CHAPTER THIRTY
The sole nature of these Mantras, once awakened, is reflective

awareness. (2ab)
Surely, it has been said before many times that reflective awareness can
be the nature only of the agent and Mantras are instruments (not agents in
themselves). So how can it be logically possible for them to be such? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

svatantrasyaiva ciddhāmnaḥ svātantryāt kartr̥āmayāḥ || 2 |I
It is because of the freedom of the abode of consciousness, that is
free (to do anything), that (Mantras) are agents. (2cd)

Surely (one may ask), if this is so, how is it possible for the teacher to
be the agent of the grace of initiation and the like?° With this doubt in mind, he

says:

yam āviśanti cācāryaṁ taṁ tādātmyanirūḍhitaḥ |
svatantrīkurvate yānti karaṇāny api kartṛtām || 3 I
(The Mantras) penetrate into the teacher, and because he is firmly
rooted in a state of identity (with them), they make him a free (agent).
(Thus,) although they are instruments (of ritual action), they become the

agents (of that action). (3)

Surely, if that is so, without an instrument, how could they be agents?
With this doubt in mind, he says that ‘although they are instruments (of ritual

action), they become the agents (of that action)’. Although (Mantras, which

are) the instruments (of ritual action) become agents, they (continue to be)
instruments without their abandoning their state as agents. This is the meaning.
He now describes the form of (these) mantras.

Verses 2-3 are drawn from MVV 2/229cd-231ab. There, instead of vimarśaikasvabhāvakāḥ –
‘the sole nature (of these Mantras) is reflective awarenessʼ, MVV 2/229d reads
vimarśapathavartinaḥ – (these Mantras) are on the path of reflective awareness.

Conceming the nature of the agency of an agent, see above, 9/8-10.
karṭāmayāḥ literally: made of agencyʼ.

If Mantras are agents in themselves, then the successful execution of rituals would be by virtue

of the Mantras alone. The officiant would have no part to play in it.
- MVV 27230c reads tādātmyaniyogataḥ – because (he is) appointed by (his) state of identity

(with them) instead of tādātmyanirūḍhitaḥ – because he is firmly rooted in a state of identity
(with them).

TANTRĀLOKA

The Form of the Mantras (mantrasvarūpa)

The Trident Throne
The Shaft of the Trident

TITYTHI

ādhāraśaktau hrīṁ prthvīprabhṛtau tu catuṣṭaye |
kṣḷāṁ kṣvīī vaṁ kṣam iti prãhuḥ kramãd varṇacatuṣṭayam || 4 |

(The Mantra) HRĪM is within the power of the foundation (of the
Trika Trident). They say that the group of four syllables, KṢḶĀM,

KṢVĪṀ, VAṀ, and KṢAM, is within the four, (the principles) beginning
with Earth, respectively. HAM is in the channel (of the Trident). (4-5a)

Emend kkā to kṣvīṁ, as found in MV 23/13c.
This section, from 4 to 10ab, presents the Mantras for the worship of the Trident Throne. The
printed edition has grouped these verses into one. For the convenience of the reader, 1 am
separating them in accord with parts of the Trident.
The mantras are taught in the MV 23/13-15, of which these verses 4 t0 10ab are an
expanded explanatory paraphrase. The formation of the Throne is described in detai above, in
15/297cd-314. The worship of the deities continues up to 352ab. We observe here, as in many
other cases, that Abhinava also supplies missing information, without which it would not be
possible to understand the procedure taught in the Tantra. Thus, all the MV tells us is this:
‘Now will be taught the etemal seed Mantras (jāti), along with the preceding throne

(āsana) of the group of five, namely, HRĪṀ (read hrīṁ for hīi) KṢLĀM KṢVĪṀ VAMṀ and
KṢAMṀ, in due order. (13)

And (those) of the other group of five, namely, HAṀ YAṀ RAṀ LAṂṀ and VAṀ.
(The phonemes) rM RM IN ḶLṀ and OṀ AUṀ and HAḤ extend up to the beginning of the calix

(of the lotus). (14)
(The consonants) ending with BH are on the filaments, and HAṀ HĀṀ HIṀ HĪṀM
HUM along with HŪṀ HEṀ HAIṀ and HOM are on the petals, and so too, in the same way, the

powers with their own names. (15)

ŚAṀ ṢAṀ (Read śaṁ ṣaṁ for śeṣaṁ) and the Subtle one (SAṀ) are in the three circles

of the Ghost (i.e. Sadāśiva). It is said that one should imagine the letter JRAM be that of the
prongs of the Trident.’ (16) MV 23/13-16
' The mantras at the base of the Trident:

OṀ HRĪṀ ĀDHĀRAŚAKTAYE NAMAḤ (the Foundation)
OṀ KṢLĀṀ DHĀRĀYAI NAṂAḤ (Earth)
OMṀ KṢVĪṀ SURODĀYA NAMAḤ (Water - the Ocean of Wine)
OṀ VAṀ POTĀYA NAMAḤ (Fire – the Boat)
OṀ KṢAṀ KANDĀYA NAṂAḤ (Air– thc Bulb)
Space is not represented in this group. One possible rcason for that is that it is included
in the domain of Ananta that extends up to Kalātattva. Another, perhaps better reason, is that
Spaceis not counted separately from the four elements becauseit pervades them.
''' OM HAṀ ANANTĀYA NĀMAḤ.