The
Doctrine of Vibration
An Analysis of the Doctrines and Practices
of Kashmir Shaivism

MARK S. G. DYCZKOWSKI

MOTILAL

BANARSIDASS

Delhi
Varanasi
Patna
Bangalore
Madras

First Indian Edition: Oil hi, 1989
MOTILAL
BANARSIDASS
Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
branches

Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
24 Race Course Road, Bangalore 560001
120 Royapettah High Road, My la pore, Madras 600004
This edition is for sale in India only.
© 1987 State University of New York. All Rights Reserved.
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner
whatsover without written permission except in the case
of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Dyczkowski, Mark S. G.
The doctrine of vibration
(SUNY series in Kashmir Saivism)
Includes index
1. Kashmir Saivism—Doctrines. I. Title. II. Series.
BL1281.l545.D93 1986
294.5'513'09546
86-14552
I S B N : 81-208-0596-8

PRINTED IN INDIA
BY JAINENDRA PR A K ASH JAIN AT SHR1 JAINPNDRA PRWK, A-45 NARAINA
INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 1 1 0 0 2 8 AND PUBLISHED BY
NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL BANARSIDASS, DBLHI 1 1 0 0 0 7 .

This book is dedicated to m
PARENTS

For you every vision has become like the words of a sealed book.
You give it to someone able to rcud and uy, "Read that."
He replies, 4 i cannot, because the book is scaled."
Or else you give the book to someone who cunnot read and say,
"Read that."
He replies, "I cannot read."
Isaiah 29/11-12.

CONTENTS

Acknowledgements

ix

Introduction
The Land of Kashmir
The Saivism of Kashmir and Kashmiri Saivism
Abhinavagupta and the Flowering of Trika Saivism
Tantra, Kashmiri Saivism and Kashmiri Society
in the Eleventh Century
The Philosophy of Recognition and the Doctrine
of Vibration
The Doctrine of Vibration
Notes on Methodology and Synopsis of Contents
Chapter I

The Integral Monism of Kashmiri Saivism

Saiva Idealism
Kashmiri Saiva Realism
Chapter II

Light and Awareness: The Two Aspects
of Consciousness
Prakasa: The Light of Consciousness
Self-Awareness and Consciousness
Awareness and the Integral Nature of the Absolute

Chapter HI

Spanda: The Universal Activity of Abnolutt

Consciousness
Three Moments in the Vibration of Connciouimcss
The Conative Power of Consciousness
The Cognitive Power of Consciousness
The Power of Action
Chapter IV

Siva and Sakti

Sankara
The Nature of Sakti
Chapter V

Sakti Cakra: The Wheel of Energies

The Wheel of Vamesvari
The Wheel of the Senses
Chapter VI

The Divine Body and the Sacred Circle
of the Senses

Chapter VII

The Path to Liberation

The Means to Realisation
No-Means (Anupaya)
The Divine Means (Sambhavopaya)
The Empowered Means (Saktopaya)
The Individual Means (Anavopaya)
Abbreviations

Notes

Bibliography

Index

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This book was originally researched and written in Oxford. I will
always be grateful to Richard Gombrich, at present Boden professor of
Sanskrit at Oxford University, who gave me the opportunity to do this
work. I also wish to thank Mr. G. S. Sanderson, at present lecturer in
Sanskrit at the same university, whose zeal and scholarship inspired me.
My gratitude also extends to a close disciple of the Late Mahamahopadhyaya Gopinatha Kaviraj, Professor Heman Chakravarti
with whom I read my first Kashmiri Saiva works in India before going
to Oxford and the late Pandit Ambikadatta Upadhyaya who taught
me Sanskrit.
Above all I cannot be thankful enough to my parents whose support
has been constant and unremitting, both through my stay in Oxford,
and for more than fifteen years in India. Finally, I wish to acknowledge
the help of Giovanna, who has been both a wife for me and a mother
for our children.

Introduction

The Land of Kashmir
The ancient Himalayan kingdom of Kashmir is now part of the
province of Jammu and Kashmir situated in the extreme northwest of
India. The heart of modern Kashmir is, as it was in the past, the wide
and fertile valley of the river Vitasta. Set at an altitude of five thousand
feet, the valley's beautiful lakes and temperate climate nowadays attract
tourists in large numbers during the summer months when temperatures
rise high into the forties Centigrade on the North Indian plains. Although
most of the population is at present Muslim, before the advent of Islam in
the thirteenth century, Kashmir enjoyed an unparalleled reputation as a
centre of learning amongst both Buddhists and Hindus. Kashmiris
excelled not only in religious studies but also in the secular fields of
Sanskrit literature, literary criticism and grammar as well as the sciences,
including medicine, astronomy and mathematics. They had a uniquely
realistic sense of history clearly evidenced in Kalhana's twelfth century
chronicle of the kings of Kashmir, the Rqjataranginl, which is virtually
the only history of its kind in India.
Remarkable as Kashmir has been as a seat of Hindu spirituality
and learning, it was no less so as a centre of Buddhism. Possibly
introduced into Kashmir as early as the third century B.C., Buddhism
had already developed there to such a degree by the first century of our era
that the Kushan king, Kaniska, chose Kashmir as the venue of a major
Buddhist Council. It was a huge gathering, attended by more than five

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

hundred Buddhist monks and scholars. The previously uncodified
portions of the Buddha's discourses and the theoretical portion of the
canon (the Abhidharma) were codified and the rest extensively revised.
The entire early canon, the Tripifaka, was then inscribed on copper
plates and deposited in a stupa. In the centuries that followed most forms
of Indian Buddhism flourished in Kashmir. Of the early schools the
Sarvastivada was particularly well developed. Similarly, the schools of
the Great Vehicle, both those of the Middle Way and the idealist Yogacara,
were taught and practiced extensively. Kashmir also produced many fine
Buddhist logicians in the line of Dirinaga and Dharmaklrti, amongst
whom Vinltadeva and Dharmottaracarya, who lived in the eighth century,
are the most famous.
The borders of Kashmir at that time extended further west beyond
the roads to Asia which ran through the Swat and Chitral valleys in
Gilgit. For this reason Kashmir was the first to make a substantial
contribution to the spread of Buddhism in Central Asia, which began
about the fourth century A.D. and travelled along these routes. Many
Buddhists, attracted by Kashmir's reputation, came from distant lands
to learn Sanskrit and train as translators and teachers. One of the earliest
and most brilliant was Kumarajiva (334-413 A.D.). Born into an
aristocratic family of the Central Asian kingdom of Khotan, he came to
Kashmir in his youth and learnt there the scriptures of the Great Vehicle
from Bandhudatta. He then went to China, where he lived and worked
for the rest of his life, translating Buddhist scriptures. The Kashmiri
Buddhabhadra, his contemporary, did the same. Yoga teachers like
Dharmabhiksu attracted a large number of Chinese and Kashmiri
students at the end of the fifth century when there was a growing foreign
interest in Buddhist Yoga. It was also during this period that the Kashmiri
Buddhasena translated a major work of the idealist Buddhist Yogacara
school—the Yogacarabhumi—into Chine.se for the first time. In
631 A.D., Hsiian Tsang, one of China's most famous Buddhist pilgrims,
came to study in Kashmir leaving us an account of his two-year stay
which eloquently testifies to Buddhism's popularity and influence.
Such was Kashmir's reputation that it was from here that Tibet
originally chose to receive its religion. The first king of Tibet, Srong-bcansgampo, sent Thon-mi Sambhota to Kashmir during the reign of
Durlabhavardhana (616 A.D.). He learnt Sanskrit from Devatltasimha
and returned to Tibet with a modified thirty-letter version of the
Kashmiri script.1 Kashmir continued to play a role in the transmission
of Buddhism from India into Tiber although other routes (particularly
through Nepal) later became more important. By the eleventh century,
when the Kashmiri Saiva schools were reaching the peak of their

Introduction

development, Kashmir was also, as Tucci says, "one of the places where
Buddhism prospered most, even if not as state religion, certainly as the
home of the greatest scholars and exegetes of the time."2
The rich spiritual and intellectual climate of Kashmir helped to
foster an important and far reaching development that affected every
aspect of Indian religious life, namely, Tantra. About the middle of the
first millennium of our era, Tantra began to assume a clearly defined,
although immensely varied, identity through the emergence of vast
corpuses of sacred literature that defined themselves specifically as
Tantric. There can be no doubt, despite the fragmentary and as yet
poorly researched evidence, that Kashmir was an important centre of a
wide range of Tantric cults, both Hindu and Buddhist. Many famous
Buddhist Tantric teachers lived in or near Kashmir at that time. Naropa
and even Padmasambhava (who is said to have introduced Tantric
Buddhism into Tibet) sometimes figure in Tibetan sources as Kashmiris.3
Ua'tfiyana (Tibetan: U-rgyan), important as Padmasambhava's birthplace and as a major centre of Tantric Buddhism and Hinduism, may
well have been located in the nearby Swat valley.
Both of Tantra's major Hindu streams, one centred on the worship
of Visnu and the other on Siva, evolved a bewildering number of Tantric
cults, some large others small. Kashmir contributed substantially to
these developments not only on the Saiva side but also on the Vaisnava.
Indeed, the earliest known references drawn from Vaisnava Tantric
sources are found in the writings of Kashmiris.4 Nowadays the form of
Vaisnavism that looks to these scriptures as authoritative, namely, the
Pancaratra, survives only in South India; however, the earliest Southern
teachers of this school looked to Kashmir as one of their oldest seats of
learning and spiritual culture.5 But although the worship of Visnu,
whether performed according to the norms prescribed by the Tantras
or otherwise, was certainly an important feature of Kashmiri religious
life and was patronised extensively by the Hindu kings of the valley,
even so, Saivism remained, on the whole, the dominant form of Hinduism.

The Saivism of Kashmir and Kashmiri Saivism
We know very little of the origins of Saivism in Kashmir, although
tradition testifies to its antiquity in this part of India. The written
records confirm that it has always occupied an important place in the
religious life of Kashmir. Thus Kalhana records (possibly from earlier
chronicles) the existence of an already ancient temple dedicated to
Siva in emperor Asoka's time. Although this is hardly possible, as

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

temples were not constructed in India as early as the third century B.C.,
this reference illustrates the then6 common Kashmiri belief in Saivisrrfs
ancient presence in Kashmir.7 Certainly the many newly constructed
temples, as well as the old ones renovated throughout the period covered
in Kalhana's history, testify to Saivism's continuing popularity. In the
early ninth century A.D., when the first Kashmiri Saiva works were
written, there were numerous Saiva groups in the valley of Kashmir.
Amongst them were those that came to form a part of what we nowadays
call Kashmiri Saivism of which the Spanda school, whose teachings
we are concerned with here, was the first development.
All these Saiva groups, diverse though they were, accepted the Saiva
Tantras (also known as Agamas) as their scriptural authority. Some
groups would look to one section of the Agamas, others to another.
They thus ordered themselves quite naturally into lineages of Tantric
masters who initiated disciples into the rituals and other practices of
their chosen Tantras. We know of the existence of these Tantric subcultures not only from epigraphic and other sources including other
Hindu scriptures, particularly the Puranas, but also from the Agamas
themselves. Although the Agamas are all considered to be divine
revelation and hence, in a sense, eternal, they do nonetheless reflect
the growth of these Saiva groups for they not only studied them but
also contributed to them. Thus, one way in which we can understand
how these groups are related is to see how the Saiva Tantras have ordered
themselves in relation to one another. The brief account that follows
of the Saiva canon8 will hopefully serve to indicate in broad terms how
the Saiva groups that have contributed to the formation of Kashmiri
Saivism are related to Tantric Saivism as a whole. According to an
important system of classification we find in the Agamas themselves,
they can be divided into the following sections.

Saivasiddhanta. The Agamas generally agree that there are twenty-eight
principal Siddhantagamas and about two hundred Saiva scriptures
(called Upagamas) affiliated to them.9 All the main Agamas, and
many of the secondary ones, are still extant in South India, although
only a relatively small number have as yet been edited from the manuscript
sources. The cults of these Agamas are largely concerned with the
worship of Sadasiva which is generally conducted in public temples and
is centred on the Linga, Sadasiva's phallic symbol. Descriptions of the
temples, Linga and iconic forms of the gods and goddesses of the
Siddhanta constitute an important part of these Agamas. They also
deal extensively with the rituals related to them. These include the

Introduction

regular daily rites as well as occasional ones such as consecration
ceremonies and festivals. Other important rituals are those that concern
the initiation of the neophyte into this form of Saivism or the priesthood.
The Agamas are primarily concerned with ritual and devote relatively
little space to philosophical matters or even yoga. Even so, the philosophical standpoint of these Tantras can, broadly speaking, be said
to be a dualism of a more or less tempered form although not one
consistently maintained throughout them. The homonymous philosophical school inspired by these Agamas, however, ultimately developed
a well defined dualism, according to which there are three basic realities,
namely, Siva (pati\ the fettered soul (pasu) and the factors that bind
it (pdsa). The Kashmiri Saiva tradition records that the founder of
dualist Saivism was called Amardaka. This name recurs in inscriptions
and other sources as that of an important founder figure believed to have
lived in the eighth century. This Amardaka had predecessors and so
cannot really be said to have founded this branch of Saivism; even so,
he is important as the founder of a major Siddhanta monastic centre
(ma(ha). This centre, named Amardaka after its founder, was located
in Ujjain. Purandara, Amardaka's successor, also founded a Siddhanta
order, namely, the Mattamayura. This order was named after the
capital of the Calukya empire in the Punjab where its headquarters
were located. A third important order was the Madhumateya founded
by Pavanasiva to which belonged the royal preceptors of the Kalacuri
kings of Central India.
Siddhanta ascetics, full of missionary zeal, used the influence of
their royal patrons to propagate their teachings in the neighbouring
kingdoms, especially in South India. From the oldest capital of the
Calukyas, Mattamayura, they established monasteries in Maharatra,
the Konkan, Karnafaka, Andhra and Kerala. The Siddhanta flourished
in the areas where it spread, until it was devastated by the Muslim
invasions, which started in the eleventh century, or supplanted by
other forms of Hinduism. It survived, however, in South India where
it changed its medium of expression from Sanskrit to Tamil in which
form it is better known and persists to this day.10 Although Saivasiddhanta survives at present only in South India, we know that a
number of the earliest commentators of the Agamas and important
authors of independent works expounding the philosophy of the
Siddhanta were Kashmiris.11 Monist Kashmiri Saiva12 authors quote
them with great reverence as their predecessors, although they do not
always agree with them. There can be no doubt that the Siddhanta
greatly influenced Kashmiri Saivism which largely adopted it, reshaping
it on non-dualist lines.

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Bhuta and G&rwjla Tantras. These two groups of Agamas have been
almost entirely lost. They are considered together as they appear to
have much in common. We know that both dealt with magical cures
(particularly of snakebite), exorcism of malevolent ghosts and spirits,
the protection of children from such entities as well as the acquisition
of magical powers and other such matters. References to these two
groups is common in the Siddhantagamas, and Kashmiri Saivites also
knew of them although already at this time (viz., the ninth century A.D.
onwards) they were clearly on the decline, at least in Kashmir.13
The VGmatantras. According to the classification we are following in this
account, each group of Agamas constitutes a 'current' (srotas) of
scriptures spoken by one or other of Sadasiva's five faces. The Siddhanta
belongs to the Upper current, spoken by the Upper face, while the
Bhuta and Garudatantras belong to the Western and Eastern currents.
The Vamatantras were spoken by the Northern face. This face, located
to the left of centre (which is in the eastern direction), is that of the
left-hand current, not to be confused with the Tantric distinction
between 'left' and 'right-hand' paths.
The only Tantra belonging to this group that has been recovered
so far is the Vinasikhatantra recently edited from just two Nepalese
manuscripts by Dr. T. Goudriaan.14 Although this group of Tantras is
regularly mentioned in the primary sources when they refer to the
Saiva canon and its divisions, the cults associated with it seem to have
had little success in India and practically died out after the first millennium
of our era. The dominant form of Siva in these Tantras appears to have
been Tumburubhairava.15 He is described as having four faces, each
one of which spoke one of the major Tantras of this group, namely, the
Tantra of the Severed Head (Sirascheda), the Tantra of the Crest of the
Vina (Vinafikha), the Tantra of Delusion (Saipmohana) and the
Tantra of the Higher Law (Nayottara).16
These Tantras, and with them the cult of Tumburu, spread from
India to Southeast Asia sometime before the end of the eighth century.
We know from a Cambodian inscription discovered at Sdok Kok Thorn
dated 1052 A.D. that these Tantras were known there at the time. This
inscription commemorates the history of a lineage of royal priests
founded by Sivakaivalya who was the priest of Jayavarman II who
returned to Cambodia from exile in Java in 802 A.D.. At that time a
Brahmin called Hiranyadama taught the four Tantras to Sivakaivalya
and several rites described in them were performed for the benefit of
the king. We also find references to Tumburu in Sanskrit hymns and
fragments from Bali, some of which go back to an early period of Hindu

Introduction

influence in Indonesia.17 The absence of further reference to these
Iantras and their cults in Southeast Asia seems to indicate that, as
happened in India, they did not survive much beyond the eleventh
century. Similarly, although the Vamatantras were known in Kashmir,
monistic Kashmiri Saivites clearly preferred the Siddhantagamas and
the Bhairavatantras to which we now turn.
The Bhairavatantras. As their name suggests, the Bhairavatantras
were especially (but not exclusively) concerned with the worship of
Bhairava. Bhairava is an important form of Siva known and worshipped
throughout India. He is popular both in the literate Sanskrit tradition
as well as in many non-literate vernacular traditions. Bhairava, whose
name literally means 'the Terrible One', is the 'wrathful', 'frightening'
form of Siva Who is 'peaceful' and 'auspicious'. Abhinavagupta, an
important Kashmiri Saiva teacher (see below), explains the popular
Tantric etymology of the word Bhairava as follows:
1) Bhairava is He Who bears all things and is supported by the
universe, filling it and sustaining it on the one hand, while uttering
it or conceiving it on the other.18
2) Bhairava is He Who protects those frightened by the rounds
of rebirth.19
3) Bhairava is the One born in the heart of those who, terrified
by transmigratory existence, call on Him for help.20
4) Bhairava is He Who arouses by His grace a fear of transmigration.
5) Bhairava is He Whose light shines in the minds of those yogis
who are intent on assimilating time (kalagrasa) into the eternal presence
of consciousness and thus exhaust the energy of time said to be the
driving force behind the machine of the galaxies.21
6) Bhairava is the Lord of the powers of the senses whose shouting
(ravaria) frightens the souls in bondage.22
7) Bhairava is the Lord Who calls a halt to transmigration and
thus is very terrible.23
There are countless forms of Bhairava, each with their own name.
A typical and widely-known form is that of Mahakalabhairava. He
is worshipped in major centres in India including Ujjain, Benares and
Kathmandu. He is the protector of these three cities. One could add,
incidentally, that Mahakala is also an important Buddhist god and as
such is the guardian of Lhasa, the capital of Tibet. He is described
as dark blue or black24 and fierce in appearance. He carries the skull
of the creator-god, Brahma, as penance for having cut off his head to

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

save the world from its great heat generated within it by Brahma's
pride.25 Bhairava's furious drunkenness and body aflame with the fire
of cosmic destruction has served for centuries as an archetype of the
liberated state for numerous Saiva cults. All these culls shared the view
that liberation is essentially freedom from the opposites of good and evil;
thus the adept who seeks it must break through them to a higher state of
expanded, inebriated and blissful consciousness that, unaffected by
them, encompasses both.
In the Kashmiri Saiva tradition, Bhairava is understood as the
divine form of the absolute realised as the exertive force (udyamd) that
drives the senses and mind at the microcosmic level along with the
universe at the macrocosmic level.26 Much of Kashmiri Saiva practice—
particularly that of the Doctrine of Vibration with which this volume
is concerned—deals with how to lay hold of this inner power and identify
with it. One way is to arouse the spiritual and cosmic energy latent in
the soul through an expansion of consciousness brought about by the
performance of rituals and the practice of yoga. Unlike the rituals of the
Siddhanta, which generally take place in public, many of these rituals
were originally performed in cremation grounds or lonely places for the
benefit of a few select initiates. Again, unlike the Siddhanta rituals,
many of them involve the offering of meat and wine to the deity and,
at times, ritual intercourse.
The Bhairavatantras were not the only Tantras to advocate such
practices. Moreover, they were numerous and of varied content and
not all of them considered these practices important. Thus a Bhairavatantra well known to Kashmiri Saivites, the Svacchandabhairavatantra,
allows such practices, but even so generally advocates 'tamer' procedures
similar to the rituals of the Siddhantagamas. The Bhairavatantras are
conventionally said to number sixty-four but must have been many
more. They were major sources for Kashmiri Saivites.
Other Saiva Groups. Important precursors of the Agamic Saiva groups
were the Pasupatas. References to them are found in the earliest
portions of the Mahabharata and in Patanjali's commentary on Panini's
grammar written in the second century B.C. Unfortunately, we do not
possess any original scriptures of these early Saiva sects. The Pasupatasutra, the only work we have, is relatively late although earlier than the
tenth century A.D..27 It enjoins, amongst other things, that Pasupatas
should behave in a manner contrary to accepted norms. They should
laugh and cry like madmen, make lewd gestures at young women and
abuse those that approach them. The aim was thereby to overcome the
ego and gain magical power through transgression. Those who behaved

Introduction

in this way were the votaries of the Great Vow (mahavrata). Other
extremist Saiva sects that adhered to the Great Vow were the skullbearing ascetics of the Kapalika order and other Saiva groups collectively
said to belong to the Higher Path (atimdrga).2
Other important Saiva groups are those of the Kaulas. In a sense,
successors of the early extremist Saiva sects belonging to the Higher
Path, these groups are closely affiliated to other Saivagamic groups,
particularly those of the Bhairavatantras. They are very important in
the history of Kashmiri Saivism as it later developed extensively by
integrating into itself a number of Kaula systems, largely divested of
their outer ritual forms. Monist in outlook, the original Tantras of
these groups were, as were the Bhairava and Varnatantras, strongly Sakta
in tone. Although they remained essentially and consistently Saiva,
they stressed the worship of female divinities. Thus they represent
the precursors of the later Sakta Tantric tradition. Indeed the word
'Kula' itself denotes the power of consciousness—Sakti, the Goddess
Who is the emission (yisarga) of the absolute (called Akula), through
which the universe is created.29
Amongst the many Kaula schools, the most important for Kashmiri
Saivites were these of the Krama and Trika. The Krama School is
important because it deals with what were considered to be the most
secret doctrines and practices of Kashmiri Saivism, namely, those
involved in the worship of Kali. Basing itself on concepts already
developing in the original Tantras and the oral traditions associated
with them, the Kashmiri Saiva Krama elevated the worship of Kali
to a level beyond outer ritual. Ritual came to be understood as an inner
process of realisation through which the initiate discovered his essential
identity with Kali Who is the flow (krama) of the power of consciousness
through the polarities of subject, object and means of knowledge in
consonance with their arising and falling away in each act of perception.
The experience of this process coupled with the arousing of man's
spiritual potential (kurujalini) and the expansion of consciousness
that brings it about is the most esoteric practice of Kashmiri Saivism.
The Kaula character of this school is evidenced by the fact that it
advocates the ritual consumption of meat and wine as well as ritual
intercourse, as a possible means of developing this consciousness.

Abhinavagupta and the Flowering of Trika Saivism
In order to complete our general survey of the forms of Agamic
Saivism incorporated into Kashmiri Saivism, before we turn to those

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

schools that originated in the hands of monist Kashmiri Saivite philosophers, we turn now to that of the Trika and to Abhinavagupta who
developed and made of it the culmination of Kashmiri Saivism.
Abhinavagupta lived in Kashmir from about the middle of the tenth
century into the eleventh. He was, without a doubt, the most brilliant
of the Kashmiri Saiva teachers and one of the greatest spiritual and
intellectual giants India has produced. He wrote more than sixty works,
some very extensive, and all remarkable for the beauty of their Sanskrit
and profundity of thought. His literary activity falls into three periods.
In chronological order these are:30
1) Tantrika. This, the first period of Abhinavagupta's literary life,
extends probably up to his early forties, and concerns us particularly
here. In this period Abhinava sought in his writings to establish the
superiority of Trika above all other schools of Agamic Saivism. His
most important work during this period is the Light of the Tantras
(Tantralokd). It is an extensive and difficult text in which he quotes
from numerous Agamic sources belonging to all (or most) types known
in Kashmir. If not the most important, certainly one of the most important
works of Tantric Hinduism, it reads as an exposition of Saivagamic
ritual and practice couched in the monistic philosophy of Kashmiri
Saivism (i.e., the Pratyabhijna). Abhinava's aim was to bring together
the major Saivagamic schools into that of Trika Saivism and in so doing
he has provided us with a unique account of Agamic Saivism, albeit
from his point of view.
2) Poetics and Dramaturgy. In the second period of his life Abhinava
wrote important works in these fields. Indeed, it is for this contribution that he is best known. His commentary on the Nafyasastra, the
foremost treatise in Sanskrit dramaturgy, is the only one preserved,
a fact that testifies to its excellence and influence. Similarly, his
commentary on Anandavardhana's Mirror of Suggestion (Dhvanyaloka)
is justly famous. In this work Anandavardbana and Abhinavagupta
expound the theory that the soul of poetry is its power of suggestion
through which sentiment is conveyed to the reader.
3) Philosophical. In the last period of his life Abhinava wrote extensive
and profound commentaries on Utpaladeva's Stanzas on the Recognition
of God (Isvarapratyabhijfiakarika). In these commentaries he elucidates
the Doctrine of Recognition (pratyabhijna) which is the monistic
philosophy proper of Kashmiri Saivism to which we shall refer later.

Introduction

We know that Abhinavagupta was a Brahmin belonging to the
Atrigotra and that his ancestors were distinguished scholars in the
court of Kanauj. They were brought to Kashmir by King Lalitaditya
about the middle of the eighth century. Abhinava's grandfather was
Varahagupta and his father Narasimhagupta, also known as Cukhala.
Despite the Vaisnava connotations of his father's name, he was an
ardent devotee of Siva. Abhinava refers to him reverently in several
places as the teacher who taught him, amongst other things, the
fundamentals of Sanskrit grammar, logic and literature.31 His mother,
for whom he had great affection, died when he was a child.32 Abhinava
took full advantage of the many Saiva Masters and teachers of other
branches of learning who lived in Kashmir. Even in this, his formative
period, he shunned the company of the impious and so, as he tells us,
"lived a solitary life devoted to the quest for truth."33 When Abhinava
wrote the Light of the Tantras (Tantrdloka) in his early middle age,
he seems to have had just a small group of close disciples, almost all
of whom were members of his family. He tells us that his brother
Manoratha was one of the first to learn from him34 and that he was later
joined by Kama, the husband of his sister Amba. Kama's premature
death, which left his wife alone with their only son, led her to devote
herself entirely to the worship of Lord Siva and the service of her brother.
Kama's father was a minister who had left the court to become "a minister
of the Lord."35 His sister, Vatsalika, was the aunt of Mandra, Kama's
cousin and close friend. All these in-laws of Abhinava's sister were
devoted to him and served him faithfully. Thus Mandra invited him to
stay in his town outside Pravarapura (modern Srinagar) where, in the
house of Vatsalika, he wrote his Light of the Tantras for the benefit of
his disciples who, Abhinava tells us at the end of his work, wanted to
gain "a perfect knowledge of the Tantras."36 Almost ail the other
disciples he refers to here were the sons of his paternal uncle. Amongst
them was one called "Ksema" who may possibly have been none other
than Ksemaraja, his most distinguished disciple. It must have been
in this period of his life that Madhuraja, an aged itinerant ascetic, came
from South India to Kashmir and wrote his eulogy of Abhinavagupta
entitled, Reflections on the Master (Gurunathaparamarsa). There he
describes Abhinavagupta as still young and seated in the midst of a
great congregation of religious leaders, preceptors and female ascetics
(yogini) who recognised him to be the foremost preceptor of all the
Saiva groups then prevalent in Kashmir, including the Siddhanta,
Varna, Bhairava, Kaula and Trika.37
Abhinavagupta's works can be said to represent the climax of a
hermeneutics of synthesis and exegesis of the Saivagama initiated by

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

the revelation of the Aphorisms of Siva (Sivasutra) to Vasugupta in
the beginning of the ninth century (see below). In his Light of the Tantras
which, according to Abhinava, is a manual of the rituals and attendant
doctrines of the Anuttaratrikakulan (also known simply as Trika),
he introduced a unified exegetical scheme inspired by Sambhunatha,
his teacher in Trika Saivism. This scheme brings together what he saw
as the essential elements of all Saiva ritual and doctrine. Thus he sought
to fill out and complete the theology and praxis of the Trika school.39
As we know that Sambhunatha came to Kashmir from JalandharapHha
(Punjab? Himachal?), and that his teacher, Sumati, came from "some
sacred place in the southern land,"40 it seems therefore that Trika, in
the form Abhinavagupta learned it, was not originally Kashmiri.
Trika, so called because triads feature prominently in its presentation
of the nature of reality and praxis, is said (in the Kashmiri tradition)
to look to three scriptures as its primary authorities, namely, the
Mdlinivijayottaratantra, the Siddhayogesvarimata and the (A)ndmakatantra. The Mdlinlvijaya is quoted by authors prior to Abhinavagupta
as was another Trikatantra, the Trikasdra.41 The Triad of Supreme
{Para), Middling (Pardpard) and Inferior (Apard) goddesses, who are
the focus of worship in this school, were also known and venerated42
in Kashmir before Abhinavagupta's time. Even so, it was he who made
Trika the focal point of non-dualist Kashmiri Saivism.
In order to trace the history of Trika Saivism we must eventually
come to grips directly with Agamic Saivism in its original scriptural
sources. It is also there that we must seek to uncover the origins of
two other Tantric systems scholars have discerned as syncretized in the
works of these Kashmiri Saivites, namely, the Kula and Krama.43 We
must seek out the origins of these systems in the Agamas because it is
in them, and through them, that these systems developed until they
emerged, as it were, from out of the dark, mysterious anonymity of
scripture and revealed their essential purport in the works of known
authors who were the recipients of a traditional interpretation of these
scriptures.
This aspect of Kashmir Saivism is the hardest to deal with because
the origins of these systems, with their attendant lineages, are easily
lost in their antecedents and in the broader context of the greater cultic
milieu of Agamic Saivism as a whole. In order to understand Abhinava's
Trika (and hence to know an important aspect of Kashmiri Saivism) we
cannot just limit ourselves to the Kula and Krama. Nor is it possible
to understand the limit of even these two systems. For although the
Krama and Trika can be treated as Tantric systems in the Kashmiri Saiva
context (and we understand Kashmiri Saivism here in the restricted

Introduction

sense noted above), if we inquire into their antecedents we find that
they do not have the same clearly defined identity in their scriptural
sources. Thus Kula is not a Tantric school or system in the same sense
as are the Trika and Krama insofar as 'Kula' is a broader generic term
for a number of major traditions, each with its own secondary branches.
Again, in both the Agamic context and Abhinava's Light of the Tantras,
"Kula" is not only a blanket term for Kaula Saivism (as a distinct category
of the Saivagama)44 but also indicates a liturgical type or archetypal
pattern which Abhinava terms Kulaprakriya, the 'Kula Method'.
This method is contrasted with, as complementary to, the basic Tantric
Method—Tantraprakriya.
The rituals of the Krama school, which
involve the. consumption and offering of meat and wine to the deity,
as well as ritual intercourse,45 fall into the former pattern. Those of the
Trika (as we would expect since it integrates every form into itself)
contain both. That Trika and Krama (at least as presented in the
Kashmiri Saiva context) share common Kaula roots is clear from the
fact that the masters who are traditionally said to have brought the
Kula scriptures to earth are equally venerated in both traditions.46
This does not mean that the Trika school is to be simply identified with
Kula for Abhinava clearly distinguishes between the two in a number
of places, usually indicating the superiority of the former over the
latter We understand this to mean not that Trika excludes Kaula
Saivism but that Trika, as presented by Abhinava, completes it, so to
say, as its finest flower. Indeed, from Abhinava's point of view, which
he supports by reference to scripture and sustains on the authority of his
teacher Sambhunatha, Trika comes as the culmination of the entire
Saivagamic tradition and encompasses it.47 Heading a hierarchy of
Agamic 'systems', arranged in such a way that the higher members
include the lower, Trika (and hence Kashmiri Saivism) contains them
all. Abhinava thinks of Tantric systems in their original Agamic contexts.
He makes observations on the level and relationship between initiates
belonging to the different currents (srotas) of Saiva scripture.48 This
is coupled, following a method of exegesis already worked out in the
Agamas themselves, with the hierarchy of forces and metaphysical
principles which constitute reality.49 It makes sense, therefore, that
Abhinava should insist that in order to study and understand Kashmiri
Saivism, it is essential not only to have studied grammar logic and the
orthodox philosophical systems, but also to have a sound knowledge
of the Saivagamas.50
Sumati, who was Abhinava's grandteacher in the Trika, was
reputed to have a thorough understanding of the five currents of
Saiva scripture as well as the Pasupata and kindred schools that

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

constitute the Higher Path (atimarga).5. Trika, Krama and Kula are
therefore just a part of what Abhinava and Kashmiri authors have
attempted to bring together into one system. Although they are certainly
very important, they are far from being the only components. In fact,
we should even reckon the dualist Saivasiddhanta amongst them, not
to mention the Agamas of the Bhairava current of Saiva scripture.
The former is important because it constitutes the backbone of the
ritual of Abhinava's Trika, which he presents as blended predominantly
with that of the Malinivijaya, the Svacchandabhairavatantra and other
Tantras such as the Trisirobhairava and Devyayamala. The latter
is important because at least the Siddhayogesvarlmata, one of the
most authoritative of the triad of scriptures to which Abhinava's Trika
looks for scriptural support, belongs to the Bhairava group of Saivagamas.

Tantra, Kashmiri Saivism and Kashmiri Society
in the Eleventh Century
Despite Kalhana's frequent references to temple building and
endowments and the pains he takes to note prominent figures in
Kashmir's history, and although he himself was Saivite,52 he ignores
Saiva teachers of the non-dualist faction. The one exception is a wellknown reference to Kallatabhafta,53 a key figure in the Spanda tradition
to whom we shall have occasion to refer later. Clearly what we nowadays
call Kashmiri Saivism was not a religion of the masses. Abhinavagupta
himself declares that it is very hard to find even one person who is
qualified to follow the Saivism of his Light of the Tantras. Nonetheless,
he wishes that "at least someone impelled by Siva should make an
effort to achieve perfection in this system".54 Here Abhinava is referring
specifically to the form of Trika Saivism he elaborates in this work.
He implies that those who dedicated themselves to this system were a
minority amongst the followers of that type of Agamic Saivism to which
the Trika was affiliated, namely, that of the Kaulas and of the Bhairavagamas. Although the members of these Agamic traditions were themselves probably a minority of the Hindu population, they must have
been a notable feature of Kashmiri society, certainly larger in number
than their absence in Kalhana's work would lead one to suppose. This
is probably due to the fact that Kalhana, being the son of a minister,
was particularly concerned with the history of the Kashmiri courts
and their vicissitudes, rather than with the religious history of Kashmir,
Although Abhinavagupta, for example, must have been an intellectual

Introduction

of repute, Kalhana never refers to him. This is probably because Abhinava
lived a life away from the Kashmiri political scene, never attaching
himself to the court despite his reputation among his contemporaries.
Another reason for Kalhana's silence was that the type of Saiva
culture represented in the elevated and refined works of these authors
was a source of scandal and the object of active repression. Kalhana
himself entertained but scant regard for the individuals who posed as
its privileged hierophants. What he has to say about King Kalasa and
his associates exemplifies his attitude well. King Kalasa (1063-89 A.D.)
lived a particularly dissolute life choosing to surround himself with
rogues, procurers, and teachers of Tantric cults that encouraged depravity
and licentiousness. One such was the 'Cat Merchant' whose influence
over the king and the learned of his court suggests that belief in these
'extremist' Bhairava-centred Saiva cults prevailed at times even in
these circles. Thus Kalhana writes:
These honourable and learned men (bhaffapada) who knew how
to behave fearlessly at great [Tantric] rites and who, grimly conscious
of their power and thus immune to terror, were heedless even to
Bhairava, would fall to the ground in fear and bend their knees before
the 'Cat Merchant, who put them at ease again by placing his hand
on their heads ... Deceitful of his ignorance and vaunting his [learning]
as a physician and Guru, he gradually established a position [for himself]
as the Guru of dyers and other craftsmen.55
Abhinava, for his part, wrote eulogies of the land of Kashmir as a
place where Tantric adepts, male and female, met to drink the wine for
which his beloved land was famous and "inspired timid lovers with
confidence"56 to play in this garden strewn with saffron flowers growing
as an offering to the Three Goddesses of Trika Saivism. Ksemendra,
a well-known Kashmiri poet and younger contemporary of Abhinava,57
on the contrary, was struck by the hypocrisy, greed and lasciviousness
of the masters of the Tantric cults belonging to the culture from which
Abhinavagupta drew inspiration. He felt it his moral duty to write
biting satires on this and other aspects of what he considered to be the
corruplion that afflicted Kashmiri society in his day.58 In this spirit he
describes in his Garland of Satire {Narmamala) a Kaula ritual centred
on a mantfala in which are drawn male and female sexual organs coupled
in union. The rite is officiated by Trighantika, a Bhairavacarya (also
called Kulacarya) who, already in a drunken state, is brought to the
house where the rite is to take place, supported by two disciples. His
other disciples are a motley crowd of low caste reprobates including

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

shoemakers, butchers, fishermen, fake ascetics, old prostitutes, pimps,
liquor distillers and drunken Brahmin bards. Kemendra describes him as:
The Saiva master (saivacarya), Trighantika, [disfigured] like the
root of an elephant's ear, his eyes wrathful, throat swollen with goitre
and nose severed, he performs the Great Vow [mahavrata of antinomian
behaviour] and his face is [withered and distorted in appearance like]
the female sexual organ. Naked, he attends to the vow of observing
the auspicious times [to perform ritual intercourse— velavratiri], both
silent and a composer of hymns, his knees [are round and swollen like]
bells. Exalting, surrounded by dogs and mad women, his body smeared
with faeces he knows the Mantras, practices alchemy, magic, and
ritual intercourse. Full of wisdom, he knows the nature of lust.59
Supposedly learned Brahmins who belonged to the higher levels
of society were also among K$emendra's favourite targets. Kaula
doctrines were, it seems, particularly deleterious for them. He writes:
[Here], come to his preceptor's house, is the learned Brahmin
(bhaffa) initiated [into Kaula practice]. In his hands a fish and ajar
[of liquor], his mind made up to drink, freed by JCaula doctrine of the
sense of shame [he should feel] by virtue of his caste.
Filling himself with [the wine which is] Bhairava, making the sound
"gala gala" of a jar as it fills, he seems carried away in its flow and is
bent over by its flood [like a jar tipping over in a torrent of water that
makes that same sound as it fills].
Passing thus the night [he leaves] drunk, vomiting his wine; his
face licked by a dog, the Brahmin in the morning is purified by his
prostration in the midst of other learned men.60
Cakrabhanu was an important Kashmiri master of the Kalikrama.
According to Kalhana, he was the son of a minister who, for his objectionable practices, was branded on the forehead with the mark of a dog's
foot.61 A manuscript of one of his works, possibly written in prison,
is preserved in Nepal. There he writes about how he longs to be released
from prison so that he can go out at night to the cremation ground, his
forehead covered with the edge of his turban, to offer human sacrifice
to the goddess Kal!.62 Somadeva, a Jain monk living in South India
in the tenth century, refers in the Yasastilaka to the Kaulas whom he
identifies with the followers of the Trika. He is very critical of the Trika
Kaulas whose antinomian behaviour he took to be no more than a sign
of their depravity. If salvation were the fruit of reckless living, he says,
then it would sooner come to thugs and butchers than to Kaulas. Even

Introduction

though this is almost the only independent reference we have to Trika
Jsaivism, it is nonetheless solid evidence for the existence of Trika as a
distinct school and to its presence far outside the confines of Kashmir.63
Somadeva also tells us in this way that the followers of the Agamic Trika
were (or at least seemed to him to be) far different from the refined,
spiritual Kashmiris, like Abhinavagupta, in whose hands Trika came
to finally blossom.

The Philosophy of Recognition and the Doctrine of Vibration
Up to now we have dealt with the components of Kashmiri Saivism
that are derived directly from the Tantric traditions of the Saivagamas,
namely, the Kula, Krama and Trika. The two schools of Kashmiri
Saivism left to consider, namely, those concerned with the philosophy
of Recognition (Pratyabhijna) and the Doctrine of Vibration (Spanda),
unlike the others, do not extend back directly into Agamic traditions.
Both have, for this reason, a peculiar importance of their own and
merit separate consideration as independent schools although they
share much in common and have deeply influenced each other. We
turn first to the philosophy of Recognition and conclude with the
Doctrine of Vibration, the subject of this book.
The Pratyabhijna represents the fullest expression of Saiva monism,
systematically worked out into a rational theology of Siva and philosophy
of absolute consciousness with which He is identified. The Pratyabhijna
takes its name from the Stanzas on the Recognition of God (Jsvarapratyabhijnakarika) written by Utpaladeva towards the beginning of
the tenth century. Utpaladeva understood the ultimate experience of
enlightenment to consist essentially of a profound and irreversible
recognition that one's own authentic identity is Siva Himself. According
to him:
The man blinded by ignorance (Maya) and bound by his actions
(karma) is fettered to the round of birth and death, but when knowledge
inspires the recognition of his divine sovereignty and power (aisvarya)
he, full of consciousness alone, is a liberated soul.64
According to Utpaladeva, the soul is bound because he has forgotten
his authentic identity and can only achieve liberation, the ultimate
goal of life, by recognising his true universal nature. Realising that
everything is a part of himself, extending his being in wonderfully
diverse forms, the fettered soul achieves this recognition and with it the

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

conviction that he is not a slave of creation (pasu) but its master (pati).
In this way he who thought himself weak discovers his spiritual might.
Failing to recognise his identity with Siva, the one reality Who is the
life and Being of every existing thing, the soul perceives only their
individual identity and thus severs them from one another and from
himself. For this reason he is seemingly sullied by his actions and
afflicted by the myriad conditions that stand as obstacles to the realisation
of his goals.65 Yearning for liberation, he is like a young woman betrothed
by arrangement to a handsome man. Hearing of his many fine qualities
she comes to love him even though she has never seen him. One day they
chance to meet but she remains indifferent to him until she notices
that he possesses the qualities of the man she is to marry and so, to her
great delight, she recognises him.66 Similarly, just as man and wife
become one in spirit, so the fettered soul becomes one with Siva by
recognising his identity with him, and is liberated.
Utpaladeva's teacher was Somananda whose Vision of Siva
(Sivadrs(i) is the first work of the Recognition school. Somananda
lived towards the end of the ninth century and was, he says, the nineteenth
in line from Tryambaka. Tryambaka, according to Somananda,67
was the mind-born son of Durvasas,68 who taught him the principles
of Saiva monism he had learnt on Mount Kailasa from Srikantha,
a form of Siva.69 Tryambaka figures again in another account, this
time one which refers to the origin of Trika.70 According to this story,
Durvasas was instructed by Snkantha (here represented as an incarnation
of Siva) that "he may spread the wisdom of Trika (sadardhakrama)
which is the essence of the secret of all Saiva scripture."71 Durvasas then
generated from his mind three perfected yogis, namely, Tryambaka,
Amardaka and Snnatha, who taught Saiva monism, dualism and
unity-in-difference, respectively.72 Of these, the lineage (sampradaya)
founded by Tryambaka that transmitted monistic Saivism was none
other than that of the Trika.73
On the basis of this connection J. C. Chatterjee thought the
Pratyabhijna to be the "philosophy proper of the Trika" and identified
the two as did K. C. Pandey.74 At the same time Pandey simply took
the Tryambaka of these accounts to be Somananda's legendary ancestor75
and distinguished between monistic Saivism as a whole founded by
Tryambaka and the Pratyabhijna started by Somananda.76 Presumably
Pandey believed that Trika was the original form of monistic Saivism
of which the Pratyabhijna was a later development, initiated by
Somananda. It seems more likely, however, that Trika was traditionally
identified in this way with monistic Saivism as a whole to enhance its
importance. In the same way, Somananda attributed the beginnings

Introduction

of his own system to a popular mythical figure associated with the origins
of Agamic Saivism in order to lend it the authority of a tradition grounded
in the scriptures. To do this he sought the support of an already existing
mythical account of the origin of the monistic strains in the Agamas.
Utpaladeva, therefore, is justified in referring to the Pratyabhijna
taught by Somananda as a 'New Path'.77 It is, moreover, an entirely
Kashmiri product. Jayaratha, Abhinavagupta's commentator, accordingly says that this, the doctrine of the 'oneness of the Lord' (Jsvaradvayavada\ initiated by Somananda, flourished in Kashmir and it is from
there that it spread to other parts of India where it was received as
a product of that land, as precious and unique to it as saffron itself.78
The importance of the Pratyabhijna in the development of Kashmiri
Saivism lies in its rigorously philosophical exposition of those fundamental principles of monistic Saivism that Kashmiri Saivites considered
to be essentially common to all the schools of Kashmiri Saivism. Through
the Pratyabhijna the monism of the Tantric schools and their idealism
was supported by sound argument and an analysis of the fundamental
problems that any thoroughgoing Indian philosophy must tackle.
These problems include the nature of causality, the problem of change
and continuity, the nature of the absolute and its relationship to its
manifestations and the relationship between God and man.
Somananda and Utpaladeva enjoy the distinction of having
introduced a number of fundamental concepts previously unknown
or poorly understood. Certainly the most important of these new ideas
was the concept of the Superego. According to these philosophers
ultimate reality is Siva Who is the identity of all beings as pure T
consciousness. This entirely original idea had important repercussions
in the later monistic philosophies through which the Tantras were
interpreted. Worth noting also is the fact that the precedents of what
is less original in this philosophy are found not so much in the Agamas
(although it is certainly, as it professes, in harmony with their monistic
strains), but in the works of earlier philosophers and so should be
considered to belong to the history of Indian philosophy rather than
religion.
An important source of the Pratyabhijna is, for example, the
philosophy of the Saivasiddhanta (not to be confused with the Siddhantagamas). Although Saivasiddhanta is dualist in orientation and insists
on a distinction between God and the individual soul, nonetheless it
prefigures many of the essential elements of the philosophy of Recognition. Particularly important in this respect is the Siddhanta's phenomenological analysis of Being which stresses the reality of experience.
The world is quite real79 and consciousness is the essential nature of

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

both God and the soul despite their equally essential differences.
Consciousness is the direct perception of entities just as they are in
themselves, insofar as it is experience-as-such (anubhava) free of
thought-constructs.80
Somananda was concerned with refuting rival Hindu schools;
he does not tackle the traditional enemy of the Hindu philosopher,
namely, the Buddhist. Utpaladeva, on the contrary, builds up the
Pratyabhijna as a critique of the Buddhist doctrine of'no-self (anatmavada)1 and in this way he is clearly following in the tracks of his dualist
Saiva precursors. In a manner reminiscent of Utpaladeva's latter
argumentation, the Siddhanta pointed to the phenomenon of recognition
as proof that objects are not momentary and that they are essential
for language to be possible.82 Moreover, a conscious Self, the Siddhanta
argued, must persist unchanged in order to connect a previous perception
with a subsequent perception as a necessary condition for recognition.83
In Somananda's work, the term 'recognition' appears just once and does
not bear the specific technical sense it has for Utpaladeva. Somananda
does seek to establish that a unity must exist between the perception of
a previously perceived object and its recollection in order that its
recognition as the same be possible, but he does this merely to prove
that an essential unity underlies the two perceptions.84 He does not
think of recognition as the intuitive capacity of consciousness to grasp
its own nature. This extension of the recognitive faculty common to
every act of determinate perception occurs for the first time with
Utpaladeva.
The development of the meaning and implication of the concept
of recognition is emblematic of the logical development of this phase
of the history of Indian philosophical thought from dualist to monistic
Saivism. It serves to stress the fact that the Pratyabhijna developed
in the milieu of philosophical and theological speculation. The Spanda
school and its Doctrine of Vibration, with which this book is concerned,
is best understood, however, as a development of the practical application
of the yogic doctrines of the esoteric Agamic traditions of Kashmir.

The Doctrine of Vibration
Just as the Pratyabhijna school is named after Utpaladeva's
Stanzas on the Recognition of God, so the Spanda school takes its
name from one of its root texts, namely, the Spandakarikd, the Stanzas
on Vibration. The philosophy of the Pratyabhijna focuses on the
liberating recognition of the soul's authentic identity as Siva while the

Introduction

I )octrine of Vibration stresses instead the importance of experiencing
Spanda, the vibration or pulse of consciousness. The mainstay of the
Doctrine of Vibration is the contemplative experience the awakened
yogi has of his true nature as the universal perceiving and acting
consciousness. Every activity in the universe, as well as every perception,
notion, sensation or emotion in the microcosm ebbs and flows as part
of the universal rhythm of the one reality, which is Siva, the one God
Who is the pure conscious agent and perceiver. According to the
Doctrine of Vibration, man can realise his true nature to be Siva by
experiencing Spanda, the dynamic, recurrent and creative activity
of the absolute.
The Spanda school, like the Pratyabhijna, originated and developed
in Kashmir through the works of known authors, not in anonymous
Tantras. Indeed, the origins of this school mark the beginnings of
Kashmiri Saivism in our modern sense of the term. In the first half
of the ninth century, a Saiva ascetic called Vasugupta received, Ksemaraja
tells us, a revelation from Siva in a dream in which he was told that an
important message for all mankind lay hidden on Mount Mahadeva
in Kashmir. Going to the spot indicated to him, he found a boulder on
which were inscribed the Aphorisms of Siva (Sivasutra).5 Consisting
of some eighty brief statements, the Sivasutra summarizes the essentials
of monistic Saiva Yoga. Although its authorship is traditionally
attributed, as is scripture, to Siva Himself, it is nonetheless the first
Kashmiri Saiva work. Concise as it is profound, the Sivasutra required
explanation and so commentaries came to be written, four of which
survive. The most extensive is the Vimarsinl by Ksemaraja, Abhinavagupta's closest disciple. It has already been translated into a number of
languages.
Varadaraja, Ksemaraja's junior contemporary, wrote
another commentary largely based on Ksemaraja's work. Although
lacking originality it does contain a few novel ideas. It is not just a
summary cf it, as is the anonymous Sivasutravrtti. A fourth commentary,
by Bhaskara, however, differs from it in many respects. Predating
Ksemaraja's work, it appears to represent an independent commentatorial
tradition. It is, as yet, untranslated.86
Vasugupta's most prominent disciple was Kallatabhatta who lived
during the reign of King Avantivarman (855-883 A.D.).87 The Stanzas
on Vibration (Spandakarika) are, according to some Kashmiri Saiva
authors,88 the work of Kallatabhafta who wrote them with the intention
of summarizing the teachings of the Sivasutra. Although we cannot be
sure whether it was he who wrote the Stanzas or, as Ksemaraja maintains,
Vasugupta himself, there can be no doubt that he wrote a short commentary (vrtti) on it which was the first of a series of commentaries by

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

various authors, including two by Ksemaraja who took a special
interest in this branch of Kashmiri Saivism. Indeed, it seems that
Ksemaraja's very first work was a commentary on the first verse of the
Stanzas which he called the Essence of Vibration (Spandasamdoha).
After writing his commentary on the Aphorisms, he wrote an extensive
commentary on all the Stanzas called the Determination of Vibration
(Spandanirnaya). This work has been translated.89
In a companion volume we shall publish a translation and study
of Kallata's commentary along with Kemaraja's Essence of Vibration
and the remaining two surviving commentaries that have not yet been
translated, namely, the Lamp of Spanda (Spandapradipikd) by
Bhagavatotpala and the Extensive Commentary (yivrti) by Rajanaka
Rama.90 Although both predate Ksemaraja, they are later than Utpaladeva whom they quote and so belong to the latter half of the tenth
century. The reader is referred to our volume of translations for a
detailed account of these authors and the historical development of
the Doctrine of Vibration as reflected in their works.

Notes on Methodology and Synopsis of Contents
This book can be read from two points of view: as an introduction
to the doctrines and practices of the Spanda school of Kashmiri Saivism
as well as to Kashmiri Saivism as a whole. The reader is thus free to read
this volume alone or else to make use of it as an introductory study to
the companion volume of translations. The scope of the present work
covers the exposition of the Doctrine of Vibration in its most complete
expression as presented by Ksemaraja in his commentaries on the
Stanzas on Vibration, a work which, although considered to be the
root text of the Spanda school, Ksemaraja effectively treats as a concise
and direct exposition of the essentials of Kashmiri Saivism as a whole.
It seems that for this reason he boasts of the superiority of his commentary
over that of others who failed to present such a complete synthesis
of the essential doctrines of all the schools of Kashmiri Saivism.91
Insofar as the fifty-one Stanzas on Vibration present the essential
teachings of the Aphorisms of Siva,92 which Ksemaraja characterizes
as "a compendium of secret Saiva doctrine,1'93 they are a succinct
exposition of monistic Saiva yoga—the 'secret' of the Saivagama.94
Following in Ksemaraja's tracks, this exposition presents Spanda
as a doctrinal formulation of the dynamic character of the absolute
and its manifestations at every level of existence and experience.
Appearing in many forms, it is a fundamental feature of the Saiva

Introduction

absolute, both in the primary Agamic sources and in their exegesis
at the hands of Kashmiri authors. In the present work we have therefore
chosen to cut across the internal distinctions between schools and
traditions within Kashmiri Saivism to present Spanda as a concept
which represents an important point of contact between them, on the
one hand, ond on the other to see how each of these schools contribute
to the development of the Doctrine of Vibration within the context
of the Spanda tradition. In our companion work, particularly in our
analysis of the Stanzas of Vibration and their commentaries, we note
differences in emphasis and terminology and points of divergence between
this and other schools of Kashmiri Saivism. We also indicate how the
commentators who have drawn from other traditions have modified
the original Spanda doctrine and how it has, in its turn, influenced
these other schools. In other words, the presentation of the Doctrine
of Vibration in the present work is systematic and generic, whereas
in the later it is historical and particular.
These two approaches are possible and valid because Kashmiri
Saivism can be studied as a unit and does indeed constitute, according
to its authors, a single corpus of literature. Even so, when we study
these works we find ourselves drawn in two directions, one being to
consider them as part of a whole, and the other to discern in them
different schools or systems.95 Thus on the one hand we can study each
system in the process of its development within the context of Kashmiri
Saivism (and in some cases, through their Agamic antecedents); on
the other hand, we can study Kashmiri Saivism as a collective development
of these various schools. Each system develops to varying degrees,
and in different ways, by the accretion of elements from others and
can be explained in terms of the other systems. Thus the study of
any one of these systems is impossible without reference to the others.
This is particularly true of the Spanda tradition because, as already
noted, it eventually came to represent a focal point of synthesis of all
these schools. From this point of view Spanda presents in general
and essential terms the whole of Kashmiri Saivism.
Thus although this book is about Spanda, the Pratyabhijna serves
as an important source, particularly for the first two chapters because,
despite differences in both doctrine and terminology, it has served,
within the extended ambit of the Spanda tradition presented by Rajanaka
Rama and Ksemaraja, as a definitive statement and defence, in philosophical terms, of Spanda doctrine. The point of contact is the idealism
of both systems. Consciousness rather than Being is the most perfect
representation of the absolute. It is not just a consciousness which
observes but one that actively perceives itself as its object through,

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

and as, each act of perception. The fundamental concept of consciousness
as a universally active and absolute principle is common to both Spanda
and Pratyabhijna. Indeed, it is common to every formulation of the
nature of ultimate reality we find expressed in the varying terminology
of the doctrinal systems which constitute the semantic manifold of
Kashmiri Saivism as a whole.
Spanda is the spontaneous and recurrent pulsation of the absolute
objectively manifest as the rhythm of the arising and subsidence of
every detail of the cosmic picture that appears within its infinite expanse.
At the same time, Spanda is the inner universal vibration of consciousness
as its pure perceptivity (upalabdhfta) which constitutes equally its
cognizing subjectivity (jnatftvd) and agency (kartrtva). Common to
all these systems is this liberating insight into the nature of the outer
recurrence of reality through its manifest forms as an expression of its
inner freedom and inherent power. It is for this reason that it is possible
to move from the world of discourse of one system to that of another
to form a single universe of expression.
In Chapter One the Saiva concept of the absolute is contrasted
with that developed through an exegesis of the Upanisads by Sankara
in his Advaita Vedanta. Although this form of non-dualist Vedanta
was unknown to these authors, it represents, typologically, forms of
absolutism they knew well, namely, those that understood non-duality
solely as the transcendental unity of the absolute. This transcendental
absolute is the infinite, supreme reality (paramartha) contrasted with
the finite as the ground of its apparent existence. The finite, although
not totally unreal, is a lesser reality of undefinable status (anirvacaniya),
much as an illusion exists in relation to its real ground.
This approach is contrasted with that of monistic Saivism, which
establishes that reality can be one and undivided only if it is understood
to be a creative, infinite absolute that manifests itself actively through
the finitude and transitoriness of phenomena perpetually changing in
consonance with the absolute's activity. Thus we encounter Spanda in
its most fundamental form when we deal with the Saiva solution to the
problem of relating the finite to the absolute—a problem common
to all absolutisms. It is Spanda, the inscrutable pulse of consciousness,
that moves and yet moves not, that changes and yet remains eternally
itself, that ensures that both manifestation and the absolute, its unmanifest
source, form part of a single process which passes freely from one to
the other in such a way that both poles are at the same level and equally
real.
Somananda lists a number of Vedantas in terms of their most
characteristic doctrines. Amongst them are the bhr&ntivadins, who

Introduction

maintain that the world is an illusion and hence unreal.96 Thus, although
he did not know about Sarikara's Advaita, Somananda was well aware
that the world of manifestation can be understood to be less than
real, and he is careful to refute this view in various places throughout
his work. Later Pratyabhijna authors, particularly Abhinavagupta,
follow suit. The Pratyabhijna doctrine of manifestation (abhasavada)
differs radically from that Tormulated by the forms of Vedanta typified
by Sarikara's Advaita. From the Advaita point of view, manifestation
is an appearing to be (dbhdsa) in the place of actual existence. The
unity of being appears to be a multiplicity in the sense of its seeming
to appear as such. Those ignorant of the underlying unity behind this
apparent diversity assume that the latter is all that exists whereas it
has no real independent existence. The Pratyabhijna also understands
manifestation to be an appearance {abhasa)—not, however, in the
sense of a semblance, but as the manifest form of the absolute. The
everyday world of diversity is not a world of semblances contrasted
with an absolute that preserves its authenticity and absolute nature
by never being actually and phenomenally manifest.
Although these Kashmiri schools are idealist, they affirm the
reality of the world and the common commerce of daily life (yyavahara).
Even so, the reality status of appearances is variously conceived in the
works of Pratyabhijna authors, and in Kashmiri Saivism as a whole.
To quote extreme examples, we can observe a contrast between the
uncompromising realism of Somananda—for whom even illusions are
real insofar as they are manifest appearances—and Abhinava's adaptation
of the Paramdrthasdra, in which we find a clear-cut distinction between
levels of manifestation in the absolute, such that the higher levels are
fuller expressions of its essential nature, and therefore are more 'real'
than the lower levels. Similarly, we can observe a range of views in
the commentaries on the Stanzas on Vibration. Bhagavatotpala, for
example, influenced by monistic Kashmiri Vaisnavism,97 maintains
that the universe is, in a sense, both a real as well as an apparent transformation of the absolute (parindma and vivarta).9 Rajanaka Rama,
on the other hand, tends to interpret the Stanzas as positing a distinction
between a real, ultimate reality (paramdrtha) and the unreal (asat)
experience of pleasure, pain and dullness.99 Kemaraja, for his part,
maintains that in reality "nothing arises or falls away" but, even so,
asserts that manifestation is real in the sense that it is the shining appearing
of the power of consciousness.100 The divergence and contrast between
the presentation of Spanda doctrine and its original form in the Stanzas
is a measure of the divergence of views within the wider ambit of the
works by Kashmiri Saiva authors and those they accepted as authoritative.

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Our point of departure here is the presentation of the world-affirming
realism of Saiva absolutism as a whole. Despite the fact that it was
variously tempered in the course of its exposition and development,
this realism remained essentially unchanged.
Chapter Two deals with the Pratyabhijna representation of the
Saiva absolute as Light (prakasa) and reflective awareness (vimarsa),
terms which denote the pure Light of the absolute and its infinite
appearing. The absolute is Siva Who is universal consciousness and
man's authentic nature (atman) Who, reflecting on Himself, actively
generates and discerns His own manifestations.101 Thus a striking
feature of Pratyabhijna literature in its original sources is the regular use
made of analogies with the properties of light to express and explain
the nature of manifestation. It is common in these works for the author
to express the notion that an object is manifest, appears, is visible, or
just simply exists, by saying that "it shines." Thus, typically, the
Pratyabhijna establishes that all things participate in the one reality
by arguing that nothing 'shines' (i.e., appears, manifests or exists in its
apparent form) if it is not illuminated by the light of consciousness.
If phenomena were to be anything but 'light', they could not 'shine',
that is, exist. One cannot help recalling here a famous passage from
the Svetasvataropanisad:
The sun shines not there, neither moon nor stars. There these
flashes of lightning do not shine nor does fire. It is that by whose shining
all things shine. It is the light of That which illumines all this.102
Light and its attendant phenomena fascinated Kashmiri minds.
Thus the dualist Kashmiri Siddhantins also make use of light analogies
freely, as do monistic Kashmiri Vaisnavas and Kashmiri poets such as
Ratnakara (the author of the Haravijaya) who uses words for iight'
or 'brilliance' to express the appearance of the details which fill out and
decorate his poetic descriptions. Even so, it is with Utpaladeva and
Abhinavagupta that this terminology really comes into its own.
Somananda makes but sparse use of it, while in the Aphorisms of
Siva and the Stanzas on Vibration which predate Somananda, the
terms 'light' (prakasa) and 'reflective awareness' (vimarsa) are entirely
absent.
Consequently, Spanda doctrine (and so, one could add, Kashmiri
Saivism at its inception) originally lacked an important characterisation
of absolute consciousness which clearly distinguishes it from other
Indian absolutisms, namely, its existential status as a Superego (ahambhava). Utpaladeva was later to insist that if the light of consciousness

Introduction

were devoid of reflective awareness, it would be as inert and lifeless as
the light of a crystal.103 He meant to say that the light of consciousness
not only illumines and makes manifest all things, but that it is a living
light which, reflecting on itself, is an infinite, self-conscious subjectivity.
This subjectivity, as the pure T sense, is the very "life of all living
beings."104 Somananda also refers to Siva as the pure egoity of'myself
(asmad)105 and in so doing clearly distinguishes his view from that
of his senior predecessors who were the custodians of the doctrines
of the Aphorisms of Siva and the Stanzas on Vibration.
A careful, unprejudiced reading of the Stanzas without reference
to its later commentaries (all of which postdate Utpaladeva) reveals
that despite the fact that commentators found the Superego hidden in
these verses, it was not really there. The original concept of the Self
in these early works was, in fact, generally closer to that of the Agamas,
which understood liberation as a freedom from egoity that entailed
no loss of personal identity. Accordingly, in the Stanzas, this selfidentity is neither understood as an impersonal 'atman'nor as a Superego,
but rather as one's own being (svabhdva) which, belonging to none other,
is intimately one's own (svasvabhava) as one's own fundamental state
of being (svasthiti). This personal identity is the living soul (jiva) who
is none other than Siva Himself.106 The soul's inherent and authentic
attribute (akrtrimadharmd) is cognizing subjectivity (jnatrtva) coupled
with agency (kartrtva).101 Yet although it is thus both the agent and
knower, the soul is nowhere identified with an ego^onsciousness
(ahambhdva) even though it is said to be a state of pure perceiving
subjectivity (upalabdhrta). In this way the soul is not confused with
the individual subject (grdhaka) set in opposition to its object.108 In
the Stanzas and in Kallaja's commentary, the ego is consistently relegated
to the level of a notion or conception of oneself (ahampratyaya) which
inevitably figures as a part of an idea or mental representation of the
type: "I am happy, sad or dull." It is never found as a pure ego outside
such patterns of representation.
Of the commentators, only Bhagavatotpala observes this feature of
Spanda doctrine without overlaying and obscuring it with ulterior
interpretations. This is because he is not concerned to integrate
Pratyabhijna into Spanda doctrine, as are the other commentators
who stress, in typically Pratyabhijna terms, that the goal of the Spanda
teachings is the recognition (pratyabhijna) of Spanda as the activity
of consciousness. In this way, they say, it is possible to lay hold of one's
own authentic identity as the universal agent and perceiver, understood
as the universal vibration (sdmdnyaspandd) of the pure ego. Although
Bhagavatotpala does talk of recognition, and even quotes Utpaladeva's

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Stanzas on Recognition, his intention is to refer to nothing more than
a faculty of individualised consciousness which enables One to recognise
past experience and link it with the present. He does this in order to
establish the permanence of a personal identity constantly and universally
present in all experience. He never represents recognition as an intuitive
insight into reality. Bhagavatotpala is in this instance (as he is in general)
more consistent with original Spanda doctrine than are other commentators. This is not just because he seeks to be faithful to the text, but
also because the monistic Vainavism he integrates into Spanda doctrine
agrees with it more exactly, in this respect, than does the PratyaDhijna.
Even so, Spanda is generally represented as the activity of the pure
T and more particularly as a manner of characterising the reflective
awareness (vimarsa) of its universal Light. This identification has
been so thorough that the doctrine of Self as 'one's own nature' (svabhdva
or svasvabhdva) no longer features evidently in the works of Kashmiri
Saivas. Although it is in fact a technical term charged with a very
specific meaning in its own right, 'own nature' (svabhdva) seems in
these works to be merely a manner of referring to oneself as an immediate
qualification of the ultimate principle and, as such, to pure T consciousness.109
In this way the doctrinal identity of the Spanda teachings has
been worn away, so much so, that as eminent a scholar as K. C. Pandey
has been led to say that the Stanzas on Vibration is only a minor treatise
dealing with certain aspects of the Pratyabhijna system, particularly
with what is termed 'reflective awareness' (vimarsa) in Utpaladeva's
Stanzas on Recognition.110 Pandey has been misled by the equations
made in the Spanda commentaries as well as in the Pratyabhijna of
cognate concepts and terms in the two systems. Thus, for example,
'sphuratta", meaning literally 'radiant pulse' or 'glittering', is an inherent
quality of the light of consciousness in the Pratyabhijna world of
discourse. It also means 'pulsation' or 'vibration', and so quite naturally
is equated with Spanda by Abhinavagupta,111 who sees it as corresponding
to the activity of the reflective awareness of consciousness which reflects
upon its manifestations within its own pure noetic continuum. Thus
Light (prakdsa) represents consciousness as its own illuminating
knowledge, and awareness (vimarsa) its activity.
In Chapter Two we discuss this dimension of Spanda in Pratyabhijna
terms. In Chapter Three we examine what is meant by 'Spanda' in its
own terms as a movement which proceeds from the interior domain of
undifferentiated consciousness, out to the exterior domain of its
manifestation which is created as it moves outward and is destroyed
when it returns to the inner state of undifferentiated unity.

Introduction

Just as the step from a personal self-identity, which is at the same
time the universal perceiving and acting subjectivity identified with
Siva Himself, to a universal T consciousness is a short one, so too
that from Spanda (as the creative-cum-destructive activity of Reality)
to its representation as power is easily made. In the original Spanda
doctrine 'Spanda' is a neutral term simply denoting this recurrent
activity, whether it be that of the Supreme Principle in itself (equivalent
to Siva, the male polarity) or that of its power (the female polarity)—a
power that extends and withdraws as the will or intent to manifestation.
The commentators are, however, generally more struck by the power of
this activity, than by the activity itself, and so Kemaraja goes so far
as to talk of the power of Spanda as 'Spandasakti\ a term unknown
to other commentators. Once again it is Kemaraja and Rajanaka Rama
who depart most distinctly from the original form of Spanda doctrine.
Kemaraja, who everywhere in his works finds equivalents in Krama
doctrine for the essential principles of other systems, here sees Spandasakti as the Krama Goddess of Consciousness (samviddevi). Rajanaka
Rama, who is not concerned to integrate Krama into the Doctrine
of Vibration, finds equivalents in the Saktism of PradyumnabhaUa.
Thus, universal Spanda, which he equates with the 'principle of power'
(saktatattva),ul is none other than the Supreme Goddess (paramesvarl),
who manifests Herself as all the principles (tattva) constituting the one
reality—including Siva Himself. Therefore, according to Rajanaka
Rama, Spanda is the Goddess Who is the highest principle.
It is not surprising, therefore, that a number of modern scholars
consider Spanda doctrine to be Sakta-oriented.113 Indeed, Spanda
regularly figures as Sakti in Kashmiri Saiva works in general and so
is presented in this way in Chapter Four where Sarikara and His Spanda
nature are viewed as the equivalents of Siva and Sakti. The relationship
between these polarities within the unity of the absolute is examined from
various points of view, as presented in the works of Kashmiri Saiva
authors, and in the Agamas which serve as their sources. The dynamic
recurrence which characterises their relationship is, in this exposition,
the focus of attention. The pulse of their union and separation is the
archetype of the fusion and divergence of opposites, through the interplay
of the elements constituting the cosmic order that takes place in harmony
with their recurrent emergence and subsidence into the absolute.
Although not discussed in these terms in Spanda literature, it finds
a place here as a feature of monistic Saiva (as well as Sakta) metaphysics
and its verbalization in these symbolic terms. The relationship between
Sankara and Spanda is in this way explained as that which exists
between the absolute, as the power-holder, and its power. This relation-

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

ship is itself Spanda.
Chapter Five discusses a subject which is clearly an element of
original Spanda doctrine, namely, the Wheel of Energies (sakticakrd)
of which Sankara is both the source and master. This is a very important
topic for Ksemaraja who comments extensively on the nature of the
Wheel of Energies. He is motivated primarily by the intention to
demonstrate (as was his teacher Abhinavagupta) that the most secret,
and hence highest Saiva doctrine, is that of the cycle of powers
as presented in the Krama tradition, particularly that of the Twelve
Kalis (which Abhinava describes in his Light of the Tantras)114 and
that of VamesvarL The Wheel of Energies is in this way presented as
the cycle of universal consciousness which expresses itself at the
individual level as, and through, the powers of the senses.
It follows that the next topic is the body of consciousness to which
belongs the power of perception operating through the circle of the
senses. Thus this is the subject of Chapter Six. The yogi and his
experience have gradually come to the fore in the course of our exposition
and it is this that concerns us primarily in the remaining portion of this
work, just as it does Spanda doctrine. Thus we discuss two forms of
contemplative absorption, which Ksemaraja says are the subject of
the entire Spanda teachings, namely, that 'with the eyes closed' and
that 'with the eyes open' {nimllana and unmllanasamadhi). Spanda
doctrine equates the opening and closing of Siva's eyes (unmesa and
nimesd) with His pulsation. It seems obvious to equate it also with the
introverted and extroverted phases of the enlightened yogi's contemplation who, one with Siva, similarly creates and destroys the world
of his objectified perceptions by opening and closing his eyes in these
two phases of contemplation. Even so, only Ksemaraja actually makes
this connection. In fact, these terms themselves are peculiar to his
vocabulary. The concept is attested in the works of earlier authors,
just as it is in the primary sources, but these terms, as such, are not
previously found elsewhere, not even in Abhinavagupta's works.
Thus, although Ksemaraja most likely derived these formats of representation of yogic states from Krama sources, his application of these
categories both fills them out and further contributes to Spanda
doctrine. We therefore discuss them in this chapter because they are
connected with the operation of the senses and with the yogi's experience
of them in consonance with their authentic nature as the powers of
consciousness operating in the field of its own manifestation.
In Chapter Seven we discuss the nature of bondage and the means
to liberation. Although our concern is primarily with Spanda practice,
we present it here in terms of the system of classification of the means

Introduction

to liberation (updya) described by Abhinavagupta. Abhinavagupta
quotes the Mdlinivijayottaratantra as his authority when defining
the fundamental characteristics of these categories;115 even so, there
is no evidence to suggest that this system of classification is applied
extensively, if at all, in the Agamas or elsewhere. On the other hand,
it appears that he learnt it from Sambhunatha who taught him Trika
doctrine. Thus instructed by the oral tradition, he went on to add
it to the patrimony of literate Kashmiri Saivism. It is for this reason
that we find no trace of it in any of the works that predate him. Even
so, Ksemaraja considered that the three sections into which the Aphorisms
of Siva are divided dealt separately with these three orders of practice
and that the Spanda doctrine of the Stanzas could similarly be analysed
in terms of these categories. We conclude this work, therefore, with
an exposition of these categories in relation to Spanda practice and
refer the reader to our translation and analysis of the Stanzas on Vibration
for its specific features and further details.

The Integral Monism of
Kashmiri Saivism
In India, metaphysics serves as a theoretical framework supporting
a body of spiritual discipline; it is never merely abstract speculation.
More than a reasoned opinion, it indicates the seeker's attitude to
his own experience, an attitude that forms the path he treads to salvation.
When the seeker acts upon the conclusions he has reached, philosophy
blends imperceptibly into religion. To the degree in which he participates
in this new attitude, death yields to immortality and the darkness of
doubt and ignorance is banished by the light of spiritual illumination.
Underpinning the quest is the ultimate goal: gnosis, which is not a
knowledge of things but insight into their essential nature. Metaphysical
insight is the pinnacle of knowledge. Long ago those who attained this
absolute knowledge exclaimed: "no longer can anyone bring before
us anything that we have not already found understood or known."1
It is essentially a state or experience of recognition.
The ways to this realisation are various. We can tread the Path of
Wisdom (jnanamarga) and seek to intuit the Real, illumined by its
own brilliance, in the directness of (an essentially mystical) insight
developed through meditative practice and disciplined reasoning
(viveka). Another way is that of Devotion {bhaktimarga) to the
embodiment of truth experienced with religious awe and wonder as
Deity. A third way is to follow the Path of Yoga and seek freedom
directly through mastery {aisvarya) of the Self and with it the All
which it contains and governs. From the yogi's point of view this is

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

the most direct approach, for all paths tend towards this achievement.
As Karl Potter remarks:
The ultimate value recognised by classical Hinduism in its most
sophisticated sources is not morality but freedom, not rational selfcontrol in the interests of the community's welfare but complete control
over one's environment—something which includes self-control but
also involves control of others and even control of the physical sources
of power in the universe.2
Freedom (svatantrya) in the sense of both autonomy (kaivalya)
and mastery (aisvarya) is the goal. It can be attained only if we manage
to rid ourselves of outer constraints and limitations. To do this we
must be able to homologise with a single, all-embracing reality from
which nothing is excluded—neither the world nor ourselves. Th,e
dualism of most devotional approaches, however tempered, understands
reality in terms which preclude the possibility of ultimate release. If
we are to attain salvation, reality can only be one and absolute. In the
Hindu tradition the nature of this absolute has been understood in a
wide variety of ways. Here we shall consider only two. One is embodied
in the metaphysics of Kashmiri Saivism and the other in that of Advaita
Vedanta.
Advaita Vedanta emerged, to a large extent, as a critique of
Samkhya dualism. Classical Samkhya posits two realities, both eternal
but of contrary nature. One is Puru?a, 'the Person1, the other Prakrti
or 'Nature'. The Person is the Self who, as pure sentient consciousness,
is the witness of the activity of all that lies in the sphere of objectivity.
The latter includes not only the outer physical world but also the body
and mind the Person inhabits, vitalising and illumining it with his
conscious presence.
Although varied and constantly changing, all
that lies in the sphere of objectivity shares a common nature. All
thoughts, perceptions or physical phenomena are equally part of the
play of Nature—Prakrti—which manifests in this way to fulfil the need
of the Person for phenomenal experience. In this experience the Person
represents the principle of sentience and Nature that of change and
activity. Just as insentient Nature cannot view itself, and so is as if blind,
similarly the Person does not act or change, and so is as if lame. 3 The
two together make experience possible. The content of this experience
is real but unsatisfactory. The Person is bound by Nature; it experiences
the changes in Nature as if they were its own and so suffers their painful
consequences. The Person is freed when he discriminates between
himself and Nature. The latter then retires into its original unmanifest

Integral Monism of Kashmiri Saivism

state severing its association with the Person.
Isvarakrsna explains:
Just as a dancing girl retires from her dance after performing for
the audience, in the same way Nature (Prakrti) retires after exhibiting
herself to the Person.4

In this way the Person achieves a state of transcendental detachment
(kaivalya). But because the Person is an independent reality, already
separate from Nature, he can in fact neither be bound nor released.
Therefore, no one is actually bound, no one released and no one
transmigrates. [It is] Nature, the abode of diversity that transmigrates,
is bound and released.5

Ultimately, bondage is unreal and no relationship is possible
between an eternal subject and an equally eternal object. The problem
is that they cannot be related to one another unless this relationship
is also eternal. In order to preserve the transcendental integrity of the
Person, the reality of Nature must be denied. Not only does the Advaita
Vedanta do this, but it also denies that there is a plurality of Persons.
The Self, each individual's most authentic identity, is beyond the
specifications of the qualities of Nature, and so nothing can distinguish
one 'self from another. The Self is one only and hence none other than
the Brahman, the absolute, free of all specification. From this point of
view the one reality can only be grasped through negation.6 However,
although this safeguards it from predication it also implies that the
empirical (vyavahara) is itself a negation of absolute reality. As Ksemaraja
puts it: "the Brahman is what the world is not."7 And so the world
is less than real. The Brahman is always empirically unmanifest
(avyakta). It is beyond the reach of the senses but, like the Person,
is the witness (sdksin) of all things. It can never be an object of knowledge
for "who can know the knower?"9 Ultimately it is that which cannot
be grasped or perceived. The world which is 'grasped1 and 'perceived'
cannot be the Brahman and is consequently less than real.
Absolute Being is not an existing quality to be found in things;
it is not an object of thought or the result of production. It is that from
which both speech and mind turn back, unable to comprehend its
fullness.10 To make this point Sankara quotes a passage from a lost
Upanisad in his commentary on the Brahmasutra. Baskali, an Upanisadic
sage, is being questioned by his disciple about the nature of the absolute.
He sits motionless and silent. "Teach me, sir," prayed the disciple.

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

The teacher continued to be silent. When addressed a second and third
time he said: "I am teaching, but you do not follow. The Self is silence."1 J
The undetermined and unthinkable character of the Brahman
is a consequence of the absolutes's eternal and immutable nature.12
To concede the existence of a real universe is, from the Vedantin's point
of view,13 to posit the existence of a reality apart from the Brahman.
Nor can we simply identify a real universe with the absolute unless
we are prepared to compromise its unchanging, absolute status. The
criterion of authenticity is immutability. Reality never changes; only
that which is less than real can appear to do so. Reality is constant
in the midst of change. What this means essentially is that there is
change although nothing changes. This impossible situation is reflected
in the ultimate impossibility of change itself. That which does not
exist prior to its changing and at the end, after it has changed, must be
equally non-existent between these two moments. Although the world
of change appears to be real, it cannot be so.14 Change, according to
the Vedantin, presupposes a loss of identity. Reality cannot suffer
transformation; if it were to do so, it would become something else
and the real would be deprived of its reality. The immortal can never
become mortal, nor can the mortal become immortal. The ultimate
nature of anything cannot change.15 Change of any sort is merely
apparent (vivarta); the world of change and becoming is a false superimposition (adhydropa, adhyasa) on the absolute.16
In cosmic terms, the mistake (bhranti) consists of the supposition
that the real Brahman is the unreal universe and the unreal universe
is the real Brahman. In microcosmic terms, it is the mistake of falsely
conceiving the body, mind or even one's personality to be the Self.
In the same way as the image of a snake is falsely superimposed on a
rope, similarly the universe is falsely projected onto the real substratum,
the Brahman. Ignorance is not merely a personal lack of knowledge,
but a cosmic principle. As such it is called "Maya," the undefinable
factor (anirvacaniya) that brings this mistake in identity about. The
reality status of this cosmic illusion is also undefinable: on the one hand
it is not Brahman, the sole reality; on the other hand it is not absolutely
non-existent like a hare's horn or the son of a barren woman.
Brahman is the source of world appearances only in the sense of
being their unconditioned ground or essential nature. The universe
is false not because it has no nature of its own but because it does have one.
Just as the illusion of a snake disappears when one sees that it is nothing
but a rope, similarly cancellation (badha) of the empirically real occurs
when the absolute reality of the Brahman is realised. Thus, according
to Vedanta, appearance implies the real, while the real need not imply

Integral Monism of Kashmiri Saivism

appearance. To appear is essentially to appear in place of the real,
but to be real is not necessarily to appear. All things-exist because the
absolute exists. It is their Being. Thus the very existence of phenomena
implies their non-existence as independent realities. When they are
known to be as they are, in the fullest sense of their existence, their
phenomenal nature disappears leaving the ground of Being naked and
accessible. This approach was validated by a critique of experience.
The Vedanta established that space, time and the other primary categories
of our daily experience can have no absolute existence. It was therefore
necessary to make a distinction between a relative truth—that accepted
by the precritical common man—and an absolute truth discovered
at a higher level of consciousness.
The Saiva absolutist17 rejects any theory that maintains that the
universe is less than real. From his point of view a doctrine of two
truths, one absolute and the other relative, endangers the very foundation
of monism. The Kashmiri Saiva approach is integral:18 everything is
given a place in the economy of the whole. It is equally wrong to say
that reality is either one or diverse. Those who do so fail to grasp the
true nature of things which is neither as well as both.19
"We, do not" says Abhinavagupta, "base our contention that
[reality] is one because of the contradictions inherent in saying that it
is dual. It is your approach {paksa) that accepts this [method]. [While],
if [duality and oneness] were in fact [to contradict each other], they
would clearly be two [distinct realities]."20
The Vedantin, who maintains that non-duality is the true nature
of the absolute by rejecting duality as only provisionally real, is ultimately
landed in a dualism between the real and illusory by the foolishness
of his own excessive sophistry (vdcafadurvidya).
Oneness is better
understood as the coextensive unity (ekarasa) of both duality and unity.21
They are equally expressions of the absolute. 22 As Gopinath Kaviraj says:
According to Sarikara, Brahman is truth and Maya is inexplicable
(anirvacaniya). Hence the [Advaitin's] endeavour to demonstrate the
superiority of Advaita philosophy is turned against his own system.
It tarnishes the picture of its philosophical perfection and profundity.
He cannot accept Maya to be a reality, therefore his non-dualism is
exclusive. The whole system is based on renunciation and elimination
and thus is not all-embracing . . . . By accepting Maya to be Brahman
(brahmamayi), eternal (nitya) and real (satyarupa). Brahman and Maya
[in the Tantra] become one and coextensive.23

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

The Vedantin seeks to preserve the integrity of the absolute by
safeguarding it from all possible predication. The Saiva24 defends the
absolute status of the absolute by ensuring that it is in every way selfsubsistent (svatantra) and all-embracing (puma). The integral nature
of the absolute allows for the existence of the world of objectively
perceivable phenomena along with the pure subjectivity of consciousness.
The two represent opposite polarities of a single reality. Of these two,
objectivity is insignificant (tuccha) with respect to the ultimacy
(paramarthatva) of the subject.25 It is the sphere of negation, in which
objectivity presents itself as a void (sunya) in relation to the fullness
of the subject.26 Thus it appears in some Kashmiri Saiva works that
objectivity is said to be false with respect to the ultimate reality of
absolute consciousness.27 What is meant, however, is that nothing
can exist apart from the absolute; not merely in the sense that only the
absolute exists, but also that nothing exists separated from it. All
things are as if nothing in themselves apart from the absolute in this
sense alone—it does not mean that they do not exist.28 The world, in
other words, represents a level of manifestation within the absolute
which in the process of its emanation must, at a certain stage, radically
contrast one aspect of its nature with another to appear as the duality
and multiplicity of manifestation.29 The One is not any one thing because
it is all things;30 excluding nothing from its omniformity, it cannot be
defined in any other way than as the Supremely Real (paramartha).
The Real is, from this point of view, the All (nikhila). It is the pure
absolute because nothing stands outside it which can in any way qualify
its absoluteness; on this point at least, Saiva and Vedantin are in
agreement. It is the Saiva's approach to establishing the absoluteness
of the absolute which differs from the Vedanta. The Saiva method is
one of an ever widening inclusion of phenomena mistakenly thought
to be outside the absolute. The Vedantin, on the other hand, seeks to
understand the nature of the absolute by excluding (nisedhd) every
element of experience which does not conform to the criterion of
absoluteness, until all that remains is the unqualified Brahman. The
Saiva's approach is one of affirmation and the Vedantin's one of negation.
They arrive at the absolute from opposite directions. The Vedantin's
way is a path of renunciation founded on dispassion (vairagya) born
of discrimination (yiveka) between the absolutely real and the provisionally relative. It is only when all attachment, and, ultimately, perception
and thought of the illusory world of phenomena—Maya—have been
abandoned, that the true nature of the absolute is realised to be as it
really is, that is, free of all phenomenality. The realisation of the true
nature of the relative accompanies the realisation of the absolute.

Integral Monism of Kashmiri Saivism

It is to realise that the world never existed, just as it does not at present,
nor ever will.31 It is just a magic show.
One could say that in this approach the field of consciousness is
increasingly restricted to exclude the 'unreal' and focus on the real.
It is the Way of Transcendence, and we progress along it by denying
all ultimate significance to the transitory. The doctrine is one of world
denial. Thus Gautfapada, Sarikara's teacher, says:
Constantly reflecting that everything is full of misery, (sarvam duhkham)
one should withdraw the mind from the pleasures nurtured by desire.
Recalling constantly that the birthless Brahman is all things, one no
longer perceives creation.32

The Advaitic path leads to a freedom 'from'. Desire is denied because
it individualises attention, dispersing it among the objects of desire
which are defined as impure matter and ultimately unreal as opposed
to the absolute, which is spirit and reality itself. Freedom is ignorance
of 'matter-unreality'; conversely, ignorance of the spirit is equivalent
to knowledge of matter. These correspond to:
A) A knowledge of qualities and conditions through acts of
determining knowledge {vikalpd).
B) A direct experience (sak$atkara) of the unqualified (nirguna)
free of determinate perception (nirvikalpa).

Case A implies a contrast between subject and object, which is
unreal or illusory; case B implies the disappearance of the subject-object
distinction by denying the reality of the object, and thus expresses the
real state of affairs. A and B are not really opposites because A is unreal;
consequently the contrast between A and B comes under category A
and so is illusory. In other words, our spiritual ignorance (avidya)
consists of the false conception that there is a real relationship between
the finite and the infinite. Herein we find the philosophical justification
for an attitude of detachment. The relationless absolute is realised
by the elimination of the finite.
The New Way (navamarga)33 taught in Kashmiri Saiva doctrine
is transcendence through active participation. Not freedom 'from',
but freedom 'to'. Desire is not denied, but accepted at a higher level
as the pure will or freedom (svdtantrya) of the absolute. Desire is to be
eliminated only if it is desire 'for' (akariksa), rather than desire 'to' (icchd).
Matter cannot sully the absolute, nor is it unreal. Freedom is achieved
by knowing 'matter-unreality' completely; ignorance of the spirit is

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

ignorance of the true nature of matter. From this point of view ignorance
is failure to experience directly the intimate connection (sambandha)
between the infinite and the finite, thus justifying an active participation
in the infinite-finite continuum. Following this New Way the transition
from the finite to the infinite does not require that we postulate any
ontological distinction between them. The finite is a symbol of the
infinite. The infinite stamps its seal (mudra) onto its own nature replete
with all possible forms of the finite.34 This is the transcendental attitude
of the absolute, namely its impending manifestation as the finite. Reality
is the state of eternal emergence {satatodita) of the finite from the
infinite and vice versa. Expansion of the relative distinction (bheda)
between the elements constituting the All is equivalent to contraction
of the undivided (abheda) awareness of its totality and vice versa.
Neither excludes the other, but together they participate in the allembracing fullness (purnata) of the pulsation (spanda) of the absolute
in its different phases of being. True knowledge (sadvidya) from this
point of view, is to know that the apparent opposites normally contrasted
with one another, such as subject and object, unity and diversity, absolute
and relative, are aspects of the one reality.
The Vedantin's way is one of withdrawal from the finite in order
to achieve a return (nivrtti) to the infinite. This process, however, from
the Saiva point of view is only the first stage. The next stage is the
outward journey (pravrtti) from the infinite to the finite. When perfection
is achieved in both movements, that is, from the finite to the infinite and
back, man participates in the universal vibration of the absolute and
shares in its essential freedom. Thenceforth, he no longer travels "to'
and 'from' but eternally 'through' the absolute, realised to be at once
both infinite and finite.35 The highest level of dispassion (paravairagya)
is not attained by turning a\>ay from appearance but by realising that
the absolute manifests as all things.36 The absolute freely makes diversity
{bheda) manifest through its infinite power. The wise know that this
power pours into the completeness of the All (visvamandala) and in
so doing, flows only into itself.37 Standing at the summit of Being
(parakastha) the absolute is brimming over with phenomena. The
streams of cosmic manifestation flow everywhere from it as does water
from a tank full to overflowing.38 Replenished inwardly by its own
power, it emerges spontaneously as the universe, and makes manifest
each part of the cosmic totality as one with its own nature.39
The involution of phenomena and their reassimilation into the
absolute is not enough. True knowledge and perfect dispassion can
only be achieved when we realise that the universe is the expansion
(vikasa) of the absolute void of content (sunyarupa).40 The absolute will

Integral Monism of Kashmiri Saivism

(icchd) is the driving force behind this cosmic expansion. It is the pure
intent of Being to act and exist which although, in a sense, is similar
to mundane desire is unsullied by any object of its intent {isyamdna)41 and
so differs fundamentally from it. The absolute yearns for nothing other
than itself. Desire is not to be abandoned but elevated to the level of
this pure will (icchdmdtra). This is achieved not by restraint or suppression
of desire, but by merging it with the divine creative will of the absolute.
This is the spontaneity of the Way of Wholeness. Quotes Jayaratha:
Those who went before said that [desire] is checked by the practice
of dispassion; we teach that this is achieved by desisting from all effort.42
The absolute oscillates between a 'passion' (rdgd) to create and
'dispassion' (virago) from the created. This is the eternal pulsation—
Spanda—of the absolute. Through it the absolute transforms itself
into all things and then returns back into the emptiness (sunya) of its
undifferentiated nature. Both poles of this movement are equally real;
both are equally absolute. Allowing for the reality of manifestation,
the Saiva absolute is called the Great Oneness (mahddvaya).43
An
experienced music lover, hearing a fast sequence of notes played on
the vind can distinguish whether the microtones are high or low. 44
Similarly the well-practiced yogi can discern the unity of reality while
phenomena are manifest to him. If duality and unity were in fact
absolute contraries, the moment they appeared together, they would
cancel each other out. This, however, is not the case. We continue to
experience the diversity of daily life (yyavahdra)45
The Vedantin who
distinguishes between duality and unity, saying that the former is false
while the latter is true, is under the spell of Maya—the ignorance he
seeks so hard to overcome. All forms of relative distinction, even that
between the dual and the non-dual, are due to Maya; none of them are
applicable to the uncreated, self-existent reality, free of all limitation.46
Abhinava writes:
Where duality, unity and both unity and duality are equally manifest
is said to be [true] unity. To those who object that in that case diversity
(bheda) must also exist, [we say:] so be it: we do not want to speak
overmuch. We neither shun nor accept [anything] that [manifests to us]
here [in this world] as you do. If you wish to be supported by the view
that .. ^urs all then resort to the doctrine of Supreme Unity, the
great refuge you should adopt.47
The one reality is manifest both as unity and diversity. There can

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

be no real unity unless diverse elements are united in the wholeness
of totality. On the other hand, without unity, diversity would be
unintelligible.
A total dispersion of elements does not constitute
diversity but a number of single, unrelated units.48 Just as everything
that falls into a salt mine becomes salty, so all this diversity, grounded
in unity, shares in the single flavour of oneness. 49 There is an undeniable
difference between individual phenomena, but the distinction we
perceive between two entities which leads us to think that one differs
from the other is merely external.50 Relative distinction is not an inherent
quality of things that can divide their innate nature, not because this
division (bheda) is in any way unreal, but because it operates within
the domain of the real, which appears as phenomenally manifest.
Division (bheda) is merely the relative distinction between two manifest
entities; it is based on the difference between their manifest form.
"Relative distinction between two realities (tattva)" writes
Abhinava, "is not impossible. This is the doctrine of Supreme Unity
in which relative distinction is neither shunned nor accepted. While
there is [an external] difference between phenomena, there is none
[inwardly], established as they are in their own essential nature."51
Reality is the One (eka) which becomes manifest as the many (bahu).
Universal Being moves between two poles, viz., diversification of the
one and unification of the many. Thought (vikalpa) interferes with
our direct intuitive understanding of this fact and splits up the two
aspects of this movement into separate categories. Reality is a structured
whole consisting of a graded hierarchy (taratamya) of metaphysical
principles corresponding to the planes of existence (dasa). On the lowest
planes up to the level of Maya, we experience division (bheda) between
objects and ourselves; at the highest level we reach the plane of unity
(abheda) which pervades and contains within itself all the others.
Mahesvarananda writes:
We maintain that the basis of duality (bheda) in the [empirical]
universe is a phase (vibhaga) [of reality]! The separation between things
is certainly not adventitious (upadhi) for then they [i.e., the object and
its separatedness] being two, unity would stand contradicted.52
He goes on to say:
The various categories of existence (padartha), though distinct
from one another in their [outer form] must be, in terms of their essential
specific nature, a single collective reality.53

Integral Monism of Kashmiri Saivism

This understanding of reality allows for a range of insights into
its nature which complement and sustain each other without conflict.
Almost every school of Indian thought aspires to lead us to a plane of
being and an experience which it believes to be the most complete and
satisfying. This is the liberation it offers. All these views are correct
insofar as they correspond to an actual experience. But this is because
the absolute, through its inherent power, assumes the form of all the
levels of realisation {bhumika) which correspond to the ultimate view
(sthiti) each system upholds.54 Dualism is not an incorrect view of
reality although it corresponds to only one of the levels within the absolute.
Citing the well-known Jaina example, Abhinava explains that the
exponents of different systems are like blind men who, presented with
an elephant, touch one part or another and argue amongst themselves
about what it could be. This is not because they disagree completely
but because their agreement is only partial.55 Ultimately, differing
views of reality are the result of the capacity (sakti) of the absolute to
appear in different forms.56 Rather than reject all views as incorrect
because they are not completely true, the Kashmiri Saiva prefers to
accept them all because they are partially true. System builders are all
equally concerned with reality, but are like children of feeble intellect
(sukumaramati) who have not yet reached the supreme summit
(parakas\ha) of the absolute, the experience of Supreme Oneness.
They cannot, as yet, look down to the lower planes and see their role
within the whole. Accordingly Mahesvarananda says:
Not accepting each others' point of view they talk of Your universal
nature in terms of that which is to be refuted and that which refutes it
in order to reject [their] opponents' position.57
Why does this phasing or hierarchy of planes not divide the absolute?
The answer to this question will emerge through a closer examination
of the nature of the Saiva absolute. Saivism equates the absolute wholly
with consciousness. Reality is pure consciousness alone (samvid).
Consciousness and Being are synonymous.58 To experience the essential
identity between them is to enjoy the bliss (ananda) of realisation.59
The Advaita Vedantin maintains that in a primary sense reality cannot
be characterised in any particular way, but affirms that secondarily
we can conceive it to be 'Being-Consciousness-Bliss (saccidananda).
Being, understood as an absolute substance (which is not substantial
in a material sense), is the model for the Advaita conception of consciousness. Monistic Saivism, on the other hand, considers consciousness to
be the basic model through which we understand Being. Consciousness

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

from the Vedantirfs point of view is the microcosmic parallel of macrocosmic Being. Being is the real substratum of the universe and consciousness that of the individual personality (jlva). Hence consciousness,
like Being, is perfectly inactive, a pure noetic plenum: knowledge as
such, without an object of knowledge or even self-awareness. He
maintains that consciousness is autonomous; it is an eternal reality
that does not depend on the mind or body for its existence. On this point,
the Saivite and Vedantin agree. Abhinava pours scorn on materialist
views; making no pretence at politeness, he says,
Some fools consider that nothing apart from the body exists
because movement arises from the body, whose property is consciousness, which in its turn is one with the vital breath. This conception,
peculiar to individuals (of low status) such as children, women and
idiots is, by the materialists, elevated to the status of a system.60

The concept of consciousness is the firm foundation upon which
Kashmiri Saiva metaphysics is constructed. One could almost describe
it as a psychology of absolute consciousness. Consciousness is more than
the awareness an individual has of himself and his environment; it is
an eternal all-pervasive principle. It is the highest reality (paramartha)
and all things are a manifestation of this consciousness (cidvyakti).61
All entities, without distinction, are of the nature of consciousness02
and hence reality can be positively affirmed to be a 'compact mass of
consciousness and b\\ss\ (ciclanandaghana). There are no holes or gaps
anywhere in reality where consciousness is absent. It is eternally and
blissfully at rest within its own nature (svatmavisranta), free of all
association with anything outside itself.63 Free of all craving for
anything (nirakanksd) and independent (nirapeksa), it looks to none
other but itself (ananyamukhapreksin).
The essential nature (svabhava) of this pure universal consciousness
is the true nature of the Self. As the supreme subject who illumines and
knows all things, it is called the 'Great Light1 {mahaprakasa) which is
uncreated and can never be taught (asrauta). Figuratively described as
the sun of consciousness, its light absorbs duality in its brilliance,
bathing the whole universe with the splendour of its divine radiance.
Making all things one with its nature, it transforms them into the sacred
circle (mandala) of its own rays.64 Not only is consciousness absolute,
it is also divine. It is Siva, the Lord (cinnatha) of the universe.65 As the
authentic identity (atman) of all living beings, consciousness is the
supreme object of worship, the true nature of Deity.66 Consciousness
is God and God is consciousness by virtue of its very nature; omnipotence,

Integral Monism of Kashmiri Saivism

omniscience and all the other divine attributes are in fact attributes
of consciousness. Bhagavatotpala, commenting on the Stanzas on
Vibration, quotes:
In none of Your states [O Lord] is consciousness absent. Therefore.
You are worshipped as the yogi's dense mass of consciousness alone.67
Consciousness is not a passive witness (saksiri), but is full of the
conscious activity (citikriya) through which it generates the universe68
and reabsorbs it into itself at the end of each cycle of creation. The
freedom (svdtantrya) of consciousness to do this is its sovereign power
(aisvarya) by virtue of which it is the one God Who governs the entire
universe. Absolute freedom to know and do all things is the primary
characteristic of Deity:
The governing power of the Supreme Lord Whose nature is
His own unique eternal nature as pure agency (kartrta) whose essence
is the divine pulsing radiance {sphuratta) of the light of consciousness.69
Both dynamic and creative, this divine power is Spanda—the
vibration of consciousness. Its universal activity is the basis of Siva's
divine sovereign status. Indeed, Spanda is Siva's most essential nature
for without it He would not be God. As Kemaraja says:
Thus God (bhagavai) is always the Spanda principle with its
dependent categories - He is not motionless (aspanda) as those who
say, 'the supreme reality is perfectly inactive (aspanda)'. If that were so,
His nature would be a self-confined stasis (santasvarupa) and so He
would not be God at all.70
The supreme reality which is 'perfectly inactive'is like the Vedantin's
Brahman. Although the Vedantin says that kGod alone is the source of
all things',71 Brahman cannot be a creator God (isvara) for His supposed
creation is unreal. A creator implies that His creation is a separate reality
and this would contravene the fundamental principles on which Advaita
Vedanta bases its concept of non-duality. Accordingly, Saiikara says:
God's rulership, omniscience and omnipotence are contingent to
limiting adjuncts conjured up by nescience: in reality such terms as ruler
and ruled, omniscience etc., cannot be used with regard to the Self
shining in its own nature.72

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Kashmiri Saivism, on the contrary, believes in a personal absolute
God Who is the one reality (isvaradvayavada). The planes within the
absolute correspond to a hierarchy of deities which rule over them,
empowered to do so by the Supreme Deity: consciousness. Absolute
Deity is the highest level of consciousness which stands at the supreme
summit of Being (parakas(ha). It is attained by a process of ascent
through higher levels or, in other words, through increasingly expanded
states of consciousness, until we reach the highest and most complete
state of expansion possible (pumavikasa). The Supreme Lord rests
at the end of the expansion or evolution of objectivity from the lowest
level to the supramental state (unmana) of pure consciousness.73
This supreme state is named variously in the differing traditions
syncretised into Kashmiri Saivism. Thus Bhairava (the 'wrathful' form
of Siva) figures as the supreme God in Abhinavagupta's works when
he deals with the doctrine and ritual of the Kaula schools (including
Trika and Krama) and those in various ways linked to them. This male
principle is associated with corresponding female ones such as Kail,
KalasankarsinI (the 'Attractress of Time'), Matrsadbhava (the 'Essence
of Subjectivity') and Para (the 'Supreme'). In the Spanda school the
supreme male deity is Siva Who is also called Saiikara, while Spanda
is by some identified with the Goddess. When no sectarian distinctions
are intended, the supreme is simply called Paramesvara (the Supreme
Lord), Paramasiva or just Siva.74

Saiva Idealism
Interiority {antaratva) is the keynote of both Kashmiri Saiva
metaphysics and practice: it is a 'doctrine which maintains that everything
is internal' {antararthavada).15 Everything, according to this view,
resides within one absolute consciousness. It is the great abode of the
universe.76 Full (puma) of all things, it sustains them all and embraces
them within its infinite, all-pervasive nature. Utpaladeva writes:
O Lord, some, greatly troubled, move perplexed {bhramanti) within
themselves while others, well established [in themselves], wander in
that which is their own Self alone.77

All events are consciously experienced happenings. According to
Somananda, only that which hypothetically exists outside consciousness
can be said to be non-existent (avastu) and hence false. Daily life carried

Integral Monism of Kashmiri Saivism

on without knowledge that everything is manifest within consciousness
is illusory or unreal in that sense alone.78 Things are more real or more
tangibly experienced according to their own essential nature (svabhdva)
to the degree in which we recognise that they are appearances (dbhasa)
within absolute consciousness. As Jayaratha says:
Just as images manifest in a mirror, for example, are essentially
mere appearances, so too are [phenomena] manifest within consciousness. Thus, beause they are external, [phenomena] have no being (sattva)
of their own. The Lord says this [not with the intention of saying
anything about the nature of things] but in order to raise the level of
consciousness of those people who are attached to outer things; thus
everything in this sense is essentially a mere appearance. [Knowing this],
in order to quell the delusion of duality, one should not be attached to
anything external.79

The ultimate experience is the realisation that everything is contained
within consciousness. We can discover this in two ways. Either we merge
the external world into the inner subject, or we look upon the outer as a
gross form of the inner. In these two ways we come to recognise that
all things reside within our own consciousness just as consciousness
resides within them.
This all-embracing inwardness is only possible if there is an essential
identity between the universe and consciousness. The events which
constitute the universe are always internal events happening within
consciousness because their essential nature is consciousness itself.80
We can only account for the fact that things appear if there is an essential
identity between consciousness and the object perceived.81 If a physical
object were really totally material, that is, part of a reality independent
of, and external to, consciousness, it could never be experienced.82
Abhinava says:
The existence or non-existence of phenomena within the domain
of the empirical (iha) cannot be established unless they rest within
consciousness. In fact, phenomena which rest within consciousness
are apparent (prakasamana). And the fact of their appearing is itself
their oneness {abheda) with consciousness because consciousness is
nothing but the fact of appearing (prakasa). If one were to say that they
were separate from the light of [that consciousness] and that they
appeared [it would be tantamount to saying that] 'blue' is separate from
its own nature. However, [insofar as it appears and is known as such]
one says: 'this is blue1. Thus, in this sense, [phenomena] rest in consciousness; they are not separate from consciousness.83

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

The universe and consciousness are two aspects of the whole, just
as quality and substance constitute two aspects of a single entity. The
universe is an attribute (dharma) of consciousness which bears (dharmiri)
it as its substance.
It is said that 'substance' is that resting in which this entire group
of categories manifests and is made effective. Now, if you don't get angry
[we insist that] this entire class of worlds, entities, elements and categories
(tattvd) rests in consciousness and [resting in it] is as it is.84
Thus consciousness contains everything in the sense that it is the
ground or basis (ddhara) of all things, their very being (satta) and
substance from which they are made. But, unlike the Brahman of the
Advaita Vedanta, it is not the real basis (adhisthana) of an unreal
projection or illusion. Consciousness and its contents are essentially
identical and equally real. They are two forms of the same reality.
Consciousness is both the substratum and what it supports: The perceiving
awareness and its object.85 In this respect, the Kashmiri Saiva is frankly
and without reserve an idealist. Although he does not deny the reality
of the object, his position is at odds with most commonly accepted
forms of realism. The realist maintains that the content perceived is
independent of the act of perception. The content is only accidentally
an object of perception and undergoes no change in the process of being
perceived. His contention, however, is essentially unverifiable; to verify
it, we would have to know an object without perceiving it. This, from the
Kashmiri Saiva point of view, is not possible. Objects of which we have
no knowledge may indeed exist, but they are knowable as objects only
if they are related to subjects who perceive them. In this sense, if there
were no subjects, there could be no objects.86 The subject, however, as
opposed to the object is, in terms of the phenomenology of perception,
apparent to himself. He is self-luminous (svaprakasa). Thus, consciousness (the essence of subjectivity) is one's own awareness by virtue of which
all things exist.87
The realist maintains that consciousness clearly differs from its object
insofar as their properties are contrary to each other. The Saivite idealist.
however, says that the object is a form of awareness (vijnanakara)
The objective status of the object is cognition itself.89 Perception
manifests its object and renders it immediately apparent (sphuta) to those
who perceive it.90 It does not appear at any other time.91 If 'blue' were
to exist apart from the cognition of 'blue\ two things would appear:
'blue' and its cognition, which is not the case.92 It is the perception of
the object which constitutes its manifest nature. An entity becomes an

Integral Monism of Kashmiri Saivism

object of knowledge not by virtue of the entity itself but by our knowledge
of it. If objects had the property of making other objects appear, it
would be possible for one object to make another appear in its own
likeness. 'Blue' is perceived to be 'blue' because it is manifest as such
to the perceiver.93 As Abhinava points out:
The [nature of an] object of knowledge could not be established
through a means of knowledge totally unrelated to it—a crow does not
become white because a swan [sitting next to it] is white.94
Perception, on the other hand, is immediately apparent to consciousness. It is self-luminous in the sense that it is directly known without
need of being known by any ulterior acts of perception and makes its
object known at the same time.95 Adopting the Buddhist Yogacara
doctrine that things necessarily perceived together are the same (sahopalambhaniyamavada), the Saivite affirms that because the perceived is
never found apart from perception, they are in fact identical.96 Reality
(satya) is the point where the intelligible and the sensible meet in the
common unity of being; it cannot be said to exist in itself outside, and apart
from, knowledge or vision. Bhagavatotpala in his commentary on the
Stanzas on Vibration quotes:
Once the object is reduced to its authentic nature, one knows [the
true nature of] consciousness. What then [remains of] objectivity?
What [indeed could be] higher than consciousness?97
Consciousness is essentially active. Full of the vibration of its own
energy engaged in the act of perception, it manifests itself externally
as its own object. When the act of perception is over, consciousness
reabsorbs the object and turns in on itself to resume its undifferentiated
inner nature.98
Knowledge (jnana) manifests internally and externally as each
individual entity . . . . Once knowledge has assumed that form it falls
back [into itself]99
The Yogacara Buddhist similarly maintains that consciousness
creates its own forms. But, according to him, because the perceived and
perception are identical, there is no perceived object at all. The so-called
outer world is merely a flux of cognitions, it is not real. He is firmly
committed to a doctrine of illusion. The reality of consciousness from

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

his point of view is established by proving the unreality of the universe.
"All this consists of the act of consciousness alone", says Vasubandhu,
"because unreal entities appear, just as a man with defective vision sees
unreal hair or a moon, etc.".100
He points to dreams as examples of purely subjective constructs
which appear to be objective realities. The apparent reality dreams
possess is not derived from any concrete, objective world, but merely
from the idea of objectivity. While the Yogacara does not say that an
idea has, for example, spatial attributes, it does have a form manifesting
them. While he agrees with the Saiva idealist that appearances have no
independent existence apart from their appearing to consciousness,
he maintains that for this reason they are unreal. The creativity of
consciousness consists in its diversification in many modes having
apparent externality; it is not a creation of objects.
While the Kashmiri Saivite agrees that the world is pure consciousness alone, he maintains that it is such because it is a real creation of
consciousness. The effect is essentially identical with the cause and
shares in its reality. Matter and the entire universe are absolutely real,
as 'congealed' (sty ana) or 'contracted' (samkucita) forms of consciousness.
"This God of consciousness", writes Kemaraja, "generates the universe
and its form is a condensation of His own essence (rasa).'''101 By boiling
sugarcane juice it condenses to form treacle, brown sugar and candy
which retains its sweetness. Similarly, consciousness abides unchanged
even though it assumes the concrete material form of the five gross
elements.102 The same reality thus abides equally in gross and subtle
forms.103 Consequently no object is totally insentient. Even stones bear
a trace (vasana) of consciousness, although it is not clearly apparent
because it is not associated with the vital breath (prana) and other
components of a psycho-physical organism.104 Somananda goes so
far as to affirm that physical objects, far from being insentient, can
only exist insofar as they are aware of themselves as existing.105 The
jar performs its function because it knows itself to be its agent.106 Indeed,
all things are pervaded by consciousness and at one with it and hence
share in its omniscience.107 Thus, Siva, Who perceives Himself in the
form of physical objects, is the one ultimate reality.108

"The jar knows because it is of my nature", writes Somananda,
"and I know it because I am of the jar's nature. 1 know because I am of
Sadasiva's nature and He knows because He is of my nature; Yajnadatta
[knows] because he is of Siva's nature and Siva [knows] because He
is of Yajnadatta's nature".I09

Integral Monism of Kashmiri Saivism

Everything in this sense is directly perceived by absolute consciousness, and this direct perception (pratyaksa) unifies the knowable into
a single, undivided whole. This is the central concept behind a doctrine
originally expounded by Narasimha called 'the non-dualism of direct
perception' (pratyaksddvaita).110
This states that consciousness is
essentially perceptive and that its perception of all things operates
throughout the universe.111 Insofar as phenomena are clearly evident
(sphufa) to us, everything is directly perceived by absolute consciousness,
with which our individual consciousness is identical.
This direct
perception unfolds everywhere; the one true reality, it is alone and
without companion or rival (nihsapatna). Even though it remains one,
it can, by its very nature, perceive distinctions (bheda) between one
entity and another, without this engendering any division within it.112
We distinguish between two entities in empirical terms on the
basis of their mutual exclusion (anyonydbhdva). The relative distinction
(bheda) between them is essentially the perceived difference between
their respective characteristics. Despite this difference they are united
within the purview of a single cognition insofar as they are equally
both manifest appearances. This cognition is the undivided essence
(rasa) or 'own nature' (svabhdva) of both. Encompassed by the 'fire of
consciousness', there is no essential difference between them. Just
as when an emerald and ruby reflect each other's light, the ruby is
reddish-green and the emerald greenish-red, similarly everything is
connected with everything else as part of the single variegated (vicitra)
cognition of absolute consciousness. 113 Mahesvarananda writes:
The Supreme Lord's unique state of emotivity (asadharanabhava)
is the outpouring of pure Being (mahdsatta). It is manifest as the
brilliance (sphuratta) of the universe which, if we ponder deeply, [is
realized to be] the single flavour (ekarasa) of the essence of Beauty
which is the vibration of the bliss of one's own nature.114
In this way all things are in reality one although divided from the
one another sharing as they do the 'single flavour' (ekarasa) of the pure
vibration of consciousness.

Kashmiri Saiva Realism
Kashmiri Saivism as a whole has been variously called a form of
'realistic idealism',115 'monistic idealism',116 'idealistic monism' 117 and
'concrete monism'. 118 It is easy to understand why Kashmiri Saivism is

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

said to be 'idealistic' and 'monistic', but in what sense is it also 'realistic?
The answer to this question is of no small importance in trying to understand the central idea behind its metaphysics and the fundamental
importance of the concept of Spanda, in this seemingly impossible
marriage between monistic idealism and pluralistic realism.
The Kashmiri Saiva approach understands the world to be a symbol
of the absolute, that is, as the manner in which it presents itself to us.
Again we can contrast this view with that of the Advaita Vedanta. The
Advaita Vedanta understands the world to be an expression of the
absolute insofar as it exists by virtue of the absolute's Being. Being is
understood to be the real unity which underlies empirically manifest
separateness and as such is never empirically manifest. It is only
transcendentally actual as 'being-in-itself. The Kashmiri Saiva position
represents, in a sense, a reversal of this point of view. The nature of
the absolute, and also that of Being, is conceived as an eternal becoming
(satatodita), a dynamic flux or Spanda, 119 'the agency of the act of
being'.120 It is identified with the concrete actuality of the fact of
appearing, not passive unmanifest Being. Appearance (dbhdsa) alone
is real.121 Appearing (prakdsamdnatva) is equivalent to the fact of being
(astitva).122
Ksemaraja writes in his commentary on the Stanzas on
Vibration:
Indeed, all things are manifest because they are nothing but
manifestation. The point being that nothing is manifest apart from
manifestation.123
The absolutely unmanifest, from this point of view, can have as
little existence as the space in a lattice window of a sky-palace. Nay,
even less, because even that space can appear as an imagined image
manifest within consciousness. 124 Everything is real according to the
manner in which it appears.125 Even an illusion is in this sense real,
insofar as it appears and is known in the manner in which it appears.
The empirical and the real are identical categories of thought. As
Abhinava says:
Thus this is the supreme doctrine {upanisaif), namely that, whenever and in whatever form [an entity] appears, that then is its particular
nature.126
Perhaps at this stage a brief comparison with Heidegger's ideas
might prove to be enlightening and not altogether out of place. According
to Heidegger's phenomenology of Being, reality is intelligible in a two-fold

Integral Monism of Kashmiri Saivism

manner as 'phenomenon' and logos'. Heidegger defines what he means
by 'phenomenon' as: "that-which-shows-itself.
The manifest . . .
phenomena are then the collection of that which lies open in broad
daylight or can be brought to the light of day—what the Greeks at times
implicitly identified as 'ta onta' (the things-which-are)".127 In his later
writings Heidegger drops the term 'phenomenon' in preference for
the verbal form 'phainesthai' in order to emphasize even more the
actuality or presentational property of Being. Explaining this new form
of the term he writes: "Being disclosed itself to the ancient Greeks as
'physis'. The etymological roots 'phy-' and 'pha-' designate the same
thing: 'phyein', the rising-up or upsurge which resides within itself as
'phainesthai', lighting-up, self-showing, coming-out, appearing-forth."128
Heidegger contrasted his notion of phenomenon with semblance
(Scheiri) and with appearing (Erscheinung). In the case of semblance a
thing can show itself as that which it is not, as when fool's gold shows
itself to be gold. The ancients always allied semblance with non-being.
Heidegger points out, however, that semblances are grounded in showings,
and so does Abhinava. Both Heidegger and Abhinava consequently
maintain that all semblances have a real basis and are to be treated as
instances of phenomena along with the so-called real showing or
manifestation of non-deceptive objects. So Heidegger states that: 'however much seeming, just that much being'.129 Thus self-showing or
appearing defines Being as phenomenon, but this definition of Being
is as yet incomplete. Being is not only self-showing but 'logos' which
Heidegger explains means 'discourse' (Rede) in the sense of'apophansis':
'letting-be-seen'. Phenomenology, which according to Heidegger is
the only correct study of Being, means 'letting-be-seen-that-whichshows-itself. This is true of Saiva Paramadvaita as well.
The reality of the world demands recognition; we are forced to
accept the direct presentation of the fact of our daily experience. As
Abhinava says: "if practical life, which is useful to all persons at all times,
places and conditions were not real, then there would be nothing left
which could be said to be real."130 A thousand proofs could not make
'blue' other than the colour blue.131 The reality of whatever appears in
consciousness cannot be denied. Objects appear; they do not cease to
do so by a mere emphatic denial.132 The manifestation of an entity
in its own specific form is a fact at one level of consciousness; it is real.
The appearing of the same entity in the same form but recognised to be a
direct representation of the absolute is also a fact, but at another level
of consciousness.133 It is no more or less real than the first. 'As is the
state of consciousness, so is the experience,' says Abhinava.134 Although
the nature of the absolute is discovered at a higher level of consciousness,

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

nonetheless it presents itself to us directly in the specific form in which
we perceive things; otherwise there would be no way in which we could
penetrate from the level of appearing to that of its source and basis.
Abhinava writes:
Real is the entity (vastu) that appears in the moment of direct
perception (sak$atkara), that is to say, within our experience of it.
Once its own specific form has been clearly determined one should,
with effort, induce it to penetrate into its pure conscious nature.135
All things are known to be just as they present themselves. The
concrete actuality of being known (pramiti), irrespective of content,
is itself the vibrant (spandd) actuality of the absolute. Liberating
knowledge is gained not by going beyond appearances but by attending
closely to them. "The secret," Mahesvarananda says, "is that liberation
while alive (jlvanmukti) is the profound contemplation of Maya's
nature."136 No ontological distinction can be drawn between the absolute
and its manifestations because both are an appearing {abhasa), the latter
of diversity and the former of 'the true light of consciousness which is
beyond Maya and is the category Siva'.137
Those who have attained the category of Pure Knowledge above
Maya and have thus gone beyond the category of Maya, see the entire
universe as the light of consciousness . . . Just as the markings [on a
feather] are nothing apart from the feather, the feather [is nothing apart
from] them, similarly, when the light of consciousness is manifest, the
whole group of phenomena is manifest as the light of consciousness
itself.'38

Within the sphere of Maya, every entity's 'own nature' (svabhdva)
corresponds to its specific manifest form. Accordingly it is defined as
that which distinguishes it from all else and from which it never deviates. 139
Above the sphere of Maya, that is, above the level of objectivity, is the
domain of the subject. At this level, everything is realised to be part
of the fullness of the experiencer140 and hence no longer bound by the
conditions which impinge on the object. Here the part is discovered
to be the whole, that is, consciousness in toto. In this sphere beyond
relative distinctions, the yogi realises that (all) the categories of existence
are present in every single category.141 The yogi experiences every
individual particular as the sum total of everything else. He recognises
that all things have one nature and that every particular is all things. 142
This is the 'essence' {sard) or co-extensive unity (samarasya) of all things.

Integral Monism of Kashmiri Saivism

We have established that reality is manifest according to how
[and the degree in which] the freedom of consciousness reveals it and
that [this freedom] is the womb of all forms. Just as 'sweetness' is present
in its entirety in every atom of the sugarcane, so each and every atom
[of the universe] bears within itself the emanation of all things.143
This is the level of consciousness in which the absolute reflects on
itself realising to its eternal delight and astonishment (camatkara) its
own integral nature.144 The reality of the world of diversity is not denied,
but experienced in a new mode of awareness free of time and space in
the eternal omnipresence of the Here and Now.
[Phenomenal forms of awareness] such as 'this [exists]', born of
the colouring [imparted to the absolute] by the limitations engendered
by the diversifying power of time (kalakalana) also emanate within the
Supreme Principle. There [at that level], Fullness (purriata) is the one
nature [of all things] and so everything is omnipresent; otherwise,
associated with division (khandana\ the Fullness [of the absolute]
would not be full.145

The content of absolute consciousness consists of diverse appearings
(ahhdsa) which, because they are manifest through it in this way, do
not compromise the wholeness of consciousness. Everything we perceive
is a momentary collocation of a number of such manifestations which
combine together like 'a row of altar lamps' (dipavall) to form the single
radiant picture of the universe. The individual objects which constitute
the universe are specific collocations of such 'atomic'appearings. Together
they form a single unified particular which appears according to its own
defining features (svalaksana). A jar, for example, consists of a number
of appearances such as 'round', 'fat', 'earthen', 'red', etc., which together
discharge a single function (arthakriya), in this case, that of carrying the
appearance 'water'. They unite with each other much as the scattered
rays of a lamp come together when focused, or as the various currents
of the sea together give rise to waves.146 Atomic appearings can combine
in any number of ways, provided that they are not contrary to one another
as established by the dictates of natural law (niyati). An appearance
of 'form', for example, cannot combine with that of 'air'.147
Insofar as they share a common basis (samanyadhikaranya), a
given cluster of appearances appears as a single whole. This common
basis is the most prominent member of the group; the appearance 'jar
is such in the example quoted above. Any one appearance in a cluster
may assume a more important or subordinate role. The result is a specific

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

awareness of an object of the form: 'here this is such.'148 While individual
appearances do not lose their separate identity (svariipabhedd) when
they rest on a common basis, even so the particular object which appears
according to its own characteristics (svalakana) is an individual reality
in its own right. It is a different kind of appearance characterised by
its association with the appearance of the specific location and time in
which it is made manifest.149 The form of our experience is thus 'I now
see this here'.150 But when we perceive each particular constituent
appearance separately, each assumes a separate fixed function. Abhinava
cites the following colourful example to illustrate how the various
combinations of appearances account for the variety of experience:
Thus even though the appearance of the beloved may manifest
externally, it is as if far away in the absence of another appearance,
namely, that of 'embracing'. So when the [appearing of the beloved]
is associated with another appearance [namely that of 'far away'] the
power (arthakriya) it formerly had of giving pleasure appears as its
contrary.151
The form our experience assumes depends, not only on the nature
of the object perceived, but also on personal factors entirely peculiar to
ourselves. This theory explains this in two ways. In one sense, the object
remains the same, but one or other of its constituent appearances comes
to the fore according to the inclinations of the perceiver. From another
point of view, we can say that the perceived object is different for each
perceiver according to the difference in the prominent appearance
manifest to him. Abhinava, citing as an example a golden jar, illustrates
how the same object appears differently to different perceivers according
to the use they wish to make of it and to their state of mind:
When a person who is depressed and feels that there is nothing
[of value for him in the world] sees the jar, he merely perceives the
appearance 'exists' [in the form of the awareness that] 'it is'. He is not
conscious of any other [of its constituent appearances] at all. An
individual who desires to fetch water [perceives] the appearance 4jar\
The man who simply wants something that can be taken somewhere
and then brought back, [perceives] the appearance 'thing'. The man
who desires money [perceives] the appearance 'gold'. The man who
desires a pleasing object [perceives] the appearance 'brightness' while
he who wants something solid sees the appearance 'hardness'.152
These 'atomic events' or appearances emerge from the pure subject's
consciousness and combine together to form a total event at each moment.

Integral Monism of Kashmiri Saivism

Daily life (vyavahdra) goes on by virtue of this ever renewed flux of
appearances.153 They are connected together and work towards a single
unified experience because they appear within the field of consciousness
of the universal subject.
The aggregate of appearances arises in the [supreme] subject as
do [sprouts in] a rice field. Even though each sprout germinates from
its own seed, they are perceived as a collective whole.154

Appearances rest in this way within the universal subject. 'Externality' is itself another appearance;155 it arises from a distinction between
appearances and the individual subject.156 So, although all manifestation
always occurs within the subject, it appears to be external due to the
power of Maya157 which separates the individual subject from his
object. This split must occur for daily life to be possible. Only externally
manifest appearances can perform their functions; when they are merged
within the subject and at one with him, they cannot do so.158 Daily
life proceeds on the basis of the operation and withdrawal of the conditions
necessary for fruitful action to be possible. Appearance in this sense
represents the actualisation of a potential hidden in consciousness made
possible by virtue of its dynamic, Spanda nature which is both the flow
from inner to outer and back as well as the power that impels it. The
emergence from, and submergence into, pure consciousness of each
individual appearance is a particular pulsation (visesaspanda) of
differentiated awareness. Together these individual pulsations constitute
the universal pulse (sdmdnyaspandd) of cosmic creation and destruction.
Thus, every single thing in this way forms a part of the radiant vibration
(sphurattd, sphurana) of the light of absolute consciousness.

II

Light and Awareness: The Two
Aspects of Consciousness
Absolute consciousness understood as the unchanging ontological
ground of all appearing is termed 'Prakasa'. As the creative awareness
of its own Being, the absolute is called ' Vimarsa'. Prakasa and Vimarsa—
the Divine Light of consciousness and the reflective awareness this
Light has of its own nature—together constitute the all-embracing fullness
(purnata) of consciousness. The Recognition (pratyabhijfia) school of
Kashmiri Saivism develops this concept of the absolute which finds its
fullest expression in Utpaladeva's Stanzas on the Recognition of God.
Even though neither of these two key terms appear in the Stanzas on
Vibration or the Aphorisms of Siva, they recur frequently in their
commentaries. Thus, although the original formulation of the Doctrine
of Vibration differs from the theology of Recognition in this respect,
it was extended in the course of its development to accommodate this
concept of the absolute as well. This was possible, and quite justified,
insofar as the absolute understood in Pratyabhijfia terms does not,
as we shall see, differ essentially from that of the Spanda school. We can,
as Kashmiri Saivites themselves have done, explain one in terms of
the other.

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Prakasa: The Light of Consciousness
Prakasa is the pure luminosity' (bhdna) or 'self-showing' that
constitutes the essence and ultimate identity (dtman) of phenomena.1
That things appear at all is due to the light of consciousness, and their
appearing (avabhdsana) is itself this Light which bestows on all things
their evident, manifest nature.2 Established in the light of consciousness
everything appears there according to its own specific nature (svabhdva).
Anything that supposedly does not rest in this Light is as unreal as a
sky-flower.3 Thus, according to Rajanaka Rama, unlike the light of
the sun, or any other light, this Light not only makes all things apparent,
it is also their ultimate source.4 Full of its divine vibration the Light
makes all things manifest and withdraws them into itself. This supratemporal activity characterises it most specifically; devoid of it, it would
be no better than an inert physical phenomenon.5 At the same time,
this light is the conjunction (slesa) or oneness (aikdtmya) of its countless
manifest forms,6 and the collective whole (sampintfana) of all the
categories of existence.7 The universe is nothing but the shining of
the Light within itself. It is the radiant vibration (sphuratta) of this
Light, the state (avasthdna) in which consciousness becomes manifest.8
Although the Light shines as all things at all times and hence also
makes their diversity manifest,9 penetrating each object individually
as well as collectively, it is not totally 'merged' (magna) or identified
with the object so as to suffer any division within itself.10 Our experience
of any object is of the form: i see this': it is not itself an object, but the
manifest form the object assumes as a luminous principle of experience.11
The Light is ever revealed and can never be obscured; objectivity can
never cast a shadow on the light of consciousness.12 The Stanzas on
Vibration declare:
That in which all this creation is established and from whence it
arises is nowhere obstructed because it is unconditioned by [its very]
nature.13

This Light is the highest reality (paramdrtha). It is the 'Ancient
Light' (purdnaprakdsa) that makes all things new and fresh every
moment.14 It is 'always new and secret, ancient and known to all'.15
It is the form of the Present (yartamdnarupd), the Eternal Now. Time
and space are relations between the contents of consciousness; they
cannot impinge on the integrity of the absolute itself.16 Neither space
nor time can divide it, for they are one with the Light that illumines them

Light and Awareness: Two Aspects of Consciousness

and makes them known as elements of experience. But this Light is
the shining of the absolute, it is not an impersonal principle. It is the
living Light of God, indeed it is God Himself,17 the Master Who instructs
the entire universe.18 Siva is this 'auspicious lamp', Who illumines
all things.19 He is the Light of consciousness that reveals the presence
of both the real and the unreal, of'light'and 'darkness'.20 Abhinavagupta
writes:
Thus Bhairava, the Light, is self-evident (svatahsiddha); without
beginning, He is the first and last of all things, the Eternal Present.
And so what else can be said of Him? The unfolding of the categories
of existence (tattva) and creation, which are the expansion of His own
Self, He illumines, luminous with His own Light, in identity with
Himself, and because He illumines Himself, so too He reflects on His
own nature, without His wonder (camatkard) being in any way
diminished.21
The Kashmiri Saiva concept of consciousness is clearly more akin
in the West to the Christian mystic's understanding of the nature of
Deity than to that of consciousness as conceived by most western
psychologists and philosophers of mind. Dionysius the Aeropagite talks
of God, in the passage cited below, in much the same terms as the
Kashmiri Saivite would about the light of absolute consciousness.
[God] being One communicates His unity into every part of the
world and also unto the Whole, both unto that which is one and that
which is many. He is One and unchangeable in a superessential manner
being neither a multiplicity of things, nor yet the sum total of such
units . . . . He is a unity in a manner far different from this . . . He is
indivisible plurality, insatiable, yet brimful, producing, perfecting
and maintaining all unity and plurality.22
The central mystical experience of enlightenment is aptly symbolised
by light in most of the numerous forms of mysticism; Deity and all that
surrounds the higher reaches of existence are universally symbolised by
light. The vision of Light is one of the most characteristic features of
higher mystical experiences. When the Kashmiri Saiva talks of Deity
or ReaUty as Light, he is trying to express his direct experience of the
Real; this is more important to the mystic than any concept of reality.
The yogi's concern is realisation, not philosophical speculation or
theological discussion.
If the mystic is to traverse the boundary between the transitory and

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

the eternal, he must die to the profane condition. He must depart from
a world devoid of light to be reborn into the higher, sacred state of
enlightenment, into a world he recognises to be full of light. The result
is an increase in consciousness; that is, the previous condition is augmented
by formerly unconscious contents. The new condition carries with it
more insight, which is symboiised by more light. It is a vision of the
world radiant with the light and life of the divine reality within all
things, and yet beyond them. The most profoundly satisfying experience
possible is the recognition that the light of one's own consciousness
is all things.
"[This] Bliss", writes Abhinava, "is not like the intoxication of
wine or that of riches, nor similar to union with the beloved. The
manifestation of the light of consciousness is not like the ray of light
from a lamp, sun or moon. When one frees oneself from accumulated
multiplicity, the state of bliss is like that of putting down a burden;
the manifestation of the Light is like the acquiring of a lost treasure,
the domain of universal non-duality."23
This is the central experience upon which the Kashmiri Saiva
bases his understanding of the nature of reality. In the transition from
experience (mysticism) to a concept of reality (metaphysics), we can
only carry with us ideas symbolic of the original experience. Philosophy,
from this point of view, can only serve a descriptive function. It is a
'systematic symbolism' which serves primarily to generate insight into
the nature of reality by a process of elevating the philosopher's power
of recognition (pratyabhijna), allowing him to couple the concept
with the experience which lies behind it.
Philosophy is an elaboration of different kinds of spiritual
experiences. The abstractions of high-grade metaphysics are based
on spiritual experience and derive their whole value from the experiences
they symbolise. No metaphysical concept is entirely intelligible without
reference to the spirit.24
Light (prakasa), Sound (nada), Vibration (spanda), Taste (rasa)
and a host of others all serve this symbolic function in this universe of
discourse. Amongst these, Light (prakasa) and Vibration (spanda)
feature prominently. Light symbolism helps us to grasp the inner
relationship between things understood as integral parts of the absolute
in static juxtaposition and mutual interpenetration. Vibration (spanda)
symbolism serves to represent the dynamic, self-regenerative character

Light and Awareness: Two Aspects of Consciousness

of the absolute. It symbolises the active participation of the infinite
in the finite as the process of its transformation into the finite and the
reconversion of the finite into the infinite. Space is the model for the
former and time for the latter. Light aptly symbolises an absolute
conceived as a pure noetic plenum. The absolute is called 'Light' because
it is the universal knowledge of the supreme subject which makes the
entire knowable manifest.25 It represents consciousness as the unchanging
witness of all the events in the universe, the power of the absolute to
know the universe (Jnanasakti) merged within it:
We bow to Siva Who eternally illumines by the lamp of the power
of his knowledge the many objects lying in the Great Cave of Maya.26
In the cognitive sphere, the dynamic character of the light of
consciousness is represented by the flux of cognitions. This is the
pulsation—Spanda—of its noetic activity (jnanatmikakriya) of which
it is itself the conscious agent (kartr) as well as perceiver. Knowledge
cannot exist independently of the knower.27 The object is grounded in
knowledge and knowledge in the subject which thus connects them
together like a powerful glue.28 Ultimately, these three are identical:
Nothing perceived is independent of perception and perception
differs not from the perceiver, therefore the universe is nothing but the
perceiver [himself].29
The one universal consciousness, therefore, has three aspects: it
is the illuminator (prakasaka), the illumined universe (prakasya) and
the light of knowledge (prakasa) which illumines it. The universe,
Light and Self are one.30 Subject, object and means of knowledge
necessarily attend each act of perception and make cognitive awareness
(prama) possible. Manifested by the creative power (srsjisakti) of the
Great Light,31 they are always present together whenever anything
is perceived objectively, and so embrace, as it were, the entire universe
in their nature:32
The group of subjects, the various means of knowledge, the multiple
kinds of knowledge and the objects of knowledge—all this is consciousness alone. The Supreme Goddess is the absolute freedom of our own
consciousness which assumes these various forms.33
When they are made manifest, the universe appears within the
field of universal consciousness. When they cease to operate, and the

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

tension between subject and object is resolved again into their primordial
unity, the universe is again withdrawn into undifferentiated consciousness.
Thus the devout yogi addresses the divine Light with the words:
Your playful desire is the cause of the diversity between the
perceiver, perceiving, perception and perceptible; when Your playful
desire is over, that diversity disappears somewhere. Seldom does
man realise this.34
As aspects of the dynamic consciousness (caitanya) which is Siva's
freedom to act as the agent of cognition,35 they are phases of His vibration
(spanda). This movement of conscious energy, incandescent with the
light of consciousness, generates cognitions that appear as manifestations
(abhdsa) of consciousness within it. Thus, taken together as a single
whole, they are the inner light of the innate nature of all things (svarupajyotis).}b United, they are the supreme subject (parapramatr) identified
with the state of pure awareness (pramitibhava) that constitutes their
essence. This higher subject is Paramasiva Who assumes these three
aspects through a process of self-limitation (samkoca), all the while
continuing to exist as the undifferentiated unity of pure consciousness.37
As aspects of the light of consciousness, these three are appropriately
symbolised as three great luminaries, namely, the Fire, Sun and Moon.38
The means of knowledge, like the Sun, illumines the object. The object
shines, like the Moon, by its reflected light. Again, like the moon,
according to the common Indian way of thinking, it exudes nectar in the
sense that the object delights the senses.39 Fire aptly symbolises the
subject because fire is said to have three abodes, as ordinary fire on
earth, as lightning in the sky and the god of fire in heaven. The subject
too is three-fold as the object, the means of knowledge and the subject
itself. Moreover the subject, like fire, flames upwards, consuming all
things within the pervasive field of its consciousness, ultimately digesting
them within itself when perception is over and he rests tranquil.
Even though the light of consciousness experiences all three, it does
not require another to be perceived, but illumines itself in the course
of making the universe manifest. Consciousness is the ultimate principle
of revelation. The Light that reveals everything does not require a
second for its own revelation.40 If consciousness were not self-conscious
but required another consciousness to reveal its nature, that too would
require another and the third a fourth and so on ad infinitum.41
This Light, as we have seen, unfolds or expands (prasarati) everywhere, shining this way and that as each particular aspect of our
experience. Siva does this by creating and freely imposing on Himself

Light and Awareness: Two Aspects of Consciousness

countless limiting conditions (upadhi) through which He becomes
manifest in limited forms, just as a light shining through a lattice window
appears diverse. At the same time He abides unchanged as the supreme
experiencer. Rajanaka Rama in his commentary on the Stanzas on
Vibration writes:
If we could anywhere, at any time, or in any way conceive of You
apart from [universal] manifestation, then we could say that Your
diversity (vicitrata) is due to the diverse limiting conditions {upadhi)
[that reflect Your light] like outer crystal.42
The formless, pervasive nature of consciousness makes it possible
for objects to be related to each other. The Light (prakasa) does not
exhaust itself as the luminosity of the outer object, for although every
object is separate from every other, it is not totally unrelated to other
objects. We do in fact experience a variety of objects in a single act
of perception.43 This is only possible if the light of consciousness is
fundamentally one and the same for each object. Even so, the Kashmiri
Saiva denies that consciousness is a formless (nirakara), undivided
reality, set apart from the object it perceives. We know from our own
experience that consciousness does not view all things equally; some
objects are more clearly apparent than others.44 Moreover, if the Light
(prakasa) were to be one and entirely homogeneous, there would be no
difference between the knowledge of 'blue' and that of'yellow'.45 Objects
would become confused with one another and the world of perceptions
would collapse into a chaos (samkara).46 How could the same Light
by virtue of which we know 'blue1 to be 'blue', illumine 'yellow' so that
we know it to be 'yellow', if consciousness were in no way affected by
the object perceived?47 The way we experience things is therefore only
explicable if we agree that the Light which illumines them is somehow
both formless and omniform at the same time.
We can explain how consciousness can have these two aspects only
if we admit that it is free to be both single and diverse.48 It cannot be
just one or the other for then we would have to posit the existence of a
second reality to make up for the deficiency of one or other of these two
aspects. Indeed, we cannot say that the Light is either single or diverse
for that would imply a division (bheda) within it.49 One way for solving
this problem, without recourse to some form of dualism, is to say
that unity alone is real and that diversity is merely apparent. All that
exists is consciousness which seems to assume diverse forms. This
is the Advaitin's view.
We can, however, approach this problem in a different way through

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

a deeper understanding of the properties of consciousness. The light
of consciousness is absolute and hence free of the limitations inherent
in all that is relative. This freedom from limitations characterises the
Light most specifically.50 It is by virtue of this freedom that it is not
bound to a single fixed form, as are common objects.51 Vibrant with
life, the Light assumes countless forms. Pure consciousness is equivalent
to absolute freedom. A lifeless unconscious object, on the contrary,
is hemmed in on every side by spatial and temporal limitations. Unlike
the light of consciousness, it is not free to be other than the form in
which it appears to be.
According to the dualist Samkhya consciousness is always formless.
It is matter that assumes diverse forms although it remains substantially
the same, as does the clay from which pots of different sizes and shape
are fashioned. This cannot be correct, says the Kashmiri Saiva, because
matter, however subtle we may conceive it to be, is objective and, as
such, cannot be both one and diverse. Our experience testifies to the
fact that 'the states of unity and division are distinct in all objective
phenomena'. 52 But as Abhinava writes:
Both characteristics, unity and diversity, are found in that which
does not fall to the level of an object but which, because it is consciousness, is the supremely real Light. It has only one characteristic, namely,
consciousness which is the perfect medium of reflection (svaccha).
This is what experience tells us.53
The experience we all have to which Abhinava is alluding in this
passage is that we perceive various objects in the scan of one perception
without it being divided. The same holds true of the universal perception
absolute consciousness has of the universe. Accordingly, the Light of
Siva's consciousness is symbolically conceived to be an infinite, perfectly
polished (svaccha) mirror within which the entire universe is reflected.
In this way the Kashmiri Saiva explains how the one conscious reality
can at once be immanent and transcendent without this either compromising its unity or denying the reality of the manifest universe.
Abhinava quotes a Tantra as saying:
Deity is both formless and omniform, pervading all things both
moving and immobile, as does water or a mirror [the image reflected
in it].54
Consciousness, like a mirror, can reflect objects within itself. It
has the power to manifest entities that are separate from it as if they

Light and Awareness: Two Aspects of Consciousness

were one with it, without this in any way affecting its nature.55 Conversely,
it also makes manifest these reflected images as if they were distinct
from it although they are not.56 Again, the variety of manifest forms
(abhasa) appear separate from one another, without this compromising
the oneness of consciousness, just as happens with the reflections in a
mirror.57 However, in one respect at least, the mirror analogy does not
hold good. Reflections in a mirror correspond to outer objects; this
is not the case with consciousness. The All (visva) is entirely a reflection
(pratibimbamatra).5 From the point of view of consciousness, the
original object is as much a reflection as the image reflected in the mirror.
Although the universe is like a reflection, there is no object outside the
mirror of consciousness that, reflected within it, appears as the universe.
Abhinava points out:
The image reflected [in a mirror] is deposited [there] by the original
external object. Now, if this too is a reflected image, what remains
of the original object?59
The object apprehended by the senses cannot be the original object
because the perception of the object is never immediate; it occurs through
a series of causes.60 The perception of the object is real enough, but it
is always perceived as a reflection within the mind and senses. An outer
world may indeed exist, but the form in which it appears is always as a
reflection, never as the original object. An opponent may object that
no reflection can exist without an original reflected object. Abhinava
replies that this is true of reflections in a mirror but not of those within
consciousness. Anyway, even in the case of a mirror, the object is
never one with the reflected image.61 Nor are they one in the way that a
particular can be said to be one with its universal.62 Moreover, when
we perceive a reflection in a mirror, we do not perceive the original
object at the same time. The cognition of one follows the other; they
are not simultaneous. Similarly, we hear an echo when the original
sound has ceased,63 and we can perceive a shadow without seeing the
hand that makes it.64 The bashful maiden can secretly view the charming
form of her lover standing behind her, reflected in a mirror without
having to IoGk at him directly.65 Thus Abhinava prefers to cut short
all argument and boldly state:
If then, even though [the universe] clearly bears the characteristics
[of a reflected image], you still insist on calling it the original object
(bimbo), go ahead. The wise attend to the facts, not to commonly
accepted convention.66

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

The only way to account for the appearing of this cosmic reflection
is to accept that consciousness itself creates it spontaneously. Consciousness is free (svatantra) to be 'the agent of the act of manifestation'.67
Consciousness in this sense is the cause of both the original object and
its reflection.68 Otherwise, if this were not the case, we would be forced
to seek another reality apart from consciousness which deposits these
reflections within it;69 as this is impossible, nothing would appear at all.
Abhinava concludes:
The truth is therefore this: the Supreme Lord manifests freely
(anargala) all the varied play of emissions and absorptions in the sky
of His own nature.70

The creation of reflections within the mirror of consciousness is
spontaneous, like play. In the Spanda tradition, Ksemaraja personifies
the power of consciousness that plays the game of manifestation as the
Goddess Spanda. Consciousness is the fecund womb from which all
things are born and in which they ultimately unite to rest blissfully.71
The Goddess is therefore not just the power of consciousness that
generates the cosmic reflection, but is also the mirror in which it appears.
Thus it is the Goddess Spanda Who is:
the Lord's power of freedom that, although undivided,
displays on the screen of Her own nature all the cycles of creation and
destruction. [She reflects them within Herself] in such a way that
although they are at one with Her, they appear to be separate from
Her, like a city reflected in a mirror . . . . Therefore, the Supreme Being
is always one with the Spanda principle and never otherwise. 72

The vibration of consciousness is manifest as the forms which
emerge within it. In the mental, subjective sphere, these include thoughts,
memories and cognitions; in the objective sphere objects, universals
and words—none of which could exist if consciousness did not have
the power to generate them. Thus our exposition of the Kashmiri Saiva
concept of the absolute as Light and its manifestations as reflections
has led us to consider its universal power apparent through its recurring
pulsations of activity. This same power both generates forms within
itself and is conscious of them. Therefore, this, the absolute's power of
self-awareness, to which we now turn, is also Spanda—its vibration.

Light and Awareness: Two Aspects of Consciousness

Self-Awareness and Consciousness
As we have seen, the absolute is the light of consciousness (prakasa)
because it makes all things manifest by shining in its universal form.
The phenomena that appear in the field of consciousness are experienced
directly in this way at the initial instant of perception when they are
still at one with the perceiving subject. The light of consciousness is itself
this direct experience73 had before thought-constructs interpose themselves between subject and object, thus degrading the latter to the level
of objectivity, which obscures the light of the subject's immediate
perception. But although the light of consciousness accounts for the
appearing of phenomena in this way, it does not by itself fully account
for our experience of them. No experience is possible without selfawareness. Experience must be personal to be experience at all. As
Jung suggests:
Experience is not possible without reflection, because experience
is a process of assimilation without which there could be no understanding.74

From the Kashmiri Saivite point of view, this reflection is an
awareness of the images that appear within the mirror of the Light.
For the psycho-cosmic processes occurring at the level of universal
consciousness (samvid) to be accessible to experience, consciousness
must reflect (literally fcbend back') on itself to know itself and what
appears within it:
The Supreme Lord bears within Himself the reflection of the
universe and the [reflection] is His nature as all things. Nor is He
unconscious of His nature as such because that which is conscious
necessarily reflects on itself.75
This act of reflective awareness is termed 'vimarsa'. The word is
derived from the root 'mrs' which means to touch, feel, understand,
perceive, reflect or examine. Thus 'vimarsa'is the power of consciousness
by virtue of which it can understand or perceive itself, feel, reflect on
and examine the events that occur within it—in short, behave like a
limitless, living being. This ability to reflect on itself is inherent in the
very nature of the light of consciousness; indeed it is its most specific
characteristic76 and the very life of its sentient nature. Deprived of
reflective awareness, the light of consciousness would amount to no

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

more than the more appearing of phenomena unknown to anyone77
like the light that shines reflected in a common mirror or crystal.78
Through this awareness, the Light knows itself to be the sole reality
and so rests in itself, but not as does a self-confined, lifeless object.79
It enjoys perfect freedom and is satisfied (caritartha) in the knowledge
that it is all that exists, be it subject, object or means of knowledge.80
Self-awareness is God's omniscience, the fullness (purnata) of allembracing consciousness, its bliss (dnanda) or aesthetic rapture
(camatkara) that contains within itself the infinite variety of things.81
As such, it is the pulse of pure contemplation, the inner activity of the
absolute's power of action (kriyasakti)2 in it all the powers of the
absolute83 merge to form its uncreated T consciousness (aharri), whose
radiant vibration (sphurana) is manifest as the form, emanation and
reabsorption of the universe.84 By contemplating its own nature,
consciousness assumes the form of all the planes of existence from the
subtlest to the most gross.85 The power of reflection is thus the inherent
creative freedom of the light of consciousness to either turn in on itself
introspectively and be free of its outer forms, or move out of itself to
view its outer manifestations.86 In harmony with the oscillation of
awareness between these polarities, the universe of manifestation is
incessantly renewed and is the essence of the vitality of its pulsation.87
The vibration of awareness serves, in short, to account for the manifestation of phenomena without either material cause or essential change in
cor ;iousness, and distinguishes the Light as a primary, uncaused
principle from its creations.
Awareness is the oneness of the unlimited vision of the All. Lack
of awareness results in incomplete vision and divides the All into parts,
each separately seen as a specific 'this' (idarri) contrasted and distinguished
from all that it is not. Turning away from the unity of self-awareness,
we become obsessed with the part and ignore the Whole. But when
awareness rests in itself and contemplates its own nature, it sees itself
as the pure subject that unfolds as the unity of all things.88 This awareness
(vimarsa) can therefore be said to have two aspects:
Internal. This is the act of awareness when the light of consciousness
rests in itself alone. It is the pure awareness of T (ahamvimarsa), devoid
of all thought-constructs (nirvikalpa), said to be 'total freedom and
unsullied wonder'.89
External. This aspect corresponds to the act of reflection directed away
from the subject to the object he perceives as separate from himself.
Reality then becomes accessible to discursive representation (vikalpa)
and amenable to empirical definition.

Light and Awareness: Two Aspects of Consciousness

Awareness serves to relate objectivity with subjectivity in such a
way that the object ultimately comes to rest in the self-awareness of the
subject. In reality, reflective awareness is always awareness of T
(ahamvimarsa); it never objectivises even when, in the form of the
awareness of 'this' (idamvimarsa), it reflects upon the object. The
experience we have of things existing outside consciousness is due to
a lack of self-awareness. The awareness of the object is never 'out there';
it is registered and known within the subject. All forms of awareness
come to rest in the subject:
"Just as every drop of water comes to rest in the ocean, so all acts
and cognitions [come to rest] in the Great Lord, the ocean of consciousness. Even a little water on the ground drunk by the sun's rays goes,
as rain, to the great ocean. Similarly all knowledge and action in the
universe merge in the ocean of Siva either spontaneously and evidently
(sphufam), by itself or [indirectly] through a series of other [processes]."90
Individual and universal consciousness are one. The same processes
operate in both; the only difference between them is that in the case of
individual consciousness these processes are restricted or limited
(samkucita) representations of the maximally expanded (vikdsita)
operation of universal consciousness. The activity of the mind is that
of consciousness itself, or to be more precise, of its reflective awareness,
the power of Spanda.91 Thus, on the individual level, reflective awareness:
Is the capacity of the Self to know itself in all its purity in the state
of perfect freedom from all kinds of affections; to analyse all its states
of varying affections, due either to the internal or the external causes;
to retain these affections in the form of residual traces (samskara);
to take out, at will, at any time, anything out of the existing stock of the
sarpskaras and bring back an old affected state of itself as in the case
of remembrance; to create an altogether new state of self-affection by
making a judicious selection from the existing stock and displaying
the material so selected on the background of the prakasa aspect as
at the time of free imagination.92

Cognition would be impossible if consciousness were incapable
of it. This capacity is the reflective awareness it has of itself as pure T
consciousness. When it is conditioned by the object of knowledge,
which is in its turn conditioned by the forces and laws that govern the
physical universe (all of which are aspects of the power of Maya), it
operates as cognition, memory and all the other functions of the mind.93
Cognition, in other words, is the reflective awareness of T limited by
the affections imposed upon it by the variety of external manifestations

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

generated by this T consciousness itself. Freed from all association
with outer objects, the individual shares in God's bliss, which is the
experience He enjoys at rest in His own nature.94 This blissful selfawareness (vimarsa) is the abiding condition of the subject even while
he perceives the world and reacts to it. It is the inner activity of the
Spanda principle, which is the inspired wonder (camatkara) of consciousness from which the powers of will, knowledge and action flow out as
phases in its vibrating rhythm {spanda).95
Normally, the individual subject fails to recognise the creative
nature of this flow of awareness (jnanadhara) to and from the object
in the act of cognition. He is unaware that he fashions from his own
consciousness the various forms which populate his objective field of
awareness. On the universal level of subjectivity, however, this movement
from inner to outer and back is experienced within consciousness as
the coming into being and destruction of the entire universe. Consequently, reflective awareness (vimarsa) is characterized as action
(kriya) which is the flux of Becoming, while the Light (prakdsa) is
knowledge (jnana) or passive Being.96 In other words, awareness is
the creative act of making reality known, while the Light is the actuality
of its being known. The latter without the former would be an inactive
principle, a state of pure potential that could never actualize into an
act of awareness. From this point of view the two aspects of awareness are:
Karma Vimarsa. When the act of awareness is directed externally and
coincides with the unfolding (vikasa) of the expansion of the universe
(prapanca) out of the absolute.
Kriya Vimarsa. When this activity is still unlimited and infinite, completely internalized within the absolute as its agency (kartrtva),
undisturbed by any goal of action (karya) as the pure vibration or stir
{samrambha) of consciousness.97

The Saiva rejects the Vedantin's view that knowledge is incommensurable with action. Knowledge and action together constitute the basis
of daily life and the life of all living beings.98 One is never without the
other; they function hand in hand. At the universal level, the power of
action evolves forms out of the pleroma of consciousness, while the
power of knowledge makes them manifest. On the individual level, they
represent the objective and subjective poles of all sentient activity. As
the inner awareness that i am' (aham), knowledge is the stable referent
of all actions. It persists undivided throughout all action, however
diverse. If it did not, then running, for example, would be impossible,99
nor would we be able to understand a sentence spoken in haste.100

Light and Awareness: Two Aspects of Consciousness

While our own self-awareness (svasamvedand) informs us of its existence,
action, thus illumined by knowledge, is the awareness that 4I act'.
Together they are the pure awareness of T (aharri) as the knowing and
acting subjectivity which is the inner Spanda nature of consciousness.

Awareness and the Integral Nature of the Absolute
Although diverse elements may appear within consciousness, they
must be distinguished from one another. Individual appearances share
a common nature as appearances and so cannot divide themselves off
from one another; otherwise the severed elements, disassociated from
their essential nature, would not appear at all.101 Established in its
own undifferentiated (avisisfa) nature, the universe would not be a
universe unless the light of consciousness itself differentiates the diverse
forms it creates by its spontaneous shining. It does this by the various
ways in which it reflects upon its own nature. Although the Light is
always undivided on the lower level of Maya as well as on the higher
level of pure consciousness, the reflective awareness it has of its own
nature is not.102 Thus while Light expresses the unity of consciousness,
awareness, when distinguished from it, expresses the diversity of
perceptions. At the microcosmic level we can say:
The one light of consciousness consists of such types of reflective
awareness as: 'this is a jar' and 'this is a cloth; 'these two are divided
from each other and from other subjects as well as from me'.103

At the macrocosmic level:
The Light is the supreme reality {paramanha) that encompasses
[the categories] from Earth to Paramasiva, [while] the unfolding
(unme$a) of the reflective awareness of the Heart [of T consciousness]
within it, distinguishes between them.104

This does not mean that vimarsa is diverse. Although it is due to
the awareness of the unity or relative distinction between the phenomena
illumined by the light of consciousness that they are experienced as
one or diverse, this is only possible because awareness is the same in
both cases.105 This then is another aspect of the dynamic nature of
awareness: it is the "freedom [of consciousness] to unite, separate and
hold things together."106 This distinguishes consciousness from inert

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

objects "devoid of the freedom to conjoin and disjoin."107 It is the
vibration of consciousness which generates the universe by a process
of uniting and dividing the elements contained within it in an undifferentiated state.108 Thus vimarsa is said to operate in four ways: (1) it
negates its true nature and (2) identifies with something else, (3) merges
both into one and (4) denies both once they have been merged together.109
These four functions correspond to three levels of reflective awareness,
namely, the awareness of the separation, of the holding together and
of the union of the manifestations of consciousness. First, by 'negating
its true nature and identifying with something else', consciousness,
through its power of awareness, freely identifies with the psychophysical
organism and denies its true nature as consciousness. The result is the
emergence of seemingly individual locii of consciousness distinct from
the object and from each other. Secondly, through the same power of
awareness, subject and object are held together and different objects
related to one another in a single field of consciousness during the act
of cognition. Thirdly, the individual subject and object, together with
all diversity, merge in the reflective awareness the light of consciousness
has of its nature as the universal subject.
These three levels of awareness correspond to the three-fold
appearing of consciousness:
Division (Bheda) corresponding to the awareness of separation
between objects.
Awareness of unity-in-difference (bhedabheda) represented by the
means of knowledge which serves as a link between the unity (abheda)
of the subject and the diversity (bheda) of the object.
Awareness of the undivided unity (abheda) of all things as the pure

subject.
These three levels are held together in the fullness (purnata) of
consciousness as the wave of vibration (spandd) of awareness moves
from the lower contracted level of diversity in the process of ascent
(arohakrama) to the expanded state of unity, and down from unity to
diversity in the process of descent (avarohakrama). We can understand
this movement from two points of view. Firstly, 'vertically'as a movement
from the absolute down to its manifestation and back in consonance
with the emanation (sr$fi) a n d withdrawal (samhara) of diversity.
Secondly, 'horizontally' as the movement of awareness towards and
away from the object during the act of perception. Perception serves
in this way as a paradigm for cosmogenesis and as a means of realising

Light and Awareness: Two Aspects of Consciousness

the oneness and creativity of the absolute.
An aspect of the pulsing power of awareness operates at each
level as a separate energy generating, sustaining and annulling the
dimension of experience to which it corresponds. Thus there are three
energies, namely, those of will, knowledge and action corresponding
to the supreme (para), middling (parapara) and inferior (apara) levels.
These three are emanations or aspects of the pure 4I-ness' of the undifferentiated power of the reflective awareness of consciousness.110
This is the pure vibration of its Bliss which contains and pours forth
all the powers operating on every plane of existence. It is the simultaneous
awareness of the unity of all three planes in the oneness of undistracted
contemplation. Self-realisation is the recognition that this integral
I-ness' (purnahanta) manifests on these three levels and is the yogi's
true Siva-nature which encompasses all possible formats of experience,
from the unity of transcendental consciousness to the diversity of its
immanent manifestations. Spanda is thus the powerful wave of energy
released through the act of self-awareness which carries consciousness
from the lower contracted level to the supreme state of expansion,
freeing the unawakened from the torments of limitation and awakening
them to the fullness of universal consciousness.

Ill

Spanda: The Universal
Activity of Absolute
Consciousness
We have seen how the dynamic {spanda) character of absolute
consciousness is its freedom to assume any form at will through the active
diversification of awareness (vimarsa) in time and space, when it is directed
at, and assumes the form of, the object of awareness. The motion of
absolute consciousness is a creative movement, a transition from the
uncreated state of Being to the created state of Becoming. In this sense
Being is in a state of perpetual Becoming (satatodita); it constantly
phenomenalises into finite expression. The shining of inner Being is the
manifestation of outer Becoming1 and, as such, is the constantly selfrenewing source of its own appearing as Becoming. Thus, the universal
character (sdmdnya) of Being is expressed in the radiant form (sphurattd)
of each phenomenon. Rightly understood, Being and Becoming are the
inner and outer faces of universal consciousness which becomes
spontaneously manifest, through its inherent power, as this polarity.2 The
inner face (antarmukha) of consciousness is the pure subject which, devoid
•of all objective content, abides beyond the realms of time and space. The
Stanzas on Vibration declare: "That inner being is the abode of
omniscience and every other divine attribute. It can never cease to exist
because nothing else can be perceived [outside it]." 3

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

The outer face of consciousness represents the diversity and
continuous change of the manifest universe—the object.4 While the outer
appears to be a distinct reality set apart from the inner, the inner contains
the totality of the outer which appears within it without dividing its nature:
"Internality", writes Utpaladeva, "is a state of oneness with the subject,
while externality is the state of separation from it."5
Again:
Having made itself manifest consciousness abides as both the inner
[subject] and outer [object]. It shines there [within itself] in such a way
that it appears to be illumining [some] other [reality].6
The emergence of a particular object within the field of awareness is
accompanied by a mental representation through which the subject
identifies the object and distinguishes it from others.7 Thus, the manner in
which the objective universe is experienced is governed by the same
principles as those upon which thought is based. Phenomena follow one
another linked in a causal chain, much as one thought leads to the next in
a chain of associations (prapancd). This is not only true of individual
objects but applies equally to individual perceivers. The manifestation of
the universe and the emergence of Becoming, consisting of both individual
subjects and objects, from the inner state of pure Being is equivalent to the
emergence of thought in universal consciousness. Although introverted
and inherently free of all dichotomysing mental activity, consciousness,
through its inner vibration (spanda), conceives the world-thought
(visvavikalpa). As it thinks., it turns away from its pure 'I-ness'(ahantd) to
plunge into its opposite—'thisness' (idanta), which is the essence of all
empirically definable distinctions {bhedavyavahara). Thus the movement
from inner to outer engenders a split within consciousness between subject
and object that gives rise to the perception of relative distinctions. This
corresponds to the loss of a direct, thought-free intuition of the essential
unity between inner and outer.8 In the supreme state—that is the 'inner'
reality of consciousness—there is no difference between 'inner'and 'outer'.
Everything is experienced as part of one, undivided compact mass of
consciousness (samvidghana). The pure Being (satta) of universal
consciousness assumes the form of Becoming and is involved in time and
space only when a contrast appears within it between the perceiver and
the perceived:
It is Lord Siva alone Who, by virtue of His freedom, playfully gives
rise to the subject and the object, the enjoyer and the enjoyed, which are
the basis of every activity in this world of duality.9

Spanda: Universal Activity of Absolute Consciousness

When the power of awareness gives rise to a sense of separation
between subject and object with all the consequent limitations it imposes
upon itself, it is called 4Maya\ As Maya, it veils consciousness and
obscures the individual subject's awareness of its essential unity.10 While
non-dualist Vedanta maintains that Maya is an undefinable principle that
gives rise to the cosmic illusion of multiplicity falsely superimposed on the
undivided unity of the absolute, according to Kashmiri Saivism, Maya is
the power of the absolute to appear in diverse forms. The separation
between subject and object is the product of a creative act and not of an
illusion:
The variety of subjects and objects with their characteristic
differences is made manifest by the creative power of the Lord, Who
knows them."

The creative freedom (svdtantryd) of the absolute and its deluding
power of Maya are identical. When the power of consciousness is
recognised to be the spontaneous expression of the absolute made manifest
in the variety of forms it assumes without compromising its essential unity,
it is experienced as the pure vibration (spanda) of its freedom. If, however,
the cosmic outpouring (visvollasa) of consciousness is felt to consist of
diverse and conflicting elements, the same power is called Maya. The field
of operation of the freedom of the absolute is the kingdom of universal
consciousness, while that of its power of Maya is the world of transmigratory existence. The difference between them is based on the degree
of insight we have into the nature of reality. Due to this power the object
appears to be projected outside the subject even though it is always
manifest within it and is the inner reality of the object. The creation of
diversity is accordingly defined as 'the projection (ksepa) of one's own
nature into the Self from the Self.12 Abhinava explains:
Creation is to make that which shines within, externally manifest
while it still preserves its original internal nature. Therefore [the object]
must be made manifest by that in relation to which it is said to be internal
and which makes the internal externally manifest.13

Conversely, the moment-to-moment destruction of the objective
content of consciousness occurs by a reversal of the movement from inner
to outer. The object, in other words, is never destroyed, but merely
withdrawn into the inner reality of the subject.14 The Spanda teachings
agree with the Buddhist doctrine of momentariness only insofar as it

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

applies to outer objectivity.I5 Although perception and every phenomenal
occurrence can be analysed into a series of moments (ksana), daily life
cannot entirely be understood in terms of such moment-units. Change is
an activity within the absolute which can only be properly understood in
terms of conscious action and not as a mechanical process. Each act is part
of a single continuous motion which proceeds from the agent—the pure
Being of introverted consciousness—to its final completion in the result,
which is the object or deed (karya). The outer reality of Becoming is the
effect which emerges from the cause, the inner reality of Being, just as
action emerges from the agent. It is a wave of activity which rises out of
the infinite potential of the agent. Every event is a part of the greater
rhythm of the total, cosmic event. Every object is part of the universal
object and every subject shares in the agency of the universal subject.
Ksemaraja writes:
Hence the Lord creates and destroys only the objective aspect of the
perceiver, i.e., the body, etc., but not the subjective aspect which is the
light of T consciousness because although embodied, the subject is, in
reality, one with the Lord. Thus of the two—subject and object—the
latter is perishable while the former is the freedom of consciousness and
immortal. For even when the world is emanated and absorbed [the
subject] does not waver from his true nature. If he were to do so, the
emanation and absorption of the world would not be manifest [for there
would be none to perceive it].16

The inner is the domain of Being, where the subject's power of
knowledge (jnanasakti) operates within itself, while the outer is the
domain of the subject's power of action {kriyasakti). Knowledge turns
into action and action leads to knowledge. Thus every individual
phenomenon has two aspects: its outer form and its inner nature. Its outer
form is apparent to us as the manner in which it behaves, its properties and
pragmatic efficacy (arthakriya). This aspect differentiates each individual
object from other objects and renders it accessible to conceptual
representation (savikalpa). Its inner nature the Kashmiri Saiva equates
with its pure Being as an appearance (abhasa) within universal consciousness at one with pure T-ness' and hence inaccessible to conceptual
representation (nirvikalpa). Thus the movement from Being to Becoming
is essentially an act of perception. Perception is the connecting link
between the outer manifest form of the object and its inner nature. The
movement of awareness from inner to outer is equivalent to a movement
from an awareness of the unity of the inner nature of all things to the
diversity of their outer forms. The activity of consciousness gives rise to

Spanda: Universal Activity of Absolute Consciousness

diversity in this sense alone.
Although it would not be wrong to say that the absolute is in a
constant state of transformation or is full of vibration—Spanda—from
another point of view we could say that no change or movement occurs in
the absolute at all. Movement (samrambha) and rest (visranti) in the
absolute presuppose one another.
The freedom (svatantrya) of
consciousness to do what seems, according to reason, to be impossible
explains how the absolute can at once be motionless and yet full of activity.
Abhinava explains:
By Vibration' {spandana) [we mean] subtle movement. It is subtle
[in the sense that] although it moves not, it manifests as motion. The light
of consciousness is not at all separate [from manifestation] yet it appears
to be so. Thus, that which is immobile, associated with the variety of
manifestation, manifests [as movement].17

Motion normally implies a movement between two separate points,
which entails the existence of at least two distinct entities between which
motion can occur. But as all things are equally consciousness there are no
two such distinct realities between which motion, as we understand it, can
take place.
Abhinava explains that Spanda—the pulsation of
consciousness—is defined as a 'subtle movement' {kincicc aland) because
"if that movement [were] to entail motion towards another entity, it would
not be 'subtle' [but merely gross motion];if not, [on the other hand], it is
not motion at all."18
The cosmic process consists of a cyclic series of creations and
destructions which follow one another like buckets fixed on a waterwheel.19 Although change is manifest through this process, and change is
the basis of time, the pulsation of the absolute is a movement outside the
confines of time. Siva is eternally engaged in all the phases of the creative
act simultaneously and yet performs them one after another. So
Utpaladeva sings of Siva's glory thus:
Salutations to the Lord Who eternally delights in emission {srsti)
and is always comfortably seated in persistence {sthiti), and is eternally
satisfied with the Three Worlds for His food.20

Although the creative activity of consciousness is not divided by time
or set in space, it is the basis of all sequentially definable spatial and
temporal manifestations (desakrama and kalakramabhasa). Action,
therefore, is of two kinds. The first is the kind of activity that can be

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

broken down into a series (krama) or sequence of actions set in time and
space. The second type is the non-successive (akramika) action that takes
place within the absolute. It is the source of time and space and hence
beyond the spatial and temporal distinctions which characterize all
sequences.
"Worldly action", writes Utpaladeva, "can be said to be successive due
to the power of time; but the eternal activity of the Highest Lord, like the
Highest Lord Himself, cannot."21
Reality contemplated from the highest (para) level of consciousness
is experienced as a single, unchanging (akrama) whole. At the lower
(apara) level we experience this same reality as a sequence (krama) of
events—as changing positions in space and a continuous transition from
one moment in time to the next. At the intermediate (parapara) level,
reality is experienced at the instant of cosmic manifestation into which it
blossoms with the suddenness and energy of a lightning flash.22 This
cosmic expansion (visvasphara) occurs in a single, non-sequential flash
which transcends both the successive change and the non-successive,
simultaneous manifestation of all its phases at once.23 Ksemaraja quotes
the Sarasvatsamgraha as saying: "This Self has shone forth but once; it is
full [of all things] and can nowhere be unmanifest."24
Abhinava explains:
Moreover, consciousness does not issue forth in succession, as do
the seed, sprout, stalk, petals, flowers and fruit, etc.. The sprout issues
from the seed, and the stalk from the sprout, not the seed. In this case,
however, absolute consciousness (samvittattva) is manifest here in every
circumstance (sarvatah) [of daily life because] it is everywhere full and
perfect. [Consciousness] is said to be the cause of all things because it is
everywhere emergent (udita) [as each manifest entity].25
A sequence is only intelligible as a series of differing elements. From
the point of view of absolute consciousness, events do not occur
successively. Succession (krama) depends upon difference, and difference
on the existence of a certain manifestation (abhasa) and the (simultaneous)
non-existence of another.26 On the other hand, cosmic events cannot be
said to occur simultaneously either, because simultaneity of being is only
possible between two different entities.27 In reality, succession and its
absence are not objective properties of an entity but only formats of
perception.28 Succession is a function of time which is not to be
understood as a self-existent reality but merely as the perception of 'prior'
and 'subsequent' based on the recollection of past events in relation to the
present or possible future events in the field of awareness. Thus

Spanda: Universal Activity of Absolute

Consciousness

Utpaladeva writes:
Time is in reality nothing but the succession observable in the
movement of the sun, etc., and the birth of different flowers [in their due
season], or [the transition from] summer [to] winter.29
The transition or movement of awareness from one perception to the
next is the basis of our sense of time passing. It is only possible because we
sense separation between individual phenomena, both from each other
and from the individual subject. This happens when consciousness freely
obscures itself by turning away from its own self-awareness to become
extroverted and contracted. In the essentially introverted nature of
consciousness there is no time. Time operates within the sphere of
objectivity; it cannot divide the inner subjectivity of consciousness. 30 To
think that time can divide consciousness is like seeking nourishment from
lumps of sugar cut from the sky by a whirling sword.31 As consciousness is
the source and basis of all appearances, it makes time manifest as well and
hence cannot be affected by it.
Ksemaraja insists that all talk of processes occurring within universal
consciousness in terms of a sequence of events does not really refer to the
actual state of affairs (vastu), but serves merely to impart instruction about
the nature of consciousness in the only manner in which language
permits. 32 The incessant creative activity of the absolute does not involve
it in any temporal diversification. The emergence and submergence of
each total-event from the body of consciousness does not divide it in any
way. Even so, we experience change. Abhinava says:
As there is no succession within [consciousness], there is no
simultaneity; and as there is no simultaneity, there is no succession
either. The extremely pure conscious reality transcends all talk of
succession and its absence.33
In reality nothing arises and nothing falls away. It is the vibrating
power of consciousness which, though free of change, becomes manifest in
this or that form and thus appears to be arising and falling away:34
[All things] exist in Siva just as blue rays reside in the opal; in reality
they nowhere come into being nor cease to exist.35
Reality presents itself to reason as a paradox: though it is one, yet it is
diverse; though changing, it changes not at all. All the concepts we may

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

have of it necessarily fall short of the truth. To know reality we must
experience it directly. "Why speak much?" ask the Stanzas on Vibration,
"[the yogi] will experience it for himself! "36 When the yogi is plunged in
the contemplative absorption of the 'Fourth State' (turiya) beyond
waking, dreaming and deep sleep, he shares in Siva's experience, enjoying
its vibrant creative power personified as the Goddess, Siva's consort:
This Goddess of Consciousness, the Fourth State (turiya) consists of
the union of emission, preservation and destruction. She emits and
withdraws [into Herself] each particular phase of emission, etc..
Containing all things within Herself She is eternally lull' and, [void of
all particulars], kthin\ She is both as well as neither of the two, abiding
[eternally] as the vibrating radiance [of consciousness] in a manner free
of all succession (akrama).31
Cosmic creation and destruction is not a mechanical process. The
emergence of the universe from consciousness and its submergence back
into it are not simply a matter of withdrawing or replacing an object from
a locus in space. The world does not come out of the absolute as do
walnuts out of a bag.38 The change from the pre-cosmic to the cosmic state
is a transformation from one form of consciousness to another. The
transition from one form of consciousness to another marks the creation
of a new experience and the destruction of the old. Thus the power of
awareness potentially contains within itself every possible experience—
every cycle of creation and destruction. It is the inner blissful vibration
(antahspanda) which impels the movement (yibhramd) of the universe
made manifest as the outer cosmic rhythm (bahihspanda) of creation
and destruction. 39 Ksemaraja writes:
The vibrating power of awareness (spandasakti) is the bliss which is
the wonder of the one compact mass of T consciousness embracing the
endless cycles of creation and destruction. Its true nature is the
manifestation of the expansion and contraction of the perceiver and the
perceived which represent the entire pure and impure creation.40
Universal creation is like the individual creation of the world of
waking life when a person wakes from sleep. Conversely, just as when a
person sleeps all the activities and ideas of waking life cease and merge
back into his self-consciousness, so during cosmic destruction, in the sleep
(nimesa) of consciousness, everything is withdrawn and brought to rest
within it. Abhinava prayerfully addresses Siva with the words:

Spanda: Universal Activity of Absolute Consciousness

When Your nature expands, You, I and the entire universe come
into being; when it is withdrawn, neither You nor I nor the universe
[exist].41 The universe awakes when You awake and is destroyed when
You sleep. Thus the entire universe of being and non-being is one
with You.42

The Stanzas on Vibration explain that the universe comes into being
when Siva, as it were, opens His eyes to see it, and is again destroyed when
He closes His eyes to observe His own nature and no longer views the
universe.43 Siva's power to know the universe is one with His power to
create it:
Then, when the Lord desires to discern something within the abode
of the Void, the universe spontaneously unfolds and is established within
consciousness and the Lord's unfolding power of knowledge
perceives it.44

In this way, consciousness expands to assume the form of the universe
by withdrawing back into itself. In other words, by veiling His undivided
nature, Siva appears as the diverse play of multiplicity. Conversely, when
Siva reveals His own nature and withdraws the veil which contracts
consciousness, the universe is destroyed:45
The Supreme Lord is the light of the absolute (anuttara).
Concealing His own nature, by the glory of His free will alone, He rests
on the plane of objectively definable knowledge (pramdna), etc., and
makes phenomena manifest [as if] separate [from His own nature].46

The universe is the wonderful variety (vicitrata) of Siva's nature
created by Him when he reflects on Himself and thinks 4I am diverse'.47
Siva contemplates none other than Himself, whether He knows Himself as
the multiplicity of things or as their undivided source. At one with Siva,
the enlightened yogi recognises that the expansion {unmesa) of the
universe of diversity coincides with the expansion of his own undivided
consciousness which appears as "the dawning of absolute reality to the
exclusion of the external world."48 Thus the two phases in the pulse of
consciousness coincide. Oscillating like the pans of an evenly weighted
balance,49 they are perfectly equivalent. Ksemaraja writes:
The state of cosmic contraction (nimesa) is identical with the state
of expansion (unmesa) even though the [universe reverts to a pure

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

consciousness] which assimilates everything within itself to form an
undivided unity.50
Again:
The contracted state (nimesa), corresponding to the withdrawal of
previously emitted diversity, is itself the expanding (unmesa) awareness
of the unity of consciousness. [Conversely] the expanded state (unmesa),
indicative of forthcoming diversity, is itself the contraction (nimesa) of
the awareness of the unity of consciousness.51
Thus, the expansion and contraction of consciousness are brought
about by Siva's pulsating power, which is simultaneously identical with
both. They are the internal and external aspects of the same energy.
Similarly, cosmogenesis and lysis do not essentially differ:
Cosmic lysis {pralaya) corresponds to the state of [Siva's] power in
which external [objectivity] is predominantly withdrawn (nimesa). It is
the unfolding (unmesa) of the innate nature which corresponds to the
emergence of a state of unity (abheda) and the withdrawal of diverse
multiplicity (bheda). Therefore we maintain that lysis (pralaya) is the
same as the genesis (udaya of consciousness) and that genesis is also the
same as lysis.52
There are many passages in the Upanisads which explicitly state that
the universe emerges from Brahman and that it is ultimately reabsorbed
back into It.53 Even so, Sankara's Vedanta cannot accept that creation is
a real process. Following the lead of his predecessor, Gautfapada, Sankara
maintains that no universe is ever actually created. The real is unborn and
uncreated;54 hence creation can only occur within the domain of illusion
(maya). From the Advaita Vedantin's point of view, to state that the
universe arises from, and subsides into, the absolute Brahman is another
way of saying that the universe is transitory and hence illusory. Illusions
also appear and disappear; only their real ground continues to exist
unchanged:
"As the spaces within pots or jars," writes Sankara, "are nondifferent from cosmic space, or as water in a mirage is non-different from
a [sandy] desert—since they sometimes appear and sometimes vanish
away, and as such their nature cannot be defined, even so is it to be
understood that this phenomenal world of experiences, things
experienced and so on, has no existence apart from Brahman."55

Spanda: Universal Activity of Absolute Consciousness

Kashmiri Saivism maintains that all things are spontaneously
emanated by consciousness in such a way that the original source of the
emitted product remains unchanged and one with its emanation. The
plenitude of universal manifestation emerges out of the fullness of the
absolute; both are perfect expressions of the all-encompassing totality of
reality which, thus emitting itself, suffers no loss.56 The manifestation of
the universe is, in this sense, a real event, not just an apparent change
(vivarta) in the essentially undivided nature of the absolute. Even so, as
the absolute undergoes no change when becoming manifest as the
universe, diversity is, in a sense, merely an apparent deviation from unity.
Again, in one sense, cosmogenesis involves a real transformation
(parinama) of consciousness into the form of a universe, much as a ball of
clay changes when fashioned into a jar. Yet, in another sense, consciousness undergoes no transformation at all. Bhagavatotpala quotes the Light
of Consciousness (Samvitprakasa) in his commentary on the Stanzas on
Vibration to illustrate this seeming paradox:
In no circumstance is the All-Pervasive Lord subject in this way to
change, either apparent or real. Even if He were subject to both His
nature would remain undivided.57

The Kashmiri Saivite agrees with the Vedantin that everything
appears just as it is without any real change occurring in the essential
nature of the absolute. Even so, he maintains that the production of
diversity is not merely an apparent change in the unity of the absolute if
this implies the production of unreal entities, for they could never be made
manifest.58 Thus, the Kashmiri Saivite accepts the view that an effect is a
real transformation (parinama) of its cause, although he does so with
certain reservations. Even when the light of consciousness is apparent to
us as the universe of our experience, there is no question of its becoming
anything else. The effect is the cause appearing as the effect without
changing in any way. Abhinava writes:
[A real transformation of cause into effect] entails the obscuring of
the preceding form [of the changing substance] and the coming into being
of another. In the case of the light of consciousness this is impossible
because it has no other form. [Moreover], if [the light of consciousness]
were to be obscured [the entire universe] would be as if blind. Again, [if
the new form] were other than the light of consciousness it could not
appear. In either case the universe [could not be perceived and hence]
would be as if asleep, [which runs contrary to our] experience.59

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

A change can involve two types of transformation (parinama). The
first type is total. The material cause becomes its effect (karyaparinama)
in such a way that it is completely and irreversibly absorbed into it. The
example given is that of a log burnt to ashes. This type of change the
Kashmiri Saiva rejects, and so denies that the substance of a material
cause undergoes any real change to produce its effect. However, he does
accept the possibility of a real change occurring in its qualities (dharmapaririama). This second type of change does not entail the total destruction
of the cause and allows for the possibility of a reversion of the effect back
into it. All that has happened is that the qualities of the material cause—its
form, texture, physical properties, etc., have temporarily changed.60
This concept of causality fits with the manner in which the Kashmiri
Saivite describes the process of manifestation.
Consciousness
spontaneously evolves through a series of stages ranging from the most
subjective or 'inner' states of Siva-consciousness to the most 'outer' or
objective forms of awareness. The process of descent into matter is a
progressive self-limitation (rodhand) of consciousness. As we have seen,
the different orders or levels in the hierarchy (taratamya) of being do not,
in reality, become manifest consecutively. Even so, the only way we can
understand the process of manifestation is to conceive the different
categories of existence (tattva) as progressively emerging from
consciousness in a single causal chain. Each member of this chain is the
effect of all the preceding members and a constituent cause of the lower,
grosser orders which follow it.61 Ksemaraja explains:
When [the Lord] feels a playful desire to veil His own nature and
appears in the order of descent, the preceding [members in the sequence]
. . . fall into the background and the succeeding forms come to the fore, in
such a way that the preceding members serve as the substratum for the
succeeding [phases].62

In this way the cause contains within itself the effect in a potential
form while the effect contains the cause as its actualization. Abhinava
explains:
Thus, even though the final element [in the series] is such as it is, it
nonetheless contains within itself all the other countless aspects that, step
by step, precede it and are encompassed by it in such a way that they are
inseparable from its own nature. [Consciousness] thus illumines and
contemplates itself as full and perfect {piirna). The members which
precede [any given phase] likewise have their being in the same reflective
awareness and light of consciousness which, full and perfect, has already

Spanda: Universal Activity of Absolute Consciousness

unfolded through the succeeding members. Thus, [none of the phases]
are divorced from the fullness [of consciousness] and they embrace all the
other members which precede them and forcibly induce them to form a
part of their own nature. Each of these phases illumining itself thus, and
reflecting on its own nature, is full and perfect.63
The two phases of the pulsation of consciousness from inner to outer
and outer to inner are equivalent, respectively, to the processes of selflimitation or coagulation (rodhana) of consciousness and the dissolution
(drdvana) of the gross into the subtler forms of consciousness. They
represent the sequence of descent into matter and ascent into consciousness.64 As consciousness descends, its manifestations become increasingly
subject to the power of natural law (niyati) and so progressively more
conditioned. Conversely, as it ascends it frees itself, step by step, of
constraints until it reaches its fullest manifestation as the absolute beyond
all relativity.65 Therefore, from one point of view, we can think of the
process of descent as a movement into the fettered condition and the
process of ascent as the movement towards liberation. This is how it
appears to those who have not realised the true nature of the pulse of
consciousness—Spanda—in its two phases. For the enlightened, however,
these movements represent the spontaneous activity of consciousness.
Creation is the manifestation of difference within the unity of consciousness through which it immanentalises into its cosmic form. Destruction is
the reverse of this. Diversity merges into unity and consciousness assumes
its transcendental formless aspect.
These two aspects represent,
respectively, the 'lower' (apara) and 'supreme' (para) forms of Siva.

Three Moments in the Vibration of Consciousness
The transformation from one aspect to the other can be analysed in
terms of a number of successive phases. This, as we have seen, is no more
than a convenient way of conceiving the activity of consciousness. Even
so, it serves not only to explain in conceptual terms what happens, but it
also serves as a means to realise the liberating experience of Spanda. One
way this movement can be understood is to analyse it into three stages
corresponding to three aspects of the universal power of Siva's
consciousness, namely, will, knowledge and action. All things come into
being through an act of will, with action as its immediate instrumental
cause and knowledge of its application as the intermediary between the
will to create and the act itself.66 Insofar as the emergence of an object

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

within the field of awareness through the act of perception, and its
subsequent subsidence when it has been perceived, are part of the radiant
pulse (sphuraria) of awareness,67 this three-fold vibration constitutes the
essential nature of all things as elements of experience. 68 The intent on
making the object manifest, the actual act of manifestation and the
manifest state, which are the result of these three powers in their due order,
represent the beginning, middle and end of all things, held together as
aspects of the universal flow of the absolute (anuttara).69 Siva's 'lower'
(apara) form is the unfolding (unme$a) of the flow (prasara) of this
universal will70 in which His powers of will, knowledge and action manifest
in relation to their respective fields of operation. 71 In Siva's supreme
(para) form His powers merge into one energy that comes to rest within
Siva where it naturally resides.72 As Bhaskaracarya explains:
[Sakti's] own abode is understood to be the place of Being (sat)
called Siva. It is [Siva's] vitality (virya), [His] energy of the nature of
knowledge and action. [Energy's] stable state is absorption (llnata), that
is, penetration into the agential aspect [of consciousness]. That same
[state] is the light of intuition (pratibha) which is the solitary churner of
the light of consciousness [that thus aroused issues forth as the
universe].73
In His supreme, transcendental state, Siva's knowledge is the
awareness He has of Himself as full of all things (purno'ham). It is one with
His activity as the inner vibration of His all-embracing 'I-ness', the creative
movement of the will. Thus, together, these three powers represent aspects
of Siva's bliss, 74 which is His Spanda nature as the enjoying subjectivity
(bhoktrtva).
They are the Lordship (lsvarata\ agency of knowledge
(jnatftva) and agency of action (kartrtva) of universal consciousness. 75
The vibration of consciousness is the power of one's own true nature
(svabala) which brings about the incessant coming together and separation
of these energies in the supreme state of universal consciousness and on the
lower level of individual consciousness. 76 So let us now examine these
three powers in greater detail.

The Conative Power of Consciousness
The self-revealing (svatahsiddha) character of Being corresponds to
the incessant flow of consciousness through its will to Be. The outpouring
of the will to exist expresses itself both as the active cause of individual

Spanda: Universal Activity of Absolute Consciousness

beings and the passive assent (abhyupagama) to Being expressed through
the individuality (svabhdva) of all that partakes of Being. The will is thus
both the agent and the act of Being:
Thus the will of the Lord Who wills to appear as the jars or cloths,
etc., constituting the world as the manifestations (abhasa) of consciousness, is the cause, the agent and the action.77

The will is coextensive with its own conscious intent. As such it is a
form of awareness (vimarsa) associated with a specific goal which it reflects
on as its objective. The generic nature (samanyarupd) of awareness is thus
restricted and directed to a single object.78 The potter's intention to make
a pot relates to the action he is about to perform. If his intent were not
limited to its own specific object, the potter could just as well set about
weaving a cloth or do anything else.79 When we walk down the road, we
are conscious of our ultimate destination and move towards it; even
though we may pause to admire the scenery, the will remains fixed (niyata)
on its goal.80 Similarly, cooking involves a number of separate actions;
even so, the awareness that 'I cook' remains one and unbroken. The
conscious intent remains constant throughout. Although it may manifest
at different times through different actions, the same will necessarily
precedes every action and perception. The existence of another will, prior
to, and instigating the will to act or perceive entails that this second will
require another to initiate it and that another, leading to an infinite regress.
Nor can we deny the existence of the will. Without an original desire to act,
activity would be aimless: nothing would determine that one action should
occur rather than another. Similarly, no intrinsic necessity ordains that
the perception of a particular object should follow that of another. The
reason why all other possible perceptions are excluded from the field of
awareness is that the will freely chooses to direct attention towards the
intended object of perception.
Preceding both perception and action, the will is most clearly manifest
(sphufa) when it begins to assert itself in the subject before either
perception or action take place. The first moment or intent (aunmukhya)
of the will towards its objective conditions the inherent contentment of
consciousness at rest in itself, by the act upon which it is intent.81 Even so,
it coincides with the final moment in the movement of the will when the
previous desire to act is satisfied and consciousness abides in a state of pure
intent free of all specific goals and full of the power of bliss.82 Abhinava
explains:

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

[The universal will] in the form of desire (kdmand) blossoms forth
through the individual subject. Thus actualized, it is apparent as a desire
for sense objects. It does not proceed through the succeeding phases
[mechanically] step by step like the feet of the blind. Rather, after it has
been aroused and has initially decided upon its goal, thus stimulated, it
bounds forward with delight to forcibly lay hold of its goal like a farsighted man when walking. The will is clearly evident in the initial state
when it has [just] arisen and is similarly full and perfect (purna) in its
final state of rest.83

Thus, we can distinguish between two moments in the movement of
the will. The first is the initial state of tension or intent (aunmukhya) and
the second when it goes on to develop into a conscious desire for a specific
object (isyamdna), discursively representable (savikalpa) at the individual
level of awareness. At this stage the object of desire appears to be projected
outside the subject who desires it, although at the universal level their
essential unity remains unchanged. In reality, it is the subject who is
always the object of his own desire.84 But insofar as the subject is now
caught up in the object he desires, the first moment is, from the point of
view of practice, more important. So for the rest of this section we shall
devote our attention to it.
Prior to their manifestation, all things reside within consciousness in
a potential form just as in a peacock's egg, we find all the peacock's limbs
with its feathers large and small, colours and patterns.85 In the state of
involution {nimesa) all things mingle with one another in the all-embracing
egoity (piirnahanta) of Siva's nature.86 When consciousness evolves
(unmesa) out of itself to become the diversified universe of experience, this
pre-existent potential is actualized. In this way differentiated awareness
pours out of the body of undifferentiated consciousness, heralded by a
subtle stress or vibration (ghumana) of aesthetic delight set up in its causal
matrix.87 This is Spanda in its purest form, free of all differentiation.
Bhagavatotpala defines it accordingly: "[This] pulsation (spanda) is
consciousness free of mental constructs. It is the state in which the
Supreme Soul actively tends towards [manifestation]. It simultaneously
operates everywhere [although the Supreme Soul is in Himself]
motionless (nistarahgay\u
At this stage all the powers of the absolute are activated and merged
in the unity of the bliss (ananda) Siva experiences contemplating His own
nature. Subject, object and means of knowledge form a single undivided
whole, like the clay ball (pinda) a potter is about to fashion into a jar.89 It
is the matrix of all cosmic vibrations, both of the physical order and the
extra-physical or metaphysical. In this state consciousness is like a seed

Spanda: Universal Activity of Absolute Consciousness

swelling to bursting point (ucchuna), abounding with infinite possibilities.90 Somananda explains:
When a waveless stretch of water becomes violently agitated, one
may notice, if one observes carefully, an initial tension [which forms
within it] just when this begins to happen. When the open fingers of the
hand are clenched into a fist, one may notice at the outset of this action,
a [slight] movement. Similarly, when the desire to create begins to unfold
in consciousness, at rest tranquil in itself, a tension [arises within it].91

This initial instant (tuti) is as fleeting and full of energy as a lightning
flash.92 Preceding the spatial-temporal continuum of the lower (apara) or
immanent level of consciousness, it is not a moment fully set in time. The
subtle influence the power of time exerts on the, as yet, unclearly
differentiated objectivity (idanta) made manifest at this level93 serves as a
link between the eternal and the temporal, the unmanifest consciousness
and the manifest universe. He who pays close attention to the initial
welling up of desire when it is especially intense is afforded an opportunity
to realise the fullness of consciousness by merging into the force of his
intention. As Utpaladeva puts it:
Here [during the initial movement of the will], worldly men who
desire to ascend to the plane of ultimate reality can experience in this way
the entire aggregate of energies.94

In states of heightened psychic intensity all the powers operating
through the mind and senses are suddenly withdrawn into the pulsing core
of one's own nature, just as a tortoise contracts its limbs in fright,95 and the
continuity of mental life is suddenly broken. The ordinary man, hopelessly
distracted, is carried away by this flood of energy (saktivisargd). The yogi,
however, master of himself, can by the sheer intensity of this energy
penetrate through the flux of his feelings to the 'firmly fixed vibration'
(pratisfhaspanda) of his own nature. He must learn to do this the instant
fear arises in him or when he begins to feel depressed or disgusted, no less
than when he is confused and wondering what to do. Equally he must try
to penetrate into the source of the vitality (virya) which intensifies the
activity of the senses during the ecstasy of love or of joy at beholding a
beautiful object or seeing a close relative after a long time.96 Overcome
with the awe (vismaya) of self-realisation (atmalabhd), the yogi intuits the
intense feelings welling up inside him as aspects of the aesthetic rapture of
consciousness (ciccamatkara)91 in which all emotions blend together like

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

rivers in the ocean of his blissful consciousness.
Vibration teach:

The Stanzas on

Spanda is stable in that state one enters when extremely angry,
extremely excited, running or wondering what to do.98
The alert yogi (prabuddha) reflects upon his own nature and in so
doing instantly penetrates into the initial tension of the will during these
heightened states of emotivity. The instant they arise he is elevated beyond
his conditioned state of consciousness and so is never entangled in them.
The unawakened, however, overcome by Maya, falls a victim to these
states believing mistakenly that his many perceptions and actions are
independent of the universal pulsation of his own authentic nature. Thus
in order to achieve the direct intuitive insight (upalabdhi) that they are
grounded in the universal movement of consciousness (sdmdnyaspanda),
one must desist from the tendency, engendered by one's lack of selfawareness, to make distinctions between the functions (vftti) of
consciousness to will, exert itself, know and act, etc.". In this way, the yogi
discovers that they are all aspects of the one undivided pulse of
consciousness.
This awareness can be achieved by attending to the first movement of
the will, discovered when we are fully present to ourselves in the actuality
of our situation. Every instant is a new beginning which abides in the
eternity of the self-perpetuating present where all 'beginnings' cease.100
The closer we come to experiencing the moment in which the impulse to
action arises, the more directly we come in contact with the concrete
actuality of the present and the authenticity of our Being. Thus the Spanda
teachings instruct the yogi to maintain an alert awareness of the continuity
of his consciousness throughout his every action. When running in fear,
for example, he should attend closely to the desire he feels to lift his foot;
then to the exertion he applies to lift it and the attention he directs to the
place where he is going to place it, as well as the actual act of doing so. He
must similarly attend to each phase in the production of words and
sentences {sabdanispatti) uttered in the excitement of a vivacious
conversation, or the movement of the fingers while playing a musical
instrument.101
The same holds true of the impulse to perceive. The yogi must fix his
attention on the thought-free (nirvikalpa) intent of the unfolding (unmesa)
of awareness which marks the initial impulse to perception (didrksd). For
an instant the individual subject (ksetrajna) experiences the same identity
between the entities he desires to perceive and his own consciousness, as

Spanda: Universal Activity of Absolute

Consciousness

does the supreme subject between Himself and every entity in the
universe.102 He shares in the Great Pervasion (mahavyapti) of universal
consciousness present in all the categories of existence (tattva).
Abhinava explains:
Immersing himself in the supreme reality, clearly aware that
consciousness is all things, [the yogi's consciousness] vibrates. This
vibration (ghurrii) is the Great Pervasion (mahavyapti).m
Always on the alert to discern the activity of his own vibrating
consciousness, the yogi's attitude (mudra) is kept secret (rahasya) in the
privacy of his own experience. Established in his own nature, the yogi's
awareness is intent (unmukha) on discerning the All (sarvabhava) as his
true nature through the on-going expansion (vikasavftti) of his own
consciousness the instant his senses are set in motion:
The yogi should abide firmly fixed in his own nature by the power of
the exertion of [his] expanding consciousness (yikasavrtti). [Thus he is]
established on the plane of Bliss relishing the objects of sense that
spontaneously appear before him. Perfected yogis (siddha\ devoted to
bliss, are ever steadfast in this, the Supreme Gesture (mudra), the perfect
and unobstructed expansion of the Awakened.104
Intent in this way on the initial movement of the will, the power of the
yogi's awareness free of thought-constructs (nirvikalpa) transcends the
limitations imposed upon it by the diversity of perceptions and he is
awakened to the higher reality of his all-embracing (purna) nature.
Penetrating into the universal vibration (samanyaspanda) of consciousness, he shares in its unfolding vision (unmesa)105 and comes to recognise
every state, whether in the mental or in the physical sphere, to be Siva. 106
Every phase in the unfolding and withdrawal of the activity of the will is
now illumined by the yogi's reflective awareness. Perceiving the totality of
his experience through the undivided vision of universal consciousness, he
experiences the subject, object and means of knowledge as a single whole
reposing in the supreme subject with which he is now identified. Having
burnt away the sense of diversity (vibhdgabodha) in the fire of awareness
and transmuted it into the unity of his true nature, the yogi is established in
the supreme flow (paradhara) of the powers of consciousness. 107 He
maintains a state of self-awareness throughout every moment of his
experience, be it while waking, dreaming or in deep sleep. 108 Space, time,
change and form are recognised to be modalities of the one consciousness

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

and no longer condition it. The awakened yogi is now constantly mindful
of the pulsing power of his true nature not only in the beginning but in
every phase of his activity and perception. He realises that all things exist
by virtue of their identity with the supreme subject which he recognises
himself to be and so no longer wanders in samsara.m

The Cognitive Power of Consciousness
The apparent gap between the unmanifest, perceiving consciousness
and the manifest, perceived object is bridged by understanding their
distinctive status as two modes of perception. The cognitive power of
consciousness operates both as the immediate, intuitive awareness
consciousness has of its own nature and as the mediated perception of
objectively manifest particulars. The will to create represents the first
movement (adyaspandd) out of the absolute, unmanifest condition into
the relative, phenomenally manifest state. The first movement (ddyaspanda) of awareness that occurs within the sphere of manifestation is
the perception of the undifferentiated totality projected into it by the
universal will. The activity of the power of knowledge coincides with the
expansion (unmesa) of objectivity in the field of awareness. In the
primordial emptiness of consciousness the faint traces of cosmic
manifestation appear as 4the inner desire to know the universe [consciousness] wills to create'.110 This unfolding awareness successively evolves
through the various states of consciousness ranging from deep sleep to
the waking state,l ]l where the totality of occurrences making up the world
of experience is set apart from the individual locus of awareness. The
perceptions occasioned by the operation of the cognitive power of
consciousness are now fully formed and the universe of experience is
manifest in all its plenitude:
This is the expansion of the power of knowledge which unfolds
[spontaneously] through its own energy {tejas)\ phenomena become fully
manifest through the persistence of cognition {jnanasthiti).ul

The vibrating power {spandasakti) of knowledge is thus the pure
cognitive awareness (upalabdhrta) of consciousness,113 which both links
perceptions together and accounts for their individual emergence within
the field of awareness. These two functions correspond to the quiescent
and emergent aspects of consciousness, which together account for the
possibility of phenomenal experience. The quiescent aspect represents

Spanda: Universal Activity of Absolute Consciousness

absolute, undivided consciousness and the emergent, its finite manifestations. Perceptions could not take place were consciousness to be
constantly at rest within itself. Completely immersed in its own
indeterminate nature, nothing could be made manifest at all. On the other
hand, if consciousness were to be entirely emergent as the manifest
universe, it could never be consciously experienced. The apparent
ontological distinction between the absolute and the relative, the infinite
and the finite, is thus reducible to an epistemic distinction between two
different modes of knowledge. The cognitive power of consciousness is
its capacity to shift back and forth between these two modes and, as it
does so, select some of the countless potential forms merged within it to
make them externally manifest.114 The light of consciousness, full to
overflowing with innumerable phenomena, thus separates some of them
from itself, while at the same time limiting its own nature to apear as the
individual (mdylya) subject set apart from the object. Perception takes
place when this limited subject is affected by the 'shade' (chdyd) cast upon it
by the object. As the pulse of awareness moves from the expanded,
undivided state to the contracted, limited condition and back again at
each instant, novel perceptions are generated and the world of experience
is thus constantly renewed. Thus this energy, like those of will and action,
is essentially Siva's creative power (svatantrya) which is the vibration
{spanda) of consciousness through which He generates all things.115

The Power of Action
Siva's conative energy becomes fully evident in all its plenitude when
the activity of consciousness is manifest (prasrta) on the phenomenal
plane.'16 The creative will is the freedom of the absolute and so is equated
both with its power to act (kriydsakti) and its power to fashion the diverse
forms of the universe (nirmdnasakti). It is the action of the creative
subjectivity (nirmdtrta) of consciousness.117 As 'the agency of the act of
Being' the power of action is the essence (sdra) of universal Being
(sattamatra)u% of all things119 both as their pragmatic efficacy and
manifest nature.120
This autonomous act of Being is free in every way. It is an act of
awareness, the agent of which is the Light of the Heart of consciousness.
Being can only be directly experienced within the domain of the subject.
We cannot grasp the pure Act of universal Being in the sphere of
objectivity. The object is a product of the act of Being of which the
subject is the agent. Only the agent is completely autonomous and

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

self-existent. As such he is one and absolute and so can be none other than
Siva Himself, Whose agency is free in all respects.121 The potter is an agent
and is free to make his pot because he shares in Siva's nature as the agent.122
It is Siva Himself Who fashions the jar through the potter and weaves a
cloth through the weaver, just as at the universal level He is the guide and
impeller (pravartaka) of the flux of cosmic forces and of the powers of
consciousness:
Listen! Our Lord, Whose nature is consciousness, is unlimited, the
absolute master of the arising and dissolving away of every power.123
Siva, the universal agent, eternally active is never bound by His
activity. The universe is the unfolding effect of Siva's agency (kartfpratha)
while He, as the agent, always remains true to His essential, autonomous
nature.124 The law of action and reaction {karma) binds only the
ignorant.125 At the lower level, outer activity contrasts with inner
awareness. The unfolding of the power of action coincides with the
withdrawal of self-awareness. At the higher level, the universal outpouring
of consciousness is experienced as the inner Being of all things which
spontaneously rise out of it without obscuring it in any way:
Thus action is said to be one and born of no other inner nature [but
itself, which, as such] emerges out of the innate nature [of all things]. It
is [the goddess] Siva, the inner nature, which spontaneously emerges
out of itself.126
The Doctrine of Vibration urges us to be conscious of Spanda, the
recurrent activity of consciousness. In all its outer phases, be they will,
knowledge or action, we can catch a glimpse of our authentic identity and
realise our inherent freedom. The inner activity of consciousness, free of
all restrictions, is bliss itself. The experience of Spanda is wonder, an
abiding bliss far higher than the transitory pleasures of life. We can
experience Spanda through the activity of the senses, mind and body,
because its foundation is universal consciousness, our authentic Siva
nature. Thus the Spanda yogi finds freedom where those who, failing to
attend to the vibration of consciousness, are bound.

IV

Siva and Sakti
As do the Tantras that are their original source and inspiration, all
Kashmiri Saiva traditions speak of God as an inconnumerable and perfect
Identity between two contrasted principles, distinguishable in all
composite things, but coincident without composition in the One Who is
everything.
Encompassed by the vision of Siva's all-embracing
consciousness, all contrasts and contradictions are resolved in the
harmony of opposites.1 This unity is the Wholeness of the All in which
the opposites are transfigured into a divine polarity, each member of
which fully represents the absolute through its inherent identity with its
opposite counterpart.
In the Hindu tradition this primal opposition and its reconciliation
in the unity of opposites is understood as the intimate, inner relationship
between God and His omnipotent power. God is the formless and
transcendent unity Who as, and through, His power manifests diversity.
God and His creation are not two contrasting realities. Intimately bound
together as heat is with fire2 or coolness with ice,3 Sakti—God's power,
and Siva—its possessor, are never separate.4 Even so, if we are to
understand their relationship we must provisionally distinguish between
them in the realms of manifestation. First, we have the finite vision in
which they are seen apart and then the infinite vision in which we realise
their unity. Without the experience of duality that of unity would have no
meaning. Unity is not mere negation of distinction, but the absence of
difference in diversity. The realisation of unity (tadatmyd) consists of the
insight that apparently different things are identical.

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

As expressions of this polarity, the Doctrine of Vibration focuses on
the continuity and change which characterize every experience.
Accordingly, Kemaraja represents the primordial couple as Sarikara and
His Spanda energy. Spanda is the immanent, actively emergent aspect,
while Sankara, although 'one with the Spanda principle and never
otherwise',5 is the pure, unchanging experiencer Who represents the
element of continuity—the passive, quiescent aspect of consciousness. In
the Trikakula school the latter is called Bhairava and the former His
emission (yisarga):
"Bhairava and His power of emission," explains Abhinava,
"constitute the couple (yamala). One member (Bhairava) rests in His
own eternal, unchanging nature, and is therefore called 'repose'
(visrama). The other is His primordial vibration {prathamaspanda)
and is therefore called 'emergence' (udaya)."6

The opposites separate and merge in rhythm with the pulsing union
of Siva and Sakti. This play of opposites is itself the absolute, the supreme
form of Spanda. 7 When Siva and Sakti unite, the universe, formerly
experienced as a reality set apart from consciousness, ceases to exist.
When they separate, it is once more created. The eternal rhythm of cosmic
creation and destruction is consonant with the pulse of their union and
separation. Spanda is the blissful relationship between these two aspects
through which the universe unfolds. 8 The emission of cosmic manifestation (yisarga) pours out between these two poles. It is the result of their
conjunction, just as through the bliss of orgasm (visarga) the male and
female seeds mingle, and man—the microcosm—is born. The yogi who
witnesses this union experiences the birth of a higher level of consciousness
within himself. He recognises the all-powerful pulsation of his consciousness as it moves between Sankara's transcendental bliss 9 and the radiant
emission of His immanent power within Himself. One fixed and the other
moving, these two poles are like firesticks that, rubbing together, generate
within Sankara His pure Spanda energy. 10 In the bliss of self-realisation,
the yogi experiences this as the simultaneous unfolding of cosmic
consciousness and the pure undifferentiated consciousness of the absolute.
He experiences them together as the universal vibration of the supreme
subject beyond all contradictions and distinctions. Abhinava instructs:
Just as a female ass or mare [in orgasm], enters into the [delight of
her own] Abode, the Temple of Bliss repeatedly expanding and
contracting and is overjoyed in her own heart, so [the yogi] must establish
himself in the Bhairava couple, expanding and contracting, full of all

Siva and Sakti

things, dissolved and created by them again and again.''
Jayaratha explains that the contraction of Sakti marks the
withdrawal of the universe and the expansion of transcendental Sivaconsciousness. Conversely, the contraction of Siva-consciousness marks
the expansion of Sakti as the cosmos. 12 The yogi attains the supreme state
of consciousness by experiencing the pulsing rhythm of this divine couple
(yamalabhava) through which he realises that the absolute is at once both
Siva and Sakti and yet neither of the two:
The couple {yamala) is consciousness itself, the unifying emission
and the stable abode. It is the absolute, the noble cosmic bliss consisting
of both [Siva and Sakti]. It is the supreme secret of Kula [the ultimate
reality]; neither quiescent nor emergent, it is the flowing fount of both
quiescence and emergence.13
Both Sarikara and His Spanda energy have two aspects. Sankara is
Spandasakti, the active aspect, as well as being Sankara, the passive
aspect. Equally, Spanda is Sankara, the passive aspect, as well as being
Spanda, the active aspect:
"These two aspects, passive (sdnta) and active {udita)" explains
Abhinava, "arise at the same time in the power and its possessor. The
active passes from one domain to the other, the passive is confined within
the Self [the essential nature of both]. But even so, in reality, each of
them form a couple {yamala). Hence the emergent is the quiescent."14
Despite the one aspect being the other, Spandasakti is still the active
aspect and the cause of creation:
Even though the awareness proper to these two aspects, passive and
active, pertains to them equally, nonetheless it is power, not its possessor,
that nurtures His emission (visarga).15
Mahesvarananda explains the manner in which we can perceive Siva
and Sakti as a gestalt. It is like a picture of a bull and an elephant drawn
together in such a way that we see either one or the other depending on the
way in which we view it.16 There is a movement (spanda) of awareness
from one to the other as Siva becomes Sakti and Sakti becomes Siva. They
are reflected within one another like two mirrors facing each other.
Exchanging roles repeatedly, they penetrate each other in the intimacy of

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

their union.17 In this way consciousness contemplates itself as both Siva
and Sakti simultaneously. In other words, the moment in which it is aware
of itself as transcending all things, it is also aware of its immanence. These
two moments of transcendence and immanence imply one another while
remaining distinct.18
The Play of Passion and its Power (Kamakaldvilasa), a text of the
Sakta Srlvidya tradition explains the dynamics of this process in some
detail. Siva and Sakti are represented in this work as the universal subject
and His cosmic object. Their infinite nature is symbolized by two transdimensional points of absolute consciousness (bindu). Siva is represented
by a white point (suklabindu) and Sakti by a red point (sonitabindu): both
expand and contract. 'White Siva' penetrates 'Red Sakti'. This results in
the creation of the universe and Siva's transformation into Sakti and
Sakti's transformation into Siva. Siva becomes 'Red Siva' and acts as the
supreme reality and transcendental ground of 'White Sakti'—the manifest
universe. Then 'Red Siva' penetrates into 'White Sakti' and 'White Siva'
withdraws from 'Red Sakti'. This phase of their pulsation marks the
moment of transcendence and the withdrawal of the universe. 'White
Sakti' is retransformed into 'White Siva' and 'Red Siva' into 'Red Sakti'.
Sakti then merges in Siva as the introverted awareness He has of Himself
as pure transcendental T consciousness. They thus exchange roles. When
one comes to the fore and becomes manifestly apparent, the other recedes
into the background as the unmanifest, inner nature of the other. The two
moments of transcendence and immanence, Siva and Sakti, thus imply
one another.19
The two points make up the two aspects of Visarga—the last member
of the vowel series, written in Sanskrit as ':' and pronounced 'h\ This is
the form (svarupa) of KameSvari—the Mistress of Passion Who is the
power of reflective awareness (yimarsasakti) through which the absolute
unfolds and withdraws its cosmic form. She is called 'Kala'—the 'Divine
Power' of consciousness manifest as the incessant transformation or
Spanda of Siva and Sakti. When Siva and Sakti, the two aspects of the
pure vibration of consciousness, are understood as one reality, their
symbol is a single dot (pronounced 'm') called a 'mixed point' (misrabindu). It represents both the integral unity of the absolute and the fertile
potential of consciousness which, like a seed, is swollen (ucchuna) ready to
germinate into cosmic manifestation.20 This 'mixed point' is the seed of
consciousness known as the 'Sun of Knowledge'. It is Kamesvara—the
Lord of Passion.21 He is the Self worshipped by yogis as the highest reality
and the form or body (pintfa) of the absolute symbolized as the sexual
embrace of Siva and Sakti,22 the Divine Husband and Wife. He is called
'Passion' (kama) because His state is sought and desired (kamyate)

Siva and Sakti

by great yogis.23
Siva is symbolized in the mystic alphabet by the first letter—'A'—
which stands for the absolute. Sakti is represented by H\ the last letter of
the Sanskrit alphabet, which symbolises the ongoing emanation (prasara)
of the universe. Each letter of the alphabet stands for an aspect or phase in
the cycle of cosmic manifestation and withdrawal. 4A' and H\ Siva and
Sakti, the two ends of the cycle, are united by their 'Passion' (kama\ in the
totality of 'Aharp' ( T consciousness). This pure T is the universal
vibration of consciousness24 which embraces the universe in its nature.25
It is Kamakala sometimes called the 'Supreme Power',26 and at other times
the Supreme Siva.27 The identity and distinction between them is thus
reiterated in different ways at higher and lower levels of consciousness in
more or less comprehensive terms.
Despite their essential identity, the Saivite stresses Siva's superiority
over Sakti and the Sakta that of His power. Thus, although all schools of
Kashmiri Saivism are essentially Saivite, some tend to emphasise the
importance of one or the other. The Spanda school, however, maintains
that power and the power-holder are equally important. Sankara is the
source of power28 and so is, in this respect, superior to the Goddess Who is
its embodiment. On the other hand, this power is the means by which we
can discover our authentic identity to be Siva—the power-holder. The
flow of the supreme power is Sankara's path.29 Herein lies Spanda's
importance; while Safikara is the goal (upeya), Spanda is the means
(upaya).^ We must recognise the activity of Spandasakti in every moment
of our lives. By knowing the divine energy which creates and animates the
world, we know ourselves to be its possessor. Only through Spanda's
power can we realise our identity with Siva. But it alone is not enough;
power without a power-holder to regulate its activity is blind and
potentially destructive.

Safikara
The Spanda yogi experiences the absolute in intimately personal
terms as an infinite and perfect divine Being. Although not an object of
thought, and hence, Nameless (nirnama)1 this divine reality is present in
all named things.32 It is the Nameless Whose name is All-Names. It is man
who gives It a name to aid in his quest for enlightenment and endear it to
his own heart.33 As a male deity Vasugupta and Kallaja call Him Sankara,
Siva, Viresa and Bhairava. His commentators add to this list common
synonyms of Siva such as Mahesvara, Paramesvara, Isa, Sambhu, etc.. Of

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

all these names for Siva, 'Sankara' is the one preferred by the teachers of
the Spanda tradition. Intent solely on gracing man in every way, Sankara
is so-called because He bestows the best of things (sam).34 Like the
Wishfulfilling Gem, He gives man all he desires.35 As Abhinava says:
Once one has achieved the Supreme Lord's state (paramesvarata) all
the good things that came from it are automatically attained just as all the
jewels [in the world] are acquired by acquiring Rohana, the Mountain of
Gems. Other achievements are vain if one has missed the supreme reality,
the Self. But once one has attained this reality {paramartha), there is
nothing left one could desire.36
Through Sankara's grace man overcomes all the limitations that
contract his consciousness and he comes to recognise that it fills the entire
universe.
Encompassing all things in itself it is blissfully at rest.
Ksemaraja says:
We praise Sankara Who is one's own nature. He bestows the grace
to recognise the total expansion of one's own consciousness which is the
non-duality of Supreme Bliss wherein all troubles cease.37
Sankara bestows both the peace of liberation from suffering
(apavarga), and the delight (bhoga) of recognising all things to be nothing
but Sankara Himself.38 Man achieves liberation (mok$a) and becomes
tranquil through Sankara's gracious withdrawal (nime$a) of the binding
activity of Maya. Through the concomitant expansion (unme$a) of his
consciousness, he enjoys divine bliss (bhoga) in countless forms, 39 even
while delighting in the world. Ksemaraja quotes Utpaladeva as saying:
"This is Sankara's Path wherein pain becomes pleasure, poison turns to
nectar and samsara becomes liberation."40
As the innate nature (svabhava) common to all (sdmdnya)
phenomena41 none equal Sankara nor are like Him (nihsdmdnya).42 He is
the supreme good realised at the 'summit of all summits'.43 None is greater
than He along the scale of Being and so can only be discovered at the very
peak of man's spiritual endeavour:
O Lord, those who have achieved the supreme path (gati) of
renunciation, the supreme wealth of knowledge and the supreme summit
of desirelessness, bear You, the Lord, [always before them].44
The gods who rule over the worlds pale before Siva's glory; they are

Siva and Sakti

like mere bubbles in the vast ocean of His consciousness. 45 The many
powerful gods, including Vinu and Brahma, reside within the sphere of
Maya and owe their divine status to a mere spark of Siva's power. 46
Arranged in order of precedence, the gods are like flowers in bloom on the
creeper of Siva's power. 47 They all aspire to attain Siva's abode and race
along the garland-like ladder of yogic practice (karma) in their attempt to
reach it.48 Again, while they have fixed forms, Sankara appears to us in
whatever form we worship him, like a Wishfulfilling Gem which appears in
any form we wish it to assume. 49 Siva, the source of all the powers,
becomes manifest through them and is worshipped in various ways,
according to the form we conceive Him to have. 50 Yet, as Bhafta
Narayana says:
O Lord, even though You are seen and desired in various ways,
You bestow the wonderful (citrd) fruit of Supreme Reality in its
entirety.51
The names and forms of God may vary but ultimately all the forms in
which the Deity may appear, or names that it may assume, are expressions
of the radiant pulsation of man's own consciousness (svatmasamvitsphurana). Ultimately the most authentic form of God and the object of
worship is the Self.52 Mahesvarananda asks: "Abandoning their own
consciousness, what lifeless [object] should they worship?" 53
Again:
Those Who meditate on other deities abandoning attention to their
own nature [although] possessing great wealth, go begging. And even
when they have begged [their food, still remain] hungry.54
In reality, both the worshipper and the worshipped, the bound and the
released, are Siva:
May Siva Who has penetrated and become one with me, worship
Himself thus by means of His own power that He may Himself reveal
His own nature.55
The basis of Sankara's divinity is His Spanda nature. Spanda
converts the cold, impersonal absolute of monistic Vedanta into Sahkara,
the warm, worshipful absolute of Kashmiri Saivism. An impersonal
absolute is unsatisfactory on metaphysical grounds, and fails to satisfy
man's deepest need for devotion and grace. Kemaraja quotes

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Nayaka as saying:
O Lord, how fruitful can this neuter Brahman be without the
beautiful female of Your devotion which makes of You a person?56
Through its divine power the Self assumes the form of a deity man
can contemplate and venerate, even though Siva, the pure subject, can
never in fact be an object of meditation (adhyeya). Until we realise our
true identity with Sankara, He is worshipped and conceived to be a reality
alien to ourselves. While we are in the realm of creation, He too is a
creation or mode or appearing of the absolute, manifest to us in
meditation, through His freedom as an eternal, omniscient being.57 There
is no gulf between the created and the uncreated creator:
Nothing in reality, although an object of knowledge, ceases to be
Siva: this is the reason why meditation [on this or that aspect] of reality
bestows its fruit.58
The world of the senses and mind appears to the Well Awakened
(suprabuddha) as a theophany, an eternal revealing of God in His creation.
The Doctrine of Vibration declares that "there is no state in word, meaning
or thought, either at the beginning, middle or end, that is not Siva." 59 To
utter any word is, in reality, to intone a sacred formula. 60 Every act is a
part of Siva's eternal cosmic liturgy, every movement of the body a ritual
gesture (mudra), and every thought, God's thought.
By what path are You not attainable? What words do not speak of
You? In which meditation are You not an object of contemplation?
What indeed are You not, O Lord?61
Spandasakti, which accounts for the appearing of all things, is also
the means by which Deity in its many varied forms appears to man.
K$emaraja concludes:
The ultimate object of worship of any theistic school differs not
from the Spanda principle. The diversity of meditation is due solely to
the absolute freedom of Spanda.62
Safikara is not only the supreme object of devotion; as the static
polarity of the absolute, He is the inner reality which holds together its

Siva and Sakti

outer manifestations. 63 Phenomena are patterns of cognitions projected
onto the surface of self-luminous Siva-consciousness. There they become
apparent, directly revealed to consciousness according to their manifest
form. Siva is accordingly symbolized as the ground or surface of
awareness, smooth and even like a screen
(samabhittitalopama).M
Inscribed on this screen (kutfya) are the countless manifest forms which
appear within it rendering it as diverse and beautiful as a fossil ammonite
(falagrama).65 Siva is the sacred ground upon which the cosmic man^ala
is drawn, the absolute surface of inscription which bears the mark (cihna)
of the universe. Abhinava writes:
The variety of this world can only be manifest if the Highest Lord,
Who is essentially the pure light of consciousness, exists; just as a surface
is necessary for a picture. If external objects were perceived in isolation
then, because 'blue' and 'yellow', etc., are self-confined and the
perceptions [we have of them] refer to their objects alone and so are
insentient, mute and dumb in relation to one another... how would it be
possible to be aware that an object is variegated? But just as depths and
elevations can be represented by lines on a smooth wall, and we perceive
[a female figure and think], 'she has a deep navel and upraised breasts',
similarly it is possible to be aware of differences in the variegated
(contents of experience) only if all the diverse perceptions are connected
together on the one wall of the universal light of consciousness.66
Siva is the perfect artist Who, without need of canvas or brush, paints
the world pictures. The instant He imagines it, it appears spontaneously,
perfect in every respect. The colours He uses are the varying shades and
gradations of His own Spanda energy and the medium His own
consciousness. The universe is coloured with the dye of its own nature
(svabhava) by the power of Siva's consciousness (citi).bl
Rajanaka
Rama says:
Homage to Him Who paints the picture of the Three Worlds,
thereby displaying in full evidence His amazing genius {pratibha)\ to
Sambhu Who is beautiful with the hundreds of appearances laid out by
the brush of His own unique, subtle and pure energy.68
Analogously, at the microcosmic level, all the cognitions and
emotions, etc., which make up the individual personality form the outward
flow of essentially introverted consciousness. They are specific pulsations
(yise$aspanda) or aspects of the universal pulsation (samanyaspanda) of
pure T consciousness. At the lower level, within the domain of Maya, they

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

represent the play in the fettered soul of the three primary qualities (gunas)
or feeling-tones' which permeate to varying degrees his daily experience.
These are: 1) Sattva—the quality of goodness and luminosity which
accompanies blissful experience both aesthetic and spiritual. 2) Rajas—
the passion or agitation which oscillates between the extremes of light'
and 'darkness' and characterises inherently painful experiences.
3) Tamas—the torpor and delusion which accompany states of inertia
and ignorance.69 The liberated soul recognises that these three are the
natural and uncreated powers of pure consciousness. For him they are
manifest respectively as: 1) Sankara's power of knowledge (jndna)—the
light of consciousness (prakdsa); 2) the power of action (kriyd)—the
reflective awareness of consciousness (vimarsa)\ 3) the power of Maya—
which does not mean here the world of diversity, but the initial subtle
distinction which appears between subject and object in pure
consciousness.70
On the lower level, the power of awareness (citisakti) is disturbed
from its self-absorption and begins to generate thought forms (vikalpa)
within itself. Consciousness devolves and becomes the thinking mind
(citta).11 Sankara assumes the form of a human personality (mayapramatf) residing in a world of limitations and diversity.72 His consciousness is extroverted and generates out of itself a subtle body (puryasfaka)
consisting of the three components of the inner organ of mentation
(antahkararia)13 and the five subtle essences (tanmdtrd) of taste, touch,
smell, sound and sight. Residing in this subtle body, consciousness
transmigrates from one physical organism to the next and is seemingly
affected by Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. The higher stage represents a state
of introversion when the subtle body, with its transient emotions and
cognitions, is withdrawn into T consciousness and dissolves away.74
Sankara is both these aspects simultaneously. Ksemaraja criticises the
Mlmamsaka who believes that the Self is pure being alone, only
accidentally associated with transient perception. He explains that this is
true only of the functions of the subtle body (puryasfaka) when
experienced as independent of consciousness.75 According to the Doctrine
of Vibration, the momentary, transient nature of the object, whether
mental or physical,76 does not affect the eternal stability of Sankara, the
Self. The Fully Awakened (suprabuddha) recognises this truth, while the
unenlightened are always caught in the outward flow of events. The Fully
Awakened yogi identifies himself with Sankara, the universal (samanya)
Spanda nature, and experiences the universal flow of consciousness in all
the opposites. The unenlightened, however, who wrongly identifies
himself with the body, is caught by his fascination for the individual
pulses of emanation, dispersed and separated from each other by the

Siva and Sakti

tension of the opposites.
Thus, these particular pulsations are to be totally avoided; they are
present in the body, etc., which is other than the Self and arise by
mistaking [the body, etc.,] for the Self. [The particular pulsations of
consciousness] are the fields of sensory operation (vi$aya) of the
phenomenal (mayiya) subject. Each is distinct from the others as ongoing fluxes {pravaha) of perceptions (pratyaya) of the type (guna)Tam
happy' or I am sad', which are the causes of transmigratory existence.77
However, these perceptions can in no way 'be an obstacle for the
enlightened'.78 Right and wrong, pleasure and pain, merge and all
distinctions disappear in the universal vibration of Siva's consciousness.
Thus we read in the Stanzas on Vibration:
The streams of the pulsation (spanda) of the qualities and the other
[principles]79 are grounded in the universal vibration [of consciousness]
and so attain to being; therefore they can never obstruct the enlightened.
Yet for those whose intuition slumbers [these vibrations of consciousness] tend to disrupt their own state of being (svasthiti) casting them
down onto the terrible path of transmigration so hard to cross.80
The universal vibration of consciousness understood as Siva's perfect
egoity is contrasted with the fettered soul's conceived notion of himself as
the body. The latter's ego is a thought-construct (pratyaya) and hence
limited and artificial. It consists of particular pulsations of consciousness.
Sankara's ego consciousness, on the contrary, is complete and integral
(purna). Reflecting on Himself, He is aware that "I am pure consciousness
and bliss; I am infinite and absolutely free."81 Immersed in this
contemplative state (turiya), Siva delights in the awareness "the universe
in all its diverse aspects arises out of Me, it rests within Me and once it
disappears, nothing remains [apart from Me]." 82 Thus, this self-awareness
is the universal Spanda of consciousness.
Raj ana ka Rama explains that the alert yogi in the course of his
meditative practice gains an insight, by Siva's grace, into the manner in
which the particular pulsations (vise$aspanda) of his consciousness arise
with their consequent effects. He constantly exerts himself to experience
the pure universal vibration of his authentic T consciousness and so free
himself of the disturbing influence (ksobha) the pulsations have on him. 83
He is always on the alert to discern universal Spanda. 84 Thus reflecting on
his own nature as the pure awareness that 4I am' (ahani), he distinguishes
between the particular and generic vibration of consciousness. While the

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

una wakened is constantly subject to the ups and downs of these individual
pulses of consciousness, the awakened, on the contrary, turns even more
resolutely to his true nature whenever he observes their activity within
himself. Thus, for him, they serve as a means to liberation.
Sankara is the ground of both the particular and universal aspect of
Spanda. Through the discrimination (viveka) born of the intuition
(pratibha) of the universal pulsation of i-ness', contemplative souls
discover Him to be their own pure subjectivity (upalabdhrta) which, as the
source of all the individual pulsations of consciousness, is their ultimate
reality (paramartha) beyond all subject-object distinctions.85 Reality
cannot be discovered if we think of it as a 'something' of which we are
ignorant but may come to know through practice. Reality is an
experience—the experience of the fully enlightened.

The Nature of Sakti
Inherent in Siva is His infinite power. Essentially one with Him, His
power represents the freedom of His absolute nature from the limitations
of the finite, and the freedom to assume the form of the finite while abiding
as the infinite. Freedom from limitations implies the capacity to become
manifest in countless diverse forms.86 Ultimately, it is Siva's freedom
alone which unfolds everywhere as all things.87 The universe exists by
virtue of His power which is at once the universe itself and the energy
which brings it into being.88 Thus Abhinava says:
The Lord is free. His freedom expresses itself in various ways. It
reduces multiplicity into unity by inwardly uniting it and of one it makes
many. . . . He is therefore described as the knowing and acting subject,
perfectly free in all His activities and all-powerful; this [freedom] alone
is the essential nature of consciousness.89
This freedom is also the inherent nature of the Self—man's authentic
identity. Perceiving nothing but itself in all things, the Self requires no
external aid in order to manifest itself in the sphere of objectivity. The ego,
confined to the physical body and fashioned by the thought-constructs
generated by a form of consciousness whose focus of attention is
(apparently) outside itself, is not free. It is a 'non-self dependent on outer
objectivity. However, even in this condition destitute of power (sakti'
daridra) the fettered, individualised ego-consciousness partakes of the
autonomy of the pure conscious Self. One's own authentic nature

Siva and Sakti

(svabhava) is independent of objectivity and so must necessarily
objectivise itself for the world to become manifest without impinging on
its freedom.90 Thus the perfect autonomy of the Self is also its universal
creativity. Absolute independence implies more than a transcendental,
autonomous state of aloofness. It requires that this autonomy be creative.
This is the freedom which is Siva's power to do 'that which is most difficult'
(atidurghafakdritva). His capacity to accomplish that which would be
logically impossible (virodhate) in the domain of the empirical (mdyd),
governed by the principles of natural law {niyati). In order for Siva to
manifest as the diverse universe, He must deny His infinite nature and
appear as finite entities and "what could be more difficult than to negate
the light of consciousness just when it is shining in full?1'91 Thus, negation
or limitation is a power of the absolute. Sakti is the principle of negation
through which Siva conceals His own undivided nature and becomes
diverse.92
As the source of diversity, Sakti is the absolute's creative power of
Maya. Due to Mayasakti, an initial contrast emerges within universal
consciousness between the conscious (cit—subject) and the unconscious
(acit—object). This split goes on to develop into the innumerable
secondary distinctions which obtain between specific particulars.93 The
one power made manifest in this way appears to be diverse due to the
diverse forms of awareness the subject has of the many names and forms
of the object.94 There is no object or event that does not disclose the
presence of Sakti. "The universe," says the Sivasutra, "is the aggregate of
[Siva's] powers."95 Each power is a means, channel or outlet (mukha)
through which Siva, though formless (anarnsa) and uncreated, becomes
manifest in a particular form.96 The very Being (satta) of an entity consists
essentially of its capacity to function (arthakriya) within the economy of
consciousness.97 All things are endowed with Sakti in the form of their
causal or pragmatic efficacy (kdranasdmdrthya). It is on the basis of an
entity's causal efficacy that we say that it is what it is and not anything else.
Thus, there are innumerable powers in every object. Although these
powers cannot be known directly, they are inferred from their effects.
Change is the coming to prominence of one power at the expense of
another. When a jar, for example, comes into being, the pragmatic
efficacy of the clay ball is superseded by that of the clay jar.98 In this way
the abiding fullness (purnatd) of the one universal power, in a sense, alters
as one aspect 'expands' and comes to the fore, while another 'contracts' or
recedes into the background.99 Sakti is, in this sense, in a state of perpetual
pulsation (spanda\ expanding and contracting, assuming now this, now
that form. Thus, this one power appears to be many due to the diverse
results of its activity.100 Although reality is one, it performs many

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

functions. Various aspects of the one universal potency appear in each
individual entity as its specific functions and so the ignorant wrongly
assume them to be divided from one another.101 The enlightened, however,
discover the universe to be power and thus undivided and at one with Siva,
their authentic nature as the possessor of power.102
Thus, Sakti is both immanent when actively giving rise to its effects,
and transcendent when considered to be the source of its many powers.
Spanda is both the universal vibration of energy (samanyaspandd) and its
particular pulsations (visesaspanda). Every power is like a pane of
coloured glass through which the light of the absolute shines and assumes
the form of the sparkling variegations of the manifest universe. The
principal forms of power can be classified into three basic categories
according to the sphere in which they operate, namely:
1) The Sphere of Siva-Consciousness, The powers here include: a) Siva's
Divine Attributes. These divine attributes are five: omnipresence,
eternality, freedom of will, omniscience and omnipotence. They
correspond to Siva's powers of consciousness, bliss, will, knowledge
and action.
b) Siva's Cosmic Functions. These cosmic functions are also five
and are implemented by Siva's five powers to create, maintain, destroy,
conceal Himself and grace by revealing Himself.
c) Siva's Creative Energies. The principal creative power in the
sphere of manifestation is Siva's power of Maya, which is an aspect of His
power of action. Other aspects of His power of action are Nirmanasakti,
the power to fashion particular entities out of His own undifferentiated
consciousness, and Kdlasakti, the power of time through which Siva
creates the temporal order and hence the universe of change and
becoming.103
2) The Sphere of Cognitive Consciousness. The preceding sphere can be
said to have two aspects—inner and outer. The former corresponds to
Siva's divine attributes and the latter to His cosmic functions and creative
energies. Similarly, at this level, the inner aspect is mental in which operate
the power of cognition and memory along with the power to differentiate
individual perceptions. The outer aspect corresponds to the powers
of the senses.
3) The Sphere of Individualised Consciousness. In the individualised
consciousness sphere the power of consciousness operates through the

Siva and Sakti

individual subjects and objects it engenders. The inner aspect corresponds
to the many experiencing subjects, all of which are forms of the power of
self-awareness.104 In addition, we have the waking and other states which,
as modalities of consciousness, are also powers. Again, there are the forces
which help to elevate the soul and develop his consciousness to a more
expanded state as well as those that, on the contrary, restrict it. To the
outer aspect of individualised consciousness corresponds external
objectivity, which includes the categories of existence, worlds and cosmic
forces that bind them into a coherent whole. Belonging to all three spheres
both in their inner and outer aspects is the power of speech. At the highest
level it is the pure awareness Siva has of His own nature. In the lower
spheres it is the silent inner speech of thought as well as the manifest
articulate speech of daily life. Thus, Sakti manifests as everything that can
be denoted by speech as well as every form of speech.
These three spheres correspond to three aspects of Sakti: Supreme
(Para), Middling (Pardpard) and Lower (Apara). Worshipped as three
goddesses in the Trika school, this Triad is one of the most essentially
defining features of this form of Saivism and its earlier prototypes in the
Agamas. Ksemaraja sees in this Triad aspects or phases of Spanda.105
Accordingly, we turn now to a brief description of these three important
energies.
The Supreme Power (Para iakti). This energy operates on the Supreme
Summit of Being (parakdtfhd). There consciousness reflects upon itself as
the universal ego (purndhantd), which is the ultimate ground of all
things106 and abode of rest,107 where everything is one and beyond all
relative distinctions.108 Knowledge and action, unsullied by their objects,
abide here as Light and awareness. At this level, awareness (vimarsa)
includes the Light of consciousness (prakdsa) and they are one.109
Consciousness and its content merge like water in the sea or a flame in
fire.110 We can distinguish between two aspects of this energy corresponding to two aspects of the supreme state:
0 The first aspect is the supreme power unsullied by the products of its
activity. This is the pure freedom of consciousness. It is the pure intention
(icchdmdtra) through which the absolute affirms its absolute Being
unconditioned by the cosmic Totality generated by it. As such, it is the
primordial vibration (ddyaspanda) of consciousness free of all restrictions
on its activity. It generates and contains within itself the innumerable
Benevolent (aghora) powers of consciousness that bestow the fruits of
realisation to the enlightened yogi.111
ii) The purely transcendental state of the first aspect turns to immanence

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

when this will is disturbed and aroused out of its quiescent state. The
emanation of Totality dawns on the horizon of consciousness as its
potential goal and the will to existence spontaneously presents itself as
the exertive force that actuates it. It now acts as the Lordship (isikd) of
consciousness which governs the universe held within it. For the
awakened yogi it operates as the actuality of a conscious exertion to
make the oneness of the absolute apparent. Thus it sets into operation
all its Benevolent (aghora) powers to guide the yogi's way along the
path to realisation.112
The Middling Power (Parapara tokti). The Intermediate level is that of
unity-in-difference, between the lower level of the awareness of division
(bhedadr$fi) and that of unity (abhedadr^i) at the summit of consciousness. Here the universe is experienced within consciousness as one with it
while maintaining itself distinct from it, like a reflection in a mirror. The
form awareness assumes here is 'I [am] this [universe]' (ahamidam).xn
Subject and object are equal in status; they are distinct but not divided
and experienced as the two aspects of awareness, namely, knowledge
and action.114
This level is the point of contact between the absolute and its
manifestations. It is the sphere of relatedness. Practical life is based on the
relationship between immanence and transcendence and that between
the elements of diversity.115 Thus the energy which operates at this level
is also the basis of all empirically definable experience.116 By the power
of awareness in this intermediate state we can make contact with the
undivided unity of pure consciousness while we are on the level of
diversity. However, the power of awareness operating here can also
generate the Fierce (ghora) energies of consciousness that block the path
to liberation by engendering attachment to the fruits of action, whether
good or bad. If through this power the yogi realises the oneness of
consciousness and its manifestations, he is elevated, but if he fails to do so,
this same power throws him down. Thus the Intermediate power plays a
dual role by illumining both the 'Pure Path' to liberation and the 'Impure
Path' of bondage.117 This ambiguity reflects the paradoxical nature of
the absolute's knowledge of the universe it has willed into existence, as
either one with it or separate from it. From the point of view of the
absolute these two are complementary modes of experience, but from the
point of view of the relative, knowledge of difference is binding, while
knowledge of unity is liberating.
The Inferior Power (A para sakti). This energy operates in the Kooi(mula)

Siva and Sakti

of consciousness where objectivity predominates, 118 and the inner
awareness (jnana) of the Self takes second place to outer activity. 119 This
is the level of diversity where the beauty of the world picture, charming
with its many details, is fully displayed:
The lower (apara) level corresponds to the extension of relative
distinctions (bheda) which, like a [fine crop] of tender sprouts, are born
of the potency of the Supreme Lord's contemplation (vimarsa) of His
transcendental Light. It is the illusion of daily life (yibhrama) embossed
with this cosmic multiplicity, pleasantly various like a work of art.120
Limitations which the Sun of consciousness imposes on itself shroud
it like dark storm clouds. Subjective awareness (ahaipvimarsa) contracts,
conditioned by the body in which it has taken up residence and perceives
particulars (both individual subjects and objects) as cut off from one
another and from itself. Even so, the awareness it has of its own nature
abides as the Lower power, pulsing and brilliant like a streak of
lightning.121 For those ignorant of its true nature this power operates as
Maya and generates the 'Extremely Fierce' (ghoratara) energies of
consciousness that lay hold of the soul and throw him down to its lower
levels. 122 However, to one who experiences the infinite consciousness of
his own nature and Maya as its eternal freedom, it bestows both yogic
power (siddhi) and liberation (mukti).m
The Stanzas on Vibration
explain:
This, Siva's power of action, is binding when residing in the fettered
soul (pasuvartini); [but], when [its true nature] is understood and it is
set on its own path it bestows success in Yoga (siddhi).124
According to the Doctrine of Vibration, the soul is liberated by
recognising that 'the whole universe is the result of the activity of the
[Spanda] principle.'125 Conversely, by being ignorant of this he is
bound.17-6 Failing to contemplate his own Spanda nature, its activity
functions as this Lower power and engenders gross action. 127 This breaks
up the unity of his consciousness, 128 splitting up and obscuring it by the
tension between the contrasting responses to what he seeks to acquire
(upadeyd) or give up (heya).m
The universal act of self-awareness
(purnahantd) assumes the form of a 'drop of egoity' (ahantdvipruf) which
animates the gross and subtle body. 130 In this way Apara sakti pervades
the vital forces (jivakald) operating in the body. 131 Once the ignorance of
Maya has been overcome, the yogi recognises his oneness with Siva by the

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

power of his own self-awareness (svasamvedana). He ascends to the plane
of the Well Awakened and, having achieved all that is to be achieved
(krtakftya), attains both the supreme perfection (siddhi) of the realisation
of his own Lordship and the lower perfections (aparasiddhi) of all the
yogic powers (vibhuti) that accompany it. He recognises that even his
lower embodied awareness is Para, the Supreme Goddess Who
contemplates the pure non-dual consciousness which is the innate nature
of all things, and the Light of the Supreme Lord.132 Pervading Siva, this
power pervades the universe. The yogi thus experiences Siva-consciousness and cosmic consciousness simultaneously and this power is then said
to be 'set on its own Path1.133 In other words, it resides in one's own Sivanature, on the plane of absolute unity (atyantdbhedadasd) where
awareness no longer moves to any other object (yi$aya). The Lower is then
one with the Supreme power through which all things are experienced in
their true universal (sdmdnya) nature as pure consciousness.134
The harmonious union (sdmarasya) of these three planes are
Bhairava's supreme glory, the radiance of the fullness of His power
(purriasakti)135 which fills the entire universe. Together, this triad
constitutes the Deity's universal experience (bhogya). By sharing in it
the yogi comes to realise the unsullied bliss of the absolute (anuttardnanda), the supreme form of Spanda.136

V

Sakti Cakra: The Wheel
of Energies
As we have seen, the ceaseless flow of consciousness perpetually
generates new forms within it as some of its powers come to the fore and
become manifestly active, while others abide in a potential state within it.
In this way novel patterns of energy spontaneously form on the surface of
consciousness through its inherent activity, as do waves on the surface of
the sea.1 The arising and subsiding of each wave of cosmic manifestation
is marked by a regular sequence (krama) of metaphysical events.
Following one after another in recurrent cycles, each sequence is aptly
symbolised by a rotating wheel (sakticakra), the spokes of which are the
aspects of the divine creative energy of consciousness brought into play as
the wheel revolves. Thus these Wheels collectively represent the primal
form or 'archetype-field structure' of all experience. They are infinite in
number and the number of spokes in each can vary from one to infinity in
accord with the diversity of the configurations of power which form at
each stage along the cycle of cosmic manifestation. Scripture says:
These powers become diverse, increasing or decreasing in number,
etc., in accord with the divine will (svatantrya). In this way, Bhairava
becomes manifest as the 'Solitary Hero', as the couple {yamala\ as three,
four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven powers, as the Lord of the
great Wheel of twelve, a thousand or infinite spokes. [Thus He] ultimately unfolds as the master, endowed with all power, of the Wheel of the All.2

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Like the circles of light produced by a whirling firebrand (alafacakra),
the cycles of divine creative activity manifest as a single Act. As each
Wheel rotates, one power after another becomes active, taking over from
the one that went before it and blending into the one that follows. The
flow of the energy of consciousness moves round the circle in harmony
with the rhythm of its pulsation. Thus the Wheels of Energy are the
vibrant radiance of Bhairava, the light of consciousness. 3 They represent
the plenitude (purnata) of the absolute. Kemaraja explains that: "the
universe is established and exists because its manifest form is one with
the inner Light of the Lord. Hence it is said to be the Wheel of Energies.4
The Doctrine of Vibration teaches that there is an essential identity
between the inner world of the subject and the outer world of the object.5
The universe is equally the outer physical world and the inner world of
mind and body. 6 Thus the emanation of these Wheels corresponds to the
creation of both these worlds. 7 Accordingly, Ksemaraja explains that the
many deities well known to those learned in Agamic lore, grouped and
worshipped in circles, represent the biological components of the body
and the transient moods, thoughts, etc., of the mind. 8 Sankara is the Lord
of the Wheel (cakresa) and hence of both the macro- and microcosm. He
is the 'source of the power of the Wheel of Energies'.9 The Wheels of power
unfold within Siva's infinite consciousness, evolving as they do to higher
degrees of complexity, and then once more dissolve into the undivided
unity of His consciousness. They are generated and withdrawn in
harmony with the evolution and involution of Siva's Spanda energy. This
expands and contracts at the transcendental level, beyond the categories
of existence (tattva), generating as it does so, all these powers. 10
Abhinava explains:
[We can see the many colours] white, red and yellow of the peacock's
feathers when they are unfurled, but not when they are folded together.
Similarly, if the Lord of the Wheel does not unfold [His powers, He]
merges with [His own nature] full of subtle consciousness. He manifests
variously through the unfolding and contraction [of His power]. Thus
by the contraction of one [aspect] and through the unfolding of another
[He] appears in [many] forms ranging from the single spoked Wheel to
the Wheel of a thousand spokes.11
To witness this expansion and contraction and to worship its diverse
aspects as Goddesses seated in the circles generated by this activity and
recognised to be one's own authentic nature, is to worship the Supreme
Lord in the fullness of mystic absorption (turiya).12 Each Wheel rotates,
radiant with the light of consciousness, in a space or spiritual sky (vyomari)

Sakti Cakra: Wheel of Energies

of its own. Pure consciousness (saipvid) is the universal space or Great
Sky {mahdvyomari)n which embraces all the spiritual extensions which
make room for the unfolding of every configuration of experience. Called
the 'Sky of Siva' (sivavyoman), the 'Abode of Brahman' (brahmasthana)
and the 'Abode of the Self (dtmasthdna), it is at once Bhairava and the
supreme form of Sakti (pardkuntfalini),14 equally consciousness and its
contents. In a sense everything, including consciousness, is empty. As
Abhinava says:
The [dawn] sky, though one, appeajs radiant white, red and blue,
and the clouds accordingly seem various; so pure, free consciousness
shines brilliantly with its countless forms, though they are nothing at all.l5
Sakti represents the all-encompassing fullness (purnatd) of the
absolute, the ever-shifting power of awareness actively manifesting as the
Circle of Totality (visvacakra). Siva is the Void (sunyatd) of absolute
consciousness—its supportless (nirdlamba) and thought-free (nirvikalpa)
nature. Integral and free, Siva, the abode of the Void, dissolves everything
into Himself and brings all things into being.16 Fullness pours into
emptiness and emptiness pervades fullness. Penetrating suddenly into the
fullness of consciousness, all things are at once made part of its absolute
and undefinable nature. "[For the yogi who] penetrates into the non-dual
Void," teaches the Vijndnabhairava, "his true nature (dtman) is there
made manifest."17 The Void actively assimilates all diversity. In the pure
subject the flux of objective perceptions dissolves away. The external
personality merges in the supreme subject and the seed of all future
diversification is destroyed, thereby freeing the yogi of all causal and
karmic necessity: "Well concealed, and attainable only with great effort,
is the subtle Void, the chief root of liberation".18
To experience this emptiness, the yogi must penetrate into the initial
instant of perception (prdthamikdlocana) when he directly perceives the
object and no dichotomyzing thoughts have yet arisen in his mind. In this
way he finds the centre (madhyamapada) between one thought and the
next or between two perceptions.19 In the Heart of his own consciousness,
apparent in the Centre, he experiences the initial expansion (unmesd) of
awareness at its most intense, just as it is about to blossom into the
diversity of thought.20 All objectivity is then suddenly dissipated and the
yogi shares in the extraordinary sense of wonder (camatkdrd) the Lord of
Consciousness Himself experiences when he perceives the ideal universe
within Himself on the point of emergence. Through this sudden eruption
into reality, brought about by a supreme act of grace, the yogi is instantly
absorbed in the fully expanded state of the Great Void (mahdsunya).2X He

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

then moves freely, without obstruction or effort, in the Sky of Consciousness (ciddkdsa) beyond time and space, at one with the power of awareness
which wanders there in its infinite freedom. When all supports have fallen
away, the yogi experiences the Void of the primal vibration (spanda) of
the absolute as a single, undivided mass of consciousness (cidekaghana).
The rays of the Wheels of his powers, both physical and mental, are drawn
into the vibrating emptiness and the yogi is plunged in the direct actuality
of the Present. He thus frees himself from the tyranny of the flow of time
from the past to the future.
Having checked the rays of one's own Wheel of Energies and drunk
the incomparable nectar [of self-realisation], one remains fully satisfied
in the [eternal] present, unconditioned by the two times [of past and
future].22
Merged in the incessant systole and diastole of the Heart of
consciousness, the yogi is no longer a victim of time but its master. He is
the conqueror of time, one 'who delights in the relish of devouring time'
(kdlagrdsarasika) and assimilating it into his own eternal consciousness:
[For the yogi] past and future are not different from the present;
it is the present itself which becomes divided by the past and the future.
When they no longer exist, the present also ceases to exist. The yogi,
resting even for an instant is this ocean of consciousness, intent on
devouring time, becomes instantly a 'Wanderer in the Sky' (khecara)
[and is liberated].23
According to the Svacchandabhairavatantra,
there are various
degrees of Voidness. The yogi must traverse them all if his extroverted
consciousness is to be brought completely to rest in its innate nature. The
unchanging (akrama) Goddess of Consciousness, the embodiment of
mystic absorption (turiya), then appears within the Great Pervasion
(mahdvydpti) of the Supreme Void. 24 This, the Void beyond all degrees
of emptiness is called 'Fullness'(asuny a—literally, the 'non-void9). It is
described as the compact mass of consciousness and bliss which is the pure
dynamic Being (sattdmdtra) of both the existent and the non-existent. 25 It
absorbs all the levels of Voidness and contains them all, pervading them
as does oil sesame seeds. 26 The 'Void beyond Mind' which precedes it is
the transcendental experience of Siva. If the yogi manages to rise beyond
this transcendental emptiness, he attains the highest Void which is that of
the supreme form of Siva (paramasiva). Here he experiences a state of
transcendence in immanence and immanence in transcendence.27 Inner

Sakti Cakra: Wheel of Energies

and outer become one in the unifying experience of undivided consciousness. Voidness dissolves into Voidness until the yogi reaches the highest
level of undifferentiated consciousness. Free of thought, beyond all
distinctions of immanence and transcendence, Siva and Sakti,28 he attains
the supreme place of rest (yisrantisthana).
When, by means of this practice, the unfolding universe dissolves
away in the Void and all that qualifies it in the Sky, and when this Void
[itself] dissolves away [like a drop of water in the sea], the Good
(anamdya) alone abides. This, O Brahmin, is the essence of the true
teachings.29

In one of the few places where the author of the Stanzas on Vibration
takes time to indulge in polemics, he points out that the Voidness (sunyata)
of the vibrating power (spanda) of consciousness, manifest when all
diversity disappears, should not be confused with an empty 'nothing'. The
universe of diversity is not annihilated, but recognised to be one. It is void
in the sense that it is universally manifest and hence has no distinguishing
features. Eternal and free of the contraries, it cannot be contrasted with
anything else.30 Intuited as the throb of one's own awareness, it is never
known objectively and hence is essentially undefinable.31 Although it is
said to be the destruction of all objectivity, the Void is not a state of'nonbeing' (abhava). Ksemaraja quotes the Svacchandatantra as saying:
The non-void is described as the Void while the latter is nothing at
all. O Goddess, that is considered to be nothing wherein all phenomena
(bhdva) are destroyed [by losing their phenomenal nature].32

There can be no place anywhere in experience where we can discover
that which is not. The light of consciousness illumines even that which we
understand to be non-existent.33 Being and non-being are merely
conceived distinctions; both are qualities superimposed on that which is
presented directly to consciousness. The absence or non-existence of an
object in a particular place is just as much a positive reality as is its
presence. Both the perception of its presence as well as its absence are
equally apparent to consciousness.34
Although the non-dualist Saiva agrees with the Buddhist who
maintains that the true nature of things is essentially unspecifiable
(anirdesya), he does not agree that all determination of the emptiness of
ultimate reality is an error. Ksemaraja explains that the highest level of
Voidness is the emptiness of reflective awareness, the pure undifferentiated

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

pulsation of the power of consciousness, grounded in the consciousness
and bliss of the Self—the Supreme Lord (paramesvara) of the universe.35
If the Buddhist denies the existence of a perceiving subjectivity, how can
he say that he has experienced emptiness? An experience of Voidness
devoid of the awareness of Self is, from this point of view, little better than
that of deep sleep (susupti). But even then a total loss of all subjective
awareness is impossible. Even in deep sleep, or in certain states of
contemplative absorption accompanied by ego-loss, some subjective
awareness must persist. It would be foolish to believe, say the Stanzas on
Vibration, that the subject ceases to exist in these states just because the
effort normally directed towards perceiving his object ceases.36 Once we
have fallen deeply asleep there would be no way we could wake up if the
subject who directs the movement of awareness out to the objective world
ceased to exist. Moreover, if ego-loss is an experience, there must be
someone who experiences it.37 When we awake from deep sleep, we
remember that we were sleeping; we can recall that something happened
although we do not know what it was. We could not therefore have been
totally unconscious.38
Moreover, any state liable to subsequent recall as an event in the past
cannot be ultimate. The experience of 'I am' (aharri) pervades all possible
states whether they be the deeper ones of contemplative absorption
(samadhi) or those closer to the surface consciousness (yyutthana) of the
waking state. The supreme state is uncreated (akrtrimd) and full of
consciousness and action39 while all the lower states are transitory
(kdddcitka) and creations of the higher. The emptiness of ego-loss
experienced in certain types of absorption are liable to subsequent recall
and are therefore transitory, artificial states which must be transcended to
achieve the uncreated voidness of pure T consciousness which, because
it is always present, can never be recollected.40 Far from being the ultimate
reality, the emptiness of ego-loss can be an obstacle in the way of attaining
the supreme realisation.41 It separates the lower levels of consciousness
based on subject-object distinctions from the higher level of pure T
consciousness, the fullness (asunya) of the empty (sunya). Unlike the lower
void of ego-loss, the Supreme Sky (paravyomari) of T consciousness is
brimming over with countless power of which Siva is the master. Thus
Siva, Whose body is pure consciousness (vijnanadeha),42 is the Lord of
the Wheel of Energies, each of which represent aspects of His divine
majesty, the power of His sovereignty (aisvarya) and freedom (svatantrya).
As His Wheel of Energies revolves, the universe is created and destroyed43
manifesting in this way His power. The Liberated, at one with Siva, share
in His freedom while those ignorant of their true identity are caught in the
movement of this Wheel and so bound to the recurrent round of birth

Sakti Cakra: Wheel of Energies

and death:44
Happy is the child who sucks at its mother's breast; it is the same
breast it fed from in a former life. The husband takes his pleasure in his
wife's belly, he was conceived there in the past!
He who was the father is today the son and that son, when tomorrow
comes, will be father in his turn.
Such is the flow of Saipsara: men are like buckets around a
waterwheel!45
We experience this creation and destruction, this ceaseless coming
and going, as binding only if we fail to recognise that everything abides
within the light of consciousness.46 If we realise that all this is merely the
play of the power of consciousness—the rotation of the Wheel of
Energies—the world no longer appears to us to be Samsara. Abhinava
exclaims:
It is Siva Himself, of unimpeded will and pellucid consciousness,
Who is even [now] sparkling in my heart. It is His highest Sakti Herself
Who is ever playing at the edge of my senses. The entire world glows at
one with that bliss [of 'I-ness']. Indeed, I know not what the word
'Sarpsara' refers to.47
In our failure to contemplate the Lordship of our own nature,
consciousness generates thought forms (yikalpa) which rise and fall as the
Wheel of Energies rotates and we are caught in the seemingly endless
wandering from birth to birth. Bhagavatotpala quotes Naradasamgraha
as saying: "all thought is samsara, there is no bondage except thought.'48
Trapped by thought on the periphery of the movement of the Wheel, we
lose hold of the inwardly unchanging nature of reality and are entangled
in the fickle, transient and diverse nature of its outward appearance.49
Conversely, when through an act of self-awareness, the restless movement
of the mind (citta) is quelled and thought turns in on itself, the yogi realises
the true nature of Samsara to i>e the Wheel of Energies and is no longer
bound, even in the midst of the change and diversity of the world.
Worthy of attainment is that reality in which the yogi, brilliant with
the rays of [his] consciousness fully formed, is established. [It is] the fully
evident arising of an experience free of worldly bonds (bhavavandhyodaya). [It takes place] even while the Self, the radiance of one's own
conscious nature, the internal senses which aid it, the group of external
senses which depend on it for their activity, taste and the other objects of

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

the senses, are [all] fully active.50
Although the Wheels of Energies are innumerable, just as the aspects
of Sankara's ever emergent power of awareness are beyond number
(kaland),51 only a few are important in the Doctrine of Vibration.
According to the Krama doctrine adopted by Ksemaraja in his
commentary on the Stanzas, foremost among them is a cycle of twelve
phases.
It represents the twelve aspects of (KdlasankarsinV (The
Attractress of Time), the Goddess of Consciousness. Technically called

the Wheel of the Absolute' (anuttaracakra), all the other Wheels emerge
from it and are all eventually dissolved in it.52 Subject, means of
knowledge, object and pure cognitive awareness (pramiti) are symbolised
by Wheels containing eight, twelve, sixteen and four elements respectively.
The twelve-spoked Wheel thus represents the cognitive cycle (pramdnacakra) and is symbolised by the sun which passes through the twelve signs
of the zodiac in the course of a year.53
This Wheel represents, amongst other things, the twelve senses, that
is, the intellect (buddhi) and mind (manas) together with the five organs
of knowledge (jndnendriya) and the five organs of action (karmendriya).5
It also represents the twelve vowels of the Sanskrit alphabet (excluding
r, f, 1, I,), symbolising the processes and forces operating directly within
Siva-consciousness (rather than Sakti, the universe, which is symbolised
by the consonants). 55 Again, the twelve phases represent the three
goddesses Para, Parapara and Apara, each subject to a cycle of arising
(srsfi), persistence (sthiti) and withdrawal (samhdra), together with the
manifestation of their own undefinable nature (andkhya). As phases in
the cognitive cycle, the twelve powers are worshipped as twelve Kails,
normally divided into three groups of four. They are the subject, the
means of knowledge and the object, each appearing in the process of
emergence, persistence, withdrawal and an undefinable state (andkhya)
beyond them. 56 According to Ksemaraja, this cycle gives rise to a four-fold
cycle of cosmic creation and destruction consisting of:
1) The initial exertion (udyoga) that arises within the body of the
absolute that leads to its transformation into the universe.
2) The actual manifestation (avabhdsana) of the universe within
the absolute.
3) The relishing (carvana) or reflective awareness of the appearing of
the universe within consciousness.
4) The destruction (vildpana) or withdrawal of the universe back into
the absolute when it resumes its pristine form as the radiant, Undefinable
power (andkhyasakti) of pure consciousness.57

Sakti Cakra:

Wheel of Energies

This is just one possible way of analysing the Wheel's motion. In fact,
it unfolds in many ways, both sequentially and instantaneously,
assimilating into itself as it does so the subject, object, means of
knowledge and resultant cognitive awareness. The yogi can, by close
attention (avadhdna), observe the movement or Spanda of this Wheel in
the course of each act of cognition, as it moves from the centre or 'Heart'
(hfdaya) of pure consciousness out to the periphery, where it becomes
manifest as sense objects. In this way the yogi comes to realise that all is
contained within, and generated through, the cycle of consciousness
(samviccakra). Every sound, taste, smell—anything he then perceives—
occasions in him a profound state of contemplative absorption. Abhinava
describes the sequence (krama) of events in the process of this realisation
as follows:
This Wheel of the Absolute (anuttaracakra) flows out from the
Heart throught the void of the eyes, etc., onto each sense object. The rays
of this Wheel progressively engender the Fire [of the subject], Moon [of
the object] and Sun [of the means of knowledge], in [each phase] of the
destruction, creation and persistence of the external world. In this way
[the yogi] should contemplate [how everything] in the field of sound, etc.,
becomes one with this Wheel as it falls upon it along the path of the
voidness of the sense of hearing, etc.. This Wheel, which is all things, like
a universal monarch, [is followed by its vassals, the senses] wherever it
falls in this [all-embracing] process. In this way the Cosmic Path
(adhvari) [of emanation] spontaneously merges with the great Wheel of
Bhairava and [His] surrounding [goddesses] of consciousness. Then,
even though the universe has merged [into it] leaving behind nothing but
its faint latent trace, contemplate this great whirling Wheel as the
outpouring {ucchalatta) of one's own nature. When all the fuel [of
objectivity] is consumed [in the fire of the Wheel] and its latent traces are
destroyed, contemplate the Wheel on the verge of extinction, in the
process of extinction [and finally as totally] extinct. In this way, by this
meditation, the universe dissolves into the Wheel and this into
consciousness, which finally shines forth void of all objects. The nature
of consciousness is such, however, that there is again a new creation, for
such [is the activity of the] Goddess of Consciousness (cinmahesvari). He
who every instant dissolves the universe thus into his own consciousness
and then emits it is eternally identified with Bhairava.58

Abhinava adds that this process is common, in its basic form, to all the
meditations leading to the realisation of the absolute (anuttara).59
Moreover, the yogi can meditate on other Wheels apart from this one and
still be graced with the same fruits.60 To be successful, however, he must

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

identify with the Lord of the Wheel Who resides in its centre as the pure T
consciousness, which is the impelling force (anupranitvd) behind the
emanation and movement of its powers. Ksemaraja refers to Him as the
'Churning Bhairava' {manthanabhairava) because 'He engenders the
creation, etc., of all things [by arousing] and churning His own power.'61
Siva churns and whirls the energies around Himself, creating and
destroying the universe through the pulsation (spanda) of His universal
will62 while He abides unmoving (acala) in the Heart—the centre of
the Wheel.
He, Siva, the One of unmeasured {akalita) greatness pulsing and
self-established, measures out (kalayati) in the Heart, the universe from
Earth to Sadasiva, and by diverse conjunctions [of aspects of His nature],
emanates the wonderful sport of emission and withdrawal.63
In the centre, Siva is free in the greatness of the Wheel: He is not a
slave of its operations.64 Fully Awakened, He sees and contemplates its
movement and effects in all of life's daily activities. The individual soul,
bound by the Wheel of the world and of the body, is liberated the instant
he discriminates between himself as the embodied and the 'body-world'he
lives in.65 By experiencing the entire universe ranging from Earth, the
grossest, to Siva, the subtlest, he recognises that he is Siva,66 the pure T
consciousness which eternally delights in the play of the Wheel.
Sambhu triumphs [over all] by the glory of [His] incomparable and
undivided Bliss. He, like a newly wedded husband, constantly gazes at
His beloved power Who, although inwardly undivided, dances in many
ways outside [Her] own nature, [Her] diverse forms and seemingly new
aspects conceived in the varied light of thought.67
Sharing in Siva's experience of Sakti we participate in His Lordship
and are free to create and destroy the subtle body of the mind and
sensations (puryasfaka) and so become the Lord of the Wheel. The
Stanzas on Vibration declare:
But when [the mind of the fettered] is firmly established in one place,
then generated and withdrawn [by him at will], his state becomes that of
the [universal] subject. Thus he becomes the Lord of the Wheel.68
Ksemaraja, in his Heart of Recognition {Pratyabhijnahrdayd),
explains where the 'one place' the yogi should fix his attention is found:

Sakti Cakra: Wheel of Energies

Then, by becoming absorbed in the integral 4I-ness' which is the bliss
of the light of consciousness and the power of the Great Mantra, [the
yogi] achieves mastery of the circle of the deities of his own consciousness
who engender perpetually the emanation and withdrawal of all things.69
To become Lord of the Wheel and be liberated, the yogi must become
one with the absolute (anuttara), identified with the power residing in the
space of the Heart of consciousness. The yogi who grasps the true nature
of the absolute need not know or practice anything else, not even
contemplation of the Wheel of Energies.70 The yogi who is unable to
merge directly with the absolute is instructed to penetrate the Centre of the
Wheel by contemplating its universal activity and concentrate on the great
whirling Wheel as the vibration of his own nature.71 Through the power of
the Great Mantra—T (aham)—the yogi must vibrate the circle of powers,
thus saturating the rays of his own consciousness with the plenitude of
self-awareness. Whatever he perceives is then filled with the pulsation
{spanda) of the light of his self-realisation:
[The yogi experiences] stability, satisfaction and merger in the Light
to the degree in which consciousness deploys itself and progressively
covers objectivity. [He experiences] there the vibration which allows him
to realise the supreme freedom everywhere pervaded by this essence.72
The unfolding of the Wheel of Energies confers upon the yogi the
enjoyment (bhoga) and bliss (dnanda) of cosmic consciousness. When the
Wheel contracts, the yogi's individuality fuses with pure consciousness
and he experiences its unconditioned freedom (svatantrya). In these two
movements yogic powers (siddhi) are conferred by the particular waves of
energy (yisesaspanda) of the universal vibration (samanyaspanda) of
consciousness which is the source of liberation (moksa). Mastery over all
things and the realisation of the oneness of consciousness are thus achieved
by discovering oneself to be the Lord of the Wheel (cakresvaratvasiddhi).
This liberating realisation issues from a state of uninterrupted absorption
in the vibration (spanda) of consciousness both in the ecstasy of
contemplation 'with the eyes closed' (nimilanasamadhi), and when the
yogi has risen out of it (vyutthdna), to regain the more normal waking
consciousness which for him is transformed into a state of contemplation
'with the eyes open' (unmllanasamadhi). Thus, whether his eyes are open
when awake, or closed when sleeping or meditating, the yogi merges with
the pulsation of consciousness which moves like a fire-stick between these
two poles generating in him the brilliance of enlightened consciousness73

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

and he is liberated while still residing in the body:
If [the yogi] resides without a break for three hours in his own nature
which shines once [and forever], is free of diversity and is absorbed in
contemplation, the mothers Brahmi, etc., and the mistresses of yoga
realised by practice centred on that Wheel together with the Heroes,
Aghora, etc., the Lords of the Heroes and the nine-fold god, etc., all
become fully manifest and the perfections (siddhi), which are the powers
generated by practising [attention to the movement of] that Wheel, are
attained. These [powers] possess Bhairava's energy. The yogi becomes
powerful through it and by virtue of the SakinI energies associated with
it, various according to [their] diverse forms ranging from Khecarl
onwards. All these liberate him through this very body itself and
[bestow upon him] Supreme Perfection (paramasiddhi) [in the practice
of yoga which is the realisation of his immanence everywhere] in the
cosmic order ranging from Earth to Siva.74

Thus for the enlightened yogi, the power (prabhava) of the Wheel of
Energies is the Light (prabha) which illumines his mind and the divine
breath of the spirit which blows (yati) within him as pure—'I-ness\ It
impels his every act and perception. Presiding over and sanctifying his
mind and body, it brings all things to rest within his own nature.75 Again,
it bestows upon the yogi "the ability to ascend in terms of his own essential
nature to ever higher levels by foresaking the lower ones."76 The yogi
penetrates into the Great Light which is his free, undivided nature through
the divine rays of his consciousness gathered together in the Wheel of
Energies.77 The Wheel is thus the source of the spiritual power the yogi
enjoys when he achieves the object of his meditation through grace and
his purified intuition.78 But as K$emaraja is quick to point out:
It is only a few who, [blessed with] the wealth of absolute
contemplation (anuttarasamadhi), ascend intuitively (dhi$ana) into
the light of Saftkara which is their own true nature and lordship of the
Wheel of consciousness; others, afflicted by embodied egoity, do
not do so.79

The Wheel of Energies can function in two opposite ways. It can
either be the source of bondage for those deluded by Maya, or else
represent the powers the enlightened achieve through yogic practice.80
The same forces which bind and condition man can also lead him to the
higher levels of enlightenment. That which binds the ignorant sets free
the man of wisdom.81 We shall see how this works in the following

Sakti Cakra: Wheel of Energies

account of the Wheels of Energies contemplated in the Spanda tradition
as presented by Ksemaraja.

The Wheel of Vamesvari
Again borrowing from Krama doctrine, Ksemaraja explains that the
pure universal pulsation of consciousness (sdmanyaspanda) is manifest in
five cycles or pulses of power (visesaspanda) represented by five concentric
circles. These circles symbolise the states of individualised consciousness
ranging from the subtlest, most internal and subjective to the grossest,
most external and objective. Four of these groups of energies82 serve as a
link between absolute, unmanifest consciousness and the realm of
manifestation. They are:
1) the circle of Khecarl energies which constitute the individual
subject,
2) the circle of Gocari energies which are the powers of the inner
organ of mentation (antahkararia),
3) the circle of Dikcarl energies which are the powers of the
senses, and
4) the circle of Bhucari energies which represent the outer objects
of the senses.
5) In the centre of these four circles is the fifth—the circle of pure
consciousness. It represents the absolute as cosmic motion transfigured
into the inner revolving power of pure consciousness. The centre of the
fifth circle is empty. In the Void of the Centre the power of awareness
(cicchakti) is 'established on the thought-free plane of the Supreme
Lord's inner nature'.83

This power wanders in the void of the absolute, the sacred space
which abides for the divine eternity before the cosmogonic split between
subject and object occurs. It is the primordial outpouring (ullasa) of the
undivided awareness of universal consciousness within the 'own nature'
(svarupa) of all things and within which all spatially perceived diversity
(disyamanabheda) emerges. This power is the Supreme Goddess Who
acts as the root-consciousness and ground of sensory percepticn. She
personifies the powers of the internal and external senses as well as their
objects, both inner emotive states, thoughts, etc., and outer physical
sensations. In Her wanderings in the Sky of Consciousness (cidakasa) She
perceives all things. When the split emerges within consciousness between
subject and object and they are perceived as a multitude of diverse entities,

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

She is the source of the positive and negative responses of the perceiver to
the perceived.84 These responses are implemented by the four circles which
evolve out of Her as aspects of Her nature when this split occurs. Hence
this Goddess is called 'Vyomavamesvari\85 'Vyomesvari' or simply
'Vamesvar!.86 She is the Goddess (isvari) Who resides in the Sky (vyoman)
and emits, spits out or vomits (Sanskrit root Vam) the universe of personal
experience out of the universal experience of the absolute, much as a
person suffering from cholera vomits out everything in his stomach.87 She
is the fullness (purnata) of pure consciousness and the source of the other
limited forms of awareness manifest as Her four circles of powers.88 She
personifies the pure subjectivity which operates in all individual subjects
and becomes manifest at the instant of complete realisation.89 Kemaraja
explicitly identifies Vamesvari with the Spanda principle90 that brings
about the extending perception (pratha) of the Triad of powers, Supreme
(para), Middling (parapara) and Inferior (apara). Thus She impels every
form of emanation at all levels of manifestation.91
As Her name 'Varna' (meaning 'left', 'perverse' or 'contrary')
indicates, She accounts for a reversal or, more precisely, a 'doublereversal' within the absolute. For the unenlightened She is the source of
diversity and, as such, She is the potential cause of bondage—the 'reverse'
of Siva's state of unity and freedom. For the enlightened She is the power
of awareness which 'runs counter to the normal course of transmigratory
existence'.92 For them, Varna represents the spiritual energy (kuntfalini)
latent in man when it awakens and illumines his consciousness.93 Her
powers: "lay hold of, and throw down from a great height the essence of
diversity and bestow the perfect oneness (abheda) of unity in the midst of
multiplicity (bhedabheda)."94 The fettered soul is caught in the force of
the downward rush of the flux of emanation from the undivided (abheda)
level to that of division (bheda). The enlightened soul, however, merges
in the current which flows from the level of diversity to that of unity.

The Circle of Khecari Energies, The previous level was the sphere of the
universal subject; this level is the sphere of the individual subject. While
the former represents the experience of the oneness of pure consciousness
enjoyed by the enlightened, this circle represents the powers which
accompany this realisation. The powers of Khecari are the very essence of
the expansion of consciousness and bliss. They are the attributes of
consciousness when it is in its most expanded, unconditioned state. These
are five: omnipotence, omniscience, perfect completeness, freedom from
natural law and eternality. At the level of the pure individual subjectivity

Sakti Cakra: Wheel of Energies

which emerges when consciousness limits itself prior to any contact with
the subjective sphere, these same powers function as the five obscuring
coverings (kancuka) which limit the five divine attributes of consciousness.
These are:
The power of limited action (kalasakti),
the power of limited knowledge (vidyasakti),
the power of attachment (ragafakti),
the power of natural law (niyatisakti), and
the power of time (kala&akti).

The Circle of GocariEnergies. The word go\ Ksemaraja tells us, means
'speech'. Accordingly, the three powers which operate in this sphere are
the primal energies of the mind (antahkarana) said to constitute the subtle,
inner discourse (sarnjalpa) of thought. For the unenlightened these
energies function via the intellect (buddhi), ego (aharnkard) and mind
(manas) as the powers to determine distinction (bhedaniscaya), to identify
the Self with diversified objectivity (bhedabhimana) and to form thoughtconstructs centred on diversity (bhedavikalpa), respectively. For those
who enjoy a state of grace, they give rise to pure determinate awareness in
the intellect (i.e., the direct experience of unity); pure self-arrogation in the
ego (i.e., the reflective awareness that 'I am Siva'), and pure intent in the
mind (i.e., the synthesis of diversity into a unified whole).

The Circle of Dikcari Energies. Moving further out we reach the sphere
of the ten senses (five of knowledge and five of action), symbolised by the
ten directions (dik). Through these sensory powers the unenlightened
perceive only multiplicity. When these same powers have been purified
and energized by Siva's grace, the awakened yogi perceives through them
Siva's pure unity revealed in the diversity of sensations.95

The Circle of Bhucari Energies. This is the outermost circle—the sphere
of objectivity—'Earth' (bhii). The energies operating in this sphere
manifest as the five objects of the senses: form, taste, sound, smell and
touch. The enlightened experience their consonant harmony (tanmayd)
with the senses and so their ultimate identity with consciousness. These
powers 'are manifest as the body of the light of consciousness for the
awakened, while they display limitation everywhere to others.'96

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

The Wheel of the Senses
Sensory activity is the most tangible expression of the power of
consciousness to know and act. The physical organs of sight and hearing,
for example, are merely 'doors' (dvara) or channels through which this
power flows; they do not in themselves account for the sensory perception
of light and sound.97 They are merely the locii (golaka) of particular
aspects of the pervasive power of universal consciousness to know all
things in all possible ways. Ksemaraja explains that the Lord of
Consciousness operates the body and senses of each individual by His
own power of Maya.98 The senses are instruments of the power of
awareness projected out of consciousness through this same power.99
Thus the perceptions and activities of the countless living beings in the
universe function as the senses of the Supreme Lord of Consciousness.100
They are aspects of His power of awareness impelled by His Spanda
energy to activity. Thus the Stanzas on Vibration teach:
That principle should be examined with effort and respect because
this, its uncreated freedom, prevails everywhere. By virtue of it the
senses, along with the inner circle, [although] unconscious, behave as
if conscious in themselves, move towards their objects, rest [there]
and withdraw [from them].101
The senses are figuratively arranged in two concentric circles. The
outer circle consists of the ten senses: five of knowledge (Jndnendriya)
and five of action (karmendriya). The inner circle is the inner organ of
mentation (antahkarana).102 It consists of the intellect (buddhf), ego
(ahamkara) and mind (manas). The Doctrine of Vibration stresses that
Spanda can be experienced through the operation of the senses. By
practice and Siva's grace, the yogi attains a state of alert awareness. He
then ranks amongst the Awakened (prabuddha). Awakened, he can
perceive Spanda as the vibration of consciousness that animates the body
and is the impulse which drives the senses. By attending carefully to this
vibration he experiences the unity between himself, Siva (Who is universal
consciousness) and the world of objects and perceptions. At first he
experiences this only occasionally, but once this experience becomes
permanent, he is Fully Awakened (suprabuddha) and, as such, liberated.
To understand how this works, we turn now to a description of the senses.
The Intellect (buddhi). The individual soul divested of all sensation
and thought reposes in a state of deep sleep in union with the primordial

Sakti Cakra: Wheel of Energies

substance (prakfti) from which the objective world (including the
psycho-physical organism) is generated. The substance of all that can
be perceived objectively in any form, this primordial matter is understood
to be a power of consciousness technically called Sambhavlsakti.103
This energy is roused to activity by consciousness personified as the
god Svatantresa, otherwise known as Ananta.104 The equilibrium
(sdmarasya) of its three qualities iguna) of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas
is then disturbed (praksubdha) and the lower principles are generated
from them. The first principle to emerge is the intellect.105 Experience
at this level is like that of waking from sleep. For a moment we are
not clearly aware even of ourselves but merely register that things
exist around us and that we are waking up. Similarly, the intellect is
free of both the sense of ego and the determinative mental activity of
the mind. Thus the images that appear in the intellect are apprehended
directly, its function being merely to illumine the products of sensory
and mental activity106 projected onto it where their existence (satta)
is registered.
The Ego (ahatfikara). The emergence of the ego marks the next stage
in the process through which we come to know ourselves as individuals
and the world about us. The ego's function is to appropriate and
personalise experience—to link it together as 'my own'. It arises from
the mistaken notion that the light of consciousness reflected in the
intellect and coloured by objectively perceived phenomena is the true
nature of the Self.107 Thus, the personal ego falsely identifies the Self
with that which is not the Self and vice versa.108 The individual soul
is bound by this mistake in identity which functions not only in relation
to the subtle, inner operations of the intellect, but also in relation to
gross, physical objects.
I am wealthy', 4I am thin', 'I delight in the senses', I am content',
i breathe', (and when in deep sleep) 'I am empty': egoity (asmita)
is observable on these six levels.109

The ego which forms a part of the inner mental organ should
not be confused with the pure egoity (ahambhava) of consciousness.
T consciousness is of two kinds. One is pure and is Siva, the light of
consciousness reposing in itself.110 The other is a product of Maya.
The pure ego rests on pure consciousness and the impure ego on outer
objective forms.

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

[Universal] T consciousness rests on freedom whose primary
characteristic is perfect autonomy. It is without any break, like an
inward consent (antarabhyupagamakalpa). It is the Self which abides
as the living being whose nature is the essence of the light of consciousness, pure and unsullied by any association with the body, etc. It is
[perfectly real] and not a thought-construct.111
False identification conditions this pure egoity (ahanta), limiting
it to the psycho-physical organism.
It is imperfect (apuma) and
hemmed in on every side by the limitations imposed upon it by its
physical and mental environment. Pure egoity is uncreated (akftrimd)
and free. The individual ego is a creation {kftakatvd) imagined into
existence (kalpita) by pure T consciousness.112 Even so, there is in
fact only one ego which operates within different parameters. The
pure ego functions at the universal level of cosmic subjectivity (yisvapramatfta) and the impure ego at the individual level of the Mayasubject. By recognising that T (aham) is Siva and that this ego is not
that of the fettered soul (pasu\ we realise our identity with Siva and
are liberated. We must stick to the abiding conviction that our authentic
ego and Sankara are identical.113 To have an ego is not in itself harmful
or bad:
O Supreme Lord, although I have understood that pride is
vain, even so, if I do not measure [the expanse] of my own nature
by the pride of thinking, I am made of You1, all joy comes to nought.114
This pure ego is Spandasakti. It manifests as the individual ego
which transmits the impulse (samrambha)
of consciousness that
activates the vital breaths115 animating the mind and body. According
to Ksemaraja the Doctrine of Vibration teaches:
Anointed by a drop of the nectar (rasa) of egoity even the unconscious becomes conscious. Thus this reality, infusing consciousness
into them, renders both the senses and the conceived subject (kalpitapramatrX falsely assumed to be the impelling force {prerakatva)
behind their activity, capable of performing their functions. Thus
[the individual soul] falsely assumes that he impels the senses to action.'16
The individual ego is the source of all the other senses. As uninterrupted self-awareness, it is called the Sun of Knowledge. Around the
sun of the ego rotate the twelve suns of the other senses. They emerge
from it and are drawn back into it just as, according to Saiva cosmography,

Sakti Cakra: Wheel of Energies

the twelve suns, corresponding to the signs of the zodiac, emerge from
and return to the thirteenth sun.117 Thus the function of the ego is the
self-arrogation of experience through the identification it engenders
between consciousness and the senses which are its instruments of
knowledge and action. Although those ignorant of the authentic
identity of the ego are bound by its operations, it is nonetheless an
essential component of individualised consciousness. Directing its
sensory and mental activity, it reflects in the microcosm the supremity
of the universal ego that is the source and master of all that takes place
in the domain of manifestation.
Mind (manas). The ego full of the brilliance of sattva is the source of
the mind (manas) and the live organs of knowledge (jnanendriya).
Mind (manas) is the instrument through which consciousness fashions
specific, clearly defined mental representations of the world of sensations,
which pours into the inner mental organ through the channels of the
outer senses and is reflected in the intellect. Like a chisel which cuts
away the unwanted stone from a block of marble to reveal the image
contained within it, mind (manas) excludes all the sensations not
immediately useful to the perceiver and focuses his attention onto those
that are. Without mind (manas) our field of awareness would be flooded
with thousands of indiscernible sensations. It would be impossible
to follow a sequence of events or go about any task without succumbing
to a thousand distractions. A faint sound heard in the distance would
be registered with the same intensity of awareness as the music we were
listening to in a concert hall.
Manas selects and isolates specific sensations from the mass
reflected in the intellect. This sensation is then compared with similar
sensations perceived in the past, the latent traces of which are stored
in the intellect and named according to the prevailing linguistic convention
(sanketa). The two sensations—one in the past, the other in the present—
are held together by the continuity of awareness between these two
moments and so we come to recognise that the two sensations belong
to the same class and manas is able to form a discursive representation
(vikalpa) of the sensation perceived. Manas thus not only analyses
and dissociates individual sensations from each other, but also synthesises
a set of sensations into a single whole.118 For example, a series of discrete
sensations occurring in successive moments is grouped together by
manas in the notion of action or in the notion of relation in general.
The basis of this determinative activity (anuvyavasaya) is unity-indifference (bhedabheda) and its function, the structured ordering
of sensations.119

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Manas (in the normal states of waking and dreaming) is always moving (cancald) from one sensation to the next. Unlike the external organs
of knowledge, manas is not confined to a specific field of operation
(yisaya). It can equally well apprehend sound, taste, smell, etc., and
thus relate them to one another to form a single, coherent picture of
the world of physical objects. As no activity is possible in the absence
of a will to act, manas is said to be full of will (iccha) or desire to move
on to, and process, different sensations. It is driven to its task by the
ego's incessant seeking to appropriate and assimilate experience. The
pure sensation clothed in thought and differentiated from other
sensations by manas and personalised by the ego (ahamkara) is then
presented to the intellect, where it becomes known to consciousness.
Mahesvarananda, explaining the process of perception and the
function of the inner mental organ, compares its three constituent
elements to waves (kallola) which form in the ocean of the Heart (hfdayd)
of consciousness. As they rise out of the Heart of pure T consciousness,
they carry with them some of its egoity and spill it out onto the object
of perception. The 'thisness' (idanta) of objectivity is drawn into
intimate relationship with the 4I-ness' of subjectivity. The three senses
of the inner mental organ "drag 'thisness' there [into the ocean of the
Heart] and project 'I-ness' out here [onto the object of perception]."120
There is a movement (spanda) of awareness in two directions—from
inner to outer and outer to inner. This movement free of temporal
distinctions,121 is a great wave (mahdtarariga) of the ocean of consciousness. From this great wave originate the smaller waves which are the
movements of the outer senses, just as ripples or eddies follow in the
wake of large waves.122 Thus the power of the Heart of consciousness
emanates out to the outer world and back, vibrating as it moves.
Although the entire process of perception constitutes a single event,
Mahesvarananda analyses the pulsation of the Heart into three phases
as follows.
Primal vibration (adyaspanda). This is the initial throb of awareness
that pulses in the subject. It corresponds to the tendency (aunmukhya)
inherent in the power of consciousness to expand out into universal
manifestation.
Intense vibration (parispanda). This is the universal vibration of
consciousness that reveals itself in the outpouring of awareness that
takes place during each act of perception.
Vibrating radiance (sphuratta). In the final phase of perception it
matures into a fully formed cognition which is imprinted on consciousness through the pulsing and illuminating activity of the senses. The
five-fold universe of sound, taste, touch, smell and sight now becomes

Sakti Cakra: Wheel of Energies

fully manifest,123 brilliant with the radiance of consciousness.
We move on now to examine the nature and function of the ten
outer senses.
The Outer Senses. Ail of manifest creation can be divided into two
primary categories, namely, conscious and unconscious manifestations
(cid~ and acidabhasas)—sentient beings and inert objects.124 The ability
to know and act is the very life (jivana) of sentient beings,125 and their
knowledge and action are most tangibly externally manifest through
the functions of the senses. Coupled with the limited power of knowledge,
the power of limited action (kalasaktx) constitutes the conditioned
agency which operates through the inner mental organ, impelling126
and guiding the functions of the senses, linking together the stream of
data coming in through the organs of perception and the outgoing
responses through the organs of action.127
The Organs of Knowledge. According to Spanda doctrine, the five
organs of perception—the senses of taste, touch, smell, hearing and
sight—are aspects of the radiant pulsation (sphuratta) of consciousness.
Each of these five senses is confined to its own locus (golaka) in the
body, situated where it can pick up the maximum amount of information
in the most efficient way.128 Like a lamp set inside a perforated jar,
the light of consciousness radiates through the senses, freely limiting
itself so that each one is confined to its own specific field of operation
(visaya). The Kashmiri Saivite rejects the view that the sources of
the senses are the gross physical elements. He contends that they are
the products of the ego (ahamkara) brilliant with the lustre of Sattva,119
insofar as all sense perception is accompanied by T consciousness.
The notions: 'I hear', 4I see' or I smell', etc., are always attended by
the ego.130 As we have seen, from the Kashmiri Saiva point of view,
perception is an activity as well as a state of awareness. Knowledge
and action are two interdependent categories; they are never found
apart.131 As instruments of the act of perception, the senses require
the conscious agency of the ego. In the absence of an agent who
implements their activity, we would have to posit the existence of
another instrument to perform this function and there would be no
reason why that too should not require a third and so on, leading to
an infinite regress.132
However, from the point of view of a phenomenology of sensory
perception, the ego alone does not fully account for the existential being

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

of the senses. The senses can have no real existence as such, without
the objects with which they are correlated. Thus, along with the senses,
the ego, full of the inertia of Tamas,133 generates the pure sensations
(tanmatra) of taste, touch, smell, etc., corresponding to each sense
organ. In this way the essential elements of sensory perception,
namely, the perceiving ego, the senses and the perceived sensation
are accounted for by the activity of the sentient subject.
The Organs of Action. The organs of action presuppose the existence
of the organs of perception. They are generated from the ego as
instruments to implement its responses to the sensations coming in
through them. While the activity of the organs of action is accompanied
by bodily movement, the activity of the organs of perception is not.134
Although bodily movement is essentially one, it is differentiated into
five categories according to the diverse conceptions we form of its
nature.135 Handling, picking up or grasping is the activity of the hand.
Excretion is the activity of the excretory organs. Locomotion is the
activity of the feet and emission that of the sexual organ. These four
are said to correspond to the outer actions of appropriation (adand),
rejection (hand), both136 and neither.137 The fifth action is speech;
it is internal and hence does not belong to any of these four categories.
Although each organ of knowledge is invariably associated with only
one specific locus, this is not the case with the organs of action. A lame
man can move about from place to place without the use of his feet and
we can pick up things with parts of the body other than the hands.138
To conclude: the inner and outer senses are aspects of the vibration
of consciousness and, as such, are the channels through which consciousness becomes manifest as the world of perceptions. Together they
are said to be 'the vibration of the glory of consciousness'.139 Through
this vibration the yogi catches a glimpse of the wonder of the Divine,
brilliantly manifest in its creation. By its Light, he ultimately realises
Siva's ubiquity as all things and that this is, in fact, his own presence
everywhere.

VI

The Divine Body and the
Sacred Circle of the Senses
The yogi seeking enlightenment must undergo a complete conversion
or reversal (paravftti) of perspective. To know as man knows is the
very essence of bondage;1 freedom is to know reality as God knows it.
The seeker then finds himself in a new existential situation in which he
recognises his own authentic Being by being as God is. This is achieved
by a pure and intense act of self-awareness in which the old mode of
understanding reality is dropped in favour of a new and deeper knowledge
of oneself as unlimited, infinite consciousness. This change in perspective
discloses a new dimension of experience. In the moment of realisation,
man and the world reveal themselves as an or.tophany in which consciousness of Being coincides with the worship of Being as the sacred. The
realisation of Being is fused with participation in the Holy. The sacred
ontophany of manifestation is realised in the wonder (camatkdra)
inspired by the theophanic vision. To see the world with God's eyes
is to witness the eternal worship of His Being. The organ of vision is
the sacred circle of the senses and the abode of its operation, the
Divine Body.
True monism (paradvaya), as we have seen, requires that each
part be the Whole, that the Wholeness of totality be manifest in every
aspect of its fullness.2 Every existent thing is sacred and enshrines
the divine cosmos in the fullness of its participation in Being. The

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

human body, in a particularly special way, is the epitome of the universe;
it is the pure vessel of pure consciousness. 3 Pervaded by consciousness,
the body partakes of the sacred character of the absolute. Consecrated
by the divine presence within it, it is the temple of God, 4 the sacred
place of sacrifice and worship. We do not experience our consciousness
as something external to the body, like a blanket or an outer garment.5
In the same way, the universe, with all that we perceive, is an intimate
extension of our own pure conscious being. 6 Abhinava writes:
Thus, one should think of the body as full of all the Paths (adhvari)
[to enlightenment and cosmic emanation]. Variegated by the workings
of time, it is the abode of all the movements of time and space. The body
seen in this way is all the gods, and must therefore be the object of
contemplation, veneration and sacrifice. He who penetrates into it
finds liberation.7
Everything is a part of God's Divine Body—the sacred cosmos
in which God's blissful activities are made manifest through the workings
of natural law (niyati). The presence of T consciousness in the body
is revealed by the movement of its limbs; the presence of God in His
Cosmic Body is seen in the movement of the universe.
Just as the ego (asmita) in the body flings apart the two lifeless
arms by a mere act of will, so [the universal ego] in the universe [rends
asunder] mountains by its power.9
Similarly, the yogi who perceives that all things are like the limbs
of his own body (svdhgakalpa) plunges in the divine awareness that:
'I am this [universe]' (aham-idam).
Bondage is a false identification
with the physical body and liberation a true identification with the
cosmic body. Thus the split between subject and object is healed and
the yogi perceives reality everywhere, as an undivided unity (avibhakta)
in which inner and outer blend together like the juices in a peacock's egg. 10
Each level of consciousness corresponds to a degree of spiritual
attainment. At each stage of ascent along the 'living ladder of consciousness'11 the yogi achieves a higher degree of mastery over the cosmic
processes taking place within his own universal consciousness. With
each degree of empowerment, he penetrates into a fresh dimension of
experience. In the theosophical language of the Tantras, he is said to
become the lord of a higher world-order (bhuvana). He possesses a
different 'space' in the pure extension of conscious Being and lives in
this world in a body suited to his new existential situation. 12 At the

Divine Body and Sacred Circle of the Senses

Parasiva level his body is the universe, the sum total of all spiritual
extensions and world-orders. In a sense, however, because Siva does
not confront any reality outside Himself, He has no body at all. His
body is a body of Consciousness (vijnanadeha), the sacred image
(murti) of His manifest form.13 This is the Supreme Body (paradeha),
the greatest of all bodies14 radiant with the infinite vitality (Ojas),
fecund power (virya), strength (bala) and divine vibration (spanda)15
of the supreme state of subjectivity (parapramatrbhava) it enshrines.
This Divine Body (divyadeha) is entirely spiritual and no longer
belongs to matter. It is the Body of Power (sdktadeha), the universe
of energy replete with the five principle powers of consciousness, bliss,
will, knowledge and action.16 In failing to contemplate the Cosmic
Body of the Self, we fail to experience the sacred festival (utsava) of
the external manifestation of the glory of its pure Spanda nature
(vibhutispanda).11 We must rid ourselves of the false notion that the
body is in any way impure.18 We must recognise that it is pure consciousness alone and give up the fruitless quest for satisfaction in objects
we fail to realise are part of our own Cosmic Body.
Once the tendency (aunmukhya) [to see external] objects ceases
and limitation is destroyed, what remains in the body apart from the
nectar (rasa) of Siva's Bliss? [Thus] seeing and worshipping the body
night and day as replete with [all] the categories of existence and full
of the nectar of Siva's Bliss, [the yogi] becomes identified with Siva.
Established in that holy image (liriga), content to rest in [his] cosmic
body, [the yogi] does not aspire to any outer Linga, [to make any]
vows, [travel to] the sacred sites or practise [external] disciplines.19
To attain this pure body of consciousness or, to be more precise,
to recognise our own body to be it, we must first purge ourselves of the
lower states of embodied consciousness. We must unite the knot of
ignorance which binds us and leads us to suppose that the psychophysical organism, with all the subtler bodies contained in it, is our
true body. When this false identification is overcome, consciousness,
which formerly seemed contracted, now presents itself in its true,
fully expanded (vikasita) form. The individual ego merges in the
pervasive, universal ego, just as the space in a broken jar merges with
the space around it.20 The yogi then realises that the Spanda energy
of this authentic egoity does all things and that he, the individual, is
the agent in this sense alone. Thus the action of the wise, free of false
identification with the physical body, entails no Karma and they are
liberated.21

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

The false identification of the ego with the physical body conditions
the power of awareness (citisakti) by generating thought-forms (vikalpa)
based on the notion of that a difference exists (bhedd) between the
embodied subject and the extra-corporeal object. These thoughtconstructs constitute the lower order of embodied subjectivity and,
to all intents and purposes, its body. The yogi transmutes thought
back into its original form as the light of consciousness by burning it
in the sacred fire of consciousness (cidagni) inflamed by the contemplative
awareness that: "It is I, the Great Lord, Who, as pure consciousness,
always shine thus as all things".22 This inner awareness is the divine
radiance (sphuratta) of the rapture of the supreme ego.23 It is pure
Spanda energy, the secret power of Mantra (mantravirya) which burns
away the false identification with the body and with it the body of
thought.24 This is the true fire sacrifice in which, as the Aphorisms of
Siva declare, this body is the oblation.25
External rites are of no avail if their inner significance is not
understood and their symbolic function does not correspond to an
inner activity within consciousness. The inner conscious processes
(vasanakrama) corresponding to the outer ritual activity (pujakrama)
must be understood and mastered. Whether outer rites are actually
performed or not makes no difference from this point of view. In reality,
all of life's activities are part of the great sacrificial rite (mahayaga)
eternally enacted by universal consciousness within itself, to itself.
In this rite, the sacrificial fire is the Great Void (mahasunya), the
supreme reality (paratattva) entirely devoid of all division (bhedd) and
beyond the emptiness of insentience. The sacrificial ladle is awareness
(cetana) and the offering is the entire outer universe of diversity,
including the gross elements, senses, objects, world-orders and categories
of existence, together with the inner world of mind (manas) and thought.26
All division between subject and object is burnt away and everything
made one with the fire of consciousness. Abhinava explains:
Oblation is effortlessly offered in the fire of [Siva's] intensely
flaming consciousness by offering fully all of the great seed of internally
and externally created duality {bhedd).21
The fuel offered in the fire of this supernal (alaukika) and eternal
sacrifice is the forest of duality, and death is the sacrificial victim
(mahdpasu).2 We must rid ourselves of all attachment, of all sense
of 'me' and 'mine', however painful this may be, and thus acquire a
new, transfigured body, not made of matter but of the spiritual essence
of consciousness. In the chilling words of the Tantras:

Divine Body and Sacred Circle of the Senses

O Goddess, by eating the body of the beloved, a relative, close
friend, benefactor or dear one, one must fly upwards with the Maiden
of the Sky, [the power of consciousness].29
What this verse means is that the embodied subjectivity (dehapramatfta) must be assimilated into consciousness so that the disturbing
thought-constructs engendered by it may no longer agitate it. Then
the yogi spontaneously recognises the highest level of Spanda's power
within himself.30 All duality is burnt away and consciousness rests
tranquil, firmly fixed (dhruva) and free of the waves of cosmic manifestation (nistaranga).
Nothing remains of the yogi's unenlightened
individuality and he shares in the pure contemplative absorption
consciousness itself enjoys. Thus, no longer identifying himself with
the body, he recognises his true nature to be the vibrant power of
Spanda, personified as the goddess Bhairavi, and so unites with Bhairava,
the Great Light of consciousness.31
The first vibration {spanda) or wave of activity that rises spontaneously out of this state of tranquility (visrdnti) is the immaculate
body {murti) of consciousness.32 Pure, undifferentiated Siva-consciousness unfolds in this way as the universe and displays its true nature.33
The yogi united with Siva witnesses the emanation of Siva's cosmic
body as the creation of his own perfected, divine body. This pure
emanation (suddhasrsfi) confirms the yogi's state to be that of Bhairavi.34
In this state the yogi experiences the identity (sdmarasya) of unity and
diversity in the oneness of his pure Spanda nature. This unity for the
fettered soul corresponds to the unfolding of his Siva-nature; diversity,
the unfolding of Maya.35 The enlightened yogi, identified with Siva,
resides in Siva's abode located in the centre between the two sides of
this expansion. In this way he experiences the bliss of the emergence36
of consciousness within his spiritual cosmic body.
In the centre of his body, the yogi contemplates the power of his
own consciousness (citi), the radiant Fire of Time where all the categories
of existence are burnt away. The perfected yogi (siddha) thinks his
physical body to be hardly more than a corpse—mere dead matter,
like all the other objects he perceives within his cosmic body. The
universe appears to him to be a vast cremation ground strewn with the
lifeless 'corpses' of phenomena. He makes the Vow of a Hero (viravrata)
to see all things, however disgusting or attractive, with an equal eye,37
aware that they are all manifestations of consciousness. He carries
in one hand the sacred staff (khafvdriga) of awareness with which he
smashes the body of his own ego to pieces. In the other hand, he bears
the skull bowl of the portions of the universe which appear in the

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

purview of his senses, white with the light of consciousness. From this
bowl he drinks the wine of the essence (rasa) of the universe.38 Absorbed
in the contemplation of the fire of his own consciousness (citi), he
enters the cremation ground of his own body, terrible with the funeral
pyres (citi) in which all the latent traces of his past actions (krama)
are burnt to ashes.39 Abhinava writes:
"[The body] is the support of all the gods, the cremation ground
frightening with the pyre [of consciousness, citi, which destroys all
things]. Attended by siddhas and yoginls, it is their awesome (maharaudra) playground wherein all embodied forms {yigraha) come to
an end. Full of the countless pyres [of the senses] and pervaded by the
halos of their rays, the flux of the darkness [of duality] is destroyed
and, free of all thought-constructs, it is the sole abode of bliss. Entering
this [body], the cremation ground of emptiness—who does not
achieve perfection?"40

All Tantric traditions, including those of Kashmiri Saivism,
teach that the senses, along with the body, should be venerated as
manifestations of the sacred power of consciousness which emits them
as the sun does its rays.41 Accordingly, the senses can be personified
and worshipped as deities that surround and attend upon the god
(or goddess) who is their master. According to Kemaraja, although
the senses and their presiding deities do not in fact differ, the Spanda
teachings distinguish between them. The physical senses are merely
the external expansion (vijrmbha) of the body of consciousness
(vijndnadeha) which belongs to the deities of the senses. The Supreme
Lord and inner master of the Circle (cakradevata) is the universal
subject (mahapramatr) Who, endowed with the sacred power of the
senses, is seated in the Heart of consciousness within the sacred abode
(pitha) of the body,42 and there playfully rotates the wheels of their
powers.43
The forms and names ascribed to the deities of the senses vary
considerably in different traditions and even in different Tantras
belonging to the same tradition. The reason for this, according to
Abhinava, is largely due to the ritual context in which they are venerated
and the functions ascribed to them. The activities of the senses are
altered by the emotions generated by consciousness, and so the character
of their presiding deities changes accordingly. Thus, in rites performed
in anger with the aim of killing an enemy, the deities are represented
in a wrathful {raudra) attitude. Rites intended to bring peace and
prosperity are attended by deities of a peaceful {saumya) disposition.44

Divine Body and Sacred Circle of the Senses

The original rites described in the Tantras have no place in the yogic
teachings of the Spanda school; even so, the esoteric philosophy
(rahasyadfsfi) at the root of their symbolic significance has been
retained. This makes sense because the spiritual, cosmic body is more
'internal' than the lower-order body through which the rites are
performed. It is one with the universal consciousness residing in the
Centre, the pulsing Heart (hfdaya) of pure T consciousness, the 'great
abode of the universe'45 in which everything rests46 and which gives
life and being to all things. Jayaratha quotes:
Although [the Light] pervades all the body and senses, even so,
its supreme abode is the core of the Lotus of the Heart.47
This same inwardness is shared by the sacred circle of the senses
of this Divine Body. It is the inner circle of the goddesses of the senses
(karanadevatd). Ksemaraja, expounding the Doctrine of Vibration,
says that they are the "circle of the rays of the glory of the Self which
presides over and gives life to the outer circle of the physical senses.48
In his "Hymn to the Circle of Deities in the Body" (Dehasthadevatacakrastotra), Abhinava describes the goddesses of the senses. Although
this hymn belongs to the Krama tradition, not to Spanda, it is clear
that Ksemaraja understood the nature of these divine powers essentially
in the way Abhinava describes them here. He portrays the goddesses
of the senses as seated on the petals of the lotus of the Heart arrayed
around the Divine Couple, Anandabhairava and Anandabhairavi,
Who are in the calix. The goddesses move restlessly hither and thither
in search of the most pleasing sensations to offer in worship to the
Couple in the Centre. Abhinava begins by saluting Ganesa and Vatuka,
the inhaled and exhaled breaths (apana and prana). He then praises
Anandabhairava, the true teacher (sadguru) Who is the yogi's attentive
awareness (avadhdna) that illumines Siva's Path—the universe—by the
power of His intellect (dhi). Meanwhile His consort, Anandabhairavl,
playfully gives rise (udayd) to the universe, manifests it {avabhasana)
and relishes its pure conscious nature (carvana). Around them are
Brahman!, the intellect (buddhi), who offers the flowers of certainty
(niscaya); Sambhavi, the ego (ahamkara), who offers the flowers of
egoity; Kaumarl, the mind (rnanas) who offers her flowers of thought
(vikalpa); Vaisnavi, the ear, offering sounds; Varahi, the skin, offering
tactile sensations; Indrani, sight, offering forms; Camuruja, the tongue,
offering tastes; and Mahalaks.ml, the nose, who offers smell. After
rendering homage to the Self, replete with all the categories of existence,
Abhinava concludes with the words:

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

I venerate in this way the circle of deities eternally active (satatodita)
in my own body, ever present in all beings and the essence of the radiant
pulsation of experience (sphuradanubhava).49
At the lower level of consciousness, the physical senses are hardly
more than unconscious instruments of perception. They are extroverted
and operate in relation to external objects. At the higher level, when
'the island of embodied consciousness' has been destroyed and submerged
into the ocean of pure consciousness, the senses perceive reality in a
new, timeless mode.50 They are introverted in the sense that they are
recognised to be spiritual forces operating within sacred consciousness.
Plunged in Bhairava's Great Light, the senses are divinised and their
activity leads the yogi to the higher reaches of consciousness even
as they perceive their objects. The senses thus illumine the yogi after
having themselves been illumined by Siva and he realises in this way
that the senses are the pure Spanda energy of consciousness which
perceives the Divine manifest as sensations.
Siva manifests His freedom in the joy {ahlada) he feels as the
subject who perceives the world through the pulsing activity of the
senses. He sports in the garden of His universe delighting in the five
flowers of smell, taste, sight, touch and sound.51 At the same time
Siva rests in His own nature. The repose He thus enjoys is the source
of His bliss and the foundation of His freedom. Embracing the diversity
of things in the oneness of His nature, Siva is content. The yogi must
seek to imitate Siva, the archetype of Fully Awakened (suprabuddha)
consciousness. The yogi's experience conforms to Siva's blissfully
unifying vision to the degree in which he succeeds in maintaining a
state of authentic self-awareness. The perfected yogi is always established
in himself, reflecting on his true and uncreated {akrtrima) nature.
But although self-absorbed, he is never abstracted from the world.
In fact, by being constantly mindful of himself, he sees and hears with
greater clarity and understanding, and, with his senses and mind thus
actively in touch with the world, his meditation matures and becomes
perfect.
The Spanda teachings, accordingly, instruct the yogi to observe
the movement of the senses, mindful that their activity is an extension
of the activity of Siva—the universal consciousness which is the yogi's
true nature.52 In this way he comes to recognise himself to be full of
the Spanda energy which impels the operation of the senses.53 Sensations
of all sorts thus ultimately lead him to recognise himself to be the
pervasive experience of the Great Light (mahdprakdsa) of consciousness,
filling both his individual subjectivity and his environment.54 Consequent-

Divine Body and Sacred Circle of the Senses

ly, although many spiritual paths seek to curb and discipline the
senses, seeing in them one of the principle sources of bondage (samsdra),
the Spanda teachings, and Kashmiri Saivism in general, maintain,
on the contrary, that they can serve both initially as a means to selfrealisation and, ultimately, are the very bliss of liberation itself.55
Utpaladeva, the great exponent of the philosophy of recognition,
repeatedly dwells on this theme in his hymns to Siva. Realising his
authentic Siva-nature and thus inspired by the spirit of the highest
form of devotion (parabhakti\ Utpaladeva exclaims:
May the outpourings of the activity of my senses fall on their
respective objects. May I, O Lord, never be so rash as to lose, even
for a moment, the joy of my oneness with You, however slightly.56
The yogi can take pleasure in sense objects; indeed he is specifically
instructed to do so,57 if he maintains an awakened, mindful attitude
(prabuddhabhdva) and does not just blindly follow his natural inclinations
as does an animal with a bare minimum of self-awareness. The pleasure
we derive from physical objects is, in reality, the repose we enjoy when
the activity of the mind is momentarily arrested and delights onepointedly in the source of pleasure. All pleasure, in other words, is
essentially spiritual. It is a state the subject experiences and not a
property of the object. It is 'a drop from the ocean of Siva's bliss',58
a small wave or pulse in the universal vibration of consciousness. The
yogi must fix his attention on the source of pleasure, freeing his mind
of all disturbing thoughts and so make the transition to a state of
awareness in which his personal concerns are transcended in the pervasive
experience of consciousness. This yogi is no hedonist. He is free of
the false notion that the body is the Self and so does not crave for the
pleasures of the senses, although he does make use of them as springboards to project him beyond the realms of physical, transitory objectivity
into the eternal sphere of consciousness.
If the connection between 'worldly' pleasure and spiritual bliss
is strong, the link between aesthetic experience and the rapturous
delight (camatkdra) of consciousness is even more so. Sweet song,
a pleasing picture, the sight of a beautiful woman, all these are full
of a 'juice' (rasa) which the senses relish or 'taste' and which, like food,
feeds consciousness with delight and wonder (camatkdra). The senses
are the organs of this 'tasting' (dsvadana, rasand) and a state of aroused
consciousness is the fruit. Abhinava writes:
Once one has overcome distraction, the pleasure one enjoys

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

through the sentiments of love, etc., expressed in poetry or drama,
for example, differs from the pleasure derived from sense objects. This
is because [one gains access to it] by the removal of such obstacles
as the anticipation of possible personal gain. So, once freed of these
impediments, the experience {pratiti) is one of 'relishing' (rasana),
'tasting' (carvana) or 'contentment' (nivrti) and is, in fact, repose in
the cognising subjectivity. It is right to describe it in these terms because
the Heart, that is, self-awareness {paramartd) is [in this experience]
the predominant factor. Although the Prakasa aspect, centred on the
object, is also present, the sensitivity [on the part of the subject] to
its aesthetic quality (sahfdayata) is a result of ignoring [this objective
aspect]
When one tastes sweet or other juices (rasa), contact with the
object of sense represents an obstacle [to the blissful experience of its
purely pleasurable potential]. Similarly, in the case of poetry and
drama, etc., although there may be no such obstacles, their latent
traces continue to be perceived. Even then, however, by removing the
partial obstruction that arises in that way [we] gain attentive Hearts
and that is supreme bliss.59
Changes occasioned in the powers of the senses in contact with
the aesthetic object represent a shift of awareness from the surface
consciousness of mundane experience to deeper levels.
Here the
fragmentation of the surface is resolved in the fullness of the vibration
of T consciousness in the centre of the circle of sensory energies.
The senses initially resonate, as it were, in consonance with the aesthetic
object, penetrating and mingling with it so completely, that the boundary
between sensation and appreciative awareness dissolves away, leaving
a state of unity (tanmayibhdva) which pervades both the senses and
the aesthetic object. This leads to a heightened state of introversion
(antahpravesa) in which the aesthetic object is experienced with such
intimacy and sense of direct contact that it is no longer felt to be external.
It is submerged (nimqjjana) in the field of awareness, filling it so
completely with the aesthetic delight (rasa) it arouses, that the subject
loses all sense of his individuality. Consciousness, now freed from the
restrictions of the narrow confines of individual subjectivity, spontaneously expands to finally delight in the untrammelled outpouring {ucchalana)
of his own pulsation (spandana, vighurnana) as the pure appreciative
subjectivity.60
Whatever enters the field of awareness through the channels of
the senses and mind affects the perceiving subject and brings him to
life, as it were, as the centre of awareness in the world of perceptions.
The influx of sensations is a stream of energy which 'feeds' the vibrant
power of consciousness much as the vital breath vitalises the limbs

Divine Body and Sacred Circle of the Senses

of the body. Spanda is this dynamically effective character of consciousness—its vitality (virya) and fecund power (ojas) apparent as the
beauty (kdntatd) of all its manifestations.61 The arousal or intensification
of this power is the most essential, indeed the basic, element of all
aesthetic experience. The sound of pleasing music, the smell of incense,
a gentle caress, etc., can all arouse the subject from a state of inattentive
indifference (mddhyasthya) and stimulate the Heart of consciousness
to pulsate more intensely with the subtle movement of awareness and
bliss.62 This movement, or arousal of the vitality of consciousness
(viryaksobha), is the unfolding of the power of awareness (sdktasphdra)
which inspires the aesthete with wonder (camatkdra) and delight
(ananda). It creates for him a new world of beauty, the creation of
which, at its most intense and sublime level, coincides with the creation
of an entire universe of experience, generated by the constantly renewed
emissive power (visargasakti) of consciousness. None other than the
subtle transcendental movement of Bhairava's awareness in all its
fullness, this 'arousal of vitality' (viryaksobha) is the ecstatic experience
of the outpouring of His powers of freedom and bliss.63 The yogi, fully
centred on the aesthetic object, his thoughts and senses stilled, becomes
one with it and consciousness turns in on itself to realise its eternal,
pulsing (spanda) nature as a divine aesthetic continuum, vibrant
with vitality (virya).64
Wonder is the essence of life. To be incapable of wonder is to be
as dead and insensitive as a stone. We live and enjoy the vitality (virya)
of consciousness to the degree in which we are sensitive to the beauty
of things around us. Each aesthetic experience, had with mindfulness
and a disciplined intention directed towards heightening our general
level of aesthetic sensitivity, brings us a little closer to the sustained
wonder of the pulsation (spanda) of consciousness which permeates
all experience. The yogi at first practices to penetrate into this state
of wonder through the medium of objects more easily pleasing and then,
as he makes progress, he learns to discern that same sense of wonder
in himself even when confronted with the foulest of things or in times
of great trouble and pain.
The whole of life with all its events and our reactions to them is the
unfolding drama of cosmic manifestation staged by the creative genius
(pratibhd) of consciousness. Siva is the seer, the poet (kavi) Who
writes the plot and is, at the same time, the Self who plays all the roles65
on the stage of the mind66 with the senses as the spectators.67 The
three moments during which the plot is introduced, runs its course
and is concluded correspond to the creation, persistence and destruction
of Siva's universal creation.68 The perfected yogi shares in Siva's

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

delight and experiences all things as full of the varied sentiments (rasa)
which they, at once Siva and His wonderful creation, can impart to a
receptive consciousness. The delight the yogi takes in the things about
him transcends the pleasures of the hedonist or even those of the most
refined aesthete. For although all aesthetic experience is a glimpse
into a different, supernal (alaukika) order of reality, the yogi alone
can maintain this awareness constantly. The moment of aesthetic
delight is for him both the result and the essence of an attitude which
can ony be adequately described as religious. Utpaladeva writes:
How wonderful it is that although only one sound, that is, Siva's
name, is always on the tips of their tongues, yet [His] devotees can
taste the ineffable relish of all the objects of the senses!69
For the yogi the pleasing, beautiful objects from which he derives
so much strength and satisfaction are sacred manifestations of consciousness offered to the Lord of consciousness in worship.70 When recognised
to be one with 'Brahman's Abode', whatever brings pleasure to the
mind through the workings of the senses is an aid to worship.71 This
is what the yogi offers in the Sacred Festival (mahotsva) of non-dual
worship (advayapuja), plunged in the inebriating experience of
Cosmic Bliss (jagadananda). Again Utpaladeva exclaims:
Drunk am I by drinking the wine of the Elixir of Immortality
(rasayana) which is Your worship, perpetually flowing through
the channels of the senses from the goblets, full [to overflowing],
of all existing things.72
At the lower, contracted (samkucita) level of consciousness, the
senses are expressions of the limited powers of knowledge and action
(yidya- and kala-sakti) of the fettered soul. At the higher, expanded
(vikasita) level of consciousness, the senses express the pure awareness
(bodha) and freedom (svatantrya) of the absolute. These higher,
empowered senses make the entire universe one with consciousness
the instant they behold it in the purview of their universal activity.73
These higher, divinised senses are the deities of the sensory powers said
to reside in the inner circle located within the circle of the physical senses.
In this way the divine senses are symbolised as being more internal
(i.e., closer to consciousness) than the physical senses. Their function
is of a higher order, serving as the organs of Siva's omniscience and
omnipotence. They are not 'senses' in the normal sense of the word.
Yogaraja illustrates this point by quoting the Saiva Svetasvataropanisad:

Divine Body and Sacred Circle of the Senses

Seeming to possess the quality (guria) of all the
senses, It is devoid of all the senses; . . .
Without foot or hand, He is swift and a seizer!
He sees without eye, He hears without ear!
He knows whatever is to be known; Him there is
none who knows!
Men call Him the Great Primeval Person.74
The outer circle of the physical senses goes through three phases
during the act of perception.
1) The initial outpouring of sensory activity {pravrtti). This
phase corresponds to the initial unfolding of the senses towards their
object when they 'face' it and the subject is intent (unmukha) on its
perception.
2) The initial phase intensified or stabilized (sthiti). At this stage
the senses are actively affected by their object which they now clearly
perceive and which abides at one with their field of awareness
{grhitarthavisrantyavastha).
3) When their operation reaches a fruitful conclusion, the object
is abandoned and sensory activity merges with the undifferentiated
awareness of pure consciousness and so comes to a halt.75
At the higher level of consciousness, when the outer circle of
the physical senses is recognised to be one with the inner circle of
goddesses, these three moments of perception are seen to correspond
to the three moments of creation, persistence and destruction. As
Kemaraja says:
Even when the Supreme Lord resides in the body, He effects
the creation and destruction of the five-fold universe of form [taste,
touch, smell and sound] by the expansion (unmllana) and contraction
(nimilana) of the senses.76
When the wheel of sensory energies contracts, it returns to its
Centre, the Heart of consciousness where it reposes, to then expand
from it. Then the Heart, like a vast lake full to overflowing, again
pours the currents of sensory activity out into the external world.77 Thus:
The channels of the senses by which the yogi enjoys the pleasure
of the objects of sense are those through which he fills the three worlds
with the consciousness emitted from his own Heart.78

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

The senses are outer, subsidiary cycles of conscious energy
(anucakra), revolving around the core or primary cycle (mukhyacakra)
of pure consciousness. They scintillate with the diversity of sensations
and resonate in the field of their awareness like the feathers of a peacock
unfurled and folded back in the ecstasy of its dance. 79 Ultimately
it is Siva Himself Who, for His own pleasure,80 extends and withdraws
them,81 not the individual soul. The outward movement of the senses
is the creative flow of consciousness from the subject who, like an
ocean, is the source of the waves of their activity and the final resting
place of the flow of the rivers of sensations and thought-forms that
unfold through the arising of the power of each of the senses. 82 The
Stanzas on Vibration declare:
Indeed the individual soul does not activate the impulse of the
will [which directs the body's activity] by himself alone but through
his contact with [his] own [inner] strength {bald) made in such a way
that he identifies with it [thus acquiring its power].83
The close contact between the senses and universal consciousness
vitalises them and sets them in motion. They share in the properties
of consciousness, just as a heated iron ball can burn, cook or give out
light.84 Spanda doctrine does not agree with the Sarnkhya view that
the individual soul (purusa) alone stimulates activity in the objective
sphere (prakrti) by the contact he makes with it. The soul can do this
only because universal consciousness animates him.
Moreover,
consciousness, which has the power to impel this activity, cannot
itself be inactive as the Samkhya maintains. The influence it has on
lifeless matter implies an active exertion. 85 This activity is the subtle,
inner outpouring of the Self (svdtmocchalatta) within the Self. Outside
the confines of time and space, in the centre of the circle of the senses,
this inner activity initiates the expansion (prasara) of the flow of
conscious energy. As the pure exertion (udyoga, udyama) of Being
(bhava), it is the source of the initial unfolding (unmesa) of Becoming. 86
Ksemaraja explains:
[By] 'exertion' (udyama) is [meant] the emergence of the supreme
[level of] intuition (pratibha) which is the sudden outpouring of the
[immanent and transcendental] unfolding of the reflective awareness
of pure consciousness.87
The direct, intuition (pratibha) of reality, free of thought-constructs,
is the supreme power (pardsakti) of consciousness. The yogi can gain

Divine Body and Sacred Circle of the Senses

this pure intuitive awareness by grasping the initial expansion (unmesa)
of consciousness which engenders the emergence of thought and the
activity of the senses. It can be discovered in the subtle Centre, between
one thought and the next. The Stanzas on Vibration teach:
The expansion of consciousness that takes place when one is
engaged in a single thought should be known to be the source from
whence another arises. One should experience that for oneself!88
This does not mean that the unfolding expansion of consciousness
{unmesa) is an intermittent, transitory occurrence.89 As the source
of all thought, including the notions of past, present and future,90 it
stands outside the confines of time. Consciousness is in a state of
perpetual expansion. It is an ever developing process, a tiny part of
which we observe as the flow of events around us and the thoughts and
feelings within us. The totality of this process can never be grasped
objectively. Objectivity is a state of fragmentation (bheda) in which
discrete elements are discernible and mutually distinguished as individual,
specifically definable entities. It is the realm within which thought
and language operate. To grasp reality in its completeness, we must
go beyond the partial representations of thought and speech. To
experience the primordial source and basis of all things, we must pierce
through the outer periphery of thought and plunge into the Centre,
to discover the instant in which thought, and with it, the sense of
diversity, initially emerges. Ksemaraja cites a practice from the
Vijnanabhairava through which the yogi can achieve this state of
awareness:
Checking [the movement of] attention (cit) once it has quit its
object, it must not [be allowed] to move to any other; contemplation
(bhavana) then blossoms forth by [experiencing] the state in the
centre between them (tanmadhyabhava).91

Left unattended and undisciplined, awareness spontaneously
shifts from one object of thought to the next. The transition from one
to the other entails a movement through a state of pure indeterminate
(nirvikalpa) awareness divested of all thought-forms and perceptions.
The yogi who succeeds in checking the movement of his attention,
experiences within himself the subsidence of thought into the emptiness
of the Centre which unfolds full of the powerful pulsation of consciousness
within which all objectivity merges and becomes one92 in the transcendental outpouring (lokottarolldsa) of its aesthetic rapture.93

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Turning in on himself, the yogi must exert his power of awareness
to discern the vitality of his own blissful Spanda nature. Just as a distant
object becomes more clearly visible by exerting an effort to perceive it,
in the same way, through practice, the yogi's own Spanda nature becomes
progressively more evident to him,94 The effort the yogi exerts to free
himself of ignorance is essentially one with the force of awareness
that impels the senses and mind. This inner exertion is the basis of
every means to liberation. Ultimately bestowing the bliss of selfrealisation, it carries the yogi along the path to salvation with all its
twists and turns like wind which blows a cloth in various directions.95
As the basis and ultimate goal of all yogic practice, this exertion is the
pure wonder (camatkdra) inspired by the realisation of the essential
identity of consciousness (cit) and being (sat).96 As such it is the divine
radiance (sphurattd) of the Heart of one's own consciousness97 where
the powers of will, knowledge and action merge in the harmony
(sdmarasya) of bliss.98 Thus the highest form of worship (varivasya)
is the contemplation of the inner strength (bald) or universal exertion
of one's own true nature.99
"One should examine [that reality]," says Ksemaraja, "with the
exertion which is Bhairava's nature and is true service (sevana) to
the integral inner nature [of all things] and the unfolding of the activity
of one's own vitality (ojas) which withdraws all duality [back into
consciousness]."100
Mindful of the eternal joy (dhldda) of his inner strength, the yogi
must give up all desire for the fleeting moments of petty pleasure
(kanikasukhalava)m he may glean from outer objects. He must
even give up the desire to achieve enlightenment and a reality (tattva)
which can never be realised through a personal act of will.102 In short,
he must die to himself in an act of profound faith (sraddhd) and adoration
(ddara) to find rest in the supreme reality free from the binding dichotomy
of means and objectives (upeyopdyabhdva)—the reality of his perfected
effort. The yogi, now full of devotion for this reality unfolding within
himself and the universe (antarmukhatattva), merges into it and,
by achieving the pure consciousness and bliss (ciddnanda) of the power
(bald) of his own nature, achieves oneness.103
The yogi is firmly established in his true nature by recognising the
creative unfolding (unmesa) of consciousness through which he is able
to know all things, whether in the present, past or future.104 Master
of the vitality which gives life to his mind and body, he can strengthen
it directly without need of food or drink,105 or quit it at will to vivify

Divine Body and Sacred Circle of the Senses

that of another.106 Experiencing the eternal satisfaction of his own
uncreated nature,107 the yogi is freed of disease and the infirmities of
old age.108 Inspired by this vitality, he has the inner strength to overcome
the severest hardships and obstacles in the way of his ultimate goal.109
The Stanzas on Vibration explain:
Lassitude ravages the body and this arises from ignorance but
if this is eliminated by an expansion of consciousness (unmesa), how
can [ignorance], deprived of its cause, continue to exist?110
Doubt (sarikd) is the source of every spiritual ailment.111 A man
in doubt about his true nature, and the path to follow by which he
may come to realise it, is constantly overcome by difficulties.112 "Due
to ignorance" teaches the Sarvdcdratantra, "the deluded man is in doubt
and thus [suffers the cycle] of birth and death."113 Caught between
conflicting alternatives, the mind shifts from one to the other becoming
more entangled in its own thoughts as it does so. Doubt thus contracts
consciousness114 sullying it with the turbulence of confused thinking.115
At once both the root of "the ancient tree of transmigration" and the
first sprout of its seed,116 doubt deprives man of the innate bliss
(sahajdnanda) of his own nature.117 Like a thief it steals away the
wealth of true knowledge and reduces man to an imagined state of
poverty in which he feels hemmed in on all sides by constraints and
limitations.118 Ignorance and its sister, doubt, are the essence of all
impurities (mala) which sully consciousness. To the degree in which
the yogi is cured of this ailment, namely, the lassitude (gldni) of doubt,
his true nature becomes manifest, just as raw gold when heated is
freed from dross. When the yogi recognises the all-powerful expansion
(unmesa) of his consciousness, he is projected beyond the reaLn of
relative distinctions between virtue and vice. Thus overcoming all
doubt as to what he should or should not do, he penetrates into the
pulsing Heart of Bhairava's consciousness.119 As the Stanzas on
Vibration say:
An individual who [though] desirous of doing various things
[but] is incapable of doing them due to his innate impurity, [experiences]
the Supreme state when the disruption (ksobha) [of his ego] ceases.
Then [the soul realises] that his [true] uncreated nature is [universal]
agency and perceiving subjectivity and so he knows and does whatever
[he] desires.120
The individual soul is a combination of conscious (cit) and

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

unconscious (acit) elements121 brought together when he allows the
power of his authentic nature to be obscured by his own impurity.
This impurity is three-fold. The first is technically called the 'Impurity
of Individuality' (anavamald). Due to this impurity, the individual
soul fails to recognise his all-embracing fullness (purnata) and is
disturbed by his craving for experience (bhoga) based on the unreasoned
assumption that he is incomplete (apurnd) and in need of something
outside himself.122 Thus it manifests as desire or attachment (rdga).123
At the same time it is primordial ignorance, 'the cause of the sprout of
transmigration'.124 As such, it works in two ways. Firstly, it deprives
individual consciousness of freedom. The yogi affected by this impurity
is incapable of entering or emerging out of the states of contemplation
as he wishes. Secondly, this impurity renders the individual unconscious
of his freedom, which for the yogi means that he is liable to lose
consciousness of his true nature when he is not in a state of contemplative
absorption.125
The second impurity is called the 'Impurity of Maya' (mdylyamald).
This comes into operation when consciousness has been contracted by
the Impurity of Individuality. It limits the power of knowledge operating
in the individual soul through the inner and outer organs of perception.126
Due to this impurity he perceives diversity everywhere.127 Finally, the
third impurity, that of Karma, comes into play when the individual,
deprived of the freedom and knowledge of unconditioned consciousness,
acts in his limited way prompted by desires and fears for his personal
gain. Disturbed by these three impurities the soul cannot find rest
in himself. When he manages, however, to overcome their disturbing
influence, he experiences the pure vibration (spandd) of consciousness
and through this recognition realises his essentially omnipotent and
omniscient nature.
In order to do this the yogi must first discover universal consciousness
within himself. Secondly, he must learn to recognise his own Spanda
energy operating in the outer world. In the first stage, the power which
flows through the channels of the senses and mind is withdrawn into
itself (saktisamkocd) through a powerful, one-pointed act of introspection.128 If the yogi is successful, he comes to perceive the totality
of existence reflected in his mind (cittd) and pervaded by the light
of consciousness. Thus he enjoys the inner bliss of contemplative
absorption with his eyes closed (nimilanasamadhi). As Bhairava
instructs the goddess:
Merging the senses in the centre, between the upper and lower
lotuses [of the Heart], in the void of the Heart, with mind unwavering,

Divine Body and Sacred Circle of the Senses

O Fair One, attain the Supreme Bliss.129
The restriction imposed on the exertion (udyama) of the senses
by the confining perception of outer objectivity is thus overcome and
the senses move freely in the 'Sky of the Heart of Consciousness'. 130
Like fuel in a fire, diversity is burnt to ashes and fused with the pure
energy of one's own nature.
All things deposited in the fire of the belly of one's own consciousness, suddenly (hafhatah) abandoning all distinctions, feed it with
their own power. When the diversity which divides things is dissolved
away by this violent digestion (hafhapaka), the deities of consciousness
[i.e., the senses] devour the universe transformed [by this process]
into the nectar [of T]. Once they are satisfied, they rest at one with
the God (deva) Bhairava Who is the fullness of one's own nature and
the Sky of Consciousness which, solitary, rests in the Heart.131
The yogi is now absorbed in the unfolding (unmesa) of consciousness
and becomes one withjts universal vibration. 132 The 'Great Expansion'
(mahdvikdsa) of the ; yogi's consciousness unfolds as he penetrates
and becomes one with the pure Being (satto) of Bhairava133 and thus
enjoys the bliss (bhoga) of simultaneously making all things one with
consciousness, 'savouring' their essence and 'protecting' or securing
their place and function within the economy of the Whole. 134 The yogi
experiences consciousness expansion both inwardly and externally.
When all things are absorbed in the introverted unity of his consciousness,
it emits itself into itself freely without succession or division. In this
way his consciousness also unfolds throughout the external world
mediated by the senses divinised by the grace of his inner realisation
and he perceives its transcendental nature immanentalise into the
activities of the universe. His senses open up fully in an instant as the
power hidden within consciousness expands out from it.135 The state
of absorption 'with the eyes closed' (nimilanasamddhi)
thus leads
spontaneously to a state of absorption 'with the eyes open' (unmllanasamddhi) and vice versa. The yogi, with the greatest respect and
devotion for the reality now unfolding before him, must learn to unite
these t v o forms of absorption and experience the underlying unity of
his consciousness which pervades both simultaneously from the Centre
between them. Kemaraja explains:
By [the practice] of introverted and extroverted absorption and
by being firmly fixed in the Centre which pervades both simultaneously,

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

having laid hold of the fire-stick (arani) of their two-fold emanation
(visarga) with all thought fallen away, the circle of the senses expands
instantaneously.136
The activity of the senses is now unconditioned by time and space;
free of all obstacles, they function perfectly. They unfold to fill the
entire universe with the power of their awareness and thereby withdraw
into their pure and undivided source—the omnipresent Lord they
perceive in all things. This state of simultaneous expansion (yikasa) and
contraction (sarfikoca) beyond both outward and inner movement
is technical y called Bhairavlmudra. The experience of this attitude
(mudra) o f awareness takes place thus:
[If] you project the vision and all the other powers [of the senses]
simultaneously everywhere onto their respective objects by the power
of awareness, while remaining firmly established in the centre like a
pillar of gold, you [will] shine as the One, the foundation of the
universe.137
The One is the Lord of the Centre Who manifests all the deities
of the inner circle as the essence of His pure awareness (svasaijivittisara)
together with the outer circle of the physical senses. 138 The power of
awareness thus manifests itself on two levels simultaneously. It functions
at the microcosmic level as the power of sensory awareness which
apprehends specific objects in the field of individualised, embodied
awareness. At the macrocosmic level it functions as the divine power
of sensory awareness which apprehends the universal, cosmic object
in the field of universal consciousness.
Through the practice of
Bhairavlmudra these two aspects are experienced together in the
blissful realisation that results from the union of the inner and outer
states of absorption. 139 Thus, nothing that appears before him is any
longer confined within the ridged structures of thought and, supportless,
he becomes inwardly absorbed in Siva's consciousness. 140 Kemaraja
quotes an unknown Tantra as saying:
With one's aim inside while gazing outside, eyes neither opening
nor closing—this is Bhairava's Mudra kept secret in all the Tantras.141
During the initial instant of perception, T consciousness is
manifestly apparent and the yogi, participating in its plenitude,
observes the outer world without being attached to any particular

Divine Body and Sacred Circle of the Senses

or singling it out from any other, like a man who observes a city from a
high mountain peak. 142 He sees the outer world reflected within his
consciousness free of thought-constructs and so 'stamps the outer on
the inner while absorbing the object and means of knowledge in the
pure subject which grasps them as the expansion of his own nature.143
Kemaraja says:
By penetrating into Bhairavimudra, the yogi observes the vast
totality of beings rising from, and dissolving into, the Sky [of consciousness], like a series of reflections appearing and disappearing inside
a mirror.144
Through the practice of Bhairavimudra the yogi realises that he
is the substratum consciousness (adhisfhatf)145 which both underlies
and is the essence of all things. He discovers that phenomena have no
independent existence apart from him and so are, in this sense, void.
At the same time, he realises that because all things are consciousness,
they are far from unreal. He views the outer world yet sees it not.
Beyond both Voidness and Non-voidness he penetrates into the Supreme
Abode (pararn padam) of Siva's consciousness. 146
[The powers of the senses] endowed with the attributes of the
Great Union [between subject and object] whose form is the awakening
of man's spiritual potential (kunqtalinf), fill [with consciousness] the
outer clatter of diversity (bhedacjambara) born of its intense power
and are then established in the unobscured abode of the void of
consciousness to shine [there] eternally. Thus residing beyond Being
and Non-being, the sole protector of the unity which is tranquil and
expanding [consciousness], whose glory is all-embracing and form
unobscured, is called Bhairavimudra.141
Through the practice of Bhairavimudra,
the yogi unites the
universal vibration of T consciousness with the individual pulsation
of objectivised 'this' consciousness. The two aspects of consciousness
are now in a state of equilibrium like the two pans of an evenly weighed
balance148 and the yogi experiences the pure knowledge (suddhavidya)
that: 'I alone am all things'. Thus becoming the master of the Wheel of
Energies he is free, like Siva, to create and destroy. 149
When [the yogi] is well established, without wavering, solely
in the integral egoity of his authentic nature, the Spanda principle,
and is absorbed in contemplation (samavitfa), he becomes one with it

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

(tanmaya). Then . . . dissolving and creating the universe by means of
his introverted and extroverted absorption, he destroys and creates
all things out of Sankara, his innate nature. [Thus] he assumes the
state of the universal experiencer and having absorbed all that is to
be experienced from [the grossest level]—Earth—to (the subtlest)—
Siva—he reaches the state of the supreme subject by progressively
recognising [his identity with Him].150
Thus, introverted and extroverted absorption both lead to the
recognition of the pulsation (spanda) of one's own consciousness. 151
At the level of consciousness corresponding to Siva's basic state
(sdrjibhavdvasthd), the alternation from inner to outer is instantaneously
resolved into the vibration of His nature. When the yogi finally comes
to be constantly aware of this reality, his enlightenment is full and
perfect.152 Freed of all means (anupdya) and delighting in the power
of his bliss (dnandasakti), he knows and does whatever he pleases.
The yogi seeking self-realisation must acquire mastery over this
movement. Ksemaraja stresses that the Doctrine of Vibration teaches
that liberation can only be achieved by first withdrawing all sense activity
in introverted contemplation (nimllanasamddhi)
to then experience
the 'Great Expansion' (mahdvikdsd) of consciousness while recognising
this to be a spontaneous process within it.153 This is done through the
practice of Kramamudrd.
A passage from the now lost Kramasutra
explains:
Although the adept's attention [may be] outwardly directed,
he enjoys contemplative absorption through the introverted aspect of
Kramamudrd. Initially he turns inward from the outside world and
[then] from within [himself] he exits into the outer world under the
influence of his absorption. Thus the sequence (krama) in this attitude
(mudrd) [ranges through] both inner and outer.154
The yogi must pervade the surface level of awareness (yyutthdna)
with the same bliss he experiences plunging into the depths of contemplative absorption (samddhi).
Submerging himself and emerging
repeatedly from samddhi, he eventually recognises that the unity of
consciousness pervades both states:
The best of yogi's, who has achieved a state of complete absorption
even when risen from meditation, [inwardly] vibrating like a drunkard
in blissful inebriation from the after-effects of the nectar of contemplation, sees all things dissolving in the Sky of Consciousness
like a cloud in the autumn sky. He plunges repeatedly within himself

Divine Body and Sacred Circle of the Senses

and becomes aware of his identity with consciousness by the practice
of introverted contemplation. Thus even when he is said to have
risen from absorption, he is one with [his] experience of it.155
Ksemaraja goes on to explain that this practice is called Mudra'
because it both fills the adept with bliss (mud) and is itself the bliss of
consciousness. Moreover, it dissolves away (dra) all bondage and
'stamps' the universe of experience with the seal (mudra) of the fourth
state (turiya) of enlightened consciousness beyond, and including,
the three states of waking, dreaming and deep sleep. It is called 'Krama'
because it is the root source of all emanation and all other conscious
processes which succeed one another in ordered sequence (krama)
and is, at the same time, their successive (krama) appearance as well.156
By the practice of Kramamudra the opposites fuse and Siva and
Sakti unite. They yogi comes to experience the simultaneous pervasion
of all the lower, grosser categories of existence by the higher and the
presence of the lower in the higher. Commencing his practice in a low
form of Bhairavimudra, the yogi conjoins the outer with the inner;
then, in Kramamudra, he fills both the outer with the inner and the
inner with the outer. When he achieves perfection in this two-fold
movement, he attains to the highest form of Bhairavimudra in which
the two merge completely in the experience of the absolute (anuttara),
free of all differentiation and polarities. If he fails to maintain awareness
of this state, he again falls into Kramamudra until he has finally
completely merged all the highest states in the lower and the lower in
the higher. He then no longer needs to resort to any means (anupaya)
to achieve liberation. All he says or does, anything he perceives or
thinks, instantly occasions in him the highest level of consciousness.
Thus the fruit of Bhairavimudra is the wonder (camatkara) or amazement
(vismaya) that overcomes the yogi when he reaches the plane of union
(yogabhumika),151 where all opposites merge in the radiance of the
Great Light of consciousness. The Stanzas on Vibration teach:
How can one who, as if astonished, beholds his own nature as
that which sustains [the existence of everything] be subject to this
painful round of transmigration (kusrti)!15
The yogi, recognising his true nature to be the supreme subject,
is astonished to suddenly discover that the individual he thought
he was, caught up in the trammels of thought and living in a world
enmeshed in the web of time and space, does not really exist at all.159
He experiences a 'turning about' (paravrtti) in the deepest seat of

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

consciousness as he penetrates his true nature. The sudden eruption
of this intuition (pratibha) arouses in him a cry of amazement as he
transcends all thought-constructs and, perfectly absorbed in his own
nature, is liberated.

VII

The Path to Liberation
Essentially, Spanda doctrine is concerned with two matters. The first
is to impart to those who are fit to receive the teachings a deeper
understanding of the ultimate goal of life (upeya). When we have
understood what truly benefits us and is worth attaining and what, on the
contrary, is of no real value but stands in the way of this attainment, we can
begin to make progress towards our goal. This is Spanda doctrine's second
concern, namely, to show the way in which we can develop spiritually
through iva9s grace and the right application of the means to realisation
that it teaches. When both these aspects of the teaching have been
correctly understood and applied, the Spanda yogi achieves a clear and
permanent realisation of his goal and is liberated, thus fulfilling the
ultimate aim of the teaching. The Doctrine of Vibration is not meant for
the spiritually dull. It is not for the worldly whose consciousness, clouded
by ignorance, is as if dreaming, even during the waking state of daily life,
the dream of its own thought-constructs.1 The teachings are meant for
those who are awake (prabuddha), those who, full of faith and reverence,
are always alert and intent on discerning the true nature of ultimate reality.
This reality is understood in three basic ways. The first is purely
transcendental. The Stanzas choose this aspect as the one which formally
defines it most specifically. Ultimate reality transcends all the opposites,
including subject and object. This does not mean, however, that it is an
unconscious void,2 a mere absence of all existence. In fact, this negative
characterisation of reality (which includes also a denial of all that is
unconscious) implies a positive immanence in which the opposites are

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

united in the oneness of pure consciousness that is equally Siva and
Spanda, His universal activity. These two seemingly contrasting aspects
are reconciled in the third, namely, reality understood as the essential
nature of all things. Although universal and everywhere the same, it is
understood to be the essential and specific nature of each existent as its
'own nature' (svabhava). In the case of the individual soul it is even more
specific, more personal as his own 'own nature' (svasvabhava). Belonging
to none other than oneself it is the pure subjectivity who perceives,
experiences, enjoys, reflects, thinks and senses as well as being the
conscious agent who creates every possible form of experience in all the
states of consciousness.3 The liberating knowledge of reality thus
corresponds to our regaining possession of ourselves (svatmagraha). We
must lay hold of ourselves and abide in our authentic nature. Reality
coincides with our own most fundamental state of being (svasthiti), free of
all contrasts and contradictions. Once we have overcome the negative
forces that arise from our ignorance and prevent us from abiding in
ourselves, we are liberated. To do this, we must penetrate through the
pulsing fluctuations of objectively experienced states and perceptions at
the surface level of consciousness and gain insight into the timeless rhythm
of our own nature manifest in the universal arising and falling away of ail
things. We are not freed of the trammels of perpetual change by setting it
aside; on the contrary, we must gain insight into the recurrent cycles of
creation, persistence and destruction, or else be bound by our ignorance.4
This spiritual ignorance consists essentially of our contracted state of
consciousness and so can only be effectively countered by expanding it5 to
reveal our own authentic nature as this expanded state itself, which is the
universal vibration (samanyaspandd) of consciousness. The Spanda-yogi
treads the Path of Consciousness Expansion. The movement from the
contracted to the expanded state marks the transition from ignorance to
understanding, from the dispersion and incompleteness of a form of
consciousness entirely centred on an objectively perceived and discursively
represented reality to a direct, intuitive awareness of the unity and integral
wholeness of our own absolute Spanda nature. Along the way to this
supreme realisation consciousness develops, as veil after veil is lifted, until
it becomes full and perfect in the absolute which encompasses within itself
all possible formats of experience. As Abhinava says:
[This realisation] is the supreme limit of plenitude and as such there
can be no higher attainment. Any [other] attainment [we can] conceive
issues from a state that falls short of [this] perfection. Once [this]
uncreated fullness has been attained, pray tell, what other fruit can there
be [beyond it]?6

Path to Liberation

The fettered soul's contracted state of consciousness binds him
because he is deprived thereby of the subtle, intuitive insight into the
underlying unity of existence and his attention is focused instead on its
gross, outer diversity easily apparent to everybody, however restricted his
consciousness may be.7 However, although the fettered soul in this
state is ignorant of this unity, this does not mean that his knowledge of
diversity is false. Ignorance entails a form of knowledge which, although
quite correct, is binding.8 We are not absolutely ignorant of reality for if
we were we would be totally unconscious. Spiritual ignorance is always
linked with some degree of consciousness. Those subject to the round of
birth and death are not inert clods of earth.9 Thus, although ignorance
obscures consciousness, it is wrong to think of it, as dualist Saivites do, in
terms of a defiling impurity that shrouds it like a cloth covering a jar.10
Spiritual ignorance can be nothing but consciousness itself, albeit in a
limited state. Siva, Who is universal consciousness, is the innate nature of
both its contracted and expanded states,11 both of which are forms of
knowledge, namely:
1) Supreme Knowledge (parajnana) defined as the revelation of one's
own innate nature as the one reality which is the Being of all things.12
2) Inferior Knowledge (aparajndna) which Jayaratha explains results
from the mental activity (yyapard) of the individual subject whose
consciousness is contracted. It consists of the mental representations
(yikalpa) he forms of himself and his object, of the type i know this'.13 The
lower knowledge obscures the higher and binds the soul by breaking up his
direct, pervasive awareness of his own pure consciousness nature, free of
mental representation.14 The Stanzas on Vibration teach:
Operating in the field of the subtle elements, the arising of mental
representation marks the disappearance of the flavour of the supreme
nectar of immortality; due to this [man] forfeits his freedom.15
As we have already seen,16 three factors are necessary for perception
and thought to be possible, namely, the perceiving subject, the means of
knowledge and the object perceived. Rajanaka Rama, in his commentary
on the Stanza cited above, explains at length that these three factors
correspond to three major divisions in the lower thirty-one categories of
existence, namely:
1) The object. This consists essentially of the five primary
sensations which are the subtle elements (tanmatra) of srnell, taste, sight,
touch and sound along with the five gross elements—earth, water, fire,
air and ether—of which these sensations are the perceivable qualities.

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

2) The means of knowledge. This consists of the senses and the
inner mental organ.
3) The subject. At this level, the subject is the individual soul
(purusa) whose consciousness is contracted by the five obscuring
coverings (kancukas) of limited knowledge and action, attachment,
natural law and time along with Maya, their source.
All these categories belong to the Impure Creation (asuddhasrsfi),
which is the sphere of Maya where the lower order of knowledge operates
and subject and object are divided. Above them are five more categories
which belong to the Pure Creation (suddhasrsfi) where subject and object
are still united. The highest of those categories are Siva and Sakti.
Combined they represent the state of pure T consciousness and its sentient
subjectivity (upalabdhrtd), respectively. The next category is called
Sadasiva. Here faint traces of objectivity appear in the pervasive,
undivided consciousness of Siva and Sakti. Consciousness, now full of the
power of knowledge (jndnasakti), views the All in a state of withdrawal
(nimesa), shining within, and at one with its o^n nature. Tconsciousness
predominates over 'this' consciousness which it encompasses in the
awareness that: 'I am this [universe]' (aham-idam). Next comes the
category 'Isvara' corresponding to the awareness: 'this (universe) is me'
(idam-aham).
'This' consciousness takes the upperhand over T
consciousness and unfolds externally full of the creative power of action
(kriya&akti). The All now becomes more clearly manifest as an
independent reality. It is still experienced as one with consciousness but is
no longer fully merged within it. Finally, when both subjective and
objective aspects share an equal status in the two-fold awareness that: 'I
am this (universe) and this (universe) is me (ahamidam-idamaham)\ Pure
Knowledge (Suddhavidya), the last of these categories, emerges.
The pure categories are the experience of the impure categories when
they are recognised to be one with consciousness. They are experienced
within the domain of the pure universal subject the enlightened yogi
realises himself to be. Mental representations (vikalpa) emerge from this
pure awareness and subside into it in consonance with the rhythm of the
emanation and withdrawal of the lower categories. Impelled by the
universal will, this movement is spontaneous and free. Free of all hopes
and fears the enlightened yogi sees all things as part of this eternal cosmic
game, played in harmony with the blissful rhythm of his own sportive
nature at one with all things. The Stanzas on Vibration teach:
Everything arises [out of] the individual soul and he is all things.
Being aware of them, he perceives his identity [with them]. Therefore

Path to Liberation

there is no state in the thoughts of words or [their] meanings that is not
Siva. It is the enjoyer alone who always and everywhere abides as the
object of enjoyment. Or, constantly attentive, and perceiving the entire
universe as play, he who has this awareness (santvitti) is undoubtedly
liberated in this very life.17
According to the Doctrine of Vibration, only liberation in this life
(jivanmukti) is authentic liberation.18 Liberation after death {yidehamukti) in some form of disembodied state free of all perceptions and
notions of the world of diversity is not the ultimate goal. Kemaraja
stresses that liberation is only possible by realising one's own identity with
the whole universe, however difficult this may be.19 Similarly, he
maintains that the suspension of all mental and sensory activity, which
takes place in the introverted absorption of contemplation with the eyes
closed (nimllanasamadhi) that leads to identification with transcendent
consciousness is complemented and fulfilled by the cosmic vision had
through the expansion of consciousness that takes place in contemplative
absorption with the eyes open (unmilanasamddhi).20 Consequently,
Kemaraja explains that the first of the three sections, into which he
divides the Stanzas, deais with the former mode of contemplation and the
second section with the latter. Significantly, the last Stanza of the second
section ends with the declaration that 'this is the initiation that bestows
Siva's true nature'.21 In other words, this realisation, attained through the
expanding consciousness of contemplation with the eyes open, initiates the
yogi into the liberated state, which is identification with Siva whose body
is the universe.22
In order to attain this expanded state of liberated consciousness, the
yogi must find a spiritual guide because the Master (guru) is the means to
realisation.23 The Master is for his disciple Siva Himself for it is he who
through his initiation, teaching and grace, reveals the secret power of
spiritual discipline.24 Instructing in the purport of scripture he does more
than simply explain its meaning: he transmits the realisation it can bestow.
The Master is at one with Siva's divine power through which he enlightens
his disciple. It is this power that matters and makes the Master a true
spiritual guide,25 just as it was this same power that led the disciple to him
in his quest for the path that leads to the tranquility that can only be found
'in the abode beyond mind'.26 The Master is the ferry that transports the
disciple over the ocean of thought27—if, that is, the disciple is ready. The
disciple must be 'awake' (prabuddha)2 attending carefully to the pulse of
consciousness. This alert state of wakefulness is at once the keen sensitivity
of insight as well as the receptivity of one who has no other goal to pursue
except enlightenment.

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

The highest, most perfect relationship the disciple can have with his
Master is such as it is with Siva Himself: one of identity. The exchange
that takes place between them is an internal dialogue within universal
consciousness, their common identity (svabhava).
Limiting itself to a
point source (anu) and obscured by the thought-constructs born of doubt
and ignorance, consciousness assumes the guise of the disciple who seeks
to attain the expanded fullness of his Master's consciousness. 29 The
Master, on the other hand, embodies the aspect of consciousness which
responds to the inquiring consciousness of his disciple. 30 Free of the
notions of 'self and 'other', when the disciple is liberated by his grace, it is
the Master who in reality liberates himself.31
Although Ksemaraja assures us that the Master can by himself
enlighten his disciple by the initiation he imparts to him 32 and the other
means (yukti)33 he adopts, even so, he is not the only guide on the path.
Apart from the Master there is scripture and, above all, one's own personal
experience, 34 because, as Abhinava says:
The knowledge [acquired] by gradually [coming to understand the
meaning of] the scriptures and following the Master [who knows them]
leads, [when] confirmed for oneself, to the realisation of one's own
identity with Bhairava.35
It is important to know the scriptures. God reveals Himself through
them; they are one of the forms in which He is directly apparent in this
world. 36 They teach man what is worth attaining and what should be
avoided 37 and so like a boat convey him across the ocean of profane
existence (samsdra) to the other shore where God's true nature is revealed
to him. 38 However, the study of the scriptures is of value only if
accompanied by the spiritual knowledge that results from personal
experience. Mahesvarananda writes:
Being well versed in the nature of Deity is one thing, but being well
versed in the sacred scripture is another, just as the peace of that Abode
is one thing and what worldly people experience is another.39
Vasugupta, who found the Sivasutra, knew the means to realisation
(yukti) as well as the scriptures and had fully experienced the one ultimate
reality. Therefore, Ksemaraja declares him to be amongst the best of
teachers.40 The Stanzas on Vibration (that Ksemaraja attributes to
Vasugupta) accordingly transmit the secrets of the Sivasutra in accord
with scripture, sound reasoning and personal experience.41 The latter is

Path to Liberation

particularly important for the Spanda yogi; he is not interested in wasting
his time in useless discussion about the experience of consciousness
expansion and its fruits, for that can only be known for oneself.42 The yogi
can achieve this experience either through faith in the Master or personal
insight (svapratyayatah) acquired by unswerving devotion to God.
Ksemaraja accordingly quotes a passage from the Bhagavadgita where
Krsna says:
Those I deem to be the best yogis who fix their thoughts on Me and
serve Me, ever integrated [in themselves], filled with the highest faith.43
But while the yogi's development depends on faith and personal
experience of the higher states of consciousness, he can, and must,
strengthen his conviction in the light of reason. When reason {upapatti)
and direct insight (upalabdhi) work together, they serve as a means to
liberation. Reason alone cannot help us, but when it is based on an
intuitive insight of fundamental principles along with a direct experience
of reality, error is eradicated and the yogi is freed.44 In this way the
Awakened yogi realizes his inherent spiritual power (svabala) with which
he exerts himself to distinguish between the motions of individualised
consciousness and the universal vibration (samanyaspandd) of the
collective consciousness that is their ultimate ground and firm
foundation.45 Thus, although the doctrine taught in the Stanzas on
Vibration accords with scripture,46 it is supported by reason and above all
by personal experience. Thus, for example, the seventeenth Stanza
describes the difference in the manner in which the Well Awakened and the
unawakened experience their own nature (dtmopalambha),47 while the
eighteenth describes the experience of the Well Awakened in the three
states of waking, dreaming and deep sleep.48 Indeed, Rajanaka Rama, one
of the commentators, explains that the first sixteen Stanzas establish on
the basis of personal experience (svanubhava) that one's own true nature is
independent of the body.49 Similarly, the remaining Stanzas also discuss
the direct experience of one's own nature, but this time as the unity of all
things. This direct experience, in its diverse aspects, is both the means by
which the yogi develops his consciousness as well as his ultimate goal.
Spanda practice is based solely on the processes inherent in the act of
awareness and hence on the self-evident (svatahsiddha) fact of being
conscious. Even so, this does not mean that sound argument is useless.
Right reasoning clears the understanding of false notions; it uproots, as it
were, the tree of duality.50 Leading the pilgrim on the path of truth along
the right road of the highest doctrine, it protects him from falling to lower
views. As such, it is the best limb of Yoga and, indeed, the only truly

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

effective one.51 Right reasoning is based on, and ultimately blossoms fully
into, the Pure Knowledge (suddhavidyd) that: I am this universe and this
universe is me'.52 Jn this way argument not only sustains doctrine but also
leads to the firm conviction that results in, and essentially is, the
recognition of one's own authentic identity as Siva.
All those who have commented on the Stanzas on Vibration^
particularly Ksemaraja, are concerned to establish on a sound logical basis
that the intuitive awareness of one's own inherent existence is valid. The
Doctrine of Vibration seeks to show the Awakened yogi the way in which
he can make the experience of his own pure subjectivity, the pulse of
consciousness, permanent. It therefore concerns the experiencing subject
most intimately. This is true of the philosophy of Recognition of the
Pratyabhijna school as well. However, the liberating recognition of one's
own authentic identity that it teaches allows for no intermediary between it
and the lower states of consciousness. The yogi must grasp reality directly
in an instant. This is only possible through a firm conviction of the Selfs
supreme identity, and argument in the philosophy of Recognition serves a
key role to instil this conviction in him. The Doctrine of Vibration, on the
other hand, chalks out a path to this recognition through the experience of
Spanda based on practice (abhydsa),53 and so argument plays a secondary
role. Thus, although Ksemaraja insists that an understanding of the
philosophy of Recognition is essential for the Spanda yogi, he excuses
himself with the 'tender hearted' who prefer the intimacy of a personal
experience of Siva and His Spanda nature, rather than the intricacies of
philosophy. Accordingly, when his discussion begins to seem too long and
complex he refers his reader to the Pratyabhijna to find there the
arguments which establish the permanent existence of the Self.54 His need
to philosophise and refute possible objections is not however entirely his
own. As he himself points out, the author of the Stanzas on Vibration
similarly takes time, at least in one place, to do the same even though
philosophy is clearly not his main concern.55 Let us return now then to that
which does concern Spanda doctrine directly, namely, practice.

The Means to Realisation
As a sequel to this book we will publish a translation of the Stanzas on
Vibration along with a number of hitherto untranslated commentaries. In
that work we will present an analysis of the practices and doctrines taught
in the Stanzas to show how commentators have interpreted and extended
them further by their own contributions drawn from various sources.
Therefore, in order to avoid unnecessary repetition, we conclude this

Path to Liberation

volume with a brief exposition of the basic principles underlying Spanda
practice framed in the wider context of Kashmiri Saivism as a whole. We
are aided in this task by Abhinavagupta's brilliant synthesis of Saiva
Tantra into Trika doctrine presented by him in the Light of the Tantras
(Tantrdloka). There, he divides all practice into four basic categories
which he calls the 'Four-fold Knowledge' (jndnacatuska).56 These four
categories are exemplified by the many means to realisation presented in
the course of his systematic exposition of the Saiva ritual, cosmography,
theology, metaphysics and Yoga that he incorporates into Trika.
Abhinavagupta himself realised the highest levels of consciousness
through this 'Four-fold Knowledge' taught him by his Trika teacher,
Sambhunatha.57 This great yogi taught Abhinavagupta much about the
rituals and practices of the Saiva Tantras known in Kashmir, particularly
the Mdlinivijayottaratantra upon which the Light of the Tantras is
avowedly based. Even so, Sambhunatha was not himself a native of
Kashmir but, coming from outside, probably brought with him new
interpretations of the Tantras which contributed to the further
development of the Tantric schools of Kashmiri Saivism.58 Thus,
although three of the four categories of practice are defined in the
Mdlinivijaya, there is no evidence to suggest that they were known, or in
any way extensively applied as categories of interpretation, by anyone
before Abhinavagupta. They do, nonetheless, characterise remarkably
well the forms of practice outlined in Kashmiri Saiva works that precede
him.59 This is particularly true of the Sivasutra and, consequently, of the
Stanzas on Vibration which is closely related to it.60 Significantly, only
Kemaraja finds these categories of practice exemplified in these works.
As he was a direct disciple of Abhinava, this should not surprise us. Again,
that other writers do not do so indicates nothing more than the fact that
they lived before Abhinava and so had no knowledge of them. It does not
mean that they are not applicable to Spanda practice. Indeed, Kemaraja
makes an important contribution to a deeper understanding of it by
locating it in this wider context. Significantly, he calls the three sections of
the Sivasutra 'Expansions of Consciousness' (unmesa). Although this is
one of many possible ways of naming sections or chapters of a Sanskrit
work,61 clearly what Kemaraja is implying is that each section of the
Sivasutra deals with one of the three basic formats of practice that leads to
consciousness expansion.62 Thus although the Spanda texts themselves do
not attempt to present a universal typology of spiritual discipline, Spanda
practice can be, and has been, characterised in terms of these basic types
which we shall now outline.
Abhinavagupta calls each category of practice a 'means to realisation'
(updya). This does not imply that there is just one means to realisation

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

belonging to each category, but rather that all forms of spiritual discipline
are based on one or other of these principles. Once we have understood
clearly what these principles are, we can identify the categories to which
any given practice belongs. Kashmiri Saivism does not reject any form of
spiritual discipline which genuinely elevates consciousness. It is, in a sense,
a science of spirituality which allows for the possibility that any discipline
may be effective, although some may be more so than others. While no
limit is set on the number of possible means to realisation the yogi may
adopt, he should dedicate himself to the means most proximate to the
reality he seeks to know.63 Accordingly, the Master first instructs in the
highest means and then tries lower ones if he fails to liberate his disciple.
Thus the first section of the Sivasutra, according to Ksemaraja, deals with
the Divine Means {sambhavopaya), which is the highest of the three.64
The second section is concerned with the Empowered Means (saktopaya)
and the last with the Individual Means (anavopaya), which is the lowest.
Again, although the Malinlvijayatantra defines the lowest means first,
when Abhinava quotes from it, he starts from the highest. He also explains
them individually in this order in separate chapters of his Light of the
Tantras. Developing in different ways from differing initial states, the
three types of practice lead to corresponding forms of mystical absorption
(samavesa) that, although fundamentally identical, are distinguished on
this basis and defined accordingly as follows:
The Divine (sambhava) form of mystical absorption is said to be
that which is born of an intense awakening of consciousness [brought
about by the Master in the disciple]65 free of all thought-constructs.
'Empowered' (sdkta) is the name given here to the mystical
absorption attained by pondering mindfully (cetasa) on reality [directly],
unmediated [by other means, be it] the recitation of Mantra (uccara) [or
anything else].
The absorption attained by the recitation of Mantra, postures of ihe
body (karana), meditation, the mystical letters (varna)and the formation
of supports (sthanaprakalpana) is rightly called individual' (ariava).bf>

Basically, these definitions characterise the three categories of
practice in the following manner:
The Divine Means (Sambhavopaya). This means functions within the
undivided realm of Siva's pure consciousness which, free of all thoughtconstructs, is the universal subject Who contains within Himself all
objectivity. Practising this means the yogi is carried to the supreme level
of consciousness by a powerful and direct awareness of reality awakened

Path to Liberation

in him by Siva's grace through which he attains identity with Siva without
resorting to any form of meditation.67
The Empowered Means (saktopaya). The practices belonging to this
means are all internal. They function within the mental sphere (cetas) by
reconverting thought (yikalpd) back into the pure consciousness which is
its source and essence. Practice here is centred on the flux of perception
(pramand) through which the cyclic activity of the powers of the senses and
mind merge with the cycle of universal consciousness (samvkcakrd).
The Individual Means (anavopaya). This means operates in the ind i vid ual
soul's (anu) sphere of consciousness. Any spiritual discipline which
involves the recitation of Mantras, posturing of the body, meditation on a
particular divine or cosmic form and concentration on a fixed point, either
within the body or outside it, belongs to this category. This Means, like
the Empowered Means, is concerned with the purification of thought
(vikalpasamskara), which in this case is achieved through the
contemplative absorption that results from a meditative awareness
sustained by objective supports. These, ranging from subtle to gross, may
be centred in the intellect, vital breath and body or external physical
objects. Included, therefore, in this means are all forms of outer ritual.
It is in the sphere of Siva's power that a distinction arises between
Him as the goal and the means to attain to Him (upeyopdyabhava). It is
here also that Siva freely chooses to create the many means to realisation68
as aspects of His power which reveal the freedom of His universal
consciousness. Thus, corresponding to the four basic categories of
practice, there are four basic aspects of Siva's power. Ranging from the
highest to lowest, these are the powers of bliss, will, knowledge and action.
Again, these means operate on the three levels of Siva's universal
manifestation while the fourth means—Anupdya—is transcendental.
These levels are the Supreme (para), Middling (pardpard) and Inferior
(apara), which correspond to the perception of unity (abhedd), unity-indiversity (bheddbhedd) and multiplicity (bheda).69 According to Trika
doctrine these levels correspond to those of Siva, Sakti and the individual
soul (nara) respectively.
We can also distinguish between types of practice according to the
manner in which they develop. Thus, some reach their goal instantly
without any intervening stages (akrama) through an intense act of will.
Other practices develop in parallel with the cognitive processes operating
within consciousness which are, as we have seen, explicable only in terms

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

of a succession of simultaneously experienced metaphysical events. Based
on a direct intuition of reality which, although immediate, matures
progressively as the factors which obscure it are removed, these practices
are both direct as well as successive (kramdkrama). Finally, there are those
practices that develop progressively as consciousness unfolds in successive
stages (krama). The three categories of practice can be distinguished in this
way because they are each related to different phases in the cognitive cycle.
Each act of perception starts with a direct intuition of objectivity in its
most generic form through the initial awareness the subject has of himself.
He then defines his specific object by dividing it off from all others to
analyse it part by part through a series of mental representations of a
discursive order confined to the object previously determined70 by the
subject's direct intuitive awareness. This intuition, independent of thought
and objectivity71 and hence free of all gradations (tdratamya), is the form
of awareness the yogi who practices the Divine Means (sdmbhavopdya)
exercises. It is the consciousness of the subject free of all thoughtconstructs (avikalpa), comparable to the initial certainty we have that two
and two equals four without need of further analysis. Practising the
Empowered Means (saktopaya) the yogi links together the discrete parts
with the whole, that is, himself as the subject with his object, through the
flux of the means of knowledge (pramdna) which flows between them. It
is like adding two and two together. The Individual Means (dnavopdya)
deals with the diversity and relative distinctions between particulars. It is
like counting one to four to arrive at the answer we intuited originally.
Thus although the means are diverse and correspond to different levels of
consciousness, this does not affect their ultimate goal.72 By practising any
one of these means we can achieve both liberation and all the yogic powers
(siddhi) which issue from the perfection of practice.73 Every means is, from
this point of view, the supreme means. Abhinava explains:
Although the causes may be various, the result, that is, the
destruction, disappearance and removal of impurity (mala) and the
power which determines it, is nevertheless one, just as a jar can be
destroyed [in various ways].74
Although the principal categories of practice are three (not counting
anupdya), these are again divisible into innumerable secondary varieties to
suit the level of consciousness and capacity of each aspirant. If the yogi
fails to achieve absorption by practising one means, he must appeal to
others. Thus, for example, while practising the Empowered Means
(saktopaya) he may sometimes need to resort to practices belonging to the
Individual Means (driavopdya). Thus, the three means become six if we

Path to Liberation

add those mediated by others. This number is again multiplied by two
according to whether they reach completion or not and again by two
according to whether practice is blocked by extrinsic factors or progresses
smoothly. The number of means thus becomes twenty-four. As the
possible impediments to progress are countless, the means to overcome
them are equally so; in actual fact there is no end to the number of means
that may need to be applied by different people in various circumstances.75
The means we adopt is not, however, a matter of personal choice. Reality
reveals itself to the degree in which ignorance is removed and this, in a
sense, takes place independently of our efforts. Siva manifests His true
nature as He chooses, whether in all its fullness at once, or successively,
part by part.76 The yogi, in order to make progress, must be empowered by
the grace of Siva's enlightened consciousness. When permeated by the
power of Siva's grace (Saktipata), the powers of will, knowledge and action
operating through the means to realisation are directed to a complete and
unwavering insight into the true nature of reality. Then the yogi discovers
that the pure knowledge (pramitibhava) of universal consciousness
inwardly manifests as every act of will and each perception, and outwardly
as action. This realisation is consciousness free of all means (anupayasaifivitti). Although there is nothing more for the yogi to do at this level,
the flow of awareness in this state is a sort of means—a 'No-means
means'—a 'Pathless Path', to which we now turn our attention.
For a tabular arrangement of this material, see table 1.

No-Means (Anupaya)
It is possible to penetrate into supreme consciousness directly without
the mediation of any means.77 In fact, all means ultimately lead to the
practice of 'No-means' for it is the direct experience reality has of itself as
the uninterrupted awareness (aviratdnuttarajnapti)7 the yogi acquires
when he penetrates into his true nature. 'No practice' is the only practice
which conforms fully to reality.79 Consciousness is ever revealed; it cannot
be sullied by anything outside it. Nothing can be added or subtracted from
its fullness. Those who are ignorant of this fact fall to the lower levels of
consciousness and so have to practice.80 When the uninterrupted
consciousness and bliss, the subtle inner nature of all things, are
submerged below the horizon of awareness by the power of ignorance we
lose sight of our own authentic identity and experience it as if it were
distant from us, like a goal to be attained. But as Abhinava explains:

sK

If

C

•"2 a

o S,

I
C

o

s

4, O

o

22 f

If
— .1
2

I

on

S 1

11

f

8^

aI

O

^3 .2

""8 |

II

I i|I

.2 |

c
o

c

O

3-8
I 8.

is

O X

e-a

i

IC

>5

S -3
Z.5

>
s

s

> g
S'3

Path to Liberation

Ml

Those who are purified by this supremely real consciousness firmly
affirmed within them become well established on the path of the absolute
(anuttara) and are not bound by practice.81

In fact, there is nothing we can do to free ourselves.82 All forms of
practice, whether internal or external, depend on consciousness and so
cannot serve as a means to realise it.83 He who seeks to discover this reality
by practice is like a man who tries to see the sun by the light of a firefly.84
Those who are in the realms of 'No-means' (anupdya) recognise that the
light of consciousness shines as all things. All the opposites merge and
their seeming contradiction is resolved. Liberation and bondage become
synonymous just as the words 'jar and 'pot' indicate the same object.85
No-means (anupdya) is the experience of the absolute (anuttara) beyond
both transcendence and immanence (Siva and Sakti). Undefinable and
mysterious, it is neither existent (sat) nor non-existent (asat), neither
is it both nor neither.86
Not grounded in anything, this [Light] is not energy, the Great
Goddess; nor is it God, the power-holder, because it is not the foundation
of anything. It is not an object of meditation because there is none who
meditates, nor is it he who meditates because there is nothing to meditate
on. It is not an object of worship because there is none to worship it, nor
is it the worshipper because there is nothing to worship. This allpervasive [reality] is not Mantra, not that which is expressed by Mantra,
nor he who utters it. This [reality], the Great God (mahesvara\ is not
initiation, the initiator or the initiated.87

To all intents and purposes Anupdya is liberation itself. It is the
eternal fullness of consciousness, which is already liberated before we even
begin to practice (ddimukta). Those who reach this level of practice do not
need to exert themselves at all to grasp reality everywhere constantly
present.88 Anupdya is the way of bliss (dnandopdya)\ it is the untroubled
rest within one's own nature (svdtmavisranti) experienced when the
recognition dawns that it is this which appears as all things. At that instant
the powers of will, knowledge and action merge into the bliss of
consciousness:
In this way, even supreme knowledge, divested of all means, rests in
the power of bliss said to be [the presence] of the absolute here [in every
moment of experience].89

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Thus there are two levels of Anupaya. At the higher level nothing can
be said about it. It is literally the reality which cannot be described in any
way (anakhya) or approached by any means. To this level belong those
rare, highly spiritual souls who are born fully enlightened and come into
the world to show others the way to attain their liberated state. For them
Anupaya literally means that they do not need to practice at all. Most
yogis, however, have to prepare themselves for this state and when they are
ready achieve instant access to it through the practice of Anupaya as the
most subtle means possible (suk$mopaya). The adept whose consciousness has been purified and made fully receptive to instruction needs to be
taught this practice just once for it to mature in an instant to the fullness of
perfect enlightenment. When the disciple is truly fit to receive the
teachings and be liberated,90 all the Master needs to do is to tell him that
he shines by the light of Siva's consciousness and that his true nature is the
entire universe.91 Thus:
When the Master utters [his instructions] with words intent on the
thoughtless, [the disciple] is liberated there and then, and all that remains
[of his former state] is the machine [of the body].92
When such a disciple sits before his Master, all he has to do is to gaze
at him and be aware of his elevated state to feel the fragrance (vasana) of
the Master's transcendental consciousness extending spontaneously
within him. Abhinava explains:
So gracious is he that, by transferring his own nature to those whose
consciousness is pure, they became one with him at his [mere] sight.93
If the disciple does not possess the strength of awareness to allow the
Master to infuse this consciousness into him directly in this way while his
eyes are open, he is instructed to close them. The Master then bestows
upon him a vision of former perfected yogis (siddha) while the disciple is
in a state of contemplation with his eyes closed (nimllanasamadhi).
Through the vision of these perfected yogis (siddhadarsana)94 he
recognises their level of consciousness and so experiences it within himself.
The disciple's consciousness thus suddenly expands within him like the
violent and rapid spread of poison through the body (bhujarigagaralavat).
He thus becomes one with his Master in the unifying bliss of universal
consciousness and so, whether his eyes are open or closed, continues to
enjoy the same state constantly.
Although it is possible to catch glimpses of the highest reality in

Path to Liberation

advanced states of contemplation before attaining perfect enlightenment,
these states, however long they last, are transitory (kdddcitka) and when
they end the vision of the absolute ceases with them. The highest
realisation, however, persists in all states of consciousness. It happens
once and need never occur again. A passage from a lost Tantra declares:
"the Self shines forth but once, it is full [of all things] and can nowhere be
unmanifest."95 All spiritual discipline culminates in this moment of
realisation. Accordingly, Abhinava stresses that the goal of all the means
to realisation, even the Individual Means, is this absolute consciousness.
Finally, it is worth noting that although Abhinava affirms that the
teachings concerning Anupaya are found in the Siddhayogesvarimata and
the Malinivijaya, both of which, according to Abhinava, are major
Tantras of the Trika school, it is in the theology of the school of
Recognition that it is best exemplified. Abhinava himself refers to
Somananda, the founder of this school, as teaching it and alludes to the
following passage in the Vision of Siva to support his own exposition:
When Siva, Who is everywhere present, is known just once through
the firm insight born of right knowledge (pramana), the scripture and the
Master's words, no means [to realisation] serves any purpose and even
contemplation (bhavana) [is of no further use].96
Anupaya is therefore, according to Abhinavagupta, the recognition
of one's own authentic Siva-nature, which all the higher Tantric traditions
teach is the ultimate realisation. This is also true of the Doctrine of
Vibration whose precedents are clearly traceable to these same traditions.
Thus, although the Stanzas themselves never refer directly to enlightenment as an experience of recognition, there can be little doubt that Spanda
practice leads to this same realisation. Accordingly, commentators stress
that we realise the vibration of consciousness by recognising its activity
and that liberation depends on the recognition of this as one's own
nature.97
Ksemaraja describes what happens in this moment of
Recognition according to the Doctrine of Vibration thus:
At the end of countless rebirths, the yogi's [psycho-physical] activity
[which issues from ignorance] is suddenly interrupted by the recognition
of his own transcendent nature, full of a novel and supreme bliss. He is
like one struck with awe^nd in this attitude of astonishment (vismayamudra) achieves the Great Expansion [of consciousness] (mahavikasa).
Thus he, the best of yogis, whose true nature has been revealed [to him] is
well established [at the highest level of consciousness], which he grasps
firmly and his hold upon it never slackens. Thus he is no longer subject to

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

profane existence {pravrtti), the abhorrent and continuing round of birth
and death, which inspires fear in all living beings, because its cause, his
own impurity, no longer exists.98

The Divine Means (Sambhavopaya)

In Anupaya the yogi does not need to deal with the world of diversity
at all; only Paramasiva exists there. Beyond both immanence and
transcendence, He has nothing to do with the world of practice and
realisation. Anupaya is the experience of the undefinable (andkhya) light
of consciousness, which is the pure bliss beyond even the supreme state
(pardtlta) of Sivatattva. At a slightly lower level, corresponding to the
Divine Means, a subtle distinction emerges between the goal and the Path.
The yogi now practises within the domain of the outpouring of the power
of consciousness. From this level he penetrates directly into the universal
egoity of pure consciousness by the subtle exertion (udyamd) of its
freedom (svdtantrya) and reflective awareness. The yogi who practises the
Divine Means is not concerned with any partial aspect of reality but
centers his attention directly on its abounding plenitude. Hence this means
is based on Siva's own state (sdmbhavdvastha) in which only the power of
freedom operates as the pure Being (satta) or essence of all the other
powers. This state is the light of consciousness which, free of all thoughtforms, is the basis of all practice." The yogi who recognises that pure
consciousness, free of thought-constructs (nirvikalpa), is his basic state,
can practice in any way he chooses; even the most common Mantra will
lead him directly to the highest state. Thus the forms of contemplative
absorption, empowered (sdkta) and individual (dnava), that are the fruits
of the other means to realisation both attain maturity in this same
undifferentiated awareness. This awareness is the pure ego manifest at the
initial moment of perception {prdthamikdlocana), when the power of the
will to perceive is activated. It is the subtle state of consciousness that
reveals the presence and nature of its object directly:
That which shines and is directly grasped in the first moment of
perception while it is still free of differentiated representations and
reflects upon itself is [the basis of the Divine Means] said to be the will.
Just as an object appears directly to one whose eyes are open without the
intervention of any mental cogitation (anusarpdhana), so, for some, does
Siva's nature.100

Path to Liberation

The movement of awareness at this level of practice attains its goal
quickly. While consciousness is heightened progressively in the other
Means, here it expands freely to the higher levels, unconfined by any
intruding thought-constructs. The Divine Means is a 'thoughtless
thought', a 'processless process', that occurs at the juncture between Being
and Becoming. Abhinava explains:
When the Heart [of consciousness] is pure and [free of thoughtconstructs], it harbours the light which illumines the radiant, primordial
plane (pragrabhumi) together with all the categories of existence. [The
yogi] then realises through it his identity with Siva Who is pure
consciousness.101
The yogi must catch the initial moment of awareness (adiparamarsa)
just when perception begins^ He must not move on from the first pure
sensation of the object but return to its original source in his own T
consciousness. Observing in this way the objective field of consciousness
without labouring to distinguish particulars, the yogi penetrates into his
own subjectivity which, vacuous and divested of all outer supports
(nirdlamba), is not directed anywhere outside itself (ananyamukhapreksin).
Here he can iay hold of the power inherent in his own
consciousness through which he discerns the true nature of whatever
appears before him. Thus the Stanzas on Vibration teach:
Just as an object, which is not seen clearly at first even when the
mind attends to it carefully, becomes later fully evident when observed
with the effort exerted through one's own [inherent] strength (svabala),
in the same way, when [the yogi] lays hold of that same power, then
whatever [he perceives manifests to him] quickly according to its true
nature, whatever be its form, locus, time or state.102
Thus, although the practice of this Divine Means starts by catching
hold of the will in the first moment of awareness, it also concerns the
second and third moments in which the means of knowledge and the object
are made manifest. When practice at this level proceeds smoothly and
without interruption, the three powers of will, knowledge and action fuse
into the Trident (trisula) of power, which is the subject free of all
obscuration (niranjand),m at one with the power of action in its most
powerful and evident form. The Kaula schools call this state the stainless
(nirahjanataitvd). Equated in the Spanda tradition with the dawning of
the vibration of consciousness (spandodaya), it is the enlightenment the
Spanda yogi seeks.

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Many practices taught in the Stanzas on Vibration belong to the
Divine Means. Spanda practice is based on the experience of Spanda
which, as we have seen, is defined as the intent (aunmukhya) of
consciousness, unrestricted to any specific object and hence free of
thought-constructs.104 Spanda can therefore be experienced directly when
a powerful intention develops within consciousness, whatever be its
ultimate goal or cause. We have already noted that intense anger, joy, grief
or confusion are such occasions.105 Similarly, the yogi can make contact
with the omnipotent will, which he as Siva possesses, through intense
prayer. Directing his entire attention to Siva, the Benefactor of the world,
entreating Him fervently and without break, his will merges with Siva's
universal will, which is the source of every impulse and perception. As he
looks about him, the yogi realises that it is Siva Himself, the universal
consciousness and the yogi's authentic identity, Who ordains his every
action, thought and perception. Thus the yogi's cognitive intent on his
object coincides with the universal will to make that object known to him,
whether the yogi be awake or dreaming. He is thus no longer like the
worldly man who cannot dream as he wishes and is forced to experience
whatever spontaneously happens in these states of consciousness.106
Ultimately the yogi manages, by Siva's grace, to maintain a constant
awareness of his own pure perceptive consciousness (upalabdhrta)
divested of all obscuring thought-constructs in deep sleep as well as in the
contemplative state (turlyd) beyond it. When he rises to the higher levels
of contemplation in which the breath is suspended and all sensory and
mental activity ceases, the yogi who manages to sustain this pure,
undifferentiated awareness does not succumb to sleep as do less developed
yogis. Perfection in the practice of the Divine Means thus coincides with
the goal of Spanda practice, namely, a constant, alert attention to the
perceiving subjectivity which persists unchanged in every state of
consciousness both as the perceiver and agent of all that it experiences.
Another important Spanda practice belonging to this means is
Centering. The Spanda yogi seeks to find the Centre (madhya) between
one cognition and the next, for it is there that he discovers the expansion
{unmesa) of consciousness free of thought-constructs from whence all
differentiated perceptions (yikalpd) emerge.107 Abhinava explains that
this pure awareness is called:
. . . the expansion (unmesa) of [consciousness] or the creative
intuition (pratibha) [experienced] in the interval which divides two
[moments] of differentiated perception (vikalpa). It is here that they arise
and disappear. The Sastras and Agamas proclaim with reasoned
argument that it is free of thought-constructs (nirvikalpa) and precedes

Path to Liberation

all mental representations of any object. None can deny that a gap exists
between perceptions insofar as two moments of thought are invariably
divided. This [gap] is the undifferentiated unity of all the countless
manifestations.108
Similarly, in the outer more objective sphere, where change consists
of the alterations in the configurations of manifest appearances (abhasa),
the transition from one to another corresponds to a phase of pure
luminosity that marks the beginning of one form and the end of another. 109
The world of manifestation and differentiated perceptions (vikalpa) thus
extends from one Centre to the next. Although it is never in fact divorced
from the subject who resides there, the ignorant fail to grasp this fact and
so, cut off from the Centre, the world of objectivity becomes for them the
sphere of Maya. 110 Bhagavatotpala quotes the Light of Consciousness

(Samvitprakasa):
This ever pure experience (suddhanubhava) is variegated by each
form [revealed within it]; even so it remains unstained (nirmala) when
moving to another. Just as a cloth which is naturally white, once dyed,
cannot change colour without [first] becoming white again, similarly the
pure power of awareness, (citi) once coloured by form, is pure [again] at
the Centre where that form is abandoned and from whence it proceeds to
another.111
In his Essence of Vibration (Spandasamdoha), Kemaraja explains
that the rise and fall of every individual perception in the field of awareness
is a specific pulsation of consciousness. From the point of view of the
object, the expansion (unmesd) of this pulse is represented by the initial
desire to perceive (didfksa) a particular object, while the contracted
(nimesa) phase is the withdrawal of attention from the object previously
perceived. From the point of view of the perceiving subjectivity, the phases
are reversed, so that the initial desire to perceive marks the contraction
(nimesa) of subjective consciousness while the falling away of the previous
perception is its expansion (unmesd). At the higher level, where these two
phases are experienced within consciousness, they represent the state of
the categories of Isvara ('this universe is me') and Sadasiva ('I am this
universe'). Utpaladeva says:
Expansion (unme$a), which is in the external manifestation [of
objectivity], is ISvaratattva while contraction (nimesa), which is in the
internal manifestation [of subjectivity], is Sadasiva.112

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

At this level all the powers of consciousness fuse and both phases are
manifest as part of one reality. This unity is in fact apparent to everybody
at each moment. However, within the domain of Maya, which is the
sphere of differentiated perceptions (vikalpa), it is clearly manifest only at
the juncture (madhya) between two cognitions. 113 In this Centre resides
the void (kha) of consciousness (free of thought-constructs) which,
divested of diversity, digests into itself all the psycho-physical processes
that give life to the multiplicity of perceptions. The yogi moves from the
particular vibrations of consciousness at its periphery to the universal
throb of the Heart in the Centre. As Abhinava explains:
The self-reflective awareness in the Heart of pure consciousness,
present at the beginning and end of each perception, within which the
entire universe is dissolved away without residue, is called in the
scriptures, the universal vibration of consciousness (samanyaspanda)
and is the outpouring (uccalana) [of awareness] within one's own
nature.114
All the categories of existence (tattvas) are united in the Heart of the
Centre where the life-giving elixir of Siva's consciousness floods one's own
inner nature. To reside in the Centre is to abide by the law of totality
(gramadharma) in a state which transcends the workings of the mind

(unmana).
Consciousness (Jnana) with Light as its support, residing in the
Centre between being and non-being is known as the act of abiding in
one's own abode as the perceiving subjectivity (dra$frtva) free of all
obscuration.
That which has been purified by pure awareness
(suddhavijnana) is called the transcendent (viviktavastu), said to be the
mode of being (vftti) of the law of totality (gramadharma) through which
everything is easily attainable.115
The power in the Centre (madhyasakti) is the eternal Present. Beyond
time it is the source of both past and future. To be established there is to
abide without a break in Rama, the supreme enjoyer, in every action of
one's life.
Rama is Siva, the supreme cause Who pervades the fourteen aspects
which embrace the entire universe of experience, namely, moving,
standing, dreaming, waking, the opening and closing of the eyes, running,
jumping, exertion, knowledge [born] of the power of the senses, the
[three] aspects of the mind, living beings, names and all kinds of
actions.116

Path to Liberation

By developing an awareness of the Centre, the yogi experiences the
bliss of consciousness.117 Through this gap he plunges into introverted
absorption (nimilanasamadhi) and then emerges again to pervade the field
of awareness between Centres and so experience the Cosmic Bliss
(jagadananda) of the universal vibration of consciousness.118 He then
recognises that this state pervades every aspect of experience. In this way
the yogi's consciousness is no longer afflicted by the power which obscures
it, hemming the Centre in on both sides with thought-constructs that
seemingly deprive it of its fullness. As he realises directly his pure
conscious nature as the universal ego free of all mental representations, it
expands out to embrace all things within itself. Thus the realisation the
Divine Means leads to, and is directly based upon, is that this pure ego is
in all things just as all things are within it.
In the Spanda tradition, as recorded in the Stanzas on Vibration, no
such ego is recognised.'I9 Man's authentic nature is, however, understood
in personal terms as every individual's own 'own nature' (svasvabhdva)
which is Siva, the universal vibration of pure subjectivity (upalabdhfta). It
is not surprising, therefore, that later commentators found these two
conceptions to be essentially the same and accordingly identified one's own
inner nature with the pure ego. This came as a natural development in
Spanda doctrine not only for this reason but also because the universal ego
is experienced as the inner dynamics of absolute consciousness. To
conclude our summarial exposition of the Divine Means, which is centred
on the direct experience of this pure ego (and hence on Spanda in this
form), we turn now to a brief description of its inner, cyclic activity. We
shall do this by examining Abhinava's esoteric exegesis of the symbolic
significance of the word 'AHAM', which in Sanskrit means T, and
symbolises by its form the ego's dynamic nature.
The objective world of perceptions is, as we have seen, essentially a
chain of thought-constructs (prapanca) closely linked to one another and
woven into the fabric of diversity (vicitratd). This thought (vikalpa) is a
form of speech (vac) uttered internally by the mind (citta), which is itself
an outpouring of consciousness. Consciousness also, in its turn, resounds
with the silent, supreme form of speech (para vac) which is the reflective
awareness through which it expresses itself to itself. Consequently, the
fifty letters of the Sanskrit alphabet, which are the smallest phonemic units
into which speech can be analysed, are symbolic of the principal elements
of the activity of consciousness. Letters come together to generate words
and words go on to form sentences. In the same way the fifty phases in the
cycle of consciousness represent, in the realms of denoted meaning (vdcya),
the sum total of its universal activity (kriyd) corresponding to the principal
forces (kala) which come together to form the metaphysical categories of

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

experience, which in their turn appear in the grossest, most explicitly
'articulate' form as the one hundred and eighteen world-systems
(bhuvana).
'A', the first letter of both AHAM and the Sanskrit alphabet, is the
point of departure or initial emergence of all the other letters and hence
denotes Anuttara—the absolute. 'Ha', is the final letter of the alphabet
and represents the point of completion when ail the letters have emerged.
It represents the state in which all the elements of experience, in the
domains of both inner consciousness and outer unconsciousness, are fully
displayed. It is also the generative, emission (visarga) which, like the
breath, casts the inner into the outer, and draws what is outside inward.
The two letters 'A'and 'Ha'thus represent Siva, the transcendental source
and Sakti, His cosmic outpouring that flows back into Him. The
combined 'A-Ha' contains within itself all the letters of the alphabet—
every phase of consciousness, both transcendental and universal. (For a
graphic representation of this analysis, see figure 1.)
M, the final letter of AH AM, is written as a dot placed above the letter
which precedes it. It comes at the end of the vowel series and before the
consonants and so is called 'anusvdra'(lit. 'that which follows the vowels')
and also 'bindu'(\il. 'dot,' 'drop,"point' or 'zero'). While the consonant
'M' symbolises the individual soul (purusa), 'bindu'represents the subtle
vibration of T, which is the life force (jlvakala) and essence of the soul's
subjectivity manifest at the transcendental, supra-mental level
(unmana). 12° It is the zero-point in the centre between the series of negative
numbers, in this case the vowels which represent the processes happening
internally within Siva, and the series of positive numbers—the consonants
which symbolise the processes happening externally within Sakti.
Bindu, as a point without area, symbolises the non-finite nature of the
pure awareness (pramitibhava) of AHAM. It is the pivot around which
the cycle of energies from 'A' to 'Ha' rotates, the Void in the centre from
which all the powers emanate and into which they collapse. As such, it is
the supreme power of action which holds subject, object and means of
knowledge together in a potential state in the one Light that shines as all
three121 containing them in its repose122 (visrdnti). Bindu is the 'knower'
(jndtr), who is essentially consciousness that, though omniscient, does not
manifest its intelligence, like a man who knows the scriptures but having
no occasion to explain them to others silently bears this knowledge within
himself. As such, it symbolises the union of Siva and Sakti {sivasaktimithunapin(ia)m in a state of heightened potency in which they have not
yet divided to generate the world of diversity. It stands, in other words, at
the threshold of differentiation in the stream of emanation still contained
within Siva.

The Absolute.
Expansion Commences

Bindu—The Individual Soul
Withdrawal Commences
Figure 1

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Then, to the degree in which that which is to be accomplished by the
power of action residing within it [as a potential] penetrates into the
absolute, it appears initially as bindu, which is the light of pure
consciousness.124
When outer objectivity is reabsorbed into its transcendent source,
bindu is the point into which all the manifest powers of consciousness are
gathered and fused together. The universal potency of all the letters is thus
contained in bindu which, as the reflective awareness of supreme T
consciousness,125 gives them all life. Thus bindu also marks the beginning
of Siva's internal movement back to the undifferentiated absolute and so
stands at the threshold of both emission and absorption without being
involved in either.
The three aspects of AH AM together constitute a movement from the
undifferentiated source of transcendental consciousness—'A'—through
the expansion or emission of its power—4Ha'—to the subject —'NT—
which contains and makes manifest the entire universe of experience. The
reverse of this movement, that of withdrawal (samhdra), is represented by
M-Ha-A. AHAM and M-Ha-A alternate in the rotation (ghurnana) of
the reflective awareness of T consciousness as immanent Sakti emerges
from transcendental Siva to then merge back into Him. As Abhinava says:
The universe rests within Sakti and She on the plane of the absolute
(anutiara) and this again within Sakti. . . for the universe shines within
consciousness and [consciousness shines] there [within the universe by
the power of] consciousness. These three poles, forming a couple and
merging, make up the one supreme nature of Bhairava Whose essence
is AHAM126
At the microcosmic level, fcA' represents the initial moment when the
subject begins to rise out of himself to view the object. The movement
from 'A to 4Ha' marks the emergence of sensation within the field of
awareness, which is represented by the fifty letters of the alphabet symbolic
of the fifty aspects of the flux of consciousness leading to objectified
perception. 4M' is the subject who, resting content within himself when he
has perceived his object, merges through the inner flow of awareness into
k
A\ the absolute. Then from the absolute (A) its emission (Ha) flows back
into the pure subject (M) set to perceive his object. Thus all the cycles of
creation and destruction are contained within AHAM through which they
are experienced simultaneously as the spontaneous play of the absolute.
The yogi who recognises this recurrent pulse of awareness to be the
movement of his own consciousness merges his limited ego with the

Path to Liberation

universal ego. Thus he realises that its power to create, sustain and destroy
all things is his own inner strength (svabaia) that he exerts effortlessly in
the same state of mystical absorption (turiya) in universal consciousness
that the absolute itself enjoys. In this way he shares in the three-fold
awareness Siva Himself has of His own nature which Abhinava describes
as follows:
'I make the universe manifest within myself in the Sky of
Consciousness. I, who am the universe, am its creator!'—this awareness
is the way in which one becomes Bhairava, 'All of manifest creation
(SCKJladhvari) is reflected within me, I cause it to persist1—this awareness
is the way in which one becomes the universe. The universe dissolves
within me. I who am the flame of the [one] great and eternal fire of
consciousness'—seeing thus one achieves peace.127
The experience of the liberated thus coincides with the realisation of
their own divine nature which, through its power, rules and guides the
cosmic order. Thus this attainment (siddhi), which is liberation itself, is in
the DoctrLie of Vibration technically called 'Mastery over the Wheel of
Energies' (cakresvaratvasiddhi) because the liberated soul, identified with
Siva, now governs, as does Siva, the cycle of the powers that bring about
the creation and destruction of all things,128

The Empowered Means (Saktopaya)
All the practices taught in the Stanzas on Vibration are internal.
Whenever ritual is mentioned, it is invariably interpreted in terms of the
dynamics of the inner processes the yogi experiences and implements in
the course of his yogic practice. The Doctrine of Vibration, Ksemaraja
affirms,129 is concerned entirely with these inner disciplines centred, as it is,
in one way or another, on consciousness or, at least, on the inner activity of
the mind. Thus the Empowered Means which, like the other categories we
have discussed, is entirely internal, includes an important part of Spanda
practice. Spanda practice belonging to the Divine Means centres on one's
own inherent nature (svasvabhdva) as Siva, the universal perceiver and
agent, that belonging to the Empowered Means on His power. Instead of
arriving directly at the all-embracing emptiness of subjective consciousness, the yogi practising the Empowered Means realises his true nature
through the fullness of its energy. Practising the Divine Means, the yogi
plunges, as it were, straight into the fire of consciousness; practising the

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Empowered Means he merges with its rays. Either way the yogi is centred
equally on ultimate reality. The power of consciousness is no less absolute
than its possessor. To make this point Abhinava quotes the Matangatantra:
This reality consists of the rays of [Siva's] power and is variously said
to be the abode of the Lord's manifestation . . . That same [power]
illumined [by Siva] is itself also luminous, unshaken and unmoving.
That very [power] is the supreme state, subtle, omnipresent, the nectar of
immortality, free of obscuration, peaceful, yearning for pure Being alone
(vastumatra) and devoid of beginning and end. Perfectly pure, it is said
to be the body [of ultimate reality].110
The yogi concentrates on the powers operating in all of life's activities
as particular pulsations (visesaspanda) in the universal rhythm
(samanyaspanda) of the power of consciousness. In this way he rises
progressively from the particular to the universal until he reaches pure
Being (satta), the greatest of all universals (mahasamanyd) and the highest
form of Siva's power. Thus the creative power of Maya, manifest through
countless lesser powers, no longer causes the yogi to stray from Siva's
consciousness but becomes the means through which it can be realised131 in
the illuminating brilliance (sphurattd) which is Siva's pure Being. Thus by
discovering the true nature of Sakti, the yogi realises himself to be Siva,
its possessor Who consists of all its countless powers. Thus practise
belonging to this Means leads to the same pure consciousness free of
thought-constructs realised through the Divine Means. Although the
ultimate realisation is instantaneous, the yogi rises to it gradually by
freeing his consciousness of the limitations imposed upon it by thought.
Abhinava explains:
The same occurs in the Empowered Means [as does in the Divine].
At the discursive level of consciousness (vaikalpikibhumi) [where the
Empowered Means functions] knowledge and action, although evident,
are, for the reasons explained previously, contracted. A blazing energy
[is revealed within] the one who dedicates himself to removing the burden
of this contraction. [This energy eventually] brings about the inner
manifestation {antarabhasa) of pure consciousness he seeks.132
Consciousness is individualised and its power of knowledge and
action contracted by the thought-constructs born of ignorance. The
arising of these mental representations, as the Stanzas on Vibration say,
deprives the soul of its freedom and immortal life.133 The practise of the

Path to Liberation

Empowered Means is meant to free the fettered soul of this constriction on
his consciousness. It operates within the mental sphere (cetas)m and is
designed to purify thought (vikalpasamskara) in order to. reveal the pure
consciousness which is its ground and ultimate source. Thus, the
Empowered Means is concerned with the second instant of perception,
during which the subject forms mental representations of his object.
Thought functions on the basis of an awareness of relative distinctions
between specific particulars, distinguishing them from one another and
thus seemingly fragmenting the essential unity of reality.135 The vibrant
vitality of consciousness, universally manifest, is clouded like a mirror by
a child's breath136 and the soul is deprived of the liberating intuition of the
one reality free of thought-constructs (nirvikalpa). Abhinava writes:
The [fettered soul] is like a dancing girl who although wishing to
leave the dancehall is collared by the doorkeeper of thought and thrown
back onto the stage of Maya.137
All thought is centred on objectivity and hence dislodges awareness
from the plenitude of pure subjective consciousness. Thus, to regain the
original state of rest (visrdnti) consciousness enjoys, the yogi must rid
himself of thought. As thought-forms decrease, pure, thought-free
awareness is strengthened138 until the yogi is fully established in a state in
which the relative distinctions (bheda) conceived between entities dissolve
away. Everything appears to him as pure Being (sattdmdtra)l}9 and the
entire universe shines before him pervaded by Siva's radiance.140 His
intuitive faculty (mati) thus purified, the yogi gains both the perfections
(siddhi) of yogic practice and liberation (mukti). His consciousness is now
like a well-polished mirror which reflects everything he desires and grants
it to him.141 Abhinava writes:
Just as a man who has been ill for a long time forgets his past pain
completely when he regains his health, absorbed as he is in the ease of his
present condition, so too those who are grounded in pure awareness free
of thought-constructs are no longer conscious of their previous [fettered]
state. Consciousness, the sole truly existent reality, free of thoughtconstructs is made fully and evidently manifest by eliminating these
differentiated perceptions. The wise man should therefore exert himself
to attend closely to this [state of awareness].142
The thought-constructs generated within consciousness do not in
reality affect it at all. They can neither break up nor add anything to the
Light which shines as all things.143 They are in fact nothing but

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

consciousness itself144 which perceives, through its power of reflective
awareness (vimarsa), the multitude of objects in diverse ways, and so
assumes this form.145
Although thought-constructs are mental
representations of objects once seen or present, they are products of the
power of consciousness and not of the objects they represent.146 Thought
is both analytic and synthetic;147 it serves the useful purpose of separating
individual elements of experience from others and linking together those
that appear to be distinct from one another so that they can be better
understood.148 It does not consist merely of false mental constructs
projected onto reality that need to be wholly rejected. Thought obscures
consciousness and distracts it only when it appears in the form of doubt,
vacillating between alternatives.149
Once this conflicting duality
(dvaitddhivasa)150 is eliminated, thought is purified and rests in itself as the
'thought-less thought' of pure consciousness.151 By gradually eliminating
the multitude of conflicting notions that agitate him, the yogi ultimately
achieves the certainty (niscaya) corresponding to a direct awareness of his
own divine nature.152 Abhinava explains:
Thought is in reality none other than pure consciousness. Even so,
it serves as a means to liberation for the individual soul (anu) only when
it takes the form of certainty (niscaya).15
The yogi must eliminate every doubt and misguided notion that leads
him to believe himself to be other than Siva. By developing the thought:
k
I am Siva\ it ultimately affirms itself directly as a pure awareness beyond
thought without any intervening mental representations. Abhinava says:
Just as the man who thinks intensely that he is a sinner becomes
such, just so one who thinks himself to be Siva, and none other than He,
becomes Siva. This certainty (dartfhya), which penetrates and affirms
itself in our thoughts, coincides with an awareness free of thoughtconstructs engendered by a series of differentiated mental representations, the object of which is our identity with Siva.154
As thought is gradually purified, it becomes progressively clearer
until its object becomes maximally apparent (sphufatama).155 The stream
of perceptive consciousness (pramana) progressively reveals each aspect
of its object which, thus affirming itself with increasing clarity, reveals its
ultimate nature. The yogi reflects repeatedly upon it as the object of his
realisation and loving devotion, for all that is perceptible and need be
known (jneya) is Siva alone. As Abhinava says:

Path to Liberation

What should we say of those who before they are satisfied have to
see their beloved again and again, caress her and think about her for a
long time?156

The yogi practising the Empowered Means is initiated into the Great
Sacrificial Rite (mahayaga), eternally enacted at the interface between the
inner and outer aspects of consciousness, by a direct infusion of awareness
from his master who is the embodiment and outer symbol of the yogi's
enlightened identity.157 The rite begins with ritual bathing (snana) which is
in this case the immersion of the body of thought in the white ashes of the
cosmic fuel of duality, burnt in the fire of consciousness.158 The yogi then
goes on to worship (puja) by uniting all that is pleasing to the senses in the
oneness of consciousness.159 The ritual formula (mantra) he recites is the
eternal resonance of the awareness which is the pulsation of the Heart of
his own consciousness.16() Repetition (japa) of the formula is every activity,
perception, breath or thought which arises within him while plunged in the
universal awareness of his true nature.161 The mental image he visualises
meditating (dhyana) on the Deity in the course of the rite, is whatever the
yogi spontaneously imagines and contemplates as the outpouring of the
universal creativity of consciousness.162 Ritual gesture (mudra) is
whatever bodily posture the yogi may assume when, fully absorbed in
consciousness, he moves, staggering about (ghurnita) as it were, drunk
with the wine of self-realisation.163 Oblation is performed by offering with
devotion and awareness all the sensations which flow in through the
channels of the senses to the fire of his subjectivity, which is thus inflamed
(uddipita) and makes all things one with itself.164
The outer ritual which commences in the sphere of the Individual
Means thus leads naturally to the inner rite of the Empowered Means.
When the yogi's practise (abhyasa) reaches fruition, the rite merges with
the spontaneous activity of consciousness. This is fullness (purnata), the
completion and reunification of the forces within consciousness which,
through the power of ignorance, were formerly dispersed and divided.
"Just as a horse driven here and there", writes Abhinava, "over
plains, hills and dales follows the will of its rider, so also consciousness,
driven by various expedients (bharigi), quiescent or terrific, abandoning
duality, becomes Bhairava. Just as by looking repeatedly at one's own
face in a mirror one comes to know that it is the same [as the image
reflected], so also, [one sees] in the mirror of mental representations of
meditation (clhvana), ritual (puja) and worship (area) one's own Self as
Bhairava and so quickly identifies with Him. This identification is the
realisation that takes place in the absolute (anuttara)."]6i

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

By ridding himself of the relative distinctions engendered by thought,
the yogi practising the Empowered Means, illumined by the power of selfawareness of Pure Knowledge (suddhavidya), transcends the distinction
between right and wrong, purity and impurity. He is led to the conviction
that the pure consciousness, which is his true nature, is unaffected by
whatever action he may do, whether conventionally accepted as good or
bad. Abhinava quotes the Malinlvijaya as saying:
All here is enjoined and all prohibited. This alone, O Lord of the
gods, is here prescribed as obligatory, namely that the mind be firmly
applied to the true reality. It matters little how this is achieved. He whose
mind is firmly established in [this] reality, even if he eats poison, is as little
affected by it as are lotus petals by water.166

Impurity is a state of seeming separation from consciousness.167 The
yogi who has freed himself of all false notions comes to realise that the true
nature of consciousness can never be sullied or limited by any object
appearing within it.168 This is the realisation the ancient sages achieved
through a direct intuition of reality free of intruding thought-constructs
(avikalpabhava), but kept secret in order not to confuse the worldly.169
Similarly, in reality nobody is ever bound. It is ignorance to believe
bondage exists and to contrast it with a conceived state of liberation.170 If
the Self is one with Siva, how can it be either bound or released?171
Nothing essentially distinguishes those who are bound from those who are
free.172 The difference between their states is merely conceptual.173 Pure
consciousness abides free of all such distinctions. Thus Bhagavatotpala,
in his commentary on the Stanzas, repeatedly stresses that thoughtconstructs obscure consciousness and misguide the individual soul.174
Those who are bound are convinced that they are dull witted, conditioned
by Karma, sullied by their sin and helplessly impelled to action by some
power beyond their control. He who manages to counter this conviction
with its opposite achieves freedom.175 He who considers himself to be free
is free indeed, while he who thinks himself bound remains so. Thus at the
highest level of realisation, as Abhinava says:
Nothing new is achieved nor is that which in reality is unmanifest,
revealed- [only] the idea is eradicated that the luminous being
shines not.176
Nothing is impure, all is perfect, including Maya and the diversity it
engenders. To say that illusion exists and that ignorance must be

Path to Liberation

eradicated implies that it has a separate existence apart from consciousness. If this is so, it has as little reality as the shadow of a shadow, but if
not,then it must be consciousness itself. Thus, as Kallaja says, bondage,
the binder and the bound are in fact one.177 It is Siva Himself Who freely
obscures His own nature. Siva binds Himself by Himself.178 Concealing
and revealing Himself, Siva plays His timeless game.
At the Divine (sambhava) level of pure Siva-consciousness, the
Spanda yogi directly lays hold of the power inherent in his own conscious
nature (svabala) which gives life to the psycho-physical organism and
impels the senses and mind to action.179 In this way every thoughtconstruct, and with it the ego, is instantly annulled in the immediacy of the
pure subjectivity that remains unaltered throughout every perception and
state of consciousness. The same takes place at the Empowered level b>
attending to the recurrent activity—Spanda—of the subject, that is, the
flux of awareness through the cyclic movement of the powers of
consciousness.180 By attending (avadhana) to this movement the thoughtconstructs that emerge and subside in the course of perception are seen to
be part of this universal process, and, in this way purified, are no longer
binding. Thus, Ksemaraja says that the Spanda teachings are concerned
most directly with the Empowered Means. m The yogi who is always alert
to discern the pulse of Spanda quickly realises his own authentic state of
being (nijaip bhdvam).™2 He is then truly awake, not only literally, but
also in the deeper sense that he is awake to his authentic nature, its power
and activity. When attention (avadhana) slackens, this movement takes
place unconsciously and so the thought-constructs and perceptions
generated through it appear to take on an autonomous existence of their
own, just as happens when we dream.183 The spontaneity of the movement
that travels between subject and object and holds them together in the pure
awareness of the universal subject's identity with his cosmic object
devolves into the creative activity of waking and dreaming. Man, in other
words, becomes a victim of his states of consciousness and the contents
that they, by their very nature, generate within themselves.184
The Spanda teachings are not only concerned with the structure of
thought and its functions, but also with the powers and properties of its
vehicle, namely, speech. Speech issues out of consciousness, develops into
thought to then become articulated sound. A focal point of Spanda
doctrine is thus the role speech plays in the formation of thoughtconstructs and their purification. Although this takes place at all levels of
practise below the Divine (sdmbhava), the Spanda teachings, meant as
they are for advanced yogis, ignore the outer forms of spiritual discipline
to concentrate on practise in the Empowered (sakta) psychic sphere (cetas)
and what lies beyond it where speech is the pure inner awareness (vimarsa)

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

of the light of consciousness. The Doctrine of Vibration identifies this, the
highest level of speech {para vac), with the universal pulse of consciousness
that resounds spontaneously within it as the inner flow of its own
undifferentiated awareness.185 Beyond the realms of language, it is the
transcendental consciousness in which all language is rooted and pervades
all that language denotes as its essential being. Utpaladeva writes:
The Supreme Voice is consciousness.
It is self-awareness
spontaneously arisen, the highest freedom and sovereignty of the
Supreme Lord. That pulsing radiance (sphuratta) is pure Being,
unqualified by time and space. As the essence [of all things] it is said to
be the Heart of the Supreme Lord.186
When the intention arises within consciousness to discern its own
brilliance manifest in the world of denotations and denoted meanings,
speech turns from the supreme transcendental level to that of immanence
and assumes the form of a pure intuitive awareness (pratibha) which
perceives and comprehends its universal manifestation. This is the voice
of intuition (pasyanti), which grasps the meaning inherent inwardly in all
words and externally in all that they denote. Analogous to the nondiscursive, instinctual knowledge animals possess, it is a pure generic
perception not yet formed into language in which the act of denotation, its
object and that which denotes it are indistinguishable. Illumined by the
voice of intuition birds migrate in their due seasons, the cock crows at
dawn and young mammals suck at the breast.187 Infants similarly reflect
and respond instinctively to their environment by virtue of this intuitive
sense188 and through it come to grasp the link between words and the
objects they denote. As they learn to speak, they begin to form concepts
and so the next two levels of speech develop. One is the outer corporeal
speech (yaikhari) and the other the subtler, inner discourse (antahsatpjalpa) of thought that forms at the intermediate level (madhyama)
where the ratiocinating mind stands between the higher levels of intuition
and its outer verbal expression. In this way the development of speech in
infancy reflects its progressive actualisation in every spoken word. A
hymn to the Goddess quoted by Bhagavatotpala describes this
process well:
Therefore, O Supreme Goddess, the highest form of speech should
be worshipped as the [universal] cause that establishes the existence of
all things by insight (niscaya) into their nature (qrtha) brought about by
their manifestation through the superimposition [of verbal designations].
O Mother, insight into the true nature [of things] is nothing but the

Path to Liberation

act of intent of that [same speech], apart from which [speech itself and all
that it expresses] could not attain to its own nature. Again, in that state
[speech] is said to be the light of one's own nature. Free of division and
succession it is attainable [only] by the yogi.
Then from the state of intent, O Siva, speech [assumes] the nature of
thought as the radiant pulse (sphuraria) of desire to speak of that which is
in the domain of words. Then consisting of words, it bears a clearly
expressed meaning, for if [speech] were not such, meaning could not be
understood.189

Personal experience clearly proves that thought is invariably
associated with speech.190 Thought is a function of language. Through it
we communicate to ourselves a mental image of the world about us and
can construct complex ideas about ourselves. Language is the fabric from
which our world of ideas is woven. Mental representation which orders
the influx of sensation and presents us with a meaningful, picture of the
world, memory, the elaboration of ideas and the shifting tides of emotion
are all intimately connected with language and through it to the
consciousness which underlies them. To think of language as nothing
more than a system of denotation based on a commonly accepted
convention (sanketa) fails to fully account for its inherent power to convey
meaning (yacakasakti). In order to learn the convention we must be born
with an innate ability to grasp meaning, and this ability is not itself learned
nor found anywhere within the domain of convention. Lacking this ability
we would be caught in an infinitely expanding system of denotation in
which each element pointed to some other within it, without ever coming
to rest anywhere. Unless we can couple the word 'jar' with the object it
denotes, explaining that the word 'pot'is a synonym of the word 'jar'would
leave us none the wiser.191 The connection between word and meaning is
only explicable if we postulate that it is an inherent property of the power
of awareness to link one with the other. Language must be grounded in the
pure cognitive awareness (prama) of consciousness which stands beyond,
and yet illumines, the sphere of experience we define and understand
through the medium of language. As Abhinava says:
Someone may hear another person speak, but if his awareness
(prama) is obscured, he is unable to rise, unconscious as he is, to the level
of the experiencing subject [who understands] what has been said. He
only grasps the outer successive (sound) of what the other person says
and thus can only repeat it as wou'd a parrot. An understanding of its
meaning presupposes that he has caught hold of his own power of
awareness (prama) by attaining the autonomy [of the conscious,
universal subject].192

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Outer, articulate speech consists of a series of ordered phonemic
elements produced and combined by the vocal organs to form meaningful
words. In order for this to be possible, these elements must also be
grounded in consciousness (pramd). The articulated phonemes are merely
outer, gross manifestations of the phonemic energies (yarnagrdma) held in
a potential state within consciousness. This 'mass of sounds' (sabdardsi) is
the light of consciousness (prakdsa) which makes the universe manifest
and contains all things within itself. In other words, it is the totality of
consciousness expressed as the collective awareness symbolised by all the
letters corresponding to the introverted subjectivity of Siva Himself. The
power through which this potential actualises itself into speech and the
world of denotation is technically called 'Mdtrkd'. It is the reflective
awareness (vimarsa) and radiance (sphurattd) of the supreme subject—the
'mass of sounds' (Sabdardsi)—and the undivided wonder Siva experiences
when He contemplates the universe He gathers up into Himself in the form
of countless words (ydcaka) and their meanings (vdcya).193 Mdtrkdsakti
is manifest in the second movement of consciousness after the primal
vibration of the pure luminosity of the 'mass of sounds', as the state of pure
potency which arises when its unsullied subjectivity begins to turn away
from itself and is associated with faint traces of objectivity (dmrsyacchdyd).194 Mdtrkd contains within itself the various aspects of objectivity
that, although not yet manifest, are ready to issue forth. Thus this power,
at one with Siva, is called Mdtrkd' because she is the mother {mdtrkd) of
the universe that she contains within herself as does a pregnant woman her
child, iw
The circle of the powers of Mdtrkd (mdtrkdcakra) consists of the
phonemic energies contained in AH AM, the universal ego.196 When
grasped in its entirety at its source, these energies elevate the consciousness
of the enlightened, but when split up and dispersed give rise to the
obscuring forces (kald) which lead the ignorant away from realisation.
The fettered soul is ignorant of the pure egoity that is the source of speech
and so it generates, through its powers, the many thought-constructs that
deprive him of the awareness of unity and obscure Siva's universal
activity.197 The Stanzas on Vibration declare:
He who is deprived of his power by the forces of obscuration {kald)
and a victim of the powers arising from the mass of sounds (sabdardsi) is
called the fettered soul.198 The powers [of speech] are always ready to
obscure his true nature as no mental representation can arise that is not
penetrated by speech.199
The rays of phonemic energies emanate from the light of Siva, the

Path to Liberation

'mass of sounds' (sabdarasi) in eight groups. They constitute the powers
of the inner mental organ and the five senses, figuratively arranged in a
circle around the sacred shrine (pi(ha) of Matrkasakti who manifests
externally as the body. 200 The eight classes and the names of the deities
presiding over them are as follows: 201
Gutturals
Palatals
Cerebrals
Dentals
Labials
Semivowels
Sibilants
Vowels

Brahman!
Mahegvari
Kaumarl
Narayanl
Varahi
Aindri
Camungla
Mahalakm!

Intellect (buddhi)
Ego (ahankara)
Mind (manas)
Hearing
Touch
Sight
Taste
Smell

The yogi who grasps the true nature of the power of Matfka and its
phonemic forces is liberated202 by recognising that the activity of the senses
and the discursive representations of the mind are in fact emanations of
universal consciousness. Conversely, when ignorant, he is affected by its
power in its multiple negative aspects known as 'Mahaghora' ('greatly
terrible') and, unable to rest within himself free of the sense of diversity, he
is constantly disturbed by the flux of extroverted perceptions. 203
Abhinava explains:
When the [phonemic energies] are not known to be [emanations of
the Lord] they conceal the wonder (camatkara) of consciousness which
is the one essential non-discursive awareness [present throughout
perception] and even in discursive thought. They obscure it with
thought-constructs constituted by the diverse configurations of
phonemes and syllables which [although also] a form of the deity [are no
longer benevolent but] most terrible. Inducing doubt and fear, they
engender the fettered soul's state, bound by the shackles of transmigration. . . . But once their true nature is understood correctly in this way,
they bestow freedom in this very life
This knowledge of their intimate
being [at one with the absolute] consists of this, namely, that even in the
midst of all these fluctuations, free at their inception of discursive
representations, thought-constructs do not conjoin [individualised
consciousness] with the wheel of energies consisting of the totality of
phonemes, even though [these constructs] are coloured by the many
diverse words generated by the aggregate of phonemes.204
Language has a powerful effect on us. A few words we may hear or
read can inspire us with joy, fear or sadness, and the constant inner

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

dialogue of thought arouses intense feelings within us. This power hidden
in language, which binds us through the thought-constructs it generates,
can also be used to free us of them by channeling it through Mantra.
Mantric practice begins at the Individual (artava) level where Mantras are
recited in consonance with the rising and falling away of the breath. In this
way they are charged with the vibration (spanda) of consciousness and, in
their turn, make consciousness vibrate. Serving as a means to concentration, they free the mind of discursive representations.205 The word
'Mantra' is thus traditionally said to derive from the words 'manana'and
'trdria '. 'Manana 'literally means 'reflection'. In this context it denotes the
continuous thought or awareness of Mantra which is universal, omniscient
consciousness (visvavijnana). 'Trdriam 'means to 'save' and Mantra 'saves'
us by freeing the mind from the bondage of transmigration.206 Mantras
thus serve to generate a higher level of consciousness by a process of
'manana' which the texts describe as 'a progressive heightening of the
reflective awareness which is the aesthetic rapture that threads through
each state of being'.207 As MaheSvarananda puts it:
Reflection {manana) on one's own omnipresent consciousness
(nijavibhava) and protection from the fear of one's own limitations is the
undefinable intuition (anubhuti) which has absorbed all dualistic
thoughts and is the meaning of Mantra.208
Although Mantras may convey an intelligible meaning, they are not
bound to a convention (sanketa) as is common speech. The 'language' of
Mantras is not concerned with external objects. It is language directed
inward, deriving its energy from the supreme power of consciousness into
which it ultimately involutes, transcending the outer and reverting to the
inner. The Mantra, like the visualised image of a deity, is a symbol which,
precisely because it has no assigned connotation as has the literal sign we
use in propositions, is capable of being understood in more significant
ways, so that its meanings are fraught with vital and sentient experience.
The Mantra opens a new avenue of thought which becomes truer to itself
than does any other type of thinking which has found its limits in devitalised symbols or signs that can be used to signify anything without
themselves being significant. "Mantras are pure," writes Rajanaka Rama,
"in the sense that they are not tainted by a conventionally accepted
meaning (vacya) and transcend the usual form of awareness created by
reflection on the phonemes [conjoined to form words]."209
The essence of Mantra is an experience entirely free of objective
relations. It is the pure power of awareness directed at its own nature and
thus free of objectivity and eternal.210 It frees us of the desire to attend to

Path to Liberation

things temporal by redirecting attention to the heart of consciousness
which thus assimilates thought back into itself and stills the agitation
(k?obha) occasioned by object-centred awareness.211 In this way the yogi
rises from the partial perceptions individualised by thought, to the
universal perception free of thought-constructs.
By remembering
(smarana) and rightly enunciating the Mantra, he attains a level of
reflective awareness in which all things are experienced as one with his own
nature.212 Thus Mantra has meaning and serves a purpose (artha) to the
degree in which it is possible to intuit through it the power of consciousness
which gives it, and all things, being. The outer forms of the Mantra are
expressions of the powers experienced inwardly.213 At root, the Mantra
represents the pure signification of all possible sentences and words
relating to the world of particulars. It enshrines a form of undivided,
non-discursive intuition necessarily represented in parts (as the phonemic
body of the Mantra) but whose full significance is transcendental and
includes all possible forms of verbal expression.214 The yogi who repeats
his Mantra undistractedly achieves the power to understand the ultimate
significance of the formula he is repeating. Thus understood, it awakens
in him a state of contemplative absorption at the Empowered (sdkta) level
in which he experiences the pulsing power of consciousness that emits
from itself, in progressively grosser stages, thoughts and articulated words
along with their meaning. Abhinava writes:
A waterwheel moves a series of machines connected to it and can
set them into operation by the force of its unified impulse. In the same
way, by the power of the one continuous act of awareness (anusa/pdhdna)
which corresponds to the incessant arising of Mantra, the deities of all
Mantras, at one with them, become automatically (qyatndt)
propitious.215

The recitation of Mantra starts at the Individual level in consonance
with the movement of the vital breath. To be effective, however, the
Mantra and its component syllables and words must resonate with the
force of awareness. They must be energised with the pulsation (spanda) of
consciousness and so penetrate into the absorption of the Empowered level
of practice. At that level the pure thought of the Mantra gradually takes
over from the impure and dispersed thought of the world of objects,
wrongly perceived to be severed from consciousness and so leads the adept
to the Divine level where the ultimate source of its power resides.216 This
vitality is Spanda, the universal pulse (sdmdnyaspanda) of awareness
residing in the heart of consciousness at the supreme level of speech (para
vac) as all-embracing T consciousness.217 T consciousness (AHAAf) is

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

the Great Mantra eternally manifest as the wonder inspired by the light of
consciousness. The Mantra AHAM which gives life to every living being
contains all the powers of the letters within itself; giving rise to the entire
universe, it is present at the very beginning of manifestation where it is
established in pure consciousness free of time and space.218 Ksemaraja
explains:
All-embracing i-ness' (purrtahanta) is the mistress of all the letters
from [the first] 'A' to [the last] 'Ksa1 which, as the absolute (anuttara)
power of unstruck sound {an&hata), it contains and encapsulates. Thus
it is a pure immutable awareness even though it has absorbed into itself
every cycle of creation and destruction in the play of the Wheel of
Energies constituting the unfolding cosmic order (?atfadhvari) of
countless words and all they denote. It is the supreme level of speech, the
great unspoken Mantra which, eternally manifest, is the life of all beings.
Here [in the Spanda school] it is called the vibration of the Lord because
it unfolds pulsating within one's own being as does the movement of this
divine universe.219

Mantric energy is not to be sought in the actual sound or form of the
Mantra directly. The ordering of its phonemic constituents (yarriasannivesa) is merely a channel through which the yogi can tap the energy of
his own consciousness. The Mantra should be recited with the full force of
awareness. It can only be effective when associated with the adept's
consciousness.220 The Mantra and the reciter of Mantra must be rooted in
the one conscious reality, otherwise the Mantra can bear no fruit.221 As
Rajanaka Rama puts it, Mantras are a mere flux of phonemic sounds,
powerless to bend even a blade of grass unless the adept makes contact
with Siva's plane of oneness.222 The imperishable power of awareness he
attains thus is the very life of Mantras; without it they are as fruitless as
autumn clouds.223 Through this power consciousness emanates and
withdraws the countless Mantras224 to gratify the wishes of each adept and
bestow upon him the well-deserved fruits of his practice. Mantras are thus
full of the knowledge and action225 they derive from the Spanda energy of
universal consciousness through which they are empowered to perform
their function.226 The vitality of Spanda is the ground of all Mantras. It is
the power by which they emerge from the emptiness of consciousness and
are drawn back into it, along with the adept's mind, when they cease to
exist as articulate sound.227 They are Siva Himself, one with the universal
vibration of consciousness through which they are created and in which
they lead the yogi to union with Siva. The awakened realise that the power
hidden in Mantras is the vibration of Siva's pure subjectivity (upalabdhfta-

Path to Liberation

matra) which is both the transcendental inner nature of all things and the
immanent awareness that threads through (anusyuta) all the planes of
consciousness.228 Rajanaka Rama explains:
The vitality of Mantra (mahtravirya) is Siva's power, the undivided
reality of Mantra and mind (cetas) both when they arise and when they
fall away. It emerges from Siva both as Mantra and as the adept's mind
(citta) in the form of phonemes and thought-constructs (sankalpa). The
Mantric power manifest [this way] is capable of producing only limited
(niyata) results for those yogis who have not come in contact with the
power of their own nature. However, when the yogi achieves a firm
insight into his authentic identity, all Mantras can do all things [for him]
because he knows how they arise and fall away.229

So while Mantra at the Divine level of practice (sdmbhavopdya) is the
silent consciousness of T, at the Empowered and Individual levels it serves
as a means to purify thought.230 It leads the adept in stages along the rungs
of the ladder of consciousness, ascending which he abandons the lower
stages of conditioned awareness to reach the highest state of iva-hood,
dense with the light of consciousness.231 Thus the supreme form of
Mantric energy destroys the obstacles to enlightenment set up by impure
thought and5 establishes individual consciousness in the true universal
thought of pure Being.232 Filled with this energy Mantras are like rays that
emanate from the all-consuming fire of consciousness, depriving thoughtconstructs of their essence.233
The aesthetic rapture (camatkdra) the yogi experiences increases to
the degree in which the uncreated reality of this pure awareness (pramd)
abounds234 and the power of his intuition is heightened as the conventions
of the day to day, spoken language are immersed and absorbed in the
supernal (amdyiya) energy of the phonemes of the Mantra.235 The mind of
the adept is freed of the constraints imposed upon its attention
(abhisarndhyupddhi) and so, free of thought-constructs, merges with the
silence of consciousness together with the Mantra.236 The Stanzas on
Vibration declare:
Seizing that strength (bald). Mantras, endowed with the power of
omniscience, perform their functions, as do the senses of the embodied.
It is there alone that they, quiescent and stainless, dissolve along with the
adept's mind and so partake of Siva's nature.237
At this stage any thought the yogi may conceive is vibrant and full of
energy because, having thus absorbed all objectivity into itself, his mind is

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

one with Mantra.238 So although in the beginning individual Mantras may
effectively correspond to distinct levels of consciousness and stages in the
cosmic process, once the yogi has ascended through the planes of power
by merging with the vibration of the Mantras at each level, he emerges into
a state where he enjoys a direct awareness of his own nature. Siva's power,
which determines the nature and function of all things, (niyatUakti) is
transcended and the yogi's own mind, discovered to be the source and
essence of all Mantras, can now implement any one of them to achieve
anything he wishes, including liberation.239

The Individual Means (Anavopaya)
As Kemaraja points out, none of the practices taught in the Stanzas
on Vibration belong to the Individual Means240 and so it does not, strictly
speaking, concern Spanda doctrine, if that is, we consider the Stanzas to
be the basic text of the Spanda school.241 From Kemaraja's point of view,
however, the third section of the Aphorisms of Siva (Sivasutra), which is
both the last and most extensive, is largely an exposition of this category
of practice.242 The Stanzas and Aphorisms have been traditionally linked
together and so, even though we feel that they should be distinguished
insofar as the Stanzas rather than the Aphorisms teach the Doctrine of
Vibration as such, we are nonetheless justified in referring to the
Aphorisms as its major source. Our exposition of the Individual Means
will therefore be largely based on Kemaraja's interpretation of the third
section of Aphorisms and we will present it, as he does, as an exposition of
a possible mystical journey of individualised (ariava) consciousness to
realisation. We follow K$emaraja because he understood the practise
taught in the Aphorisms in these terms, thereby not only illustrating for us
how it fits into this scheme but also how he understood the basic categories
of practice and their relationship to one another.
According to Kemaraja, the first Aphorism of each section of the
Sivasutra characterises the condition and nature of the Self at the
corresponding three levels of practice. In other words, they indicate the
yogi's basic state at each level in terms of his self-identification. This
identification corresponds to his existential condition as a degree of selfrealisation in the process leading to the authentic self-awareness of the
liberated. The very first Aphorism starts directly with this, the highest
state, by declaring that the Self is pure, dynamic and universal
consciousness (caitanya).243 This is true for the yogi who has awakened to
his authentic nature at the Divine (sambhava) level of being. At the

Path to Liberation

Individual (anava) level, however, the situation has changed. In this
sphere of consciousness the intermediate processes of discernment,
analysis and classification of perceptions, which bridge the gap in the flow
of awareness from the universal subject to a specific object of knowledge,
appear to take over the status of the perceiving subjectivity which
underlies them. The universal Self recedes into the background as a pure,
undefinable awareness, and the individual ego, consisting of the
perceptions, thoughts and emotions generated by the contact between the
universal perceiver and the perceived, emerges in the juncture between
them. Thus at this level, as the Aphorisms say, the Self is the mind.244 This
is the Self which moves (atati) from one state of being to another, from one
body to the next carrying with it subtle traces left behind by its sensory and
mental activity. Together these are said to constitute, and be caused by,
the subtle body technically called the 'City of Eight' (puryasfaka) with
which consciousness is identified and due to which it is subject to the
constant alterations of pleasure, pain and inertia. The Stanzas teach:
[The soul] is bound by the City of Eight {purya$faka) that resides in
the mind, intellect and ego and consists of the arising of the [five] subtle
elements [of sensory perception]. He helplessly suffers worldly pleasure
and pain (bhoga) which consists of the arising of mental representations
born of that [City of Eight] and so its existence subjects him to
transmigration.245
Whereas consciousness itself is the subject who practises the Divine
Means (Sambhavopaya), the subject who practises the Individual Means
is the mind. Unlike the Empowered Means, however, the mind is not
directed inwards onto itself. At the Empowered level, enlivened by the
direct intuition (pratibha) consciousness has of its own nature, mind ceases
to function merely in the paradigmatic, formative manner which gives rise
to mental representations, but operates instead as the subtle introverted
activity of reflective awareness (vimarsa), the power of consciousness
(sakti).246 This activity, as we have seen, is the essence of Mantra247 which,
independent of the senses, is no longer restricted in any way. At the
Individual lev , however, the creative powers of consciousness reflected
through the eAtroverted mind are greatly attenuated. All that remains is
the power to form thought-constructs and make determined resolutions
(sankalpa) which go on to issue through the body into outer action to make
the private creations of the mind apparent to others.248
The Individual Means, therefore, deals with the objectively perceived
contents of consciousness and hence with the individual subject as a
composite aggregate of objective elements, ranging from the subtle life

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

force (prdria) to the physical body 249 and its outer environment. The
practices belonging to this Means are thus of two types. One is concerned
with the individual subject who resides in, and as, the psycho-physical
organism; the other with external reality.250 What this implies essentially
is that practice at this level is not concerned as much with the will or
cognitive consciousness as are the other two Means, but with the power of
action applied, in the context of the practice taught in the Aphorisms, to
the spiritual activity of Yoga. According to Ksemaraja, the Individual
Means culminates in the Empowered state and hence leads to the levels of
practice beyond it.251 This is possible because, despite their differences,
there is an essential similarity between them. The aim of both the
Individual and Empowered Means is to purify the discursive representations of differentiated perceptions (vikalpasamskdra)252 and so lead the
yogi to the expanded (yikasita) consciousness of the Divine (sdmbhava)
state. The other levels of practice therefore both sustain and complement
it. The activity of individual consciousness can be fully perfected only
when it operates through the flow of the conative and cognitive powers
which together constitute the pure activity of universal consciousness
beyond all means (anupdya).
In fact, according to Ksemaraja, all three soteriological types function
together in various ways, their corresponding states representing
dimensions of the same experience.
For example, the upsurge of
consciousness (udyamd) which is the supreme, illuminating intuition
(parapralibha) of the Divine state (sdmbhavdvastha)25 is concomitant
with the gathering together of all the powers of consciousness in the
Empowered state. 254 The Divine Means, in other words, leads to the
experience of Power (sakti) which in its turn, when fully affirmed, marks
the attainment of a permanent contemplative consciousness (turlydtita) at
the Divine level which persists unaltered in every state of consciousness.
Consequently, Ksemaraja concludes his exposition of the first section of
the Aphorisms which exemplifies, according to him, the Divine Means,
by saying:
Thus we have explained the first expansion which starts with [the
Aphorism] 'the Self is pure dynamic consciousness' and expounds the
nature of the realisation (prathana) attained through the Divine Means.
It is the intuitive insight (samdpatti) of Bhairava's nature which is, as we
have said, the upsurge of consciousness that quells all bondage, namely,
the ignorance of that freedom which makes it manifest. Transforming all
things into the nectar of one's own innate bliss, it bestows every yogic
accomplishment (siddhi) including mystic absorption in the vitality of
Mantra, the highest of them all. Accordingly, we have, in the course of
this exposition, explained the nature of Sakti in order to show that the

Path to Liberation

Divine nature (kambhavarupd) possesses [every] power.255
Another way in which the Means are related to one another is
illustrated by the recurrence of the same Aphorism in different sections of
the Sivasutra which indicates, according to Ksemaraja, that the same
practice belongs to more than one Means. Both times this happens, the
Aphorism appears first in the section dealing with the Divine Means and
then recurs in that concerned with the Individual Means.256 In one case,
Ksemaraja tells us this is because practice at the Divine level requires no
effort whereas at the Individual level, the yogi must exert himself to
achieve the same state that at the Divine level dawns spontaneously.257 At
the Empowered level also, as the Sivasutra says, 'effort achieves the
goal'.258 Here, however, because as the Empowered Means is, according to
Ksemaraja, predominantly concerned with the contemplation
(anusamdhi) of the vitality of Mantra,259 the effort exerted is that required
to bring the practice of Mantra to fulfillment. It is, as Ksemaraja says, 'the
spontaneous effort exerted to grasp the initial expansion of intention to
apply oneself to the contemplation [of Mantra]. It is this exertion which
wins the favour of the gods of Mantra and identifies the adept with
them.'260
The second case of the same practice being taught in different sections
of the Aphorisms concerns the realisation of the Fourth State of
contemplative consciousness (turiya) in the other three states of waking,
dreaming and deep sleep. At the Divine level this takes place by 'violently
digesting' (hafhapdka) the three states in the Fourth. At the Individual
level the Fourth state is first experienced at the junctures between the other
three states and then induced gradually to spread out from these Centres
to pervade the other states like oil extending slowly through a piece of
cloth.261 The difference in this case between the level of practice is not only
that at the Divine level it reaches fulfillment spontaneously, but it is also
sudden and complete, leading directly to the liberated state of
consciousness Beyond the Fourth (turiydtita)262 At the Individual level,
however, practice is gradual and even when the yogi manages to rise to
states of contemplation, he must take care not to fall to lower levels of
consciousness. Indeed, until the yogi attains the sudden and direct
realisation of perfect enlightenment, whatever be his state of consciousness
or level of practice, he is bound to rise and fall because his contemplative
state is necessarily transitory (kaddcitka) however long it may last.
The yogi is more prone to these ups and downs the lower his basic
state of consciousness. Consequently, the last section of the Sivasutra
repeatedly instructs the yogi not only how to rise to higher levels of

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

consciousness and maintain them, but also in what way he is liable to fall
from them and how to regain them.263 Ksemaraja stresses that the rise
from one level of consciousness to another is marked by the transition
from a lower Means to a higher. Conversely, a fall from the higher level to
the lower entails practice of a lower Means. The measure of the yogi's level
of consciousness, and that which sustains him in it allowing him to
progress further, is his attentiveness (avadhana) to the higher realities he
experiences in the more elevated states. Thus the last Aphorism of the
second section of the Sivasutra warns the yogi that if his pure awareness
(suddhavidya) of his oneness with all things slackens, he will fall from his
awakened state to dream the dream of thought-constructs.264 From
Kemaraja's point of view this means that the negligent yogi must now
resort to the Individual Means described in the next section to return to his
former, higher Empowered practice in which he experiences this
oneness.265
Ksemaraja expounds practice at the Individual level, as he sees it in
the Aphorisms, as extending from one Means to the next. For example,
practice at the Individual level diverts the flow of the vital breath (prana)
from its more usual course and induces it to enter the Central Channel
(susumna) along which it rises as a pure conscious energy (technically
called 'kurujalini'). This leads the yogi to the Empowered state in which he
enjoys the pure awareness of unity. If he manages to make it truly his own
and it becomes his basic state of being, he enters the Divine plane
(sambhavapadd) of identity with Siva.266 The Individual Means is both a
point of departure to higher levels of practice and the level to which the
yogi returns if he falls. Thus although the practices taught in the last
section of the Aphorisms may belong to any one of the three Means, they
are collectively treated as part of the Individual Means because they start
from it and because it is the yogi's abiding standby if he falls.267
Let us turn now to the basic practice at the Individual level, as
Ksemaraja understands it. This is essentially Yoga. According to the
Classical Yoga system taught by Patanjali in the Aphorisms of Yoga
(Yogasutra), Yoga is defined as 'the quelling of the fluctuations of the
mind5 (cittavrttinirodha).2™ The aim is to sever the spiritual essence of the
Person (purusa) from the defiling materiality of Nature (prakrti), even
though the word 'Yoga'means to 'unite'or 'yoke together.' Here, however,
Yoga combines both union and cessation. It is the act (kriya) of removing
the latent traces (yasana) of differentiated perceptions (yikalpa) born of
the impurities (mala) which contract consciousness.269 This is achieved by
uniting all the elements of experience (tattva) together in the wholeness of
the activity of consciousness. As Jayaratha explains:

Path to Liberation

The [wise] consider Yoga to be the union of one thing with
another,'270 thus, in accord with this dictum, Yoga is the [act] of uniting
[all] the metaphysical principles together within consciousness. . . ,271
Ksemaraja seeks initially to establish the best form of Yoga for the
yogi to practice at the Individual level. His sources are two Tantras he
knew well and considered to be amongst the most important, namely, The
Tantra of {Siva's Third) Eye (Netratantra) and The Tantra of the
Liberated Bhairava (Svacchandabhairavatantra).
The basic model is that
of the Eight-limbed Yoga (asfdriga) taught by Patanjali which consists of:
1) The five restraints {yama\ namely, abstention from violence
(ahirpsd), falsehood (satya), dishonesty (asteya), sexual intercourse
(brahmacarya) and desire for more than the essential (aparigraha).212
2) The five disciplines {niyama), namely, cleanliness (sauca),
contentment (santo$a), austerity (tapas\ study (svddhydya) and
reverence for God {Uvaraprariidhdna)211
3) Posturing of the body (dsana) in a manner conducive to the
practice of meditation and physical health.274
4) Regulation of the breath (prdndydma)215
5) Withdrawal of the senses from their objects (pratydhdra)216
6) Focusing of attention (dhdrand)211
7) Meditation (dhydna), that is, steady, uninterrupted
concentration.278
8) Contemplation (samddhi).
Ksemaraja rejects Patanjali's system because he believes it to be a
form of Yoga that can, at best, lead only to limited yogic attainments
(mitasiddhi).219
In the Netratantra, however, Siva teaches a different,
higher form of the Eight Limbs of Yoga which lead to perfect penetration
into the supreme, transcendental principle280 of which the Netratantra
says:
Speech cannot express, nor the eye see, the ears hear, or the nose
smell, the tongue taste, the skin touch or the mind conceive that which
is eternal. Free of all colour and flavour, endowed with all colours and
flavours, it is beyond the senses and cannot be objectively perceived.
O goddess, those yogis who attain it become immortal gods! By great
practice and supreme dispassion . . . one attains Siva, the supreme
imperishable, eternal and unchanging reality.281
A necessary preliminary of all Tantric Yoga is a process technically

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

called the 'purification of the elements' (bhutasuddhi), through which the
body is homologized with the macrocosm and so made a fit vessel for the
pure, conscious presence of the Deity within it. Ksemaraja equates this
with the meditation (dhydna) which, according to the Mdlinivijayatantra,
characterises the Individual Means.282 In order to practice this meditation
the yogi must visualise the dissolving away of all the forces in the body.283
There are two ways in which this can be done. The first is called 'the
contemplation of dissolution' (layabhdvand). Through it the progressive
differentiation of consciousness from its causal, pre-cosmic form to its
phenomenal manifestation is reversed. As the Vijfidnabhairava teaches:
"One should meditate on the All in the form of the Paths of the worldorders etc. considered in their gross, subtle and supreme forms until, at the
end, the mind dissolves away."284
Mediated by consciousness, the macrocosm rests in the microcosm
which is emitted along with it successively in the emptiness of the
individual subject, vital breaths, mind, psychic nerves (ndtfi), senses and
external body.285 The yogi reproduces this process by visualising the
totality of reality including the world-systems, metaphysical principles and
cosmic forces along with the Mantras, letters and syllables which represent
them, as arising successively throughout the psycho-physical body so as to
constitute it. Deployed in this way they form the Cosmic Path along which
the yogi ascends, absorbing as he does so, the lower elements into the
higher, thus strengthening and extending his unifying awareness
(anusamdhdna) of the configuration of the Path. Thus, moving from the
gross elements constituting the outer physical body, to pure sensations
(tanmdtra), then to the senses and mind back to their primordial source,
the yogi rises from the embodied subjectivity of the waking state to the
Fourth State (turiya) of contemplation where he is one with the pervasive
intent which initiates the creative vision of consciousness. Abhinava
writes:
Once [the yogi] has known [this] Path in its completeness, he must
then dissolve it into the deities who sustain it and these successively into
the body, breath, mind [and emptiness] as before, and all these into his
own consciousness. Once this is full and an object of constant worship, it
destroys, like the fire at the end of time, the ocean of transmigration.286
Thus, the second method Kemaraja teaches to dissolve away the
diversity of sensory, mental and physical energies into the unity of
consciousness is a meditation on the Fire of Consciousness (dahacintd)
which the yogi visualises as burning away all division. At the Divine level

Path to Liberation

(sambhavopaya) the yogi witnesses the sudden and violent withdrawal of
all objectivity into the pure ego (aham), like the pouring of fuel into a
raging fire.287 He does not need to visualise this process but merely attend
to it with a passive, receptive attitude. At the Individual level the yogi must
exert his imagination to induce this process and so rise to the Divine level
through the Empowered. The Vijndnabhairava teaches:
Visualise the fortress [of your body] burning with the Fire of Time
(kalagni) risen from the Abode of Time; then at the end peace
manifests.288
The Fire of Time (kalagni) resides underneath the hell worlds at the
bottom of the Cosmic Egg (brahmaruja). It issues from Ananta—a form
of Siva who presides over the lower regions. He floats on a boat in the
causal waters supporting the Egg, his mind all the while fixed on Bhairava.
The flames of the Fire of Time rise up to the hell-worlds heating them
intensely289 and radiate its energy throughout the universe. At the end of
each period of creation the flames rise higher and destroy the old cosmic
order to make room for a new one.290 At the microcosmic level the yogi
reproduces this process by mentally placing the letters of the alphabet, in
the prescribed order, on the limbs of his body starting from the left toe to
the top of the head. As his attention progresses upwards, he visualises the
Fire of Time moving with it in such a way that his bodily consciousness,
together with the universe of differentiated perceptions, is gradually burnt
away leaving in its place the white ashes of the undivided light of
consciousness.
Ksemaraja considers this meditation (dhyand) to be a limb of a
programme of yogic practice at the Individual level291 of which the
remaining limbs are as follows:292
Posture (Asana). The yogi fixes his attention on the centre between the
inhaled and exhaled breath, absorbing in this way the flux of his awareness
into the unfolding power of knowledge which rises initially as the upward
flowing breath (uddnaprdna) in the Central Channel (suumnd) between
the other two breaths. The Prank aspect of this flow disappears as it
moves upward and the yogi experiences the spontaneous rise of the
omniscience of consciousness within himself. The mind reverts back to its
original, pervasive conscious nature and understands the infinite fact of
Siva's omnipresence. This is the firm seat (dsana) upon which the yogi sits
to practice.

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Regulation of the Breath (Pranayama). To regulate the movement of the
breath, the yogi must first cleanse the right and left channels of the
ascending and descending breath by blocking the left nostril while exhaling
and the right while inhaling a few times. This ensures that the movement of
the breath is firm and evenly distributed. Next, without attempting to
control it in any way, he attends to the flow of his breathing. As the mind
becomes steadier and in closer harmony with the rhythm of its movement,
the duration of each inhalation and exhalation gradually alters until they
become equal. At this stage they unite and merge in the upward flowing
current of vitality in the Central Channel (Susumna). This is when true
Pranayama begins. The yogi's mind pure and tranquil, he returns, as it
were, to a prenatal state and the external breathing cycle is internalised, so
that it no longer moves through the lungs but passes directly to the
universal source of vitality. The yogi, now at the Empowered level of
practice, experiences this movement as travelling from the Heart centre
upwards to a point distant twelve fingers above the head where it merges in
the void of consciousness. Free of its outer gross form, the breath moves
freely through the Central Channel and soon transcends even this subtle
movement to become one with the supreme vibration of consciousness. In
this way, the yogi's breathing becomes one with the spontaneous rise and
fall of energy from the bosom of the absolute. Abhinava quotes the Tantra
of the Line of Heroes (Viravalitantra) as saying:
When, by constantly merging the mind in Siva, Who is the pure
conscious nature, the Sun and Moon [of the two breaths] have dissolved
away and the Sun of Life, which is one's own consciousness, has reached
the twelve-finger space, this is termed liberation. Breath control [at this
stage] serves no useful purpose. Breath control which merely inflicts pain
on the body is not to be practised. He who knows this secret is both
himself liberated and liberates others.293

Focusing of Attention (Dharana). Attention is fixed on the psychic
centres in the body corresponding to the five gross elements. In this way
the vital breath is successively directed to these centres from the Heart of
consciousness to refresh and stimulate their activity. First it moves to the
Earth centre in the throat which regulates the firmness of the bones and
flesh of the body; then to the Water centre in the glottis responsible for the
balance of the bodily fluids. After this it travels to the navel which is the
Fire centre dealing with digestion and anabolesis and catabolesis in
general. It then moves to the Wind centre in the toe of the left foot which
governs the movement of gases to and from the cells via the circulatory
system. When the yogi has thus achieved control over these forces, the

Path to Liberation

breath rises from the Heart to the top of the head and he becomes master
of the Ether element and so attains every yogic power.294
Meditation (Dhyana). The highest form of meditation stills the flux of the
qualities (guna) and induces the mind into a state of contemplative
absorption. The object of this meditation is the supreme and pervasive
divinity of the pure subject whose true nature is known to none but himself
alone (svasatpvedya). The yogi attains him by merging into the constant
flow of awareness that streams into the Light which illumines his own
nature.
Contemplation (Samadhi). The yogi rises to the level of contemplation
when the awareness he has of himself and the things around him become
one and he realises his own identity with Siva, the sole reality.295
The aim of this Yoga in all its phases is to achieve the Fourth State of
consciousness (turiya) beyond the three states of waking, dreaming and
deep sleep and to then ultimately reach the liberated state Beyond the
Fourth (turiydtita). These five states correspond to: (a) Siva's activity
(vydpdra), that is, His power of action; (b) Siva's Lordship (adhipdtya),
which is His power of knowledge; (c) the absence of these two, which
corresponds to Siva's power of will; (d) His exertion (prerakatva), which
contains all the cycles of creation and destruction and, (e) the rest Siva
enjoys in His own nature, which is His power of consciousness.296 The first
three states, when divorced from the last two, belong to the sphere of
transmigratory existence. The Fourth and Beyond the Fourth on the other
hand are higher, supramundane (alaukika) states of consciousness in
which the yogi enjoys bliss and repose (visrdnti) in his own nature by
penetrating (samavesa) into the universal consciousness of the Self,
through which he ultimately becomes liberated (jivanmukta). Beyond the
Fourth is the state of awareness ParamaSiva Himself enjoys when duality
has entirely disappeared and everything is realised to be one with
consciousness. The Fourth is the state of awareness of the yogi who,
catching hold of the pure subjectivity (upalabdhrtd) flowing through the
lower three states, is still actively eliminating his sense of duality. While
the former is the supreme subject as T consciousness (aham), the latter is
the pure awareness (pramd) or I-ness' (ahantd) of the subject which
encompasses the lower states, giving them life and uniting them
together.297 As such, the Fourth State is the reflective awareness of one's
own nature shining in all three states at one with them.298 The fact that we
recall that we slept well is proof that this state of consciousness persists

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

even in deep sleep. Indeed, if the flow of Turiya could somehow be brought
to a halt, all the other states of consciousness would come to an end in the
absence of the pure subjectivity which makes them, and their contents,
manifest.299 The states of waking, dreaming and deep sleep correspond to
the form of awareness consciousness assumes when it it predominantly
manifest as the object, means of knowledge and individual subject,
respectively. Turiya is the pure awareness (pramd) that both transcends
them and merges them all into itself.300 As such, it appears as the triad of
deed, means and agent in the pure act (yydpdra) of consciousness unsullied
by any outer reality.301 Abhinava explains:
(Turiya) transcends the three aspects of 'form', 'sight' and T
consisting as it does of the pure act of 'seeing'; therefore any means [by
which this state could be realised] has merely a [provisional] instrumental
value. It is, in other words, pure subjectivity of the nature of absolute
freedom, independent of all external means. This is the state of
consciousness called Turiya, luminous with its own light.302
Turiya is thus not just a psychological state but the supreme creative
power (para sakti) of consciousness, the Goddess (samviddevi) Who
generates and withdraws the entire universe of subject, object and means
of knowledge. In the Heart of Recognition Ksemaraja explains:
Whenever the extroverted [conscious] nature rests within itself,
external objectivity is withdrawn [and consciousness] is established in
the inner abode of peace which threads through the flux of awareness in
every [externally] emanated [state]. Thus Turiya, the Goddess of
Consciousness, is the union of creation, persistence and destruction. She
emanates every individual [cycle] of creation and withdraws it. Eternally
full [of all things] and [yet] void [of diversity] She is both and yet neither,
shining radiantly as non-successive [consciousness] alone.303
The yogi is fully absorbed in this state of consciousness and takes
possession of its power when he is able to rise from contemplation
(samddhi) carrying with him the abiding awareness of Turiya throughout
his waking, dreaming and deep sleep. When he achieves this constantly, he
continues to experience these states individually, but they no longer
obscure the insight (pratibhd) he has acquired because he realises that they
are all aspects of the bliss of Turiya. Thus, while the common man calls
this state the 'Fourth' (turiya) because he cannot experience it directly and
knows only that it is beyond the other three, the yogi calls it 'Beyond Form'
(rupdtita) because it transcends the detachment of the state of deep sleep

Path to Liberation

which, devoid of objective content, is the naked form' of the individual
subject tending towards the fullness of consciousness. Those who are on
the path of knowledge (jndnin) call it the 'Whole (pracaya) because, in this
state, they see the entire universe gathered together in one place.304
'Supra-mental Awareness' (manonmana) is the name given to the
experience of Turiya in the waking state. The yogi in this state moves and
lives in the world of waking experience free of all disturbing thoughts while
abiding in the transcendental silence beyond the activities of the mind.
'Infinite' is the name of the experience of Turiya while dreaming because,
free of the limitations imposed upon the body by time and space, the yogi
enjoys the unlimited expanse of the Self. When Turiya is experienced in
deep sleep, the yogi's state is called 'All things (sarvartha) because in it he
discovers his freedom from limitations in this, the most contracted state of
human consciousness. The yogi who manages to maintain Turiyaconsciousness comes to experience the three states of waking, dreaming
and deep sleep as the constant flow of the bliss of consciousness in which all
traces of the relative distinction between these states and their contents is
eradicated.305 Following the stream of Turiya to its highest level (para
katfha), he reaches the state Beyond the Fourth (iuriyatita), which is the
universal consciousness {caitanya) of the Self. Here the yogi comes to rest
within his own nature. Plunged in the vast, waveless ocean of the
consciousness and bliss (ciddnanda) of the state Beyond the Fourth, the
yogi becomes Siva,306 the Free One (svacchanda), and thus wanders freely,
practising the Yoga of Freedom.307
Kemaraja equates the Fourth State with the pure (suddha), innate
(sahaja) knowledge that one's own conscious nature is all things. It is the
Supra-mental State (unmana) in which Siva's pervasive presence is
experienced308 once the Yoga practised at the Individual level attains
fruition at the Empowered.309 What the yogi must do, once consciousness
is elevated to grasp the Fourth State, is make it constant. He must
forcefully lay hold of it within himself and not release his grip until it
becomes permanent. Then he travels 'Beyond the Fourth' to enlightenment.310 Before this ultimate attainment the yogi inevitably falls. The
forces operating within consciousness that limit and obscure it throw him
down whenever they possibly can. The only way the yogi can defend
himself against them is to maintain a constant attentive awareness of the
Fourth State.311 He falls when he is distracted but when he attends
carefully to his pure conscious nature, he realises that every aspect of his
state of being, including the forces that lead him astray, are one with the
pulsing flux of his own consciousness and so cannot affect him.
These powers, which are the energies of Matrka we have already
discussed, are not the only obstacles the yogi must overcome. He must,

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

for example, also resist the temptation to rest content with the miraculous
yogic powers (siddhi) he acquires in the course of his spiritual development. Again to do this he must practice Yoga. Similarly, in order to
pervade the Fourth State gradually through the other states in the manner
proper to practice at the Individual level, the method is the same. He must
practise the higher yoga of the Tantras which, turning his mind inwards
and freeing it from discursive representations, allows him to penetrate into
the Supreme Principle.312 Once the yogi has attained this contemplative
state, his main problem is to make it permanent. In the introverted state
the gross external movement of the breath is suspended and with it the
activity of the intellect, mind, individualised consciousness, powers of the
senses and the ego.313 When the yogi rises out of this state, he is liable to
fall again into the lower order of creation generated by Maya if he does not
maintain his awareness of the higher reality he has experienced and allows
his awakened, illumined insight to be obscured by the dream-like vision of
thought-constructs.314 Naturally, the yogi must rise out of the introverted
condition of suspension. It is inherent in the very nature of reality that it
should move out of itself.315 Pure, universal consciousness initially
transforms itself into the vital breath316 charged with the impression
iyasana) of the power of awareness attained through introversion. By
attending to the pulse (spanda) of the breath as it moves out of the
absolute, the yogi can develop an intuitive sense of the inherent unity of all
he will perceive in the mental and physical spheres created by the
outpouring of consciousness. In this way he realises that his own nature is
everywhere present in all he perceives and that all things thus reside within
him. Blessed with this insight his consciousness remains free and unlimited
even at the individual level where the breath, mind, senses and body
are active.
If the yogi fails to do this, he finds himself once again beset by the
strictures of his embodied existence and must, as before, try to pervade all
his other states of consciousness with the aesthetic delight (rasa) and
wonder (camatkard) of the Fourth State he experienced in contemplation.
Again this means that he must strengthen his pure, empowered awareness
that his universal nature manifests as all things.317 In this way he discovers
Siva's presence in every sphere of individualised consciousness ranging
from the breath to outer objectivity. The yogi's mind then becomes
tranquil and undistracted because wherever it may wander, the yogi
perceives only Siva, his authentic nature.318 Consciousness is thus freed of
all external referents and the yogi's subjectivity is purified of all
identification with the body or anything else that belongs to the objective
sphere. The yogi then becomes detached from the opposites of pleasure
and pain and is transcendentally free (kevalin).319

Path to Liberation

The yogi is again, however, liable to fall if he allows himself to get
entangled in the play of opposites. This fall is more serious than the others
because, although he is caught by the confining restrictions of individualised consciousness as before, he is now also affected by karma. Fleeing
from pain in the pursuit of pleasure he is bound to act (karma) to minimise
one and maximise the other and so is thrown down to the lowest level of
embodied subjectivity (sakala). In order to regain his lost state, he must
ascend gradually, by Siva's grace, from one order of subjectivity to the
next and so free himself progressively of the limitations of the lower levels
to gain the greater freedom and expansion of the higher. As he progresses,
the objective sphere also evolves from the grossest perceptions of physical
objects outside the lowest order to subjectivity, through to the subtler
inner, mental perceptions to finally reach the order of subjectivity that
contains objectivity within itself and is free to externalise it at will.320
The degree to which this process develops depends, as before, on the
yogi's awareness of the Fourth State. In consonance with the general
principle that the remedy should suit the defect, the yogi is instructed to
seek this higher state of consciousness in the wonder (camatkara) or
delight (ananda) he feels in moments of intense physical pleasure. At first
he experiences this subtle consciousness for an instant in the subjective
sphere. If he manages to catch hold of it, it becomes more intense as the
cognitive and objective spheres are also gradually pervaded and vitalised
by it. Occasions for this practice are, for example, the sense of satisfaction
one feels after a good meal or the aesthetic delight one experiences when
listening to good music or the pleasure of sexual union with the Tantric
consort or even solitary sexual excitation. In these moments of delight the
yogi can penetrate momentarily into his own authentic Siva-nature
(sambhavavesa) through the empowered contact (sdktasparsa)nx he
makes with it in the freedom of the pure subjectivity of the Fourth State.322
If the yogi develops his awareness of this higher level of consciousness and
maintains it, he eventually experiences it constantly.323
Clearly, what prevents the yogi from attending to his state of
consciousness rather than the circumstances which induce it is the craving
for pleasure (abhila$a) born of ignorance—the source of every impurity
which clouds consciousness. Craving directs the yogi's attention towards
outer, worldly things and so he is caught in the net of thoughtconstructs.324 To free himself of his worldly desires and reverse this
binding extroversion, the yogi must eradicate its cause. To be freed of all
the ups and downs of the path and no longer be tormented by the
possibility of a fall, the yogi must see reality perfectly and completely.
This insight is itself liberation and the moment it dawns the yogi is
instantly freed. This sudden realisation is the goal of Tantric Yoga.

THE DOCTRINE OF VIBRATION

Accordingly the Tantra declares: "He who perceives reality directly, even
for the brief moment it takes to blink, is liberated that very instant and
never reborn again."325
Although the yogi's body and mind continue to function as before,
they are like mere outer coverings326 which contain, but do not obscure,
the mighty, universal consciousness which operates through them. The
yogi's body is the universe, the senses the energies that vitalise it, his mind
Mantra, the rhythm of his breath the pulse of time and his inner nature
pure, dynamic consciousness. Raised above all practice, and hence all
possibility of falling to lower levels, the yogi realises that he has always
been free327 and that his journey through the dark land of Maya was
nothing but a dream, a construct of his own imagination.

ABBREVIATIONS

A.P.S.
Bh.G.
Bhl.
B.P.
Br.Su.
Bf.Up.
C.G.C.
Chan .Up.
I.P.
I.P.v.
I.P.V.V.
K.K.V.
K.S.T.S.
K.J.N.
Kena Up.
K.N.P.
L.S.
L.V.
L.A.S.
M.P.
M.M.
M.U.V.
M.V.
M.V.V.
Ma.Ka.
Mu.Up.
N.A.
N.T.

Ajatfapramatrsiddhi
Bhagavadgita
Bhaskari
Bodhapancadasika
Brahmasutra
Brhadaranyakopaniid
Cidgaganacandrika
Chandogy opanisad
Isvarapratyabhijna
ISvarapratyabhijnavimarsinI
Kvarapratyabhijnavivftivimarsini
Kamakalavilasa
Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies
Kaulajnananirnaya
Kenopaniad
Kramanayapradlpika
Lalitasahasranamastotra
Lallavakyani
Luptagamasaipgraha
Mahanayapraka^a
Maharthamanjari
MahopadesaviipSatika
Malinlvijayatantra
Malinivijayavartika
Mancjukyakarika
Mun<Jakopaniad
National Archives
Netratantra

ABBREVIATIONS

N.T.U.
N.P.
Pancast.
P.C.
P.P.
P.S.
Parapra
P.T.
P.T.L.V.
P.T.V.
Pr.Hr.
R.T.
R.S.O.
S.C.N.
Sa.Df.
Sam.P.
Sam.Ka.
SB.

Netratantroddyota
Nilamatapurana
Pancastavi
Paramarthacarca
Paryantapancasika
Paramarthasara
Parapravesika
Paratriipsika
Paratrinisikalaghuvrtti
ParatriinSikavivarana
Pratyabhijnahfdaya
RajatarahginI
Ricerche e Studi Orientali
Saccakranirupana
Saktadrti
Sambapancasika
Sarnkhyakarika
ankarabhaya on the Brahmasutra

s.st.

Sivastotra
Sivasutra
Sivasutravartika
Sivasutravimarsini
Svacchandabhairavatantra
vetasvataropaniad
Spandakarika
Spandakarikavivrti
Spandanirnaya
Spandapradlpika
Spandasaipdoha
Stavacintamani
Taittiriyaranyakopaniad
Tantraloka
Tantrasara
Vakyapadlya
Varivasyarahasya
Vijnanabhairava
Virupak^apancasika
Yogasutra
Yoginlhfdaya

S.Su.
S.SQ.va.
S.Su.vi.
Sv.T.
Sv.Up.
Sp.Ka.
Sp.Ka.vi.
Sp.Nir.
Sp.Pra.
Sp.Sam.
St.Ci.
T.U.
T.A.
T.Sa.
Va.P.
V.R.
V.B.
V.P.P.
Y.Su.
Y.Hf.

NOTES

INTRODUCTION
1. A. H. Francke and E. W. Thomas, The Chronicles of Ladhak and Minor
Chronicles (Antiquities of Indian Tibet) Part 2, Asiatic Society of India, New
Imperial Series, (Calcutta: 1926), vol. L, pp. 39-40.
2. G. Tucci, La Via dello SvaU (Bari: 1963), pp. 16, 97.
3. L. Nadou, Les Buddhistes KaSmiriens au Moyen Age (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1968), p. 38. The reader is referred to this book for a
detailed account of Buddhism in Kashmir.
4. See Introduction to the Pancaratra and the Ahirbudhnya Sarnhita by
F. Otto Schrader, Adyar Library Series, 2nd ed. (Adyar: 1973), p. 20ff.
5. Yamunacarya is the earliest Srivaisnava author whose works have come
down to us. He lived in South India about the middle of the tenth century and was
the teacher of Ramanuja's teacher. He is credited with having written a work, now
lost, called Authoritativeness of the Kashmiri Agama. This work is said to have
established the revealed character (apauruseyatva) of the Ekayana branch of the
White Yajur Veda which Pancaratrins claim is the original source of their Agamic
literature. (See M. Narasimhacharya, Contributions of Yamuna to Visisfadvaita
(Madras: M. Rangacharya Memorial Trust, 1971), p. 12. For Yamuna's date see
ibid. pp. 10-11) The origins of the Pancaratra were, therefore, it seems, linked by
Yamunacarya with the Kashmiri Agamas and the Ekayana. Recently discovered
material confirms that the Ekayana was known in Kashmir before the eleventh
century. Bhagavatotpala (who probably belongs to the eleventh or tenth century)
frequently quotes a work called Samvitprakasa in his commentary on the Stanzas
on Vibration (Sp.Pra. pp. 85, 87, 89, 95-6, 99, 100 and 112). (For abbreviations see
pp. 219-220.) At least two incomplete manuscripts of this work are still extant.
One is deposited in the research Centre in Srinagar responsible for the K.S.T.S.. A
copy of this manuscript was kindly given to me by Professor R. Gnoli. Another
manuscript which is less complete is MS no. C4003 deposited in the Central
Library of Banaras Hindu University. A verse at the end of the first chapter reads:

NOTES

ekayane prasj-tasya kaSmiresu dvijanmanali
krtir vamanadattasya seyaip bhagavadasraya (fol. 6b).
We can gather from these lines that the author of this work was Vamanadatta who
was a Kashmiri Brahmin belonging to the Ekayana. It is significant that this
author should be quoted so extensively by Bhagavatotpala who was himself a
Kashmiri Vaisnava Brahmin by descent even though he was a Saivite. It shows the
close affinity between certain forms of Vaisnavism in Kashmir with monistic
Saivism. Bhagavatotpala's is the oldest work so far recovered anywhere which
quotes Vainava Agamic sources. There can be no doubt, therefore, that Kashmir
was an important centre of Tantric Vaisnavism (the Pancaratra) at a relatively
early date.
6. Kalhana wrote the introduction to his Chronicles in 1148-49 A.D. and
completed his work the following year. See R.T. Intro, p. 6; also ibid., verse 1/52
and 8/3404.
7. Stein, the editor of the RajatarahginU writes: "It is characteristic that the
Kashmir tradition knows the great Asoka both as a founder of viharas and stiipas
and as a fervent worshipper at the ancient Saiva shrines." R.T., Intro, p. 9, fn. 25.
See R.T. l/102ff. and l/1055ff.
8. For a more detailed treatment of the Saiva canon, the reader is referred to
the author's The Canon of The Saivagama (Albany: SUNY Press, 1987).
9. For their names and brief details, see the introduction by Filliozat to the
Rauravagama, vol. 1 (Pondichery: 1961) pp. v-xv.
10. For the inscriptional and textual references which support this account
see Saivism in Early Mediaeval India as Known from Archaeological Sources by
V. S. Pathak in Bharati: Bulletin of the College of Indology, no. 3 (1959-60). Also
Rohan A. Dunuwila, Saiva Siddhanta Theology (Delhi: M. Banarsidass, 1985),
p. 34ff.
11. See Gli Agama Scivaitinell 'India Settentrionale by R. Gnoli in Indologica
Tourinensia, vol. I (Torino: 1973), pp. 61-9. Also, for an account of these Kashmiri
Siddhantins and their work, see K. C. Pandey, Bhaskari, vol. 3. The Princess of
Wales Sarasvati Bhavan Texts no. 84 (Lucknow: 1954), Intro, p. lxvi ff.
12. The term "Kashmiri Saivism" can be misleading. The monistic Saivism
we generally indicate by this term was not the only form of Saivism in Kashmir, nor
was it entirely confined to Kashmir. Scholars first came to know of the existence of
a distinct form of Saiva theology prevalent in Kashmir when the fourteenth century
work by Madhavacarya, the Sarvadarsanasamgraha, came out in the Bibliotheca
Indica series in 1858 edited by Isvaracandra Vidyasagar. In 1877 G. Biihler
published a general account of the works of non-dualist Kashmiri Saiva authors
in his Detailed Report of a Tour in Search of Sanskrit Manuscripts Made in
Kashmir (extra number of the Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society, 1877). J. C. Chatterjee, the first director of the research centre in Srinagar
responsible for the editing and publication of the Kashmir Series of Texts and
Studies, in his book Kashmir Shaivaism (Srinagar, 1914), was the first to refer to
the monistic Saivism elaborated by Kashmiri authors from about the middle of the
ninth century, and preserved in the works later published in the series as 'Kashmir

Notes

Shaivaism\ He did so simply in order to "distinguish it from the other forms of
Shaivaism known and still practised in different parts of India.' (Ibid., p. 1). This
term has since been generally adopted by scholars, even though we nowhere come
across it in the works of these authors who simply considered themselves to be
Saivites expounding Agamic Saivism (Saiva&asana) from a non-dualist standpoint
with no emphasis on anything peculiarly Kashmiri about it.
13. We suppose that this is so because Tantras of this class are hardly quoted
by Kashmiri Saiva authors. Moreover, the passages from Tantras they quote
relating to the Saivagamic canon tend to omit these two groups indicating,
possibly, that this tendency was not only confined to Kashmir. Practically the only
Tantra that belongs to these groups that is quoted is the Kriyakalottara (N.T.U.,
vol. 2, pp. 148, 151, 157-8 and 196-9). A manuscript of this Tantra is preserved in
Nepal dated Nepal Saipvat 304, i.e., 1148 A.D. (N.A., no. 3/392). See the
catalogue Brhatsucipatram, Part IV Tantra, vol. 1, compiled by Buddhis&gara
Sarma, Virapustakalaya, Kathmandu, 1964, pp. 96-8. In the passage quoted from
the beginning of this Tantra the Goddess asks Karttikeya a number of questions.
She says that she has not yet heard the Garmjatantra and would like to do so along
with the Bhutatantra and Mantravada. She wishes thereby to learn the
characteristic features of snakes and those of other kindred species such as
scorpions. She also wants to know about the planets and their (evil) influences
and about the potentially malevolent spirits such as Yaksas, Raksasas, Pi&acas
and Sakinis. Other matters are the evil planetary influences that take possession
of children and trouble pregnant women.
14. The Vinasikhatantra: A Saiva Tantra of the Left Current edited with an
introduction and a translation by Teun Goudriaan (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
1985).
15. A description of Tumburu, found in the (unedited) Jayadrathayamalais
recorded in The Canon of The Saivagama> part 1 fn. 181.
16. Goudriaan, Intro, p. 25.
17. For a more detailed account refer to Goudriaan, Intro, pp. 24-30.
18. According to the first etymology, Bhairava's name is derived from the
roots fBhf\ meaning to sustain and nourish, and 'Ru\ to shout.
19. From the roots 'BhV, 'fear' and 4Av\ 'protect.
20. From 'Bhi-rava \ 'a cry (for help born) of the fear of transmigration in the
hearts of those who invoke Him'. The form 'Bhairava' thus means 'He who is born
from this cry.
21. The word 'Bhairava' is here derived from 'Bha \ meaning 'star' and the root
'//•', to push, impel, or move. Together they form the word 'Bhera 'understood to
mean time. The last syllable—' Va '—is interpreted as a derivative of the root 'Vai\
to exhaust. Thus the 'Bheravas' are those who exhaust (vayanti) time, while
Bhairava (derived from Bherava) is their inner nature.
22. According to his interpretation 'Bhairava' is a compound referring to
those powers 'whose shouting instils fear', while Bhairava is their Lord.
23. T.A., 1/96-100a.
24. 'Mahakala' means both the 'Great Black One' and the 'Great Time'.
Bhairava is well known to Kashmiri Saivism as the eternity of all-destroying and

NOTES

universally creative time. Similarly in the Buddhist Tantric tradition, time is an
important representation of Emptiness. 'Xla/'is, by coincidence, both an IndoEuropean root meaning 'time' and a non-Aryan root meaning 'black' or 'dark
blue'. For a discussion and references see Myth, Cult and Symbols in Sakta
Hinduism by Wendell C. Beane (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1977), pp. 81-4.
25. For accounts of the mythical origins of the gods we must generally
turn, not to the Tantras, but to the PurSnas and Vedic literature. Although we
do come across mythological material in the Tantras, myths concern them little
and only indirectly. They focus on ritual and all that concerns its execution and
ultimately its symbolic meaning. For the beheading of Brahma, why it took
place and Bhairava's origin see Asceticism and Eroticism in the Mythology of Siva
by Wendy Doniger O'Flaherty (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1973), pp. 123-7.
26. S. Su., 1/5.
27. The Pasupatasutra and an old commentary have been translated into
English under the title The Pds'upatasutram with Pancdrthabhdsya of Kaun<jiinya
by Haripada Chakraborti (Calcutta: Academic Publishers, 1970).
28. For an interesting account of Saiva sects such as these and their Pa&upata
affiliations drawn mostly from inscriptions and literary sources see The Kapalikas
and Kalamukhas: Two Lost Saivite Sects by David N. Lorenzen (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1972).
29. Jayaratha in his commentary on the Tantraloka (vol. Xlb, p. 4) quotes
fragments from Agamic sources in which the term 'Kula' is defined. These are
as follows: "Kula is the supreme power." "The nature of the arising and falling
away (of all things) is consciousness, therefore that is said to be Kula." "Kula is
pure consciousness present in the innate nature (svabhdva of all things) and is
the universal cause." "O Best of Women, Kula is subtle, all-pervasive and the
agent of all things." "O Goddess, Kula is the Lord of all things, is all things
and is established in all things. That brilliant energy (tejas) is supremely
terrible . . . " "Know that Kula, everywhere present, is vitality in the sphere of
power." "Kula is supreme bliss." "Kula is indeed one's own innate nature" and
"Kula is said to be the body". Abhinavagupta explains what Kula is in his
Pardtrimsikdtattvavivarana, p. 61 ff. This work has been translated into Italian
by R. Gnoli: // commento di Abhinavagupta alia Pardtrims'ikd Serie Orientale
Roma vol. 58 (Rome, 1985). See also T.A., 29/111b ff. for an extensive exposition
of the relationship between Akula and Kula, i.e., Siva/Bhairava and His power.
30. K. C. Pandey was the first to identify these three periods of Abhinavagupta's work. See K. C. Pandey Abhinavagupta, an Historical and Philosophical
Study, 2nd ed. (Varanasi: Chowkhamba, 1963), p. 191.
31. T.A, 37/58. Abhinava had great respect for his father whom he considered to be the greatest of his teachers (T.A., 1/12, M.V.V. 1/5) and a fully
realised soul who knew the deepest meaning of the scriptures (T.A., 1/12).

32. Ibid., 37/56-7.
33. Ibid., 37/63.
34. Ibid., 37/64.
35. Ibid., 37/65.
36. Ibid., 37/70.

Notes

37. See the Gurunathaparamarsa by Madhuraja, K.S.T.S. no. 85, edited
by P. N. Pushp, 1960, verse 18. The same work was edited by V. Raghavan
from a South Indian MS. Although substantially the same, the order of the
verses does not quite tally. See Gurunathaparamarsa in Abhinavagupta and
his Works by R. Raghavan (Varanasi: Chowkhambha Orientalia, 1981), pp. 3-16.
In this edition the verse referred to above corresponds to verse 20. See Pandey,
pp. 20 ff. for a detailed account of Madhuraja's work.
38. T.A., 1/14.
39. K. C. Pandey did not wish to consider the Trika a separate system,
nor did he succumb to the view prevalent in Kashmir nowadays, and supported
by the writings of J. C. Chatterjee and others, that Trika is Kashmiri Saivism
in toto. In fact, as Pandey rightly remarks, 'Trika' stands for "the entire Saiva
thought as presented by (Abhinava) in his Tantraloka." (Pandey, p. 295).
Even so, although Abhinava certainly contributed enormously to enstating
Trika in the Kashmiri Saiva milieu (and in so doing practically created a Trika
system of his own), it is clearly an equally exaggerated view to simply ignore
it as a distinct system (as Pandey has done) as it is to identify it wholesale with
all of Kashmiri Saivism.
40. T.A., vol. 1, p. 236.
41. For references and discussion about this Tantra see my Translations
from the Spanda Tradition of Kashmiri Saivism (Albany, State University of
New York Press forthcoming).
42. The Triad is referred to in Sp.Pra., p. 91; it is not, however, certain
that this work pre-dates Abhinavagupta. See Translations.
43. For a historical survey of the Krama system represented in the works of
Kashmiri Saiva authors, see The Krama Tantricism of Kashmir by Navjivan
Rastogi (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979). Also the relevant chapters on
Krama and Kula in K. C. Pandey's Abhinavagupta.
44. See The Canon of the Saivagama for an account of the relationship
between Krama, Trika, Kula and the Saivagama. This work pretends to do
little more than present a broad outline of this, as yet, hardly researched area.
Hopefully this preliminary study will be followed soon by more extensive work
in this field.
45. See Pandey p. 491 ff.
46. As an example of the close relationship between the Trika and Kula
one can cite Abhinava's treatment of the Kaula element in the Pardtrimsika.
This brief tract drawn from the Rudraydmala deals with what Abhinava
defines as the path of Anuttara—the absolute. This path, he asserts, is that
of the Kaulika (See Pandey, p. 46) and indeed the text is so thoroughly couched
in Kaula terminology that some scholars hold the view that it belongs to the
Kaula tradition (see, for example Dvivedi in L.A.S., vol 2, p. 39). Abhinava,
however, calls it the 'Trikasutra' because it expounds in brief the basic principles
(prameya) of the Trika system (T.A., 12/15). Again, the text along with Abhinava's commentary, is called Anuttaraprakhyd (T.A., VI, p. 249) which reminds
us of the name Abhinava gives to Trika, namely Anuttaratrikakula.
47. Jayaratha writes:

NOTES

In this way Trika, the sixth, includes all the dualist and other
scriptures which issue from Is"a, Varna and Aghora, the Supreme
Lord's (faces), because it is the abode in which the three goddesses,
Para, etc. reside. As the saying goes:
Must as scent (pervades a) flower, oil the sesame seed, life the body
and flavour water, just so Kula is (everywhere) present in all scriptures.'
May [Trika] accordingly, flood [all doctrines] with the nectar of
Supreme Unity (paramadvaya) that it may serve as the means to
realize the supreme state. (T.A., I, p. 45).
We said above (in fn. 39) that it is a wrong to identify Kashmiri Saivism
with Trika as some scholars have done. If they were the same, Trika would have
no independent identity either as an Agamic or Kashmiri Saiva school. This
is not the case. Let us start with Trika's Agamic identity. Jayaratha quotes a
passage which follows a long series of references from the SrikanfhJyasatphitd
suggesting that it is possibly drawn from the same Tantra. This passage states:
"The three powers [reside], in due order, in the [Tantras] of the Upper
Face [Isana, i.e., the Siddhanta], the left [i.e., the Vamatantras] and
the right [i.e., the Bhairavatantras]. Starting from the lower to the
supreme, Trika encompasses them all." (T.A., I, p. 46)
Trika 'contains' all the Tantric teachings in the sense that it was originally
an oral tradition that explained their ultimate purport in Trika terms. Jayaratha
consequently appeals to the authority of the tradition handed down by the
Tantric masters to support Trika's contentions. In this way he tacitly agrees
that there is no scriptural authority for it. He does, however, stress that Trika is
an independent school and quotes (the $rikanfhiya7) accordingly as saying:
"Trika doctrine is in this way dispersed amongst [the scriptures] variously. It
resides in the Master's house because it is handed down by tradition (sampradayakrama)." (Ibid).
Abhinava himself seems to support the view that Trika is predominantly an
oial tradition when he says: "The teachings of the Lord are divided into ten,
eighteen and sixty-four (Tantras) the essence of which are the Trika teachings
(Trikasdstra) and of these the Mdlinivijaya. Therefore, at the command of the
Master, we will explain all that is contained here [in these scriptures particularly]
that which sages not belonging to any spiritual lineage (sampraddya) have failed
to observe." (T.A., 1/18-19). Although Abhinava takes the Nialinivijayatantra
as the prime authority for his Trika, this Tantra nowhere refers to Trika as an
independent school, much less to itself as a Trikatantra. Even so, it most
certainly deals with specifically Trika matters, such as the Mantric system centred
on the Trika goddesses Para, Parapara and Apara. See R. Gnoli, Luce delle
Sacre Scritiure {Tantralokd) di Abhinavagupta (Torino: Classici Utet, 1972),
pp. 715-30. In the footnotes to his translation of chapter 30 of the T.A. he notes
all the parallel passages in the M.V. which deal with the mantras of these goddesses
and their consorts.

Notes

It seems, therefore, that Trika was not originally fully defined in the Agamas
as an independent school even when the elements of Trika ritual, etc. had already
developed. However, there can be no doubt that it did become an independent
school(s) not only in the oral tradition but also in the Agamas prior to Abhinava.
We know this from references to Trika in Agamic sources. The Essence of Trika
(Trikasara), a lost Tantra predating Abhinava, clearly belonged to this school
(S.Su.va., p. 31; for other references to this Tantra see L.A.S., II, pp. 39-40). But
whatever Trika's identity and character may have been before Abhinava's time,
there can be no doubt that he considers it to have had an independent identity
both in the Agamic context and in terms of other Kashmiri Saiva schools.
Thus he says: "Many are the manuals in use in the many and diverse traditions,
yet for the rituals of the Anuttaratrika there is not one to be seen." (T.A., 1 /14).
To make up for this deficiency he wrote his Light of the Tantras.
If Trika is not Kashmiri Saivism, then what do we mean when we say that
Trika is 'the culmination of the entire Saivagamic tradition and encompasses
it'? We are referring here to an exegetical method which we find exemplified not
only in Abhinava's Trika but also in other Hindu traditions and even outside
them. Dunuwila, who refers to this same method in the context of the Saivasiddhanta, describes it as follows: "What we have here is a structured theology
of Comparative Religion, on the 'gradationist' model, which establishes a
hierarchy of systems, the lowest being the furthest away from the truth, and the
highest the most near to it, if not identical with it. This model is common in
Christian and Islamic theologies." (Dunuwila, p. 47). The higher truth contains
the lower truth, but this does not mean that they have no separate identity. Trika
can be, and is, an independent school although it contains, from its own point
of view, all others.
48. Abhinava thus refers to the Bhairavakulatantra as saying: "The master
who knows the supreme principle, although consecrated on the path of the
Varna (Tantras), needs to be further initiated, first into the Bhairava (Tantras),
then into those of Kula, Kaula and (finally) Trika." (T.A., comm. 13/302).
Again he says that: "according to the venerable Bhairavakula, only the master
who has been thoroughly purified by the five initiations and has crossed over
the lower currents (of the Agamas) is established in Trika doctrine." (T.A.,
VIII, p. 182).
49. T.A., 15/319.
50. See Pandey, pp. 297-8.
51. SeeT.A., I, p. 236.
52. That Kalhana was a Saivite is clear from the fact that he begins every
chapter of his work with a verse of praise dedicated to Ardhanarlsvara, the
hermaphrodite union of Siva and Parvatl.
53. R.J., 5/66.
54. T.A., 35/43-4.
55. R.T., 7/279 and 7/283; see also 7/295 ff. 7/253 and 7/712.
56. T.A., 37/44.
57. It appears that Ksemendra tells us in one of his works that he learnt
poetics from 'Abhinavagupta. Although not all scholars agree about this,

NOTES

there can be no doubt that he heard Abhinavagupta lecture on poetics and
respected him as his elder. See Pandey, pp. 153-6 and Minor Works of Ksemendra
edited by E. V. V. Raghavacarya and D. G. Padhye (Hyderabad, 1961) Intro,
p. 1 ff.
58. "Satire has been deftly utilised by three well-known writers, Dantfin,
Somadeva and Ksemendra in Sanskrit with the pious motive of reforming the
administrative machinery and the degenerating antisocial elements in the
country." (Ibid., p. 7.) Ksemendra himself states more than once that he wrote
his satires not merely for their own sake, but also to inspire social reform and
an upliftment of moral values. (Ibid.)
59. Narmamalayll\4b-\1.
Minor Works of Ksemendra p. 337.
60. Desopadesa, 8/11-13. Minor Works of Ksemendra p. 299.
61. This took place during the reign of King Yasaskara (939-48 A.D.) at
his instigation for he wished to "exercise control over the caste and over the
condition of life (varnasramadharma) of his subjects" R.T., 6/108-12.
62. The work is called Sripifhadvadasika and has been edited, although
not yet published, by Mr. G. S. Sanderson who gave me this information.
63. See Yasastilaka and Indian Culture by K. K. Handiqui (Sholapur,
1949) p. 205, fn. 7. Another Jaina writer, Yasahpala (author of the Moharajaparajaya written in the twelfth century) creates a Kaula in his play who says
that one should eat meat daily and drink heavily because the religion he teaches
allows free scope to one's desires (Ibid., p. 204). This reference proves that this
form of Saivism was known in South India in the twelfth century. According
to Somadeva's account of Trikamata practice, the initiate, after eating meat
and drinking wine, should worship Siva by offering him wine in the company
of a female partner seated on his lap. The worshipper is to identify himself with
Siva and his consort with Parvati (ibid., p. 204). Again, we are told that a
young prince called Maradatta considered his body to be divine, like one initiated
into Trika doctrine (ibid. p. 43).
64. I.P., 3/2/2.
65. Ibid., 3/2/3.
66. Ibid., 4/2/2.
67. S.Dr., 7/109-123.
68. The legendary sage Durvasas is intimately related to Siva according
to both the Puranas and Agamas. According to the Brahman<fapurana the
circumstances that attended his birth are as follows. Once a quarrel arose
between Brahma and Siva. Siva became very angry and his appearance became
so frightening that the gods fled in terror. Parvati, his wife, also frightened by
him, exclaimed "durvasam bhavati me," meaning: "it has become impossible
for me to live with you!" Siva realised that his anger was the cause of useless
suffering and deposited it in the belly of Anusuya from whom was born the
sage Durvasas. Durvasas is therefore considered to be an aspect (amsa) of
Siva. (See Vettam Mani, Puranic Encyclopaedia [Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1954], pp. 256-7 for this and other myths relating to Durvasas). Commonly

Notes

portrayed as a devout Saivite in the Puranas, Durvasas is also particularly
associated with the Saivagamas. According to the Harivamsa, Krsna was taught
the sixty-four monistic Agamas by Durvasas who is the revealer of them in the
Kali age (Pandey, p. 63). The Siddhanta also venerates Durvasas and would
like to identify him with Amardaka, although he sometimes figures as his
predecessor (Dunuwila, pp. 35, 43).
69. The Saivagama, according to Abhinava, is divided into two major
currents (pravdha); one originates from LakuliSa, the other from Srikantha.
The latter consists of the five streams (srotas) which constitute the majority of
the Saivagama. T.A., 36/13b-17.
70. J. C. Chatterjee quotes it at length, as a part of Jayaratha's commentary
on the Light of the Tantras in a variant form that can only be partly traced in
the printed edition. Kashmir Shaivaism, p. 6, fn. 1.
71. nikhilasaivasastropaniatsarabhutasya
satfardhakramavijfianasya
(Ibid.).
72. T.A., 36/11-12.
73. tesu mateu praSastam advayarthaviayakam trikakhyamatam
traiyambakasampradayakam sarva$retham praSasyate. Kashmir Shaivaism,
p. 6, fn. 1.
74. Kashmir Shaivaismy p. 17. See fn. 42 above. Pandey writes:
"We know that the word Trika' is used for the philosophy presented
in the monistic Saivagamas, revealed to humanity by Durvasas, through
his mind-born son, Tryambaka, at the behest of Srikantha." (Pandey,
p. 599) He refers to Jayaratha (T.A., I, p. 28) who "speaks of the
system, introduced to humanity through the descendents of Tryambaka
as 'sa<jlardhakramavijnana '." He concludes, "it is, therefore, indisputable
that the word Trika' is used for the Pratyabhijna system also." (Ibid.,
p. 600)
75. Pandey, p. 135-6.
76. Ibid., p. 137.
77. I.P., 4/2/1.
78. R. K. Kaw, The Doctrine of Recognition (Hoshiarpur: 1967), p. 4.
79. The philosophy of the Siddhanta was right from its inception concerned
to establish the validity of our daily experience that the world is real. Accordingly,
Sadyojyoti, the earliest SiddhSntin whose works are still extant "never condemns
perception, inference and the other modes of knowledge as illusory. His
respect for the objective witness is as high as that for the most revered revelation."
Sadyojyoti "tries, with great success, to prove the existence of everything
whether secular or otherwise by such methods as are intelligible to all." (The
Naresvarapariksd of Sadyojyoti with commentary by Ramakanjha, K.S.T.S.,
XLV, edited by Madhusudana Kaula Sastrl 1926, Introduction p. 11.)
Sivaraman writes: "Saiva Siddhanta approaches the reality of God in a
different spirit. The theory of the illusoriness of the world is not a necessary
formulation of religious consciousness, which is alive to the reality of God more
as the 'Absolute Thou' than as being in general negatively implied by phenomena."

NOTES

K. Sivaraman Saivism in Philosophical Perspective (Varanasi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1973), p. 66. The phenomenology of perception requires the authentic
existence of the perceived world. This is the a priori basis for any discussion
about its possible nature. Expressing the Siddhanta's view Sivaraman writes:
"But before showing the significant truth about the world's existence in time,
it has to be acknowledged that the world is. The world must exist. The most
formal statement we seem capable of making about the 'world' involving a
minimum of theory is that the world intelligible to our understanding is qua
intelligible an existent, in whatever sense the term 'world' is understood."
(Ibid., p. 56). The Siddhanta theologian is particularly concerned to prove the
existence of a real world so that he can establish the existence of God Who is
its cause (ibid., p. 69).
80. Sadyojyoti writes:
Now, because the nature of consciousness is experience-as-such
(anubhava), it is right to equate it with direct perception. Therefore
the object immediately in front of us in the field of (this pure) experience
is devoid of non-being. One should know this, namely, that there is a
clearly evident distinction between consciousness and its object. The
form of the first is experience while the latter is that which is experienced.
(Nare&varapariksa, 1/8-9).
81. See The Kashmiri Saiva Response to the Buddhist Challenge by
Dyczkowski, lecture delivered at the Seventh World Buddhist Conference,
Bologna, forthcoming.
82. In the first section of the Naresvaraparik$a, Sadyojyoti seeks to establish
the existence of the individual soul as both perceiver and agent. His chief
opponent here is the Buddhist. According to Madhusudana Kaula: "the
Buddhists receive a severe thrashing at the hands of our author and are defeated
in their arguments more systematically and more directly than any other school."
Ibid., Intro., p. 12.
83. Sadyojyoti writes: "Therefore, although an object may change to
some extent, it is perceived to be inherently stable because it is recognised
[to be the same at all times]." Ibid., 1/34. In the absence of recognition, says
Sadyojyoti, language would not be possible. If when we hear sounds, we can
distinguish and recognise phonemic components within them and link them
together as words that convey a meaning (again sensed through recognition),
we have language. Ibid., 3/35-41.
84. S.Dr., 4/118 ff.
85. S.Su.vi., pp. 2-3. The reader is referred to the bibliography for bibliographical notes on these texts and their edition.
86. See bibliography.
87. R.T., 5/66.
88. See my Translations from the Spanda Tradition of Kashmiri Saivism
(Albany: State University of New York Press, forthcoming).
89. See bibliography.
90. See my Translations from the Spanda Tradition of Kashmiri Saivism

Notes

(Albany: SUNY Press, forthcoming).
91. Sp.Nir., p. 33.
92. K. C. Pandey does not therefore consider Spanda to be an independent
system or school in its own right, but rather says that "the Spandakarika is
simply an amplification of the fundamental principles of Saivaism as aphoristically
given in the Sivasutra" (Pandey, p. 155). From another point of view K. C.
Pandey sees in the Stanzas mere dogmatic statements of the fundamental
principles of what he defines as the Spanda branch of the Pratyabhijna (ibid.,
p. 294). All the Kashmiri commentators on the Stanzas, however, consider it
to represent an independent tradition, while the South Indian Madhavacarya
in his enumeration of the works of the Pratyabhijfia in the Sarvadarsanasamgraha
does not include Spanda works. Although Pandey is reluctant to concede to
the view that Spanda is an independent branch of Kashmiri Saivism, he does
treat it as such when dealing with the Sivasutra, Spandakarika and their
commentaries.
There are evident differences of opinion on this point. Thus J. C. Chatterjee
criticises Biihler for saying that the Spanda- and Pratyabhijna-sastra are two
different systems, insisting that the term 'sdstra' means here simply 'treatise'
and not system. He believes that these works all belong to Trika (See Kashmir
Shaivaism, p. 7, fn. 1). Dr. Kaw follows Chatterjees classification verbatim.
Pt. Madhusudana Kaula also agrees (preface to the I.P.v., I, p. 1). Dvivedi
maintains that Spanda is an independent branch of Kashmiri Saivism; however,
he identifies Trika with the Pratyabhijna (L.A.S., II, p. 11) and so cannot think
of Spanda as part of Trika without identifying it with the Pratyabhijna even
though he does not want to do this. Although it is true that the Spandakarika
is by no means as philosophical as the works of the Pratyabhijna and is particularly
concerned with doctrine rather than argument, it does present its own views and
doctrines in a terminology clearly distinguishable from the Pratyabhijna.
93. sivopaniatsamgraharupani s'ivasutrani (S.Su.vi., p. 2): Ksemaraja writes
in the concluding verses of his commentary:
"This is a commentary on the Aphorisms of Siva, expounded in order
to penetrate Siva's secret doctrine and beautiful in its agreement
with the scriptures and the Spanda [teachings]. To sever the bondage
of phenomenal existence (bhava), may the pious savour this lucid
[commentary], the Sivasutravimarsini, full of the flavour of the
essence of the nectar that flows ever anew from the teachings of Siva's
secret doctrine." (Ibid., p. 70).
94. According to Ksemaraja, Siva graced Vasugupta by revealing the
Aphorisms to him so that the secret tradition might not be lost in a world given
over to dualism (S.Su.vi., p. 1). Similarly, non-dualist Saivism is characterized
by Somananda in his Sivadfsfi as a 'secret doctrine' {rahasyam sastram) in
danger of being lost in the Kali age. (S.Dr., p. 220).
95. The term 'system' is one that has been in general use since the earliest
studies in Kashmiri Saivism. Buhler, as far back as 1877, made free use of the
term. Later writers regularly referred to the major schools they discerned within

NOTES

Kashmiri Saivism as 'systems'. Pandey makes explicit what he means by this
term when he says that "these 'systems' are fundamentally distinct from one
another. Each has a different history, a distinct line of teachers, a set of books
in which it is propounded and a different conception of the ultimate reality"
(Pandey, p. 295). The term 'system is, however, problematic if we analyse
Kashmir Saiva sources on these lines. It is not really possible to think of the
Siddhantagamas, for example, as collectively concerned with a single theological
standpoint or with the same ritual programmes in all their details. There are
unmistakeable resemblances between Agamas, but the differences are equally
notable. The same is particularly true of the Agamas belonging to the other
groups. Thus, according to Abhinava, it is part of the Saiva teacher's job to
find uniformity and consistency (ekavdkyata) in the scriptures. These Kashmiris
have, in their own brilliant way, sought and found such uniformity in the form
of the Tantric systems which they have constructed from the raw and disordered
material of the original sources. In this they do nothing new but participate,
develop and extend a process apparent in the scriptures themselves.
96. S.Dr., 6/9. The other schools of Vedanta Somananda refers to here
are the citrabrahmavddins, who hold that Brahman assumes the diverse forms
of the universe of objects, and the ndndtmavddins, who attributed plurality
to the Self (ibid., 6/3). Another school of Vedanta maintained that the Self,
or Brahman, is the material cause (upadanarupa) of the universe (ibid., 6/8).
There were also the dtmavddins who argued that the Self, that is, the individual
soul, is the absolute, and the netivddins who disagreed with them (ibid., 6/9).
The sphulingdtmavddins maintained that individual souls are related to Brahman
as sparks are to a fire. The pratibimbavddins held that the Self is a reflection of
Brahman (ibid., 6/11). One school of Vedanta declared that the Self is different
in different bodies and that plurality (bheda) is inherent in the world, while
another school maintained that although individual embodied souls do differ,
they are in essence one with Brahman, just as waves are one with the sea
(ibid., 6/13).
97. The discovery of manuscripts of the Light of Consciousness (Samvitprakds'a) by Vamanadatta (see above fn. 5) has brought to our notice an entirely
new field of research, namely, monistic Kashmiri Vainavism. There appears
to have been a number of works written by Kashmiri Vainavas which present
basic Vaisnava tenets found in the Pancaratra and elsewhere in terms of an^
idealistic monism very similar to that of Kashmiri Saivism. Apart from the
Samvitprakds'a we know that the Discernment of the Six Attributes {$d(jtgunyaviveka) and the Essence of Ultimate Reality (Paramdrthasdra) were monistic
Vaisnava works. These and other such works were well known to Kashmiri
Saivas and influenced them. The quotations from Bhaskara's lost Kaksydstotra
clearly show signs of monistic Vaisnava influence (see Sp.Pra., p. 103). Abhinava
himself refers to Vamanadatta with respect as his elder and teacher (or predecessor,
T.A., 5/155). Bhagavatotpala's commentary on the Stanzas on Vibration is
particularly important from this point of view. In this work he clearly attempts
an extensive integration of monistic Vai$navism with Spanda doctrine and
hence with Kashmiri Saivism. For a fuller treatment of these matters the reader

Notes

is referred to the Translations.
98. See below chapter 3.
99. See Sp.Ka.vi., p. 29.
100. Sp.Nir., p. 5.
101. It is a notable fact that these terms, so important in the technical
vocabulary of the Pratyabhijna, are not at all common in the Saivagamas,
although the concepts they denote are represented there. Consequently, these
terms do not belong to the terminology of the Tantric systems syncretized
into Kashmiri Saivism, at least as far as we can gather from the sources quoted
by these Kashmiri authors themselves. As examples of the uncommon occurrence
of the term 'vimarsa'we can cite the Kdlikula: "The supreme power of the Lord
of the gods Whose nature is supreme consciousness is reflective awareness
(vimarsa) endowed with omniscient knowledge" (quoted in N.T.U., I, p. 21,
and also in S.Su.vi., p. 55). Abhinava refers to the Gamatantra which says:
"The deity of mantra is considered to reflective awareness (vimarsa) co-extensive
in being with the Great Consciousness.' (T.A., X., p. 117). These two are
virtually the only references quoted from the Agamas where this term occurs.
102. Sv.Up., 6/14 quoted by Bhattananda on p. 51 of his commentary on
the Vijnanabhairava edited by Mukundarama Sastrl K.S.T.S. No. 8 (Bombay:
1918).
103. I.P., 1/5/11.
104. I.P., 1/1/4.
105. S.Dr., 1/1.
106. Sp.Ka., 28-9.
107. Ibid., 10.
108. Ibid., 5.
109. Utpaladeva writes that "repose in one's own essential nature (svasvarupa) is the reflective awareness (vimarsa) that 'I am"" (A.P.S., v. 15). One
might say that Utpaladeva is here explaining, in Pratyabhijna terms, that the
Spanda doctrine of 'establishment in one's own essential nature' (svasvarupasthiti) implies that this, the liberated condition, is that of the pure ego-identity.
110. Pandey says: "the books, for instance, which include the word
'Spanda' in their titles, deal with what is referred to as 'Caitanya' or 'Vimarsa'
(consciousness) in the Siva Sutra and Isvara Pratyabhijna Karika respectively
They are mere dogmatic statements of the fundamental principles of the Spanda
branch of the Pratyabhijna." (Pandey, pp. 293-4).
111. I.P.v., I, p. 208.
112. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 1.
113. Thus Dr. Rastogi, for example, in his book The Krama Tantricism
of Kashmir discusses the Spanda school because he finds that Spanda doctrine
is, like Krama, Sakta. This, he believes, links them vitally together. He says:
It has been frequently repeated that the Spanda system is nearest to
the Krama for its unmistakeable emphasis on the dynamic aspect of
reality which technically passes under the name of Sakti or Spanda
or Vimarsa. If this be granted, the Spandakarika must propound

NOTES

a system that is Sakta in nature (p. 116).
114. T.A., 4/122b-181b.
115. T.A., 1/168-70 where M.V., 2/21-3 is quoted.

CHAPTER I

1. Cf. Chan.Up., 4/6/4.
2. K. Potter, Presuppositions of India's Philosophies (Westport: Greenwood
Press, 1977), p. 3.
3. Sarn.Ka., v. 21.
4. Ibid., v. 59.
5. Ibid., v. 62.
6. Br.Up., 2/3/6.
7. Sp.Sarn., p. 24.
8. Br.Su., 3/2/23.
9. Br.Up., 2/4/14.
10. Kena Up., 1/3.
11. SB., 3/2/17.
12. Bh.G., 2/20.
13. When we refer to 'Vedanta' in this work we mean both the Advaita
Vedanta developed by Sankara and, by extension, other forms of Vedanta of
the same type.
14. Ma.Ka., 4/13.
15. Ma.Ka., 3/21, 4/7.
16. S.B., 1/1/1.
17. Whenever we refer to 'Saivism' or 'Saiva absolutism' we mean Kashmiri
Saivism as a whole. Although a number of conceptions of the absolute are
distinguishable in Kashmiri Saiva works, we are not concerned here with these
differences but will, for our present purpose, treat them collectively as aspects
of a single fundamental concept, the nucleus of which is its dynamic—Spanda—
character.
18. L. N. Sharma, Kashmir Saivism (Varanasi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakasana,
1972), p. 9.
19. K.A., 1/110.
20. M.V.V., 1/628.
21. Samvidullasa, quoted in M.M., p. 75.
22. T.A., 2/18.
23. G. Kaviraj, Bharatiya Samskrti aur Sadhana, vol. 1 (Patna: 1963), p. 5.
24. Throughout this work the appellation 'Saiva' refers to monistic
Kashmiri Saivism unless otherwise specified.
25. T.A., 1/136.
26. Ibid., 6/9-10.
27. As an example we can quote the following verse from one of Utpaladeva's
Hymns (S.St., 16/30) also quoted by Rajanaka Rama in his commentary on the

Notes

Stanzas on Vibration (Sp.Ka.vi., p. 8): "O Lord of All! Your supreme [transcendent] lordship triumphs for it Lords over nothing. Just so is Your lower
[immanent] Lordship by virtue of which this universe is not such as it appears
to be."
28. Ksemaraja, commenting on the verse quoted in the previous footnote,
explains that it is not the universe (considered as an independent reality) which
manifests but God as all the categories of existence. In this sense it is quite real.
He quotes Utpaladeva as saying: "In this way all these physical objects (jatfa)
which in themselves are as if unreal are [the forms] of the Light [of the absolute]
alone. The Light alone exists, [manifesting] its own nature both as itself and
as [everything] else." (A.P.S., 13). At Siva's supreme level all that manifests
is Siva alone and so there is no world apart from Him. Siva's lower level of
sovereignty corresponds to the states of Sadasiva and Isvara in which the universe
is manifest within consciousness. It does not, therefore, appear as it does now
to the ignorant, to whom it manifests as separate from consciousness (S.St., p. 270).
29. T.A., 6/9-10.
30. Abhinava writes: "How can any aspect [of reality] be manifest within
the Light [of the absolute] if it is not that same Light? If it shines there within it,
no duality between them is possible. If it does not, how can one say that it
has any existence iyastuta)! Thus it makes no sense to say that the Light has
any particular form." (T.A., 2/20-3).
31. S. Dasgupta, History of Indian Philosophy vol. 1 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1969), p. 443.
32. Ma.Ka., 3/44.
33. 'Navamarga' or 'New Way is an expression Utpaladeva has coined
to refer to his systematization of the Pratyabhijna in the Stanzas on the Recognition of God as taught originally by Somananda, his teacher. I.P., 4/1 /1.
34. T.A., 32/1-2.
35. Cf. G. Kaviraj, Tantrik Vangmaya meryi Sakta Drsfi (Patna: Bihara
Rastrabhasa Parisad, 1963), Chap. 6.
36. M.V.V., 1/240.
37. Ibid., 1/241-2.
38. Ibid., 1/245.
39. Ibid., 2/100-2.
40. Ibid., l/262a.
41. T.A. comm. 3/72a, srstavyanarusitecchamatrarupa; cf. M.V.V., 1/248.
42. T.A., comm. 4/257b-8a.
43. Cf. B. N. Pandit, Kasmlra Saiva Darsana (Jammu: Ranavir Kendriya
Sanskrt VidyapHha, 1973), p. 7.
44. M.V.V., 1/180-2.
45. Abhinava writes: "if daily life which is useful for everybody, everywhere
and at all times were not real then we know of nothing else which is real."
I.P.v., II, p. 59.
46. T.A., 4/254.
47. M.V.V., 1/629-31.
48. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 163.

NOTES

49. See MM., pp. 44-7, particularly p. 47.
50. Ibid., p. 46.
51. M.V.V., l/123-4a.
52. M.M., p. 47.
53. Ibid.
54. Pr.Hr., su. 8, tadbhumikah sarvadarsanasthitayah; M.M., p. 12.
55. M.M., p. 11.
56. I.P.V.V., I, p. 12.
57. M.M., p. 12.
58. Ibid., p. 38, ya cit sattaiva sa prokta sa sattaiva ciducyate.
59. Ibid., p. 34.
60. T.A., 6/15; see also comm., I.P., 1/6/4-5.
61. S.Dr., 4/7a, 4/29.
62. Ibid., 5/ l-4a.
63. M.V.V., 1/88.
64. Sam.Pan., p. 49.
65. T.A., 3/4.
66. M.M., pp. 4-5, svatmasamvitsphurattamatrasvarupeti prakasa eva
visvopasya devatetyapatitam.
67. Sp.Pra., p. 104.
68. Pr.Hr., PP- 27-8.
69. Pr.Hr., p. 63.
70. Sp.Nir., p. 3.
71. S.B. (Gambhlrananda's trans.), p. 142.
72. Ibid., p. 344.
73. Sv.T., vol. 1, p. 57.
74. See L. Silburn, Vijnanabhairava, (Paris: E. de Boccard, 1961) p. 12;
also Pandey, p. 331.
75. K.N.P., p. 4.
76. P.T.v., p. 134.
77. S.St., 10/12.
78. S.Dr., pp. 129-30; Anuttara^ika, v. 7-8.
79. T.A. comm. 3/21, vol. 2, pp. 29-30.
80. I.P_., 1/8/7.
81. T.A., comm. 3/9, vol. 2, p. 11, samvitsamlagnameva hi viSvam
samvedyate.
82. S.Dr., comm. 4/31.
83. I.P.V.V., I., pp. 4-5; cf. Sp.Nir., p. 10 and I.P., comm. 1/5/9.
84. I.P., comm. 1/5/12.
85. T.A., comm. 10/89-91a.
86. Ucchumabhairavatantra, quoted in S.Su.vi., p. 4.
87. M.V.V., l/427a.
88. I.P.V.V., II, p. 78.
89. T.A., comm. 1/ 136b.
90. M.V.V., 1/720.
91. I.P.V.V., II, p. 159.

Notes

92. Ibid.
93. I.P.V.V., I., p. 52.
94. M.V.V., 1/430.
95. I.P., I., p. 95, paraprakasanatmakanijarupaprakasanam eva hi svaprakasatvam jnanasya bhanyate.
96. sahopalambhaniyamad abhedo nllataddhiyoh iti vijnanakaramatram
nliadi prasadhayitum nirupitam.
I.P.V.V., II, p. 78; cf. B.B., p. 4, T.A. comm. 3/123; also ibid., comm. 3/57.
97. Sp.Pra., p. 89.
98. See Pr.Hr., p. 52; Sp.Sam., pp. 11-12.
99. Quoted from the Kalikakrama in comm. T.A., 5/80; comm. T.A., 3/57.
Attributed to the Devikakrama in M.M., pp. 9-10.
100. Vijnaptimdtratasiddhi, v. 1.
101. Sp.Nir., p. 10.
102. .MM., v. 25; P.S., v. 26.
103. Sv.T., 4/233.
104. M.M., p. 53.
105. S.Dr., 5/34; 5/105-6.
106. Ibid., 5/16.
107. Ibid., 5/104.
108. Ibid., 5/109.
109. S.Dr., 5/105-6.
110. M.V.V., 1/764.
111. Ibid., 1/747.
112. Ibid., 1/768 and 1/762-3.
113. M.M., p. 79.
114. M.M., p. 44.
115. Pandey, Intro, to Bhaskari III, p. cc.
116. 'Kashmiri Saivism', J. Rudrappa, Quarterly Journal of the Mythic
Society vol. 45, no. 3 (Bangalore: 1955), p. 29.
117. Pandey, Intro, to Bhaskari, III, p. cc.
118. R. K. Kaw, The Doctrine of Recognition (Hoshiarpur: Visvesvarananda
Institute, 1967), p. 358.
119. T.A., 3/93b, yo 'nuttarah paraft spando . . . .
120. I.P.v., I, p. 209, bhavanakartrta.
121. I.P., II, p. 71, abhasamatram vastu.
122. I.P.V.V., I, p. 220, astitvam prakasamanatvam eva.
123. Sp.Nir., p. 12.
124. M.V.V., 1/219.
125. I.P.V.V., I, p. 10.
126. T.A., 10/82.
127. Quoted by L. M. Vail in Heidegger and Ontological Difference,
Pennsylvania: Rider College, 1972, p. 10 from Sein und Zeit.
128. Ibid., p. 15.
129. Sein und Zeit, p. 36, quoted by L. M. Vail, p. 10.
130. I.P.v., comm. 2/2/7.

NOTES

131. I.P.V.V., I., p. 292.
132. Quote from Divakaravatsa's Vivekahjana in I.P.v., I., p. 10.
133. I.P.,comm. 1/7/14.
134. T.A., 10/144.
135. I.P.V.V., I., p. 192.
136. M M . , p. 47.
137. I P . , v. II, p. 116.
138. Bha., vol. 2, p. 63.
139. I.P.V.V., I, pp. 266-7; cf. P.T.v., p. 139 ff.
140. S.Dr., p. 7, paravasthayam punah purno Tiamityeva svasvabhavah
prakasate.
141. Quote in Sv.T., vol 2, p. 59; M.M., p. 65; cf. M.V.V., 1/658.
142. M.V.V., 1/641; cf. P.T.v., p. 140.
143. M.V.V., 1/1063-4.
144. P.T.v., pp. 136-7.
145. M.V.V., 1/131-2.

146. I.P.v., comm. 2/3/7.
147. Ibid.
148. I.P.v., comm. 2/3/3.
149. I.P.,v., comm. 2/3/1-2.
150. I.P.v., comm. 2/3/6.
151. I.P.v., L, pp. 329-30.
152. I.P.v., II, pp. 91-2.
153. I.P.v., I, p. 109.
154. I.P.V.V., II, p. 107.
155. I.P.v., I, p. 326.
156. I.P., 1/8/6 and comm.
157. I.P., 1/8/7.
158. I.P., 1/8/6.

CHAPTER II

1. I.P.V.V., II, p. 68: prakasa eva arthasya atma; I.P.V.V., II, p. 69:
arthasya ca prakasamanata anubhavarupata atma.
2. T.A., 3/2: yah prakasah sa sarvasya prakasa tvarn prayacchati.
3. T.A., 8/3.
4. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 16.
5. T.A., comm. 5/59; Intro, comm. to I.P., 1/5/4-5; I.P.v., I, pp. 277-8.
6. M.M., pp. 132-3.
7. M.M., p. 10.
8. Pr.Hr., p. 26.
9. M.V.V., l/62b-64.
10. I.P.V.V., II, p. 69: na tu asau prakasamanatatma prakaso Vthasya
svarupabhuto 'rthasarlramagnah.

Notes

11. I.P.v., I., p. 277.
12. T.A., 1/ 136b.
13. Sp.Ka., 2.
14. P.T.L.V., intro. verse.
15. M.M., v. 67, gutfhad gutfhataro bhavati sphutad api sphufatara esal?.
16. I.P.V.V., I, p. 5; S.Su.vi, p. 2; M.V.V., 1/61; 1/419.
17. M.V.V., l/69-70a.
18. M.M., p. 4; Y.Hr., p. 1.
19. Y.Hr., p. 65; M.M., v. 10.
20. V.P.P., v. 22; cf. B.P., v. I and P.T.L.V., p. 1; Y.Hr., 2/75.
21. P.T.V., p. 134.
22. The Divine Names by Dionysius the Areopagite, trans. C. E. Rolt.
(London: 1937), pp. 79-80.
23. Anuttarasfika, v. 4.
24. K. C. Bhattacarya, Studies in Philosophy vol. 2 (Calcutta: 1959),
Intro., p. xiii.
25. M.M., p. 88, prakaSyate 'nena prameyajatam iti vyutpattya prakasah
pramanam ityartho bhavati.
26. I.P., I, p. 151.
27. Quote from Utpaladeva's commentary on his own Ajatfapramatrsiddhi
in M.M., p. 133.
28. M.M., p. 76.
29. I.P.V.V., I, p. 710, Sarnvitprakdta quoted in M.M. p. 20 and Sp.Pra.
p. 114: jnanam iti hi jnatrtaiva ukta.
30. M.M., p. 133; M.V.V., 1/433.
31. I.P., v. II, p. 66.
32. M.M., p. 76: pujatvam caisam asesavisvakrotflkarasamarthyat.
33. T.A., 4/171-2; cf. P.S., comm. v. 4 and I.P., 2/1/8.
34. Jnanagarbhastotra quoted in Sp.Nir., p. 48.
35. Cf. I.P., 1/5/12 and I.P.v. I, p. 198.
36. V.R., comm. v. 3.
37. Y.Hr., P- 65; also T.A., comm. 3/2a.
38. T.A., 3/120-1.
39. Ibid.
40. See S. K. Saksena, The Nature of Consciousness in Hindu Philosophy
Chowkhamba, (Benares: 1969), p. 73.
41. M.M., p. 30; T.A., 2/9; 17/20a-2a, 10/144-6a.
42. Sp.Ka. vi., p. 92; cf. P.S., v. 6 and comm.
43. I.P., v. II, p. 48.
44. I.P., vol. 1, p. 162; I.P.V.V., Ill, pp. 79-80.
45. I.P., v. I, p. 160.
46. I.P., 1/5/3.
47. I.P., v. I, p. 160.
48. T.A., 2/18.
49. Ibid., 2/20-1; T.Sa., pp. 5-6.
50. T.A., 3/101b-2a; M.V.V., 1/80.

NOTES

51. T.A., 3/100b-la.
52. Quoted in I.P., v. II, p. 177.
53. Ibid.
54. Kamikagama, quoted in T.A., 1/66; cf. P.S., v. 6.
55. T.A., 3/8.
56. I.P.V.V., I, p. 6.
57. I.P.v., II, p. 178; P.S., v. 12-3.
58. T.Sa., chap. 3.
59. T.A,, 3/49.
60. Ibid., 3/37.
61. Ibid., 3/59.
62. Ibid., comm.
63. Ibid., 3/33.
64. Ibid., 3/34.
65. Ibid., 3/29.
66. Ibid., 3/58.
67. Ibid., comm. 3/1, svatantrad eti prakasanakriyakartrtvam.
68. Ibid., 3/11.
69. I.P.V.V., I, p. 9.
70. T.A., 3/3.
71. T.A., 4/138.
72. Sp.Nir., p. 3.
73. I.P.V.V., II, p. 69: arthasya ca prakasamanata anubhavarupata atma
. . . arthasya ya prakasamanata sa prakaso 'nubhavah.
74. C. G. Jung, Psychology and Religion: East and West, vol. XI of the
Collected Works (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul) pp. 1-2.
75. T.Sa., p. 12; cf. I.P.v., p. 338.
76. M.M., p. 34, evam ca prakasasya vimarsah svabhava ityanglkaryam.
77. I.P., 1/5/11.
78. I.P.v., comm. 1/5/20.
79. I.P.v., I,_p. 198.
80. Ibid.; T.A., comm. 4/172.
81. Cf. P.T.V., p. 136.
82. M.M., p. 67: vimarsakhyo yah samrambhah svantahsphuratkriyasaktisphararupah . . .
83. Ibid.
84. Parapra, pp. 1-2.
85. M.M., v. 12; ibid. p. 67.
86. I.P.V.V., I, pp. 5-6; I.P.v., I, p. 198.
87. Sp.Nir., p. 13, vastutastu etad viryasaram evaseam.
88. A.P.S., v. 15.
89. P.T.V., p. 75.
90. M.V.V., 1/381-2.
91. I.P.v., comm. 1/5/18.
92. Pandey, pp. 324-5.
93. I.P.v., II, pp. 223-4.

Notes

94. M.V.V., 1/88.
95. M.M., p. 40.
96. I.P.v., I, p. 338.
97. L. Silburn, M.M., p. 95.
98. I.P., 1/1/4.
99. I.P., 1/5/19.
100. Ibid, comm.; S.Dr., p. 12.
101. I.P.V.V., I, p. 5.
102. P.T.V., p. 130.
103. M.V.V., l/625-6a.
104. M.M., v. 12.
105. I.P.V.V., II, p. 38: itthamabhasasya vimarsa eva jivitam iti tadbhedabhedakrtaiva vastubhedabhedasthitih | iha ca vimarsa aikyena eva.
106. I.P.v., I, p. 202.
107. Ibid.
108. Sp.Nir., pp. 31-2.
109. I.P.v., I., p. 205.
110. Sp.Nir., p. 66.

CHAPTER III

1. I.P.v. I, p. 43, fn. 79.
2. T.A., 4/ 122b-3a; cf. ibid., 4/147.
3. Sp.Ka., 16.
4. M.M., p. 110.
5. I.P., l/8/8b.
6. T.A., 4/147.
7. I.P., 1/6/3-5; P.S., comm. v. 2.
8. M.V.V., 1/623.
9. P.S., p. 10.
10. Ibid. I.P.V.V., Ill, p. 318; Sp.Nir., p. 23; M.M., p. 44.
11. I.P., 2/1/8.
12. T.A., 3/141b.
13. I.P.V., II, p. 144.
14. Sp.Nir., p. 32.
15. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 50.
16. Sp.Nir., p. 32.
17. I.P.v., I, pp. 208-9.
18. P.T.V., p. 207.
19. Y.Hr., p. 15.
20. S.St., 20/9, quoted in Sp.Sam., p. 9.
21. I.P., 2/1/2.
22. S.Dr., pp. 10-11; ibid. p. 11, fn. 1.
23. T.Sa., p. 84: atra ceam vastavena patha kramavandhyaiva

NOTES

ityuktarn kramavabhaso'pi castltyapi uktam eva.
24. Sp.Sam., p. 25; cf. T.A., comm. 4/179.
25. T.A., 10/220b-2.
26. I.P., 2/1/4a.
27. I.P.V.V., II, p. 318: sa eva capeksantarena yaugapadyam.
28. T.A., 9/17b.
29. I.P., 2/1/3.
30. M.V.V., l/125-6a.
31. M.V.V., 1/419.
32. Sp.Satp., p. 8.
33. T.A., 4/179b-180a; cf. ibid. 29/80a and 10/224a.
34. Sp.Nir., p. 5.
35. T.A., 11/110.
36. Sp.Ka., 45.
37. Pr.Hr., comm. su. 8; P.T.v., p. 165.
38. Sp.Nir., p. 10.
39. St.Ci., p. 1;T.A., 5/79.
40. Sp.Nir., pp. 3-4.
41. M.U.V., v. 9.
42. Ibid., v. 11.
43. Sp.Ka., 1; Sp.Nir., p. 5; M.M., p. 74; P.T.L.V., p. 2.
44. M.V.V., 1/260-1.
45. Sp.Sam., p. 4.
46. T.A., comm. 5/62.
47. I.P.V.V., I, p. 45.
48. Sp.Nir., p. 4.
49. M.M., p. 74.
50. Sp.Sam., pp. 5-6.
51. Sp.Nir., pp. 5-6.
52. Sp.Nir., p. 5.
53. e.g., Chan. Up. 3/14/18; "Verily, this whole world is Brahman.
Tranquil, let one worship It as that from which he came forth, as that into
which he will be dissolved, as that in which he breathes" (Hume's translation).
54. Ma.Ka., 2/27-8.
55. S.B., trans, pp. 327-8 (italics mine).
56. Br.Up., 5/1/1.
57. Sp.Pra., p. 85.
58. I.P.V.V., I, p. 8.
59. Ibid., I., pp. 8-9.
60. Ibid., I, p. 145.
61. T.A., VI, p. 7: karyakaranabhavatma tattvanam pravibhago vaktavyah . . .
62. Sp.Nir., p. 4.
63. P.T.V., pp. 135-6.
64. Cf. T.A., 4/167a.
65. See Chapter 7, p. 164.

Notes
66. Sp.Pra., p. 90.
67. I.P., comm. 1/5/14.
68. S.Dr., l/19-22a.
69. P.T.V., p. 177.
70. S.Dr., 1/2; cf. also ibid., pp. 13-4; Sp.Pra., p. 90.
71. S.Dr-, comm. 1/2.
72. S.Su., 1/17 (Bhaskara's recension).
73. Ibid., comm.
74. S.Dr., comm. 1/3-4.
75. Sp.Pra., p. 88.
76. Sp.Nir., p. 6; Sp.Pra., p. 98; Sp.Sam., p. 6.
77. I.P., 2/4/21.
78. I.P.V.V., II, p. 233.
79. I.P.v., I., p. 193.
80. I.P.V.V., II, p. 234.
81. S.Dr., p. 17: karmavacchinnanivrtir aunmukhyam.
82. Ibid.: anavacchinna nivrtimatram anandasaktih.
83. I.P.V.V., II, p. 355.
84. M.V.V., 1/214-5.
85. M.M., p. 75.
86. Sp.Sam., p. 7.
87. S.Dr., l/7b-8.
88. Sp.Pra., p. 84.
89. S.Dr., P- 12 (footnote).
90. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 129.
91. S.Dr., l/13b-5.
92. S.Dr., p. 11, fn. 1.
93. Ibid., p. 10, fn. 2.
94. Ibid., pp. 10-11.
95. Sp.Nir., p. 40; Pr.Hr, p. 79.
96. V.B., v. 71.
97. P.T.V., p. 42.
98. Sp.Ka., 22; cf. V.B., v. 101; ibid., v. 118.
99. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 73.
100. M.V.V., l/367b-8a.
101. Sp.Ka.vi., pp. 73-4.
102. Ibid., p. 121.
103. T.A., 5/ 104b-5a.
104. Sp.Pra., p. 123.
105. Cf. Pr.Hr., su. 20 and comm.
106. Cf. Sp.Ka., 29.
107. Sp.Pra., p. 123.
108. Sp.Nir., p. 64.
109. SpJta.vi., p. 124.
110. T.A., II, pp. 85-6.
111. M.V.V., p. 26.

NOTES

112. Ibid., 1/267.
113. Sp.Ka., 3.
114. I.P.v., I, p. 108.
115. I.P.V.V., I., p. 286:tatracayadais\aryarnsvatantryamsajn^inas'aktiriti.
116. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 7: nimea prasrtakriyasaktitvat svarupasarnkocarupe
jagatah udaya udbhavah.
117. I.P.v., II, p. 136.
118. I.P., comm. 1/5/14.
119. S.Su.vi., p. 2.
120. S.Dr., p. 148.
121. M.V.V., 1/344-a.
122. Ibid., l/310b-lla.
123. T.A., 3/99a-100a.
124. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 4.
125. T.A., l/314b-5a.
126. N.T., 21/39b-40a.

CHAPTER IV

1. O Three-eyed Lord! You contemplate Your pairs of opposites (yuga)
such as Heaven and Earth, ocean and river, tree and forest, tone and
microtone, internal and external, white (semen) and red (ovum), light
and darkness, knowledge and action in [Your] extensive consciousness
of both.
M.M., p. 72.

2. V.B., v. 18.
3. S.Dr., 3/7a.
4. Ibid., 3/2b-3.
5. Sp.Nir., p. 6.
6. P.P., v. 30.
7. T.A., 3/93b.
8. ydmalam prasaram sarvam, ibid., comm. 3/67; also ibid., 3/68 and
ibid., 29/49.
9. Ibid., comm. 28/322a.
10. Sp.Nir., p. 3.
11. T.A., 5/60-la.
12. Ibid., comm..
13. Ibid., 29/116-7a.
14. Ibid., 29/119-20: My translation differs from Gnoli's who renders
'iti tathoditam Santam' as: 'tale e la descrizione della forma quiescente'. The
context is the sexual union of Siddha and Yogini through which they realise
the union of opposites.
15. Ibid., 29/120-1.
16. M.M., v. 28.

Notes

17. Sawvidullasa quoted in M.M., p. 152.
18. P.T.V., p. 167.
19. K.K.V., p. 158.
20. Ibid., p. 156.
21. Ibid., v. 50.
22. Ibid., p. 153.
23. Ibid., p. 157.
24. Sp.Nir., p. 66. See Chapter 7 for a detailed description of this movement.
25. K.K.V., v. 5.
26. Ibid., v. 25.
27. Ibid., v. 50.
28. Sp.Ka., 1; Sp.Nir., p. 8.
29. Ibid., p. 19; cf. Sp.Pra., p. 108.
30. T.A., comm. 1/74; V.B., v. 20-1.
31. Sp.Pra., p. 85.
32. Sp.Ka., 29a.
33. I.P.v., I, p. 9.
34. sam karoti iti samkarah, Sp.Pra., p. 88; Sp.Ka.vi., p. 3; Sv.T., I., p. 9.
35. Sp.Pra., p. 85.
36. I.P.v. I., p. 17.
37. Sp.Nir., p. 3.
38. Sp.Pra., p. 88.
39. Ibid., p. 90.
40. S.St., 20/12, quoted in Sp.Nir., p. 19.
41. Sp.Pra., p. 84.
42. Sp.Nir., p. 3.
43. St.Ci., v. 69.
44. Ibid., v. 73.
45. A verse quoted from his own stotra by K$emaraja in comm., St.Ci., v. 34.
46. I.P.v., I, pp. 13-4.
47. St.Ci., v. 34.
48. Ibid., v. 33.
49. Sp.Pra., p. 85.
50. Sp.Pra. p. 92; M.M., p. 118 yad yad rupam kamayate tat tad devatarupam bhavati.
51. St.Ci., v. 96.
52. M.M., pp. 3-4.
53. Ibid., p. 117.
54. Ibid., p. 118.
55. S.Dr., 1/1.
56. Sp.Nir., p. 18.
57. T.A., 1/73; I.P., comm. 1/5/16-17.
58. T.A., 10/120.
59. Sp.Nir., p. 48; cf. M.M., p. 155.
60. S.Su., 3/27: kathajapah.
61. St.Ci., v. 21.

NOTES

62. Sp.Nir., p. 12.
63. Ibid., p. 15; Sp.Pra., p. 95; cf. I.P., comm. 2/2/3.
64. I.P., 2/3/15; Pr.Hr.,su. 2.
65. M.V.V., 1/1041; cf. 1/951-2; T.A., 11/97-9.
66. I.P., comm. 2/3/15-6.
67. M.V.V., 1/276-7.
68. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 8.
69. T.A., 9/221-2.
70. Sp.Nir., p. 36; I.P., 4/1/4.
71. Pr.Hr., su. 5.
72. Ibid., su. 6;S.SQ., 3/1.
73. See below chapter 5, fn. 102.
74. Sp.Nir., p. 16.
75. Ibid.
76. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 28.
77. Ibid., p. 64.
78. Sp.Ka., 19b.
79. Although K$emaraja glosses 'gurtadi' (lit. -qualities, etc.') as referring
to the qualities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, Swami Laksmanjoo of Kashmir
interprets 'guryadV to mean the powers of the sense organs of knowledge and
action (karma- and jnanendriya). According to this interpretation, what the
verse means is that the generic vibration of universal consciousness can be
realised by means of the particular pulsations of consciousness operating through
the senses.
80. Sp.Ka., 19-20.
81. P.S., comm. v. 39.
82. T.A., 3/287a.
83. Sp.Ka.vi., pp. 66-7.
84. Sp.Ka., l/21a.
85. Sp.Pra., p. 106.
86. T.A., 9/52b-3a.
87. I.P.V.V., II, p. 209.
88. Bha., vol. 2, p. 208; cf. T.A., 4/171-2.
89. I.P.v., I, pp. 31-2.
90. I.P.v., comm. 1/5/15.
91. I.P., comm. 2/3/17.
92. P.S., comm. v. 4.
93. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 9; cf. I.P.V.V., II, p. 208; T.A. 4/171-2.
94. Ibid.
95. S.Sii., 3/30.
96. T.A., 1/74.
97. Cf. S.Dr., 4/1-3.
98. Ibid., comm.
99. I.P.V.V., I. p. 273; T.A., 10/163; cf. S.Dr., 4/2.
100. T.A., comm. 1/69: phalabhedad aropitabhedah padarthatma Sakti.
101. I.P.V.V., I, p. 288.

Notes
102. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 12.
103. I.P.v., II, p. 43.
104. T.A., 1/78-81.
105. Sp.Nir., pp. 14-5.
106. M.M., p. 47.
107. T.A., comm. 1/2.
108. P.T.V., p. 130.
109. I.P.v., I., p. 338.
110. P.T.V., p. 133.
111. M.V., 3/33, quoted in T.A., 3/7Ib-2a and Sp.Nir.' pp. 67-8.
112. T.A., 3/72b-3a.
113. I.P.v., comm. 1/8/10-U.
114. Ibid.
115. I.P.v., comm. 2/2/3.
116. M.M., p. 47.
117. T.A., 3/74b-5a.
118. I.P.v., comm. 1/8/10-11.
119. Ibid.
120. M.M., p. 47.
121. T.A., 1/3.
122. M.V., 3/31, quoted in Sp.Nir. p. 67.
123. T.A., 13/266-8a; Sp.Ka.vi., p. 133.
124. Sp.Ka., 48.
125. Sp.Nir., p. 72.
126. Intro., comm. in Sp.Nir. on Sp.Ka., v. 48.
127. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 144.
128. T.A., 13/269.
129. Sp.Nir., p. 72.
130. Ibid.
131. Quote from Kallaja's comm. in Sp.Ka.vi., p. 143.
132. Ibid.
133. Sp.Ka., 48.
134. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 152.
135. T.A., 3/192b-3a.
136. T.A., 3/93.

CHAPTER V

1. T.A., 5/102b-4a.
2. T.A., 1/109-12.
3. P.T.V., p. 35.
4. Sp.Nir., p. 6.
5. Sp.Sam., p. 14.
6. Ibid.

NOTES

7. a.Dr., p. 182.
8. Sp.Sam., p. 22.
9. Sp.KS., 1.
10. M.M., p. 38; T.A., 3/266-7.
11. M.V.V., 1/944-6.
12. M.M., p. 82.
13. An unknown Tantra Jayaratha quotes in T.A., p. 40 says: "The Supreme
Sky is the King of Realities (tattva), the abode of contemplation, the contemplative
absorption which pervades upward from the Centre [of consciousness].
14. Ibid., 3/140.
15. M.V.V., 1/949.
16. V.B., pp. 110-1.
17. Ibid., v. 89.
18. S.C.N., v. 42.
19. Sp.Sam., p. 6; M.M., p. 50.
20. Cf. Sp.Ka., 41.
21. I.P.V.V., II, p. 63-4.
22. P.T.V., p. 35.
23. M.V.V., p. 16.
24. Pr.Hr., pp. 46-7.
25. Sv.T., vol. 2, pp. 185-94.
26. Ibid.
27. T.A., 11/21.
28. L.V., v. 40.
29. Ibid., v. 39.
30. Sp.Pra., p. 97.
31. Alokamala quoted in Sp.Nir., p. 28; Sp.Pra., p. 97.
32. Sv.T., 4/292 in Sp.Nir., p. 11.
33. Sp.Nir., p. 11; ibid., p. 27.
34. Ibid.
35. Ibid.
36. Sp.Ka., 15.
37. Sp.Nir., pp. 32-3.
38. Sp.Ka., 12.
39. Ibid., 10.
40. Ibid., 13.
41. Sp.Nir., p. 29: spandatattvasamavivik$Gnam api ca Sithillbhuta
prayatn&n&m SOnyam etad vighnabhQtam.
42. Kallata's comm. on Sp.Ka., 1.
43. Pr.Hr., comm. sQ. 20.
44. S.Dr., p. 6.
45. Yogatattva Up., 131-3.
46. I.P.V.V., I., p. 47.
47. Quoted in M.M., p. 24.
48. Sp.Pra., p. 88.
49. I.P.V.V., II, pp. 258-9.

Notes
50. M.V.V., 2/115; T.A., 5/127.
51. T.A., 5/37-40.
52. Ibid., 3/254.
53. Ibid., 4/146b.
54. See below.
55. T.A., 3/250b-la.
56. Ibid., comm. 4/145.
57. Sp.Nir., p. 6.
58. T.A., 5/27b-36.
59. Ibid., 5/42.
60. Ibid., 5/37-8.
61. Kramakeli in MM., p. 172; Sp.Nir., p. 6.
62. Kallafa's comm. on Sp.KJL, 1.
63. Sp.Sam., p. 1.
64. Sp.Nir., p. 7.
65. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 162.
66. Sp.Nir., p. 74.
67. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 164.
68. Sp.Ka., 51.
69. Pr.Hr., su. 20.
70. Cf. P.T.V., p. 251.
71. T.A., 5/33.
72. P.T.L.V., p. 7.
73. Sp.Nir., p. 25.
74. P.T.L.V., p. 13.
75. Sp.Sam., p. 17.
76. Ibid., p. 18.
77. Ibid., p. 23.
78. Ibid., p. 17.
79. Ibid., p. 12.
80. Ibid., p. 20-1.
81. Kulayukti quoted in Sp.Pra., p. 86.
82. See Sp.Nir., p. 38.
83. M.M., p. 86.
84. P.T.V., pp. 39-40.
85. M.M., p. 86.
86. Sp.Nir., p. 37; Sp.Sam., p. 21.
87. M.M., p. 86; K. C. Pandey, p. 508.
88. P.P., v. 23.
89. T.A., 4/177b-8a.
90. Sp.Nir., p. 37.
91. Sp.Sam., p. 21.
92. Pr.Hr., p. 60.
93. L. Silburn, V.S., p. 75.
94. Sp.Sam., p. 20; cf. Sp.Nir., p. 28.
95. Sp.Sam., p. 20; Pr.Hr., p. 60-1.

NOTES

96. Sp.Saip., p. 21.
97. Cf. Sp.Nir., p. 20; L.A.S., p. 63.
98. Sp._Nir., p. 46.
99. T.A., 9/244-5.
100. I.P.comm., 4/1/1/.
101. Sp.Ka., 6-7.
102. This is according to Kallata's interpretation of this passage. Rajanaka
Rama and Bhagavatotpala agree with this view. Ksemaraja, however, interprets
the 'inner circle' to mean the presiding deities of the senses (see below) and
expressly refutes the other commentators' interpretation. Ksemaraja also
rejects Abhinava's view (expressed in I.P.V.V., II, p. 301) that the inner circle'
stands for the subtle body {puryatfaka) which transmigrates at death. Sp.Nir.,
p. 20-1.
103. MM., v. 20.
104. T.A., 9/225; M.V., 1/30.
105. T.A., 9/227.
106. Ibid., 9/228-9.
107. Ibid., 9/230.
108. T.Sa., p. 86.
109. V.P., v. 3.
110. A.P.S., v. 22b.
111. I.P.v., I., p. 239.
112. T.A., 9/231-2; T.Sa., p. 86.
113. T.A., 37/2; V.B., v. 109.
114. St.Ci., v. 37.

115. T.A., 9/231.
116. Sp.Nir., p. 22.
117. T.A., 4/160-3.
118. Ibid., 9/277.
119. See I.P., 2/2/3 and comm. T.A., 9/278-9.
120. M.M., v. 21.
121. Ibid., p. 61.
122. Ibid., p. 61.
123. Ibid., p. 84.
124. I.P.v., comm. 1/1/3.
125. I.P., 1/1/4.
126. T.A., comm. 9/246.
127. M.M., p. 62.
128. Ibid.
129. T.A., 9/234.
130. Ibid., 9/241.
131. Ibid., 9/249-50.
132. T.A., 9/242-3.
133. Ibid., 9/271-2.
134. M.M., p. 63.
135. T.A., 9/265b-8.

Notes

136. Walking entails abandoning one place and reaching another.
137. At the climax of sexual union the individual experiences the bliss
and contentment of resting in his own nature and so neither seeks to procure
nor abandon anything.
138. T.A., 9/256.
139. M.M., p. 61. This is also the name of a section of the Stanzas on
Vibration.

CHAPTER VI

1. S.Su., 1/2: jftanam bandhab.
2. Cf. T.A., 12/5; M.M., p. 73.
3. T.A., 4/119b-20a.
4. P.S., v. 74.
5. I.P.V.V., I., p. 43.
6. S.Su., 1/14; M.M., p. 80: drtyarn Sariram.
7. T.A., 12/6-8.
8. MM., p. 73.
9. V.P., v. 6.
10. S.Su.vi., p. 15.
11. I.P.V.V., II, pp. 135-6.
12. T.A., 9/161b-4a.
13. S.Su.va., p. 5; Sp.Ka.vi., p. 10.
14. S.Su.va., pp. 37-8.
15. T.A., 6/62; M.M., v. 29.
16. S.Su.va., p. 23.
17. M.M., p. 74.
18. T. A., 4/119.
19. Ibid., 15/284b-7a.
20. P.S., comm. v. 60.
21. Ibid., comm. v. 67.
22. Ibid., comm. v. 68.
23. Ibid., comm. v. 76.
24. T.A., 15/234b-6.
25. .Su.f 2/8.
26. V.B., v. 149.
27. P.S., v. 76.
28. Ibid., comm.
29. Quoted in S.Su.vi., p. 33.
30. Sp.Ka., 9 and comm. by K$emaraja.
31. T.A., IX, pp. 129-30.
32. Ibid., 15/238.
33. Ibid., 15/265.
34. Ibid., comm. 15/261.

NOTES

35. Ibid., 15/267b-8a.
36. Ibid., 15/167.
37. Ibid., 12/12.
38. P.S., v. 79-80.
39. Cf. ibid., v. 61-2.
40. T.A., 29/183-5.
41. P.T.V., p. 42.
42. M.M., v. 34.
43. P.S., v. 47-50.
44. P.T.V., p. 42.
45. S.Su.va by Varadaraja, l/77b.
46. P.T.V., p. 61.
47. T.A., comm. 5/20.
48. Sp.Nir., p. 20; Sp.Sarn, p. 15.
49. See Pandey (appendix C), pp. 952-3.
50. P.S., comm. v. 51; Sp.Ka.vi., p. 40.
51. M.M., v. 24.
52. Sp.Nir., p. 20.
53. Ibid., p. 20.
54. M.M., pp. 7-8.
55. M.M., p. 14.
56. S.St., 8/5 quoted in Sp.Nir., p. 21.
57. V.B., v. 74.
58. St.Ci., v. 61.
59. I.P.V.V., II, p. H8-9.
60. T.A., 10/160-1.
61. Ibid., 3/229b.
62. Ibid., 3/209b-10.
63. P.T.V., pp. 45-52.
64. T.A., 3/229.
65. S.Su., 3/9; cf. S.Dr., 1/37; MM., v. 19.
66. S.Su., 3/10.
67. Ibid., 3/11.
68. St.Ci., v. 59.
69. S.St., 1/20.
70. T.A., comm. 3/229.
71. Ibid., 4/120.
72. S.St., 13/8.
73. T.A., 5/83.
74. Sv.Up., 3/17a-19 (Hume's trans.).
75. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 34.
76. Sp.Nir., p. 8.
77. S.Su., 1/22.
78. M.M., v. 63.
79. V.B., v. 32.
80. P.S., p. 47.

Notes
81. Sp.Sam., pp. 2-3.
82. Sp.Pra., p. 94; M.M., pp. 60-1.
83. Sp.Ka., 8.
84. Sp.Pra., p. 97.
85. M.M., pp. 56-7.
86. S.Su.va., p. 8.
87. Ibid.
88. Sp.Ka., 41.
89. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 116.
90. P.T.V., p. 108.
91. V.B., v. 62.
92. Sp.Nir., p. 62.
93. Ibid.
94. Sp.Ka., 36-7.
95. M.M., pp. 174-5.
96. Ibid., comm. v. 13.
97. Ibid., p. 106.
98. Ibid., p. 174.
99. Ibid., v. 42.
100. Sp.Nir., p. 19.
101. Sp.KS.vi., p. 38.
102. Sp.Nir., p. 22.
103. Pr.Hr., su. 15.
104. Kallata, comm. Sp.Ka., 37.
105. Sp.Ka., 38.
106. Kallata, comm. Sp.Ka., 6-7.
107. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 111.
108. Kalla^a, comm. Sp.Ka., 38.
109. Sp.Nir., p. 59; Sp.Ka.vi., p. 110.
110. Sp.Ka., 40.
111. T.A., 12/24: ^artkaya jayate
112. Ibid.
113. P.T.V., pp. 233-5.
114. T.A., 12/20.
115. Ibid.
116. P.T.V., p. 233.
117. Sp.Ka.vi., pp. 114-5.
118. Sp.Nir., p. 61.
119. P.T.V., p. 235.
120. Sp.Ka., 9-10.
121. T.A., 9/144b-5a.
122. Ibid., 9/62;P.T.V., p. 41.
123. Sp.Nir., p. 23.
124. M.V., 1/23.
125. I.P., 3/2/4.
126. Sp.Nir., p. 23.

NOTES

127. I.P., 3/2/5: bhinnavedyapratha.
128. Pr.Hr, p. 79.
129. V.B., v. 49.
130. C.G.C., v. 28.
131. T.A., 3/262-4.
132. P.Hf., p. 97: citsamanyaspandabhuh unmesatmavyakhyatavya.
133. Sv.T., I., p. 14.
134. I.P.V.V., II., p. 25.
135. Pr.Hr., P. 79.
136. Sp.Nir., p. 25.
137. Kaksyastotra quoted in Pr.Hr., p. 80; M.M., p. 80.
138. Sp.Nir., p. 20.
139. M.M., p. 90.
140. Ibid.
141. Quoted in Sp.Nir., p. 25; M.M., p. 90.
142. I.P.v., II, p. 178; V.B., v. 60.
143. M.M., p. 91; Sp.Nir, p. 25; on Mudra see T.A., XXXII; Pr.Hr.,
pp. 85-88.
144. Sp.Nir., p. 25.
145. Sp.Ka., 11.
146. T.A., 5/80b.
147. M.M., p. 91.
148. T.A., comm. 5/79.
149. S.Su., 1/21; Pr.Hr., su. 20 and comm.
150. Sp.Nir., p. 74.
151. Ibid., p. 44.
152. Ibid.
153. Ibid., pp. 25-6, p. 54.
154. Quoted in Pr.Hr., p. 86.
155. Pr.Hr., PP- 85-6.
156. Ibid., p. 88.
157. S.Su., 1/12.
158. Sp.Ka., 11.
159. Sp.Nir., pp. 25-6.

CHAPTER VII

1. The waking state is knowledge'. 'Dreaming is the formation of thoughtconstructs.' S.Su., 1/8-9. Ksemaraja, commenting on these Aphorisms says:
"the first moment of awareness (jnana), free of the thought-constructs proper to
the dreaming state, is waking. Again, those thought-constructs which [arise]
there constitute dreaming." S.Su.vi., p. 11.
2. Sp.Ka., 5: "That exists in the ultimate sense where there is neither
pleasure nor pain, subject nor object, nor an absence of consciousness."

Notes

3. Sp.Pra., p. Ill, 115; Sp.Ka., 10.
4. T.A., 6/68-9.
5. Ibid., 15/107-9a.
6. Ibid. 4/ 209b-10. This verse refers to the realisation of identity with
Siva in the absolute (anuttara) which Abhinava identifies with the supreme
form of Spanda (ibid., 3/93b).
7. Ibid., comm. 4/94. Jayaratha says: "Bondage is defined as the spatial
and other relative distinctions which pertain to the contracted condition
consciousness freely assumes."
8. S.Su., 1/2.; T.A., 1/26-30.
9. Ibid., 1/25.
10. Ibid., 9/71b-5a.
11. Pr.Hr., p. 32: Ksemaraja writes: "If we reflect carefully on the nature
of contraction [we discover that] because we experience it to be one with
consciousness, even that is nothing but consciousness itself/
12. T.A., 1/141.
13. Ibid., comm. 5/9.
14. S.Su.va., p. 12, fn. 14.
15. Sp.Ka., 46.
16. See above pp. 63-4.
17. Sp.Ka., 28-30.
18. Sp.Pra., p. 88.
19. Sp.Nir., p. 49 and Jayadeva Singh's translation pp. 119-20.
20. Sp.Nir., p. 44.
21. Sp.Ka., 32.
22. Sp.Nir., p. 52.
23. S.Sii., 2/6.
24. See Ksemaraja's commentary on .Su., 2/6.
25. Ksemaraja says that the Supreme Goddess, the power of grace and
the Master are equal. He quotes the Malinlvijayatantra as saying: "That [power
of grace] is called the Wheel of Energies said to be the Master's mouth" and the
Tantra of the Three-headed Bhairava which says: "Higher than the Master is
[his] power which resides in his mouth."
26. S.Su.va., p. 35.
27. Sp.Ka., 52.
28. Ibid., 44.
29. T.A., 1/253.
30. Ibid., 1/256.
31. Ibid., 1/234-5.
32. Sp.Nir., p. 52.
33. 'Yukti' is a term which, in these works, means a number of things
including 'reason, Expedient', 'means, and in a more technical sense, a knowledge
of the means to self-realisation. Thus the Vijnanabhairava teaches 112 such
means. Ksemaraja explains that "the word 'yukti' indicates there [in the
Vijnanabhairava] the knowledge of the 112 planes of yoga [taught therein]."
S.Su.vi., p. 121. For the usage of this term in this technical sense see V.B., v. 148.

NOTES

Note also the names of two works quoted in Bhagavatotpala's commentary
on the Stanzas, namely, Tattvayukti and Kulayukti.
34. Kiranagama 1/9, 13b quoted in T.A., 4/41, 4/78, 13/162b. The
Nisacaratantra says the same; see T.A., 4/78.
35. T.A., 4/77b-8a.
36. Sp.Pra., p. 84.
37. Ibid., p. 83.
38. Ibid., p. 84.
39. M.M., p. 6.
40. Sp.Nir., pp. 16-7: yuktyanubhavagamajno rahasyagurupravarah.
41. Sp.Nir., p. 2.
42. Sp.Ka., 42. Abhinava similarly says: "How can [the experience of]
that which is our own consciousness be ever set to writing?" T.A., 29/ 126a.
43. Bh.G., 12/2, quoted in Sp.Nir., p. 49.
44. Sp.Pra., p. 115.
45. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 64.
46. S.Su.vi., p. 70.
47. Sp.Nir., p. 33.
48. Ibid., p. 35.
49. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 55.
50. Sp.Nir., p. 49. Abhinava also says:
The wise sever the very root of this tree of harmful multiplicity, so
hard to fell (durbheda), with the axe of sound reasoning: such is our
conviction. This [reasoning] the awakened call the contemplative
actualisation of Being (bhavana), the wish-granting cow which renders
evident even that which is beyond the sphere of desire.
T.A., 4/13-4.
51. Ibid., 4/15-6.
52. Ibid., 4/39-40.
53. Sp.Ka. vrtti, p. 31.
54. Sp.Nir., p. 16.
55. Ibid., p. 29 with reference to Sp.Ka., 12-13. 15.
56. T.A., 1/245. cf. T.A., 2/4: "The four-fold emergent (udita) nature of
the All-pervasive Lord's consciousness should be known to be one's own nature
itself, the eternally manifest (nityodita) Lord."
57. T.A., v. I, pp. 52-3. See above p. 12.
58. See above p. 12.
59. Good examples are the practices taught in the Vijfianabhairava, a text
which certainly pre-dates Abhinava. Kemaraja, and later Sivopadhyaya,
both indicate to which of these categories the practices taught in it belong.
60. We shall discuss the relation between the Stanzas on Vibration and
the Sivasutra in the companion volume of this work.
61. The nomenclature of the division into chapters in Sanskrit works in
general is very varied and particularly well illustrated in the Tantras and related
literature. Thus "there are Paricchedas "Sections", Prakasas "Rays", Ullasas

Notes

"Illuminations", Tarangas "Waves', and many others. A popular principle is
that of adapting the term for "chapter' to the title of the whole work. Thus the
Mantraratnakara and Mantramahodadhi, two "Oceans of Mantras" are
divided into "Waves", the Sivarcanacandrika "Moonlight of Siva Worship"
into "Rays", the Saubhagyakalpadruma "Fabulous Tree of Delight" into
'Skandha\ "Branches"; the Bhuvaneivarikalpalata "Wish-granting Creeper of
Bhuvanesvari" into 'Stabakas'—Bunches of Flowers." Teun Goudriaan and
Sanjukta Gupta, Hindu Tantric and Sakta Literature, A History of Indian
Literature, edited by J. Gonda, vol. 2 fasc. 20 (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz,
1981), p. 31.
62. See footnote 64 below.
63. T.A., 4/273.
64. We have said that there are four types of means to realisation. Although
this is quite true from one point of view, the fourth and ultimate means is not
one in the same sense as are the others. Considered to be the highest form of
the Divine means (sambhavopaya, for which see below), it is the end of all practice
and is accordingly called 'No-means (anupaya). It is the uninterrupted consciousness the absolute has of its own nature (T.A., 2/1) spontaneously and
completely realised in an instant. Thus 'Anupaya' is the means (upaya) that
concerns the absolute (anuttara) directly. This means is very important in
Abhinavagupta's Trika which aims primarily at the realisation of Anuttara.
The reader is referred to P.T.V., pp. 81-4 for the meanings Abhinava attributes
to this term (see also Gnoli's translation, pp. 49-50). Abhinava does not quote
scripture to define this Means. Possibly Abhinava intends to imply in this way
that, insofar as no practice is involved here, it is essentially undefinable. For
the same reason it is sometimes not counted amongst the means to realisation
which are thus reduced to three.
65. According to Abhinava the word 4guruna" can mean either 'by the
Master' or 'intense'. We have put the former meaning in brackets because what
is essential at this level of practice is that consciousness be intensely alert; it
does not matter whether this takes place spontaneously or is induced.
66. T.A., 1/168-70 quoted from M.V., 2/21-3.
67. T.A., l/178b-9a.
68. Ibid., 1/91.
69. Ibid., 1/241-3.
70. Ibid., l/180b-la.
71. Ibid., l/182b-3a.
72. ibid., 1/ 144b, 1/165.
73. Ibid., 1/245.
74. Ibid., 1/166.
75. Ibid., 1/143 and comm.
76. Ibid., 1/140.
77. Ibid., 2/4-6.
78. Ibid., 2/1.
79. Pancast., vol. 3, p. 2,
N
80. T.A., 1/145.

NOTES

81. Ibid., 2/38.
82. Ibid., 2/9.
83. Ibid., 2/11.
84. Ibid., 2/14.
85. Ibid., 2/19.
86. Ibid., 2/28.
87. Ibid., 2/24-6.
88. Anuttara$fikdy v. 1-3.
89. T.A., 1/242.
90. Ibid., 2/2.
91. See comm. to T.A., 2/2.
92. Ratnamala quoted in M.M., p. 166.
93. T.A., 2/40.
94. T.A., comm. 2/2. The passage quoted here by Jayaratha is probably
from the Siddhayogesvarimata which Abhinava tells us teaches the way of
Anupaya called, in this passage, Nirupaya. Cf. T.A., comm. 2/40.
95. Sp.Sam., p. 25.
96. S.Dr., 7/5b-6; cf. ibid., 7/100b and T.A., 2/47.
97. We shall discuss this point more extensively in the companion volume
of translations from the Spanda tradition.
98. Sp.Nir., pp. 25-6.
99. T.A., comm. 1/226: evarn ca nirvikalpatma parah prakasa eva sarvesam
esam upayah.
100. T.A., 1/246-7.
101. Ibid., 1/212.
102. SpJCa., 36-7.
103. T.A., 3/108.
104. Sp.Pra., p. 84.
105. Sp.Ka., 22.
106. Ibid., 33-5 and Kallata's vrtti.
107. Ibid., 41. See also above p. 153.
108. P.T.V., p. 106.
109. M.V.V., 1/418.
110. I.P.v., comm. 1/5/11.
111. S^.Pra., p. 46.
112. I.P., 3/1/3a.
113. Sp.Sam., p. 6.
114. T.A., 4/182b-3.
115. Ibid., l/84b-6a.
116. Ibid., 1/87-8.
117. Pr.Hr., su. 17.
118. M.V.V., 2/20b: jagadanandamayo 'sau samanyaspanda ityuktah.
119. The concept of a 'super ego' (ahambhava) is unique to the Kashmiri
Saiva schools and those influenced by them. It has virtually no precedents,
even in the Saivagama. The development of this important insight goes to the
credit of the Pratyabhijna theologians, particularly Utpaladeva and Abhinava-

Notes

gupta. It is therefore absent in the Stanzas on Vibration which predate them.
We shall deal with this important point in the companion volume to this work.
120. Y.Hr., comm. 1/35.
121. T.A., 3/111.
122. Sv.T., I., p. 56: aSesavtevasamarasyavedanatma.
123. K.K.V., v. 5.
124. T.Sa., pp. 14-5. The word 'praveksyati'(here translated 'penetrates into')
is presumably derived from the root 'vis' in the sense of 'entering'. The third
person singular should be 'pravesati'.
125. T.A., 3/125; K.K.V., v. 7.
126. Ibid., 3/205b-8a.
127. Ibid., 3/283-5.
128. Sp.Ka., 51; Pr.Hr., su. 20.
129. Commenting on S.Su., 3/4, which belongs to the section of the sutras
that Ksemaraja explains deals with the Individual Means, he says:
[The Individual Means] is gross, it is therefore not included in the
Doctrine of Vibration (spandasastra) which is concerned with explaining
the Empowered Means. However, when dealing here [with any practice]
that ultimately culminates in the Empowered and other Means we have
corroborated [what we have said] with the Stanzas on Vibration and
shall to a certain extent, continue to do so.
S.Su.vi., p. 38.
130. T.A., 1/202-4.
131. Ibid. 1/206.
132. Ibid. 1/217-8.
133. Sp.Ka., 46. The reader is referred to the introductory discussion at
the beginning of this chapter.
134. M.V., 2/22.
135. I.P., 1/6/3-5; P.S., comm. v. 2; T.A., comm. 4/175; ibid., vol. 2, p. 199.
136. Sp.Pra., p. 105.
137. I.P.V.V., II, p. 15.
138. T.A., 10/200.
139. P.S., comm. v. 42.
140. T.A., 14/43.
141. T.A., 14/11 lb-3a; ibid., 5/2.
142. M.V.V., l/988b-90;T.A., 10/201-3.
143. T.Sa., p. 23.
144. T.A., 5/5a.
145. T.A., 7/30b-2a.
146. I.P., 1/5/20.
147. I.P.V.V., I, p. 118.
148. Ibid., p. 246.
149. Y.Hr., P- 78.
150. T.Sa., pp. 22-3.
151. Sarnvitprakasa quoted in M.M., p. 25.

NOTES

152. T.A., 12/18b-21a. The context here is ritual. He who offers to the
deity obnoxious substances or those normally considered improper must try
to do so with his mind free of doubts and aversion.
153. T.A., 5/5.
154. Ibid., 15/269b-72.
155. Ibid., 4/2-5.
156. Ibid., 4/84.
157. Ibid., 4/203.
158. Ibid., 4/116b-7a.
159. Ibid., 4/120b-la.
160. Ibid., 4/181b-2a.
161. Ibid., 4/194.
162. Ibid., 4/195-9.
163. Ibid., 4/200.
164. Ibid., 4/201-2.
165. Ibid., 4/205-9a.
166. M.V., 18/78-80 quoted in T.A., 4/218-20.
167. Ibid., 4/240-la.
168. Ibid., 4/244.
169. Ibid., 4/243b-4a.
170. S.Dr., 3/68-70.
171. M.V.V., 1/1112.
172. T.A., 13/42.
173. P.S., p. 73.
174. Sp.Pra., p. 88.
175. T.Sa. quoted in P.S., comm. v. 33.
176. I.P., v. II, p. 129.
177. Sp^ra., p. 88.
178. T.A., comm. 10/118.
179. Sp.Ka., 8.
180. Ibid., 3.
181. S.Su.vi., p. 38: saktopayaprakasatmani spandasastre. Ksemaraja
lays great stress on the importance of contemplation and mastery of the Wheel
of Energies. As a result he affirms that Spanda practice belongs predominantly
to the Empowered Means. The energies are aspects of the freedom of consciousness which Kemaraja identifies with the supreme goddess of the Krama school.
Her Wheel is that of the twelve Kalis who represent phases in the cognitive cycle
(described above on p. 124). Abhinava gives pride of piace to the contemplation
of this Wheel in his treatment of the Empowered Means in the Tantraloka
(verses 4/122b-18 la). Thus Ksemaraja concludes his exposition of the Aphorism
which declares that "when the Wheel of Energies is fused into one there follows
universal destruction" (S.Su., 1/6) by stating that this practice belongs to the
Empowered Means and is also taught in the first and the last verses of the Stanzas
on Vibration (S.Su.vi., p. 10). Ksemaraja maintains that because these verses
refer to the Wheel of Energies the Doctrine of Vibration includes the esoteric
teaching of the Krama school. Thus Ksemaraja says that:

Notes

"In this way the venerable Vasugupta indicates how, through the
introduction and conclusion [of the Stanzas, the Spanda teachings]
embrace Krama doctrine (mahartha), and so reveals that this [Spanda],
doctrine (sastrd) is supreme amongst all secret Saiva doctrine because
it is the essence of [Krama]." (Sp.Nir., p. 74).
182. Sp.Ka., 21.
183. S.Su., 9; S.Su.vi., p. 11; see fn. I above.
184. Sp.Ka., 35.
185. Sp.Pra., p. 112.
186. I.P., 1/5/13-4.
187. Sp.Pra., pp. 120-1.
188. T.A., 11/66; Sp.Nir., p. 71.
189. Sp.Pra., p. 113.
190. Sp.Nir., p. 71.
191. T.A., ll/68b-9.
192. Ibid., 11/73-5.
193. Sv.T., comm. 11/199.
194. T.A., 3/198.
195. Ibid., 15/130b-la.
196. See above p. 103.
197. The anonymous author of the Sanskrit notes on the S.Su.va. writes:
Inferior and superior knowledge correspond to the perception of
division and the manifestation of unity, respectively. The power
matrka is the mother of the universe who sustains and presides over
them both. [When giving rise to the] superior knowledge [of ultimate
reality] she is the power called Aghora because she makes manifest
both the inner reality [of undifferentiated consciousness] and the
outer reality [of the All] as her own nature. Inferior [knowledge is the
domain of the aspect of matrka] called the power Ghora who directs
the consciousness [of the fettered soul] out of itself when it fails to
reflect upon the unity of reality and so obscures its Siva-nature.
(Ibid., fn. 9 pp. 8-9).
198. Sp.Ka., 45.
199. Ibid., 47.
200. V.M., p. 3: pHhastu matrka prokta.
201. Sv.T., I, p. 29. See also Jaideva Singh, The Divine Creative Pulsation,
158; also Sp.Nir., pp. 66-9 on Sp.Ka., 45.
202. P.T.V., p. 44.
203. S.Su.vi., p. 8.
204. P.T.V., pp. 43-4.
205. T.A., 5/140-1.
206. T.A., II, p. 214: mananan sarvavettrtvarn tranam samsaryanugrahah.
207. M.M., p. 122.
208. M.M., v. 49.

NOTES

209. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 82.
210. I.P.V.V., II, pp. 213-4.
211. M.M., p. 122.
212. T.A., II, p. 450.
213. "The functions of an externally directed Mantra are said to be its
powers when it is introverted." T.A., II, p. 47.
214. Y.Hr., p. 180.
215. T.A., 7/3b-5a.
216. Ibid., IV, p. 2.
217. Ibid., 4/182b-3.
218. P.T.V., p. 4.
219. Sp.Nir., p. 66.
220. "O beloved, the Mantras whose seed phonemic powers (blja) lie
dormant will bear no fruit, while those mantras which are filled with consciousness
are said to accomplish all things. K.A., 15/60.
221. Srlkanfhiyasamhita quoted in S.Su.vi., p. 24.
222. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 81.
223. Sritantrasadbhava quoted in S.Su.vi., p. 23.
224. Pr.Hr., p. 93.
225. Sv.T., VI, p. 40.
226. Sp.Nir., p. 45.
227. Ibid.
228. Sp.Ka.vi., p. 80.
229. Ibid., pp. 83-4.
230. T.A., 11/86-9.
231. S.Su.va., fn. 1, pp. 29-30.
232. T.A., III, p. 1.
233. The Stotrabhaffaraka quoted in M.M., p. 112.
234. T.A., 11/76.
235. Ibid., comm. 11/77.
236. Sp.Ka.vi., pp. 83-4.
237. Sp.Ka., 26-7.
238. S.Su.va., fn. 1, p. 30.
239. Sp.Ka.vi., pp. 83-4.
240. S.Su.vi., p. 38.
241. We shall have occasion to discuss the relationship between the Sivasutra
and the Spandakarika in our companion volume of Translations. Suffice it to say
here that even though all commentators connect the two texts in various ways,
their relationship is far from clear. Bhaskara thinks that the Stanzas are a part
of a commentary on the Aphorisms (S.Su.va., p. 3). Bhagavatotpala consistently
refers to the Stanzas as a synopsis (samgrahagrantha) by KallajabhaUa of the
essential teachings of the Aphorisms (Sp.Pra., p. 83). Ksemaraja similarly says
in a number of places that the Stanzas convey the secrets of the Aphorisms
(Sp.Nir., p. 2). At the same time, however, commentators think of the Stanzas
as representing a 'separate system' (svatantradarsana) (Sp.Pra., p. 87) or what
Rajanaka Rama calls the philosophy of Spanda (Spandasiddhanta) (Sp.Ka.vi.,

Notes

p. 12). K$emaraja, it seems, also implies this when he refers to the Stanzas as
'Spandakastra'if we understand 'sdstra'in its broadest sense to mean 'a school of
thought' rather than just a 'book' (S.Su.vi., p. 38;Sp.Nir.,p. 1). It seems, therefore,
that although the Stanzas and Aphorisms are closely related, the former marks
the emergence of a distinct school, whereas the latter, although serving as the
principle source of the Stanzas, does not belong to any particular school. This
hypothesis is supported by the striking absence in the Aphorisms of a number
of the fundamental terms and concepts in the Stanzas. A prime example is
the term Spanda itself, and the teachings concerning the experience of Spanda
in the first moment of perception when consciousness is in a state of propensity
(aunmukhya) to manifestation (see above pp. 92-95).
242. S.Su.vi., pp. 35-6.
243. S.Su., 1/1: caitanyam atma.
244. Ibid., 3/1: cittam atma.
245. Sp.Ka., 49-50a.
246. T.A., comm. 13/188.
247. cittam mantrap: 'the mind is Mantra' (S.Su., 2/1). Bhaskara,
commenting on this Aphorism, says: "One should know the mind itself to be
Siva, the subject free of all limitations, endowed with omniscience and every
other divine attribute. Free of the differentiation (kalana) of time and space,
its inalienable quality is the experience of its own identity and so, as such, is
said to be Mantra." S.Su.va., p. 30.
248. Ibid., p. 42.
249. Abhinava writes:
This Supreme and authentic reality shines also in this, the unreal subject,
immersed in the intellect, vital breath and the body because the vital
breath and the rest are not independent of the Light which is pure
consciousness alone (cinmatra).
T.A., 5/7-8a.
250. Ibid., 1/164.
251. S.Su.vi., pp. 38, 41.
252. Abhinava writes:
[The state of] individualised consciousness (anu) coincides with the
most fully evident manifestation of multiplicity (bheda). The Means
proper to it is therefore called 'Individual'. It consists of representations
and ascertainments of a discursive order [which culminate] ultimately
in [a pure] undifferentiated awareness.
T.A., 1/221.
253. S.Su.vi., p. 8.
254. Ibid., p. 9.
255. Ibid., p. 22.
256. S.Su., 1/20 and 3/5; 1/7 and 3/20.
257. S.Su.vi., p. 40.
258. S.Su., 2/2.

NOTES

259. S.Su.vi., p. 35.
260. Ibid., p. 24.
261. Ibid., p. 50.
262. Ibid., p. 12.
263. Sivopadhyaya, like Ksemaraja, understands the liberated state as
one of permanent contemplation (nityasamadhi). Those who achieve it are
never again disturbed by the emergence of the ego (V.B., p. 64). Taking the
Vakyasudha, a lost work on Yoga, as his authority, Sivopadhyaya outlines
the six types of contemplation (samadhi) which lead to it. Sivopadhyaya
defines contemplation (samadhi) as 'the subtle state of the mind engendered
by its undivided, non-dual nature (ibid., p. 99). The first degree of contemplation
is discursive (savikalpa) and associated with visible objectivity (drsyasamprktasamadhi). It is developed by attending to the movement of the mind in moments
of intense excitement or passion. As the Vdkyasudhd says: "One should
contemplate the mind as the witness of passion, etc., capable of being such
because it has taken on their likeness." The second degree of contemplation
is also discursive but associated this time with the Word (sabda) of consciousness.
This state is "pure being, consciousness and bliss. Self-illuminating, free of
duality and worldly ties it is pervaded by the Word 'I am"'. The third degree
of contemplation is free of thought-constructs. Unlike the previous level of
contemplation, which can only be attained with much effort, this one dawns
spontaneously when the other two have been achieved. Free of discursivity
and objects of perception it is tranquil and steady like the flame of a lamp set
in a windless place. The yogi who is absorbed in it relishes the aesthetic delight
(rasa) of the glorious powers of his authentic nature. To these three levels
correspond three others which are their fruits. Thus the first degree of contemplation frees the yogi from his attachment to name and form and so he participates
in the transcendental freedom of his universal consciousness even while he views
the world and acts in it. To the second degree of contemplation corresponds
the uninterrupted reflection (cinta) of the undivided and unique aesthetic
delight (akhantfaikarasa) of being, consciousness and bliss. The next degree
of contemplation develops when the mind resumes its original absolute (brahman)
nature and savours the aesthetic delight which results from the cessation of
thought-constructs. The highest level of contemplation is permanent and
effortless. It consists of the direct vision (saksatkdra) of reality attained when
the six degrees of contemplation have matured to perfection. Liberated from
all identification with the body, the yogi realises his Supreme Identity (paramatmari) and so passes freely from one form of contemplation to the other
wherever the mind may happen to wander (V.B., pp. 100-l).
264. S.Su., 2/10.
265. S.Su.vi., p. 35.
266. Ibid., p. 46.
267. Jaideva Singh writes:
Such a high state of realisation is not possible by Anavopaya. It is
only possible by Saktopaya. But Anavopaya is only a stepping stone

Notes

to Saktopaya . It is not an end in itself. It has to end in Saktopaya.
(The Yoga of Supreme Identity\ p. 150)
Ksemaraja also says that "even the Individual Means culminates in the Empowered." S.Su.vi., p. 41.
268. Y.Su., 1/2.
269. T.A., 1/150-1 and comm.
270. Sv.T., 4/22 quoted also in N.T.U., I, p. 180.
271. T.A., I, p. 190.
272. Y.Su., 2/30.
273. Ibid., 2/32.
274. Ibid., 2/46.
275. Ibid., 2/49.
276. Ibid., 2/54.
277. Ibid., 3/1.
278. Ibid., 3/2.
279. S.Su.vi., p. 41. Ksemaraja, like other Kashmiri Saivites, knew
Patanjali's system well. He was aware that it also distinguished between minor
yogic attainments and the higher realisation which they obstruct. Thus he
quotes the Aphorisms of Yoga as saying: "The obstacles which arise in the
course of contemplation are the yogic attainments (siddhi) gained when one
emerges from it." (Y.Su., 3/37 quoted in S.Su.vi., p. 28) He connects this
with stanza 42 of the Stanzas on Vibration which says:
Shortly after, from that [expansion of consciousness] arises the
Point (bindu), from that Sound (nada\ from that Form (rupa) and
from that Taste (rasa) which disturb the embodied soul.
The Point, etc., represent visions of light, sound, form and taste, respectively.
280. N.T.U., I., p. 181.
281. N.T., 8/6-8a.
282. S.Su.vi., p. 38.
283. S.Su., 3/4.
284. V.B., v. 56.
285. T.A., 8/4.
286. Ibid., 8/7-8.
287. Ibid. 3/262-4; ibid. 3/286; M.V.V., 1/1091.
288. V.B., v. 52.
289. T.A., 8/20b-4a.
290. Ibid., 6/140b-2a.
291. S.Su.vi., p. 39.
292. This account is based on NT., 8/11-18 and Sv.T., 7/294-300, which
are Ksemaraja's sources. Although the N.T. gives the full complement of
eight limbs, Ksemaraja eliminates the first two, thus reducing the limbs to six.
N.T., 8/10 defines the missing two as follows:
The supreme and permanent form of restraint (yama) is said to be
dispassion from profane existence (samsara), while the [inherent]

NOTES

eternal, discipline (niyama) is contemplation (bhavana) of the
Supreme Principle.
293. T.A., 4/89-91.
294. Sv.T., 7/299b-300a quoted in S.Su.vi., p. 39.
295. Samadhi, which literally means 'gathering together [of the faculties]',
is here made to derive from the words 'samana, meaning equal1, and dhi\
meaning 'intellect or 'awareness'.
296. T.A., 10/185; ibid., 10/309; M.V., 2/34b-5a.
297. M.M., p. 156.
298. S.Su.va., p. 11: svasvarupaikaghanatavimarsas turyabhuh smrta.
299. Sp.Nir., p. 13; P.S., p. 74-81.
300. T.A., 10/266.
301. Ibid., 10/271.
302. Ibid., 10/268-9.
303. Pr.Hr., pp. 46-7.
304. T.A., 10/273-4.
305. S.Su.vi., p. 12.
306. Ibid., p. 53.
307. Sv.T., 7/250.
308. S.Su.vi., pp. 41-2.
309. Abhinava writes:
Beyond the subject stands the pure awareness (prama) which, no
longer detached, is intent on becoming full and perfect. That is said
to be the Fourth State, considered to be penetration into the power
[of consciousness] (saktisamavesa).
T.A., 10/264b-5b.
310. S.Su.vi., p. 52.
311. Ibid.
312. Ibid., p. 50.
313. V.B., v. 138.
314. S.Su., 3/23; cf. ibid., 2/10.
315. S.Su.vi., p. 51.
316. Kallatabhatta is frequently quoted as saying in one of his lost works
"the vital breath is the first transformation of consciousness"—prak samvit
prane parinata.
317. S.Su.vi., p. 53.
318. Ibid.
319. S.Su., 3/34.
320. S.Su.vi., p. 61.
321. V.B., v. 69-76 and comm.
322. See above p. 93.
323. S.Su.vi., p. 64.
324. Ibid., pp. 64-5.
325. N.T., 8/8 quoted in S.Su.vi., p. 66.

326. S.Su., 3/42.
327. S.Su.vi., p. 69.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

SANSKRIT TEXTS

Isvarapratyabhijnakarika by Utpaladeva.
1921. Edited by M. S. Kaul.

With own vrtti. K.S.T.S., no. 34,

. with Vimarsinl by Abhinavagupta. vol. 1. K.S.T.S., no. 22, 1918.
Edited by M. R. Sastri. Vol. 2. K.S.T.S. no. 33, 1921. Edited by M. S. Kaul.
. English translation named Pratyabhijna Karika of Utpaladeva by
R. K. Kaw. Srinagar: Sharada Peetha Research Centre, 1975.
. English translation of the Vimarsiniby K. C. Pandey. In Bhaskari\oL 3.
Sarasvati Bhavan Texts, no. 84, Benares, 1954.
. Vivrtivimarsini by Abhinavagupta. (3 vols.) K.S.T.S., no.60, 1938;
62, 1941 and 66, 1943, respectively. All edited by M. S. Kaul.
Kamakalavilasa by Punyanandanatha. With the commentary of Najananadanatha. Translated with commentary by Sir John Woodroffe. Madras:
Ganesh and Co., 1971.
Gurunathaparamarsa by Madhuraja.
P. N. Pushp.

K.S.T.S., no. 85, 1960.

Cittasantosatrirfisika by Nagarjuna (Nagabhaffa).
Srinagar: Sharada Peetha Series, 1962.

Edited by

Edited by R. K. Kaw.

Cidgaganacandrika. Edited by Swami Trivikrama Tirtha. Tantrik Texts 20.
Calcutta: Agamanusamdhana Samiti, 1936.
. with Divyacakorika. In two parts with commentary by Karra Agnihotra
Sastri. Letukuru, East Godavari District, 1943.
. with Kramaprakasika. Commentary by Raghunatha Misra. Sarasvatlbhavanagranthamala, no. 115. Benares, 1980.
Tantravafadhanika by Abhinavagupta. K.S.T.S., no. 26, 1918. Edited by

BIBLIOGRAPHY

M. S. Kaul.
Tantrasara by Abhinavagupta K.S.T.S., no. 17, 1918. Edited by M. S. Kaul.
. Italian translation entitled L'Essenza dei Tantra by R. Gnoli. Torino:
Boringheri, 1960.
. Translation into Hindi with commentary Niraksiraviveka by Paramahaqisa Misra. Vol. 1. Benares: Sakti Prakasana, 1985.
Tantraloka by Abhinavagupta (12 vol.) with viveka by Jayaratha. Part 1 edited
by M. R. Sastrl; parts 2-12 edited by M. S. Kaul, K.S.T.S., no. 23, 1918;
28, 1921; 30, 1921; 36, 1922; 35, 1922; 29, 1921; 41, 1924; 47, 1926; 59, 1938;
52, 1933; 57, 1936; and 57, 1938.
. Translation into Italian. Titled La Luce delle Sacre Scritture by
R. Gnoli. Torino: Classici Utet, Boringheri 1972.
Naresvarapariksa of Sadyojyoti with commentary by Ramakan^ha. K.S.T.S.,
no. 45, 1926. Edited by M. S. Kaul.
Netratantra with uddyota by Ksemaraja. Vol. 1., K.S.T.S., no. XLVI, 1926;
vol. 2, no. 61, 1939. Both edited by M. S. Kaul.
Pancastavi Five hymns to the goddess, in three parts with Sanskrit commentary
by Hara BhaUa Sastri. Part 1, K.S.T.S., no. 90, 1963; part 2, K.S.T.S.,
no. 92, 1962; part 3, K.S.T.S., 87, 1960. All edited by Dinanatha Yaksa.
Paramarcanatrimsika by Nagarjuna (Nagabha(fa). Edited by R. K. Kaw.
Srinagar: Sharada Peetha Series, 1962.
Paramarthacarca by Abhinavagupta. K.S.T.S,, no. 77. Edited by J. Zadoo.
Srinagar, 1947.
Paramarthasara by Abhinavagupta with vivrti by Yogaraja. K.S.T.S., no. 7,
1916. Edited by J. C. Chatterjee.
. English translation titled The Paramarthasara of Abhinavagupta
by L. D. Barnett. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain
and Ireland. London, 1910.
. With annotated Hindi translation by Prabha Devi. Kashmir: Isvara
Asrama, 1977.
. French translation titled La Paramarthasara by L. Silburn. Paris:
E. de Boccard, 1958.
Paramarthasara by Bhagavadadisesa with vivarana by Raghavananda.
Edited with Sanskrit notes by Surya Narayana Sukla. Acyutagranthamala,
no. 9. Benares, 1932.
Paratrimsikalaghuvrtti by Abhinavagupta. K.S.T.S., no. 67, 1947. Edited
by J. Zadoo.
. Italian translation called // commento Breve alia Trentina della
Suprema by R. Gnoli. Torino: Boringheri, 1965.

Bibliography

. A French translation by A. Padoux. Paris: E. de Boccard, 1965.
Paratrirnsikavivarana by Abhinavagupta. K.S.T.S., no. 18, 1918. Edited
by M. S. Kaul.
. Sanskrit text with Hindi translation and notes under the name
Srisriparatrirn&ika by Nilakantha Guruja. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1985.
. Italian translation titled // Commento di Abhinavagupta alia Paratrimsika by R. Gnoli. Serie Orientale Roma 57, Rome, 1985.
Paratrxsikavivfti by Laksmirama. K.S.T.S., No. 69, 1947. Edited by J. Zadoo.
ParyantapancaUka by Abhinavagupta. Edited with notes by V. Raghavan.
Reprinted in Abhinavagupta and His Works. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Orientalia, 1981.
Pas'upatasutram with Pancarthabhasya by Kauntfinya. Translated with an
introduction on the history of Saivism in India by Haripada Chakraborti.
Calcutta: Academic Publishers, 1970.
Pratyabhijnahrdaya by Ksemaraja. English translation titled The Secret of
Recognition with notes from Baer's German translation. Adyar: Adyar
Library, 1938. References are from this edition.
. Hindi translation with notes by Jaideva Singh. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1973.
. English translation with notes by Jaideva Singh. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1963.
. English translation and commentary named The Secret of Self
Realization by I. K. Taimni. Adyar, 1974.
Bodhapancadaiika by Abhinavagupta. K.S.T.S., no. 86,1947. Edited by J. Zadoo.
Bhagavadglta with Sarvatobhadra by Ramakanjha. K.S.T.S., no. 64, 1943.
Edited by M. S. Kaul.
. Edited by Srlnivasa Narayana. Anandasrama Sanskrit Series no. 112.
Poona, 1939.
. Edited with English and Sanskrit introductions by T. R. Cintamani.
Madras: University of Madras, 1941.
Bhagavadgitarthasarngraha by Abhinavagupta. Edited by Lakmana Raina.
Srinagar, 1933.
Bhaskarl. A commentary by Bhaskarakantha on the Isvarapratyabhijnavimarsini by Abhinava. Edited by K. A. S. Iyer and K. C Pandey. Three
parts: parts 1 and 2, Sanskrit texts. Part 3, English translation of the
Vimarsini with An Outline of the History of Saiva Philosophy. Sarasvatlbhavana Texts no. 70, 1938; 83, 1950; and 84, 1954.
Bhavopahara by Cakrapani with vivarana by Ramyadeva. K.S.T.S., no. 14,
1918. Edited by M. R. Sastrl.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Mahanayaprakasa. There are two widely differing texts published under
this name. One is entirely in Sanskrit and appears in the Trivendrum
Sanskrit Series, no. 130. Edited by K. Sambasiva Sastrl. Trivendrum,
1937. The other is also in verse, although not in Sanskrit, together with
a Sanskrit commentary by Sitikantha. K.S.T.S., no. 2\. Edited by
M. R. Sastrl, Srinagar, 1918.
Maharthamanjari and Parimala by Mahesvarananda. K.S.T.S., no. 11,
1918. Edited by M. R. Sastrl.
. Edited by Ganapati Sastri. Trivendrum Sanskrit Series, no. 66, 1919.
. Edited by Vrajavallabha Dvivedi. Yogatantragranihamala, no. 5.
Benares, 1972. This is the edition quoted in this book.
. French translation with exposition titled La Maharthamanjari de
Mahesvarananda by L. Silburn. Paris: E. de Boccard, 1968.
Matfkacakraviveka by Svatantranandanatha. With Sanskrit bhasya by
Sivananda and Hindi translation by Krsnananda Budhauliya. Datiya:
Pitambara Saipskrit Parisad, 1977.
Malinivijayavartika by Abhinavagupta. K.S.T.S., no. 31. Edited by M. S. Kaul.
Srinagar, 1921.
Malinivijayottaratantra. K.S.T.S., no. 37, 1922, Srinagar. Edited by M. S. Kaul.
Yoginihrdaya with commentaries Dipaka by Amrtananda and Setubandha
by Bhaskara Raya. Sarasvatibhavanagranthamala no. 7, 2d ed. Edited
by G. Kaviraj. Benares, 1963.
Rajatarangini by Kalhana. In A Chronicle of the Kings of Kasmir. Translated,
with introduction, commentary and appendices by M. A. Stein. 2 vols.
Reprint. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979.
Luptagamasamgraha. Part 1 collected and edited by G. Kaviraja. Yogatantragranthamala, no. 2. Benares, 1970. Part 2 collected by Vrajavallabha
Dvivedi. Yogatantragranthamala, no. 10. Benares, 1983.
Varivasyarahasya and its commentary Prakasa by Bhaskararaya Makhin.
Edited with English translation by S. Subrahmanya Sastri. Adyar Library
Series no. 28. Adyar (4th ed.) 1976.
Vatulanathasutra with vrtti by Anantasaktipada. K.S.T.S., no. 49, 1923.
Edited with English translation by M. S. Kaul.
French translation called Vatulanathasutra avec le Commentaire d'
Anantasaktipada by L. Silburn. Paris: E. de Boccard, 1959.
. Vamakesvaramata with vivarana by Jayaratha. K.S.T.S., no. 66,
1944. Edited by M. S. Kaul.
Vijnanabhairava with commentaries by Ksemaraja (incomplete) and £/vopadhyaya. K.S.T.S., no. 8, 1918. Edited by M. R. Sastrl.
. With Kaumudi by Anandabhaffa. K.S.T.S., no. 9, 1918. Edited

Bibliography

by M. R. Sastri.
. French translation and exposition called Le Vijnanabhairava by
L. Silburn. Paris: E. de Boccard, 1961.
. English translation called The Vijnanabhairava by Jaideva Singh.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979.
. With subtitle Samagra Bharatiya Yogasastra and two commentaries
called anvaydrtha and rahasydrtha in Sanskrit and Hindi respectively
by Vrajavallabha Dvivedi. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1978.
. The Book of Secrets—Discourses on the Vijnana Bhairava Tantra.
5 vols. By Acharya Rajneesh. Edited by Ma Ananda Prem and Swami
Ananda Teerth. Poona: Rajneesh Foundation, 1974.
Virupdksdpancdsikd with vivrti by Vidydcakravarti. In Tantrasamgraha,
vol. 1. Yogatantragranthamala no. 3, pp. 1-22. Edited by G. Kaviraj.
Sdktavijndna by Somanandanatha with Pardtrimsikdtdtparyadlpikd. K.S.T.S.,
no. 74, 1947. Edited by J. D. Zadoo.
Sivadrsfi by Somananda with vrtti (incomplete) by Utpaladeva. K.S.T.S.,
54, 1934. Edited by M. S. Kaul.
Sivasutra with Rjvdrthabodha by Pltambarapithasthasvami. Datiya, 1960.
. Italian translation in Testi dello Sivaismo by R. Gnoli. Torino:
Boringheri, 1962.
. English translation and commentary under the title The Ultimate
Reality and Realization by I. K. Taimni. Madras: Adyar, 1976.
Sivasutravartika by Bhaskara. K.S.T.S., no. 4, 1916. Edited by J. C Chatterjee.
Sivasutravartika by Varadardja. K.S.T.S., no. 43, 1925. Edited with foreword
by M. S. Kaul.
Sivasutravimarsiniby Ksemaraja. K.S.T.S., no. 1,1911. Edited by J. C. Chatterjee.
. Second edition with no title page. (This is the edition quoted in this book).
. English translation by Shrinivas lyengar. Trivandrum, 1912.
. English translation named Siva Sutras: The Yoga of Supreme Identity
by Jaideva Singh. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979.
. Italian translation named Sivasutra con il Commento di Ksemaraja
by Raffaele Torella. Rome: Ubaldini Editore, 1979.
. French translation and introduction named Etude sur le Saivisme du
Cache mire, Ecole Spanda, Sivasutra et Vimarsini de Ksemaraja. Paris:
E. de Boccard, 1980.
Sivastotravali by Utpaladeva. With commentary by Ksemaraja. Edited with
notes in Hindi by Swami Laksmanjoo. Benares: Chaukhamba, 1964.
. Sivastotravali by Utpaladeva. Sanskrit text with introduction, English
translation and glossary by N. K. Kotru. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1985.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Sarnkhyakarika by Isvarakrsna with fippani, Gaudapadabhasya and Hindi
translation by Dhurujhiraja Sastri. Haridasasamskrtgranthamala no. 120.
Benares: Chowkhamba, 1953.
Sambapancasika edited with Hindi translation and notes by Swami Laksmanjoo.
Srinagar, 1976. An edition with commentary by Ksemaraja appears in
the Tantrasamgraha, vol. 1. pp. 23-50. Edited by Gopinatha Kaviraja.
Benares, 1970.
Siddhitrayl by Utpaladeva. This consists of three works: Ajatfapramatrsiddhi,
Uvarasiddhi and Sambandhasiddi. K.S.T.S., no. 34, 1921. Edited by
M. S. Kaul.
Stavacintamani by NarayanabhaUa with commentary by Ksemaraja. K.S.T.S.,
no. 10, 1918. Edited by M. R. Sastri.
. French translation called La Bhakti: he Stavacintamani by L. Silburn.
Paris: E. de Boccard, 1964.
Spandakarika with vrtti by KallatabhaUa. K.S.T.S., no. 5, 1916. Edited
by J. C. Chatterjee.
. Italian translation in Testi dello Sivaismo by R. Gnoli. Torino:
Boringheri, 1962.
. Hindi translation, introduction and notes by Nllakantha Gurutu.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1981.
. Hindi translation by Pitambaraplthasvaml. Datiya, 1980. Spandakarikavivrti by Rajanaka Rama. K.S.T.S., no. 6, 1916. Edited by J. C.
Chatterjee.
Spandanirnaya by Ksemaraja. K.S.T.S., no. 43, 1925. Edited with English
translation by M. S. Kaul.
. English translation called The Divine Creative Pulsation by Jaideva
Singh. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1980.
Spandapradlpika by Bhagavatotpala. Published in the Tantrasamgraha
vol. 1. Yogatantragranthamala no. 3. pp. 83-128. Edited by G. Kaviraj.
Benares, 1970. (This is the edition used in this book.)
. Edited by Vamana Sastri. Publishers not known. Islamapurkara, 1898.
Spandasarndoha by Ksemaraja. K.S.T.S., no. 16, 1917. Edited by M. R. Sastri.
Svacchandabhairavatantra with uddyota by Ksemaraja. 7 vols. K.S.T.S.,
21, 1921; 38, 1923; 44, 1925; 48, 1927; 51, 1930; 53, 1933; 56, 1955. All
edited by M. S. Kaul.

MANUSCRIPTS
Anuttaraparapancasika by Nagananda (alias Adyananda). Six MSs of this

Bibliography

short work are in the Adyar Library, cat. no. 951-6. All are complete.
Five are in Telugu script, one in Devanagarl. Also commentary by
Cidatmananda called Svarupavimarsini. Two MSs cat. no. 957 and 958
(incomplete).
Isvarapratyabhijnanvayadipika by Mahamahesvaranalhananda. Government
Oriental Library, Mysore, MS. no. B 167, 133 foi.
Cittanubodha by Rajanaka Bhaskara, Benaras Hindu University (B.H.U.),
ace. no. C 784, s. no. 14/7598, 211 fol. Sarada (complete).
Citspharasaradvayaprabandha by Sahikolananda. B.H.U., cat. no. 14/7599,
MS. no. C 3945, 10 fol. Sarada (complete).
Jnanagarbhastotra by Narayanamuni. B.H.U., ace. no. B 900, s. no. 17/8528,
3 fol. Sarada (complete).
Tantroccaya by Abhinavagupta. B.H.U., ace. no. C 1020, s. no. 14/7634,
14 fol. Sarada (complete).
Niruttaravada B.H.U., cat. no. 14/7674, MS. no. C-4720, 35 fol. Sarada
(complete).
Nirvariayogottara B.H.U., ace. no. C-4246, s. no. 14/7675 Sarada, 8 fol.
(complete).
Netroddyotavivarana by Kalyana Yarma. B.H.U., ace. no. C-4394, s. no. 14/7679
Sarada, 16 fol. (incomplete).
Prabodhapancadasa by Abhinavagupta(?) with comra. by Avadhutamuni.
Government Oriental Library, Madras. MS. no. D-15338, 13 fol. Devanagarl (complete). Cat. no. 12303, MS. no. R-2701, 11 fol. Grantha,
(complete).
Bahurupagarbhastotra by Anantasaktipada. 8 MSs in B.H.U. All in Sarada;
all complete except one. See, for example, ace. no. C-488, s. no. 17/8746,
9 fol. (complete with (ikd).
Bhedavilasa B.H.U., cat. no. 14/7755 MS no. C-1533 114 fol. Devanagar!
(complete).
Madhyavikasa, B.H.U., cat. no. 14/7759 MS. no. C-4393 98 fol. Sarada
(complete).
Mahadvayasivavicara Bhandarkar Oriental Institute, Poona MS no. 479
(1875-6), 2 fol. Sarada (complete).
$aftritpsattattvadarpana
by Manjunatha, Government Oriental Library,
Madras, MS no. R-5042 (C), 11 fol. Devanagarl, (complete).
Sarfivitprakasa by Harsadattasunu, Bhandarkar Oriental Institute, Poona,
MS no. 472 (1875-6) 2 fol. Devanagarl (complete). B.H.U., ace. no. C-4003,
s. no. 14/7893, 16 fol. Sarada (up to 6th prakarana only).
Siddhavlresvaritantra (i.e., Siddhayogesvarimata). Asiatic Society of Bengal,
Calcutta Cat. no. 5947, MS no. 3917 D, 2 fol. Bengali (incomplete).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Cat. no. 5948, MS no. 5465, 71 fol. Newarl (incomplete).
Siddhantacandrika by Vasugupta (?) Bhandarkar Oriental Institute, Poona,
MS no. 501 (1875-6), 38 fol. Sarada (complete).
Stavacintamani by NarayanabhaUa with a commentary by Rama (Rajanaka
Rama?). One MS in Baroda cat. no. S 54, MS no. 1821, 16 fol. Sarada
(incomplete).
Svarupaprakasikd by Nagananda with comm. by Cidananda Government
Oriental Library, Madras, cat. no. 24821, MS no. R-2159, 15 fol. Grantha
(complete). Cat. no. 24822, MS no. R 3281, 31 fol. Telugu (complete).
MS no. D 15328, 6 fol. Devanfcgari (complete).
Svatmopalabdhi&ataka by AcSrya Millana. B.H.U., ace. no. C-4412, s. no.
14/7941, 28 fol. Sarada (complete).
For notices of other unpublished Kashmiri Saiva texts, see Abhinavagupta
and His Works by Dr. V. Raghavan. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Orientalia,
1981. Chapter titled The Works of Abhinavagupta, pp. 17-32. Also
The Krama Tantricism of Kashmirby N. Rastogi. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1979, pp. 225-7.

SECONDARY SOURCES—BOOKS

Beane, Wendell Charles. Myth, Cult and Symbols in Sakta Hinduism:
A Study of the Indian Mother Goddess. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1977.
Bhattacarya, K. C. Studies in Philosophy. 2 vols. Calcutta: Firma K. Mukhopadhyaya, 1959.
Cefalu, Richard F. Shakti in Abhinavagupta's Concept of
Ph.D. dissertation. New York: Fordham University, 1973.

Moksha,

Chatterjee, J. C. Kashmir Shaivaism. Research and Publications Department,
Srinagar: 1st ed., 1914; 2d ed., 1962.
Dunuwila, Rohan A. Saiva Siddhanta Theology: A Context for HinduChristian Dialogue. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1985.
Dvivedi, Vrajavallabha. Tantrayatra—Essays on Tantra—Agama Thoughts
and Philosophy, Literature, Culture and Travel (Sanskrit). Varanasi:
Ratna Publications, 1982. Agama aur Tantrasastra, (Hindi). Delhi:
Parimala Publications, 1984.
Francke, A. H. and Thomas, E. W. The Chronicles of Ladhak and Minor
Chronicles. Antiquities of Indian Tibet, part 2. Asiatic Society of India,
Calcutta New Imperial Series vol. 50 1926.
Gnoli, R. The Aesthetic Experience According to Abhinavagupta. Benares:
Chowkhamba, 1968.

Bibliography

Haldar, Hiralal. Realistic Idealism. In Contemporary Indian Philosophy,
edited by S. Radhakrishnan and J. H. Muirhead. 2d ed. London: George
Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1952.
Jtachra, Durgaprasad. Utpala, the Mystic Saint of Kashmir. Poona, 1945.
Kaviraja, Gopinatha. Tantrika Vanmaya Mem Saktadrsfi. (Hindi) Patna:
Bihara Rastrabhasa Parisad, 1963.
. Bharatiya Samskrti aur Sadhana (Hindi, in two parts). Patna: Bihara
Rastrabhasa Parisad, 1963, 1964.
Kaw, R. K. The Doctrine of Recognition. (Pratyabhijna Philosophy). Hoshiarpur:
Visvesvarananda Institute, 1967.
Jha, Yaduvarnsl. Saivamata. (Hindi). Patna: Bihar Rastrabhaa Pariad, 1955.
Jung, C. G. Psychology and Religion: West and East. Vol. 11 of the Collected
Works. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1958.
Lorenzen, David N. The Kapalikas and the Kalamukhas: Two Lost Saiva
Sects. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972.
Matus, Thomas. The Christian Use of Yoga: A Theoretical Study Based on a
Comparison of the Mystical Experience of Symeon the New Theologian
and some Tantric Sources. Ph.D. Dissertation. New York: Fordham
University, 1977.
Michael, Tara. Corps Subtil et Corps Causal. Les Six Cakra et le Kun<Jlaliniyoga.
Paris: Courrier du Livre, 1979.
Murphy, Paul E. Triadic Mysticism: The Mystical Theology of the Saivism
of Kashmir. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1986.
Nadou, L. Les Buddhistes Kasmihens au Moyen Age. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1968.
Narasimhachary, D. M. Contribution of Yamuna to Visisfadvaita. Madras:
M. Rangacharya Memorial Trust, 1971.
O'Flaherty, Wendy Doniger. Asceticism and Eroticism in the Mythology
of Siva. Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1975.
Padoux, A. Le Symbolisme de L'energie de la Parole dans certains Textes
Tantriques. Paris: E. de Boccard, 1963.
Pandey, K. C. Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical Study.
Benares: Chowkhamba, 2d ed., 1963.
Indian Aesthetics. Vol. 1 of Comparative Aesthetics 2 vols. Benares:
Chowkhamba, 1950.
Pandit, B. N. Kasmira-Saiva-Darsana. (Hindi). Jammu, Shri Ranbir Kendriya
Sanskrit Vidyapitha, 1973.
Pereira, Jose. Hindu Theology: A Reader. Doubleday Image Books, 1976.
(pp. 381-8 contain a translation of Mahesvarananda's Maharthamahjari)

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Potter, Karl. Presuppositions of India's Philosophies. Reprint. Westport:
Greenwood Press, 1976.
Raghavacharya, E. V. V. and Padhye, D. G. Minor Works of Ksemendra.
The Sanskrit Academy, Sanskrit Academy Series, no. 7. Hyderabad:
Osmania University, 1961.
Raghavan, V. Abhinavagupta
Orientalia, 1981.

and His Works. Varanasi: Chaukhambha

Rastogi, Navjivan. The Krama Tantricism of Kashmir. Historical and General
Sources, Vol 1. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979.
Rolt, C. E. Translation of the Divine Names by Dionysius the Aeropagite.
London, 1937.
Rudrappa, J. Kashmir Saivism. Prasaranga, Mysore: University of Mysore, 1969.
Saksena, S. K. The Nature of Consciousness in Hindu Philosophy. Benares:
Chowkhamba, 1969.
Schrader, F. Otto Introduction to the Pdncaratra and the Ahirbudhnya Samhita.
Adyar Library Series, no. 5. Adyar (2d ed.) 1973.
Sharma, L. N. Kashmir Saivism. Benares: Bharatiya Vidya Prakasana, 1972.
Silburn, L. Hymnes de Abhinavagupta. Paris: E. de Boccard, 1970.
———-. Hymnes aux Kali, La Roue des Energies Divines. Paris: E. de Boccard,
1975.
_ LQ Kunijalini ou L'Energie des Profondeurs. Paris: Les Deux Oceans,
1983.
Temple, Richard Carnac, Sir. The Word of Lalla the Prophetess. Cambridge,
England, 1924.
Tucci, G. La Via dello Svat. Ban, 1963.
Vail, M. Heideggar and Ontological Difference. Pennsylvania: Rider College,
1972.

ARTICLES

Alper, Harvey P. "Svabhavam Avabhasasya Vimarsam: 'Judgment' as a
Transcendental Category in Utpaladeva's Saiva Theology. The Evidence
of the Pratyabhijnakarikavrtti." Unpublished.
"Siva and the Ubiquity of Consciousness: The Spaciousness of an
Artful Yogi." Journal of Indian Philosophy 1979 pp. 345-407.
. "Understanding Mantras," Albany, N.Y.: SUNY Press. Forthcoming.
Basu, Arabinda. "The Religions". In Kashmir Saivism, The Cultural Heritage

Bibliography

of India 4 vols. Calcutta: The Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture,
1937-56. Vol. 4: pp. 79-97.
Biihler, George. "A Detailed Report of a Tour in Search of Sanskrit Manuscripts
Made in Kashmir". Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society, Extra number, 1877.
Chatterjee, J. C. "Saivism of Kashmir". In Sharada, 1, i: pp. 15-9. Delhi, 1952.
Gnoli, R. "The Sivadrsji of Somananda". Canto 1 Translation and notes in
East and West, 8 (1957): pp. 16-22.
. "Morte e Sopravivenza nello Sivaismo Kashmiro" Ricerche e Studi
Orientali, (1957): pp. 101-2.
. "Vac. 11 Secondo capitolo della SivadrsU di Somananda". Ricerche e
Studi Orientali, (1959): pp. 55-75.
. "Vac. Passi scelti e tradottidel Paratrimsikavivarana" Pait i. Ricerche e
Studi Orientali, (1959): pp. 163-182; Part 2, Ricenhe e Studi Onentali,
(1965): pp. 215-45.
. "Alcune techniche yoga nelle scuole Saiva". Rtcer. he c Studi Orientali
(1956): pp. 279-90.
. "Corrections and Emendations to the text of the Paramrpsikavivarana".
Miscellanea India: East and West (1959): pp. 192-212
"Five Unpublished Stan/as by Abhinavagupta"'
New Series 9-3, 1958.
. "Bhairavanukaranastotra
Series. 1958.

by

Ksemaraja \

East and West,

East and

West, New

. "Gli Agama Scivaiti nelT India Settentnonale". Indoloxua Taurinesia,
no. 1. Torino. (1973): pp. 61-69.
Kaul, B. N. "Shaivism in Kashmir" and "Tenet of Inka" Research-Kashmir
Trika Philosophy and Culture, 1 1. 1959.
. "Utpalacarya-The Mystic" Kashmir Today, (I960) and "The Doctrine
of Self-Recognition" Kashmir Today, (1962): pp. 62-81.
Kaul, H. N. "Introduction to Trika Philosophy and Culture". Kashmir Research
Biannual, I, i. Srinagar (1960): pp. i-iv.
Kaul, S. "Mahamahesvara Rajanaka Abhinavaguptacarya". Kashmir Today,
1961.
Kaw, R. K. "Finite Self in Pratyabhijna System". Indian Philosophy and
Culture, 1963, Institute of Oriental Philosophy, Vrindaban.
"Concept of Maya in Kashmiri Saivism". Ibid., 1968.
. "Utpaladeva and his Philosophy", tttar Pradesh, 1965.
"Nature of Mind in Pratyabhijna". Kashmir Research Biannual 1,
Srinagar, 1960.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Padoux, Andre. "Contributions a TEtude du Mantrasastra". EFEO 65. Paris,
1978.
. "Contributions a Tfetude du Mantrasastra II—Nyasa". EFEO 67.
Paris, 1980.
Sanderson, G. S. "Purity and Power Among the Brahmins of Kashmir".
The Category of the Person: Anthropological and Philosophical Perspectives,
Steven Lukes et al. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Forthcoming.
Torella, Raffaele. "Una Traduzione Francese Delia Paratrirnsikalaghuvrtti di
Abhinavagupta". Ricerche e Studi Orientals 54 (1980): pp. 171-200.

INDEX

A, first letter of Ahaw, 186-88
Abhasa, Pratyabhijna conception of,
25. See also Appearance and
Manifestation
Abhava, \2\. See also Non-being
Abhidharma, 1

Abhinavagupta, father of, 224; his life
and works, 10-14; and Trika
Saivism
Abode, supreme, 159
Absolute, 34, 90, 113, 114, 127, 177,
193, 202, 257; as A, 186; bliss of,
116; concept of, 24,38; cosmic play
of, 188; experience of, 161; and
finite, 24, 40; integral nature of,
38//1; as Light and pulsation, 6364; power of, 40-41; void of, 126;
wheel of (anuttaracakra), 124, 125
Absorption, empowered (sakta), 201;
introverted and extroverted, 15758; mystical (samdvesa), three
types of, 172. See also Contemplation
Action, 89, 91, 137; inner and outer
forms of, 98,152; relation to knowledge, 72, 80; limited, 137; limited
power of, 150; organs of, 138;
power of, 80, 90, 97-98, 108, 166,
173, 175, 176, 177, 181; power of,

applied to yoga, 206; power of, as
bindu, 186, 188; power of, contracted by thought-constructs,
190; temporal and eternal, 82-83;
as vimarsa, 72, 113
Aesthetic experience, 148-50
Agama, types of, 4-9, 232
Agency, 90, 98, 154, 164
Agent, 27, 98, 141
Aghora, 261. See also Benevolent
powers
Agitation (ksobha), stilling of, 201
Ahatfi, 198; as Mantra, 202; symbolism
and activity of, 185-88. See also
T-Consciousness; Ego; Egoity
Aisvarya, 122. See also Sovereignty
All-Things (sarvartha), 215
Alphabet, Sanskrit, 124
Amardaka, 5, 18, 229
Amba, 11
Anakhya. See Undefmable
Anamakatantra, 12
Anandabhairava, 145
Anandabhairavi, 145
Anandavardhana, 10
Ananta, 133, 211
Ariavamala. See Impurity
Antahkarana, 108
Antararthavada, 46
Anupaya, 160, 173, 175-80, 206, 257; as
fruit of Kramamudra\ two levels

INDEX

of, 178
Anusvara, 186
Anuttaraprakriya,

Anuttaratrika, 227
Anuttaratrikakula, 12, 225
Aphorisms, practices taught in, 204-5;
terms Prakasa and Vimarsa absent
in, 59; as presenting Saiva secret
doctrine, 231; relation to Stanzas
on Vibration, 204, 262-63
Appearance (abhasa), reality of, 25, 3637. See also Manifestation
Ascent, 89
Asoka, 3, 222
Astonishment (camatkara), 55; attitude
of (vismayamudra), 179. See also
Wonder
Atimarga, 9, 14
Atmalabha.
See Self-realisation
Atman. See Self
Atmavadins, 232
Attachment {raga\ 156; power of, 131
Attention, focusing of (dhararia), 209,
212-3; attention (avadhana) to
higher reality, 208; to Spanda, 195
Attribute, divine, of Siva, 112
Aunmukhya.
See Intent
Avantivarman, 21
Awakened {prabuddha\
132, 167, 169,
170; fit for the teachings, 163; fully
(suprabuddha\
108, 116, 126,
132, 146
Awareness, cognitive [prama, pramiti),
124, 176, 186, 197, 198, 214; maintenance of; 94, 216; as power of
Mantras, 202; moments of, 181.
See also Vimarsa

B
Bandhudatta, 2
Bathing (snana), inner, 193
Becoming, relation to Being, 72, 77, 78
Being, 51, 52, 110, 120, 140, 203; activ-

ity of, 97; relation to Becoming, 72,
77-80, 152; as consciousness, 43,
154; as functional capacity (arthakriya), 111; as manifestation, 52;
relation to non-being, 121; oneness
with, 157; own fundamental state
of (svasthiti), 164; as one's own
innate nature, 165; phenomenology of, 52-53; as radiance, 196;
realisation of, 94, 191; as the
sacred, 139; self-revealing character of, 90-91; summit of, 113; as
supreme universal, 190
Benevolent powers (aghora), 113, 114
Beyond-Form (rupatita)y 215-16
Beyond-the-Fourth (turiyatita), 206,
207; relation to the Fourth state

(turiya\ 213, 215
Bhagavatotpala, 22, 25, 27, 221, 222,

Bhairava, 117, 128, 149, 155, 156, 157,
211; as Aham, 188; character of,
7-8; Churning {manthanabhairava\ 126; cult of, in Kashmir, 15;
relation to His emission {yisarga\
100; etymology of the name, 7,223;
identification with, 125, 168, 189,
193; in Kashmiri Saiva texts, 46,
103; as Light, 61, 118, 143, 146;
mythical origin of, 224; realisation
of, 206; wonder of, 61
Bhairavatantras, 7-8, 11, 226, 227;
followers of, in Kashmir, 14; place
in Kashmiri Saivism, 14
Bhairavakulatantra, 227
Bhairavi, 143
Bhairavimudra, 158-59; relation to
Kramamudra, 161
Bhauananda, 233
Bhaskara, 21, 232, 262, 263
Bheda. See Distinction, relative;
Diversity; Division; Multiplicity
Bhoktrtva. See Subjectivity, enjoying
Bhucarl, 127,131
Bhutasuddhi. See Elements, purification of

Index
Bhutatantras, 6, 223
Bindu, 102; as final letter of Aham>
186, 188
Bliss, 161, 178, 179, 180, 213, 214, 251;
through aesthetic experience, 148;
through awareness of the Centre,
185; cosmic (jagadananda), 50,
185; as cosmic consciousness, 127;
emergence of, 143; as illuminating
realisation, 62; innate, 155, 206;
inner, 154, 175; as Kula, 224;
nectar of, 141; as oneness of being
and consciousness, 43; as oneness
with consciousness, 157; as pleasure, 147-48; power of, 91, 160,
173, 176, 177; as rest, 146; as
Spanda, 90, 116
Body, cosmic, 140, 141, 143, 218; as
cremation ground, 144; divine
(divyadehd), 138, 141; empowered
(saktadeha), 141; as Kula, 224;
postures of, 172, 173; supreme
(paradeha), 141; as temple and
microcosm, 140; worship of, 141
Bondage, 123, 128, 130, 135, 140, 177;
and liberation, 17-18, 114, 195;
nature of, 139, 194, 195, 255
Brahma, beheading of, 224
Brahman, 264; abode of, 119, 150; concept of, 33-38; as ground of worldappearances, 36; not object of
devotion, 106; uniqueness as
source and end of all things, 86
Brahmi, 127, 145
Brahmantfapurana, 228
Breath, 145, 218; attention to, 212;
cleansing of, 212; emergence of,
216, 266, flow of, 208; regulation
of, 209, 212; suspension of, 182,
216; upward flowing (udanaprana), 211
Buddhabhadra, 2
Buddhasena, 2
Buddhists, 121, in Kashmir, 1-3; refuted
by SadyojyotU 230
Buhler, G., 222, 231

Cakra. See Wheels
Cakrabhanu, 16
Camatkara, See Astonishment;
Wonder
Camunq'a, 145
Canon, Saiva, 222, 223
Carvana. See Relishing
Categories (tattva), 95, 165, 185; chain
of, 88; pure and impure, 166
Causality, types of, 87-88
Centering, 182
Central Channel (su?umna\ 208,
211, 212
Centre, 129, 145, 248; between breaths,
211; between expansion and contraction, 157; between thoughts,
119; Lord of, 158; power in, 184;
psychic in the body, 212-13; source
of thought, 153
Certainty (niscaya), 192
Change, 123; as alteration of power,
111-112; as conscious action, 80;
freedom from, 164; none in consciousness, 83; unreal according
to Advaita Vedanta, 36; real and
apparent, 25, 87-88
Channel, Central (su$umna), 208,
211, 212
Chapters, names of, in Sanskrit works,
256-57
Chatterjee, J. C , 18, 222, 225, 229, 231
Churning, 126
Circle, lord of, 144
Citrabrahmavadins, 232
Cognition, creativity of, 96-97; encompasses diversity, 51; process of, 9697; as reflective awareness, 71
Concealment, 85
Consciousness, 125; absolute, as the
goal. 179; activity of, 45, 49, 185;
attributes of, 130; as Being, 154;
body of, 122, 141; concept of, 4344; condensation of, 50; contains
and is everything, 46-48; contrac-

INDEX

tion of, 156, 164-65; creativity of,
44-5, 89; cycle of, 125, 173; deities
of, 127, 157; as Deity, 44-45, 105;
embodied, 146; emptiness of, 118;
expanded and contracted levels of,
150; expanded state of, 130, 164;
expansion of, 95,153,164,167; fire
of, 142,144,189,193,203; formless
and omniform, 65-66; introverted
and extroverted, 83; Heart of, 144,
155; as Kula, 224; ladder of, 140;
Lord of, 119, 132; mass of, 120;
mirror-like, 66-68; one and
diverse, 66//!; perceptive (upalabdhrta\ 182; pure, 175, 194; as the
Self, 204; self-luminosity of, 64;
sky of, 118, 120, 126, 130,159,160;
states of, 93, 95, 113, 161, 169,207,
213, 214; as subject, object and
means of knowledge, 63-64; as substratum and supported, 48;
thought-constructs in relation to,
190, 191; as ultimate reality, 43-45
Contemplation (samadhi), 30, 122,209,
213, 214, 266; definition and six
levels of, 264; rising from, 122,127,
160; with eyes open and closed,
127, 156-58, 160,167,178,185. See
also Absorption
Contraction, 118; caused by thoughtconstructs, 190; one with consciousness, 255; relation to expansion, 84-86, 89, 101, 183; removal
of, 190
Convention, linguistic (sariketa), 135,
197, 200
Cosmic-order (?a<jadhvan), 202, 210
C o s m o s (brahmantfa), 211
Council, Buddhist, 1-2
Couple, divine (yamala), 101, 117
Covering, obscuring (kancuka),
131, 165
Craving (abhila$a\ 217
Creation, 79; illusory according to
Sankara, 86; pure and impure, 84,
166; relation to destruction, 84-

86, 89
Crematorium, 143, 144
Cukhala, 11
Cycles, 117; cognitive, 124; contained
in Aha/p, 188; creative and destructive, 81, 84-86, 124, 125, 164,
202; primary and secondary, 152

D
Daily life (vyavahara), 57
Darwin, 228
Descent, 89
Desire, as actualized will, 41, 92; based
on freedom, 39; object of, 92;
renunciation of, 154
Destruction, nature of, 79, 86, 89;
relation to creation, 84-86, 89
Deep sleep, 84, 122, 132, 182, 214
Deity, as consciousness, 105; concept
of, 61; both formless and omniform, 66; as Light, 61
Delight, aesthetic, 264
Desakrama, 81
Devatitasimha, 2
Devotion, 147, 154, 169; path of, 33
Devyayamala, 14
Dharmabhiksu, 2
Dharmakirti, 2
Dharmottaracarya, 2
Dhvanyaloka, 10
Digestion, violent (hafhapaka),
157, 207
Dikcari, 129, 131
Dinnaga, 2
Disciple, 168, 178
Disciplines (niyama), 209, 266
Discrimination, 110
Dispassion (virdga, paravairagya),
40-41
Dissolution (dravana), 88-89; contemplation of (layabhavana), 210
Disturbance, 114
Diversity, 173, 176; absent in anupaya,
180; level of, 114, 115; pervasion

Index
of, 159; relation to unity, 65-66
Divine (sambhava) absorption, 172;
plane, 208; state, 204, 206
Division (bheda\ 74, 114, 130, 142, 261
Doubt, 155, 168, 192
Drama, cosmic, 149
Dreaming, 84-85, 195, 254; control of,

Durlabhavardhana, 2
Durvasas, 18, 288, 289
Dvivedi, V., 225, 231

E
Earth-centre, 22
Effort, applied to practice, 207
Ego, 110, 131, 136, 138, 140, 142, 143;
concept in Stanzas and Kallafa, 27;
disruption due to, 155; eradication
of, 195; freedom from, 264; function of, 135; limited, 115; limited,
merger with universal ego, 188-89;
loss of, 122; nature of, 133; pure,
identified with own nature, 185;
pure, withdrawal of objectivity
into, 210-11; as source of senses,
137; super-, concept of originates
in Kashmiri Saivism, 258-9;
supreme, 142; universal, 113, 115,
135, 141, 185
Egoity, all embracing, 92; embodied,
128, establishment in authentic
form of, 159; pure, 198; universal,
penetration into, 180
Ekayana, 221
Elements, purification of (bhutasuddhi), 210
Emanation, relation to absorption, 80;
nature of, 87; process of as Aham,

Embodiment, 265
Emergence, 119; relation to quiescence,
96-97, 100, 10!
Emission (visarga), 81, 101, 126;
relation to Bhairava, 100; as Ha

of Aharp, 186; generated through
union of Siva and Sakti, 100-101;
power of (visargasakti), 149
Empowered (sdkta) absorption, 172;
contact (saktasparsa), 217; means,
(saktopaya), 189-204
Emptiness, relation to fullness, 119; the
subject, 38, 40, 41
Energy, cosmic patterns of, 117; flood
of (saktivisarga), 93; waves of, 117
Enjoyment (bhoga), 127
Essence (sdra), 54
Ethics, transcendence of, 194
Exertion (udyama\ 124, 152, 157, 180;
as the basis of practice, 154
Expansion (unme$a\ 92, 118; engenders thought, 153; from the
centre, 119, 182; generated by
Bhairavimudrd; 159; Great, 157,
160, 179; inward and external, 157;
as liberating, 154, 155, 164-65;
realisation of, 157; relation to contraction, 84-86, 89, 101, 158, 183
Experience, importance of, 169; as
means and the goal, 168, 169
Externality, defined, 78
Extroversion, 157
Eyes, opening and closing of, 85

Faith (sraddha), 154, 169
Fettered, the, 130, 134, 150, 165, 191,
198, 199, 261
Fierce (ghora) powers, 114; Extremely
(ghoratara), 115
Finite, relation to infinite as mode of
knowing, 97
Fire, 125; centre, 212; inner, that consumes diversity, 142, 157; as
symbol of the subject, 64;
Temporal (kalagni), 211
Flow, 90, 117, 118; sensorial from the
subject, 152; supreme (paradhara)
of energies, 95

INDEX

Forces (kald), 102, 185, 198
Form (riipa), 265
Fourth state (turlya), 84, 109, 118, 120,
161, 182, 189; as absorbing other
states, 207; compared to Beyond
the Fourth state, 213-15; as the
goddess of consciousness, 214;
maintenance of, 215, 216, 21"7;
nature of, 214, 266; in other states,
214, 215, 216; rise to through other
states, 210; wonder of, 216
Fullness, 175, 178, 180, 185, 193, as
anupdya, 177; belonging to the
absolute and its manifestations,
40, 55, 87; as consciousness, 82; as
the Fourth state, 118; contains all
levels of being, 74; at every level of
being, 88-89; loss of, 156; as power,
111, 119; relation to emptiness,
119, 120; realisation of, 93, 95, 164
Functions, cosmic of Siva, 112
Freedom (svdtantrya), 122, 134, 150,
180, 196, 214, 264; and bondage,
139; concept of in Advaita Vedanta
and Kashmiri Saivism, 39; to
create and destroy, 159, as creativity oi consciousness. 55. as the
goal. 34; loss ot, 156. in relation to
Maya, 7 9, vis power and independence, i 10-11; as pure intention
{itchdmdtra), 113; possessed by
Siva 64, 97. 146. yoga of, 215

Gamaiantra. 233
Game, cosmic 166, 167
Ganesa, 145
Garudatanuas, 6, 223
Gautfapada. 86
Gem, wishfulfilling, 104. 105
Gesture {mudra)% 106, 193; Secret, 95;
Supreme, 95
Ghora, 261. See also Fierce powers
Ghoratara. See Fierce powers,

Extremely
Ghurni, Ghurnana. See Vibration
Gocarl, 129, 131
God, concept of in Advaita Vedanta,
45; in Kashmiri Saivism, 46; names
of, 46
Goddess, 63, 84, 120, 124, 125, 177,214;
inferior, 130; middling, 130;
supreme, 116, 124, 129, 130, 196,
255, 260
Goddesses, triad of, 118, 124, 125, 226
Grace. 109, 119, 131, 132, 168,173,175,
178, 182. 217, 255
Guna. See Qualities
Gurundthapardmarsa, 11

H
Ha, 186-88
Haravijaya, 26
Harivamsa, 229
Hathapaka. See Digestion, violent
Heart, 125, 126, 148, 155, 201, 212;
awareness in, 73; centre, 119, 151,
184. 213; light in, 97, 181; pulsation
of, 120, 136. 149, 193, space in, 127,
157; as supreme speech, 196, 201
Heidegger, 52-53
Hero, solitary {ekavira), 117; vow of
{viravrata), 143
Hieiarchy (tdratamya), 42-43, 88-89
Hiranyadama, 6
Hsiian Tsang, 2

i
T-consciousness, 148; absorbs subtle
body, 108; active and at rest, 71-72;
authentic, identification with, 134;
as cycle of Aham, 103, 186-88;
embraces all cycles of creation and
destruction, 84; as the Great
Mantra, 202; as the Heart, 145; in
initial moment of perception, 159;

Index
as knowing and acting subjectivity,
72-73; limited, 137; as Lord of the
Wheel, 126; persistence of, 91;
relation to 'this'-consciousness,
166; as repose in one's own nature,
233; as return to source of perception, 181; as supreme subject, 213;
transcendental, 102; two levels of,
109, 133, 140; as universal Spanda,
107, 159; as void, 122
I-ness, 75, 128, 202; 213; projected onto
the object; pulsation of, 90, 110
Idealism, Buddhist, 49-50; Kashmiri
Saiva, proof of, 47-49
identification, 74; false, 133, 134, 140,
141, 142
Identity, supreme, 264
Ignorance, 155, 168; as cause of doubt,
155; freedom from, 164; as limited
knowledge 165; not material, 165;
power of, 175, 193; removal of,
175; spiritual, as contracted consciousness, 164; ultimately unreal,
194-95
Illusion, 36-39
Immanence, 113, 114, 120, 163-64;
relation to transcendence, 102
Impulse (sarjirambha), 134
Impurity, 155, 208; three kinds of, 156;
ultimately unreal, 194
Individual (anava) absorption, 172;
level, 205, 207-8; means (anavopaya\ 204; soul 126, 152, 155-56,
166, 173, 176; subject, 94, 97,
108, 103
Indrani, 145
Infinite, 215; relation to finite, 40, 97
Initiation, 167
Inner, relation to outer, 77-80, 160
Insight, direct (upaiabdhi), 169
Instant, initial of the will, 93
Instinct, as Voice of Intuition, 196
Intellect, 131, 132-33, 145
Intensity, psychic, 93
Intent, 91-96, 151, 182, 210
Intention, pure (icchdmatra), 113

Internality, defined, 78
Interiority (antaratva), 46-47
Introversion, 148, 156
Intuition (pratibha), 107, 110, 149, 152,
162, 182, 196, 205, 214; supreme,

Intuitive faculty (mati), 191
Involution {nime$a), 92
Isa, 103
Isika. See Lordship
Isvaradvayavada, 46
Isvarakrna, 35
Isvarapratyabhijfiakarika,
10, 17
Isvara, 235
Isvaratattva, 166, 183

Jalandharapitha, 12
Japa. See Mantra, repetition of
Jivanmukti. See Liberation

K
Kak$vastotra^ 232
Kalacurl, 5
Kalakrama> 81
Kalasa, king, 15
KalasaktU i 12
Kalasarikarsini, 46, 124
Kalhana, 1, 3 , 4 , 14, 16, 222, 227
Kali, 9, 16, 46
Kalikrama, 16
Kalikulatantra, 233
Kalis, twelve, 30, 124, 260
Kallatabhana, 14, 21, 103, 195, 250,
262, 266
Kamakala, 103
Kamesvara, 102
Kamesvarl, 102
Kancuka. See Covering, obscuring
Kaniska, king, 1
Kapalika order, 9
Karma, 98, 141, 217

INDEX

Karna, 11
Karttikeya, 223
Kashmir, 1, 222; as a centre of Buddhism, 1-3; Kaula ritual in, 15-16;
land of origin of the Pratyabhijna,
19; relations with Tibet, 2-3; script
of, 2; Saivism in, 3; Tantrism in,
3,6-8
Kashmiri Saivism, 9, 12, 14, 19, 87, 105,
171; characterisation of, 51-52;
meaning of the term, 2-3; practice
of, 8; relation with the Tantras, 13;
relation to Trika, 12,225; syncretic
character of, 23
Kaula, Madhusudana, 31, 230, 231
Kaula schools, 181
Kaulatantras, 11, 227
Kaulas, 14-16
Kaumari, 145
Kaw, R. K., 231
Khecari, 128, 129, 130
Knowledge, 89, 157; inferior and superior, 165, 177, 261; innate
(sahaja), 215; four-fold (jnanacatu?ka\ 171; liberating, 33, 164;
limited, 131; limited power of, 150;
manifests as object 49; means of,
63-64, 124, 166; power of, 63, 80,
85, 90, 96-97, 108, 112, 166, 173,
175, 176, 177, 181; power of, contracted by thought-constructs,
190;asprakasa, 133; pure (suddhavidya\ 159, 166, 170, 194, 208; relation to action, 72, 80; as subject,

Krama. See Succession
Krama doctrine, 124, 129; integrated
into Spanda teachings, 29, 260-61
Krama school, 9, 12, 13, 17, 145, 225;
relation to Spanda school, 233
Kramamudra, 160-61
Kriyakalottara, 223

Life (jivana), 137
Light, 26, 128,143,146, 161; bliss of, 62;
merger in, 127; mysticism of, 6162; symbolism of, 62-63. See also

Krsna, 169, 229
Ksemaraja, 21, 22, 23, 25, 29, 30, 31,
167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 189,
204, 207, 260, 262, 263

Prakasa
Limitations (upadhi), 65
Logos, 53
Lord, Supreme, 118, 122, 129, 144, 196,

K$etrajna. See Individual subject
Ksemendra, 15, 16, 227, 228
Kula, 9, 17, 101, 224; present in all
scripture, 226

Kulaprakriya, 13
Kula school, 12, 13, 225; relation to
Trika, 13, 225
Kulatantras, 227
KulayuktU 256
Kumarajlva, 2
Kun<jalini, 9, 119, 130, 159, 208

Lakullsa, 229
Language, 197, 199-200
Lassitude, 155
Latent traces, 135
Letters, 185, 202
Levels, in order of manifestation, 88-89;
inferior, 173,176; intermediate, 82;
middling, 173, 176; three, 74-75
Liberation, 115, 127, 147, 167,177,212,
213, 217-18; as abiding in one's
own nature, 164; attainment of,
162; in the body (jivanmukti), 128,
167; and bondage, 114, 122-23,
140-41; by conviction, 194; by
knowledge of Maya, 54; by mastery of the Wheel of Energies
{cakresvaratvasiddhi), 127; means
to, 154; by penetrating the body,
140; as permanent contemplation,
264; through purification of the
intuitive faculty, 191; through
recognition, 17-18; sudden, 178,
217-18

Index
Lordship, 90, 114, 123

M
Macrocosm, 158
Madhavacarya, 231
Madhumateya, 5
Madhuraja, 225
Mahaghora, 199
Mahakalabhairava, 7, 223-24
Mahalaksmi, 145
Mahavikasa. See Expansion, Great
MahdvydptL See Pervasion, Great
Mahesvara, 103
Malinivijayottaratantra,

12, 14, 31,

171, 172, 179, 226
Man<jalay 107

Mandra, 11
Manifestation (abhasa), 124; as appearance within consciousness, 47; as
'atomic constituents of reality,
55-57; concept of, 25; as outpouring of the absolute, 40-41; process
of, 88-89; reality of, 52-53; as successive 82; three phases of, 90; two
types of, 137
Mantra, 177, 180, 218, 262, 263; Great,
127; as T-consciousness, 203;
inner, 193; nature and practice of,
200-4; power of, 142; purifies
thought, 203; recitation of (uccara), 172, 173; repetition of (J^PoX
193; vitality of (mantravirya), 203
Mantravada, TIZ
Manoratha, 11
Maradatta, 228
Master, 167, 178, 255, 257; infuses
awareness, 193; relation with disciple, 168; word of, 178, 179
Mdtangatantra, 190
Matrka, 215, 261; as binding and liberating, 199; classes of, 199
Mdtrkacakra, 198
MatrkasaktU 198
Matjrsadbhava, 46

2X9

Mattamayura, 5
Maya, 115, 128, 133, 143, 166, 191, 194,
216, 218; concept of according to
Advaita Vedanta, 36; concept of
according to the Tantras, 37; as
creative freedom and awareness,
79, 190; criticism of Advaita
Vedanta's concept of, 37, 41; distracts the una wakened, 94; domain
of, 107-8; the illusory world, 38;
power of, 71, 108, 111, 112, 132; in
relation to freedom, 79; as sphere
of the lower gods, 105; as the
sphere of objectivity, 54, 183; as
the sphere of thought-constructs,
184; splits subject from object, 57
Means to realisation (upaya), 172, 17375, 177, 206-7, 208; divine, 172-73,
180-89; empowered, 173, 259, 260,
264, 265; empowered can lead to
divine means, 180; empowered,
designed to purify thought, 191;
empowered, relation to Spanda
practice, 260; individual, 173, 263;
individual, can lead to divine
means, 180; individual, can lead to
empowered means, 206, 264, 265,
individual, relation to Spanda
practice, 259
Meditation (dhyana), 172, 173, 177,
193, 209, 210, 213; on the Fire of
Consciousness {dahacinta), 210-11
Memory, power of, 112
Microcosm, 158
Mimamsaka, 108
Mind, 108, 123, 131, 135-36, 153, 185;
associated with Mantra, 203; as
Self, 205; as Siva, 263; steadying
of, 212
Mirror, analogy of, 47, 66-68
Mohardjapardjaya, 228
Momentariness, 79-80
Moon, 64, 125, 212
Motion, 81
Mudrd, 161. See also Gesture

Multiplicity (bheda), 263

INDEX

Muslims, 5
Mysticism, 62
Myth, 224

N
Nameless (nirnamd), 103
Nanatmavadins, 232
Naradasamgraha, 123
Narasirnhagupta, 11, 51
NarayanabhaUa, 105
Narmamala, 15
Naropa, 3
Natural law (niyati\ 89, 131, 140
Nature (prakrti), 34-35, 133, 152, 208
Natyasastra, 10
New Way, 39, 235
Nayakabhatta, 106
Nayottaratantra, 6
Netivadins, 232
Netratantra, 209
Nimesa. See Involution
Nirmanasakti, 112

Nirupaya, 256
Niyati. See Natural Law
No-means. See anupaya
Non-being, 121-31

o
Object, 165; aesthetic, 148, 149; as
aggregate of appearances (abhdsa),
55-57; one with cognition, 48-49;
as a reflection in consciousness, 67;
in relation to the subject, 48,63-64,
78-80, 97, 118; sensory, as aid to
worship, 150; sphere of, 113, 153;
wheel of, 124
Oblation, inner, 142, 193
Ojas, 149. See also Vitality
One, 158
Oneness, 37-38, 41, 42, 43-44, 54-55,
143, 154
Oneself, possession of {svatma-

graha), 164
Opposites, 99, 244
Outpouring, 129, 152, 153
Outer, in relation to inner, 77-80, 160
Own nature, 27, 28, 51, 107, 110-11,
164, 168; as Deity, 105; fullness of,
157; as Kula, 224

Padmasambhava, 3
Pancaratra, 221, 222, 232
Pandey, K. C , 18, 28, 225, 231, 232
Paradhara, See Flow, supreme
Paraka$tha. See Being, summit of
Paramadvaita, 53
Paramarthasara, 25, 232
Paramasiva, 46, 64, 180, 213
Paramesvara, 103
Parapara. See Level, intermediate
Parasakti. See Power, supreme
Paratrimsika, 225
Parinama. See Change and Transformation
Particular, relation to universal, 190
Passion (kama), 103, 104
Pasupata, 8-9, 13, 224
Pasupatasutra, 8
Pasyantl See Speech, as Voice of
Intuition
Patanjali, 208, 209, 265
Path, pure and impure, 114
Pavanasiva, 5
Perception, 91, 165-66, 173; direct, 51;
initial instant of, 119, 180-81, 263;
juncture between, 184; phases in
the act of, 97, 136, 151, 174;
phenomenology of, 48-49; sensory,
132; unifying function of, 51, 80;
world of, 185
Perceiver, 27
Pervasion, 161; Great (mahavyapti),
95, 120
Person {purusa), 34-35, 151, 152, 208
Phainesthai, 53

Index
Phenomenon, 53
Philosophy, relation to religion, 1, 62
Phonemes, energies of, 199-200
Picture, cosmic, 107
Pleasure, as essentially spiritual, 14748; as means to realisation, 217
Point (bindu), 265
Posture (asana), 209, 211
Potentiality, prior to manifestation,
92-93
Power, 190; inferior, 114-16, 124; middling, 114, 124; oneness of, 116; of
one's own nature (svabala)y 90;
penetration into (saktisamavesa),
266; plurality of, 90; rays of, 190;
relation to many powers, 190;
withdrawal of (saktisamkoca),
156; sphere of, where means and
goal are distinct, 123; supreme,
214. See also Sakti
Practice, 170, 180
PradyumnabhaUa, 29
Pragmatic efficacy (karanasamarthya),

Prakasa, 28, 113, 116, 148, 180, 211,
213; all things one with, 47; beyond
the sphere of Maya, 54; as bindu,
186, 188; in the centre, 184; changeless nature of, 87; defined, 59; as
Deity, 61; experienced through the
senses, 138; formless and omniform, 65-66; in the Heart, 181; as
illuminating light, 61-62; not lifeless, 26-27; as the mirror of consciousness, 66-68; nature of, 60//!;
in the psycho-physical organism,
263; reflected in the intellect, 133;
relation to perception, 97; relation
to vimarsa, 26-27, 72; as sabdarasi,
198; as Siva, 203; as sole reality, 60,
235; as subject, object and means
of knowledge, 63-65; as subject
who absorbs duality, 44; as substratum of manifestation, 167
Pramiti. See Awareness, cognitive
Prasara. See Flow

Pratibimbavadins, 232
Pratyabhijna doctrine, main features
of, 17-20; relation to Spanda
doctrine, 23-24
Pratyabhijna school, 10, 170; as a
critique of Buddhism, 20; place
in Kashmiri Saivism, 19; relation
to Spanda school, 59, 231; relation
to Trika, 18
Pratyaksddvaita, 51
Prayer, penetration into Spanda
through, 182
Present, 120, 184
Principle, supreme, 266; penetration
into, 216
Pulse {sphurana), 90
Puranas, 224
Purandara, 5
Purnata. See Fullness
Purnahanta. See I-ness

Qualities (guna\ 108, 133, 213, 246
Quiescence, 96-97, 101, 114

R
Radiance {sphuratta), 57, 77, 136, 142,
154, 190, 196; manifest through the
senses, 137; as matrka, 198
Rajanaka Rama, 22, 23, 25, 29, 262
Rajas, 108, 133
Rajatararigini, 1
Rama, 184
Ramanuja, 221
Rastogi. N., 233
Ratnakara, 26
Reality, concept of, 43; as manifestation, 52; ultimate, 163
Realisation, ultimate, 179
Reason, importance, nature and
function of, 169-70; 256
Recognition, 20, 180, 185, 199; in

INDEX

anupaya, 177, 179; of awareness
in the body as the supreme power,
116; of expansion, 154, 160; as
liberating, 17-18, 123; philosophy
of, 170; to Saivasiddhanta, 20,230;
of Spanda, 27, 143, 146, 156, 17980; of Siva, 115, 126, 134; of
supreme subject, 161
Recognition school, 59, 179; relation
to Spanda school, 27-28
Reflection, cosmic, 66-68, 159
Relation, notion of, 135
Relative distinction (bheda), 40-42, 78
Relishing (carvana), 124
Rest (visranti), 81, 93, 133, 177, 213,
214; abode of, 113, 121; of prakasa
as bindu, 186; regaining of, 191;
relation to emergence, 96-97, 100
Restraints {yamd), 209, 265
Rhythm, 166
Ritual, 224; inner, 189, 193; outer, 173;
types of, 8, 144
Rodhana. See Self-limitation
Root (mulal 114-15
Rudrayamala, 225

Sabdarasi, See Sound, mass of
Sacrifice, inner, 142
Satfardhakrama, 18, 229
Sadasiva, 4, 6, 235
Sadasivatattva, 166, 183
$a<jgunyaviveka, 232
Sadyojyoti, 229, 230
Sahopalambhaniyamavada, 49
Saivagama, 13, 225, 229
Saiva sects, 224
Saivism, 223, 231; in Kashmir, 3-4,
14-15
SakinI, 128
SaktU 123, 173, 176; abode of, 90;
expansion and contraction of, 111;
experience of, 126; as fullness, 119;
kinds of, 112-16; nature of, 110-16;

as principle of negation, 111;
relation to Siva, 99, 102, 103, 161,
188; as the universe. See also
Power

Saktisaipkoca. See Power, withdrawal
of
Saktism, influence of on Spanda doctrine, 29
Samadhi. See Absorption; Contemplation
Sambhavi, 133, 145
Sambhu, 103, 107, 126
Sambhunatha, 12, 13, 31, 171
Sarnkhya, concept of consciousness in,
66; criticism of, 152; principles of,
34-35
Sammohanatantra, 6
Sarnsara, 96, 123, 147, 168, 265
Samvitprakasa, 87, 183
Sankara, 46, 86, 124, 160; identification
with., 134; nature of, 104, 108;
relation to Spanda, 100-1
Sanketa. See Convention, linguistic
Sara. See Essence
Sarasvatsamgraha, 82
Sarvacaratantra, 155
Sarvadarsanasaipgraha, 231
Sattva, 108, 133, 135, 137
Scripture, 168
Sdok Kok Thorn, 6
Self, 27, 122, 123, 145, 206, 213, 215,
232; concept of in Advaita Vedanta, 35-36; as consciousness, 44,204;
false identification of, 109, 133; as
T-consciousness, 134; inner,
activity of, 152; as mind, 205; as
object of worship, 105; perfectly
free, 110-11; proof of existence of,
170; shines just once, 82, 179
Self-awareness {svasamvedana),
109, 116
Self-evidence, 169
Self-limitation (rodhana), 88-89
Self-realisation (atmalabha), 93
Sensations, 135, 136, 138, 148, 152, 165;
emergence of, 188

Index
Senses, 124, 131; deities of, 144, 145,
146;divinizationof, 146; divinized,
150; expansion of, 151, 152, 157;
inner and outer circles of, 139, 144,
145, 151, 158; introverted and extroverted, 146; freedom of, 157,
158; as means to realisation, 147;
physical and divine, 144, 145, 146;
powers of, 112; twelve, 124; universal and individual function of, 158;
vitalization of, 152; wheel of,
132-38
Siddhadarsana, 178
SiddhU 115, 127, 128, 206, 265; as distracting, 216; as liberation, 189;
supreme and inferior, 116, 128
Siddhanta, 5, 11, 26, 222, 226, 227, 229;
place in Kashmiri Saivism, 5, 14;
philosophy of, 221; as a source for
the Pratyabhijna, 19-20
Siddhantagamas, 232; cults and rituals
of, 4
Siddhayogesvarimata,
12, 14, 179,258
Siraschedatantra, 6
Siva, 128, 131, 132, 133, 142, 145, 147,
150, 170, 173, 176, 224; all states
one with, 95; all things one with,
64-65, 167; all things within, 83; as
artist, 107; as author of the Sivasutra, 21; as the Benefactor, 182;
bliss of, 90, 92, 141; as blissful perceiver, 146; body of, 141, 143; as
consciousness, 26, 44-45, 158, 163;
deity of Spanda school, 46; experience of, 84, 116, 120, 180; as
ground of manifestation, 107; in
the Heart, 123, 126; as highest god,
104-5; identification with, 115,
173, 192, 208, 213, 215; imitation
of, 146; impeller of His energies,
98; impeller of the senses, 152;
incarnates as Srlkantha, 18; as
light, 61; Mantra and mind emerge
from, 203; master of powers, 122;
as object of knowledge (Jneya),
192; as object of meditation, 106;

as the one reality, 50; as one's
own nature, 185; the poet, 149;
powers of, 90, 103, 105, 122; processes in, 124; as Rama, 184; realisation of, 179, 190; reveals Himself, 175; as sabdarasi, 198; and
Sakti,99, 102, 103, 121; as Self, 26;
Sky of (sivavyoman), 119; as
source of means to realisation, 173;
and Spanda, 85, 118, 163; state of,
180; supreme and lower levels of,
89, 90, 120, 235; three-fold awareness of, 189; union with Sakti, 29,
161, 186; as universal agent, 98;
worshipped in many forms, 105;
both worshiper and worshipped,

Sivadmi, 18, 231
Sivakaivalya, 6
Sivatattva, 180
Sivaraman, 229
Sivasutra, 12, 21-22, 168, 171, 231
Sivopadhyaya, 256, 264
Sky, wanderer in {khecara), 120;
supreme, 122
Somadeva, 16, 228
Somananda, 18, 19, 20, 24, 25, 26, 27,
46, 50, 93, 179, 231
Sound, 265; mass of, 198, 199; unstruck, 202
Sovereignty, 122, 196
Space, twelve-finger, 212
Spanda, 126, 164; as appreciative subjectivity, 148; as Bhairavl, 143;
in the body, 141; as cognition, 51,
63, 72, 136, 139; concept of absent
in the Sivasiitra, 263; as creative
movement of consciousness, 2829, 40, 57, 74, 77, 79, 118; dawning
of {spandodaya), 181; doctrine,
103, 163, 195; as dynamic Being,
52; experienced through merger of
the breath, 98, 127, 132, 156, 170,
212; forms of, 75, 84, 92, 93; glory
of {vibhutispanda\
141: as the
goddess, 29, 68; as an independ-

INDEX

ent school, 231, 233, 262; induces
expansion of consciousness, 75;
induces expansion and contraction, 86; as intent {aunmukhya) of
consciousness, 182; nature of, 24,
81; as oscillation between selflimitation and dissolution, 89;
philosophy of (spandasiddhanta),
262; as power, 29, 68, 79,97, 111,
113, 149; practice, 31, 171, 182; as
primordial vibration (ddyaspandal 96, 113, 136, 143; as
radiance (sphuratta), 26, 60; realisation of, 115, 154, !60; relation
to Mantra, 210, 202; relation to
Sarikara, 100-1; school, development of and texts, 21-22; as selfawareness, 109; as sensory energy,
146; as Siva's divinity, 45, 105;
supreme form of, 255; system,
Sakta character of, 233; three
phases of, 89-90; transcendental
form of, 118; as two phases of contemplation, 30; as union of Siva
and Sakti, 29, 100-2; universal, 27;
universal, of cosmic bliss, 185;
universal and particular, 57, 107,
109-10; 112, 127, 129, 159, 169,
183, 184, 190; as Vamesvarl, 130;
as vimarsa, 28, 70-75; void ness of,
120, 121-2; as wonder {camatkara)
and the source of the powers of
consciousness, 72
Spandanirnaya, 22
Spandapradipika, 22
Spandasakti, 84; Ksemaraja alone uses
this term, 29; as means to realisation, 103; as means through which
Deity manifests, 106; as one with
Sarikara, 101; as pure cognitive
awareness (upalabdhrta), 96; as
pure ego, 134
Spandasarndoha, 22, 185
Speech, 185; Corporeal (vaikhari), 196.
197; development out of consciousness and relation to thought.

195-97; goddess of, 196; power of,
113; supreme, 195-96, 202; as Voice
of Intuition (pasyanti), 196, 197
SphulirigatmavadinSy 232
Sphuratta. See Radiance
Sphurana. See Radiance; Pulse
Srlkantha, 18,229
Srikanfhlyasamhita, 226
Srinatha, 18
Srong-bcan-sgampo, 2
Stanzas on Vibration 20; accord with
scripture, 169; commentaries on,
21-22; concept of superego absent
in, 185; divisions of, 167; practices
taught in, 182, 189, 204; terms
prakasa and vimarsa absent in,
59; relation to Sivasutra, 22, 204,
205, 231; represent teachings of a
distinct school, 263
State, supreme, 122
Strength, inner {bala), 141, 154, 189;
empowers Mantras and senses,
152, 203; realisation of, 169, 195
Subject, conceived, 134; independence
of, 48; individual, 113, 134, 165,
166, 205-6; linked to object and
means of knowledge, 63-64, 78-80,
97, 118, 159; persistence of, 122;
pure, 213; split from object, 111,
129, 142; supreme, 64, 96, 119;
supreme, recognition of, 160, 161;
universal, 130, 166, 172, 197;
unreal, 263; wheel of, 124
Subjectivity, cognising, 148; embodied,
143, 217; enjoying {bhoktrtva), 90;
orders of, 217; perceiving, 155,
184; perceiving, Buddhist denial
of, 122; as power of Mantra, 202;
pure (upalabdhfta), 110, 164, 170,
185, 189, 213, 214; supreme, 141
Substance, as consciousness, 48;
obnoxious to be offered without
aversion, 260
Subtle body, 108, 115, 126, 205, 250
Succession (krama), 82-84, 117,
125, 161

Index
Sumati, 12, 13
Sun, 64, 125, 134, 144, 212
Superego, absent in original Spanda
doctrine, 26-27; its origin in the
Pratyabhijna, 19
Supports, formation of (sthanakalpana).

Supramental (unmana), 215
Supreme, 173, 176
Svacchandabhairavatantra, 8, 14, 120,
121, 209

Svatantresa, 133
Svatantrya. See Freedom
Svatmagraha. See Oneself, possession
of
Svatmocchalatta. See Outpouring
Svetasvataropanisad, 26, 150
System, as specific term, 231-32

Tamas, 108, 133, 138
Tanmatra, 108
Tantra, 158, 171, 179
Tantras, 140, 142, 144, 145, 224, 226;
their types, 4-9
Tantraloka, 10, 11, 12, 14, 171, 172, 227
Tantraprakriya, 13
Tantric lineages, 4
Taratamya. See Hierarchy
Taste (rasa), 265
Tasting, (asvadana), 147-48
Tattva. See Categories
Tattvayukti, 256
Tension, 93
Thon-mi Sambhota, 2
Thought-constructs, 126, 135, 136, 143,
159, 174, 208, 216, 217; affects not
consciousness, 191-92; as binding
and obscuring, 123, 165, 168, 185,
190, 191, 194; break up unity, 42,
69, 78; contemplation with and
without, 264; like dreams, 163,
208, 254; generation of, 108, 119,
142, 153, 166, 182, 198; nature of.

192; purification, elimination and
transcendence of, 142, 162, 173,
191, 192, 195, 203, 206; relation to
speech, 185, 197
Tibet, 2
Time, 218; absent in consciousness, 81,
83, conquest of, 120; fire of, 143;
generation of, 184; notion of, 8283; power of, 93, 131
Totality, law of (gramadharma), 184
Transcendence, 102, 113, 114, 120,
163, 209
Transformation {parinama), 88
Transmigration, 155, 156
Triad, 113
Trident (trisula), 181
Trighantika, 15-16
Trika, 10, 11,31, 171, 179; aims at realisation of absolute {anuttara), 257;
categories of, 173; as independent
school, 225, 226-27; goddesses of,
12, 15, 113; in Kashmir, 14-15;
Kaula character of, 13, 16, 100;
origins of, 12, 18; outside Kashmir,
17, 228; relation to Pratyabhijna,
18, 229, 231
Trikamata, 228
Trikasara, 12, 227
Tripifaka, 2
Trisirobhairavatantra, 14, 255
Truth, relative and absolute, 37-38
Tryambika, 18, 229
Tucci, 3
Tumburu, 6, 223
Tunya. See Fourth State
Tunyatlta. See Beyond the Fourth

u
Uc^iyana, 3
Udyoga. See Exertion
Indefinable [anakhya), 124, 180
Unfolding (unmesa), 90; of becoming,
152; of cognition, 94-95, 96; of
consciousness, 95

INDEX

Union (samarasya\ 116; Great, 159
Unity, 74, 114, 130, 137, 159, 173, 176,
261; as harmony of opposites, 98;
of inner and outer, 121; level of,
114, 116; realisation of, 95-96, 140;
relation to diversity, 40-42, 65-66;
splitting up of, 115; supreme, 226
Unity-in-diversity (bhedabheda), 74,
114, 130, 135, 173, 176
Universal, relation to particular, 190
Universe, 47-48, 67-68, 111, 112
Unmesa. See Unfolding; Expansion
Upadhi. See Limitations
Upalabdhfta. See Spanda, as pure
cognitive awareness; Subjectivity
Upanisads, 86
Upaya. See Means to realisation
Upsurge (udyama), 206
Utpaladeva, 10, 17, 18, 19, 22, 26, 27,
28, 59, 258

Vaisnavl, 145
Vaisnavism, Kashmiri, 25, 26, 222, 232;
monistic, 28
Vakyasudha, 264
Vamanadatta, 222, 232
Vamatantras, 6, 226, 227
Vamesvarl, 129-30
Varadaraja, 21
Varahagupta, 11
Varahl, 145
Variety (vicitrata), 85
Vasubandhu, 50
Vasugupta, 12, 21, 103, 168, 231
Vatsalika, 11
Vatuka, 145
Veda, White Yajur, 221
Vedanta, advaita, 24, 25,34-35, 86, 105;
types of, 24-25; schools of, 232
Vibration, 92, 95; doctrine of, 8, 17, 20,
21, 22-23, 189; as a symbol of the
absolute, 62-63. See also Spanda
Vicitrata. See Variety

Vijnanabhairava, 119, 153, 210,
255, 256
Vikalpa. See Thought-constructs
Vimarsa. 26, 28, 113, 115, 192, 233; as
blissful, 72; as creative power and
repose of consciousness, 70; as
cause of diversity, 73; defined, 59;
etymology of the term, 69; functioning of, 71, 72, 73-74; in the
Heart, 184; inner and outer aspects
of, 70-71; as Kamesvari, 102; levels
of, 74-75; as mantric power, 200;
as matrka, 198; as self-awareness
of consciousness and its manifestations, 69, 72; as Spanda, 72, 28; as
speech, 195-96; as subjective
awareness, 115; as the will, 91
Vinasikhatantra^ 6
Vinitadeva, 2
Viravalitantra, 212
Vlresa, 103
Vlryaksobha. See Vitality, arousal of
Visarga, 102. See also Emission
Vitality (v/rvfl), 149; arousal of, 149;
inner, 154-55
Void, 119, 129, 142, 144, 184, 212;
abode of, 85; criticism of Buddhist
conception of, 122; as emptiness of
phenomena, 159; levels of, 120-21;
not unconscious, 163; preceding
manifestation, 96; as Siva, 119; as
source and end of energies, 186
Vyavahara. See Daily life
Vyomavamesvari, 130
Vyomesvarl, 130

w
Waking, 84-85, 167, 195, 215, 254
Water, 212
Wheels, 30, \\tff.\ can be both binding
and liberating, 128; centre of, 126;
contemplation of, 260; generation
of, 117, 118; Lordof, 118, 122, 126,
127; mastery of as liberation, 159,

Index
189; motion of, 118, 125; play of,
202; twelve-spoked, 124
Whole {pracaya), 215
Will, 89; activity of, 136; as creative, 64;
as ground of divine means, 180;
initial instant of, 93, 96, 180;
nature of, 90-95; power of, 90-96,
173, 175, 176, 177, 181; two
moments of, 92; universal, 166,182
Wind, 212
Wisdom, path of, 33
Withdrawal, 86, 126, 166; process of,

Wonder (camatkara\ 119, 139, 154,
198; born of aesthetic experience,
147, 149; experience of, 93, 217; as
fruit of Bhairavimudra,

161;

nature of, 199
Word (sabda), 264
World, 50; illusory nature of according
to Yogacara, 49-50; reality of, 35,
53, 235; reality of according to the
commentators on the Stanzas on
Vibration, 25-26; reality of according to Kashmiri Saivism and

Advaita Vedanta, 24-25; 86; reality
of according to the Siddhanta,
229-30
World-orders (bhuvana), 148, 186
World-picture, 115
Worship ipuja), 150, 154, 177

Yasahpala, 228
Yasaskara, 228
Yasastilaka, 16
Yoga, 115, 169,213,215,255; definition
and nature of, 208-9; limbs of, 209,
265-66; path of, 33; planes of, 161
Yogacarabhumi, 2
Yogacara, 49-50
Yogaraja, 150
Yukti, definition of the term, 255

Zodiac, 124, 135