TANTRĀLOKA
THE LIGHT ON AND OF THE TANTRAS
by Abhinavagupta

with the Commentary called Viveka by Jayaratha
Translated with explanatory notes
by Mark S. G. Dyczkowski

Chapters Thirty through Thirty-Seven

TANTRĀLḶOKA
THE LIGHT ON AND OF THE TANTRAS

Volume Eleven
Chapter Thirty through Thirty-Seven
With the Commentary
called Viveka
by Jayaratha

Translated with extensive explanatory notes
by Mark S. G. Dyczkowski

Copyright © 2023 Mark S. G. Dyczkowski

ISBN: 9798852286673

www.anuttaratrikakuḻa.org

AII rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical
including photocopying, recording or any information storage or retrieval
system, without prior written permission of both the copywrite owner

indicated above and the publisher.

Cover illustration: Shivansh.ganjoo/commons.wikimedia.org
Varanasi,

September 2023

DEDICATION

This book is dedicated to my family and friends who have

supported and assisted me.
T offer this work most humbly to the feet of Swami Lakshmanjoo
who inspired and guided me in many ways.

May this work be of benefit to all.

Swami Lakshmanjoo

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The volumes the reader has before him is the fruit of a lifetime’s work
that has encompassed and pervaded every aspect of my life, as it has that of my
family, first my parents, and then my wife, children and even grandchildren. My
acknowledgements are humbly offered to all who throughout my life who have
taught, assisted and sustained me. Reflecting on over 50 years of study, during

most of which I have had the great good fortune to live in India, the holy land of

the Ṛṣis, Siddhas and Yoginīs, I cannot escape the feeling that a mighty Divine
Power has guided my life. Any acknowledgement of help received or inspiration
must begin for me with a sense of profound gratitude to the One Infinite Being
who sustains and is both the origin and final end of all things. Nowadays, in this
modern secular world such declarations seem improper and contrary to the spirit

of detached objectivity that serious academic research demands. Nonetheless,

bound as a scholar by the moral duty to acknowledge my sources and those who
have assisted me and taught me, I cannot do otherwise. Were it not for that
impulse, inscrutable as it is powerful, that sent me from England, my native
land, to India in 1969 and to the many people I was fortunate to meet there who
taught and guided me, the volumes the reader has before him would not exist.
Amongst the many that come to mind I can only mention a few, the first
of whom is the late Pt. Ambikadatta Upadhyaya at whose feet I was introduced

to the Sanskrit language and the marvels of the world of Sanskrit literature and

grammar. Pt. Hemendranatha Cakravarti opened the door that allowed me to
enter the glorious realms of Kashmiri Śaivism. The journey into that world
began for me in 1971 with the Mahārthamañjarī of which he helped me make a
partial translation. Pandit Chakravarti was the most senior disciple of the great
Mahāmahopādhyāya Gopinātha Kavirāj who was one of the greatest scholars of
Tantra in India and amongst the first to reveal the teachings of Kashmiri
Shaivism to the world. I met him only once. The encounter took place in 1972.

He was very ill then with terminal cancer and lived in Aananda Mai’s ashram in

Benares. Although I was hardly twenty, he sat up for me on his bed and
summoned his strength to say just one word as he stared up into Emptiness.
Slowly, but clearly and with deep feeling, he uttered ‘mahāprakāśa” – ‘the
Great Light’. In this way, he expressed the essence of non-dualist Śaivism of
Kashmir and left an indelible impression on me. Along with sitar, this blazing
Light would consume the rest of my working life.
In 1975 the great Kashmiri master, Swami Laksmanjoo sealed my quest
with his initiation and divinely inspired teachings. Words cannot express the

good fortune of a person who has had the chance to sit at the feet of a fully

realized soul and study from him. In the six months I was living near his ashram
in Kashmir, I was given access, after much insistence, to the recordings that had
been made of his lectures from 1970 by John Hughes. In the past few years
many of them have been transcribed published. The audio recordings along with

transcriptions will give some idea of the wisdom and joy Swamiji’s inner state.

He was teaching Tantrāloka at the time. While very learned scholars may have

been confused because what he taught may not always be found in the scriptural

sources, I always took his words to have the authority of scripture. This he knew

ii
very well, according to the degree of access to the sources available in those
days and the works of the great Kashmiri masters. He also received much from

his environment which is those days was still alive with the tradition. Swamiji

offered what John Hughes has called a ‘revelation’ rather than a translation of
the Tantrāloka. The present work seeks to present the translation along with
Jayaratha’s invaluable commentary and copious notes drawn from the sources.
My hope is that read together, revelation and translation will illumine each other
in the reader’s mind.
It is important also to acknowledge that Swamiji exemplified a method
– a way of understanding the Tantrāloka and teaching it to others. This was his

focus on practice. His instruction was not only based on the texts. His concern

was to teach the matters that the texts did not make explicit concerning practice
and the states of consciousness and their developments achieved by practice and
grace. I have taken care to be as accurate as I can in my translation and striven
to furnish notes drawn from textual sources that serve to explain the translation.
This makes the work essentially a scholarly one. However, I am also deeply
concerned with practice. Indeed, a large part of what is required to understand
the Tantrāloka is to see through the many technical details into the practice they

implicitly or explicitly teach. This I try to do by reading the text and explaining

it orally in classes regularly held on line. I also quote Swamiji’s works in Hindi
and English in the notes to my translation.
While Swami Laksmaṇajoo was a great master of inner, yogic practice,
in Nepal I was introduced into the vast and complex world of Newar Kaula
ritual by Kedararāja Rajopādhyāya, whose ancestors were the purohitas and
Tantric gurus of the Malla kings of Bhaktapur. Kedararāja generously gave me
his tīme and courageously braved the possible consequences of transmitting
such matters outside the circle of his initiates.
Pt. Vrajavallabha Dvivedi, former head of the Yogatantra Department at
Saṁpūrṇānanda Sanskrit University, was an abiding source of inexhaustible
knowledge. Indeed, his scholarly work, both in Sanskrit and Hindi,

is

formidable – ranging as it does through virtually every major Tantric tradition

including not only Kashmiri Śaivism, but also Śaiva Siddhānta, Vīra Śaivism,

Śrīvidyā, the Kaula Tantras, Vaiṣṇava Pañcarātra, the Buddhist Anuttarayoga

Tantras and even Jain Tantrism.
In other areas of study, I cannot but recall with gratitude Pt. B. P.
Tripathi, better known as Vāgīśa Śāstrī, former Director of the Research

Department of Saṁpūrṇānanda Sanskrit University, who labored for years to
teach me Sanskrit grammar both in the traditional manner through the
Siddhāntakaumudī and through his own didactic method.
Although I have not studied formally with Prof. K. D. Tripathi, retired
dean of the Sanskrit college of Banaras Hindu University, I cannot but
acknowledge that the many lectures I have heard him deliver and dialogues I
have had with him over the years inspired and helped me very much to
understand Pratyabhijñā, Bharṭrhari’s philosophy of grammar, Abhinavagupta’s
aesthetics and the Śaiva Āgamas. In a similar way, 1 had the good fortune to
listen to many lectures and attend classes on the Naātyaśastra with
Abhinavagupta’s commentary by the late Premalata Sharma, formerly Dean of

the Music Faculty of BHU and President of the Sangit Nataka Academy. There

are many other renowned scholars in Kāśī whom I must also thank for
inspiration such as the late Prof. Ananda Krishna and Vatukanatha Khiste, who

was a scholar and initiate in line of Bhāskara Rāya, the great 18 century

exponent of Śrīvidyā.
I owe a special thanks also to Bettina Báumer whose dedication and
scholarship in many fields has been an abiding source of inspiration and
knowledge for me throughout the 50 years of our acquaintance. Of those who do
not reside in Benares I gratefully acknowledge Prof. Navajivan Rastogi whose
books and lectures have helped me a great deal.

I should not forget to mention my good friends and fellow travelers,

especially Dr. Śitalāprasād Upādhyāya, formarly head of the Yogatantra
Department at Saṁpūrṇānanda Sanskrit University and then rector of the

University. I am especially grateful to Prof. Rana Singh, retired head of the
Geography department of Banaras Hindu University who guided me through the
principles of sacred geography, particularly that of Kāśī.

During the decades that went into making this translation and study I

continuously searched for the sources Abhinavagupta quotes in his Tantrāloka

and other works. In this regard I am deeply indebted to the librarians who

permitted me to have copies of manuscripts and early rare printed books. I am
especially grateful to the German directors in Nepal of the German Nepalese
Manuscript Preservation Project. Over the twenty odd years in which 1 travelled
every year, sometimes more than once, to Nepal, seven came and went. There I
collected copies of manuscripts of the majority of the most important texts
belonging to the early period, that is, prior to Abhinavagupta, from which he
drew. The Nepalese collection is very extensive and contains most of the earliest
manuscripts preserved in the Indian subcontinent. Other libraries that have
furnished manuscripts of important texts, are the Asiatic Society in Calcutta, the
central library of Banaras Hindu University, and the libraries in Jodhpur and
Poone.

An important source are Kashmiri manuscripts, most of whichare in

Śāradā script. There are a few exceptions, but to a very large 'extent the
Kashmiri Śaiva texts that have survived have been recovered. Even so there aré
several texts written after the 13" century that have not yet been edited. These
are preserved in the Kashmiri Research Institute in Srinagar and the Ranbir

Singh library in Jammu and elsewhere. The scholarly community owes Chetan

Pandey a great debt of gratitude for his unstinting effort to scan Kashmiri and
other manuscripts including the entire collection of the Ranbir Singh library and
numerous private collections.
Next only to the Nepalese collection in importance for this research, are

the transcripts and manuscripts deposited in the French research institute in

Pondicherry. Professor NR. Bhatt was the director of the Indological Institute
there for many years and the first editor of Siddhāntāgamas to produce critical
editions of several of major Siddhāntas. He also supervised a project that lasted
many years to search libraries and private collections for important Siddhānta
manuscripts. These he had transcribed from Grantha and other South Indian

scripts into clean, well-written devanāgarī script. In this way he made accessible
over 1,200 Saiddhāntika works, including all the twenty-eight Siddhāntāgamas.
I am very grateful to Prof. Goodall who in 2008 authorized the photography of

iv

this collection at my suggestion for Muktabodha, The PDFs were put up on the
Muktabodha site and are still freely available to all for study. Amongst these
transcripts, there are several of texts quoted by Abhinavagupta. Two especially
spring to mind, namely, the Sarvajñānottara and the Dīkṣottara.
I heartly thank the people who have assisted me for over 30 years, the
first 20 for my work and the remaining time for Muktabodha’s project. They
typed manuscripts and collated them laboriously with meticulous care and
processing my books and editions. Especially relevant here is their collation of
the available manuscripts of the Tantrāloka and Jayaratha’s commentary.
The most senior amongst them is Ravindra Mishra who has worked
with me from the beginning. In time, the office grew to four more people,
namely, Birendra Pathak, Vinay Kumar Mishra, Dharmendra Shrivastava and

Devavrata Patel. They learnt to read and transcribe manuscripts in a variety
scripts, including the many varieties of Newarī script going back into the tenth
century. The learnt Kashmiri Śāradā script, Bengali and Maithili. They could
also transcribe South Indian Grantha. These very well trained and highly
qualified people continued to work for me on the project financed by
Muktabodha.

I worked for Muktabodha between 2007 and 2018 as academic advisor

and manager of the Varanasi office where e-texts of Sanskrit Tantric sources are
produced for the on-line Mukatbodha digital library. Hema Patankar, Robert
Kemter and Vasistha who were part of the executive staff of Muktabodha
sustained me with their sincere appreciation of my humble attempts to

contribute to the preservation and deeper understanding of Śaiviṣm. The same

support came also from David Katz who in the later years became the director.
Over the years I prepared had 350 e-texts typed by my staff whom 1 had
previously trained to do this for my work. These e-texts include cover most of
the important early publications and manuscripts from Tantric traditions,
especially Kashmiri Śaiviṣm and Aagamic Śaivism in general. The interested
reader is encouraged to visit the site and download them and other e-texts that
are regularly added to the collection. The reader will find about 150 more
Tantric e-texts at my website – anuttaratrikakula.org. Global searches of these etexts, has completely transformed studies in this field.
I always recall with much gratitude the foreigner’s scholars who have
been my mentors and peers. In 1975 Gnoli published an Italian translation of the
Tantrāloka. Īt was just the bare text without Jayaratha’s commentary and
relatively meagre notes. Even s0, this and his other translations into Italian and
books contributed much to my understanding. My esteemed seniors and mentors
include Professor André Padoux who, especially in these last few years, give me
great moral support by his appreciation of my humble efforts. Professor Richard
Gombrich has never forgotten me although many years have passed since he
was my supervisor in Oxford. Others include the late David Kinsley, a sincere
and most humble man who took pleasure in conversation and exchanging views.
David Lorenzen has been a friend for over thirty years whom I have come to
know better over the past ten or so since he began to make short yearly trips to
Varanasi. He has always brought with him new vistas and interests along with
his deep sensitivity and a self-effacing nature that hides the depth of his
scholarship. Amongst my other fellow scholars, I would like to thank the ‘other

v
David,, that is, David White. A dear friend, he has been unfailing in his support
and has always tried his best to keep me on the path towards the distant goal of
completing these volumes. Amongst those younger than me, I recall Jeffrey
Lidke, whose exchanges have led to much reflection, and John Nemec. I should

mention with gratitude my students who have always been very supportive.

I reserve a special place in these acknowledgements for my revered

teacher Prof. Alexis Sanderson formerly of the Sanskrit Department of the

Oriental Institute at the University of Oxford, now retired, with whom I was

fortunate to study for my doctoral dissertation on the Spanda teachings of
Kashmiri Śaivisṃ between 1975 and 1979 which resulted in the Doctrine of
Vibration. Our interaction continued for the next six years. His knowledge and
insight, inspired me greatly as he continues to do so to this day through his
writings that has contributed an immense amount to our knowledge of Śaiviṣm.
It was he who sowed the seeds of this work. The study of Kashmiri Śaivism
under his guidance opened a door for me onto the vast and rich world of the
early Śaivāgamas, which fascinated and attracted me intensely. Were it not for
him and my esteemed Indian teachers, I would not have given the best years of
my life to this work.
Finally, I wish to express my unbounded gratitude to Ram Krishnan and
Raphael Wiilterlin who made my website and to those who have helped to

maintain it and develop it, most especially loana-Raluca Voicu (‘Yaria’), who

has been in charge of the site for the past three years. She regularly uploads the
classes I hold three times a week, seminars and the music I play on sitar. Mariya
Karagyozova has also helped me much over the years send out notices to people
and assisting in the coordination of my lectures and seminars. A very special
thanks goes to Saraḥ Caldwell, known to her friends as ‘Amba’. She spent an
immense of amount of time proof reading the text of my translation two times

over.

Freedom Cole is an old friend and very excellent and well-known
astrologer. He dedicated a good deal of his very valuable time to writing a
substantial essay on Indian astrology in the light of the teachings of chapter six
of the Tantrāloka. These are concerned with the projection of the cycles of time
into that of the breath. All the diagrams and drawings in that article are made by
him. The reader will find it in the appendix to that chapter.

CONTENTS
CHAPTER THIRTY
The Current of Mantras, verses 1-3, pages 1-2
The Form of the Mantras (mantrasvarūpa)

The Trident Throne, The Shaft of the Trident, verse 4, page 3-4
The Knot of Māyā, verse 5, page 4
The Plinth, the Lotus and the Corpse, verses 6-9ab, pages 4-7
The Abbreviated Rite, verses 9cd-10ab, page 7

Ratiśekhara Bhairava Mantra, verses 10cd-11ab, pages 7-9

Navātmā Bhairava Mantra, verses 11cd-14, pages 9-12
The Faces and Limbs of Navātman, verses 15-16ab, pages 12-13
Bhairavasadbhāva Mantra, verses 16cd-17, page 14
Gaṇeśa Mantra, verses 18-19, pages 14-15
Parāparā Vidyā, verses 20-26ab, pages 15-21
Aparā Vidyā, verse 26cd, page 21

Parā Vidyā, verses 27-37ab, pages 21-27

The Limbs of the Vidyā (Vidyāṅga), verses 37cd-41cd, pages 27-31
1) The Heart, verses 37cd, page 27

2) The Head of Brahmā, verse 38, page 27
3) The Topknot, verse 39ab, page 27
4) The Armour, verses 39cd-40ab, pages 28-31
5) The Eye, verses 40cd-41ab, page 31

6) The Weapon (Pāśupatāstra), verses 41cd, page 31

The Guardians of the Quarters and their Weapons, verses 42-43ab, pages 32-33

The Six Classes of Invocations, verses 43cd-45ab, pages 33-34
Mātr̥ṣadbhāva, verses 45cd-46, pages 34-35
Variants of Mātrṛsadbhāva, verses 47-51, pages 35-37

Yoginīcakreśvara Mantra, verses 52-53, pages 37-38

Nine-syllabled Kālakarṣiṇī Vidyā, verses 54-55ab, pages 38-40
The Razor, verses 55cd-58, pages 40-42
The Liberating Weapon, verses 60-62ab, pages 43-44
The Brahmavidyā, verses 62cd-92, page 44
The Brahmavidyā Consisting of Parts (sakalā), verses 64cd-66ab, pages
44-45
The Brahmavidyā, verses 68-90ab, pages 45-52
The Brahmavidyā Without Parts, verses 90cd-92, pages 52-53
The Mantras for the Scale Initiation, verses 91cd-98, pages 53-?
The Mantra for Fetching the Sacrificial Animal, verses 91cd-92, page

A Mantra to Paralyze Śākinī, verses 93-94ab, pages 53-54

Bhairava’s Heart Mantra, verses 94cd-99, pages 54-57
The Initiation Taught in the Śrīsantati, verses 100-101, page 57
The Three Vidyās, verses 102-106, pages 57-59
The First Vidyā, verses 107-110ab, pages 59-60
The Second Vidyā, verses 110cd-115, pages 60-62
The Third Vidyā, verses 116-121ab, pages 62-63

vii

The Vitality of Mantras (mantravīrya), verses 121cd-123, pages 63-64

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE
The Trika Maṇḍala

The Drawing of the Square Base of the Maṇḍala According to the
Mālinīvijayottara, verses 1cd-10ab, pages 65-70
The Various Types of Trika Maṇḍala with Lotuses and Tridents

(śulābjabhedah)
A) The Construction of the Maṇḍala According to the Trikasadbhāva,
verses 10cd-52, pages 70-89
Another form of the Trika Maṇḍala according to the Trikahṛdaya,
verses 53-59, pages 89-93
B) The Construction of the Maṇḍala According to the

Mālinīvijayottara, verses 60-85ab, pages 94-103

C) The Construction of the Maṇḍala According to the Devyāyāmala,

verses 85cd-100ab, pages 103-109

D) The Construction of the Maṇḍala According to the

Triśirobhairavatantra, verses 100cd-131, pages 109-119

A Description of (the Parts of the Maṇḍalas Called) the ‘Lord of the

Skyʼ, the Svastika, and the Rest (yyomeśasvastikādinirūpaṇa) ,
verses 132-154, pages 119-129
E) The Construction of the Maṇḍala According to the
Siddhayogeśvarīmata, verses 155-164ab, pages 129-133

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
The Procedure Concerning the Seals (Mudrā) (mudrikāvidhi)

Definition of Mudrā, verses 1-3, pages 134-137

The Primary and Secondary Types of Mudrās, verses 4-9ab, pages 137-141

The Nature of the Mudrās (svarūpa) , verses 9cd-10ab, pages 141-142
A) The Seal of the Skyfarer (khecarīmudrā) According to the
Mālinīvijayottara, verses 10cd-12ab, pages 143-144
B) The Seal of the Skyfarer according to the Yogasaṁcāra, verses 12cd31, page 144
The Seal of the Trident, verses 13cd-25, pages 144-148

The Seal of the Skeleton – Karaṅkinī Mudrā, verses 26-31, page
149-150

C) The Seal of the Skyfarer (khecarī) According to the Vīrāvalītantra,

verses 32-47ab, pages 151-157

D) The Seal of the Skyfarer According to the Kāmikatantra, verses

47cd-48, pages 157-158
E) The Seal of the Skyfarer According to the Kulagahvaratantra, verses

49-53, pages 158-161

F) The Seal of the Skyfarer According to the Bhargāṣṭakaśikhākula,
verses 54-62, pages 161-165

viii

Deliberation on the Vitality (vīrya) of Mudrā (vīryacarcanam) , verses 63-65,
pages 165-166
The Various Occasions When the Seals are Applied (kālabheda) , verses 6668ab, pages 166-167

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE
The Gathering Together of the Deities (ekīkāraḥ) According to the
Mālinīvijayottara

The Six-spoked Wheel of Six Yoginīs, verse 2, pages 169-170
Twenty-four Spoked Wheel Made of Two Groups of Twelve Yoginīs, verses 35, pages 170-172
The Sixteen-spoked wheel of Sixteen Yoginīs, verses 6-7ab, page 172
The Powerholders of the Six and Twelve-spoked Wheels, verses 7cd-9ab, pages
172-173
The Powerholders of the Sixteen-spoked Wheel, verses 9cd-12, pages 173-174
The Powerholders Worshipped in the Wheel of Twenty-four Spokes, verses 1314ab, pages 174-175
The Bhairavas of the Wheel with Thirty-four Spokes, verses 14cd-17ab, pages

175-176

The Mantras of the Six-spoked Wheel, verses 17cd-18, pages 176-177
The Mantras of the Thirty-two-spoked Wheel, verse 19, pages 177-178

The Formation of the Mālinī, Mātṛkā and Śabdarāśi and Development of Ekaśīti

and Other Mantras from them as the Activity of Consciousness, verses
20-26, pages 178-181
Fractions of Measures and Accents, the Many Applications of Consciousness,

verses 27-29, pages 181-182

All is Contained in the Three Goddesses and Mātṛṣadbhāva, verses 30-32, pages

182-184

CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR
Entry into One’s Own Nature (svasvarūpe praveśaḥ)

The Ascent Through the Individual, Empowered and Śāmbhava States and
Beyond to Realisation, verses 1-4ab, pages 185-187

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE
The Encounter of the Scriptures (śāstramelana)

The Basis of Daily Life is a priori Commonly Accepted Belief (prasiddhi) .
verses 1-2ab, pages 188-191
Reason and All the Means of Knowledge Depend on this a priori Belief, verses
2cd-4ab, pages 191-192
Guided by this a priori Belief, Babies Experience Attraction or Repulsion and
Learn to Speak, verses 4cd-10ab, pages 192-196

1X

Examining the Progressively Prior Factors on which Subsequent Ones Depend,
the Ultimate Root of Daily Life is this a priori Certainty, verses 10cd-

12ab, pages 196-197

The Totality of Daily Life Can only be Possible if it is Based on Bhairava, the
One Omniscient Perceiver, verses 12cd-14, pages 197-198
Associated with Countless Partial Aspects, the One Tradition Extends
Throughout Daily Life, verse 15, pages 198-199
This is the Śaiva Tradition, that is Complete and Perfect and Bestows the
Highest Fruit, verses 16-17, pages 199-200
Food is Known to be Nourishing only by a priori Belief, verses 18-19ab, pages

200-201

A priori Certainty is the Inner Language (śabdana) of Conviction (pratīti) Free
of Contradiction, verses 19cd-22, pages 201-202
The Tradition is Just One and Source of All Fruits, verses 23-25, pages 203-204
AIl Worldly and Spiritual Traditions Come from the Five Faces of Sadāśiva,
verses 26-27, pages 204-208

Gradations in the One Tradition, verses 28-29, pages 208-209

Only One Tradition (āgama) in which Evyery (Tradition) is Grounded from
Vedic to Śaiva, Culminating in Trika, verses 30-31ab, pages 209-210
Trika is Kuḷa, that is Present in AIl Traditions, verses 31cd-34, pages 210-212
This is the One Tradition that Embodies a priori Certainty, verse 35, pages 212213
AlIl Traditions Come from Śiva and are Juṣt Fragments of the One Traditions,
verse 36, pages 213-214
Even if There Are Many Traditions, They Must be Establishedin a Single
Hierarchy for Them to Have Authority, verses 38-39ab, page 214
Only the Śaiva Traditionis Valid and Free of Contradictions, verses 39cd-42ab,
pages 214-217
Very Few are Qualified for this Tradition, verses 42cd-44ab, pages 217-218

CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX
An Account of the Transmission of the Scriptures (āyātikathana)
The Transmission of the Siddhayogīśvarīmata, verses 1-6, pages 219-222
The Division of the Parts of the Scripture, verses 7-10, pages 222-224

The Transmission of the Śaiva Traditions (santatikrama) , verses 11-14, pages

224-225

The Tantrāloka is Their Essence, verses 15-16ab, pages 225-226

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN
A Description of the Scriptures to be Adopted (śāstropādeyatvanirūpaṇam)
The Highest Tradition is Grounded in Complete Belief (prasiddhi) and so
Bestows the Full Fruit, verses 1-5, pages 227-228
The Scripture Whose Teachings are Complete Bestows Anuttara, verse 6, pages

228-229

Lower Teachings are Imparted by Those with a Corresponding Limited
Knowledge, verses 7-9, pages 229-230
The Types and Superiority of the Śaivāgama, Especially that of the Left, verses
10-17, pages 230-233
The Four Collections of Scriptures (pītha) and the Excellence of the Vidyāpītha,
verses 18-25ab, pages 233-237
The Excellence of Trika Kaulism, verses 25cd-28, pages 237-238
The Transmission of Immediate Realization, verses 29-33ab, pages 238-240
The Concluding Verses
The Beauty and Spiritual Power of India, the Land of Kumārikā, verses

33-37, pages 240-242

Madhyadeśa, the Abode of AIl Scripture, and Home of Atrigupta, verse
38, page 243
Latitāditya Took Atrigupta to Kashmir, verses 39-40, pages 243-244
Kashmir, the Land of the Goddess Śāradā, Where its Excellent Wine
Enflames Lovers’ Passion, verses 41-44, pages 244-246
The Beauty of the Kashmir Valley and Greatness of its Inhabitants,
verses 45-46, pages 246-247
King Pravarasena, the Founder of the Capital Pravarapura, verses 47-48,
pages 247-248
The Beauty and Sanctity of the River Vitastā, verses 49-51, pages 249-

Abhinavagupta’s Ancestral Home Donated to Atrigupta and Handed
Down to Varāhagupta and Narasiṁhagupta, verses 52-54, pages

250-251

Abhinavagupta’s Mother Died When He Was a Child; His Youthful
Folly and the Dawning of Discrimination, verses 55-57, pages

251-252

His Father Was His First Teacher, and He Delighted from an Early Age
in Literature; Gripped by Devotion to Maheśa, He Had No
Worldly Concerns, verses 58-59, pages 252-253

Abhinavagupta’s Teachers, verses 60-63, pages 253-257

Abhinavagupta’s Students, verses 64-72, pages 257-263
Vatsalikā and Her Husband, the Minister Śauri, verses 73-75, page 263
Ambā: Abhinavagupta’s Sister, verses 76-80, pages 263-265
Living in the House Vatsalikā Gave Him, Assisted by Lumpaka, He
Wrote the Tantrāloka, verses 81-82, pages 265-266
Concluding Invocation and Blessing, verses 83-85, pages 266-268
Conclusion of Jayaratha’s Commentary, pages 268-276
Appendix Volume Eleven
Appendix A to Chapter Thirty-two
Chapter Seven of the Mālinīvijayottara, Concerning Mudrās, pages 277-284
Appendix B to Chapter Thirty-two
Chapter Eight of the Tantrasadbhāva concerning Mudrā, pages 285-290

Appendix C to Chapter Thirty-two

Mudrā according to the Krama System, pages 291-292

X1

Appendix D to Chapter Thirty-two
Mahārthamañjarī concerning Mudrā according to the Krama System, pages

293-296

Appendix E to Chapter Thirty-two
Selected Mudrās taught in Chapter Two of the Fourth Satka of the
Jayadrathayāmala, pages 297-306
Appendix A to Chapter Thirty-three
Sarvātmakacakra according to chapter five of the Tantrasadbhāva, pages 307-

Appendix B to Chapter Thirty-three
In Praise of the The Sixteen Amṛitarudras by Abhinavagupta, pages 311-321
Appendix C to Chapter Thirty-three
The Thirty-four Rudras of the Consonants, pages 322-327
Appendix to Chapter Thirty-five

Chapter Twenty-one of the Tantrasāra, Concerning Prasiddhi, pages 328337
Biblography, pages 338-276
The Numbering of the Verses of the Printed Edition of the Tantrāloka, pages

377-379

Index, pages 380-431

Abbreviations
APS
ASB
AV

Ajaḍapramātr̥ṣiddhi
Asiatic Society of Bengal
Atharvaveda

BY

Brahmayāmala

BLO
BhGī

BhoKā
BrUp
ChUp
CMSS
DhAK

DP

Dhál

GOMLḶL

Bodleian Library, Oxford
Bhagavaádgītā

Bhogakārikā
B,rhadāraṇyakopaṇiṣad
Chandogyopaṇiṣad
Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccayā
Dharmālaṅkārakārikā
Devīdyvardhaśatikā
Devīpañcaśataka

Dhvanyālokālocana

HCC
HDh

Government Oriental Manuscript Library, University of
Chennai
epic poem by Jayaratha put in bibliography
History of Dharmaśāstra

IFP
ISMEO

Institut Français d'Indologie de Pondichéry
Istituto Studi Medio ed Estremo Oriente

I
|%
ĪPVy

ĪŚGDP `
JA
JASB
JRAS

KED
KJIN
KNP
KuKh
KuPa
KhCPS
KM
KṢSS

KNP
LYV

MBh
MP
MP (I Śk)
MP (2 Tri)
MP (3 AS)

Indo-Īranian Journal
Iśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī
Iśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛtivimarsśinī
Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati

Journal Asiatique
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bombay
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
Jayadrathayāmala
Kashmiri Series Edition
Kaulajñānanirṇaya
Kramanayapradīpikā
Kumārikākhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairavatantra
Kulapañcaśikā
Khacakrapañcakastotra
Kubjikāmata
Kashmiri Shaivism, the Secret Supreme
Kashmiri Series of Texts and Studies
Kramanayapradīpikā
Laghuyogavāsiṣṭa

Mātaṅgaparameśvarāgama

Mahābhārata
Mahānayaprakāśa
Mahānayaprakāśa commented by Śitikaṇṭha
Mahānayaprakāśa by unknown author published in
Trivendrum.
Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasiṁha

xiii
MS
Mv
MVv
Mw
Mund

Manuscript
Maālinīvijayottaratantra
Mālinīvijayavārtika
Monier-Williams
Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad

MrTVK
MrṛKri
MṛrV
NGMPP
NSA
NB
NBT
NT
NTu
no.
p.
PMNKā

Mṛgendratantravṛtti Kriyāpāda
Mṛgendratantra Kriyāpāda
Mṛgendratantra Vidyāpāda
Nepal German Manuscript Preservation Project

Nyāyabindu
Nyāyabinduṭīkā
Netratantra
Netratantroddyota
Number
Page
Paramokṣanirāsakārikā

MrIT

PT
PTyv

PS
Pv
PVi

Mṛgendratantra

Parāṭrīśikā (= Parātriṁśika)
Parātriṁśikavivaraṇa (Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa)

Pānini’s Sūtras, the Aṣṭādhyāyī.
Pūrvakāmikā
Paramārthasāra
Pramāṇavārtika
Pramāṇaviniścaya

RSO
RT
RauSūS

Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya
Ricerche e Studi Orientali
Rājataraṅginī
Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha

SB

Śatapathabrāhmaṇa

RgV

SBUM
SLJ
SOL
SP

SpKā
SpNi
SpPra
SpSaṁ
SDrṛ

Śvet

Rgveda

Sarvajñānottara
Sva/Subodhodayamañjarī
Swami Laksmanjoo
Science of Light
Saṅṁvitprakāśa

Spandakārikā
Spandanirṇaya
Spandapradīpikā
Spandasaṁdoha

SŚivasūtra
Śivasūtravimarśinī
Śivastotrāvali
Śrīmatotara
Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad

xiv

SSS

SSP

SvT

SvTu

SUNY
SYM

Satsahasrasaṁhitā
Somaśambhupaddhati
Svacchandatantra

Svacchandatantroddyota

Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha
State University of New York Press
Siddhayogeśvarīmata
Tattvatrayaparīkṣā
Tantrāloka
Tattvārthacintāmaṇi

Trika Śāstra Rahasya Prakriyā
Tantrasāra

Tantrasadbhāva

Tantroccaya
Taittirīyopaniṣad
Tantravaṭadhānikā
Triśirobhairava

Ūrmikaulāraṇvatantra
Vijñānabhairava
Vāmakeśvarīmata

Vātulanāthasūtra

Yogavāsiṣṭa
Yonigahvaratantra
Upaniṣad

laghu
guru
commentary

CHAPTER THIRTY
The Current of Mantras
I bow to Him whose body has been washed (clean) with the wine of the

great vitality (of Mantras) which is (His own) innate (sahaja) awareness, He

who is present in Mantra and in the mind of the adept who accomplishes (his)
desires.

Now with the second half (of the verse begun at the end of the previous

chapter,) in order to describe the Mantras, he says:

atha yathocitamantrakadambakaṁ

trikakulakramayogi nirūpyate |
I will now describe the required collection of Mantras linked with

the liturgies (krama) of the Trikakula. (lab)

Surely (one may ask), what is the use of the (Mantras) described (here)?

With this doubt in mind, he says:

taã ēḶ |ḹ ? 1
tāvadvimarśānārūḍhadhiyāṁ tatsiddhaye kramāt |I 1 I|

(We do this so that) those whose intellect is not firmly rooted in

such (tāvat) (perfectly full) awareness (may) gradually achieve that. (lcd)

‘Such” (means perfectly) full (reflective awareness). (We do this so

that they) ‘may achieve that’. The meaning is that the purpose is to achieve
ascent into the reflective awareness of full (unconditioned) subjectivity

(pūrṇāhaṁvimarśa).
Surely (one may ask), how is that possible by (means of these Mantras)?

pratibuddhā hi te mantrā vimarśaikasvabhāvakāḥ |
' We notice in this chapter dedicated to Mantras that Abhinava hardly deals with Krama Mantras.
The only one to which he refers is the Mātṛsadbhāva, which is both a Trika Mantra, as it is found
in the MV, and, as Abhinava und.
nds it, directed by his teacher Śambhunātha, it is the seed
syllable of the godde:
rīka
, and so also a Krama Mantra. He also gives a nine-syllable

version of Kālasaṁkarṣiīī’s
Vidyā (30/4-55ab). However, he does not give thc full scvēnteensyllable Vidyā anyywhere. We ar indebted to Jayaratha for quoting a passage in thhe Devyāyāmala,
where it is given in code (TĀv ad 29/69ab-70).

Abhinava’s relentless promotion of

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī as the supreme deity, beyond even Parā (parātītā) of the Trika, tells us that her

Vidyā was his main mantra, and so he kept it secret.
Read tāvat for tāvān.

CHAPTER THIRTY
The sole nature of these Mantras, once awakened, is reflective

awareness. (2ab)
Surely, it has been said before many times that reflective awareness can
be the nature only of the agent and Mantras are instruments (not agents in
themselves). So how can it be logically possible for them to be such? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

svatantrasyaiva ciddhāmnaḥ svātantryāt kartr̥āmayāḥ || 2 |I
It is because of the freedom of the abode of consciousness, that is
free (to do anything), that (Mantras) are agents. (2cd)

Surely (one may ask), if this is so, how is it possible for the teacher to
be the agent of the grace of initiation and the like?° With this doubt in mind, he

says:

yam āviśanti cācāryaṁ taṁ tādātmyanirūḍhitaḥ |
svatantrīkurvate yānti karaṇāny api kartṛtām || 3 I
(The Mantras) penetrate into the teacher, and because he is firmly
rooted in a state of identity (with them), they make him a free (agent).
(Thus,) although they are instruments (of ritual action), they become the

agents (of that action). (3)

Surely, if that is so, without an instrument, how could they be agents?
With this doubt in mind, he says that ‘although they are instruments (of ritual

action), they become the agents (of that action)’. Although (Mantras, which

are) the instruments (of ritual action) become agents, they (continue to be)
instruments without their abandoning their state as agents. This is the meaning.
He now describes the form of (these) mantras.

Verses 2-3 are drawn from MVV 2/229cd-231ab. There, instead of vimarśaikasvabhāvakāḥ –
‘the sole nature (of these Mantras) is reflective awarenessʼ, MVV 2/229d reads
vimarśapathavartinaḥ – (these Mantras) are on the path of reflective awareness.

Conceming the nature of the agency of an agent, see above, 9/8-10.
karṭāmayāḥ literally: made of agencyʼ.

If Mantras are agents in themselves, then the successful execution of rituals would be by virtue

of the Mantras alone. The officiant would have no part to play in it.
- MVV 27230c reads tādātmyaniyogataḥ – because (he is) appointed by (his) state of identity

(with them) instead of tādātmyanirūḍhitaḥ – because he is firmly rooted in a state of identity
(with them).

TANTRĀLOKA

The Form of the Mantras (mantrasvarūpa)

The Trident Throne
The Shaft of the Trident

TITYTHI

ādhāraśaktau hrīṁ prthvīprabhṛtau tu catuṣṭaye |
kṣḷāṁ kṣvīī vaṁ kṣam iti prãhuḥ kramãd varṇacatuṣṭayam || 4 |

(The Mantra) HRĪM is within the power of the foundation (of the
Trika Trident). They say that the group of four syllables, KṢḶĀM,

KṢVĪṀ, VAṀ, and KṢAM, is within the four, (the principles) beginning
with Earth, respectively. HAM is in the channel (of the Trident). (4-5a)

Emend kkā to kṣvīṁ, as found in MV 23/13c.
This section, from 4 to 10ab, presents the Mantras for the worship of the Trident Throne. The
printed edition has grouped these verses into one. For the convenience of the reader, 1 am
separating them in accord with parts of the Trident.
The mantras are taught in the MV 23/13-15, of which these verses 4 t0 10ab are an
expanded explanatory paraphrase. The formation of the Throne is described in detai above, in
15/297cd-314. The worship of the deities continues up to 352ab. We observe here, as in many
other cases, that Abhinava also supplies missing information, without which it would not be
possible to understand the procedure taught in the Tantra. Thus, all the MV tells us is this:
‘Now will be taught the etemal seed Mantras (jāti), along with the preceding throne

(āsana) of the group of five, namely, HRĪṀ (read hrīṁ for hīi) KṢLĀM KṢVĪṀ VAMṀ and
KṢAMṀ, in due order. (13)

And (those) of the other group of five, namely, HAṀ YAṀ RAṀ LAṂṀ and VAṀ.
(The phonemes) rM RM IN ḶLṀ and OṀ AUṀ and HAḤ extend up to the beginning of the calix

(of the lotus). (14)
(The consonants) ending with BH are on the filaments, and HAṀ HĀṀ HIṀ HĪṀM
HUM along with HŪṀ HEṀ HAIṀ and HOM are on the petals, and so too, in the same way, the

powers with their own names. (15)

ŚAṀ ṢAṀ (Read śaṁ ṣaṁ for śeṣaṁ) and the Subtle one (SAṀ) are in the three circles

of the Ghost (i.e. Sadāśiva). It is said that one should imagine the letter JRAM be that of the
prongs of the Trident.’ (16) MV 23/13-16
' The mantras at the base of the Trident:

OṀ HRĪṀ ĀDHĀRAŚAKTAYE NAMAḤ (the Foundation)
OṀ KṢLĀṀ DHĀRĀYAI NAṂAḤ (Earth)
OMṀ KṢVĪṀ SURODĀYA NAMAḤ (Water - the Ocean of Wine)
OṀ VAṀ POTĀYA NAMAḤ (Fire – the Boat)
OṀ KṢAṀ KANDĀYA NAṂAḤ (Air– thc Bulb)
Space is not represented in this group. One possible rcason for that is that it is included
in the domain of Ananta that extends up to Kalātattva. Another, perhaps better reason, is that
Spaceis not counted separately from the four elements becauseit pervades them.
''' OM HAṀ ANANTĀYA NĀMAḤ.

CHAPTER THIRTY

‘(The principles) beginning with Earth’ are in the Earth, the Ocean of

Wine (Water), the boat (Fire), and in the Bulb (Air) (kanda). According to this,

the seed-syllable of Māyā (HRĪṀ) is in the power of the foundation. Elsewhere
(in the others,) are the navel (KS) along with the left breast (L) and milk (Ā)

(KṢḶĀṀ – Earth), (the navel) conjoined with the throat (V) and nose (Ī)
(KṢVĪṀ – Water, the Ocean of Wine), just (the navel) (KSṢAṀ) (in the Root –
Air), and the throat (VAMṀ) in the boat (Fire). Vitality' (M) is everywhere (at
the end of the syllables).
‘The channel’ is the staff (of the Trident). According to this, the vital
breath (H) is here, along with vitality (Ṁ) (HAṀ).

The Knot of Māyā

3š ar š

d rṁītzaqa|

Ṝ X d q nd®

fTāēTKATT
I 41

yaṁ tathā raṁ laṁ vaṁ dharmãdicatuṣṭaye |

rṁ Rrṁ ḷṁ Ḷṁ catuṣke ca viparītakramād bhavet | 5 II
YAṀ, RAM, LAṀ, and VAM are in the four, Dharma and the rest
(that are in the knot at the base of the three prongs of of the Trident). ṛM,

RM, IM, and LMṀ and in the four (which are their opposites, arranged) in
the reverse order. (Sbcd)
(Dharma and the rest) ‘in the reverse orderʼ, that is, Adharma and the

rest. Here (in this case), according to this, (these four in the forward order
correspond to) the group of four semivowels conjoined to vitality (M) (i.e.

YAṀ, LAṀ, RAṀ and LAṀ), and (in the reverse order to the four) neuter
vowels (i.e. ṛM, ṚRM, IM and ḶM).
The Plinth, the Lotus and the Corpse

Read ojas ca for tejaś ca.

The eight qualities of the mind at the level of Māyātattva:

OM YAṀṂ DHARMĀYA NAMAḤ (SE) (Dharma)

OMṀ RAṀ JÑĀNĀYA NAMAḤ (SW) (Jñāna (knowledge))

OM LAṀ VAIRĀGYĀYA NAMAḤ (NW) (Vairāgya (dispassion))
OṀ VAṀ AIŚVĀRYĀYA NAMAḤ (NE) (Aiśvārya (mastery))

OMṀ IM ADHARMĀYA NAMṂAḤ (E) (Adharma)
OṀ RM AIÑĀNĀYA NAMAḤ (S) (Ajñāna (ignorance))
OM [M AVAIRĀGYĀYA NAMAḤ (W) (Avairāgya (lack of dispassion))

OṀ ḶṀ ANAIŚVARYĀYA NAMAḤ (N) (Anaiśvārya (lack of mastery))

TANTRĀLOKA

oī aurṁh has trayam ity etad vidyāmāyākalātraye |
anusvāravisargau ca vidyeśeśvaratattvayoḥ || 6 |l

The three, OṀ, AUM and HAḤ are in the three (principles of)
Knowledge, (absence of) Māyā, and (absence of) the Force (of limited

agency) (kalā), (respectively).
AṀ and AḤ are within the principles of Vidyeśa and Īśvara. (6)

(The three (principles of pure)) “Kmowledge’, which is the crossroad,

(catuṣkikā) Māyā, which is made of darkness (asūraka), is the lower cover, and

the power (of limited agency) (kalā) is the upper cover. (Pure) Knowledge is the
plane (which is the ground) of the Iśvara principle, that is just next to it, above

it.

Along with that (tena) here are the pair of shanks (AUM) and the vital

breath (H), along with emission (AH) (HAḤ). ‘Vidyeśa’ (here means) the place
which is presided over by the Vidyeśvaras, that is, the Īśvara principle, the form

of which is a lotus. (Here) ‘Iśvara’ is Sadāśiva. The sense is that this is the state
of pervasion in the form of the pure enclosure etc. (śuddhāvaraṇa) etc. within

the calix (of the lotus).

Ṁā īṢSaaTSHga: |

afarzāī zvcazāad ī T ĀṜḷā] | . 1|
TTITĪ Tā-Ṁ- TIIT-TṬĪ
TTVSGGĪŠ |
afrg. Ṁḷ ̄d Ṁ JJṀ] Ṁ̄- T I| ¢ 1|

Ṝ TT;
ṢTHTAT
TTTR-T

kādibhāntāḥ keṣareṣu prāṇo ‘ṣṭasvarasaṁyutaḥ |

'! The Croṣsroad (catuṣkikā) is located the aperture in the back of the palate and cranium. There is
a plinth there that has two coverings. There is a problem here with the identity of these three
levels. Just below them is the group of eight, consisting of Dharma etc., that are located at the
upper extremity of the shaft of the Trident. This is where Ananta resides, and s0 corresponds t©
the level of the priṅciple of Māyā. If that is correct, the plinth should mark the beginning of the
pure principles, that is, Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā). Jayaratha apears to confirm ths, saying
that (Pure) Knowledge is the plane (which is the ground) of the śvara principle that is juṣṭ next
to it above it. This then should be the plinth, which is also called the crossroad. However,
according to Jayaratha, we should break up the compound vidyāmāyākalātraye into the three Vidyā, Māyā and Kalā. This is confusing. We would expect Māyā and Kalā to be below the
pliṅth, not on it.Better then is t© read the three components as being ‘Amāyā’ and ‘Akalā’, that is,
the absence of Māyā and limited agency. Then we may consider the ‘coverings' on the pliṅth ta
be aspects of Pure Knowledge.

OṀ HAḤ ŪRDHVACHADANĀYA NAṂAḤ (Upper covering (power of limited agency))
OṀ AUṀ ADHAŚCHADANĀYA NAMAḤ (Lower covering. Māyā)
OṀ OMṀ VIDYATATTVĀYA NAMAḤ (Plinth. Vidyā (power of of imited knowledge)
On the coverings of the plinth is a lotus, which is Īśvaratattya, within which reside the
Vidyeśvaras. Their mantras are:
OMṀ AṀ VIDYEŚVAREBHYO NAMAḤ

OMṀ AḤ ĪŚVARATATTVĀYA NAMAḤ

CHAPTER THIRTY

sabinduko daleṣv asṣṭasv atha svaṁ nāma dīpitam | I 7 I|
śaktīnāṁ nayakasya syāc chaṣasā maṇḍalatraye |
sabindukāḥ kṣmaṁ prete jūṁ śūlaśṛṅgeṣu kalpayet || 8 II
prṛthagāsanapūjāyāṁ kramān mantrā ime smṛtāḥ |
(The twenty-four phonemes) from K to BH are (each in one of the

twenty-four) stamens (of the lotus). (7ab)

The vital breath (H) conjoined (successively) with the eight vowels

along with bindu is in the eight petals. The names of the nine powers are
energized (dīpita) (by the mantra OṀ). Ś, S, S, together with the Point
(bindu),is in the three circles. (7cd-8ab)
KṢMAM is in the Ghost (i.e., Sadāśiva). One should imagine that

JRAM is on the prongs of the Trident. These are said to be, one by one in
due order, the Mantras (required) for the worship of the Throne. (8cd-9ab)
(The phonemes) ‘from K to BH” are twenty-four. _There is one

phoneme for each filament. The vital breath is the letter H. A

ĀII U Ū E AI are

Each of the eight petals of the lotus has three filaments. Thus, there are three for each of the

eight dircctions, primary and secondary. The letters on the filaments starting from the eastern
petal are:

KAṀ, KHAṀ, GAṀ (E) GHAṀ, ṄAṆI, CAMṀ (SE)
CHAM, JAṀ, JHAṀ (S) ṄAṀ, TAṀ, ṬHAṀ (SW)
ḌAṀ, DHAṀ, ṆAṀ (W) TAṀ, THAṀ, DAMṀ (NW)
DHAMṀ, NAṀ, PAṀ (N) PHAṀ, BAṀ, BHAṀ (NE)
The names of the yoginīs are lited above in 8/338 (338cd-339ab) and in 15/305-397. HOM is
the mantra of the power in the centre of the lotus (ṂV 23/15, where in the third pāda there should
read hūĩ heĩ haiṁ hoṁ for huṁ heṁ hai). Thus, the mantras of the yoginīs on the petals of the
lotus, clockwise beginning with the castem petal, are:
OMṀ HAṀ VĀMĀYAI NAMAḤ (E)
OṀ HĀṀ JYEṢṬHĀYAI NAMAḤ (SE)
OMṀ HIṀ RAUDR̥YAI NAMAḤ (Ś)
OMṀ HĪṀ KĀLYAI NAMAḤ (SW)
OṀ HUṀ KALAVIKARAṆYAI ṄAMAḤ (W)

OṀ HŪṀ BALAVIKARAṆYAI NAMAḤ (NW)
OṀ HEṀ BALAPRAMATHANYAI NAMAḤ (N)
OṀ HAIṀ DAMANYAI NAMAḤ (NE)

OṀ HOṀ MANONMANYAI NAMAḤ (centre)
'Ś See above, 15/307. Cf. MV 23/16ab: maṇḍalatritaye śeṣaṁ (>śaṣam) sīūkṣmaṁ (i.e. sa)

pretasya kalpayet |

The mantras of the parts of the lotus:

Petals- Sun: OM ŚAṀṂ ṢŪRYAMAṆḌALĀYA NAMAḤ
OṀ ŚAṀ SŪRYAMAṆḌALĀDHIPATAYE BRAHMAṆE NAMAḤ
Stamens - Moon: OM SAṀ SOMAṂAṆḌALĀYA NAMAḤ
OṀ ṢAṀ SOMAMANDALĀDHIPATAYE VIṢṆAVE NAMAḤ
Calyx – Fire: OM SAṀ AGNIMAṆḌALĀYA NAMAḤ
OṀ SAṀ AGNIMAṆḌALĀDHIPATAYE RUDRĀYA NAMAḤ

Lying within the lotus is the Great Ghost (mahāpreta), who Sadāśiva. His mantra is: OṀ
KṢMAṀ MAHĀPRETĀSANĀYA NAMAḤ.

The mantta of the proṅgs of the Trident OM JRAṀ ŚŪLAŚR̥ṆGEBHYO NAṂAḤ.

TANTRĀLOKA

the eight vowels. Saying that there are nine (powers) entails this, namely, that

the vital breath (H) conjoined with the ninth vowel (O) is in the calix also. That

is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘(The consonants) ending with BH are on the filaments, and HAM

HĀMṀ HIṀ HĪM HUṀ HŪṀ HEṀ HAIṀ and HOM are on the petals, and so
too, in the same way, the powers with their own names.”

‘The three circlesʼ, that is to say, along with their presiding deities, are

the Circle of Fire, within which is the genitals (Ś); that of the Sun, in which is

the belly (S); and that of the Moon, within which is the living being (S). “On the
Ghost (i.e. Sadāśiva) are the navel (KS) and the hip (M), conjoined with

vitality (M) (KSMAṀ). The trident (J) along with the Point and the statf (RAMṀ)

(JRAM) ‘is on the prongs of the Trident’.

The Abbreviated Rite

JṬTJST T JTIRTTT

āĪTT 1 8. 1A

JTTRIĀTHĀNTTFTĀĪTRYḺPGTR̥TTT-TJT|I

saṁṂkṣepapūjane tu prāg ādyam antyaṁ ca bījakam || 9 ||
ādāyādhāraśaktyādi śūlaśṛṅgāntam arcayet |
In the abbreviated rite of worship, (the parts of the Trident)
beginning with the power of the foundation and ending with the prongs of
the Trident can be worshipped (all together,) assuming the first and the last

seed syllable Mantra. (9cd-10ab)

‘The first’ is the seed-syllable of Māyā (HRĪṀ), that denotes the power
of the foundation, and ‘the last’ is the syllable JRAṀ. Thus the abbreviated
Mantra (ūha) (for the Trident as a whole is) HRIṀ JRAṀ ĀṢANAPAKṢĀYĀ

NAMAḤ.

Ratiśekhara Bhairava Mantra

TrārTRr̥āādTṃ'sēaTṀTTGGRĀ I 2 ||

agnimārutapṛthvyambusaṣaṣṭhasvarabindukam || 10 l|
ratiśekharamantro ‘sya vaktrāṅgaṁ hrasvadīrghakaiḥ |

"MV 23/15.

According to Jayaratha, the mantra of the entire Trident Throne is: ON HRĪṀ JRAṀ
ĀṢSANAPAKṢĀYA NAMAḤ.

Read jraṅkāraṁ for jūṁkāraṁ.

Read jraṁ for jīi.

CHAPTER THIRTY
The Mantra of Ratiśekhara (consists of) Fire (R), Air (Y), Earth (L)

and Water (V), along with the sixth vowel (Ū) and the Point. His faces and
limbs (are formed) with the short vowels (A I U E O) and the long ones (Ā

I Ū AI AU), respectively. (10cd-11ab)

Ratiśckhara is the Bhairava of Parāparā. His mantric form is: RYLVŪṀ. This Mantra, as is
generally the case, is presented in the Mālinī code in the MV. There we read:
raktatvaṅmāṁsamūtrais tu vāmakarṇavibhũṣitam |

binduyuktaṁ prameyotaṁ ratiśekharam āḍiśet I

‘Fashion (the mantra of) Ratiśckhara with the blood (R (of the goddess Mālinī), the
skin (Y), flesh (L), and tendons (V); adorned with the left ear (Ū), it is threaded through with the
objectivity (prameyota) conjoined with the point (M).’ MV 9/35
Abhinava helps his reader by encoding the Mantra in the commonly familiar Mātṛkā

code, as he does in numerous other such instances. See, for example, the extraction of the Mantra
of Bhairavasadbhāva below in 30/16cd-17ab.

The faces of polycephalic deities represent aspects of their personality and nature, often derived
from other deities they have assimilated, or varieties of forms they have assumed. Their limbs are

their powers. Mantras, their sonic bodies, analogously, are said to possess limbs and faces. The

faces are usually five or six, as are the limbs. The faces are arranged in the directions and named
accordingly, the eastern face etc. The limbs are the Heart (hṛdaya), Head (śiras), the Topknot

(Śikhā), thē Armour (kavaca), the Eye (netra), and the Weapon (astra). The Eye is the third eye or
the pair of eyes. This limb is sometimes omitted. See above, 22/20-21 and note; also below,
30/40cd-41ab.

The six limbs represent the qualities of the deity. For example, they are Śiva’s

omniscience (sarvajñatā), contentment (tṛpti), beginningless knowledge (anādibodha), freedom
(svatantratā), unobstructed power (aviluptaśakti), and infinite power (ananta śakti) (see SvTu ad
1/64-65ab). According to SŚP, the attribution of limbs to the deities, a procedure called

sakalīkaraṇa - completing by the addition of parts' – generally follows after the four rites of

invocation, installation, presence and detention of the deity (see above, 27/11, note). It is done so

that the deity is worshipped in its complete form. The SŚP explains: ‘just as the sun is invincibly
powerful by virtue of its fierce rays, so too the Supreme Lord (parameśvara) is visualized with his
limbs. The Heart is his power of consciousness (cicchakti). The Head is his eightfold sovereignty
(as the eight yogic powers, see above, 8/264-271 and note). The Topknot, above all others, is his

independence and lordliness. The Armour mentioned previously is (his) brilliance, the weapons of
his enemies cannot penetrate. His Weapon is his ardour, which is impossible to bear, that

eliminates (every) obstacle. (SŚP, 3/71b-74a).

The faces and limbs, especially the limbs, can be considerably elaborated by
representing them as fully formed deities with their own mantras and modalities. Kubjikā’s six
limbs is a good example. Generally, however, the mantras of the faces and limbs of a mantra are

formedin a simple, uniforn way. The mantra is first stipped ofits final vowel, along with its

anuṣvāra or visarga. Then the six limbs are formed by adding the six long vowels – Ā, T, Ū, AI,
AU and AH, and the faces by adding the short vowels - A, I, U, E, and O. Anusvāra (Ṁ)is added

to all of them except the Weapon, which ends in visarga (H) (see Brunner 1986: 102). They are
often prefixed with the praṇava OṀ or other seed syllables that are prominent in a particular
tradition. Krama mantras are prefixed with the syllable KHPHR̥ÉṀ or just PHREṀ. Kubjikā
mantras begin with the Five praṇavas ~ AIṀ HRĪM ŚRĪṀ KHPHREṀ HSAUḤ.
Concerning the formation of faces and limbs of Śaiva mantras, see Brunner-Lachaux
(1986a: 89-132) and Rastelli (2001: 319-395) for the equivalent in Vaiṣṇava Pāñcarātra, which is

practically the same.
Ratiśekhara’s mantra is RYLVŪMṀ. The ‘stem’ of the syllable is RYLV; the limbs are formed in
the standard way, by inflecting the six long vowels ending with anusvāra for the first five, and
visarga for the last one. Each one is preceded by the default syllable OM and followed by the

name of the limb in the dative, and one of the six classes of invocations (jāti) NAMAḤ etc. (see
below, 30/43cd-45ab). The mantras of the five faces are formed by conjoining the five short

TANTRĀLOKA

Fire is R, Air is Y, Earth is L, Water is V, and the sixth vowel is Ū (thus
the mantra of Ratiśekhara is RYLVŪMṀ). The five short (vowels) are A I U F

and O. The six long ones are Ā Ī Ū AI AU and AH. He is indicating in this way

by saying this, that (the letters) are those of the (corresponding) faces and limbs
(of the deity) coming down (serially) in this way.

Navātmā Bhairava Mantra

TTTTTTIĪTTTRRATGJTĀTṬHHJT I 22 1
ṭṭtz-̄ḷcc-tGEeE+k; HṀ-CEIḺEH
agniprāṇāgnisaṁhārakālendrāmbusamīraṇāḥ || 11 II
saṣaṣṭhasvarabindvarãdhacandrãdyāḥ syurnavātmanaḥ |
(The Mantra) of Navātmā consists of Fire (R), the Vital Breath (H),
Fire (R), Withdrawal (KS), Time (M), Indra (L), Water (V), Air (Y), the
sixth vowel (Ū), the Point and the Half-Moon etc. (I1cd-12ab)
(The phonemes that constitute Navātmā are as follows). Fire which is R,
the Vital Breath which is H, Fire which is R, Withdrawal which is KS, Time
which is M, Indra which is L, Water which is V, Air which is Y, and the sixth

vowel, which is Ū.”

vowels to the base preceded by the syllable OṀ, followed by the names of thc five faces in the
dative and the salutaton NAMĀḤ. We arrive at the following.
The Limbs of Ratiśekhara

OṀ RYLVĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAṂAḤ
OṀ RYLVĪṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

OṀ RYLVŪMṀ ŚIKHAYAI VAUṢAT
OṀ RYLVAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUM
OṀ RYLVAUṀ NETRĀYA VAṢAT
OṀ RYLVAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ
‘The Faces of Ratiśekhara

OMṀ RYLVAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper)
OMṀ RYLVIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (E)
OṀ RYLVUṀ DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (S)
OṀ RYLVEṀ UṬṬARĀVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (N)
OṀ RYLVOMṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAṂAḤ (W)
This same form of Navātman – RHRKṢMLVYŪṀ - is extracted using the Mālinī code in MV
8/22-23. The formation of the limbs and faces of Navātman is taught below in 30/15-16ab.

Navātmān is an important Mantra. From as far back as the Brahmayāmala, which is the one of

carliest Bhairava Tantras, it is serves as the sonic body of Bhairava. It is also an important seed

syllable for the Saiddhānúika Niśvāsatattvasaṁhītā, which is the oldest known Śaivāgama. It s the
seed syllable of Svacchandabhairava, according to the Svacchandatantra, and some centuries
later, it is Kubjikā’s Bhairava. Here Navātman is the Bhairava of Aparā. His mantric form is given
in the Mālinī code in MV 8/21d-23ab, which Abhinava has replaced here with the easier

Śabdarāśi. It is RHRKṢMLVYŪṀ. It has several variant forms. For example. in the Śrīvidyā

says:

CHAPTER THIRTY

The Point and the rest are taught elsewhere in another way. Thus he

&̄IhīTṁTHīgaadrTāTTT&IITTTI-TA

hī |

bindunādādikā vyāptiḥ śrīmattraiśirase mate || 12 II
kṣepākrānticidudbodhadīpanasthāpanānyatha |
tatsaṁvittis tadāpattir iti saṁjñābhiśabditā || 13 II
etāvatī mahāvyāptir mūrtiṭvenātra kīrtitā |
In the venerable Traiśirasa Mata, the sphere of pervasion of the
Point, Sound and the rest is termed as follows. 1) Casting Forth (kṣepa), 2)
Entering

Within

(ākrānti),

3)

the

Awakening

of

Consciousness

(cidudbhoda), 4) Energization (dīpana), 5) Establishment (sthāpanam), 6) its
Consciousness (sarvitti), and 7) the achievement of that (tadāpatti). (This)

Great Pervasion, which is so extensive, is here praised as the Body (miūrti)

(of the deity). (12cd-14ab)

1) Here the pervasion of the Point comprises the Half-Moon up to the

Obstructress. After that, what refers to Sound. In this way, it is said (in the

Svacchandatantra) that ‘the Point is itself Īśvara.’ (According to the

Iśvarapratyabhijñā, where the Point is equated with the Īśvara principle) ‘Iśvara
is the opening outwards (unmeṣa) (of the pulsation of consciousness to

become all things). In accord with this teaching, the outer unfolding (of
object

) and its true nature (is experienced) within ĪIśvara’s state, (in which

the experience is “all this universe am I”). Thus, it is called ‘Casting Forth’
(kṣepa).

‘one

2) Again, concerning Sound, (it is said in the Svacchandatantra that)

should

say

Iśvarapratyabhijñā,)

that

Sadāśiva

is

within

Sound.™

(And

in

the

ʻSadāśiva is the closing inwards (nimeṣa) (of the

withdrawal of objectivity into the subjectivity of consciousness experienced as

rcpertoirc of mantras, we find the female HSKṢMLVRYIṀ, along with the male
SHKṢMḶVRYŪMṀ. The six limbs of Navātmā are described below in 30/15-16ab.
. Theṣe planes correspond respectively to 1) the Point (bindu), 2) Sound (nāda), 3) the End of
Sound (nādānia), ) Power (śakti), 5) the Pervasive One (yyāpinī) 6) the Equal One (With Mind)
(samanā) and 7) the Traṇsmental (ummanā). The Half-moon and the Obstructress after the Point,
that we normally find in this sries, are missing. See above, 6/161, note.
It appears that these verses and the following one are a misplaced digression. but this is
not so. Abhinava is referring to the sonic energies of Navātman here, and in the following vers
to the sense of completing its limbs and those of other mantras with ‘namal..
SYT 4/264d.
ĪP 3/1/3a. Alṣo quoted above ad 11/28. Sce note to TĀv ad 4/140, and Jayaratha’s explanation
in TĀv ad 6/39cd-40ab.
ṢYṬ 4/265b.
IP 3/1/3b.

TANTRĀLOKA

“I am all this”). According to this teaching, the nature (of Sound) is the inner

transition (into consciousness) of the universe that has poured forth externally,
and so (is called) Entering Within (ākrānti).

3) Similarly also, by the submergence of objectivity into the End of
Sound, which is the emergence of subjectivity, consciousness which is the
subject awakens and so it is called the Awakening of Consciousness
(cidudbhoda).

4) In the same way, awakened consciousness increases on the plane of
Power (which is therefore called ‘Energized’) and
5) when it increases in some way also within the Pervasive One, such is

its Establishment.

6) That which for Yogis is the direct experience of that on the plane of

the Equal One (and so is called Consciousness),
7) that is called oneness on the plane of the Transmental. (The Great
Pervasion is) ‘so extensive’, that is (it extends) up to the attainment of oneness

with the Transmental. As is said there (in the Triśirobhairavatantra) beginning
with:
‘1) Casting Forth (kṣepa), 2) Entering Within (ākramaṇa), 3)
Awakening of Consciousness (cidudbhoda), 4) Energization (dīpana), 5)

Establishment (sthāpana), 6) Consciousness (sarṁvitti) and 7) the attainment of
that – O beautiful damsel of the gods, it is said in this scripture that the Body (of
the deity) (māurti) is of seven kinds, by virtue of the succession of the causes
and the relationship (between them) as the sustainer and the sustained.’

‘It is said that 1) Casting Forth is the Point, and 2) Entering Within
(ākrānti) is said to be Sound. 3) The Awakening of Consciousness (cidudbhoda)

is the supreme state, and 4) Energization (dīpana) is said to be Power. 5)
Establishment (sthāpana) is said to be the Pervasive One, 6) Consciousness
(saṁvitti) is said to be the Equal One, and 7) the Transmental is the attainment

of that. This is said to be the Body (of the deity).’

Such extensive pervasion is not only that of the Body (of the deity); it is

also that of the desired salutation as the energizer of Mantra. Thus, he says:

TTSI: 3STTĪ || Q%II
pariṇāmas tallayaś ca namaskāraḥ sa ucyate || 14 ||
‘Salutation’ is the transformation (of consciousness that takes place
by bowing to a venerated being) and merger (into it by becoming one with
it). (14cd)
This pervasive presence (in many Mantras) as a (member of a) class (of
Vedic) invocations (jāti), well known everywhere (in the Tantras) is said to be

The term jāti has been translated as ‘inflecton’ (Goodall and lsaacson 2016: 5) The word ‘jāti
literally means a ‘class' or ‘type’. In this context, it denotes a class of invocations that have been
imported into the early Tantras from the Vedic aplication of Mantra, and with them this term.

CHAPTER THIRTY

‘saḷutation’. It is a ‘transformation’ (that takes place) because of the oneness

he who (bows) in salutation (attains) by abandoning (his) embodied subjectivity
and thereby assuming the subjectivity of consciousness, which is like a
transformation. Even though this is so, it is not impossible for him to fall from
(that) reality level (tattva), and so (in order to stress that that state has been

consolidated,) he says (that it is a state of) ‘mergerʼ.

The Faces and Limbs of Navātman

r̥JITTī eTāTT āa-āīVGT T --T I 2, I

eJmaT®īvīzq āraṁrzfāōz+:

eṣa tryarṇojjhito ‘dhastād dīrghaiḥ ṣadbhiḥ svarair yutaḥ |

saḍ aṅgāni hṛdādīni vaktrāṇy asya ca kalpayet || 15 II
kṣayaravalabījais tu dīptair binduvibhūṣitaiḥ |

Omitting the last three (letters of Navātmā), one should fashion
(his) six limbs, that is, the Heart and the rest, with the six (letters that
follow), conjoined with the six long vowels. (His) faces should be fashioned

with the energized seeds KS, Y, R, V, and L and decorated with the Point.
(15-16ab)

They aree NAMAḤ, SVĀHĀ, VAṢAT, HUṀ, VAUṢAT and PHAT. Although Vedic, they are
fundamental features of the majority of Tantric Mantras, as they are usually added, as we have

just noted, to the limbs ofa Mantra (see above, note 30,27; for an extensive discussion of the jātis
in relation to the limbs, see Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 5 note 15 p. 197-200). The Kubjikā tradition,
aware no doubt of their Vedic character, prides itself in being without them, and so more

thoroughly Tantric. But although there are statements to that effect (see KuKh 68120-122),

nonetheless, they do regularly appear as concluding markers of the ‘limbs` of the mantras of that
tradition, as normally happens in general, thus underscoring their importance and power. See
Dyczkowski 2009: 2, 260-262, KuKh 10/32 note 23.

°MV reads jātibhedena for vaktrāṇy asya ca.
The six limbs of Navātmabhairava are HĀṀ RĪṀ HŪṀ KṢAIṀ MAUṀ and LAḤ. The five
faces are KṢAṀ YIṀ RUṀ VEṀ and LOṀ.

The Limbs of Navātman

OMṀ RĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ
OMṀ HIṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

OMṀ RŪṀ ŚIKHAYAI VAṢAṬ
OMṀ KṢAIṀ KAVACĀYA HÚM
OM MAUṀ NETRĀYA VAUṢAT
OM LAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ
The Faces of Navātman:

OṀ KṢAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper)
OMṀ YIM PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (E)
OṀ RUṀ DAKṢINAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (S)
OṀ VEM UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (N)
OMṀ LOM PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (W)

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Omitting the last three (letters of Navātmā), it is devoid of these

three, namely, V, Y and Ū (so H, R, H, KS, M and L remain). The seed-

syllables conjoined with the five short (vowels) are Space (KS), Air (Y), Fire

(R), Water (V) and Earth (L). According the earlier (teachers,) they are

‘energized’ because the short (diphthong) letters beginning with E (i.e. E and

0) and the short vowels beginning with A (i.e. A I U) are fiery by nature, and
so are made of radiant energy (tejas). (But) according to the venerable

Lakṣmaṇagupta, (it is because they) have the letter R (added to them). As

scripture (āgama) says:

‘1) The supreme seed-syllable is the twenty-sixth. It is conjoined with
the letter R and has a Point. O Pārvatī, this is the eastern face of Maheśa and the
goddesses (KSRAM. 2) The right face of the host of the goddesses and gods has

the form of Bhairava. It ends with (the letter) at the end of the end of M. It has a

Point and the letter R (YRAM). 3) Again, the great seed syllable of Indra is the

auspicious twenty-eighth. It has the letter R and is conjoined with the Point
(LRAṀ). 4) The auspicious western face (is that of) the supreme seed syllable

of Varuṇa that is conjoined with (R) the seed of Fire (VRAMṀ). 5) the Point is
conjoined on the head (of the seed syllable) of the auspicious northern face

Lakṣmaṇagupta, who may or may not be the Lakṣmaṇagupta who taught Abhīnava Pratyabhjñā
(see above, 1/1) was mentioned above in TĀv ad 15/2545cd-246ab. There t00, he is presented by
Jayaratha as holding a diferent view concerning the structure of a mantra. There, the proponent of
the accepted view, we are told, is Śambhunātha.

These are the syllables of the five faces of Navātman, set in the five cardinal directions. Indra’s
direction is normally the east, but in this case, it is very clearly stated that the eastern face is that

of Maheśa. Normally, north follows south. However, the text tells us that the fifth face is Utara,
meaning either ‘north’ or ‘above’. The former meaning is the common one, but makes no sense
here. The Upper face is normally listed at the end (cf. Dyczkowski 1986: 31). Thus, following the
normal sequential order, as there is no reason not to, ] arrive at the following table:
The Five Faces of Navātmabhairava

Direction of the Face |_Deity _]Scd syllable | Ēlement
East
Maheśa
|_KṢRAṀ
Space
South
Bhairava | _YRAṀ

North
Indra
LRAM
Earth
West
Varuṇa

Water
Ūpper

Fire

Note that the sequence of the letters in Navātman corresponding to the five elements is, as
Jayaratha noṭes, the normal one: Space (KS), Air (Y), Fire (R), Water (V) and Earth (L.).
According to the text Lakṣmaṇagupta followed, all of the seed-syllables, each

corresponding to one of the five gross elements, incorporates the letter ‘R’, which represents fire.
This, he maintains, is the reason for their power and brilliance.

CHAPTER THIRTY
Bhairavasadbhāva Mantra

IRRTTTTII:: āḤTRĀTHTGAT: II QĒ I

ũy sraaīāzgrzrīfefārfr:|

JTTḤ TṬETaT |I| 2 1I

jhakārasaṁhr̥iprāṇāḥ saṣaṣṭhasvarabindukāḥ || 16 ||
eṣa bhairavasadbhāvaś candrārdhādivibhūṣitaḥ |
mātr̥kāmālinīmantrau prāg eva samudāhṛtau || 17 |I
The letter JH, Withdrawal (KS) and the Vital Breath (H), along
with the sixth vowel (Ū) and the Point – (JHKṢHŪM); this is (the mantra)

Bhairavasadbhāva, adorned with the Half-Moon and the rest. The
Mantras of Mātṛkā and Mālinī were taught previously. (16cd-17)

The letter JH is considered the right finger (of the goddess Malinī).

Withdrawal is KS, the Vital Breath is H, and the sixth vowel, U. (The Mantras

of Mātṛkā and Mālinī) ‘were taught’ (previously,) in Chapter Fifteen.
Gaṇeśa Mantra

TJTJīfRg ārāī: āaāīstsi aj
ā I 2¢ 1

-īTHRIRHTĀĪĪTRITRCĪTTT|

gdTrH Ṁ̄ĨḤĨ TṀṀTṬATTSSAÃI| 28 |
Bhairavasadbhāva is the parner of Parā. His mantric form is extracted in the MV, as usual, in
the Māliṅī code (in MV 8/33-34ab). Here again, in 16cd-17cd, Abhinava presents the same in the
better known Śabdarāsi code (cf. above, note t© 30/10cd-11ab). The Mantra is: JHKṢHŪṀ. His
limbs, according to the MV, are formed in the same way as the faces of the mantra, described
previously.
The Limbs of Bhairavasadbhāva:

OṀ JHKṢHĀṀ HRṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ

OM JHKṢHĪṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

OM JHKṢHŪṀ ŚIKHAYAI VAṢAṬ
OM JHKṢHAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUṂ
OMṀ JHKṢHAUṀ NETRĀYA VAUṢAT
OM JHKṢHAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ
The Faces of Bhairavasadbhāva:

OM JHKṢHAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper)
OMṀ JHKṢHIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (E)
OMṀ JHKṢHUṀ DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (S)
OMṀ JHKṢHEṀ UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (N)

OMṀ JHKṢHOMṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (W)
See above, 15/15cd-145.

TANTRĀLOKA

oṅkāro ʻtha caturthyantā saṁjñā natir iti kramāt |
gaṇeśādiṣu mantraḥ syād bījaṁ yeṣu na coditam || 1 8 I
nāmādyakṣaram ākārabinducandrādidīpitam |
sarveṣām eva bījānāṁ tac caturdaśaṣaṣṭhayuk || 19 ||
The mantra of Gaṇeśa and others consists of the syllable OM, the
name (of the deity) in the dative, and the word ‘salutation’ (i.e. NAMAHḤ),
in that order. The seed-syllable amongst them, which is not mentioned (in
the Mālinīvijayottara), consists of the initial letter of (their) name, energized
by the letter Ā, the Point and the Half-Moon etc. AIl the seed-syllables (may

be) conjoined with the fourteenth (AU) and sixth (vowel) (Ū). (18-19)

(Their seed-syllable) ‘is not mentioned’ in the Mālinīvijayottara. Thuṣ,

the execution (prayoga) (of the Mantra) is OM GĀṀ GAṆESĀYA NAMAḤ
or, for example, OM VĀṀ VĀGĪŚVARYAI NAMAḤ. ʻThat initial letter of
(his) name is (conjoined with) the fourteenth (vowel) AU and the sixth (vowel)

Ū. Thuṣ (we arrive at the form) GŪAUM® (for the seed syllable of Gaṇeśa).
Parāparā Vidyā

aṛaṁ ē a+x fēzaṁaṁ 20 1
ṬĪCĀĪTTrTJT HTRTT-TTṬ |
fkcī-at-rṁsāR
UPĀTAR T aII |M 32 |

sfīravīgaī vaaaāqjā ḷ gaĩai || 32 1
3JBīTTTTAT

fāraī sīrakēra
āmantritānyaghoryāditritayasya kramoditaiḥ |
bījair visargiṇī māyā huṁ hakāro viṣargavān || 20 ||
punar devītrayasyāpi kramād āmantraṇatrayam ḷ|
dvitīyasmin pade ‘kāra ekārasyeha ca smṛtaḥ || 21 ||

The worship of Gaṇesa is, of course, essential. For that reason, it is univyersally common to all

traditions, as is the basic form of his Mantra. Its omission in the MV can simply be that, because

ofthis, it does not need to be specifically taught. Abhinavais thus ree to draw from any source to

make up for its omission in the MV, and he has indeed presented the basic common form of it,
which is OM GĀṀ (or GŪAUṀ) GAṆEŚĀYA NAMAḤ.
Read with MSs Th gār for gaṅ.

“ Read with MS Th gā-auṁ for gā.

““ ] take the compound āmantritānyaghoryāditritayasya to mean literally, the ‘three beginning

with Anyaghorī who have been invoked’. The name ‘anyaghorī – literally ‘she who is other than
Ghorī’, i.e. Aghorī, is rather clumsy, or at the least, unusual.

CHAPTER THIRTY

tataḥ śaktidvayāmantro luptaṁ tatrāntyam akṣaram |
he ʻgnivarṇāv ubhau pañcasvarayuktau parau pr̥thak || 22. ||
akārayuktāv astraṁ huṁ ha visargo punaḥ śaraḥ |
tāreṇa saha vasvagnivarṇārdhārṇadvayādhikā || 23 ||
eṣā parāparādevyā vidyā śrītrikaśāsane |
This is the Vidyā of the Goddess Parāparā, according to the

venerable Trikaśāsana. It is made of 1) the three (goddesses) Aghorī etc.,
in the vocative (A.GHORE PARAMAGHORE GHORARŪPE), with (their)
seed-syllables uttered successively (between them). (The first is the syllable

of) Māyā with a (final) visarga (i.e. HRĪḤ), (then) HUM, and (then) the
letter H with a (final) visarga (i.e. HAH). 2) (Then) again the three vocatives
of the three goddesses (GHORAMUKHI BHĪMA BHĪṢAṆE) in due order,
(bearing mind that) in the second one, (the final letter) ‘E” is here replaced

by ‘A”. 3) Then, the invocation of the (last) two powers, of which the last

Abhinava declares that what he says is found in the venerable Trikaśāsana. Is this a reference to
a specific text? There is one instance at least in which it is clear that Abhinava is referring

generically to the Trika teaching as Trikaśāsana (see 31/50cd-51ab). Conversely, there is one

place at least where it is the name of a text. This reference is found in 4/274ab, but this too is not

fully secure, as we find there are variants in the manuscripts that cast doubt on the reading. Thus,
MS C reads srīkramapañcake in place of śrītrikaśāsane. Similarly, when Jayaratha refers to it in
his commentary, MSs Ch, Jh, and N read sśrākramapaṁcake.
However, there can be no doubt that Jayaratha considered it to be a text that Abhinava is

quoting directly, as indeed he is. Thus, introducing it, he says: nanv evam apūrvārthakathane ki
pramāṇam? ity āśaiṅkyoktam iti proktaṁ śrītrikaśāsane | tatratyam eva granthaṁ paṭhai (Now)
surely (the question arises) as to what the authority (pramāṇa) īs for this novel teaching

(apūrvārthakathana)?ī With this doubt in mind, he declares that ‘it is said in the venerable
Trikaśāsana. (He now) quotes from that text (introductory remark to 4/274cd-275ab).

But is this an independent text or a homonym? ln one place at least, Abhinava refers

generically to the Mālinīvijottara as ‘Trikaśāsana’ (see 10/277cd, which is MV 2/45cd).
Similarly, Abhinava introduces TĀ 11/47cd as being from the 7rikaśāsana. Jayaratha mentions
the MV as referring to the same notion, although admittedly, he does not quote from it directly.
There is no such reference in the printed edition of the MV. However, as we know of several

instances of missing passages, Jayaratha may well not have been wrong. Thus, here 100 it is
possible that Abhinava is referring in a generic way to the MV as ‘trikaśāsana’. But ṭthis is not so,
because the form of the Parāparā Vidyā taught there is not the same as it is here.
Parāparā Vidyā is extracted in MV 3/41cd-50ab. Abhinava’s extraction of this Vidyā is

not just a reworking of that passage. Although it is possible that he has written his own condensed
presentation drawing from a number of sources, he does not normally do this, and it would not be
in keeping with his method. It seems to me to be more likely that he is drawing from a single
source. This may be the Triśirobhairavatantra. The lines Jayaratha quotes from there in his

commentary on this passage quite possibly conclude it in the original source. He introduces them

saying: ‘That is said in the Triśirobhairava’. He may be referring to the whole passage Abhinava
is drawing from. If that is so, the diction ‘Trikaśāsana’ (literally ‘the Trika teaching) has a

general sense rather being the name of a specific text, which in this case may well be the
Trisirobhairava. Further evidence for this is the concluding passage Jayaratha quoles, that states,
as Abhinava does, that the Vidyā consists of thirty-eight syllables plus two half-letters.
“ The form ‘bhīma’ is a vocative of the masculine bhīmaḥ, which is clearly not intended. The
vocative of the feminine bhīmā is bhīme. If we read bhīmabhīṣaṇe as one word, the Sanskrit
would be correct. However, in that case, the ancillary goddess Bhīmā would not be accounted for.

It appears that a mistake occurred whereby bhīme was read as bhima. This is quite an

understandable error. The vocative bhīmabhīṣaṇe – ‘0 terrible frightening one!’” May well sound

better than bhīme bhīṣaṇe, and makes more sense to someone who may not know that eight parts

of the Vidyā correspond to ancillary goddesses.

TANTRĀLOKA

syllable is dropped (VAMA PIVA). 4) (After that come) HE and 5) then
the following two are the letter of Fire (R) both conjoined with the fifth
vowel (U) (iee. RURU), and the next two (Rs) are separate and are
conjoined with the letter A (i.e. RARA). (Then come) the Weapon (PHAT),

HUṀ, H with visarga (i.e. HAḤ), and then again the Arrow (PHAT) (i.e
HE, RURU, RARA, PHAT, HUM, HAHḤ, PHAT). Along with the Saviour
(OM) (in the beginning), it consists of thirty-eight syllables plus two halfletters (i.e. without vowels). (20-24ab)
‘The three (goddesses) Aghorī etc. are in the vocative’ (means)

AGHORE PARAMAGHORE and GHORARŪPE, ‘with (their) seed-syllables
uttered successively (between them), that is to say, are seen at the end (just

after each one of them). (Māyā) ʻwith a (fi nal) viṣarga means that here (in this

case, the seed syllable of Māyā - HRĪṀ) has no Point (and so the syllableis
HRĪḤ, not HRĪMH). Thus (we arrive at) AGHORE HRĪḤ PARAṂAGHORE,
(followed by) the seed syllable of the Armour, (HUṀ) GHORARŪPE HAḤ.
‘(Then) again, the three vocatives’, that is, GHORAMUKHI BHĪME
BHĪṢAṆE. However here ‘in the second word’, which is in the vocative, one
should make the ‘A” in the place of (the final letter) ‘E?, so that its form would
be BHĪMA. ʻ‘The invocation (of the last) two powersʼ is VAMANI and
PIBANI. ʻThe last (syllable) is the syllable ‘NI’ (which should be dropped).

Thus (we arrive at) VAMA and PIBA. After that also (comes) the Vital Breath

(H) conjoined with the right knee (of the goddess) (E) (= HE). (Then the

following) ‘two are the letter of Fireʼ, that is two Rs. The fifth vowel is U
(thus we arrive at RURU). ‘[Tḷhe next two’ are just letters of Fire (with no
added vowels) (iee. RARA). ‘The Weapon’ is PHAT. Then comes the seed-

syllable of the Armour (HUṀM), the Vital Breath with emission (HAH), and
again the Arrow, that is, the second Weapon (PHAT). ‘The Saviourʼ is OM,
which is placed at the beginning (of the Vidyā). (Thus, it consists) of thirtyeight syllables plus two ‘half-letters’, that is the letter T without vowels. That is
said in the Triśirobhairava:
‘In this way, the goddess Parāparā is adorned with eight parts (pada).
She is the Supreme Goddess (paramesśvarī), who has been extracted (as a
Vidyā) consisting of thirty-eight letters. And those who know reality (tattva)
should know that she (also) possesses two half-letters.”

TJṬṬJTTTRaTGTTTRT
TGT I 21I

pañcasṣatpañcavedākṣivahninetrākṣaraṁ padam || 24 ||
aghoryādau saptake syāt pibanyāḥ pariśiṣṭakam |

The parts (pada) (of the Vidyā) pertaining to the seven, Aghorī and

the rest, consists, respectively, of five, six, five, (four as are) the Vedas, (two

Thus, instead of vamani and pibani, the Vidyā has vama and piba.

CHAPTER THIRTY

as are) the eyes, (three as are the three) fires, and (two as are) the eyes. The

remaining one (of eleven syllables) is that of Pibanī. (24cd-25ab)

$ Abhinava reverts to his primary source, the MV, for the Vidyās of the tradic goddess. See MV
3/41cd-50ab for the extraction of the Parāpar Vidyā, and ibid 3/59-60 (quoted here in the
commentary) for its division into syllables and above, 16/213-216ab, where it is presented in the
reverse ordēr.
The Parāparṁ Vidyā her is as follows:

AGHORE

PARAMAGHORE
HUṀ,
GHORARŪPE
HAḤ,
GHORAMUKHI, BHĪMA, BHIṢAṆE, VAMA, VAMA PIBA PIBA HE, RU RU, RA RA,
PHAT, HUM, HAḤ, PHATṬ.

This makes thirty-nine syllables, counting the final 7s of the two phafs as half a syllable
each. Parāparā Vidyā consists of 19 (to be more precise 18 and a halḹf) padas, as follows:
1) OṀ 2) AGHORE 3) HRĪḤ 4) PARAMAGHORE 5) HUM 6) GHORARŪPĒ 7)
HAḤ 8) GHORAMUKHI 9) BHĪMA 10) BHĪṢAṆE 11) VAMA 12) PIBA 13) HE 14) RURU
15) RARA 16) PHAT 17) HUM I8) HAḤ 19) PHAT.
The last eight padas, i.e. 12) PIBA; 13) HE:; 14) RU RU; 15) RA RA; 16) PHAT; 17)

HUMṀ: 18) HAH; 19) PHAT. pertin to Śiva, and are governed by Pibanī. The previous eleven

pertain to Śakti, and are governed by Aghorī to Vamanī.

From the body of Parāparā are bor, in their tum, eight Yoginīs (also called goddesses)
corresponding to the eight Bhairavas Aghora, Paramaghora, Ghorarūpa, Ghoramukha, Bhīma,

Bhiṣaṇa, Vamana, and Pibana (see MV 1/19cd-21ab), that are the partners in union with the eight
Mothers (TĀ 29/52-53). The eight Yoginīs are listed in a verse quoted from the Trisirobhairava īn
TĀv ad 33/3-5. Concerning the Eight Bhairavas, see note 1,802; 8,1029; 15,386, 391; and 29,127.

These eight Bhairavas, who take their names from Rudras, are regularly worshipped in
the course of Trika ritual. They are closely associated with Parāparā, who is built up from the
Vidyās of their eight partners, who bear their names in the feminine. Their mantras are the eight
parts of Parāparā Vidyā, from which they are thus derived. These eight parts (pada) are as follows
(see MV 3/59-60ab quoted in the TĀy ad 30/15-28ab).

Aghorī: O AGHORE HRĪH – Ś5 letters
Paramaghoī; PARAṂGHORE HUM – 6 leters
Ghoraūpā GHORARŪPE HAḤ -–Ś5 letṭiers
Ghoramukhī: GHORAMUKHI – 4 leṭters
Bhīmā: BHĪṀA – 2 letters

HĪṢAṆE -– 3 letcers
VAṀA - 2 lēters
Pibanī PIBA HE RURU RĀRA PHAT HUṀ HAḤ PHAT – 1 letṭers
The MV 4/19 explains that the Śiva principle (i.., niṣkaa Śiva)is the syllable OṀ of
the Parāparā Vidyā. The principles Śakū, Īśvara and Vidyā, which constitutc sakala Śiva,
corespond to the units (pada) AGHORE (hree syllables, HRIḤ (one syllable),
PARAMAGHORE (five syllables), and HŪM (one syllable), respectively. (PTv p. 123-124)
The Vidyā here compared to the one in the Śiddhayogeśvarīmata (pṛesented in TĀv ad
3025cd-26ab) is longer as the final HUṀ HAḤ PHAT found here are missing. The version
extnacted in the Malinīvijayotara (MV 3/lcd-50ab) ends with HUM PHAT. Thus, in the MV it
is:
OMṀ AGHORE HRĪḤ PARAMAGHORE GHORARŪPE HAḤ GHORAMUKHI
BHĪMA BHĪṢAṆE VAMA PIBA RURU RARA PHAṬ HUṀ PHAT.

syllables:

According to the Kubjikāmata, Parāparā (KM 18/4-24) consists of forty-two and a hal

TANTRĀLOKA

(The first part consists of) ‘five’ (syllables) of Aghorī, that is, OṀ

AGHORE HRĪḤ. ʻThe Vedas’, that is, the number four. ‘The eyesʼ is the

number two. ‘The firesʼ is the number three. ‘The eyes’ (again) is the number
two. ‘The remaining one’ is the part consists of eleven letters including the two
half ones. As is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘Eight very powerful Yoginīs are born from the limbs of Parāparā,

seven of which should be known to consist of five, six, five, four, two, three and

two letters in due order,' and one of eleven letters, amongst which are two halfletters (i.e. consonants without vowels).

pratyekavarṇago ʻpy uktaḥ siddhayogīśvarīmate || 25 ||
devatācakravinyāsaḥ sa bahutvān na lipyate |

The deposition of the assembly of deities corresponding to each
letter (of the Parāparā Vidyā) is also described in the venerable
Siddhayogīśvarīmata. It is very long, and so is not written (here). (25cd-

26ab)

‘The circle of deities means that of forty. As is said there (in the

Siddhayogīśvarīmata):

‘Bhairava is the deity within OṀ and is located in the calix.
Utphullanayanā (Blooming Eyes) is in the letter A. Pīnapayodharā (Fat Breasts)
is in the letter GHO. Tvaṣṭrrūpā (the Creatrix) is in the letter RE. Vyāghrarūpikā
(the Tigress) is in the syllable HRIH. Siṁharūpā (the Lioness) is in the letter PA
and Pānaniratā (Devoted to Drink) is in the letter RA. And then, in due order,
Rākṣasī (the Demoness) is in the letter MA. Mārṁsabhakṣī (the Flesh Eater) is in
the syllable GHO, and Raṇāśinī (Thunderbolt in the Battlefield) is in the
syllable RE. Retovahā (the Transporter of Vital Seed) is in the syllable HUM,
and Nirbhayā (the Fearless One) is said to be in the letter GHO. Ghoradaśanā
AIṀ AGHORE HRĪṀ HSAḤ PARAMAGHORE HŪṀ GHORARŪPE HSAUṀ
GHORAMUKHI BHĪMA BHĪṢAṆE VAMA VAMA PIBA HAḤ HE RU RU RA RA HRĪṀ
HŪMṀ PHAT.

! Ṭheṣe are the seven parts of Parāparā Vidyā up to VAMA. See TĀ 30/20-26ab.

Theṣe are the two phonemes T of the two PHATs. MV 3/59-60ab is quoted in the TĀv ad
30/15-28ab.

MV 3/59-60ab. Parā is surrounded by twelve Yoginīs, who correspond to the twelve
transformations of SAUḤ that arise by substituting AU with the twelve fertile vowels. They are:

Siddhi (SAḤ), Ṛddhi (SĀH), Lakṣmī (SIḤ), Dīpti (SĪḤ). Mālā (SUḤ), Śiv

(SŪḤ), Sumukhī

(SEH), Vāmanī (SAIḤ), Nandā (SOḤ), Harikeśī (SAUḤ), Hayānanā (SAṀ) and Viśveśī (ŚAḤ)

(see MV 20/46-47). Aparā is accompanied by three Yoginīs (corresponding to the three syllables
of the Vidyā), namely, Mānasī (HRĪḤ), Cakravegā (HUMṀ) and Mohanī (PHAT) (see SYM f. 34a
and TS fl. 43b).

This passage containing the names of the goddesses of each letter is not found in the short
edited recension of the Siddhayogīśvarīmata. Tōrzṣôk

1999: 232

CHAPTER THIRTY

(Horrifying Teeth) is in the letter RA, and Arundhat is in the letter RŪ.
Having deposited them in due order, Priyavādinī (Sweet Talker) is in the letter
PE. Ugrarūpā (Fierce Form) is in the letter HAḤ and Nagnarūpiṇī (Naked
Beauty) is in the letter GHO. Raktanetrī (Red Eyes) is in the letter RA and
Caṇḍarūpiṇī (Fierce Beauty) is in the letter MU. Pakṣirūpā (Bird Shaped) is in
the letter KHI and Bharaṇojjvalā (Flaming with Ornaments)is in the letter BHI.
Maāraṇī (the Slayer)is said to bein the letter MA and Śivāin the letter BHĪ.

Having placed these (Yoginīs) as they come in due order, Śākinī (the Witch)is

said to be in the letter ṢA. Yantralehā (Licker of Yantras) is in the letter ṆE and
Vaśakārikā (the Controller) is in the letter VA. Kāladamanā (Chastiser of Death)
is in the letter MA and Piṅgalī (Tawny One) is said to be in the letter PI.
Vardhanī (the Sacrificial Jar) is in the letter VA and Himaśītalā (Cold as Winter)
in the letter HE. Rukmiṇī is with the letter RU and Halāyudhā (Plough
Weapon) with the (second) letter RU. Vahnirūpā (Fire)is with the letter RA and
Tejorūpā (Radiant Energy) is born from the (second) letter RA. Yonirūpā (the
Womb) is in the letter PHA and Pararūpiṇī (the supreme One) is in the letter T.
The one called Hutavahā (Transporter of Oblations) is in the letter HUṀ and
Varadāyikā (Bestower of Gifts) is in the letter HAḤ. Mahāraudrā is with the

letter PHA and Pāśadāyikā (Burner of Fetters) is in the letter T.”

According to Monier-Williams Sanskrit dictionary, Arundhatī is the name of a ‘little and

scarcely visible star Alcor, belonging to the Great Bear and personified as the wife of one of its
seven chief stars, Vasiṣṭha, or of all the seven, the so-called seven

At formal marriage

ceremonies Arundhatīis invoked as a pattern of conjugal excellence by the ridegroom.”
According to Monier-Williams Dictionary, Rukmiṇīis ‘the name of a daughter of Bhīṣmaka

and siṣter of Rukmin. [She was] betrothed by her father to Śiśupala but [was] a secret lover of
Kṛṣṇa, who, assisted by Balarāma, carried her off after defeating her brother in battle. She is the

molther of Pradyumna and in later mythology is idenified with Lakṣmi.’

Table of the Deities of Parāparā Vidyā
According to the Śiddhayogeśvarīmata
OM

A
GHO
RE

Bhairava

Utphullanayanā (Blooming Eyes)
Pīnapayodharā (Fat Breasts)
Tyaṣṭrrūpā (the Creatrix)
Vyāghrarūpikā (the Tiīgress)

Siṁharūpā (the Lioness)

RA

Pānaniratā (Deyoted to Drink)

GHO
RE

Maāṁsabhakṣī (the Flesh Eater)
Raṇāśinī (Thunderbolt in the Battle Field)

GHO
RA

Nirbhayā (the Fearless One)
Ghoradaśanā (Horrifying Teeth)

HUM

PE

GHO

MU

KHI
BHI

Rākṣasī (the Demoness)

Retovahā (the Transporter of Vital Seed)

Arundhatī

Priyavādinī (Sweet Talker)
Ugrarūpā (Fierce Form)
Nagnarūpiṇī (Naked Beauty)
Raktanetr (Red Eyes)
Caṇḍarūpiṇī (Fierce Beauty)

Pakṣirūpā (Bird Shaped)

Bharaṇojjvalā (Flaming with Ornaments)

Maāraṇī (the Slayer)

TANTRĀLOKA

‘It is very long, and so, for fear of making the book too lengthy, this
worship is not taught in the Mālinīvijayottara cited here. This is the intended
(sense).

Aparā Vidyā

māyā visargiṇī hīūṁ phaṭ ceti mantro ‘parātmakaḥ ||26 ||

The Mantra which is the nature of Aparā consists of (the seed
syllable of) Māyā, that has visarga (HRĪḤ) (along with) HŪM® and PHATṬ.
(26cd)
(The Mantra which is) ‘the nature of Aparā’ is the one associated with
it. This is the meaning. As is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘One must first deposit (the syllable) that comes at the end of AGHORE
(i.e. HRIH), the vital breath (H) along with the left earring (Ū), the Point (Ṁ),
and the Foot (PH) along with the skull (T), as before.
Parā Vidyā

TATHTTHGRATTTTSĪḤ’:
TR TTCT: |

aṝahvraī fiT̄rc-rīaēī ēā ēRmī u 29 1

SA

VA

PI
VA
HE
RU
RU

PHA
T

PHA
T

Śākinī (the Witch)

Yantralehā (Licker of Yantras)
Vaśakārkā (the Controller)
Kāladamanā (Chastiser of Death)
Piṅgalī (Tawny One)
Vardhan (the Sacrificial Jar)
Hīmaśītalā (Cold as Wintep
Rukmiṇī
Halāyudhā (Plough Weapon)
Vahnirāpā (Fire)
Tejorūpā (Radiant Energy)
Yonirūpā (thhe Womb)
Pararūpiṇī (the supreme One)
Hutavahā (Transporter of Oblatioṅs)
Varadāyikā (Bestower of Gifts)
Mahāraudrā
Pāśadāyikā (Bumer of Fetters)

Read hūi for huh. The Vidyā here is stated to be HRIḤ HUṀ PHAT. However, the citation
from the MV in the commentary, we find HŪM. not HUM. C. below 30/39ab.
According to MV 4/24, as explained in the PTv (p. 124). Apar, like Parā, pervades the
four Eggs (MV 2/49 and above 4/186cd-188ab). The two Eggs of Earth and Nature correspond to
the syllable PHAT, the Égg of Māyā to the sylable HŪM, and that of Śakti to HṚRĪḤ. Aparā in the
Kubjikā tradition of the Kubjikāmata (18/25-29) consists of six and a half syllables: AIṀ HRĪṀ
HRŪṀ PHREṀ HŪṀ PHATṬ.

MV 3/51.

CHAPTER THIRTY

GTTRTTISTTTTHIT TITT-TPṀTRGT |
parāyās tūktasadvyāptir jīvaḥ saha caturdaśaḥ |

sānekabhedā triśirahśāstre proktā maheṣśinā || 27 ||
svarūpato ‘vibhinnāpi racanānekasaṅkulā |
Parā’s pervasion of the Being (sar) of Parā taught (previously) is the

living being (S), along with the fourteenth (vowel) (AU) (and emission

H).' The Great Lord has taught it in the Triśiraḥśāstra with many varieties.

Although essentially one (and the same), it is arranged in many ways.
(27-28ab)

Parā ʻtaught (previously)ʼ, that is, before. The living being is S. The
fourteenth (vowel) is AU. ‘Although essentially one’ʼ, it is taught in many

ways, and so is ‘arranged in many ways’. This is the reason (given) by means
of an adjectival ascription.
He (now) paraphrases (the passage in the Triśirobhairavatantra).

jīvaḥ prāṇastha evātra prāṇo vā jīvasaṁsthitaḥ || 28 II
‘Here the Living Being (S) is present within the Vital Breath (H), or
the Vital Breath (H) is within the Living Being (S). (28cd)

0 According to the MV., jīva – ‘the living being’ is S. In the Mālinī alphabet taught in a passage of
the 7riśirobhairava, quoted by Jayaratha above ad 15/121-125ab, there is no entry for jva’.
There, paramātmā is the letter S.
' Parā Vidyā is given in MV 4/25, which Abhinava does not quote here. See above 3/167-172
(166cd-172ab); 4/181cd-19; 5/143-146 (142-145). There are two Mantras for Parā in the central
Iotus of the Trident. She is installed first with SAUḤ and then worshipped with HSHPHREM, that
is, Mātṛṣadbhāva (15/331cd-332). This form of the seed-syllable of Parā is given in code below in
30/47-48ab and in MV 8/39-40ab, where it is said to be the ‘supreme essence (sadbhāva) of the

Mothers. In the Kubjikā system of the KM, Parā is HSRŪĀṀ (KM 18/30-31).
“2 Ṟead svarūpato ‘vibhinnāpi for ṣvarāpato vibhinnāpi.
Veṛṣes 28-36ab are a paraphrase of a passage from the 7iśirobhairavataṉira.

Abhinava has several occasions to teach Parā bīja — SAUḤ in the Tantrāloka. For example, see
above 3/167 (166cd) ff. 3/253cd-254ab, 4/181cd-182ab, 186cd-188ab, 191cd, and 5/60cd-61ab.

These examples suffice to observe that Parā, in various aspects, has an important place in all the
three means to realisation expounded in those chapters.
‘ Iṇ that case, there are in this mantra itself the two others, SHAUḤ and HSAUH. Jayaratha notes

where these two variants are found in the 7riśirobhairava, which is one of the main Trika Tantras.

We find many examples of such ectypes of SAUḤ, the basic seed-syllable of Parā, outside the
Trika Tantras also. Clearly this seed-syllable was generally considered to be very powerful. So

t00, indeed, was Parā, who also had her variant forms in other traditions, such as Tripurabhairavī

(where the form is HSRAUḤ, see Sanderson 1990: 36). The matrix mantra of Tripurā – AIṀ
KLĪṀ SAUḤ - reveals her composite identity, derived from Kubjikā (AIṀ), Kālī (KLĪṀ), and
Parā (SAUḤ). Another interesting example are the seed-syllables Prāsādaparā and Parāprāsāda,
that are the most important in the Kaula cult of the Kulārnavatantra. Theṣe are HSAUMH and
SHAUṀḤ, respectively (see Kulārṇava 16/150-156). Concering the extraordinary combination
MH, see Śāradatilaka 10/22-23: In the various kinds of mantras of Bālā (Tripurāsundarī), some
(end with) bindu and some with visarga and sometimes (both) hindu and visarga are extracted

(together). Sanderson 1990: 41

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The living beingʼ, that is to say, along with the fourteenth (vowel)

(AU). The vital breath is H. That is said there (in the Triśirobhairavatantra):

‘The Supreme Power is conjoined with Sāvitrī (AU) and the Will (H).
Here the living being (S) is present within the vital breath (H), or the vital breath
(H) is within the living being (S).”

Thus (this form of the Parā Vidyā) is SHAUḤ or HSAUḤ.
Clarifying that the intended sense is the reversal of the relationship
between the two as the support and the sustained, he explains their distinctive
(character).

STHIRHJATḤ BTTRTHTHĀTTT: |

JaTTĪTÑTJTTT-TGATĀĪTTTÇ̄A

3īā TaTrhrātTsīṁ I| o ||
ādhārādheyabhāvena avinābhāvayogataḥ |

haṁsaṁ cāmrṛtamadhyasthaṁ kālarudravibheditam || 29 ||

bhuvaneśaśīroyuktam anaṅgadvayayojitam ḷ
dīptād dīptataraṁ jñeyaṁ ṣaṭcakrakramayojitam || 30 ||

’This is because of the invariable concomitance (of one with the

other,) by virtue of (their) relationship as the support and the sustained.
The Swan (H), situated in the middle of (two) Nectars (S), conjoined with
Kālarudra (Ū), the head of Lord of the Worlds (AU) and the two Anaṅgas

(H) (i.e SHSŪAUḤ), applied successively to the six wheels (as it is made of
six parts), should be known to be (a seed-syllable Mantra) which is more
energized than (any other) energized (one). (29-30)

“’(There is an) ‘invariable concomitance (of one with the other)ʼ,

because of the oneness of Power and the pure Self. As is said there (in the
Triśirobhairavatantra):

“ Variants of this seed syllable are also found in the mantras of the Kubjīkā Tantras. Five seed

syllables, called praṇavas, are regularly prefixed to mantras, and suffixed (in reverse order) to

energize them. They are a major characterizing feature of Kubjikā mantras. The first three rarely

change. They are AIṀ (which is Kubjikā’s seed syllable), ŚRĪṀ (this is Lakṣmībīja), and HRĪMṀ

(this is Māyābīja). The following two are drawn from Krama and Trika. The first is PHREṀ
variant KHPHREṀ, and HSKHPHREṀ (see Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 1 p. 654). The other one is
HSAUM, which has the largest number of varants. Some of them are HSŪAUM, HSVŪAUM,
HSMRAṀ, HSMVUAIṀ, HSMVAṀ, HSAUṀ and HSRŪAUṀ. We also find these and other
varants ending in visarga (H). See Dyczkowski 2009: vol. , 637-653.
“’ In the printed edition, verses 29-64ab are all printed together without a break. A long
commentary on the entire passage follows. For case of reference, 1 have broken up the
commentary into sections corresponding to the Mantras and placed them there.

“Ś Cf. previous note 30,67.
“ In the published edition, the commentary of all the verses from here to 64ab is printed together
affer 64ab. As a matter of convenience, 1 have divided it up so as to follow the text.

CHAPTER THIRTY

‘O goddess, because of the invariable concomitance of Power with the
pure Self, one should know that Śiva and Śakti are the one called the Pure Self
and the vital breath, (respectively). They should be known to be of a single
nature by virtue of (their) relationship as the support and the sustained.”
The greatness of the end of this seed-syllable is proclaimed in the

venerable Devīpañcaśatika, with (the words):

‘The letter of the Heart (H), that of the Buttocks (S), and the one on
the (goddess's) Right Knee (AU) (?). Sheis the goddess and Heis Śiva, and that
is the universe, whichis their other extension. One should think that thatis the
essence of millions of scriptures. One cannot say (enough) about her power even

in countless ages.”

On the authority of (our) teacher, (we know) that the venerable Ojarāja

was of a different view, because the readings are reversed.
The Swan is H. Nectar is S. Kālaruḍra is Ū. The Lord of the Worlds is
AU and the two Anaṅgas is H. (Thus, the Mantra is) SHSŪAUH. There are ‘six

wheelsʼ because there are six parts (of the syllable) (avayava).

sSḹ vgraṁīz% ġ TṬaRṝhtzōaī 3ā |

G JĀṬCĒE |ḤIEGĀCEAETTĀEEE:

prāṇaṁ daṇḍāsanasthaṁ tu guhyaśaktīcchayā yutam |
pareyaṁ vācikoddiṣṭā mahājñānasvarūpataḥ || 31 ||

sphuṭaṁ bhairavahr̥jjñānam idaṁ tv ekākṣaraṁ param |

amṛtaṁ kevalaṁ khasthaṁ yad vā sāvitrikāyutam || 32 ||
śūnyadvayasamopetaṁ parāyā hṛdayaṁ param |

7 Theṣe lines correspond to 3/29-30 of my working edition of the DP. The last three lines are the
same. However, the first one reads:
amrtārṇaṁ [k, kh: amṛtāṇaṁvaṁ] tu brahmātṁḍaṁ tripiṇḍaṁ brahma sat paraṁ ||

‘The letter of Ñectar (S), the Égg of Brahmā (AU), which is the Triple Body, followed
by Brahmā, who is supreme Bcing (H).
The version cited by Jayaratha rcads:
hrṛdayārṇaṁ nitambārṇaṁ dakṣajãnugataṁ priye |
' Cf. 30/28cd. Did Ojarāja write a commentary on the Devipañcaśataka? See Sanderson 2006: 26
n.68.
” Theṣe are: S, H, S, Ū, AU, and H.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Vital Breath (H) situated on the Staff (R) as its seat, conjoined
with the Secret Power (Ī) and the Will (H) (HRĪḤ) – this is said to denote

Parā, for its nature is great knowledge. (31)
This, the one that comes after, consisting of (just) one syllable, is the
clear knowledge of Bhairava’s heart.” (It consists of) nectar (S) alone, and

is situated in the Sky (H) (SH) (SHAṀ), or else it is united with Sāvitrikā
(AU) and possesses the two voids (HI). (This is) the supreme heart of Parā

(SAUḤ). (32-33ab)

The Vital Breath is H. The Staff is R. The Secret Power is Ī and the will,

H. Thus (the Mantra is) HRĪH. Nectar is S. The Sky is the seed-syllable of

space, which is H, thus (making) SH. One should add the Point here, because it
is invariably concomitant (thus making SHAM). “Or else’ according to another
view, (S is united with) Sāvitrikā, which is AU, and with that the Two Voids, H,

thus (making) SAUḤ.

g™adTīī J̄yāē. ] āāicd ūīādt̄zfT: I| 33 1|

STRSTTTRT 3 ] ŪGGTTÑTRTITT: |
TṬaT TṬTĪTTKĪ ] TÇJTISTJĪSTT: I| 3% 1

Ç̄ōāTētṝ geTR=TTATTa: 1| 3. |

yugmayā2ge prasiddhaṁ tu kartavyaṁ tattvavedibhiḥ || 33 |
anye ‘py ekākṣarā ye tu ekavīravidhānataḥ |
guptā guptatarās te tu aṅgābhijanavarjitāḥ || 34 |
yaṣṭavyāḥ sādhakendrais tu kulasthāḥ siddhidāyakāḥ |
kulakramavidhānena sūkṣmavijñānayogataḥ |l 35 ||
anuṣṭheyāḥ sadā devi striyā vā puruṣeṇa vā |
Those who know reality should make use of it in the Śacrifice of the
Couple (yugmayāga), in which (its application is) well known. So too other
monosyllabic (mantras) that are secret, extremely secret, devoid of limbs
and faces (abhijana), should be worshipped by the most excellent adepts, in

accord with the procedure (laid down for a) Solitary Hero (i.e. a deity that

is not in the company of a consort).” Established in Kula, they bestow

accomplishments by means of the procedure of the Kula liturgy (of one’s

own Kula) (kulakrama), in association with the subtle knowledge (of its
inner principles). O goddess, they should be practiced (anusṭheya)

” Another, different Hear, ‘which is called Bhairava’, is extracted in 30194cd-95. Also, sce note
to 16/158cd-163ab and commentary, that states that Bhairava’s Heart is Mātṛṣadbhāva
(HSHPHREṀ).
See above, 30/28cd.
” In other words, the varieties of Parā's seed syllable can be rccited by an individual initiate alone
– the Solitary Hero – or by the couple engaged in Kaula rṅitual intercourse.

CHAPTER THIRTY

constantly (assiduously) by (every member of the Kula,) be it a woman or a
man.’ (28cd-36ab)
‘The sacrifice of the Couple’ is a couple (of deities, male and female,)

in union (yāmala).

JGRNIIĨ ÇTĪTAṀT TISGTTĀTTTITT T I 3 1
-Iq T Uā T ēāTgāTGTHTa:

sakāro dīrghaṣaṭkena yukto ‘’ṅgāny ānanāni tu || 36 ||
syāt sa eva paraṁ hrasvapañcasvarakhasaṁyutaḥ |
The limbs (of Parā) are the letter S conjoined with the six long
vowels, whereas the faces are also S, but conjoined with the five short

vowels and the Void (MṀ).” (36cd-37ab)

Even though this (seed syllable) was extracted previously with (the
words) ‘the Living Being (S), along with the fourteenth (vowel) (AU)’, it is
repeated again (here,) because (what was stated previously was)in accord with
the venerable Triśirobhairava as the basic text (whereas here heis following the

ijayottara). Thus, thereis no defect (in doing so again), (or if) other

(things are) said about it, such as ‘the Living Being (S)is present within the

Vital Breath (H).””
‘The faces’ are faces. ‘Also S’ means the letter S. The ‘Void’ is the
Point (M). That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

“The bodies of the three Vidyās consist of the Living Being (S) along

with the six long vowels, together with (their) separate (respective) classes (of

” These lines (30/36cd-37ab) are an explanatory paraphrase of MV 3/60cd-61ab, which is quoted
by Jayaratha. See below, 30/43cd-45ab and above, 30/10cd- 1ab and note. The limbs and faces of
Parā are formed as follows.
OMṀ SĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ
OM SĪṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

OM SŪṀ ŚIKHĀYAI VAUṢATṬ
OM SAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUṀ
OM SAUM NETREBHYAḤ VAṢAṬ
OM SAḤ ASTRĀYA PHATṬ
# Alernatively, NETRATRAYĀYA
OṀ SAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ
OMṀ SIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ
OM SUM DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ

OMṀ SEṀ UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAṂAḤ
OṀ SOṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ
” Above, 30/27b.

the Heart (red SE)
the Head (yellow NE)
the Topknot (golden SW)

the Armour (greyish NW)

the Eyes (shining white the centre)

the Weapon (brown in the E, S, W, N)
the Upper Face (transparent NE)

the Eastem Face (pale yellow)
the Sothern Face (dark blue)

the Northern Face (red)

the Western Face (white)

Jayaratha notes here that the mantra of Parā was explained above in verse 27. However,
Jayaratha points out that Abhinavagupta paraphrases the 7riśirobhairavatantra there, as he
himself indicates. Here the source is the MV, and so he is not repeating himself.
” Above, 30/28c.

TANTRĀLOKA

invocations) (jāti); the faces (are formed from the same Living Being (S)) with

the five short vowels.’"

The Limbs of the Vidyā (Vidyāṅga)
1) The Heart

īīgt. raṀvḷ=ī fkzaṁçazā 7āiq 1 3 u

oṅkāraiḥ pañcabhir mantro vidyāṅgahṛdayaṁ bhavet || 37 |

The mantra whichis the Heart, amongst the limbs of the Vidyāis

made of five OMs. (37cd)
2) The Head of Brahmā

TTaTT TSTTĪĪṀĪT] TTAT TE
TJJTRJĪRṜ JaTTTTGTTĪTGTH I 3¢ 1
praṇavaś cāmṛte tejomālini svāhayā saha |

ekādaśākṣaraṁ brahmaśiras tan mālinīmate || 38 ||

The Brahmaśiras (the Head of Brahmā), according to the
Maālinīmata, consists of eleven syllables, thatis, praṇava (OṀ) and AMṚTE

TEJOMĀLINL along with SVĀHĀ. (38)
3) The Topknot

vedavedani hūṁ phaṭ ca praṇavādiyutā śikhā |
The Topknot (Śikhā)is VEDAVEDINI HŪṀ PHAT, preceded by

the syllable ONLṀ (39ab)
“ MV 3/60cd-61ab.

This line is a literal quotation of MV 3/61cd.
Read -māl

as found in MV, for -mālinī. This verse is drawn from MV 3/62 that reads:

oṁ amṛte tejomālini svāhāpadāni (davi) bhūṣitam |

ckādaśākṣaraṁ proktam etad brahmasiraḥ priye lg

30/37cd-40ab (except 38ab)is a lightly modified quote of MV 3/61cd-64; TĀ 30/37cd= MV
3/61cd, TĀ 30/38 is a paraphrase of MV 3/62cd-63ab; TĀ 30/39ab= MV 3/63ab vedavedini hūṁ
phat ca praṇavādīsamanvita |g: yutā śikheti] | 3/63ab (read with MS G: yutā śikhā); TĀ 30/39cd40ab (reads svāhety oṅkārapūrvakam for svāhāntaṁ praṇavādikam) = MV 3/64. The whole

passage says:

‘The mantra Vidyāṅgahr̥daya (the Heart of the Limbs of the Vidyā,is made) with five
OMs. O beloved, the Brahmaśiras (the Head of Brahmā). consisting of the eleven syllables
(mantra)is said to be OṀ AṂṚTE TEIOMĀLINI, adorned with the sylables SVĀHĀ. The
Śikhā (the Topknot, amongst) the group of (the limbs of the) Vidyā should be known to be
Rudrāṇ, consisting of eight syllables. Itis VEDAVEDINI HOM PHAT. and has the syĪlable OṀ

CHAPTER THIRTY

4) The Armour

3Īīdī āgTITIT aTGAĀĪgTṬĀT II šx 1

vajriṇe vajradharāya svāhetyoṅkārapūrvakam || 39 ||
ekādaśākṣaraṁ varma puruṣṭutam iti smṛtam |

VAJRIṆE VAJRADHARĀYA SVĀHĀ, preceded by the syllable

OM, is the Armour (varman) called Puruṣṭuta (Praised by Many),
consisting of eleven syllables. (39cd-40ab)

Here (with regard to this), according to the followers of the venerable

Triśirobhairava, the seed syllable of the Armour is in the Topknot. Those who
live by the venerable Devyāyāmala (say it is) Catuṣkala ‘possessing four
energies.' Our teachers accept the latter view. Rejecting the view of the
venerable Triśirobhairava, because the nomenclature (abhidhāna) here is in

accord with procedure (taught in) the venerable Devyāyāmala, the matter
(artha) concerning the Mantra of the Eye, which is not mentioned in the

Mālinīvijayottara, is meant to be explained (in accord with the Devyāyāmala).
And the same according to the Triśirobhairava (is as follows):

‘1) Having fashioned Gaāyatrī (O) five times, along with Śukrā

(Female Sperm) (M), and (having uttered ‘hail) to the Heart (hṛdayāya)’ – this

at the beginning. VAJRINE VAJRADHARĀYA SVĀHĀ, preceded by the syllable OM, is the

Armour (varman) called Puruṣṭuta (Praised by Many), consisting of eleven syllables.' MV
3/61cd-64

39cd-40ab = MV 3/64. ‘Puruṣṭuta’ means greatly valucd, praised by many, etc.
Jayaratha is referrng here, somewhat obscurely, to verses he goes on to quote from the

Devyāyāmala. The last quarter of the passage in which the extraction of the Topknot is described

states śikhāṁ vajrīṇa uddharet – ‘extract the Topknot of the one who bears the thunderbolt’. It
seems Jayaratha is referring to vajriṇe – O bearer of the thunderbolt’, which in both the MV and

‘TBh appears at the beginning of the mantra of the Armour, i.e. VAJRĪṆE VAJRADHARĀYA

SVĀHĀ. Thus, Jayaratha says that some are of the opinion that the seed-syllable (i.e. vajriṇe) is
in the Topknot. Others, with whom Jayaratha and his teachers agree, say that the reference to
vajriṇī there refers to the syllable HŪM, to which he refers as catuṣkala (see following note).

’Bindu is said to have four energies (caruṣkala) in several places. See, for example, the

Tantrasadbhāva, quoted in TĀv ad 3/66cd-67ab (67); TĀ 8/385cd (385ab) (= SVT 10/1222ab)
and Niśiṣaṁcāra in TĀv ad 15/86cd-88. The seed-syllable of Māyā (HŪM) is also said to have
four energies (catuṣkala) (TĀv ad 16/221-222 (221cd-223ab) and TĀ 30/90c). The two

interpretations are equated in TĀv ad 30/107, where Jayaratha says that “Bindu has four energies,

and so is HŪMṀ (binduś catuṣkalatayā hūrṁī).

The Triśirobhairava does indeed describe a different version of the Eye, namely, CSHAUM.
Abhinava presents what he calls a Mantra common to all Śaiva schools, This is the mantra of

Mṛtyuñjaya (Amṛteśvara), namely, OM JUṀ SAH. It is described in the Netratantra. Its alias –

Amrteśvaratantra – clearly indicates the identity of this mantra form of Śiva with that of the Third
Eye. As this limb (aṅga) is not described in the MV, according to Jayaratha, Abhinava is

following the Devyāyāmala here.

! These correspondences are drawn from the Mālinī alphabet taught in the 7riśirobhairava, as
reported by Jayaratha above ad 15/121-125ab. The sequence of letters in the MV version and that

TANTRĀLOKA

omniscient Mantra, the supreme Heart (is complete). (OM OM OM OMṀ OM

HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ)

2) Taking Vāgīśī (A) alone, write (the letter of the goddess’s) Buttock
(M). Having placed it in Contentment (nivṛtti) (r), Tārā (the Saviouress) (T)
comes next. Conjoining her twice with Jñānaśakti (the Power of Knowledge)

(E), extract the Trident (J) without the Staff, along with Gāyatrī (O), Mahākālī
(M) conjoined with the Milk (Ā), and Pūtanā (L), with the power of Māyā (I),

Nādinī (the Resounding One) (N) conjoined with the Tongue (I), and Paramā
(the Supreme One) (S)is conjoined with the throat (V), and having endowed her

with Milk (Ā), Ambikā (the Little Mother) (H) is conjoined with Milk (Ā)

(thus) the Head of Triśiranātha (the Three Headed Lord) endowed with

fulfilment has been taught. (AMrTE TEJOMĀLINI SVĀHĀ – Head)

3) Jñānaśakti (the Power of Knowledge) (E) is on the Throat (V)).
Deposit Dahanī (the Burning One) (D) alone (VEDA), and apply it twice,
having written Nādinī (the Resounding One) (N) after that (VEDAVEDANA).
Then, after that, it is conjoined with Māyā (I). (Then comes) Mohinī (the
Enchantress) (Ū) united with Ambikā (the Little Mother) (H) and the goddess

Śukrā (Female Sperm) (Ṁ) (HŪṀ). After that comes Pheṭkārī (PH). The Skul

(T) is at the end of it, devoid of the half vowel (PHAT). O governess of the
gods, the Topknot, which is called Beginningless Consciousness (anādibodha)
has (thus) been taught. (VEDAVEDANI HŪM PHAT
– Topknot.)

4) One should place Śikhinī (the Peahen) (V) alone, and Jayantī (the
Victorious) (J) conjoined with the Staff (R), should be applied conjoined with
the Tongue (I), and Janārdanī (She who Agitates People) (= Nārāyaṇī) (Ṇ)

conjoined with Knowledge (= Jñānaśakti = E). One should extract Śikhinī (the

Peahen) (V) alone. The Trident (J) conjoined with the Staff (R), Priyadarśanī
(DH), and then the Staff (R) along with Milk (Ā), Vāyuvegā (the Force of

Wind) (Y), Paramā (the Supreme) (= Parmātmā) (S), Śikhinī (the Peahen) (V)
conjoined with Milk (Ā), Ambikā (the Little Mother) (H) conjoined with Milk
(Ā) – (the wise) know that this is the impenetrable Armour. (VAJRIṆE

VAJRADHARĀYA SVĀHĀ– Armour.)

5) Cāmuṇḍā (C), the power Paramā (the Supreme) (S), and then one
should extract Ambikā (the Little Mother) (H). They are all accompanied by

Sāvitī (AU) and adorned with the Point (M). O lady of good vows, I have told
you the Three Eyes of the god. (CSHAUM - Three Eyes.)

6) (There is) Kusumā (= Kuṣsumāyudhā) (the Flower) (Ś) and Pūtanā
(the Demoness) (L) along with Guhyaśakti (the Secret Power) (I); (united) with
Śukrā (Female Sperm) (Ṁ), they (all) possess a head. One should add the Heart

of the Triśirobhairava are not exactly the same. See Appendix B to Chapter Fifteen, Volume
Eight, for tables of the Mālinī alphabet in the MV and TBh.
The Six Limbs of the Vidyā

OṀ OṀ OṀ OṀ OṀ HR̥DAYÃYA NAMAḤ - the Heart

AMr̥TE TĒJOMĀLINI SVĀHĀ - Head
VEDAVEDANI HŪṀ PHAT - Topknot

VAJRIṆE VAJRADHARĀYA SVĀHĀ – Armour.

CSHAUM
- the Third Eye.

- the Weapon.
“ Read pheṭkārī for pheṅkārī.

CHAPTER THIRTY

(P) alone. Having conjoined the Genitals (Ś) with Mohinī (the Enchantress) (U),

Ambikā (the Little Mother) (H) is conjoined with the Point (M) and mounted on

Prajñāśakti (the Power of Wisdom) (Ū). One should quickly add Pheṭkārī (PH)
conjoined with Kāpalinī (the Skullbearer) (T). (Such) is the Weapon that
shines like the sun called_ Mahāpāśupata, that destroys all lack of success

(asiddhi).” (ŚLIṀ PAŚU HŪṀ PHAT -– the Weapon.)

The venerable Devyāyāmala also (teaches a variant of the same

limbs).

‘(1) That which is considered to be the first (of all syllables) (OM)

repeated five times is his Heart’ (OM OM OM OM OM).

(2) The letter of Speech (A), the Buttock (M) and (the letter) which is

the first of the Garland of the Head (r) and, having fashioned twice all around

the Thigh (T) located on the Right Knee (E), after that extract the syllable of the

Trident (J), energized by the letter O, the Buttocks (M) conjoined with Milk (Ā),

and the third (letter) of the Garland of the Head (L)” (followed by) NI and
SVĀHĀ. (This) is said to be the Head adorned in the beginning with (the
syllable) OM. (OṀ AMrTE TEJO MĀLINI SVĀHĀ - head)

(3) The syllable OM and the letter of the Throat (V), added to the Right
Knee (E), having doubled it and then after that, the Right Foot (D), and then
having extracted the Right Foot (D) for the middle (of VEDANI), and having
added the remaining last two, namely, the Topknot (N) united with the letter of

the Tongue (I), having added the other last two, extract the Topknot of the one
who bears the thunderbolt. (OM VEDAVEDANI (HŪM PHAT))

(4) Extract the letter of the Throat (V) and the Trident (the whole
Trident is J + R) followed by the two eyes (DH). The Staff of the Trident (R) is

in the letter of the Milk (Ā) – the one that ends with SVĀHĀ is the Armour
which is in front. (VAJRADHARĀ(YA) SVĀHĀ – Armour).”
(5) the Eye) The syllable OM, the letter of the Trident (J), adorned with

the Right Earring (U), (to which) one should add the Self (S), along with the
Buttocks (M), possessing emission (H). That is the Eye of the goddess. That is
the supreme instrument of Mṛtyuñjaya. (OM JUM SAH).

(6) the Weapon) SLIM PASU beginning with syllable OM, after which
comes the vital breath (H), which should be conjoinedin all respects into the
ornament of the left ear (Ū), and add the letter within the vital seed” (Ṁ)
– (this

is) the Weapon which is supremely terrible.'(OṀ ŚLIṀ PAŚU HŪṀ®– the

Weapon.).

Read pheṛkārī for pheikārī.
The Mālinī code is used above ad 29/69-70ab to extract the Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. So we can
assume the same code is being used here.
Here the third letter of the Garland of the Head – | – stands for the semi-vowel L., which is its
counterpart amongst the consonants.

Rcad śikhār for śikhā.
VAIRIṆĒ is missing. and so is YA at the end of vajradharāya.
Ó Paramātmā is Ś in TBh and H in MV. Here Devyāyāmala’s syllabic nomenclature is the same as
that of the Mālinī code of th TBh.
Read sukrānte for śikhānúād.
- There is no PHAT at the end of this version.

TANTRĀLOKA

5) The Eye

ā fr: avwāazgrsña
= |] vx 0 1|

īTHTTJGTRITR TTHTHTSĪ TT]

tāro dvijihvaḥ khaśarasvarayug jīva eva ca || 40 ||
netram etat prakāśātma sarvasādhāraṇaṁ smṛtam |

”The Saviour (OM), Two Tongues (J), Space (Ṁ), conjoined with

the vowel Arrow (U), and the Living Being (S), (along with emission H,) are
the Eye (netra), whichis light, and said to be (a Mantra) common to all
(Śaiva schools). (40cd-41ab)
‘The Saviourʼ is the syllable OM. The Two Tongues iis J. Spaceis the
Point (Ṁ. The vowel Arrowis U. The Living Beingis S, along with emission

(H). (OṀ JUMṀ SAḤ)

6) The Weapon (Pāśupatāstra)

tāraḥ ślīṁ paśu hūṁ phaṭ ca tad astraṁ rasavarṇakam || 41 ||

6) The Saviour (OṀ) ŚLĪṀ PAŚU HŪṀ PHAT ~ this is the

Weapon (astra), consisting of six syllables. (41cd)

(The Weapon consists of) ‘six syllables’. The letter T is not counted
here (amongst them), because it has no vowel.

”? 3040cd-4aḥ has no equivalentin the MV. as all the other limbs appear therin serial order
(3/37cd-40). Iis possible that these two lines have somehow been lostin the manuscripts of the

MV. But this is probably not so. It is not uncommon to find versions consisting of five limbs

rather than six. Moreover, as here, the limb thatis

usually omittedis the Eye. Indeed, Jayaratha

observes that the Netramantra (also called Mṛtyuñjayamantra) – OṀ JUṀ SAḤ - is not
mentioned in the MV (cfr. SVT 1, p.51). The reason implicitly given here for this is that it is
common to all Śaiva schools and so needs no special mention. See above, 22/20-21.
Read with MV 3/65b, hii for huri.

l 30/41cdis an abridged version of MV 3/65, which says:
slīpadaṁ [g: sśtaśahdam itiḹ (> slīṁpadaṁ) paśuśabdaṁ ca hīūṁ phadantaṁ bhavādikam |
etat pāśupataṁ proktam aráhasaptākṣaraṁ param |

‘The syllable ŚLĪṀ, the word PAŚU and HŪṀ PHAT at the end and BHAVA at the
beginning – this is said to be the Pāśupata (Weapon). Supreme, it consists of seven and a half
syllables.’

The form of the mantra of the Weapon taught in the MV is BHAVA ŚLĪṀ, PAŚU
HŪṀ PHAT, which consists, as th MV says, of seven and a half syllables (PHATis one and a
half). See below 30/41cd, where it is given in full. Abhinava has, for some reason, substituted
BHAVA with OṀ and reckoned PHAT to be just one syllable, This mantra recurs elsewhere, see,
for example, the Rauravāgama Kriyāpāda, 1/10.

CHAPTER THIRTY

The Guardians of the Quarters and their Weapons

ṢZIRGTTGTTī] gJCĀTĀTṬIṬSTTḤT || 5 1

laraṭakṣavayair dīrghaiḥ samayuktaiḥ sabindukaiḥ |
indrādayas tadastrāṇi hrasvair viṣṇuprajāpatī|| 42 II
smrtau turyadvitīyābhyāṁ hrasvābhyāṁ padmacakrake |
(The mantras of the Guards of the Quarters), beginning with Indra
(are formed, respectively) with (the consonants) L R T KS V Y along with S
M (conjoined) with (the six) long (yvowels Ā I Ū AI AU AH), (as well as Ū
and Ā for the last two, and all of which have a final) Point (M).
Their weapons are (formed with the corresponding) short (vowels).
(The mantras of) Viṣṇu and Prajāpati are said to be (formed) with the

fourth and second (vowels, i.e. Ī and Ā) (and their two weapons), the lotus

and discus, by the two (corresponding) short (vowels, i.e. I and A). (4243ab)

(The six) long (vowels) are the group of six long (vowels) mentioned
earlier. The letters S and M of Kubera and Īśāna (who are the guardians of the
2 30/42-43ab is paraphrase of MV 3/66-67 (3/67 is quoted below ad 30/60-64ab):

‘The skilful (adept) should fashion (the mantras of) Indra and the other (guardians of the
quarters) with (the phonemes) L R T KṢ V Y, along with S and M (conjoined) with (the six) long
(vowels Ā Ī Ū AI AU AḤ) and (a final) Point (Ṁ), and their weapons with short (vowels). Visṇu
and Prajāpati should be conceived in the same way, with the Nose () and the Milk (Ā). The fiṣt
and third vowel (A, I) denote (their weapons,) the lotus and the discus.
The guardians of the quartrs are a standard set common to all schools. They have
already been mentioned above (6/68cd-72ab and note; 15/222cd-225ab). They are Indra (Ē), Agnī
(SE), Yama (S), Nirṛti (SW), Varuna (W), Vāyu (NW), Kubera (N), Īśāna (NE), Brahmā (Zenith),
Viṣṇu (Nadir). Their weapons (ayudha) are respectively, a thunder bolt, (vajra), lance (śaki), stat
(daṇḍa), sword (khaḍga), noose (pāśa), banner (dhvaja), club (gadā), trdent (rriśūla), lotus
(padma), and discus (cakra). The mantras of the weapons are formed in the ṣame way,
substútuting for the long phonemes the corresponding short phonemes A, 1, U, E, 0, AM, U, A, A,
and I. Thus, thir mantras are as follows:
OṀ LĀṀ INDRĀYA NAṂAḤ
OM RĪṀ AGNAYE NAMAḤ
OṀ TŪṀ YAMĀYA NAMAḤ
OMṀ KṢAIṀ NIRRTAYĒ NAMAḤ
OṀ VAUM VARUṆĀYA NAMAḤ
OṀ YAḤ VĀYAVE NAMAḤ
OMṀ SŪṀ KUBERAYA NAMAḤ

OṀ ĀṀ PRAJĀPATAYE NAMAḤ
OMṀ ĪṀ VIṢṆAVE NAMAḤ

OṀ LAṀ VAJRĀYA NAMAḤ (ĒÉ)
OMṀ RIṀ ŚAKTAYE NAMAḤ (SE)
OMṀ TUṀ DAṆḌĀYA NAMAḤ (S)
OMṀ KṢEṀ KHAḌGĀYA NAMAḤ (SW)
OṀ VOṀ PĀŚĀYA NAMAḤ (W)
OṀ YAṀ DHVAJĀYA NAṀAḤ (NW)
OMṀ SUṀ GADĀYAI NAMAḤ (N)
OṀ MAMṀ TRIŚÚLĀYA NAMAḤ (NE)
OṀ AṀ PADMĀYA NAMAḤ (zenith)
OMṀ IM CAKRĀYA NAṂAḤ (nadir)

Concerning the nature and characteristics of the Guardians of the Quarters, see
Mallmann 1963: 118-137, and for the weapons, ibid. pp. 244-255.

TANTRĀLOKA

north and northeastern quarter, respectively,) are conjoined with the sixth and
second long (vowel, thus making SŪM and MĀM, respectively). This is stated
by saying that they are ‘conjoined along with S Mʼ°. ‘The short (vowels)’
correspond to the long ones. As is said (in the Triśirobhairavatantra):

‘O great goddess, one should know that Pūtanā (the Demoness) (L), the
Staff of the Trident (R), the Skull (T) and the Navel (KS), Śikhinī (the Peahen)

(V), Vāyuvegā (the Force of the Wind) (Y), Paramā (the Supreme One) (S) and

the Buttocks (M) conjoined with the long (vowels) and the Point (Ṁ), are the

Mantras of the Guardians of the Quarters. Their weapons do not have long
(vowels).”

The fourth and second are the letters I and Ā. ‘The two

(corresponding) short (vowels) are the letters I and A.

_Viṣṇu and Prajāpati should be conceived in the same way, with the

Nose (I) and the Milk (A). The first and third vowel (A, I) denote (their

weapons) the discus and the lotus.”

The Six Classes of Invocations (jāti)

īT. Ta-a āaīḷ āJīg ē ōT GZ T TITd: I| %3 1|

T ṜI aTaṁ̄ ṀTICS JIĪ-TS I `€? I
rTā-āīN ] T-JTII] TTRRTEṢṬTT; |
namaḥ ṣvāhā tathā vauṣaṭ huṁ vaṣaṭ phaṭ ca jātayaḥ || 43 ||
aṅgeṣu kramaśaḥ ṣaṭṣu karmasv atha tadātmikāḥ |
jape home tathāpyāye samuccāṭe ‘tha śāntike || 44 |
abhicāre ca mantrāṇāṁ namaskārādijātayaḥ |

1) NAMAḤ, 2) SVĀHĀ, 3) VAUṢAT, 4) HUM, 5) VAṢAT, and

6) PHAT are the (six) classes (jāti) (of invocations). Of that nature, they are

ĀṀ and ĪṀ are the syllables of the last two guardians of the quartrs, that is, Prajāpati (i.e.
Brahmā) (zenith) and Viṣṇu (nadir), respectively.
MV 3/67. svarāv ādyatrīīyau tu vācakau padmacakrayoḥ l 6īcd. Read as in the KSTS edition,
this line literally says: ‘The fist and third vowel (A, I) denote (their weapons), the lotus and the
discus.’ The reading is the same according to Jayaratha. This line literally says: ‘The first and
third vowel (A, I) denote (their weapons) the lotus and the discus.’ Viṣṇu is represented by IṀ
and Brahmā by ĀṂṀ. If we accept this reading as it sands, that would mean that thir respectivē
weapons would be denoted by AṀ and IṀ, respectively. However, the weapons of all thē other
guardians are represented by their corresponding short vowels. Thus, for example, Indra is LĀṀ
and his weapon is LAMṀ. There scems to be no reason for this anomaly. Accordingly, we may
reverse the order of the words in the text, which we can easily do without compromising the
metre, to read cakrapadmayoḥ iṅstead of padmacakrayoḥ. Or else assume that the stated order
does not correspond and assign AṀ to the weapon of Prajāpati, who is ĀṀ, and IṀ to that of
Viṣṇu, who is IM.

CHAPTER THIRTY

in the six (limbs), (respectively,) in due order, and the (six types of) rites

(karman). The classess NAMAḤ etc. of Mantras (are used for) 1) the
repetition of Mantra (japa — NAMAH), 2) the offering of oblation (homa –

SVĀHĀ), 3) nourishment (apyāya – VAUṢAT), 4) expulsion (samuccāta –
HUṀ), 5) pacification (śāntika – VAṢAT) and 6) black magic (abhicāra –

PHAT). (43cd-45ab)

‘In the six’ should be added to one, then the other (that is, the six limbs

and six types of ritual actions, for) what is meant is that the ritual actions
(karman) are also of six kinds. They are ‘of that nature’, that is, in a sequence
of the form of the liturgy (kramarūpa). He displays that same nature in the
course of the repetition of Mantra (japa) etc.

ftaī. ā Ṁfttz̄T u1 x. 1

akṣiṣaṇmunivargebhyo dvitīyāḥ saha bindunā || 45 ||
yonyarṇena ca mātṚṇāṁ sadbhāvaḥ kālakarṣiṇī|
ādyojjhito vāpy antena varjito vātha saṁmataḥ || 46 ||

Kālakarṣiṇī, the Essence of the Mothers (mātṛṣadbhāva), consists of

the second letters of the second (KH), sixth (PH) and seventh class (of

consonants) (R), along with the letter of the Womb (E) and the Point (MI).
Or else it is also agreed (that it can also) be without the first (letter — KH

i.e., PHREṀ) or the final one (R i.e., KHPHREṀ). (45cd-46)

See above, 30/10cd-1 lab and note. The sequential order of the types of invocatory syllables —

jaati – used at the end of the limbs of Mantras and elsewhere – is fixed. Abhinava perceiving their

importance as regularly recurrent features of Mantras, takes care to present the sequential order in

30/43cd-45ab. One would expect VAṢAT to preceded VAUṢAT, if nothing else simply because
the of the alphabetical order. But we can be sure that this is not a scribal error for Abhinava goes

on to say that VAUṢAT the third jaati, is used for ‘norishment’ (apyaayana), that is, completion.

This is indeed the syllable that is universally uttered for the full oblation (puur.naahuuti) at the

end ofa series of fire offerings (aahuuti).
Ó Ṣee previous note..
Concerning these six ‘types' in detail, see Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 5, note 15.

" The second, sixth and seventh class of letters of the Sanskrit alphabet are, respectively, the
gutturals, the palatals, and the four semivowels. The second letters of these three classes are KH,
PH and Ṛ, respectively. The mantra is, therefore, KHPHREM.
This basic form of this mantra, called Piṇḍanātha or Pañcapiṇḍanātha, is KHPHREMṀ (see
above, 4/191cd). Without adding OM, or the like, the limbs and faces are as follows:

KHPHRĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ
KHPHRĪṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

KHPHRŪṀ ŚIKHAYAI VAUṢAT
KHPHRAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUM
KHPHRAUṀ NETRAYĀYA VAṢAṬ

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The second’ is the class of gutturals. ‘The sixth’ is the sixth class (of

consonants), the labials. ‘The seventhʼ is the seventh class (of consonants), the
semi-vowels. ‘The second’ (letters of these classes) are KH, PH, R
(respectively). ‘The letter of the Wombʼ is E. In this way (we arrive at)

Pañcapiṇḍanātha (KHPHREṀ). As is said:

‘The second Row of Teeth (KH) and the Left Foot (PH), conjoined

below with the Staff (R), united to the Right Knee (E) and covered with the

Tilaka (M), it gives all accomplishments.”

(Or else it is ‘without) the first’ (letter, that is) KH, and so is PHREM:

‘or the final one’. It is not only (without) the first letter KH, it is also (without)

the last one, that is, the letter R. This is the meaning. Thus (the resulting syllable

is) PHEM.

Variants of Mātṛṣadbhāva

aETSTTTGATā āTHIṬTTĪĪTHĀ: |

EEEGIĒ ;ḺEi IEHI

g5BfRaTaHTḤ
1 8 1

THTRT TṬ JĪTFRTTIT
ARĪTTHT | 40

JTÇSPITTṬ
TTTRAT: ṬTTTSARĪTTĀĪTĪ; I 4g |I

jīvaḥ prāṇapuṭāntaḥsthaḥ kālānalasamadyutiḥ 1

atidīptas tu vāmāṁghrir bhūṣito'' mūrdhni bindunā || 47 |
dakṣajānugataś cāyaṁ sarvamātṛgaṇārcitaḥ |

anena prāṇitāḥ sarve dadate vāñchitaṁ phalam || 48 ||
KHPHRAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ
KHPHRAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ
KHPHRIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ
KHPHRUṀ DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ
KHPHREṀ UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ
KHPHROṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ

There are other forms of this mantra that have the same ‘pervasion’ (yāpti) or energy.

These variant forms are the subject of the following verses, 47 to 55ab.

"! Read vāmāṅṁghrir bhūṣito for vāmāṁghirrabhūṣio.

'" MV 8/40c reads sarvāḥ for sarve.

CHAPTER THIRTY

sadbhāvaḥ paramo hy eṣa mātṚṇāṁ bhairavasya ca |
tasmād enaṁ japen mantrī ya icchet siddhim uttamām || 49 ||
rudraśaktiṣamāveśo nityam atra pratiṣṭhitaḥ |

yasmād eṣā parā śaktir bhedenānyena kīrtitā || 5O ||

yāvatyaḥ siddhayas tantre tāḥ sarvāḥ kuṟute tv iyam |
aṅgavaktrāṇi cāpy asyāḥ prāgvat svaraniyogataḥ || 51 II

The Living Being (S) within the capsule of (the two) Vital Breaths
(H), shining like the Fire of Time (R), the Left Foot (of the goddess) (PH),

intensely energized, its head adorned with the Point (Ṁ) and linked with

the Right Knee (E) (HSHPHREM). Venerated by all the hosts of Mothers
(mātṛ), thīs (Mantra) gives life to them all, and they bestow the fruit
(one) desires. This is the supreme essence of the Mothers (Mātṛsadbhāva)

and of Bhairava." Therefore, it is this that he who recites Mantra, who
aspires to the most excellent accomplishment (of liberation), should
repeatedly recite. The penetration of Rudra’s power (rudraśaktisamāveśa)
is always established here (in it), for it is said to be the Supreme Power

(Parā), in another form.” As many as are the accomplishments (siddhi)

'! 30/47-51ab is a direct quote of MV 8/39-43ab, 51lcd is a variant of MV 8/43cd. See following

notes for variant readings.

Ī Thus, the Mantra is HSHPHREM as extracted in MV 8/39-40ab. Itis significant,no doubt, that

Abhinava chooses to present Pañcapiṇḍanātha i.e. KHPHREM, which is the most basic and

extensively used monosyllabic Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī

as the main form of Mātrṣadbhāva. He

presents the Mātr̥sadbhāva extracted in the MV as a variant.

For 30/48b sarvamātr̥gaṇārcitaḥ `venerated by all the host of Mothers’, MV 8/40b reads
sarvamātr̥gaṇānvitaḥ accompanied by all the hosts of Mothers'.

"" Iṭis standard practice for a Tantric system to preface its mantras with the root seed-syllable of

the main deity. The Mantras are thereby vitalized, ‘given life’, and so, alive, function effectively.
This would be the meaning if we retain the reading in the printed edition, which is the masculine
‘sarve’. However, the MV reads the feminine sarvāḥ, which refers to the Mothers. This makes
sense for a mantra called ‘the Essence of the Mothers'ī - mātṛsadbhāva. 1t is possible that

Abhinaya changed the gender to leave the understanding of ‘all’ as referring to all Mantras, and

by a play on words,

perceiving subjects (mātṛ) plays on the double meaning of the word mātrṛ as

‘mother and ‘subject'. Concerning this play on words, see above, note to 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab).
The Essence of the Mothers is taught in the MV (8/39-42ab), and so it is a Trika mantra, but it

happens to be similar to Krama Mantras. See above, note 3,228.
".S ṂWV 8/41b reads paripaṟhyate – ‘is taught (in the scriptures) for bhairavasya ca ʻand of
Bhairava’. This variant suggests that Abhinava did actually read sarvāḥ all (the Mothers), as noted
in the previous note. Otherwise, if he read ‘all’ in general, there would have been no need to

specify Bhairava also.

The extraction of this mantra is a direct citation of the MV 8/39-40ab; clearly
HSHPHRĒM is the form of Mātrṛsadbhāva taught in the MV. Abhinava tacitly takes this to be the
mono-syllabic Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, although she is entirely absent in the MV. This is the
form associated with Parā. See above, note 3,228 ad 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab). We can well suppose
that this was a wonderful coincidence for Abhinava as a practitioner. It allowed him to worship
the highest Goddess of both the most elevated schools together.
!T MV 8/42d reads MV -bhedānena ‘in thīs formʼ for bhedenānyena_in another formʼ. The
reference here is to the sonic form of Parā, that is, SAUH. See above, TĀv on 29/21: ‘Here with
the word ‘Parā’ itself, the author has referred (vyākṛra) to Mātṛsadbhāva, which is the highest

form of Parā Herself.' The change from ‘this' to ‘another” is Abhinava’s way of saying that this is

another, Trika form of Mātrṛsadbhāva, along with the Krama form, i.e.. KHPHREṀ.

TANTRĀLOKA

(promised) in the Tantra, this (Vidyā) generates them all." Her (six) limbs
and (five) faces are formed by applying the vowels in the same way as

(explained) previously. (47-51)

The Living Being is S. It is encapsulated within the capsule of the two

Vital Breaths, that is, two letter H’s (HSH). The Fire of Time is R. The Left

Foot (of the goddess) is PH. It is intensely energized by the letter R, which is
below. The Right Knee is E. (Her limbs and the faces are formed by applying)

‘the vowelsʼ, divided into short (and long).

Yoginīcakreśvara Mantra

āītṭrēvaī rēgaī fraĩ. aÃr̥ō-; I u.2 1

EEIÚBĒEFZUILIĒVINECTTḤ
3TRaIT--TRIḺa
fīīṝ: aaTē̄TTRTT u3 I]
daṇḍo jīvas triśūlaṁ ca dakṣāṁgulyaparastanau |
nābhikaṇṭhau marudrudrau visargaḥ satriśūlakaḥ || 52 ||
sarvayoginicakrāṇām adhipo ‘yam udāhṛtaḥ |
asyāpy uccāraṇād eva saṁvittiḥ syāt paroditā || 53 ||

'!" For 51b tāḥ sarvāḥ kurute tv iyam As many as are the accomplishments (siddh) (promised) in

the Tantra), this (Vidyā) generates them all.’ MV 8/43b reads: sarvāḥ syur anayā kṛtāḥ 'all of

them are generated by this (Vidyā). Note that here the word ‘tantra’ appears to be used in the

manner it is in modern western parlance. We may circumvent that dubious usage by taking tantre
‘in the Tantra’ to mean ‘in this Tantra’, or translate as ‘in the Tantrasʼ, taking the singular to be a

collective noun.

" See above, 30/10-1 1ab and 15-16ab. For 51cd aṅgavaktrāṇi cāpyasyāḥ prāgvatsvaraniyogataḥ
‘Her limbs and faces are formed by applying the vowels in the same way as (explained)

previously, that is, as explained with respect to other Mantras (see above, note 30,26). MV

8/43cd reads aṅgāni kalpayed asyāḥ pūrvavat svarabhedataḥ ‘Her limbs should be formed as

before in conjunction with the vowels.”
The six limbs of Mātṛṣadbhāva:

OMṀ HĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ
OMṀ SĪṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

OM HŪM ŚIKHĀYAI VAUṢAT

OMṀ RAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUṀ
OMṀ PHAUṀ NETRAYĀYA VASṢAT
OMṀ RAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ
The five faces of Mātṛsadbhāva:

OṀ HOṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ
OMṀ SEṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ
OṀ HUṀ DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAṂAḤ
OMṀ RIṀ UṬṬARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ
OṀ PHRAṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ

CHAPTER THIRTY

The Staff (of the Trident) (R), the Living Being (S), the Trident (J),
the Right Finger (BH), the other (i.e. Left) Breast (L), the Navel (KS) and
Throat (V), Wind (Y) and Rudra (Ū), and emission (H) is along with the
Trident (AU). (This mantra) is said to be the Lord of all the assemblies
(cakra) of Yoginīs. Just by uttering this, (one attains the state of)

consciousness that arises from Parā. (52-53)

The Staff (of the Trident) is R. The Living Being is S. The Trident is J.
The Right Finger is BH. The other Breast is, in relation to the right one, the left
one, which is L. The Navel is KS. The Throat is V. Wind is Y. Rudra is Ū.
Emission is H. The Trident is AU.
Nine-syllabled Kālakarṣiṇī Vidyā

idūtkEIEĀRIPĒṭITĪI

mahācaṇḍeti tu yogeśva ṛ ity asṭavarṇakam |
navārṇeyaṁ guptatarā sadbhāvaḥ kālakarṣiṇī || 54 II
śrīdāmare mahāyāge parāt parataroditā |

MAHĀCAṈḌAYOGESŚV followed by R, as the eighth syllable.

according to the venerable Ḍāmara Mahāyāga, this is the nine-syllabled
' 30/52-53 is a paraphrase of MV 11/12cd-15ab. TĀ 30/53 = MV 11/12cd-13ab. Read paroditā,
as is found in the MV, for puroditā. MV reads:

jmvaṁ daṇḍasamākrāntaṁ śīlasyopari saṁsthitam ||

dakṣāṅguli tato.adhastāttato vāmapayodharam |
nābhikaṇṭhau tato.adhastādvāmaskandhavibhūṣaṇau ||

Śivajivānvitaḥ paścāt tadūrdhvoṣṭhena copari |

‘There above that, one should deposit the god, with this syllabic (kūṭa) mantra: the
living being (S) invaded by the staf (of the Trident) (R) (= SR), which is on top of the Trident (J)
.and then below, the right finger (BH), after which comes the left breast (L), the navel (KS) and
the throat (V), and then, below, both are adornd with the left shoulder (Y). After that it has Śiva’s
tonguc along with the uper lip above it’ MV 11/12cd-l4ab
Thus, this too is a Trika mantra drawn from the MV. It is the mantra of the L.ord of all
the assemblies of yoginīs. In other words, it is a Bhairava mantra. The previous verse (i.e. MV
HI/I) refers to the deployment of the cight
s in the directions. Clearly the ‘aṣsemblies of
yoginīs' are the Mothers and the yoginīs associated with them, over which Bhairava, in the centre,
presides.
The Mantra is: SRIBHLKṢVYŪAUḤ (pronounced SRJA BHLKṢA VYŪ-AUH). The
mantra when applied is probably something like SRJBHLKṢVYŪAUḤ ŚRĪBHAĪRAVAPĀDĀYA NAṂAḤ.
Litṭerally ‘phoneme’ (vara). There are two forms of the Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. One consists
of seventeen syllables (recorded above in TĀv ad 29/69cd-70). Anotheris this shortened version
consising of nine_syllables. It begins with the syllable KHPHREṀ, and so the Vidyā is
KHPHREṀ MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI (see Sanderson 2007: 307 n 246) or, as here, ending

TANTRĀLOKA

(Vidyā) which most secret, (is called) ‘the essence’'™ and Kālakarṣiṇī,

arisen from the Supreme beyond the Supreme. (54-55ab)

(MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGESŚV followed by R,) as ‘the eighth’. 1It is

indicated here that the letter which is the first of the neuter (vowels) is (present)

here as conjoined (to the rest). That is said (in the following passage):

in r. To this are normally added OṀ in the beginning, that serves to energize it (d’paka), and
PHAT, 'marking it as one endowed with the character of aggression.’ (Sanderson 2007: 279).
There is also a Samayavidyā of 100 syllables (sce MP OId Kashmiri 13/1-5 and DP 6/130).
Sanderson (2007b: 307 n. 247) decodes it as follows:
KHPHREṀ PHAṬ | MAHĀCAṆḌE CAṆḌAMUKHI CAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI PHAT |
CAṆḌADUḤKHA-VIMOCANI
SARVASAṀAYALOPAVIGHĀTANI
TEJOVATI
AMR̥TAMŪRTE ASIDDHASĀDHANI SIDDHI-RDDHIPRADE NĀŚAYA SARVADOṢĀN
ABHIMATAṀ ME PRAYACCHA SARVE SARVAGE ARŪPE SARVARŪPE HRĪṀ PHAT |
KHPHREṀ PHAT | HŪṀ KROṀ KṢĀṀ SARVAVIDYEŚVARĪ PHAT SVĀHĀ I

This is the form of the Samayavidyā of the Anākhyakrama. There are four others

corresponding to the other four circles of the Five Currents (pañcavāha), that is, the Sṛṣti-, Sthiti-,

ŚSaṅhāra- and Bhāsā- kramas. They are recorded in the Kālikākulapañcakramakramārcana by

Vimalaprabodha, of which there are two Nepalese manuscripts (see bibliography)..The version in
the MSs reads:

KHPHREṀ
PHAT MAHĀCAṆḌEÉ
CAṆḌAMUKHI
CAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI
PHATṬ
CAṆḌADUḤKHA-VIṂOCANI (K: -MUKHA-) SARVASAṀMAYALOPAVIGHĀTANI (K: VIGHOTANI KH: -VIGHOTANI) TEJOMAYI_AAṂṚTAMŪRTE ASIDDHISĀDHANI
ṚDDHISIDDHIPRADE NĀŚAYA SARVADOṢĀN-ABHIMATAṀ MEĒ PRAĀYACCHA
SARVE SARVAGE ARŪPE SARVARŪPE HṚĪṀ PHAṬ KHPHREṀ PHAT HŪṀ KROṀ

KṢĀṀ SARVAVIDYEŚVARI PHAṬ SVĀHĀ II 100 I| MS K folio 14a.
' The Ḍāmara Mahāyāga is a part of the Dev)

imala (see above 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab)).

' The ‘essence’ here does not mean the Essence of the Mothers -mātr̥sadbhāva – that is a

different, monosyllabic mantra (see above 30/47-51). The Vidyā Abhinava is presenting here is
the nine syllable Vidyā - navākṣarī– of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. See above, note 30,122.

The Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī is Parātītā - Beyond Parā.
' s this from the Ḍāmarayāga section of the Devyāyāmala, as Abhinava seems to be implying?
Sanderson (2007b: 279-280) has identified this passage as also being found in the

Devīdvyardhaśatika

and

two

other

sources,

namely,

the

Siddhakhaṇḍa

of

the

Manthānabhairavatantra and the Jayadrathayāmalaprastāramantrasaṁgraha. A line omitted at

the beginning has been added at Sanderson’s suggestion. My edition reads:
varāṅgavihagaṁ sūraṁẼ pujaṁ puruṣam eva ca || 86 || ?

kālaṁ sarvagataṁ [k: sarvā-] caiva dāruṇākrānta sundari |

trtĩyārghaṁ (Sanderson -ādyaṁ) turaṅgaṁ ca ḍākinīmarmasaṁyutam || 87 ||

pavanaṁ navame yukiaṁ [kh: ?] tejas teiahsamanvitam (Śanderson: tejagṛhe yutam) [kh: ?] |
lakṣmīveśmaṁ tu udadhir ekatra [k: udadhi ekara] samayī [k, kh: -yo] japet (S: samayayojitam)
|ḹ ss Il

somāt [k, kh: somā] saptamākoddhrtya navavarṇā [k: na varṇāḥ, kh: -varṇāḥ] kuleśvarī |
Sanderson; Read krāraṁ for sūraṁ
Text in the edition of the TĀ:
kālaṁ sarvagataṁ caiva dāraṇākrāntamastakam ḷ

tṛttyādyaṁ taraṅgaṁ ca ḍākinīmarmasaṁyutam ||

pavanaṁ navame yuktaṁ tasmātsaptamameyutam |
lakṣmībījaṁ tatoddhṛtya udadhīśasamanvitam ||

somāt saptamam uddhr̥tya navavarṇā kuleśvarī|

CHAPTER THIRTY
‘The nine-syllabled (Vidyā) Kuleśvarī (is formed from) (the best part of

the body (E), the Bird (KH), the Fierce One (PH), the Mass (of Rays) (R) and

the Individual Soul (M).

Kāla (Time) is M. Sarvagata (the Omnipresent One) is H. Dāraṇā (She

who Rends Asunder) is Ā. The first (letter) of the third (class of consonants) is
C. Taraṅga (the Wave) is Ṉ. Ḍākinīmarma (the Vital Centre of the Ḍākinī) is DḌ.

Pavana (the Wind) is Y. The ninth (vowel) is O, united with E and the seventh

‘from that’ (G) Lakṣmī’s seed is Ś. Udadhīśa (the Lord of the Ocean) is V. The

seventh from Soma (the Moon) is r.

‘This is the nine-syllabled (Mantra)’ ‘(called) the Essence and
Kaālakarṣinī.” According to this statement, it is one out of (the Mantras of
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, that is) Sadbhāva (the Essence) and the rest. He indicates by

this that the two Pinḍa Mantra are as pervasive as Piṇḍanātha. (It has) ‘arisen
from the Supreme beyond the Supreme’. As is said there (in the
Devyāyāmala):
‘She who is the goddess Saṁkarṣiṇī, Parātītā (Beyond the Supreme), is

located (there above the middle prong).”

The Razor

TITRRPTVATTĪSĪ JTRHTTITT I A, II

Tā JTTTGT
JTJÑĪT ATTTJĀT |

a gr̥stttāāṁ | u 1|
sudhācchedakaṣaṇṭhādyair bījaṁ chedakam asvaram || 55 |I
adhyardhārṇā kālarātriḥ kṣurikā mālinīmate |
šatāvartanayā hy asyā jāyate mūrdhni vedanā || 56 |I
evaṁ pratyayam ālocya mṛtyujiddhyānam āśrayet |
naināṁ samuccared devi ya icched dīrghajīvitam || 57 ||

'“Wine (S), the Divider (K), the first of the neuter vowels (ṛ), the

Divider (K) without a vowel – this is (the Vidyā) of one and a half syllables

' This makes KHPHREṀ.
' This makes MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVR. The nine-syllable Vidyā of Kālasa karṣiṇī extracted

here is: KHPHREṀ MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVR

' This line is quoted above in TĀv ad 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab) and below in TĀv ad 31/97. Here

Jayaratha is telling us, apparently, that the syllable that comes at the beginning of the nine syllable
Vidyā is that of Parātitā, which is KHPHREMṀ. The remaining eight syllables of the Vidyā that

follow arise from that.
' This and the following Vidyā are Kṣurikās – ‘Razors’, that cut through the vital centres
(marman) in the body to bring about an exit of the vital breath from the body (utkrānti). The first
one (55cd-57) is drawn from the Maālinīvijayotara; the second (58-62ab) from the
Tantraṣadbhāva. The former is discussed by Abhinava above in 14/32cd-42ab; see there and
noles.

TANTRĀLOKA

(called) Kālarātri (the Dark Night) and Kṣurikā (the Razor), (taught) in
Mālinīmata. By repeating it one hundred times one gets a headache.
Observing this sign (pratyaya) (of its efficacity, the practitioner) should take

recourse to visualizing Mṛtyujit (Śiva, the Conqueror of Death) (to counter
its effects). O goddess, he who wishes to live a long time should not utter
it! (55cd-57)
Sudhā (Wine) is S. Chedaka (the Divider) is K. The first of the neuter
vowels is r. Chedaka (the Divider) without a vowel is the letter K without a
vowel. In this way (we arrive at) SKrṛK. That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘Having conjoined the first (letter) of the Garland of the Head (r) with

The Living Being (S), mounted on the first Twice Born (K), then place the

Twice Born without the Living Being (K) in front (SKṛK). This is said to be
Kālarātri (the Dark Night), that severs the vital points. O goddess, he who
wishes to live a long time should not utter it! By repeating it fifty times one gets
a headache. Observing this sign (pratyaya) (of its efficacity, the practitioner)
should take recourse to visualizing Mṛtyujit (Śiva, the Conqueror of Death) (to

counter its effects).”

TaT I u_¢ 1

=rfzafṝ

u u

The lines 56cd-57 here correspond to MV 17/30cd-31. In the printed edition, the third
line comes first:

naināṁ ṣamuccared devi ya icched dīrghajīvitam ||

Śšatāvartanayā hy asyā jāyate mūrdhni vedanā |

evaṁ pratyayam ālocya mṛtyujiddhyānam āśrayet II MV. 17/30cd-31
The only

significant variant is the reading in the MV śatārdhoccārayogena for śatā-

vartanayā hy asyā. The MV says that it is enough to repeat this Vidyā fifty times. Abhinava’s
version says a hundred. Is this his way of saying ‘many time’, or is the text Abhinava had
different?
' mantras tu pañcapiṇḍakṣurikākālarātryabhidhānaḥ śrīguptatantrāt śrṇpūrvādidṛṣṭaḥ |
tatprayogād yoginyaḥ kṣaṇāt parajīvam ānayanti || ‘The Mantra called Pañcapiṇḍa (the Five

Bodies), Kṣurikā (the Razor), and Kālarātri (the Dark Night) is (drawn) from the venerable

Guptatantra. By using it the Yoginīs lead (the adept) in a moment to the supreme soul.' NTu ad

20/36ab
' The mantra is SKṛK. The Kālarātri Vidyā that ‘severs the vital centres’ (marman) is extracted

with the Mālinī code in the Mālinīvijayoitara (MN 17/29). Although Abhinava goes on to quote

the following lines from there, he chooses to use another code. See above, 19/11-14 and notes.

' 30/57cd is a literal quote of MV 17/30cd. The MV goes on to supply the remedy: By repeating
it fifty times (not 100 as Abhinava says), one gets a headache. Observing this sign (pratyaya) (of

its efficacity, the practitoner) should take recourse to visualizing Mṛtyujit (Śiva the Conqueror of
Death) (to counter its effects). Then, having forcefully applied (nipīdya) that visualization

(cintaka) of the Point and Sound etc. there and drawn it up with force, he should dismiss Kālarātrī,
whois present there.’ 17/31-32. See below, TĀv ad 30/60-64ab, where MV 17/29-31 is quoted.
' MV 17/29-31.

CHAPTER THIRTY

dvirdaṇḍāgnī śūlanabhaḥprāṇāś chettranalau tathā |

kūtāgnī saviṣargāś ca pañcāpy ete ‘tha pañcasu || 58 II
vyomasv iti śivenoktaṁ tantrasadbhāvaśāsane |
chedinī kṣurikeyaṁ syād yayā yojayate pare || 59 ||
a) and b) Two times the Staff (R) and Fire (R); c) the Vital Breath
(H), Sky (KS), and the Trident (J); d) the Divider (K) and Fire (R); e) the

Peak (KS) and Fire (R) – (all) these five with emission' and (applied) to

the five Voids. (58)

Śiva has taught this in the Tantrasadbhāva, (according to which)
this is the Razor that splits (the inner vital centres,) by which one is

conjoined with the supreme (reality). (59)

a and b) The Staff is R. Fire is R. They are two each. Thus, making
RṚḤ and RṚḤ. c) The Vital Breath is H. Sky is KS, and the Trident J. In this
way (we arrive at) HKSJAH. d) The Divider is K and Fire R. In this way (we
arrive at) KRAḤ. e) The Peak is KS, Fire is R making in this way KṢRAḤ.

The mantras are a) RRAḤ, RRAḤ, b) HKSJAḤ, c) KRAḤ, and d) KṢRṞAḤ.

The five Voids are, respectvely, in the seat of birth, the navel, the heart, between the
eyebrows, and in Sound (nāda) (i. the Cavity of Brahmā?). See above, TĀv ad 19/15-16.
Ī These four Voids taken together make the fifth encompassing Void, which is RRH RRH
HKṢJAḤ KRAḤ KṢRAḤ.
TS 9/299cd-325 is dedicated to the Kṣurikā Vidyā. Indeed, TĀ 30/59cd is derived from
TS 9/315:

katitā tu mayā bhadre kṣurikā marmachedanī |
chedayeta tato marmaṁ [kh: marmā] yojayet parame pade l
‘0 auspicious lady, I have told (you) the Razor that severs the vital centres. Thus, (the
teacher) should split the vital centres (of the disciple) and conjoin (him) to the supreme plane.
The previous verses read:
kṣurikāṁ [k, kh, g: -kā] tu pravakṣyāmi yathālakṣaṇalakṣitām !| 31 1 Iḷ
stanaṁ devyās tu dakṣasthaṁ (CH) rephayuktaṁ (R) visarpitaṁ |k, g: visargitaṁ; kh:
visargiṇaṁ ] |
dvirabhyāsapadaṁ kāryaṁ dvitīyaṁ daśanaṁ (K) punaḥ |/

312.1|

dakṣajaṁghāsamāyuktaṁ (0) punas taṁ prathamākṣaraṃ (CH) |

prathamaṁ (CH) tu tato datvā daśanaṁ (K) rephasaṅyutam (R) | 313 Iḷ
nābhiṣ (KṢ) tu tena saṁyuktaḥ [k, kh, g: saṁṅyukīā] prathamanṁ [kh: prathamā] (CH) u punar
jihvam [k: dvijam kh: puṇadvijaṁ] (K) |
yathā [kh: yaya] pūrvaṁ tathā kāryaṁ lakṣaṇaṁ [kh: -ṇa] samudāhrtam l| 314 1
‘I will tell (you the Vidyā of) the Razor according to the characteristics that characterize
it. The goddess's breast on the right (CH) has flowed forth, conjoined with R. (This) part (of the

Vidyā) should be repeated twice. The second one is the Tooth (K) conjoined with the right thigh

(0), and (then) again that first letter. Then having given the first one (CH), (comes) the tooth (K)

conjoined with R. The naval (KS) is conjoined with that, and then again, the first, which is the
Tooth (K). One should do as before. (Its) characteristic has been explained.' TS 9/311cd-314
The form of this Razor appears to be: CHR CHR KOCH CHKṚR KṢCHK.
Clearly, the Razor taught here in the TĀ is not the same as this one in the TS.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Liberating Weapon

TTITōōṬāī=̃ HaarTz sq I| h

īTaāīfccāhīTT-ā ā GZTT I| 2

7a

bindvindvanalakūtāgnimarutṣaṣṭhasvarair yutam |

āpādatalamāūrdhāntaṁ smared astram idaṁ jvalat |/ 60 ||
kuīñcanaṁ cāṁgulīnāṁ tu kartavyaṁ codanaṁ tataḥ |

jānvādiparacakrāntaṁ cakṛāc cakraṁ tu kuñcayet | 61 I|
kathitaṁ sarahasyaṁ tu sadyonirvãṇadaṁ param |

!(The adept) should recollect this Weapon, whichis conjoined with

the Point (Ṁ) (at the end), Moon (S), Fire (R), the Peak (KS), Fire (R),

Wind (Y),' and the sixth vowel (Ū), flaming from the soles of the feet up

to (the end of) the head. He should, (meditating in this way,) bend the

Cf. TS 9/319-320ab:
apādatalamīrṟdhānāntaṁ [kh: -mūrddhā ntaṁ; g: āpādutala-] smared [kh: smare] devaṁ ṭ1
vyāpakam | 319ab
uccāo hy astrarājaṣya kartavyaḥ śakiṣaṅyutaḥ [g: sakti-] |319 |
jvalapāvakasaṁkāśo dhyãyamãmo japet sadã |
TS 9/320cd: kuīcanaṁ añgulīnāṁ tu kartavyaṁ codanaṁ [kh: -na] tatā |
The following section (TS 9/321-325ab) is summarized in line 61cd:
jānuvḥ [kh: jānu] cākuñcayet [kh: cāīkucayet] paścād ū̃rakau [kh: -rúkau] tadanantarāt |
kaṭiguhyaṁ tato kuñcya nābhisthagrahaṇaṁ [k, g: -sthaṁ-] tataḥ l 321 11
brahmasthaṁ caiva viṣṇusthaṁ rudrasthaṁ [kh; -stha] bindumadhyagam [g: vidu-] |
nādasthaṁ [kh:

-stha] caiva [g: ceva] śaktiṣṭhaṁ [g: sa-] vyāpinīsthaṁ ca sarvataḥ l| 322 ||

viṣuvasthaṁ ca jãātavyaṁ visargastham anantaraṁ |
guruvaktṛagataṁ [kh -ta] jāātvā mucyate mocayati [k, kh, g: -yeti] ca || 323 11
evaṁ tyāgagatiṁ [g: -gatiḥ] jñātvā śaktyādhārasya suvrate |

Śśaktiḥ [all: śakti] sīkṣmaparā [kh: śū-] jyotsnā [kh: jyetstā] paradharmaprabodhanī | 324 1
taṁ jñānaṁ paramaṁ devi pāraṃparyakramāgatam [kh: pāraparya-] |

‘Then one should bend the knee, and after that (contract) the thighs. Then, having
contracted the genitals and the hips, then that which is locatedin the navalis laid hold of. Located
in Brahmā, locatedin Viṣṇu, located in Rudra, in the middle of the Point, and locatedin Sound,
locatedin Śakti, located in the Pervasive Onein all respects, one should know the one locatedin

the Equinox and that located in emission, and after that, once known the one in the teacher’s
mouth, he is freed and liberates (others). Having known the process of abandonment in this way,

(the yogi atains) the power of the Foundation of Power. O lady of good vows, (it is) subtle and
supreme light, that awakens the supreme Dharma. O goddess, that is the supreme knowledge that

has come down through the lineage (of teachers).” TS 9/321-325ab

Cf TS 9/325cd kathitaṁ sarahasyaṁ tu sadyonirvāṇadaṁ padam || Read with TS —nirvāṇadaṁ
for -nirvāṇakaṁ.
'! 60cdis derived from TS 9/319ab, 61abis a direct citation of TS 9/320cd, 61cdis a summary of
TS 9/321-325ab and 62ab
= TS 9/325cd.
' Read -marutṣaṣṭha- for -maruṣaṣṭha-.

CHAPTER THIRTY

fingers and then impel it (up) from the knees to the supreme wheel (in the
End of the Twelve), and bend (each finger as he passes) from wheel to
wheel. (Thus) this (Mantra) has been taught with (its) secret which,

supreme, (bestows) liberation (nirvāṇa) immediately. (60-62ab)

The Point (is at the end). The Moon is S, Fire is Ṛ, the Peak is KS, Fire

is R, Wind is Y, the sixth vowel U. In this way (we arrive at) SRKSṚYŪM.
The Brahmavidyā

3TJṃT=āīd āa’ldT̄I] T=: ṬCTTGTTHĪ II ṜR II

zaī úfcāāīa5-a straī āīṁ frzzr 1

athocyate brahmavidyā sadyaḥ pratyayadāyinī || 62l|
śivaḥ śrībhūtirājo’ yam asmabhyaṁ pratyapādayat |
saryveṣām eva bhūtānāṁ maraṇe samupasthite || 63 ||

yayā paṭhitayotkramya jīvo yāti nirañjanam |

We will now talk about the venerable Brahmavidyā, which

immediately instils conviction, and was taught to us by this auspicious
(śiva) and venerable Bhūtirāja.” By reciting (it) when the death of any
living being is immanent, the soul ascending (out of the body) goes to the
stainless (plane of liberation). (62cd-64ab)
He now illustrates its (capacity to) instil immediate conviction.

The Brahmavidyā Consisting of Parts (sakalā)

gaṁ at-ī 1| ē 1

EḻEkeEx|tezṭGĒITzḤ
Concerning the application of these Mantras, see above 19/10-14.
Concerning this Mantra, see above, 19/23cd ff.

i Are we to understand that the diction ayam – ‘this’ here implies that Bhūtirāja was still alive

when Abhinava wrote this?
“ Jayaratha refers to this verse and Bhūtirāja above in his commentary on 4/173ab. See note to

TĀv ad 1/9. Bhūtirjais idenúiied with Śrīkaṇṭha twice- firstin 1/9 and then again in 30/120cd-

121ab. Śrīkaṇṭhais the form of Śiva that lives on mount Kailasa and teaches the Śaivāgama. Thuṣ,
we could translate śivaḥ śrībhātirājo yam as Śiva, this venerable Bhūtirāja’ Abhinava most

probably meant a play on words here with ‘śiva that, as an adjective, means ‘auspicious’ or the

like, leaving open a second implied sense that he was also Śiva.

TANTRĀLOKA

ṬAṬCṬRIṬTRTT:āḤTITTTCN STIT AGTT I ēē I

yā jñānino ‘pi saṁpūrṇakṛtyasyāpi śrutā sarī|| 64 ||
prãṇādicchedajāṁ mṛtyuvyathāṁ sadyo vyapohati |
yām ākarṇya mahāmohavivaśo ʻpi kramād gataḥ || 65 ||

prabodhaṁ vaktr̥ṣāṁmukhyam abhyeti rabhasāt svayam ḷ

paramapadāt tvam ihāgāḥ sanātanas tvaṁ jahīhi dehāntam | 66 ||
pādāṁguṣṭhādi vibho nibandhanaṁ bandhanaṁ hy ugram |
āryāvākyam idaṁ pūrvaṁ bhuvanākhyaiḥ padair bhavet || 67 |I
Heard from (the lips of) a man of knowledge or one who has
completely fulfilled (all his) obligations immediately eliminates the
suffering of death, brought about by the severance of the vital breath and
the rest (of the body’s mental and sensorial functions). (64cd-65ab)
Hearing it, even if he is helplessly subject to great delusion, he
gradually awakens and becomes, spontaneously and with great force,

attentive to the one who is uttering (it). (65cd-66ab)
The Brahmavidyā

1) '“O pervasive Lord, come here from the supreme plane; '' You

are eternal. Abandon the extremity of the body (i.e. Your presence within

the body and death) (dehānta).' The tethering (of the soul) from the toes of
' Quoted above in TĀv ad 19/42cd-44ab.

“ This prayer is intoned when a person is dying, by his teacher or even just a fellow initiate, so
that he or she may be freed from the body and no longer retur. At first Lord Śiva is invoked to

enter the dying man’s body to accompany the dying man’s soul up and out through it. Fetters that
bind the soul extend in layers from the dying man’s feet up to the top of his head and beyond, to
the extremity of the subtle body. The dying man’s relative beseeches his soul to make the journey,

addressing him as the deity whose presence makes him divine and gives him the strength and
force of consciousness to rise up through the body, tearing asunder the fetters that bind him.

Alone, he is helples

' Sanderson 2005b: 126 n. 92. While giving the text, which comprises 12 verses in Āryā metre

exhorting the soul to rise from level to level within the body, Abhinava notes its variant readings
seen in the Niḻiśvāsa and the Mukuṭottara, both Saiddhāntika sources.

' The deity is requested to descend from transcendence and enter the body of the dying man.
' This prayer is intoned when a person is dying by his teacher or a fellow initiate to free the soul

from the body in such a way that it no longer retums. First of all, Lord Śiva is invoked to enter the

dying man’s body, to serve as his true identity as he rises through it. The fetters that bind the soul

extend in layers from the dying man’s feet up to the top of his head and beyond. The soul is
exhorted make the journey, addressing him as the deity, that rises and flows upwards with the

breath out of the body. He is reminded of his divine nature, and that as such, his true body is also

Deity. Coming to the end of the physical body, the soul as deity is freed from death.

In this context, the word dehānta has three meanings. all of which are relevant here.

Dehānta can mean the ‘end of the body’, that is, death. It can also mean ‘within the body’ or ‘the

extremity of the body°. Thus, by being told to abandon the dehānta, the soul, one with deity, is
exhorted to abandon death, its presence within the body, and come to the end of its ascent through
it, and so pass beyond its fetters.

CHAPTER THIRTY

the feet (up through the rest of the body) is indeed terrible bondage!”

(66cd-67ab)

This, the first declaration (vākya), set in Ārya metre, is made of (as

many) words (pada) as are said to be the worlds. (67cd)

TṬGRĪĪ STTIT STJAĪ THĪ Ṭeī īg |

ḺGIGIT-ḺÉVKŪKPVĪÉIḺPĪFSIVEZAAḤI

gulphānte jānugataṁ jatruṣṭhaṁ bandhanaṁ tathā meḍhre |
jahihi puram agryamadhyaṁ hr̥tpadmāt tvaṁ samuttiṣṭha || 68 |I
etāvadbhiḥ padair etad āryāvākyaṁ dvitīyakam |
2) ““Abandon the bond within the ankles, the one in the knees, (the

one) in the collar bone and in the genitals! Rise up from the lotus of the
heart up to the abode which is the centre at the (very) top!” (68)

This is the second declaration, set in Ārya metre; it is made of as

many words (as the preceding one). (69ab)

zaq aīa fī aaīaāī sfā shaīaā: 1 E 1
ēāīrafzzīzf=rzzzī

haṁsa hayagrīva vibho sadāśivas tvaṁ paro ‘si jīvākhyaḥ || 69 ||
raviṣomavahniṣaṅghaṭṭabindudeho hahaha samutkrāma |

tṛtīyamāryāvākyaṁ prākṣaṁkhyairekādhikaiḥ padaiḥ || 70 ||

3) “O Haṁsa! Hayagrīva! Pervasive Lord! You are Sadāśiva! You
are the Supreme, called the individual soul (jīva). Your body is the Point,

which is the union of Sun, Moon, and Fire. Ha! Ha! Ha! Come forth (from
the body)” (69cd-70ab)
This is the third declaration, set in Ārya metre, made of one more

word than the number of the previous one. (70cd)

ṜTTRIT-TIT: JHĪITTT JḺĀTJJATTAf |

īVRGÑTATĪĪTT: JITRTGTHṬGRVTHGT I 9g II

srrāraṁazārīr¢ aṁ xzṣāzrTafaī | 2 1|

fraaī a-ṁīazz mhsīzd =fī sat. |
The same holds good for the other declaratons also. There ar fourteen worlds.
Thatis, 15 worlds.

TANTRĀLOKA

haṁsamahāmantramayaḥ sanātanas tvaṁ śubhāśubhāpekṣī|
maṇḍalamadhyaniviṣṭaḥ śaktimahāsetukāraṇamahārthaḥ || 71 ||
kamalobhayaviniviṣṭaḥ prabodham āyāhi devatādeha |
āryāvākyaṃ idaṁ sārdhaṁ rudrasaṁkhyapaderitam || 72 ||
niḥśvāse tv apaśabdasya sthāne ‘sty upa iti dhvaniḥ |

4) “Made of the great Mantra Haṁsa, You are eternal, indifferent
to (your) auspicious and inauspicious (actions). Located in the centre of the

maṇḍala, you are the very precious (mahārtha)' cause of the great bridge
to (the attainment of spiritual) power. Dwelling in both lotuses,° awaken!

You whose body is Deity!” (71-72ab)
This declaration (in one) and a half (verses), set in Ārya metre, has
been uttered with the same number of words as are the Rudras (i.e. eleven).

In the Niḥśvāśāsana, (the preposition) upa is found in the place of the
preposition apa. (72cd-73ab)

3TTITT JT=: JaĪTTĪTT
TT || B
93 1
TJTTgJTTTĪĪĪTT TATTĪ: ṬTZ; |
ajñānāt tvaṁ baddhaḥ prabodhitottiṣṭha devāde! || 73 ||
etat pañcamam āryārdhavākyaṁ syāt saptabhiḥ padaiḥ |
5) ‘You are bound due to (your) ignorance. Awakened, arise! 0
first amongst the gods!” (73cd)
This is the fifth declaration, set in Ārya metre, (consisting) of half (a
verse,) made of seven words. (74ab)

T-JṬTTIT-dTTG TṬSS HTHTṬCTĪĪ: Tē: I A9., ||

vraja tālum āhvayāntaṁ hy auḍambaraghaṭṭitaṁ mahādvāram || 74 ||
prāpya prayāhi haṁho haṁho vā vāmadevapadam |
āryyāvākyam idaṁ ṣaṣṭhaṁ syāc caturdaśabhiḥ padaiḥ || 75 II

ārṭha is also the name of ultimate reality according to the Krama system of which

ja was one of Abhinava’s teachers.

The meaning is unclear to me. Possibly, these two lotuses may be HAṀ and SA of the exhaled
and inhaled breath, respectively. Together they are the soul – haṣa.
' The reading is therefore subhāśubhopekṣī for Śubhāśubhāpekṣī, which means ‘you are

indifferent to (your) auspicious and inauspicious (actions). Without this correction, the meaning

of śubhāśubhāpekṣī is, on the contrary. ‘you are dependent on (your) auspicious and inauspicious
(actions) and s0 are bound by your Karma. See Jayaratha’s commentary.

CHAPTER THIRTY

6) “Go to the palate (to be heard)' and, attaining the great door
made of udumbara wood, calling out “ho! hollol”'® (haṅho haho), go
to Vāmadeva’s abode!”” (74cd-75ab)
This, the sixth declaration, set i
fourteen words. (75cd)

Ārya metre, (is fashioned) with

JẼĀT ṬŪTTṀT̄] TI HIIRJĪIT|

ē āa fzi flrav vraīaīmg 1| vē 1

JYGĪTTĪTTCTS
TTT ṜFATHATITGT 1 SS1
granthīśvara paramātman śānta mahātālurandhram āsādya |
utkrama he deheśvara! nirañjanaṁ śivapadaṁ prayāhy āśu || 76 ||

āryāvākyaṁ saptama syāt tac caturdaśabhiḥ padaiḥ |

prabhañjanas tvam ity evaṁ pātṭho niḥśvāsaśāsane || 7 ||
7) “Lord of the Knots! Supreme Self! Tranquil one! Attaining the
great cavity of the palate, come forth, O lord of the body! Go quickly to

Śiva’s stainless abode!” (76)

This is the seventh declaration, set in Ārya metre, (consisting of)
fourteen words. The reading found in the Niḥśvāsaśāsana īs ‘you are

breath. (77)

TIFT ṬeṬTTĪ JIĪTṬTĪ gHTRT |

ākramya madhyamārgaṁ prāṇāpānau samāhṛtya |
dharmādharmau tyaktvā nārāyaṇa yāhi śāntāntam || 78 II
āryāvākyam idaṁ proktam aṣṭamaṁ navabhiḥ padaiḥ |
8) “Having entered the Middle Path, retracted the exhaled and
inhaled breath and abandoned Dharma and Adharma, go, O Nārāyaṇa, to
the extremity of the Tranquil One!” (78)

'Read tālum āhvayāntaṁ for tālus āhvayāntaṁ.

The Ficus glomerata.

'“ Monier-Williams: Hartho is an indeclinable vocative particle corresponding to ‘ho!’ or ‘hollo!”

that according to some also expresses haughtiness or contempt. However, in language of Sanskrit
drama it is a form of address used by equals to each other.
“Açcording to Jayaratha, the reading accepted by the Niḥśvāsa was he utkrama he deheśa
prabhañjanas tvam, ec., for utkrama he deheśvara nirañjanam, etc.
.2 The reading in the Niḥśvāsa is prabhañjans tam instead of nirañjanam. The meaning in that
case is: “you are breath; go quickly to Śiva’s abode!” Unfortunately, the Brahmāyidyā is not
found in the extant Niḥśvāsa (which is also spelt Niśvāsa).

TANTRĀLOKA

This is said to be the eighth declaration, set in Ārya metre, (and it
is) made with nine words. (79ab)

stēṝz & ēraīa |
TGTGTTÑGATĪTĀTTF
JĪRHT] ICo |
arā fiftrsfṁṝ ērēraṁf
fterr 1

vḸrā 3 naTR̥gīzīt=g 1 ¢2 1

he brahman! he viṣṇo! he rudra! śivo ‘si vāsudevas tvam || 79 ||
agnīṣomasanātanamr̥tpiṇḍaṁ
jahi hi he mahākāśa! |
etad bhuvanasaṁkhyātair āryyāvākyaṁ prakīrtitam || 80 |
sanātma tripiṇḍam iti mahākośam iti sthitam |

padatrayaṁ tu niḥśvãsamukuṭottarakādiṣu || 81 I|

9) “0 Brahmā! O Viṣṇu! O Rudra! You are Śiva! You are
Vasudeva! O great sky! Abandon indeed the primeval body of earth
(fashioned from) Fire and Soma.” (79cd-80ab)
This declaration, set in Ārya metre, is said to be made of (fourteen

words, as is) the number of worlds. In the Niḥśvāsa, Mukuṭottaratantra and
elsewhere (instead of the words sanātana (primeval), mṛtpiṇḍa (body of
earth) and mahākāśa (great sky), the three words are sanātma (individual

existence), tripiṇḍa (triple body), and mahākośa (great container),
(respectively). (80cd-81)

E|ZIIEAEGĀ ECHTCAEEEZĪṬḶĀĀI

aṁguṣṭhamātram amalam āvaraṇaṁ jahi hi he mahāsiūkṣma. |
āryyāvākyam idaṁ ṣaḍbhiḥ padair daśamam ucyate || 82 ||
alaṁ avir iti sūkṣmaṁ cety evaṁ śrīmukuṭottare |
10) “O greatly subtle one (nahāsūkma)! Abandon, this stainless

(amala) covering which is just (the size) of a thumb!” (82ab)

' So instead of ‘O great sky! Abandon this body of earth, made of fire, of ŚSoma and of the

Eterna’ʼ, the variant means ‘Abandon the great container, the triple body. which is made of Fire,

Soma and (individual) existence.”
' This is the standard size according to the Upaniṣads of the individual Self that, as here, is

somewhat ambiguously both the fettered soul and so subject to karman and death, and yet is also

unlimited and immortal. So, it is said that: ‘a Person of the measure ofa thumb stands in the midst
of oneself (ātman). . . A Person of the measure of a thumb, like a light without smoke, Lord of
what has been and what is to be, He alone is today, and tomorrow too.’ (Kathopaniṣad 4/12-13).
Again: a person of the measure of a thumb is the inner soul (antarātman), ever seated in the heart

of creatures. He is framed by the heart. by the thought, by the mind, they who know that become

CHAPTER THIRTY

This declaration, set in Ārya metre, made of six words, is said to be
the tenth. In the venerable Mukuṭottara (the reading is) twice alaṁ (instead
of amalam) (i.e. ‘enough! enough!) and ‘sūkṣmamʼ (for mahāsūkṣma) (i.e
‘subtle’). (82cd-83ab)

ṬRTIT ṬGTTTÑGṬSEgRTĀT āTS: I ¢ 1I

3nāmr
yaārvī 7rr- TÑĪTASĪ TTTTTĀTTT] |
TJTATGYTIŚ TTRTTĪITHJTṬTT I Z 1I
puruṣas tvaṁ prakṛtimayair baddho haṅkāratantunā bandhaiḥ || 83 ||
abhavābhava! niṭyodita! paramātmaṁṅs tyaja sarāgam adhvānam |
etat trayodaśapadaṁ syād āryāvākyam uttamam || 84 ||
11) “You are the soul bound by (all things,) made of Nature and by
the thread of ego. Neither phenomenal existence nor its absence!
Perpetually present (nityodita) O supreme Self! Abandon the path (sullied)
with attachment (rāga)” (83cd-84ab)
This excellent declaration, set in Ārya metre, consists of thirteen
words. (84cd)

3TāĪTTFATTKTÇ 3IGJ TGTS TT I ¢U, I
hrīṁhīṁmantraśarīram avilambam āśu tvam ehi dehāntam 1
āryārdhavākyam etat syād dvādaśaṁ ṣaṭpadaṁ param l| 85 ||
12) “Go quickly without delay to the end of the body, which has as
(its) body the Mantras HRIṀ and HŪM!” (85ab)
This declaration in half (a verse), set in Ārya metre, that follows
after, is the twelfth, and consists of six words. (85cd)

jḻbukEEĀCSĪE Ā Ec EaRṭist:Ḥ

tad idaṁ guṇabhũtamayaṁ tyaja sva ṣāṭkośikaṁ piṇḍam |

immortal. (Śvetāśvataropaniṣad 3115) In the following reference, it is clcar that this is the
fetered soul.lts size implies its confincd limited state, that in the mantra here is portrayed as a
covering. ‘Whoever has qualiies (guṇa distinctions) is the doer of deeds that bring recompense
And of such action surely he experiences the consequence. Undergoing all forms, characterized by
the three Qualiies. trading the three paths, the individual soul roams about according to its deeds
(karman). He is the measure of a thumb, of sun-lke appearance when coupled with conception
(sahkalpa) and egoism (ahaūkāra). (ibid. 5/7-8) traslation by Hume.
So instead of ‘O greatly subtle one (mahāṣūkma) Abandon, this stainless (amala) covering
which is just (the size) of a thumb! the meaning is ‘Enough! enough! Abandon the subtle
covering which is just (the size) of a thumb!”

TANTRĀLOKA

syāt trayodaśam āryārdhaṁ padaiḥ saptabhir īdr̥śam || 86 ||
13) “O myself! Abandon this body with six sheaths (kośa) made of

the (three) qualities (guṇa) and gross elements!” (86ab)

Such is the thirteenth declaration, in half (a verse,) set in Ārya

metre, (fashioned) with seven words. (86cd)

š JTd JTṬRT] JTITdĪ Trēī2ē, |

aīat=: ũŪĀTTTTH I| ¢ 9 I
mā dehaṁ bhūtamayaṁ pragṛhyatāṁ śāśvataṁ mahādeham |
āryārdhavākyaṁ tāvadbhiḥ padair etac caturdaśam || 87 I|
14) ṅo (more) a body made of gross elements! Assume the great
eternal body!” (87ab)
This declaration in half (a verse,) set in Ārya metre, made of as

many words (as the previous one), is the fourteenth. (87cd)

maṇḍalam amalam anantaṁ tridhā sthitaṁ gaccha bhittvaitat |
āryārdhavākyam aṣṭābhiḥ padaiḥ pañcadaśaṁ tv idam || 88 I|

15) “Go to the stainless maṇḍala which, without end, is threefold,
having smashed this one (to pieces)!” (88ab)
This declaration in half (a verse,) set in ÁĀrya metre, made of eight

words, is the fifteenth. (88cd)

sakaleyaṁ brahmavidyā syāt pañcadaśabhiḥ sphuṭaiḥ |
vākyaiḥ pañcākṣarais tv
niṣkalā parikīrtyate || 89 ||
prativākyaṁ yayādyantayojitā paripathyate |

This is the Brahmavidyā, consisting of parts (sakalā) made of fifteen

clear declarations. We will (now) talk of this (same Brahmavidyā) without
parts (niṣkalā), (fashioned) with five syllables, with which each declaration

is conjoined at the beginning and at the end. (89-90ab)

“ See also above, 19/23cd-26ab and Jayaratha’s comment. These five syllables are given in the
following verse (90cd-91ab). They are: 1) OṀ 2) HRIM 3) HŪM 4) PHREṀ and 5)

RHRKṢMLVYŪM.

CHAPTER THIRTY

(As many) words as ‘are said to be the worldsʼ, that is, fourteen. ‘As
many” (words (as the preceding one)), that is, just fourteen. “One more than
the number of the previous one’, that is, fifteen. ‘The same number of words
as are the Rudras’ʼ, that is, eleven. (In the Niḥśvāśāsana (the preposition))
‘upa’ (is found in place of the preposition apa). Thus, the reading here (means,)
‘you are indifferent to the auspicious and inauspicious (śubhāśubhopekṣī)
(instead of ‘you are dependent on (your) auspicious and inauspicious (actions)

The (variant reading) in the Niḥśvāsana means, ‘come forth, O lord of

the body, you are breath, go quickly (to Śiva’s abode!)ʼ. The division of the

words is the same (in both readings). (He is told that “once) ‘conjoined
togetherʼ, (the exhaled and inhaled breath go to the extremity of the Tranquil
One”) as the impetus (to attain the object of his endeavour) (iṣṭi) is (focused
together) as one. ‘Made of (as many words as is) the number of the worldsʼ,

that is, fourteen. ‘The body of earth of fire, Soma and the Eternal’ is just one

(compound) word. (This) ‘declaration, set in Ārya metreʼ, that is to say, the
ninth one. In the Niḥśvāsana and elsewhere, there are ‘three words’ʼ, and the

reading (there means,) ‘Abandon the great container, the triple body, which is
made of Fire, Soma and (individual) existence.’ In this way, there are fifteen
words.' “(This) declaration, set in Ārya metreʼ, that is, to say half of one.

‘“Twice’ means two times. Thus the (variant) reading (means,) ‘“Enough!
enough! Abandon the subtle covering which is just (the size) of a thumb!’.

‘(This) declaration, set in Ārya metreʼ, that is to say the eleventh. ‘Made of

that manyʼ’ (words (as the previous one)), that is, seven. ‘Made of fifteen

declarationsʼ, that is twelve (lines in) Ārya metre, along with (three) half
(lines).

The Brahmavidyā Without Parts

He (now) teaches the Brahmavidyā without parts.

TIT Hīāī dēēhrōō īṬāTJ TaTHa: || Q |

tāro māyā vedakalo mātrṛtāro navātmakaḥ || 90 ||
iti pañcākṣarāṇi syuḥ proktavyāptyanusārataḥ |

The Saviour (OṀ), Māyā (HṚĪṀ), the Quadruple Energy (HŪṀ),
the Saviour of the Mothers (PHREM) and Navātmā (RHṚKṢMḶ_VYŪM) –

these are the five syllables (which are applied) in accord with the (extent of
their) stated pervasion. (90cd-91ab)

“6 The expression ‘tripinda’ (‘triple body°) should not be considercd to be a single word scparated
from the preceding agniṣomasanātma (‘iire, Soma and the EÉtemal by natur) If it were to be, the
verse would consist of fifteen words, not fourteen, as it should be.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The Quadruple Energy’ (is HŪM). ‘The Saviour of the Mothers’ is
PHREM. ‘Navātmā’ is made of the (following) letters (in reverse order): the

Point (M), the Vital Breath (Ū), the Staff (Y), the Navel (V), the Buttocks (L),
the Left Breast (M), the Throat (KS), the Left Shoulder (R), and the Ornament

of the Left Ear (H).'“ Moreover, as it is possible to understand for oneself the

twelve and a half (verses and fifteen) statements set in Ārya metre, the matter
and nature of what was stated before concerning the reflection thereon has not
been explained word for word for fear of making the book too lengthy. So the
learned should not be displeased (and grumble about that).

The Mantras for the Scale Initiation
The Mantra for Fetching the Sacrificial Animal

TT JTTTÑSTĪSĪTTTĀÑ

q2 1

binduprāṇāmṛtajalaṁ marutṣaṣṭhasvarānvitam || 91 ||

etena śaktyuccārasthabījenālabhyate paśuḥ |
kṛtadīkṣāvidhiḥ pūrvaṁ brahmaghno ‘pi viśuddhyati || 92 ||
The Point (M), the Vital Breath (H), Nectar (S), Water (V), Wind
(Y), along with the sixth vowel (Ū) – with this seed syllable, present within
(the upward flow of) the utterance Power (śaktyuccārastha), (the sacrificial)

animal is fetched (for the sacrifice). One (for whom) the rite of initiation

has been performed, even if he has murdered a Brahmin, is purified (in this

way). (91cd-92)

‘The Point’ is the Void (M), ‘the Vital Breath’is H, ‘Nectar’ is S,

‘Waterʼ is V, ‘Wind’ is Y and ‘the sixth vowel’ is Ū. Thus (making)

HSVYŪM.

A Mantra to Paralyze Śākinī

GTG- ṬGTIfS: āa: TṬGTTRITTĪ |
āī vāã: fqvēī āg sīgŪo'arz <3 1

laghutvena tulāśuddhiḥ sadyaḥ pratyayakāriṇī |
tāraḥ śamarayaiḥ piṇḍo natiśca caturarṇakam || 93 ||
' This makes HRKSMLVYŪM. However, thisis one letter short (i.. the initial ‘R’ ). Navātman
is clearly said above in 30/1 lcd-12ab to be RHRKṢMLVYŪṀ.
' The mantra is therefore HSVYŪM.

CHAPTER THIRTY

śākinīstobhanaṁ marma hr̥dayaṁ jīvitaṁ tv idam ḷ
The Saviour (OM), the group (pinḍa) (formed) with (the letters) ,

M, R, and Y, (along with vowel Ū) and salutation (NAMAH) (constitute)
the four syllabled (Mantra).™ The purification (brought about by the
Initiation of the) Scales (tulāśuddhi) instils immediate conviction (that it has

been effective),”™ by (perceiving that he who has received it loses weight

and so) is light. This (Mantra) paralyzes the Śākinīs; it is the weak spot

(marman) (of the body), the heart, and life (itself). (93-94ab)

‘(The letters) , M, RṚ, and Yʼ are the Genitals (Ś). Buttocks (M), the
StaffI and Left Shoulder (Y) (of the goddess Mālinī), thus (making) SMṚYUM.

Bhairava’s Heart Mantra

TRJṬITITTTITTTGṬPTGTTHṢGĒĪ I Ṝ I
JTT-ā-THIGHTÑ-KATR HTRT] |
ca ‘īTāaã ũdũaTẼṀG-TII RU,I

saṣṭhaprāṇatrikūṭoráhvabāhu mśūlākhyabindubhiḥ || 94 ||
anackanāsādhovaktracandrakhaṇḍaiś ca maṇḍitam |

hṛdayaṁ bhairavākhyaṁ tu sarvasaṁhãrakãārakam || 95 l|
(The Mantra consisting) of the sixth (vowel Ū), the Vital Breath (H),
the Triple Peak (KS), the Raised Arm (JH), the Trident (AU), and the Point
adorned with Unstruck Sound (anacka) (i.e. Nāda), the Nose (i.e. Śakti),

and the Fragment of the Moon (candrakhaṇḍa) that faces downwards (i.e.
Ardhacandra), is the Heart, called ‘Bhairava’, that destroys all things.
(94cd-95)
'" Ṭhe mantra is therefore OM ŚMṚYŪṀ NAMAḤ.

'" Iṇ ṭhat case union occurs by force or violence (haṭhataḥ). See above, 28/371.
'2 Concerning marmans, see above, note 20.17.
’ Quoted above in TĀv ad 20/14cd-15ab. See Chapter Twenty concerning the Initiation of the
Scales, which is effected with the Mantra ŚMRYŪṀ.
..Cf above 30/32-33ab for a different form of this mantra. Also, see note to 16/158-163ab.
” The mantra is HKSJHŪAUM plus Sound (nāda) etc. The Bhairava Hṛdaya is taught in the
Tantrasadbhāva. There we read:
16b] cavargasya caturthaṁ (jha) tu ārāḍhanṁ [kh: -dha] kaṣasaṁjñake (ka ṣa) | 169 11

tasyādhastād [k, kh, g: -dhastā] nyaset prāṇaṁ (ha) vāmabhūṣaṇasaṁyutam (ū̃) |
vāmajaṁghāsamopetaṁ (au) ardhacandraśikhānvitam || 170 Il

41a kh] nādaśakúisamopetaṁ bhairayaṁ hr̥dayaṁ param |

‘The fourth (letter) (JH) of the class of cerebrals is mounted onto the one called KAĀṢA
(KṢ). Below it, one should place the vital breath (H) conjoined with the ornament of the left (ear)
(Ū). The supreme (Mantra) which is Bhairava’s Heart possesses the left shank (AU), and the crest
which is the Half-moon and the power of Sound.” TS 3/169cd-171ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The sixth’ (vowel) is Ū, ‘the Vital Breath’ is H, ‘the Triple Peakʼ is
KS, ‘the Raised Armʼ is JH, ‘the Trident’ is AU, ‘the Point’ is the Void (Ṁ),
‘Unstruck Sound (anacka) is Sound (nāda). `The Nose’ is Power (śakti), and

‘the Fragment of the Moon (candrakhaṇḍa) that faces downwards’ is the
Half-Moon (ardhacandra), thus (making) HKṢIHŪAUM.

things.

He illustrates (the Mantra’s) condition as that which withdraws all

Ej|EeEEEEEJTEEGIEITIĒṬITḤI

TIĪF-N: TITTHIT TERT I Qē II

agnimaṇḍalamadhyasthabhairavānalatāpitāḥ |
vaśam āyānti śākinyaḥ sthānam etena ced dahet || 96 ||
visarjayet tāḥ prathamam anyathā cchidrayanti tāḥ |

In the middle of a circle (maṇḍala) of Fire, heated by Bhairava’s
fire, the Śakinīs come under (one’s) control, if one burns the place (in

which this takes place) by means of this (Mantra).”’ One should, first of all,

(release and) dismiss them (immediately), otherwise they make cracks (in

the vital points of body). (96-97ab)

The form of the Bhairava Hṛdaya taught here is JHKṢHŪAUṀ. The text states clearly
that the H is ‘below’ KṢ. This is how a H following KṢ would be written in the conjunct
kūṭākṣara. There can be n0 doubt about the sequence. It seems, therefore, that Jayaratha is
mistaken, or a scribal error has occurred. The Mantra is clearly the same. Moreover, the following
three lines are drawn from the Tantrasadbhāva. Sce note 30,175.
'l Ṣee above, 30/30-32ab for another form of Bhairava’s Heart mantra.
'” Iṇ that case, one has a union through force or through violence (ha¢hataḥ). See above 28/371.
'’96-97ab is a condensed paraphrase of TS 16/329cd-334, which reads as follows:
bhairavaṁ hr̥dayaṁ devi jagatsaṁhārakārakam ||329 l| [g: ?]
tena yuktā sadā devyāḥ kiidyante kinnayonayaḥ |
dahyante [g: ?] patate sśīghraṁ [g: sīghraṁ] prāṇaṁ muṁcyanti bhūriṣaḥ | 330 |1
vaśam āyanty asaṁdehāt [g: vasa-;k, g:

-yāntasaṁdehā] taptā bhairavavahninā|

drṣṭvā [k, g: dṛṣṭā] balāsamūhaṁ [kh: vālā-] tu hṛdayena tu bhāvayet || 331 ||

vahnimaṇḍalamadhyasthaṁ [k, g: -maṇḍalaṁ-] bhairavānalatāpitam [g: bhaira 2] |
116b g] samūhaṁ [k: -hāṁ] bhāvayed evaṁ [k: -devaṁ] niruddhaṁ hṛdayena u l 332 || [g: ?]

tatra śākinya āgacchanti na saṁśayaḥ | [g: ?]
saṁbhāvayanti [k, g: -yati] tai vīram [kh: vīryam] akāryaṁ tu tvayā kr̥tam || 333 || [g: ?]
visarjayet tato mantrī tatkṣaṇān naivaṁ [g: -va] dhārayet|

anyathā cchidrayanty evaṁ sādhakaṁ kupitātmanaḥ || 334 |
‘O goddess, Bhairava’s Heart destroys the universe. Yoked with that, the goddesses are

always wet, and their genitals are wet (with arousal). they burn up (with passion). Quickly they

fall (to the ground), and they release (their) breath repeatedly. Without a doubt, they come under

(one’s) control, heated by Bhairava’s fire. Once seen the crowd of (these) powerful (witches.)
contemplate them with the Heart (mantra). In the middle of a circle (maṇḍala) of Fire, heated by
Bhairava’s fire, contemplate the crowd (of Śākinīṣ,) blocked in this way by (the mantra of

Bhairava’s) Heart. Without a doubt, however many they may be, the Śākinīs (all) gather there and
suggest to the adept (vīra): “you have done what should not be done". The one who recites the

mantra should dismiss them at that very moment, and not maintain (their company) in this way.

CHAPTER THIRTY
(The Śakinīs) ‘come under (one’s) control’ means that they bring

about violent union (with the Yoginīs). ‘First of all’ means (immediately) after

union (with the Yoginī) has taken place.

iJEGTEEIĀAUĒCḶJFIEGEE ṀrJṬKICN

7 ēz aqē q |

ayaī

hrīrḥ kĩīṁ vleṁ kleṁ ebhir varṇair dvādaśasvarabhūṣitaiḥ || 97 ||
priyamelāpanaṁ nāma hṛdayaṁ sampuṭaṁ japet |
pratyekam athavā dvābhyāṁ sarvair vā vidhir uttamaḥ l| 98 II
(Bhairava’s) Heart (Mantra) that brings about pleasing union
(priyamelāpana) (with the Yoginīs) should be recited repeatedly,
encapsulated by syllables HRIMṀ, KLIṀ, VLEMṀ, KLEM, adorned with the
twelve vowels. It may be (recited) with each (individually) or with two (at a
time), or else with all (of them together). This is the most excellent

procedure.” (96-98)

‘Thesesyllables’ are the seed syllables of Māyā (HRĪṀ) and the King
of Passion (KLIM), and the Left Breast (L) and the Right Knee (E) conjoined
with the Point (M), along with the Throat (V) and the First (Row of) Teeth (K).

(They may be (recited)) ‘each (individually)’ thus: KLAM VLAṀ KLAṀ
KRĪM KLAṀ VLAṀ KLAM. ʻTwo (at a time) thus: VLĀṀ KLĀṀ HRĪṀ
KLĪṀ VLĀṀ KLĀṀ and HṚIṀ KLIṀ VLIṀ KLIṀ HRĪṀ KLIṀ VLEṀ
KLEM KLIṀ VLIṀ KLIṀ HRIM. One should understand (their form) when
they are adorned with the other vowels also (for oneself).

regard).

He (now) presents (what) the teacher and scripture (say) here (in this

T@THGRATI: JTT-TTTTHTIGĪ |
3q 3. JTRTE T TT ēfIT;: ṢFTT || 8 I
tulāmelakayāgaḥ śrītantrasadbhāvaśāsane |
ya uktaḥ śambhunāthena sa mayā darśitaḥ kramāt || 99 |I
I have (thus) revealed in due order (the mantras required for the)

sacrifice'™™ of the balance (that eliminates weight) and (for) the union (with

Otherwise, angered as they are, they make cracks in (the vital points in the body of) the adept.
(TS 16/329cd-334)

'" The printed text of Jayaratha’s commentary here appears to be corrupt. I cannot understand it.

See above, 28/371.

' Read -yāgaḥ for -yogah. These mantras are taught in verses 91cd to 98.

TANTRĀLOKA

the Śākinīs, given) in the Tantrasadbhāva, that was revealed (to me) by

Śambhunātha. (99)

The Initiation Taught in the Śrīṣantati

ra7 fīāfrr

- 1
ĠTaTGITECTIT
T TATRTTITĀTḤ I g00 1|

RATĪ GIGṀTTITTTTTJTĪTTTHĪTETT
I 2 02 1

atha vittavihnānāṁ prapannānāṁ ca tattvataḥ |
deśakālādidoṣeṇa na tathādhyavasāyinām || 100 ||
prakartavyā yathā dīkṣā śrīṣantatyāgamoditā |

kathyate hāṭakeśānapātālādhipacoditā || 101 I|

I will (now) teach how the initiation should be performed as
enjoined by Hatakeśāna, lord of the netherworlds, in the

Śrīsantatyāgama, for those who do not have money but are truly devoted,
and those who, because of the defect of space and time etc., do not
understand (things) in this way (as they truly are). (100-101)

He says that:
The Three Vidyās

sTraāī: ad ūīrdraīṣgdgy ŪīaTazṝaī: I| 20 1

rṁaqr rtsfriīrīā |

ṀTaTA] āITT #aōāī || g o;; I
śrīnātha ārya bhagavann etat tritayaṁ hi kanda ādhāre |
varuṇo macchando bhagadatta iti trayam idaṁ hrṛdaye || 102 ||
dharmādivargasaṁjñāś catvāraḥ kaṇṭhadeśagāḥ pūjyāḥ |

! Thiṣ Initiation of the Scales is taught in chapter 9 of the Tantrasadbhāva. Conceing this

initiation, see above, chapter 20. Abhinava himself tells us that the passage here from 30/93 to 98
is drawn from the Tantrasadbhāva.

' Śṛīṣantatyāgama can mean ‘the scriptures of the Śrīsantati’ or ‘the tradition of the Śrsantati’ or

‘the venerable Āgama (called) Santati. Abhinava refers to the Śrīsantati several times as a Śaiva
school, and twice as founded by a certain Śrīnātha. Butin this case, as the speakeris a deity, we

can assume that a scripture is meant. However, it may be called ‘Santati’, but it is more like to be
the name of the school to which it belongs.

CHAPTER THIRTY

hrīṁhśrīṁpūrvāḥ sarve sambodhajuṣaś ca pādaśabdāntāḥ l| 103 II

mūrdáhatale vidyātrayam uktaṁ bhāvy atha mano ‘bhiyogena |
kuṣumair ānandair vā bhāvanayā vāpi kevalayā || 104 |

1) Śrīnātha, Ārya and Bhagavān - these three (teachers) are

(worshipped) in the foundation within the bulb. 2) The three (teachers),
Varuṇa, Macchanda and Bhagadatta (should be worshipped) in the heart.
3) The four named Dharma and the rest of the group should be worshipped
as present in the throat. (The names of) all these (should be) preceded by

(the Mantras) HRĪṀ and ŚRĪM, declined in the vocative and followed by
the word pāda. 4) The three Vidyās taught before or those that will be
(explained further ahead' should be worshipped) on the surface of the
head. Now, (they should all be worshipped) by applying the mind with

flowers, joyous (drinks,) or just with the meditative imagination (bhāvanā)
alone. (102-104)

‘The four named Dharma and the rest of the groupʼ. The four,

Dharma, wealth (artha), passion (kāma) and liberation, are the group (of the
four aims of life. Thus (these teachers are called) Dharmanātha, Arthanātha,

Kāmanātha and Mokṣanātha in the vocative case, which serves for invocation.

The_sequence (of Mantras) begins with HRĪM ŚRĪṀ, ŚRĪṄĀTHAPĀDA

(HRĪṀ ŚRĪṀ ĀRYAPĀDA) etc. (The three Vidyās) ‘taught before’ are Parā,

Aparā etc. ‘Those which we will be’ explained (further ahead are three other
ones). (The word) ‘now’ serves to indicate an option. (They should all be
worshipped) ‘by applying the mind’, that is to say with stable (unwavering)

' Sanderson (2005b 126-127) characterizes these 3 Vidyās as ‘for use in a radically simplified
form of Kaula initiation and for recitation by initiates thereafter as a substitute for external

worship. Though Śākta in character, in that they invoke the Goddess, nothing connects them
especially with the Krama. More probably they belonged to the related tradition of the
Śrīmāthasaṁsthāna associated by Abhiṅavagupta with Bhūtirāja’s son.’ (See below, 37/60) The

reasons for this surmise are circumstantial. 1) The first Nātha installed in this initiation is Śrīnātha,
which accords with the name of the order. 2) Abhinava introduces this topic sayin,

śrīsatatyāgamoditā . . . hāṭakeśānapātālādhipa-coḍītā. According to Sanderson, a possible
meaning could be: ‘which has been proclaimed in the scripture Śrīsaṁtati, taught by Hāṭakeśvara,

the Lord of the Subterranean Paradises.' But as no such scripture is known or mentioned
elsewhere, a preferable translation could be: ‘which has been proclaimed in the scriptural tradition

of the Śrīṅātha order, taught by Hāṭakeśvara, the Lord of the Subterranean Paradises.’ Either way,
Abhinava is certainly drawing from a text.
If ṭhis is correct and these Vidyās are from the Śrīsantāna, it would support the view that

it was a Śākta Kaula tradition. But the references to it are so few that it is hard to understand in

what way it was, as it is said to be, dualist-cum-nondualist, that is, that reality is one in the state of

withdrawal and many in that of emanation. Sanderson suggests that one possible representation of
this system is found in Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s commentary (vṛtti) on the Mataṅgapārameśvara
(Vidyāpāda p. 41) (Sanderson 2005b 128 n. 95 and Sanderson 1992, 307-8 n 91).

' According to Jayaratha, these are the mantras of Parā, Parāparā and Aparā. If that is correct,

which is far from certain in the absence of an authoritative citation, then the Śrīsantati is a Trika

or closely related to it. Further ahead, Abhinava presents three Vidyās he leamt from
. I Jayaratha has understood correctly, Abhinava leaves the option open of choosing the

Trika triad of Vidyās or this one.
' See below, 30/107 ff.

TANTRĀLOKA

attention (anusandhāna). ‘Joyous (drinks)” are wine (surā) and the like, that

bring that about (joy).

TīṜR̥TTTTA ĠĀTaT #Td TRITTTTHT | Qo. 1|

guruṇā tattvavidā kila Śiṣyo yadi mokṣamātrakṛtahṛdayaḥ |
mokṣaikadānacaturā dīkṣā seyaṁ paropaniṣaduktā || 105 ||
etad dīkṣādīkṣita etad vidyātrayaṁ smaran hṛdaye |
bāhyārcādi vinaiva hi vrajati paraṁ dhāma dehānte || 106 ||

If the disciple has set his heart solely on liberation, this is the
iniṭiation that a teacher who (profoundly) knows reality (needs to
administer) – capable by itself of dispensing liberation, it is said to be the

supreme secret. (105)
He who has been initiated with this initiation, recollecting these

three Vidyās'™in (his) heart, goes when the body comes to an end to the

supreme abode, even without performing the external rites of worship etc.
(106)

By (saying) ‘the supreme abode’, it is established that the area (of
s to liberation.
application) of this (initiation) is one who
He (now) presents the three Vidyās.

The First Vidyā

aṝa |

TRJWG ÑāĪTITJTTĀĪTTTTTĪK
||Ṟ09 1|
praṇavo māyā bindur varṇatrayam āditaḥ kuryāt |
padapañcakasya saṁbodhanayuktasyāgnidayitānte || 107 ||

(To form the first Vidyā,) one should place the three syllables

Praṇava (OṀ), Māyā (HṚRĪṀ) and the Point (HŪM) at the beginning of the
five words with a vocative (case ending) and, at the end, the Beloved of the
Fire (SVĀHĀ). (107)

‘Praṇava’ is OM. “Māyā’ is HRĪṀ' and ‘the Point’ has four

energies, and so is HŪM. ‘The Beloved of the Fireʼ is SVĀHĀ.

“ Preṣeṉted here in verses 107 to 120ab.
” Cf. ad 30/|16a māyāraṇaṁ hrīṁ. Śāradātilaka 6) -40 _Ssaṁpradāyikās īu
praṇavamāyālakṣmīpañcākṣarī. . . prayogas tu oṁ hrh śrī namaḥ ś

CHAPTER THIRTY
He presents the five words.

ftzaraṝ+ ācq vīaaaarṁxēērāttṛ |

gṃtrarardīaz̄ ahedā a fnēīd I g0¢ 1

EjEEĀNEEFTEEḺĪGIĪGTJĀET

TJTGTTTĀTRIṬĪRĪTI TḺṬJĒT I 2° l

siddhasādhani tatpūrvaṁ śabdabrahmasvarūpiṇi |
samastabandhaśabdena sahitaṁ ca nikṛntani ll 108 II
bodhani śivasadbhāvajananyāmantritaṁ ca tat |
pañcāṣṭarandhratryaṣṭārṇakrameṇa padapañcakam || 109 I|
khapañcārṇā parabrahmavidyeyaṁ mokṣadā śivā |
comes)

SIDDHASĀDHANI comes at the beginning of that (Vidyā), (then
ŚABDABRAHMASVARŪPIṆI
along
with
the
word

SAMASTABANDHA and NIKṚNTANI. (Then comes) BODHANI invoked
(in the vocative with) ŚIVASADBHĀVAJANANI. (These) five words

consist of five, eight, nine, three, and eight syllables, respectively. This is the
(first) Vidyā, which is that of the supreme Brahman, consisting of fifty
syllables that, benevolent (śivā), bestows liberation. (108-110ab)
1) He (now) also states the division of the syllables (that make up) the

five words, saying they consist of ‘five’ etc. (syllables, respectively). The ‘fifty
syllablesʼ (of the first Vidyā) are thus:

OM

HRĪM

ŚABDBRAHMASVARŪPIṆI

SIDDHASĀDHANI
OM

SAMASTABANDHANIKR̥NTANI OṀ HṚĪṀ HŪṀ BODHANI OṀ HRĪṀ

HŪṀ ŚIVASADBHĀVAJANANI SVĀHĀ.

The Second Vidyā

3ITTĪTS= Iāg TāTTIRJTGÑ; I| 220 1|
Éreerz:IkEeEsk’lEieEz#E:Ḥ

aṁī saiīrga īīsdraāīe: I| 232 1|

mṝzri amzafa sat ṁaṛṝarṁzdī I g2= 1

īā ̄a1 jā fifēkāmvṝ vaṝrqorg 1 223 1

The printed editon reads only: OM HRIṀ HŪṀ BODHANI OṀ HRĪṀ HŪṀ
ŚIVASADBHĀVAJANANI SVĀHĀ.

TANTRĀLOKA

ŠĒ=- TĒAEUI TūcākrT-īa ŪTāq |

arfe#ravīī
fṁērad taṁttētfc ēīfdtaī 1| ṇg..
anuttarecche ghāntaś ca satrayodaśasuṣvaraḥ ||

110 I|

asya varṇatrayasyānte tv antaḥsthānāṁ catuṣṭayam |

vargādyaśvau tryasrabinduyuk pānto ‘ṛṇatrayād ataḥ l/ I1 I II
mahāhātakaśabdādyamīśvarītyarṇasaptakam |
āmantritaṁ kṣamasveti tryarṇaṁ pāpāntakāriṇi || 112 ||
saḍarṇaṁ pāpaśabdādivimohanipadaṁ tataḥ |
pāpaṁ hana dhuna dvir dvir daśārṇaṁ padamīdṛśam || 1 13 II
pañcamyantaṁ ṣaḍarṇaṁ syãd rudraśaktivaśād iti |

tata ekākṣaraṁ yat tad visargabrahma kīrtitam || 1 14 ||
tadanackatakāreṇa sahaikībhāvataḥ paṭhet |

randhrābdhivarṇā vidyeyaṁ dīkṣāvidyeti kīrtitā || 115 II
(The second Vidyā begins with) Anuttara (A), the will (I), and the
end of (the letter) GH (Ṇ) together with the beautiful thirteenth vowel (O).

At the end of these three letters (following after are) the four semivowels (Y
R L V), the first (letter) of the class (of vowels) (A), the Horse (Ṇ), the end
of (the letter) P (PH), conjoined with the Triangle (E), and the Point (M).
Then after (these) three letters come the seven syllables, consisting of the
word MAHĀHĀṬAKA, followed by ĪŚVARIin the vocative. (Then comes)

KṢAMASVA, consisting of three syllables, and PĀPĀNTAKĀRIṆI,
consisting of six. (This is followed) by the word beginning with PĀPA, and
then VIMOHANI (consisting of six syllables). Then comes (the group

consisting of) PĀPAṀ and HANA DHUNA, (repeated) twice each. Suchis
(this) part (of the .Vidyā) that (consists) of ten syllables. (Next comes)

RUDRAŚAKTIVAŚĀT, whichis in the ablative and consists of six letters.

Then (comes) a single letter said to be the Brahman of Emission
(visargabrahman) (S) along with a T without vowels, which should be read
as one. This Vidyā, consisting of forty-nine syllables, is praised as the Vidyā
of initiation. (110cd-115)

‘Anuttara’ is A. ‘The willʼ is I. ‘(The letter) at the end of GHʼ is ṅ.
‘The thirteenth vowel’ is O. ‘The semivowels’ are Y, R, L and V. ‘The first
(letter) of the class (of vowels) is A. ‘The Horse’ is N. ‘The Triangleʼ is E
‘conjoined with the Point (M)’. ‘The end of (the letter) P’ is PH. Thus (we
arrive at) PHĒM. ʻ[Tḷhe Brahman of Emission’ is S. (The syllables are) fortynine. In this way (the Vidyā) is:

CHAPTER THIRTY

AIÑṄOYARALAVA
AṆAPHEṀM
MAHĀHĀṬAKEŚVARI
KṢAMASVA PĀPĀNTAKĀRINI PĀPAVIMOHANI PĀPAṂ HANA HANA

DHUNA DHUNA RUDRAŚAKTIVAŚĀT SAT.
The Third Vidyā

ḶEUELAKEEIICIHVETÑEEṬIĀṈI

THĪTTTṀTĀTTTT
T] ṬGTJḤ |
TḠ-Ī āTāṝīTS√ aJrṀ qAITĀTḤ 1 22 1

YTifts

ṬG GGaGTTT IJTITĪ TTHC I 22¢ 1

āl̥á aaī | 22., 1|

māyārṇañ ca pare brahme caturvidye padatrayam |
aṣṭārṇam atha pañcārṇaṁ yogadhāriṇisaṁjñitam || 116 ||
ātmāntarātmaparamātmarūpaṁ ca padatrayam |

ekārāntaṁ bodhanasthaṁ daśārṇaṁ parikīrtitam || 1 17 ||
rudraśaktīti vedārṇaṁ syād rudradayite 'tha me |
pāpaṅṁ daha dahety eṣā dvādaśārṇā catuṣpadī || 1 18 II
saumye sadāśive yugmaṁ ṣaṭkaṁ bindviṣuṣāvahā ḷ
sārdhavarṇacatuṣkaṁ tad ity eṣā samayāpahā || 119 ||
vidyā sārdhārṇakhaśarasaṁkhyā sā pārameśvarī |
(The third Vidyā begins with) the syllable of Māyā (HṚĪṀ), which
is followed by three words consisting of eight syllables (altogether), namely,
PARE BRAHME CATURVIDYE, and one of five syllables, that is,

YOGADHĀRIṆI.

(This is

followed

by)

three words - ĀTMAN,

ANTARĀTMAN, PARAMĀTMAN -– in the vocative and terminating with

the letter E,” said to consist of ten syllables. (Then comes) RUDRAŚAKTI,

which consists of the four syllables, (followed by another) four words
consisting of twelve syllables (altogether), namely, RUDRADAYITE ME

PÃPAṀ DAHA DAHA. (Then comes) the pair SAUMYE SADĀŚIVE,
consisting of a group of six (syllables). (They are followed by) four syllables
and a half, which are the Point (HŪMṀ), the Arrow (PHAṬ) and SĀVAHĀ.

"' Apart from the initia syllables and the final SAT. the other words of the Vidyā may be loosely
transḹated as: 0O great body of the Hātaka hell, be lenient, destroyer of sins, confounder of sin,
strike strike disperse disperse sin, by the will of Rudra’s power!’

Sanderson proposes to emend the final SAT, which has no clear meaning, to SAḤ.
However, this cannot be done with a simple emendation of the text of the Tantrāloka. Are we to

make this emendation to the source that Abhinavagupta used?

' Ātme, etc.

TANTRĀLOKA

(This) Vidyā, numbering fifty and a half syllables, is that of the Supreme

Goddess (Parameśvarī), that removes (the sins of transgressing) the Rule.
(116-120ab)

‘The syllable of Māyā’ is HRIM. By (saying) ‘in the vocative and
terminating with the letter E’ (we arrive at) ĀTME ANTARĀTME

PARAMĀTME. ʻThe four syllables’ are DAHA DAHA, that (together are
reckoned as) just one word. ‘The pair’ of two words (consists of) ‘a group of
six’ syllables. ‘The Point’ (in this case) is HŪM. The Arrow’ is PHAT.

‘SĀVAHĀ’ is SVĀHĀ. ʻThe half syllable’ is T. In this way (the Vidyā) is:

HRĪṀ PARE BRAHME CATURVIDYE YOGADHĀRIṆI ĀTME

ANTARĀTME PARAMĀTME RUDRAŚAKTE” RUDRADAYITEĒ ME
PĀPAṀ DAHA DAHA SAUMYE SADĀŚIVE HŪṀ PHATṬ SVĀHĀ.
This was taught to us by our teacher. Thus he says:

TāĨēaīTā̃ rT-zfārsṁ aasTq I| 230 1|
a: TIĀRAÑTÑTĀTTVṀĀTPTGT
TIṬĪ TT |
etad vidyātrayaṁ śrīmadbhūtirājo nyarāpayat |/ 120 |

yaḥ sākṣād abhajac chrīmāñśrīkaṇṭho mānuṣīṁ tanum |

Bhūtirāja, who was the venerable Śrīkaṇṭha (Himself), who,
directly visible, had assumed a human body, explained these three Vidyās
(to me). (120cd-121ab)
Surely (one may ask), the nature of the Mantras has been presented
here. How is it that (the nature of their) vitality has not been taught? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

The Vitality of Mantras (mantravīrya)

ṝ d̃ṭ̃ ḍā’IṀ gaTTATGPII 222. 1|
sT̄āsīar-ṁerīNaT7dTTa:|
l PHAT consists of one and a half leters.

Read -ŚAKTE in place of -SAKTI. This simple emendation, based on the basic rules of

Sanskrit grammar, is suggested by Sanderson 2005b 127 n
. 94. The corresponding reading in the printed edition of the Tantrāloka – rudraśaktīti – can easily
be emended to something like rudraśakte ca. If we don't accept aṉy emendation, as Jayaratha did
not, it presumes that the original had already been corrupted in Abhinava’s source.
'" The Vidyā means: ‘HRĪṀ O supreme Brahmā! You who possess the four sciences! Sustainer
of yoga! Scl! Iner Self! Supreme Self! Rudra’s Power! Beloved of Rudra, burn burn (away) my
sin! O meek one! O Sadāśivā! HŪṀ PHAṬ SVĀHĀ!
' Quoted above ad 4/173ab, see note 4.656. Abhinava identifies his teacher Bhūtirja with
Śrīkaṇṭha above in 1/9. See above, note 30,147. Concerning Bhūtirāja, see below 37/60.
' If we translate nyarūpayat as Ṁtaugh rather than ‘explained’, Abhinava is saying that he
received these mantras through a direct oral transmission through the Śrīṣantati. See above, note
30.182.

CHAPTER THIRTY

acga 7 f=Ttā 1 g22 1

atra vīryaṁ puraivoktaṁ sarvatrānuṣared guruḥ ll 121 ||
arthabījapraveśāntar uccārādyanusārataḥ |
nahi tat kiñcanāpy asti yat purā na nirūpitam || 122. |
niṣphalā punaruktis tu nāsmabhyaṁ jātu rocate |
(The nature of) the virility (of Mantras) has (already) been taught
here previously.” The teacher should proceed accordingly everywhere (in
all instances) in accord with (their) purpose, (the form of their) seed
syllables, the (manner in which they induce) penetration into (the supreme

reality), and the (manner of their) utterance,' etc. There is nothing
about (all) this that has not already been explained. Repetition is fruitless
and we do not like it at all. (121cd-123ab)

Surely (one may ask), that vitality has many modalities. So, with which
modality (should the adept practice)? With this doubt in mind, he says ‘in

accord with (their) purpose’ etc.

He concludes this (chapter) with half a verse:

|| 223 1|

ity evaṁ mantravidyādiṣvarūpam upavarṇitam || 123 ||
(123cd)

The nature of the Mantras and Vidyā etc. has thus been described.
This is the auspicious (end of this chapter).

Satisfied by the nature of the Mantras obtained by (his) venerable
teacherʼs instruction, the one called Jayaratha has explained this, the thirtieth
chapter.
Thus (ends) Chapter Thirty, called the revelation of Mantras etc., of the
(commentary called) Discernment, of the venerable Tantrāloka.

! See above, 4/181cd-193.
Ṣee above, 5/84cd-100 (84-100ab).
' See above, 5/43-74ab (43-73).

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

The Trika Maṇḍala
Śambhu, (enveloped in His) enclosures, unfolding all around this
Trident universe, the spokes of which are the seven paths and triadic nature,
Vidyā, Māyā and Prakṛti, is victorious!
Now he begins to discuss, paraphrasing (the sources in accord with its

essential purpose) (tātparyataḥ), the nature of (the Trika) maṇḍala.

atha maṇḍalasadbhāvaḥ saṁkṣepeṇābhidhīyate |
Now we will talk concisely about the essential nature of the (Trika)

maṇḍala. (lab)

There (in that regard), he sets about explaining how the square (in

which the maṇḍala īs drawn) is made successfully.

The Drawing of the Square Base of the Maṇḍala
According to the Mālinīvijayottara

39Ōr PR IẼĨ ṀHHRRRIṀR
aftraī

U k

hḷḶEFGVEEIETḤ PR-ṈṂ I3 1.

sādhayitvā diśaṁ pūrvāṁ sūtram āsphālayet samam |l 1 II
tadardhayitvā madhyaprākpratīcīṣv aṅkayet punaḥ |
tato ‘py aráhatadardhārdhamānataḥ pūrvapaścimau || 2 ||
aṅkayet tāvatā dadyāt sūtreṇa bhramayugmakam ḷ
matsyasandáhidvayaṁ tv evaṁ dakṣiṇottarayor bhavet |l 3 |I
tanmadhye pātayet sūtraṁ dakṣiṇottarasiddhaye |
'Having (initially) ascertained the eastern direction, one should
extend the thread (with which the maṇḍala is traced) and, having divided it
into (two) equal parts, make marks in the front (eastern part of the thread),
the rear (western part), and the centre. Then again, in the same way, marks
should be made on the eastern (front) and western (rear halves), measure a

' 31/1cd-4ab is an expansion of MV 9/2-3ab.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

half (of their length), half again and (then) half again (thus marking
divisions in the thread of four, eight, and sixteen parts). Draw two curves
with this thread in such a way that the two junctures (at the front and end
of) the oval (fish shape produced thereby) are in the south and the north. In
order to ascertain (the exact position of) the south and the north, one
should (as before) cast the thread along the centre (between) these (two

points). (lcd-4ab)

Figure 1: The square of the maṇḍala drawn according to 31/1-4ab.

3If? āī JP"RTRCĀTHTĪTTGĒI I

rczazz fṝrcgmra =fkīīā | u,
TRTTÁḤTH TPJĪTRATgĀTT |

II

Tcza-. RAṬTĪTTGHITT: | , |A
cGdT] rāīī TJTĪT- aTTĀTĀTĀT |
yadi vā prākparāktulyasūtreṇottaradakṣiṇe || 4 II
aṅkyed aparād aṅkāt pūrvād api tathaiva te |
matsyamadhye kṣipet sūtram āyataṁ dakṣiṇottare || 5 I|
matakṣetrārdhamānena madhyād dikṣv aṅkayet tataḥ |
sūtrābhyāṁ digdvayotthābhyāṁ matsyaḥ syāt pratikoṇagaḥ |l 6 |l
matsyeṣu vedāḥ sūtrāṇīty evaṁ syāc caturasrakam |

Sce figure 1.
Diagram taken from Gnoli 1999: 61 1.

TANTRĀLOKA

Or else, if (by another method), the north and south are marked

with a thread (the length of which) is equal (to the distance starting) from
the mark in the west and from (that in) the east (at these two extremities),

then in the middle (of the two points of intersection) of the oval (with the

base line,) one should, in the same way (as before), cast the thread (so that

it) extends through the south and the north. (4cd-5)

““The procedure for drawing the square of the maṇḍala

according to MV 9/2-5 = TA 31/4cd-7ab, with some variants.

This method is taught in MV 9/1-5 from which Abhinavagupta draws here. There we read:

sa ca pūrvãṁ diśaṁ samyak sũtram āsphãlayet tataḥ |
tanmadhyāt pūrvavāruṇyāv aṅkayet samāntaram l| 2 ||

pūrvāparasamāsena sūtreṇottaradakṣiṇam |

‘(First of all,) lay out a thread correctly (extending) towards the castem quarter. Then,
from its centre, mark (an equal) unit (of distance) from the west (.e. below) and from the east (i.e.
from above) along with a thread of equal length (read samānena for samāsena) behind it and in
front, (extending) north and south. (2-3ab)
(Starting) from the mark in the west and from (that in) the east (at these two
extremities), then in the middle (of the two points of intersection) of the oval (with the base
line) one should, in the same way (as before), cast the thread (so that it) extends through the
south and the north. (3cd-4ab)
Then, by means (of a thread) which is half the length of the area (covered by) the
oval (drawn initially), one should, starting from the centre, mark (in the same way the
intermediate) directions. (4cd)

tadvadáiksthāc ca koṇeṣu anúlomavilomataḥ |
pātayet teṣu sūtrāṇi caturaśrapasiddhaye | 5 (
In the same way, starting from a (primary) quarter, cast threads forward and reverse into

those corners (as required) so as to fashion a square.' MV 9/2-5
TĀ 31/5-6ab is a literal quotation of MV 9/3cd-4.
This method is taught in MV 9/1-5 from which Abhinavagupta draws here. There we read:

sa ca pūrvãṁ diśaṁ samyak sũtram āsphalayet tataḥ |
tanmadhyāt pūrvavāruṇyāv aikayet samāntaraṃ ||2 ||

pūrvāparasamāsena sūtreṇottaradakṣiṇam |

‘(First of all,) lay out a thread correctly (extending) towards the eastem quarter. Then,

from its centre, mark (an equal) unit (of distance) from the west

(i.e. below) and from the east (i.e.

from above) along with a thread of equal length (read -samānena for -samāsena) behind it and in
front, (extending) north and south. (2-3ab)

(Starting) from the mark in the west and from (that in) the east (at these two
extremities), then in the middle (of the two points of intersection) of the oval (with the base
line) one should, in the same way (as before), cast the thread (so that it) extends through the
south and the north. (3cd-4ab)
Then, by means (of a thread) which is half the length of the area (covered by) the

oval (drawn initially), one should, starting from the centre, mark (in the same way the
intermediate) directions. (4cd)

tadvadáikṣthāc ca koṇeṣu anulomavilomataḥ |
pātayet teṣu sītrāṇi caturaśraprasiddhaye | 5 |

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

Figure 2

Then, by means (of a thread) which is half the length of the area
(covered by) the oval (drawn initially), one should, starting from the centre,
mark (in the same way the intermediate) directions. (Then,) by means of
the two threads, lifted up from the two directions (i.e. east to west and
north to south), an oval (is to be drawn that extends) to each corner (in the

intermediate directions). In this way, (four) threads (that pass through) the
four (extremities of the four) ovals form a square. (6-7ab)

‘Having (initially) ascertained the eastern direction’, that is to say,

and also the western direction in the evening and the morning, by the shade of a
peg (gnomon) during an equinox, one should place a thread that extends
through the eastern and western directions which is the same (in length) as the
desired area, (which may be), for example, four handspans. Having divided that

into (two) equal halves, it should be marked in the middle and in the eastern and
the western directions, (which are the front and posterior extremity,

respectively). The meaning is that it should be marked with three lines. Then

after that also, in relation to all the threads, assuming as a measure half (of their

length,) which is four parts, half that again, which is eight parts, and (then) half

that again, which is sixteen parts, ‘marks should be made on the eastern

(front) and western (rear halves)’. The meaning is that one should place six

lines externally in their respective (locations). Then again, in the same way, by
In the same way, starting from a (primary) quarter, cast threads forward and reverse into
those corners (as required) so as to fashion a square.' MV 9/2-5

TĀ 31/5-6ab is a literal quotation of MV 9/3cd-4.
Taken from Gnoli 1999: 612.
Lines 31/6cd-7ab are needed to make sense of the procedure required to draw the maṇḍala
described in chapter nine of the MV, and need to be located there between 9/4ab and 4cd. This

suggests that these too, like others, are lines lost from the version of the MV Abhinava had before
him.

Se Figure 2.

’ A gnomon is the pointer of a ṣundial. The (exact location of) the eastern (direction) is
ascertained by means ofa gnomon which is imagined to be in the centre of the maṇḍala. The four
times four lateral squares for the doorways are generally added later.

TANTRĀLOKA

means of a thread which is of the measure of each of two halves of two
directions, east and west, placing it in each respective location of the marks on
the left and right, in due order, one should place two curved (lines) in the
southern and northern directions in such a way that there are two intersections of
the oval (formed in that way) in the shape of a crow’s wing. Two directions are
established by a thread placed in the middle of the two intersections of the oval
extending south and north.
(By saying) ‘“Or else if (by another method)’, (he indicates that the
exposition of) another view (as to how this can be done) begins here (the north

and south are marked with a thread (the length of which)) is equal (to the
distance starting) from the mark in the west and from (that in) the east (at
these two extremities). The meaning is that (it is marked) by the whole
(thread,) and that the exposition of all the remaining instruction (begins) with

this mark. ‘In the same way’ as was taught before. And taking the centre as a
base, one should mark the directions with two threads which are half the length
of the chosen area, as, for example, four handspans. The meaning is that, in
order to make it equal in all ways, one should place four threads there. Thus,
(extending) ‘to each corner° (of the square in the intermediate directions), there

should be an oval (formed) ‘by means of the two threads, lifted up from the

two directions (i.e. east to west and north to south), such that (one is) in the

southeast (formed by the threads of) the east and south, in the northeast (formed

by the threads of) the east and north, in the southwest (formed by the threads of)
the west and south, and in the northwest (formed by the threads of) the west and

north. One should place four threads within the four ovals (running through)

that are in each of these corners. Thus, the square (has been fashioned)

successfully.
Surely (one may ask), there are many maṇḍalas in each scripture. So
here which of those is said to be essential? Taking this doubt into account, with
the intention (expressed in the dictum that) ‘he who has exerted himself in the
main one is successfulʼ, (he starts with an initial) declaration (of his topic) in

order to first of all teach the maṇḍala of the triple Trident (tritriśūla) presented
in the venerable Trikasadbhāva as the cause of (maṇḍalas) taught (in the
scriptures)

with

Tridents

present

(śūlavartanā),

and

that

are

its

many

modalities.' (He does this) by taking as a base (this particular) maṇḍala, that
has been fixed as the main one, even though, on the authority of our own
scripture, they are many.

UGṀṬTJf]
ĪĪT JTT HTYSG Ja; I| .9 |

aTTSTTTT TGĀ HTGVJHĪ TJ TĪTT I ¢ I|

Tī r̥fāīīā agṁā CTTdT I| 8 1|

See below 31/10cd ff.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

ekasmāt prabhṛti proktaṁ śatāntaṁ maṇḍalaṁ yataḥ || 7 I|
siddhātantre maṇḍalānāṁ śataṁ tat pīṭha ucyate |

yat tanmadhyagataṁ mukhyaṁ maṇḍalãnãṁ trayaṁ smrtam || 8 I|

madhyaśīlaṁ tritriśūlaṁ navaśūlam iti sphuṭam |

tatra śūlavidhānaṁ yad uktam bhedair anantakaiḥ || 9 ||

tadyoni maṇḍalaṁ brūmaḥ sadbhāvakramadarśitam |

The maṇḍala is said to begin with one and end with a hundred.
Thus, it is said in the Siddhātantra that in that section (tatpītha), there are a
hundred maṇḍalas. Amongst them, three maṇḍalas are clearly considered
to be the main (mukhya) ones, namely, one with a (single) trident in the
middle, one with three tridents, and one with nine tridents. (7cd-9ab)
There, (with regards to) the procedure concerning the Trident
taught (in the scriptures) with (its) endless number of varieties, we will talk

about the maṇḍala presented in the liturgy of the Sadbhāva which is their
source. (9cd-10ab)

‘The section concerning them’ is the maṇḍalapīṭha. The word ‘them’

(in the expression) ‘amongst them’ refers to the hundred maṇḍalas. ‘It is said’,

that is, in the Siddhātantra itself. As is said (in the Siddhātantra):
‘Now the section (pītha) concerning maṇḍala is being taught. Listen, O
beloved. O fair faced lady, a hundred maṇḍalas are taught in the Siddhātantra. 1
will tell (you) their names, listen with a well concentrated mind, O fair lady, to

the (full) hundred maṇḍalas in due order.’”

Having begun this way (the Tantra continues):

‘(They are called) Hāhārāva (Sound of Loud Laughter), Ghana (Dense),
Ruddha (Fixed), Sāmaya (The Maṇḍala of the Rule), Citrakaṇṭaka (Varied
Thorns) . . . etc., the middle: ‘Madhyaśūla (Trident in the Middle), Tritriśūla

(Triple Trident) and Navaśūla (Nine Prongs).” Ending with: ‘along with the
Aśvamedha (Horse Sacrifice), there are considered to be a hundred maṇḍalas.
He says just that:
The Various Types of Trika Maṇḍala with Lotuses and Tridents
(Śulābjabhedaḥ)

A) The Construction of the Maṇḍala According to the Trikasadbhāva'

vedāśrite caturhaste tribhāgaṁ sarvatas tyajet || 10 ||

'' Cf. above, 16/2cd-4.
No such maaṇḍala is described in the Tantrasadbhāva, so we may safely presume that by
‘Sadbhāva' Abhiṅava means the Trikasadbhāva, that he goes on to draw from.
The passage Jayaratha quotes here from the SYM is not found in the short edited recension.
Tórzsôk 1999: 232-233.
This passage, which extends from 10cd to 52, is drawn from the 7rikasadbhāva

TANTRĀLOKA

bhāgaiḥ ṣoḍaśabhiḥ sarvaṁ tat tat kṣetraṁ vibhājayet |

One should omit a third part on each side from a square

(measuring) four handspans and, having done so, divide all the remaining
area into sixteen squares (on each side). (10cd-11ab)

‘Four handspans’ measure ninety-six finger-breadths. ‘A third part’
is thirty-two finger-breadths. “On each side’ means in the four directions. Thus,
one should remove sixteen finger-breadths in each of directions. The meaning is

that one should establish them (in reserve) for the doors etc. This is the

meaning. By omitting a third part of a handspan, all the area (kṣetra) that

remains, which is useful for the fashioning (vartanā) of the triple Trident that is

about to be explained, should be divided into sixteen parts. The meaning is that
256 squares (measuring) four finger-breadths (each) should be fashioned. There
are 576 squares in the entire area, which is divided twenty-four times, and so, by
omitting four parts in each direction for the doors etc, 320 squares remain. This
is the overall meaning.' He begins to fashion (vartanā) the Trident there,
(saying):

The maṇḍala of the Three Tridents

described in the Trikasadbhāva.

JṚāḶTGJTTTY
TET JṬaTTG TṭḺT I Ṝ8 I

gaajṀ] āṁ aead ṁqg̃ aamṝē: 1
' See Figure 3.

' The drawing of the maṇḍala of the Triple Trident begins by making a square. This is the ‘field’

(kṣetra) or area within which the maṇḍala is drawn. It is divided into sixteen rows of equally sized

squares, thus making 256 squares (16 x 16). The expanded version that accommodates the

surrounding doors contains four extra squares on each side, that is, eight more altogether. This the
squares are now (24 x 24 =) 576 squares. This is 320 more squares (576 – 256 = 320). Each

square measures four finger-breadths. Twenty-four fingers make a one handspan. The field is

divided into sixteen squares that, along with those for the doors that are attended subsequently,

become twenty-four. Each square is four fingers wide. Twenty-four fingers make a cubit.
E

Śee above in 16/5 {f. for a draving and description of the configuration.of the manḍala of the
Three Tridents.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

ṁfī feraṁq 1 2

ḷī gīTP-T vTTq |

ārāc faṁtā ēzā ṁtr frgvī u 2x 1

ã-̄ fr-r: 1|

brahmaṣūtradvayasyātha madhyaṁ brahmapadaṁ sphuṭam || 11 II
kṛtvāvadhiṁ tato lakṣyaṁ caturthaṁ sūtram āditaḥ |
tatas tiryag vrajet sūtraṁ caturṛthaṁ tadanantare || 12 ||
koṣṭhe cendudvayaṁ kuryād bahirbhāgārdhabhāgataḥ |
tayor lagnaṁ brahmasūtrāt tṛtīye marmaṇi sthitam || 13 II
koṣṭhakārdhe ‘paraṁ ceti yugmam antarmukhaṁ bhavet |
brahmasūtrād dvitīyasmin hastaṁ marmaṇi niścalam || 14 ||
kṛtvā pūrṇenduyugalaṁ vartayeta vicakṣaṇaḥ |
The middle of the two threads of Brahmā clearly (marks) the Place

of Brahmā (brahmapada) (which is the centre of the maṇḍala). Then, after

having made (this) the starting point, one should mark the fourth thread.
Then, one should move from there (upwards on the eastern side) diagonally
(tiryak) (until one reaches) the fourth thread. One should fashion in the
adjacent square two moons, (i.e. circles that extend) outwards for one and a
half squares. The conjunction of the two is located in the third point of
intersection (marman), (starting) from the thread of Brahmā. (13)

One should then make within half a square another pair (of semi-

circles, connected to the preceding ones,) facing inwards. Then, having

(firmly) placed one’s hand without moving on the second intersection

(marman) (starting) from the thread of Brahmā, one who is well versed
(vicakṣaṇa) should fashion two full moons (i.e. circles). (11cd-15ab)
‘Thenʼ, after having made (this) the starting point. The meaning is
‘having begun from the Place of Brahmā’ (where the drawing of the maṇḍala
begins). (Observe the fourth) ‘threadʼ, not the square. ‘Then’, after having
marked the fourth thread, (one should move) ‘from there’ progressively
upwards. ‘Diagonallyʼ, by a sideways movement. ‘The adjacent square’
means the one next to it. Thus, having placed the left hand on the intersection
(marman) on the fourth thread, then, beginning from half the fourth square

located, in relation to Thread of Brahmā, above that intersection, up to the
square below it, outside (it), that is, taking as a base the measure of half a

portion of the inner (preceding) portion, one should fashion two moons (i.e.

circles) by (rotating in) a circular motion.

' The Place of Brahmā is the centre of the maṇḍala, and the two threads of Brahmā are those that
pass through that centre.

Read hastaṁ for haste.

TANTRĀLOKA

(When fashioning the middle prong,) taking as a base the third
intersection from the Thread of Brahmā, one should thus place the right hand on
the third intersection by rotating with the left hand within (that) square and the

half (of one next to it, one should draw two) ‘inward facingʼ (half-moons (semicircles),) not outward facing ones, (and so one should fashion another two
moons (i.e. circles) connected to the two moons located immediately next to

them, and they should be ‘inward facing’. And, placing the left hand firmly on
the second intersection, in relation to the Thread of Brahmā, one should, in other
words, (fashion) another full (circle) which is conjoined to the first two moons
(i.e. circles). One should not draw a pair of half-moons (i.e. semicircles) like the

moons drawn previously.

ÉkrEEREIISIKEEEIḤI SĪCAĀIÇII
EṇeEeacza‘eRukkaviŪzztt:Ḥ.
JTĀÇTT GTGTTTĪTR̥TTTTḤ I 2ē I
brahmasūtragatāt ṣaṣṭhāt tiryagbhāgāt tṛtīyake || 15
kṛtvārdhakoṣṭhake sūtraṁ pūrṇacandrāgralambitam ḷ
bhramayed unmukhaṁ khaṇḍacandrayug vahnibhāgagam || 16 |
Then, having (fastened) the thread in the third half square
(starting) from the sixth horizontal square (tiryagbhāga) on the thread of
Brahmā, and (so having made it) coincide with the extremity of the full
moon (circle), it should be rotated (upwards) towards that, (to form) a pair

of half-moons (i.e. semi-circles) within the (three) squares in the southeast.
(15cd-16)
Thus, one should lead (a thread) horizontally upwards from the Thread
of Brahmā up to the end of the second square (bhāga), in such a way that here,
by the procedure (krama) that will be explained, it may make contact with the

‘pillowʼ (gaṇḍikā) (at the lower end of the staff of the Trident). Thus, (the one

who draws this maṇḍala) is said to be an ‘expert (in this procedure).

(In the third half square (starting) from the sixth horizontal square
(trryagbhāga)) ‘on the thread of Brahmā’. The meaning is that it is located on

the thread of Brahmā, taking the place of Brahmā (in the centre) as the starting

point ‘from the sixth square’, and from the thread, the seventh. ‘The third’

(square is) horizontally above. (The circle fashioned there,) in relation to the
two moons (i.e. circles) to the west of it (i.e. behind it,) is a ‘full’ (circle). As he

will say, ‘from (the last) half-moon in the west’. Thus, having placed the right
hand on the back of the thread in the second half square, beginning from the tip
of the full moon (i.e. circle) located within it ‘towards that’, that is, facing
upwards, one should rotate the thread up to the third remaining square,
characterized as (that of) ‘fire’ (i.e. in the southeast). How (is that done)? He

According to Jayaratha, ‘vahni’ (‘hite’) here means ‘three’, and s0 the translaton would be ‘for
three squares. The two half-moons occupy the space of three squares in the southeast, which is
the direction of Fire. Cf. below 31/69cd-71ab.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

says ‘(to form) a pair of half-moons (i.e. semi-circles)ʼ. Its form here is that

(made) conjoining with a half-moon (i.e. semi-circle).

āṬsd ġgāTq GTS WTGATI| 2.9 I

fitafrafī

fatr. ēa. 1. 2. 1
T=AYTṢ¥
ārdsī THT GTHīgā |
EGkEEHEETVFGEEE EFḺÉTĀICAI

tiryagbhāgadvayaṁ tyaktvā khaṇḍendoḥ paścimāt tataḥ |
koṇaṁ yāvat tathā syāc ca kuryāt khaṇḍaṁ bhramadvayam || 17 II
sutīkṣṇakuṭilāgraṁ tad ekaṁ śr̥ṅgaṁ prajāyate |
dvitīyasminn api proktaḥ śṛṅga eṣa vidhiḥ sphuṭaḥ l| 18 ||
madhyaśṛṅge ‘tha kartavye tṛtīye

ūrdhvakoṣṭhake |

caturthārdhe ca candrārdhadvayam antarmukhaṁ bhavet/|| 19 ||
Then omitting (another) two squares horizontally, one should

fashion from (the last) half-moon in the west up to the corner, two semicircles. One prong, which is sharp and point curved, is created (in this

way). This same clear procedure, (is applied) to (draw) the second prong

also. (17-18)

Now when one needs to make the middle prong, two inward facing

half-moons (semi-circles) should (be fashioned first) in the third square
above, and half of the fourth. (19)

Then, again, ‘omitting (another) two squares horizontally’ from the
third half square, that is to say, having placed the right hand on the back of half
the thread which is in that second square, then from the west (side), beginning

from the half-moon, one should rotate (the thread) up to the corner which is at

the extremity of the half-moon (i.e. semi-circle) that was fashioned previously
by that thread, in such a way that, rotated in that way, a pair of half-moons are

(created).

Thus, in this way, (the circle) is incomplete, not full. One should rotate
(the thread) twice so that a ‘prong, which is sharp and point curved’ (is
created in this way). ‘Then’, or else, reading ‘from the firstʼ, beginning from the
first half-moon, that was fashioned initially from the initial square up to the
corner. This is how one should explain ‘from (the last) half-moon in the westʼ,
not, as in the previous statement, ‘the pair of moons’ʼ, that is, the pair of moons
above from the west; and from the beginning of the half-moon, ‘one should
fashion two semi-circles’ etc. As the drawing of the two moons is being
executed and the word ‘from the first’ need not be taken into consideration, and
The sense of the word ‘two’ here is probably that the same should be done also with regard to

the other trident.

TANTRĀLOKA

because it has no meaning (or serves no purpose, that reading should be
rejected) (?).
He transposes this same (procedure) to the (fashioning of the) next

prong, by (saying) ‘this same clear procedure, (is applied) to (draw) the
second prong also’. Here (in this case), the difference is only the placement of
the hand, which is not the same. Having explained the positioning of the two
prongs on the side, in the same way, he (goes on to talk about) the positioning of

the middle prong, saying: ‘Now when one needs to make the middle prong’.

Two inward facing half-moons (semi-circles) should (be fashioned first) ‘in the

third square’, in relation to the thread of Brahmā ‘above’, not to the side.
(They should be) ‘inward facing’, not facing outwards.

TRIT JSTAT I| Ṝ |
t ftr-aṁcaa avẽṣzgaāīq |

: ḤI
eḵ|terelEHititzE#r-z
TrJJīJ̄TI. TATGTRĀT fiTāēT I 221

Ṭaād TTaTTTTĀ’ĪTRTTRT|
JRTGTT

STAṬ

TI 23 I
tac ca pūrṇendum ekaṁ prāgvartitaṁ prāpnuyād yathā |
anyonyagranthiyogena baddhāratvaṁ prajāyate || 20 ||
evaṁ dvitīyapārśve ʻṣya khaṇḍendudvayavartanāt |
madhyābhyāṅṁ gaṇḍikā śliṣṭā parābhyām agrato nayet || 21 II
sūtraṁ pārśvadvaye yena tīkṣṇaṁ syān madhyaśṛṅgagam |

pārśvadvayādhare paścād brahmasūtraṁ dvitīyakam || 22 |

avadhānena saṁgrāhyam ācāryeṇohavedinā |
bhavet paścānmukho mantrī tasmiṁś ca brahmasūtrake || 23 ||
madhyaśr̥ṅgaṁ varjayitvā sarvaḥ pūrvodito vidhiḥ |
That (pair) should reach (to make contact with) the one full moon
drawn previously, in such a way that, by the union of (their) knots with one
another, the spokes (of the Trident) are well connected. The same should be
repeated on the other two sides. (20-21a)

By the presence of its two semi-circles, the ‘pillow’ (gaṇḍikā) is
encompassed by the two (prongs) in the middle; (the teacher) should extend
the thread from the other two up to the extremity (of the field) on the two

The ganḍikā (lit. lile pillow°) looks like a squashed bulb at the lower extremity of the staf, or
handle, of a weapon (as is the tident), or sacrficial implements, such as, for example, the small
and large ladles used for offering oblations of clarfied butter. Concerning this term, see MrT,
kriyāpāda, p. 65-67 and the relevant illustrations.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

sides, so that it may reach (and thus fashion) the sharp prong in the centre.
(22ab)

The teacher, who knows how to apply the same procedures in

accord with varying circumstances (ūhavedin), should carefully lay hold of

the second thread of Brahmā, that extends along the western part (of the

maṇḍala), below the two sides (on the south and north). Facing west, the
teacher, making use of that thread, (should repeat) all the previously
described procedure, with the exception (of that part of it which concerns)

the prong in the middle. (22cd-24ab)

‘That’ pair of half-moons. ‘The one’ (full moon) means one each, thus

the meaning is that there are two full moons (i.e. there are two complete circles).
Here itself, he explains the purpose (of doing this,) saying: ‘in such a way that’
etc. He transposes (the same procedure) to the other sides also, saying ‘the same
should be repeated on the other two sides’. (The ‘pillow’ (gaṇḍikā)) ʻis
encompassed’ʼ (by the two (prongs) in the middle) by their alignment (melanā)

above and below. (The teacher) ‘should extend’ (the thread) up to end of the

field. Having explained in this way the positioning of the front of the field, he
begins to explain the rear part also, (saying,) ‘(below) the two sides’ etc. (t is)
‘the second’ (thread of Brahmā) because it is located in the other half (of the
field). (The teacher is one) ‘who knows how to apply the same procedures in
accord with varying circumstances’, because he is skilled in understanding
the matters concerned with transposition (of a procedure from one context to

another) and the like. Again, what should he do in this way? He says: ‘Facing
westʼ etc. (He says that this should be done) ‘with the exception (of that part

of it which concerns) the prong in the middle’, because the staff (of the

Trident) will be present in that place.
sides.

He now says how the prongs are located on the southern and northern

ÇJTrāT I| 2II

iīleeEāitee
Ḷ ḷēcpe E: te -T I

R̥TITTTTAĪ TTgGT WST I 2U,I
tato yad unmukhaṁ khaṇḍacandrayugmaṁ puroditam || 24 ||
tato dvayena kartavyā gaṇḍikāntaḥ susaṅgatā |

dvayenāgragasūtrābhyāṁ madhyaśṛṅgadvayaṁ bhavet || 25 ||
Then, making use of the two previously mentioned half-moons that
are facing (each other), (the teacher should) make a good (and beautiful)
inner alignment of the ‘pillow’ with these two (between them), and with
the two threads in front of them, along with the two (prongs, above and

The middle prong, in the western part of the maṇḍala, is hidden by the staff of the Triḍent.

Each of these two prongs is part of a different trident, namely, the one in the southern part of the
maṇḍala and the one in northern part of it.

TANTRĀLOKA

below the two tridents on the southern and northern sides), there are

(also) the two prongs in the middle (between the prongs). (24cd-25)

‘Previously mentioned half-moons’ when the formation of the trident
in the front part (of the maṇḍala was described). ‘A good (and beautiful)
alignment’ (of the ‘pillow’ with) the prongs next to it (on the two sides).
Having formed in this way the three tridents here, he says (the

following) in order to form the lotuses etc. that are below it also.

̄āqa- a|

ī̄āzāh TVIR 3IGTIT fI āTq | 2ē 1

aT |

aãl zBaT

EE ĪE IE EAHEIṈEEEEFAĀAEAĀH-ṬĪCṈI

I

[EEk/ ĀṭtkútRĀc

TITTJ THIi #AIIHĪ aTI TTa YIT I

fhfyr ara āṣgīdī sāracaāīqīaa.|

II

adho bhāgavivṛddhyāsya padmaṁ vṛttacatuṣṭayam |

tataś cakraṁ ṣoḍaśāraṁ dvādaśāraṁ dvidhātha tat || 26 ||

madhye kuleśvarīsthānaṁ vyoma vā tilakaṁ ca vā |
padmaṁ vãtha ṣaḍaraṁ vã viyaddvãdaśakaṁ ca vã || 27 ||
tritriśūle ‘tra saptāre śliṣṭamātreṇa madhyataḥ |
padmānām atha cakrāṇāṁ vyomnāṁ vā saptakaṁ bhavet l| 28 ||
miśritaṁ vātha saṅkīrṇaṁ samāsavyāsabhedataḥ |
Underneath it is a lotus that has four circles (around it, formed) by

(progressively) increasing (the number of squares).” Then comes a wheel,

which may be of sixteen, twelve and double (that number) of spokes (i.e.
twenty-four). Kuleśvarī’s place is in the centre. (It may be marked with) a
void (yyoman) (i.e. circle) or a point (tilaka), or (surrounded by) a lotus with

six petals or twelve voids.” Here, in the middle (of this maṇḍala) with three
See the preceding note.
The thrce tridents formed from seven prongs are completed in this way. Above in 16/5-2
Abhinava preṣents the composite collective sacrifice and pantheon (sāmudayikayajīa) based on
this form of the Trika maṇḍala with three tridents. This is the rite of the higher Trika initiation,

beyond the regular one of the Rule (samayadīkṣā), that is performed with the single Trident
maṇḍala taught in the MV, and expounded by Abhinava in Chapter Fiften. Culminating in
oneness with Śiva, its the liberatig nirvānadīkṣā. In the course of that exposition, the placement
of the three goddesses and their Bhairavas on the prongs is presented in brief in 16/12ed-15ab. See

note there for a schematic representation.
See below, 31/74-78. The lotus is partially hidden by the trident.
Sanderson (1986: 197-198): “The Trikasadbhāva, as quoted in the Tantrāloka, allows ‘twelve
voids’ (vi;
śakam) to be drawn in the centre of the central lotus. The precise meaning of
this expression and the fact that these
‘voids are designed to contain the twelve Kālīs of the

Krama’s Cycle of the Nameless (anākhyacakram) is apparent from the Devīpañcaśataka and the
Jayadrathayāmala (Tantrarājabhaṭṭāraka), two Āgamas of the independent Krama tradition. The

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

tridents and seven spokes, there should be seven lotuses, wheels, or void

(circles) that are just grouped together (śliṣṭamātra) (not superimposed).
(The seven may

be) mixed

collectively.” (26-29ab)

(together) or conjoined separately or

‘Underneath’ (the prongs of) the trident and above the staff. (The

place) below ‘it’ is a befitting location. Thus, the inner covering of these (parts

of the lotus) is (formed) by (the base of the prongs of) the trident, and with them
(all) (the covering) of the staff. Thus, it is said that ‘five are its squares, that are

concealed by the lotus seat (padmapīṭha).”

(The four circles (around it are formed)) ‘by (progressively) increasing

(the number of squares) by one and two etc., successively. ‘Double (that

number)ʼ is (a wheel with) twenty-four spokes. Thus, first comes one with

twelve spokes, then sixteen and twenty-four. ‘A point (tilaka) means just a dot.
They are ‘just grouped together’, not (superimposed) as coverings. The word
‘or’ is in the sense of ‘alternativelyʼ (as one wishes). Here (in this case, their)

commingling takes place on one spoke either ‘all together°, that is, of a lotus,

wheel and void (circle), or ‘individually°, of a lotus and wheel, lotus and void
(circle), or wheel and void (circle). When their condition is ‘mixedʼ, they are

arranged on separate spokes.

Thus, beginning from one, up to six, when they are in groups of two and

(are combined with others) elsewhere (on other spokes) one at a time, there are

six kinds. In the same way, there are just six (kinds), with groups of three

former instructs the worshipper of this climactic cycle to draw a circle (yyomabimba) surrounded
by twelye others. Each of the resulting thirten should be coloured with indigo powder and

surrounded by a vermillion border. He is to worship the supreme Kālī (Mahākālī) in the
central
circle, and the twelve Kāṭīs in the ring of circles that surround it. The same pattern is found
in the

Kālīkamavidhiḥ of the second tex, where it stands with a four-gated square as the Krama’s

initiaton maṇḍala. In its centre is Mahākālī; equated with the world-manifesting vibration

(spandaḥ) within the heart of consciousness and bliss, realized when the meditator dissolves

into

the ego-less ground, through the contemplation that the agent, act and object of cognition are

cognition in essence; visualized as the awesome black goddess haloed in the fire of her own
radiance, decked with the skulls and corpses of deities, devouring the Lords of the Tattvas,

dancing wildly in the moment of universal destruction; worshipped by the wine-intoxicated

devotees with offerings of wine in skull-cups, with animal sacrifice and the drinking of the
victims’ blood. Around her as the twelve Kālīs, their forms are identical with hers.
The innermost power of the mnaṇḍala of final initiation into the Trika is then this

quintessential group of deities of the Krama, Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, mirrored in the twelve Kālīs of the
Nameless as all-pervading, alldevouring nondualiy of the dynamic cycle of the object, act and

agent of cognition.’ The texts cited here are quoted and translated in the Appendices to Chapter

Four.
Verse 31/28 is quoted above in TĀ v ad 29/170-173. The lotuses etc. are ‘mixed together’ when

they are subdivided in accord with the spokes (for example, one spoke of all lotuses, and s0 0n).
They are ‘commingled’, i.. combined when on the same spoke, and arc there individually

present when there are only two units of the three, or ‘all together’ all three. The overall number

of these constituent units aranged on the spokes in trids, pairs, or just individually, is various,
ranging from twenty (.c. six spokes of three and one of two) to cight (i.c. six spokes of one and

one of two). The various number and arrangement of these units determines the form of the

varieties of this maṇḍala. It is clear from Jayaratha’s commentary and implicilly from what
Abhinavagupta says (below in verse 31/42cd-43ab) that they are two hundred and fity.

“ Is this a citation from the Trikasadbhāva?

TANTRĀLOKA

(combined) with one each at a time. (Again,) in the same way, groups of two

(combined) with groups of three make six (kinds). When the three are mixed

together and one is present five times, then when a group of three is in one place

and a group of two is one place, and in the (remaining) five (spokes) there are

single (units), this is one (type) (10). each single one in one place, a triad in one

place, and pairs in (the remaining) five (spokes) is the second (type) (14). One
in one place, a pair in one place, and triads in (the remaining) five (spokes), the
third (type) (18); thus making three (types).
When one is repeated four times, and (all) three are in one place, two
pairs in two and in the (remaining) four (spokes), one (each), this is one (type)

(I1). (When) there is one pair in one place, a triad in two, and in the (remaining)
four (spokes), one (each), this is the second (type) (12). (When) there is one in
one place, a pair in two, and in the (remaining) four (spokes), three (each) (17).
This is the third (type). (When) there is one in one place, a triad in two, and in
the (remaining) four (spokes), two (each) (15). This is the fourth (type). (When)
there is a triad in one place, one in two, in the (remaining) four (spokes) two
(each) (13). This is the fifth (type). (When) there is a pair in one place, one in
two, and in the (remaining) four (spokes) three (each) (14). This is the sixth

(type). Thus making six.

When (the same one is) repeated three times and there are a pair in two
(spokes), a triad in two, and in (the remaining) three one (each) (13). This is one

(type). When there are two in two (spokes), one (each) in two, and in (the

remaining) three, three (each) (15). This is the second (type). When there is a
triad on two (spokes), one (each) on two, and in (the remaining) three, two

(each) (14). This is the third (type).
When three are repeated on two, and there is one in one place in three

(spokes), two in three, and in the (remaining) three, three (each) (18). This is

one type. When there is a pair in one place, single one in three, and in the
(remaining) three, three (each) (14). This is the second (type). When there is a

triad in one place, pairs in three, and in the (remaining) three, one (each) (12).
This is the third (type). Thus, there are just three, making in this way thirty-three
(types altogether).
A lotus first and then a wheel; or else a wheel first and then a lotus.
Thus, when commingling them etc., by altering the sequence in this way, pairs
are (variously) combined on the seven spokes. This is one type, because it is
associated with many types with reference to (this one) particular (variation). By
altering the sequence in the same way of (all) three also when they are
commingled (together, it makes) one (other type). Thus, there are thirty-five.
When multiplying by seven in accord with their determined locations on the
seven spokes, (the variations number) two hundred and forty-five. Just the
lotuses, wheels or circle alone are everywhere of three kinds, and the three are
also everywhere, thus making one (type each). So too, pairs everywhere is a

type also, because, as the pair is common (to all the spokes,) it is associated with

many types, with reference to (this one) particular (variation). Thus, the
unmixed kinds on the seven spokes have one form, because there is no
difference (between them,) thus making five (more types altogether,) and so (the

number of varieties is) two hundred and fifty.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

Amongst these types, by altering the sequence of the (groups of) three
etc., and when the groups of three, two and one are commingled and mixed
together, gives rise to many (more) types, and so they are endless. Thus, they
are not reckoned (here).

tataḥ kṣetrārdhamānena kṣetraṁ tatrādhikaṁ kṣipet || 29 ||
Then one must plot an extra area there half the measure of the area

(plotted already). (29cd)

‘Then’, after having drawn the tridents, lotuses and wheels etc. there (in
the area) divided into sixteen parts, that is, an area covering sixty-four fingerbreadths, ‘one must plot an extra area’ (there,) so that it may include (the

space required) in order to draw the desired (remaining part of the) staff and the
door etc. (of the maṇḍala). Surely (one may ask), what is the extra (space to be

added) here? Is what he means to say with reference to the area that was

eliminated on all sides previously? Or is it (meant) in (some) other way also?
With this doubt in mind, he says that (it should be) ‘half the measure of the
area (plotted already). The area taken up in order to draw the Trident etc. is of

thirty-two finger-breadths, and consists of eight squares. Its measure is half of
that. This is the meaning. Thus, the sense is that there are sixteen (extra) fingerbreadths and four squares on each side.

Now once the extra area has been plotted in this way, what needs to be

done? He says:

gdlaōī: gFTN: ¥TITRTTTaHI: I 3° 1|

T Tē̄TI āk-arḺ̄ fṛāī TgITETSHT|| 32 I

ē 1| 3 1

tatra daṇḍaḥ smrṛto bhāgaḥ ṣaḍarāmalasārakaḥ |
āgraḥ suraktābhaḥ kṣaṇād āveśakārakaḥ || 30 ||
yā sā kuṇḍalinī devī taraṅgākhyā mahormiṇī |
sā ṣaḍaśreṇa kandākhye sthitā ṣaḍdevatātmikā || 31 II
aṣṭabhāgaiś ca vistīrṇo dīrghaś cāpi tadardhataḥ |

tato dvārāṇi kāryāṇi citravartanayā kramāt || 32 ||

! The area of one that has already been drawn consists of sixteen squares on each side (i.e. 16 x
16) 256 in all. This extra area contains four more on each side, that is, eight in all, which is the
half of sixteen. The total number of squares in this extra area are 320 (24 x 24 = 576 – 256 = 320).

TANTRĀLOKA

It is said that (base of) the staff (of the Trident) there is (the width
of) a square. (The tip has) six sides, (above which is a round protuberance
technically called) āmalasāraka (the Essence of a Tamarind). Its tip is very
sharp and colour a beautiful red. It brings about immediate penetration
(āveśa). She who is the Goddess Kunṇḍalinī, the great wave (of
consciousness) called ‘the Wave’ (taraṅga), resides in (the part of the
Trident) called the ‘bulb’ (kanda) and, (characterized) as having six sides,
She abides (there) as six deities. (The āmalasāraka) is eight parts wide and

half of that in length. The doors should be fashioned after that, in due

order, by drawing (them) in various ways (citravartanayā). (30-32)

As the breadth of the staff and the āmalasāra (is such, their extent) is

said to be ‘a squareʼ. Thus he says that their pervasion is ‘She who is the

Goddess Kuṇḍalinī. (The bulb is) characterized as having ‘six sidesʼ. (She) is

‘six deities’. As is said (in the Trikasadbhāva):

‘Hāhārāvā (Sound of Raucous Laughter), Mahārāvā (Great Sound),

Ghoraghoṣā (Fierce Sound), Bhayaṁkarṁī (Frightening One), Pheṅkāriṇī
(Cursing One), and Mahājvālā (Great Conflagration) are in the bulb, greedy for
the six juices.
The word ‘part’ (in the expression) ‘eight parts' denotes a fingerbreadth. Thus, the meaning is ‘two squaresʼ. It is ‘wide’, that is to say, the

āmalasāraka. ʻHalf of that’ means four finger-breadths. ‘After that’ means
after having drawn the staff.
He explains how (the doors can be) draw in various ways.

vedāśrāyatarūpāṇi yadi vā vṛttamātrataḥ |
The form (of the doors may be square, made) with four (clearly

drawn) sides, or just fashioned (roughly). (33ab)

The drawing of the (corresponding) door (at the base of the) staff will

be (described) further ahead, and so that has not been separately explained here.

i-z Ḷ;VIḤIEIḤĀE|ḤCEEITK ĀṬŪAṈI

āfT-ī maqdā;Ṃ ṂJṃTāIāI]a: ṇīãT;s fkaā: 3

34 1A

The word ‘vṛtta’ may also mean ‘round' or ‘circular’ as well as ‘fashioned’, as I have translated.
It seems to me that the former meaning makes no sense in this context.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

[IPIR aī īāṣraṁ ṣa |
spasṣṭaśr̥ṅgam atho kuryād yadi vā vaiparītyataḥ || 33 ||
unmukhaṁ candrayugmaṁ vā bhaṅktvã kuryãc catuṣṭayam |
kuṭilo madhyataḥ spaṣṭo ‘dhomukhaḥ pārśvagaḥ sthitaḥ || 34 ||
uttāno ‘rdho ‘samaḥ pūrṇaḥ śliṣṭo granthigatas tathā |
candrasyetthaṁ dvādaśadhā vartanā bhramabhedinī| 35 ||
antarbahirmukhatvena sā punar dvividhā matā |

1) Now one may fashion the prong (directly and) clearly, or else 2)

in the opposite (indirect) way (as before). 3) Or else, having divided up the
pair of moons that are facing each other, make them into four. 4) (The

moon may be) twisted in the middle or 5) evident (as before), 6) facing
downwards or 7) located on (the areas) to the sides, 8) laying face up
(straight) or 9) in unequal halves, 10) (the moon may be) full, 11) (the parts

may be) conjoined or 12) connected with the knot. Such is the twelve-fold
manner of drawing of the moon, various according to (manner in which the
thread by which it is done) turns. Again, that (drawing) is considered to be
of two kinds, according to whether (the prongs) face inwards or outwards.

(33cd-36ab)

1) (One may fashion) ‘the prong (directly and) clearly, that is, like
the middle prong, drawn in three parts facing east etc., (or else) 2) ‘in the
opposite (indirect) way’, that is, in an unclear (manner) as before. 3) ‘The pair
of moons facing each other’ are drawn (in a manner so that they are) connected
to the fourth intersection (marman) (between the squares). ‘Having divided
(them) upʼ, that is, having divided them in two, (make them into) ‘four’, that is
to say, (four) moons. 4) (The moon may be) ‘twisted in the middle’, that is, a
half-moon (may be drawn) within (them), (or it may be) 5) ʻevident (as
before)ʼ, that is, its form (may be) drawn in the middle as before. (The words)

‘in the middle’ are (added by transposition) like the eye of a crow (that moves

from one side of the head to the other). (It may be) 6) ‘facing downwards’.

The meaning is that it is the tip of the half-moon that protrudes a little outside
(the main area of the maṇḍala). 7) (It may be) ‘located on (the areas) to the

sidesʼ like the prong (that is drawn) clearly (directly), it is drawn facing the
south and the north. 8) (It may be) ‘laying face upʼ, that is, facing upwards (or)

9) ‘in unequal halvesʼ, that is, (each) half is not equal, it is just a line that

serves as one of the moons. 10) By contrast (to that, the moon may be) “full’
(i.e. completely round and clearly drawn). 11) (The parts may be) ‘conjoined’,
that is, they are drawn so as to be mutually connected, starting from the base
(mūla) (or) 12) ‘connected with the knot’ʼ, that is, drawn so as to be well

Twelve modifications to the way the single Trident may be drawn or decorated are listed verses
33cd-36ab. Frankly, they are not clear to me. ltis very difficult, if not impossible, to make most if
not all these modifications and additions just on the basis of these brief indications. It is clear,

however, that many such modifications are possible.

See above, note 1,88 concerning the analogy of the ‘eye of the crow’.

TANTRĀLOKA

connected to the extremity of the half-moon. ‘That’ drawing which is of twelve
kinds.
If one makes (a further) variety of these varieties also, then an endless
number of varieties of maṇḍalas arises. Thus he says:

TīēaTVRJHĪ RIRGGGĀĪ ŪaṬGT:
kieeiEIEIAVIEAEFAEAĪEIḤ

3 IA

JĪĀTTTTTTĪGTTṄGTHĒCTT:|I| 3.|A

√IaTĀTGTTHĀT HTGGTHITHTTT I| 3¢ |I

tadbhedān maṇḍalānāṁ syād asaṅkhyo bhedaviṣṭaraḥ || 36 |I
pīṭhavīthībahirbhūmikaṇṭhakarṇakapolataḥ |
śobhopaśobhāsaṁbhedād guṇarekhāvikalpataḥ || 37 II
svastikadvitayādyaṣṭatayā paryantabhedataḥ |
bhāvābhāvavikalpena maṇḍalānām anantā || 38 ||

tato rajāṁsi deyāni yathāśobhānusārataḥ |

The extent of the variety of manḍalas is innumerable because of

these differences. (Moreover) the maṇḍalas are endless (because of the
possible differences in their) pedestal (pītha), platform (vīthi), the outer

ground (for the doors etc.), throat, ears, and cheek, and so (also) because of

the differences (in their) main and secondary decorations (śobha) and the
(various) options (to make) the parallel lines (of the borders) (gunarekhā);
(s0 too) because of the various (number of) svastikas, that may be two (or

more) up to eight, and because (any of these additions) may optionally be

present or absent. Then, (after the doors have been drawn), one should

add coloured powders as required to make it beautiful. (36cd-39ab)
Read tadā for tat.

According to NT 18/44, a kaṇṭha (‘throat’) is as wide as a vīrhi (platform), that is, two squares,
and is half a vīih high, that is, one square. The upakaṇṭha (‘attendant throat) s six squares long
and one finger-brcadth high. According to Kṣemarāja (SYT 5/34), a ‘check (kapola) is in some

texts, the length of a virhi, which in the maṇḍala described in the Svacchandatantra is four
squares, and half a vīṭhi thick, that is, two squares. In the case of the maṇḍala of the Nerratanīra,
itis nevertheless one square thick. The ‘sub-cheek’ (upakapola), mentioned in some texts (see, for

example, ĪŚGDP 1/6, 37, 58 etc.), analogously to the ‘attendant throat’, is a minor ‘cheek’ below
the ‘cheek’ proper. The ‘ears' (karṇa, karṇika) are two square protuberances in the comers of the
maṇḍala. The adomment’ śobhā and ‘adjacent secondary adornment’ are, respectively, a door
which is upside down on its sides with respect to the māin one, and after another one, upside

down with respect to that. In architecture, a ‘decoration’ is ‘an element of a certain thickness
which originates on the side of the throat of the door and the sub-ornament (upaśobhā) a small
portion below this'. In the commentary on NT, 18/44-45, Kṣemarāj
pecifies that the śobhā and

the upaśobhā have the aspect of an upside-down (or upturned?) (parāvrtta) door. In the speciic

case of the NT, the śobhā is five boxes long, and the upaśobhā one (see also AgP, 29/15-18). The

‘sub-cheek’ (upakapola) mentioned in some texts (see for example IŚGDP, 1, 6, 37. 58, etc), in
analogy to the ‘sub-throat’ is a minor cheek below the main one, that which is true and proper.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

In the group of six of the first kind, analysed previously in this way,
when pairs of components of the same nature are combined with single ones of
the same nature of a lotus and a wheel, beginning with one spoke up to six,
placed together with a lotus, wheel or a circle (vyoman) that is elsewhere, it
makes eighteen. In the same way, there are eighteen (varieties) of a lotus and a
circle, and eighteen of a wheel and a circle. Thus, there are fifty-four varieties.
When multiplying by seven in accord with their determined locations on the
seven spokes, (the variations) become three hundred and seventy-eight.
Multiplying them by two, due to the (two) different (kinds of) doors, (the
varieties) become seven hundred and fifty-six. Multiplying them by twenty-four
because of the (twenty-four) kinds of moons, (we get) eighteen thousand one
hundred and forty-four. These too (become) thirty-six thousand two hundred
and eighty-eight, according to whether there is or is not a pedestal (pīṭha). These
also (become) seventy-two thousand five hundred and seventy-six. In this way,
due to the other options, they become thirty-seven million one hundred and
fifty-eight thousand nine hundred and twelve.

ftrzī ũstaā

afer

fkamaaī

< 1

T] TīTTTTAĪ
TTT šTTĪ ṬŪTḺ || 0 |
TTI I TT WĪGĪ SfTTITṬBVĀĪTTTTĒ4

sindūraṁ rājavartaṁ ca khaṭikā ca sitottamā || 39 ||
uttamāni rajāṁsīha devatātrayayogataḥ |
parā candrasamaprakhyā raktā devī parāparā || 40 ||
aparā sā parā kālī bhīṣaṇā caṇḍayoginī |
The best colours, each for one of the goddesses, is red lead
(sindūra), (dark blue or black) lapis lazuli (rājavarta), and the whitest
chalk. The Goddess Parā is (white) like the moon. The Goddess Parāparā is
red. The other one is Aparā, who is the black (kāḹ), terrific, and fierce
Yoginī (caṇḍayoginī). (39cd-41ab)
Here itself, a lotus and a wheel together in one place, a lotus and a circle
together in one place, a lotus and a circle together in one place, a lotus in one

The ‘ears’ (karṇa, karṇikā) are two square projections of the angles of the maṇḍala. Concerning
the svastikas, see below, 132 ff.
Combining a lotus and wheel together as a pair with another lotus or a wheel, we get Iw + w, Iy
+ kwl + w. w + I, w + | wḹ + | wḹ + w.
A lotus and a wheel + a lotus, a lotus and a wheel + a wheel, a lotus and a wheel + a
zero, which makes three combinations. We get three more in the same way by combining a wheel
and a lotus with the three singly. Perhaps what is meant is lotus wheel + lotus.
These six vareties each combine with the thrce again singy to make eighteen varieties.
The rājavartam, according to the editor of the Viṣṇudharmotarapurāṇa (vol ḹ, p, 397), is the
blue of lapis lazuli.
By a play on words, Abhinava implies that the black (kālī Aparā is Kālī, who, as
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, is identfied in her Vidyā with Caṇḍayogeśvaṁ (see above, note 29,170).
31/40cd-1ab is quoted in MM p. 47, no variants. C. above, 15/323ab-329ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

place, a wheel in one place, and a circle in another place and so on – by
combining together collectively and individually pairs with different
(components) and one (or other) of the varieties that arise (in this way), without

having a fixed (number of) spokes, as explained previously, multiplying by
seven etc. (according to the number of spokes taken into consideration), many
varieties arise. What is the number if they are multiplied with other secondary
varieties is a very difficult question. ‘Then’, after the doors have been drawn.
(Aparā is) Kālī and also black.
Thus, (its) glory is so much that he says:

Z=T: TaI ṬadT=āī JāT̄ I| `¢, |

dṛṣṭvaitan maṇḍalaṁ devyaḥ sarvā nṛtyanti sarvadā || 41 ||
anarcite 'py adīkṣeṇa dṛṣṭe dīkṣyeta mātrṛbhiḥ |
Seeing this maṇḍala all the Goddesses always dance (with joy). Even
if it is not worshiped or it is seen by one who is not initiated, he would be
initiated by the Mothers! (41cd-42ab)

Having thus established by the way that the maṇḍala has an endless
(number of varieṭies,) and having described how it is coloured, as it is just the

Trident that is primary here, even though there are an endless number of
differences, he briefly gives the number of the main varieties on the basis of
that.

fa. aṝũḷāāṀ-1 firrōarhī; 1. + 3 1

kiṁ vātibahunoktena tritriśūlārasaptakāḥ || 42 ||

Śśūlayāgāḥ ṣaṭ sahasrāṇy evaṁ sārdhaśatadvayam |
Or what is the use of speaking much? The trident maṇḍalas

(śūlayāga) with three tridents and seven spokes are six thousand. Such (is
the number of) the two hundred and fifty (maṇḍalas) mentioned previously
(multiplied by twenty-four). (42cd-43ab)
Or what is the use of establishing that the maṇḍala has an endless

(number of varieties)? By saying that ‘here, in the middle (of this maṇḍala) with

kaṣṭaśrīthara eva praṣṭavyaḥ. The meaning of the expression in bold is unclear to me and is
not found in the Úictionaries. It rquires emendation.
The word ‘yāga’as Sanderson points out (sce above, note 2,219) may also mean ‘paṇtheon' or
an assembly of deities. In that case, the expression sīlayāga’ would mean the pantheons (or
assembly of deitis) on the prongs of the Trident. In this context ‘yāga’ means mmaṇḍala. See
above, note t0 3/70. See below, 31746c-47a and 31/53ab.
250 x 24 = 6,000. Sce above, 31/27- 29ab and not; also 31/33cd-36ab.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

three tridents and seven spokes' etc., he indicates that the (main) types are two

hundred and fifty and, in the aforementioned manner, taking as a basis half the

group of seven and multiplying by twenty-four due to the variety of moons,
there are six thousand trident maṇḍalas (śūlayāga). Thīs is the meaning of the
statement. (However, it is written in the 7rikasadbhāva that): ‘the trident
(maṇḍalas) are six thousand less than two hundred and fifty.”
(This is not correct. The text is corrupt. The reading) nūnam (which
means ‘less’) or ūānā (that means the same) is (also) wrong, because there is no
(grammatical) connection (between the words,) as it is not right to replace an
instrumental case with an ablative. Moreover, here (in this case), one needs to

multiply the number two hundred and fifty, and that by which it is multiplied
are the twenty-four varieties of moons one arrives at in relation to the seven
spokes. The multiplied aggregate amounts to six thousand. When the reading of

that word is (taken to be) ‘less’ (iūna), there is no reference to multiplication and

so it becomes groundless. Here (in this passage) nothing was said before also
about multiplication. So enough of this (discussion). The main point (prāya) is
this verse:
‘Then (after the doors have been drawn), one should add coloured

powaders . . .

Thus, it follows that (what was taught) before is sound, so that
everything is coherent.
Surely (one may ask), how is it is that it possesses such greatness? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

1 -x3 1
yā sā devī parā śaktiḥ prāṇavāhā vyavasthitā || 43 ||
viśvāntaḥ kuṇḍalākārā sā sākṣād atra vartitā |
tattvāni tattvadevyaś ca viśvam asmin pratiṣṭhitam || 44 ||
That Goddess who is the supreme (parā) power, established as the

one who transports the vital breath, present within all things, her form (as
Kuṇḍalinī, circular like an) earring (kuṇḍala), is fashioned (and made to
abide) here (in this maṇḍala) in a directly (apparent manner). (All) the

Above, 31/28a.
In its present form, with an ablative ending, the meaning is as stated, i.e. less than two hundred
and fifty. If the word ardhaśatadvaya – ‘two hundred and fifty’ were to be in the instrumental

case, the meaning would be ‘less by two hundred and fifty’. This makes sense; even so, Jayaratha
says there is no logical reason to take an ablative to be an instrumental.
TĀ 31/39.

See above, 31/31. Concerning the name ‘kuṇḍalinī’ as meaning ‘one who has an earring’ or is
‘coiled like an earring’, see Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 2, 4.

TANTRĀLOKA

reality levels (tattva) and their (presiding) goddesses, (indeed) everything, is
installed (pratiṣṭhita) (and well established) within this. (43cd-44)

He explains this bit by bit.

STTRTG-] ĀĪSBTI] ĀTHTRTTHTṬRTT;
|| 5, |

| -ś,
TAĀTTHITĪT
aTI īaTĪST I āĒ |
ST] TTTTIII JTĪTTJTRTĀĪT;
|I| `5. 1
rōra-ī āḷ faī. fēra: aaaṁāīafa1

TTJTTTĪTGRISATHTRGGTṬSHT]
I #¢ I

qṃṛa zarīē% zaiāī fe-rā a: 1| x8 1

fṝazfa |
atrordhve tantumātreṇa tisraḥ śūlaragāḥ sthitāḥ |
āsanatvena cecchādyā bhogamokṣaprasādhikāḥ || 45 ||
tās tu mokṣaikakāmasya śūlāraviddhamadhyakāḥ !
tasmād enaṁ mahāyāgaṁ mahāvibhavaviṣṭaraiḥ |l 46 ||
pūjayed bhūtikāmo vā mokṣakāmo ‘pi vā budhaḥ |
asya darśanamātreṇa bhūtavetālaguḥyakāḥ || 47 ||
palāyante daśa diśaḥ śivaḥ sākṣāt prasīdati |
mandaśaktibalāviddho ‘py etanmaṇḍalapūjanāt || 48 II
satataṁ mãsaṣaṭkena trikajñānaṁ samaśnute |

yat prāpya heyopādeyaṁ svayam eva vicārya saḥ || 49 ||
dehānte syād bhairavātmā siddhikāmo ‘tha siddhyati |

Here above, as (a part of) the Throne, on the spokes of the trident,

(in the form) of just a (subtle) thread, there are three (goddesses, who are

the powers) beginning with the will, that vouchsafe (both) worldly benefits
and liberation. For one who aspires solely to liberation, these very (three)

are pierced in the middle by the spokes of the Trident. Thus a wise man,
whether he desires worldly fruits or liberation, should worship this great
pantheon (mahāyāga) with great and extensive (expenditure of his) wealth.
Just by seeing (this maṇḍala,) Bhūtas, Vetālas and Guhyakas fleein (all) ten

directions and Śiva (becomes) propitious in a direct (clearly apparent
manner). By worshipping this maṇḍala continuously, even one whois not
penetrated (by even just) the strength of a weak (descent of the) power (of
‘ See above, 15/339-343.

Read śūlāraviddha- for śūlārāviddha-.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

grace) attains in (just) six months (the liberating) knowledge of the Trika

(teachings). Once having attained and personally examined what should be

adopted and avoided, he becomes Bhairava (bhairavātman) when the body
comes to an end, and one who desires attainments (siddhi) attains them.
(45-50ab)
(The goddesses are there in the form of) ‘just a (subtle) threadʼ

(tantumātreṇa). The meaning is that (they are present there) in an expanding

form. (The word) ‘very (tu) (in the expression ‘these very (tu) (three)) serves

to emphasize (that it is these very same goddesses). Thus, they themselves (are

the three powers) ‘beginning with the will’. This is the meaning. ‘(These

energies) are pierced in the middle by the spokes of the Trident’, as they are

the three lotuses of the (energy of) the Transmental (unmanasa). That was said

before:

‘As duality is in the process of coming to an end with the (Great) Ghost,
those (energies) gradually unfold and, (remaining) well distinct from one
another, (manifest as) the three prongs (of the Trident). Once their duality has
been completely destroyed, they then (manifest in the form of) the three lotuses,

consisting of the Transmental (unmanasa). (AII) this serves as (the Lord’s)

Throneʼ.N

power.

‘Thus’, because (the maṇḍala) is the abode (adhiṣṭhāna) of the supreme
Such greatness is not only of that (maṇḍala), rather it is also of one who

knows it. Thus he says:

PVRG

HI
ṜTTT-ĀTR
THĀĀ IJ
U. |

maṇḍalasyāsya yo vyāptiṁ devatānyāsam eva ca || 5O II
vartanāṁ ca vijānāti sa gurus trikaśāsane |
tasya pādarajo mūrdhni dhāryaṁ śivasamīhinā || 51 I|
He who knows the pervasive extent (yyāpti) of this maṇḍala, the

deposition of the deities (within it) and (how to) draw it, is a (true) teacher

in the Trika teachings (trikaśāsana). It behoves one who aspires to

Jayaratha here has in mind the root an, which means ‘to extend'. Jayaratha clearly had this
rcading before him. Even so, one wonders if this reading is correct. The meaning a it stands is not
clear.
Above, 15/342-343ab. Instead of e1ā eva u galie bhedaprasare, the reading there is 1ā eva
galati bhedaprasare, which has been discarded. See above, note 15,556.
?' Here the expression ‘trikaśāsana’, which literally means ‘Trika teaching°, clearly denotes the
Trika school or traditon generically, rather than a text. Similaty, the analogous expression
sana’ means Āgamic Śaiviṣm in general as Śiva’s teachings. Cf. also the expression
trikasśāstram in 1/18c and other places. Knowledge of the maṇḍala is. of course, essential in order

TANTRĀLOKA

(realise) Śiva to bear the dust of his feet on (his) head (by bowing devoutly
to him). (50cd-51)

€ei-ā-bi.EIEe'EIE

maṁ āay] ādī] JNG

ú| 43

atra sr̥ṣṭiṣṭhitidhvaṁsān kramāt trīn api pūjayet |
turyaṁ tu madhyato yad vã sarveṣu paripūrakam || 52 |
Here one should also worship the three phases (krama), that is,

(those of) creation, persistence and destruction, and the Fourth (process) in
the centre, or else (just that alone as present) within all (of them, as that

which) fills (and perfects them). (52)

‘Here’ on the three Tridents (one should worship the three phases of
creation). ‘The centre’ is Kuleśvarī’s place, (present) ‘in all’ the three
processes (of creation, persistence and destruction).
He now explains another configuration of deities (yāga) through the
process of transposition (from this one into it).
Another Form of the Trika Maṇḍala According to the Trikahr̥daya

TTH aT 7JTGTS aAIĪ THĪTIÑÇ |
EÚEḤ ṬGRTT TGē̃ ṀH-Ĩ̄TāH | M3 1|
caṭustriśūlaṁ vā guptadaṇḍaṁ yāgaṁ samācaret |
tatra tat pūjayet samyak sphuṭaṁ kramacatuṣṭayam || 53 ||

Or else, one may worship the configuration of deities (yāga) of (a

maṇḍala consisting of) four tridents with the staff hidden (by one of them).
to worship the deity. The main maaṇḍala s a specifying characteristic of a tradition. The varieties
it may have characterize the various branches or schools within that tradition. This
is true even

though this may also be determined in other ways, such as, for example, variations in the form of
the deity°s mantra. Thus, for example, the maṇḍala of tṅe Śrīvidyā school is invarably the same
Śrīcakra. Its two major branches - kādi and hādi - are distnguished by yvariants in the root Vidyā.
Again, the basic maṇḍala of a branch of a tradition may have a range of varieties. This appears to
be so especially so in the case of Trīka ritual. Within the Śaiva traditions, the degree to which it

presented here, however ideally, is unusual. Proliferation of configurations of divine forms in

general is not, of course. One has only to observe the very numerous kalpas of the
Jayadrathayāmala to sec the ease with which that takes place.
Sanderson (1986: 197) explains: ‘The guru further installs these phases (kramāḥ) in their fully

elaborated form as the four separate sequences of [Krama] deities, those of projection, immersion

and resorption on the Tridents of Parā, Parāparā and Aparā, respectively, and those of the
Nameless in the centre, or else the fourth alone, containing the three by implication’. Sanderson

points out that Abhinava supplies another example of the latter alternative above in 16/157. The

additional projection of the Krama onto the Trika Trident, although unknown to the Mālinīviiaya,
is Abhinava’s preferred form of the Trident and worship that takes places on it.

This is the fourth trident, which, in the preceding maṇḍala, is partially covered by the stick.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

There (in that maṇḍala), one should worship properly and in a clear (and in

a directly apparent manner) the four processes (of creation and the rest)
(kramacatuṣṭaya). (53)
‘The staff is hidden’. The sense is that the middle prong is in that

place. This is the sole difference between this (maṇḍala) and the previous one.

says:

Moreover, what we have said is also stated in other scriptures. Thus he

Ṣ̄TT-rdT

aaā IīT. ūTr{ srzīrītarrī
| uçx u

Jā: ā̄Tdīaī q TTVSG Tddhīṁē7 |

TGIṬGRHTITT ṬTTHTĪCAJTTḤ I 4U, I

āq f-ṝ̄ aĩ J uçs (

ũ agqfērā fēā aaoṁ rṝ faft̃ |

ity etat kathitaṁ gupte ṣaḍardhahr̥daye pare |
sṣatke proktaṁ sūcitaṁ śrīsiddhayogīśvarīmate || 54 ||

agrataḥ sūtrayitvā tu maṇḍalaṁ sarvakāmadam |

mahāśūlasamopetaṁ padmacakrādibhūṣitam || 55 ||
dvāre dvāre likhec chūlaṁ varjayitvā tu paścimamṃ |
koṇeṣv api ca vā kāryaṁ mahāśūlaṁ drumāṇvitam || 56 |
amrṛtāmbhodbhavārīṇāṁ śūlāgre tu trikaṁ trikam |
Śūla itthaṁ prakartavyam aṣṭadhā tat tridhāpi vā l| 57 ||

evaṁ saṁsūcitaṁ divyaṁ khecarīṇāṁ puraṁ tv iti |

This is stated in the hidden, supreme Saḍardhahr̥daya of six

thousand

verses

(ṣaka),

Siddhayogīśvarīmata.”

and

(just

implicitly)),

mentioned

in

the

The four processes - kramacatuṣṭaya – īs a clear reference to Krama, which this form of the

Trika maṇḍala incorporates in this way. Abhinava tells us in the next line that this is drawn
from
the Trikahdaya. Thus, this Trika Tantra, like the Devyāyāmala, incorporated Krama elements

into the Trika Trident maṇḍala. Noṭe that here and in the following verses, that are clearly drawn

from the Trikahr̥daya, the Trident maṇḍala is not quite the same as the one just described
in the
Trikaṣadbhāva / Trikasāra. Thus, there can be no doubt that the two are quite separate Tantras.

Presumably, Jayaratha means that the other two prongs of the fourth trident, which is below the

other three, are visible.
“ Here in verses 10cd to 52, Abhinava has described the drawing of the triple Trident
maṇḍala.
He tells us there that he is following the Sadbhāva (31/10ab). First he presents the
purely Trika

Trident maṇḍala, and makes it very clear that this is such, by declarng that a person who knows
how to draw it is a teacher of the Trika Tantras. Then, after having spent about 40

verses to

do
that,he continues for another two to explain how the fourfold Krama can be projected and

TANTRĀLOKA

worshipped in this Trika maṇḍala. This is followed by the statement that this is taught in the
Saḍardhaḥr̥dāya. – ‘This is stated in the hidden, supreme Ṣaḍardhahṛdaya of six thousand verses

(satka) (31/54bc) (iry etat kathitaṁ gupte ṣadardhahr̥daye pare saṭke).

Reading sadardhahṛdaye ‘pare, as Gnoli does, the translation would be ‘in the last (or
‘other’) section of six thousand verses (saka)' (Gnoli: ‘nell'esade posteriore’) instead of ‘supreme
Saḍaráhahr̥daya’. But thereis no need to hypothesize that thisis one ṣaṭka along with others of
the same text. We know from a reference in Bhāskara’s commentary on ŚSu 2/2 that the

Trikaṣāra was just 6,000 verses long. The Parāṣatka (the Six Thousand Verses concerning Parā)

is a Trika Tantra, mentioned along with the Vīrāvalī and the ‘one called Bhairava’ (i.e. the
Bhairavakula?) and the Kālikākula, that is a Krama Tantra, at the end of the Kumārikākhaṇḍa.
There in chapter 68, a hierarchy of schools is outlined based on a graded classification of their

scriptures. On the basis of the same common exegetical principle adopted by Abhinava that we

see exemplified in the revealed scriptures themselves, lower schools (= Tantras) sustain and

support higher ones, and the more so, the closer they are in the hierarchy. These are considered to

be immediately below Kubjikā Tantras (KuKh 68/114cd-116ab). They may well have included
the Parāṣaṭka in particular as a Trika Tantra that incorporated the Kālīkrama, as do the Kul
Tantras, that are themselves direct descendants of the Trika. Given the intimate relations

between the Kubjikā and the Trika Tantras, it may well be that the Parāṣaṭkais the Trikasāra oṝ
six thousand verses.

Let us get back to Jayaratha, who glosses ‘Sadardhahṛdaya’ as ‘Trikahṛdaya and
concludes his commentary on this passage (in TĀv ad 31/59) saying that: ‘Having explained the

placement of the tridents and lotuses taughtin the venerable Trikasadbhāva, he sets out to explain

(the placement) described in other scriptures.' Clearly, there can be no doubt that Jayaratha

considered the Trikasadbhāva and Trikahrdaya (i.e. Saḍardhahṛdaya) to be one and the same.

Nor is he simply guessing. Jayaratha appears to be citing the Trīkasadbhāva in as many as four

places in the course of his commentary on this passage in TĀv ad 31/26-29ab, 30-32, 42cd-43ab
and ad 31/54-58ab, and he cites the Trikasāra in several places. All this evidence suggests that the
Trikahrdaya, Trikasadbhāva and the Trikasāra are the same.

Sanderson, however, does not accept this identification, maintaining instead that this

Trika maṇḍala is described in the Trikasadbhāva, and the projection of the Krama is from the
Trikahr̥daya. Then, for good measure, Abhinava describes another alternative form of that

maṇḍala. Seemingly, that too is taken from the Trikahṛdaya. The Krama projection taught in the

Trikahr̥daya into the core of the Trika maṇḍala is central to Abhinava’s Anuttara Trika. It is at the

summit of the worship and contemplation of the maṇḍala (see above, note 31,27). Accordingly.,

Abhinava places it at the summit of the full Trika initiation that results in ultimate liberation

(nirvāṇadīkṣā), taught above in Chapter Sixteen. We witness it here in the deployment of the

pantheon in the triple Trident maṇḍala, as we did in there, where the preparatory purification of

the initiand is taught. There we have seen that it involves the projections onto his body of a series
of seventy depositions (1yāsa). The base of these depositions is constructed with Trika alphabets

and mantras, to serve as the surface of inscription for the ultimate deposition, which is that of the
Krama cycle of ‘the four-fold wheel of the Nameless, withdrawal, stability and emanation,
together with their own deities, nourished (bṛṅhita) by (the Vidyā of the goddess) Mātr̥sadbhāva.”
(16/157) Abhinava, as usual, acknowledges his source, invoking its unique authority by declaring
that amongst the Trika Tantras, this Krama rites is taught in the the ‘venerable Śāraśāstra, which
is how Abhinava almost always calls the Trikasāra (ṣaḍardhaśāstreṣu śrīmatsāraśāstre ca
kathyate 1 16/158cd). So there we face again, as we do here and in several other places, the

uncertainty of the identity of the Trika / –hṛidaya / –sadbhāva/ –sāra. Are they three different

texts, two or just one? IF Abhinava is saying that this is taught only in the Trikasāra amongst all of
the Trika scriptures, then obviously these are three names for the one text. Indeed, the names all

mean the same, i.e. ʻessenceʼ.
We know that the Devyāyāmala also taught the supremacy of the goddess
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. Abhinava repeats that with obvious satisfaction several times in the Tantrāloka.

Here perhaps it is specifically the Krama teaching of the four processes coordinated with the

Twelve Kālīs that surround Parā / Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī in the maṇḍala and the highest deposition. If so,
and it is indeed likely, then most probably we should take these to be three names for the same

text.

Abhinava is referring to the incorporation of Kālī Krama worship into the Trika Trident

maṇḍala. By sayiṅg that it is just mentioned or suggested (sācita) in the SYM, it is clear that it

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE
‘After having first of all traced the maṇḍala that bestows all (one’s)

desires, equipped with a large trident adorned with lotuses and wheels etc.,

one should draw a trident in each door except the western one. (One may)
also fashion in (each of) the corners a large trident that has (its own) tree.
One should fashion (the lotuses) of the spokes born from the ocean of
nectar® in groups of three on the tip of the trident, or else eight times

(that,) or just three times only.® The divine abode of the skyfaring
(goddesses) (khecarī) has in this way been well outlined.” (S4-58ab)
This scripture is ‘hidden’, that is, secret. The Saḍaráhahṛdaya is the
Trikahr̥daya. (This has been) ‘(just) mentioned’ (in the Siddhayogīśvarīmata),
not spoken about directly. He quotes from that (first) book saying: ‘after

having first of all traced’ etc. (Tridents are drawn in all the doors) ‘except the
western one’, which serves as the support of the rite of worship (for it is said
that):

‘one should keep the western one open.’
‘Lotuses of the one born from the ocean of nectar” are the lotuses of
‘the one born from the ocean of nectar’, that is, the moon.® This is the meaning.
‘Eight times (that) or just three times onlyʼ, according to whether (the

maṇḍala) is one of four tridents or one (respectively).
This is not said only here, rather it is also (said) elsewhere. Thus he

says:

u¢ 1

sthānāntare ‘pi kathitaṁ śrīṣiddhātantraśāsane || 58 II
“Ṭhis has been taught in another place also, that is, in the teaching
of the venerable Siddhātantra. (58cd)
was not explicitly taught there, which is as we would expect. There certainly is no mention of
Krama worship in the short recension of the SYM that has survived.

Jayaratha says that the western door serves as the support of the rite of worship, and so should
be kept open. This is because the worshipper mentally enters the maṇḍala through it, thus moving
up towards the east along the shaft of the Trident.
tis still common practice to install and worship Śiva’s trident under a tree.
“ Read amṛtāmbhodbhavārīṇāṁ for amṛtāmbhobhavārīṇāṁ.
V Itis not clear where these lotuses should be drawn.

“2 The Trident projected into the body is, as we shall see in the following chapter, called
Khecarīmudrā – the Seal of the Skyfaring Goddess. By following the current of the vital breath
and the power of awareness that flows with it, the soul is transported up into the End of the

Twelve to become a Skyfarer, empowered by the Skyfaring goddesses of the Krama in the Trika
Trident and beyond. Thus, the outer and inner maṇḍala mirror the heavenly Trident of the Sky of
consciousness.
This reference is drawn from the Trikahṛdaya (-sāra). See above, note 31,57.
Sun lotuses are red, and open when the sun rises and close when it sets. Moon lotuses are blue,

and open and close with the rising and setting of the moon.

According to Gnoli, the passage from 55 to 58cd is drawn from the SYM. However, this is not

Jayaratha’s view. There can be no doubt that 59 is drawn from the SYM, as Abhinava himself

clearly says that in 58cd. However, it is not immediately clear from what Abhinava says whether

TANTRĀLOKA

He quotes that:

Ṭ || 48, I|

kajaṁ madhye tadardhena śūlaśṛṅgāṇi tāni tu |
śūlāṅkaṁ maṇḍalaṁ kalpyaṁ kamalāṅkaṁ ca pũraṇe || 59 ||
“(In one type of maṇḍala, there is a) lotus in the middle (of it). (In
the other type,) the prongs of the trident are half the size of that (lotus).
These (constitute) the maṇḍala that is marked by a trident. One marked by

a lotus should be fashioned to complete it.’ (59)

Having explained the placement of the tridents and lotuses taught in the
venerable Trikasadbhāva, he sets out to explain (the placement) described in
other scriptures.

the

preceding

passage

is

also

from

there.

He

writes

sthānāntare

kathitaṁ

śrīsiddhātantraśāsane (58cd). This line can be translated ‘this has been taught in another place
also in the teaching of the venerable Siddhātantra.’ (Sšcd) However, it may also mean, as 1
understand it, that: ‘this has been taught in another place also, that is, in the teaching of the

venerable Siddhātantra (Ś8cd) Jayaratha introduces this statement saying: ‘This is not said only

here, rather it is also (said) elsewhere.' Does he mean ‘here’ in the SYM and ‘elsewhere in the
same source? Or does he mean here in the 7rikasadbhāva and elsewhere in the SYM Abhīnava is

about to quote as verse 59? Jayaratha himself suplies the answer by stating just ater verse 59, by

way of introduction to what follows: ‘Having explained the placement of the tridents and lotuses
taught in the venerable Trikasadbhāva, he sets out to explain (the placement) described in other

scriptures.' Apparently, Jayaratha thought that the entire scction from 10cd to 58 was drawn from
there. The reference drawn here from the SYM does not describe a separate maṇḍala, it is simply
statig in a general way the size and placement of lotuses in relation to the Tridents of Trika
Trident maṇḍalas. This is clear in itself, and further confirmed by Jayaratha, who concludes this
exposition of the Trident Maṇḍala in the Trikasadbhāva, saying that this is how the Tridents and
lotuses should be placed in it.

The reason Abhinava cites the Siddhayogīśvarīmata here is quite probably because he

has just presented a form of the Trika Trident drawn from the Trikasadbhāva, which incorporates

the fundamental elements of the Krama system. Conscious, no doubt, that this syncretism was not
known to the SYM, or to the MV, for that matter, he wished to stress that this is nonetheless a
Trika maṇḍala, bearing as it does the essential characteristics of one to which this generic

statement in the SYM testifies. In other words, he cites the SYM to state that all such maṇḍalas

are acceptable. This is not a description of a maṇḍala taught in the SYM. In order to stress its
authority, Abhinava offers a detailed presentation of a maṇḍala described in the SYM (31/155158) to conclude this chapter.

“ This prescription, concerning two types of manḍalas, can be identified in SYM 6/12 {f and 8/11

ff. The first is the Trident maṇḍala. The second is a maṇḍala uṣed for the rite of initiation, that has
a lotus in the middle of it. Such detailed descriptions of the Trident maṇḍala as the references in
this chapter suggest (i.e. in 31/60-61, 155-163) were found in the SYM are not found in the
recension of the SYM that has been recovered.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

B) The Construction of the Maṇḍala According to the Mālinīvijayottara.

ēeG@E e/EHFibCĀEG/THḤ
fkzrā ftēāz ũaramgHrvaī | ēc ||
3qjī: āīāaīTā ] T̄āTRTTTRIT; |

a JāJ{ād TTS JaTGRTPJTĪT
a: || 2 1
atha śūlābjavinyāsaḥ śrīpūrve triśiromate |

siddhātantre trikakule devyāyāmalamālayoḥ || 60 |I

yathoktaḥ sāraśāstre ca tantrasadbhāvaguḥhyayoḥ |
tathā pradarśyate spaṣṭaṁ yady apy uktakramād kṛtaḥ || 61 ||

Now, although the placement of the tridents and lotuses® has

(already) been done according to the stated procedure (krama) as it is

taught in the Sāraśāstra (i.e. Trikasāra), (that found in) the
Tantrasadbhāva and the Guhya will be clearly exemplified in the same way,

(by the one found) in the Maālinīvijayottara,’ the Triśiromata,” the
Siddhātantra,” the Trikakula, the Devyāyāmala, and the Mālā (i.e. the
Kularatnamālā). (60-61)

“ The source is MV 9/6-31, which is quoted almost literally in 31/62-85ab. See following notes

for details. See above, 31/5-6ab = MV 9/3cd-4 and note, where MV 9/2-5 is quoted. This is the
maṇḍala deṣcribed in the MV for the basic samayadīkṣā (MV 9/1).

“ Read kṛtaḥ for gataḥ.

“’ The most essential characteristic of all Trika maṇḍalas is ‘the placement of the tridents and
lotuses (śūlābjavinyāsaḥ) (31/60a). They way this done, their number, positioning, and relative

placement distinguishes one Trika maṇḍala from another, even as their presence together
specifically characterizes a maṇḍala as being a Trika maṇḍala.
7 Perhaps the already cited Trikasadbhāva.

See below, 31/62-85ab.
See below, 31/101-154.
” See below, 31/155-163 and above 31/54-59.
See below, 31/85cd-100ab.
” The descriptions of the way the Trident maṇḍala is drawn found in this chapter are taken from
the following Trika Tantras: 1) Trikasadbhāva / Trikahṛdaya – verses 10cd-58, 2)
Maālinīvijayottara – yerses 62-85ab, 3) Devyāyāmala – verses 85cd-100, and 4) Triśirobhairava –101-154, Siddhayogeśvarīmata – yerses 155-163 (and 58). The texts Abhinava lists here are more
than these, but as he says, the ones described here serve to exemplify those described in the other
Trika Tantras, from which he does not draw. As for the texts he does not name fully, the one he

calls Mālā is most probably the Kularatnamālā. Although Abhinava generally calls it Ratvamāā,

he does refer to it simply as ‘Mālā’ in at least three places (15/598b (594b), 28/113d, 29/238d).

The Sāraśāstra is the Trikasāra. The identity of the Guhya is uncertain. It may be the
Guhyayoginītantra, quoted once in the PTy (p. 190), but there is nothing in the reference there to

indicate that it is a Trika Tantra. Perhaps it is the Kulagahvaratantra, if we take Kulagahvara to
be the Yoni, which may also be called Guhya. But I have not found evidence of this usage. I have
not managed to locate the way the Trika maṇḍala is drawn in the Tantrasadbhāva, although the

Trika Trident does appear there as the locus around which the sixty-four Trika yoginīs congregate.

As for the Trikakula – this may be the Trikaratnakula ciṭed by Abhinava in the PTy (p. 192) or
the (Trika)bhairavakula. could not find another certain reference to a text by this name, just as it
stands. It is possible that none such existed. If so, we should understand the expression
siddhātantre trikakule to mean ‘in the Siddhātantra which belongs to the Trikakula’.

TANTRĀLOKA

eUGHcṝaeztxEakēṟccaTAI

vedāśrite trihaste prāk pūrvam ardhaṁ vibhājayet |
hastārdhaṁ sarvatas tyaktvā pūrvodagyāmyadiggatam || 62 ||
tryaṁgulaiḥ koṣṭhakair ūrdhvais tiryak cāṣṭadvidhātmakaiḥ |
dyau dvau bhāgau parityajya punar dakṣiṇasaumyagau || 63 ||

”One should first of all divide the front half within a square

(enclosure) (measuring) three handspans. Having left half a handspan on

all the sides to the east, north and south, (the remaining space is divided)

by sixteen squares of three finger-breadths above (i.e horizontally) and
laterally (i.e. vertically), having omitted two squares each on the southern
and northern sides. (62-63)
‘(One should) first of all (divide off the front half within a square

(enclosure) (measuring)) three handspans’ʼ. The intended sense is that by

subsequently adding a handspan (to the sides) in order (to make room) for the

doors, (the enclosure will measure) four handspans. Thus because, as will be

explained, ‘by sixteen squares of three finger-breadths’, (the prescription that

the enclosure) should be divided thirty-two times is accomplished. Thus, having
in this way omitted spaces of twelve finger-breadths from the three directions
beginning with the east, one should divide ‘the front half’ horizontally with
eight squares of three finger-breadths and vertically with sixteen. One should
then again omit the last two squares in the linear sequential order on the
southern (right) and northern (left) sides, that have been divided off from the
eastern (front) half in such a way that twelve squares along the vertical remain.
By just this much (space, the drawing of the trident) can be successfully
completed.
First of all, he talks about the drawing of the sides (of the maṇḍala).

JTIFḤTTHT
] āVGTKRA ZT I| £7 I
brahmaṇaḥ pārśvayor jīvāc caturthāt pūrvatas tathā |
bhāgāráhabhāgamānaṁ tu khaṇḍacandradvayaṁ dvayam || 64 ||

/62-63 = MV 9/6, 7cd-8ab. MV 9/Tab is missing: guṇāṅgulasamair bhāgaiḥ

śeṣam aṣya

vibhājayet | ‘Dīvide up the remaining (space) into equal parts of three finger breadths.” (after . . .
north and south . . .).
This is where the doors will be constructed, see below, 31/83cd-85ab.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

On the two sides of the (thread of) Brahmā, beginning with the

fourth living (jīva) (thread) from the east (i.e. the front, one should draw)
two pairs of half-moons (two on the right and two on the left), measuring
half a square and one (full) square (respectively). (64)
Here, apart from the thread of Brahmā (brahmasūtra), the threads are

called ‘livingʼ (jīva) (threads). On the two sides with respect to the thread of
Brahmā, the fourth living thread beginning from that and then the fourth living
thread ‘from the east’, that is, in the eastern quarter, then with a thread that
measures a square and one that measures half a square, two half-moons (are
drawn). The repetition ‘two pairs’ is intended with reference to the two sides.
How is that? (In response to this question,) he says:

htatctrcṭēeecēglcx tI

āTkiṝa y #dīq avsēāī<z̄d zAḤ I| €ē I

tayor antas tṛtīye tu dakṣiṇottarapārśvayoḥ |
jīve khaṇḍenduyugalaṁ kuryād antarbhramād budhaḥ || 65 ||

tayor aparamarmaṣthaṁ khaṇḍendudvayakoṭigam |

bahirmukhaṁ bhramaṁ kuryāt khaṇḍacandradvayaṁ dvayam ll 66 ||

tadvad brahmaṇi kurvīta bhāgabhāgārdhasaṁmitam |

On a third living thread between those two on the southern (right)
and northern (left) side, the wise man should fashion a pair of half-moons
by turning (the thread) towards the inside, after that he should fashion
(another) two pairs of half-moons (two on the right and two on the left),
facing outwards, located on another junction (between squares with respect
to the preceding ones), touching at the extremities of the two half-moons. In
the same way, he should fashion (two half-moons) measuring one square
and a half square, on the (thread of) Brahmā.” (65-67ab)

As one begins from the fourth thread to the side (vertically) where,
because it is the measure of a square, it comes to rest in the second thread, the
third thread in the middle between these two threads, that is to say, the same

fourth (thread) from the front, having the left or right hand there, as is required,
‘by turning towards the inside’ (between) both the two sides, not outside, ‘the

wise man’ who knows how to draw that should fashion two half-moons.™

However, the difference with the half-moon, from the point of view that will be
explained (further ahead), is that it is drawn beginning from the fourth square.

” 31/64 = licrally MV 9/8cd-%ab.
” 31/65-67ab = MV 9cd-1 no variants.
$ Read khaṇḍacandradvayaṁ for khaṇḍacakradvayaṁ.

TANTRĀLOKA

Having placed one hand on the third junction (between squares) in relation to
the fourth as one enters inwards to the other one (between) both those two sides,
outwards, not inwards, as it is connected to the front extremity of the two halfmoons drawn previously. In other words, one should rotate (the thread) twice in
such a way that ‘two and two’ of two half-moons may be drawn. ‘In the same
wayʼ, having placed one hand on the second junction in relation the third
(thread), in the other (placed between) both the two sides, ‘touching at the

extremities of the two half-moons’ʼ as well connected to the threads that extend
along the south (right) and north (left); thus one should make two inward facing

turns in such a way that there are ‘two pairs of half-moonsʼ, measuring a single
square and a half square (respectively).
After having drawn the sides in this way, he talks about the drawing of
the middle prong (of the trident), because (that is the) main one, when the

prongs need to be drawn.

š ĩa r̥ṀṀ Ĩ varr 3. |

r̥-ziaāhīz̄ī̄ JGaTṀTJĨṢÃT I| RC II

eeeEET' EJEVIEF-CI

tato dvitīyabhāgānte brahmaṇaḥ pārśvayor dvayoḥ || 67 ||
dve rekhe pūrvage neye bhāgatrya)
ame budhaiḥ |
ekārdhendūrdhvakoṭisthaṁ brahmasūtrāgrasaṅgatam || 68 II

sūtradvayaṁ prakurvīta madhyaśṛṅgaprasiddhaye |

Then, at the end of the second square, on the two sides of (the
thread of) Brahmā, the wise man should lead two lines (upwards) towards
the east, that come to rest (at a distance) of a third of a square. In order to
successfully fashion the prong in the middle, two threads should be

prepared that, (beginning from) the upper extremity of one of the halfmoons, join at (the other) end with the thread of Brahmā. (67cd-69ab)

Then again, the two second squares said to be (in front) in the east
vertically above the two on the sides of the thread of Brahmā from its root up to
its extremity, two lines should be led by connecting with the extremity of the
half-moon that measures one square in such a way that they come to rest by
extending (vertically) for (a space of a) third of square. Thus the ‘pillow’ (at the
base of the prong) is one finger wide and three fingers broad. The other (thread)
is in contact with the ‘pillowʼ and so, beginning from the upper extremity of the
(half) moon that measures half a square, one should connect the two threads to

the end of the thread of Brahmā in such a way that the prong in the middle is
successfully (completed).
He now explains how the prongs on the (two) sides are drawn.

31/67cd-69ab = MV 9/12-13 no variants.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

Tīaāīāāāīsttarq, āHHTX #JTT I|

TāTaTTṬSSĪĪATq TPHTĪīRHITIT: | .9ō0 |
tadagrapārśvayor jīvāt sūtraṃ ekāntare dhṛtam || 69 ||
ādidvitīyakhaṇḍendukoṇāt koṇāntam ānayet |
tayor evāparāj jīvāt prathamārdhendukoṇataḥ || 70 ||
tadvad eva nayet sūtraṁ śṛṅgadvitayasiddhaye |
A thread is fixed at a distance of one (part) from the threads

situated on the two sides in the front of that (prong in the middle). It should

be led from the corner of the second of the first (two) half-moons (drawn
previously) up to the last corner (of the enclosure). Lead a thread in the

same way from the other thread, which is apart from those two, starting
from the extremity of the first half-moon, so as to (fashion) successfully the

two prongs (on the two sides). (69cd-71ab)

There are two (threads) in the maṇḍala on the two sides in front of that
central prong. This is, in other words, (with respect) to these two, the fourth
thread. Taking that as a support, one should lead (another) thread (measuring)
six squares, starting from the upper tip of the half-moon fashioned in the

beginning which, in relation to the other (half-moon), is the second outer one,

that measures one square, so that it is fixed in a place at a distance one square
away. According to the teaching that (the two half-moons) ‘are within the
(three) squares in the southeastʼ,™ it is (fixed) in a place which is three squares
(away). This is the meaning.

‘(Lead a thread in the same way) from the other thread, which is
apart from those twoʼ, that is, from the thread which, in relation to the fourth
one, is the third of those two that are on the two sides in front, in the manner

explained (previously,) from the front, that is, from half of the fourth square. (In

other words, it should be led) ‘starting from the extremity of the first half-

moonʼ, that is, from the extremity of the (half) moon, the one that was drawn as
the one on the inside, measuring half a square. (It should be led) ‘in the same

way, that is, in the manner explained previously, up to the end of the sixth
square, so that in this way the (drawing of) the prongs on the sides is
successfully (accomplished).
Having drawn the three prongs in this way in the front half of the field,

(in order to explain how) to draw the staff etc. (of the Trident) in the other (part

of the field) also, he says:

' MV 9/14-15, quoted as 31/69cd-7lab with two variants, without change in meaning. For TĀ
3169d dhrtam – fixed' MV 9/14b reads śritam - placed’. For 31/70b ānaye - should be led
MV 9/14d reads āśraye ‘should be placed'.
There is also the thread of Brahmā. Thus, there are three threads, and with tnis one, four.
Above, 31/164.

TANTRĀLOKA

ms+ aTṚ zv=ṛ fgēzeīqzā: 1I 9, 1

TṬJ a āā TB TēāTJTTTS 1 92 1

ga f=j āīāāīzam |

TÃFATTIT
#jaīz arāīT̄ṁ āaat I 9%|
kṣetrārdhe cāpare daṇḍo dvikaraśchannapañcakaḥ || 71 I|
saḍvistṛtaṁ caturdīrghaṁ tadadho ʻmalasārakam |
vedāṁgulaṁ ca tadadho mūlaṁ tīkṣṇāgram iṣyate || 72 ||
ādikṣetrasya kurvīta dikṣu dvāracatuṣṭayam ḷ|
hastāyāmaṁ tadaráhaṁ tu viṣṭārād api tatsamam || 73 |I
dviguṇaṁ bāhyataḥ kuryāt tataḥ padmaṁ yathā śrṛṇu |
ekaikabhāgamānāni kuṟyād vṛttāni vedavat || 74 ||
“The staff (drawn) in the other half of the field (measures) two

handspans (in length), five (squares) of which are covered.° The pure bulb

(at the base of the shaft) (sāraka) below that is six (finger-breadths) wide
and four broad. Below that is the root, which is four fingers (wide) and

should end in a sharp point. In the quarters of the first field (above), one
should fashion four doors in the (four) directions that extend (altogether)

for one handspan and half that (deep).® Their breadth is the same as that.

Externally double it. "Then listen to how the lotus (is drawn in the
middle). (First of all,) fashion circles (that number four) as do the Vedas,

they measure each one square (more than the preceding one).” (71cd-74)

(The staff measures) ‘two handspans’, along with the area of the door,

as will be explained, and ‘five (squares) of which are covered’. (These are)

four squares of the lotus’” and one that is covered by the pedestal. As is said:

31/71cd-73 = MV 9/16ab, 17cd-19ab.
““ Abhinava omits MV 9/16cd-17ab, which is quoted by Jayaratha, who explains that four of the

five squares are covered by the lotus, and one by the pedestal (pīrha). See below. Jayaratha

observes that the two handspans of the length of staff include the squares for the door. Thus, it is

in actual fact only one and a half handspans long.
Without the doorways, the maṇḍala measures three handspans on each side.

Read, as is found in the published text of MV 9/19 and as read by Jayaratha, tadardhaṁ tu for
tadardhaṁ vã.
' Whereas the breadth of the ‘throat’ is four squares, that of the ‘cheek is eight. Jayaratha notes

that the ‘throat’ and ‘cheek’ are two squares wide.

“31/74-78 = MV 9/19cd-24ab. There are no variants.

! The distance of the first circle from the lotus is one square, that of the second one two, the third
three and fourth four.

“2 Read padmasya for asya.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

‘(In the remaining part of the field one should draw the staff (of the
Trident)), which is two handspans (long), of which five squares are hidden by
the lotus and the pedestal. The rest of it is visible and is one square in breadth.”
The two (that is, the root and) the āmalasāraka, are said to be ‘four
fingersʼ (big. The latter is) six finger-breadths wide and four finger-breadths

broad. (The root should) ‘end in a sharp point’, (that is to say,) its form is a
single spoke. ‘The first field (above) (measures) three handspans. (Four doors

extend for) ‘one handspan’ by taking up four squares on each side of the

middle threads. ‘“Half of that’ is half a handspan, because a door is four squares

wide (viṣtṛta). ‘Externally double it’,’ because an extra four squares are added
on each side. ‘Their breadth is the same as that’, because like the throat, the
cheek also is two squares wide.
Now he explains the drawing of the lotus, which occupies four squares
in the field of the staff, (with the words) ‘then’ etc. (The circles around the lotus
number) ‘as do the Vedasʼ, that is, four.

feeatī gaā%ḷ ssāzattṃ

a

̄āī Jjcā] ṬT-ā-iĨ TTITJTIĪ TTTTGT || 9. 1

ēīdá zgṣgṣās-,_ I| 9c 1|
dikṣv aṣṭau punar apy aṣṭau jīvasūtrāṇi ṣoḍaśa |
dvayor dvayoḥ punar madhye tatsaṁkhyātāni pātayet II 75 |I
eṣāṁ tr̥tīyavṛttasthaṁ pārśvajīvasamaṁ bhramam ḷ
etadantaṁ prakurvīta tato jīvāgram ānayet || 76 ||
yatraiva kuṭracit saṅgas tatsaṁbandhe sthirīkṛte |
tatra kr̥tvā nayen mantrī patrāgrāṇāṁ prasiddhaye || 77 |I

ekaikasmin dale kuṟyāt kesarāṇāṅṁ trayaṁ trayam |

dviguṇāṣṭāṁgulaṁ kāryaṁ tadvac chṛṅgakajatrayam || 78 Il
There are sixteen threads - eight (threads) in the (eight) directions,
and then again eight (more in the intermediate spaces). (Then,) in between

each pair, one should lay out that number (of threads) again. Of these
(threads, select one that is) in the third circle and rotate it (so as to make a

curved line), equal (in measure) to (one of) the lateral threads, (and that
extends to) the end of it. Then one should bring the end of the thread to

MV 9/16cd-17ab. Read padmapīṭha- for pañcapīṭha-.
See note 31,88 above.

TANTRĀLOKA

wherever there is a conjunction. When the link to that has been made firm,

having placed (the hand) there, the reciter of mantra should lead (the

thread along in such a way) as to fashion the tips of the petals. (Then) he

should make three stamens within each petal. The three lotuses of the
prongs (of the trident), measuring two times eight (finger-breadths each),’
should be made in the same way. (75-78)
‘In between’ (each pair of the sixteen threads), that is, at an equal
(distance) between both sides, (lay out) ‘that numberʼ (of threads again), that
is, sixteen. ‘Of these’ sixteen (threads) that have been added again ‘in the third
circleʼ, that is to say, in the middle of one of the sixteen threads that have been
added again and is in the third circle. Having placed a hand (there) and drawn a

curve outside it, equal (in length) to the thread on the sides, beginning from (a

thread) located at the front of the third square up to the end of any one of the
sixteen threads that have been added again. Having done that, lead it from that
end up close to the thread next to it, and so produce (in this way) sixteen half
petals (of the lotus). (One should bring the end of the thread to) ‘wherever’
(there (is a conjunction)) in the lotus with another (thread, where a petal) has not
been fashioned. This is what is indicated (by saying this,) namely, just as was
said (previously), that in order to (draw) half a petal successfully, having placed
a hand in the middle of one of the sixteen threads that have been added again
and is in the third circle, one should then rotate it; the same (is said should be

done) here also, but by transposing (the procedure to make the next half petal).
‘When (the link to that) has been made firm’ʼ, with (one’s) mind ‘having
placedʼ the hand ‘there’ʼ (at the location of the conjunction, the reciter of
Mantra) ʻshould lead’ (the thread along), that is to say, rotate (it so as to draw a
curve). (Then) he should make ‘three’ (stamens within each petal) by making
use of the three threads located there. (The three lotuses of the prongs of the
trident should be made) ‘in the same way’. However, (they should measure)
‘two times eight (finger-breadths each)’. That (makes) twenty-four fingerbreadths (altogether). One should understand that lotuses, wheels and voids

should be fashioned in the same way, for a space of four squares, as before.”
(He goes on) to talk about the regulation concerning the colouring (of
the maṇḍala).

I .98

[aEŪĪEATS IŪIĀITAḤZ-ISĀ
raftrft srgfṁr fttr’vzgftra
1 ¢2

According to Jayaratha, the Lotus of Wisdom measures 24 digits in diameter.
Read pūrvatreva instead of pūrvātrāpi.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

õ JGiaĨĨ JTĨGŨqd JGTṬTTI 3 I

Taī, ga JĀT] TRTTgPTÇTTĪ|

3. ācā a ar agjmī ar faṀNāīBrā 1 ¢3 1

karṇikā pītavarṇena mūlamadhyāgrabhedataḥ |
sitaṁ raktaṁ tathã pītaṁ kãryaṁ kesarajãlakam || 79 ||
dalāni śuklavarṇāni prativāraṇayā saha |
pīthaṁ tadvac catuṣkoṇaṁ karṇikārádhasamaṁ bahiḥ || 80 l|
sitaraktapītakr̥ṣṇais tatpādān vahnitaḥ kramāt |
caturbhir api śṛṅgāṇi tribhir maṇḍalam iṣyate || 81 ||

daṇḍaḥ syān nīlaraktena pītamāmalasārakam |

raktaṁ milaṁ prakurvīta yat tat pūrvaṁ prakalpitam |) 82 ||

paścād dvārasya pūrveṇa tyaktvāṅgulacatuṣṭayam |
dvāraṁ vedāśri vṛttaṁ vā saṅkīrṇaṁ vā vicitritam || 83 ||
ekadvitripuraṁṅ tulyaṁ sāmu(dra)mathavobhayam |
kapolakaṇṭhaśobhopaśobhādibahucitritam || 84 ||
vicitrākārasaṁsthānaṁ vallīṣūkṣmagṛhānvitam |

"Ṭhe calix should be coloured yellow and the stamens white, red
and yellow, according to whether they are at the root, middle or end (i.e. on

the left, middle or right). The petals, along with the protective border

(prativāraṇā), are white. Such also is the square pedestal (pītha) (on which
the lotus is situated). (It extends) outwards (beyond the lotus) for a space
equal to half (the width) of the calix.” (t is supported) by its (four) legs,
that are of four (different) colours, namely, (moving clockwise) beginning
with the one in the southeast, white, red, yellow and black.” The prongs are
(coloured with the same) three (colours, omitting red). This is how the

maṇḍala should be. The shaft (of the trident) is purple (nīlarakta). The bulb
(at the base of the shaft) (āmalasāraka) is yellow and the root should be

' The published MY contains a verse not found in the TĀ:
tataḥ prapjayen manirī rajobhiḥ sitapūrakaiḥ l
raktaiḥ kr̥ṣṇai ṣtath pũairharitaiśca viśeṣataḥ |
‘Then the officiant (mantrin) should worship (the maṇḍala) with powders, first white

(read sitapūrvakaiḥ for sitapūrakaiḥ), red, black, yellow and, especially, green. MV 9/24-25ab

Then 31/79-85ab = MV 9/25cd-31; MV 9/25cd reads -desataḥ for -bhedataḥ in 31/79b,
which is the reading of MS K of the MV.

” The lotus is on pedestal within a square enclosure that extends beyond its circumference by a
space of three fingers.
” The feet are fierce lions with three eyes, that correspond, respectively, from southeast to

northeast, to the dharma, knowledge (jāna), dispassion (vairagya), and lordship (aisvarya). See
SYT 2/61-62 and SŚP 3/49 f.
' Read māūlar for śūlaṁ.

TANTRĀLOKA

coloured red. It should be fashioned in the western (lower part of the

maṇḍala), leaving a space of four finger-breadths to the east (i.e. in front) of

the door. (79-83ab)

The doorway may be square, circular, mixed, or variously formed,

equal (in size) to one, two (or) three squares, plane (with the sides of the

maṇḍala), protruding (sāmudgama) or of both (kinds), (variously)

ornamented in many (ways) by ‘cheeks’ (kapola), ‘throats’ (kaṇṭha),
‘ornaments’ (śobha), ‘secondary ornaments’ (upaśobha) etc., with varied
forms and placements, and has ‘creepers’ (valfi,, ‘subtle houses’
(sūkṣmagrha) (?) and the like. (83cd-85ab)
‘The protective border (prativāraṇā) is a curved line located in front

of the petals. ‘Such also’ (is the square pedestal), that is, white. ((It extends)
outwards (beyond the lotus for a space) ‘equal to half (the width) of the calix’,

which is one square. (t is supported by) ‘its (four) legs° that are the legs of the

pedestal. (The prongs are (coloured with the same)) ‘three’ (colours), omitting
the red coloured powder. (The bulb should be fashioned in the lower part of the

maṇḍala) ‘leaving a space of four finger-breadths’ that serves as an exception

(from the total length of the lower half,) which is two handspans. (Writing) ‘the
doorway’ etc., he presents what remains (to be said) concerning the door also,

that is stated in other scriptures, concerning its variously (ornamented varieties).
Although all the scriptures mentioned (above) talk about the placement
of the tridents and lotuses, even so, here he just presents whatever differs (from

the general common form of the maṇḍala). Without maintaining the sequential
order (in which these scriptures are listed above), he presents that placement as
taught in the venerable Devyāyāmala.

C) The Construction of the Maṇḍala According to the Devyāyāmala

qṝṁ &t aaṁāi aiĨṀ | ç..1|

ṝ-zr; ṝ framī da yaatraī |
TTTi TÑṜASN THS YTTTH;: I CM9II

EGRIIFA-ḺĪE
I

āqd frārrq 1
śrīdevyāyāmale tūktaṁ kṣetre vedāśrite sati lI 85 II
This proves, observes Jayaratha, that the stick is not two cubits long (see above, verse. 71)– it

is onc and a half.

.2-MḶeaning uncertain.

""Thiṣ passage extends from 85cd t0 100ab.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

ardhaṁ dvãdaśadhã kr̥tvã tiryag ūrdhvaṁ ca tiryajam |
bhāgam ekaṁ svapārśvordhvaṁ guruḥ samavatārayet || 86 ||
madhyasthaṁ taṁ tribhāgaṁ ca tadante bhramayed ubhau |
bhāgam ekaṁ parityajya tanmadhye bhramayet punaḥ |l 87 II
tṛtīyāṁśordhvato bhramyam ūrdhvāṁśaṁ yāvad antataḥ |
caturthāṁśāt tadūrdhvaṁ tu ūrdhvādho yojayet punaḥ || 88 II
tanmānād ūrdhvam ābhramya caturthena niyojayet |
It is said in the Devyāyāmala that ‘half of a square field of four

(handspans) is divided into twelve (squares), horizontally and vertically.

Then the teacher should turn from the square located in the middle
towards his own suitable side, upwards by one square and three quarters,
making contact with the thread of Brahmā. Omitting one square, he should
rotate (the thread) again in the middle of that (tanmadhye) to draw two
half-moons, after that he should draw two others, toward the top, in the
third square, until (it touches) the part above. (Then,) starting from the

fourth square, he should again conjoin it (to corner of the field) above that,
below and above. Starting from that measure, he should, having rotated
upwards, connect well (the whole) with the fourth (pair of half-moons).”

(85cd-89ab)

By saying ‘having divided half by twelve (squares)ʼ, it is established
that all the field should be divided twenty-four times ‘horizontally and

verticallyʼ, that is, on all sides. Thus, having omitted six squares in each of the
four directions, the field in the middle, measuring twelve squares, should be

taken up (for the task of drawing the maṇḍala). There, ‘located in the middle’

which, in relation to the field, is close to the place of the Brahmā. Thus, one

square vertically, because it is located to the side of one next to that one square
which is diagonally across, the teacher should cause to ascend upwards along
with its own square to the side that is associated with that. The meaning is that
he should pay attention to rotate (the thread) in that way. Thus, having placed
one hand on the second joint (marman) in relation to the location of the Brahmā
(i.e. the centre), all that square, that is to say, its own three parts, not, as before,

half of it. Rotate both of them at the end of that thread of Brahma, beginning
from close to that, in such a way that two crescent moons are made successfully.
Again, having omitted one square, which is above the second square next to it,
that is to say, having placed a hand on the third junction (marman), as before,
rotate around the end of the square that has been omitted in such a way that two
crescent moons are made successfully. The two crescent moons that have been
drawn next to that, ‘starting from the fourth square’, that is to say, ‘he should
conjoin it’ ‘below and above’ in a diagonal sequence, up to the upper corner of
the field, and so the prongs are successfully completed. By the word ‘again’, he
transposes (the directions) to another part (of the maṇḍala) also. Again, taking

the support of that same stated measure, without a gap, having rotated as
appropriate three pairs of crescent moons above, all around by connecting them
with one another, and by that means drawn (them) with a fourth prong, ‘he
should conjoin (them) with a fourthʼ pair of half-moons. The meaning is that
one should do as is taught by that (scripture).

TANTRĀLOKA

Having explained the drawing of the side spokes (of the maṇḍala), he

says the following in order to explain how to draw the middle spoke.

SGATaISTJTĪ
JTGTJTTI FTT I ¢8 I

TZṬGTT:

TĪITITTTTR
āVST fṜṬI 3TIĪ || ṞQo

ūrdhvād yojayate sūtraṁ brahmasūtrāvadhi kramāt || 89 ||

kramād vaipulyataḥ kṛtvā aṁśaṁ vai hrāsayet puṇaḥ |
ardhabhāgapramāṇas tu daṇḍo dviguṇa iṣyate || 90 II

Conjoin the thread' from the top, ending with the thread of

Brahmā, decreasing gradually (the width) part (by part on its sides) from
(its initial) width (vaipulya). The staff measures half a square (i.e. two
finger-breadth) (in thickness) and should be double (the remaining field)

long (i.e. two handspans) (89cd-90)

Again, extending a thread ‘ending with the thread of Brahmā’,

beginning from above the half-moon that, drawn from the first (square), extends

for three squares, gradually, part by part decreasing its width, ‘conjoin’ it, that

is, connect it there itself, in such a way that the tip is sharp. The middle prong is
thus (fashioned) successfully. And so in this way here, the two sides of the
middle prongs are diminished. This too is different from the previous ones.
‘Half’ (etc.) the size of a square (measuring) four fingers is formed by

two halves of two connected squares. This is the meaning. ‘Double’ - by adding
half the field above the six parts remaining of the half field that has been taken
up makes two handspans, which is the size of twelve squares.

He causes the āmalakṣāraka to be drawn just here.

Ji JTī ŪṬē̄ṝaāī q 3TĀS TTI-q |

JTāi frezrqṭ T aīī maā Ūasq 1 82 1
bhāgaṁ bhāgaṁ grṛhītvā tu ubhayor atha gocarāt |

bhramyaṁ pippalavat patraṁ vartanaiṣā tv adho bhavet || 91 ||
soḍaśāṁśe likhet padmaṁ dvādaśāṁgulalopanāt |
Having taken from the field (gocara) one part from both, (the
thread) should be rotated (to form the shape of a) leaf like that of a banyan

(ficus indica). This is the drawing of the bottom (part of the staff).

'" This is the thread used to draw the middle prong.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE
(Next) one should draw a lotus in (a space consisting of) sixteen

parts by removing twelve finger-breadths. (91-92ab)

Here the word ‘part’ denotes a finger-breadth. Thus, taking up a fingerbreadth from the field (viṣaya)

‘from both’

sides,

a curve is formed

(bhramodaya), in the shape of an aśvattha leaf. This is the lower part of the
staff, (which is done) in such a way that the base (of the staff) with (its) sharp

point is four finger-breadths (wide) and is below the āmalakasāraka. The
‘sixteen partsʼ is the field divided by the sixteen threads. (Draw the lotus) ‘by
removing twelve finger-breadths’ in each direction, so that the lotus
(measures) one handspan.

And where should that be drawn?

̄zzads aṁfcāid | 23 |

tadūrdhvaṁ madhyabhāge tu vārijanma samālikhet || 92 ||
madhyaśṛṅgāvasāne tu tr̥tīyaṁ vilikhet tataḥ |
savyāsavye tathaiveha kaṭiṣṭhābje samālikhet || 93 II
One should draw a lotus above that (staff) in the middle part (of the
maṇḍala). A third one should then be drawn at the end of the middle prong.
In the same way, one should draw two other lotuses (of the same size) on

the wall (kaṭi), to the right and the left. (92cd-93)

‘Above that’ (means) above the staff (of the trident). ‘[I]n the middle

partʼ in relation to the maṇḍala. One should draw a lotus only here, but also
above the prongs. Thus he says ‘at the end of the middle prong’ etc. He
establishes the meaning of the word ‘third’ by (saying) ‘at the end of the
middle prongʼ etc. ‘In the same way’ means by removing (lopa) twelve
finger-breadths.

GIT TTaTGTIT JGIĪ TfḠaāTTTĪT I| 1I

! Jayaratha explains that this ‘space of sixteen parts’ is ‘in the field divided by sixteen

strings/threads’, which is not clear to me. The central part of the maṇḍala measures, as we have

seen, twelve squares on each side. The diameter of the lotus is twenty-four finger-breadths, which
is one handspan. Above we were told that the square extends three squares outside the lotus.

Read āmala- for amala-.
' The boundary wall of a temple is called the ‘kaṭi’; see Kramrisch (1946: vol. 1, p. 238). Here, it
seems, the word denotes the surface on which the maṇḍala is drawn.

TANTRĀLOKA

karṇikā pītalā raktapītaśuklaṁ ca keṣaram |
dalāni padmabāhyasthā śuklā ca prativāraṇī |l 94 |I
Śūlaṁ kṛṣṇena rajasā brahmarekhā sitā punaḥ |
śūlāgraṁ jvālayā yuktaṁ śūladaṇḍas tu pītalaḥ || 95 ||
śūlamadhye ca yat padmaṁ tatreśaṁ pūjayet sadā |
asyordhve tu parāṁ dakṣe ‘nyāṁ vāme cāparāṁ budhaḥ || 96 ||
The calix (of each lotus) is yellow, the stamens are red, yellow and

white. The petals (are white) and the protective border (prativāraṇī)
(around) outside the lotus is (also) white. The trident (is coloured) with

black powder, whereas the line of Brahmā is white. The tip of the trident

has a flame, and the staff (of the Trident) is yellow. A wise man should
always worship Iśa there (on) the lotus in the middle of the trident, Parā
above him, the other (goddess i.e. Parāparā) on the right and Aparā on the
left. (93cd-96)
‘Petals’, that is to say, white (petals). ‘The line of Brahmā’ is the

middle part of the prong.' (The tip of the trident) ‘has a flame’ made by
applying red powder. ‘Iśa’ is Śadāśiva in the form of a ghost (preta). (Parā is
worshipped) ‘above him’ on the middle prong." ‘The other’ (goddess) is
Parāparā.

Surely (one may ask), here (according to this teaching), Kālasaṅkarṣiṇī,
who is (variously) called by such names as Mātṛsadbhāva,'' and is superior to
Parā, also is the Goddess (bhagavatī). Where should she be worshipped? With
this doubt in mind, she says:

JT JJīē ī ft-rvŪāāo]
āī | –.91|
yā sā kālāntakā devī parātītā vyavasthitā |
grasate śūlacakraṁ sā tv icchāmātreṇa sarvadā || 97 ||

The Goddess who destroys time (kālāntakā) and is established as

(she who is) Beyond Parā (parātītā), devours the Wheel of the Trident
continuously by just (Her) will alone. (97)
As is said there itself (in the Devyāyāmala):

' The line of Brahmā is the vertical line that divides the two sides of the middle prong.
. Cf, above, 15/309.
'! Read madhyasṛige for madhyaśṛṅgasya.
'! See above, 3/68¢d-70 (69-71ab).
'!Cf. above 30/45cd-46.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

‘The goddess Parā is in the middle of that (Trika Trident). Parāparā is
on the right (prong) and Aparā is on the left prong. Listen to what is above the

middle prong. She who is the goddess Saṁkarṣiṇī, Parātītā (Beyond the
Supreme), is located (there).

(She) ‘devours’ (the Trident Maṇḍala) means that she makes it one with
herself. Thus, the intended sense is that all of this is one with Her (tanmaya).
(Now) he states the pervasion of these (goddesses) in terms of the

cosmic order.

JIfTETṢ ĒGTI āI fJrī=Ṭ ṬR] TT |

TT I| 3¢ 1I
śāntirūpā kalā hy eṣā vidyārūpā parā bhavet |
aparā tu pratiṣṭhā syān nivṛttis tu parāparā || 98 ||
She is the (sphere of) energy (kalā) which is Śānta (the Tranquil

One). Parā is the (energy of) Vidyā, Aparā is Nivṛtti (Cessation), and

Parāparā Pratiṣṭhā (the Foundation). (98)

Surely, Śāntā and the rest are said to belong to Sadāśiva as (his) energy.

So how is it that their pervasion is so extensive? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

iã avç a#ãrá xt graīaraṁāē|

I: JTTĀTAT
TGĪ: TṬATTTTTĀHĪ |I R° I
bhairavaṁ daṇḍa ūrdhvasthaṁ rũpaṁ sādãśivātmakam |
catasraḥ śaktyas tv asya sthūlāḥ sūkṣmās tv anekadhā || 99 II
Bhairava’s nature (rūpa), situated above the staff, is that of

Sadāśiva, whose four powers, gross and subtle, are of many kinds. (99)

Bhairava’s nature, which is full (and perfect), situated above the trident,

(here) implicitly characterized by the staff, is ‘that of Sadāśiva’. He possesses

many powers, which in (their) gross state are the Śāntā etc., otherwise (in their
subtle state), they are these (four goddesses). This is the overall sense.

Having explained this thus by the way, he concludes the main subject.

" Theṣe three lines are also quoted above in TĀy ad 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab). The last line is quoted
in TĀv ad 30/54-55ab to indicate that the nine-syllabled Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī
is Parāttā.
" I read, in verse 98cd, nivṛúiḥ in place of pratiṣṭhā, and pratiṣṭha iī
of nivrttiḥ.
Concerning these spheres of energies that pervade the reality levels (tattva) up to Sadāśiva (with

Beyond the Tranquil One corresponding to Śiva and Śakti), see above, Chapter Eleven.

TANTRĀLOKA

Y JIT: qTRGATIĪ] STIHTGATHĪTĒTH; |
eṣa yāgaḥ samākhyāto ḍāmarākhyas triśaktikaḥ |
This maṇḍala (yāga), which has (just) been taught, possesses (all
the) three powers, and is called ‘Ḍāmara”. (100ab)
Now he sets out to talk about the placement of the tridents and lotuses

according to the Triśirobhairava also.

D) The Construction of the Maṇḍala According to the

Trīśirobhairavatantra

ÉCĀ EICI |PAAVĒAGAKIṬCFṈI
SI
atha traiśirase śūlābjavidhidṛṣṭo ‘bhilikhyate || 100 ||

Now (I) will write the procedure (to draw of the maṇḍala of)
tridents and lotuses (as I have) seen it in the Triśirobhairavatantra

(Traiśirasa). (100cd)
He says that:

arṁīgatēfrrjaā: úēṝ: gāR: |
JṀṁ dsīfā āzot ahēī āts+aq I g •2 1
EitPĀEikatkEtcadreEEz] fjēxd s#āīā-zgfaṟaztāāiī I| 2. 1
aaāīḶGō: Jā-T=d: TTHTTT-TT |
ŠīGNTĪTGHTT aVGTG q TĪRa ] 203 |
aTTFZHT JaTTGT &TTRNITTGT I| 2 0 ||

vāmāmr̥tādibhir mukhyaiḥ pavitraiḥ sumanoramaiḥ |
rajāṁsi karaṇīūṁ khaṭikāṁ mūlato ʻrcayet || 1OI II
caturaśre caturhaste madhye śūlaṁ karatrayam |
daṇḍo dvihasta ūrdhvādhaḥ pīthayug vipulas tv asau || 102 ||
vaṣvaṁgulaḥ prakartavyaḥ sūtratrayasamanvitaḥ |
dvādaśāṁgulamānena daṇḍamūle tu pīṭhikā || 103 ||

" Saṇḍerson point out that the meaning of yāga here is maṇḍala. See above note to 3/70.
See above, 3'70.
" This passage extends from 100cd to 1 54.
"! The folowing passage, in which is taught the drawing of the Trika maṇḍala, that extends from
101_t0 131, and the svaska associated with it, from 132 t0 154, is drawn from the
Triirobhairava. As layaratha does not quote the original, it is likly that Abhīṅava is quoting so
literally that itis unnccessary.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

dairdhyāt tūcchrāyāc cordhve ca caturaṅgulamānataḥ |
ūrdhve `py ucchrāyato vedāṁgulā dairghyād daśāṁgulā || 104 1|
Śūlamūlagataṁ pīṭhadvayaṁ khābdhisamāṁgulam |
(First of all,) one must worship the ground (on which the maṇḍala is
to be drawn), and the coloured powders, chalk and thread (by which that is
done), with the root (mantra) and with holy and beautiful (offerings),

foremost of which is (wine), the nectar of the left." (101)

The trident, which measures three handspans, is in the middle of a

square (enclosure measuring) four handspans (on each side). The staf
(measures) two handspans and it has two pedestals (pītha), one above and
one below. It should be made (the number of) finger-breadths thick as are
the (eight) Vasus, and have three threads (attached to it). The pedestal at

the base of the staff measures twelve finger-breadths in width and four in

height, that which is at the top is ten (finger-breadths) long and is, as

before, four (finger-breadths) wide. (The space for) the two pedestals' up

to the base of the staff is (thus) equal to the ocean of the sky (i.e. forty
finger-breadths).” (102-105ab)
(The ground etc. is worshipped) ‘with the root’, that is, the root (i.e.
main) Mantra. (The square enclosure measures) ‘four handspans’ (on each

side), and is also divided up, in the manner that is being described, into twentyfour. One part of the three handspans is (taken up by) the staff (of the trident,
that extends for) two handspans. (The staff is) ‘(the number of)

finger-breadths thick as are the (eight) Vasus’. It is eight finger-breadths in

thickness. As is said there (in the 7Triśirobhairavatantra): “(Its) thickness is eight
finger-breadths. The reading vimala (i.e. ‘pure’ for ‘vipula’ i.e. ‘thick) is
wrong, because that is not in accord with the tradition (anāgamika). In the same

way elsewhere also, incorrect readings have been refuted, because they are not
in accord with the tradition, and they will be (further ahead also). Thus, one

should not consider it to be otherwise. ‘The ocean of the sky’ is forty (fingerbreadths). Eight finger-breadths is covered by the Lotus of Wisdom, and one

finger-breadth by the line of the sky. Thus, thirty-one finger-breadths can be
seen of it.
Concluding this (topic) as he (starts) to (teach) the drawing of the

trident, he now talks about the field that is used for that.

: aIIGTHT TH-ād:; |

g o, u

kṛtvā daṇḍaṁ triśūlaṁ tu tribhir bhāgaiḥ samantataḥ | 105 II
aṣṭāṁgulapramāṇaiḥ syād dhastamātraṁ samantataḥ |
'! See above, 29/10 and note.

'2 Properly, of width.

' Read pīṭhadvayaṁ for pīṭhīmadhyaṁ.

' Jayaratha interprets here differently, and 1 do not know whether due to error or for some

reason.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Having fashioned the staff, (one should draw) the trident with

three squares measuring eight finger-breadths all around, (that is to say)

just one handspan on all sides.’ (105cd-106ab)

The ‘three squares’ are one above the other. (The space the trident

occupies is) ‘just one handspan on all sidesʼ, and so is a square equal (in
length on all sides).
He (now) divides up the group of three squares in terms of the parts of
the trident.

JJ ṀJōã Tī-agō q ẽã I| 2Ẽ |

ŠGYTITGĀTHĪ ] 3TĪ: ṬÑHATTAT |I Ḷ09 1|

īTTIVĪ-JTTIṀ d] TaTTTT_ I

śūlāgraṁ śūlamadhyaṁ tac chūlamūlaṁ tu tad bhavet || 106 II
vedī madhye prakartavyā ubhayośca ṣaḍaṁgulam |
dvādaśāṁguladīrghā tu ubhayoḥ pārśvayosṭathā || 107 ||
caturaṁgulam ucchrayān miūle vedīṁ prakalpayet |
ubhayoḥ pārśvayoś caivam ardhacandrākṛtiṁ tathā || 108 II
‘That (group of three squares) consists of the tip of the trident, the
middle of the trident, and the base of the trident. In the middle of it, one

should fashion an enclosure (vedr), both sides of which (extend for) six
finger-breadths, and is twelve finger-breadths long on both sides (that is,
above and below, respectively). In the base (of the trident), one should

fashion (another) enclosure, the shape of a half-moon, four finger-breadths
high, and the same on both sides. (106cd-108)

Here in the middle part of a finger-breadth, the area (contained) ‘on

both sidesʼ, in relation to the thread of Brahmā, and so also both extremities, is

considered to be six finger-breadths, that is to say, having laid (it out) in this

way, an enclosure, that is, a place the shape of an enclosure, should be fashioned

there in the middle, six finger-breadths wide (prakāreṇa) and twelve finger-

breadths in length. Two crescent moons facing inwards should also be drawn on

(its) two sides. This is the meaning. The same (should be done) in the base (of

the trident), in other words, omitting half a square from the proximity of the
Brahmā (square in the centre) that is used for the ‘pillow’ (gaṇḍikā), (the
drawing of which) will be explained (further ahead), by going to the side for

The tident of ths maṇḍala is constructed by means of a system of ‘cnclosures’ (vedh) drawn in
a square which measures twenty-four finger-breadths on cach side (that is, one handspan). This is
divided into ṅīne squares measuring eight finger-brcadths on each side. Concerning the term vedī
or vedikā, see Kramrisch (1946: vol. | pp. 145-146).

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

half a square to the two sides, fashion an enclosure (vedr) in the form of an

upward facing crescent moon that is four finger-breadths in hight.

ēãl JTAṬGTTTIṀJ TIT: I| 220 1

tṝēīā q vkrzā sd q gō |
TJTIÑTṀ
ī gdtaāi T JṬGT I 223 1

bhramayet khaṭikāsūtraṁ kaṭiṁ kuryād dviraṁgulām |

vaipulyād dairdhyato devi caturaṁgulamānataḥ || 109 ||
yādṛśaṁ dakṣiṇe bhāge vāme tadvat prakalpayet |
madhye śūlāgravaipulyād aṁgulaś ca adhordhvataḥ || 110 ||
caturaṅgulamānena vaipulyāt tu ṣaḍaṁgulā |

ucchrayāt tu tataḥ kāryā gaṇḍikā tu svarūpataḥ l| 1 1 1 II

pīthordhve tu prakartavyaṁ Śśūlamūlaṁ tu suvrate |

śūlāgramaṁgulaṁ kāryaṁ sutīkṣṇaṁ tu ṣaḍaṁgulam || 112 ||
arāmadhyaṁ prakartavyam arādhas tu ṣaḍaṁgulam |
One should (then) rotate the thread with chalk (khaṭikāsūtra) in a

circleē and, O Goddess, make a wall (kaṭi) two finger-breadths thick
(vaipulyāt) and measuring four finger-breadths in length. As is (this one) on
the right, fashion one that is the same on the left. In the middle, the

thickness of the prong is that of its tip,' and below it is one finger-breadth

(thick). Above (in the upper part) (ārdhvataḥ) (one should draw another

enclosure) measuring four finger-breadths in thickness and six in height.
Then, O Lady of Good Vows, one must fashion the ‘pillow’ (ganḍikā). (109111)
Above the pedestal base, which is, by virtue of its own form (and

nature), the root of the trident, that needs to be well made. The tip of the
(middle) trident should be made very sharp and be one finger-breadth

(thick). The middle of the prongs should be made six finger-breadths
(long), and the lower part of the prongs (should also be) six
finger-breadths.’ (112-113ab)

Açcording to Jayaratha, the proṅg in the middle is two finger-breadths thick.
The gaṇḍikā (see above, 25 and note), according to Jayaratha, extends here by two squares.
The central trdent, which concems us here, is eighteen finger-breadths high and extends, like
those on the sides, up two finger-brcadths from the boundary of th field.

TANTRĀLOKA

Then again, that is to say, having placed a hand on the closest extremity

of the thread of Brahmā, rotate the thread, beginning from the second extremity

up to the extremity of the crescent moon drawn in the middle part, in such a way
that a place (saṅmiveśa) is successfully (fashioned) on the two sides that is the
form of a wall (kari) measuring four finger-breadths in length. There the
thickness

is

two finger-breadths.

He

transposes

that

(measure

of)

two

finger-breadths to the middle part (of the prong) also, (and so says that,) ‘in the
middle the thickness of the prong is that of its tipʼ. Nor is it everywhere the
same two fingers thick. Thus he says that ‘below it is one finger-breadth
(thick)’. Thus, one should diminish (the thickness) of the half-moon as required,
from the end of the wall up to the end, (which is one) finger-breadth.

Now he directs the drawing of the tip of the trident, saying ‘above (in
the upper part) (ūrdhvataḥ) etc. After that, again on the upper part, one
should fashion an enclosure, wall or prong on the two sides that measures six
finger-breadths, that is, half a square in height (horizontally), up to the end of
the sides of the field of the trident; (to do this), for otherwise it would not be

possible, (it should be part of) an area of just one handspan from all sides, that is
located (around) the three lotuses that (measure) as has been stated, twelve
finger-breadths and four in thickness. This is the meaning. Having explained in
this way the drawing of the two prongs on the (two) sides, he directs the
drawing of the prong in the middle also, (saying one must fashion) ‘the ‘pillow’
(gaṇḍikā) etc. The three prongs are fashioned first, (then) the base of the trident
should be made. It is the ‘pillow’ which measures two finger-breadths in width
and is above the pedestal. Then after that, on the tip (of the trident), one fingerbreadth in thickness, and so is ‘very sharp’. By omitting two finger-breadths
above the third box, (the prong is) six finger-breadths in the middle and the
same measure below. In this way, the middle prong is eighteen finger-breadths
in length up to the two extremities of the half-moons.
He now talks about the extent here (of their) thickness.

-ITTTIṀĪr+]
q] md q ṁRAcNdd I| 223 1

TĪTR aāē Sd JJ T Ta-l: |

sÃā ] JJṬōīJi dc[NIGIGTĪṬGT 1

JTTRAT-TTAĀT] ṀTRRIĀTTTHTT I 22U, I
fcanfraz ōīṀ ' TaTITITJ I 226 1

THJTT ṬŠ ] JāN AIS TSIT I 22 I

Th TT̄T̄dd JJṀ JHTTTTHSTTĀT I/ 22. I

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

fēz] aqggRITI RTHII: 220 1

faī fa-ra ērī graīṬgr |

EAEESEZḺĀE KEIŪIEḤ

caturaṁgulanimnaṁ tu madhyaṁ tu parikalpayet || 113 |I
pūrvãparaṁ tad eveha madhye śūlaṁ tu tadbahiḥ |
kārayeta tribhiḥ sūtrair ekaikaṁ vartayeta ca | |14 ||
kajatrayaṁ tu śūlāgraṁ vedāṁśair dvādaśāṁgulam |

kramād dakṣānyamadhyeṣu tryaṣṭadvādaśapatrakam || 115 ||

cakratrayaṁ vãtapuraṁ padmam aṣṭãṁgulãrakam |
vidyābhikhyaṁ Śśūlamūle rajaḥ paścāt prapātayet || 116 ||
triśūlaṁ daṇḍaparyantaṁ rājavartena pūrayet |

sūtratrayasya pr̥ṣṣṭhe tu śuklaṁ cārātrayaṁ bhavet I|

śuklena rajasā śūlamūle vidyāmbujaṁ bhavet |

11T II

raktaṁ raktāsitaṁ śuklaṁ kramād ūrdhvāmbujatrayam || 118 |I

Śśuklena vyomarekhā syāt sā sthaulyād aṁgulaṁ bahiḥ |
tāṁ tyaktvā vedikā kāryā hastamātraṁ pramāṇataḥ || 119 I|
vaipulyatriguṇaṁ dairdhyāt prākāraṁ caturaśrakam |
samantato ʻtha dikṣu syur dvārāṇi karamātrataḥ || 120 ||
tridhā vibhajya kramaśo dvādaśāṁgulamānataḥ |
kaṇṭhaṁ kapolaṁ śobhāṁ tu upaśobhāṁ tadantataḥ l| 121 I|
prākāraṁ caturaśraṁ tu sabhūrekhāsamanvitam |
sitaraktapītakr̥ṣṇai rajobhiḥ kārayet tataḥ l| 122 ||

raktai rajobhir madhyaṁ tu yathāśobhaṁ tu pūrayet |

asya vyāptau purā coktaṁ tatraivānusarec ca tat || 123 ||
“(The upper) eastern and (lower) western (part of the prong in the
middle) should be fashioned (in such a way that) the middle (part of it) is

depressed by four finger-breadths. Such is the prong here in the middle.

Outside that (on its two sides), one should fashion with three threads each

(three circles),“ and draw (within them) three lotuses on the tip of the
trident.' (These lotuses have a radius of) twelve finger-breadths (set at a
distance of) four finger-breadths (from one other). Those on the right and
left (both) have three and eight petals (respectively), and the one in the

' Taking the tip of the prongs as the centre, three concentrc circles should be drawn with the
compass, which thus extends beyond the tips of the trident.
Ṭhe radius of each lotus measures twelve finger-brcadths.

TANTRĀLOKA

middle, twelve.' (Thus making) three wheels (cakratraya). (Then) a circle
(vātapura) consisting of a lotus eight finger-breadths (wide) with (eight)

petals, called (the Lotus of) Wisdom, is (drawn) at the base of the trident.
(113cd-116abc)

After that, one should apply coloured powder (to the maṇḍala). The

trident, up to the end of the staff, should be filled with (dark blue or black)

lapis lazuli (rājavarta), whereas the three prongs behind the three
threads' are white. The Lotus of Wisdom in the base of the trident (should

be coloured) with white powder. The upper three lotuses are red, red-black
and white, respectively. The row of circles (vyomarekhā) (should be
coloured) with white (powder) which, because of (their) size, (extends) one
finger (further) out (to the sides). Having left (and gone beyond) that (line),

The eight yoginīs that attend upon Parāparā according to the 7riśirobhairava are recorded in a

citation below ad 33/2-17ab. The names of the twelve yoginīs attending on Parā, corresponding to
the twelve vowels (a ā i ī u ū e ai o au aṁ aḥ), are recorded in the MV (20/46-47):
siddáhir ṛddhis tathā lakṣmīr dīptir mālā śikhāṣivā |
sumukhī vāmanī nandā harikeśī hayāṇanā ||

visvesī ca samākhyātā [sumākhyā ca; g: sāmākhyā ca] etā vai [vā] dvādaśa kraṃāt |

‘Or else, there are these twelve in due ord
iddhi, Ṛddhi and Lakṣmī, Dīpti, Mālā,
Sivāśivā, Sumukhī, Vāmanī, Nandā, Harikeśī, Hayānanā, Viśveśī, and the one called Sumā. One

should know that the vowels, without the (four) neuter, are their denotators.’ (MV 20/46-47)

Read with Sanderson (1990: 53 n 99) sivāśivā for śikhā śivā. The reading śivāśivā is found in
TS 3/219b.
nāmabhir [kh: nāmabhis-] mudritās tv etā dvādaśāre tathā śrṇu |
siddhir [k, kh, g: siddhi] buddhis tathā lakṣmī dīptir [k, kh, g: dipti-] mālā śivāśivā |
23b g] sumukhī vāmanī nāndā harikeśī [kh: harike ] hayānanā [k, kh, g: -nāḥ] lI TS 3/218cd219

‘Listen to these in the twelve ‘r̥ke

Siddhi, Buddhi, Lakṣmī, Dīpti, Mālā

Hayānanā.’

(wheel) stamped with their names. (They are)

Sumukhī, Vāmanī, Nandā, Harikeśī, and

The only variant with respect to the MV cited above, we find buddhis in the first ine for
rddhiṣ, which is clearly the better reading and is most probably the original one. The second line
is identical as it stands. However, the yogiīs listed ar only eleven. The twelfth is listed in a third
line in the MV, which is missing here. If this lin droped out in the course of rdaction of the text
of the TS, the TS is drawiṅg from the MV.
The Tantrasadbhāva lists the three yoginīs attending on Aparā as follows:
tryarake tu tataś cakre sthitāḥ sarvagatāḥ [k, g: -gatā; kh: sarvagaṇugratā] śubhāḥ I

pūrve tu mānasī proktā cakravegā tathāpare |

43a kh] kauverye [k, kh, g: kauvīrye] mohanī jñeyā mahābalaparākramā [k: -kaṁ; kh, g: kramāḥ] l

‘Then residing in the three-spoked wheel, they are omnipresent and auspicious. In the
id t© be Mānasī and Cakravegā in the same way in the west. One should know that
. who is is very strong and with great valour, is in the north.' TS 3/214ed-215
See above, 31/39.
Theṣe are connected with the statĩ. Sce above, 31/103ab.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

an enclosure (vedikā) should be made which measures just (one) handspan
(on each side). (117-119)
The (whole) square enclosure (prākāra) (around the maṇḍala)

measures three times that in length and breadth. Now, there should be

doorways all around in the (four) directions, (measuring) just (one)

handspan (altogether). Having divided (their) measure of twelve fingerbreadths successively three times, (draw in those spaces) the neck, cheek,

ornament and the secondary ornament after that.’ (120 -121)

(Finally,) the square (outer) enclosure (prākāra), along with (its)
earth line (bhūrekhā), should be sprinkled with white, red, yellow, and

black powders.' One should complete the middle (of the maṇḍala) with

red powders in such a way that (it looks) beautiful. With regards its'

pervasion (of reality levels and principles), one should proceed there as

taught previously. (122-123)

With respect to that middle prong in this way, the (upper) eastern and
(lower) western (part of it) should be fashioned in such a way that the middle
part is depressed by four finger-breadths. This is the syntactical (prose order of
the words of this sentence). The meaning here is this: the width is four fingers,
such that the ‘pillow’ is included from above the extremity of the two halfmoons. The four finger-breadths, beginning from the middle part onwards, the
remaining finger-breadth is diminished (progressively) as is required, beginning

from the middle square. (Then) he explains (the manner of) drawing the three

lotuses on top of the prongs (with the words) ‘Outside that (on its two sides)
etc. ‘Outside that’, by taking up an extra amount of the field, one should
fashion three lotuses by means of three curved lines. Each one (measures)
twelve finger-breadths, and should be drawn with four finger-breadths (between

each one). This is the meaning of this statement.

(The Lotus of Wisdom) (of the trident is) ‘eight finger-breadths
(wide), with (eight) petals’. Connected to the staff is (this lotus that is) eight

finger-breadths (wide) and has eight petals and the three prongs. ‘Red-black’

means dark brown. ‘Respectively’ means in the aforementioned (lotuses) on the

right, left and in the middle. ‘The row of circles’ associated with the Lotus of
Wisdom. ‘Having divided’ each square ‘successively three times’. (One

should proceed there as taught) ‘previouslyʼ, on the occasion when (the
drawing of) the triple trident was explained. He makes that procedure (anusrṛti)
somewhat clear.
He says that.

rarāṁ -ar y: 1

3JTTGTTCTITT:
#JRGAT 3CA: T: I| gN¥ I

ga |

l See above, 31/102.
Concemning these see above, 31/36cd-38 and note.
Thiṣ is probably the perimeter of the maṇḍala ad its boráer.
Read asya for aṣyā.

TANTRĀLOKA

īTTũray: yvszq 3ōō āfē ferāq

224 1

arātrayavibhāgas tu praveśo nirgamo bhramaḥ |
anāhatapadavyāptiḥ kuṇḍalyā udayaḥ paraḥ || 124 ||
hṛdi sthāne gatā devyas triśūlasya sumadhyame |
nābhiṣṭhaḥ śūladaṇḍas tu śūlamūlaṁ hṛdi sthitam || 125 ||
Śśaktiṣṭhānagataṁ prāntaṁ prānte cakratrayaṁ smaret |
The division into three spokes (corresponds) to the entrance (into

the mmaṇḍala), the exit (from it), and the circular movement (within it). It is
the pervasion of the plane of Unstruck Sound (anāhata), which is the

supreme arising of kuṇḍalinī. The goddesses of the trident are in the

location of the heart, in the beautiful middle (of the trident). The staff of the

trident is located in the navel. The base of the trident is in the heart. (Its)
extremity is in the Place of the Power. One should recollect the three wheels
within the extremity (of the End of the Twelve). (124-126ab)

(It is the pervasion of the plane of) ‘Unstruck Sound (anāhata)
because the arrangement of the spokes, as the entrance (into the maṇḍala), the
exit (from it), and the circular movement (within it,) are its form. The

awakening of the power whose form is Kuṇḍalinī is just like this, and so it is

that it is ‘the supreme arising of kuṇḍalinr’. (The goddesses of the trident are)
‘in the location of the heart’ because (they) arise (there) as the spokes of (the

powers) of will (knowledge and action). (The staff of the trident) ‘is located in
the navel’ because the power of the vital breath arises from there in the form of

the staff. (The base of the trident is) ‘iīn the heart’, that is, in the Foundation of

Birth (‘anmādhāra), which, in accord with the teaching, ‘the Heart is the thread

of energy . . ., is the place where Śakti arises. Thus he says that ‘(its)
extremity is in the Place of the Power’. (One should recollect the three

wheels) ‘within the extremity’, that is, within the End of the Twelve.

He explains the method (yukti) (used) in the rise (of Kuṇḍalinī) from the

Foundation of Birth up to the End of the Twelve.

JJBCTGĪTĀTTṬJGTAṬ-TĪ-RḤ|

Jāīa TTTFĀTHTT I 2 I
utkṣipyotkṣipya kalayā dehamadhyasvarāpataḥ || 126 ||

śūladaṇḍāntamadhyasthaśūlamadhyāntagocaram |
praviśen mūlamadhyāntaṁ prāntānte śaktiveśmani || 127 |

' Read rasaṁmiveśasya for rāsaṁmiveśasya.

' Quoted above, TĀv ad 1/1, see note there.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

-After repeatedly casting upwards the area (gocara) from the

middle of the the end of the trident that is located in the middle of the end
of the staff, by means of the energy (kalā) (that comes forth) from the one’s

own essential nature in the middle of the body, he should enter into the end
of the middle of the base within the Abode of Power in the end of (its)
extremity. (126cd-127)
So how is that? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TTRTGHTĪTIT] TTPTTITTTĀTaT: I| 228 I

qITGTT-TTTHĒTĀTĪTJTTTT:|

fīr uūaīq 1 2

23? |

aspandakaraṇaṁ krtvā ekadā spandavartanam |
mūḷamānandam āpīḍya śaktitrayapadaṁ viśet | 128 I|
tatra pūjyaṁ prayatnena jāyante sarvasiddhayaḥ |
samastādhvasamāyogāt ṣoḍhādhvavyāptibhāvataḥ || 129 ||
samastamantracakrādyair evamādi prayatnataḥ |
ṣaṭtriṁśattattvaracitaṁ triśūlaṁ paribhāvayet || 130 ||
viṣuvatsthena vinyāso mantrāṇāṁ maṇḍalottame |
kāryo ʻ’smin pūjite yatra sarveśvarapadaṁ bhajet || 131 ||
(In other words,) after having set the motionless instrument all at

once into motion and squeezed the root which is bliss, one should enter into

the plane of the three powers, that should be worshipped there with effort.
AII the attainments arise (this way). (At the same time,) one should
contemplate (paribhāvayet) the trident made of the thirty-six reality levels
(tattva) with this kind of initial effort, by conjoining (there) all the Path by

(power of) the pervasion of the Six Paths, along with all the Mantras and

wheels etc. The Mantras should be deposited in this venerated and most
excellent maṇḍala, where one who is established in the Equinox (viṣuvat)

may attain the plane of the Lord of AIl.’” (128-131)

Jayaratha does not comment on verses 126cd-131. These are drawn, like the preceding ones,

from the Triśirobhairava. They are written in an extremely cryptic language and so, without

access to other relevant sources, the translation can only be tentative. According to Jayaratha, it
teaches the method to develop the ascension from janmādhāra to dvāda śānta (126cd-127) and

the way in which this ascent is achieved. (128-131).

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The root’ is the anus (mattagandha). (This should be done) ‘by one

who is established in the Equinox’, that is, when the breath in a state of

balanced equality.

Having taught the various kinds (of arrangements of) the tridents and
lotuses (in the varieties of the Trika maṇḍala), he describes the Svastika of the
Lord of the Sky.

A Description of (the Parts of the Maṇḍalas Called)
the ‘Lord of the Sky’, the Svastika, and the
Rest (vyomeśasvastikādinirūpaṇam)

svastikenātha kartavyaṁ yuktaṁ tasyocyate vidhiḥ |

Now (the maṇḍala) should be fashioned conjoined with a svastika.

The procedure for that is explained (as follows). (132ab)

‘One should fashion’ the maṇḍala in accord with the (following)
statement that authorizes (us to do s0): “now, we will talk concisely about the

essential nature of the (Trika) maṇḍala.”' (This maṇḍala) is ‘conjoined with a

svastika’, and because it is conjoined with a svastika, it is called that. This is the
meaning. As is said (in the Triśirobhairavatantra):

‘0 Lord! Master of the Wheel of the Mothers! You who bestow refuge

in the Transmental! O Supreme Lord, the blessed Svastika that gives tranquillity

and satiṣfaction and all (one may) desire has been mentioned in all the

scriptures, (but) not taught. Tell (me about) the threads (required to execute it)
and, by the elimination (of squares), the formation of the curves (bhrama) and
lotuses. (Teach me this) great (maṇḍala) that nourishes (all) and quells the fiood
of obstacles.”

(It is said) with regards to the Svastika of Vyomeśa that ‘one should
offer the incense of the body to the great Liṅga of Vyomeśa (the Lord of the

Sky).”

In order to describe the

(maṇḍala) that

is presided over by

Navātmabhaṭṭāraka, who is called the ‘Lord of the Skyʼ, in accord with (his)

nature, he says,

̄dt ũaāīmṝa 232 1
hEēētautcz-rdtereaztrttxse!
' Concerning the symbolic Equinox that occurs in the breathing cycle in which inhalation and
exhalation are equalized, see above, 6 |5cd-l 16ab (115) f.
The source of the diagram described in the following passage from 132 to 154 is again the
Triirobhairava. There can be no doubt of that. as Jayaratha introduces the one that follows (from
155) saying: Having taught in this way (how to draw) the svastika of Vyomeśa (the Lord of ṭhe
Void), by the way, according to the teachings of the venerable Trisirobhairava . . .
’Abovē, 31/1ab.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

nāḍikāḥ sthāpayet pūrvaṁ muhūrtaṁ parimāṇataḥ || 132 ||
śakravāruṇadikṣṭhāś ca yāmyasaumyagatās tathā |
(The teacher) should first of all install the channels (nāḍikā),

numbering thirty, that are located in the east and west and in the north and

south. (132cd-133ab)

‘The channelsʼ are the threads. (They are) ‘located in the east and
westʼ, that is, they extend (vertically) from the east to the west and ‘in the

north and southʼ, that is, they extend (horizontally) from south to north.
So what happens in this way? He says:

TGĪHTĪSIZTT: āṬ-TTSJTTTTaTGTAT || 233 1
ekonatrīṁśadvaṁśāḥ syur ṛjutiryaggatās tathā || 133 II
(In this way,) there should be twenty-nine parts (vaṁśa) that extend
vertically and horizontally. (133cd)
The ‘partsʼ are the sections (which are the squares into which the field

of the maṇḍala is divided). (They extend) ‘verticallyʼ, that is, from east to west

and ʻhorizontallyʼ, that is, from south to north.
In order to make this well understood, he calculates (their number).

aṣṭau marmaśatāny ekacatvāriṁśac ca jāyate |
Eight hundred and forty-one junctures (marman) are produced (in
this way). (134ab)
The ‘juncturesʼ are the (square) parts. (The number arrived at is) such

by multiplying twenty-nine by twenty-nine.

He divides that up:

viīēṭEēzezk'ḷ'ṭe_ttcx &ITENH
GĪTĀTĀĪATa TTJTG: J| 23., |I
vaṁśair viṣayasaṁkhyaiś ca padmaṁ yugmendumaṇḍalam || 134 ||
rasasaṅkhyair bhavet pīṭhaṁ svastikaṁ sarvakāmadam |
vasuṣaṅṁkhyair dvāravīthāv evaṁ bhāgaparikramaḥ || 135 ||
The lotus (is drawn with squares) numbering the (five) objects of
sense (viṣaya), and consists of two maṇḍalas of the moon. The pedestal (is
fashioned) with (squares) numbering the sentiments (i.e. six). (There) the
svastika (is located,) that bestows all (one’s) desires. The door, and (so too)

TANTRĀLOKA

the platform, are (fashioned within squares) numbering the (eight)

Vasus." Such is the circumambulation of the squares. (134cd-135)

‘The objects of sense (viṣaya) are five, and this is (done) all around

(sarvataḥ), so that there are two and half squares on each side. One should

understand (that the procedure) is such subsequently also. A distinguishing

characteristic of the lotus is that it ‘consists of two manḍalas of the moon’, that

is, the svastika. In order to clarify that, because it is conjoined, it is of primary
importance here, he says that it ‘bestows all (one’s) desiresʼ. Thus, the lotus (is

drawn) with five squares, the circle of the moon with two, the pedestal with six,
the platform (vīthī) with eight, and the door with eight. Thus, it is said that there
are twenty-nine squares. ‘Such is the circumambulation of the squares’.
He now sets out (tāvar) to draw the door there.

[GEEHTUEIĀVÉEEIIETĀEZIS

ãg |

randhravipraśarāgnīṁś ca lupyed bāhyāntaraṁ kramāt |
marmāṇi ca caturdikṣu madhyād dvāreṣu sundari l 136 ||
vahnibhũtamunivyyomabāhyagarbhe purīṣu ca |

‘O fair lady, (the teacher) should (now) delete progressively in the

four directions, from the outside to the inside, intersections (marman) (i.e.
squares, numbering the nine) cavities (of the body), (the seven) Brahmin
(sages), (the five) arrows (of the God of Love), and (the three sacred) fires,

beginning from the middle, and delete in (the sides of) the doors squares

“1 1) ṛhe lotus occupies five squares, 2) the circle of the moon, two, 3) the pedestal, si, 4) the
platform (vīrhī) eight, and 5) the door, eight. 5 + 2 + 6 + 8 + 8 = 29.

2 1/2 lotus-24

1 –- moon-–1

3 - pedestal- 3

4 - door
-4

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

(numbering the three sacred) fires, (five) gross elements, (seven) sages, and

(nine) voids (of the body), from outside to inside, within the fortresses.”
(136-137abc)

‘The cavities are nine. The ‘Brahminsʼ are the seven sages. The

‘arrows’ are five. (The sacred) ‘firesʼ are three. Here, with respect to the centre,

squares numbering nine etc. should be deleted in due order within the four
doors, beginning from outside up to the inside, so that the configuration is that

of the plan (talacchanda) of a temple (of the type) called ‘Meru’.' The ‘gross
elementsʼ are five. The cavities (of the body) are characterized as ‘voids’,
because (their) form is (one of) emptiness. Thus, one should delete three etc.

groups of squares on both sides of the doors, beginning from the outside to

inside. In such a way that (this) configuration (saṁmiveśa) which serves as a

door (dvāraprāya) should be like a fortress turned towards the inside
(antarmukhaḥ puryākāraḥ)

Having explained the drawing (of the maṇḍala) in the four directions,

(he explains how that is done) in the corners as well.

RTIITRTTĀĪTTJ ṀTTGTRTTTT |

lopayec caiva marmāṇi antarnāḍivivarjitān || 137 II
dvāraprākārakoṇeṣu netrānalaśarān ṛtiīīn |
“(Then beginning from) the inside, (he should remove), in the
corners of the walls (prākāra) of the doors, with the exception of the inner
threads (nāḍivivarjitān), (squares numbering the two) eyes, (three sacred)
fires, (five) arrows, and (the six) seasons.’ (137d-138ab)

‘The eyesʼ are two and the ‘seasons’ six. One should erase in this way,

beginning from within, squares numbering two, three, and five, by omitting

single squares at a time. (Śquares) numbering those of the (six) seasons are

taken together, and so (the number six stands for ‘all together’ (niravaśeṣān).

The figure that should be generated within the angles, by combining the two

Śobhā that are on both directions (to the sides of the doors), is like a zigzag
design (gomutrikābandhaprāyaḥ). This is the conjunction of the doors
(dvārasandhiḥ)
Now, in order to direct the drawing of the platform (vīrhī), he says:

-īṬ=aī JaṁdT=d laāī TJTSTRATTT: I 23¢ 1I

' By this is meant that this is done in order to fashion the citadels in the maṇḍala.

Concerning this type of temple, see, for example, Śilpaprakāśa, table XXXIV.
' Unfortunately, Jayaratha does not comment on this obscure expression.
“ Concerning this term, see above, 31/36cd-38 and note.

TANTRĀLOKA

āaī 1| 2 1
nāḍayo brahmavaṁśasya lopyā netrād rasasthitāḥ || 138 II
vahner netrānalau lopyau vedān netrayugaṁ rasāt |
netraṁ saumyagataṁ lopyaṁ pūrvād vedānalau rasāt || 139 ||
‘Six squares (nāḍī) should be deleted, (beginning) from the second
(square on the right side of) the square of Brahmā, from the third, five,
from the fourth, four, and beginning from the sixth, two. (The same should

be done also) on the left, where (the equivalent squares should similarly) be
deleted beginning from the second, the third, the fourth and the sixth
(squares).” (138cd-139)

There, the second square on the right side of Brahmā’s square (i.e the

middle one) in the door, and the six squares beginning from that, should be
erased. Above that, five squares, beginning from the third one, and above that
also, beginning from the fourth, a pair or two pairs and above that also
beginning from the sixth, two squares should be erased. This is the meaning. He
transposes this same (procedure) on the left side also, saying ‘(the same should
be done also) on the left’ etc. In the same way, on the left also, beginning from
the first that is mentioned, namely, the second square. In accord with the
principle that ‘the sequence of meanings prevails over the sequence of the
recitation (of the words that convey them)’, groups of squares should be erased,

beginning from the third, fourth and sixth.' (In this way), by being in
consonance with the cleaning up of the area meant for all the platform (vīthī),

that will be explained (further ahead), the deletion (of those squares) that are

within it has been successfully accomplished.
Having drawn the configuration of the citadel, he teaches the drawing of
the svastikas also.

BTāJT] āTTRTT] ftcāT īāTāTTūa: |

lokasthān nāḍikān hitvā netrād vedāgnayaḥ kramāt |
Śarair vahnīyutaṁ caiva yugaṁ netrāgnayo kramāt || 140 ||
netrāt pūrvagatāc caiva..…

‘Having omitted seven threads (nāḍikā)' (i.e. squares, starting

from that of Brahmā) and (then) after the eye (that is two more), (one
should delete) (the number of the four) Vedas (squares) and (three squares)
(that are the number of the sacred) fires, successively. (Then) from the eye

“ In the original Sanskrit the sequence is second, fourth, third and sixth. As a matter of

convenience, the order as stated here by Jayaratha is the one that appears in the translation.
'“ Read lokasthān nāḍikān for lokasthā nāḍikā.
' Thatis, starting from the ninth.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

(which is the ninth square), that is in the beginning, conjoined with (three
sacred) fires,' together with (five squares as are the) arrows; the pair (that
is, the second square), together with two and three squares, (should be

deleted) in due order. (140-141ab)

Omitting seven squares beginning from the square of Brahmā (in the
centre), ‘after two (more)’,' (one arrives at) the ninth square. (Then,) taking

that as a base (as a point of departure, one should occupy), four (squares), and
three next to them. Four squares in the form of śobhās, as one limb of the
svastika, should be erased in accord with the view concerning the deletion (of

squares) that will be explained (further ahead). After that, beginning with the

ninth square, which is denoted by the word ‘eye’, ‘together with (five) arrows’
which, denoted in this way, is the fifth square in the second line, (counting) in
reverse, should be deleted along with the fires, that is, three squares. The
conjunction (sandhi) here of the (four) Vedas and (the three) fires (that is, the

four and three squares) is like (the one between the goddess and Rāma, when it
is said that)

‘she is this Rāma, the son of Da

.1s
aṭha

The second square from the one denoted by the word ‘arrows’,
‘conjoined with fireʼ, that is, along with three squares, should be deleted. This
the meaning. Then again, from the first, which is denoted by the word ‘pair’,
from the eye (i.e. the two) that remain, the eye, that is, the second square, the

‘firesʼ, that is, three squares, should (all) be deleted in due order. The (drawing

of the) svastika is (thus) successfully (completed). One should know that the

same is in the other directions also. Having first of all drawn two svastikas from

the eastern (quarter) in the sacred seat, (another two) should be drawn from the

western quarter in such a way that the arrangement is similar on all sides.
Presenting the configuration of both also, he concludes:
r̥RĀR TĪT:

2e 1

JJFIJĀĒĀĒPĒṣumerur dvārasaṁjñitaḥ |
svastikā ca purī ramyā caturdikṣu sthitāvubhau || 141 I|

(Mount) Sumeru is characterized by the doors." Both the beautiful

fortress of the svastikā (and Sumeru) are located in (each of) the four
directions.’ (141bcd)

“ ]n reality, from the ninth.
' Read vahniyutaṁ for vahnigataṁ.

Read kramāt for rasā.

Read netrāt for netra.

' Concerning Rāma and the practice of being established in Rāma, see above 1/85cd ff.
' Concerning the plan of the ‘Meru’, see above, 31/136-137 and note.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Bothī’ means the fortress of the svastikā and Sumeru.
Surely (one may aṣsk), within how many squares does the deletion
(required for the) platform take place? With this doubt in mind, he says:

tnfrġforaṛ
fear. |

māftāhīa aīsa īīxēaīq gaI 1 22 1
marmaṇāṁ ca śate dve ca ṛṣibhir guṇitā diśaḥ |
netrādikāṁś ca saṁmārjya mārgamadhyāt suśobhane || 142 ||

‘O beautiful lady, after having cleared away two hundred squares

and (the number of the ten) directions times that of the (seven) sages and

the (two) eyes,'“ from the middle of the path (i. e. the maṇḍala) (then
drawn the platform). (142)

The ‘directions’ are ten, which, multiplied by seven (which is the
number of) sages, makes seventy. The ‘eyes’ are two. Thus, having erased two
hundred and seventy-two (squares) in the field of the platform, the teacher
should draw the platform called the citadel of the svastikā. This is the rest (that
completes the sentence).
Now he directs the drawing of the lotus.

ftTrrāāji mīa

ṛṣitrayakr̥te madhye

(Of this,) the middle consists of (squares numbering on each side)
three times (the number of the seven) sages. ' (143a)
(The middle) ‘consists of three times (the number of the seven)
sages’ means that (each side) is divided twenty-one times (into as many
squares).

He (now) divides this (area) up.

ŨṀã Ṁd JGTTTSTT 1 23 1

..-... ... viṣayaiḥ karṇikā bhavet |

netrīkṛtāṉ vasūn patraṁ netraṁ sakṛdvibhājitam || 143 |I
vahnūĩ vaṣugataṁ kr̥tvã śaśāṅkasthãṁś ca lopayet |

' The area of the whole maṇḍala covers 841 squares. The middle of it wher the pedestal and,
lotuses ete. are located, is a square area made up of thirteen squares on cach side, and so consists
of 169 squares. The platform (vīthi) measures 272 squares and the doors 400 altogether.
Ṭhusṣ, including the area for the ‘platform’, there are 441 squares altogether.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

The calix is (fashioned with the number of squares, as are the five)

objects of sense, and the petals (are the number of the eight) Vasus

multiplied by the (two) eyes (i.e. sixteen). The second and the third (square)
is divided up once (into two), ending with the eighth, and having done
(that,) erase (the squares) where the moon is located. (143bcd-144ab)
(The petals are eight) ‘multiplied by the (two) eyes’ʼ, that is, doubled
(to make sixteen). The sense is that, apart from the five squares that have been

fashioned for the calix, there are sixteen squares on all sides for the drawing of

the petals. There is a petal in each of the (eight) directions, which, along with
the line of the sky, (is formed) with eight parts, because the tip of the petal will
be drawn at the end of seven parts. How is that? (In response to this question,)
he says ‘the second’ etc. ‘The second’ is the second square. It is ‘divided up
onceʼ means that it is divided in two with just one thread, and (so too) in the

same way, ‘the third’. These two parts, ‘ending with the eighth’, that is,

having divided into two all (this) area up to the end (of it), ‘erase (the squares)

where the moon is located.' The meaning is one should make three circles in

the form of the moon in order make the stamens, junctions between the petals
and their tips.
How (is that done)? He says:

TGRIJ-TTTTATTT GJT TṬḺrARTĀĪ | 2 4¥ 1I

vahnīṣuṟṣimadhyāc ca lopyaṁ pīṭhendukāvadhi || 144 ||

(This) must be erased (starting) from the middle, (specified by the

numbers of the three sacred) fires, (five) arrows and (seven) sages, ending

with the moon (next to) the pedestal. (144cd)

The meaning is that (the area starting) ‘from the middleʼ, that is,
(beginning from) the location of the calix, qualified by three, five and seven
parts, should be erased, up to circle of the moon that is in contact with the
pedestal. The overall sense is as follows. One should draw a curve beginning

from the thread that falls within the second square in the third circle, up to the

square of the Brahmā (in the centre), and so produce sixteen half petals, and in
the same way the tips of the petals, however, (taking care to do s0) by
(progressively) transposing (the same procedure), in the manner taught
previously.
Having taught in this way (the manner of) drawing the lotus, he (now)
says (how the) pedestal (pīha) also (is to be drawn).

ēT |

aTR N GĪIA āTGA: ṬāTETIIT: I 234, I
brahmaṇo netraviṣayān netrād vedānalau haret |
sāgare netrakaṁ lopyaṁ nāḍayaḥ pūrvadiggatāḥ || 145 I|

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Starting from the second square from Brahmā (in the centre), one
should remove five (squares) from the two (i.e. both sides), (then) four and
three. (Then) the second should be removed in the fourth. (In this way),
there are three channels located in the eastern quarter.’ (145)

Five squares beginning from the second square ‘from the Brahmā’,
that is, from (the centre, which is) the location of the Brahmā, (ends with) the
sixth square beginning from the Brahmā. Five squares should be erased ‘from

the twoʼ, that is, from the two sides. (The squares) located there are arranged in
a row, in accord with the lines (the drawing of which) will be explained (further

ahead). (They should be) in a place that is other than the place (reserved for) the
svastika, (the drawing of which) will be explained (further ahead). (This must be
the procedure,) because no other erasure is mentioned. Although there are ‘four
and three’, that is, seven squares located in this way from the Brahma, ‘one

should removeʼ just five from both sides (of it, and) then ‘in the fourth’

square, ‘the second’ square, which from the Brahmā is the fifth. (This means

that) five (squares out of those) present there should also be erased from both
sides, in such a way that there are three channels (nāḍikā) in the form of a (thin)

strip of cloth (paṭṭikārūpā) (formed) in the eastern quarter, in accord with the
teaching that will be imparted (further ahead namely). This is the meaning.

JTTBHT
TgTTT

q1

RaTT] TITÇ GĪTĀT =TṬTTĪ I 2xē,
bhūtanetragatān mūrdhnā netrād dvivahnidṛktrikāṭ |
saumyagāt pīṭhakoṇeṣu lopayeta caturṣv api |l 146 ||
“‘The master must, in the four angles of the pedestal, beginning with
that of the southeast, therefore cancel the boxes of the five and the two, at
the top and beginning from the two, those of the two, of the three, of the
two and of the three(?)”. (146)

In this way a svastika is successfully (formed).

ēāī: I| 2 . |

ũṝ amaāī fāaītcataiaú| ¢ 1
TTTĪTTI-TĪTṬ;

g |
kIREFtE--|Eeīttē

kCIGEEIEFĀṀ,|ḺŪREEĪUṬ

' The angles of the pedestal, like those of the platform, are it sems, adorned with four svastikas.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

| gÚ0
q |
ñczafrṁ

aṣg vīi acihāŪaq |

BSt TTGTATṢ

TĪTHTT
TI Q.2 |A
TTṬ ṬĪTRTTRIT THRGTRATT |

J, ṀũtṝṀraṝṁṁḤ sdr̥rgJaTT II 242 I

T ēīfnṁ Taṁṁq atadHar̄ || qu3

I 2 TT
4 I
dalāni kāryāṇi sitaiḥ kesaraṁ raktapītalaiḥ |

karṇikā kanakaprakhyā pallavāntāś ca lohitāḥ l| 147 ||
vyomarekhā tu sumitā vartulābjās tu nīlabhāḥ |
pīthaṁ rekhātrayopetaṁ sitalohitapītalam || 148
svastikāś ca catuṟvarṇā agner īśānagocarāḷḥ |
vīthĩ vidrumasaṅkãśā svadikṣy astrãṇi bãhyataḥ || 149 ||
indranīlanibhaṁ vajraṁ śaktiṁ padmamaṇiprabhãm |

daṇḍaṁ hāṭakasaṅkāśaṁ vaktraṁ tasyātilohitam || 150 ||

nīladyutiṣamaṁ khaṅgaṁ pāśaṁ vatsakasaprabham |
dhvajaṁ puṣpaphalopetaṁ pañcaraṅgaiś ca śobhitam || 151 ||
gadā hemanibhātyugrā nānāramavibhūṣitā |
Śūlaṁ nīlāmbujasamaṁ jvaladyahnyugraśekharam || 152 |
tasyopari sitaṁ padmam īṣatpītāruṇaprabham |
cakraṁ hemanibhaṁ dīptam arā vaiḍūryasaṁnibhāḥ l| 153 II
arāmadhyaṁ supītaṁ ca bāhyaṁ jvālāruṇaṁ bhavet |
mandiraṁ devadevasya sarvakāmaphalapradam || 154 |

The petals are to be fashioned with white (powders), the stamen
with red and yellow, the calix (is bright yellow) like gold, the ends of the
sprouts are red, and the row of circles (yyomarekhā) is brilliant white. The

round lotuses are blue. The pedestal has three white, red and yellow lines.

The svastikas in the southeast and northeast are of four colours. The

platform (vīthī) is (red) like coral. The weapons from outside (around the

maṇḍala) are in their own (corresponding) quarters.' (Their colours are as

follows). The thunderbolt (vajra) (is blue) like sapphire. The lance (śakti)
shines (red) like a ruby. The staff is (yellow) like gold, and its face (at the
top of it) is very red. The sword is like the radiance of blue. The noose is
(black) like iron sulphate. The flag has flowers and fruit and is embellished
with five colours. The club is (yellow) like gold and, adorned with many
gems, (it scintillates) very fiercely. (The colour of) the trident is like (that of
a) blue lotus and its summit is fierce with burning fire. Above it (in the next

'®ead vartulābjāṣtu nīlābhāḥ for vartúābjāntanīabhāḥ.
' These are the weapons of the guardians of the quarters. See above, note 30,10.2.

TANTRĀLOKA

quarter) is a white lotus which is slightly orange.' The discus (cakra)
shines brilliantly like gold; (its) spokes are like beryl, and the centre is a

beautiful yellow. The sanctuary of the God of the gods, that bestows the

fruit every desire, is red with flames on the outside. (147-154)

‘The svastikas’ are on the pedestal (pītha) and the platform (vīthī).
Apart from the ṣvastika, (the platform is) ‘(red) like coral’. (The sanctuary is

red with flames) ‘on the outside’, that is, (outside its) door also.
Having taught in this way (how to draw) the svastika of Vyomeśa (the
Lord of the Void) by the way, according to the teachings of the venerable

Triśirobhairava, he teaches (how to draw) the trident and lotus (maṇḍala)

taught in the venerable Siddhātantra also.

E) The Construction of the Maṇḍala According
to the Siddhayogeśvarīmata

The procedure (by which to draw) the trident is (also found) in the

venerable Siddhā (Tantra). (155a)

A ‘procedure (by which to draw) the trident’ is taught (in the

Siddhātantra), which he paraphrases (arthād uktaḥ).

He (now) states that procedure.

.... . ...9 prāk kṣetre caturaśrite |
hastamātraṁ tridhā sūryān navakhaṇḍaṁ yathā bhavet |I 155 |I
madhye śūlaṁ ca tatretthaṁ
First (one must draw) within a square field (another one which is

smaller) by twelve (finger-breadths on each side). It is three times one
handspan (on each side) and (fashioned) so that it is divided into nine parts
(for each handspan), and the trident is (drawn) there in this way in the

middle (of it). (155bcd-160a)

Having omitted ‘twelve (finger-breadths) on each side ‘within the
square fieldʼ, one should take up the field (formed that way, which) measures
three times that of a handspan, that is, three handspans. It should be such that by
dividing it into three, it consists of nine squares for each handspan. And ‘there

“ pīāruṇa – literally: 'yelow and red’.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

in this way’, that is, in the manner which will be explained, one should fashion
‘in the middle (of it)’ a trident. This is the rest (of the sentence required to
complete the meaning).
He (now) divides up just the middle (part).

fraī ṝrq 1

TTaī āA’ HTTGAK 7 |
TITTR, JTĪḤT TTTĪIgTRTJTĒĪT
I ṞUS II
...--....... madhyabhāgaṁ tridhā bhajet |

navabhiḥ koṣṭhakair yuktaṁ tato ʻyaṁ vidhir ucyate | 156 ||
madhyabhāgatrayaṁ tyaktvā madhye bhāgadvayasya tu |
adhastād bhramayet sūtraṁ śaśāṅkaśakalākṛti |I 157 ||

The middle part should be divided in two," and have nine

(squares). Then this is what the procedure is said to be. Having omitted

three squares (below) the middle, a thread (should be placed) in the middle

of the two squares, and made to turn downwards (to thus produce a line)
with the form of a digit of the moon. (156cd-157)
That middle part, that measures one handspan, has nine squares, and is

divided into three, ‘should be divided in two’. The meaning is that it should be
divided on all sides by six, and should be made to have thirty-six squares with
four finger-breadths (each). “This’ is (the procedure) that will be explained. He

says that (with the words): ‘having omitted three squares’ etc. Having

omitted, with reference to Brahmā’s place (in the centre), the three squares there

below the centre, placing a hand ‘in the middle’ of both the sides ‘of the two
squaresʼ, that is, in the second junction (marman), One should rotate’ a thread

in the form of a half-moon below it, that is to say, rotate it twice, as explained
before.

Na-Ĩ JĨ

ubhayato bhramayet tatra yathāgre hākṛtir bhavet |
koṭyāṁ tatra kr̥aṁ sūtraṁ nayedrekhāṁ tu pūrvikām || 158 II
One should rotate (a thread) there on both sides in such a way as

(as to produce) the shape of (the letter) H in front (of the middle thread).

In accord with Jayaratha, read dvidhā for tridhā.

TANTRĀLOKA

Having a placed a thread there on (its) extremity, one should extend the

line (produced) previously. (158)

Placing a hand there also ‘in front’, in the third junction to the east of
the middle thread, (produce a line) ‘with the form of a digit of the moon’, that
is, turned inwards, and rotate it upwards between two squares in such a way that
there should be a figure (saṁmiveśa) that has the form of two humps. There on
the extremity (of this figure,) in the form of (the letter) H, located between the
two sides, from the threads that have been connected together on the upper and
lower extremities (koṟiṣu), one should extend (nayer) the line that is on the
thread (between) the two sides, that was fashioned previously when the nine
parts were produced on the thread of the middle prong, up to a distance of half a
handspan, of the nine squares that are above, in the manner that is being
explained, towards the western door.

GPṞ…EGS EĀĪEEE EIJG

aparadvārapūrveṇa tyaktvāṁgulacatuṣṭayam |
rekhāṁ vināśayet prājño yathā śūlākṛtir bhavet I/ 159 |

śūlāgre tv ardhahastena tyaktvā padmāni kārayet |

adhaḥ śrgatrayaṁ hastamadhye padmaṁ sakarṇikam || 160 |

Having omitted four finger breadths from the front of the western
door, the wise man should diminish the line in such a way (as to form) the

figure of a trident. (159)

Having omitted half a handspan' in front of (the prongs of) the

trident, one should fashion (three) lotuses. Beneath the three prongs, in the

middle of the (space of a) handspan (covered by the square in the middle,
one should draw) a lotus with a calix. (160)

How (is that done)? He says ‘having omitted four finger breadths’

etc. The line that has arisen from the extremity of the tip of the lunar digit that
has been drawn (facing) inwards, having omitted four finger breadths from the
base, should be ‘diminished’ (by degrees), that is, he should, by the strength of
his own intelligence, thin out (the line) as needs to be done, in such a way that
the tips of the prongs become sharp. Such is (the manner in which the drawing)
of the three prongs is successfully accomplished. And then, when the tip of the
prongs has been drawn with half a handspan (of space), that is to say, having
omitted half a handspan above, that is to say, one should fashion, as before,
This is the one made previously, in which the Trident is drawn in the middle square. It seems

that the reference here is to the two corners in the southeast and northeast.

' Meaning uncertain.

' Starting from the horizontal thread of Brahmā.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

three lotuses of twelve finger-breadths, and below the three prongs there should
again (as before) be a lotus (measuring) one handspan.
Having explained in this way the drawing of the trident, he says (the
following, in order to explain that) of the staff.

mukhāgre dhārayet sūtraṁ tribhir hastais tu pātayet |

‘Place a thread in front of the base (mukha) (of the middle prong)

and cast it for three handspans (length). (161ab)

Having placed a thread at the front of the mouth of the middle prong,
‘cast it with three handspans (space), lead it from the centre up to the end of
the outer twelve finger-breadths that have been omitted.
Having taught (the manner of drawing its) length in this way, he talks
about its width.

Ez#=R rHEIE°EEGZCIĀTTTI

|| 2ē2

E,I

madhye cordhvaṁ tataḥ kuryād adhastād aṁguladvayam || 161 |
rekhādyayaṁ pātayeta yathā śūlaṁ bhavaty api |
adhobhāgādibhiś cordhvaṁ tatra rekhā prapadyate | 162 ||
samīkṛtya tataḥ siūtre ūrdhve dve evam eva tu |

In the middle, above and below, one should cast two lines, two
finger-breadths (apart from one another), in such a way that the trident is
also (fashioned) there. Once the lower (and middle) parts have been made
equal with the upper (one), a line is formed there. Then, the two threads
above (should be cast) in the same way. (161cd-163ab)
One should fashion two lines in this way on the two sides, with a gap of
two finger-breadths (between) them, in three places, in such a way that equally
all around the lower and middle parts, along with (the one) above, have been
made equal, and (so) after that ‘a line is formed’. Then ‘the two threads
above’ should be cast in the very same way, so that a trident with (its) staff is
produced.
And the lotus in the middle should not thereby be covered with the staff.
Thus he says:

’This is the lower part of the trdent which seems to coincide with Brahmā that marks the centre.

TANTRĀLOKA

q£3 1I

madhyaṁ padmaṁ pratiṣṭhāpyaṁ śūlādhastād yaśasvini l/ 163 |

O Famed Goddess!'" The lotus in the middle should be installed

below the trident. (163cd)

Everything, that is, the doors and the rest, should be drawn here, in the
same manner as explained before, in (this) field that has been divided up
twenty-four times. The Lord has fashioned, as the primary, the parts in (the
space of) the middle handspan that is used for the half-moon. Let this suffice.
verse):

He concludes the matter (artha) (taught in this) chapter with half (a

ity eṣa maṇḍalavidhiḥ kathitaḥ saṁkṣepayogato mahāgurubhiḥ |

Thus this, the procedure (to be followed in order to draw) the

maṇḍala, has been taught in brief by our great teacher. (164ab)
Such is the auspicious (end of this chapter).

The one called Jayaratha, who is expert in explaining Śiva’s scripture,
which is hard to understand, concerning the teaching (of the method of drawing

the maṇḍalas with) svastikas, tridents and lotuses, has explained the thirty-first
chapter (of the Tantrāloka).
Thus (ends) Chapter Thirty-one, called the Revelation of the Maṇḍala,
of the (commentary called) Discernment, of the venerable Tantrāḹoka.

“ Here again we notice that Abhinava is quoting so literally that he has even included the god's
form of address to the goddess.
'" The plura here serves as an honorific. Abhinava is referring to just one ‘great teacher’, who

can only be Śambhunātha, who initiated him into Trika Śaivism, and hence must have shown him

the Trika maṇḍala, the vision (darśana) of which marks the culmination of initiaton and its
worship and contemplation in daily observance. Abhinava has stated clearly that he had only one
Trika teacher. So, we may discard the possibility that he studied the various Trika scriptures
teaching these variant forms of the maṇḍala with diferent teachers.

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
The Procedure Concerning the Seals (Mudrā)
(mudrikāvidhiḥ)
May time, that as consciousness stamps (with the seal of temporality)
the double abyss, that is, the entire universe, divided into the pure and impure

Paths, measure out (in time and so bring to an end) (kalayatu) the sin of the

wise.

He now begins to expound the procedure concerning the Mudrās.

fār] |

atha kathaye mudrāṇāṁ gurvāgamagītam atra vidhim |
Now I will talk about the procedure here concerning Mudrās

praised (gīta) by (my) teacher and the scriptures.

He says that:

Definition of Mudrā

ṭē [Ūḷṝēte|aaPīEēztrezeitrcJHI

3sṁī fāīaāīcāzgcaṁ araarattaa

? 1

mudrā ca pratibimbātmā śrīmaddevyākhyayāmale |
uktā bimbodayaśrutyā vācyadvayavivecanāt |I 1 ||ḷ
Mudrā (is a seal; as such, it) is said in the venerable Devyāyāmala
that it is essentially a reflection (pratibimba) (of the original form of the

seal). This is because two meanings can be discerned by the expression in

the scriptures (concerning the nature of Mudrā, namely that it is) 1) ‘the
arising of (and 2) from) the original formʼ (bimbodaya) (of reflected

consciousness). (1)

' In common parlance, a nudrā īs a seal. As in English, a seal can mean both the stamp which
makes the impression and th actual impression itsclf.
The word bimba denotes the obiject that is reflected, what I call the original form or object. The
word pratibimba denotes its reflecton. It is that which faces in front of or towards – prai – the
original form – bimba, as its reflected counterpart or ‘counter-form’. Taken as an ablative, the
compound ‘himhodaya’ means ‘the arisig FROM the original image’ (bimbād udayaḥ). It can
also mean, simply, 'the arising OF the original image’ (bimbaṣya udayaḥ). Padoux explains:
‘Mudrā is pratibimba, reflection, or rather pratibimbodaya . . . First . . . ḷmudrā] arises

from an original image . . . the maudrā appears from the deity and is a reflection, a reproduction
by man of the appearance (and nature) of the deity. Or . . . [mudrā] īs that from which the original
arises, that which is a means by which the original appears . . . For Abhinavagupta these two
interpretations are equally valid. A mnudrā has therefore a twofold nature and function: It reflects
reality; i.e. the hand and body postures adopted by the adept, together with the visualizations,

TANTRĀLOKA

(It is said) there in the venerable Devyāyāmala that ‘Mudrā is the
arīsing of a reflection (pratibimbodaya)’. Such is the form of the ‘expression in
the scriptures (concerning the nature of Mudrā, namely that it is) ‘the

arising of the original form (bimba)’. The meaning of this statement is that

‘Mudrā is said to be a reflection’, because it is a (concrete) form (ākṛti) of
supreme consciousness. (lt is said to be such) by discerning two meanings (of

the expression ‘the arising of the original form’) as an ascriptive (compound)

(bahuvṛīhi) (of which the component words may be related to one another) in

the sense of an ablative or a genitive (in relation to its object). And these are the

two meanings here. When (taking the prefix) ‘prati’ (of the word pratibimba –

‘reflection’) to mean ‘facing towards’, thus putting (the reflection) in close

proximity to the original image, as (its) instrumental cause, its arising is solely
determined by the original image. Thus, (in accord with one meaning,) it is said
that the original form is the instrumental cause of the origination OF the

reflection (pratibimba). (According to the other meaning,) the reflection is the

means of perceiving the original form because it is derived FROM (the original
form) as (its) ʻreturning backʼ (pratigata) (i.e. reflection), which is it its
‘arisingʼ, the characteristic of which is (its) manifestation.

Or the ‘expression ‘the arising of the original form’ (can be taken to
be drawn from the statement in the Devyāyāmala that) ‘Mudrā is, by name, the

arising of the original form (bimbodaya) . . ’, and can be explained without
reference to the meaning of the prefix ‘prati’ (in the word prati-bimba).
He says the same by means (of a presentation of the) general purport (of
this statement).

bimbāt samudayo yasyā ity uktā pratibimbatā |

bimbasya yasyā udaya ity uktā tadupāyatā || 2 ||
(In the sense of) the arising (of Mudrā) from an original image
(bimba) (as does a reflection of an image in a mirror or an impression of a
seal in wax), the state of (Mudrā) is said to be that of a reflection

(pratibimba). (In the sense that) the arising is that of its original image,

(Mudrā) is said to be the means to (the realization of) that (original image).

(2)

reflect, reproduce, the form and attitude of the deity. But from these postures, etc., reproducing

those of deity, and from the visualizations of divinity. there arises, for the adept, an identification

with that deity. For him the original appears and takes the place of the merely reflected image: he
is possessed by the devatā, identified with her; the original form is born from the reflection.’

(Padoux 1990a: 71-72)
A less literal, clearer translation of this verse could be: ‘A udrā is said to be a reflection in the

sense that it is bom from the original image or else in the sense that the image is born from it,

which thus becomes an instrument of its birth.”

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

The ‘arisingʼ (samudaya) (of the reflection is its) origination (utpatti).
(The pronoun) ‘its’, that is, of Mudrā, which is a reflection, has the sense of a
genitive. (In the second instance of the use of the word) ‘its’, the sense is that of
an ablative, as (the arising of the reflection) from the presence (of the original

image). Its ‘arising’ is insight (jñapti) and ‘the means to that’ is the means to

(the realisation of the nature of) the original image by means of insight. This is
the meaning.

Having explained the conventional meaning (riḍhi) of the word

‘Mudrā’, he (now) also explains the etymological (yoga) one.

Tē THWTGTĀTRĪ
TTRT TITHTTT] |
Taīṝ̄afdṁ - Jgī aīraī] ataī . 3 1
mudaṁ svarūpalābhākhyaṁ dehadvāreṇa cātmanām |
rāty arpayati yat tena mudrā śāstreṣu varṇitā || 3 ||

It is called mudrā in the scriptures because, (as its etymology

indicates,) it bestows (rāti), that is, offers to the Self by means of the body
the bliss (mud) called ‘the attainment of one’s own nature’. (3)

About the origin and derivation of the word mudra, see Shah 1956: 11-14. This is a common
didactic etymology of the word maudrā. Abhinava uses the term mudrā in another sense in the PTy
(p. 223). There he says that maudrā – a feminine word – denotes two forms of Śakti. One is the

power of knowledge (vidyā) and the other action (kriyā). Theṣe energies are the ‘stamps’ (mudrā)

or marks (aika) which characterize gender, female and male respectively. He alludes also to the
union of the genders as a yoga of inner reversing into outer and outer into inner’ as the union of

the sign of gender of the two partners engaged in union. He writç

sarvaṁ hi mudrādvayānuviddhaṁ – jñānakriyāśakúṣāratvāt kevalaṁ devatāsu jāānamudrā
antarudriktā kriyāmudrā bahiḥ vīreṣu viparyayaḥ anupraveśas tu samatayā viparyayāc ca
anenaivābhiprāyeṇa jñānaśaktyātmake liṅge kriyāśaktisamarpaṇam uktam ḷ

‘Everything is threaded through with two seals, because the essence (of all things) are
the powers of knowledge and action. The seal of knowledge is inwardly predominant within the
deities (of the senses). The scal of action is extemal and is within Kaula adepts (vīra). Reversal is
entering (within,) and because of the balance (sama1ā) and reversal, it is said with this intention
that the power of action is offered into the genital centre (liṅga), which is the power of
knowledge.’ PTy (p. 223)
Commenting on the following verse from Utpaladeva’s Śivastotrāvali, Kṣemarja says,
along the same lines. that the vauudrā of Maheśvara is stamped everywhere, and consists o
knowledge and action, which are the two genders.
jaya sarva jagannyastaṣvamudrãvyaktavaibhava |
jayāmmadānaparyantaviśveśvara maheśvara |
‘Victory (to You) O Maheśvara, You who are everything! You whose glory is manifest
by Your own seal (mudrā) samped (everywhere) in (all thē uniyerse; victory (to You) who are
the Lord of the universe to the very limit of the gift of Yourself. ŚSt 14/12
jaya

sarveti

/_sarvatra

jagati

nyastayā

svamudrayānandasārajñānakriyāśaktivyāpti-

mayayāvaṣṭambharāpayā vyaktāaṁ vaibhavaṁ vyāpakatvaṁ prabhutvaṁ ca yasya | yad āgamaḥ

na cakrāṅkā na vajrãkã dr̥yante jantavaḥ kvaci |

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Thus, with this intended (sense, it is said that) mudrā liberates

(mocayate) from all the net of fetters and melts away (drāvayate) the latent
traces (of the past Karma) of the gross and subtle body. In the same way, it
stamps (mudrayati) Mantra, Yoga, (ritual) action and observance (caryā) with
its oneness with it.’
Although according to the teachings, exemplified by this one here (in
this passage), the etymology (yoga) (of the word presented in the scriptures) can

be of many kinds, even so this (i.e., the one Abhinava presents) is the main one,
as (Mudrā essentially) bestows the state of (one’s own) essential nature, that is

completely full of supreme bliss. Thus, only this much has been stated.
bhagaliṅgāṅkitaṁ viśvaṁ tena māheśvaraṁ jagat | iti |

‘His glory is his Lordship and omnipresence, made manifest in His own seal, made of
the pervasion of the powers of knowledge and action, the essence of which is blis . As scripture
(declares):
‘People, wherever they be, are not seen (to be who they truly are by being) marked

(with sectarian signs such as) the Wheel and Vajra. (But) everything is marked with the signs of

the female and male organs, thus the universe (pervaded by) Maheśvara belongs to Him.’
See also Gnoli-Orofino 1994 p. 81.

Abhinava is statng and explaining a standard, well known didactic etymology of the word

mudra, that derives the word from the roots maud, in the sense of bliss or joy, and rā in the sense of
‘to give’. So it is said that mudarṁ rāti iti mudrā. Mudrā is that which gives bliss’. Jayaratha is

probably quoting from the same Devyāyāmala. By doing this, he points out, it seems, that the

main source does not present the same etymology. But he justifies this by pointing out that the one

Abhinava supplies is the main, most common and basic one. By referring to it, he is not
contradicting or ignoring his source, he simply chooses to present the better known one.
Kṣemarāja echoes this one and supplies other didactic etymologies in his commentary

on the Śvacchandatantra:

gandhaiḥ puṣpais tathā dhīpair dhīpayitvā tam arcayet |

sarvam etan mānasaṁ kuryāt |
atha sannidhānārthaṁ mudrāṁ pradarśayet paścāt tridhā traikālyakarmaṇi l 102 ||

mudaṁ harṣaṅ rati dadāti, parabhairavacaitanyadraviṇaṁ mudrayati, parāveśena modayati
bhaktān, drāvayati pāśān iti vā niruktāṁ parasvarāpapratībimbarūpāṁ mudrāṁ vakṣyamāṇām

etā mudrā mahādevi bhairavasya pradarśayet
avāhane nirodhe ca tathaiva ca visarjane |" (14/20)
iti yakṣyamāṇatraikālyakarmaṇi | tridheti ----

manojā guruvaktrasthā vāghhavā mantrasaṁbhavā |

dehodbhavāṅgavikṣepair mudreyaṁ trividhā smṛtā ||
ity āmnāyanirdiṣṭā |/ 102 | ṢVṬ 2/102

‘He should be worshipped having fumigated it with perfumes, fowers and incenses.’
(SVT 2/102a)
AIl that should be done mentally. Now, in order to draw (the dcity) near, he should
then display mudrā of three kinds in the course of the (daily) ṅte (performed) three times (a day).
(Mudra) is that which bestows (rāti) joy (harṣa) and scals (mvdrayat) the wealth of
Supreme Bhairava consciousness. By the supreme penetraion (of consciousness) it delights
(modayati) devotees. Or else, another etymology (declares) that (mudrā is that which) melts avay

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

The Primary and Secondary Types of Mudrās
(gunapradhānatābhedāḥ)

ieae-EṈEteziiiḷ: czvfE¥ITCIḤIÑ]

āSzuitōEIEĒĒCĪKICTJEEAḺ

TR̥TIT āĪTTIIJT SSIfīt eTHTĪ #JaT J 4, 1

tatra pradhãnabhũtã śrīkhecarī devatātmikā |
niṣkalatvena vikhyātā sākalyena triśālinī |I 4 II
karaṅkiṇī krodhanā ca bhairavī lelihānikā |
mahāpretā yogamudrā jvālinī kṣobhiṇī dhruvā II 5 II
ity evaṁ bahubhedeyaṁ śrīkhecary eva gīyate |
“There, (in this regard, of all the mudrās,) the main (and most
fundamental) one is the venerable Skyfarer (khecarī).’ (In her)
‘undifferentiated’ form (niṣkalatvena), she is well known to be Deity by
(drāvayati) the fetters. Mudrā is the reflection of the Supreme Nature and, (as) will be taught
further ahead, it is of eighteen kinds.

It will be taught in the course of (describing) the (daily) rite (performed) three times (a
day) that ‘one should, O Great Goddess, display these Bhairava’s mudrās during the invocation

(āvāhana) (of the deity); (when it’s) restraint (in the place it has been invoked) and (its)
dismissal.’ (SYT 14/20)
(Mudraa) is of three kinds. Thus, the tradition teaches:

‘(The first kind of mudra) is bor of the mind. (The second) is located in the
teacher°'s mouth, as speech bor from Mantra. (The third is) bor from the body by the movement
of (its) limbs. This is mudrā which is said to be of three kinds. SvT 2/102
This passage may well be drawn from the Devyāyāmala. It is common practice to list the names
of a series of maudrās that are described in the remaining part of the chapter. See for example MV
72-3. Several of them are not found in chapter seven of the MV, which is dedicated to that topic
(see below), notably those elaborated in the Kramanaya. Although these are not aranged in what
became a standard set of five, associated with the so-called Pañcavāha, that emerged as the
central teaching of the Krama system. The mix of Trika and Krama 1udrās liṣted here may well
be drawn from the Devyāyāmala, which taught, as we have repeatedly observed, a form of Trika
dominated by Krama as its highest teachings. The mix of mmudrās listed here reflects this
syncretism well.
The description of Khecarīmudrā - the Śeal of the Skyfarer < here is very different from the one
we find in the later medieval texts on yoga, many of which belong to the Gorakhanāī tradition,
or are strongly influenced by it. The Khecarīmudrā taught in those sourees involves curling the
tongue to the back of the mouth and inserting it up into the nasal cavity. This serves to catch the
lunar nectar that flows down from the lunar Drop (bindu), from which it oozes spontaneously,
located between the eyebrows.
The practice of Khecarīmudrā Abhinava tcaches here is essentally same as the daily
practice of visualiīzing the Trika Trident in the body. Although the other form of Khecarīmudrā is
known to the early Tantras, variants of this one is by far the most popular. Indeed, th popularity
of the other form, which nowadays is only one generally known, is largely due to the later Hatha
Yoga traditions, said to originate from Gorakhanātha.

TANTRĀLOKA

nature. In (Her) differentiated form (sākalya) (She is the mudrās called)
Triśūlinī (the Trident), Karaṅkinī (the Corpse), Krodhanā (Rage),
Bhairavī, Lelihānikā (Śhe Who Destroys by Licking up), Mahāpretā (the
Great Ghost), Yogamudrā (the Gesture of Yoga), Jvālinī (the Burning
One), Kṣobhinī (the Disturbing One), and Dhruvā (Firmly Fixed).’ This

venerable Skyfarer itself, that is and has many varieties, is praised in this
way. (4-6ab)
‘Well fixed’ is an adjective of Khecarī. The intended sense is that even

though it assumes a differentiated (sakala) form as Triśūlinī and the rest, it does

not fall from (its essentially) undifferentiated nature (ṇniṣkala). Indeed, it is said:

‘This Gesture of the Skyfarer is said to be undifferentiated. lts

differentiated form abides as each of these (many) varieties.’'

Surely (one may ask), there can also be other mudrās like Triśūlinī etc.
that are its auxiliaries. So how is it that those too also are not mentioned? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

JTTH
TITIT

TITPTĪTYT

anyās tadaṅgabhūtās tu padmādyā mālinīmate || 6 ||
tāsāṁ bahutvāmukhyatvayogābhyāṁ neha varṇanam |

' Yogamudrā is described in MV 7/35-36; even so, one wonders whether to emend to the mach
better known yonimudṛā.
’ Tṁhese four mudrās beginning with Karaṅkinī are, along with Khecarīmudrā, an important,
standard set of five, integrated and internalized into the so-called Pañcavāha, taught in the
systematized Krama practice in its final fully formed development as an elaboration of phases of
the flux of cognitive consciousness engaged in the act of perception, marked with the components
of its original extemal_liturgy. They are mentioned together in a meditaton in the
Vijñānabhairava (verse 77). Kṣemarāja makes a brief reference to these mudras in his
comṃentary on NT 20/36ab, referring us back to his unfortunately lost commentary on the VBh.
He writes:

mudrātra

krodhanā, tadraśm

prathamaṁ

_svaśarīraniḥsaraṇasamaye

karaṅkiṇī,

taccharīrākramaṇe

āpane lelihānā, tatpurād niḥsaraṇe khecarī, svahrtprāptau bhairavī|

tadbandhasatattvaṁ śrīvijñānabhairavoddyote.asmābhirdarśitam |

‘Here the first Seal is Karaṅkiṇī, (which is used) at the time when one exits from one's
own body. (The Seal called) Krodhanā (is used) when attacking that body. Lelihānā (is used)

when its rays etc. are being destroyed, and Khecarī when quiting that abode (i.. body), Bhairavī
when attaining one’s own heart. 1 have explained their formation and nature in the venerable

Vijñūānabhairavoddyota.’

The reader is referred to the Appendix to this chapter for extensive citations of Trika

and Krama sources concerning mudras, including these five, that are elaborated as phases or
aspects of the dynamism of cognitive consciousness engaged in perception.
Read ity evaṁ bahu- for ity evaṁbahu-.

'' Jayaratha may be quoting the source of, at least, verse four. It is not the Mālinīvijayottara.

Perhaps it is the Devyāyāmala.

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

Other (wnudrās) (described) in the Maālinīmata that are its
auxiliaries, such as Padmamudrā, are not described here, because they are
many and are (only of) secondary application. (6cd-7ab)
Surely (one may ask), the venerable Khecarīmudrā īs also taught in the
venerable Mālinīmata, along with Padmamudrā and the rest. So how is it that it
is the main one? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Eriktī ēṭzt’Eḻ:EIEPETIḤC

Śśrīkhecarīsamāviṣṭo yad yat sthānaṁ samāśrayet II 7 II
devīsaṁnidhaye tat syād alaṁ kiṁ ḍambarair vṛthā |
Whatever place one who is penetrated by the venerable (goddess)
Khecarī (the Skyfarer) (may choose) to take up as his dwelling
(samāśrayet), that (act by itself) is enough to make the goddesses draw close.
So why (indulge) in useless chatter (about other mudrās)? (7cd-8ab)
It is ‘enoughʼ, that is, sufficient.

' The Mālinīmata is the Mālinīvijayottara, chapter seven of which is dedicated to the description

of mudrās. Padmamudrā (the Lotus Śeal) is made simply by spreading open the fingers of the two

hands held together at the wrists so that they look like a blooming lotus. padmākārau karau kr̥tvā

padmamudrāṁ pradarśayet | MV. 7/6ab Having made the two hands in the form of a lotus,

display the gesture of the lotus.’ The yogic practice of this mudrā is described in the Kubjikāmata.
Yoked to the flow of the vital breath through

suṣumnā, it leads to the state of flight, and so is

considered there to be a form of Khecarīmudṛā, as are all the yogic mmudrās taught in thīs chapter.
There we read:

‘Padmamudrā is a scal of the Skyfarers. It is produced in thrce ways. A) The energy
Anāmā should be conjoined to the hub of th sixteen spoked (Wheel) (in the throat,) and it should
be pressed. By pressing i (the energy) sraightens along the Path of the Skyarer. When it raches
the goal, namely, Māli, (the yogi) certainly achieves) Flight.
B) (The yogi) should first place th six-petalled (lotus) (of Svādhiṣthāna) on (his) head
conjoining it with the tip of (his) index finger. Once the (yogi’s) mind is Void and is established in
the Void, he should press one (Void) with the other, The six petalled (lotus) should be made to
bloom under the impulsc of the upward moving breath (udāna). (The yogi) should (then)
contemplate Mālinī (and so) certainly (achieves) flght.
C) (The yogi) should enter into the end of the uvula by means of the tube that is above
the twelve spoked (Wheel) (in the heart). (Then) by contracting (the breath, he should) break the
chain connected to the Tortoise (in mālādhāra at the base of suṣumnā). (Then) he should
contemplate Mālinī (and so achieve) Flight. (KM 6/59 – 64a)
The maudrāṣ deṣcribed in the MV are listed in the beginning of chapter seven (MV 7/23). They are:
1) Triśūla (the Trident, 2) Padma (the Lotus), 3) Śakti (Power), 4) Cakra (the Wheel),
5) Vajraka (the Thunderbolt,, 6) Danda (the Stã), 7) Daṅṣṭra (Teeth), 8) Mahāpreā (the Great
Ghost), 9) Mahāmudrā (the Great Seal), 10) Khageśvarī (the Skyfarer), 11) Mahodayā (the Great
Arising), 12) Karālā (Fierce Teeth), 13) Khayvāṅga (the Ascetic’s Stat), 14) Kapālaka (the
Skull, 15) Hala (the Plough), 16) Pāśa (the Noose), 17) Aiṅkuśa (the Goad), 18) Ghaṇṭā (the
Bell), 19) Mudgara (th Peṣtle), and 20) 7risikha (the Three Crests).

TANTRĀLOKA

ŚSurely (one may ask), with regard to these (other Mudrās, it is said
that): ʻ‘the reciter of Mantra who is protected by these (Mudrās) attains
accomplishment of Mantra. According to this teaching, they are primary with
respect to the adepts (engaged in reciting Mantras). So how is it that he has said
this? With this doubt in mind, he says:

āT-ã ar-r āīa JTGaī: r̥aīTī STITrT I ¢ 1

kāmye karmaṇi tāś ca syur mukhyāḥ kasyāpi jātucit | 8 II
However, in the case of optional (magical) rites (performed for

some specific purpose) (kāmyakarman), they may sometimes be primary for
someone. (8cd)

(That) ‘someone’ can only be an adept (sādhaka) (whose basic practice
is just the recitation of Mantra), not a spiritual son (or other kinds of initiates).
(For such a person,) ‘they may sometimes’ (be primary,) not, as in the case of

the daily (obligatory) rites, at all times.
As the intent here is the attainment of the primary goal called liberation,
optional (magical) rites (kāmya) are not discussed in this book. So what is the

use of describing Mudrās that are of use for that (purpose)? Thus he says:

tac ca nāsmābhir uditaṁ tat kiṁ tadupayoginā |
And that is not discussed by us (here), so why (talk about matters)
that are of use for that (purpose)? (9ab)

He says (the following) in order to explain their nature by indicating
their varieties.
The Nature of the Mudrās (svarūpam)

TṢ īqfāīI āTTākTTRTTCT: I| 3 I

- ī ṜIT FrIā arīā |

mudrā caturvidhā kāyakaravākcittabhedataḥ || 9 ||
tatra pūrṇena rūpeṇa khecarīm eva varṇaye |
Mudrā is of four kinds, according to whether it is (made with) the

body, the hands, speech or mind.™ There (in that regard), I will describe
only the Skyfarer' in a complete form (that includes all these four
varieties). (9cd-10ab)
' MV 7/1cd.
' Cf above, 26/67.

' The image of the flying yogi goes back at least to the late part of the Ṛgveda, where we find the

hymn to the Muni:

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

(The Mudrā made with) ‘speech is the repeated utterance of Mantra.

As is said (in a passage of scripture) beginning with:

‘Mudrā should be known to be of four kinds, according (to whether it
involves) entry into the hands, body, speech or mind.”
‘(The Mudrā) produced by the hands is of (many kinds) according to the
placement of the fingers, and is present (and operant) on many paths (of ritual

procedure). The gesture that is (made with) the body is (its) single (uniform)
dynamic state (vṛti) in all (corporeal) states. (Such for example) is the vow of

wearing the five seals (pañca-mudrā) practiced by a Siddha. The gesture called
‘speech is said to be the state of oneness with Mantra. The gesture of the mind
is said to be the state of oneness with the object of meditation.’
(This Mudrā is going to be taught in its) ‘complete form’ means of (all)

four kinds. He sets out (first of all) to talk about its form as taught in the
venerable Mālīivijayottara (śrīpūrvaśāstra) as the main one there (in that case)
also (that is, amongst the varieties of Khecarīmudrā).

He with the long loose locks supports
Agni, and moisture (poison), heaven and earth;
He is all sky to look upon: he with long
Haĩr is called this light. (1)
The Munis, girdled with the wind, wear
Garments soiled of yellow hue.
They, following the wind’s swift course,
Go where the gods have gone before. (2)
Transported with our Munihood we have

Pressed into the winds:

You therefore, mortal men, behold our
Natural bodies and no more. (3)

The Muni, made associate in the holy
Work of every God,
Looking upon all varṅed forms flis through
The region of the air. (4)
The steed of Vāta, Vāyu’s friend, the
Muni, by the Gods impelled,
In both the oceans has his home, in
Eastern and in the wester sca ()
Treading the path of the sylvan beasts

Gandharvas and Apsarases,

He with long locks, who knows the wish,
Is a sweet most delightful friend. (6)

Vāyu hath chumeḍ for him; for him he
Poundeth things most hard to bend,
When he with long loose locks hath drunk,
With Rudra, poison from the cup. (7)
Ṛgveda 10/86 (Griffith’s translation). Concerning Khecarīmudrā (here called Khageśīmudrā), see Eliade 1954: 249-251.

TANTRĀLOKA

A) The Seal of the Skyfarer (khecarīmudrā) According to the

Maālinīvijayottara

frīa ṁā r̥t aāq aā-ãNN T 1. 8.

Tī āaā a īttr. aāṀr sr̥ra |

baddhvā padmāsanaṁ yogī nābhāv akṣeśvaraṁ kṣipet |/ 10 |
daṇḍākāraṁ tu taṁ tāvan nayed yāvat kakhatrayam |

nigrhya tatra tat tūrṇaṁ prerayet khatrayeṇa tu || I 1 II
etāṁ baddhvā khe gatiḥ syād iti śrīpūrvaśāsane |
(It is said) in the Śrīpūrvaśāsana (that is, in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘Assuming the lotus posture, the Yogi should direct (his mind), the Lord of
the Senses, into the navel. In the form of a staff, he should lead it along
until (it reaches) the three Voids (in the head). After restraining it there, he
should rapidly impel (it) with the three Voids (above the head). Having

formed this (Mudrā), (the yogi) flies into the (supreme) Void.” (10cd-12ab)

In the follwing verses from 10cd to 62, Abhinava teaches the practice Seal of the Skyfaring
Goddess (khecarī) according to the following six Tantras. Apart from Kāmika, the others are, as
we would expect,all Trika Tantras.
1) Mālinīvijayottara (10cd-12ab), 32/10cd-12a= MV 7/15cd-17a
2) the Yogasaṁcāratantra (12cd-31),
3) The Vīrāvalitantra (32-47ab),
4) The Kāmikatantra (47cd-48),
5) The Gahvaratantra (49-53)
6) The Bhargaśikhākulatantra (54-62).
MV 7/15cd-17a. MV 7/16a reads bhāvaṁ for TĀ 32/11a tāvan.
Somadeva (2004: 266) explains that: ‘The Mālinīvijayottara refers here to two groups
of three voids, one triad in the head (kakhatraya) and another beyond (khatraya). The interior void

in the heart is not mentioned separately in this context,presumably because nothing of importance

takes place when the mind (and by implication the vital energy) traverses that region. The
voids are thu at least seven: one in the heart (abhyāntaraśūnya), three in the

head (samuccayaśūnya), ad three beyond (bāhyaśūnya).
This interpretaton may be confirmed by comparing a textually closely related passage
in the Kubjikāmata. There, the term ‘granthi’ is used instead of ‘void:

‘The yogi, seated in the lotus-posture, his body straight and his head erect, should expel
the air from his body, inhale it again and retain it in the heart. He should cast his mind into the
pericarp (nābhau) of the lotus that is in the knot in the hcart. The wise (yogi) should unify three:
the mantra, the self and (the breath.) and guide them, in the form of a staf, up to the cranial
aperture, From that place, he should impel (the staff) along the grcat path, O beautiful lady, with
his two finger(s) again and again. He should conjoin his tongue and uvula and attain the fift state
(2). He should assume the secret wheel (?) (and) assume the attitude of (pullig) up the anus.
When the three knots are merged (and have been reached), 0 Goddess, there will take place
motion in the Void, (of this) there is ṅo doubt.’ KM 7/81cd-86ab

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

Once the Yogi who is seated in a stable and comfortable posture has

risen from the Foundation of Birth and placed (his) mind in the location of the

navel and rotated around many times there, by uniting (it) with the energy of the
vital breath in the central (channel) and, in the form of a staff, led it (up) to the

three Voids, that is, the Point (bindu), Sound (nāda), and the Cavity of Brahmā

in the head. Blocking it there by the continuing application of breath retention
and by a process of opening up, ‘he should rapidly impel (it) with the three
Voids (above)ʼ, which are Power (śakti), the Pervasive One (vyāpinī), and the
Equal One (samanā). Thus, he should lead it to face Supreme Śiva (directly), by
entering into the plane of the Transmental in such a way that by laying firmly
hold of that, he may (attain) flight in the supreme sky of consciousness.
(He now) teaches its nature, along with its subsidiary varieties, as taught
in the venerable Yogasaṁcāra:

B) The Seal of the Skyfarer According to the Yogasaṅṁcāra'

ESizIbIGĒENĀCEEĪ IEĀICC

fta fiṛaī m sṣōiq |
dhvanijyotirmarudyuktaṁ cittaṁ viśramya copari |ll 12 II
anenābhyāsayogena śivaṁ bhittvā paraṁ vrajet |
Once having brought to rest the mind, yoked to Resonance (dhvani),
Light (jyotiṣ) and Wind (marut), and pierced (progressively) through (the
levels) above, (the Yogi) reaches supreme Śiva by engaging in this practice.

(12cd-13ab)

‘Resonance’ is (Unstruck) Sound (nāda). ‘Light’ is the Point (bindu),

and the ‘Windʼ is Power (śakti). Thus, (the yogi reaches) the End of the

Twelve, which is the Cavity of Brahmā. Applying in this way (his) mind, that is
conjoined to these three Voids, from the Foundation of Birth (onwards) and,

having there itself progressively pierced through the upper three Voids, thatis,
Power and the rest, by (his) compact (uninterrupted) meditation, the yogi

‘reaches supreme Śiva’. Thisis the meaning of this statement.
The Seal of the Trident

He also teaches the nature of the Trident (Mudrā) as that (process of)

piercing (through to higher levels).

STTaTTGTTĒĪĪ

STTT TÇTTIIT Jg TSĪgAT I ° II

Ś This passage, drawn from the Yogasaicāra, extends from 12cd to 31.

TANTRĀLOKA

fī JāTTT] JRTGṬITT; || 24 1

Tē WṃTaTsJ TTHTĪ TPTGTĪTT
ĀTRTTTḤ |
jatravadhastāt karau kr̥tvā vāmapādaṁ ca dakṣiṇe || 13 ||
vidāryāsyaṁ kaniṣṭhābhyāṁ madhyamābhyāṁ tu nāsikām |
anāme kuñcayet prājño bhrūbhaṅgaṁ tarjanīdvayam || 14 ||
jihvāṁ ca cālayen mantrī hāhākāraṁ ca kārayet |
triśūlena prayogeṇa brahmarandhram upasthitaḥ || 15 ||
padaṁ santyajya tanmãtraṁ sadyas tyajati medinĩīm |

Placing the hands below the collarbone (jatru) and the left foot on

the right, and opened the mouth wide with the little fingers and the nose
with the middle fingers, the wise man should bend the ring fingers. (Then)
the reciter of Mantra should arch the eyebrows, move the two index fingers
about and so too the tongue. (As he does this,) he should make the sound

HĀ! HĀ! Having reached the Cavity of Brahmā by (thus) applying (the
Gesture of) the Trident, abandoning the place which is just that much (as
where he is), he immediately quits (the surface of) the earth. (13cd-16ab)

Here the word ‘collarbone’ indicates the throat. Thus, the meaning is
that (the hands are placed) below that. (By) ‘the nose’ (is meant) its two

nostrils. (The injunction) ‘he should move about’ should be applied to the

three, beginning with the arching of the eyebrows. ‘Just that much’ means
‘locatedʼ (there). ‘He quits (the surface of) the earth’ means that by removing
the subjective identification (ahantā) with the body etc., (the yogi) moves
through the space of supreme consciousness.
He teaches the application of (the Gesture of) the Trident.

JI-ĀVTHGT
WḍcīĪ úTFCTRTGTTGĪ I| 2€ I

firrīē aũṭītam aaāīīāag aa: 1 2.© 1
śūnyāśūnyalaye kṛtvā ekadaṇḍe ‘nilānalau || 16 ||
śaktitritayasambaddhe adhiṣṭhātrṛtridaivate |

triśūlaṁ tad vijānīyād yena vyomotpated budhaḥ || 17 ||

Once Wind and Fire' have been made (to fuse) into the single staff

of the three presiding deities, the three powers conjoined (to it and each
other), and the Void and (its opposite) the Non-void have dissolved away,

The end of the two branches (śtkhāprānta) is the End of the Twelve, and the two whecls (or
branches) of exhalation (prāṇa) and inhalation (apāma) thāt, ascending and descending, reabsorb
and emit, respectively.

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

one should know that that is (the Seal of) the Trident, by which the

awakened one flies up into the sky. (16cd-17)

Once he who is such has made ‘Wind and Fire’, that is, the exhaled
and inhaled breaths, one within the middle breath, and so by the upward flow

from the Root Foundation onwards, (the three together) assume the form of the
staff (of the inner Trident); then, applying that in this way, ‘one should know

that that is (the Gesture of) the Trident’, by which he flies up into the sky.

(This happens when) the middle breath, that has the form of the single staff (of

the Trident), penetrates through ‘the three presiding deities’ who, established
as the three causes, are called Iśvara, Sadāśiva and Anāśrita, and are located in

the centre (between) the eyebrows etc. This is the meaning. And in the same
way, when Power, the Pervasive One and the Equal One are conjoined, that is,

when union with them has been attained, by attaining the supreme plane, ‘the

Void and (its opposite) the Non-void have dissolved away’. This is the
meaning.

He does not fly up into the sky by (doing) just this much. Thus he says:

3TRTNITd T<JSā āTTHTUĪAa:: |
J TTT cal J īā āa fīrā: I| ¢ 1

ŚāT I. 22 1

eḶEiEEF=AKRDETZEI|THEIECIIE

ākāśabhāvaṁ santyajya sattāmātram upasthitaḥ |

Śūlaṁ samarasaṁ kr̥tvā rase rasa iva sthitaḥ |l 18 II

ekadaṇḍaṁ sa vijñāya triśūlaṁ khacaraṁ priye |
baddhvā tu khecarīṁ mudrāṁ dhyātvātmānaṁ ca bhairavam || 19 l|
khecarīcakrasañjuṣṭaṁ sadyas tyajati medinīm |
Having abandoned the condition of (material) space and realized
that the trident, with its single staff, O beloved, moves in the Void, having
also abandoned (even) just (the essence of) the being (sattāmātram) (of

objectivity), and made the Trident one, (the yogi) abides (in that oneness)

like the juice (of aesthetic delight) (rasa)” (merged) into juice. (Then,)
having formed the Seal of the Skyfaring goddess (khecarī) and

contemplated his own Self, endowed (saṅījuṣṭa) with the assembly (cakra) of
the Skyfaring goddesses, as Bhairava, he immediately quits (the surface) of
the earth. (18-20ab)
‘Having realized’ in this way ‘that the trident, with its single staff,
moves in the Void’, and ‘having also abandoned (even) just (the essence of)

the being (sattāmātram) (of objectivity)” that gives rise to each specific

Jayaratha reads rasam iva for raṣa iva.

TANTRĀLOKA

limitation, and entered into the formation of Khecarīmudrā, that awakened one
who, having arrived at the state of the essential nature of the Supreme Sky,
‘abidesʼ just there (in that oneness), having made the Trident one like the juice

(rasa) (of aesthetic delight merged) into juice. (Then) having ‘contemplated his
own Self, endowed (saṅījuṣṭa) with the assembly (cakra) of the Skyfaring
goddesses, as Bhairava, he immediately quits (the surface) of the earth.’
This is the prose order (saṁbandha).

he says:

Surely (one may ask), what happens to him? With this doubt in mind,

aṬfTTITT

fī-TgṬ]

GĪRITTT
ḹ: I| 2 1|

TḤRTTSB: JṬYAT ṜRIT. GāTRJTT I 32 I

RTTITTTtTTTETTATĪJTTN|

RṬIGT aTI ̄ēFērI
T aIT;
J I 23 1

aTTTTTT Ī| 23 1
JāĨHT. Ja] TYAT] JTĪ fāaaāfā ūēaq |
tyaktāṁśako nirācāro niḥśaṅko lokavarjitaḥ || 20 ||
avadhūto nirācāro nāhamṃ asmīti bhāvayan |
mantraikaniṣṭhaḥ saṁpaśyan dehasthāḥ sarvadevatāḥ || 21 ||
hlādodvegāsmitākruṣṭanidrāmaithunamatsare |
rūpādau vā kartṛkarmakaraṇeṣu ca sarvaśaḥ || 22 ||

nāham asmīti manvāna ekībhūtaṁ vicintayan |
karṇākṣimukhanāsādicakrasthaṁ devatāgaṇam || 23 ||
grahītāraṁ sadā paśyan khecaryā siddhyati sphuṭam ḷ
Free from partial aspects and without (any) doubts, devoid (of the

need for conventionally proper) behaviour (nirācāra), devoid of the world

(and its concerns), having shaken off (worldly desires) (avadhūta), devoid of
(all obligations to observe any prescribed) conduct (nirācāra), meditating
that “I am not”, solely intent on Mantra, seeing that all the deities reside in

(his) body, considering that “I am not” present in any way in the agent,

action and (its) instrument, nor in form and the rest (of the objects of
sense), or (in the shifting emotions of) joy, worry, pride, anger, sleep, (the
desire for) sex and envy, thinking that (they are all) one (thing), always
seeing how the host of deities that reside in the wheels of the ears, eyes,
mouth and nose etc., are the (true) perceiver, is, by virtue of the Skyfaring
(mudrā), clearly (and evidently) successful. (20cd-24ab)
(One who is) ‘free from partial aspects’ is one who possesses the

condition that is without parts (and aspects). This is the meaning. (He is) devoid

(of the need for conventionally proper) behaviour (nirācāra), that is, he is

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

one from whom (various) observances have emerged (and fallen away,

as he

himself) has emerged out from the observances (of conventionally proper)

conduct. ‘Seeing that all the deities reside in (his) body’ means

that he knows

that the Self is made of all the deities. (By saying) ‘joyʼ etc., particular
fluctuations of the mind are indicated (thereby). ‘Form and the rest’ are
the
group of five objects of sense. ‘The (true) perceiver’ is one in nature with the
supreme perceiver. This is the meaning.
He strengthens (this view) by (referring) to its opposite.

fcērg eraṣgī vīaivgī

vidyāśaṅkī malāśaṅkī śāstraśaṅkī na siddhyati || 24 |

One who is in doubt (about the efficacity of the) Vidyā, (the
existence of the binding) Impurity (of the soul), and the (the teachings of

the) scripture, is not successful. (24cd)

‘Vidyā’ is the knowledge of the Veda, that does (all that is) auspicious.
Surely (one may ask), how is it that he is not successful in this way?

With this doubt in mind, he says:

fraār fṝ: ferī at: ũṁcāīca ka

5īā| 2 |A
Śivo raviḥ śivo vahniḥ paktr̥tvāt sa purohitaḥ |
tatrasthā devatāḥ sarvā dyotayantyo ‘khilaṁ jagat || 25 II
Śiva is the Sun, Śiva is Fire, and because he cooks (all things), (Śiva

is) the priest (purohita). There (within Śiva), all deities reside, iluminating

the entire universe. (25)

‘The Sun’ is the means of knowledge, ‘Fire’ is the perceiver, thus ‘the

priestʼ is the sacrificer. This is the meaning. ((Śiva is) the priest (purohit
a))
‘because he cooks (all things)ʼ, that is, makes all things one with Himself,
and

so (the deities at one with Him) illuminate (the universe). This is (what) remains
(to be said to complete this statement). In this way Śiva Himself is everything,
so what occasion is there for doubt? This is the intended sense.

This line and the folowing verse seem t0 be free-floating, with no connecton to what prccedes
or follows. It seems that thre has been some error in the trsmission of the text. Iṝ that is so, it
had altēady occurred before Jayaratha’s time. His commentary apears 0 try to śomehow make
connections, but he cannot be said to have succeeded.
In he course of hhe Vedic sacrific, food is offered to the gos as oblations to the fir. This may
be raw food - grains and the like, or cooked. Cooked food is the meat of an animal thāt has been
sacrficed for that purpose. This is ṅot offered raw. It must firt be cooked. Thus, the pries is the
cook of the gods, and the sacrificial arca his kitchen. The priest is called ‘purohia’
lierally
‘placed in fron’, because he sits in front of the Fire. The Fire is also called ‘purohita’ because
Fire is in front of all, as the priest of he gods, who conveys the offering t© hem,

TANTRĀLOKA

The Seal of the Skeleton - Karaṅkinī Mudrā
Having taught the nature of the Trident (Mudrā), he also talks about that
of Karaṅkinī (the Skeleton Mudrā).

āTcrṟaaṝ fēraāīz ṝsaṝ ygat er 1
sTT
ar azī fSraēā?

kaniṣṭhābhyāṁ vidāryāsyaṁ tarjanībhyāṁ bhruvau tathā |
anāme madhyame vaktre jīhvayā tālukaṁ spṛśet || 26 ||
eṣā karaṅkiṉī devī. . … .… . . .

Holding the mouth wide open with the little fingers, and, in the
same way, the eyebrows with the index fingers, (placing) the ring and
middle (fingers) on the mouth, (the yogi) should touch the palate with (his)

tongue. This is the Goddess Karaṅkinī (the Skeleton). (26-27a)

(The mouth is held wide open with) ‘the little fingers’ of both hands.

(The middle (fingers)) are placed ‘on the mouthʼ. The teachers (direct) that one

should contemplate (anusandhātavya) the penetration (of trance) (brought

about) by forming this kind of Khecarīmudrā.

r̥aiī samīgjf5ā: a-ṇṀ 1 2 1

ēraT

ARNIĀa I 2¢ I

..... . .. jvālinīṁ śṛṇu sāṁpratam |
hanur lalāṭagau hastau prasāryāṅgulitaḥ sphuṭau || 27 ||
cālayed vāyuvegena kr̥tvāntarbhrukuṭīṁ budhaḥ |
vidāryāsyaṁ sajihvaṁ ca hāhākāraṁ tu kārayet || 28 ||
eṣā jvāliny agnicakre tayā cāṣṭottaraṁ śatam |
japed yadi tataḥ siddhyet trailokyaṁ sacarācaram || 29 ||
Now listen to (how the seal of the Goddess) Jvālinī (the Blazing
One) (is made). The hands placed (on the area) from the jaw to the
forehead, stretching (them out) clearly from the fingers, and having placed
the eyebrows within them, the wise man should move them about with the

Read kaniṣṭhābhyāṁ for kaṇiṣṭhayā.

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

force of the vital breath. Then opening the mouth wide along with the
tongue, he should make the sound HĀ! HĀ! This is Jvālinī (muḍrā). If (the
yogi) repeats Mantra with this, one hundred and eight times within the
Wheel of Fire, he would then achieve (mastery over) the three worlds, with
(all that) moves and is immobile. (27bcd-29)

The reading (of the word) ‘hanur’ (‘the jaw’) is a deviant form (aiśaḥ
pāṭhaḥ). Thus (one should understand) the meaning to be that (the hands)
should be placed (on the face,) beginning from the jaw (hanataḥ sic hanutaḥ) up
to the forehead.” ‘Stretching the fingers out’ means with the fingers stretched
out. (The eyebrows are) ‘within them’, that is, within the two hands. (The yogi
should repeat Mantra,) having meditated on (his) inner Self in the upward facing

triangle ‘within the Wheel of Fire’.
mudrā).

He (now) explains the accomplishment (attained by means of this

TRGRJ TTT] T TITHJTĪT:|
TJTTĪ RTHITIGTTIHTGTATḤ I 30 1|

s=a 32 1
paradeheṣu cātmānaṁ paraṁ cātmaśarīrataḥ |
paśyec carantaṁ hānādād gamāgamapadasthitam || 30 ||
navacchidragataṁ caikaṁ tadantaṁ vyāpakaṁ dhruvam |

anayā hi khacārī śrṛīyogasañcāra ucyate || 31 |I

By (making the) sound (nāda) HĀ! (the yogi) sees (his own) Self
wandering within the bodies of others and (that of) another (person) within

his own body. Established on the plane of the going and coming (of the vital
breath), by letting (it) go and taking (it) up, he is present in the nine cavities

(of the body, moving through them back and forth). One (alone), within
that, he is pervasive and well fixed (dhruva). It is said in the venerable
Yogasaṁcāra that by virtue of this (nudrā), he is indeed a Skyfarer
(khacārin). (30-31)
‘By (making the) sound (nāda) HĀ!” means by uttering the sound of

the letter HĀ. ‘Eṣṭablished on the plane of the going and coming (of the vital

breath), (he moves) from his own body into another (person’s) body, or from
another (person’s) body into his own. The penetration (of trance) (brought

about) by forming Khecarīmudrā is explained also by (saying) that (he is) ‘a
Skyfarerʼ

Clearly Jayaratha takes this to be a direct citation from the Yogasaṁcāra, confirming that the

entire passage (i.e. 12cd-31) is drawn from there.
t would be easier simply t0 emend hanur t© hanor.

TANTRĀLOKA

He now explains the procedure concerning this (Mudrā) taught in the
venerable Vīrāvali also.

C) The Seal of the Skyfarer (khecarī) According to the Vīrāvalītantra

āTIT Warē 7ē e-ṁ aar- , 33 I

kulakuṇḍalikāṁ buddhvā’ aṇor antaravedinīm |

vāmo yo 'yaṁ jagaty asmiṁs tasya saṁharaṇodyatām || 32 ||
svasthāne nirvṛtiṁ labdhvā jñānāmṛtarasātmakam |

vrajet kandapadaṁ madhye rāvaṁ krtvā hy arāvakam || 33 ||

yāvaj jīvaṁ catuṣkoṇe piṇḍādhāre ca kāmikam |

Kulakuṇḍalikā abides unaware (avedinī) within the individual
(fettered) soul, and is intent, once awakened, to withdraw (into herself all)

that is within this universe that runs contrary to that (soul’s essential

freedom). Once she has attained, in her own place, rest (and contentment)
(nivṛti), she should travel to the plane of the Bulb (kandapada), which is the
juice (of the aesthetic delight) of the nectar of (spiritual) knowledge (jñāna).
(Then,) having made, in the middle (of the Root), the Sound without sound,
(she continues) until (she reaches) the living being (i.e. the inhaled breath)

(jīva) thaṭ, lustful (kāmika), is in the square base of the body.” (32-34ab)
This passage, drawn from the Virāvalitantra, extends from verse 32 to 47ab.
Read with MS T buddhvā for baddhvā.

Meaning and translation uncertain.

” Jayaratha reads the text we find in the printed edition, and comments accordingly. That reads

(jvaṁ) catuṣkoṇaṁ piṇḍādhāraṁ ca kāmikam, which means that ‘the living being, lustful, is the
square base of the body°. Clearly this reading makes no sense. A better reading would be (jva)
catuṣkoṇe piṇḍādhāre ca kāmikam – ‘the liviṅg being, lustful, is in the square base of the body’
and so I have emended accordingly. The ‘living being’ is apāna. This is the wind that expels the
products of the body, which includes both excreta and urine. Triggered off by orgasm, it expels
seminal fluid. Thus, the text says that it is ‘lustful’. The rhythm of the breathing oscillates between

the Heart in the chest and the End of the Twelve. The latter may be external (hāhyadvādaśānta).
As such, it is situated at a distance of twelve finger-breadths from the place between the
eyebrows, where the breath curves down and out. The upper End of the Twelve
(ārdhvadyādaśānta) is at a distance of twelve finger-breadths from the Cavity of Brahmā at the

top of the head. When Kuṇḍaliṅī is ‘awake’, ie. active, she is the enlivening and enlightening
flow of the breath, at one with its energy, the power of consciousness, and speech. Initially. in

those who are ignorant, she pervades the individual soul, abiding unconscious within it. When
awakened, she emerges out of the individual soul, who is located in the Heart, that is, the inhaled
breath. Preparing to emit seed, the inhaled breath (apāna) is sucked down into the base of the

genitals, here called the Empowered Place, which is Kundalinīśakti’s place. Then apāna operates
as the energy of Saājīvanīkalā - túhe Vivifying sixteent digit of th Moon, which is the power of
emission (visargaśakti). It is joined by Kunḍalinī, that resounds with Unstruck Sound within
this, the Bulb at the base of suṣumṇā – the inner Trika Trident. Now it is ready to ascend the

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

Kulakuṇḍalikā, who ‘abides unaware (vedinī)’ here ‘within the
individual (fettered) soul’, wanders inwardly in a state of identity with that

(soul’s) nature. Entering into the power of the vital breath in the centre, She who
withdraws ignorance reaches ‘her own place’, that is, the Foundation of the

Empowered One (śāktādhāra), and (there) attains ‘(a state of contended) rest
(nivṛti)’, which is the attainment of oneness with that. Then she impels the
Sound of (the soul’s) awakened consciousness, in accord with the teaching (in

the Vīrāvali) that

‘the empowered one who impels awakened consciousness and Sound is

said to be in the root (mĩla).”

For this reason, (Kuṇḍalinī) makes ‘the sound’ (zāva) which is (the
innate) Sound (of consciousness) (nāda) that is ‘without sound’, its nature
completely tranquil, within the foundation of the subtle channel (biṣa) in the
centre (i.e. suṣumṃā). Then, in accord with the view (taught in the Viīrāvali) that
‘(the deities) in the Bulb (kanda) are greedy for the six flavours’, ‘the plane of

the Bulbʼ ‘is the juice (of the aesthetic delight) of the nectar of (spiritual)
knowledge (jūāaa)’ (There,) the living being’ called ‘All Desire’ is ‘lustful
(kāmika), and is called the Vivifying Nectar (saājīvanyamṛta). (Kuṇḍalinī)
travels to ‘the base (ādhāra) of the bodyʼ (the abode of the living being). Called
‘the Wish-granting Gem’, it is ‘square’, because it is located on a crossroad.

šaā? āārJīPi fkrq 1 3u u

fṣā faāNaāī 1| 35 1
tatra tāṁ bodhayitvā tu gatiṁ buddáhvã kramāgatām || 34 ||
cakrobhayanibaddhāṁ tu śākhāprāntāvalambinīm |
mūlasthānād yathā yogī tamogranthiṁ vidārayet || 35 ||
vajrākhyāṁ jñānajenaiva tathā śākhobhayāntataḥ |
koṇamadhyaviniṣkrāntaṁ liṅgamūlaṁ vibhedayet || 36 ||

(The yogi) awakens (Kulakuṇḍalinī) there (at first), and knows (her)
motion, (that is,) how she has approached gradually from the location of

Trident in the manner described in the following verses. Impelled by the power of emission, it
transports the ‘living being’ i. the individual soul, upwards.
Read kandapadam | for kandapadar.
Read sañjīvanyamṛtābhidham | for sañjīvanyamṛtābhidhaṁ.

There is another ‘crossroad’ (catuṣpatha) above, at the base of the uvula at the back of the
throat. Here, as there, the function of the ‘crossroad’ is to regulate the upward ascent of the

Kuṇḍalinī. When it is an in the form of an X, the path is blocked. When it is rotated to form a
cross +, it is free to ascend.

TANTRĀLOKA

the Root, and, linked to both the two wheels (of the cycles of inhalation and
exhalation), takes as her support the extremity of the branches (of the flow

of the breath). (Then) the yogi™ should burst apart the knot of darkness

called the Adamantine (vajra) (and suṣumnā) by (the strength) born of
knowledge. (Then, hanging) from the extremity of both branches (of the
flow of the breath), he should in the same way pierce through the root of
the liṅga that has emerged from the centre of the triangle. (34cd-36)
‘Once (the yogi) has awakened’ that Kulakuṇḍalikā ʻwho has come’
there ‘graduallyʼ, into the foundations, and known her to be moving up to the
End of the Twelve, beginning ‘from the location of the Root’ ‘linked to the
two cycles (cakra) that are inhalation and exhalation, this yogi ‘should burst
apart’, by the great glory (māhātmya) ‘born of knowledge, the knot of
darkness’ which, because it is hard to pierce, ‘is called the Adamantine
(vajra) as well as the Central Channel (suṣumnā). (Then,) taking (his) support

‘from the extremity of both branches’, thatis, the exhaled and inhaled breath,

‘he shouldin the same way pierce through the root of the liṅga that has

emerged from the centre of the triangle’, that is, the Foundation of Birth. As

it is located below the penis (i.e. in the root of the Liṅga), it is called the
foundation of Akula.

dcqaā

ī a1 ũ tē]

ēai I38 11

tatra saṅghaṭṭitaṁ cakrayugmam aikyena bhāsate |
vaiparītyāt tu nikṣipya dvidhābhāvaṁ vrajaty ataḥ || 37 ||
ūrvādyaṁguṣṭhakālāgniparyante sā vinikṣipet |
gamāgamanasañcāre caret sā liṅgaliṅginī || 38 ||
tatra tatpadasaṅiyogād unmīlanavidhāyinī|
yo jānāti sa siddhyet tu rasādānavisargayoḥ || 39 ||
sasaṅgamam idaṁ sthānam ūrmiṇyunmīlanaṁ param |

Conjoined there, the two wheels shine as one. Having cast (the
breath up) in reverse (from the root of the Liṅga), it (again) assumes a twofold state. From there, (Kuṇḍalinī) should cast (herself down) from the hips
up to the end of the big toe, (where) the Fire of Time (kālāgni) (is located).
She who is marked with the signs (of the two breaths, i.e. Kuṇḍalinī,)

“ Read yogī for deī.

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

should move, whilst the going and coming (of the exhaled and inhaled
breath continues to) circulate. By the conjunction of those (two) planes (of
exhalation and inhalation) there (within the Central Abode), She bestows

the opening up (and expansion of consciousness) (xnmīlana). He who knows
this supreme place, which is the unfolding of the wave (of consciousness)

along with the union (saṅṁgama) (of the two breaths,) accomplishes (the

attainment of the power) of the emission and assumption of the juice (of the
aesthetic delight of consciousness) (rasa). (37-40ab)

‘Conjoined there’, by breaking up the essential nature of ‘the pair of

wheelsʼ, that is, exhalation and inhalation, it always ‘shines as one’. The

meaning is that, after that, the energy of the vital breath, which is in the centre
(between them), rises. Then, having cast it again ‘in reverse’, downwards from

the location of Akula, which is called ‘the root of the Liṅga’, (Kuṇḍalinī) again

‘assumes a two-fold state’. As this (Kuṇḍalinī) who is without instrumental

cause casts herself down ‘from the hips up to the end of the big toe’, she
may (thus) assume that nature. This is the meaning.

Regardless of the upward and downward circulation (of the breaths),
this Kulakuṇḍalikā, ‘who is marked with the signsʼ that are the characteristics
of

the

inhaled

and

exhaled

breath,

‘should

move’,

having

attained

consciousness (jñapti), by embracing them together. (The meaning is that) she
should enter the Middle Abode, by piercing through each Foundation and the

rest (of the stations of ascent). “By the conjunction’ of those two planes of
exhalation and inhalation ‘there’, within the Central Abode, she bestows an
expansion of consciousness. ‘He who knows this supreme place’, which is
such, namely, ‘the unfolding of the wave (of consciousness) that threads
through all existing things, and bestows the expansion of supreme
consciousness, ‘accomplishesʼ (the attainment of the power) ‘of the emission

and assumption of the juice (of the aesthetic delight) of consciousness. The
meaning is that his capacity to bring about emanation and withdrawal arises.

SATTH: gTĪT TĀ I 0 |

eṣa kramas tato ‘nyo 'pi vyutkramaḥ khecarī parā || 40 ||
yonyādhāreti vikhyātā śūlamūleti śabdyate |
varṇās tatra layaṁ yānti hy avarṇe varṇarūpiṇi || 41 ||
This is the sequence (of the gradual rise of Kuṇḍalinī). There is also

another (way Kuṇḍalinī rises, that takes place suddenly,) out of sequence.

(Then) the supreme Skyfaring (Goddess), (previously) known as the
Foundation of the Yoni (yonyādhārā), is called ‘the Root of the Trident’
(śūlamūlā). The phonemes dissolve away there, that is, within (the Unstruck
Read -paryante tv animittam for -paryantatvanimittam.

TANTRĀLOKA

Sound) devoid of phonemes (avarṇa), which is immanent as) the phonemes.

(40cd-41)

‘This is the sequence’ of her (gradual rise), which is (her) circulation

through each of the Foundations (ādhāra) as stated, that is, (her) spontaneous

flow. This is the meaning. ‘There is also another” (arising of) that (Kuṇḍalinī,)

that takes place (suddenly) ‘out of sequence’. This ‘supreme Skyfaring
(Goddess), (previously) known as the Foundation of the Yoni (yonyādhārā), is

then ‘called ‘the Root of the Trident’ (sūlamālā) when she is arisen. The
meaning is that she attains the plane of the End of the Twelve (suddenly and)
immediately by being conjoined to the three spokes (of the Trident), that are
Power, the Pervasive One and the Equal One. It is because of that that ‘the

phonemesʼ that are outer (acts of) reflective awareness ‘dissolve away there’

within (Kuṇḍalinī, who is Unstruck Sound, and so is) ‘devoid of phonemes
(avarṇā)’. (In other words, they) come to rest in (her) own nature, which is just
her own (pure) reflective awareness (of her own pure conscious nature), that has
also encompassed (within itself) outer reflective awareness, and whose nature is

to remove all (the diversity of discursive representation). This is the meaning.

Surely (one may ask), be that so (as you say), but how can the yogi

awaken her again? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JTē+ TIÑ TF. T JS TRTĪTRTT | #2 1

nādiphāntaṁ samuccārya kauleśaṁ dehasaṁnibham |
ākramya prathamaṁ cakraṁ khe yantre pādapīḍitam || 42 |I
nādaṁ vai śaktisadgarbhaṁ sadgarbhãt kaulinĩpadam |

‘(The Mālinī alphabet) from N to PH is uttered (first). It is the

Lord of Kula (Kauleśa), who is like the body. It is the Sound (nāda) that
contains the Being of Power (śaktisat). (Then, once uttered and) having

traversed into the first wheel, which is squeezed with the foot within the

organ (yantra) of the Void (khe yantre), the plane of Kaulinī (that is,
Kulakuṇḍalinī) (arises) from the womb of Being. (42-43ab)

‘Kauleśa is the pure Self that is consciousness, and is the most

important (and fundamental of all) secret (spiritual) knowledge. Thus (having)

There are two forms of reflective awareness, outer and inner. The former is directed to outer

objectivity and is multiple. It is clothed in mental discursive representations (vikaḹpa) of

individual objects, each with their own form and location in space and time. Thus, it is made of

the phonemes that constitute words. Inward awareness is directed towards the perceiving and
acting subjectivity, which is one, and devoid of conceptual representation, and s0 is ‘devoid of

phonemesʼ. Concerning these two aspects of reflective awareness, see Dyczkowski 1987: 70-71.

The utterance of the Mālinī alphabet in the course of ritual or yogic procedure (as taught here,

for example) is characteristic of Trika practice in the early Tantras, and so is further evidence that

the Vīrāvali was a Trika Tantra. Another characteristic of Trika practice is the projection of the
Trika Trident into the body along the axis of the Central Channel (i.e. suṣumnā), as we find here.

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

‘uttered (first)’, as one with one’s own body, Sound (nāda), the form of which

(is the Mālinī alphabet) that begins with N and ends with PH. (It) has included
within itself the power (of the vital breath) in the centre (of Suṣumnā), (its)

nature the fire stick (that energizes) all Mantras. (Then,) taking that Sound,
which is being uttered in this way, along with its contents as a base (adhikṛtya)
within ‘the Void’, that is, within the vital centre (marman), the form of which is
the space of the genitals (ianmākāśa), (the yogi) squeezes with the foot, which
is a ḻimb (of his body), ‘the first wheel’. This is the channel (of the vital
breath,) concerning which it is said that ‘the wheel of the channels (of the vital
breath) is in (the vital centre) called that of birth’, and is ‘the abode of
Kauḻinī’, that is, of Kulakuṇḍalinī.

JṝTRGTNO ṢJṬBÑGṢĪĪTTT T I 3 I

aecp
EEFGĒFFAIĪiREILCG

bījapañcakacāreṇa śūlabhedakrameṇa tu || 43 |I
hṛcchūlagranthibhedaiś cid rudraśaktiṁ prabodhayet |
(There,) consciousness should awaken Rudra’s power by moving

through the five seeds, by progressively breaking through the Trident,
along with the various knots of the trident of the heart. (43-44ab)

(Then,) having blocked in some way the power of the vital breath
(there), and ‘traversed into’ the remaining five wheels by successively crossing
over the group of five causes beginning with Brahmā, he should awaken

Rudra’s power. (This is the power) of the Trident in the Heart, with twelve

knots made of the three channels, and that of the Trident located beyond the

Cavity of Brahmā, that consists of Power and the rest. (He awakens Rudra’s

power) by progressively breaking through (bhedanakrameṇa) (the two-fold
Trident).

EiEEER|īṝGc-ḺĀḤCEAZZḺE|ĒṟḺST- ṬIPAI

TTT-̄FGJTĪATHTTT] TJTRGYĪTTTTT |
TTHTTGIĪĪT JTHJrRTTRT I U, I
JTG] āēĪ JĪĪ TIATTJTTTTTH_|
r̄. ftz: daṝṁṅa aszã fad a. 1 v ē 1
JTġRTGTĀI
T THTGĀTĀĪTHT:/|

vāyucakrāntanilayaṁ bindvākhyaṁ nābhimaṇḍalam || 44 |I

āgacchel lambikāsthānaṁ sūtradvādaśanirgatam |
candracakravilomena praviśed bhūtapañjare || 45 ||

The Five Causes are the deities who preside over the five gross elements and corresponding

pentads, arranged in the cakras along the axis of the subtle body, marking stations of the ascent of

Kuṇḍalinī. See above, note 8,25.

TANTRĀLOKA

bhūyas tu kurute līlāṁ māyāpañjaravartinīm |
punaḥ sṛṣṭiḥ saṁhr̥tiś ca khecaryā kriyate budhaiḥ || 46 ||
śrīmadvīrāvalīyoga eṣa syāt khecarīvidhiḥ |
(In

this

way,

the

yogi)

comes

to

the

sphere

of the

navel

(nābhimaṇḍala), located near the Wheel of the Wind, (then) to the location
of the uvula (lambikāsthāna) (at the back of the throat), and (above that, to)
the one called Bindu, that has come forth from the twelve knots. Then,
(descending) again in reverse from the Wheel of the Moon, he should enter
into the body made of the gross elements, and again play the game that
takes place within the cage of Māyā. (Then,) by means of the Skyfaring
(Goddess), the wise should again operate emission and re-absorption.’ This
is the procedure concerning the Skyfaring Goddess, found in (the section
concerning) Yoga in the venerable Vīrāvalī. (44cd-47ab)

Due to that (awakening), this (rise of Kuṇḍalinī takes place,) beginning
from the Abode of Birth (up to) the end of the Wheel of the Wind, whichis the

Foundation of the Wind, near whichis located ‘the sphere of the navelʼ, which

is the foundation of its union. ‘The location of the uvula’ is above that. The

Foundation of Nectar (sudhā) is the one ‘called Bindu’, located between the
eyebrows. The foundation of the channels (of the vital breath) is called the

Lotus of Knowledge (vidyākamala). It (i.e. Bindu (??)) has come forth from the
twelve knots present there (in those channels) up to the abode of the End of the

Twelve, which is beyond all the fetters. It moves all around in a straight

sequence and should be made to rest there. This is the meaning.
Then, (descending) again in reverse, which is a turnabout, from the

Wheel of the Moon which is in (the flow of) exhalation, in such a way that this

(yogi) can behave in a manner proper to (his) rising from meditative absorption.
Thus, the meaning in brief is that, in accord with the force and speed of those
who know (reality) and have penetrated into Khecarīmudrā, they have the
power to emanate and withdraw (all this) by the inner and outer unfolding and
withdrawal

(of their consciousness).

(This

Vīrāvalītantra) in the context of teaching ‘yoga’.

matter

is

expounded

in

the

He (now) talks about the form of that (Khecarīmudrā) taught in the

venerable Kāmika also.

D) The Seal of the Skyfarer According to the Kāmikatantra

ṬATGTT] āJHII āīTTTTĀ JĪ TT I `4. ||

fā-ã srxr̥̄kṭed2 |

cumbākāreṇa vaktreṇa yat tattvaṁ śrīyate param || 47 II
grasamānam idaṁ viśvaṁ candrārkapuṭasaṁpuṭe |

Read sarvabandhoītīrṇaṁ for sarvasaṁbandhottrrṇaiṁ.
This passage, drawn from the Kāmikaiantra, extends only from 47cd to 48.

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

tenaiva syāt khagāmīti śrīmatkāmika ucyate || 48 ||
It is said in the venerable Kāmika that ‘supreme is the Reality

(tattva) (which is the Mantra uttered) with the mouth shaped in the form of

a kiss. It is heard, engaged in devouring this universe, within the cavity of
the capsule formed by the Moon and Sun. By just that, (the yogi) becomes
a Skyfarer.” (47cd-48)

‘The form of a kissʼ is the energy of Unstruck Sound (anackakalā)

which has the form of the cavity of the beak of a crow.' By virtue of that, and

by means of ‘the mouth’, which is one’s own nature, that takes the support of
the energy of the vital breath in the Centre (of the channel of Suṣumnā), ‘this
universeʼ, consisting of the means and object of knowledge, is made one with
one’s own nature. Thus the ‘supreme reality, which is one with the perceiver,
‘is heardʼ, that is, made directly perceivable, ‘in the cavity° of the Central
Abode ‘of the capsule formed by the Moon and Sun’, that is, the pair,
inhalation (prāṇa) and exhalation (apāna). Thus (the yogi) attains the state of

flight. This is the meaning of this statement.

Now he says (the following) in order to teach the form of this (Mudrā,)

with (its) special (characteristics,) taught in the venerable Kulagahvara.

E) The Seal of the Skyfarer According to the Kulagahvaratantra

bhavān muktvā drāvayanti pāśān mudrā hi śāktayaḥ |
mukhyāsāṁ khecarī sā ca tridhoccāreṇa vācikī || 49 ||
triśiromudgaro(re) devi kāyikī paripaṭhyate |

See above, 3/168cd-170ab (168-169) and note and also PT 12cd ff.
Abhinava clearly identifies his source as the Kāmika. Even so, the first line of his
citation is practically the same as the first line of NTS mālasūtra 6/10, and that reads:
cumbākāreṇa vaktreṇa yat tattvaṁ śrūyate bhuvi |

kalāḍhantaṁ vijānīyād ākāśasthaṁ ca me śrṇu |

‘That TAṬṬVA (Mantra) that is heard on earth (bhuvi) (when it is uttered) with the
mouth shaped in the form of a kiss: (this) one should know to be KALĀḌHYA.’ (modified
translaton by Goodall et al.)
Alo, Sārdhatriśaikālotara 19/6ab: cambākāreṇa vaktreṇa ta tatvaṁ parīkritam |
Goodall et al. suggest that ‘In other words this could be a sort of whistling sound
produced by breathing HUM through the mouth when the lips are pushed forward into a moue.’
See also Goodall, Vasudeva and Isacson, tatva’ in Tantrābhidhānakośa vol. 3 p. 5.
Conceming the Cavity of the Beak ofaCrow, see above 3/168cd-170ab (168-169) and note.
“ This passage drawn from the Kulagahvara extends from 49 to 53.

TANTRĀLOKA

Mudrās are indeed powers, (and are so called because,) having
liberated (muktvā) from transmigratory existence (bhava), they melt away
(drāvayanti) the fetters. Of these, the main one is the Skyfarer, which is of
three kinds.® (Of these three, its) the vocalic (form is produced) by
utterance. Ó Goddess, the bodily one is called ‘the Hammer with Three

Headsʼ. (49-50ab)

Thus, the Supreme Goddess’s powers are indeed called mudrās that,
having liberated these fettered souls from the world of transmigration, ‘melt
away the fettersʼ. This is a didactic etymology (nirvacana) of their (name). As
is said (in the Kulagahvara):
‘They liberate from the very terrible world of transmigratory existence,
which has the form of a sea monster, and they melt away the fetters of the
fettered soul. Thus, Mudrās are (indeed) powers.”
(The vocalic (form is produced)) ‘by the utterance’ of Mantras etc. (It

is said in the Kulagahvara concerning) ‘the Hammer with Three Heads’ that:

‘it is preceded by (and based on the powers of) will, knowledge and
action . . .ʼ.
In accord with this teaching, the Hammer with Three Heads consists of

(these) three powers, and so it lays hold (gṛnāti) of joy (muda), that is, supreme
bliss. (Thus, as it) contemplates within itself, it is supreme consciousness. This
is the meaning of (this) statement.

In the very same way, supreme consciousness has poured forth as the
body. Thus he says:

| u 1|

TaTJĪTÑTĪYHTTT-TÑITĀTĀTJT
I Ġ. I

nāsāṁ netradvayaṁ cāpi hṛt stanadvayam eva ca || 50 ||
vṛṣaṇadvayaliṅgaṁ ca prāpya kāyaṁ gatā tv iyam |

The three kinds of udrā are those of the body, speech and mind. Above in 32/9cd, it is said
that udrās are four kinds, thats, these thrce as well as hands.
Abhinava has condensed 32/49ab the following verse, quoted by Jayaratha from the
Kulagahvara::
mocayanti mahāghor t saṁsāramakarã

drāvayanti paśoḥ pās ṁṁs tena mudrā̃ sśaktayaḥ ll

‘They liberate from the greatly terible world of tansmigratory existence, which has the
form of a sea monster, and melt away the fetters of the fettered soul, aṅd so Mudrās are (indeed)
powers.ʼ

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

bhavasthānābhavasthānam uccāreṇāvadhārayet || 51 ||
mānasīyam . . .

Having reached the nose, the two eyes, the heart, the two breasts,
the two testicles and the penis, this (mudrā) is present (in all) the body. One

should ascertain the abode of transmigration and the abode of its absence

by the upward movement (uccāreṇa) (of Mudrā). This is the mental (form

of the Seal of the Skyfarer). (50cd-52a)

(In this case,) ‘the heart’ is the (hollow) stalk (nāla) of the lotus of the heart. It

has been described along with its true nature (in various places) here and there
in the scripture. It is not discussed at length here because it is very secret. That
should be known only from the teacher’s mouth. ‘The abode of
transmigration’ is the body. ‘The abode of its absence’ (is attained) ‘by the
upward movement (of Mudrā).”

RTTaīaī

ī; TTaārēq Ū’RATT: I AR I

JtÑ T JTTT JTTTRĀTĀHTTĪḤ|

. . . itas tv anyāḥ padmādyā aṣṭa mudrikāḥ |
mātṛvyūhakule tāḥ syur asyās tu parivāragāḥ || 52 ||
śarīraṁ tu samastaṁ yat kūṭākṣarasamākrti |

eṣā mudrā mahāmudrā bhairavasyeti gahvare || 53 ||

Apart from (the Skyfarer,) there are eight (other) mudras, including

(the Seal of the) Lotus and the rest, that are amongst its entourage, (each

belonging) to a family of the group (of eight) Mothers. The form of the
entire body (as a whole) is the phoneme KS (kāṭākṣara). (It is said) in the
Gahvaratantra that this seal is Bhairava’s Great Seal (mahāmudrā). (52bcd-

53)

Mothers _| Mudrā /Kula

Lotus

Trident

Wheel

Javelin

Thunderbolt

Yogeśvar

Skuīl

Staff

Tooth

Location
Heart
Three Channels

Navel

End of Sound

TAĀ Location (2)
Nose
Right Eye

Left Eye
Heart

Point

Right Breast

Tongue

Two Testicles

Mind

Firmament

Left Breast
Penis

Jayaratha does not tell us the name of the source from which he is quoting. It is clear
from this table that the locations of the mnudrās as listed by Abhinava and Jayaratha’s source are
not the same. Perhaps the references are to two sets of locations both listed in the Kulagahvara,
but this seems unlikely.

TANTRĀLOKA

(Itis said in the Kulagahvara:)

‘O beloved, 1) the Lotus (padma) here (in this case) is the lotus of the

heart. 2) The Trident is the three channels (of the vital breath). One should know
that 3) the Wheel (cakra) is the navel. 4) The Javelin (śakti) is the End of

Sound. 5) The Staff (daṇḍa) has arisen from the location of the Point. 6) The

impenetrable Thunderbolt is the mind. O greatly fortunate one, 7) the Tooth
(daṁṣṭra) is the tongue and 8) the Skull is the firmament (vyomamaṇḍala). (The
Seal) is called the mental one because it moves in these places.”
The meaning is, it moves upwards in the way (described in such

passages). There ‘are eight’. As is said (in the Kulagahvara):

‘Khecarī’s entourage is said to consists of eight seals (mudrā).N 0
mistress of the gods, they are said to be in the group of eight families Kulas
within the group of Mothers. (They are) 1) the Lotus (padma), 2) the Trident
(śūla), 3) the Wheel (cakra), 4) the Javelin (śakti), 5) the Staff (daṇḍa), along

with 6) the Thunderbolt (vajra), 7) the Tooth (darṁṣṭra), and 8) the Skull
(kapāla) – all of this is arranged (there) in this way."
its)

‘The phoneme (kāṭākṣara) is KS. This, along with (a description of

nature,

has

been

established

previously

many

times.

The

(main)

characteristic of the Bhairava Mudrā mentioned before has also been taught
thus.
In order to explain that (the teachings concerning this Mudrā) are
consistent everywhere (in all the scriptures), he talks about (its) form along with
(its) varieties according to another scripture also.

F) The Seal of the Skyfarer According to the Bhargāṣṭakaśikhākula

Tīzṇazffī-qerxfzar
r̥zikeā: u uç u
By reading with Th: parivārāya for pariyāras u, the meaning would be ‘there are said to be
eight seals, that serve to make up Khecarī's entourage.
“’Read with MS Th: kulāṣṭake for śūlāṣṭake.
“ Read dahṣtṭraṁ for daṣṭrā
“ This set of eight Mudrās associated with the Mothers goes back to the Brahmayāmala, one of
the firṣt Bhairava Tantras. There they are listed as follows, with just a small varation in their
sequential order:

sūlamudrā tathā padmaṁ cakṛaṁ śakúsṣtathaiva [k; śakī tathaiva] ca l 182 1
88a) daṇḍaṁ caiva tathā vajraṁ draṁsṣṭrāṁ caiva [k: draṣṭrāścaiva] kapālakaḥ [k: -kam] |
e1ā mudṛāḥ [k: mudrā] samākhyātā [k: tāṁ] mātrṇāṁ ca yathākramaḥ [k: -mam l 183 |
‘The Mudrā of the Trident, the Lotus, and the Javelin, s0 too that of the Staff, the
Thunderbolt, the Tooth and the Skull. BY 12/182cd-183
This passage, drawn from the Bhargāṣṭakaśikhākula extends from verse 54 to 62. Presumably
this is he Bhargavaśikhā / Bhargaśikha Ābhinava quotes in several places.

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

sūpaviṣṭaḥ padmake tu hastāgrāṁguliraśmibhiḥ |

parāṅmukhair jhaṭity udyadraśmibhiḥ pṛṣṭhasaṁsthitaiḥ || 54 ||
antaḥsthitiḥ khecarīyaṁ saṅkocākhyā śaśāṅkinī |

1) (The yogi,) well seated in the lotus posture, (experiences) the
inner state (of rest when he engulfs and withdraws outer objectivity) with
the (lunar) rays located on the back of the fingers on the forepart of (his)
hands, that emerge all of a sudden, turned away (from him). This (first

form of the Seal of the) Skyfarer is (the Goddess of the Moon) Śaśāṅkinī,
who is (also appropriately) called ‘Retraction’ (saritkocā).(54-55ab)

Here (engaged in this practice), the yogi sits in the lotus or other such
posture. The fingers on the forepart of the hands are straight rays (of lunar
light). The emerging rays face away (from the yogi) because they are located at
the back (of the hands which are turned away from him). They are the rays of
the Moon issuing forth externally (into the outer world of objectivity). (The
yogi) thus characterized by these (rays), ‘all of a sudden’ ‘(experiences) the
inner state (of rest)ʼ, because what is external has been withdrawn back (into
consciousness). (In other words, the yogi) should be at rest within himself. Then

(if this happens), this is the first (kind) of Khecarī Mudrā. (It is called) Śaśāṅkinī
(the Goddess of the Moon), because She is the Moon contemplated in this way.

(Again,) because the outer (world) has been contracted, it is
‘Retraction’ (saṁkocā)’.

‘called

TṬHHīca ##dr—d dg BElEE7ni II 4.i 1
Tṃīĩzījyg TTITĪg STṬHIGTĪ GI HT |

The citation appears to be a contracted paraphrase of the original. As it is so concise, the
meaning is not inmediately clear. If Jayaratha had a copy of the original, one wonders why he did

not quote it. Perhaps the original was no less enigmatic. Jayaratha’s explanation is plausible,
although one would wish for more details.

The printed text reads pṛṣthasaṁsthitai – ‘located at the back (of the hand) qualifying
udyadrasśmibhiḥ ‘emerging rays’. This leads to a possible meaning that there are two sets of rays

– those from the tips of the fingers and those from the back of the hands. But this makes little
sense, nor does Jayaratha’s explanation support this interpretation. Perhaps the reading should be
emended to pṛṣṭhasaṁsthitaḥ - located behind’ qualifying the unstated subject (i.e. the yogi), as

Jayaratha’s interpretation suggests. The yogi is ‘located behind’ his hands, i.e. they are in front of
him. Presumably they are upraised before him.
These rather difficult lines seem to me to be teaching the following practice. The yogi sits in the
lotus posture with his hands raised in front of him, the paims facing towards him. The fingers are
held straight. He should imagine that rays of lunar light emerge suddenly and with great force
from the back of his fingers and hands and go out into the outer world. This presumably takes

place when the yogi exhales. Then, it seems, the lunar breath of inhalation withdraws the outer

lunar realm of objectivity into the yogi’s subjective consciousness. Thus, he experiences the inner

state of rest within that consciousness. Then, if he succeeds in doing this, the yogi enters the first
form ofa series of eight ŚSeals of the Skyfaring Goddess Khecarī, in which She is called Śaśāṅkinī
– the Goddess of the Moon. As the objectivity withdrawn in this way contracts, she is also called
‘Retraction’ (Saṁkocā, literally ‘Contraction’).

TANTRĀLOKA

tasmād eva samuttamya bāhū caivāvakuñcitau || 55 |I

samyag vyomasu saṁṅsthānād vyomākhyā khecarī matā |
2) Then having raised the arms well bent, he abides well in the
Voids and so this (form of) Khecarī is considered to be (the one) called the
(Seal of the) Void (vyomākhyā). (55cd-56ab)

Maintaining that same positioning of the hands and fingers etc., ‘having

raised the arms well bent’ in the form of a diagonal cross (svastika), and fixed

them (in that position) by abiding well, that is, with profound resolution

(gāḍhāvaṣṭambha), by means of the aforementioned process (of withdrawal of
objectivity) within the five Voids, referred to in (such statements as) ‘the Void
is endless and is called Māyā’, the second (form of Khecaṁī Mudrā is formed,)

‘called the (Seal of the) Void ( vyomākhyā).

muṣṭidvitayasaṅghaṇāt dhṛdi sā hṛdayāhvayā || 56 ||
3) The one called the ‘(Seal of the) Heart’ (hṛdaya) (is formed) by

uniting the two fists in the heart. (Ś6cd)

So also (the two hands are clenched into) fists. The right fist is below

and the thumb is placed within it (enclosed by the fingers). The thumb of the left

fist, that is placed above it, extends upwards. By the union of the two fists in the
heart (i.e. at the level of the chest) that third (form of) Khecarī called (the Seal
of ‘the Heart’) Hṛdaya (is produced).

TĪTRGĀT ṜĪī ṜTTTTJT:

Śśāntākhyā sā hastayugmam ūrdhvādhaḥsthitam udgatam |
samadr̥ṣṭyāvalokyaṁ ca bahiryojitapāṇikam || 57 ||

4) (The next form of Khecarī Mudrā) is called ‘Tranquil’ (Śāntā).

The two hands (i.e. arms) are one above the other, and the hands are united

externally. (The yogi) should gaze at the upraised one with balanced
(concentrated) vision. (57)

Again, the word ‘hand’ (in this case) denotes, by association, the arm,

and so (what is meant by saying ‘the two hands’ is actually) the two arms. The
left one is below and the right one is above. Although the hands face each other
inwardly (i.e. the back of the left hand is placed in the palm of the right one),
‘the upraised oneʼ, that is, the (right) hand that is above, should be observed

Read samuttamya for samuttambya.

Rcad samattamya for samuttambya.

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

with a balanced (concentrated) vision. If that takes place, then that is the fourth

(kind of Khecarī Mudrā,) called ‘Sāntā’ (‘Tranquil”).

eṣaiva śaktimudrā ced adhodhāvitapāṇikā |
5) This same (mudrā) is the Mudrā of Power (śaktimudrā) if the
lower hand is shifted downwards. (58ab)
Then, similarly, ‘this same (nudrā), that is called Tranquil, is the fifth

one called the Seal of Power (śaktimudrā), if ʻthe (lower) hand is shifted
downwardsʼ, although the positioning (of the hands) is the same.

GIHTTGṀĪTĪ
] ftzāīTaāīTTTST I uC I

hezia°EṭUECIfEEATceifErIḤ

daśānām aṁgulīnāṁ tu muṣṭibandhād anantaram || 58 I|
drāk kṣepāt khecarī devī pañcakuṇḍalinī matā |
6) By suddenly spreading out the ten fingers after (the hands) have

been clenched into fists, the goddess Khecarī is considered to be (the Seal
of) the Five Kuṇḍalinīs. (58cd-59ab)

Again, the sixth (kind of Khecarī Mudrā) is called (the Seal of) the Five

Kuṇḍalinīs, because each hand has the form of five Kuṇḍalinīs, (made) ‘by
suddenly spreading out the ten fingers’ sideways after the two hands ‘have

been clenched into fistsʼ.

ēīāgaī īā az faa- fṝ 1 u< u

saṁhãramudrã caiṣaiva yady ūrdhvaṁ kṣipyate kila || 59 |l
utkrāmaṇī jhagity (> jhaṭity) eva paśūnāṁ pāśakartarī|
‘7) Again, this same (Seal) is the Seal of Reabsorption if (the fingers)
are cast upwards. (Khecarī) exits upwards and immediately severs the
fetters (that bind) fettered souls. (9cd-60ab)
Similarly, if all ten fingers are cast upwards in the same way, then (at
that very moment), that same (Seal of the) Five Kuṇḍalinīs is the seventh one,
called the Seal of Reabsorption. Its state as the Seal of Reabsorption is described
(by saying that) ‘(Khecarī) exits upwards’ and the rest.

#J gg āfaṀ aaṁa r̄̄aṀa 1 £o

TANTRĀLOKA

UGGEÉEṄEĀAEtĀĒtTEEG-EAḶ

€ÉṭṭiēuRiaādĀtzkitcxziIerĪTI

śvabhre sudūre jhaṭiti svātmānaṁ pātayann iva |l| 60 |I
sāhasānupraveśena kuñcitaṁ hastayugmakam |
adhovīkṣaṇaśīlaṁ ca samyagdṛṣṭisamaṉvitam || 61 ||
vīrabhairavasaṁjñeyaṁ khecarī bodhavardhinī|
aṣṭadhetthaṁ varṇitā śrībhargāṣṭakaśikhākule || 62 ||
8)

Looking

downwards,

endowed

with

sound

(inner)

vision

(samyagdrṣṭi), the two hands contracted (and bent), as if throwing himself

suddenly into a deep abyss by penetrating with audacity (and forcefully

into consciousness) (sāhasa) – this is the Skyfarer who, called Vīrabhairava,
develops consciousness.” (Khecarī) has thus been described in eight ways in
the venerable Bhargāṣṭakaśikhākula. (54-62)
Again, (the yogi) who, by virtue of his habit (śīla) of looking
downwards is ‘endowed with sound vision’, which is directed inwards, having
made ‘the two hands contracted (and bent)ʼ, is ‘as if throwing himself

suddenly into a deep abyss’

by penetrating the Seal of Audacity

(sāhasamudrā). (Then,) if the Yogi’s consciousness has developed (well,) this is

the eighth (seal,) called Vīrabhairava. (This is the teaching according to) the
venerable Bhargaśikhākula.
Concluding this (topic,) he praises the vitality (of the Seal of the
Skyfarer).

Deliberation on the Vitality (vīrya) of Mudrā (vīryacarcanam)

arī ftaṛ |

evaṁ nānāvidhān bhedān āśrityaikaiva yā sthitā |
śrīkhecarī tayāviṣṭaḥ paraṁ bījaṁ prapadyate || 63 ||

He who in this way is penetrated by the venerable (Seal of the

Goddess) Khecarī, who abides as one alone, assuming many kinds of forms,
atṭṭains the supreme seed-syllable (Mantra). (63)

The ‘many kinds’ are (the Seals) of the Trident and the rest. As there is

no intention to form all of these (seals), namely, the Trident and the rest, their

nature has not been taught. ‘The supreme seed-syllable (Mantra)’ is the seedsyllable of Parā, that is made of emanation. The sense is that in reality these two
do not differ. As scripture (declares):

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

‘One is the seed-syllable made of emanation and one is the Seal, which
is the Skyfarer. He who knows the two (to be) one is indeed worthy of
veneration in the Kula tradition (āgama).

Thus
he says:

īṝ gfttnā ī asd d-ā]

āī gI TTī ] JT. TĪTTTI aTIT I €; I
ekaṁ sṛṣṭimayaṁ bījaṁ yad vīryaṁ sarvamantragam |
ekā mudrā khecarī ca mudraughaḥ prāṇito yayā || 64 ||
One is the seed-syllable made of emanation, the vitality of which is
present in all Mantras. And one is the ŚSeal, which is the Skyfarer, that gives
life to the flux of (all) the Seals. (64)
Thus, its penetrative trance (āveśa) is the (ultimate) reality of all the

Seals. Thus he says:

tad evaṁ khecarīcakrarūḍhau yad rūpam ullaset |

tad eva mudrā mantavyā śeṣaḥ syād dehavikriyā || 65 II

The configuration (rūpam) (of consciousness) that pours forth in
this way, when one is firmly established in the Wheel of the Skyfarers, is
considered to be (the one true) Seal. The rest are (just) deformations of the
body. (65)
‘The rest’ are (those Seals) that are devoid of its penetrative trance
(āveśa).

He says (the following) in order teach the various (appropriate) times to

make these (Seals).

The Various Occasions When the Seals are Applied (kālabheda)

yāgādau tanmadhye

S Thi vers is quoted in brief and explained in verse 32/64; verses 63 and 65 is part of this
explanation.

TANTRĀLOKA

tadavasitau jñānayogaparimarśe |
vighnapraśame pāśacchede mudrāvidheḥ samayaḥ || 66 ||

The (right) time (to apply) the procedure (by which) the Seals (are
made) is at the beginning, middle and end of the sacrifice, when
contemplating knowledge and Yoga, when pacifying obstacles, and when
severing (the disciple’s) fetters (in the course of initiation). (66)
Surely (one may ask), what happens by making a Seal in this way at
(the right) time? With this doubt in mind, he says:

frastṁ saāīārṝ. |

bodhāveśaḥ sannidhir
aikyena visarjanaṁ svarūpagatiḥ |
śaṅkādalanaṁ cakrodayadīptir iti kramāt kṛtyam || 67 ||

The function (of these Seals) is, in due order, the penetration (āveśa)

of awakened consciousness, (invocation of the deity’s) presence along with

oneness (with it), (its) dismissal, (the manifestation of) the essential

condition of one’s own nature (svarūpagati), the destruction of doubt, and
the energizing of the dawning of the cycles (of Mantras). (67)

‘The energizing of the dawning of the cycles (of Mantras)’ means the
infusion of energy (dīpana) of the Mantras, that have arisen in the manner

described (above) in Chapter Seven. This is the meaning.
He concludes this (topic) with half (a verse).

iti mudrāvidhiḥ proktaḥ sugūḍho yaḥ phalapradaḥ |

The procedure (concerning) the Seals has thus been taught which,
kept well hidden (and guarded), bestows (its) fruit. (68ab)
This is the auspicious end (of this chapter).

‘The one called Jayaratha, who (experiences) the penetration of
consciousness as it unfolds completely by virtue of (his) intense contemplation
of the true nature of the venerable Skyfarer, has explained this, the thirty-second

chapter (of the Tantrāloka).”

Thus (ends) Chapter Thirty-two of the venerable Tantrāloka, called the

Revelation of the Seals.

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE
The Gathering Together of the Deities (ekīkāraḥ)

According to the Mālinīvījayottara

“The Lord of the Universe, who is the treasure of the nectar of supreme

bliss, is victorious; He who, even though he pours forth all this externally, is

engaged in bringing it to rest within the Supreme Soul, who is the Lord of the

Universe.”

Surely (one may ask), here (according to this teaching), (all that) exists

is just one consciousness, the essence of which is the reflective awareness of all
things. Therefore (as there is only one reality), it makes no sense that there

should be a relationship between the object of worship and the worshipper in
this way (tāvat). (Moreover,) there (in that case) also, what difference can there

be between (the deities that are) the objects of worship? So how is it that this
state (of multiplicity), in which there are many configurations (of deities)
(cakra), is taught (in the scriptures)?

In order to explain how they are made one, having taken this doubt into

consideration, (he says,) with the second half (of the verse begun at the end of

the previous chapter):

3TIRRTĀTTT TāTĪTṀĪĪ fTTEIT |

athāvasarasaṁprāpta ekīkāro nigadyate |
Now the occasion has arisen, we will talk about the gathering
together (ekīkāra) (of the configurations of divine forms, as taught in the
Mālinīvijayottara).
He says that:

qgṁ ā=-ā ar r̥ard frsē

T] IJTTIĪTĒII
fĒJTITAT 1 2 1
yad uktam cakrabhedena sārdhaṁ pūjyam iti trikam |

The word ekīkārah literally means ‘unificaton’; the sense in this context is clearly ‘gathering
together’ or ‘assembling together.

Read viṣveṣe for viśveśo.
The word ekīkāra literally means ‘making one’, that is, ‘gathering together’. This chapter is
dedicated to listing the names of the deities of the assemblies (cakra) that, according to the
Siddhavīra (SYM?) and MV, surround the central Trika deities of the Trika Trident. The same

expression is found in the concluding line of this chapter, where the ‘assembly is that of the
śāstrārtha, which can mean ‘the sense of the scripture’ or ‘realities (taught) in the scripture’, or as
Gnoli translates ‘passi delle scritture’ ‘passages from the scriptures'. As this chapter is essentially
a presentation of MV 20/43-60, following almost the same order found in the MV, it is best to

translate ‘scripture in the singular. Moreover, the sense of ‘artha’ here is ‘meaning’, that is, the
sense of the teaching concerning the matter presented here. It may also mean the ‘realities’ taught
there – in this case the deities.

TANTRĀLOKA

tatraiṣa cakrabhedānām ekīkāro diśānayā | 1 IIḷ
It has been said that the triad (of goddesses) (trika) should be
worshipped along with various (surrounding) assemblies (of deities)
(cakrabheda). Thus there (in that regard), we will now expound this, the
gathering together (ekīkāra) of the various assemblies (of deities taught in
the Mālinīvijayottara). (1)
It has been said (already) in Chapter One and elsewhere. And that is
(said) there in this way beginning with:
‘(Bhairava, abides as) the ‘Solitary Heroʼ (ekavīra), the ‘Couple’
(yāmala), as possessing three powers, and as four-fold.
And much (more,) ending with:
‘The Great Lord, (all) powerful, who is (Himself) all the powers,

unfolds in this way within (the one Wheel which is) all the Wheels (viśvacakra),

until (He expands) into the Wheel of a Thousand Spokesʼ or even within that of

countless spokes.”

So now accordingly (tāvat), he presents the varieties of wheels

(cakrabheda).

The Six-spoked Wheel of Six Yoginīs

ar

Here by ‘Trka’ is meant, presumably, the tṅad of Goddesses - Parā, Paāpaā and Aparā.
AAbhinava presents thm here as worshipped on the proṅgs of the Trident, surrounded by ‘wheels’
of various numbers of spokes, to which are a

gned the deities listed in this chapter. The form

and underlying reason for the emanation of divine forms within consciousness as configurations

of its energies is discussed above in 1/110cd-11 1ab (110) ff. and notes. The authority there, as
it is
throughout the Tantrāloka, for this subject is the Triśirobhairava. We observe that in
the

following presentation, Abhinava combines passages from chapter 3 and 20 of the MV, and so
integrates the pantheon of the MV. Moreover, he also draws from the Triśirobhairava, and

so

incorporates the pantheon of the encompassing host of Bhairavas and Yoginīs from that important

Trika Tantra as well.
Above, TĀ 1/109cd (110ab).

This verse is quoted in MM p. 82. There instead of the reading prabhuḥ (‘powerul’), we find
vibhuḥ (‘pervasive’), which seems better in this context.
Cf. above, 4/132ab.

' Above, 1/11lcd-112ab (112). Jayaratha’s refernce is cogent in a general way. However,
specifically, the configurations Abhinava lists here are not arranged in the numerical
configurations taught in the 7ṝiirobhaiṟava. Here the wheel consists of six, twenty-four, sixteen
and thirty-four Yoginīs, along with their consorts. The 7riirobhairava presents an initial
sequence of six wheels with four, six, eight, twelve, sixteen and twenty-four spokes (see above,
I√/113cd-114ab (114))

? Gánoli tanslates vaeties of maṇḍalas', but these are not complete maṇḍalas. They are parts o
possible vnaṇḍalas. Like wheels rotating inside one another, they encompass the main Trika
deities in the centre. The deities that reside in them are their entourage or attendants,

regular spatial symmetries

configured in

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

'Viśvā tadīśā hāraudrī vīranetryambikā tathā |
gurvīti ṣaḍare devyaḥ śrīṣiddhāvīradarśitāḥ || 2 ||

1) The goddesses that are presented in the Siddhāvīra (as being in

the wheel) with six spokes are Viśvā (the All), its governess (‘adīśā) (the
Governess of Universe), Hāraudrī, Vīranetrī (Hero’s Eye), Ambikā
(Mother) and Gurvī (Teacher). (2)
‘Its governess’ʼ is Viśveśvarī (the Governess of Universe). ‘Vīranetrī’

is Vīranāyikā. That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara)

‘Viśvā (the All), Viśveśvaṁī (the Governess of Universe), and Hāraudrī,

Vīranāyikā, Ambā and Gurvī are the Yoginīs . . . .

These are not only mentioned in our system (asmaddarśana), but also

elsewhere. Thus, he says that (the goddesses)
Siddhāvīratantra.”

‘are presented in the

Twenty-four Spoked Wheel Made of Two Groups of Twelve Yoginīs

ITIU&F Ḷad aJTīTĪTTĪA TRTĀTĀĪḺĪSATT 1| 3 1

T<T HgI STTĪ TṬĪ?Ṭ] GŪGI T̄ṇṬṬHĪT II
hītġhḹ HṬHH=I Eḷ EIÇERIBE-CIEĒII

1Il

af̃ rgfāra ftr: ṇ u, 0

māheśī brahmaṇī skāndī vaiṣṇavy aindrī yamātmikā |
' TĀ 33/2-17ab draws largely from MV 20/43-60ab, although Abhinava does not adhere entirely

to the sequence of presentation of the configurations (cakra) we find there.

33/2ab is quoted by Jayaratha in TĀv ad 1/109cd-1 1 Iab (III). The reading there is:

viśvā tadīśikā raudrī vīrakā tryambikā tathā |
MV 20/59cd-60ab reads:
viśvā viśveśvarī caiva hāraudrī vīranāyikā |I

ambā gurvīti yoginyo bījais tair eva ṣa smriāḥ |

' Abhinava refers to a Siddhavīrāvalīsāra above in 22/40cd which may be the same text (see note
there). Or is this the Siddhayogeśvarīmata? The list of these six Trika Yoginīs is found in SYM

29/13, although Jayaratha only quotes the MV (see Tsorok 1999: 235). However, Jayaratha says
(ad 33/3-5) that ‘these (goddesses) are not only mentioned in our system (darśana), but also

elsewhere. Thus, he says that (the goddesses) ‘are presented in the Siddhāvīratantra.’ The term

‘darśana’ is a common way of referring to a Tantric system. Trika and Krama, for example, are a

darśana. Ṭhusṣ, it appears at first sight that Jayaratha is saying that the Siddhāvīratantra is not a

, he did not identify it with the SYM. But this seems unlikely; the six Yoginīs to
age refers are listed in the SYM. Moreover, they appear in the MV and so too in the
Triśirobhairava. In other words, they are a Trika group of Yoginīs. So perhaps here darśana is a
way of referring to a major scripture, in this case the MV. 33/2abc is quoted by Jayaratha in TĀv

ad 1/(109cd-111ab) (HO-1 11). See note there.
' MV 20/59cd-60a.

TANTRĀLOKA

cāmuṇḍā caiva yogīśīty aṣṭāghoryādayo ‘thavā || 3 II
agnīnirrṛtivāyvīśamātṛbhir dvādaśānvitāḥ |

nandā bhadrā jayā kālī karālī vikr̥tānanā || 4 ||

kroṣṭukī bhīmamudrā ca vāyuvegā hayānanā |
gambhīĩrã ghoṣaṇī ceti caturviṁśatyare vidhiḥ || 5 ||

2) The prescription for the (wheel) with twenty-four spokes (12 +
12) is that (the following goddess should be worshipped there. 2A) These
are) the eight (Mothers) Māheśī, Brāhmaṇī, Skāndī, Vaiṣṇavī, Aindrī,

Yamātmikā, Cāmuṇḍā and Yogīśī;'' or else (one may worship) Aghorā

and the rest along with the four Mothers of the southeast, southwest,

northwest and northeast.' 2B) (They are) accompanied by the twelve

(goddesses) Nandā, Bhadrā (Auspicious), Jayā (Victory), Kāḥ, Karālī
(Fierce Teeth), Vikṛtānanā (Deformed Face), Kroṣṭukī (Jackel),
Bhīmamudrā (Terrible Look), Vāyuvegā (Świft as the Wind), Hayānanā

(Horse Face), Gambhirā (Profound), and Ghoṣaṇī (Shouting One). (3-5)

‘Skāndī is Kaumārī. ‘Yamātmikā’ is Yāmyā. ʻ‘Aghorā and the restʼ.
As is said in the venerable Triśirobhairava:

‘Aghorā, Paramāghorā, and another' is Ghorarūpā. Ghoravaktrā and

Bhīmā, Bhīṣaṇā, Vamanī who is next, and Pivanī who is said to be the eighth.”

‘(They are) accompanied’ (by the twelve (goddesses),) that is to say,

(the Mothers) Māheśī etc. (are accompanied by these goddesses). As is said (in

the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘0 beloved! Brāhmaṇī and the rest are in the four directions, starting

from the southeast."

33/3abc is drawn from MV 3/14:
māheśī brāhmaṇī caiva kaumārī
vaiṣṇavī tathā |
aindrī yāmyā ca cāmuṇḍā yogīṣī ceti tā matāḥ || 14 II

‘They are considered to be Māheśī, Brāhmaṇī, Kaumāṁ̃, Vaiṣṇavī, Aindrī, Yamayā,

'Ī See above, 30/20-26ab and note.
' The names of these Mothers are feminine forms of those of the guardians of the quarters (see
above, 15/222cd-225ab; 30/42-43ab and note).

'” 4cd-šabc = MV 20/44-45a. Abhinava is integratng here three groupings mentioned separately
in the MV, namely, the cight (Mothers), four beginning with Aghorā, and twelve beginning with
Nandā. Thus, altough he quotes MV 20/44-45a directly, which lits the twelve yoginīs beginning

with Nanda, he changes the last half of the line, which reads dvādaśaitāḥ prakīrtitāḥ 'theṣe are

said to be twelve’, to caturvīñśatyare vidhiḥ ‘(this is) the prescription for the (wheel) with
twenty-four spokes’.
' Read rathāparā for tathā parā.

' These are the feminine of the names of the eight Bhairavas listed in MV 1/19cd-21ab, that are

the partners in union with the eight Mothers (29/52-53). They are the eight goddesses associated

with the Parāparā Vidyā, in which they are invoked. See above 30/24cd-25ab.
MV 20/45cd.

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

‘The prescription for the (wheel) with twenty-four spokes’ consists

of (the Mothers) Māheśī etc. along with the group of twelve (goddesses). As is
said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘(Now) listen (to the names of those) in the group of twenty-four. (They

are) Nandā and all the rest in due order, and so also Brāhmaṇī and the rest.”

This has been said in order to supplement (upajīvanāya) the goddesses
present in the twelve spokes. One should not enjoin a departure from the serial
order of the (normal) sequence. Again, (the scripture) teaches that the
powerholders of (the goddesses) Aghorā etc. are (included) in the two groups of
eight. However, as they were taught previously, they are not mentioned here.
That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘And Aghora and the rest are in (the wheel with) eight spokes. O

goddess, the deities are Aghorī and the rest, as well as Māheśī and the rest. . . .

The Sixteen-spoked Wheel of Sixteen Yoginīs

aāa: zaiī sfr.
Eiḻa r̥ftcṁf:: Eā|Iṭē gfkaf: gāñaī: afar. | e 1

siddhir vṛddhir dyutir lakṣmīr medhā kāntiḥ svadhā dhṛtiḥ |
dīptiḥ puṣṭir matiḥ kīrtiḥ susthitiḥ sugatiḥ smṛtiḥ lI 6 Il
suprabhā ṣoḍaśī ceti śrīkaṇṭhādikaśaktyaḥ |
(The goddesses of the wheel of sixteen spokes are) Siddhi
(Accomplishment), Vṛddhi (Increase), Dyuti (Lusture), Lakṣmī, Medhā

(Intellegence),

Kānti

(Beauty),

Svadhā,

Dhṛti

(Fortitude),

Dīpti

(Radiance), Puṣṭi (Satisfaction), Mati (Intellegence), Kīrti (Fame), Susthiti
(Good State), Sugati (Good Fortune), Smṛti (Memory) and Suprabhā
(Beautiful Light), who is the sixteenth. (They are) the powers of Śrīkaṇṭha

and the rest. (6-7ab)

The Powerholders of the Six and Twelve-spoked Wheels

f%a atōāra azītaī ḷ Ṁa . 11 s

MV 20/53bcd.
See above, 30/20-26ab and note.
MV 20/52cd-53a.
Read with MV 20/50d svadhā for sudhā.
MV 20/50cd-51.

TANTRĀLOKA

baliś ca balinandaś ca daśagrīvo haro hayaḥ | 7 II
mādhavaḥ ṣaḍare cakre dvādaśāre tv amī smṛtāḥ |
dakṣaś caṇḍo haraḥ śauṇḍī pramatho bhīmamanmathau || 8 ||
Śakuniḥ sumatir nando gopālaś ca pitāmahāḥ |
(The powerholders) in the wheel of six spokes are Bali, Balinanda,
Daśagrīva, Hara, Haya and Mādhava. These are said to be in the wheel
with twelve spokes, namely: Dakṣa, Caṇḍa, Hara, Śauṇḍin, Pramatha,
Bhīma, Manmatha, Śakuni, Sumati, Nanda, Gopāla and Pitāmaha.” (7cd-

9ab)

The Powerholders of the Sixteen-spoked Wheel

ī fatdī: varat: < u

ÉIḶCRṀĪtERŪIEIjpīērztiize-THKṢĪ

TīfTR-T-TgTa1 JṬRJRāTĀĪĀT. || 2.. |I

TTāTTTTĪI. ḍĪTRGSÑST. |
īēīxEzzā—EEHE/ENEĀ dITYIHEEN!
śrīkaṇṭho ‘nantasūkṣmau ca trimiūrtiḥ śaṁvareśvaraḥ l| 9 ||
arghīśo bhārabhūtiś ca sthitiḥ sthāṇur haras tathā |
jhaṇṭhibhautikasadyojānugrahakrūrasainikāḥ | 10 ||
dvyyaṣṭau yad vāmrtas tena yuktāḥ pūrṇābhataddravāḥ |
oghormiṣyandanāṅgāś ca vapurudgāravaktrakāḥ || 1 1 ||
tanusecanamūrtīśāḥ sarvāmṛtadharo ‘paraḥ |
strīpāṭhāc chaktayaś caitāḥ ṣoḍaśaiva prakīrtitāḥ || 12 ||
The sixteen (powerholders) are Śrīkaṇṭha, Ananta and Sūkṣma,
Trimūrti, Śaṁvareśvara, Arghīśa and Bhārabhūti, Sthiti, Sthāṇu and

Hara, Jhaṇṭhīśa, Bhautika, Sadyoja, Anugraha, Krūra, and Mahāsena.

7d-8a = MV 20/58cd-59a.
” 8cd-9ab = MV 2043. These twelve deities preside over the months of the year. See above,
6/123 (122cd-123ab) and commentary. They are amongst the first to receive the descent of the
Siáddhayogeśvarīmata. See below TĀy ad 36/1-7ab.
33/9cd-10ab = MV 20/48cd-49ab. MV reads sarvarīśvaraḥ for śaivareśvaraḥ; argheśo for
arghīśo and sthitiḥ for sthitaḥ, which has been accepted.
33/10cd is a compressed version of MV 20/49cd-50ab. These are the sixteen Bhairavas of
Śabdarāśi, that govern the sixteen yowels. Śaṁvareśvara is a variant of Amarīśa, and Sthiti is a

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

Or else, the following may be (optionally) conjoined with that (wheel):
Amṛta, Pūrṇa, Abha, its Drava, Ogha, Ūrmi, Syandana, Aṅga, Vapuḥ,
Udgāra, Vaktra, Tanu, Secana, Mūrtī, Īśa, and Sarvāmṛtadhara™ is the

other one. By reading (their names) in the feminine, these are said to be
(their corresponding) sixteen powers. (9cd-12)

‘Sadyoja’ is Sadyojāta. “Anugraha’ is Anugraheśvara. ʻSainika is

Mahāsena. As is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

“. . . Sadyojāta is another, Anugraheśvara, Krūra and Mahāsena who is

the sixteenth.’

(Conjoined) ‘with that’, Amṛta (Nectar), that is the letter of Nectar
(amṛtavarṇa), Amṛtābha, and so on. This is the sequence. ‘Vaktra’ means
‘face’. ‘Secana’ means ‘sprinkling’. That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘Amṛta and Amṛtapūrṇa, Amṛtābha, Amṛtadrava, Amṛtaugha and
Amṛtormi, Amṛtasyandana is another. (Then there is) Amṛtāṅga, Amṛtavapuṣ,
as well as Amṛtodgāra, Amṛtāsya and Amṛtatanu, Amṛtasecana, Amṛtamūrṭi,

Amṛteśa, and Sarvāmṛtadhara is another.

The Powerholders Worshipped in the Wheel of Twenty-four Spokes

Tũādōār̥jrIfāTāhĀfsīTTTIF’STTHTGHTGĪ; |

frẽTṁoveṝ fntxaīvrāīrrrṁraft arīf 1 2 3 1

saṁvartalakulibhṛgusita-

bakakhaḍgipinākibhujagabalikālāḥ |

variant of Tithīśa. See Appendix C to Chapter Fifteen (Volume Eight) for the fifty Bhairavas

comprised in Śabdarāśi Bhairava.

These are the sixteen Amṛta Rudras, who govern the sixteen vowels. AIl their names begin with
‘amṛta’ which Abhinava has omitted here. Thus, the first three are called Amṛta, Amṛtapūṭṇa,
Amṛtābha, and so on. Their names are listed in MV 3/17-19ab, which is quoted in the

commentary, and from which 11-12ab is drawn. Abhinava gave them a special importance by

writing separate verses in praise of each one, that serve as the opening maṅgala verses at the
beginning of his commentary of each of the sixteen chapters of the śvarapratyabhijīūā. See the

Appendix B to this chapter for a translaton and explanation of these verses. The MV lists the
names of all 50 Rudras governing the letters of the alphabet (MV 3/17-24ab).
Read strīpaṭhāt for śrīpāṭhāt. Cf. below 33/17ab. 33/12cd is based on MV 20/48ab:

Cf. MV 3/24cd-25ab:
strīpāṭhavaśamāpannā eta evātra śaktayaḥ ||

bījayoniṣamudbhātā rudraśaktisamāśrayāḷ |

“The powers born from the seeds and the matrices are grounded in Rudra’s power, and

their (names are those of the Rudras) in the feminine.”

MV 20/49d-50ab.
MV 3/17-19ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

aviś chagalāṇḍau Śśikhiśoṇameṣamīnatridaṇḍi sāṣāḍhi || 13 ||
devīkāntatadardhau
dārukahaliṣomanāthaśarmāṇaḥ |

(The powerholders worshipped in the wheel of twenty-four spokes
are) Saṁvarta, Lakulin, Bhṛgu, Sita, Baka, Khaḍgin, Pinākin, Bhujaga,

Bali, Kāla, Dvi, Chagalāṇḍa, Śikhin, Śoṇa, Meṣa, Mīna, Tridanḍin, along
with Āṣādhin, Devīkānta, Tadardha, Dāruka, Halin, Somanātha, and

Śarman. (13-14ab)

Now their turn has come, he indicates the powerholders in the wheel

with twenty-four spokes, beginning with Saṁvarta. ‘Lakulin’ is Lakulīśa. ‘Sita’

is Śveṭa. “Kāla’ is Mahākāla. “Dvī’ and ‘Chagalāṇḍa’ are Dviraṇḍa and

Chagalāṇḍa. ʻŚoṇa’ is Lohita. ‘Devīkānta’ and ‘Tadardha’ are Umāk. nta and

Ardhanarīśa. ‘Halin’ is Lāṅgalin. ‘ŚSomanātha’ is Someśa. That is said (in the
Mālinīvijayottara):
‘Saṁvarta and Lakulīśa, Bhṛgu, Śveta and Baka, Khaḍgin, Pinākin,

Bhujaga, the ninth and Bali, Mahākāla and Dviraṇḍa, Chagalāṇḍa and Śikhin,
Lohita, Meṣa and Mīna, the two called Tridaṇḍin and Āṣādhin, Umākānta,
Ardhanarīśa, Dāruka, Lāṅgalin along with Someśa and Śarman. These are

considered to be twenty-four.’

The Bhairavas of the Wheel with Thirty-four Spokes

TTRcHTGCTĪTḤ TVqTGVĒCTTRĀĪT; |
TGTRITI ḶĪT TTTTYTGTTTĒḤ
I| Q., I

ftrrzge:

TTĪSṬTĒĪYTṀTṀTRAGẼJĪRTATR: TI; |2ē. IA

JGTRR TI GĪTTGTrBTTHT:; |
jayavijayajayantãjita-

sujayajayarudrakīrtanāvahakāḥ || 14 ||

tanmūrtyutsāhadavardhanāś ca balasubalabhadradāvahakāḥ |
tadvān dātā ceśo
nandanasamabhadratanmūrtiḥ || 15 ||
Śivadasumanaḥspṛhaṇakā
33/13-14ab is a condensation of MV 20/54-56, which is quoted in the commentary. These are

the thirty-four Bhairavas that govern the consonants in Śabdarāśi order of the alphabet. See

Appendix C to Chapter Fifteen, Volume Eight.

MV 20/54-56.

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE
durgo bhadrākhyakālaś ca |

“ceto ‘nugakauśikakā-

laviśvasuśivās tathāparaḥ kopaḥ || 16 I|

śrutyagnyare syur ete

strīpāṭhāc chaktyas tv etāḥ |

Jaya, Vijaya, Jayānta, Ajita, Sujaya, Jaya, Rudra, Kīrtana, Āvaha,

and its Mūrti, Utsāhada, and Vardhana, Bala, Subala, Bhadrada, Āvahaka,
Tadvān, Dātā, Īśa, Nandana, Samabhadra, Tanmūrti, Śivada, Sumanaḥ,
Spṛhaṇaka, Durga, Kāla, called Bhadra, Ceto’nuga, Kauśika, Kāla, Viśva,
Suśiva, and after them, Kopa.” These are (Bhairavas) on (the wheel) with
thirty-four spokes. By reading (their names) in the feminine, these are

(their) powers. (14cd-17ab)

‘Ajita’ is Aparājita. (The word) ‘Jaya’ is connected to the three. Thus
(the names are) Jayarudra, Jayakīrti, and Jayāvaha. The words ‘its’ refers to the
word ‘jaya’. Thus (those names are) Jayamūrti, Jayotsāha, Jayada, and
Jayavardhana.

‘Subala’ is Atibala. The three ‘bhadra’ (and the rest) are

similarly linked to the word ‘bala’. Thus (their names are) Balabhadra,
Balaprada and Balāvaha. “Tadvān’ is Balavān. ‘Dāta’ is Baladāta. ʻIśa’ is

Baleśvara. ‘Samabhadra’ is Sarvatobhadra. ‘Tanmūrti’ is Bhadramūrti.

‘Śivada’ is Śivaprada. “ʻBhadrākhya’ is Bhadrakāla. ‘Ceto’nuga’ is Mano
‘nuga. ‘Viśva’ is Viśveśvara. That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘Jaya and Vijaya, Jayānta and Aparājita, Sujaya and Jayarudra,
Jayakīrti, Jayāvaha, Jayamūrti, Jayotsāha, Jayada, Jayavardhana, Bala and
Atibala, Balabhadra, Balaprada, Balāvaha and, Balavat, Baladāta, Baleśvara,
Nandana, Sarvatobhadra, Bhadramūrti, Śivaprada, Sumanas, Spṛhaṇa, Durga,

Bhadrakāla, Manonuga, Kauśika, Kāla, Viśveśa, Suśiva, and Kopa. Born from
the wombs, these are said to be thirty-four.”
He (now) teaches the division of the Mantras here (in this case).

The Mantras of the Śix-spoked Wheel

JRRSTTīTTĪ TST WVAaTSTT: I 2.

kāsi#uuRezibĀ{GĪ{EICEAĀIAĀ
juṅkāro ʻthāgnipamīti ṣaḍare ṣaṇṭhavarjitāḥ |I 1T I|
dvādaśāre tatsahitāḥ ṣoḍaśāre svarāḥ kramāt |

halas taddviguṇe `ṣṭāre yādyaṁ hāntaṁ tu tattrike || 18 I|
Read ceto 'nuga for cetānuga.

This alternative set of 34 deities who govern the consonants is listed in MV 3/20-24ab.
33/14cd-17ab is a contraction of MV 3/20-24 which is quoted in the commentary.
MV 3/20-24.

TANTRĀLOKA

1) (The mantras) within the wheel of six (spokes) are the syllables
JU. and the Wife of Fire (SVĀHĀ). 2) Those in the twelve spoked (wheel)
are the vowels without the neuters (r Ṛ I L). 3) Those of sixteen spoked
(wheel) are the vowels including them in due order. 4) Those of (the wheel)
with double that (number of spokes) are the consonants. 5) Those of the
eight spoked (wheel) are (the consonants) beginning with Y and ending

with H. (AII of the letters are) in that triad (of wheels of sixteen, thirty-

and eight spokes). (17cd-18)

‘The Wife of Fire’ is SVĀHĀ. Thus, each one (of the spokes) has one
the letters.'Including them’ that is, along with the neuter (vowels) (r RṚ 1 L).
‘Double that (number of spokes) means thirty-two spokes.
He defines a (special) feature here (of these letters).

The Mantras of the Thirty-two-spoked Wheel

dvātriṁśadarake sāntaṁ binduḥ sarveṣu mūrdhani |

A bindu īs above all (the consonants beginning with K and) ending

with S, in the (wheel of) thirty-two spokes. (19ab)

he says:

Other wheels should be conceived in this same sequence (krama). Thuṣs

TJāTTĀŪÇJṬJĪCTTSTTTĒCTAḤ I 28 1

evam anyān bahīṁś cakrabhedān asmāt prakalpayet || 19 |
The many wheels other than this should be conceived in the same

way.(19cd)

‘Other than this’ means (other than) the aforementioned varieties of

wheels. The ‘many other” ones are those of the (wheel of) sixty-four spokes

“ pratyekam ekaiko varṇaḥ. 1 suppose this means 1)J 2) UṀ 3) SV 4) Ā 5) H 6) ā.

! Cf. MV 20/57cd, with reference to the consonants: makāro bindurūpasthaḥ sarveṣām upari
sthitaḥ `the letter M present as the form of bindu is located above them all.’
Chapter 5 of the Tantrasadbhāva is dedicated to a description of the Sarvātmacakra (the
Assembly that is AIl Things), in the centre of which is worshipped the Rudra called Ruru, who is
described as ‘sarvātmaka’. It is very similar in structure and content to the assemblies (cakra)

taught in chapter twenty of the Mālinīvijayottara, that Abhinava presents hcre as typical of Trika.

The presentation begins with a description of the manner in which the Cakra should be drawn.
The innermost circle consists of the four petals of the central lotus. These are then surrounded by

circles with eight, twelve, sixteen, and thirty-two petals. Together with the four in the centre, the

five circles contain seventy-two spokes. Or, if one prefers to call them lotuses, seventy-two petals.
See Appendix A to this chapter for the full text, edited and translated.

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

etc. By (saying that they) ‘should be conceived’, he reveals their (ultimate) lack
of reality (avāstavatva) (as they are all the one energy of consciousness).

In reality, it is the light of consciousness alone that is everything. Its

power is only (a manner of) referring to it. Thus he says:

The Formation of the Mālinī, Mātṛkā and Śabdarāśi

and Development of Ekaśīti and Other Mantras from them
as the Activity of Consciousness

= eTaīcā āzāī ||2 1
eka eva cidātmaiṣa viśvāmarśanasārakaḥ |
Śaktis tadvān ato mātā śabdarāśiḥ prakīrtitau || 20 ll
tayor eva vibhāge tu śaktitadvatprakalpane |
śabdarāśir mālinī ca kṣobhātma vapur īdṛśam || 21 ||
This consciousness, which is the essential nature (ātman) (of all
things), is one alone, and its essence, the reflective awareness of all things.
(Proceeding) from this is power and its possessor, which are (respectively)
said to be Mātṛ (Mother) and Śabdarāśi. When these two divide (further)
and are conceived to be power and its possessor, (they are then) Śabdarāśi

and Mālinī, whose essential nature is the arousal (into manifestation of

Mātṛkā,) and body is like this. (20-21)

(He says) ‘(proceeding) from this’, because it indicates the (initial)

division (vibhāga) of power and its possessor (but which is not yet fully

formed). ‘Mātṛ (Mother) is Mātṛkā (Young Mother). ‘These two’ are Mātṛkā

and Śabdarāśi. Surely (one may ask), whyis Mālinī Śakti? With this doubtin

According to Jayaratha, the use of the verb ‘to form or fashion’ (prakrp) suggests here
implicitly that all these configurations of the energies embodied in these deities are ultimately
unreal (avāstavatam).

Read Śaktiṣ tad- for śaktitad-.

“ The division into power and possessor of power in the state of Śabdarāśi – Mātr̥ka is still latent,

not yet fully formed. Mātrkā and Mālinī are the power, tespectvely unmanifest and explicit, of

the Śahdarāśi. The sequence of letters of both alphabet deities, thatis, Śabdarāśi and Mātr̥kā,is
that of the normal, common alphabetical order. The difference between themis that the letters of

the former are govemned by Bhairavas, and the those of the latter by their yoginīs or śaktis. The

bodies of Śabdarāśi Bhairava and the goddess Mātṛkā are thus essentially the same. There is no
difference in their sonic form, only in their gender and iconic forms. As the sonic form is their
essential and basic nature, there is no essential difference between them, even though one is

feminine power and the other the powerholder. The Mālinī order of the syllabary is different.

Male vowels are ‘mixed’ with female consonants, and so Mālinī is essentially different from her
Bhairava Śabdarāśi, not just iconically. See above, 3/198-200ab and 15/130cd-1 34ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

mind, he says that (her) ‘essential nature is the arousal (into manifestation of

Maātṛkā,) and body is like this’ (i.e. the Mālinī sequence of the alphabet).

(AII) this extensive variety of configurations (cakra) of these two is
grounded in the reflective awareness of each single (component letter). Thus he

says:

STTTR-JTHTI
JTT fi fṛēātrī ṇ 2 1
T<ĪTHATT
] Tāīzā aūaTaā 1|

TṬṬTTṬGIHHT
ZIGTT WST |

tathāntaḥsthaparāmarśabhedane vastuṭtas trikam |

anuttarecchonmeṣākhyaṁ yato viśvaṁ vimarśanam || 22 ||
ānandeśormiyoge tu tat ṣatkaṁ samudāhṛtam |
antaḥsthoṣmasamāyogāt tad aṣṭakam udāhrtam || 23 ||

tadāmṛtacatuṣkonabhāve dvādaśakaṁ bhavet |

tadyoge ṣoḍaśākhyaṁ syād evaṁ yāvad asaṁkhyatā || 24 ||
When the inner reflective awareness (of consciousness) is split up in
that way, in actual fact it is the triad (trika) called Anuttara (A), Will (I)
and Unfolding (U), from which all reflective awareness proceeds. When
(this triad) is conjoined with Bliss (Ā), Dominion (Ī) and the Wave (of
unfolding consciousness) (Ū), that is said to be the group of six. By

conjunction with the semi-vowels and sibilants, that is called the group of
eight. Then it is the group of twelve when (the vowels are) without the
group of four (called) nectar, and when they are conjoined with them, it is
(the wheel of) sixteen. (The units of phonemic awareness increase) in this
way until (they become) numberless. (22-24)

When the reflective awareness of ‘I’, that abides at one with the
perceiver inwardly as power and its possessor, is split up ‘in that way’, then, in
accord with the teaching stated previously, namely, ‘(the wise) say that that
same group of three is Bhairava’s supreme glory," what ‘in actual fact’ exists
is ‘the triad (trika) called Anuttara (A), Will (I) and Unfolding (U)ʼ, ‘from
which proceedsʼ the full (and unconditioned) ‘reflective awareness’ that “I am
all this’’. When that same (triad) is again conjoined with Bliss (Ā) etc., ‘ṭhat is
said to be the group of six’ mentioned previously, by virtue of which this
variety of wheels (that is, configurations of the forms of phonemic reflective
awareness that are the energies of consciousness, exists). In this same way,

Above 3/193ab (I92cd).
I
‘ Śee, for example, above /185ab (I8ácd): ‘Juṣt the group of six vowels (A, I, ḹ, U and Ũ)
alone are the root (of all the others) in the series of leṭters.

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

taking into consideration the two groups of four (letters) called semivowels (Y

R L V) and sibilants (Ś S S H), the group of eight (beginning) with Y is
(formed,) thus it was said that ‘within the eight spoked (wheel) are (the

consonants) beginning with Y.’ ‘The group of four (called) nectarʼ is the
group of four neuter (vowels, i.e. r Ṛ 1 L). (The vowels are twelve) ‘when

without (them)ʼ, that is, devoid of them. This is the meaning. ‘When they are

conjoined with them’, that is, when they include the group of four (neuter
vowels called) nectar, (the vowels are sixteen). This is the meaning. “(They
become) numberlessī by the conjunction and separation of each (act of)

reflective awareness.

Surely (one may ask), how can that which has a single, undivided and

compact form here (in this case) be endless (in the sense of an endless series of

particulars)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ā23] |

Ūdā aa ai: 2.1
: ṬJTTITTRĀĪ TTSTTPĪTSKTTT |

kGR GaAil-ṟeSCHĪELI

viśvam ekaparāmarśasahatvāt prabhṛti sphuṭam |

aṁśāṁśikāparāmarśān paryante sahate yataḥ l| 25 ||
ataḥ pañcãśadaikãtmyaṁ ṣvaravyaktivirãũpatã |
vargāṣṭakaṁ varṇabheda ekāśītikalodayaḥ || 26 ||
iti pradarśitaṁ pūrvam .......

(Consciousness) clearly tolerates (and bears) the universe (within
itself) by bearing (it all) initially in a single act of awareness, and (then
progressively more,) until it finally bears (countless) partial (aṁśāṁśika)
acts of awareness, and so (in various contexts it presents itself) as the
oneness of the fifty (phonemes together), the (pluriform) variety of vowels
and manifestations, the group of eight classes (of phonemes), the division of
(all the fifty) phonemes (one by one), and the emergence of the eighty-one
fragments (kala), as has been explained previously. (25-27a)
(By) ‘the universe’ (is meant) everything. ‘The oneness of the fifty

(phonemes together) is the reflective awareness of (the supreme) ego

(ahaṁparāmarśa). The ʻmanifestationsʼ are the consonants. The ‘fragments

(kala) are the half measures (of phonemic sound). (As has been explained)

‘previouslyʼ, in Chapters Three and Six.
Surely,

‘ Above, 33/18c.
See above 3/197cd conceming the cighty-one half measures; see also 6/226-228ab (225cd227cd).

TANTRĀLOKA

‘A single measure is a short (vowel), and two measures is said to be a

long one. One should know that three measures is prolated, and that a consonant
is half a measure.ʼ
In accord with this teaching, it is correct to say that consonants may
have half measures, but that is not so in the case of the vowels, (because they all
have) a single measure. So how is the emergence of the eighty-one fragments
(kala) possible? With this doubt in mind, he says:
Fractions of Measures and Accents, the Many

Applications of Consciousness

sTāīaēca |

aT’rak aīa.Ṃ ṀtaāṀNaēam ṃā-T 1| 29 |

‘rdhamātrāsahatvataḥ |
svarārdham apy asti yataḥ ṣvaritasyārdhamātrakam || 27 ||
tasyādita udāttaṁ tat kathitaṁ padavedinā |
A half vowel also exists, as (the vowels) allow (division) into half
measures, wherefore (Pāṇini), who knows grammar (padavedin), has said
that the half measure at the beginning of a middle accent (ṣvarita) is acute
(udātta). (27bcd-28ab)
As vowels allow (division) into half measures, they also have half-

measures. Accordingly, Pāṇini declares that the middle accent is a combination
of an acute accent, (in the aphorism,) ‘the vowel that has the combination of

udātta and anudātta tones is said to be svarita or circumflexly accented'.

(Similarly, there is the rule that) also declares that the short vowel in the first

part of an acute accent is half a measure. (It states that) ‘the first portion of it
(i.e. svarita) is udātta, to the extent of a half measure, or prosodial length.’
Read -mātrarūpatayā for -mātrānurāpatayā.

Pāṇini, 1/2/31 and 32, also citated in TSā, p.61. Cf. PTy (p. 202): Just as the union of two
measures etc. are contained in two or three measures as one or two etc. (units), in the same way,

one can perceive the conjunction of a half measure etc. in just a single measure. As the venerable

Naārāyaṇa (SIC 7) has said: “Salutations to that immense and (yet) tiny half measure after the
syllable OM.” Concerning the subtle resonance of the half measure at the end of the utterance of

OM, see Dyczkowski 2009: vol. I pp. 382-386.

samāhāraḥ svaritaḥ PāSū 1/2/31. Translation by Śrīśa Candra Vasu who comments: “The

svarita or circumflexed accent is pronounced by combining the raising and falling of the voice. It

is marked by a perpendicular line on top of the letter. . . . This sūtra is not to be understood to
mean that a ṣvarita is the resultant of the combination of two vowels, an udātta vowel with an
anudātta yowel. It means the accent midway between the two well-known qualities of letters

known as acute and grave accents.’
taṣyādita udāttam ardhahraṣvam PāSū 1/2/32. Translatoṇ by Śrīśa Candra Vaṣu. ‘t has been
defined that svarita accent is a combination of udātta and anudātṭṭa. It remained doubtful what

portion was acute and what grave. The present sūtra clears up the difficulty by declaring that in

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE
He concludes the main subject.

TaṬRṬGRJIHTT
TĀĪ TTTATĪTSĪ I 5 |I
itthaṁ ṣaṁvid iyaṁ yāãjyasvarūpãmarśarũpir
abhinnaṁ saṁvidaś caitac cakrāṇāṁ cakravālakam |
svāmyāvaraṇabhedena bahudhā tat prayojayet || 29 ||
In this way, this consciousness is the reflective awareness of the
essential nature of the object of worship. And that surrounding circle of
wheels (around the centre) is one with consciousness. Many are the ways in
which that may be applied (by the devotee), in accord with the various
surrounding enclosures (of the attendant deities) of the Lord. (28cd-29)
‘That’ means surrounding circle of wheels.

Surely (one may ask), what is the variety (of forms) (bheda) the Lord
also (possesses)?

All is Contained in the Three Goddesses and Mātṛsadbhāva

TJ TŪTT J-āī gtēeīzufāfēzīrra

parā parāparā cānyā sṛṣṭisṭhititirodhayaḥ |
mātṛṣadbhāvarūpā tu turyā viśrāntir ucyate || 30 ||

Parā, Parāparā and the other one (i.e. Aparā) (correspond to)
emission, persistence and the obscuration (of reabsorption). The Fourth

(power), Mātṛsadbhāva (the Essence of the Mothers), is said to be (their)
state of rest (viśrānti) (at one within consciousness). (30)

svarita, the first half is acute and the other grave. The phrase aráhahrasva īs used to indicate half
the measure ofa short vowel. Thus, if a short vowel is svarita, its mātrā being one, half will be
udātta and the other half anudārta. If a long vowel, whose mātrās are two, is svarita, then half
will be udātta, one and a half will be anudātta. If a pluta (protracted) vowel is svarita, then first
half measure will be udātta, and the remaining two and a half measures will be anudātta. In short,
the udātta portion of a svarita must not occupy more time than is taken in pronouncing a half
short vowel.”

Read parā parāparā for parāparā parā.

See above, 30/45cd-46. Sanderson (1988: 199) translates: Mātṛsadbhāva is defined as the

ground in which they rest in unity. The group of three is the Trika triad. Along with the added

fourth, which is a form of Kālī, constitutes ‘the sequence of four” (kramacatuṣṭaya or
catuṣṭayārtha) of the Krama system. Here, as in other places, Abhinava asserts the superiority of
this form of Trika (that he calls Anuttaratrika in 1/14) that takes Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī to be the Fourth
Beyond Parā (parātīta). See, for example, above 1/(106cd-107ab) (107), 3/69cd-70 (70-71ab)
(and commentary) and 30/45cd-46.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The otherʼ is Aparā. ‘Obscuration’ (tirodhi) (here means) withdrawal
(saṁhāra).
Surely (one may ask), if the fourth one alone is the place of rest (of the
other phases of the cycle within consciousness), then how is it that it has not
been taught, having analysed (it in detail and distinguished it clearly from the
other phases)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

tac ca prakāśaṁ vaktrasthaṁ sūcitaṁ tu pade pade |

That is (an oral teaching,) which is in (the teacher’s) mouth, (not in
books,) and should not be made known publicly. (Nonetheless, it is)
alluded to here and there (at each opportune) place (throughout this book).

(31ab)

(The other phases of consciousness) should be made to rest here (in this

state). Thus he says:

turye viśrāntir ādheyā mātṛṣadbhāvasāriṇi || 31 I|

It is (this state of) rest within the Fourth (power), the possessor of
the essence of Mātṛsadbhāva, that is the goal to be aṭṭained. (31cd)

What happens by (attaining) rest here? With this doubt in mind, he says:

tathāsya viśvaṃ ābhāti svātmatanmayatāṁ gatam |

(Once attained) in this way, everything appears to him to have

become one with his own (true) Self. (32ab)
(verse).

He (now) concludes the topic of (this) chapter, with (the following) half

Ṣ̄A ITĀTTR

Ā I 33 1

ity eṣa śāstrārthasyokta ekīkāro gurūditaḥ || 32 |)

1 follow Sanderson (1986: 199 n 142) who suggests reading tac caprakāśyaṁ for tac ca
prakāśam. Gnoli takes prakāśa to be an adverb in the sense of ‘clearly (this is an oral teaching)
etc. In Abhinava’s case, the teacher of this Trika teaching could only be Śambhunātha, who
imparted to him the teachings of the Devyāyāmala, which is the primary scriptural locus and
authority for this syncretism.

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

Thus this, the gathering together (ekīkāra) of the realities (taught)
in the scriptures (śāstrārtha), declared by (my) teacher (Śambhunātha), has

thus been taught. (32cd)

This is the auspicious end (of this chapter).
This man called Jayaratha, who is inclined to contemplate (and conjoin)

each wheel that is one with supreme consciousness, has explained this, the

thirty-third chapter (of the Tantrāloka).

Thus (ends) Chapter Thirty-three, called the Revelation of Unification

of the (commentary called) Discernment, of the venerable Tantrāḹoka.

Although it is possible to translate in the plural ~ ‘teachers’ for ‘teacher’ – this is unlikely, as

these are Trika teachings and Śambhunātha was Abhinava’s only Trika teacher. Chapter Thirtythree is essentially an exposition of MV 20/43-60, where the names of the members of the

entourage surrounding the Trika triad of goddess and their configurations (cakra) is taught. So
here is another clear instance of the great detail with which Śambhunātha instructed Abhinava as

to the meaning of the MV.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR

Entry into One’s Own Nature (svasvarūpe praveśaḥ)
May the good Śiva, who is the Great Sound, be auspicious for the wise
again and again; He who, although He has poured forth externally, has not come
out of His own essential nature.
The Ascent Through the Individual, Empowered

and Sāmbhava States and Beyond to Realisation

Surely (one may ask), if this consciousness, which is the essential nature
(ātman) (of all things) and the Supreme Lord, is one alone, then what purpose is
served by the Individual (āṇava) and the rest of the variety of means (to
liberation)? Taking this doubt into consideration, he begins here, with the

second half of the verse (begun at the end of the previous chapter), to explain
the (manner of) entry (into this, one’s own true nature,) that takes place
(progressively by each means,) leading (successively) one to the other.

3aTIsS? ā̄TTRTJJTJI: JTTR |

ucyate ʻtha ṣvasvarūpapraveśaḥ kramasaṅgataḥ |

Now we will talk about entry into one’s own essential nature

(svasvarūpapraveśaḥ), (that takes place) in consonance with a series (of
ascending levels).

He talks about that.

I2 |
vad etad bahudhā proktam āṇavaṁ śivatāptaye |
tatrāntarantarāviśya viśrāmyet savidhe pade || 1 ||
tato ’py āṇavasaṅtyāgāc chāktīṁ bhūmim upāśrayet |
tato ʻ’pi śāmbhavīm evaṁṅ tāratamyakramāt sphuṭam || 2 ||
Having penetrated more and more deeply into the Individual
(means to realization), which is of many kinds, in order to attain Śiva’s

nature (śivatā), (the adept) should come to rest on that plane (which is

proximate to it and) of a similar nature (savidha). Then, by abandoning the

Individual (level), he should take the support of the Empowered plane.

Then, after that also, (he attains) the Śāmbhava one. In this same way, by

CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR

(this) sequence of progressively higher (levels, his own nature becomes
perfectly) clear (and evident). (1cd-2)
(The Individual (means to realization)) is ‘of many kinds’, as it consists
of (the practice of) visualization (dhyāna) and the utterance (of Mantra and

atṭṭention to the breath) etc. (The adept penetrates into this means) ‘more and
more deeplyʼ, just as in relation to (the formation of) supports (for meditation in
the cycle of the breath he enters into the meditation on) the phonemes (in the
flow of the breath), and in relation to those in (the practice of) the instruments

(of Yoga) (karaṇa), and so on. (That plane) is ‘of a similar nature’ as one’s own
essential nature. ‘Then’, after resting (in the practice of) visualization etc.,

which is similar in nature to one’s own essential nature. ‘By abandoning the
Individual (level)) when objectivity ceases, a (state of absorption) is to be

effected within perception (jāāna). This is the intended (sense). ‘Then, after that
alsoʼ, that is, after taking the support of the Empowered plane, (the next) reality
level is the repose of thought within thought-free (consciousness). ‘The

Śāmbhava one’ means (that) plane. ‘In this same wayʼ, that is, by resting in
whateveris next (above that). (What is) ‘(perfectly) clear (and evident)ʼ is one’s
own ‘own nature’. Thisis what remains (to be said to complete the sentence).

Surely (one may ask), once thisis so, what happens to him? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

3 1

itthaṁ kramoditavibodhamahāmarīcisaṁpūritaprasarabhairavabhāvabhāgī |
ante 'bhyupāyanirapekṣatayaiva nityaṁ
svātmānam āviśati garbhitaviśvarūpam || 3 II

' Apparently, Jayaratha takes these levels of practice, that is, states, to be categories of practice.

The terminology supports this interpretation, but while this is quite possible, Abhinava does not
explicitly confirm it. He tells us that the source of this teaching is his teacher’s teacher, that is,

Sumaii. Īf Abhinava were to be tlking about the categories of practice - pāya- we would have

to accept that he learnt this classification of practice. But this is unlikely, for we have no other

references that could possibly suport that view. Here āṇava etc. clearly refer to states. In the MV,

the same terms are applied to levels and forms of āveśa / samāveśa. So, it appears that Sumati
interpreted them as states — avasthā or planes — bhūmi. This perspective has been retained to

fumnish the distinction in the modern exegesis between means - upāya and the state – avasthā in
which the adept practices. The former is a development that, apparently, Abhinava brought about
or led to completion.
This is the sequence of types of practices in this category of means, corresponding to that taught
above in Chapter Five, that is dedicated to an exposition of the Individual Means (āṇavopāya). It

is inspired by MV 3/21, which is quoted above in TĀ 1/170.

TANTRĀLOKA

He who participates in the flow of Bhairava’s state, that is

thoroughly filled with the great rays of consciousness gradually arisen in
this way, enters in the end independently of (any) means into his own
eternal Self, that has encompassed the nature of all things. (3)

(This yogi realizes this) ‘independently of (any) means’ʼ, that is, by the
process of No Means, which is that of imparting instruction just once and the

like. Thus it is rightly said that:

‘The wise should not imagine that there is any difference here in the
fruit which is consciousness.’
He concludes this (topic) with a half (verse).

kathito ‘yaṁ svasvarūpapraveśaḥ parameṣṭhinā |

My teacher’s teacher has (thus) taught this, the entry into one’s

own nature. (4ab)

This is the auspicious end (of this chapter).
“This (man) called Jayaratha, who knows the true nature of the

relationship between the true means and the goal that has come forth from the
mouth of (his) venerable teacher, has explained the thirty-fourth chapter (of the
Tantrāloka).”
Thus (ends) Chapter Thirty-four
Discernment, of the venerable Tantrāloka.

of

the

(commentary

called)

Read kramodita- for kramoditi-.
See above, 22.
MV 2/25ab. Also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/226cd-227ab (227), 5/155cd-156ab (154cd-155ab),
and in the introductory remarks to 13/1.
Sumati was the teacher of Śambhunātha, Abhinava’s Trika teacher. Abhinava, it seems, is telling

us in this way that the system of categorizing practice in three or four āveśas — the prototype of

the upāyas – is an oral Trika tradition originating with Sumati. See above, note 34,1.
'Read jayarathanāmā for jayadrathanāmā.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE
The Encounter of the Scriptures (śāstramelana)
‘He who has brought down (into the world) the essence of Speech
(mātṛkā), which is all the scripture with each of its varieties, the omniscient
(sarvavit) Lord (vibhu) and saviour of the universe, is victorious.’

3Tdāī-ad qTĀTI JTHTTIĪTTS HGT |
athocyate samastānāṁ śāstrāṇām iha melanam |
Now we will explain the coming together here (in our tradition) of
all the scriptures.

The Basis of Daily Life is a priori Commonly
ÁAccepted Belief (prasiddhi)

e ī’ācdṁīiīsa saaī: Ç-: I 8 |

ytāTzrza-aīā āa aīm 3=ã |

iha tāvat samasto 'yaṁ vyavahāraḥ purātanaḥ ll 1 I|
prasiddhim anuṣandhāya saiva cāgama ucyate |

Here indeed, all this (varied) behaviour (of daily life) (vyyavahāra) that
has come from the past (purātana) has (always proceeded) once having
ascertained commonly accepted belief (prasiddhi). 1t is this that is said to be
tradition (āgama). (lcd-2ab)
The second line reads śāstraṁ jagad uddhartā jayati vibhuḥ sarvavit kopaḥ !| The sense of the
word kopal is not clear to me.

Depending on the context, I sometimes translate prasiddhi as ‘commonly accepted belief” or

well-established (prasiddha) commonly accepted belief. In a more technical epistemological

sense, it denotes a priori knowledge. We do not need to examine the food we eat to check every

time i it is nourishing. We simply eat it assuming it is so. Similarly, we do not normally wait
anxiously in the early moring to see if the sun will rise. This knowledge is in some respects like
instinct. Birds know when to migrate and a lion that its claws are powerful. Instinct of this sort is

called pratibhā by the gaammarian and cognitive linguist Bhartṛhari. Marking the point in which
we ‘know that we know’, thus puttig a stop to a possible infinite regress, prasiddhi is the
necessary basis of every means of knowledge. As the common acceptance of the authority of
scripture or traditional knowledge, it has come down through the ages uncontradicted (avigītā). As

such it is the quintessence of tradition that has come down — āgama – through generations of

teachers and from the uppermost reaches and innermost depths of consciousness. As such, it is the
reflective awareness inherent in consciousness. It is its inner discourse – śabdana, abhilāpa – that,

untaught,affirms truth and certainty prior to all learning, as its very basis.

Gnoli translates these two and the following line thus: “Here, all this manifold assembly of
various activities and behaviour inherited from our forebears takes place on the basis of a belief

thatis called ‘traditon’ (āgama). Both positive and negative reasoning depend on this belief.”

The basic, non-technical meaning of the word ‘prasiddhī’ is ‘renown’ or ‘common

knowledge’, which is well-known and accepted by everybody. Jayanta Bhatta (Nyāyamañjarī p.

648, quoted by Hanneder p. 23, note 84) uses this key term in its common sense in the same
context: ‘mahājanasamūhe ye prasiddáhiṁ prāpur āgamāḥ’ – ‘(the traditions) that have common

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Here indeed° ‘all this (varied) behaviour (of daily life) (proceeds)

‘once having ascertained’ ‘the commonly accepted belief’ ‘that has come

from the past’ which, as it has not been uprooted by other commonly accepted
beliefs, is well established, (and has developed) for a very long time. The

meaning is that everybody behaves in this way (in daily life). ‘It is this that is

said to be the tradition (āgama) (transmitted through scripture)ʼ. The
meaning is that it is common daily usage (to refer to it) by that name. As is said:
‘Traditional doctrine (āgama) is that which is commonly accepted

(prasiddhi) in the world . .

down (from the past) are those that attained renown in the society of distinguished people.’ Here

Abhinava understands the word in the technical, philosophical sense as the fundamental sense of

certainty, which is the necessary basis of any cognitive act for it to reach a conclusion in
knowledge which is satisfactory and instils certainty (niścaya).

In a note, Gnoli (1999: 628) quotes from Berlin, 1: The Magus of the North. J.G.
Haṃann and the Origins of Modern Irrationaliṣm. John Murry, London, 1993. Basing himself
on
the following references, Gnoli prefers to translate prasiddhi as belief rather than
‘a priori

certainty. In actual fact, there is not much difference between the two. Indeed, the latter term,

although more clumsy, practically serves to explain the former. Hamann elaborates on Hume who,

as a radical empiricist, is a well-known exponent of the view that no knowledge is certain.

Each

cognitive event is a uniqu instance. There is no inherent necessity, whether causal or otherwise,

that connects one thing to another. Berlin explains that from this point of view (ltalian translation
op. cit pp. 60-64): ‘there is no knowledge that does not have at its base a belief, an unreasoned
belief. ‘In order to eat an egg, to drink a glass of water, Hume needs belief. (Hamann) ʻTradition
is an accumulation of beliefs from the past: revelation is the manifestation of God through
nature

or the sacred scriptures. "Things are as they are: if one does not accept this given fact, there is no

knowledge because all knowledge is based on belief or faith.’ ‘Belief is the source of all our
values, of heaven and earth, of custom and the real world . . .’ ‘The connection between cause
and

effect, means and goals is not physical, but spiṅtual, ideal; it is a relatonship of blind faith.

(Hamann) ‘We do not perceive causes or necessity in nature; we believe in them, we behave as if
they existed; we think and formulate our ideas on the basis of such beliefs, which are nonetheless,
in their turn, mental habits. They are de facto forms of human behaviour.

This is the opening quarter ofa passage quoted above in TĀv ad 1/I8; see note 1,306 conceing

prasidáhi. As this deals with the nature of prasiddhi, it is convenient to see the commentary

passage from which this line is drawn:

on the

‘Traditional doctrne (āgama) is that which is commonly accepted (prasidhi) in the
world, whether it is accompanied by sound argument (yuktimat) or otherwise. As it is devoid of
contradiction, itĪs the authority (pvramāṇa) conceming knowledge and ignorance.
What is commonly accepted (prasiddhi) and free of contradictions (a
) (in this
sense) is considered to be the Lord's speech, which is the truth (itṣeīḹ). That w h is proved
(siddha) in this way should be accepted by those who are free of doubts.’
The last verse as quoted in ĪPv I p. 36, where instead of tathā yatra yathā siddhaṁ tad

grāhyam aviśaṅkitaiḥ, the last sentence reads tayā yatra yadā sidáhaṁ etad grāhyam asaṁśayam

‘Wherever and whenever (something) is proved by her, it should be accepted without a doubt.™
Bhāskara

comments:

iti avigītā

vedāviruddhā,

tathā ca prasiddham api

vedaviṟuddhaṁ cet tyājyam eva | prasiddhir iṅy anenāvīditakartr̥kaṁ paraṁparãgatam
upadeśajātaṁ gr̥hītam | aiśvarī vāk - īśvarasaṁbandhinī vāk, āgamavāg ity arthaḥ | tayā -īśvarīyavācā, yatra yasminn adhikāriṇi deśe vā, yadā ~ yasmin kāle | evaṁ ca satvam

āgamaśāstraṁ paraṁparāgatam eva |

Bhāskara comments: ““Free of contradiction’ means not contrary to the Veda, and is

commonly accepted (prasiddha) in this way. If it is contrary to the Veda, it should be discarded.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

One knows that there is a relationship between an entity, the nature
which is to be determined, and the means to determine it, by the positive and
negative concomitance (of the two). In accord with the principle that:

‘Perceiving (even) one effect of an entity that is not perceived when one

views it, and not perceiving it when that is not seen, a person acts in accord with
that, even without (the help of others) who know (what it is).”
(Once having known that,) everybody behaves variously in the course

of daily life. So why is it said that all this business of daily life (vyavahāra)
(Saying that it is) what is commonly accepted (prasiddhi) (implies that) the author (of that belief)

is unknown, that it has come down through a traditional lineage (paraṁpara) and has been
accepted as a teaching. It is ‘the Lord’s speech’, that is, it is the Speech associated with the Lord
(iśvara). The meaning is that it is the speech of the tradition (and the scriptures) (āgamavāk). By
that’ (means) by the Lord’s Speech. Or ‘wherever’ (yatra), that is, within a suitable (fitting)

place. “Whenever’ (yadā) at whatever time. In this way, all scripture (āgamaśāstra) has come

down through a traditional lineage (paraṅṅpara).

tathā cātra śrīmattantrāloke prasiddhīnibandhakāriṇāṁ śrīmaṭhikāgurūṇāṁ nirṇayaḥ kṛta evety

alaṁ rahasyeṣu sīūkṣmekṣikābhiḥ | nanu kim ete upadesāḥ vede na santi yena prasiddhiḥ
Śaraṇīkrtā | satyam, na bhaviṣyanty api, na hi śrparameṣśvarasyaiśvaryam etāvanmātre samāptiṁ
gatam | ṣanto ’pi vā atirahasyatvena tatra vyākhyākṛdbhir na sphuṭīkṛtāḥ, iti karṇopakarṇikayā

mahāgurubhir mahāśiṣyeṣu sūcitāḥ, dayāvadbhiḥ maṭhikāgurubhiḥ prakaṭīkṛtāḥ | teyāṁ hy ayam
abhiprāyaḥ | yeṣām adhikāras te ‘yatnaṁ jñāsyanty eva, ye tv anyathā te śrāvyamāṇā api
jalagatanaliúīdalavan na tatsparśaṁ kartuṁ śaknuvanty eva |
And here in this way in the venerable Tantrāloka the teaching has been given

concerning the teachers of the Śrīmathikā, who wrote well known books – s0 enough of those who

with subtle vision (inquire) into secrets. Surely (one may ask), what of these teachings that are not
in the Veda and so have taken refuge in commonly accepted belief? (To this objection, we
respond that yes, that is) true, nor will they be (in the Veda). The Śupreme Lord’s sovereignty has
not come to an end for just this much. Or else if they are (in the Veda,) the commentators have not

claṅfied them because they are very secret. Thus, they have been taught to grcat disciples by great
teachers (by word of mouth, transmitted) from ear to ear. The compassionate teachers of the

mathikā have clarified them. There the intended sense is (as follows). Those who are fit will know

this effortlessly, whereas those who are otherwise, although they hear (the teachings), they will
not be able to touch it, like water on the petals of a blue lotus.

k-

“k kadḍācit

u mahāguravo ‘pi

āmānyadrśā sarvatra pravṛttā

śyanta eva, tatra

cānadhikārinãṁ
lpataiva, yathā gaṅgāṁ prāptānāṁ kuṅbhādirahitānām
| etenāgamapramāṇe pramāṇa-sāmānyalakṣaṇayojanā kṛtā | atra ca viśeṣalakṣaṇam

āntaraśabdanamūlatvam eva |

Sometime even great teachers are seen to be operating everywhere with (their) universal
vision (that views all equally) (sāmānyadṛk), and that there are disciples who are not competent

(to receive the teachings). They have very litle good fortune, as it is with those who have reached

the Ganṇges but have no jars (to draw water). Thus, the general common defining characteristic of

an authoritative means of knowledge has been applied with respect to the authority of the Āgama
(āgamapramāṇa) (both written and oral). Here the particular defining characteriṣtic is that it is
rooted in the inner discourse (āntaraśabdana) (of the reflective awareness of consciousness).”

Bhāṣkarī vol 2, p. 89-90. See notes to ĪPy vol. 2 p. 83-84.

The nature of an entity one cannot perceive directly can be inferred by seeing its effects. Smoke

seen on a hill is a sign that there is a fire on the hill that causes it. This is positive logical

concomitance (anvaya). The correctness of the inference can be confirmed by negative

concomitance (vyatireka), that is, when there is no smoke on the hill, there is no fire. In both cases
the fire is not seen, but in the former its effect is, whereas in the latter, it is not.”

TANTRĀLOKA

(goes on) ‘once having ascertained commonly accepted belief (prasiddhi)

With this doubt in mind, he says:

Reason and All the Means of Knowledge
Depend on this a priori Belief

srazaafṅyaī

anvayavyatirekau hi prasiddher upajīvakau || 2 ||
svāyattatve tayor vyaktipūge kiṁ syāt tayor gatiḥ |

(The ascertainment of) both positive and negative concomitance

(anvaya – vyatireka) depends on (this) a priori belief (prasiddhi). If they
were to be self-dependent, what would become of them in the midst of a
mass of individual entities (yyakti)? (2cd-3ab)

Positive and negative concomitance would only be related to (the
process of) coming to know the relationship between an object that is to be

known (sādhya) and the means to ascertain it (sādhana) when (the existence of)
the entity (in question) (vastu) is (already) well known (intuitively) (prasiddha).

Otherwise, if those two means of ascertainment (i.e. positive and negative
concomitance) were to be independent (i.e. self-sufficient in themselves), the
consequence follows that their association would be invariable with respect to
every single object, because it is possible to apply them to every single thing.
(But) this is not so. Therefore, the root there also (of their effectiveness) is (this)

a priori belief. Again, if that were so, the particular (qualities) of smoke, which
is in positive and negative concomitance with the burning (of fire), such as its
white colour etc., (would all seem equal relevant to ascertaining the existence of
fire). But even though they are such, because there is no a priori belief
The objection here is that there is no need to accept the existence of a fundamental intuitive
sense of certainty to account for our behaviour in daily life, even if we do not perceive the true

nature of things directly. Inference accounts for it sufficiently.

The criteria to ascertaīn whether knowledge of what is morally or otherwise good or bad is not
supplied by conceptual, discursive knowledge, which cannot independenty make such

ments. Rather, it is uniquely based on the authority of revelation (cf. VP, I, 40), which not
only embraces the written word but also oral tradition; both are a valid means of knowledge, not
contradicted, that is, by the reality of the facts (cf. below, 35/19cd-20), for those who believe in
and adhere to this with all their heart (cf. ĪPVv vol. 3 p. 96). Revelation is, in this sense, that in

which one firmly believes. He who does not have this faith, says Abhinavagupta, in a tradition or
authority, whatever it may be, is like one who does not have eyes and is devoid of an essential
instument of knowledge. The identificaton of prasiddhi with the scripture is already clearly

affirmed by Utpaladeva (see ĪP 2/3/1-2 and commentary also below, 35/19cd-20 and note).
The word ‘vyakti’ literally means a manifest entityʼ, hence an ‘individual thing or

‘phenomenon’. When inferring the existence of fire, reasoning that ‘“where there is smoke there is

fire and conversely ‘where there is no fire there is no smoke’ would not be relevant or possible if
the existence of the fire were not already itself the object of a prasiddhi, that is, belief or a priori

certainty. I his were not the case, observes Abhinava, reasoning would have a its obiect only a
multiplicity of individuals insufficiently known ~ all the singular fires - from which it is not

possible to deduce anything.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

(concerning the relevance of those that are relevant, none of these particulars)

could be determined as being invariably concomitant (with fire in such a way as
to be diagnostic of its existence).

(This) a priori belief is not only necessarily associated with inference,
but even with direct perception as well. Thus he says:

1 31

pratyakṣam api netrātmadīpārthādiviśeṣajam || 3 I]
apekṣate tatra mūle prasiddhiṁ tāṁ tathātmikām |

Direct perception also is the result of (an aggregate of) specific
(factors. In the case of sight these) include the eye, the Self, light and the
object (it illumines) etc. There, at (its very) root, it also depends on that

(same) a priori belief the nature of which is such (as stated). (3cd-4ab)

‘Direct perception also’, which is a product of an aggregate (of
relevant factors) such as the senses etc., depends upon the a priori belief which
is necessarily associated with all the (dealings of the daily) business of life, and
is of such a nature, namely, that it consists of the reflective awareness which is
in that form within the (very) root (of direct perception,) that is, the senses and

the rest. Without that, there would be no impulse (to set) the senses etc. (into
operation,) and so, (in its absence,) nothing at all could be ascertained as correct.
This is the meaning.
He clarifies this (point) by (indicating the consequences) of the absence
(of this a priori belief).

Guided by this a priori Belief, Babies Experience Attraction

or Repulsion and Learn to Speak

abhitaḥsaṁvṛte jāta ekākī kṣudhitaḥ śiśuḥ || 4 |I
kiṁ karoṭu kim ādattāṁ kena paśyatu kiṁ vrajet |

A baby born alone and hungry, surrounded on all sides (by many

things), what could he do, (without this innate sense)? What would he take
up (and what would he reject)? With what would he see? Towards what
would he move? (4cd-5ab)

A newborn baby who is in a place that is surrounded on all sides with

many kinds of things that are useful, ‘hungryʼ, in need, ‘aloneʼ, and has not

received instruction from (anybody) else, ‘what could he do?” with the a priori
certainty which is its own reflective awareness? The meaning is that the baby

TANTRĀLOKA

would not engage in the business of rejecting (or) taking up (particular) fixed

objects (that suit its purpose).

He states (an opponent’s view,) that (this) a priori certainty finds no
application, as (the same result may be) accomplished in another way.

TTRTGTTT

nanu vastuśatākīrṇe sthāne ‘py asya yad eva hi ll 5 |I
paśyato jighrato vāpi spṛśataḥ saṁprasīdati |
cetas tad evādāya drāk so ʻnvayavyatirekabhāk || 6 ||

Surely, (someone may object that a baby) in a place that is strewn
with hundreds of things, immediately takes (something) that, seen, smelt, or
touched, satisfies (his) mind. (Thus, having done so, it is clear that he too

responds on the basis) of positive and negative concomitance (by taking

what is pleasing and rejecting what is not). (5cd-6)

A newborn baby, although he is ‘in a place that is strewn with

hundreds of thingsʼ, takes what which, having entered the field of (his) sense

of sight etc., gives it mental satisfaction (cetaḥprasāda). (Thus, he knows that) it

is that which should be chosen and so, by implication, what is other than that

should be discarded. Subsequently, (his) daily behaviour soon (comes to be)
rooted in positive and negative concomitance, which is brought about by the
excellence of (his) rapidly repeated practice, engaged in (that) positive and
negative concomitance. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), where does this mental satisfaction come from?
(In response to this question,) he teaches (the following,) scolding (those who

fail to understand).

-N JaJITCIST āīsgraśērīrrīr; |

IEEĀIEIEEIĪĒEEUĪĒCAṬc+-ĀĀHCI
ī JaTṬTTTTCTGEHTTTHTGSĪ; |
hanta cetaḥprasādo ‘pi yo ʻsāv arthaviśeṣagaḥ l
so ʻpi prāgvāsanārūpavimarśaparikalpitaḥ || 7 ||
na pratyakṣānumānādibāhyamānaprasādajaḥ |
Come on (hanta)! The mental satisfaction (the baby experiences)

that is linked to (some) particular object is also conceived by a reflective
awareness, the form of which is the prior latent impressions (of past

experience in a previous life). It is (certainly) not born by the grace of outer
means of knowledge, such as direct perception or inference etc. (7-8ab)

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

Surely (the opponent may object that that) mental satisfaction is just
instinct, in the form of the reflective awareness that as arisen at that moment. So
why is it said that it is conceived by a reflective awareness, the form of which is
the prior latent impressions (of past experience)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

ī TadTexzdī

prāgvāsanopajīvy etat pratibhāmātram eva na || 8 II
na mr̥dabhyavahārecchā puṁsṣo bālasya jāyate |
This (satisfaction) depends on (these) prior latent impressions; it is

not just instinct (pratibhāmātra). No desire arises in a man (or) baby to eat
earth! (8cd-9ab)

This state of mental satisfaction depends on prior latent impressions,

certainly not on just (sudden) causeless instinct. If that were so, a person who
has grown to some extent could also, like a baby (that desires) the breast etc.,

desire to eat earth, by failing to ascertain the real nature (of things). And this is
not so. Here (in this case), the root is the prior latent impression, the nature of
which is reflective awareness. That a baby, for example, (does sometimes) eat
earth is solely due to (his intense) desire to eat, (and so eats anything that

happens to be at hand). So, this (fact) does not entail any fallacy (in our
argument).

Surely (one may ask), alright, agreed that (this) mental satisfaction is
conceived (on the basis of) prior latent impressions, the nature of which is

reflective awareness, (but) as (it is accounted for) by that being so, what

occasion is there for (this) a priori belief? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ÉIEIEEIEEIEÚIIeFIHE/IEHEIEEḤ'I

prāgvāsanopajvī
ced vimarśaḥ ṣā ca vāsanā | 9 I|
prācyā ced āgatā seyaṁ praṣiddhiḥ paurvakālikī |
(Moreover,) if (this satisfaction) depends on a prior latent
impression, and this prior latent impression is (a form of) reflective
awareness, it is (in fact) this (very) a priori belief that comes from the past.

(9cd-10ab)

Surely, if the prior latent impression is necessarily associated with (this)
mental satisfaction, and if that preceding latent impression is only reflective
awareness, that amounts to the a priori belief that has come down from the past.
It is this itself which is its (essential) true nature. As is said:

TANTRĀLOKA

‘the tradition (that has come down from the past) (āgama) is the
reflective awareness which is (commonly held and) uncontradicted conviction.’

This line reads in the Sanskrit: vimarśa āgamaḥ sā sā prasiddhir avigīikā. I could not trce this
reference, but a very similar statement is quoted by Abhinava in IPy vol. I p. 39 and quoted above
in TĀv ad I/18. It says:
prasiddhir avigītā hi satyā vāgaiśvarī mat |
tayā yatra yadā sddhaṁ ¢iad grāhyam asaṁśayam |
‘What is commonly accepted (prasiddhi) and free of contradictions (avigītā) (in this

sense) is considered to be thē Goddess of Speech (Herself) Who is true. Iṝ that is proved by that

anywhere, that is free of doubt and should be accepted. (variant: tathā yatra yathā siddhaṁ tad

grāḥyam aviśaṅkitaiḥ ‘That which is proved (siddha) in this way should be accepted by those who
are free of doubts.”)

According to Uṭpaladeva in two verses inserted in his lost fikā to the ĪP (concemning
which see MVV 1/805-806, ĪPVv vol. 1, p. 36, vol. 3 p. 84 and ĪPy yol. 2 p. 83-85).
prasiddhir āgamo loke yuktimān athavetaraḥ |

vidyāyām apy avidyāyāṁ pramāṇam avigānataḥ |
prasiddhir avigīā hi ṣatyā vãgaiśvaṁĩ matã |
tathā yatra yathā siddhaṁ tad grāhyam aviśaṁkitaiḥ [r: prasiddhaṁ tadgr̥hyar
avisaṅkitair] l

‘Commonly accepted belief (prasiddhi) is the scripture (and traditional doctrine)

(āgama) in (this) the world, whether it be in accord with reason (yuktimat) or otherwise. Devoid

of contradiction (and in accord with reality), itis thus the authority (pramāṇa) concerning
knowledge as well as ignorance. Commonly accepted belief (prasiddhi) which is uncontradicted

(avigītā) is considered to be the Lord’s Word which is truth (itself). That which is proved (siddha)

in this way, wherever (it be) and in whatever way, should be accepted by those who are free of
doubts.”

These

two

verses

are

drawn

from

Utpaladeva’s

lost

tikā_

on

his

own

Īṣvarapratyabhijñākārikā. Jayaratha, who calls it Advayaṭīkā, refers to it in TĀv ad 3/8. TAA
MSs G, Ch, Ṅ, T, and D read vāgīśvaṁī– ‘the Goddess of Speech’. This may look like a better

rcading than vāgaiśva - ‘the Lord's word' - and has the support of the majority of the
manuṣcripts of the Tantrāloka and by the reading in ĪPv vol. 1 p. 39 where the first lin is quoted.
However, in ĪPv (bhāskaṁī) vol 2 ’p. 89, where the we find the whole verse, the reading is
vāgaiśvarī, which Bhāskara supports glossing aisvarī vāk as īśvarasaṁbandhinī vāk ‘the speech
that is associated with the Lord.' The first quarter of the second verse is quoted below in TĀv ad
35/1cd-2ab with no variants. In the IP (bhāskarī) vol. 2, p. 89 th reading of the last line is tayā
yatra yadā siddhaṁ etad grāhyam asaṁśayam (‘that which is proved by that (Speech) wherever
and whenever (it be) should be accepted without doubt’) instead of tathā yatra siddhaṁ tad

grāḥyam aviśaṅkitaiḥ (That which is proved (siddha) in this way wherever (it be), should be

accepted by those who are free of doubts.) However, in the ĪPv (without Bhāskara’s commentry)

it reads: tayeti yatra hi yadā yat tad grāhyam aśaṁkitaiḥ || Wherever and whenever (it is
declared) by that (speech) however it is, should be accepted by those who are free of doubts.’
Condensed into three lines, they are quoted by Abhinava in MVV 1/805cd-806, as follows:

uktaṁ satyaiva vãgaisĩ prasiddhir avigánataḥ l 805 |1
prasiddhir āgamo loke yuktimān athaveiaraḥ |
vidyāyām apy avidyāyāṁ pṛamāṇam iti tat sthitam || 806 |
‘What is commonly accepted belief (prasiddhi) and free of contradictions (avigītā) (in
this sense) is considered to be the Lord’s word which is the truth (itself). That which is proved

(siddha) in this way should be accepted by those who are free of doubts. The Lord’s word is truth

itsef. It is not inconsistent (or subject to disagreement) and so is commonly held belief

(prasiddhi). The tradition that has come down (from the past) (āgama) in the world is (commonly

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE
Surely (one may ask), what is the use of (this) a priori belief? Let the

necessary basis (nibandhana) of the business (of daily life) be just (that) mental
satisfaction alone. With this doubt in mind, he says:

Examining the Progressively Prior Factors on which Subsequent Ones
Depend, the Ultimate Root of Daily Life is this a priori Certainty

na ca cetaḥ prasattyaiva sarvo vyavahr̥tikramaḥ l| 10 ll
mūlaṁ prasiddhis tanmānaṁ sarvatraiveti grhyatām |
Moreover, it is not the case that the entire process of the business of
daily life depends on (this) mental satisfaction alone. One must accept that

everywhere (in all cases), the root (of it is just this) conviction (prasiddhi),
which is its means of knowledge. (10cd-11ab)

AII this business (of daily life), consisting of acceptance and rejection,

would not be accomplished (on the basis of) just mental satisfaction, because if

that were so, one could not successfully reject (or accept anything).' This
(view) imposes (itself) forcefully. “One must accept that everywhere’ in the

business (of daily life), which consists of rejection and acceptance etc., that the
root (of it) is just ‘“(this) conviction’, which is the means of knowledge. As they
say:
‘The entire process of the business of daily life is due to common
(universally accepted) belief, which is of the same kind (sayātīya). The
beginning of all, it is (this) conviction, and so too the latent impression (of past
experience,) that abides as prior (to every particular experience).”
Surely, the situation is that all the business (of daily life) lives on the

basis that progressively prior factors develop (into subsequent ones). Nor does
this infinite regress cut away the root (basis of this process). So what is the use
of (its having a) necessary connection with (this) a priori belief? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

ātṀr̄tazi ú| 22

held) a priori belif (ead prasiddhir for prasiddha). Whether it is accompanied by sound
argument (yuktimat) or otherwise, itis the established authority (pramāṇa) concerning knowledge
as well as ignorance.’
Ó The acceptance of something as useful for some purpose or its rejection cannot be based on a
sense of satisfaction one feels by choosing what is appropriate, because both acceptance and
rejection are only possible on the basis of the belief that what is accepted or rejected is apropriate
or otherwise.

TANTRĀLOKA

pūrvapūrvopajīvitvamārgaṇe sā kvacit svayam || 11 ||
sarvajñarūpe hy ekasmin niḥśaṅkaṁ bhāsate purā |

In the course of investigating the progressively prior factors on

which subsequent ones depend, (one comes to) that (conviction which)

shines initially (prior to all, spontaneously) by itself, free of doubt,

somewhere within the essential nature of the one who is omniscient. (11cd12ab)

Even ‘in the course of investigating the progressively prior factors

on which subsequent ones depend’, that a priori certainty manifests in a state
that, because it is subtle, has not unfolded. It ‘free of doubt’ ‘(spontaneously)
by itself’, because it does not depend on anything else ‘initially° in the first
stage, which is supreme, within a certain (undefinable) ‘one’ who is omniscient.
The meaning is that it pulses radiantly as supreme reflective awareness.
Surely, (one may object that) in this way the totality of this activity of
daily life (vyavahāra) is devoid of omniscience (i.e. is not known completely),
because (it proceeds) solely (on the basis) of dependence on a progressively
preceding a priori certainty. So, what is the use of conceiving that there is an

omniscient (being at the beginning of the chain)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

The Totality of Daily Life Can only be Possible if it is Based
on Bhairava, the One Omniscient Perceiver

sn-ī% fē īēā raā: īsfī īai 1 g3 1

ftraafa 1

vyavahāro hi naikatra samastaḥ ko ʻpi mãtari || 12 I|
tenāsarvajñapūrvatvamātreṇaiṣā na siddhyati |

The totality of the activity of daily life (vyavahāra), whatever it be,
cannot be present all together within (a single limited) perceiver. Thus, (its

existence) is not justified by just being based on (a perceiver that) does not

kmow everything. (12cd-13ab)

‘The totality of the activity of daily life (vyyavahāra) is not present all

together somewhere in a perceiver who is not omniscient, because ‘whatever it
beʼ, it is nothing at all. This is because he does not know everything. Thus, this
ā priori certainty cannot be established (as existent), because it is preceded (and
so based on a perceiver who) does not know everything. The meaning is that it

cannot sustain all the activity of daily life.'

" In other words, if the perceiver were not to be fully capable of understanding all that needs to bc
known, everything daily life would be so full of uncertainties, mistakes and gaps due to ignorance
thatit would not be possiblc.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

7 ī =aīṝx fē u 3 1

bahusarvajñapūrvatve na mānaṁ cāsti kiñcana || 13 II
(Thus,) there is no proof at all (to support the view that) it is based
(lit ‘preceded by’) many omniscient (perceivers). (13cd)
“There is no proof” (for many reasons,) including that (the existence of

many omniscient perceivers) would be redundant (as one universal omniscient
perceiver is sufficient to account for the fact of daily life).
Thus, there is just one Supreme Lord who is omniscient, and consists of
the reflective awareness of (His) full (and unconditioned) ego
(pūrṇāhaṁparāmarśa), which is necessarily associated with all a priori
certainties. He says that:

āfzrdtzāvrṁaāīsaī sza: āTN. 1| 2 1
bhogāpavargataddhetuprasiddhiśataśobhitaḥ |
tadvimarśasvabhāvo ‘sṣau bhairavaḥ parameśvaraḥ || 14 ||
He who is adorned with (countless) hundreds of a priori convictions

that are the cause of (both) worldly fruits (bhoga) and liberation, and
whose nature is that reflective awareness, is Bhairava, the Supreme Lord
(parameśvara). (14)

This (conviction) that issues from the Supreme Lord is necessarily

associated with the business of peoplesʼ daily life in two ways. Thus he says:

Associated with Countless Partial Aspects, the One Tradition
Extends Throughout Daily Life

yāf.. Ū-- |

JITēi īṬJ̄ā fāīTāī dJTPITKSTRERJT
I 2. I
tataś cāṁśāṁśikāyogāt sā prasiddhiḥ paramparām |
śāstraṁ vāśritya vitatā lokān saṁvyavahārayet || 15 ||
Thus, this conviction, by its association with (countless) partial
(aspects,) or by assuming the tradition (paramparā) and scripture as its
basis, extends (through them) and induces the people of this world to
engage in (the activities of) daily life. (15)

(This conviction is associated with) ‘(countless) partial (aspects)
because of the difference of country and family etc., or the difference between
worldly and Vedic (traditions) etc. ‘The tradition’ is a firm grounding in the

TANTRĀLOKA

oral tradition. ‘Scripture’ is (its) necessary associate. It ‘extends’ because there
is no inner inconsistency. As is said:
‘The Speech of the Supreme Goddesses is such, namely, the stability (of
the insight) of one who knows the oral tradition (vaktrāgama), and it develops
the inner reflective awareness of scripture, which is the secret of worldly (i.e.

Vedic) and other (scriptures).”

Surely (one may ask), be it so (as you say), but what reason is there to

adopt (lower) limited traditions? With this doubt in mind, he says:

This is the Śaiva Tradition, that is Complete and Perfect
and Beṣtows the Highest Fruit

TTTTĪTYTTq TTEIPTT;: |

m ū̃ RīgTT
>Tpl

]|

tayaivāśaiśavāt sarve vyavahāradharājuṣaḥ |
santaḥ samupajīvanti śaivam evādyam āgamam || 16 |
apūrṇās tu pare tena na mokṣaphalabhāginaḥ |
It due to this (certainty) alone that the wise, in the stream of the

business of (their) daily life, depend from their childhood only on the Śaiva

revelation (āgama), which is the first of all. The others (who do not do so)
are incomplete (and imperfect), and so do not partake of the fruit of
liberation. (16-17ab)

‘The wise’ are those who are discerning. By (saying) that ‘the Śaiva’
revelation is ‘the first of all’, it is revealed that it teaches the complete (nature
of) reality (artha). As they say:
‘Therefore, that which reveals all the nature of reality (sarvatattvārtha),
and which establishes (one within) the supreme nonduality of completely full,

awakened consciousness, is the supreme tradition (āgama).”

‘The others' are those who are not wise. They have reflected on
(teachings that are) incomplete, ‘and so do not partake of the fruit of

liberationʼ.

Surely (one may ask), if that is so, then away with teaching the
authoritativeness of all scriptures! With this doubt in mind, he says:

3stī
arTaīg af

ōāīīT: || g 9 ||

upajīvanti yāvat tu tāvat tatphalabhāginaḥ || 17 |

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

Indeed, (these others) partake of the fruit corresponding to the
degree (of elevation of the revelation) they take as their support. (17cd)

‘Indeed’ (here has the sense of indicating a) reason. ‘To the degree’ in

which (each tradition) is limited (so is the fruit of their practice). Thus it said
that they ‘partake of the corresponding fruit’. Thus, the fruit they attain is
limited and fixed. It is for that reason that it is said that ‘Buddhists remain in the
principle of the intellect. '
Surely, (one may object that,) agreed that a baby who does not
understand positive and negative concomitance etc. is necessarily bound to (rely
on) just a priori belief alone, however how can this be so in the case of a

discerning (adult)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Food is Known to be Nourishing only by a priori Belief

bālyāpāye ʻpi yad bhoktum annam eva pravartate |
tatprasiddhyaiva nādhyakṣān nānumānād asambhavāt |I 18 II
Even after childhood has passed, (a person) directs (himself)
towards food alone in order to eat, due to that same a priori conviction
(that it will nourish him), not because (he is guided by) direct perception or
inference, because it is logically impossible (that he can perceive or infer
that food is nourishing). (18)

The movement towards food, for example, even on the part of a
perceiver who is not a baby, is necessarily associated with (his) a prior belief,
because that much direct perception does not arise. Its object is (just) the food,
not that it is edible, because (its edibility) does not elicit a modification in the
perception (of it)." So how could that (direct perception) impel (the perceiver)
towards an entity that has not become an object (of perception)? Nor (could)
inference (do this). Its basis is positive and negative concomitance. It has

(already) been stated that they are (both) necessarily dependent on that same a

prior certainty. Once removed the a priori certainty which is their basis, how
could the condition (of either of them) be such? As is said with the same

' The full passage of which this is the beginning is quoted above in TĀv ad 6/151-152ab (150cd151).

Read annam eva for annam eṣa.
We may see two plates of rice. One is poisoned, the other is not. The perception of rice remains

the same. It does not change.

I No means of knowledge, whether direct perception or inference, could serve as such without the

fundamental a priori certainty that ‘I know that I know°. Without that fundamental epistemic
ground, to know that one knows would require an ulterior act of perception and so that too another

and so on. No ultimate certainty would be possible about anything, and so daily life would come
to an end.

TANTRĀLOKA

intention: ‘A baby and a learned man are similar to one another when it comes
to the daily business of worldly life.’
this:

And no other cause here (in this case) is reasonably (possible). He says

na ca kāpy atra doṣāśā śaṅkāyāś ca nivṛttitaḥ |

(Hungry, he directs his attention to food,) and free of doubt (that it will

nourish him,) there is no expectation of (anything being) wrong' here (in his
doing s0). (19ab)

Although (a hungry man) is afflicted in some way by hunger etc., he

does not direct himself elsewhere (other than food), because such (is his a priori

belief that it will nourish him). (This must be so,) because no ascertainment (of
any means) to remedy the defect of his hunger etc. is (logically) possible (apart

from that a priori belief).
Surely (one may ask), if that is so, how is it that one who is impelled by

that a priori belief would not in this way be in doubt (as to whether food is
nourishing)? With this doubt in mind, he says:
A priori Certainty is the Inner Language (Śabdana) of

Conviction (prañīti) Free of Contradiction

E.eēlEU IIĒṭĒHNE= |TaḶṬṬCḤI

STIṬT |

a 1| 2o .
prasiddhiś cāvigānoithā pratītiḥ śabdanātmikā || 19 ||
mātuḥ svabhāvo yat tasyāṁ śaṅkate naiṣa jātucit
svakṛtatvavaśād eva sarvavit sa hi śaṅkaraḥ || 20 ||

(This) a priori certainty is the language (of reflective awareness)
(Śśabdana). It is a conviction (pratīti) that arises without contradiction, and is

the essential nature of the knower. When it is present, he (suffers) no
uncertainty at all, and because it is of his own (spontaneous) making, he is

omniscient Śiva (Himself). (19cd-20)

(This) a priori certainty is always active, and so (its) actuation
(ullasitā), free of contradiction, is a conviction that is one’s own reflective
awareness, and is the essential nature of the perceiver. Thus, when that a priori
certainty is present as the agency of the act of reflective awareness, ‘because it

' Add prasiddhyā after tāvatā.

Ś The perceiver could not know anything if it were not a knowing subject. Its essentially noetic

nature is this conviction. The knower knows and knows that he knows.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

is of his own (spontaneous) makingʼ, that perceiver never doubts, that is,
hesitates (with uncertainty), for ‘he is omniscient Śiva (Himself)’. The

meaning is that in actual fact, he is of that nature.

Surely (one may ask), agreed that that is so when (his) state (is that) of

the Supreme Lord’s nature in this way, but if it is otherwise, how can that be
reasonably explained? With this doubt in mind, he says:

āīatṁa īt fātz aṁrṁga 1 22 1
T-aarṝrdrg} aāzaāī ā ñ--d |

yāvat tu śivatā nāsya tāvat svātmānusāriṇīm |

tāvatīm eva tām eṣa prasiddáhiṁ nābhiśaṅkate || 21 ||
anyasyām abhiśaṅkī syād bhūyas tāṁ bahu manyate |
As long as he is not identified with Śiva, he does not doubt of only
that much conviction that accords with his own (presumed) nature.
(Conversely,) he would be beset by doubt in the presence of another
(belief,) and values that (which is his own) much more (than others). (2122ab)
(His certainty is) ‘only that much’, that is, limited. ‘Another (belief)

is that of someone else. ‘Much more’ʼ means ‘extremely’. ‘That (which is his

own) is the a priori certainty ‘that accords with his own (presumed) nature’.
(t is clear that he) ‘values that (which is his own) much more (than others)’,
because he does not deviate from it.

Surely (one may ask), if that is so, why is it said that the wise depend

(upajīvanti) only on the Śaiva tradition?' With this doubt in mind, he says:

ũafz da #gḤ 1| 32 1

evaṁ bhāviśivatvo ʻmūṁ prasiddhiṁ manyate dhruvam || 22 |
It is in this way that one who (is destined) to be Śiva in the future,
values this (his own) certainty, without wavering. (22cd)

‘In this way’, that is, like his a priori certainty, (he values) ‘this’

(certainty) which is the Saiva one, that is already active (prakrāṇta).

Surely (one may ask), this a priori belief is of many kinds, according to
whether it is Śaiva or Buddhist etc. So how is it that for one who is certainly

(destined) to be Śiva in the future, only Śaiva belief is highly valued? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

Above, 35/16cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Tradition is Just One and Source of AIl Fruits

J TaTā

gT

fI fša ) 23 1

cka evāgamaś cāyaṁ vibhunā sarvadarśinā |
darśito yaḥ pravṛtte ca nivṛtte ca pathi sthitaḥ || 23 1|
This revelation (āgama), revealed by the omniscient Lord, is just

one, and it is on the path of (both) engagement (in ritual action) (pravṛtta)

and disengagement (from it) (nivṛtta). (23)

(The path of) ‘engagement’ is in (ritual) action etc., and (that
of)

‘disengagement’ is solely that of knowledge.
Surely (one may ask), if the All-pervasive Lord (vibhu) has revealed
only this one tradition, then what is the reason for the variety of
the four

categories (of aims of human life,) namely, righteousness (dharma

) and the rest,

with respect to each (corpus of) scripture, both by (their) nature and fruit? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

fahTRṜY GGTḥ STT: TJIṀATIJ 3v1A
dharmārthakāmamokṣeṣu pūrṇãpūrṇãdibhedataḥ |
vicitreṣu phaleṣv eka upāyaḥ śāmbhavāgamaḥ || 24 ||
The Śaiva revelation (Śāmbhavāgama) is the sole means to (attain
the) fruits, various according to whether they are complete or not, of
(the

four goals of human life, namely) righteousness (dharma), material

prosperity (artha), (conjugal) love (kāma), and liberation (mokṣa). (24)

Śurely (one may ask), as there is thus only one agent, it is his teaching
that is diverse, why would (its diverse components) not mutually contradict
one
another?

āñt-camāftzattṣfrcōaṟatx|

a-q 1|ē̄
2u |A

Imn a pamllel passage in the Tatrasāra (chapter 21, p. 193-194) Abhīnava adds that,
fundamentally, the śāstras were not divided according to the variety of desired
results and the
diversity of qualifications (adhikāra), but through Śiva’s power of limitation, people
became
deyoted only to parts of the Ur-Āgama: some to the Veda, where duality predomina

tes; some to
the Sāṁkhya or to the Vaisṇava scriptures in their fruitless search for liberation; some
who hold

that the nature of Śiva is separate from the world to the Śaiva Siddhānta; some who teach

the
higheṣt deity as omniform to the Mataigatatra; and vyery few to the Trika. In this way, Śiva leads
every soul gradually to the ‘one fuit’, i.e. liberation, which is that of Trika.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

tasmin viṣayavaicitryād vicitraphaladāyini |
citropāyopadeśo ‘pi na virodhāvaho bhavet || 25 ||

It is due to the variety of its objects that it bestows various fruits.

Thus, although the teaching within that is one of various means, it does not
give rise (avaha) to contradictions. (25)

‘Within that’ tradition which is instituted by Śiva, who is just one, the
teaching of the various means, such as righteousness and the rest, ‘does not give
rise (avaha) to contradictionsʼ, that is, it does not became a cause of a lack (on

its part of) authoritativeness, because ‘it bestows various fruits’, on the basis of
the difference of (its) field of operation, in (terms of) space, time and

competence etc. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), what is the authority here (to support the view)

that all this has been instituted by Śiva alone, setting aside (other) competent
authorities (āpta), such as the Buddha (who founded Buddhism), the Arhat (who

founded Jainism), Kapila (who founded Sāṁkhya), and so on? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

AII Worldly and Spiritual Traditions Come
from the Five Faces of Sadāśiva

aa srāīrē a |

ġrīrgraeg

laukikaṁ vaidikaṁ sāṅkhyaṁ yogādi pāñcarātrakam |
bauddhārhatanyāyaśāstraṁ padārthakramatantraṇam || 26 ||
siddhāntatantraśāktādi sarvaṁ brahmodbhavaṁ yataḥ |
śrīṣvacchandādiṣu proktaṁ sadyojātādibhedataḥ || 27 ||
AII (the various learned and spiritual traditions, be they) worldly

science (laukika), Vedic, the Sāṁkhya, Yoga and the like, (the Vaiṣṇava)
Pañcarātra, Buddhist, Jain, logic (nyāyaśāstra), grammar, (the dualist
Śaiva) Siddhāntatantras and Śākta (Tantras) etc., are all born from the
(five) Brahmās, distinguished from one another as Sadyojāta and the rest
(of Sadāśiva’s five faces), as is taught in the venerable Svacchandatantra

and other (scriptures). (26-27)

(This is so) ‘as it is taught in the venerable Svacchandatantra and
other (scriptures)ʼ, that all (the technical treatises,) beginning the with worldly

! Rcad vaicitryād for vaiviktyād.

Veṛses 26-27, 30-32 are quoted in the Stanzas on Vibration p. 313 and above in note to TĀv ad
118.

TANTRĀLOKA

sciences (and culminating in the Śaiva scriptures), are born from Śiva’s faces.

They are the (five) Brahmās, ‘distinguished from one another as Sadyojāta
and the rest’. This is the (overall) meaning of (this) statement. As is said there
(in the Svacchandatantra, concerning their descent into the world):
‘From Śiva, the supreme cause, (comes forth the scripture) that has

come down from the unseen body (of the Deity), in a form of a very subtle and
extremely pure sound (dhvani), possessing a beautiful light. That same

(sound) in another form, as Siva, the supreme soul, mounted on the throne of

Mantra, is the great soul (made of) five Mantras. Reflecting quickly on what
would be of benefit to man (puruṣārtha), (he taught many) separate (works),

each a means (to attainment) (sādhana), beginning with worldly (treatises) up to
(the scriptures) of Śiva. In order that those who are fit to be graced with them

may have supreme and lower treasures, each one in the field of their respective
subjects, he composed thousands of millions (of verses) set in anuṣṭubh

SVT 8/27cd-31ab. In the original Sanskrit the first of these verses reads:
adṛṣṭavigrahāyātaṁ śivāt paramakāraṇāt |

dhvanirūpaṁ suṣūkṣmaṁ tu suśuddhaṁ suprabhānvitam || ṢVT 8/27cd-28ab

‘From Śiva, the supreme cause, (comes forth the scripture,) that has come down from

the unseen body (of the Deity) in the form of a very subtle and extremely pure sound (dhvani).
possessing a beautifl light.
The following is a variant of this verse quoted by Ksemarāja in his commentary on the

Svacchandatantra (ṢTu ad 1/1-4ab):

adṛṣṭavigrahāc chāntāc chivāt paramakāraṇāt |

dhvanirāpaṁ viniṣkrāntaṁ śāstraṁ paramadurlabham |

¢. adr̥ṣṭavigrahācchāntācchivāt paramakāraṇāt | 33 (
idaṁ vãkyaṁ sśrutaṁ me kālikākramam [g: rkālikā-] | DP 1/33cd-34ab
‘From Śiva, the supreme cause, whose body is unseen and tranquil, has come forth the

scripture in the form of sound (dhvani), which is supremely hard to obtain.

It appears that Kṣemarāja believes that he is quoting from the Svacchandatantra,

because he introduces this verse stating that it is ‘as will be said’ (yad vakṣyati) further ahead in

the Svacchandatantra. He quotes the fist quarter again in SvTu ad $/45ab, similarly stating that

this is the teaching that will be imparted further ahead (iti bhāvinītyā). He also quotes it in this

form in the fragment that has survived of his commentary of the Vij~ñānabhairava on lines 1-2ab.

Abhinava quotes it in this same form, except for one minor variant (nādarūpaṁ for
dhvanirūpaṁ)in ĪPVv 3, p. 97. However, it appears that he says that it is drawn from a Siddhānta
source (siddhāntaśrutyādeḥ). To add to the confusion, Kṣemarāja quotes this form of this verse as
follows, in his commentary on S√T 8/27cd-31ab. He introducesit saying that ‘the division of the

many currents (of scripture) has been stated in the Śrīkaṇṭhīyasaṁhitā etc. There (it says)

(śrīkaṇḷhīyasaṁhitādyukta-nānāsrotobhedaḥ sūcitaḥ | tatra). The first line of the verse he goes on

to quote is identical to that of this version of the verse. The second line reads: jānarūpaṁ
viniṣkrāntam anavaccha(bda)Ī mahat |ḷ

SYT 8/27cd-31ab. Kṣemarāja comments:

śivāt paramādyayaprathātmakaśreyorūpāt, paramakāraṇāt śivāntānāṁ kāraṇānāṁ sarveṣāṁ
svabhittúāv ābhāsakāṁ, ata evādṛṣṭaḥ paradraṣṭer ekarūpo vigrahaḥ svarāpaṁ yasya tasmāt |
bhinnam etat padaṅ chāndasena pañcamyātvādeśena | atha ca tasmiṁs tadrāpam evāyātaṁ
prasaraṇasphuraṇaṁ .yasya tad dhvanirūpaṁ nādāmarśāṁmakaṁ susūkṣmamaprameyaṁ

viśvavyāpakaṁ ca, akārādikalākalitatvābhāvāt suśuddham, suprabhānvitaṁ

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

‘From Śiva’ who is the most excellent revelation (prathā) of the supreme nondual

(realty) andis 'th supreme cause’ hat manifests all the causes ṅight up t© Śiva on the screen of

his own (nature) and so is his ‘body°, thatis, (his) own nature whichis ‘unseen’ (as it is) with the

supreme perceiver. . . . Ṅow, that (Śiva) nature has entered into that (body of scripture as the)

ftashing radiance of the flow (of consciousness.) of which that is the reflective awareness of
Sound in the form of the Resonance (of scriptures' deepest suggested sense). (This suggested
meaning) is an extremely subtle object of perception, and it pervades all things. It is ‘extremely

pure’, because it is undifferentiated into the energies of the phonemes beginning with A, and
‘possesses a beautiful ligh'.

yat

tad

evāpararūpeṉety

anāśriṭabhaṭṭārakākhyena

daṇḍavaktrabhaṁgyavasthita-sadyojātapañcamahāmantraśarīre

śivena

prthak

prthag

anantagranthasaṁdarbhãātmakaṁ
.nibaddham
. mantrasiṁhãsanasthena
mantrādhipatinety anenaiva śāstrānantyasyāvakāśo dattaḥ |

’sãrdhatrikoṭi-

anugrāhyānusāraṁ sādhanāny anuṣṭhānāni laukikādi-śivāntāni vicārya tattatsādhanārtham
apararūpeṇaiva
sthūlena
vedādirahasyāntatattatsroto-bhedodbhūta-nānāśāstrarūpam

He is the Great Knowledge who is in another form as Śiva called the Lord Anāśrita.
Having reflected on the form of the observances (anuṣṭhāna) that are means (to attain the goal)

(sādhana), in accord with (the nature of) those who are the objects of grace, each individually in
the body of the five Great Mantras of Sadyojāta, arranged in accord with the modality of their
faces, fierce (and otherwise) (read caṇḍavaktra- for daṇḍavaktra-), (te same knowledge) is
bound together as a collection of countless books in the form of many scriptures that have come
forth from each of the various currents (of the teachings) beginning with the Veda up to the secret
(scriptures). Seated on the throne, this same Lord of three and half billion Mantras affords an

opportunity (for the formation) of endless (numbers of) scriptures.

pañcamantramahātmanety anena śrīkaṇṭhīyasaṁhitādyuktanānā-srotobhedaḥ sūcitaḥ | tatra --adr̥ṣṭavigrahāc chāntāc chivāt paramakāraṇāt |

dhvanirūpaṁ viniṣkrāntaṁ śāstraṁ paramadurlabham |
iīyādinā nādasvarāpaṁ nirūpya ----

tato jātam idaṁ sarvaṁ caturyargaphalapradam ||
ity uktvā srotobhedena nānāśāstraprapañcodayaḥ pradarśitaḥ | tad evetyādinā ābaddham ity

antena

.tattadanugrāhyāśayānusāreṇa

bhinnabhinnaphalāny

api

vastuto

vākyaikavākyatayā paripārṇā-bhinnavimarśasphārāṇy āṣūtritasamastabhedābheda-prapañcāṇīti

| tathāvidhavyāptijñaṁ tattvajñaṁ praty abhinnacidānandaghanatattvaviśrāntiparamārthāny
eveti dhvanati | tad uktam

yataḥ śivodbhavaṁ sarvaṁ śivadhāmaphalapradam | iĩi |

He who is great with the Five Mantras has indicated the variety of many currents (of

scripture) taught in the Śrīkaṇṭhīyasaṁhitā etc. There (we read):

‘From Śiva, the supreme cause, whose body is unseen and tranquil, has come forth the

scripture in the form of sound (dhvani), which is supremely hard to obtain.

Having described the nature of Sound (nāda) by means (of such statements,) and having

said that ‘that from which all this has arisen bestows the fruit of the four categories (of scripture)?,

he has shown the emergence of the series of the many scriptures according to the various currents

. the scriptures (bestow) diverse fruits in accord with the intentions of those who are the objects

of grace. (However), in actual fact, because the statements (of the scriptures) are coherent, they

are the expansions of the reflective awareness that is completely full and undivided, and all the

ongoing developments (of their teachings both) dual and nondual are threaded through (with that
coherence). Thus, (this statement) suggests that the knowledge of that kind of attainment is, with
respect to one who knows reality, (such that he knows that every one of the scriptures) in actual

fact repose in the reality that is dense (uninterrupted) and undivided consciousness and blis .

This

TANTRĀLOKA

Again:

‘O goddess, worldly science has emerged from Sadyojāta, Vedic

(knowledge) from Vāmadeva, the spiritual (knowledge of Yoga) (adhyātmika)
from Aghora, (the Paśupata) that is called Atimārga, O fair faced lady, has come
forth from Puruṣa, and the great knowledge (of the scriptures) called Mantra has

come forth from Īśāna.’

is what is suggested (in this verse). That is said (in the following line): “As all (the Śaivāgama)
arises from Śiva, it bestows the fruit of Śiva's abode.’
evarṁ parasambandhamūlatãṁ śãstraprasarasya pradarśya, sambandhāntaragocaratām api pradarśayiṣyāmītyāśayena paramaśivenāpīttham idam utthāpyata ity āha ----

guruśiṣyapade sthitvā svayaṁ devaḥ sadāśivaḥ l
pārvottarapadair vākyais tantram ādhārabhedataḥ |

Having explained in this way that the unfolding flow of the scriptures is rooted in the

supreme relationship (between the teacher and the taught), with the intention that I will also

explain the extent of the domain of the other relatonships (between them), Supreme Śiva also
generates this (mass of scriptures) in this way. He says that:

‘Having established himself on the plane of teacher and disciple, the god Sadāśiva
(crcated) the Tantra by means of statements made of questions and answers, based on the
distinction between (their) ground (as the Lord and recipient of the teaching).’ SvT 8/31cd-32ab

quoted
in notes in Chapter One.

SYT

11/43cd-45ab.

Kṣemarāja

comments:

laukīka

vaidikaṁ
nityanaimittikakāmyayajñādisvarāpam

sāṁkhyogādipratipāditaprakr̥tipuruṣavivekajñānasarvavr̥tinirodhajñānādikam

ādhyātmikaṁ
| ātimārgikaṁ

vārtādaṇḍanītyāyurvedadhanurvedanātṭyavedādiprati-pādyakṛṣinayānayacikitsādivijñānam

t

vedasāṁkhyayogādyuktopāsātmakaprasiddhamārgātikrāntaṁ

pārameśaśāstrapratipāditavividha-mudrāmaṇḍalakriyādy upāyarūpaṁ vijñānam ihābhipretam,

.catuṣṭayāt

.mantrākhyam
.iti
tatraiva
pañcapraṇavādhikārapratipāditanītyā mantreṣu ā samantāt khyānaṁ

mantravīryadaṁ

pārameśeṣu

a tathābhūtaṁ yan

jñānapādaproktakriyāditantrātma-vijñānād

nubhavasāratāṁ mantrāṇāṁ prathayati ||

vailakṣanyenā-

‘Worldly (laukika) (knowledge) is (daily) news, the law, Ayurveda, archery,
dramaturgy, Vedic agriculture, management and polity, medicine etc. Vaidika (knowledge
consists of Vedic) regular, occasional and optional sacrificial rites etc. Spiritual science

(ādhyātmika) is the discrimination between Nature and the individual soul, and the knowledge of
how to block all the fluctuations (of the mind,) as established by the Sāṁkhya and Yoga etc.

Ātúimārgika: (Atimārga) is beyond the well-known path consisting of the observances (upāsā)

taught in the Veda, Sāṁkhya and Yoga etc. What is meant here is the knowledge in a general
sense, consisting of many kinds of means such as maudrā, maṇḍala, ṅituals taught in the Supreme
Lord's scriptures. Itis not specifically out of the four (classes of scrpture). The one called Mantra
is the complete knowledge within the mantras there in the scriptures of the Supreme Lord,
according to the teaching expounded on the basis of the authority of the five praṇavas (embodied
in the five faces of Sadāśiva that utter them). He who possesses the great knowledge, which is

such that bestows the vitality of Mantras, makes known the essential experience of Mantras

according to their specific differences (vailakṣanyena) by virtue of the knowledge of the essential

nature of the Tantras, in the sections (pāda) concerning knowledge and (those that) teach ritual
etc.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

Again:

O governess of the gods, worldly knowledge is fashioned (baddha)

just with Dharma (righteous conduct), that of the (Vaiṣṇava) Pāñcarātra and the

Vaidika with Dharma and knowledge.” O lady of good vows, that of the
Buddhists and Jains (is fashioned) with dispassion (for the world). O Pārvatī, the

wisdom of the Sāṁkhya is fashioned with knowledge and dispassion.

Knowledge, dispassion and mastery (of yogic powers) is well established in the
knowledge of Yoga. Atimārga is said to be beyond (atīta) the states of the
intellect (represented by these systems). The knowledge that is beyond the

world is said to be Atimārga.’

Surely (one may ask), if in this way the Buddhist and the rest is also,

like the Śaiva, (authoritative) tradition (āgama), then how is it that it is said
that the votaries of the Buddhist and other such scriptures, being as they are

propense to the Śaiva scripture, also (require) another (additional) purification

(saṁskāra), such as the extraction of sectarian signs and the like (to convert

them)? He quells this doubt by presenting a (relevant) example:
Gradations in the One Tradition

TTBI-TTĪTG
Teī fōērgaāaē- u. 2.¢ 1
yathaikatrāpi vedādau tattadāśramagāminaḥ |
Sadāśiva’s Five Faces

Direction [_ _Face__]_Causal Lords
West
Sadyojāta
Brahmā
North

South
East
Upper

Vāmadeva

Aghora
Tatpuruṣa

Rudra

Sadāśiva

Laukka
Vaidika

ndhyāatmika
Atimārga (Pāśupata)
Mantratantra

See Dyczkowski 1988: 31 ff.
’ SVṬ II/IT9cd-182.
” Éṣemaṁja comments SvTu ad 11/179cd-18ab: pāñcarātrair abhigamanopādānejyādidharmavat bhāta eva ṣa svayaṁ bhavai’ iṅyādi jñānam apy upadiśyate | vaidikair
api kammānuṣṭhānavat puruṣa evedaṁ saryam’ iũi jñānakāṇḍādau jāānam apy ucyate |
‘The followers of the Pāñcarātra, along with the duties (dharma) of cleaning the deity

(abhigamana), mking offerings (upādāna), sacṅfice (ijya) and the like, tcach the knowledge that
‘a gross element (bhūta) is what exists (spontaneously) by itselṝ’. Vaidikas also, along with the
observance of ritual, teach knowledge in the parts (of the Veda) dealing with knowledge
(jñānakāṇḍa), such as ‘Puruṣa himselfis all this’ (rgveda 10/90/2).
Kṣemarāja comments SvTu ad 11/I8Iab: jāānaṁ puṅṣprakṛtivivekopalabdhiḥ | Knowledge is
the perception of the discriminating discernment between the individual soul and Nature.’
Read śaivavad for śaiva-.

Read tadā for tat.
See above, Chapter Twenty-two.

TANTRĀLOKA

saṁskārāntaramatrāpi tathā liṅgoddhṛtādikam || 28 ||
Just as also happens in one place (that is, in a single tradition) like
the Vedic, one who enters each (successive) stage (asśrama) (within it), (must

undergo at each stage) another (additional) purification (saṅskāra), such is

the case with (the purifying initiatory rites that mark the transition from
lower to higher traditions,) such as the extraction of sectarian signs and
the like. (28)
(A rite of conversion) is said to be ‘another (additional) purification

(saṁskāra), in terms of what it essentially is (arthāt).

Surely (one may ask), even if it is in this way, that all this (multitude of
scripture) has arisen from Śiva, then how is it that (the realisation of one’s

own) Śiva nature does not arise from (the practice of the teachings of) the

Vaiṣṇava Pāñcarātra etc. also? Taking this doubt as an example (of a general
principle), he says, by presenting the example first of all (as the basis of his

response):

īḹ ̄T TATTIJĪ TTIJHTT |

yathā ca tatra pũryasminn āśrame nottarāśramāt |

phalam eti tathā pāñcarātrādau na śivātmatām || 29 ||
Moreover, just as there (in that case, one who is) in a prior
(inferior) stage (āśrama) does not attain the fruit (that comes) from the
following (superior) stage, in the same way, one who belongs to the
(Vaiṣṇava) Pāñcarātra etc. does not (attain) the state of Śiva’s nature. (29)
‘There (in that case)’ means in one place (that is, in a single tradition)

like the Vedic. ‘In a prior (inferior) stage’ʼ, that is to say, one who is located
(in that lower stage).

That is the sole tradition, namely, this one that has been instituted by the
Lord, where all this, starting from the textual (corpus) of the worldly sciences
(laukikaśāstra), rests. Thus he says:

Only One Tradition (āgama) in which Every (Tradition) is
Grounded from Vedic to Saiva, Culminating in Trika

U UATTTGTTHĪTT JĪ’RĒTTAT; |

Concerning conversion i.e. ‘the extraction of sectarian signs’ see above, Chapter Twenty-two.

Read tadā for tat.
Read vaiṣṇava- for śaivā-.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

eka evāgamas tasmāt tatra laukikaśāstrataḥ |
prabhr̥tyā vaiṣṇavād bauddhāc chaivāt sarvaṁ hi niṣṭhitam || 30 ||
Therefore, there is only one tradition (āgama) in which every
(tradition) is grounded, starting from the mundane (Vedic) scriptures to
that of the Vaiṣṇavas and the Buddhists, (up to) that of the Śaivas. (30)
Surely (one may ask), what is the goal of a tradition that is like this?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

tasya yat tat paraṁ prāpyaṁ dhāma tat trikaśabditam |

The ultimate goal and abode of that (Śaiva tradition) is called

Trika. (31ab)

Surely (one may ask), according to the following view, it is said that

Kula alone is the (ultimate) abode of rest of all (traditions):

‘Where this varied universe has dawned and where it sets — know, O
omniscient one! That to be Kula whichis devoid (of all polarities, including
that) of Śiva and Śakti.’

says:

Then what is this that is being taught? With this doubt in mind, he
Trika is Kula, that is Present in AII Traditions

āaa avŪ=T I
I

āTTRṬGYTHGT ūHĪTTGĀĪÑTTḤ I| 33 1

sarvāvibhedānucchedāt tad eva kulam ucyate || 31 ||
yathorãhvādharatābhākṣu dehāṅgeṣu vibhediṣu |
ekaṁ prāṇitam evaṁ syāt trikaṁ sarveṣu śāstrataḥ l| 32 ||
śrīmatkālīkule coktaṁ pañcasrotovivarjitam |
Cf. SVT 8.
One could also understand Abhinava here to be saying that it is ‘proclaimed to be Trika (in the

scriptures). I prefer t0 think that Abhinavais also thinking of Trīka as a reality, not just a school.
` Read tadā for tat.

TANTRĀLOKA

daśāṣṭādaśabhedasya sāram etat prakīrtitam || 33 ||
puṣpe gandhas tile tailaṁ dehe jīvo jale ‘mṛtam |
yathā tathaiva śāstrāṇāṁ kulam antaḥ pratiṣṭhitam || 34 |

That same (Trika tradition) is said to be Kula, because it is not
divided by anything and (never) ceases (to exist, and so cannot be sublated

by a higher teaching). Just as in all the limbs of the body, whether superior

or inferior, each distinct from one another, there is (only) one to which life
is imparted, just so, as scripture (declares), (the Kaula) Trika is present in
all (the scriptures and all things). (31cd-32)
And (this is) declared in the venerable Kālīkula, that, ‘devoid of the
five currents (of scriptures), it is said to be the essence of the (two) groups
(bheda) of ten and eighteen (Siddhāntāgamas). Just as is the scent in a
flower, oil in sesame seed, the soul (jīva) in the body, and nectar in water, in
the same way Kula is inwardly established in (all) the (Śaiva) scriptures

(śāstra). (33-34)

See above 1/I8 and, conceming the five currents, below, 37/1617.
The analogy can have other referents. For example, we rcad in the Sārdhatriśaiikāloitara 33/4
with reference to the presence of sakala ( diferentiated') Śiva (= haṁsa = Sadāśiva) in the body
which is paśudharṇa in coṅtraṣt to niṣkala which is devoid ofa body and is ;
tileṣu ca yathā tailaṁ puṣpe gandha iva sthitaḥ l
puruṣas tu šarīre ‘'smin sabāhyābhyantare ṣthitaḥ l 334

‘As oilis present in oil sceds and scent in a flower so is the individual soul in this body
present internally and outside.
35/34 is quoted above in TĀ ad 1/18, see note there. Ṅote that although Abhinava is clearly
identifyng Trika with the entir Kaula tradition in all its forms and ramifications, and as its
supreme eṣsence, he is draving from a Krama text as an authority for this view replacing Krama
with Trika. 35/34 is quoted above in TĀ ad 1/18, sce note there. It is also found in the
Mahārthamañjari p. 170, where Maheśvarānanda says that it is ‘the view of the Tantrāloka’,
without identifying its source. According to Sanderson (2007: 375), the Kālīkula is very probably
the Kālikulapañcaśataka (which Jayaratha calls the Devīpañcaśataka), of which the following
passage appears t0 be paraphrased here by Abhinavagupta. The passage, in chapter two of the DP
reads according t© my edition:
etad rahasyaṁ paramaṁ kulaṁ jñātaṁ na kenacit |
Śśaivād bāhyam idaṁ deva pañcasrotovivarjitam [k, kh, g: -śrotra-] I1 35 ||

daśāṣṭādaśabhedasya śaivasya parameśvara |
antarlīnam idaṁ [k, kh, g: antalī-] jāānaṁ na jñātaṁ tridaśeśvaraiḥ 1 36 1
sarvatra saṁsthitaṁ deva sugūḍhanṁ [k, kh: sugūḍhe, g: sugāḍhai] kulam uttamam |
puṣpe [g: puṣpai] gandha ivāsaktas [kh g: -śaktaṣ] tailaṁ [k: melaṁ; g: tairaṁ] yadvat tilādiṣu l

10kh-a, 9g-a) tathaiva sarvaśāstrāṇāṁ [k, kh: -ṇaṁ; g: -sāstrānāṁ] kuḷam ante pratiṣṭhitam |

‘This secret is the supreme Kula that not known to anybody. Ó god, devoid of the five

currents (of Śaiva scripture), this is outside the Śaiva (canon). Ó Supreme Lord, ths knowledge,

which is unknown (even to) the gods, of the Śaiva (scriptures, consisting of) ten and eighteen
diyisions, is merged inwardly. 0 god, the most excellent and well-hidden Kula (teaching), it is
present everywhere like scent present in a flower or oil in sesame seeds and the like, in the saṃe
way, Kula is well-established within al the (Śaiva) scriptures (śāstra).
Note that although Abhinava is clearly identifying Trika with the entire Kaula tradition
in all its forms and ramifications, and so is its supreme essence. It is important to note that he is

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE
‘That’ Trika alone manifests everywhere as the nondual (reality of)

consciousness, because that which is undivided by location and time etc.

‘(never) ceases (to exist).” (The root) ‘kul’ has the sense of ‘condensation’ (that
is ‘accumulation’ or ‘gathering together”). Thus, in accord with the meaning (of
its) root, (that supreme reality) ‘is said to be Kula’ and is commonly referred
(vyavahriyate) to in that way. This is the meaning. He justifies this (view) by
way of examples, saying ‘just as is the scent in a flower’ʼ etc. That is not only
proved to be so by reasoned argument (yukti), but also by (the testimony of)
scripture. Thus he says ‘it is said in the venerable Kālḹīkula’ etc.
He (now) concludes the main point.

This is the One Tradition that Embodies a priori Certainty

tad eka evāgamo ‘yaṁ citraś citre ‘dhikāriṇi |
That is this one tradition (āgama) that, wonderfully varied, is
present (within its own) varied (domain of) authority. (35ab)
(This one tradition is) ‘varied’. He states the reason for that (saying that

it) ‘is present (within its own) varied (domain of) authorityʼ.

Surely (one may ask), how can that (tradition) be both one and varied,

because of the variety (of its votaries’) competence? Explain how that is

reasonably possible. With this doubt in mind, he says

tõī rī ṀẼ̄tũzś aageaqaa 1 3u 1
tathaiva sā prasiddhir hi svayūthyaparayūthyagā |l| 35 ||
That a priori certainty is present in that very same way (in the
traditions that belong) to our own group and those of others. (35cd)
It is that very same ‘a priori certainty° which is common belief
(pravāda) and varied by nature ‘that is present’ in that same way as one (and
the same) ‘(in the traditions that belong) to our own group and those of
others.” In this way there is no tradition (āgama) at all, be it that of the

Buddhists or others, that even though it is one, is not varied, because of the
diversity (of its votaries’) competence.

drawing from a Krama source as an authority here for this view. The text he draws from implies
the same identification of all of Kaulism or its most essential highest form with its own Krama

teachings. Accordingly, Maheśvarānanda expounds at length (in MM p. 170) that the four streams
of the Kaula empowering transmissions (ājāā) that pour forth from the Supreme Lord’s mouth are

all excelled by Mahārtha which is venerated by all of them. This makes sense from Abhinava’s

understanding of Anuttara Trika as being such, because it agrees with the Trika traditions that

consider the highest principle to be

Kālasaṁkarṣinī Kālī who, as the Goddess of Consciousness, is

the encompassing Inexplicable (Anākhya) Fourth State that encompasses and so rises above the

Trika triad.

TANTRĀLOKA

The oneness here (of the tradition) is not only proved by reasoned
argument, but also by (the authoritative statement of) scripture. Thus he says:

AIl Traditions Come from Śiva and are Just
Fragments of the One Tradition

zã: flrad

sfṁ a-as-ā

Ṁ .3 1
sāṁkhyaṁ yogaṁ pāñcarātraṁ vedāṁś caiva na nindayet |
yataḥ śivodbhavāḥ sarva iti ṣvacchandaśāsane || 36 ||

It is said in the teachings of the Svacchandatantra that the

Sāṁkhya, Yoga, (the Vaiṣṇava) Pāñcarātra, and Veda should not be
criticized, as they all originate from Śiva. (36)
Surely (one may ask), if Sāṁkhya and the rest all originate from Śiva,

how is it that their (common basic) belief (prasiddhi) is not Saiva? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

TGāHTTTITT GTGATS] ATĪGT; |

ekasmād āgamāc caite khaṇḍakhaṇḍā vyapoddhṛtāḥ 1
loke syur āgamās taiś ca jano bhramyati mohitaḥ || 37 ||

These (various) traditions current in the world are fragments
extracted from (this) one tradition (āgama). Deluded by them, they lead

people astray. (37)

(Theṣe traditions are fragments) ‘extracted’ (from this one tradition) by
Kapila (who founded Sāṁkhya) and Sugata (the Buddha, who founded
Buddhism) etc. ‘Deluded (by them), they lead people astray°. The meaning is
that because each one is instituted by a different (person), they teach doctrines
(artha) that are mutually contradictory, and (so) the man (that believes in them)
does not see (the nature of reality) as it truly is. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), if there is only one tradition, then, according to
the view that it is the notion (vikalpa) of the learned, who are (all) equally
SVṬ 5/44cd-45ab:

sāṁkhyaṁ yogaṁ pāñcarātraṁ vedāṁś caiva na nindayet |ḷ
yataḥ Śivadbhavāḥ sarve hy apavargaphalapradāḥ |

Abhīnava has quoted the first three quarters of this verse quite literally. He has omitted the last

quarter. which says that they all ‘bestow the fruit of liberaton’. Kṣemarāja glosses:

tattatṣvocitamuktikārṇaḥ `they give rise to their own particular (form of) liberation that is
appropriate to themselves.”

Abhinava clarfies an important point from here to 42ab in his own words, in the context of the
doctrine he is propounding, namely. that ulimately there is only one scriptue.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

authoritative, what (purpose) needs be served by (formulating a) distinction
between the areas (of its application), in order to establish that (this) notion is

sound? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Even if There Are Many Traditions, They Must be Established
in a Single Hierarchy for Them to Have Authority

STYATTHTTTTRṬAT THITTTJGĀ I| 3¢ 1

anekāgamapakṣe ‘pi vācyā viṣayabheditā |
avaśyamūrdhvādharatāsthityā prāmāṇyasiddhaye || 38 II
anyathā naiva kasyāpi prāmāṇyaṁ siddhyati dhruvam |
Even according to the view that there are numerous traditions, it is
necessary to admit, in order to establish their validity (and authority)
(prāmāṇya), that (their) area (of competence) differs, because they are
arranged (in a hierarchy of levels, some) above and (others) below.
Otherwise, (if this were not so,) it would certainly not (be possible to)
establish the authority of any one of them. (38-39ab)
Even if there are numerous traditions, it is necessary to admit that (their)
area (of competence) differs, in order to establish their validity (and authority),
‘because they are arranged (in a hierarchy of levels, some) above and
(others) below. If not, as ‘any one’ tradition is in mutual conflict (with the
others), it is certain that its authority could not be established. Thus, in accord

with the view that ‘everything is applied wherever (it is appropriate)’, for
anybody with (a particular) competence, there is a scripture which is
authoritative that teaches (the corresponding) predetermined (niyata) means (for
that person to make progress). This is the overall sense (of this passage).

Surely, (one may object that) the authoritativeness of a tradition is

established by its permanence and the absence of (intrinsic) inconsistencies;
what is the use of talking about the distinction or otherwise of (its) areas (of

competence)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Only the Śaiva Tradition is Valid and Free of Contradictions

frrācarṁfā#ara
zfī īṛ TāTI 38 1
nityatvam aviṣaṁvāda iti no mānakāraṇam || 39 ||
Permanence and absence of (intrinsic) inconsistencies (and general
consensus) is not the cause (and criterion) of validity. (39cd)

Read tadā for tat.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘It is not the cause (and criterion) of (their) validity’ because, even
though direct perception and the like are not permanent, they are described as

being authoritative. (On the other hand,) although space (ākāśa) and the like are

permanent, that is not a consideration (relevant to them). (Again,) although one

does not see an absence of inconsistency in, for example, the (Vedic)
declarations concerning (the nature of) heaven and (the Vedic rite of offering)
oblations to the fire (agnihotra), (their) authoritativeness is accepted. (Finally,)

although it may be seen at any time that (the statement) ‘there is water in the

wellʼ (is correct, and so is both permanent and consistent,) it is not reasonable to

consider it to be to be authoritative (in the sense that scriptures are).
He says (the following), even if (this view) has been accepted:

srTtrtāī

sarr

tai|

asminn aṁśe ‘py amuṣyaiva prāmāṇyaṁ syāt tathoditeḥ |

Even in this aspect (arśa), validity belongs to this (Śaivite tradition)

alone, because it said to be such, (that is, permanent and free of intrinsic

contradictions). (40ab)

Even if one accepts that ‘this (aspect), which is the aspect (of the Śaiva

tradition) that is the cause of (its) authoritativeness, namely, that (the tradition)
is permanent and free of intrinsic contradictions, it is ‘this’ Śaivite (tradition)

‘alone’ that can be authoritative, because such is the sense of the teaching (in
this regard).
‘The meaning of the scripture that describes (and articulates) (varṇaka)

supreme speech (paravāṅmaya), which is one with the awakened consciousness
of (its) inner essence, purified with the purification (saṁskāra) that has as its

root the supreme and uncreated penetration (āveśa), is the (final) conclusion of

worldly (revelation) (laukikānta) within the supreme Pervasive Lord, who is the
thirty-seventh (and highest level of reality).
The Vedas etc. are (essentially) Śaiva alone. Therefore, in accord with
the principle stated (in the above verse), they are eternal, resting as they do on
the supreme and other levels. (Again,) its freedom from intrinsic contradictions
can be established on the basis of (various hermeneutical principles,) such as
(considering some) statements (in the totality of the scriptural tradition, here
understood to be fundamentally Śaiva,) as eulogies (whereas in the strict sense

of the term) ‘the Śaiva Āgama is not eulogy°

Gnoli tanslates: Ānyway, even i one wishes to accept them as sound, even so only the Śaiva

tradition would be valid, because this is what is

said of it.’

'° The same statement is quoted above in TĀv ad 4/232cd, see note there. According to the
Mīmāṁsṣa, there are two ways a passage from the Vedic scriptures can be understood — namely, as

the statement of an injunction (vidhivākya), or as the explanation of the meaning of a precept
(arthavādavākya), which is essentially eulogy of the importance of what needs to be done. From

this point of view the Mīmāṁsa maintains that the Veda is all essentially all made of injunctions.

This statement says that this is so in the case of the Śaivāgama also.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

Surely (one may ask), even if there is (any seeming) contradiction, the
situation in the case of eulogies and other such statements is different, (as they

are not statements of fact or injunctions that are liable to contradiction). So,

what does it matter (if there is some seeming inner contradiction)? With this
doubt in mind, he says:
sr̄aaāṛṝ āVcdTīdḤcāīcdā TT 1I| %o | )

T̄īṁācgç. gd-aTaITTTTTaTAG: |

anyathāvyākṛtau kḷptāv asatyatve prarocane || 40 |l
atiprasaṅgaḥ sarvasyāpy āgamasyāpabādhakaḥ |
(The various methods adopted by exegetes to explain contradictions
in the scriptures, namely,) the explanation (of passages) in a manner other

than (their immediate sense) (anyathāvyākṛti), as (an imagined) fabrication
(kḷpti), (by recourse) to untrue (asatya) (etymology,) and as praise
(prarocana), have, as their undesired consequence that must necessarily be

accepted (atiprasaṅga), that all the tradition (āgama) is (thereby) rendered
invalid (apabādhaka). (40cd-41ab)

‘The explanation (of passages) in a manner other than (their
immediate sense) (anyathāvyākṛti)’, that is, as a metaphorical interpretation
(lakṣaṇa) and the like. The (imagined) fabrication (kḷpti) is of the meaning of a
statement. An example of (recourse) to ‘untrue (asatya) (etymology) is (the
derivation of the name) ‘Rudra’ from rodana (which means ‘weeping’).

‘Praise’ may be by means of, for example, panegyric or criticism (of detractors)

etc.

Where does this rule come from, that in this way the explanation of
some statements and not others in one and the same scripture is in a manner
other than (their immediate sense) etc.? With this approach, the consequence
would be that the authoritativeness of all the scripture would be undermined. Or
else, (one may say) that then the authoritativeness of scripture should be
eliminated, or else one should accept our aforestated reasoning. (Indeed,) this

(latter alternative) is not a different position (āvasthā) (from the one we are
advancing). Thus he says:

gCTIHHHIT JĪTIH-TIHĪT I| Q I

3JdTāāTTcqHTT=@JTIHĪ-TS3ĪĪTTAŪUT] |
avaśyopetya ity asmin māna āgamanāmani || 41 ||
avaśyopetyam evaitac chāstraniṣṭhānirūpaṇam |

“ A famous Vedic etymology states that Rudra is so-called because he weeps rodit iti rudraḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

Thus, with regard to this means of knowledge called ‘tradition’
(āgama), one must necessarily accept this description of the basis of

scripture (śāstraniṣṭhā). (41cd-42ab)

‘This’ (description) stated previously.
Surely (one may ask), i all the scriptures are equally authoritative, how
is it that only the Śaiva (one) enjoys (this) most excellent respect? With this
doubtin mind, he says:
Very Few are Qualified for this Tradition

ā || `53 1|
TaāīSFTT qGTIT] ISTT VĀSGAIĀĪTRT|
pradhāne ʻṅge kṛto yatnaḥ phalavān vastuto yataḥ l| 42 ||
ato 'smin yatnavān ko ʻpi bhavec chaṁbhupracoditaḥ |

‘In actual fact, only the effort directed at the main part (whichis
most important)is fruitful’, and so itis necessary that someone, impelled

by Śiva, should exert himselfin this (system). (42cd-43ab)

And so the tradition also is such. Thus he says:

JīIJ āTT TRĪJTIT || # 1

tatra tatra ca śāstreṣu nyarūpyata maheśinā || 43 ||
etāvaty adhikārī yaḥ sa durlabha iti sphuṭam |

Maheśvara himself has clearly said in many places in the scriptures

that it is difficult to find (even) one individual who is qualified to this (high)
degree (for this tradition). (43cd-44ab)
As is said (in the Siddhayogīśvarīmata):

‘O goddess, a teacher who knows this Siddhātantra in all respects is

hard to find, and is said to bring delight to the heart of the Yoginīs.”

He concludes with half (a verse,) first acknowledging that (this is his)

teacherʼs teaching.

ṣcai sTrT¥Ḥ māīṁ JIRHGHT I # I

itthaṁ śrīśambhunāthena mamoktaṁ śāstramelanam || 44 |

“’ See Patañjali, Mahābhāṣya, Paśpaśāhnika vol. 1, p. 1, 1.20.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

The venerable Śambhunātha taught me the coming together of the
scriptures in this way. (44cd)
‘In this wayʼ, that is, in the aforestated manner, (Śambhunātha taught)

‘me the encounter of the scripturesʼ that I have brought together (to form a
coherent whole). Nor is that our own idea. So he says that ‘the venerable

Śambhunātha taught’ (it to him). This is the auspicious end (of this chapter).

The one called Jayaratha who, as a wayfarer on the road of the teaching

(artha) of all the tradition (āgama), mounts onto the spacious abode. (It is he

who) has explained this the thirty-fifth (chapter of the Tantrāloka).

Thus (ends) Chapter Thirty-five, called the Coming Together of the
Scriptures, of the (commentary called) Discernment, of the venerable

Tantrāloka.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX
An Account of the Transmission of the Scriptures
(āyātikathana)

May the Aggregate of Sound (śahdarāśi), which is the reflective
awareness of full (unconditioned) subjectivity (pārṇāhantā), from which all this
scripture has clearly descended part by part successively (into the world),

protect you.

He now begins to narrate the sequence in which the scripture that is
being discussed is transmitted from the abode in which all the scriptures rest.

āyātir atha śāstrasya kathyate ‘vasarāgatā |

Now the occasion has come (to do so), a narration of the

transmission (of the scripture follows).

He says that.

The Transmission of the Siddhayogīśvarīmata

lETAKIĒIRIH-AKAEĒĀESEGIḤ

1 21

1 21

TTR̥T T: JĪāīīq, úrē fērīarq |

S ārT-t=q:

TTRṬṬG ġ ārāī TTRTGĀṢ AĪST I I
ftjērāṁ āã: ftrarz zī vmīt frrāīqa 1

Gv=T: TāTĪGṢṬ TAHĪ || 4 I|

ferstvṛr̥aṁeṛq r̥ftrsafzfkrēarīa 1 ē 1

gRTGTTTRTTJT

śrīṣiddhādivinirdiṣṭā gurubhiś ca nirūpitā |
bhairavo bhairavī devī svacchando lākulo ‘ṇurāṭ| 1 II
gahaneśo ʻbjajaḥ śakro guruḥ koṭyapakarṣataḥ |
navabhũḥ kramaśo ‘dhītaṁ navakoṭipraviṣṭaram || 2 ||

CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX

etais tato guruḥ koṭimātrāt pādaṁ vitīrṇavān |
dakṣādibhya ubhau pādau saṁvartādibhya eva ca || 3 ||

pādaṁ ca vāmanādibhyaḥ pādārdhaṁ bhārgavāya ca |
pādapādaṁ tu balaye pādapādas tu yo ‘paraḥ || 4 Il

siṁhāyārdhaṁ tataḥ śiṣṭād dvau bhāgau vinatābhuve |
pādaṁ vāsukināgāya khaṇḍāḥ saptadaśa tv amī | 5 Il
svargād ardhaṁ rāvaṇo ‘tha jahre rāmo ‘rdham apy ataḥ |
vibhīṣaṇamukhād āpa guruśiṣyavidhikramāt || 6 |I
khaṇḍair ekānnaviṁśatyā vibhaktaṁ tad abhūt tataḥ |
(This is the transmission) taught in the venerable Siddhā and other
(Tantras) (my) teacher has described. (The first to transmit it was)

Bhairava, (then the following received and transmitted it successively:) 2)
the goddess Bhairavī, 3) Svacchanda, 4) Lākula, 5) Aṇurāṭ (the Lord of the

Souls), 6) Gahaneśa, 7) Abjaja (Brahmā, the Lotus Born One), 8) Śakra

and 9) Bṛhaspati. (The scripture originally) extended to 1) 90,000,000
(verses). 2-9) 10,000,000 (verses) less (of it) was studied successively by
(each of one of) these nine. Then Bṛhaspati out of the mere 10,000,000
(verses he had received) transmitted 10) a quarter (2,500,000) to Dakṣa and

the rest, 11) both quarters to Saṁvarta and the rest, 12) a quarter to
Vāmana etc (2,500,000), 13) half a quarter (1,250,000) to Bhārgava, 14) a
quarter of a quarter to Bali (625,000), 15) a half of the other quarter of a
quarter to Siṁha (312,500), 16) then two parts (bhāga) of what remained to

Garuḍa (104,167), 17) one part to the snake Vāsuki (52,083). (Up to this
point,) these sections (khaṇḍa) number seventeen. Now 18) Rāvaṇa stole

half from heaven (78,125). (Then) from that 19) Rāma also (obtained) half

from Vibhīṣana’s mouth (78,125). Thus, that (scripture which was
transmitted) successively from teacher to disciple in the prescribed manner
was divided into nineteen parts (khaṇḍa). (1-7ab)

‘Aṇurāṭ (the Lord of the Souls)” is Ananta. ‘Abjaja (The Lotus Born

One)ʼ is Brahmā. (Then each of the following studied) ‘10,000,000 (verses) less

Aīthough no direct citatons can be identified the edited tex of the short rccension of the SYM
has a short version of the trasmissionin chapter 32. The list of names Daksa etc. rferred to in
verse 3 and cited by Jayaratha are foundin chapter 28 of tha recension of h SYM.
I take the plural of gurubhiṣ to be an honorific rferring to Śambhunātha. This is quite possible,
as there are several other places where Abhinava implies he has reccived teachings from him
conceming the SYM. However, it scems that Jayaratha does not agree. Thus, after quoting (above
in TĀv ad 1/84-86ab) the first half of the first line of his citaton from the SYM here, the
commentary, apparently miroring Abhinava’s words, declares that, ‘this and the remaining
statement has also been made by our teachers (asmadgurubhi. He then goes on to say, 'this is
said by Śrīkaṇṭha’, who is a form of Śiva (iyādyukter asmadgurubhiṛ apy ukta iti
śrtkaṇhasyeyam ukiḥ). We may take this to be an ambiguous, indirect way of referring to
Śambhunātha, whom Abhinava identifis with Śrīkaṇṭha (above, 1/9, where he is called
Mahcśvara).
312,500 divided by 3 = 104,167.
“104,167 divided by 2 = 52,083.
This is halfof 156,250 which is half
of 312,500.
2,500,000 + 2,500.000 + 2.500,000 + 1,250.000 + 625,000 + 312,500 + 104,167 + 52,083 +
78,125 +78125 = 10,000.00.

TANTRĀLOKA

(of it)’. Bhairava studied (all the) ninety million (verses), Bhairavī, eighty, (and
S0 0n) up to Śukra, (who studied) ten. (They did so) ‘successivelyʼ, (that is)
Bhairavī (studied it) from Bhairava, then Svacchanda (from the goddess, and so
on) up to Bṛhaspati (who studied it) from Śukra. ‘These’ (nine, that is) Bhairava
and the rest. As scripture (i.e. the Siddhayogīśvarīmata declares):

‘Bhairavī’ obtained the Siddhayogīśvarīmata from Bhairava. It was then
(obtained from Bhairavī) by the god Svacchanda, and from Svacchanda by
Lākuḷa, by Ananta from Lākuḹīśa, and Gahanādhipa from Ananta. 0 goddess,

(Brahmā)

the

Grandfather

and

Lord

of

the

gods

(received

it)

from

Gahanādhipati. (It was transmitted by) the Grandfather to Indra and by Indra to
Brṛhaspati, diminishing by ten million (at each stage), it was heard by all the
greatly powerful ones, Svacchanda and the rest.”
‘A quarter’ is a fourth part, which consists of 2,500,000 (verses). By
(saying) ‘bothī’ and ‘quarters’ʼ, the dual number indicates that it is used (with
the intention) of including the previous quarter (which was transmitted to

Dakṣa). Otherwise (if this were not to be the meaning), because of the dual
number, both would be doubled, and so (the calculation would not) bear fruit
(and be correct); moreover, the calculation (of the extent of the descending
series of parts) would not be consistent. ‘Half a quarter’ (that was given to

Bhārgava consists of) 1,250,000 (verses). ‘A quarter ofa quarter’ (was given

to Bali, that is) 625,000 (verses). ‘The other quarter of a quarterʼ is also

625,000, a half of which (was given to Siṁha, which) amounts to 312,500

(verses). ‘Then two parts of what remained’ that is the second half, which
was the same (as the first, i.e. 312,500 verses). In relation to the second half,
which measures 156,250 (verses, of which half), as will be explained, was
stolen by Rāvaṇa, (two parts) from the first half measure 104,167 (verses). This

is the meaning. ‘A part’ (here) means a third, which is 52,083. Along with the
previous nine parts, (the scripture was divided into) seventeen (parts in this
way). The conclusion is such in order to highlight that their subject is divine.
(Rāvaṇa) ‘stole half from heaven’ means that he obtained it in the
manner in which violent sexual intercourse (haṭhamelāpa) (takes place). ‘From

thatʼ, that is, from the half that was stolen by Rāvaṇa, (Rāma obtained) ‘half°,
which numbered 78,125 (verses). (The statement that the scripture that was

transmitted) ‘successively from teacher to disciple' applies to all (these

instances). (It was divided into) ‘nineteen partsʼ, including the previous
seventeen. In order to show that these two parts belong to one and the same area
(of application, namely, this) earthly world, they are indicated by being
enumerated separately from the (other) seventeen (parts). It is said with the

same intention that ‘the rest will be (revealed) in a house on the Island of the
Virgin (Goddess) (i.e. India). ‘That’ (scripture) is the Siddhayogeśvarīmata
that extends for ninety million (verses). As the scripture (i.e. the

Siddhayogeśvarīmata says,) beginning with:

Read bhairavyā for bhairavṁ. The first half
of this line is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/84-86ab.
In other words, Saṁvarta received a quarter. He says ‘both quarters' in the sense of that one and
the quarter received by Dakṣa.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX
‘There,

(scripture).”

the

illustrious

Bṛhaspati

began

an

explanation

of that

‘O goddess, once Dakṣa, Caṇḍa, Hari, Caṇḍin, Pramatha, Bhīma,

Manmatha, Śakuni, Sumati, Nanda, Gopaāla, and Pitāmaha had heard this

Tantra, the Yogīśvarīmata, out of ten million, they made one quarter clear and
firm (in their memory). Saṁvarta and the rest and the Vīreśas learnt two
quarters. O fair lady, O Bhairavī, Vāmana and the ṛest knew one quarter. Then
Śakra obtained a half (of that) and Balinanda a half of that. In the same way
Siṁha (received) half of that, and Garuḍa just 100,000 (verses of it). Mahānāga,

the Lord engaged in guarding the netherworld, (got) half of 100,000. The lord of
the Nāgas, called Vāsuki, having laid hold (of it,) worshipped (it) constantly.
Then all that remined of it was stolen by one with an evil mind. (It was) Rāvaṇa,
the thorn (in the side) of the god who went to Laṅkā.”

‘It has come in this way into the mortal world from the world of
Vāsava. Brought down by Rāvaṇa, it has come down through the sequence of
the series (of teachers). Then Vibhīṣaṇa obtained it, and from him it went to
(Rāma) the son of Daśaratha.
‘Thus the Siddhayogīśvarīmata, that is a part of (the original scripture
of) ninety million (verses), is divided into nineteen parts (khaṇḍa) in this way by
those who wished to hear it.”
Here, the word ‘just’ (in the expression) ‘just 100,000 (verses of it)’
and the word ‘half’ (in the expression) ‘half of 100,000’, which denotes an
unequal part, indicates that a slightly greater number (than a half) has been
accepted, which the author has conceived to be a ‘bhāga’ (‘part’), in order to

highlight that (discrepancy).
says:

Each of the (nineteen) sections is here made of eight sections. Thus he

The Division of the Parts of the Scripture

agūz aT= ṁīzāaTg JFTTĪGTGT: I 9 I

khaṇḍaṁ khaṇḍaṁ cāṣṭakhaṇḍaṁ proktapādādibhedataḥ | 7 ||
And each of these parts (khaṇḍa) is (subdivided into) eight parts, in

accord with the division into pādas etc. taught (in the Siddhayogeśvarīmata).
(7ed)

He indicates (the name of the types of divisions of the scriptures into)
pādas etc.

’ See above 33/8cd-9ab, where these twelve are liṣted as the members of a twelve-spoked wheel.
They govem the twelve months of the year.
Ó Jayaratha is saying that Abhinavagupta refers to portions of the scripture that were received by
Garuda as hhāgas’, which is one of a number of words that mean ‘part’, in order to stress that
these portions were mot of equal length, as indicated above.

TANTRĀLOKA

TR] ṬPĪRNṬTJaGH

āfhcāhraaa. aaīḷ rī ftkãā 1| ¢ 1

pādo mūloddhārāv

uttarabṛhaduttare tathā kalpaḥ |

sāṅṁhitakalpaskandāv
anuttaraṁ vyāpakaṁ tridhā tisraḥ || 8 II
devyo ‘tra nirūpyante
kramaśo vistāriṇaiva rūpeṇa |
nayame pade tu gaṇanā
na kācid uktā vyavacchidāhīne || 9 |
(These divisions are) 1) the pāda, 2) the miūla, 3) the uddhāra, 4) the
uttara, 5) the bṛhaduttara, 6) the kalpa, 7) the saṁhitā and 8) the

kalpaskanda. Here, the three Goddesses in a (fully) unfolded form are
described in due order in three ways. Anuttara pervades (them all). In the

ninth phase (pada) (which is that of Anuttara and so) exempt from division,

no enumeration of any sort is taught (and so is not part of this
computation). (8-9)

These, ‘pāda’ and the rest, are technical terms that have as their objects
fixed (predetermined) sizes of a book. Surely (one may ask), if the three
Goddesses are described here in their amplified (and developed) form
(prapañca) in three ways, so how is it is not said that there are nine sections?''
With this doubt in mind, he says that ‘Anuttara pervades (them all)ʼ. It is for

this reason that it is said that ‘In the ninth phase (pada) (which is that of

Anuttara and s0) exempt from division, no enumeration of any sort is
taught’. As scripture (i.e. the Siddhayogīśvarīmata says):

‘0 lady of good vows, I have told you the pāda, mūla, and uddhāra, the
uttara, the bṛhaduttara, the kalpa, and the saṁhitā. O fair lady, I will tell you
the kalpaskanda' in brief. A pāda numbers half of one hundred (syllables), the
miūla one hundred, know that the uddhāra is twice that (i.e. 200), and the uttara

is considered to be four times that (i.e. 400). O fair lady, this other one is devoid

of half a syllable. In this way, the uttaratantra within the root Bhairava (current
of scripture) has been declared. If the other one, O fair lady, is devoid of six

parts, then it is the bṛhaduttara (of 394 syllables). By omitting the syllable of
nectar, it consists of a hundred syllables and is called a paribhāṣā. The kalpa
numbers 1000 (syllables) which is that of Aparā, O renowned lady. When (the

'' I take pratyekaṁ (‘each one’) to be spurious. Each phase (pada) cannot be considered to be

ninefold. There can be a doubt as to why each one of the three Goddess is not threefold to make

nine altogether.

' Read as we find further ahead in ths passage, and as does Abhinava, kalpaskandaṁḥ for kalpaḥ

skandaṁ.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX

scripture) consists of 14,062 verses (sloka), then it should be known as a

Saṁhitā within the Siddhayogīśvarīmata. The kalpaskanda was explained
before, and is double (the length of) a kalpa (i.e. 2000). I have thus declared the
division of the Tantra in great detail.”
Surely (one may ask), Rāma obtained it from Vibhīṣaṇa, did someone
obtain it again from him or not? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ṬT=] GJPTTTHTGTTR fṬGTRTYĀĪST āṬTT: |
Taāāīa] āTTT̄aTṬ āĪTTT ṬTTGTT I| 2 1 |A

rāmāc ca lakṣmaṇas tasmāt siddhās tebhyo ‘pi dānavāḥ |
guhyakāś ca tatas tebhyo yogino nṛvarās tataḥ |l 10 |I
From Rāma (it was transmitted to) Lakṣmana, and from him the

Siddhas (obtained it), from them the Dānavas also, and then from them the
Guhyakas (received it), then from them the Yogis, and then (from them)
the most excellent of men (obtained it). (10)

As scripture (i.e. the Siddhayogīśvarīmata says):
‘Rāma (came to possess it) by way of Vibhīṣaṇa, and it was
(transmitted) by Rāma to Lakṣmaṇa. Those to who Lakṣmaṇa taught it were

devoid of accomplishment (siddhi) (but become Siddhas by receiving it). The

dwarfish Dānavas (received it) from the Siddhas, the Guhyakas from the

Dānavas, the Yogis from the Guhyakas, and the most excellent of men obtained
it from the Guhyakas by Bhairava’s command and by fierce austerity, O
Bhairavī.”
Having in this way taught the sequence of the transmission taught in the
venerable Siddhātantra, in order to also talk about the one in which the teachers

are described, he says:

The Transmission of the Śaiva Traditions (santatikrama)

TTJĪTŚĀHĪTTTGAJTTATI
TgĀ ṢJ |

g īzākīT̄ad: āaīm: gafaṁza: 1 23 1

frTrāīTRHĪTJTTĪTTĪTṬ.

teṣāṁ krameṇa yat prāptaṁ bhraṣṭaṁ kālāntarādyadā |
tadā śrīkaṇṭhanāthājñāvaśāt siddhā avātaran || 1 1 II

TANTRĀLOKA

tryambakāmardakābhikhyaśrīnāthā advaye dvaye |
dvayādvaye ca nipuṇāḥ krameṇa śivaśāsane || 12 ||
ādyasya cānvayo jajñe dvitīyo duhitṛkramāt |

sa cãrdhatryambakābhikhyaḥ saṁtānaḥ supratiṣṭhitaḥ || 13 ||
ataś cārdhacatasro ‘tra maṭhikāḥ saṁtatikramāt |

śiṣyapraśiṣyair viṣṭīrṇāḥ śataśākhaṁ vyavasthitaiḥ || 14 ||

When what they had received” through the sequence (of the

transmission) was lost with the passage of time then, at the command of the
venerable Śrīkaṇṭha, (three) Siddhas came down (to earth). (They were) the

ones called Tryambika and Amardaka, (along with) Śrinātha, who were

skilled, respectively, in the nondual, dual and dual-cum-nondual teachings
of Śiva (śivaśāsana). The first one gave rise to a second lineage that
(originated) from the school (krama) (of his) daughter which, well
established, is called the lineage of Ardhatryambaka (Half of Tryambaka).
Thus, there are three and a half orders (maṭhikā) (that have originated)
here from the lineages (of the Śaiva) tradition (santatikrama), and were
extended (far and wide) into countless (lit. ‘“a hundred’) branches by
disciples and their disciples. (11-14)
‘Nondual’ (Śaiva schools are) the Trikakula etc. (It is a) ‘half’

(lineage,) in relation (to the fact that it was established by Tryambika’s)

daughter. ‘There are three and a half’ (lineages). ‘Along with the half,

there are fourʼ (lineages,) means there are three and a half.
Surely, (one may ask that,) it would be logical to say here (in this case
that) there is only Traiyambika’s lineage (maṟhikā) through which this scripture
comes down. So, what is the use of describing another lineage? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

The Tantrāloka is Their Essence

TṬTafcīēīīā-TTaTRTT]|

aiĩ TJĪ I 2.. 1|
Read yat prāptaṁ for tanmadhye.

“ Verses 11cd to 14ab are quoted above in TĀv ad 1/7. Cf. above 4/260 and see below 37/60-61
concerning Abhinava’s teachers in these lineages. See above notes 1,139, 167 and 168, where this

passage and its parallel in ŚDr̥ 7/107-111 are discussed. The reader is reminded that in
Somānanda’s account of these lineages, which is the original one upon which this one is

modelled, there is no mention of Tryambaka’s daughter as the founder of the lineage of
Ardhatryambaka (Half of Tryambaka), that Abhinava identifies as the one that teaches the Kaula
modality of Trika, which is, essentially, Trika itself.

Itis normal practice, as in this case, that women receive a ‘hal’ initiation with respect to men.

It is not said to be ‘half’ because it is less than a man’s initiation or because a woman only has

‘half’ his authority. It simply denotes that it is brief and is the woman’s part through which she

receives immediate enlightenment. The Trika tradition transmitted in Kashmir by Tryambaka’s

daughter, that Abhinava felt he belonged to, was clearly not a lesser tradition. Indeed, quite the
contrary. See previous note.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX

adhyuṣṭasaṁtatiṣrotaḥsārabhūtarasāhṛtim |
vidhāya tantrāloko ‘yaṁ syandate sakalān rasān || 15 |
Having extracted (and absorbed) the juice (rasa) (of the aesthetic

delight) which is the essence of the current of (these) three and a half

lineages, this (our work), the Tantrāloka, oozes with all the juices (rasa) (of

aesthetic sentiments). (15)

Concluding this (topic) he introduces another one:

uktāyātirupādeyabhāvo nirṇīyate ‘dhunā |
Now we will explain why it is necessary to adopt (this tradition, of
which) the transmission has been explained. (16ab)
Here (in this book), in order to show the mutual connection between one

chapter and the next, at the end (of the prior one) and the beginning (of the
subsequent one), the separate conclusion (of the former) and introduction (of the

latter) are connected together by (being incorporated into) one verse, (of which

the first line is the former and the second line, the latter). Even though (this is so
in every case), now (we are) at the end of the book: in order to stress that

intimate connection strongly, (they are) connected together simultaneously by

(just) half (a verse).

This the auspicious end (of this chapter of the Tantrāloka).

“This, the supreme thirty-sixth chapter, has been explained by Jayaratha,

who belongs to the inner secret tradition (saṁpradāya), that has been

transmitted through the sequence of (teachers) of the three and a half lineages.”

Thus (ends) Chapter Thirty-six, called the Description of the Sequence
of the Transmission, of the (commentary called) Discernment, of the venerable
Tantrāloka.

Quoted above in TĀv ad 1/9.

In other words, the second half of the verse, which would normally be at the beginning of the

following chapter, is omitted.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN
A Description of the Ścriptures to be Adopted
(śāstropādeyatvanirūpaṇam)

The illustrious goddess Maālinī is victorious, for it is by being of Her
nature that the scripture, which is the weapon against the duality of fettered
existence, attains the supreme goal.
In order to teach that the treatise in hand is to be adopted in this way, as
that on which (daily life) depends, from the very start (prāk) (of any activity or
perception), he writes the conclusion.

The Highest Tradition is Grounded in Complete Belief
(prasiddhi) and so Bestows the Full Fruit

ēī saaēī rai |

JRGTṬṬSĪTRATTTTTTJTTR
TTH: || 2, |I
uktanītyaiva sarvatra vyavahāre pravartite |
prasiddhāv upajīvyāyām avaśyagrāhya āgamaḥ |l 1 II

As the ongoing business of daily life depends (always and)

everywhere on a priori belief (prasiddhi), in accord with the principle (nīti)
that has just been explained, it is essential to accept (this, the most elevated
and complete) tradition (āgama) (that embodies it most completely). (1)
As the business (of daily life) that is going on everywhere depends on a

priori belief (prasiddhi), in accord with the principle stated in Chapter Thirtyfive, the tradition (āgama) must be adopted, otherwise nothing can be
accomplished.
Surely, (one may object) – agreed that the establishment of (the nature

of) an entity within the ambit of the means of knowledge (that operate) in daily

life depends on (this) a priori certainty, but how can that be so in the case of
Śiva, who is not within the ambit of any of the means of knowledge, and cannot
be attained (and known,) even by yogis. With this doubt in mind, he says:

TTĪĀTKT |

TRTTTETĀĪgfrōārīīā, TāāTTa: I| 3 I
vathā laukikadr̥ṣṭyānyaphalabhāk tatprasiddhitaḥ |
samyagvyavaharaṁs tadvac chivabhāk tatprasiddhitaḥ || 2 l|
Just as from the perspective of (ordinary) worldly life one gets (this
or some) other fruit, behaving as is appropriate (for its attainment) on the
basis of a corresponding a priori belief (that by doing so it can be obtained),

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

in the same way, one attains Śiva on the basis of that certainty (of His
existence and identity with him). (2)

‘(Some) other” (fruit) is one that is not seen.

Surely (one may ask), in this way, the tradition, which is essentially
commonly accepted belief (prasiddhi), is of many kinds, so which one (these
many kinds) is it essential to accept? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TĨTJTĒĠṢTJTTGATÑ TĪTRTĪTHT I| 3 I

tadavaśyagrahītavye śāstre svāṁśopadeśini |
manākphale ‘bhyupādeyatamaṁ tadviparītakam || 3 |l
yathā khageśvarībhāvaniḥśaṅkatvādviṣaṁ vrajet |
kṣayaṁ karmasthitis tadvad aśaṅkād bhairavatvataḥ || 4 II
yadārṣe pātahetūktaṁ tad asmin vāmaśāsane |
āśusiddhyai yataḥ sarvam ārṣaṁ māyodarasṭhitam || 5 Il
(Although) the scriptures, that teach their own (partial) aspects (of
reality) and (so yield) limited fruits, must necessarily be chosen (by those
who want these fruits), (the scripture) which is much more worthy of

selection is one that (yields unlimited fruit, and so) is the opposite of this.

(3-57

‘One that is the opposite of thisʼ (yields) great fruit.

What is the one that is such? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Scripture Whose Teachings are Complete

Bestows Anuttara

IḻeE EEEEkA~ĀEEZIḺTĀETEK
tac ca yat sarvasarvajñadr̥ṣṭaṁ tac cāpi kiṁ bhavet |

' There are two types of consequences of one’s actions (karman). One is ‘seen, in the sense that it

is apparent in this life. The other type is not.

Verse 4 of the printed edition is the same as verse 12cd-13ab, and verse 5 is the same as 11cd12ab. Placed as verses 4 and 5 they make litlle sense, whereas as 12cd-13ab and 11cd-12ab, they

are in context. Accordingly, these two verses have been removed from here. The numbering
remains that of the printed edition so as not to create confusion.

TANTRĀLOKA

And that (scripture is the one) that is perceived by all who are

omniscient. (6a)

Which is the one that is perceived by all who are omniscient? Asking
this question first, he explains its nature.

TGTĪITCYT
TṬJTSṬT WGH I ē II

yad aśeṣopadeśena sūyate ‘nuttaraṁ phalam || 6 ||
(And which one is that?) (It is) the one that, because its teaching is
complete, (and by teaching it completely) (aśeṣopadeśena) gives rise to the
fruit which is Anuttara (beyond which there is nothing higher) (anuttara).

(6bcd)

Surely (one may ask), what is this complete teaching, by virtue of which
that which is such may come about? With this doubt in mind, he says:
Lower Teachings are Imparted by Those with
a Corresponding Limited Knowledge

qPṬTTITĪĪTFATTĀTTaTT;|

3m. āhīdī̄ fafcāzz āfz āa vd̄qḶ u

yathādharādharaproktavastutattvānuvādataḥ |
uttaraṁ kathitaṁ saṁvitsiddhaṁ tad dhi tathã bhavet || 7 I|

Just as a higher (reality) is explained in terms of its consonance

with the nature of the matter (vastutattva) taught at a correspondingly

lower level, so is it with (the reality) that is proved (to exist) by the

consciousness (of personal experience). (7)

Just as the reality, namely, ritual action and the like, taught by the
followers of the Veda, when asked about it (anūdya) (is said to be) the most
excellent (and so true), similarly, it is said that knowledge and Yoga etc. are
proved (to be valid) by one’s own personal experience.
It is thus determined (for sure) that the lower teachings are instituted by

those who are not omniscient. Thus he says:

vaduktādhikasaṁvittisiddhavastunirāpaṇāt |

Gnoli’ transtation is more in accord with Jayaratha’s explanation: ‘after having referred to the
main essential points that are rcepeatedly eaffimmed by progressively inferior doctines. a superior
reality is affirmed here, in the same way, this reality must be personally ascertaiṅed.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

apūrṇasarvavitproktir jñāyate ‘dharaśāsane || 8 II
One knows that the teachings of a lower school have been imparted
by those who are not fully omniscient, by examining the reality that is
proved (to exist) by the greater consciousness taught (here). (8)

Surely, (one may object,) (it is known that spiritual) knowledge etc. is

taught in lower schools also from views (we find there,) such as ‘one should

know the Self and reflect on it’. So here (in this case), how is it said that one
knows that (they are) instituted by those who are not omniscient?

3ãTIT-TaTT<=T.
gTaTTT JTfSTT |

TYIRT HTATGĪ ōeT TĪTRJTĪT I Ṝ I
ūrdhvaśāsanavastv aṁśe dṛṣṭvāpi ca samujjhite |
adhaḥśāstreṣu māyātvaṁ lakṣyate sargarakṣaṇāt |I 9 I|
Although the reality (taught by) superior systems is perceived in
(some) aspect within inferior scriptures, even so, (that aspect) is neglected.
The Māyā (they harbour) within them (to which they and their votaries are
subject) is apparent, because (of their concern) to protect (and preserve this

binding) creation. (9)

It is ‘neglected’, because it does not develop there. The reason (why
they are lower systems is) because of ‘(their concern) to protect (and

preserve this binding) creation’, that is, protect the worldly way of life
(lokarakṣaṇa). This is the meaning.

The Types and Superiority of the Śaivāgama,

Especially that of the Left

says:

What is the proof here (that this is s0)? With this doubt in mind, he

ṀTa=zraīcī
ũīēṁ d TATRTI |

r̥āTcā agrīāgaīcdha ftt | 2. |

īa yavāṝz fēṝd ũtaāam #ārq |

śrīmadānandaśāstrādau proktaṁ ca parameśinā |

ṛṣivākyaṁ bahukleśam adhruvālpaphalaṁ mitam || 10 ||
naiva pramāṇayed vidvān śaivam evāgamaṁ śrayet |

Upaniṣad

In other words, they are not opposed to transmigration, but rather assure its persistence.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Supreme Lord has said in the venerable Aanandaśāstra, for
example, that a learned man should not select as (his) authority the Veda

(ṛṣivākya), which (gives) much affliction (kleśa), yields little and unstable
results, and is limited (mita) (in its teachings and application); (rather) he
should take refuge only in Śaiva scripture (āgama). (10-11ab)
Surely (one may object) that, if one should not adopt treatises such as

Manusmṛti (that deal with Dharma), would not all this (right) conduct (ācāra)

suffer a fall? With this doubt in mind, he says:

EEEIIEEUĀŪ'EzFṭEl:túxzEṀ EXI

yadārṣe pātaheṭūktaṁ tad asmin vāmaśāsane || 11 I|
āśu siddhyai yataḥ sarvam ārṣaṁ māyodarasthitam |
That which is said in the Veda to be the cause of a fall (into sin), in
this doctrine of the left (vāmaśāsana), serves to lead rapidly to
accomplishment. This is so because all (the Vedic teaching) of the rṣis (ārṣa)
is in the very belly of Māyā. (11cd-12ab)
‘That which is said (in the Veda) to be the cause of a fall (into sin)
means the word uttered by the gods etc., who are the cause of sin. A clear (and
hence preferable) reading is ‘that which is said to bring about a fall’. (The Vedic
teaching) is ‘in the very belly of Māyā’ because its intent is to protect (and
preserve) the worldly way of life.
Surely (one may ask), would not the basic condition (sthiti) of Karma
(that ensures that our actions bear their consequences) be undermined?” He

removes this doubt, heralding (his response) by first presenting an example,

saying ‘just as’ etc.

ōṣētd I| 2< 1|

The same expression appears below in 37/28a.

'This verse is also from the Ānandatantra. About the significance and symbolic value of the word

vāma (which means ‘lef̄ or ‘opposite’), as contrary to the current of worldly existence

(saṁsāraviparīta), see above, 15/278cd-281. Cf. Kulārṇavatantra 5/48ab: yair eva patanaṁ
dravyais siddhis tair eva coditā | ‘Those sacrificial substances which cause (one) to fall (according

to other schools) are (the means to the attainment) of the accomplishment enjoined (in this one).”

According to Sanderson (1995: 86), who refers to Śrīkaṇṭhī v. 264, by vāmaśāsana here is meant

the left current of scriptures (vāmasrotas), as the Ānandatantra quoted here belongs to that part of
the canon.

The queston is very cogent. It is the Veda and its related literature – the smṛti – amongst which
are the law books (dharmaśāstra), that ascertain the nature of Karma, whether it is good or bad

and to what degree in relation to the person who creates it. Moreover, it prescribes the penances
that are applicable for the infringement of the rules of Karma and more. The concept of Karma is
universally accepted in all of Asia. For Śaivites the authority on which this acceptance is based is

the Veda. Thuṣ, its authority cannot be totally denied, nor does it need to be.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

yathā khageśvarībhāvaniḥśaṅkatvād viṣaṁ vrajet | 12 ||
kṣayaṁ karmasthitis tadvad aśaṅkād bhairavatvataḥ |
Just as (snake) venom departs (from the body) by (the firm
conviction), free of doubt, of being Garuḍa, in the same way the (fettered)
karmic state’ is destroyed (by the firm conviction), free of doubt, that one

possesses Bhairava’s nature. (12cd-13ab)

Agreed that this takes place by attaining Bhairava’s state, well then, (as
this happens) by just (doing) this, why is it necessary to adopt scripture (as a
means to liberation)? With this doubt in mind, it is said:

JTGTTTTUCTÇTTCTKSĀTJTH
I 23 I

[GĪAFEIP GEC-ĀNEÁ EĒEṢI

srāāzā q gemfraīīaṁq
ftkr u g. u

TgJaaIT 3ṜT IIT #ĪTĪPRTGNITHTḤ
II ÇF I
GTITRṬGYTI]
&ĀĪT.TAḤ TTTITAĀGÑ |
šcṣīē iaāúrēz% rāqafkzfaiz 1 2..

ajñatvānupadeṣṭrtvasaṁdasṣṭe ‘dharaśāsane || 13 ||

etadviparyayād grāhyam avaśyaṁ Śśivaśāsanam ḷ
dvāv āptau tatra ca śrīmacchrīkaṇṭhalakuleśvarau || 14 ||
dvipravāham idaṁ śāstraṁ samyaṅniḥśreyasapradam |
prācyasya tu yathābhīṣṭabhogadatvam api sthitam || 15 ||
tac ca pañcavidhaṁ proktaṁ śaktivaicitryacitritam |
pañcasrota iti proktaṁ śrīmacchrīkaṇṭhaśāsanam || 16 ||
daśāṣṭādaśadhā srotaḥpañcakaṁ yat tato ‘py alam |
utkṛṣṭaṁ bhairavābhikhyaṁ catuḥhṣaṣṭivibheditam || 17 ||
(The teachings) of inferior systems are afflicted by ignorance and
the lack of (sound) teachings. It is necessary therefore to choose the

' Correct karmasthitis to karmasthites.

_Garuḍa, the king of the birds, is the enemy of the serpents. The venom of the serpents,
according to a widespread tradition, is neutralized by the meditaton of Garuḍa, if done, that is. by

the one bitten or, the doctor who has him in his care, thinking that he is Garuḍa, identifies himself

mentally with Garuḍa. Mutatīs mutandis, the poison/venom of transmigraton is
overcome/conquered by thinking of onesel to be Bhairava. This comparison also occurs in the

writings of Śaivite masters of South India (for example Tirumālar, etc.). For an outline of this

practice as found in a passage of the Gāruḍapurāṇa, which may well have been drawn from a
Gāruḍatantra, see Dyczkowski 1988: 39-41.

TANTRĀLOKA

doctrine preached by Śiva, which is the (exact) opposite of this. (13cd14ab)
(The teachers) qualified there (to teach it) are two, the venerable
Śrīkaṇṭha and Lakulīśa. This scripture, which is the right (one) and

bestows the supreme good, is divided into two (major) currents (pravāha),
of which the first also bestows worldly benefits as desired (not just

liberation). (14cd-15)

Again, that (current), diversified by the variety of (Śiva’s five)
powers, is said to be of five kinds." The teaching (śāsana) of the venerable
SŚrīkaṇṭha is called the Five Currents (srotas) (of scriptures). These five
currents (combining variously are) ten and eighteen-fold, (as the common
scriptures of the Siddhānta) and then (above them) also is the most
excellent and complete (alam) (current) called Bhairava, which is divided

into sixty-four (scriptures). (16-17)

(Inferior teachings) are ‘afflictedʼ, that is, touched (by Impurity) due to
ignorance, and because they teach (dualist doctrines) that are the reverse (of the

nondualist truth). “‘The first’ (of the teachers qualified) ‘there’ in Śiva’s
teaching (sśivaśāsana). is Śrīkaṇṭha. The ‘five kinds’ are divided into (the power
of) consciousness and the rest.

The Four Collections of Scriptures (pītha)
and the Excellence of the Vidyāpītha

Now in order to teach the nature of the group of four seats (pīṭha) here
(in this context), he says:

ar:: ũēa fāī afr̥raṁu 2 u
EeIC it-e fErittktcḺ
E-ck
śrīmadānandaśāstrādau proktaṁ bhagavatā kila |

samūhaḥ pīṭham etac ca dvidhā dakṣiṇavāmataḥ || 18 II

'! The first part of the citation from the Ānandatantra ends here. The following lines from 14cd to
17, that outlie the major currents of scripture, were probably written by Abhinava himscf.
Cf. TĀ 37/13cd-17 with MVV 1/193-196ab.

Śrṛīkaṇṭha is a form of Śiva credited with revealing the Śaivāgama (below) and the major Śaiva
sect of the

36/11) (see above, note to TĀv 1/33). Lākulīśa was the founder of an important

Pāśupatas that belonged to the Atimārga.

' In other words, Pāśupata Śaivism, taught by Lākulīśa, which is practiced by those who observe
the ascti’s Vow of the Pāśupata, aims solely at the attāinment of liberation. Āgamic Śaivism,
taught by Śrīkaṇṭha, which can be practiced also by those living a householder’'s life, bestows both
worldly benefits and liberation. See above, note 1,423 to TĀv 1/33.
' Śiva’s five powers of consciousness, bliss, will, knowledge and action are each related to one of
his five faces. See MVV 1/169cd-171ab also S¥Tu vol. 1 (2), p. 54, 11. 2-3.
See above, 1/18 and note. The five currents of scripture come from Sadāśiva’s five faces, that
utter five categories of Tantras. These are discussed in Dyczkowski 1988: 40-41.
' See above note 37,13.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

mantro vidyeti tasmāc ca mudrāmaṇḍalagaṁ dvayam |

The Blessed One (bhagavat) has said in the venerable Ānandaśāstra
and elsewhere that (the term) ‘pītha’ (denotes) a ‘collection’ (samiūha) (of

scriptures). And that is of two kinds, that of the right and the left, (which

are, respectively, the pīthas) of Mantra and Vidyā. From that (pair) (come)
two (more) associated with Mudrā and Maṇḍala. (18-19ab)
‘The Blessed One (bhagavat) has said’ in the Āgama that ‘(the term)
‘pītha’ (denotes) a ‘collection’ (samūha) (of scriptures).” The meaning is that

it has been defined this way. ‘According to whether it is of the right or the
left’ means as being in the form of Śiva or (His) Power. The nature of Mantra is

' 1 have discussed this important way of categorizing the Tantras, including lists of the contents

of the four groups of scripture in my Canon 1988 p. 49-55 and 105-120 The reader is referred

there for a detailed discussion. Sanderson has written about the distinguishing characteristics of

the Tantras of these piīthas, focusing especially on the Vidyāpītha in his first epic article published
in 1988. Perhaps the earliest place where this classification appears is in the Brahmayāmala. The
BY consisting of twelve thousand verses refers to itself as a Bhairava Tantra containing the four pīṟhas

(mudrāmaṇḍalamantrāṇi vidyāpīhopalakṣitam | | ṣahasrāṇi daśadve ca catuhpīrhaṁ tu bhairavam

|). They are all implicitly indicated and so contained in the Vidyāpītha to which the BY assigns itself
in its colophons (bhairavasrotasi mahātantre vidyāpīṭhe brahmayāmale ). The SYM does the same.

By the time we get to the first (and probably earliest) ṣarka of the JY (which also assigns itself to
the Vidyāpītha), the classification is filled out with lists of Tantras belonging to each pīṭha. The
Vidyāpīṭha contained the Trika Tantras and developed extensively amongst the types of Tantras
Abhinava valued the most. It is mentioned in the Svacchandatantra (that belongs to the
Mantrapīṭha) and the Sarvācāra and the Ānandatantra. Sanderson has pointed out in eloquent

detail the special prestige, from Abhinava’s point of view, of the Tantras of the Vidyāpītha as
being contrary to the norms of purity advocated by the Brahminical orthodoxy and prescribing the
worship of goddesses with offerings of bodily substances.

Commenting of SvT 1/5c, where the Svacchandatantra is declared to be ‘a great Tantra

consisting of the four pīrhas’ (catuṣpīthaṁ mahātantraṁ), Kṣemarāja,
introducing a quote from
the Śarvavīra, which was a Trika Tantra, he says that: caturṇāṁ vidyāmantramaṇḍalamudrāṇām,

pītham āśrayaṁ saṁbhavamātreṇa | `A pīṭha is a category (āśraya) (of scriptures that teach)

Vidyās, Mantras, Maṇḍalas and Mudrās (respectively). (This is not an absolute rule, it is so) just
as a possibility. (In other words, Tantras of any of the four categories may teach matters found in

the others) (Indeed, they are all present in each of them) (cf. TĀ 37/19cd-22ab). The division of

Tantras into groups called ‘pīhas' is not found in the MV nor does it affiliate itself to any of
them. Mantras are the sonic bodies of male deities and Vidyās of female ones. This distinction is a

major defining feature of the Tantras of these two piṭhas. Thus, according to the Sarvavīra quoted
by Kṣemarāja in the SvTU ad 1/5c, the Mantrapīṭha Tantras are named after Bhairavas:

svacchandabhairavaścanḍaḥ krodha unmattabhairavaḥ |

granthāntarāṇi catvāri mantrapīthaṁ varānane ||

‘O fair faced lady. the Mantrapīṭha consists of four other books, namely, the
Svacchandabhairavatanra, he Caṇḍabhairava, Krodhabhairava and Unmattabhairava.’
The Svacchandatantra is the only known Tantra of this ptha. It is centred on the worship of this
Bhairava. Abhinava citṅg the AĀnandabhairava underṣṭands the worship of the numerous
goddesses of the Vidyāpīha to be its completion and fulfiment.

TANTRĀLOKA

Śiva and the nature of Vidyā is Śakti.' ‘From that’ pair of seats, that is, Mantra
and Vidyā.

He explains that in due order.

TTTTITTIĒ a] ÑJTĀ T fēraī || 28 1

3drāvrāraīa:

T-ĨJĨTGTTH=T ṬTAITTTNGT I Ṝ
qvga #rdjṁ fe nvegcaāṁī ftraāīzāī

mananatrāṇadaṁ yat tu mantrākhyaṁ tatra vidyayā || 19 I
upodbalanam āpyāyaḥ sā hi vedyārthabhāsinī |
mantrapratikr̥tir mudrā tadāpyāyanakārakam || 20 ||
maṇḍalaṁ sāram uktaṁ hi maṇḍaśrutyā śivāhvayam |
evam anyonyasaṁbhedavṛtti pīthacatuṣṭayam || 21 ||
yatas tasmād bhavet sarvaṁ pīṭhe pīthe ‘pi vastutaḥ |
The one that bestows (deep) reflection (manana) and salvation

(trāṇa) is called ‘Mantra’. The reinforcement there (in that respect) by
Vidyā is fulfilment (āpyāya) (of Mantra). It is that which illumines what

should be known. Mudrā is the counterpart (pratikṛti) of Mantra, and

Manṇḍala fulfils it. Itis said to be the essence and, in accord with (the sense

of) the word ‘maṇḍa’, it is called Śiva. The four pīthas penetrate one
anotherin this way and so, in actual fact, everything is present in each
single pītha. (19cd-22ab)
As has been stated in brief: ‘the secret of Mantra is the Being of the

Body of Knowledge (Vidyā)’. (Vidyā) ʻ‘illumines what should known’

' In other words, the Bhairava Tantras of the Mantrapīṭha focus predominantly on the worship of

Bhairava. The only surviving Tantra of this group of scriptures, the Svacchandatantra, is a fine
example. The Tantras of the Vidyāpīrha teach the worship of goddesses.

In Jayaratha’s view, it seems, the following verses (19cd-25ab) are Abhinava’s explanation of

the citation from the Ānandatantra, not a continuation ofit.

Concerning this popular etymology of the word ‘mantra’, see above, 11/5560ab and note.
The maṇḍala according to this last etymology is therefore that which gives, administers (lā
dāne) the essence, and like it, nurtures mmudrā. Concerning the system of classification of the

Tantras into four pīthas, see Dyczkowski 1988 pp. 49-55. The point Abhinava is making is that
the Tantras of a particular group – pīha - do not deal exclusively with the matter to which they
are said to be concerned.

ŚSū 2/3. Bhāskara explains: By knowledge, we mean the unfolding of one’s own inherent
light; it is the sudden expansion (unmesa) of the thrill of energy (sahasa) that takes place within
the Pure Principle by penetrating (āveśa) (and becoming one with) pure consciousness (cinmātra).
This is the Being (sattā) of the body of the one who recites Mantra, and the supreme secret.

According to Kṣemarāja, the knowledge referred to here is supreme nondual awareness
(parādvayaprathā). Śiva, as the essence of all possible words and meanings, contained in a
potential form in the fifty letters of the alphabet (śhdarāśi), possesses this ‘Body of Knowledge’,

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

because its nature is Śakti. ‘Maṇḍala’ is that which bestows (lāti) ‘maṇḍa’, that
is, the essence called Śiva. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), if a single pīṭha is in this way the nature of all (of
them), then what is the use of teaching them separately? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

TĪTATT
TA āTÇTĪT fṜṬāI TT: I 23 1|

ẽEāAṀGPFECR ES—’[EcaIEIHFICEN

ũīegcērs=1

pradhānatvāt tasya tasya vastuno bhinnatā punaḥ || 22 ||
kathitā sādhakendrāṇāṁ tattadvastuprasiddhaye |
pratyekaṁ tac caturdhaivaṁ maṇḍalaṁ mudrikā tathā || 23 ||
mantro vidyeti ca pīṭham utkṛṣṭaṁ cottarottam |
Again, the difference there is said to be between them is due to the
predominance of one or other matter (vastu) (they deal with. And the
reason for this difference is) that those who are the most excellent adepts

(guided by one or the other of them) may succeed in that particular matter.
(Thus,) each one is (again) divided into those (same) four kinds. Moreover,

(the four pīthas, namely) Maṇḍala, Mudrā, Mantra and Vidyā, (are
arranged in this order because) each subsequent collection (of scriptures —

pītha) excels the one that precedes it. (22cd-24ab)

He (now) concludes by applying this (teaching) to the main point.
‘Each one’ (is such) that ‘the subsequent pītha excels the one that
precedes (it in the series). Thus, the Mudrāpītha is (more elevated) than the
Maṇḍalapīṭha, then (comes) the Mantrapīṭha, and then (finally, the most
excellent of all, that is) the Vidyāpīṭha.
He (now) concludes by applying this (teaching) to the main point.

fgaāīīazna 21

vidyāpīthapradhānaṁ ca siddhayogīśvarīmatam || 24 ||
tasyāpi paramaṁ sāraṁ mālinīvijayottaram |

the essence of which is the secret power of Mantra, and is the pulsing radiance (sphurattā) of the
light of consciousness identified with the reflectve awareness of perfect ‘ consciousness
(pūrāhaṁvimarśa) thṭ consists of the oneness of the entire universe. ŚSūvi p. 89, Dyczkowski
1992b: 69-74.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Siddhayogeśvarīmata is the main (most important Tantra) of

the Vidyāpīṭha. (Beyond even that is) its supreme essence, namely, the

Maālinīvijayottara. (24cd-25ab)

The Excellence of Trika Kaulism
says:

What is the authority here (for this view)? With this doubt in mind, he

ũTASHT I| 34,II
TJĪTTTT
aTTGĒĀJTTĪĪYT] |

ezRETTĪE-TJĀPIEEACA TA

faṝ ũzṣrṁres aṁai fiaīae| 3 1
GTTT āgav% Taīdtr̥dtā̄isīā|

ṃarkēṁfazāīṁ aī f--- -as aaa 1 2¢ 1
uktaṁ śrīratṇamālāyām etac ca parameśinā || 25 ||
aśeṣatantrasāraṁ tu vāmadakṣiṇam āśritam |

ekatra militaṁ kaulaṁ śr̥īṣaḍardhakaśāsane || 26 ||
dakṣiṇaṁ raudrakarmāḍhyaṁ vāmaṁ siddhiṣamākulam || 27 ||
svalpapuṇyaṁ bahukleśaṁ svapratītivivarjitam |
mokṣavidyāvihīnaṁ ca vinayaṁ tyaja dūrataḥ || 28 I|

The Supreme Lord has declared this in the venerable Ratnamālā,

(where we read): ‘the essence of all the Tantras, present in (those of) the
Left (vāma) and Rīght (dakṣiṇa), is united (milita) in one place as Kaula

Alternatively, one may translate the ‘The Siddhayogīśvarīmata primarily belongs to the
Vidyāpīha.’ Again: ‘the predominant (pītha) of the Siddhayogeśvarīmata is the Vidyāpītha.’ 1
have chosen to translate in this way, as it follows from what Abhinava h:

just said. He is again

establishing a hierarchy of scriptures, this time in terms of the pīṭha classification, of which he
perceives the Vidyāpīha and its Tantras to be the most excellent. He goes on to say that of theṣe
Tantras, the most important is the Siddhayogeśvarīmata, of which the ‘supreme essence’, and

hence ultimately the most excellent, is the MV.
Cf. above, 1/18.
Perhaps Kaula here refers to Kula teaching present in the Tantras, whereas Kula refers to
particular schools. Hanneder (1998: 25) comments: ‘For that reason, the Trika is called ‘half of
six’ because its constituent parts are the following three: the sixth stream above Īśāna, i.e. the
ūrdhordhva, the left and the right.’ Here the stream above the upper one is roundly identified with
all the forms and levels of Kula schools, which are the primary domain of Trika.
‘Trika Kauḻism is characterized in this citation as a fusion of the Tantras of the right, that

teach fierce magical rites, and those of the left, that teach the attainment of supernatural powers

(siddhi). It is a fusion that rises up above both, loaded with their power transformed into the
current that leads to liberation.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

(doctrine, found) in the illustrious Trika system (ṣadardhaśāsana). (25cd-

26)

”mṇ the Siddhānta there is an (excessive) abundance of (outer)
riṭual, which is, (moreover,) sullied by the Impurity (of ignorance) and
Maāyā etc. The current of the right abounds with fierce (black) rites

(raudrakarman). The left is confounded by (an excess of) supernatural
powers (siddhi). Stay far away (from works on) moral discipline (vinaya),

which gives little merit and much affliction (kleśa)” and, without personal
insight, is devoid of the knowledge that leads to liberation (mokṣavidyā).”

(25cd-28)

‘Fierce (black) rites (raudrakarman) include (rituals designed to)
murder and eradicate (an enemy). ‘“One’s own insight’ is personal experience.
‘Moral discipline’ is scripture which is predominantly Tantric (rather than

Surely, (one may object,) here also an (excessive) abundance of ritual is
prescribed as what remains to be done (until the initiate dies and attains
liberation) (Śśeṣavṛtti). So how is it that this has been said (especially of the
Siddhānta)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Transmission of Immediate Realisation

3ṇftr-ēīs 7Ṭkoī f+ṝāṁc yahīzra |

yasmin kāle ca guruṇā nirvikalpaṁ prakāśitam |
muktas tenaiva kālena yantraṁ tiṣṭhati kevalam || 29 l|
When

the

teacher

reveals

(the

one

reality)

free of thought

constructs, (the disciple) is liberated in that very moment; all that remains

is the machine (of the body). (29)

” Cf. above 13/300cd-301, where the progressive development of śaktipāta is traced by the
hierarchy of scripture.
The right current of scripture is uttered by Aghora, which Hanneder (1998: 218) explains with

reference to Abhinava’s account of this face in the MVV (1/288cd-289ab). He writes that ‘Aghora
is related to the non-dualist śāstras [i.e. Tantras], the power that manifests this face, i.e. the power

of action, is interpreted as that which nullifies prior division, thereby conforming this description
of non-duality as a rejection of duality. The aspect of reabsorption inherent in this concept
accounts for the destructive practices prevalent in this part of the tradition.’
The same expression appears above in 37/10c.
yinayaṁ tantrapradhānaṁ śāstram |

This verse is from the Gamatantra. It is also quoted above as 13/230cd-231ab (see note there)
and the first line and a half in TĀv ad 13/313cd-314ab. The point is that the Siddhānta, which, as
presented here at least, can only lead to liberation after death for those who have maintained their
moral and ritual obligations. It does not offer an alternative. Although the rites and forms of Yoga
Abhinava prescribes, even in just in his own liturgical manual, the Tantrāloka, are also numerous,

the concern with rites and Yoga is not ‘excessiv’, because an alternative is an ever-present
possibility. That is immediate realisation, which requires neither rite nor Yoga, and moreover, it
grants immediate and permanent liberation while alive. The Siddhānta, at least as portrayed by

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), what is the nature of (this Trika) current (of

scriptures) with respect to others, that it is reasonable to describe it in this way,
as the one that should be adopted because it is the most excellent? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

TĀTTRĪTĀĪ ṜHTTTTCTÇ {JTT |

3mmā fazzīrṁ mē-ñrahaīta 1| 30 1|

fāīākā ũaavṁavnrg a-. |
3 Ṭ]ā-īāēē% -ITRATT || 32 1|

mayaitat srotasāṁ rūpam anuttarapadād dhruvāt |
ārabhya vistareṇoktaṁ mālinīślokavārtike || 30 ||

vayaṁ tūktānuvacanam aphalaṁ nādriyāmahe || 31 II
T have discussed the nature of these (five) currents (of scripture), as
beginning from the immovable (dhruva) plane of Anuttara, in detail in the

Maālinīślokavārtika. He who wants to know (about it), can understand it
from there. We do not sanction fruitless repetition of what has (already)

been said. (30-31)

Now (Abhinava goes on to) say that it is this treatise (śāstra) that
should be adopted (as scripture), even if it has been written by him, because it

expounds this matter (artha) in this way.

RuĀKtEIEIEISĒĀCEIĒ-YEḶCZAḤI

TSHT TTBrATTTRATTC TGeT |

itthaṁ dadad anãyãsāj jvanmuktimahāphalam |
yathepsitamahābhogadātṛtvena vyavasthitam || 32 |
saḍardhasāraṁ sacchāstram upādeyam idaṁ sphuṭam ḷ

Bestowing in this way without effort the great fruit which is

liberation in this life, and arranged in such a way so as to bestow the great
enṉjoyment (of all worldly benefits) as one desires, clearly, it is this, the

Abhinava, does not offer this possibility. One fundamental rcason for this, according to Abhinava,
is that the former is a gradual path of step-by-step upward progres of the soul in consonance with
the flow of the life force. The other is one of devastating, radical transformation by powerful
penetration of the power of consciousness radiating from the deity into the soul, ad the soul
projected with force into its Infinite Being and ultmmate, essentūal dynamic identity.
This is the published Malinīvjayavārika, which is also called just Mālinīvārika. The ful
name is is Malinīvijayaikaslokavārttika, because it is a commentary on one verse of the
Maālinīvijayottara, that is, the intoductory maṅgalaśloka.
See the MVV 1/15 {f. and above, 1/8 and notes.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

essence of Trika (ṣaḍardha), that is the true scripture (śāstra) that one

should adopt (upādeya). (32-33ab)

By this (statement,) he has completed the great purpose of this book that

was taken up (right from the start), as (stated at the beginning):

“Thus, the wise man who constantly (and assiduously) practices these
thirty-seven chapters becomes Bhairava Himself in person (directly visible)
(sākṣāṅ). He whose awakened understanding of the thirty-seven (chapters) is
perfectly complete (and His perfectly full consciousness (pervades) within the
thirty-seven (principles)) is Bhairava; what wonder is it if by his (mere)
glance, individual souls (also) attain Bhairava’s state?
The Concluding Verses
Now, in the course of talking about this book, in order to make known

the competence he has within himself, after setting down in writing (a
description of his) country, family and the lineages of his teachers etc. as that
which inspired him to (achieve) excellence, he talks about the events of his own

(ife).

The Beauty and Spiritual Power of India,
the Land of Kumārikā

Taa-TĪ JTTTTGTT |
TaTIVGTT-TTĪTRT]

Trzaĩst
ē ũaa: 1 33 1

ṣattriṁśatā tattvabalena sūtā
yady apy anantā bhuvanāvalīyam ḷ
brahmāṇḍam atyantamanoharaṁ tu
vaicitryavarjaṁ nahi ramyabhãvaḥ || 33 I|
Although all this endless series of worlds has been generated by the

might of the thirty-six principles,” it is the Egg of Brahmā that is the most
delightful. (Indeed,) without variety there is no beauty. (33)

The ‘essence of Trika’ to which Abhinava is referring here is his Tantrāloka. lt is a śāstra both
in the sense ofa ‘treatise’ and a ‘scripture’.
The first line of this verse has two meanings. The immediate sense is the one that follows from

the previous verse. The suggested sense is that of the translation of the same line in brackets.
TĀ 1/286-287 (284cd-286ab), also quoted above in TĀv ad 13/160.

Literally: ‘the strength of the principles, which are thirty-six.’ Grammatically sattriīśatā is a
substantive, used in opposition with rattvabalena.

The ÉEgg of Brahmā covers the extent of the Earth principle. By describing one, the other is

described. See above 8/1 18cd-119ab (118).

TANTRĀLOKA

sstrārāárirn nṟī 1 3: 1I

bhūrādisaptapurapūrṇatame 'pi tasmin

manye dvitīyabhuvanaṁ bhavanaṁ sukhasya |

kvānyatra citragatiṣūryaśaśāṅkaśobhirātrindivaprasarabhogavibhāgabhiūṣā l 34 ||
tatrāpi ca tridivabhogamahārghavarṣadvīpāntarād adhikam eva kumārikāhvam |

Although completely full of the seven worlds beginning from earth

(bhūr), 1 think that within (the Egg), it is the second world that is the

abode of joy. Where else is there (such a world,) adorned with the (two)

kinds of enjoyment of the unfolding of day and night, embellished by the

wonderful (and various) courses of the Sun and Moon? And there also, of

the other continents and islands (in this world), greatly precious enjoyment
of the gods, the greatest is the one called ‘Kumārikā’. (34-35ab)
‘The second world is the world of the sky (bhuvarloka). ‘There’ in the

second world. The ‘continents’ are Ilāvṛta and the rest. ‘The islands’ are Śāka

and the rest.

He explains (its) greatness.

rĪÇTAĪTTĪTT: GĪHTTTTHĪT I 34, 1

yatrādharādharapadāt paramaṁ śivāntamāroḍhum apy adhikṛtiḥ kṛtinām anarghā || 35 |I
It is where the priceless faculty (adhikṛti) called creative action (kṛti)
exists, to ascend gradually from lower levels up to the Śiva, the supreme
summit. (35cd)

The seven worlds starting from the lowest are: Bhūrloka, Bhuvarloka, Mahāloka, Brahmaloka,
Satyaloka, Viṣṇuloka and Śivaloka. See above, 8/1 19cd (119) ff.
Concerning the continents (varṣa) and islands (dvīpa) of this world, see above, 8/62cd ff.
Amongst them, India is the region called ‘Kanyā’ or ‘Kumārikā’. Cf. above, 8/83-84 and note, see
also Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 1 p. 115.
! See above, 8/102-104.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

He justifies this (view of the uniqueness of this land as the only place

where new Karma is made,) by contrasting it with (everywhere else) apart from
it, (where only the consequences of past Karma can be experienced).

ṭeazEiubṚlEēxxURISI

fē s-āTT ī3 ghīvṣT

gaī fe sṁfafr m Faīṁt

garfeaī 7 g fn-frōr
arinī 3=1

JTTST T TāTJT

a: |

sr anīsftr-—

prākkarmabhogipaśutocitabhogabhājā
kiṁ janmanā nanu sukhaikapade ‘pi dhāmni |
sarvo hi bhāvini paraṁ paritoṣam eti
saṁbhãvite na tu nimeṣiṇi vartamāne || 36 ||

kanyāhvaye ‘pi bhuvane ‘tra paraṁ mahīyān
deśaḥ sa yatra kila śāstravarāṇi cakṣuḥ |
jātyandhasadmani na janma na ko ʻbhininded
bhinnāñjanāyitaravipramukhaprakāśe || 37 ||

What use is birth, be it even in a place where there is only
happiness, (if it be one) in which one (only) experiences the consequences

that befit the fettered state, that suffers the consequences of previous

actions (karman)? The greatest (possible) delight for all (who are here is
only) in what they hope for in the future, not indeed in the present, that
lasts (just) an instant. (36)

Moreover, here in this land called Kanyā, there is no greater place

than one where the most excellent scriptures are the eye (of all). Who
indeed would praise birth in a house of those born blind, where the light

of (all luminaries), the first of which is the sun, is black as pitch? (37)

“2The same idea is found again below in verses 77 and 79, where the ‘hope for the future’ clearly
rfers to supemnatural powers (siddh) and liberation, which will be attained in the future.
‘ Iṣ Abhinava referring hre to India as the land of Kumāṁ, or is he referring to Kanyākubḹa, i..
Kannauj, where his ancestor Atigupta lived? While that is not impossible, Abhinava is talking
about the land by this name, not a city or town.
““ If the rceading na janma no ko’bhinindet is correct, the two negations ‘na’ ‘not’ would be
rinforcing cach other: ‘who would (definitely) not criticize (= ‘curse) a birth . . .. However, two
ncgations in regular Sankrit usage cancel cach other out. Emending [aJbhinindet to [aJbhinandeī
‘praise’, resolves this problem.
“ Literally, ‘is lik the collyrum (bhinnāñjanāyita -). About thē term bhinnāñjaṅa, (oil) — mixed
collyium, ‘pounded galena’, see the note by C. Vogel, On the meaning of the Sanskrit (PRA)
bhiṅnnāñjana 311011967, pp. 171-176.

TANTRĀLOKA

Madhyadeśa, the Abode of AIl Scripture,
and Home of Atrigupta

5ttzeEekṈltšiFcāisē
ISTTṬT
Ṝ̄ THTīTTTTII:
ITĪTPTTTTRŪTIGTTCTĪ: I 3¢ |I
niḥśeṣaśāstrasadanaṁ kila madhyadeśastasminn ajāyata guṇābhyadhiko dvijanmā |
ko ʻpy atrigupta iti nāmaniṟuktagotraḥ
śāstrābdhicarvaṇakalodyad agastyagotraḥ || 38 ||

Madhyadeśa (the Land in the Middle) is indeed the abode of all

the scriptures. Here was born a brahmin who possessed extraordinary
qualities, a certain Atrigupta, whose family lineage (gotra) is declared by
the etymology of his name, and who, intent on the art of relishing the ocean

of the scriptures, (rightly) belongs to Agastya’s clan (gotra). (38)
Latitāditya Took Atrigupta to Kashmir

TTTTVTI]
GYĪTTA fkīzāīḡTg |
|ĒEEIĪÁEAEHETIEEAvITĒEA

afēraraī

g-TaāTaī
ī7aṝk ¥ aai srṣze: |

i-EVEtAEEĪEF-CĀE-Fcoṛ

tam atha lalitādityo rājā nijaṁ puram ānayat
praṇayarabhasāt kaśmīrākhyaṁ himālayamūrdhagam |
adhivasati yad gaurīkāntaḥ karair vijayādibhiryugapad akhilaṁ bhoge sāraṁ rasāt paricarvitum || 39 ||
sthāne sthāne munibhir akhilaiś cakrire yan nivāsā
yac cādhyāste pratipadam idaṁ sa ṣvayaṁ candracūḍaḥ |
tan manye ‘haṁ samabhilaṣitāśeṣasiddher na siddhyai
kaśmīrebhyaḥ param atha puraṁ pūrṇavṛtter na tuṣṭyai || 40 ||

Ó The Madhyadeśa extends round the area of Prayāga (modern Allahabad) up to Vārāṇasī in the
east, and to where modem Delhi is now located in the west.
‘’ Agastya was a Vedic sage (rṣi) who, among other thīngs, is famous for having drunk the ocean
(Mahābhārata, 3/105, Padmapurāṇa, 1/19).

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

Enthused by (his) affection (for him), king Latitāditya brought
him to his country called Kashmir, that lies on the top of the Himālayas.
(Śiva), Gaurī’s beloved, resides here with (his) rays (kara), Vijaya and other

(Rudras), in order to relish with delight (rasāt), all at once, the entire

essence of worldly enjoyment. (39)

(There,) in every place, all (the great) sages made their dwellings.

(Indeed,) Śiva Himself presides over every step (within it). I believe there

is no country greater than Kashmir to achieve all the accomplishments (one
may) desire, and satisfy one whose condition is full (and perfect). (40)

(The consequence of Karma) ‘one experiencesʼ (bhoga) is the body.

(Delight here) ‘lasts (just) an instant’ means that it ceases in a moment. The
reason for the greatness (of the land called Kanyā) is that the scriptures are the
eye (of all). ‘The family lineage (gotra) that is declared by the etymology of
his name is Atrigotra. This is the meaning. The name of a family lineage is
indicated as one that adheres to it (most closely). (The expression Śiva’s) ‘rays
(kara)ī denotes the rays of (his) hands (who are the Rudras that attend on him).
(There is no country) ‘greater’ and more excellent (than Kashmir). These two

verses (i.e. 39 and 40) describe how here (Kashmir) was a fitting residence (for
Abhinavagupta’s distinguished ancestor, Atrigupta). By (saying that in Kashmir
Śāradā) ‘bestows her own glorious riches on (one and) all’, he proclaims that
here is a place for all learned men.

Kashmir, the Land of the Goddess Śāradā,

Where its Excellent Wine Enflames Lovers’ Passion

ī ãī JITRGTxṬJ

gd s aTāvr̄zī
1 #2 1

TRÇRTTHĪĪTx TITRfHTh-īTG-aīārrŪārrōfdī

ITE|UIZISŪZ-EṞEAGVEIĒHLEVEḺI

“ Laliāditya Muktapīḍa reigned in Kashmīr in the first half of the eight century CE. C. PTv p.
280: ‘The Brahmin Atrigupta who was born in Antarvedī migrated a long tmme ago to a city in
Kashmir, where there is no comer which is not purified by countless incamations of Śiva.
Jaya, Vijaya, etc. are names of Rudras in Śiva’s retinuē (see above, 28/ 14cd-17ab). In the fourth
irom the last verse of the Abhinavabhāra, the river Vitastā that flows through the capial of
Kashmir is ṣaid to be purified by thousands of Rudras, like Vijaya, etc.’ Viḹaya is a hypostasis of

Śiva, who presides over a homonymous liṅga that was one of the most venerated places of

piḷgrimage in Kashmir. It corresponds to the modern village of Vijabror. The myth concerning the
origin of this liīga is narated by Jayadratha in chapter ten of the Haracariacintāmaṇi. See Steīn
(1892) vol. I p. 38. 105 and notē.
Read paricarvium fot paricarcium.
Read bhoge sāraṁ for bhogāsāraṁ.
About the sacred places of Kashmir, see Stein (1892) vol. 2, pp. 37.6 f.

TANTRĀLOKA

ṭzeuix.EeitĀEEIRŪVCEŪIP“

yatra svayaṁ śāradacandraśubhrā
śrīśāradeti prathitā janeṣu |
śaṇḍilyasevārasasuprasannā
sarvaṁ janaṁ svair vibhavair yunakti |/ 41 1|
nāraṅgāruṇakānti pāṇḍuvikacadballāvadātacchaviprodbhinnāmalamātuluṅgakanakacchāyābhirāmaprabham |
kerīkuntalakandalīpratikr̥tiśyāmaprabhābhāsvaraṁṅ
yasmiñ śakticatuṣṭyojjvalamalaṁ madyaṁ mahābhairavam || 42 ||
trinayanamahākopajvālāvilīna iha sthito
madanaviśikhavrāto madyacchalena vijrmbhate |
katham itarathā rāgaṁ mohaṁ madaṁ madanajvaraṁ
vidadhaniśaṁ kāmātaṅkair vaśīkurute jagat || 43 |
yat kāntānāṁ praṇayavacasi prauḍhimānaṁ vidhatte
yan nirvighnaṁ nidhuvanavidhau sādhvasaṁ saṁdhunoti |
yasmin viśvāḥ kalitarucayo devatāś cakracaryastan mārdvīkaṁ sapadi tanute yatra bhogāpavargau || 44 II
It is where (the goddess resides,) radiant white like the autumn

(śārada) moon, well known amongst people as the illustrious Śāradā who,

well pleased by the aesthetic delight (rasa) of Śāṇḍilya’s (devout) service,

bestows her own glorious riches on (one and) all. (41)
Here wine is Mahābhairava, who burns radiantly (with His) four
powers (that are its four types). One is beautiful with the red colour of

oranges. (Another) takes (her) beauty from the white ripening rice. (The

third shines with a) light beautiful with the golden lustre (cchāyā) of

Śāṇḍilya is, accoding to the legend, an ascetic (mni) who subjected himself to severe
austeīties o attain a vision of he goddess Śaradā. See Stein op. cit, vol.2, pp. 280.28.
Concening the use of wine and other alcoholic beverages, see above, 15/69 ff. and note, and
also 29/12-13 and note.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

stainless (freshly) sliced lemons. (The fourth) shines dark blue, imitating

(the colour) of the kerīkuntala’s sprout. (42)

Dissolved away completely in the flames of the great wrath of
(Siva,) the Three-eyed One, the arrows of Madana (the god of love) unfold
(their power) in the deceitful guise of wine. For how could they in any other

way, giving rise to attachment, delusion, inebriation and the fever of love,
constantly subjugate the world by the afflictions of passion (kāma)? (43)
It is that wine that here (in Kashmir) spreads all at once (both)

worldly enjoyment and liberation. It infuses boldness into the words of
lovers and, free of impediments, it expels fear (and inhibition) when
making love. Delighted (kalita-ruci), within it move (all) the deities of the

wheels. (44)

The ‘four powers’ are Siddhā etc.,” and they are white, red, yellow and
black in colour. ‘The arrows’ of Madana (the God of Love) are desiccation

(śoṣaṇa) etc., and their task is (to induce) attachment (rāga) etc. (The deities

of) ‘ṭhe wheels’ (move in) the primary wheel (of consciousness), and the

subsidiary ones (of the senses).

The Beauty of the Kashmir Valley and
Greatness of its Inhabitants

3aGTg{Īqd: YĀTTd: TGTĀ—
TāTTTaTaōTHĪTGYTTHĀĀTGIĪTATḤT: |

gRTCTĪĒTTATTSTĪTTTTTITTSRĪTT I #, II

aat ōraā; lT7 3̄ īT ṢJISĪT arsṃī

Probably an allusion to the colours of the wine. On the cultivation of the vines in Kashmir, at

one time flowering much more than now, see Lawrence (1895) pp. 351 ff. ḹ am unsure what plant

the keerikuntala is. Perhaps it is the Kuntalavaráhana, which is the eclipta prostata. In the Tamil
tradition of Siddha medicine, it is used to treat many diseases. In Ayurvedic medicine, the leaf

extract is considered to be a powerful liver tonic, and especially good for the hair. A black dye
obtained from the eclipta prostata is used for dying hair and tattooing. It also used to trcat
athlete’s fool, eczema and dermatitis, and is applied to the scalp to prevent loss of hair loss. The
leaves improve the growth of hair growth and its colour. However, the plant is not blu, but the
stem is purplish red in some plants
This verse is quoted in Maheśvarānanda’s MM p. 113. There yat kāntānāṁ (‘lovers’) reads yan
mugdhānāṁ (‘simple people’). It may be that Maheśvarānanda altered the original reading to fit
the context in which he quotes this verse, which is the interiorization of worship. Other variants

are mādhyīkaṁ (intoxicating drink made from honey) for mārdvīkaṁ (‘grape wine’) and kuṟute

(‘does’) for tanute (‘spreads out’).
Theṣe four are Siddhā, Rakṭā, Śuṣkā and Utpalāhastā. See above, TĀv ad 29/51 and note
29,125. Sanderson (2005: 277 n 110): ‘the colours were no doubt thought to be significant as
those of four varieties of wine.’ Sanderson notes (ibid. 277) that ‘the Ānandesśvarapūjā has
set
of four worshipped as the retinue of Ānandeśvarabhairava and his consort Surādevī, the deities of

wine.

Madana, more commonly called Kāmadeva, has five arrows that inflict five wounds of love and

give rise to the lover's five states of mind.

TANTRĀLOKA

TRTGaITĪ TTTTTJ: ŪŨīTTĀJ a] |

ṬTRRSSTGTTHTJTĪ-TTṬTJHTĪTSTTā -gTTTTRTGĪī āṬĪTTĪĪTĪ

udyadgaurāṅkuravikasitaiḥ śyāmaraktaiḥ palāśairantargāḍhāruṇarucīlasatkesarālīvicitraiḥ |
ākīrṇā bhūḥ pratipadam asau yatra kāśmīrapuṣpaiḥ
samyag devītritayayajanodyānam āviṣkaroti || 45 ||
sarvo lokaḥ kavir atha budho yatra śūro 'pi vāgmī
candroddyotā masr̥ṇagatayaḥ pauranāryaś ca yatra |
yatrāṅgārojjvalavikasitānantasauṣumṇamārga
grastārkendurgaganavimalo yoginīnāṁ ca vargaḥ || 46 ||

The ground strewn at every step with saffron flowers, with their

blue-red (śyāmarakta iī.e. violet) petals blooming on the white sprouts
emerging (from their stem), (adorned) on the inside with beautiful rows of
stamens (quivering) playfully with their radiant deep red colour, make a
(veritable) garden fit for the worship of the three goddesses (Parā,

Parāparā, and Aparā). (45)

Every man here is a poet, wise, valiant and eloquent. Graceful is the
gait of the women of the towns, who shine (like the) light of the moon. Here

the yoginīs are stainless like the sky, the Sun and Moon (of exhalation and
inhalation) devoured into the blooming, endless path of suṣumnā that burns
radiantly (like red-hot) coals. (46)

(The petals of the saffron flowers are) ‘blue-red’, that is, (violet and)
dark brown (kṛṣṇapiṅgala). ‘The three goddesses’ (Parā, Parāparā and Aparā)
are mentioned due to the appropriateness of the context and other (such

reasons). (Every man here is) ‘eloquent’, that is, (like the teacher of the gods)

Bṛhaspati also. “Graceful is the gait’ (of the women of the towns), that is, they
move slowly (gracefully). (The flow of the breath of the Yoginīs here in

suṣumnā is) ‘(like red-hot) coalsʼ. (The meaning is that they also possess) the

fire of the upward moving breath (udāna). (By saying that) ‘the Sun and Moon
(of exhalation and inhalation) are devouredʼ, he also suggests the two
eclipses.
King Pravarasena, the Founder of the Capital Pravarapura

fī. |

’ The word for saffron here is kāśmīrapuṣpa – the flower of Kashmir. Saffron is today one of the
principal products of Kashmir. In the past, this was the only place in the world in which it grew.
See RT vol. 2, p. 428.
“ See above 28/371-373ab and note

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

AĪHĪTTTGQSĪTHĒG TṬṬHYaTḤ I 4M 1I

TTRTP-ĪĪRTTTGRTĀTTE

qī Jī=d Tcgqã raāīaa |

śrīmatparaṁ pravaranāma puraṁ ca tatra

yan nirmame pravarasena iti kṣitīśaḥ |
yaḥ svapratiṣṭhitamaheśvarapūjanānte
vyomotpatan nudasṛjat kila dhūpaghaṇṭām || 47 ||
āndolanoditamanoharavīranādaiḥ
sā cāsya tatsucaritaṁ prathayāṁbabhūva |
sadvṛttasāragurutaijasamūrtayo hi
tyaktā api prabhuguṇān adhikaṁ dhvananti || 48 II
There, the king Pravarasena, who constructed the supremely

illustrious city called Pravara (Most Excellent), at the end of a rite of
worship (in the sanctuary of) Maheśvara he had himself established, flew

up into the sky, letting fall an incense bell. (47)

That (bell), with its pleasing, most excellent® sounds produced by

its swinging, proclaimed his righteous conduct.® (Metallic) icons made of
radiant energy, heavy with essence and well fashioned, even when dropped,

sonorously proclaim even more the qualities of their lord. (48)

‘The king Pravarasena constructed the city (called Pravara (Most

Excellent)) within which the king Lalitāditya ‘ʻmade a dwelling place there
for this brahmin (Atrigupta); (thus, the two statements are) related at a

distance (from one another).® By (saying that the king Pravarasena) ‘flew up

into the skyʼ, what he proclaims here (in this case) also is in consonance with
(that kingʼs supernatural) accomplishments (siddhi). “That’ bell, and (icons)

‘made of radiant energyʼ and iron.

l Thiṣ is the modern SŚrinagar. The legendary story of the founding of this city by king

Pravarasena the second, who reigned in Kashmir towards the second half of the fourth century, is
narrated in the RT 3/336 ff.; see also RT vol. 2, pp. 442 ff.

“2 The miraculous ascension into the sky of king Pravarasena happened in the temple of Śiva
Pravareśvara, founded by him. Bilhana refers to it his Vikramāṅkadevacaritam (18/28), as does
Kalhaṇa in RT (3/374 ff). However, neither of them refers to the dhūpaghaṇtā, which I have here
translated, as ‘incense bell’.
Read -vāranādaiḥ for ~vīranādaiḥ.

Or perhaps, '‘this his extrordinary enterprise’?
The second part of this verse contains a samāsokti, which is a figure of speech whereby the
behaviour of something is described by describing the similar behaviour or attributes of something
else.

b The first satement is made in the beginning of verse 47 and the second one at the end of verse
52.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Beauty and Sanctity of the River Vitastā

ŚUEEAEEIZITEÚCAEIĀ

TāTIṢTTTT-TĀĪTJTTĀĪ: |

[E-GEEEIḶIĒIETBḤ

TṬRTTTRITTTT GTĪī RITSA I

1|

TTHSTTTTṬTĀĪTRTrTSSTĪTH—

[EēTTIEIUIGIEEAEḶZEE ṬṬĪṬHAI

īēhzrīātkṁī gTratza 1
ezei k
FIĒFZAVEil

ug 1

saṁpūrṇacandravimaladyutivĩrakāntãgāḍhāṅgarāgaghanakuṅkumapiñjaraśrīḥ |
proddhūtavetasalatāsitacāmaraughairājyābhiṣekam aniśaṁ dadatī smarasya || 49 ||
rodhaḥpratiṣṭhitamaheśvarasiddhaliṅgasvāyaṁbhuvārcanavilepanagandhapuṣpaiḥ |
āvarjyamānatanuvīci nīmajjanaughavidhvastapāpmamuniṣiddhamanuṣyavandyā | 50 |
bhogāpavargaparipūraṇakalpavallī

bhogaikadānarasikāṁ surasiddhasindhum |

nyakkurvatī harapiṇākakalāvatīrṇā

yad bhūṣayaty avirataṁ taṭinĩ vitastã l| 51 I|

Beautiful with the masses of yellow orpiment, (red) saffron, and

unguents (left within it) by the women of heros who bathe there, shining

like the full moon, and the clumps of its reeds and creepers (like) white fans
(cāmara) shaken (by its current), (it seems to be) constantly engaged in the
royal consecration of the God of Love. (49)
Siddhas, ascetics, and men (rightly) honour it, purified of (their)

sins by repeated immersions in its waves, and prostrating the body (whilst
offering) flowers, perfumes, unguents and worshipping the spontaneously
generated liīgas”’ and those erected by SŚiddhas in honour of Maheśvara,
along its banks. (50)

“’ A svāyambhū (literally ‘self-generated') liṅga is a natural formation of rock or other materials
thatlook like a liiga and is worshipped as such.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

The river Vitastā, brought down (into the world) by a blow from
Śiva’s trident (pināka), adorns without a break (by its constant flow, the
city).® (A veritable) wish-granting creeper that fulfils (those who bathein it
with) both worldly fruits and liberation, demeaning (the Ganges), the river

of the gods and Siddhas, which gives only worldly fruits. (51)

(The river Vitastā) fulfils (those who bathe in it with) ‘both worldly
fruits and liberation’, describedin (the previous) two verses (i. e. 49 and 50).
‘(Śiva’ s) trident (pināka)’ is (his) weapon, whichis (his) trident.

Abhinavagupta’s Ancestral Home Donated to Atrigupta

and Handed Down to Varāhagupta and Narasiṁhagupta

ṭtezeAiEṭzeeeIEf
3ṇīṝānrq fnarānūa srh

TTHI āI]a ṬTaT] TāTHĀHTĠ, |

TaTṬPĪĀŪG ṬHIGHTTT I 43 1
TRATTTTJGGĀĪ
S JTg—
ḡTTGṬTĪTTIĪī TTTṬT; |

ḷEÁIETGEEENV{ÉĒEEḤ

T “ĪF: I | u I
tasmin kuberapuracārisitāṁśumauli-

sāṁmukhyadarśanavirūḍhapavitrabhāve |
vaitastarodhasi nivāsam amuṣya cakre

rājā dvijasya parikalpitabhūriṣaṁpat I| 52||
tasyānvaye mahati ko ʻpi varāhaguptanāmā hbabhūva bhagavān svayam antakāle |
gīrvāṇasindhulaharīkalitāgramūrdhā
yasyākarot paramanugrahamāgraheṇa || 53 ||
tasyātmajaś cukhalaketi jane prasiddhaścandrāvadātadhiṣaṇo narasiṁhaguptaḥ |
yaṁ sarvaśāstrarasamajjanaśubhracittaṁ

The legendary origin of the river Vitastā is narrated in the Haricaritacintāmaṇi 12/2-34. See
also the RT vol.2 p. 411.
’ The word pināka most commonly means a bow. Śiva’s precursor, the Vedic Rudra, is
commonly portrayed as a hunter who carries a bow – pināka. Śiva’s pināka is his trident.

Jayaratha glosses the word ‘pināka in the general sense ofa weapon.

TANTRĀLOKA

māheśvarī paramalaṁkurute sma bhaktiḥ || 54 ||
(Thus,) on the bank of the Vitastā, sanctified by the sight before it

(of the temple) of Sītāṁśumauli,™ (to the north of which is) Kubera’s abode,
the king, imagining the great benefits (saṁpat) (of doing s0), made a
dwelling place there for this brahmin (called Atrigupta). (52)
Within his great lineage, there was a certain (descendent) called

Varāhagupta. The Lord, the top of whose head is adorned by the waves of
(the Ganges,) the river of the gods, by his affection (for him,) spontaneously

bestowed upon him, at the point of death, his supreme grace. (53)

His son was Narasiṁhagupta, well known amongst men by the

name of Cukhalaka.” Supremely adorned with devotion to Maheśvara, his

intellect was pure like the moon, and his mind shone brightly by virtue of
his (constant) immersion in the aesthetic essence (rasa) of all the scriptures.

(54)

Abhinavagupta’s Mother Died When He Was a Child;
His Youthful Folly and the Dawning of Discrimination

TīRTTrRTTG"TTTĪTI

TT® avaīāī a WaTT:I .4,|

JĪTṬGTTIĪSTTTTJT:|

ḻEttzu

Jaī:

ēṭVUIHEARĪTĀITIGĀ

-a fkāṛ stta a. 3f: u| uv u
7 A name of Śiva which litrally means ‘(the god who wears as) a diadem the moon’. This verse
may also be translated: “Purified by the sight, in front of them, of the (mountain) peak (mauli),
radiant white, situated in the north’ alluding to some Himalayan mountain, for example, the
Haramukh, yīsible from Śrīnagar and sacred to Śiva.

' 37/54ab is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/I (see note there concerning the various forms of his
name). Other references to Abhinava’s father are above 1/12 (see notes there); also in MVV 1/5,
ĪPVY vol. 3 pp. 405-406 verses 2-5, and PTv p. 281, where Abhinava says of him:
‘After a long time, Varāhagupta was born in his (i.. Atrgupta’s) family, and from him
Cukhala, who was averse to the things of the world and was entirly concentrated on Śiva. From
him, who had discemned all things, Abhinavagupta was purely conceived who, having conquered
al fear of transmigration, makes this ancient essence of Trika known. (12-13)

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

tāruṇyasāgarataraṅgabharānapohya
vairāgyapotam adhiruhya dṛḍhaṁ haṭhena |
yo bhaktirohaṇam avāpya maheśacintāratnair alaṁ dalayati sma bhavãpadastãāḥ || 55 1|
tasyātmajo ‘bhinavagupta iti prasiddhaḥ
śrīcandracīūḍacaraṇābjaparāgapūtaḥ |
mātā vyayūyujad amuṁ kila bālya eva
daivaṁ hi bhāviparikarmaṇi saṁskaroti || 56 ||
mātā paraṁ bandhur iti pravãdaḥ
sneho ‘tigāḍhīkurute hi pāśān |
tanmūlabandhe galite kilāsya
manye sthitā jīvata eva muktiḥ || 57 ||
His son is well known as Abhinavagupta, who has been purified by
the pollen of the lotus feet of (Śiva,) the venerable one whose diadem is the
(crescent) moon. (His) mother left him when he was just a child. Fate (does
indeed) purify (us) (saṁskaroti) for (our) future work. (55) (56)
Once he had set aside the burdens of the oceanic waves (of his
stormy) youth, he mounted with vigour (haṭhena) on the firm boat of
detachment, and then, having attained the (full) development of (his)
devotion, thanks to the (precious) gems of (his) meditation on Maheśa,

totally destroyed the calamities of (worldly) existence.” (56) (55)
As the saying goes, a mother is the greatest friend. (However,) love
makes the fetters (that bind to worldly life) very firm. When this, the root

fetter, had fallen away, I consider that for him liberation in this life itself
was accomplished (sthitā). (57)

‘Kubera’s abode’ is the northern quarter. ((His) mother) ‘left (him)
(when he was just a child,) which made him spontaneously detached, for he was
(a child whose) mother had died.
He clarifies (what he means by his childhood) ‘purification’ (saṁskāra).

His Father Was His First Teacher, and He Delighted
from an Early Age in Literature; Gripped by Devotion
to Maheśa, He Had No Worldly Concerns

T-JT—

TINĪĀĪTTṬṬTĪTTGTTTTRTT|

TGTTI TGTṬGÚTGHGAT
TṬGTĪ: I| WC II

” This verse has been taken t© be a reference Abhinava makes to himself. This is indeed likely.
However, in the printed edition, this verse comes just ater the one rcferring to his father, and so
appears to be referting to him. Reversing the order of this verse with following seems appropriat.
Abhinava firṣ loses his mother in his childhood and then had a ‘stormy youth’

TANTRĀLOKA

mšttmṛā ēī+t #a T: |
iPEḵU| GFF-Āu

ā T TṬRAYIT TGAT I 4< I

pitrā sa śabdagahane kṛtasaṁpraveśas
tarkārṇavormipṛṣatāmalapūtacittaḥ |
sāhityasāndrarasabhogaparo maheśabhaktyā ṣvayaṁgrahaṇadurmadayā gṛhītaḥ || 58 ||
sa tanmayībhūya na lokavartanīm
ajīgaṇat kām api kevalaṁ punaḥ |
tadīyasaṁbhogavivṛddhaye purā
karoti dāsyaṁ guruveśmasu svayam || 59 ||

He was introduced to (Sanskrit) grammar (śabdagahana) by his

father. The drops sprinkled by the waves of the ocean of logic (tarka)

purified his stainless mind, and he dedicated himself to the enjoyment of
the intense aesthetic delight (rasa) of literature, gripped by devotion to
Maheśa, by virtue of the (spiritual) inebriation that spontaneously takes
hold (of those such as him). (Ś8)

Totally immersed in deity, he had no concern for anything in the
world at all. AII he did was to serve in the homes of (his numerous) teachers
himself, in order to develop his (spiritual) experience. (59)
‘He did’ (purā karoti) – the use of the present tense (in this case is
sanctioned by the rule ‘(the affix verbal) laṛ (that normally marks the present
tense denotes future action when associated with the particles) yāvat and
= »75

purā.

Who are these teachers? With this doubt in mind, he says:
Abhinavagupta’s Teachers

aē 3 Eaīce -THSTTĪĪHHTJ:

E cTṬSI TGNSTPĀĒHTTṬTTTI:

” śabdagahane literally means ‘into the abyss of words’.
” tanmayībhīya – literally means ‘being one with’ (the deity).
” yāvat purānipatayor laṭ PāSū 3/3/4. The expression here ‘purā karoti’ ,which literally means ‘in
the past he doesʼ, denotes past action, although the verb ‘to do’ is conjugated in the present tense.
This idiom is sanctioned by this rule.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

EAIĒEEHNEṄIĪAEIEEEII

sr-sfī rdttīacārā-īaīaṣazī-

JITTRŪGTJT
TeTT; I| £3 I
Ñ HaāTJTTTRTTTJRT: JIHHR—

ī sTRīRTĀJT{aT]
TJTRHTGAHTY TĀTTTATSJT I Ē3
IVPHIEEĀNEECEKHEAIEI
efkrtēaiṭēivkutṣ

ānandasaṁtatimahārṇavakarṇadhāraḥ

saddaiśikairakavarātmajavāmanāthaḥ |
śrīnāthasaṁtatimahāmbaragharmakāntiḥ

śrībhūtirājatanayaḥ svapitṛprasādaḥ || 60 ||

traiyambakaprasarasāgaraśāyiṣomānandātmajotpalajalakṣmaṇaguptanāthaḥ |
turyākhyasaṁtatimahodadhipūrṇacandraḥ
śrīṣaumataḥ sakalavit kila śaṁbhunāthaḥ || 61 II
śrīcandraśarmabhavabhaktivilāsayogānandābhinandaśivaśaktivicitranāthāḥ |
anye ‘pi dharmaśivavāmanakodbhaṭaśrībhūteśabhāskaramukhapramukhā mahāntaḥ || 62 ||
ete sevārasaviracitānugrahāḥ śāstrasāraprauḍhādeśaprakaṭasubhagaṁ svādhikāraṁ kilāsmai |
yat saṅprādur yad api ca janānnaikṣatākṣetrabhitān
svātmārāmas tad ayam aniśaṁ tattvasevāraso ‘bhūt || 63 ||
1) Vāmanātha, the son of the true teacher, the excellent Erakavara,
was the helmsman (of the boat on which he crossed) the ocean of the

Lineage of Bliss (ānandasaṅtati). 2) The venerable son of Bhūtirāja, who

? Abhinava has had occasion to refer to a sct of four Śaiva orders (maṭhika – literally ‘small
monasteries') (see 4/265cd-267ab, and 36/11-14), of which, he says, the Tantrāloka is imbued
with the eṣṣence (rasa). These derive thcir names from thcir founders. The Āmardaka order taught
dualiic Śśaivism. The one founded by Śrīnātha, dualitic-cum-nondualiṣic. Tryambaka is
nondual, and the additional Half Tryambaka founded by his daughteris the Kaula Trika. If ṭhīs is
the model here, as Sanderson understands it to be (2005b: 121 note 79), the Ānandasaṁtai is the
dualist Śaiva order founded by Āmardaka taught to him by Vāmanātha. While the identity of the
other three is quite clear, this one is not. The problem is the identity of Erakavara. According to

TANTRĀLOKA

was favoured (with initiation) by his father, (was for him) a radiantly
beautiful a sun (that illumined) the great sky of the lineage (santāna) of

Śrīnātha. (60)

the Kramastotra, as reported by Jayaratha (TĀv ad 4/173ab), Eraka, also called Erakanātha and
Naverakanātha, was a disciple of Keyūravatī, who was a direct disciple of Śivānanda (alias
Jñānanetra), who introduced the Krama system into the Kashmir Valley around the middle of the

9" century. That would place Erakanātha around the first half of the 10 century. Erakanātha
wrote the Kramastotra that Abhinava commented on and appreciated very much. The young

Abhinava may well have leart the Krama teachings of this, ‘the Lineage of Bliss’ of the Krama

school, from an aged Vāmanātha. Sanderson does not endorse the view that the Erakavara to

whom Abhinava refers was the Krama teacher. However, Āmardaka is a well-known founder
figure mentioned in Siddhānta sources. This is as one would expect, if this order taught dualiṣṭ
Saiviṣm.
One wonders why Abhinava refers to these teachers before he does those of the

Pratyabhijīñā and Trika, who appear in the verse that follows. If the serial order of the verses has
not been reversed by mistake, it may appear that these teachers were in some way more important

than the ones that follow. Possibly Abhinava is listing them in chronological order. Abhinava’s

first teacher was his father. We know that his commentary on the Bhagavadgitā was the earliest
surviviṇg work. There he states that he reflected on the traditional explanation taught in
Bhatṭendurāja’s tradition (ibid. intro. verse 6) and that he was Bhūtirāja’s son (concluding verse 1,

where he is compared to the sun, as he is at the beginning of the work). We know from his

reference to his commentary on the Kramastotra – the Kramakeli – in the PTy that Abhinava
wrote it before the PTv. Abhinava appears to have begun his studies with Krama and Trika
and

then moved on to the Pratyabhijīā, because although he quotes from the śvarapratyabhijñā and
other works by Utpaladeva in the PTv, he does not refer there to Lakṣmaṇagupta, who taught him

Pratyabhijñā (above 1/11). Finally, we observe that this is the serial order in which he praises
them at the beginning of the Tantrāloka also (see above, 1/7-11)
” We have seen that Bhūtirāja was one of Abhinava’s Krama teachers. Abhinava hails him with

the greatest respect as his most excellent teacher (tato gurutaraḥ śrīmānbhūtirājo mahāmatiḥ |

MVV 1/6ab) on a par with his Trika master, Śambhunātha (above, 1/9). It appears therefore that
he also taught the dualist-cum-nondualist Śaivism of the Śrīṣantati, Śrīsantāna and

Srīnāthasaṁtāna (see above comm. 1/9 and 6/89). See above, note to comm. 1/9. There has been

some speculation whether ‘the son of Bhūtirāja’ was Helārāja, who wrote an important
commentary of the Vākyapadīya by Bhartrṛhari, the foremost treatise in Sanskrit on the philosophy
of language. In the colophons at the end of each chapter, Helārāja declares that he is ‘the son of
Bhūtirāja’. Moreover, elsewhere he tells us that he was a descendent of Lakṣaṇa (> Lakṣmaṇa), a

minister of the Kashmiri king Muktāpīḍa (VP khaṇḍa 3 pt.2 p. 272). However, in the concluding
verses on his commentary on the Bhagavadgītā, Abhinava tells us that his teacher in the Gītā and

literature (ṣāhitya) was the son of Bhūtirja, called Indurāja ot Bhaṭṭendurāja. The later ascription
is amply confirmed by Abhinava himself, for he praises Bhaṭṭendurāja as his teacher at the

beginning of his commentary (locana) on the great work on poetics, the Dhvanyāloka by

Anandavardhana. Thuṣ he writes:

bhaṭṭendurājacaraṇābjakr̥ādhivāsahṛdyaśruto ‘hhinavaguptapadābhidho ham |
‘I am the one called Abhinavagupta, who has heard what is to be taken to heart, having

taken as (my) abode the lotus feet of Bhaṭṭendurāja.”

Although Indurāja's leaming as a literary criti is attested, it is not stated that he was
also leamed in the work of Bhartṭhari. Is it possible that Indurāja and Helārāja were both sons of
Bhūtirāja? We know from Jayaratha that Abhinava wrote a work called Prakīraakavivaraṇa (TĀv
ad 10/44) that has not been recovered. It appears from the context that it was a work that dealt
with grammar. As prakīrṇa is the name of the third scction (khanḍa) of the Vākyapadīya. It is
possible that it was a commentary (vivaraṇa) on this section of the Vākyapadīya. Helārāja'
commentary is called Prakīrakaprakaśa. It has been suggested on the basis of thīs very tenuous
evidence that Helārāja was the ‘son of Bhūtirāja’, to whom Abhinava is referring here (Iyer 19
40). There can be no doubt that Bharthar was well known to the expounders of the Pratyabh
Somānanda (who criticized him) and Utpaladeva (who accepted him), before Abhinava, as he was

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN
3) Lakṣmaṇaguptanātha, a disciple of Útpala, who was the disciple

(ātmaja)” of Somānanda, who lay on the ocean of (the lineage that) spread

from Tryambaka (and showed him through it). 4) Śambhunātha, who knew

everything (of the Śaiva scriptures and traditions), the disciple of the

venerable Sumati, (ilumined for him, like) the full moon, the ocean of the
lineage called the fourth. (61)
(Other

teachers

were)

the

venerable

Candraśarman,

Bhavabhaktivilāsa, Yogānanda, Abhinanda, Śivaśakti, and Vicitranātha.

There were other great (teachers also) who were (amongst) the main ones,
namely, Dharmaśiva (the Siddhāntin), Vāmanaka, Udbhaṭa (who taught
Krama, as did) the venerable Bhūteśa, and (Bhāskara,) whose face is like

the sun (bhāskaramukha). (62)

by Abhinava himself. It may well be that Abhinava did write a commentary on his work, but
beyond that there is no strong evidence that he was a disciple of Helā
” Referting to Lakṣmaṇagupta, Abhiṅnava says: by whom the bee of my mṁind, though (api)
intoxicated by relishing countless new tastes, is (eventually) satisfied with the pleasure (bliss that
is the ultīmate reality,) and attainiṅg unity with it, remains so in itself (its own self), that a wealth
of different sounds (‘doctrines) is opening in her.’ MVYV 1/10
” The expression ‘āhmaja’ can also mean ‘son’. Indeed, Pandey was of the opinion that
Utpaladeva was Somānanda’s son and Lakṣmaṇagupta, that of Utpaladeva. But the expression can
equally mean ‘spiritual son’, ic. disciple. As there are no reference in our sources to suggest
otherwise, I have chosen to translate in this way.
Read srīsaumataḥ for śrīsomataḥ. See Sanderson 2005b pp. 132-133, fn 106 concerning this
emendation.

" We have seen that there were said to be three teachers who founded the lineages that taught

dualist, dualist-cum-nondualist and non-dualist Śaivism, namely, Amardaka, Śrīnātha and
Tryambika, respectively. The daughter of the last founded a fourth ‘half tradition’ (ardhamaṭhikā)
(see above, 36/11-14),which is identified here very cleary with that of the Trika tṭransmitted to
Abhinava by Śambhunātha. Ñote, moreover, that Tryambika’s lineage descends through the nondualist Śaiva Somānanda down to Utpaladeva, who founded its development, called Pratyabhijāā
Through his disciple Lakṣmaṇagupta it reached Abhinava. Clearly, this is the lineage of the
Pratyabhijñā which, although closely related to Trika, is distinguished from it.
The reading of some of these names is uncertain. Bhava could be the name of a teacher,
Bhayvabhūti
mentioned abovein 13/149-150ab as being one of several who wrote a commentary
on the Parātīṣikā. Or,in the sense of Śiva, be linked to the following -bhaktivilāsa. It could also
be understood to mean ‘son’, thatis, the son of Candraśarman.

Pandey (1963a: 12) reads Śivabhakti for Śivaśakti. See Rastogi 1987: 35 ff.

I is not possible, at present at least, to identify all these teachers. Abhinava refers to a ritual
manual by Dharmasiva (above 31/50 see also Kṣemarāja on SYT vol. 6, pp. 8-9). Initiatory names

ending in -śiva are common amongst Śaivasiddhāntins, and so we may assume that Dharmaśiva

was one. The appellaton ‘śakti’ is commonly affixed to the names of female Siddhāntins. So it
possible that Śivaśakti was such. Vāmanaka may be identified with Bhūtitāja, one of Abhinava’s
Krama teachers (see above, note 37,77). Or it may be that Śrībhūteśa is Bhūtirāja. Udbhaṭa was
another of Abhinava’s Krama teachers (see above, TĀv ad 4/173ab). 1 have translated
‘bhāskaramukha’ as an adjective, ‘he whose face is like the sun’ referring to the teacher called
Bhāskara. It is not impossible that he is the Bhāskara who wrote a commentary on the Śivasātra.
A the beginning of it, he gives a brief account of his lineage, that descends directly from
Kallaṭabhaṭa, from whom he is removed by just four generations, and so could have been
Abhinava’s teacher (Dyczkowski 1992b: 11).
Torella has ’suggested that it is possible that Vāmanadatta, who is author of the
Viṣṇuṣṭuti, better known as the Sahvirprakāśa, mīght be the Vāmanaka mentioned here. It s also
possible that he is the same as the author of the Svahodhodayāmañjarī, a possibility to which
Torella cautiously subscribes (Torella 1994b: 482, note 4), which 1 reject (Dyczkowski 1992a:
305). Abhinava quotes Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha 2 directly above (8/428cd-434ab (428-434)): (see
Goodall (1995: intro p. 3) without criticising him:; this might be because Rāmakaṇṭha was a

TANTRĀḶLOKA

The sentiment (with which he) served (them) (sevārasa) evoked

their grace, and (so) they bestowed upon him their authority (to access and

practice the teachings of their tradition,) which was pleasing and clear by

virtue of their confident (and mature) (prauḍha) instruction concerning the

essence of the scriptures. He (for his part) did not desire (the company of)

persons who did not belong to (his) areas (of interest). (Thus, he lived a

solitary life,) delighting

within himself and always (devoted) to the sayour

(rasa) of serving (and seeking ultimate) reality. (63)
Abhinavagupta’s Students
so ʻnugrahītum atha śāṁbhavabhaktibhājaṁ

svaṁ bhrataram akhilaśāstravimarśapūrṇam |

yāvan manaḥ praṇidadhāti manorathākhyaṁ

tāvaj janaḥ katipayas tam upāsasāda || 64 ||
Now a few people came to study with him as he applied his mind to

grace his brother called Manoratha, who was (also) devoted to Śiva and

full of reflection on all the scriptures. (64)

‘The lineage called the fourth’ is the one called Ardhatryambaka
(through which the Trika teachings are transmitted). ‘Unworthy persons’ are
those who are generally unfit (to receive and practice). This is the meaning. (A
few people) ‘came to study with him’, that is, lived with him (as his students).

This is the meaning.

He (now) refers to these few people.

aāTazi J̄ī̄ TeTTGTTTTTTATI ē.,I

śrīśaurisaṁjñatanayaḥ kila karṇanāmā
yo yauvane viditaśāṁbhavatattvasāraḥ |

senior contemporary whom he would not attack directly. Again, Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, Rāmakaṇṭha’s

father, quotes the Saṁvitprakāśa. Thus, although a direct connection between Abhinava and the
author of the Saṁvitprakāśa is unlikely (Hanneder 1998: 146 note 18), it is still possible that he
was one of Abhinava’s teachers, if Abhinava was young and he was quite old,

Abhinava says this of him in the PTy:
bhrātā mamaiva śivaśāsanarūḍhacittaḥ

prepsuḥ parātmani manorathaguptanāmā |

yaḥ śāstratantram akhilaṁ pravivektukāmaḥ
prāptuṁ paraṁ śivapadaṁ bhavabhedanāya || 8 ||
teachin

‘My brother, named Manorathagupta, whose mind is well established in Śiva’s

much intent on attaining the supreme Self, desires to discern all the śāstras and Tantras

to attain iva’s supreme plane, and so destroy continued rebirth.’ PTy p. 280 (8)

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

dehaṁ tyajan prathayati sma janasya satyan
yogacyutaṁ prati mahāmunikr̥ṣṇavākyam || 65 |I
(Amongst them) was a (young) man called Karṇa, the son of the

venerable Śauri, who in his youth had (already) come to know the essence
of Śiva’s true nature (śāmbhavatattva). Leaving the body (when he was still

young), he demonstrated the truth of the words of Kṛṣṇa the great ascetic,
about those fallen from (the practice) of Yoga. (65)
‘The words of Kṛṣṇa’ (are as is said in) the Gīta:

He who has fallen from Yoga is born in the house of a pure and noble
family. Or he is reborn in a family of wise yogis endowed with wisdom. Such a
birth in this world is indeed (even) more difficult to attain.

There he regains that level of realisation that he possessed in his

previous body, and by virtue of this, O Joy of the Kurus, he keeps on practicing

in order to attain perfection in Yoga.
He is, even against his will, transported by that former practice, and

desiring to know Yoga, transcends the study of the Vedas (śabdabrahman).

The yogi, continuously practicing with great effort, purified of all sins,
perfected through many births, reaches the ultimate goal.”

Kama was the husband of Ambā, who was Abhinava’s sister. Abhinava refers to him, still alive,
in one of the concluding verses (7) of the PTy, where we read:

tasyaivātmabhavo vibhāvitajagatsargashitĩḥ śaikaradhyānārcāparicintanaikarasikaḥ karṇābhidhāno dvijaḥ |
ya bālye ’py atha yauvane ’pi viṣayāsaktiṁ vihāya sthirām
enām āśrayate vimarśapadavīṁ saṁsāraniṛṇālinīm | 7 I
‘The Brahmin called Karṇa, son (of Śauri), who has meditated deeply on the creation

and present state of the world, and whose sole delight is the thoughts (born of) the meditation and

worship of Śiva, who in (his) childhood also, as well as in his youth, abandoned all attachment to

the objects of sense, and took refuge in this firm path of reflection (vimarśa) that uproots
transmigratory existence.’ PTy p. 279-280 (7)

We may also note, by the way, that Kara is mentioned along with his close friend
Mandra at the beginning of the MVV (I/I), as his true disciple. Together they requested him to
write the MVV. Thus, he was certainly alive then also. Mandra, his childhood friend, is not
mentioned in the PTy, as he is here (below 37/66). This is surprising, as it was probably written
after the MVV.

Iṇ one of the concluding verses to the PTy (p. 279, (5)) Abhinava refers to Śaura as the son of
Vallabha, a Brahmin who was prime minister at the time of king Yaśaskara (reigned 939-348 CE).

He praises him as possessing many fine qualitis, and as dedicated to meditatig on Śiva.
Vatsalikā was his wife, see below TĀ 37/75 note 37,97 and 98.

The spiritual merits of a person who is engaged in the practice of Yoga but unable to reach the
goal in one life are not lost. Rather, they ensure that he is reborn to parents who are both advanced
in Yoga and in an environment that encourages and sustains its practice so that he may attain
liberation.

Arjuna in the Bhagavadgītā is anxious to know what happens to a person who dies without

being able to achieve perfection in Yoga. BhGī 6/43cd-47 Jayaratha quotes here is Kṛṣṇa’s reply
to his question.

TANTRĀLOKA

#ṃīrz zdTavGTGJTITTTT: |

vṁzzafī a aT@a
aIJcTā fSaād gTTI: |

ÉIAIIKECEEZGAYU ḺI

qfd̃ zaēzd ēfē īēr-T I| Ṝ.9 1I

TTTĪ TṬPPJTTÑaTTHTTYRTTHTHTĪ: I €.¢ 1

TÑTITRJTTGVTĪTRĀTA: t|

iṭaEE|EUtCḺIEIIẼĒEI

TTZ-TTJRT: Ñ: _ I Ē II

tadbālamitram atha mantriṣutaḥ prasiddhaḥ
śrīmandra ity akhilasāraguṇābhirāmaḥ |
lakṣmīsarasvati samaṁ yamalañ cakãra
sāpatnakaṁ tirayate subhagaprabhāvaḥ || 66 ||
anye pitṛyyatanayāḥ śivaśaktiśubhrāḥ
kṣemotpalābhinavacakrakapadmaguptāḥ |
ye saṁpadaṁ trṇ amamaṁsata śaṁbhusevāsaṁpūritaṁ svahr̥dayaṁ hr̥di bhāvayantaḥ || 67 ||
ṣaḍardhaśāstreṣu samastam eva

yenādhijagme vidhimaṇḍalādi |
sa rāmagupto guruśaṁbhuśāstrasevāvidhivyagrasamagramārgaḥ || 68 II
anyo ʻpi kaścana janaḥ śivaśaktipātasaṁpreraṇāparavaśasvakaśaktisārthaḥ|
abhyarthanāvimukhabhāvam aśikṣitena

tenāpy anugrahapadaḥ kṛtaḥ . . . I| 69abc II
Now, the venerable Mandra” was his childhood friend and, well

known, was the son of a minister. He was beautiful with all the essence of

(good) qualities (guṇa). Both Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī adorned him equally.

(Indeed,) the power of charm (and good fortune) surmounts rivalry

between wives. (66)
Others were the sons of his paternal uncle, bright with Śiva’s
power. They were Kṣema, Utpala, Abhinava, Cakraka and Padmagupta,
“ See above, note 37,86.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

who considered worldly success (sarīpat) (to be as worthless as) grass,

meditatingin (their) heart on their own (true) heart, which was completely

filled (by their devout) service to Śiva.” (67)

(Another was) Rāmagupta, who, (devoutly) intent on all the path of

service to the teacher, Śiva and the scriptures, came to know all the rites

and maṇḍalas etc. (prescribed)in the Trika scriptures.” (68)

(Indeed,) any other person (who came to him) possessing (spiritual)
power of his own, helplessly impelled by a descent of Śiva’s power, he made
a locus (of Śiva’s) grace, for he had not been taught to be averse to

refusing a (sincere) request. (69)

(They were meditating on their own (true) heart) ‘in (their) heart’, that

is, on the plane of reflective awareness. This is the meaning. (He helped anyone

(who came to him) possessing (spiritual)) ‘power (of his own)’, that is, the

capacity (to understand and practice).

' An intentional play on words based on the word ‘heart’, which is both the individual heart of
each one as the abode of the individual soul and the universal Heart of consciousness, which is its
supreme subjectivity or ‘I-ṅess’. Itis impossible to say whether the person Abhinava refers to here
amongst these five brothers, his paternal cousins, as Kṣema, was Kṣemarāja, the only disciple who
can be said to have continued his work.
Ṛāmagupta must have been Rāmadeva, to whom Abhinava refers at the end of the PTy p. 280
(9). as being of noble birt and as an expert in Sanskrit grammar, ritual and logic, but solely
concentrated on Śiva’s scriptures. At the end of his commentary on the Neīratantra, Kṣemarāja
refers to a certaīn Śrīrāma as ‘the fist of the group of teachers' (śrīrāmādigurugrāmas-). Could
this be the same man?
Rcad padah for -pada.
“ To sum up, comparing this account with the other found in the concluding verses of the PV (p.
279-280) (5-10) (A) parallel t0 TĀ (B). Sanderson (2006, p. 7 note 16) co-ordinates them as
follows: (TĀ 37/65-83), concerning his disciples Kara (Vallabha, prime miniṣter [amātyāgraṇḥ]
of Yaśaskara (reigned 939-348 CE) (A 5) > Śauri, who retired to devote himself o religion [B 75]
> Kamṇa), and his cousin Mandra, described as the wealthy and leamed son of an unnamed
minister (B 66). Śauri was the brother of Mandra’s father and was married to Vatsalikā (A 6 ab, B
75a) in a house provided by whom Abhinavagupta wrote his Tantrāloka (B 82). Sanderson notes
(ibid p. 7) that: ‘the innermost circle of the devotees of Abhinavagupta . . . consisted of members
of ministerial families one of a grandson of the same king’s [ic. Yaśaskara’s] prime minṣer.
This trend continues with Jayaratha, whose patilineal ancestors included ministers to several
kings.

TANTRĀLOKA

āJJTIÑT] JṬTTfTTTRTgĀTT I 2, 1
esa vargaḥ || 7Od II
ācāryam abhyarthayate sma gāḍhaṁ
saṁpūrṇatantrādhigamāya samyak |
jāyeta daivānugṛhītabuddheḥ
saṁpatprabandhaikarasaiva saṁṅpat | 70 ||
so 'py abhyupāgamad abhīpsitam asya yad vā
svātodyam eva hi ninartiṣato ‘vatīrṇam |

so ʻnugrahapravaṇa eva hi sadgurūṇām-

ājñāvaśena śubhasūtimahāṅkureṇa || 71 I

This was the group (of disciples) who requested the teacher (to

teach them,) in order to learn (all the) Tantras fully, in depth and properly.
May the wealth (saṁpat) of the intellect of one graced by (good) fate be

dedicated solely to (this) literary work, (which is itself an unbroken stream

of) prosperity (saṁpatprabandha). (70)
He also accepted their request, or else (how could it be otherwise,)

the required musical instrument is surely furnished to one who wants to

dance.” At the command of his excellent teachers, which is the great sprout
that gives birth to (all that is) auspicious, he was (always) inclined to favour

(them). (71)

‘This was the group (of disciples) who, in order to learn (all the)

Tantras fully. ‘requested the teacher (to teach them)ʼ. This is the

(syntactical) relationship (between these statements). (He accepted) ‘their”
(request) that is, of (this) group (of disciples).

(By saying) ‘or else (how could it be otherwise,)ʼ, (he) mentions

another view in order to highlight (what would happen even if that) request is
not made (i.e. Abhinavagupta would have taught them anyway, for that was
essential for them).

fastīravraṁzāī ftaaāiī
rṝ=š. āa- ṬG. fcafrz

ard smāzfṁ ũarrāī-hū
J sṜ i

GIÉEFÚḤEĀCFEEVLLEI

ÉẽlEiḷēīktēṟeic-atōrirziIHCEḤI

” The sense seems to be this – he who intensely desires something, sooner or later finds an
occasion to satisfy his desire.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

etEtctāEIHTAIEĪḶIRCTĀ]I

g vrTkṁēaqaaāṝai—
TTTST
āṬ JTTTHIITĀT I |ey, 1]
vikṣiptabhāvaparihāram atho cikīrṣan
mandraḥ svake puravare sthitim asya vavre |
ābālagopam api yatra maheśvarasya
dāsyaṁ janaś carati pīṭhanivāsakalpe || 72 ||
tasyābhavat kila pitṛyyavadhūr vidhātrā
yā nirmame galitasaṁsṛticitracintā |
śītāṁśumaulicaraṇābjaparāgamātrabhūṣāvidhir vihitavatsalikocitākhyā || 73 I|
mūrtā kṣameva karuṇeva gṛhītadehā
dhāreva vigrahavatī śubhaśīlatāyāḥ |
vairāgyasāraparipākadaśeva pūrṇā
tattvārtharamarucirasthitirohaṇorvī || 74 ||

bhartāpi tasyāḥ śaśiśubhramauler-

bhaktyā paraṁ pāvitacittavr̥ttiḥ |
sa śaurir ātteśvaramantribhāvas
tatyāja yo bhūpatimantribhāvam || 75 ||
Wishing (to help him) avoid distraction, Mandra invited him to his
own excellent city where, like a sacred place, everybody including children

and cowherds behaved as servants to Maheśvara.” (72)

The same expression ~ mahesvaraṣya dāsyaṁ – is found in the first verse of Utpaladevas
Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā, īn which he proclaims that this is his condition (i.c. that of a servant of
Maheśvara, Śiva the Great Lord). Note also that in these verses, Abhinava uses the same word for
‘wealth’, good fortune’ ‘success' sahpai. Here it s:
kathaṅcid āsādya maheśvarasya dāsyaṁ

janasyāpy upakāram iccan |

samstasaṁpatsamavāptihetuṁ
tatpratyabhij~ām upapādayāmi |

‘Having in some way attained the status of a servant of Maheśvara (maheśvarasya
dāsyaṁ) and wishing to offer assistance also to the whole of mankind, I shall - by giving its logic

justification - make possible the awakening of the recognition of the Lord, which brings about the
achievement of all success. ĪP 1/1/1

TANTRĀḶOKA

Vatsalikā and Her Husband, the Minister Śauri

He (i.e. Mandra) had an aunt who was the wife of a paternal uncle

and was appropriately given the name Vatsalikā (Endearing One). The
creator had fashioned her (in such a way as to render her) free of the

(many) diverse worries of (worldly) existence. Her only manner of
adornment was the pollen of the lotuses of the feet of (Lord Śiva), the One

whose diadem is the (crescent) Moon (sitāṁīśumauli). (73)

She was like patience personified, compassion incarnate, a river of

auspicious virtue embodied. She was like the complete state of the perfect

maturity of the essence of dispassion, the earth wherein grows, like a

splendid gem, the essence of truth (tattvārtha).” (74)
Such was the case with her husband” also, whose state of mind

(cittavṛtti) was completely purified by devotion to Śiva. This was Śauri”
who, having assumed the state of a minister (mantribhāva) of the Lord,
renounced the condition of a minister to the king. (75)

‘Heʼ, that is, Mandra (had an aunt who served Abhinavagupta). (Śauri

assumed the state of) ‘a minister” (mantrin) (to the Lord) and (that of an) adept

also.

Ambā: Abhinavagupta’s Sister

’ Abhinava praises Vatsalikā at the end of the PTy (p. 279) in the same way. saying that she was:
sīlaṣyāyatanaṁ parasya yaśaso jr̥mṁbhãspadaṁ narmabhãr
vātsalyaṣya samagralokakarumādharṇasya janmasthitiḥ |
sśrīmadvatsalikābhidhā sahacārī taṣyaiva bhakyullasatprodriktāntaravr̥ti śaṁkaranutau yaṣyā mano jrmbhate | 6 l

‘A veritable temple of supreme virtue, the place where (spiritual) fame manifests,
garden of tender affection (vātsalya), whose observance (dharma) is compassion for all creatures,
and whose condition from birth is denoted (by her name)– the venerable Vatsalikā (EĒndearing

One). (Śauri) was her companion (sahacārin) and her mind, resplendent with inner devotion,

bowing (and dedicated) to Śiva, unfolds (perpetually).’ (6)
° Sanderson suggests the reading bhartā (‘husband’) for bhrātā (‘brother’). Taking, no doubt, the
expression sahacārin -. ‘companion’ Abhīnava uṣes in the verse in PTy quotedin the previous
note with reference to Śauri, in its usual sense of ‘husband’. Gnoli, on the contrary, understands
sahacārin, which he agrees would normally mean husband, to mean ‘brother’ in this context.
Sanderson’s suggestion appears to be much more plausible and so, accordingly, I read bhartāpi
‘wife also for bhrātāpi brother also’.
“ See above, 37/65.
' The word ‘mantrin’ means both ‘minister’ and ‘one who recites Mantra’, that is, one who
invokes Deity by repcating its Mantra. This is essentially the practice of a sādhaka, that is,

repeated recitation of Mantra (mantrajapa).

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

ŠEEEIEEĒEUEÉELEE

I . |]

šṭagīĪ gavryrdīarzṝara

a aīsa: 1| s¢ 1

aÑ JITÑ JṬHGRJTTYTT|

ŠiErCIEZIECAAEIT-

ī arTTGaT I| `98, II

graāṁ āāraāīsfi+razg

ī #arv a-rGkft
aī: |
ṝ- ftz--ī
a=

tasya snuṣā karṇavadhir vidhūta-

saṁsāravṛttiḥ sutam ekam eva |
yāsūta yogeśvaradattasaṁjñaṁ
nāmānurūpasphuradarthatattvam || 76 ||
yām agrage vayasi bhartṛviyogadīnām
anvagrahīt trinayanaḥ svayam eva bhaktyā |
bhāviprabhāvarabhaseṣu janeṣv anarthaḥ
sārthaṁ samākṛṣati so ‘rthaparamparāṇām || 77 ||
bhaktyullasatpulakatāṁ sphuṭam aṅgabhūṣāṁ
śrīśaṁbhunāthanatim eva lalāṭikāṁ ca |
Śaivaśrutiṁ śravaṇabhūṣaṇam apy avāpya
saubhāgyam abhyadhikam udvahati sma yā ʻntaḥ|| 78 Il

ambābhidhānā kila ṣā guruṁ taṁ

svaṁ bhrātaraṁ śambhudr̥śābhyapaśyat |
bhāviprabhāvojjvalabhavyabuddhiḥ
sato ‘vajānāti na bandhubuddhyā I| 79 lI
bhrātā tadīyo ʻbhinavaś ca nāmnā
na kevalaṁ saccaritair api svaiḥ |
pītena vijñānarasena yasya
tatraiva tr̥ṣṇā vavṛdhe nikāmam || 80 ||

TANTRĀLOKA

(Ambā, Śauri’s) daughter-in-law, that is, Karṇa’s wife," had

shaken off the condition of worldly life (saṁsāravṛtti). She had only one son,

who was given the name Yogeśvara (Lord of Yoga),' who was radiant
with the essence of reality, as befitted his name. (76)
Saddened by the separation from her husband, who preceded (her

in death) when he was (still) young, (Śiva) the Three Eyed One Himself

(spontaneously) graced her by virtue of (her) devotion. In those who are

zealous for future greatness, a misfortune drags with it a series of good

fortunes. (77)

The clearly apparent ornament of her body was the horripilation

due to (her) deyotion; (the ornament of her) forehead was her respect for

the venerable Śambhunātha; she also obtained as an ornament (for her)

ears, her hearing of (the sacred) Śaiva (scriptures), (and so as a result), she
bore within (herself) an extraordinary (inner) beauty (saubhāgya). (78)

Her name was Ambā. She viewed the teacher, her own brother, as if

he were Śiva (Himself). One who possesses an intellect, excellent with

future (destined) greatness, does not disrespect the wise, considering them
to be (mere) relatives. (79)
Her brother was Abhinava by name, not only because of his own
righteous deeds. One who has drunk the aesthetic juice (rasa) of
consciousness, his craving there itself (for it) grows exceedingly (nikāmam),

by virtue of that. (80)

He explains (how his condition was) ‘ever new’ (abhinavatva), not only

(for his) righteous deeds.

Living in the House Vatsalikā Gave Him,

Assisted by Lumpaka, He Wrote the Tantrāloka

ēdN TGTĀ I| C |I
iRrd'Ticariu
fkrā. aāaa
ft ārçf1 1

'” Karṇa was Śaurī’s son. Karṇa’s wife was Ambā, Abhinavagupta’s sister. See above, note
37.86.

.2Read yogesvara- for yogesvari-.

har for satyam. Cf. above 37/36 and note.

supplies various explanations of his name, he himself has conceived. See above, 1/1

and 4/278cd-279ab (278) and below 37/85. Here heis saying that he is called this because of his

pious actions, inluding the performance of rituals and the like, not just because of his knowledge.
Read na saccaritakr̥tam eva for saccaritakṛtam eva.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

IṬTHITTṬ]
TṬĪT TTTT TTT I ¢3 I
so ʻnyaś ca śāṁbhavamarīcicayapraṇaśyat-

saṅkocahārdanalinīghatitojjvalaśrīḥ |

taṁ lumpakaḥ paricacāra samudyameṣu
sādhuḥ samāvahati hanta karāvalambam || 81 II
itthaṁ grhe vatsalikāvitīrṇe

sthitaḥ samādhāya matiṁ bahūni |
pūrvaśrutānyākalayan svabuddhyā
śāstrāṇi tebhyaḥ samavāpa sāram || 82 ||
Lumpaka was another (devotee) whose blazing (spiritual) opulence
(Śśrī) (grew) by virtue of the lotus of (his) heart, as its contraction came to be

(progressively) destroyed by the multitude of Śiva’s rays. He assisted

(Abhinava in his) exertions. Indeed, a wise man is (always quick) to lend a

hand! (81)
In this way, staying in the house granted him by Vatsalikā, and

there concentrating (his) mind, interpreted with his intelligence many
ancient scriptures, extracting from them (their) essence. (82)
Concluding Invocation and Blessing

q fha-ṝ fāaṝ ars

JIGĪĒHTĀT āCTTTI

r: gG afRāī f-ā̄G | ¢3 1

T=TĪSṬGTĪTT Īft āāra
r̥̄tḷ r̥d f̃Ra ra |

TaTSTTGTIT N TṬTHÇRĀĪ I C II
sa tan nibandhaṁ vidadhe mahārthaṁ
yuktyāgamodīritatantratattvam |

ālokam āsādya yadīyam eṣa

lokaḥ sukhaṁ sañcaritā kriyāsu || 83 ||

grhṇīta pūrvaṁ vidhir eṣa tāvat |
tadapi grṛhṇātu bhavanmatiṁ sā
sadyo ‘nugṛhṇātu ca tattvadrṣṭyā || 84 ||

TANTRĀLOKA

(Thus), he composed this greatly precious (mahārtha) work, in

which is expounded the essence of the Tantras (tantratattva), in accord with
reason (yukti) and the tradition (āgama). Easy is the practice of (their) rites

once (the people of) this world has acquired (its) light (āloka). (83)

May you (who are) good receive well (anugrh) this, his work, but

first of all seek to grasp it (grh). This is the rule. And may that also' lay

hold (gṛh) of your mind and soon grace it (anugṛrh) by the vision of the
reality (it bestows). (84)
In order make known that the name of his book accords with it content

(artha), he says: “(Thus) he composed this workʼ etc. In order to explain the

condition of receiving (anugraha) and laying hold (grahaṇa) as
interchangeable, he says ‘first of all’ (seek to grasp it (grh)) (and may) ‘that
also’ (lay hold (gṛh) of your mind.
Or else (one may ask,) what is the use of requesting local learned people
who are skilled, it is Śiva Himself who will be the one here who hears (the

teachings of this book). Thus, he says:

isa

fkra fnr īaq ūai: Jāī
āa fs- 3fṝīī aī ft aāṇzrad–

-īaú’NTqr aTTTĪReTT I| ¢u II

idam abhinavaguptaprombhitaṁ śāstrasāraṁ
śiva niśamaya tāvat sarvataḥ śrotratantraḥ |
tava kila nutir eṣā sā hi tvadrūpacarcety abhinavaparituṣṭo lokam ātmīkuruṣva || 85 ||
O Śiva, you who hear (everything) in all respects, listen (graciously)

to this essence of the scriptures, composed by Abhinavagupta. This, in

truth, is praise (nuti) (dedicated) to You; and, indeed, it is an examination
of your nature. (O Lord,) satisfied by (this) praise (abhinava), make the

(whole) world one with Yourself! (85)

Here is another clear double meaning. The word ‘mahārtha’ literally means ‘greatly precious’.

It is also a name of the Krama system. Although it is clear at every step that the Tantrāloka is an

Anuttara Trika Śaiva work, here Abhinaya covertly implies that it is also a Krama work.

” Abhinava is referring, by this play on words, to the Tantrāloka which, as the essence of the

Tantras, explains how their Trika rituals should be performed. Here, the end of his treatise mirrors

the beginning, where he refers to it as a liturgical manual’ (paddhati) (above, 1/14).
Ó Read, as Jayaratha does, tad api for tato 'pi.

' There is a play on the word ‘abhinava’, the second part of which is derived here from the root

nu – to praise – and so is understood to mean ‘praise’ (ui, stava).

Alternative translation could be: ‘The essence of all scriptural writings has been put

together by Abhinavagupta (in this Tantrāloka) so that Śiva may bring peace to all who hear it.
Inspired by You, O Lord Śiva, this work talks about You; I, Abhinavagupta, pray that you be
pleased with this hymn, and request You appear in every particle of this world.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

‘O Śiva’, Supreme Lord! It is You who are the one that hears me.
‘Listen (graciously) to this essence’ which is in the midst of the scriptures,
‘composed’ with the excellence which is that of encompassing in itself all
knowledge and its true nature, ‘by Abhinavagupta’, who has attained fame
(prasiddhi) by (constantly) reflecting (cintana) on Your (sacred) feet. This is the

meaning. It is for this reason that ‘you who hear (everything) in all respects’

are oṃmniscient to this same extent. The sense is that one who is not omniscient
does not have the competence to ascertain (its true and complete meaning).
Moreover, that alone is not the reason here (to write this book). Thus he says:
‘this, in truth, is praise (nuti) (dedicated) to Youʼ. (However,) one should not

consider that the nature of this (book) is just a hymn."' Thus he says: ‘īndeed, it

is an examination of your nature’. The meaning is that ‘This’ ‘praise (nuti)’
(that is dedicated) to Youʼ is the examination of Your nature as the object of
praise, that is, the repeated reflective awareness of (Your) own nature. It is this

(praise) alone of Śiva, Who is nondual consciousness, that is described here
with every word. Thus, O Lord, being satisfied with my praise (abhinava) (or
‘with me Abhinava’), which is (this) hymn (nava) (that eulogises You) in every
way (abhitaḥ) all around, ‘make the (whole) world one with Yourself!” Make

it one with Your own nature, as one’s own nature that has been recognized (to
be Yours,) so that everybody may be competent to understand (and attain) that.

This is the auspicious (end).

‘Jayaratha explained this, the thirty-seventh chapter (of the Tantrāloka).
May the wise (sar) reflect on this right up to the end, and may it be auspicious in
every way.’
Thuṣ (ends) Chapter Thirty-seven, called the Description of the State of

What Should Be Adopted etc., of the (commentary called) Discernment, of the

venerable Tantrāloka.

This book has come to an end.
Conclusion of Jayaratha’s Commentary
The illuṣṭrious and most excellent teacher has, with incomparable effort,

examined and reflected on the truth extracted from all the scriptures and the
troupe of (its) many attendants. Having done so, what he taught in this

(commentary), the wise and noble (arya) should bear in the treasure chest of the
lotus of (their) heart, so that (it may all be auspicious and for Lord) Śiva
(śivāya). (1)

He who has studied (each and every) word in all the scriptures, who
exerts himself in (the practices taught in) the treatises on Yoga (yogaśāstra), he
who has developed passion for the coherence of the teachings declared (in the
scriptures) (vākyārtha) which is the nectar of the illustrious (philosophy of)
recognition, he who by virtue of his extensive study of other (forms of)
'! Read stotrarūpatvam eva atrāsyāstīti for stotrarūpatvaṁ ca atra na astīti.

TANTRĀLOKA

reasoning, possesses the knowledge of duality and nonduality,""" may he be

competent in this (teaching). The words of others is like prattle. (2)

He who, in order to make this universe, prevails over everything; He
who, because He is omniscient, institutes all the scriptures and, compassionate,
bestows the cessation of all fear of phenomenal existence. In the world he is
(Kailāsa), the king of the mountains, whois the teacher (guru) (whois the ‘more
weighty ‘senior” of Śiva),'' whose feet are worshipped by Indra and the rest
(of the gods,) and is the beloved of the Daughter of the Mountains. Thus,

everywhere here in the world and elsewhere (in the other worlds), he who is the
lord of the mountains, is well known as the Snowy Mountain (himācala). (3)

(This is) where (Kashmir,) the land of unsurpassable ((anuttara) good

fortune, which is Anuttara), (presided by) the glorious (goddess) Śāradā, is
located. Itis as if the dwelling place of the northern quarter, (the elevated home)
of those engaged in philosophical debate, (where) the words of their (Trika)

respondents rest on (that most excellent reality — Anuttara,) to which (when

taught) there can be no reply (and further discussion). (4)

(Śiva, the Himalaya’s) son-in-law, attractive by virtue of (his) locks

fashioned by (the art of the) energy of (the moon,) the One Whose Rays are
Nectar, has taught in an instant respect for all (his) words, once known (they are
His). The mountain (himself listening to them) bore that (country) on (his) head,
for it is the land of truth, attended by all the philosophies, nestled like a bee
within (Lord SŚiva’s) crescent moon. (5)
Śāradā is the goddess of the sacred seat here in (this) seat of knowledge
(vidyāpīṭha) called Kashmir, where she is the Speech of all who are celebrated
as the most famous. (Discerning and) impelling the true nature of that reflective

awareness which is the (very) Self even of awakened consciousness, she is

praised as the most important (mukhya), and so prevails united with Vijayeśvara
(the Lord of Victory), who is the Lord of the sacred seat, she who, by the

presence of Her own greatness, is the foundation of awakened consciousness.

(6)

That which makes wine (maireya)'' have the greatest effect, that none
would not desire, the Goddess Śāradā, who makes known the supreme nature of
knowledge, and the Vitastā that assumes dexterous exertion in good action —
where that unimpaired triad (trika) (of will, knowledge and action)is found, it

nourishes intensely the ordinance (praśasti) (of Śiva and the king). (7)

Within (that land of Kashmir) is Pravarapura (the Most Excellent City)

which, embodied, is named in accord with truth (tathya). The one who made it

was (the most excellent – pravara) king Pravara (by name), who attained
success (siddhi) because he was before (all others), as the Lord whose body
'" One could also translate dvaitādvayajñāna- as ʻthe knowledge of the nonduality of duality°.

' The word guru also means ‘more weighty° or ‘senior°.

'" Maireyais a kind ofintoxicating drink made of two kinds of wine, surā and asava.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

(aṅka) bore his own name, and because of the orders he had had written
(lekhādeśa), and (so too) because he had obtained the most excellent (vara) host
of attendants. (Thus,) because he was one with the part of the immortal house
which is (its) head, he attained Siva’s abode. (8)

(Kashmir is) where the doctrine of the nonduality of the Lord
(īśvarādvaitavāda), which is the path of right conduct (nīti) taught by the best of
teachers, beginning with the illustrious Somānanda, was formed through sound
(intelligence and) skill. Once obtained there, it came forth from Kashmir, its

fragrance clearly apparent, delighting all countries, unseen in (any) other land,
like the spread of saffron (that grows only there), it became the object of
everyone’s praise. (9)

Adoring the city, the illustrious king Yaśaskara"" brought low the

condition of the rule of Dharmasūnu by discriminating discernments of what is

true and false, and made the one called Pūrṇamanoratha" minister in all matters

concerning the stability of Dharma. (10)

His son, Utpala(ratha) obtained a son (called) Prakāśaratha, the
moonlight of whose fame made the universe one with the light (of
consciousness). Clever (catura) as he was, he gave birth to (four – catvāra)
sons, (namely), Dharma(ratha), Uttama(ratha), Sūrya(ratha) and Manoratha,

who were beloved to the heart of all people and were precious like the Lord’s

grace. (11-12)

Sūryaratha, like Viṣṇu with four arms, had as many sons, who were
skilful in embracing Lakṣmī (the Goddess of Wealth), (called) Amṛta(ratha),
Vaśiṣṭha(ratha), Utpala(ratha 2) and Jyestha(ratha). (13)
In

the

monastery

(called)

Vartakāra

in

Utpala

and

Amṛtaratha, who were (the embodiment of) good deeds and diligent work, took

refuge with the Brahmins (who resided there).' (14)

The armies (niveśa) of the (king of) of the land of Trigarta' were made

to hang, (helplessly drenched) by the waters of the rut of the elephants (of
Ananta’s army). (The armies) complained that (the earth was) languishing (and

! Yaśaskara ruled from 939 to 948 CE.
"i Ṟastogi 1987: 88: ‘Pūmamanoratha, the firṣt known ancestor of Jayaratha, was a colleague of
Vallabha who was a minister in king Yaśaskar’s court. We have seen that his son Śauri was
Abhinaya’s senior contemporary, and grandson Karṇa was married t©o Ambā, Abhinava’s siṣter.
. The Sanskrit reads:
śālāsthāne vartakāre maṭhe sukr̥takarmaṭhau |
teṣūpalāmṛtarathau cakrāte dvījasaṁśrayau l
This tramslation is bascd on the one in Hindī by Paramharṁsṣa Miśrā. I suggest the following one:
‘Amongst them, Utpala(ratha) and Amṛtaratha established two monasteries (matha), that

were engaged in good (spiritua) work and were the support of (virtuous) Brahmins in a place

there was (formerly) a metal workshop (vartakāra (?)). (12)
""T Thiṣ was another name for Jālandhara, which is situated in the northwest of India.

TANTRĀLOKA

decreasing in vigour (mlāni)), and so too of the sullied state of the spreading

reputation of king there (of that place). (In response,) Ananta,'' (the king who
was) like the moon of the earth, put to flight with great force (the darkness of)

the king of the Dards. Having attained (on that occasion) the status of his
minister, Utpala(ratha) (now) also (attained) a befitting path (padáhati) on the

road to liberation (as did the king). (15)

His maternal uncle, the illustrious Vibhūtidatta, made him (his) disciple.
(Vibhūtidatta) was the son of Kamaladatta, who was the son-in-law of

Lakṣmīḍatta, the king of Gañja. (16)

Although (Vibhūtidatta) out of love for him had taught his eldest son all

the scriptures (sarṁhitā), and then also consecrated him (as a teacher),

(however,) the deity did not accept that consecration, (and so) he died within
seven days (of receiving it). (Vibhūtidatta) was averse to his youngest son and
so did not give him the consecration. Then he was awakened (vibodhita) by the

goddess in a dream, (who said to him) “may (the consecration of) this son take
place by means of him (i.e Utpalaratha).” (17)

(From Utpalaratha) he obtained (the teaching concerning) union (with a

Yoginī) (melāpa) which, threaded through with great Kaulika'” knowledge, is

glorious and should be given to just one (most excellent) disciple. Having
attained the reality which is free of (further) rebirth, that Brahmin (Uṭpalaratha),
who was (just like) the Lord who sustained the world, gave (the teaching (artha)
concerning (freedom from) further rebirth) to Śrīcakra, (a pupil of Vibhūtidatta).
From Śrīcakra, (Viśvadatta) took all (the teaching,) that was obtained from the

lineage of his own the father, along with the competence (to practice it that) was
given (with it). (18)
Now when his teacher (Vibhūtidatta passed away and) attained oneness
with the Supreme Abode, (Utpalaratha) brought (Śrīcakra’s spiritual) son
Viśvadatta to his own residence, and he did the most important of good deeds,
that is, taught him the Saṁhitās, and he, having made known his (good)
qualities, took hold of his own competence (and authority of his own ancestral
legacy). (19)
(Then,) in order to live there, (Viśvadatta moved to) a monastery

(maṭha) in front a temple constructed by the illustrious Kanakadatta who,

after he had (constructed it,) gave him the full amount of gold and immovable
assets (for his maintenance). (20)
(Utpalaratha)

obtained

four sons called

Śiva(ratha),

Śakra(ratha),

Samma(ratha) and Nandiratha. Their intentions extremely profound and

'! King Ananta ruled from 1028 to 1063 CE.
! Read kaulika- for laukika-.
ṭ is not possible to say who this Kanakadatta was. He was possibly a relative of Vibhūtidatta,
as their common surname ‘datta’ may indicate.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

impassioned (sarasa), they were like oceans and veritable jewel mines of many
(good) qualities. (21)

They attained great proficiencyin the daily practice of devotion to Śiva.

(They were) dedicated to the attainment of all goals. (Out of them,) Śivaratha,
(Uṭpalaratha’s eldest son,) took up attendance to liberation (mokṣasevā) and
(dedicated all) he had inherited from his father (to that end,) and resigned from
his (ministerial) responsibilities. Having renounced (that,) he came to know the

defects of wealth, and became devoid of attachment and free of clinging. (2223)

Authority (to be a minister) was conferred upon that learned man by

king Ucchala.'" Having created a stable state of law and order (dharma) (in the
country) for some time, free of clinging, he renounced (his post). (24)

By Śiva’s grace, from Sammaratha (two sons) were born, called

Guṇaratha and Devaratha, who, like worldly enjoyment and liberation, were the
hope of all. (25)

Of the two, the one called Guṇaratha erected a new (monastery called)
Acalaśrīmaṭha which, because he was well known to be on the true path (of his

right conduct), was not burnt even when the city (of Pravarapura) was burnt by

fire. (26)

He gave birth to scholarliness itself (in the form of) two sons called
Guṅgaratha and Laṅkaratha, who were fit for the two worlds (of men and gods),
and (were like) fame and discernment. (27)
Having given birth to one son, as if in order to announce the fame of the

future second one, Guṅgaratha died (while still) young. (28)

Greedy for the dust of (her saintly husband’s) feet, (his widow) served
the wise intelligence (dhī) that was bound to the ordinances of the fire offerings
to the manes and gods, and (her) thought was great with good deeds
accumuḷated by blameless conduct. By rivelling the radiant beauty of the nails
(of his feet,) coming forth clearly (from them) white and clear, she was like the
river of the gods. (29)

This (son), Śṛṁgāraratha by name, his virtue well known (to all), whom

the illustrious Rājarāja in due course appointed as a minister, was brought up (as

a child) by that mother called Sattvā. (30)

l Kiṇg
Ucchala rcigned from 1101 to 111 CE.
Read sivānugrahād for śivānugagād.
Sanderson has translated this verse, concerning which he writes (2006b: 159-160 and ibid. note
579): Evidence of the date of Ṛājāṅaka Jayaratha is herein the last verses of his commentary.
There he tells us that his father Śrgāraratha was made a minister by the king Rājarāja. It was his
father who inspired him to write his commentary on the Tantrāloka (v. 30). At the end of his
commentary (—vimarśinī) on Ruyyaka’s Alaikārasarvaṣva (p. 753, 1I 10-15), he reports that his
father Śrṅgāraratha was the priṅcipal miniṣter (manriṇām agraṇīḥ) of RṚājaāja. No Kashmiri king

TANTRĀLOKA

Although (his enemies) where made to wither away in the fire of his
majesty, that possessed the lustre of the sun at the end of a cosmic age, that was
not so for the host of celestial maidens who, (surrounding him,) were the

treasure of (his) garland (mālyanidhi). (So too,) the course of (his right) conduct
(and service to his subjects) was greatly cooling (for them,) filled as it was with
the nectar that flowed from the description of the spread of his fame, that
challenged (even) the moon (and the kings of the lunar dynasty). (31)
He extracted' the best (rorodogdhā) of all people with talent by his
knowledge of (their) inner qualities, and he gave more to all people here who

were enamoured with (their) talent. His zeal for (his good) intentions was

endless, and so it was he who become (the real) instrument that induced my

reflection on (the meaning of) the Tantrāloka. (32)

What is the use of (speaking) much here (about Śṛṅgāraratha)? 1t is not
possible for there to be any (minister like him) anywhere who makes the earth
prosper (and is praised) in the stories of the assembly of the talented, nor was
there (ever), or will ever be, one who is his equal in detachment, greatness, the
arts, the natural (capacity for) forgiveness, profundity, and for his inner
understanding, bravery, and beauty. (33)
He was (as close to the king) as (his) mind to his soul. Having attained
the highest office and unimpeded (freedom to) act as the king (himself) in the

collection of money (as taxes) through intermediaries, he bore (upon himself)

directly (the responsibilities in the king’s) matters, such as (the maintenance of
the rivers) like the Ledari, as well as in those matters that were not the concern

of others (in government) (ananyaviṣaya). (34)

He attained (unrestricted) authority over all the main infantry and armed
forces that belonged to the families of tributary lords, and when this (faithful)
assistant of the king occupied the post of plenipotentate (sarvādhikārin), he
extended the regular forces (sena) and mercenaries (bhaṭa), (each one)

separately (from the other) also. (35)

has precisely this name, but it is evident that Jayaratha means Rājadeva who lived in Kashmir for
23 years from AD 1213-1236 (Jonarāja, Rājataraṅginī, yy. 75 and 87). Jayaratha tells us (in these
verses) that Śivaratha, a brother of his great-great-grandfather had served ās a minister under King

Uccala, who ruled Kashmir from AD 1101 to 1111. Jayaratha quotes the Rājataraṅginī of
Kalhaṇa in his commentary on the Alaṅkārasarvasva (p. 720, 11 3-26). Kalhaṇa began his work in

AD 1148/9 and completed it in the following year, only five years before the end of the reign of
Jayasiṁha (1128-1155). (pace Rastogi 1979: 210 and Pandey 1963: 262) who identify Rājarāja
with this Jayasiṁha.
2 Read roradogdhā for roradrogáhā.
' In other words, Jayaratha was much encouraged by his royal patron Rājarāja, whose inspiration
impelled him to write his commentary on the Tantrāloka.
According to Rastogi, he was given unrestricted authority over all the infantries and armies

falling under the tributary princes, and while exercising his powers as the top brass
(sarvādhikārin), he introduced a major innovation by keeping the regular forces and mercenaries
separately (33).

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN
He helped all (the common) people, supporting the talented with (grants

of his own) money and wealth. He wisely took away (peoplesʼ) terror (of the
State) and, as befitted (his noble) family, his devotion to Śiva was very pleasing

(to Him). (36)

In accord with the succession of (his) family lineage, the illustrious

Subhaṭa Datta was the son of Tribhuvanadatta and grandson of the illustrious

Viśvadatta, who was the son (of Vibhūtidatta). He who was his teacher also
gave me initiation. (37)

And Śṛṅgāra, son of Rājānaka Dāśī, who was also my teacher’s teacher
(paramaguru), was the teacher of (my father) in the Rājatantra (when he was

concerned) with the kingʼ’s governance (rājatantra). (38)

Observing the lamentable (appearance) of what had been newly

constructed, due to the adverse nature (daurātmya) of (its) location and time,

(this) wise man carried out five renovations (to old buildings) on Mahādeva
mountain. (39)

From him, through (his wife) Kamalā arose (two sons) called Jayaratha
and Jayadratha who, like the nectar and the moon, (that arose) out of the (milky)

ocean, were a delight to everybody and rich with equal (talents and good)
qualities. (40)

. 'The venerable Subhaṭa Datta wrote a commentary on the Tantrāloka
(for Sṛṅgāraratha,) who because of him (yas caibhyo) knew the teaching (artha)

Rastogi: ‘He devoted his energies for the welfare of the common man and encouraged pursuit

of excellence by suitable financial gifts and grants. He created an atmosphere free from terror and

subsequently developed acute devotion for Śiva, something behoving his noble heritage.’ (34)

' This translation follows that of Sanderson (2006b p. 17, n. 46, 2007: 253 n 68). Rastogi (1987:

introduction p. 93) understands the expression ‘Rājātantra’ to mean ‘statecraft’. According to
him, Rājānaka Dāśī was an alias for Tribhuvanadatta and Śṛṅgāra, Subhaṭadatta. However,

Sanderson proposes that the Rājatantra was the Jayadrathayāmala, also called the Tantrarāja that

Śrṁṅgāra taught to Jayartha' father, the miniṣter Śrṁgāraratha. He writes (loc. cit) ‘the alternative

is to take this to mean that Śṛṅgāra taught him the science of governance while he was concerned
therewith. But that would be very flat and out of context, especially since Jayaratha declares him

his own paramaguruḥ. Īt would be more probable that Jayaratha has substituted Rājatantra 'the
King Tantra’ for the uṣual title Tantrarāja 'the King of Tantras’ for the sake of a play on words.’
2 Cf, above, 1/2164 for this expression.
Sanderson ((2006: 7 n 17 and also 2007: 242 n 36) summarizes the contents of the concluding
verses (8-41) of Jayaratha’s commentary in which he outlines his genealogy: Purṇamanoratha,

minister of Yaśaskara (r. 939-948) > Utpala(ratha) > Prakāśaratha > Sūryaratha > Utpalaratha
minister of Ananta (r. 1028-1063), and disciple of his mother's brother Vibhūtidatta, grandson of
an unnamed minister of finance > Śivaratha >, minister of Uccala (r. 1101-1111); his brother

Sammaratha > Guṇaratha > Guṅgaratha > Śṛṅgāraratha minister of Rājarāja (Rājadeva, r. 1213-

236), initiated by Subhaṭadatta, descendent of Vibhūtidatta and author of a lost commentary on

the Tantrāloka > Jayaratha.
Jayaratha reports that his patrlineal ancestors included ministers under Yasakara,
Ananta (r. 1028-1063), Uccala (r. 1101-1111) and Rājadeva (r. 1213-1236), the last of these being

his own father. A connection with the milieu of the court is also suggested by the prevalence of
contributions by these authors to belles-letres and the theory of poetry, drama, dance and music.

TANTRĀLOKA

of all the Śaiva scripture. (Jayaratha,) having obtained this teacher, called the
illustrious Kalyāṇa, (whose) passions (rajas) had ceased and had realised

(vidita) the great bliss that was made clearly manifest (prakaṭita) by the
knowledge of nondualist Śaiviṣm (Śśivādvaita). (41)

(Śaṅkhadhara) had attained (full) knowledge of grammar (padavidyā)
and he studied (the teachings of) the three sages." He made known the lack of
weight (laghutva) in Jaimini’s science of linguistic interpretation (vākyabodha),
and attained mastery on all the paths of the philosophies (naya) and (so) reached

proficiency in (this) the third of the disciplines (kathā). (42)

The elder of the two (brothers), that is, the one called Jayaratha, wrote

this commentary (viveka) on the Tantrāloka, having acquired the knowledge (to
do so) from that illustrious Saṅkhadhara. (43)

Even when acquainted with all the locations of (its) teachings, no one is
confident in the presence of Śaiva scripture, which is hard to navigate
(durgama) and fearsome with its (numerous and profound) revelations of the

sense of (the many) Āgamas (belonging) to the various currents (of scripture).
Thus, even if (I have) stumbled greatly here and there (and) my (work) may be
wanting, may not those who are good (and wise) become, for this reason, averse
to me! (44)
If this request is made to good (wise people), it serves no purpose, as
their response is spontaneous (and always correct). If those who are of bad
character are requested, (it is also useless,) because they would not respond
(however much they were to be requested to do s0). If (an open) mind which
(embraces) all forms (notions and attitudes) does not develop when requested

(to understand), then I (rest content) within myself alone, what is the use of
(pitiful) dependence on others? (45)

Aho! O fate! (you) have always in some (mysterious) way become
propitious towards me! Be gracious now O Lord, and make (even just) one
(person) listen to (these) words! Make just any one person at once into one who
has known that and who will listen to this, my work, for (even just a) moment
with his hearing (opened up, and) with tears (in his eyes) arisen from the delight

(he experiences). (46)

You (too, O Lord,) listen to (these) words (I have) fashioned, containing

the essence of truth (tattvārtha), that are pleasing to the heart like the resonant
sound of a vīṇā. This creative reflection (bhāvānā) (on the meaning of the
He himself wrote a commentary (vimarsinī) on the Alaṅkārasarvasva, a work on Sanskrit poetics

by Ruyyaka. He also wrote an epic poem called Haravija

' T suppose these are Gautama, who taught the Nyāyasūtra, Kaṇāda, who taught the

Vaiśaṣikasūtra, and Jaimini, the founder of the Mīmāṁsā.

According to Rastogi (ibid. p. 98), this verse means that Śaṅkhadhara had attained “proficiency
in the secular sciences, including grammar, the science of linguistic interpretation expounded by
Jaimini and all other empirical disciplines’.
' Read pramoditāsru for pramoditāsu.

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

scriptures that has developed by) constant practice is (like) a newly married

woman whose youth is well matured. Most tightly embracing us who are
attended by (profound) thought, she will cling (lambhayiṣyati) (to our) lotus-like
faces cleansed with the flow of the tears of bliss (that signal how) now our

(suffering) has ceased. (47)

Doubt has been removed, the suffering of transmigratory existence has
been quelled, discrimination, with increasing abundance, has arisen deeply

within (my) heart in (just) an instant. Thus, I have attained the unique
(asāmānya) state of nondual consciousness devoid of (all) limitations, so what

use is there now for other (mundane) affairs? (48)

1, the blameless Jayaratha, have become firmly groundedin the secret of
all the Śaiva scriptures of (their every) word, sentence and conception. Indeed,
nowherein this worldis there any other whois now (as) well-versed as 1 in

Trika doctrine (trikadṛk) and Krama (kramārtha).

Thus, the Discernment of the Light on the Tantras is fully complete. It is
the work of the illustrious Rājānaka Mahāmāheśvarācārya Jayaratha.
Praise to the teacher who for those who desire the fruits (that) Śiva

bestowsis a veritable wish-granting tree. The only fire (that can burn up) the
fuel of duality, heis the lamp (that illumines) Śiva’s path. (He)is Śambhu, who
has made the lunar orb an adornment for the crest of his matted hair. Heis this
boat (that ferries across) the ocean of the Śaiva (scriptures) and bestows the

most excellent fruits.

Jayaratha says of himself that he was free from all doubts and was imbued with a sense of
blissful inner tranquillty. His realisation of absolute harmony induced a fcling of total
resignation from mundane afairs.

Appendix A to Chapter Thirty-two
Chapter Seven of the Mālinīvijayottara
Concerning Mudrās
The first two passages concerning Mudrā are drawn from two Trika
Tantras. The first is Abhinava’s prime authority, the Mālinīvijayottara. The
second is an excerpt from a chapter in the Tantrasadbhāva dedicated to this
topic. We notice immediately that in the former the Mudrās are, for the most
part, just outer ritual gestures made with the hands. But this is not entirely so.
Some relate to the movement of the vital breath or are accompanied with
reciation of Mantra. The names of several of them indicate their connection with
yogic practice, at least in the minimal sense that they are made when the yogi is
engaged in his practice. In some cases, there is a hint that they may not only
induce or accompany yogic states, they are identified with these states
themselves, as we find in passages quoted further ahead from Krama or proto
Krama sources. Abhinava clearly declares that these states are one of the four
modalities in which Mudrā is formed along with the body, hands and speech.
Only these three are mentioned in the Tantrasadbhāva that models its
presentation accordinglyThe Tantrasadbhāva is much more sophisticated than
the Mālinīvijayottara in that it identifies Mudrā with the goddess who can
assume the innumerable forms as countless Mudrās who are, basically, yoginīs.
athātaḥ saṅpravakṣyāmi mudrākhyāḥ śivaśaktayaḥ |
yābhiḥ’ saṁrakṣito mantrī mantrasiddhim avāpnuyāt | 1 II
Now I will tell (you) about Siva’s powers that are called gestures
(mudrā). (Ib) by which the reciter of mantra is well protected and attains the
accomplishment of mantra. (1)

triśūlaṁ ca tathā padmaṁ śaktiś cakraṁ savajrakam |

daṇḍadaṁṣṭre mahāpretā mahāmudrā khageśvarī || 2 |
mahodayā karālā ca khaṭvāṅgaṁ sakapālakam |
halaṁ pãśāṅkuśaṁ ghaṇṭā mudgarastriśikho ʻparaḥ | 3 ||
āvāhasthāpanīrodhā dravyadā natireva ca |
amṛtā yogamudreti vijñeyā vīravandite || 4 ||
(The gestures are:) Triśūla (the Trident) and Padma (the Lotus), Śakti

(Power), Cakra (the Wheel) along with Vajra (the Thunderbolt), Daṇḍa (the

Stick), Daṁsṣṭra (the Fang), Mahāpretā (the Great Ghost), Mahāmudrā (the Great
Gesture), Khageśvarī (the Skyfaring Goddess), Mahodayā (the Great Arising),
Karālā (the Gapping Mouth and Protruding Teeth) and Khaṭvāṅga (the Ascetic’s
Staff) along with Kapālaka (the Skull), Hala (the Plough), Pāśa (the Fetter),
Aṅkuśa (the Elephant Gaud), Ghaṇṭā (the Bell), Mudgara (the Mallet), and

Triśikha (the Three Tufts of Hair) is another. (The gesture made to) Aavaha

svaccha yābhiṣu rakṣita
MV 7/1b TĀv ad 15/259ab.

APPENDIX A TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

(Invocation), Sthāpanī (Placing) and Rodhā (Blocking), Dravyadā (Bestower of
the Sacrificial Substances), Nati (Salutation), Amṛtā (Nectar) and Yogamudrā.
(These are the gestures) that should be known. O goddess praised by (all the)
heroes. (4)

Triśūla (the Trident)
tarjanīmadhyamānāmā dakṣiṇasya prasāritāḥ |
kaniṣṭhāṅguṣṭhakākrāntāstriśūlaṁ parikīrtitam || 5 |
The index, middle and ring fingers of the right (hand) are extended
(while) the thumb covers (and

Padma – the Lotus Gesture

padmākārau karau kr̥vā padmamudrāṁ pradarśayet |
Having made the two hands into the form of a (blooming) lotus, display

the gesture of the lotus. (6ab)

Śakti (Power)

saṁmukhau prasrtau kr̥vā karānantaritāṅgulr | 6 ||
prasrte madhyame lagne kaumāryāḥ śaktiriṣyate |

Extending the hands first in front of each other and withdrawn the

fingers inwardly, extending the middle fingers touching (each other) is
considered to be (the gesture of) Power. (6cd-7ab)
Cakra (the Wheel)

uttānavāmamuṣṭestu dakṣa š
|| 7 ||
k k kayeṉmuṣṭiṁ cakraṁ nārācaṁ |
The fist of the left-hand faces upwards, the right . . . cast the fist . . . is

the Wheel and the Arrow . . (Jcd-8ab)
Vajra (the Thunderbolt)

uttānavāmakasyordhvaṁ nyased dakṣam adhomukham || 8 II

vajramudreti vikhyātā caindrī saṁtoṣakārikā || 9 ||
Place the right face downwards above the left facing upwards. The little
fingers and the thumbs adhere together and the rest (of the fingers touch) the

wrist – this is said to be the gesture of the thunderbolt of Indra that gives
satisfaction. (8cd-9)

Part of the text is missing here.

TANTRĀLOKA

Danṇḍa (the Stick)
ūrddhvaprasārito muṣṭir dakṣiṇo ‘hṅguṣṭhagarbhagaḥ |

daṇḍamudreti vikhyātā vaivasvatakulapriyā || 10 l|

The right fist is extended upwards and the thumb is placed within it.
This called the gesture of the stick which is beloved of Vaivasvata’s family. (10)
Daṅṁṣṭra (the Fang)
vāmato vaktragāṁ kuryād vāmamuṣṭeḥ kaniṣṭhikām |
daṁṣṭreyaṁ kīrtitā devi cāmuṇḍā kulanandinī |I 1 1 ||
Place the little finger of the left fist on the mouth to the left. This, O

goddess, is praised as (the gesture of) the Fang that is the delight of Cāmunḍā’s
Kuḷa. (11)

Mahāpretā (the Great Ghost)
vāmajānugataṁ pādaṁ hastau pṛṣṭhapralambinau |

vikr̥te locane grīvā bhagnā jihvā prasāritā || 12 |
sarvayogigaṇasyeṣṭā prītā yogīśvarī matā |

The foot is placed on the left knee and the two hands hang behind, the
eyes are distorted, the neck is bent and the tongue extended – (this is the gesture

of) the ghost, considered to be the goddess of yogis (yogīśvarī) is the favourite

of the all the hosts of yogis. (113ab)
Mahāmudrā (the Great Gesture)

hastāv adhomukhau padbhyāṁ hṛdayāntaṁ nayed budhah || 13 ||
tiryagmukhāntam upari saṁmukhāv ūrdhvagau nayet |

mahāmudreti vikhyātā dehaśodhanakarmaṇi || 14 |
sarvakarmakarī caiṣā yogināṁ yogasiddhaye |

The hands facing down, the wise man should lead (his) two feet up to

the heart and (then) lead them up the top of the face which (should be) tilted.

The two feet, raised up, face each other. (This is) called Mahāmudrā (which is

uṣed) during the rite of the purification of the body. This (gesture) performs all
the rites and serves yogis to accomplish yoga. (13cd-15ab)
Khageśvarī (the Skyfaring Goddess)
vaddhvā padmāsanaṁ yogī nābhāv akṣeśvaraṁ nyaser |/ 15 |I
daṇḍākāraṁ tu taṁ tāvan nayed yāvat kakhatrayam
Read pretā for prītā.

taṁ: kṣiped

APPENDIX A TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

nigṛhya tatra tat tūrṇaṁ prerayet khatrayeṇa tu || 16 ||

etāṁ baddhvā mahāvīraḥ khegatiṁ pratipadyate |

Assuming the lotus posture the yogi should direct (his mind) the lord of

the senses into the navel (region). In the form of a staff, he should lead it along
untilʼ (it reaches) the three voids (in the head). After restraining it there he
should rapidly impel (it) with the three voids (above the head). Having formed
that (Seal of the Skyfaring Goddess), the great hero, attains flight (in the sky of
consciousness). (15cd-17ab)

Mahodayā (the Great Arising)
adhomukhasya dakṣasya vāmam uttānam ūrdhvataḥ || 17 ||

anāmāmadhyame tasya vāmāṅguṣṭhena pīḍayet |
tarjanyā tatkaniṣṭhāṁ ca tarjanīṁ ca kaniṣṭhayã l| 1 8 I|
madhyamānāmikābhyāṁ ca tadaṅguṣṭhaṁ nipīḍayet |
mudrā mahodayākhyeyaṁ mahodayakarī nṛṇām || 19 ||

The left (hand) faces upwards, middle and ring fingers of the right

(hand) that faces downwards should be pressed with the thumb of the left

(hand), the little finger with the index, and the index with the little finger, and
that thumb should be pressed with the middle and ring finger. This is the gesture
called the Great Arising which that greatly elevates men. (17cd-19)

Karālā (the Gaping Mouth and Protruding Teeth)
anāmikākaniṣṭhābhyāṁ sṛkvaṇyau pravidārayet |

jihvāṁ ca cālayen mantrī hāhākāraṁ ca kārayet || 20 l|
kruddhadrṣṭiḥ karāleyaṁ mudrā duṣṭabhayaṅkarī |

The reciter of mantra should pull apart the corners of the mouth with the
ring and and little fingers, wiggle the tongue and make the sound HĀ HĀ
starring angrily. This the gesture of the Gaping Mouth and Protruding Teeth that
instils fear in the wicked. (20-21ab)

Khaṭvāṅga (the Ascetic’s Staff)
vāmaskandhagato vāmamuṣṭir ucchritatarjanī | 21 I|
khaṭvāṅgākhyā smṛtā mudrā kapālam adhunā śṛṇu |

Kh: taṁ ca taṁ tãvad

Read with TĀ 32/11b tāvan for bhāvaṁ
The three voids in the head are bindu, nāda and the Cavity of Brahmā. The three aboye the head
are Power (śakti), the Pervasive One (vyāpinī) and With Mind (samanā). The mind is ‘restcained
by breath retention (kumbhaka). If successful, the yogi attains the level of the Transmental,
through which he unites with Śiva.

MV 7/15ed-17ab is quoted in TĀv ad 15/(361¢d-363ab) (361-362), which is a commentary on it,
and TĀ 32/10cd-12a= MV 7/15cd-17a.
k. jiḥvāṁ ca lālayed

TANTRĀLOKA

The left fist, with the index finger extended, is placed on the left

shoulder. (This) gesture is said to be called the Ascetic’s Staff. (21cd-22ab)

Kapālaka (the Skull)

nimnaṁ pāṇitalaṁ dakṣam īṣatsaṁkucitāṅguli 1 22 ||

kapālam iti vijñeyam adhunā halam ucyate |

Now listen to (the gesture of) the Skull. The palm of the right hand is

slightly cupped and the fingers contracted. This should be known to be (the

gesture of) the Skull. (22cd-23ab)
Hala (the Plough)

muṣṭibaddhasya dakṣasya tarjanī vāmamuṣṭinā || 23 ||

vakratarjaninā grastā halamudreti kīrṭitā |

Now the (gesture of) the Plough will be taught. The index finger of the
right (hand) clenched into a fist is grasped with the bent index finger of the left
fist. This is praised as the gesture of the Plow. (23cd-24ab)

Pāśa (the Fetter)
muṣṭyāḥ pṛṣṭhagayor dakṣavāmayos tarjanīdvayam || 24 |
vāmāṅguṣṭhāgrasaṁlagnaṁ pāśaḥ prasṛtakuñcitaḥ |

The two index fingers of the right and left (hands) that are on the back

of the (downturned) fist are connected to the left thumb. (This is the gesture of)

the Fetter that (alternately) extends and is contracted. (24cd-25ab)
Aṅkuśa (the Elephant Gaud)

hale muṣṭir yathā vāmo dakṣahīnas tathāṅkuśaḥ || 25 I|
The left fist, without the right, is as it is (when making the gesture of)
the plough. Such is (the gesture of) the Elephant Gaud. (25cd)

Ghaṇṭā (the Uvula)
adhomukhasthite vāme dakṣiṇāṁ tarjanīṁ budhaḥ |
cālayen madhyadeśasthāṁ ghaṇṭāmudrā priyā matā || 26 ||
When the left hand is facing downwards, the wise man should wiggle

the index finger of the right (hand) located in the middle (above of the left one).

This the Gesture of the Uvula, which is considered to be dear (and pleasant)

(priyā). (26)

√ ṣva: mīṣattatkuñcitāṅgulim

APPENDIX A TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

Mudgara (the Mallet) and Triśikhā (the Three Tufts of Hair)
karāv ūrdhvamukhau kāryāv anyonyāntaritāṅgulī |
anāme madhyapṛṣṭhasthe tarjanyau mūlapavarge | 27 ||
The hands should be turned upwards and the fingers mutually concealed
by one another. The two ring fingers are placed on the back of the middle
(fingers) and the two index fingers on the two little fingers (māūlaparva). (27)

madhyame dve yute kārye kaniṣṭhe paruṣāvadhi |

tarjanyau madhyapārśvasthe virale parikalpite || 28 I|
The two middle fingers should be connected together and the two little
fingers at the end of the paruṣa (paruṣāvadhi); the two index fingers are

placed on the middle fingers' and splayed apart. (28)
mudgarastriśikho' hy eṣa kṣaṇād āveśakārakaḥ |

This is (the gesture of) the Mallet and the Three Tufts of Hair that

brings about the penetration (of Rudra’s power) in a moment. (29ab)

Āvāhāna (Invocation)
karābhyām añjaliṁ kr̥tvā anāmāmūlaparvagau |I 29 ||
aṅguṣṭhau kalpayed vidvān mantrāvāhanakarmaṇi |
The learned man, having cupped the two hands together (añjaliṁ kṛtvā),
should place the thumbs on the ring and little fingers (during) the act of
invoking the mantra (deity). (29cd-30ab)
Sthāpanī (Installation)
muṣṭī dvāv unnatāṅguṣṭhau sthāpanī parikīrtitā || 30 ||
The thumbs of the two fists are raised up. (This is) said to be (the
gesture for the) installation (of the deity). (30cd)

Rodhā (Fixing)
dvāv eva garbhagāṅguṣṭhau vijñeyā saṁnirodhinī|

sva0 mūlaparvata
' sva0 madhye dva tu yuta paru:
The text here is corrupt, paruṣāvadhi makes no sense. It seems that the sense is that the two

little fingers are conjoined at the side of the hand.

' “Read madhyaparvasthe for madhyapārśvasthe.
'k: striśira

TANTRĀLOKA

The two thumbs placed within (the clenched fists) should be known to

be (the gesture used to) fix (the installed deity in place) (saṅnirodhinī). (31ab)
Dravyadā (the Offering of the Sacrificial Substances)
dravyadā tu samākhyātā tra saṁmukhī|| 31 ||

. . . (placed) facing before one . . . is said to be (the gesture of) the

offering of the sacrificial substances.' (31cd)
Nati (Salutation)

hṛdaye saṅmukhau hastau saṁlagnau prasr̥tāṅgulĩ |
namaskṛtir iyaṁ mudrā mantravandanakarmaṇi l| 32 ||

Joining the hands together in front of the heart with the fingers extended

– this is the gesture of Salutation (namaskṛti) (which is used for) the act of

praising the mantra (deity). (32)

Amṛtā (Nectar)
anyonyāntaritāḥ sardhāḥ karayor aṅgulīḥ sthitāḥ |
kaniṣṭhāṁ dakṣiṇāṁ vāme ‘nāmikāgre niyojayet || 33 II
dakṣiṇe ca tathā vāmāṁ tarjanīmadhyame tathā |
aṅguṣṭhau madhyamūlasthau mudreyam amṛtaprabhā || 34 ||

All the fingers of the hands cover one another mutually. The right little
finger should be conjoined to left ring and little fingers and in the same way, the

left (little finger) to the right index and middle fingers, and the two thumbs are

placed on the middle and little fingers – this gesture is (called) the Light of
Nectar (amṛtaprabhā). (33-34)
Yogamudrā
dakṣiṇaṁ nābhimūle tu vāmasyopari saṁsthitam ḷ
tarjanyaṅguṣṭhakau lagnau ucchritau yogakarmaṇi || 35 ||

The right (hand), placed on top of the left one, is (placed) at the base

(mūla) of the navel with the index and thumbs connected together and upraised
– (this gesture is made) when practicing yoga (yogakarman). (35)
evaṁ mudrāgaṇaṁ mantrī badhnīyād dhṛdaye budhaḥ |
sarvāsãṁ vãcakaś cãsãṁ onṁ hrĩṁ nãma tato namaḥ l| 36 ||

The wise reciter of mantra should make the group of gestures in this

way in (front of his) heart. (The mantra that) denotes all of them (and is uttered
' Part of the text is missing here.

APPENDIX A TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

when they are displayed) is OM HRIM, the name (of the gesture) then (followed

by) NAMAḤ. (36)

iti śrīmālinīvijayottare tantre mudrādhikāraḥ saptamaḥ || 7 |I

Appendix B to Chapter Thirty-two
Chapter Eight of the Tantrasadbhāva concerning Mudrā
The following is an extract from chapter eight of the Trika Tantra, the
Tantrasadbhāva.
75b kh) evam ādyais tu (kh: -mādyaustu) paryāyaiḥ śaktir vācyā (k, kh, g: vācyāḥ) pṛthak pṛthak |
mudrāśaktir iti proktā mudritaṁ (kh: -ta) drāvayiṣyati || 76 ||
tena mudrā samākhyātā devadevena śaṁbhunā (kh: -vā) |
mudritaṁ gopitaṁ proktaṁ cicchaktyāyāḥ (all: cichaktyāyā) svarūpiṇam (kh: -

pakaṁ) I| 77 ||

na (g: ?) jñāyate (k: jāyate; g: ?) varārohe sā māyā (k, kh, g: mayā kh: + sayā)
samudāhṛtā |
ajñānamalarūpeṇa yāvad baddhaḥ sa puḍgalaḥ || 78 |
na jānāti parātmānaṁ tāvan māyā (k, kh, g: yāyā) pravartate |
bhinne tamasi ekatvaṁ yadā paśyati mānavaḥ || 79 ||
tadā sā tu parā proktā bandhamokṣakarī (kh: kari) priye | (g: ? 76 to 80ab
unclear in MS ĠG)
Śakti is denoted in this way by these and other such synonyms, each
separately. She is said to be the power of Mudrā (mudrāśakti). Stamped (with
that the world) will melt away. Thus, she is called Mudrā by Śambhu, the God
of the gods. `Sealed' is said to be what has been hidden which is the essential
nature of the power of consciousness. Unknown, O fair lady, she is said to be

Maāyā. As long as the soul is bound by the impurity of ignorance, he does not

know the Supreme Self and Māyā operates. If when the darkness has been rent
asunder and a man sees oneness, then, O beloved, (that power) is said to be

Parā (the supreme) who binds and releases (bandhamokṣakarī) (76-80ab)

ekā (kh: eka) sā paramā śaktiḥ (kh: sakti) saṁṣthitā tu śivecchayā || 80 || (g: ?)
mocayantī (k, kh, g: -yanti) grahādibhyaḥ pāśoghan (k, g: yāmoghaṁ)
drāvayanti ca | (g: ?)
mocanād (k, kh, g: mocanā) drāvaṇād yasmān mudrākhyā (kh: -smāt-) sā śaktiḥ
(k, g: śaktyaya; kh: śaktaya) smṛtā (k, kh, g: smṛtaḥ) l 81 II

gatimatyarthabhāvena khamārge caiva nityaśaḥ (g: -saḥ) |
carate sarvajantīūnāṁ khecarī tena sā smṛtā (k, kh, g: smṛtāḥ) || 82 ||
paratvenaikadhā (kh: nekadhā) jñeyā punaś caiva dvidhā smṛtā |
icchā (g: icchā) jñāna (g: jñūāna) tṛtīyā (g: ?) tu (g: ?) varṇarūpā (g:

?) upāgatā (g: ?) || 83 I| (k: ?)

' KM 6/76-113ab is drawn directly from the Tantrasadbhāva 8/T6cd-113ab. The two versions
have been compared. In places I adopt the reading in the KM although, the Tantrasadbhāva
certainly precedes it.

Read with the KM parātmānaṁ for parātmā vai and māyā for yāyā
Read with KM ajñānamalarāpeṇa for ajīānatamarāpeṇa

Or ‘if a man sees oneness in the multiplicity of darkness’.
Or ‘releases the bound'.

APPENDIX B TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
That supreme power is one, established as Śiva’s will, liberating from

(the negative influences of) the planets etc and causes the mass of fetters to melt

away. As she releases (mocana) and causes to melt away (drāvaṇa) that power
is said to be called ‘mudrā’. As she moves perpetually on the Path of the Sky as
the fate, intelligence and purpose of all living beings, she is said to be Khecarī.
She should be known to be one as the supreme and is also said to be two-fold as
will and knowledge. The third form she assumes is the letters (varṇa). (80cd-

83)

pañcāsadbhedasaṁbhinnā ekā evam udāhṛtā | (k: miṣṣing g: ?)
aṁśāvayavasampūrṇā (kh: aṁsāva-) mālayitvā jagat sthitā) || 84 1| (k, g: ?)
30a) nādiphāntasvarūpeṇa (kh: -phanta-; g: ?) tena (g: ?) sā (g: ?) malinī
smṛtā (k, kh, g: smṛtāḥ) |

saptakoṭyas tu mantrāṇāṁ aprameyās tu ye smṛtāḥ || 85 I|
svatantrasthās (k, g: svatanusthās) tu te sarve mudritāḥ parameśvari |

76a kh) tena mudrā samākhyātā sadyaḥpratyayakārikā (k, kh: -kāḥ; g: pratyaya
- 2 ) || 86 |I|

Divided into fifty, she is said in this way to be one. Complete in all her
limbs and parts, she abides in the form of (the alphabet) beginning with N and
ending with PH having threaded together (mālayitvā) the universe. Thus, she is
called Mālinī. O Supreme Goddess, the 70 billion mantras that are said to be
without measure (in their extent and number). (They are each) in their own

Tantra, all sealed (with Mudrā). Thus, she is called Mudrā and gives immediate

realisation. (84-86)

avayavair (k: -vai) mātṛrūpā sve sve aṁśe vikalpanā (k: -nāṁ) (KM:
vyavasthitā) | (g: ?)
brāhmāṁśā caiva (kh: brāhmaṁ-) raudryāṁśā (kh: nāsti) kaumāryāṁśā
varānane || 87 || (g: ?)

vaiṣṇavyaṁśā ca yāṁyaṁśā caindryāṁśā ca tathānaghe | (g: ?)
yogeśvaryā (k, kh, g: yogeśvaryāśa-) yogāṁśā yogayogeśināyikā || 88 ||
ete cāṁśāḥ (k, kh, g: cāṁśā) smṛtāḥ (kh, g: smṛtās) sapta punaḥ (kh, g: punas)
saptasu saptasu |
brahmakhyā sapta uddiṣṭāḥ (kh, g: uddiṣṭās) sapta māheśvarī punaḥ l| 89 ||
kaumāryāḥ (kh: -ryās; g: kumā ?) sapta uddiṣṭā vaiṣṇavyāḥ (kh: -vyās) sapta
eva hi | (g: ?)

41b g) vaivasvatyās (k, kh, g: -svatpās) tathā sapta aindrāṇyāḥ (k, kh, g: indrā-)
sapta eva tu | 90 || (g: ?)
cāmuṇḍās tu smṛtāḥ (kh: smṛtās) sapta evaṁ vai sapta saptasu | (g: ?)

KM 6/81cd reads: khagatir hy ūráhvabhāvena khagamārgeṇa nityaśaḥ

Flight always (occurs) by means of the elevated state (ārdhvabhāva) which is the Path

of the Skyfarers.

paratve ekā tu sā jñeyā punas caiva tridhā smṛtā |I 81 II

icchā jñānī kriyā sā tu varṇarāpam upāgaā |

In the supreme state she should be known to be one and she is also said to be three-fold.
She is will, knowledge and action and has assumed the form of Letters.

TANTRĀLOKA

ekonapañcāśatir devyo (k, g: -ti devyau) bhuvanāvalisaṁsthitāḥ (kh: -saṁ
tāḥ) |I 9T II

Her form, in terms of (her) limbs are the Mothers, each one located

within her own limb. O fair faced lady, there is the limb that is Brāhmī, (so too)
Raudrī, Kaumārī, Vaiṣṇavī, Yāmī, and Aindrā. O sinless one, she is Yogeśvarī’s
limb of Yoga. She is the leader (nāyikā) of (these), the Mistresses of Yoga
(yogayogesī). These are said to be seven limbs and, again, they are in each
group of seven. (88-89ab)
Those called Brahmī are said to be seven. Again, those of Maheśvarī are
seven. Seven are said to be those of Kumārī and seven those of Vaiṣṇavī, so too
the Vaivasvatīs are seven and seven those of Indrāṇī. The Cāmuṇḍās are said to
be seven. In this way there are seven in the seven and (so) there are forty-nine
goddesses who reside in the series of worlds. (88cd-91)

punar bhedair anekais tu saṁsthitā gaganāvalī |
tasyā dehagatā romāḥ koṭyas trīṇi (k, kh, g: koṭyaḥ-) prakīrtitāḥ || 92 |
lakṣāṇi caiva pañcāśad romāṇāṁ tu tadudbhavāḥ (g: tadudbha ?) |
ekaikaromakūpe (kh: ekaike-) tu yoginyaḥ koṭiśaḥ sthitāḥ !| 93 || (g: ?)
trikoṭikoṭikotīnāṁ koṭayas tu anekadhā | (g: ?)
yathā cāmbaraparyante pṛthivyādiṣu sāṁbhavāḥ (k, kh, g: saṁbhavāḥ) || 94 |

(8: ?)

Again, she who is the series of (Yoginīs) in the Sky (gaganāvalī) abides
as many kinds. The pores (of the skin) in her body are said to be three billion
and fifty lakhs. (The Yoginīs) are born from them. There are billions of Yoginīs
in each (and every) pore. They are three billions of billions, many times over
that rise up to the extremity of the heavens beginning with (the worlds) in Earth

and the rest. (994)

aṇavas tv aprameyās tu (k: abhāvastva-; g: ?) tatve tatve anekadhā |
sūkṣmarāpās (k, g: sūkṣmā rūpā) tathā mudrā evaṁ saṁkhyā na vidyate || 95 II
vyāpitaṁ tu samastaṁ (kh: -sta) hi mudre sūkṣmāntaraiḥ (kh: sūkṣmaparaiḥ; g:
sūkṣmātaraiḥ) priye |
evaṁ mudrāḥ samākhyātā vyāpitvam aprameyataḥ (k: -tāḥ; g: vyāpi + #

2) I| 96 I|

76b kh) ekā eva parā mudrā yasyedaṁ (k, kh, g: -haṁ) tiṣṭhate jagat | (g: ?)

yaṁ yaṁ spr̥śaty asāv aṅgaṁ sā sā mudrā vidhīyate || 97 || (g: ?)

We note, by the way, that Abhinava must have observed

the scriptures he considered to be

the most elevated taught of the existence of hoards of Yoginīs. Although he does, of course, refer
to yoginīs and their worship, he does not stress their immense numbers and forms as do his

scriptures that refer to them repeatedly, extensively, with great imagination. They are a primary
feature of the Tantras of the Vidyāpīṭha, so too of the Mudrāpītha, if we accept that the Kubjikā
Tantras also belonged to that group of scriptures as well as to the Vidyāpītha. Apart from the two
chapters at the end of the Svacchanda that appear to be later additions, they hardly appear in the
Svacchanda, although the Mothers, are well known to it and integral to the entourage of
Svacchanda Bhairava. Kṣemarāja stresses their association with the letters of the alphabet. He

cites the Tantrasadbhāva about this in his commentary on the Śivaṣūrra.

APPENDIX B TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

The individual souls are without measure (that is, innumerable) in each
one of the principles (tattva). Of many kinds, they are subtle. In the same way,
Mudrās are innumerable. O Mudrā! Beloved! Everything is pervaded (by them

and they) are most subtle. Such are the Mudrās said to be. (They are

everywhere. Such is their) pervasion because they are (innumerable) without
measure. There is (however) just one supreme Mudrā to which this universe

belongs. Whatever limb it touches, that (llmb) becomes this or that Mudrā. (95-

97)

nṛtyaṁ calaṁ (k, g: valaṁ; kh: valbhaṁ) tathā hāsyaṁ nagnatvaṁ (k, g:
nanagna; kh: nagnatvā) laṁghanaṁ (kh: laṁghana) ca yat |
romodgamaṁ (kh: romodbhava) tathā cānyaṁ rodanaṁ sphoṭam eva ca || 98 II
yaṁ vikāraṁ prakurvanti tat sarvaṁ mudrasaṁjñitam |
aṅgulyā (k, kh, g: -ś) caṅganā proktā aṅge carati nityaśaḥ (g: -saḥ) |1 99 Il
aṅgulyās tena uddiṣṭā mudrābandhe varānane (g: va ?) |
kaṁ śarīram (k, g: śavīram; kh: śarīras) iti khyātaṁ nyastās tatra pravartate ||

100 || (g: ?)

helāgamanamārgeṇa (kh: -na) tena nāmā kanīyasī (k: varīyasī ? kh: vanīyasī) |

(2: ?)

Dance, motion, humour, nudity, jumping, horripilation, weeping,

outbursts — whatever alteration they bring about (in the body), it is all called
mudrā. And the finger (aṅgulyā) is said to be the woman (aṅganā) (Kuṇḍalinī
(?)) who moves constantly in the body (aṅga). Thus, O fair faced lady, (the

positioning of) the fingers are taught when making a nudrā. ‘Ka’ is said to be
the body. (The fingers) placed there, (mudrā) operates by the path of amorous

dalliance (helāgamana). Thus (kanīyasī, the little finger) is called the `lowest'
(kanīyasī). (98-101ab)

anāmā (g:?) nāmarahitā (g: ?rahitā) koṭidhā (kh: -dho) saṁvyavasthitā (k, kh,

g: -tāḥ) l 101 1

nāmaṁ na śakyate (g: sakṛte) kartuṁ (KM: vaktuṁ, kh: karta) anāmā tena

gīyate |
madhye pravartate nityaṁ āśrayā pudgalasya tu || 102 ||
tatrādhārād (k, kh, g: -ro) vrajed ūrddhvaṁ punar āgamanaṁ priye |

madhyamā nāma tenātra kathitā mantravādinām (g: -vādi ?) || 103 |I

(The ring finger is called) `anāmā' as it (corresponds to the energy
called) `Without Name'. She is configured in billions of ways. ' (She is called)
`Without Name' because (as that is s0) it is not possible to give (her a) name.

(101cd-102ab)

The middle (finger) (madhyamā) of those who know mantra is so-called
here because it always operates in the middle and is the support of the individual
soul. There it moves upward from the foundation and then, O beloved, returns
again. (102cd-103)
Reading, as in the KM, aṅgulyā Another translation could be ‘Thus it (the woman ?) is indicated

by the finger when a gesture is formed.”

' KM reads koṭibhedair vyavasthitā 'she is configured with billions of kinds’.

TANTRĀLOKA

tarjanaṁ kurute nityaṁ
saṅyojanaviyojanam (k: -viyoktana) | (g: ?)
tarjayeta mahāmohaṁ p.
am anantakam || 104 | (g: ?)
tarjanī kathitā tena mudrā sarvāsu (k, kh, g: sarvāstu) cottamā |
aṅguṣṭha oghabhūtas tu pravahet satataṁ priye || 105 1|
uccāreṇa (kh: -ṇā) pravarteta aṅguṣṭhas tena sa (k: saḥ) smṛtaḥ |

It is called the gesture of the index finger (tarjanī). Amongst all (the
mudrāṣ) it is the most excellent. It always points, that is, connects (with what it
is pointing to) and disconnects (from where it moves away). It points
(threateningly) at the endless net of fetters which is the great delusion
(disconnecting from it and connecting to a higher reality). (104-105ab)
O beloved, the thumb is the current (of the vital breath) that flows

constantly. It is should be set into operation by the utterance (of Mantra) and so

itis said to be the thumb (aṅguṣṭha)." (104-106ab)

aha (k, g: adha) ūrddhvagatiḥ proktā stau tu rātrī nigadyate (k, g: ṇi-) | 106 |
hastau (kh: hasto) tena samākhyātau vāmadakṣiṇam ucyate |
77a kh) vāme sṛṣṭir iti proktā saṁhāro dakṣiṇena tu I 107 1|
savyāsavyagatau tena kathitau vīranāyike |
Day (AHA) is said to be the upward motion (of prāṇa) and STAU, (the

downward movement of apāna), is called Night. Thus, they are called the two
hands (hastau). (Now) left and right (hands will be) taught. Emanation is said to
be on the left. Withdrawal (takes place) by means of the right. Thus, O
(goddess, you who are) the leader of the heroes, (the hands) are said to be on the
left and on the right. (106cd-108ab)

vāmavyāptaṁ jagat (kh: gajat) kṛtsnaṁ jñātvā jñātaṁ tadā priye || 108 I|
saṁyogena varārohe ātmakuṇḍalinī
(k, g: -muṇḍalinī) tu ṣā |
etat sāraṁ parā (k, g: paraṁ; kh: para) yoniḥ yonīnāṁ (kh, g: -nā) yonir uttamā

IF 109 11

yo jñāyati varārohe śaktir ādyā (g: sa-) manonmanī (kh: -manotmanī) |

tena jñātaṁ (k, g: jñānaṁ) jagat sarvaṁ (g: ?) avarṇaṁ (k, kh: avarṇa; g: ?)
varṇavarjitam (kh: varṇā-) || 110 ||
42a g) sā tu mudrā samākhyātā viśvavyāptikarā parā |
The universe is pervaded by the left. Once known (that), then, O
beloved, everything is known. O fair lady, by conjoining (the two), that

(mudrā becomes) the Kuṇḍalinī of the Self. This is the essence, the supreme

womb (yoni), the most excellent womb (yoni) of the wombs (yoni). O fair lady,

he who knows the first (and foremost) Śakti, that is, Mind beyond Mind
(manonmanī), has known the entire universe. (It is) the letter A devoid of

! The word for thumb – aṅguṣṭha – is here derived apparently from aiga means ‘lmb’ and, by
extension ‘body°. The word ‘oṣṭha’ means ‘lip’. So, the thumb is the ‘ip of the body, that s, it
stands for the mouth especially when spcaking.
Lines 107 to 108 illegible in MS g.
KM 107cd reads: vāmāvyāptaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ saṁhārántaṁ tadā priye ‘The entire univerṣe is
pervaded by Vamā then, O beloved, it is the end of withdrawal.

APPENDIX B TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

letters. That is said to be Parā Mudrā who brings about the pervasion of the
universe. (108cd-111ab)

dvau bindū (k, kh, g: vindu) culike (k, kh, g: tulike) dve tu visargaḥ
śaktiṣaṁpuṭaḥ || 1 1 I II
tadutthatveha (kh, g: -ceha) nādāntaṁ viddhi śūnyam udāhrṛtam (kh: -samudā-;
g: sūnya-) |
30b) ekā (k, kh, g: ekaṁ) mudrā samākhyātā vāṅmanaḥkāyakarmaṇi (g: -mana-

) | 11221

The two Drops and two Crests (cūlika) (constitute) emission
encapsulation by Śakti. Here above that is the End of Sound, the pervasive
energy (vibhvī) which said to be the Void. She rises upwards from the Place of
Birth until (she reaches) the Circle of Phenomenal Existence. This is between

the Foundation and the genitals by virtue of the union of emanation and
withdrawal. There is (thus) said to be (just) one Mudrā (that operates) in the

activity of speech, mind and body. (110cd - 3)

The KM reads: varṇāvarṇavivarjitam free of (both) leter and (the condition) devoid of letters’.
' Instead of this line, read with KM 6/1 1 1 -1 ḻ2ab:

tadūrdhvam iha nādāntaṁ vibhvī sīūnyam udāhrtam |
janmasthānāt samudyantī yāvat tadbhavamaṇḍalam l| 1 1 Iḷ
sṛsṭisaṁhārayogena meḍhram-ādhāramadhyagam |
! The

colophon

declares:

iti

bhairavasrotasi

mahātantre

vidyāpīṭhe

saptakoṭipramāṇe

śrītantrasadbhāve mudrādhikāro nāmāṣṭamaḥ paṭalaḥ l 8 I This is the eighth chapter concerning
Mudrā which is in the venerable 7antrasadbhāva that is part of the Vidyāpīṭha that measures
seven billion (verses), the great Tantra within the Bhairava current (of scriptures).

Appendix C to Chapter Thirty-two
Mudrā according to the Krama System

The five mudrās of the five spheres of Siddhas according to the
Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasiṁha
The Wheel of the Aggregate
1) Karaṅkinīmudrā of the Jñānasiddhas

(The energy that does this) is called Karaṅkiṇī, the supreme seal

(mudrā), by the wise. It is the energy of these, the Jñānasiddhas. This gesture,

having sealed duality, is free of all the senses. (86-87ab)
2) Krodhinīmudrā of the Mantrasiddhas

The rays of the Mantra (siddhas) upwardly consume (nigalanti) by (the
force of) Wrath the entire expanse of the play of the twenty-four conditioned
principles from Earth to Nature as they are the Mantrasiddhas of that (power of
consciousness) generated from the process (operating in) the Abode of
Emptiness (vyomadhāmakrama). (87cd-89ab)
The seal (mudrā) that is fierce and (yet) undisturbed, that conducts the

energy (vibhava) of the principles to the supreme vitality of mantra by (the
power of) Wrath is said to be Krodhinī. This most excellent seal is that of the

Mantrasiddhas. Once sealed what is generated by duality it is established in the

body. (89cd-90ab)

3) Bhairavīmudrā of the Melapasiddhas
Once the twelve knots have been pierced, these energies arise supreme.

Endowed with the qualities of the Great Union, their one form oneness

(sāmarasya) they, established in the abode of the unobscured expanse of
consciousness, shine perpetually. (90cd-93ab)
Bhairavī is said to be the seal that, having filled the spectacle of duality
generated by the intensity of her innate power, is free of being and non-being,
her glorious power full (and perfect) and form unobscured. Bhairavī by nature,
this is the gesture, full to overflowing with the oneness (sāmarasya), which is
the waveless expansion of consciousness, of these Melāpasiddhas. (93cd-95).

4) Lelihānamuḍrā of the Śāktasiddhas
The Śāktasiddhas, free of defects, are rightly said to be (those who)

reside in the abode devoid of limitations (graha) they, luminous and supremely

powerful (tīkṣṇatama), are intent on destroying the most subtle energies said to

' MNP (by Amṇasimha) vērṣes 86-106

APPENDIX D TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

be (those) who form are the seeds of the latent traces of the subtle body
(puryasṣṭaka). (96-97)
The seal said to be Lelihānā, extremely voracious and free of all
restraint, is the activity (of consciousness) which is the destruction of all

destruction. (98)
This seal, ever active, is present within the Supreme Abode having
sealed the duality of these, the goddesses of the Śāktasiddhas. (99)
5) Khecarīmudrā of the Śāmbhavasiddhas

The goddesses of the Śāmbhava(siddhas), reside in the abode free of
duality and bestow the attainment of the plane of oneness (sāmarasya). They are
said to be these very (goddesses) because, expanding, luminous lights, they are
intent on devouring (the duality of) the four-fold manifestation of Speech that
ranges from the Supreme to the Corporeal (vaikharī). (100-101)

The seal that, free of all obscuring coverings and without abode

(nirniketanā), moves in the Expanse of Touch (sparśagagana) and is (herself)
Touch (sparśā) is said to be Khecarī. (102)

Khecarī is said to be the lightening flash that travels through the Sky (of

Consciousness), the plane free of all things, her sole nature the expansion of her

own innate light (svaprakāśa). (103)

This seal, free of thought constructs and perceived (prathitā) at all

times, serves to seal in an instant the multiplicity of these, the goddesses of the
Śāmbhavasiddhas. (104)
The five goddesses, ever active, abide thus, as does (the one energy
which is) the five seals, in the Wheel of Egoity (asmitācakra). (105)
Formless, everywhere established and endowed with the five wheels,

(her true nature) should be known by the wise through the practice (yukti) that
comes from the mouth of the master. (106)

Appendix D to Chapter Thirty-two
Mahārthamañjarī concerning Mudrā
according to the Krama System
'By (practicing the mudraas called) Karaṅkinī, Krodhanii, Bhairavī,
Lelihānā and Khecarī when perception takes place, the supreme pervasion (of
consciousness) is revealed. (77)
The manner in which the nudrās are formed (externally) is taught there

itself (in the Vijñānabhairava):

(The yogi should sit) on a soft seat, on one buttock, keeping (his) hands
and feet without support. By adhering to that (posture, his) intellect (mati)
becomes supreme and complete. (78) (77) (Karaṅkinī)
Sat on a seat, half bending the arms properly (as required), fixing the
mind on the space under the armpits, by merging into that, peace comes. (79)
(Krodhanii)

Fixing the gaze without blinking on something with a gross (and
beautiful) form, having freed the mind of (all) support, in a short time, one
attains tranquillity (Śiva). (80) (Bhairavī)
The tongue (turned up) into the center (of the nasal cavity), the mouth
wide open and the attention fixed on the center (there), uttering the letter H
mentally, (the breath) then dissolves into the Tranquil One. (81) (Lelihānā)

The following passage conceming Krama Mudraas is drawn from Mahaarthama~njarii verse 77

p. 90 ff.
karaṅkiṇī krodhanī ca bhairavī lelihānikā |

khecarī cei mudrāyāḥ pañcātmakatayā sthitiḥ | iti |
tathā śrīvijñānabhaṭṭārake -

1) karaṅkiṉyā 2) krodhanayā 3) bhairavyā 4) lelihānayā |
5) khecaryā dṛṣiikāle ca parā vyāptiḥ prakāśate | iri |
mudrāṇāṁ bandhaprakāraśca tatraivopapāditaḥ | yathā -

1) mṛdvāsane sphijaikena hastapādaṁ nirāśrayamm |

vidhāya tatprasaṅgena parā pūrṇā matirbhavet || (karaṅkiṇyā)

2) upaviśyāsane samyag bāhū krtvārdhakuñcitau |
kakṣavyomni manaḥ kurvan śamamāyāti cllayāt | (krodhanayā)
3) sthūlarūpasya bhāvasya stabdhāṁ dṛṣṭiṁ nipātya ca |

acireṇa nirādhāraṁ manaḥ kṛtvā śivaṁ vrajet | (bhairavyā)

4) madhyajihve sphāritāsye madhye nikṣipya cetanām |
hoccāraṁ manasā kurvan tataḥ śānte pralīyate || (lelihānayā)
5) āsane śayane sthitvā nirādhāraṁ vicintayet |

svarṁ dehaṁ manasi kṣīṇe kṣaṇāt kṣīṇāśayo bhavet || iti | (khecaryā)
If this is the posture (mudra) of the Skeleton, like śavāsana it involves lying down, but in this

case on one side so only one buttock is resting on the matress (mṛdvāsana). If so, the reference
here is not to both feet and hands being ‘without support’ just the two that are on the upper side of

the reclining body.

APPENDIX D TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
Either (sitting) on a seat or (lying) on a bed, meditating on his own body

as being without support, when the mind ceases, within a moment (the yogi) is
free of (all his binding) dispositions (āśaya). (82) (Khecarī)

From the point of view of reality (rattvavṛttyā) the Mudrā called
Karaṅkinī is capable of bringing about the falling away of the duality (bheda)
which is called one’s own body and senses. As (is said) in the venerable

Cidgaganacandrikā:

O Mother! These inner, and so too outer rays (kara), are the bodies of
Your senses. This is the body, (Your iconic) form. There is also a second one
superior to this, which is the Sky of Consciousness to to which (You) Karaṅkinī

lead us.

Krodhanī

Krodhanī leads to the (true) nature of one’s own Self by means of the

anger which is the intense desire to withdraw inwardly the essence of the reality
levels (tattva) beginning with Earth up to Nature. As (it is said in the
Cidgaganacandrikā):

You are Krodhanī as the intense desire to withdraw the assembly of
reality levels ending with Nature and commencing with Earth, which is the
plane of limited perception. Your iconic form is Mantra of which (You are) the

one who unfolds it here.

attvavrúyā tu karaṅkiṇī nāma svadehendriyākhyabhedavīgalanapragalbhā mudrā | yathā
śrīcidgaganacandrikāyām antar amba! bahir apy anī karā ye tavākṣatanavo ‘īka eṣa yaḥ l
vigrahadvitayam apy ataḥ paraṁ cinnabho nayasi naḥ karaṅkiṇī | iĩi I
pṛthvyādiprakr̥tyantaṁ tattvasandoham antahsaṁjhĩr̥ṣãlakṣaṇena krodhena svātmarāpatāṁ
nayati krodhanī | yathã yat prakr̥tyavadhitattyamaṇḍalaṁ kṣṇāmukhaṁ parimitagrahāspadam l
krodhanī tvam asi tajjihīrṣayā mantramārúir iha te vijmmbhate l iti I
antarbahirbhāvayaugapadyena pūrṇasaṁvitṣyabhāvā bhairavī | yahā granthayo ʻpi ṣaḍ ume! yayā dhrtā sā nirāvaraṇacimmabhaḥpadā |
spandamārúidhr̥tabhedaḍambarā bhairavi tam asi viśvabhedinī | iti |
iyaṁ ca nimīlanonmīlanasamādhidvayasāmarasyaucityād asmābhir atyantam upalālyate | yad

antarlakṣo bahirdṛṣṭir nimeṣonmeṣavarjitaḥ l
iyaṁ ṣā bhairavī mudrā sarvatantreṣu gopitā | iti |

TANTRĀLOKA

Bhairavī
Bhairavī is (perfectly) full consciousness (that is such) by virtue of the
simultaneous (awareness) of interiority (within subjectivity) and externality
(within objectivity). As (is said in the Cidgaganacandrikā):

O Umā, there are also six knots. She who sustains them is the plane of

the Sky of Consciousness, free of obscuring coverings. You, O Bhairavī, who

splits apart all things (from one another), are the clutter (and deceat) of duality

sustained by (the power of action) the form of which is the pulse (of
consciousness) (spandamirti).
And this is that in which we delight very much for that (state, at once
internal and external) befits the oneness of the two (forms of) absorption

(samādhi), that is, with the eyes closed and the eyes open.

The goal within and sight (directed) outwards, the eyes not opening or
closing- this is Bhairavīmudrā, kept hidden in all the Tantras. (p. 91)
As (is said in the) venerable Mahānayaprakāśa:

Endowed with the qualities of the Great Union, their one form oneness

(sāmarasya) they, established in the abode of the unobscured expanse of

consciousness, shine perpetually. Bhairavī is said to be the seal that, having
filled the spectacle of duality generated by the intensity of her innate power, is
free of being and non-being, her glorious power full (and perfect) and form

unobscured. Bhairavī by nature, this is the seal, full to overflowing with the

oneness (sāmarasya), which is the waveless expansion of consciousness, of

these Melāpasiddhas.

As my teacher has said in the Mano ‘nuśāsanastotra:

The gaze is fixed and is the support of the outer object. Although free of

thought constructs, it is your seat which, like a parrot freed from (its) cage
atṭains (āhara) that lofty Bhairava of the body.
T have also said in the venerable Parāstotra:
yathā śrṝīmahānayaprakāe -

mahāmelāpadharmiṇyaḥ krauṇḍalyummeṣavigrahāḥ |
nirāvaraṇacidvyomadhāmasthā bhānti nityaśaḥ |
āpūrya ṣvabalodrekasamutthaṁ bhedaḍdambaram |
vyā sthitā pūrṇavibhavā nirāvaraṇavigrahā |
bhairavī saiva

vikhyātā mudrā sadasadujjhitā |

taraṅgavikãsãṁmasãmarasyaikapalinĩ||

mu(dri?dre)neyaṁ dvidhā bhāsamudreyaṁ bhairavātmikā || iti |

This passage is not drawṇ from the Mahānayaprakāśa by Armasiṁha (see appendix to
chapter four for the complete tex. it corresponds to verses 90cd-95 of the MNP (T). Each group
of five Siddhas is in its own state corresponding to one of the five Mudraas.

APPENDIX D TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
Having heated intensely the Earth with the hot, stainless (rays) that have

unfolded from the eyes from (the state) which is the dawning of bliss without
limits whose sole touch (spar”sa) is (contact) with the Inner Place, She, who the

wise man contemplates above (in the Sky of Consciousness), for there to be the
festival of the unfolding perception of full (and perfect) subjectivity

(pūrṇāhamprathana) is that certain (inscrutable reality) that is said to be You,

the inconceivable accomplishment - the great immobile Mudrā!
Lelihānā

Lelihānā is (the Mudrā) who is greedy (lālasā) to consume all the
wealth of the latent traces (of Karma produced) by (the activity of) the subtle
body etc. As is said (of Her):
‘O Mother! You are Lelihānā, the mass of rays (that pour forth) from

the abyss of the withdrawal of the latent traces of the seeds (of Karma) that arise

from the subtle body (asṣṭapuri), You whose mouth is wide open (bhedā)

(engaged) solely in licking (them up).
Khecarī

Śeṣavikalpavikṣobhavilāpinī
sauṣumnasaraṇiṣīmollaṅghinī
svātmasaṅṁvidavibhinnākārā ca khecarī | yathā Khecarī destroys the disturbance of the remaining thought constructs.
Her form undivided from the consciousness of Her own essential nature, she
crosses over the boundry of the path of suṣumna. As (is said):

“You are intent on destroying the expanse of manifestation that extends
from Supreme (Speech) and ends with the Corporeal One. O goddess, You, are
Khecarī who expands consciousness present in Śiva’s abode that is free of
coverings. (You are) Kuṇḍalī who, flying upwards swiftly like a bolt of
lightning, burns up the abodes of Fire, Sun and Moon. O Mother! You are
Khecarṁī who has entered’ Śiva’s (dimensionless) Point (śāmbhavabindu) by the

Middle Way.”

stahdhadrṣṭi bahirarthasaṁśrayaṁ nirvikalpam api yat tavãsanam |
muktapañjaraśukānukāri tad bhairavaṁ vapor udāram āhara | iti |
mayā 'py uktaṁ śrīparāstotre ānandodayalakṣmaṇor akaluṣair urpakṣmaṇor āṣṇalair akṣṇor unmiṣitaiḥ pratāpya pṛthivīm antaḥsthalaikaspṛśaḥ |
pūrṇāhamprathanotsavāya sudhiyo yām ūrdhvam adhyāṣate
sā kācit tvam acintyasidáhir acalā mudrā mahaty ucyase | iti |
puryaṣṭakādivāsanāsarvasvagrāsalālasā lelihānā | yathoktam -

aṣṭapuryuditabjavāsanāsaṁhr̥tipravanaraśmipu-njayā|
līdhamātramukhabhedayā tvayā bhāyate janani! lelihānayā | iti |
Read gatāsi for matāsi
tvaṁ parāprabhr̥tivaikharāntimollekhaviṣṭaravilāpanonmukhī |
devy anāvaraṇaśambhusadmagā khecarī

bhavasi cidvikāsinī |]

vahniṣūryaśaśidhāmaghasmarī kuṇḍalī tidad ivotpatanty asau |

śāmbhavaṁ janani bindum adhvanā madhyamena ca matāsi khecarī ||

Appendix E to Chapter Thirty-two
Selected Mudrās taught in Chapter Two of the
Fourth Satka of the Jayadrathayāmala
Over a hundred mudrās are described in the second ṣatka of the
Jayadrathayāmala. Here we are drawing from the fourth one. Although he
draws from several sources, Abhinava does not quote from it or even refer to it
in chapter thirty-two of his Tantrāloka that deals with mudrās. This may be
because, apart from the Kāmikāgama, the rest are all Trika Tantras and the
teachings focus on Khecarīmudrā.
The Trident Seal (triśūlamudrā)
athātaḥ saṁpravakṣyāmi mudrā ghoraparākramā l| 170 l|
triśūlākhyā mahādevī [kh: -devi] sarahasyā mahāhalā |
mattagandhaṁ samāhṛtya pāpaśūla [kh, g: yāvacchūlaṁ] viniḥsṛtaṁ ([kh, g:

vini-JII 17I I

trināḍicaru(?)yogena [kh, g: -vaddhayogena] triśūlaṁ dvādaśāntagam 1
jvalajjvalanasaṁkāśaṁ sphuliṅgānekasaṁkulam [g: spuliṁgā-] I/ 172 ||
cintayiṣa [kh, g: cintayitvā + karau samyaganyonyaḥ śleṣa] yojitaḥ [k:
yojanaiḥ; g: (?)] |
Now I will tell (you about) the mudrā that possesses fearsome valour
along with its secret called Triśūlā (the Trident), the Great Goddess who is very
powerful. Having drawn up the anus (mattagandha) until the spear of sin
(pāpaśūla) has come out (from it), by the Yoga of the binding of the three vital
channels, the Trident is present in the End of the Twelve. (Brilliant) like a
blazing fire, full of countless sparks. Having imagined (this), the two hands are
clasped together, united with one another.
Ms g: page 16 is unclear
16a

g)

viśata

|[k:

viṁśatid

kh:

d]

ūrdhvagau

kāryau

kaniṣṭhāṅguṣṭhayojanāt || 173 |I
iśṛtaṁ tu [kh: su] mahacchūlaṁ sarvavighnapramardanam |
māsād abhyāsayogena [k, g: māsādāyāsa-] khecaro jāyate naraḥ [k, g: nara] |l

174 1|

sarvasiddhiguṇopetā [kh: -praṇopetaḥ] guṇāṣṭakasamanvitaḥ |
bandhenāsya [k, g: vande-] mahābhāge sākṣād [k, g: sākṣā] devo vṛṣadhvajaḥ |

175 1|

dṛśyate sarvalokeṣu yaś cāsau [kh: yathāsau] parameśvara [kh: -raḥ] |
13a) anayā baddhayā devī ḍāvyo ḍāmarikās tathā || 176 ||
khecaryo nakracu(?)ṣpāś [kh: cīūnyāś] ca lāmā bhūcarya eva ca |

te sthitā gatadarpāś ca mohitās tā bhavanti hi || 177 ||
mahocchūṣmādayaḥ sarvā vaśe tiṣṭhanti tasya [kh: tasma] tāḥ |
eṣā sarvottamā mudrā [k: ] triśūlākhyā prakīrtitā || 178 II

iti jayadrathe triśūlamudrāvidhiḥ [kh: śūlamudrā ] |I

APPENDIX E TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

The two hands stretched up, a great trident comes forth that destroys all
obstacles by the conjunction of the little fingers and thumbs. In a month, by
applying (himself) to (its) practice, a man becomes a skyfarer. Endowed with

the qualities of all the accomplishments, he possesses the eight (yogic) powers
(guṇa). O greatly fortunate lady, by forming this (mudrā) he become the god
whose banner is the bull directly apparent. He is seen in all the worlds, he who
is the Supreme Lord.
By

forming

this

(mudrā)

the

goddesses,

Dāmarikās,

Khecarīs,

Nakracu.spaas, Lāmās, Bhūcarīs stand (before him) humbly and deluded. The
Mahocchūṣmās and others are all under his control. This is the most excellent of

Mudrās called Triśūlā (the Trident).

This is the procedure concerning the Trident Mudrā in the Jayadratha

ataḥ paraṁ pravakṣyāmi sarahasyaṁ mahadbhutam l
yan na kasṣyacid ākhyātaṁ [g: (?)khyātaṁ] tad adya kathayāmy aham || 572

lII

40b g) yena samyag adhītena bhairaveva bhaven naraḥ |

vedhayet sarvam akhilaṁ jagad etac carācaram [g: -carācaraṁ] || 573 I|

tatrādau [kh: tavādau; g: tatrā (?)] daṁṣṭriṇī śreṣṭhā tāṁ śṛṇuṣva nagātmaje |
madirānandacaitanyaḥ sadhūpāmodamoditaḥ [g: dhūpā-] || 574 ||
supuṣpitasutāṁvūlaś candanāgurucarcitaḥ |
devīrūpaṁ samālambya pūrvavīryasamanvitaḥ || 575 ||
sahasotthāya deveśi śvāsanāsphoṭayogataḥ |
vāmajānuṁ [kh, g: -nu] prasāryeta madhyam eva vikuñcayet || 576 ||
Next, I will tell (you something) that is very astonishing along with its
secret. What I have not told anybody (before), today I will tell (you) that by

which, well sudied, a man becomes Bhairava and he pierces all the universe
moving and immobile. There, first of all, Darṁṣṭriṇnī (mnudrā) is the most

excellent. Listen to that, O daughter of the mountains. His consciousness
blissful with wine, delighted by the fragrance of incense, adorned with flowers
and (chewing on) good beetle, perfumed with sandalwood and fragrent aloe,
assuming the form of the Goddess, (whilst still) endowed with his prior virility,
rising with audacity, O mistress of the gods, breathing (heavily) and flapping to
and fro, he should extend the left knee and contract the waist (madhya).

kotare locane kṛtvā bhruvor yugmaṁ [g: (?)voryugmaṁ] pracālayet [kh:
pracārayet; g: pracalayet] |
33a) sarpavad valitāḥ sarvā hy aṅgulyaḥ [kh, g: hyaṅgulyo] karayobhayoḥ /|

577 |

pradeśinye sṛrk kaṇābhyāṁ [k, kh, g: - kiīṇībhyāṁ] dāritāsye [k: dāritā (?)
stho, kh, g: dāritāsyo] vinikṣipet |
jihvāṁ [kh: jihvā] sañcālayed vegāt [kh: vegād] svāhākāraṁ samuddharet [k:
samudana; kh: samu dana; g: samuda (?)] || 578 II

Literally the yoginiis who ‘suck finger nails’.
JY 4/2/170cd-178.

TANTRĀLOKA

attahāsaṁ [g: (?)] naded [k, g: vaded] ghoraṁ aṣṭadhā bhairavātmakam |
eṣā sā daṁsṣṭriṉṇī mudrā raśmicakrodayātmikā || 579 ||
sarahasyā tavākhyātā [k, g: bhavā-] nākhyeyā yasya kasyacit |
29b kh) anayā baddhayā gauri kālāgnyādiśivāntakam || 580 ||
kampate viśvam akhilaṁ darśanāt sādhakasya [k, g: -kalpa; kh: -kasya] hi |

devī yathā devī [kh: devā] karaṅkiṇī [g: (?)raṁkiṇī] |l| 581 ||
41a g) tathā sā dṛśyate [g: dṛ te] sarvaiḥ sadevāsuramānuṣaiḥ |
Making his eyes look severe, he should move the pair of eyebrows, all
the fingers of both hands should be intertwined like snakes, he should place (the
thumbsṣ of his hands) in (his) gaping mouth with two drops of blood in places
(on it). He should move his tongue with force and utter svāhā! He should make

a loud frightening laugh, that is fierce (and threatening) by nature (bhairava),
eight times. This is Daṁṣṭriṇīmudrā which is the dawning of the Wheel of the
Rays (raśmicakra).
I have told it to you with (its) secret. It should not be told to (just)
anybody. O Gaurī, when this (nudrā) is made all the universe from the Fire of
Time to Śiva trembles at the sight of the adept. As is the goddess the venerable
Darṁṣṭriṇī, so is the goddess Karaṅkiṇī seen by all including the gods, demons

and men.

Lelihānāmudrā
athātaḥ saṁpravakṣyāmi ghorāṁ [kh: ghorā] mudrāṁ [kh: mudrā] bhayānakī |

587 I

lelihānābhidhāneti sarvadāveśakārikā |
yasyā bandhanamātreṇa bhaved romodgamasphuṭam [kh: romodgamaṁ-] |

588 I

kampate piīṇḍam atulaṁ śivārāvāṁ [k, kh, g: -vāḥ] kariṣyati |

mahāhāsyaṁ ca geyaṁ ca nartanaṁ valganaṁ tathā || 589 ||
sarvacakravikāsaṁ ca jāyate bandhamātrataḥ |
tac chrṇuṣva samāsena sādhakānāṁ hitāya vai || 590 ||

Now I will tell (you about) the fearsome and frightening mudrā called
Lelihānā, that always brings about possession (āveśa). Just by making it, the
hairs (of the body) visibly stand on end. The body shakes in an incomparable
manner and will produce the (frightening) sound of a jackel. Just by making it a
great joke, song, dance, rolling around and so too the expansion of all the cakras
(in the body). Listen to that (as I explain) in brief for the benefit of the adepts.

(587cd-590)

41b g) utthitaśvāsanāt tūrṇaṁ |[k: tūraṅga] haṭhād gātraṁ viśoṣayet [k:
viśoṣayan] |

kanīvike locane ca kruddhadṛṣṭir vidhūnayet [kh, g: -dṛṣṭividhūnayet] || 591 I
cālayel lehayej jihvāṅ [kh: jihvā] oṣṭhau [k: ṣṭhau; g: oṣṭho] saṁcūṣayed
bhṛśam [g: (?)śaṁ] 1
muṣṭihandhaiḥ karair devi karasthe kuñcite [kh: kucite] kṛte || 592 ||
JY 4/2/572-582ab.

APPENDIX E TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

nābhisṛkkiṇi saṁkṛṣṭiṁ kuryāt [g: kuyāt] sādhakasattamaḥ [k, g: -ma] |

vivecayen mahājvālāṁ pūrvavīryabalolbaṇām [g: pūrvavirya ś(?) I| 593 1|

pratyālīdhasthānakaṁ [k, g: gha-] syāl lirovyā dhunvataṁ [g: syānliro-] sakṛt |
aṭṭahāsaṁ naded ghoraṁ mudreyaṁ lelihānikā [k, g: -nakam] ll 594 II

She rises swiftly by exhalation, drying out the body with force. The
eyes (fierce) and gaze wrathful, he should make (the body) shake. He should
move (his) tongue and streneously suck on (his) lips. O goddess, with the

(many) hands clenched into fists, having contracted them. The most excellent of

adepts, should draw drops of blood from (his) naval. He should discern the great
confligration, strengthened by his prior virility. He stands with his leg extended
to one side (pratyālīdha) and shakes (the body) repeatedly. He should make a
loud and fearsome laugh. This is the mudrā (called) Lelihānikā. (591-594)

etāṁ badhvā mahāvīraḥ [kh, g: -ro] kṣobhayed bhuvanāvalim [g: (?)] |
mārayed bhūtayakṣoghāṁ bilayantrāṁ [k, kh: vina-] prabhañjayet || 595 ||
34a) pātayed yoginīvṛndaṁ vimānaṁ siddhasantatim |
kālāgnir bhayabhītas tu trāhi trāhīti jalpataḥ || 596 |I
sadāśivādayo devāḥ śāntiṁ [k, g: śāṁtī] kurvanti [k, g: kurya(?)ti] bhītitaḥ |
ardharātre śmaśānastho [kh: sma-] mahāvīrakulopari || 597 1I

yadā prabandhayen mudrāṁ mandirānandananditaḥ |
42a g) tadā [g: (?)] āyānti [g: (?)] yoginyas tricakrasthā mahābalāḥ || 598 II
tābhiḥ sārdhaṁ plaved [k: plāvayed, g: plāva] vyomni [k: vyoma; g: dhyoma]
mahābhairavarūpadhṛk |
The great hero who makes that (mudrā) disturbs the manifold worlds.

He slays the flood of ghosts and Yakṣas and splits apart the cavities and
machines (of the netherworlds). He causes the host of Yoginīs to fall (from the

sky and so too) the aircraft of the lineage of Siddhas. The Fire of Time is

terrified with fear, repeating ‘save (me)! save (me)!” The gods Sadāśiva and the
rest, frightened are tranquillized. If at midnight, in a cremation ground,
delighted by the bliss of wine, he makes the mudrā (projecting it) onto the
family of great heroes, then the very powerful Yoginīs who are in the three
assemblies (cakra) come (to him) and, bearing the form of Mahābhairava, he
flies up with them into the sky. (595-599ab)

yad yat karma samanvicchet [kh: ṣatvicchet] tat [kh, g: nāsti] tat sādhayate

balāt |I 599 ||

īdṛṣṣī [kh, g: īdṛśā] nāsti mudreśī [g: (?)] jagaty asmin carācare [g: (?)] |
mudrāpīṭhe [g: (?)] devadevī pradhānā parikīrtitā || 600 |I

yāvanti devadevesyā vidhānāni bhavanti hi |
anayā rahitāḥ sarvā na siddhiphaladās tu te || 6O1 II [g: (?)]
tasmāt [g: (?)] sādhāraṇā [g: (?)dhāraṇā] proktā bhogamokṣaphalapradā |
iti [g: nāsti] jayadrathe lelihānāmudrāvidhiḥ ||
Whatever be the action he desires, that is accomplished forcefully.
There is no Mudreśī like this in this moving and immobile universe. The
goddess of the gods, she is famous as the main (mudrā) of the Mudrāpītha. As
many as there are procedures pertaining to the goddess of the God of the gods,

TANTRĀLOKA

without her, none of them bestow the fruits of accomplishment. Thus, she is said

to be common (to all) and bestows the fruits of worldly benefits and liberation.

This is the procedure concerning Lelihānamudrā according to the
Jayadrathayaamala.

Karaṅkinīmudrā
ataḥ paraṁ pravakṣyāmi mudrāṁ [kh, g: mudrā] nāmnā karaṁkiṇīṁ (?) [kh: -

nīḹ l| 613 ||

durlabhā bhuvaneśānāṁ bandhamātrāt susiddhidā [g: (?)] |

35a) sarvamudrāpradhāneyaṁ |[kh: sarvamudrā (2); g: (?)rva-]
trailokyabhayakārikā [k: trailākya-] || 614 ||
43a g) asyās tulyāṁ |[kh, g: -tulyā] na paśyāmi mudrānyāṁ |[g: -nyā]
bhuvanodare |
31a kh) tāṁ śr̥ṇuṣva mahābhāge siddhimokṣaphalapradām [kh, g: -dā] l/ 615 |
Next, I will talk about the mudrā called Karaṅkiṇī. She is hard to
acquire. By just making it, it bestows the accomplishments of the Lords of the
Worlds. Of all the maudrās, this is the main one who instils fear in the three
worlds. I see no other mudrā that is its equal in the world. O greatly fortunate

lady, listen to (how that mudrā) bestows the fruits of accomplishment and
liberation. (613cd-615)

gatvā harāspadaṁ ghoraṁ madirānandananditiḥ [g: -naditaḥ] |

mahāvīravratadhāro mahākāṅkālaśobhitaḥ || 616 I|

citihhasmoddhūlitātmā śavayajñopavītikaḥ |
bandhen mudrāṁ ghoratarāṁ karaṇagrāsatatparām || 617 ||
ālīḍhagatisaṁrūḍhā |[g: ālīṁḍhagatisaṁrūḍho] pratyālīdhaḥ punaḥ [k: puna]

sthitaḥ |

Śoṣayeta balād gātraṁ bāhū ardhanikuñcitau || 618 II
saviṣmayagatau hastau nayane koṭare punaḥ |
bhrāmayeta sakṛd vaktraṁ naden [g: narder] nādaṁ subhairavam || 619 ||
vikāśayed granthikulaṁ kramavyutkramayogataḥ |
Having gone to Hara’s fearsome abode, exaulted by the bliss of wine,
observing the vow of a great hero, adorned with (the bones of) a great skeleton,

his soul covered with the ashes of the power of consciousness (citi), wearing a
sacred thread made from (the hair of) a corpse, (the adept) should make the most

fearsome mudrā, intent on devouring the causes (of worldly existence) (karaṇa).
Engaged in the process of licking up (the worlds) and then standing again, the
right knee advanced and the left leg drawn back (pratyālīḍha), he should dry out
the body with force. The two arms half bent, his hands (expressing his sense of)
astonishment and his eyes again looking severe, he should move his face around
and produce a beautiful and fearful sound (subhairava). He should expand out
(and burst apart) the mass of knots by (practicing the movement of the breath)
sequentially and out of sequence. (616-620ab)
JY 4/2/587-602ab.

APPENDIX E TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

mahādhāmakulārūḍho jagad etad grasaṁn iva || 620 ||

vamaty [k, kh: vamety; g: vamertya-] avalihet [k, g: avellihet; kh:evellihe]

sarvaṁ [k: sarvad, kh, g: bhaved] graset sarvamalaṁ priye |
pūrvavīryasamārūḍho bandhen mudrāṁ mahāprabhām || 621 |
anayā baddhayā devi trailokyaṁ bhasmasād vrajet |
graset kālāgnilakṣāṇi [g: kālogni-] pātayet sūryasantatim || 622 ||
māyāṇḍaṁ [kh: mayāṁ ut] kṣobhayet sarvaṁ bandhamātrān na saṁśayaḥ |

praharārāhāt plaved vyomni yoginīcakravanditaḥ || 623 |I
sa ca bhairavanãtho ʻsau bhavaty eva na cāãdbhutam |

35b) 43b g) nānṉayā sadrṛśī muḍdrā triṣu lokeṣu vidyate || 624 |I

sarvakarmakarī

jñeyā sarvasaṁhārakārikā |

mahākṣobhakarījñeyā na bandhet samayaṁ vinā || 625 ||
sarahasyā tavākhyātā [k: bhavā-] gopanīyā prayatnataḥ |
iti jayadrathe karaṅkiṇīmudrābandhaḥ |

Mounted in the Kula of the Great Abode, as if (engaged) in devouring

the universe, (the yogi) vomits and licks everything up. O beloved, he devours

all Impurity (mala). Mounted on the vitality (vīrya) of yore, he makes the mudrā
of great light. O goddess, when that (mudrā) is made the triple world is reduced
to ashes. He devours hundreds of thousands of Kālāgnis and causes a series of
suns to fall (from the sky). Without a doubt, by just making it, he disturbs the
entire Egg of Brahmā! In an hour and a half (praharārdha) he flies up into the
sky, praised by the assembly of Yoginīs. If he is the Lord Bhairava, what

wonder is it! There is no other mudrā similar to this one in the three worlds. One
should know that it does all tasks and withdraws all things. One should know

that (that mudra) is greatly disturbing (to oneself) if she is made without
(observing) the Rule. I have told you about it along with its secret. It should be

protected with effort.
(Such)

is

Jayarathayāmala.

the

formation

of

Karaṅkiṇīmudrā

according

to

the

Khecarīmudrā
adhunā saṁpravakṣyāmi sarvakarmakarī śivām [kh, g: śivā] || 626 ||

khecarī nāma yā mudrā sarvatantreṣu gopitā |
31b kh) yayā khecaratāṁ yāti sādhako [k: -ke, kh, g: -kaṁ] vīravandite || 627 ||
guruvaktrasthitā nityaṁ yoginīhrdaye sthitā |
yayāpy eva na śocanti sādhakāḥ [k: -kā] siddhikāṁkṣiṇaḥ [g: sirádhi-] || 628 II
yasyā bandhanamātreṇa khecaraiḥ saha modate |
tasyā [kh: asyās; g: yasyā] tulyāṁ [kh, g: tulyā] na paśyāmi mudrāpīthe
suvistare || 629 ||
tāṁ śrṇus.va [kh: -Śṛṇuṣvaṁ; g: Śśṛr_(?)dhvaṁ] mahābhāge sarvajyeṣṭhā
jagaddhitã |
Now 1 will tell (you about) the mudrā called Khecarī that, auspicious,

does everything and is hidden in all the Tantras by virtue of which, O (goddess)
JY 4/2/613cd-626ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

praised by (Kaula) heroes, the adept attains flight. (This mudrā) is always in the
teacher’s mouth and in the heart of the Yoginī by virtue of which the adepts

who desire accomplishments do not grieve and by just making it, they delight

with the Skyfarers. I see no other (mudrā) its equal in (this) very extensive
Mudrāpīṭha. Listen (to the teaching concerning) it, O lady of great good fortune,
(the mudrā) that is beneficial to the universe and the most senior of all.

kr̥tvā manorame deśe puṣpaprakarasaṁkule || 630 ||

pañcāmṛtaviliptaṁ tu sudhūpāmodavāsitam |

madirānandacaitanyaṁ kr̥tapūjāvidhikramaḥ || 631 I|
svadeham arcayed devī yathā devī karaṅkiṇī |

paścāt svarūparūpastho cittabhāsāvalokakaḥ || 632 I|

triśūlacakre saṁrūḍho [k: suṁ-] maṁḍalaṁ cānukalpayet |
44a g) satyaṁ tad ūrdhvagaṁ |[g: tadūrddhegaṁ] kāryaṁ hastenāṅguṣṭham
ākramāt [kh: hasta-] || 633 I|

Having made a beautiful place strewn with flowers and smeared with

the five nectars, fumagated with the fragrence of fine incense, (one’s)
consciousness (joyful) with the bliss of wine and performed the liturgy
according to the procedure (by which the deity is) worshipped, he should, O
goddess, 1 worship his own body as the goddess Karaṅkiṇī. After that,
established in his own nature, viewing the light of (his own) mind, mounted on
the Wheel of the Trident, he should fashion the maṇḍala. In truth, it should
made to face upwards by covering the thumb with the hand.

36a) vāmapādaṁ tadvad eva gudayantraniveśitam [kh, g: -tāṁ] |
ūrdhvavaktro viśālākṣo hāsyavaktro [kh: -vakreṇa] naded [k: nahed; kh: pad;
g: ṇahed] bhṛśam || 634 1|
aṣṭadhātu mahānādaṁ Śśūlaṁ [k, kh, g: -le] preṁkhatprayogataḥ |
prerayet cārgalān [k, kh: kārgalā g: kārgalāṁ] tān tān [k, kh, g: taṁd] yāvad
vāmā susaṁsthitā [k, g: stu; k, kh, g: -taḥ || 635 I|
tatrārūḍhaṁ plaved devi praharāt khecarīpadam |
eṣā devi tavākhyātā mudrā nāmnā tu khecarī | 636 ||
In the same way, the left foot is placed in the yantra (visualized in) the
rectum. He faces upwards, his eyes are large, smiling he makes a big sound. The
Great Sound is made as he applies (his) gaze to the Trident made of the eight
metals. He should impell each of those bolts (argala) until Vāmā (?) is well

established. O goddess, in three hours he should fly up to the plane of the
Skyfarers that are mounted there. Ó goddess, I have told you about the mudrā
called Khecarī.
sarvã mudrã tu rãjeśī sãmãnyã sarvataḥ [kh: sarva (?)] sthirã [kh, g: sthitāḥ] |
guruvaktrakramāyātā nākhyātā kasyacin mayā || 637 II
baddhainām āviśet [k: āviṣet; kh: āviṣet, g: aviṣe] tūrṇaṁ ghūrṇamanā vilocanā

mahāhāsyaṁ mahāgeyaṁ mahāmelāpam uttamam ḷ

APPENDIX E TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

32a kh) mudrābandhādikaṁ sarvaṁ prakuryāt [kh: kuryācca] sādhakeśvaraḥ |l

639 |

AII the mudrās are Rājeśī, common (to all practice) and firm in every
way. She has come through the tradition (krama) of the teacher’s mouth. I have
not told anybody about her. By making it, one enters in swiftly. She rolls around
(in bliss) looking here and there (vilocanā). By (her) rotating sounds of jackles

(are produced) and explosions. The lord of adepts does everything, ke makes the

mudrā etc, the great joke, the great song, the great and most excellent union.

plavate gaganābhogaṁ khecaraiḥ paripūjitaḥ |

bhavaty eva hi saptāhād yathā devī karaṅkiṇī || 640 ||
haṭṭāhaṭṭamukhā [kh, g: haḍḍāhaḍḍa-] raudrā tathānyā nātra saṁśayaḥ |
mahārahasyamudreśī nākhyeyā jātuci tvayā || 641 II
sārāt [k: sārā] sāratarā hyeṣā tavākhyātā yathārthataḥ |
iti khecarīmudrābandhaḥ [kh: -mudrā ] I|
He flies up into the sky and is worshipped in every way by the
skyfarers. In seven days, he becomes as is the goddess Karaṅkiṇī. Her face
made of bones, fierce and more without a doubt. She is the greatly secret
Mudreśsī whom you should never talk about to anybody. I have told you what is
the most essential essence of her as it truly is.

This is the formation of Khecarīmudrā
Bhairavamudrā
44b g) athātaḥ saṁpravakṣyāmi mahātantrottamottamām [kh: -mā] || 642 ||

mahābhairavanāmeti yā mudrā sarvasādhanī|
36b) yasyās tulyāṁ [kh, g: -lyā] na paśyāmi mudrāpīthe suviṣṭare || 643 ||
yasyā bandhanamātreṇa bhaved bhairavanāyakaḥ |
tāṁ śr̥ṇuṣva mahābhāge sarvaśroteṣu nāyakā || 644 ||
iyaṁ devi purā guptā sarvatantreṣu bhāmini [k: tāmiti; kh: bhāvini] |
anayā saptarātreṇa vīrabhūmau sthito naraḥ [g: niraḥ] || 645 ||
plavate khecaraiḥ sārdhaṁ nātra kāryā vicāraṇāt [kh: -ṇā; g: vicaraṇāt] |

Now I will tell (you) the mudrā that attains all things, the most excellent

one in the great Tantras called Mahābhairava. I see no (other one) that is its

equal in the very extensive Mudrāpītha. By just making it, one becomes the
leader of the Bhairavas. O greatly fortunate lady, hear that, (the mudrā) that is

the leader in all the currents (of scripture). O beautiful goddess, it is this that
was hidden previously in all the Tantras. A man who stands in the field of the
heroes for seven nights flies by means of this with the skyfarers, no reflection
needs be done here (about this, it will certainly happen).
gatvā vīravarodyānaṁ madirānandananditaḥ || 646 ||
uktāsanopaviṣṭas [kh, g: udvāsano-] tu samakāyaśirodharaḥ |
Y 4/2/627Tcd-642ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

spastṭavakṣakoṭarākṣo [g: -vakṣo-] bhrūviḻāsakutāśramaḥ || 647 ||
ardhamākuñcuyed bāhu gajacarmavaro [kh, g: -dharo] yathā |
punaḥ punar vimuñceti [kh: puṇarvi ] śaṃayec [g: śmaye] ca punaḥ punaḥ

|| 648 II

nāśāvaṁśe [g: -vaṁśe(?)] svacipite [kh: su-] vitate krodhamiūrchite |

īṣadv idāritasyo [k: haryad-; k, g: vidyaritāsyo] sau] jihvām antaśca lālayet |

649 I|

hāhākāraṁ naded raudraṁ kramād aṣṭakramodgatam |

45a g) srṣtadeho bhāsurātmā pūrvavīryāvalambakaḥ l| 650 l|
punaḥ punaḥ plaved valgain [kh, g: valgen] mudreyaṁ bhairavābhidhā |
32b kh) anayā baddhayā gauri kampate [g: kampane] bhuvanāvalim || 651 II
Having gone, delight with the bliss of wine to the garden of the best of
heroes and taken up the seat taught (previously) bearing one’s body and head
straight, the chest (bare and clearly) visible, (the look in) the eyes severe,

eyebrows playing restlessly, he should half bend the arm nd (wear) a most
excellent elephant hide. He should repeatedly let out (a loud noise) and then
come to rest again and again (?) fainting with anger. The mouth slightly
open, he should move the tongue within it from side to side. He should make the
fiercesome sound HĀ HĀ that comes forthin due order from the eightfold
process (?). His body emitted, his (inner) nature light, he takes the support of the
primordial vitality (pārvavīrya). He flies up again and again, spinning. This is
the mudrā called Bhairava. O Gaurī, when it is made, the series of worlds
trembles.
kṣobhayec chaktisadanaṁ pātayed [g: pāṭayed] granthisañcayam |
palālipūrṇaḥ sānando [kh: (?)] vinā yāgaṁ na darśayet || 652 |
śmaśāne [kh: -naṁ] bandhayed vīro vedimadhye vyavasthitaḥ |

37a) praharārdhāt khecaro ‘sau sādhakendro bhaviṣyati || 653 ||

sarvaiśvaryasamāyukto yathā bhairavanāyakaḥ |
sakrt svarūpalābhaṁ syād baddhā paśyati yo naraḥ || 654 ||
śilāśarīro 'pi sadā samayācāralopakaḥ |
mudrasyā [k, kh, g: mudresyā] darśanād devi svarūpastho bhaviṣyati l| 655 ||
anayā rahitaṁ [kh: -taḥ] sarvaṁ bhiravāśeṣavistaraṃ [kh: bhairavā

(JII

nirjīvaṁtaṁ samākhyātaṁ nātra kāryā vicāraṇā || 656 ||
sarvatantreṣu sāmānyā vidyāpīṭhe tathaiva hi |
na prakāśyā maheśāni śiṣye mandaparīkṣiṭe || 657 |
mudrārājñā ([kh: mudrā (?)] mahābhāgā
bhogamokṣaphalapradā |

|[kh:

(?)bhāgā]

iti jayadrathe [g: jayadrethe] bhairavamudrāvidhiḥ ||
He should disturb the abode of Śakti and cause the mass of knots to fall.
Full of meat and wine, blissful, without offering sacrifice (yāga), he should not
disṣplay it. The hero makes it in a cremation ground, located in the centre of the
altar. In an hour and a half, that lord of adepts will become a skyfarer, endowed
with all lordship like the leader of the Bhairavas.

APPENDIX E TO CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
The man who sees it formed, in a moment attains his own essential

nature. Though (his) body be like stone and he always transgresses the conduct

of the Rule, O goddess, by viewing (this) mudrā he will be established in his

own essential nature. Without this all the expanse without exception of Bhairava

is said to be dead. There is no need to reflect on this. O Great Goddess, it should

not be revealed to the disciple who have been poorly examined. The queen of
mudrās, the greatly fortunate one, who bestows the fuits of worldly benefits and

liberation.

This is the procedure concerning Bhairavamudrā according to the
Jayarathayāmala.

JY 4/2/642cd-658ab.

Appendix A to Chapter Thirty-three
Sarvātmakacakra according to chapter five of the Tantrasadbhāva'
mantranyāsaṁ (k, kh: madyanyāsaṁ) tataḥ kuryād bījair dvādaśabhedataḥ
(bījaidvādasa-) |

sve sve varṇādhikāreṇa parāyāstu (kh: parāyastu) yathākramam || 11 |I
dīrghāstu yoginī jñeyā hraṣvā rudrāḥ prakalpayet |
dale dale tu dātavyo rudraṣaṭko varānane || 12 || (g: ?)
taducchagagatā devya ṣaṭkā yuktāni yogataḥ | (g: ?)
saḍ mudrāḥ (k, kh: mudrā; g: ?) ṣaṭyoginyas tenāyaṁ (kh: -ya; g: ?) dvādaśo
gaṇāḥ (k, g: gaṇaḥ) || 13 ||
19a) āvisaptatiḥ (k, g: asaptati; kh: dvasaptati) samākhyātāḥ (k, kh, g: -tā)
ṣaṭkaścaiva surārcite |

Then (after the outline of the cakra has been drawn) deposit the Mantras
in their own (places) with seed syllables in groups of twelve in due order
according to the appropriate letters. The long (vowels) should be known to be
yoginīs and the short ones, Rudras. O fair faced lady, groups of six Rudras
should be placed on each petal.
(Then) above them are groups of six goddess, conjoined to them.
(These) six yoginīs are six Mūdrās and so this host of twelve (groups of) six that
are said to be seventy-two, O (goddess) worshipped by the gods. (11-14ab)
nyāsaṁ teṣāṁ pravakṣyāmi śrāyatāṁ (kh: -tā) vidhiniścayaḥ (> -yam) || 14 ||
catuṣke tu nyased (kh: nyase) devi napuṁsakagaṇaṁ śubham |
aṣṭāre tu (g: ?) yakārādyāḥ (g: ?) prāṇāntā (g: 7ntā) yāvad eva hi l 15 ||
26a g) dvādaśāre kalāḥ (k, kh, g: kalā) nyasya dvādaśaḥ (kh: -śa; -saḥ)
parisaṁkhyayã |
soḍaśair vā yathā nyasya nādyādhārāḥ (kh: -dharā; g: dhārās) śubhekṣaṇe (kh:

su-) | 16 II
sparśākhyaṁ (kh, g: -khyā) tu tato dadyād dvātriṁśaddalamadhyataḥ (kh:dvā
dala-, g: -sadala-) |
evaṁ nyāsastu kartavyo (g: karītavyā) bāhyācaraṇagaḥ (kh: -ga; g: caratyāgaḥ) priye || 17 II
I will tell (you) their deposition. Listen to the sure (and certain) teaching
concerning the procedure. Ó goddess, on the group of four (petals of the central
lotus), one should deposit the auspicious group of (four) neuter (vowels) (ie., r
R ṬḶ). On the (wheel of) eight spokes the (semivowels) begining with Y and
ending with te aspirate H. On the one with twelve spokes the energies
numbering twelve (of the twelve vowels). O lady with the auspicious gaze, (the

following wheel) is depositied with the sixteen (vowels) that are the foundations
beginning with A. Then one should add those called consonants in the middle of

the thirty-two petalled (lotus) (i.e., K to S). 0 beloved, one should perform the

external deposition in this way. (14cd-17)

' Refer to note 33, 42.

APPENDIX A TO CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

karṇikāyāṁ (kh: -yā) nyased devaṁ ruruṁ sarvātmakaṁ śubham (kh: śubha; g:
subha) |
tryakṣaṁ daśabhujaṁ (k, g: bhujāṁ; kh: -bhujā) bhīmaṁ padmahastaṁ

trilocanam || 1 8 II

jatājūtadharaṁ (k, kh, g: -paraṁ) devaṁ śaśāṅkaṁ kr̥tam ūrddhvajam (k, kh, g:
kita-) |

prottuṁgena (kh: proktaṅgena; g: proktuṁ-) lalāṭeṉṇa (kh: -te ) nāsāvaṁśena

śobhitam (kh: - 1ā) || 19 ||

itthaṁ rũpaṁ sadã dhyeyaṁ karṇikãntargataṁ vibhum |
The auspicious Ruru who is all things (sarvātmaka) is in the calix. He

has three eyes, ten arms, he is fierce, holds a lotus and has three eyes. He wears
dredlocks. He is the god who has placed the Moon on his hair. He has a high

forehead and is adorned by (his) beautiful nose. One should always meditate on

the pervasive Lord in this form within the calix (of the lotus). (18-20ab)

tasyordhvagagatā (k: -gato; kh: tasyocchagagato; g: tasyocchaṁ-) devī (k, kh,
g: devīṁ) nādiphāntasvarūpiṇī (k, kh, g: -hāntasvarūpiṇīm) || 20 |l
sarvāvayavasaṁyuktā (k: sarvo- -yuktāṁ; kh: sarvo ?saṁyuktāṁ; g: yuktāṁ) krīdayantī mahādyutiḥ (k, g: -ti; kh: -tiṁ) |
dale dale (kh: dales) tu yugmaṁ (kh: yugmā) tu kṛīḍābhinayatatparāḥ (kh: nayana)
| 2 1 ||
teṣāṁ (kh: teṣā) nāmāni vakṣyāmi vīrāṇāṁ yogibhiḥ (k: yogibhi; kh, g:
yogabhis) saha |
Above him is the goddess whose form begins with N and ends with PH.
Endowed with all the limbs, possessing a great lusture, she plays. On each petal
a couple are intent on play and dance. I will tell (you) the names of those heroes,
along with (those of) the yogis (i.e., yoginīs). (20cd-22ab)
harir vāmanakaḥ siṁho mahākālo.atha bhairavaḥ || 22 ||
jayā ca vijayā caiva gokarṇī ca mahābalā |
catuṣke vinyased devi yogeśvaryo mahābalaḥ || 23 ||
47a kh) baliś ca balinandaś ca daśagrīvo haro hayaḥ |
mādhavaś ca samākhyāto mahābala parākramaḥ || 24 |
viśvā (kh: vimvā) viśveśvarī (kh: vimveru?rī) caiva hāraudrī vīranāyikā (k, g: ke) |
ambā pūrveti nāmāni yoginyas tv ambharodbhavā || 25 ||
pūjyāḥ (k,
g: pūjyā; kh: pūjā) sṣaṭke (g: sṣatkai) mahāgauri
vāñchitārthaphalapradāḥ |
O goddess one should deposit the very powerful mistresses of Yoga
(and Bhairavas namely,) Harī, Vāmanaka, Siṁha and Mahākāla Bhairava (along
with) Jayā, Vijayā, Gokarṇī and Mahābalā.

O Mahāgaurī, (the following) that

bestow as fruit the things desired should be worshipped in the group of six.

(They are) said to be Bali, Balinanda, Daśagrīva, Hara, Hayaḥ, and Mādhava,

(each) very powerful and valourous. Viśvā, Viśveśvarī, Hāraudrī, Vīranāyikā,

Ambā and Pūrvā –- these are the names of the Yoginīs who have come forth
from the sky. (22cd-26ab)

TANTRĀLOKA

nandiś caiva mahākālo vṛṣabho bhṛṅgir eva ca || 26 ||
sameśvaras tathā Śśarmaḥ (k: Śśamo?; kh: śarmmā;
caturānaṇaḥ (g: ajesa-) |

yg: sarma) ajeśaś

jambhanī mohanī vāmā andhanī kartṛr eva ca || 27 ||

kalanī damanī caiva tathā pramathanīti (k, kh, g: prathama-) ca |
aṣṭāre pūjayed etā (kh: pūjā-) yogeśvaryo (kh: -ryā) mahābalāḥ || 28 ||
Nandi, Mahākāla, Vṛṣabha, Bhṛṅgi, Sameśvaras, Śarma, Ajeśa, and
Caturānana (are the Rudras). In the (wheel) with eight spokes these are the very
powerful Yogīśvarīs that should be worshipped: Jambhanī, Mohanī, Vāmā,
Aandhanī, Kṛtṛr, Kalanī, Damanī and Pramathanī. (26cd-28)
dakṣaś caṇḍo (k, kh, g: -ścaṇḍā) haraḥ śauṇḍī pramatho bhīmamanmathaḥ |
Śakuniḥ (g: -nis) samatir nando gopālo ʻtha pitāmahaḥ (kh: -mahāḥ) | 29 ||

jaṭilā rambhā sīṁhī haṁsā (kh: haṁsāṁ) gajānanā |

bhīṣaṇī pīṅgalā śūrā gajakarṇiḥ (k, kh, g: -karṇi) pinākinī || 30 ||
Śśikhidhvajāśca (kh: śikhidhvajā ca) vikhyātā dvādaśāre (g: -sāre) vyavasthitāḥ |
Dakṣa, Caṇḍa, Hara, Śauṇḍī, Pramatha, Bhīma, Manmatha, Śakuni,

Samati, Nanda, Gopāla, and Pitāmaha (are the Rudras). Vāmanī, Jaṭilā, Rambhā,

Siṁhī, Haṁsā, Gajānanā, Bhīṣaṇī, Piṅgalā, Śūrā, Gajakarṇi, Pinākinī and

Śikhidhvajā are said to be located in the (wheel with) twelve spokes. (29-31ab)

nabhau (kh: nabho) bhānur anantaś ca helārājo (kh: halā-) mahābalaḥ || 31 I|
bhīmārjuno tathā droṇo mahārājo.atha sundaraḥ |
bhasmarājo.atha kalyaṇo madhuḥ (kh: madhu; g: madhus) sindūrakasṭathā || 32

I

caturo vāmanaścāpi (k, kh, g: -naśvāpi) vīrā hy evaṁ prapūjayet |
Śśivā hariprabhā durgā bhadrakālī mano.anugā || 33 ||
kaušikī (g: kausiki) kāli viśveśī (g: -sī) jayā ca vijayā tathā |
47b kh) 26a g) raktā raktapriyā caiva karālā kekarā tathā || 34 1|
mahocchuṣmā ca yoginyaḥ (k, kh, g: yoginya) ṣoḍaśāre (g: -sāre) vyavasthitāḥ |
Nabha, Bhānu, Ananta, Helārāja, Mahābala, Bhīma, Arjuna, and Droṇa
and Mahārāja, and Sundara, Bhasmarāja, Kalyaṇa, Madhu and Sindūraka,

Catura, along with Vāmana – one should worship these heroes in this way.

(31cd-33ab)

Śivā, Hariprabhā, Durgā, Bhadrakālī, Manoʼnugā, Kauśikī,

Viśveśī, Jayā, and Vijayā, Raktā, Raktaprīyā, Karālā, Kekarā and Mahocchuṣmā
are the Yoginīs situated in the (wheel of) sixteen spokes. (33cd-35ab)

saṁvarto

(k,

kh,

g:

samvartā)

lakulīśaśca

bhṛguḥścetathaiva; g: bhṛguhścetas-) ca || 35 ||

bhṛguścetastathaiva

(kh:

vakaḥ (kh: vaka) khaḍgī pinākī ca bhujaṅgo vālireva ca l|
mahākālo durāṇḍaśca cchagalaṇḍaḥ (k: -laṇḍa: g: -ścacchagalaṇḍa)
Śśikhisṭathā || 36 ||
lohito meṣamīṉau ca tridaṇḍī ca tathā ṣaḍhiḥ |
umākāntorddhanārīśo (k, g: -kāntārddha-) dāruko lāṅgalī tathā || 37 |

APPENDIX A TO CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

someśvaro.atha śarmāṇaścaturvaktraikanetrakaḥ |
kūrmaścaivaikarudraśca śivottamastathā (k, g: -ma tathā) paraḥ || 38 ||
pañcāntakaścaṇḍakrodhī
saṁpūjyāścakre
(k,
g:
_saṁpūjyāke;
sapūjyāścakre) tu śobhane (g: so-) |

kh:

Saṁvarta, Lakulīśa, and so too Bhṛgu, Cetas, Baka, Khaḍgī, Pinākī,
Bhujaṅga, and Vāli, Mahākāla, Durāṇḍa, Cchagalaṇḍa and Śikhi, Lohita, Meṣa,

and Mīna, Tridaṇḍī and Saḍhi, Umākānta, Arddhanārīśa, Dāruka and Lāṅgalī,

Someśvara, Śarmāṇa, Caturvaktra, Ekanetraka, Kūrma and Ekarudra, followed

by Śivottama, Pañcāntaka, Caṇḍa and Krodhī should be worshipped in the
beautiful wheel. (35cd-39ab)
bhagayogī tu citrākṣī viśālā ca (k, g: viśālāśca) tathāparā |I 39 ||
dāmotī caiva kalhotī daṁṣṭriṇī (kh, g: -nī) piṅgalā tathā |
mūlā mūlatarā caiva yatrā vai mūlaghātikā (k: śūlapātikā) || 40 |
mūlakārī tathānyā ca vijñeyā prāṇahārikā |
chuchundarī (kh: cchucchudūrī) ca ratnākṣī (kh: raktākṣī) rākṣasī (g: -śī) ca
tathāparā l| 41 I|
ghorā ca śūkarī (kh, g: sūkarī) caiva tathānyā ca valotkaṭā |
(k,g: piśācānyatyanāpīḍā) vyāghrī haṁṣī halāyudhā || 42 ||
19b) sahanī grasanī (k: yamanī; kh: graṣaṇī) caiva mohanī (kh: mohanā)
priyadarśanā |

trāsanī (k, kh, g: trāśanī) ca samākhyātā dvātriṁśāre (g: -sāre) prapūjayet || 43
I

Bhagayogī, Citrākṣī, with Viśālā as another, Dāmoṭī and Kalhofī,
Darṁṣṭriṇī and Piṅgalā. Mūlā and Mūlatarā, Yatrā, Mūlaghātikā (k: śūlapātikā),
Mūlakārī and should know that Prāṇahārikā is another. Chuchundarī and
Ratnākṣī, and Rākṣasī is another, Ghorā, Śūkarī and another is Balotkaṭā,
Piśācā, Nṛtnā, Āpīḍā, Vyāghrī, Haṁsī, Halāyudhā, Sahanī, Grasanī and Mohanī,
Priyadarśanā, and the one called Trāsanī should be worshipped in the (wheel

with) thirty-two spokes. (39cd-43) Tantrasadbhāva 5/11-43

Appendix B to Chapter Thirty-three
In Praise of the

The Sixteen Amritarudras

by Abhinavagupta
Introduction

The sixteen verses translated here were composed by Abhinavagupta to
praise the sixteen Rudras who, according to the Mālinīvijayottara, govern the
sixteen vowels. One by one in serial order, each serves as the customary verse
praising the deity (maṅgalaśloka) that introduces his commentary (vimarśinī) on
each of the sixteen chapters of Utpaladeva’s Iśvarapratyabhijnākārikā. A
distinctive feature of these sixteen Rudras is that they are all intimately related
to Nectar with which they are variously identified and flows forth from them.
Abhinavagupta does not tell us directly why he has chosen to do this, but by a
careful reading of the text we can understand that for ourselves. The key is the
word for nectar, which is ‘amrṛta’. The association with the sixteen phases of the

Moon, each one dripping with lunar necter is the most immediate association.
The word also denotes the first vowel and letter of the alphabet which in the

very first verse Abhinava tells us stands for Anuttara, the Absolute. This Nectar

/ Anutṭara pervades and is the source and abode of all the sixteen yvowels.
The fifty letters of the alphabet represent fifty energies of AHAM - the
great I AM that is the self awareness and innermost nature of Deity and the
Abṣolḻute. The alphabet ranging from the letter A to H symbolizes the phases in
the cycle of creation, just as the reverse, MAHĀ – represents that of withdrawal.
Everything takes place within Śiva as the play of His energies; each one an
aspect and phase of His one power which is His freedom identified with the

reflective awareness of AHAṀ. The sixteen vowels at the beginning of the

alphabet represent phases of the activation of the energies within Śiva’s
consciousness. They are at the pure level in which the universe manifests as one
with Anuttara as its aspects experienced directly within it. The thirty-four
consonants that follow represent phases of the emanation of the reality levels
(tattva) ranging from Earth to Māyā, that are experienced as a universe of
objects and perceivers that are as if outside Śiva consciousness. Abhinava
explains this process in all his works on Trika, most extensively in chapter three
of the Tantrāloka.
The word ‘anuttara’ appears in the very beginning of the Parātrīśikā, a
Trika scripture of great authority. There the Goddess asks a question:
‘anuttaraṁ kathaṁ deva ṣadyaḥ kaulikasiddhidam. “0 God, what is Anuttara
that immediately bestows Kaula accomplishment?” There it may simply mean
‘tṭhe most excellent – which is its literal meaning. But Abhinava takes Anuttara
to be a proper name denoting the highest reality taught in Trika Śaivism. We

I firṣṭtrasḹated the verses at in March 2014 in Varanasi.
These Rudras are listed in MV 3/17-19 which is quoted in TĀv ad 33/9cd-12, see notes there.
These fit sikteen have a special importance as representative of all fifty Rudras governing the
leters. Thus, similaty, we observe that only the fist sixkteen Bhairavas of the Śabdarāśi aphabct
are listed in TĀ 20/48cd-50. The remaining thirty-four Rudras listed in MV 3/20-24ab. Sce below
after this series of sixteen.

APPENDIX B TO CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

know that Somānanda, the teacher of Utpaladeva wrote a commentary on the
Parātrīśikā, to which Abhinava refers in his own commentary (vivaraṇa), but

we do not know whether Somānanda also understood the meaning of the word
‘anuttara’ in this way. He may well not have done, as there is no reference to
Anuttara in his work, the Śivadṛṣṭi, or, indeed, in the works of his great disciple

Utpaladeva. Abhinava, on the contrary makes much of this word which he takes

the trouble to define no less than sixteen times in his commentary on the
Parātrīśika. 1t is clear also from his Tantrāloka, which he wrote subsequently,
that he champions Anuttara as the highest reality in his system that he himself,
apparently, calls Anuttara Trika (TĀ 1/14). He identifies Anuttara with
Bhairava, whom he considers to be Supreme Śiva, the thirty-seventh reality
level (tattva) above that of Śiva which is the highest in Aagamic Śaivism in

general, as it is for Utpaladeva.
It appears that Abhinava alludes to Anuttara in his verse in praise of the
ultimate
reality
that
.introduces
his
_commentary _on .,re
and ʻfree ã needʼ (or according to a variant reading ‘unmanifest’) as the source
of the two polarities (śākhā) of Śiva and Śakti. If there were any doubt about his
intention, it is dispelled by his sixteen verses praising the Rudras of Nectar,i.e.,
Anuttara. Clearly, he is praising Anuttara as the ultimate reality of the
Pratyabhijnā - Recognition - school of non-dualist Śaivism as it is of Trika, its
Kaula form.
Swami Lakṣmanjoo taught the recitation of these verses to his disciples
no doubt aware of their reference to Rudra / Bhairava as Anuttara, both as

preceding the sixteen as the ‘seventeenth’ which is their transcendental source
and, equally, as the first of the series in the inner procession of emanation. He
recommended the recitation of these verses as an especially powerful way of
invoking Śiva and the sixteen aspects of his recognition as our own true nature.
George de Barselaar explains that ‘Swamiji gave this out for people to
recite, to enkindle within them their own Self-recognition, which is
what the vowels are, that is, pure subjectivity (pramitibhāva).”

1. Amṛta (A) The Rudra Who is Nectar
amṛtam anantam anuttaram aghoraṣoḍaśakaśakticakragatam |
aunmanasapadanirūḍhiprathamopodghātakaṁ vande ||
I praise that eternal and most excellent (anuttara)
Amṛtarudra (who is Anuttara), present in the wheel of the sixteen

energies of Aghora. He is firmly established on the plane Beyond
Mind

(unmana)

emanation). (1)

as

the

first

who

opens

up

(and

introduces

The first letter of this verse is A, which is also the letter to which the verse refers. Most (but not
all) of the verses begin with the letter to which the Rudra praised in that verse corresponds.

As the intention is to praise Amṛtarudra, I have put this meaning as the primary
one, although it is, in fact, just an allusion. A literal translation would be ‘ḹ praise
Anuttara, which is the eternal nectarʼ

TANTRĀLOKA

The Aghoras are the energies of the goddess Parā. They are the sixteen
vowels beginning with A that stands for the reflective awareness (parāmarśa) of
Anuttara. The ultimate source of all the letters, it is present in a most evident
way in the vowels as they are all directly or indirectly derived from it. The
vowels represent the phases of manifestation experienced within the Light of
Śiva consciousness which is Anuttara. Within the Light of Anuttara nothing is
created or destroyed. The play of emanation takes place within the domain of its
freedom which, viewed from the perspective of emanation, is also Anuttara as
the first disclosure that introduces and ‘opens upʼ the process of emanation. As
the highest level of Śakti, it is the plane Beyond Mind which is the point of
contact between emanation and the transcendent Anuttara. Beyond Mindis the
supreme transcendental energy that is united with Śiva and is virtually one with
Him. It is the highest and most subtle limit of immanence. As such it is the final
point of transition into Śiva, that it pervades and in which it is stilled. Thus, it is
described as the transcendental Void of the energy of consciousness, and as
uncreated immobile Speech. This is the plane on which the Trika Goddesses
reside, seated on the tips of Śiva’s Trika Trident. In terms of the reality levels
(tattva), A (anuttara), which is Beyond Mind is equivalent to Śivatattva as

Unmanifest Śiva (Anāsṛtaśiva). Ā (ānanda), whichis With Mind, is Śaktitattva.
2. Amṛtṭapūrṇa (Ā) The Rudra Who is Filled with Nectar.

ānandam amrtapūrṇaṁ sāmanase parapade paraṁ satyam |
ghaṭitānuttaradr̥ḍhatamanirūḍhibhājaṁ śivaṁ vande ||

I praise Śiva Amṛtapūrṇa (Filled with Nectar), who is the
supreme truth on the supreme plane With Mind (sāmana); he
whose supremely firm stability (within His own supreme nature) is
forged from two Anuttaras (A+A). (2)
The second vowel – long A - stands for Ānanda – ‘blissʼ. This

reflective awareness is formed by the union of two short As, that is,

Anuttara as the Light of Śiva and A, Anuttarā, which is Śakti, the
brilliant creative genius (pratibhā) of Anuttara. Abhinavagupta teaches

that this is not a lower level. Rather, With Mind (samanā) is a
consolidation of Anuttara Beyond Mind (unmanā), within the highest

sphere of emanation in which it is as yet unmanifest.

3. Amṛtābha (I) The Rudra Who is the Light of Nectar
icchāśaktiṣuṇirbharam aṃmrtābham anantabhuvanajananapaṭum |
vande svaśaktilāharībahalitabhairavaparānandam |l
I praise

(Rudra) Amṛtābha

(the

Light

of Nectar)

who,

beautifully full (to overflowing) with the power of the will (icchā),
is skilled in generating the endless number of worlds; He who is

APPENDIX B TO CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

Bhairava’s supreme bliss made mighty by the waves of his own
energies. (3)

Now we enter the sphere of the reflective awareness of the
power of the will. It is the very freedom of the Light of Śiva
consciousness that, containing all its energies has begun to be
propense to generate its manifestations. Thus they rise like waves out
of the ocean of Anuttara, which is that Light pervaded by the one
Pervasive power (vyāpinīśakti). Indeed, all the letters, representing

aspects of the reflective awareness (paramārśa) derive from Anuttara

to which Abhinavagupta refers in one way or another in all the verses.
The vowels, as the inner awareness within universal consciousness, are
at the pure level in which everything is still experienced at one with it.
They are the sources of the following series of consonants that
represent the principles from Māyā down to Earth which is the impure
level in which everything is experienced as separate from individual
consciousness. Thus, Anuttara is ultimately their source also.
However, this is not experienced directly at the impure level which, as
the sphere of duality, is experienced instead as a product of Māyā and
hence pervaded by that rather than Anuttara.
4. Amṛtadrava (Ī) The Rudra Who Pours Out Nectar.
īśvaram aśeṣatāpapraśamanam amṃṛtadravaṁ sadā vande |

apratighātisvecchāvikāsaviśrāntam amṛtakaramaulim |l
I always (sadā) salute the Lord (īśvara) Amṛtadrava (Who
Pours Out Nectar). He who is the quelling of all (the intense heat
of) suffering and, resting in the unimpeded expansion of his own
will, bares as a crest jewel (on his hair), a ray of (lunar) nectar. (4)

This and the previous Rudra correspond to Sadāśivatattva to
which, it seems Abhinavagupta is covertly referring by saying ‘always’
– sadā. This word is an indeclineable, so sadā vande – ‘I always salute
alwaysʼ can also mean ‘I salute Sadā’ i.e. Sadāśiva. As usual, the long
vowel represents the consolidation or ‘expansion’ of the state
represented by the short vowel. The will (icchā – I) which impels the
worlds into existence becomes the sovereign power (īśānaśakti) of
Iśvara (Ī) – the Lord of all the worlds outlined within consciousness,
resting at one with it as the reflective awareness that ‘I am (all) this’.

5) Amṛtaugha (U) Rudra Who is a Flood of Nectar.
yad anuttarasaṁbodhãd ãnandavikasvarecchyã pũrṇam l|
īśvaram unmiṣad amṛtaughasundaraṁ tat stuve dhāma ||

TANTRĀLOKA

I praise the Lord (īśvara) who is the Abode that is full (and
perfect) by virtue of the will that is expanding with bliss out of

(and because of) the awakened consciousness of Anuttara and is

beautiful with the unfolding (unmiṣat) flood of nectar (amṛtaugha).

(5)

Each of the forms of reflective awareness symbolized by the
letters is an Abode of Anuttara but this is especially true of the
vowels. Anuttara is Amṛta, that is nectar, which is ‘not dead’ (amṛta)

and gives its imperishable life to all things pervaded by it. This abode
of nectar is where the power of knowledge unfolds and so the vowel U
is called ‘Unfolding’ (unmeṣa), to which Abhinava is clearly alluding
here. This and the following form of reflective awareness, centered on the
power of knowledge, function on the reality level (tattva) of Īśvara as the
experience that ‘(all) this is me’. It seems that Abhinava is alluding to this also
by referring to this Rudra as Īśvara – Lord. He is said to be ‘full’ because
the awakened consciousness of Anuttara, which is the awakening of
Anuttara, is its bliss from which arises the will to know itself as all

things full’ of the nectar of that realisation. That awakening of
Anuttara within the nature of Anuttara is the power of knowledge
which is the awakened awareness of Anuttara, that is, the full
knowledge of Anuttara. The awakening takes place inside the nature of
Anuttara because before that there is only the Light of consciousness
pervaded by the power of the will (icchā) to know. This is not yet
knowledge (j/nāna) which arises when that initial state of unfolding is
consolidated in the following state of reflective awareness. Here

Īśvara – the Lord - is perfect, full (pūrṇa) and beautiful. In the

following phase this plenitude pours out of itself as waves of the
lifegiving nectar of insight.
6) Amṛtormī (Ū) The Rudra Who is the Wave of Nectar.

aham ānandaghanecchāghaṭiteśyaratonmiṣatsamastormiḥ |
ity ullāsataraṅgitam amṛtōrmiṃ ahaṁ cidarṇavaṁ vande ||
I am the wave (ūrmi) of the totality (of all things), unfolding

(as and) by the lordship fashioned by the will of dense
(uninterrupted) bliss. Thus, I praise (myself), the ocean of
consciousness, (called) the Wave of Nectar (amṛtormi) that is filled
with waves by (its innate) exuberance. (6)
The three primary energies of will, knowledge and action, indeed all the
energies, which are their permutations, constitute a mighty wave on the surface
of the ocean of Anuttara and Ānanda which, in its depths, abides supremely
have translated ānandavikasvarecchyā, as ‘the will that is expanding with bliss.”” One could
equally well translate as ‘the will expanding from / due to / within (his innate) bliss’, or, ‘the will
that expands (his innate) bliss”

APPENDIX B TO CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

tranquil within itself. The energy of the will is the first, innermost, outpouring of
the will to be all things which governs their existence. The energy of knowledge
is the first unfolding of the wave of their emergence at one with the infinite
ocean of their unconditioned nature. The energy of action, represented by the
four dipthongs (E AI O AU), is the full procession of waves that, clashing with
one another, fuse together and separate. In this phase the experience of
Īśvaratattva – ‘this (universe) am I’ – is stabilized and intensified as the

reflective awareness of being all things, as their Lord, who is born from the
unalloyed bliss of Anuttara and sustained by the intention to be that. Thus, A is

Śivatattva, Ā is Śaktitattva, 1 and
I are Sadāśivatattva in which subjectivity

predominates and U and Ū are Īśvaratattvain which objectivity predominates.
7) Amṛtasyandana (r) The Rudra Who is the Flow of Nectar.
svaprasarapreṅkhitavilasadūrmiṣaṁkṣhubhitacidrasāpūram |
amṛtasyandanasāraṁ bhairavasaṁvin mahārṇavaṁ vande ||
I

praise

(bhairavasaṁvid),

that

great

ocean

of

Bhairava

consciousness

the essence of which is (this) flow of nectar

(amṛtasyandana) and is completely full of the aesthetic savor of
consciousness (cidrasa), aroused by the waves that pour forth
impelled by its own unfolding. (7)

This Rudra, along with the following three Rudras and the

vowels they govern, constitute a distinct group of four vowels, that is,
ṛ R ḷ Ḷ. They possess the characterics of vowels but, at the same time
have a touch of the semi-vowels R and L that are classified as
consonants. Thus, Indian phonetics refers to them as ‘neuter’ vowels.
Amongst the sixteen ‘seeds of nectar’ these four are singled out
especially as ‘vivifyingʼ (saṁjīvinī) and as the ‘energies of nectarʼ
(amṛtakalā). Abhinava expounds the states of awareness to which they
correspond in his Tantrāloka and Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa. However, there
it appears that, although they represent internal states, within
Anuttara, they are presented as interruptions in its development up to
its emission. Thus, they are ‘neuter” in that context also.
Here they are presented as an alternative flow of awareness
back to Anuttara that does not need to travers the lower impure levels
beyond emission, the sixteenth vowel (H). Accordingly, this verse

describes the beginning of this process as the outpouring of Anuttara
within itself, whilst relishing the aesthetic delight of its own

unconditioned consciousness. The next stage is the formation of the
body of Anuttara. Once that has formed it manifests countless
processions, although in itself it is devoid of succession. Finally, at
the fourth stage, it frees itself of all possible impurities that develop at
the lower levels of the processes of outer manifestation.

TANTRĀLOKA

8) Amṛtāṅga (ṛ) The Rudra Whose Limbs are Filled with Nectar.

pūrvaṁ yad anuttaraṃ aṃr̥tabhūmim āsādya saptamīṁ kalanām |
viśrāmyati tat praṇamāmy amrtāṅgadaṁ parānandi |l

I bow to one who, having first attained the most excellent

(anuttara) plane of nectar which is the seventh phase (kalanā of the
vowels), he brings that to rest, bestows a body of nectar and
possesses supreme bliss. (9)
9) Amṛtavapuṣ (R) The Rudra Who is the Embodiment of Nectar.
śivam amṛtavapuṣaṃ amṛtakalācatuṣṭayatṛtīyabhāgajuṣam |
praṇamāmi bhāsayantaṁ kramarahite ʻpi kramam anekam ||
I bow to Śiva, whose body is nectar and, endowed with the
third of the group of four energies of nectar (i.e., 1), constantly
makes manifest multiple succession, although devoid of succession.

(9)

10) Amṛtodgāra (1) the Rudra Who is the Spew of Nectar.
saṁjīvanaturyakalākalitavibodhaṁ samastabhãāvãnãm |

I praise Śiva who is the well awakened consciousness

generated from the fourth (turya) vivifying (saṁjīvana) energy (i.e.,
L) and the spew of nectar (amṭodgāra) of (all phenomena) wasted

away (śīrṇa) (and rent asunder) by the poison of corrupting
(impurity) (dūṣaṇa). (10)

Śaiviṣm divides the reality levels (tattva) into five spheres of energy
called kalā. These, along with the reality levels they encompass are as follows:
1) Nivṛtikalā – the Energy of Cessation. This contains just one tattva, namely,

Earth. 2) Pratiṣṭhākalā the Energy of Establishment. This sphere extends from
Water to Nature (prakṛti). 3) Vidyākalā – the Energy of Knowledge that
contains the levels from Puruṣa, the individual soul up to Māyā. 4) Śāntakalā –
the Tranquil Energy that extends from Śuddha Vidyā to Sadāśiva. 5)
Śāntātītākalā The Energy Beyond the Tranquil. This corresponds to Śakti and
Śivatattva.

“ If we understand udgāra to mean ‘utterance’ rather than ‘vomit’ or ‘ejection’, the
meaning would be the Rudra who cries ‘nectar’

APPENDIX B TO CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

George: The first three of these four Rudras, who govern the
vowels r R and 1, are also Sadāśiva, Īśvara, and Śuddhavidyā. This is

the fourth Rudra who is the energy (kalā) of the fourth state (turya).

It is transcendental, because once you enter Śuddhavidyā you are in
transcendental

consciousness.

The

fourth

energy

(kalā)

all-

encompassing because it includes Sadāśiva, Īśvara, and Śuddhavidyā,
that contain everything that is going to manifest in external creation.
The fifth sphere of energy is Śāntātītākalā which is transcendental.
Śāntākalā goes up to Sadāśiva. So, the fifth is Śiva-Śakti that are
beyond that. Once you enter Śuddhavidyā the rise is automatic and the
only Impurity (mala) that is left is āṇavamala which fades away
automatically as you rise to Āśvara and Sadāśiva. That is the great
impediment - āṇavamala here called ‘poison’.
Mark: the poison of corrupting (impurity) (dūṣaṇa) is
āṇavamala, which sustains the imperfection of duality caused by Māyā
Those who have been overcome by the wasting away of their energies
(śīrṇa) due to their misdirected Karma are caught by it. The remedy is
the nectar of Śiva’s well awakened consciousness (vibodha). 1t is the
special, most excellent consciousness that generates (kalita) the fourth

vivifying energy (saṅjīvana) that gives and renews the life of living
beings and, as turya, burns up all impurity.
(11) Amṛtāsya (E) The Rudra Whose Face is Nectar.

ekam anuttararūpāt prabhṛtitrikaśaktipūritānandam |
amṛtāsyam asya jagataḥ pramāṇabhūtaṁ śivaṁ vande ||
I praise Śiva, whose face is nectar (amṛtāsya) and is the

means of knowledge of his universe. The one (unique) emanation
(prasṛti) from the nature of Anuttara, He is bliss filled with the
energy of the triad (trikaśakti) (of will, knowledge and action). (11)

Resuming the ongoing flow to emission, this Rudra governs
the letter E. Graphically it looks like an inverted triangle that
represents the Goddess as the womb of the universe. The corners of
the triangle are the three energies of will, knowledge and action that
fill it with nectar. The Tantras sometimes refer to this triangle as the
face of the goddess. The face of the Rudra Whose Face is Nectar is
here, it seems, understood by Abhinavagupta to be the triangle. The
word here for ‘face’ is āsya which also means ‘mouthʼ. It is through
this ‘mouthʼ that the universe is emitted.

1 rcad prasrlti for prabhṝti.

TANTRĀLOKA

12) Amṛtatanu (AI) The Rudra Whose Body is made of Nectar.

aikyaparamārthakalayā triśaktiyugaghaṭitavaiśvarūāpyam aham |
amrṛtatanum atanuhodhaprasaramahākāraṇaṁ smarāmi haram |l

I recollect, Hara (Śiva the savior), whose body is made of
nectar (amṛtatanu) and is the disembodied expansion of awakened
consciousness which is the great cause (of all things); He who, by
the power of the ultimate reality, which is oneness, is the

omniformity (of His cosmic nature) fashioned by the two triadic

energies (in union). (12)

The dipthong AI is represented here as consisting of ‘two
triadic energiesʼ, that is, triangles, one facing up and the other down
superimposed on one another to make a hexagon. The upward facing
triangle represents the three energies merging into Anuttara. The latter,
emerging from it. The former is ‘the disembodied expansion of
awakened consciousnessʼ, the other is Śiva’s omniformity. The two
aspects, inner and outer, are held together in the oneness of
consciousness.

13) Amṛtasecanaḥ (O) The Rudra Who is the (Consecrating)
Sprinkling of Nectar.
otaprotaṁ sakalaṁ viddhvā svarasena śivamayīkurute |
yo ʻnuttaradhāmny udayan svayam amṛtaniṣecanaṁ tam asmi nataḥ l|

1 (always) bow to (Śiva) who, arising within the Abode of
Anuttara, is Himself (svayam) the (consecrating) sprinkling of
nectar; who, having pierced all (things) woven together (otaprota),
transforms them into Śiva by His own (alchemical and aesthetic)

savor (rasa). (13)

There are sṣeveral intended meanings of this verse. One is that I
bow (nataḥ) to Śiva who is Himself — svayam - this sprinkling of
nectar. Another is that I am sprinkling the nectar on myself – svayam.
A third meaning of the word ‘ṣvayamʼ is ‘spontaneouslyʼ. In the course
of Śiva’s arising within the Abode of Anuttara, he spontaneously
sprinkles nectar which makes everything into Śiva. It becomes Śiva,

svarasena, which means both ‘by its own (alchemical and aesthetic)

savor (rasa), or ‘spontaneouslyʼ’.
Having pierced through this universe in which everything is
‘woven together” with its own nectar (svarasena), it transforms
everything into Śiva. And arising totally within the abode of Anuttara,
spontaneously (svayam) of itself, it sprinkles (niṣecana) nectar. And it
is to that that I bow.

APPENDIX B TO CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE
14) Amṛtamūrtiḥ (AU) Who is the personification of nectar.

auṣadham ādhivyādhiṣu pāśatrayaśātanaṁ triśūlakaram |
vande ‘ham amrṛtamūrtiṁ pūrṇatrikaśaktiparamārtham |l
I praise (Śiva), He who holds a trident, (He who is) the

medical herb (auṣadha) (that is the cure) for (all) diseases, mental

and physical and the destruction of (all related to) the three

fetters; He whose sacred iconic form (mūrti) is nectar, the ultimate

reality which is (His) full (and perfect) triadic energy (trikaśakti).

(14)

The letter AU is the last of the four dipthongs, E, AI, O and

AU. We have seen that the first is the triangle representing the womb

of emanation, the corners

of which are the three Trikaśaktis.

Analogously, the last is represented by the Trident (which is also the
name of the letter AU) on the prongs of which are the same energies.
The first marks the emergence of the power of action through which
the universe is emitted. The last its complete formation. On the impure
level this same energy is Māyā, which sustains the three fetters of the
individual soul, that is, the triple impurity (mala) Āṇava, Māyīya and
Karma. At this, the pure level, Nectar / Anuttara is its sacred iconic

‘formless form’ that destroys them.

George: Once you reach that level, the fetters are automatically burnt
up. In terms of the Twelve Kālis we are at the level of Kālāgnirudra – the Rudra
of the Fire of Time. In the body, when you look at where the letters are
deposited (nyāsa) then ‘AU’ is in the Cavity of Brahmā (brahmarandra) on the

crown of the head. And the Cavity of Brahmā is a burning fire as the upper seat
of Kālāgnirudra when he rises up and fills the body and the universe it reflects
within itself with its might consumming fire.
15) Amṛteśaḥ (Ṁ) the Rudra Who is the Lord of Nectar.
baindayam amrtarasamayaṁ vedyaṁ yo ‘nuttare nije dhāmnīi |

pūrṇībhāvayati satām amṛteśaṁ taṁ namasyāmi ||
I bow with reverence to that Amṛteśa (the Lord of Nectar)
who renders the wise full (and perfect); he who is the (aesthetic)
The text reads pāśatraya- The word for fetter — paśa- has a short initial vowel. The lengthening

of this vowel renders the word into a possessive. Thus, pasa means ‘fetter’ and pāśa ‘pertaining to
a fetter.

The Tridenti is the symbol of Trika Śaivism. But it may also be substituted for a trangle which

is the common symboi for the goddess.

' Cf. Spandakārikā 48: ʻThis, Śiva’s power of action, residing in the fettered soul, binds it, (but)
when (its true nature) is understood and it is set on its own path, (this power) bestows the fruits of
Yoga (siddhi).' Śee Dyczkowski 1992: 259 ff.

TANTRĀLOKA

savor (rasa) of Bindu realized (vedya) within Anuttara, His own

abode. (15)

The word vedya means, more literally, ‘that which can be
known / realized’ or ‘should be known / realized’. It may mean, by
extension, ‘the object’ or ‘objectivity’. Bindu – the fifteenth vowel - is
the state of consciousness of the perceiver. It is the ‘knower’ who, as
such, cannot be known as an object. At this level there is no external

object in relation to which it would be a subject. It can only be known
to itself, that is, ‘within Anuttara, His own abode’. It is the experience
of objectivity as the aesthetic delight of Anuttara, that is, its beauty.
Everything is contained within it. Abhinava cites as an example a
learned, realized person who knows all the
ture but, having no
occasion to articulate his knowledge keeps it within himself (TĀ 3/126
(125cd-126ab)). It is that aspect of Anuttara consciousness which is its

unsullied transcendental subjectivity at one with the universe to be
emitted in the following and final phase of its interiority, that is, the
reflective awareness of the subjectivity from whence issues emission.
This is the reflective awareness of inner plenitude of ‘the wise’ who,
experiencing the pure level as their own nature, participate in it and so
renders them perfectly full, that is, complete and perfect.
16) Sarvāmṛtadharaḥ (Ḥ) Who bathes everything with a stream of
nectar.

prasṛtam anuttararūpād ānandādikrameṇa viśvam adaḥ |
sarvāmr̥tadharam antarbahiś ca visrjantam abhivande |l
I praise all the flood of nectar, internal and external, that has come

forth from the nature of Anuttara, that through the sequence of Bliss and
the rest (of the vowels) is emitting this universe. (16)

AIl that exists is nothing but Anuttara. Emitted inwardly it is
experienced as one with it. Emitted externally it is experienced as separated
from it. From the inner point of view, within pure unconditioned Anuttara,

nothing is emitted. From the outer point of view, in the domain of Māyā in
which countless perceivers relate to the infinite number of particulars, each
different and separate from one another, Anuttara is the outer universe of
experience. It is realised by the Yogi in Kramamudrā as the alternation between
introverted absorption ‘with the eyes closed’ (nimīlana-samādhi) and the
emergence from it into absorption ‘with the eyes open’ (unmīlanasamādhi).
When the formless inner Anuttara consciousness flowing with the nectar of its
forms of inner reflective awareness and its outer omniformity developing
progressively analogously externally are experienced equally as the aesthetic
delight of its beauty in the wonder of consciousness, the yogi realizes his
liberated oneness with it.

Appendix C to Chapter Thirty-three
The Thirty-four Rudras of the Consonants
As an auspicious beginning of his commentary to a chapter of his
commentary, Jayaratha writes a verse praising a Rudra. Just as Abhinava
composed the sixteen verses praising the Rudras of the sixteen vowels listed in
the Mālinīvijayottara, we have just examined, Jayaratha completes the set with
the thirty-four Rudras corresponding to the consonants. However, as there are
thirty-seven chapters in the Tantrāloka, at the beginning of chapter one his
maṅgala verse mirrors Abhinava’s prayer for inspiration with which he
commences his Tantrāloka. The verse at the beginning of the last chapter is in
praise of Mālinī as the ultimate deity. Jayaratha omits this completely at the
beginning of his commentary on chapter 27.
Chapter 1: The Types of Liberating Knowledge (vijñānabhid)
May that (divine) abode – the Trika reality which is nonduality (itself)
and the full (and perfect) realisation of freedom — from which (proceed the

powers of) will, knowledge and action that are the immanent (udita) planes of
(transcendental) consciousness and bliss and of which all this (universe), which

is such, is the (unfolding) glory of its unrestrained power, be (ever) present
within my mind and (thereby) destroy (all that within it) obscures the secret of
the transmission (āgamarahasya) of Siva’s teachings. (1)

Chapter 2: Jaya Rudra (KA): The Penetration into Ultimate Reality

Devoid of Means (Anupāya):

May Rudra, Who is attended by victory (jaya) and makes the humble
victorious, be, without any means, victorious. As the Lord of Desire, what
desire does He not fulfil completely?
Chapter 3: Vijaya Rudra (KHA): The Supreme Means (Paropāya):
(He who is the embodiment of) victory is victorious, manifesting within
Himself, although it is (the Void) Sky (of consciousness), like a city in a mirror,

all this wonderfully diverse universe of words and meanings.

Chapter 4:

(Sāktopāya)

Jayānta Rudra (GA): The Empowered Means

May (the Lord) Who is the supreme vitality of Mantras be victorious,
He Who, conquering the supreme (reality), bestows mastery over the mass of
good thoughts in order to destroy the obstacles brought about by bad ones.
Chapter

5:

Aparājita

Rudra

(GHA):

The

Individual

Means

TANTRĀLOKA

Rudra, Who by the awesome, resounding sound of His utterance (of

Mantras) instils fear in all the universe, Who, intent on the contemplation of His

own abode and unconquered, is victorious.

Chapter 6: Sujaya Rudra (NA): The Temporal Means (kālopāya)
‘Victorious is He Who is the good victory, (He Who) constantly
generates the perishable (world) in order to gobble up time. His is (the true)
victory, of the one who has, before our very eyes (sākṣāt), overcome the world

of transmigration.’

Chapter 7: Jayarudra Rudra (CA): The Division of the Principles

(tattvabhedanam)

‘May the Rudra (who bestows) victory and is the penetration (āveśa) of

the fierce (caṇḍa) Bhairava that has rendered excellent the emergence of (every)

single

Mantra

and

eliminated

the

impression

of

fettered

existence

(bhavamudrā), make (all that is) auspicious (and beneficial) firm (and stable).”

Chapter 8: Jayakīrti Rudra (CHA): The Path of Space (deśādhavan)
May He Whose glorious fame is the conquest (of the darkness of

ignorance) be victorious. He Who, like the sun, makes the lotus of the universe

divided up by the petals of the worlds bloom, by assuming as His dwelling (its)
unique stalk of consciousness.

Chapter 9: Jayāvaha Rudra (JA): The Path of the Principles

(tattvādhvan)

His glorious power (vibhava) the division of the manifestation of the
sequence of realities (tattva), his ornament a snake, he effects the coming to
pass of the victory of (His) devotees, (Lord Śiva), who brings victory, triumphs.
Chapter 10: Jayamūrti Rudra (JHA): The Division of the Principles

(tattvabhedanam)

(Śiva, who is) the veritable icon of victory, flashing radiantly with the
conquest of transmigratory existence, holding the sharp Trident, radiantly
energized by piercing through each of the principles of existence (tattva),
conquers the Supreme.
Chapter 11: Jayotsāha Rudra (ÑA): The Path of the Forces
May the enthusiasm for victory be victorious! (That) enthusiasm for
victory that rends asunder the fort of fettered existence is the series of paths
shattered to pieces by the power of the reflective awareness of the great
terrifying roar of one’s own nature.

APPENDIX C TO CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

Chapter 12: Jayada Rudra (TA): The Application of the Path of the

Forces and the Rest (kalādyadhvādhvopayogaḥ)

May the one who gives victory to the wise (sar), whose ornament is
made from the Half Moon, which is nectar, bringing to rest the enTtire circle of
the Paths within his own consciousness, bestow victory.
Chapter 13: Jayavardhana Rudra (THA): The Descents of Power and
Obscuration (śaktipātatirohitī)
May the one who waxes great by (his) victory (over all things) increase
(our) wealth of bliss (sukharddhi), He whose path is made clear by the full
moon, He who nourishes the universe by the showers (āsāra) of nectar of the

descent of the power of (His) own (grace).

Chapter 14: Bala Rudra (ḌA): A Preamble to the Rite of Initiation
(dīkṣopakramaṇaṁ)
We make an offering (bali) to that strength (bala) which, as the beloved

of the Yoginīs, strengthens the process by which the obscuration of the universe
disappears by virtue of its power (bala).
Chapter 15: Atibala Rudra (ḌHA): The Common Initiation into the
Rule (sāmayṝī dīkṣā)
‘I who have (tamed) the elephant of fettered existence with the goad of

the teachings concerning the rites of the Supreme Lord’s worship, bow (to Lord
Śiva,) who has a snake as his ornament, and is the strength of (my) weak mind.”
Chapter 16 Balabhadra Rudra (ṆA): The Initiation of the

Apprentice (pautrikaḥ)

‘I bow (to the Rudra called) Balabhadra, whose power (bala) to sever

(bheda) the entire association with the flux of the fetters is auspicious (bhadra).
His power is full by virtue of his skill (in making) the horse of the vital breath
roam.’
Chapter 17: Balaprada Rudra (TA): What needs be Done in the

Procedure concerning the Apprentice (vidheyaprakriyā vidhau)

I bow with reverence to (Śiva’s) glory (vibhava), that is skilful in
moving in the ongoing unfolding of Karma (karmaprapañca) generated by its
own power, and that bestows (inner) strength, as it draws near the (grace) to
bestow the strength to cross over phenomenal existence.
Chapter

18:

Balāvaha

Rudra

(THA):

The

Brief

Initiation

TANTRĀLOKA

I praise the one who gives strength, who gives the endless, unmeasured
strength that bestows righteousness (rtadhā), he who graces all this undivided
universe with His own greatness.
Chapter 19: Balavān Rudra (DA): The Initiation of the Immediate
Exit from the Body (sadyaḥsamutkramaḥ)
I bow to the powerful one (balavat) who, not aṣssuming (his) fierce
form, is the Pervasive Lord (vibhu), who has the strength (bala) to separate and

conjoin what arises from the glorious outpouring (vibhava) of the duality of
phenomenal existence.
Chapter 20: Baladātṛ Rudra (DHA): The Initiation of the Immediate
Exit from the Body (sadyaḥsamutkramaḥ)

The Pervasive Lord who bestows strength and inspires confidence in the
ignorant is victorious. By Him the body which is the Void in the centre is made
to pour forth perpetually externally as it does at the beginning and the end.

Chapter 21: Baleśvara Rudra (NA): The Initiation Validated by the

Scales (tulādīkṣā)

I praise that Lord of Strength (baleśvara) who is the lord of the strength
that destroys the perception of duality. May it deny the limited state of the Self

of the fully conditioned and (partially) unconditioned perceivers.

Chapter 22: Nandana Rudra (PA): The Extraction of Sectarian Signs

(liṅgoddhāra)

I praise the Lord who has opened His mouth wide to withdraw the false

purification of those who are badly fashioned (durvṛtta); the praise (l offer) is
not weak (amanda) and delights (all) the worlds.

Chapter 23: Sarvatobhadra Rudra (PHA): The Consecration of a
Teacher (abhiṣecanam)

May (the Rudra called) Sarvatobhadra (In Every Way Auspicious),
having assumed Bhairava’s body, bestow upon you (all) that is here, which is
auspicious in every way, by apportioning his own form.
Chapter 24: Bhadramūrti Rudra (BA): The Funerary Rites (antyeṣṭiḹ)
May (the teacher) Bhadramūrti, whose auspicious form (bhadramūrti) is
the universe, also conjoin one who has died to the supreme abode within the

(sacrificial) jar of supreme nectar, and ordain what is tranquil (and auspicious)

(Śiva) for you all.

APPENDIX C TO CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

Chapter 25: Śivaprada Rudra (BHA): The Fashioning of the

Offerings to the Ancestors (śrāddhakḷṛpti)

May (the teacher) who bestows Śiva, presiding over the terrible body
which is phenomenal existence, and is as if bestowing existence all around,
prevailing in the hearts of (His) devotees, be auspicious (śiva) for the wise

(satām).

Chapter 26: Sumanas Rudra (MA): The Remaining Observance

(Śeṣavṛttinirūpaṇam)

Śiva’s worship, that takes place by (the Lord'’s) will, conquers the
universe marked with all things everywhere. That (teacher) with a fine mind
(who is engaged in it) has a good mind to liberate (those) people who are (his)
supplicants.
Chapter 27: The Worship of the Liṅga (liṅgārcā)
Chapter 28: Sprhaṇa Rudra (YA): The Many Kinds of Propitious
Times (parvan), (the offering of) the Sacred Thread and other Occasional Rites
(bahubhitparvapavitrādi nimittajam)
May the one who is hard to attain (durga), whose body is fierce so as to

remove (vilumpana) (the sin of) transgressing the Rule, quell for you without
restraint the obstacle (durga) to every good fortune (saripad), and that of the
misfortune of mundane existence (durgamabhavadurgati).

Chapter

(rahasyacaryā)

29:

Durga

Rudra

(RA)

The

Secret

Observance

May (the Rudra) Bhadrakāla (Auspicious Time) bestow auspicious
things upon you at all times. His course (gati) without compares, he abides on
the (transcendental) plane of Akula, and yet rushes (down) repeatedly with great
force onto the (immanent) plane of Kula, here (in this world).
Chapter 30: Bhadrakāla Rudra (LA) The Current of Mantras
I bow to Him whose body has been washed (clean) with the wine of the

great vitality (of Mantras) which is (His own) innate (sahaja) awareness, He
who is present in Mantra and in the mind of the adept who accomplishes (his)
desires.
Chapter 31: Manonuga Rudra (VA) The Trika Maṇḍala
Śambhu, (enveloped in His) enclosures, unfolding all around this

Trident universe, the spokes of which are the seven paths and triadic nature,
Vidyā, Māyā and Prakṛti, is victorious!

TANTRĀLOKA

Chapter 32: Kauśika Rudra (ŚA) The Procedure concerning the

Seals (Mudrā)(mudrikāvidhi)

May tīme, that as consciousness stamps (with the seal of temporality)
the double abyss, that is, the entire universe, divided into the pure and impure
Paths, measure out (in time and so bring to an end) (kalayatu) the sin of the

wise.

Chapter 33: Kāla Rudra (ṢA) The Gathering Together of the the
Deities (ekīkāraḥ) according to the Mālinīvijayottara
‘The Lord of the Universe, who is the treasure of the nectar of supreme bliss, is

victorious; He who, even though he pours forth all this externally, is engaged in
bringing it to rest within the Supreme Soul, who is the Lord of the Universe.

Chapter 34: Viśveśa Rudra (SA) Entry into One’s Own Nature
(svasvarūpe praveśaḥ)
May the good Śiva, who is the Great Sound, be auspicious for the wise
again and again; He who, although He has poured forth externally, has not come
out of His own essential nature.
Chapter 35: Suśiva Rudra (HA) The Encounter of the Scriptures

(śāstramelana)

‘He who has brought down (into the world) the essence of Speech

(mātṛkā), which is all the scripture with each of its varieties, the omniscient
(sarvavit) Lord (vibhu) and saviour of the universe, is victorious.

Chapter 36: Kopa Rudra (KṢA) An Account of the Transmission of
the Scriptures (āyātikathana)

May the Aggregate of Sound (śabdarāśi), which is the reflective

awareness of full (unconditioned) subjectivity (pūrṇāhantā), from which all this
scripture has clearly descended part by part successively (into the world),

protect you.

Chapter 37: A Description
(śāstropādeyatvanirūpaṇam)

of the

Scriptures to be Adopted

The illustrious goddess Malinī is victorious, for it is by being of Her
nature that the scripture, which is the weapon against the duality of fettered
existence, attains the supreme goal.

Appendix to Chapter Thirty-five
Chapter Twenty-one of the Tantrasāra

Concerning Prasiddhi

In parallel with chapter thirty-five of the Tantrāloka, Abhinava
dedicates chapter twenty-one of his Tantrasāra (pp.193-197) to ‘an exposition
of the validity of scripture (āgamaprāmāṇyaprakāśana) and names it
accordingly. It comes, as in the Tantrāloka, as a conclusion to his exposition of
the rituals. Basic a priori beliefs are the foundation of daily life. The teachings
of the scriptures, accepted as true and certain, are just one example, albeit a very
important one, as they reach out beyond the realities of daily life. Moreover, the
common root of both revelation and the common belief that is the basis of daily
life is this same grounding in consciousness. Thus, the supernal reality of the
former and daily common reality of the latter, are clearly understood to extend
into and through one another. Accordingly, in order to establish that all that he
has has said in his Tantrāloka, which he has meticoulously validated by

reference to scripture and the oral teachings of his teachers, Abhinava focuses
on establishing that their authority is valid. Essentially this amounts to an
exposition of the nature of a priori knowledge as the probative validity of
scripture and tradition, and as the basis of common, everyday belief. As usual,
his exposition in the Tantrasāra is not just a summary of what he has already
written in the Tantrāloka, it is also an explanation. As such it is translated here
along with other passages concerning the subject and in the commentaries on
the Iśvarapratyabhijñā where Utpaladeva dedicates a short chapter (called

āgamādhikāra) to the subject.

It is essential that Abhinava’s understanding of the validity of scripture
must take into account that scriptures belong to various, differing schools that
may not always agree. Even so, they are all valid both objectively as revelation
and subjectively as instilling conviction. In the Mālinīvijavārtika’ Abhinava’s
earliest recovered Trika work, he discusses at length how ultimately all Śaiva
scriptures have as their one fruit the realisation of Śiva which is possible
because they are all connected in a hierarchy culminating in Trika. He
distinguishes between Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava as the latter cannot achieve complete
liberation. Like other schools, they can only attain the level assigned to them.
He discusses the hierarchy of systems how they are successively lower or higher
with respect to one another and how it is sinful to use Vaisṇava mantras if you
are a Śaiva and maintains the separate identity of non-Śaiva traditions. He
concludes by saying that Trika is the ultimate teaching which is an all

embracing non-dualism in which all the traditions, systems and their scriptures
form a part regulated by their place in the hierarchy. In his commentary

(vimarśinī) on the Īśvarapratyabhijñā Abhinava writes:

‘Āgama is an interal activity of God whose nature is consciousness. It

is an inner utterance (antaraśabdana) which, (within the one who is fit to hear

' MVV 22276 f

IPv kriyādhikāra, pp 80-83. Modified translation by Wallis thesis p. 108-109:

APPENDIX TO CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

it) is a most stable and firm (state of) reflective awareness. (Indeed) it is like the

(very) life of (all the means of knowledge) including perception and the rest.

Whatever it reflects upon, and in whatever way, is such in that very way (as is,
for example when one who is full of this conviction reflects that) “This (snake)
venom cannot kill me – I am Garuḍa himself!” There (in that regard) any
scripture (śabdarāśi lit. ‘aggregate of sacred words’) that is appropriately
conducive to that that kind of reflective awareness which consists of utterance
(of supreme speech — śabdana) is also a valid means of knowledge as is, for
example, the Veda, the Siddhānta and other (such scriptures), or else other
(heterodox) scriptures also such as those of the Budhists and Jains. For (by this
principle) whatever expression has suddenly arisen (within one) such as (in the
Vedika) “I will perform the Jyotiṣṭoma and go to heaven” or (in the Siddhāntin)
“I am initiated so am free of rebirth” or (in a Buddhist) “I am compassionate and
so will attain the state of the Buddha.” or (in a Jaina) “enduring terrible

austerity, I will attain the state of an Arhat,” it will not be contradicted (but will
come to pass exactly in that way), because only one who trusts in it will
properly and fully engage in it. But for someone else, because there is no firm
realization on his part, (a given scripture) is not authoritative (apramāṇa); it is
(for him) an expression lacking conviction (avimarśana).

Objection: “If this is so, the very same scripture can be a valid means of
knowledge for one person and not for another, and this is not proper, because
the means of knowledge are (necessarily) impartial.” If you say this, you know
nothing of how knowledge functions; nevertheless, I will not dismiss your
objection. What is the meaning of the statement “the means of knowledge are
impartial?” If someone becomes aware of the colour blue through direct
perception, then that will manifest blue to everybody? Or, if he perceives
smoke, (and infers fire, that inference will manifest the fact that there is) fire (o

everybody)? So, (you must admit), it is something for some specific person at
some specific point of time. It is just so in the case of scripture as well. The
expression that takes the form of an inner intense convicion (vimarśana) causes

one to thoroughly know (ā-gam) its object – thus it is called āgama, and to that
extent is a means of knowledge for everyone (who has such a conviction). For
each and every scripture (āgama) produces a conviction restricted to a particular
qualified person (niyatādhikārin), a particular place, time and other factors;
(only then does it serve) as a (valid) injunction or prohibition.”
Let us see now what Abhinava has to say in chapter twenty-one of his
Tantrasāra.

evaṁ samastaṁ nityaṁ naimittikaṁ karma nirūpitam | adhunā asyaiva
āgamasya prāmāṇyam ucyate | tatra saṁvinmātramaye viśvasmin saṅvidi ca

vimarśasya
ca
śabdanātmakatāyā

sakalajaganniṣṭhavastunaḥ tadgatasya ca karma-phalasaṁbandhavaicitryasya
yat vimarśanaṁ tad eva śāstram iti parameśvarasvabhāvābhinna eva samastaḥ
śāstrasaṁdarbho vastuta ekaphalaprāpakaḥ ekādhikāryuddeśenaiva tatra tu
parameśvaraṇiyatiśaktīmahīimnaiva bhāge bhāge rūḍhiḥ lokānām iti | kecit

māyocitabhedaparāmarśātmani vedāgamādiśāstre rūḍhāḥ anye tathāvidha eva
mokṣābhimānena
sāṁkhyavaiṣṇavaśāstrādau
pare
viviktaśivasvabhāvāmarśanasāre
śaivasiddhāntādau

tu
anye

TANTRĀLOKA

sarvamayaparameśvaratvmarśanasāre mataṅgādiśāstrē kecit tu viralaviralāḥ
p.194)
samastāvacchedabandhyasvātantryānandaparamārthasaṅvinmayaparame-śvara-svarūpāmarśanātmanṉi
.Śrītrikaśāstrakrame
kecit
htu
pūrvapūrvatyāgakrameṇa laṅganena vā ity evam ekaphalasiddáhiḥ ekasmād eva
āgamāt |
In this way, all the rites, both daily and occasional, have been described.
We will now expound (the basis of) the validity (prāmāṇya) of this scripture
(and traditional teaching) (āgama) (concerning them). Once expounded in that
regard and demonstrated that all things are nothing but cognitive consciousness
and that consciousness consists of reflective awareness and that reflective
awareness is (the ground and ultimate nature of) language (śabdana), (one can
certainly affirm) that that which is called scripture (śāstra) is nothing but
reflective awareness that has as its object all existing things that populate the
universe along with the many kinds of actions and their consequences that
regulate them. The entirety of the scriptures as a whole is one with the Lord’s
nature and, in reality, (ultimately) gives rise to one and the same result with

regard to (any) one perceiver. Even so, due to the Lord’s power of necessity
(niyati) (that specifies that particular entities possess specific causal properties
and Karma its consequences,) people adhere to (only) one part or another of this
totality (of scriptures). Thus, some adhere to Vedic scriptures and the like that
amount essentially to a pluralist (dualistic) perception (of reality and its
constituents) that belongs to the plane of Māyā. There are others similar to them
that adhere to Vaiṣṇava scriptures and those of the Sāṁkhya and the like who
wrongly believe that they will attain liberation by means of them. (Then there
are) others (who adhere) to dualist Śaivism (śaivasiddhānta) and the like which

essentially consist of the contemplation of (transcendental) Śiva who is separate
(from everything else). Others (again adhere to) the Mataṅgatantra and the like
that are essentially (grounded) in the contemplation the Supreme Lord’s
(immanent) state that consists of all things. (Finally,) there are few (who adhere)
to the procedures and venerable scriptures of Trika (Śaivism) which are
essentially the contemplation the nature of the (one) Supreme Lord who is

ultimately real consciousness consisting of freedom and bliss, devoid of all

limitations. There are some (amongst them) who, by gradually abandoning
inferior doctrines (one by one), or (others) who skip over (one or more

intermediate schools) attain in this way the same (ultimate) result from the one
Aagama (operating on all the levels of revelation).

bhedavāde Ś‘pi samastāgamānām ekeśvarakāryatve ‘pi prāmāṇyaṁ tāvat
avasthitam
prāmāṇyanibandhanasya
.ekadeśasaṁvādasya
avigītatāyā
anidantāpravr̥tteśca tulyatvāt parasparabādho viṣayabhedāt akiṅṁcitkaraḥ |
brahmahananatanniṣeḍhavat saṁskārabhedaḥ saṁskārāti
h tadabhāve
kvacit anadhikr̥tatvam iti samānam āśramabhedavat phalotkarṣāc ca utkarṣaḥ
tatraiva

Although all the scriptures (and their corresponding traditions) (āgama)
are the products of the one Lord, even from the dualist point of view (of the
kt matādiśāstre iti pāṭhaḥ |

APPENDIX TO CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

Naiyāyika school), their probative value (prāmāṇya) remains the same in this
way (from the point of view of their own tradition). The agreement (amongst its
votaries) depends on the (uniform) probative value (of the tradition to which
they adhere). This is because their course (and application is) equally (uniformly

consistent and so) stands uncontradicted (each in their own terms) (avigītatā)
and is not disrespected. The mutual contradictions (that exist between the
various traditions) have no affect (on their authority) because their objects (and

domains of operation) differ (and each one is concerned with its own order of
things). p. 195)
As is the case, for example, with the injunction that a Brahmin should
not be killed. Similarly, the difference (and contradiction it entails) between the
purificatory rites (taught by the various schools is ultimately resolved by
positing) a gradual progression of increasingly elevated purifying rites. When
that is absent, not celebrating (them) entails in some cases (kvacir) (that they are

essentially) the same (school). As is the case, for example, with the phases of a
Brahmin’s life (āśramabheda) (as a student, householder, married monk and

renouncer). (The higher degree of) elevation (of each succeeding level in the

hierarchy) is due to the (increasing) excellence of the fruits (that it yields).

upaniṣadbhāgavat
bhinnakartṛkatve
cpi
sarvasarvajñakṛtatvam

saṁbhãvyate taduktatad-atiriktayuktārthayogāt nityatve
‘pi āgamān.
prasiddhiḥ
tāvat
avaśyopagamyā
anvaya-vyatirekādhyakṣādīnāṁ
tatprāmāṇyasya
tanmūlatvāt
satyaṁ
.rajataṁ
.paśyāmi
i1ti
.hi
sauvarṇikādiparaprasiddhyaiva
Although the Upaniṣads, (for example,) are a part (of Vedic doctrine,
they bestow more elevated fruits than the rest of it).® Although (each of the
various traditions) has been created by different authors one could say that in
actual fact they have all been created by one omniscient author. (It is not right to
maintain that it is not possible for a being who is not omniscient to have been
the author of all the scriptures) because each one says different things from the
others. (If we accept that, then none of them would be valid).
Moreover, even (if the various religious traditions are all considered to

be) eternal (and hence valid as eternal truths), one must admit the existence of a
The two Vedic prescriptions to which Abhinava alludes are ‘one must not kill a Brahmin’ and ‘a
Brahmin should kill a Brahmin’. The degree of sin a person accrues in commiting a crime varies
according to the level of his innate impurity in consonance with his caste status. The higher the

caste, the greater its inherent purity. Thus the impurity that members of higher castes accrue due a

particular sin is correspondingly less as it is countered by their innate purity. Thus, if a member of
a low caste comits a murder he sentenced to death as a penance for his sin. A Brahmin cannot be

sentenced to death however grievous the crime he may comit. Consequently, only a Brahmin can
kill another Brahmin.
Cf. TA 35/13ab-16

Cf: Just as also happens in one place (that s, in a single trdition) like the Vedic, one who
enters each (successive) stage (asrama) (within it), (must undergo at eac

e) another

the transition from lower to higher traditions,) such as the extraction of

sectarian signs and the

(additional) purificaton (sahṣkāra), such is the case with (the purfying initiatory rites that mark
like. Moreover, just as there (in that case, one who is) in a prior (inferior) stage (āśrama) does not

attain the fruit (that comes) from the following (superior) stage, in the same way, one who belongs
to the (Vaiṣṇava) Pāñcarātra etc. does not (attain) the state of Śiva’s nature.’ TĀ 35/28-29.

TANTRĀLOKA

(fundamental) intuitive certainty (prasiddhi) (that grasps their purport and

accepts their truth). This is because direct perception, and the two forms of

inference - positive and negative ~ together with its authoritative value are
rooted in this intuitive certainty. (The authoritative value of a perception) such
as: I really see a piece of silver is based on the certainty someone else has,
such as a jeweller (who testifies to its authenticity).

p. 196) prasiddhir eva āgamaḥ sā kācit dṛṣṭaphalā bubhukṣito bhuṅkte iti
bālasya prasiddhīta eva tatra tatra pravṛtiḥ nānvayavyatirekābhyāṁ tadā
tayoḥ abhāvāt yauvanāvasthāyāṁ tadbhāvo ‘pi akiṁcitkaraḥ
The tradition (with its scriptures) (āgama) is essentially (a form of) a
priori certainty (prasiddhi). (There are many kinds of certainties). The results of
some of them are visible. (Those concern this world.) An example is the activity
(and reactions) of an infant here and there (to the world around it). (The
perception he has that) ‘I am hungry. I eat’ is grounded in a form of (a priori,
spontaneous unreasoned) certainty. This is because these two (reactions) are
independent of any form of positive or negative reasoning. Nor does the
existence (of any such reasoning) when, for example, (the infant has grown to) a
young man do anything (to undermine the validity of that certainty or its
function).

prasiddhiṁ tu ’miũlīkr̥tya ṣo “stu kasmaiścit kāryāya kācit adṛṣṭā
vaidehyaprakṛtilayapuruṣakaivalyaphaladā kācit śivasamānatvaphaladā kācit
aikyapary-avasāyinī sā ca pratyekaṃ anekavidhā ity evaṁ bahutaraprasiddáhiḥ
pūrṇe jagati yo yādṛśo bhaviṣyan sa tādṛśīm eva prasiddhīṁ balād eva
hṛdayaparyavasāyinīm p. 197) abhimanyate iti riktasya jantoḥ atiriktā
vācoyuktiḥ tāsāṁ kāṁcana prasiddhiṁ pramāṇīkurvatā abhyupa-gantavyam
eva āgamaprāmāṉyam iti sa āgama āśrayaṇīyo yatra utkṛṣṭaṁ phalam ity alam
anyena | balād eva hṛdayaparyavasāyinīm p. 198) abhimanyate iti riktasṣya

jantoḥ .atiriktā

vācoyuktiḥ

tāsāṁ kāṁcana prasiddhiṁ pramāṇīkurvatā

abhyupagantavyam eva āgama-prāmāṇyam iti sa āgama āśrayaṇīyo yatra

utkrṛṣṭaṁ phalam ity alam anyena |

(We may conclude that one must certainly admit that) an individual
possesses a capacity (to know and act and) is capable (thereby) to do anything
only if his activity is based on some form of intuitive certainty. The result of
some kinds of certainty (such as) disembodedness (vaidehya), the dissolving

away of the material (from which the lower impure principles are made)
(prakṛtilaya) and the isolation of the soul (from objectivity) (puruṣakaivalya)

are invisible, (thatis to say, they concern the other world, not this one). Otṭher
(kinds of intuitive convictions) bestow a state of equality with Śiva, others
culminatein a state of (perfect) oneness. Moreover, there are (many) varieties of

each one of these kinds (of certainty). In this way, the worldis full of multiple
forms of ‘certainty. As this is how things are, each person should adhere
completely in his heart to the corresponding form of certainty in accord with
what he desires to become. The idea some have that when a man is born he

APPENDIX TO CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

possesses nothing at all (in himself) is empty (and groundless) reasoning. Thus,
he who considers any one of these forms of certainty to be a valid authority,
must also admit the validity of the tradition (it supports). The tradition one

should adopt is the one that bestows the most fruits. Enough now, concerning

this matter.

saṅvitprakāśaparamārthatayā yathaiva
bhāty āmṛśaty api tatheti vivecayantaḥ |
santaḥ samastamayacitpratibhãvimarśasāraṁ sṣamāśrayata śāstram anuttarātma ||
nijadṛḍhaprasiddhighaṭite
vyavahāre loka asti niḥśaṅkaḥ |
tadā bhavati janottīrṇa-

prasiddhirūḍhaḥ paramaśivaḥ l|
‘Just as the light of consciousness shines as ultimate reality, so too is it

reflectively aware (of its shining as all things). O wise ones, discerning this in

this way, take refuge in this supreme scripture the essence of which is the

reflective awareness, intuition (pratibhā) and consciousness (cir) which is all

things.

‘Free of doubt people are engagedin the commerce of daily life thatis
founded on a firm inherent certainty, in the same way Supreme Sivais well
rootedin his own certainty that transcends the ordinary (every day) world.”
In a long passage in the the ĪPVV (vol. 3 p. 90-100) Abhinava again
returns to the theme of this eternal a prior belief (prasiddhi) and the origin of
scripture in the course of commenting on Utpaladeva’s presentation of the
ultimate validity of scripture as a means of knowledge. Skeptics such as Hume
in the West and a range of philosophers of different schools in India such as the
Nyāyika Gaṅgeśa or the Buddhisṭ logicians like Dharmakīrti, in their differing
perspectives and for their own reasons hold that although common belief is
certainly a fundamental factor enabling the continuity of daily life, they
maintain that this implies that a degree of uncertainty is an inevitable corollary
and, indeed, characteristic feature of daily common experience. Thus, it has no
ultimate validity and nor does any means of knowledge, including direct
perception and inference. What this means for the Buddhists is that daily life is
illusory. The radically empiricist Naiyāyika cannot not agree with that view, but
even so agrees that uncertainty cannot be ultimately circumvented. The
Pratyabhijñā position is radically different. Knowledge is the reflective
awareness of consciousness, that perceives and knows itself and its manifest
contents. Error, varied and of many levels, is a constantly abiding possibility,
but is not diagnosed and corrected by reason which, corrupted by its inevitable

Abhinava is alluding here to the school of Buddhist logic built up by Dinnāga and Dharmakīrti
that did not admit the validity of tradition and maintained that a man is born devoid of inherent
qualities. Abhinava is citing here the first words of a verse (4/54) in Dharmakīrti’s

Pramāṇavārttika.

Read tathā for tadā.

TANTRĀLOKA

objective referants, can anyway never reach absolute certainty. But this certainty
must be possible for there to knowledge and that can only be because that

certainty is an inherent quality of a firm and stable reflective awareness that can

only by self-contradicted by its own vacillation.
Abhinava explains commenting on Utpaladeva that ‘that which is heard
(as scripture), that too is just commonly accepted belief (prasiddhi). And that
also is without beginning. All (of the many) commonly accepted beliefs, have
existed from a beginningless time. There, sometimes one emerges (from
consciousness) and another, merges back (into it). (Utpaladeva) clarifies in this
way what is meant by ‘emergesʼ and ‘is submerged’ by means of an example in
this way. That is something that is figuratively defined (upacāravastu). It is like
the letters of a name (for example) that, are to be brought into the perview of the
listener’s mind (and so, understood and remembered), that are figuratively
denoted (upacaryante) in written form. Thus, they function in the world, by
virtue of a firm (and fully convinced) reflective awareness (on the part of the
perceiver), as the commonly maintained truth. (This takes place) in accord with
the firm imposition (imposed) by the affairs of daily life that have been
practiced for a very long time over many lifetimes (as explained) in accord with

(the teachings of Trika Tantras) such as the Sarvavīra and the Bhargaśikhā, that

are in accord with the Supreme Lord’s command (ġjīā). (In short) truth belongs

to a firm (convinced) reflective awareness.”

Biblography
Manuscripts
Agnikāryapaddhati Research Library Jammu and Kashmir MS no. 781 folios

95.
Ambāmatasaṁhitā NAK no. 1/1119 Śaivatantra 993, ṄGMPP reel n0. A 169/3.
Amṛteśatantra NAK MS no 1/285, NGMPP reel no. B25/4
Āgamārthasaṁgraha Oriental Research Institute in Mysore MS no. 258,
palmleaf Grantha script..
Aṣṭamātṛkāpūjā NAK no. 1/596, NGMPP reel no. A 436/7.

Aṣṭikāstotra by Prabodhanātha NAK no. 5-5183 Śaivatantra 157, NGMPP reel

no. A 150/6 folios 23.

Úrmikaulāraṇvatantra attributed to Matsyendranātha K: NAK MS no: 5-5207
(sic. 5-5202); NGMPP reel no: B 115/9; folios 83. Newari script; Kh NAK MS
-5206, NGMPP reel no. A 146/3, folios 7, Devanāgarī.

Kālikākulakramasadbhāva NAK n0.1-76 Śaivatantra 144, NGMPP reel no. A

209/23.

Kālikākulapañcaśataka: K: NAK no. 5-5183-157, NGMPP reel no. A 150/ 6.
Kh: NAK no. 5-358-11, NGMPP reel no. B 30/26. MS G (called

Kālikākulakramārcana). NAK MS no 3-314 ("Saivatantra) 162, NGMPP reel

number: A 129/9 (67 folios), paper Newari script.

Kālikākulapañcakramārcana by Vīmalaprabodha, NAK MS no. 1-169

Śaivatantra 149, NGMPP reel no.
B 158/1; NAK 5-5188, Śaivatantra 163, NGMPP reel no. A 148/10 (called

Kālīkuḻakramārcana); NAK no. 1 - 252 Śaivatantra 150, NGMPP reel no. A 182/6
(called Kālikākulakramārcana).

Kālikāstotra by Jñānanetra: NAK no. 5-5183 Śaivatantra 157, NGMPP reel no.

A 150/6 (fl. no. 21)

Kālottaras The manuscript of the Kālottaras from which I draw is NAK MS no

5-4632. NGMPP reel no. B 118/7. It contains a several Kālottaras. The contents

are as follows: 1) Jñānapañcāśikā) (this not a recension of the Kālottara; see

Goodall 2007, pp. 127-128). 2) Kālajñāne. 3) Kālottare sārdhaśatikam. 4)
Kālottare dviśatikam. 4) Kālottare ‘dhyuṣṭaśatam (sārdhatriśatikam). 5)

Kaālottare saptaśatikam. 6) Kālottare trayodaśaśatikam. 7) Unidentified
Kālottara. This manuscript to be an apograph of NAK 1-1114, NGMPP B 25/7

an undated Nepalese palmleaf manuscript in the Nāgarii script, except that it has
added the Sārdhaśatika recension from some other source (Goodall 2007, p.

129)
Kulasāra NAK MS no. 4-137/6, NGMPP reel no. A 40/11 (or 4/137?) folios 63,
Palm leaf, early Nāgarī.

Kulakaulinīmata K: NAK no. 5/9 (87) (17) 982 -1009, NGMPP reel no.
A179/6; Kh: NAK no. 217a, NGMPP reel no. C 24/2; G: NAK reel no. A 178/4,

NGMPP reel no. B 14/22; Gh: NAK no. 3-788-139, NGMPP reel no. A 42/7;

“N: NAK no. E 40401, NGMPP reel no. E 2188/12. Other MSs consulted are

deposited in the Man Singh library, Jodhpur. These are MSs no. 1487 and 1488.

TANTRĀLOKA

Also, in the Gaṅgānātha Jha Institute, Allahabad, MS no. 7105/4003 and

catalogue number 2651.
Kulapañcāśikā MS K: NAK no. 1/1076, NGMPP reel no. A 40/13; MS Kh:

NAK n0

5-6564, NGMPP reel no. A 969/16.

Kulapañcāśikā attributed to Matsyendranātha: K: NAK no. 1-1076, NGMPP

reel no. A 40/13; Kh: NAK no. 5-6564, NGMPP reel no. A 969/16.

Kulamūlaratmapañcakāvatāra K: NAK no. 1-45, NṄGMPP reel no. B 117/5; Kh:
NAK no. 1-1552, NGMPP reel no. B 112/3; G: NAK no. 5-1585, NGMPP reel
no. B 1217/3.
Kularatnoddyota K: CSS MSs no. 123; Kh: NAK no. 1-1653 Śaivatantra 246,
NGMPP reel n0. B 119/3; G: NAK no. 1-16 Śaivatantra 245, ṄGMPP reel no.

A 206/10.

Kubjikāmatatantralaghuṭippaṇī: NAK no. 34-34, NGMPP reel no. C 3/14.

Kubjikānityāhnikatilaka: K: NAK no. 5-1937-442, NGMPP reel no. B 415/22;

Kh: NAK no. 3-195-676, NGMPP reel no. A 161/21; G: NAK no. 1-239-201,
NGMP?P reel no. A 228/3; Gh: NAK no. 1-1320-97, NGMPP reel no. B 26/10.

“N: NAK no. 1-1361-98, NGMPP reel no. B 26/11.

Kramasadbhāva NAK MS no. 1/76 NGMPP reel no. A 209/203 Script: nevārī

Kramavilāsastotra: NAK n0. 5-5183 Śaivatantra 157, NGMPP reel no. A 150/6
folios 24-25.
Kramasūtrādhikāra: K: NAK no. 5-783, NGMPP reel no. A 123/49; Kh: NAK
no. 1-1653 Śaivatantra 336, NGMPP reel no. B 157/26.
Khacakrapañcakastotra: K: NAK no. 5-5183 Śaivatantra 157, NGMPP reel no.

A 150/6 (fl1 15-20); Kh: MS no. 1 - 252 Śaivatantra 150, NGMPP reel no. A 182/6

(part of MS a manuscript called Kālīkulakramārcana).
Kriyāsaṁgrahapaddhati by Vāladhārin Kaiser Library, Kathmandu MS no. 63,
NGMPP C 5/3 manuscript completed in AD 1091/2.

Guhyakālītantra. MS no. H 4811, NGMPP reel no. H 297/12.

Guhyasidáhi attributed to Matsyendranātha NAK no. 1-169-397, NGMPP reel
no. B 15773.

Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya K: NAK MS no. 1-767 (Śaivatantra) 412, NGMPP

reel no. B157/19,

folios 38 Newari script. Kh: NAK MS no. 1-245 (Tantra) 411; NGMPP reel no.

A 117717; folios
36 (1-21 24-26 30-41) Devanāgarī script. G: NAK MS no. 1-145 (Śaivatantra)
411; NGMPP ṛeel
no. B121/9; folios 36; Newari script (missing folios: 22-23, 27-29). This

manuscript has been

photographed twice. SoNGMPP reel no. B 121/9 is the same as NGMPP reel

no. B 123/8. Gh:
NAK MS no. 1-199 (Śaivatantra) 410; NGMPP reel no. B123/5; No. of folios:
69 script:
Devanāgarī.

Jayadrathayāmala First ṣaṭka: K: NAK no. 3-358, NGMPP reel no. A 995/6;

Kh: NAK no. 5-1975,

NGMPP reel no. A 152/9.

Second ṣaṭka: K: NAK no. 4-1357 Śaivatantra 427, NGMPP reel no. A 151/14;

Kh: NAK no. 1-255, NGMPP reel no. A 996/2; G: NAK no. 5-4650 Śaivatantra

BIBLIOGRAPHY

432, NGMPP reel no. A 153/2; Gh: NAK no. 1-253 Śaivatantra 420, NGMPP

reel no. A 151/18.

Third ṣaṟṭka: K: NAK no. 1-1497 Saivatantra 425, NGMPP reel no. B 122/3; Kh:

NAK running no. 728, NGMPP reel no. C 72/8; GĠ: NAK no. 5-1978 Śaivatantra

430, NGMPP reel no. A 151/15; Gh: NAK no. 5-1975 Śaivatantra 429, NGMPP
reel no. A 152/9.
Fourth ṣaṭka: MS K: NA MS no. 5-1941 Śaivatantra 428, NGMPP reel no. A
151/16;

NAK n0. 1-1468 Śaivatantra 422, NGMPP reel no. B 122/4; G: NAK

MS no. 3-683. NGMPP reel no. A 996/3.

Jayadrathayāmalaprastāramantrasaṁgraha (labelled ‘Jaydrathayāmala’)
folios 3-64 of NAK 1-253 NGMPP reel no. A 152/8 Newari script; dated CE

Jñānaramāvalī by Jñānaśiva, a South Indian living in Benares in the second half
of the 12th century (IFP T 231)

Tīkā (MSs labellēd Manthānabhairavatantra): K: NAK no. 5- 4878 Śaivatantra

1074 (or 10147),NGMPP reel no. A 176/4; Kh: NAK 4-288 Śaivatantra 889,
NGMPP reel no. A 179/4.
Tantrasadbhāva: MS K: NAK no. 5-1985-1533, NGMPP reel no. A 188/22 - A
189/1; Kh: NAK no. 1/363vi, NṄGMPP Reel No. A 44/1; G: NAK no. 5/445-

185vi, NGMPP reel no. A 44/2.
Tantrāloka The editors of the printed edition of the Tantrāloka supplied no
information concerning the manuscripts they consulted. Variants noted in
printed edition are labelled K, Kh, G, and Gh and in only one place "N. AIl of
the following MSs I have used to collate the Tantrāloka except C, also contain
Jayaratha's commentary.
C: National Mission for Manuscripts Manus Data, Oriental Research Library,
University Campus, Hazaratbal, Srinagar. Department of Libraries and Research
Municipal Complex, Karanagar, Srinagar (NMM) MS no. 1053-III, 190 folios.
size 22 x 16.5 cm, “Sāradā script. Complete but there is no commentary. Some
of the best readings are found in this manuscript.
Ch: Research Library Jammu and Kashmir Government Srinagar (RLS) MS no.
1352, 526 folios, size: 18 x 18 cm, “Sāradā script. Contains with Viveka. TĀ
1/1-11/80; 21/42 - end. Tantrāloka along with Viveka ends at the end of chapter
two.

J: ends at the end of chapter two (both Tantrāloka and Viveka)
Jh: Research Library, Srinagar MS no. 1012, 288 folios, Size 18 x 12.5 cm,
"Sāradā script. Tantrāloka and Viveka end with first verse of chapter six.

Ñ: National Mission for Manuscripts MS no. 1716 1, 1I, 382 folios, size 20.4 x
13.9 cm, "Sāradā script. Tantrāloka and Viveka from the beginning to 11/80.
T: Research Library, Srinagar MS no. 2201, 299 folios, size 26.4 x 18.7 cm.

Tantrāloka along with commentary starts at the beginning and ends with verse

4/178. It then the Tantrāloka picks up again without the commentary from

13/179 to 36/55.

TH: Research Library, Srinagar MS no. 1792, 544 folios size 25 x 16.5 cm,
“Sāradā. Starts from chapter nine. Contains 9/1 – 11/16 then restarts 17/1

continues to 17/48. There onwardsthe folios are not always in correct serial

order (they are not numbered). After 17/48 comes verse 11/80cd and text
continues.

TANTRĀLOKA

D: Research Library, Srinagar MS no. 4908, 422 folios 1/204-2/50 (end); 3/1-

267; 9/254ab - (both TĀ and viveka)
DH Research Library, Srinagar MS no. CN 5019, 16 folios size 35.0 x 18.5 cm,

Devanāgarii script. Starts at 1/204 and ends at 3/6

Devīdyvardhaśatikā K: NAK 1-242 Reel No. A161/12, folios 19, paper, Newari
script,. Folio 4 is missing in MS K (i.e. verses 37cd to 50ab) and also folios 15

and16 (i.e. verses 178-202); Kh NAK MS n0. 5-5184 śaivatantra 655, NGMPP

reel no. A 161/14, folios 9, Devanāgarī script.
Dīkṣottaratantra, IFP T 0017B.
Dikṣottaratantra, in Niḥśvāsatattvasaṁhitā, NAK MS no. 1/279.

Dhvajārohaṇavarṣavardhanavidhi: NAK no. 1/735 NMPP, reel no. A 240/15.

Nityādisaṁgrahapaddhati by Rājānaka Takṣakavarta Bodleian Library, Oxford

MS Stein Or. d. 43.

Niḥśvāsatatvasaṅhitā K: Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine, MS

no. 4; Kh: NAK 5-2406, Śaivatantra 703, NGMPP reel no. A 159/18.
Niśiṣaṁcāratantra: NAK 1/1606, NGMPP reel no. B 26/25.

Nityākaulatantra NAK 2-226, NGMPP reel no. B26/21a.

Naimittikakarmānusandhāna of Brahmaśambhu of Mālava Asiatic Society of

Bengal MS no. Ġ 4767 composed in CE 938, this is the oldest surviving
paddhati.
Prāyaścittasamuccaya by Hṛdayaśiva NAK MS no. - 5.2402, NGMPP reel no. B 427/2. 60 folios, Devanāgarī script.
Pīthadvādaśikāstotra by Cakrabhānu: NAK no. 5-5183 Śaivatantra 157,
NGMPP reel no. A 150/6 folios. 22, Devanāgarī script
Pūjāsūtranirṇaya: NAK no. 4-323 vi Karmakāṇḍa 83, NGMPP reel no. A

56/19.

Pratiṣṭhālakṣaṇasārasamuccaya: NAK no 3-351, NGMPP reel no. A 518/7.

Brhadyonitantra: MS No. 1389 of the Baṅgīya Sāhitya Pariṣad (Calcutta).

Brahmayāmala: K: NAK no. 1-433 Śaivatantra 833, NGMPP reel no. A 166/1;
Kh: NAK no. 3/370, NGMPP A 42/6;, G: NAK n0.1-296, NGMPP reel no. A

1178/1.
Bhaktibodha: NGMPP running MS no. E _38303, reel no. E 2043/1.

Manthānabhairavatantra
Kumārikākhaṇḍa – concerning the MSs see introductory pages to vol. 1 of the

edition.

Yogakhaṇḍa (1) K: NAK no. 2-165 Śaivatantra 805, NGMPP reel no. A 180/4;

Kh: NAK no. 1-1151, NGMPP reel no. B 27/23-A 28/1; G: NAK no. 2-118

Śaivatantra 137, NGMPP reel no. A 27/19; Gh: NAK no. 5-4654, NGMPP reel

no. A 173/5; “N: NAK n0.3-164, NGMPP reel no. A 176/3; C: NAK no. 2-298,

NGMPP reel no. B 153/50; Ch: NAK no. 2-291, NGMPP reel no. B 136/9.

Yogakhaṇḍa (2) of the Manthānabhairavatantra: K: NAK no. 3-164, NGMPP

reel n0. A 176/2; Kh: NAK no. 2-105 Śaivatantra 997, NGMPP reel no. A

168/7.
Siddhakhaṇḍa K: NAK no. 5-4877, NGMPP reel no. A 172/4; Kh: NAK no. 1-

228 Śaivatantra 988, NGMPP reel no. A 178/2; G: NAK no. 1-787 Śaivatantra
133, NGMPP reel no. B 27/72. Sam Fogg Rare books and Manuscripts, London.
Palm-leaf, Nandināgari / Pāla script probably copied in the 12 century.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Mayasaṁgraha. NAK MS no0. 1-1537, NGMPP reel no. A 31/18. Palmleaf
incomplete (codex unicum).

Mahānayaprakāśa by Aṇasiṁha: K: NAK no. 5-5183 Śaivatantra 157,

NGMPP reel no. A 150/6 fl. no. 26-33 Devanāgarī script.

Mohacūḍottara NAK MS no. 5-1977, NGMPP reel no. A 182/2. There are 47
folios, written in Devanaagarii script. It is dated Valabhiisa.mvat 806 i.e. 1123/4

CE.

Yonigahvaratantra: ASB MS no. 10000.
Rasendramaṅgala by Nāgārjuna, Bikaner. Anup Sanskrit Library, Lalgarh Palace

MS no. 4281 and Jamnagar, Gujarat Ayurveda University, MS no. 862/34.

Laghvikāmnāya: NAK no. 5-877/57, NGMPP reel no. A 41/3.
Liṅgārcanatantra chapter 4 IFP T. No. 937 p. 1-60 copied from MS no. 24758
of the Sarasvatī Bhavana library in Vārāṇasī.
Vasiṣṭhadīkṣākarmapaddhati. Photocopy of a manuscript in a private collection.
Thisis the rite ofinitiation imparted to higher caste Kaulasin Bhaktapur, Nepal.
Śrīmatasārasaṁgraha: NAK no. 5-4956-871, NGMPP reel no. A 177/13.
Śrīmatasāra: K: ṄAK no. 5/4849, Śaivatantra 1538, NGMPP reel no. A 192/2.
Kh: NAK no. 3/275 Śaivatantra 1537, NGMPP reel no. A 194/4.
Śrīmatottara: K: first printed edition called Gorakṣasaṁṅhitā. Kh: ṄAK no. E51544, NGMPP reel no. E 2898/1; G: NAK no. 2/229-1549, NGMPP reel no. A

196/6. J: NAK no. 2114, NGMPP reel no. A 1290/3.

SŚrīmatottara (saṅvartāṣūtravyākhyā): Gh: NAK n0. E 37571, NGMPP reel no:
E 1990/4; “N: NAK no. H 5077, NGMPP reel no. H 312/9; C: NAK no. 319,
NGMPP reel no. C 33/2; Ch: NAK no. 1100, NGMPP reel no. G 54/7.
Saḻsāhasrasaṁhitā: K (MS labelled Kulālikāmnāya): NAK no. 5-4775

Śaivatantra 209, NGMPP reel no. A 149/4; Kh: NAK no. 5-428 Śaivatantra 52,
NGMPP reel no. B 32/6.
Saṭsāhasrasaṁhitā vyākhyā: K: NAK no. 5-4775 Śaivatantra 209, NGMPP reel

no. A 149/4.; Kh: NAK no. 1-30 Śaivatantra 300 NGMPP B 121/6 G: NAK no.
1-1363, NGMPP reel no. A 44/6; Gh: NAK 2-219 Śaivatantra 1565, NGMPP
reel no. A 200/4
Saḍanvayśāmbhavakrama by Umākānta. Wellcome Institute for the History of

Medicine, MS Sans. B 353.

Saṅvartārthaprakāśa: NAK no. 4-1060, NGMPP reel no. B 156/6.
Saṅvartāstotra: NAK no. 3-359, NGMPP reel no. E 189/11.
Sarvajñānottara: 1) IFP T 760. Copied from manuscript D. 15595 of GOML
(yogapāda) (p. 1 – 3) jñānapāda (p. 3-17) kriyāpāda (p. 17-end); 2) IFP T 334

copied from MS D. 5550 of GOML, (yogapāda p. 1-4) jñānpāda (p. 4-22) and
kriyāpāda (p. 22-end); 3) IFP T 170. Yogapāda (p. 1-4), jñānapāda (p. 4-22),

kriyāpāda (p. 22-end); 4) IFP T 496b (yogapāda); 5) IFP T 83; 6) IFP T 985
vṛtti by Aghoraśivācārya; 7) NAK MS no. 1/1648; 8) Central Library of

Banaras Hindu University MS no. 99 in śāradā script called
Jñānottarayogaśāstra; 11) GOML MS no RE 108716 (Jīñāna and Yogapāda);
12) GOML MS no 47852/47818/47828 along with vṛtti by Aghoraśivācārya.
Siddhavīreśvarītantra ASB MS 3917D, catalogue no. 5947.
Siddhāntasārapaddhati by king Bhojadeva (reigned c. 1018-1060) NAK

1/1363, NGMPP B 28/29.

TANTRĀLOKA

Siddhapañcāśikā: K: (Kulamūlāvatāra + Kulapañcāśikā) NGMPP reel no. B

155/10; Kh: NAK no. 1-1473, NGMPP reel no. B 28/15.

Printed Sanskrit Texts

Ādhārakārikā by Ādiśeṣa, in The Essence of Supreme Truth (Paramārthasāra),
edition and translation H. Danielson, Religious Texts Translation series, Nisaba,
vol. X, E.. Brill, Leiden, 1980.

Aitareyāraṇyaka, see Keith, 1909.
Ajitāgama, 2 vol. critical edition N. R. Bhatt, IFI, Pondichery, 1964-1967.
Ajitāgama, edited by N. R. Bhatt. Vol. 1, vol. 2: 1967 Pondichéry : Institut
Français dʼIndologie, no. 24 and 24,2, 1964

Atharvavedasaṁhitā and bhāṣya of Sāyaṇācārya, translated by Whitney, W. D.
Edited and revised by K. L. Joshi. Delhi: Indica Books, 2000 (reprint).
Aparājitapṛcchā of Bhuvanadeva, edited by P. A. Mankad, Barod, 1950.
Āryamañjuśrīmūlakalpa. Mahāyānasūtrasaṁgrahaḥ dviṭīyaḥ khaṇḍaḥ. Edited
by P. L. Vaidya and published by the Maithila Institute of Post-graduate Studies

and Research in Sanskrit Learning. Darbhanga, 1964.

Aṣṭaprakaraṇam - a collection of the eight Siddhānta tracts: Tattvaprakāśa,
Tattvasaṁgraha, Tattvatrayanirṇaya, Ratnatraya, Bhogakārikā, Nādakārikā,
Mokṣakārikā, and Paramokṣanirāsakārikā. Edited by Vrajavallabha Dvivedi.
Yogatantragranthamālā vol. 12. Vārāṇasī: Śaṁpūrnānanda Sanskrit University,

1988.

Ānandakanda, edited S. V. Radhakrishna Sastrī. Tanjore Sarasvati Mahal
Series, 15. Tanjore, 1952.

Anuttarāṣṭikā by Abhinavagupta see Pandey, 1963a; Silburn, 1970.
Anubhavanivedana by Abhinavagupta, see Pandey, 1963a; Silburn, 1970.
Abhinavabhāratī by Abhinavagupta, 4 vol. Gaekwad Oriental Series, Baroda,

1926-1960.

Aṣṭaprakaraṇam, edited by V.V. Dvivedi, Sampurnananda Sanskrit University,
Vārāṇasī, 1988.
Ahirbudhnyasaṁhitā of the Pāñcarātrāgama, PMḌ. Ramanujacharya and F.O.
Schrader, second revised

edition P.V. Krishnamācārya, The Adyar Lbrary and Research Centre, Madras

1966 (first edition, 1916).

Iśānaśivagurudevapaddhati of Īśānaśiva Gurudeva. In four volumes edited by
Gaṇapati Śāstrī Trivandrum, 1920-1925. Reprint with introduction by N. P.

ŪUnni. Bharatiyā Vidyā Prakashan. Delhi, 1988.

Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā by Utpaladeva with the vimarśinī
by Abhinavagupta.
Edited by M. S. Kaul vol. 1, KSTS 22 and vol. 2 KṢTS 33. Srinagar, 1918 and

1921.

Iśvarapratyabhijñākārikāvṛtti by Utpaladeva, see Torella, 1994b.
Iśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī by Abhinavagupta, Mukund Rām Shāstrī and
Madhusudan Kaul Shāstrī, KṢṬS (22, 33), Bombay, 1918, 1921.

Iśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛtivimarśinī by Abhinavagupta. Edited by M. S. Kaul vol.
1, KSTS 60, vol. 2, KSTS 62 and vol. 3 KSTS 66. Srinagar: 1938, 1941 and

1943.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Iśvarasaṁhitā, P.B. Anantacharya Swami, Śāstramuktāvalī Series (46),
Conjeevaram, 1923.

Uttaraṣaṭka. Edited by Vṛajavallabha Dvivedi. Vārāṇasī: Saṁpūrṇānanda
Sanskrit University, 1994.

Karmakaṇḍakramāvali by Śrīsomaśambhu. General editor J. D. Zadoo. KṢTS

no. 73. Srinagar 1947.
Karpurādistotra: See below under Woodroffe 1973.
Kaśyapasaṁhitā or Vṛddhajīvakīyatantra by Vṛddha Jīvaka, with Sanskrit
introduction by Hemarāja Varmā and Hindi commentary, translation and
introduction by Satyapāḹla Bhiṣagācārya. Kashi Sanskrit Series, no. 154.

Vārāṇasī, 1953

Kālottarāgama (Sārdhatrīśatī), R. Torella, in RSO, L, 1976, pp. 279-318.
Kādambarī by Bāṇabhaṭṭa, with the commentaries of Bhānucandra and
Siddhacandra, edited by
Kāmakalāvilāsa by Puṇyānanda with the commentary by Natanānandanātha.
Translated with commentary by John Woodroffe. Madras: Ganesh and Co. 1971
(reprint)
Kālikāpurāṇa: Text, introduction and English translation by B. N. Śāstīī in three
volumes. Delhi: Nag Publishers. 1992.
Kālīkalpadruvallarī. A collection of hymns to Kālī edited by Rāma Nārāyaṇa
Tripāṭhī Saṁpūrṇānanda Sanskrit University, 2007.
Kaulajñānanīrṇaya, see Bagchi, 1934.
Kiraṇāgama, Testo e traduzione del Vidyāpāda (text and translation of the
Vidyāpāda) Vivanti, Maria Pia Iṣṭituto Orientale di Napoli, Supplemento n. 3
agli Annali, XXXV fasc. 2, Napoli 1975.

Kiraṇavṛtti Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s commentary on the Kiraṇatantra volume 1:
chapters 1-6 critical edition
and annotated translation by Dominic Goodall. Publications du Département
dʼIndologie – 86.1. Institut
Français de Pondichéry. École Française D'Extréme-Orient 1998.
Kramastotra by Abhinavagupta, see Pandey, 1963a.

Kubjikāmatatantra, T. Goudriaan and J.A. Schoterman, E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1988.

Kubjikā Upaniṣad edited and translated by Goudriaan, Teun and Schoterman, J.
A. Groningen: Egbert Forsten, 1994
Kūrma Purāṇa edited by Anand Swarup Gupta. Vārāṇasī: All-India Kashiraj
Trust. 1971.

Kubjikā Tantra edited by Chatterjee Calcutta, 1891.

Kṛṣṇayāmala edited with introduction by Sitalāprasāda Upādhyāya. Vārāṇasī:
Prācya Prakāshan, 1991.
Kaulajñanirṇaya of the school of Matsyendranātha. Text edited with an

exhaustive introduction by P. C. Bagchi. Translated into English by Michael
Magee. Vārāṇasī: Prachya Prakashan, 1986.
Kaulāvalinirṇaya by Jñānānanda. Edited by Arthur Avalon assisted by
Narendranātha Vidyānidhi. Calcutta: Luzac and Co 1985 (reprint).

Garuḍapurāṇa. Édited by Ramashankar Bhattacarya. Vārāṇasī: Kashi Sanskrit
series, 1964. Translated by Sāstrī, Manmatha Nath Dutt. Vārāṇasī.

Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1968.

TANTRĀLOKA

Gopathabrāhmaṇa. Edited by Rajendralal Mitra, reprinted Vārāṇasī:
Chawkhambha, 1972.
Gaudavaho of Vākpati. Edited by Śaṅkar Paṇḍuraṅga Paṇḍit, re-edited for the
second edition by Nārāyaṇa Bāpujī Udgītakar. Poona, 1927, Edited with an
introduction, Sanskrit commentary, English translation and notes by Narahari

Govinda Suru, Prakrit Text Society Series, no. 18, Ahmedabad. Vārāṇasī, 1975

Gorakṣasaṁhitā (part one). Edited by Janardana Paṇḍeya.
Sarasvatībhavanagranthamālā, vol. 110. Vārāṇasī: ŚSampūrṇānanda Sanskrit

University, 1992.

Cidgagaganacandrikā by Kālidāsa with the commentary K ramaprakāśikā by
the editor, Raghunātha Miśra. Sarasvatībhavanagranthamālā, no. 115.
Vārāṇasī: Śaṁpūrṇānanda University, 1986.
Guhyādyaṣṭasiddhiṣaṁgraha, Sanskrit text edited by V.V. Dwivedi and Tibeten
text by Samdhong

Rinpoche and, Rare Buddhiṣṭ Text Series (1), Central Institute of Higher

Tibetan Studies, Sarnath,
Vārāṇasī, 1987.

Guhyasamājatantra, S. Bagchi, The Mithila Institute of Postgraduate Studies
and Research ins Sanskrit

Learning, Buddhist Sanskrit Texts (9), Darbhanga, 1965.

Guhyasamājatantrapradīpodyotanaṭīkāṣaṭkoṭīvyākhyā by C. Chakravarti, Kashi
Prasad Jayaswal

Research Institute, Patna, 1984.

Gurunāthaparāmarśa, by Madhurāja, P. N. Pushp, KSTS, 85, Śrīnagar, 1960.
Ghatakarparakulakavivrti by Abhinavagupta KṢTS (67), 1945.
Catuḥśataka by Aryadeva, edition and translation by K. Lang, Indiske Studier

(7), Akademisk Forlag,

Copenhagen, 1986.

Janmamaraṇavicāra by Bhaṭṭavāmadeva, KṢṬS 19), Bombay, 1918.

Jayākhyasaṁṅhitā, critical edition with introduction in Sanskrit E.
Krishnamacharya and preface di B.

Bhattacharya, Gaekwad Oriental Series, no. 54, Baroda, 1967.

Jīñānadīpavimarśinī by Vidyānanda. Edited by Vrajavallabha Dvivedi with the
assistence of Śītalāprasāda Upādhyāya. Vārāṇasī: Śampūrṇānanda Sanskrit
Universtity, 1996.
Jīyanmuktiviveka by Vidyāraṇya edition and translation by Subrahmaṇya Śāstrī
and TR. Śrīnivāsa
Ayyaṁgar, The Adyar Library General Series, no. 6, The Adyar Library and

Resarch Centre, Madras, \
1978.

Tantrāloka by Abhinavagupta, 12 vol. M. R. Śāstī and M. S. Kaul, KSTS (23,

28, 29, 30, 35, 36, 41, 47,
52, 57, 58, 59), Bombay-Srinagar, 1918-1938 (reprint Motilal Banarsidass,

Delhi, 1987).

Tantrāloka. The Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta with the Commentary of
√Jayaratha. Reprint in 7 volumes supervised by Dwivedi, R. C. and Rastogi,

Navjivan. New Delhi: Motilal Banarasidass, 1987.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Tantrāloka translated into Hindi Paramahaṁsa Mishra, into English by

Satyaprakāśa Śāstīī, first five

chapters by Lilian Silburn into French and then English by Padoux.

Tantrarājatantra. Edited by Mahāmahopadhyāya Lakṣmaṇa Śāstrī. Introduction

by Arthur Avalon. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1981 (reprint).

Tantrarājatantra edited by Lakṣmaṇa Śāstrī with introduction by Arthur Avalon

Ganesh and Co (Madras)

Private Ḷtd. Calcutta, 1926.

Tattvatrayanirṇaya by Sadyojyotis, with a vṛrti by Aghoraśiva, in
Aṣṭaprakaraṇam. (see entry there)
Tattvaprakāśā with Tātparyadīpikā by Bhoja and vṛtti by Aghoraśiva in
Aṣṭaprakaraṇam.
Tattvasaṁgraha by Sadyojyotis with vṛrri by Aghoraśiva in the
Aṣṭaprakaraṇam.
Tantravaṭadhānikā by Abhinavagupta, KSTS (24), 1918.
Tantrasāra by Abhinavagupta, M. R. Śāstrī, KSTS (17), Śrīnagar, 1918.
Tantrasāra by Kṛṣṇānanda Āgamavāgīśa. Reprinted and translated by R. K. Rai.
Vārāṇasī: Prachya Prakashan, 1985.

Tantroccaya by Abhinavagupta, see Gnoli-Torella, 1990.
Trikaśāstra Rahasya Prakriyā (in Hindi) Ishvar Ashram Truṣṭ, Isbar, Srinagar,

Tripurārṇavatantra. Edited by Śītalāprasāda Upādhyāya.
Yogatantragranthamālā no. 12. Vārāṇasī: Sampūrṇānanda Sanskrit University,
1992.
Tīrthāṅka. Gorakhpur: Gītā Press, 1957

Taittirīyasaṁhitā. Translated into English by A. B. Keith. Pardi: Svadhyāya

Maṇḍala, 1957.
Dehasthadevatācakrastotra by Abhinavagupta, see Pandey, 1963a; Silburn,

1970.

Dvayasaṁpattivārttikam by Vāmanadatta, (son of Harṣadatta) edited and
translated by R. Gnoli, in

Gururājamañjarikā. Studi in onore di Giuseppe Tucci, Istituto Ornentale,

Napoli, 1974, pp. 451-55.

Dhvanyālokalocana by Abhinavagupta, Kashi Sanskrit Series (135), Benares,

1940.

Nāgārjuna, Pañcakrama, L. de the Vallée Poussin, in Études et texts tantriques:

Pañcakrama, Louvain,

1896.

Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, Mṛgendratantravṛtti, M. S. Kauḻ, KṢṬS (50), Bombay, 1930.
Nandikeśvarakāśikā Upamanyukṛtaṭīkāsahitā, Vidyabhawan Sanskrit

Granthamala (133), Vārāṇasī,

1966.

Narmamālā, in Kṣemendralaghukāvyasaṁgraha, by Kṣemendra, Hyderabad,

1961.

Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava with the commentaries Ṛjuvimarśinī by Śivānanda and
Artharatnāvalī by Vidyānanda. Edited by Vrajavallabha Dvivedi with long
Sanṣkrit introduction. Yogatantragranthamālā no. 1. Vārāṇasī: Sampūrṇānanda
Sanskrit University, 1985 (second edition).

TANTRĀLOKA

Nirukta of Yāska with the commentary of Durgācārya, edited by M. M. Pt
Śivadatta, Veṅkatesvara Press, Bombay, 1912

Niśvāsatattvasaṁhitā. The earliest surviving Śaiva Tantra. Volume 1. A critical
edition and annotated translation of the Mūlasūtra, Uttarasūtra and Nayasūtra.
Edited by Dominic Goodall in collaboration with Alexis Sanderson and
Harunaga Isaacson with contributions of Nirajan Kafle, Diwakar Acharya and
others. Collection Indologie 128 Early Tantra Series 1. Institut Français de
Pondichéry. École Française D’Extréēme-Orient Asien-Afrika-Institut,
Universitit Hamburg 2015
Netratantra, with the commentary by Kṣemarāja, M. S. Kaul, KṢṬS (46, 61),

Śrīnagar and Bombay, 1926-1939.

Netratantra (Mṛtyuñjayabhaṭṭārakaḥ) with commentary by Kṣemarāja. Edited
by Vrajavallabha Dvivedi, Varanasi 2004.
Nyāyabindu by Dharmakīrti in Paṇḍitya Durveka Miśra's Dharmottarapradīpa,
being a sub-commentary on Dharmottara's Nyāyabinduṭīkā, a commentary on

Dharmakīrti's Nyāyabindu, D. Malvania, Tibetan Sanskrit Works Series 2,

Kashi Prasad Jayaswal Research Institute, Patna, 1971 (first edition, 1955).
Pauṣkarāgama K. K. Raja, in Brahmavidyā: The Adyar Library Bulletin, LVIII,

1994, p.p. 133-231.

Parimalasaṁskr̥tagranthamālā no. 15. Delhi: Parimala Publications, 1984.
Parātantra. Edited by Dhana Śamśer Jaṅgabāhādur Rāṇā. Prayāga: Kalyāṇa
Mandir, ‘Caṇḍī’ kāryālaya, 1952.
Pāśupata Sūtras with Pañcārthabhāṣya of Kauṇḍinya, R. Anantakrishna Sastri,

Trivandrum Sanskrit Series (32), Trivandrum, 1940.

Pauṣkarasaṁhitā, S.Y. Sampathkumara, Madras, 1934.
Puṇḍarīka, see Vimalaprabhāṭīkā.

Padmasaṁhitā, critical edition by Seetha Padmanabhan, R. N. Sampath and V.
Varadachari, 2 vol.

Pāñcarātra Pariṣodhanā Pariṣad Series (4), Madras, 1974-1982.

Paratrīśikātātparyadīpikā and Śāktavijñāna of Somānanda, J. D. Zaadoo, KSTS

(74), Śrīnagar, 1947.
Parātrīśikāvivṛti, by J. Zaadoo Śāstrī, KṢṬS (49),Ś agar, 1947.
Parāīīśikālaghuvṛtti by Abhinavagupta, and Parāī
kāvivṛti by Lakṣmīrāma,
J. D. Zaadoo Śāstrī, KSTS (68, 69), Srīnagar, 1947.
Parātriṁśikātattvavivaraṇa by Abhinavagupta, see Gnoli, 1985.
Paramārthacarā by Abhinavagupta, see Pandey, 1963a; Silburn, 1970.
Paramārthadvādaśikā, see Pandey, 1963a; Silburn, 1970.

Paramārthasāra by Abhinavagupta with vivṛti by Yogarāja. KSTS no. 7, 1916,
edited by J. C. Chatterjee

Paramokṣanirāsakārikāvṛtti Rāmakaṇṭha’s commentary on Sadyojyotiḥ’s
refutation of twenty conceptions of the liberated state (mokṣa). Critically edited,
translated into English and annotated by Alex Wilson, Dominic Goodall and S.
L. P. Anjaneya Sarma. Collection Indologie 122. Institut Français de
Pondichéry. École Française D’Extrēme-Orient. 2010
Paramārthāara of Abhinavagupta with the commentary of Yogarāja Essence of

the Supreme Truthy translation by Deba Brata SenSharma, Muktabodha
Indological Research Institute New Delhi, India and Emeryville USA First
Edition New Delhi 2007

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Paramārthasāra with the vivṛti of Yogarāja, by Abhinavagupta J. C. Chatterjī,

KṢTS (7), Śrīnagar, 1916.

Patañjali, Yogasūtra, An analysis of the Sanskrit with accompanying English
translation, C. Chapple and Y.A. Viraj (E.P. Kelly, Jr), Delhi, 1990.

Paryantapañcāśika by Abhinavagupta, V. Raghavan, Madras, 1951.
Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya by Kṣemarāja edition and translation by J. Singh, Motilal
Banarṣidass, Delhi, 1991 (first edition, 1963).

Pratyabhijñāhr̥daya by Kṣemarāja, edited by J. C. Chatterji KSTS 3, Srinagar,
Kashmir 1911
Prāyaścittasamuccaya (with a transcription of Hṛdayaśiva’s
Prāyaścittasamuccaya) 2015: Śaiva Rites of

Expiation. The first edition and translation of Trilocanaśiva’s twelfth-century.

Edited and translated by Sathyanarayan, R. with an introduction by Dominic
Goodall. Collection Indologie 127. Institut Français de Pondichéry. École
Française D’Extréme-Orient, 2015.
Prāyaścittasamuccaya by Hṛdayaśiva edition and translation by Satyanārāyaṇa
see below.
Pratiṣṭhālakṣaṇasārasamuccaya. Edited by Kṛṣṇa Śarmā. Kathmandu: Nepāla

Rāṣṭrīyābhilekhālāya, vol. 1, 1966, vol. 2, 1968.

by Rāmatoṣaṇa Bhaṭṭācārya. Editor not mentioned. Vidyābhavanaprācyavidyāgranthamālā no. 46. Chowkhamba, Vārāṇasī 1992 (reprint).

Brṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad. Published by the president Srī Ramakrishna Math,
Mylapore. Pondicherry: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1979 (third edition).

Bṛhannīlatantra. Edited by Madhusudan Kaul. Srinagar KṢTS, 1941.
Bodhapañcadaśikhā by Abhinavagupta, KSTS (25), Bombay, 1918; see Silburn,

1970.

Brhatsaṁhita by Varāhamiḥira with the commentary di Bhaṭṭotpala, Vārāṇasī,

1968.

Brahmayamala Tantra or Picumata (set of two volumes) edited with annotated

translation by Shaman Hatley and Csaba Kiss Institut Francais d’Indologie
Pondichery 2018
Bhagavadgīta, edition and translation S.K. Belvalkar, Hindu Vishvavidyalaya

Nepal Rajya Sanskrit Series (1), Poona, 1959.

Bhagavadgītārthasaṁgraha by Abhinavagupta, L. Raina, Śrīnagar, 1933.
The Bhagavad Gita by Cidbhavānanda, Swami, Tapovan Publishing House,

Tirupparaitturai, 1965.

Bhairavastotra by Abhinavagupta see Pandey, 1963a; Silburn, 1970.
Bhavopahārastotra by Cakrapāṇinātha with vivaraṇa by Ramyadeva Bhaṭṭa.
Edited by Mukundarāma Śāstrī. KSTS no. 14. Bombay: Tattvavivechaka Press,

1918.

Bhāgavatamahāpurāṇa: Rendered into English by C. L. Goswami in two parts.
Gorakhpur: Gita Press, 1971.

Bhāṣāvaṁśāvali. Edited by Nayanātha Pauḍela. Kathmandu: Purātattvavibhāga
Nepālarāṣṭrīya Pustakālaya, 1963.
Bhartṛhari, Vākyapadīya with the Commentaries Vṛtti and Paddhati of
Vṛṣabhadeva, Kāṇḍa 1, K.A. Subramania Iyer, Deccan College Monograph
Series (32), Poona, 1966.

Bhāvacūḍāmaṇi by Vidyākaṇṭha. Raghuvīra Temple Library, Jammu

TANTRĀLOKA

Bhogakārikā by Sadyojyotis, with the vṛtti by Aghoraśiva, in Aṣṭaprakaraṇam.

Mālinīvijayavārttika by Abhinavagupta, M. S. Kauḷ, KṢṬS (31), Srīnagar, 1921.
Mālinīvijayottaratantra, M. S. Kaul, KSTS (37), Bombay, 1922.

Maitryupaniṣad, edition and translation E.B. Cowell, Calcutta, 1935.

Mañjuśrīyaśas, Śrīkālacakratantrarāja, R. Vira and L. Chandra in KālacakraTantra and Other Texts:
Part I, International Academy of Indian Culture, Śata-piṭaka Series (69), New

Delhi, 1966, pp. 53-378.

Matargapãrameśvarāgama (kriyāpāda, Yogapāda and Caryāpāda) by N. R.
Bhatt
Matargapārameśvarāgama (Kriyāpāda, Yogapāda and Caryāpāda) avec le
commentaire de Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha. Critical edition by N. R. Bhaṭṭ Institut

Francais d’Indologie Pondichery 1982
Mataṁgapārameśvarāgama (Vidyāpāda), with the commentary by
Rāmakaṇṭha, critical edition N. R. Bhatt, IFP, Pondichery, 1977.
Mahākālasaṁhitā. Edited by Kiśoranātha Jhā. Guhyakālīkhaṇḍa part 1, 1976,
part 2, 1977 and part 3, 1979; Kāmakalākhaṇḍa 1986. Allahabad: Gaṅgānātha
Jhā Kendrīyasaṁskṛtavidyāpīṭha.
Mahānayaprakāśa, K. S. Śāstīī, Trivandrum Sanskrit Series (130), Trivandrum,

1937.

Mahānayaprakāśa by Śitikaṇṭha. Edited by Mukundarāma Śāstrī. Bombay:

KṢṬTS n0. 21, 1918.
Mahārthamañjarī by Maheśvarānanda. Edited by Vrajavallabha Dvivedi.

Yogatantragranthamālā no. 5. Vārāṇasī: Sampūrṇānanda Sanskrit University,

1972.

Mahopadeśaviṁśatikā by Abhinavagupta, see Pandey, 1963a; Silburn, 1970.
Mālinīvijayottaratantra. Edited by Madhusūdana Kaula Śāstrī. KṢṬS no. 37,

1922.

Mīmāṁsāsūtra, by Jaimini with the Bhāṣya by Śabara, Brahmadatta Dwivedi,
Vārāṇasī, 1987.

Mīmāṁsāsślokavārttīka, K. S. Śāst, Trivandrum, 1926.

Mīmaṅṁṣāsūtra edited by Ganganatha Jha with the commentary by Śabara,

śabarabhāṣya Gaekwadʼs Oriental series vols. 66, 70 and 72. Baroda: Oriental

Institute 1933, 1934, 1936.

Mudrāvicāraprakaraṇam edited by Shaḥ, Priyabala Baroda, 1956.
Mūlamadhyamakakārika (Mādhyamikāsiūtras) by Nāgārjuna with the
Prasannapadā, commentary by Candrakīrti, L. de the Vallée Poussin,
Bibliotheca Buddhica (4), Imprimerie de I'Academie Imperiale des Sciences,
St.-Petersbourg, 1913.
Mṛgendratantra (Kriyāpāda, Caryāpāda) with the commentary by Bhatta
Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, critical edition N. R. Bhatt, IFI, Pondichery, 1962.
Mṛgendratantra (Vidyāpāda & Yogapāda), with the commentary by
Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, M. S. Kaul, KSTS (50), Bombay, 1930. See also BrunnerLachaux, 1985.

Mṛtyujitbhaṭṭāraka, see Netratantra.
Yajurvedasaṁhitā. Translation by Griffith R. T. H.. Introduction and exegetical
notes by Ravi Prakash Arya. Delhi: Indica Books, 2000 (reprint).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Yoginītantra. Edited by Viśvāsanārāyaṇa Śāstrī. Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya

Prakashan, 1982.

Yoginīhṛdaya with the dīpikā by Amṛtānanda. Edited and translated into Hindi
by Vrajavallabha Dvivedi. Delhi: Motilal Banarasidass, Delhi 1988.
Yoginīhr̥daya with the dīpikā by Amṛtānanda edited by Gopināth Kavirāja

Yogatantragranthamālā vol. 25. Saṁpūrṇānanda Sanskrit Úniversity, Vārāṇasī

Yogaśāstra by Hemacandra, Muni Jambuvijaya, Bombay, 1986.
Rauravāgama (Vidyāpāda, Kriyāpāda), 2 vol. critical edition by N. R. Bhatt,
with introduction by J. Filliozat, IFP, two volumes, 1961 and 1972.

Rauravasaṁgraha, see Rauravāgama.
Rauravāgama ed. N. R. Bhatt. Publication de Iʼ'IFP 18. Three volumes.

Pondicherry: IFP, 1961, 1972 and 1988. Volume one includes the surviving

chapters of the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha published there as the Vidyāpāda. Iṭ is in
two parts. The first extends up to verse 41 of the third patala (pp. 1- 16). The

second is in appendix I (pp. 173-194) that continues from there to the end of
paṭala 10.
Rasārṇava. Edited by P. C. Ray and Hariscandra Kaviratna. Bibliotheca Indica
no. 174. Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press, 1910.
[Rājavaṁśāvalī.: Kāṭhmāṇḍu-Upatyakāko Ek Rājavaṁśāvalī. Edited by
Bālacandra Śarmā. Prācīna Nepāla, vol. 4 (July 1968) - vol. 6 (Jan. 1969).

Rahasyapañcadaśika by Abhinavagupta, see Pandey, 1963a.

Rudrayāmala (Uttaratantram). EĒdited by Jīvanānanda Vidyāsāgara Bhaṭṭācārya,

revised and published by his sons Āśubodhavidyābhūṣaṇa and Nityabodha

Vidyāratna. Calcutta. 1937 (third edition).
Rūpamaṇḍana by Sūtradhārāṇḍana. Edited and translated into English by B.
Shrivastava. Vārāṇasī, 1964.

RṚgvedasaṁhitā and bhāṣya of Sāyaṇācārya. Translation of by Wilson, H. H.
Introduction and notes by Ravi Prakash Arya and K. L. Joshi. Four volumes.
Delhi: Indica Books, 2000 (reprint).
Aiterīya Brāhmaṇa of the Rgveda. Haug M. Vārāṇasī, 1977 (reprint).
Lakṣmītantra, a Pāñcarātra Āgama, P.V. Krishnamacharya, The Adyar Library
and Research Centre, Madrās, 1975 (first edition, 1959).
Lalitāsahasranāma with Bhāskararāya’s commentary. Translated into English
by R. Ananthakrishna Sastry. Adyar, Chennai: The Adyar Library and Research
Centre. 1988 (reprint).

Liṅgapurāṇa: Translated by a Board of Scholars and edited by Prof. J. L. Śāstrī.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1973.

Luptāgamasaṁgraha. In three volumes first volume by Gopinātha Kavirāja,
1970. Last two volumes by Vrajavallabha Dvivedi, (dated 1982 and 1986
respectively). Yogatantragranthamālā no. 12, 21 and 24. Vārāṇasī:
Sampūrṇānanda Sanskrit UÚniversity.

Vātūlanāthasūtra with the Vṛtti di Anantaśaktipāda, M. S. Kaul, KSTS (39),

Bombay, 1923.
Vātulanāthasūtras with the vṛtti by Anantaśaktipāda. Edited with English
translation and notes by Madhusūdana Kaula Śāstrī. Srinagar: KṢṬS no. 39,

1923.

TANTRĀLOKA

Vāstusāraprakaraṇa by Thakkura Pheṟu. Edited by Paṇḍit Bhagavāndāsa Jaina.

Jaipur, 1937.

Vijñaptimātratāsiddáhi by Vasubandhu, Deux traites de Vasubandhu. Viṁśatikā
d'une explication en proseet Triṁśikā avec le commentaire de accompagnee
Sthiramati, S. Levi, Biblitheque de 1École des Hautes Études (245), Paris, 1925.
Vijñānabhairava with the partial commentary by Kṣemarāja and Śivopādhyāya,
Śāstrī, KṢTS (8), and with the commentary Kaumudī di Ānanda Bhaṭṭa, KṢṬTS

(9), Bombay, 1918.
Vimalaprabhāṭīkā of Śrīpuṇḍarīka on Śrīlaghukālacakratantrarāja by
Śrīmañjuśrīyaśa, vol. J. Upadhyāya, Bibliotheca Indo-Tībetica Series (11),
Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, Sarnath, 1986. Vol. Ī and I V.V.

Dvivedi and SS. Bahulkar, Rare Buddhist Text Series (12-13), Central Institute

of Higher Tibetan Studies, Sarnath, 1994.
Śaktisaṁgamatantra. The first three volumes edited by B. Bhattacharyya (dated

1932, 1941 and 1947 respectively); the fourth volume is edited by Vrajavallabha

Divedi 1978). Gaekwadʼs Oriental Series. Baroda: Oriental Institute of Baroda.

Śāradātilakatantra. Translation by a Board of Scholars: Śri Garibdas Oriental
Series- 82. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications 1988
Śivāgamaśekhara (also called Śivaliṇgapratiṣṭhā) two volumes Kumāra
Śuvāmik Kurukkal, Paruttiturai, Yālppāṇam, 1949, 1953
Śivajñūānabodham and the Śivajñānasiddhiyar by Meikanda Sāttiram.
Dharmapuram Mutṭ, 1942.
Śivadṛṣṭi of Somānanda with the vrrtri by Utpaladeva. Edited by Madhusūdana
Kaula Śāstrī KṢṬS vol. 54, Srinagar 1934.

Śāstradīpikā by Pārthasārathi, in P. P. Subrahmānya Śāstrī, Jaimini's

Mīmāṅṁsāsūtra with Pārthasārathi Miśra's Śāstradīpikā and Appayya Dīkṣita's
Mayūkhāvalī, Jahrbuch der Schopenhauer-Gesellschaft 1-5, 1939-1944.
Śaivaparibhāṣā of Śivāgrayogindrajñāna-śśivācārya ed. H. R. Rangaswamy
Iyengar and R. Ramasastri, Sanskrit Series 90 Mysore: Oriental Research
Institute, 1950
Śaivaparibhāṣā by Śivāgrayogīndrajñānaśivācārya, Mysore, 1950,
Śivadṛṣti by Somānanda with the vṛtti by Utpaladeva, M. S. Kaul, KSTS (54),

Śrīnagar, 1934.
Śivanirvāṇapaddhati, published by Chandra, Lokesh, Sanskrit Texts from
Kashmir, Volume 7. Śatapiṭaka Series, Indo-Asian Literatures, No. 333 p. 274ff.
New Delhi 1984.
Śivasūtravimarinī, by Kṣemarāja, edited by J. C. Chatterji, KSTS (1), Śrīnagar,

1911.

Śivasūtravārttīka, by Varadarāja, J. C, Chatterji, KSTS (43), Śrīnagar, 1925.

Śivasūtravārttika, with Śivasūtravr̥ti by Bhāskara, edited by J. C. Chatterji,
KSTS (4) Srīnagar, 1916 (second edition, 1970).
Śrītatvārthacintāmaṇi by Pūrṇānanda. Critically edited from original
manuscripts (chapters 1-18) with an original commentary by Bhuvanamohana
Saṅkhyatīrtha and (chapters 19-26) with notes by Cintāmanṇi Bhaṭṭacārya.

Introduction by Prabodhacandra Bagchi. First published Calcutta, 1936, reprint
Motilal Banarasidass, Delhi 1994.
Śrīlaghukālacakratantrarāja by Śrīmañjuśrīyaśas with the Vimalaprabhāṭikā of
Kalkin Srīpuṇḍarīka, vol. 3. Edited by Vrajavallabha Dvivedi and S. S. Bahulkar.

Sarnatha: Rare Buddhist Texts Series 13, 1994.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

SŚrīvidyārṇayatantra by Śrīvidyāraṇya. First edited by Rāmacandra Kāk and
Harabhaṭṭa Śāstrī. Reprinted by R. K. Rai. Vārāṇasī: Prachya Prakashan, 1986.
Śaivasiddhāntaparibhāṣa by Sūryabhaṭṭa. Devakoṭtai: Śaivāgama Siddhānta

Paripalana Saṁgha, 1926.
Śivastotrāvalī by Utpaladeva, with the commentary di Kṣemarāja, Rājānaka
Lakṣmaṇa, Chowkhamba
Sanṣkrit Series 15, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, Vārāṇasī, 1964.
Saṭsāhasrasaṁhitā. Chapters 1-5 edited, translated and annotated by J. A.
Schoterman, E. J. Brill, Leiden: 1982.

Sāmavedasaṁhitā and bhāṣya of Sāyaṇācārya. Translation by Griffith R. T. H.
Introduction and exegetical notes by Ravi Prakash Arya. Delhi: Indica Books,
2000 (reprint).
Saubhāgyaratnākara by Vidyānanda. Edited by Paramahaṁsa Miśra.
Yogatantragranthamālā no 30. Vārāṇasī: Saṁpūrṇānanda Sanskrit University,

2000.

Sarvollāsatantra by Sarvānandanātha. Edited by Rāmamohana Cakravartti.
Calcutta: Economic Press, 1953.
Saṁvarodayatantra, selected chapters, Shinici Tsuda, The Hokuseido Press,
Tokyo, 1974.
Samvitprakāśa by Vāmanadatta edited with English introduction by Mark S. G.
Dyczkowski. Printed at Ratna Press, Vārāṇasī 1990

Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra, edition of text in Sanskrit and Tībetan,

translation and notes by T. Skorupski, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1983.
Sarvajñānottara (jñānapāda), A preliminary edition with a rikā by

Sivāgrayogīndra Saivācārya by Pt Muttayyāpillai published by Estate Press,

Devakoṭṭai, 1923.
Sāṅkhyakārikā by Īśvarakṛṣṇa in Vācaspatimiśras Tattvakaumuḍī. Ein Beitrag
zur Textkritik bei kontaminierter Uberlieerung, vorgelegt von Srinivasa Ayya
Srinivasan, Alt-und Neu-Indische Studien, Seminar fur Kultur and Geschichte

Indiens an der Universitat Hamburg, Hamburg, 1967.

Sātvatasaṁhitā Alaśiṁgabhaṭṭaviracitabhāṣyopetā, V.V. Dvivedi, Library Rare
Texts Publication Series (6), Sampūrṇānanda Sanskrit University, Vārāṇasī,

1982.

Sārdhatriśatikālottara by Bhatt NṚ , with the comentary of Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha
critical edition. Institut Français d’Indologie, Pondichéry 1979.
Sāmbapañcaśikā, by Kṣemarāja with the 7ikā by the author in Tantrasaṁgraha,
G. Kavirāj, vol. l, Yogatantragranthamālā (3), Sampūrṇānanda Sanskrit
University, Vārāṇasī, 1992 (first edition, 1970).

Sāmbapañcāśikā of SŚāmba. Edited by Sāmbaśiva Śāstrin. Trivandrum Sanskrit
Series no. 104 (Śrī Setu Lakṣmī Prasādamālā no. 104) Government Press:

Trivandrum 1930

Sekoddeśaṭīkā, by Nāropā, see Carelli, 1941; Gnoli-Orofino, 1994.
Siddhitrayī by Utpaladeva, see Vyas, 1989.

Siddhāntaśekhara by Viśvanātha. Manomanīgranthamālā no 20, Bangalore, 1971.
Siddhāntasārāvali by Trilocanaśivācārya with the commentary of Anantaśambhu,
Bulletin of the Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, no. 16 to 20, Madras

1965 to 1972.

TANTRĀLOKA

Skandapurāṇa (Kāśīkhaṇḍa). Translated and annotated by Tagare, G. V. parts X
and XI. Deḷhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1997.
Suśrutasaṁhitā. Bombay: Nirṇayasāgara Press, 1945.
Somaśambhupaddhati. Edition and translation by H. Brunner-Lachaux. 4 vols.
Pondicherry: Institut Français d’Indologie, 1963, 1968, 1977 and 1998.
Stavacintāmaṇi by Bhaṭṭaṇārāyaṇa with commentary by Kṣemarāja, edited by

M. R. Śāstī, KSṬS (10), Śrīnagar, 1918.

Spandapradīpikā, by Utpalavaiṣṇava, Commentary on the Spandakārikā by
Bhagavadutpalācārya, M. S. G. Dyczkowski, Ratna Printing Works, Vārāṇasī,
1990. Reprint Indica Books, 2000
Spandanirṇaya by Kṣemarāja. Edited with English translation by Madhusūdana
Kaula Śāstrī. Srinagar: KṢṬS vol. 43, 1925.

Spandasaṁdoha, by Kṣemarāja M. R. Śāstrī, KSTS (16), Bombay, 1917.

Svacchandatantra, with the commentary of Kṣemarāja, M. S. Kauḻ, KṢṬS (31,

38, 44, 48, 51, 53, 56), Bombay, 1921-1935.

Svacchandatantra. Reprint supervised by Vrajavallabha Dvivedi. Delhi: Parimal
Publications, 1985.
Svāyaṁbhuvāgamaṭīkā by Sadyojyotis, see Filliozat, 1991.
Svabodhodayamañjarī, by Torella, Raffaele,; or how to suppress the mind with
no effort.’ Harānandalaharī V olume in Honour of Professor Minoru Hara on
his seventieth Birthday edited by Ryutaro Tsuchida and Albrecht Wezler Pp.

387-410 Tokyo 2000.

Spandakārikā with the vivṛti di Rāmakaṇṭha, J.C. Chatterji, KSTS (6), Śrīnagar,

1969 (first edition, 1913).
Haracaritacintāmaṇi by Rājānakaśrījayadratha, Kāvyamālā (61), Bombay,

1897.

Haravijayam by Ratnākara with a commentary by Ālaka. Edited by Paṇḍit
Durgāprasāda and Kāśīnātha Śarmā. Vārāṇasī: Caukhambha Sanskrit
Saṁsthāna, 1982.
Books (Studies and Translations)

Āraṇya, Swami Hariharānanda, 1977: Yoga Philosophy of Patañjali. Rendered
into English by P. N. Mukherjee. University of Calcutta.
Abhyankar, Kashinath Vasudev Abhyankar, 1977: “A Dictionary of Sanskrit
Grammar’. Oriental Institute, Baroda.

Agrawal, Vasudeva S. 1963: Matṣya Purāṇa. A Study. Vārāṇasī: Pṛthivi
Prakashan.

Agrawal, Vasudeva S. 1964: Vāṃana Purāṇa –- A Study. Vārāṇasī: Pṛthivi
Prakashan.
Agrawal, Vasudeva S. 1970: Ancient Indian Folk Cults. Vārāṇasī: Prithivi

Prakashan.
Alper, H. P. 1991, Understanding Mantras, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi.
Allen, WS. 1953, Phonetics in Ancient India, Oxford.

Allen, Michael R. 1969: The Cult of Kumari.Virgin Worship in Nepal.

Kathmandu: Madhab Lal Maharjan.

Anderson, Mary M. 1975: The Festivals of Nepal. London: Rupa and Co.
Apte, Sanskrit Dictionary

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Arguelles, José and Miriam 1972: Mandala, Berkeley: Shambhala.

Arraj, W. J. 1988: The Svacchandatantram: History and Structure ofa Śaiva
Scripture. Doctoral dissertation for the University of Chicago.

Aurobindo, 2001: Essays on the Gita. The Bhagavadgita as Translated by
Aurobindo. Publisher Sri Aravindo.
Bakkar, Hans T. 2000: Somaśarman, Somavaṁśa and Somasiddhānta. A
Pāśupata Tradition in Seventh-Century Dakṣiṇa Kośala. Studies in the

Saikndapurāṇa 3, in Harānandalaharī. Volume in Honour of Professor Minoru
Hara on his Sventieth Birthday, ed. R. Tsuchida and A. Wezler. Reinbek: Dr.
Inge Wezler, pp. 1-19.
Bakker, Hans, and Alan Entwistle, eds. 1983: Devī: The Worship of the Goddess
and its Contribution to Indian Pilgrimage. Institute of Indian Studies, State
University of Groningen, Groningen.
Bakker, Hans 1986: Ayodhyā. Groningen: Egbert Forsten.
Bakker, H. T. and Bisschop, P. Moksadharma 187 and 239-241 reconsidered.

Published in Asiatischen Studien / Études Asiatiques.

Bagchi, K. P. 1994: The Making of Medieval India. Delhi: Oxford University
Press.
Bagchi, P. C. 1934: Kaulajñānanirṇaya and some Minor Texts of the School of
Matṣyendranātha. Calcutta Sanskrit Series, no. 3. Calcutta: Metropolitan.

Bagchi, P. C. 1939 1975 (reprint): Studies in the Tantras. Part 1. Calcutta:
University of Calcutta.
Bagchi, P.C.1934: Kaulajñānanirṇaya, Calcutta.
Barks, Coleman, 2011: Rumi: The Big Red Book, Harper Collins Publishers,
New York
Banerjea A. K. 1962: The Philosophy of Gorakhnātha with Gorakṣha-vacanasangraha. Gorakhpur: Mahant Dig Vijai Nath Trust
Banerjea, J. N. 1974: The Development of Hindu Iconography, second edition
Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi (first edition: University of Calcutta,
Calcutta, 1956).

Banerji, S. C. 1978: Tantra in Bengal. A Study in its Origin, Development and
Influence. Calcutta: Naya Prakash.
Baring, Anne and Cashford, Jules 1991: The Myth of the Goddess. Evolution of

an Image. London: Arkana, Penguin Books.

Biumer, Bettina and Das, Rājendra Prasād 1994: Śilparatnakośa. A Glossary of
Orissan Temple Architecture by Sthāpaka Nirañjana Mahāpātra. Sanskrit text,
critically edited with English translation and illustration. Indira Gandhi National
Centre for the Arts. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Báumer, Bettina Sharada, 2011: editor Sāmarasya, DK Print World Delhi

Báumer, Bettina Sharada, 2018: Tantrapuṣpañjali. Tantric Traditions and
Philosophy of Kashmir.
Studies in Memory of HṆ Chakravarty edited by and Hamsa Stainton. Indira
National Centre for the Arts. New Delhi.

Biumer, Bettina Sharada, 2019: The Yoga of the Netra Tantra. DK Printworld,

Delhi

Beal, Samuel 1994 (reprint): Si-Yu-Ki Buddhist Records of the Western World.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

TANTRĀLOKA

Beane, Wendell Charles 1977: Myth, Cult, and Symbols in Śākta Hinduiṣm: A
Study of the Indian Mother Goddess. Leiden: E. J. Brill.

Beck, Guy L. 1995: Sonic Theology. Hinduism and Sacred Sound. Delhi: Motilal

Banarsidass
Benard, Elisabeth Anne 1994: Chinnamastā. The Aweful Buddhiṣṭt and Tantric
Goddess. Buddhist Tradition Series edited by Alex Wayman volume 22. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass.
Beyer, Stephen 1978: The Cult of Tārā. Magic and Ritual in Tibet. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Bhandarkar, R. G. 1965: Vaiṣṇavism, Śaivism and Minor Religious Systems.
Vārāṇasī: Indological Book House.

Bharati, A. 1969: The Tantric Tradition, second edition, Rider & Company,
London (first edition, 1965).

Bhate, S. and Bronkhorst, J. 1994: Bhartṛhari. Philosopher and Grammarian.
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Bhartṛhari (University of
Poona, January 8-8, 1992), Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi (first edition, Bern,

1993).

Bhat, M. R. (part 1) 1981 and (part 2) 1982: Bṛhatsaṁhitā by Varāhamihira Bhaṭṭa
with English translation, notes and comments. Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi.

Bhat M. S. 1987: Vedic tantrism, a study of ṛ[gvidhāna of śaunaka with text and
translation. Delhi, Motilal Banarsidass,
Bhattacharyya, Narendra Nath 1971: Indian Mother Goddess. Calcutta: Indian
Studies Past and Present.
Bhattacharyya, Narendra Nath 1974 A History of the Śākta Religion. Munshiram
Manoharlal, Delhi.
Biardeau, M. 1964a: Theorie de the Connaissance et Philosophie de the Parole

dans le Brahmanisme Classique, Paris, La Haye.
Biardeau, M. 1964b: Bhartṛhari, Vākyapadīya Brahmakaṇḍa, de Boccard, Paris.
Biardeau, Madeleine 1989: Hinduism. The Anthropology ofa Civilization.
Translated from the French by Richard Nice. French Studies in South Asian
Culture and Society 3. Delhi: Oxford University Press
Bryant, Edwin 2001: The Quest for the Origins of Vedic Culture. The IndoAryan Migration Debate. New York: Oxford University Press.
Boner, A. 1966: Ramachandra Kaulacara, Śilpaprakāśa, Mediaeval Orissan
Sanskrit Text on Temple Architecture, translation and notes by A. Boner and
Sadasiva Rat Sarma, Brill, Leiden.
Boner, Alice, Śarmā, Sadāśivaratha and Bettina Baūmer 1982: Vāstusūtra
Upaniṣad: The Essence of Form in Sacred Art. Sanskrit text, English
translation, and notes. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

Bose (Basu), Manindra Mohan 1986: The Post Caitanya Sahajiyā Cult of

Bengal. Delhi: Gian Publishing House.
Briggs, G. W. 1973 (reprint): Gorakhnātha and the Kānphata Yogīṣ. Delhi:
Motilal Banarṣidass.
Brighenti, F. 2001: Śakti Cult in Orissa. New Delhi: D. K. Print World.
Broido, MM. 1993: Killing, Lying, Stealing, and Adultery: A Problem of
Interpretation in the Tantras, in D. S. Lopez, Jr. Buddhist Hermeneutics, second
edition, Delhi (first edition, University of Hawaī Press, Honolulu, 1988).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bronkhorst, J. 1993: The Two Sources of Indian Asceticism. Schwiezer

Asiatische Studien, Monographien, Bd. 13. Bern: Peter Lang.

Brooks, Douglas Renfrew 1999: The Secret of the Three Cities. An Introduction
to Hindu Śākta Tantriṣm. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Brown, C. Mackenzie 1974: God as Mother: A Feminine Theology in India. An
Hisṭorical and Theological Study of the Brahmavaivarta Purāṇa. Harford,
Vermont: Claude Stark and Co. Brown, C. Mackenzie 1990: The Triumph of the
Goddess: The Canonical Models and Theological Vision of the Devī-Bhagavata
Purāṇa. SUNY Series in Hindu Studies. Albany: State University of New York
Press.
Brown, W. Norman 1958: The Flood of Beauty. Edition and translation
presented in photographs of the Saundaryalaharī. Cambridge: Harvard
University.
Brunner, H. Oberhammer, G. and Padoux, A. 2000: Tāntrikābhidhānakośa. A

Dictionary of Technical Terms from Hindu Tantric Literature, vol. 1. Vienna:
Der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften
Brunner, Hélēne: Tantrābhidhānakośa vol 2 eds, Gerhard Oberhammer and
André Padoux (Wien: Verlag der Ôṣterreichischen Akadamie der

Wissenschaften 2004)

Brunner-Lachaux, H. 1963-1998: Somaśambhupaddhati, see above.

Brunner-Lachaux, H. 1964: Les categories sociales vediques dans le Śivaisme

du Śud, in JA (270), pp. 451-72.

Brunner-Lachaux, H. 1965: Analise du Kiraṇāgama, in JA (271), pp. 309-28.
Brunner-Lachaux, H. 1967: Analise du Suprabhedāgama, in JA, (273), pp. 31-

60.

Brunner-Lachaux, H. 1975: Le sādhaka, Personnage oublie du Śivaisme du Sud,

in JA (279), pp. 411-43.

Brunner-Lachaux, H. 1985: Mṛgendrāgama avec the vṛtti de Bhaṭṭa
Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, edition and translation, IFP 69, 1985.
Brunner, H. 1986a: Les membres de Śiva,in Asiatischen Studien / Études
Asiatiques, XL, 2, pp. 89-132.

Brunner-Lachaux, H. 1986b: Maṇḍala et yantra dans le Śivaisme Āgamique, in
Mantras et Diagrammes
rituels dans l'Hinduisme, Editions du CNRS, Paris, pp. 11-35.

Brunner-Lachaux, H. 1992: Jñāna and Kriyā: Relation between Theory and
Practice in the Śaivāgamas, in Goudriaan, 1992, pp. 1-59.
Brunner-Lachaux, H. 1994: The Place of Yoga in the Śaivāgamas in Pandit N.
R. Bhatt Felicitation Volume ed. P.-S. Filliozat, S. P. Narang and C. P. Batta pp.
425-461, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

Biihnemann, 1980: Identifizierung von Sanskrittexten Sankaranandanas. Wiener
Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Sūdasiens 24. 1980. 191-198.
Biihnemann, Gudrun 2000: The Iconography of Hindu Tantric Deities. Vol. 1:
The Pantheon of the Mantramahodadhi. Groningen: Egbert Forsten.
Biihhnemann, Gudrun 2001: The Iconography of Hindu Tantric Deities. Vol. 2:
The Pantheon of the Prapañcasāra and the Śāradātilaka. Groningen: Egbert
Forsten.

Biihnemann, Gudrun 2003: The Hindu Pantheon in Nepalese Line Drawings.
Two Manuscripts of the Pratiṣṭhālakṣaṇasārasamuccaya. Vārāṇasī: Indica
Books.

TANTRĀLOKA

Bunce, Fredrick W. 1994: An Encyclopaedia of Buddhist Deities, Demigods,
Godlings, Saints and Demons. Vol. 1. New Delhi: D. K. Printworld.

Burnett, LD. 1910: The Paramārthasāra of Abhinavagupta, in JRAS, pp. 70747.

Caitanyānanda 1996: Śrī Vidyā. Śrī Cakra Pūjā Vidhiḥ. Śrī Dattātreya
Caitanyānandanātha Sampradāya Sampūrṇa Krama. Madras: Śri Maruti

Graphics.

Carelli, M. 1941: Sekoddeśatīkā of Naḍapāda (Nāropā), edition and

introduction, Gaekwad's Oriental Series (90), Baroda.

Chakraborti, Haripada 1970: Pāsupata Sūtra with Pañcārtha--bhāṣya of

Kauṇḍinya. Translated with an Introduction on the History of Śaivismin India.
Calcutta: Academic Publishers.
Chakraborti, Uma 1991: Kṣemendra the Eleventh Century Kashmiri Poet. A
Study of His Life and Works. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications.
Chakravarti, 1972: Tantra. Studies on their religion and literature, Calcutta:
Punthi Puṣṭak.
Chakravati. 1986: The Concept of Rudra Śiva through the Ages. Motilal
Banarṣidass, Delhi.
Chakravarti, Chintaharan 1940: A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit

Manuṣcripts in the Collections of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal. Volume

8, parts 1 and 2. Calcutta: Royal Asatic Society of Bengal.
Chandra, Lokesh 1991: Buddhist Iconography.Compact Edition. New Delhi:
International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan.

Chattopadhyaya, Brajadulal 1990: Aspects of Rural Settlement and Rural

Society in Early Medieval India. Calcutta and New Delhi
Chakravarty, H. N. 2012: Tantrasāra of Abhinavagupta. Translation from the
Sanskrit edited by Boris Marjanovic. Rudra Press, Portland Oregon.
Chatterji, J. C. 1914: Kashmir Shaivaiṣm, KṢṬS (2), Śrīnagar.
Clothey, Fred W. and Long, J. Bruce, 1983: Experiencing Śiva. Encounters with
a Hindu Deity. Delhi: South Asia Books.
Coburn, Thomas B. 1984: Devī-Māhātmya. The Crystallization of the Goddess
Tradition. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Coburn, Thomas B. 1991: Encountering the Goddess: A Translation of the
Devī-Māhātmya and a Study of its Interpretation. SUNY Series in Hindu
Studies. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Coccari, Diane Marorie 1986: The Bir Babas of Banaras: An Analysis ofa Folk
Deity in North Indian Hinduism. Doctoral dissertation submitted to the
University of Wisconsin.

Coomaraswamy, Ananda K. 1980 (reprint): Yakṣas. Delhi: Munshiram

Manoharlal.
Cole, Freedom Tobias, 2006 and 2021: Science of Light. Two volumes Nevada
City
Cox M. Whitney, 2006: Making a Tantra in Medieval South India: The
Mahārthamañjarī and the Textual
Culture of Cola Cidambaram (thesis for the University of Chicago) 2006 p. 67 n

Crooke, William 1972: Religion and Folklore of Northern India. Reprint Delhi:
Chand and Co.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Cunningham, Alexander (1871) 1990 (reprint): The Ancient Geography of
India. Delhi: Low Price Publications.
Dagens, Bruno 1979: Le Florilēge de la Doctrine Śivaite

Śaivāgamaparibhāṣāmañjarī de Vedajñāna. Édition critique, traduction et

notes. Publications de I’Institute Français d’Indologie. No. 60. Pondicherry:

Institute Français d’Indologie.
Dagens, Bruno 1985: Mayamata. An Indian Treatise on Housing, Architecture
and Iconography. Delhi: Sitaram Bhartia Institute of Scientific Research.
Dandekar, R. N. 1967: Some Aspects of the History of Hinduism. Poona:
University of Poona.
Dange, S. A. 1979: Sexual Symbolism from the Vedic Ritual. Delhi: Ajanta
Publications.
Dange, S. A. 2000: Vedic Sacrifices Early Nature (ŚSome Problems and
Discussions). Two volumes. New Delhi: Aryan Books International.

Daniélou, Alain 1985: The Gods of India, Hindu Polytheism. New York: Inner
Traditions International Ltd.

Datta, Saroj 1995: Land System in Northern India, c. 400 - 700 AD. New Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlal.
Davis, R. 1991: Ritual in an Oscillating Universe. Worshipping Śiva in
Medieval India. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Das, H.C. 1981: Tantricism: A Study of the Yoginī Cult. New Delhi.

Dasgupta, S. N. 1922, 1931, 1939, 1948, 1954: A History of Indian Philosophy,

5 vol. Cambridge.
Dasgupta, S. N. 1979: Yoga Philosophy. In relation to other systems of Indian
thought. Motilal Banarasidass, Delhi
Dasgupta, S. B. 1976: Obscure Religious Cults. Calcutta: Firma K. L.
Mukhopadhyaya.
Dash, V.Bh. 1986: Alchemy and Metallic Medicines in Āyurveda, Delhi:
Concept Publishing Company.

Datta, Swati 1989: Migrant Brahmaṇas in Northern India. Their Settlement and

General Impact c. AD 475-1030. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002: Indian Esoteric Buddhism. A Social History of the
Tantric Movement. New York: Columbia University Press.
Dawson, J. E. 1999: Bronze Treasures of the National Museum, National
Museum, New Delhi.

Day, Nundo Lal 1927) 1990 (reprint): The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient

and Medieaval India. Delhi: Low Price Publications.
Defow, Hart and Robert Svoboda (2003)

Dehejia, Vidya 1979: Early Stone Temples of Orissa. Delhi: Vikas Publishing
House. 1986: Yoginī Cult and Temples. A Tantric Tradition. Delhi: National
Museum, (editor)

Dehejia, Vidya 1999: Devi the Great Goddess. Female Divinity in South Asian

Art. Ahmedabad: Arthur M. Sackler Gallery, Smithsonian Institution,

Waṣhington, D.C. in association with Mapin Publishing, Ahmedabad and
Prestel Verlag, Munich.

Deo, S. B. 1956: The History of Jaina Monachism. Poona.
Deussen, Paul 1972a (reprint): The System of the Vedānta. Translation by
Charles Johnston. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

TANTRĀLOKA

Deussen, Paul 1972b (reprint): The Philosophy of the Upanishads. Delhi:
Oriental Publishers.
Deussen, Paul 1997 (reprint): Śixty Upaniṣads of the Veda. Translated from
German by V. M. Bedekar and G. B. Palsule. Delhi: Motilal Banarasidass.
Desai, Devangana 1985: Erotic Sculptures of India. A Socio-cultural Study.
Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Deṣai, Devangana 1996: The Religious Imagery of Khajaraho. Mumbai: Project
for Indian Cultural Studies Publication IV.
Desai, P. B. 1957: Jainism in South India. Sholapur.
Dikṣhitar, Ramachandra 1991: The Lalitā Culti. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Dīimmitt, Cornelia and van Buitenen J. A. B. 1998 (Indian edition): Classical

Hindu Mythology: A Reader in the Sanskrit Purāṇas. Delhi: Satguru
Publications.
Dimock, Edward C. Jr. 1989 (reprint): The Place of the Hidden Moon: Erotic
Mysticism in the Vaiṣṇava-sahajiyā Cult of Bengal. Chicago: Phoenix Press.
Diehl, C.G. 1956: Instrument and Purpose: A Study on Rites and Rituals in
South India, CWK Gleerup, Lund.
Doniger O'Flaherty, W. 1973: Asceticism and Eroticism in the Mythology of
Śiva London: Oxford University Press

Douglas, Kenneth, and Bays, Gwendolyn 1978: The Life and Liberation of
Padmasambhava. Padma Ka’i Thaṇg, as recorded by Yeshe Tsogyal. Berkeley:
Dharma Publishing.
Dowman, Keith 1984: Sky Dancer: The Secret Life and Song of the Lady Yeshe
Tsogyel. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Dumont, Louis 1980: Homo Hierarchicus: The Caste System and its
Implications. Completely revised English edition. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Dupuche, John R. 2003: Abhinavagupta. The Kula Ritual as Elaborated in
Chapter 29 of the Tantrāloka. Delhi: Motilal Banarṣidass.
Dupuche, 2018: The Wisdom of Excess: Guru, Initiation and Practice in an
Extreme Tantric ritual Tantrapuṣpañjali: 205. Tantric Traditions and
Philosophy of Kashmir. Studies in Memory of H. N. Chakravarty edited by
Bettina Sharada Biáumer and Hamsa Stainton. Indira National Centre for the
Arts. New Delhi.
Dvivedi, V. 1994: Uttaraṣaṭkam, Vārāṇasī.
Dvivedi V.V. 1983: Luptāgamasaṅgraha (dvitiyo
bhāgaḥ)Yogatantragranthamālā vol. 10. Sampūrṇānanda Sanskrit University.
Dwivedi, R. C. and Navjivan Rastogi, Motilal Banarsidass, 1987, The
Tantraloka of Abhinavagupta: With the Commentary of Jayratha

Dyczkowski, M. S.G. 1987a: The Doctrine of Vibration, SUNY, Albany

(reprint, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1989).
Dyczkowski, M. S.G. 1987b: La Via dello Yogin: La Spiritualita’
dello
Śaivismo del Kashmir. In La Realizazione Spirituale dell” Uomo. Istituto

Propaganda Libraria, Milano (pp. 33-59)

Dyczkowski, M. S.G. 1988: The Canon of the Śaivāgama and the Kubjikā
Tantras of the Western Kaula Tradition, SUNY, Albany.

Dyczkowski, M. S.G. 1992a: The Stanzas on Vibration, SUNY, Albany.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Dyczkowski, M. S.G. 1992b: The Aphorisms of Śiva. The Śiva Sūtra with
Bhāskara’s commentary, the ārttika. State University of New York Press,
Albany.
Dyczkowski, M. S. G. 1990: Self-awareness, Own Being and Egoity. Ratna
Printing Works, Vārāṇasī. Reprinted in ‘Journey in the World of the Tantras’
Indica Books, Vārāṇasī 2004 pp. 29-49
Dyczkowski M. S. G. 2004: A Journey in the World of the Tantras. Indica,
Varnasi
Eck, Diana 1982: Banaras. City of Light. New York: Albert K. Knopf.
Egnor, Margaret Trawick, 1978: The Sacred Spell and Other Conceptions of
Life in Tamil Culture. PhD dissertation. University of Chicago
Eliade, Mircea 1974: Patterns in Comparative Religion. Clinton Mass.: New
American Library.
Epigraphia Carnatica, in 12 volumes; vol. 14, supplementary inscriptions in
Mysore and Mandya taluks; vol. 15 supplementary inscriptions in the Hasan
district.
Eschmann, Anncharlot, Kulke, Hermann and Tripathi, Gaya Charan 1986
(reprint): The Cult of Jagannath and the Regional Tradition of Orissa. South
Asia Interdisciplinary Regional Research Programme Orissa Project. Delhi:
Manohar.
Fabri, C. L. 1974: History of the Art of Orissa. Bombay.

Farquhar, JN. 1920: Outline of the Religious Literature of India. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Farrow, G. W. and Menon, I 1992: The Concealed Essence of the Hevajra

Tantra with the Commentary Yogaratmamālā. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Fedorova, Mariana 1990: Die Marmantheorie in der klassischen indischen

Medizin. Doctoral dissertation, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitát, Miinchen.
Feuerstein, Georg 1975: Texthook of Yoga. London: Ryder.
Finkelstein, Isreal and Silberman, Neil Asher 2001: The Bible Unearthed.
Archeology’s New Vision of Ancient Isreal. New York: The Free Press, a

Division of Simon and Schuster, Inc.

Finn, Louise M. 1986 : The Kulacīūḍāmaṇi Tantra and the Vāmakeśvara Tantra
with the Jayaratha Commentary. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
Flood, Gavin 1993: The Body and Cosmology in Kashmir Śaiviṣm. San
Francisco: Mellen Research University Press.

Flood, Gavin 2003: The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism. Edited by Gavin

Flood. Oxford: Blackwell.
Filliozat, P-S. 1991: Le Tantra de Svayaṁbhū vidyāpāda avec le commentaire
de Sadyojyotiḥ, edition and translation vol. 1: École Pratique des Hautes Études,
Paris; vol. 2: Hautes Études Orientales (27), Geneve.

Gambhīrānanda, Swami, 2006: Eight Upaniṣads with the commentrary of
SŚarkarācārya (two yolumes) Advaita Ashrama Kolkata First edition 1957
eighth impression

Ganguly, D.C 194: ‘Yādavaprakāśa on the ancient Geography of India’, Indian
Historical Quarterly 19.

Gellner, David N. and Quigley, Declan (eds.) 1995: Contested Hierarchies: A

Collaborative Ethnography of Caste in the Kathmandu Valley. Oxford:

TANTRĀLOKA

Clarendon Press. Ethnography of Caste in the Kathmandu Valley, Nepal.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Ghose, Rajeshwari 1996: The Lord of Ārūr. The Tyāgarāja Cult in Tamilnāḍu.
Motilal Banarsidass: New Delhi
Ghurye, G. S. 1995 (reprint): Indian Sadhus. Bombay: Popular Prakashan

Gimbutas, Marija 1991: The Language of the Goddess. San Francisco: Harper
Collins
Gnoli, R. 1956: Alcune tecniche yoga nelle scuole Śaiva, in RSO (31).
Gnoli, R. 1957: Śivadṛṣṭi by Somānanda. English translation of chapter one,

East and West (8) pp. 16-22.

Gnoli, R. 1959a: Vāc. il secondo capitolo della Śivadṛṣṭi di Somānanda, in RSO

(34), pp. 55-75.

Gnoli, R. 1959b: Vāc. Passi scelti and tradotti of Parātriṁśikāvivaraṇa, in RSO

(34-35), pp. 163-82.

Gnoli, R. 1960: The Pramāṇavārttikaṃ of Dharmakīrti. The first Chapter with

the Autocommentary,
Serie Orientale Rome (23), Rome. (only Sanskrit text)
Gnoli, R. 1962: Testi dello Śivaismo, Boringhieri, Turin.
Gnoli, R. 1965: Vāc. Passi scelti and tradotti of Parātriṁśikāvivaraṇa, in RSO
(40), pp. 215-45.
Gnoli, R. 1985: The Aesthetic Experience according to Abhinavagupta,

Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series

Studies, vol. 62 third Indian edition, Benares (first edition, Serie Orientale
Rome, Rome, 1956).

Gnoli, R. 1973: Gli Āgama Scivaiti nell'India settentrionale, in Indologica

Taurinenṣia (1), pp. 61-69).
Gnoli, R. 1976: Bhagavadgītā, il Canto del Beato, with the commentary by
Abhinavagupta, Italian
introduction and translation, UTET, Torino.
Gnoli, R. 1978: La Trentina della Suprema (Parātriṁśikālaghuvṛtti), second
edition, Boringhieri, Torino (first edition, 1965).

Gnoli, R. 1985: II commentario di Abhinavagupta alla Parātriṁśikā

(Parātriṁśikātattvavivaraṇam), translation in Italian and text, Serie Orientale
Rome (58), ISMEO, Rome.

Gnoli, R. 1989: Svabodhodayamañjarī. il Mazzo di Fiori del Sorgere della
nostra Conoscenza, Appendix to ‘Vijñānabhairava: La conoscenza del

Tremendo’ talian translation and notes by A. Sironi, Milan, pp. 113-136
Gnoli, R. 1990: Abhinavagupta, Essenza dei Tantra (Tantrasāra), 2 vol.
Boringhieri, Torino, third edition (first edition, 1960).

Gnoli, R. 1998: Abhinavagupta, Considerazioni sull'Assoluto. Commentary

breve alla Trentina della Dea Suprema, Luni Editrice, Milan.
Gnoli, R. - Orofino, G. 1994 Naāropā, ḷniziazione (Kālacakra), Biblioteca
Orientale (1), Adelphi, Milan.

Gnoli, R. - Torella, R. 1990: The Tantroccaya of Abhinavagupta in Indo Sino
Tibetica. Studi in onore di Luciano Petech, P. Daffina, Studi Orientali pubblicati
dal Dipartimento di Studi Orientali (9), Bardi Editore, Rome, pp. 153-89).
Gnoli R. 1999: Luce dei Tantra, Abhinavagupta Adelphi Edizioni, Milan

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Goodall, Dominic, 2013: Tantrābhidhānakośa vol 3, eds and Marion Rastelli
(Wien: Verlag der Osṣterreichischen Akadamie der Wissenschaften)

Goodall, Dominic and Isācson, Harunaga, 2016: Tantric Studies. Fruits ofa
Franco-German Project on Early Tantra. Collection Indologie 131. Early

Tantra Series 4. IFP 2016 (p. 5 ‘On the Shared ‘Ritual Syntax of the Early
Tantric Traditionsʼ by Dominic Goodall and Harunaga Isācson).
Gollner, Michael A. 2021: The Descent of Scripture. A History of the

Kāmikāgama. PhD Thesis for the School of Religious Studies McGill

University, Montreal.
Gombrich, Richard 1988: Theravada Buddhism: A Social History from Ancient
Benares to Modern Colombo. London and New York: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Gonda, J. 1954: Aspects of Early Vaiṣṇavism. Utrecht. 1965: Change and
Continuity in Indian Religions. Disputationes Rheno-Trajectinae 9. The Hauge:
Mouton & Co. 1970: Notes on the Names of Gods in Ancient India. London.
Gonda, J. 1962: Les religions de l'Inde, vol. I: Vedisme et Hindousme ancien,
Paris.
Gonda, J. 1963a: The Indian mantra, in Oriens (16), pp. 244-97.

Gonda, J. 1963b: The Vision of the Vedic Poets, The Hague.

Gonda, J. 1965: Les religions de l'lInde, vol. 2, Paris.
Gonda, J. 1967: The Meaning of the Sanskrit Term Dhāman, Amsterdam
Akademy, Amsterdam.
Gonda, J. 1970: Viṣṇuism and Śaivism, a comparison, London.
Gonda, J. 1977: Medieval Religious Literature in Sanskrit, vol. ḹ, fasc. 1, di A

History of Indian Literature, J. Gonda, Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden.

Goodall, D. 1998: Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha's Commentary on the Kiraṇatantra, vol.
I, capp. 1-6, Publications du departement d'indologie (86, 1).
Goodall, Dominic 1998: Bhaṭṭarāmakaṇṭharacitā kiraṇavṛttiḥ. Bhaṭṭa
Rāmakaṇṭha’s Commentary on the Kiraṇatantra. Volume 1: chapters 1-6
critical edition and annotated translation. Pondicherry: Publications du
Département dʼIndologie –- 86.1. Institut Français de Pondichéry, École Français
dʼExtrēme-Orient.

Gopal, Lallanji 1989 (2nd revised edition): The Economic Life of Northern

India, c. AD. 700-1200. Delhi: Motilal Banarasidass.
Goswami, Shyam Sundar 1980: Laya Yoga. An Adyanced Method of
Concentration. London. Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Goudriaan, Teun 1978: Māyā Divine and Human. Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi,
1985: The Vīṇāśikhātantra: A Śaiva Tantra of the Left Current. Edition
introduction and translation. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
Goudriaan T. - Gupta, S. 1981: Hindu Tantric and Śākta Literature, vol. ḹ, fasc.

2 of A History of Indian Literature, J. Gonda, Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden.

Goudriaan, T. 1992: Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism, Studies in Honor
of Andre Padoux, SUNY, Albany.

Gros, F. 1984: Tevāram. Hymnes Sivaites du Pays Tamoul, T.V. Gopal lyer and
François Gros, editors. Pondicherry: Institut Français d’Indologie.
Gross, Robert Lewis 1992: The Sadhus of India. A Study of Hindu Asceticism.
Delhi: Rawat Publications
Gupta, Beni 1979: Magical Beliefs and Superstitions. Delhi: Sundeep Prakashan

TANTRĀLOKA

Gupta, S. 1972: Lakṣmītantra. A Pāñcarātra Text, translation and notes,
Orientalia Rheno-Traiectina (15), E.J. Brill, Leiden.

Gupta, S. and Goudriaan, T. 1979, Hindu Tantriṣm, Leiden.
Halbfass, Wilhelm 1988: India and Europe. An Essay in Understanding.
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Handiqui, K. K. 1949: Yaśastilaka and Indian Culture. Sholapur: Jain Saṁskṛti

Saṁrakṣaka Sangh.

Hawley, John S. and Wulff, Donna Marie (editors) 1986: The Divine Conṣort:

Rādhā and the Goddesses of India. Berkeley: Berkeley Religious Studies Series.
Hanneder, Jirgen 1998: Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation. An Edition
and Annotated Translation of Mālinīvijayaślokavārtika 1, 1-399. Egbert Forsten,
Groningen.
Hanneder, Jūrgen 2005: The Mokṣopāya, Yogavāṣiṣṭha and Related Texts edited
by Jurgen Hanneder. Indologica Halensis. Shaker Verlag, Āchen.
Hatley, Shaman and Csaba Kiss, The Brahmayamala Tantra or Picumata (set of
two volumes), Institut Français de Pondichéry, École Français d’Extrēme-

Orient, 2018

Hazra, R. C. 1975: Studies in the Purāṇic Records on Hindu Rites and Cuṣtoms.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1958: Studies in the Upapurāṇas Vol. 1: Śaiva and
Vaiṣṇava Upapurāṇas. Calcutta: Calcutta Sanskrit College Research Series, no.
2. 1963: Studies in the Upapurāṇas Nol. 2: Śākta and Non-sectarian

Upapurāṇas. Calcutta: Calcutta Sanskrit College Research Series, no. 22.
Hedayetullah, Muhammad 1977: Kabir: The Apostle of Hindu-Muslim Unity.

Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

Heilijgers-Seelen, D. M 1994: The System of Five Cakras in Kubjīkāmatatantra

14-16. Groningen: Egbert Forsten.

Hillebrandt, Alfred 1980: Vedic Mythology. Translated from the original
German by Sreeramula Rajewara Sarma in two volumes. Delhi: Motilal
Banarasidass.
Hopkins, E. W. 1978: The Great Epic of India. Calcutta: Reprint by Punthi
Pustak.

Houben, Jan E. M. 1992, Bhartṛhari's samaya and Helārāja's saṁketa, in JI, XX,

pp. 219-42.
Houben, Jan E. M. ed. 1996. Ideology and Status of Sanskrit: Contributions to
the History of the Sanskrit Language. Brill’s Indological Library, vol. 13.
Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Hughes, John 1997: Self-realization in Kashmiri Shaivism. The Oral Teachings

of Śwami Lakṣhmanjoo. Indian edition, Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications

Hume, Robert Ernest 1930: The Thirteen Principle Upaniṣads. Second edition.
Oxford University Press, New York.
Hultzsch, E. 1972: South Indian Inscriptions. Archeological Survey of India n.
s. 3 1890; reprint, Vārāṇasī, Delhi: Indological Book House.
Iyengar, B. K. S. 1981: Light on Prāṇāyāma, Delhi: Harper Collins Publishers
India.
Ingalls, D. 1962: Words for Beauty. Indological Studies in Honour of W.
Norman Brown, New Haven.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Iyer, K. A. Subramania, 1977: The V ākyapadḹa of Bhartṛhari. English
translation with exegetical notes. Khaṇḍa 2, 1977; Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi

chapter 3, pt. 2,1974.
James, William 1919: The Varieties of Religion Experience,
Jhā, Gaṅgānātha 1942: Pūrva-Mimāṅsā and its Sources, Banaras Hindu
University second edition 1964.
Jhā, Gaṅgānātha 1983: Mīmāṁsāślokavārttika, translation, Delhi.
Jain, Sāgaramala 1997: Jainadharma aur Tantrik Sādhanā. Vārāṇasī:
Pārśvanātha Vidyāpītha.
Jayakar, Pupul 1989: The Earth Mother. Delhi: Penguin Books.
Jhavery, M. B. 1944: Comparative and Critical Study of Mantraśāstra, being a
critical study of Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa. Ahmedabad.

Johari, Harish 1987: Chakras. Energy Centres of Transformation. Vermont:

Inner Traditions of India
Johnson, Buffie 1994: Lady of the Beasts. The Goddess and her Sacred
Animals. Rochester, Vermont: Inner Traditions International.
Kane, P.V 1974 (second edition): History of Dharmaśāstra. Bhandarkar

Oriental Institute, Poona,

Karambelkar, V. W. 1959: The Atharvavedic Civilization. Its place in IndoĀÃryan Culture. Poona: University of Nagpur.
Karpatri, Swami 2009: The Lirga and the Great Goddess (translated from
Hindi), Indica Books, Vārāṇasī.

Kauḷ, Jayalal 1973: Lal Ded. New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi.
Kavirāj, Gopinātha 1966: Aspects of Indian Thought. Burdwan: The University

of Burdwan.

Kavirāj, Gopinātha 1972: Tāntrika Sāhitya. Hindi Samiti Granthamālā 200.

Lucknow: Bhārgava Bhūṣaṇa Press.
Keith, Arthur Berridale 1971 (Indian reprint): Rigveda Brahmanas: The
Aitareya and Kauṣītaki Brāhmaṇas of the Rigveda. Translated from the original
Sansṣkrit. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Khiste, Baṭtukanātha Śāstrī 1993: Bhāskararāya Bhāratī Dīkṣitā Vyaktitva evaṁ
Kṛtitva. Yogatantragranthamālā no. 21. Vārāṇasī: Saṁpūrṇānanda Sanskrit
University.
Kinsley, David 1989: The Goddess’s Mirror. Visions of the Divine from East
and West. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Kinsley, David 1997: Tantric Viṣions of the Divine Feminine. The Ten
Mahāvidyās. London: University of California Press.
Kiss, Caba 2015: The Brahmayāmalatantra or Picumata. Volume 2. The
religious observances and sexual rituals of the Tantric Practitioner: chapters 3,
21 and 45. A critical edition and annotated translation. Institut Français de
Pondichéry et. al.
Keith, A.B. 1909: The Aitareya Āraṇyaka, Oxford (reprint Eastern Book
Linkers, Delhi, 1995).

Kosambi, Damodar Dharmanand (reprint) 1992: Myth and Reality. Bombay:
Popular Prakashan.
Kramrisch, Stella 1976 (reprint): The Hindu Temple, 2 vols. Delhi: Motilal

Banarṣidass.

TANTRĀLOKA

Kramriṣch, Stella 1981: The Presence of Śiva. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Kripal and McDermott 2005: Encountering Kālī, in the Margins, at the Centre,
in the West. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Kuanponpol, Priyawat 1991: Pratibhā: The concept of intuition in the
philosophy of Abhinavagupta. Thesis (order number 9211708) Harvard
University.
Kuiper, F. B. J. 1948: Proto-Munda Words in Sanskrit. Amsterdam.
Kuiper, F. B. J. 1979: Varuṇa and Vidūṣaka. On the Origin of Sanskrit Drama.
Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Kumar, Pushpendra 1974: Śakti Cult in Ancient India. Benares: Bharatiya
Publishing House.
Kunjunni Raja K. 1971: New Catalogus Catalogorum. An Alphabetical Register
of Sanskrit and Allied Works. Volume six. Madras: University of Madras.
Kunjunni Raja, K. 1963: Indian Theories of Meaning, Adyar.
Lakṣmanjoo, Swami (Raina, Laksmana)1995: Śrīrantrāloka Īshvara Ashram
Trust, Ishbar (Nishat), Śrīnagar (in Hindi)

Laksmanjoo, Swami 2002: Vijñāna Bhairava. The Practice of Centring
Awareness. Commentary by Swami Laksman Joo. Introduction and translation
of the verses in bold face by Bettina Báumer. Delhi: Indica Books.
Laksmanjoo, Swami 2003: Kashmiri Shaivism. The Secret Supreme. USA
Universal Shaiva Fellowship. Fourth printing revised.
Lakṣmanjoo, Swami 2006: Trika Śāstra Rahasya Prakriyā (in Hindi) (reprint)
Lakṣmanjoo, Swami 2010: Kramanayapradīpikā (Hindi) Ishwar Ashram Trust,
Iṣhbar (Nishat) Srinagar, Kashmir First edition 1958.
Lakṣmanjoo, Swami 2010: Abhinavagupta’s Paramārthasāra (The Essence of
the Highest Reality) revealed by Swami Laksmanjoo. Edited by John Hughes.
USA Universal Shaiva Fellowship.
Lal, Shyam Kishore 1980: Female Divinities in Hindu Mythology and Ritual.
Publications of the Centre of Advanced Study in Sanskrit. Class B no. 7. Pune:
University of Poona.
Lamotte, E. 1962: L'Enseignement de Vimalakīrti, Louvain.
Larson, Gerald James and Ram Shankar Bhattacharya: Encyclopedia of Indian
Philosophies. Vol. 12. Yoga: India’s Philosophy of Meditation.
Lath, Mukunda 1988: Dattilam. Kalāmūlaśāstra series 2. Delhi: Indira Gandhi
National Centre for the Arts and Motilal Banarsidass.
Lawrence, David D. P. 2005: ‘Remarks on Abhinavagupta’s use of the analogy

of reflection’ in the Journal of Indian Philosophy 33: 583-599.

Lawrence, W. R. 1895: The Valley of Kashmir, London.
Layle, P. G. 1973: Studies in the Devī Bhāgavata. Bombay: Popular Prakashan.
Leslie, Julia (editor) 1992: Roles and Rituals for Hindu Women. Delhi: Motilal

Banarasidass.
Lévi, Sylvain 1990 (reprint): Le Népal. Étude Historique d’un Royaume
Hindou. In three volumes. Delhi: Asian Educational Services.
Levy, Robert I. 1992: Meṣocosm: Hinduism and the Organization of a
Traditional Newar City in Nepal. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Levi, S. 1966: The doctrine du sacrifice dans les Brahmanas, second edition,

PUF, Paris.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Locke, John K. 1980: Karuṉamaya. The Cult of Avalokiteṣvara –
Matsyendranath in the Valley of Nepal. Kathmandu: Sahayogi Prakashan for the

Research Centre for Nepal and Asian Studies, Tribhuvan University.

Lorenzen, David N. 1972: The Kāpālikas and Kālamukhas: Two Lost Śaivite
Sects. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Macdonald, A. 1962: Le maṇḍala du Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa, Paris.
Macdonell, A. A. 1927: A Sanskrit Grammar
for Students. London: Oxford
University Press.
Madan, T. M. (editor) 1982: Way of Life. King, Householder, Renouncer.

Essays in honour of Louis Dumont. Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
Mahalingam, T. V. 1969: Kāñcipuram in Early South Indian History. Bombay:
Asia Publishing House.
Majumdar, R. C. 1951-1960: The History and Culture of the Indian People.
Bombay: Bhāratīya Vidyā Bhavan.
Malamoud, Charles 1977: Le Svādhyāya. Récitation personelle du Veda.
Taittirīya Āraṇyaka, Livre 2. Publications de lʼinstitut de civilisation indienne
42. Paris: Institut de civilisation indienne.
Malamoud, Charles 1998: ‘Cooking the World Ritual and Thought in Ancient

India.” Translated by David White, Oxford University Press, Delhi

Malcom, John 1970 (reprint): A Memoir of Central India Including Malwa and
Adjoining Provinces with the History and Copious Illustrations of the Past and

Present Conditions of that Country. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

Mallmann, Marie-Thérēse de, 1963: Les ensignements iconographiques de
1’Agnipurāṇa. Annales du Musée Guimet, bibliothéque d’études, tome 67. Paris.

1975: Introduction ā lʼiconographie du Tantriṣme bouddhique. Bibliothéque du

Centre de Recherches sur I' Asie Centrale et la Haute Asie, vol. 1. Paris.
Mallinson, James and Singleton, Mark 2017: Roots of Yoga. Translated and
edited with an introduction. Penguin Classics. Penguin Random House UK
Mani, Vettam reprint1984: Purāṇic Encyclopedia. Motilal Banarasidass. Delhi.
Mazzarino, V. 1982: Ānandavardhana, Luce della Risonanza (Dhvanyāloka),
Einaudi, Torino.

Meister, Michael W. 1984: Discourses on Siva: Proceedings ofa Symposium on
the Nature of Religious Imagery. Philadephia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Meister, Michael W. and M.A. Dhaky (editors) 1988-91: Encyclopedia of
Indian Architecture. 4 vols. in 8 parts. Princeton and Delhi: Princeton
University Press and the American Institute of Indian Studies.

Meyer, Johann, Jakob 1971 (reprint): Sexual Life in Ancient India. Delhi:

Motilal Banarṣidass.
Michael, R. Blake 1992: The Origins of Vīraśaiva Sects. A Typological
Analysis of Ritual and Associational Patterns in the Śūnyasaṁpādane. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass.
Michell, George 1993: Temple Towns of Tamil Nadu. Mumbai: Mārga
Publications.
Mishra, Paramhaṁsa 1992: Tantrālokaḥ śrīmadācāryajayarathakṛtayā ʻviveka’
vyākhyayā ḍā Paramahaṁsamiśrakṛtena ‘nīrakṣīraviveka’ -hindībhāṣyeṇa
yogatantragrantha mala (17) Saṁpūrṇānandaviśvavidyālaya Vārāṇasī.
Mishra, Ram Nath 1981: Yakṣha Cult and Iconography. Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal.

TANTRĀLOKA

Miśra, Umeśa 1967: Descriptive Catalogue of Śanskrit Manuscripts in the
Gaṅganātha Jhā Research Institute, Allahabad. Volume I parts 1 and 2.
Allahabad: Gaṅganātha Jhā Research Institute.

Monier-Williams 1996 (reprint): Sanskrit-Eṇglish Dictionary. Vārāṇasī: Indica

Books.
Moraes, G. M. 1932: The Kādamba Kula. A History of Ancient and Medieval
Karṇataka. Bombay.
Montelle, Clemency 2011: Chasing Shadows. Mathematics, Astronomy, and the
early History of Eclipse Reckoning. The John Hopkins University Press.
Baltimore. 2011
Muller-Ortega, P. 1989: The Triadic Heart of Śiva. Ṅew York. State University
of New York Press.
Murthy, C. Suryanarayana 1975: Śrīlalitāsahasranāmam with introduction and
commentary. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.
Mausalgaonkar, Gajānana Śāstrī 1963: Vedāntaparibhāṣā viṣayapariccheda.
Vārāṇasī: Chowkhamba.
N. 1969: The Gospel of Ramakriṣhna. Translated by Swami Nikhilananda. New
York: Ramakriṣhna-Vivekananda Center.
Nadou, L. 1968 : Les Buddhistes Kashmiriens au Moyen Āge. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.
Nagaswamy, R. 1982: Tantric Cults of South India. Delhi: Agam Kal Prakashan

Nandi, Ramendra Nath 1973: Religious Institutions and Cults in the Deccan (c.

AD. 600- AD. 1000). Motilal Banarsidass. Delhi
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Śwami 2005: Śiva Tattva. Ṅew Delhi: Gauḍīya Vedānta
Publications.
Nemec, John William (undated): The Cult of Śiddhalakṣmī in the

Tridaśaḍāmaratantra. Theṣis for an M. Phil. in Classical Indian Religions.
Oxford: Hertford College.

Nepali, Gopal Singh 1965: The Newars. An Ethno-sociological Study ofa
Himalayan Community. Kathmandu: Himalayan Booksellers.
Niyogi, Puṣpā 1980: Buddhism in Ancient Bengal. Calcutta: Jijñāsā.
Nunes, Judilia 1979: The Monuments in Old Goa. Delhi: Agam Kala Prakashan.
Odin, Jaishree Kak 1999: To the Other Shore. Lalla’s Life and Poetry. New
Delhi: Vitastā.
O°Flaherty, Wendy Doniger 1973: Hindu Myths. London: Harmondsworth,
1981: Śiva the Erotic Ascetic. New York: Oxford University Press.
O°Flaherty, Wendy Doniger 1976: The Origins of Evil in Hindu Mythology.

Berkeley: The University of California Press.

O'Flaherty, Wendy Doniger 1980 (a): Sexual Metaphors and Animal Symbols in
Indian Mythology. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
O’Flaherty, Wendy Doniger 1980 (b): Women, Androgynes, and other Mythical
Beasts. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
O°Flaherty, Wendy Doniger 1984: Dreams Illusions and Other Realities.
Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.

O'Flaherty, Wendy Doniger 1985: Tales of Sex and Violence: Folklore,

Sacrifice and Danger in the Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa. Chicago and London:

University of Chicago Press.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ojha, Gaurishankar Hirachand 1971: bhāratīya prācīna lipimālā. The
Paleaography of India. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Olivelle, P. 1993: The Āśrama System: The History and Hermeneutics of a
Religious Institution. New York: Oxford University Press. 1997 (Indian
edition): Rules and Regulations of Brahmanical Asceticism.
Olivelle, P. 2005: The Yatidharmasamuccaya of Yādava Prakāśa. Edition and
translation. Deḷhi: Sri Satguru Publications.
Orofino, G. 1994: Sekoddeśa. A critical edition of the tibetan translation, with
an appendix by R. Gnoli, Serie Orientale Rome (72), ISMEO, Rome.
Padoux, A. 1978: Contributions a l'etude du mantraśāstra. I. the selection des
mentra (mantroddhara), in Bulletin de YÉcole Francaise d'Extreme-Orient (65),
pp. 65-85.
Padoux, a. 1980: Contributions a l'etude du mantraśāstra. I. nyāsa: l'īmposition
rituelle des mantra, in Bulletin de 1'Ecole Francaise d'Extreme-Orient (67), pp.

59-102.

Padoux, a. 1987a: Contributions a l'etude du mantraśāstra. I. Le japa, in
Bulletin de I'École Francaise d'Extreme-Orient (76), 117-64.
Padoux, A. 1987b: Un rituel hindou du rosaire (Jayākhyasaṁhitā, Chapitre 14),
in Journal Asiatique (275) pp. 115-29.
Padoux, André 1990: Vāc: The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras.
English translation by Jacques Gontier. SUNY Series in the Shaiva Traditions of
Kashmir. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Padoux, A. 1991: Mantras - What Are They? in Alper, 1991, pp. 295-318.
Padoux, André 1994: Le Caur
de la Yoginī. Yoginīhrdaya avec le commantaire
Dīpikā d’Amṛtānanda. Texte sanskrit traduit et annoté. Paris: Collēge de
France. Publications de linstitut de Civilisation Indienne.
The Princess of Wales Sarasvati Bhavana Texts (54), Vārāṇasī.
Pandey, K. C. 1963a (Second revised edition): Abhinavagupta. An Historical
and Philosophical Study. Vārāṇasī: Chowkhambha.
Pandey, K.C. 1963b: Comparative Aesthetics, 2 vol. Vārāṇasī (first edition,

1950 and 1956).

Pandey, K.C 1986: An Outline of the the History ofŚaiva Philosophy. Delhi:

Motilal Banarsidass.

Pandey, Rajbali 1969: Hindu Saṃskāras. Socio-religious Study of the Hindu

Sacraments. Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi

Panikkar, Shivaji K. 1997: Saptamātṛkā Worship and Sculptures. Delhi: D. K.
Printworld (P) Ltd.

Parry, Jonathan P. 1994: Death in Banaras. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Pathak, V. S. 1980: History of Śaiva Cults in Northern India from Inscriptions
(700 AD to 1200 AD). Allahabad: Abhinash Prakashan

Pal, Pratapaditya 1974: Buddhiṣṭ
Art in Licchavi Nepal. Bombay: Marg
Publications.
Pal, Pratapaditya 1981: Hindu Religion and Iconology according to the
Tantrasāra. Los Angeles: Vichitra Press.

Pelissero, Alberto 1991: Techniche Indiane di Divinazione (Śivasvarodaya).

Torino: Promolibri.

TANTRĀLOKA

Pelliot, Paul 1904: Deux Itinéraires de China en Inde." BEFEO 4, pp. 131-413
Petech, Luciano 1958: Medieval History of Nepal (c. 750-1480). Rome: Serie
Orientale Roma vol. X. Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
Pillai, Suranad Kunjan 1957: Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the
University Manuscripts Library Trivandrum. Vol. 1 (A to Na). Trivandrum
Sanskrit Series no. 186. Trivandrum: University of Kerala.
Pillai, K. Raghavan 1965: Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the
University Manuscripts Library Trivandrum. Vol. 2 (Ta to Ma). Trivandrum
Sanskrit Series no. 215. Trivandrum: University of Kerala.
Pintchman, Tracy 1997: The Rise of the Goddess in the Hindu Tradition. Delhi:
Sri Satguru Publications.
Pingree D. 1964-5: ‘Representations of the Planets in Indian Astrologyʼ Indo
Iranian Journal 8.
Pingree D. 1978: The Yavanajātaka of Sphujidhvaja Edited, translated and
commentated Harvard Oriental Series 48 Harvard University Press,
Massachusetts and London.
Quigley, Declan. 1993. The Interpretation of Caste. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli and Moore, Charles A. 1957: ‘A Source Book in
Indian Philosophy'. Edited by Princeton University Press, Princeton
Raghavan, V. 1975: The Number of Rasas, third edition, Adyar, Madras.
Raghavacarya, E. V. V. and Padhye, D. G. 1961: Minor Works of Kṣemendra.
Hyderabad: Osmania University.
Rai, R. K. 1975: Encyclopedia of Yoga Chaukambha Orientalia, Vārāṇasī

Raja, K. Kuṇjunni 1963: Indian Theories of Meaning, the Adyar Library and
Research Centre, Madras.

Rajagopalan, S. 1987: Old Goa. Delhi: The Director General, Archeological
Survey of India.
Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa (Swami Lakṣmanjoo) 1958: SŚrīkramanayapradīpikā (in
Hindi). Kashmir: Guptagaṁgā.
Rangarajan, L. N. 1987: The Arthashastra. Edited, Rearranged, Translated and
Introduced. London: Penguin Books.
Rao, T. A. Gopinatha 1971: Elements of Hindu Iconography. In two yolumes of
two parts each. Indological Book House. Vārāṇasī.
Rastogi, Navjivan 1979: The Krama Tantricism of Kashmir. Historical and
General Sources. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Rastogi, N. 1987: Introduction to the Tantrāloka. A Study in Structure, Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi.
Rawson, Philip 1973: The Art of Tantra. Thames and Hudson, London.
Regmi, Dilli Raman 1965: Medieval Nepal. Part 1 (of4 parts). Calcutta: Firma
K. L. Mukhopadhyay. 1966: Medieval Nepal. Parts 2 and 3. Calcutta: Firma K.
L. Mukhopadhyay; part 4 Patna: the author.

Renou, L. - Filliozat, J. et al. 1947, 1953: L'īnde classique, vol. 1: Paris; vol. 2:

Hanoi.
Rigopoulos, Antonio 2000: Dattātreya the Immortal Guru, Yogin and Avatāra.
Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications
Rocher, Ludo 1986: The Purāṇas, A History of Indian Literature 2, 3.
Weisbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ros, Frank 1995: The Lost Secrets of Ayurvedic Acupuncture. Delhi: Motilal
Banarṣidass
Sachau, Edward C. 1910) 1996 (reprint): Alberuni’s India. Volumes 1 and 2
(bound in one). Delhi: Low Price Publications

Ruegg, D. S. 1959: Contributions a l'histoire de the philosophie linguistique
indienne, Publications de l'Institut de Civilisation Indienne, Paris.

Ruegg, D. S. 1984: Problems in the transmission of Vajrayāna Buddhism in the
western Himalaya about the year 1000, in Acta Indologica, VI.
Śarmā, Buddhisāgara 1969: Nepālarājakīyavīrapustakālayasthapustakānāī
bṛhatsūcīpatram. yasyāyāṁ tantraviṣayakaḥ caturtho bhāgaḥ.
Śāstrī, H. K 1974: South Indian Images of Gods and Goddesses. Delhi.
Śāstrī, Hara Prasāda and Bendall, C 1905 (vol. 1) and 1916 (vol. 2): Notices of
Sanskrit Manuscripts (extra number): A Catalogue of Palmleaf
and Selected
Paper Manuṣcripts belonging to the Darbar Library, Nepal. Calcutta
Śāstrī, S. Subrahmaṇya 1976 1934): Varivasyārahasya and its commentary
prakāśa by Bhāskararāya Makhin. Edited with English translation. Adyar: The
Adyar Library and Research Centre.
Śa. rī, Sunderlal 1960: Yaśastilakacampū by Somadeva, translation into Hindi.

Sachau, E.C. 1983: Alberuni's India, Low Price Publications, New Delhi (first
edition, London, 1910).

Saletore, R. N. 1981: Indian Witchcraft. A Study in Indian Occultism. New
Delhi: Abhinava Publications.
Saraswati, Baidyanath and Sinha, Surajit 1978: Ascetics of Kashi. Vārāṇasī: N.
K. Bose Memorial Foundation.
Sarkar, Jadunatha (no date): A History of Dasnami Nag Sanyasis. Allahabad: Sri
Panchayati Akhara Mahanirvani.
Sanderson, A. 1985: Purity and power among the Brahmans of Kashmir, in M.
Carriters, S. Collins, S.
Lukes, The Category of the Person, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
Mass. pp. 190-216.
Sanderson, A. 1985: Review of Mataṇgaparameśvarāgama (Kriyāpāda,
Yogapāda et Caryāpāda), avec le commentaire de Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha. Bulletin
of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, vol. 48,

No. 3 1985), 564-568.

Sanderson, A. 1986: Maṇḍala and Āgamic Identity in the Trika of Kashmir, in
Mantras et Diagrammes
rituels dans l'Hinduisme, Editions du CNRS, Paris, pp. 169-214.

Sanderson, A. 1988: Śaiviṣm and the Tantric Traditions, in The World's

Religions, Sutherland, S. er al. London, pp. 660-704.

Sanderson, A. 1990: The Visualisation of the Deities of the Trika, in L'image
divine. Culte et meditation
dans I'Hindouisme, A. Padoux, Paris, pp. 31-88.

Sanderson, A. 1992: The Doctrine of the Malinivijayottaratantra, in Goudriaan,

1992, pp. 281-312.

Sanderson, A. 1994: Vajrayāna: Origin and Function, in Buddhism into the
Year 2000, Dhammakaya Foundation, Bangkok, pp. 87-102.
Sanderson, A. 2003: The Earliest Surviving Śaiva Guides to Ritual: The
Unpublished Paddhatis of Brahmaśambhu and Bhojadeva and the propagation

TANTRĀLOKA

of a Standardiīzed Saiddhāntika System. Heidelbergh handout p. 2-3 Round

Table on South Asian Rituals 27"-29" November 2003 Internationales

Wissenschaftsforum Heidelburg.
Sanderson 2006a: The Lākulas: New evidence of a system intermediate between

Pāñcārthika Pāśupatism and Āgamic Śaivism. Ramalinga Reddy Memorial
Lectures
Sanderson, A. 2006b: The Date of Sadyojyotis and Bṛhaspati. Cracow

Indological Studies vol. VIII, pp.

Sanderson A. 2007b: Atharvavedins in Tantric territory. The Áṇgirasakalpa
texts of the Oriya Paippalādins and their connection with the Trika and
Kālīkula. With critical editions of the Parājapavidhi, the Parāmantravidhi, and

the Bhadrakālīmantravidhiprakaraṇa

Sanderson A. 2007c: Swami Lakshman Joo and His place in the Kashmirian

Śaiva tradition. In Samvidullāsaḥ, edited by Bettina Biumer and Sarla Kumar,

New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, pp. 93-126
Sanderson, A. 2009 Hinduism of Kashmir

Schrader, F.O. 1916: Īntroḍuction to the Pāñcarātra and the

Ahirbudhnyasaṁhitā, the Adyar Library and Research Centre, Madras.
Schoterman, J. A. 1982. The Satsāhasra Saṁhitā, chapters 1-5, ed., transl. and
annotated, Leiden. also published as Orientalia Rheno-Traiectina 2
Schoterman, J. A. 1980: The Yonitantra. Delhi. Manohar Publications.

Schwartzberg, Joseph E. 1978: A Historical Atlas of South Asia. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.

Sengupta, J.C. 1965: West Dinajpur, Calcutta: State Editor West Bengal District
Gazetters.
SenSharma, Debabrata 2007: Paramārthasāra of Abhinavagupta with the
commentary of Yogarāja Essence of the Supreme Truthy translation by Deba
Brata SenŚharma, Muktabodha Indological Research Institute New Delhi, India
and Emeryville USA First Edition New Delhi 2007
Settar S. and Sontheimer, Gunther D. 1982: Memorial Stones. A Study of their
Origin, Significance and Variety. Manipal: Institute of Indian Art History,
Karṇatak University, Dharwad and South Asia Institute, University of
Heidelberg, Germany.
Shaha, Rishikesh 1997: Ancient and Medieval Nepal. Delhi: Manohar.
Sharma, B. N. K. 1986: The Brahmasūtras and their Principal Commentaries: a
critical exposition, 3 vol. New Delhi, (first edition, Bombay, 1971-1978).
Sharma, D. B. S. 1985: Prakṛtilīna in the Sāṅkhya-Yoga Systems and
Pralayākala in the Trika System of Kaśmīra, in JGJKSV (38-39), pp. 278-90.
Shringy, R. K. and Sharma, Premlatā, 1978: The Saṅgītaratnākara of
Śāraṅgadeva. Volume 1. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Shulman, David Dean 1980: Tamil Temple Myths. New Jersey: Princeton
University Press.
Silburn, L. 1958: Le Paramārthasāra d'Abhinavagupta, Paris: De Boccard.
Silburn, L. 1959: Le Vātulanāthasūtra, Paris: De Boccard.
Silburn, L. 1961: Le Vijñāna Bhairava, Paris: De Boccard.
Silburn, L. 1963: La Bhakti dans le Śivaisme du Kashmir, Parīs : De Boccard.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Silburn, Lilian 1968: Le Mahārthamañjarī de Maheśvarāṅanda avec des
extraits du Parimala. Traduction et Introduction. Paris: De Boccard.
Silburn, L. 1970: Hymnes de Abhinavagupta, Paris: De Boccard.

Silburn, L. 1975:

Hymnes aux Kālī, Le Roue des Énergies Divines, Paris.

Silburn, L. 1980: Sivasūtra et Vimarśinī
de Ksemaraja, Paris, Institut de
Civilisation Indiene
Silburn, L. 1983: the Kuṇḍalinī ou L'energie des profondeurs, Paris.
Silburn, L. 1988: Kuṇḍalinī. Energy of the Depths. Albany: State University of
New York.
Singh, J. 1977: Pratyabhijñāhṛdayam, second revised edition Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi (fourth edition, 1982; first edition, 1963).

Singh, J. 1979: Vijñānabhairava or Divine Consciousness, Motilal Banarsidass,

Delhi.

Singh, J. 1980: Spanda-kārikās. The Divine Creative Pulsation, Motilal
Banarṣidass, Delhi.
Singh, J. 1982: The Heart of Recognition. The Pratyabhijñahṛdayam by
Kṣemarāja. Sanskrit text with English translation and notes. Delhi: Motilal
Banarṣidass
Singh, J. 1988: Abhinavagupta Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa. The Secret of Tantric
Mysticism. English translation with notes and running exposition by Jaideva
Singh. Sanskrit text corrected, notes on technical points and charts dictated by
Swami Lakshmanjoo. Edited by Bettina Báumer. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Singh, Rana P. B. (editor) 1993: Banāras (Vārāṇasī) Cosmic Order, Sacred

City, Hindu Traditions. Festschrift to Prof. R. L. Singh. Vārāṇasī: Tara Book
Agency on behalf of Vārāṇasī Studies Foundation.
Singh, Rana P. B. and Singh, Pravin S. 2002: Banaras Region. A Spiritual and
Cultural Guide. New Delhi: Indica
Singh, Ravi Shankar 1999: Goddess in India: A study in the Geography of
Sacred Places. Doctoral dissertation submitted to the P. G. Department of
Geography, Faculty of Social Sciences. Chapra: Jai Prakash University.

Sircar, D. C. 1948: The Sākta Pītha, JASB (14), pp. 1-108.

Sircar, D. C. (editor) 1967: The Śakti Cult and Tārā. Calcutta: University of
Calcutta.

Sironi, A. 1987: the commentary of Kṣemarāja to stanza V, 88 of Svacchanda-

Tantra: the nature and the scope of dīkṣā, in RSO (61), pp. 89-113.
Sironi, A. 1989: Vijñānabhairava. the conoscenza of tremendo, translation and

commentary, introduction di R. Gnoli, Adelphi, Milan.

Sivaramamurti, C. 1992: The Chola Temples. Thañjāvūr,
Gaṅgaikoṇḍacholapuram and Dārāsuram. New Delhi: The Director General
Archeological Survey of India.
Slouber, Michael, 2016. Early Tantric Medicine: Snakebite, Mantras, and
Healing in the Garuda Tantras, Oxford University Press
Smith, H. D. 1975-1980: vol. 1: A descriptive Bibliography of the printed texts
of the Pāñcarātrāgama; vol. 2: An Annotated Index to Selected Topics,
Gaekwads Oriental Series (158-168), Baroda.

Snellgrove, D. L. 1959: The Hevajra Tantra, A Critical Study Part 1
Introduction and Translation. Part2, Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts, London
Oriental Series (6), London.

TANTRĀLOKA

Snellgrove, D. L. 1987: Indo-Tibetan Buddhism. Indian Buddhists & their
Tibetan Successors, 2 vol. Shambhala, Boston.

Snodgrass, Adrian 1988: The Matrix and Diamond World Maṇḍalasin Shingon

Buddhism. Śatapiṭaka Series Indo-Asian Literatures, volumes 354 and 355.
Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan
Somadeva, Vasudeva 2004: The Yoga of the Mālinīvijayottara
Sontheimer, Gūnther-Dietz 1989: Pastoral Deities in Western India. Translated
from the German by Anne Feldhaus. New York: Oxford University Press.
Speijer JS. 1988: Sanskrit Syntax, reprint Delhi: Motilal Banarasidass.
Śṛīnivāsan, K. R. 1972: Temples of South India. Delhi.
Śrīnivās Iyengar, P. T. 1994: Indian Thought (3-4), second edition, Allahabad
(first edition, 1911-1912).

Śrīvastava, Balram 1978: Iconography of Śakti. A study based on the
Śrītattvanidhi. Vārāṇasī: Chaukhambha Orientalia.
Staal, Frits and Cherumukku Vaidikan Somayajipad, M. Itti Ravi Nambudiri

1984: Agni, the Vedic Ritual of the Fire Altar, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass

Stein, M. A. (1892 and 1900) 1979 (reprint): Kalhaṇa’s Rājataraṅgiṇī or
Chronical of the Kings of Kaśmīr. Translated, with an introduction,
commentary, and appendices. Two volumes. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
(reprint).

Stein, M. A. (1899) 1977 (reprint): Memoir on Maps Illustrating the Ancient
Geography of Kaśmīr. Delhi: Indological Book Corporation (reprint).
Subramania lyer, K.A. 1965: Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari with the vṛtti cap. I,
translation ingl. Poona.
Subramania Iyer, K.A. 1969: Bhartṛhari, A Study of the Vākyapadīya in the
light of the Ancient
Commentaries, Deccan College, Poona.
Sukuḻ, Kuber Natha 1977: Vārāṇasī Vaibhava. Patna: Bihār Ṛāṣṭrabhāṣā
Pariṣada.

Sutherland, Gail Hinich 1991: The Diguises of the Demon. The Development of

the Yakṣa in Hinduism and Buddhism. Albany: State University of New York

Press.
Schrader, F. Otto 1973 (2nd edition): Introduction to the Pāñcarātra and the
Ahirbudhnya Saṁhitā. Madras: The Adyar Library and Research Centre.
Tagare, G. V. 1996: The Skanda Purāṇa. Ṭranslated and annotated. Part X.

Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

Tawney C. H. 1984 (reprint): The Ocean of Story (Kathāsaritsāgara), being C.
H. Tawneyʼs translation of Somadeva’s Kathāsaritsāgara (or Ocean of Streams

of Story). In ten volumes. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

Taylor, Kathleen 2001: Sir John Woodroffe, Tantra and Bengal. ‘An Indian Soul
in a European Body’? Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press.
Thapar, Romila 1979: Ancient Indian Social History Some Interpretations.

Delhi: Orient Longman Limited.

Thatte, D. G. 1988: Acupuncture Marma and other Asian Therapeutic

Techniques. Vārāṇasī: Chaukhambha Orientalia.
Theophile, Erich G. and Ranjitkar, Rohit K. 1994: Patukva Agache, Patukva
Tol, Patan. Historic Structure Report. Kathmandu: Kathmandu Valley

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Preservation Trust in collaboration with His Majesty’s Government, Department
of Archeology.
Thomsen, M. 1976: Kult und Ikonographie der 64 Yoginī. Berlin.
Tiwari, J. N. 1985: Goddess Cults in Ancient India (with special reference to the
first seven centuries AD). Delhi: Sundeep Prakashan.
Torella R. 1979a: Due capitoli of Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha, Śaivadarśana and
Pratyabhijñādarśana, in ṚSO (53), pp. 361-410.
Torella, R. 1979b: Vasugupta, Śivasūtra with the commentary di Kṣemarāja,
Ubaldini, Rome.
Torella, R. 1987: Examples of the Influence of Sanskrit Grammar on Indian
Philosophy, in East and West (37), pp. 151-64.

Torella, R. 1988: A Fragment of Utpaladeva's Īšvarapratyabhijñāvivṛti, East
and West (38), pp. 137-74.
Torella, R. 1991: Importanza di Utpaladeva, in Atti of quarto and quinto
convegno nazionale di studi sanscriti, O. Botto, A.ISS. Torino, pp. 101-106.
Torella, R. 1992: The Pratyabhijñā and the Logical-Epistemological School of
Buddhiṣm, in Goudriaan, 1992, pp. 327-45.
Torella, R. 1994a: On Vāmanadatta, īn N. Ramachandra Bhatt Felicitation
Volume, P.-S. Filliozat, C.P. Bhatta, S.P. Narang, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi,

pp. 481-98.
Torella, R. 1994: The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the author's
Vrtti, Serie Orientale Rome (71), ISMEO, Rome.

Torella, R. 1998: The kañcukas in the Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava Tantric Tradition:
Some Considerations between Theology and Grammar, in G. Oberhammer,
Studies in Hinduism Ī, Miscellanea to the Phenomenon of Tantras,
Osterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Wien, pp. 55-86.
Torella, R. 1999: The Word in Abhinavagupta's Bṛhadvimarśinī, in Actes du
Congres Les Sources et le Temps', Pondichery, pp. 325-44.
Tōrzsók, Judit 1999: The Doctrine of Magic Female Spirits: A critical edition of
selected chapters of the Siddhayogeśvarīmata(tantra) with annotated translation
and analysis. Doctoral dissertation. Oxford:
Tsuda, Sinichi 1978: The Saṁṅvarodaya Tantra, Selected Chapters. Tokyo: The
Hokuṣeido Press.
Tucci, G. 1930: Animadversiones Indicae, JASB, NS. (26) 125-60, reprinted in
Tucci, 1971, vol. I, pp.

195-238.

Tucci, G. 1936: Indo-Tibetica, Rome.

Tucci, G. 1949: Tibetan Painted Scrolls, Rome.

Tucci, G. 1968: Oriental Notes, 3: A peculiar Image from Gandhāra, in East
and West, XVII, pp. 289-92.
Tucci, G. 1971: Opera Minora, Studi Orientali pubblicati a cura della Scuola
Orientale (6), P. Daffina,

Universita di Rome, 2 vol. Rome.

Tucci, G. 1956-1958: Minor Buddhist Texts, Part I and 2, third edition Motilal
Banarṣidass, Delhi, 1986
(first edition, Serie Orientale Rome, 9, ISMEO).

Tucci, Giuseppe 1978: La Via dello Swat. Rome: Newton Compton.
Unni, N. P. 1987: Tantrapaddhati. Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan.

TANTRĀLOKA

Van Kooij 1972: Worship of the Goddess according to the Kālikāpurāṇa, part
1. Orientalia Rheno Traiectina, vol. 14. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Vajracharya, Dhanavajra 1973: licchavikālakā abhilekha (Licchavi Period

Inscriptions). Institute of Nepal and Asian Studies, Historical Collections Series,

no. 6. Kathmandu: Institute of Nepal and Asian Studies, Tribhuvan University.
Varadachari, V.: Catalogue descriptif des manuscripts. Descriptive Catalogue
of Manuscripts. 1986: vol. 1 with preface by N. R. Bhatt; 1987: vol. 2 with
preface by N. R. Bhatt; 1990: vol. 3. Publications de lInstitute Français
dʼIndologie no. 70. Pondicherry: Institute Français d’Indologie.
Vergati, Anne 1995: Gods, Men and Territory: Society and Culture in the
Kathmandu Valley. New Delhi: Manohar Centre de Sciences Humaines.
Vetter T. 1964: Erkenntnisprobleme bei Dharmakīrti, Osterreichische
Akademie der Wissenschaften, Wien.
Vijnananda, Swami 1977: The Srimad Devi Bhagawatam. Part 1 and 2. Delhi:
Oriental Reprint.
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, Satish Candra: The Nyāya Sūtras of Gotama translation revised
and edited by Nandalal Sinha. Motilal Banarasidass. Delhi 1981.
Viennot, O. 1964: Les Divinites fluviales Gaṅṁgā et Yamunā, PUF, Paris.
Vyas, S.P. 1989: Siddhitrayī of Rājānaka Utpaladeva, Kashi Sanskrit Series
(259), Vārāṇasī.

Vyāsa, Kalu Rāma 1981: A Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Maharaja
Mansingh Pustak Prakash Jodhpur (Hindi and Rajasthani Manuscripts) part 1.
Jodhpur: Maharaja Mansingh Puṣṭak Prakash.
Vyāsa, Kalu Rāma and Kṣīrasagar D. B 1986: A Catalogue of Manuscripts in
the Maharaja Mansingh Pustak Prakash Jodhpur (Sanskrit and Prakrit
Manuscripts) part 2. Jodhpur: Maharaja Mansigh Puṣṭak Prakash.
Vyāsa, Kedāranātha 1987: kāsīkhaṇḍokta paṅcakrośātmaka jyotirliṁga
kāśīmāhātmya evaṁ kāśī prācīn itihāsa. Vārāṇasī: Jyotiṣa Prakāśa Press.
Walton, H. G. (editor) 1911: District Gazetteers of the United Provinces ofAgra

and Oudhḥ XXXV. Allahabad.

Warner, A.K.: Indian Kāvya Literature. In six volumes: vol. 1 1989 (revised

edition), vol. 2 1990 (revised edition), vol. 3 1990 (revised edition), vol. 4 1983
(first edition), vol. 5 1988 (first edition), and vol. 6 1992 (first edition). Deḷhi:

Motilal Banarsidass.
Warner, Marina 1976: Alone of All Her Sex: The Myth and Cult of the Virgin
Mary. London: Weidfeld and Nicolson.
Watts, Alan W (editor) 1963: The Two Hands of God: The Myths of Polarity.
Patterns of Myth vol. 3. New York
White, David 1996: The Alchemical Body. Siddha Traditions in Medieval India.

Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

White D. 2009: The Sinister Yogi. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

White D. 2003: Kiss of the Yoginī. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Whitehead, Henry 1988 (reprint): The Village Gods of South India. Delhi: Asian
Educational Sevices.

Woodroffe, Sir John (alias Arthur Avalon) 1973 (reprint): Hymns to the

Goddess. Madras: Ganesh and Co.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Woodroffe, Sir John (alias Arthur Avalon), 1969 (reprint): Principles of Tantra.
The Tantratattva of Śrīyukta Śiva Candra Vidyārṇava Bhaṭṭācārya Mahodaya.

In two parts. Madras: Ganesh and Co.

Woodroffe, Sir John (alias Arthur Avalon), 1972 (reprint): Tantra of the Great
Liberation (Mahānirvāṇa Tantra). A translation from the Sanskrit with

introduction and commentary. New York: Dover Publications.

Woodroffe, Sir John (alias Arthur Avalon), 1980 (reprint): Introduction to

Tantra Śāstra. Madras: Ganesh and Co.

Woodroffe, Sir John (alias Arthur Avalon), 1981 (reprint): The World as Power.
Madras: Ganesh and Co.
Woodroffe, Sir John (alias Arthur Avalon), 1985 (reprint): The Garland of
Letters: Studies in Mantra Śāṣtra. Madras: Ganesh and Co.
Woodroffe, Sir John (alias Arthur Avalon),1988 (reprint), The
Śāradātilakatantram, English Translation
with notes and yantras, Madras: Ganesh and Co.

Woodroffe, Sir John (alias Arthur Avalon), 1997 (reprint): The Serpent Power.
Being the Satcakranirūpaṇa and Pādukāpañcaka. Madras: Ganesh and Co.

Wujastyk, Dominik 1998: The Roots of Ayurveda Delhi: Penguin Classics.
Yati, Tridaṇḍī Bhakti Prajan 1989: Śrīharibhaktiṣudhodaya and the
Śrīmarādabhaktiṣūtra. English translation. Madras: Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭha.
Zaehner, R. C. 1969: The Bhagavadgītā with a commentary based on the
original sources. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

The Numbering of the Verses of the Printed Edition of the Tantrāloka

The numbering of the verses in the printed edition is incorrect in a

number of places. Obviously, the correction of a numbering error that occurs in

one place in a given chapter entails changing all the numbering of the verses

that follow accordingly. Within the body of a chapter these errors are easily
understood to be simply the mistakes. In one case however, numbering is

problematic. Abhinava wished, it seems, to indicate that his work is a single
integral whole rather than a collection of chapters. In order to do this, he wrote a
concluding verse at the end of each chapter. The first line of these verses states
variously that chapter has ended. The second line is the first line of the
following chapter. Read together they do indeed make good sense. Even s0, the

second line is the first one of the following chapter. It would be consistent and

quite logical to begin the numbering of each chapter from that line, taking it to

be half a verse. This generally does not happen, but it does sometimes. In one
case that line is not numbered at all and so numbering begins from the following
verse. Otherwise, although a half line it is number 1 and the numbering
continues from there. By treating that as an error all the numbering of the entire

chapter would have to be corrected accordingly. This would entail a complete
change of numbering of the whole text which would inconvenience the reader
used to the numbering of the printed edition even more. Thus, I choose to leave

iṭ as it is trusting in the more pedantic readers’ indulgence.

Chart of the Verse Numbering of the Tantrāloka
Old Numbering as found in the Printed
Edition
Chapter 1

New Numbering

59 > 136

59 >136ab (half less)

225cd > 287ab

225ab > 287cd (half less)

1 >57

136cd > 223

286cd > end

Chapter 2

17cd > 37cd
Chapter 3
1>29

30cd > 120
121ab > 194cd
195cd > 260ab
260cd > 293

Chapter 4

1 > 57 (same)

136cd > 223 (same)

288ab > end (one and half
more)

17ab > 37ab (half less)
1 > 29 (same)

30ab > 121ab (half less)
121cd > 195ab (half extra)

195cd > 260ab (same)
260cd > 294ab (half extra)

Numbering Correct

Chapter 5

1 > 66ab
66cd > 116ab
116cd
> 157

1 > 66ab (same)
67ab > 116 (half extra)

> 159 (one extra)

THE NUMBERING OF THE VERSES OF THE TANTRĀLOKA
157 > 159ab

159ab > 160cd (one half extra)

1 >93
94cd > 251ab
Chapter 7
Numbering Correct
Chapter 8
1>102

1 > 93 (same)
95ab > 251cd (half extra)

Chapter 6

103cd > 452cd
Chapter 9
1 >313
314cd

Chapter 10
Correct Numbering
Chapter 11
1 > 50cd

51cd > 59cd

60cd > 117cd
118cd

Chapter 12
Correct Numbering
Chapter 13

1 > 102 (same)

104ab > 453ab (half extra)
1 > 313 (same)
314ab (half loss)

1 > 50cd (same)

52ab > 60ab (half extra)

60cd > 117cd (same)
118ab (half loss)

1 > 127cd

1 > 127cd (same)

133 > 206cd

133 > 206cd (same)

127ef-128
129cd-130ab
130cd-132

208cd > 361

Chapter 14
Correct Numbering
Chapter 15
1 > 346cd

347abc > 377
377(+2.3and 4) > 613
Chapter 16
1 > 203cd
204cd > 311cd
Chapter 17
Correct Numbering
Chapter 18
Correct Numbering

Chapter 19
1 > 36
37cd > 55cd
56cd >

130-131ef

207cd - 208cd
208cd > 361 (same)

1 > 346cd (same)

347cd > 378ab (half extra)
378cd > 616 (three extra)
1 > 203cd (same)
204ab > 311ab (half loss)

1 > 36
37ab > 55ab

55cd (one loss)

TANTRĀLOKA

Chapters 20 to 27
Correct Numbering
Chapter 28
1 > 366cd

1 > 366cd (same)

367cd > 435ab

368ab > 435cd (half extra)

Chapter 37
1 > 32cd
33cd > 85cd

1 > 32 (same)
34ab > 86ab (half extra)

Chapters 29 to 36
Correct Numbering

Index
Note that the numbering of the verses given here in the index
corresponds to that of the original printed edition of the Tantrāloka and its

commentary.

Sanskrit words
abheda (absence of difference) 1/226, 228,230; 2/20-21; 3/181cd-83ab; 4/168-

169; 13/279cd-281ab; 15/261cd-268ab; 17/14-15

Abhijit, an asterism, 4/68cd-72ab

Abhinanda, Abhinavagupta’s teacher, 37/62

Abhinavagupta, etymology of 1/1, 4/278, 37/85, 37/52-85
abhyukṣaṇa, purifying lustration, 15/69-73ab
Aḍabilla, one of the hermitage places, 29/37-39

Aadarśa, one of the eight Eight Pāśupta scriptures called Pramāṇas, 8/328-328ab
Aḍavī, one of the places of almsgiving, 29/37-39
adhikāra, authority, 11/85cd-89, 17/36-38ab, 40cd-45ab

adhivāsa (preliminary purification for initiation), 16/1-2

adhyavasāya (ascertainment), function of the buddhi, 1/37-38, 215; 9/238

Aditi, 1/123,
Advayasidáhi, 1/82-90

Agastya, the sage 37/38,
Agastya, peak of Mount Malaya, 8/86; 37/38

Aghora, one of the faces of Siva, 1/18, 8/368cd-373ab; 15/191cd-193, 203cd206ab
Aghora, the deity, 6/171-172; 15/239cd-245ab, 247-251ab, 353cd-358;
16/151b157, 159-161
Aghorā, beneyolent powers, 3/71cd-72ab, 72a-73ab, 257cd-259ab; 4/205-206
Aghoraśiva, Śaiva teacher, 9/237
Aghoresa (alias Ananta), 9/60-61, 147-149ab

Aghorī, the goddess, 33/3-5, 15/247-251ab; 16/151cd-157, 220cd-221ab
Agnīdhra, mythical ruler, 8/94-96, 103cd-104

agnihotra, vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505
Agnirudra, deity, 8/179cd-181ab, 438cd-440ab
agniṣṭoma, vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505
agrahāyani, vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505

ahaṁ (1), 3/202cd-208ab

ahaṅṁkāra (sense of self), one of the thirty-six principles 1/214, 222; 4/159-167;,

8/186-190ab; 9/230, 237, 240-242ab, 253-257ab, 271cd-279ab, 299cd-300ab,
worlds of the principle, 8/225, 408cd-41 lab, 413-414, 428-434ab, 444cd-445

Ahīndra, Siddha, 29/41
Aindrī, deity, 29/52-53, 33/3-5

aiṣṭka, Vedic observance, 15/498-505
Aitareyākhyavedānta, see Aitareyāraṇyaka
Aitareyāraṉyaka 3/226-231
Aitareyopaniṣad, 3/226-231

Aja, deity, 8/247-248

TANTRĀLOKA

Ajaḍapramātr̥siddhi, 5!61cd-62ab

Ajaramekhalā, dūtī, 29/29cd-33ab

Ajeśa, one of twelve Suśivas, 8/249-251ab

Ajita, Siddha, 29/29cd-33ab
Ajitāgama, 5/112cd-113ab
Akṛta, one of the eight Yogas, 8/235cd-237, 264-271, 446

Akṣara, one of the places of almsgiving, 29/37-39
akuḷa, 3/67; 4/170
Alinātha, Siddha, 29/33cd-34

Alipura (alias Hālā), 15/92-93ab; 29/59-63 end

Amā, 6/92cd-96

Amaranātha, Siddha, 29/33cd-34, 37-39

Amarāvati, 8/43cd-56ab

Amareśa, deity of the water principle, 8/203-204, 440cd-441ab
Amaryādaśāstra see Nirmaryādaśāstraḥ
amāvāsyā, 6/92cd-96
Ambā, sister of Abhinavagupta, 37/65, 37/79

Ambarāpada, deity of the ether principle, 8/443cd-444ab
Ambikā, deity of principle of pure knowledge, 8/450cd-451
Ambikā, śakti, 33/2

Ambilla, one of the hermitage places, 29/37-39

Amitā, a deity, 8/395cd-397ab

Amogha, a wind, 8/122cd-139ab
Amrātikeśa, deity of the fire principle, 8/441cd-442ab
Amṛtā, deity, 8/395cd-397ab, 33/9cd-12
Amṛtābha, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12
Amṛtadrava, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12
Amṛtamūrti, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12

Amṛtāṅga, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12

Aīṁrtapūrṇa, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12

Amṛtasecana, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12
Amṛtāsya, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12
Amṛtasyandana, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12
Amṛtatanu, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12
Amrṛitaugha, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12
Amṛtavapus, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12
Amṛteśa, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12
Amṛteśaśikhā, Śaiva work, 28/237cd-248ab
amrtīkarana, (transformation into nectar), 15/292cd-295ab

Amṛtodgāra, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12

Amṛtormi, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12
anāhata, sound not produced by vocal cords, 6/217-218
Ananta, 6/68cd-72ab, 8/9-10, 20cd-22ab, 178cd-181ab, 249-251ab, 262cd263ab, 300cd-316, 318-319, 322-324, 326-327, 330cd-332ab, 341-355ab,
397cd-405ab, 407cd-408ab, 424cd-426, 428-434ab, 438cd-440ab, 447-448;
9/60-61, 147-149ab, 180-181, 186-189ab; 13/275cd-276ab; 15/297cd-303,
376cd-377, 33/9cd-12; 36/2-7ab
Anantakārikā, 28/313-315; see also Śeṣakārikāb

INDEX

Anantamekhalā, ḍūtī, 29/29cd-33ab
Ananteśvara, deity, 4/31-32; 13/274cd-275ab; 15/183cd-190ab
Anāśrita, 8/9-10, 397cd-405ab, 424cd-426; 9/55cd-59
Anātha, 8/397cd-405ab, 424cd-426
Anṅga, island, 8/86

Aṅguṣṭhamātra, 8/249-251ab, 298cd-300ab, 428-434b, 449-450ab; 16/117125ab,

Aniruddha, Śaiva master, 1/46; 9/260cd-261ab; 13/293cd-295ab
Anubhavastotra, see also Pramāṇstotrab
Anugraheśvara, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12

Anuttara (without superior), 1/5, 242-244; 2/34; 3/65-66, 93cd-103ab, 110-

113ab, 149cd-150ab, 157, 160-162ab, 188cd-190ab, 201cd-208ab, 220-225,
247cd-250ab; 4/209-210, 278; 5/42-43, 117, 119, 125, 144, 147; 12/26;
29/115cd-117ab; 36/8-9; 37/30-31

anuttaraprakriyā, 9/313
apāna, descending breath 3/113-116; 5/53cd-54ab, 86-90ab, 141; 6/21cd-28ab,

64-67ab, 113cd-114, 121-127, 219-221, 224-225ab; 7/59cd-60ab; 15/412cd414ab, 474cd-478ab; 17/83-85ab, 19/17-20; 29/142cd-146ab, 146cd-147ab,
29/179; 29/278cd-281, 289cd-290; 32/16cd-17, 32-36, 37-40ab; 37/46
Aparā, 1/2-3, 107-108, 139, 271-272; 3/247cd-250ab; 5/22-25ab; 10/7cd-9ab,
192, 194-195, 271cd-273ab; 15/318, 321, 323cd-325, 460-463ab; 16/12cd-15ab,
99, 101cd-105, 129-130, 212, 218cd-219ab, 232-233, 17/38cd-39ab, 40cd-45ab,
48, 50-57, 115cd-117; 29/46cd-48; 30/1 1cd-12ab; 31/39-41ab, 94-96, 97-99
Aparājita, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab

Aparamekhalā, dūī, 29/33cd-34

Apsaras, 8/41cd-43ab
aptoryāma, Vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505
Ardhanārīśvara, Ardhanārīśa, deity, 33/13-14ab
Arghiśa, of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12

Arṇava see Yonyarṇavaḥ
astra the weapon mantra, 15/49-55, 56, 69-73, 191cd-193, 232cd-233, 353cd358, 369-374ab, 447, 474cd-4 one 78ab, 611cd-613; worship of, 15/377 ff, of
Pašupati (pāśupata), 15/398-401ab; 17/30cd-33, 58-60; 9/621 of the command
(codanāstra); 29/192cd-195; mantric form, 30/42-43ab

Arthanātha, deity, 30/102-104
arthavāda, 4/232cd-233

Aruṇāditya, a Śaiva teacher, 34

Aruṇodaka, the lake, 8/60cd-62ab

Aṣādhya, deity, 8/318-319
asidhārā, vow of, 15/506-508, 540cd-545
Aśoka, mountains, 8/97-98
aśvamedha, vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505

Aśvin, city of, 8/43cd-56ab

Aśvinī, the asterism, 6/105; 28/106cd-111

Aṭana see Niśaṭanab

Atharvaveda, 1/113-114

Atibala, deity, 33/14cd-17ab

atirātra, vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505

TANTRĀLOKA

Atrigupta, 37/38
Atṭṭahāsa, a sacred place, 8/442cd-443ab; 29/37-39, 70cd-71ab
atyagniṣṭoma, vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505
Avīci, hell, 8/24cd-27

Avijita, Siddha, 29/29cd-33ab

avikaḷlpaka, nirvikalpa (free from vikalpa, non-discursive, non-differentiated),

1/146-147, 178cd-179ab, 221, 226, 228-229; 3/268-277; 416-7; 5/|4cd-16ab,
13/229cd-231ab; 14/42cd-45; 15/270cd-272ab, 273cd-275ab, 344cd-346, 350351ab; 16/249-251, 280-282; 284-287, 293cd-295ab

Avimukteśa, deity of the ether principle, 8/443cd-444ab
ābhāsa (appearing, manifestation) 39/41-42

Ādhārakārikā, 28/307-309, 312
ādhāraśakti, 15/183cd-90ab, 279cd-303 16/11-12ab
Āditya, 3/226-231, 8/139cd- 142ab
Āgama 8/368cd-373ab, 16/210-211

Ākarṣa, one of the eight Eight Pāśupta scriptures called Pramāṇas, 8/328-329ab
Āmardaka (alias Aamarda), Siddha, 4/263cd-270ab; 36/11-12; 37/60-61
Āmrātakeśvara, a sacred place, 29/59-63
Ānanáādhikatantra, -śāsana, 8/32cd-35ab, 32cd-40, see also Aanandatantrab
Ānandagahvara, 14/18-19; see also Aanandatantrab

Ānandamekhalā, dūtī, 29/29cd-33ab

Ānandatantra,
-śāsana,

(alias
Aanandādhikatantra,
Aanandagahvaratantra,
Ānandeśvaratantra) 13/353cd-355, 15/45, 278cd-283ab, 588cd-591ab, 601cd-

604ab, 37/10-11ab

Ānandeśvaratantra, 29/198cd-200, see also Aanandatantra.
āpyāyana (nourishment) rite of, 15/69-73ab, 369-374ab
āpyāyana, `feeding ritual”, 1/113-114, 119cd-122

Ārya, a deity, 30/102-104

āṣāḍha, the month (June-]uly) 28/36-39ab, 121cd-127ab

Āṣaḍhin, deity of the water principle, 8/440cd-441ab; 33/13-14ab
āśrayaparāvṛtti (turing around in the foundation of consciousness), 28/198-

203ab

āśvayuja, month (September-October), 28/31-35, 36-39ab
āśvayujī, vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505

Āvaha, a wind, 8/122cd-139ab
Āyurveda, 28/228cd-230a

Icchā, a goddess, 8/373cd-376; 15/305-306
iḍā, left channel, 6/198cd-199ab, 390-393, 418cd-420; 16/36cd-45ab; 17/30cd33; 29/257-2538

Ikṣaṇeśāna, one of the eight Mahādevas, 8/249-251ab, 449-450ab

Ilāvṛta, a continent, 8/68, 71, 79, 94-96

Ilāiambā, dūtī, 29/29cd-33ab
Indhikā, 8/283-289, 424cd-427

Indra, Vedic god and one of the guardians of the regions, 1/105, 123; 3/226-231,

6/68cd-72ab, 138cd-140ab; 8/43cd-56ab, 105, 119-120, 221-222, 226, 264-271;
15/222cd-225ab, 498-505; 30/1 1cd-12ab, 42-43ab

INDEX

Indradvīpa, region, 8/83-84, 93
Indrānī, 8/241cd-244ab

Tsa, 8/216-220, 249-251ab

Iśāna, one of the five faces of Śiva, 1/18; 8/368cd-373ab; 11/20; 15/203cd-

204ab
Iśāna, the deity, 6/68cd-72ab; 8/161,244cd-247ab, 249-251ab; 15/222cd-225ab;
30/42-43ab
Īśānaśiva, Śaiva master, 12/28cd-31ab

Īśvara, one of the thirty-six princes, 1/327cd-328; the deity 6/38-45ab, 157-158,
160; 8/9-10; 9/50cd-53ab; 11/34cd-35, 36cd-39ab, 55cd-59; 15/432-436ab,
456cd-459, 463cd-466ab; 16/125cd-127, 213-216ab; 17/11cd-17; 30/2-3, one of
the causal forces, 15/209cd-211, 226cd-229ab, 309-312; 24/17cd-20ab
uccāra (‘utterance”), 1/170, 219; 5/17cd-19ab, 43-62ab, 62cd-73, 112cd-113ab,

131cd-133ab, 155cd-156ab; 6/60; 30/121cd-123ab

Ucchuṣma, mythical Śaiva master, 28/391-393

udāna, the rising breath, 6/211cd-213

Udbhata, restore kaśmiro, 37/62
Uddiyāna, region, 15/83cd-86ab
Ugra, Ugreśa, 6/68cd-72ab; 8/161, 216-220, 447-448
Ugra, mythical Śaiva master, 28/391-393
ūha (modification of a mantra), 16/268cd-270ab;

22/23-27ab
Ujjayinī, city, 15/86cd-88; 29, 59-63

17/11cd-13, 25cd-30ab;

ukthya, Vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505

“Ultraquiescence”, one of five kalā, 8/424cd-426, 452; 9/9-12ab; 16/147-150ab

Umā, wife of Śiva, 8/230-235ab, 238-241ab, 251cd-253ab, 264-271, 415-416
Umākānta, 32/13-14ab

Umapāti, 8/238-241ab, 244cd-247ab, 251cd-253ab
unmattaka, vote, 15/506-508
Unmeṣa, one of the eight Ardors, 8/235cd-237

Upanayana, rite, 15/498-505

Upaniṣad, 18/6cd-7ab

Upendra, 8/383-389
ūrdhvaretas (semen reflux), 29/41

Uurmikaulatantra, Uurmitantra, 2/48; 14/31-32ab; 15/563, 573cd-574, 588cd-

591ab; 23/42cd-43ab; 28/53-56ab, 121cd-127ab

u ita (niṣkrāmaṇa), rite of, 15/498-505; 17/36-38ab

Utpala, disciple of Abhinavagupta, 37/67

Utpaladeva, Śaiva master, 1/10; 3/1-4 note, 5-8 note, 84cd-85ab note; 5/138-139
note; 6/21cd-28ab note; 9/276cd-279ab note; 10/288 note; 12/22cd-25 and note;

13/290-293 note; 15/152-153ab note; 35/1-3ab note, 19cd-20 note; 37/60-61
Utphullakamatatantra, Utphulla, 29/164-166ab

Uttaraphalguni, asterism, 28/36-39ab and note, 106cd-111
Uttaraproṣṭhapada, asterismo, 28/106cd-111

Uttarāṣāḍha, asterismo, 28/106cd-11 1

TANTRĀLOKA

Eḍābhī, a sacred place, 29/59-63
echo (pratiśruktā), 3/24-34

Ekāmra, a sacred place, 15/86cd-88

Ekanetra, one of the Vidyeśvaras, 6/68cd-72ab; 8/341-344
Ekaliṅga, one of the eight Mahādevas, 8/249-251a, 449-450ab
Ekaliṅgekṣaṇa, one of the Lords of the maṇḍala,

Ekarudra, one of the Vidyeśvaras, 6/68cd-72ab; 8/341-344
Ekaśiva, one of the twelve Suśivas, 8/249-251ab, 428-434ab, 447-448

Ekavīra, 8/235cd-237, 249-251ab, 300cd-301ab, 447-448; 16/117-125ab
Elāpura, Elāpurī, a sacred place, 15/89-91; 29/59-63

Eraka (alias Erakavara, Naverakanāthe, Navera), Krama teacher,, 34, 37/60-61

hero (vīra), 22, 32, 34, 68; 12/17cd-20ab; 15/66-68, 166cd-167ab, 563; 16/57cd58ab; animal, 16/52cd-54ab; 28/91cd-92ab, 104cd-106ab, 29/6, 287cd-289ab

Eruḍikā, a sacred place, 15, 89-93ab end note
Eruṇā, dūtī of the Siddha Varadevanātha, 29/33cd-34

OM, 6/161 note; 15/181-190ab; 17/1 1cd-13; 22/20-21
Orṁkāreśa, one of the ten Sivas, 8/368cd-373ab

ovallī (current of knowledge), 4/274-275ab; 29/35-36 and note

kampa (uncertainty, worry, tremor), 12/17cd-25

kañcuka, 1/39-40; 6/40cd-43ab, 153-154; 9/204, 206cd-212; 10/101, 105-113ab;
19/29cd-31ab; 28/232cd-236ab; 29/265-266

Kacabhārgavatantra, 23/4-6; see also Bhārgaśikhāb
Kaikavīreśa, deity of the principle Nature, 8/272-273ab
Kailāsa, mountain, 8/63cd-67, 244cd-247ab

kal-, 38252cd-253a, 4/131-132, 148, 173cd-175; 9/155cd-156ab; 13/204-206
kalā, the five "“forces", 4/383-389; 11/1-12ab; 16/109-110ab, 147-150ab;
29/248-252
kalā, (strength, efficiency, finitude energy level), one of the thirty-six principles,

6/40cd-43ab, 153-154; 8/9-10, 186-190ab; 9/40cd-42ab, 45cd-48ab, 154cd-192;

etymology of, 9/155cd-156ab; 206cd-213, 247-250; 10/3-5, 12cd-17, 98cd-100,

105-107; 13/271cd-274ab; 15/297cd-303, 319-320, 432-436ab; 16/101cd-105;
purification of, 16/117-125ab; 17/65-66, 103-115ab
Kalā, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab

Kalāḍhya, 8/368cd-373ab; 29/160cd-161ab
Kālāgni, 6/140cd-142ab, 171-172; 8/22cd-24ab, 35cd-40, 165-166ab, 262cd263ab, 264-271, 407cd-408ab, 428-434ab, 437cd-438ab; 9/3-4ab, 53cd-55ab;
10/95cd-96ab; 32/37-40ab
Kālāgnirudra, 4/164-167; 10/63cd-66ab
Kālāgnirudrakālī, 4/164-167
Kālakarṣiṇi, Kālasaṁkarṣinī, 3/68-71ab, 234-236; 4/173cd-175, 189-191ab;

15/247-251ab, 331cd-333ab, 335cd-338, 346; mantric form, 30/45cd-62a 1 see

also
Kālañjara, deity of the ego principle, 8/225, 444cd-445

kālarātri, Mantra, 13/234cd-235; 19/11-14; 30/55cd-57
Kālarudra, 30/28cd-36ab
Kalavikaraṇī, 8/338cd-39ab; 15/305-306

INDEX

Kāleśa, 8/368cd-373ab
Kāli, 3/252cd-253ab; 4/148, 150, 152-154, 176-178ab; 6/7-8; 8/338cd-339ab;
15/305-306; 33/3-5
Kālikā, 3/252cd-253ab

Kālīmukhatantra, 27/44-46

Kaāliṅga, 15/89-91

Kalkin, futures avatāra di Viṣṇu, 9/32cd-35ab

Kallaṭa Bhaṭṭa, Śiva master, 6/12;

28/338cd-340ab; 29/121-124ab

10/208;

13/344-346ab;

16/36cd-45ab;

Kālottaratantra, 11/19
Kalpeśvara, 28/397-399

Kalyāṇa, Śaiva master, 13/149-151ab

Kāmamaṅgalā, ḍūtī of Meṣanātha, 29/29cd-33ab

Kāmanātha, Siddha, 30/102-104

Kāmarūpa, a sacred place, 15/83cd-86ab; 29/37-39
Kāmikāgama (-tantra, saṁhitā), 1/58-61ab; 4/25cd-27; 6/1cd-90ab; 8/212cd-

214; 14/210-211; 32/9cd-10ab, 47cd-48

Kaṇāda, 1/158; 9/71cd-75ab, 297cd-299ab
Kanakhala, deity of the wind principle, 8/442cd-443ab

Kāñcī, 23/14cd-16ab

Kaṅka, mountains, 8/97-98

Kaṇṭhyoṣṭhya, Kaṇṭhyauṣṭhya, one of eight Bhairava, 6/68cd-72ab; 8/368cd-

373ab; 29/160cd-161ab
Kānti, 8/383-389; 33/6-7ab

Kanyā, a continent, 37/35, 37
Kapālīśa, 8/179cd-181ab, 438cd-440ab

Kapila, 8/151cd-152ab, 280

Karabilla, a pigrīmage site, 29/37-39

Karālī, 33/3-5

Kāraṇeśa, one of the ten Śivas, 8/368cd-373ab
Karaṅkiṇī, a mudrā, 32/4-6ab, 26

Kārkoṭa, one of eight Nāgas, 6/68cd-72ab
Karmadeva, 8/43cd-54ab
karman, 8/28cd-30ab, 78-72, 90-92; 9/78cd-81ab, 127cd-134ab, 135cd-137,
140-141, 167cd-169, 180-181, 186-189ab; 13/6cd-120ab, 231cd-234ab, 236238, 256cd-268ab, 271cd-274ab, 286-289; 14/1cd-5ab; 14-15; 15/27-30;
16/170cd-182, 302cd-309ab; 17/34-35, 63, 65-66, 69-70ab; 19/7-8; 28/217218ab, 222-224ab, 230cd-236ab, 264cd-269ab, 313-315; 29/209; 37/12cd-13ab,

karmasāmya (balance of karman”, 13/37-96, 128-129ab, 259-262ab
Karṇa, relative of Abhinavagupta, 37/65,76
kārttika, the month (October-November), 6/122cd-127ab, 148-150

Kāruka, Śaiva teacher, 13/303-306
Kaśeru, region, 8/83-84
Kashmir, 8/212cd-214ab; 15/92-93ab; 37/39-40, 42, 44, 45
Kaula, 13/300cd-302, 319cd-322ab; 37/25cd-29

Kaulagiri, a sacred place, 29/37-39, 59-63
Kaulajñānanirṇaya, 15/83cd-86ab

TANTRĀLOKA

Kaulikī, 6/67, 136cd-137ab, 143

Kaumāra, one of the eight Yogas, 8/235cd-237

Kaumārī, 8/241cd-244ab; 28/10-14ab; 29/52-53; 33/3-5

Kauśika, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab
Kedāra, deity of the fire principle, 8/441cd-442ab
Ketu, 6/65-67ab, 100-101

Ketumāla, a continent, 8/69-79, 108-109
Khaḍgin, 33/13-14ab

Khagendranātha, Siddha, 29/29cd-33ab

Khamalaṅkṛta, Khamala, one of the eight Bhairavas, 8/368cd-373ab; 29, 160cd161ab

Khaṭvāṅga, weapon, 15/326-328ab

khekarī (-mudra), 15/361-362; 29/150cd-156ab; 32/1-67
Khecarī, heart of (mantras), 16/159-161
Khecarīmatatantra, 29/164-166ab
Kheṭaka, a sacred place, 15/92-93ab
Kiṁpuruṣa, continent, 8/79

Kinnara, 8/43cd-56ab

Kiraṇa, 8/368cd-373ab
Kiraṇāgama (-tantra), 19; 1/75-77, 201; 4/40cd-42ab, 76cd-79; 5/112cd-1 13ab;
9/45cd-48ab, 144cd-146ab; 13/162-163ab, 283284; 15/18-19; 18/3cd-6, 11
Kiīrti, 33/6-7ab

Kopa, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab

Kramapūjanatantra, 29/2cd-3
Kramarahasayatantra, 29/14-16

Kramasadbhāva, 12/22cd-25

Kramastotra, 60, 75; 4/164-167
Krau~ca, an island, 8/103cd-104

kṛcchra, a penance, 15/540cd-545

Kriyā, a goddess, 8/373cd-373; 15/305-306

Krodha, deity of Pure Knowledge, 8/450cd-451
Krodhanā, a variety of Khecarīmudrā, 32/4-6ab
Krodheśa, a deity from the beginning Pure Knowledge, 8/447-448; 16/117125ab

Krodheśvara, deity of the Nature principle, 8/272-273ab
Krodheśvaras, group of eight deities, 8/235cd-237, 251cd-253ab note, 417-

418ab, 428-34ab

Krodhin, ancient Śaiva master, 28/391-393

Kroṣṭukī, 33/3-5
Kṛṣṇa, 3/113cd-116; 37/65
Kṛṣṇāṅgārā, a city, 8/43cd-45ab
Kṛta, one of the eight Yogas, 8/235cd-237, 264-271
Kṛtānta, one of the ,Lords of Wrath, 8/235cd-237
Kriūra, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12

Kṣapaṇa, one of the eight Bhairavas, 8/368cd-373ab; 29/160cd-161ab
Kṣayānta, Kṣayāntastha, one of the eight Bhairavas, 8/368cd-373ab; 29/160cd161ab

Kṣema (is this Kṣemarāja?), 37/67

INDEX

Kṣemarāja, Śaiva master, 6/68cd-72ab; 8/122cd-139ab, 227-229, 251cḍ-253ab,

345-352ab, 400-405ab; 15/27-33ab, 183cd-190ab; 17/30cd-33; 24/6-10ab;
31/36cd-38
Kṣemeśa, 8/318-319
Kṣiraka, a sacred place, 29/59-63

Kṣirikā, a sacred place, 15/89-91
Kṣobhiṇi, variety of Khecarīmudrā, 32/4-6ab
Kubera,ne of the Lokapāla, 6/68cd-72ab; 8/43cd-56ab, 105; 15/222cd-225ab;

30/42-43ab

Kuḍyākeśoo, a sacred place, 29/59-63

Kula, means literally the ‘family’ of divine powers and so, by extension denotes
the order of immanence. It is also the designation of a category of practice and

s0 too Tantras which may belong to Kulas of differing schools. 1/1, 7; 4/57cd58, 200, 257cd-259ab, 263cd-270ab; 5/71, 86-94ab; 13/134cd-136, 300cd-302,
319cd-321ab; 15/168cd-170ab, 517, 531cd-533, 572-573ab, 588cd-591ab;
26/20; 27/44-46, 28/10-18ab, 25cd-30, 114-130ab, 415-417ab; 29/1-2ab, 4, 6-7,
9, 14-16, 42-45ab, 46cd-48, 56, 68, 78-79, 121-124ab, 127cd-129ab, 130cd-132,
219-223, 225-229, 282-283, 289cd-291; 30/1, 28cd-36ab; 32/42-44ab; 35/31-34
Kulagahvaratantra Gahvaratantra, 3/146-148ab, 168-169; 13/319cd-321ab;

15/595-598ab; 16/187-182; 19/7-8, 17-20; 28/224cd-227ab; 29/239cd-240ab,
243cd-244ab; 31/60-61; 32/9cd-10ab, 49-53
Kulagiri, a sacred place, 15/86cd-88; 29/66-67
Kulakālīvidhi, a Śaiva scripture, 13/303-306

Kulaputtalikā, an alphabet, 15/128cd-130ab

Kularatnamāla, 31/60-61; see also Ratnamālātantra
Kuleśvara, Lady of Kula, 29/45cd-46ab, 222-223, 228-229

Kuleśvarī, Lady of Kula, 29/45cd-46ab, 222-223, 228-229; 31/26-29ab

Kulika, one of eight Nāga, 6/68cd-72ab

Kullāīambā, dāūtī, 29/29cd-33ab

Kulūta (Kulūta, Kulāta), a sacred place, 15/8993ab
Kumāra, 8/264-271; 16/288

Kumār, dūrī, 29/33cd-34

Kumārikā, region, 8/83-85, 88-89, 91; 37/35

Kumārila, 4/232cd-233; 10/20-22, 57cd-58ab; 16/261cd-263ab
Kumbhārikā, place to give alms, 29/37-39
Kumbhīpāka, 8/24cd-27

Kumuḍda, island, 8/86

kuṇḍagolaka, 13/227cd-229ab; 15/577-578, 170-173

kuṇḍalinī, 3/137cd-140, 220-225; 5/54cd-58ab, 108cd-112ab, 145; 7/40, 68cd70ab; 8/395cd-397ab, 400-405ab, 424cd-427; 15/86cd-88, 313-314, 432-436ab;
17/36cd-45ab; 29/37-39, 68, 71cd-72ab; 31/30-33ab, 124-126ab; 32/32-40ab,
42-44ab
Kurikunāmbā, dārī, 29/29cd-33ab
Kuru, continent, 8/72-73, 79

Kurukṣetra, deity of the wind principle, 8/442cd-443ab
Kurukṣetra, a sacred place, 15/92-93ab

Kuśa, island, 8/103cd-104

TANTRĀLOKA

Kūṣmāṇḍa, deity whose name is given to a hell, 6/142cd-145ab; 8/28ab, 262cd-

263ab, 407cd-408ab, 428-434ab, 437cd-438ab
garhoda, a water jar, 8/113-114, 118
Gabhasti, demons, 28/96cd-98
Gabhastimat, region, 8/83-84
Gahana, 8/318-319

Gahaneśa, Gahaneśvara, 6/155-156; 36/2-7ab
Gamatantra (-śāsana, -śastra), 1/150-151; 13/229cd-234ab; 15/278cd-283ab,

422-424ab, 531cd-533; 16/286-287; 29/141 cd-142ab
Gambhīrā, 33/3-5

Gaṇādhyakṣa, one of the eight Tejas, 8/235cd-237

gāṇapatya, voete, 15/506-508
Gaṇḍakī, river, 28/237cd-248a
Gandhamādana, mountain, 8/58cd-60ab, 63cd-67, 69, 71
Gandharva, 8/43cd-56ab, 83-88, 122cd-139ab;
Gandhavatī, city, 8/43cd-56ab

Gaṇeśa, 1/6, 287-327ab; 15/183cd-190ab, 376cd-377; 16/7cd-10; 28/168-173,
397-399; 29/27cd-29ab, 130cd-132, 287cd-289ab; 30/18-19
gaṇeśa, vow, 15/506-508

Gaṅgā, river, 3/89, 139cd-142ab, 203-204; 15/183cd-190ab; 37/49-51, 52

garbhãvaraṇa (embryo’s covering ), 16/78-80
Gargikā, a sacred place, 15/92-93ab

Garuḍa, 8/32cd-35ab,
37/12cd-13a
Gaurī, 28/237cd-248ab

115-117,

139cd-142ab,

15/137cd-139ab; 36/2-7ab;

Gautama, 15/497
Gaya, a deity, 8/206cd-208ab, 442cd-443ab
Gemini, sign of the zodiac, 28/121cd-127ab
Gokarṇa, a sacred place, 29/59-63

Gokarṇaka, divinities of the principle of earth, 8/443cd-444ab

Gomedha, an island, 8/103cd-104
Gopāla, 33/7cd-9ab

Gopati, 8/318-319

grāmadharma, 1/82-90

Guḍikānātha, Siddha, 29/33cd-34

Guhya, one of the eight Eight Pāśupta scriptures called Pramāṇas, 8/328-329ab
Guhya, a Śaiva scripture, 31/60-61

Guhyaka, 8/43cd-56ab; 28/96cd-98; 31/45-50ab; 36/10

Guhyayoginītantra, 31/60-61
guṇa (the three qualities of Nature - sattva, rajas, and tamas), one of the thirtysix principles, 8/253cd-260ab; 9/223-224; the principle of the worlds -, 8/253cd-

278, 415-418ab; 428-434ab; 28/281-286, 326cd-327ab, 333-334ab

guṇa, the eight powers attained by the practice of Yoga, 8/263cd-271, 278, 303-

306, 418cd-420; 13/192-193ab; 15/27-30; 29/237-239ab
Gurvī, 33/2

ghara (house), 4/263cd-270ab; 29/37-39

INDEX

Ghora, legendary Śaivite master, 28/391-393
Ghorā, fierce powers, 3/73cd-75ab, 257cd-259ab; 4/205-206
Ghoramukha, a deity, 30/20-26ab

Ghoramukhī, 30/20-26ab
Ghorānana, 30/20-26ab

Ghoratarā, most fierce powers, 3/257cd-259ab; 4/22cd-24ab, 205-206
Ghoṣaṇī, 33/3-5
ghrteśa, a vow, 15/506-508
caitra, month (March-April), 6/119-120, 123cd-125; 28/36-39ab
Caitrarathra, forest, 8/60cd-63ab
caitrī, vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505

cakra, assembly of deities, energies, letters etc etymology of, 29/104-106ab;
centres in the subtle body, 58; 15/494cd-496; 24/10cd-12; 38/14cd-18ab note;

32/32-36

Cakraka, cousin of Abhinavagupta, 37/67
camatkāra (‘‘ʻwonder, amazement”), 5/74; 11/76cd-78ab; 26; 29/176

Cāmuṇḍā, 8/241cd-244ab; 28/10-14ab; 29/52-53; 33/3-5

Caṇḍa, name of deity, 8/272-273ab, 447-448; 16/117-125ab; 33/7cd-9ab
ṁśu, mythical master, 28/391-393

deity, 15/551cd-557ab

ṇḍikā, 15/391cd-393

Candra, a deity, 8/368cd-373ab
Candra, a mountain, 8/97-98
Candraśarman, master of Abhinavagupta, 37/62
cāndrāyaṇa, a penance, 15/540cd-545
Caritra, a sacred place, 29/59-63, 66-67
Caryākulatantra, Śaiva scripture, 29/164-166ab
cāturmāṣya, a vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505
Catuṣkapañcāśīka, Śaiva text, 26/38cd-44

cintā, 13/327

Chakra, mountains, 8/97-98

Chagalāṇḍda, deity, 16/114-116

Chāgalāsya, deity, 15/183cd-190a
Chāgāsya, deity, 15/183cd-190a
Chāndogryoupaniṣad, 19/11-14
chindi, mantra, 19/11-14

chummā, 4/236cd-270ab; 29/37-39
Citrā, asterism, 27/36-39ab

Citranātha, a Kaula prince, 29/33cd-34
Cukhula (alias Chukalaka, Narasiṁhagupta) father of Abhinavagupta, 1/1, 12;

37/54 heart, 55; 1/1, 82-90; 3/208cd-214, 263-264; 4/49-50, 181cd-186ab, 191b,
196-199; 5/20-25ab, 27cd-29ab, 44-50ab, 52cd-54ab, 60cd-61ab, 71, 73, 97cd100ab; 6/13, 179cd-181ab; 8/345-252ab; 11/23cd-27; 13/300cd-302; 15/111cd112ab, 114cd-115ab, 168cd-170ab, 171cd-174ab; 15/412-414ab, 474cd-491ab,
16/36cd-47ab; 17/30cd-35, 58-60; 22/43-44; 23/73cd-76; 24/10cd-12; 28/25cd30; 29/133-135ab, 158cd-160ab, 176, 263-264; like cakra, 3/170-172ab; 4/49-

TANTRĀLOKA

50, 181cd-186ab; 5/52cd-54ab, 112cd-113ab; 6/51b, 61-62, 65-67ab, 88cd91ab, 187cd-189ab, 219-223, 238; 15/494cd-496; 17/83-85ab; 19/17-20; 23/3341ab, 29/37-39,59-63,71cd-72ab, 214-216, 240cd-241ab, 30/58-62ab; 31/124ab;
32/42-44ab, mantra of, 15/436cd-441ab, 509-51 1ab; 17/30cd-33

Jains, 4/25cd-27; 13/303-306; 35/26-27

jada (insentient, inert), 1/176cd-178ab; 10/133cd-135ab; 17/16-18ab

Jaitra, Siddha, 29/29cd-33ab

Jālandhara, 15/92-93ab

Jalpeśa, deity of the fire principle, 8/441acd-442ab

Jambūdvīpa, 8/62cd-63ab, 71, 93-898, 103cd-104, 110

Janaloka, 6/142cd-145ab, 8/151cd-153ab
Jananāśaka, one of the Lords of Wrath, 8/235cd-237
Jārudhi, mountain, 8/63cd-67
Jaṭhara, mountain, 8/63cd-67

jāti, a possible constituent element of mantra, 15/463cd-466ab; 30/10cd-1 1ab,
43cd-45ab
Jaya, the world of Bhadrakāli, 8/193-196ab
Jaya, a deity, 33/14cd-17ab; 37/39

Jayā, 33/3-5

Jayada, 33/14cd-17ab
Jayakīrti, one of the fifty Rudras,33/14cd-17ab
Jayamūrti, 33/14cd-17ab
Jayanta, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab

Jayantī, a sacred place, 15/89-91; 29/59-63
Jayarudra, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab
Jayāvaha, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab
Jayavardhana, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab
Jayotsāha, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab
jīmūta, clouds, 8/122cd-139ab

jñānabodhā, a kalā, 8/383-389; 15/305-306

Jñānaramāvalr, 27/11
Jñānī, an energy, 8/373a-376; 15/305-306
Jñānottaratantra,
9/45cd-48ab;
23/20cd-23ab;
Sarvajñānottaratantra

27/6-8;

see

also

jñānin (man of knowledge, kower of reality, tattvavid), 15/12-13; 20/8-10ab;

21/59-60; 26/55cd-56ab; compared to a yogi,

10/138-140ab, 242-281ab;

13/326cd-340; 28/60cd-75ab, 417cd-423ab; as opposed to a ritual agent,

23/13cd-28, 1000cd-101ab; 29/129cd-130ab; superior to the yogi and the ritual

agent, 15/8-19; 28/72-75ab, death of the -, 28/303-309
Jvālinī, 8/373cd-376; 15/305-306; 32/4-6ab, 27-29

jyesṭtha, the month (May-June), 28/36-39ab

Jyeṣṭhā, the goddess, 6/52, 56-57; 8/338cd-339ab, 355cd-357ab, 373cd-376,

450cd-451; 15/305-306; 21/56cd-57ab

Jyotis, a god, 8/272-273ab, 447-448
Jyotiṣmat, king of Krauñca, 8/103cd-104; 16/1 17-125ab

Jyotsnā, kalā, 8/383-389

Jyotsnāvati, kalā, 8/383-389

INDEX

Jhaṇṭhiśa, 33/9cd-12
damara, sacrifice, 3/68-71ab; 15/335cd-338, 351cd-352ab; 31/100
Dāmaramahāyāgatantra, 30/54-55ab
ḍombī, “place to give alms, 29/37-39

Tapas, austerity, 9/127cd-131ab; 13/140-143ab; 15/537cd-540ab

tāḍana, rite of striking a blow, 15/69-73ab and note; 17/30cd-33

Tattveśvaras, 6/176cd-179ab; 17/48, 49
Taittirīyāraṇyaka, 8/352cd-355; 15/203cd-204ab; 22/20-21
Takṣaka, uno degli otto Nāga, 6/68cd-72ab
Tamopahā, kalā, 8/383-389
Tāmravarṇa, region, 8/83-84
Tantra, etymology, - as a specific school, 15/1; 22/40cd-42; 23/99-100ab;

26/33cd-37ab; 35/26-27

Tantrasadbhāva (alias Trikasadbhava), Śaiva scripture, 20/1 lcd-13ab; 28/112-

113, 121cd-127ab; 29/211cd-212ab; 30/58-62ab, 99-101; 31/60-61

Tantrasāra, Śaiva scripture, see Trikasārab

Tantrasāra, work of Abhinavagupta, 1/21, 148; 3/205a-208b; 4/109cd-114ab;

5/141; 6/127, 0145cd-146; 7/21cd-23ab; 9/174-176, 200cd-201ab, 220cd-222,
271-272ab; 10/264cd-269, 289-294ab; 11/15cd-18; 15/328-329; 22/7cd-9, 22;
23/26cd-28; 24/2-3, 10cd-12; 25/8-9; 26/2-4, 66-70; 28/87-88ab, 121cd-127ab,
138-139ab, 406; 35/1-3ab
Tantravārttika, 4/232cd-233; 16/261cd-263ab
Tapana, Śaiva master, 13/344-346ab
Tapoloka, one of the seven worlds, 8/152cd-153ab

tappeto, rite of, 15/398

tappezzamento, rite of, 15/398
Tārā, 8/373cd-376, 418cd-420

tarka (reasoning), 4/15-16, 33-37, 45cd-47ab, 86, 95-96; 28/402

Tatpurusa, one of the five faces of Śiva, 1/18; 8/368cd-373ab; 15/204cd-206a

Tattvaprakāśa, 8/307-316
Tattvarakṣaṇa, Tattvarakṣaṇavidhāna, Śaiva scripture, 3/110-113ab; 29/140-

141ab

TṬattvārthacintāmaṇi, Śaiva work, 10/208; 16/36cd-45ab, 50cd-52ab
Tejasvin, 8/357cd-368ab

Tejāṣṭaka group of eight divine entities, 8/235cd-237, 251cd-253ab, 415-416

Tejovatī, city of Viśvedeva, 8/43cd-56ab

Tirumūḷar, Saiva master of South India, 37/12cd-13ab
Tiṣya, asterism, 28/36-39ab, 106cd-111
Tonsures (cūḍa), rite of, 15/498-505

Treta, one of the four ages, 8/80-82
Tridaṇḍin, 33/13-14ab

Tridoṣa, one of the eight Ardors, 8/235cd-37

Trigala, 8/318-319

Triguṇi, one of seven Vidyārājnī, 8/339cd-340

TANTRĀLOKA

Trika, Śaiva school, 1/14-18, 106; 7/53-56; 10/1-2; 11/85cd-89 note; 13/300cd302, 319cd-302, 319cd-321ab, 347cd-348; 15/319-320, 409cd-410 note, 517;
16/158; 22/40cd-42; 23/73cd-76, 99-100ab; 25/1-2ab; 26/20; 28/423b425ab;
29/93-95; 30/1, 20-26ab; 31/45-50ab; 33/1; 35/31-32; 37/25cd-29, 32-68

Trikahr̥daya, Śaiva scripture, 31/54-59;

see also Trikasārab

Trikakula, Śaiva scripture, 28/14cd-18ab; 31/60-61

Trikarammakula, Śaiva work, 31/60-61

Trikasadbhāva, 31/10cd-11ab, 60-61; see also Tantrasadbhavab
Trikasāra (alias Trikatantrasāra, Tantrasāra, Mālinīsāra, Sāra, Trikahṛdaya),

3/253cd-254ab; 8/320-321ab; 13/121cd-125ab; 15/168cd-170ab, 252cd-253ab;
16/252-253ab; 23/97-98; 28/48cd-52; 31/60-61

TrikaŚāstra, Trikaśāsana, Śaiva work, 4/274-275ab

Trikasūtra si veda Parātriśikāb
Trikūṭa, Mountain, 8/86

Trimūrti, one of the Vidyeśvara, 6/68cd-72ab; 8/341-344; 33/9cd-12

Tripurāntaka, one of the eight Ardors, 8/235cd-237
Tripurottara, holy place, 29/37-39
Triśirobhairavatantra

(alias

Triśirastantra,

Triśiromata,

Triśirahśastra,

Traiśirasa, etc.), 1/89-90, 113-114, 116, 136; 2/32; 3/137cd-140, 254cd-257ab;
5/9-10ab, 20-21, 86-90ab, 108cd-112ab, 136cd-137; 6/21cd-28ab; 8/12-16ab;
15/69-73ab, 183cd-190ab, 432-436ab, 540cd-545; 16/3-4, 110cd-113; 17/8385ab; 28/60cd-63, 145cd-146ab, 320b324ab; 29/9, 109cd-111ab, 140-141ab;
30/12cd-14, 27-28ab, 28cd-36ab; 31/60-61, 100

Triśṛṅga, chain of mountains, 8/63cd-67
Triśulinī, variety of mudrā Eterovagra, 32/4-6ab

Throne (āsana), 15/308-323ab, 339-343ab, 376cd-377; 16/78-80; 27/53-58ab;
29/81; 30/4-9ab;

Tryambaka, Tryambakāditya, Teramba, mythical founder of a Śaiva movement,

1/8; 4/263cd-270ab; 6/88cd-91ab; 36/11-12; 37/60-61

Tryambaka Half of, Trika, 4/263cd-70ab; 36/11-12.

Tucci, G., 1/43-44

Tumburu, 8/43cd-56ab; 15/92-93ab
Dakṣa, deity, 6/122cd-123ab; 8/139cd-142ab; 33/7cd-9ab; 36/2-7ab
Dakṣiṇapītha, a sacred place, 29/37-39
s
arta, a place foOr giving alms, 29/37-39
Damaneśa, one of five Praṇavas, 8/328-329ab

Damanī, 8/338cd-339ab

dantakaṣṭha, stick to clean the teeth, rite of, 15/447, 22/14cd-19; 28/167-173;

29/196-198ab
Dānava, 36/10

Daṇḍaḍapāni, 8/159cd-160

Daāruka, deity, 33/13-14ab
Daśagrīva, deity, 33/7cd-9ab
Daśeśāna, deity, 8/318-319
Dātrṛ, one of five Praṇavas, 8/328-329ab
deva, etymology of, 1/101-103
Devīkoṭṭa, a sacred place, 15/86cd-88; 29/37-39

INDEX

Devīyāmala, see Devyāyāmalatantra
Devyāyāmalatantra (alias Devīyāmala, Devyākhyayāmala), 3/68-71ab; 8/16cd-

17ab, 212cd-214; 15/335cd-338, 351cd-352ab, 460-463ab, 521cd-531ab;
22/28cd-31ab; 23/7-10, 14cd-16ab, 33-41ab; 28/385cd-386ab, 390; 31/60-61,
85cd-89ab; 32/1-2

digbandhana, the rite of, 15/191cd-193

Dīkṣottaratantra, 1/62cd-63; 5/148-150; 8/9-10; 440cd-441ab; 15/456cd-459;
17/97cd-99ab; 18/11; 19/21-23ab; 21/59-60; 24/4, 17cd-20ab; 27/65-71;
29/241cd-243ab
Diṇḍin, 15/183cd-190ab
Dīpikā, 8/383-389
Diīpta, one of the ten Śivas, 8/368cd-373ab
Diīptī, 33/6-7ab
Droṇa, mountains, 8/97-98

Dundubhi, mountains, 8/97-98
Duraṇḍa, deity of the principle of the ego, 8/225, 444cd-445
Durga, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab

Durjaya, wind, 8/122cd-139ab

Durjaya, one of the wrathful lords, 8/235cd-237

dūtī, 1/16; 29/96-166ab; 287cd-289ab
dvādaśānta, 4/89-91, 140-142; 5/86-90ab; 6/21cd-28ab, 46cd-48, 92cd-96,
187cd-189ab, 211cd-213, 219-221, 238; 15/76cd-78ab, 313-314, 361-362,
424cd-428, 519-520ab; 16/100-101ab; 17/83-85ab, 88-91; 19/17-20; 23/3341ab; two, 5/142-144; 7/68cd-70ab; 16/110cd-113; nasal, 6/61-62; 29/37-39,
156cd-158ab, 246-247, 248-252, 259-260; 31/124-126ab
Dvāravṛtti, Dvāravatī, a sacred place, 15/92-93a end

Dviraṇḍa, 16/114-116; 33/13-14ab;
Dyuti,33/6-7ab

Dyutimat, ruler of Sālmali, 8/103cd-104
Dhaniṣṭhā, asterism, 28/106cd-111

Dhanvantari, 8/43cd-56ab

dhāraṇā (concentration), 2/41-43; 3/289-290ab; 4/92-96; 8/208-212ab; 28/292295; 29/219-220; on fire, 205-206ab; 19/11-14; on earth, 22/2-7ab; on the soul,

22/2-7ab
dhārikākalā, 11/4
Dharmakīrti, 1/161-162; 3/52-55; 4/14; 7/32cd-36ab; 10/247-250ab; 16/276-278
Dharmanātha, 30/102-104

Dharmaśiva, Śaiva teacher, 21/50-53; 36/62

Dharmasūtra; 15/497
Dharmottara, 1/161-162

Dhṛti, 33/6-7ab
Dhruveśa, 8/357cd-368ab

Dhūmra, mountains, 8/97-98
Dhyanyālokālocana, 1/7, 332
dhyāna (meditation, visualization) 1/170; 2/28, 41-43; 4/92-94; 5/17cd-42,

156cd-158ab; 6/72cd-75ab, 108; 12/6-13; 13/259cd-262ab; 16/25, 37-39;

TANTRĀLOKA

15/75cd-76ab, 143-145, 472-474ab, 579-580; 19/26cd-27ab; 20/5-11ab; 21/1618ab; 24/6-10ab; 26/28cd-37ab

Dhyāna, one of the five Praṇavas, 8/328-329ab
Dhyānoḍḍāra, place in Kashmir, 28/237cd-248ab

nāḍī, 6/49-51ab, 195cd-199ab; 8/4; 12/2-3; 16/21cd-23ab; 21/25, 27; formation

of, 7/65cd-68ab; 28/222/224ab, 228cd-230ab; 29/142cd-146ab, 268-270
Naābhi, 8/94-96
nāda (sound), 1/62cd-63, 75, 77; 3/113cd-116, 220-225, 237-241ab; 6/21cd28ab, 157-158, 217-218; 8/ 282-286ab, 383-389, 400-405ab; 15/83cd-86ab,
432-436ab; 23/33-41ab; 24/10cd-12 note, 93-95, 147cd-149ab, 239cd-240ab,
243cd-244ab and note; one of eight kalās of praṇava, 6/161 and note; 8/390-

393, 424cd-426; 23/33- 41ab; 26/5lcd-53ab; 28/174-181; 29/154cd-156ab note;
30/12cd-14 note, 94cd-97ab; 32/12cd-13ab note
Nāga, 6/68cd-72ab; 8/20cd-22ab, 41cd- 43ab
Nāgadvīpa, 8/83-84

Nagara, a sacred place, 29/59-63

Naimira, a garden, 8/115-117
Naimiṣa, a deity of the water principle, 8/440cd-441ab
Nairṛta, 8/179cd-81ab, 438cd-440ab
Nakhala, a deity of the wind principle, 8/442cd-443ab
Nakuleśa, 15/604cd-605; see also Lakuleśab

NAMAḤ, 17/11cd-13 and note, 226-224; 22/20-21 and note; 30/43cd-45ab,

123b note

Nandā, 33/3-5

Nandana, 33/14cd-17ab

Nandana, forest, 8/60cd-62ab

Nandana, mountain, 8/97-98

Nandin, mount of Śiva, 8/139cd-142ab note; 15/183cd-190b and note

Nandisikhātantra, 12/9-12; 13/163cd-164ab, 251-253ab; 15/278cd-283ab
Nara, 28/237cd-248ab and note

Nārada, 8/43cd-56ab; 13/347cd-348

Narahari, incarnation of Viṣṇu, 28/237cd-248ab
Narasiṁhagupta (alias Cukhalaka or Cukhuḻa), father of Abhinavagupta, 1/1
note; 37/54
Nārāyaṇa, 28/237cd-248ab and note; 15/409cd-410 note, 498-505; 17/36-38ab
Navātman, 55/239cd-245ab and note, 245cd-246 note, 414cd-416ab; 16/12cd-

15ab, 78-80 note, 151cd-157 note, 159-161 note, 221cd-222 note; 21/54-56ab;

30/90cd-91ab;

Netratantra (alias Mṛtyuñjaya), 12/13 note; 15/23cd-26 note, 183cd-190ab note;

16/36cd-45ab note, 59cd-62 note, 223cd-226 note; 21/11cd-15 note; 24/6-10ab

note; 27/6-8 note; 30/123b note; 31/36cd-38 note
Nidhīśvara, 8/179cd-181ab, 438cd-440ab
Nigamatantra, 29/140-141ab; see also Gamaśāstra

Niḥśvāsa, 8/368cd-373ab

Niḥśvāsaśāsana, -tantra, 30/72cd-73ab, 77

Nila, chain of mountains, 8/ 63cd-67,75

Nimeṣa, one of the eight Ardors, 8/235cd-237

INDEX

Nirmaryādaśāstra,

26/38cd-44; 29/
164-166ab, 177

-tantra (alias Amaryāda, Maryādahīna), 23;

15/66-68;

Nirṛti, one of the eight Lords of the directions, or Guardians of the regions,

6/68cd-72ab note; 8/43cd-56ab; 15/222cd-225ab, 378cd-385ab; 30/42-43ab
note
Nirukta, 6/117-118 note
nirvāṇa, 4/49-50 note; 25/22cd-23ab; 29/158cd-160ab; 30/58-62ab

Niṣadha, chain of mountains, 8/63cd-67, 76
Niśācāratantra, 4/716cd-79; 6/28cd-33; 12/22cd-25; see also Niśaṭanatantra
Niśākulatantra, 13/126-127; see also Niśaṭanatantra
Niśaṭanatantra
(alias Niśisṣaṁcara,
Niśiṣaṁcāra, Niśācara,

Naiśasaṁcara, Atana), 13/197-198; 28/72-75ab

Niśisaṁcāratantra, 1/50-51; 4/176-178ab; 13/240-242ab; 14/42cd-45; 15/83cd86ab and note, 105cd-107ab, 595cd-598ab;
Niśatanatantra
niṣkala, 8/368cd-373ab; 29/160cd-161ab

16/196-200ab note; see also

Nitala, one of seven pātālas
Nityā, a Tantra 28/121cd-127a name, of the goddesses, 15/561-562; of the

master,

15/561-562; of scriptures,

16/247; 29/35-36

15/561-562; initiatory, 4/263cd-270ab;

nivṛti, one of five kalās, 8/407cd-408ab, 438cd-440ab; 9/55cd-59; 11/8; 16/147-

150ab; 31/97-99
Nyāya, 9/240-242ab note, 259cd-260ab; 10/65cd-66 note; 11/5; 35/26-27

Nyāyabindu, 1/161-162 note; 7/32cd-36ab note

Nyāyasūtra, 1/245 note; 9/240-242ab note

parvan (auspicious sacred time), 25/11-12; 28/10-60ab, 76cd-78ab, 106cd-111,

148-150, 368-373

Padma, one of the eight Nāgas, 6/68cd- 72ab note
Padmagupta, cousin of Abhinavagupta, 27/67
pākayajña, a Vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505
pallĩ (place to give alms), 4/263cd-274ab; 29/37-39 and note
pāñcagavya (the five products of the cow), 15/369-374ab, 444cd-446; 22/14cd-

19; 28/167-173;

Pañcānta, Pañcāntaka, 8/272-273ab, 447-448; 16/117-125ab;
Pañcarātra, 4/25cd-27; 9/88cd-90ab; 35/29, 36

Pañcārtha, one of the eight Pāśupta scriptures called Pramāṇas, 8/328-329ab

Pāṇini, 3/160-162ab note; 6/206cd-207ab note; 7/32cd-36ab note; 9/8-10 note;

33/27-28ab and note

Para, 8/368cd-373ab

Parā, Supreme Power and Mantra, 1/2 and note, 107-108, 119cd-122 note, 139

note, 271-272; 3/68-71ab note, 234-236 note, 247cd-250ab, 253cd-254ab;

4/205-206 note; 5/22-25ab; 10/188cd-191, 271cd-273ab, 284cd-286; 13/121cd-

125ab note; 15/49-53ab and note, 313-314 note, 318, 323cd-334ab and note,

460-463ab; 16/12cd-15ab, 82-83 note, 99, 107, 132-138ab, 147-150ab, 212
note, 219cd-220ab, 228-230; 17/38cd-46, 53, 58-60, 115cd-117; 18/3cd-6;
29/18-19, 20-21, 46cd-48, 187cd-192ab note; 31/39-41ab, 97-99; 33/30;

TANTRĀLOKA

Parāparā, Middling Power and Mantra, 1/2 note, 107-108, 139 note, 271- 272;
3/73cd-75ab, 247cd-250ab; 5/22-25ab, 114cd-11 6ab; 10/7cd-9ab, 271cd-273ab;
11/85cd-89; 15/56 note, 323cd-325, 406cd-408ab, 460-463ab; 16/12cd-1 7ab,
99, 106, 135cd-138ab, 147-150ab, 212 note, 213-221ab, 228-230 and note;
17/38-46, 115cd-117; 29/46cd-48, 30/10cd-11ab note; 31/39-41ab, 97-99;
33/30;
Paramaghora, 30/20-26ab note

Paramārkakālī, 4/159-163 note
Paramārthasāra, work of Abhinavagupta, 28/312 note
Paraṣaṭka, a section of the Nandisiśikhātantra, 13/251-253ab
Parātrīśika, Parātriṁśika, 3/205a-208 and note; 4/49-50 and note; 9/313 note;
12/14-16ab and note; 13/149-154 and note; 15/14-17 and note; 16/15cd-17ab
and note
Parātrīśikālaghuvrtti, 1/5 note; 3/205a-208ab note; 4/49-50

Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa, 1/1 note; 3/205a-208ab note; 13/149-151ab note; 29/4 note

Parāvaha, wind, 8/122cd-139ab

Pāriyātra, mountain, 8/63cd-67
pārvaṇī, a Vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505
Pārvatī, 1/6 note;
pārvika, a Vedic observance, 15/498-505
Pāśupata, a Śaiva school, 15/203cd-204ab note; 37/13cd-15 note

Pāśupatasūtra, 8/352cd-355ab note; 15/203cd-204ab note; 22/20-21 note

Paśupati, 6/68cd-72ab note; 8/216-220, 264-271 and note; 15/377 bis, ter,

quarter

Pūjā (arcana) (worship), 7/39¢cd-52ab, 12/6- 16ab, 13/98-100ab, 259cd-262ab,

14/13,25; 15/64, 105cd-107ab, 114cd-115ab, 152-154ab, 315-317, 557cd- 558,
561-562, 567cd-568ab, 579-580, 16/78-80, 28/18cd-23ab, 31/54-59; 15/377cd385ab, of the body, 15/283cd-288ab, of the master, 28/423cd-425ab, 29/291, of
the Mantra, of the door, 15/183cd-191ab, of the wheel of the goddesses,
15/323cd-365, of the vital breath, 15/295cd-297ab, true worship 12/9-12, 2/35-

38, and Yajña, 15/506-508
Patadruk, a pātāla 8/428-434, 8/30cd-31ab, 41cd-43ab, 115-117; 30/99-101

Patañjali, author of the Yogasūtra, 13/146, 346cd-347ab note; 28/281-286 note,

307-309 and note, 313-315

Pataīñjali, gammarian, 35/42cd-43ab note
Paṭṭilla, name of a hermitage, 29/37-39
paurṇamāsa, a Vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505
pauṣa, the month of (December-January), 28/36-39ab note, 53-56ab

Pauṣkarāgama, Pauṣkarasaṁhitā, Pauṣkaratantra, 16/254cd-257ab

pavitra, myth of origin, 28/114-21a
phālguna, the month (February-March), 28/36-39ab note, 43cd- 44ab, 53-56ab

PHAT, 8/166cd-167ab; 16/213-216ab; 17/45cd-46, 70cd-72; 20/2-4 and note;
21/54-56ab; 22/23-27ab; 30/41b, 43cd-45ab, 116-120ab
Pibana, deity and Mantra, 29/52-53; 30/20-26ab note

Pibanī, deity and Mantra, 17/40cd-45ab, 115cd-117

Picu, -mata, -śastra, -matatantra, 27/21cd-24; 28/383cd-385ab, 409cd-411

Pinākin, 33/13-14ab

INDEX

Piṇḍanātha, Pañcapiṇḍanātha, (KHPHREṀM), 4/189cd-191ab note; 5/75-76 note;
16/159-161 note; 30/45cd-46 note; see also Mātṛsadbhāva

piṅgalā (right channel of the breath), 6/198cd-199ab; 8/390-393; 16/36cd-45ab

and note; 17/30cd-33 note; 29/257-258
Piṅgalasūraka, 8/272-273ab

Piśāca, 8/43cd-56ab, 122cd-139ab; 29/237-239ab

pīṭtha (sacred seat, a type of sacred site), 4/259cd-261ab; 15/83cd-86ab and note,
92-93ab note, 98cd-100ab; 29/14-16 and note, 27cd-29ab, 37-39, 57, 58 and

note, 70cd-71ab; in other sense 29/166cd-168 and note; 30-7/18-25ab
Pitāmaha, 6/122cd-123ab; 33/7cd-9ab

Pitṛ (Mani), 8/264-271

Pitṛvana, the forest, 8/60cd-62ab
Prabhākara, 10/57cd-58ab note

Prabhāsa, a deity of the water principle, 8/440cd-441ab
Pracaṇḍa 8/447-448

Pracaṇḍakṛt, one of the twelve Suśivas, 8/249-251ab
Pracetasa, the wind, 8/122cd-139ab
Pragītavat, 8/368cd-373ab

Prajāpati, 3/226-231 note; 4/232cd-233 note; 8/119-120 note, 226 note; 30/42-

43ab

Prajñālaṁkāra, 3/52-55 note
prakṛti (Nature), the level of realization of the Vaiṣṇavas, 4/29-30; in relation to

the Sāṁkhya, 8/282-286ab and note; 9/186-189ab, 225-226; 13/32-36 and note,

38-41ab; one of the thirty-six principles, 6/148-151; 8/9-10, 171-177ab, 186190ab, 253cd-60ab and note, 282-286ab and note; 9/40b42ab, 156cd-158 and

note, 167cd-169, 183, 213-220ab; 10/97cd-98ab, 103-104; 11/8, 29-31, 39cd41ab; 13/3-6ab, 274cd-275ab; 16/101cd-105, 254cd-57ab; 21/22cd-24;

pramāna (means, sources of knowledge), 1/54-57; 4/81cd-83; 10/113cd-117;

13/156; 35/7-11ab, 19cd-20, 38-40ab

Pramāṇastotra

(alias

Anubhavastotra,

Pramāṇastutidarśana,

1/201; 9/171-73; 13/128-129ab; 14/9b, 17/103-115ab

Mānastuti),

Pramāṇavārttika, 1/28-30 note, 161-162 note; 3/52-55 note; 4/14 note; 16/276-

278 note

Pramāṇaviniścaya, 4/14 note; 10/347-350ab note

Pramatha, 33/7cd-9ab
prāṇa, (the vital breath), 3/142; 4/97; 5/7-8, 10cd-12ab, 17cd-19ab, 43, 53cd-

54ab, 69; 7/2-71b; 8/7-8, 206cd-208ab; 9/237, 264cd-268; 10/103-104, 187cd227ab, 253cd-256ab; 12/2-3; 14/31-32ab; 15/69-73ab, 81cd-82ab, 93cd-97ab,
272cd-273ab, 296cd-297ab and note, 366, 424cd-428, 509-511ab, 588-591ab;

16/23cd-26ab; 19/11-14 and note; 51cd-53; 21/37-42ab; 23/33-41ab; 21/3742ab; 23/33-41ab; 24/10cd-12 and note; 28/14cd-18ab and note, 222-224ab;
29/46cd-48, 107cd-109ab; 31/43cd-44; means based on-, 6/4cd-251; devouring

of, 6/21cd-23ab; as the location of all the paths,

17/78cd-82; as what

differentiates the body from the rest of the knowable, 28/338b40ab and note; as

the seat of all the deities, 29/178
prāṇa, (exhalation, the ascending breath, symbolized as the Sun, as opposed to
apāna inhalation, the descending breath, symbolized as the Moon), 3/113cd-116
note; 5/86-90ab, 141 note; 6/21cd-28ab, 63-129 e, 215, 222-223; 7/59cd-60ab

TANTRĀLOKA

note; 15/412cd-414ab, 474cd-478ab note; 16/36cd-45ab; 19/17-20; 29/146cd-

147ab and note, 274cd-278a, 289cd-290 and note; 32/16cd-17 and note, 37-

40ab; 37/46 and note; one of the ten main breaths, 5/17cd-19ab, 43 and note;
6/63-129; 28/218cd-220ab note

prāṇana (undifferentiated breathing), 28/218cd-220ab and note, 232cd-236ab,

327cd-332ab
prāṇaśakti, 6/21cd-28ab, 46cd-54; 23/33-41ab
praṇava, see OṀ

Praṇava, name ofa group of deities, 8/328-329ab
prāṇāyāma (control of breathing), 4/89-91; 21/57cd-58
pratibhā, (intuition), 1/2 and note, 116; 3/65-66; 6/13; 10/209-211; 11/76cd-

78ab; 13/131cd-133, 134ab note, 134cd-138, 156, 160 note, 161, 173-182ab,
192-195, 247cd-250

prasaṁkhyana (contemplation of realities), 10/244-245; superior to yoga,

10/278-281ab

pratyāhāra, a term in Pāṇini’s grammar, 3/204cd-205 note
Pravarapura, city, 37/47

Pravarasena, king, 37/47 and note

Prayāga, 8/201cd-202; 15/89-91; 29/65-67

prāyaścitta, rites of reparation, 4/155-158; 8/32cd-35ab; 9/105cd-106ab;

13/309-310; 14/20-22; 15/1cd-2ab note; 19/50cd-51ab; 21/57cd-58; 22/14cd-19;
23/69; 28/408-423ab
Pulinda, one of the hermitages, 29/37-39

Punṇḍravardhana, sacred site, 15/86cd-88; 29/59-63

Puraḥsara, one of the Lords of maṇḍala, 8/449-450ab

Purāṇa, 4/25cd-27; 8/80-82; 13/285 and note; 28/264cd-267ab, 342cd-346ab

Purastīra, holy place, 29/66-67
Pūrṇagiri, holy place, 15/83cd-86ab
puruṣa, aṇu, puṅṁs, etc, the individual soul, one of thirty-six principles, 1/186cd-

189, 8/9-10, 186-193ab; 9/45cd-48ab; 10/3-5, 105-107; 11/8, 37-38ab;
13/271cd-274ab; 15/432-436ab; 16/101cd-105; 17/103-115ab; worlds of that
principle -, 8/278-294; 1/39-40, 137, 141, 221, 284cd-286; 3/170-172ab; 5/5;
8/322-324, 345-352ab; 9/38cd-40ab, 60-61, 68-75ab, 144cd-149ab, 161cd164ab, 174-182, 196-200ab, 205-212, 225-227, 230; 10/177; 13/6cd-9, 16-23,
30cd-37, 42cd-52, 59-63, 77cd-81, 103-110ab, 113cd-116ab, 182cd-185, 204211, 251-253ab; 15/41a-43ab, 432-436ab, 16/240, 32/32-36
Pratiṣṭhā (foundation), one of the five kalās, 8/408cd-411ab, 417-418ab, 446;,

11/8; 16/147-150ab; 31/97-99

Pūrva, - tantra, -śāsana, - śastra, see Mālinīvijaya
Pūrvapañcikā, see also Mālinīpañcikā
Pūrvaphalguni, an asterism, 28/36-39ab
Pūrvaproṣṭhapada, an asterism, 28/106cd-111
Pūrvāśāḍha, an asterism, 28/106cd-111
puryaṣṭaka (the City of Eight – the subtle body), 8/235cd-237, 286b and note,
418cd-420; 9/205-206ab and note; purification of, 24, 17cd-21a; 25/7 note;

29/202cd-208 note
Puṣkara, a deity of the water principle, 8/44acd-441ab
Puṣkara, island, 8/103cd-104, 106

INDEX

Puṣkara, clouds, 8/122cd-139ab

Puṣṭi, 33/6-7ab

Badarī, a sacred place, 28/237cd-248ab

Baka, deity, 33/13-14ab

Bala, deity, 8/179cd-181ab, 438cd-440ab; 33/14cd-17ab
Balabhadra, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab
Baladātr, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab

Balādhyakṣa, one of the eight Aghoris, 8/235cd-237
Balāhaka, mountains, 8/97-98
Balaprada, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab
Balapramathinī, śakti, 8/338cd-339ab, 15/305-306
Balāvaha, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab
Balavat, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab

Balavikaraṇī, śakti, 8/338cd-339ab, 15/305-306

Baleśvara, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab

Bali, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/7cd-9ab, 13-14ab; 34/2-7ab

bali, (offering), 15/472-474ab

Balinanda, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/7cd-9ab
Bhadra, deity of the ether principle, 8/443cd-444ab;

Bhadrā, deity, 33/3-5

Bhadrakāla, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab;

Bhadrakālī, 4/155-158;8/41b43ab, 196cd-200ab, 41 1cd-412
Bhadramūrti, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab
bhādrapada, month, 28/36-39ab
Bhadrāśva, continent, 8/70-79, 108-109

Bhagadatta, 30/102-104

Bhagavadgītā, 1/123; 3/113cd-116, 205a-208ab; 28/326cd-327ab, 362cd-366ab;

Bhagavat, 30/102-104
Bhagavatī, dūi of Śambhunatha, 1/13

Bhairava, 1/2-3, 18, 82-90, 109-112, 123, 284cd-286; 2/29-31, 35-39;1 3/172cd173ab, 179, 192cd-194ab, 198-200ab, 205a-208ab, 220-225, 253cd-254ab, 263264, 271-277, 283-285; 4/22cd-25ab, 31cd-32ab, 36, 123, 135cd-136ab; 6/217218; 8/5-6, 12-16ab; 10/80-81, 225cd-226ab; 11/54,99-100; 12/158, 257cd259ab, 303-306; 15/130cd-131ab, 313-317, 351cd-352ab; 17/1ab; 22/40cd-42;
26/23cd-24ab; 28/96cd-98, 114-121ab, 162cd-166; 29/11-13, 22-24, 45cd-46ab,
161cd-162ab, 233-235; 30/28cd-36ab, 47-51, 94cd-97ab; 31/45cd-50ab, 32/1820ab, 49-53; 34/3; 35/14; 36/2-7ab; 37/12cd-13ab; 8/33-3459/33 etymology,
1/95-100; deity of the fire principle, 8/205-206ab, 441cd-442ab; 15/460-463ab;
16/151cd-157, 159-161; 29/45cd-46ab; 222-223; 30/10cd-12ab, 16cd-17; the
four -, 23/31-32; the eight -, 6/62cd-68ab; 16/17cd-21ab; 29/52-53, 156cd161ab
Bhairavāgama, 29/248-252; see also Bhairavakulatantra
Bhairavakulatantra, Śaiva scripture, 13/300cd-302; 27/44-46; 27/14cd-18ab,

48cd-52, 58cd-59, 121cd-127ab, 387cd-388
Bhairavasadbhāva, 15/239cd-245ab, 247-251ab, 323cd-325; 16/12cd-15ab;
30/16cd-17

TANTRĀLOKA

Bhairavatantra see also Bhairavakulatantrab

Bhairavī, śakti, 29/182-186ab; 36/2-7ab

Bhairavīyakula, see also Bhairavakulatantra

Bhārabhūti, deity of the water principle, 8/440cd-441ab; 33/9cd-12

Bhārata, the continent, 8/57cd-58ab, 78, 80-85, 88-90, 93-96

Bhargaśikhā, -śastra, -kula, -kulatantra, Bhargāṣṭakaśikhākula, Kacabhārgava
(possibly the same work), 2/28; 4/225; 12/18cd-20ab; 15/278b283ab; 32/9cd10ab, 54-62

Bhārgava, 36/2-7ab
Bhartṛhari, 36/117-118

Bhāṣkara, teacher of Abhinavagupta, 37/62

Bhasma, one of the five Praṇavas, 8/328-329ab

Bhatṭa, Siddha, 29/41

Bhaṭṭanātha (alias Śambhunātha), 1/16
Bhatṭārikā, ḍūrī of Śambhunātha, 1/16

bhauteśa, 151506-508
bhautika, Vedic observance, 15-498-505

Bhautika, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9cd-12

Bhava, deity, 6/68cd-72ab; 8/161, 216-220

Bhavabhaktivilāsa, a teacher, 37/62
Bhavabhūti, a Śaiva master, 13/149-151ab
bhāvanā (a term for meditation) 1/73-74; 2/13-14; 3/173cd-174; 4/14; 5/50cd-

52ab, 100cd-105ab, 156cd-158ab; 10/215cd-217ab, 278-281ab; 11/23cd-27;
13/173-177, 327-329; 15/270cd-273ab; 16/270cd-271, 280-282; 17/54-57, 102115ab; 28/346cd-367
bhāvanā, technical term of Mīmāṁsṣā, 1/125cd-132
Bhavodbhava, deity, 8/249-251ab, 449-450ab

Bhīma, deity, 6/68cd-72ab, 8/161, 206cd-208ab, 216-220, 249-251ab, 447-448;
30/20-26ab; 5/25cd-26ab; 11/15cd
Bhīmamudrā, deity, 8/442cd-442ab

Bhīṣana, deity, 30/20-26ab
Bhisma, hero, 16/37-39
Bhogahastakatantra, 29/196-198ab

Bhogakārikā, 9/228-229, 237-239, 261cd-264ab, 272cd-276ab
Bhoja, 8/307-316
Bhrgu, deity, 33/13-14ab
Bhujaga, deity, 33/13-14ab

Bhūrloka (earth world) description of, 8/43cd-120

Bhūteśa, master of Abhinavagupta, 37/62

Bhūtirāja, 1/9; 6/88cd-91ab; 8408cd-11ab; 30/62cd-64ab, 120cd-121ab; 37/6061
Bhuvaneśa, 8/249-251ab, 449-450ab
Bhuvarloka, description of, 8/121-143ab;
Billa, one of the “places of almsgiving”, 29/37-39
Bimba, a deity, 8/368cd-373ab

bindu, 1/62cd-63, 75-77; 3/110-113ab, 133cd-135ab, 137cd-140, 201cd-202ab,
220-225; 5/54cd-58ab, 78, 146, 148-150; 6/21cd-28ab, 161; 8/337-380, 383389, 400-405ab; 15/83cd-88, 432-436ab; 26/10cd-12; 29/239cd-240ab, 244cd-

INDEX

245, 261-262; 30/69cd-70ab; 32/44cd-47ab; one of the kalās of praṇava, 6/161;

8/377-380, 383-389, 424cd-427; 28/174-181; 30/12cd-14, 94cd-97; 32/12cd13ab.
Bodhāī, dāūtī, 29/33cd-34
Brahmā, name of various divine entities, 4/19cd-22ab,

143-144, 248-253;

6/68cd-72ab; 6/138cd-151, 159, 162-163ab, 174-179ab, 185cd-191ab; 8/9-10,
43cd-56ab, 119-120, 122cd-142ab, 143cd-146, 152cd-164, 167cd-168ab,
179cd-185, 216-222, 226-229, 235cd-237, 262b 263ab, 264-271, 383-395ab,
407cd-411ab, 437cd-440ab; 9/55cd-59, 138-139; 13/359-361; 16/254cd-257ab;
24/10cd-12, 17cd-20ab; 28/65-71; 29/179, 248-252, 274cd-276ab; 30/11cd24ab, 64-69ab, 85cd-90, 94-96, 138cd-140, 145, 160-163
brahmacārin, according to the Kula, 29/97-100ab
brahmacārin (celibate student), 15/498-505
Brahmaloka, 8/161, 203-204

brahman, 4/29-30, 120cd-122ab, 137cd-142, 186cd-189ab; 6/166; 10/168-172;
26/58-61ab; 29/97-100ab, 285cd-287ab, 289cd-290; formula, 25/203cd-204ab
Brāhmaṇa, 4/232cd-233
Brahmaṇeśa, deity, 8/318-319

Brāhmaṇi, deity, 8/294-295ab; 29/59-63; 32/3-5

brahmano, the true, 15/515, 595-598ab, 601cd-604ab; killing a -, 21/52-53
Brahmaśiras, mantra, 30/37cd-39ab
Brahmavidyā,

30/62cd-90ab

mantra,

19/23cd-26ab, 29cd-33;

28/361b362; matric

form,

Brahmayāmalatantra, 4/54-57ab, 60-62ab; 5/97cd-100ab; 13/145; 15/43b44;

23/43b44ab; 27/28cd-29; 28/417cd-423ab; 29/11-13
Brāhmi, śakti”, 3/109; 6/176cd-179ab; 8/241cd-244ab; 28/10-14ab; 29/198cd200

branche, rite of, 15/398

Bṛhadvimarśinī, see also liśvarapratyabhijñākārikāvivṛtivimarśinī

Brṛhaspati, 8/230-235ab, 298-300ab; 301cd-302; 9/206cd-212; 36/2-7ab
Buddha, 4/19cd-22ab; 13/347cd-348; see also Buddhist Tantras

Buddhism, Buddhists, 4/29-30; 7/32cd-36ab; 15/471; 16/276-278; 22/12cd14ab; 35/26-27; Buddhist logicians, 1/180cd-181ab; see also Buddhist Tantras

Buddhisṣṭ Tantrism, 1/82-90; 28/296-298

Bahurūpa mantra of Aghora, 4/225cd-228ab and note; 22/20-21 and note
Macchandanātha (alias Mīnanātha, Matsyendranātha), Siddha, 32; 29/29cd-

33ab; 30/102-104
Mādhava, 8/447-448; 33/7cd-9ab
Mādhavakulatantra, 15/531cd-533, 570-571; 24/21cd-22; 29/56
Madhyadeśa, 37/38

Madhyama, deity of the fire principle, 8/441cd-442ab
Maghā, an asterism, 18/36-39ab
māgha, the month (January-February), 28/36-39ab, 53-56ab, 106cd-111, 121cd-

127ab

Mahābhadra, lake, 8/60cd-62ab

Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālī, 4/170

Māhābhārata, 14/37-39; 15/513cd-514; 37/38

TANTRĀLOKA

Mahābhāṣya, 16/268cd-270ab; 35/42cd-43ab
Mahādeva, 6/68cd-72ab; 8/161, 216-220, 249-251ab
Mahādeva, group of 8/249-253ab, 295-300ab, 415-416
Mahākāla, 8/89, 441cd-442ab; 15/183cd-190ab; 33/13-14ab
Mahākālakālī, 4/168-169
Mahākrodha, one of the ,Lords of Wrath, 8/235cd-237
Mahālacchi, dūṭtī of Siddha Vindhyanātha, 29/33cd-34

Mahālaya, deity of the ether principle, 8/443cd-444
Mahāpadma, one of the eight Nāgas, 6/68cd-72ab
Mahāparivaha, wind, 8/122cd-139ab

mahāpreta (The Great Ghost), 15/309-312, 313-314, 322, 339-343ab; 28/88cd90ab; 31/94-96
Mahāṣena, 33/9cd-12

Mahātala, one of seven pātāla,

Mahātejas, 8/249-251ab, 298cd-300ab, 449-450ab
Mahāvaha, wind, 8/122cd-139ab

Mahendra, deity of the wind principle, 8/442cd-443ab
Maheśi, 28/3-5

Maheśvara, epithet and name of Śiva, 2/24-26; 3/90, 117-119, 196cd-197;

4/248-253, 276b; 5/39-40, 96-97ab; 6/28cd-33; 8/196cd-198ab, 400-405ab,
450cd-451; 13/112cd-113ab; 15/218cd-219ab; 16/69cd-70; 18/3cd-6; 22/43-44;
28/114-121ab; 35/43cd-44ab; 28/114-121ab; 35/43cd-44ab; 37/47, 49-51, 58-72
Maheśvara, a Śaiva master, 1/9; 3/90
Maheśvari, 8/241cd-244ab

Mahīdhara, Siddha, 29/41

Mahodara, 15, 183cd-190ab

Mahodaya, city, 8/43cd-56ab

Mahāloka, 6/142cd-145ab; 8/149-152ab

Maināka, mountains, 8/97-98
Mākoṭa, deity of principle sense of self, 8/225, 444cd-445
Mālātantra see also Ratnamālātantrab
Malaya, a mountain chain, 8/86

Malaya, an island, 8/86

Mālinī, 3/198-200ab, 232-233; 11/85cd-91; 15/49-53ab, 116cd-130ab, 131cd133ab, 133cd-145; 15/247-251ab, 331cd-333ab, 374cd-376ab, 377c, 401cd404ab, 411-412ab; 15/135cd-138ab, 143, 151cd-157, 208, 227; 17/10cd-13;
18/417cd-223ab; 29/18-19, 20-21, 45cd-46ab, 55, 187cd-192ab, 201-202ab,
243cd-244ab; 30/16cd-17; 33/19cd-21;
nīpaṉñcikā, 1/18; 23/73cd-76
nīṣāra, 27/112-113; see also Trikasārab
ślokavarttika, 1/18; see also Mālinīvijayavārtika
Maālinīvijaya (alias Mālinītantra, Mālinīśastra, Mālinīmata, Mālinīvijayottara,

Pūrvatantra), 1/18, 23, 62cd-63, 150-151, 167, 186cd-188ab, 192-195, 196,
227, 242-244; 3/68-71ab, 104cd-108; 4/15-16, 33-37, 45cd-47ab, 106-109ab,
189cd-191ab, 212-213ab; 5/107cd-108ab; 7/62cd-65ab; 8/1, 179-181ab, 206cd208ab, 208cd-209ab, 225-226, 235cd-237, 298cd-300ab, 325, 373cd-376,
436cd-437ab; 9/7, 40cd-42ab, 48cd-49ab, 84cd-86, 120-121ab, 134cd-135ab,
143-144ab, 147-149ab, 166cd-167ab, 174-176, 190cd-191ab, 201cd-202,

INDEX

276cd-279ab, 308cd-310; 10/1-2, 89-91ab, 121cd-122ab, 138-140ab, 149cd151ab, 167, 185-186ab, 240cd-241, 252cd-253ab, 271cd-273ab, 273cd-277,
284cd-286, 301b; 11/32-34ab, 34cd-35, 46-47, 80cd-82ab, 85cd-89; 13/7377ab, 117cd-120ab, 199-203, 213-216, 218-222ab, 247cd-250, 253b, 312314ab, 327, 332-333ab, 347cd-348; 14/37-39, 41-42ab; 15/2cd-7, 14-17, 47,
53cd-55, 117cd-125ab, 135cd-137ab, 162-163ab, 232cd-233, 239cd-245ab,
245cd-246, 253cd-255, 296cd-303, 309-312, 313-314, 323cd-325, 353cd-358,
361-362, 365, 374cd-376ab, 377a, 378cd-385ab, 399-401ab, 412cd-414ab,
417cd-418ab, 444cd-446, 456cd-459, 472-474ab, 534-537ab, 546-551ab,
551cd-557ab; 16/1-2, 3-4, 7cd-9, 73-86, 90cd-93ab, 100-101ab, 106-107, 109110ab, 117-125ab, 132-135ab, 143-146, 147-150, 185-186, 210-211 end note,
212, 232-233, 276-178, 288; 17/1-3ab, 4cd-5ab, 53, 58-60, 65-66, 74-78ab,
85cd-87, 88-91, 103-115ab; 19/1, 11-14, 54-55; 20/1 lcd-13ab; 21/2-3, 14cd-19;
23/11-12ab, 56-58, 73ab, 83-87ab, 87cd-89; 27/1, 37cd-39; 28/417cd-423ab;
29/8, 186cd-187ab, 192cd-195, 196-198ab, 219-220, 10cd-11ab, 18-19, 26cd53, 55cd-57; 31/1, 4cd-5, 60-61, 71cd-73; 32/6cd-7ab, 10cd-12ab; 33/2-21;
36/24cd-25ab, 30-31
Mālinīvijayavārttika, 1/18, 180-181ab; 2/12; 3/205a-208ab, 286, 5/52cd-53ab,
83-85, 100-105ab, 121; 11/54, 93-117; 13/285, 290-293; 35/19cd-20; 37/30-31
Maālayavat, a mountain, 8/63cd-67, 70-71

manas (internal sense, mind, etc.), one of the thirty-six principles, 1/75-77, 214,

222, 224-225; 3/39, 4/159-163; 9/235-242ab, 272cd-276ab; 13/188cd-191;
16/241; 24/17cd-20ab

Maānasa, lake, 8/60cd-62ab
maṇḍala, 1/2; 3/68-71ab; 4/49-50; 6/2-4ab; 8/244cd-247ab;

13/152cd-153;

15/229cd-231ab, 296cd-297ab; 16/5-9, 21cd-26ab, 81; 17/lcd-3ab; 21/11cd-15,
16-24; 24/10cd-12; 27/44-46, 50-52, 56cd-58ab; 18/106cd-111, 425cd-431ab;

29/8, 9, 25-27ab, 75cd-77, 150cd-153ab; 30/9cd-10ab; 31/1-163;

Maṇḍaleśvara, group of eight deities, 8/449-450ab

Maṇḍaleśvara, deity of principle sense of self, 8/225, 444cd-445
Mandara, mountain, 8/58cd-60ab

Mandra, disciple of Abhinavagupta, 37/66, 72, 73
Maṅgalā, ḍūīṭī of Kūrmanātha, 29/29cd-33ab

Māṅgalaśastra, 5/39-40
Manmatha, 33/7cd-9ab

Manonmanī, 8/295-98ab, 338cd-339ab, 345-52ab
Manonuga, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab
Manoratha, the brother of Abhinavagupta, 37/64

Manovatī, 8/43cd- 56ab

Mantra, 1/62cd-63; 2/24-26, 35-38; 3/220-225, 268-270, 289-290; 4/49-50,
57cd-58, 60-62ab, 66-68, 213cd-221ab, 225cd-228ab, 258cd-261ab; 5/53cd54ab, 81-82, 136cd-137, 152-154ab; 6/125, 216, 226cd-227ab; 7/2-59ab;
9/42cd-44ab, 308cd-310; 9/44-53, 85cd-91; 12/21cd-22ab; 13/120cd-121ab,
197-198, 213-216, 218-222ab; 14/13, 40; 15/2cd-7, 21-23ab, 27- 30, 47-58, 61,
65, 69-73ab, 73cd-76ab, 395-397, 418cd-424ab; 15/456cd-466ab, 521cd-531ab,
561-562, 579-80, 588cd-591ab; 19/21-23ab, 42cd-44ab, 48cd-50ab; 20/2-7;

TANTRĀLOKA

Mantra, limbs of (aṅgamantra), 8/357cd-373ab; 11/90-91; 15/49-53ab, 139cd-

142, 328-329, 369-374ab, 401cd-406ab, 418cd-421; 16/151cd-157, 159-161,
190-193ab, 212; 30/10ab -11ab note.

Mantra, repetition of (japa), 1/89-90; 3/289-290ab; 4/57cd-58, 203 note; 6/107;

7/39cd-52ab, 57-59ab; 13/140-143ab, 173-177, 259cd-262ab; 14/25, 33cd-35ab;
15, 114cd-115ab, 143-145, 353cd-358, 391cd-393, 463cd-466ab, 509-51 1ab,
537cd-540ab, 579-580; 24/6-10ab; 26/28cd-29ab; 27/37cd-39; 29/82, 93-95,
149cd-150ab; all is -, 4/194; the true -, 12/13

Mantraśvaras, 1/78-81, 242-244 note; 9/53cd-55ab, 90cd-93ab; 10/6-7ab, 12cd-

17, 83-84, 103-104 note, 110-113ab, 118cd-121ab, 122cd-127ab and note,
135cd-137, 168-172, 178-184, 209-211, 284cd-286, 289-294ab; 13/275cd276ab; 15/339-343ab
Manu, 6/138cd-140ab; 8/94-96

mārgasīrṣa, month (November-December), 28/ 31-35, 36-39ab, 53-56ab

Mārkaṇḍa, 8/149-151ab
Maārtaṇḍakāli, 4/159-163 note
Marudeśa, a sacred place, 15/89-91, 92-93ab note
Marukośa, a sacred place, 15/92-93ab note; 29/59-63

Mata, 13/300cd-302, 319-321ab; see also Siddhayogīśvarīmatab

Mataṅga, an ancient master, 18/391- 393
Mataṅgatantra, Mataṅgapārameśvara, 1/46 and note, 202-206, 224-225 and
note; 6/227cd-228ab and note; 8/1 note, 320-321ab and note, 330cd-332ab note,

379-380 and note, 428-434ab and note; 9/4b -6 and note, 45cd-48ab and note,
190cd-191ab and note, 248-249ab, 260-261ab; 13/283-284b and note, 293cd-

295ab; 15/8-11 and note, 278b - 283ab; 16/254cd-257ab and note; 22/87cd-89;
25/24cd-28ab and note
Mataśāstra, 22/45-46ab; see also Siddhayogīśvarīmataḥ
Matatantra, 26/74-75ab; see also Siddhayogīśvarīmataḥ
Mati, 33/6-7ab wedding, rite of,15/498-505
Mātṛkā, 3/198-200ab and note, 232-233; 8/337cd-338ab; projection of,

15/116cd-120, 130cd-131ab, 139cd-142, 239cd-245ab, 331cd-333ab, 401cd404ab; 16/135cd-138ab and note, 139cd-142, 159-161, 208, 227; 18/7; 22/2021; 27/34cd-36ab; 28/417cd-423ab; 29/18-19 note, 45cd- 46ab, 89-91; 30/16cd17; 33/19cd-21 and note.
Mātṛnandā, city of the Rudras, 8/43cd-56ab
Mātṛsadbhāva (Essence of the Mothers, or Essence of the Perceiver) 4/176178ab, 189cd-191ab note; 6/217-218; 15/247-251ab and note, 353cd-358 note,

463cd-441ab; 16/17cd-21ab, 151cd-157; 29/18-21, 46cd-48, 187cd-92ab note;
31/97- 99 note; 33/30
Matsyendranātha see also Macchandanātha
Maāyā, in general, 1/4 note, 214; 3/10-11, 127cd-128ab; 4/9-12, 25cd-27, 33-37,

186cd-189ab; 6/92cd-96; 8/227- 229; 9/138-139 note; 13/45cd-48, 113cd-

116ab, 126-127, 231cd-234ab note, 271cd-275ab, 316cd-317ab, 353cd-355;

15/262cd-268ab; 16/209, 309cd-311; 28/65-71; 29/198cd-200, 289cd-290;
32/44cd-47 ab; 37/9, 11cd-12ab;

Maāyāpura, Māyāpuri, a sacred place, 11/89-91; 29/59-63
Mayatantra, 16/ 1 08

Medhā, 33/6-7ab

INDEX

Medhātithi, king of Śāka, 8/103cd-104
Meru, mountain, 5/112cd-113ab note, 8/43b-60ab, 62cd-63ab, 68 and note, 6970, 71 note, 72-78, 93, 106, 110, 118 and note, 244cd-247ab; 9/32cd-35ab;
10/95cd-96ab; 31/136-137 note, 141 and note;

Meśa, 33/13-14a

Meśanātha, Siddha, 29/29cd-33ab
Meśāsya. 15/183cd-194ab and note
Pāśupta scriptures, the eight Pramāṇas (pramāṇa), a group of deities, 8/328-

329ab
Mimāṁsā, 1/125cd-132; 4/232cd-233, 236-23; 10/18-19, 57cd-58ab; 16/ 268cd270ab.
Miīna, 33/13-14ab
Miīnanātha (alias Macchandanātha, Matsyendranātha), 4/263cd-270ab; 26/71

Mitra, 8/221-222

Mocikā, 8/383-389

Mokśanātha, a Siddha, 30/102-104 note

Mokśadharma 15/513cd-514, 1/49; 4/255; 8/196cd-198ab, 205-206ab, 209cd212ab, 230-235ab; 11/103; 13/90cd-92ab, 130cd-131ab, 199-203, 236-238;
14/32cd-40; 28/213-218ab, 230cd-232ab; in holy places, 8/209cd-212ab, 230235ab; 28/237cd-261ab; of the yogi, 28/292-302; of the man of knowledge,

28/303-309; of the liberated in life, 28/310-324ab; the last thought at the

moment of death, 28/325-367
Mṛgendratantra (-āgama), 1/43-44 note; 5/112cd-113ab note; 15/21-22ab note,
69-73ab note, 399-401ab note, 442cd-443ab note, 456cd-459 note, 481cd- 489,

497 note; 16/1-2 note, 239 note; 17/30cd-33 note; 26/45-51ab note; 29/201202ab note; 31/11cd-24ab note

Mṛtyuhantr, one of the Lords of Wrath, 8/235cd-237
Mṛtyukāli, 4/153-154 note

Mṛtyuñjayatantra 16/59cd-62, 223cd-226; 21/11cd-15

Mudrā, 3/268-270; 5/79-80 note; 9/308cd-310 note; 13/227cd-229ab; 15/22cd-

223ab, 259ab, 521cd-531ab; 26/28cd-33ab; 32/1-65; all is-, 4/200; as a secret
gesture of recognition, 4/263cd-270ab; 29/37-39; expressed with the mind,

Yoga and word, 26/66-70; vitality of, 29/42 note; 32/63-65; supreme Skyfarer

(khecarī), 29/150cd-153ab; XXXI, 4-62 e; etymology of, 32/3; one of four
pīthas, 37/18-19ab; of the cow, 15/292cd-295ab; of the jar, 15/69-73ab and
note, 326-328ab; of the bestowal of a boon, 15/326-328ab; of protection,

15/326-328ab; of the deer, 15/418cd-421; of withdrawal, 17/30cd-33; Khecarī,

32/4-62, 32/54-62; Triśūlinī, 32/4-6ab, Krodhanā, 32/4-6ab; Bhairavī, 32/4-6ab,
49-53; Lelihānikā, 32/4-6ab; Mahāpretā, 32/4-6ab, Yoga, 32/4-6ab; Jvālinī

32/4-6ab, 27-29; Kṣobhiṇī, 32/4-6ab; Dhruvā, 32/4-6ab; Padma, 32/4-6ab;

Śaśāṅkini, 32/54-62; of the heart, 32/54-62; tranquil, 32/54-62; of the power,
32/54-62; kuṇḍalinī, 32/54-62; of withdrawal, 32/54-62; Vīrabhairava, 32/54-62
Mukuṭa, 8/368cd-373ab

Mukuṭatantra 15/513cd-514; 25/16-18; see also Mukuṭaśāstrab
Mukuṭottaratantra, 30/ 80cd-81; see also Mukuṭaśāstrab
Mulla, asterism, 38/36-39ab, 1 06cd-111

TANTRĀLOKA

mūlamantra, basic, root Mantra, 15/49-53ab and note, 276cd-278ab, 292cd295ab note, 418cd-421; 17/88-91; 26/15-16; 28/174-181; 29/222-223 and note;

31/101

Muni, group of deities, 8/264-271
mūrti, iconic form Siva, 6/68cd-72ab and note; 8/216-220 and note, 244cd-274a
e, 249-251ab; 15/47 and note, 66-68, 76cd-78ab; miūrtimantra (OṀ HAṀ),

15/139cd- 142, 238-239ab and note

Yakśa, 8/264-271

Yakśī, 41cd-43ab
Yama, one of the Lokapālas, 6/68cd-72ab note; 8/43cd-56ab, 105, 179cd-181ab,

438cd-40ab; 15/222cd-225ab;

Yama, mythical Śaiva master, 28/391-393
yama and niyama (prohibitions and disciplines), 4/87-88
Yamakālī, 4/151 note
Yāmala, 15/319-320 and note; see also Devyāyāmala e Brahmayāmala
Yamunā, river, 15/183cd-190ab and note

Yāmyā, 19/52-53; 33/3-5;

Yaśasvini, city of Varna, 8/43cd-56ab
Yāska, 6/117-118 note
Yava, island, 8/ 86
Yoga, 4/15-16, 49-50 and note, 57cd-58; 6/72cd-75ab; 8/230-235ab, 244-248;

10/246; 13/152cd-153, 173-177, 330; 14/25, 40; 15/5-11, 18-19, 114cd-115ab,
154cd-155ab; 16/243, 289-293ab, 295cd-299ab, 300-302; 19/23cd-27ab; 21/1618ab, 29, 34; 24/6-12; 25/24cd-28ab; 26/66-70; 28/20cd-23ab, 256cd-259ab
note; 32/66;
Yoga, system, 1/4; 4/106-109ab; 8/253cd-260ab note, 264-271; 9/88cd-90ab;

35/26-27, 36

Yogas, group of eight, 8/235cd-241ab, 251cd-253ab and note, 262cd-263ab,

415-416, 428-434ab, 446; 16/114-116, 131

Yogacārantantra, 4/126-127 and note; 6/58; 13/240-242ab; 15/65; 23/12cd-

13ab; 28/10-14ab; 29/82; 97-100ab, 150cd-153ab; 32/9cd-10ab note, 30-31; see

also Yogasaṁcāratantra

Yogamudrā, a variety of Khecarīmudrā, 32/4-6ab

Yogānanda, master of Abhinavagupta’s teacher, 37/62
Yogasaṁcāratantra (alias Yogasaṁcara, Yogacāratantro), 4/126-144; 6/58;

13/240-242ab; 15/65, 391cd-393; 28/10-14ab; 29/82, 97- 100, 150cd-153ab;

32/9cd-10ab note, 12cd-31
Yogasūtra, 4/86-88; 13/146 note; 28/281-286 note, 349cd-352ab note

Yogeśī, 28/10-14ab; 29/52-53; 33/3-5

Yogeśvarīdatta, nephew of Abhinavagupta, 37/76
Yogeśvarīmata, see also Siddhayogīśvarīmatab

yogi, 3/75cd-77, 104cd-108; 4/213cd-221ab, 225cd-228ab; 9/26-27; 10/198,
205-207, 242-243, 253cd-256ab, 261-262, 273cd-277, 14/25; 15/8-10, 18-19;
16/293cd-295ab; 21/29; 28/292-302, four types of,

yoginī, 1/1 note; 3/253cd-257ab; 4/259cd-261ab; 5/73, 121; 15/181-183ab;

28/6-9, 19V-20ab, 23cd-25ab, 85-86, 371-373ab; 29/27cd-29ab, 40, 71cd-72ab

INDEX

and note, 104-106ab note, 124cd-126ab, 150cd-153ab, 182-186ab, 221; 37/46

and note
yoginībhū (born of a yoginī), 1/1 note; 29/43-45ab note, 162cd-163
Yoginīkaula, 7/39cd-52ab
Yonyarṇavatantrab; 39/164-166ab

Rāhu, demon, 6/65-67ab and note, 68cd-72ab note, 100-101 and note, 102-103,
107, 23/52-55 and note

Raibhava, one of the eight Yogas, 8/235cd-237
Raivata, wind, 8/122cd-139ab

Rājagṛha, 29/59-63
Rājapurā, sacred city, 15/86cd-88 and note
Rājataraṅgiṇī, 35 note; 28/237cd-248ab note, 37/47 note
Rākṣasa, demons, 8/43cd-56ab, 264-271

Raktā, 4/62cd-65

Raktakāli, 6/149 note
Raktākṣa, one of the Lords of Wrath, 8/235cd-237
Rāma, 36/2-7ab, 10

Rāmagupta, disciple of Abhinavagupta, 37/68
Rāmakaṇṭha, 1/46 note, 201 note

Ramyaka, continent, 8/75

rasa (aesthetic taste), 1/119cd-122 note; 36/15; 37/58
Rasātala, one of seven pātālas,
Ratiśekhara, deity and Mantra, 15/239cd-245ab note, 245cd-246, 323cd-325;
16/1cd-15ab, 151cd-157 note

Ratṇalālātantra, 1/273-274; 13/229cd-231ab, 28/112-113, 127-139ab, 307-309,
415-417ab and note; 29/54,

37/25cd-29

192cd-195, 201-202ab, 237-239ab, 282-283;

Rātrikulatantra, 15/593

Raudrī, 6/52, 56-57; 8/338cd-339ab, 355cd-357ab, 373cd-376 note, 450-451;
15/305-306

Raurava, name of
a deity and of a hell, 8/24cd-27, 368cd-373ab; 13/353cd-355
Rauravāgama (-tantra, -śāsana, -mata, Ruru), 1/46; 6/140cd-142ab and note,
226cd-227ab note; 8/1 note, 31cd-32ab and note, 87 and note, 99-101 and note,

162, 168cd-170, 272-273ab note, 345-cd-352ab note; 9/40cd-42ab and note,

217-220 and note; 15/401cd-404ab note; 19/11-14 note; 22/20-21; 28/112-113
note; 30/10cd-1 1ab note; 30/41cd

Rauravavārttika (alias Ruruvārttika, Rauravādivṛtti), 8/92, 182cd-183, 345352ab note
Rāvaṇa, demon, 36/2-7ab

rṛbhu, one of the eight Bestowers of Yoga, 8/264-271

RHṚMŪṂ, 19/21-23ab and note
Roddhṛī, kalā, 8/388-389
Rodhani, kalā, 8/388-389
Rodhikā, kalā, 8/388-389

Rohiṇī, an asterism, 28/36-39ab, 106cd-111

rṣi, 1/273-274, 8/282-286ab

ṛtarddhi, a wind, 8/122cd-139ab

TANTRĀLOKA

Rudrakoṭi, a deity of the ether principle, 8/443cd-444ab
Rudraloka, 8/161

Rudrāṇī, 8/264-271

Rudrāṅkuśa, one of the eight Eight Pāśupta scriptures called Pramāṇas, 8/328-

329ab
Rundhani, kalā, 8/383-389

rūpavrata; deities, 8/122cd-139ab

Ruru, see Rauravāgama

Lāhulā, a sacred place, 15/89-91

Lakṣaṇa, one of the eight Pāśupta scriptures called Pramāṇas, 8/328-329ab
Lakṣmaṇa, legendary Śaiva master, 36/10

Lakṣmaṇagupta, master of Abhinavagupta, 1/11; 15/247-251ab; 37/60-61

Lakṣmi, 15/183cd-190ab; 33/6-7ab
Lākuḻa, 8/203-204; 16/131; 36/2-7ab

Lakuḻeśa, Lakuleśvara, Lakulīśa, alias Nakuleśa, mythical Śaiva master,
founder ofa Pāśupata school, 37/13cd-15
Lakulin, a deity of the water principle, 8/230-235ab, 440cd-441ab; 16/114-116

Lakulīśa, 33/13-14ab

Lalita, as one of the eighteen Rudras, 8/368cd-373ab

Lalitāditya, the king, 37/39
Lāṅgalin, 33/13-14ab

Laṅkā, city, 8/86
Lehihānikā, a type of Khecarīmudrā, 32/4-6ab
Līlākāra, 8/108-109

Liṅga, 4/106-109ab; worship of-, 4/213cd-221ab, 256-257ab; 27/11, 50-59b;
28/417cd-423ab; 29/141cd-142ab; various types of-, 5/112cd-119; 27/1-29;
28/237cd-247ab, 250cd-256ab; the body as – supreme, 29/170-173; the true

Liṅga -, 32/32-36; 37/49-51
Lohita,
33/13-14ab

Lokāloka, mountain, 8/107-109, 113-114, 118

Lokapāla, Guardians of the regions, 15/221cd-225ab, 399-401; 16/17cd-21ab;

33/3-5,

Lollaṭa Bhaṭṭa , Śaiva master, 1/180cd-181a
Lumpaka, assistant of Abhinavagupta, 37/81
Vācaspatimiśra, 9/272cd-276ab note

8/373cd-376 note; 15/305-306

Vāgīśvaṁī, 63; 8/298cd-300ab note, 326-327; 15/401cd-404ab note; 17/8cd-lOab
note, 34-35 note, 58-60 note, 74-78ab; 28/397-399
Vaibhāśika, Buddhist school, 4/29-30 note
Vaibhava, one of the eight Yogas,
Vaibhr̥āja, forest, 8/60cd-62ab
Vaidyuta, wind, 8/122cd-139ab
Vaimala, “Śaiva school, 13/303-306 and note

Vairiñci, 29/52-53

vai’sākha, month (April-May), 28/36-39ab note

INDEX

Vaiśeṣika, philosophical school, 3/25-27 note; 9/257cd-259ab, 297cd-299ab
note, 305; 15/194-195 note
Vaisṇava, one of the eight Yogas, 8/235cd-237

Vaiṣṇavī, 6/176cd-179ab; 8/241cd-244; 28/10-14ab; 29/52-53; 33/3-5
vājapeya, Vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505
Vājasanīyatantra, Vājasineyatantra, 4154; 13/143cd-144
Vajrāṅka, wind, 8/122cd-139ab

Vaktaṣṭi,

Siddha, 29/29cd-33ab

Vākyapadīya (‘of the sentence and the word”), 15/194-195 note; 17/14-15 note;

35/1-3ab note
Valkala, Siddha, 29/41

Vāma,

448;,

8/249-251ab, 300cd-301ab, 373cd-376, 423-424ab, 428-434ab, 447-

Vāmā, 4/19cd-22ab; 6/52, 56-57; 8/295-298ab, 337cd-339ab, 355cd-357ab,
373cd-376 note, 423-424ab, 450cd-451; 13/314cd-316ab; 15/305-306, 422424ab, 518
vāmācāra, ''left" school, 8/32cd-35ab and note; 11/85cd-89; 13/300cd-302, 321323ab, 324cd-326ab; 15/278cd-283ab, 319-320; 37/11cd-12ab, 25cd-29
Vāmadeva, one of the five faces of Siva, 1/18 note; 8/368cd-373ab; 15/203cd206ab and note; 30/74cd-75ab
Vāmadeva, 8/249-251ab, 449-450ab

Vāmadevī, a deity of the principle Pure Knowledge, 8/450cd-451
Vamana, 30/20-26ab note; 36/2-7ab; 37/62

Vāmanadatta, kaśmiri author, 5/I54cd-155ab note

Vāmanaka, maestro di Abhinavagupta, 37/62

Vāmanātha, master of Abhinavagupta, 37/60-61
Vamanī, and relative mantra, 17/40b45ab

Vāmeśa, divine entity. 6/68cd-72ab

Vāmeśvarī, 4/176-178ab

Vāṇāsārasvatī, dea, 8/ 43cd-56ab

vanaprastha, forest dweller, 15/498-505
Vapuṣmat, 8/103cd-104

Varadevanātha, Siddha, 29/33cd-34

Varāha, island, 8/86, 97-98

Varāhagupta, grandfather of Abhinavagupta, 37/53
Varaṇā, a sacred place, 15/89-91, 92-93ab note
Vārāṇasī (Benares), 15; 15/89-91; 29/59-63

Vārendra, a sacred place, 15/86cd-88, 92-93ab note
Varuṇa, one of the Lokapāla, 30/42-43ab note, 102-104

Vāruṇa, region, 8/83-84
Varuṇā, a sacred place, 29/66-67

Varuṇatantra, 25/13-15
Vāsanā (mental disposition, impression, etc.), 4/155-158; 6/16-20; 15/21-22ab,

34cd-35ab; 16/163cd-168 note, 170cd-174 and note, 193-196ab; 26/33cd-37ab;

28/261cd-264ab; 35/7-11ab
VAŠṢAT, 30/43cd-45ab

Vassolini, I., 37/65 note
Vastrāpada, 8/208cd-209ab

TANTRĀLOKA

Vasu, 8/43cd-56ab, 139cd-142ab
Vasu, asterism, 28/106cd-111
Vāsudeva, 30/79cd-80ab

Vāsuki, one of the eight Nāgas, 6/62cd-72ab note; 28/1 14-121ab; 36/2-7ab

Vatsalikā (aunt of Mandra, a disciple of Abhinavagupta), 37/73, 82
Vātsyāyana, 1/246 note

Vaṭuka, 28/130cd-137; 29/27cd-29ab
VAUṢAT, 17/24cd-25ab, 53, 58-60, 69-72; 22/23-27ab; 28/174-181; 30/43cd45ab
Vāyu, one of the Lokapāla, 6/68cd-72ab note; 8/ 43cd-56ab; 15/222cd-225ab;
30/42-43ab note
Vāyuvegā, 33/3-5

Veda, vedico, 1/125cd-132 note, 4/25cd-27, 229cd-233 and note, 240-243ab,
248-253; 6/152; 8/153cd-154, 216-220, 413-414; 15/175cd-177ab; 16/210-211
note, 268cd-270ab note; 25/16-18; 28/48cd-52; 35/26-27, 36; 37/1 1cd-12ab

Vedānta, 4/29-30 note; 13/346cd-347ab note

Vedi, 8/264-271

Veggenti (sette), constellation, 8/143cd-146

veglia, 1/78-81; 6/83cd-84ab; 10/227cd-309; 29/222-223
Venere, planet, 6/68cd-72ab note; 28/36-39ab

Vetāla, divine entities, 28/96cd-98; 31/45-50ab
Vibhīṣaṇa, 36/2-7ab

Vibhu, 8/373cd-376
Vibhvī, 8/373cd-376 notal 15/305-306

Vicitranātha, master of Abhinavagupta, 37/62
vidhi (injunction), technical term of the Mimāṁsā, 1/123 note, 125bR134ab
note; 4/229cd-230ab, 32cd-33 note, 236-237 and note; 15/606-608ab

vidyā, mantra “female”, 1/2 note; 7/39cd-52a. 53-59ab; 16/232-233 and note,
237; 23/52-58; 26/21-23ab; 29/55, 166cd-68; 30/20-26ab; of the supreme

brahman, 30/107-110ab; of initiation, 30/110cd-115; of Parameśvara, 30/116-

120ab;
Vidyā, 1/242-244; 15/309-312
Vidyādhara, divine entities, 8/43cd-56ab; 8/122cd-139ab

Vidyādhipa, one of twelve Suśiva, 8/247-248; 30/41cd
Vidyādhipati, Vidyāpati, Vidyāguru, 1/201; 9/171-173 note; 13/128-129ab;

14/9b; 17/103-115ab
Vidyāṅgahrdaya, manra (OṀ OṀ OṀ OMṀ OM), 30/37cd-40ab
Vidyeśa, 8/318-319

Vidyeśvara, divine entities, 1/242-244, 6/68cd-72ab note; 8/193cd-196ab,

289cd-291, 341-344, 345-352ab, 418cd-420, 450cd-451; 15/309-312; 17/63;
23/97-98

Vidyutvat, mountain, 8/99-101

Viennot, O., 15/183cd-190ab note
Vijabror, city, 37/39 note

Vijaya, name of various divine entities, 8/368cd-373ab; 37/39 and note;
33/14cd-17ab;
Vijara, world of Virabhadra, 8/196cd-198ab

INDEX

Vijjambā, dāī, 29/29cd-33ab
Vojñānabhairava, “Śaiva work, 3/168-169 note; 5/52cd-53ab note, 71 note,

135cd-136ab note; 10/204 note; 11/29-31 note; 15/480cd-481ab note; 32/4-6ab

note

vijñānakevalin, category of acquaintances, 9/90cd-93ab; see also knowing
subjects “disorganized by knowledge”

vikalpa (mental representation, discursive thinking, etc.), 1/50-51, 119cd-122,

146-147, 171, 174cd-176ab, 179cd-184ab, 198-201 and note, 210, 214, 217219, 221, 228, 263-268; purification of, 4/2-12, 4/49-50 note, 109cd-114ab,
225; 5/2-5, 9-10ab, 14cd-16ab; 7/30cd-36a e; 8/12-16ab; 10/188cd-192, 200203, 247-252ab; 11/55-59, 70; 13/103-105, 197-198, 240-242ab; 15/42cd-26,
15/112cd-113ab, 262cd-272ab and note, 273cd-275ab, 350-351, 599cd-604ab;

16/196cd-200ab, 250-251 and note, 257cd-261ab and note, 280-282, 284-285;

28/303-306, 408-409ab, 413-414; 29/89-91; 29; 29/182-186ab
vikramāṅkadevacarita, kaśmiri work, 37/47 note

Vikṛtānanā, 33/3-5
Vimala, Siddha, 29/29cd-33ab

Vimalā, mother of Abhinavagupta, 75; 1/1 note; 8/383-389

Vimalā, kalā, 8/383-389

Vimaleśvara, a deity of the wind principle, 8/442cd-443ab

vimarśa, 1/146-148; 3/196cd-197, 200cd-201; 11/46-47, 55-60ab, 71; 15/270cd272ab, 401-404ab; 16/250-251 and note, 257cd-261ab and note, 280-282, 286-

287; 33/28cd-29; as vitality of Mantra, 29/154cd-156ab; as the nature of

awakened Mantra, 30/2-3

Vināyaka, divine entities, 8/43cd-56ab, 122cd-139ab

Vindhya, Vindhyanātha, Siddha, 29/29cd-34
Vipula, mountain, 8/58b, 60ab

Viīra, 8/368cd-373ab

Vīrabhadra, 8/179cd-181ab, 196cd-200ab and note, 247cd-253ab; 262cd-263ab

note, 407cd-411ab, 415-416, 438cd-440ab; 9/3-4ab

Vīrabhairava, variety of mudrā Eterovagab; 32/54-62

Virajā, a sacred place, 15/89-91; 29/59-63
Viranāyaka, diviṉe entities, 6/68cd-72ab

Vīranāyikā, 33/2

Virāvalī( -tantra, -kulatantra, -bhairavatantra), “Śaiva work, 4/89-91; 6/72cd-

75ab; 12/ 22cd-25; 29/162cd-163, 177, 233-235, 272-273ab; 32/9cd-10ab note,
44cd-47ab
Virāvaliḥr̥daya, “Śaiva work, 15/102cd-104ab
Virāvalipada, “Śaiva work, 15/107cd-109ab
Vireśa, group of eight deities, 8/295-298ab, 421-422
viṣa ( “venenum”"), 168-174 and note

Viśākha, asterism, 28/36-39ab
Visara, 8/368cd-373ab

Viśāvarta, wind, 8/122cd-139ab
Viṣṇu, 4/248-253; 6/68cd-72ab note, 145cd-146, 174-179ab; 8/9-10, 43cd-56ab,
155-57, 161 note, 221-222, 262cd-263ab note, 264-271, 407cd-408ab; 9/32cd35ab note, 55cd-59; 10/151cd-157; 13/ 268cd-27lab, 287cd-289, 359-361;

TANTRĀLOKA

15/209cd-21 I and note, 226cd-229ab, 307; 17/4cd-5ab; 24/17cd-20ab, 28/65-71,
237cd-48ab; 30/42-43ab and note; 30/79cd-80ab
Viṣṇudharmottarapurāna, 31/39-4l1ab note

viṣṇuiti, 4/19cd-22ab, 25cd-27 note, 29-30, 38; 10/135cd-137, 168-172; 11/97
note; 13/279cd-281ab note, 303-308, 312-314ab, 316cd-319ab, 347cd-348;
15/471, 570-571, 586cd-588ab; 16/254cd-257ab; 22/12cd-14ab; 28/395-396;
29/73cd-75ab; 35/30
Viṣṇuloka, the world of Viṣṇu, 8/161 note

ṇupurāna, 28/342cd-346ab note

Viśvā, 33/2

Viṣuvat, the equinox, 3/170-172ab note; 6/113cd-114 nota. 115-115, 200cd-

208ab and note; 25/13-15 note

Viśvedeva (‘Tutti-gli-dēi”), 8/428-434ab

Viśveśa, 8/318-319
Viśveśvara, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab
Viśve”vari,
33/2 ordinary life, worldly conduct, ordinary conceptions
(vyavahāra, loka, lokācāra, etc.), 1/180cd-181ab note; 7/32cd-36ab; 13/207cd-

211; 15/23cd-30, 278cd-283ab; 24/21cd-22; 32/20cd-24; 35/26-27, 30
Vitastā, river, 38/237cd-248ab; 37/39 note, 49-51, 52

Vrateśvara, 22/23-27ab

Vṛddhi, 33/6-7ab

Vṛṣabha, mountain, 8/94-96
vyāna, `ʻpervading? breath; 5/10cd-17ab, 44-50, 53cd-54ab; 6/206cd-207ab, 214

Vyāpin, 8/397cd-405ab, 424cd-426

vyāpinī (the Pervasive One), one of eight kalās del praṇava, 6/161 note, 163cd-

165;

8/186-190ab,

395cd-397ab;

15/313-314,

29/158cd-160ab, 257-258 note; 30/12cd-14 note
Vyomarūpa, 8/397cd-399, 424cd-426

432-436ab;

23/33-41ab;

Vyomātmaka, 8/400-405ab
vyomavyāpin (Pervader of Space), mantra, 6/226cd-227ab note; 7/37cd-38ab;
22/20-21 and note
Vyūha, one of the eight Eight Pāśupta scriptures called Pramāṇas, 8/328-329ab
Śśakti, female partner of a Kaula adept, 28/104cd-106ab, 417cd-423ab;

29/100cd-106ab, 107cd-111ab, 121-124ab, 154cd-156ab

śaktipāta (descent of the power of grace), 1/96-100; 4/33-37, 51-53, 81cd-83,

203; 9/171-173, 186-189ab; 13/49-52, 90cd-92ab, 97, 101b, 117cd-120ab, 128129ab, 129cd-310, 323cd-324ab, 341-342; 14/23, 37-39; 15/20, 35cd-38ab,
275cd-276ab, 418cd-421, 444cd-446, 451cd-456ab, 493cd-494ab; 16/310cd311; 17/73, 94-97ab; 19/2-8: 22/10-12ab, 35cd-37ab; 23/90-92; 24/2-3;
25/22cd-23ab; 28/281-286, 395-396; 29/196-198ab, 202cd-208; 37/69

Śabarabhāṣya, 1/123 note; 4/232cd-233 note
Śśabdabrahman, 8/203-204 and note

Śabdarāśi (Assembly of Sounds), 3/198-200ab, 232-233; 15/130cd-131ab, 411412ab, 16/151cd-157, 210-211 note; 33/19cd-21 and note

Śaivaparibhāṣā, 15/21-22ab note
Śāka, island, 8/103cd-104

Śakinī, divine entities, 15/531cd-533 and note, 551cd-557ab; 30/94cd-97ab

INDEX

Śakra, 36/2-7ab
Śākta, “Śaiva school, 23; 35/26-27

Śakti, one of the thirty-six princes, 1/186cd-188ab note; 6/38-40ab; 8/9-10, 186190; worlds

of the principle 8/397cd-399; 9/50cd-53ab; 15/313-314 note

Śśakti, one of the eight kalās of praṇava, 6/161 and note; 8/390-393, 424cd-426;
15/313-314 and note; 23/33-41ab; 26/51cd-53ab; 29/154cd-156ab note; 257-258
note; 30/10cd-11ab note; 32/12cd-13ab note

Śaktiṣūtra, 28/338cd-340ab
Śakuni, 33/7cd-9ab

Śākuntalā, 6/68cd-72ab note
śālagrāma, 11/97 and note
Śāligrāma, holy place, 28/237cd-248ab

Śālmali, isola, 8/103cd-104

Śambhu, 8/179cd-181ab, 438cd-440ab

Śambhunātha, master of Abhinavagupta, 1/13, 16 note, 21, 213 note; 5/41,

50cd-52ab; 6/88cd-81ab; 9/264cd-268; 10/186cd-187ab, 226cd-227ab, 287;
13/102, 254-256ab, 333cd-336; 15/131cd-133ab, 239cd-245ab note, 245cd-246
and note, 351cd-352ab, 408cd-409ab; 20/5-7; 21/26; 28/366cd-366c; 29/93-95,
211cd-212ab, 241cd-243ab; 30/99-101; 35/44b; 37/60-61

Śāṇḍilya, ascetic, 37/41

Śaṅkara, epithet of Śiva, 1/242-244
Śaṅkara, group of ten deities, 8/295-298ab, 421-422
Śaṅkaranandana, Yogācāra Buddhist, 3/52-55

Śaṅkhapāla, one of eight Nāgas, 6/68cd-72ab

Śaṅku, isīand, 8/86

Śaṅkukarṇa, a deity of the ego-sense principle, 8/225, 444cd-445
Śānta, one of the eight Ardors, 8/235cd-237
Śarabilla, a hermitage 29/37-39

Śāradā, the goddess, 37/41 and note

Śarman, 33/13-14ab

Śarva, 6/68cd-72ab note; 8/161, 216-220, 244cd-247ab, 368cd-373ab, 408cd-

411ab; 22/20-21 note

Śaśāūkinī, a kind of Khecarīmuḍrā, 32/54-62

Śāstradīpikā, 10/20-22 note
Śauṇḍin, 33/7cd-9ab

Śauri, father of Karṇa, disciple of Abhinavagupta, 37/65, 75
Śavara, mythical “Śaiva master, 28/391-393
Śeṣa, 28/307-309 and note

Śīghra, 8/179cd-181ab, 438cd-440ab
Śśikhā (tpoknot), 6/21cd-28ab and note; 17/4cd-5ab, 74-78ab; 29/201-202ab,
257-258

Śikhā, mantra (OṀ VEDAVEDINI HUṀ PHAT), 6/21cd-28ab note; 30/37cd-

39ab

Śikhaṇḍin, Śikhaṇḍiśa, Śikheśa, one of the Vidyeśvaras, 6/68cd-72ab note;
8/341-352ab, 447-448

Śikhin, 33/13-14ab

Śikhoda, a deity of the principle Nature, 8/272-273ab

TANTRĀLOKA

Śiva, without parts (niṣkala) and with parts (sakala), 16/310cd-311; 17/78cd-82,

97cd-99ab; 28/237cd-238ab;

Śivadharmottara, 8/157cd-159ab note

Śivadṛṣṭi, 8/119-122ab; 13/106-109ab and note16/210-211 note

Śivāgni, a deity of the fire principle, 8/262cd-263ab note
Śivaprada, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17
Sivaśakti, one of Abhinavagupta’s teachers, 37/62
Śivasūtra, 1/26 and note

Śivatanuśastra, 1/101-103; 8/1 note, 230-235ab, 263b, 276-277 note, 298cd-

301ab, 303-306, 322-324 note, 345-352ab and note

Śivottama, one of the Vidyeśvaras, 8/345-352ab
Śrīkaṇṭha, one of the eight Yogas, 8/238-241ab
śrāvaṇa, the month (July-August), 28/36-39ab, 53-56ab, 148-150
śrāvaṇī, a Vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505

ŚrīT, 8/201cd-202, 41 1cd-412

Śrīgiri, a holy place, 8/201-202

1/9; 5/39-40; 6/68cd-72ab, 149-151; 8/9-10, 43cd-

56ab, 157cd-159ab, 182cd-183, 238-241ab, 251cd-253ab, 341-344, 415-416,
428-434ab, 447-448; 16/117-125ab; 30/120cd-121ab; 33/6-7ab; 36/11-12;
37/13cd-15

Śrīkaṇṭhin, 1/273-274

Śrīnagar, city, 37/47, 52

Srīnātha, a founder figure, 4/263cd-270ab; 6/88cd-91ab; 30/102-104; 36/11-12;

37160-61

Śriga, mountains, 8/74

Śṛṅgavat, montagne, 8/63cd-67

Śrīparatantra, 9/134cd-135ab

Śrīpītṭha, holy place, 29/59-63

Śrīśaila, a deity of the fire principle, 8/441cd-442ab; 29/59-63
SŚrīsaṁsatyāgama, 30/99-101

Śśruti, 10/168-172; 13/346cd-347ab

Śuddhavatī, the city of Varuṇa, 8/43cd-56ab
Śūnya, one of the eight Bhairavas, 8/368cd-73ab; 29/160cd-161ab

Śveta, 33/13-14ab

Śveta, chain of mountains, 8/74
saḍardhahr̥daya, see Trikahr̥dayaḥ
soḍaśin, a Vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505

Sādaākhya, world, 8/383-389
Sadāśiva, the deity, 1/273-274 note; 15/203cd-204ab, 208-211 and, 226cd229ab; 24/17cd-20ab; 28/94-96

Sadāśiva, one of the thirty-six principles, 1/188cd-189 note, 211; 6/43cd-45ab,

161; 8/9-10, 186-190ab; 9/50cd-53ab, 161cd-164ab; 11/37-38ab; 13/328-329;
14/216; 15/309-312, 313-314 note, 322, 339-343ab, 432-436ab; 16/101cd-105,
213-216ab; 17/74-78ab; 28/425cd-431ab; 30/4-9ab;

INDEX

sādhaka (Ś“adept”), 17; 4/62cd-64; 6/112-113ab; 13/296cd-300ab; 15/1cd-2ab
note; 15/27-30, 69-73ab, 465cd-466; 16/1-2; 19/50cd-51ab; 12/28cd-31ab; 23/23; 24/6-10ab; 25/13-15; 26/18, 55cd-56ab; 27/10, 53-56ab; 28/65-71, 156cd162ab; 29/287cd-289ab; 30/28cd-36ab;
Sadbhāvaśāsana, see Tantrasadbhāva
Sādhya, 8/43cd-56ab, 151cd-152ab and note

Sādhya, one of the five Praṇava, 8/328-329ab

Sadyojāta, one of the five faces of Śiva, 19; 1/18 note; 8/368cd-373ab; 11/20;
15/203cd-204ab and note, 369-374ab; 16/212; 30/9cd-12; 35/26-27

Sadyojyotis (alias Kheṭapāla), Siddhāntin author, 27; 1/47 note; 6/134cd-138ab

note; 8/1 note, 9/239 note, 261cd-264ab, 271-272ab note, 272cd-276ab; 13/2
note; 16/210-211 and note

sahr̥daya (lit. ‘endowed with a heart’ an aesthetically sensitive person),

3/208cd-210 and note, 237-244ab

Sakaḷa, one of the eight Bhairavas, 6/68cd-72ab; 8/357cd-373ab, 450cd-451;

29/160cd-161ab

sakalīkaraṇa (attribution of the limbs of a deity), 30/10cd-11ab note

sālokya (residing in the same world as the deity), 8/307-316; 16/54cd-56ab note;

200cd-201ab; 17/92-93 note; 28/236cd-237ab note, 248cd-249ab, 273
samādhi, 3/166cd-167, 289-290ab; 4/92-94; 6/182cd-185ab; 12/13; 15/606608ab
samāna (the Equal Breath), 5/44-50ab; 6/195-198ab, 199cd-200ab, 209cd-

210ab

Samvareśvara, 32/9cd-12
saṁnirodhana, 2/27; 27/11, 14-16; 30/10cd-1
la
saṅkalpa (intention, imagination, mental conception), function of manas, 1/215;

6/182cd-185ab; 9/159cd-161, 228-229, 238; 10/247-250ab, 253cd-256ab,
257cd-260ab, 289-294ab; 16/241, 284-285; 17/103-115ab
saṁcāra (passage), rite, 29/286cd-287ab

saṅdhyā (the three junctures of the day), rites of, 12/14-16ab; 15/506-508;

26/12-13, 29cd-33ab; 28/5, 148-150

Saṁhārakālī, 4/152 note
Saṁkarṣinī, 29/69-70ab; see also Kālasaṁkarṣinī

sāmīpya (close proximity with the deity), 8/307-316; 16/54cd-56ab note;
28/236cd-248ab note, 261-264ab

Sāṁkhya, 1/13; 4/25cd-27; 6/152; 8/162 note, 253cd-260ab and note, 264-271

note, 282-286ab and note; 9/88cd-90ab, 153-154ab note, 200cd-201ab note,

225-226, 239 note, 272cd-276ab; 10/168-172; 13/32-36 note; 35/26-27, 36
Sāṁkhyakārikā, 9/271-272ab note, 276cd-279ab note

saṁpātasaṁskāra (“purification by fall”), riot, 15/442b and note; 28/162cd-166
saṅṁpu.yīkaraṇa (encapsulation”), mantric operation, 3/205a-208ab and note

Saṁtāna, 8/368cd-373ab

saṅskāra, rites of passage, 15/497 and note, 498-505, 509-511ab

Saṁvara, 8/103cd-104; 15/89-91

Saṁvarta, name of various deities, 8/122cd-139ab, 235cd-137, 272-273ab, 447-

448; 33/13-14ab; 36/2-7ab

Saṁvitprakāśa, by Vāmanadatta, 5/1 54cd-155ab note

TANTRĀLOKA

Snāna (ritual bath), 3/289-290ab, the true -, 4/114cd-118ab; 6/107; 15/38cd-79

end; 22/14cd-19
samanā (equal, mental) one of the eight kalās of praṇava, 8/161, 163cd-167;

8/400-405ab, 424cd-426; 15/313-314 end, 432-436ab; 28/174-181; 29/154cd156ab note, 257-258; 30/12cd-14ab
Sāra, Sāraśāstra, Śaiva scripture, 6/112cd-113; 16/158; see also Trikasāra
Sarasvatī, 8/203-204 and note, 41 1cd-412; 15/183cd-190ab
sārūpya (similarity in nature with the deity), 28/236cd-237ab

Sarvabhūtadamanī, 15/305-306

Sarvācāratantra, 12/22cd-25
Sarvācārahṛdayatantra, perhaps another name of the Sarvācāratantra, 13/303-

306; 29/103

Sarvajñānatantra, 28/250cd-254ab; see also Sarvajñānottaratantra
Sarvajñānottaratantra (alias Sarvajñāna, Jñānottara), 4248-253
Sarvāmṛrtadhara, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/9-12cd

Sarvarūpa, one of the eight Tejas, 8/235cd-237

Sarvatobhadra, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab

Sarvavidyādhipa, 8/179cd-181ab, 438cd-440ab
Sarvavīratantra (also called Vīratantra), 4/55-57ab and note; 13/145
Satyaloka, one of the seven worlds, 8/153cd-154, 203-204 note
SAUḤ (hṛdayabīja seed of the Heart), 1/2 note; 3/165cd-166ab note. 253cd254ab note; 4/181cd-186ab note; 5/60cd-61ab, 136cd-137, 142-144 and note;
30/28cd-36ab and note, 52-53 and note; see also Parāsaumika, a Vedic observance, 15/498-505

Saumya, a region, 8/83-84
Sautrāmaṇi, a Vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505
Sauvarṇa, one of the eight pātālas, 8/30cd-31ab
sāyujya (union with the deity), 8/307-316; 16/54cd-56ab note, 65-68ab; 17/9293 note; 28/236cd-248ab note, 264cd-267ab, 273

Senāni, a wind, 8/122cd-139ab
Siddha (accomplished), 1/233-234; 2/41-43, 48; 4/259-261ab note, 8/307-316,

352cd-355ab; 14/31-32ab; 28/19cd-20ab, 371-373ab note; 29/2cd-3, 27cd-29ab,
46cd-48, 182-186ab, 272-273ab; 36/11-12

Siddhā, - tantra, -tantraśāsana, -mata, -matatantra, 4154, 67-68 note, 261cd-

270ab; 15/168cd-170ab; 13/29-30; see also Siddhayogīśvarīmata
Siddhacāraṇa, a wind, 8/139cd-142ab

Siddhānta, 1/192-195; 4/258cd-259ab, 263cd-270ab; 8/368cd-373ab note;
9/66cd-67 note; 11/85cd-89; 13/41cd-129ab, 300cd-306, 319cd-321a, 347cd348; 15/319-320, 551cd-557ab; 22/40cd-42; 23/99-100ab; 28/236cd-37b note,
264cd-267ab; 29/73cd-75ab; 35/26-27; 37/25cd-29
Siddharudra, 8/368cd-273ab
Siddhayogīśvarīmata, 1/242-244; 2/41-43; 3/220-225; 7/39cd-52ab; 8/41cd43ab, 115-117, 184-185; 9/7; 11/80cd-82ab; 15/156cd-157ab, 321, 331cd334ab; 16/3-4; 17/103-115ab; 19/21-23ab; 20/10cd-11ab; 21/11cd-15; 23/4-6;
24/6-10ab; 25/1-2ab; 19-21ab; 26/21-23ab; 27/25-28ab; 28/75cd-76ab, 93cd96ab, 106cd-111, 112-112, 423cd-425ab; 29/164-166ab; 30/20-26ab; 31/7cd10ab, 54-59, 60-61, 155-159; 37/24cd-25ab
Siddhi, 38/6-7ab

INDEX

Sillāī, dūti, 19/33cd-34
Siṁha, 36/2-7ab

Sitāṁśumauli, mane ofŚiva, 30-7/52, 73
Sitodaka, lake, 8/60cd-62ab

Skanda, son of Śiva, 4/248-253; 8/122cd-139ab

Skandayāmala, 28/425cd-431ab

SKRK, Mantra of the Razor, 19/11-14 and note; 30/55cd-57 and note

smṛti, 13/346cd-347ab note; 15/515
Soma, 4/127-144; 8/43cd-56ab, 119-120, 226; 30/79cd-80ab
Somadeva, a Śaiva teacher, 37/60-61

Somadeva, Jaina author, 33/35
Somānanda, Śaiva master, 1/10; 2/48; 3/84cd-85ab; 13/106-109ab, 149-151;

37/60-61

Somaśambhupaddhati, Śaiva work, 15/183cd-190ab, 191cd-193, 298cd-295ab,

309-314, 378cd-385ab, 399-401ab, 444cd-446, 534-537a note; 17/30cd-33;
27/11, 30-32ab; 28/112-113; 30/10cd-1 1ab; 31/79-30ab

Someśa, 33/13/14ab
Sopāna, holy place, 29/59-63
spanda (pulsation, vibration), 4/181cd-186ab; 5/79-80, 107cd-108ab, 140; 6/13;

7/2-3ab, 23cd-30ab; 23/93
Spandakārikā, 3/280-281; 8/5-6; 9/84cd-86, 215-216; 11/32-34ab; 12/20cd21ab; 13/266-268ab, 344-346ab; 15/113cd-115ab; 23/33-41ab
Spandaśāsana, see Spandakārikā
Spandasaṁdoha, 29/43-45ab

Spandasūtra, 6/12
Sprhaṇa, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab

Srṛṣṭikālī, 4/148

Sthāṇu, 8/262cd-263ab note, 443cd-444ab; 33/9cd-12

Sthiti, 33/9cd-12
Sthitināśakālī, 4/150

Sthūla, Sthūleśvara, deity of the principle of ego, 8/225, 444cd-445

Sudhā, 33/6-7ab

Sugati, 33/6-7ab

Suhṛṣṭa, a deity of the principle of Attachment, 8/421-433
Sujaya, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab

Sūkṣma, 8/68cd-72ab, 341-344; 33/9cd-12
Sūkṣmā, 8/395cd-397ab, 424cd-426

Sūkṣmarūpa, one of the ten Śivas, 8/368cd-373ab

Sumanas, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab
Sumati, Abhinavagupta’s grand Trika teacher; 1/213; 5/41; 10/287; 33/7cd-9ab

Supārśva, a mountain, 8/58cd-60ab

Suprabhā, 8/383-389; 33/6-7ab

Suprabhedāgama, 5/112cd-113ab
Sūra, Sūra, deity of principle Necessity, 8/447-448; 16/117-125ab
Suśiva, one of the fifty Rudras, 33/14cd-17ab
Suśivas, group of twelve deities, 8/249-251ab, 251cd-253ab, 368cd-373ab, 415-

416, 423-424ab
Suṣṭhiti, 33/6-7ab

TANTRĀLOKA

Susūkṣmā, 8/395cd-397ab

suṣumnā, 6/21cd-28ab, 159, 198cd-199ab; 8/394-395ab, 159, 198cd-199ab;
8/394-395ab, 424cd-426; 15/432-436ab; 23/33-41ab; 29/42, 121-124ab, 150cd153ab, 257-258; 32/32-36
Sutala, one of the seven pārtāla,
Sutejas, one of the ten Śiva, 8/368cd-373ab
Svacchandatantra,

1/256; 4/19cd-22ab,

38; 6/49-51ab,

134cd-138ab,

148;

7/165cd-68ab; 8/1, 83-84, 89, 103cd-106, 108-109, 119-139ab, 142cd-161, 165168ab, 181cd-182ab, 186-190, 190cd-193ab, 196cd-204, 215, 216-251ab,
260cd-263ab, 286cd-298ab, 339cd-340, 373cd-376, 383-405ab; 9/161cd-164ab;
13/276cd-279ab, 307-308, 316-317ab; 15/21-22ab, 27-30, 31-34ab, 183cd190ab, 399-401, 411-412ab, 418cd-421, 456cd-459, 2, 509-511ab; 16/97-98,
170cd-174, 239; 17/74-78ab; 22/20-21; 27/58-59ab; 28/292-293; 29/37-39,
160cd-161ab; 30/10cd-1 1ab, 40cd-41ab; 31/79-83ab; 35/26-27, 36; 36/27ab
SVĀHĀ, 1/119cd-22; 15/414cd-416ab, 436cd-442b, 509-511ab; 17/11cd-13,
22cd-25ab, 40cd-45ab; 18/3cd-6; 22/23-27ab; 30/37cd-40ab, 43cd-45ab, 107110ab, 116-120ab, 121cd-123ab; 32/17cd-19ab

Svarṇākṣaka, deity of the ether principle, 8/443cd-44ab

Svatantreśa, 9/227
Svayambhū, 8/368cd-373ab
Svāyambhuva, -tantra, -āgama, 1/46; 8/434cd-435; 9/45cd-48ab; 15/2cd-4;

16/210-211; 28/261cd-264ab

Hāhārāvā, 31/30-33ab

Haiḍaratantra, 28/14cd-18ab, 25cd-30

Hālā (alias Alipuram), a sacred place, 15/89-93ab; 29/59-63

Halahala, mythical Śaiva master, 28/391-393
Hālāhalaruḍra, deity of principle of Pure Knowledge, 8/450cd
haṁsa (‘tcigno”), 3/142; 4/135-137ab; 17/30cd-33; 29/83-88; 30/69cd-70ab

Hara, a deity, 33/7cd-12
Hara, a sacred place, 15/92-93ab
Haramukha, a Himalayan peak, 37/52
Hāraudrī, 33/2
Hari, a continent, 8/76, 79
Harihara, a deity, 8/318-319
Harīndu, deity of the fire principle, 8/205-206ab, 441cd-442ab
Hasta, a constellation, 28/106cd-111

Hāṭaka, Hāṭakeśvara, the lord of the netherworlds, 6/142cd-145ab; 8/30cd-32ab,

35cd-40, 262cd-263ab, 407cd-408ab, 437cd-438ab; 30/99-101, 110cd-115

haṭhapāka (violent digestion), 3/259cd-261, 263-264

Havya, ruler of Gomedha, 8/103cd-104
Haya, 33/7cd-9ab
Hayagrīva, 30/69cd-70ab

Hayānanā, 33/3-5

Hemakūṭa, chain of mountains, 8/63cd-67, 76-77

Himālaya, 8/63cd-67, 78, 83-84; 37/39
Himavat, mountains, 8/63cd-67, 77
Hiraṇyamaya, continent, 8/74

INDEX

hiraṇyapāda, a Vedic sacrifice, 15/498-505
Hrdaya, one of the eight Pramāṇas of the Pāśupata canon, 8/328-329ab
Hṛdayabhaṭṭārakatantra, 29/164-166ab

HRĪM, the seed (bīia) of Māyā, 22/20-21; 30/116-120ab
Huluhulu, mythical Śaivaite master, 28/391-393
English words

action, 1/149-155, 217-218, 242-244, 246
action and knowledge, 1/150-155, 159, 232; 2/8-9
Agni, 3/226-231; 4/128-130; 6/68cd-72ab; 8/221-222; 15/222cd-225ab; 30/4243ab, 79cd-80 city of, 8/43cd-56ab; one of the eighteen Rudras, 8/368cd-373ab
aesthetic experience, 59; 3/208cd-210; 9/167cd-169; 10/85-88
after the four (state), 1/78-81; 10/227cd-309; 29/222-223;
AlIchemy, 29/11-13

Allahabad, 37/38

alms (bhikṣā), Vedic rite of, 15/506-508

antelope skin (ajina), rite of, 15/506-508

apprentice (putraka), 4162cd-64; 13/296cd-300ab; 15/1cd-2ab, 23cd-26, 463cd-

466ab, 469-470; 25/13-15; 27/9-10, 53-56ab; 28/156cd-162ab; 29/201-202ab;

armour mantra (varman) HUM, 1/113-114; 8/166cd-167ab; 15/69-73ab, 191cd-

193, 237; 17/45cd-46; 30/43cd-45ab. Armour mantra called Puruṣṭuta OṀ

VAIRIṆE VAJRADHARĀYA SVĀHÁĀ, 30/37cd-40ab;
aspersion (prokṣaṇa), rite of, 15/69-73ab, 369-374ab

assembly of Siddhas e Yoginīs (melaka, melāpa), 15/557cd-558, 577-578; 28/69, 23cd-25ab, 371-373ab and note, 373cd-380ab
aspirants for worldly benefits, 17, 15/23cd-30, 69-73ab, 81cd-82ab, 101cd-

102ab, 143-145, 147, 153cd-154ab, 155cd-156ab, 231cd-232ab, 290cd-292ab,
377bis, 378cd-385ab, 17/295cd-297ab, 302cd-304ab, 23/7-10; 25/8-9; 26/5-6,
18, 55cd-56ab; 28/174-181; 29/20-21, 127cd-129ab, 225-227, 236; 31/45-50ab
aspirants for liberation,

15/23cd-30, 69-73ab,

105cd-107ab,

143-145, 147,

191cd-193, 254-256, 290cd-292ab; 16/201cd-204; 26/5-6, 55cd-56ab, 58-61ab;
28/174-181; 29/20-21, 219-220; 31//45-50ab
Attachment, one of the thirty-six principles, 9/45cd-48ab, 62-64, 171-173,
200cd-200ab, 203-204, 206cd-212, 217-220ab, 306-308ab; 10/98cd-100;
13/77cd-81; 15/432-436ab; 16/117-125ab, purification of – 17/103-115ab;
15/89-91; 10/200-202; worlds of the principle – 8/295-298ab, 421-422, 428434ab
beard trimming, rite of, 15/498-505

belief (prasiddhi), 51-58; 35/1-22, 35; 37/1-6
bliss (ānanda), 1/101-103; according to Advaita Vedānta, 4/29-30; the six

species of, 5/44-52ab; 5/100cd-105, 107cd-112ab, 121-122; 6/78cd-83ab,
10/278-281ab; 11/23cd-271 15/167b-168ab, 283cd-288ab; 26/58-61ab;
28/373cd-380ab; 29/97-100ab, 115cd-117ab, 130cd-136ab, 182-186ab, 248252; 31/126cd-131; as the phoneme ā, 3/65-200ab
Buddhist idealism (vijñānavāda), 4/29-30

TANTRĀLOKA

Bulb, 5/108cd-112ab, 145, 225, 235cd-237, 251cd-260ab; 6/49-51ab, 187cd189ab; 19/15-16; 29/37-39, 51-63, 257-258; 32/32-36
Cancer, sign of the zodiac, 28/121cd-127ab

caste, 15/517, 576, 601cd-604ab
causal forces (karaṇa), 6/185cd-189ab, 8/400-405ab; 11/55cd-59; 15/259cd261ab, 494cd-496; 16/32-36ab; 29/233-235, 248-252
Cavity of Brahmā (brahmarandhra), 58. 70. 72; 4/143-144; 6/159, 211cd-213;
8/390-393, 424cd-427; 15/308; 16/100-101ab; 24/10cd-12; 29/59-63, 83-88,
179; 30/58-62ab
conception (garbhādhāna), rite of, 15/404cd-406ab, 498-505; 17/40cd-45ab;

along with other birth rites, 17/34-35

consecration (abhiṣeka), 69,4/51-53, 70b72ab; 13/140-143ab; 15/466cd-468;
special,
consent to conversion (śrāvaṇa), rite of, 22/14cd-19

contraction (saṁkoca), 1/96-100, 217-218; 4/49-50, 248-253; 9/99cd-104ab,
105cd-106ab, 135cd-137; 10/103-104, 261-262; 12/20cd-21ab; 13/213216;28/217-218ab, 232cd-237ab, 373cd-380ab, 381cd-383ab
consciousness (cit, citi, caitanya), passim
convention (sarketa), 11/67cd-75ab; 26/21-23ab
cosmic dissolution (pralaya), 4/153-158; 6/130-185ab; 7/62cd-65ab, 70cd-71ab;
8/322-324, 330cd-332ab; great -, 8/276-277; 9/140-141; 13/27-29ab
cosmology, 8/1-452
creation, emanation (sṛsṣṭi), 1/78-81; 3/141-148ab, 257cd-259ab, 280-281, 282;
4/145-146b, 186b189ab, 195; 5/25cd-26ab, 27cd-29ab; 6/58, 60, 168-173,
176cd-185ab, 215, 219-221; 8/303-316, 330cd-332ab; 13/27-29ab, 113cd116ab; 14/1cd-5ab, 24; 29/153cd-154ab; 31/50cd-52; 33/30; great -, 6/168-170;
14/1cd-5ab

Deep sleep, 1/78-81; 6/83cd-84ab, 182cd-185ab; 9/174-176; 10/141cd-148ab,
173-176, 227cd-309; 29/222-223
definition (lakṣaṇa), 1/139, 246, 260-266, 269
devotion (bhakti), 3/290cd-293; 4/55-57ab; 8/230-235ab; 13/73-77ab, 117cd120ab, 213-216, 285, 16/196cd-200ab; 17/73, 94-97ab; 25/24cd-28ab
differentiation (bheda), 1/138, 220-221, 230; 3/15-18, 75cd-77, 181cd-182ab,
262-265; 419-13, 159-163;8/12-16ab; 9/149cd-155ab, 214-216; 10/209-211,
214-215ab; 13/204-211, 279cd-281ab; 15/315-317, 339-343ab, 344cd-345:

29/81

differentiation-cum-non-differentiation (bhedābheda), 1/220, 230;15/339-343ab
Discrimination (viveka), 13/164cd-195, 271cd-274ab; see also isolating vision

Dissolving and coagulating (rudh-, dru-) 4/155-158, 164-167

doubt, 1/247; 4/131-132; 12/20cd-25; 13/197-198, 317cd-319ab; 14/13;
15/481cd-489, 575, 588cd-591ab, 593; 22/14cd-19; 26/72-75ab; 28/274-275;
29/17
dream, 1/78-81; 6/83cd-84ab, 182cd-85ab; 10/173-176, 227cd-309; 11/101;
28/352cd-353ab; 29/222-223
dreaming, rite concerning, 15/478cd-480ab; esame del -, 15/48lcd-494ab; 21/1
lcd-15

INDEX

duality, 1/28-30; 2/15-18; 4/9-12, 105-109ab, 205-206; 5/10cd-12ab; 6/28cd-33,
193cd-195ab; 10/224cd-225ab
Earth, one of the thirty-six princes, 3

/157; 10/10cd-12ab, 98cd-100, 103-104, 151cd-157, 164; 11/8; 15/432-436ab;
16/106; 17/11cd-13, 34-35; purification of the principle -, 17/47-64, 103-115ab;

worlds of the principle -, 8/20cd-167ab, 405cd-406ab, 428-434ab; 16/114-116
elements, gross (bhūta, mahābhūta), 1/190-191; 4/221cd-222ab; 8/209cd-

212ab; 9/271-272ab; 11/15cd-18, 20; 12/21cd-22ab; 13/186-187ab; 24/20cd-

21ab; worlds -, 8341-368ab, 407cd-424ab, 428-434ab; purification of, 17/103-

115ab
elements, subtle (tanmātra), 9/235, 253, 271-276ab, 279cd-285ab, 308cd-310;

15/297cd-303; worlds of, 8/216-220, 413-414, 428-434ab

ego (abhimāna), function of the sense of self (ahaṁkāra), 1/214; 4/159-163;

9/230, 237-238; 17/103-105ab and note

“egg” (aṇḍa), nature of”, 8/159cd-160, 179cd-181ab; 11/12cd-14ab; della terra,
della Natura, di māyā, della Power, 6/170; 8/171-177ab, 325, 407cd-408ab;

11/12cd-14ab; 16/109-110ab, 147-150ab, 163cd-168, 187-189;
End of Sound (nādānta), 5/54cd-58ab; 6/161-163a end; 15/313-314; 23/3341ab; 29/154cd-156ab; 30/12cd-14ab
Enunciation (uddeśa), 1/246, 252-255, 262-268

enveloping (avaguṇṭhana), rite of, 15/69-73ab and note, 369-374ab

excavation, right of the, 15/398

execution of the thunderbolt, rite of 15/398

extraction of impure principles (uddhāra), 13/328-329; 16/245; 17/53
ether, ten senses of the word, 5/93-94ab

etymology, 6/28cd-33
evocation (āvāhana), 2/27; 17/8cd-18ab; 26/38cd-51ab; 17/11; 30/10cd-1 lab
“everything and everything”, 10/151-157
Eye, mantra of (netramantra), 15/69-73ab note, 353cd-358, 448-451ab; 22/2021 and note; 30/10cd- 11ab note, 40cd-41ab and note
examination (parīkṣa), 1/139, 246, 261-266, 270

faces of Śiva, 8/357cd-368ab; 15/191cd-193 note, 202cd-204ab and note,
209cd-211 and note; from which emanation of different scriptures, 28/146cd-

147 note; 35/26-27

faces, mantra gods (vaktramantra, brahmamantra), 11/90-91; 15/139cd-142,

369-374; 27/32cd-33ab; 30/10cd-11.
face (vrata), 3/289-290ab; 4/51-53, 57cd-58, 213cd-21ab, 258cd-259ab; 15/506-

508; i1 vero, 12/9-12; 13/140-143ab; della Sapienza, 13/140-143ab, 147-148;
23/31-44ab; i sette, 15/506-508; purification of, 22/14cd-19, 22; 28/417cd-

423ab
freedom, 1/5, 31, 78-81, 92, 160; 2/44/47; 3/123cd-125ab, 162cd-165ab, 205a208ab, 234-236; 4/9-12, 109cd-114ab, 118cd-120ab, 122cd-123ab, 151, 171173ab; 5/3-5, 7-8, 10cd-12ab, 81-83; 292-293; 9/8-10, 20cd-22, 49cd-53ab,
83cd-84ab, 97cd-99ab, 149cd-152, 232, 244-245; 10/12cd-17, 127cd-132ab,
135cd-137, 194-195, 264cd-269; 11/9-12ab, 23cd-28, 72-75ab, 92, 115; 13/103105, 116cd-117ab, 128-129ab, 204-206, 266-268ab, 270cd-271ab; 14/7cd-9ab,

TANTRĀLOKA

20-22, 25-27; 15/38cd-40ab, 273cd-275ab, 315-317, 346; 23/68; 26/58-61ab;
28/198-203ab; 30/2-3

flower, throwing of, 29/187cd-192ab

fetter (pāśa, bandha) 1/16, 27-30, 145; 4/25cd-27, 70cd-72; 5/105cd-107ab;
8/289cd-294, 326-327; 13/41cd-43ab, 85-87, 173-177, 192-195; 14/26;
15/456cd-466ab; 16/78-80, 82-83, 85, 210-211, 284-285; 17/25cd-30ab, 3638ab, 65-66, 69-72, 88-91; 23/31-32; 25/7; 29/4, 106cd-107ab, 209; 32/49-53,

food, rite of first feeding of solid food (annaprāśa), 15/498-505

food, sacrificial (caru), rite of, 15/411-412 and note, 436cd-446; 21/11cd-15;

28/167; 29/192cd-195, 282-283

formed-cum-unformed (kalpitākalpita), 4/51-53, 72cd-74ab; self-created
(svayambhīū), 13/134cd-136; 13/7-10, 14cd-16ab; of various inclinations, 15/1819; rules to observe in his presence -, 15/534-391ab; name of the -, 15/561-562;
dependence on -, 16/297cd-99ab; of other doctrines, 22/31cd-32; unconscious,

22/34-35ab; transmission of suitability to -, obligation to initiate, 23/26cd-28;

consecration of, 23/1-30; tasks and characteristics of, 23/31-103b; as man of
knowledge or priest, 23/13cd-14ab, 14cd-16ab, 25-28, 100cd-101ab; 28/6475ab, 389; five kinds of, 28/386cd-387ab; worship of the -, 28/423cd-434

Fourth State (turīya), 1/78-81; 3/287; 6/83cd-84ab; 10/227cd-309; 29/222-223;
33/31-31
grammarians, 37-38; 9/257cd-260ab; 35/26-27

Great Lords of Mantras (mahāmantreśvara), 1/78-81; 8/383-389; 9/53cd-55ab,

90cd-93ab, 95cd-97ab, 147-148ab; 10/3-7ab, 12cd-17, 110-113ab, 122cd127ab, 138-140ab, 168-172, 178-184, 209-211, 213, 224cd-225ab, 284cd-286,
289-294ab, 302-309; 15/339-343ab
grace, (anugraha), 19, 43; 1/78-81; 6/215; 13/116cd-117ab, 182cd-185; 14/20-

22; 23/65-67; 28/232cd-236ab

Hair, parting of the (sīmanta), rite of, 15/498-505
householder (gṛhastha), 15/498-505
Hand of Śiva, rite of,

15/456cd-466ab, 472-474ab; 17/30cd-33 and note;

28/415-417ab; 29/192cd-195, 225-227

Half Moon (ardhacandra), one of eight kalās of the pranava, 6/161 and note;

8/383-389, 424cd-426; 23/33-41ab; 29/154cd-156ab note; 30/94cd-97ab

ignorance, 1/23, 25, 26, 28-30, 36-40, 43-44, 46, 48-51; 8/292-293; 9/62-63,
84cd-86, 90cd-93ab, 120-121ab; 13/16-18ab, 23-26, 32-36, 38-41ab, 85-87,
199-203, 213-216, 231cd-234ab, 276cd-279ab; 15/ 107cd-109ab
impurity, 1/183cd-184ab; 4/118cd-120ab, 221cd-247ab; 15/163cd-164ab and
note, 168cd-170ab, 601-604ab
impurity, binding in general (nala), 1/23, 166, 237-240; 9/62-63, 65-77ab,

78cd-88ab, 190cd-104ab, 117-121ab, 138-139, 142-144ab, 147-149ab; 10/103104; 13/49-63, 66, 68-87, 110cd-116ab, 126-127, 259cd-262ab, 264-265;
16/59cd-62; 19/7-8; 22/10-12ab; 23/59-61

INDEX

impurity of Karma (kārmamala), 1/4, 23, 152-153, 9/90cd-104ab, 117-121ab,

138-139, 14-44ab, 180-181; 10/103-104, 177, 289-294ab; 17/1cd-5ab; 20/5-7;
combustion of-, 17/65-70ab
impurity of Māyā (māyīyamala), 1/4, 152-153; 8/373cd-376; 9/180-181;
10/103-104, 177, 289-294ab; 13/77cd-87, 164cd-67ab; 17/lcd-5ab, 63; 20/5-7;
37/25cd-29

impurity inherent in the soul, subtle impurity, innate impurity, etc. (āṇavamala),

1/4, 152-153; 9/90cd-104ab, 117-121ab, 138-139, 14-44ab, 180-181; 10/103104, 177, 289-294ab; 13/276cd-279ab; 17/1cd-5ab; 20/5-7; 37/25cd-29

immersion, the rite of (laya), 11/85cd-89; 17/36-38ab

Initiation (dīkṣā), 1/48, 75-77, 237-240; 2/24-26, 35-38, 41-43; 4/49-50, 5557ab, 70cd-72ab, 203; 6/191cd-192ab; 8/190cd-193ab, 235cd-237, 326-327,
332cd-337ab; 11/38cd-39ab; 13/155, 167cd-170ab, 173-177, 193cd-195, 199203, 225cd-229ab, 239-242ab, 247cd-253ab, 281cd-283ab, 300cd-302; 14/1a9ab, 20-22, 42cd-46; 22/10-14ab; 25/23cd-24ab; 28/114-121ab, 213-216,
236cd-248ab, 269cd-272, 274-276, 279-286;,
ate, regular (samayin), 2/35-38; 4/62cd-64; 13/140-143ab, 296cd-300ab,
307-308; 15/463cd-466, 471, 519-520ab, 534-537ab, 584cd-586ab; 16/1-2, 31,
297cd-299ab; 19/4-6, 11-14, 31cd-32ab, 297cd-299ab; 19/4-6, 11-14, 31cd32ab, 46cd-47ab, 51cd-53; 21/6-11ab, 18cd-22ab; 23/4-6; 24/6-10ab note;

28/82cd-84, 99-101, 106cd-111, 156cd-162ab, 29/196-198ab

installation (stāpana), of the deity in a liṅga, 2/27; 27/11; 30/10cd-1 lab

inspection (nirīkṣana) rite of, 15/69-73ab, 369-374ab
invocation, rite of (saṁnidhāna, āsana), 2/27; 27/11 note; 27/50-52; 30/10-11ab
note
isolating vision (viveka), 9/184-189ab and note; 13/32-36 note, 38-41ab, 98100ab; 25/24cd-28ab; see also also discrimination
Jupiter, 6/68cd-72ab; 28/36-39ab

karmic impressions (saṁskāra),

1/41-42,

150-153; 5/32cd-34ab; 8/80-82;

9/102cd-105ab, 106cd-109ab, 117-118, 135cd-141; 10/12cd-17, 127cd-132,
135cd-137, 159; 13/6cd-9, 77cd-81, 188cd-191; 26/33cd-37ab; 28/237cd-248ab,
264cd-267ab, 281-286, 289, 327cd-332ab, 349cd-352ab, 3543cd-358ab, 361cd362ab
knower of the field (kṣetrajña), 9/144cd-146

knowledge, flux of (jñāna-saṁtāna), 28/195-212

knowledge (jñāna, vidyā), 1/4, 22-47, 82-90, 141-147, 232; 3/41-43; 4/47cd-48,
55-62ab, 72cd-74ab, 76cd-79, 81cd-83, 85; 6/149-151, 192cd-193ab; 8/190cd193ab; 9/127cd-134ab; 10/284cd-286; 13/10/14, 16-26, 29cd-31, 131cd-133,
139, 155-156, 162-163ab, 164cd-167ab, 182cd-185, 187cd-191, 193cd-198,
225cd-227ab, 229cd-234ab, 276cd-279ab, 328-329, 333cd-336, 338-339, 341342, 347cd-348, 351cd-353ab; 15/8-17, 154cd-155ab, 584cd-588ab; 16/163cd168ab, 170cd-174, 193cd-196ab, 242, 249, 289-293ab, 295cd-302ab, 304cd306ab; 19/26cd-27ab; 21/16-18ab, 28, 32, 34; 22/7cd-12ab, 28cd-31ab;

24/10cd-12; 25/10; four forms of, 1/241/245; false, 1/331; bookish, 9/55cd-59;
as the main characteristic of the teacher, 23/2-6; 28/387cd-388; il maestro e la -,

TANTRĀLOKA

23/1-103b; 28/114-121ab, 237cd-248ab, 303-309, 320cd-324ab; 29/180-181;

32/54-62; 33/30; one of the pīṭhas, 37/22cd-24ab
Knowledge (vidyā), one of the five Forces (kalā), 8/421-422, 450cd-451; 11/8;

31/97-99

Knowledge, (limited capacity to know) (vidyā), one of the thirty-six principles,

6/40cd-43ab, 153-154; 9/45cd-48ab, 171-173, 183, 191cd-192ab, 196-199ab,
204, 206cd-12 and note, 246, 249-250, 306-308ab; 10/12cd-17, 98cd-100;
15/319-320;
Knowledge, Pure (śuddhavidyā), one of the thirty-six principles; 6/40cd-43ab;

8/9-10, 186-190ab; 9/50cd-53ab; 10/12cd-17; 15/297cd-303 and note, 376cd377 and note; 17/74-78ab, 103-115ab;

Kula substances 9/78cd-81ab; 166cd-170ab, 183cd-190ab, 531cd-533, 559-560;

28/88cd-111, 168-173, 371-373ab, 391-393; 29, 10-13, 14-17, 22-27ab, 75cd77, 97-100ab, 198cd-200, 289cd-900, 31/101; 37/42-44;

language, 11/67cd-68ab, 70; 16/261cd-263ab, 265cd-267ab; 35/19cd-20; secret
- 28/104cd-106ab
last sacrament (antyeṣṭi), 15/506-508; 24/1-24; 25/10, 16-18

liberation, liberated (mokṣa, mukti, mukta), 1/22, 24, 31-34, 49-51, 64-65, 123,

145, 149, 154-157, 161-162, 165, 233-240, 245, 330; 2/19; 4/17-19ab, 29-38,
49-50, 137cd-139; 5/2, 117; 6/58-59, 67cd-75ab, 107-108, 190cd-191ab,
8/35cd-40, 190cd-196ab, 289cd-291, 294; 10/284cd-286; 12/6-8, 41cd-43ab;
13/85-87, 90cd-92ab, 117cd-120ab, 121cd-125ab, 130cd-133, 147-148, 159,
164cd-170ab, 193b, 199-203, 213-216, 225cd-227ab, 266-268ab, 296cd-300ab,
316cd-317ab, 321cd-322ab, 327, 330, 338-339; 14/32cd-33ab, 37-39; 15/5-11,
27-33ab, 41a-43ab, 69-73ab, 104cd-109ab, 114cd-115ab, 131cd-133ab, 254256, 418cd-421, 436cd-441ab, 521cd-531ab, 593; 16/63-64, 163cd-168;
25/21cd-22ab, 24cd-29ab; 26/5-8; 28/25cd-30, 188-189, 190-193, 198-203ab,
213-216, 254cd-256ab, 259cd-261ab, 307-310, 313-315, 425cd-431ab; 29/1113, 57, 89-91, 103, 231, 274cd-278ab; 30/102-106;31/45-50ab; 35/16-17, 24;
37/44, 49-51,
liberation (kaivalya), 4/212-213ab; 13/167cd-170ab; 15/69-73ab; 28/312, 316320ab
Libra, the sign of the zodiac, 28/121cd-127ab

levelling the ground, rite of, 15/398

light (prakāśa), 1/52-57, 82-90, 224-225, 330; 2/15-18, 20-26; 3/1-4, 110-120,
130cd-134ab, 137cd-140; 4/192-193, 221cd-222ab; 6/9-10, 77cd-83ab;
9/144cd-146, 196-199ab, 220cd-222, 228-230; 10-31cd-33ab, 33cd-37, 48cd50ab, 54cd-56ab, 57cd-58ab, 66cd-67ab, 75cd-78ab, 113cd-117, 168-172;
13/103-105, 112cd-113a. 116cd-117ab, 254-256ab; 14/7cd-9ab; 15/206cd209ab, 212-217ab, 262cd-268ab, 270cd-272ab; 16/90cd-93ab; 17/19cd-22ab
lightning, rite of, 20/1-16ab

magic, black (abhicāra), 1/113-114 note; 6/67cd-68ab; white magic, 1/113-114

note

materialists, 6/ 16-20

Mars, 6/65-67ab, 68cd-72ab; 8/143cd-146

INDEX

means of realization, Individual (ānavopāya), 1/149, 164, 219-221, 230; 5/1-159

passim; 12/26; Empowered (śāktopāya), 1/144 and note, 214-215, 217-220,
230; 4/1-278 passim, Divine (śāmbhavopāya), 1/144 and note, 167, 171-213;
3/1-293 passim

Mercury, planet, 6/68cd-72ab note; 18/36-39
Mothers, 4/57cd-58; 8/35cd-40, 238-241ab, 241cd-244ab; 30/47-51; 33/3-5
moon, 6/68cd-72ab; 8/216-220, 223-224, 413-414; 28/36-39ab
nadir, 6/68cd-72ab note; 30/42-43ab note

naming ceremony, 15/404cd-406ab, 498-505
Necessity (niyati), one of the thirty-six principles, 6/40cd-43ab, 153-154; 8/186190ab; 9/45cd-48ab, 171-173, 201cd-203; 11/37-38ab; 13/77cd-81; 15/432436ab; the principle of the worlds -, 8/295-298ab, 421-422, 428-434ab, 447448; 16/117-125ab;
net, rite of the, 13/234cd-235 note; 21/25-45; 24/10cd-12 note

non-duality (advaita), 2/15-18; 3/202cd-204ab, 288; 4/276b; 8/289cd-291,
294cd-297; 15/441-442ab; 21cd-27; 29/73cd- 75ab
oblation in the fire (homa, āhuti), 1/119cd-222 note; 3/289-290ab; 4/114cd-

116ab; 6/107; 7/38cd-39; 15/22cd-23ab, 359, 391cd-393, 418cd- 421, 424cd431, 436cd-446, 472-474ab, 498-505; 17/11cd-13 note, 25cd-30ab, 40cd-45ab,
50-52; 18/3cd-6; 19/11-14; 20/8-10ab; 23/17cd-20ab; 25/2cd-4ab; 27/37cd-39;
29/83-88, 93-95; full oblation (pūrṇāhuti), 15/278cd-283ab, 406cd-408ab;
17/53-60, 69-72, 78cd-82, 92-93, 121; 18/3cd-6; 19/23cd-26ab; 21/37-42ab, 5053; 22/23-27ab; 28/156cd-162ab; 29/181
one of the eight yogas, 8/235cd-237

obscuration (tirobhāva), 1/78-81; 4/22cd-24ab note; 6/215; 13/95cd-96, 110cd-

112ab, 120cd-121ab, 182cd-185, 264-265, 311-361; 14/1a-24; 22/39cd-40ab;
23/59-61

Obstructress (nirodhikā), one of eight kalās of praṇava, 6/161 and note; 8/383-

389, 424cd-426; 23/33-41ab; 29/154cd-156ab note

Path (adhvan), 3/283-285, 289-290ab; 5/31cd-32ab, 66cd-67ab; 6/21cd-28ab,
34-37; 8/16cd-17ab; 9/161cd-164ab; 10/89-91ab, 253cd-256ab; 12/1-3; 13/331;
15/22cd-23ab, 360, 406cd-408ab; 21/25; 28/425cd-431ab; etymology, 6/28cd33, pure, 6/174-176ab; 9/60-61, impure, 9/60-61; of the time, 6/1-251; 17/78cd82, of the space, 8/1-452; 17/78cd-82; projection of in the body, 15/456cd-459;
11/6, projection of a single - inclusive of the others, 16/94cd-168;17/1cd-3ab;
21/22cd-24; 29/20-21; purification of projected into the body, 16/207-223ab;

29/202cd-208; purification of the - without projection, 16/223cd-249; imagine
yourself in cords, 28/130cd-139ab, projected into the trident, 31/126cd-131

Path of the phonemes (varṇādhvan), 1/78-81; 6/34-36;1 11/44-92; 17/50-52,
118-120; projection of the - in the body, 16/139cd-146, 29/243cd-244ab

Path of mantra (mantrādhvan), 1/78-81; 6/34-36; 11/44-92;17/50-52, 118-120
Path of the worlds (bhuvanādhvan), 1/78-81; 6/34-36;,11/60-62ab; 17/50-52,
118-120

Path of the principles (tattvādhvan), 1/78-81; 6/34-36;, 9/49cd-314;11/36-43, 60-

62ab; 17/50-52, 118-120

TANTRĀLOKA

Path of parts of Mantra (padādhavan), 1/78-81;6/34-36; 11/44-59;17/50-52,118-

Path of the forces (kalādhvan), 1/78-81; 6/34-36; 11/2-27, 60-62ab; 17/50-52.
118-120;
perceptibility (vedyatā), 10/19-97ab, 113ab-118ab, 122ab-127ab, 138-140ab

perceivers, sakala, 1/78-81; 10/6-7ab, 10cd-18, 97cd-102, 105-107 e, 122cd148ab, 151-159, 165-166, 168-172, 177-184, 298-309; 15/339-343ab, 344cd-

345 note
perceivers, pralayākala, 1/78-81; 4/31-32 note; 6/142cd-145ab; 9/138-139;
10/3-5 and note; 12cd-17, 98cd-100, 105-107 and note, 108-109, 122cd-140ab,

151cd-159, 178-181ab, 289-294ab, 298-309; 15/339-343ab
perceivers, vijñānākala, 1/78-81; 9/93cd-110ab, 117-118, 184-185; 9/3-7ab,
12cd-17; 10/98cd-100, 105-109, 122cd-140ab, 168-172, 178-181ab, 289-294ab;
13/271cd-274ab; 15/339-343ab
perceivers, śāmbhava, 9/53cd-55ab
perceivers, śaktija, śākta, 9/53cd-55ab
persistence (sthiti), 1/78-81; 3/257cd-259ab, 280-281, 282 note; 4/149, 150;

5/25cd-26ab, 27cd-29ab; 6/59, 215; 8/303-316; 13/113cd-116ab; 14/1cd-5ab,
24; 29/153cd-154ab; 31/50cd-52; 33/30
pervasion (vyāpti), definition, 9/308cd-310 note; great -, 5/44-50ab, 100cd105ab; 16/90cd-93ab; supreme, 5/97cd-100ab

pilgrimage, 15/93cd-97ab, 278cd-283ab; 28/25cd-30, 236cd-248ab note; futility
of, 15/100cd-101ab
post-initiatory disciplines (śeṣavṛtti), 2/35-38; 15/1cd-2ab; 17/99cd-101; 26/1-

76b; 29/219-220
play (llā, krīḍā), 1/101-103; 3/1-4; 4/137cd-139; 11/55-59; 13/103-105

phonemes (varṇa), 1/170; various nature of, 5/131cd-159; ariṣing of them in the

breathing cycle, 6/216-251; birth of, 33/25-26; see also path of phonemes

posture (āsana), 3/205a-208ab note; 15/313-323a e, 350-351ab, 376cd-377 and
note, 399-401ab; 27/56cd-57; 28/425cd-431ab; 30/4-9ab; 31/45-50ab; see also

throne
power of action (kriyāśakti) 1/145, 156-157; 3/96cd-97ab, 103cd-108, 144,

172cd-173ab, 250cd-251ab; 4/186cd-189ab; 5/54cd-58ab, 64cd-66ab; 6/3840ab; 8/2, 143cd-146, 357cd-168ab; 9/50cd-53ab; 10/185-186ab note, 299301ab, 302-309; 13/266-268ab; 15/339-344ab, 389cd-391ab, 401cd-404ab;
31/45050ab
power of bliss (ānandaśakti), 1/242-244, 3/60-71ab, 93cd-95ab, 144, 157, 160-

162ab, 189cd-191ab, 208cd-210; 9/50cd-53ab; 10/185-186ab note, 299-301ab

power of consciousnesss (ciccakri), 10/185-186ab note, 299-301ab, 11/23cd-27;

19/40cd-42ab; 30/10cd-1 lab note

power of knowledge (jñānaśakti), 49-50, 53, 70-71; 1/159; 3/73cd-75ab, 104cd-

108, 172cd-173ab; 4/186cd-189ab; 5/54cd-58ab, 64cd-66ab, 8/357cd-368ab;
9/50cd-53ab; 10/185-186a. 299-301ab, 302-309; 15/212, 339-43ab, 349, 401cd404ab; 31, 45-50ab
power of the will (icchāśakti), 40-41, 49-50, 53, 70-71; 1/93-94, 159, 213, 271272; 3/71cd-72ab, 78-81 note, 104cd-108, 154-159, 172cd-173ab, 188cd-190b,
247cd-250ab; 4/186cd-189ab; 54cd-58ab, 64cd-66ab; 6/183cd-185ab; 8/375cd-

INDEX

368ab; 9/50cd-53ab; 10/12cd-17, 185-186ab, 299-301ab, 302-309; 15/332cd338, 349, 401cd-404ab; 31/45-50ab; 33/22-24;
powers, yogic accomplishments (siddhi), 1/242-244; 5/19cd-24ab, 54; 6/115-

116; 8/12-16ab; 10/163; 11/80cd-82ab; 13/152cd-153, 173-177, 182cd-185,
266-268ab, 307-308, 328-331, 353cd-355; 15/80cd-81ab, 105cd-107ab, 131cd133ab, 143-145, 156cd-157ab; 28/259cd-261ab; 29/180; 30/28cd-36ab; 30-7,
24cd-25ab;
prescriptions and prohibitions, 4/212-277 e; 15/165cd-180, 290-292ab
procreation of a son (puṁsavana), rite of,15/498-505

principles, division of into nine (Nature, soul, Necessity, Time, māyā, Pure
Knowledge, Iiśvara, Sadāśiva, Śiva), 11/37-38ab; 16/109-110ab; in eighteen,

11/37-38ab; in five (earth, water, fire, air, ether), 11/15cd-18, 34cd-35; 16/109-

110ab, 163cd-168; 6/6cd-9;

projected into the body of the initiand, 16/147-151ab
physical body, pure, 1/49, 152-153; 4/87-88, 97-99, 116cd-120ab, 212-213ab,

221cd-222ab, 256-257ab; 5/7-8, 61cd-62ab, 69, 100cd-105ab; 6/2-4ab, 14-15,
43cd-45ab; 7/65cd-68ab; 8/7-8; 9/131cd-132ab, 134cd-137, 161cd-164ab, 205206ab; 10/103-104; 13/182cd-185, 199-203, 227, 229cd-234ab, 240-244ab;
14/28-30, 37-40, 42cd-45; 15/27-30, 46, 66-73ab, 81cd-83ab; 16/178-182,
223cd-226, 228-230, 237, 243, 309cd-310ab; 17/30b33; 20/13cd-15ab, 21/3542ab; 23/44cd-47ab; 26/64, 66-40; 28/195-203ab, 213, 217-237ab, 294-306,
325-326ab, 327cd-346ab, 380cd-381ab; seat of the whole, 12/6-8; 15/276cd278ab; 17/78cd-82; place of pilgrimage, 15/93cd-97ab; combustion of,
15/232cd-237, 288cd-290ab; adoration of, 15/283cd-288ab, sacred mantric -

sacred individuated, 15/238-239ab, 323ab, see also mir:ī; the only holy place,
15/604cd-605; projection of the paths in the -, 16/94cd-157, 207;

principles (reality levels) (tartva) 1/82-90, 150-151, 186cd-189; 3/274-277;

4/118cd-120ab; 6/38-43ab; 8/12-16ab and note; 9/8-12ab; 13/218-212ab;
etymology 9/2, 4cd-6; sequential order of, 9/ 38cd-42ab; the unfolding of,
9/49cd-314; division of in relation to the hierarchy of perceivers, 10/97cd-166;
as constituting the deity’s throne, 15/308 and note; emanation of the pure

principles,16/78-80; 23/59-61; 19/209; projection of, 16/212; purification of,
16/232-233, 239; 17/7cd-64. 70cd-72, 74-78ab, 103-115ab, 115cd-117; 18/3cd11; 19/23cd-26ab; 21/54-56ab; projected into the body,
purification of, 16/223cd-226; 26/28cd-33ab; ofa liberated man alive, 28/307324ab;

purity, as immersion in the Self, 15/57-58; as an immersion in non-duality,
16/26cd-27; of disposition, 15/110cd-111ab

qualities of the intellect, 1/82-90; 8/264-271 and note, 289cd-291 and note;
9/200cd-201ab note; 15/297cd-303, 376cd-377 and note
Quiescent (śānta), one of the five kalās, 8/423-424ab, 450cd-451; 11/8; 31/9799 note
Razor (kṣurikā), mantra that severs the vital points, 29/10; 30/55cd-57

reflected image, 3/1-64, 268-293; 4/173cd-175; 9/227-229; 11/93; 26/38cd-44
renouncer (saṁnyāsin), 15/498-505

TANTRĀLOKA

right, conduct of the (dakṣiṇācāra), 11/85cd-89; 13/300cd-302, 319cd-321ab;

15/319-320; 37/25cd-29,

rites, daily (nitya), 15/481cd-489, 579-580 note; 13/43cd-44ab; 26/11 and note,

15-16, 76b; 27/23cd-24; 28/1-5 e, 60cd-63, 148-150, 417cd-423ab

rites, occasional (naimittika), 15/565cd-566ab, 579-580 and note; 26/11 and

note, 14; 27/23cd-24; 28/1-5 e, 6-9, 60cd-63, 148-150, 186cd-187, 417cd425ab; 29/291
rites, optional (kāmya), 15/579-580 note; 26/11 and note; 27/23cd-24, 47-48;

28/58cd-63, 99-101, 104cd-106ab; 32/7cd-9ab

ritual, in general (karman, kriyā), 1/231; 3/265; 4/49-50 and note, 55-57ab,

6/107; 9/121cd-124ab; 10/215cd-217ab; 12/14-16ab; 13/227cd-229ab; 15/8-11,
21-22ab, 143-145, 154cd-155ab, 283cd-288ab, 422-424ab; 16/170cd-174, 190193ab, 200cd-201ab, 248; 19/26cd-27ab; 20/5-7; 21/16-18ab, 18cd-22ab, 34;

28/409cd-411; 33/30 note; ritual and knowledge, 2/1-50; celebrated with
thought, 23/43cd-44ab; predominance of – in the Siddhānta, 37/25cd-29 secret

riṭual, 29/1-292

rosary (akṣasūtra), 27/30-32ab and note, 34cd-36ab

rules, pledges (samaya), 4/60-62ab, 261cd-263; 8/32cd-35ab; 15/23cd-26,
521cd-613; 16/178-182; 17/94-97ab, 99cd-100; 19/10, 51cd-53; 23/97-98; 26/56; 28/6-9, 29/198cd-200; etymology, 15/609cd-610ab and note; combustion of

the fetters of, 17/70cd-72; burned away by Mantra, etc., 24/6-10ab; elimination

of, 28/76cd-78ab; infringement of (samayollaṅghana), 8/32cd-35ab; 13/317cd-

319ab; 14/18-19; 15/581-584ab; 16/65-68ab, 201cd-204; 21/6-11ab; 24/2-3;
28/145cd-146ab, 408-423ab; 30/116-120ab

sacred thread, offering of (pavitrāropana), 26112-13; 28/5, 76cd-78ab, 112-186a
and
post-mortem offering (śrāddha), 15/498-505, 546-551ab and note; 19/17-20;

25/1-29b; 28/6-9, 76cd-78ab, 195-197 note

sacrifice (yāga, etc.), 69-72; 2/41-43; 3/289-290ab; 4/49-50 note; 5/114cd-

116ab; 13/173-177; 15/1cd-2ab, 69-73ab, 115cd-116ab, 148-151, 157cd-158ab,
283cd-288ab, 334cd-335 note; 351cd-352ab, 365;

sacrifice, foremost (ādiyaga), 28/44cd-47ab and auxiliary (anuyāga), 28/39cd40ab, 60cd-63; of the embodied icons as low caste women, 28/60cd-111, 186cd-

187; Kula sacrifice, 29/2b-55;
sacrificial pit (kuṇḍa), 15/338cd-391ab, 401cd-404b, 429-431; 29/8

sacrificial surface (sthaṇḍila), 12/6-8; 21/16-18ab; 26/37cd-76b; 27/14-16,

37cd-39; 29/73cd-75ab
sacrificial vessel (arghapātra), rite of, 15/146-164ab, 179cd-180, 288cd-295ab

sacred thread, investiture cord (merkhalā), Vedic rite, 15/505-508, 565cd-566ab
Saturn, 6/68cd-72ab note; 8/143cd-146
scripture, scriptures (śāstra, etc.), 1/13, 18, 47, 50-51, 198-200. 273-274 note;

2/44-47, 49; 4/45cd-47ab, 69cd-70ab, 72cd-74ab, 232cd-233 note, 248-253;
13/156, 162-163ab, 173-177, 197-198, 213-216, 303-306, 325cd-326ab, 357,
359-361; 15/12-13, 466cd-468 and note; 22/40cd-42; 26/12-13; 29/211cd212ab; equality of, 4/274-275ab; uselessness of, 13/131 cd-133 division of, 1/18
note; disclosure of, 15/563; 19/37-40ab, 47cd-48ab; explanation of, 28/385cd-

INDEX

407; meeting of of the various schools, 35/1-44b e; transmission of, 36/1-10;

superiority of the Trika, 37/1-32

sectarian signs (liṅga), 7/23-10; avoid, 15/591cd-592;
(liṅgoddhṛti), 13/281cd-283ab, 359-361; 22/1-48b; 35/28

extraction

of

senses (indriya), 1/6 note, 96-100, 154-155; 3/35-43; 4/57cd-58 note, 143-144;

9/192cd-193 and note; 21/27; 28/222-224ab, 294-295; 29/4 note, 248-252;
32/13cd-16ab;

senses of action (karmendriya), 4/159-163; 8/221-222; 9/244-245 and note, 253,

260cd-268, 272cd-276ab; 12/18cd-20ab; 16/88; 17/103-115ab; 28/198-203ab
space, 1/58-61ab, 154-155; 11/104, 111; 12/6-8; 15/194-195; Path of, 8/1-452;
directions of, 15/194-232
Speech, Corporeal (vaikharī), 1/271-272; 3/234-236, 244-247ab

Speech, Middle (madyamā), 1/271-272; 3/234-236, 241cd-244ab, 245cd-247ab

Speech, Supreme (parā), 1/271-272; 16/209
Speech of Vision (paśyantī), 1/271-272; 3/234-241ab, 245cd-247ab; 11/63cd-65

note
sin, 13/218-222ab; 15/546-551ab; 21/54-57ab; 23/70-72; 28/148-150, 409cd411, 415-417; 29/282-283
sign made of ashes (tryāyuṣa), rite of, 15/506-508
Six-syllable mantra (OM NAMAḤ ŚIVĀYA), 22/20-21

stick for the teeth (dantakaṣṭa), rite of, 15/506-508

skull, 27/20cd-28ab; 28/417cd-423ab; 29/14-16, 25-27ab

sacrificial ladle (small) (sruva), 15/416cd-421, 424cd-431, 436cd-441ab

sacrificial ladlre (large) (sruc), 5/64cd-66ab; 15/416cd-421, 424cd-431, 436cd-

441;17/65-66, 88-91; 29/75cd-77

selection of place (for the sacrifice, etc.), 15/80a-115ab
study (śruta), 1/198-200; 13/327

teacher, master, 1/7-21, 233-236; 2/35-38; 3/220-225; 13/129cd-260, 164cd-

167ab, 197-225ab, 246cd-253b; 15/466cd-267ab, 197-225ab, 246cd-253b;
15/466cd-468, 520cd-521ab, 579-580, 594-595ab; 16/163cd-168, 170cd-174,
196cd-206, 250-251; 19/50cd-51ab; 22/12cd-14ab, 27a-28ab; 25/16-18, 21cd24ab; 26/5-37ab; 27/10-11; 28/203cd-207ab; 29/43-45ab;
time, 1/58-61ab, 96-100, 267-268; 3/129cd-130ab; 4/131-132, 164-167, 255;
11/104; 12/6-8; 13/204-211; 14/14-15; 15/194-195, 347-348, 432-436ab;

28/14cd-18ab; the path of, founded on the vital breath, 6/1-71b; power of,

6/185cd-187ab; 17/78cd-82; devouring of, 61-62; 1/96-100; 7/21cd-23ab;
15/335cd-338

Time, one of the thirty-six principles, 6/40cd-43ab, 153-154; 9/45cd-48ab, 171-

173, 201cd-203; 11/37-38ab; purification of the principle of, 28/232cd-236ab;

tradition (āgama), in particular, 35/1-44cd

“ṭransmental” (unmanā), one of eight kalā of praṇava, 6/161; 7/39cd-52ab;

15/313-314, 339-343ab, 432-436ab; 23/33-41ab; 28/174-181; 29/154cd-156ab,

160cd-161ab; 30/12cd-14
transfixion, initiation for, 13/243cd-235; 29/236-269
transmigration, phenomenal existence (saṁīsara, bhava), 1/23, 96-100; 2/12;

4/55-57ab, 164-167, 277; 5/84-85; 6/56-57; 8/7-8, 352cd-355ab; 9/84cd-86;
120-121ab, 147-149ab, 171-173, 206cd-212; 10/122cd-127ab, 219b; 13/16-

TANTRĀLOKA

18ab, 32-36, 49-52, 186-191; 15/278cd-283ab, 422-424ab, 521cd-531ab; 12/2T7ab; 23/29-30;28/65-71, 203cd-207ab, 281-286; 32/49-53
trident,1/2; 3/68-71ab, 104cd-108; 54cd-58ab; 15/295cd-365, 460-463ab; 16/57ab; 19/17-20; 21/18cd-22ab; 24/10cd-12, 13-17ab; 29/170-173, 257-258; 30/410ab; 31/1a-163; 32/16cd-17
twice born (dvija),

15/497, 509-511ab; as an intermediate state of the

purification of consciousness, 15/512cd-513ab
vows, taking of, Vedic rite, 15/498-505

voluntary release from the body (utkrānti), 14/32cd-39, 178-182; - for disgust of
uses, 19/56; 'initiation of the -, 10/19-56; (suicide), 28/236cd-237ab, 256cd259ab
void (śūnya), 3/211-214 and note; 5/16cd-17ab, 44-50ab; 6/9-10, 43cd-45ab;

7/62cd-65ab; 8/4, 7-8; 11/21-23ab; 12/2-3; 15/295cd-297ab and note, 366 note;
28/218cd-220ab; 29/133-135ab

weapons of the guardians of the quarters, 11/90-91; 31/147-154
women, 15/577-578, 531cd-533; dissolute to adore, 15/551cd-557ab; adoration
of, 28/39cd-40ab; killing of, 28/415-417ab; see also yoginī, dūtī
withdrawal (sarṁhāra), 1/78-81; 3/141, 257cd-259ab, 280-281, 287; 4/150, 153154, 189-191ab; 5/25cd-26ab; 6/59, 173, 182cd-185ab, 215; 8/303-316, 330cd332ab; 13/113cd-116ab; 14/1cd-5ab, 24; 33/30
whitewashing, rite of, 15/398
withdrawal of knowledge, rite of, 13/312-314ab; 23/52-68, 73ab

zenith, 6/68cd-72ab note; 30/42-43ab note