TANTRĀLOKA
THE LIGHT ON AND OF THE TANTRAS
by Abhinavagupta

with the Commentary called Viveka by Jayaratha
Translated with explanatory notes

by Mark S. G. Dyczkowski

Volume Three - Chapter Four

TANTRĀLOKA

THE LIGHT ON AND OF THE TANTRAS

Volume Three

Chapter Four
With the Commentary

called Viveka
by Jayaratha

Translated with extensive explanatory notes
by Mark S. G. Dyczkowski

Copyright © 2023 Mark S. G. Dyczkowski

ISBN: 9798394428098
www.anuttaratrikakula.org

AII rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced
or transmited in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical
including photocopying, recording or any information storage or

retrieval system, without prior written permission of both the
copywrite owner indicated above and the publisher.

Cover illustration: Shivansh.ganjoo/commons.wikimedia.org
Varanasi,

March 2023

DEDICATION

This book is dedicated to my family and friends who have

supported and assisted me.

I offer this work most humbly to the feet of Swami Lakṣhmanjoo

who inspired and guided me in many ways.
May this work be of benefit to all.

Swami Lakshmanjoo

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The volumes the reader has before him is the fruit of a lifetime’s work
that has encompassed and pervaded every aspect of my life, as it has that of my
family, first my parents, and then my wife, children and even grandchildren. My
acknowledgements are humbly offered to all who throughout my life who have
taught, assisted and sustained me. Reflecting on over 50 years of study, during

most of which I have had the great good fortune to live in India, the holy land of
the Ṛṣis, Siddhas and Yoginīs, I cannot escape the feeling that a mighty Divine
Power has guided my life. Any acknowledgement of help received or
inspiration must begin for me with a sense of profound gratitude to the One

Infinite Being who sustains and is both the origin and final end of all things.
Nowadays, in this modern secular world such declarations seem improper and
contrary to the spirit of detached objectivity that serious academic research
demands. Nonetheless, bound as a scholar by the moral duty to acknowledge
my sources and those who have assisted me and taught me, I cannot do
otherwise. Were it not for that impulse, inscrutable as it is powerful, that sent
me from England, my native land, to India in 1969 and to the many people I
was fortunate to meet there who taught and guided me, the volumes the reader

has before him would not exist.

Amongst the many that come to mind I can only mention a few, the first

of whom is the late Pt. Ambikadatta Upadhyaya at whose feet I was introduced
to the Sanskrit language and the marvels of the world of Sanskrit literature and
grammar. Pt. Hemendranatha Cakravarti opened the door that allowed me to
enter the glorious realms of Kashmiri Śaivism. The journey into that world
began for me in 1971 with the Mahārthamañjarī of which he helped me make a
partial translation. Pandit Chakravarti was the most senior disciple of the great

Mahāmahopādhyāya Gopinātha Kavirāj who was one of the greatest scholars of

Tantra in India and amongst the first to reveal the teachings of Kashmiri
Shaivism to the world. I met him only once. The encounter took place in 1972.

He was very ill then with terminal cancer and lived in Aananda Mai’s ashram in
Benares. Although 1 was hardly twenty, he sat up for me on his bed and
summoned his strength to say just one word as he stared up into Emptiness.

Slowly, but clearly and with deep feeling, he uttered ‘mahāprakāśa’ – ‘the
Great Light’. In this way, he expressed the essence of non-dualist Śaivism of
Kashmir and left an indelible impression on me. Along with sitar, this blazing

Light would consume the rest of my working life.
In 1975 the great Kashmiri master, Swami Lakṣmanjoo sealed my quest
with his initiation and divinely inspired teachings. Words cannot express the
good fortune of a person who has had the chance to sit at the feet of a fully
realized soul and study from him. In the six months I was living near his ashram

in Kashmir, I was given access, after much insistence, to the recordings that had
been made of his lectures from 1970 by John Hughes. In the past few years
many of them have been transcribed published. The audio recordings along with
transcriptions will give some idea of the wisdom and joy Swamiji’s inner state.
He was teaching Tantrāloka at the time. While very learned scholars may have
been confused because what he taught may not always be found in the scriptural

11

sources, ḹI always took his words to have the authority of scripture. This he knew
very well, according to the degree of access to the sources available in those
days and the works of the great Kashmiri masters. He also received much from
his environment which is those days was still alive with the tradition. Swamiji
offered what John Hughes has called a ‘revelation’ rather than a translation of
the Tantrāloka. The present work seeks to present the translation along with
Jayaratha’s invaluable commentary and copious notes drawn from the sources.
My hope is that read together, revelation and translation will illumine each other
in the readerʼ’s mind.
It is important also to acknowledge that Swamiji exemplified a method
– a way of understanding the Tantrāloka and teaching it to others. This was his
focus on practice. His instruction was not only based on the texts. His concern
was to teach the matters that the texts did not make explicit concerning practice
and the states of consciousness and their developments achieved by practice and
grace. I have taken care to be as accurate as I can in my translation and striven
to furnish notes drawn from textual sources that serve to explain the translation.
This makes the work essentially a scholarly one. However, I am also deeply

concerned with practice. Indeed, a large part of what is required to understand

the Tantrāloka is to see through the many technical details into the practice they
implicitly or explicitly teach. This I try to do by reading the text and explaining
it orally in classes regularly held on line. I also quote Swamiji’s works in Hindi
and English in the notes to my translation.
While Swami Lakṣmaṇajoo was a great master of inner, yogic practice,

in Nepal I was introduced into the vast and complex world of Newar Kaula
ritual by Kedararāja Rajopādhyāya, whose ancestors were the purohitas and
Tantric gurus of the Malla kings of Bhaktapur. Kedararāja generously gave me
his time and courageously braved the possible consequences of transmitting
such matters outside the circle of his initiates.
Pt. Vṛrajavallabha Dvivedi, former head of the Yogatantra Department at
Saṁpūrṇãnanda Sanskrit University, was an abiding source of inexhaustible
knowledge. Indeed, his scholarly work, both in Sanskrit and Hindi, is

formidable – ranging as it does through virtually every major Tantric tradition
including not only Kashmiri Śaivism, but also Śaiva Siddhānta, Vīra Śaiviṣm,

Śrīvidyā, the Kaula Tantras, Vaiṣṇava Pañcarātra, the Buddhist Anutṭarayoga
Tantras and even Jain Tantrism.
In other areas of study, I cannot but recall with gratitude Pt. B. P.
Tripathi, better known as Vāgīśa Śāstīī, former Director of the Research
Department of Saṁpūrṇānanda Sanskrit Unive:
, who labored for years to
teach me Sanskrit grammar both in the traditional manner through the
Siddhāntakaumudī and through his own didactic method.
Although I have not studied formally with Prof. K. D. Tripathi, retired
dean of the Sanskrit college of Banaras Hindu University, I cannot but
acknowledge that the many lectures I have heard him deliver and dialogues 1
have had with him over the years inspired and helped me very much to
understand Pratyabhijñā, Bharṭrhari’s philosophy of grammar, Abhinavagupta’s
aesthetics and the Śaiva Āgamas. In a similar way, I had the good fortune to
listen to many lectures and attend classes on the Nāṭyaśastra with

Abhinavagupta’s commentary by the late Premalata Sharma, formerly Dean of

iīt

the Music Faculty of BHU and President of the Sangit Nataka Academy. There
are many other renowned scholars in Kāśī whom I must also thank for

inspiration such as the late Prof. Ananda Krishna and Vatukanatha Khiṣṭe, who

was a scholar and initiate in line of Bhāskara Rāya, the great 18" century
exponent of Śrīvidyā.
I owe a special thanks also to Bettina Báumer whose dedication and
scholarship in many fields has been an abiding source of inspiration and

knowledge for me throughout the 50 years of our acquaintance. Of those who
do not reside in Benares I gratefully acknowledge Prof. Navajivan Rastogi
whose books and lectures have helped me a great deal.

I should not forget to mention my good friends and fellow travelers,

especially Dr. Śitalāprasād Upādhyāya, formarly head of the Yogatantra
Department at Saṁpūrṇānanda Sanskrit University and then rector of the
University. I am especially grateful to Prof. Rana Singh, retired head of the
Geography department of Banaras Hindu University who guided me through the
principles of sacred geography, particularly that of Kāśī.
During the decades that went into making this translation and study I
continuously searched for the sources Abhinavagupta quotes in his Tantrāloka
and other works. In this regard I am deeply indebted to the librarians who
permitted me to have copies of manuscripts and early rare printed books. I am
especially grateful to the German directors in Nepal of the German Nepalese
Manuscript Preservation Project. Over the twenty odd years in which I travelled
every year, sometimes more than once, to Nepal, seven came and went. There 1
collected copies of manuscripts of the majority of the most important texts
belonging to the early period, that is, prior to Abhinavagupta, from which he
drew. The Nepalese collection is very extensive and contains most of the
earliest manuscripts preserved in the Indian subcontinent. Other libraries that
have furnished manuscripts of important texts, are the Asiatic Society in
Calcutta, the central library of Banaras Hindu University, and the libraries in
Jodhpur and Poone.
An important source are Kashmiri manuscripts, most of which are in
Śāradā script. There are a few exceptions, but to a very large extent the
Kashmiri Śaiva texts that have survived have been recovered. Even so there are
several texts written after the 13 century that have not yet been edited. These
are preserved in the Kashmiri Reaserch Institute in Srinagar and the Ranbir
Singh library in Jammu and elsewhere. The scholarly community owes Chetan
Pandey a great debt of gratitude for his unstinting effort to scan Kashmiri and
other manuscripts including the entire collection of the Ranbir Singh library and
numerous private collections.
Next only to the Nepalese collection in importance for this research, are
the transcripts and manuscripts deposited in the French research institute in
Pondicherry. Professor NṚR. Bhatt was the director of the Indological Institute
there for many years and the first editor of Siddhāntāgamas to produce critical
editions of several of major Siddhāntas. He also supervised a project that lasted
many years to search libraries and private collections for important Siddhānta
manuscripts. These he had transcribed from Grantha and other South Indian
scripts into clean, well-written devanāgarī script. In this way he made accessible
over 1,200 Saiddhāntika works, including all the twenty-eight Siddhāntāgamas.

iv
I am very grateful to Prof. Goodall who in 2008 authorized the photography of
this collection at my suggestion for Muktabodha, The PDFs were put up on the

Muktabodha site and are still freely available to all for study. Amongst these

transcripts, there are several of texts quoted by Abhinavagupta. Two especially
spring to mind, namely, the Sarvajñūānottara and the Dīkṣottara.
I heartly thank the people who have assisted me for over 30 years, the
first 20 for my work and the remaining time for Muktabodha’s project. They
typed manuscripts and collated them laboriously with meticulous care and

processing my books and editions. Especially relevant here is their collation of
the available manuscripts of the Tantrāloka and Jayaratha’s commentary.
The most senior amongst them is Ravindra Mishra who has worked
with me from the beginning. In time, the office grew to four more people,
namely, Birendra Pathak, Vinay Kumar Mishra, Dharmendra Shrivastava and
Devavrata Patel. They learnt to read and transcribe manuscripts in a variety
scripts, including the many varieties of Newarī script going back into the tenth
century. The learnt Kashmiri Śāradā script, Bengali and Maithili. They could
also transcribe South Indian Grantha. These very well trained and highly

qualified people continued to work for me on the project financed by

Muktabodha.
I worked for Muktabodha between 2007 and 2018 as academic advisor
and manager of the Varanasi office where e-texts of Sanskrit Tantric sources are
produced for the on-line Mukatbodha digital library. Hema Patankar, Robert
Kemter and Vasistha who were part of the executive staff of Muktabodha

sustained me with their sincere appreciation of my humble attempts to

contribute to the preservation and deeper understanding of Śaivism. The same
support came also from David Katz whoin the later years became the director.
Over the years I prepared had 350 e-texts typed by my staff whom I had
previously trained to do this for my work. These e-texts include cover most of
the important early publications and manuscripts from Tantric traditions,
especially Kashmiri Śaivism and Aagamic Śaivismin general. The interested
readeris encouraged to visit the site and download them and other e-texts that
are regularly added to the collection. The reader will find about 150 more
Tantric e-texts at my website – anuttaratrikakula.org. Global searches of these etexts, has completely transformed studies in this field.

I always recall with much gratitude the foreigner’s scholars who have
been my mentors and peers. In 1975 Gnoli published an talian translation of the
Tantrāloka. Īt was just the bare text without Jayaratha’s commentary and
relatively meagre notes. Even so, this and his other translations into Italian and

books contributed much to my understanding. My esteemed seniors and mentors

include Professor André Padoux who, especially in these last few years, give me
great moral support by his appreciation of my humble efforts. Professor Richard
Gombrich has never forgotten me although many years have passed since he
was my supervisor in Oxford. Others include the late David Kinsley, a sincere
and most humble man who took pleasure in conversation and exchanging views.
David Lorenzen has been a friend for over thirty years whom I have come to
know better over the past ten or so since he began to make short yearly trips to
Varanasi. He has always brought with him new vistas and interests along with

his deep sensitivity and a self-effacing nature that hides the depth of his

v

scholarship. Amongst my other fellow scholars, I would like to thank the 'other
David,, that is, David White. A dear friend, he has been unfailing in his support
and has always tried his best to keep me on the path towards the distant goal of
completing these volumes. Amongst those younger than me, I recall Jeffrey
Lidke, whose exchanges have led to much reflection, and John Nemec. I should
mention with gratitude my students who have always been very supportive.

I reserve a special place in these acknowledgements for my revered
teacher Prof. Alexis Sanderson formerly of the Sanskrit Department of the
Oriental Institute at the University of Oxford, now retired, with whom I was
fortunate to study for my doctoral dissertation on the Spanda teachings of
Kashmiri Śaivism between 1975 and 1979 which resulted in the Doctrine of
Vibration. Our interaction continued for the next six years. His knowledge and
insight, inspired me greatly as he continues to do so to this day through his
writings that has contributed an immense amount to our knowledge of Śaiviṣm.

It was he who sowed the seeds of this work. The study of Kashmiri Śaivism
under his guidance opened a door for me onto the vast and rich world of the

early Śaivāgamas, which fascinated and attracted me intensely. Were it not for

him and my esteemed Indian teachers, I would not have given the best years of
my life to this work.
Finally, I wish to express my unbounded gratitude to Ram Krishnan and

Raphael Wiilterlin who made my website and to those who have helped to

maintain it and develop it, most especially loana-Raluca Voicu (‘Yaria’), who
has been in charge of the site for the past three years. She regularly uploads the
classes I hold three times a week, seminars and the music I play on sitar. Mariya
Karagyozova has also helped me much over the years send out notices to people
and assisting in the coordination of my lectures and seminars. A very special

thanks goes to Sarah Caldwell, known to her friends as ‘Amba’. She spent an
immense of amount of time proof reading the text of my translation two times
over.
Freedom Cole is an old friend and very excellent and well-known
astrologer. He dedicated a good deal of his very valuable time to writing a
substantial essay on Indian astrology in the light of the teachings of chapter six
of the Tantrāloka. Theṣe are concerned with the projection of the cycles of time
into that of the breath. All the diagrams and drawings in that article are made by
him. The reader will find it in the appendix to that chapter.

CONTENTS
CHAPTER FOUR
The Empowered Means (Śāktopāya)
The Purification and Empowerment of Thought (vikalpasaṁskāra) without
Outer Support: verses 1-7, pages 1-10
The Lord Conceals and Reveals His Own Nature: verse 8-12, pages 10-14
The True Nature of Sound Reasoning (tarkatattva): verses 13-16, pages 14-22
Mistaken Attachment to Lower Paths: verses 17-32, pages 23-43
The True Teacher (gurusatattvaka)
Finding a True Teacher (gurusatattvaka): verses 33-40ab, pages 43-49
The Types of Teachers: verses 40cd-78ab, pages 49-93
The Spontaneously Enlightened (sāṁsiddhika), Uncreated (akalpita)
Teacher: verses 40cd-5 1ab, pages 49-67
The Pure Knowledge of Sound Discriminative Reasoning: verses 44cd47ab, pages 58-59
The Uncreated-cum-created (akalpitakalpaka) Teacher: verses 51cd-59,
pages 67-77
Direct Initiation by the Goddess: verses 60-65, pages 77-83
Learning Mantras from Books: verses 66-69ab, pages 83-86

The Created-cum-uncreated (kalpitākalpita) Teacher: verses 69cd-70ab,
72cd-73ab, pages 87, 89
The Created (kalpita) Teacher: verses 70cd-72ab, pages 87-89
The Uncreated (akalpita) Teacher: verses 73cd-78ab, pages 90-93

The Sources and Means of Knowledge: verses 78cd-85, pages 93-101
The Uselessness of the Ancillaries of Yoga (yogāṅgānupayogitva): verses 86109ab, pages 101-129

Sound Discriminative Reasoning – the Sole Ancillary of Yoga: verses 96-

109cd, pages 116-129
The Irrelevance of Conceived Forms of Worship (kalpitārcādyanādara): verses
109cd-122ab, pages 129-149
Pure Knowledge and the Inner and Outer Cogitation of Consciousness:

verses 109cd-114ab, pages 129-133

The Perennial Rite of Pure Knowledge and Inner Worship: verses 1 14cd-122ab,
pages 133-149
The Arising of the Cycles of Consciousness (saṁviccakrodaya): verses 122cd-

180ab, pages 149-280

A Yoga from the Yogasaṁcara: verses 127-146ab, pages 165-195
The Twelve Kālīs: verses 146cd-173ab, pages 195-252
The Four Kālīs Who Consume the Sphere of Objectivity: verses 148151, pages 199-218
1) Sṛṣṭikālī – The Kālī of Creation. The Emanation of Objectivity:

verses 148, pages 199-204

vi

2) Raktakālī – The Red Kālī. The Persistence of Objectivity: verses

149-150a, pages 204-210

3) Sthitināśakālī – The Kālī of the Destruction of Persistence. The

Withdrawal of Objectivity: verses 150bcd, pages 210-213

4) Yamakālī – The Kālī of Restriction. The Inexplicable State of
Objectivity: verses 151, pages 213-218
The Four Kālīs Who Consume the Sphere of the Means of Knowledge:
verses 152-163, pages 218-235
5) Saṁhārakālī – The Kālī of Withdrawal. The Emergence of the
Means of Knowledge: verses 152-153, pages 218-221
6) Mṛtyukālī – The Kālī of Death. The Persistence of the Means of
Knowledge: verses 154, pages 221-224
‘7) Rudrakālī –The Fierce Kālī. The Withdrawal of the Means of
Knowledge: verses 155-158, pages 224-230

8) Mārtaṇḍakālī – The Kālī of the Sun. The Inexplicable state of the

Means of Knowledge: verses 159-163, pages 230-235
The Four Kālīs Who Consume the Sphere of Subjectivity: verses 164-

173ab, pages 235-252

9) Paramārkakālī – The Kālī of the Supreme Sun. The emanation of
the subject: verses 164, pages 235-237
10) Kālāgnirudrakālī – The Kālī of Rudra the Fire of Time. The

persistence of the subject: verses 165-168, pages 237-241

11) Mahākālakālī – The Kalī of the Great Time. The withdrawal of
the subject: verses 169-170, pages 242-245
12) Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālī – The Horrific and Fierce Kālī of
the Great Bhairava. The inexplicable state of the subject: verses
171-173ab, pages 245-252
The Krama Lineages ad: verses 173ab, pages 253-270
The Five Operations (kalana) of Kālakarṣiṇī Kālī: verses 173cd-175, pages

270-272

The Dynamism of Kālakarṣiṇī Kālī, Mātṛsadbhāva and Vāmeśvarī: verses
176-181ab, pages 273-279
The Vitality of Mantra (mantravīrya): verses 181cd-193, pages 279-297
The Universal Pulse of the Heart of Consciousness: verses 181cd-186ab,
pages 280-286
SAUḤ and KHPHREṀ: verses 186cd-191, pages 286-295
‘I’ Consciousness is the Vitality (vīrya) and Heart of all Mantras: verses
192-193, pages 295-297
The True Repetition of Mantra (japyādivāstavam): verses 194, pages 297-299

Supreme Dhyāna: verses 195-199, pages 299-303
Mudrā: verses 200, pages 303-304

Oblation and Recitation of Mantra: verses 201-203, pages 304-307

Viewing Oneself in the Mirror of Inner Meditation and Worship: verses 204-

212, pages 307-313

The Relativity of Prohibitions and Injunctions (niṣedhavidhitulyatva):

viī

Commentary on Chapter Eighteen of the Mālinīvijayottara: verses 213-

221ab, pages 314-317
a) Commentary on the words ‘here (in the practice of this Tantra) there is

neither purity nor impurity.: verses 221cd-247ab, pages 318-344

b) Commentary on the words: ‘there is no deliberation on what may (or may

not) be eaten or the like.ʼ: verses 247cd-253, pages 344-354

c) Commentary on the words ‘there is neither duality nor nonduality.’:
verses 254-255, pages 354-356

d) Commentary on the words: ‘there is no worship of the Liṅga or the like.’:
verses 256-257ab, pages 356-358
e) Commentary on the words: ‘(such practices of having) matted hair,
(smearing the body) with ashes and the like’: verses 257cd-258ab, pages
358-364

f) Commentary on the words: ‘the observance or otherwise of (an ascetic’s)

Vows and the like’: verses 258cd-259ab, pages 364-365
g) Commentary on the words: ‘entry into the sacred meeting grounds
(kṣera) etc.: verses 259cd-261ab, pages 365-367

h) Commentary on the words ‘the observance of the Rule (samaya) etc.’:
verses 261cd-263ab, pages 367-369

i) Commentary on the words ‘one’s own and others’ icons (rūpa), sectarian

insignia (liṅga), (initiatory) names and clans (gotra) or the likeʼ: verses

263cd-270ab, pages 369-376

j) Conclusion: verses 270cd-276ab (270cd-275ef), pages 377-381
The Excellence of the Inner Rite: verses 276cd-279cd (276-279ab), pages 381383
Appendices to Chapter Four
Introduction to the Appendices of Chapter Four: The Sources of the Kramanaya

with Special Reference to the Assembly of Thirteen Kālīs, pages 384386

Appendix A: The Early Krama, pages 387-414
Chapter Four of the Mādhavakula, the Fourth ṣaṭka of the
Jayadrathayāmala, Called the Kālīkramavidhipaṭala, Which
Teaches the Initiation in Front of the maṇḍala of the Thirteen

Kaālīs, pages 400-413
Appendix B: The Wheel of Twelve Kālīs According to Chapter Seven of the

Ciñciṉṇīmatasārasamuccaya – The Collection of the Essence of the
Tradition of (Kubjikā) the Goddess of the Tamarind Tree, pages 414-

436
Appendix C: Chapter Five of the Kālikulakramapañcaśatika, also called the

Devīpañcaśatika, pages 437-453
Appendix D: The Kālikāstotram by Śivānandanātha, pages 454-463
Appendix E: The Thirteen Kālīs of the Kramastotra by Erakanātha, pages 464-

470

Appendix F: The Kramastotra by Abhinavagupta, pages 471-479

1x

Appendices G, H and I to Chapter Four: The Final Form of the Krama System,

pages 480-482
Appendix G: The Krama Gurus, pages 483-487

Appendix H: The Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasimha, pages 488-524
Appendix I: The Twelve Kālīs and the Cycle of the Inexplicable

according to Chapter Nine of the Trivandrum

Mahānayaprakāśa, pages 525-533
Appendix J: Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Vidyās, pages 534-536

CHAPTER FOUR
The Empowered Means (Śāktopāya)
May (the Lord) Who is the supreme vitality of Mantras be victorious;
He Who, conquering the supreme (reality), bestows mastery over the mass of
good thoughts in order to destroy the obstacles brought about by bad ones.
Now, after (having taught) the Divine Means, in order to teach the
Empowered Means that comes next, he announces that (he is going to do s0) in
the second half (of the verse with which the previous chapter ends).

³T⁹] JĒTTAĪTĒG
GRJTĪT: THTTTĀTHC |

atha śāktam upāyamaṇḍalaṁ kathayāmaḥ paramātmasaṁvide || 1 II
Now we will speak of the group (maṇḍala) of Empowered Means
(which serve to attain) the consciousness of the Supreme Self. (1)
(He refers to) ‘the group (maṇḍala) of (Empowered) Means’ because
they are many, beginning with the purification of thought (and the rest).
Accordingly, there (in that context), he begins at first to define the

purification of thought announced in the subsequent (detailed) enunciation (of
the contents of the Tantrāloka).¹

³The Purification and Empowerment of Thought (vikalpasaṅskāra)

without Outer Support³

' This chapter is about the Empowered Means (Śaktopāya). The penetration of
consciousness that takes place in this category of means is defined in the MV 2/22, as
quoted above in 1/169:
‘The penetration one attains whilst thinking of (the nature of) reality (vastu)
with the mind alone, without (having to practice) the utterance of Mantra (uccāra) (or
the like), is here called Empowered (śākta).” See above, 1/292cd-293 (291ab-291cd) for

a list of the practices taught in this category of means.
² The word ‘saṁṅskāra’ means ‘refining, preparing, making ready or fit to do or be

something’. Monier-Williams defines the word in his dictionary as follows: ‘putting
together, forming well, making perfect, accomplishment, embellishment, adornment,
purification, cleansing, making ready, preparation, dressing (of food), refining (of
metals), polishing (of gems), rearing (of animals or plants), cleansing the body, toilet,
atṭire, forming the mind, training, education, correction (also in an astronomical sense
Sūryasiddhānta), correct formation or use of a word, correctness, purity (especially of

pronunciation or expression), making sacred, hallowing, consecration, a sacred or
sanctifying ceremony, the faculty of memory, mental impression or recollection,

impression on the mind of acts done in a former state of existence. It is one of the 24

qualities of the Vaiśeṣikas and is associated with bhāvanā, the faculty of reproductive
imagination. According to the Buddhists [a saṅskāra is] a mental conformation or
creation of the mind (such as that of the external world, regarded by it as real, though

actually non-existent, and forming the second link in the twelve-fold chain of causation
or the fourth of the five skandhas. [It also means] a polishing stone.’

2

CHAPTER FOUR

³ The term ‘vikalpa’, here translated simply as ‘thought’, has a complex series of
connotations (see note 3,394). There are two types of perception or ways in which
things are known. One is free of vikalpa (nirvikalpa). Īt iīs a direct and correct

knowledge of things just as they are. According to the Pratyabh

it is the manner in

which consciousness as the perceiver knows the contents of its perception as the

radiance of its own light. This is their ultimate, real (paramārthika) nature. The other
type of perception is ‘with vikalpa’ (savikalpa). It is a *differentiated perception’ of
things, in which they are perceived to exist individually and independently in their own
right, different from one another and the perceiver. This is how we commonly perceive
things in daily life. Most nondualist schools consider this to be simply a mistaken
perception of reality. Even so, they all agree that in its own terms, i.e. at the level of
daily life, it is functional. Indeed, daily life would not be possible without vikalpa. This

is how we know the world and can function in it, making use of the things around us to
the degree and the manner in which we know them in this way. Linked to the inner

speech of thought, this is discursive knowledge that can be communicated to others and
shared with them. It can also be analysed and developed conceptually, even
independently of outer objects, although it can also be applied to them to understand

their nature in conceptual terms. Through this knowledge we can make use of them. In

that sense, vikaḷpa is a form of knowledge that can be developed and applied, but it is
not the direct holistic knowledge of reality just as it is in the fullness of its totality. From
that perspective, it is ‘incomplete’ (apūrṇa), ‘partia’ (aṁṣśika) and ‘impure³. Pure,
complete and integral knowledge is free of vikalpa and is liberating, just as, conversely,

the former is binding.
AIl this and the many ramifications and implications of what is meant by
vikaḷpa need to be borne in mind. Rather than maintain a complex term in Sanskrit like

this one untranslated, I choose to find a single word equivalent, which in this case is
‘thought’. In various contexts, one or more of the other multiple meanings of the term

vikalpa and what they denote come to the fore, and so it has been translated accordingly

variously as, for example, ‘discursive representation’, ‘notion’, ‘idea’ or ‘conception’.
The last of these implicitly also conveys the sense that vikalpas are both conceptual
creations and are themselves creative. These are distinguished from the creations of

consciousness itself, i.e. its manifestations, which are ‘authentic’ or ‘uncreated’ —

akṛtrima (for an example of this usage see below 4/192, 194). Those created by vikalpa
are ʻartificial’ and ‘created’ – kṛtrima by the mind and intellect (see, for example, below
4/107). The notion we have of ourselves is conceived or ‘created’, as opposed to the
‘uncreated’ supreme sense of ‘’ which is the reflective awareness of consciousness

itself (see above, note 1,460; cf. TĀv ad 5/10cd-1 1ab, also 16/264 (264cd-265ab) ff.).

Thus, vikalpa is an ‘unclear² indirect perception of reality. The purpose of the practice

of the means to realization in the domain of the Empowered Means is to make vikalpa
completely ‘clear” (sphuṭa). This involves a progressive transition from the domain of

vikalpa, in which the underlying reality of pure undivided consciousness which is all
things is obscured by vikalpa, to the domain devoid of vikalpa, in which that reality
shines in its pristine purity. The Empowered Means are, one could say, largely forms of
cognitive Yoga that operate in the field of cognition and the mechanisms of discursive
thought that accompany it. The liberated state is essentially the recognition of one’s own
true nature as the pure fully sentient consciousness of Deity free of thought constructs.
We have seen that those who have risen up to this condition by Śiva’s grace practice the

Śāmbhava Means, which serves to make it firm and stable (dṛdha, rūḍha). This is done
by merging and being merged into the reflective awareness of the supreme ‘I’ of the
Light of Siva consciousness which, as its freedom in all respects, articulates itself into

the world of words and the entities they denote. This takes place without it thereby
losing its essential nature and condition as the supreme, transcendental Speech that

TANTRĀLOKA

3

STT-TĀTGPĪThSTĀĀTYTT ṬRHA |
sfttāṁrzrfĪēṁhcūzā aāīcdiīēhīaīzā ú 3 1
anantarāhnikokte ‘smin svabhāve pārameśvare |
pravivikṣur vikalpasya kuryāt saṁskāram añjasā || 2 |I
He who wishes to enter into this, the Supreme Lord’s nature,

described in the previous chapter, must purify (his) thought (properly and)
without delay (añjasā). (2)

‘This (Supreme Lord’s) natureʼ is the one (pure conscious) nature,
free of thought constructs. (By saying this, Abhinavagupta) thereby (implicitly)
indicates that (thought) is at rest in the Divine Means. (To achieve this, one

articulates the plenitude of the Light of consciousness, both in the lower domains of
Speech and, as it is in itself, beyond them as their source, ground and ultimate nature.
This continuity downwards into the realms of thought and objective representation

assures, as Sanderson puts it (2006: 46): ‘the fundamental principle of the left’s

soteriology that discursive (savikalpaka-) formulation of the self’s true nature can lead
eventually to its nondiscursive (nirvikalpaka-) realization (sākṣātkāra). It is believed
that thought (vikalpaḥ) of the nondual reality of consciousness can be so intensified

through constant reiteration that it obliterates all other awareness and finally throws off
its dualizing nature to become the enlightened nondual consciousness which until then
had been its object.”
Time, marked by the succession of events which are distinct from one another,
is a vikalpa. It is the notion of progressive development and change. In the domain of
the Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya), there are no vikalpa, as it is based on the reflective
awareness of consciousness free of vikalpa, as ‘complete’ (pūrṇa), ‘authentic”
(akṛtrima) and ‘supreme” ‘F’. Thus, in that sphere of practice, there is no succession

(krama), just direct timeless insight. It operates in the sphere of Śiva, the subject who

contains everything within himself, ranging from the One — Anuttara – right down to

gross Earth. It abides within him as phases or aspects of His divine power or will, which

is at once His freedom (ṣvātantrya) and reflective awareness (vimarśa). It is the Means
based on the unity (abhedopāya) of Śiva’s omnipotent and omniscient will (icchopāya).
Here that is not so. Practice here centres on perception (jñāna), that involves

working in various ways and degrees with the flux of vikalpa. Thus, there is an element
of succession and progression (krama) in a practice belonging to this category, the
Empowered Means, which is based on the power of perception (jñānaśakti). However,
as practice here is also grounded directly in the development of the direct insight which

is the reflective awareness consciousness has of its own nature, it is also non-successive

and only incidentally related to the psychophysical organism.

The sphere of practice of the Individual Means also leads to the liberated state

free of vikalpa, but that is not achieved by working with vikalpa and hence
consciousness directly. This does (as it must) take place, but it is mediated (at least
initially) by the activity of the psychophysical body (see below, 5/2-9ab). It includes

such things as ritual, Yoga, the recitation of Mantra and so on, which are explicitly
excluded in the domain of the practice of Empowered Means. In the sphere of practice

of the Individual Means, the power of action predominates, and it may involve

successive progressions and levels marked by features or locations

psychophysical body, including the dynamics of the vital breath.

in the

4

CHAPTER FOUR

must) ‘purify’ (thought) by repeatedly pondering etc.⁴ on what one has heard
(of the teachings) by the process (that develops) from unclear (notions of Self)
at the beginning, right up to the attainment of the supremely (lucid) state of
clarity³ (of its true nature) at the end. (In this purified state, thought) assumes
another (contrary) quality (which is direct insight), by virtue of which one
penetrates into the (essential) nature (of consciousness), which is free of thought
constructs. (This should be done) ‘without delay’, that is, quickly, otherwise
(this process of) purification could not develop, because other contrary notions
(would) arise (that prevent it taking place).⁶

Swami Ḷakṣhmaṇjoo teaches that ‘the purification of thought means essentially
the practice of maintaining of a single thought, thereby removing others. But it is more

than a form of concentration. It is also a process of sattarka – ‘right reasoning’ which is
and develops śuddhavidyā – the reality level (tattva) called Pure Knowledge. The
former essentially consists of focused reflection on the teachings, finally to arrive at the

conviction of one’s own identity with Śiva. As such, it is clearly distinguished from

purely intellectual endeavour. Jayaratha refers to this practice at the beginning of his
commentary, where he writes:

‘[am not engaged (in this work) to attain (some) unique status as a writer; nor
(am I doing this) to show off (my) skill with language; rather my desire is that (my)
thought be purified (vikalpaḥ saṁskāravān) by being constantly occupied with this
teaching (artha). (4)

Pure Knowledge greets the fortunate soul who has been graced by rising
beyond Māyā and its domain – the thirty reality levels below it. Here, freed of most its
Impurity, the soul perceives the true identity of the world to be itself at one with Śiva. It

is the insight which is the immanent foundation of the realisation of transcendental Śiva,

four levels above. As such, it is not of course a thought construct. Rather it is the ‘pure
thoughtless thought’ that Jayaratha tells us is “ am all this and all this am I”. This pure
Knowledge is thus the blooming of sattarka – ‘right reasoning’. Accordingly, Abhinava
refers to six levels or degrees of clarity of this ‘pure thought’. There is no reference here

to concentration as such. Thought is not eliminated, it is cultivated and refined to think

in conformity with the teachings, that are realised to be true. Although many, if not

most, philosophies in India maintain that there is a total break between ‘thought’ –

vikalpa and ʻ*non-thought’ – nirvikalpa, with the former representing the domain of

ilusion and the later that of insight into the true nature of things, here there is an
unbroken continuity between the two domains. The former develops up from gross to

subtle, that is, from an ‘unclear⁷ understanding of reality to a ‘clear one’. The latter

travels down from perfect clarity down to growing obscurity.

⁴ See below, note to 4/207-208.

⁵ Read sphuṭatamatvāpatti- for sphutatamatvādyāpatti-.
⁶ Thought is at rest when practicing in the sphere of the Divine Means. This state of

tranquil repose within consciousness, free of thought, is immersion into Śiva’s nature. It
takes place by an intense descent of the power of grace, requiring very little from the

practitioner beyond openness and fearless consent. If there is a need to enter this state
and so realise one’s own true Śiva nature, it means that thought constructs are arising
within consciousness that obscure it and need be brought to rest within it. This is done

by purifying them, by reflecting deeply on the teachings. The initial unclear notions of
the purport of the teaching, namely, our essential identity with Śiva, thus gradually
become clearer. As they do so, the conviction of their truth is progressively strengthened
by the direct experience induced by Śiva’s grace. This is because, as this process

TANTRĀLOKA

5

Surely (one may ask,) everybody agrees that cognitive consciousness
(jñāna) is momentary, and as the thought (that arises) from that is also a form of
cognitive consciousness and so is momentary, how can the purification of one’s
own nature, which is (essentially consciousness) hidden (by thought constructs),
develop?⁷ That could (only take place) if (the prior pure consciousness)is stable
(sthira) (and continuous), as is the case for example with the flowers (that are
present in a potential form) in a sesame seed.⁸ So howis it that he has said that?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

f-āhca. ũ̄īṝa. ̄d Ṁahcã ũaũũthd

aqçā aāīsfī] āīraṁ aīsã aqdTcd̄ | 3 1
vikalpaḥ saṁskṛtaḥ sūte vikalpaṁ svātmasaṁskṛtam |

svatulyaṁ so ‘pi so ‘py anyaṁ so ‘py anyaṁ sadṛśātmakam || 3 |I
A notion (vikalpa) (of the sort ‘I am Śiva and this universe is my
glory”), once purified (to some degree), 1) generates another notion, which
is (already) purified by its very nature, and 2) that one also, another similar
to itself (which is more refined), 3) that also another one, and that too 4)
another similar one by nature (thus forming a series of progressively purer,
more refined notions of Self). (3)

Here (in everyday life), the conceptual representation (vikalpa) (that

something is) blue arises from a conceptual representation of ‘blue’. The
conceptual representation of ‘yellow’ does not (arise from that). 1) In the same
way, even if (the first notion of Self) is unclear, because it is being contemplated

in order to make it clear, the state in which the lack of clarity is (in the process

progresses, consciousness shifts from the aspect in which it perceives the nature of
things as external through the medium of thought constructs, to its other aspect, in

which it perceives them within itself and as itself directly, unmediated by thought. AIl
things reside within Lord Śiva and Śiva within everything. But while this realisation is

brought about by Śiva’s grace, the practitioner should take care to apply himself or
herself assiduously to this practice, and do so, as far as possible, without interruptions,
because until the goal is reached, thought-free consciousness tends to revert back to its
opposite aspect.
⁷'The text here is corrupt. It appears that some part of it has been lost and the word order

has been disarranged. Rather than make an extensive conjectured emendation, the most
direct way to arrive at a minimally satiṣfactory text is to omit the reading
utpādasamanantaraṃ eva.

⁸ The seed can only give rise to a plant that goes on to bear fruits and then flowers, i all

the succeeding stages of their progressive development are present in some potential
form in the previous ones. This would not be possible if each stage were to be

momentary, that is, totally self-contained and independent. Something already present in
the initial stage must be carried over from one stage to the next to ensure continuity and
growth. Similarly, consciousness must exist initially in a pure state free of the thought
constructs that obscure it before they arise, otherwise it could not arise subsequently

when thoughts have been purified, that is, removed by absorbing them into the pure
conscious nature of the yogi engaged in this practice.

6

CHAPTER FOUR

of) decreasing (bhraśyadasphutatva) is initially⁹ attained, so that the (resulting)
notion (vikalpa), which has been refined (to some degree), generates another
refined notion (of Self) like itself (which has also been purified to a higher

degree). (This is not surprising); indeed, it is generally the case that the

production of an effect accords with (the nature of its) cause.¹⁰ This is the
general sense (of this verse). One should understand that (this applies) in the
same way to the succeeding notions (in the series) also. 2) ‘That one also’

(gives rise to) a second one born from that purified notion, and 3) ‘that also
anotherʼ third one, and then again, 4) ‘that one too, another’ fourth one. Here
(in this case, another, subsequent notion) which is ‘similar to itself’ can be

related to (the previous one). Even so, it is said to be a ‘similar one by nature’

in order to indicate that even though (the individual notions) of the chain of

notions are progressively more distant (in nature from one another as they
become more refined), this (does not entail) any loss (hāni) of their (basic)

similarity.¹¹

Surely (one may ask,) agreed that from one purified notion another

arises that is similar to that, but then would not the arising of the third (notion)

and so forth, again in the same way, be useless, or else, if (you say that there is)
a difference (between them), would that not compromise (hāni) (their)
similarity? With this doubt in mind, he says:

⁹ See below, commentary to 4/5cd.

'⁰ The cause here is a notion in the process of being increasingly purified. The effect is

another notion which is also in the process of being increasingly purified, and so has

been purified to a higher degree than the previous one, and will give rise in the same
way to another which is purified to a greater degree, and so on. In this way, there is a
chain of causes and effects that carry on from one to another, both similar with respect

to what they are and also with respect to their potential to develop further.
'' This progression through the first four stages, from unclear to clear notions of the
nature of reality, maintains the similarity between the previous and subsequent notions,
because a cause doesn't give rise to an effect totally dissimilar to itself. More proximate
notions are most similar, those more distant least. Even s0, as they are all related one to
another in this chain of progressive development, there is no logical inconsistency even

if the final, clearest notion develops into a complete and perfect insight into the nature
of reality which is totally subversive of the initial one. For example, we may begin with

an initial understanding of Lord Śiva’s nature as the Lord, Who is so infinitely greater

than us, that He is qualitatively different, as when we feel that He is the creator and we

are His creatures. But as we advance in our practice and understanding of the teachings,

we progressively understand who we really are and Who Lord Śiva is. As we progress,
our notions become clearer, more in conformity with reality, until ultimately we not

only understand conceptually that the Lord we worship is our own true nature, we
experience it directly. In other words, this kind of practice makes use of thought to
eradicate it. Thought does not only obscure consciousness, and so should not be
eliminated as valueless. It can also serve in this way as a vehicle of realisation, by
disciplining it and opening it up to the illuminating grace that clarifies it. Thus, radiant
and clear, that is, transparent to the Light of consciousness, thought, freed of its

obscuring confinement, rises to the thought of the identity with Śiva and the world, be it
terrible or wonderful, His thought creates.

TANTRĀLOKA

7

dt faē-āī a: úaāR: Ūhāīāī |

3TTG: TWGḺ̄TI'ī
J TfTTIcT : I ` I
caturṣv eva vikalpeṣu yaḥ saṁskāraḥ kramād asau |
asphuṭaḥ sphuṭatābhāvī prasphuṭan sphuṭitātmakaḥ || 4 II
The (degree of) purity of these four thought constructs is,

progressively,

1) unclear

(asphuṭa),

2)

about

to

become

clear

(sphuṭatābhāvin), 3) in the process of becoming clear (prasphuṭan), and 4)
clear (sphuṭita). (4)
(Notions concerning the true nature of things are) ‘progressivelyʼ,

according to the degree of the excellence of (one’s) practice (abhyāsa), ‘about
to become clearʼ, that is, fit to become clear (and correct), ‘in the process of

becoming clearʼ, that is, (their) clarity is developing, and ‘clear’ʼ, that is, have
attained a state of clarity. Thus here (in this case), (the clarity of the correct

conception of reality) accords with (the progressive) excellence of insight
(darśana); (thus, although the succeeding notions become progressively more
lucid, the preceding ones are) not useless, nor does that compromise (hāni)
(their) siṃilarity, because no other insight (into the nature of reality) (pratyaya)
arises which is dissimilar (to the notion formed of it on the basis of the highest
teachings).” Thus, what is being said in this way is that the purification that

takes place initially develops according to the excellence of (one’s) practice.

Is not (complete) purification of (thought) possible by only just this

much? (With this question in mind,) he thus says:
aE Taš EḷEcs ajã̃ Tāq

|

tataḥ sphuṭataro yāvad ante sphuṭatamo bhavet |
Then (at the next higher level, the notion one has of reality)
becomes 5) more clear (sphuṭatara) until it finally becomes 6) supremely
(sphuṭatama) so. (5ab)

‘“Then’ (at the next higher level), after the fourth (degree of clarity).
'² This means is based on repeated practice (abhyāsa), and so can be contrasted with the

Divine Means (Śāmbhavaopāya), in which the highest state of divine, subjective
consciousness is attained with just one application of self-awareness, and even more s0,

with No Means (Anupāya), which is the spontaneous awareness consciousness has of

itself. But although these two appear to be extreme opposites, in fact, all the means to
realisation ultimately lead to No Means, preparing for its realization.

'³ Indeed, the opposite takes place – as correct notions of reality become progressively
clearer, they develop into a direct experience of it, which confirms that they are correct,
thus contributing to their clarity. In other words, the essential similarity of true notions
of the nature of reality that develop in this way is based on the fact that they are correct
and grounded in a direct experience which underlies and sustains them, namely, that
they are ultimately products of Śiva consciousness, not just the mind.

8

CHAPTER FOUR

Surely (one may ask,) even by means of the most excellent practice,
how can an initially unclear notion rapidly assume the state of one that is about

to become clear, and so on? With this doubt in mind, he says:

³T-&zṛāī fēk-ḥ *ī ’ārarazāīTāīfcēē
I .. 1A

asphuṭādau vikalpe ca bhedo ‘py asty āntarālikaḥ lI 5 II
In (between all these six stages,) starting from (the first, in which)

the notion (vikalpa) (of the nature of reality is) unclear, there are other

intermediate (gradations). (Ścd)

(There are) ‘other” particular ‘intermediate’ (gradations) in between

(each stage). In this way, in between (the initial stage in which the correct

notion is) ‘unclear” and (the one that is) ‘about to become clearʼ, the (initial)

lack of clarity is ‘(in the process of) decreasing³ (bhraśyadasphuṭatva). In the

same way, (the next intermediate stage) is ‘a little clarity’ (īṣarprasphuṭatva)

(between the stages in which the correct notion of reality is ‘about to become

clear’ and ‘in the process of becoming clear’). (Then, between ‘the process of
becoming clear” and ‘clear’, the intermediate stage is) ‘clarity which is (just)
sprouting³ (aṅkuritasphuṭatva). (The intermediate stage between ‘clear’ and
‘more clear’) is ‘the indication of greater clarity² (āsātritasphuṭataratva).

(Finally, the one between ‘more clear’ and ‘supremely clear” is) ‘emergent
supreme clarity’ (udgacchatsphuṭatamatva).
Surely (one may ask,) once this has been done in this way, what of it?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

hGĀA
TAEIGIGITAĒĒIai1ṈI
ĪMMĀṆāḍRCIARHSṈ
tataḥ sphuṭatamodāratādrūpyaparibṛṁhitā
|
saṁvid abhyeti vimalām avikalpasvarūpatām || 6 l
¹“Thus (as a result of this process), consciousness, strengthened by

that noble and supremely clear nature (of the most lucid notion), attains (its
own) pure state of being, which is free of thought constructs.¹⁵ (6)
‘Thus’, because of the purification (which takes place) as described,

‘ṭhat nature’ (of consciousness) which is (engaged in) thought (vikalpakatva)

is ‘supremely clear” and therefore ‘noble’, that is, great, because it is on the
same level as (consciousness, which is) free of thought constructs.
‘Strengthened’ by it, and having been freed of the need of further purification,
the form of consciousness consisting of thought constructs (vikalparāpā saṅvit)

'⁴ Jayaratha refersin TĀv ad 1/171 to this passage, which extends up to here from verse

2. This verse is quoted belowin TĀv ad 5/5.
'° This is possible because there is a continuity between thought (vikalpa) and the

consciousness free of it that precedes it. See preceding notes and also above, note 3,87.

TANTRĀLOKA

9

‘aṭṭains (its own) pure state of being, which is free of thought constructs’ by
the removal of the stain of limitation (sarṁkoca). The meaning is that is shines

radiantly as full (and perfect) knowledge (jñāna) (of reality), free of thought

constructs. Thus, this (verse) also says (in this way) that one should not rest in
just thought constructs alone. As they say:
‘A. wise man should not immerse (himself in any notions) — even

thought that concerns ultimate reality. What difference is there between an

auspicious and an inauspicious thought? (They are both equally just notions).”¹
He (now) relates this to the main point (he is making).

sṛāg1 āī aāīsī; āfēṛaraīaēhq

SJJĪṬ AṬT fĒīryīāī SīATT TTHGREISHĀTT || 9 1
ataś ca bhairavīyaṁ yat tejaḥ saṁvitsvabhāvakam ḷ
'⁶ This verse is also quoted above ad 1/24. We have had occasion to note several times

that consciousness is of two kinds, that is, consciousness with thought constructs
(vikalpasaṁvid) and consciousness devoid of them (avikalpasaṁvid). The former is
necessarily limited, conditioned by the relative distinctions between the things that

conceptual representation is based on. The latter, devoid of them, is ‘pure’ in the sense
that, free of all relative distinctions, both internal with regards to what manifests within
it, and external with regards to the possibility of some other reality distinct from it,

consciousness is all that exists. The finite experience of daily life requires both these
aspects. In actual fact, they work together and are not in conflict. However, those who
fail to recognise the integrity of consciousness are generally obsessed with that aspect of
it which is engaged in thought, and the conditioning, limitation and consequent suffering

it entails, and a few, on the contrary, are obsessed with the notion that only

consciousness free of thought is of value. Thus, it is necessary to uncover the other

aspect of consciousness free of thought constructs in order to be free of them, and at the
same time realise their oneness with consciousness.
Although thought constructs obscure ‘pure¹ consciousness, they arise in order

to understand what is perceived directly in the domain of the other aspect of
consciousness, and so are useful, indeed, necessary. However, they entail a split, as it

were, within consciousness, between the perceiver and the perceived. The flux of
perception that connects them is actually the whole of consciousness, when it is ‘pure’
and there is no split. Otherwise, moving between the polarities of subject and object, it

develops into thought constructs after the initial direct perception consciousness has of
itself as manifesting as all things. Accordingly, two aspects of consciousness are
distinguished as ‘pure’, direct perception on the one hand, and conceptual on the other.

The former includes the latter, whereas as the latter excludes the former. Thus, in order
to recognise the original pristine condition, thought-centred consciousness is ‘purified’
by focusing on the other aspect, which is free of thought. Those who practice the

Empowered Means do this by developing thoughts that are in conformity with the

nature of consciousness and hence reality, by attentive reflection and application of

these teachings, until ultimately thought reverts to its true essential, pure conscious
nature. This does not mean that all thought ceases. Rather, thought thus purified not
only ceases to obscure consciousness; it also contributes to its illumination. The yogi
moves freely from savikalpa to nirvikalpa consciousness and back, radiant with the

grace of Bhairava, that is, Supreme Śiva, who is his true nature.

10

CHAPTER FOUR

bhūyo bhūyo vimṛśatāṁ jāyate tatsphuṭātmatā || 7 ||

And thus (for this reason), Bhairava’s radiant power (tejas), which
is consciousness, becomes (fully) clear (and evident) to those who reflect
upon it again and again. (7)
‘Thus’, because consciousness with thought constructs (vikalpasaṁvit)

manifests radiantly as consciousness free of thought constructs (avikalpasaṁvit)
by the power of each particular (level of) purification. Those great souls who,
endowed with the most intense descent of the power (of grace), ‘reflect again
and again’, progressively, (proceeding) from unclear (notions) right up to the
attainment of the state of emergent supreme clarity, on (the pure) ‘’
(consciousness) which is ‘Bhairava’s radiant power (tejas), which is
consciousnessʼ called knowledge and action, the object of their reflective
awareness, namely, the radiant power of Bhairava’s conscious nature, becomes

(supremely) clear (and evident). The meaning is that by the power of Śāmbhava

penetration (into pure Śiva consciousness), that is experienced directly.
Surely (one may ask,) as the sole nature of consciousness is the subject,
it is logical that (consciousness) should be (the subject) who reflects not the
object of (that) reflective awareness; if it were to be so, would it not entail (the
undesirable consequence) that it would be insentient as is (any object) such as

(the colour) ‘blue’? With this doubt in mind, he presents (the problem):

The Lord Conceals and Reveals His Own Nature

E EḶETEEATĀĀFHEAEĪĪEEKTḤI

TITYaT ā#} īīaāīṁēzagsḷ
q āã ṀTē || ç 1|
nanu ṣaṁvit parāmraṣṭrī parāmarśamayṝī svataḥ |
parāmr̥śyā kathaṁ tāthārūpyasṛṣṭau tu sā jaḍā || 8 II
Śurely, (someone may object that this cognitive) consciousness
(saṁvid) is a reflecting perceiver that is itself (svataḥ) (intrinsically and
spontaneously) reflective awareness. How can it be an object of awareness?
If it were to be emitted in that form (it would be) insentient (not

consciousness).¹⁷ (8)

‘In that formʼ means as the object of awareness. He (now) replies to

that (objection).

3aāīḹ̄ āTTāāīī;
āāīāīa⁷ fstr̥ |
īTzaāīṁāṁzā
īī fktzīzzafzii
u <u
'⁷ Sanderson translates: “Surely consciousness is itself awareness. It is that which carries

out acts of representation. How then, could it be itself the object of such representation?
If it were to assume such a character it would no longer be consciousness.”

TANTRĀLOKA

11

ucyate svātmasaṁvittiḥ svabhāvād eva nirbharā |

nāsyām apāsyaṁ nādheyaṁ kiñcid ity uditaṁ purā || 9 ||
'⁴(In reply to this objection,) it is said that consciousness, which is

one’s own (authentic) self (svātmasaṁpvitti), is by its very nature full (of all
things) (nirbharā). It was said before that there is nothing at all that needs

be subtracted from it or added to it.¹ (9)

Here (according to us), consciousness (sarṁvid) is the form of one’s own
(authentic) self (svātmarūpā) because there is nothing separate from it on which
it depends. It is (spontaneously) by itself (svataḥ) full (of all things)ʼ, that is to

say, it craves for nothing else. Thus, because it is ever manifest (nityodita),

‘there is nothing at all within’ consciousness, which is one’s own (authentic)
self, (that could be) ‘unclear’ etc., that ‘needs be removed’ʼ or that is

‘supremely clear” etc. that (needs be) ‘added to it’. It was said ‘before’ in the

chapter concerning No Means that:

‘(No practice) associated with action (kriyāyoga) can serve there as a

means (to realisation).”²

Thus, with that³¹ same intended sense, it is said by (others) also who are

outside (our tradition):

‘Thuṣ, there is nothing that is to be removed and nothing that needs be

added. What needs to be seen arises from what exists (bhūtatā). He who sees

what exists is liberated.”

Surely (one may ask,) if this is the case, how is it that this ‘unclear” etc.

unfolding expansion of consciousness (arises)? With this doubt in mind, he
says:

'⁸“ Sanderson: ‘To this we answer as follows. The consciousness which is our identity is

all-containing by its very nature. We have already said that nothing can be subtracted

from it nor anything added to it.”
¹Consciousness, which is essentially subjective, is initially known objectively as the
goal – ultimate reality, Deity, one’s own nature etc. But even so, it is not degraded

thereby to the level of a common object. Even when making itself known to the
individual fettered soul in this way, it does not change. The process through which the

individual comes to realise that this fundamental divine consciousness, which is at once
all things and beyond them, makes no difference to it at all. Developing insight is not a

matter of removing limitation, impurity, ignorance or the like from consciousness. Nor

does anything need to be added to it, nor could it be. Full to overflowing with all things,

it lacks nothing, and, perfect in all respects, it is free of all defects that could possibly

require removal or remedy.

²⁰ Above, 2/8ab, see there. Also quoted ad 3/271cd-272ab (271).
²¹ Read tadabhiprāyeṇaiva for yadabhiprāyeṇaiva.

12

CHAPTER FOUR

fēā ] gdechlāīcaārrg-āīrairaāit |
ĪTHTJBĪGTGHGTĪTTSTTTHAT: || Q0 |
kiṁ tu durghaṭakāritvāt svācchandyān nirmalād asau |
svātmapracchādanakrīḍāpaṇḍitaḥ parameśvaraḥ || 10 ||

”However, by

virtue of His unsullied

freedom, which can

accomplish the impossible,³ the Supreme Lord is adept in (playing) the

game of concealing His own nature.²⁴ (10)

‘However, the Supreme Lord’, Who is the Supreme Light, ‘can
accomplish the impossible’, that is, hide His own nature. Thus, because of this,

³² Sanderson: ‘Yet by virtue of that absolute freedom which is his power to accomplish
the impossible the supreme lord is adept in the game of self-concealment.”

²³ The expression durghaṭakārin literally means ‘one who can do what is very difficult
(to do)ʼ.

³⁴ This verse is quoted in the Mahārthamañjari (p. 51), where Maheśvarānanda explains

it as follows. yady api asau śaktipātādyabhāvāt kumbhakārasyāpi ghatakaraṇe
sarvaśaktiśivātmatā,
tadaparijñānāt
tu
kumbhakāratety
arthāḥ
iti

padasaṅgatiprakriyayā svahr̥dayena (p. 50) parameśvarībhāvaparāmarśaśūnyo

bhavati, tathāpi tatvadrṣṭyā tasya parameśvaratvam āmnāyodghoṣitam avarjanīyam |
tathāh
parameśvarasya
hy
ayam
evāsādhāraṇasvabhāvo
yat
_sarvadā
srṣṭyādipañcakṛtyakāritvam | tac cottaratra vyaktam ālocayiṣyate | etad anaṅgīkārād
dhi māyāvedāntādinirṇītasyātmanaḥ svasphuraṇāmodamāndyalakṣaṇam asatkalpatvam āpatitam | puṟuṣaś cāyaṁ

kintu durghatakāritvāt svācchandyānnirmalādasau )

svātmapracchādanakṛīdāpaṇḍitaḥ parameśvaraḥ || TĀ 4/10

iti śrītantrālokasthityā māyāpathāvatīrṇo 'pi parameśvaravat sarvadā pañcāpi kr̥tyāni
karoṭi | yato ʻsya na kasyāñcid apy avasthāyāṁ saṅvitsaṁskāravandhyatvam ḷ

‘Even a potter who (is engaged) in making a pot possesses Śiva’s nature with
all its powers. However, because no descent of the power (of the grace) etc. has taken

place, he does not know that fully, and so his condition is that of a potter. Thus, due to
his own heart (of reflective awareness) that functions in accord with (his) level, he is
devoid of the reflective awareness of (his essential) state of identity with the Supreme

Lord. (p. 50) But even so, from the point of view of reality, his (identity) with the
Supreme Lord, proclaimed by the tradition, cannot be set aside. Such is the Supreme
Lord's unique nature, namely, that he always performs the five functions of creation etc.

This will be examined clearly further ahead. It is because of Māyā that Vedānta and the

like have not accepted this (teaching) that that which is the pulsing radiance and joy (of
consciousness) has become as if unreal, the characteristic of which is blindness. Again,

although this individual soul has descended down onto the path of Māyā, like the
Supreme Lord he always performs (all) the five functions. This is because, in accord
with the view of the venerable Tantrāloka (as stated in this verse), he is not devoid of a

trace
of
MM p. 49-50.

consciousness

in

any

state

at

all..

Kṣemarāja analyses in detail in the Spandasaṁdoha (p. 10-14) how every

perceiver performs in a limited way Śiva’s five functions of creation, maintenance,
withdrawal,
grace
and
See Dyczkowski 1992a: 65-67.

obscuration

in

each

act

of

perception.

TANTRĀLOKA

13

which is (His) pure ‘freedom’ʼ, He conceals ‘His own nature’, which is the

supreme subject alone (and nothing else), by the outpouring (of countless

individual) subjects and objects etc. and manifesting in that way. That is (His)
‘gameʼ, that is, (His) activity (pravṛtti), which takes place without (His)

contemplating (any) particular pre-determined result, in which (He is) ‘adept’
and skilled. This is the meaning. This alone is His power called Māyā, which is
His freedom. It makes His own nature manifest as concealed (āvṛta), although it

is (always) unconcealed (anāvṛta), due to which this manifestation of duality
(and relative distinctions) (bheda), consisting of subjects and objects etc., is so
(extensive).
He says that (in the next verse):

TTīad aaũṣṭfī7̄ gqaraāṁōī
fārī: |

ã raī āī Jē ūaTaṁzēāfā:
I| 22 I|
anāvṛte svarūpe ‘pi yad ātmācchādanaṁ vibhoḥ |
saiva māyā yato bheda etāvān viśvavrttikaḥ || 11 ||

*Although the All-pervasive Lord’s own nature is (always)

unconcealed,²⁴ yet He conceals himself. That (concealment) is itself Māyā,

from which (proceeds) such duality (and diversity) (bheda) that is active

everywhere (viśvavṛttika).⁷ (11)

(The Lord’s) manifestation in this way as all things is what is said to be

duality. It is due to that that this bondage of transmigratory existence, the end of
which is far away (and hard to attain, exists). In order to remove that, (one
should exercise) this reflective awareness so that consciousness itself,
repeatedly contemplated (in this way), may become clearly evident.
He says that (in the following verse):

TJTITHTTT
ZTTḤ HRTYT: |

TaATITT-ĀTT ṬTHTĪTĒTT

22 1

tathābhāsanam evāsya dvaitam uktaṁ maheśituḥ |
taddvayāpāsanaivāyaṁ parāmarśo ‘bhidhīyate || 12 ||

⁵ Sanderson: ‘The actual nature of the all-pervading Lord is not concealed. Yet he
seems to conceal himself. It is this self-concealment that is (meant by) māyā, the source

of all this diversity which is active everywhere.

²⁰ Read with MS C, anāvṛte for anāvṛtte (which is, anyway, incorrect). In place of

yadātmācchādanaṁ, ‘*namely, the cover (which conceals) His own natureʼ, MS C reads:
yasmād ācchādanaṁ. Adopting this reading, this line could be translated thus: ‘Māyā is
that due to which a cover (exists that conceals) (the All-pervasive Lord, although His
nature is (always) unconcealed).”

²⁷ Cf. ŚDr 1/32cd: ātmapracchādanakrīḍāṁ kurvato vā kathaṁcana māyārīpam – Or
else Māyā accomplishes in some (miraculous) way the game of self-concealment.

14

CHAPTER FOUR

Duality is said to be the manifestation of this Great Lord in this
way. The removal of that duality² is said to be this reflective awareness

(that this is s0).²⁹ (12)

‘The removal of that duality° takes place by attending to the

(essential) oneness (abheda) of the effect and (its) cause (that is, universal
manifestation and Lord Śiva).

Surely (one may ask,) everybody here agrees that what is manifest is

not unmanifest⁰and that this body, (the colour) blue and the rest manifest as
different (from one other) (bhedena).³¹ So how is it that it is said that: ‘the

manifestation of consciousness itself (takes place) by removing that’? In order
to (answer this question and) remedy this doubt, after (having discussed) the
purification of thought constructs, he commences (his exposition of) the nature

of sound discriminative reasoning (tarkatattva), announced in the initial

enunciation (of topics of the Tantrāloka).

The True Nature of Sound Reasoning (tarkatattva)³²
³⁸ In place of taddvayāpāsanenāyaṁ – *by the removal of that duality this . . .’ read with

MSs C and Ch, and apparently Jayaratha himself, taddvayāpāsanaivāyaṁ – ‘The
removal of that duality is itself this . . .

²⁹ The form of reflective awareness in the sphere of the Divine Means, where the

oneness of consciousness prevails, is the pure all-encompassing awareness of ‘I’. The
sphere of the Empowered Means is that of both unity and duality. The same freedom
which is the reflective awareness of the oneness of subjectivity, free of thought
constructs, also operates as dichotomizing Māyā, that generates the duality of

objectivity, and with it the notions that accompany and sustain it. At this level, there is a
choice to be made between one or the other. This is the form of reflective awareness that
operates here in order to remove duality. This is the Sound Reasoning (sattarka) that is
examined in the following section.

*⁰ The same expression appears above TĀv ad 3/21-22, 323, 5/155cd-156ab (5/154cd155ab), 9/159 and 28/355b. See note to TĀv ad 3/21-22.

³¹ One could as translate that they manifest ‘as duality² or ‘as division’, that is, as the
relative distinction between things that constitutes duality.
³³ The term tarka is here translated as ‘sound disceming and intuitive reasoning’, in

accord with Abhinavagupta’s usage of the term. It has a variety of meanings and

applications in the various schools of Indian philosophy. The conimon basic meaning of
the word ‘tarka’ is simply reasoning applied to discover the nature of something. Nyāya

is the school of Indian philosophy that prides itself especially in the application of
reason in this way. It is defined in the Nyāyasūtra, one of its earliest texts, as
avijñātatatve ʻrthe kāraṇopapattitas tattvajñānārtham ūhas tarkaḥ- ‘Tarka is reasoning
(applied) in order to (gain) correct knowledge of something when its true nature
unknown; it is the ascertainment of the causes (for its correct apprehension).’ (NS
1/1/40 quoted in SvTu ad 10/678ab). Nyāya (which itself means ‘sound reasoning’) is
the discipline of applying sound reasoning (tarkaśāstra). It lays down the criteria for
sound and unsound reasoning and the rules that should govern formal philosophical
debate with an opponent of a rival school. The latter’s view is stated first as the ‘initial
view³ (pūrvapakṣa). It is then confronted with the ‘subsequent view’ (uttarapakṣa),
which is the response (urtara) to it. The debate swings back and forth in this way until
the ultimate conclusion (siddhānta) is reached, which proves and establishes one’s own
position. Tarka can be seen to be just ‘dry logic’ (śuṣkatarka), especially if focused on

TANTRĀLOKA

15

g³aũlẽõaaT7
r̥̄á -r-ṁ hlãr. |

JTAGT āTh-R̥JRJĪR
fFēTT: ] 23 1|
durbhedapādapasyāsya mūlaṁ kṛntanti kovidāḥ |
dhārārūḍhena sattarkakuṭhāreṇeti niścayaḥ || 13 II

³t is certain (niścaya)³ that the learned sever the root of this tree

of harmful duality (durbheda) (which is hard to fell (durbheda)) with the

epistemological matters or formal logic, not metaphysics. This Tarka is quite the

opposite. It is sattarka – sound or true reasoning focused on the highest reality and truth

– sat in the highest sense. A Śivasūtra (1/18) declares that vitarka ātmajñānam – ‘right

discernment is the knowledge of the Self’. Bhāskara comments from the point of view

of the Pratyabhijñā:
‘The discriminating insight which (operates) in the midst of (the many and)
diverse limiting conditions (upādhi) is the right discernment of the single uninterrupted
awareness (vimarśa) of one’s own true nature (svasvabhāva), which serves to attain the
recognitive insight (pratyabhijīñā) that the Self is Śiva. Know this to be the higheṣt
means to realisation, in which one experiences the true Self (satyātman) directly.
Therefore, (this is) the supreme unfolding of the intuitive awareness of the pure Self.’
Commenting on the same aphorism, Kṣemarāja simply writes: ‘Right

discernment is to deliberate that: ‘I am Śiva Who is all things’. This is one’s knowledge
of the Self.”

Grounded in the developing contemplation (bhāvanā) of reality mediated by a
sound discernment between the view to adopt and the one to reject, Sound Reasoning is
the reverse of Māyā, which is the application of the freedom of consciousness that

induces the error of duality and hence the stream of conceptualization. Sound Reasoning

is the application of that same freedom that grasps the truth of oneness. Subject and

object, perceiver and perceived persist, but not separately. t is the unfolding insight that

knows that the perceiver is the perceived and the perceived is the perceiver. This is the
experience of Pure Knowledge (sśuddhavidyā), the first of the five ‘pure’ reality levels
(śuddhatattva), on which consciousness is not sullied by dichotomizing thought
constructs. It is the unfolding discriminating insight that accompanies the purification of
dualistic notions, and fuels the expansion of consciousness (vikāsa) that encompasses

the lower reality principles, that are the domain of Māyā, recognizing them to be

manifestations of the subjectivity of consciousness.
The classic formulation of the experience at this level is the insight that ‘ am
this’ (aham idam) and ‘this am I’ (idam aham), in which there is a common base
(sāmānyadhikaraṇya) of consciousness on which subject (‘I') and object (‘this’) rest,
equally balanced as aspects of the same consciousness, like ‘the evenly weighted scales
of a balance’. Sattarka has thus also been translated as ‘insight’. This is clearly a good
and correct translation. However, by ignoring the literal, common meaning of the word,

an important aspect of sartarka is ignored, namely, that it is also the process of the
‘purification of thought’ that culminates in the insight which sustains it and underlies it.

It also ignores the two-fold quality of thought and consciousness, namely, that they are

both thought and its absence, confusion, approximation, limitation and duality as well as

certainty, exactitude, freedom and oneness. Where it not so there would be no

possibility of thought, reason or insight.
³³ Cf. ‘when duality is destroyed by masses of sharp reasoning, just like a tree that is
felled by a sharp axe, (reasoning) that is tempered by real knowledge (as an axe is
tempered by fire,) it does not grow again.’ MVV 1/229. Cf. below, 4/80-81ab.

16

CHAPTER FOUR

fully sharpened (dhārārūḍha) axe of sound discerning reasoning (sattarka)
(that has attained the highest level).³⁵ (13)

This ‘duality” consisting of subject and object etc. is the sole cause of
bondage and s0 is ‘harmful’. Itis (like) a tree because it is hard to uproot. The
‘wise’, who have recognized their own (true Śiva) nature, (possess this sound

intuitive reason and so uproot it). Itis ‘sound’ (sar),² thatis, establishedin (the

one) reality (tattva), which (for them) is directly apparent (sākṣāt).³⁷ Thus,

different from other (lower forms of) reasoning, (what is meant here by)

‘intuitive reasoning’ is the one that has attained the supreme eminence (koṭi)
(of insight). Emerging from the intellect sanctified by (its) contact (sparsśa) with
the aspect (of consciousness) which is Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā), its
supreme form brings about the recognition of one’s own (true) nature.³⁸ That is

the well sharpened ‘axe’ of this (tree), which is experienced (in this way) by
means of which (the wise) ‘sever the root’ cause (of duality), which is

ignorance (akhyāti), in such a way that this (tree which is the) ignorance of full

(all-encompassing) and supreme pure consciousness⁹ may not arise again.⁴
This is the teaching (concerning sound discriminative reasoning). It purifies the
notions (vikalpa) of great souls in accord with the excellence of their practice
(of insight) by examining (the true nature of) the body and the rest (of the
psychophysical organism, wrongly identified with the Self, in the light of the
³⁴ The acquisition of knowledge, whether through direct perception, inference,

authoritative testimony or any other valid means of knowledge, takes place in stages.
The final one is termed ‘niścaya’, which can be translated as ‘ascertainment’, ‘decision’

or ‘conviction’, according to whether the process of ‘coming to know’ is understood to

be one of choosing between alternative possibilities or, what amounts to the same thing,

eradication of doubt.

³⁹ The expression ‘dhārārūḍha-’ means both fully sharpenedʼ and ‘mounted on (the
highest) levelʼ. The first meaning qualifies ‘axe’ and the second this intuitive insight.

³Read sat for san.

³⁷ The word sat is thus fancifully derived from sakṣar (‘directly apparent’) and tattva
(‘reality”).

³⁴ Śuddha Vidyā is the experience of entry into the Pure Principles above the duality of
Māyā. It is a state of consciousness of oneness free of thought constructs ~ vikalpa. The

experience has two aspects. One is that “all this universe is me” and the other is “T am

all this universe”. They correspond to the principles of Īśvara and Sadāśiva beyond it.

One may wonder why there need be these two beyond, when they combine in Śuddha
Vidyā. The answer, according to Swami Lakshmanjoo, is that Suddha Vidyā is not
stable. There is entry and exit from it into the duality of Māyā in the domain of thought
constructs just below it. Thus, further ascent is not so much a matter of an evolving

experience as one thatis marked by growing stability of insight. Understanding sattarka
to be Śuddha Vidyāis thus a way of expressing that, although sartarka moves into the
realms of nondual consciousness beyond Māyā, until it is fully perfected it repeatedly
falls back into Māyā to then rise out of it again. In this way, the domain of vikalpa
gradually purified by increasing absorption into nirvikalpa until, when Śuddha Vidyā

reaches its supreme form, that is, its completely stable form, fully immersed in

nirvikalpa, the recognition of one’s own true identity as Śiva flashes forth so perfectly
and completely that it need not do so again.

³⁹ Read with MS Jh: —saṅvinmātrākhyāteḥ for -saṁvinmātrakhyāteḥ.

⁴“⁰ Ṭṛees that are not cut down from the root may grow again.

TANTRĀLOKA

17

teachings). Once it has reached (its) supreme summit, it assumes the nature of
contemplation (bhāvanā), by virtue of which the nature of consciousness,

aḹthough (initially) unclear, attains a state of (perfect) clarity.
Thus, he says:

āī- īaTTHTg: TāTRTTGHI 3HT: |
Tr̥dgāq aāīīrṁṁ TāIRTGṬĪT
I 2* II
tām enāṁ bhāvanām āhuḥ sarvakāmadughāṁ budhāḥ |
sphuṭayed vastu yāpetaṁ manorathapadād api || 14 |

The wise call that (intuitive reason) creative contemplation
(bhāvanā),¹¹ the cow who grants all wishes.⁴² It renders (that) reality (vastu)
which is beyond even (the most) wishful (imagination)⁴ vividly evident. (14)

(Sound intuitive) reasoning is ‘that’

which they call

‘creative

contemplation’. (Common logical) reasoning (tarka) is (the process) of

reaching a conclusion (concerning the nature of something) on the basis of
available evidence (liṅga).⁴⁴ (When that) has reached (its) supreme summit, it is

³ “Bhāvanā’ literally means ‘causing to be’. It is a state of creative contemplation
attained through concentration, at the end of which the contemplated object, whether
externally existent or imagined, appears before the yogi as if present and fully evident

(see SpN p. 27). If it is directed at the fundamental state of subjective consciousness free
of thought constructs (nirvikalpa), it empties consciousness of its contents, as it were, as
the yogi lays hold of his higher subjective Śiva nature, fusing with its Emptiness. In this
way the yogi who seeks liberation attains, by means of bhāvanā, direct understanding of

the true purport of the scriptures, that is, knowledge of the highest reality, which is

‘beyond the plane of desire’. See also below, 28/346cd-349ab.
⁴! Abhinava is referring here to Kāmadhenu, also known as Surabhi, the divine cow
(dhenu), believed to be the mother of all cows, who are her earthly embodiments. She is
a miraculous ‘cow of plenty° whose milk fulfils every desire (kāma). Iconographically,
she is generally depicted as a white cow with a human female head and breasts, or as a

white cow containing various deities within her body. Below, in 13/156, the same
analogy is applied to pratibhā, the creative, intuitive genius of consciousness, which is
its capacity to understand profoundly and imagine. Poets and sages shine with pratibhā.
It is also because of that that we can understand and use language, reason, and
experience beauty. Even animals possess it to some limited degree. The birds know
when it is time to migrate, and lions have a sense of their strength. In its most developed
form, it is the creative genius of Bhairava who, independently of any means, creates the
world (3/65cd-66ab). The practice of bhāvanā in the domain of the Empowered Means

serves to progressively strengthen it as Śiva’s grace becomes progressively more
intense.

⁴³ Lit. ‘which has departed from the path of desireʼ.

⁴ Read abhidhīyamānaliṅgānuvedhaḥ for vidhīyamānaliṅgānuvedhaḥ. The emended

reading literally means ‘penetration into the sign (liṅga) which is being denoted (by the
teaching)ʼ. The word ‘liṅga’ is a term commonly used in logic. In that context it denotes
the ‘sign’ or ‘evidence’ on the basis of which inference is possible. For example, smoke
on a hill is a ‘sign’ or ‘evidence’ that a fire is burning there. The scriptures or a teacherʼs

oral instruction voices ‘signs⁷ or ‘evidence’ of the existence of an ultimate reality.

18

CHAPTER FOUR

said to be creative contemplation (bhāvanā). That is said (in the following line):

‘that itself is supreme knowledge which is considered to be creative
contemplation’.⁹ Thus ‘this’ (creative contemplation) is the act of expounding
(kathana)⁴⁶ that (teaching concerning sound discriminative reasoning) in accord

with (the teacher’s) command (ādeśa). When (that contemplation) becomes

fully developed, one obtains the desired fruit, and so he says (that this
contemplation is) ‘the cow who grants all wishes’. That is said (in the
following verse):

‘Present there for just one (auspicious) moment (nuhūrta), he attains

(perfect) contemplative absorption (samādhi), and there also, when it is well

completed, he attains the desired fruit.⁴⁷

(That) ‘reality’, which is ultimately real consciousness, whose unique
characteristic is (its identity as) the supreme subject, is (s0 wonderful that it is)
‘beyond (the most) wishful (imagination)ʼ. It is not in the sphere of even free
(unhampered) thoughts (svatantravikalpa), because it cannot be (conceived) by

thought. That contemplation (bhāvanā) alone ‘renders (it) evident’; that is, can

make it directly apparent (sākṣāt) by (its) condition (vṛtri), free of thought
(avikalpa). What can the yogi not accomplish by its glorious power?
Thus, this itself is said in our teaching (darśana) to be the most
excellent limb of Yoga. Accordingly, he says:

€ḻẽiīētzĀEatú-zzkĀ

ṜTIIGĪHHTTTITTT TT:JJTHTT I QU, I

ī³t 3ka; kri 3sĩ̃ vrṣar |
ÉEĀEEPHCEIETṬGGEUŪĀIKCI

‘Penetration’ into that which this ‘sign’ or ‘evidence’ indicates is the realisation of its

truth by becoming one with it, that is, recognizing one’s own essential identity with it.
⁴³ MV 17/20cd. The previous line says tadarthabhāvanayuktaṁ mano dhyānam
udāhṭam ḷ| *It is said that the mind that is engaged in the creative contemplation of that

reality (arthabhāvanā) is meditation (dhyāna).’ This verse defines dhyāna, which is the
fourth ancillary of the Yoga of Six Ancillares (ṣaḍaṅgayoga), taught in chapter

seventeen of the MV (verses 1-24). It comes just after Tarka, as its highest level. This

then, when it is fully developed, turns into samādhi – contemplative absorption – which

is defined in the verse that Jayaratha goes on to quote. Concerning the translation of the

term ‘yogāṅga³ as ‘ancillary of Yoga’ rather than ‘limb of Yoga’ as is commonly done.

see below, note 4,50.
⁴⁰ The word ‘*kathana’ literally means ‘telling’ or ‘explaining’. In the context of the
Krama teachings, ‘kathana’ denotes the imparting of a realised state of consciousness

through the teacher’s word. Just as consciousness expands by ‘siddhadarśana’ ‘seeing a
fully realised teacherʼ, it may do so also by hearing his words and profoundly

experiencing the reality to which they refer. See above, note on 2/2.

⁴TMV 17/21. CĒMV 18/16 ‘Abiding for a moment (muhūrta) (thus), he attains the Lord
of the gods. Penetrated (by the power of the deity), he sees all things (shining with a
light) equal to the brilliance of millions of suns.”

TANTRĀLOKA

19

śrīpūrvaśāstre tat proktaṁ tarko yogāṅgam uttamam |
heyādyālocanāt tasmāt tatra yatnaḥ praśasyate || 15 ||
mārge cetaḥ sthirībhūtaṁ heye ‘pi viṣayecchayā |

prerya tenānayet tāvad yāvat padam anāmayam || 16 ||
It said

in

the

scripture

(called)

Śrīpārva⁴ that

“(sound

discriminating) reasoning (tarka) is the most excellent ancillary° of Yoga
⁴³ Abhinava is referring here (4/15-16) to chapter seventeen (verses 1-24) of the MV,
that teaches Saḍaṅga Yoga. It has been studied in detail by Vasudeva (2004), referring

to cognate Siddhānta sources, especially the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha, from which
the MV draws extensively. The names given to these stages or ‘ancillaries” or ‘limbs’
(see below, note, 4,50) of this Yoga are common terms found in all forms of yoga, but
as is the case generally, here they denote specific practices which form part of a

partīcular program of practice that develops gradually through these stages
(kramayoga). See below, note 4,53.

Vasudeva points out that it is well known that the number of the limbs of Yoga
taught in the Yogasūtra are eight. However, in the Śaivāgamas they are commonly just
six. The MV is typical in that respect. But its Yoga also has a number of its own
features, including the order in which they are arranged. Thus, there they are 1)
Prāṇāyāma which consists of five types of breath control. 2) Dhārāṇā, which consists
of four meditations centred on navel, heart, palate, and throat. 3) Tarka. 4) Dhyāna.
5) Samādhi, and 6) Pratyāhāra, that is, the withdrawal of the senses from their objects.
Although Abhinavagupta devotes the whole of Chapter Six to the movement of the vital

breath (prāṇacara) and refers to various forms of it in numerous places, he practically

ignores prāṇāyāma as a technique of breath control. Although the practice in Chapter

Seven does implicitly entail breath control in conjunction with the recitation of Mantra,

he did not approve of it as such (cf. below 4/87-91). He also has no interest in the

pratyāhāra taught in the MV. In Patañjali’s system, the withdrawal of the senses from

their objects heralds a series of stages of concentration. Samādhi in his system is perfect
concentration, and so is the last of the series. These stages are typically in a comparable
order of succession in many other forms of Yoga praxis. It is very unusual to find
pratyāhāra at the end of the series. In the context of the praxis taught in the MV

however, it makes sense. There it is described as follows: ‘Having as if died, (the yogi)

is not moved (from his inner absorption) even by (the most) intense sound and other

(objects of sense). (Such a) yogi is the delight of the Yoginīkula. Having thus by means

of this procedure withdrawn (his) mind repeatedly (from the objects of sense), the yogi

should practice breath control and the rest in order to attain success in yoga.’ (23-24)

The MV then goes on to teach a method of ritual suicide (utkrānti). This

subject is taken up by Abhinava, who quotes this passage from the MV (see 19/54cd ff.,
with reference to MV 17/25-27). However, he treats it quite separately from the yoga
praxis, whereas, although certainly a change of subject in the MV, it is not irrelevant.

Again, Abhinava does not even mention samādhi, for it is hardly more than the
culmination or fruit of dhyāna, that precedes it.

This leaves Tarka and dhyāna which, as understood in the MV, are closely
associated. This association is reflected in Abhinava’s presentation of Sattarka as the

cornerstone of the cognitive yoga of Śāktopāya. He is so centrally focused on that, that

he quotes two verses that define it in the MV (17/18-19 in TĀ 4/15-16) fully and

practically literally. Even so, in this passage, Tarka appears to be simply defined as just
the ascertainment of what is to be cultivated and what is to be rejected. Vasudeva
accordingly translates Tarka in that context simply as ‘Judgement’. Dhyāna is the
consequence of that, namely, contemplation (bhāvanā) of the goal and purpose (artha)

20

CHAPTER FOUR

because it is the (careful) consideration (ālocana) of what must be
abandoned etc. (and what should be adopted). Therefore, it is enjoined that
effort (must be applied) there (to that).

The mind is firmly fixed on (its chosen) path, even though it be one
that should be abandoned, because of (its) desire for (its) object.° Having
been impelled (instead) by that (sound discriminative reasoning), it should

be led along³ (by it) until it reaches the (supreme) plane (of consciousness)

free of (all) infirmityʼ. (15-16)
(It is said that):

of that Judgement, which is Śiva. Abhinava refers to these two, and Jayaratha obliges us
by supplying the MV’s definition of samādhi, which is the contemplative absorption
that arises from prolonged meditation (dhyāna/bhāvanā) (MV 17/21, quoted in TĀv ad

4/14).

Here we observe the vigour of Abhinava’s exegetical method. In accord with

his avowed policy that everything taught in the Tantrāloka is taught directly or

implicitly in the MV, in the following passage, from here to verse 18ab, Abhinava refers
us to it. He does this in the context of his exposition of Śāktopāya. The removal of the

ignorance that obscures consciousness is brought about in this category of practice by

the progressive purification of thought that takes place by the development of creative
contemplation (bhāvanā). Although not at all ‘explicitly² stated in the MV, he finds
there the scriptural authority justifying his teaching. Thus, the MV also declares that
Tarka leads the mind along to the supreme plane of consciousness, and it bears fruit in
dhyāna, which is creative contemplation (bhāvanā). This Abhinava identifies with the

principle of Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā) taught in the Pratyabhijñā, and presents it as

the manner in which thought is refined until it tapers off into pure consciousness free of

thought constructs, that recognises itself as all things and all things as itself (aham idam
idam aham), which is the experience of Pure Knowledge (suddhavidyā).
Finally, we may presume, as Jayaratha does, that Abhinava, following the MV.,

accepts the Yoga with six ancillaries. However, Abhinava himself lists the five

prohibitions (yama) and five injunctions (niyama), and along with the other six
ancillaries of classical Patañjali Yoga, defines them much as they are there (4/87 ft.).
Admittedly, however, he lists them to say that they are of no use compared to Sound

Reasoning, which is thus not only the best ancillary of Yoga – in the context of the
practice of the Empowered Meanṣ, it is the only one.

⁴ MV 17/18bcd-19. This is a direct quotation. The printed edition of the MV reads
ālocanā for ālocanāt, bhūte for bhūtaṁ, and preryaṁ for prerya. Vasudeva accepts all

the readings found here.

³⁰ As does Vasudeva (p. 367 n 1), following Sanderson (1992b: Appendix 2), 1 translate
‘yogāṅga’ as ‘ancillary to Yoga³ rather than, as is common practice, ‘limb of Yoga’.

Cf.: ‘Sanderson has shown that it is this technical use of the term aṅga, denoting a

secondary factor necessary for the accomplishment of the principle derived from the
terminology of the Mīmātṁsā.”

³¹ Below, in his introductory remarks to 4/28, Jayaratha explains that the expression

‘desire for the object (of desire)³ is not to be understood literally. Rather it denotes the

combination of two factors. One is the general sense of craving technically called the

principle of Attachment (rāgatattva). The other is the constraint of previous Karma,
implemented by the principle of Necessity, that focuses that craving onto a particular
goal (see below, 4/17ff.). In this context, ‘the object of desire’ is the form of liberation a

particular school preaches.
³² Read with MV 17/19c tenānayet for tena nayet.

TANTRĀLOKA

21

³“Breath control, visualization (of deities), meditation (dhyāna),

withdrawal (of the senses) (pratyāhāra), fixing (the attention) (dhāraṇā),

discriminative reasoning (tarka),

and

(perfect) contemplative absorption

(samādhi) is said to be the Yoga with six ancillaries.’³⁴

Although according to this teaching (nīti), as an ancillary of Yoga

(sound discriminative) reasoning is the same as breath control and the rest (of
the ancillaries),³⁹ even so, because it ‘is the careful assessment (ālocana) of

what needs to be abandoned (and what should be adopted)ʼ, it is the
ancillary of Yoga which is ‘the most excellent’, that is, (its most) internal

ancillary. Reflecting by means of (sound discriminative) reasoning that ‘this is
to be abandonedʼ” and ‘this is to be adopted’, the Yogi quickly comes to know
reality. That is said (in the following verse):

⁵³ This list, in this same sequence, corresponds exactly to the one reported by Vasudeva
as being the one in the Śrīkaṇṭhī. Jayaratha used this text extensivelyin his commentary
on verse 1/18, where it lists the names of the Śaiva scriptures in their various groups.

The Yoga with Six Ancillariesis basic to the Siddhānta. Although the orderin which
they appear is different etc., one essential feature of the great majority is the presence of

Tarka as the ‘most excellent’ of the six. See the introduction to the French translation of

the MĀP (kriyā etc. pādas) concerning the limbs of Yoga according to the

Siddhāntāgamas. Somadeva has surveyed the number and names of the ancillaries of
Yoga in twenty-two texts (2004: 367-382) and drawn up two charts (ibid. p. 339-380)
displaying their layout. The texts are the following. The number of ancillaries of their

respective forms of yoga are given in brackets: Svacchanda (4); Markaṇḍeyapurāṇa,

Sarvajñānottara, and Matsyendrasaṅhitā (4); Śaraṅgadharapaddhati (4); Nyāyabhāṣya
2. Vāyupurāṇa (5), Jayākhya, Maitrayaṇīya Upaniṣad (6), SŚrīkaṇṭhī (6),
inīvijayottara (6), Svāyambhuva (6), Gorakṣaśataka, Yogamārtaṇḍa, and

āUAŪVMUJṆHĪWA

(6), Pataīñjali,

Śāradātilaka,

Siddhasiddhāntapaddhati,

Yogayajñavalkya, Īśāna-gurudevapaddhati, Matṣyendrasaṁhitā, Mṛgendrandra and
Netratantra (8).
Six of these texts teach four ancillaries, one five, seven eight, and sixteen six.

There are, however, three texts that teach two different numbers of ancillaries in

different places. Of those that teach six, nine out of twelve are Śaiva. All the
Siddhāntāgamas except one (Mṛgendra) teach six. Moreover, all of them include Tarka

even though they are not all the same. Somadeva notes, ‘lt is this form of yoga that is

commonly referred to as Sadaṅgayoga in Śaiva sources. In the majority of surviving
Śaiva scriptures generally, in which these six auxiliaries are found, there is no consensus

as to their order, their definition or even their subdivisions. Such disagreement reflects
doctrinal divergences in the various Śaiva Tantras and indicates deliberate shifts of
emphasis. It is important to realise that despite their superficial mutual similarities, and
the evident terminological overlap with the Aṣṭaṅgayoga of Patañjali, these systems are
not simply indiscriminate reshuffled versions of an original ‘correct’ order. Many Śaiva

scriptures have invested considerable effort in the reformulation of Yoga. Under deeper

familiarisation, the internal logic of the respective systems proves their coherence.’
³⁴ Concerning the translation of the term yogāṅga as ancillary of Yoga rather than a

limb, see above, note 4,50.
³³ Cf. MV 17/18ab: yogāṅgatve samāne ‘pi tarko yogāṅgam uttamam | ⁵Although

equally an ancillary of Yoga (like the others), (Sound) Reasoning is the best ancillary of

Yoga.”

22

CHAPTER FOUR
‘(Sound) reasoning (iūha) is the inner ancillary of Yoga, because it is

due to that that (the yogi) is established on the path, and so, although it is on the
same level (sādhāraṇa) (as the other ancillaries), it assists more (than any of the

others do to attain) liberation.”³⁶
Similarly:

‘Only he who, by (sound) reasoning not opposed to his own Siddhānta

(svasiddhānta), reflects on the goal (artha)³⁸ (of life, namely) right conduct
(dharma), knowledge and liberation, knows reality (as it truly is).”

Therefore, one must exert oneself primarily just here (in the practice of
Sound discriminative Reasoning). Thus it is said: “therefore it is taught that
(one’s) effort (should be applied) there (to that).” The yogi who has exerted

himself ‘there’ on ‘a path that ought to be abandoned’ʼ, taught by other
schools (śāstra) such as the Sāṁkhya and characterized (by them) as the means
to liberation, his ‘mind is firmly established’ (there), because the (erroneous)
conceit (abhimāna) has arisen (in his mind) that ‘this truth (attva) which (one)
should ardently desire is mineʼ. ‘Once impelled’ (instead) ‘by that’ (sound

discriminative) reasoning and thus rendered averse to the path which should be

abandoned, (the mind) ‘should be led onwards (by it)³ and brought to rest on

the path which is to be adopted, ‘until it reaches the (supreme) plane (of
consciousness) free of (all) infirmity’ and manifests radiantly as the supreme

all-transcendent Light. This is the meaning.

Asṣ itis hard to understand, he himself*⁹ explains the (preceding) verse.

Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha 20/29. Vasudeva (p. 442 n 149) suggests emending
mukteḥ to yatne, but I see no good reason for that. Invoking grammatical irregularities
as a reason for emendation is not convincing, as the Sanskrit of these texts freely resorts

to them for metric reasons.

⁵¹ MS Jh, Ñ read: -virodhena for -viruddhena. The word ‘siddhānta’ may mean a

number of things here. One is the basic, literal sense of the word, namely, ‘proved

conclusion’ʼ, which may mean, by extension, ‘philosophy³ with reference to doctrine.

Another meaning is the ‘Śaiva tradition’ in general. More specifically, each of the

Āgamas of the Śaivasiddhānta is a ‘siddhānta’ in its own right. They deal with a range

of topics. Apart from matters concerning ritual, they include a philosophy or theology of
Deity, man and the world, the cause and nature of bondage, its remedy and the like. This

may well be meant here. Anyway, the sense is clear. Reasoning applied to the teachings

concerning these matters should not contradict what has been taught in the scriptures,

rather it should enhance and deepen it. Sound Reasoning is the means by which the
teachings are assimilated, and ultimately their truth is experienced directly. It is not

reason applied independently of revelation. Reason alone, devoid of direct experience,
cannot grasp the nature of reality.

³* understand the word artha here to mean the goal or purpose of life, that is, what is

commonly called puruṣārtha in the Dharmaśāstras. There we find a standard set of
four, namely, conjugal love (kāma), (right) livelihood (artha), righteous conduct
(dharma), and liberation (mokṣa). The last of these is considered to be a latter addition

to the basic group constituted by the first three.
⁵⁹ Read svayam eva for svayamava.

TANTRĀLOKA

23

Mistaken Attachment to Lower Paths

rīīsī ajīdīa:

a: dTaāīTaúṝe |

ṬṬTT ṬTT

T TITITĀT|

faftrūṝ fīarītar ārar frafṝāṣṣa
ṇ g 1
mārgo ‘tra mokṣopāyaḥ sa heyaḥ śāstrāntaroditaḥ |
viṣiṇoti nibadhnāti yecchā niyatisaṅgatam || 1⁷7 II
rāgatattvaṁ tayoktaṁ yat tena tatrānurajyate |

(What is meant) here (by a) path is a means to liberation taught by

other scriptures, that should (therefore) be abandoned. The desire
(mentioned above) which constrains (viṣiṇoti), that is, binds, denotes the

principle of Attachment (rāgatattva) in conjunction with (that of) Necessity
(niyati).⁰ It is due to that that (the mind) is attached there (to that
misleading path). (17-18ab)

It was previously established that a path taught by other scriptures

(śāstra) should be abandoned. So there is no need to repeat that here. The sense

of the root ‘ṣiī’ (from which the word ‘viṣiṇoti’, meaning ‘constrains’, is
derived) is ‘bondage’. Preceded by (the prefix) ‘vi’, the word ‘viṣaya’ (which
means ‘object (of desire)’ is derived from the same root). Thus, this binding
‘desire’, in the form of a (binding) object (of desire), is the particular (insidious)
intention, ‘may this be mine’. In a general sense (sāmānyena), ‘it is the
principle of Attachment (rāga) in conjunction with (that of) Restraint
(niyati)’. The principle of Attachment is just the craving (abhilāṣa) (itself) for
all (binding) objects (of desire in general); the principle of Restraint is that same
(craving when) it arises (with some particular) fixed (niyata) object (of desire).
Thus, the principle of Attachment should be defined in conjunction with it. It is
due to that (combination of the two) that the mind ‘is attached there’, that is, is

firmly established by that (principle of) attachment to a fixed⁶ (particular) path

that should be abandoned. This is the meaning.

Surely (one may object that this applies) in every case (and so all

reasoning is unsound). (As is said) elsewhere:

“⁰ Concerning these two principles, see below, 9/45cd-48ab, 62-66ab, 119cd-200ab,
202cd-203. Necessity – niyati – is the principle that determines that specific causes have
their specific effects. It is also the moral Law of Karma, which ordains that every action
we do has its appropriate consequence – good, if the action is good, and bad if the action
is bad. The principle of Attachment works together with Necessity. It is due to these two
that individuals follow a teaching that cannot lead beyond the level of Māyā, of which

these two are its aspects. The principle of Attachment impels the ignorant into feeling,

“I need this”. In this context, it is the mistaken attachment to a wrong or incomplete

view.
⁶l Read with MSs Ch and Jh niyate for niyateḥ.
⁶2 Cf. below, 13/28.

24

CHAPTER FOUR

‘Those low people who are not devoted to the teacher, deity, fire and
the scripture, who take their support from dry logic, know (only) the
deliberations produced by false reasoning. By (their) desire for liberation, Māyā
makes (them) wander about (confused) in what is not liberation.’⁶³

Again,

‘The discipline of logic (hetuśāstra) that is (prevalent) in the world

misleads as to the nature of what is eternal and what is not. Uncertain, (those
who follow it) dispute (with one another) with dogmatic (arguments) (vāda),

quibbles (jalpa) and idle carping (vitaṇḍa). O lady of good vows, statements
based on (dry) logic are devoid of (any) reality (vastu), knowledge, Yoga and
deity. (No) certainty can (ever) arise (by means of them) concerning (the true
nature) of righteous conduct (dharma), (right) livelihood (artha), sexual
fulfilment (kāma) (or) liberation. Composed by ignorance for an irreligious (and

immoral) (adharma) purpose, they send those people who are devoted there (to

false logic) to hell.

Censoring this (kind of) logic, in this way the Lord (Himself) has
explained its low (unspiritual) nature and (has also) said with that same
intention (in this way) that one should also avoid a teacher who knows (only)

that (kind of dry logic). As is said: ‘one should not take a logician as a teacher.”
Again: ‘there is (only) death and bondage (to be had) in a logician.” They
themselves who, pierced by this (dry logic), are engaged in it, have said

(concerning their opponents):

‘Devoid of (any certain) conclusion (nirṇaya) concerning reality, each
contradicted by the other, the sole essence (of their nature) pride, we are
ashamed (jitrīma) by those whose intellect is given to (dry) logic.”
Well, (one may ask,) how it is that that is said here to be excellent?

(Surely) in this way (the teachings of the) scriptures would be contradicted. As
there is just one source of authority for both cases (i.e. that sound reasoning is a
means to realisation and that dry logic is an impediment to it), it is not possible
to discern what is not authoritative even in (just) one case. So what should one
admit here (in this case to be correct)? (Our reply is that) one should admit that

the subject (viṣaya) here (in this case) differs, so that everything may be in its

own (proper) place. Indeed, logic (tarka) is of two kinds. A certain (kind of

logic) is predominantly deceit and the like, devoid of (any correct) assessment
of reality (vastunirṇaya). It is like (senseless) quibbling, that ultimately results
in just getting the better of (someone) else. (Another) kind (of logic) discerns

between what should be adopted and what should be abandoned (for one’s

⁶³ SVT 10/1140cd-1141. Jayaratha quotes these lines again as part of a longer passage
drawn from the Svacchandatantra (10/1138cd-1141) below in his commentary on 4/38,

where Abhinava quotes the last line. He quotes SVT 10/1141ab above in his
commentary on 1/21. Abhinava quotes all this passage below in 8/333-336 (332cd336ab) and the last line in 13/317ab.
⁶⁴ SYT 11/174cd-177.

“’ Read -bādhitābhiḥ for ~bodhitābhiḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

25

spiritual benefit), and so results in a (certain) conclusion concerning (the nature
of) reality (vastunirṇaya), and devoid of deceit and the like, it is like (a sound)
view (vāda). There (in that case), the first is devoid of a (certain) conclusion
concerning (the nature of) reality and so is a low (form of reasoning). Thus it
was

said

(in

the

quote

above

that)

“

.

.

.

devoid

of

(any)

reality . . . (n0) certainty can (ever) arise . . .
Thus it is said that those who know (only) that (kind of logic) should

also be avoided, because they have no knowledge of reality. Whereas that

(sound discriminative reasoning) which, by assessing carefully what is to be
abandoned (and adopted) etc., leads to the purification (of one’s understanding

of the nature) of reality and, having abandoned that which should be given up,
brings one to rest in that which should be adopted, is the supreme and most
excellent ancillary of Yoga. Thus, there is no defect at all (in this teaching
concerning sound discriminative reasoning). Accordingly, the distinction

(between these two forms of reasoning) is that ours is sound discriminative

reasoning (sattarka), whereas that of (any) other philosophy is unsound
(asattarka).

Surely (one may ask,) the people of this world are (always) intent on

their own (selfish) goals and, independent of scripture, act by themselves to

remove what needs to be abandoned and take up what needs to be taken up (to

achieve their goals). Scripture is of no use to someone who is hungry (to teach

him that he needs to) eat, and someone who is dirty (that he needs to) bathe. So

what is (the purpose) here of reasoning? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3qgJ] āIJISÑATĪ gRJTIGRATJaTI ||2¢ 1
JTī īcāiT gdfzīṁrçr̥̄dTa’st̄
īīā 1
yathā sāmrājyasaṁbhogaṁ dr̥ṣṭvādrṣṭvāthavādhame || 18 II
bhoge rajyeta durbuddhīs tadvan mokṣe ‘pi rāgataḥ |

Just as a foolish person is (equally) attached to vile pleasures

(bhoga), whether or not he has experienced the pleasure (of a king who
enjoys) imperial sovereignty,® such is the case with liberation also, due to
(one’s) aṭṭachment (rāga) (to lower teachings, whether or not one has
experienced something of the higher ones). (18cd-19ab)
Just as some ignorant person, who does not know how to discriminate
between what is to be adopted and what is to be abandoned, whether he has
known ‘the pleasures of imperial sovereignty” or not as one who is rightly fit
to enjoy (them or not) is, because of (his) attachment, ‘(equally) attached to

vile pleasures (bhoga)³, that is, the objects of enjoyment of unfortunate people.

(This is) because he is attached (to them) due to the influence of previous latent

impressions (of past actions impelled by worldly desires) that have developed
for a long tīme and matured. In just the same way, having abandoned the
directly evident (sākṣāt) (path to) liberation, (he is attached) to a false (notion
⁶⁶ Read -dṛṣṭvāthavādhame for <dṛṣṭvāthabādhame.

26

CHAPTER FOUR

of) liberation. This is the meaning of (this) statement. Thus, it is necessary to
apply (sound) discriminative reasoning in order to abandon what should be
abandoned and take up what should be taken up. And so it is rightly said that:
‘(sound discriminative) reasoning is the most excellent ancillary of Yoga.”⁶⁷
Surely (one may ask,) everybody is naturally (svabhāvataḥ) attached to
this or that philosophy (darśana), with which intended (sense) it is said
elsewhere that:
‘(Who knows) by what people who are attached (to worldly pleasures
are impelled); not knowing® what is to be done and what not, take on the
difficulties (and dangers) of (false) philosophies and, alas, are cheated.” ⁹
(Such a person) also (attains the kind of) liberation appropriate to each

particular (path). So what is this attachment (you refer to)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

Tq TJĪW’ ṢcT: īaṀĪATGĀ: T T TjeḤ I| 28 |
sa evāṁśaka ity uktaḥ svabhāvākhyaḥ sa tu sphuṭam |I 19 ||

siddhyaṅgam iti mokṣāya pratyūha iti kovidāḥ |

This (form of attachment) is said (in the scriptures) to be (devotion

to some lower deity that accords with one’s own natural disposition. This

deity is technically termed) ‘the limb (aṁśaka) called one’s own nature
(svabhāva)’. It is evident (that, at best, it is the source of) accomplishment
(siddhi) (of a lower level of attainment), which is (just) (an ancillary) limb

(aṅga) (of the path). Thus, according to the wise, it is an obstacle to
liberation. (19cd-20ab)

called

‘This’ attachment is said in the scriptures (āgama) to be ‘ṭhe limb
one’s

own

natureʼ.

Such

Svacchandatantra,’⁰ beginning with:

is

(the

teaching)

in

the

venerable

“’ MV 17/18ab, also quoted abovein TĀv ad 1/9. See above, 4/15-16 also below 4/86.
“ Read with MSs K, Kh, and N read ajānataḥ -- ‘not knowingʼ for apaśyataḥ – ‘not
seeingʼ.
“’ Read raktasya for riktasya, pralabáhā for vilabáhā and bata for vata.
”⁰ The following citations are drawn from chapter eight of the Śvacchandatantra, which
is just thirty-six verses long. It deals with the so-called six ‘limbs’ (aṁśaka). These are
briefly explained by Kṣemarāja in his commentary on this line (SVT 8/1ab). He first
supplies a series of definitions of the term ‘aṁśa’, which, according to the context,

means ‘limb’ or ‘part’. Gods and a range of supernatural beings are called ‘limbs’,
because they are ‘parts’ of Bhairava. A devotee of these beings is also referred to as an

‘aṁśaka’, in the sense that he adheres so closely to the deity that he is, as it were, a part

of him and vice versa. Again, the manner in which the deity is worshipped, the offerings

made, and even the sentiment felt towards it are each an ‘aṅsa’ or related to it

TANTRĀLOKA

27

‘O goddess, I will tell (you) about the limb (arhśaka) which is of six
kinds. (They are,) the limb of the Emotive State (bhāvāṁśaka), the one called
Own Nature (svabhāva), and there is also the limb of the ‘Falling of the

Flowerʼ.””¹

Having announced (the subject in this way), this (limb) is characterized

with (these verses) onwards:

‘The (limb called) Own Nature is the behaviour (cesṣrā) (with respect to

the deity). I will tell (you that) in due order. (One who is) Brahmā’s limb is
devoted to the Vedas. Know Rudra’s limb from me. (He is) devoted to Rudra

and very well behaved. He is always devoted to Śiva’s scriptures.³”²

(‘aṁśaka”). Finally, an accomplishment a deity bestows is an ‘aṁśaka’, that is, a ‘small

part’ that contributes to the adept’s progress. The passage reads:

“The limbs are said to be the limbs of the supreme Bhairava of Consciousness.

They are Brahmā and other (gods) who are made manifest by (Bhairava’s) energies, that
is, Brāhmī and the rest who preside over them. Then those who are the objects of their
grace are also said to be (their) ‘limbs’. Thus, that which relates to the limbs as objects
of worship, such as ‘this is the limb of Brahmā’, ‘this is the limb of Viṣṇu’ and so on in
due order, that is, the (six), sentiments (bhāva), own nature (svabhāva) and so on that
will be explained, are said to be ‘related to a limb’ (aṁśaka). Moreover, in relation to
the means of attainment (sādhaka) (it is called this) because it is conducive to
attainment (siddhi). (Again,) it is called an ‘aṁśaka’ because (taking the suffix ‘-ka’ as a
diminutive) it is a small part (aṁśa).’ ŚvTu ad 8/1ab

⁷¹ SVT 8/1cd. The following line supplies the names of the remaining ‘limbs’, which are

Mantra and Effecting (āpādāna), which is of two kinds. Kṣemarāja explains: ‘the (limb
called) Emotive State (bhāva) is the natural (sahaja) (one of the devotee). It is the
disposition of the mind (āśaya) of devotion for this or that (deity). (The one called) Own
Nature is the behaviour (vyāpāra) which accords with that (emotive state). The limb of
Mantra is that (phase of initiation in which) a flower (cast by the neophant), in accord
with the procedure (described) previously, falls (into a grid of letters representing

various possible Mantras), (so that,) in order to worship (the appropriate deity), the

nature of the deity which is denoted by (the corresponding) Mantra is ascertained. (The
next one) relates to the limb of Mantra, even if its nature has not been described (here).

It is done for the worshipper by offering to the fire Kaula sacrificial substances
(vīradravya) etc., or in (the course of) the ritual procedure for the initiation of an adept
(sādhaka), and so is of two kinds. ŚSuch are the six limbs.”

”² SVT 8/3cd-4ab. t seems that this limb is called ‘Own Nature’ for three reasons. One is

to indicate that the deity to which the adept is devoted accords with his nature or
disposition. The other is that that ‘own nature’ is the particular deity to which the

devotee adheres so closely that he is, as it were, a part of it. Again, the deity is that
particular ‘limb’ or ‘aspect’ of Bhairava. The two lines Jayaratha quotes refer to just two

such ‘limbs’, that is, to the devotee who is a ‘limb of Brahmā’ and to the one who is a
‘limb of Rudra’. In the following verses, another thirteen are listed along with the

qualities or accomplishments (siddhi) received in accord with the nature of the deity or
supernatural being of which he is a ‘limb’. They are: Candra (the Moon), Yakṣa, Vāta
(Wind), Nāga (Snake), Gandharva, Vidyādhara, Daitya (Demon), Kāma (Passion),
Rakṣas, Piśāca, Agni (Fire), and Savitṛ (Sun). The Tantra and Kṣemarāja’s commentary

continue:

28

CHAPTER FOUR

Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, then every such person would,
in accord with his own nature (svabhāvavaśāt), attain the liberation which is

appropriate for himself, so what is (the purpose of) this distinction for him

between that which should be abandoned and that which should be adopted (as

he will anyway follow his own path according to his inclinations)? With this
doubt in mind, he says: ‘it is (evident (that, at best, it is the source of)
accomplishment)”. Again, this kind of ‘own nature’ is ‘evident’. (It is said
that): ʻthe individual soul (is the principle attained by) the followers of the
Sāṁkhya”.” Thus, it is established by the authority of the scriptures that it is a
limb of the accomplishment (siddhi) which is the enjoyment (bhoga) proper to
the corresponding principle (of a particular school and not ultimate, permanent
liberation) as it is subject to decay. (Moreover,) even so, according to those

who know the scriptures, it is an impediment to liberation for such reasons as

(the following, given in the Yogasūtra):

“‘They all bestow the fruits of their own (corresponding) accomplishment, by
meditating (on them), repeating (their) Mantra and making offerings (dedicated to them)
to the fire.’ (ibid 8/1 1ab)
(The deity that is) worshipped bestows (benefits) on adepts in accord with the

degree of its command (of particular accomplishments). Referring to them in this way,

(the Tantra) says that the emergence of a Mantra of a limited limb bestows this or that
(particular) plane (of attainment). . . . (It is said that): ‘He is conjoined there to wherever
the worldly benefits (bhoga) he desires (may be) (and so) is successful by the power of
Mantra.³ If (this is s0), in accord with this view, (it takes place) here (in this case) by
means of the corresponding Mantras by which the adept has been initiated. By

worshipping with those Mantras, the particular deities are worshipped, which are then

all forms of Bhairava and (so) are means to the attainment of all accomplishments. (The
Tantra) says this:

‘O fair faced lady, all the deities who have attained (the condition of being)

limbs of Bhairava are said to be Bhairavas and they all bestow the fruits of
accomplishment.”” (ibid. 8/11cd-12ab)

In other words, when particular deities are worshipped with their
corresponding Mantra, they bestow particular benefits to the degree in which they have

the power to do so. But if they are worshipped with the Mantras that were given in the
course of initiation into the worship of Bhairava, these deities become aspects of
Bhairava, and as such, Bhairavas in their own right. Then they bestow all the fruits of
worshipping Bhairava. In terms of what Abhinava
ying, the point is that the deities
of followers of other traditions are in reality just partial aspects of Bhairava, but they do

not know that, and so the fruit they bestow, that is, the form of liberation to which they

lead, amounts to just a particular accomplishment (siddhi) along the path. If they are
recognised to be what they are, they and the forms of liberation they bestow are

understood to be stages along the path. Otherwise, they are just relatively minor
accomplishments, and so if the aspirant is satisfied just by them and does not seek
further, they are obstacles to the attainment of liberation.

”³ SVT 11/70a. Cf. above comm. and notes to 1/33.
⁷⁴ Read parimlānatayā for aparimlānatayā.

TANTRĀLOKA

29

‘the invitation of the celestial beings should not be accepted nor should
it be a cause of vanity, because it entails the possibility of undesirable

consequencesʼ.⁷”²

He whose nature (svabhāva) is such believes that the accomplishment

(siddhi) (he achieves), which is the attainment of its (corresponding) reality

level (tattva), is liberation. Thus, he rests within what appears (to him) to be
liberation, (although) it should be abandoned (in order to progress further).
In this way, because (his) nature is such, having abandoned the direct

(sākṣāt) (and clearly visible) means to liberation, he is attached (āsakta)
elsewhere (to other lower teachings). Thus, he says:

ftravīā-rīēīa-á
fēāāā ta fē 1 20 1

3ṇīārāīJ
āṣādá ra? aũoṝ Ġzā: |

śivaśāsanamāhātmyaṁ vidann apy ata eva hi || 20 |
vaiṣṇavādyeṣu rajyeta mūḍho rāgeṇa rañjitaḥ |

Thus, although the fool knows the greatness of Śaiva doctrine,

affected by (this) attachment, he would prefer (the teachings) of the
Vaiṣṇavas or others. (20cd-21ab)

Surely (one may ask,) if he knows the excellent power of Śaiva doctrine

as the direct means to liberation, why is he attached elsewhere (to some other

teaching)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

qaaāīatā
aī ṁīā aīaīēāī Jīthzaā || ², 1

U="(īaāfīā dīīār̥̄āīīvīṁ |

yatas tāvati ṣā tasya vāmākhyā śaktir aiśvarī || 21 ||
pāñcarātrikavairiñca saugatāder vijrmbhate |

⁷⁵ YSū 3/51. Vyāsa’s commentary (as translated by Hariharānanda Āraṇya) explains:

‘the celestial beings in a high place, noticing the purity of the intellect of those who by
reaching [the level of concentration called] Madhumati have attained unalloyed truth,
try to invite them [to their worlds] by tempting them with the enjoyments available in
their regions . . . Thus accosted, one should however ponder over the danger of their

companionship . . . Not having formed any attachment, let him not also feel a sense of
gratification that he is coveted by the celestial beings. Through self-gratification a false
sense of security arises, and a man forgets that death has got him by the hair.”

Jayaratha quotes this sūtra here, because each metaphysical principle spans a

number of world-orders governed by particular deities (i.e. ‘celestial beings’). The

attainments (siddhi) acquired by reaching the principle a particular system considers to
be ultimate, and hence liberation, are bestowed upon the adept by the being to which he
is to devoted as his deity, that governs the worlds it contains.

30

CHAPTER FOUR

This is because this divine power called Vāṃā, which (functions just

to) this extent, unfolds (its influence) over the followers of the Pāñcarātra,
Brahmā (i.e. Vedāntins), the Buddha and others. (21cd-22ab)
‘The power called Vāmā (functions just to) this extentʼ, that is, it

bestows just this or that limited (ṇiyata) accomplishment. According to the

dictum, ‘Vāmā (is so called because she) emits (vamanāt) the world of

transmigration,"” she is (Śiva’s) power of obscuration that generates the world
of transmigration. This
is the meaning. The followers of Brahmā are the
Vedāntins (brahmavādin).
Surely (one may ask,) if, not knowing the greatness of Śaiva doctrine,
(someone) is attached elsewhere (to other lower teachings), let that be. What

defect (can there be in that)? But knowing (its greatness), how can that be?⁷⁷

With this doubt in mind, he says:

ÇTT: aīJŪēzā*īī f-rzzā āsfī atzaī u 222 1

ī q āaīTāī; ā-] ṂīīPaāīeṝṭ: Ūaṣṁā-īa] |

dṛṣṭāḥ sāmrājyasaṁbhogaṁ nindantaḥ ke ʻpi vāliśāḥ || 22 ||
na tu saṁtoṣataḥ sveṣu bhogeṣv āsīḥ pravartanāt |
There are some fools who have experienced the pleasures of
imperial sovereignty (and yet) deprecate it,⁸ (but) not because they are

content; (rather it is) because (they are) engaged in their own (petty)

pleasures, hoping (to gain what they desire). (22cd-23ab)

Here (in this world) there are indeed some who are like fools. Even

though they have known ‘the pleasures of imperial sovereignty’ to be
desirable as they are the most excellent, and ‘have experienced’ (them),

¹⁰ TĀ 6/57a. Cf. vāmā viśvasya vamanād YHrṛ 1/37c. The full line is quoted below in

TĀv ad 13/207cd-208ab (207). Vāmā is one of an important group of four goddesses,
namely, Vāmā, Jyeṣṭhā, Raudrī and Ambikā (cf. quote from Tantrasadbhāva in TĀv ad
3/65cd-66ab (66); also see quote ad 4/173ab). Omitting the last, Vāmā also appears as

part of the triad consisting of the first three (see below, 6/52-57, 8/356-357 (355cd-

357ab), 452ab (451cd)). She also appears, with them, in other groupings (see below,
SVT 10/1117-1118ab, quoted in TAv ad 8/294cd-298 (294-298ab), also 8/339ab

(339cd), and 15/305-306 with reference to MV 8/62cd-66). She is commonly paired
with Jyeṣṭhā, who embodies Śiva's liberatīng power, whereas Vāmā embodies His

binding power, that is, Śiva's power of delusion (vimohīśakti) (23/53). Vāmā is the
active energy engaged in obscuring the soul (see 13/314cd-316ab). But when she is

tranquil (śāntā), she no longer does so. Instead, reverting back to her essential nature,

she on the contrary reveals the soul’s true Śiva nature (13/207cd-208ab (207)). Then she
is Jyeṣṭhā, the power that graces the soul. Thus, the two work in opposite ways

(28/382cd-383ab).

⁷ I⁴ is understandable that someone who does not know about the Śaiva teachings and
their value follows another path, and he cannot be blamed for that. But if one does know
it, how is it that that person does not follow that path, preferring another instead?

⁷ Cf. above 4/18¢d-19ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

31

because of their foolishness ‘deprecate’ them. However, they do not do so
because they are content, that is, because their desire for (worldly) pleasures has

been completely removed; it is (their) disposition (to consider it) proper to
deprecate them. This is the intended sense. Fools, on the contrary, are not

content thereby (tāvat), for they are engaged ‘in their own petty pleasuresʼ,
(expressing their) good wishes (to one another) that ‘may it be so (as you desire)
again and again’ʼ, because (their) craving for (worldly) pleasure has not been set
aside. In this way, although they know the greatness of Śaiva doctrine, foolish
(as they are), they are engaged in deprecating it, and are seen to be attached
elsewhere (to other lower teachings), due to which, because they are governed
by (the power of) Vāmā, they plunge again and again into transmigratory
existence.
He says that:

dõ *ēTaTa’=rTCTHTTT: I 33 I

raā-cāragdīā̃ṝ; āīcēfr mīṝcṝaṁ
a 1
evaṁ cidbhairavāveśanindātatparamānasāḥ || 23 ||
bhavanty atisughorābhiḥ śaktibhiḥ pātitā yataḥ |
In the same way, struck down by the most terrible divine powers,
there are those whose minds are dedicated to deprecating penetration into
the Bhairava of Consciousness.™ (23cd-24ab)

The meaning is that ‘the most terrible divine powers’ characterized

(as follows in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra) are the lower (aparā) powers called
Ghoratara (Extremely Terrible):

‘(Embracing the individual souls) attached to sense objects, they cast

them down to ever lower levels.”⁴

Thus, this deluded person does not emerge out of (the ocean of)

transmigratory existence. Accordingly, he says:

ī̄ TTTTTRIT
STITR: ṢJṬĪĀĪTT-T I Ṝ I

³TaāšTī āīTtcz āī arēīīaīq|

¹ See below, 13/311 ff. and 14/1-23. According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, ‘penetration
into the Bhairava of Consciousness’ means Saivism here.

⁸ MV 3/31ab. Jayaratha, quoting from this well-known passage, implicitly also

illustrates the basic principle that Śiva’s powers can both elevate and cast the individual
soul down. As the power Vāmā, Śiva’s power of freedom operates as the power of
obscuration (tirodhanaśakti), which binds the ignorant. But when He elevates wise
souls, it operates as the power of grace (anugrahaśakti). From another perspective, the
former aspect is Māyā and the later Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā). Jayaratha quotes

the first of these three verses above in TĀv ad 3/103cd-104ab and below ad 8/35cd-42ab

and 13/279cd-280ab. See above note to comm. on 3/71ab (71) for the complete

reference. Also Dyczkowski 1992a: 70 and 337.

32

CHAPTER FOUR

tena śāṅbhavamāhātmyaṁ jānanyaḥ śāsanāntare || 24 ||
āśvasto nottarītavyaṁ tena bhedamahārṇavāt |
Thus, he who knowing Śiva’s greatness (and yet) has faith in (some)

other teaching should not, for this reason, be lifted out of the great ocean of

duality (bheda).³¹ (24cd-25ab)

He (obstinately) adheres (niṣṭha) (to that inferior teaching) because (his)

heart has faith (in that), not because, as (one who is) upright is intent on

maintaining the unity of society, (and so observes different forms of practice) in

accord with the teaching (that he should be) ‘inwardly a Kaula, outwardly a
Śaiva, and for (the duties of) daily life a Vaidika’. Thus, he does not emerge out

of the ocean of transmigratory existence, (but is) within it because (his)
experience of emerging (from it to then again be) submerged (in it again) has

not ceased.⁴²

Thus, (in order to establish) that what we have stated is not just our own

idea, he says:

lea-ae¹ISJAEṞIMFETUISTE&IEURI
śrīkāmikāyāṁ proktaṁ ca pāśaprakaraṇe sphuṭam || 25 ||
And (that) has been clearly said in the venerable Kāmikā™³ in the

‘chapter on bondage’ (pāśaprakaraṇa).³³ (25cd)

⁸! This kind of person is unable to accept the higher Śaiva teachings because, even

though he knows them, he has rejected them. For the same reason, he is also not fit to be

elevated to the nondualist Śaiva teachings. In other words, it seems that Abhinava is
saying here that such people should not be given Śaiva initiation. Cf. below, 21/16.

⁸² Whatever the outer practice for reasons of social conformity may be, it is the internal
practice that defines the true status and belonging of the practitioner.
⁸ Sanderson (2005: 285 n 136) explains: ‘Dropping —saṁhitā and transferring the
feminine ending to the preceding word is a common practice when citing the names of
both [Vaiṣṇava] Pāñcarātrika and Śaiva scriptures. Cf. Pauṣkarā for Pauṣkarāsaṁhitā
and Sātvatā for Sātvatasaṁhitā in Spandapradīpikā (p. 3 and 21).” Brunner (1985: xiv)
and Rastogi (1987: 281) have noted this change in gender/feminine inflection.
Moreover, Goodall has noticed the title Kāmikāsaṁhitā in the Jñāānaramāvalī (IFP T.
231, p. 623) (Gollner (2021:71). Note that in this case, the Kāmika that is traditionally

considered to be a Siddhānta, certainly not a Vaiṣṇava scripture is called a ‘saṁhitā’, a
term more commonly used to denote a Vaiṣṇava scripture, thus clearly illustrating that
the distinction sometimes made between Śaiva Tantras as ‘Āgamas’ and Vaiṣṇava ones

as ‘saṁhitās’ is not at all accurate.

We find the masculine form in 1/58-59ab (59-60ab), 1/65 (66), 22/31cd-32,
23/4, 32/48 and the feminine in 4/25cd-27, 6/96-97ab (95cd-96) (see note there), 6/190-

191 (189cd-191ab) 8/213cd-215ab (213-214). Similarly, Gollner ibid, p. 70 has
suggested that ‘given that both masculine and feminine inflections are found throughout

the Tantrāloka, it is conceivable that Abhinavagupta was drawing on more than one
version of the Kāmika.’ Again (ibid. p. 76) ‘we can observe that Kṣemarāja, like
Abhinavagupta, here also uses the feminine-inflected ‘Kāmikā’, which suggests that he

too may have been aware of more than one version of the text.’ Although this is an

interesting hypothesis, it is hard to sustain it on just this evidence alone. For we find this

TANTRĀLOKA

33

He quotes that very (text):

rTGJṬTTTT: TTÑTTTÑIĀTṬĪ:; |

3 ḥfr̥gaāī sśīaT: ṂṬPī-īqTATT:|| 3ē |

āī̄arraṁ;
aã Ĩ fkrmāoṛ āzraāī 1

ṬATITJTĪ ṬaraāTrōārtaī

fēzi 1 2.9

vedasāṁkhyapurāṇajñāḥ
pāñcarātraparāyaṇāḥ |
ye kecid ṛṣayo dhīrāḥ śāstrāntaraparāyaṇāḥ || 26 ||
bauddhārhatādyāḥ sarve te vidyārāgeṇa rañjitāḥ |
māyāpāśena baddhatvāc chivadīkṣāṁ na vindate || 27 ||

‘Those who know the Vedas, Sāṁkhya and Purāṇas, or are
dedicated to the (Vaiṣṇava) Pāñcarātra (taking it to be the highest), as well
as those few firm-minded Vedic sages (ṛṣi) who are dedicated to other
scriptures (considering them to be supreme), the Buddhists and the Jains

etc., are all (foolishly) delighted (rañjita) (by (limited) knowledge and
attachment. Thus, because they are bound by the fetter of Māyā, they do

not get Śiva’s initiation.³⁸⁵ (26-27)

The ‘firm-minded’ are those whose wise (insight) into the Vedas and

the like is firm (sthiraprajña). The ‘other scriptures’™ are the Vedānta and the

like. ‘ʻKmowledge and attachment’ taken together, form a copulative (dvandva)
compound. As (the word) ‘knowledge’ here (in this case) is next to the word
‘attachment’, it is said to be impure (limited) knowledge (not Pure Knowledge,
kind of change of gender in other cases also. For example, Abhinava refers to the
Kiraṇatantra/KiraṇatantralKiraṇaśāstra in the feminine (Kiraṇā) and Jayaratha calls it
a ṣaṁhitā (below 4/41cd-42ab and commentary).

⁸¹ Gollner (2021: 70) notes: ‘In the modern Kāmika, there is no chapter on bondage; the
modern text focuses rather on ritual and consists of but a large Kriyāpāda. A discussion

of bondage is a topic we would expect to find in a Jñānapāda or Vidyāpāda. A

Vidyāpāda aṭṭributed to the Kāmika exists amongst the manuscripts held at the Institut
Français de Pondichéry, although the text is not considered authoritative today (Kāmika,

Vidyāpāda TFP T. 830). In this Vidyāpāda, we find a discussion of bondage (ibid. pp 50-

51); however, we do not find these verses. Also, in this Vidyāpāda, as in the modern
Kāmika, chapter divisions are not referred to as prakaraṇas; they are referred to as
paṭalas,’

⁸ Cf. ‘The Vaiṣṇavas and others (like them) are regulated (niyamita) (by the observance
and doctrines found) in scripture, which is limited just to (as far as it can go) by the

principle of Attachment, and so they are not propense even to the upper (elevated)

systems (darśana). Thus, they are even averse to the teachings of a true teacher, true
scripture and sound reasoning. As is said in the Pārameśvarāgama,
‘AIl Vaiṣṇavas and the like are affected by (limited) knowledge and
attachment. Devoid of the knowledge of the Omniscient One, they do not attain the
supreme principle.⁷ TSā p. 22.

⁸⁶ Read śāstrāntaraṁ for śāstrātaraṁ.

3.4

CHAPTER FOUR

which is above the level of Māyā). Thus, those who (obstinately) adhere to the
Vedas and other such scriptures have fallen into (the domain of) Māyā, and so

do not acquire the knowledge of Śiva, whichis beyond that.⁹ Thus it is said:
‘because they are bound by the fetter of Māyā, they do not get Śiva’s
initiationʼ.
Previously,⁸ we explained (the nature of) the principle of Attachment
which, accompanied by the principle of Necessity, brings about attachment
(abhiṣyaṅgaprada) to the means to liberation taught in other scriptures, that is,
the Veda and the rest, with the words: ‘desire for the object (of desire)’⁸’ drawn

from the Mālinīvijaya (śrīpūrvaśāstra), which is (our) corroborating authority
(saṁvādagrantha). This is not without reason. In order to elucidate (how this is
s0), he explains the term ‘attachment’ (rāga) (again) here (in this case) as well.

TṬTJGT ]

TṬTTSS rāTTāēq 1|

mṃrṀP̄Ĩ s-ī’ T dṭswīā’ frzāāēfāI 2¢1
rāgaśabdena ca proktaṁ rāgatattvaṁ niyāmakam |
māyīye tac ca taṁ tasmiñ chāstre niyamayed iti || 28 I|

What is meant here by the word ‘attachment’ is the principle of

Attachment (rāgatattva)” that constrains (and regulates) (niyāmaka). It
constrains (a person) to adhere to some scripture belonging to the sphere of
Māyā (mmāyīyaśāstra). (28)
The prose order is that ‘by the word ‘attachment’, for the reason about
to be explained, is meant ‘the principle of attachment (rāgatattva) which
constrains (and regulates)². It ‘constrains’ in the sense that it brings about
atṭachment to some fixed (determined) (niyata) object (viṣaya), and so that
principle of Attachment leads (a person) to a ‘scripture belonging to the
sphere of Māyā’, such as the Veda, and it ‘constrains’ that foolish person (to
adhere to it, guided by the thought that): ‘this is what I need (and crave for)’,

and so establishes (consciousness) in a contracted state. Although the nature of

the principle of Attachment is just a craving for all (possible) objects (of desire)

in general (sāmānyena), even so, if a fixed (determined) object (of attachment)

were not to develop, that would not become manifest. Thus, it is necessary that
it should include the principle of Necessity. Thus, it is rightly said that: ‘the

principle of attachment constrains (and regulates)ʼ.

Surely (one may ask,) how is it that this person does not emerge out of
the sphere of transmigration even when he has attained the liberation taught in

⁸⁷ Read taduttīrṇaṁ for taduttīrṇa.
⁸⁵ Read pūrvaṁ for pūrva. See above, 4/17-18ab and also quote in TĀv ad 1/37-38ab.
The order in which the Obscuring Coverings are arranged varies in different scriptures.
See below, 9/45cd-48ab.

⁸⁹ See above, 4/16b.
“ See below, 9/199cd-200ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

35

other scriptures, such as those of the Vaisṣ ṇavas? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

ṃīaīsfī ātraczā. taṇāgaād oṁi:1
ṬGĪĪĀTSĀ ṢITT-TTT II Ṝ~X II

[Eḻ/eaEIPḺEI-ECEEEIĪACĒHI

T TJTTTSITHGĀTĒGTHd;I| 30 |
mokṣo ‘pi vaiṣṇavāder yaḥ svasaṅkalpena bhāvitaḥ |
paraprakṛtisāyujyaṁ yadvāpy ānandarūpatā || 29 ||
viśuddhacīttamātraṁ vā dīpavat saṁtatikṣayaḥ |
sa savedyāpavedyātmapralayākalatāmayaḥ || 30 |I

Again, the (form) that the Vaiṣṇavas and others (like them) have

conceived by their own imagination (saṁkalpa) liberation to be, namely,
union (sāyujya) with the Supreme Nature (paraprakṛti), or (by Vedāntins)

as the blissful nature (of the Brahman), pure consciousness alone (by

idealist – Vijñānavāda – Buddhists), or the extinction of the series (of
individual existences) like (blowing out)a lamp (by Vaibhāṣika Buddhists).
(They are all) in the state of (perceivers called) ‘Dissolution Deconditioned’

(Pralayākala) (which are of two kinds, namely,) those (in deep sleep)
‘associated with objectivity’ (savedya) (in which it is perceived,) and those
(in deep sleep) ‘free of objectivity? (apavedya) (in which it is not

perceived).³¹ (29-30)

⁹' Cf. above 1/33 for another way of explaining the gradation of realisation for followers

of other schools. We have seen (above, 1/77-80 (78-81) and note 1,658) that there are
seven perceivers, arranged along the series of thirty-six metaphysical principles, that
experience corresponding spans of these principles. The first three perceivers are subject

to the ‘Force (of limited agency)³ (kalā), which is an energy of Māyā, that obscures their

consciousness in such a way that they are perceiving subjects related to objectivity,
which they experience as separate from themselves. The first of these is subject to all
the aspects of the Force (of limited agency) — kalā – and so is called ‘With Kalā’ –
Sakala. This is the perceiver who experiences the principles from Earth up to the
Individual soul, and is subject to all the three forms of Impurity (mala), that is,
Fundamental (āṇava), Māyā and Karma. The following two above that perceiver are

still within the realms of Māyā. The domain of the one called Dissolution Deconditioned
(Pralayākala, lit. ‘devoid of the forces of limitation in dissolution’) extends from the

individual soul to the beginning of Māyā. It is freed of some part of the Force (of limited

agency) that conditions it when cosmic dissolution (pralaya) takes place. In this

intermediate state between the end of one cosmic cycle and the beginning of another,
the individual soul loses personal consciousness and is in a state of deep sleep (suṣupti).
He is of two kinds, according to whether there is some consciousness of objectivity in
his deep sleep (savedya) or not (apavedya).

The first kind, in savedya (lit. ‘with objectivity°) deep sleep, experiences latent
traces of objectivity (vedya) and so is conscious to a degree. This type resides in the
domain of the obscuring coverings (kañcuka) that extends from the individual soul to

the Force (of limited agency). The second type resides in the Māyā principle above. In

36

CHAPTER FOUR
’The (form of) liberation according to the view (mata) of the Vaiṣṇavas

and the rest (mentioned here), according to our philosophy (darśana), is (just)
the state (of the deep sleep) of Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers)

(pralayākala). This is the connected (sense of these lines). There (in that

context), the ‘liberation’ Vaiṣṇavas (achieve is only) ‘union (sāyujya) with the

highest level of Nature (paraprakṛtī)’. ³ According to that view (mata), the

Great Power (mahāvibhūti) called the Lord Vāsudeva is the ordainer (who

governs all) sentient and insentient (beings). For this reason and because He is

the essential nature (ṣvaṣvabhāva) of the Supreme Brahman, which is the

Supreme Nature (paraprakrti)³⁴ by contemplating Him in this way and that as

this state it does not experience the duality of the lower principles and so is free of

Māyīya Mala. However, it is destined to wake up on the lower level.

Above that is the subject who is Consciousness Deconditioned (Vijñānākala);

that is, he is free from the Force (of limited agency) by virtue of his higher state of
consciousness (vijñāna). He too is free of objectivity as is the one who sleeps, but is
about to awaken either into the higher pure principles above Māyā or back down below.
The first of these is free of the impurity of Māyā, the second one of Karma also. Above
are the remaining four perceivers up to Śiva, in whom the impurity of individuality has

also been removed, and so they perceive the universe in various aspects of oneness, as is
the experience of the pure principles above Māyā within which they reside as their

perceivers. They are Mantra, Mantreśa, Mahāmantreśa and Śiva, who deputes them to
the domain over which they have authority. Here Abhinava declares, and Jayaratha
explains in detail, that these schools can lead only to the condition of the two types of

Pralayākala. In other words, they do not rise above the duality of Māyā. All this is

described at length below at the beginning of Chapter Ten.

⁹²³ The reader will recall that Abhinava introduces his Tantrāloka by explaining that the

Path he is teaching leads to complete and perfect knowledge of reality (pārṇajñāna),

which is complete liberation. This is the fully expanded state of consciousness of Śiva,
the supreme perceiver, in which there is no objectivity at all. Degrees of consciousness
expansion and hence knowledge of reality correspond to levels of subjectivity,

distinguished from one another according to the degree of objectivity with which it

identifies or perceives to be one with itself. Abhinava briefly characterized these levels
of subjectivity above in 1/31-33, declaring that they correspond to degrees of liberation,
without however mentioning any specific schools that teach them. Even so, it

occasioned a similar discussion by Jayaratha of these schools, such as the one we find
here, which the reader may compare (see TĀv ad 1/33).
“³ There are differing degrees of union or proximity to the deity, which are considered

by various schools to be the ultimate, liberated condition of the individual soul. The
most dualist view maintains that liberation is an eternal condition of close proximity
(sāmīpya) to the Deity. Another similar view maintains that liberation is the state of the
soul when it resides in the same world as the Deity (sālokya). Others maintain that the
liberated state is one in which the soul shares the same nature (sārūpya) as the Deity,

although it does not become one with it. More intimate is the state of union (sāyujya)
mentioned here. In some sources, these are presented as four degrees of blissful

intimacy with the Deity. Vaiṣṇavas are, to varying degrees, as reflected in these

conceptions of liberation, dualists. Siddhānta, which to some degree, is less dualistic,

maintains that the liberated souls are in a state of ‘equality° (samatā) with Śiva (see

below, 4/74cd-77ab and comm.). Nondualist Hindu traditions maintain that liberation is

a state of oneness (tādātmya) with the Absolute Brahman or Deity.
”⁴ The theistic Sāṁkhya of the Bhagavadgītā diṣtinguishes between two Natures
(prakṛti) – lower (apara) and supreme (para). The former is the phenomenal and

TANTRĀLOKA

37

material nature, of which the material and mental things of the world are made, and the
latter is spiritual, that is, Kṛṣṇa’s own nature. In the Gītā we read, as translated by
Aurobindo: ‘The five elements (conditions of material being), mind, reason, ego, this is
my eightfold divided Nature (prakṛti). But know my other Nature different from this,
the supreme which becomes the individual soul and by which the world is upheld.”

Classical Sāmkhya posits a dualism between the perceiver, the individual soul, which is
pure consciousness, and the perceived, which is insentient Nature (prakṛti). The theistic
Sāmkhya of the Gītā modifies this view to overcome this antinomy. Otherwise, as
Aurobindo explains: ‘Nature then would only be the Māyā of the three guṇas and all
this cosmic existence would be simply the result of Māyā; it could be nothing else. But

there is something else, there is a higher principle, a nature of spirit, [as Kṛṣṇa says]
parā prakṛtir me [My supreme Nature]. There is a supreme nature of the Divine which

is the real source of cosmic existence and its fundamental creative force and effective

energy and of which the lower and ignorant Nature is only a derivation and a dark
shadow. In this higher dynamism Puruṣa and Prakṛti are one. Prakṛti there is only the

will and executive power of Puruṣa, his activity of being — not a separate entity, but
himself is Power.
This supreme Prakṛti is not merely a presence of the power of spiritual being

immanent in cosmic activities. For then it might be only the inactive presence of the allpervading Self, immanent in all things or containing them, compelling in a way the
world action but not itself active [as classical Sāṁkhya maintains]. Nor is the highest

Prakṛti the avyakta [Unmanifest Nature] of the Sāṁkhya, the primary unmanifest seedstate of the manifest active eight-fold nature of things, the one productive original force
of Prakṛti out of which her many instrumental and executive powers evolve. Nor is it
sufficient to interpret that idea of avyakta [the Unmanifest] in the Vedāntic sense and

say that the supreme Nature is the power involved and inherent in the unmanifest Spirit
or Self out of which the cosmos comes and into which it returns. It is that, but it is much

more; for that is only one of its spiritual states. It is the integral conscious-power of the
supreme Being, cit-śakti [the power of consciousness], which is behind the self and

cosmos. In the immutable Self it is involved in the Spirit; it is there, but in nivṛ1ti or a
holding back from action; in the mutable self and the cosmos it comes into action,
pravṛtti. There by its dynamic presence it evolves in the Spirit all existences and appears
in them as their essential spiritual nature, the persistent truth behind their play of
subjective and objective phenomena. It is the essential quality and force, svabhāva, the

self-principle of all their becoming, the inherent principle and divine power behind their

phenomenal existence. The balance of the guṇas is only a quantitative and quite
derivative play evolved out of this supreme Principle. All this activity could not be at all

except for this spiritual force and this power of being; it comes from that and it exists in
that and by that solely.⁷ (Aurobindo (2001): 268 ff.).

Although Aurobindo’s eloquent exposition of Deity, Visṇu and Kṛṣṇa
Vāsudeva, as the supreme Prakṛti according to the Gītā is not wrong, Abhinava’s
exegesis does not accept its identification, as this exposition effectively implies, with his

own Śaiva vision of the Supreme. From the Śaiva perspective, the devotee of Viṣṇu

cannot get beyond the spherein which the individual soul retains its limited conditioned
identity, even if in union with the Deity. Moreover, despite the distinction, underscored
by Aurobindo, the Gītā and other sources clearly make between the supreme Nature,
which is that of Viṣṇu, and the Unmanifest state of Nature, Abhinava effectively

understands it in an analogous way. In the state of the Dissolution Deconditioned

perceiver, the individual soul resides at the extremity of Māyā, temporarily free of the

dichotomizing effect of Māyā, and so enjoys some kind of union with the Deity which

possesses it, but it is sleeping and not free of its individuality. Moreover, it is destined to
return to the realm of Māyā when it awakes.

38

CHAPTER FOUR

the wonderful variety of (the cosmic) process (krama), and as all things,

although He is many (in this aspect),” one attains liberation which is the

realization (avagama) of oneness. (This is achieved) because the bond of change
(and distortion) (vikāra) has come to an end by not deviating from the oneness

of completely pure consciousness, by the practice of the knowledge of reality as
(taught) in Vedic scripture that declares, for example, that: ‘the Brahman is one
without a secondʼ.⁹⁶ (This is possible) because multiplicity is not ultimately real.
As the Veda (śruti) says:

‘A quarter of Him is all existing things, the immortal in heaven is that of

the (other) three quarters.”⁷
Moreover:

“. . . therefore creation manifests as (being as insubstantial as) a bubble

(of water).”⁹⁸

The liberation (attained by) (nondualist) Vedāntins (hrahmavādin) is

‘the blissful nature (of the Brahman)’. According to that view (mata), the
liberation of the Self experienced on the plane of transmigratory existence due
to the obscuration of ignorance is the experience (sarīvedana) (of the Self) as
beautiful with the innate bliss of its unending and most excellent (selfillumining) Light, when the obscuration of ignorance is removed by the practice
of the knowledge of reality, in accord with the Vedic dictum (ṣruti):

(it).¹”

‘one should hear about the Self, reflect (on its nature) and contemplate

As Veda (declares):

‘the Brahman is consciousness and bliss.’'
The liberation (attained by) Vijñānavādins (idealist Buddhisṭts) is pure

consciousness alone (cittamātra). According to that view, liberation is the direct
experience (sākṣātkāra) of one’s own nature as imperishable Light, (that takes

place) by the power (bala) of the turning about of the (deepest) seat (of

phenomenal) consciousness (āśrayaparāvṛtti), brought about by destruction of
each adventitious impurity through the practice of the contemplation of the
absence of self (nairātmya) etc., even when covered over with adventitious
“³ Perhaps the text is corrupt here and we should read the passage from here to the next
paragraph as relating to the liberation the Vedāntin says is attained by realizing the

Brahman when understanding that the world of Māyā is just an illusion and hence
discovering that, unlike painful illusory Māyā, the real Brahman is bliss.

‘⁰ ChUp 3/10/4.
‘⁹⁷ ṚgV 10/9073 quoted in ChUp 3/12/6.
“³ Maṇḍūkyopaniṣad 3/15.
“⁹ BṛUp 3/7/11.
¹.⁰Br̥Úp 3/9/34, quoted from ŚB 14/6/9/34.

TANTRĀLOKA

39

impurities such as attachment and the rest, (that arise) due to the power (bala) of

beginningless

ignorance

of

the

continuous

flow

of

consciousness

(cittasaṇtāṉa),¹” which is luminous (prabhāsvara) by its very nature. As they
(the Yogācāra Buddhiṣṭs) say:

‘This mind is (self-)luminous; impurities are, by (their very) nature,

(just) adventitious (not innate to it). When they cease, that light, which is the

goal of all (sarvārtha),¹² (shines) imperishable.”¹⁰²

According to the Vaibhāṣika (Buddhiṣṭs), liberation is ‘the extinction
of the series (of individual existences), like (blowing out) a lampʼ. According
to that view, the five Aggregates (skandha) beginning with Form arise due to
the afflictions (kleśa), Karma and the rest, which are their consequence.¹⁴ This

¹⁰l Vijñānavāda – the Doctrine (that all that exists is) Consciousness — maintains, like all
Buddhiṣṭ schools, that perceived reality is momentary. It agrees with earlier schools that

aṭ the phenomenal level it is constituted by irreducible elements or factors of experience
called ‘Dharmas’ (see below, note 4,104), but they are aspects of the stream of

consciousness engaged in perception (pravṛttavijñāna), that is, illusory components of

the dream-like world of cognitive experience. The world, made solely of perceptions,
arises, as do dreams, on the basis of previous experiences. These are mistakenly thought
to be the perceptions of a perceiver. But in reality, the perceiver, like the perceived, is an
aggregate of factors — Dharmas – that arise together in the act of perception, in which
the distinction between subject and object, perceiver and perceived, prevails. Acting in

response to objectified perceptions, the illusory perceiver accumulates Karma which, in

a latent seed state, is deposited in a ‘storehouse consciousnessʼ (ālayavijñāna) which,
like a river, streams with these seeds. Eventually they mature to give rise to new

experience, which in turn generates more seeds. This continues as long as the mistaken
distinction between subject and object prevails due to adventitious (i.e. not intrinsic)

defects, such as the craving of the inevitably frustrated perceiver that it brings about.

When insight into this mistake develops, consciousness turns around as it were, away

from objectivity and the subjectivity that is invariably associated with it. If this reversal

is sufficiently sustained, it penetrates down into the deepest seat of consciousness, and
so ʻturning about’ the stream, the process of sowing the seeds of perception and creating
new ones ceases. Thus, the stream of the store house consciousness dries up, leaving

just the undefinable pure consciousness (cittamātra) – the ‘pure light– free of
subjectivity and its concurrent objectivity.

¹⁰² One could also translate ‘which is all that there is’.
¹⁰³ PV 2/208. Also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/33. See note there.

'⁰⁴ Early Sarvastivādin Buddhists are also called Vaibhāṣikas because they base their

views on a monumental commentary by Kātyāyanīputra of the first century BCE on the
Jñānaprasthāna (⁵Arrangement of Knowledge’) called ‘Mahāvibhāṣā’ (‘Great
Commentaryʼ). The material there was systematically arranged with some additions by
Vasubandhu (c. fourth or fifth century CE) in his Abhidharmakośa. Abhidharma
literature focuses on identifying and classifying the ultimate components of the real,

called dharma. According to the Abhidharmakośa, the number of these closely

interdependent elementary principles are 75, divided into five groups (skandha). The
first group – Form (rūpa) (or ‘matter’) – comprises the five sensory organs and
nonconceptualized matter (avijñapti). The second group comprises just the mind, and

the third group forty-six mental functions. The fourth group consists of fourteen powers

not linked to the mind. The fifth group comprises the three unconditioned Dharmas, that
is, space (akāśa), ceṣsation deriving from reflection and not deriving from it

40

CHAPTER FOUR

transmigratory existence is both. As they (the Vaibhāṣikas) say: “transmigratory
existence consists of cause and effect.’ Liberation, on the contrary, is the

blocking (nirodha) (of this process), which is like (the extinction of) a lamp,
that takes place because the oil etc. which is its cause has finished, and so (the

flame) cannot arise again. In the very same way, the five Aggregates beginning
with Form (are extinguished) by the destruction of impediments and Karma etc.
due to the practice of the contemplation of the absence of self (nairātmya). As
they say:
‘Just as (the flame of) a lamp that has ceased (to burn) (nirvṛtim

abhyupetaḥ) because the oil has finished goes neither to heaven nor earth, nor to
any of the directions, primary or secondary, it is simply extinguished,¹ in the
same way the Yogi who has attained tranquillity (nirvṛtim abhyupetaḥ) because
the afflictions have ceased goes neither to heaven nor earth, nor to any of the
directions, primary or secondary, he simply attains peace (kevalam eti

śāntim).”¹⁰

(The perceivers called) ‘Dissolution Deconditioned’ (pralayākala) are
(of two kinds, namely) those ‘associated with objectivity’ (savedya) and those
‘free of objectivity² (apavedya). The reason why this difference is specified (is
the following). Here (in this case, the liberation which is taught in) the first two
views (i.e. those of the Vaiṣṇavas and Vedāntins) is like (the state of) the
Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers), who are associated with objectivity
(savedyapralayākala) as that of one who reflects on his own nature
(svātmaparāmarśaka) as the Brahman, because (Brahman) is bliss (and so there
is a trace of the experience of objectivity). Again, the other (of the two views of
liberation, namely those of the two Buddhist schools,) is like (the state of)
Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers), who are free of objectivity
(apavedya-pralayākala), because (they) do not accept (the existence) of one

permanent perceiver of any kind.

(pratisaṁkhyāna-, and apratisaṁkhyāna- nirodha). These arise by the cessation of the
other Dharmas, which takes place by the realisation of the absence of Self (nairātmya).

¹⁵ The expression is kevalam eti śāntim, which literally means ‘it simply goes to

tranquillityʼ.

¹⁰⁶ These two verses stem from the poet Aśvaghosa’s work Saundaranandana verses

16/28-29. Read with the version in Saundaranandana, diśaṁ na kañcid for deśaṁ na

kañcid in both instances in the third quarter of both verses. The first quarter of the

second verse reads evaṁ kṛti nirvṛtim abhyupeto (‘in the same way he who has reached
Nirvāṇa’ for yogī tathā nirvṛtim abhyupeto (‘in the same way the Yogi who has attained

tranquillity²). My thanks to Prof. Buescher for pointing this out to me.

The preceding lines are significant: ‘So be aware, my friend, of the causes —
desire, for example- of the many types of birth, and if you seek freedom from suffering,

cut them off. For the destruction of an effect follows from the utter destruction of its

cause, and the destruction of suffering follows from the destruction of its cause. Set
Dharma before your eyes, which is peaceful and benign, with no passion for desire, a

resting place, a cessation, an eternal, irremovable and noble protection, in which there is
no birth, no old age, no death, no sickness, no association with anything unpleasant, no
failure of wishes and no separation from anything pleasant; its an ultimate, unfallen state
of ease.⁷ Translation by Linda Covil.

TANTRĀḶOKA

41

These four views (pakṣa) are representative of other views also, and so
(these can be analysed in the same terms). Thus, the (Nyāya) school of

Akṣapāda¹” and the like, which also maintains that in the liberated state

(apavarga) all (phenomenal) qualities of the Self have been destroyed, amounts

to the same (state of) Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers), who are free of
objectivity (apavedyapralayākala). Dīssolution Deconditioned (perceivers) still
possess the remaining two impurities (mala) (that is, those pertaining to the
individual soul (āṇava) and Māyā), and so because the cause of transmigratory
existence has not ceased, (their) condition is subject to (the bondage of)

transmigration. Thus, it is said that the liberation which is like that should also

be abandoned. Moreover, the point is that the effort they exert in the state of
Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers), even though it is much to their liking

(svarasikya), is useless because each of these principles (to which they aspire as
ultimate, will some time) dissolve away. Thus (the liberation others believe in

has been) ‘conceived by their own imagination (saṁkalpa)³, and because

these four views (of liberation) are (just) notions, it has been explained in this
way that they are unreal (avāstava).

Surely (one may ask, the view advanced) here is that liberation is the
destruction of bondage. The saying ‘one who is in darkness is better than one
who is blind’ applies to the Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver), who (free of
Karmic impurity,) is bound by (just) two, (namely, those pertaining to Māyā and
the individual soul,) with respect to the (fully) Conditioned (sakala) (perceiver),

who is bound by (all) three impurities. So why should this (form of) liberation,

even if it is like that, be completely abandoned? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

ī raaṁṀ̄Ṁ f= ēī; āārī̄īTTy: |

TīTāTazaāī-̄ T Ūīēaī gftzāTTā; 1| 32 1

Tṃ-āāītdī̃ āā’HIGT-TV fcdaīd |

taṁ prāpyāpi ciraṁ kālaṁ tadbhogābhogabhuktataḥ |

tattattvapralayānte tu tadūrdhvāṁ sṛṣṭim āgataḥ || 31 ||
mantratvam eti saṁbodhād ananteśena kalpitāt |
He who has attained (these lower forms of liberation) enjoys for a
long time (their) pleasures or the absence of pleasure (in the case of one for

whom seeming liberation is emptiness). (After that, if he progresses, he)

!⁰⁷” Akṣapāda is said to be the founder of the Nyāya school of philosophy (see above note

to 1/247ab-247cd (247cd-248ab)). Torella (2011: 35) explains: “The textual corpus is
based on the Nyāyasūtra, a collection of brief aphorisms which assumed its (relatively)
definitive form in the fourth century CE, starting from an original nucleus that can be
dated to the second century CE. Its author is deemed to be a sage named Akṣapāda, who
later on (from the tenth century onwards) is designated as Gotama or Gautama. His
historical existence is rather doubtful, and everything known about him has a legendary

air, starting from the meaning attributed to the name Akṣapāda (‘he who has eyes in his

feet?). This derives from a special gift of the gods, worried by his repeated accidents

(falls etc.) due to his continuous absorption in profound and learned study.”

42

CHAPTER FOUR

atṭṭains the higher level of creation at the end of the period of (cosmic)
dissolution, when that principle (namely Māyā, dissolves away). Then,

awakened by Ananteśa" to (the pure principles) above that (i.e. beyond
Maāyā), he becomes a Mantra (subject).¹ (31-32ab)
The person (to whom these lines refer) is a Vaiṣṇava or the rest

(mentioned previously). Although ‘he’ has attained the (state of) liberation

which is like that of a Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver)¹⁰ ‘for a long

timeʼ, he first ‘enjoys its pleasures or the absence of pleasure (in the case of

one for whom liberation is emptiness)² of the delusion (moha) and the rest
associated with Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver). (Then,) ‘at the end of

the period of (cosmic) dissolution’, ‘that principle’, namely, Māyā etc., which
is the plane of experience previously associated with the Dissolution
Deconditioned (perceiver, is dissolved away). Then again, at the beginning of (a
new) creation, ‘his awakening (leads him) to become a Mantra (perceiver) or to

transmigratory existence (as a Conditioned perceiver).’'"" Having received, in
accord with this principle (nīti), the descent of the power (of grace), by the
action of ‘Ānanteśa’, which stimulates (his powers of) knowledge and action,

he is ‘awakenedʼ. Having thus attained ‘above that’'² the pure creation above

Maāyā, ʻhe becomes a Mantra (subject). Otherwise, (if he cannot manage to
rise, he) again (returns to the previous) state of bondage. This is established (by
the scriptures). Thus, even though the (form of) liberation taught in the
Vaiṣṇava and other philosophies has been attained, the world of transmigration
is not destroyed, and so it is said that there (in that regard, that these other forms

of liberation) should be abandoned.¹¹

'⁰³ Ananteśa (also called Aghora or just Ananta) is the form of Śiva who operates on the

Impure Path (see below, 8/306ab-307ab (305-306) and 8/331ab-332cd (330cd-332ab)

and commentaries, and also 9/147-149ab). Thus, just as he generates the lower order, he

can awaken the individual soul to the higher one also.

'⁰⁹ The Mantra subject resides in the realm of Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā), which is

the first of the pure principles beyond Māyā. There he experiences that ‘I am all this
(world) and all this (world) am °. If, on the contrary, when he is awakened, he is pulled
down by the activated latent traces of his Karma into the duality of the realm of Māyā,
he experiences himself as different from the world around him, and all things as

different from one another.
'!⁰ Read pralayākalaprāyaṁ fot pralayākala prāyaṁ.
'!¹ Read as found below in 10/135ab, prabodho ‘sya mantratvāya bhavāya ca for

prabudhyante mantratvāya bhavāya | See below, 10/135cd-137.

' Read tadūrdhvāṁ for tadārdhvā.

''³ This is the highest form of liberation Vaiṣṇavas can attain. At most they can aspire to
this, not merger into Śiva, the supreme principle. Indeed, they do not even want to do
so. The cultivation of sound insightful reasoning (sattarka) leads to a deepening
understanding of what should be adopted and what should be abandoned by

understanding why this needs to be done. Rules and regulations concerning what must

and must not be done have a reason behind them. The Yogi who practices this Yoga
seeks thereby to understand it. This not only helps him to choose the highest path, it also
purifies his thoughts to make them more permeable to the light of consciousness, which
is freedom itself, that develops as he travels on it.

TANTRĀLOKA

43

Surely (one may ask,) if the state of a Dissolution Deconditioned
(perceiver) is the same (for all of them), what is the reason here that some

(attain) the state of Mantra (perceivers) and others (return to the previous) state
of bondage? With this doubt in mind, he says:

T̄Fāī| āTTāīṁT gCTTTĪ īāē-̄ ā̃qI| 33

etac cāgre taniṣyāma ity āstāṁ tāvad atra tat | 32 ||

We will deal with these matters at length further ahead, so let this

much suffice here. (32cd)

As he will say ‘further ahead’ in Chapter Nine etc. (where he says):

‘This is said to be Karmic impurity, with which the Dissolution
Deconditioned (pralayākala) subjects are associated. Like sleeping serpents,
they reside deep in the abyss of the cave (of Māyā). Then, when their latent
(karmic) impressions are awakened, they reap their appropriate consequences
and transmigrate repeatedly in this (universe), ranging from (the world of)
Brahmā down to that of plants. Again, those who have started to practice
meditation (bhāvanā) in order to destroy the latent impressions of their Karma,

(but are themselves) dissolved away in the great destruction (at the end of a
cosmic cycle) before their meditative practice has reached perfection, assume
the diverse states of the Mantra subjects brought about by their diverse Karma,

according to the degree in which the inner (impression) of their meditative

practice (bhāvanā) has reached maturity.˚'⁴

‘So let this much suffice’, because (further discussions about these

matters) are of no use with reference to the (main) subject, which is the nature

of (sound discriminative) reasoning.

The True Teacher (gurusatattvaka)
Finding a True Teacher

Surely (one may ask,) if the world of transmigration is not destroyed by
the liberation taught in other philosophies, how is it Vaiṣṇavas and the others

are (s0) attached to it? With this doubt in mind, he says:

šīīāīṝṣrāāīēcjavacāīṝ
fāfta |
³rāḡ cefra aāīT3 *za | 33 1

tenājñajanatākḷrptapravādair yo viḍambitaḥ |
asadgurau rūḍhacit sa māyāpāśena rañjitaḥ || 33 1

'!" Below, 9/138-141. Abhinava expounds at great length and in detail the nature and

state of the seven perceivers in 10/1-186a. See also above, 1/77-80 (78-81).

44

CHAPTER FOUR

Thus, he who is deceived by (inferior) doctrines contrived by the
ignorant, and places his trust in a false teacher, is made to be attached (to
them) by the snare of Māyā. (33)

‘He’ʼ, that is, a Vaiṣṇava or the like, has been deceived by the hordes of

teachers such as Kapila,¹⁵ with (their inferior) doctrines. There are, for

example, those (of the Sāṁkhya), regarding the discrimination (viveka) between
the individual souls and Nature contrived by them due to their ignorance. This is
because (each of these teachers) has been made to be intensely attached there (to
these inferior doctrines) by the Supreme Lord, Who is well known by all, by

means of the ‘snare of Māyā’, that is, the power called Vāmā."⁰ Thus, ‘he

places his trust in a false teacherʼ, that is, a particular teacher who teaches (the
nature of) reality. He does not just desire to know (him and his teachings), he
trusts (him blindly), whereas on the contrary, one who trusts a true teacher has

liberation (there in front of him) directly. This point is thus established by its

contrary counterpart (vyatireka)." Thus, after (having discussed) the nature of
(sound discrīminative) reasoning, in order to explain the nature of a (true)

teacher, which is (a subject) directly related to that and announced in the
preliminary enunciation, he has introduced (this, the next topic,) in this way.

Surely (one may ask,) if this is the case, no faith in a true teacher would

arise for a Vaiṣṇava and the like, because they are governed by Vāmā. So how
can there be any question of him attaining liberation directly? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

aīsf7 āāēaāī a agz ī |

īīṁ: ṂJGTTā aī ā-ēōl TaĨTIT I 3: 1
so ʻpi sattarkayogena nīyate sadguruṁ prati |
sattarkaḥ śuddhavidyaiva sā cecchā parameśituḥ || 34 ||

However, even he is led to a true teacher¹"⁸ by (practicing) the Yoga

of Sound Reasoning (sattarkayoga). Sound Reasoning is (not just talk), it is
Pure Knowledge itself, and that is the will of the Supreme Lord. (34)

'!³ Kapila, along with Āsurī and Pañcaśikha, is the legendary founder of the Sāṁkhya

philosophy, on which the Yoga taught by Patañjali in the Yogasūtras is based.
Accordingly, Jayaratha refers here to a fundamental concept of the Sāṁkhya.

¹!⁶ We have seen that there are two aspects of Śiva’s power that are embodied in two

goddesses. One is Vāmā, who is Māyā, that binds and deludes. The other is Jyeṣṭhā,
who is Pure Knowledge, that liberates and enlightens. See above, note 4,76.

""” It is standard form in a logical argument to establish that something is the case by

reference to both a positive example, analogy or affirmation, and then by checking that

that is correct by referring to a counter, contrary example. That a false teacher deceives
and cannot guide his disciple to liberation is underscored by the existence of a true
teacher who can do so.
'"⁸ This expression, i.e. nīyate sadguruṁ prati – ‘he is led to a true teacher⁷ – is found in
MV 1/44d. There it is one who is penetrated by Rudra’s power who is led to a true

TANTRĀLOKA
teacher.

45

‘Even he’, the Vaiṣṇava and the like, who has placed his trust in a false

Surely, (first a sound intention) develops by sound discriminative
reasoning concerning reality, which is sound and reasonable, (and then) a true
teacher is attained by Śiva’s power. Thus, it is said everywhere that:
‘Lord Śiva has said, wherever a firm trust (rūḍhi) arises in that which is
sound and reasonable (yuktiyukta) by the certainty (that comes by sound

discriminative reasoning), that is the grace of Pure Knowledge.”¹⁹

“That’ is Pure Knowledge, (which is the) “will’ (of the Supreme Lord),
that culminates in the attainment of a true teacher, and its nature is grace.
Nor has he (simply) stated his own idea. Thus, he says:

rrdvṁaā ṁrṁ

faarg: ftrārzar 1

yTṁā’Tcītaz
īa aṣge u 1 3uu

śrīpūrvaśāstre tenoktaṁ sa yiyāsuḥ śivecchayā |
bhuktimuktiprasiddhyarthaṁ nīyate sadguruṁ prati || 35 ||
Thus (the Lord) declares in the Mālinīvijayatantra: ʻhe (who) desires
to go to a true teacher in order to attain worldly benefits (bhukti) and

liberation (mukti) is led (to him) by Śiva’s will.”¹" (35)

teacher. In other words, we are to understand that Sound Reasoning — sattarka – is

rudraśaktisamāveśa.

""⁰ This is one of the two meanings of the expression yuktiyukta. Another is based on a
different usage of the word ‘yukti’. Derived from the root yuj, as is the word ‘yoga’, it
conveys the sense of meditative, yogic practice. Thus, for example, the 112 meditations
taught in the Vijñānabhairava are called ‘yuktis’ as well as dhāraṇās, which is a more
common term denoting a meditative, yogic practice (see above, note 1,774). One who is
‘yukta’ to something is ‘connected to it’ or ‘engaged in it’. Thus, the common
expression ‘yogayukta’ means a person who is deeply engaged in the practice of Yoga.
This is practically what the much less common expression ‘yuktiyukta’ means. So by a
beautiful play of words, ‘that which is sound and reasonable’ — yuktiyukta – is also ‘that

which is engaged in deep meditation.’ Thus, Sound Reasoning means and is two things.

One is engagement in rational thought centred on understanding the teachings, so as to

clarify what is to be adopted and what is to be abandoned in order to progress toward
the goal. It is also the insight of the Pure Knowledge, which is the experience that “I am
all this (that I perceive) and all this am I”. It results from the deep contemplation that is
the culmination of Sound Reasoning, even as it informs it throughout its development,
progressively clarifying unclear concepts. Reason and insight thus work together.

'” MV 1/44bcd. The full passage, i.e. MV 1/42-45, is quoted in 13/199cd-203. Swami

Lakshmanjoo explains: “Bhoga is enjoyment of the universe. Mokṣa [liberation] means
establishment in one’s own Self. As long as there is no bhukti [worldly enjoyment],
mukti [liberation] is not possible. There must be bhoga in mokṣa and mokṣa in bhoga.
Desire is not excluded in Śaivism because it is the expression of Lord Śiva. ʻI want sex,
food etc.” – this gross desire is also included, but only with awareness, not otherwise.

46

CHAPTER FOUR

‘He’ who is penetrated by Rudra’s power and desires to realise his own
(true) nature is led ‘by Śiva’s will’, that is, the power called Jyeṣṭhā, to a true
teacher, and (that power) makes him propense (to accept) a true teacher, so that
he achieves (both) worldly enjoyment (bhukti) and liberation (mukti). Thus, it is

proved that because sound discriminative reasoning and Śiva’s power are not
different, (the stimulus brought about) by sound discriminative reasoning to be
propense to (accepting) a true teacher is that of Śiva’s power itself.
Surely (one may ask,) it is said that ‘it is by Śiva’s will that everyone
becomes propense to (accepting) a true or a false teacher’. Let that just be for a

true teacher (directly), what is (the use of this) sequence? With this doubt in

mind, he says:

īṀckīdrīāṁāg
ā ōhhrē- ãã |
fkēraaāī āīṣg vīīaāīTa arḹ āa-7ṣ f. | 3 1A
Śaktipātas tu tatraiṣa kramikaḥ saṅpravartate |
sthitvā yo ‘sadgurau śāstrāntare vā satpathaṁ śritaḥ || 36 |
There (in that case), the descent of the power (of grace) (śaktipāta) is

gradual (kramika)¹¹ (for one who), having followed a false teacher or
(some) other scripture, (subsequently) takes to the true path. (36)

‘(Some) other scripture’ means the wrong path (followed by)

Vaiṣṇavas etc. ‘The true pathʼ is a Śaiva teacher and scripture. ‘In that case’,
(when) one follows a true teacher (and scripture) after having followed a false

teacher and scripture.
Surely (one may ask,) agreed that (the people of) this world follow a
true or false teacher or scripture according to (the degree of) the descent of the
power (of grace they receive). What could be wrong (with that view)? But for
what reason are those two (kinds of teachers distinguished as being) true and

false? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TṬRATT
TTHSTTN *II
RTT
ftēēēqĪ|
ckqī
ātra jaaātak
az
ṀṀtzã
a|| 3
The desire for a woman by most people is full of malas [impurities] and so they are
likely to be destroyed. When there is desire without malas [impurities], you wish for a

woman and she is yours at that very moment, without hindrance. That is the Lord’s

desire; the other is desire from the individual mind.’ (personal communication)

'³¹ From this perspective, there are two types of descents of the power of grace. One is

direct, that leads directly to a true Trika teacher. Another is gradual, that is, takes place

in stages, as the seeker is led to more than one teacher. Initially, the first teacher may not
even be a Śaivite. But then, by Śiva’s grace, he is led to a true Śaiva teacher. Abhinava,

it seems, is also alluding here to the possibility that the seeker is led by Śiva's grace to
several teachers, from whom he receives initiation into Śaiva schools of progressively
higher levels, until he finally finds one who initiates him into Trika. See below, 13/302

where the Bhairavakulatantra is cited.

TANTRĀLOKA

47

guruśāstragate sattve ‘sattve cātra vibhedakam |

śaktipātasya vaicitryaṁ purastāt praviviṁcyate || 37 |I

The distinction here between a true or false teacher or scripture
effectively amounts to the variety of the descent of the power (of grace he
has received), which will be explained further ahead. (37)

‘Here’ʼ, in what was said before. (This will be explained) ‘further
aheadʼ in Chapter (Thirteen), that deals with (the varieties of) the descent of the
power (of grace). !² “Ḷhe distinction’ (between them) is the cause of their

difference. In this way, the teachers and the rest that belong to other systems
(darśana) are governed by the (deluding) power of Māyā called Vāmā, whereas
our (teachers are sustained) by the (illumining) power Jyesthā. Thus, this

(particular) person, according to the power'⁸ that governs him, is made to
believe there (in that particular teaching).

Nor is this (view) without (the support of scriptural) authority. So he

xšīṀ rr̥a³ ³ḷ a²

ṉ ÉĀḤ

uktaṁ svacchandaśāstre tat vaiṣṇavādyān pravādinaḥ |
sarvān bhramayate māyā sāmokṣe mokṣalipsayā |l 38 Il
It is said in the Svacchandatantra that those who preach the
doctrines of Viṣṇu etc. are all (deluded and impelled) by Māyā to wander

about (confused) by their desire for liberation in what is not liberation.¹²⁴

(38)

(The seeker is) ‘deluded (and impelled)’ (by Māyā) because he adopts
(a view) which is not within (and part of) that (right path). He says that (with the
words): ‘(they are deluded and impelled) by Māyā to wander about
(confused) by their desire for liberation in what is not liberation’. The
intended sense of this reference paraphrased (from the Svacchandatantra) is

what has been said there many times (in various ways). That is said (there):

‘Beyond that” is Māyā that deludes all living beings, their intellect

confused by (Māyā that operates freely) with none to oppose its obstruction

'²² See below, 13/129cd-310.

'³³ Read yac chaktyaivādhiṣṭhito for tacchaktyaivādhiṣṭhito.

¹³³ TĀ 4/38cd is a paraphrase of SvT 10/1141cd.
'³ The Svacchandatantra is describing the world orders (bhuvana) present in the thirtysix principles. Having dealt with the ones below Māyā, it goes on to talk about Māyā
itself. The world orders will be described, mostly on the basis of chapter ten of the
Svacchandatantra, below in Chapter Eight.

48

CHAPTER FOUR

(nirvaira-paripanthinyā).¹²⁶ Philosophers argue here (with one another, saying,)
“this is reality, this is not”. Having abandoned the true path, it quickly leads far
away (along) the wrong path. Those low people who are not devoted to the

teacher, deity, fire and the scripture,'⁷ who take their support from dry logic,

know (only) the deliberations produced by false reasoning. By (their) desire for
liberation, Māyā makes (them) wander about (confused) in what is not

liberation.³¹²⁸
Again,

‘Those others who know Sāṅṁkhya, Veda and the Purāṇas and preach

liberation, and are unable in their settled opinions concerning (those) other

scriptures to go beyond them, are obstructed by Māyā. Deluded (by it, they

wander on a path) whichis not that of liberation, (impelled) by (their) desire for

liberation. ¹⁹

Surely (one may ask,) if this person, be he a Vaiṣṇava or the like, is
deluded by Māyā, because his latent tendencies (sarṁskāra) develop only there

(in that practice and belief), it should not be possible (for him) to descend from

(that) false path. Thus, is it not so that he will never ascend onto the true path?

With this doubt in mind, he says:

azGq #alSfq TāḶHYĪRTTG;|
a yqJāÑTrīṁīēīc-āīrrōfcāārātatīa:

rrēāā
-TḤ ṀJTqGTRATT |

32 1

yas tu rūḍho ‘pi tatrodyat parāmarśaviśāradaḥ |
sa śuddhavidyāmāhātmyāc chaktipātapavitritaḥ l| 39 ||
ārohaty eva sanmārgaṅṁ pratyūhaparivarjitaḥ |

⁴⁶ The same expression is also found in SYT 12/119cd, that says: “Māyā is the Knoṭ
which is hard to traverse because none oppose its obstruction.’ Kṣemarāja comments:
‘‘None oppose it’ means that it has no cause (or purpose). It is Māyā which is the

Supreme Lord's power of freedom. It obstructs by concealing one’s own full (and

complete) nature and generates the limited (individual) perceiver’s nature (in its place).
As that is its nature, Māyā that binds the individual soul is called the Knot.”

Swami

Lakshmanjoo explains

this expression

as follows.

‘Māyā is

nirvairaparipanthinyā, i.e. it misleads only, it has no purpose in doing so, so this way of
being misled is very difficult to overcome. It is easy to overcome it if one is misled with
purpose, but if one is being misled instead without purpose it is very hard to overcome.
No philosophy has even tried to begin to refuteits doctrines.’ (personal communication)

'³⁷ Read with TĀ 8/335a gurudevāgniśāstreṣu for gurudevāgniśāstrasya, even though

thisis the readingin the SvT.

'³⁸ SVT 10/1138cd-1141. Jayaratha has already quoted SYT 10/1139cd-1140 above in his

commentary on 4/17cd-18ab. See note there.
'⁹ SVT 12/120-121ab. Kṣemarāja comments: ‘Whatever liberation (there may seem to
be) other than the liberation (achieved) by attaining oneness with Supreme Bhairava,

Who is pure, free and dense (uninterrupted) consciousness, even though it has to some

extent crossed over the path, because the other (remaining) path has not been traversed,

there appears to be liberation in what is not liberation.’

TANTRĀLOKA

49

However, even though he adheres there (to these inferior systems),
he becomes wise by the emergence of reflective awareness (within him).
Sanctified by the descent of the power (of grace), free of obstacles by virtue
of the greatness of (this) Pure Knowledge, he (ultimately) ascends onto the
true path. (39-40ab)

Again, even though one who, due to the firmmess of (his past) latent

tendencies has developed (in his), for example, Vaiṣṇava (beliefs), he ‘becomes
wise’, that is, skilful (in discerning) the difference between the essence (of the
truth) and what is other than that, as the reflective awareness, which is sound

discriminative reasoning (sattarka), emerges (by degrees). Thus, sanctified by
the governance of the power Jyesthā, ‘by virtue of the greatness of (this) Pure

Knowledgeʼ, which is sound discriminative reasoning,' he ascends onto the
true path which is free of obstacles, and is established in our philosophy
(darśana), by virtue of which he may (attain) liberation directly (sākṣār).
Surely (one may ask,) what is the cause of the emergence of his

reflective awareness? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Types of Teachers'¹³¹
The Spontaneously Enlightened (sāṁsiddhika), Uncreated (akalpita)
Teacher

g Taā---āTrīi:
aJ Td Tadd I| `⁶o ||

a 7 ũītatgā: vīā Trk: aaaāīṁ:|
'³⁰ Puṟe Knowledge is the insight that ‘I am all this (that I perceive) and all this is me’. It

is the ‘sound reasoning’ or ‘discriminating logic’ which counters the undiscriminating
and unsound reasoning (asattarka) that ‘I am the body’. The latter is inevitably a
thought construct, as the body is an object which is defined, as are all objects, in relation

to other objects which it is not. The same holds true for the mind even though it is a
much subtler object.

' In course of the discussion that follows, Abhinava goes on to talk about the various

kinds of teachers (4/40cd to 78ab). He talks about this again below in Chapter Thirteen
(13/129 ff.), that deals with the nature and occasion for a descent of the power of Śiva's
grace. There, as here, Abhinava distinguishes between teachers according to the degree

in which they have been liberated through their personal insight into the essentially
liberated condition of consciousness. In doing so, he also establishes that, as liberation is
achieved only when this knowledge dawns, any other means, whether it is the teacher,
scripture, Yoga, or ritual or any of its constituents, such as Mantra, are not essential. But
from Abhinava's point of view, this does not mean that ritual or any other means should
simply be abandoned. He says this in his introduction to the means based on action, that

he expounds in the following chapter. Purification of thought that leads to the liberated

state of consciousness which is free of it, does not only take place in the sphere of
cognition, which is the domain of the Empowered Means. It may, indeed must, also take

place in the sphere of the lower order of subjectivity identified with the psychophysical

body engaged in Yoga and ritual. This is because neither give rise to knowledge in the

absence of the fundamental discernment that the yogi or the ritual agent are not
essentially the body. This requires discernment grounded in Sound Reasoning.

50

CHAPTER FOUR

sa tāvat kasyacit tarkaḥ svata eva pravartate || 40 ||
sa ca sāṁsiddhikaḥ śāstre proktaḥ svapratyayātmakaḥ |
This (discriminative intuitive) reasoning (tarka) arises thus for some

(spontaneously) by itself (svata eva). And such a one is called in the

scriptures ‘Spontaneously Enlightened’ (sāṅsiddhika),¹² and his nature is

such that he is enlightened by himself (svapratyayātmaka) (without
instruction). (40cd-41ab)

(Discriminative reasoning arises in some cases) ‘by itself’, that is,
independently of the causes well known to all, such as a teacher’s instruction.
(However,) it is not without a cause in all respects, because in actual fact

(vastutaḥ) the Supreme Lord’s descent of the power (of grace) and the like
arises as an alternative instrumental cause.¹³ Thus, (such a teacher) is given a

name in our system which accords with its etymological meaning also.¹³⁴ ‘And
such a oneʼ etc. who is by himself (svayaṁ) (spontaneously) engaged in (the
discriminative) reasoning (of liberating insight, by virtue of which he is called
a) Spontaneously Enlightened (teacher), that is, one who is so from birth, by
virtue of the perfect accomplishment (saṁsiddhi) (achieved by his enlightened)
reasoning (spontaneously instilled in him by grace). This is the meaning. And it
is said:
‘The great sage who is established in reality, and for whom
independence from the teacher and scripture arises (spontaneously) by itself, is

said to be spontaneously enlightened.”¹

³² According to Monier-Wiliams’s dictionary, sāṁsṣiádhika means: ‘effected naturally,

belonging to nature, natural, native, innate, existent, existing by its own nature or
essence, existing absolutely, absolute and effected by supernatural means (as spells
etc.)¹.”

³³ In other words, Sound Reasoning, which purifies thought and results in direct
contemplation of the true nature of the Self and all things as Śiva, can develop
progressively by reflection on the teachings imparted by a teacher or scripture. Or elseit
can develop inwardly by itself in the course of meditation, or at other times by Śiva’s

grace directly. We are reminded that it is commonly accepted, even by the empiricist
Naiyāyikas, that the intuitive insight Yogis develop is a valid source of knowledge,
along with the standard means of knowledge (pramāṇa), such as direct perception,
inference and valid testimony.

'³⁴ This teacher has accomplished everything by himself spontaneously. In other words,

he is accomplished (siddha) by his very nature or from his own nature (svabhāvataḥ).
Thuṣ, he is ‘properly° (samyak) ‘one who is fully accomplished’, which is the literal
meaning of the term sāṁsiddhika and ‘accords with its etymological meaning’. Here it
is translated as ‘spontaneously enlightened’. Concerning this type of teacher, see also
below, 13/134cd ff.

¹³³ This reference drawn from a scriptural source demonstrates that the concept of a

svayaṁsāṁsidáhika ʻspontaneously enlightened by oneself’ is not Abhinava’s own idea.

The possibility of a spontaneously enlightened teacher is a feature of the overarching
possibility of direct enlightenment, that we see repeated in various perspectives and

contexts throughout the Anuttara Trika narrative of the Tantrāloka. It finds its scriptural

basis in the Bhairava and Kaula Tantra, specifically the sources Abhinava cites for the
Anuttara Trika. The Siddhāntas, that generally do not promote the possibility of

TANTRĀLOKA

51

liberation in this life (jīvanmukti) and so do not preach the possibility of spontaneous
realisation, do nonetheless maintain in secondary, indirect ways, moderate links to it.

One area of contact and common discourse are the siddhis (lit. ‘accomplishmentsʼ). In
this context, the ultimate siddhi practically amounts to a form of liberation in which the
liberated soul is equipped to be a teacher, to lead others to the same realisation. While
we do not come across the term svayaṁsāṁsiddhika in the Siddhāntāgamas, we do find
sāṁsiddhika. This is the highest of three types of accomplishment, along with Vainayika
and Prākṛta. We observe in the enumeration of the Dharmika sāṁsiddáhika siddhis the
features of higher illumination, and in the Adharmika, impediments to that. They are
defined as follows in chapter ten of the vidyāpāda of the Saiddhāntika Mṛgendratantra:
siddhikā vainayikāḥ prākṛtāś ca bhavanty aṇoḥ !| 26 ||

viśiṣṭadharmasaṁskārasamuddīpītacetasām |

guṇaḥ sāṁṣiddhiko bhãti dehābhāve ʻpi pūrvavat | 27 |
viśiṣṭeneṣṭāpūrtādidharmasaṁskāreṇa samyag uddīpitaṁ ceto yeṣāṁ teṣāṁ na paraṁ
dehasaṁyoge yāvad dehābhāve ‘pi prāg baddho guṇaḥ prakāśate, sa sāṁsiddhiko nāma
hoddhavyaḥ || 27 || athaitebhyaḥ sāṁsiddáhikādibhyo dharmebhyaḥ phalaviśeṣān

vaktum āha

“(There are three types of qualities) of the individual soul. (They can be)
sāṁsiddhikas, vainayikas and prākṛtas. The quality (guṇa) of those whose minds are

energized by special (excellent) traces of Dharma is said to be sāṅṁsiddhika. It shines, as

(explained) before, even (after death), when there is no body. (10/26cd-27)

Nārāyaṇabhaṭṭa explains: The quality that shines for those whose mind has
been energized by a special (excellent) trace of Dharma, such as the completion of a
sacrifice, fashioned (baddha) previously, is not theirs (only) when (alive and) conjoined
to the body, it is so also when (they are dead and) there is no body.

Now, in order to state the special fruits that come from these sārṁīsiddhika and
other Dharmas, it is said:
svargo muktiḥ prakṛtivāvighātau

yonikrāntir niṛayāvāptibandhau |

rāpeṣv arthā vinayaprākṛteṣu

saṁpadyante ṣavighātāḥ krameṇa || 29 ||

tatra tāvad vainayikeṣu rūpeṣu krameṇārthāḥ saṁpadyanate sphītim upayānti | ke ta ity
āha svarga ityādi, dharmāt svargaḥ,
jñānān muktiḥ, vairāgyāt prakṛtilayaḥ, aiśvaryād

avighātaḥ yatheṣṭasidáhir ity arthaḥ | athādharmāt tiṛyagādiyonikrāntiḥ, ajñānān
nirayāvāptiḥ, avairāgyād bandhaḥ, anaiśvaryād vighātaḥ | 29 II atha
sāṁsiddhikeṣūcyante

Heaven, liberation, (the dissolving away of) Prakṛti, and the absence of
impediments (are attained by Dharma). (Due to Adharma there is) entrance into a
womb, the attainment of hell and bondage. (These) things, with (their) impediments,
accrue respectively in the case of those things that are Vinaya by nature. (10/29)
There (in that case), such things accrue, that is, become clearly manifest,
respectively, in the case of things that pertain to the Vainayikas. What are they? (The
Tantra) says: heaven etc. By Dharma (one attains) heaven, by knowledge, liberation, by

52

CHAPTER FOUR
Thus he is (dependent only on) himself, not on another, be it a teacher

or anything else. He whose nature™ is the well determined (certainty) which is

the knowledge that ‘this is so’ is referred to in this way.
Surely (one may ask,) elsewhere (in other traditions) it is said that in
order to realise the supreme principle something else, such as a teacher, is
referred to as the cause (of realisation, not just oneself). So how is it that here
(in this school, with regards to this kind of teacher), on the contrary, one’s own
(spontaneous insight) is (said to be) the only one? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

ē'rāīṝ āgāh īṬēā: JTāīā; Tā̄: |ḷ ?, 1|

Tāṁāē
ṇaá r̥dda súra: |

dispassion, the dissolving away of Prakṛti, by mastery (aiśvarya) one is without
obstacles, that is, (one gets) whatever attainment one desires. This is the meaning.

Now, due to Adharma there is entrance into a womb of a bird and the like; due
to ignorance, the attainment of hell, and due to the absence of dispassion, bondage, and
due to the absence of mastery, impediment. Now (what happens in the case of)
sāṁsiddhikas is taught.

vaśyākrāntis tatparījñānayogo
bhogānicchā vighnasaṁghavyapāyaḥ |

bhogāsaktir nyakkṛtir dehalabdhi
vighnaś cārthās teṣu sāṁsiddhikeṣu || 30 ||
dharmādiṣu sāṁsiddhikeṣu satsv idam idaṁ saṁpadyata iti pūrveṇa saṁbandhaḥ | kiṁ
kim Lity atrāha vaśyākrānúr •ityādi,
vaśyakrāntḥ sāṁsiddhikād dharmāt,
tatparijñānāyogas 1tādṛgvidhāj jñānāt, bhogeṣv anabhilāṣo vairāgyāt, vighna-

samīhāpagama .aiśvaryāt, bhogeṣv āsakiḥ sāṁsiáddhikād adhaṁmāt, nyakkṛtr
nyakkāras tathāvidhād ajñānāt, dehalabdhir avairāgyāt, kāryeṣu vighno ‘naiśvaryād iti

I10/3011

Overpowering those who need to be controlled, the Yoga of knowing that
completely, the desire for worldly enjoyments, and the removal of the mass of obstacles
(pertain to Dharma). Attachment to worldly pleasures, humiliation (and contempt), the
‘aṭṭainment of a body” and ‘obstacles” (pertain to Adharma). These are the things that
pertain to those sāṁṅsiddáhika (accomplishments). (30)
When there are sāṁsiddhikas such as Dharma and the rest, the following are
attained. This is the connecting syntax with what was said before. What (are they)? 1)
‘Overpowering those who need to be controlled°- (this is achieved) by sāṁsiddhika
dharma. 2) ‘The Yoga of knowing that completely² (is achieved) by that kind of
knowledge (i.e. sāṅsiddhika). 3) The desire for worldly enjoyments³ (is remedied) by
dispassion. 4) ‘The removal of the mass of obstaclesʼ (is achieved) by mastery.
Due to sāṅsiddhika Adharma (on the contrary, there is) 1) ‘attachment to
worldly pleasuresʼ, 2) ‘humiliation (and contempt)² due to that kind of ignorance, 3)

‘the attainment of a body’ due to the absence of dispassion and, 4) ‘obstaclesʼ to the

(completion) of works that need to be done, due to the lack of mastery.”

'³⁰ Read jñūānamātmāsvabhāvo for jñānamātmā svabhāvo.

TANTRĀḶOKA

53

kiraṇāyāṁ yad apy uktaṁ gurutaḥ śāstrataḥ ṣvataḥ || 41 I|
tatrottarottaraṁ mukhyaṁ pūrvapūrva upāyakaḥ |
As is said also in the Kiraṇā: “(Śiva should be known) from the

teacher, the scripture and oneself.’” Of these, that which comes later in
this series is primary (mukhya), whereas that which comes earlier serves as
a means to that which follows.¹³⁸ (41cd-42ab)

'³⁷ TĀ 4/41d is KiT 1/9/14b. This quarter verse is quoted again as TĀ 4/78d, where

Abhinava says it is also found in the Niśāṭanatantra. He refers to its source as the

Niśāṭanatantra in TĀ 13/197-198. In his commentary there, Jayaratha obliges us by

quoting the passage in full from that source. This same quarter verse is quoted again
below in 13/162d. The source is named there, as here Kiraṇā (saṁhitā). Abhinava is

fond of referring to this set of three throughout the TĀ in various contexts. (See for
example, 26/5, in the commentary to which Jayaratha quotes the version found in the
Niśātanatantra (i.e. tripratyayam idaṁ jñānam)). Indeed, this seems to be a common

view found in Tantras of various traditions, especially Kaula. So we read, for example,
in the Kubjikāmata (13/58) of the Kubjikā school:

‘If one has seen (directly and understood) all things from the teacher, the
scripture and oneself, then (such a one) is said to belong to the tradition (kramika), or
else he is (himself) equal (in value) to the tradition.”

Again, Abhinava explains this line in the MVV, stressing the primary

importance of scripture, and how its validity is grounded in essentially the same insight

that arises spontaneously within consciousness. He writes:

“The principle (fundamental nature) of one’s own consciousness is made clear
from the teacher, the scripture and oneself. This effort has been primarily made (this
way). The teacher depends on the common practice (vṛ#i) of the scripture, and that is

grounded in one’s own consciousness. Thus all this is accomplished (and proved) by

one’s own consciousness; it is not indeed without help (from consciousness) . . . . Those
whose hearts have awakened constantly are so by the practice of that scripture, and that

scripture is one’s own consciousness and that is not dependent (on anything). If one

explains it that way, one should say that it is (intrinsically) an authoritative mean of
knowledge by itself (svataḥ).’ (2/2267-268, 271cd-272)
Referring again to this line in the Kiraṇatantra below in 13/162, Abhinava

goes on to paraphrase a long section of the Nandiśikhatantra (13/163-195), where it is

explained at length. He then goes on to refer to the Niśātanatantra, which he tells us
states the same (13/197). One of the reasons Abhinava focuses on this passage is
because in it he finds scriptural authority for the view that external initiation is not

essential, at least for those who can achieve spontaneous realisation. One could hazard

to say that Abhinava is also suggesting that it is possible to achieve in this way the goal
of liberation that Śaivism generally maintains is achieved through ritual action,
commencing with the rite of initiation. He maintains that initiation can be imparted
directly by the goddess (see below, 4/63cd-64 and note). Moreover, he also supports the
view voiced in the PT (25abc, quoted below in 4/49-50), that Śiva can impart the
liberating knowledge that bestows the initiated state ‘immediately’ (sadyaḥ). This is a
form of initiation devoid of outer ritual. While the Tantras of traditions that preach the

immediate transmission of enlightened consciousness as one of a transmission of Śiva’s
or (according to the MV and others) Rudra’s intense spiritual power, Abhinava stresses

54

CHAPTER FOUR

It is said in the scripture (sarṁhitā)'⁹ called Kiraṇā that there are three
causes (kāraṇa) (that serve as the means) to know the supreme reality, which is

devoid (śūnya) of the (negative) qualities of Māyā,¹⁴⁰ (where we read):

‘The Void (śūnya) should be known in this way from the teacher, the

scripture and oneself.
'!

Although¹ (this seems to imply that they are of equal status,) what is

meant is that there (in that case,) each subsequent one is primary (with respect
to the one that precedes it). Thus, scripture (is more important) than the teacher,

and (more important than) that also is one’s own insight (svaparāmarśa).¹³

Thus, that which is prior (in this sequence) comes first (as the basis of those that
follow,) just as the teacher is the means (to understanding) the scripture, and
that (is the means to achieving) one’s own insight (svaparāmarśa). In the same

way:

‘it is said that even those things that are to be abandoned are means (if
they are abandoned) in order to adopt (what needs be adopted).”
that this stimulates personal insight, which is the direct means to liberation, as it is the
Pure Knowledge that ‘I am all this (universe) and all this (universe) is me. In other

words, he shifts the focus from power to gnosis.
'³* The teacher’s instruction is a means to understanding the meaning of scripture,
whereas scripture is the means to attaining one’s own insight. The scripture is more
authoritative than the teacher, and so can overrule what the teacher says, if it does not

agree with scripture. Greater than scripture is one’s own insight. Each serves as a means

to the subsequent one, and so insight that arises within oneself is the highest. The
teacher’s instruction and scripture are secondary with respect to the insight that arises
spontaneously, without any external means. It is the reflective awareness of
consciousness, which is the basis of them all. However, although this is true, we should
note carefully that they do not, and should not, contradict one another. The teacherʼs

instruction is in accord with scripture, and that is in agreement with one’s own insight,
which is sustained and confirmed by both.

'³⁹ See above, note to 4/25cd-27. There are several ways Śaiva scripture refers to itself.

The best known is ‘Tantra’, which simply means ‘book, and ‘Āgama’, which literally
means ‘what has come’. The term ‘saṁhitā’ literally means ‘put together’. We are

alerted in this way that Tantras (= Āgamas = Saṁhitās) are often compilations. Even a
cursory critical analysis of Tantric texts reveals that they are indeed often ‘compilations’
of passages that may have been written at different times or even by different people.
They may be original or, not infrequently, drawn from other Tantras. By tracing the

origins of such passages, this intertextuality may serve as a means of establishing a
relative dating of the Tantras, and furnish insights into the manner a particular Tantric

system is built up and develops. Moreover, a comparison of the readings of the two or

more sources is a valuable aid for the textual editor.
¹“⁰Cf. KiT 9/2c (quoted above ad 1/74-75ab (75-76ab)): māyādharmaiḥ śivaḥ śūnyaḥ
‘Śiva (is the Voidin the sense that He is) devoid of the (impure) attributes of Māyā.
¹³ KĪT 9/14ab.

'⁴² Read yady api for yad api.

¹³ The expression svaparāmarśa literally means ‘one’s own reflective awareness’ or

just ‘self-awarenessʼ. In this context the sense is, as I have translated, ‘one’s own

insight’. The expression implies that insight consists of the self-reflective awareness that
perceives one’s own identity with ultimate reality.

TANTRĀLOKA

55

In accord with the principle (yukti) stated in such passages, the teacher
and scripture are a means (to the attainment of one’s personal insight), and so
are not primary (mukhya) (ones). Thus, one’s own insight (svaparāmarśa) is the
main (and most fundamental one), and so here (in this case) it is that which is

accepted (upādāna) (as the best).¹⁴⁴

Thus, one for whom (this) reflective awareness (parāmarśa) arises
spontaneously has been made fit in all respects (and every circumstance, to
practice and initiate others). Accordingly, he says:

qT] ārīs̃ aāā: ṂḍdTTITTTIĀTT]
I| 3 1
srfṅtrṁ: aaārcēñfvrtrtēag a: 1

yasya svato ‘yaṁ sattarkaḥ sarvatraivādhikāravān || 42. |I
abhiṣiktaḥ svasaṁvittidevībhir dīkṣitaś ca saḥ |

He in whom this sound discriminative reasoning (sattarka) (arises

spontaneously) by itself is fit in all respects (to perform any ritual, practice

any form of spiritual discipline, and initiate others). He has been both
initiated (as a disciple) and consecrated (as a teacher directly) by the

goddesses of his own consciousness.¹⁵ (42cd-43ab)

'³ The knowledge that develops from one’s personal insight is the highest. Indeed, the

teacherʼs instruction and the scriptures should be abandoned, if by doing so one

achieves higher levels of realisation and insight than by following them. But even
though they should be abandoned, they continue to be means to realisation, although not
primary ones. The intended meaning, it seems, is not just that personal insight is better

than the teacher’s instruction and that of scripture. Ultimately, the only means to

realisation is one’s own spontaneous reflection, which is free of all means, develops
inwardly by Śiva’s grace, supported by the teacher and the scriptures. A very small

emendation quite feasibly yields the original reading, and with it this meaning, almost
directly. Thus, by reading yady api – ‘although’ for yad api – ‘as is also’ we could
translate:
‘Although it is said in the Kiraṇatantra: ʻ(Convincing insight comes) from the
teacher, the scripture and oneself, of these, that which comes later in this series is more
important (mukhya), while that which comes earlier serves as a means to that which

follows.” To complete the meaning, one may add: “Thus one’s own insight is the

ultimate means to both, and so is effectively in the end the only one.” By this of course
is not meant that one should not have a teacher or learn from scriptures. Rather that they

are effective guides by virtue of one’s own insight that develops by Śiva’s grace, which
as His divine power is the Goddess.

'⁸³ This verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 15/15cd-16 and 26/15-16. See also below,

13/131cd-142ab. Cf. ‘Therefore, those who have not been pierced with a firm Śāmbhava

descent of the power (of grace), (even so) enter the supreme level of reality once
purified thought by the process (of applying themselves to understanding) the true
scripture and the like. Surely then (one may ask,) is not the supreme principle to this
extent not an object of thought? This is not so, as (this process of purification)

completes its function by just destroying the trace of duality (of dualistic notions). The

supreme principle is everywhere self-luminous as all things. Thought there cannot aid

anybody nor damage them. For one who is penetrated there by a very firm descent of
the power (of grace), Sound Reasoning arises by itself as (and so becomes) a

56

CHAPTER FOUR

‘He in whom this’ʼ, the previously described ‘sound discriminative

reasoning arises spontaneously² independently of a teacher etc. ‘is fit in all
respectsʼ (to practice) Yoga, (receive and give spiritual) knowledge.
Surely (it is said that) ‘there is no competence to practice Śaiva Yoga
without initiation²,' so according to this view, how can he have authority in all

respects (to practice) without initiation? With this doubt in mind, he said: ‘he

has been both initiated (as a disciple) and consecrated (as a teacher
directly) by the goddesses of his own consciousness’. (These are) the
functions of his own (forms of) sensory consciousness (indriyavṛtti). They are
the goddesses who illumine the oneness (of the object) with the perceiver, in

accord with the teaching (imparted in the following verse):⁴’

Spontaneously Enlightened (sāṁsiddhika) (teacher), that is, one who is said to be
initiated by the goddesses. We will explain how it comes about progressively in the case

of another (kind of person) in the section in which (the nature) of the descent of the

power of grace (is taught).⁵ TSā p. 22-23.
It is not clear who these goddesses are. They may possibly be the goddesses

associated with the goddess Raktā, who bestows this initiation according to the
Brahmayāmala (see below, 4/64). Jayaratha says that the ‘goddesses of consciousness’
are the goddesses of the senses. To understand what the goddesses of the senses are, we

need to turn to Kṣemarāja’s commentary on the Stanzas on Vibration verses 6 and I
that declare:

‘That principle should be examined with effort and reverence, because this, its
uncreated freedom, prevails everywhere; by virtue of it, the senses, along with the inner

circle, (although) unconscious, behave as if conscious in themselves, and move towards
(their objects), rest (there) and withdraw (from them).⁷
Kṣemarāja explains that we should distinguish between two aspects of the
senses. On the one hand, they form a part of the gross, insentient level of emanation, and
yet on the other, they are aspects of Śiva’s power. It is the latter aspect that the esoteric
doctrine (rahasyārtha) of the Krama and other Kaula schools stresses. From this point
of view, the senses, as powers of consciousness, are in fact sentient; but even so,
says
Kṣemarāja, we must distinguish provisionally between these two levels in order to lead

the more spiritually immature to this higher doctrine. He explains that there are two
groups of senses, an inner and an outer one. ‘The outer group consists of the thirteen
senses made manifest by the power of Māyā, as insentient in relation to the individual

soul. The inner group consists of the goddesses of the senses (karaṇeśvarī). These
goddesses are hypostases of the energies or rays of the light of one’s own conscious

nature (maricīcakra). They are thus said to possess a ‘body of consciousness”
(vijñānadeha), and are aspects of its ecstatic nature or ‘wonder’ (ciccamatkāra). . . . The
inner circle of sensory powers generates and withdraws its own object in and through
the act of perception. However, it is coupled with the activity of the outer circle of the

senses in such a way that only the latter appears to be apprehended, and react to its

object, which is felt to be outside it. Ultimately, both groups are impelled by Śiva, one’s
own inherent nature. Thus Śiva can be realised in a moment by the blissful and
effortless means (sukhopāya) of direct introspection – even while the senses are fully

active.” Dyczkowski 1992a: 202-203.

¹⁴⁰ MV 4/6cd, see above note to TĀv ad 1/231cd-232ab (232).

"⁴⁷ The Sanskrit reads saṁvittaya indriyavrttāyaḥ, that can be translated as ‘perceptions
that are the activities of the senses’. In the state of bondage in which consciousness is

contracted by its identification with the psychophysical organism, the activities of the

TANTRĀLOKA

57

‘The functions (vṛrti) that are said to belong to a Mantra of one who

(directs his attention) outside are said to be (the divine) energies (sśakti) of (the

Yogi who directs his attention) inwards.”¹⁴⁸

The meaning is that by energizing the knowledge and action (of the
senses and mind by an expansion of consciousness), those (goddesses of
consciousness operating through the senses) bestow freedom everywhere (in all
respects).

Thus (the Spontaneously Enlightened teacher) is supremely excellent.
He says accordingly:

Tq TG ūJTaIJĀĪTI| T TGT: JaĪTT: I `3 1
sa eva sarvācāryāṇāṁ madhye mukhyaḥ prakīrtitaḥ || 43 ||
tatsaṁnidhānenānyeṣu kalpiteṣv adhikāritā |
He, amongst all teachers, is said to be the chief one (mukhya). In his
presence, all other (teachers) who have been formed (kalpita) (by other
teachers) are devoid of authority. (43cd-44ab)

‘Of all teachers, that is, of those who, as will be explained,¹⁹ are

‘uncreated-cum-created’ (akalpitakalpaka) and the rest, he is the chief one, and

so in his presence all other (teachers) have no authority to grace others (or do
anything else). This is said (with the words) ‘in his presence’ etc. As he will

say:

‘Just as, according to the dualist (Śaivite schools,) (the fettered souls

who achieve liberation at some point (ādisiddha) and are as they say) ‘liberated
Śivas⁷ (muktaśiva) should be considered to be inferior to (Śiva Himself), Who is
such originally (anādisiddha), in the same way, (teachers) who have attained

senses and mind serve to maintain and even increase its contracted state. But when the

insight dawns that consciousness is not a bodily or mental function but rather, on the

contrary, is the cause and foundation of its existence and imparts life and consciousness

to it, everything changes. The activity of the senses and mind expand consciousness by
rendering the perceiver one with the perceived. As its pervasive presence is thus

increasingly recognised, consciousness and all that appears within it is increasingly

experienced as sacred. Moreover, the power of this presence renders all things sacred,
especially the individual contracted consciousness, which is thereby initiated into the

purity of oneness with Śiva and consecrated to infuse this pure, initiated state into
others. Cf. Dyczkowski 1992a: 202.

¹³ Mantras, like the senses, derive their power from the vitality (vīrya) of
consciousness, that impels them and gives them life. The Stanzas on Vibration teach
that:

‘Seizing that strength (bala), Mantras endowed with the power of omniscience
(divine consciousness itself possesses), perform their functions, as do the senses of the
embodied.” (26)

'⁹ See below, 4/51-53.

58

CHAPTER FOUR

knowledge (in the manner just described) are inferior to (the teacher) who
atṭains this knowledge spontaneously. In (the latter’s) presence (the former)
have no authority, just as the ‘liberated Śiva’ souls (have none in Śiva’s
presence). They keep quiet or, if they are to do anything, they behave according

to his example.”'

Surely (one may ask,) none disagree that one comes to understand the
scripture from the teacher. So how can someone who has no teacher understand
the scriptures? Even if he is engaged by himself in (sound discriminative)
reasoning and takes initiation and the rest, what success (siddhi) can he achieve?

For it is said: “O lady praised by the Heroes, without scripture there can be no
success in initiation and the rest.’ With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Pure Knowledge of Sound Discriminative Reasoning

g gārxi d raād% RGṀĪICa TAT I| ² I
sa samastaṁ ca śāstrārthaṁ sattarkād eva manyate || 44 ||

Moreover, by virtue of (his) sound discriminative reasoning alone
he grasps the entire purport of the scripture. (44cd)
‘He grasps’ means, he understands.

Surely (one may ask,) how can one understand all the scriptures to this

extent independently of a teacher and the rest? With this doubt in mind, he says:

yr̥fṁēī fē ṁākā aa aṁ raq |
śuddhavidyā hi tan nāsti satyaṁ yad yan na bhāsayet |
There is no truth that Pure Knowledge does not illumine. (45ab)

Nor is that proved by just reasoning alone, it is also (established) by the
scripture; and so he says:

TdTĀTĀST̄TTGTŪT-ITA
STT |I| #4, I
rfĩ sīq̄dṁāzā
srṅāacfā vīzīā: |
sarvaśāstrārthavettṛtvam akasmāc cāsya jāyate || 45 ||

cause

(AlI) that (we have said up to now) is implied in the words ‘without

(akasmāt)

in

the

(following

'³⁰ Below, 4/74cd-76ab. See note there.

passage

drawn

from

the

TANTRĀḺOKA

59

Mālinīvijayottara:¹⁵' ‘knowledge of the purport of all the scriptures arises
within him (spontaneously) without cause.’ (45cd-46ab)

‘Thatʼ is the understanding of (the purport of) all the scriptures, which
is the (impelling) instrumental cause for sound discriminative reasoning, and is
‘implied in the words ‘without cause’. This is (the prose order) relationship
(between the words).

Surely, (saying) ‘without a causeʼ is just words (without meaning;

nothing exists without some prior cause), so how is it that he has said that? With
this this doubt in mind, he says:

JrāāTIĪTT āI Ṝq³ āISTīĀITRTT
’ĀT || T⁶ē. |
q J Tāīr̥gfraāṝjāī|
lokāprasiddho yo hetuḥ so ‘ʻkasmād iti kathyate || 46 ||

sa caiṣa parameśānaśuddhavidyāvijrmbhitam |

A cause that is not commonly known to everyone is what is meant

by the expression ‘without cause’. (In actual fact, the cause in this case is

just) the unfolding of the Supreme Lord’s Pure Knowledge. (46cd-47ab)

It is said that (if something is) ‘without cause’ it has no cause. That is

unreasonable. If that were to be the case, it would either be eternal'² or unreal.

Here (in this case), that (kind of teacherʼs enlightened state) must certainly exist

due to some cause, and that is not commonly known to everybody, because (in
this case) the teacherʼs teaching (being imparted) or the like is not seen directly.
Thus, because it is not like that, it is not commonly known to everybody.

(However,) one may infer by its fruits (that the cause) is the Supreme Lord’s

outpouring of Pure Knowledge, by virtue of which his great knowledge, (born)
of the intuitive insight (prātibhaṁ mahājñānam) which has as its object (viṣaya)
all things, may arise independently of the teacher and scripture. As he will say:
‘Again, by the moderately intense (madhyatīvra) (descent of the power
of grace), all ignorance ceases (directly, without the need of scriptures or

teachers). That through which one knows by oneself (svayam eva) that one’s

'³¹ MV 2/16cd. Read śrīpūrva- for śrīpūva- The spontaneous arising of an understanding

of the purport of the scriptures is the fifth and highest accomplishment (siddhi) which

characterizes the penetration of Rudra’s energy (rudraśaktisamāveśa). The other four
signs are described below in 13/214-216. Cf. above, 3/292ab-293ab (291cd-292), 4/35
and commentaries.

'³² An eternal entity has no beginning just as it has no end, so it cannot have a preceding

cause. According to the Vaiśeṣikas, for example, who do not believe in the existence of
God or an impersonal Absolute, everything is made of eternally existing categories of
entities (padārtha) that are the ultimate cause of everything. Three of these are
substance, quality and motion. By ‘substance’ they mean atoms that aggregate to form

physical phenomena, within which qualities and motion inhere. Atoms are eternal and
without a prior cause.

60

CHAPTER FOUR

own Self is (the cause of both) bondage and liberation, is the great knowledge
(mahājñāna) (bor) of the intuitive insight (pratibhā) (that comes by grace),

independently (of the knowledge of the) scriptures or teachers.”'⁵³

It is due to the diversity of limiting adjuncts that (teachers are) of many
kinds. Thuṣ, he says:

srai ag zaī faṝūt. aēfīftrs: 1. .9 1

gatīsvīā:
aāīrsī] raaṁqaaīvīṝtza: |

fifsī; ŪĀīŪsttācṁ
m. Tāī āīērct: 1| #¢ 1
asya bhedāś ca bahavo nirbhittiḥ sahabhittikaḥ l| 47 II
sarvago ʻṁśagataḥ so ʻpi mukhyāmukhyāṁśaniṣṭhitaḥ |
bhittiḥ paropajīvitvaṁ paraḥ prajñātha tatkṛtiḥ || 48 II
There are many types of (teacher, who belong to two principal

categories, namely, those) who need no support (of a teacher or scripture)

(nirbhitti) and (those) who do (sahabhittika). (The latter is of two types,
according as to whether the support is applied) everywhere (sarvaga) or
(partially) to an aspect (aṁśagata). Again, (the latter is of two kinds,
according to whether) the aspect is established in primary or secondary

(mmukhyāmukhya) (sources). The support is essentially dependence on
something else, and that other thing¹⁶ is (one’s own spiritual) insight
(prajñā) or its product (that is, these teachings).¹⁵ (47cd-48)
'³³ Below, 13/130-132ab (130cd-132). Jayaratha implies by quoting these verses that, in
this context, Pure Knowledge arises by Śiva’s grace. Indeed, it is Śv' grace which, as

the Pure Knowledge that “ am all this (universe) and all this (universe) is me”, is the
liberating insight the scriptures and the teacher teach.

'³⁴√ Ṛead with Jayaratha and MSs C, J and Jh, paraḥ for parā. The priṇted text of the

verse reads ‘parā prajñāthā’, but Jayaratha comments on the reading ‘paraḥ
prajñārthaḥ’. In order to make the commentary coherent with the text, I have adopted

Jayaratha’s reading to get the meaning: “The support is essentially dependence on

something else and that other thing (paraḥ) is (one’s own spiritual) insight (prajāñā) or
its product (that is, these teachings). If one adopts the first reading, the sentence means:

“The support is essentially dependence on the supreme (consciousness) and the supreme

(consciousness) is (one’s own spiritual) insight (prajñā) and its product (that is, these
teachings).” I have adopted Jayaratha’s reading for the sake of the translation. However,
it is quite likely that he had a faulty reading before him, on which he commented.
Indeed, it makes little sense to identify ‘the other’ on which this teacher depends to

grace his disciples with his own insight, which is internal, not external or ‘other” with
respect to his own consciousness.
'³⁹ There are two basic kinds of spontaneously enlightened teacher - one who is
‘without support’ (nirbhittika), and one who is ‘with support’ (sahabhittika). The former

has no need at all of scripture, teacher, or any means of realisation, whereas the latter
does take some support from them. Again, the ‘support’ may be total or partial. For

example, some spontaneously enlightened teachers may only need to make use of one
scripture. That is termed ‘partial support’ (aṅśagataḥ). Otherwise, he may consult all
the scriptures, regularly. This is not because he needs to achieve anything more, as he is

TANTRĀLOKA

61

These are the two main kinds of spontaneously realised (sāṁsiddhika)

(teachers), namely, (one who needs) ‘no support’, that is, who has gone beyond
(niṣkrānta) (having to take any) support (from any means to realisation both for
himself and others). (The other kind) is ‘with support’, that is, has the support
(of other means to liberate others or confirm his own liberated state). Again, (a

teacher who is) ‘with support’ may be associated with all the support or
partially, and so he says ‘(the support is applied) everywhere or (partially) to
an aspectʼ. Again, the one that is partially applied may be established in a
primary aspect or otherwise. These are the three types of (Spontaneously
Enlightened teacher who need a) support. Along with the one that is without
support, there are four (types). Again, there may be many (types), because the
support and its aspects are multiple. Here (in this case), the difference that arises
(bhedollāsa) according to whether (one or other aspect) exists or not, is referred
to with the term ‘support’. ‘The support is essentially dependence on
something else’. The meaning is the support is something that depends on
something else (other than one’s own direct insight). What is (that something)

else? With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘that other thing is (one’s own)
(spiritual) insight (prajñā) or its product (that is, these teachings)³. ‘Insight’
is one’s own reflective awareness. ‘Its product’ is the scripture produced by

(that) other thing (namely, insight), which explains each particular ritual (and

yogic) practice.
Surely (one may object), as his knowledge arises spontaneously, there is

no other thing on which it is dependent. Fine, let (his) state be the one without

support, what is wrong with that (view)? However, when his state is one with

support, as is being explained, then he would not be one who is spontaneously
enlightened, because by being dependent on something else, his condition

would be that of a (teacher who is) ‘created’ (kalpita)'³⁶ (by another teacher).

Nor (is it possible to maintain) that the particular (kind with supports) is
already accomplished. He does so only to grace others who are not enlightened. Again,
that support may be primary or secondary; that is to say, his dependence may or may not
be predominant. Thus, along with supreme insight, which is ‘without support’, the main
types are four. Again, there may be many more kinds of such teachers, according to the
nature of the support they use. They may also be of many kinds, as are the endless
number of means to realisation or combinations of them. ‘Its product’, which is
whatever such teachers say, is scripture (see the note 4,158, below).
Reading Abhinava alone, without Jayaratha’s commentary, it is not clear why a

teacher who is spontaneously enlightened by himself may need any support at all. One

explanation may be that, although he is enlightened, he may need some degree of

support from another teacher, scripture, or some other means simply to confirm that his

realisation is authentic, or to maintain himself in that state. While this may be a possible
explanation, it seems more likely that, as Jayaratha explains, such a teacher may need
the support of various means to realisation to grace his disciples. They are not for
himself. The teacher ‘without support’ in this perspective is one who manages to
enlighten his disciple directly by a look or other means of transmitting his enlightened

state into him, without any gross mediating means. The following verses that refer to the

conditions for the possibility of direct realisation, unmediated by any means, may be

taken to indicate that Jayaratha’s explanation is correct. But they may only refer to the
teacherʼs attainment, not that of his disciples.

'³⁰ See below, 4/10cd-72ab.

62

CHAPTER FOUR

(essentially the same as) the general kind (who is spontaneously enlightened
without support) that has not (yet fully arisen).⁷ (If that were s0,) how is it that
(not yet enlightened) he is said to be (spontaneously enlightened) with support?
(In reply to this question,) it is said that here (in this case, he is
spontaneously enlightened) by himself, because sound discriminative reasoning
arises, and so having reduced all bonds to insignificance, the Spontaneously
Enlightened teacher is full of Bhairava’s (liberated) state (bhairavībhāva), and

has accomplished everything within himself. Thus, the remaining observance
(of such a one until he dies) has (as its) supreme (para) purpose solely that of

gracing others (para). As was said before:

‘One who is armed with the sword (of discernment) that cuts through
the weave (tantra) of all restrictions has no other purpose at all than to grace
(others) in the course of the remaining mode of conduct (of his life after

liberation) (śeṣavṛtti).¹⁵⁸
Again:

“(The people of) this world exert themselves, intent as they are in some

way on their own affairs. They do not act at all for the benefit of others. While
he in whom all the impurity of phenomenal existence has been destroyed has
identified with Bhairava, by virtue of which he is full (and perfect), has clearly
only this (left) to do, namely, (attend to) the well-being of the people of the

world.”¹⁹

There (in that case), he graces those whose consciousness is pure and
are the objects of grace (directly), without (resorting to) any expedient. He
graces them by effecting his same (state in them), by transmitting his own

consciousness (to them) by the mere sight (of his presence) (darśana), free of

assessment (anusaṁdhāna).¹⁰ As was said before:

'⁹⁷ The printed text here appears to be corrupt. It reads: asaṁbhavat tatsāmānyaḥ

tadviśeṣo nāma.
'³⁸³ Above, 2/37cdef (38). Note that this and the following quotes are all drawn from

Chapter Two above, which deals with No Means. The spontaneously enlightened

teacher has attained his liberated state without the use of any means to realisation.

Although four kinds of teachers of this sort are enumerated here, they all attained

liberation following the ‘pathless path’ of No Means, when the insight (pratibhā) which
is Pure Knowledge (sśuddhavidyā) becomes operational at the highest stage of
development of Sound Reasoning. The power of insight of the most intensely graced

soul is so great that, as the most excellent spontaneously enlightened teacher, he does
not even need a teacher. But he will need to take recourse to the many various means to
realisation to enlighten those disciples who are not pure enough to ‘be here now’.

'⁹ Above, 2/39.
'⁰ The term ‘anusaṁdhāna’ is derived from the ‘sandh’, which means ‘to connect

together’. It denotes a kind of meditative concentration which, as the form of the word
suggests, ‘connects together’ the meditator with his object, and those with others, to

form a unity by integrating the elements of experience into consciousness. The term
appears several times, for example, in the SŚivasūtra. One sūtra (1/6) reads:
‘śakúicakrasaṁdhāne viśvasaṁhāraḥ’ that is, *by contemplating (= ‘connecting
together’) the Wheel of Energies (of self-awareness), the universe (of thought

TANTRĀLOKA

63

‘Those whose consciousness is pure and behold him also become of his
same nature by (his) transmission of that nature (to them). Such is the extent of

his grace!”
¹

It is with this intention that this (teacher) is said to be one without

support (nirbhittika), because he does not depend on anything else (apart from
his own realised state of consciousness) to grace others also. But, on the

contrary, with respect to those whose consciousness is impure, he graces with
(some) expedient, such as the assessment (anusaṁdhāna) that ‘he is in this

manner an object of my grace’. Here (in this case), all (his) activity (pravṛtti)
depends on external aids for him to successfully grace another person. As was
said before:
‘However, if by the power of his freedom he wishes to grace those

whose consciousness is not pure also, even he should take recourse to the

procedure we are about to explain.”'²
Again:

‘Moreover, although he is the Supreme Lord, for that purpose (that is,
gracing others), he also (should continue to) respect (the practice) of
contemplating and listening to the scriptures etc. that are the means to that

(identification with Bhairava).¹⁶³

The recipients of grace are varied (and diverse) also when their

consciousness is impure, and so because (of their variety), in accord with their
particular intentions (and needs) (āśaya), the expedients are also endless. And

so is the scripture that explains that is required by all (of them), otherwise (he
cannot) manage to grace others. As is said:

‘O fair-faced lady, there are (various) differing scriptures because

peoples⁷ minds differ, just as there are (various) differing powerful herbs

because diseases differ. Just as having known (just) one herb, it does not serve
as medicine everywhere (in all cases), in the same way, the teacher (cannot
dispense his grace) everywhere (in all cases) taking the support of (just) one
means.
The intended sense (of this passage is that this is the case in which the
teacher needs to apply a support to transmit his grace) everywhere (sarvaga) (in
all cases). There are some (particular teachers) also who, taking just one
(particular) fixed scripture as (his) authority, grace those who are fit to be

constructs) is withdrawnʼ. The teacher in this case transmits his own state of
consciousness to his disciple directly, without the mediation of anything, even the
contemplative reflection that assesses and thus ‘connectsʼ, the content of which we are

informed a few lines further ahead is, ‘in this manner an object of grace’.

'⁶l Above, 2/40.
'“² Above, 2/44.
'“³ Above, 2/46.

64

CHAPTER FOUR

graced. This is what is said to be his (partial use of) an aspect (aṁśagata) (of the
manifold means to realisation). As he will say:

‘Itis taught (in that scripture) that a teacher is (of five) kinds. (He may
be a teacher) who knows (just some particular ritual) procedure (used to worship
a deity for a specific purpose) (kalpa); '⁴ (he may be) one who knows a (large)

collection of them; (he may be one who) knows (those of a particular corpus of)

scripture (śāstra), (or) knows the meaning of (just one) Āgama (saṁhitā), or one

who knows the contents (artha) all the scriptures. ⁵

‘(The teacher) whose knowledge of a (corpus of) scripture (śāstra) is

well practiced may explain it, not another.³¹⁶⁰

Each subsequent corpus of scripture (śāstra) and parts thereof, is more

primary (than the one that precedes), and the others are secondary.¹⁷ In this

way, in accord with (the following) view, the primary and secondary (scriptures,

from our point of view) are declared (to be as follows):

‘After the Veda comes Śaiva (i.e. Śaivasiddhānta), then Vāma (the
Tantras of the Left Current), then Dakṣa (the Tantras of the Right Current), then

Kula, then Mata, and then after that also comes Trika which, the best of all, is

supreme.³ ¹ ⁸

As one who is spontaneously enlightened, (this teacher’s) state is not
compromised even in this way by his attending to other (means), because within

himself he has by himself done (all that) needs to be done, and because he
requires that for the benefit of others (not for himself). As was said before:

'⁶⁴ Note the use of the term ‘kalpa°. The term ‘kalpa’ is used in the context of Vedic

ritual to denote ‘a sacred precept, law, rule, ordinance (= vidhi, nyāya), manner of
acting, proceeding, practice (especially that prescribed by the Vedas)³. (MonierWilliams) The term is used in Tantras to denote particular procedures to worship
specific deities. Substantial sections of a Tantra may be dedicated to such ‘kalpasʼ. A
striking example is the Jayadrathayāmala where many kalpas are prescribed for the
worship of numerous forms of Kālī.
Again, by extension, an entire Tantra may be called a Kalpa, in which case it is
practically another of the many synonyms for a tantric text. An example is the published
Ākāśabhairavakalpa. Despite the name, it is not especially concerned with the worship
of Ākāśabhairava, but rather deals with matters relating to magical potions and

medicinal herbs.
'⁶⁹ Below, 28/386cd-387ab. Abhinava is drawing from the Devyāyāmala. Jayaratha
quotes the corresponding passage in his commentary there.

'⁶⁶⁵ Below, 28/387cd. Read, as Jayaratha does, nānyo ‘tha for nānyathā. This line may

also be drawn from the Devyāyāmala.

'⁷ Another way to understand this distinction is, as we have seen (above, 4/41cd-42ab),

the scripture is primary with respect to the teacher, and insight is primary with respect to
the scripture. The others are, correspondingly, secondary.

'⁶“ This verse is also quoted in PTv p. 92, along with analogous ones from the Niśācāra
and Sarvācāra. Similarly, when it is quoted below ad 13/300cd-301, it is accompanied

by the same verses from those two sources, that thus together form a standard set.

TANTRĀLOKA

65

“(This can do him no harm.) Nothing in any circumstance compromises
him, free as he is. (And he should apply himself in this way because) the soul
whose consciousness is not pure cannot have grace without a means (to

realisation).”¹

Thus, his status is that of one who is spontaneously enlightened,
because he is not dependent in himself (for himself) on anything else. Thus,
what was said is reasonable.
Nor is this said just as our own idea. Thus, he says:

JGaTsaīsad a: #irgTī āīāā |
a ftfzzrvvīāFrcā
a ar a = zṝa: 1 +8

uṣ̃ aī ā̃̃ ṁan ṁ= fxairvmmf̄ṁṝt1

ṭaīṁ vraf=fa īṁ ztr̄Tāraṁa1 uo 1
adrṣṭamaṇḍalo ʻpy evaṁ yaḥ kaścid vetti tattvataḥ |

sa siddhibhāg bhaven nityaṁ sa yogī sa ca dīkṣitaḥ l| 49 ||
evaṁ yo vetti tattvena tasya nirvāṇagāminī |
dīkṣā bhaved iti proktaṁ tac chrītriṁśakaśāsane || 50 ||

It is said in the (Parā)triṁśikā" that: “Whoever knows (this
reality)¹”¹ as it truly is (tattvataḥ) is always successful (siddhibhāk), even

though he has not (been initiated and so has not) seen the maṇḍala. He

indeed is a (true) yogi and initiate.’ "² ‘“He who knows (reality) thus as it
truly is has the initiation that leads to Nirvāṇa!”¹”³ (49-50)
'“⁹ Above, 2/47.
'⁰” Abhinava refers to the PT here as ‘triṁ5ik

sana³. The metre does not allow any

confirms by referring to it in the feminine ‘ri

ā³. The feminine, which involves the

adjustment and so must be accepted as the ori

reading, which Jayaratha partially

lengthening of the final short ‘A’, does not fit the metre. But it is permissible in

compounds to shorten long final vowels. This has been lengthened in translation, as
Jayaratha would have it.
'”" From the context we know that the PT is referring here not just generically to
ultimate reality, but also specifically to the seed-syllable of the Heart (hrdayabīja), that
is, SAUḤ, the basic Trika seed-syllable Mantra of the goddess Parā.

'² PT verse 19. Generally, a teacher who imparts initiation is necessary in order to

receive it. The Tantra says that initiation can also be imparted directly by Bhairava,
without the mediation of a teacher. Thus, in those exceptional cases, neither an external

initīation nor a teacher are necessary. The verse primarily alludes to initiation by

referring to the seeing of the Maṇḍala, as that is the culminating moment of the rite of
initiation. But this is not all. Abhinava does say that the Maṇḍala meant here may be the
external Trika Maṇḍala made of one or more Tridents and lotuses. However, he supplies
other explanations of what is meant here by the word maṇḍala, corresponding to two
other means to realisation. Thus, Maṇḍala is also the assembly of deities that is ‘seen’ in
the course of intense ‘violent union’ (hathamelāpa) between Kaula practitioners and

Yoginīs, their partners, in the Kaula rites performed at night, as a part of their
disciplined practice (caryā). Again, the word ‘maṇḍala’ may also refer to the

66

CHAPTER FOUR
(One who,) because he has been graced by the supreme descent of the

power (of grace), does not need a teacher etc., and so has ‘not seen the

maṇḍala’, which stands for (all the) ancillaries to the external (rite of)
initiation, and the sacrificial rite etc., and so, even though he is such, he has the
initiation that leads to Nirvāṇa which is free of doubt and devoid of the fire
offerings of sesame and clarified butter (that are made in the course of the

external rite of initiation). Whoever (spontaneously) by himself in this very
same way knows his own Self according to its own true nature, because it does
not assume (any specific) qualities (viśeṣānupādānāt) (as does the false, limited
Self), is initiated by the goddesses of his own consciousness. (They do this by)
first destroying the fetters (that bind him, and so) make him (a fit) vessel (to
receive) the knowledge of his own true nature (svātmajñāna). Thus, he is

always ‘a yogi’. Even when he rises from contemplation, he is one with the

Supreme Lord (paramesśvaikātmyavat).'⁸ Thus he is ‘successful’. Although he

is still alive (in the body), he possesses (that supreme) accomplishment (siddhi)
which is liberation. This is said in the venerable treatise (called) (Parā)triṁśikā.

assemblage of primary and secondary Wheels (cakra) in the subtle body, including
those of the senses and mind, made of the channels of the vital breath (nāḍī), the yogi
‘sees’ as part of his yogic practice. Abhinava explains that the maṇḍala in any of these
three senses does not need to be seen, that is, experienced, to be initiated and achieve
realisation, if one receives the highest form of the deity’s grace. As he says: “Whoever

has been favoured by a descent of the supreme power ‘knows’ in this way that initiation
is nothing but this knowledge and that there is no other initiation than that. Knowing
this, he is an initiate (initiated directly) by the omnipresent and venerable Bhairava.’

PTy p. 252-253.

'³ PT verse 26abc, also quoted below in TĀ 13/152cd-153ab. The complete verse says:

‘He who knows this in truth has (received) the (true) initiation that, devoid of (outer

offerings) such as sesame seeds, clarified butter and the like, is free of doubt and leads
to Nirvāṇa.
The initiation that leads to Nirvāṇa (nirvāṇadīkṣā) is the Śaiva initiation in the

most basic sense, here understood to bestow instantaneous liberation in this life

(jīvanmukti). The reader is referred to a previous publication for an outline of the Śaiva
rites of initiation (Dyczkowski 1992a: 235 ff.). Commenting in the PTv (p. 259) on
these lines, Abhinava pertinently quotes the Stanzas on Vibration (verse 32), where its

says:

‘This alone is the attainment of the nectar of immortality, this indeed is to catch
hold of oneself, this is the initiation of Nirvāṇa, that bestows Śiva’s true nature.” ‘Other
initiationsʼ, he goes on to say, ‘may bestow worldly benefits (bhoga), but the true
initiation (that bestows liberation) is only this knowledge. Thus this (Trika) school is
superior to all the others.’ anyā api dīkṣā bhogān vitareyurapi etatparijñānameva tu
tattato dīkṣeti tata evātra sarvottaratvaṁ. Cf. below. 4/60cd-62ab and note.

'”⁴ Literally ‘he possesses oneness with the Supreme Lord.' The word ‘yogin’ (English

‘yogi’) literally means ‘one who is in union’. Initiation is basically a ritual procedure
whereby the teacher first removes the binding impurities from the disciple’s soul. Then,
once the limitations have been removed, the disciple’s soul is essentially the same pure
consciousness as that of the deity. Thus, it can easily unite with the Deity. The same can
happen directly by the grace of the energies, that is, goddesses, of consciousness.
Liberated in this way, he is mostly literally a ‘yogin’.

TANTRĀLOKA

67

The point is that this (view) is not without (the support of scriptural) authority.
There (we read):

‘(Whoever knows (this reality) as it truly is (tattvataḥ) is always

successful (siddhibhāk)), even though he has not (been initiated and so has not)

seen the maṇḍala. (He indeed is a (true) yogi and initiate). ”⁵

The following line says, ‘By having just known that, (he is known by all

the energies).’" Although this line follows, it is not quoted because it not
relevant to matter (discussed here). As he has not seen the maṇḍala, it follows
that he does not (offer) sesame seeds, clarified butter and the rest, and so that
(line which follows where this is said) has also not been quoted.
He also has another name. Thus, he says:

sīāfcāāī īāīaā ūāīātazāṁ f aḹ̃
akalpito gurur jñeyaḥ sāṁsiddhika iti smrṛtaḥ |
One should know that the teacher who is (called) Uncreated

(akalpita) s (also) called Spontaneously Enlightened.¹” (51ab)

The teacher who is called Spontaneously Enlightened in our scriptures
(śāstra) should be known to be Uncreated, because he has not been produced by
another teacher. Thus he can also be designated by the word ‘uncreated’. This is
the meaning.
Having described the uncreated teacher in this way, he (now) talks
about another (kind of) teacher as related to that one.
The Uncreated-cum-created (akalpitakalpaka) Teacher

JTq], āg*TāTcaāṁīTardrd: ŪT fē-- I| ug 1

rrāiāṝā īṬē: Tīā Trālskhcũāhcd; |
yas tu tadrūpabhāgātmabhāvanātaḥ paraṁ vinā || 51 II
śāstravit sa guruḥ śāstre prokto ‘kalpitakalpakaḥ |

The teacher who has that nature (of a Spontaneously Enlightened
teacher) and knows the (ultimate purport of the) scriptures by

'⁹ PT 19a. The remaining part of the verse has been added in brackets.
'⁶ PT 20a. The remaining part of this line has been added in brackets.
¹⁷⁷ Chapter Four deals with the Empowered Means, which is based on the activation of

the power of knowledge. This is set in operation in accord with the developing descent

of Śiva’s power of grace. As it grows, the innate intelligence (pratibhā) of

consciousness comes to the fore, thus incrementing the capacity for intuitive, creative
and discerning insight, i.e. Sound Reasoning (tarka). It is this which, when well
developed, is the cardinal characteristic of true teachers. Accordingly, Abhinava deals
with their gradations and types there. The highest kind of teacher is graced by such an
intense form of it that he is spontaneously enlightened.

68

CHAPTER FOUR

contemplating his own true nature (ātmabhāvanā) without (taking recourse

to) another (teacher) is said in the scriptures to be one who is ‘uncreated-

cum-createdʼ (akalpitakalpaka).¹⁸ (51cd-52ab)

Again, (there may be a teacher) who has the nature of a spontaneously

enlightened (teacher) but even so the insight (he possesses that has) arisen by
itṣelf is not completely full (and perfect) to that degree. (However,) by the
power of the contemplation of his own true nature (ātmabhāvanā) in accord
with the dictum (of the scriptures that) ‘I myself am the supreme soul
(haṁsa)¹,'" independently of ‘another’ teacher etc., he ‘knows the (ultimate
purport of the) scriptures’ʼ. In our scripture that teacher is called ‘Uncreated-

cum-createdʼ (akalpitakalpaka). This is because (on the one hand his) insight is

attained spontaneously and so is ‘uncreated’, (but he is also ‘created’) because
(he is) formed ‘by contemplating his own true nature’, that is, by the
progressively developing experiential
knowledge of the
scripture
(śāstravedanakrameṇa).
Like the spontaneously enlightened (kind of teacher, this one) also is of
many kinds. Thus, he says:

TJṬ STa]Ṭ SŪFFPTĀTTṬTT;:I 42 II
tasyāpi bhedā utkṛṣṭamadhyamandādyupāyataḥ || 52 ||

There are various types of the latter, according to whether the

means (that is, the grace he has received,) is intense, moderate or weak.

(52cd)

‘The meansʼ is the descent of the power (of grace this teacher has

received).

'” The reader will recall that at its most developed level, Sound Reasoning is

contemplation (bhāvanā) (4/14). To be more specific, it is the contemplation of one’s
own pure conscious subjectivity as one with Bhairava. The Spontaneously Enlightened

teacher became such as his consciousness was free of the impurities of thought, and so,

the object of an intense descent of the power of Śiva’s grace, he entered the liberated
state of No Means consciousness, without any mediating means. Thus, he is ‘uncreated’.

However, if he does not receive access to the perfect and complete plenitude of
consciousness, he must make up the rest of the distance by purifying the remaining
conceptualization (vikalpa) that is contracting his consciousness. This, as we have seen,
is essentially doubt or the limited conception of his true Śiva nature, due to the principle

of Attachment, along with its accompanying constraint. Once this process is complete
and his unclear thoughts become complete, clear and transparent to the underlying
unconditioned expanded consciousness of the supreme perceiver, he is identified with
the teacher, and so fully realised. Thus, he is also ‘created’, that is, fashioned into a
teacher by this process of purification, and so this kind of teacher is called ‘uncreatedcum-createdʼ.

'"” ṢVṬ 4/339c. Also quoted below ad 12/4. The full line states. ‘I myself am the

supreme soul (haṅsṣa), Śiva, the supreme cause’ aham eva paro haṁsaḥ śivaḥ

paramakāraṇam SṆṬ 4/399cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

69

Well then, (one may ask,) is the contemplation of his own true nature
(ātmabhāvanā) the sole occasional cause (nimitta) by which (such a teacher)

can complete the knowledge that is developing (pravṛtta) (within him) by
himself, or is there some other one also? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JTHĀTTĪSJ
JṬ SATTINSTITRTTHĪRTĪRT : |
JĪTRJHTTTĪCITĀĪṬTar HGTHId̄: II u3 1
bhāvanāto ‘tha vā dhyānāj japāt svapnād vratād dhuteḥ |
prāpnoty akalpitodāram abhiṣekaṁ mahāmatiḥ || 53 |I
A man of great intellect (and resolve) (mahāmati) (who is such by

virtue of the practice of) creative contemplation (bhāvanā), meditation
(dhyāna), the repeated recitation of mantra (japa), (yogic) sleep (svapna),

(by observing a) vow (vrata) (or offering) oblations, receives (this)
uncreated (akalpita) and noble consecration.¹ (53)

This great man of knowledge (mahājñānin) (who has become such) by
virtue of the glorious power of the endless number of means, including
contemplation and the rest, (but) has not been made (a teacher) by some other
teacher etc.,'⁸" receives (this) ‘uncreated’ and hence ‘noble’, that is, great,

'⁴⁰ Ṣee below, 13/152cd-53ab. In other words, it is not necessary in some cases to take

initiation from a teacher. A person who is fit to receive it may get it directly from the
Deity (65-69), or even, as Abhinava says here, by his spiritual discipline. But, of course,

those who cannot manage alone without scripture or teacher must seek them out and

practice what they prescribe (69cd-70ab). Abhinava goes on to list the SYM along with
the Vājasanīya, Sarvavīratantra and Brahmayāmala as authorities for this view, which
would generally be considered heretical and unacceptable. Another possible translation

could be:

‘A man of great intellect (and resolve) (mahāmati) receives (this) uncreated

(akalpita), noble consecration (by various means, including), contemplation (bhāvanā),
meditation (dhyāna), the repeated recitation of mantra (japa), (yogic) sleep (svapna),
(by observing a) vow (vrata) and (offering) oblations.”
My translation follows Jayaratha’s commentary. Abhinava himself in the
following verses makes it clear that spiritual practices of this sort develop the adept’s
capacity for liberating insight and that insight itself. However, the consecration

(abhiṣeka) into the status of a teacher is not due to them directly. If that were so, there

would be no need of a consecration at all. Anybody could attain the status of a teacher
by virtue of their practice alone. Ultimately, there would be no need of teachers or,
indeed, the initiation they impart. But this is not so. The teaching is not that there is no
need of initiation. The point is that in certain exceptional cases, when the adept’s

spiritual intellect is exceptionally well-developed through spiritual discipline, he may

receive an intense descent of the power of grace directly from the deity, and so receive

the most excellent and ‘noble’ consecration. Abhinava calls it ‘uncreated’, because it is
not done by man, not because it is not done at all.
!³! Jayaratha understands that a teacher who is ‘uncreated’ is not formed (kalpita) by

another teacher. Thus, this status could be attained by anybody who practices meditation

70

CHAPTER FOUR

‘consecration’.'” The meaning is that he has the authority (to transmit) the

knowledge of the scriptures etc. (even without having been initiated by a
teacher).

or even Mantra, without a teacher. However, an ‘uncreated’ teacher, that is, a
spontaneously enlightened one, is such without the use of any means to realisation at all.

He is such purely by Śiva’s grace. Although any progress at all, in any way at any level,
is entirely due to Śiva’s grace, who wills it so, apart from the case of the spontaneously
enlightened who are graced by No Means (anupāya), which is the highest grace, this

same grace, although less intense, operates through some means to realisation. Those
that Abhinava lists as examples, including meditation, involve some degree of
cogitation – kalpana – they are conceived or formed (kalpita). They also serve to form
the teacher, and so he is ‘created’. Ultimately, they consecrate him directly as an
enlightened teacher without the mediation of another teacher, and so he is also
‘uncreatedʼ.
The important point Abhinava is making by these distinctions is that it is quite
possible to develop spiitually in
i all these practices without having to be initiated. This
is because progress is the result of Śivas grace. Śiva is
i free to grace anybody at any
time. It depends entirely on His own will to do so. Śiva is not constrained by an factors
or conditions. Simply because a person has receivedinitiation does not mean that Śiva
muṣt grace him with progress in the practices into which he has been initiated.

Conversely, Śivais not obliged to ignore those who have not takeninitiation. One might

think that a distinction can be made between the practice of meditation and the like,

which does not involve Mantra and hence does not require initiation, and those practices

that do require it, as the Mantra is normally given to a disciple by his teacher. But

clearly Abhinava does not agree. He tells us in the Tantrasāra that initiation is only
necessary for those who need to perform or participate in rituals to achieve liberation.

The first part of the Tantrāloka up to Chapter Fifteen (and the Tantrasāra up to Chapter
Eleven) teach practices that do not require the performance of outer rituals. Thus, he
says right at the beginning of Chapter Eleven of the Tantrasāra:
tatra yãvat idam .idam uktam tat sākṣāt kasyacit apavargāptaye
yathoktasaṁgrahanītyā bhavati kasyacit vakṣyamāṇadīkṣāyām upayogagamanāt .iti
dīkṣādikaṁ vaktavyam ḷ
“Well then, there (in that regard), it is said that it is the case that, in accord with

teaching imparted in the compendium (of the Tantras called Tantrāloka), the initiation
that is about to be taught has become useful for some (who cannot manage otherwise),
in order for them to attain liberation. Accordingly, initiation and the rest (of the rituals)
should (now) be taught.”

But even then, one would suppose, in the light of what he is saying here, there

may be exceptions. Note that he is not saying that no one needs to be initiated – the
category of teachers who are ‘created’ (kalpita) have become so by means of initiation.
This is, no doubt, the great majority. True to his Kaulism, which abjures rules and

regulation, sustaining instead intense determination to attain realisation, Abhinava wants
to leave every possibility open. He is supported in that by the Śaiva emphasis on the
power of grace, the absolute, independent status of which he safeguards by ridding it of
all provisos and any other considerations.
'³² ṛhe word translated here as ‘consecration’ is abhiṣeka, which literally means
‘sprinklingʼ. It denotes the rite by which a teacher initiates his disciple into the status of
a teacher by sprinkling him with consecrated water or other liquid. The texts thus

distinguish ‘initiation’ – dīkṣā – into the status of a disciple, from ‘consecration’ —
abhiṣeka – into that of a teacher.

TANTRĀLOKA

71

Surely (one may ask,) what is the authority (that establishes that) the

number of means (nimitta)'⁸ to attain knowledge, that is, contemplation and the
rest, are endless? With this doubt in mind, he says:

it--vFĀPITĀ FRILTAĀ!
rzr̥aī
rāī ṀṀ--̃ TEI I VYII
śrīmadvājasanīye śrīvīre śrībrahmayāmale |
śrīsiddhāyām idaṁ dhātrā proktam anyatra ca sphuṭam || 54 II
The Benefactor has stated this clearly in (a number of scriptures,

including)

the

venerable

Vājasanīya,¹⁸

the

venerable

Viīra

(i.e.

Sarvavīratantra), the venerable Brahmayāmala, the venerable Siddhā (i.e.

Siddhayogīśvarīmata), and elsewhere.¹⁸⁵ (54)

(The Benefactor has said) ‘this’, namely that there are endless means,
such as contemplation, (to attain knowledge, independently of a teacher).

Although this is said in many scriptures, he quotes the venerable

Sarvavīra first of all in order to introduce (the topic).¹⁸

'⁸³ The term nimitta literally means an instrtumental cause, occasion, or a reason. Here it

can be safely translated as ‘means'. The most basic term denoting a means to realisation

is ʻupāya’. Perhaps Jayaratha does not want to use this term, as it may also denote a
category of means in general (as for example, in the expression ‘Śāmbhavopāya), rather

than just one particular means.

'⁸¹ See below, 13/143cd ff., where the passage in Vājasanīyatantra is quoted, regarding

self-consecration into the status of a teacher.
'³³ All the following Tantras that affirm that one can be consecrated by the deity directly

are Tṛika Tantras, except the Brahmayāmala. Below (13/143cd-145), Abhinava
practically repeats this statement, mentioning the Sarvavīra and the Brahmayāmala as

teaching the same, but does not refer to the Siddhātantra. Indeed, the recovered
recension of the SYM is silent about the possibility of self-initiation.
'⁸⁰ In 13/143cd-144, Abhinava quotes a reference from the Vājasanīya to a rite in which
the aspirant initiates himself. This is in accord with 4/54, where Abhinava lists this
Tantra along with the Sarvavīra, Brahmayāmala and Siddhā as teaching that a person
may initiate himself. In 4/62cd-64, Abhinava describes how this is done according to the

Brahmayāmala. He quotes the Sarvavīra and the other named sources as authorities for
the view that Śiva is completely free to grace anybody, anywhere and at any time as he
wishes unconditionally. This implies, in this context, that the saving grace that impels

and eṣsentially imparts liberating initiation may descend on a person freely. Abhinava
will argue his case extensively and in detail against a hypothetical Siddhāntin opponent
in the first half of Chapter Thirteen, which is dedicated primarily to teaching the nature

of empowering grace (śaktipāta) (see below 13/1-128). Here the many possible means

to liberation are presented as another indication that the Lord is free to grace the fettered

soul in any number of ways.
After Abhinava lists the four Tantras in TĀ 4/54, he then proceeds to quote

from them. If he is quoting all four, i.e. the Vājasanīya, Sarvavīra, Brahmayāmala and
the Siddhayogeśvarīmata, one would expect him to do so in the same serial order as he
lists them. Indeed, this is certainly so in the case of the last two (i.e. the BY and the

72

CHAPTER FOUR

SYM) that Abhinava takes the trouble to name. Unfortunately, he does not help us with

the previous two citations.
If they are quoted in the same serial order he lists them, we would expect the
first citation to be from the Vājasanīya. However, according to Jayaratha, the source of
the first citation is the Sarvavīra (55-57ab), and the second the Brahmayāmala (57cd-

58). Thusṣ, according to him, Abhinava quotes the latter twice — once here, and then

again in 4/62cd-64, where Abhinava himself tells us he is quoting from there. In the first
instance, Tōôrzṣôk (1999: xli and 219) follows Jayaratha, at least in his saying that the
identification is incorrect. However, Jayaratha identifies the first reference to be from
the BY, which is wrong. In fact, there can be no doubt that Abhinava is quoting from the
Sarvavīra in the first instance. This is because Abhinava quotes and names the source of

4/55-57ab in the ĪPVY (3 p.106). There he introduces it by telling us that it is ‘as stated
in the venerable Sarvavīramata’ (yathā uktaṁ śrīsarvavīramate). Iṭ reads:

kadācid bhaktiyogena karmaṇā dīk
saṁsṣāriṇo ʻnugr̥hṇāṭi‘Sometimes (the Lord) graces those subject to transmigration by means of the

Yoga of devotion, (ritual) action or by means of initiation also.”

Abhinava quotes every word of this short passage in TĀ 4/55-57ab,
introducing it and interspersing it with his own comments, as follows:
tasya svecchāpravr̥tatvāt kāraṇānantateṣyate |
kadācid bhaktiyogena karmaṇā vidyayāpi vā || 55 ||
jñānadharmopadeśena mantrair vā dāīkṣayāpi vā |
evam ādyair anekaiś ca prakāraiḥ parameśvaraḥ || 56 II
saṁsāriṇo ʻnugṛhṇāti viśvasya jagataḥ patiḥ |

‘The causes (of liberation) are considered to be countless because they are
impelled by (Śiva’s) own will. Sometimes (the Lord graces the individual soul) by
means of the Yoga of devotion, (ritual) action (karman) or knowledge (vidyā) also,
by instructing (in the ways of) righteousness (dharma) and wisdom (jñāna), or by means
of mantras or initiation also. By these and numerous other ways the Supreme Lord, the
governor (pati) of all the universe, graces those subject to transmigration.’ (55-57ab)
Abhinava presents a passage from the Vājasanīya, that one would expect him
to do here, in TĀ 13/143cd-144. It describes a simple rite whereby the adept can

consecrate himself by himself. It goes so far as to admit that he can do so mentally,
without having to perform any outer ritual. Jayaratha quotes a lengthy passage from the

Sarvavīra in TĀv ad 12/24cd. Abhinava quotes the same passage in the PTy p. 235-236,
saying it is from the Sarvācāra. Thuṣ, it would appear that they are two names for the
same text, as Sanderson believes. However, be that as it may, there is no clear direct

evidence that Jayaratha had access to the Sarvavīra. Thīs is because the quotation he
supplies in his commentary here does not appear to coincide with Abhinava’s reference,

and so he may well not have identified the source correctly. Thus, despite the variant

name, which may suggest that Jayaratha did have a copy of the text, he could simply
have been quoting Abhinava’s citation and covering his tracks. In short, Jayaratha’s

identification of 55-57ab as the Sarvavīra is not certain. Indeed, the two brief quotations
he presents in his commentary on 55-57ab do not match with 55-57ab. Moreover, while
Jayaratha may correctly have identified the Sarvavīra, it is not at all certain that he has

identified the following citation correctly as the Brahmayāmala, which we know he

TANTRĀLOKA

73

Tīa īTrTTTI] PRTTHTTTHT |

raṬṟarafTkāiīī
a'oṃ fērazaṁ arī 1 u., u
JTTe³HĪTCṢIT
T-adī ēīēṛaīt ar |
TJTTTĪhg JTēī.: TTHT; I| U5, |I
ūṁīṣġraīṁ
faza srai fā |

tasya ṣvecchāpravṛttatvāt kāraṇānantateṣyate |
kadācid bhaktiyogena karmaṇā vidyayāpi vā ll 55
jñānadharmopadeśena mantrair vā dīkṣayāpi vā |
evam ādyair anekaiś ca prakāraiḥ parameśvaraḥ || 56 ||
saṁsāriṉo ʻnugṛhṇāti viśvasya jagataḥ patiḥ |

'³⁷”.Ṭhe causes (of liberation) are considered to be countless because

they are impelled by (Śiva’s) own will. Sometimes (the Lord graces the
individual soul) by means of the Yoga of devotion, (ritual) action (karman)
or knowledge (vidyā) also, by instructing (in the ways of) righteousness
(dharma) and wisdom (jñāna), or by means of mantras or initiation also. By
these and numerous other ways, the Supreme Lord, the governor (pati) of
all the universe, graces those subject to transmigration.’"⁸ (55.57ab)

There (in the Sarvavīratantra it is said):¹⁹
‘The Supreme Lord is (the universal) cause (of all things) in (this) world

of transmigration without beginning. By His very nature, He is always intent on
gracing living beings.”

could not access. Sanderson has argued that this reference is from the Sarvavīra (see

Tõrzṣõk 1999: intro. p. xli). Moreover, Tórzsók points out that it has close parallels to
the SYM (22/33 and 28/40) (see note to 57cd-58).

''⁷ What happens if there is no teacher? That options were left open for such a

possibility in the early Tantras (and the Brahmayāmala is amongst the earliest) is a clear

indication that even in those times teachers were hard to find. This is not surprising.
These traditions are secret. Out of the public domain, one would not expect teachers to
have had large followings. Moreover, the Tantras themselves were rare. And even if one
managed to get copies, it required then, as now, long hard study and practice to be
qualified to teach them. In short, it appears that right from their incipience, these

traditions were in danger of being lost. Accordingly, provisions for their revival were
made from the start. Moreover, the teachings of the masters encouraged independent

seekers to pursue their quest with confidence. For our modern age, in which these
traditions are being revived, this is a very supportive teaching. While it does not at all
deny the great importance and value of a qualified teacher, it allows for the possibility

that those who have not found one can, nonetheless, make progress by understanding

and applying the teachings for themselves or follow someone who is knowledgeable

enough to guide them.

'“* See above note 4,186.
'⁹ See above note 4,186.

74

CHAPTER FOUR
(In this way, the Tantra teaches that) the Supreme Lord bestows grace

by virtue of His own freedom alone. Beginning (with this verse, the passage
goes on) to conclude:

‘Thus Śiva frees the fettered souls by His own (free) willʼ.

This passage declares that although the Lord is free to grace others, the

other instrumental means (to realisation) (nimitta) are (implicitly designated

and) perceived within it. And so ‘His’ʼ, that is, the Supreme Lord’s ‘will alone is
the cause of that.” Although, in accord with such teachings, His own will (alone)
is the (sole) cause (of His) engaging in gracing etc. (souls), it is wonderfully
diverse because there are (many) different kinds of souls who are the object of
(His) grace. Thus it is said that the causes (which serve as means to realisation)
are endless. In reality there is nothing apart from (the Lord’s will) on which
(liberation) depends. This has been said many times before. Thus, because He
possesses, amongst others, (the divine attribute) of protecting (palana) all living
creatures, the Supreme Lord is (called) ‘the governor’ (pati) (of the universe).

He graces the limited perceivers, that is, those subject to transmigration, by
(means of) many kinds of causes (that serve as means to realisation), in accord
with the particular aspirations (of each soul). Sometimes (he graces them by
means) of devotion, sometimes by (means of) Yoga. The meaning is that he
makes (Himself) known as full (and complete) knowledge (of Himself) by

removing the contracted (state of consciousness that binds the soul). “By these
(and numerous other) ways’ includes the practice of austerity and repetition of
Mantras etc. In this way, many means are possible to obtain full (and complete)
knowledge. This is the overall meaning.
Although (the matter) has been explained in this way, in order to
establish that there are endless (numbers of) means (to attaining realisation) and
to gain more (benefit from the scriptures which are) the authority, he quotes the

venerable Brahmayāmala.¹⁰

TTTGGāTHT] āGHRTTĀ: BI I uy9 1|
AṬTHTRĪTTTGSTITRTĀ-=TTTTT
JTTḤ |
GTS ṭṇGVHTH āIĪ HĪTPBāGTHTGaT I uC I
mātṛmaṇḍalasaṁbodhāt saṁskārāt tapasaḥ priye || 57 ||
dhyānād yogāj japāj jūānān mantrārādhanato vratāt |
saṅṁprāpyaṁ kulasāmānyaṁ jñānaṁ kaulikasiddhidam || 58 II

'“⁰ We observe that the extant early version of the BY does refer to the worship of

Mātṛkās, and even occasionally to the Mātṛmaṇḍala, but references to Kula as a distinct
category rather than a mātrṛkula of Yoginīs and related matters are quite rare. Given the
character of the Tantra, with its Kāpālika rites, which could well accommodate such
references, their scarcity indicates that it belongs to an early period in which Kaulism
had not yet developed to a significant degree. So it may well be that Abhinava is not
quoting here from the BY. Generally, Jayaratha quotes the original source. But he does
not quote the BY here or indeed anywhere in his commentary, indicating that he did not

have access to it.

TANTRĀLOKA

75

‘The knowledge which is the (realization of) universal oneness

within Kula¹”¹ (the sphere of manifestation) (kulasāmānya) and bestows
(diberation, which is) the Kaula accomplishment (kaulikasiddhi),'² can be
attained, Ó Dear One, by awakening the Circle of the Mothers

(mātrṛmaṇḍala),¹* purification, austerity, meditation, yoga, the repetition of
Mantra, knowledge, worship with Mantra (mantrārādhana)¹⁵¹ and (the
observance of) vows.’*⁵ (57cd-58)

The Mothers are the goddesses of the senses of sight and the rest.
(Their) Circle (maṇḍala) is properly (awakened) by ignoring its nature as
(external sensory) activity and understanding it instead to be in the form of
(many) energies, and so (having done that,) awaken it by the agency of the
Circle of Mothers, by means of the process of Pleasing Union etc. (with the

Yoginīs) (priyamelāpa).¹⁰ By endless numbers of means such as these, (one
⁰¹ See below, 29/4.

¹² Kaulikasiddhi, according to Swami Lakshmanjoo, is ‘he complete Cakreśvara state’,

that is, the condition of the Lord of the Wheel of the Energies of the senses and
consciousness.’ In the PTv, it comes about in a flash of realisation, due to an intense
transmission of the power of grace that may also happen in the course of sexual Yoga or
riṭual.
¹³ Note the similarity with the ŚSū (2/7), which simply says, ‘the awakening of the

Wheel of the Mothersʼ (mātṛkācakrasaṁbodhaḥ).¹ This practice is a major feature of
the teachings of the Śivasūtra. This passage teaches that this awakening is brought about
by ritual invocation of the Mothers into the maṇḍala. In other words, they are

‘awakened’ by the Mantras used to invoke them. In line with the higher exegeses of the

Kashmiri teachers, Jayaratha is not concerned with ritual, and so focuses on the Wheel

of Mothers as the assembly of the goddesses who are the powers of the senses.
Kṣemarāja in his commentary on this sūtra explains that the awakening of this Wheel is
the process of the conscious assimilation of its energies that seemingly emerge and
become active, one by one, as the Wheel rotates. As these energies are the sources of the
constituents of all the manifest (i.e. immanent) and unmanifest (i.e. transcendent)
reality, this effectively means that when the Wheel is awakened and the yogi is fully

conscious of its potencies and activity as that of absolute consciousness, and hence his
own true nature, he too awakens and reclaims his own inherent power. This is none
other than Mātṛkāśakti, which is the supreme power of Speech as the reflective

awareness (vimarśa) and creative autonomy (svātantrya) of consciousness, and hence
the vital energy of Mantra.

'³* Mantrārādhana īs mantra recited to worship and propitiate the deity which is that

mantra. So one could also translate the expression as the ‘worship of Mantra’.

¹³ One can obtain liberating knowledge through such practices. The intended implicit

sense here, it seems, is that initiation is not essential in order to engage in them.
Jayaratha steers away from this interpretation by glossing ‘purification’ as including

initiation, which he sees as the means by which this takes place. Nonetheless, Abhinava

is arguing the case here that a person can become a teacher independently by himself.
He does refer to initiation as one of many means to realisation in 56-57ab, but this is not
presented as a fundamental prerequisite.

¹⁰ Swami Lakshmanjoo’s explanation of how the Circle of the Mothers is awakened is

very interesting. In accord with Jayaratha, he says that it takes place in two ways. One is

by infusing awareness of God consciousness into the senses, which in this context are
the Mothers. It may also take place spontaneously by vunion with a Yoginī

76

CHAPTER FOUR

atṭains realization of) ‘universal oneness within Kula’. (Oneness is attained)

within Kula, that is, in accord with the dictum, ‘within Kula, which is the field

of creation . . .”¹⁷ (it is attained) everywhere here within (all that is) of the

nature of subject and object, that arises (continuously) by a process of
(apparent) separation from one’s own (true innate) nature. (Its oneness) is

‘universal’, that is, (it is perpetually) present in association (with all things);
otherwise, (Kula, which is the totality of all things,) would not even manifest.
This is the sense. Thus, (abiding in the state of) being within the Kula, that is,
within the Self, is this accomplishment (siddhi) which it gives. The meaning is
that one certainly attains the knowledge which is the supreme subject shining
radiantly as one’s own nature alone. (This takes place by) ‘purification,’ that is,
by initiation and the like.
Surely (one may ask,) if this is so, then (is not) the main characteristic

of a teacher who is ‘uncreated-cum-created’ that he is immersed (niṣṭha) in the

network of means, namely, contemplation (bhāvanā) and the rest? The author

himself says (the following) in order to remove this doubt.

Taāīcāk
ḍr% āī āīd g9ad |

q ũā fē īāā ēgST® TRATT I u.8 1I
(yoginīmelāpa). He explains: “When you are absorbed in the awareness of God
consciousness sometimes you practice with no result. You are merging inside, growing

with desire to see Him. Sometimes in an instant your eyes close and you feel yourself

surrounded by divine women and they illuminate you. This is priyamelāpa [Pleasing
Union] (as opposed to haṭhamelāpa [Violent Union]). This occurs just by your
continuous devotion and use of the Mantras given in Chapter Thirty-one [of the
Tantrāloka]. In Union with a Yoginī (yoginīmelāpa) two Mantras are given. One is for
Pleasing Union (priyamelāpa) and one is for Violent Union (haṭhamelāpa). The second

is superior. The latter involves the ‘protection of the cracks (that is, weak spots)²

(cidrarākṣaṇa) so that there will be no ‘leakage’ [of God consciousness]. In Violent
Union with the Yoginīs, (the Yoginīs) make you lie down and have sex with you, or

they offer prasāda (sacrificial food) in your mouth that seems obnoxious. As soon as it

is put in your mouth you get elevated, that is mātrmaṇḍalasaṁbodha (the awakening of

the Circle of Mothers), that is the process of violent union with the Yoginī

(haṭhayoginīmelāpakrama). Pleasing Union (priyamelāpa) is inferior; you get sweet

things from the Yoginī. It is not the process of the Awesome Practice by means of the

energy of consciousness (vijñānakalābhīmacaryākrama). The Awesome Practice
(bhīmacaryā) is Violent Union (haṭhamelāpa) which is very effective. The Master will

give one or other Mantra to the disciple and will tell him which way union (nelāpa) will
occur, so that he doesn’t get confused and accepts whatever is given and whatever act is
to be performed. It is internal. He does it in samādhi. These foul substances are given to

him in samādhi. For women beautiful men appear. This is Siddhamelāpa (Union with
Siddhas).”

'⁷ This line is also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/1. The reading there is kulam

utpattigocaraḥ, ‘Kula is the field of creation . . ., which is practically the same reading

as we find in the printed edition here, which reads utpattigocaram. However, above MS
Ch, J, Jh, T, and D read kula utpattigocare – ‘within Kula which is the field of creation’.

Jayaratha also reads ‘kule’ within Kula – in his gloss of this statement. Thus, as this
variant is better aligned with what Jayaratha says, both in the first instance as well as
here, it has been accepted.

TANTRĀLOKA

717

tattvajñānātmakaṁ sādhyaṁ yatra yatraiva dr̥śyate |
sa eva hi gurus tatra hetujālaṁ prakalpyatām |l 59 |I
He alone is the (true) teacher wherever the goal, which is knowledge
of (ultimate) reality, is seen (to be). Apply the network of means there (to
atṭṭain the knowledge the teacher has attained spontaneously). (59)
Wherever one sees (the goal) one desires to attain, namely, one’s own

(true) nature, which is complete realisation (pūrṇaṁ jñānaṁ) and the supreme
reality, one should know that that is the ‘uncreated-cum-created’ (type of)
teacher. He is not stuck (niṣṭha) in just the network of means, namely,

contemplation (bhāvanā) and the rest. In this way, in accord with the dictum

that ‘causes do not necessarily (produce their) effects (immediately and in every
case)²,¹⁰ sometimes, a certain (teacher) may not attain complete realisation
although he has exerted himself (to practice) in the network of means (to
realisation), such as contemplation and the rest. Thus, in some way (and to some
degree), his status may be that of an ‘uncreated-cum-created’ (teacher, although

he is not yet fully realised). This kind of realisation (jñāna) is occasional (it

does not arise at any fixed time), and so (one should understand that) it will
(arise in the future) due to some cause. Thus it is said that (for such an adept),
‘ṭhe network of means should be applied there (to attain the knowledge the
teacher has attained spontaneously)ʼ. Thus here, (according to us, this
teacher’s) primary characteristic is that he possesses complete knowledge,
which is the fruit (of that practice). This is the overall sense.
¹

And that is not just our own idea. Thus, he corroborates (this teaching)
by paraphrasing (a passage from the Brahmayāmala):
Direct Initiation by the Goddess

TTāā̄īīr̄ āT-aGGaTĪ JRTTTS⁵ |

tattvajñānādṛte nānyal lakṣaṇaṁ brahmayāmale |
According to the Brahmayāmala, apart from the knowledge of
(ultimate) reality, there is no other distinguishing characteristic (of a true
teacher). (60ab)

¹“³ The same dictum is quoted above in TĀv intro to 1/161 (see 1/161 for Abhinava’s
response), and also TĀv intro to 9/122.
'⁹ For this reason, even though the practitioner (sādhaka) may practice meditation, he
does not always realise full knowledge through it. But even so, he may have developed

to a level of an ‘uncreated-cum-created’ teacher, because he has attained that state of
spontaneous realisation through his practice. However, he is not well established within

himself, and so has to resort again to the practice of external means. Even so, he is a
teacher for those who see that knowledge of ultimate reality shining within him,
although he still needs to practice further. It is the teacher’s realisation that makes him a
teacher. If he is still engaged in practice, this is not what characterizes him as a teacher,
but this is not relevant, nor does it detract from his status and authenticity as a teacher.
However, he is not on the same level as a teacher who is spontaneously fully realised.

78

CHAPTER FOUR

In another scripture, it is said that (a teacher should be) ‘well disposed,
in good spirits, and always devoted to the repetition of Mantra and making
offerings to the fire.” Setting aside (this) characteristic (of a teacher), it is said in

the venerable Brahmayāmala that the primary characteristic of a teacher is (his)
knowledge of (ultimate) reality. This is the meaning of (this) statement. It is said
elsewhere, with the same intended (sense): ‘The most excellent teacher is one
who possesses (this) knowledge, even if he is devoid of all (the other)

characteristics (of a good teacher).⁷²

Surely (one may ask,) if (the practice) of contemplation and the rest
does not bear any fruit even for one who has made (a great deal of) effort,
would that not contradict (the teaching of) the scripture? Taking up this question
again, (Abhinava) corroborates (his teaching) by paraphrasing (arthadvāreṇa)
(the Brahmayāmala).

āī siṁ aṁaī araīkũd: || k |
amṝhxr ī cafa: fē āī-rat āītēa
³TTTHĪATt JTTṢṀHII HIṬHGTRĪTTT I E2 I

Ūāaāvũṝũzrṁã
a: aī ũ̄azf |

tatraiva coktaṁ sevāyāṁ kṛtāyām avikalpataḥ l| 60 ||

sādhakasya na cet siddhiḥ kiṅṁ kāryam iti codite |

ātmīyam asya saṁjñānakrameṇa svātmadīkṣaṇam || 61 ||

sasphuratvaprasiddhyarthaṁ tataḥ sādhyaṁ prasiddáhyati |
²!ṭ is said there itself (where the goddess) asks: “What should be
done if the adept has not achieved success (siddhi) even though he has
served

(his

teacher

with

a

mind)

free

of

thought

(and

doubts)

(avikalpataḥ)?” (To which the Lord replies): “He should initiate himself

through the progressive (development) of insight (saṁjñānakrama) into his

own nature, so that (his Mantras etc.) may acquire the effulgence of

consciousness, by virtue of which he attains the goal.”²”² (60cd-62ab)

²⁰ This line is also quoted above ad 1/45. See note there. A variant of this line is found
below as 23/6ab. Abhinava paraphrases it from the Kacabhārgavatantra, which may be
another name for the Bhargaśikhā.

2⁰¹ Cf. above, note 4,187.
²⁰?” While Siddhānta Śaivism (which Sanderson denotes as ‘the right’) considered that
only ritual action can serve as the vehicle of the empowering grace Śiva bestows, that
can vouchsafe the higher state and status of a teacher, the other traditions (which

Sanderson denotes as ‘the left’) did not. As a consequence of their acceptance of
knowledge as the true and sole means to liberation, they maintained that it is possible to
attain the highest states of realization, and hence the status of the most excellent
teachers, without recourse to ritual. However, as Sanderson explains: ‘This [. . .] view
was in flagrant conflict with the central principle of the common core of Śaiva doctrine.

The left, therefore, had to disguise its heresy; and it did so by claiming that such gurus,
far from being uninitiated, have actually received a higher kind of initiation. While the

ordinary candidate must pass through a ritual conducted by a consecrated officiant,
these mystics (jūānī) are empowered directly by Śiva himself [see above TĀv on 1/43],

TANTRĀLOKA

79

‘There’ in the venerable Brahmayāmala, (this) is said (concerning the

adept who is) ‘free of thought’, in accord with the dictum: ‘one who has doubts

is not successfulʼ; and thought is doubt, which (in this case) is absent because
his own view is sound. Even though (the disciple) ‘has served’ (his teacher and
deity), repeating Mantra hundreds of thousands of times and the rest as taught in
his own ritual procedure (kalpa), (but) due to some inability on (his) teacherʼs
part,² (he does not achieve) the success which is its fruit, namely, the

atṭtainment of the object of (his) mind’s desire, then ‘what should he do°?
When the goddess had asked this question, the Lord replied that ‘he should
initiate himself”, that is, reflect (on his own nature) as supreme consciousness,

so that it may serve as a further means to energize the nature of the Mantra, for
example, that he is repeating, so that ‘they may be endowed with the
effulgence of consciousness through the progressive (development) of his
insight (saṁjñānakrama) into his own nature, that is, the correct insight into
his own (nature) which is related to (his true) Self, which, free of the opposition

of doubt, is (of the form) ‘the Self alone is all this’.²™ Tts ‘progressive

(development)³ is the ascent onto the supreme summit (of consciousness), in
accord with the excellence of (his) practice. By virtue (of this practice), the

adept ‘aṭṭainsʼ the reality he wishes to attain. The meaning is that (in this way)

as was believed to happen in the case of the souls awaiting release in the worlds

(bhuvanam) other than ours. As for the ritual consecration (abhiṣeka) in which the
initiate is raised to the office of the officiant (ācāryaḥ) by having water impregnated
with the power of the relevant set of mantras poured over him, this too is accomplished,
we are told, within the mystic himself “by the goddesses [embodied as his own internal
awareness]” [below, 13/142ab]. The goddesses take the place of the young girls
(kumārī) who pour the empowering water on the candidate’s head in the cults of the left.

The action, though attributed to the goddesses, is really Śiva’s – just as the girls are
directed by the officiant – since they are the personification of his powers.”
Cf. above 4/450, with reference to PT 18 and 25abc. There the initiation takes
place directly, through Siva’s grace, by the liberating knowledge that develops thereby

within the aspirant's consciousness. We may add here that we need not understand that
the procedure taught in the BY indicated here was only meant for the exceptional few,

or those who had already attained a higher degree of insight or were capable of it,

although it would seem that Abhinava himself does (see below 13/140-141). The
procedure here, we are told, is meant for any very sincere and devoted disciple who is
being unjustly refused initiation by his teacher. We are told next that he is said to pass

through all the levels of initiation, starting with the basic common one. He is thus

clearly indicating that this procedure can work, and is supported by a range of

scriptures, for anyone who, being such, his own insight is in one stage or another of the
process of its development. Procedures for self-initiation are not common, but they do
exist. An example is the rite of self-initiation into the worship of Vajrabhairava, the
tutelary deity of Tibetan Buddhist Kargyupa. Another is the self-initiation into the
worship of Śiva as Dakṣiṇamūrti, which is well known in South India.

³⁰³ The printed text here clearly says that this inability (vaiguṇya) is that of the adept

(sādhaka), but the remedy clearly implies that that it is the teacher who cannot elevate
his disciple. Otherwise, if the adept could receive the initiation he needs from his
teacher, why should he be advised to initiate himself? Accordingly, the reading
sādhakasya – *adept¹– has been emended to ācāryasya – ‘teacher².

²⁰⁴ This Upaniṣadic saying is also quoted above ad 1/147-148.

80

CHAPTER FOUR

he may proceed (to progress) up to the (final) complete development of the fruit
(of his practice).
He (now goes on) to explain the overall meaning (of the teaching).

STT TaTāāf̄īī TTTTITTRT I| £3 1
S TGTTITJTĀĪ
TSTĪT T THR |
anena svātmavijñānaṁ sasphuratvaprasādhakam || 62 ||
uktaṁ mukhyatayācāryo bhaved yadi na sasphuraḥ |

It is taught by this (statement) that the (the adept’s) own insight

(svātmavijñāna)²⁸ (into his own nature) is the cause of the effulgence (of

Mantras etc). (Therefore,) if there is no teacher (available) who is effulgent
(with consciousness to do this for him, he should cultivate this insight) as

the principal (source of their empowerment). (62cd-63ab)

‘The point made here² by the venerable Brahmayāmala is that the
adept’s own ‘insight’ serves as the principle means (nimitta) (to the
development) of the effulgence (of the consciousness) of, for example, the
Mantra (he) repeats, if the teacher¹* is not effulgent (with consciousness)

because he is not one with the Supreme Lord. Thus, as on the contrary, (it is the

adept himself who is) a teacher endowed with the effulgence (of consciousness),

he should initiate (himself) into that (Mantra) within himself, by virtue of which
his Mantra may also be effulgent (with consciousness, as he is).

Surely (one may aṣsk,) whether the teacher be effulgent (with
consciousness) or not, what does that have to do with our purpose? (One must
make do with any teacher); without him initiation does not take place by

itself²⁰⁷ If that were so, it would be contrary to (the teachings of) the scripture.

So is that explanation not wrong? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ā̄-̄ SN TṬ JTHrḡPTTITGĪTI | £3 1
faskṝ ũṁ aa7 ̃- mīāaāṁ 3ad
TTṬ TT¥ĪYĀTĀTḤ ṬTH; ḍHAĀT TAT I ē;
tatraiva ca punaḥ śrīmadraktārādhanakarmaṇi l| 63 ||
vidhiṁ proktaṁ sadā kurvan māsenācārya ucyate |
pakṣeṇa sādhako ʻrdhārdhāt putrakaḥ samayṝ tathā || 64 |

²⁰³ One could also translate svātmavij-nānam as ‘insight into his own nature’, but 1

choose to follow Jayaratha. Both meanings are correct and make good sense. Mantras
gain power by the adept’s power of awareness. They do so also by the insight he has

into his true nature as universal,

ultimately, omnipotent consciousness. Cf.

Spandakārikā verse 26, quoted above in note 4,148.

²⁰⁰ Read sasphuratve mukhyatvena nimittam uktaṁ yadi nāma ācāryaḥ for sasphuratve
nimittam uktaṁ yadi nāma mukhyatvenācāryaḥ.

²⁰⁷ One could also translate ‘there is no initiation of oneself.’

TANTRĀLOKA

81

Again, it is said there itself (in the Brahmayāmala) that he who
applies the aforementioned procedure (vidhi) regularly (without a break) to

the worship of the venerable (goddess) Raktā is said to be a regular Śaiva
initiate (samayin) within three and a half days, an apprentice (destined to
become a teacher) (putraka) in a week, an adept (sādhaka) in fifteen days,
and a teacher (ācārya) in a month.²⁰ (63cd-64)
(It is said) ‘there’, in the venerable Brahmayāmala after the question

and answer that have (just) been mentioned (occur), (in the section) dealing with
the procedure concerning the venerable (goddess) Raktā, that is, the venerable
Caṇḍikā.²⁰⁹ The ʻaforementioned procedure’, which by its excellence, that is,

²⁰⁵ This formulation is typical of the way the scriptures express themselves. Moreover,
this a statement of a ‘fact’, which Abhinava on his own initiative would never make.

Accordingly, we can safely assume that he is quoting here. On the other hand, the verse
that follows, like the one that precedes, are more of the nature of an explanation.
Abhinava is telling us the reason why the scripture is true, and how it is possible for that
be so on the basis of fundamental metaphysical principles.

³⁰ Jayaratha did not have access to the Brahmayāmala, so it is not impossible here that

he is mistaken. Caṇḍikā does appear in the pantheon of the BY that has been recovered,
but either as the Yoginī Caṇḍākṣī (see further ahead) or as one the eight Matṛkās. It is
not likeḷy that the goddess Raktā is Caṇḍīkā, that is, the goddess Durgā. We have
already observed that the reference here cannot be traced in the extant BY. Indeed, very

few of the references Abhinava makes can be traced in the BY that has been recovered

in Nepal in an 11¹ century manuscript and its Nepalese descendants. But while it
appears that the Nepalese recension differs from the Kashmiri one, it does contain

numerous procedures for the worship of the goddess Raktā. Visualized as sitting on the

left of Bhairava, Raktā is his consort in the BY. But although she is one of the principal
deities of the BY, she is not a major deity in other Tantric systems.

Raktā repeatedly appears in the BY as the first member of a group of eight

yoginīs, who are ‘the horde of the Mantra (goddess) Raktā’ (raktāmantragaṇa), headed

by her (raktādi). They embody eight of the syllables of the mantra of the main male
deity of the BY, namely, Kāpālīśa Bhairava. The Mantra is (OṀ or) HŪM CAṆḌE

KĀPĀLINI SVĀHĀ. Ṭhe nine syllables are presided over by the nine deities, who are

the main object of daily worship. These are Kapālīśa Bhairava ((OṀ or)
HŪṀ), his four
goddesses, Raktā (CAṀ), Karālā (ḌE), Caṇḍākṣī (also called Caṇḍikā) (KĀ) and
Mahocchuṣmā (PĀ), and their four attendant companions (ḍūtī) – Karālī (LI), Danturā
(NĪ), Bhīmavaktrā (SVĀ) and Mahābalā (HĀ). Theṣe last four are hardly more than
embodiments of epithets that describe the four main goddesses. The goddesses, also
called Yoginīs, are set in the eight directions around Kāpālīśa Bhairava, as follows:
1) East: Raktā; 2) South: Karālinī; 3) West: Caṇḍākṣī; 4) North: Mahocchuṣmā; 5)
South-east: Karālyā; 6) South-west: Danturā; 7) North-west: Bhīmavaktrā; 8) North-

east: Mahābalā.

pūrvapatre [k: sūrva-] nyased raktāṁ praṇavāsanapūrvakām [. . .]
[k: -de karālini] |
anenaiva vibhāgena dakṣiṇāre karālinī
paścime [k: -maṁ] caiva caṇḍākṣī mahocchuṣmā [kh: -chuṣmā; k: -chuṣmāṁ] tathottare |
āgneye tu karāḷyākhyā [k: -lākhyā] nairṛte [k, kh: nairite] danturā [k: dantunāṁ] tathā |

vāyavye [k: -vya] bhīmavaktrā [k, kh:

-vaktrān] tu īśāne [k: i-] tu mahābalā |I

pūrvakrameṇa vai devi yoginyo [k: -nyā] vinyased budhaḥ | BY 30/21ab, 23-25ab

82

CHAPTER FOUR

independence from a teacher etc., consists of taking up (the practice of) that
Mantra, (its) repetition, the visualization (of the deity) etc. The adept who
applies it ‘regularly², that is, every day, is said to be ‘a teacher in a month’,
without (receiving any) consecration or the like. The meaning is that once he

has commenced (to exercise) the authority consonant with that, he does not

return (pratyavaiti) (to his prior uninitiated state). In the same way, (he
becomes) ‘an adept in fifteen days’, and in half the time, that is, in seven days,
‘a spiritual son’, and ‘within three and a half days, an initiated Śaivite

(samayin).
Surely (one may ask,) how could (one possess) the state of an initiated

Śaivite and the rest without initiation? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ãṝardssrā-ī
ākhīaṁ āarēṛa: |

TRōīīī īrṁza fafē#ra⁶ gaNq 1 ē.,
dīkṣayej japayogena raktā devī kramād yataḥ |
guror alābhe proktasya vidhim etaṁ samācaret || 65 |I

This is so because the goddess Raktā (herself) initiates him
progressively by means of (his) repeated recitation of (Her) Mantra. If (the

aspirant) cannot find a teacher such as has been described, he should

observe this procedure (vidhi) (and take the Mantra himself directly). (65)

AIIl the (ritual and other) ritual action the teacher performs is indicated

(by saying that the goddess) ‘initiates’ (the aspirant directly). As is said:

‘It is Caṇḍikā (Herself) who offers oblation and repeats Mantra

everywhere here to elevate²"⁰ (Her devotee).’

(She does this) ‘progressively° through (all the levels of initiation),
beginning with (that of the first common) Śaiva initiation of the Rule (samaya).
Sureḷy (one may ask,) if this is the case, would not all the scriptures, which
(invariably) praise the teacher, become meaningless? With this doubt in mind,

he says: ‘if (the aspirant) cannot find a teacher’ and so on ‘such as has been

describedʼ, that is,

‘uncreated-cum-created’ etc., who is effulgent (with

consciousness), ‘he should observe this procedure’; that is, he should practice
the procedure previously described, of taking the mantra and the rest by himself.
Otherwise, (if he does find a qualified teacher), he should, on the contrary, get

the teacher to do everything (for him). This is the sense (of this verse).

These Yoginīs appear throughout the BY, but especially in chapters 29 and 30,
where their maṇḍala is described (cf. Sanderson 1988: 672). Sanderson (2007: 237 n
23) has located the inclusion of Caṇḍā Kāpalinī and her retinue along with her nine-

syllable Mantra, the root-Mantra of the Brahmayāmala, in two ritual manuals of

Kashmir. These are the Agnikāryapaddhati and Śivarātri-pāūjāpadádhati. He also notes
variants and derivatives of this Mantra (ibid.).

³¹⁰ Read with MS Jh proddhe for preddhe.

TANTRĀLOKA

83

Surely (one may ask,) if this is so, according to the (scriptures which

say that) ‘those foolish people who have taken mantras by themselves (without
initiation) suffer (countless) afflictions,’²¹' mantras learnt from books have the

defect of (causing such) afflictions and more. So how is it that that is said

elsewhere? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Learning Mantras from Books

d ṬTITRTTTAT
āT ṜH: |
ST aTT] ēā̄Ūīāīdā5āīĪ
flgāī 1 ēē 1
mate ca puṣṭakād vidyādhyayane doṣa īdrśaḥ |

ukto yas tena taddoṣābhāve ‘sau na niṣiddhatā || 66 ||

(The Lord) has said in the (Siddhayogeśvarī) Mata that the study of

Mantras from a book is (generally) attended by the same defect (that is,

they lack the effulgence of consciousness). Thus, in the absence of this

defect, it is not prohibited.²¹² (66)

(It is said) ‘in the Mata’, that is, in the venerable Siddhāmata. As he
will say: ‘thus, this is said in the Siddhāmata also with regards to Vidyās learnt

from books.’²"³ “He’, the Lord, has said that (study of Mantras from books) ‘is
attended by the same’³ (defect) mentioned previously, that is, they lack the
effulgence (of consciousness).³²¹ Mantras in books have no vitality (vīrya).

Thus, those that have been taken (from books) do not shine with their own

radiant energy (1ejas) in such a way that (they may serve as a means to) achieve
their own (particular) accomplishments. Thus, because Mantras learnt from
books are devoid of accomplishment (siddhi), they are said to be only (sources
of) affliction. As he will say:

²¹" This is a citation from the SYM. See Tōrzsóōk 1999: 219. The question naturally

arises that if a person has not taken initiation, and hence not been taught the Mantras he

requires by a teacher, he must necessarily have to take them from books. But Jayaratha
quotes the SYM here, that warns against doing that. In the following verse, referring to
the SYM with this line in mind, Abhinava voices his response to this objection,

blending it in with the citation in such a way that it appears to be the view of the SYM
itself.

¹¹² See below, 26/21-24ab. If the learning of mantras is without fault, then it is allowed

to learn them from books. Jayaratha adds that in spite of the generally held view that
one should not learn mantras from books because they lack vitality (vīrya), there are

some individuals to whom this vitality manifests.

²¹³ Below, 26/23ab. See a little further ahead in the commentary, where the verse that
follows is quoted.
¹¹⁴ Read sasphuratvābhāvalakṣaṇaḥ for sasphuratvābhāvalaśaṇaḥ.

84

CHAPTER FOUR
‘A written Mantra is devoid of vitality. It is (something that has been)

conceived (kalpita) here. Due to the strength of the (linguistic) convention (that

obscures it),²¹ its (innate) glory (mahaḥ) is not perceived from a book.’²¹⁶

In the absence of that defect (for the use of such Mantras), there is not

such prohibition, (as is commonly the case when we are told that) ‘Mantras
should not be learnt from booksʼ. Thus, for the aforestated reason, some
Mantras learnt from books do shine with their own (innate) radiant energy. As
he will say:
‘Those who know the vitality present in a Mantra, even if it has been

obtained from a book, are said to be have been purified by Bhairava (Himself),

and are spontaneously realised (sāṁsiddhika).”²¹¹

He (now) quotes that same book (that is, the Śiddhayogeśvarīmata),

which declares that (same) intended (teaching).³¹⁶

ṝa-zīcīa-i ṁa fhsṁīā īfzd 1
ṬGTRTĪTTTaṬ] 37 Ṭ̄aTī̄īq̄aāf̄sīāī I|

āīaēT: ṃēēītē avaīt: a sī<ōn |

ī

1]

farçṣāāīī āqaāīt sh aṇaH 1 ēc 1

mantradravyādiguptatve phalaṁ kim iti codite |

²¹⁹ Whether Mantras have literal meanings or not, the power of a Mantra lies in the

power of awareness. Awareness is a direct apprehension unmediated by thoughts and
notions. These are clothed in language made of words that convey the meanings that

convention assigns to them. A Mantra is ‘meaningful’ only in the sense that it heightens

and deepens awareness of the Deity which is its object, and of which the Mantra is the
sonic body.

²¹⁶ Below, 26/22. t is worth quoting the preceding verse to complete the sense: ‘Mantras

are made of phonemes, and these are (forms of) reflective awareness. Thus, this can
(only) be transmitted to the disciple if it is not separate from the consciousness of the
teacher.”

³'¹ Below, 26/23cd-24ab. Mantras that are vital and functional are said to bestow
particular accomplishments (siddhi). Some Mantras are for very specific purposes,
others have a more general application. But whatever they be, it is essential that Mantras

possess what is termed ‘vitality (vīrya) or ‘radiant energy’ (tejas). The Tantras supply

ritual procedures to infuse this energy into them, and appropriate initiatory rites to
purify the practitioner to empower him or her to use them. Thus, Mantras learnt from

books that have not been purified and vitalized in this way are generally powerless. The

effort one may put into repeating them is just useless affliction. But there are exceptions
to this general rule. Abhinava affirms, as do the scriptures, that there are Mantras that

possess an intrinsic power of their own. It is however necessary to know that by means
of the very insight which is the reflective awareness (vimarśa) Kashmiri masters teach is

that vitality. By reciting Mantras of this sort, such as the one taught in the
Brahmayāmala, with sound insight into their nature, and making use of them correctly,
the Deity itself purifies them directly.

²¹⁸ Abhinava now responds to the question, that if it is legitimate to draw Mantras

directly from books, then why are they kept secret?

TANTRĀLOKA

85

pustakādhītavidyā ye dīkṣāsamayavarjitāḥ || 67 ||

tāmasāḥ parahiṁsādi vaśyādi ca caranty alam |

na ca tattvaṁ vidus tena doṣabhāja iti sphuṭam || 68 II

If one were to ask what is the benefit of keeping, for example, the

Mantras and the sacrificial substances secret, (we reply that) those who
have learnt Mantras from books (but) have not been initiated, do not
observe the prescribed code of conduct (samaya), and under the sway of the
darkness (tāmasa) (of ignorance), are violent towards others and practice
(magical rites) to control (them) and the like, and do not know the true

nature (tattva) (of these Mantras),¹ they thus clearly possess (many)
defects. (67-68)

Indeed, (it is said) here (in the Siddhayogīśvarīmata):

“(I have) explained (this) and hidden it from them. Therefore, it should
not be written in a book. It should be obtained from the teacher’s mouth, and in

no other way at any time.¹³⁰
Again:

‘a wise man should always (take care) with effort to protect (his)

Mantras.³²⁸¹

Having heard many times such things the Lord has said, the goddess
asked: ʻwhat is the purpose of (keeping them) secret’? by not writing Mantras
and the like in books etc.? The Lord replied, with regards to the writing of
²¹⁰ The immediate sense of na ca tattvaṁ viduḥ īs, ‘moreover, they do not know the

nature of reality°. Jayaratha’s explanation of the word tattva as the nature of Mantra

makes sense. In line with that reasoning is his attribution of the defects mentioned here
to the Mantras, rather than the practitioners. However, it would be quite in accord with

Abhinava’s general exegetical approach, which repeatedly stresses the primacy of
knowledge, that the implicit intended sense here is that Mantras only function if there is
such knowledge (i.e. insight into one's own Śiva nature), and that moreover, it is only
the Mantras that are in consonance with it that are effective means on the path to
liberation. Otherwise, not only are the Mantras defective, those who practice them are
subject to those defects. Thus, it appears that Jayaratha’s explanation is not correct. See
the following note.

³²" Cf. SYM 28/44cd. Tôṛzsōk (1999: 220): “In fact, it may be that another passage of
the SYM (1/7-14) which tells us that Devī asks Bhairava why he has made the mantras
ineffective, to which Bhairava replies that people practiced them without observing the

appropriate rules. Abhinavagupta’s paraphrase changes the focus of the passage. For
while the SYM emphasizes the importance of the guru and his possession by

Rudraśakti, which renders the mantras powerful, Abhinavagupta’s version stresses the
role of knowledge, which is more important than having a guru. Moreover, his version
seems to condemn practitioners of black magic, while nothing of the sort is said or

implied in the SYM; on the contrary, the problem in the SYM is that the mantras are not
capable of performing such acts.”

²²" This line is also drawn from the SYM, but cannot be traced in the available short
recension.

86

CHAPTER FOUR

Mantras in books and the like, that: ‘*Mantras learnt from a book (are not
effective)⁷ etc. Some ‘have not been initiated and do not observe the
prescribed code of conduct (samaya)ī and so, ‘under the sway of the

darkness (tāmasa)³ of the two kinds of ignorance, spiritual and intellectual, are
in a state which is devoid of (liberating) knowledge. Thus, having studied those
(Mantras from books and made use of them, they) ‘are violent towards others

and the likeʼ⁰²² and that (higher purpose of Mantra) is not accomplished, as
they do not know the true nature of Mantras etc., because the teacher’s oral
(instruction) (gurumukha) is missing. Thus, ‘clearly’, these (Mantras) possess

such defects as casting down to hell (those who recite them). This is because

(these) Mantras are devoid of vitality, as they have been learnt from books, and
so, applied to this and that (magical rite) to control others etc., they are not
successful. Thus, (for all these reasons, those who practice these Mantras) are

themselves lax in (practicing the teaching of the) scripture, and so they also
cause others to be disrespectful (of them). Thus, (by practicing in this way, all)
they may gain (is just) a cause (nimitta) to abandon the (correct) procedure
(prescribed by) the scriptures (śāstraprakriyā).
He now explains the two parts here (in the first of these two verses),
because they (do not seem to) be consistent.

r̥Ṁ ũgĩĩ a’PaṀJI
JGTHT |
pūrvaṁ padayugaṁ vãācyam anyonyaṁ hetuhetumat |
The first two parts (of the above verse) are in a mutual relationship

of cause and effect.²³ (69ab)

The first two parts (of the above verse) are in a mutual (relationship of

cause and effect), that is, because (such people) learnt the Mantras (they know)

from books, therefore they have not been initiated, and (conversely), because

they have not been initiated, therefore they have learnt the Mantras (they know
only) from books.

Now that he has described the ‘uncreated-cum-created’ (type of teacher)
in this way, he begins to describe the ‘created’ one also.
The Created-cum-uncreated (kalpitākalpita) Teacher

zṇxg vīāi fṝṁ ³tī araṁraitxrz ē< u
T: ā vŪŪTaāsṁr-̄drāgā
āĨINq |
yas tu śāstraṁ vinā naiti śuddhavidyākhyasaṁvidam || 69 ||
guroḥ sa śāstram anvicchus tad uktaṁ kramam ācaret |

He who does not attain the (state of) consciousness called Pure

Knowledge without the scriptures should seek the scriptures of a teacher
²2² Read parahiṁsādi for parahiṁsādyartha.
¹²³ See above, 4/67cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

87

(who knows them well), and practice the procedure (krama)²² they
prescribe. (69cd-70ab)

Again, one who, on the contrary, ‘does not attain the (state of)

consciousnessʼ, which is sound discriminative reasoning (sattarka) ‘called
Pure Knowledge’, without reflecting on the (meaning of the) scripture, that is,
one for whom sound discriminative reasoning does not arise by itself
(spontaneously), wishing to seek a scripture with the desire to hear it etc.

directly from any teacher who is (of any type) ‘uncreated’ and the rest,² should
‘practice the procedure (krama)³, that is, ‘having done this, one should do
that’, taught by the scripture he has learnt by developed interaction (with it)
(vṛádhavyavahāra) in such a way that, by worshipping his teacher, Pure
Knowledge may arise.
He says that:
The Created (kalpita) Teacher

3 āīTqdTṬPTRIS ĪTFRT: II ṣ0 |

TTtakīrārīd
vraṁ arcaiī ā̃:

3āfrīē garṁāīaī aī vdrdaā

āhftūdr: 1 .5g 1

EEEÚEEVIIEIĒFṭECACTĀĪ

yena kenāpy upāyena guruṃ ārādhya bhaktitaḥ || 70 ||
taddīkṣākramayogena śāstrārthaṁ vetty asau tataḥ |
abhiṣekaṁ samāsādya yo bhavet sa tu kalpitaḥ || 71 ||
sann apy aśeṣapāśaughavinivartanakovidaḥ |
He who has worshipped (his) teacher with devotion by any

(befitting) means, knows the purport of the scriptures through the series of
initiations (dīkṣākrama) (the teacher gives him).²⁸ Then, once he has
²²⁴ The term ‘krama’ in this context is the ritual and Yogic procedure taught in a

particular system. The term is used, by extension, to denote the system itself,

particularly a Kaula one. So, for example, Abhinavagupta is teaching the ‘krama’ of the
Anuttara Trika in his Tantrāloka. See above, 1/14.

³²³ Notice that Abhinava says that it is possible to make progress without referring to
scriptures or the writings of teachers, like Abhinava, that are derived from their
teachings. But this is not so for everybody. Indeed, most people need some such

support. But Abhinava does not recommend that they study the scriptures by

themselves; rather they should go to a qualified teacher who knows them to learn what

is taught in them. Again, it is possible that a teacher is fully realised, and so he himself
needs no such support to guide his disciples. But even so, he may have to refer to the

scriptures if his disciples are not sufficiently developed to attain realisation without
them.

²⁶ The series of initiations a teacher imparts to his disciple, if he receives all of them,

begins with the basic initiation into the Rule (samayadīkṣā). By this initiation he
becomes an ordinary Āgamic Śaivite. The teacher may then initiate him again, if thatis
appropriate, in two alternative ways. Oneis by initiating him into the status of an adept

88

CHAPTER FOUR

obtained consecration (abhiṣeka), he becomes a ‘created’ (kalpita) teacher.
However, even though he is such (and not one who is spontaneously
enlightened), he is (equally) skilled in stemming the torrent (of his
disciplesʼ) fetters. (70cd-72ab)
Here indeed, the first thing to do is to worship the teacher according to
the procedure (krama) taught in the scriptures (in such places as) ‘once he has
worshipped (the teacher), and because he has satisfied, he obtains from him

Śaiva initiation. . . .’²²⁷ There is no other means, and so one should exert

(oneself) intensely² to be accepted by him. Nor is he the sole (teacher),

because those who are worthy of worship are many. Some are worshipped by
the desire to listen (on the part of the disciple), some by money, some by the
offering of knowledge in return. As is said in general, (one should worship the

teacher) ‘by any (befitting) means’, that is, one should do whatever needs to be

done for his worship to be successful. This is the (overall) sense. Again, what
should be done is not like something that should be done one has seen. Thus he
says that (he should be worshipped) ‘with devotion’. (Then,) because he has
been worshipped (and has been satisfied thereby), a relationship (is established
with the teacher) by means of the sequence of initiations (he imparts) in such a
way that (the disciple) may succeed in understanding the scriptures. Otherwise,
he is not fit even to just hear them, (and so) what possibility can there be (for
him) to understand them? This is the (overall) sense. As is said:

‘one should not recite Śiva’s scriptare²ʼ in front of those who have not

been initiated.”
And after that:

‘consecration (as a teacher) is prescribed here for one who has fully
understood the scripture, and not otherwise.
In accord with this view, ‘(once he has obtained) consecration’

properly, with full knowledge etc. from that same teacher, he has been rendered
fit in every circumstance to grace others etc. Again, although he has been
produced by another teacher and (so) is a ‘created’ (teacher), he is ‘(equally)

skilled in stemming the torrent (of his disciples’) fetters” without residue

(niḥsaṁskāra). This is the meaning. It is implied by (saying) that although he is
(sādhaka). As an adept he is engaged primarily in the repetition of Mantra and other
related practices to attain the accomplishments (siddhi) he seeks. Again, the teacher may

initiate him into the status of a spiritual son (putraka), thereby making him his
apprentice, and then as such, finally consecrate him as a teacher (ācārya). Obviously, a
spontaneously enlightened teacher does not need to be put through this or any other
series of initiations.

²²⁷ MV 1/45ab.

³²⁸ Ṛead ity atitarām for ititarām.

²²⁹ Instead of chivasaṁhitām – *Śiva’s scriptur’ MSs Kh, Ch, ṄÑ, and T: read
chāstrapaddhatim – ‘the liturgy of a scripture’, as is the reading of this line quoted

below in TĀv ad 19/36.

TANTRĀLOKA

89

a ʻcreated’ (teacher), (ultimately) from the point of view of the fruit, there is no

difference at all (between him) and an ‘uncreated’ one. May the Supreme Lord
Himself, having assumed the form of the teacher, remove all the fetters (of his
disciples). That is said (in the following verse):

‘As the Great Lord has directly assumed the body of a man out of

compassion, in the form of a teacher he elevates (His) creatures who are

immersed²* (in the ocean of transmigration).”

The point here is that, in actual fact, there is no (ultimately significant)
distinction between a ‘created’ and ‘uncreated’ (teacher). In this way, even
some ‘uncreated’ (teacher) may also be ‘created’, because (he practices)
contemplation (bhāvanā) etc. in order to complete his insight (jñāna) into his
own nature (ṣvātmajñāna), and so is said to be ‘uncreated-cum-created’. In the
same way, one who is ‘created’ may in some cases, independently of a teacher,
understand the scripture by the power of his own intuitive insight (pratibhā),
and so may (also) be ‘uncreated’. Thus, in order to define the ‘created-cumuncreated’ (type of) teacher, he says:
The Created-cum-uncreated (kalpitākalpita) Teacher

JṬ gTTATI] GĪÑTTĪTRrBTHTTTĪ I 92 1

TFTTk Jīqār fcũaītcaī
fe : 1

yo yathākramayogena kasmiṁścic chāstravastuni || 72 |
ākasmikaṁ vrajed bodhaṁ kalpitākalpito hi saḥ |
(The teacher) who attains spontaneous (ākasmika) awakened

consciousness (bodha)³™ of any matter taught in the scriptures (by

practicing) in conformity with (the reality and) procedure (they teach)

(yathākramayogena)² is one who is ‘created-cum-uncreated. (72cd-73ab)

Any c‘created’ teacher ‘who attains spontaneous awakened
consciousnessʼ independently of a teacher etc. ‘of any matter taught in the
scripturesʼ, which is transcendental (lokottara) and concerns the ultimately real
object of knowledge, ‘(by practicing) in conformity with (the reality and)

procedure (they teach)ʼ, that is, in accord with reality, is (also) ‘uncreated’,

because, although he is ‘created’, he has activated (his) awakened consciousness
(bodha) by himself.

Surely (one may ask,) if a ‘created’ teacher is in some aspect
‘uncreated’ to this extent, then what (of that)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

²³⁰ Ṛead magnān proddharati prajān for magnāḥ proddharati prajāḥ.

²³¹ Ṣee above, 4/45cd-47ab.
¹¹ This translation follows Jayaratha’s explanation. One could also translate ‘in

association with the proper course (of development).

90

CHAPTER FOUR

The Uncreated (akalpita) Teacher

Tīaī āīṣēhtcī
⁷T; ā JSSH: TIa: | .93 1

3-t : JfhTTTTTTTĀaTI
ā., |

tasya yo ʻkalpito bhāgaḥ sa tu śreṣṭhatamaḥ smṛtaḥ || 73 |
utkarṣaḥ śuddhavidyāṁśatāratamyakṛto yataḥ |
(Of these two), his ‘uncreated’ aspect is considered to be the best (of
all). This is so because the excellence (utkarṣa) (of his realisation) is
determined by the progressive heightening of the (‘uncreated’) aspect,

which is Pure Knowledge.²³ (73cd-74ab)

(The ‘uncreated’ aspect is considered to be) the best (of all), because

‘the excellence (utkarṣa) (of his realisation) is determined by the
progressive heightening of Pure Knowledge’. The gradation of Pure
Knowledge is the reason for (the different kinds of teachers), beginning with the
‘uncreated’ (kind). This is the point.

Surely (one may ask,) it was said previously that there is no difference

between a ‘created’ and an ‘uncreated’ (teacher) with respect to the fruit (of

following one or the other). So why is the ‘uncreated’ one with respect to the
‘created’ (considered to be) the best? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3qa]] ³īsāTTRTqITRBaTĀHTTTI ṜI: I 9% |
Taiī āīfā’rTTGṬGTGTTTTSTTAT:|

Ṭ̄āīTīr ṀīīēhāīTatkī ṀĩraĩṀṀ̄ĩ I| .s.,

f 3 qvi—heafṣāga
ṝtāī

yathā bhede ‘nādisiddhāc chivān muktaśivā hyadhaḥ || 74 ||
tathā sāṁsiddhikajñānād āhṛtajñānino ‘dhamāḥ |
tatsaṁniáhau nādhikāras teṣāṁ muktaśivātmavat |I| 75 ||
kiṁ tu tūṣṇīṁsthitir yad vā kṛtyaṁ tadanuvartanam |
Just as according to the dualist (Śaivite schools) (the fettered souls

who achieve liberation at some point (ādisiddha) and are as they say)
‘liberated Śivas’ (muktaśiva) are inferior to (Śiva Himself) Who is such

originally (anādisiddha),*⁴ in the same way, (teachers) who have attained
²³³ See below, 13/138-139.

³⁴ Read bhede’ nādisiddhāc-

for bhedenādisiddhāc-. Dualist Śaivasiddhānta teaches

that although there are an infinite number of individual souls, and that they are distinct

from Śiva, they are essentially pure consciousness, as is Śiva Himself. Thus, they are all

Śivas, albeit bound ones (baddáhaśiva). Freed from the obscuring coverings of the

impurity (mala) that separates them from Śiva, they are liberated. They are then called

‘lierated Śivas’ (muktaśiva). In that state they are identical with Śiva. The only

difference is that Śiva has never been bound, that is, His liberated, accomplished state

TANTRĀḶLOKA

91

knowledge (in the manner just described) are inferior to (the teacher) who
aṭṭains this knowledge spontaneously. In (the latter’s) presence, (the

former) have no authority, just as the ‘liberated Śiva’ souls (have none in
Śiva’s presence). They keep quiet, or if they are to do anything, they behave

according to his example.⁵ (74cd-76ab)

It is said according to the dualist Śaiva view (bhedeśvaravāda) that:

‘here (in this teaching) the supreme (state)is equality with Śiva (śivasamatā)²,*⁶
and so liberation (according to this view)is considered to be a state of equality

with Śiva, because (in the liberated state) there is no difference amongst the
iēence and
individual souls with regards to the manifestation of (their) omu
omnipotence etc. However, even so, there is a difference between (Siva) and the

liberated souls in that He ‘is such originallyʼ, whereas their omniscience etc. is

accrued (and adventitious) (upādhika).²³⁷ Thus, just as the attributes of
omniscience and the rest of ‘liberated Śivas’ are not different (from those of

Śiva), even so they are less (than Him), in the same way, the ‘created’ etc.
(kinds of teachers are not essentially different) from the ‘uncreated’ teacher (but
even so are less than him). His knowledge is not accrued (from someone else),

because it operates by itself (spontaneously), whereas the (knowledge other

kinds of teachers possess) is accrued from someone else. Thus, just as liberated

Śivas in Supreme Śiva’s presence have no authority to govern (the process) of

creation (and destruction) etc., in just the same way, the ‘created’ and other

kinds (of teacher have no authority to impart) initiation etc. in the presence of a
Spontaneously Enlightened (teacher). Thus it is rightly said that the most
excellent (teacher) is the ‘uncreated’ one. Surely (then), (one may ask,) if that is
the case, then, like the liberated Śivas (in Supreme Śiva’s presence), do the

created and other (kinds of teacher) do anything in the presence (of a
Spontaneously Enlightened teacher,) or not? With this doubt in mind, he says:

‘they keep quiet, (or if they are to do anything, they behave according to his

example)ʼ.

Surely (one may ask,) although the ‘uncreated’ (teacher is already
spontaneously) engaged by himself in (the insight of sound discriminative)

has no beginning (anādisiddha), whereas the accomplishment of the liberated condition

of these souls, although unending (ananta), has a beginning (ādisiddha), andis attained
by Śiva’s grace. They possess all of the powers and attributes of Śiva Himself, but are
never in conflict with His will, and so do not interfere in the process of creation etc.,

which only Śiva is authorized to govern. See MrT Vidyāpāda, p. 49.

²³⁵ Cf. above 4/43cd-44ab.

²⁶ Ṣee above, note ad 4/29-30.

²⁷ The view expressed here is that individual liberated souls are pure, like transparent
crystals. Just as a red coloured flower appears to colour the crystal because of its
presence, that is, adventitiously, similarly, Siva’s presence imparts His divine attributes
of omniscience, omnipotence and the rest to the individual soul adventitiously.

Although Jayaratha implicitly attributes this view to dualist Śaivites, it is not really the
view of the majority of Siddhāntins. Although they are (to varying degrees) dualists,

they maintain that the essential nature of individual souls is inherently the same as that

of Siva Himself. See previous note.

92

CHAPTER FOUR

reasoning, is his need for the scripture etc. mentioned previously, a defect or a
positive quality? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TṬTTTĪFTTRTTSTT āTTRṬGHTĒ I '9¥, I

TaITI GaATTTR.
J TIJTGTĪ T: |

yastv akalpitarūpo ‘pi saṁvādadṛḍhatākṛte || 76 ||
anyato labdhasaṁskāraḥ sa sākṣād bhairavo guruḥ |

That teacher who, even though uncreated (akalpita), has by the

confirmation (obtained) from other (teachers or scriptures) strengthened
(his conviction of the genuineness of his enlightenment) and is thus further

purified, is Bhairava in person (sākṣāt).³³⁸ (J6cd-77ab)
That teacher who,

although

‘uncreated’,

in

order to make

(his

conviction) firm²” that ‘this is so, not otherwise’ with regards to his insight

(jñāna) that has arisen spontaneously, (but) which is in the field of his own
experience alone, ‘by the confirmation’ that (reality is) also perceived to be

such ‘from other’ (sources) elsewhere (apart from himself), such as teachers

and scripture etc., collectively or individually from a (particular) teacher or
scripture, and has obtained thereby (the highest state of) excellence, is

‘Bhairava in person’, because he is free within himself of (any further) need
(of confirmation). The meaning is that he is penetrated by full, (complete) and

supreme consciousness.

Surely (one may ask,) how can that be possible by just (a simple)
confirmation? With this doubt in mind, he says:

aqId; ŪJTTRTPTTTṬPGTṬYĪGTT
I SS (

cājcāfã
īā Īāaīad |

yataḥ śāstrakramāt tajjñaguruprajñānuśīlanāt || 77 ||
ātmapratyayitaṁ jñānaṁ pūrṇatvād bhairavāyate |

This is so because the knowledge proved trustworthy by oneself,
(attained) by putting into practice the procedures laid down in the

scriptures (śāstrakrama) and attending to the wisdom (prajñā) of a teacher
who knows them, is full (and perfect) (pūrṇa), and so leads to the

realisation of one’s authentic identity as Bhairava (bhairavāyate).²⁴⁰ (77cd78ab)

‘This is so because the knowledge’, which is the source of conviction
(pratyaya) that has arisen within oneself, possessing the confirmation that

³³* This is Abhinavagupta’s case. This verse is quoted below in TĀy ad 13/251-253ab.
²⁹ Read dārḍhyaṁ for dārḍhya.

²⁴⁰ See below, 13/158 and 247cd-253ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

93

comes from the discernment (paryālocana) that ‘this is so and not otherwise’,
by progressively coming to understand (and putting into practice) the scriptures
and ‘attending to the wisdom of a teacher’ who knows the scriptures, has
become firm²⁴" by the arising of the certainty that ‘this is so and not otherwise’.

Thus, because (he is) free of (any further) need, (his knowledge,) full¹² (and
complete,) ‘leads to the realisation of one’s authentic identity as Bhairava’.

The meaning is that it shines radiantly as the supreme knowledge of the
Absolute (anuttaraparajñāna),²⁴² free of (all) doubts.
Thus, the scripture is also such. So he says:

The Sources and Means of Knowledge

ī⁷ £āīfkīvīṁē aagēa aāīaī: aaād 1| 9 1|

frrṝcaaṝḷ āaṝ ar- frtṁa 1

Tīāīāt̄rcárātcr̄ēti

. 19 1

tena śrīkiraṇoktaṁ yad gurutaḥ śāstrataḥ svataḥ || 78 |I

tripratyayam idaṁ jñānam iti yac ca niśāṭane |

tatsaṅghātaviparyāsavigrahair bhāsate tathā | 79 |
This is the reason why it is said in the venerable Kiraṇa that ‘(Śiva
should be known) from the teacher, the scripture and oneself’²and (also)
in the Niśātana, (where it says) that ‘this knowledge has three sources of
conviction (pratyaya).’ ⁴* Again, (this knowledge) shines (variously,)
according to whether (these three operate) in unison, in the reverse

order,²⁴ or individually.³⁷ (78cd-79)

²⁴" Read dārḍhyaṁ prāptam for dārḍhya prāptam.
²⁴² Read pūrṇaṁ

for pūrṇa.

²⁴³ One could also translate anuttaraparajñāna as ‘most excellent supreme knowledge’ʼ,

ie. of which there is nothing higher. “Supreme knowledge’ of reality is attained in the

sphere of the Sāmbhava Means, but it is transitory. The ‘most excellent’ knowledge, of
which there is nothing higher, is that of No Means — Anupāya, in which Anuttara is
realised once and for all. This is the knowledge that comes from Anuttara, of Anuttara,
and abides there forever. This is Parabhairava.

²⁴⁴ KĪṬ 1/9/14b; also quoted above as TĀ 4/414.
¹⁴³ See below, 13/197-198, and the commentary there, where the passage from the

Niśātanatantra is quoted in full, of which Jayaratha supplies just the first line here. This
quarter verse is cited ad 26/5-6.

²⁴⁶ As in the previous case, in which one who, even though he has the knowledge that

develops from himself, needs to confirm it by consulting teachers and the scriptures.
Ultimately, however, Abhinava supports, as one would expect, the view that personal

insight is the best and is, indeed, the basis of all understanding. Thus he already wrote in

the Mālinīvijayavārtika:
prādhānyaṁ prakaṭaṁ
gurutaḥ kila śāstrataḥ

svasaṁvidaḥ |
svataḥ

tad ayaṁ mukhyatayā kr̥taḥ śramaḥ l| 267 ||
śāstravṛttiparatantrito guruḥ

94

CHAPTER FOUR

(This knowledge) ‘has three sources of conviction’.²** As is said there

(in the Niśāṭanatantra):

“This knowledge has three sources of conviction, oneself, the scripture
and the teacher’s mouth.”

svātmasaṁvidi ca tat pratiṣṭhitam |
tena sarvam idam ātmasaṁvidā

siddhim eti nahi jātv asahyatām || 268 |I
‘The clarity of one’s own consciousness is the fundamental (basis of the

knowledge that comes from) the teacher, scripture and oneself – that is primarily
(where) this effort has been made. (267)
The teacher is rendered dependent on the manner (of instruction) of the
scriptures and that is established in the consciousness of one’s own Self. Thus, all of this
is accomplished by one’s own consciousness, indeed, not without (its) assistance. (268)

etac chāstraṁ prayatnena carcyatāṁ he mumukṣavaḥ |

mā vr̥thaivāyur āyastam anyaśāstreṣu nīyatām || 269 ||

abhedadrṛṣṭir yā kācid bhedadṛṣṭir athāpi vā |
sātraivāyāti nirvāhaṁ tenaitat pravicāryatām || 270 ||
svapnakālaparijñātavī * * * yathā tathā | (?)
etacchāstrasamabhyāsaprabuddhahṛdayaḥ sadā || 271 ||
svasaṁvid eva tacchāstraṁ sā cāpekṣāvivarjitā |
tathā yady abhidhīyeta svataḥ prāmāṇyam ucyatām |272l|
Śāsanaṁ śāsitavyaṁ ca śāsakaṁ ceti yat kila |
tat tatrākālakalitaṁ svātantryādvaitasuṇdaram || 273 ||
O you (all) who aspire to liberation reflect with effort on that scripture (śāstra).
May you not end your life (exerting yourselves) in other scriptures. Whatever nondualist
or dualist view it may be, it ultimately concludes here alone, so you should reflect on
that. * * * (?) May your Heart be always awake by practicing that. That scripture is
one’s own consciousness alone and that is free of (all) dependence. If one speaks in that
way, then say that that is (what is meant by) self-validation (svataḥ prāmāṇyam). The
teaching, what is to be taught and the one who teaches — that is there eternal and
beautiful with the nonduality of freedom.’ MVV 2/267-273

²⁴1 See above, 4/41cd-42ab and note. 4/78d is KiT 9/14b. Maheśvarānanda (MM p. 6),

most probably drawing from the Tantrāloka, also quotes these two sources together, as

here. yad uktaṁ śrīniśāṭane – tripratyayam idaṁ jñānam iti, which corresponds to TĀ

4/78cd-79.
²⁴⁸* Amongst Monier-William’s dictionary definitions of the word pratyaya, along with
‘conception, assumption, notion, idea’ and others, we find ‘belief, firm conviction, trust,
faith, assurance or certainty of, proof, ascertainment (as pratyayaṁgam), to acquire
confidence, repose in [conviction as in the statement] asty atra pratyayo mama – ‘that is
my conviction’ and kaḥ pratyayo ‘tra, what assurance is there of that?” Jayaratha

understands the word in this context to mean ‘cause’, and so 1 have translated
accordingly. It would perhaps be better to understand it to mean something like
‘conviction’. The teacher, scripture and personal insight are touchstones that serve as a

check to instil conviction that the knowledge an ‘uncreated’ teacher already has of the
teachings, and consequently of reality, is correct.

TANTRĀLOKA

95

Thusṣ, as even an ‘uncreated’ teacher requires a teacher and the rest, (in
such cases,) it is said in the venerable Kiraṇa and elsewhere, that the teacher

and the rest are the three causes (kāraṇa) of knowledge of the supreme reality.
(This knowledge) ‘shines (variously,) according to whether (these three
operate) in unisonʼ etc. in the aforestated manner. The meaning is that it shines
radiantly, as proved by everybody’s (personal) experience. ‘In unison’ means
collectively. ‘In the reverse order’ means other than the stated sequential
order. (Thus,) although knowledge has arisen (spontaneously) for someone from
himsṣelf, it is completed by (referring to) a teacher and scripture. This is the
point. The intention (behind his saying that each one may operate)
‘individually’ is that for some, knowledge arises by just one (of these sources),
for example, the teacher. This is the intended meaning.
Surely (one may ask,) if the cause of knowledge of the supreme reality
is all (three) together, that is, the teacher and the rest, why does he refer to them
individually (also as such)? Or (again), if they each individually (serve as the

source of knowledge) and (s0) the task is accomplished by just one of them,
then what is the use of (any one of) the others? With this doubt in mind, he says:

āvraz fāftrrcaṅtzftamā aī fōsaq
āq āīī ā gġ N āēāēd aIII TUI I ¢o 1

āīāē āāā āa, ū²taraṁbatka |

karaṇasya vicitratvād vicitrām eva tāṁ chidam |
kartuṁ vāsīṁ ca taṅkaṁ ca krakacaṁ cāpi gṛhṇate || 80 |l
tāvac ca chedanaṁ hy ekaṁ tathaivādyābhisaṁdhitaḥ |
One makes use of a hatchet, axe or saw in order to make various
(kinds of) cuts (in a piece of wood), because this (variety) depends on the
variety of the tool. Even so, the act of cutting (in itself) is essentially one and

the same, insofar as the intention (abhisaṁdhi)²⁹ which precedes it is such.

(80-81ab)

A carpenter, for example, makes use of all or just one of (his) tools, ‘in
order to (make various) cutsʼ, that is, split (a piece of wood) in two in that

(particular) way, because the best tool to accomplish the task of cutting (in some
particular way), such as a hatchet, varies. This is the meaning of this statement.

Just as in daily life a large piece of pine wood can be cut up in various ways
with (just) a hatchet or the like, in the same way crooked (cuts can be made in it
or) hollows (cut out of it) and so on by (making use of several cutting tools)
together. This is the intended (sense).

¹⁴⁹ The term abhisaṁdhi and cognate abhisaṁdhāna denote both ‘connecting together’

and ‘intention’, in the sense of desire to do something, conditioned by whether one

wants to avoid something one does not want or take up something desired, which is at

the root of the commerce of daily life (vyavahārā). Intention or desires thus presupposes
an ascertainment or decision (niścaya) as to what is desirable or otherwise, and thus the
conjunction (abhisaṁdhi) of perceptions and notions etc. See ĪPVY 1, p. 253.

96

CHAPTER FOUR
Surely (one may ask,) there is no dispute that the result is various

according to the variety of instrumental causes, and so because the tool, for

example, a hatchet, differs (from another tool), the act of cutting varies
accordingly. So how is it that, whether taken individually or collectively, they

only do one job?²³" With this doubt in mind, he says ‘even so’ etc. ‘The act of
cutting’ carried out by a particular tool, such as a hatchet, is not (in itself)
various (for each tool), ‘as the intention which precedes it is such’, that is, the

desire to cut (up a piece of wood, for example) is one (and the same). In this
way, there is nothing wrong with the hatchet and the like, whether collectively
or individually, serving as tools for the same act of cutting. The point (implicitly
being made here) is that the object of awareness is diverse because the (form of)

awareness is s0.”¹

He (now) relates this (example) to the main point.

zī fīṝāī aī=ā avīaaā aāi a: | ¢ |
ī īi īaī ī adtaTīṁ
ēērd |
TITTTTTT-T TTĪSĒT 3ĒTĪ I ¢3 I

mṝaṣg faf=rīrsaīṝ vīPāṁkīīarzrāa |

JṢT̄ ṬHITIHTTTRTNĪṢĒT: TR: I ¢³3 I
ittham eva mitau vācyaṁ karaṇasya svakaṁ vapuḥ || 81 I|
na svatantraṁ svato mānaṁ kuryād adhigamaṁ haṭhāt |
pramātrāśvāsaparyanto yato ‘dhigama ucyate || 82 ||
āśvāsaś ca vicitro ‘sau śaktipātavaśāt tathā |

pramite ‘pi pramāṇānām avakāśo ‘sty ataḥ sphuṭaḥ | 83 ||

The same can be said with regards to an instrument’s own specific

form applied to knowledge (miti). The means of knowledge (māna) is not
independent (in such a way) that it can, by itself, abruptly (haṭhāt) generate
understanding. This is because it is said that understanding (must)
culminate in the firm belief (and satisfaction) (āśvāsa) of the subject (that
he has indeed understood and overcome doubt). And this firm belief (and

satisfaction) varies according to the (intensity) of the descent of the power

(of grace) (śaktipāta). This is the reason why (many) means of knowledge²⁴²
²³⁰ Read kāryaṁ for kārya.

¹ I have reversed the order of these last two sentences with respect to the printed
edition.
²³? What is meant here by the plurality of the ‘means of knowledge’ is not only a variety

of means by which the object of knowledge is known; it also denotes a plurality of

cognitive acts. The ‘means of knowledge’ is one of the three modalities of
consciousness, along with the subject and object, in which it manifests and operates.
Emerging from the subjective aspect, channelled through the senses, the means of
knowledge is a stream of cognitive consciousness that extends out to the objective

aspect as the means whereby the subjective aspect perceives it and so is a perceiving
subject in relation to it. This principle applies to whatever form the cognitive stream

TANTRĀLOKA

97

clearly find application, even in the case of something that has already been

known (but which the subject is not fully satisfied he has understood).

(81cd-83)

‘The instrument’ (of knowledge) is the teacher or the like. It has ‘its
own specific form’, which (it does not share) in common with anything else,
and is (applied to) ‘knowledge’, that is, the knowledge that comes from sound

discriminative reasoning (tarkajñāna). ‘The same can be said’ (about the

means of knowledge) in the stated manner, that is, (that they can be applied)
indiviḍually or collectively. Although reality can be understood by means of

just one of (these means,) for example, the teacher, even so, until the need of the

perceiver comes to rest, they are applied (and useful) individually or
collectively. This is the intended (meaning). Thus, the means of knowledge,
because it is (just a) means of knowledge, is not independent such that it can
impart understanding by force independently of the perceiver. Understanding is
(the awareness that) ‘I have known this thing’. Such is the subject’s ultimate

conviction (and satisfaction) (āśvāsa). If that has not arisen, what has been

understood (adhigamārtha)? (In response to this question, we say that if he is
not fully satisfied that he has understood, it does not mean that he knows
nothing); this conviction (and satisfaction depends on) the type (and degree of)
the descent of the power (of grace), that is, according to whether it is most
intense (or less s0) and so on. In that way, it is varied according to whether it is
progressively most intense (or less so0) and so on. The intended meaning is that
it is because of (the variety and degree of grace) that (this conviction) arises by
means of the teacher (scripture and one’s own insight), collectively or
individually. There is nothing logically wrong in making use of other means of
knowledge because the perceiver is not convinced (of having understood) the

nature of something (or a teaching), even if it has already been known (to some

degree) externally (but not fully inwardly).
Surely (one may ask,) if the aggregate (of the factors required for
perception to take place), that is, the object, light and the rest, are not present
together (saṁghaṭitā), that (particular) cognition (jñāna) does not arise, and so

what has been understood (adhigamārtha) there (in that case)?³³³ Now if (all the

necessary conditions for perception) are present together, then the perceiver
should know the unknown entity (he wished to know the very moment) the

initial contact with the senses (takes place), without need of any other (ulterior)

validating perception (pratyaya). Again, even if this is so, and fluxes of
perceptions arise there subsequently, let them arise, what is wrong (with that)?

(However,) there (in that case), they would not be means of knowledge. (This is

because) something new (apūrvārtha) (that was not known before) is made
manifest only by the very first moment of perception (but not by the subsequent

ones). (The definition of) a means of knowledge is the manifestation of

something new (not known previously). As they say:

may assume. This includes not just direct perception, but also inference, as well as the
verbal testimony of a teacher, apt authority or scripture.
³³ The implied answer is: ‘nothing at all, as no object of knowledge is perceivable (or
indeed exists as an object of knowledge) if all the necessary attendant conditions that
make perception possible are not present together.”

98

CHAPTER FOUR
‘A means of knowledge (is defined as having) as its object (an entity)

not (as yet) known, or (to put it another way) it is the (cognitive) light (that

illumines) something that is unknown.’²*⁴

The fruit the perceiver possesses (by applying a means of knowledge) is
just this, namely, ‘I have known this thing’, because he considers (himself) to be
satisfied in this way. And that does not arise with respect to the subsequent
streams of perceptions. So how is it said that ‘the means of knowledge find
application even in the case of something that has already been known’? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

r̥xaṝ gazā? gāīvvs F=Ṝ gaē s=rāī |

fraṝ ã ũ̄Ṁsã ftk rg: kv at

1A

dṛṣṇ ā dṛṣṭvā samāśliṣya ciraṁ sañcarvya cetasā |
yaiḥ parituṣyeta kiṁ brūmaḥ kila tān prati || 84 II
(There is nothing wrong in the view that a means of knowledge can
find further application to an object already known), for what should we
say of those who are (only) satisfied when they have seen the beloved²*

repeatedly (countless times), embraced her and relished the thought of her

at length? (84)

(The statement) ‘seen (the beloved) repeatedly (countless times)³ or
the words ‘at length’ (implies that) by ‘seeing’ is also meant embracing (the

beloved repeatedly) and relishing (the thought of her presence at length). (What
is meant) by that is that (even though) the beloved is (already) known, (the lover
who perceives her is only finally) satisfied by countless actively applied
(pravṛtta) means of knowledge, that is, perceptions of (her) form and touch and

the thoughts that follow after. So ‘what should we say of those’ (who do this)?
There is no contradiction at all in one’s experience that something is known in
the first moment of perception, and (many such moments may be required) until
the perceiver is ultimately satisfied. Thus (one view is that):

‘What other unperceived aspect could there be of the nature of a single
entity that is itself directly perceived, which (needs to be) examined by (various

other) means of knowledge?”²⁴⁶

²³⁴ This line is also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/54 (see note there) and ad 1/180cd-181ab.

²³ Read with MSs C and Ch and as grammar demands, priyāṁ for priyā.

³⁶ Pramāṇavārttika 1/43. Also quoted below ad 9/12. In the commentary on his own
work, Dharmakīrti writes:

tasya pratyakṣenaiva siddheḥ sarvākārasiddhiḥ | tadānyasyāsiddhasyābhāvāt |

bhāve vā ʻtatsvabhāvatvam | na hi yo yad ekayogakṣemo na bhavati sa tatsvabhāvo
yuktaḥ | tanmātranibandhanatvād bhedavyavahārasya | anyathā ‘bhāvaprasaṅgād ity
uktam | tasmāt pratyakṣe dharmiṇi tatṣyvabhāvasākalyaparicchedāt tatrānavakāśā

pramāṇāntaravṛttiḥ syāt

TANTRĀLOKA

99

(But) the point is that this statement is not a sound view. Thus:

‘Wherever (something is specifically) determined by (other) subsequent

means of knowledge, (it means that) there (in that case) also, that entity was

certainly not apprehended in the same way by the previous (one).”

According to this view, expressed (in this and other ways), it must
certainly be the case that some new aspect (of the perceived object) not known

by a previous means of knowledge is known by other means of knowledge, so
that finally (when they have all been applied), the perceiver may be satisfied. As
others (say,) on the contrary:

‘Certainly, subsequent (applications of) means of knowledge do not

(give rise to) more (specific) determination (of their object). What more (can)

manifest in the streams of perceptions (bodha) (that is not already known once
something has been perceived)?³
It is said (here in this way that) the streams of perceptions (vijñāna) are
(still) valid means of knowledge, although they perceive what has already been
perceived. That is not sound, because (if that were so, the application of further
means of knowledge would be) useless, and countless (other) such defects

(would) arise. Therefore, (a previously) unknown entity is known even when
there is a flowing together of countless applications of (many) means of
knowledge, even with regard to just one thing (artha), and so the (application
of) other means of knowledge is not without purpose, because they also
manifest a novel entity. If this were to be so, then the subsequent streams of
perceptions would be (constantly) spontaneously engaged (in perception), and
the manifestation of (some) novel entity would never cease (to take place). Thus

also, (by adopting our view,) there would be no infinite regress, because there is
an end (each time to the streams of perception) which cannot be transgressed,
namely, the satisfaction the perceiver (experiences that he has known the object

he wishes to know).²⁷

Moreover, by the perceiver*s application of many means of knowledge
(coordinated) together to just one entity in this way, a novel manifestation

arises. Thus, (whereas) their (view entails that) the validity of the subsequent
“When (the nature of something) has been established by direct perception, (its)

entire form has been established. This is because there is nothing else that has not been

established (siddha). Or else if that were to exist, it would not be of that nature. It is not

reasonable (to maintain) that that which is incapable of being conjoined together as one
(thing) be of that nature. This is because the daily business of relative distinctions

(bhedavyahāra) is regulated solely by that. If it were to be otherwise, it is said that that
is because it does not exist, which is an undesirable contingency. Therefore (an entity)
that possesses the quality of being directly perceived is such because its nature has been
determined completely. There (in that case) there would be no occasion for the
operation of another means of knowledge.” Edition by Gnoli (1960) p. 26.

²⁷ The stream of cognitive awareness is not without end, exposing one after another
infinite aspects, thus resulting in an infinite regress; rather, it continues only until the
subject is satisfied. This possibility is not open to the Buddhist opponent who, denying
the existence of a perceiver, maintains that all that exists is the stream of cognitive
consciousness.

100

CHAPTER FOUR

(perceptions) depends on the previous ones, and the previous ones on the
subsequent ones, here (in our view), there is also no (such) vicious circle. This
is because (according to us) the validity (of perceptions) is not mutually
dependent (on one another). The validity of perceptions depends on the novelty
of the manifestation (prakāśa – lit. ‘light’) of the object (artha), and that light
(of consciousness) which has as its object (some) novel entity is the (specific)

separate condition of all things (as this or that). So what occasion could there be
for (this kind of) vicious circle? It is said concerning the concurrence (of many
valid perceptions together) (saṁplava) with respect to (a single entity that
possesses many) properties (dharmin), that many means of knowledge operate
in the case of just one entity. (However,) in actual fact, on the contrary, some

particuḻar attribute of an entity (dharmin) which is qualified by many attributes
is made manifest as novel by some (means of knowledge, and others by
others).²*⁸ Thus, once the perceiver has known the possessor of these attributes
completely by first coming to know each particular attribute, he ultimately

becomes satisfied.²⁴⁹

He says that:

z̄2i T ṃPāāgamṝd
īṝēṝrīā fa 1

3 aḷīāī īTaāaī TRāIIṬTĪTG
ST 1| ¢&1
itthaṁ ca māãnasaṁplutyām api nādhigate gatiḥ |
na vyarthatā nānavasthā nānyonyāśrayatāpi ca |l 85 ||
Now, although the means of knowledge concur to act together in

this way, (this does not entail the fallacies) of apprehending something

already known, or of (their application) being useless. (Nor does it entail)

an infinite regress or vicious circle (anyonyāśrayatā).¹⁰ (85)

Now, concluding (this discussion concerning) the true nature of a

teacher, which is related to that of the true nature of discriminative reasoning,

⁸ A single object (dharmin) may be specified by many qualities, and so may be the
object of many means of knowledge that serve to identify it.

⁹ Pramāṇa – here translated a ‘means of knowledge'- is a stream of cognitive
gnosis of the subject, eternally viewing itself in this way as the object. Thus variety
(vicitratā) does not compromise the unification of experience, which is the Absolute in
this system. The object is flooded with streams of cognitive awareness that apprehend

now this aspect, now that. Thus, the contradiction does not arise that the means of
knowledge makes apparent something already known, which would not be knowledge at
all.

¹⁰⁰ Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: “There is always something more to realize. Like

undressing a woman, embracing her and having sex with her, there is always more. It is
not ‘useless’ as the Buddhists think, who consider that once an object has been

perceived there is no further means to cognition. Nor is it an infinite regress, because in
realizing God Consciousness you realize more and more from the Master, from scripture
and from what you can experience. The Buddhists object to this view, saying that it is an
anavasthā [infinite regress].³

TANTRĀLOKA

101

next he goes on, as announced in the initial enunciation (of the topics of the

Tantrāloka), to talk about the inapplicability of the ancillaries of Yoga.

The Uselessness of the Ancillaries of Yoga (yogāṅgānupayogitva)

tṝ aārṁrṣftratṁ
ṁ t 7 Tg |
³TāīTT: ṬāTYTTIRTITTJIATTI ā: II ¢E I
evaṁ yogāṅgam iyati tarka eva na cāparam ḷ

antarantaḥ parāmarśapātavātiśayāya saḥ || 86 ||
³"Tn this way, (there is ultimately only one) ancillary of Yoga
(yogāṅga)²² which is (established to be) such, namely, discriminative

²⁶" unṃeṣamātrarūḍhasya sā nirmūlā na (> ca) saṁbhavet |
itthaṁ kūṁ bahunoktena naye ‘nuttaranāmani |1105||
vastuto 'sti na kasyāpi yogāṅgasyābhyupāyatā |

svarūpaṁ hy asya nīṝrāpam avacchedavivarjanāt I1O6II

upāyo ‘py anupāyo 'syāyāgavr̥tinirodhataḥ (-syāyogyavṛtti-) |

recanāpūraṇair eṣā rahitā tanuvātanauḥ (> tanuś cātanoḥ) |107 II

tārayaty evam ātmānaṁ bhedasāgaragocarāt |

nimañjamānam apy etanmano vaiṣayike rase ||1O8II
‘And for one who is well established in the expansion (of consciousness) alone,

(Māyā) is without root. In this way, what is the use of speaking much in this doctrine

(naya) called Anuttara? In actual fact, the ancillaries of Yoga are of no use as a means
to anything. The form (svarūpa) (of Anuttara) is that it has no form because it is devoid
of (any) defining limitations (avaccheda). Although a means, it is no means (anupāya),
because (nothing is attained, all that takes place is that the yogi’s) states (and activities)
(vṛṇi) that are unfit (for the attainment of realisation) are blocked. This body of the
disembodied one (i.e. Anuttara) is devoid of the exhalations and inhalations (of the

practice of breath control). In this way, (Anuttara) makes the Self cross over the sphere
of the ocean of saṁsāra, even though this mind plunges into the juice (of the aesthetic
delight) (rasa) of the objects of sense.' MVV 2/105-108

²? Abhinava has a line in mind from the MV that declares that ‘(Sound intuitive)

Reasoning is the most excellent ancillary of Yoga (yogāṅga).’ (MV 17/18ab, quoted in
TĀv ad 1/9 and ad 4/18cd-19ab) Here he goes a step further by saying that it is the only
one. Or to put it another way, the development of insight is the path to realization; the
practice of the ‘limbs’ or ancillaries of Yoga are of no use if they do not contribute to
that development. Conversely, if they do, they are essentially the insight of Sound

Reasoning anyway. In other words, Abhinava is replacing Yoga with liberating gnosis.
Abhinava does describe and support a range of yogic practices throughout the

Tantrāloka. But these are not part of a system of yogic praxis with ‘limbs’ or
‘ancillaries'. Indeed, it is clear from the passage quoted in the following note that he

does not consider Yoga in itself to be liberating, although he does admit, as we shall see

further ahead, that it can be if it leads to insight. In other words, from Abhinava’s

gnoseological standpoint, for Yoga to be functional, it must be grounded and sustained
by the development of insight, which is both its ultimate goal and the means to it. In this
perspective, he does allow a place for the practice of Yoga, but even so, he also

maintains the hard line expressed in the passage quoted in the following note, that Yoga
is of no use at all, if only to emphasise that insight is ultimately all it is about.

102

CHAPTER FOUR

reasoning (tarka), and none other, bestowing as it does an ever more
internal and excellent capacity for reflective awareness. (86)

As the object of inquiry, which is the nature of the teacher, has been
established ‘in this way to be such’, (it follows that) discriminative reasoning
alone is the most excellent ‘limb of Yoga’. Moreover, this amounts to saying

that there is none other at all, including the prohibitions (yama) and the rest (of

the standard ancillaries of Yoga), that may give rise, as (the realisation of pure)
consciousness draws progressively closer, to ‘an ever more internal and
excellent capacity for reflective awareness’ʼ, that is, Pure Knowledge, so that
(finally) in the end, the Yogi may experience supreme consciousness directly.
That is said (in the following passage,) which begins:
‘The deliberation (iiha) of the dispassionate one who has attained the

plane (of Yoga) is the statement of sound reasoning and the observation of
discernment, charmingly adorned with the conquest of that (supreme reality). As
is the level of the place presided over (by its own form of) worldly experience

which, transitory, is rooted in doubt, so is it sullied (with these impurities).

What use is that? Enough of this daily commerce of views (generated) by
thought constructs. (The place of our own insight,) fulfilled with (our own)
special (and excellent) worldly experience, is other than that.”
And ends with:

‘The most excellent plane of those who have attained (that) plane which
is the profound vision of one’s own (innate) radiant energy (svatejas) is, free of

(false) reasoning and suffering,*™³ the sole abode of the Lord. Those who desire

liberation should abandon the other (planes which are under the sway of false)
reasoning. O lion amongst the sages, those who practice Yoga cannot give up
those (lower planes) without sound discriminative reasoning. And so it is right
also to make use of (sound) discriminative reasoning. It has become an ancillary

(of Yoga) for Yogis and serves to help them.’²⁶⁴

We should not forget that Abhinava is saying this in the context of his
exposition of the Empowered category practice, which is based on the ‘purification of
thought’ through the development of insight.

³⁶³ Instead of anāturam – ‘free of suffering’, MS Kh and T read anuttaram.
³⁴ Abhinava appears to be referring to this line in the following passage in his

Maālinīvijayavārtika, in which he outlines the difference between Sound Reasoning
(tarka, sattarka) and what dualist logicians and Buddhists call logic:

‘In this way, the god Maheśvara abides as all things, and is worshipped
(upāsyate) by means of knowledge (that develops) progressively and Yoga, and by
(various forms of) meditation (dharaṇā) (as we find, for example, in the
Vijñānabhairava). Reality (tattva), which is the sequence of principles (tattvakrama)

free of the net of Māyā, that

is, the Impurity of duality, is rightly discerned in the

eighteenth chapter (of the Mālinīvijayottara), where it is said that (it is) where breath
control and the rest (of the limbs of Yoga) should be abandoned.* There is no means (of
realization) with respect to its supreme consciousness. (1-3) *[MV 18/19 quoted in TĀ

4/107]

TANTRĀLOKA

103

How can that which is blocked all around within consciousness, the form of

which is the vital breath and the intellect, move inwardly within this (consciousness)?
(If you say that it is possible) ‘in this way, (then pray make) a program (krama) of the
(appropriate) practice (abhyāsa) of Yoga. Those who are intensely engaged in this
consciousness in order to purify it by the path of practice, what, where, from whence,

and how can they apply it? This is what we know here (in this case, namely, that it is not

possible). (4)
Practice is something that is repeated again and again, and that too (is only
possible) because there are differences between (moments of) time and locations (in
space), and it arises due to the association of (one) manifestation with another (which
differs from it) on the path of the body, mind, vital breath and senses. (5)

Those meditations (dhāraṇā) which seek to discern (reality) within Bhairava’s

nature, which is the compact (uninterrupted) light (of consciousness), are well
established within it by resting (there) in the consciousness which has shone forth (just)
once (and forever). Thus here (in this case), the limb (of Yoga) which is said to be
supreme and serves to help all (the others) (i.e. saṭtarka) is the means (dvāra) by which
(this supreme reality) is realized (niścita), (and so those meditations) are also of that
nature (whereby they attain their goal). (6-7)

Surely, (an opponent may object:) what faith could one conceive to have in

reasoning (tarka) which (invariably) has no (sound) basis (apratiṣṭha)? Indeed (hanta),
are not your words (also), in the same way, without (sound) basis? In the same way,
(this objection applies to all means of knowledge. Thus,) there are those who are
convinced (niścita) that scripture alone is the one (certain) means of knowledge
(pramāṇa). (But) how can one determine that (reality) with certainty, when the mass of
scriptures are (mutually) contradictory? (If you reply that) there (in that case), the cause
of the validity of (that) means of knowledge is what is well known to great (learned and
realized) people, (that also has) no (sound) basis, as it is quite well possible that (the
teachings of these) great people concerning that (reality) are (also mutually)
contradictory. (8-10)
(Such is the case with) direct perception also, which is a perception (sarīvid) in
which (something that) sublates (and corrects it is) perceived (only) according to (one’s)
needs. (Moreover, as it requires) further ulterior perceptions (to confirm it, and these
too, subsequent ones, the knowledge derived from direct perception is subject) to an
infinite regress. Surely, (the opponent continues,) there (in that case also), what
(certainty remains) of one’s own perception (svasaṁvid) when it has been sublated
(bādhita) (by another one)? (11-12ab)

(To these objections we reply,) how can (this opponent,) who is skilled in

(connecting together and) contemplating (saṁdhāna) duality, fashion (all this common

reality) consisting of the business of daily life (vyavahāra)? At no time and nowhere (in
any circumstance) are we devoid of a sound basis (for our knowledge of reality). Those

(like us) who everywhere possess the completely full and supreme ocean of Bhairava
(consciousness) are not devoid of (a sound) basis, especially (in their) reasoning. (12cd-

14ab)

AII those ancillaries of reasoning (tarkāṁśa) that have not contemplated their
own (inherent) consciousness anywhere (in any circumstance) attain the ultimate fruit,
which is Śiva, as do those who (grounded in Bhairava) have attained the supreme nectar
of consciousness by crossing over the ocean of (unsound) reason. (14cd-15)
Nonduality is the essence of all the meaning of the scriptures. It is foolish
people (miḍhadhī) who are devoted to the difference that is (provisionally) perceived
there, in order to realize that (essential oneness of their nondual purport). (16)
And (sound) reasoning alone is skilled in refuting the reasoned arguments that
are the ancillaries of dualism (bhedavāda). Surely (then, the opponent finally rejoins,

104

CHAPTER FOUR

Surely (one may ask,) if sound discriminative reasoning is a limb of

Yoga the same (as are the others), why is just that (considered to be) the best

limb of Yoga, and not the prohibitions (yama) and the rest (of the other
ancillaries)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

āīTē̄āī Taa--ã̄qṟaŪrāuṀũ:|

rfṝ īḍ aārṛ. īaīcāfērāīt
īrdzāīTīā çs 1
āT ṃṂJaāṁ ā f-raī aīāzīāTTITTTJ
3ā TdHīTG aTRIĪSJṬTTḤ I ¢¢ 1
ahiṁsā satyam asteyabrahmacaryāparigrahāḥ |
iti paīñca yamāḥ sākṣāt saṁvittau nopayoginaḥ l| 87 |I
tapaḥ prabhṛtayo ye ca niyamā yat tathāsanam |

prāṇāyāmāś ca ye sarvam etad bāhyavijrmbhitam || 88 |I
(There are) five prohibitions (yama), namely, (one should) not
iṇjure living beings (ahiṅiṣā), tell lies (satya), steal (asteya), indulge in sexual
intercourse (brahmacaryā), or be miserly (parigraha). (These) and
injunctions (niyama) such as the practice of austerity (tapas) and the like,
the

various

bodily

postures

(āsana)

and

(types

of)

breath

control

(prāṇāyāma), have no direct application to consciousness. (In fact,) they all
operate externally (and have nothing to do with inner consciousness).³⁵ (87-

88)

‘And the like³ refers to ‘cleanliness” and the rest (of the injunctions).
As is said (in the Yogasūtra):
‘(The five) injunctions (niyama) are cleanliness (śauca), contentment
(santoṣa),
ausṣterity
(tapas),
study,
and
reverence
for
God

(īśvarapraṇidhāna).²⁵

you are saying that) reasoning does have some application to (the one) nondual (reality).

(To which we reply) that that too is not unreasonable, when the view is that of supreme

nonduality (according to which everything is a manifestation of consciousness and
hence real, according to the manner in which it appears).’ MVV 2/1-18ab

²⁰³ After declaring that these two ancillares of Patañjali’s Yoga are of no use to

attaining liberation, Abhinava goes on in the following verses to say the same about the

rest of them.

³⁶⁶ YSū 2/30. The five prohibitions and five injunctions are listed in YSū 2/30-32. The

following is a summary by Rama Shankar Bhattacarya of the explanation given of them
in the Yogabhāṣya: ‘Non-violence is absolute abstinence from malice. Truth-telling (i.e.
abstinence from lying) is the correspondence of speech and thought to fact. A true

sentence must not delude others or create a wrong notion in others or appear
meaningless to its hearer. Non-theft means abstention from taking things illegally that
belong to others. Celibacy is the control of the organ of generation by a person who is
the master of his senses. Non-avarice is to desist from taking things, with the
observation that their acquisition etc. breeds frustration.

TANTRĀLOKA

105

In this way all the others also ‘have no direct application to

consciousnessʼ. This is the connected (sense). By saying ‘directly’, he also
implies those that could be applicable indirectly (pāramparyeṇa). The reason
why they are not applicable directly is because ‘they all operate externally°.
That is not established just by reason alone; (this view) is also
(sustained) by the scriptures. Thus, he says:

Tr̥Tā
īṁṁ aṁŪāī ftraīcṁaṁ

frrrēērāāī
JG JĪTTITaT 1| ¢ 1

Taã

gJḺṀḷ ŨĩĨ Ṁũ-ṁĨGa aaiṝ

ēī. g ūŪā ha: Ṁīṃaāṁaī fṝ€iaē: 1 Qo

ITATĪī T #dieā: JĪĀ ā Áṛīṣṣīḍ
cšṝ ahTR aīl a-̄N

J. T J HĨI- 82 1|

śrīmadvīrāvalau coktaṁ bodhamātre śivātmake |
cittapralayabandhena pralīne śaśibhāskare || 89 ||

prāpte ca dvādaśe bhāge jīvāditye svabodhake |
mokṣaḥ sa eva kathitaḥ prāṇāyāmo nirarthakaḥ | 90 |I
prāṇāyāmo na kartavyaḥ śarīraṁ yena pīḍyate |
rahasyaṁ vetti yo yatra sa muktaḥ sa ca mocakaḥ || 91 11

Itis saidin the venerable Virāvali: “By dissolving the one-pointed

mind into Śiva’s nature, which is just (pure awakened) consciousness

(bodhamātra), the Moon (of apāna) and the Sun (of prāṇa) dissolve away.²⁶

Purification is either external (by using external things) or internal (i.e. removal
of the impurities of awareness). Contentmentis the absence of desire for more than
immediate necessities. Ascetic exercise is the ability to bear extremes. Vowis included

in it. Study/recitation is either the reading of authoritative texts on liberation or the

repeating of OṀ. Focusing on God is offering up all actions to him.’ Encyclopedia of

Indian Philosophies. Vol. 12 p. 199-200.
²⁷ The same phrase appears in the Stanzas on Vibration:

yām avasthāṅṁ samālambya tad ayaṁ mama vakṣaṭi |

tad avaśyaṁ kariṣye ʻham iti saṁkalpya tiṣṭhati || 23 |
tām āśrityordhvamārgeṇa candrasūryāv ubhāv api |

sauṣumne ‘dhvany astamito hatvā brahmāṇḍagocarāt || 24 |
tadā tasmin mahāvyomni pralīnaśaśibhāskare |

sauṣuptapadavan mūḍhaḥ prabuddhaḥ syād anāvṛtaḥ l| 25 II
‘Once having entered that state which (the yogi) takes as his support and firmly

resolves that: “I will surely do whatever He says”, both the Sun and Moon set, following
the ascending way into the channel of suṣumnā, once having abandoned the sphere of
the universe, then in that great Sky, when the Sun and Moon dissolve away, the dull

minded (yogi is cast down) into a state like that of deep sleep. The awakened however

remains lucid.’ SpKā 23-25

106

CHAPTER FOUR

(Then, when) the Sun of Life (jīvāditya),⁸ which is one’s own
consciousness, reaches the twelfth part (of the End of the Twelve), that is

said to be liberation.²* Breath control is useless. Breath control, which

(merely) inflicts pain on the body, should not be practiced.⁰ He who knows
(this) secret is both liberated and liberates (others).”²”¹ (89-91)

The ‘dissolving away of the mind’ is the state of rest (viśrānti) within
the sentient subject (cetayitr)²™ (attained) by the progressive assimilation of
²⁶⁸ The Praśnopaniṣad identifies the vital breath — prāṇa – with the sun. When it rises in

the East and then enters the other directions, it gathers up the vital breaths into its rays.
The Upaniṣad goes on to declare that: “That very one rises who is prāṇa and fire, who is
identified with all creatures . . . (Those who realised the Brahman knew) the one that is
possessed of all forms, full of rays, endowed with illumination, the resort of all, the

single light (of all), and the radiator of heat. It is the sun that rises – the sun that
possesses a thousand rays, exists in a hundred forms and is the life (prāṇa) of all
creatures.³ (1/6-8)

²⁹ The mind, well concentrated, dissolves into Śiva’s pure awakened consciousness as

the breath, inhalation and exhalation, spontaneously fuse and flow into the Centre

between them. As the Upward Moving inner breath, it rises like a fire up through
suṣumnā, consuming objectivity as it moves up to the End of the Twelve, where
individual consciousness, now divested of all restrictions, fuses into Śiva consciousness.
This is authentic breath control, which liberates the fettered soul.
²¹⁰ The wording of this line is exactly the same as in Jayaratha’s citation, so there can be
no doubt that he had access to the Virāvalītantra.

²⁷! Notice that the context in which Abhinava is quoting the Vārāvalī is to state that in
the Empowered Means (Śāktopāya), the ancillaries of Yoga, of which breath control is

an example, are of no use. In other words, these verses are not at all meant to be ‘a
definition of liberation’. Abhinava quotes them as an authority for this practice, which
begins by concentrating the mind and so dissolving it away (by purifying it of thought).

In this case, the insight of the still mind leads to a fusion of the two breaths (Śun and
Moon), corresponding, in cognitive terms, to the union of the senses (= the Sun of the

means of knowledge) with their object (= the Moon). This union takes place by entry
into suṣumnā, in which they rise as the Upward Moving breath (udāna = Kuṇḍalinī). In
cognitive terms, the fusion takes place progressively into the perceiver (= Fire). As
Kuṇḍalinī rises, subjectivity develops, until at the culmination of the ascent the pure
liberating subjectivity of Śiva dawns as the Upward Moving breath, and merges into the
highest level of its ascent (= the End of the Twelve). In other words, cognitive and
prāṇic Yogas operating together lead to liberation from the objectivity that constricts
consciousness. This process is initiated by concentration, which culminates in the
dissolving away of the mind. When that happens, the rest follows automatically,
including breath retention.

²”² The ‘sentient subject’ — cetayitṛ is the subjectivity that perceives the activity of the
mind – citta. The mind in this sense is made of the objects of mental perceptions - cetya

– of the sentient subject. The triad – cetayitr, citta and cetya – sentient subject, mind and
objects of mental perceptions — operate on the worldly plane of daily life. By paying
aṭtention to the sentient subject, that is, the perceiving consciousness that views the
activity of the mind (citta), which generates and is its objects of mental perception
(cetya), thīs activity gradually comes to a halt as the mind becomes more one-pointed.

The activity of the mind, perception and the movement of the breath are intimately
connected and take place in parallel. When the mind is agitated, the breath becomes so

also; conversely, as the mind becomes still, so does the breathing. When the mind

TANTRĀLOKA

107

comes to rest by dissolving away its objects by one-pointed attention to their perceiver,
the breath also comes to rest by entering suṣumnā. This channel of the vital breath is
called the Central Abode (madhyamadehāman) because the breath that flows through it
is the Central Breath (madhyamaprāṇa). According to the Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad,

which is one of the earliest Upaniṣads, the Central Breath is the immortal breath of life

that gives life to the body, senses and mind. There we read that: ‘Prajāpati (the Lord of

the Creatures) emitted the activities (of the senses). These once emitted, quarrelled with
one another. The organ of speech took a vow: “I will go on speaking”. The eye: “ḹ will

see”. The ear: “I will hear”. And so did the other organs according to their functions.
Death captured them in the form of fatigue – it overtook them, and having overtaken
them, it controlled them. Therefore, the organ of speech invariably gets tired and so do
the eye and ear. But it did not overtake the Central Breath (madhyamaḥ prāṇaḥ) (in the

body).⁷ (BṛUp 1/5/21)

Physiologies of the vital breath related to states of consciousness are very

ancient. The early Upaniṣads already describe the conduits along which the vital breath

travels. The breath moves through them, up and down, out and into the body, and with it
travels the individual soul, who is thereby transported through various states of
consciousness. In the same Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad (2/1/19) we read:
‘Now when one falls sound asleep (suṣupta), when one knows nothing
whatsoever, having crept out through the seventy-two thousand channels called hitā,

which lead from the heart to the pericardium, one rests in the pericardium. Verily, as a

youth or a great king or a great Brahman might rest when he has reached the summit of
bliss, so this one now rests.’ (Hume’s translation)
The most important amongst these channels is the one that leads upwards,

along which the individual who is destined to achieve liberation travels when the body

dies. In the following passage from the same Upaniṣad (4/4/8-9), the sage Yajñavālkya

proclaims he has found this ‘narrow path’ and has travelled on it:
‘The ancient narrow path that stretches far away
Has been touched by me, has been found by me.
By it the wise, the knowers of Brahma, go up

Hence to the heavenly world, released.
On it, they say, is white and blue
And yellow and green and red.
That was the path by Brahma found;

By it goes the knower of Brahma, the doer of right (puṇyakṛt),

And every shining one.’ (translation by Hume)

According to an unnamed source quoted by the Chāndogyopaniṣad, the
channels are only one hundred and one. Of these, the most important is the one along

which the vital breath travels down into the body when, at a certain point in the
development of the foetus, it enters it through a cavity at the top of the head. The vital

breath of those who die knowing the true nature of things and their origin chooses to
travel out of the body by the same channel through which they entered it. Others leave
the body in other ways. Thus this, the last journey of death, is like the little death of

sleep, or the change of consciousness that takes place by the practice of Yoga. The
Chāndogyopaniṣad (8/6/6) declares:

“There are a hundred and one channels of the heart
One of these passes up to the crown of the head.

Going up by it, one goes to immortality.
The others are for departing in various directions.’ (translation by Hume)

108

CHAPTER FOUR

thought. It is ‘one-pointed’ (bandha), that is, it does not go to anything else. In

that way, the Sun along with the Moon, that is, the flow of exhalation (prāṇa)

and inhalation (apāna) (respectively), ‘set’, and their flow is cut off by merging
into the Central Abode (madhyadhāman). Thuṣ (when that happens), the ‘life’,
which is the ‘Sun’ of the Upward (Moving breath) (udāna), (rīses and is
identified with the inner) Fire, because it takes up (and consumes into itself)

every object of knowledge and the rest which is to be burnt up (by it and fuels
it). Then it reaches the End of the Twelve by the progressive upward flow (of
the breath) in the centre within it, and is mounted on the supreme summit of
existence (parākāṣṭhā) within the perceiver, by uprooting the commerce of daily
life (based on the interplay between) the means and object of knowledge. Then,
when the pure awakened consciousness (bodhamātra), which is self-luminous

and self-awakening, has arisen thus, that particular special, indefinable (kaścir)
experience (he attains) is called ‘liberation’.²” As was taught there previously
(in the Vīrāvalītantra):

The understanding of this movement of the breath and the function of the vital

channels led those who sought liberation to attain it by these means directly, by

reproducing what happens at the moment of death. Thus, the first forms of the Yoga of
the vital breath focused on the journey of the soul transported by the breath, along the
‘narrow path’. This came to be called ‘suṣumnā’, to which we find the earliest reference
in the following passage in the Maitryupaniṣad (6/21):
‘Now it has been said elsewhere: ‘there is a channel called ‘suṣumnā̃’, leading
upward, conveying the breath, piercing through the palate. Through it, by joining (yuj)
the breath, the syllable OM, and the mind, one may go aloft. By causing the tip of the
tongue to turn back against the palate and by rubbing together (saryojya) the senses,
one may, as greatness, perceive greatness.' Thence he goes to selflessness. Because of
selflessness, one becomes a non-experiencer of pleasure and pain; he obtains the
absolute unity (kevalatva).’ (translation by Hume) For more details, see Dyczkowski

2009: vol. l1,
p. 195 ff.

⁵”³ The breathing and cognitive cycle are two of the main aspects of the manifest activity

of consciousness, and so are parallel and equivalent. Thus, according to Abhinava’s
exegesis, the Sun of the exhaled breath (prāṇa) corresponds to the means of knowledge,

and the Moon of the inhaled breath (apāna), the object. The Fire of the upward moving

breath (udāna) of the flow of Kuṇḍalinī corresponds to the subject. At the limited,
conditioned level, the means of knowledge, that is, sensory and mental perception as
well as its object, are so strongly dominant that the perceiver is as if hidden away, like a
slow burning fire under ashes. The Sun and Moon of exhalation and inhalation follow
one another, as do day and night. The breath naturally come to a halt in the space in

between, where the Fire of the upward moving breath rises. The flux of the breath

oscillating between these polarities generates perceptions clothed in thought constructs,

by which the perceiver, who is not a thought construct, is obscured, although the

perceiver is their basis, from which they proceed and into which they return. By

concentrating on the centre between the breaths, the gap between them naturally widens

as the mind stills (‘dissolves away’) and the reflective awareness of the perceiver is

strengthened. No breath controlled is required. The Fire of the upward moving breath
within the perceiver rises spontaneously, consuming the thoughts generated by the
interplay of the two breaths, that feed it like fuel. Ultimately, when the mind has fully
dissolved away and the Fire has fully risen up to the supreme apex of subjectivity

TANTRĀLOKA

109

‘By the union of the Moon and the Sun, the individual soul becomes

Pure Being,²”™ here Brahmā and the rest who long for liberation dissolve away,
s0 as to (achieve) liberation.¹²”

Unlike other teachings (darśana), (this one declares that) one does not
need to make use of (any) other means. Thus ‘breath control’ (which involves
the control of) exhalation etc. ‘is uselessʼ, and so no goal like liberation is

achieved by that (means). This is the point. When the Lord had thus questioned
(Her), in order to establish the teaching concerning the subject (artha) of (his)

question, the Goddess²™ (replied in the Vīrāvalītantra), beginning (with the
words):

‘O greatly wise one, this is true (indeed) that breath control is not a
cause (of liberation).” (And concluded): ‘Breath control, which (merely) inflicts
pain on the body, is not to be practiced.”
Having presented with (these words the scriptural) authority which
confutes the view (taught by) others, (he goes on to) present (the scriptural)
authority that establishes our own (view) (with the words): ‘he who knows (this)
secret . . .⁷ The secret is the supreme principle, which is the true nature of the
(pure) perceiver alone, (free of all objectivity. It is secret) because it is not
perceivable by everybody, because no means of knowledge and the rest operate
(there). He who knows it and perceives it directly, is himself ‘liberated’, and

being so, ‘liberates’ others also.
(Moreover,) by saying that breath control is useless, that (same) point is

established by extension’” with regards to (the other ancillaries of Yoga,)

beginning with the prohibitions (yana). Thus, they have not been discussed

experienced at the climax of its ascent in the End of the Twelve, the yogi achieves

liberation.
²¹⁴ The expression here is: ‘tanmātratāṁ vrajet’,which literally means, ‘goes to the state
of being just that much alone’, that is, just Being Itself.

²⁷³ The union of the Moon of inhalation (apāna) and the Sun of exhalation (prāṇa) takes

place in the centre between them, where they come to rest. Initially, there are two such
places — one below, when the Moon of inhalation sets, before the Sun of exhalation
dawns. The other is above where the Sun of exhalation sets, and the Moon of inhalation

has not yet risen. In this way, the Sun and Moon unite naturally for everybody. For the
Yogi who pays attention to these junctures, his mind with all its thoughts dissolves away

there, and as they merge in perfect Stillness, he experiences the Pure Being of his

essential conscious nature. Brahmā, who governs the element Earth, and the Lords of
the other four Elements, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Rudra and Sadāśiva, desiring the liberated
state, also dissolve away there with the lower principles, to merge in the Voidness of
Being.

²⁷⁶ Ṛead bhagavatī praśnārthameva for bhagavatīpraśnārthameva.
²”⁷ The text reads: ‘daṇḍāpūpīyanyāyena’, which literally means, ‘by the analogy of the
stick and cake’. This is a way of reasoning in which once one fact is established to be
correct, another related one is automatically proved to be so. This manner of extending
the scope of a proof is illustrated by saying that a mouse that has eaten a stick is sure to

eat a cake.

110

CHAPTER FOUR

separately (in the Vāzāvalitantra).”⁸ (The reference to) ‘Śiva’s nature, which is

(nothing but pure awakened) consciousness alone (bodhamātra) indicates
implicitly, in brief, what is taught in the previous two chapters (of the

Vīrāvalitantra).²”

Surely (one may ask,) if the prohibitions (yama) and the like are not
applicable to (the realisation of) consciousness because they operate externally,

let that be, what is wrong (with that)? However, the withdrawal (of the senses)

and the like are turned away from the external (world), and that being so,
develop inwardly. Thus, why is that also not rightly applicable there (to the

realisation of liberation)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TcaTēgy āīāīāvāīṣgrṝēraī fṝ a: |

īrā-ṣīa
ā-ā āē- fk r-TT 1 < 1

ftī-a fāīā ēāṇṁ ārsṝṀ⁴ ōīṟeṁēhd,|

TīTāTTTTTT] SATTITRTTHATITI| RQ3 I

3qa] ġ šāīcīczāīīa,
ārāē: sīā̃ |

TRTFRTTHTḺTYĀTT gHTRĒT I] ³% 1

praṅyāhāraś ca nāmāyamṃ arthebhyo ‘kṣadhiyāṁ hi yaḥ |
anibaddáhasya bandhasya tadantaḥ kila kīlanam || 92 ||
cittasya viṣaye kvāpi bandhanaṁ dhāraṇātmakam |
tatsadr̥gjñānasaṁṅtāno dhyānam astamitāparam || 93 ||
yadā tu jñeyatādātmyam eva saṁvidi jāyate |
grāhyagrahaṇatādvaitaśūnyateyaṁ samāhitiḥ || 94 |
The withdrawal (pratyāhāra) of the senses and mind from their
objects consists of (nothing more than just) inwardly fixing (kīlana) (within
the mind) the bond (of contracted, conditioned consciousness), which is not
(yet) firmly secured (in outer objectivity, and so in actual fact serves only to

tighten it further). Fixation (dhāraṇā) consists of fixing the mind on some
object (viṣaya). Meditation (dhyāna) consists of a homogeneous flow of
cognitions (jñūāna), and is the cessation of (all that is) other than that

(astamitāparam).³⁰ Contemplative absorption (samāhiti, i.e. samādhi)²¹ is

?”⁸ Here it seems that Jayaratha is saying is that the Vrāvalitantra only refers to

prāṇāyama as useless. Thus, it appears that the application to the other ancillaries of
Yoga of the same line of reasoning is Abhinava’s own extended exegesis of that. If so,
the verses that follow are written by Abhinava and not drawn from this source.

²”” Clearly the topic of the two chapters of the Vīrāvalitantra to which Jayaratha refers
was Śiva and how He is essentially pure consciousness. If the Tantra was nondualist,
and so Śiva is all things, it follows that practice is useless. Liberation is attained only by

Śiva’s grace. Again, Abhinava quotes the Vīrāvalitantra as an authority for the view

that impurity is not ultimately real. This teaching is also justified by the same doctrine.
If everything is Śiva, nothing else apart from him exists that can contaminate him.
Moreover everything, being such, is pure, as is Śiva; nothing can be impure.
³⁴ Read dhyānam astamitāparam for dhyānam astamitā param.

TANTRĀLOKA

111

the (experience of the) absence (śūnyatā) of duality between the object and
perception, when a state of oneness with the object arises within
consciousness. (92-94)

³⁸" The term here is samāhiti, which in a literal non-technical sense means ‘well placed

or deposited, performed, done, effected or completed’ and ‘close attention’. In the
context of yogic practice, it is a synonym of the term ‘samādhi’,which literally means

‘well gathered together’. The latter, much better-known term, denotes the final, most
developed, stage of concentration, that I call ‘contemplative absorption’ here. The series

of levels, as I translate them are, 1) pratyāhāra- withdrawal (of the senses), 2) dhāraṇa
– concentration, 3) dhyāna -– meditation, 4) samāhiti (samādhi) – contemplative
absorption.

The Yoga of the Yogasūtra is based on the philosophy of the Sāṁkhya, which

is dualist. It teaches that there are two realities. One is Nature – Prakṛti. This comprises

all that is in the sphere of objectivity, ranging from the gross outer object to the mind.
The other is consciousness, which is the nature of the individual soul. There are

countless individual souls, although there is only one Prakṛti, that varies for each one of

them. According to the praxis taught in the Yogasūtra, Yoga is the process of stilling the
mind by progressively withdrawing attention from the sphere of objectivity (i.e. Prakṛti),

to which the mind’s activity invariably relates. It is done by the practice of
concentration on progressively more subtle objects, ranging from a gross outer physical

object to the subtle sense of ego (asmitā), which has a bare trace of objectivity. The goal
is to isolate or rediscover the essential isolation (kaivalya) of the individual soul’s pure

free consciousness from Nature, which is insentient, binding and painful objectivity.
The liberated state is accordingly understood to be achieved by first discriminating the

two domains (viveka), then discerning that the objective domain is painful and that it
continues to affect the subjective domain as long as there is attachment to it. This

attachment is maintained by paying attention to the sphere of objectivity, which with its
diversity and incessant state of change, continues to generate fluctuations in the mind

that perceives it and is itself part of it. This discriminative insight leads to dispassion

(vairāgya), which develops hand in hand with the practice of concentration and
detachment. When detachment is total, the yogi attains the final stage of contemplation,

which is pure consciousness totally free of objectivity and the suffering, decay and death

it entails.

This, the Yogasūtra declares, is liberation. However, from the Kashmiri Śaiva
point of view, this is only the state of the Dissolution Deconditioned (pralayākala)

perceiver who, as we have seen (above, note 1,658), is in a state of deep sleep. This can
be ‘with some object’ (savedya) if there is an experience of bliss, or devoid of externally
perceived objectivity (apavedya). As this state cannot develop further by the practice

taught in the Yogasūtras and, moreover, is transitory, Abhinava rejects this also as not
being of any use for the attainment of full realisation. According to him, the ‘emptiness’

of the subject is due to the merger of objectivity into individual (not universal,

unconditioned) subjectivity. The Sāṁkhya, as we have just noted, considers that
emptiness to be due to the absence of objectivity. Thus, as in all the other ancillaries of

this Yoga, despite the claim that it progressively frees consciousness from objectivity, in
actual fact, Abhinava argues that at every step objectivity becomes more insidiously
entrenched. All that this praxis actually does is to internalize objectivity progressively
more, to the point where it becomes one with individual conditioned consciousness. It is
not absorbed thereby; rather it becomes so intimately bound to it, as happens in deep
sleep, that it cannot be directly extricated from it.

112

CHAPTER FOUR
Withdrawal (pratyāhāra) ‘consists of fixing inwardly’ the sensory

perceptions of the sense of vision etc. that have been withdrawn ‘from their

objectsʼ, form and the rest, so that, making (them) conform to the nature of the

(tranquil) mind (citta), they are brought under one’s own control. As is said (in
the Yogasūtra):

‘The withdrawal (pratyāhāra) of the senses (takes place) when, not
applied to their corresponding objects, they conform, as it were, the nature of

the mind (citta).’²⁸¹

And that is the (inner) ‘fixing’ which is the consolidation ‘of the bond
(of contracted consciousness conditioned by time and space etc.), which is
not (yet) firmly secured (in outer objectivity)ʼ, that is, has not developed.
(This condition) accords with the principle that: “in reality there is no world of
transmigration, (s0) how can there be any question of embodied beings being

bound?²⁸⁸ (We define) bondage as ‘the state of limitation (avacchinatva)
brought by space (and time) etc. of supreme consciousness which, out of its own

freedom, has assumed a contracted (state).” (Bondage is merely) strengthened

here by placing the senses that have been withdrawn here from somewhere to
somewhere (else). So how can the withdrawal (of the senses from their objects)

and the rest (of the states of internalization) be of (any) use to attaining a direct
(experience)

of

consciousness?

The

point

is,

how

can

(all-)pervasive

consciousness be experienced in (just) some (particular place, even an internal

one)?²⁸

As is said:
‘Fix your mind there, wherever it may wander to. As everything is Śiva,

once it moves, where will you go?³²⁵

²³¹ YSū. 2/54. The commentary on the Yogasūtra attributed to Vyāsa explains that: ‘Not
applied to their corresponding objects, the senses conform, as it were, to the nature of
the mind when it ceases to function, and (so) they also cease to function. Thus, the
application of (any) other means to control the senses is unnecessary. Just as drones

follow the course of the queen bee and rest (when she) rests, in the same way, when the

mind stops, the senses also stop their activities. This is (what is meant by) the

withdrawal (of the senses) (pratyāhāra).’ See Āraṇya (1977: 275).
³³³ Aṇuttarāṣṭaka 2a. The verse is quoted in full above in TĀv ad 1/332 (331). 2c is
quoted below ad 5/74cd-75ab (74) and ad 19/51-53ab (51cd-53). The point is that the

yogi withdraws his attention from the outer activity of the senses directed at their
objects because he realises that the world of fettered transmigratory existence is

insubstantial.
²²⁴ The withdrawal of the senses from their objects (pratyāhāra) does not lead to
liberation because withdrawing the senses from one locus entails intensifying their

activity in another one. Moreover, the withdrawal of the senses from their objects

caṉnot be a means to make pure consciousness directly perceptible, because
consciousness is all-pervasive, whereas this withdrawal implies only a localized

awareness. There is anyway no place outside consciousness to withdraw into.

²⁸⁵ The Sanskrit reads:

yatra yatra mano yāti tatra tatraiva dhārayet |

calitvā kutra gantāsi sarvaṁ sivamayaṁ yataḥ l

TANTRĀLOKA

113

SVT 4/313 is practically the same. That reads:
yatra yatra mano yāti jñeyaṁ tatraiva cintayet |

calitvā yāṣyate kutra sarvaṁ śivamayan yataḥ |
‘(For such a great yogi,) wherever (his) mind goes, he would think of (the
supreme reality) which is to be known. As everything is Śiva (sśivamaya), having moved
(from one place), where will it go?³
There in the second line, instead of the reading calitvā kutra gantāsi, we find
calitvā yāsyate kutra, which means the same. This is the reading of this quote in MM p.
163 and VBh p. 64, and when the second line is quoted again below in TĀv ad 5/53cd-

54ab.

The entire passage in the SŚvacchandatantra says:
‘One whose mental disposition (bhāva) is firm (and unwavering), full (without

craving) all around (in all aspects) and made of (the supreme reality) which is to be

known, his mind, (although) he is in all the states (of consciousness), does not move.

(For such a great yogi,) wherever (his) mind goes, he thinks of (the supreme reality)

which is to be known. As everything is Śiva (sśivamaya), having moved (from one place)
where will it go? Present in all the fields (of consciousness) (viṣaya) and objects of the

senses, wherever one pays attention, there is no place where Śiva is absent.⁷ SvT 4/312-

314. SVT 4/314 is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/87-88
Kṣemarāja observes: “Having known this kind of oneness, he is never deluded.

The intended sense of the word ‘neverʼ is that (only) false yogis are deluded when they

rise out (of meditation).”
The second half of the verse quoted by Jayaratha that we are examining is
quoted by Śivopādhyāya in his commentary on VBh 74 (73) as if it were part of a verse
of the VBh. The texts of the manuscripts of the VBh are surprisingly varied, so it is not

impossible that this verse was indeed part of the VB. But even if it is not, exactly the

same idea is expressed in VBh 116 (cf. ibid. 117, 129), with which Śivopādhyāya links

it:

yatra yatra mano yāti bāhye vābhyantare ‘pi vā |

tatra tatra śivāvasthā vyāpakatvāt kva yāsyati || 116 ||
_*Wherever the mind goes, whether outside or within, Śiva’s state is present
there. (Siva) pervades (everything), so where (else) could it go?’ (116)

Śivopādhyāya quotes the following in his commentary on VBh 116:
dehābhimāne galite vijñāte paramātmani |
yatra yatra mano yāti tatra tatra samādhayaḥ ||

‘Once the identification with the body has ceased and the Supreme Self has
been known, wherever the mind goes, there (the yogi experiences) the absorptions
(samādhi).’

Śiva’s presence everywhere justifies an important, indeed, central approach to

nondualist Kaula practice, which we find applied in several meditations taught in the

Vijñānabhairava. One of them, which is relevant here, is the realisation of Deity

114

CHAPTER FOUR

The same contingency (avasā) applies to fixation (dhāraṇā) and the

rest. There (in that case, concentration consists of) fixing the mind on a
particular place, such as the Root (centre at the base of the spine) (kanda). As is
said (in the Yogasūtra):
‘Fixation (dhāraṇā) is fixing the mind (citta) on a (particular) place.⁷³⁸⁶

through the activity of the senses. However, this Trika Tantra nowhere identifies itself
as Kaula, although much of what it teaches could be said to be. This is perhaps because
Kaulism had not yet developed as an independent typology, or at least had not yet
asserted itself in Trika Śaivism. If this is correct, it could be taken as possible evidence
of an early date. Be that as it may, several meditations taught in the Vijñānabhairava

based on the view of Śiva’s omṇipresence understand that to mean that attention may be

fixed anywhere to experience Śiva’s presence through an expansion of consciousness
which empties it out of objective content, absorbing it into the emptiness (i.e. absence of
objectivity) of the unfolding subjectivity, within which the mind and senses come to

rest.

yatra yatrākṣamārgeṇa caitanyaṁ vyajyate vibhoḥ |
tasya taamātradharmitvāc cillayād bharitātmatā || 1 17 ||
‘Wherever the (universal) consciousness of the all-pervading Lord is revealed

through the path of the senses, (their object) dissolves away within consciousness,

because it possesses that (very) same nature alone, and so (the Lord’s) state of (perfect)
plenitude (as all things manifests as the yogi’s true nature).⁷ (117) (115)
This meditation leads to the manifestation of one’s own supreme Bhairava
nature as the universe. Accordingly, Kṣemarāja quotes this verse in his commentary on
ŚSū 3/8: ʻwaking is the second ray (of consciousness).” (jāgrad dvitīyakaraḥ) Bhāskara
explains: ‘the waking state is said to be the knowledge (born of sensory perception).

Observing the field of his (awareness), with it the lord of yogis should gather together
all things into a unity, and thus eliminating delusion, should remain well awake at all
times and free of duality. The ray (kara, of sensory awareness) is like a hand (kara),
because it has the power to gather together the waking state in this way, and so is said to
be the second (ray), because of its wonderful (cosmic) nature.' Kṣemarāja summarizes
this cognitive Yoga in a nutshell in his commentary: ‘The meaning is that ‘this universe
shines forth effulgent, as if it were the rays of his own (consciousness).’ (viśvam asya
svadīdhitikalpaṁ sphurati ity arthaḥ)
The reader may recall that Jayaratha has quoted (in TĀv ad 1/4) from an

unidentified source as saying: “The All-pervasive Lord (vibhu) Himself blossoms forth

wherever the rays (of the senses) unite (within consciousness when they make contact
with their objects).” If this takes place, the activity of the mind and senses need not be

quelled. Indeed, they can be used to propel the yogi who aspires to liberation to higher
states of expanded blissful consciousness. As Abhinava says below concerning the
experience of this yogi’s elevated cognitive Yoga: ‘Wherever (this) Wheel falls, by (its)

association with this process (whatever be the sense organ through which it operates), it
is indeed all things (and so all the other functions of consciousness following along with

it) like a great emperor, the lord of all the earth (who is followed into battle by his vassal

lords).” (TĀ 5/30cd-31ab). See below note 4,355.
²⁴⁶ YSū 3/1. Vyāsa explains: “concentration (dhāraṇā) consists of keeping or fixing the
mind on the navel circle, or on the lotus of the heart, or on the effulgent centre of the
head, or on the tip of the nose or on the tongue or on such like spots in the body, or on

any external object, by means of the modifications of mind.⁷ (Āraṇya (1977): 279)

TANTRĀLOKA

115

The nature (of things) (rūpa) (experienced) in meditation (dhyāna)

consists of a stream of perceptions of the same kind, not dissimilar ones, and so

is also conditioned by a (limited) fixed form.²”⁷ As is said:

‘Meditation (dhyāna) is the (continuous), homogeneous flow of

cognition (pratyaya) there (in that state of concentration).¹²⁸⁸

Thus it is said that it is ‘the cessation of (all that is) other than

that’⁴⁹ The nature (of things) (rūpa) (experienced) in contemplative absorption

(samādhi) is also the manifestation of the object of knowledge alone
(jñeyamātra), which is the object of meditation, by the removal of the two

forms, namely, knowledge and the object of knowledge. Here (in this case also),

(its particular) fixed form limits (and conditions consciousness). As is said (in
the Yogasūtra):
‘Contemplative absorption (samādhi) is (the experience of) the
manifestation of just the bare entity (arthamātra) (which is the object of

meditation), as if it were devoid ofa nature of its own.³²⁰

Surely (one may ask,) the (first) five, that is, the prohibitions (yama)

and the rest, are external ancillaries (of Yoga),³” so if they have no application

to consciousness, let that be. (But according to the following Yogasūtra, which
says that): “(these) three are internal (practices) with respect to the previous

ones,⁰*² how is it that these are not applicable there (to the realisation of the
liberated state of pure) consciousness? With this doubt in mind, he says:

²⁸¹ Dhyāna is a flow of homogenous cognitions. It cannot encompass those that are
heterogeneous. So it is also of no use to realizing pure consciousn
which is allinclusive.

³³³Ṁ YSū 3/2. Vyāsa comments: “There, in that place (mentioned in the commentary on
the previous sūtra), the flow of the cognitive consciousness relating to the object of
meditation being continuous, i.e. uninterrupted by any other cognition or thought, is
known as ‘meditation’ (dhyāna).”

²⁹ Ṛead astamitāparam for astamitā param.
² Read <śūnyam iva for śūnvam iva YSū 3/3. Vyāsa explains that: “when the state of
meditation (dhyāna) becomes so deep that only the object stands by itself, obliterating,
aṣ it were, all traces of reflective thought, it is known as ‘contemplative absorption’

(samādhi). The Sāṁkhya view is dualistic. There are two realities, namely, the
perceiver (that is, puruṣa, jīva) and the sphere of objectivity (prakṛti). Both are eternal.

Thus, the object in the full state of contemplation does not cease to exist nor is it

absorbed into the perceiver; it is simply removed from the purview of the perceiver, or
better, the perceiver retreats far away enough from it that it no longer impinges on

consciousness, and so, unmanifest, it is ‘as if it were devoid of a nature of its ownʼ, that
is, non-existent.”
¹ The five external ancillaries of Yoga are prohibitions (yama), injunction (niyama),

posture (āsana), breath control (prāṇāyāma) and withdrawal (pratyāhāra).
²² YSū 3/7. Vyāsa explains: ‘these three, namely, concentration, meditation and
contemplation, are more internal than (the observance of) prohibitions (yama) and
injunctions (niyama) with respect to (the practice of) Yoga with perception

(saṁprajñāta).

116

CHAPTER FOUR

Ṭ̄TI JTTTTATTĪTHĒTTTĀĪ TTT |

fāz ũẼṁ ṀĨr rgāīmṁ aadd 1 Q 1

tad eṣā dhāraṇādhyānasamādhitritayī parām |
saṁvidaṁ prati no kañcid upayogaṁ samaśnute || 95 ||
(Thus,) these three (ancillaries of Yoga), namely, fixation,
meditation and contemplative absorption, are of no use at all in attaining
supreme consciousness. (95)

In accord with (what was) said (before, namely) “(The withdrawal

(pratyāhāra) of the senses and mind from their objects consists of (nothing
more than just)) inwardly fixing (kīlana) (within the mind) the bond (of
contracted, conditioned consciousness), which is not (yet) firmly secured (in

outer objectivity, and so in actual fact serves only to tighten it further)’²* and

the rest, (these ancillaries of Yoga are also of no use) because they are (in

reality) binding.
Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, why are the prohibitions
(yama) and the rest of the eight called ancillaries of Yoga? With this doubt in
mind, he says:
Sound Discriminative Reasoning - the Sole Ancillary of Yoga

aīīṛçaāī āHrazq aāītāṁītā ātā |

aṬHṬGTṬTĀTTGTĀTH
TṬTITTT: I Rē I

yogāṅgatā yamādes tu samādhyantasya varṇyate |
svapūrvapūrvopāyatvād antyatarkopayogataḥ || 96 ||
If the (eight) beginning with the prohibitions and ending with
contemplative absorption are (rightly) described (at all) as being the
ancillaries of Yoga, it is because each one is the means to that which follows
after it, and so they serve in the end (to attain sound) discriminative

reasoning (by which one’s own consciousness is realised directly).²* (96)

²⁹³ Above, 4/92cd. I have added the first line in brackets to complete the sense.
²⁴¹ Abhinava is very careful to underscore that the teaching is not that the practice of
Yoga, or indeed, any spiritual discipline, is useless, and so all that needs to be done is to
do nothing. The ancillaries of Yoga do not, and cannot, purify consciousness, which is,

always was, and always will be pure, and hence immortal and free. The practice of the
ancillaries of Yoga is useful – indeed for the great majority of people, essential – for
various reasons, which Abhinava gives in this and the following verses. Essentially

these are 1) the ancillaries lead to one another and ultimately culminate in Pure
Knowledge. 2) Although exercising the psychophysical organism does not develop

consciousness, consciousness can develop and transform the psychophysical organism.
3) As everything is essentially consciousness, practice removes the ignorance and other
factors which obscures our understanding that this is so. 4) The reflective awareness
(vimarśa) of consciousness can be strengthened by practice. Basically, Abhinava is

TANTRĀLOKA

117

It is right (to say) that (sound discriminative reasoning is a) fit (means

to realisation) ‘in the endʼ, as it is the object of attainment of the eight
ancillaries (of Yoga), beginning with the prohibitions (yama). The prohibitions
are the means to the injunctions (niyama), the injunctions to posture (āsana) and
so on, in due order. (Thus,) the eight beginning with the prohibitions are
described as ancillaries (of Yoga) insofar as the previous ones (in the series)
serve as a means to the subsequent ones. Now, as they are objects of attainment
(in this way with respect to one another), related to each other in a series, such
that one leads to the next, they can be of use (to developing sound)

discriminative reasoning, which comes at the very end (of the series). It is

because of this that the self-reflective awareness of the yogi, whose insight
(mati) has also been prepared (and aided) (upaskta) by these eight (ancillaries),
arises in this way, by virtue of which (he experiences) his own (pure)
consciousness directly in a moment. The point of setting aside the six ancillaries
of Yoga of our own system (darśana) and referring here (instead to) the eight

(ancillaries) of Patañjali’s (Yoga)²* is because there is no other limb (of Yoga)
apart from these eight ancillaries, and so in all cases (all) other (possible)
ancillaries (of Yoga) are the means to (sound) discriminative reasoning, which

is (by itself the means to) the direct experience of one’s own (innate pure)
consciousness.
He (now gives reasons to) establish this (view).

ṝī:. ḍfafz ē fē ṁggrṁ īvīēzaī: 1|

3ṇai āīt āavsararāī
arazq aTat: | <.I
antaḥ saṁvidi rūḍhaṁ hi taddvārā prāṇadehayoḥ |

buddhau vārpyaṁ tadabhyāsān naiṣa nyāyas tu saṁvidi || 97 ||

Indeed, that which is inwardly established in consciousness can be

transmitted through it by practice to the breath, body or intellect. It is not

logically possible (that it should be the other way round, that is, from the
body etc.) to consciousness.²”⁶ (97)

teaching that the practice of the ancillaries of Yoga can only aid the development of a

higher, more expanded state of consciousness by exercising self-awareness. This is what
spiritual development is, and is itself the means to it. We may engage in āsana practice
or aerobics, for example, or even meditation on a Mantra, prayer, the vital breath, or just
tranquil stillness; none of that helps our spiritual development unless it strengthens the

awareness of universal and transcendental divine consciousness, and that awareness

develops to the degree that thoughts are purified and wane away through Sound

Reasoning, which is Pure Knowledge.

²³ But see above, note to 4/15-16, concerning whether Abhinava does really refer to a
six-limbed Yoga or not.

²⁶ See below, 5/14cd-16ab and MVV 2/5. The body, senses, mind, and so too the vital
breath function because consciousness is present within them. All the limbs of Yoga,
and indeed any other presumed means of realisation based on them, reside in this way

within consciousness, as it does within them, and so cannot serve as a means to attaining
it. Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains: “God Consciousness is the life of all these means.

118

CHAPTER FOUR

As that which is ‘inwardly established in consciousness’, at one with
it, has developed and is perceived, the prohibitions and the rest (develop)
‘through it’, by means of consciousness itself, (as) nothing which is not
perceived can be applied to any practical purpose (vyavahārayogya). This is the
point. (Consciousness) ‘can be transmitted by practice’ to the body and the
rest by attending (to consciousness) repeatedly. The meaning is that
(consciousness) develops (there) in accord with its capacity to slowly (and
gradually) purify (them), that is, (by means of the practice of) the postures etc.
with respect to the body, breath control with respect to the vital breath, and

withdrawal (of the senses) with respect to the intellect. ‘It is not logicalʼ that,

on the contrary, by the power of the practice of the prohibitions etc. and their
development in the body etc., it gives rise to development within consciousness.
It is said that the capacity (to observe and practice the) prohibitions etc. that
develops within consciousness is (essentially a process of) purification
(saṁsṣkāra), and consciousness does not require purification. Purification (is the

process of attaining a more) excellent (state), and that is not possible within
(consciousness, as it is the most excellent state possible, otherwise, if it were in

need of purification,) the contingency would arise that it is not consciousness
(because purification is a process whereby that which is purified is made one

with consciousness, which is essentially pure).²” Thus the prohibitions and the
rest (of the ancillaries of Yoga) serve no purpose with regards to this eternally

manifest and supreme nondual (consciousness). This is the overall sense (of

what is taught here). As is said:

‘(If one were to ask,) how could that which is firmly fixed (nirūḍha)

within consciousness in all respects (abhitaḥ) be transmitted to the vital breath,

intellect and body, so that the sequence of means (to realisation) operates there
(within them)? We wonder (on the contrary,) what, where or how could those

who exert themselves by the path of practice to purify this consciousness

contribute (anything to it) here?”

Or else (one can accept that this mounting) excellence, which is (the

developing)

manifestation

(of consciousness),

does

take place

consciousness (directly), by means of the body and the rest. He says this:

within

EÉPĀEEEKṀIEIGECŪTĀEzTYAḤI

TSĪTĀTTTTTIĪSāYTĀTĪIS-TĪTTḤ
I Q¢ I
atha vāsmaddrśi prāṇadhīdehāder api sphuṭam |
sarvātmakatvãt tatrastho ʻpy abhyãso ʻnyavyapohanam || 98 I

They exist in God, so how can they be the means to God? One enters God

Consciousness only by Tarka [sound reasoning].⁷ (personal communication)

²⁷ AIl extermal yogic discipline is based on the accumulation of latent impressions, but

these being finite cannot affect consciousness in any way. Self-awareness is the only
means, and this is the awareness consciousness has of itself.

TANTRĀLOKA

119

Or else (if you prefer to put it another way), because, according to
our view, the vital breath, intellect and body etc. are (each) of the nature of
all things, practice based on them clearly leads to the elimination of the
contrary (elements which prevent the manifestation of consciousness).²*⁸

(98)

Or else, according to the view of the philosophy of supreme nonduality
(parādvayavāda), that ‘although the Absolute (Brahman) is (equally in each)

place, (It is) omniform, unsurpassed and inconceivable’,* the body and the rest

are also essentially consciousness, and so ‘are of the nature of all thingsʼ.
Thus, the practice of the prohibitions etc., although established (only) there in
the vital breath and the rest, (corresponds implicitly) to the denial of other

(modes of conduct) that are not those of the prohibitions and the other

(ancillaries of Yoga), which are established in duality, such as violence and the

like. In this way, just as one should not do violence to oneself, so also (one

should not do s0) to others. Thus, consciousness itself manifests by the falling
away of duality between oneself and the other, because (both) manifest as one’s

own nature. This is the sense (of this verse).³⁰⁰

Surely (one may ask,) if one practices that here, one should become
more skilled (in the development of higher states of consciousness) by the
strengthening of the latent impressions (formed thereby). (If that is what you
mean,) let that be (as you say). What is wrong with that? (However,) how is that
that (practice) exerts itself to eliminate something else in such a way that it may

²³⁸ AII things are essentially Śiva consciousness, and so everything is of the nature of

everything else. So from this point of view, as the body, senses, mind and vital breath
are also such, they can be said to serve as a means to developing Śiva consciousness. In
other words, the means and the goal are the same, and so they work together.

Consciousness is perpetually self-realised and revealed. Yogic and other spiritual

practices simply remove the veil of ignorance which seemingly obscures this fact. Thus,
Sound Reasoning operates in this way, in the Empowered Means, whereas the other

practices do so in the lower Individual Means described in the following chapter. But in
every case, they do so, paradoxically, because consciousness is already realised, and

there are no means outside it to attain it.

³” See above, TĀv ad 1/165 and note there. This line is also quoted above in TĀv ad

3/43cd-45ab (45-46) and below in TĀv ad 12/5 and 28/375cd-376ab.

³* The practice of the ancillaries of Yoga are all related to the body, senses, mind, and

vital breath, which are conditioned, finite entities. Thus, they would not lead to
realisation, which is the manifestation of unconditioned consciousness, were it not that
the body and the rest are themselves forms of consciousness. Moreover, the practice of
the ancillaries of Yoga is beneficial and justified, because by practicing them, their

opposites, which are harmful, are eliminated. The practice of nonviolence, which is one

of the injunctions, eliminates violence done to oneself and others. The practice of
nonviolence facilitates the manifestation of consciousness, which is the realisation that it
is one's own consciousness, and that of others is the same. Violence done to others is

violence done to oneself. Conversely, good done to others is good done to oneself. The

more deeply we experience that, the more firmly we realise the fundamental oneness of

consciousness. To put it another way, to the degree in which we experience Śiva’s
immortal, blissful consciousness, to that degree we take on the suffering of others and
share in their joy.

120

CHAPTER FOUR

give rise to some other result also?³⁰ In order to quell this doubt, he gives (the
following) example.

EtḷtkkEti|ssattteṭḷḷ

3c@ṝqd TgeaŪdTaTRIg7āŪēaTd I Q8 I
deha utplutisaṁpātadharmojjigamiṣārasāt |
utplāvyate tadvipakṣapātāśaṅkāvyapohanāt || 99 ||
(Thus,) the body is made to jump upward by the quality of the zeal
(rasa) of one’s intention to jump up (strengthened by repeated practice
and) much jumping, and by eliminating the fear that it will fall, in a
manner contrary to that (which is intended). (99)

(The body) ‘jumps upwards’, that is, leaps upwards much, because it
takes place repeatedly in order to (develop thereby) the ‘quality’, which is the
desire to travel upwards, of the ‘zeal’ and excellence of (the athlete’s)

enthusiasm (to do so, that develops) by repeated practice. Eliminating first of all
the fear that the body will fall down or sideways, in a manner contrary to the
zeal of one’s intention to jump upwards, it is ‘made to jump upwardʼ, that is,
is rendered fit to jump (further) upwards by exerting the ancillaries etc. (to
improve their performance). This is the meaning. In that way, by practicing
jumping upwards, the body’s downward etc. fall is attenuated. Thus, by

practicing one thing, another is also achieved. This is the point.³²
He now relates this (example) to the main point.

TG-TTĒKHYTTÇ] TaTJTSĪ |
Jg, āgaīī sgaī: ũúaftrīa

Q00 1|

guruvākyaparāmarśasadṛśe svavimarśane |
prabuddhe tadvipakṣāṇāṁ vyudāsaḥ pāṭhacintane || 100 |I

³⁰!The question is, how can the elimination of latent traces of ignorance bring about

higher states of consciousness? How can practice to bring about one result (i.e. the
removal of latent traces) give rise to a different one (i.e. higher levels of consciousness),

especially as the nature of consciousness and the latent traces are quite different?

³⁰² The athlete, through training and casting aside fear of falling, learns to jump higher

and higher. As he jumps higher, he is also attempting to fall less. Ideally a time will

come when he jumps, he will continue to move upward without ever falling. In the same

way, by repeatedly directing our intention to elevate our consciousness, it rises higher as
practice progresses by eliminating those factors which bring it down. As Swami

Lakshmanṇjoo puts it: ‘when you jump up you do so by rejecting ‘falling down’.

(personal communication) So, in the same way, by focusing on God you reject

differentiated perception.’

TANTRĀLOKA

121

Once (the disciple’s) own reflective awareness, which is similar to

that (aroused by) the teacher’s instruction,³⁸ is awakened, (all things) that

are contrary to that (enlightened state of consciousness) are eliminated
when he ponders on the readings of the scripture (pāṭhacintana). (100)

When, in this way, by the excellence of the disciple’s repeated practice
of pondering on the readings of the scripture etc., his ‘own reflective
awarenessʼ conforms ‘to that (aroused by) the teacher’s instructionʼ; the
dullness and the rest ‘that are contrary’ to his own (enlightened) reflective

awareness ‘are eliminatedʼ
³⁴

Surely (one may ask,) if dullness and the rest (of the obstacles) can be
eliminated just by the power of the teacher°s instruction, then what is the use of

(the disciple’s) own reflective awareness, which (in that case would be)

like an

inner (useless) goitre (or hump on his back) (gadu)?³⁹ With this doubt in mind,

he says:

ī.Ṛ TṬRTĪI JIT̄

fif̄ ārafaġ

JIĪ J=z Ta aṬ |

avvāīṁēē
s̄T |āī
g.0. 1

nahy aṣya guruṇā śakyaṁ svaṁ jñānaṁ śabda eva vā |
dhiyi ropayituṁ tena svaprabodhakramo dhruvam || 101 |
Insofar as the teacher cannot inculcate his own knowledge or even
word into the intellect (of his disciple directly), there can be no doubt
(dhruvyam) that the (disciple ultimately brings about) the progressive
awakening (of his own consciousness) by himself. (101)
The teacher cannot make his knowledge, that is, his ideas (cintā) etc., or
(even his) word, whether his own or one he reads (from the scripture), develop

in his disciple’s intellect, by his own power alone, as long as (the disciple) does

not possess his own reflective awareness. This is because he is not capable of

even understanding the teacher’s instruction (vākya) without his own reflective

awareness, so how is it even possible for (the obstacles to his understanding,)

¹⁰³ Notice that, stated in this way, Abhinava does not preclude that the teacher be absent;

indeed, no longer alive. In No Means, Abhinava stresses the presence of the Master. He
need not teach anything. For the disciple who is ready, a gracious glance is sufficient to
liberate him. Here, at the level of the Empowered Means, it is the teaching which
counts.
³¹ The disciple ponders repeatedly on the scripture he reads, keeping his thoughts in

harmony with those of his teacher, and so when the self-reflective awareness of

Siva’s

pure, unlimited consciousness, which is the essential purport of the scripture and

the

teacher’s instructions, arises within him, all the notions he has that are contrary
to it and
prevent its manifestation, are eliminated.

³⁰³ These are the two relevant meanings of the word ‘gaḍu’ in this context. A hump on

one's back or a goitre are both unnecessary accretions to the body. They only deform
it,
without serving any function. If the teacher’s instruction were to suffice
by itself to

enlighten the disciple, his reflective awareness would be similarly superfluous.

122

CHAPTER FOUR

such as (his) dullness, to come to an end? Therefore, it is certain that there is a
progressive (development) of his own (awakened) consciousness (bodha),
which is his own reflective awareness, excellent because it is Pure

Knowledge.® This is the rest (that is implied to complete the meaning of what

is stated here).
By the glorious power of those who are attentive by nature (to the
teachings and practice of Śiva consciousness), even something experienced in a
dream becomes directly perceptible (to them in all respects), right up to (the

performance) of its function (arthakriyā).³⁰” Accordingly, he says:

Tā td TaSIṀ JT T-ITT āTTT |

TṬarc-āTTTTTAIIT TWTA T WŪAT || Q0 |I

ata eva svapnakāle śrute tatrāpi vastuni |
tādātmyabhāvanāyogo na phalāya na bhaṇyate || 102 ||

Thus it is said that even if applied to something heard in a dream,

the Yoga of the Creative Contemplation of Oneness (tādātmyabhāvanāyoga)
certainly bears fruit. (102)

‘Thus it is said that’ just by being aware of oneself, even when one

perceives something unreal, such as something heard in a dream, or (one sees)

the form of a woman or the like (as happens with nocturnal emissions), by

repeatedly practicing the Yoga of Creative Contemplation (bhāvanāyoga), it
‘certainly bears fruit’. The meaning is that one experiences it directly as

functioning (as does something experienced) when awake.³

³⁰⁶Although the teacher may instruct, if the disciple is devoid of reflective awareness,
he can never come to understand it. Thus, from this point of view, his progressively
developing insight, which is essentially Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā), is superior even

to the teacher’s instructions.

³⁰⁷ Real and illusory objects are distinguished from one another because the former do

not give rise to the effects of the latter. A rope lying on the floor ofa dark room that is
mistaken for a snake cannot bite. It does not ‘perform the function’ (arthakriyā) of a

snake.
³⁰⁸ The Yoga of the Contemplation of Oneness (tādātmyabhāvanāyoga) is the union

(yoga) with Śiva consciousness that develops by contemplating one’s own essential

oneness with it. It is the contemplative process of becoming one, which develops by the
exercise of reflective awareness in all states of consciousness, including dreaming. Even
dream objects, that are unreal, take on the reality of objects perceived in the waking
state by recognising that both are equally manifestations of consciousness. This happens

by first cultivating the reflective awareness of being conscious as the individual
perceiver; then, as that reflective awareness strengthens, by cultivating the awareness of
being the universal perceiver, who is consciousness itself. We know this is possible

because even without developing higher forms of reflective awareness we sometimes

experience dream objects as being so real that they give rise to the same results as their
externally real counterparts. The standard example is emission when a man sees a
beautiful woman in a dream. Here the term bhāvanā translated here as ‘contemplation’
retains its literal sense, which is ‘bringing into being’. Bhāvanāyoga – the Yoga of

TANTRĀLOKA

123

Surely (one may ask,) if the subject (viṣaya) (of these teachings) is

considered to be one’s own self-awareness, then what is the nature of the

recitation (pāṭha) (of scripture) and the pondering (on its meaning) (cintā)?³⁰⁹

TgTHT=. TaTSTTIĪT TS: |

Ṭarax ṁazṛ ftrrā dtxrzaaāṁq
| 1031
saṅketānādare śabdaniṣṭham āmarśanaṁ pāṭhaḥ |
tadādare tadarthasthā cinteti paricarcyatām || 103 I|
The recitation (of passages from the scriptures is defined as a form
of) reflective awareness (āmarśana) focused on (just) the sound (of the
words), without regard for the convention (that ascribes meaning to them).
When one does pay attention to (the convention,) consider that to be

(contemplative) thought (cintā) focused on their meaning.³⁰ (103)

Contemplation, is thus also the Yoga of Bringing into Being. Śiva ‘brings things into
beingʼ by the creative freedom which is His reflective awareness. The same reflective

awareness animates every limited ‘contracted’ locus of consciousness. Thus, the
exercise of reflective awareness amounts to the exercise of the freedom of
consciousness to do all things and bring them about. Thus, ‘contemplation’– bhāvanā –
is a process of self-suggestion attained through the practice of concentration and the

like, which when it reaches its supreme level, causes the objects which the yogi
contemplates, whether real or unreal, to appear to him as if immediately in front of him,
fully evident. The Buddhist Dharmakīrti (PV 2/285) is quoted by Abhinava (IPVv, 1 p.
270) and Kṣemarāja (SpN p. 27) as saying in this regard: ‘Thus all that is meditatively

realised, whether real or unreal, with great intensity appears clearly before the yogi, at
the culmination of the process, fulfilling his desires.”

The expression ‘Yoga of Contemplation’ (bhāvanāyoga) is equivalent to the

expression ‘process of contemplation’ (bhāvanākrama), that we find in the following

passage in Abhinava’s Tantrasāra: ʻWhen, in order to enter into the essential nature (of
consciousness) explained before, one purifies thought progressively (krameṇa), one
must apply the process of contemplation (bhāvanākrama), preceded by the teaching of a

true teacher, true scripture and sound reasoning. Due to the power of thought
(vikalpabala), people believe themselves to be bound. This (mistaken) belief (which is
due to their thought constructs) is the cause of the continuing state of transmigration.

Thus (it is not illogical to maintain that) the arising of a thought construct which is

contrary to that destroys the thought construct which is the cause of transmigratory
existence, and so (serves) as the cause of the elevation (of the fettered soul). And that

(thought construct) which is such transcends all (the principles) up to Śiva, which are
limited (and conditioned), and is the ultimate reality (paramārtha), which is nothing but
unconditioned consciousness. It is the place where (all) things are deployed (according

to their own nature), which is (their) radiant (vital) energy (tejas) that gives life to

everything. That is itself myself (aham), and so it is that I (aham) transcend all things
and am the nature of all things. This (realisation) does not arise for those who are
blinded by Māyā, because (they are) devoid of Sound Reasoning and the rest.’ TSā p.
21-22

³⁰⁹ Śee above, 4/100.

³¹⁰ Read with MSs K and C tadarthasthā for tadarthastu.

124

CHAPTER FOUR

(If one recites scripture without regard for) the ‘convention’, that is,
one is indifferent to the meaning (of the words) established by linguistic
convention, one is said to be ‘focused on the sound (of the words)’
(śabdaniṣṭha), and not on (their) meaning (arthaniṣṭha). When one does pay
aṭṭention to that, with relation to the sound (of the words), the perception of
(their) meaning (arises) by giving it precedence over the perception of (just) the

sound (of the words). This is the sense (of this verse).³¹¹

Having thus explained this by the way, he (now) continues (his
exposition of) the main point.

Tēaamaīḷ Ẽr̥īaāīāīs̄āra|

hdv£TTṀ-ĀYIITTĀGHT
3: I| g⁰* |
³! The word śabda has two meanings. One is ‘word’ and the other ‘sound’, which

indicate two ways of understanding language. A language consists of sounds. They are
the sounds of the words not, of course, just any sounds. In the case of Sanskrit (as well

as other languages like Hebrew or Arabic), the sound of the language is an integral
feature of the language which, at least from the perspective of its use in ritual, is as

important as the capacity these sounds have to convey meaning. The recitation of the
Vedas or Tantric Mantras is an example of how Sanskrit functions as a language even
without reference to its meaning. Vedic or Tantric Mantras may have meaning, but a

knowledge of that is not essential, all that is required is their utterance for ritual or yogic
purposes. The Vedas are still nowadays meticulously committed to memory, which

takes years of hard work, without any felt need to understand their meaning. This is
because the purpose of doing so is just their recitation. The sound itself is considered to

be powerful and sacred in itself. Abhinava explains that the reason for this is because by

reciting or hearing it, the reflective awareness of consciousness, free of thought
constructs, is strengthened. Thus, Jayaratha’s commentary ignores an important point
that Abhinava is making here with regards to the distinction between the two aspects of

the practice of reading or reciting scriptures. One is the exercise of nondiscursive,
reflective awareness devoid of notions, by focusing on just the sound of the Sanskrit of
the recitation. The other is the contemplation of the notions which form by reflecting on
its meaning. Thīs process is called cintā, which means literally, as I have translated,
‘(contemplative) thought’. Here this term refers to the progressive refining of thought to
higher notions of the meaning of the scripture, culmiṇating in
i the intuitive insight of its

ultimate purport, whichis the experience that one’s own essential Śiva nature and all
things are one with it. This is Pare Knowledge and the acme of Sound Reasoning. These
two ways of reading scripture, that is, concentrating on its sound alone or its meaning,
reinforce each other and lead to the same state of consciousness, although the former is

nonconceptual, and the latter involves thought.

According to Swami Lakshmanjoo (2007: 39), the state of concentration on the

sound of language is dhyāna. Cintā is a more subtle state of concentration on the onepointed concentration of dhyāna. Iṭ is practiced to maintain that concentration. In this

perspective, knowledge of the meaning of language, and attention to it, is considered to
be superior to just utterance without that knowledge. This is consistent with

Abhinavagupta’s view that any aspect or form of ritual, like the recitation of Mantras,

should be accompanied by a deepening understanding of their sense that is attained in a
heightened state of consciousness that develops by the Yoga of Sound. This must be so
if ritual or the recitation of a sacred text is to develop into the knowledge which, when it
attains fullness, is itself the liberated state. See below, 5/136cd-137ab (5/135cd-136ab)

and cross references noted there.

TANTRĀLOKA

125

tadadvayāyāṁ saṁvittāv abhyāso ʻnupayogavān |
kevalaṁ dvaitamālinyaśaṅkānirmūlanāya saḥ || 104 ||
³1²\s far as that nondual consciousness is concerned, (repeated)
practice (abhyāsa) is useless (as it always perfect). (Practice) serves only to

uproot the doubt that (consciousness is in any way) sullied by duality.³³
(104)

For the aforestated reason, (as far as) ‘that’ (nondual consciousness is

concerned), ‘(repeated) practice’ of (the ancillaries of Yoga,) beginning with

the prohibitions, (is useless). Well then, if this (practice) serves no purpose, then
why is it mentioned (at all)? With this doubt in mind, he says: “(Practice)

serves onlyʼ etc.³¹⁴

Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, why was it said before that

sound discriminative reasoning, which is essentially one’s own reflective

awareness, uproots (all) the doubts (which are the thought constructs due to the

mistaken notion) of duality (dvaitasaṅkā)?³¹³ With this doubt in mind, he says:

šTīgīa ākī ẽz ṣa aṁīã |

ṬāēṬṬ³Taāīq āTGTTTTT I 2⁰., II

dvaitaśaṅkāś ca tarkeṇa tarkyanta iti varṇitam |
tattarkasādhanāyās tu yamāder apy upāyatā || 105 ||
It was said that discriminative reasoning investigates the doubts
(which are the thought constructs) brought about by (the mistaken notion

of) duality, (and so eliminates them). The prohibitions and the rest (of the

³¹² Veṛse 104 continues on from verse 100.
³¹³ The expression nirmūlanāya literally means ‘in order to render (the mistaken notion

of duality) without rootsʼ. The common daily experience of the fettered soul is that there

is a difference between himself as the perceiver and the world around him. He

experiences this duality because he is ignorant that the true nature of all things,
including himself, is the one consciousness which manifests as every single thing, that

is, both as the perceivers and their objects as well as their perceptions of them. These
distinctions are essentially thought constructs (vikalpa). If examined in the light of the

teaching concerning the oneness, i.e. the absence of duality, in the one reality of

consciousness, these notions are no longer taken for granted as being true and correct.

However, they persist as doubts which, as active expressions of ignorance, seem to sully

the purity of self-illumining consciousness. The insight of Sound Reasoning, namely,

the Pure Knowledge which is the experience that ‘I am all this (universe) and all this
(universe) is me’ severs the very root of these doubts. Realising them to be groundless,
they give way to the clarity of insight which is the reflective awareness of consciousness
itself.

³¹⁴ Only Sound Reasoning is a direct means to realization. The other means function on
its basis and serve only to clear away impediments to its application, progress, and the
attainment of its goal.

³!³ One could also translate the expression dvaitasaikā as ‘the doubt born of duality’ or
‘the doubt which is duality°.

126

CHAPTER FOUR

ancillaries of Yoga) serve as means (to realisation indirectly only) insofar as
they are means to that discriminative reasoning. (105)
‘It was said’, when the nature of intuitive reason was discussed.³¹⁶
Moreover, it is said:
‘By means of that (sound discriminative reasoning), the Yogi may
discern that which impels towards the accomplishment of Yoga
(yogasiddhipravartaka) and that which obstructs it, which is established (and

ordered) (saṁvyavasthita) in many ways.”³⁷

Therefore, it was said that the prohibitions and the rest (of the

ancillaries of yoga) uproot the doubt that (consciousness is in any way sullied)
by duality, because they are (progressively), one after another, means to the
sound reasoning (which brings) that (about). Therefore, (sound reasoning)

should be said to be the primary (factor) amongst them. Thus he says that (the
ancillaries of yoga are means to realisation) ‘insofar as they are means to that

discriminative reasoning’. Thus it is said that only (sound) intuitive reasoning
is the direct means (to the realization of enlightened) consciousness, not the
other (ancillaries).

Nor is this (teaching unsupported by the) authority (of the scriptures).

Thus, he says:

3ṁ JJTṬḠṁē

7

- sīgā |

fōr̄ēītēē adtrgṣhza JTT | g ē 1]
fdfēṝṝ aTam sẼũtr̥çṀṀ
a 1

ITĪTTHĪRĀTRAĪTTT; R]: RĒTI
ĪT ; I| 2 0¹9 |
ī īTTāūṁzaāīīa
oī īīfx tīgāīg |
uktaṁ śrpūrvaśāstre ca na dvaitaṁ nāpi cādvayam |

liṅgapūjādikaṁ sarvam ity upakramya śambhunā || 106 II

vihitaṁ sarvam evātra pratiṣiddham athāpi vā |
prãṇāyāmādikair aṅgair yogāḥ syuḥ kṛtrimā yataḥ l| 107 ||
te tenākṛtakasyāsya kalāṁ nārghanti ṣoḍaśīm |
Moreover,

Lord

Śiva

has

said

in

the

Śrīpūrvaśāstra

(the

Maālinīvijayottara), in the passage that begins: ‘there is neither duality nor

nonduality and no worship of the Liṅga or the like . .

³¹ (He goes on to

say that) ‘everything is prescribed here, or else (one could say that
everything is) prohibited.” (The point is that) ‘the Yogas (of other systems),

³¹⁶ See above, 4/13 ff.

³⁷. Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha 20/31, quoted by Vasudeva (p. 422). Read with
Vasudeva nirodhakaṅ for nivartakam.

³¹⁶ The three references in this passage drawn from the MV correspond to MV 18/74cd,
78ab and 19, respectively.

TANTRĀLOKA

127

along with the various ancillaries such as breath control, are artificial
(mental constructs) (kṛtrima). Thus, they are not worth (even) a sixteenth

part of this one, which is uncreated (and authentic) (akṛtrima).’ *⁰ (106108ab)

Śambhu has said in the Śrīpūrvaśastra, (in the passage) which begins,
‘neither duality nor nonduality°, which is not quoted (with exactly the same

words) due to the constraints of the metre.*"” A negative particle is also

(implicitly) associated (with the statement), ‘anything such as the adoration of
the

liṅga

etc.”

(denoting

its

negation).

As

is

said

there

(in

the

Maālinīvijayatantra): ʻand (so too), not the worship of the liṅga etc.’.³⁸" (The
word) ‘anythingʼ (implies) that (this Tantra) accepts that (everything,)
beginning with the worship of the Liṅga, should (also not) be given up etc. As is
said there:
‘(There is no worship of the Liṅga or the like), neither its
abandonment.³² There is neither (the renouncerʼs) rule of not carrying to own
anything (niṣparigrahatā) nor (the householder’s) engagement with possessions
(saparigrahatā). (Such practices as having) matted hair, (smearing the body)

with ashes and the like are neither rejected (nor enjoined).³²⁸ Such is also the

case with the observance or otherwise of (the ascetic’s) Vows and the like.
Entry into the sacred meeting grounds (kṣetra) etc., the observance of the Rule
etc., (the diṣṭinction between) one’s own and othersʼ (sectarian) appearance

(rūpa), sectarian insignia (liṅga), (initiatory) names and clans (gotra) or the like
– none are either prescribed or prohibited in this (Tantra).⁷³²⁴⁸
(Well then, an opponent may object that) in this way, (all that one can
do) amounts to maintaining silence. With this doubt in mind, he says:

‘(everything is) prescribed’ etc. Everything (prescribed in the scriptures) is
enjoined, and (they are also) prohibited. Prohibiting something and (having
done so) enjoining something (else) would give rise (to the duality of) relative
distinctions (bheda). Thus, there is no division between what is to be done and

what not for a yogi who has realized the nonduality of consciousness.³²³ This is
what is being said (here). Thus ‘the yogas’ of other systems which, accepting
breath control and the like (to be the ancillaries of yoga as means to realization
³¹⁰ MV 18/19. MV reads -iṅgair for aṅgair, -matāḥ for yataḥ. Read with the MV te
tena for tat tena. See above, note 4,2.
³* Ibid. 18/74c. In the printed edition of the MV, this line reads: na dvaitaṁ nāpi
cādvaitam. Abhinava’s reading of it is: na dvaitaṁ nāpi cādvayam. The meaning is the

same. Jayaratha quotes the first version to explain that Abhinava makes this change to
accommodate the metre.

³³¹ Tbid. 18/744.

³²² Also quoted above in 4/106-108ab.

³³³ See below note 4,930 ad 4/257cd-258ab where the Kulapañcasikā is quoted as

disapproving the growing of matted hair and the wearing of sectarian insignias as do

Śaiva ascetics.

³³*MV 18/75-77, quoted below as 4/214cd-217ab. The entire passage from which these
lines are drawn is commented upon below, from 4/221cd ff.

³³³ There is nothing the yogi who is at one with pure consciousness should or should not
do.

128

CHAPTER FOUR

in themselves),¹* are artificial (constructs), and so are incapable of becoming

even merely similar in just (some) small aspect to (our) yoga, which is
essentially nondual consciousness attained spontaneously. This is said (with the
words) ‘(the various ancillaries) such as breath control (are artificial

(constructs))⁷ and s0 on.³”⁷

Surely (one may ask,) if that is so, as that (reflective awareness) is
uncreated and does not depend on (any) instrumental means, is (this teaching)

always true (and applicable) or not”³²⁸ With this doubt in mind, he says:

fk. arcza šatḷ frzāāē̃ī fāsfiīaa || g 1

ṝṁ *a: ftetī̄á z aai atkif 1
kiṁ tv etad atra deveśi niyamena vidhīyate || 108 II

tattve cetaḥ sthirīkāryaṁ tac ca yasya yathāstv iti |
‘Rather, O mistress of the gods, it is enjoined here as a fixed rule
(niyama) that the mind must be firmly fixed on (ultimate) reality, and that

that be so for whomever in whatever way it may be (achieved).’ ³ (108cd109ab)

So what should be enjoined here (in this teaching) as a fixed rule? (In

reply to this question, the Mālinīvijaya teaches): ‘the mind must be firmly
fixed on (ultimate) realityʼ, and the mind does not become firm (and stable)
here spontaneously (without cause). Thus, in this case, one must certainly

¹³⁶ Read prāṇāyāmādyaṅgīkaraṇatayā for prāṇāyāmādyaṅgakaraṇakatayā.

⁴⁷ Only Sound Reasoning, which is essentially the reflective awareness of
consciousness, is uncreated (akṛtrima) and authentic. All other forms of yogic practice

are derived from this one. They are created from it and so are artificial constructs and

secondary to it. The direct insight which is the spontaneous realisation of nondual
consciousness arises in an instant. One and eternal, it is not attained bit by bit, gradually
over a period of time. Thus, the ancillaries of Yoga, each of which are understood to

operate partially and successively, belong to the sphere of composite, temporal reality,

which is a creation of the fundamental, perennial uncreated consciousness. The Yoga
taught here is that of the direct insight consciousness has of its own nature through its

own naturally inherent power of reflective awareness. Reflective awareness, which
discloses the true unconditioned nature of consciousness, is ‘uncreated’. It is innate in

consciousness which, as the one eternal reality, is not created by anything. Thus, it is

totally different from the other forms of Yoga and their ancillaries that are, on the
contrary, artificial constructs.

³²* The question here is whether there are any rules at all that need to be observed, or
whether they are all equally and invariably false. Or else, are they applicable sometimes

in certain circumstances?

³⁹ TĀ 4/108¢d-109a is MV 18/78cd-79a. TĀ 4/109b is a condensed paraphrase of MV
18/79cd. Cf. below 4/120cd-121ab and 4/213cd ff. MV 18/79a reads sthirīkāryaṁ for

sthiraṁ kāryaṁ. The line in the MV ends with suprayatnena yoginā instead of tac ca

yasya yathāsṣtv iti.

TANTRĀLOKA

129

consider there to be some instrumental means (nimitta)³³⁰ (or reason for this to

take place). With this doubt in mind, he says ‘that that be so for whomever in

whatever way it may be (achieved)’. And that mind of the yogi, whoever he
may be, should be firmly fixed, independently of (any particular) fixed (niyata)
means (nimitta). This is the meaning. As is said there (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘In whatever way (that is conducive) to that, so should he practice³³*¹

Thus it is said that as there is no (particular) rule (niyama): everything is
enjoined and (everything) is prohibited. This verse has been corroborated in

detail (in all respects) in order to show that (this is) the one unequivocal view of
the (entire) eighteenth chapter (of the Mālinīvijayottaratantra).
He concludes this (teaching as follows).

The Irrelevance of Conceived Forms of Worship (kalpitārcādyanādara)³³²
Pure Knowledge and the Inner and Outer Cogitation of Consciousness

Tg £TTRTSĪTTI
TṀR: I| 2 ⁰8, I
āat-rāīamṁāōṁṁātrdi
fkēr: |

evaṁ dvaitaparāmarśanāśāya parameśvaraḥ || 109 ||
kvacit svabhāvam amalam āmṛśann aniśaṁ sthitaḥ |
In this way, the Supreme Lord abides somewhere, constantly
reflecting on His own stainless (amnala) nature, so as to put an end to the

awareness of duality (dvaitaparāmarśa).³²³ (109cd-110ab)

Surely (one may ask,) the Supreme Lord’s nature is nothing but pure
consciousness, of which the reflective awareness is that ‘ḹ alone am everything’.
Nor is it possible for it to differ in any way at any time, anywhere. So how is it
that it is said that He abides ‘somewhere’, constantly reflecting on His own
stainless (amala) nature? With this doubt in mind, he says:

EPṀṀEIŠHUKĪ‘ĒCEIELIHIṬAṈI
faīā aqaīsāī āī īāīā²zāīāzh̄|
³¹⁰ Another possible translation could be: ‘if the mind does not become firm (and stable)

here spontaneously (without cause), one must thus, in this case, certainly consider some
means (nimitta) (by which it may become s0).”
³ MV 18/79cd.

³³? The absence of corroborative references on the part of Jayaratha and the distinctive
Pratyabhijñā terminology indicate that the passage from 109cd-122ab consists of
Abhinava’s own reflections.

³³³ There are two aspects of the reflective awareness of Śiva consciousness. One is the

awareness of duality, and the other, the awareness of nonduality. Immersed in the

former, the individual soul is bound. When Śiva chooses to grace the soul, he instils the
latter, inducing the soul to participate in it and hence be free of binding duality.

130

CHAPTER FOUR

yaḥ svabhāvaparāmarśa indriyārthādyupāyataḥ || 110 |I
vinaiva tanmukho “nyo vā svātantryāt tadvikalpanam |
The reflective awareness of the essential nature (of things can be
direct and) free of (outer) means, such as the senses and (their) objects etc.,

or it can be other than that, and have that (direct awareness) as its basis
(tanmukha). The cogitation (vikalpana) (that embraces these two forms of
awareness, the one direct and the other aided, and the choice between

them)³³ depends (on the perceiver’s) freedom. (110cd-111ab)

Indeed here (in the course of perception, the reflective awareness of the
nature of things may be) established in the inwardly subtly manifest form
(ullikhitākāra) (of consciousness as the perceiver) alone, independently of (any)
means, such as the senses and (their) objects etc. Or else it can be a ‘reflective
awareness of the essential nature (of things)³, which is ‘other than that and

ha[s] that (direct awareness) as its basis (tanmukha)³; that is, one that has the
senses

and their objects etc.

as

its means, and follows on from

the

nonconceptual (nirvikalpa) (consciousness that precedes it, and is its basis).

Although that ‘cogitation’ (vikalpana), which is a thought construct (vikalpa),
possesses both natures, it is generated from the freedom of (the individual

subject)

who perceives

(kṣetrajña).³⁵

the field (of sensory

and mental

perception)

³³⁴ The word vikalpa is a substantive noun, that is, one that denotes a particular thing.

The word ‘vikalpana’ is an action noun. So if ʻvikalpa’ means ‘a thoughtʼ, vikalpana the
thinking of that thought, or one could say ‘conception’, as is translated here. Abhinava
uses the two terms vikalpa and vikalpana in this passage from 110cd to 114ab in a very

specific way, which he defines clearly below (in 113cd-114ab). There he says that
vikalpana is Pure Knowledge, which as we have seen is the experience of the insight

that “I am all this”. On the contrary, vikalpa, is the product of the ignorance (‘impure
knowledge’) of Māyā, that perceives and generates the experience of duality, division,
and difference between the perceiver and the perceived. Thus, vikalpana is both, as it is
the experience of the identity of oneself as the perceiver (i.e. ‘I am’), which is one, and

the object (‘all this³), which is many. It is dynamic, as it moves freely from one polarity

to the other without exclusion or conflict. On the contrary, vikalpa, centred as it is on
the object, is static, confined, as it were, to it. Thus, from the perspective of vikalpa –
‘ṭhought’ – in the domain of Māyā, it excludes vikalpana – ‘conception’ – in the domain

of the insight of Pure Knowledge.

³³³ We can arrive at a better understanding of this verse by examining other possible
meanings and hence translations of it. These are as follows:

‘The senses and their objects can serve as a means to the reflective awareness
(Śiva has of) His own nature, or (independent of them,) it can be other than that (as
nonconceptual awareness). These (two) alternatives (vikalpana) (proceed) from (the
Lord’s) freedom (which is never restricted).”

Or

‘The reflective awareness (Śiva has of) His own nature can be devoid of means
such as the senses and their objects, or it can be other than that (while maintaining) that
(direct awareness) as its basis (tanmukha). That (alternative) conception (vikalpana)

TANTRĀLOKA

131

(between these two possibilities proceeds) from (the perceiver's) freedom (to choose
between them).”

The reflective awareness consciousness has of its own nature is described here

in relation to sensory perception. One of the points Abhinava makes is that
consciousness remains the same whether it is engaged in sensory perception or not.

When it is directed at objects of sense through the channels of the senses, in the initial

moment of perception everything is perceived directly as it is, that is, as a manifestation
within consciousness. This inner manifestation corresponds to an inner awareness

consciousness has of itself as all things and that all things are manifestations of
consciousness. Accordingly, Jayaratha calls this the ‘inner manifestation’ (antarollekha)
of consciousness, in which subject and object are still one. In the second moment of

perception, the individual features of the one unified manifestation of consciousness as
all things are defined as individual entities separated from one another and the

perceiving consciousness. This process is marked by another activity of consciousness,
namely, the formation of mental labels for individual entities and perceivers,
accompanied by concepts and notions concerning their nature, qualities, functions,
relationships between one another, and so on. The first stage is free of thought
constructs and characterized by oneness, the second is that of thought and is
characterized by multiplicity.
In this way, the reflective awareness of the one consciousness has two forms.
One is the pure reflective awareness of the perceiver’s own nature as all things, which is

internal, not objective, one and undivided. The other is that same reflective awareness

operating through the senses, and so relates to the objects of the senses. The former,
which is independent of the senses, perceives the inwardly manifest form of
consciousness as the intimate reflective awareness which is its all-embracing
subjectivity. Although the awareness operating through the senses perceives concrete
manifest forms, it must nonetheless be invariably preceded by the former nondiscursive
awareness. The former, in this respect, is the pure nondiscursive awareness which is the

underlying ground of perception and illumines all its phases, including the formation of
the thought constructs (vikalpa) that serve to identify specific objects. This essentially
amounts to the difference between the same reflective awareness when it has these two
aspects and when it does not. Thus, aṣ the spontaneous discursive cognition of the
perceiver, the reflective awareness of Śiva’s innate nature is both. To elucidate this
view, Abhinavagupta refers to consciousness engaged in perception with the word

vikalpana, which has two meanings. One is ‘alternative’, and the other can be translated
as ‘notion’ or ‘cogitation’. It is Pure Knowledge, in which awareness is of the form, ‘
am all this and all this am I˚. It is called ‘vikalpana’ because it encompasses the
‘alternative’ notion that ‘l am all this’ and ‘all this am I’ as a higher form of ‘cogitation’.

However, when this ‘cogitation’ — vikalpana – is not grounded in Pure Knowledge as

one of its two alternatives, then it is termed ‘vikalpa’, which is the stream of

dichotomizing notions generated by the sense of duality, which is the ignorance of
Māyā.

In both aspects — vikalpana and vikalpa – the pure subjective awareness
remains unaffected by objectivity; that is to say, it never descends to the level of a
thought construct. This is the aspect of awareness which, operating independently of the
senses, is the Divine Means, by which consciousness perceives itself and all the
universe it produces within itself, directly. The form of awareness which operates

through the senses and mind is active in the other two categories of means, Empowered

and Individual. The Empowered (śāktopāya) is essentially the exercise of reflective
awareness, engaged in the act of knowing. As knowledge of ultimate reality, which is
pure consciousness, is free of notions and mental constructs, the focus of the practice of

132

CHAPTER FOUR
And that is of two kinds, and so he says:

Ṭīṝēḷ ā³ṇēaāT-ATTTTĪTHTHT]
āTÇCT I|222 1

ṬTaī ḍaātīā TaāTTāT *īTṬ-T |
āīa q aŪāāaātīstTīãkTTTḤ
I 222 1
hetk|tkaAtEE.EGEIĒYIÇZAI

tac ca svacchasvatantrātmaratnanirbhāsini sphuṭam || 111 II
bhāvaughe bhedasaṁdhātrṛ svātmano naiśam ucyate |
tad eva tu samastārthanirbharātmaikagocaram || 1 12 ||
śuddhavidyātmakaṁ sarvam evedam aham ity alam |
Again, that (cogitation is two-fold).³*⁸ (One) is called (the darkness)
of the Night (of Maāyā), which (perceives and) forges (saṁdhātṛ) the duality
between

one’s

own

(conscious)

nature

and

the flux of phenomena

(bhāvaugha) that manifests clearly within the jewel of the pure, free Self.

(The other is) that same (reflective awareness) directed entirely to the Self,

which is full to overflowing with all things. (This is) the Pure Knowledge
that “I am all this”, which is complete. (111cd-113ab)
‘Again, that’ cogitation (vikalpana) (is two-fold). It is this ‘Self’ which
is ‘purē’ (svaccha) because it is not made manifest by something else, and so
because it does not depend on anything else, is ‘free’, and is nothing but the
perceiver who is the supreme Light (of consciousness). It is (like a) crystal,
because it can bear the reflections (of phenomena within itself). Having made
‘the flux of phenomena (bhāvaugha)³, consisting of subjects and objects that
can manifest there at one with it, ‘clearly’ (manifest there within it), it is said to
be ‘(the darkness) of the Night’ of Māyā, because it (perceives and) forges the
duality (bheda) (between consciousness and the flux of phenomena) as (separate

this means is the active engagement of the reflective awareness of consciousness that
eliminates them through direct insight into its true nature. As we shall see, this is the

goal of the Individual Means below the Empowered one, as it is of the Divine one above

it. However, the sphere of practice of the Empowered Means is perception and its

instruments, which are primarily the mind and senses, and hence secondarily, the body

and the vital breath. Thus, the sphere of operation of this Means is the point of contact
between the unity of the subject (the experience ‘I am’) and the plurality of the object

(the experience ‘this is’). This unity-in-diversity is the Pure Knowledge experienced as

‘I am all this and all this am I˚. This ‘cogitation’ – vikalpana – is Sound Reasoning —
sattarka. As we shall see in the following chapter, the Individual Means is based on the

diversity of objectivity within the domain of Māyā, which thus serves as a means to
realisation (māyopāya). In that domain, practice begins with the body, senses, mind and
the vital breath operating in relation to objectivity.

³³⁴⁶ The ‘cogitation’, ‘alterative notion’ or ‘conception’ – vikalpana – is the cogitation

in the realm of nonduality of the pure reflective awareness free of thought constructs
(vikalpa) that form on the lower level of Māyā, the realm of duality. The former is the
basis of the latter, which develops out of it. One with it, it is of two kinds, as explained
in the previous note.

TANTRĀLOKA

133

and) distinct from the (direct) presence of one’s own (consciousness).³”⁷ The

meaning is that, by this general statement, all (phenomena) are described (in this
way). Again, that same conceived option (vikalpana) assumes the (other
opposite) form, of the sort ‘I myself am all thisʼ, and is established solely in its
own (conscious) nature, which is completely full of ‘all things’, and so is
‘complete’, that is, sufficient (in all respects to do this), and (so) as such is said
to be Pure Knowledge. This is the connection with (what was said) previously.
Surely (one may ask,) according to the dictum: ‘all thought is

transmigratory existence,¹³⁸ all (forms of) thought (and notions) should be

abandoned. So what is the purpose of the aforementioned division (into two

alternative conceptions)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ē fdēhcūi JGTNaTTĒT
WGATWT I 223 1

sfrēxtz mīraāīcá fāṁcū iīazaīaāēg1

idaṁ vikalpanaṁ śuddhavidyārūpaṁ sphuṭātmakam || 1 13 ||
pratihantīha māyīyaṁ vikalpaṁ bhedabhāvakam |

This cogitation (vikalpana) is Pure Knowledge (free of thought

constructs that,) clearly evident, eliminates the Māyic thought (vikalpa) that
generates (and ponders on) the relative distinctions (bhedabhāvaka)
(between things) here (in everyday life). (113cd-114ab)

(Pure Knowledge) ‘is clearly evident’. The meaning is that (it is a form
of cogitation that) has attained a state of direct (apprehension of the one reality,
which is pure, undivided consciousness,) by the process of purification of

thought constructs described previously.³⁹ As it eliminates the Māyic thought
which is the cause ‘that generates (and ponders on) the relative distinctions

(between things) here (in everyday life)ʼ, this is (the form of cogitation) that
should be adopted (upādeya), because it generates (and ponders on) nonduality
(abhedabhāvaka). Thīs is what is said (here in this verse).
And, because of the (many) different objects of awareness, that (Pure

Knowledge) is of many kinds. Thus, he says:

The Perennial Rite of Pure Knowledge and Inner Worship

GTFTīTTĪ
a: āṃ ŪTa TaTRHT I| 223II
TTÇTGTHĪĪĪRTATTTTĀĪTRATT;|
śuddhavidyāparāmarśo yaḥ sa eva tv anekadhā ||

114 ||

³³⁷ The expression here is atyāpoharūpatvena, which literally means, ‘as something else

which is (its) negationʼ.

³³⁸ This dictum is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/214 and below ad 14/13 and ad 16/283cd-

284ab (284).

¹⁹ See above, 4/3-7.

134

CHAPTER FOUR

snānaśuddhyarcanāhomadhyānajapyādiyogataḥ |

³4⁰ (In the context of the ritual worship of the deity,) this same

reflective awareness, which is Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyāparāmarśa), is
of many kinds, according to whether it (arises) in association with the
ablution (snāna) (that precedes the rite), (the preliminary process of)

purification, worship (of the deity), the offering of oblations (to it), the
visualization (of it), or the repeated recitation of Mantra and the rest.³⁴¹

(114cd-115ab)

³⁰ The domain of the Empowered Means is that of Pure Knowledge. The dualistic
perception of the world in the domain of Māyā is transformed into the play of the
polarities of subject and object as aspects of the contemplation (bhāvanā) which is the
sound discernment of identity. Once the stage has been set in cogitative cognitive terms,

in what follows, Abhinava describes it as the experience of the aesthetic relish of
worship. The perception of Pure Knowledge is a perpetual offering to the universe,

inwardly merged in consciousness. The rite unfolds through the following stages: A)
The yogi penetrates into his cosmic nature. B) He offers libation (tarpaṇa) to the Paths.
C) This is followed by the inner ablution, and D) libations (tarpita) to the deities of the
senses. Then follows E) the purification of the metaphysical principles of the body. F)

Beholding the body as the vessel of consciousness. G) The offering through the mind
and the senses.
³⁴¹ The Tantrāloka is presented by Abhinavagupta as a ritual manual (paddhati) (above
1/14); accordingly, he always refers to ritual in relation to the categories of the means to

realization. Thus, in the previous chapter, while declaring that ritual is not operational at
all in the sphere of Divine Means (above, 3/280-290ab), he takes care to emphasize that
riṭual action ultimately reaches its goal in the realization of the pure supreme

subjectivity, which is the sphere of the Divine Means (3/294ab (293)), and so is not

useless. Here Abhinava explains the function of the components of the ritual worship of
the deity in the context of the Empowered Means. These outer forms of practice are

effective for the same reasons advanced with respect to the ancillaries of Yoga if they
are grounded in this reflective awareness and sustain it. Thus, it can be said secondarily

to be of as many kinds as are these outer practices.
In the course of expounding the experiences of the yogi who is immersed in the
empowered (śākta) (state of) penetration (samāveśa) (MV 18/28), the MV teaches how

phases of outer worship of the Deity are assimilated to them. There we read:

The yogi should always worship himself fervently with scent, flowers and the

like (placing the offerings on the top of his head, where) the Cavity of Brahmā is

located, or else (do this with just his) imagination. (43cd-44ab)
1) His bathing is effected (just) by making contact with (any) liquid substance.

(44cd)

2) (His) offering (yajana) (to the deities) is considered to be (merely his)
perception (grahaṇa) of the smell of perfume, flowers and the like. 3) His savouring of
the six flavours (of good food) serves as (his) offering of food (to the deities). (45)
4) Whatever sound (he happens to) utter is said to be (his) repetition of mantra
(japa). (46ab)
5) (His) offering to the fire (homa) continues for as long as (his) mind is
focused there (on the sound) of anything that is burning burns. (46cd-47ab)
6) (His) visualization (dhyāna) (of deity) is considered to be whatever form he
(happens) to see. (This) great nondual (way of) worship has (thus) been taught by
implication (in relation to the subject at hand). (46-48ab) MV 18/43cd-48ab

TANTRĀLOKA

135

Surely (one may ask,) how can this reflective awareness, which is Pure

Knowledge, remove the Māyic thought (vikalpa) which is established in duality
(bheda), if that also is said to have other modalities (which are required) in
order to apply it? With this doubt in mind, he says:

frēī-cckaafaftrzāfradTk
aaṛa | 2 1

sṝftrva yaī fhā% Tzīēzaāṁvza3|
viśvam etat svasaṁvittirasanirbharitaṁ rasāt || 115 ||
aviśya śuddho nikhilaṁ tarpayed adhvamaṇḍalam |

A) Once the pure (yogi who has attained this reflective awareness)

has penetrated (spontaneously) by virtue of (his) aesthetic delight (rasāt)
into this universe, full to overflowing with the aesthetic sentiment (rasa) of
his own consciousness, B) he should offer libation (tarpayer) to the entire

circle of the Paths (of cosmic manifestation).³⁴² (115cd-116ab)

Sanderson (1992: 297-298) suggests that this passage inspired Abhinava’s
presentation of the higher nondual worship he maintains is taught in the Bhairava

Tantras, that he presents in the passage that follows (from 115cd to 122ab). Supported
by his prime authority, the Mālinīvijayottara, he teaches this in the context of practice

based on thought empowered by energy of the one ultimate dynamic cognitive
consciousness (anuttarasaṁvid), the Inexplicable (anākhyā). Thus, after defining how
this works in relation to ritual ablution (snāna) (4/116cd-117ab) and the other
preliminary purifications (4/117cd-119ab), Abhinava goes on to define worship itself in
these terms (4/121ad-122ab). This leads him to teach the form this worship takes in the

context of the Empowered Means (i.e. as a method of purifying thought) by an
exposition of the cycles of consciousness, focusing amongst them on that of the Twelve
Kālīs (4/122cd-181ab).

He then teaches how Mantra operates by analysing in this context the primary
seed-syllables of the deities (Parā and Kālasāṁkarṣaṇī) of the Trika and Krama systems
he integrates into his Anuttara Trika (4/181cd-193). He goes on to define the nature of
the repetition of Mantra (japa) practiced in the Empowered Means (4/194), the
visualization of the Deity (dhyāna) (4/195-199), Mudrā (4/200), and the offering of
oblations (homa) (4/201-202). He then concludes with an exposition of the nature of this

inner sacrifice (yāga) in general. (4/203-212).

³⁴¹ Sanḍerson (2006: 50) translates: ‘Cleansed by joyfully immersing himself in this

universe brim-full with the <liquid>/<bliss> (rasaḥ) of his awareness, he should gratify

the entire sequence of cosmic hierarchies.”
All this takes place spontaneously by the power of the reflective awareness of
Pure Knowledge, not by the practitioner's own effort. He simply abides respectfully

attending on Śiva consciousness, ready to do whatever he intuitively senses, it suggests.

He penetrates into all things, recognising that they are the outpouring of consciousness,

full of its aesthetic delight (rasa), by the wonder he experiences of the infinite expanse
of his true nature, which is one with it. Savouring its aesthetic delight, it becomes
directly apparent to him in accord with its true nature, even as it becomes one with him.

Sanderson (2006: 50) sees here a reference to the initial purifying ablution. Although
not clearly stated, this may well be so, as ablution with water marks the very beginning

of worship. Moreover, Abhinava has referred to it in the previous verse as marking the
commencement of this inner worship. Then, the yogi, his senses active and enthralled,

136

CHAPTER FOUR

Here (according to this teaching), the yogi who possesses this kind of
reflective awareness ‘has penetrated’ into this universe, because of the
excellence of his reverence (ādara) (for Lord Śiva), by virtue of the fullness of

the wonder (camatkāra) of his own Self, by means of the process (that purifies
thought) which will be described (further ahead).³*⁸ Then he is thus at one with

the supreme subject, and so is ‘pure’. (In this state of purity, he) ‘should offer

libation to the entire circle of the Paths (of cosmic manifestation)ʼ, that is, he
should make it directly perceptible (to himself) (sāksṣāt kuryāt) as ‘full to

overflowing with the aesthetic sentiment (rasa) of his own consciousnessʼ.
This is the meaning. Having in this way established³* that there is no object of
worship etc. which is conceived (kalpita) in a fixed external form, after having
(explained) that the ancillaries of Yoga are of no use, the occasion has arisen to
(explain), as announced (previously), that (we do not) revere any conceived

(kalpita) (external) idol (arcā) or the like.³⁹

Surely (one may ask,) it is right to consider that (ritual) ablution and the
like are essentially forms of reflective awareness (in the domain) of Māyā
because (Māyā) (perceives and) forges duality, so how is it that (they are) said
to be (forms of) the reflective awareness of Pure Knowledge? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

3lāāTāḡī̄TaŪrā-īāītcd
I| 22, |

fāāraṝ̄
zā ṃss --z=ā |

ullāsibodhahutabhugdagdhaviśvendhanodite || 116 ||

sitabhasmani dehasya majjanaṁ snānam ucyate |

C) (The true, inner) ablution is said to be the immersion of the body
in the white ash (produced) when the fire (that devours offerings), which is

outpouring (ullāsin) (awakened) consciousness, has arisen, and the fuel of
the universe has been burnt away.* (116cd-117ab)

offers the libation with reverence of the ‘juice’ (rasa) of the aesthetic delight (rasa) of

his own consciousness to all things. Thus, he experiences that the joys and sorrows of
the world are in reality the bliss of the contemplation of his own infinite Śiva nature,
and that his offering is for the benefit of the whole world.

³⁴³ The process that purifies thought, to which Jayaratha is referring and will be

described further ahead, is the recognition of the universal activity of consciousness in

twelve phases, as the worship of the Twelve Kālīs. See below, 4/122cd-180ab.
³⁴ Read kaṭ
tvā for kaṭākṣayatā.

³⁴³ The point is that worship for the pure Yogi who has attained Pure Knowledge is not

‘conceived’, that is, imagined as it is as in the sphere of the Individual Means. At that
lower level, the Deity who is the object of worship is imagined to exist in the external
form that represents it, and so too all the rest of the components of the rite that
represents the sacred universe it governs and within which it is worshipped. At this level
of practice, all this should be experienced directly (sākṣār); nothing is imaginary.

³⁴⁶ Sanderson (2006: 50) translates: ‘The bath [which follows] is the immersion of his

body and other [levels of contracted selfhood] in the ‘white ash’ that remains of the
universe when he has incinerated it in the fire of his expansive consciousness.’

TANTRĀLOKA

137

That awakened consciousness (bodha), which is cognition (pramāṇa)
that, because it is propense (to manifest) externally, pours out of itself
(ullasanaśīla), is Fire, because it is the light (of consciousness). ‘The universe’
(of outer objects, such as the colour) ‘blue’, (and the inner ones) such as
‘pleasureʼ, are ‘burnt away’ by it, that is, made one with it, and because it is
what is to be burnt up (by the fire of consciousness), it is its ‘fuel’. When (this
fire) ‘has arisen’ from that, that is, when it has become established
(pratiṣṭhāna) by the union of both these two, the ‘ash’ (it produces is) devoid of
(all) (phenomenal) limitations (upādhi), (and so is) ‘white’. It is the supreme

reality, which is just the one, unlimited perceiver. ‘The immersion of the
bodyʼ, that is, of the limited subject (into it, takes place) by considering one’s
own (body etc.) to be secondary, and penetration (samāveśa) there as primary.³⁴⁷

That ‘is said to be (the true, inner) ablution’, not the outer one with water

etc.¹⁴⁴ The difference (between them) can be grasped by the power of the sense
(of this verse to convey this suggested meaning). As is said elsewhere with (this
same) intended meaning:

‘If (one could attain) liberation by bathing with water, why should fish

not be (liberated)?²

Surely (one may ask,) outer ablution renders one fit to perform the daily
obligatory rites and the rest and the body etc. is also purified, so what is gained
from this kind (of bathing)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ṣ̄d̃ ī fāē̄īāī-āīāraāīācaza: 1 22.911

Ṭāīṣī ãēīā-ñftr aī dtaāīmrrq1

itthaṁ ca vihũtasnãnas tarpitãnandadevataḥ tarpitãnantadevataḥ || 1 17 ||

tato ‘pi dehārambhīṇi tattvāni pariśodhayet |

D) He who has performed the prescribed ablution in this way and

offered libations (tarpita) to the deities of bliss (that govern the senses)

should then proceed to also purify the metaphysical principles (tattva) that
constitute the body.³⁹ (117cd-118ab)
³⁴⁷ The limited subject, that is, one who identifies with the psychophysical organism,
abandons his limited, conditioned state by penetrating into unlimited, unconditioned
consciousness, and thus becoming one with it. This happens when he realizes that his

true nature is primarily consciousness, and his association with the body is a secondary,
adventitious and mistaken identification.

³⁴⁴ The ash represents the supreme reality, at one with the unlimited subject. It is white
because (consciousness, which is the one reality,) is free of limiting adjuncts. The body

represents the limited subject, and its ‘immersion’ represents penetration into this higher
level of being. It is not mere bathing.

³⁴⁹ Sanderson (2006: 50) translates: ‘When he has performed the rites of ablution and

gratified the infinite deities in this way he should ‘purify’ the levels of reality (tattvam)
which have given rise to the body [and the rest].” However, I prefer to read
‘tarpitānandadevataḥ² (‘offered libations (tarpita) to the deities of bliss’) for

138

CHAPTER FOUR
Surely (one may ask,) according to the (nondual) view (of the

Upaniṣads) that: ‘all this is indeed the Brahman’, all this, namely, the body and

the rest, is Śiva Who is the Supreme Brahman, and so how can there be purity
or impurity there? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ftrarṁcūāērrarrg
āfazdī zafīāēttī 1| 22. 1
ãñarzf:. Ūaṁī gēzīta*zm, 1

Śivātmakeṣv apy eteṣu buddhir yā vyatirekiṇī || 1 18 II
saivāśuddhiḥ parākhyātā śuddhis taddhīvimardanam |

E) *"The supreme form of impurity (aśuddhi) is said to be the

(persistent) notion (buddhi) of separation (from Siva that prevails) within

tarpitānantadevataḥ (‘offered libations (tarpita) to the infinite number of deities’).
These are the deities of the senses, to which libation is offered in the manner described
above (in verse 115cd-116ab). Divinized by the infusion of the aesthetic delight (rasa)

of the awareness of God consciousness, the senses are satisfied by their objects in the

oneness of the wonder of consciousness. When insight develops in this way in the state
of supreme subjectivity (parapramātṛbhāva), the deities of the senses attain complete
fulfilment. Thus, when the ‘doors of perception’ are cleansed in this way, they serve to
heighten that consciousness and really satisfy it, whereas conversely, devoid of this
reflective awareness, they contract it.

³³⁰ Maheśvarānanda (MM: p. 43) quotes this verse as:

cidātmakeṣv apy eteṣu yā buddhir vyatirekiṇī|

saivāśuddhiḥ parā proktā śuddhis taddhīvimardanam

cf. sivātmakeṣv apy eteṣu buddhir yā vyairekiṇī | TĀ 4/ 118 I
saivāśudáhīḥ parākhyātā śuddhis taddhīvimardanam |
The meaning is the same, except the reading cidātmakeṣv ‘consciousness by

nature³ for śivātmakeṣv ‘Śiva by nature’.
Maheśvarānanda (MM: p. 43) quotes TĀ 4/118cd-119ab just after citing the

following line from the Paryantapañcaśikā: śuddhir bahiṣkṛtārthānāṁ svāhantāyāṁ
nimajjanam ‘Immersion into one’s own subjectivity is (the way) things that have been
externalized (from consciousness) are purified.’ He continues:
anye punaḥ śuddhim ittham asyā manyante – yat sadāśivādiṣv aham idam iti
sāmarasyaśālinī saṁvid asti, tatra sāmānādhikaraṇyād aikarasya yoge “pi
māyīyasyedantāṁśollāsasyāvarjanīyatvāt sadāśivādīnāṁ ca māyāvārtānabhijñatvāt so
‘yam
idantāṁśo
māyīyatādoṣavyudāsād
ahambhāvabhāgavad
anayā
pratīyamānatvenāvasthāpyate | tatpratītivyatireke tu tatsāmānādhikaraṇyam eva
bhajyeteti | ayaṁ bhāvaḥ ‘Again, others consider that purity (śuddhi) (to be a state of) consciousness that
0s
s the oneness (sāmarasya) (of the experience) that “I (am all) this” (aham idam)
had (on the pure reality levels), thatis, Sadāśiva and the rest. There (on those levels),
thereis union in oneness (aikarasayoga), because (both polarities share) a common

ground (in consciousness). But even so, as the outpouring of dualistic (māyīya)

objectivity is inevitable and Sadāśiva etc. are unacquainted with the condition of Māyā,
this objective aspect (idantāṁśa) is established, as is the subjective (ahaṁbhāva) aspect,

TANTRĀLOKA

139

(the experience of) these (metaphysical principles deployed in the body,

although they are in fact) Siva by nature. Purity is the obliteration of that
notion.³⁹¹ (118cd-119ab)

‘Separation’ is (the duality of) relative distinctions (bheda). ‘That
notionʼ is the notion of separation. As is said:
‘There is nothing impure. Everything is established there (in
consciousness). Whatever is devoid of that becomes, for that reason, impure.

And so, what of that? Thus (in order to explain,) he says:

because by removing the defect of Māyā, it is perceived (in this way) by this (subjective
consciousness). When that perception (of objectivity) has been removed, (objectivity)
should share a common basis with that (subjectivity). The sense is as follows:
bhagavataḥ paramaśivabhaṭṭārakasya paśūn api kāṁścit pramātRn prati sadāśivādi
nirviśeṣam anujighṛkṣotkarṣād aśuddhavidyākalaṅkaprakṣālanāvinābhūtā svasvabhāvapratyabhijñāpanātmīikā saṁvitsvātantryaśaktiḥ śuddhavidyā, yām avalambya

vijñānakevalā rudro

Ś‘gniś ceti pramātrvaicitryam iti sa ity anenedantā-

krāntasyārthasya kārtsnyena koṭyantaratvadyotanārtham ahambhāvasyāvāpoddhāra-

buddhyupalabdhaṁ kaivalyam unmīlyate |

The Lord Paramaśiva (bestows the) Pure Knowledge, which is the power of the

freedom of consciousness that brings about the recognition of one’s own essential
nature. It is invariably associated with the cleansing of the stain of (limited, binding)

impure knowledge (brought about) by the excellence of (His) desire to grace some
perceivers, although they are fettered souls, equally without distinction, to (attain)

Sadāśiva and the other (higher reality levels). Taking (His) support from (that Pure
Knowledge, Paramaśiva unfolds) the variety of perceivers, namely, Vijñānakevalas,
Rudra and Agni (etc., up to) the liberated state of subjectivity (ahambhāva) perceived
by the intellect, that extracts (its presence) sown (within it) in order to illumine the
interiority (of that) polarity of (the aspect of) reality pervaded by objectivity in its

entirety by that (variety of perceivers).”

³³¹ After the senses have been satisfied in this way, the next thing to do is to purify the

metaphysical principles that constitute the body. This is done by the spontaneous
expansion (unmīlana) of consciousness the yogi now experiences, which purifies it,
transforming it into Śiva’s own pure body. Although all the thirty-six metaphysical
principles are one with Śiva, the notion of separation (vyatirekibuddhi) induces the
fettered soul to perceive the constituent principles of the body as separate from each

other and from Śiva. As Pure Knowledge dawns in the process of the unfolding
awareness of Śiva consciousness when the senses are active, the individual form of the
principles in the body are recognised to be essentially the same as those from which all

things are made. Thus, externally, the yogi experiences everything around and within as
his body. As the Śivasūtra (1/14) says: ‘the perceptible is (his) body’. Inwardly, his

body is a pure vessel of Śiva consciousness.

Sanderson (2006: 51) sees in this and the following verse a reference to the
process of the deposition Mantras and letters on the body (nyāsa), which he calls ‘the
imposition of the ‘body³ of ‘the pantheon of mantras.' The ‘body” (mrti) is here the

mantra as the sonic iconic form or ‘body of the deity, and the pantheon of mantras are
the sonic forms of the main deity’s attendants.

140

CHAPTER FOUR

TāTē āīthúīṁ TTāṁ’ēzhī
I| 22 l

ryāīāfāīTrāīāī ā- fāṁ=rā n: 1

evaṁ ṣvadehaṁ bodhaikapātraṁ galitabhedakam || 119 II
paśyan saṁvittimātratve svatantre tiṣṭhati prabhuḥ |

F) Beholding his own body in this way, as the unique vessel (pātra)

of (awakened) consciousness, free of duality, the (yogi) master (of all)

(prabhu) abides in a state of (pure) free consciousness alone.³² (119cd120ab)

The meaning is that one should experience the pure conscious nature
directly, by applying (prayojakīkāreṇa) the attributes of freedom and the rest
present within the Self (which is one’s own true nature), by disregarding
(nyakkāreṇa) the (false) arrogation of Self to (the body etc.) that is not the Self,

‘in this wayʼ, that is, in the manner described.
Having explained in this way that (inner) ablution and the rest are not

īmaginary (akalpita) (as are their lower, outer representations),³³ he (now goes
on to) explain the other ancillaries of worship (in the same way).

afcḥt̄z̄ṁīāāīaīfē
aā aāṁrzaiī 1 2 2⁰ 1
aṇszdi JJaTāaīT-ī ṬSĪTGTVĪ f€ q |
yat kiñcin mānasāhlādi yatra kvāpīndriyasthitau || 120 ||
yojyate brahmasaddhāmni pūjopakaraṇaṁ hi tat |

G) *“Whatever delights the mind, wherever the senses may (happen

to be operate, through which it is perceived) and is conjoined, that unites
³² One could possibly emend the text from bodhaikapātraṁ – ‘the unique vessel (pātra)

of (awakened) consciousness’ – to bodhaikamātraṁ – ‘just (awakened) consciousness

alone’. If the body is the vessel of consciousness, that would entail a residue of duality

between the possessor of consciousness and the consciousness it possesses. Even so, I

have chosen to accept the reading as it is, because here at the level of Pure Knowledge,

consciousness contemplates itself as all things, on the analogy of the identity the

conditioned consciousness of the individual soul has with his body. Pure Knowledge is

a state of immanent, universal consciousness of identity, not transcendence, although the
Lord Who perceives the universe as His body in this way is always pure transcendental

consciousness. Cf. ŚSū 1/14 dṛśyaṁ śarīram – ‘the perceptible is (His) body°.
³³³ See below, note 4,361.

³³⁴ This verse corresponds to MVV 2/124, which reads yujyate bodhasadbrahmadhāmni

brahmabilātmani ʻunites (the devotee) to the Abode of the True Brahman of
Consciousness, which is the Cavity of Brahma (at the top of the head)³ for yujyate
brahmasaddhāmni pūjopakaraṇaṁ hi tat ‘(whatever) unites (the devotee) to the abode
of (the radiantly beautiful) Brahman’s Being is an aid to worshipʼ. Sanderson (2006: 51)

understands this verse as referring to the inner mental equivalent of the worship of the

Self (ātmapūjā), which is done by placing a flower on the Cavity of Brahmā at the top
head. Thus, he translates the verb ‘yojyate’ not as ‘unitesʼ, as translated here in accord
with Jayaratha's interpretation, but as ‘placed’, as follows (ibid.): ‘Whatever delights his

TANTRĀLOKA

141

(the worshipper) to the abode of (the radiantly beautiful) Being of the

Brahman, is an aid to worship (pūjā).³*⁶ (120cd-121ab)

mind in any of the fields of the senses is then ‘placed’ <in the light of the real which is
the Brahma>/<upon that place of nectar which is [the aperture of] Brahmā. For it is thus
that it becomes a true offering [to the circle of powers of consciousness].”

³³S The VBh 74 similarly teaches: “One should maintain one’s attention wherever the
mind finds satisfaction. It is there that the inherent nature of Supreme Bliss arises.”

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: “Whatever is displayed joyfully in your brains should be
offered to God. For example, you feel joy from embracing a beautiful girl [or man], that

is the worship of Śiva. You must not embrace her [or him] for your own joy. Offer that

joy to Śiva in the Heart [of your consciousness, that is, in] brahmasaddhāmni
[Brahman’s Abode of Pure Being] which is sākṣātkāra [direct realization of the

Absolute] Offer the joy of sex to Śiva, don't taste that joy yourself. It is for Śiva.
Worshipping is really this differentiated perception of the world of objectivity, united
with pure, independent Bhairava consciousness.” The expression ‘whatever delights the
mindʼ (yat kiñcin mānasāhlādi) is a standard one. A verse that makes a similar point,
quoted from an unidentified source in TĀv intro. to 29/21ab, also begins this way. So

also does the following one, quoted by Kṣemarāja in SvTu ad 2/131-135 to explain the
‘secret¹ inner equivalent of the food offered to the deity and then consumed in the
course of worship (naivedya). ‘All of whatever delights the mind, having first
contemplated it with the method (yukti) that corresponds to it, is one with Bhairava,
because it is one with all things and so merges it all in that, its own (and one’s own)
abode (which is consciousness).⁷ (personal communication)
Similarly, Abhinava affirms:

“The inner (spiritual) wealth of the sacrifice (yāgaśrī) becomes well established
there in whatever external place the lotus of the heart blossoms (vikāsa).” TĀ 15/107cd-

108ab

One reason for this is made evident in this meditation taught in the VB:
yatra yatra mano yāti tat tat tenaiva tat kṣaṇam |
parityajyānavasthityā nistaraṅgas tato bhavet ||
‘“Wherever the mind moves, having by that (very mind) at that (very) moment

abandoned whatever (it moves to), it has no fixed place and so (left without support),
one becomes free of (its) fluctuations.” (129) (127)

However, for this to take place, the yogi should be free of the desire that causes

him to cling to objectivity — to some particular place or thing – and hence agitate the

mind that seeks to find ways to get what he wants and avoid what he does not. The VBh

itself supplies the practice to remedy this craving:

jhagitīcchāṅṁ samutpannām avalokya śamaṁ nayet |
yata eva samudbhūtā tatastatraiva līyate ||

‘Having observed that a desire (has just) arisen, it should be put to rest

immediately. Thus it dissolves away there from whence it has come forth.” (96) (95)

Thuṣ ultimately, on whatever path we travel, whether it be the common one of

self-restraint or the less common one of those who are graced with an experience of the

142

CHAPTER FOUR

‘Whatever’ thing (it may be), without any restriction, that ‘delights the

mindʼ, in whichever (field of) the activity of the senses (it may happen to be
perceived, and) ‘is conjoinedʼ to the beauty (śobhana) which is the Brahman,

the radiant energy (tejas) that is quite different from (outer light) such as that of
the sun and moon,³* making it directly apparent as (pure) consciousness alone,
by abandoning its external nature (that appears to be outside consciousness).
(Thus) that is (then) ‘an aid to worshipʼ, by which worship (pijā) (of the deity)

is completely fulfilled.”⁷ This is the meaning.

Surely (one may ask,) is this not (a new) definition of worship, unheard

of before? With this doubt in mind, he says:

r̥ ī āīrza vrarzaī̃ aāṣgf u 222 1
TATHTJT-TĪTĀĪTA JIGṬHT

|

pūjā nāma vibhinnasya bhāvaughasyāpi saṅgatiḥ || 121 ||
svatantravimalānantabhairavīyacidātmanā |

³“³*Worship (pūjā) (in the highest sense) is (the process of) uniting

(again) the diverse (and separated) flux of phenomena with Bhairava’s

independent, stainless and infinite consciousness.³ (121cd-122ab)

Lord’s presence, it is essential to be free of attachment and desire in order to rise to the
recognition of our own, free, omnipresent Śiva nature.

³³⁶ Read sūryacandrādi- for sūryācandrādi-.

³³S⁷ Objects that are pleasing to the senses need not be distractions. Indeed, they can serve

as a means to worship the Deity if they are experienced within consciousness. In order
to do this, the misconception that the body is separate from consciousness must be

eliminated. The body, like all else that is objective, is always experienced within

consciousness. By the exercise of attention to this, the false notion that they are external

gradually disappears and gives way to a direct experience of the Deity Who is
consciousness, which the soul’s true nature. In this way, the body and the outer world
are inwardly united with the splendour of the Absolute Brahman, and are experienced as

offerings to Him as the Self.
¹³⁸ Sanderson (2006: 51), translating ‘pūjā’ as ‘the presentation of the offerings to the
deities³, understands this verse to be a reference to the inner equivalent of the outer

offering to the deities that have been invoked onto the earthen platform (sthaṇḍilam) or
their idols (liṅgam).
³³⁹ Cf. below 4/180cd-181ab. The interiorization of worship is a practice that belongs to
the category of Empowered Means (Sāktopāya), as it involves a purification and

empowerment of conceptualization, which culminates in the pure nonconceptual

consciousness of the Divine Means (Śāmbhavopāya), in which the recognition of one’s

on true Śiva nature takes place. Abhinava is telling us that that grooms the mind for
inner worship. Thus, Somānanda found it fitting that his great work on nondualist

Śaiviṣm, the Śivadrṣti, that paved the way for his disciple Utpaladeva’s philosophy of™
Recognition - Pratyabhijñā - should conclude with an account of the internalized forms

of the ancillaries of Yoga and the elements of ritual. The passage is ŚDṛ 7/78-106. This
is translated below. The interiorizations are as listed. Following the numbering of the

verses in the ŚDr comes that of verses in this chapter of the Tantrāloka relating to the
same interiorization. They are as follows: Visualization (dhyāna) ŚDr 7/78-80 (cf. TĀ

4/195 and VBh 146 (144)), Yoga ŚDṛ 7/81-84, repetition of Mantra (iapa) ŚDṛ 7/85-87

TANTRĀLOKA

143

(cf. TĀ 4/194 and VBh 144cd-145 (142cd-143) and 156 (154-155ab)), Ablution (snāna)
ŚDr 7/88-89ab (cf. TĀ 4/116cd-117ab and VB), Offerings to the Fire (homa) – ŚDr
7/89cd-92ab (cf. TĀ 4/201-202 and VBh 149-150ab (147-148ab)), Worship (pūjā) –
ŚDr 7/92cd-95ab (cf. TĀ 4/121cd-122ab and VBh 147 (145) and 153 (151)), and the
Sacrifice (yajana) – ŚDrṛ 7/95cd-106 (– interiorization of worship (B)).
Going through them one by one, he writes in Chapter Seven:
‘Visualization (dhyāna)
Visualization (dhyāna) in the highest sense (paramārthika) is whatever (the
yogi) fashions externally and internally by his own (free) will out of his own (true
conscious) nature (which is endowed with the power) of emanation (sṛsti). (TA 4/195)
Visualization (dhyāna) is the immobile, formless and unsustained intellect.
Meditation does not consist of imagining the face and hands etc. of the body (of a deity).
VBh 146 (144)
dhyānaṁ nāmātra yat sarvaṁ sarvākāreṇa lakṣyate |
bhāvanācakṣuṣā sādhvī sā cintā sarvadarśinī || 78 II
yena yenendriyeṇārtho gṛhyate tatra tatra sā |
Śśivatā lakṣitā satyā tad dhyānam api varṇyate || 79 |
yasyāṁ yasyāṁ pratītau tu śivo ʻsmīti manogamaḥ |
tasyāṁ tathaiva cintāyāṁ tad dhyānam api jalpitam || 80 Il
Here (what is meant by) dhyāna is that everything is viewed with the eye of
contemplation (bhāvanā) as beīng omniform; wise (indeed) is that contemplation (cintā)
that sees all things. (78)
By whatever organ of sense an entity is perceived, there in each place Śiva's
state is perceived as (truly) existing – that too is described as being dhyāna. (79)
In whatever perception (the notion) comes to mind that ‘I am Śiva’, that too is
said to be viṣualization, that (occurs) in that very way within that thought (cintā). (80)
Yoga
yasminn arthe sadā tyāgo gacchatas tiṣṭhato ‘pi vā |

dhāvataḥ khādato vāpi sa yogaḥ parayoginaḥ || 81 II
bhāvite *bhāvite vāpi śivatve śivataiva me |

sarvadā pitṛmātrāditaulyadārḍhyena yogitā || 82||
tathāpi kośahemādisādṛśyaṁ yogasatyatā |
Śivo ʻsmīti madicchātaḥ sarvabhāvapravartanam || 83 1|
ata eva śivaḥ sarvam iti yogo ‘tha cetasi |
santataṁ śaktisantānaprasareṇa sadaiva me || 84 ||

Constant renunciation, (whatever) be the purpose, while moving, standing,

running or eating – that is the Yoga of a supreme yogi. (81)
The state of Yoga (obtains) with a stability like that of (the love of one’s own)
father or mother, (by reflecting that) whether the Śiva nature (śivatva) (of all things) is
contemplated (bhāvita) or not, I always possess (that) very Śiva nature (śivatā). (82)

‘In the same way, the truth of Yoga is like a treasure or gold. “ am Śiva”, and

so all things take place in accord with my own will. (83)

144

CHAPTER FOUR
Thus, this Yoga (is constantly present in my) mind, namely that ‘Śiva is

everythingʼ, (and everything) is always strung together by the continuous flow of my
power. (84)

The Repetition of Mantra (japa)
Whatever one who is established in this uncreated Heart does, or (however) he
breathes or reflects, is all considered to be his repetition of Mantra (japa). (TĀ 4/194)

O gazelle-eyed Goddess, this procedure (prakriyā) (of reciting Mantras and

performing rituals) here (in this scripture is considered to be) external and gross. The
contemplation (bhāvanā) that is experienced (and takes place) repeatedly again and
again iīn the supreme state is here (according to this scripture) the repeated recitation of
Mantra (japa). It is the spontaneous Sound (of consciousness). Such is the nature of
Mantra that should be repeatedly recited. VBh 144cd-145 (142cd-143)

The inner practice of the repetition of Mantra belonging to the Individual
Means according to the Vijñānabhairava:
Following along, and abiding within her, in the sacrificial rite made of Great
Bliss, may he who is penetrated by that Goddess attain supreme Bhairava. It is taught
that the repeated recitation (japa) of the goddess (Who is the Mantra HAṀSAḤ) takes
place 21,600 times in the course of one day and night. It is very hard to attain at the
termination of the vital breath.¹ VBh 155-156 (153-155ab)
aniruddho japo ‘sty eva sarvāvasthāsv asau japaḥ |

nānākāraiḥ sadā kurvann udayan sarvavastugaḥ l| 8 1I

abhyāsenāsmi so ‘py atra japaḥ parama ucyate |

saṅkalpāṁ janayann asmi sthitaḥ śabdān ato mukhe || 86 |
so hi nāmajapo jñeyaḥ satyādis trividho hi saḥ |

na me bandho na me mokṣas tau malatvena saṁsthitau || 87 ||
Uninterrupted repetition of Mantra (japa) is that repetition that (persists) in all
states, doing it constantly in many forms and arising present in all things. (85)
“The supreme (form of) the repetition of Mantra (is attained) by the practice ‘I
am here and so is Heʼ. ‘ḹ abide (here) generating intentions and thus (also) words in
(my) mouth.” (86)
That should be known to be the repetition of (Siva’s) name and as truth (satya)
etc.; it is of three kinds, namely (the notion that) ‘I am not boundʼ, ‘I am not liberated’
and ‘those two (bondage and liberation) are the Impurities (of ignorance that sullies the
soul)ʼ. (87) (Concerning inner japa, see above 1/89cd (90cd).
Ablution (snāna)
(The true, inner) ablution is said to be the immersion of the body in the white
ash (produced) when the fire (that devours offerings), which is outpouring (ullāsin)
(awakened) consciousness, has arisen and the fuel of the universe has been burnt away.

(TĀ 4/116cd-117ab)

(Real) oblation (homa) is the offering of all the elements, the senses and (their)

objects etc., along with the mind, into the fire which is the Abode of the Great Void,

TANTRĀLOKA

145

with the sacrificial ladle of awareness. O Supreme Goddess, the sacrifice (yāga) here is

the satisfaction which is bliss. (VBh 149-150ab (147-148ab))

pratipattyānayā snānaṁ nirmalīkaraṇaṁ matam |
duḥkhe vāpi sukhe vāpi sarvāsu pratipatiṣu || 88 II
Śivo 'smīti manohlādo jalasnānaṁ paraṁ matam |
cin nirmalā tanmayaṁ hi jagad asmi tathāvidhaḥ || 89 ||
ity āsthā jalaśaucena śuddhisnānaṁ tathoditam |

Bathing is considered to be (a process of) purification that takes place by

means of this understanding (pratipatti), (whether) suffering or happy (indeed) in every
experience (pratipatti). (88)
The mental delight that “I am Śiva” is considered to be the highest (kind of)

bathing with water. “Consciousness is pure. The universe is of that nature (and) IĪ aṃ

(also) like that.” This is (my firm) conviction (that has come about) by purification with
(this) water. Purifying bathing is spoken of this way. (89-90ab)
Offerings to the Fire (homa)

The fire (of consciousness) burns constantly and intensely without need of any

other fuel, its awesome flame pouring forth from all the senses. Phenomena entering this
fire of consciousness, intensifying its glorious splendour, become the means to offer

oblation. (TĀ 4/201-202)

sarvabhāvāḥ śivākārā antarbhũūtāḥ śivānale || 90 ||

so 'haṁ śivaḥ sutr̥pto ʻsmi homa ity uditaḥ paraḥ |

atrākāre na yan me 'ṣṭi tad ākārāntare ‘sti me || 91 ||
tasmād asmi nirākāṁkṣas trptyā nyo (> tu) homa īdṛśaḥ |

“AII ṭthings are forms of Śiva and they are within Śiva’s fire. ḹ am He – Śiva

who is well content!” This is said to be the supreme offering to the fire (homa). (90cd-

91ab)

What is not mine in (this) form here, is mine in (some) other form. Thus,
because of the contentment (I feel), I am devoid of craving. Such is the offering to the

fire. (91cd-92ab)
Worship (pūjā)

cf. TĀ 4/121cd-122ab
(Real) worship (pūjā) is not (performed by just offering) flowers and the like. It
is that which makes the intuitive mind (mati) firm (and stable) in the Supreme Sky (of

transcendental consciousness), free of thought constructs. By the devout (performance

of) that (kind of) worship, (the mind) dissolves away. (147) (145)
Those sacrificial substances with which Parā and (Bhairava) the Supreme

(Lord) (parāpara) are worshipped, or with which they are offered libation, and he who
is the worshipper- all this is one. What then remains of worship? (153) (151)

pūjanān nāsti me tuṣṭir nāsti khedo hy apūjanāt 92.||
|I
pūjakair avibhedena sadā pūjeti pūjanam |

atrākāre ca me pūjā yā syāt sādāśivātmani || 93 ||

liṁgādike pūjito ‘smi sadā pūjeti vā sthitā |

146

CHAPTER FOUR

pūjakaḥ pūjanaṁ pūjyam iti sarvaṁ Śivaḥ sthitaḥ || 94 |
kim etenātmabhāvena tṛptyā vā parapūjanam |
“T am not satisfied by worship, nor am I troubled by not worshipping. Worship
always takes place at one with those who worship.” This is (true) worship. The worship

that takes place here in my (physical) form is within Sadāśiva’s nature. (In that case) I
am worshipped in a Liṅga and other such (forms of Lord Siva). Or else it abides as

perpetual worship. (In that case,) the one who worships, the act of worship and the
object of worship – all (that) is Śiva. Or (does) supreme worship (take place) by the
satisfaction (that comes) by this, one’s own state (ātmabhāva)? (92cd-95ab)
The Fire Sacrifice (yajana)

sarvākāreṣu bhogyena yajanaṁ mama vartate || 95 ||

bhuñje 'haṁ yatra tatrāpi bhogalagnaḥ prattitaḥ |
sśivo smi sādhanāviṣṭaḥ śivo haṁ yājako 'py aham 1| 96 |
Śśiva evānayā sthityā satyayā yāga uttamaḥ |
yena yena yatra yatra yair yair yad iha cejyate || 97 ||
sa mayā kriyate yāgaḥ śivatvād yāga uttamaḥ |

My sacrifice takes place by means of the object of enjoyment within all forms.

Where I have worldly experience, there too do I adhere to worldly experience by way of
perception. (95cd-96ab)

I am Śiva engaged in spiritual practice (sādhanā). I am Śiva and it is I also who

offer sacrifice. This being the situation, it is Śiva Himself who is the most excellent
sacrifice. (96cd-97ab)

By whosoever, wherever and with whatever (offerings), sacrifice takes place
here, I perform that sacrifice which, because it is Śiva, is the most excellent. (97cd98ab)
Śivaṁ yāmi śivo yāmi śivena śivasādhanaḥ || 98 II
bhinno ‘py abhinna evāsmi śiva itthaṁ viceṣṭanam |
Śśivo bhoktā śivo bhojyaṁ Śśiveṣu śivasādhanaḥ || 99 ||

bhuktvodeti śivāvasthā sthitetthaṁ bhoktṛrūpatā |
Śśivaḥ kartā śivaḥ karma śivo ʻsmi karaṇātmakaḥ || 100 ||
Śśiva eva phalāvasthā vyāpāra iti sādhuṣu |

I go to Śiva. I who am Śiva am going. The spiritual practice to attain Śiva

(Śśivasādhana) (is done) by Śiva. Although I am separate (from Him), I am not separate

(from Hiṃ) – such is the way Śiva behaves. (98cd-99ab)
Śiva is the worldly experiencer (bhoktr) (of the consequences of Karma). Śiva
is that which he must experience. the spiritual practice to attain Śiva (śivasādhana)

(goes on) within (us, the countless) Śivas. Once (all the consequences of Karma) have
been experienced, Śiva’s state arises and abides in this way (as) the nature of the one
who experiences (the consequences of Karma). (9cd-100ab)

Śiva is the agent, Śiva, the action (karman). I am Śiva, who is the instrument

(of action). Śiva Himself is the state of the fruit (of Karma); such is the buṣiness (of

daily life) amongst the wise. (100cd-101ab)

bhāvanākaraṇābhyāṁ kiṁ śivasya satatoditeḥ l 101 II

yathā tathā pratiṣṭhāmaḥ prabuddhasyeti vartanam |

TANTRĀLOKA
‘The flux of phenomena’

consists of the

147
‘diverse’

(types of

sensations), namely, (the sight) of form, taste and the rest. “(The process of)

uniting’ (it consists of) making (it) one with the supreme conscious nature,
which, free of limiting adjuncts and undivided by time and space etc., is full
(and all-embracing). That is experienced as (the supreme form of) ‘worship’.
The point is that this (teaching) is not just our own idea. As is said (in the
Vijñānabhairava):
‘(Real) worship (pūjā) is not (performed by just offering) flowers and

the like. It is that which makes the intuitive mind (mati) firm (and stable) in the

Supreme Sky (of transcendental consciousness), free of thought constructs. By
the devout (performance of) that (kind of) worship, (the mind) dissolves

away.”⁴

What have meditation and means (to realisation) to do with Śiva, who is

perpetually manifest (and active) (satatoditi)? Just as we are well established, so is the

condition of one who is well awake. (101cd-102ab)

yad dr̥śyaṁ yac ca saṁspr̥śyaṁ yad ghreyaṁ rasyam eva yat |l 102 ||
yac chrāvyaṁ tac chivavyaktes tac chivatvena saṁśritaḥ |

gamye grāhye tathā vācye sukhādāv api sarvadā || 103 |
sthite śivatve baddhāstho bhavet sarvagataḥ śivaḥ |

mantavye cābhīmātavye boddáhavye dhṛtisaṁgamāt |I 104 |
sukhe duḥkhe vimohe ca sthito ‘haṁ paramaḥ śivaḥ |

pratipāditam etāvat sarvam eva śivātmakam || 105 ||

(Whatever) can be seen, touched, smelt, tasted and heard belongs to Śiva’s
manifestation, and has come forth as Śivahood. Śivahood abides as that whichis to be

attained, grasped, and spoken, and
so too alwaysin (the experience of) pleasure and the

like; present in (all that is) bound, Siva is omnipresent. (102cd-104ab)
In what is to be approved, desirable and to be known with a firm resolve, (and
s0 to0) in pleasure, pain and delusion I, supreme Śiva, am present. In this way,

everything has been established to be Śiva. (104cd-105)
na svabuddhyā śivo dātā śivo bhokteti śāstrataḥ |

iti kathitām (> -tam) aśeṣaṁ śaivarāpeṇa

jagad uditamaheśāṁghryājñayā svapnabhājā (> -jam) |
yad adhigamabalena prāpya samyag vikāsaṁ

bhavati śivamayātmā sarvabhāvena sarvaḥ l 106 |1

That Śiva is (considered to be) the benefactor (of the world) and that Śiva (is
the individual soul who) experiences (the consequences of Karma) is not own’s own
idea – it comes from the scriptures. Thus it is said that all the universe is Siva. The
universe (that has came into existence) by the command arisen from Maheśa’s feet,
sleeps. Once having attained the correct (state of consciousness) expansion by the power
of (sound) understanding, the Self, which is Śiva, is by virtue of His universal being
(sarvabhāva), everything.” (106) Thisis how the ŚDṛ ends.
The Vijñānabhairava adds the interiorization of sacred place, which is a
cardinal feature of Kaula practice:

“O Pārvatī! the penetration of Rudra’s power is the sacred place of pilgrimage

(kṣetra), which is supreme contemplation (parā bhāvanā) because it removes (kṣapanāt)

148

CHAPTER FOUR
Such is the nature of the oblation (homa) and the rest (of the other

rituals) also, because they too, in the same way, are aids to worship. This is

established (implicitly) by the sense (of the teaching), and so has not been
taught directly (for each one of them separately). Moreover, that has been said
before many times, and will be (again), and so one should understand this in this

way.*!

Surely (one may ask,) how can something which is (quite different)

from something else be made one with it, so that that can also be said to be the
defining characteristic of (true inner) worship etc? With this doubt in mind, he

says:³³

all sins and saves all (living beings) (trānāt). Otherwise, what worship (could there be)
of that (nondual) reality, and who (could be) satisfied (thereby)? (150cd-151) (148cd-

149)

The exhaled breath (prāṇa) should exit and the living being (apāna – the
inhaled breath) should enter. (Impelled) by the will, its form is crooked. That Great

Goddess is extensive (dīrghātmā), both transcendent and immanent (parāparā), She is
the most excellent sacred field (kṣerra).” VBh 154 (152)

³⁶⁰ VBh 147 (145) also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/21. See there note 1,332.
³“¹ See above, note 359. In his Tantrasāra Abhinava explains:

‘Pure Knowledge is nothing but that (Sound Reasoning) that is purified in
various ways, that is, with the sacrifice (yāga), fire offerings (homa), repetition of
Mantra (japa), the observance of a vow (vrata) and Yoga. The sacrifice (yāga) is the
offering of all things to the Lord alone, in order to confirm this notion, namely, that all
things reside solely within Him and nothing exists separately from Him. There the
external use of all things that are pleasing (such as flowers, offerings, scent and the like)
is enjoined insofar as the (best) offering to the Lord is that of all these things which,

because they are pleasing, tend to enter spontaneously into consciousness (cf. above,
4/120cd-121ab).

The offering to the fire (homa) is the dissolving away of all things into the fire
of divine consciousness, in order to attain this stable notion that all things are made of
the fire of the Lord which, conceived as an intense desire to devour everything that
exists, should be all that remains of them (cf. 4/116cd-117ab, 201-202). In the same

way, the repetition of Mantra is this inner cogitation, namely that the supreme reality
exists in itself, for itself, and is not independent of differentiated objectivity, in such a
way that a reflective awareness arises that embraces both terms (cf. below, 4/194).

The vow (vrata) is the perception of all things, including the body and (any

common object) like a jar, in this way, that is, that they are one with the Lord. It is said
in the Nandīśikhātantra that ‘the supreme vow is the equality of all things.' Yoga is
(thuṣ) a special determinate representation (vikalpa), the nature of which is an attentive
reflection (anusaṁdhāna) of the essential nature of ultimate reality (paramārthatattva)
in order to corroborate this conviction that all that exists is nothing but the eternal Light
of ultimate reality which, even though it shines by the (many) wonderfully various

conceptual representations (vikalpa) which are aspects of Pure Knowledge, is, even so,
completely independent of them.” TSā p. 25-27

³² How can this finite, conditioned, temporal and spatial reality be united with Śiva
consciousness that is quite the opposite, in such a way that this true inner worship,
which is defined by and as this oneness, can take place?

TANTRĀLOKA

149

The Arising of the Cycles of Consciousness (saṁviccakrodaya)³⁰³

āaīṁē drcraṁrcrtraāTraīā-T
|| 22 1
TTT--TTRTHTS THYTAĒĪTTĪ |
tathāhi saṁvid ev eyam antarbāhyobhayātmanā || 122 ||

svātantryād vartamānaiva parāmarśasvarūpiṇī |

³"In the same way, this same consciousness manifests by virtue of
its freedom as both internal and external (reality), even as it persists as

essentially (pure) reflective awareness.³⁵ (122cd-123ab)

³³ Verses 122cd-180ab are dedicated to the Wheel of the Twelve Kālīs. Abhinava

introduces the Twelve Kālīs with a presentation of the twelve phases of the cycle of

perception (pramāṇa), with which Abhinava identifies them. This begins with verses
122cd-127 and concludes in 145-147. It appears as if Abhinava had written them
together initially and then inserted the lengthy passage from the Yogasaṅcāra.
The Kālīs are energies or aspects of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the Goddess of the
Kashmiri Kālī Krama, who is experienced by the awareness of their incessant activity.
The subject is also treated in the TSā p. 28-30 (quoted below in note 4,469) and briefly
in MVV 1/935-942 (quoted below, note 4,469). See Sanderson's discussion (1986: 197204) and Silburn’s Hymnes aux Kālī, Le Roue des Énergies Divines (1975), which,
entirely dedicated to the Twelve Kālīs, focuses on this passage. In the Empowered

Means they are experienced as the phases of worship outlined in the previous verses. As
Sanderson (2006: 51) explains: ‘The principal inspiration of this language of higher
riṭual in the Trika and its colonies is the Krama. The sequence of the external rites
(pūjākramaḥ) is transformed into the liberating contemplation of the natural cycle of the
Goddess Cognition (saṁvitkramaḥ) which is the special practice of that tradition. So

Abhinavagupta explains that his ‘presentation of offerings to the deities (pūjā), namely
the reunion of alienated objectivity with the pure subjectivity established by the
preliminaries (from ‘ablution’ onwards), is the contemplation of the fact that reality is
pervaded by the twelve Kālīs of the Krama’s Sequence of the Nameless

(anākhyakrama), that is to say, by the Goddess as she manifests herself within the

diminution or increase of her power in the twelve moments of manifestation, from the
initial projection of subjectivity which sustains that awareness into the egoless light of
nonduality.”
³⁶¹ Maheśvarānanda quotes this verse in conjunction with SpKā 14ab: ‘Moreover two
states called the ‘agent’ and the ‘product of action’ abide here’. He goes on to say that
according to their view: yadā svasmin hṛdayaprakāśarūpa evātmani tiṣṭhati, tadā
vimarśaḥ śuddho vimarśa ity eva vyavahriyate | yadā tu vikalpopaśleṣalakṣaṇaṁ
kṣobham anubhavati, tadā viśvavistāraḥ prapañcasphuraṇavaicitryātmā (p. 34) vimarśa

iti tatrādhiko viśeṣaṇāṁśaḥ kaścid utpadyate | evaṁ ca prakāśasya vimarśaḥ svabhāva

ity aṅgīkāryam | etadvyatirekaś ca svabhāvabhaṅgaparyāyatvāt tasyāprakāśatvam eva
prayojayati | tataś cāyaṁ sphaṭikamukurādivad alpaprakāśaḥ stambhakumbhādivad
aprakāśo vā syād ity uktaṁ bhavati |
‘If reflective awareness abides within its own self, which is the Light of the
Heart, it is then said to be pure reflective awareness. Whereas, if it experiences the

disturbance which is association with thought constructs, then a certain extra qualifying
aspect (of the Light) arises, namely, the expanse of all things, which is the wonderful

150

CHAPTER FOUR

variety of the effulgence of the world of daily life (prapañca). One should accept that in
this way reflective awareness is the essential nature (svabhāva) of the Light (of
consciousness). Separation (of awareness) from that (Light) is synonymous with the
destruction of its own nature and so renders it devoid of Light. Thus, what is being
stated (in this way) is that it would be a small light, like that of a crystal or mirror, or
(even) no light at all, like a pillar or a jar.”
Maheśvarānanda goes on to quote from an unknown source:
saccitsukhamayaḥ śambhuṣ trirūpaḥ sarvavastuṣu | iti |
ittham antarbahirbhāvavaicitrye ‘pi prasarpati |
yaugapadyamayīṁ svasya vimraṣṭrtvamayīṁ sthitim |l
anuśīlya janaḥ svacchām aiśvarīṁ śriyam aśnute |

evam etadupekṣāyāṁ pāśavena vimuhyati l

yathā yathā vijrmbheta svasaṁrambhacamatkriyā |
tathā tathā vikalpānāṁ vikṣobhaḥ kṣayam aśnute |l
kalayāpi vimarśasya vīryavattā vipaścitaḥ |
tanvyāpi viṣakākiṇyā durlaṅgho hi bhujaṅgamaḥ || iti Iḷ
nanu viśvavyavahāro hi bahirgrāhyārthatayā vartamānaḥ katham ātmasvabhāvo
vimarśaḥ syād ity āśaṅkyāha pṛthvīparamaśivayoḥ pratyāhāre prakāśaparamārthe |
yo ʻnyonyaviśeṣaḥ sa eva hṛdayasya vimarśonmeṣaḥ ||
‘‘Śambhu, who is being, consciousness and bliss, possesses (these) three forms

in all things. He flows along in this way even when the wonderfully varied relationship

between inner and outer obtains.
By being in accord with his own abiding state, which is
that of the subject engaged in reflective awareness consisting of the simultaneity (of

inner and outer), a person attains the pure lordship and glory (of consciousness). In the
same way, (conversely,) when he is indifferent (to that), he is deluded by the fettered
state.

To the degree and manner in which the wonder of the dynamism of his own

(inherent nature) unfolds, so does the disturbance of thought constructs come to an end.
A wise man is endowed with (great) vitality by even a (small) degree of awareness. A
serpent is hard to cross because of even just a small amount of poison.’

Surely, all daily life (viśvavyavahāra) goes on as an externally perceivable
reality; how can reflective awareness be one’s own nature (ātmasvabhāva)? With this
doubt (in mind), it is said:
The mutual differences within the conglomerate (of all the reality levels),

ranging from Earth to Supreme Śiva, the ultimate nature of which is the Light (of

consciousness), is the unfolding of the reflective awareness of the Heart.’ MM p. 33-34
(commentary on verse 11).

³³ Consciousness freely assumes two forms – internal and external, subjective and

objective. Internally it is one with Bhairava. Externally, it is the objective world. The

following exposition, the core of which is the Cycle of the Twelve Kālīs, is an analysis
of the reflective awareness of the process which is consciousness (saṁvitkrama) taught

in the Krama system. Abhinava has introduced it in this way as the pervading activity of
consciousness marked externally by the phases of the liturgy (pūjākrama), of which he
has presented the inner ‘uncreated’ (akritrima) and ‘unconceived’ (akalpita)
equivalents. In this perspective, these are the outer and inner reality manifested by

consciousness.

TANTRĀLOKA

151

‘This same consciousness,’ the nature of which has been explained,

‘manifests by virtue of its freedom’ in (both) an internal and external form.
Thuṣ, in reality there is nothing else apart from that, and so it is reasonable to
say (that worship is the process of) making the diverse flux of phenomena one
with the conscious nature. Surely (one may ask,) how is it that even when

(consciousness) manifests externally,³⁶ its own essential nature can be the
reflective awareness of (pure) ‘I’ (consciousness)? With this doubt in mind, he

says that: “(it persists as) essentially (pure) reflective awarenessʼ’. Thus, in

this way also, it does not fall from its own essential nature. This is the meaning.

Such is the reflective awareness (of consciousness), that it manifests as
all things. Thus, he says:

a
aaā] āJ̄ JaTT’ĪTaTT:
| g33 1
g tē fē dṁaā # # feava: ftaa: 1

hTICJTHTCHḤ TCATECṬTTTTÁĪT: I 22% I

sa ca dvãdaśadhã tatra sarvam antar bhaved yataḥ || 123 ||

sūrya eva hi somātmā sa ca viśvamayaḥ sthitaḥ |
kalādvādaśakātmaiva tatsaṁvit paramārthataḥ || 124 ||

And that is twelve-fold there, as it includes everything within
(itself), and is the Sun (of perception), which is the nature of the Moon (of

³⁸⁶ bahīrūpatāvabhāsane ‘pi even – lit. ‘when its exteriority manifests’. ‘Internal’ and

‘external’ are states consciousness assumes. Everything is consciousness; there cannot

be anything outside it. Here ‘outside’ consciousness means everything that is perceived

objectively. This not only includes outer objects, but also mental images and the activity
of the mind. They are also experienced objectively, that is, as objects with respect to the

perceiver, who is ‘intemal’. We may understand this polarity more ‘externally’ by
understanding ‘external’ to be outside ourselves and ‘internal’ within ourselves, that is,
our thoughts and feelings etc. We may also understand it more ‘internally’ by taking
both these polarities to be ‘external’ with respect to consciousness itself. However much

we ascend up the ladder of internalization or descend down it, the innermost subjective
polarity is grounded in self-awareness, which is that of consciousness itself. Thus,
consciousness polarizes ‘externally’ even as it abides ‘internally’ unchanged as the
essential self-reflective awareness of the perceiver. This play of inner and outer amounts
to the formation of thought constructs (vikalpa), the primary function of which is the
externalization of consciousness that thereby splits into the inner ‘I’ and outer ‘this’ in
such a way that the perception (pratīti) arises that ‘I know this’. But even so, the pure

noetic state (the ‘know’ part) which is consciousness is not divided up thereby. This

reflective awareness of ‘knowing’ is the basis for both the limited individual ‘T and its
object. This ‘knowing’ knows that it knows and itself as knowing. As such it is pure ‘’

consciousness, which although it is not the individual perceiver, fundamentally, the
individual perceiver is it.

Abhinava introduces his exposition of the Twelve Kālīs as a primary means of
purifying thought here in the domain of the Empowered Means by explaining that this is
possible because the reflective awareness of ‘inner’ and ‘outer’, which is conceptual, is
essentially the same reflective awareness of pure consciousness which, free of thought,

is neither ‘inner’ nor ‘outer°.

152

CHAPTER FOUR

objectivity), and abides as all things. That consciousness is in reality
(paramārthataḥ) made up of twelve digits (kalā).³√⁷ (123cd-124)
³“⁷ Abhinava is now going to expound his teaching concerning the ‘inner’ sequence of
the phases of consciousness (sarvitkrama), that correspond to the sequence in which
the assembly (cakra) of Kālīs are worshipped (pūjanakrama) externally. In order to
understand the point of Abhinava’s exposition, it is necessary to know the basic model

of worship of the goddess Kaālī in the early Tantras. Its initial phase developed in the
Jayadrathayāmala, to which Abhinava refers with special reverence as the
Tantrarājabhaṭṭāraka – the Venerable King of the Tantras. This vast seminal work,
divided into four parts of six thousand verses (ṣatka) each, is an extraordinary source of
Kālī worship. It refers to many forms of Kālī, of which it presents procedures (kalpa) to
worship them, some of which continued to be worshipped in Kashmir until recently (see

Sanderson 2006b: 17). One of the principal ones, who emerged as the goddess of the

Krama, is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. The first part (ṣaka) is originally a self-contained work on
the cult of this goddess (ibid. p. 21 n. 55), whom Abhinava takes to be Kālī herself (cf.
4/177), and refers to her directly in that form in several places. Kālīs may be worshipped

in groups (cakra) alone without male partners to form pure female maṇḍalas. Embedded
in these procedures are sections dedicated to the Kālīkula, also called, Kālīkrama, which
constitute the initial revelations that developed through subsequent independent
Kālīkula Tantras (notably the Kramasadbhāva and Kālikulapañcaśataka). Sets of
configurations emerge that came to be the standard ones for the worship of Kālī in these
traditions. As Kālī is the Goddess of Time (kāla), it is appropriate that these

configurations be understood as phases or aspects of the cycles of cognitive time that

Kālī encompasses. These are basically four cycles (cakra) represented by four
configurations (cakra) of Kālīs, namely those of emanation (srṣticakra), persistence
(sthiticakra), withdrawal (saṁhāracakra), and a fourth called the Inexplicable
(anākhyacakra), because it encompasses the other three in a manner that defies
definition as either sequence or stasis. The details vary within this basic model. The
form accepted hereis one in which there are sixteen, twelve, eight and four Kālīs, and

aṣsociated deities, arranged around a central one, in the four Wheels, respectively.

Sometimes a fifth is added, called the Wheel of Illumination (bhāsācakra), which need

not concern us here. The name however indicates another cardinal feature of the

Goddess, namely, her luminosity. This is represented in the Tantras themselves by the
identification of the first three Wheels with the Moon, which has sixteen digits (kalā),
the Sun, which has twelve, and Fire, eight. The fourth Wheel, which is like the fifth, is

the Light of consciousness itself, contains four digits, one for each of the three Wheels,
and one of its own. All this we find in the original Tantras themselves, which supply the
names of the Kālīs in each Wheel. Abhinava, who is not concerned with their outer
worship, refers only to the twelve Kālīs of the Wheel of the Śun by name.

From its inception, as evidenced in the JY, Kālī’s metaphysical nature was

unḍerstood to be dynamic cognitive consciousness, denoted by the usual words for

consciousness, along with one which came to denote this understanding of

consciousness most specifically, namely, saṁvid. The JY already contains statements

declaring the essentially unity of the perceiver and the perceived as aspects of the

dynamic unity of consciousness, and the seeds are already sown for the kind of
phenomenological idealism that is the hallmark of its most developed form as the
Krama school (kramanaya), also called the Great Reality (mahārtha), which in the
English studies is called the Krama system (kramadarśana), or simply Krama. There is
no need to summarize all features of this complex system here. The essential point is
that it teaches that Kāḹī as Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī is the Goddess of Consciousness (sarviddevī)

Who is the perpetually active power of consciousness that ‘measures out’, ‘manifests' or
‘emits’ the streams of perceptions that constitute all things. From this perspective, the

TANTRĀLOKA

153

‘That’ supreme subject and reflective awareness is twelve-fold, and
manifests as all things. This is the meaning. After (having explained) that
(externally) imagined (kalpita) (ritual) worship is not (worthy of) attention
(compared to the inner worship that takes place within consciousness), (the
teaching concerning) the Dawning of the Cycle of Consciousness
(saṁviccakrodaya) (that is, the Twelve Kālīs), which was announced in the
initial enunciation (of the topics of the Tantrāloka), is also introduced in this

way.

Surely (one may ask,) the All (visśva), consisting as it does of (the
countless) perceivers and (their) objects etc., (possesses many forms and aspects

and) is of many kinds, so how is it that it can (all be) gathered together by
subsuming it (upātta) into just the means of knowledge alone, which is the Sun,

consisting of twelve digits (kalā)? With this doubt in mind, he says that it ‘(is
twelve-fold)

there

(as

it

includes

everything

within

(itself))’.

‘everything’ (is meant) subject and object etc. Indeed (it was said) here:

(By)

‘The supreme principle of Fire is indeed that of the subject.³³⁴
According to this teaching, the perceiver, who is supreme
consciousness, is Fire, as it burns the fuel of duality. And it is nothing but selfawareness alone (ahampratītimātra), which out of its own freedom, shining

forth in twelve ways as the organs of knowledge and the rest (of the senses),³⁰’

Kashmiri exegetes identified the Wheels of the Moon, Sun and Fire as those of the
spheres of the object (prameya), means of knowledge (pramāṇa) and the subject

(pramātṛ), respectively. Understood as phases of the act of perception, which is

consciousness — saṁvid, they serve as markers of the cycle of perception through and as
which it unfolds. This then is the fourth Wheel, namely, the resultant noetic
consciousness (pramiti), which is the supreme subjectivity. The subject, set as it is in
relation to the other phases, is associated with objectivity. The pure noetic

consciousness which is the result and basis of their interaction is entirely free of all

objectivity.
Swami Lakṣhmanṇjoo (2010 p. xii footnote 21) explains, ‘There is a difference
between pramātṛbhāva [subjectivity] and pramitibhāva |[noetic cognition].
Pramātr̥bhāva is that state of consciousness where objective perception is attached.
When that state of pramātṛbhāva is attached with objective perception, that is the pure
state of pramātrbhāva. When it moves to the state where there is no objective
perception, there is no touch of objective perception, it is beyond objective perception,
that is pramitibhāva.¹
This is the wheel of the cycle of consciousness itself (saṁviccakra), which is
that of the Inexplicable. It is the Fourth state (turīya) of the direct experience of
consciousness, that pervades and sustains the states of waking, dreaming and deep sleep,
corresponding to the subject, means and object of knowledge. Abhinava focuses on the

cycle of the means of knowledge, that of the ŚSun, because it contains all the others. As

such, it encompasses the phases of emanation, persistence, withdrawal, and the

inexplicable fourth state, in each of the domains of the subject, means and object of
knowledge, thus making twelve. Held together in the pure consciousness of the
Inexplicable, this is the ultimate reality of all the processes (krama) of consciousness.
³⁶³Ṉ Above, 3/123cd (123ab).

³⁶⁹ The twelve senses are the intellect and mind, along with the five organs of action

(hands, feet, genitals, anus and speech) and five cognitive organs of sense (taste, sight,

154

CHAPTER FOUR

is established on the level of the means of knowledge (pramāṇa) and is said to
be the Sun. The means of knowledge is the subject’s extroverted (bahirmukha)
form, and so the perceiver there, in (the corresponding) degree, becomes its
inner state. The means of knowledge is perception (jñāna), and that does not
arise anywhere without a basis, and so it must necessarily include the object of
perception, and so that is also included here. He says that ‘it is the Sun’. The

‘Moonʼ is the object of knowledge. As was said before:

“(The wise) say that the Sun is the means of knowledge, while the Moon
is ṣaid to be the object. (Although) they are both independent, they are not

separate from one another.”³

It is ‘all things’ because all things are objects of perception (meya).
Thus, as everything is included here (within it), supreme consciousness that
manifests in the form of all things in actual fact arises twelve-fold. So it is

rightly said that ‘that is twelve-fold’. Thus he says that (that consciousness) is

'made up of twelve digits’. The digits are (its) aspects as the subject and the

rest.³⁷¹

Surely (one may ask,) others say that this (consciousness) consists of

thirteen (aspects), so how is it that it is said here to be just twelve?³² With this
doubt in mind, he says:

hearing, smell, and touch). Note that the ego (ahaṅkāra), which is normally the third
member of the internal organ of sense (antahkaraṇa), along with the intellect and mind,

is not included. Thīs is because it is represented by the pure self-awareness, which

manifests as these twelve when operating in the sphere of objectivity, which is the outer
domain and aspect of consciousness.
³¹⁰ Above, 3/122 (121cd-122ab).

³⁷¹ Abhinava defines the word kalā below in 4/173-175, based on the five meanings of

the root kal, from which it is derived. The Tantras exploit its multiple meanings, as
Abhinava does, to indicate a number of things at once. First of all, at the most
immediate ‘external’ level and general non-technical sense, the word ‘kalā’ denotes the
phases or ‘digits” of the moon. These are sixteen, as are the lunar days (according to
certain astrological calculations) from a New to a Full moon. Analogously, the sun has
twelve, one for each of the signs of the zodiac it traverses in the course of a year. We
have seen that in the context of this symbolism, as exemplified by the
Yogasaṁcāratantra, Fire has eight, and departing from this natural symbolism, the
transcendent Inexplicable has four. In this perspective, the word ‘kalā’ could be

translated as ‘digit’, in the sense of a part or ‘phase’ in a cycle. Moreover, ‘kalā’ also

means energy. The word ‘śakt’ means energy in general. The word ‘kalā’ resonates
with the additional sense of a unit of energy. Thus, we get the additional sense of
‘modality° or ‘function’. In other words, consciousness viewed as a process consists of
twelve ‘phases’. As the totality of reality encompassed in the dynamism of this

cognitive consciousness, it has twelve ‘functions’, ‘modalities’ and ‘energies’. The
twelve aspects, as we have seen above, are subject, means and object of knowledge,

each of which arises, persists and falls away, and has an indefinable aspect as
consciousness itself, which encompasses the three moments in timeless immediacy.

³⁷² The earliest Tantric sources do, in actual fact, describe the Wheel, which here

consists of twelve Kālīs, as having an extra thirteenth one in the centre. Sanderson

(2007: 257) explains, with reference to the section called the Procedure (vidhi) of the

TANTRĀLOKA

155

aī ī mīaiR fkē āī āvrīX 1
īa? rrqfārṝ ṁṀr̥ ēāa ṝ | 22,
sā ca mātari vijñāne māne karaṇagocare |

meye caturvidhaṁ bhāti rāpam āśritya sarvadā || 125 ||
And this (consciousness) shines perpetually, assuming a four-fold

form (as emanation, persistence, withdrawal and the inexplicable),³” 1)

within the subject (mātṛ), 2) within the cognitive consciousness (vijñāna),
which is the means of knowledge (māna) in the sphere of the senses, and 3)

within the object of knowledge (meya).³*⁴ (125)

Kālīkṛama in the fourth part (ṣaṟka) of the Jayadrathayāmala, that there (in chapter
four) is taught ‘the Krama's culminating circle (śāktaṁ cakram) of the thirteen Kālīs,

twelve surrounding and mirroring their source.' The thirteenth Kaālī in the centre is
portrayed as reflecting in her mirror-like face the twelve surrounding Kālīs. Sanderson

(2007: 260 n 84) explains that initiation into the maṇḍala of the thirteen Kālīs is taught
in the Kālīkramavidhi section of the fourth ṣatka of the JY. He writes that ‘it is this set

of identical Kālīs that Viśvāvarta hymnsṣ in the last verse of his Tantrarājāvatārastotra,

implying that the teachings of the Tantra culminate here . . . “ḹ sing the praise of the
sequence-transcending circle of powers animated by the supreme Goddess that

resembles a single face appearing in contact with a series of mirrors.’ Śivāṅanda
himself, the founder of the Krama school in Kashmir, accepted that there are thirteen

Kālīs (Sanderson 2007: 271). The thirteenth is the supreme Kālī, who manifests as the
twelve. (See below, note 4,672, with reference to Kālikāstotra v. 5) Similarly, according
to the surviving Kālīkula Tantras, there is a Kālī in the centre of the other Wheels, as we
find in the Devipañcaśatika. The Yogasaṁcāratantra Abhinava quotes further ahead
refers to Wheels of sixteen, twelve, eight and four constituents. However, the text has

been lost, and there is nothing in the references Abhinava draws from it to establish that
it is a Kālīkula Tantra, which it most probably was not.

Jayaratha considers this discrepancy – thirteen Kālīs according to the textual
sources, and just twelve taught by Abhinava – to be a serious problem. Thus, he

discusses the reason for it at length here and returns to it several times in his
commentary. The deity in the centre of a Wheel is normally understood to be the source
of the surrounding forms that attend on it as aspects or emanations of it. Thus, the issue

here is essentially the relationship, if any, between a supposed pure transcendental

consciousness, which is free of all cognitive processes, and the source of its dynamic,

immanent form as all of them. In this perspective, the question is whether the supposed
thirteenth aspect, which is pure consciousness, is something separate and beyond the
twelve differentiations.

³⁷ Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that Anākhyā -- the Inexplicable – is the gap between
the perceiver and the means of perception, the means of perception and its object, the
object and the perceiver.

³⁷⁴ In the parallel Krama sources, both before and after Abhinava (with the sole

exception of MP (2 Tri) that follows Abhinava), we find the basic three to be emanation,

persistence, and withdrawal. They mark the phases of each of part of the ‘four-fold
formʼ. Thus, Krama sources in this context may refer to the cycle of emanation
(sṛṣṭicakra), rather than just emanation itself. Thus, here again we witness one of the
major features of Abhinava’s Trika exegesis, namely, the substitution of basic triads
with phases of perception shining in the subject, means and object of knowledge. In the

156

CHAPTER FOUR

‘Cognitive consciousnessʼ (vijñāna) is an adjective qualifying the

means of knowledge. (The teacher) means to say that the nature of the other
(aspects of perception) are the means of knowledge, although it is also (both)
consciousness (bodha) (as the subject) and the absence of consciousness
(abodha) (as the object). (Cognitive consciousness) is ‘within the sphere of the

sensesʼ, that is, it has become the field of operation (viṣaya) of the means of

knowledge.³” This is the meaning. Otherwise (if this were not s0), the object in

itself (independent of perception) is nothing at all. This is the point. (The word)

‘and’ indicates a reason."® ‘This’, ultimately real consciousness, assuming a

‘four-fold form’ as emanation (sṛsti), persistence (sthiti), withdrawal and the

Inexplicable (fourth), ‘always manifests' in the subject, means and object of

knowledge. The meaning is that it shines radiantly, without a break (or
limitation), in each one (of the three) with (its) four-fold nature, and so is

twelve-fold. As is said:*⁷

‘The form of the radiance of the Moon, Sun and Fire which is

omnipresent and unlimited, associated with the sequences of emanation and the

rest,³”⁸ makes (all things) clearly manifest.’
Again:

‘Whatever plane of (awakened) consciousness the one who knows

reality enters, having attained (there) within it a state of identity (tanmayatā)
(with the object), attains a four-fold nature.”
purely Trika context, he does this right at the beginning of the Tantrāloka, where he
praises the three goddesses Parā, Parāparā and Aparā as this triad.

³¹³ The term ‘means of knowledge’ ~ pramāṇa – generally denotes a particular valid
means of knowledge, such as direct perception, inference, scripture, valid testimony and
the like, whereas here it is fundamentally cognitive consciousness, which is the essential
nature of all other things, whether they are conscious subjects or insentient objects.

Functionally, it is the capacity of consciousness whereby the object of knowledge is
made known to the perceiver. Concretely, it is the power of the senses (both external
and inner, mental) through which it operates as its instruments.

³¹⁶Coṇsciousness shines without a break in all twelve domains of perception at all
times. It is because ‘this (consciousness) shines perpetually” that it is these twelve. This,
Jayaratha tells us, is what the word ‘and’ suggests.

³⁷⁷ Judging by the content and terminology, it is clear that all the references Jayaratha

quotes here in his commentary on this verse are from Krama sources.

³⁷⁸ Each of the phases of emanation, persistence, withdrawal and the Inexplicable, that

constitute the sequence of the activity of consciousness (sarṁvitkrama), are themselves
sequences (krama). In the Tantras from which these teachings are derived, the term

krama – which literally means ‘sequence’ – denotes the sequence of the liturgy. We

have noted already that each Wheel is populated by forms of Kālī. They are worshipped

generally, in the normal way, just by uttering simple Mantras that contain their names
and salutation. This is done in sequence, in accord with their location in the Wheel. In
this perspective, the Wheel of Emanation (sṛsṣṭicakra) and the others have their own

‘krama³, as does the whole ritual procedure, which is, accordingly, also called a
‘krama’. When the deities of the Wheels, and indeed the entire liturgy, is understood to
be an outer expression of the sacred cognitive activity of consciousness — saṁvitkrama,
the metaphysical sense of the term comes to the fore.

TANTRĀLOKA

157

Surely (one may ask,) others maintain, following this very same
approach, that this supreme (fully expanded) consciousness has thirteen aspects
(not twelve). As has been said (in the Mahānayaprakāśa):

‘The one essential nature (of all things) abides as the subject, object and

means of knowledge,⁷” having penetrated into the (the cycles) consisting of
emanation, embodiment (avatāra) (i.e. persistence) and withdrawal. Each one
(of them), in accord with their own nature, are four-fold, due to the categories

(bheda) of emanation, persistence and the rest (i.e. withdrawal and the
Inexplicable, brought about by their progressive) differentiation (kalanā). The

four-fold outpouring (vibhava)³ (of consciousness brought about by their)

emergence (udaya), that ends with the absorption of time (kālagrāsa)³⁶ (along

with) its state of rest (viśrānti), which is just one (alone), thus (consists of)
thirteen goddesses located in the Cycle of the Inexplicable, who, because of
their fundamental (and predominant nature) (prādhānyāt), are the objects of

worship.”³²

“We don’t understand,” (asks an opponent), “how it is said here to be

twelve-fold?” (We reply that) here, (with regard to this question,) that it is said
that here (according to our view), supreme consciousness manifests twelve-fold

in the aforestated manner, by virtue of its own freedom (to do so). To this
extent, there is no disagreement. Now if that supreme consciousness were to
manifest separately, apart from those twelve forms (of consciousness), then it
would be its the thirteenth (form). Otherwise, what other (reality) could be the
thirteenth (aspect)? If consciousness were to be separate (from tits
manifestations), the twelve forms would not manifest, as they (would) not be

consciousness, and so all that would remain is one (unmanifest) consciousness
³1⁰ Read with the MP (2 Tri) —pramātrṛtaḥ for —pramātrtāḥ.

³³⁰ MP (2 Tri) reads vihito (‘is proper’) for vibhavo (‘outpouring’).

³³¹ Concerning these four phases in the process of absorption, see above, note to comm.
3/266ab (3/265).

³⁴* These lines correspond to the anonymous MP (2 Tri) 9/15-18. According to this

passage, the thirteenth aspect is the ‘state of rest’ within consciousness. This is

consciousness itself, perpetually at rest within its own nature, and so this state is ‘just

one (alone)ʼ. Abhinava does not consider this to be a separate condition, whereas, as
Sanderson (2007: 315) points out, all the Krama sources that refer to this matter do. The
earliest of them is by the founder himself, Jñānanetra, who writes in his Kālikāstotra (v.
8-9):

“The unitary nature of (your) essence becomes triple in the aspect of Emission,
Stasis and Withdrawal; each of these assumes four aspects, through Emission, Stasis,
Withdrawal and Rest. Supreme is your form that by thus dividing your spontaneous
essence into twelve, sets in motion the whirl that is your unfolding (vivartaḥ) as the

world.” verses 8-9, Sanderson's translation.

The twelve phases culminate in this state of transcendental rest, in which they

are grounded and of which they are its apparent transformations. This is the thirteenth

Kālī, within whom the twelve phases manifest as one with her pure conscious nature,
perpetually at rest within itself. See above, note 4,369.

158

CHAPTER FOUR

devoid of manifestations (nirbhāsā). So what occasion could there be for a

thirteenth form? Now if (you say that) even if consciousness is separate, it
(nonetheless) pervades the twelve forms as would a universal (its particulars),

and also manifests as it is in its own essential nature. Thus, such is its state as

the thirteenth (form). Then we would say that that is wrong (asar). A universal

differs from (its) particulars, and so as such pervades them so that (wherever
one perceives a cow) the notion (pratyaya) that it is a cow associated with it is
the same (every time one sees a cow).³ Again, those forms manifest just as

they are within consciousness; they are not separate from it, for if that were to

be s0, they would not manifest. Thus, whatever be the forms that manifest, one

says just the same³⁴ that ‘consciousness manifests’.³*⁹ How and by whom is that
known? (There is no possible reply to these questions,) as the example does not

correspond (to what it is supposed to exemplify), that it be something.³⁸° It is
said elsewhere with the same intended sense that:

‘It is manifest that (when we experience that,) phenomena (bhāva)

manifest, the Self manifests within consciousness. It is manifest that (when we
experience that) the Self manifests within consciousness, phenomena manifest.”
Now if (you were to ask,) does not this same supreme consciousness
manifest in a form which is coloured (by its) twelve-fold nature, and as the
thirteenth, which is pure consciousness alone, it is uncoloured (by them)? (We
reply) that that is not so. Here our established view (siddhānta) is that supreme
pure consciousness is unmanifest (nirābhāsā), devoid of limiting adjuncts, and

(is essentially) uncoloured (by any external reality, as a crystal would be by a
red flower placed next to it). And that (consciousness), having hidden its own

essential nature by the glorious power of its freedom and manifesting (its)

nature as all things, would (then) manifest in the form which is coloured with
the twelve-fold nature. Its uncoloured form would not manifest then (at the

same time) as separate from it and uncoloured (by it). If that were to be so, then

the coloured form itself would not manifest. This has been said (already) many

times.

Surely (one may ask,) even when it is (immanent) as all things, it is
possible for its transcendental (nature) to be uncoloured, otherwise that would

³⁸³ We see a cow and think, ‘this is a cow’. In this way, the cow we perceive is identified

as a cow because it is the same as all other cows, or to put it another way, it is at one

with the one universal cow. A particular cow is not different from (the universal) cow

that pervades it: From this point of view, the ‘universal cow’ is what the word ‘cow’
denotes. When we experience that ‘this is this cow’, the name-cum-universal is linked to
the particular cow and we identify it as such.

³³⁴ Read yāni yāni for tāni tāni.

³³³ Consciousness accompanies the perception of everything and anything equally. It

makes no difference whatever it may be. Anything that is perceived and manifests can
be an occasion to experience the presence of consciousness within which it manifests.
Moreover, this is equally so for every perceiver.

³⁴⁶ The experience of the manifestation of phenomena within consciousness is not the

same as that of the perceiver. The former are many and objective, whereas the latter is

only one and not some ‘thing’. The same example does not apply to both, although they

both entail the experience of consciousness.

TANTRĀLOKA

159

entail (the fallacy that consciousness) is insentient. (To which we reply by first

asking,) what is the seeming intention behind this question? (Is it not) whether it

is possible that even when immanent (as all things), there is a form of that

(consciousness) which is uncoloured and separate from it, as are the two horns

(on a) cow’'s (head)? Or (is the view that) by virtue of its freedom, making its
(immanent) form as all things manifest, this nondual consciousness does not fall

from its own essential nature? The first view there is defective. If
(consciousness) were to transcend its own (immanent) nature as all things, it

would not possess the effulgence (sphurattā) (of its Light).³⁷ This has been said
many times, and he will say (it again in the following verses):

‘The Śiva (that dualists imagine,) who is tranquil, different from

everything else, and transcends all the other paths (of emanation) (and so) is like

(any insentient object such as a) a jar, does not exist anywhere.³⁸ This

consciousness, which is the Great Light and is (perpetually) expanding,
is

Śiva.³*⁹ (His) Śiva nature (śivatā) itself is His manifestation as all things. Thus,

His union (yoga) with the shining in this way (of the Great Light of
consciousness and its manifestation as all things) unfolds spontaneously
(svarasena).”³⁰

sense:

The venerable Tapasvin has also said with the very same intended

‘(Śiva is saying to Śakti): "the original nature (of all things) that I make
manifest (kalayāmi) as this and that at progressively more superior (levels), are
each Your foundations (adhara) (at every higher level of existence). Nor is
there any manifestation (kalanā) where You are not present everywhere, even

though it is lower (adhara) (than these).³

Again, according to the second view, although (consciousness) is not

really coloured, it manifests as each particular manifest (lit. ‘coloured’) form

that has poured out (of consciousness) by virtue of its own freedom. Thus, this
too is not its thirteenth form. (To say that it is) would mean that the

manifestation of the two (i.e. the immanent twelve and the transcendental
thirteenth) would be locked in conflict like (two) pieces of iron (clashing
together). When an actor assumes this or that role, although he (continues) in

reality (to be the same) actor, he appears in this and that form, but not as the
actor as well (at the same time). The same is the case with consciousness also.

³⁸³T As manifestations of the Light of consciousness, the countless entities in the universe

are its effulgence. If the manifestation of the Light as all things were to be separate from
its pure shining, its manifestation in this way would be some separate reality, not its

effulgence. Indeed, the Light would have no effulgence and so, not ilumining anything,
would effectively not shine.

³³⁸ Cf. above, 3/98cd-103ab.

³⁴⁴ Read vijṛmbhate | ṣā for vijrṛṃmbhate | ṣa. The same consciousness unfolds and

manifests perpetually as both transcendental Śiva and His immanent Śiva nature
manifest as all things.
³⁴⁰ Below, 15/264cd-266.

160

CHAPTER FOUR

Although in reality (it continues) to be pure consciousness alone, when it is
(immanent) as all things, it manifests in (its) twelve-fold form. It does not also

manifest in a thirteenth form as just pure consciousness. Thus, what has been

said is sound. Therefore, manifesting (its immanent) form as all things,
consciousness manifests twelve-fold. Otherwise, on the contrary, it amounts to
being just one (and not also the many). As the scripture (says):
‘To the extent that deities are engaged in their own individual tasks
(performed one after another), the term ‘produced in sequence’ (krama)³⁹¹ is
applicable (to them), not otherwise. If everything abides in a state of oneness
within the Inexplicable, then one should know that that is (the condition that) is

non-sequential (akrama), as it is transcendent in all respects.”

(So some may say that,) although there is oneness in this way, it is not

contrary to duality³⁹ However, that qualification (with regards to

consciousness) is also not possible, for it would be just consciousness alone
(devoid of manifest form). The word ‘alone’ (eva) precludes association with
anything else. And there is nothing else at all here. So how can it be
disassociated (from something else)? The consequence would be that it would
be consciousness in this way that cannot bear that association also.² Moreover,
consciousness is the foundation (niṣṟhā) of objectivity, and objectivity, separate
from its own essential nature (whichis consciousness), is nothing at all. Thus,
just as it cannot even be denoted, it cannot be named (in any way) in any
circumstance, and so is proclaimed to be the Nameless (Anāmakā) and the
Inexplicable (Anākhyā). Enough now of much (talk).
Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, how is it that elsewhere (in

other scriptures), it is right to say that it has a thirteenth (form)? It is not
possible to say that that is not right, because the authority (pramāṇa) (for this
view) is scripture, which (as such) is not subject to contradiction (nirbādha). So
pray tell me, how can one remedy this (problem)? It is said (in response to this
question), that the Māyā perceivers are subject here to duality (bhedādhivāsita)
(and so) are to be instructed accordingly. Thus, just as happens in common
spiritual discipline (samānārthacaryā), the teaching operates in accord with (the
disciple’s) capacity (to grasp it), so that it may develop (in him) easily. Thus, in
terms of duality (bheda), which is (due to) the influence of conceptual thought
(vikalpabala), it is said that consciousness has a thirteenth (form).³*⁴ Here, on

³⁹" MS N reads: kramagatā part of a sequence’ for kramakṛtā ‘produced in sequence’.

³⁰² Read dvayāpratipakṣabhutam for dvayapratipakṣabhutam. Thīs is actually a dualist

view. From a dualist perspective, the oneness of consciousness is preserved by
understanding it to be a separate reality from the objective world, which is its opposite.

If we consider, as Advaita Vedānta does, that the objective world is just the dream of

ignorance, and that all that truly exists is consciousness alone, we are still left with two
distinct realities, although in a different sense.

³⁹³ If consciousness is the oneness of reality, there is no other reality with respect to
which it can be said to be contrary. This means that there would be no objective world
in any sense, even as an illusion.

³⁴⁴ Thought constructs have the power or ‘strength’ (bala) to generate a sense of duality,

that is, difference and relative distinctions. It is due to this that we conceive a difference

TANTRĀLOKA

161

the contrary, the teaching is such in relation to nondual (reality), which is truly
existent. Thus, everything is (consistent) and accounted for.

Surely (one may ask,) the twelve-fold dawning of this supreme
consciousness is explained differently here than it was before, by such teachings
(as the following):

‘(Śiva) has just these three powers, namely, (the Goddess) Parā
(Supreme) and the rest (that is, Parāparā (Middling) and Aparā (Lower)). They
manifest in (the phases of) creation, persistence, withdrawal and the Fourth (that

both includes and transcends them).³²⁹ Thus (they) have arisen twelve-fold.”³⁸

Thus, (it appears) that there is a contradiction between what was (said)
before and (what was said) subsequently. How is that? It is said here (in
response to this query), that whatever (Abhinavagupta) intended to say concerns
the dawning of the twelve-fold form of supreme consciousness. (Alright,) let it

be so or else not (as you like), because a difference in the modality (in which it
is worshipped and practiced) (prakriyā) (does not entail an essential) difference
in that (teaching concerning the nature of consciousness).³⁹”’ Summing up this
(point as) intended (here), he himself has said elsewhere:

‘Each one of those four energies abide three-fold, by virtue of the

freedom (of consciousness), in emanation, persistence, and withdrawal, and so

are twelve.”³⁸

between a transcendental, thirteenth form of consciousness and a twelve-fold immanent

aspect.
³“³ Cf. below, 33/30.

³⁴⁶ Above, TĀ 1/106cd-107ab (107).
³⁹⁷ Ṭhe twelve phases of consciousness can be worshipped as Twelve Kaālīs, as taught in
the Krama system (that is, to be more precise, in the form of it Abhinava accepts), or as
the three Trika Goddesses. Both are essentially the same, and so there is no need to
bother about the difference in the outer representation. However, there is a difference
with regards to the modality of the ritual procedure (prakriyā). The former follows that
of Krama ritual and the latter that of Trika. One could call the former kramaprakriyā
and the latter trikaprakriyā (although we do not find these terms being used anywhere).
While the former procedure has been traced in the original Tantras, the latter has not.
This may be due to the loss of Trika Tantras which integrated their Trika procedure with

Krama. We know that such Tantras existed from references Abhinava draws from them.

One striking example is the Devyāyāmala. It is clear that Jayaratha considers both
modalities to be attested by scriptural authority, however, he does not supply any direct
supporting references from the scripture, nor does Abhinava. So it is not impossible that

it may be Abhinava’s own adaptation or that of the author of the Kramastotra who, as
we shall see, Jayaratha regularly quotes to describe each Kālī.

Jayaratha addreṣses this problem again below where he quotes scriptures that
typically teach that there are thirteen Kālīs, although Abhinava says that there are only
twelve. Jayaratha will account for this seeming contradiction by explaining that thirteen
Kaālīs (twelve with one in the centre) are worshipped in the outer ritual procedure —
krama. Here, he explains, Abhinava is concerned with the inner sequence – krama – of
the phases of consciousness to which they correspond. From that perspective, there is no
separate, transcendental thirteenth phase.

³³⁸ ṬSā p. 28-29.

162

CHAPTER FOUR
According to this view, it is said that (consciousness) dawns twelve-fold

in a different modality of practice (prakriyā) also.²”⁹ Thus, all (that is taught

concerning this matter) is free of contradiction.
Surely (one may then ask), as (consciousness) manifests (in this way)
because such is its nature, then one must inevitably accept that (consciousness)

possesses specific qualities; otherwise it would not be the many (things that are
made manifest by it). So where (in what circumstance)
consciousness qualified)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

and

how

(is

lcieeEiṀ|EeN ĀEextaktf.
JT] JṬGTITRĒTT āāā; gTĀĪTGAI
|| 2ē I
śuddhasaṁvinmayṝī prācye jñāne śabdanarūpiṇī |
karaṇe grahaṇākārā yataḥ śrīyogasañcare || 126 ||

Consciousness is pure in the initial (phase of perception), which (is

nonconceptual) perception (jñāna). (Then in the second phase, which

operates) in (the sphere of) the senses, it is the (inner) discourse (śabdana)

(of conceptual consciousness centred on multiplicity), whose form is

(sensory and mental) perception (grahaṇa).⁴⁰ As is (said in the) venerable
Yogasaṅcāra.⁴⁰ (126)
³⁴⁹ One is three times four, and the other is four times three.
⁴⁰⁰The phenomenological, cognitive analysis of these cycles is certainly Abhinava’s
exegesis. This is true also of his presentation of these two aspects of consciousness, a
doctrine which is the mainstay of nondualist Saiva understanding of consciousness. Not
unknown to earlier Krama sources and other texts such as the Vijñūānabhairava, it is
formulated and extensively elaborated for the first time by Somānanda in his Śivadṛṣṭi.

‘⁰l This subject is taken up again in line 146cd, after a long passage drawn from the
Yogasaṅcāratantra. 1 have translated this verse as Jayaratha understands and explains

it. However, it is possible that Jayaratha has misunderstood Abhinava here. Another
translation could be:
‘Consciousness is pure in the initial (phase of perception), which (is
nonconceptual) perception (jñāna), and its form is the resonance (śabdana) (of
reflective awareness). (Then in the second phase, which operates) in (the sphere of) the
senses, its form is (sensory and mental) perception (grahaṇa). As is (said in the)
venerable Yogasaṅcāratantra.”
The concepts and terminology here are drawn from the nondualist Śaivism of
Somānanda and the Pratyabhijñā of his disciple Utpaladeva. They may be implicit in the
teachings of some Tantras, as Abhinava clearly understands to be the case, but they are

not articulated fully in this way. Jayaratha understands that this is said in the
Yogasaṁcara, but there can be no doubt that the reference drawn from the Yogasaṅcāra

begins in the following verses. Here Abhinava is introducing its teachings from the
perspective of these, his exegetical models.

Here again one wonders whether Jayaratha is correct. When the texts refer to

consciousness as ‘pure’, this normally means free of thought constructs (vikalpa). Pure

consciousness is equated with the supreme subject. Supreme subjectivity is not
subjectivity related to objectivity. Indeed, one may ask whether it is ‘subjective’ at all

TANTRĀLOKA

163

without an object. This is why Abhinavagupta posits the Absolute — Anuttara – as the

supreme state beyond it, at the level of No Means (anupāyāvasthā). Nonetheless,

subjectivity devoid of objectivity is possible according to this view because the power

of reflective awareness is the inherent freedom of consciousness, by virtue of which it is
freely, without constraints or conditions, a subject which is ‘supreme’ precisely because
its ‘object’ is itself, which is not an object. This is the state at the level of the Divine
Means (śāmbhavāsthā). Thīs seems to be what Abhinava is saying here, that is, that in

the initial moment of perception, consciousness is ‘pure’ because the subjectivity with
which perception starts and must exist, according to this view, in order for it to be
possible, is as yet devoid of an object. Thus, it should be free of all objectivity and the
thought constructs which accompany it.
But Jayaratha does not take this view. According to him, the subject at the
moment of perception is contracted to some slight degree, and so although free of
objectivity and hence thought constructs, the cognitive consciousness is a state of

‘contracted nondiscursive cognition’. It would be easy to emend the text from

‘saṁkucita-” – ‘contractedʼ to asaṁkucita-¹ – ‘uncontracted’⁷. However, that would not

square with what was said before, namely, that the perceiver at this stage is ‘contracted’
to some degree, and emendation of the text there also would be problematic.
The problem is the term ‘śabdana’. t is derived from the noun ‘śabda’, which
in its
most common literal sense means ‘word’ or just ‘sound’. Accordingly, the action

noun ‘śabdana’ literally means ‘uttering’, ‘resounding’ or ‘articulating’. In a technical

sense, Jayaratha understands the term here to be the inner ‘utterance’, ‘articulation’ or

‘discourse’ of thought. This a possible interpretation, but I propose that this is not the

one Abhinava intended. In order to understand the issue here, we must briefly explore

the nature and function of language as understood by the Pratyabhijñā and its relation to
consciousness, perception and thought (vikalpa). The starting point is Bhartṛhari, the

great grammarian and philosopher of language, whose views are a major source for the
Pratyabhijñā view. The following two verses are especially central for the Pratyabhijñā:
‘There is no understanding (pratyaya) (of any sort) that is not associated with
Word (śabda). AIl knowledge shines as if permeated by Word (śabda). If Speech (vāc),
the eternal essential nature of consciousness, which is (its) reflective awareness

(pratyavamarśinī), were to abandon it, the light (of consciousness) would not shine.” VP

1/123-124

The Buddhists agree that language permeates mental representations (vikalpa).
But this is not so, they maintain, in the case of a direct knowledge of things, which is
free of conceptualization (nirvikalpa) and hence language. This, they say, is the way

things are known directly in the first moment of perception, before it precipitates down
to conceptualization in the second moment. The Pratyabhijñā agrees with them. Indeed,
it is commonly accepted by all schools of Indian philosophy, including the dualist Śaiva

Siddhānta, that in the first moment of perception there is a direct experience of the

realia their system maintains are ultimate principles. In other words, although the
content of direct experience (anubhava) free of thought constructs (nirvikalpa) differs
from school to school, there is common agreement that it is ultimately veridical, not just
provisionally so, as is the case in the second moment of conceptualization of the

contents of the first. The Pratyabhijñā agrees with the Buddhist idealists, who
formulated this view that the thought constructs of the second moment are a kind of
inner mental discourse of the sort ‘this is a jar³, ‘that is a cloth not a jar², ‘I remember
the jar², or ‘ḹ imagine a jar¹ and so on.

utterance – śahdana – going on within nondiscursive consciousness. Prior (and hence

164

CHAPTER FOUR

superior) to the operation of the mind, it is not mental discourse. It is the self-reflective
awareness (vimarśa) which shines as all things and makes them manifest as its own
essential, supremely real (paramārthika) nature. The Pratyabhijñā maintains that this

self-awareness consciousness has of itself as ‘I amʼ is the supreme level of speech
(parāvāc). Obviously, it is not audible, as is Corporeal Speech, nor is it based on a
linguistic convention (sarketa). Nor is it heard inwardly as thoughts, as is the Middle

level of Speech. Nor does it have any object – even of itself as everything, as does the

Speech of Vision (paśyantī). Nonetheless the Pratyabhijñā refers to it as ‘utterance’ —

Śśabdana. Not surprisingly, this is a shocking and most distasteful view for the
Buddhiṣts. Enlightenment is the removal of all sense of ‘I’, which is just a notion
(vikalpa) and hence false. To be free of thought and for reality to appear just as it is, is
to be free of language. Utpaladeva counters this view by saying that a notion is always
formed, as the Buddhists themselves say, on the basis of a counter-correlate, and there is
none such with respect to this pure self-awareness of the one reality which is
consciousness. Moreover, he declares, building on Bhartṛhari:

‘(The power of) consciousness (citi) is reflective awareness. It is Supreme
Speech that arises spontaneously. That is the (supreme) primary (mukhya) freedom and
sovereignty of the Supreme Self.’ IP 1/5/13
Abhinava comments (IP√ 1, p 205): “Reflective awareness is (a kind of)
utterance (śabdana), the nature of which is an inner discourse (antarabhilāpa) (within
consciousness), and that utterance is independent of (linguistic) conventions, like the
(silent) inner indication (of something made by a) nod of the head. Its nature is
uninterrupted (and unconditioned) wonder, and it is the (very) life of conventional,
phenomenal words made of letters. (t is such) because it is the inner foundation of the
(surface forms of) reflective awareness such as ‘this is blue’ and ‘I am Caitra’. It is
‘supreme’ because it is full (complete and perfect). It is ‘speech’ because it says and
denies everything by reflecting (on it).’
In the initial phase of perception, pure consciousness is supreme,
transcendental and absolute subjectivity (parapramātṛbhāva), which is devoid of
thought constructs. In the second phase of perception, consciousness is in the lower,
immanent state of subjectivity of conceptually conditioned consciousness formed
through the thought constructs of the individual perceiver engaged in perceiving its

object through the activity of the senses. In this phase, it is engaged in perceiving and
conceptualizing objects of perception through the activity of the senses and mind. Thus,
there are two forms of cognition. One is the knowledge we have of the one universal
reality and the other that of specific things, whether outer physical or inner mental ones.
The first is cognition free of mental representation (avikalpakaṁ jñānam). t īs the basis

and source of the other one, which is either directly or indirectly rooted in it. The first is
direct experience (anubhava). It arises within the individual perceiving subjectivity, and
so is ‘contracted’ to a degree; nonetheless, it is pure consciousness, which is
uncontaminated by an object outside itself. This is because the object is still one with it,
as is the case in the higher principle of Sadāśiva, where the experience is one of identity,
of the form ‘I am this’. Above it is the pure reflective awareness of the transcendental

Śiva priṇciple, which is totally devoid of objectivity, as ‘I am’. Below is the principle of

Īśvara, in which objectivity is mixed in with the subjective reflective awareness of ‘, in
the experience of ‘this am Iʼ’. The ‘I’ of the experience of ‘ am this’ is still detached
from the ideal objectivity shining within it, it is not ‘mixed in’ with it. At this level, the
object — ‘this’- is universal (sāmānya) objectivity-as-such with no specific form. It
cannot serve any function or purpose on the plane of daily life, which operates in the

TANTRĀLOKA

165

This supreme consciousness is pure ‘in the initial (phase of
perception)ʼ, that is, within the perceiver, because even though contraction
does arise to some extent, (consciousness in this phase) is the perceiver (and not
the object, which is completely conditioned and an object of thought). This

consciousness is not impure, as (it is when it is in the form) of the means of
knowledge and the rest, and its nature is the most contracted (form of)

conceptual knowledge. (In the sphere) of the means of knowledge, that is, (in
the sphere of) the senses and the rest, (consciousness is in the form of) ‘(inner)

discourse)³ (śabdana) which is discursive mental representation (vikalpa). The
meaning is that it is the reflective awareness of the difference (between

individual entities and the perceiver). Therefore, it is said that its ‘form is
(sensory and mental) perception’ (grahaṇa), and that depends on both the
(individual) perceiver and object of perception.
Surely (one may ask,) what is the authority here (to support the view)
that it is supreme consciousness itself which is present on the level of the means
of knowledge also in the form of (sensory and mental) perception? With this
doubt in mind, he says: ‘as is (said in the) venerable Yogasañcaratantra’ in

the passage about to be quoted.⁴” That says:

A Yoga from the Yogasaṁcāra

3 ar̥d ī̃ Jca maaR |
TĨ̄TIT ZIGTR TTS TJRṬTTḤ I 2N I
ye cakṣurmaṇḍale śvete pratyakṣe parameśvarīi |
soḍaśāraṁ dvādaśāraṁ tatrasthaṁ cakram uttamam || 127 I|
‘O Supreme Goddess, the two white, visible circles of the eyes are

(the wheel) of sixteen spokes. The best of Wheels, consisting of twelve

spokes is located there. ⁴⁰³ (127)

sphere of the second form of cognition that develops after it, when consciousness
operates through the senses. Through them it perceives individual entities, each

according to their own specific characteristics (svalakṣaṇa), the knowledge of which

makes daily life possible.

⁴2 4/127 to 144 is drawn from the Yogasaṁcāra. See note ad 4/144 concerning
Abhinava’s method. Note that Jayaratha does not quote the original verses, as he would
were he to have had access to the text.

⁴⁰³ Deities and metaphysical principles are commonly projected onto the body. Special

attention is normally given to the head. An early example of the projection of deities in
parts of the eyes is found in the Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad, where we read:

‘He who knows the calf and its abode, its special resort, its post and its tether,
kills his seven envious kinsmen [the eyes, ears, nostrils and mouth]. The vital force in
the body is indeed the calf; this body is its abode, the head is its special resort, strength
its post, and food its tether. These seven gods that prevent decay worship [the vital
force]. Through these pink lines in the eye Rudra attends on it; through the water that is
in the eye, Parjanya; through the pupil, the sun; through the dark portion, fire; through
the white portion, Indra; through the lower eyelid, the earth attends on it; and through

166

CHAPTER FOUR
‘“The two’ are in the dual number, in relation to the two (eye)balls, one

should understand the same further ahead also (and relate what is said to both

eyes). ‘The two white circles of the (two) eyes’ can be seen. They are

‘yisible⁰⁴⁰ and are seen, not like the red circles (around the eyeballs) that are
hidden (under the eyelids). The sixteen-spoked wheel, located there (in the

white circles), is most excellent as it encompasses all things, because each (of
the four) – object, means, subject and (resulting) knowledge, are of the nature of
all the others. The meaning is that it manifests in that form.
It is (said) with that same intended sense in the venerable
Kramasadbhāva that there are said to be sixteen goddesses that should be
worshipped in the Wheel of the Inexplicable. As is said there in a passage
beginning with:
‘Next, O Hara, listen attentively to a brief (account of) the sixteen

(goddesses)” And ending with: ‘The Kālī Whose being dissolves away is said to

have sixteen parts (kalā).⁷⁴⁵

the upper eyelid, heaven. He who knows it as such never has any decrease of food.”
BrUp 2/2/1-2 (translation by Mādhavānanda).

Although one would expect a similar symbolism in the Nerratantra (the Tantra

of (Śiva’s Third) Eye), in actual fact the ‘“Eye’ meant there is the mantra (orṁ juṁ saḥ)
(see below, 30/40cd-41ab), which corresponds to this limb (vidyāṅga) of the Mantra

body of the deity. Nonetheless, Ksemarāja, applying his usual hermeneutics, implants
what he, like his teacher Abhinava, considered to be the higher esoteric teachings of the
Krama into the Netratantra, by seeing them secretly revealed in Śiva's Third Eye, just as
they are in the Yogasaṁcāra. Thuṣ, as Sanderson (2006: 55) explains: ‘at the end of his

commentary on the Netratantra, Kṣemarāja reveals the esoteric nature of the Eye

(netram), which gives the deity of the Tantra (Netranāth, Lord of the Eye [-mantra]) and

the Tantra itself their name:

Victorious is the unique Eye (netram) of Śiva. 1) It is white [in part] with a
radiance that is innate, since it bestows the light [of reality] on everything (ābhāsanam).
2) It is red [in part] because it immerses itself in the awareness of whatever it manifests
(āmarśanām). 3) It is grey [in part] because it internalizes all that [manifestation] in
[subjective] relish (saṁīarvaṇam). 4) It is black [in part] because it devours [even] that
[subjective awareness] (grāsaḥ). 5) It is neither white nor black nor grey nor red nor not
these, since it is the unity embodied in the Circle of Absolute Light (bhāsacakram).
(NTu 2 p. 343)²
See Sanderson (2006: 56) for a comparative table of components of this

sequence with the one in the Yogasaṅcāra, and in the MP. (2 Tri) (9/4-11/3) and MM
(39-40). Cf. also PrHṛ 11 and above, note 3,797 for other similar Krama sequences.

‘“⁴ Add te pratyakṣe between dṛsśyete and dṛśyamāne.

⁴“⁰³ Theṣe lines cannot be traced in the extant manuscript of the Kramasadbhāva.
Although this may be because it is incomplete, it is not likely that it was originally there,

as fragments in the Kramasadbhāva that have been recovered state that this Wheel

consists of seventeen Kālīs, not sixteen. Indeed, Jayaratha himself quotes the
Kramasadbhāva, where it says this (see below TĀv ad 4/173ab and note). However, the
discrepancy may only be apparent. The Kālīs are also said in the sources to be in a
Wheel of Twelve Kālīs, but there are thirteen, counting the one in the centre. The same

TANTRĀLOKA

167

Although (the Wheel) here is the Inexplicable (Anākhya), the object of

knowledge, which (corresponds to the process of) emanation, predominates, and
so as it is the Moon (of objectivity), it is white.
Surely (one may ask,) if the sixteen-spoked wheel is located here, how

can the twelve-spoked wheel (be here) also? With this doubt in mind, he says:

tr̄aāīāzāṁḥ zātēā gā

fitá mea 2 3 Jvmīd & *Vs | 22¢ 1
āa-āā fkṝr yrag ftrāīzrrgrrī

-Jš̄ q ú ī sr-ṁtīāī-ṁk
f 1 22x 1
ftzgīaā fkr ā 7 - š wāaf |
gHaiī-tīṁṁ
ú ṝ-āī-dá fāīaāīārk 1| g30 1

prativāraṇavad rakte tadbahir ye tad ucyate |
dvitīyaṁ madhyage ye te kṛṣṇaśvete ca maṇḍale || 128 I|
tadantar ye sthite śuddhe bhinnāñjanasamaprabhe |
caturdale tu te jñeye agnīṣomātmake priye || 129 ||
mithunatve sthite ye ca cakre dve parameśvari |
saṁmīḷaṉonmīḷaṉaṁ te anyonyaṁ vidadhātake || 130 ||

may be the case here. The spokes of this wheel of Kālī are sixteen, but the Kālīs are
seventeen. Jayaratha did not have access to the Yogasaṁcāra (see below), so this
reference cannot be from there.
4/127 to 144 is drawn from the Yogasaṁcāra. (See note ad 4/144). Elsewhere
in his exposition, Jayaratha does not quote the original verses, as he would were he to
have had access to the text. Moreover, it appears that Jayaratha may not have
understood every detail correctly. Thus, observe possible errors or, at least, uncertainties

in Jayaratha’s interpretation. See, for example, the multiple problems with his

explanation of 4/135-136ab. Even Gnoli, who generally follows Jayaratha, is perplexed

here by what he says.

The circles symbolize the subject (pramātṛ), means (pramāṇa), and object of
knowledge (prameya), with the fourth as the Inexplicable, which is the one all-

encompassing pure noetic (pramā) consciousness. These identifications are certainly
Abhinava’s exegesis. The Krama are idealists, teaching that the one reality is the

goddess who is dynamic cognitive consciousness. Accordingly, there are references to
subject and object and their essential oneness. However, the terms there for them are
bhokṭṛ and bhogya. There is no evidence that the primary texts had elaborated this triad
of subject (pramātṛ), means (pramāṇa), and object of knowledge (prameya). This

terminology is typical of Mīmāṁsaka cognitive theories and epistemology. Thus,
although the Mīmāṁsa is not nondualist, it appears that that they have been drawn from

there. The common point of contact is the phenomenology of the Mīmārṁsa, that affirms

that whatever can be named is real within its own contextual parameters. Thus, for
example, if we can say ‘the rabbit has horns’, the Mīmāṁṣa would maintain that such a
rabbit exists, albeit in an imaginary form. Perception is the tying together, as it were, of
the three polarities – trikiūṭa – of subject, means and object of knowledge, all three of
which must be real for perception to be possible, irrespective of whether it is veridical or

not.

168

CHAPTER FOUR

That second one is said to be the two red (circles of twelve spokes),

which are like enclosures, outside that (wheel of sixteen spokes). In (the iris
of each eye,) between (the black pupils and the white circles of the two
eyes,) there are two (other) Wheels (of the two eyes), which are (partially)
black and (partially) white (and have eight spokes each). One should know
that within them (in the pupils) there are two (other) pure circles, (their)

colour like that of (freshly) sliced black collyrium, with four spokes (each).
O beloved, the two (subject and object, the male and female
partners,) abide (united) as a couple in the two Wheels of the Fire and
Moon (of eight and sixteen spokes, respectively). O Supreme Goddess, they
expand and contract one another (when the yogi and yoginī are engaged in

union).⁴⁰⁶ (128-130)

“⁰⁶ The dynamic meditative practice drawn from the Yogasaṅcāratantra begun in verse

127 continues up to verse 144. It is presented by Abhinavagupta as an explanation of
how the four processes of emanation, persistence, withdrawal and the Inexplicable, in
the three domains of subject, means and object of knowledge, operate in relation to the

senses (see below 4/145). Thus, he says, it illustrates how consciousness appears to

manifest phenomena, that is, the psychophysical organism and the outer world, as
separate from itself. Moreover, Abhinava tells us that it is a secret practice (4/146ab),
which Jayaratha clearly says is a yogic sexual practice (caryākrama) which, because it
is secret, one should understand for oneself (TAv ad 4/144), and this we will try to do,

encouraged by his declaration that it is also ‘very clear’.

There are five phases in this creative meditation. Each phase is marked by a

descent of a stream of supreme consciousness, characterized as the ‘nectar’ that emerges
from the Moon of objectivized consciousness (the female polarity) heated by the Fire of
subjectivity (the male polarity). It rains down from its own objectivized energies,
generating and subjectivizing the spheres of the phases of perception and the physical
body. This is followed by an ascent. Each ascent is an opportunity to enter and become

one with supreme liberated consciousness. Then the next phase follows.

The First Phase (verses 128-132). The Pulse of Subject and Object in the Night and
the Ascent into the Thousand Spoked Wheel.

The First Ascent.

1) The first phase commences with an ascent that takes place in the dark Night of Māyā,

the sphere of duality. The Fire of the subject that shines in the male partner engaged in

union unites there with the Moon of objectivity that shines in the female partner.

‘Pressing’ one another together, they exude ‘nectar’, which Jayaratha explains is ‘the
supreme principle of consciousnessʼ. This is the blissful energy of the flux of emission
(visarga), represented by the seventeenth digit of the Moon (see above note 1,23).

Union first takes place in consciousness, as both partners experience each other and
themselves as the subjective and objective polarities of the one universal consciousness.
The cycle of perception - the stages of which are marked by the Twelve Kālīs – flows
through the two polarities, out from one partner to the other and back. Moving out from
one subjectivity, it contracts as objectivity expands. As it returns, swinging back,

objectivity contracts and subjectivity expands. Expansion and contraction in the male
polarity is complemented by the reverse in the female and vice versa, back and forth, in
and out. Thus, the two ‘squeeze’ and rub against each other, full of the sacred awareness
of the divine energies of the Kālīs in each moment and phase of perception, in the

TANTRĀLOKA

169

course of this dynamic, pulsing union. By their union, the Tantra teaches, they ‘exude
nectar˚. (128-132ab)

2) In this way, a vision of the Light of the Supreme Perceiver dawns in the dark night of
Māyā, ‘ʻabove’ the two wheels of subject and object. The Thousand Spoked Wheel of
the cosmic manifestation of consciousness within consciousness shines within it.
(132cd)

The Second Phase (133-137ab). The Generation of the Individual Soul.

The First Descent

3) After this first initial ascent, if liberation is not achieved in the Thousand Spoked
Wheel, a new creation takes place at the individual level. The Egg of Brahmā, that
ranges from the principle of Śakti to Earth, is generated from the Wheel of a Thousand

Spokes within the transcendental Śiva principle. (133)
4) Descending from there, the objectivity of the Egg, which is the Moon, is melted by
the Fire of subjectivity rising from the female partner, and the lunar nectar, which is the

essence of individual subjective consciousness, pours out of it. Thus, the initial
universal objective creation that emerges from transcendental Śiva becomes the
individual subjective creation. Now at the individual embodied level it completely fills
the wheels (that is, spheres and cycles,) of consciousness with the blissful lunar energy

of emission, and then the senses, down to the gross elements that constitute the body. In
this way, as Jayaratha says, the Supreme Lord first manifests the ‘contracted’ i.e.
individual forms of subjectivity, and then the rest, down to the physical body formed
from the gross elements.

5) As in the first phase, liberation can be achieved without proceeding further. Even in
this gross individual form, everything can be withdrawn back into unconditioned,

liberated, disembodied consciousness by the resonance (nāda) of the self-reflective
awareness of individual consciousness of its Śiva nature.
6) Īf this liberating withdrawal does not take place, the process continues into the
following phase. And so, as before, the nectar of the emission of consciousness that
streams out of objectified consciousness transports the presence of the unchanging and
pervasive Deity down into the confines of the physical body consisting of the five gross

elements, where it is subject to its changes. There it travels down with force into the
genitals, where the universe is generated by the outer emission (visarga) of
consciousness and dissolves away into it. The recognition that this is all the activity of
consciousness is the third occasion to attain liberation and accomplishment (siddhi).

(137cd-139)

The Second Ascent
7) Now, having descended this way into outer embodied subjectivity, the Lord again
travels up from there by the practice of Brahmacaryā, which in common parlance means
‘continence’ (see below, note to TĀv ad 4/139). Here it means the ‘conduct (caryā) of

bliss³ (the Brahman = bliss). Coupled with yogic practice, this leads the vital seed up

into the infinite, unconditioned plane of Brahmā. There, by the union of subject and

object at this level, the upper emission takes place internally from the individual Self
within the universal Self. (140)

The Third Phase (141-143)
The Second Descent and Third Ascent

170

CHAPTER FOUR

“’“The two red circles’ (of the two eyes hidden by the eyelids)

‘outside’ the white circles are ‘like enclosuresʼ, that is, (are present there) like
surrounding circles. ‘That is said to be the second one’, namely, the wheel of
twelve spokes consisting of the (Twelve Kālīs), beginning with the venerable

Sṛṣṭikāll.'⁰⁴ Although the state here is that of the Inexplicable, the means of

knowledge, which corresponds to persistence, predominates. It is red, coloured
8) Unretained, the Moon of objectivity has not flown upwards, and so, still in the
genitals and heated by the passionate Fire of subjectivity, objectivized consciousness

melts and flows down progressively through the legs into the Wheel of Five Spokes,
that is, the body made of the five gross elements and the other wheels. The entire

process is then repeated progressively in all the senses.
9) Now at the final, grossest embodied level, the last ascent of the Fire of embodied
subjectivity takes place through the body, now fully formed this way, from the toe – the

lowest extremity — to the Cavity of Brahmā – the highest extremity at the top of the
head. (143ca).
⁴⁷ One wonders where Jayaratha got the details of his explanation of the contents of the
cakras. Abhinava quotes the Yogasaṅcāra in several places, Jayaratha nowhere presents
the original source. So he most probably did not have access to it. If so, how can he

supply so many details? It seems unlikely that he invented them. He most likely
received them from a predecessor. Perhaps from an earlier commentary or an oral

explanation he received from his teacher. Certainly, the details appear to be quite
plausible. Even so, an analysis of the text Abhinava supplies does not entirely agree, it
seems to me, with Jayaratha’s explanation. The reader is referred to my notes for the
details. Swami Lakṣhmanjoo supplies yet another explanation.

At the same time, there are also a good number of details that appear to be
consistent with what we know about the YS from other references. Of central
importance is the identification of the YS as a Trika Tantra that integrated into its Trika
teachings those of the Kālī Krama, as did others, notably the Devyāyāmala. There is

substantial evidence for this (see Appendix concerning the cited texts under the heading
‘Yogasaṅcāra’). Here the association with the Krama is obvious in the symbolism of
the eyes of the goddess, with the twelve Kaālīs in the outer red enclosure of the eyes.
Thus here also, according to Jayaratha, the YS maintains that in the iris the lotus of four
petals comprises the three Trika goddesses along with Mātṛsadbhāva, who is identified
with Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the Kālī who is the supreme goddess of the Krama system, just as
we find in the Devyāyāmala.

⁴“⁰⁸ The wheel of twelve spokes is mentioned after that of sixteen spokes mentioned in

the previous verse, which is one of the reasons why it is referred to here as ‘the second

oneʼ. One would expect the wheel of sixteen spokes to come first, followed by the other
three, each of which has four spokes less, progressively. However, that would
contravene the commonly accepted equation of white with the Moon, which is
universally accepted as representing the object, and consists of sixteen parts. Moreover,

and above all, it would go against a deeper logic at work here. We shall see that the
wheel of the twelve Kaālīs, which is that of the cycle of the means of knowledge

(pramāṇa), contains within itself the other cycles of the object, subject and resultant
noetic consciousness, which are represented by the succeeding circles. It is thus
appropriate that it should encompass them, although it is the second wheel, after that of

the object. Again, without the intervening means of knowledge, the object, located in
the white circle of the eye, and subject, located in the iris, would be next to each other

and directly connected. Even so, they are intimately related. Thus, as the dark iris

expands, the white circle of the eye contracts and vice versa, symbolically representing
the dynamic relationship between subject and object expressed here.

TANTRĀLOKA

171

by the object (prameya). Thus, because the object abides at one with it, the

group of four associated with it does not exist separately, and so (this wheel has

only) twelve spokes.⁴ Moreover, it is located on the outside because it includes

the object.⁴"⁰

⁴⁰’ Read a break () between dvādaśāratvam and ata and then another between —sthānarṅ

and madhyage. We will see that all these spheres of the cycles (‘wheels’) of

consciousness are contained in that of the means of knowledge, which is the Wheel of
the Twelve Kālīs, through which they can all be experienced. Then the cycle of
perception (i.e the means of knowledge) is experienced as the cycle of the Inexplicable.
Recognizing consciousness to be the dynamism of this universal pulsation
(sāmānyaspanda), which is ‘inexplicable’ because it cannot be described as either
successive, non-successive, both or neither, is to recognize the true nature of the Self,
which is liberation itself. Swami Lakshmanjoo in his Kramanayapradīpikā (p. 13-16)
explains the four categories of Kālī’s expanded cosmic form, that is, the Twelve Kālīs,

as follows.

‘1) Noetic consciousness (pramiti). This is also said to be the category of the
perceiver (pramātṛ), which is beyond the state of the individual subject (grāhaka) and
object (grāhya). At the same time, it is the state of consciousness corresponding to the
experience: ‘T have known this entity°. Thus, in accord with this aspect, it abides in the

state which is the fruit of the means of knowledge. This state is free of the disturbance
of subject and object and manifests solely in its own nature free of the limiting

conditions brought about by the object of knowledge. From another point of view, this
state is the first sprout of the cosmic form (of consciousness). In this state, the perceiver
abides completely merged in noetic consciousness (pramā). This category of noetic

consciousness is said to be the Wheel with four petals, because all four Wheels
described next are considered to be within it. They are the three Goddesses and

Maātr̥sadbhāva. The purpose of saying that Mātrṛsadbhāva (is also present here) is that the
aforementioned three goddesses, Parā and the rest, are present there as energies.
However, along with them, the supreme perceiver, that is, Śiva, assuming the form of
energy (śakti), is present (there with them also). In this state, Śiva does not unfold as the
powerholder, that is, as Śiva. This is why the category of noetic consciousness which is

the four-petalled wheel is also said to be the nature of the Inexplicable (anākhyarūpa).
2) When the category of perceivers unfolds in the gross sphere of the cosmic nature (of
consciousness), then as it progresses it unfolds from the category of noetic
consciousness onwards. It is for this reason that the energies (kalā) of the subsequent
categories increase with respect to the previous ones. All the perceivers in this category
of perceivers experience worldly experiences in the form of sound, touch, form, taste
and smell. This category of perceivers is considered to be the form of Fire. It is also said
(in the Tantrāloka 3/124ab (123cd)): ʻThe supreme principle of Fire is indeed that of the
subject.⁷ In other words, that which is considered to be the (true essential nature) of Fire
is also considered to be that of the perceiver. Thus, Fire and the perceiver are not even
slightly different. From the point of view of (its) energies (kalā), Fire is considered to

have eight energies. These same eight energies are considered to be those of the
perceiver as well.
The category of noetic consciousness (pramiti) is also called the Wheel of the
Inexplicable. The four parts (kalā) of that are incorporated into the category of the

perceivers, that is, the three goddesses along with Kuleśvar (who is the form of
Mātṛsadbhāva here). The four new energies are the three Bhairavas of the corresponding
goddesses, namely. Para, Parāpara and Apara Bhairava, along with Kuleśvara.

3) The category of the means of knowledge includes all the senses, which are formed
(from consciousness) as a means to experience the worldly experience (bhoga) of sound
and the rest associated with the phenomenal universe. They are twelve – namely, the

172

CHAPTER FOUR

five cognitive organs of sense, five of action, along with the mind and intellect. These
are considered to be solar. It is said that the Śun is said to be the means of knowledge.

Theṣe energies are considered to be primarily those of persistence (sthiti) because their
inner and external nature is constantly filled with expanding consciousness. The four

energies of noetic consciousness and the perceiver are combined within the Wheel of
persistence of the category of the means of knowledge. Thus, by adding the (four)
energies of this form, there are twelve altogether. These are as follows:
1) The four energies of the category of noetic consciousness (i.e. the Wheel of the
Inexplicable), namely, the three unmanifest (avyakta) goddesses and Mātrṛsadbhāva.

2) The four energies of the category of perceivers (i.e. the Wheel of Withdrawal),

namely, the three Bhairavas and Kuleśvara.
3) The four energies of the category of the means of knowledge (i.e the Wheel of
Persistence), namely, the three manifest-cum-unmanifest goddesses and Mātṛṣadbhāva.

Added together they make twelve energies. Thus, this Wheel of Persistence, which is

that of the category of the means of knowledge, is called the Wheel with Twelve
Spokes.
4) AIl the types of objects of perception, that is, sound and touch etc., are found and
included in the fourth category, which is that of the objects of knowledge. The perceiver
relishes sound and the rest of the objects of sense on the plane of the means of
knowledge. This category of the objects of knowledge is considered to have a lunar
nature . . . because the energies of the Moon are said to be sixteen, as are those of the
object of knowledge. When (the goddess of consciousness) abides in this form, and the

expansion of the sixteen energies of the object of knowledge has reached its final end,
she completes the outer expansion (of consciousness into objectivity). Thus, as this is

the extreme limit of the unfolding of emanation, this plane of the object of knowledge is
considered to be predominantly emanation. The four energies of noetic consciousness,

the perceiver and the means of knowledge, also unfold within this category of the object

of knowledge. Apart from these twelve energies, the four energies associated with the
category of the object of knowledge, namely, the three manifest goddesses and
Mātṛṣadbhāva, also emerge (here). Thus, there are sixteen energies in this category of
the object of knowledge, that is, the Wheel of Emanation, and it is also called the Wheel
with Sixteen Spokes.
Observing how the energies are more or less in this way, the reader should not
think that there is any difference in any way in their real essential nature. This is
because in reality the nature of these three categories is (essentially) one. The only small

difference is just that in the category of noetic consciousness the energies are

unmanifest (avyakta), in the category of the means of knowledge manifest-cumunmanifest and in that of the objects of knowledge they are considered to be manifest.

The categories of the perceivers are not counted amongst these three because it is not
(like them) predominately energy (śakti), and so the four energies of the category of the

perceivers, namely, the three Bhairavas and Kuleśvara, are said to be male.
All these four configurations are experienced in the oneness of consciousness,

which is the state of the Inexplicable (Anākhyā). It is the experience of each one in a

state of pure noetic consciousness (pramitibhāva). This is how they are when their true
nature as such is realised directly. In this state of consciousness, its domains and phases
are experienced as a progression (krama) in which the prior is merged into the latter,
decreasing, step by step, by four units (kalā) at a time. The first group of four of the
sixteen-spoked Wheel of objectivity realised to be the Inexplicable merges into the

twelve-spoked Wheel of the means of knowledge. The four units that merge in this way
represent the essential objectivity of that sphere at one with the Inexplicable. Similarly,

the eight-spoked Wheel of the subject is formed by merger of the four energies that
constitute the essential state of the means of knowledge when that is realised to be the

TANTRĀLOKA

173

Inexplicable. Finally, when this dissolves into the four-spoked Wheel of the
Inexplicable, which is the resultant pure noetic consciousness (pramiti), the essence of
its subjectivity merges into it. The four units (kalā) of the Wheel of the Inexplicable

correspond to all four Wheels as one pure noetic consciousness. Although the previous
phases also unfold within that state, here this is fully realised to be so.”

Questions may arise concerning how this process operates and the status of the

groups of four that are lost and those that remain. For example, what is the difference

between the objectivity in the twelve-spoked wheel and in the sixteen-spoked one, or the
means of knowledge in the subject and the subject in the Inexplicable? Even if the

Yogasaṁcāra were still available, one would not find the answer there. The question

arises in the perspective of Abhinavagupta’s phenomenological hermeneutics, and so
the answer is found in the logic of how that operates. The manner in which the
quaternity of the object and the rest abide at one with consciousness in the four-spoked

Wheel is as the triadic goddess of the Trika and the Goddess of the Krama, as aspects of
the Inexplicable (Anākhyā). In this sense, all the Wheels are those of Anākhyā, but not

yet recognised to be such. When the sphere of objectivity is recognised to be a form of
the means of knowledge, its three units are absorbed into the Inexplicable (Anākhyā) of
that phase. In the same way, those of the means of knowledge are absorbed in the

subject, and then finally those of the subject into Anākhyā directly. This is how the four

deities of the fourth wheel are the Inexplicable (Anākhyā) form of the others and

Inexplicable itself. The objectivity that remains in the Wheel of twelve spokes, like the

means of knowledge in the Wheel of subjectivity, are there in their Inexplicable

(Anākhyā) aspect.

As we shall see in detail, the Kālīs are arranged in three groups of four. These
correspond to the object, means of knowledge and the subject, each of which is four-

fold as they are emanated, persist, withdrawn, and even as they abide in a fourth
Inexplicable state which encompasses them but cannot be defined as any one of them.

The culmination of each of the three phases is the Inexplicable, which remains at the
end as the completion of the three cycles. As it is, this Wheel that contains the others

and leads to the realisation of the Inexplicable, which is consciousness itself, it is the
focus of practice. Thus, the Wheel of the Twelve Kālīs, like the Wheel of the
Inexplicable, also is understood to contain the others. Abhinava reiterates several times
that all the ‘wheelsʼ, i.e. cycles and configurations, of the energies of consciousness are

contained in the wheel of the Twelve Kālīs, which is accordingly identified directly at

times with the Wheel of the Inexplicable.
They are distinguished in the domain of practice. The phases of the dynamism
(‘rotation’) of the twelve marks the development of the full realisation of the

Inexplicable state. The goal is the recognition that the dynamism of individual

perception – the ‘means of knowledge’ – is one with the dynamism of universal noetic

consciousness. The Wheel of the Twelve Kaālīs is the initial point of entry into the
Inexplicable, which is its final state. The initial condition is beset with thought

constructs, and so operates in the domain of relative distinction between ‘prior’ and
‘subsequent’, and so is set in time. The final condition is the recognition that the
dynamism of the Inexplicable is free of these distinctions, and hence not a temporal
process. Attention to the sequence of the Twelve Kālīs purifies thought by the

experience of the Inexplicable which, progressively strengthened in all three domains of
the objectivity, perception and subjectivity, consumes them. As all four are explicitly
present in the Wheel of the Twelve Kālīs, this is the one that leads directly to the
recognition of Anākhyā consciousness because, as Jayaratha explains, both subject and

object are present in the means of knowledge as its essential polarities. Again, the pure

noetic state of the Inexplicable is the direct development of the means of knowledge
(see above, comm. 4/123cd-124). The former is the universal activity of consciousness

174

CHAPTER FOUR

(The third circle is the iris, which is) ‘in between’ the white and black
circles. Thus, because it is coloured by the black circle (of the pupil), which is
on the inside, and the white one (of the eyeball) on the outside, the two circles
(of the iris, one in each eye), are ‘(partially) white and (partially) blackʼ, that

is, grey-like (dhūsara).⁴" These two circles (represent) the state of rest of the
means of knowledge within the subject, and so, although the group of four is
present in it, because it does not exist separately (independently), it is said to be
the eight-spoked Wheel, which is predominantly the perceiver, who corresponds
to withdrawal, and consists of the three Bhairavas, the three goddesses (Parā,
Parāparā and Aparā, who are their consorts), Kuleśvara and Kuleśvarī. This is
what the meaning (of this verse) amounts to. As he will say:
‘Now (next), the Moon rains down in this way (evaṁ) (its) most

excellent nectar everywhere and in every way progressively (krameṇa) into the
eight spokes (of the Wheel of Fire), along with the two Wheels of sixteen and

twelve spokes.”⁴¹²

The two very black™² (circles, i.e. the pupils of the two eyes), within the

(partially) black and (partially) white circle,⁴⁴ are called ‘Kumārikā’.⁴"³ Where

(sāmānyaspanda), of which the latter is the particular form (viśeṣaspanda), operating
with respect to a specific perceiver in relation to a specific object. In this perspective,

the process is one of recognizing the essential identity of the particular and the
universal. Each act of perception is the entire activity of consciousness, on the basis of
the fundamental principle which governs the expansion of consciousness, namely, the
recognition that every single thing is everything (sarvaṁ sarvātmakam) and vice versa.
Thus, the Mālinīvijayavārtika declares:
eko bhāvaḥ sarvabhāvasvabhāvaḥ sarve bhāvā ekabhāvasvabhāvāḥ |
arhadvādaḥ so ʻyaṃ asmatsudṛṣṭau yuktaś ca śrīṣāraśāstre pi coktaḥ ||
‘The nature of one thing is everything and the nature of all things is one thing.
This venerable teaching (arhadvāda) fits well in our own good doctrine, it is reasonable
(yukta) also, and taught in the venerable Trikasāra.’ 1/641
Also
tathā hi paripūrṇo ʻsau sarvasarvātmarūpadhṛt |

‘In this way, He is completely full (unconditioned and perfect), bearing the

nature which is that everything is all things.’ (Ibid. 1/820cd)

⁴!⁰ The red circle of the twelve Kālīs, representing the means of knowledge, is located
outside the white circle of the Moon of the object, because it includes and thus
encompasses it.

‘!l RṞead a break (l) between dhūsaraprāye and ye.

⁴!² Below, 4/135. Another, translation could be: “From the two Wheels of sixteen and
twelve spokes (the Moon rains down in this way the supreme nectar everywhere) in all
respects within the eight spokes.” See note ad loc.

⁴!³ RṞead atīvakṛṣṇe for atīva

TANTRĀLOKA

175

these two circles are located is known as the (Wheel) with four petals, because
the subject also rests (there) in (pure) noetic (consciousness) (pramā). The three

goddesses (Parā, Parāparā and Aparā) (are there), along with Mātrṛsadbhāva.⁴¹⁶
The meaning is that it shines radiantly as the Wheel of the Inexplicable
(i.e. Mātṛsadbhāva), which is just (pure) noetic consciousness alone

(pramāmātra) and its essential nature. Thus, the blackness here (of the pupil

symbolizes this state of consciousness,) because it withdraws everything, and

because, as undivided, its form is the darkness (tamas) (of the unmanifest state).
It is taught that in (its) form with (specific) fixed parts

(pratiniyatāvayava-rupatvena), it is located (and arranged) within the eye in this

way, as the four-fold process of emanation, (persistence, withdrawal, and the

fourth encompassing state of the Inexplicable beyond them).⁴"⁷ He describes its
consequent nature there (in that case) also, (with the words) ‘Fire and Moon’

etc. Out of these four wheels, the two wheels of the Fire and Moon, consisting

of eight and sixteen spokes of the subject and object (respectively), ‘abide
(united) as a coupleʼ, as both the enjoyer (bhoktṛ) and the enjoyed (bhogya).

‘They expand and contract one another’ mutually, that is, they (both) make

(each other) expand and contract. This is the meaning. The subject contracting
into itself, makes the object expand, and as the object is made to contract, it
expands itself. The object also (behaves, conversely,) in the same way. This is
the meaning of the statement that ‘(they expand and contract) one another°.
Moreover, that is said to be the state of emanation and withdrawal.

Without the development of the means of knowledge, the object would not
come to rest in the subject. Thus, persistence is also implied here. So too the
perceiver, by virtue of its intent on the object, (reaches the state of awareness
that) ‘I have known this’, and (so), free of desire (to know more) because of the
(sense of) satisfaction that arises (thereby), attains rest within its own nature.

Thus, it is possible for full supreme consciousness to arise by the dynamic union

of subject and object also.⁴¹⁸

⁴!³ The reason why the iris is called ‘Kumārikā’ (‘young virgin’) is because when one
stands in front of somebody else and looks into his or her eyes, a small human figure
that looks like a young woman appears to be reflected in the iris.

⁴!⁶ We have seen that Mātṛsadbhāva is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the Kālī who is the supreme
goddess of the Krama system. See above, note 3,227.

⁴⁷ The spokes of the Wheel of the Inexplicable are the three goddesses (Parā, Parāparā
and Aparā) and Mātṛsadbhāva, when it is ‘undivided’ in its unmanifest state. Its
manifest form with specific fixed parts consists of the four-fold process of emanation
(corresponding to the object), persistence (corresponding to the means of knowledge),
withdrawal (corresponding to the subject), and the fourth encompassing state of the
Inexplicable beyond them, deployed in the circles of the eyes as described.
⁴!⁸ The Wheels are in pairs, as they are projected into both eyes. Thus, there are two

Wheels of sixteen, twelve, eight and four spokes. These are:

1) The white circle of the eye. It contains the Wheel with sixteen spokes, which

corresponds to a) the object of knowledge, b) creation, and c) the Wheel of the

Inexplicable. This is the Wheel of the Moon.

2) The red circle outside it (hidden by the eyelids) contains the Wheel with twelve

spokes, which is the Wheel of the Twelve Kālīs, and corresponds to a) the means of
knowledge and b) persistence. This the Wheel of the Sun.

176

CHAPTER FOUR

aaṛ āīṝṁg fõē garīcāīa sṇā |
TATṬTĪTTTATIg RTKI T ÑYIA: I 232 I
yathā yoniś ca liṅgaṁ ca saṁyogāt sravate ‘mṛtam |
tathāmṛtāgnisaṁyogād dravatas te na saṁśayaḥ || 131 ||
3) The iris, which is the ‘black and white’ circle, between the black pupil and the white

circle, corresponds to a) the subject and b) destruction. It contains a Wheel of eight rays
consisting of the three Bhairavas, the three Goddesses Parā, Parāparā and Aparā, along

with Kuleśvara and Kuleśvarī. This is the Wheel of Fire.

4) The black circle, that is, the pupil, corresponds to pure cognitive consciousness
(pramā, pramiti) and consists of four rays corresponding to the three Goddesses and
Mātrṛṣadbhāva (i.e. Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī).

The Wheel of twelve rays is located in the two red circles around the borders of
the eyeballs. There are two other Wheels that partake of the colour of both, between the
black pupils (of four rays) and the white circles (of sixteen rays), within which there are
two other circles, black as collyrium, each with four rays. In the two Wheels of Agni
and Soma –- Fire and Moon (of eight and sixteen rays, corresponding to the subject and
object, respectively), the two, subject and object, come together and mutually unfold out
and fold into one another. As the eight-spoked Wheel of subjectivity expands, the
sixteen-spoked Wheel of objectivity contracts and vice versa. Subject and object expand
and contract in relation to one another according to which one predominates over the
other. In the first moment of perception (the eight-spoked Wheel of) the Fire of the
subject burns brightly; in the second, (the sixteen-spoked Wheel of) the Moon of the
object.
Although the Wheel of the Twelve Kaālīs, which is that of perception
(pramāṇa), is established in the Inexplicable (anākhya), it is red because of the presence

of objectivity. As the object is one with the subject, and because it is not separate from

the four Wheels themselves, it has twelve spokes. Moreover, containing within itself the
object of awareness, it also manifests externally. The eight-spoked Wheel is in the iris

between the white and the black circles, that is, it encompasses the black circle while it

is itself surrounded by the white one, which symbolizes the resting of the means of
knowledge in the experiencing subject. Although it is not essentially different from the

four Wheels, it is principally the experiencing subject, corresponding to the state of

withdrawal of objectivity. The eight spokes are the Three Bhairavas and Three
Goddesses of the Trika, Parā, Parāparā and Aparā, along with Kuleśvara and Kuleśvarī.

The Black Wheel of the pupil consists of the Three Goddesses of the Trika and
Mātr̥ṣadbhāva of the Kālīkrama. It is the object of knowledge, where the subject rests in
pure gnosis itself. In other words, it manifests as the Wheel of the Inexplicable
(Anākhya

Cakra),

which

consists

of pure

knowledge

(pramāmātra)

and

its

corresponding state (pramitibhāva), with its pertinent category of reality (satattva). It is
black, as it is undifferentiated darkness, because it is dissolves away all things (into pure

noetic consciousness). Thus, there are the four states in the eye in their own particular

form of creation and merger etc.

The Wheels of the Fire and Moon represent the subject and object, mutually
conjoined, expanding and contracting in relation to one another. When the subject

contracts into itself, it unfolds the object of knowledge. Conversely, the contraction of

the object is accompanied by the expansion of the subject, alternating in the rhythm of
emanation and withdrawal. The object of knowledge does not rest within the subject
when the means of knowledge is active, but when the subject, directed at the object,
experiences that “I know this”, it is satisfied and comes to rest within itself, where

subject and object unite in the plenitude of consciousness.

TANTRĀLOKA

177

Just as the (female) Yoni and (male) Liṅga stream forth⁴⁹ nectar by

(their) union, similarly, no doubt, the Fire (of the subject) and the Moon

(amṛta) (of the object) exude (nectar) by (their) union.⁴*" (131)

In accord with the (following) teaching, their union is mutual

penetration (āveśa):

‘the Lord of Mantra, having penetrated Māyā with (His) energies,
created the universe in order to accomplish a means for worldly enjoyment for

one who desires it’⁴³!

The Yoni is Māyā,¹² and the Liṅga, according to (the following)
teaching, is the Supreme Lord, Who performs the five functions of creation and

the rest.⁴²³

⁴¹⁰ Read with MSs Ch, Jh, N, T: sravate for sravato.

“2" The double entendre here is obvious. Based on the principle that the universal is
reflected in the particular, the Yoni is both Māyā, the Goddess who is the source of the

universe of duality, and the female organ. Similarly, its complimentary opposite is the

Liṅga, which is both the imperishable ground of reality from which all things arise and
into which they dissolve away, and the male organ. In cognitive terms, they correspond
to the Fire of the subject and the Moon of the object. Clearly, throughout this account,
amongst the implicit layers of meaning is the dynamism of sexual arousal of the lunar
Yogi and the fiery Yoginī. The red Fire arouses the white Moon full of seed. The

delightfully cooling full moon, shining in a hot Indian summer night does indeed feel as
if it exudes nectar. The Yoginī, burning with the passionate Fire of subjectivity, arouses

the stolid Yogi, softening his staunch, distant reserve. He melts and flows. The Moon of
objectivity rises, descending from the original integral and free oneness of
consciousness, when the object distances itself from the subject and separates from it.
But then the Fire of subjectivity heats it, and it emits its vitalizing seed. Once the lunar
nectar has flowed down and filled all that is below, the lower spread of consciousness,

thus full and satisfied, then flows back up, to re-enter its original source and resume its

original state, and so affords an opportunity to regain that original lost liberated state.
This happens for the first time here, and then twice again (133ab and 141cd). Here the
flow is from the original pulse of consciousness, from whence it flows down again into

the body to form the individual subjectivity within it which, if all goes well, is then
transported upwards to regain the summit of consciousness. Otherwise, it flows down

again, but this time into the lower body from there, when it has reached its lower

extremity, it rises as the Fire, now that of the subtle and physical body, that caused it to
flow down. Each time the passionate Fire of subjectivity melts the Moon of objectivity,
it consumes its flood of nectar, and nourished by it, absorbs its objectivity, and so rises
up back into supreme consciousness.

“T MV 1/25. TĀ 9/147-149ab is a paraphrase of MV 1/24cd-25, which is quoted by
Jayaratha there and ad 9/61. MV 1/25d is quoted in TĀv ad 9/40cd-41ab.

⁴² All Māyā or saṁsāric existence is the Yoni (symbolized by the letter E). It is Empty.
Māyā has no independent existence, everything is the divine effulgence of pure
consciousness. All phenomena are momentary. They are emitted from consciousness
and dissolve away into it at each instant. This process is the eternal flux of reality, and
so is in itself (ultimate) reality. Although it is always defining itself in this form or that,
as empirical knowledge, even so, it eludes empirical knowledge, for it is the very

process by which empirical knowledge arises. This Māyā is the Yoni – the creative

source of all things, that is, the Lord’s freedom. Liṅga is the Supreme Lord. The
universe is created by the union of these two.

178

CHAPTER FOUR

‘The learned call the imperishable plane, (which is the universal) cause
of emanation and withdrawal, with the word ‘liṅga’ because it dissolves (all)

things (away) (laya), and because (it makes them) come forth (āgamana).²⁴

‘Just as’ the two ‘stream forth’, that is, (once united) they generate
emanation, similarly, the two Wheels of sixteen and eight spokes ‘no doubt”
(do so also). ‘ʻBy the union’, which is (their) mutual intent on one another, that
is, of the Moon (the Wheel of sixteen spokes), which is the object, and of the
Fire (the Wheel of eight spokes), which is the subject, they ‘exude’ nectar, that

is, the supreme principle of consciousness, which, because it is unmeasured by

time, is without beginning or end.⁹ The meaning is that they flow out in that
form. The intended sense is that consciousness itself, (initially) in a gross state

(āśyānībhūtā),⁸ assuming the form of (all phenomena), such as (the
experience) ‘blue’, having destroyed (vilāpya) that form and coming to rest in
the subject through the development of the means of knowledge, manifests
radiantly in its own form as one with the subject. This is the intended

(meaning).⁴²⁷

“³ Lord Śiva performs five functions (kṛtya). They are emanation (sṛṣṭi), persistence

(sthiti) and withdrawal (saṁhāra), which relate to the world, along with grace
(anugraha) and obscuration (tirodhāna), which relate to the individual soul. The last
two functions are the specific subjects of Chapters Thirteen and Fourteen of the
Tantrāloka, respectively. The previously three are dealt with generically in Chapters Six

to Twelve. See Dyczkowski 1992a: 178 ff. for a description of the functions, their
relation to perception, and their equivalents according to the Krama school.
⁴2* The word ‘liīga’ means, ‘sign’, ‘gender’ or phallus. Shaped like a phallus, or
sometimes just an aniconic stone, the Liṅga is worshipped as a representation or ‘sign’
of Śiva. The texts commonly supply a didactic etymology of the word, as here in this

verse, deriving from the words ‘laya’, ‘merger’ and ‘gam’ ‘going’ or, as here,
‘āgamana’ ʻcoming forth’. The Liṅga thus represents Śiva, into which all the universe
dissolves away and from whence it comes forth. See below, note to 5/114 (113cd114ab).
“³³ The word ‘amṛta’ – ‘nectar’ – literally means ‘not deadʼ, that is, undying and eternal.
Consciousness, which is not subject to time, is such and so has no beginning or end.

⁴⁰ āśyānībhūtā literally means ‘being in a coagulated state’. Just as consciousness is
said to contract to manifest as conditioned objectivity and expand to manifest as
unconditioned subjectivity, by another analogy, it is also said to ‘coagulate’ and ‘melt’.
Cf. below, 4/158ab.
“*⁷ The dynamics of two of the four cycles or ‘wheels’ are described here. One is the

cycle of eight phases, which is that of subjectivity and Fire. The other is the cycle of
sixteen phases, which is that of objectivity and the Moon. They work together, rotating,

as it were, in and out of each other. The pure subject, devoid of objectivity, cannot be
defined as being in any place or at any time. Nor can it be said to have specific qualities.
These define and delimit the countless individual objects that populate the sphere of
objectivity. As the wheel of subjectivity rotates, the subject pours out into the sphere of

objectivity through the channels of the senses, that is, the means of knowledge. In this

way, subjective, unconditioned consciousness focuses down onto specific objects, and
so ‘condenses’ into a gross form. The cycle of objectivity now becomes dominant. As
that rotates, it moves through that of the means of knowledge back into the subject,

where it comes to rest. And so, it goes on from inner to outer, outer to inner. The yogi
who practices to focus his attention on this dynamic union of subject and object, and
experiences it as that of universal consciousness, enters Kramamudrā, that flows with

TANTRĀLOKA

179

Surely, (one may ask) the daily commerce of subject and object etc. is
that of Māyā; so how can that be such, when that (consciousness) exists (and
operates in this way)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TTēīhrēīīṣāīt sāiṭr̥īãrcahīaīraq
ī ā̄aāāī Ūīā TdJĨ-Ī] ā̄īōāī JTaTi | 32 1|
taccakrapīḍanād rātrau jyotir bhāty arkasomagam |
tāṁ drṣṭvā paramāṁ jyotsnāṁ kālajñānaṁ pravartate || 132 ||
The light (of the subject), beyond the Sun (of the means of
knowledge) and the Moon (of objectivity), shines by pressing these two
Wheels (of sixteen and eight spokes embodied in the male and female
organs, respectively,) at night (when the duality of Māyā prevails, during

the prelude to union, prior to the dawning of subjectivity). Beholding that
Supreme Light (as one’s own nature), the Knowledge of Time⁴⁸ (which is
the supreme reality) arises. (132)

‘By pressingʼ, that is, drawing out the essential reality (sārārtha) of
‘these two Wheels’ of eight and sixteen spokes, which are the subject and
object, ‘at night’ even when (the duality of) Māyā prevails, ‘the light’, which is
‘beyond the Sun and the Moon’ʼ, that is, the subject beyond the means of

knowledge and the object, ‘shinesʼ. (This light) is ‘supreme’ with respect to the

means of knowledge and the rest. It is called ‘the Light’ because it nourishes
etc. all things. ‘Beholdingʼ. that is, perceiving it as one’s own nature, ‘the
Knowledge of Time arises’. The meaning is that, in accord with the teaching

that: ʻTime, which is Bhairava, emits the universe beginning with (Śiva, its
universal) cause, up to (a tiny) insect, ³⁴N time (kāla) is the full Light (of

consciousness), the sole nature of which is the supreme subject, because it
generates

(kalana)

the

universe,

which

is

emanation

(persistence,

and

the ‘nectar” of the aesthetic delight of ‘the supreme principle of consciousness’ by the
pressing and rubbing together of the two polarities, subject and object, Sun and Moon,

Śiva and Śakti, and, as is taughtin the following verses, Siddha and Yoginī. Concerning
Kramamudrā and Bhairavamudrā, see Dyczkowski 1987: 159-161.

‘2⁸ See above 3/252cd-253ab and below, 4/173cd-175, for various meanings of the root
kal, from which the word kāla, meaning time, is derived. Here the expression
Knowledge of Time can well be taken to mean the realisation or attainment of the
ultimate reality, which is Bhairava, the Deity Time. But more commonly in the Tantras,

it means knowledge of the time when death approaches. The Tantras of most major
schools of the early period, that is, up to around the eleventh century when Abhinava
lived, teach several methods by which the yogi can cultivate this ability and
prognosticate from various signs when death is approaching, knowing that he can take
measures to postpone it or at least prepare himself for it. The yogic procedure for that is

called Kālavañcana – Cheating Death; see below note 28,258 to 28/256cd-259ab.

“³ Kālikāstotra v. 6ab. See above, TĀv ad 3/234, where the whole verse is quoted. See
note there. This line is also quoted below in TĀy ad 4/168 and ad 4/173ab.

180

CHAPTER FOUR

destruction). Its ‘knowledge arises’ means that (Light) itself manifests in that
form (as the Knowledge of Time).

Surely (one may ask,) if that is so, would it not be the manifestation of

(the immanent) All (rather than that of the transcendental Light)? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

sahasrāraṁ bhavec cakraṁ tābhyām upari saṁsthitam ḷ
The Wheel of a Thousand Spokes is located above these two
(Wheels of eight and sixteen spokes, subject and object). (133ab)
‘The Wheel ofa Thousand Spokesʼ is the universe which, as the living

beings (bhūta), (individual) phenomena (bhāva) and worlds (bhuvana) etc., is of

endless kinds (bheda). It ‘is located above these two’ Wheels of eight and
sixteen spokes in the sense that, even though it is being (constantly) separated
off (from consciousness), it manifests radiantly posited within its own (essential
conscious nature) (svasaṁlagna).

Again, (other) secondary wheels also arise from that Wheel, which is all
things. Thus, he says:

TṬāē¥īTaā ōrāāīls dgaīēāḤ
I 233 II
tataś cakrāt samudbhūtaṁ brahmāṇḍaṁ tad udāhṛtam || 133 I|
(133cd)

What has arisen from that Wheel is called the Egg of Brahmā.
‘The Egg of Brahmā’ also stands for (all the other Eggs, including) the

Egg of Nature (prakṛti) and the rest.⁴⁰

Surely (one may ask,) how could such a universe, which is of many
kinds, manifest without a break (avicchedena)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

tatrasthāṁ muñcate dhārāṁ somo hy agnipradīpitaḥ |
⁴" Theṛe are four Eggs. They contain all the principles from Earth to Śakti. They
correspond to four divisions of the universe ruled, respectively, from highest to lowest,
by Iśvara, Rudra, Viṣṇu and Brahmā. They are 1) the Egg of Power (śaktyaṇḍa), which
corresponds to the pure principles from Śakti to Śuddhavidyā (Pure Knowledge); 2) the
Egg of Māyā, which contains the principles from Māyā to Puruṣa (the Individual Soul);

3) the Egg of Nature (Prakṛti), which contains the principles from Nature to Water; 4)
the Egg of Earth, which contains only that principle. The Egg of Brahmā corresponds to

the Egg of Earth (see below, note to TĀv 6/151ab-152ab (150cd-151)). Here Jayaratha

is saying that it stands for the other three Eggs also. Moreover, as the four Eggs are

generated from Śiva, we may surmise that He is present here in the Wheel of a
Thousand Spokes. Concerning the four Eggs, see note 6,371 ad 6/170cd-171ab (170).

TANTRĀLOKA

181

The Moon (of objectivity), enflamed by the Fire (of subjectivity),
releases the stream (of the nectar of universal manifestation) present there
(within it). (134ab)
‘The Moon’, which is the power of action, is ‘enflamed by the Fire’,
which is one with the supreme subject, by (the power of) its own (inherent)

freedom, and so, energized in its extroverted state, it ‘releases the stream (of
universal manifestation) present thereʼ, that is, everywhere here (in the

sphere of objectivity). (This means) that it manifests radiantly as the unbroken
flow of subject and object etc., by virtue of which this cosmic expansion

(viśvasphāra¹ is so (extensive) (iyat).

It not only emits this universe which is common (to all), it also (emits)

the one (which is personal and) not common (to everybody). Thus, he says:

gSTdTĪd TTGGTHITH-ĀTTHĀTTĀĒT
I| 23% |I
sṛjatītthaṁ jagat sarvam ātmany ātmany anantakam || 134 ||

(134cd)

It emits in this way the entire infinite universe within (each) soul.

‘Within (each) soul’ means (that a personal universe is emitted) for

each individual soul.⁴³ And how is that?

ĪIBJJJCJRIIITRṢĀA
TTT: |

z l] #aīī TJFAṬTTTTḤ
I 3.,
īa: #īdīfṭ] āāīārēa TJTI *TīhŪdgīdī; |

ṣoḍaśadvādaśārābhyām aṣṭāreṣv atha sarvaśaḥ |
evaṁ krameṇa sarvatra cakreṣv amṛtam uttamam || 135 ||
somaḥ sravati yāvac ca pañcānāṁ cakrapaddhatiḥ |
Now the Moon rains down in this way (eva) (its) most excellent

nectar everywhere and in every way progressively (krameṇa) into the eight
¹ The literal meaning is ‘opening up as all things’. Consciousness, the supreme

perceiver, ‘opens up’, expanding into the manifestation of everything at each moment,
by turning away, as it were, from its transcendental nature, in which it looks inwardly,

to its immanent nature as all things, when it looks outwards. In its extroverted state,

when it opens up as all things, consciousness flows out of itself, as it were, as the stream
of subject, object and means of knowledge.

⁴³² Although the pure conscious nature of each individual soul is essentially the same,
thus ensuring that they share a common reality, at the level of Māyā, each one lives in

the universe emitted for it in accord with its Karma etc. See for example below 8/309-

310 (308cd-310ab). However, at the level of the Pure Principles, there is just one
universe, which is common to all individual souls, and shines at one with their essential,
universal consciousness nature. In this way they inwardly share a common objective
reality, even as they each live in their own outer world.

182

CHAPTER FOUR

spokes (of the Wheel of Fire), along with the two Wheels of sixteen and
twelve spokes and (into all) the wheels,¹³ until the series of Wheels of five
(modalities is made fully manifest). (135-136ab)
The sense of ‘etc.’ can be understood by the use of the plural in the

expression ‘into the (wheels of) eight spokesʼ, and so, by implying the four-

spoked wheel also, ‘along with the Wheels of sixteen and twelve spokes’,⁴*⁴
(the meaning is that this lunar nectar pours down) everywhere into all these four
Wheels ‘progressively’, that is, in a descending (order), ‘thusʼ, in the manner

explained, ‘in all ways’ and every way. ‘The most excellent nectar’ is one’s

own (conscious) essence in an external form. ‘The Moon’ is the power of

action. In other words, the meaning is that it ‘rains down’ until ‘the series’ of
five modalities of the senses (buddhīndriya) and the rest of the four Wheels

manifests, right up to the Earth Principle in a gross form as the object.⁴³⁵
The general sense is that the Supreme Lord, desiring to make (His)

cosmic form manifest (as all things) by virtue (of the power) of His own

(innate) freedom, assuming the form of the means and object of knowledge etc.,
by the progressive manifestation of the contracted state of subjectivity and the

³* The translation follows Jayaratha’s explanation. However, another possible

tranṣlation is: “from the two Wheels of sixteen and twelve spokes the Moon rains down

in this way (evaṁ krameṇa) the supreme nectar everywhere in (all the) wheels of eight
spokes (and the rest). If this one is correct, the ‘nectar’ streams from the contact of the

sphere of objectivity with that of the means of knowledge. However, in the previous
verse we saw that the polarity is represented by the Wheels of sixteen and eight spokes
of the spheres of objectivity and subjectivity. This is as we would expect. Subject and
object making contact generate the state of pure cognitive awareness, which is one with

pure consciousness. The same takes place when a couple is engaged in union with
awareness of the essential conscious nature of themselves as the consciousness that
manifests through these polarities. The original source certainly did not relate these

‘wheels’ʼ to polarities of perception. Even so, the logic should hold for the cognitive

analogy to be consistent.

⁴³⁴ Swami Lakshmanjoo understands ‘by means of” rather than ‘along with’. These two
wheels, the sixteen-spoked one of objectivity embodied in the woman and the twelvespoked one of the cognitive organs embodied in the man, when united, serve as the
means to enter into the eight and four-spoked wheels, representing subjectivity and the
pure subjective consciousness beyond, respectively.

⁴³³ The four wheels (that is, configurations) beginning with the five senses of
knowledge, are those along with the five senses of action, the five subtle and five gross
elements. Thus, each is of five kinds, and the series ends with the element Earth. It is

possible, however, that Abhinava refers to five wheels, as Gnoli understands him to be
saying. If that is so, Jayaratha has misunderstood. But Gnoli understands these lines by
Jayaratha differently. Thus, he writes in a note that: ‘according to Jayaratha, the five

Wheels are made up of the four Wheels of the five senses of knowledge and action, the

five subtle and gross elements, perhaps the ego, from which they originate, should be

added as a fifth.’ According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, the five are the five sensations,

then the five senses of knowledge, and then contact also takes place with the organs of

action. Further ahead, he says that the creation of the five-fold wheel is that of the
senses.

TANTRĀLOKA

183

rest, manifests the body made of the five gross elements and the rest, consisting

of causes and effects.⁴³

He not only emits the universe is in this way, he also withdraws it.

Thus, he says:

cq: ftafT taaṁ ēaā āa sfā xŪq 1 23

Tzāraā ] gcāī gvaṝē̃ fōaid

1

tat puṇaḥ pibati prĩtyā haṁso haṁsa iti sphuran || 136 ||
sakṛd yasya tu saṁśrutyā puṇyapāpair na lipyate |
Then again, shining radiantly as (the Goose (haṁsa), that is, the
supreme subject, resonant with the awareness), “I am this (haṅṁṣa)! I am
this (haṁsa)¹” he drinks (all) that (nectar) with delight. He who hears this

(Unstruck Sound just) once is not sullied by either virtue or sin.⁴ (136cd137ab)

(He is thus) ‘shining radiantly without a break, because he is
constantly engaged in the (act of) reflective awareness which is his own
essential nature that, uncreated (and authentic), emanates and withdraws (all

things), namely that, ‘although I am the supreme subject, (I am) this cosmic

expansion" and ‘that cosmic expansion also is just me (the supreme subject
alone)ʼ. In accord with the dictum that ‘Śiva, the Supreme Self is Haṁsa (the

Goose)ʼ,¹⁴⁹ the supreme subject, (here) called Fire, (shining thus,) is the (Divine)

⁴³⁰ The series of Principles are made manifest progressively in such a way that the

previous higher ones are the causes of the subsequent lower ones, which are their
effects.

⁴⁷ Únderstanding the entire passage from the YS to be referring also to the union of
Siddha and Yoginī (the two ‘eyes'), commenting on these verses Swami Lakshmanjoo

refers to the following passage, quoted in TĀv ad 1/1 and ad 29/101cd-102:

“(Each) should meditate on (their) mutual nature (ripa), which is Śiva and
Śakti, and not entertain human ideas (of each other) involving attachment, delusion, or
the like. Everything should be done by the most excellent adepts as the contemplation of

cognitive consciousness (jñūānabhāvanā).¹

Swami Lakshmanjoo warns that if there is any attachment to the body, ‘all these

processes are ruined – there is no Yāga’, concerning which he quotes TĀ 29/5:

“(Only) that sacrifice (yāga) is such (that is, a true Kaula sacrifice) which (is
offered by one) who, seeing all phenomena as they really are (tathātvena), the multitude
of his doubts (and their consequent thought constructs) are destroyed.” (5)
Both partners must experience Haṁsa (that is why it is repeated), and that

‘functioning in me is inseparable from me.” This is the fruit in Nirañjana [the Stainless].

See above, 3/172 (171cd-172ab) and note 3,565.

⁴³⁸Read sa viśvasphāraḥ for saviśvasphāraḥ in both instances.
“³⁹ SVT 6/25a. The complete line reads:

paramātmā śivo haṁsṣas tv apareṇa samanvitaḥ |

184

CHAPTER FOUR

Goose (haṁsa) (so called because He has the power) to destroy (hāna) and take

up (samādāna) (all things).⁴⁴⁰

“Then again’, after (the process of) emanation and the rest, ‘he drinks’
the universe of perceivers and (their) objects etc., that is, makes it (all) one with
himself itself, (and so) withdraws it (into pure consciousness) ‘with the delight’
which is the bliss of (his innate) freedom. This is the meaning. Whoever
‘hearsʼ, that is, experiences directly, ‘this’ Goose who is the Supreme Self

‘once’, only just a single time, ‘is not sullied by either virtue or sin’, and is

not touched by consequences (bhoga) of auspicious and inauspicious actions,
although they are his own. Rather he is freed from them. This is the meaning. It

is said in this way that a person who has experienced that directly has achieved

the goal, not another (who has not). As is said:

‘A man has not achieved the goal as long as he does not attain the

Goose.³⁴¹

‘Śiva, the Supreme Self is Haṁsa (the Goose), associated with the other (group of five

praṇavas)..

Kṣemarāja explains: yo haṁsaḥ svayam uccaradrūpo vācakavṛttyā, vācyavṛttyā tu
paramātmā sarveṣāṁ brahmādīnām anuprāṇakaḥ, paranirvāṇātmakaśreyaḥpradatvāc
chivaḥ vācyavācakayor atrāvibhāgena prakāśānandaghanatvena sphuraṇāt so ‘yam
īdr̥śo
haṁsaḥ,
apareṇeti
proktarūpa-vācyavācakarūpeṇa
.praṇavapañcakena
samanvitaḥ saṁbaddáhaḥ | atra cakārãādirãpeṣu praṇaveṣu hraṣvādyuccārakalā

jāgradādayo ‘vasthābhedāḥ, pṛthivī-prakṛtimāyeśvarasadāśivāntāni cabrahmādy-

adhiṣṭhitāni tattvāni, iti pañcakāntarāṇy eṭāny antarbhūtāni nirṇītadṛśā praṇavarūpāṇy
anusartavyāni ||

‘That Haṁsa that utters forth (itself) by itself as the modality of the denotator

is, in the modality of the object of denotation, the Supreme Self who gives life to all (the
other five causal deities), beginning with Brahmā. (He is) Śiva because he bestows the
supreme good (śreyas), which is Supreme Nirvāṇa. He flashes forth here as the dense
(uninterrupted) Light and bliss (of consciousness), which is the undivided (domain of
both) the denotator and the object of denotation. Thus, He is this Haṁsa, which is such.
He is ‘associated with the otherʼ, that is, he is linked (saṁbaddha) with the group of five
Praṇavas that are the aforestated object of denotation and (its) denotator. Moreover, the
energies of the short (and long) etc. utterances here within the Praṇavas, in the form of
which are the letters A etc., are the various states (of consciousness), namely, waking

and the rest. Again, the principles of Earth, Nature, Māyā, and Īśvara, ending with
Sadāśiva, presided over by Brahmā and the rest (respectively), constitute another group
of five that are included within them which, according to the established view, should
follow in consonance in the form of the Praṇavas.' Concerning the six Causal Deities,
see note 6,389 to TĀv ad 6/187 (186cd-187ab).

⁴⁰ Read hānasamādānadharma for hānasamādānadharmā.
⁴¹ ṢVṬ 6/33ab. Kṣemarāja clarifies that ‘attaining the Goose’ means ‘recognizing it as

being oneself.” The previous verse makes it clear that Haṁsa is ultimate reality. There
we read: “(A person) wanders in the world of transmigration as long as he does not
atṭain reality (tattva). Once the supreme reality has been known, he is no longer born
anywhere.”

TANTRĀLOKA

185

Having thus explained by the way (that this state of consciousness)
withdraws (all things back into itself), he returns to the main point.

TJI. TÑTĒISJ SJTTI āITGTTTTḤ
I/2319 1

ēraṁṝ hrāāīaṁī axzārvṝ
fē: |

pañcāre savikāro ʻtha bhūtvā somasrutāmṛtāt || 137 ||
dhāvati trirasārāṇi guhyacakrāṇy asau vibhuḥ |
Now, because of the nectar that streams from the Moon within (the
Wheel of the body, consisting of) the five spokes (of the gross elements), the
All-pervasive Lord (vibhu), subject to the changes (vikāra) (of phenomenal

existence),⁴³ rushes (down) to the secret wheels (of the genitals, made) of
three spokes and three juices (rasa).⁴³ (137cd-138ab)

‘Now he’ who is called the Goose, that is, Śiva, the Supreme Soul, who
is ‘the All-pervasive Lord’, assuming a contracted (state of consciousness) by

(the power) of His own (innate) freedom and, ‘subject to the changes (of

phenomenal existence)² because (he) is linked to the changes (vikāra)* of birth
and the rest (to which the body is subject),⁴ develops within the (the Wheel
with) ‘five spokesʼ, that is, (the physical) body made of the five gross elements,
because (he is) nourished by the nectar that flows from the Moon in the manner
described previously. And so, intent (unmukha) as He is (in that condition) on

‘the secret wheels’ of the genitals (ianmasthāna) and the rest, ‘he rushes

(down)³ (towards them), with the desire to emit the universe. (The Wheels are
made of) ‘ṭhree spokes and three juicesʼ. In accord with the words (of the

scripture): ‘the left one flows, transporting water, the middle one, sperm, and the
one on the right, bloodʼ, the three juices are water and the rest. Their number
corresponds to that of (their) form as channels (nāḍī) and spokes, which are of
those kinds. There are three spokes when separated, and six spokes in the couple
in union (yāmala).⁵ Thus, they are ‘secret’, because they (should not be)

revealed.⁴ This is the meaning.

⁴² Swami Lakṣhmanjoo understands vikāra ‘changes’ to refer to the sexual excitement
of the two partners engaged in this practice.

⁴³ See 29/150cd-153ab, where what happens there is described.
¹⁴⁴ janmādayo vikārāḥ ṣaḍ bhāvabhedasya yonayaḥ | (VP 1/3) quoted in ĪPVV 3, p. 9.
⁴⁴³ This is called the Seal of the Six Spokes (sadaramudrā).

⁴⁶ Read aprakāśyatvāt for aprakāśatvāt. Jayaratha is hinting here at the yogic sexual

union, which is the practice Abhinavagupta is teaching in a veiled way, along with the
practice of reflective awareness of the process of perception, and the movement in the

body of the vital breath. The three-spoked Wheel is a triangle formed in the genitals
from the conjunction of the three channels (1āḍī) of the vital breath. They are Iḍā, on the
right of the triangle, Piṅgalā, on the left and Suṣumṇā in the middle, represented by the

cross bar. In the female partner it faces downward and in the male upwards. The Wheel

with Six Spokes (ṣadaracakra) is a hexagon that is formed when the two unite in the
Seal of the Six Spokes (ṣadāramudrā) (see above, commentary on 3/95ab-95cd (95cd96ab)). The vital force, which is the energy of consciousness that, assuming a limited

186

CHAPTER FOUR

Surely (one may ask,) if (the Lord) desires to emit the universe, what is
the point of his acting with intent on this and that (aspect of this process)? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

3aī] īd sTīcaī+ ā ā Tahlōaī I| 23 ||
yato jātaṁ jagal līnaṁ yatra ca svakalīlayā || 138 I|
The universe has arisen from that, and (this is) where it is merged

(and dissolves away) by its own (free and spontaneous) play (svakalīlayā).

(138cad)

‘The universe has arisen’ and poured forth (out of consciousness),

even though it is not separate from it (for otherwise it could not manifest), by
separating (itself off) ‘from that’, that is, from these secret Wheels (in the

genitals), ‘by its own (free and spontaneous) play², that is, by its own (innate)
freedom. Moreover, ‘(this is) where it is merged (and dissolves away)ʼ. The
point is that (by referring to the secret Wheel) in this way, (he implies that it is)
the supreme cause of the Supreme Lord, that is, the Supreme Self who desires to
emit the universe.
They are not only at their most productive (sādhakatama) in their
extroverted state, but also when resting in their own nature. Thus, he says:

īTāṁ-=# ūiī jāām 7 d |

ftfzz ṇfTa a dūīaa aT u 238 1

tatrānandaś ca sarvasya brahmacārī ca tatparaḥ |
tatra siddhiś ca muktiś ca samaṁ saṁprāpyate dvayam || 139 ||
The (true) bliss of all is there (and so too the true celibate)

brahmacārin. (Whoever) is intent (solely) on that attains there equally both
accomplishment (siddhi) and liberation. (139)

‘(It is the true bliss) of allʼ, even those of the lowest caste (pāmara).
One who is ‘intent’ has that as his only goal, whether he be a Yogi, a man of
knowledge, or (a true celibate) brahmacārin, that is, one who practices (carati)
the Brahman which is bliss, for it is taught that ‘bliss is the nature of the

Brahman’.⁴⁷ The meaning is that he shines radiantly at one with the Supreme
(‘contracted’) state, is the essence of the individual Self identified in its most

fundamental nature with the All-pervasive Lord, ‘rushes’ down to the three-spoked

Wheel of each partner ‘with the desire to emit’, intent as they are on one another. This
generates the bliss of emission (visarga), that pours out in the centre, unfolding as the

cosmic consciousness which transfigures the partners’ bodies etc., to then reabsorb the
All emitted in this way back into pure consciousness. Then the cycle recommences. This

‘expansion’ into cosmic consciousness and ‘contraction’ into pure consciousness and
vice versa is Kramamudrā (see above, note 4,427).

⁴⁴⁷ See above, note to TĀv ad 1/242.

TANTRĀLOKA

187

Brahman. Thus (he attains) ‘equallyʼ (both) ‘accomplishment’, which is bliss

here in this world, and ‘liberation’, which is the condition of one who follows
the Brahman, because bliss itself is the essential nature of the Brahman.⁴⁴⁸

⁴⁸ The word brahmacārin literally means, ‘a follower of the Brahman’. In common

usage, the word denotes a person who is celibate in general, and especially an unmarried
student who is ‘following the Brahman’ in the sense that he is studying the sacred texts,

which themselves as the sacred word – the Brahman – teach the Brahman. As a celibate

student he retains his seed. Thus, instead of flowing down, it flows upwards, and so he
is one whose ‘seed is above’ (ūrdhvaretas). Such also is the condition of the yogi. The
upward flow of seed carries with it the life force that enshrines the consciousness of the
individual soul. We see this general principle applied here also.

However, in this context, the practice of Brahmacaryā is understood

differently. Here the Brahman the yogi practices and follows is understood as ‘blissʼ, an
identification which is well affirmed already in the Upaniṣads. Clearly conscious of this,
Jayaratha, like his Kashmiri Śaiva predecessors, quotes a passage from the Upaniṣads
which says this. He suggests thereby that this bliss is experienced in sexual union. The

word for ‘bliss” here is ‘ānanda’. Although a yery common word in classical Sanskrit, it
is not found in early Vedic Sanskrit, where other words denote ‘happiness’, ‘joy’ or

‘bliss’. The earliest sense was specifically the ‘bliss’ experienced in sexual union. One
could quote numerous examples of this usage in later Vedic literature, especially the
Upaniṣads. One well-known passage declares that creatures are not born from the male
or female organs, nor from sperm or blood, or even their union, ‘creatures are born from
bliss’ (ānandāt prajāyante prajāḥ). Taittirīyopaniṣad 3/6. Later Vedic literature

represents sexual union as a sacred rite. We find an extensive, detailed example of the
procedures of this in a long passage in the Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad that takes up the
whole of the fourth brahmana of chapter six. These procedures consist for the most part

of formulations of intentions based on a guided understanding of the partners and their
union as sacred, and so set in relation to deity and the entire creation. It begins:

“Verily, of created things here earth is the essence; of earth, water; of water,
plants; of plants, flowers; of flowers, fruits; of fruits, man (puruṣa); of man, semen.

Prajāpati (‘Lord of the Creature’) bethought himself: ‘Come, let me provide
him a firm basis!” So he created woman. When he created her, he revered her from
below. – Therefore, one should revere women from below. – He stretched out for
himself that stone which projects. With that he impregnated her.
Her lap is a sacrificial altar; her hairs, the sacrificial grass; her skin the soma-

press. The two labia of the vulva are the fire in the middle. Verily, indeed, as great as is
the world of him who sacrifices with the Vājapeya (‘Strength-libation’) sacrifice, so
great is the world of him who practices sexual intercourse, knowing this; he turns the
good deeds of women to himself. But he who practices sexual intercourse without
knowing this — women turn his good deeds to themselves.' BṛrUp 6/4/1-3

Read alone, this passage celebrates the sacrality of sexuality, furnishing a way

in which the partners can perceive themselves as spiritual beings when engaged in
intimacy. The result for the man, if done with this spirit, is ‘turning the good deeds of
womenʼ to himself. It says nothing about procreation, which on the contrary is the major
concern of what follows, although a method is supplied for birth control. Clearly, these

are separate concerns, which although of course closely related, are evidently
distinguishable. We have seen right in the first verse that Abhinavagupta was born

through sacred union of his parents. Throughout the Tantrāloka, practices and states

relating to sacred, yogic and cognitive sexual union are presented repeatedly, in a more

or less overt form, especially Chapter TwentyTwneine, which deals with Kaula ritual. It

188

CHAPTER FOUR

Surely (one may ask,) if it is possible to accomplish the emission of all
things in this way from just this one secret Wheel called the Place of Birth
(janmasthāna) (in the genitals), then why is it referred to in the plural as ‘the
secret Wheels’? With this doubt in mind, he says:

rā aēi gTāīTd aīaç gāīṁ Tã |

gr̥ṁĩũĨ̄ḷr gĩ ̄ ḡṀd SJṬaÃTHĨḤ I 2⁶ ⁰ 1|
ata ūrdhvaṁ punar yãti yāvad brahmãtmakaṁ padam |
agnīṣomau samau tatra sṛjyete cātmanātmani || 140 ||
From there he again travels upwards until he reaches the plane

which is the Brahman. And there the Fire (of the subject) and Moon (of the

object) emit equally by means of the Self into the Self. (140)

‘From there’ (means) from the Secret Wheel, which, as stated
previously, is called the Place of Birth (in the genitals), ‘he travelsʼ, that is, he

sets out directed towards that, ‘again upwards’ to the supreme plane, which is

the Brahman, located in the End of the Twelve, that is, up to the Secret Wheel

which is rightly called emission (visarga), and is linked to the three spokes
which are Power, the Pervasive One and the Equal One.*⁹ This is the meaning.

(The word) ‘and’ is (to be understood as indicating) the cause (or reason)."

There ‘the Fire and Moon’, which are the subject and object, that is,
subjectivity (ahantā) and objectivity (idantā), ‘emit equally by means of the
Self’, that is, by means of the Supreme Lord Who is called the Goose (Harīsa),
‘into the Self’, that is, into His own foundation (bhitti). They manifest on an

equal footing in accord with the (Pratyabhijñā) teaching that: “True Knowledge

has been translated by Dupuche (see bibliography). In this sense, ‘brahmacaryā’ – ‘the
practice of the Brahman’ – means ‘the practice of the (spiritually transformative) bliss
of sexʼ. ‘The follower of the Brahman’ is one who, intent on yoga, practices the

development of this bliss made manifest through sexual union, consuming meat and

wine offered to the deity (which is not mentioned here) (see below, 29/98cd-100ab and

commentary). The Kaula rite successfully practiced also raises the seed in the form of
the upward flow of vital of the force, often characterized, as here, as Kuṇḍalinī (see
4/141cd-142). Concerning the Kaula understanding of brahmacaryā, see below 29/9798ab and passage ad 29/99-100ab.

⁴⁹ Concerning the twelve levels or phases of Sound, culminating in the Transmental, of
which these are the three that precede it, see Appendix to Chapter One. These three
levels are commonly found together. They are represented by three levels – base, middle
and tip – of the prongs of the Trika Trident, above which is the Transmental, where the

three Goddesses of the Trika are seated. See above, note to comm. 1/2 and below TĀ
15/313-314 (= MV 8/69-70). Here it is understood to be the place where the emission

(visarga) of consciousness takes place within itself, to generate the universe at one with
it. This is the upper Secret Wheel that corresponds to the lower Secret Wheel in the
body.

⁴30j.e. ʻand (because) there the Fire and Moon emit equally . . .’

TANTRĀLOKA

189

is the state of the notions of ‘I’ and ‘this’ (when they share) a common

(identical) foundation.”⁴³
If objectivity, that is, the Moon, predominates (udreka) again, then the
universe pours forth (once more from consciousness). Thus, he says:

ĒEŠE|ĒGĒIEI 3zṃṛ ś zāafkrd:

|

tatrasthas tāpitaḥ somo dvedhā jaṅghe vyavasthitaḥ |
The Moon, which is located there (in the Wheel of Three Spokes
and Three Juices), heated (by the Fire), is established two-fold in the (two)

shanks.⁴⁵² (141ab)

“ ĪP_ 3/1/3cd. ĪP 3/1/3a is quoted in TĀv ad 11/28 and ad 30/12cd-14ab. This process

leads to the emergence of the level of consciousness which is free of the divisive
thought constructs that characterize the lower levels below Māyā, experienced by the
countless individual perceivers and their objects. This is impure, false knowledge.
Above Māyā is the domain of Pure Knowledge, in which objectivity and subjectivity are

experienced on an equal footing in the oneness of pure consciousness, as the reflective
awareness that ‘I am (all) this and (all) this am I˚. It is a dynamic state, like breathing.
The interaction between subject and object is now experienced as taking place within
consciousness as phases of its radiant pulsation (spanda). In the phase of its expansion
(unmeṣa), that is, opening outwards with respect to the subjective polarity, the objective

polarity becomes dominant. This is the experience universal, immanent Siva
consciousness has that “all this universe is me”. This is the principle of the Lord who

governs the universe (iīśvara) at one with Him. Simultaneously, in the phase of
contracting (nimeṣa), that is, withdrawing inwards, the subjective polarity comes to the

fore as the objective one is withdrawn. Dominating over it, it is the experience of
universal, immanent Śiva consciousness has that “ḹ am all this universe”. This is the
reality level (taitva) on which Śiva is perpetually tranquil Sadāśiva. As this goes on
within consciousness, the universe of objective experience is emitted and withdrawn

each timeless moment for every individual perceiver who is afflicted by the ‘false’,

‘impure³ divisive knowledge which is Māyā. ‘True Knowledge’ is the reality level
(tattva) of the universal unitary consciousness above Māyā, which is the common
foundation of the consciousness of ‘I’ and ‘this’ as the two phases of the one pulse of
consciousness, which is all things and their perceivers. Thus, Utpaladeva writes:

‘Īśvara is opening outwards (ummeṣa), Sadāśiva is closing inwards (nimesa).

True Knowledge is the state of the notions of ‘I’ and ‘this’ (when they share) a common

foundation (in consciousness).”

These three are the so-called pure principles or reality levels (tattva) that

together constitute the three aspects of Śiva’s immanent state as all things. Pure or True
Knowledge is the experience of that. Above them are the levels Śakti and then Śiva, that
together are Śiva’s transcendental state, in which the universe is an unmanifest potential
(śakti). Thus, Utpaladeva explains the state of the first three in his vṛtti:

‘“Īśvara and

Sadāśiva are, respectively, the opening outwards and the closing inwards, which are the
outer and inner states (of consciousness). Pure Knowledge is the notion (»nati) of one

whose nature is all things that “I am this universe”, by virtue of (his state as the)
common (identical) foundation of external objectivity and internal subjectivity, (which

is such) as there is no difference between (their) repose in the one pure consciousness.”
See below TĀv ad 6/39cd-40ab for Jayaratha’s explanation of this dynamism.

190

CHAPTER FOUR

The meaning is that, established ‘there’ in a state of balance (with the
subject), the Moon, which is the object, is manifest ‘two-fold’ (as both the
universe and the perceiver, in Pure Knowledge). Energized by duality (bheda),
it is ‘established in the (two) shanks’, that is, it manifests (externally) in a
gross form as the universe, right up to the Earth principle.
And how is that? He says:

=Tṝḷ% úī̄dafqd
aaī ẽOIT I 2³2 1|
ṬGTSĪTĀĪTJ AT JJTā ṬĀṬŪT |

aī vJṀPḥṀāīt̄ṭaīṁ Ja-: ŪaaṀṝẽz ḍSTḤ I 2
adhastaṁ pātayed agnir amṛtaṁ sravati kṣaṇāt || 141 ||
gulphajānvā
vyaktaṁ kuṭilārkapradīpitā |
sā śaktis tā
bhūyaḥ pañcārādikramaṁ sṛjet I| 142 ||
The Fire causes it to fall downwards and, in an instant, it pours out
nectar, (clearly) manifest, into the knees, ankles, and other (parts of the leg

and all the limbs of the body). (Kuṇḍalinī,) this ‘crooked’ (kuṭilā) (lunar)

power,⁴³ energized (pradīpitā) by the Sun and heated again (by the Fire),⁴⁴

emits (the universe in the form) of the sequence of (the Wheels of) five
spokes (representing the gross elements) and the rest. (141cd-142)

⁴² Swami Lakṣhmaṇjoo explains that ‘the jaṅgha [shank] here stands for the universe,

(for it is said that) sthavara – jaṁghama-jagat [the universe is immobile and moving
(jaṁgghama)]. The ‘two’ means the two types of universe, mobile and immobile. ‘There”
is in the state of balance – equally I-ness and this-ness for both partners. Yoginībhū [a
Child Born of a Yoginī] arises through that. This cannot happen if you are not connected

to God consciousness.”
⁴³³ The Moon is here identified with the power of action, which is the ‘crooked’ power
of the Kuṇḍalinī of the vital breath. Kuṇḍalinī is commonly called Kuṭilā – the Crooked
One – in the Tantras. In this aspect, She is ‘crooked’ as the triangular Yoni, which

externally is the source of the universe, and inwardly the expansion of consciousness
that takes place when she ‘straightens out’ and consumes the universe previously
emitted. Accordingly, in this aspect She is said to be ‘riurekhā’, the Straight Line. This

‘straight line’ is actually slightly bent as the first digit of the moon. This contains the
potencies of all the digits that follow, right up to the full moon, which it reabsorbs as

they decrease, up to the new moon. Thus, just as the moon waxes and wanes, as the

lunar digits emerge from and retreat into their unmanifest source, so does the moon of
objectivity move into and out of subjective consciousness. Such is the complex
symbolism that lies behind such enigmatic statements as the following, found in the
Kulakaulinīmata:

bhūtānāṁ sarvayoniḥ r̥jur iva kuṭilā śuddhabalendurekhā || KuKauṂM 21/54d II
‘The universal source (yoni) of (all) existing things, She is the Crooked One

who, as if straight, is the pure line of the young moon.’¹ KuKauM 21/54d. See

Dyczkowski 2009: intro. vol. 1,278.

⁴³¹ The Sun is the means of knowledge that has been ‘heatedʼ, that is, energized, by the
Fire of the subject.

TANTRĀLOKA

191

(The Fire causes) ‘itʼ, that is, the Moon, (to flow) ‘down’ into the

external form (of consciousness).⁴³³ ‘It pours out the nectar’, that is, the Moon
heated by Fire. As (this lunar power) is the Kuṇḍalinī of the Vital Breath

(prāṇakuṇḍalinī),¹⁸ it is the ‘crooked power’,*⁷ which is action and the Moon.

It is ‘energized’, awakened by the desire to pour out externally, ‘by the Sun’,
that is, by the subject who rests on the plane of the means of knowledge. Thus
‘heated again’ʼ, that is, energized as (its) external nature, it ‘emits the sequence
of (the Wheels of) five spokes and the rest’. The meaning is that it manifests

the universe consisting of the five gross elements.⁴³⁸

He (now) explains (how) that (takes place) within the other senses.⁴³⁹

īṣṝ snstī fe=ri aīaācqraraṁīmq |
evaṁ śrotre ‘pi vijñeyaṁ yāvat pādāntagocaram |
One should know (that the same process also takes place within the
other senses) in the same way, (starting with) the sense of hearing up to the
feet. (143ab)

⁴³³ Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that ‘the man discharges amṛta [nectar] when this

Soma [Moon] is placed in the state of idaṁbhāva [objectivity] which has as its essence
the flow of semen (caramadhātuprasarasāra). Soma [Moon] is the woman. Amṛta
[nectar] is in all the limbs of the body in all the ānucakras [ṣubsidiary wheels] in the
legs, knees and ankles – everywhere! Kutilā is the woman. The Sun is the man. After

more excitation of the sequence of (the Wheels of) five spokes (representing the gross
elements) and the rest, a yoginībhiū [Child of a Yoginī] is conceived.”

⁴³⁰ See above, 3/139ab-142ab (138-141) commentary and notes.

⁴⁷ See above, note 4,453.

⁴³⁸ The nectar continues to fall down below the shank to the knees and ankles, down to
the feet. The ‘nectar’ of the Moon is the essence of objectivity. Travelling up, it melts

away with the rising Fire of the subject, until at the summit of its ascent, it merges into

the Plane of Equality, where the universe is experienced within consciousness by

consciousness as one with itself. In this case, the nectar starts to fall from the lower
Secret Wheel to flow out, stimulated as before, by the Fire of the subject, but this time,
according to Jayaratha, it rests on the plane of the means of knowledge. In other words,

itis now ‘heated’ through the twelve senses. As before, it must first fall down as far as it
can go. The previous descent marked the formation of the embodied soul and the body
in which it resides. Its final point of descent was the same union of the male and female
centres. In this case, the flow of liquid objectivity starts from here, heated initially to

make it fall, and then again, so that by falling ‘in a gross form’ down to the Earth
principle, it forms the outer universe within the body.

⁴³N The first sense is generally that of sight. Once having explained how this process
operates with respect to that, the Tantra goes on to examine how the same process
operates with respect to the rest of the senses. The Moon, as Jayaratha has said several

times, is the power of action (kriyāśakti). Fire is the power of the will (icchāśakti), and

the Sun that of knowledge (jñānaśakti). The action that takes place at the higher level
above is cosmic creation and the power of the will that stimulates it, the desire to create

it. Below, at the lower level, it is the activity of the body, senses and mind, that is
stimulated by the will on that level.

192

CHAPTER FOUR
By saying ‘up to the feet’ he says that all the (five) organs of action

(ending with the feet)⁴⁰⁰ have this same nature.

This same (conscious) nature is present not only in the senses, which are
the means of knowledge, it is (also present) in the five gross elements, that are
the objects of knowledge. Accordingly, he says:

ṬTTĪR̄RĪTHHRSd JĪHGṬGITGCTT I 2*3 I

pādāṅguṣṭhāt samārabhya yāvad brahmāṇḍadarśanam || 143 ||

(The same takes place in the body, consisting of the five gross
elements,) starting from the big toe up to the vision of the Egg of Brahmā.
(143cd)

One should also know that (this process takes place) in the same way
within the body, consisting of the five gross elements, ‘starting from the big

toe’ up to the Cavity of Brahmā (on the crown of the head).⁴⁰¹ (This is how this

line) relates to the previous one. In this way, supreme consciousness itself, in
the form of the object (grāhya), is also present on the plane of the object of
knowledge. Thus, here also that is itself the means of knowledge, and so the

point is established (arthasiddha), and will be corroborated here further ahead
(in the following verses).

Surely (one may ask,) what is the purpose of referring to the senses and
the rest as being of this nature? With this doubt in mind, he says:

g-aṝāa
aāṀḥṝ sīākārārgdt̃̃ |
SdT@ĪRaṬḤṬ JTāĪTEĪÇTT TIHAI: I|I Q“* II
ity ajānan naiva yogī jānan viśvaprabhur bhavet |

jvalann ivāsau brahmādyair dṛśyate parameśvaraḥ || 144 ||

He who does not know this is not a (true) yogi, but he who does is

the Lord of the universe. He who burns as if (shining) with (all the deities)

starting from Brahmā is seen to be the Supreme Lord.⁴² (144)

⁴ According to TĀ 9/253, the serial order of the organs of action is speech, the hands,
genitals, anus and feet. The order according to the MV 2/32cd is speech, the hands, the
anus, the genitals and the feet. See Appendix to Chapter Thirty concerning the mantras
of the tattvas.
⁴“⁶ The Egg of Brahmā is normally the universe (see above. 4/133cd and note). In this
case, Jayaratha identifies it with the Cavity of Brahmā at the top of the head,
presumably because it is here that the yogi has a ‘vision of the Egg of Brahmā’, looking

down into the body where it is reflected. Swami Lakshmanjoo agrees with Jayaratha.
The state of the primary wheel (nukhyacakra) is found everywhere throughout the body

at this stage of completion. Yogis conjoin the subsidiary wheels (anucakra) of the body

to the primary wheel of consciousness that thus pervades it all.

⁴³ According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, this verse, which summarizes the practice up to
here, refers covertly to the contemplation of the Wheel of the Twelve Kālīs expounded

just after this passage (cf. below 5/27cd-36 and Dyczkowski 1987: 125). He says:

TANTRĀLOKA

193

The point is that (by saying) ‘starting from Brahmā’, (he means) the

unfolding expansion of that (vision) is all the world.⁴³ Although the yogic

sexual practice (caryākrama)⁴⁶³ is present within the most internal (part of the
process), it is not explained extensively in that respect, because it is both very
clear (to initiates and so need not be explained), and secret (and so needs to be

hidden from those who are not initiates). So one should understand it for

oneself.⁴⁹

So having corroborated (the teachings) with the scriptures, he now

declares its essential meaning.⁴⁵

ī aīōzā; JTkē̄ī ōhīTTq

|

Ū%hhī Jāā’Ī] gICRITH=hdTṬIGTT II Q I
atra tātparyataḥ proktam akṣe kramacatuṣṭayam |
ekaikatra yatas tena dvādaśātmakatoditā || 145 ||
Here, (this passage) essentially explains how the four processes
(kramacatuṣṭaya) (take place) in each one (of the senses, and so lead to) the
emergence of the twelve-fold condition. (145)
(This process takes place) ‘in each one of the sensesʼ, that is, in all the
senses (together), ‘and so’, because the four processes*’ of emanation

‘The meaning is that, however much one may consider a common yogi to be
intent on (the practice of) Yoga, if he does not know this supreme state with its twelve-

fold nature completely, then that yogi cannot in reality be considered to be a yogi. On
the contrary, he who knows these states just as they truly are, can become the lord of the
universe. This is because only the yogi who, contemplating the cycles of emanation,
persistence, withdrawal and the inexplicable, has become the equal of Śiva whose nature
is the shining light (of consciousness), perceives his own (true) nature just as at it is, not
another. In reality, one’s own human effort is incapable of attaining this state, and (in

actual fact) does not contribute anything to attaining it. It is said that only the Supreme
Lord'’s most intense descent of the power (of grace) and the teacher’s grace (kṛpā) is

capable of making (the soul) experience this state.' (KNP p. 20-21)
““³ Brahmā governs the first of the four cosmic Eggs. Thus, it appears that by saying
‘starting from Brahmā’, Abhinava is referring to the deities of the four Eggs that extend
from Earth up to Śakti (see below, 6/171ab (170) commentary and note).

⁴⁶* Yogic sexual practice ~ caryākrama – unfolds in all three Means. This an example of
how it is practiced in the sphere of the Empowered Means. We have observed numerous
examples of practice in the sphere of the Divine Means in Chapter Three. Further ahead,
in Chapter Five, we will observe several examples in the sphere of the Individual Means
also.
⁴⁶³ Jayaratha confirms that this passage from the Yogasaṁcāra teaches yogic sexual
practice (caryākrama) and that it ends here.

³⁴“⁶ Once Abhinava has presented the meditation taught in the Yogasaṁcāra, which is
first imagined and then, with practice, experienced directly, he teaches that this process
is essentially the experience of the Twelve Kālīs when it takes place through the body
and the senses of the Siddha and Yoginī engaged in union.

194

CHAPTER FOUR

(persistence, withdrawal and the encompassing fourth) take place (avasthāna)

for each one (of the senses) in association with the subject, means and object of

knowledge, ‘the emergence of the twelve-fold condition’ takes place in each

one of the senses. The meaning is that the form of each one of the senses is the

twelve rays (of the Wheel of means of knowledge).⁴⁵

Surely (one may ask,) how is it that he has explained (just) the general
sense (of this passage from the Tantra)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3 aaāṛaaīā ġ fṅfsa aāīstīzzēq 1

na vyākhyātaṁ tu nirbhajya yato ʻúisarahasyakam |

It has not been explained in detail because it is very secret. (146ab)
Supreme consciousness is not only on the plane of the means of
knowledge in form of perception (grahaṇa); it is also on the plane of the object
of knowledge, in the form of the object of perception (grāhya). Thus, he says:

The Twelve Kāḹīs⁴⁰
⁴⁷ The term kramacatuṣṭaya – ‘the four processes' has a specific technical sense in the
context of Krama practice (see above, note 3,797). Here Jayaratha chooses to ignore that

specific sense, focusing instead on this other more general one, as the context demands.
⁴⁶* How this takes place at the Individual level of practice (ānavopāya), which involves

the body and the senses, for the solitary embodied soul (not in union with a partner) is
deṣcribed below in 5/27cd-36. Practice at the Empowered level (śāktopāya), which is
the topic of this chapter, concerns the means through which perception takes place.

Concretely, this comprises the outer senses and inner mental organ, which processes and
identifies the sensations channelled through them. Not infrequently, in this context

pramāṇa refers to this cognitive apparatus. But this is not always the case. The term
may also denote the stream of cognizing perception that travels from the subject out to

its object in order to perceive it. This stream is ‘coloured’ by its object and, returning to
the subject, is then processed by the inner mental faculties which present the subject
with a conceptual representation. Through this representation, if coherent and correct, as
far as it can be, the urge to perceive and know the object the subject felt is satisfied by
the ascertainment (niścaya) which instils in him conviction (niścaya). This final stage

marks the emergence of the resultant knowledge (pramā) which, although attained
through the operation of the senses and mind, is neither sensorial nor conceptual, rather
it is pure noetic consciousness at rest within itself knowing itself, and so thereby the true
nature of the object, perception and perceiver. Beyond the range of conceptual
representation, it encompasses the entire process. Krama doctrine refers to it as the
Inexplicable (anākhyā) and venerates it as the Goddess of Consciousness (sarvidevī),

specifically the form of Kālī called Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī – the Destroyer of Time.
⁴“⁵ Abhinava summarizes what he says here in the Tantrasāra (p. 28-30) as follows:

“There (in that context), the Supreme Lord is full (and all-inclusive) consciousness, and
(His) plenitude (pūrṇatā) is His power (śakti). It is variously named in the scriptures
according to (its) particular (aspects), so that it may abide in some form within the heart
(of the consciousness) of those who contemplate it. (These include) Kula (Totality),
Capacity (sāmārthya), Wave (see below, 4/184), Heart (see below, 4/181), Essence
(sāra), Vibration (spanda), Glorious Power (vibhūti), Mistress of the Three Energies
(trīśikā), Kālī, (Kāla-)Karṣaṇī (the Destroyer of Time), the Fierce One (Canḍī), Speech
(Vaṇī), Worldly Experience (bhoga), Perception (dṛk), Eternal One (Nityā) and so on.

TANTRĀLOKA

195

(See Sanderson 2006: 70-71 for locations of these names in the sources and an
alternative translation).
Consciousness shines in its (all its) plenitude by the realisation that it is this
(all-encompassing) totality of (all) its powers. And the powers (of the Lord) are
numberless. Indeed, how much can be said (about them)? These powers are the
universe. How can they (all) be taught (in the scriptures)? (However,) everything is

summated in (just) three (of them). (One is) the venerable Supreme (parā) power, by

means of which the Supreme Lord sustains, perceives and makes manifest this (entire
reality, comprised in the thirty-six principles (tattva) beginning with) Śiva up to Earth,
(in a state of oneness) as just (pure) inconceivable consciousness. (The second one is)
His venerable Middling (parāparā) power, by means of which (He makes the same
reality manifest) as a unity along with diversity (bhedābheda), as are (images reflected
in a) mirror (devoid of mass and measure), as happens, for example, with the reflected
image of) an elephant. (The third is) His venerable Lower (aparā) power, through which

(He makes all things manifest, whether subjects or objects, in the modality in which
they are) mutually distinct from one another, that is, as separate (and divided)
(bhedena).

(AII three are the one) Goddess, namely, the venerable Parā, Who, embracing

this three-fold contemplation (dhāraṇa) within Herself, consumes it within (Her)
synthetic contemplation (anusandhāna) of it. (Thus, She is also) called by such names
as the venerable Mātrṛsadbhāva (the Essence of (all) Subjects) and Kālakarṣiṇī (the
Destroyer of Time).
Each one of these four energies (Parā, Parāparā, Aparā, and the Goddess
Parātītā, identified with Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī,) are each, by virtue of the freedom (of

consciousness), of three kinds in emanation, persistence and withdrawal, and so they are
twelve.

1) Initially (as Sṛṣṭikālī), consciousness generates (kalayati) the (potential)

inner existence (of the object within the initial impulse to manifestation which marks the

state of the emanation of objectivity — prameyasṛsṭi). 2) Then (as Sthitikālī), it generates

(the object) in a clearly evident manner externally also, (in the state of the persistence of
objectivity ~ prameyasthiti). 3) Then, (as Raktakālī,) assuming a state of attachment

(towards objectivity in the phase of its retraction into consciousness ~—
prameyasaṁhāra), there (within) itself (consciousness) generates that same state (of
objectivity, but this time) with the intention of retracting it (back) inwardly (into itself).
4) Then (as Yamakālī, who operates in the Inexplicable state of the object
(pameyānakhya), consciousness) generates and consumes the (sense of)) doubt which
(instigates thought, and so) is an obstacle to the retraction of that (objectivity back into
itself). 5) (As Saṁhārakālī, consciousness) generates the aspect of Being as (the same
metaphysical) doubt (that stimulates further activity) once (the object) has been
consumed (thus giving rise to the emergence of the means of knowledge (pramāṇasṛṣti),
as the activity of the cognitive apparatus devoid of outer objectivity). 6) (Then as
Mṛtyukālī, consciousness in the phase of persistence of that state (pramāṇasthiti))
generates the agent of withdrawal as its (own) nature, (which reflects on itself as) “this
is my nature.” 7) Then when (as Rudrakālī / Bhadrakālī) it is engaged in withdrawing
(the means of knowledge (pramāṇasaṁhāra)), in generating the agent of withdrawal it
generates the condition which for some (contracted) states of being is a latent (residual)
trace (of what has been consumed), and for some (other uncontracted states) is the
(resultant) residual condition which is pure consciousness alone. 8) Then (as

Maārtaṇḍakālī, who represents the Inexplicable state of the means of knowledge

(pramāṇānākhya)), it generates the senses (that is, the five faculties of cognition, five of
action, the mind (manas) and intellect), as not different from the differentiation (kalanā)
of (its) own (subjective) nature (as the individual ego, into which they merge). 9) Then

196

CHAPTER FOUR

(as Paramārkakālī, in the phase of the emission of the subject (pramātṛṣṛṣṭi)), it also

generates the lord of the senses, (into which the ego that controls the twelve senses
dissolves away). 10) Then (as Kalāgnirudrakālī, in the phase of the persistence of the

subject (pramātrsthiti)), it also generates (the higher) nature of the conceived perceiver
within (the domain of) Māyā (that came to the fore in the previous phase, which now
merges into the transcendental subject, which is its higher nature). 11) (Then as
Mahākālakālī, in the phase of the withdrawal of the subject (pramātṛsaṁhāra)), it

generates the perceiver, who delights in grasping the expansion (of consciousness),

intent on abandoning contraction. 12) Then (as Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakāḹī, in the
phase of the inexplicable state of the subject (pramātaranākhya)), it also generates the

(fully) expanded form (of pure dynamic consciousness, which contains all the phases as
its innate creative power).

These twelve goddesses (are forms of) consciousness called the venerable
Kālīs, who nourish the freedom of the Lord of the Wheel, shining (variously together) in

relation to the perceivers or just one (of them), simultaneously or sequentially, two-fold,

three-fold and so on, arising and rotating (one after another) like a wheel, (manifesting)
progressively externally as (time, apparent as) the (twelve) months of the year, signs of
the zodiac and the like, and finally as the sequence (of perception) of (common objects

such as) a jar (and then a) cloth and the like.²
Abhinava presents the twelve phases as the Twelve Suns of the solar Wheel of
the Twelve Kālīs in his Mālinīvijayavārtika as follows:

‘Consciousness is twelve-fold in all the fields of emanation and the rest
equally, as each one, one at a time, has three natures, and in the three, is four-fold. (Thus

initially,) consciousness generates emanation, and 2) there (individual consciousness)
becomes attached (to it and so objectivity persists). 3) (Then) it generates the destruction
of persistence, and 4) conceives doubt. 5) Having withdrawn that and withdrawn the
phenomenal aspect (bhāvāṁśa), it reflects (on its own nature) as the agent of
withdrawal, and 6) (then again,) at the end of that (having withdrawn it into
unconditioned consciousness). 7) (Then, when doubt) with respect to what is merit and

sin (is overcome, and so thought, no longer vacillating,) is neither dissolved away

(druta) nor condensed, (having enjoyed the object of enjoyment, consciousness) desires
(to expand) by virtue of its own freedom (to do s0). 8) Consuming in this way into itself
the wheel of the rays of the (twelve) senses that are the limbs of consciousness, it
withdraws the (twelve) Suns, that are the aspect of the means of knowledge. 9-12) Then
having withdrawn the aspect (of conditioned consciousness) which is the conceptually
created perceiver into the (true) uncreated Heart (of the supreme subjectivity of
consciousness), it conducts that which transcends everything into the inner
unconditioned Abode (of consciousness). It does so until, by the act of conducting that
(perceiver into the supreme state of consciousness), it conducts everything in that way
(into it).
Then it (again) generates emanation, and so on, in accord with (this) sequence.
(Thus,) this Wheel with twelve spokes operates (in this way) all the time. The

occurrence of (the twelve) months, the signs of the zodiac and the like, are just its gross

state. This Wheel (thus) arisen, which consumes the object and means of knowledge
(along with) the perceiver and (resultant) knowledge, unfolds through many kinds of
processes and their absence, by the power of (this) processless process (akramakrama),

in each place intensely.' MVV 1/935-942.

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains the purpose of the teaching of the Twelve Kālīs
as follows (KNP p. 17-19): “How can the Saiva yogi on the plane of duality, which is
Maāyā and said to be that of subject and object associated with the means of knowledge,

TANTRĀLOKA

197

assfṝ̃ īzaīī ftṝrēṁī mrā-āaātzrārī
| g%ē, 1
The goddess also resides (within the sphere of) objectivity in the
form of the (twelve) months (of the year), the signs of the zodiac and the

like.¹"⁰ (146cd)

spontaneously attain the plane on which his own nature, which is the state of the

supreme subject, be directly perceived (svarūpaprathana)? Īt is for this reason that the

Kramastotra and other texts have explained the nature of the Twelve Kālīs which, on
the plane of transmigratory existence, is the locus of the full development
(pūrṇavibhava) of the cycle of transmigratory existence. Taking this secret teaching as
their goal, all Saiva teachers have beautifully described the way to attain the supreme
principle on the plane of the daily commerce of life where the disturbance of objectivity
(prevails). The teacher Utpaladeva (ŚSt 1/8) has said:
‘O lord, to whom are You not visible as the solitary One who abides when
objectivity comes to an end? (But) You are easily visible to (Your) devotees even when

the disturbance of subject and object takes place (on the level of daily life).”

The meaning is — O Lord! when (outer) objects such as jars and cloth cease to
exist by means
(of the practice of) yoga, who cannot perceive Your essential nature,
which abides in a state of solitary oneness? However, You are easily visible to (Your)
devotees on the disturbed plane of thought constructs, which is the state of (the
relationship between) subject and object. The point is that although the yogi
spontaneously experiences the plane which is that of the insight into his own essential

nature (and that of all things) in the state of profound contemplation (samādhi), even so,

when this yogi comes (back) to the external universe which is considered to be (his)
emergence (from that state of contemplation), every single thing appears to him as
duality, as it does to other (common) people subject to transmigration.
In actual fact, the final, ultimate level is considered (to have been attained)
when, although the yogi is on the plane of emergence (from that state of contemplation),
the expansion of insight into his own nature (continues to) take place. Then this yogi can
never fall from the state of the supreme perceiver which is the reflective awareness of

his own nature. And it is also said:

‘That mountain of duality that cannot be shattered by others even by the

thunderbolt of contemplation is contemplated and destroyed by those who possess the

strength of your devotion.”

The meaning is that yogis cannot destroy the mountain of duality, which is
hard to burst asunder even with the thunderbolt of contemplation. However, a beautiful

(auspicious) person destroys the mountain of the perception of duality even in states of
the perception of duality, by means of the reflective awareness of his own nature.
Ancient teachers have adorned this state with the name ‘the contemplation of expansion’
(vikāsasamādhī). The venerable teacher Abhinavagupta has reverently described this
state called Cosmic Bliss (jagadānanda). . … . This state of Cosmic Bliss is considered to

be much more excellent than all the other planes of bliss, such as those of the Bliss of
Consciousness and the rest (see below 5/43-52ab). This is because when this state is
attained, the yogi’s (inner state of) contemplation and (that of his) emergence from it
become one. Ancient teachers have adorned this state with the name ‘(permanent)
contemplation without emergence (from it)” (nirvyuthānasamādhi).”

⁴1⁰ Abhinava takes care to stress once again the solar association of the twelve Kālīs
below in 5/27ab. The cycle of the twelve Kālīs is the great cycle of time – kālacakra.

198

CHAPTER FOUR

‘And the like’ refers to (all those groups of things) that number twelve
in particular, such as the (twelve) vowels. As is said:
‘The vowels, excepting the neuter ones (r, Ṛ, 1, L), are said to be twelve.

It is said that there are twelve suns (one for each month), located on the twelve-

spoked (Wheel). The months are (accordingly) said to be twelve, and the

energies (kalā) are twelve (also).”⁴⁷¹

The point is that (consciousness) is also twelve-fold on the plane of the
object of knowledge as well. In this way, this supreme consciousness is just one,
and manifests everywhere as this and that. Thus, he says:

3 ōṁ ftraāī āferz-ātramraāīcā-7T|

zr̃ fnīīaā īāīc-zīga-dīa
īaād | g3.9 1
ata eṣā sthitā saṁvid antarbāhyobhayātmanā |
svayaṁ nirbhāsya tatrānyad bhāsayantīva bhāsate || 1A7 II
Thus, even as this abiding (unchanging) consciousness, having

made itself manifest as both internal and external reality,“⁷² it manifests as

though it is making manifest something there (within itself) which is
different (from itself). (147)

‘Thus’, because the situation (avasthāna) is such everywhere (here in
all circumstance) as has been established, ‘this’ supreme ‘consciousness’,

which is reflective awareness by nature (pratyavamarśātmā), ‘having made
itself manifest’ by its own glorious power, as ‘both the internal and the outer
realityʼ, that is, as subject and object etc. Even so, ‘it manifests as though it is
making manifest something there’ within itself ‘which is different (from

itself)ʼ, that is, subject and object etc., as if separate from it. ‘It manifests’ (in
this way) in the sense that this reality is proved (to be such) by everybody’s
(daily personal) experience. Although in reality supreme consciousness alone
The Year has already from Vedic times been a symbol of Totality embodied in the great
God of the Śatapatabrāhmāṇa, Prajāpati who is repeatedly eulogized as the Year.

⁴⁷¹ See below, TĀv ad 4/173ab where worshipping the Twelve Kālīs in this way as the
months of the year is called saṅcārakramapūjā – ‘worship of the sequence of transits’.

‘² The verse with which this introduction to exposition of the Twelve Kālī begins also

declares, with exactly the same wording, that: ‘consciousness makes itself manifest as

both internal and external reality’ (see above, 4/122cd-123ab). In the first instance, this
is stated in order to teach that although consciousness manifests in this way, it
nonetheless persists as reflective awareness. Here it is stated to teach that consciousness
persists as consciousness also. Abhinava wants to stress this at the very outset of his

exposition. Although the cycle of the twelve phases of reflective awareness mark a
progressive merger of the domains of consciousness in the course of their arising and
falling away into unconditioned, undefinable consciousness, consciousness continues to

spontaneously manifest as all things without thereby losing its identity or suffering any
alteration in its self-awareness.

TANTRĀLOKA

199

manifests, and nothing else at all can manifest apart from that, even so, initially
(here) (āmukhe), by the (power of its own innate) freedom, it makes the subject

etc. manifest as if it were separate from it, and s0 it pours out twelve-fold.⁴⁷

Now, analysing and explaining that (twelve-fold form of
consciousness), he (implicitly) declares that this system (darśana) (i.e. Anuttara

Trika) is closely related to the Krama system (kramanayasodara).⁴¹⁴

The Four Kālīs Who Consume the Sphere of Objectivity
1) Sṛṣṭikālī– The Kālī of Creation. The Emanation of Objectivity.

āāa⁷ ṁPīṀã gJḺā̄ āaaTāTācTiīgaiī|

gfīē ñōanṁ⁷ a ā--TaāTT 3=ã 1| ³¢ II
tataś ca prāg iyaṁ śuddhā tathābhāsanasotṣukā |
sṛṣṭiṁ kalayate devī tannāmnāgama ucyate || 148 ||
And thus, initially, this Goddess (of cognitive consciousness), Who

is pure (and unsullied by any form), (becomes) eager to manifest
(objectivity as if it were other than herself) in this way, (and) ideates (and

“³ In his Kramanayapradīpikā, Swami Lakshmaṇjoo explains that the Goddess of
Consciousness, that is, Kālasaṁkarṣinī Kālī, is in two basic states. One is her
Indescribable (anākhyā) transcendental form (‘beyond the universe’), in which Her

immanent, cosmic form is ‘contracted’, that is, withdrawn into Herself. Those who

attain this state are totally freed of all duality. The other state is ‘immanent’ (lit. ‘made
of the universe’). In this state, although the one essential, transcendental nature of all

things continues to be perceived, even so, duality in all its forms arises continuously.

Although it is generally agreed that both these states are equal, neither is greater than the

other, and the experience of the wonder of their essential nature (svarūpacamatkāra) īs
the same, even so, the immanent form is generally considered to be the highest. A verse

from the Pañcastavī puts it this way:

‘O daughter of the mountains, when you desire (to be) contracted (and
withdrawn), then you are the plane of speech and reason called the Nameless; or else if

you assume a (state of) expansion, then the host of (Your) names and forms are easily

achieved.”
Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains that when the goddess desires to contract her
form, it means that she wishes not to be phenomenally manifest and to remain beyond
the formation (kalanā) of name and form. Her eṣsential transcendental nature cannot be
an object of speech or mind, rather it constantly recedes, as it were, far from them. The

opposite of that takes place when she assumes the state in which her nature unfolds and

expands out as all things. Then her devotees can easily attain her. In this, her immanent

state, Kālī, the Goddess of Consciousness, is divided, as it were, into twelve forms,
which make all Her countless forms manifest. (summary of ibid. p. 11-12).
⁴’³ In his commentary on the following section on the twelve Kālīs, Jayaratha refers to
the Krama system with five other names, apart from Kramanaya. These are Mahānaya,

Kālīnaya, Devīnaya, Kramadarśana, and Atinaya. Other names found in other sources
include: Kramaśāsana, Kramārtha, Mahārtha, Mahāmnāya, Mahāśāsana, Kālīnaya,
Kālikākrama, Devatānayā and Rahasyāmnāya. See Sanderson (2007: 251 n 59) for the

locations of these references.

200

CHAPTER FOUR

thereby activates) (kalayate) emanation (sṛṣṭi), is called by that name⁴⁷⁶
(i.e. Sṛṣṭikālī) in the scriptures.⁴⁷⁷ (148)

‘Thus’, because supreme consciousness itself manifests radiantly as
each particular subject etc., and because ‘initially² (before) it manifests in that
way, it is ‘pure’, that is, uncoloured by (any) fixed form, whether subject
⁴³ Each Kaālī activates or, one could say, as Sanderson does, ‘ideates’ the phase of
consciousness in which she dawns. Five meanings of the root kal, from which the verb I
loosely translate in this way are derived, are noted in the standard list of Śanskrit roots
(dhātupāṭha). These are: casting forth (kṣepa), knowledge (jñāna), enumeration
(saṁkhyāna), movement (gati) and sound (nāda). Abhinava explains these meaning
from the perspective of the activities of the Twelve Kālīs below in 4/173cd-175.
Although all these meanings in general denote the activity of the Kālīs, some apparently
denote those of particular ones more specifically. In this case, it is ‘casting forth’

(kṣepa).

⁴!° Noṭe that, as they are secret, Abhinava takes care to avoid naming the Kaāḹīs directly.

Instead, he alludes to their names by describing their function and activity, as is

implicitly understood from the meanings of the root kal from which the name Kālī is

derived (see below 4/173cd-175). We will see at the end of this passage that the Twelve
Kālīs are all manifestations of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Kālī (TĀ 4/176).

⁴⁷! The scripture to which Abhinava is alluding is the Kālīkulakrama, that Jayaratha

calls the Devīpañcaśatika, quoting the relevant passages in full. Swami Lakshmanjoo
explains (KNP p. 21-22) that the Twelve Kālīs are twelve ‘expansions’ (vikāsa) of the
Goddess of Consciousness. The first one is Sṛṣṭikālī – the Kālī of Emanation. Swami

Lakshmanjoo explains: “What is meant by the state of emanation? In simple words one
can say about it that when I perceive anything by means of (the sensations) of sound,
touch, form, taste and smell, I am attracted towards it. In the first moment, I experience

the manifestation of that entity only in a form free of thought constructs. This
manifestation free of thought constructs is called ‘the initial perception’

(prāthamikālocana). When consciousness is directed towards an entity and the object
begins to be perceived, then in this first flow (of consciousness), consciousness only
perceives the nature of the object free of thought constructs devoid of (any) notion of
(its) name and form. In that state the perceiver has no conceptual (savikalpa) knowledge
such as ‘T am seeing, I am speakingʼ. There is no perception in that state of (for

example) a jar or a cloth in the domain of objectivity and relative distinctions of the
senses in the domain of the means of knowledge. All that manifests is the nature of

consciousness, free of thought constructs and beyond description, devoid of notions of

limiting adjuncts, such as that of location and the like. The nature of this state has been
beautifully described in the Yogavāsiṣṭha as follows:

‘We worship the Self, which is the vision of the first (moment of)

manifestation having abandoned the perceiver, perception and the object of perception
along with (their) latent traces.”
The meaning is that having abandoned the perceiver, perception and the object

of perception along with (their) latent trace we worship only the Self, which is the light

(of consciousness) free of thought constructs, that arises in the form of the initial
perception. (Seeing things) from the point of view of ultimate reality, the ancient
teachers have adorned this state free of thought constructs, which is that of initial

perception, and that has as its fruit the consumption of the cycle of time, with the name

of the goddess Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. In texts such as the Kramastotra, this state is described
under the name Sṛṣṭikālī. The yogi who repeatedly contemplates this state experiences

the ultimately real and supreme goddess in every external action.’

TANTRĀLOKA

201

(object or any of) the rest, and is this supreme ‘goddess’ of consciousness

(saṅviddevī), who is called the venerable Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī." She shines
(perpetually in this form), greedy to devour the stain of the procession of time

(kālakalanā),¹⁹ and ‘is eager’ there to manifest in that way by (the power of
Her innate) freedom (everything) which, though not separate from Her own
nature, is (in the process of) being separated from it, and so, (filled) with the
desire to emit, She ‘ideates (and thereby activates) emanationʼ; that is, She

contemplates (the existence of) phenomena that (are just) as if (faintly)

indicated (āsūtrita) externally.⁴ Thus, She ‘is called by that name’ in accord

with (Her) nature (anvartha), namely, the venerable Sṛṣṭikālī (the Kālī of

Emanation), ‘in the scriptures’ such as the venerable Pañcaśatika.⁸" This is
the meaning. As is said there:

‘Arising from Mantra,™² Her form Emptiness (vyoman),⁴³ and located

in Emptiness, She is devoid of Emptiness. She is everything,“ and free of all

‘’⁸ For a description of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, see below 15/335cd-338.
⁴’’ The twelve Kālīs are aspects of the one Kālī, namely, Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī (the Attractress

of Time), Who is the Goddess of Consciousness. Kālī is the Goddess of Time. The word
for time – kāla – also means ‘death’. The relentless march of time marks the progressive
decay of things and ultimately, their end. As the Goddess Time, Kālī consumes, that is,

‘eats’ and ‘gobbles’ everything up in this way. This is the reason why She is sometimes
portrayed with Her tongue extending from Her mouth, engaged in ‘licking upʼ the

worlds. Indeed, one of the many forms of Kālī is Lelihānā, She Who Destroys by
Licking. But She also destroys Time and Death (see below, 15/335cd-338). Thus She is
said to eat up Bhairava, Her consort, Who is Time. In this aspect, She is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī,
the Goddess of the Krama. What Jayaratha is saying here about the first Kālī is not
specific to Her. Every Kālī is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. We will see throughout the exposition of

the Twelve Kālīs both their individual identity coupled with this, their universal nature.

⁴* Here in this very first moment of emanation, objectivity is still deep within

consciousness, at one with it. But it is just beginning to emerge as the content of the

initial intention to emit it. It is thus just a faint trace, as the object of the intention of
consciousness. This is the state of ‘expansion’ or ‘opening upʼ (unmeṣa) of
consciousness to its cosmic form. In Pratyabhijñā terms, this is the level of the principle
of Sad
corresponding to the experience of consciousness in the form of the
reflective awareness, ‘l am all this universe’, which is one with it, and hence as yet

externally unmanifest, just ‘indicated’. It is like the object of one’s desire at the instant
the desire arises.

⁴*¹ Throughout his commentary on Abhinava’s exposition of the Twelve Kālīs,

Jayaratha quotes the Devīpañcaśatika (i.e. the Kālīkulakrama) and Kramastotra in
parallel. Manuscripts of the former have been recovered in Nepal, on the basis of which

the text quoted here has been edited by me where required (see bibliography). The latter

has unfortunately been lost, as has Abhinava’s commentary on it, called the Kramakeli
(the Play of the Krama).

⁴³² The MSs of the DP read mattodayā ʻarising from inebriated delight’ for mantrodayā
‘arising from Mantra’. We are told at the beginning of chapter five of the DP that the
Goddess, who is speaking in this Tantra to the god, is the Sun of consciousness, who
assumes twelve forms as her rays. The DP describes thirteen Kālīs. The thirteenth, who

is Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī, is in the middle of the other twelve, who originate
from her. Thus, the one Goddess both precedes the beginning and is at the end of the

202

CHAPTER FOUR

things, She destroys emanation in all this universe. That energy (kalā) whose
glorious power (vibhava) is all things, and capable of serving as the instrument
of emanation, inwardly attains tranquillity, is known as Sṛṣṭikālī.⁷⁴⁸⁵
Similarly, (it is said) in the venerable Kramastotra also:

³⁰-r̥ çoṉṣṭantly worship Sṛṣṭikālī, Who is the wave (ūrmi)*⁷ of dense

(uninterrupted) bliss of the Ocean of Energy (kaulārṇava) and contains inwardly

end. Here the goddess says that the first Kālī, the Kālī of Emanation, arises from her
Mantra body.

“³ The word I translate here as ‘emptiness’ is vyoman, which literally means ‘sky’.
There are several words for emptiness. This one and its synonyms (for example, kha,

ākāśa and gagana) appear in quite common expressions such as cidvyoman, cidākāśa,
and cidgagana, all of which mean ‘the sky (or void) of consciousness.’

⁴³* The MSs of the DP read samā ‘equal’, which is a possible variant.

‘³⁵ DP 5/23cd-25ab. In the MSs of the DP, this line reads: yasyānte śamate sā tu sṛṣṭikālī
tu sā smṛtā | `“within which⁷ (or ‘at the end of which”) She becomes tranquil ...⁷ At first

sight it appears to be a contradiction that the Kālī of Emanation should be the Kālī who
destroys it. But this is not so. The Kālīs are all aspects of the one Kālī, who is engaged
in consuming everything by withdrawing it into herself, and so making it one with Her.
In this perspective, each Kālī is an aspect of this process. Throughout this account,
Jayaratha refers to the Kālīs in each group of four as ‘devouring’ or consuming it into
the Void of the pure consciousness of the Inexplicable. Moreover, emanation follows in
the wake of destruction. Each new moment emerges from the emptiness of the cessation

of the previous one. All that consciousness contains is the void of consciousness, which

is all things.
*⁶- Sanderson (2007: 57 n 178) notes that Śrīvatsa (c. 12⁰ century South Indian)
comments on the Kramastotra in his Cidgaganacandrikā. Jayaratha has no knowledge

of this text or indeed any other Krama or Trika based text written in South India. If he

had, he may well have quoted it. Accordingly, the corresponding verses in that CGC for
each verse of the Kramastotra will be noted and translated. Thirteen Kālīs are presented

in the CGC in the sequential order in which they are normally found in the scriptural

sources, thus confirming that this was the order in the Kramastotra also. The verses of
the Kramastotra and the CGC are set in Indravajra. This metre consists of eleven

syllables for each quarter, distributed as follows: –— u | -u l u –u | –|

The following four verses in the Cidgaganacandrikā comment on this one.
This verse comments on the 1 quarter – kaulārṇavānandaghanormirūpām – ‘(You are)
the wave (iirmi) of dense (uninterrupted) bliss of the Ocean of Energy (kaulārṇava)³:
yat kulaṁ trividham amba tad bhavo yaḥ prakāśa upalakṣyate mahān |
tatra yo nikhilakalpito ʻrṛṇavas tvaṁ yad ūrmir asi kṛtyalālasā || 221 I|
‘O Mother, the threefold Kula (of creation, persistence and destruction) is
phenomenal (fettered) existence, which is perceived (by the wise) to be the Great Light.
There, the ocean fashioned from all things is You who are the Wave (of its activity),

which is the ardent desire (to perform Your worldly) functions (kṛtya). (221)

This verse comments on the 2* quarter ~ unmeṣameṣobhayabhājam antaḥ | –
‘contains inwardly (within Herself) the unfolding (of the universe when She opens Her
eyes) (unmeṣa) and (its) withdrawal (when She closes them) (nimeṣa).”
unmiṣan nimiṣad apy uta dvayaṁ viśvam etad udare dhṛtaṁ yayā |

TANTRĀLOKA

203

(within Herself) both the unfolding (of the universe when She opens Her eyes)

(unmeṣa) and (its) withdrawal (when She closes them) (meṣa) — She Who
merges (and, at rest, dissolves away) into the Abode of Energy that has merged

(into Śiva).¹⁴³⁸

sā tvam amba laharī śivāmbudheḥ kṣepasaṁprakaṭanagrahonmukhī |
‘She who holds the universe within (Her) belly even as (She) unfolds (as the
universe, opening Her eyes) (unmiṣan) and withdraws (it, closing them) (nimiṣat), or the
two (together), is You, O Mother! (You who are) the wave of Śiva’s ocean, intent on
casting forth, manifesting and laying hold (of it with each act of perception).⁷ (222)
These two verses comment on nilīyate nīlakulālaye (>līnakulālaye) yā – ‘She
Who merges (and, at rest, dissolves away) into the Abode of Energy that has merged
(into Śiva).³
yaḥ paro nirupasargataḥ paraḥ syãn mahãn api ca kevalaḥ śivel
uttaraṁ ca viṣayotsavas tad ānanda ullasati cidghanāsi yat ||
viśvasaṁhrtipade layojjhite līyase yadi niraṁśataḥ śive |
sṛṣṭikāly asi yayā bahiḥpade kṣiptam amba jagadāśu gṛhyate ||
‘O Śivā! He who is supreme, free as He is of misfortune, being supreme is
great and free (kevala), and subsequently is the festival of the objects of sense. The bliss
which (thus) pours forth is You who are dense (unbroken) consciousness. (223)
O Śivā, if devoid of parts, You thereby dissolve away into the plane of cosmic

withdrawal, devoid of dissolution, (then) You O Mother, are Sṛṣṭikālī, who having cast
the universe into the outer plane (of existence, You) quickly lay hold (ofit and withdraw
it again).⁷ (224)

“ The term ‘ārmi’, meaning literally ‘wave’, is one of several synonyms of ‘spanda’,

the pulsation or vibration of universal consciousness (see below, 4/184). A vibration or
pulsation has two phases – expansion and contraction. The Spandakārikā equates them
with opening and closing of Śiva’s eyes, by which the universe is created and destroyed.

Following the Śākta view which is expressed here, for example, some commentators
add that this is the pulsation of Śiva’s energy, not Śiva Himself. Concemning the nature
of Spanda in relation to Śakti as explained by the commentators on the Spandakārikā,

see Dyczkowski 1992a: 50 ff.

⁴³* The printed text reads: nīlakulālaye, which literally means ‘in the abode of the blue

Kula’ or ‘in the blue abode of Kula’. Without any immediate apparent meaning, this

reading is most probably corrupt. The emendation ‘līnakulālaye’ (‘the abode of Kula

that has merged’) is confirmed by the reading of this verse in the CGC (v 224, quoted
above in note 4,486). The term Kuḷa has a number of meanings. One is simply Śakti, i.e.

Śiva’s spiṅitual energy, which is the one I have chosen. As Kula means ‘familyʼ, and by
extension ‘group’ʼ, it may also mean the ‘group of energies’, which in this context may
be the energies of the senses (see below ad 29/4 for definitions of the term). Silburn

apparently understands it in this way, and translates the sentence as ‘she who rests in
latency in the undifferentiated receptacle of the sensory world'.

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo, accepting the reading as it stands, understands ‘the blue
abode of Kula’ to be the sphere of objectivity. Accordingly, he explains this verse as
follows:
‘The meaning is that the Goddess of Consciousness, who is the supreme
perceiver, is the wave which is the first pulsation (of consciousness), as she is the plane

of the initial expansion (of consciousness) of the (Ocean of) Energy, that is, the ocean of
Śiva who is supreme consciousness. In this way, she expands and contracts within Her

204

CHAPTER FOUR

Having defined in this way the nature of emanation in relation to the
object of knowledge, (now) in order to define the nature of (its) persistence as
well, he says:
2) Raktakālī– The Red Kālī. The Persistence of Objectivity.

aī ṃtr̄ēcājvzgṝ
aī āfēaī |
JTftTĒĀTI
TT TTĪS FGTTṀT I 28 |
tathābhāsitavastvaṁśarañjanāṁ sā bahirmukhī |
svavṛtticakreṇa samaṁ tato ‘pi kalayanty alam || 149 ||
sthitir eṣaiva bhāvasya * * ⁵* ³+ ³k 5* s* sx

Then that (same consciousness) is extroverted, and capable of doing

so (alam), activates (a sense of delight that) colours (rañjanā) the (various)
aspects of reality made manifest in this way, together with the circle of its
own (sensory) functions. This alone is the state of persistence of

(phenomenal) existence.⁴⁹ (149-150a)

‘Then’, after the dawning of the venerable Sṛṣṭikālī, ‘that’ supreme

consciousness itself, at one with the subject, is ‘extroverted’; that is, rests on
the plane (daśā) of the means of knowledge (pramāṇa) by (the power of) its

inner nature. She is the goddess who abides as the initial perception ‘in the blue abode

of Kula’, that is, the category of the object of perception consisting (of empirical

entities) such as a jar or cloth. I constantly worship the goddess Srṣtikālī, that is, 1

penetrate into the supreme nature, making my own state of limited subjectivity
secondary with respect to that of supreme consciousness.” (KNP p. 23)

⁴ Swami Lakshmanjoo (KNP p. 23-24) explains the nature of this Kālī as follows:

‘when that same supreme consciousness discussed previously has become propense (to
perceive) phenomena such as a jar or a cloth and (so) becomes extroverted, that is when
it is said that this goddess Kālī enters, by virtue of Her unfettered freedom, the
state of
persistence – which is that of the means of knowledge – with respect to the object of
knowledge. When this happens (the goddess of consciousness) is ‘coloured’ (rakta), that
is, delighted by the aggregate of the objects of the senses, namely, form and the rest, of

the sense of sight and the rest of the senses. Even when the Goddess of Consciousness,

who is the supreme subject, is engaged in experiencing the objects of the senses, she
makes that perception (jñāna), which is the delight elicited by phenomena

(padārtharañjana), directly apparent as her own nature. In other words, when objects
are perceived, this supreme goddess experiences the (pleasing) attachment (rakti), which
is the enjoyment of the objects of the senses, as a state free of thought constructs, in the

course of which she manifests the second state of the expansion of Her own nature. The
venerable teacher Utpaladeva has described this state in the following verse (ŚSt. 13/8):

‘May we be mad with inebriation even as we drink constantly from the goblets

of all phenomena, the alchemical potion which is the wine of your worship through the
mouth of each one of the senses.”

TANTRĀLOKA

205

own (innate) freedom.⁴* (It then activates) ‘the circle of its own (sensorial)
functionsʼ, that is, the perception of form and the rest associated with the eyes

etc., and ‘together with’ that ‘reality’, which is all (that is perceived by them)
and ‘made manifest’, as (if) separated off ‘in this way’ (from consciousness),
‘capable of doing so, activates (a sense of delight that) coloursʼ (them), that

is, brings that about as its own field (of operation) also (ātmaviṣayatayāpi), ʻfor
the (various) aspects’ (of manifest reality), form and the rest, in accord with

the words (of the scripture) that ‘this group of five (objects of sense), form and

the rest, is the extent of the universe (of experience).’⁴" Knowing it (in this way

initially) in the modality (of perception) which is free of thought constructs
(avikalpavṛttyā), the subject itself manifests in (its) extroverted form as the
means of knowledge. (However,) as all agree, the means of knowledge is
coloured by (its) object, and so through that, (the subject) also is coloured by the

object of knowledge.⁴” The point is that (it is not affected by the object)

directly. ‘This alone is- the state of persistence’ (srhiti) of phenomena
⁴*⁰ We have noted already that the means of knowledge is that aspect of consciousness

which makes its objective aspect known to the subjective one. The objective aspect,
which was in the process of being generated in the previous phase, now reaches a more
concrete state of stability. This takes place when it comes to be known as an outer object
by the senses. This is how the means of knowledge operates in the objective sphere. In

the previous phase there is intention, an intense desire but without yet any clearly
defined object. For the initial emissive state to be consolidated, the object of desire must

be known and identified. For this to take place, the senses must be set into operation and

be directed to their object. This is possible when the perceiver pays attention to the

object out of interest, attachment or delight (all meanings of the word ‘rakti’). This
phase of consciousness induces this generic desire in the subjective aspect, which thus

turns its attention away from itself to the objective aspect, which although essentially its

own nature, begins to be perceived as separate from it, but is not yet so. The five senses
set into operation their corresponding five types of objects, that appear as manifestations
of consciousness in a universal, indeterminate manner, as yet unspecified by the
formation of thought constructs. These ‘colour’ the means of knowledge, that is, sensory
awareness, giving it a generic form as, for example, visual or auditory sensory

awareness which in turn ‘colours’ the perceiver, defining its identity as the perceiver of
form or sound and so on. Thus, the objective aspect of consciousness begins to assume
an external state which is ‘stable’ or ‘persistent’ but is still one with the perceiver. The

processes that take place within the perceiver, that is, those of emanation and

withdrawal and the encompassing fourth state which includes all of them, are not states
of persistence. Objectivity has no independent existence in itself. Objects are objects of

knowledge and so can exist as such only when perceived. The aspect of the cognitive
process that knows them is the same as that which gives them apparently ‘stable’
independent existence as objects of knowledge. Thus, the sense of ‘activate’ (kalayati)
here is the second meaning of the root kal, namely, ‘knowledge’. In other words, the
activation of this state takes place by knowing all that manifests within consciousness
directly in a manner free of thought constructs, that is, generically, as the aesthetic
delight of consciousness that ‘colours’ the perceiver and the perceived.

⁴⁹1 SBUM 2ab. The complete verse is quoted above in TĀv ad 3/4, see note there. This
line is also quoted below in TĀv ad 4/221cd-222ab. The context tells us that what is

meant here is that the world of sense objects has no innate nature of its own. It is all a

manifestation of consciousness.

⁴2 Ṟead meyoprañjanaṁ for moyoprañjanaṁ.

206

CHAPTER FOUR

(bhāvajāta), such as the form (perceived by the sense of sight) and the rest (of
the objects of the senses). The meaning is that (this is) their manifest state
(vyakti), which is (their) nature as manifestations (avabhāsana) (of
consciousness). The object of knowledge is nothing in itself, and so its abiding
(manifest) state (sthiti) is (only) possible because of the development of the
means of knowledge. This is the sense of the word ‘alone’ʼ. This kind (of

consciousness) is (present) in the object of knowledge as attachment, and so is

called Raktakālī (the Kālī of Attachment).⁴³³ Thus here (in this case) also, She is

called by that name in the scriptures. This is the connection with the previous
(verse). That is said in the venerable Pañcaśatika:

‘That energy (kalā) which has arisen inwardly,⁴³⁴ that cannot be grasped
by the eye, nor is it present in any of the senses, and (although) devoid of
(phenomenal) qualities and is free of ego, colours (with attachment the entire)

circle of the universe,⁴³ should be known to be Raktakālikā.⁴⁴⁶⁶
So too in the venerable Kramastotra (we read):

⁴⁹"-] bow to Raktakālī (the Red Kālī) Whose form is all things, She Who

is reddened (with passion) when the (period of cosmic) dissolution ends (and

⁴⁰³ The word ‘rakta’ means both ‘red’ and ‘attached’. Thus, the Kālī Who is red is the

Kālī Who governs and makes manifest the attachment to the objects of the senses, due
to which we pay attention to them, so that their manifestation persists within the field of
the senses. Again, the word is derived from ‘rañjana’ ʻto colour³, which in a technical
sense means ‘to make manifest. This phase of consciousness hypostasized in this Kālī,
‘coloursʼ, that is, ‘makes manifest” the objects of the senses by directing the senses to
them, impelled by an attachment for them.

⁴⁴ The MSs read kalānta which 1 read as kalānte in place of kalā tu.

⁴³ The reading of the MSs here is sarvamaṇḍalam ʻthe circle of all (things)?.
⁴’⁰ DP 5/29-30ab. As Jayaratha himself tells us further ahead, the sequential order of the
Kālīs presented by

Abhinavagupta has

been changed with respect to

the

Devīpañcaśatika and the Kramastotra, both of which follow the basic order found in the
scriptures. The sequence recorded in the Dvyardhaśatika, quoted further ahead, places

Raktakālī in the fourth place, after the phase of withdrawal. This is the state that

Devīpañcaśatika is describing, namely, the Inexplicable, after the phase of withdrawal.
Viewed in this way, the verse makes sense.

⁴⁷ The following two verses in the Cidgaganacandrikā comment on this one:
svairakhelananiveśitāḥ śive ātmaṇākṣarucayas trayodaśa |
arthapañcakamayāś ca vedakās tvaṁ vinītaghanasāramūrcchitā ||
bhakṣayanty akhilam akṣajaiḥ śive śaktiraśmibhir imāś ca mātṛbhiḥ |
tāś ca saṁsmr̥timahālaye pare rajyantī harasi viśvavigraham |l

‘O Śivā, the thirteen lights of the senses are placed by themselves (on their

objects) to play freely. Made of the five (gross elements that are their) objects, they
inform You (of their nature), (whereas) You (are ever pure and unaffected like a radiant
white) heap of crushed camphor. (229)
O Śivā, devouring these (functions of the senses) with the Mothers who are the

rays of energy born of the senses, (You consume) everything, and (thus consumed)

make them shine* (coloured with desire) in the supreme, great abode of recollection

TANTRĀLOKA

207

creation begins), She Who is attached to drinking the essence (rasa) of the

blood of the most excellent Heroes, who offer it with great delight to the Circle

of the Mothers.’⁴⁹⁸

(where) You remove the form of all things (making it one with Yourself).’ (230) *Read
rajyantī for rajyaī.

⁴“⁰* As Raktakālī is the fourth Kālī in the Kramastotra as it is in the Devīpañcaśatika, it
makes sense that in this verse She is said to operate when the period of dissolution ends.

In this verse, a third meaning of the word ‘rakta’ is to be understood, namely, blood.

Thus, Raktakālī is the red Kālī of attachment and blood. This verse refers to a common
practice which is well known to the Tantras that focus on the worship of Bhairava and
the goddesses like Kālī associated with him. This is the practice of offering one’s own
blood to the Mothers. Their worship is attested in the Siddhānta Āgamas, but are

especially important in the Bhairava Tantras that developed from about the sixth century
onwards. There they are a group of eight arranged in the directions. Associated with

them are as many ‘families’ – Kulas of deities. In this verse, Kaula adepts, ‘the most
excellent Heroesʼ, are portrayed as making offerings of their own blood to the Maṇḍala
of the Mothers and the Blood Red Kālī, who is, one may surmise, in the centre of their

maṇḍala, as the one who in actual fact receives this offering and delights in it.
Another parallel is suggested on the authority of the ŚSū (1/11), where we read
that ‘the Lord of the Heroes is the enjoyer of the three (states of waking, dreaming and
deep sleep)². The commentators on this sūtra understand the Lord of the Heroes (vīreśa)
to be the universal consciousness that governs the senses. The senses are appropriately
called ‘Heroes’ (vīra), a term commonly used to denote Kaula adepts, because their

union with their objects epitomizes the union of accomplished Kaula adepts (siddha)
with their consorts, the Yoginīs.

Accordingly, we can also understand this verse to be

referring to the activity of the senses. In this perspective the ‘essence’ of their ‘blood’ is

the reflective awareness which is the essence of the energies of the senses. It is offered
to the Circle of Mothers, who are often identified with the senses (five outer and three

inner of the mental organ) as they are, for example, in the Hymn to the Circle of Deities
in the Body (Dehasthadevatācakrastotra). Raktā Kālī is thus the modality of the
reflective awareness of consciousness that is engaged in sensory perception and,
‘passionately attached to it’, ultimately receives this offering.
Swami Lakshmanjoo (KNP p. 24) explains further: ‘the Circle of Mothers are
the host of Mothers, that is, the goddesses of the senses (karaṇeśvarī) associated with
the senses. According to the Śivasūtra: ʻthe Lord of the Heroes is the enjoyer of the
three (states)³, the term ‘Lord of the Heroes’ denotes the most excellent yogis. The sense

here is that the developed yogi always experiences the wonder of the fourth state (of

enlightened) consciousness in the three states of waking (dreaming and deep sleep) also.

The meaning of this verse is that those supreme yogis who are connected to the bliss

which is the wonder of Pure Knowledge when in the state of (sexual) recreation
(vinoda) become absorbed in the yoginīs in the form of the goddesses of the senses. At

the time of this kind of union, between a great accomplished yogi (mmahāsiddha) and

yoginī, that is, supreme yogis and their goddess, the goddesses of the senses really come

together in union. Such is the consciousness — here called ‘blood’ — of the Supreme

Goddess (parameśvarī) in that state. In other words, when engaged in the play of the
Great Drinking that takes place in the great congregation (mahāgosthī) of Siddhas and
Yoginīs, they are always intent on that. It is also said (in the scriptures):
‘(lt is) Caṇḍikā (Herself) who everywhere here makes offerings (to the fire)

and repeats Mantras when (the sacrificial fire) is kindled.”

208

CHAPTER FOUR
Now, surely, everywhere else the venerable Sthitikālī (the Kālī of

Persistence) is described after the venerable Sṛṣṭikālī (the Kālī of Emanation), as

is said in the venerable Sārdhaśatika:⁴⁹

‘The great wheel with twelve spokes is said to be in the form of the rays
(of Divine Light). I will tell (you) the names of the rays as they (truly) are.³

(The Kālīs called) Emanation, Persistence, Withdrawal and Raktakālī, Sukālī,⁵⁰¹

Yamakālī, Mṛtyukālī, Rudra (Kālī), Paramārka (Kālī) and, after that, Mārtaṇḍa
(Kālī), Kālāgnirudrakālī and then the one called Mahākālī. Then comes (the
Kālī Whose name begins with) the word ‘mahābhairava’ followed by the word

‘ghora’ and ends with the words ‘caṇḍakālī’ (i.e. Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍa

Kālī), which is said to be the thirteenth.’³⁰²

The meaning is that when the Great Union with the yoginīs takes place, the

goddess Durgā (Caṇḍikā) (Herself) performs all the rites of making offerings to the fire
and repeating Mantras, and it is She who in this great congregation (of siddhas and

yoginīs) shines constantly. I bow to the goddess Raktakālī, who abides in a cosmic form
ever attached (and delighted) (anurakta) by the state free of thought constructs on the
plane of the cosmic expansion (viśvonmesa), which is the state of persistence that arises
at the end of cosmic destruction. The sense of the word ‘bowing’ is that of abiding in
that condition of identity with that (tanmaya).”

⁴⁹l These vi
correspond to verses 170cd-174 of the unpublished
Devīdvyardhaśatika. Although Sanderson (2007: 251 n 60) acknowledges that these

verses do correspond, he distinguishes the Devīdvyardhaśatika from the Sārdhaśatika as
a different text. The serial order of the Kālīs in the TĀ is: 1) Sṛṣṭikālī – The Kālī of
Creation, 2) Raktakālī – The Red Kālī, 3) Sthitini
ālī – The Kālī of the Destruction of

Persistence, 4) Yamakālī – The Kālī of Restriction, 5) Saṁhārakālī – The Kālī of

Withdrawal, 6) Mṛtyukālī – The Kālī of Death, 7) Rudrakālī (Bhadrakālī) – The Fierce

(or Auspicious) Kālī, 8) Mārtaṇḍakālī – The Kālī of the Sun, 9) Paramārkakālī – The
Kaālī of the Supreme Sun, 10) Kālāgnirudrakālī – The Kālī of Rudra the Fire of Time,
11) Mahākālakālī – The Kalī of the Great Time, 12) Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālī – The

Horrific and Wrathful Kālī of the Great Bhairava.
Jayaratha changes the sequence of the verses that describe the Kālīs in the DP
(5!20-46) to make it conform with the order in the TĀ. The actual serial order of the

Kalīs in the DP is: 1) Sṛṣṭikālī, 2) Sthitikālī, 3) Saṁhārakālī, 4) Raktakālī, 5) Sukālī, 6)
Yamakālī,

7)

Mārtaṇḍakālī,

Mṛtyuk:
11)

8) Bhadrakālī

Kālāgnirudrakālī,

(=

Rudrakālī),,

12) Mahākālakālī,

9)

Parmārkakālī,

13)

10)

Mahābhairava-

ghoracaṇḍakālī. See below, commentary on 4/173ab, for a quote from the
Jayadrathayāmala, in which the Thirteen Kālīs are listed, for the serial order there,
which is the same as the one here in the Devīdvyardhaśatika. Jayaratha himself has

stated that thirteen Kālīs are presented in the Kramastotra in the sequential order in

which they are normally found in the scriptural sources. The sequence according to the
Cidgaganacandrikā, which comments on the Kramastotra, is as follows:

1) Sṛṣṭīkālī, 2) Sthitīnāśakālī,
3) Saṁhārakālī, 4) Raktakālī, 5) Sukālī,
6) Yamakālī, 7) Mṛtyukālī, 8) Bhadrakālī, 9) Parmārkakālī, 10) Maārtaṇḍakāḹī,
11) Kālāgniruḍrakālī, 12) Mahākālakālī, 13) Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālī.

⁵⁰⁰ Read yathāsthitam for yadāsthitam.
³⁰l Read sukalī for svakālī.

³⁰² Devīdvyardhaśatika 170cd-174. Read udāhṛtā for udāhṛtāḥ. We may note in passing
that the following are the names of the Kālīs in the manuscripts of the
Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya: Kālī as the virgin goddess Kumāṁī (= Kubjikā?) is
worshipped in the middle, at ‘the end of the twelve’. 1) Sṛṣṭikālī, 2) Sthitikālī, 3)

TANTRĀLOKA

209

So how is it that here Raktakālī is taught after (Sṛṣṭikālī)? – is this not
contrary to the scriptures? (To this possible objection, we reply that, yes that is)
true, however, in order to hide (the correct) sequence of (the phases of)
consciousness (saṁvitkrama) (i.e. the sequential order of the Twelve Kālīs

stated) in the scripture, it is taught in a laconic and disordered way. This is just
as is the case with the Sequence of Persistence (sthitikrama) in the venerable

Pañcaśatika, following which the great teachers have undertaken the ritual

procedure (pūjākrama).³⁸ Here, (the sequence) has been established (by the
teacher) according to his own arrangement (svaśayyayā) in order to conceal the

ritual procedure (pūjākrama), with reference to which the sequence of (the
phases of) consciousness (saṁvitkrama) may become well established (and
clear). Thus, even though the venerable Kramastotra proceeds (pravṛtta) in total

accord with the scriptures (that is, the Kālīs are arranged in the sequential order
given in the scriptures), in order to reveal the (true) sequence of (the phases of)

consciousness, the author™ (of the Tantrāloka) says in (his) commentary

(vivṛti) on it.⁰ after having explained the first verse of praise (dedicated to) the

Saṁhãrakãlī, 4) Raktakālī, 5) Sukālī, 6) Yamakālī, 7) Mṛtyukālī, 8) Bhadrakālī,
9) Paramārkakālī, 10) Mahāmārtaṇḍakālī, 11) Rudrakālī, 12) Mahākālī. (CMSS 7/247)

³⁰³According to Jayaratha, there are two ‘kramas’ (‘sequences’). One is the sequence in

which the deities are worshipped, and the ritual procedure relating to their worship
(pūjākrama). Thus, each sphere of emanation, persistence and the rest has its own
sequence – krama – which is the ritual procedure that concerns it, that is, essentially, the
order in which the deities of that ‘sequence’ or phase of the ‘sequence’ of the entire

liturgy – ‘sequence’ – are worshipped. The Sequence of Persistence in the

Devīpañcaśatika to which Jayaratha refers is the order in which the deities of that
sequence are worshipped there.
The other parallel sequence, according to Jayaratha, is that of the phases of
consciousness that they represent (saṁvitkrama). Jayaratha is saying here that the
discrepancies between the sequential order of the Kālīs taught in the scriptures and that
taught here are because the scriptures keep the sequence from the point of view of
consciousness secret. Conversely, Abhinavagupta intends to keep the sequence

according to the ritual procedure secret, and is anyway concerned with the latter rather
than the former. In actual fact, there is little reason to doubt that Abhinava himself has

made these changes to accommodate his understanding of the Twelve Kālīs as
representations of the phases of perception. Certainly, there is no trace of the sequence

he teaches in the sources that have come down to us. If there was a scriptural authority

for it or he had learnt this sequence from someone, he would most certainly have
acknowledged his source. It is quite likely that Jayaratha himself thought this was so,
disclosing his view tactfully by unobtrusively stating that Abhinava describes the Kālīs
according to the number and order of ‘his own arrangement’. Jayaratha is very
concerned to stress that the order of the Kālīs has been altered. However, he is very
careful to avoid saying that it is Abhinava who made the change. Even so, the
distinction Jayaratha makes between a sequence in which the Kālīs are worshipped and

the sequence within which they appear in consciousness

is clearly a ploy. Sound

exegesis must be faithful to its object, although an explanation can range from being a

very brief literal one to an extensive reworking. Abhinava’s exegesis covers the entire

range. See Appendix to this chapter for the sources of the teachings concerning these

Kālīs.
³⁰⁴ Read granthakṛtā for granthakṛtār.

³⁰³ Abhinavagupta wrote a commentary on the Kramastotra called the Kramakeli (the

Play of the Krama), which, unfortunately, has not been recovered. He refers to it in his

210

CHAPTER FOUR

venerable Sṛsṭikālī, that ‘one should understand that the state (sthiti) which
follows after (Sṛṣṭikālī) is that of the venerable goddess Raktakālī’ and other
such things (ityādi). Here however, he proclaims this openly with reference to
the sequence (of the phases of) consciousness. Thus, there is no defect.

Now, having defined the nature of persistence (within consciousness) in
relation to the object of knowledge, he says (the following) in order also to
define the nature of withdrawal (of the object of knowledge within
consciousness).

3) Sthitināśakālī – The Kālī of the Destruction of Persistence.

The Withdrawal of Objectivity.³⁶

fsīrāī: fkṛṁāīeṝ aa fē-ā || gu⁰
³k ³k k k ³k. . . * 1ā aṇṭarmukhatārasāt |
saṁjihīrṣuḥ sthiter nāśaṁ kalayantī nirucyate || 150 ||
(Thriīled by) the delight (rasa) of introversion, She desires to
reabsorb (that state of persistence, and so) activates the process of
destruction of persistence, and is called accordingly. (150bcd)

commentary on the Bhagavadgītā, which is his earliest recovered work. For details see

under the entry ‘Kramakeli’ in the Appendix dealing with Abhinava’s sources.

³⁰⁶ Swami Lakshmanjoo (KNP p. 25-26) explains: ‘Now the state of withdrawal within

the plane of the object of knowledge of the goddess Kālī is described in this, the third
expansion. After wonder, which is the perception of the objects of sense, has arisen (and

develops) up to the state of complete satisfaction with the Goddess Raktā [i.e.
Raktakālī] just described, then consciousness in the form of the supreme perceiver

(arises as the experience) ‘I have known this thing’. When (the goddess of
consciousness), once satisfied in this way, reflects on (her) introverted state, she then
makes the persistence of the object and (its) perception one with Herself and, so doing,

the essential nature of Sthitināśakālī becomes manifest. The sense is that when the

activities constituted by the enjoyment of the objects of the senses come to an end and
these goddesses of the senses are satisfied and embrace the Lord Bhairava of

Consciousness fully, she assumes the introverted state. The venerable teacher
Abhinavagupta has explained this matter in the following very beautiful words:
‘“(When the deities of the senses) are satisfied, they rest at one with God
Bhairava, the Sky of Consciousness, Who (as) their own full (and complete) (pūrṇa)

nature, resides solitary in the Heart.” (TA 3/264cd-265ab (264))

The meaning is that, when the senses are completely satisfied with the wonder

of the activity of the enjoyment (of their objects), they then assume an introverted state,

and the goddesses of the senses rest in the locus of the heart. Thus, because they are free
of craving in this way, embracing Bhairava who is completely full (and perfect), she
becomes of His same nature (tanmaya).”

TANTRĀLOKA

211

That same supreme goddess of consciousness desires to withdraw, that
is, make one with Herself, ‘that state of persistence’, which is the means of

knowledge otherwise called ‘attachment’ (rakti),.” ‘(thrilled by) the delight’

which is the wonder (camatkāra) of repose within Her own nature in the state of
introversion of oneness with the perceiver, (as the awareness) ‘ have known
(this) thing (arthay’˚* and so ‘activates the process of destruction of

persistence and is called accordinglyʼ Sthitināśakālī, the Kālī of the
Destruction of Persistence in, for example, the venerable Kramastotra.³⁹ Thīs is

the meaning. As is said there:

⁵³l⁰-Ḵ bow to Sthitināśakālī (the Kālī of the Destruction of Persistence),

Who, tranquil, abides in the dynamic union (saṁghaṭṭa) of the going and

⁷ We have noted already the two senses of the term rañjana, which literally means
‘colouring’. One is ‘delighting’, and hence causing attachment The other is

‘manifestation’. The idea is that manifestations ‘colour’ consciousness, just as a picture

‘colours’ the canvas on which it is painted. In a previous publication we noted that:
‘Śiva is the perfect artist Who, without need of canvas or brush, paints the world

pictures. The instant He imagines it, it appears spontaneously, perfect in every respect.
The colours He uses are the varying shades and gradations of His Spanda energy and the

medium His own consciousness. The universe is coloured with the dye of its own nature
(svabhāva) by the power of Śiva’s consciousness (citi.. Rājānaka Rāma says: “Homage

to Him Who paints the picture of the Three Worlds, thereby displaying in full evidence
His amazing genius (pratibhā); to Śambhu Who is beautiful with the hundreds of

appearances laid out by the brush of His own unique, subtle and pure energy°.”
Dyczkowski 1987: 107, SpKā vi p. 8.

³⁰⁵The word ‘artha’ has many meanings. The two relevant ones here are ‘thing’ and
‘reality’. The former would be appropriate with reference to mundane perception, and

the latter to the recognition of the same as a phase in the cyclic activity of the reflective
awareness of supreme consciousness. When the perceiver has known the object through
the activity of the senses, he rests, content that he has known it, and then moves on to

the next one. In daily life this a common, mostly insignificant, event. But from the point
of view of the self-reflective awareness of fundamental consciousness, it is momentous,
because what is perceived is not just some ‘thing’ – it is reality itself. This phase of
reflective awareness, represented by this Kālī, is thus also an act of knowing (which is
the second meaning of the root kal). However, unlike the previous one, which was

directed to the subtle ‘outer’ manifestation of consciousness within itself, it is now

directed inwardly, back to itself as the perceiver. The direct experience consciousness

has, free of thought constructs, of itself as its contents now gives way to the direct
experience of itself as the reality that experiences it. The shift from ‘outer’ to ‘innerʼ in
this way marks the submergence of the former as the latter emerges. Abhinava, it seems,

prefers to refer to this state of the ‘destruction of persistence’ rather than ‘withdrawalʼ,

because clearly nothing has been emitted outside consciousness that can be said to be

‘withdrawn’ or destroyed. Objectivity is a state of consciousness, not an independent
reality. It arises and falls away within it as phases of its Being.

³⁰⁰ The name of this Kālī is generally, as one would expect, Saṁhārakālī –- the Kālī of

Withdrawal.

³¹⁰ The Cidgaganacandrikā comments:
labdhasāmyapavanadvayāhrtaṁ vātacakram adhitasthuṣī śive |

nirgaṃmāgamamapojjhitāntare tvaṁ sthitaṁ grasasi hi sthitāmbike |

vyā śikhāntarahutāśanirgatā dhāmacakram avabhindatī kramāt |

212

CHAPTER FOUR

coming (of the exhalation and inhalation) of the wheels of the wind (of the vital

channels of the breath of the chariot of the body), that has yoked (svīkṛta) the
two horses (of exhalation and inhalation) set out (on its journey). She by Whose

(intense) brilliance, (Fire,) the Pure One,³¹¹ has set.¹³¹²

ūrdhvasomarasapānadīpiā sāpi devi kalaye bahīḥ sthitaḥ (
‘o Śivā, having withdrawn (and thus prepared) the two winds (of the breath)
that have attained a state of equality (and balance), You preside over the wheel of the
wind. O Mother! You abide within (the centre which neither) exits nor enters, and (there
You) devour (the breath). (225)

O Goddess, she who has come forth from the fire (that burns) within (the midst
(śikhā) progressively bursts apart the deployment of the Abodes (of
of its seven) flames
Sun, Moon and Fire) (dhāmacakra). Energized by drinking the juice of the Moon
(somarasa) (that flows from) above, O goddess, I contemplate (kalaye) (all this that
thus) abides externally.” (226)

⁵¹¹ The Pure One (śuci) is identified with Fire in the following line (quoted in ad
3/123ab-124ab (122-123), ad 5/73ab (5/72) and ad 29/150cd-153ab): ʻFire, the Pure
One (śuci), arises by the dynamic union of the Sun and Moon.’ This line is understood

to refer to the Fire of the perceiver or the upward moving breath of Kuṇḍalinī, that is

generated by rubbing together the exhaled and inhaled breath, or by the union of the
means and the object of knowledge.

⁵¹² ] understand this verse to be referring to the body as a chariot, which is a common
metaphor. The two wheels of this chariot are the breathing cycles (vātacakra) of the
exhaled and inhaled breath, symbolized by its two horses, that have been ‘assimilated’

or ‘appropriated’ (svīkṛta), that is, yoked to the chariot of the body. This Kālī rides on

the chariot which has set out on a journey to the sun, just as brave warriors were
believed to do when they died. The belief was that time and death are on this side of the

sun, whereas eternity and immortality are behind it. In this verse, it seems that Kālī is
praised for Her radiantly brilliant presence in the body, which is so intense that before it
the light of the sun of the objectively orientated means of knowledge seemingly sets. In

other words, in this state of withdrawal, the breaths unite and merge into the state of
higher consciousness which, from a worldly perspective, is death, but for the yogi it is a

higher life. In this perspective the ‘destruction of persistence’ marks the end of this

‘persisting³ worldly condition of bondage, with its ‘persistent’ cycles of birth and death,
epitomized by the cycles of the breath.
Swami Lakshmaṇjoo (KNP p. 26-29) confirms this interpretation. He writes:
‘the meaning is that that which is conjoined to the two streams of the pair of exhalation
(prāṇa) and inhalation (apāna) has ‘yokedʼ, that is subjugated to itself, the ‘wheel of the
windʼ, that is, the 72,000 channels of the breath (nāḍī). The ‘dynamic union’ʼ, that is,
junction (saṁdhi), of the entry and exit of the pair of inhaled and exhaled breaths,

namely, the coming and going of the breath in and out of the inner and outer End of the

Twelve, is the union of the pair of the object and means of knowledge, which takes
place on the plane of the subject. The goddess whose nature is the supreme perceiver

abidesin that junction. I bow to, thatis, penetrate into, that Goddess of Consciousness
called Sthitināśakālī, by whose brilliance the ‘fireʼ (ś
whichis the limited perceiver,

has set in its own essential (unlimited) nature. (Thisis the goddess) whois devoid of the

disturbance of the means and object of knowledge, that is, is devoid of the disturbance
of the exhaled and inhaled breath etc., and who is extremely tranquil in nature,

(consciousness) free of thought constructs. The venerable teacher Utpaladeva has

described this state in the following verse:

TANTRĀLOKA

213

So too in the venerable Pañcaśatika:

‘She is Haṁsinī" (the Gander of Unstruck Sound) and Paudgalī (the

Goddess of the Embodied Soul), Who is (subtle) like the hundredth part of the
tip of a hair. (She) is conceived (kalpate) to be in the body of all (living beings,
where She) brings about the persistence (sthiti) of creation. The Goddess Who
has arisen (thus), again merges just there (where She arises). O Maheśvara, God

of the gods, know Her to be Sthitikālī.³⁵⁴

Having described in this way the form of withdrawal in relation to the

object of knowledge, he says (the following,

to describe) the nature of the

inexplicable (anākhya) (with respect to objectivity).³¹³

4) Yamakālī– The Kālī of Restriction. The Inexplicable State of
Objectivity.

āāīsī #aīāā ṃḷ fāṁīāēd} aī |
vṝḡ ā̄̄aaēṀĩ ṀÃTĨĨ J̄Ĩ Ṁ̄ṢṀ T 2. 1
‘A certain (undefinable) Śiva’s Night, which is the Light of the expansion of

one’s own (inner) Light, where this Sun and Moon, along with all (the stars and the) rest
set, is victorious.” (SSt 4/22)

The meaning is that Śiva’s Night, in the form of the supreme otherworldly

perceiver, is victorious in that state in which the deity of the Sun, in the form of
exhalation, and the Moon, in the form of inhalation, along with all the stars in the form
of thought constructs, set, (and that Night) shines with the expansion of the Light which
is the bliss of the consciousness of one’s own nature. Here the word ‘Śiva’s Night’
indicates the goddess Sthitināśakālī.’

⁵¹³ Read with the MSs havsinī instead of hāsinī.

⁵t⁴ DP 5/25cd-27ab. In this case, the sequence has been changed by Jayaratha. He

chooses to reserve the DP’s description of Saṁhārakālī, the Kālī of Withdrawal, for the
following Kālī. The reason for this appears to be that this verse refers to the withdrawal
of persistence, which is how withdrawal is understood by Abhinavagupta, who follows,
apparently, the conception of this Kālī in the Kramastotra. However, all the Kālīs are, as
explained above, engaged in ‘devouring’, that is, withdrawing duality into the
inexplicable Void of the oneness of consciousness. Moreover, Jayaratha prefers to

reserve the Saṁhārakālī – the Kālī of Withdrawal – described in the DP for the
withdrawal of the phase of the means of knowledge into the Void of consciousness (see

below, comm. 4/152). He has room to juggle the sequential order of the Kālīs around
here in this way because Abhinavagupta omits Sukālī, which in the DP comes before

Yamakālī.

⁵l³ The inexplicable condition of objectivity is one of uncertainty concerning its nature,
and consequently what should be done or not. The inexplicable state of the means of

knowledge is the individual ego. The ego is considered to be an inner sense organ. It is
part of the network of the instruments of perception, and yet it operates as if it were the
subject. In other words, its condition and nature cannot be defined as either one or the
other. Finally, the inexplicable state of the subject is the pure, perfectly free awareness
of supreme consciousness, which cannot be defined specifically as a particular subject,
although it is the ultimate perceiver. See the note following the next one.

214

CHAPTER FOUR

tato 'pi saṁhārarase pūrṇe vighnakarīṁ svayam |
śaṅkāṁ yamātmikāṁ bhāge sūte saṁharate ‘pi ca || 151 1|
Then again, when the aesthetic savour (rasa) of the withdrawal (of
what has been emitted) is full (and relished completely, consciousness

spontaneously) by itself (svayam) generates³"⁶ in one aspect (of the reality it

has emitted) doubt (śaṅkā),⁹ which is the restriction (yama) (of thought
constructs

concerning

scriptural

injunctions

and

prohibitions)

that

obstructs (progress, whereas in the other aspect it) withdraws (it).⁵⁸ (151)

³¹⁶ The verb here is not derived from the root kal; nonetheless the process set into

operation here is the one to which Abhinava ascribes one of the meanings of this root,
namely, enumeration (sarīkhyāna). Whereas the previous two phases were activated by
‘knowledge’ (jñāna), which he defines as ‘abstaining from forming thought constructs
in relation to (this reality) differentiated in this way, ‘enumeration’ (saṁkhyāna) is (on
the contrary, the formation of) thought constructs, determined by the mutual exclusion

(of the subject and the many objects). See below, 4/174.

³¹¹ Concerning this doubt and its remedy, see below TĀ 12/I8ab-26ab, on the
‘Reduction of Doubt’ (kampahrāsa). Kampa literally means ‘tremblingʼ. It is the ‘angst’
that is the consequence of doubt and uncertainty.

³¹⁸ Swami Lakshmanjoo (KNP p. 29) explains: “‘Supreme consciousness in this state of
the Inexplicable is considered to have two aspects. One is extroverted and covers over

(ācchadana) its own essential nature. The other is introverted and reveals (unmīlana) its
own nature. Only a Śaiva yogi can experience these two states (together). When the yogi

experiences Sthitināśakālī, who is the supreme perceiver, after that state in which
duality in the form of exhalation and inhalation, that is, the means and object of
knowledge, is completely withdrawn into supreme consciousness and dissolves away,
then in that supreme state, if the yogi’s contemplation (anusaṁdhāna) of his own nature
becomes even slightly loose, the (illumined) state of the Inexplicable into which he has
entered reverses into its opposite, and he begins to enter Mahāmāyā, which covers over
(ācchadana) its own essential nature (as the Inexplicable). The confused state as to what

should be done and what not, which is the result of the yogi falling from the reflective

awareness of his own nature, and the ocean of doubts (he is now) immersed in, develops

into the extroverted (state, to which he becomes subject). But the opposite of that

(binding extroverted state arises) if the yogi remains alert in that state, and he does not
abandon the contemplation of his own nature, even slightly, in accord with the teaching
that ‘Bhairava is the upsurge (and exertion of consciousness)’ (ŚSū 1/5). In other words,
if he is firmly intent on the state (āspada) which is the exertion (udyantṛtā) (of
consciousness), then as he enters into that state of the Inexplicable he enters into the
contemplative absorption of expansion (vikāsasamādhi), which is the (direct) experience
of his own (true) nature (ṣvarūpaprathana). Īt is said with the same intention in the

Spandaśāstra:

‘Then in that great sky, when the Sun and Moon dissolve away, the dullminded (yogi is cast down) into a state like that of deep sleep; the awakened, however,
remains lucid.⁷ (SpKā 25)

The meaning is that in that state in which exhalation and inhalation, or the
means and the object of knowledge, in the form of the Sun and Moon, dissolve away

completely in the Sky of Consciousness, the deluded yogi, who even though such a
supreme state presents itself, lacking (the necessary one-pointed) contemplation of his

own nature, enters the state of deep sleep which is Mahāmāyā. However, the yogi who

TANTRĀLOKA

215

‘Then again’ after the dawning of the venerable Sthitināśakālī also,

when ‘the aesthetic savour (rasa)ʼ, which is the subjectivity of the (state of)
withdrawal that is such as has been described, is ‘full’ and has ascended onto

the supreme flow (of consciousness), that same consciousness assumes the

plane (and condition) (bhūmikā) of the limited subject. (In that state, it)

‘(spontaneously) by itself’,"⁰ by the glorious power of its own (innate)

freedom, restricts (yamayati) (consciousness) ‘in one aspect’, that is, the

extroverted one, (with the sense that) ‘this is to be done and this not’, and so
establishes (the limited perceiver in the domain of) the fixed (law of Karma)

(niyati). Thus ‘restriction’ (here means) thought (vikalpa). (Impelled and)

given life by that, this ‘doubt’ that constitutes the uncertainty which is the

bewilderment (one feels) because one does not know what to do, as the
scriptures (that should serve as guides) are endless (and inconsistent), and by
observing that there is distinction between what should be done and what not, or
even just the opposite (i.e. that what should not be done is to be done). Thus, in

accord with the saying: “‘one is subject to obstacles because of doubt³⁰

(śaṅkayā vignabhājanam), (doubt) ‘obstructs’ entry into one’s own essential
nature. (Consciousness) ‘generatesʼ that. (In other words,) it gives rise (to all
things) up to the domain of objectivity and within this second ‘aspect’, that is,

the introverted one, ‘withdraws’ (it), and shines radiantly in its own expanding
form as supreme consciousness, from which the domain (viṣaya) of injunctions
is well awake and is intent on (the practice of) the reflective awareness of his own

nature, entering that state, is forever free of the wheel of rebirth. This verse emphasises
that even though (the yogi) has reached this supreme state, it is possible for him to fall

again. Thuṣ, it is necessary for the yogi to be (intent on the practice of) the reflective
awareness of his own nature (at all times, and) not be devoid of it at any time.³

⁵³¹⁰ In the previous phase, objectivity is withdrawn into the pure subjectivity of
consciousness.

Merged

in

consciousness,

objectivity

dissolves

away

in

the

overwhelming, consuming wonder of its beauty. The experience of the beauty of things
is not in the things themselves. The sense of wonder we feel when we perceive a thing
of beauty and marvel at it is the hallmark of consciousness. The object becomes one

with the perceiver, and divested of objectivity, is unconditioned consciousness. The

flow of its inherent reflective awareness now fully directed only at itself relishes the
wonder of its aesthetic savour (rasa). This wonder, free of all thought constructs, is the

very life of consciousness. The object, devoid of it, is dead and inert. The process would
come to an end here, were it not that the means of knowledge – the mind, senses and
with them the ego – has still to be absorbed into consciousness. Until that happens, rest

within consciousness cannot be total, it can only last for a certain period of time.

Inevitably, consciousness will again form itself spontaneously into a limited subjectivity

set in relation to its object. Thus, the aesthetic delight of consciousness recedes, to be

replaced by enquiry, with its accompanying thought constructs. Even so, the essential,
unconditioned nature of consciousness, with its higher subjectivity, free of objective
referents, remains as the inner aspect of the outer extroverted activity directed at the
object which generates thought. Thus, vacillating from one to the other, namely, the
‘inexplicable’ which generates the thought constructs of doubt, and the Inexplicable

beyond all doubts, consciousness is constricted into a limited state of subjectivity. It is

thus overcome by the thought constructs and doubts that are the consequences of

Karma, to then be graced again by the vision of oneness that removes the doubts and
with it that limited subjectivity.

⁵*⁰ Below 12/24d.

216

CHAPTER FOUR

and prohibitions brought about by the contraction (of consciousness imposed)

by the fixed (law of Karma) (niyati) has fallen away. Thus, like the saying: “just

as the genitals of a mare pulsate when it urinatesʼ,³²¹ (consciousness is both)
contracted and expanded, and so (in this phase, it is inexplicable,) because, as it
has no fixed (niyata) form, it cannot be explained. As before, this implies that
She Who sets into operation (kalayantī) the restriction (of thought constructs

and doubt) (yama) is called (accordingly) Yamakālī. That is said in the
venerable Pañcaśatika:

“Yamakāḹī is said to be (the Kālī) within which the energy (kalā) that is
present in the essential nature of the restraint (of injunctions and prohibitions),

and in the essential nature (of reality which is) beyond form, dissolves away.’³²
So too in the Kramastotra:

⁵³"[ bow to the Kālī Who, out of passion for the joyful sport of the

Great (feast of) Consuming (mahāgrāsa) (all things), retracts (towards Herself

³²l Cf. below, 5/58cd-60ab. The fourth condition – the Inexplicable – in the domain of

objectivity has two aspects, both of which are ‘inexplicable’. The two aspects
correspond to the extroverted and introverted states of consciousness, which alternate
one after another as long as this state continues. The extroverted aspect is, as always, the
domain of thought constructs — vikalpa. All thought constructs arise out of doubt to

some degree. Indeed, one of the meanings of the word ‘vikalpa’ is ‘option’. In other
words, a vikalpa is an option or alternative. Doubt is essentially a vacillation between
alternatives. In this case, the alternatives concern the prohibitions and injunctions taught
in the scriptures. In one sense, we can take this to mean simply uncertainty concerning
whether what should be done, as morally and otherwise correct, and what should not.

But more concretely, in the ritual context, which is the dominant perspective in Indian
ethics, the doubt concerns the actual worship of the Kālīs. A primary example of this
would be the use of the sacrificial substances prescribed in the scriptures. These are the
so-called Kaula substances (kuladravya), namely, meat, alcohol and sexual fluids
produced by intercourse (see below, 12/12-25, concerning doubt and its removal). These

are so closely connected with the worship of the Kālīs, that the anonymous author of
one of the Mahānayaprakāśas relates each of the three groups of four Kālīs to one of
these three substances. Thus, the domain of objectivity is related to the offering of meat,
that of the means of knowledge to alcohol, and that of subjectivity to sexual fluids (MP
(2 Tri) 9/35-51ab, translated in note 29,232). We need not dwell on the actual ritual

procedure. What concerns these teachers is the contrast between the two domains of
consciousness, one engaged in generating thought constructs (‘alternativesʼ, ‘doubts*)

and the other, which is free of them. Both phases are the ‘inexplicable’. The former
because thought beset by doubt does not reach a conclusion and so cannot articulate a
final certain conclusion (niścaya). The latter simply because it is free of thought, and so,

beyond conceptualization, it cannot be ‘explained’. Jayaratha tells us indirectly by
quoting this verse, which elsewhere serves to describe Kramamudrā (see notes 4,427,

446 and 5,105), that in this phase, this is the yogi’s practice. When the attention of an
undeveloped yogi is tumed to the outer world, he is plunged into thought. When he

faces the opposite, inward direction, that is, the inner sphere of subjectivity, he is freed

from it. If he succeeds, by Śiva’s grace, to maintain the introverted, subjective state, and
thought concerning outer objectivity comes to an end, he moves on to the next phase,

that is, Saṁhārakāḹī, the Kālī of Withdrawal. This Kālī continues the process of
eradication of thought within the sphere of the means of knowledge, that is the mind and
its objects.

⁵²² DP 5/33. Read with the MSs rūpātītā for rūpātīta.

TANTRĀLOKA

217

and assimilates) (saṅkarṣayantī) the essential nature (vapus) of the subjugating
restriction (yama) that restrains the withdrawal of all things, in order to regulate

(and control) the universe (jagato yamāya).” ⁴

⁵²³ Sanderson (2005a: pp. 112 note) translates this verse as follows: ‘I bow to (that) Kālī

who in the passion of her desire to accomplish the great reabsorption retracts the power
(vapuḥ) of the tyrant inhibition (yamasya) who impedes total withdrawal
(sarvārthasaṁkarṣaṇasaṁyamasya) so diminishīng man’s (innate vitality) (jagato

yamāya).¹
The CGC says this about this Kālī:

etad amba sad idaṁ tu neti naḥ śaṅkayā hṛdi vikalpalakṣaṇaḥ |

yo yamaḥ sa khalu kãlyate tvayā bhūtasaṅyamanakelikovidaḥ |
amba kāryakaraṇe niyacchataḥ pūrṇacitpadamahotsavadviṣaḥ |
jambhitasya (jrmbhitasya) hṛdaye svaśaṅkayā tvaṁ yamasya vapuṣāsi bhīṣaṇā ||

‘O Mother! ‘this (reality) does not exist’ — such is the notion (vikalpa) that
ariṣes in our heart because of doubt. (Thus) Yama (the Lord of Judgement), skilled in

the game of restraining (all) living beings, operates due to You. (232)
One who is constrained to be (engaged) in producing the consequences (of his

Karma in the sphere of worldly activity) by his own doubt (that he harbours in his)
heart, is averse to the great festival which is the plane of full (and perfect)
consciousness. You, O Mother, are the frightening body of Yama (the Lord of
Judgement) who has unfolded (therein).” (233)

⁵²⁴ ] have translated the compound sarvārthasaṁkarṣaṇasaṅyamasya in this way. The

term ‘saṁkarṣaṇa’ literally means ‘dragging (along or towards something)³. The term is
commonly used in these texts (as it is in this verse) to denote the process whereby
phenomena are ‘draggedʼī towards and assimilated into the Goddess’s essential,
transcendental nature. Accordingly, the terms ‘saṅkarṣaṇa’ (= ‘drawing (together to
assimilate)²) and ‘saṅyama³ (restraint) should be read to denote two processes. Using

the terminology of the Tantrāloka, the former is the assimilation of manifest phenomena

into consciousness, and the latter their confinement or ‘restriction’ by the rules of
causality and the like imposed on them by their phenomenality as analysed by the

thought constructs that represent them. Abhinava quotes this verse in the PTv (p. 236)

(there
we
(find
the
synonymous
reading
mahāgrāsavilāsasaktaṁ
.for
mahāgrāsavilāsarāgāt). He does so in the context of explaining that one should not
harbour doubts about the use as an offering of Kaula sacrificial substances (kuladravya),
as outlined in the previous notes. He tells us there that he has discussed this matter in

detail in his commentary on the Kramastotra, the Kramakeli. He takes up the same
theme below in Chapter Twelve in a passage (verses 18cd-26) called ‘the elimination of
doubtʼ (kampahrāsa). Clearly, whatever else this verse refers to, this is what is primarily
meant to be the object of ‘doubtʼ in this case.
Sanderson (2005a pp. 112 note) refers to the PTv, where Abhinava quotes this

verse. He does so after quoting the Sarvācāra, that commends the initiate not to harbour
any doubts or be inhibited (as Sanderson puts it) in making Kaula offerings to the deity.

Thusṣ Abhinava says (Sanderson’s translation): “So it is that the venerable teachings of
the Trika ritual is essentially this: to offer worship without the restraints (of inhibition).”

We have noted that this Kālī, in terms of Abhinava’s exegesis, embodies the state of the

Inexplicable (Anākhyā) in the domain of objectivity. In this perspective, what is
specifically meant by ‘objectivity° here in the context of worship relates to the thought

constructs generated by doubts relating to the use of these substances. This state of Kālī
consciousness serves to purify the mind of them, and so qualify the practitioner to move
on to the subsequent states of consciousness in the ongoing process of withdrawal
embodied in the subsequent Kālīs.

218

CHAPTER FOUR

Thus, in this way, the group of four goddesses beginning with (the Kālī)
of Emanation, who delights in consuming (and assimilating into consciousness)
(grāsa) the objective aspect, has been described. Now (he goes on to) describe

the group of four goddesses beginning with (the Kālī) of Withdrawal, who are
skilled in consuming (bhakṣaṇa)³² the (four) aspects of the means of
knowledge.

The Four Kālīs Who Consume the Sphere of the Means of Knowledge
5) Saṁhārakālī – The Kāḹī of Withdrawal. The Emergence of the Means of
Knowledge.

šca ũīgḹ vīzāaīāāī
a1ī īaUGĠ |
Tūafti ñoūdā aāīāīāī fd@TTTIT_ II QU 1

Swami Lakshmanjoo makes no reference to this. Instead he focuses his
explanation on the cognitive state of consciousness in this phase (KNP p. 29-30):
‘Conceptual, differentiated perception (vikalpa) is the ‘restriction’ (which differentiates)
all phenomena such as ‘form’ and the rest by the process of mutual negation (apohana),
such that it regulates them, that is, fashions notions (vikalpa) (of them) in a fixed
determined (niyata) form of the sort: ‘this is a jar, not a cloth’. Or else one could say
(that consciousness) maintains a state of fixed limitation (niyatarūpatā). (In which case,

it) is the limited subject who regulates thought, the nature of which is ‘restriction’. The
goddess Kālī who is the supreme perceiver ‘draws’ (together) towards herself, that is,

manifests (within herself) in this way the essential nature of both (thought and the
thinker) in order to regulate the universe by the sport of the aesthetic delight (rasa) of

(Her innate) bliss, which is great ‘joyful sport’ and the ‘Great (feast of) Devouring’. I

bow to that Supreme Goddess Yamakālī, who reveals the aesthetic delight (rasa) of the
Great Devouring and the Great Sport. In other words, dissolving away embodied

subjectivity into Her, I enter into the essential nature of Parā.

The sense of this verse is that (this goddess operates in two complimentary
ways). In one way, the one Supreme Goddess (parādevī) assumeṣ an introverted state by
the power of her unimpeded freedom, and having done so, merges all the universe (of

phenomena), consisting of thought constructs which restrict etc., into the introverted
state. Thus, by the exuberance of the aesthetic relish of the Great Devouring, She

manifests the plane of the supreme perceiver. In the other way, by her own aesthetic
delight in play, she projects all phenomena, consisting of thought constructs and the

subject who forms them etc., into an outer form, and then enjoys the aesthetic savour of

the Great Sport, and as she does so, she unfolds the plane of the limited subject. She
who delights in the aesthetic savour of both types of play (vilāsa) is considered to be
Yamakālī.’

³²³ The word ‘bhakṣaṇa’ literally means ‘eating’. The Kālīs eat up the worlds and digest
them into their own essential nature. From this point of view, the universe is a mouthful

of food (grāsa) for them, and the ‘great eating’ (mahāgrāsa) of it, is what they are
engaged in. In other words, Abhinavagupta teaches that in Śāktopāya, the Twelve Kālīs
represent the phases of the process of assimilation of the duality represented and

generated by the formation of thought constructs into pure consciousness that is free of
them, and so is unconfined (‘restricted’) by them, and is a perfectly nondual direct
perception of reality which is its own divine nature.

TANTRĀLOKA

219

saṁhr̥tya śaṅkāṁ śaṅkyārthavarjaṁ vā bhāvamaṇḍale |
saṁhr̥tiṁ kalayaty eva svātmavahnau vilāpanāt |/ 152 ||
Once (this phase of) doubt has been withdrawn (into consciousness,
either completely) or with the exception of the object of doubt, (the
goddess) brings about the withdrawal (of all things) in the sphere of
(phenomenal) existence, in order to consume (them) (vilāpana) into the fire

of Her own nature.³⁶ (152)

‘Once (this phase of) doubt,’ that is, restriction (yama), ‘has been

withdrawn (into consciousness completely)ʼ, ‘or’ the locus of doubt, that is,
the objects of doubt, which are those things that (one is in doubt about whether
they) should be done or not, have been set aside, that is, withdrawn (along with
it), that supreme goddess of consciousness Herself, by (her) inner activity (and

state) (vṛrti), ‘in order to consume (them)’, that is, in order to make them one
with the fire of Her own nature, ‘brings about the withdrawal (of all things)’

in all ‘ṭhe sphere of (phenomenal) existence’”" Thus She is called
Saṁhārakālī, the Kālī of Withdrawal, in the venerable Pañcaśatika and

elsewhere, and is called by that name in the scriptures. This is the distant

⁵²⁰ Swami Lakshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 30-31): “The point of attaining (and

experiencing) this play (of consciousness) is that when the yogi is in the aforementioned
state of the Inexplicable (as Yamakālī), he experiences both forms, that is, the
concealment and unfolding of its own nature. Then, by his teacher’s grace, the yogi
begins to withdraw, root and all, the extroverted modality which is the concealment of
his own (true) nature. In other words, taking the introverted plane as his support, he
dissolves away this cycle of transmigratory existence into the fire of his own (true)
nature in a state of oneness. Then spontaneously, without effort, he enters the state of
emanation associated with the plane of the means of knowledge. Entering this state, the
extroverted modality which conceals his own nature does not arise again. Thus, that
yogi enters the state which is the withdrawal of phenomenal existence into the
consciousness of his (true) nature, beyond mind, and free of thought constructs. The
teacher Utpaladeva has described this state of withdrawal of phenomenal existence in

this verse of the Śivastotrāvali:

‘Phenomena perpetually manifest to me as dissolving away into You like
pieces of cloud in the sky, and entering the purity of the process (of pure
consciousness).” (ŚSt 6/7)
This state is said to be one of the withdrawal of phenomena (bhāvasaṁhāra),
because reaching this level (koṛi), the sphere of the object of knowledge
(prameyamaṇḍala) īs totally withdrawn (into consciousness), along with the doubts that

are the perception of relative distinctions (bhedaprathā) and notions of what needs to be
adopted and abandoned.⁷

⁵²⁷ The doubt and thought constructs of the previous state maintain the existence of

objectivity in that indefinable state. Now, with the emergence of the means of
knowledge, that doubt is overcome, and the object is more perfectly withdrawn into

consciousness. Thus, although this is the phase of emanation of the means of
knowledge, it is characterized as one of withdrawal with respect to objectivity.

220

CHAPTER FOUR

connection (with the statement in verse 148 above).³²*⁸ That is said there (in the
Pañcaśatika):
‘The fierce (caṇḍa) Kālī, Her colour pure (black), is intent on devouring

the nectar (of phenomena).³” (Called) Saṁhārakālikā, She is free of being and

nonbeing, Her nature is the withdrawal of all things and is where She dissolves

away. 5530

So too in the venerable Kramastotra:

³I bow to blissful Saṁhārakālī, Who, endless and containing all

things, is the Transmental (unmanī). She Who, perpetually active (satatoditā),
in order to dawn’” as (the Goddess) void (of all phenomena), closes in on

Herself (nimeṣam eti) the withdrawal of phenomenal existence.’ *³

⁵³⁴ Verse 148 above refers to the Kālī of Emanation. The order according to the DP

places this Kālī in the third place, and so forms a pair with the Kālī of Emanation in that
sphere. Even though Jayaratha has shifted her place to here, he refers to their original

connection, which because of this shift has become ‘distant’.
³²⁹ MSs Ch, Ṅ, and T read -grasanoditā – *arisen to devour (the nectar (of
phenomena))¹.
³³⁰ḌP 5/27cd-28.

³³! The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:

barhino ʻṇḍarasavad yad antare śābdataḥ prabhṛti citritāsanam |
arthapañcakam asau tvam unmanī sandhipārvapadakalpaghasmarī | 227 1
ātmabhāvam akhlasya jagmuṣī tvaṁ śive niravadhiḥ sadoditā |
bhāvasaṁhrtinimeṣavigrahā saṁhṛtaṁ kalayasi hy anāvṛtiḥ || 228 I
‘Like the juices of a peacock's egg, the five (gross) elements that (arise) from
Sound and the rest (of the five sensations) are the variegated seat within (You that

serves as the foundation of outer objectivity). That is You, the Transmental, the raging
fire that consumes the syllables preceded by their conjuction.* (227)

O Śivā, you who attain the essential nature of all things (as one with Yourself)

are endlessly ever active (sadoditā). Your form the withdrawal (nimeṣa) of the
withdrawal of phenomena, You who are unobscured (knowledge that) establishes what
has been withdrawn (as one with Your own nature).” (228)
*According to Raghunātha Miśra, who published the CGC and translated it
into Hindi, the syllables are the two that constitute SO ‘HAM, that are reduced to OM.

³³² MSs Ch and T read sadoditām abhyudayāya for sadoditā saty udayāya.
³³³ The Great Kaula goddesses – Kālī, Kubjikā and Tripurā, are all understood to be

essentially the energy of consciousness (cicchakti) called the Transmental.

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains this verse as follows (KNP p. 31): ‘The meaning

is that by withdrawing all the aforementioned thought constructs

(vikalpa), which are

(essentially) doubts, the consciousness of the Supreme Goddess is in the form of the

Transmental. Placing all things within her own nature, She is endless. The goddess

Kālikā, as a result of Her withdrawing the entire aggregate of phenomena
(bhāvamaṇḍala) into the fire of Her own nature, abides in the condition (sthiti) of the

withdrawal of phenomenal existence. Even though She takes the support of the plane of

the exertion (of consciousness) (udyantṛtāspada) by the arising of the form (of
consciousness) which is external expansion (bahiḥsphārarūpa), She is the Void (of

TANTRĀLOKA

221

How does (consciousness) here (in this case) operate (kalana) with
respect to the (phenomenal) entities that are in the process of being withdrawn?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

ftrorqīftrī
ā 7 vrrarē̄ṭī̄āṃcā |
TJJTId
-TNI TTṬ JGTTIĪR TRIT I 243 I
vilāpanātmikāṁ tāṁ ca bhāvasaṁhṛtim ātmani |
āmṛśaty eva yenaiṣā mayā grastam iti sphuret || 153 II
She (then) ponders within Herself on the withdrawal of (all
phenomenal) entities, and (also) that (this withdrawal) is (their)

consumption

(and

assimilation

into

Her

undivided

consciousness)

(vilāpanātmikā). (She does this) so that (the experience) may manifest

(within Her) that: “I have devoured (all this).” (153)

The withdrawal of (phenomenal) entities is the spontaneous (svayam)
generation of (their) condition of merger within consciousness. It is the
reflective awareness (of their) oneness within consciousness that rests on the

plane of the means of knowledge by the consumption (vilāpana) of (their)
external state. Thus, this consciousness (shines as) the radiant effulgence
(sphurattā) that (reflects), ‘I have made manifest (all) these phenomena at one
within myself’. (All outer things are withdrawn into consciousness this way) ‘so

that’ʼ, as is said, ‘(the experience) may manifest that: “I have devoured (all
this).” This is emanation of the state of consciousness in the form of the means
of knowledge, (which takes place so that) it may manifest coloured by each

particular entity (which is its object).³³⁴

(Now that) the nature of emanation associated with the means of

knowledge has been defined, he says (the following) in order to define the
nature of (its) persistence.

6) Mṛtyukālī – The Kālī of Death. The Persistence of the Means of
Knowledge.

geratṁtīāēzaī;Ṃ
āāāaāṁaāī ēṝ #tāī: 1
frēmṝ̄r vr̥g ahrrgtszaāīṁtaā
ú gṇux 1
saṁhāryopādhir etasyāḥ svasvabhāvo hi saṁvidaḥ |
consciousness). I bow to Saṁhārakālī, who, dense with bliss (ānandaghanā), is such.
The meaning of ‘bowing’ here is, as before, that of penetration (into Her nature).”

³³⁴ This is how I have translated the expression ‘saṁvidvilīnatotpādanātmā’, which
literally means ‘the coming about of (their) state of merger into consciousness’.
Jayaratha concisely explains why this withdrawal takes place, namely, to make room for
new possibilities. The previous state of doubt engaged the conditioned subjectivity in

the struggle to remove it. Now freed from the restriction of doubt, consciousness is open
to further development.

222

CHAPTER FOUR

nirūpādhini saṁśuddhe saṁvidrūpe ‘stam īyate || 154 ||
The innate nature (svasvabhāva) of this consciousness, conditioned
by what is to be withdrawn (saṅhārya) (into it), sets into the completely

pure, unconditioned conscious nature.³⁵ (154)

Even when that which is to be withdrawn has been withdrawn in this
way, ‘this consciousnessʼ, as the means of knowledge, is ‘deathī (mṛtyu),

because it withdraws all things. Its ‘imnate nature’, which is its own and in all
respects unique (to itself), is unconditioned (and undivided) by those things that
should be done and those not, which are to be withdrawn. So that that should
not attain (the stable state) of persistence without resting within the
consciousness which is the aspect corresponding to its own (essential nature), it
‘sets’, as if it were an object of knowledge (prameya), into the means of
knowledge that is ‘unconditioned’, that is, untainted by this or that (particular)
entity. Thus (it merges) into the ‘completely pure conscious nature’, which is
the perceiver. There itself, the coloured (manifest) form (raktirūpa) (of
consciousness) comes to rest in such a way that its state as the agent of
withdrawal is well established.³*® Thus, because consciousness in the form of
death also operates (kalana) in this way, it is everywhere declared to be
Mṛtyukālī, (which is a name the Goddess of Consciousness) has received in

accord with reality (arthataḥ).³⁷ That is said in the venerable Pañcaśatika:

⁵⁴⁵ Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains (KNP p. 32): “Although all objectivity has been

removed, root and all, by means of Saṁhārakālī described previously, even so, a

limiting adjunct (upādhi) of objectivity continues to exist in the form of a subtle latent

trace by means of which Samhārakālī

reflects on Her own nature that: ‘I have made

manifest these phenomena (arthajāta) at one within myself.’ The goddess of
consciousness merges into the essential nature of the supreme subject when she has also

purified herself of the limitation in the form of the latent trace of the reflective
awareness of the withdrawal of phenomena in this way. Then when this, the sixth
expansion of the goddess Supreme, takes place, she brings about the arising of
Mṛtyukālī. One may ask why this goddess is called Mṛtyukālī. The answer to this
question is that this (state of) consciousness (sarvitti) withdraws Saṁhārakālī also into
its own eṣsential nature. Thus, because this goddess also devours (kavalana) death in the
form of withdrawal (saṅhāra), she is called Mṛtyukālī.”

⁵³⁰ In this phase, the means of knowledge by which the nature of eternal, immortal

consciousness is known to itself as such becomes stable by resting firmly within itself as
the true, imperishable ‘knowerʼ. In this way the limited subject, immersed in the

ignorant pride of personal agency and ego that seeks to appropriate what it can for itself,

dies, and the outer objective world in relation to which he is the subject by his own

karma comes to an end. Thus killed by the insight into the true undying nature of

consciousness of its own nature and all things, individualized consciousness ceases, and
is replaced by the eternal subjectivity, at rest within itself.

³³⁷ Persistence is the ‘strengthened’, intensified state of emanation. As the means of
knowledge develops, the degree of withdrawal of objectivity develops with it. Here the

state is that of the agent of withdrawal. Previously it was just emergent withdrawal and

so is more definitive. This is because, as the Kramastotra explains, it also consumes the
ego of the individual subjectivity which appropriates the object, replacing it with the

subjectivity of the agent of withdrawal. Thus it is a kind of death.

TANTRĀLOKA

223

‘Thus She is³⁴⁸ the Mistress of Kula, Who descends (pātinī) inwardly at

the time of death. O Śiva, Arouser of the Daughter of the Mountains, (when)

Her energy, which is that of the Time of Death, penetrates the form (vigraha)
(of someone’s body),¹* she should then be known to be Mṛtyukālī (the Kālī of
Death).”³
So too in the venerable Kramastotra:

³⁴I-Ḵ bow to Mṛtyukālī, Who has arisen from timeless (eternity) — (She

Who is) the voracious consciousness that has consumed (grasta)³⁴² the death of
pride, haughty with the ecstasy of the expansion (visphāra) of the host of
energies of the ego (that reflects that “this is) mine”.³⁴³
⁵³⁸ Read, with the MSs of the DP, tena hy eṣā for om ity eṣā.

⁵⁴⁰ Read with the MSs of the DP yasya for yasyāḥ. This line is repeated two lines prior
to this one in the MSs. The second half reads praviśed dehamaṇḍale- ‘penetrates the

sphere of the bodyʼ.

³⁴⁰ DP 5/35cd-36.

³⁴! The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:
vittadāramukhabhogyagāminī yā mamety abhimatir madoddhatā |
yāpy ahañṅkṛtir anātmani sthitā mṛtyurūāpam ubhayaṅ tavāsanam || 234 ||
viśvam amba kuruṣe śavāsanaṁ mṛtyuṣecanam akhaṇḍitodayā |
cidvikalpamayam antarudyamaṁ kālamohitajagat trayam prati || 235 1|

‘The pretence, arrogant with the madness (of ignorance), that ‘this is mine’,

associated with the object of enjoyment that originates from material wealth and (one’s)

wife, and s0 too the ego that resides in (the body and all that is) not the Śelf, are both
Your seat, (O Mother), the form of which is death. (234)

O Mother! You make the universe into the corpse (which is Your) seat, and by

(Your) unbroken arising, (You) sprinkle (the consecration of) death on the three, that is,
the thought constructs of consciousness, the inner exertion (that projects outwards) and
the universe deluded by time.’ (235)

³⁴² ṛnstead of grasto yayā, MSs Ch, N, and T read: grasto yathā.

³⁴³ Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains (KNP p. 33-34): ‘The meaning is: “I have merged all

this sphere of the means of knowledge into my own nature.¹ The aggregate of ego which

extends in this way is the ‘ecstasy” in the form of the joy of (the Goddess’s) own nature
(svātmānanda). 1t is the consciousness which is ‘death’ associated with the most
excellent pride (utkṛṣṭagarva) that the goddess of consciousness has completely
consumed (all things). I bow to the goddess of consciousness who delights in that Great
Devouring and is free of the passage of time (kālakalanā).
As this (state of) consciousness is associated with (this) most excellent pride
(utkṛṣṭagarva), it is possible that a doubt may arise that full ‘I-ness” has been achieved,

which all the scriptures agree is the state to be attained (upādeya). So what is the point

of again withdrawing this consciousness, which is full (and perfect) ‘l-ness’? In
response to this doubt, it is said that in actual fact one cannot consider the state

described in the fifth expansion to be that of full ‘I-nessʼ, because in the state of
Saṁhārakālī a subtle state of objectivity in the form of a latent trace continues to exist.
This is why in this state (daśā) there is a radiant manifestation of the reflective
awareness that ‘I have dissolved away objectivity into subjectivity (ahaṁsvarūpa)’.

Whereas, on the contrary, there is no need to dissolve away anything into the essential

nature of full (and perfect) ‘I-ness’. (Anyway, this kind of reflective awareness is not
such). On the plane of full (and perfect) ‘I-ness’ (the form of) reflective awareness is ‘I

224

CHAPTER FOUR

Once having described in this way the nature of persistence in relation
to the means of knowledge, he (goes on to) talk (about) the nature of (its)

withdrawal also:

7) Rudrakālī – The Fierce Kālī.³⁴ The Withdrawal of the Means of

Knowledge.

fqītraṣī
raīī ahtraīa ca a |
TRJTTTT] TJT] TTÇṬÑHĒTGRTT-̄:
II ṞUU, I

JTRITTA]
āīsā āīzāīdt TGTTCT |

vilāpite ʻpi bhāvaughe kañcid bhāvaṁ tadaiva sā |

āśyānayed ya evāste śaṅkāsaṁskārarūpakaḥ l| 155 ||
śubhāśubhatayā so ʻyaṁ soṣyate phalasaṁpadam |

Although the flux of phenomena (bhāvaugha) has been consumed,

in that very moment (tadaiva) that (consciousness) condenses some part of

it (kaṁcid bhāvam). Thīs persists as a latent trace (saṁskāra) of doubt³⁵
which, according to whether it is auspicious or not, gives rise (at the
appropriate time) to its fruits.³⁴⁶ (155-156ab)
am everything’ (sarvam aham) and so all that exists is ‘I-ness’ʼ, which is the essential
nature (of all things). Thus, it is reasonable, and makes sense, that Mṛtyukālī should now

be described (and realised) in order to make the consciousness, which is I-ness

associated with limiting adjuncts, enter into the I-ness which is the essential nature (of
all things) and is free of limiting adjuncts. Praising this state, Utpaladeva uttered this

verse:

‘O Umeśa, entering into Your own nature, which is unfathomable, free of
thought, nondual and voraciously (consumes) all things, I always worship and praise

You.’ (ŚSt 13/20)

The consciousness of the yogi who is on the plane of the means of knowledge

and experiences this state of persistence (also) becomes voracious (in the same way). In

other words, he always wants to eat. Even after he has eaten all kinds of food, he

continues to be always hungry. I have seen yogis who have been in this state for some
time. When they are in it, they delight in eating everything, be it vegetables, curd or the
like.”

³⁴⁴ She is also called Bhadrakālī, the Auspicious Kālī. See below, 4,555.

³⁴³ Read śaṅkāsaṁskārarūpakaḥ for śaṅkā saṁskārarūpakaḥ.
³⁴⁶ Swami Lakshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 34): “Although the result of merging all
phenomena into the pure consciousness of the perceiver devoid of limiting adjuncts is
withdrawal, even so this supreme consciousness which has been realised (pratipādita)
by means of its own unobstructed power of freedom hundreds of times, after having

withdrawn phenomena, and repeatedly rendered some particular (niyata) thing into a
gross form (ghanībhūta), it again gives rise to the doubt of (its) existence (independent
of consciousness) (astitvaśaṁkā). This (doubt) is (the pernicious) latent trace which

results from the persistence of the tendency on the part of (individual) perceiver to fall

into the cycle of transmigration. However, although these kind of doubts, consisting of

TANTRĀLOKA

225

‘Although the flux of phenomena’, that is, the product (of
consciousness), has been withdrawn in this way by coming to rest in the
consciousness of the pure perceiver who is free of limiting adjuncts, having
previously consumed it, ‘that’ supreme consciousness ‘condenses a part of it’
with a fixed (determined and limited) form; that is, even though it has been

consumed, it gives rise to a dense (gross) state as the subtle manifestation of

duality (kathaṁcidbhedāvabhāsa). That which has been condensed (in this way)
is doubt, which continues to exist as a latent trace (saṁskāra). The meaning is

that it persists as the instrumental cause (nimitta) of (doubt), due to which the
subject cannot decide what is to be done and what not, in the endless scriptures
that teach (a large) variety of practices (ācāra). And so, in accord with the view

that ʻthat which considers what is not right conduct (dharma) to be right
conduct is enveloped in darkness’, whatever and however (an intention)
develops in the heart (of his consciousness), it gives rise to the corresponding

consequence in that way. Thus, when this latent trace, which is the instrumental
cause of doubt, and is the unbeneficial restraint (imposed by the law of Karma)

as to what is to be done and what not, is awake (and active), it will give rise to

the many consequences, auspicious and inauspicious, due to which (the beings

of) this world, as subject to heaven and hell, experience pleasure and pain.³⁴⁷
Surely (one may ask,) the subject who is in doubt in this way cannot

reach a decision about what is to be done and what not, and so (ends up) by not

following any (code of conduct) at all, so how does his (action) give rise to
consequences that are auspicious or inauspicious? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

latent traces (of past notions of the independent existence of things apart from
consciousness), arise in this state of withdrawal, which is associated with the means of
knowledge, even so, just as these doubts arise, they are spontaneously destroyed.
Bringing about in this way the division (bhedana) which is the production of latent
traces, and then dissolving (them away) (dravaṇa), which is the quelling of (these)

latent traces, Kālikā, the Great Goddess of Consciousness manifests her seventh
expansion. The Kramastotra etc. call this expansion Bhadrakālī. The meaning of the

word ‘Bhadrakālī’ is derived from the two syllables (of her name). ‘Bha’ stands for

‘bhedana’ – *dividing upʼ, that is, the play of many diverse forms and ‘dra’ stands for
‘dravaṇa’ that is, the act of dissolving away the many different expansions into her own

nature.’
³⁴⁷ ṣukhaduḥkhādibhoktrṛtām iyāt lit. ‘they go to the condition of being the enjoyer of
pleasure and pain etc.⁷ – that is, these fettered beings become the worldly perceivers

who experience the pleasure, pain and other consequences of their own actions. In the
previous state of the inexplicable with relation to objectivity, the reason for the
indefinable state of objectivity was because it is either not fully known or because it

escapes the domain of thought. Here, deprived of the means of knowledge due to its
withdrawal, the latent traces of doubt and uncertainty which had not been removed
condense into thought constructs, obscured by which individualized consciousness is
again unable to reach a sure and certain conclusion. But here too, there are two

possibilities. One is to get stuck in the countless possibilities suggested by thought. The

other is to dissolve them away in consciousness by the insight that they are neither

essential nor useful. If the doubts are overcome at this stage, much progress is made.

Latent, hidden traces of doubt come to the fore, and so can be directly confronted and

overcome.

226

CHAPTER FOUR

T fk ũrīcũarṣī’
ōīgzã szaiṀr̥2ã | 2 4 ũ
pūrvaṁ hi bhogāt paścād vā śaṅkeyaṁ vyavatiṣṭhate || 156 ||
This doubt arises either before or after*® an experience (bhoga)
(which is the consequence of Karma). (1S56cd)
Everybody here (in this world) is in doubt ‘before’ the experience of
pleasure or pain (that are consequences of their actions), because of the many
things the scripture (śruti) (teaches) should be done or not done, (thinking)

‘what is (the right code of conduct) I should follow?” According to the degree in

which their own latent traces (of doubt) are awake, some, in certain
circumstances, reach a decision (about how they should behave), and (so) by

following (a course of action), subject to its auspicious and inauspicious
consequences, experience pleasure and pain etc. (Thus,) after that, due to an

injurious blow of suffering and the like, a doubt arises (that) ‘surely I have been
doing what should not be done as to what should be done and so I am overcome
in this way by suffering’. Thus (conversely), what was done before, such as
taking recourse to a (good) Brahmin (who can perform the appropriate expiatory
rites), (can) also loosen (the hold of) this doubt at that very moment, so that it
cannot give rise to the auspicious and inauspicious fruit (normally) associated
with (one’s actions) due to the consequences of that (doubt).
He says that (in the following verse):

TaTYĀĪTTTHĪ
ēī āīāāfzzād |

IEÉūúllēarkG|P⁵r‘VIEGTAGEĀṬNEṈ
³⁴⁸ The text reads paścād vā *or after’. Jayaratha however comments on it as if it reads

paścāc ca’ ʻand after’. The edited text may well be corrupt, as the fifth syllable of this
line is long (guru), whereas the metre requires a short (laghu) syllable. This problem is
easily solved by imply altering the order of the words in this quarter to bhogāt pūrvaṁ
hi paścād vā. Although Jayaratha refers in general to the doubt that may arise before or

after spiritual practice, the Kaula context of the teachings concerning the Twelve Kālīs
cannot be ignored. Indeed, he may well have had it in mind, but did not wish to express
it directly. Kāḹī, so too the Trika goddesses, are worshipped by the offering of Kaula
substances (kuladravya). The main ones are wine, meat and sexual fluids. The offering

when made and received by the Deity, is returned to the worshipper for his (or her)

consumption as spiritual food that infuses spiritual energy into his consciousness. In
India, this practice, if it is not rejected outright or symbolically substituted, may well
occasion doubts in those engaged in it that they are handling impure substances and
hence are in danger of contracting it. This would be the case not only for orthodox
Vedic Brahmans, for whom a major part of their observance is centred on avoiding
impurity, it would also be so for dualist Śaivites, whose model of bondage is exactly one
of being sullied by Impurity (mala). This phase is marked by the withdrawal of the
means of knowledge, through which the true conscious nature of the Deity and the

offerings is rightly understood, and so doubts arise either before or after worship.
Abhinava takes this model to explain what is happening not in the course of the liturgy
(pūjākrama), but rather universally, in the dynamism of consciousness (saṁṅvitkrama) as

it unfolds, overcoming obstacles as it advances towards its original pristine state,
manifest in the twelfth phase.

TANTRĀLOKA

227

anyad āśyānitam api tadaiva drāvayed iyam |

prāyaścittādikarmabhyo brahmahatyādikarmavat || 157 ||
Although other things (apart from doubt may) have also condensed
(into thought constructs), they are dissolved away by that same
(consciousness) the very moment (tadaiva) (they arise), just as, for example,
(the great sin of) Brahminicide (is remedied) by the performance of the

appropriate rites of expiation (prāyaścitta). (157)

The limited perceiver (by himself) cannot bring about (or remedy this

negative) quality called doubt, (whether it be an intrinsic quality) of his own
(conditioned consciousness) or (of his) mind. Thus, he says:

fũẽEISĀṀCVITVÉTÉJĀETḺVrĀIĪ
rodhanād drāvaṇād rūpam itthaṁ kalayate citiḥ |
Consciousness (citi) operates in this way by condensing (and
blocking) (rodhana) as well as by dissolving away (drāvaṇa) the form (rūpa)

(of thought constructs still unformed).³ (158ab)

³⁴⁹ In his commentary (vivaraṇa) on the Parātrīśikā (p. 247), Abhinava explains how

consciousness operates in these two ways, alluding to a didactic etymology (nirvacana)
of the name ‘Rudra’, to which he clearly alludes here also. The ‘ru’ of the name ‘Rudra’
denotes ‘rodhana’ – ‘condensing’ (i.e. external blockage) and ‘dru³ drāvaṇa –

‘dissolving away°. However, in his translation of the PTv Jayadeva Singh (p. 229-231)

translates rodhana as ‘inward dissolution’ and drāvaṇa as ‘state of external expansion’ʼ.
Experiencing these two aspects of the activity of consciousness, the Yogi attains the
vision (darśana) of the Deity of consciousness. Abhinava writes:

‘In other words, the one who has this vision (darśana) is he who, by virtue of

the infinitely (powerful and) glorious freedom (of consciousness), has attained the

(transcendental) being (sattā) of Akula, which is the cessation of all the waves (of the

activity of consciousness), and possesses (perfect mastery of) the power of the will. This
same will, directed at the object of desire contained within it, assumes the nature of the

power of knowledge, which is the subtle manifestation of duality (bheda) (as yet)

unclearly (manifest). That power of knowledge is the external condensation (and
‘fixation’, ‘blockage’) (rodhana) of all the organs of sense, which are the particular
vibrations (of consciousness). This is the process of continuous going (sātatyagamana)
(of perceptions into outer consciousness, which thereby differentiates them). (Their)

dissolving away (drāvaṇa) is (the act of) devouring (and consuming them into inner

undifferentiated consciousness). These two (opposite) activities of vomiting (i.e.
condensing within external reality) and devouring belong to the (same) vision, because
it is one with the universal perception (of consciousness) (sarvaprathā) and because

perception (prathā) is associated with this kind of wonderful diversity (vaicitrya). (Even

in ordinary life, one can observe) that an entity whose nature has been ascertained
beyond all doubt (asaṁdigdham) (can) serve (when its nature was doubtful) as the
support of both uncertain (alternatives,) such as a man and a tree. In this way, the

Supreme Lord’s power consists of what is the most difficult to do.”

228

CHAPTER FOUR

Although something may exist as a latent (potential) trace (sarṁskāra) in
this way, this supreme consciousness which generates (kalayantī) ‘the form
(rūpa)

(of the

thought constructs

that

are

still

unformed)’

in

the

aforementioned manner ‘by condensing and dissolving it away’ is called

Rudrakālī in the venerable Kramasadbhāva.³⁰ This is the meaning. That is said

there:

‘All this (sarva) at the end of withdrawal is nothing at all (asarva),

perpetually setting (into consciousness), it is consumed inwardly by the line (of

energy) of the (powerful) look of (Kuṇḍalinī,) the Crooked One.³' Then,

penetrated by the aesthetic delight (rasa) of (awakened) consciousness, She

pulsates (with bliss), undisturbed, as She emits countless rays (of Light) and
drinks them up vehemently. She within Whom that energy merges is said to be
Rudrakālī.”
Again, she is called Bhadrakālī in the venerable Pañcaśatika and
elsewhere. But although the names are different, there is none at all in the reality
(they denote). (The names) in both cases are in consonance with the reality (they

denote), as ‘dissolving away” (drāvayer) what has been ‘condensed’ (ruddha) or

‘divided upʼ (and separated) (bhinna).³³² That is said there:

‘Present in (the reality) easily attained between the coming and going

(of the breath), She observes the Great Awakened Consciousness (mahābodha),

and free of the impurity of Māyā,³” She delights in the nectar of knowledge.

She is auspicious (bhadrā), and benefiting all the world, She bestows auspicious

(bhadra) bliss.³⁴ The energy that comes to rest there is known as Bhadrakālī.⁵⁹⁵

³⁴⁰ The following passage from the Kramasadbhāva cannot be traced in the surviving

fragments of the text, nor indeed can any of the other passages that are said to be quoted
from there. From the following introductory remarks to this passage, it appears that the

Kramasadbhāva also contained an account of the Kālīs. Moreover, we notice that in this
passage the manner in which the nature of this Kālī is defined accords with the style of
presentation found also in the DP.

⁵⁹! The expression ‘kuṭilekṣana-’ literally means ‘sidelong glancesʼ, but here kuṭilekṣana
is Kuṇḍalinī – the Coiled One, who is also occasionally called Kuṭilā – the Crooked One
– in the Tantras. See above, note 4,453.

⁵³¹ In the first case, we arrive at the name ‘udra’ from ‘condensed’ or ‘blocked’

(ruddha) and ‘dissolving away’ (drāvayet), and in the second ‘bhadra’ from ‘divided

upʼ (bhinna) and ‘dissolving away’ (drāvayeī).
⁵³³ The MSs of the DP read mahābala- ⁴great strength’ for māyāmala- ʻImpurity of
Maāyā’.

³³⁴ Read with the manuscripts of the DP bhadrā bhadrasukhapradā for rudrā
rudrasukhapradā.

³⁴⁵ Ṛead with the manuscripts of the DP, ‘bhadrakālī t’ for ‘rudrakālīī’. Noṭice that

bhadrā or bhadra replaces rudrā or rudra everywhere in these lines. As Jayaratha has

just noted that the name for this Kālī is also Bhadrā, it seems unlikely that Jayaratha
himself made these changes. One wonders whether this clearly intentional alteration is
the work of the editors or scribes of the manuscripts of the Tantrāloka and commentary.
If so, it was not uniformly done. Thus, MS Jh of the Tantrāloka reads bhadrakālīti for
rudrakālīti.

TANTRĀLOKA

229

As She dissolves away (dravaṇāt) duality (bheda), She is the auspicious one
(bhadrā) Who bestows the (most) auspicious (bhadra) accomplishment.³³⁶
So too in the venerable Kramastotra:
³⁵⁷¹ bow to the auspicious one, the auspicious Bhadrakālī, Who devours
the universe with the radiant flame of Her endless power, that moves with the
terrible knitting of Her eyebrows at the end of phenomenal existence, that
resembles the repose (between phases of creation) of a great aeon

(mahākalpa).’
⁵⁸

³³⁶ DP 5/37-38. The last line of the text is missing in the manuscripts that have been
recovered of the DP.

³³⁷ The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:
arthapañcakam idaṁ tvayā jagad bhadram amba gamitaṁ tavāntaram || 236 ||

vāsanā sthitimayī bhavāspadā tvaṁ niyojya krṛtaviśvasaṁhṛtā |

tvadbhruvā kuṭilayā śive kṣaṇāt saṁhrṛtaḥ khalu bhavaḥ savāsanaḥ || 237 ||

kurvatī janani sr̥ṣicitratāṁ yā kalā bhramati vedyamaṇḍale |
brūhi sā tava kalonmukhī yadā tvaṁ kriyotkuṭilayātty amūṁ tadā || 238 I|

‘O Mother! This universe consisting of the five objects (of sense) (artha) has
been placed within (Your heart) by You (who are) the ever-flowing Fire of

Consciousness by the path of all the energized senses, and (thereby made) auspicious

(bhadra). (236)
You (O Mother) are the latent trace which is stability once the universe has
been withdrawn, the location of phenomenal (fettered) existence, applied (there to the
fettered soul, it is thereby restrained). O Śivā, by Your eyebrows knitted (with a

wrathful gaze), phenomenal (fettered) existence is indeed withdrawn in a moment, along
with (every) trace (of it). (237)

O Mother, the energy (kalā) that wanders in the sphere of objectivity generates

the wonderful diversity of emanation. Pray tell – if she is intent on Your energy (kalā),
You then eat (all) this with (Your eyebrows) knit with (the energy of) action.’ (238)

³³⁸ A kalpa, according to Monier-William’s Sanskrit Dictionary, is ‘a fabulous period of

time, a day of Brahmā or one thousand Yugas, a period of four thousand, three hundred
and twenty millions of years of mortals, measuring the duration of the world; a month of

Brahmā is supposed to contain thirty such Kalpas; according to the MBh twelve months

of Brahmā constitute his year, and one hundred such years his lifetime; fifty years of
Brahmā’s are supposed to have elapsed, and we are now in the Śvetavārāhakalpa of the
fifty-first; at the end of a kalpa the world is annihilated; hence a kalpa īs said to be equal
to a kalpānta (the end of a kalpa); with Buddhists the kalpas are not of equal duration.”

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains this verse (KNP p. 35) as follows: ‘The cycle of

withdrawal associated with the means of knowledge is like the state of withdrawal at the

end of a Great Aeon. The words ‘universe’ and ‘flame’ in this verse denote these two
activities of Bhadrakālī, namely, ‘dividing’ (bhedana) and dissolving away (dravaṇa),
respectively. Doubt born of latent residual traces also arises in the state of the
Inexplicable on the plane of the object of knowledge, but there is a vast difference
between the plane (bhūmi) which is the location of the doubt (śaṁkāspada) there, and

the one related to Bhadrakālī. The doubts that arise in that state of Yamakālī are
destroyed by the effort of the individual soul. If (in that state) the adept is not constantly

attentive to exercise the exertion which is his contemplation (anusadhāna), through

230

CHAPTER FOUR

Not only is this reality, which is blocked (ruddha) by being in a
condensed state, dissolved away, but also that which has been dissolved is
blocked (by being condensed). Thus, he says:

fī] gIāāa ādāvaTTĀRJ I| QÚ¢ I

tad api drāvayed eva tad apy āśyānayed atha || 158 II

(Consciousness operates by condensing and dissolving away the

form of the thought constructs still unformed,) as well as dissolving away
and condensing (those formed already). (158cd)

Although (the form of consciousness engaged) here in this way is the
means of knowledge, it is the perceiver who withdraws each particular entity
(into consciousness) that is predominant, which is why the author prefers the
word ‘rudra’ (rather than ‘bhadra’ as the name of this Kālī).
Once having described the nature of withdrawal in relation to the means
of knowledge, in order to describe the nature of the inexplicable (state of the
means of knowledge), he says:
8) Mārtanḍakālī – The Kālī of the Sun. The Inexplicable state
of the Means of Knowledge.

zczṝ ũrāssfī āúr̥ afī āṝ |
ũ̄̄<ĪĪ āō⁷Ṭṛ ÇTGYTHTGHTHĪĪ I/ QUR 1
itthaṁ bhogye ‘pi saṁbhukte sati tatkaraṇāny api |
saṅṁharantĩ kalayate dvādaśaivāhamātmani || 159 ||
Once the object of enjoyment has also been enjoyed in this way,
(then) withdrawing the (sensorial) instruments of that (enjoyment) as well,
(consciousness) activates the twelve (senses) within the ego (ahamātman).⁵⁹
(159)
which they are destroyed, then, falling from his abiding state within his own nature
(svātmasthiti), he becomes extroverted (and does not look into his consciousness), just
as are other people subject to transmigration. However, the doubts that arise in this state

of Bhadrakālī are destroyed by themselves without the yogi making an effort (to do

that). Thuṣ, in order to stress this point, it is said that in this state of Bhadrakālī both
pulses of ‘division’ and ‘the melting away” of doubts arise together. From the point of

view of reality, the doubts a yogi has concerning what should and should not be done

continue to be obstacles until he reaches the plane of Sadāśiva (see below 12/20cd21ab).”

³⁴⁹ Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains (KNP p. 36-37): “Although the sphere of the object of
knowledge was dissolved away completely in the seventh expansion of the goddess, and
the twelve senses on the plane of the means of knowledge that give life to the aggregate
of objectivity are withdrawn, even so, without penetrating into their true foundation,
which is the ego, their subtle being continues to exist. Thus, in this expansion the
Supreme Goddess, whose nature is the supreme subject, sets aside by Her own freedom,

TANTRĀLOKA

231

When the object (artha) has also been withdrawn in this way into
consciousness, ‘withdrawing’ the twelve senses that differentiate (and discern)
it (paricchedakārin), ‘activates (them) within the ego’, that is, merges (and
dissolves them away) just there. This is the meaning.
Now, what are these twelve senses? How is it that they are instruments

(of knowledge and action)?²®’ With this doubt in mind, he says:

āgagṁzāī|
fē Jaṣāī gīdī-ē: |

RRTNRGTTṬTAĀTTTTI
fṜĪT THT JTIĪ I Ṟē⁰ I
karmabuddhyakṣavargo hi buddhyanto dvādaśātmakaḥ |
prakāśakatvāt sūryātmā bhinne vastuni jṛmbhate || 160 ||
The senses of knowledge and action up to the intellect are twelve. As
this group illumines (the realm of the objects of the senses), it has a solar
nature. (Its sphere of operation) extends (jrrībhate) throughout the
different things (of the world) (bhinne vastuni). (160)
(The group of twelve senses) ‘up to the intellect’, along with the mind

(manas), ‘has a solar nature’ because ‘it illumines’, that is, is the perception of
the object (arthālocana). Thus, in accord with the dictum that ‘the (wise) say

the plane of the limited subject and dissolves away these twelve senses, which are the
means (to perception) and are solar by nature. (She dissolves them away) into their
foundation, which is the plane of the ego, and so manifests her cosmic form in this, the
eighth expansion (which is that of the Inexplicable, in the sphere of the means of
knowledge).

The means of knowledge, as we said before, is the Sun, and so accordingly, as

the twelve suns in the form of the senses are withdrawn into the plane of the ego, this
(form of the Goddess of Consciousness) is called Mārtandakālī (i.e. the Kālī of the
(twelve) Suns), in the Kramastotra.³

³“ Ṭhe senses are of two types, inner and outer. The inner senses (antaḥkaraṇa) are 1)

the intellect (buddhi), that determines the nature of the objects perceived by the outer
senses. 2) The mind (mnanas), that coordinates and directs the input of the senses. 3) The

ego, that appropriates the sensations etc. perceived and discerned by the senses

as one’s

own. The outer senses are also of two kinds — those of knowledge and those of action.
The senses of knowledge (buddhīndriya) are the sense of smell (grāṇa – nose), taste
(rasanā – tongue), sight (cakṣus – eye), touch (wvak – skin) and hearing (śrotra – ear).
Those of action (karmendriya) are the hands, feet, speech, genitals and anus. The word
for senses is ‘karaṇa’, which literally means ‘instrument’, because they are indeed

instruments, by means of which the perceiver perceives inner mental objects and outer
physical ones, and the agent acts. The senses are thirteen. In this case the ego is not
counted amongst them, as it is where the other twelve merge. In other words, they are

realised to be aspects of it that emanate from it, like the twelve rays of the sun, to serve

as its instruments. In this context, ‘merger” into the ego denotes the recognition that it is
the individual perceiver who acts through and as the ego. Ultimately, this ego is

recognised, as Abhinava tells us further ahead, as the power of the Goddess of
Consciousness, who manifests as the Sun of the means of knowledge, that is, the senses.

Freed from thought constructs and objectivity related to the senses of the previous
phases, the means of knowledge is recognised to be that Inexplicable consciousness.”

232

CHAPTER FOUR

that the Sun is the means of knowledge’, (the senses collectively) constitute

the means of knowledge. This is the meaning. It is said that the means of
knowledge discerns (and differentiates) the diverse (bhimna) object of
knowledge, and so it is said that ‘it extends (jrrbhate) throughout the different
things (of the world)ʼ.
Surely (one may ask,) the ego is equally a part of the inner (mental)
organ, so how is it that it is said (here) that there are just twelve senses? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

³TagGaq āTTHTTTTGTTḤ |
īfāttzārcqamṝ
#rad a- a. 1. 282 1
ahaṅkāras tu karaṇam abhimānaikasādhanam |
avicchinnaparāmarśī līyate tena tatra saḥ || 161 ||

The ego, however, is only the instrument of self-arrogation,“² and is
(the perceiver who is engaged) in uninterrupted (self) reflective awareness
(parāmarśin). Thus (the group of twelve senses) merges there (into it). (161)

Again, the ego is ‘only the instrument of self-arrogation’ in the form

of “ḹ see, I hear”, and so, as uninterrupted (avicchinna) and not separate from

the perceiver, and because it does not assume a particular (form or quality,

regardless of the object of perception and the sense organ which perceives it), it
is the sense organ (karaṇa) that reflects on all things (equally). Thus, the group
of twelve kinds of senses merges there into the ego. The meaning is that it (all)

rests there alone.³³

Surely (one may ask,) even if there is no difference in their nature as
organs of sense, how does the group of senses, beginning with the intellect,
merge into the ego (and become a part of it)? He quells this doubt by presenting

(an appropriate) example.

zṝ fē āgrmaāīc:
#vīa faūfza: 1
aṛ³cfr aēzaī] ōaāāīgzā fā 1 2ē 1
yathā hi khaṅgapāśādeḥ karaṇasya vibhedinaḥ |
abhedini svahastādau layas tadvad ayaṁ vidhiḥ || 162 |I
This way of acting (vidhi) is as happens with (any) instrument, such
as a sword or a snare. (Although) it is separate from oneself, it merges, for

³¹ Above, 3/121c.

³⁶2 See below, 9/230.

³⁰³ The ego is always manifest in cognitions such as “T hear”, and “T see’. It is not

delimited by particulars, as it is equally present in the perception of anything. Moreover,

“I” is present in all subjects, and so is not relatively defined, but rather posits itself
absolutely as the basis of notions of relative distinction between things. The other senses
merge into the ego, in the sense that they are extensions of it.

TANTRĀLOKA

233

example, into one’s own hand, which is not separate (from the embodied
agent). (162)
Here (in this case, one could ask whether) an organ of sense (itself)

possesses the capacity to impel (to action) (preryatva) as a separate
(independent entity,) or not. If it does not, then the undesirable consequence
would be that nothing (would have that capacity to impel to action). Again, if it
does have the capacity to impel to action, (an organ of sense) would be the
resultant action (karman) of the impelling activity (preraṇakriyā) and not the
instrument (of it). There is no activity (kriyā) without an instrument (to
implement it); thus, there (in that case) also, there should be another instrument
(to implement that, and s0) thus that would (result in) an infinite regress. Just as

an instrument, like a sword, for example, which is separate from the (body and
senses), serves as an instrument by thinking that it is at one (abhedabhāvanā)
with the hand, which is not separate from the agent. Similarly, (the senses,)
including the intellect and the rest, (serve as instruments of knowledge and
action) because they merge into the ego, ‘which is not separate’ from the
perceiver, because they are in contact with the subjective aspect (ahamaṁśa),
and so it is rightly said that the intellect merges into the ego.
He brings that (discussion) to rest in the main point (being discussed).

fēṝēī ŪaāTāīdāīTṁh’cTdTSCTTIĀĪ
I| 2ē 1
tenendriyaughamārtaṇḍamaṇḍalaṁ kalayet svayam |
saṁviddevī svatantratvāt kalpite ‘haṁkṛtātmani || 163 ||
Thus, the Goddess of Consciousness (sarīviddevī) Who, because She
is free (in all respects), Herself operates (by Her own free will) the group of
senses that constitute the Circle of the Sun (mārtaṇḍamaṇḍala), within the
conceived (kalpita) ego (ahaṁkṛt).³² (163)
‘Thus’, by means of the aforementioned process, ‘the Goddess of
Consciousness Herself operatesʼ, by virtue of Her freedom, not by the

³⁰⁴ See below, 9/230-232. There are a number of words for the ‘ego’ in Sanskrit. The

most common is ‘ahaṁkāra’ which literally means ‘I am the doer’. Another, which is
the one used here, is ‘ahaṁkṛt which may literally mean ‘done by me’, and is the most

common understood literal meaning. Another, which is the way a Kashmiri Śaivite

would understand it is ‘made by the ‘I’. In other words, the individual ego, which is an
inner organ of sense, is thus understood to be a product, conceived by the self-reflective

awareness of universal consciousness, which experiences itself as ‘I am’ in the

immanent sphere of manifestation. See below, 9/230-232. Gnoli understands that the

‘created’ ego corresponds to Mārtaṇḍakālī, and the uncreated ego, which is the Goddess

of Consciousness, to Paramārkakālī, the Kālī of the Supreme Sun. But this does not

seem to be the way Jayaratha understands it. The sequence according to him is as noted
in the headings, which are thus shifted forward by one with respect to Gnoli’s
presentation.

234

CHAPTER FOUR

intervention of the limited perceiver etc.,® the Circle of the Sun of the twelve

senses, beginning with the intellect, ‘within the ego conceived’ by (Her)
intense application (and attention to) the body and the rest. (In other words, She)

makes them one with that, so that She is said to be Mārtaṇḍakālī – The Kālī of

the Sun – in the venerable Kramastotra etc. Thatis said there:

³⁶’-T bow constantly to Mārtaṇḍakālī Who (consumes) to the end the

(aesthetic) essence (rasa) of all things, She Who generates the Sun (mārtaṇḍa)

that has drunk up Wheel of the Sun (pataṅgacakra) to serve, like a moth

(pataṅga), as fuel for the energy of (the Fire of) Time.”³³

³⁶⁵³ T is the Goddess of Consciousness Herself that does this, not the limited subject.
³⁶ Now that the thought constructs that accompany the operation of the senses have
been dissolved away, the Goddess of Consciousness Herself shines as the true perceiver
and agent that generates and operates the senses. This then is the inexplicable state of
the means of knowledge beyond thought.
³⁶⁷ The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:

yo mrtāṇḍanibham arthapañcakaṁ prãṇinaḥ sphurati bhãmayo raviḥ |
£saṁhr̥tārdham anu antarāhitaṁ tad bahiḥ sṛjati cārthapañcakam || 241 II
+³saṁṅhatordhvanikarasmṛtāvadhir vyyaktam aṇḍatanur amba bhāsvaram |
kālalakṣaṇakalāpradīptaye tvaṁ hi viśvarasabhakṣam āṣṭhitā l 242 |
*Read saṁhṛtārtham for saṁhṛtārdham. ** Read saṁhṛto for saṁhato.
‘The group of five (gross elements that are the objects of sense) are (dead) like
a still-born foetus (mṛtāṇḍa). The Sun made of the Light (of consciousness) of the living

soul pulses (radiantly). After (outer) reality has been withdrawn and placed within, You
then (again) emanate that group of five externally. (241)

O Mother, after the mass (of phenomena) has been withdrawn, up (to the latent
trace of) recollection, and the body of the Egg is manifest and luminous, You abide,

(engaged in) devouring the essence of all things (viśvarasa), so as to energize the energy
characterized (lakṣaṇa) as Time.” (242)

³⁶* Swami Lakshmanjoo explains this verse as follows (KNP p. 37-38): “The meaning is

that, although objectivity (bhogyavarga) is dissolved away in the aforementioned
manner, the Goddess of the Universe, whose nature is supreme consciousness, thus

establishes the Sun (mārtaṇḍa), which is the subject in the form of the (limited

individual) ego, in such a way that within this subject all the Wheel of the Sun
(pataṅga), that is, the twelve senses, are brought to an end, like a moth (pataṅga) that,

with great enthusiasm, abandons its life in a burning flame. In order to dissolve the

senses into the plane of the ego, the limited subject called Kālāgnirudra, who will be
described further ahead, should be energized. I always praise this goddess Mārtaṇḍakālī,
who dissolves away the aesthetic savour of the objects of sense into her own nature, that
is to say, I reflect on her essential nature, night and day.
When the yogi who is in the wheel (of the cycle) of the means of knowledge
enters the state of the Inexplicable, he experiences that, by illuminating Mārtaṇḍakālī,
all his senses in the wheel of the means of knowledge, along with their latent traces are,

once they have arisen, again dissolved away by the power of Mārtaṇḍakālī, and having

consumed them in this way, she (continues to) abide constantly. Some unknown teacher
has said concerning this state, as he praises it:

TANTRĀLOKA

235

So too, in the venerable Pañcaśatika:
‘Beyond the plane of the Sound Absolute (Śabdabrahman), present at

the end of the nine (syllables of Kālr’s Vidyā), at the summit of the thirty-six

(principles), beyond (Maāyā, which is) the part that is the Egg of Brahmā
(brahmāṇḍa), She is Mārtaṇḍī, Whose form is imperishable. The energy that

merges within Her is called Mārtaṇḍī Kālikā.’⁵⁷⁰

Now that the group of four goddesses, who are skilled at consuming the

aspect (of consciousness) which is the means of knowledge, has been described

in this way, he now (goes on) to describe the group of four goddesses who are

skilled at relishing (carvaṇa)³” the subjective aspect.

The Four Kālīs Who Consume the Sphere of Subjectivity

9) Paramārkakālī – The Kālī of the Supreme Sun.³ The emanation of the
subject.

T Tā maṀēcaā: ÇṀũaiãraaT Ṃ|
RTTITTTATT
TiÑR JGTĀ TĒeT I /2E% I
sa eva paramādityaḥ pūrṇakalpas trayodaśaḥ |

karaṇatvāt prayāty eva kartari pralayaṁ sphuṭam || 164 ||
‘The supreme energy (of consciousness), perfectly pure, plays here (in the

Foremost Sacrifice) in its uniqueness. 1) Powerfully and all at once (rabhasat), (in the
beginning) it brings about the emergence of the wheel of the rays of the senses which, 2)
by the aesthetic delight (rasa) of supreme bliss, attains stability there (within it in the
middle). 3) Finally, here (too) it dissolves away by the destruction of limitation (bhara)
of supreme consciousness.’ (Quoted in comm. on TĀ 3/168ab (3/167))

The meaning is that when this state is reached, all the wheel of the twelve
senses arises with great enthusiasm and joy. After that, as a result of the intense internal

bliss attained there (in that state), this wheel finds rest in the radiant energy (tejas) of the

supreme goddess. Then, due to the unlimited light which is supreme knowledge (that
shines there), this wheel of the senses, along with their latent traces, also dissolves
away. In this state, the supreme energy (paramakalā), that is, Śiva’s energy (kalā),

which is the supreme subject, is seen to be playing alone by herself (ekākī).”
⁵⁴’ There are two forms of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī’ss Vidyā. One consists of seventeen syllables
and the other of nine. See the Appendix to Chapter Thirty concerning mantras.

⁵'⁰ DP 5/41-42ab.

⁵⁷l Read ~carvaṇacaturaṁ for -carvaṇācaturaṅ.
⁵”² According to Gnoli, this and the following verses up to 167 refer to Kālāgnirudrakālī.
The text does indeed refer to Kālāgnirudra, but Jayaratha understands this to be a name
of the limited ‘created’ perceiver, which is indeed what the text says, not the Kālī by this

name.

*The passage that begins here and ends with ‘he also explains the nature of persistence
(in relation to it)¹ has been shifted from the end of the commentary on 4/165-167 that

refer to Kāḷāgnirudrakālī. The citations concern Paramārkakālī and so clearly belong
here.

236

CHAPTER FOUR

This (ego) is indeed the Supreme Sun, the thirteenth (sense organ),
which is as if full (and complete, as is the authentic, uncreated ego). It
clḷearly merges into the agent because it is (its) instrument. (164)
When the twelve senses, beginning with the intellect, are withdrawn (in
this way) into the Supreme Sun, which is a name for this kind of ego, that same
thirteenth (sense organ) called the ego, which because it is intent on subjectivity
‘is as if full (and complete, as is the authentic, uncreated ego)³, ‘clearly

merges into the agent because it is (its) instrument’. The meaning is that it
atṭṭains a state of oneness with it. *As (it) operates (kalanār) (there) in this way,

it is called Paramārkakālī in the venerable Kramastotra and elsewhere. That is
said there:

⁵⁷⁸1 bow to that endless Paramārkakālī, (otherwise called) Bhargaśikhā

(the Sun Who is the Flame of Lord Śiva), within Whom the twelve suns (of the
senses) have risen and set, Who is like a flame (śikhā), the radiance (of which)

is extinguished in the peaceful abode (of pure consciousness).⁷³⁴
So too in the venerable Pañcaśatika:

‘O Śiva, You Whose body is adorned with ashes, the single solitary

energy (without a partner) (ekavīrā), Who is extremely subtle and (beyond it), is

devoid of the subtle, She Who is the supreme state of the Supreme Self,⁵ Her

nature both supreme (transcendence) and lower (immanence), She Who is the
⁵¹⁸ The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:
unmiṣannimiṣadarkabimbayānantayāmba paramārthamadhyataḥ |

agnimūrtir iha sṛjyate tvayā bhakṣyate ‘pi ca sakṛtprabhātayā || 239 ||
bharganāmna iha bhāraveḥ śikhā śaktir amba viṣayendhanonmukhī |

śāntidhāmajuṣi yāti nirvṛtiṁ tvayy asau khalu śivaikapāvake l/240 l1

‘O Mother, in the midst of ultimate reality, You who, endless, are the solar orb

(arkabimba) that opens and closes, emit the icon of Fire here (in this world), and so too
devour it by Your shining forth (just) once. (239)
O Mother, here (in this world), the power which is the flame (śikhā) of the Sun
of the Light (of consciousness) called Bharga (Śiva, the Sun) is intent on the fuel of the
objects of sense. It ceases (and attains contentment) within You, the Abode of Peace,

who alone purifies (and sanctifies) Śiva.’ (240)
⁵¹ Swami Lakshmaṇjoo explains (KNP p. 40-41): ‘The meaning is that, as the Supreme

Goddess, who is the goddess of the consciousness of the perceiver, is undisturbed by the
means and object of knowledge, she is completely tranquil. The twelve Suns in the form
of the senses that, rising and setting, dissolve away into their own essential nature,
assume its (natural state of) wonder (camatkāra). In the same way, the Supreme Sun
called the ego in the form of Bhargaśikhā, bringing its own radiant energy (tejas) to an
end in the supreme radiant energy (tejas) (of consciousness), enters into it. I praise the

goddess Paramārkakālī, who is the repository of this endless brilliance (dīpti). In other
words, dissolving away my own embodied etc. subjectivity, I penetrate into her own

essential nature.”

⁵¹³

PRead

with

the

paramãtmapadãvasthã.

manuscripts

of

the

DP

paramātmāparāvasthā

(for

TANTRĀLOKA

237

energy that merges there with the supreme nature should be known to be

Paramārkā (Kālī).”⁵”⁰

Now, having defined the nature of emanation in relation to the subject
in this way, he also explains the nature of persistence (in relation to it).
Surely (one may ask,) the agent is of two kinds, contracted and
uncontracted, so where (in which of the two) does that (ego) merge thus (and
dissolve away)? With this doubt in mind, he sa

10) Kālāgnirudrakālī – The Kālī of Rudra the Fire of Time.⁵” The
persistence of the subject.

Emiḻ] [ġ̄ā: ³Jīīḥ: hīcdīdāīēhḹcŪdīcHsh:

|

āṀfcāāī šājgītēāašēā
īā: 1| z, I

TGīrēzṣāī=a
Ūīḷḷ TŨṀ̄ |

āōḹ āafkōōāgāī
āra³īTṁ a JḶ: || £.ē. I|
TTRGTTTGjftrraī ŪṬē-TG ṬTTĪGT: |

TTFGTTSIĀTTTTTTGĒTĠTT I E.9

kartā ca dvividhaḥ proktaḥ kalpitākalpitātmakaḥ |
kalpito dehabuddhyādīvyavacchedena carcitaḥ || 165 I|
kālāgniruḍrasa
a śāstreṣu paribhāṣitā |
kālo vyavacchit tadyukto vahnir bhoktā yataḥ smṛtaḥ l| 166 |I
saṁsārākḷrptikḷṛptibhyāṁ rodhanād drāvaṇāt prabhuḥ |
anivṛttapaśūbhāvas tatrāhaṁkṛt pralīyate || 167 |I
Again, the agent is said to be of two kinds, namely, created (kalpita)
and uncreated (akalpita). The created (agent) is covered over (carcita) by
the body, intellect and the rest. (The meaning of) his name – Kālāgnirudra

(the Rudra of the Fire of Time) – is explained in the scriptures. (He is called

this) because it is said that time sets limitations, while the Fire associated

with it is the enjoying subject (bhoktr). (He is called Rudra because) by

blocking

(condensing)

(rodhana)

and

dissolving

away

(drāvaṇa)

(phenomenal, conditioned forms), he assembles and dismantles the world of
transmigratory existence (saṁsāra), and so is the Lord (who, freely
assuming the nature of the individual soul,) has not rid (Himself) of the

`⁷⁶ DP 5/39-40. Read with the manuscripts of the DP sā kālī for sā kalā.
⁵⁷ According to Gnoli, this and the following verse describe Mahākālakālī, which is
indeed what the text appears to be saying. However, Jayaratha does not explain it in that
way, preferring instead to identify the Kālī here as Kālāgnirudrakālī, as he has

understood the reference to Kālāgnirudra in the previous verses as being just to the

limited perceiver, who is named this way there. Swami Lakshmanjoo, as we have seen,
agrees with Jayaratha.

238

CHAPTER FOUR

fettered state. It is there (in this agent) that the ego dissolves away.” (165167)

The ‘created (kalpita)’ perceiver possesses a body, intellect and the

rest that differentiate it (and separate it from the objective world). Why is (the
perceiver) called (Rudra of the Fire of Time) here when engaged (in daily life)?
With this question in mind, he says: ‘time’ and so on. (Time) ‘sets limitations’.

It is (itself) a limitation (vyavaccheda).³⁰ The (worldly) enjoying subject,

subject to the limitation which is time, is Fire. He blocks to some degree
because no latent trace of (some) past enjoyment has awakened, (and so he
thinks,) “may that not happen to me”, and by (its) awakening, he dissolves
(limitation

away)

to

some

degree,

that

is,

he

makes

himself

one

³⁷⁸ Swami Lakshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 340): “After all the twelve solar senses have
completely dissolved away in the essential nature of the Supreme Sun, which is the
thirteenth (sense) called ego, it becomes totally intent on the state of the subject, and so

its form is fashioned along with the consciousness of the perceiver. In this connection,
the supreme goddess of consciousness manifests the goddess Paramārkakālī, in order to

dissolve away her consciousness as the limited perceiver, which is that of the Supreme
Sun (paramārka) called ego. In this expansion, the radiant state of the limited perceiver
previously described (whose other name is also Paramārkakālī) should not be mistaken
in this state for the state of the limited perceiver, which is common to all people on the

plane of transmigration, and is conditioned by the limiting adjunct of the objects of
sense. It is true that in this state, the fettered state (pasśubhāva) is also present as an
aspect (aṁśāṁśikārūpa); even so, this state (daśā) of the limited perceiver and that
(commonly) associated with the individual soul are extremely different. In the state of

the limited perceiver discussed here, the limiting adjunct of the senses and their objects
are not present at all, even as latent traces. Only the light of the perceiver, devoid of the
limiting adjuncts of the senses, shines (here) in a state free of thought constructs.

With this in mind, the teacher Abhinavagupta, referring to the consciousness of
the limited subject in this state (koṭi) as Kālāgnirudra, has described him (in this way in
these verses, in which) the Master says that the scriptures have called this perceiver

Kālāgnirudra. This is because he is associated with the conditioning division

(vyavaccheda) of time as ‘present’ or ‘past’, and is considered to be Fire, that is, the
worldly enjoyer (bhoktr). (Again,) he is considered to be Rudra, because he emanates
and withdraws the world of transmigration by ‘condensing’ (rodhana) and ‘dissolving’
it away (dravaṇa). As he is capable of doing all (this), he is the Lord. Even though (this
perceiver) is so much (advanced), the fettered state (paśubhāva) has not ceased (within
him) in all respects. It is within this subject-consciousness called Kālāgnirudra that the
Supreme Sun in the form of the ego dissolves away.”

⁵⁷⁰

have translated the word ‘kalpita’ as ‘created’, which is not wrong, but a more

literally accurate translation would be ‘conceived’, in the sense of ‘imaginedʼ. In other
words, the conditioned individual subject and its activity are, from one point of view, a
product of thought constructs. But they are not for that reason unreal, that is, just
mistaken notions, as the Buddhists maintain. The power of the imagination through
which it is created and acts is derived from the power of Lord Śiva’s freedom, and so is
a real creation derived from ignorance of its own true Śiva nature that Śiva Himself

freely takes on Himself to assume this form.
³⁴⁰ The word vyavaccheda, translated here, as is commonly done, as ‘limitation’,
literally means a ‘break’, ‘separation’ or ‘interruption’, it is a ‘cutting oneself off from’.

At the daily mundane level, this is what time does, it ‘separates⁷ and ‘cuts off’ one
moment from the next, interrupting the continuity of a timeless uninterrupted,
unconditioned present.

TANTRĀLOKA
(svātamasātkaroti)

with

(that

worldly)

enjoyment.

239
Thus,

(he

is

called)

‘Rudra’⁴" Therefore, as he is intent on the object of (worldly) enjoyment, he is

‘the Lord (who, freely assuming the nature of the individual soul,) has not

rid (Himself) of the fettered state.’ The meaning is that he is associated with

the impurity of individuality (āṇavamala), which consists of the (continuous)
unfolding of craving (abhilāṣa).³² (The ego dissolves away) ‘there’ in the

contracted subject called Rudra of the Fire of Time, that is, in the limited subject

called Rudra of the Fire of Time of the Supreme Sun (paramārka), which is a

name for this kind of ego.³⁸³

aīsfīq ftāṁāīṁraṁṣar³cēaātc5f=
ftz-rTat nēṭēīv raṁṣērṁcad1 2ē¢ 1
so ʻpi kalpitavṛtitvād viśvābhedaikaśālini |

vikāsini mahākāle līyate ʻham idaṁmaye || 168 II

The functions of this (subject) are created (kalpita) (and
conditioned), and so merge into the ‘Great Tīme’ (mahākāla), which,
(perpetually) expanding, is the sole abode of the oneness of all things
(viśvābheda), consisting of (the awareness that) “I am this (universe)”.⁵

(168)

³⁴! For the etymology of the name Rudra as rodhana – ‘blocking’ and dravaṇa –

dissolving away, see above note 4,549.

⁵Ṁ³ Concerning the nature of āṇavamala as the fundamental impurity of the individual
soul, which is its basic ignorance (akhyāti) of its true Śiva nature, as craving for worldly
experience (bhoga), see notes 1,352 and 1,1024.

³ The twelve senses first dissolve into the ego (ahaṁkāra), which is the thirteenth

sense, and then this dissolves into the limited, individual subject called Rudra of the Fire
of Time, who is Śiva operating on the level of the individual soul, where He generates

and withdraws the world fashioned for it to enjoy and suffer the consequences of its
Karma. This phase of consciousness corresponds to the emission of subjectivity, which
here in this initial phase is the limited subjectivity of the individual soul. This is the

ground and agent of the senses, including the ego, which are its instruments. When the

ego is withdrawn into this subjectivity, it is clearly experienced as grounded and

essentially identical with the unlimited subjectivity of immanent Śiva consciousness,
that has freely assumed a limited form. Note that in this phase, it is not thought so much
that is ‘condensed³ and ‘dissolved away’, as it was in the previous phase of Rudrakālī;
rather, it is the ego as the individual subjectivity which is the ‘enjoyer’ of worldly
experience. This arises due to its previous Karma, but more fundamentally because the

Lord has chosen to assume the condition of the limited perceiver due to operation of this
basic Impurity, namely, craving for worldly experience.
The next step is the recognition that however ‘contracted’, consciousness
remains pure, and is the essential nature of all things. Thus, the individual soul now

experiences that everything is essentially his own nature. This takes place when the next

Kālī dawns.
³⁴⁴ Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains (KNP p. 41-42): “When the created (kalpita) perceiver
called Kālāgnirudra consumes the twelve Suns in the form of the senses, along with the

Supreme Sun called the ego, into his own radiant energy, the perceiver, by virtue of his
own (innate) freedom, begins to make his own limited condition (parimitatā) enter into

240

CHAPTER FOUR
Once (this) ego has been consumed in this way, one should contemplate

the created (kalpita) (conditioned) subject who consumes it, called the Rudra of
the Fire of Time, also as a morsel (grāsena) (consumed by consciousness). He

too is a created subject (conceived by the activity of the mind), and because he

is created, he merges ‘into the ‘Great Time’, which is, as stated before, ‘Time,
which is Bhairava, emits the universe, beginning with (Śiva, its universal)

cause, up to (a tiny) insect.”⁴⁸⁹ (Moreover, it is the ‘Great Time’,) ‘which is the
(awareness that) ‘I am this (universe)’, and so because objectivity rests in
subjectivity, ‘it is the sole abode of the oneness of all things (viśvābheda)’,
and so ‘(perpetually) expanding’. (In other words, the created, conceived
subjectivity) rests in the supreme, uncreated subject, who is the reflective
awareness of full (and all-encompassing) ‘’ (consciousness) (pūrṇāhaṁ-

vimarśa).⁰* Thuṣ this (state of consciousness) is called Kālāgnirudrakālī in the
venerable Pañcaśatika and elsewhere, because it (arises) by the operation
(kalana) in this way of the Rudra of the Fire of Time, who is the limited subject.
As is said there:

‘The bestower of boons, her form all things, transcending the qualities

(of Nature), she is the supreme energy (kalā). ŚSoundless, she is Unstruck Sound

(asvarārāvā), engaged in consuming the Fire of Time.³” Free of disease and
the unlimited condition, which is ‘I-nessʼ. In this connection, that created perceiver in

the form of Kālāgnirudra, associated (yukta) with the endless expansion made beautiful
solely with the diversity of all things (viśvabheda), having become the supreme

perceiver, dense with the reflective awareness of full ‘I-nessʼ, merges permanently into

Mahākālī. Thus, this state is considered to be the supreme place of worship of the
goddess Kālikā, who is the mother of the universe. It is also said (in the scriptures):
‘Time in the form of Bhairava emits the universe from (Brahmā, the first)

cause, up to a tiny louse, by the will of (the goddess). O mother of the world, You who
are she, are victorious.”
The meaning is that the power which is the supreme goddess of consciousness,
who by her unfettered freedom creates all the universe from Brahmā, the supreme lord

Bhairava, up to a tiny louse, is You, mother of the universe, whose nature it is to be
victorious (and excel over all). The sense is that when the yogi attains the location of the
radiant energy (of consciousness) (tejas), which is the supreme perceiver, he attains the

plane of the agency of the five cosmic functions. The sense is that just as Supreme Śiva

delights by his very nature when operating the five cosmic functions, in the same way,
the yogi who has attained that state is intent on bringing about the five cosmic functions.

One may ask way this name Kālāgnirudra has been given (to the goddess of

consciousness in this expansion)? The answer is that once having attained this state
(koṭi), the limited perceiver called Kālāgnirudra also merges into the consciousness of
the supreme perceiver.”

³⁴⁵ Kālikāstotra v. 6ab. See above, TĀv ad 3/234, where the whole verse is quoted. See

note there. This line is also quoted in TĀv ad 4/173ab.

⁵⁴⁶ Oṇe could also translate ‘full (all encompassing, immanent) self-reflective
awareness.’

⁵³⁷ Instead of -grasanodyatā engaged in consuming’ MSs Ñ and T read -grasanoditā –
‘arisen to consume’.

TANTRĀLOKA

241

formless, O (Lord) praised by the gods, She Who clearly comes to rest within

her should be known to be Kālāgnirudrakālī.’³⁸
So too in the venerable Kramastotra:

⁵³³⁰-Ḻ bow to Kālāgnirudrakālī, within Whom the Rudra of the Fire of

Time dissolves away, the fierce one Who is the aggregate (kalāpa) of (the
energies) of the inner fire that has embraced (and absorbed into itself) the Wheel

of the Sun, pervaded by the procession of time.³³⁰

`** DP 5/42cd-44ab.

³*⁹ The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:

bhūtacakramadhukośasambhr̥taṁ tattadarthamadhu pātum utsukaḥ |

yan marīciviṣayaḥ sabhāskaras tvadrucau śalabhavat pralīyate || 243 |

prāṇa eṣa yamakāla ucyate madhyavāhatanur agnim amba yaḥ |
rudram etad upanīya khaṁ paraṁ tatra sargavimukhaṁ karoṣy amum || 244 |

‘Eager to drink the honey of each thing contained in the honeycomb of the

assembly of living beings (bhūtacakra) (and so absorb them), the field of the rays (of
the senses) along with the Sun dissolves away in Your radiance (ruci) like a moth (in a

flame). (243)
This vital breath is said to be (the measure of) the time of death. O Mother, its
body the stream (of the breath) in the centre, drawing Fire who is Rudra close to the
Supreme Sky, You make it averse there to creation (sarga). (244)
tvatkramopahatabhānumaṇḍalaḥ krodha eṣa layavahnir uddhataḥ |
viśvabhakṣaṇarasā marīcayo yasya bhīmavibhavās tvayāhṛtāḥ || 245 ||
grāhyam atra purato haranti te yat pṛthaggrahaṇam apy amuṁ tataḥ |

grāhakāṁś ca varade marīcayaḥ tās tvadarpitajagadvijrmbhaṇāḥ l| 246 ||
This Anger is the rising Fire of Dissolution, the solar orb covered over
(upahata) with Your Krama. Its rays (saturated) with the juice of the devouring of all
things, their glorious power (most) terrible, are withdrawn by You (into Yourself). (245)
O bestower of boons, these rays are the expansions of the universe that has
been offered to You. Here, first of all, they steal away Your object of perception, and

also this (their) individual perception and then (its) perceivers.” (246)
%⁰ Silburn translates: “The terrifying fire of destructive time has inflamed and devoured

the quiver of fiery arrows (agnikalāpa) within the form of the solar wheel by
surmounting temporal succession ~ she in whom it dissolves, I celebrate her as the

reabsorbing energy of temporal fire!”

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 42): “The one called Kālāgnirudra,
whose consciousness is the created (kalpita) perceiver, has withdrawn into the fire of his
own nature the sphere of the means of knowledge consisting of the twelve Suns, which
is pervaded by time that conditions (the limited perceiver) and is pervaded by the five
cosmic functions of emanation and the rest. ḹ praise the goddess Kālāgnirudrakālī, that

is, I dissolve away the ‘I-ness⁷ present in all that is not the Self, namely, the body, vital

breath, and subtle body etc., into the supreme radiant energy. Kālāgnirudrakālī destroys
the perceiver called Kālāgnirudra, who possesses (that) supreme radiant energy. He
possesses the frightening mass of energy that arises by dissolving away the sphere of the

means of knowledge into himself. This is the goddess Kālī in the form of the limited
perceiver who has merged into the Supreme Kālī.”

242

CHAPTER FOUR
Now, having defined in this way the nature of persistence in relation to

the subject, he explains the nature of withdrawal:

11) Mahākālakālī – The Kalī of the Great Time.⁵¹ The withdrawal of the
subject.

GGIE ḶIĒE||ĒTĀEĒḺAFĀĒA
rf r̄āhcrzāTī āfṀTrzavũad 1 2

1

⁵kẼẽ³ẽaĩũiẽẼũẽẽṭũḷĩḤ
fxrrīfṝ dftāfīzēg at= Ġ#r u z'0 1
etasyāṁ svātmasaṁvittāv idaṁ sarvam ahaṁ vibhuḥ |
iti pravikasadrūpã saṁvittir avabhãsate || 169 ||
tato ʻntaḥ sthitasarvātmabhāvabhogoparāgiṇī|
paripūrṇāpi saṁvittir akule dhāmni līyate || 170 |I
(Then) within this, its own self-consciousness (svātmasaṁvitti), an

expanding form of consciousness (saṁvitti) manifests that “I, the AIlpervading Lord, am all this.” Then consciousness, coloured by the

enjoyment of the universal nature of everything (sarvātmabhāva) present
within (it), is completely full (and all-encompassing). Even so, it dissolves

away into the abode of (transcendent)³² Akuḻa.³”³ (169-170)

³⁹! According to Gnoli, only verse 170 describes Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakāḹī, and he

reads verse 169 along with 168 as a description of Mahākālakālī. Jayaratha takes the
following lines from 171 to 173ab as referring to the last Kālī. Lilian Silburn follows
Jayaratha’s presentation of the sequence of these Kālīs, which may not be correct.

⁵”² See above, 3/66ab-66cd (3/66cd-67ab), conceming Akula, that is, transcendental
Siva, in relation to Kula, immanent Śakti.
³⁹³ Swami Lakshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 42): This is the expansion of the Supreme
Goddess Kālī (parākālī) within the Wheel of Withdrawal on the plane of the perceiver.
In the tenth expansion, the pervasive Supreme Goddess shines as everything in all things
(sarvasarvarūpatā), She is endowed with the wonder which is full ‘I-ness’ that shines

everywhere within the consciousness of one’s own nature, which is the supreme
perceiver. When the yogi enters this state, he himself (spontaneously) experiences the

condition (sthiti) which is Bhairava that consumes all things (alaṁgrāsa). In this state,
all phenomena (bhāvavarga) come to a rest (praśamana) without any residual trace.
Thuṣ, the result is that (the yogi) becomes capable of perceiving the consciousness of
his own nature, which is completely full in all respects. However, Mahākālī, who abides
on this plane of the supreme perceiver, craves to enter into the abode of Akula (i.e.

Bhairava), which is Her own essential nature, and so this Supreme Goddess gives rise to

this eleventh expansion. When the yogi attains this state, he transcends time, and as he
does so0, mounts onto the plane called Samanā (the Equal One) (see Appendix A to

Chapter One), and so becomes permanently unaffected by (the passage of) time
(akālakalita).

Having arrived onto this plane of Samanā (the Equal One), time abides in a

state of equality (sāmya). In other words, having arrived here, time, having completely
consumed its being, abides (as nought). The sense is that when the yogi attains this state,

TANTRĀLOKA

243

When the limited subject, in the form of the Rudra of the Fire of Time,

has been consumed in this way, one should contemplate the Great Time, that is,
the supreme subject, who is completely full (and all-encompassing) ‘I-ness’
(ahaṁbhāva), as a morsel (grāsena) (consumed by consciousness), that is, as
the repose within its own reflective awareness. Thus, within this (form of)

consciousness associated with the Great Time, the nature of which has (just)
been taught, ‘(a form of) consciousness (saṁvitti)’ ‘manifests’, which is a

particular experience skilled in relishing (carvaṇa)⁴ the limited subject (it
consumes), namely that ‘“I, the All-pervading Lord, am all this”, as is (the

experience expressed) in the declaration”⁵ *all this glorious outpouring

(vibhava) is mine’³,⁵ and which is the sole abode of the oneness with all things,

and so is (perpetually) expanding.” ‘Then’, after the manifestation (of
he experiences even endless time as just a moment. Abhinavagupta has said in his hymn
concerning this plane of Samanā (the Equal One):
‘“Where there is no notion of time (kāladhī) either as ‘always’, ‘then’ or not

even ‘just once’, that is the vision of You that is not eternal and that is also not said to
be otherwise.”

The sense of this verse is ‘O Lord, (in that state) no notions of time are formed
of the sort ‘always’, or ‘it will be at some particular time’, or ‘(this is taking) place at the

same time simultaneously (with some other event)¹ (yugapadrūpa). There the vision of
Your nature takes place as it is in reality, of which one cannot say that it is either eteral
or not. (In other words, timelessness transcends the polarities of ‘etemal’ and its
opposite, as both involve some notions of time). It is because this state is free of the

passage of time (kālakalanā) that it is called Mahākālakālī (the Kālī of the Great Time)

in the Kramastotra.”
⁵⁴⁴ Ṟead -carvaṇacaturā for ~carvaṇācaturā.
³⁰³ Read ityādyuktivat for ityādyuktavat.

³⁴⁶ ĪP 4/12a. Also quoted in TĀv ad 1/41-42, 5/129cd-131ab (128cd-130ab) (the whole
verse), 7/64cd-65ab and 14/46. See note to the first instance.

³.⁷ Eyery moment unconditioned consciousness expands to encompass, as it were, its

contents. On the contrary, the consciousness of the limited perceiver conditioned by its
situation in the body etc., ignorance and past Karma, contracts back in on itself every

moment with each perception. The oneness of subject and object in the one unitary
consciousness is an ongoing process of unification which is as if in a state of perpetual
expansion. The separation between subject and object at the individual level is, on the
contrary, a constantly recurring process of self-delimitation, that is, contraction of

consciousness, that is experienced only in the subject, extending momentarily in each
act of perception out to the object, to then withdraw from it, once known. This form of
knowledge is conceptual (savikalpa) and is based on relative distinctions
(bhedapradhāna). The object is ‘outside’ the limited perceiver and is not perceived
directly. The other form is the cognitive consciousness (sarvitti) which perceives the
object directly because it is ‘inside’ within it, at one with it. This form of consciousness

is that of the perceiver when freed of limitations by ‘consuming’ them into itself, that is,

experiencing that all things at rest within it, and so do not, and cannot, condition it. In

this case, the object is perceived through a process of unification with the subject that,

unmediated by the activity of the sense and mind etc., takes place all at once, not step by
step, as happens in extroverted perception. So, from this point of view, the former, is a

‘sequence-lessī process and hence non-temporal. The latter is on the contrary,

contaminated, as it were, by time. Kālī, the Goddess Who embodies process, time and

244

CHAPTER FOUR

consciousness) in this way, the ‘imner’ ‘enjoyment’ of phenomena that abide
at
one with the perceiver, (each) the nature of all things, because every (single
thing) is everything (sarvasarvātmaka), is that of making them one with one’s
own nature by consuming them fully (in an instant) (alaṁgrāsayuktyā) by
the
process of violent digestion (haṭhapākakrameṇa).³⁸ (Thus, this consciousness
is) ‘coloured” by that (enjoyment of all things). (In other words,) it is one with

(the perceiver, who) withdraws (them all into himself). Thuṣ it is ‘comple
tely
full (and all-encompassing)ʼ, and so (this cognitive) consciousness (vitti)
is, in

relation to each and every thing (karṁcid api prati) also, the agency of the act
of
perception (vidikriyā), because it assumes the condition of an object
of
enjoyment (bhogyatva) and ‘dissolves away, into the abode of (the

transcendent) Akula’, which possesses (the transcendental) nature

(in such passages) as (the following):

described

‘Kālī’s supreme abode, extensive (and abounding) with the glorious

power (vibhava) of the Light (of consciousness), immeasurable (ameya)
and
imperishable (transcendental) Akula, from which the waves of discrimination

between existence and non-existence have fallen away, is victorious.”³”

(Dissolving away there,) it comes to rest on the plane of the reflectiv
e
awareness of (universal) ‘I” (consciousness), which is the wonder (camatkā
ṟa)

of repose within its own nature. Thus, as (this consciousness) operates (kala1a)
the Great Time, it is called Mahākālakālī in the venerable Kramastotra etc. That
is said there:
⁶⁰-] praise Kālī Who, by Night in the cremation ground, where the great
elements (Earth and the rest) dissolve away, devours the Great Time, along
with
its opposite, is the power of time (kālaśakti). As such, She both binds by

subjecting

perception to temporality and frees it by withdrawing it, allowing for the vision of
all
things within the one divine consciousness of Śiva, the supreme perceiver, Who views
all things directly within and at one with Himself, sub specie aeternitatis.
⁵* See above, 3/262ab-263ab (261-262). There this process is described in the context

of the Divine Means (śāmbhavopaya), which operates in pure subjective consciou
sness
devoid of objectivity, and hence thought constructs. Thus, the Empower
ed Means
described here, which is concerned with the purification, that is, elimination, of thought

constructs, culminates in the Divine Means, of which the highest form is No Means
(anupāya).
³⁴⁹ Kālikāstotra by Jñānanetra verse 15.

⁶ The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:

vaḥh śmaśāna iha bhūtaghasmare rajyate ‘mba karavīranāmani |
grāhakaṁ grasasi taṁ śrutaṁ mahākālaṃ apy asuhutāśadurgrahā l 247 1

dikcarī daśasu dikṣu yā bahistattadindriyamayãṣu jrmbhate |
antaramba karaṇatraye ca yā khecarī galasi te ca tatpriye || 248 ||

‘O Mother, the one who shines (as Your beloved) here in the cremation ground
called Karavīra that consumes (all) living beings is well known as Mahākāla
. He is the
perceiver that You, who are the fire (that consumes) the inauspicious (and
so) are hard
to grasp, devour. (247)

TANTRĀLOKA

245

the host®' of the congregation (cakra) (of Yoginīs) who move in the Void of the
directions; She Who, inconceivable, shines like a fire (kindled by) the wind
(anilānalābhā).⁰⁰
So too in the venerable Pañcaśatika:
‘Burning with (the energy of) menses,®³ blazing greatly, Her light is

like millions of suns, free of the stain of the powers (of limitation) (kalā), She is
intent on operating (kalanā) Time. There, where She dissolves away, she is

called Kālakālī.’⁶*

Now, having described in this way the nature of withdrawal in relation
to the subject, he also describes the nature of the inexplicable (in relation to it).
12) Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālī – The Horrific and Fierce Kālī of

the Great Bhairava. The inexplicable state of the subject.

HIṬGTĪ ṬTĪT ṢṬTg ār̄ī fkṛaāī |
Ḷ
ḵũḷṛç:cEeĀEEt
eEe'E
ṬICAI
āTsgārTTḶē]
āTāI TĀI TŪĀĀT | .3 1
pramātṛyargo mānaughaḥ pramāś ca bahudhā sthitāḥ |
meyaugha iti yat sarvam atra cinmātram eva tat I| 171 II
iyatīṁ rūpavaicitrīm āśrayantyāḥ svasaṁvidaḥ |
svācchandyam anapekṣaṁ yat sā parā parameśvarī |I 172 |
The subjects, the (yarious) means of knowledge, the many forms of
knowledge (pramā) (they bring about), and the objects of knowledge – all
that, here is (pure) consciousness alone (cinmātra). The Supreme Goddess
Dikcarī unfolds externally in the ten directions made of each one of the senses,
and Khecarī inwardly within the three (internal) senses. O Mother, You devour these
two You love.” (248)
⁰¹Read with MS Jh -gaṇena for -graṇena.

⁰² Ṣwami Lakshmanṇjoo explains (KNP p. 44): ‘The Great Night is without the outer
light, which is the perception of duality (bhedaprathā). In it the five Great Elements
have completely dissolved away. In this state, the subjectivity of the body, breath, subtle
body and void have been completely withdrawn. The goddess Cinmaheśvarī (the Great
Goddess of Consciousness) shines in the cremation ground of the Heart, which is
completely full of inner Light. (She shines) where the senses of knowledge and action
are located, along with the Skyfaring Energies (Khecarīśaktis), who are (the Eight
Mothers) Brāhmī and the rest. She completely swallows up Mahākāla (the Great Time),
who is the supreme perceiver, and makes him one with herself. Thus, the goddess,
whose glory is beyond conception, who shines in this way, the equal of Wind and Fire,

is called Mahākālakālī, because she devours Mahākāla also. I bow to Her, that is, ḹ enter
into Her own inconceivable nature.”

⁶³ Read with the MSs of the DP, ṛuyjvalā for ṛtojjvalā.
“ DP 5/44cd-45.

246

CHAPTER FOUR

(Parameśvarī) who is Parā (the Supreme) is the freedom and independence
of one’s own consciousness, which assumes this wonderful diversity of

forms.⁶⁵ (171-172)

(All) ‘that’, namely, all this – the object, means of knowledge, subject
and (resultant) knowledge (pramā), that unfolds in many forms here, within the
Abode of Akula, which is the reflective awareness of ‘I’ (consciousness), ‘is
(pure) consciousness alone (cinmātra)’. The meaning is that it manifests as

one aesthetic relish (ekarasa). That therefore is the ‘independence’ (of one’s
own) self-luminous and supreme ‘consciousness, which assumes this

wonderful diversity of forms’, unconditioned (and undivided) by the subject
and the rest.
‘The reflective awareness (vimarśa) of that God beyond the gods, Who

is supreme (awakened) consciousness, is (His) supreme power, (that is, the

Goddess,) who is omniscient and the repository of (all) knowledge.”⁶

⁰³ Swami Lakṣshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 45-46): ‘Now the most elevated state of the

Wheel of the Inexplicable will be described, which is in the sphere of the perceiver in

the last expansion of the goddess Kālī, who is the wonder of consciousness. When the
previous state of the goddess Kālī, who is the supreme subject, enters into the abode of
the Inexplicable, she attains Her most clearly evident state, and so attains (her
completely) perfect state of fruition (pratiphalita), that is, Her own completely full
expansion. She is (completely) expanded (sphārībhūta) in this condition (daśā), and so
she, who is the wonder (camatkṛti) which is the supreme perceiver, gives rise to all the

previously described states. In order to make (all) that one with her own nature, her
place of rest (āśrayasthāna) is also formed. Moreover, having come here, the subject,

means and object of knowledge, as well as the goddess in the spheres of the wheels of
emanation etc., arise and recede. When all these states dawn, this goddess Parā, whose
nature is the supreme perceiver, is said to be in Her full (and complete) form
(pūrṇarūpā). And when, in the same way, these states are again made her own,
Maheśvarī is considered to be in her ‘lean’ (krṣa) form, that can bring about what is
most difficult [i.e generate them again]. This is because reaching this state (koti) of the

Wheel of the Inexplicable, all that remains is just the energy (kalā), Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. The

venerable Abhinavagupta describes the abode of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī in (verses
4/178cd-180ab
cof)
the
Tantrāloka.
.
.
.
This
goddess
is
called
Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī, because she manifests (Her true nature) threaded

through with the Wheels associated with the subject, means and object of knowledge.

She dissolves them away into her own nature and also makes them manifest there. To
emphasize this point, the Kramastotra uses the adjectives ‘canḍa, ghora and

mahābhairava’ with great reverence with reference to the wheels of the object, means of
knowledge and the subject. She is called this because this supreme goddess Kālī in the
form of the Inexplicable (Anākhyā) swallows them up in the Great Devouring
(mahāgrāṣa).”

“⁰⁶ This verse is also quoted in TĀv ad 5/77cd-78ab (77). There, as here, Jayaratha does

not tell us its source. Kṣemarāja quotes it in the ŚSūvi ad 3/27 (p. 113) and ibid. ad 3/44
(p. 139). In both instances, he says that it is drawn from the Kālikākrama. He also
quotes it in the NTu ad 1/22cd-31ab, where he attributes it to the Kālīkula. When he

quotes it in the SvTu ad 11/3cd-4ab, he says it is from the Kālikākula. There the fourth

quarter reads aviyukto yayā prabhuḥ – ‘from whom the Lord is never separatedʼ. cf TĀ
3/67ab (67cd): kaulikī sā parā śaktir aviyukto yayā prabhuḥ. ‘Kaulikī is the Supreme

TANTRĀLOKA

247

This is said to be the essential nature of ‘the freedomʼ

(of

consciousness), which consists of the reflective awareness of (pure)

‘I’

consciousness, the nature of which is described in such passages. In terms of the
modality by which it is known, objectively (prameyaprakriyā) as the plane of
the subject, it is called ‘mahābhairava’; as that of the object, ‘caṇḍa’; as that of

the resultant knowledge (pramā), ‘ugra’; and as that of the means of
knowledge, ‘ghora’, and so taken all together, (She is) Mahābhairava-

caṇḍograghorakālī. According to our philosophy, She is ‘the Supreme
Goddessʼ (Parameśvarī) Who, as full (and all-encompassing), is called ‘Parā’
(the Supreme). As is said in the venerable Pañcaśatika:

‘O (Śiva) worshipped by (all) the gods, She Who resides in the emission

of the seventeen (energies),⁶⁷ fierce like the Great Bhairava, withdraws all the

Power, from whom the Lord is never separated’. Here this quarter verse reads
sarvajñajñānaśālinī – *(she who) is the repository of the knowledge of the omniscient
goddess) is omniscient and the repository of knowledge.’ This is also the reading in

MSs Ch, Jh and Ñ of the citation in TĀv ad 4/171-172, and is the one we find in
Kṣemarāja’s citations. Accordingly, I have chosen this one. Even so, ‘(the goddess who
is) the repository of the knowledge of the omniscient one’ is certainly the more elegant
variant and does not suffer from redundant repetition.

In SSūvi ad 3/27 (p. 113) Kṣemarāja comments on this verse saying:
iti śrīkālikākrama-nīrūpītanītyā mahāmantrātmakākṛtakāhaṁvimarśārīūḍhasya yad yad

ālāpādi tat tad asya svātmmadevatāvimarśānavaratāvartanātmā japo jāyate.

‘According to this teaching, imparted by the venerable Kālikākrama, whatever
one says who is firmly established in the reflective awareness of the uncreated ego
(aham), which is the Great Mantra, becomes the constant repetition of Mantra. (This
repetition) is the reflective awareness of the deity, which is his own Self.

In ŚSūvi ad 3/44 (p. 139) he explains: iti sśrīkālikākramoktanītyā yat
vimarśamayaṁ rūpaṁ tatsaṅyamāt antarnibhālanaprakarṣāt kim atra ucyate ayaṁ hi

sarvadaśāsu dedīpyamāno nirvyutthānaḥ paraḥ samādhiḥ |

‘According to this teaching, imparted by the venerable Kālikākrama, what is

said here (about this)? It is supreme (and permanent) contemplative absorption
(samādhī), from which there is no emergence, and that shines intensely in all states (and
levels of consciousness). (It is achieved) by the most excellent inner attention (to one’s

own consciousness that takes place) by concentration (sarṁīyama) on that form which
consists of reflective awareness.”

“⁷ One could also translate ‘She Who resides in the emission of the seventeenth

(energy).” The Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, who is the supreme form of Kālī of the

Kashmīiri Kālī Krama, consists of seventeen syllables. She is accordingly depicted as

being in the centre as the seventeenth and highest Goddess, surrounded by Her sixteen

aspects, represented as Kālīs, each of which embodies one of the syllables of the Vidyā.
These kinds of configuration (cakra, maṇḍala) of purely female forms are a feature of
the Kālī Krama. A striking, well-known example of the same, which is central to the

Śrīvidyā, is Śrīcakra, which also consists entirely of female forms. In both these cases,

the Goddess in the centre contains within Herself the male polarity, which must, of

course, be present in some way. The Wheel of Sixteen energies, in this case Kaālīs,
symbolizes the Moon with its sixteen digits. The seventeenth in the centre is understood

248

CHAPTER FOUR

Bhairavas and the universe. She within Whom She inwardly comes to rest is
Bhairavī, full (of all things). She is Parā (the Supreme Goddess), who is
Mahābhairava-caṇḍograghorakālī (the Fierce, Terrific and Ferocious Kālī of the

Great Bhairava).⁷⁰*⁸

So too in the venerable Kramastotra:
⁶⁰):] praise Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī, She Who is beautiful with

the Moon (that shines) in the Void of Energy (kalākāśa), the essential being of

the Fourth state, which is the skilful power (cāturya) to set in motion the wheel

of the rays°"⁰ of the architect (vvāṣṭra) of the three processes (of emanation,
persistence and withdrawal).”¹¹
to be the emissive energy (visarga) that generates and withdraws the others. See above,
note 1,23 and 3/139ab-142ab (3/138-141) commentary and notes. The Vidyā of
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī is *HRĪṀ MAHĀCAṈḌAYOGEŚVARĪ THR (M)*⁴* DHṚ (MṀ) THR
(Ṁ) PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAT PHAṬ PHAT . **Sanderson cogently suggests that if the first

syllable is, as it should be, the seed-syllable of the Goddess, then it should be

KHPHR̥ÉṀ not HṚĪṀ. **Sanderson suggests that an anusvāra is required, as that is

common practice. See the Appendix concerning mantras.
“⁰* DP 5/46cd-48ab. The last half of the last line reads in the MSs of the DP —ghorā kālī

parāparā. `(She is) Mahābhairavāṇḍograghorā
(transcendent) and inferior (immanent).”

Kālī,

Who

is

(both)

supreme

“” The Cidgaganacandrikā elaborates on this verse as follows:
tvaṣṭur amba śivabodhabhāsvataḥ sṛṣṭitaḥ prabhṛti yā marīcayaḥ |
dvādaśakramapadatrayordhvagās tāsu saṁcarasi vā trayodaśī ll 249 ||
‘O Mother, the rays of Tvasṣṭṛ (the creator Sun) beginning from emanation,
shining with Śiva consciousness, travel beyond the sequence of twelve (Kālīs) and the
three planes (of creation, persistence and destruction). You who are the thirteenth (Kālī)
move within them.” (249)

⁶l⁰ Compare the expression here — marīcicakrasaṁcāracāturya – with the expression

vaicitrya-caryācāracaturāḥ, with reference to the energies of the letters from A to KS,
that are ʻskilful in executing wonderfully various modes of behaviour⁷ (PTv p. 204).
Also (ibid. p. 282) taccakracāra-caturasthitayaḥ, with reference to the rays of the
goddesses of the Trika, whose ‘states are skilful in the movement of the wheel (of the
rays) of their (energies)³. Again, somasūryakalājālagrasana-vāmanacaturā, with
reference to the energies of consciousness that are ‘skilful in devouring and emitting the
network of the energies of the Moon and the Sun’ (ibid. 206). Finally, Sāmbapañcāsśikā
(3) –-srṣṭyādimarīcicakracitrasaṅcāracāturyāt ‘by virtue of the skill of the wonderfully
various motion of the wheel of the rays of emanation and the restʼ.

⁶!¹ Swami Lakshmanjoo explains (KNP p. 46-47): ‘The motion within the sphere

(maṇḍala) of the twelve rays associated with the Sun that shines as the three processes

of object, means and subject is the skilful capacity of (its) radiant pulse (sphurattā),
which is (its) cosmic expansion (viśvavikāsa). It is due to (this skilful capacity that) the

mistress of the wheel of consciousness, whose nature is the supreme perceiver, sustains

the nature of the essential being of the Fourth state, which is the Inexplicable. She also
shines in that Sky of Consciousness with the radiant light of the Moon in the sky, as She
is endowed in all respects with the light of the Energy of the New Moon (amākalā) (see
above, notes 1,16 and 3,432) which is (her nature as) Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. I praise that
goddess Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī, who possesses all these characteristics, that

TANTRĀLOKA

249

Surely (one may ask,) what is the nature of Her supremacy? With this
question in mind, he says:

H: TTṬFRĀĪĪĪR̥J-ĀT-ĀT
J; |

imāḥ prāguktakalanās tadvījrmbhocyate yataḥ |
For it is said that (all) these operations (kalana) (of consciousness)

we have just described are (nothing but) her unfolding. (173ab)

Thus, as (the Twelve Kālīs) are the unfolding expansion of that

(consciousness which takes place) in such a way that the nature of every (single

one) is all (of them), all (the Kālīs) are also present in each (form of)
consciousness, and they (all) abide (at one with) consciousness and are not

different from it. Thus, because the twelve-fold nature is present in every single
one, it is said that in the rite of the succession of the transitions (of the sun into

the signs of the zodiac) (saṁcārakramapūjā),⁰² (the goddess of consciousness)

should be worshipped in one hundred and forty-four aspects. As scripture
(declares):

‘One should worship the goddess twelve times in association with (each

one of) the twelve spokes.’

Thus, there is not even the slightest opportunity to talk about a

thirteenth form, and so it is rightly said that in reality, consciousness consists of

just twelve (aspects, not thirteen). Surely (one may ask,) everywhere in the
Krama system (kramadarśana) (we find a) reference to the venerable goddess

Sukālī⁰ in the midst of the venerable goddesses of emanation and the rest,⁶⁴ so

that there are thirteen goddesses in the Wheel of the Inexplicable. Thus, the
venerable Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī is the thirteenth. That is said in the
venerable Pañcaśatika:

is, having dissolved away the plane of the perceiver (identified with) the body, vital
breath, subtle body and the Void, I enter into the essential nature of the unlimited

perceiver and of (the reality) which is full of the aesthetic savour of bliss.’

⁶l² Cf. above, 4/146cd.
⁶l³ Emend svakālīm to sukālīm.
⁶!⁴ Notice that this is the one place that Jayaratha does not quote the Kramastotra along

with the Devīpañcaśatika. Sukālī is the fifth Kālī in the Devīpañcaśatika. The

corresponding verse in the CGC is 231:

kālapālakamukhaṁ śivāntakaṁ viśvam abdhipatitodabinduvat |

pūrṇatāṁ vahati yatra dīpticidghasmarī tvam iha sādhyakāly asi
II
‘The universe beginning with the Guardian of Time (i.e. Kālāgnirudra) up to

Śivais like a drop of water fallen into the sea. It transports plenitude where You, the

consuming
fire of incandescent consciousness, are the Kaālī to be attained here.’

250

CHAPTER FOUR

‘She is Unstruck Sound (ahalā)," frightening, fierce, (both) Kula

(Śakti) and Kaula (the union Śiva and Śakti),⁶⁶ Sheis undisturbed. Undefinable,

She cannot be (perceived or) defined by (any) defining (feature)⁰⁷ – Sheis (the
Kālī) called Sukālī, Who bestows success (siddhi).”

So too in the venerable Tantrarājabhaṭṭāraka:

‘And (1) Sṛṣṭikālī is the Supreme Goddess in (both) emanation and

withdrawal.⁶"⁶ Then⁶'⁹ (comes) (2) the fierce Sthitikālī, then (3) Saṁhārakālikā,

(then comes) (4) Raktakālī who savours, without break, a stream of blood, (then
come) (5) Sukālī, (6) Yamakālī and (7) Mṛtyukālī Who arouses (great) fear, and
s0 too (8) Bhadrakālī, and another is (9) Parmādityakālikā, (10) Mārtaṇḍakālī

and (11) Kālāgnirudrakālī, who is very powerful.*⁰ (12) the Kālī in the family

(kula)
of Mahākāla
(the
Great
Time)
(i.e.
Mahākālakālī),
and
(13) Mahābhairavakālikā (i.e. Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī). (Thus) one
should know Kālī, Who is of thirteen kinds, according to (her) different

names.”⁰³!

The venerable Sārdhaśatika was quoted previously as being in

agreement with this view.⁰² Even though the intended point stated here is that
(this view is) common with that of the Krama teaching (kramanaya), how is it
that it is said, contrary to this, that the goddesses are twelve? It is said here (in
response), that here in the Krama view (kramadarśana), there are considered to

be thirteen goddesses, that should be worshipped in the Wheel of the
⁶!³ Read with the MSs of the DP ahalā in the place of ḍakalā.

⁶⁶ Read with the MSs of the DP kulakaula- for kulakāli-.

⁶l⁷ Read lakṣanirlakṣā for lakṣyanirlakṣyā. The edited text of the DP, which 1 follow,
reads:

ahalā [k, kh: aṭṭalā (?)] bhīṣaṇā [k, kh: bheṣaṇā] raudrā kulakaulanirākulā |

alakṣyā [k, kh: alakṣā] lakṣanirlakṣā [g: nillakṣā] sukālī nāma siddhidā || DP 5/32.

“!⁸ This passage is drawn from the fourth ṣarka of the JY 4/4/38cd-42ab (MS K fl. 69b70a, MS Kh fl. 58b, MS G f1. 83a-83b). According to the MSs I have consulted, this line
reads: s

ālī ca [all MSs: ya] saṁṅhārī sṛṣṭā sā parameśvarī. ‘And Sṛṣṭikālī, Who has

been emitted and withdraws (all things), is the Supreme Goddess.”

⁶!⁹ Read, with the MSs of the JY, tato for tathā.

“” Read with the MSs of the JY kālāgnirudrakālī mahollbaṇā for kālāgnirudrakālamahollbaṇā.

“*¹ The MSs of the JY read rasśmibhedataḥ, i.e. ‘according to the division of the rays (of
the Wheel)ʼ. The JY introduces these Kālīs, declaring their association with the Kālī of
the Supreme Sun:
paramārkaprabhā śāntā sphuratsmaraṇadīpitā ||
bhārūpā paramā kālī kalayantī jagatsthitā | (4/4/42cd-43ab)
“Tranquil, She is the Light of the Supreme Sun, lit up with the radiant (power

of the) will. The supreme Kālī, whose form is Light, is present in the universe,
generating (all things).”
After listing the names of the Kālīs, the JY teaches that: trayodaśavibhedena

grasate sacarācaram | *with (her) thīrteen divisions, She gobbles up the moving and
immobile (universe).” (4/4/45ab)

“2² See above, TĀv ad 4/149.

TANTRĀLOKA

251

Inexplicable in such a way that every one is of the nature of all of them.⁰³ Thus,
to this extent, there is no fixed rule (niyama) (as to their number); accordingly,
in the venerable Kramasadbhāvabhaṭṭāraka, there are said to be seventeen

goddesses, that should be worshipped in the Wheel of the Inexplicable.⁶*⁴ As is
said there, beginning with:

‘O Mahādeva, arisen out of Time, She Who is bliss, rejoicing, Śivā,

dense with consciousness, (located) in the middle of the conjoined couple
(yugma) (of the two breaths), imperishable (akṣarā), Her field is the

imperishable.®⁹ Transcendent (akulā) and eternal (nityā), She is Kālakālī, Who,

undisturbed, operates (the processes of emanation). She within Whom that
energy merges is said to be Sṛṣṭikālī.”
(Ending with):
‘The wheel of the three processes (of emanation, persistence and
withdrawal), great and extremely fierce, is the architect (tvāṣṭra) (of all

things),* rich with the rays (of energies), its nature (all destroying) time at

the end of the end of the aeon, acts there by its skill (in observing) the Great
Practice (mahācāra) (of the cycle of emanation and withdrawal governed by the
Kaālīs). She who is the energy (kalā) that is most fierce and terrible is auspicious

(śivā) in the fourth state (of the Inexplicable). (She is the energy of) the great
and terrible (ghora) Bhairava, whose form is fierce (caṇḍa), the great Kālī Who

consumes (all things) totally, the sixteenth, Who destroys time (and death).

Know that She is the seventeenth*⁸ Kālī, Who does all things.”

Thus, one should not accept (the view that) it is with this intention that
the liturgy (pūjākrama) of the author of the venerable (Krama) Stotra (consists
of thirteen Kālīs). As they say:

“*“According to the venerable Kramasadbhāva etc., the petals

(patrikā) here (in the maṇḍala of the Kālīs) is in the series of (lunar) days°* that

“*³ Here, once again, Jayaratha feels it necessary to justify why the scriptures say that
there are thirteen Kālīs, whereas Abhinava names only twelve. Here he says there are

indeed only twelve Kālīs, but according to the Krama system, in the supreme state of
consciousness, every single thing is experienced as all things. This state is a thirteenth

condition which contains all the twelve aspects in this form of oneness.
“’⁴ But above (TĀv ad 4/126) Jayaratha affirmed that the Kramasadbhāva teaches that
there are sixteen Kālīs in Anākhyacakra.

“’⁵ Read akṣarākṣaragocarā for akṣarā kṣaragocarā. If we accept the reading of the
printed edition, one would translate ‘imperishable, Her field is the perishable’.

“2* Cf. the first line of the verse of the Kramastotra describing this Kalī (above ad 4/171172).

⁶2⁷ Ṟead marīcyāḍhyaṁ for marīcyādya.

“³* Noṭe the aiśa form saptādasī which here replaces the regular saptadasī.

“2’ A series of quotations of verses set in Āryā metre begin from here that appear to be

all from the same text, in which the Krama teachers and their lineages are described, and
Sanderson, for convenience, calls the Kramavaṁśāvali – A Krama Genealogy. The
author (here referred to in the honorific plural) was a contemporary of Jayaratha, who

quotes him mostly to point out what he considered to be his mistakes. Each of these
citations are marked with an asterisk, so that they may be easily identified.

252

CHAPTER FOUR

sustain the solar Kula (bhāskarakula), to which the venerable author of the

Stotra (belonged).⁷ ⁶⁵*

(According to this view,) there are considered to be thirteen or twelve

goddesses present as the objects of worship in the Wheel of the Inexplicable,

regarding which (we have) undertaken this discussion. In this way, here,

without the venerable Sukālī, there are said to be only twelve goddesses that

should be worshipped. What is wrong with that?°** As (is said in the) scripture:

‘One should place⁰* the word, ‘mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī’

along with the words, ‘sṛṣṭī’, ‘sthitī’, ‘saṁhāra’, ‘rakta’ and ‘yama’, ‘mṛtyuʼ,
‘rudra’, ‘mārtaṇḍa’, ‘paramāditya’, ‘kālāgnirudra, and ‘mahākāla’ (all of
which are) conjoined at the end with the word ‘kālīʼ.
Including this (reference) in the (commentary on the Kramastotra
called) the Kramakeli, written by (Abhinavagupta,) the author (of the

Tantrāloka,) and thereby explained in this way, (it is clear) that nothing there
also should be understood to be otherwise (then taught here in the

Tantrāloka).⁶*⁴

⁶³⁰ Read -parvāsu for —pūrvāṣu.
“’! Twelve Kāīṣs are related to the twelve months of the solar year. Several of them, as
we have seen. are overtly identified with the sun. The time they measure and consume is

that of the sun, which is generally identified with the thirtenth Kālī. Analogously,

according to the Kramasadbhāva, there are sixteen Kālīs, who are related to the sixteen
phases of the Moon in a lunar month, with the seventeenth as their source. This
reference is saying that the two series, one lunar, taught in the Kramasadbhāva, and the
other solar, taught in other Krama scriptures, are interrelated. In the CMSS, the Krama
teachings concerning the thirteen Kālīs are called the Bhānavīkrama, that is, the Liturgy
of the Goddess of the Sun. It is also called the Bhānavīkula, (see Appendix to this
chapter) which is virtually synonymous with the name Bhāskarakula. This is a name of

this Kula (lineage, tradition, school etc.) of the Kālīkula/Kālīkrama. The author of the

stotra, i.e. the Kramastotra, is Erakanātha. This reference makes it clear that the cycle of

(originally) thirteen Kaīs is elaborated specifically in this Krama lineage.
“³² Jayaratha is again, as before, struggling to defend the view that Abhinavagupta has
been faithful to his Krama tradition, by maintaining that there are twelve Kālīs, not
thirteen. He did, in fact, omit Sukālī.
“³³ Read nyaset for nayet.

⁶³ Jayaratha quotes this reference, found in Abhinava’s commentary on the

Kramastotra, the Kramakeli, to justify his assertion that Abhinava’s presentation of the

Kālīs in the cycle of the Inexplicable as twelve, not thirteen, is not of his own making.
Unfortunately, Jayaratha does not tell us the source from which these verses are drawn.

Itis a striking fact that even though this passage agrees with Abhinava, it does not agree
with any of the other sources we know. Sanderson (2007: 355) doubts that the passage

as it stands is genuine, and as he writes, is ‘earlier than Abhinavagupta, I suspect that it

has been modified to serve this purpose. The first line, giving the parts of the first six
names that proceed [sic (precede)] ~kālī reads yat sṛṣṭisthitisaṁhāraraktaiś ca
yamamr̥tyubhiḥ [. . .] but the conjunction ca is out of place and, more significantly, the
compound yamamṛtyubhiḥ has a plural ending rather than the dual it requires. The
anomalies arose, I suspect, by dropping -su- for Sukālī after yama- and then inserting
the redundant conjunction to restore the metre (< raktair yamasumr̥tyubhiḥ). If this is

TANTRĀLOKA

253

The Krama Lineages
Thus, here (according to the Kramakeli) (where we read that the
teachers are,) in due order, the venerable Govindarāja and Bhānuka etc., the
instruction of the teachers (of the Krama school) has in this way many branches.

Even today it shines intensely in a hundred ways on the path of the heart of
(those) great souls who are (its) great teachers. As is said there (in the
Kramakeli) by (Abhinavagupta):

This long citation from the Kramakeli continues up to ‘May I now also
grace (all) people . . .’

Kramakeli⁰³⁹
‘Juṣṭ as the first (teacher) was the venerable and most excellent Kaula

adept (v⁷īra), whose name is mentioned with reverence, called Govindarāja, the
second was the venerable one called Bhānuka,*% and the third was the venerable

so, then the passage in actual fact attested to the thirteen Kālī model that includes
SŚukālī, as we find in all other cases.”

“³³ The following long passage beginning with ‘just as the first (teacher) . . .’ up to ‘. . .

present in my own being (to them)³ is a quotation from Abhinava’s commentary on the
Kramastotra, the Kramakeli. Ksemarāja confirms that this is so as he quotes a line from
it in his commentary on the Śivastotrāvali (ad 11/10), introducing it by saying ‘as has
been said by my teacher in the Kramakeli.’ (yathoktam asmadgurubhiḥ kramakelau)
(Sanderson 2006b: 36, 110). This line, as quoted below by Jayaratha, says:
śrīmatsadāśīvapade ‘pi mahograkālī bhīmotkaṭabhrukuṭir eṣyati bhaṅgabhūmiḥ “The
great and fierce (mahogra) Kālī, her eyebrows knit with tremendous fury, becomes the

plane of destruction (bhaṅgabhūmi) on the plane of the venerable Sadāśiva.’ Kṣemarāja
reads gatograkālī for mahograkālī. He concludes his citation saying: iti ato māṁ
kṣatamaraṇaṁ cidānandaghanam advayāṇīmādipātraṅṁ kuru. ʻMake me a fitting vessel
for the (realisation) of nonduality and the yogic powers of becoming small at will etc.
and, (my) death destroyed, (make me) dense (uninterrupted) consciousness and bliss.”

6³⁶ Bhānuka (the Sun), also called Vāmanabhānu, the sun-like Vāmana who causes the

lotuses of the lineage to blossom. Also called Vāmana, Vīravāmanaka (PS p. 146),
Vāmanavīra, Vīranātha is Hrasvanātha mentioned below. Two works by him have come
down to us. One is the Svabodhamañjarī (the Bouquet of (the Flowers) of One’s Own
(Awakened) Consciousness). The last verse declares that it is the work of Vāmanadatta,
the son of Harṣadatta, ‘a lion in the forest of Mīmāṁsā’. At the end of the other work,
the Dvayasampattivārtika (also called the Bodhavilāsa), the author adds that his father
Harṣadatta was born in Tākadeśa. I supply sufficient arguments to establish that
Hrasvanātha bore all these names, and take care to diṣṭinguish him from Vāmanadatta,
who wrote the Vaisṇava Saṁvitprakāśa, who tells us that his father was Devadatta, son
of Rātradatta (Dyczkowski 1990: 6-8; see also Sanderson 2006b: 38-42).
The Dvayasampattivārtika is a commentary (vārtika) on two (dvaya) verses
regarding the attainment (saṁpatti) of liberation-in-life by the fusion of the two aspects,
introverted and extroverted, of fundamental consciousness. Edited and translated into
Italian by Gnoli and translated into English by Torella (see bibliography), the
Svabodhamañjarī īs a very interesting short tract which, although not clearly

represented as a Krama work, declares itself to be the ‘oral tradition of the Śiddhasʼ, and

is compatible with its basic view that higher, expanded consciousness can be achieved

through attentive awareness of the experience of beauty, intense emotions and feelings

that arise at times, such as in the experience of orgasm (Sanderson ibid. 340). Vāmana

254

CHAPTER FOUR

one called Eraka.⁰”⁷ They obtained the same teaching from the venerable

Keyūravatī,⁰⁰⁶ Madanikā, and Kalyāṇikā, who (had all three) received the grace

(of the teaching) from the venerable Śivānandanātha, who had received the

teaching in the Northern Seat (uttarapīṭha)*⁹ from the goddesses of (that)

sacred seat (pītheśvarī).⁸*"

was the teacher of Cakrabhānu and others, from whose disciples Abhinava learnt
Krama.

⁶’⁷ Erakanātha wrote the Kramastotra.
⁶³* Later Krama teachers trace their lineage back to their first teacher Jāānanetra through

Keyūravatī alone. It is hard to say why Abhinava adds Madanikā, and Kalyāṇikā. He

does, however, indicate that Keyūravatī was the first. The other two were graced like
her with initiation. Female gurus are not very common. It is particularly striking
therefore that all the subsequent Krama tradition was channelled through Keyūravatī.

⁶% Read uttarapīthe labádhopadeśāt for uttarapīthalabdhopadeśāt. The Northern Seat is
Uddḍiyāna (also spelt Oḍḍiyāna, U/Oḍyāna and U/Odḍayana). The Krama sources

normally portray it as the sacred seat (pītha) where male adepts (siddha, vīra) and
female (yoginīs) meet. There they are indistinguishable from deities and other
supernatural beings. Indeed, they too are such. The texts delight in describing the
revelries in the cremation ground there as awesome theophanies of the Goddess Kālī

and her fearsome retinue. One such account is found in the Kramasadbhāva. It begins:
‘In the North is the great sacred seat (pīha) called Oḍḍiyāna, the resort of Śiddhas and
Yoginīs. In that fair and excellent seat (pītha) is the Karavīra cremation ground . . .
thronged by great Bhairavas . . . In this most fearsome circle with great Mothers (mātṛ)

rests the supreme goddess Kālī in the limit of the state of self-awareness, standing on

Bhairava, devouring the power of Mahākāla (the Great Time of Death), void in form,
infinite, with eight embodiments, auspicious, adorned with fifty Rudras and attended by
the sixty-four (Yoginīs); Indra, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Īśvara, Sadāśiva and Mahādeva
Bhairava, the seventh, are ever present as the transcended ‘dead’ (that form the throne)

of that Goddess.' Here Bhairava himself seeks instruction from the goddess, asking
‘about the ultimate (attained) through the power of my self-awareness’. He wants to
know what ‘remains hidden in the heart of the Yoginī’ (edition and translation by
Sanderson 2006b 25-26). 1t is here, the tradition declares, that Jñānanetra (alias)

Sivānanda, who founded the Krama lineage that transmitted the Krama teachings
derived from these scriptures, received instruction from the Goddess Maṅgalā, a form of
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Kālī, who is the leader of the circle of goddess of the sacred seat
(cakreśvarī). Sanderson (2007: 261ff.) has successfully identified the location of
Odḍḍiyāna as a small kingdom known to the Chinese as Wuzhagna (Japanese: Ujon) and

to the Tibetans as U rgyan or O rgyan (see also Dyczkowski 1987a: 3 ), located westnorth-west of Kashmir to the North of Peshawar, with its capital on the river Swāt.

Sanderson (ibid. 30-31) reports: ‘the goddess Maṅgalā and the Karavīra cremation

ground were indeed proper to it, these two facts being independently attested by the
Tibet U rgyan pa rin chen dpal (1230-1309) who visited Uḍḍiyāna (O rgyan) from Pu
raṅg in Western Tibet. He tells us in his ‘Guide to Udḍiyāna’ (O rgyan lam yig) that in

the heart of region, before the entrance to a town whose women declared that they were

yoginīs, was a sandal-wood statue of the goddess Maṅgalā (maṅgaladevī). He also
visited the cremation ground to the east of the town and records that it was called bhir
sma ṣha. Thīs is surely the deformation of vīraśmaśāna for karavīraśmaśāna,

confirming that the Kashmirian tradition is accurate in this regard too.’
⁶*⁰ Ītis possible, of course, that the plural here is an honorific and that the reference here
is thus to the one goddess of the Northern Seat. According to Śitikaṇṭha and others, this

is the goddess Maṅgalā (also called Makāradevī), who is considered to be a form of
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. She is thus the first teacher (ādiguru): srīmakāradevī ādigururūpā jīyāt

TANTRĀLOKA

255

Govindarāja > Somānanda
There (amongst them), the first (of these disciples, i.e. Govindarāja,)

who had obtained the teaching, (the thought) swayed (his) mind: “when so much
has been understood, what is there now (left) to do?’ With his mind well set in

this way, he (simply) waited for (his) body to come to an end, and as long as he
lived, all he did was simply to pass (his) time (experiencing) the enjoyment
(bhoga) (of the fruit of his practice that remained and) happened to come (to
him), intent on instructing well (those) disciples who were fit receptacles of this
knowledge, and (so) all this secret" was passed on to a teacher called the

venerable Somānanda.⁶²

Bhānuka > Ujjata and Udbhaṭa > Abhinavagupta
The second one (i.e. Bhānuka) also (behaved) in just the same way, and

his lineage includes a series of several teachers, beginning with the venerable
Ujjaṭa and Udbhaṭa⁶³ onwards. I (Abhinavagupta) who have attained by (their)
grace glorious power, have explained this.⁶*
(MP (1 Śk) K p. 5) (May the venerable goddess Makārā, who is the first teacher, be
victorious). MP (2 Tri): vīrasiṅhāsanastheyaṁ devī (-vīī) paramamaṅgalā (-lām) |

7/85ab (This goddess, the supreme Maṅgalā, sits on the Hero’s Throne) and MP (3 AS):

ambaraughavikāṣaikadharmiṇīṁ [aṁvarāgha- -ṇī] maṅgalāṁ [-lā] śraye |
māyāto gālayaty āśu [-su] maṅgaleha tataḥ smṛtā |¹ 76 ||

‘I take refuge in the (goddess) Maṅgalā whose sole nature is the (perpetual)
expansion of the flux of the Sky (of consciousness). She who quickly causes the falling

away (gālayati) from Māyā is thus called Maṅgalā here (in the tradition).” (76)

However, one must admit that thisis not so in all Krama works. The early ones
refer to the goddesses of the seat as the teachers of Śivānanda. Thus we readin the
commentary on the Vātūlanāthaṣūtra (p. 18) that ‘the oral teaching (*thatis beyond(2))
the six philosophical systems, the four Śākta traditions and the Union (of Siddha and

Yoginī) (melāpa) was put in sūtra form and revealedin oneness with the unsurpassed

goal by the goddesses of the sacred seat (pīṭheśvarī) at the time of the Great Assembly
to a certain perfected adept (sādhaka) by teaching him to experience directly the (truth
of the) thirteen instructions (imparted in the form of sātras).” Similarly, Ramyadeva
declares at the end of his Bhāvopahāravivaraṇa (p. 44) that he is one ‘in whom the joy

of endless vigour has arisen from his practice of empowerment revealed by the
venerable goddesses of the sacred seats (pītheśvarī)’ (translations (modified) by
Sanderson 2006 p 99 n. 343 and p. 82 n. 282, respectively).

⁶*! Read with MSs Ch, Jh, N, and T: sarvam idaṁ for sa cedaṁ.
⁶² Sanderson (2006b: 105 n. 368) opines that it is unlikely that this Somānanda should

be identified with the well-known author of the Śivadṛṣṭi, who was Utpaladeva’s

teacher, as the form in which he is mentioned would be more reverential. He notes that
in every other case the suffix -pādais added to the name as a sign of respect.

“⁵³ Read, as Sanderson (2006b:

105 n 368) suggests -ujjatodbhaṭādi- for –

ujjaṭtodbhaṭṭādi-.
⁶**³ By telling us here that he received initiation in the Krama teachings from this line of
teachers, Abhinavagupta implies that his explanation of the Kramastotra, recorded in

the Kramakeḷi, is inspired by them. Normally a direct commentary on a text does not

256

CHAPTER FOUR

Eraka, Govindarāja and Bhānuka
(The third teacher,) the venerable Eraka, exerted himself to achieve

success (in his spiritual discipline) until, having become thus®*³ accomplished
(siddha), he thought: ‘“what use are worldly enjoyments (bhoga), that I have
experienced such great trouble (klesa) (to attain them)? How is it that I was not,
like (my) fellow students (Govindarāja and Bhānuka), intent (solely) as long as I
lived to just elevating those who approached (me for instruction)? For:
The great and fierce (mahogra) Kālī, her eyebrows knit with
tremendous fury, becomes the plane of destruction (bhaṅgabhūmi) on the plane
of the venerable Sadāśiva.⁶⁴ Having understood this, one should, having
reached

the

supreme

state

(srhiti),

venerate

(adhitiṣṭhet)

the

goddess

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī with the great force (haṭhataḥ) (that withdraws even Sadāśiva).

May I now also grace (all) people by propagating also by means of a
hymn the secret teaching present in my own being (to them).⁷⁶⁴⁷
(End of citation from Abhinava’s Kramakeli)

Jayaratha denies that Bhūtirāja was Abhinavagupta’s Krama teacher
Thus, those who nowadays do not know (Abhinavagupta’s) lineage of

teachers in this way (as stated in the Kramakeli, assert that):

*“(There was) also a venerable teacher called Bhūtirāja, who was

another disciple of Cakrabhānu, and the teacher of the teacher of Abhinavagupta
in the Krama system (kālīnaya). ⁶*

allow extensive rearrangement and omission of its verses. So it is possible that he

commented on the sequence as it was there originally. Jayaratha’s references to the

Kālīs being thirteen in the Kramastotra and offering reasons for that may suggest that
Abhinava made alterations here in his presentation in the Tantrāloka, not before. But

this seems unlikely, simply because the manner in which the Kālīs are deployed is an

integral part of how their nature is understood to be. We have seen (above note 4,397)

that a major reason given to explain this discrepancy is that the sequence of thirteen
Kālīs was the order in which they are worshipped, and that of the twelve Kālī is that in
which they arise as phases of cognitive consciousness. Thus, this is probably a
distinction Abhinava himself originally made, not Jayaratha.

⁶* Read with Ch, Jh, N, T: sann evar for san eva.
⁶⁴ See above, note 4,401.
⁶’⁷ The hymn is the Kramastotra. The passage quoted from Abhinava’s commentary on

the Kramastotra, the Kramakeli, ends here.

⁶* Sanderson disagrees with Jayaratha here, agreeing with his opponent instead, that

Bhūtirāja was the direct disciple of Cakrabhānu. Apart from Abhinava’s Kramakeli and
the anonymous *Kramavaṁśāvalī, we have two other accounts of the Krama lineages.
The firstis in the commentary by Śitikaṇṭha on the Mahānayaprakāśa, in OId Kashmiri.
The otheris by Amasiṁha. Śitikaṇṭha writes:
‘The venerable (goddess) Maṅgalā Herself was the receptacle of the descent (of

the teachings) in the location of the sacred seat . . . and she is the Accomplished Current

(siddhaugha) which is the fire-stick (that lights the spiritual fire) of the Kula of tripartite

TANTRĀLOKA

257

form which is the Current of Men (mānavaugha) (read mānavaughasya for
mānavaugha-), consisting of (Jñāna-) Netra, (Keyūravatī) the Queen (rājñī) and
Hrasvanātha. By ‘Kula’ is (meant) a particular lineage (ovallī). The firestick of that
(lineage) is the place where the (three teachers), which are like the three (Vedic) fires,

arīse.

And then, at the end of the Current of Men (mmānavaugha), comes the first and

foremost of the Current of Disciples (siṣyaugha), the venerable (Cakra-) Bhānu, who

was the lord of eight disciples amongst whom the Queen called Īśānā was given the

treasure of the tradition (5).
Juṣṭ as Mahādeva causes the eight (divine) forms to blossom, or Brahmā (with)
that number of Prajāpatis, or the dawn (with) the circle of the directions that are as
many, in the just same way, Bhānu, namely, the venerable Cakrabhānu, causes (his
eight) lotus-like disciples to blossom. (6)
Such is the series of teachers (paramparā) of the traditions which, arisen (and

active), is seen (by all). It is the flawless path of the means (to realisation) which, like a
garland of lamps, is self-luminous and shines in the darkness (of ignorance).” MP (2 Sk)
p. 107-8, chapter 9, comm. on verses 5-7.

Arṇaṣiṁha had two Krama teachers from two separate lineages, which he

records in his Mahānayaprakāśa. The first teachers in both lineages are the same up to

Cakrabhānu, after whom they diverge. The first lineage begins with Iśānikā and
continues for three generations, through Nandaka, Sajjana, and Someśvara to Arṇasiṁha

himself as the fourth (MP (3 AS) 158-161). Residing in the ‘abode of emptinessʼ full of the

secret Krama, stainless and free from suffering, they are said to have attained the
knowledge of the Great Teaching (mahānaya), and thus received the Great Tradition
(mahākrama). Amṃasiṁha says about the previous teachers:
uḍḍīśapīthajā śriyā maṅgalānandanirbharā |*

sadasadbhāsanāveśavarjitā tām ahaṁ śraye | 152 ||

tataḥ śrīmac chivānandanāthaguruvaraṁ sadā |
lokottaramahājñānacakṣuṣaṁ praṇamāmy aham || 153 II
śrīmatkeyūravatyākhyā
(-keryukhatyākhyā) pīṭhajajñānapāragā |

khacakracāriṇī yeyaṁ tām ahaṁ naumi bhaktitaḥ || 154 1|

mahāvīravaro yo ʻsau śrīmadvāmanasaṁjñakaḥ |

devīdhāmni sadārūḍhas taṁ vande kramabhāskaram || 155 ||

tataḥ śrīmaccakrabhānur devatānayadeśikaḥ |
mahāvratadharo yas taṁ vande *haṁ paradhāmagam || 156 ||

śrīāmadīśānikākhyā yā pañcamudrāvibhūṣitā |

akramakramasantānakovidā (-ṣantānākovidān) tāṁ namāmy aham || 157 ||
* The first half of this line is corrupt in the sole manuscript that has been recovered.

There it reads udrīthapīṭhayā śrīman. The diction ‘śrīman-‘is incorrect. The feminine
śrīmatī (agreeing with Maṅgalā) would be correct, but does not fit the metre. Although
we do find such incorrectly irregular forms in the Tantric texts, one can presume that
learned authors would avoid them. Accordingly, I have tentatively emended to śriyā.
For udrīthapīṭhayā Sanderson (2001: p. 15 n 14) suggests: udgīta-pīṭhajā (‘born of the
hallowed seat’, with reference to Maṅgalā). I prefer to emend to udḍīśa-pīṭhajā.

‘I take refuge in (the goddess) Maṅgalā, who is the glory of the sacred seat of

Uddīśa, and who, full of bliss, is free of entry (āveśa) into the manifestation of the
(dualistic) relationship between existence and non-existence (sadasadbhāva). Then I bow at
all times to the best of teachers, the venerable Śivānandanātha, who possesses the eye of

258

CHAPTER FOUR

great transcendental wisdom (mahājñāna). 1 reverence with devotion the venerable
Keyūravatī, who has grasped all the wisdom bom of the sacred seat and wanders in the

Wheel of Emptiness. I salute the venerable one called Vāmana, the best of great heroes

(mahāvīra), who, ever established in the abode of the goddess, is the sun (that illumines
the) Tradition (krama). After that I salute the venerable Cakrabhānu, teacher of the
Devatānaya (the Teaching of the Deity) who, practicing the Great (Kāpālika) Vow
(mahāvrata), has attained the supreme abode. I salute the venerable one called Īśānikā, she

who is adorned with the five insignia (of a Kāpālika) and knows well the tradition of the
processless process (akramakrama). (152-157)

mahānayaparajñānavibhūtisatpradaḥ (MS: -vibhūṣita-) sadā |
śrīmannandakanāmā yas taṁ namāmi khadhāmagam || 158 |I

śrīmatsajjananāmā taṁ (MS: naṁ) rahasyakramanirbharam (MS: rahasyaṁ-) ḷ
bhedābhedakalaṅkaṣya (ṂS: -kalaṅkastu) varjitaṁ praṇamāmy aham l| 159 |
nirmalasphaṭikaprakhyahdayaṁ vigatāmayam |

śrīmatsomeśvaraṁ vande mahāśāsanapāragam || 160 |
teneha krpayā mahyaṁ saṁpradatto mahākramaḥ |
yenāhaṁ navabhir vārṇakalaṅkair nāvṛto ‘niśam (MS: -vāṇaka-) || 161 ||

I salute the venerable one called Nandaka, who resides in the abode of emptiness

and always dispenses the truth of the wealth of the supreme knowledge of the Great
Teaching (mahānaya). (158)

I bow to the venerable one called Sajjana who, devoid of the stain of both unity

and diversity, is full of the secret tradition (rahasyakrama). (159)

I praise the venerable Someśvara, whose heart is as clear as stainless crystal and

who, free of the sickness (of saṁsāra), has mastered the Great Teaching. (160)

By his grace here I was given the Great Tradition (mahākrama) by virtue of which

Iam never covered by new stains and obscuration.’ (161)

The second lineage begins with Prabodhanātha, a disciple of Cakrabhānu.
atraiva kathyate ʻsmābhir dvitīyā gurusantatiḥ |
pīthoditamahāmnāyarahasyakramanirbharā || 162 ||
śrīcakrabhānupādais tu paramārthārthapāragaiḥ |

kṛtaprasādo (MS: <de) vīrendrah (MS: vīrendra) śrīprabodhas (MS: -da) tapodhanaḥ ||
16311

tenāhitaprasādas tu jaiyakākhyo mahāvratī|
jñānasaṁkrāntinirbhrāntaḥ svānandānandananditaḥ || 164 ||
‘Now I will relate the second line of teachers full of the secret teachings
(rahasyakrama) of the Great Tradition born from the sacred seat. The venerable ascetic and
Lord of Heroes, Prabodha (nātha), was graced (with the teachings) by the venerable

Cakrabhānu, who had grasped the supreme reality. Graced by the former, the one called
Jaiyaka, who observed the Great Vow (mahāvratin), was free of error by virtue of the
transmission of wisdom (he received), and was delighted by the joy of his own inherent

bliss. (162-164)

tenāpi ca śrīpaṅkakākhye dattaḥ (MS: datta) śrīkramaśāsanaḥ |

bhavatadabhrāntivibhrāntividhvaṁsoccaṇḍadīdhitiḥ (MS: bhavatūdbhrānti-) || 165 ||
tenāpi śrīnāganāmā deśikapravarāgraṇīḥ |
krtaprasādaparamāhlādodayavighūrṇitaḥ (MS: -prasādo-) || 166 ||
tenāpy ahaṁ mahāmnāyavaro ‘smin paramādbhute |

TANTRĀLOKA

259

abhiṣiktaḥ (MS: abhisiktaḥ) kriyāśrāntacittenāvṛttatejasā || 167 ||

itthaṁ proktā santatis tu dvitĩīyeṣā mahānaye |
nirāveśasamāveśacamatkāraughanirbharā (MS: -camatkārādya-) || 168 |I

‘He too gave to the venerable one called Paṅkaka the venerable Krama teachings,

the powerful rays of which shatter phenomenal existence and the delusion born of the
ignorance (it generates). He too (in his turn) graced (with the teachings) the venerable and

best of teachers called Nāga, who was thereby inebriated by the arising of the Great Bliss

(mahāhlāda). By him IĪ have been given the gift of the Great Tradition in this, the Supreme
Wonder, and consecrated by the mind, (its) activity calmed and enveloped with radiant
power (tejas). In this way this, the second lineage of the Great Teaching, overflowing with
the flood of the wonder of impenetrable (nirāveśa) mystical absorption (samāveśa), has
been declared.⁷ (165-168)

We are told that Cakrabhānu practiced the Great Vow of the Kāpālika, that is, he
carred a human skull in which he worshipped the deity. śānikā wore the ‘five insignia’ of
a Kāpālika. Arṇasiṁha does not tell us anything about her (Isānikā’s) fellow disciple

Prabodhanātha, but as his disciple, Jaiyaka, is said to have observed the Great Vow, he may

well have done so also. Paṅkaka, Nāga and Arṇasiṁha himself, who followed, received the
Great Teaching which ‘overflowing with the flood of the wonder of impenetrable
(nirāveśa) mystical absorption (samāveśa), possessed the liberating knowledge’ (168). But
they are not said to be Kāpālikas. As those who observe this vow are ascetics, either

lifelong, if their observance is such, or for the period of time they do so, it is possible that
the teachers who came later were not. They themselves being householders, the Krama
itself became more ‘domesticated’. Reading through the lines, this may be what Arṇasiṁha
is telling us when he writes:
itthaṁ parasparodbhūtaḥ sadgurukramavisṣṭaraḥ |

sthito ‘yaṁ divyasiddhākhyau (MS: -khyam) anujñātakrameṇa ca || 169 I

saṁvitpramāmahādbhūtasamullāsamahodayaḥ ḥ (MS: prāṇamahābhūta- -ya) |
abhyantaradr̥śā iti divyo ʻsau sadgurukramaḥ || 170 ||

‘The expanse of the lineage of true teachers has arisen in this way mutually (from

one to the other); it abides, called the Divine and that of the Accomplished (siddha), and as
the sequence (of men) who have been instructed. From the inner point of view, this divine

lineage of true teachers is the Great Arising, which is the outpouring of the great wonder of
the (pure) knowledge (pramā) of consciousness.⁷ (169-170)
Theṣe are the three currents we normally findin the later sources, for example

those of the Śrīvidyā traditio. The earlier Mahānayaprakāśa labels the three currents
differently, probably because the standard classification of three had not yet been

developed. Even so, both accounts agree in ascribing a special position to Cakrabhānu,

who is a pivotal figure in Arṇasimha’s account, as he is for Śitikaṇṭha, who declares that
the Current of Disciples began with him. Clearly, Jayaratha and the unknown author of

the *Kramavaṁśāvalī also consider him in this light. If the latter is correct, as
Sanderson (2001: p. 15 n 14) maintains, despite what Jayaratha says, Abhinavagupta
himself received the Krama teachings through the lineage of another of Cakrabhānu’s
disciples, namely, Bhūtirāja.

Even though Cakrabhānu was considered to be a very important teacher, the only

work by him that has been recovered is the brief Pīthadvādaśikāstotra, the Hymn in

Twelve Verses to the Sacred Seat. But this does not mean much. These teachers were

generally not prolific writers, although what we do have is certainly of great quality. We

260

CHAPTER FOUR

Such statements, which are (just a product of) your own imagination, should
be ignored. The venerable Cakrabhānu has not instructed anybody in this

way. (This is clear) because (we) see another teaching°" nowadays, in a

hundred (varieties), as having that (other teaching of Cakrabhānu, namely, that
there are thirteen Kālīs,) as its root. Moreover, you people yourselves say that
the sequential order of the liturgy (pūjākrama) (according to) venerable

Bhūtirāja differs, (when you declare) there (in that same work) that:

*⁴(the teaching of the teachers) beginning with Bhūtirāja is based on the

intended sense (of the teaching of the) Devīpañcaśata’.⁶⁹

Now (an opponent objects), you maintain that just twelve goddesses are
the objects of worship here (in the Devīpancaśatika); then you are also ignorant

of the teaching (artha) of the venerable Pañcaśatika, and so go⁶** and ask your
own teacher. (To this objection, Jayaratha replies:) what use is our revelation (to
you if you don’t accept it)? As is the case with the Trika system (trikadarśana),
(Abhinavagupta) had teachers, (in the lineage) beginning with the venerable

Brahmin (bhaṭṭa) Somānanda,⁶³ in the venerable Devīpañcaśatika also. The

should, therefore, take seriously the repeated claims they make that their main source is oral
tradition (mmukhāgama), and it is that which they transmit and to which, no doubt, they also
contributed.
Cakrabhānu appears in an interesting reference in Kalhaṇa’s history of
Kashmīr, the Rājataraṅginī– the River of Kings. There Kalhaṇa (RT 6/108-112) tells us

that king Yaśaskara (who ruled between 939 and 948 CE) punished a Brahmin ascetic
called Cakrabhānu for his behaviour, which ran contrary to established Brahminical
norms, by participating in a Krama ritual called cakramelaka. For this, the king branded

him on the forehead with the mark of dog’s paw. His maternal uncle, the yogi
Vīranātha, who was the king’s minister of war and peace, much angered by this,
performed a magical rite to chastise the king, who died seven days later. It is probable

that Vīranātha was Hrasvanātha, also called Bhānuka, who was the second of the three
disciples said to have been initiated by Keyūravatī and her fellow disciples. If this is

correct, we can surmise that Cakrabhānu lived around 900 to 975. Thus, it is quite possible

that Bhūtirāja, who was (whatever Jayaratha says) one of Abhinava’s Krama teachers, was

a direct disciple of Cakrabhānu. Śivānanda, who was three generations before him, lived
about from about 825 to 900. Thus, he would have been a contemporary of Vasugupta, to

whom the Śivasūtras were revealed, with which what is nowadays loosely called Kashmiri
Saiviṣm begins.

“⁴⁹ That is, that there are twelve Kālīs, not thirteen as taught in the DP.
³⁰ Read anyasopadeśasya for asyopadeśasya.

“⁵ The Devīpañcaśata īs the Pañcaśataka (also called Devīpañcaśataka. In the

colophons of the manuscripts, it is called Kālikulapañcaśataka). Jayaratha has quoted it
a number of times in his commentary on the previous verses, and so clearly considers it
to be authoritative. In actual fact, as an opponent goes on to object, the DP teaches that
the number of Kālīs is thirteen, not twelve as Jayaratha affirms.

“⁵² Read tato gaccha for tad gaccha.
“⁵³ We know that Somānanda, Utpaladeva's teacher of nondualist Śaivism, was well
versed in Trika, as he wrote a commentary on the Parātrīśika. Abhinavagupta studied it
before he wrote his own commentary on it, in which he refers to it several times. Here, it

seems, Jayaratha declares that Somānanda was also a teacher of the Krama taught in

this, one of its most important Tantras. But he is confused here between that Somānanda

TANTRĀLOKA

261

venerable Bhūtirāja is not present there also (amongst them) as a teacher, (but

this does not mean) that he was not a teacher. As (Abhinavagupta) will say

(further ahead):

‘We will now talk about the Brahmavidyā,⁴ which instils insight

immediately and was taught to us by Śiva (in the form of) the venerable

Bhūtirāja.¹⁶⁵*⁵

Again:
‘Bhūtirāja, who was the venerable Śrīkaṇṭha (Himself) who, directly
visible, had assumed a human body, explained these three Vidyās (to me).”⁶³⁸
However, it is certain that here (in this case, although he was

Abhinavagupta’s teacher,) he is not (said to be his Krama teacher).
Keyūravatī, Madanikā and Kalyāṇikā

Moreover, just as the venerable Keyūravatīdevī (kakāradevī) (was
graced with initiation) by the venerable founder (of our Krama school, that is,

and a homonymous Krama teacher mentioned above (see note 4,629). See Sanderson

2007: 382 n. 492.

“³√ Concerning this Mantra, see below, 29/23cd ff.
⁶³³ Below, 30/62cd-63ab.

“³ Below, 30/120cd-121ab. See also above, 1/9 and below 37/60. Jayaratha insists that

Abhinavagupta had no teacher in the Krama system called Bhūtirāja, even though this

quotation from the *Kramāvaṁśālī declares otherwise. He believes that to be wrong,
because if Bhūtirāja did transmit the teaching of the DP to Abhinava, Abhinava would
have followed its view and maintained that there are thirteen Kaālīs, not twelve as he
does. According to Jayaratha, Cakrabhānu taught that there were twelve Kālīs, although
he did not teach this to his disciples directly. Even so, Abhinava somehow received this
teaching and followed it in his commentary on the Kramastotra, the Kramakeli.
However, there is no scriptural tradition prior to Abhinava that maintains this. Only the

Kramasadbhāva says that the Kālīs in the cycle of the Inexplicable are not thirteen.
However, there they are seventeen, not twelve, Kāḹīs. It is most likely that Abhinava

himself reduced the number of Kālīs to twelve, and made changes to their sequential
order. Jayaratha is averse to believing this. Innovation is generally suspect in India, even
if the innovator is of the calibre of Abhinavagupta. One may ask why Jayaratha is able
to accept that Cakrabhānu made these changes. The answer to this question may be that

he was a mainstream teacher in the Krama tradition of exceptional importance who
represented a cardinal point of departure in its development. Sanderson has presented

strong positive evidence that Bhūtirāja

was indeed one of Abhinava’s teachers of

Krama. Although it is possible that a different person called Bhūtirāja taught Abhinava
these things, this does not vitiate the preceding argument (see above note, comm. 1/9).
See also Sanderson 2007: 361-362 for more arguments and citations from Bhūtirāja

which are of an evidently Krama nature, confirming that he was indeed a Krama
teacher. Concerning the number of Kālīs, see above notes 4,482 and 623.

262

CHAPTER FOUR

Śivānanda, alias Jñānanetra),⁶⁷ similarly the venerable Madanikā and Kalyāṇikā

were also graced (by him), and so this too has been determined (to be correct).
(It is said) that:

*‘the Lord (nātha) (Jñānanetra), teaching unity in the difference
(bhedābheda), based on the four phases (kula) of the Krama, made in this way

just seventeen disciples, (some of) whom had disciples (savaṁśa) (of their own,
whereas) others did not.”

(However,) this fixed (figure) is not a reasonable one, because these two
disciples have not been enumerated (along with them), and also because there

may well have been another also. In this way, one should also know that:

*“beginning from the venerable Keyūravatī up to the venerable disciple
Cakrabhānu, there are perceived in this way to be sixteen members here⁶*⁸ in the

lineage of the Krama (atinaya).⁰⁹

Moreover, it is not right to say that the venerable goddess Kakāra (i.
Keyūravatī) had just the three disciples (as is declared in the following
statement):

*"Three disciples are known belonging to the Krama school, transmitted
in the vernacular (prakṛtamahānaya),⁰ who had disciples (savaṁśa).”
Naverakanātha
Rather, (she had three more,) because the venerable Govindarāja and

Bhānuka were (her) disciples (as stated above by Abhinavagupta), and

Naverakanātha was also her disciple. As they say:

“’⁷ The founder of such schools is normally referred to as its ‘avatāraka’, lit. the one
who brought it down (to earth). Matsyendranātha, who is credited with founding
Kauḻism, is referred to in the same way (above comm. 1/7).

⁶³* We have just seen that Keyūravatī was the direct disciple of Jñānanetra, the founder

of this Krama lineage, and that Cakrabhānu is the second generation after her, so it
would not be right to understand from this third statement that there are a series of

sixteen generations of disciples between her and Cakrabhānu. Moreover, conversely, it

would be wrong to understand that Cakrabhānu and Keyūravatī were both, amongst

others, direct disciples of Jñānanetra.

⁶ Kramadarśana, Kramaśāṣana, Kramārtha, Kramanaya, Mahārtha, Mahānaya,

Mahāmnāya, Mahāśāsana, Kālīnaya, Kālikākrama, Kālīkrama Devatānaya, Devīnaya,

Atinaya and Rahasyāmnāya (Sanderson 2006: 15, n. 37) are the most common names

for the fully formed Krama system that developed out of the Kālīkula (also called
Kālīkrama).

⁶“⁰ 1t seems that a distinction is made here between the Krama tradition transmitted in

the vernacular – prakṛta – and that transmitted through Sanskrit. Several examples of

the former have survived, like Śitikaṇṭha’s Mahānayaprakāśa, which is written in early
Kashmūri, as is the Chommasaṁpradāya. The root verses of the Mahārthamañjari are in
a vemnacular of Mahārāṣṭra. AII of them have Sanskrit commentaries and translations,
some by the authors themselves.

TANTRĀLOKA

263

‘I bow to you, the venerable (devī) Keyūravatī, who, famous (in all the

world), resides in the Signless (Absolute) (aniketa).' (You are) she who is said

to shine without break as the nature of all things by the abundance®² (of the
inner) vision of the Skyfaring (energy of consciousness).”
‘I praise the one called the venerable Navera, whose glory (vibhava) has

destroyed all (fettered states of) existence; that (glory which is) the elevation (of

consciousness) that comes from (his) touch (sparśodaya),⁶³ unfolds (within his
disciples) pouring out playfully with the fall of the stream of the rays (of divine
consciousness).”

Hrasvanātha (also called Vīranātha)
Similarly, the venerable Hrasvanātha⁶® also did not have just five
disciples (even though it is said that): *“the venerable Vīranātha made five
disciples in the Krama (devīnaya)³, because there is a sixth (disciple), who is the

venerable Bhojarāja by name.
That is said by the venerable Somarāja in the course of his account of

his own lineage:⁶⁹⁵

“The venerable sun-like Vāmana (vāmanabhānu) is skilful in unfolding

the lotuses of the tradition (and energies of the processes of consciousness)

(krama);*⁶ he who has fashioned (his) lineage in the Supreme Sky beyond the

cosmic order (sadadhvan), triumphs.’

““¹ The highest state is called ‘Aniketa’. This means both ‘without sign’, that is, any

phenomenally distinguishable mark, and ‘without abode’, in the sense that it is not a
physical place.

“² Read ~drṣṭeroghāt for -dṛsṣṭiroghāt.

“6³ See Ernst concerning ‘touch’.

⁶⁶³ See above, note 4,636.
“³ Jayaratha has presented genealogies from at least three, if not four sources. These are
1) the Kramakeli by Abhinava with which he agrees; 2) the anonymous
‘Kramavaṁśāvali he criticizes; 3) one written by Somarāja; and 4) the source from

which are drawn the two verses beginning with ‘I bow to you, the venerable (devī)

Keyūravatī . . ... Jayaratha tells us of the existence of many Krama schools that present
various genealogies he considers to be incorrect. He quotes from the Trivandrum MP
(TĀv ad 4/125) (which does not contain one). But he does not seem to know the
Mahānayaprakāśa written by Arṇasiṁha and the one in Kashmiri commented by

ŚSitikaṇtha, that do contain genealogies. Was this because they had not yet been written?
A reference he draws from the text he criticises refers to ‘the Krama school transmitted
in the veracular’ (prakṛtamahānaya). This would include the MP. by Śitikaṇṭha, if it

existed at the time.

““⁶Here ‘kramakamala’ can mean both ‘the lotuses of the lineage’ and lotuses of the

spheres of energies of the flow (krama) of the energy of consciousness that expand and
blossom into their full potential, thereby illumining consciousness. Arṇasiṁha also

refers to Vāmana just after Keyūravatī in his account of the lineage of Krama teachers.

He also extolls his sun-like quality with the words: ‘ praise the best amongst the great
Heroes, the venerable Vāmana by name, that sun of (the lotuses of) the Krama (lineage),
who is perpetually established in the abode (and radiant power) (dhāman) of the
goddess⁷ (MP (3 AS) v. 156).

264

CHAPTER FOUR

Bhojarāja

‘I praise Bhojarāja, who along with the most excellent of teachers,®°⁷ is

the sagesʼ (arhat) inner object of worship; he who has destroyed all the darkness

of the most deep, great and terrible delusion; he who has rightly given the light
which is the (ultimate) repose of the exuberance of the most excellent° lotuslike (disciples) of the lineage (krama); who has attained the plane⁰ of union
with the incomparable aesthetic relish (sarasāsvāda) of consciousness.”
The many kinds of incorrect (views) that there are and are possible,

have not been explained here in this (detailed) manner, because they are not
relevant.

Twelve Kālīs, not Thirteen Kālīs
(But) surely (one may object), how can this (view) be made consistent

in this way with (the teachings) of the lineage of teachers (gurukrama)? Here

(according to you), these goddesses are just twelve, whereas (Jñānanetra,) the
venerable founder (avatārakanātha) (of the Krama tradition), who is the grand-

teacher of the venerable Govindarāja etc., implies that they are thirteen. As is he
(himself) has said (in the Kālikāstotra):

‘The nature of Your own nature (ṣvarūparūpa) is one; divided into

extension (prasara), persistence and merger, it is of three kinds. Again, each
one (of these) is of four kinds, as (its) arising, persistence, merger and repose.
Having thus ordained that Your own innate (sahaja) nature is the thirteenth,

(this) Your form (rāpa) that impels the continuous round of the apparent change

of all things, triumphs.”⁰⁷⁰⁰

(We reply that) this is true. Who disagrees here (with this)? However,

we say that he also intends (to say) that there are (just) twelve (Kālīs). The
teaching that the venerable Govindarāja and the rest (began) propagating in this
regard has reached us also. As (Jñānanetra) has said:

‘O Kālī, having divided up the body⁶’' of Time into twelve, (generating)

that (which is your own) nature, making it shine radiantly within Yourself (as

one), You triumph!⁰⁶⁷²

⁶⁶⁷ Read along with MSs ch, jh and ñ̃: -sahitaṁ for -mahitaṁ.

⁶³* Read -kamalavara- for -kamalavana-.
⁶“ Read -bhumiḥ for bhogā.
“⁰Kālikāstotra verses 8-9. Instead of viśvavivartāvartapravartakaṁ – ‘(Your form

(rūpa) that) impels the continuous round of the apparent change of all things’. MS reads
viśvavivartāvivartavartakaṁ- ⁴(Your form (rūpa) that) abides in the apparent change

and its absence of all things.”

⁶⁷ Iṇṣṭead of dehaṁ – *body’ MS N, T read rūparṁ – ⁴formʼ or ‘nature’
“N² Kālikāstotra verse 5. Sanderson (2007: 354) explains that Jayaratha claims that ‘the

tradition of twelve was that received by the three disciples Govindarāja, Bhānuka, and

Eraka. To the objection that Jñānanetra himself taught that there were thirteen in his

TANTRĀḺLOKA

265

The meaning here is as follows. O Kālī! O goddess You Whose nature
is such as described! The form of time which divides up its own nature, whose
sole nature is the supreme light (of consciousness), is, according to (the

following) dictum, the cause of the progressive differentiation of all things

(viśvakalanā): ʻTīme, which is Bhairava, emits the universe, beginning with

(Śiva, its universal) cause, up to (a tiny) insect.”⁰²

Having thus, in the aforementioned way, divided up its form into twelve
and poured it out externally in this way, and then again (generating) that form
(of time) which is (apparently) separate (and independent), (You) make it shine
radiantly within Yourself, Whose form is the one compact (uninterrupted) light
(of consciousness). Making it manifest like a reflection in a mirror, as not
separate (from Your own conscious nature), You are victorious, that is, You

shine radiantly at all times in the form of the Inexplicable, that can do what is

most difficult to do (atidurghaṭakāriṇn).⁶"⁴

(The opponent rejoins that,) surely in this way, that (view) is
contradicted by what was (said before in the verse beginning with) ‘the nature
of Your own nature (svarūparūpa) is one³.⁷⁹ How can one, having explained
that supreme consciousness arises twelve-fold, also say that it is thirteen-fold?
Should one not say that the Goddess Who abides as the agency (of these
processes) is the thirteenth, so that these two (statements) may agree? (We say
that that) is not so. Even if one wishes to say that, the contingency would arise
that in further (reasoned) statements (concerning this matter, one would have to
accept that) there is a fourteenth form, as here (in this case) also, the Goddess
abides in the same way as the agent (of the thirteenth state). (We say that) in

actual fact, in both cases this is the miserable state (daurātmya)⁰⁶ of thought
Kālikāstotra and that therefore this tradition can only be an unwarranted deviation in a

branch of his spiritual descendants, Jayaratha replies that in fact Jñānanetra taught both
twelve and thirteen in that work, so that both traditions are valid options. That argument
is empty, since the verse on the twelve states that the Goddess manifests twelve
divisions while remaining grounded in her own nature, which is evidently the
thirteenth.’ Moreover, the verse quoted above, purportedly from scripture which would
precede Jñānanetra, to justify the view that there are only twelve, is most probably
corrupt, and in actual fact confirms that there are thirteen.

⁶’³ Kālikāstotra v. 6ab. See above, TĀv ad 3/234, where the entire verse is quoted,

which says: “O0 Mother of the Worlds, You are victorious. You are She by whose will
Time, which is Bhairava, emits the universe beginning with (Śiva, its universal) cause
up to (a tiny) insect.’ This line is also quoted above in TĀv ad 4/132 and 168.
“’⁴ This is a standard way of referring in the Pratyabhijñā philosophy to Śiva’s freedom,
by virtue of which He manifests as all things without this compromising His oneness
and that of His manifest forms with Him and each other. What could be harder than
that? In the Krama system this power is appropriately identified with the fourth,

Inexplicable aspect of Kālī which, as Her essential nature, comprises the three cycles of
emanation, persistence and withdrawal of phenomena, that in that aspect are
experienced by Her through Her self-awareness as manifestations within Herself
at one

with Her, as are reflections in a mirror.

“’³ Kālikāstotra verses 8a. Verse 8 and 9 are quoted together above. See note 4,670.

“’⁰ Cf. above 1/216 for the use of this term in relation to the individual perceiver
(mātṛdaurātmya). The same ‘miserable state’ of the perceiver cuts him off from the
immediacy of the first moment of perception, when the light of consciousness shines in

266

CHAPTER FOUR

which, like Rāhu’s head, reflects on reality (vastu) as divided, although [it is]

one.®" Thus, one should understand that the venerable Siddha here intends to

say that (consciousness) is twelve-fold. (In this way,) the contradiction is
removed by (its very) arising. As (it is said) here (about this): ‘you alone shine
radiantly as each process (of emanation and the rest)’. (Thus,) the intention
behind describing it in this way is to indicate that (the ‘one form of their
essential nature’) pervades (them). And (so it is said) in the same way that:
‘“There is some (undefinable) innate consciousness (sahajasaṁvittī)

which is intent on destroying what is generated from the duality between being

and nonbeing. O Goddess, (when it) is manifest (uditā), it is You Yourself Who
are victorious in the form (of the four goddesses) beginning with Jayā

(iayādya).⁰
⁶⁰⁸

(Similarly,) it is taught by the venerable Hastanaya⁰" that, ‘You

Yourself (O, Goddess) are also manifest in the form of (the four goddesses,)
its divine, prīstine purity, and reflects on its own true, infinite nature, unconditioned by
delimiting, dualistic thought constructs.

⁶⁷” According to Indian astrology, there is a planet called Rāhu, the form of which is a
severed head. Along with him there is Ketu, who is his body. The story goes that once
the gods and demons agreed together to churn the milky ocean from which the universe
arises. By their churning seven ‘jewels’ were produced from the ocean. The most

precious of them was amṛta – the Nectar of Immortality. The gods and demons lined up

to receive a portion; the gods first, then the demons. Soon it became apparent that it
would be finished by the time it was the demons’ turn, so one amongst them — Rāhu –
quietly took his place in between the gods of the Sun and Moon. When his turn came, he

managed to take a gulp, when the Sun and Moon noticed he was a demon and yelled to
Viṣṇu to stop him. Viṣṇu immediately hurled his discus at him, severing his head. But
he had already drunk some, so the two parts of the body continued to live, and to this
day move through the heavens as Rāhu – the head, and Ketu – the body. Rāhu is still
angry with the Sun and Moon, so that when he passes close to them in the sky, he tries

to gulp them down. He manages to obscure them for a while as they pass through his

throat, but then they emerge to shine as before. This is said to be the cause of solar and
lunar eclipses. Here Rāhu's head, engaged in swallowing the Sun of the means of

knowledge and the Moon of objectivity, is understood to illustrate how thought

repeatedly obscures these aspects of consciousness; and how, although this happens
again and again with each perception, consciousness repeatedly reemerges intact in its

original form, as the pure subjectivity that can never be the object of dichotomizing
thought.

“’³ Kālikāṣtotra v. 10. According to Jayaratha, the first line reads: sadasadvibhedasūter
dalanaparā kāpi sahajasaṁvittiḥ | Thīs is the reading. The Nepalese MS reads:
sadasadvibhedaviṣṛtair dalanaparākāśasahajasamvittiḥ (k: –—saṁvitti). The second line

is the same.

⁶’’ Jayaratha has just quoted from the Kālikāstotra by Jñānanetra, the founder of the
Kashmiri Krama system. He goes on to say that the same is also said in the Hastanaya,
which is a Krama Tantra. See following note.

*⁰ The Hastanaya is almost certainly the unpublished Ūrmikaulārṇavatantra, which is

also called Bhogahasta (the Hand of Enjoyment). We read there in the surviving

fragments in manuscript: ‘in this venerable (scripture) called Bhogahasta, which has

emerged from the Ūrmikaulāgama (asmin śrībhogahastākhye ūrmikaulāgamotthite [-

taṁ] l| 1/136cd). The colophons begin: (this is chapter so and so in the scripture) that has

TANTRĀLOKA

267

beginning with Jayā (jiayādya).⁰⁰" Moreover, here (what follows) is the proper
explanation in accord with our tradition (svakrama): You are victorious in the

form (of the four goddesses) beginning with Jayā, who are the four energies of
the first letter (A).

As scripture says, beginning with:
‘Now (the following topic concerns how) the supreme, pure Brahman

has assumed the state of the first letter (A)’

And continues:
‘Ambikā is below. Then come the three energies simultaneously,
namely, Jyeṣṭhā, Raudrī and Vāmā who is like a sleeping serpent. Raudrī has

(the triangular) form of a water chestnut and the other®² (Jyeṣṭhā) that of a
straight line.⁶³ They should be known to be the (universal) cause (of all the

come down through the tradition (krama) of the venerable Bhogahasta that has come
forth from the venerable sacred seat of Kaulagiri and brought down (to earth) by the
venerable Matsyendranātha (sśrīśrībhogahastakramāyāte śrīkaulagiripīthavinirgate
śrīmīnapādā-vatārite). It teaches:

mahākaulārṇavaṁ guhyaṁ saptadhā khecarārcitam |
bhogahastakramāmnāyaṁ yoginīcakragocaram |l (ibid. 1/7).
‘the tradition of the Bhogahastakrama, which is the great secret Kaula ocean,
worshipped seven times by the Skyfarers and has as its expanse the Circles of Yoginīs.’

sarvaṁ samatayā bhãti bhogahastaṁ tu taṁ viduḥ |vibhuḥ] l| 1/73cd
‘Bhogahasta (the Hand of Enjoyment) is the state in which everything
manifests in the perfect equality of oneness.”
bhogo bhairava ity ukto hastaḥ śaktiḥ [śakti] parā smṛtāḥ ||
yāmalaṁ vai [vya] jagat sarvaṁ sṛjate saṁharaty api |
bhogahastaṁ tu taṁ vidyād yo bhuṅkte viśvamaṇḍalam || 1/77cd-78.
‘Bhoga’ is said to be Bhairava and ‘hasta’ the supreme power. The conjoined

pair (yāmala) emanates and also withdraws the universe. Know that the Hand of
Enjoyment is that which enjoys all things.”

“³ The four goddesses

are Jayā (Victory), Vijayā (Complete Victory), Ajitā

(Ūndefeated) and Aparājitā (Undefeated by Others). They form a standard group which
is well known in the Kaula Tantras of various schools, including Trika and the latter

Śrīvidyā, as well as the Krama. They appear in the Vāma Tantras as the four attendants
of Tumburu Bhairava, the main form of Bhairava of the Vāma Tantras. See Dyczkowski

1988: p. 36-38, 149-150. Jayaratha quotes a reference from the Hastanaya to the four
goddesses Ambikā etc., thus implicitly identifying them with the four, Jayā etc. These
four goddesses are the embodiments of four aspects of the letter A, which is a major

symbol in the Trika Tantras, as it is in the Kālīkrama (see above, note 3,636 at 3/202cd203ab).
⁶⁵² Ṛead tathāparā for tathā parā.
“** Concerning the deployment of these energies in the letter A and how they are parts of
it, see above, note 3,210 ad 3/66cd-67ab (67).

268

CHAPTER FOUR

letters). Everything comes from them. When the intermediate level (parāpara)
is reached, they are said to be the (forces called) Śānti etc., which are Śānti,
Vidyā, Pratiṣṭhā, and Nivṛtti is said to be the other. They are present (āviṣṭa) in
the Five Voids, and their abodes (āspada) are on the plane of the Supreme
Self.⁰⁴ These same (energies) in their lower (apara) form are the secret energies

Jayā and the rest.”*⁵

The teachers explain, (the first teacher) was initially graced by these
(four goddesses) in the (sacred seat of) Kāmarūpa, by being given the sacrificial
food (caruka) (that he ate, and thereby received the liberating initiation).⁶* (The

interpretation offered by others that the word ‘jayā’ refers to the nature of

goddess) as victorious (jayana), and that (the word) ādya means (not ‘and the

rest” but) the form which is present in the initial aspect, (and as such) “You are
victoriousʼ is (incorrect, and indeed) most sinful (because it is misleading). One
understands such (verses in Jñānanetra’s Kālikāstotra) in the same way:

‘Having divided the form consisting of thirteen (aspects) into five parts,
one by one, the Mother Who is the saviour of the universe and utters forth the

Divine Current (of the teachers),⁷ triumphs.’**

It is established that, as the lineage of teachers (gurukrama) is actually

such (that it originated from the Divine Current initiated by the Goddess
Herself), this teaching concerning it is true (and correct). There (in that case)
also, the root scripture is one’s own self-reflective awareness (svavimarśa), and

(sound) reasoning (associated with meditative practice) (yukti). Accordingly,
both of these were explained previously. Thus, in this way, the supreme

⁶* The thirty-six principles are divided into five spheres of energies, which I translate as

‘forcesʼ (kalā). Nivṛtti (Completion) comprises just the Earth Principle, Pratisṭhā (the
Established One) the principles from Water to Nature; Vidyā (Knowledge) the

principles from Puruṣa (the Individual Śoul) to Māyā and Śānti (Tranquillity) extends
from Pure Knowledge up to the principle of Śakti. Śāntyātītā (Beyond Tranquillity)
corresponds to just the Śiva principle. See Chapter Ten below for a detailed exposition
of the Five Forces. Although only four are mentioned here, they are related to the Five

Voids. Presumably the fifth Void is transcendental Śiva. The four forces span the

expanse of immanence, the fifth, the highest transcendental one, is presumably the
supreme (para) level, where the letter A is formed from the four energies. The rest are

below.
“³³ The Tantrasadbhāva refers to these goddesses many times, and discusses their nature
at length as elements of the formation of the Triangle in this way (cf. above TĀv ad
3/65cd-66ab (66)), so one would expect them to have been drawn from there. However,
these lines are not found in the extant manuscripts.

“³⁰ See above, note above ad 2/2 concerning this sacrificial food (caru).
“⁷ We have already noted above (note 4,648) that the lineages of teachers are divided
into three currents (ogha) of ‘divine’ (divya), ‘accomplished’ (siddha) and ‘human’
(mānuṣya) teachers.

“** Kālikāstotra v. 16.

TANTRĀLḶOKA

269

authority (and means of knowledge) (pramāṇa), which is (this) insight

(pratyaya), unfolds without impediment (bādha).⁰

Surely, (an opponent may rejoin,) let that be (as you say), however, the

venerable Kramastotra does not bear this kind of explanation, the intention is to

say there that consciousness arises in thirteen ways (not twelve), as each

goddess is praised with one verse each in this hymn; what (could be) the

apparent intention to praise the venerable Yamakālī with two verses, rejecting

(the reading) ‘sukālī"" and (replacing it with) the wrong reading ‘bhavānī
?'

Do the other commentators agree here on this reading? It is said here (in
response to this objection), who has said that each goddess is praised here with
(just) one verse? The venerable Kālāgnirudrakālī² is also praised (in two
verses, of which the following) is the second:

‘I salute the Kālī of the Rudra of the Fire of Time Who is inflamed with
thousands of (fiery) forms (that rise out of) the Abode of Fire, She Who
destroys the entire universe and everywhere devours the body of death.”
If you say: “well then, what is this seeming enthusiasm that the

venerable Yamakālī (is praised) in two verses? And ‘This verse also (has not

been written by Erakanātha,) it has been imagined (kalpita) by you!"” (We reply

that) this is not so, because (I have) seen this verse in the commentary

(vivaraṇa) written in venerable Hrasvanātha’s own hand (svalipi).°³ One

observes the (same) inversion (vyatyāsa) of the order of the readings and verses

on the part of all the commentators at every step, so why this aversion to the

“* In this way, Jayaratha is tacitly admitting that Abhinavagupta’s teaching, which

admits only twelve Kālīs, is the result of personal insight. Moreover, it is reasonable, if
one accepts this there are no contradictions, even though the scriptures and the earlier
Kṛrama teachers appear to be saying that there are thirteen, not twelve Kālīs.

⁶*⁰ Read sukāī for ṣvakālī.

“’¹ Unfortunately, up to now the Kramastotra has not been recovered and is most
probably lost, so we only know it from quotations, most of which are by Jayaratha here

in his commentary. From what he says here, it appears, according to him, that there

were two verses in the Kramastotra dedicated to Yamakālī. In his commentary however

he only quotes one (see above, comm. on 4/151). But, as the opponent asserts, Sukālī

precedes Yamakālī in the more commonly accepted sequence of thirteen Kālīs. The
opponent alleges that this verse was indeed dedicated to Sukālī, but someone tampered
with the texts, replacing her name with bhavānī, which would be metrically possible.
Cf. equivalent CGC 231. Sanderson (2007: 353-4), observing that all the sources,
including the Kramastotra, prior to Abhinava refer to the Kālīs as thirteen, not twelve,

‘yet Abhinavagupta presents a text of the Kramastotra that teaches only twelve, lacking

Sukālī between Yamakālī (the fifth) and Mṛtyukālī (the seventh). This revision . . . was

achieved by Abhinavagupta or a predecessor, by expunging the reading sukalim in the

verse devoted to this Kālī and putting bhavānim in its place, a non-specific name of the
Goddess that enabled the verse to be read as a second one on Yamakālī, the deity who

immediately precedes Sukālī.”

⁶’³ This means that Jayaratha had seen the autograph of Hrasvanātha’s commentary on

the Kramastotra. Clearly, the Kramastotra was an important text for this Krama

tradition from early on in its development.

270

CHAPTER FOUR

reading we have seen (in the manuscripts)?⁴ Surely (then the opponent may
rejoin), why do you not reflect on which reading is correct (sādhu) and which

one is not? If a reading is a reasonable one (and makes sense) (samila), then

that is the correct one, whereas another is not. (To which we reply) that we
observe that here in both cases, according to the sequence (of verses of the
Kramastotra) (we have) presented, the root (reason) (mila) (for accepting the

reading) is equally valid in both cases (so this is not a criterion in this case).

Thus, the reason for accepting one (rather than the other) is that it accords with

the teaching (we have received from) our teachers.” As our grand-teacher has
said: ‘the instruction a teacher has imparted to someone is liberating for him.’

So whatever is said here (about this) by those who have not seen a teacher and

are not practiced in the traditional (teachings) concerning the scripture
(transmitted by a true lineage of teachers), devoid of (any insightful) reflection

(vimarśa) of their own and are not pleasing to the deities,® should (simply) be
ignored. So now enough of this great audacity of revealing what is extremely

secret.

Conclusion: the goddess Kālī
What is said to be (the way consciousness) operates (kalana) here (in

this case)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Five Operations (kalana) of Kālakarṣiṇī Kālī

šṇī āīi Ṁḷ aa ũtĩr st ha 1 2.93 1|
e|UECIAIHEUE³IĒEZGĒEI

āīī fēēhcā: ūaTīāīaīāī
saṀTt#īaāī u 2.9% 1
īrfēṝī: aṇākUīṝēā stṝārōārcza⁷ āq |

āīē: TJTRTTTTYTIĀTTTI TĪRGTHT I g4, I

kṣepo jñānaṁ ca saṁkhyānaṁ gatir nāda iti kramāt || 173 ||
svātmano bhedanaṁ kṣepo bheditasyāvikalpanam |
jñānaṁ vikalpaḥ saṁkhyānam anyato vyatibhedanāt || 174 |
gatiḥ svarūpārohitvaṁ pratibimbavad eva yat |
nādaḥ ṣvātmaparāmarśaśeṣatā tadvilopanāt || 175 ||

“³* Jayaratha is now tackling the problem as to why the sequence in which Abhinava
presents the Kālīs is not the commonly accepted one. Again, he is hard pressed to
establish that Abhinava received this sequential order from his teachers. We have
observed already that it is most likely that Abhinava did change it to suit his exegesis.

“’³ Read yathāsvagurūpadeśa- for yathāsvaṁ gurūpadeśa-.
“³ Read devānām apriyair for devānāṁ priyair.

TANTRĀLOKA

271

(The senses of the term ‘operates’ (kalana) is that of its root ‘kalʼ,

which are)” in due order: casting forth (kṣepa), knowledge (jūñāna),
enumeration (saṁkhyāna), movement (gati) and sound (nāda). (What is
meant by) ‘casting forth’ (in this context) is the (process of) separation

(bhedana) (of outer reality) from one’s own nature. ‘Knowledge’ (jñāna) is
abstention from forming thought constructs in relation to (this reality thus)
divided. ‘Enumeration’ (sarṅīkhyāna) is (on the contrary, the formation of)
thought constructs, determined by the mutual exclusion (of the subject and
the many objects from it and one another). ‘Movement’ (gati) is mounting
(of all things) into one’s own nature in the manner of a reflection (in a

mirror).* ‘Sound’ (nāda) is the reflective awareness of one’s own nature,
which is all that remains by destroying these (forms of perception).⁶”
(173cd-175)
“’’ Abhinavagupta now focuses on how consciousness ‘operates’ – kalana – the phases

of this process. He does this by explaining from the perspective of consciousness, the
standard lexical meanings of the root kal, from which this term is derived. Cf. above,

3/252cd-253ab and commentary. Cf. also TSā p. 30-31: kalanaṁ ca gatiḥ kṣepo

gaṇanaṁ bhogīkaraṇaṁ śabdanaṁ ṣvãtmalayīkaraṇaṁ ca | yadāhuḥ s’

rājaguravaḥ kṣepāj jñānāc ca kālī kalanavaśatayāthaī.. | iti | eṣa ca arthaḥ tatra tatra
madviracite vivaraṇe p. 31) prakaraṇastotrādau vitatya
vīkṣyaḥ | na atirahasyam ekatra
khyāpyaṁ na ca sarvathā gopyam iti hi asmadguravaḥ |
‘(The sense of the word) ‘operates’ (kalana) is ‘movement’ (gati), ‘casting
forth’ (kṣepa), ʻknowledge’ (jñāna), ‘enumeration’ (gaṇana), ‘make into an object of
experience’ (bhogīkaraṇa), ‘resound’ (śabdana) and *‘dissolving into oneself”
(svātmalayīkaraṇa). As the venerable teacher Bhūtirāja has said: “(She is called) Kālī
because she casts forth and knows, because the operations (of consciousness) are under
her control.” This subject should be examined at length in my commentary (vivaraṇa) to
the Prakaraṇastotra eṭc. (i.e. the Kramastotra). According to our venerable teacher, one

should not explain what is most secret (all) in one place, nor should it be concealed
completely.”

“’³ This is the meaning of the expression svarāpārohitvaṁ pratibimbavad eva. However,

it appears from his commentary that Jayaratha understands it to mean ‘(the process of)
appropriation of one’s own nature like a reflection (in a mirror)ʼ.

“’ The phases of cognitive consciousness are set into operation by its innate power,
hypostatized as the goddess Kālī, who thus performs them. They are five, as are the five

meanings of the root kal, which are as follows. 1) The process commences with the
external differentiated manifestation of the Light of inner, undifferentiated

consciousness that ‘casts forth’ the universe as if projecting out of itself, without

dividing it up, because it is all nothing but the shining of the Light of consciousness. 2)

In the next phase, reflective awareness, free of thought constructs, emerges along with
the Light, contemplating its manifestations as its own nature. This is called

‘knowledge’. 3) In the following phase, individual entities within the sparkling radiance
of the manifestation of the Light of consciousness are differentiated from each other as

objects and perceivers. This takes place by the process of conceptualization, through
mutual exclusion of one thing from everything else, and its ascertainment by the
ascription of thought constructs that label it. This is called ‘enumeration’. 4) The fourth

stage marks the beginning of the return to the original pure conscious state, by

perceiving that all that has thus been conceptually labelled is within the subject, who

conceives these conceptual distinctions. Thus, they are appropriated by the perceiver as

272

CHAPTER FOUR
(According to Pāṇini, there are four roots ‘kal’, with separate meanings.

Thus, the sense of the cognate roots) kal, kil and bil is ‘casting forth’ (kṣepa),
‘kal’ (in the sense of) ‘movement’ (gati), ‘kal’ (in the sense of) ‘enumeration’
(saṁkhyāna), and ‘kal’ (in the sense of) ‘sound’ (nāda). (This) group of four

roots has these five meanings, as (the sense of) ‘movement’ (comprises both)

‘knowledge’ (jñāna) and ‘appropriation’ (prāpti). This is explained in due order
(with the words) beginning with ‘in due order°. 1) (‘Casting forth’ in this
context means) ‘separation’ (bhedana), that is, (the act of) pouring out
externally

(of

the

universe

of

the

manifestations

of

consciousness).

2) (‘Knowledge’, which here means) ‘abstention from forming thought
constructsʼ, is the reflective awareness (of what has been manifest externally)

as one with one’s own nature. 3) (That which has been) ‘divided’ is reality (in
the form of) subjects and objects etc., due to the mutual exclusion (apohana) of
one another (in such a way that the notion arises that) ‘this is this and not this’,

by establishing (each individual entity) according (to its own) fixed determined

(nature), and so is ‘enumeration (saṁkhyāna)’, which is ‘(the formation of)

thought constructs'. 4) ‘“Movement’ (gati) here (in this case means), in a
secondary sense, (the act of) appropriation. Itis due to that that the reality which
has been divided up (into individual entities and their perceivers) ‘mounts’ onto
one's own nature, which is consciousness, in the sense that it appropriates it. Its
condition (bhāva) (expressed by the abstract noun ‘mountingʼ) is its actual

nature (tattva). This (appropriation) is not like, as one says, ‘the mat (belongs
to) Devadatta’ (in which case Devadatta and the mat remain distinct), (rather) it
is ‘in the manner of a reflection (in a mirror)ʼ, that is, even though it is not

separate from it, it manifests as (if it were) separate from it.'™ This is the overall
meaning. 5) ‘By destroying’, that is, removing ‘these’ (forms of) perception,
nondiscursive and the rest, ‘the reflective awareness of one’s own nature is

all that remains’, because it is just the resonance (of consciousness). This is the
(specific) meaning, whereas the overall sense is that that (destruction relates)

only to that which is separate (from consciousness).”⁰'

belonging to himself, not to an external reality, and so everything manifests as a part of
him, as are thoughts in the mind, or reflections in a mirror. This phase is called

‘movement’, in the sense of the movement or state of phenomena as states of
consciousness, from which is derived its other meaning, which is knowledge. 5) In the
final phase, this inner image of objectivity within the perceiver also fades away, leaving
behind the resonance of the pure, objectless, reflective awareness of the perceiving
subjectivity of pure consciousness.

⁷⁰ Thus, according to Jayaratha, the sense of ‘gati’ is to ‘lay hold’ or ‘appropriate’, in

the manner a reflection is ‘appropriated’ by a miror, namely, as one with it, although it
appears to be separate from it.

"" Juṣṭ the sense of duality and separation is destroyed, not the essential nature of things

in themselves, which is the one pure consciousness. In this way, the operation of
consciousness brings about the disappearance of all that is made manifest, and shines in

its original form as pure consciousness.

In his Kramanayapradīpikā (p. 11), Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that the five
meanings of the root kal indicate five meanings of the name Kālī, who is the supreme

goddess of consciousness (saṅviddevi), even as they denote five complementary ways
in which She operates (kalayati), and hence aspects of Her nature. These are:

TANTRĀLOKA

273

Now he comes to the point.

The Dynamism of Kālakarṣiṇī Kāḹī, Mātṛsadbhāva and Vāmeśvarī

=f rafētī-ā a- ē̄āṁ aṬ |
šafī āōī³ḷ āaṁ āīōārtīŪīī
āIṈḷ eīq ṇ 2ē. I]
iti pañcavidhām enāṁ kalanāṁ kurvatī parā |
devī kālī tathā kālakarṣiṇī
ceti kathyate || 176 ||
Thus, the Goddess Parā, Who performs these five operations
(kalanā), is called Kālī and Kālakarṣiṇī (the Destroyer of Time). (176)

1) (‘Casting forth’), which denotes the supreme goddess of consciousness as
the one who causes all things, that is, subject, means and object of knowledge, that
abide as one with one’s own nature, to pour forth in an external state (hahirbhāva).

2) (‘Knowledge’) denotes the supreme goddess of consciousness as the one
who contemplates this universe, consisting of subject, means and object of knowledge,
as one with Her own nature, although it has been made manifest as if outside it.
3) (‘Enumeration’) denotes Kālī, the wave of consciousness, as the supreme
goddess who operates in such a way that what has been divided, namely, reality, in the

form of the universe of subject and object etc., establishes (each entity) as having a

fixed (determined) form by mutual exclusion (of one thing from another), as (for

example) ‘this is a jar, not a clothʼ.

4) (‘Movement’, here in the secondary sense, of ‘appropriation’) denotes the
supreme goddess Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Kālī, as one who operates in such a way that she
establishes the specific nature of phenomenal reality, consisting of subject, means and

object of knowledge, in the mirror of her own consciousness, as separate from it within
her own nature, although it is not.

5) (‘Soundʼ) denotes Kālī as supreme consciousness who operates in such a

way that she contemplates everything as the reflective awareness of her own nature, (in
the form of) the residue that remains of all perceptions, whether nonconceptual
(avikalpa) or otherwise (savikalpa), by (fusing together and) contemplating
(anusaṁdhāna) (in her consciousness) the five cosmic functions (kṛtya) of emanation,

persistence, withdrawal, obscuration and grace. Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that the
Supreme Goddess of consciousness, who is complete and unobstructed in every way,
contemplates all perception, conceptual and otherwise, in the form of these five cosmic

functions. She then merges into the essence of the Fourth state of consciousness, which
is the reflective awareness of her own nature.

Sanderson (2006: 64) explains the same as follows: ‘the autonomous
consciousness which is the Absolute is called Kālī (i) because it throws, in the sense that
it projects the universe, causing it to appear as though beyond it (‘kal” ‘to throw’
[kṣepe1); 2) because through it the projection returns to (‘goes to’) its identity as
cognition (‘kal’ ‘to go’ [gatau]); ) 3) because it knows the projected in the sense that it

represents it as identical with its own identity (‘kal’ ‘to know’ [gatau]); 4) because it
enumerates the projection, in the sense that it distinguishes each element from all the
others within its own unity (‘kal’ ‘to count’ [ṣaṁkhyāne]), and 5) because it sounds in

the sense that when it has dissolved the projection it continues as the resonance of
internal self-awareness (‘kalʼ ‘to utter a sound³ [śahde]).”

274

CHAPTER FOUR
(She is called) the goddess Parā (Supreme) because (this name is) in

accord with Her nature. This is the intended (sense).
Theṣse are not Her only names, there are others also. Thus, he says:

TTTRHTATKTITTI
āTTTHTqṬ I

GTāē-cifeī
JHTṬCd’ TRCTYĀTT I 9. I
arafr
vrazāī ũṁī sĩ-rraāa |
mātṛsadbhāvasaṁjñāsyās tenoktā yat pramātṛṣu |
etāvad antasaṁvittau pramātṛtvaṁ sphuṭībhavet || 177 ||
vāmeśvarīti śabdena proktā śrīniśisañcare |

Thus, She is called Mātṛsadbhāva⁷”² (the Essence of (AIl Perceiving)

Subjects) because the subjectivity within the (seven orders of) subjects is

clearly evident (only) within this ultimate level of consciousness
(antasaṁviṭti). In the venerable Niśisaṁcara she is called Vāmeśvarī.⁷⁰
(177-178ab)

‘Thus She’, the Goddess Parā, Who is called by various names, such as
Kālī, is said to be (also) ‘called Mātṛsadbhāva’ (the Essence of (AlIl

Perceiving) Subjects) ‘within this ultimate level of consciousness’, that is,

within consciousness engaged in the process of attaining each correspondingly
(higher degree) of excellence at the (supreme) conclusion (paryanta) of the
(concomitantly progressive unfolding of the) Twelve Goddesses, ‘because the
subjectivity², that is, the agency of the act of perception (pramitikriyā) ʻwithin
the (seven orders of) subjects’, beginning with the fully obscured (subject)
(sakala), ‘īs clearly evident’ (there). (In other words,) it is the essence
(sadbhāva) of these subjects (mātṛ), which is (their) state of oneness with
supreme consciousness, which is self-luminous and free.⁷® As is said:

‘It is taught that this is the supreme essence (sadbhāva) of the

Mothers.³¹⁰⁵

‘The venerable Nisisaṁcara’ is the Niśāṭana.⁰⁰⁰ As is said there:
”⁰² The Mantras of these two goddesses of supreme consciousness are given below, see
30/43d-50ab.
7⁰³ Abhinava has just said that Parā, equated with Kālasaṁkarṣinī, is called

Mātr̥sadbhāva. As before, he finds this name in the MV 8/41ab, where it refers to Parā

as the essence of the mātṛkāṣ (also quoted in 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab)). Abhinava gives the

same name (having seen it in an original source in this sense) to Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. See

above, notes to TĀv ad 1/6, 3/68ab-70ab (68cd-70) and 3/109 (109cd-110ab). He adds
here that she is called Vāmeśvarī in the Niśisaṅcara.
⁷⁰⁴ Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that Kālī (i.e. Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī) is called Mātṛsadbhāva
(the Essence of (All Perceiving) Subjects) because ‘by taking the essential being of this

goddess Kālī as its foundation, the light of the subjectivity, that is, consciousness of all
the phenomenal universe, becomes clearly evident.’ KNP p. 11.

⁷⁰³ MV 8/41ab; also quoted above in TĀv ad 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab).

TANTRĀLOKA
‘This

the

Kaulikī

Vidyā

(ice.

Mantra),

275
which

bestows

every

accomplishment (siddhi). It has come forth from the presence of the God of the
gods along the path of (His) power (śakti), which is the descent (of the Goddess)

Vāmeśvarī,⁰⁷ and become manifest.”

Surely, (an opponent may ask), how can the oneness (of consciousness
you teach as being ultimately) real (tāttvika), in such a way that that unified
(ekatara) reflective awareness (you call) the venerable Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī,
Mātṛṣadbhāva and so on, is possible, if by assuming the form of emanation and
the rest, there is a difference between (its) manifestations, and so, sequential as
it is, is extremely varied? With this doubt in mind, he says:

zc?j graaaī āfdāftrīsī fāT]T I Q9¢ 1
ūāāftī ī atsūaī. Ṁā̃ fra āṝ-ī̄ |

JTĀTTTT JTTTGĀTATGrĪTTSTĪ T I 2.9, I

itthaṁ dvãdaśadhã saṁvit tiṣṭhantĩ viśvamãtr̥ṣu |l 178 |I
ekaiveti na ko ʻpy asyāḥ kramasya niyamaḥ kvacit |
kramābhāvān na yugapat tadabhāvāt kramo ‘pi na || 179 ||
kramākramakathātītaṁ ṣaṅvitattvaṁ sunirmalam |
In this way, consciousness, that abides twelve-fold within all
(perceiving) subjects (mmātṛ), is one only, and so is not subject in any way to
succession (krama). Again, because there is no succession (of differing
elements), there is also no simultaneity (between the appearance of
differing elements), and as there is no (simultaneity), there is also no
succession. The principle of consciousness, extremely pure, transcends all

talk of succession and its absence (kramākramakathātīta).⁰⁰⁸ (178cd-180ab)

7⁰⁶Both names mean the same, that is, ‘(the Tantra concering the Vow of) Wandering
at Night’. Also called the Vow of Knowledge (vidyāvrata) (see above, note 2,7), the
practice of ‘Wandering at Night’ is the perambulation of Kaula ascetics to and in sacred

sites in search of Yoginīs, by uniting with whom and eating their sacred food, they are
said to attain yogic powers (siddhi) and even liberation. See Dyczkowski 2009 vol 1, p.

514-518.

⁰⁷ Concerning Vāmeśvarṁī and the goddesses associated with Her, understood from the
Krama perspective, see Dyczkowski 1986: 129-130; 1992: 56, 670, 182 and 2009 intro.

1,39. Swami Lakshmanjoo understands Vāmeśvaṁī here to be Tripurasundarī. He

explains: ‘(the Goddess) is called Vāmeśvarī in the Niśātana and other scriptures
because this goddess, abandoning her fierce (raudra), that is, frightening process
(krama) (i.e. form) which destroys all things, assumes the process (i.e. form) which
bestows joy to all, and so is manifest in the form of Vāmeśvarī, that is, Tripurasundarī’.

(KNP p. 11)

⁰* Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains (KNP p. 45-46): “The sense is that although the

goddess of consciousness, who has twelve forms associated with the perceiver, abides

within all perceivers, that is to say, in the wheels of the subject, means and object of
knowledge, even so, in reality, she has only one nature (svarūpa). In reality, (there is) no

276

CHAPTER FOUR
‘In this way’, in the aforementioned manner, Parā Herself, the Goddess

of Consciousness, is present ‘within all (perceiving) subjects'. The (use of the)

plural assumes the sense of ‘etc.’ (The point being that the Goddess of
Consciousness is present in all things, not just the perceiving subjects,) and so,
because it includes implicitly the means of knowledge and the rest, although

(consciousness) manifests twelve-fold as the field of the subject, means of

knowledge and the rest, it is ‘one only³, without a second. This is the meaning.
The intended sense is that even though (consciousness) manifests as all things, it
does not fall from its own essential nature. Thus, it has no fixed sequence

(krama), such that it must manifest only as twelve-fold. Although supreme

consciousness manifests in association with the limiting adjuncts of (the cycle
of) emanation and the rest, even so, in accord with the dictum: ‘this Self has
shone forth (just) once (sakṛt)’,⁷™ the manifestation of its own essential nature is
not conditioned (and divided up by it), and so, like a flash of lightning, there are

no gaps in its shining. Thus, within its own nature, it is not conditioned (and
divided) by time. So what occasion could there be for succession, which is of
that nature,

(to arise

within consciousness)? And so, there is also no

simultaneity within’"⁰ (consciousness), (as) that arises when there is a contrast
(with something else), like that between two scintillating particles of (heated)
iron. There is nothing else in relation to which it may be contrasted, and so with
what could there be simultaneity? Thus, this (consciousness) is not associated
with succession or its contrary. He says that (with the words) beginning with,

‘because there is no succession’.

Surely (one may ask,) here (in everyday life,) phenomena are

necessarily associated with succession (as time) and its absence (as space), s0

how is it that the principle of consciousness (with which phenomena are one) is
said to be beyond them? So (in response,) he says that (supreme consciousness,
devoid of both, is) ‘extremely pure’, whereas the perceiver subject to Māyā

(māyāpramātṛ) (in the deep sleep of) emptiness and the rest"™ is not pure (in

this sense), and (so) is conditioned by time, as the succession of the

manifestations of different states, due to the difference between the

manifestations of the (phases of) the activity (of a lifetime), beginning with

succession (krama) of (states in) this Supreme Goddess in whatever place or state she
may be. However, there is also no state of simultaneity (yugapadbhāva) within Her.

From the point of view of reality, this completely pure and most excellent place of the

Goddess of Consciousness is far removed from all talk of succession (krama) or its

absence (akrama). The goddess Kālī, going beyond the state of succession and its
absence, shines brilliantly on (this) most excellent plane (of supreme consciousness).”

⁷⁰⁹ See note above in TĀv ad 1/57.

⁷¹⁰ Read nāsyāṁ for nāṣyā.
⁷'!! The individual perceiver below the level of Māyā experiences himself as separate

from the object, because he identifies with the psychophysical organism he inhabits,
which is objective and hence separate from other objects. The Māyā perceiver, because
of this identification, is subject to the three states of consciousness, namely, waking,

dreaming and deep sleep. The first two correspond to the activity of the body, senses

and mind, witnessed by the embodied perceiver (dehapramātṛ) and that of the vital
breath (prāṇapramātr̥). Deep sleep is the domain of the ‘void perceiver”
(śūnyapramātṛ). See IP 3/2/13-17 for a definition and description of these states of
consciousness.

TANTRĀLOKA

2717

birth. Perceiving oneself in relation to the cessation of the manifestation of a
previous state, as manifesting accordingly as having past, it makes (things)

manifest as present in relation to that past (condition). In relation to the present
manifestation, it establishes another future state, which consists of the
manifestation of its alteration (pariṇāma) and other (forms of change). (Even)

those who believe that time has an (independent) existence of its own, consider
the simultaneity of particular entities, such as the (the colour) blue and the like,
to exist in relation to oneself. Thus, the manifestation of succession and

simultaneity pertains to that (individual perceiver, not consciousness). ”¹² As is

said (in the Īśvarapratyabhijñā):

‘In every case, the difference between (successive) manifestations

(ābhāsabheda) is also in the form of temporal succession. (This conditioned)
discontinuous manifestation pertains to (lower individual perceivers identified
with the) Void (of deep sleep) etc., not to (the unconditioned) perceiver

(himself), who shines once (and forever) (sakṛt).’ ¹³

Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, how can that supreme
consciousness (be worshipped)? The act of worship (pūjā) is based on
succession, consisting as it does of (various phases), such as (the initial)

invocation (and drawing the deity down into its representation) (āvāhana) and
dismisṣsal (at the end). With this doubt in mind, he says:

⁷¹² Consciousness

is here described as ‘extremely pure’. This means that it is not at the

level of the individual subject in the realm of the duality of Māyā, who experiences the
manifestation of phenomena successively and consequentially, in such a way that he

experiences that things are taking place in the present in relation to the past, and those of
the future in relation to the present. The object appears to manifest independently of
consciousness, and so the change to which it is subject from moment to moment gives

rise to the sense of time passing. Pure consciousness is free of objectivity and so is
timeless. Identifying with the psychophysical organism, which is objective, and
perceiving that its previous states have passed, we have a sense that time is passing for
us. It is in relation to that sense of time passing that we experience the present time as
being the present. Pure consciousness is self-existent. It does not depend on the body,

which is its manifestation in that form, and there is nothing apart from consciousness
which could ‘sully’ it with objectivity, and so it is not experienced successively as being
such previously and is now different, and so is not subject to temporal succession.

”¹³ TP 2/1/6. The expression here is ‘sakṛt – literally ‘once’. ‘Once’ in this sense is not

an event set in time. The true Self manifests ‘once’ and forever, that is, eternally. See

above note in TĀv ad 1/57. Utpaladeva explains in his brief commentary (vṛtti): “In
every object, diversified manifestation determines the appearance of temporal
succession (exclusively) for the knowing subject who identifies himself with the void

(experienced in deep sleep and the like), the body and so on. Indeed, apart from
memory, what was manifest in the past (prākkāla) does not shine in the same manner at
the present moment, and it is with reference to his own present (svavartamānāpekṣayā)
that the subject may use the notions of past and future as everyday experience. On the

contrary, for the (true) knowing subject who shines uninterruptedly, once and forever
(sakṛdvibhātasya), there is no temporal differentiation, neither in himself nor as regards

objects, since, as the shining is never interrupted, it is not possible to speak of
repetition.’ Torella’s translation.

278

CHAPTER FOUR

ī̄zzaī. āfrī šzaī āā āaād JāīTḤ II 2¢.⁰ |

[eiaṇzaitE'ḵvuEfEEH

tad asyāḥ saṁvido devyā yatra kvāpi pravartanam || 180 ||
tatra tādātmyayogena pūjā pūrṇaiva vartate |
Worship is complete (and perfect) (pūrṇā) by virtue of the union
(yoga) of the oneness (of all that is perceived within consciousness as one

with it), wherever this Goddess of Consciousness operates.”™ (180cd-181ab)

The main form of worship is the condition (avasthāna) (that arises)
wherever
one
lays
hold
of
(and
rests
within)
consciousness

(saṁvidavaṣṭambha). (According to us this is the main and most authentic form
of worship, it is) not (the outer ritual which involves a sequence of rites,) such
as the invocation (of the deity) and the rest. This is the purport (of what he is
saying here). As is said:
‘In whichever most excellent (inner) centre (cakra) one experiences the

contentment of the bliss of that (gentle) touch, the Yoga of laying hold of (and

reposing within consciousness) (avasṭambhayoga)¹ of that is said to be the
prescribed form of worship (pājāvidhi).’”"
7⁴ Cf. above, 4/121cd-122ab and commentary, with reference to VBh 147. The practice
of outer ritual, which involves the application of the power to act (kriyāśakti) that

operates in the sphere of the Individual Means, has no place in the sphere of the
Empowered Means, which is that of the power of knowledge (jñānaśakti). How then is
the worship of the Twelve Kaālīs to be performed here? How is their Mantra to be recited
in this internal worship? How should they be visualized (dhyāna)? How are the

offerings made to the sacrificial fire and the rest of the rites to be performed? As an

answer to these implicit questions, Abhinava provides their ‘internal’ equivalents,

practiced mentally and in the sphere of perception proper to the Empowered Means,

through which thought is purified and prepared for the realisation of higher
nonconceptual (nirvikalpa) consciousness.
7!³1 ṭranslate the term ‘avaṣṭambha’ as ‘laying hold’. A more literal translation would be
‘checking’ or ‘blocking’. The practice may be equally external or internal. Outwardly,
the ‘most excellent centre’ is the genitals. It is the locus of the ‘most excellent touch’
(sparśavara), that generates the blissful experience of sexual arousal. Accordingly, this

place is called ‘the Abode of Bliss (ānandadhāman). The same bliss may also be
experienced in other centres (cakra) within the subtle body by the ‘touch’ of
Kuṇḍalinī’s blissful spiritual energy. This verse teaches that the yogi should not be
carried away by lust or other such emotions. Instead, he should ‘lay hold’ or ‘block’ the
sense of contentment that accompanies the blissful experience, which is essentially that

of consciousness. The practice is a way of worshipping Deity. If all the yogi experiences
is sexual arousal, he has not been able to catch hold of the spiritual consciousness that
develops at the beginning and ‘block² it, to prevent it from degenerating into lust.

7!⁶ This verse refers to the inner practice of Yoga in the course of sexual union. The bliss

of union is in actual fact the experience of Kuṇḍalinī’s rise through the subtle body of

the conjoined partners, although they may not realise Kuṇḍalinī is the rising breath

(udānaprāṇa) that ascends through the central channel (suṣumnā) when the inhaled and
exhaled breaths are sucked into it, as it were, in the intensity of climax. The stations of

TANTRĀLOKA

279

Surely (one may ask,) it is said everywhere that there can

be no worship without Mantra, and if Mantras are separate from consciousness,

then the worship which is the condition (avasthāna) of oneness with
consciousness is lost. Whereas, if they are not separate (from consciousness),
should not (another) separate teaching be imparted concerning them? Taking
this question into account, he says (the following), as announced in the initial

enunciation, in order to reveal (the true nature of) the vitality of Mantra

(mantravīrya) as pervaded by the dawning of the cycle of consciousness.

The Vitality of Mantra (mantravīrya)¹
its ascent are marked by the inner configurations or ‘wheels’ of energies it ‘touches’ and
thereby activates, as centres of the blissful experience of ‘touch’. This process begins at
the lowest centre in the genitals, and proceeds upwards to finally ‘touch’ and make
contact with the energies of supreme consciousness, and merge into them as their all-

embracing plenitude (piūrṇatā). One-pointedly and devoutly catching hold and resting
within Śiva consciousness in this way is one of the highest, most perfect forms of
worship.

⁷¹⁷ The following passage, which extends from 4/181cd to 193, concerns the Heart and
the dynamics of its pulsation. An earlier version is found in the Mālinīvijayavārtika,

which is translated below. In this version, Abhinava refers only to the operation of the

energies of SAUḤ in the process of emanation, in the forward order, and that of
withdrawal, in the reverse order, which in the TĀ is represented by the energies of

KHPHREM (see below 4/189cd-190). The expansion of the former and the contraction

of the latter together constitute the resonance (dhvani) of the throb (sphuraṇa) of the
Heart. This is the ceaseless repetition of Mantra which is the reflective awareness of

consciousness.
Abhinava has just finished explaining in the Mālinīvijayavārtika, that Sound
Reasoning (sattarka) as taught in Trika Śaivism leads to realization. He continues:

“Therefore, we will talk about the supreme means (to attain) that supreme
nonduality which graces all things, namely, the Heart which is the pulsation (of
consciousness) (spandana). (18cd)
The (reality) which, consisting of (awakened) consciousness (hodha), is within
the Heart, is (its own) reflective awareness of itself (svavimarśa). It is the wonder (of
the experience of the beauty of its) full (and all-embracing) consciousness. It is the
vibrant effulgence (sphuraṇa) (of the Light of consciousness) that has everywhere
merged (all things into itself) with great force, simultaneously and all at once. (19)
Perfectly full of the contentment (nivṛti) that pours forth from the two states at

the beginning and the end of (each) perception of (any phenomenal) thing

(bhāvagraha), it is made of Cosmic Bliss, and said to be the universal vibration (of

consciousness) (sāmānyaspanda). (20) (cf. TĀ 4/182cd)

The radiant pulsation (sphuraṇa) of the Heart which is this manifest (prakaṭa)
universe manifests (pratibhāti) as the Being (S) of the Abode of Emission (H) to the

degree in which it penetrates here into the energy of Trika (AU). (The wise) explain that

this Heart (i.e. SAUH) is the supreme nectar of Bhairava consciousness. Present in the
prongs (of the Trika Trident), consisting of the powers of will, knowledge and action
(AU), it is emitted into Supreme Abode (S). (21-22)
(There,) this universe of the nature of consciousness has manifested (sphurita)
within the supreme (reality), which is the Lord’s supreme nature (bhagavatparātman)
(S), and is then present in the prongs (of the Trident of) the three powers (AU) by the
path of the emission of the Sāmbhava plane (H). Thuṣ, that is proclaimed to be Being

280

CHAPTER FOUR

The Universal Pulse of the Heart of Consciousness

mm-ycāyīācāīzāaī
ā: īã sai: |] 2.2 1

āa

tŨṁ ũ̄ḷ ã q |

parāmarśasvabhāvatvād etasyā yaḥ svayaṁ dhvaniḥ || 181 I|
sadoditaḥ sa evoktaḥ paramaṁ hṛdayaṁ mahat |
As (consciousness) is reflective awareness, its spontaneous and
perpetually emergent (sadodita) resonance (dhvani) (of pure self-awareness,
which is the supreme level of Speech,) is called the supreme, Great Heart

(SAUḤ).⁷⁸ (181cd-182ab)

‘The resonance’ that arises spontaneously is Supreme Speech, which is
the Sound (nāda) that is the reflective awareness of (supreme) ‘’
(consciousness), in accord with the dictum:
“The god (deva), who resides in the chest of living (breathing) beings,
spontaneously utters (the Mantra) not uttered by anybody and that none

obstructs.⁷⁷¹⁸

(sat) (S). That is here (according to the Trika teachings), this Heart which is full (all-

embracing) ‘I’ (consciousness) that shines perpetually as the radiant pulse (sphuraṇa) of

the union of Śiva and Śakti. (23-24)

Here the processes of emanation, persistence and withdrawal, generated

(saṅcita) by Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Hara as their causes, manifest a hundred times or

thousands of billions of times as the (one) eternal (reality). (25)

The one who enters herein (readily) in a moment (sadyas) by way of the

aforementioned aggregate of means (yukti) is not one who is not empowered (and

capable to do so). It is for him that the (nature of the) pulsation of the Heart is elucidated

by the path of the Empowered Means.³ (26) MVV 2/18cd-26

This is the concluding verse of this section on the Heart, the realization of
which, in these terms, is indeed treated by Abhinava in the chapter of the TĀ dealing

with the Empowered Means. What follows concerns the Six Blisses. They are related to
the Heart and its pulsation as the culminating Cosmic Bliss of this series as the universal
pulsation of the Heart, but Abhinava places them in Chapter Five of the TĀ, dealing

with the Individual Means. The reason for this is that, as is the case with all the other
practices outlined in Chapter Five, the progressive development of states begins at the

Individual level, progressing through the sphere of the Empowered Means, in which

vikalpas are purified, to reach the sphere of the Divine Means of consciousness free of
all differentiation.

”⁴⁸ See below, 4/186cd-189ab.

⁷¹⁹ SYṬ 7/59. This verse is also quoted above, in the commentary on 3/66cd-67ab (67)

and 3/147cd-148 (147-148ab), and again below in the commentary on 5/132cd-133ab
(5/131cd-132ab) and 8/388-394ab (387cd-393). See there for more details. The deity is
Haṁsa, as the original reading (haṁṣaḥ for devaḥ) in the SVT clearly confirms (see
above, note 3,166 ad 3/66cd-67ab (67), note 3,473 ad 3/147cd-148 (147-148ab) and
note 4,437). Haṁsa is the Unstruck Sound spontaneously made by the breath. It is the

microcosmic equivalent of the Unstruck Sound of the reflective awareness which is the

TANTRĀLOKA

281

It is ‘spontaneousʼ because it does not depend on anything else (apart

from the one universal reality of consciousness), and so because its nature is

eternal and unceasing, it is ‘perpetually emergent’; (in other words,) it is

(constantly) being uttered. All the scriptures refer to the (resonance of the

reflective awareness) of this supreme consciousness as the ‘supreme’ essence,

and as ‘Great’ (in the sense that) it pervades (all things) everywhere and at all

times, because it (never) wavers from it own nature.⁷ (It is also called the)
‘Heart’, which is the true nature (of all things) (tathyaṁ rūpam). Thus, as the

essential nature (of consciousness) is the reflective awareness of (supreme) ‘I’

(consciousness), which is (its) sovereign lordship (aiśvarya),¹”¹ it manifests as

all things by virtue of its glorious power (māhātyma). As is said (in the

Īśvarapratyabhijñā):

‘(The power of) consciousness (citi) is reflective awareness. It is
Supreme Speech that arises spontaneously. That is the (supreme) primary
(mukhya) freedom and sovereignty of the Supreme Self. That is the radiant
effulgence (of the Light of consciousness as the manifestation of all things), the
great (universal) Being (of all that exists), unconditioned by time and space. As

the essence (of all things), that (Supreme Speech) is said to be the Heart of the

Supreme Lord.””²

This reflective awareness of (supreme) ‘I’ (consciousness) is also

referred to in the scriptures, amongst other things, as ‘spanda’, not just the

Heart. Accordingly, he says:

za aifṣrāīṣāī zīferārrṁ’̄rāh: u1 2¢2 1
ipaúkurE-t'eīḷ TTHI-JTT::

|

T-=. q hē̄ JĪ TJISHÇTFJGĨĨ̄Ĩ: || 2_3 1|
hṛdaye svavimarśo ‘sau drāvitāśeṣaviśvakaḥ || 182 ||
bhāvagrahādiparyantabhāvī sāmānyasaṁjñakaḥ |
spandaḥ sa kathyate śāstre svātmany ucchalanātmakaḥ || 183 I

vitality of consciousness, the breath of which is the cycle of the reflective awareness of
the supreme ‘ of the divine Light of Śiva consciousness.
”²⁰ Although consciousness lights up whatever shines within it, it remains the same, one
undivided, unconditioned consciousness, and so pervades all things as their fundamental
inner nature.

”²¹ Supreme consciousness is the master of all things, because it creates and sustains
them as manifestations of its own Light within itself. This takes place because it reflects

upon itself and all things as ‘I am all this'. The reflective awareness, which is the

freedom of consciousness to be all things without compromising its oneness as all

things, is the same power by virtue of which consciousness is not just an absolute

priṅciple, it is Lord Śiva. Thus, it is also His sovereignty.

⁷² TP 1/5/13-14. 1/5/14 quoted ad 3/209cd-210, 5/139-140 (138-139) and 29/126cd127ab; ĪP 1/5/14cd is quoted ad 1/174cd-176ab.

282

CHAPTER FOUR
The self-awareness (svavimarśa) (from which) all things have flowed

forth (drāvita)⁷² (and dissolved away) within the Heart (of consciousness),

present in the beginning and end of perception (bhāvagraha),⁷⁴ is called,
according

to

the

(Spanda)

teachings,

the

universal

vibration

of

consciousness (sāmānyaspanda), which is the outpouring (uccalana) (of

consciousness) within one’s own nature.⁷ (182cd-183)

⁷²³ The word ‘drāvita’ literally means ‘melted’, by which Jayaratha understands both
‘flowed forth’ and ‘fallen away’, which are also possible meanings of the word.
Accordingly, I have supplied both in the translation.

⁷²³ T have translated bhāvagraha as ‘perception’. The literal meaning is ‘the grasping of
existence (> phenomena)³. Perception takes places in three stages. At the beginning and
the end there is a pure awareness, free of thought constructs, of pure ‘I’ consciousness

which is its universal activity (sāmānyaspanda). In between, a determinate perception,

such as ‘this is blue’⁷ develops, which is a thought construct.

⁷³³ Cf. MVV 2/18cd ff:

ata eva parādvaitaṁ yad viśvānugrahātmakam |I 18 II
tasyopāyaṁ paraṅ brūte hṛdayaṁ spandanātmakam |
hṛdaye bodhamayo yaḥ svavimarśaḥ pūrṇaciccamatkāraḥ |

yugapad drāg iti haṭhato līmīkrtaviśvataḥsphuraṇaḥ l 1 9 l
bhāvagrahādyacaramadaśādvayollāsinirvr̥tisupārṇaḥ |

jagadānandamayo ʻsau sāmānyaspanda ity uktaḥ l| 20 ||
sphuraṇaṁ hr̥dayasya yat kila prakaṭaṁ viśvam idaṁ viṣargadhāmnaḥ |
sad iti pratibhãti yãvatã trikaśaktau viśatĩha tāvatā || 21 ||
tad idaṁ hr̥dayaṁ nirucyate paramaṁ bhairavasaṅvidāmrtam |
iṣidṛkkṛtiśaktiśūlagaṁ parame dhāmni visr̥jyate tataḥ l| 22 |

parame bhagavatparātmani sphuritaṁ viśvam idaṁ cidātmakam |
śaktitrayaśūlagaṁ tataḥ śāmbhavabhūmivisargavartmanā || 23 ||
tad atho ʻsad iti pragīyate tad idaṁ pūrṇam ihāhamātmakam |

hṛdayaṁ śivaśaktisaṁgamasphuraṇātmaiva sadāvabhāsate || 24 1
iha sṛṣṭilayasthitikramāḥ śataśo vāpi sahasrakoṭiśaḥ |

pravibhānti ṣadātanātmaṇā haraviṣṇvambujahetusaṁcitāḥ || 25 |
iha tu puroktād yuktikalāpād yaḥ praviśet sadyo nāśaktaḥ |
taṁ prati śāktopāyapathena prakatīkriyate hṛdayaspandaḥ || 26 |

“Thus, I will now talk about the supreme means (upāya) to attain the supreme

nondual (reality) that graces all the universe, namely, the Heart, which is the pulsation

(spandana) (of consciousness). One’s own (inherent) reflective awareness, which is
awakened consciousness, is the wonder of full (unconditioned) consciousness within the

Heart. Suddenly and all at once with great force (hahataḥ) (its) radiant pulse
(sphuraṇa) is dissolved away in all respects (everywhere). (18cd-19)

The nondual outpouring at the beginning and end of perception, beautifully full

(and complete), made of Cosmic Bliss, is said to be the universal vibration of

consciousness (sāmānyaspanda). The radiant pulse of the Heart is clearly evident as this

universe that emerges from the abode of emission (visargadhāman) and shines as Being
untiḹ it enters here into the energy of Trika. That is said to be this Heart, the supreme
nectar of Bhairava’s consciousness. (20-22ab)

Then (the emission) present on the Trident of the energies of will, knowledge
and action is emitted into the Supreme Abode, that is, this universe, the nature of which

is consciousness. Present in the Trident of the three energies, it has flashed forth in the
Supreme, which is the Lord’s Supreme Self. That which is said to be Being is this

TANTRĀLOKA

283

In accord with the teaching that ‘(the word) ‘heart’ is a synonym of

consciousness (bodha)²,'™ the reflective awareness ‘within the Heart’ is within

the (awakened) consciousness which is one’s own nature. It has ‘flowed forth’
(drāvita), that is, extended out in an external form and also ‘dissolved away’, in
the sense that it has brought all things into a state of inner tranquillity. Thus, this

is its state of being (bhavanasīla) (in the beginning) ‘of perception’ʼ, that is,
when it is (just) beginning to assume the form of all things, and (consciousness)

intends to create (forms of perception and its contents) (nirmmitsāvasarē), ”³¹ and
at the ‘end’ when it intends to withdraw (them back into itself). Thus (reflective
awareness) is the (dynamic) state (of consciousness which is its perpetual)

outpouring (ucchalattā) as the expansion and contraction of its own nature.

Thus, in the Spandaśāstra and elsewhere, it is called the ‘vibration’ (of
consciousness), which should be said to be universal (not particular), as it does

not pour forth in (any) particular form, and also because it rests tranquil (within

itself). The meaning is that, in accord with its nature as the (dynamic) state (of
consciousness which is its perpetual) outpouring (ucchalattā), the nature of

which is subtle (non-temporal) motion (kiṁccicalana),⁷⁸ it is termed ‘ spanda'

Surely, if that is so, then would not consciousness be constantly subject
to destruction, falling away, as it does, from its own essential nature due to (its)
subtle motion? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ffzrrōṁīāaarzaxrzTt
fē ã 1

fĩšaī fēṝaāraīaī afēraṉ fē- 1 7.c1
kiñcic calanam etāvad ananyasphuraṇaṁ hi yat |
ūrmir eṣā vibodhābdher na saṁvid anayā vinā || 184 |
(This vibration is that) subtle motion (kirṁīciccalana) which is the
pulsing radiance (sphuraṇa) (of self-Ruminous consciousness that shines as

all things, independent of all else) which is not different (from itself). It is

Plenitude which is ‘’, the Heart, which is the radiant pulse of the union of Śiva and

Śakti, that shines perpetually. (22-24)

The processes of emanation, withdrawal and persistence, gathered together by
Hari, Viṣṇu and Brahmā, shine forth here a hundred or a thousand million times as the
eternal Self. He who enters (therein) by the manifold means taught (here) does so
immediately and is not powerless. It is for him that the vibration of the Heart is revealed
by the path of the Empowered Means.³ (25-26)

”³⁸ Mrṛgendratantra (Vidyāpāda) 1/3/11c.

”⁷ Cf. MVV 1/185, where we find the same expression:
sthitaḥ sarvasphurattātmã sarvasiddhiphalodayaḥ |
evaṁ jagati nirmeye nirmitsāsvīkṛtaṁ balāt l|

‘Persistence is the radiant manifestation of all things. It is the dawning of the

fruits of all accomplishments. It is the intention to create (forms of perception and its

contents) that has been appropriated with force within the created universe.” MVV

1/185

¹³³ Concerning spanda as subtle non-temporal motion, see Dyczkowski, 1987: 81.

284

CHAPTER FOUR

the wave (ūrmi) of the ocean of consciousness, and consciousness is (never)

without it.⁷ (184)

That ‘subtle motion (kiṁciccalana) is the pulsing radiance (sphuraṇa),

which is the illumination of consciousness™ that (makes all things manifest as)

‘not different (from itself)’. (In other words,) it is independent of (all) else.
The meaning is that its light is not derived from something else, rather it is its
own (self-luminous) Light. This is the difference between (the Light of
consciousness) and insentient things, namely, that it shines by itself in this way
and

that

(tathā

tathā).

Thusṣ, just

(consciousness) is called ‘vibration’

as

this

reflective

awareness

of

‘I’

(spanda) in the Spandaśāstra and

elsewhere, in the same way it is also called ‘wave’ (ūrmi) in the venerable

Ūrmikaula.”¹ This is said (with the words), ‘it is the wave (āūrmi) of the ocean

⁷²⁹ Cf. above, 3/146ab-146cd (145cd-146ab).

7³⁰ Consciousness, from this perspective, has two aspects. One is its Light, which is

consciousness in itself. The other its ‘pulsing radiance’ (sphuraṇa) or ‘effulgence’
(sphurattā), which is the activity — spanda – of consciousness, that generates and is all
the countless phenomena that are illumined by its light, and shines as its phenomenal

manifestations. So just as they are not different from it, for the same reason this, the

radiance of the Light, is independent of all else. These two aspects of the one reality is

what is perceived by the direct perception (sākṣāt), free of thought constructs, that it has

of its own nature, at once as it is in itself and all its manifestations. When thought
constructs arise, individual entities are perceived by individual perceivers through their

own means of knowledge. This is the domain of duality, just as, conversely, the former
is that of nonduality.
The innate reflective awareness of consciousness centred in itself, as the
reflective awareness of supreme ‘I’ consciousness, first extends outwards and then is

brought to rest inwards. This process, which alternates between the expansion and
contraction of consciousness or self-awareness, is termed ‘Spanda’. It is consciousness
moving out into differentiated (vikalpa) awareness, thus creating a variegated,

differentiated universe of experience, and then withdrawing inwards and taking its rest

in undifferentiated (nirvikalpa) self-awareness. The formeris Śakti and the latter Śiva.
In reality, they are one, because Śakti has no support and Śivais not the support of
anything.

The expansion into a cosmos of objectivity (prameya) (which is really an

aspect of the means of knowledge), marks the contraction of self-awareness. This
movement from inner to outer occurs at every instant of perception. From the

undifferentiated awareness of something arises the perception “I perceive this”, and
again this returns into the undifferentiated state of pure self-awareness when the tension

of the need (ākaṁṅkṣa) to know has been relieved. This marks the contraction of outer

awareness and the expansion of the inner. This spontaneous alternation is termed
Spanda. The yogi who applies himself assiduously to the practice of cultivating and
maintaining awareness of this process experiences the expansion of consciousness in the
centre (madhyavikāsa) between these two phases. There, in the centre, he surveys the
entire process happening within himself as an expression of the exertion (udyama)

which is his innate freedom as the supreme subject, who is both the knower and agent of

this process. This vibration is the effulgence of awareness which, not illumined by
anything else, is self-luminous, and so differs from inert matter. Just as this Light is self-

luminous, it is also self-moving. External objects differ from it in this respect. It is self-

awareness, life itself.
³√ Read ‘śrīmadūrmikaula ūrmitvenāpi’ for ‘śrīnadāūrmikīlāv ūrmitvenāpi’.

TANTRĀLOKA

285

of consciousnessʼ. Surely (one may ask,) why do all the scriptures hold this

view? With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘consciousness is (never) without it’.
(Indeed,) this itself is the very being of consciousness (saṁvidaḥ saṁvitvam),

namely, that it reflects on everything. Otherwise, (if this were not s0), when
(consciousness) is coloured by each particular entity, it would not differ from
(common) crystal and the like. As is said (in the śvarapratyabhījñā):
‘The (wise) know that the

(essential) nature of the light (of

manifestation) (avabhāsa) is reflective awareness; otherwise (if that were not

s0), the light (of consciousness), although coloured by the (entities manifest

within it), would be insentient, like a crystal.⁷⁷⁸²

In this way, although consciousness is (always) pure, it is said that its
radiance, coloured by each particular entity, is its primary form.
Surely (one may ask,) how is that reasonably possible? (Responding to)
this question, he gives an example:

frīāāāāzgīafa
fē fa-gar 1
niṣṭaraṅgataraṅgādivṛttir eva hi sindhutā |
Indeed, it is the nature of the sea to be (at times tranquil) without
waves and (at others) full of waves. (185ab)
He concludes:

TITHTTGTTKTK
JTRTTR STS STT I 2¢& I
īasrfrtaṁṁaāī
zza eq |
sāram etat samastasya yac citsāraṁ jaḍaṁ jagat || 185 I|
tadadhīnapratiṣṭhatvāt tat sāraṁ hr̥dayaṁ mahat |
This (awareness) is the essence (sāra) of all things, as consciousness
is the essence of the lifeless (jada) universe, and the essence of that
(consciousness) is the Great Heart (of self-awareness), because its very

foundation (pratiṣṭhā) depends upon it. (I85cd-186ab)

‘This’ is the reality (vastu), characterised as reflective awareness, ‘of all
thingsʼ, that is, of the universe, sentient and insentient. It is ‘the essence’,
which is the like the soul (jīva) (of all things), as in accord with the saying, ‘the

(many) conditions (vyavasthiti) of the objects of sense are established in

consciousnessʼ, the foundation (pratiṣṭhāsthāna) of the insentient universe,
which consists of ‘form’ (and the other objects of the senses), is consciousness

alone; otherwise, if it were not, (nothing) could logically be an object of
perception. There is no dispute about this. And the great essence of that

³²1P 1/5/11. This verse is quoted in full above in TĀv ad 2/31cd-32ab (32), the first line
below ad 11/46-47, and the first quarter ad 16/249cd-251ab (250-251).

286

CHAPTER FOUR

consciousness, the nature of which has been explained previously, is ‘the
Heartʼ alone, which because it is (intimately) associated with the wonder

aroused by its own nature,¹⁸ is the ‘great essence’, as the foundation
(pratiṣṭhāna) (of consciousness) within itself depends upon it. Otherwise, as we
have said many times (before), (devoid of reflective awareness, consciousness)

would be insentient.
He now explains this in relation another reality that needs be known
(prameya).

SAUḤ and KHPHREṀ
āa fē afēz #īāīṭ2 mraīvsatsrṁT
| 2¢F I

-BTTĪAĀT feT *īaāi ārḡā |

TŪēGIThITdTTIÚRĪTsSTdTId ÑCTHI II Q¢A9 I

frāsa fe ṁīcīṣfcaīa
fēṣṣa

tathā hi ṣad idaṁ brahmamũlaṁ mãyãṇḍasaṁjñitam || 186 ||
icchājñānakriyārohaṁ vinā naiva ṣad ucyate |
tacchaktitritayārohād bhairavīye cidātmani || 187 ||
visr̥jyate hi tat tasmād bahir vātha visṛjyate |

In the same way, this (world, which is immanent) Being (sat) (S)²⁴
that is rooted in the (sphere of) Brahmā (brahmamūla),¹⁸ is called the ‘Egg

of Māyā’ (in the Mālinīvijayottara).¹*⁸ It could not be said to be Being (sat)
without ascending (through the development of the powers of) will,

knowledge and action (AU). (This is) because it is due to the ascending
development of those three powers that it is emitted into Bhairava’s
conscious nature (and comes to rest within it). Or (if it is projected

⁷³³ Reflective awareness is the aesthetically arousing innate nature of consciousness. The

experience of consciousness is the experience of beauty, which is wonder.

⁷³ These lines refer to the three letters of the seed-syllable of Parā, that is, SAUḤ. They
are noted in brackets.

³³ The Upaniṣads similarly say that ‘this universe is rooted in the Brahman’
(brahmamūlam idaṁ jagat). The double meaning may well be intended.

7³⁶ Cf. MV 2/49:

pārthivaṁ prākrṛtaṁ caiva māyīyaṁ śāktam eva ca |
iti saṁkṣepataḥ proktam etad aṇḍacatuṣṭayam ||

‘It is said that this (sixfold Path is), in an abbreviated (form) (saṁkṣepataḥ), the
group of four Eggs. (These are the Eggs) of Earth, Nature, Māyā and Power.”

Also, MV 4/25: ‘The three Eggs (that extend up to the end of Māyā) are

pervaded by the letter S, and the fourth one by the Trident (AU), and that which is
beyond (them) all, by emission (H). (This) is considered to be the pervasion of Parā.”

Concerning the four Eggs, see note 6,371 ad 6/170cd-171ab (170).

TANTRĀLOKA

287

externally) it is emitted outside it (Ḥ) due to that (and from it).⁷”⁷ (186cd188ab)

‘This’ (mundane reality is) ‘rooted in the (sphere of) Brahmā’, that is,
begins with the Egg of Brahmā. In other words, having included within itself the
Egg of Nature, it is called the Egg of Māyā,⁷¹⁸ because it makes the universe of
Maāyā manifest, although it continues to be (pure, undifferentiated) Being. In

accord with the aforementioned reasoning (yukti), namely, that: ‘although an

entity has manifest, without (any) awareness of it, it is in fact unmanifest
because it does not rest within the (consciousness of the) perceiver,⁷”⁴ as long

as (the reality of Being in the sphere of Māyā) has not ascended into the will,
knowledge and action of the power of reflective awareness, that is, the freedom
(of consciousness), (that emerge from it) like sprouts (from a seed) by the
progressive (intensification) of the desire to perceive etc., existence (tathātva) is

not firmly established, and so it cannot be said to be Being (i.e. real). The
meaning is that it does not attain the state of common daily experience
(vyavahāra) (of particulars, that are each known individually in such a way that

they can each be determined specifically as) ‘this is that’. This is so because

when Being, which is that universe (of manifestation), has developed within
reflective awareness, which consists of the three energies of will (knowledge
and action), it is ‘emitted into Bhairava’s’ nature, which is the supreme

subject, and comes to rest there. This is the process of withdrawal. Or else, by
the process of emanation, that universe ‘is emitted outside it’, that is, from that
(supreme perceiver), which is Bhairava’s nature. The meaning is that by

progressively descending the ladder of the three energies, from the principle of

¹⁴⁷ The syllables SAUH and KHPHREM are analysed here in verses 4/186cd-191. They
are analysed again in the context of practice in the domain of the Individual Means
below in 5/54cd-79ab (78). In this case, there is no equivalent in the domain of the
Śāmbhava Means, as there is no question of any form of Mantra practice in this sphere

of consciousness, which is entirely free of discursive representation (vikalpa). See also
Padoux 1990: 416-426 and Sanderson 1990: 56-58.
”³⁸ Concerning the four Eggs, see below, note 6,371 ad 6/170cd-171ab (170). The Egg

of Māyā contains only the principles (tattva) from Māyā to Puruṣa (the Individual Soul).
However, Jayaratha says that in this case, we should understand that it also includes the
Egg of Nature below it, which extends from the principle of Water up to Nature
(prakṛti). The first Egg is that of Earth, which includes only the principle of Earth.
Governed by Brahmā, it is also called the Egg of Brahmā. Jayaratha understands the
Egg of Brahmā in this case to be the Egg of Māyā which includes the Egg of Nature.
Jayaratha, it seems, implicitly includes the Egg of Brahmā in the specific sense, that is,

as just the Earth principle, in his broadened conception of it. Thus, the Egg of Māyā
includes all the principles from Earth up to Māyā, that is, the impure principles in which
duality prevails. Beyond them are the pure principles, representing degrees of oneness.

Clearly Jayaratha’s interpretation, although correct, is forced. It is more likely that

Abhinava’s reference to the Egg of Māyā is not to one of the four Eggs, as Jayaratha
takes it to be, but rather to ‘the sphere of Māyā’ in general, that is, the Impure Principles
from Earth to Māyā.

⁴⁹ This reference in prose is not found in vimarśinī or vivṛtivimarśinī. It may be from
the vṛtti or the lost fTkā by Utpaladeva on his own ĪP.

288

CHAPTER FOUR

Force (kalā) (which is highest level in the sphere of Māyā) down to Earth, it is

made manifest in a gross form.⁷⁴⁰

In order to explain in this way that the emergence of the venerable seed
(Mantra) of the (Goddess) Parā (i.e. SAUH) is also not separate from the

sequence of consciousness (sarīvitkrama) (taught with reference to the Twelve

Kālīs),¹⁴¹ (these verses) refer to its emergence in both ways (in the sequence of
⁴⁰ Ṭhe Being in the sphere of Māyā is the transitory, seemingly illusory existence of

phenomena. This is the illusory Being (sat) of those who, like the followers of Advaita

Vedānta, experience the world as Māyā, in the sense of an illusion. Indeed, if there were
to be no higher sphere in which the energies of consciousness, which is reality itself,
operate, it does indeed have the Being of an illusion which is not ultimate Being.

However, according to the Pratyabhijñā, which is the philosophy underpinning Anuttara

Trika, the world of daily life does exist. Its existence is derived from the powers of
consciousness to will, know and act, engaged in perception, through which the world of
perceptions is generated, and is the existence of individual things as ‘this’ or ‘that’.
Thusṣ, in the sphere of the Empowered Means, the utterance of SAUḤ is experienced as

the flux of consciousness, emanating and withdrawing all things.
⁷⁴¹ Abhinava integrates the dynamism of consciousness expressed in the Trika teachings

by the phases of the utterance of SAUḤ, the seed-syllable Mantra (bīja) of the goddess
Parā, with that taught in the Krama system. He does this by explaining that although

expressed in different terms, the same phenomenology of perception underlies the

practice and experience of both. He has just explained how each of the Twelve Kālīṣ
represents a moment in the cycle of perception. This eternal, non-temporal ‘activity” is

the reflective awareness of the light of consciousness, which is its inherent energy,
identified with its freedom to be all things and yet remain one undivided reality. This
activity is inner worship, in the course of which two fundamental Mantras are uttered, as
it were, within consciousness. One is SAUH, which is the seed-syllable of the Trika.

The other is KHPHREM, which is the corresponding seed-syllable of the Krama, taught

next. The former is ‘uttered’ in the phase of emanation, and the latter in that of
withdrawal. To do this Abhinava resorts to another set of terms, which are drawn from
the Tantras, as is the Wheel of the Kālīs, and explains them in the same way in terms of
the phenomenology of perception, what is called here the ‘saṁvitkrama’ – ‘the process
which is consciousnessʼ.

The process of emanation begins with Being – sar – denoted by ‘S’, the first

letter of the syllable SAUH. ‘Beingʼ is understood here to be the Being of phenomenal

existence, which is the sphere of duality – the Egg of Māyā -- experienced as rooted in

the Being of Brahman, the Absolute. This is the point of departure. Emanation begins
when the universe — phenomenal Being — which is to be emitted has formed within the
Light of consciousness of absolute Being. Uttering the letter S, the practitioner reflects
on this initial phase. As the diphthong AU emerges in the course of the utterance of

SAUḤ, he contemplates how the undefined, inner manifestation of Being emerges into
the flow of the energies of the reflective awareness of the Light of consciousness that

has formed itself in this way. Passing inwardly through the three phases of its three

energies of will, knowledge and action, as the will to perceive, perception and the
completion of the act, inner Being comes to rest in Bhairava, the inner, supreme
perceiver. The inner cycle of perception thus complete, uttering the final H of emission

(visarga), it is emitted both externally and inwardly. ‘Uttered’ repeatedly in this way, as

the very pulse of the reflective awareness of consciousness, SAUḤ generates the
manifest universe inwardly, within universal Bhairava consciousness, and externally
within the sphere of individual consciousness, simultaneously. Conversely, by the
analogous utterance of KHPHREM, phenomenal Being, rooted in absolute Being thus

TANTRĀLOKA

289

emanation and withdrawal), by including (an implicit reference to the extent of
its) pervasion (of the principles of existence). This is as follows. (By saying
that) ‘Being (sar) is rooted in the Absolute (Brahman)ʼ, the letter S is
extracted,¹ as is said in the scripture with this intended sense: ‘O fair hipped

one, (the letter S) is the third Brahman.’"⁸ By saying that ‘it is called the ‘Egg

of Māyā’, he indicates (the extent of its) pervasion (namely, the sphere of Māya
in which duality prevails). And that (like any other consonant) cannot be
pronounced without a vowel, and so, in accord with the teaching that: ‘the three
powers (of will, knowledge and action) are fully evident (and completely

manifest) in this, the abode of (AU), the fourteenth (vowel),’”⁴ the letter AU is

extracted with the (three powers of) will (knowledge and action). Moreover,

because it possesses the power of will (knowledge and action), he also indicates

that (the letter AU) pervades the Egg.™ By (saying) ‘it is emitted’, emission

(the letter H – visarga) is extracted, and by (saying) ‘into Bhairava’s conscious
natureʼ, (he indicates the extent of its) pervasion. As is said (in Mālinīvijaya):
‘The three Eggs (that extend up to the end of Māyā) are pervaded by the
letter S, and the fourth one by the Trident (AU), and that which is beyond all by
emission (H). (This) is considered to be the pervasion of Parā.’¹⁴⁶
He concludes this (topic saying):

T JgJÑaT] āīāī JĪTFTTATHTĀ
|2¢¢ 1

ftrat vŪaḷ a-Ṁr̥
ad

emitted externally, is withdrawn inwardly from the outer sphere of individual
consciousness, to emit it within the inner sphere of universal Bhairava consciousness.

⁷⁴² Mantras are formed by ‘extracting’ their letters from a diagram (technically called

‘prastāra’), which is divided into fifty compartments, each one of which contains one of

the letters of the alphabet. Concerning these diagrams, uses and varieties, see

Dyczkowski 2009: note 1 of chapter 8 of the translation. The outer diagram represents

the matrix of energies held within consciousness, represented by the letters. The
‘extraction’ of the letters is thus the process of the emergence of the energies one by one

to form the configurations through which consciousness operates through Mantras.

⁷⁴³ PT 10a. The third Brahman is Śiva, the third member of the Trika triad of Man,

Power and Śiva. See above, note to TĀv ad 3/169ab (168ab).
⁷⁴⁴ Above 3/104cd . Abhinava is paraphrasing MV 4/25cd.

¹⁴³ The powers of consciousness to will, know and act are ‘fully evident’ in the sphere of
Maāyā, in which individual perceivers, set in relation to their objects, will, know and act.
Operant everywhere and in all circumstances within the sphere of Maāyā, i.e. duality,

they pervade it.
¹⁴⁶ MV 4/25. The first quarter is quoted above in TĀv ad 3/166 (165cd-166ab), the
second quarter is quoted ad 3/104cd-105ab. The entire verse is quoted ad 11/89 and,

along with the preceding verse, ad 16/221-222 (221cd-223ab). See note to TĀv ad
3/104ab-105cd. In the preceding verses (i.e. 19 to 23ab), the MV teaches how the
syllables of the Vidyā of the goddess Parāparā pervade the metaphysical principles, and

those of the Vidyā Aparā pervade the four Eggs (verse 24). This verse states how the
letters of Parā’s Vidyā — SAUḤ – pervade the four Eggs and the transcendent beyond.
Concerning the four Eggs, see note 6,371 ad 6/170cd-171ab (170).

290

CHAPTER FOUR

evaṁ sadrūpataivaiṣāṁ satāṁ śaktitrayātmatām || 188 II
visargaṁ parabodhena samākṣipyaiva vartate |

It is the Being (S) of (all) these existing things (i.e. the three Eggs),

(and so) is the three powers (AU); embracing (them) and emission (H)
(within itself) as supreme consciousness, it abides (dynamically) (vartate) in

this way.¹⁴⁷ (188cd-189ab)

‘(It is) the Being of (all) these existing things’,' that is, the Egg of

Brahma and the rest (of the Eggs) that manifest as the nature of all things, ‘(and

s0) is the three powers; embracing (them) and emission (within itself) as

supreme consciousness, it abides (dynamically) (vartate) in this way’. The
meaning is that by the progressive development of emission (in the manner
described), (Being) shines radiantly, at one with the supreme subject. By
referring in this way to the letter S, which includes the letter AU and emission
(H), as the main one, he indicates that even though the venerable seed-syllable
of Parā does arise in the accord with the sequence of withdrawal, emanation
predominates.¹ As he will say: . . the preceding one (SAUḤ) is considered to

be the ‘Heart of Emanation”°.*

”⁴⁷ Saṇḍerson (1990 p. 37) translates: ‘Thus the fact that these (Spheres of Brahmā,

prakṛtiḥ and māyā) are real (s-) entails that they are identical with those three powers
(au) and that they are the projection (h) (of the ultimate consciousness) and are of the

essence of that consciousness.’

¹ṀB Cf. above 3/166 (165cd-166ab) and above note 3,526.

⁷⁴⁹ The process of emission of consciousness into manifest form is concomitant with that
of its manifestation at one with it. Withdrawal of manifestation into consciousness,

whereby it is made and recognised to be one with it, is the foundation of emission,
because without that oneness, what is emitted could not exist. Emanation is thus
grounded in withdrawal and vice versa. The distinction between the two phases of this
‘processless processʼ is just a matter of predominance of one or the other. In this way,

SAUḤ, the seed-syllable of Parā, the supreme goddess of the Trika, is that of emanation

(sṛṣṭibīja), whereas Piṇḍanātha (KHPHREṀ), the seed-syllable of Kālī Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī,

the supreme goddess of the Krama, which Abhinavagupta expounds next, is that of
withdrawal (saṁhārabīja). Abhinava beautifully integrates in this way the two Tantric

schools of his Anuttara Trika. Kālī consciousness taught in the Krama consumes duality.

Parā consciousness taught in Trika emits oneness. Thus, they are both on the same

supreme level.

¹S⁰ Below, 4/191d. Sanderson (ibid. p. 57-58): ⁶. . . Jayaratha points out that in this

passage Abhinavagupta is reading SAUḤ from both perspectives: both from that of
reabsorption (saṁhārakramaḥ) and from that of emission (srstikramaḥ). Abhinavagupta

gives two meanings to the projection of the -h element of the seed-syllable, so that

SAUḤ is made to express both (i) (the awareness of) the projection of the universe into
consciousness, the fact that it comes to rest (viśrāntiḥ) through resorption, within the
nonduality of the transcendental subject (parapramātā, akalpitapramātā), and (ī) (the
awareness of) its projection out of that nonduality, its emission into consciousness from

within. Nonetheless, Jayaratha explains, Abhinavagupta intends the mode of emission to

be understood as the basic sense of the syllable. For the Tantrāloka speaks of SAUḤ as
the ‘heart in emission’ (sṛṣṭau hṛt [sṛṣṭiḥṛdayam]), contrasting it with KHPHREM, the
‘heart in resorption’ (sarṅhārahr̥dayam).¹

TANTRĀLOKA

291

Having defined the arising of the venerable seed-syllable of Parā in this

way in accord with the sequence of consciousness (saṁvitkrama), he (goes on)

to explain the arising of the venerable Piṇḍanātha, intending thereby to say that
it is on the same level (and of equal importance).
SISŚEĒI Ṭaī% ÉḷtGIEIĪEĪṬATE I| 2¢* 1

ÉṭEGREANNUĪVGĪEDIRE³TCZ-Ḥ

GTHRTÑJ ūṬṬT̄ JIĪTFTTTTTĪTRRTq I 23 1

ExśtkkaũEiẽkẼũUÉJÉṭVÉHĪḤ

tat sad eva bahīrūpaṁ prāg bodhāgnivilāpitam || 189 1|
antar nadat parāmarśaśeṣībhūtaṁ tato ‘py alam |
khātmatvam eva saṁprāptaṁ śaktitritayagocarāt || 190 ||
vedanātmakatām etya saṁhārātmani līyate |

Initially, that Being is external, and is consumed by the fire of

consciousness (R), until all that remains is a residue of inner resonant

awareness (PH). Then it becomes the Sky (of consciousness KH)
completely, and so, by the field (gocara) of the three powers (of will,

knowledge and action) (E), it becomes the awareness (vedana) (M) (which is
the power of the freedom of consciousness to act as the agent of perception)
to (then finally) dissolve away into the essential nature of withdrawal
(saṁīhāra) (of phenomenal manifestation). (189cd-191ab)

‘That’ universe manifests and hence exists ‘initially’ in an external
form, because it would not be possible for it to manifest otherwise.

‘Consciousness’ (in this case) is the contracted manifestation which is the
means of knowledge, and that is Fire (R). It consumes the Being (of the

universe) by reducing the outer form to ashes so that it attains the state of
ultimate reality (paramārtha), which is nothing but one’s own nature.
Resonating inwardly in a state of oneness with the subject, pouring forth by the

removal (tiraskāra)¹ of the awareness of objectivity (idāntāparāmarśa), it is

the ‘awareness’ (of supreme) ‘I’ consciousness (PH). That (is all that remains)
apart from one’s own essential nature as the ‘residue’, although that (too) has

become one with it. Subsequently, it becomes ‘completely’ and totally so
(atyartham), because the latent trace of duality, consisting of the means and

object of knowledge etc., also attains the state of emptiness. Then, when ‘it

becomes the Sky (of consciousness KH)’, and shines radiantly⁷²³ as just the

Light, which is the supreme subject, ‘it becomes the awareness (vedana) (Ṁ)’,

”⁸¹ Notice that in the case of SAUḤ, the seed of emanation, ‘that Being’ is initially

internal and is then emitted externally. Now the process begins when ‘that Beingʼ is
initially external and is then withdrawn internally.

⁷³² 1 translate ‘tiraskāra’ as ‘removal’, but more literally it means ‘setting aside’ or
‘concealingʼ.

⁷³³ Read san for sat.

292

CHAPTER FOUR

which is the power of the freedom of consciousness to act as the agent of the act
of perception, by rising step by step along the ladder of the three energies,
beginning with that of action (then knowledge and will) (E). Then (once that

state has been attained, they) ‘dissolve away into the essential nature of

withdrawal (saṅhāra) (of phenomenal manifestation)’ (Ṁ).⁷²⁴ The meaning

is that it shines radiantly as one within the abode of the venerable
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, Whose nature is described (in the following verse):

‘May the power of the God of the gods, Whose nature is Śiva and is
(one and) undivided, withdraw even the withdrawal of the withdrawal of the

withdrawal of everything (into Her own nature).”⁷”²⁸

The pervasion of the venerable Piṇḍanātha is (described) here in accord

with the sequence of consciousness (sarṁvitkrama), and so it has been extracted
(letter by letter) in accord with that.³⁸ Again, it is called ‘the fire of
⁷³⁴ The process of withdrawal, which takes place by the ‘utterance’ of this seed-syllable,

begins from the phenomenal Being of the outer world of Māyā. This is at first ‘burnt

away and reduced to ashes’ by recognizing the ‘means of knowledge’, that is to say, the

activity of the senses. Pouring out of the perceiving subjectivity, they transform, as it

were, the outer object into sensations, which are recognised to be extensions of the

universal activity of consciousness. The ‘outer form° thus recognised to be nothing but a

form of consciousness, its true ultimate nature is recognised to be the perceiver. This
first phase takes place through the fiery energy of the ‘contracted’ consciousness of the
senses, experienced when uttering ‘R’, the first letter. Objectivity thus set aside, the

conditioned subjectivity of the perceiver at the dualistic level of Māyā, expands

spontaneously, resonant with the reflective awareness of unconditioned consciousness,
the supreme perceiver. The fire of
R leaves behind the ‘ashes’ of objectivity, that is, its
latent trace. This expansion, experienced when uttering ‘PH’, the second letter,
consumes them also, transforming them into the void of pure consciousness that unfolds
when uttering the letter KH, shining as the Void of the Sky of the infinite Light of the
supreme perceiver. The letter E that follows is the Womb (yoni) or matrix of energies

which, of three main types, are progressively withdraw from that of action, into
knowledge and that into the will. Thus, step by step reversing the outward outpouring of
the externally directed energies of consciousness, they are withdrawn into the Goddess
of Consciousness, Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, when the final Point (M) is uttered. See below, note
4.754.

”:³ From the perspective of Trika phenomenology, the first ‘withdrawal of all things’ is
the recognition that as outer objectivity, they are forms of perception. The ‘withdrawal’
of this withdrawal is the recognition that perception is essentially one with the

individual perceiver. The third withdrawal is the recognition that the individual
perceiver is one with the universal perceiver, which is universal consciousness. This too
is finally and definitively withdrawn in the inscrutable recognition of the pure Light of
consciousness which is Anuttara, the Inexplicable. Swami Lakshmanjoo would say that

Kaālī consciousness, Śiva’s power, which withdraws all things into itself and makes them

one with it, is ‘the end of all endingsʼ.

³*⁶ RPHKHEM is the sequential order of the letters of the seed-syllable of
Mātṛṣadbhāva or Kālakarṣiṇī, also called Piṇḍanātha or Pañcapiṇḍanātha from the point
of view of the succession of consciousness (sarṁvitkrama), whereas its phonemic
succession is KHPHREMṀ (see below, 30/45cd-46 and, with variants, MV 8/39-43).

Concerning these two seed-syllables, see Padoux, 1990, pp. 416-426.

TANTRĀLOKA

293

consciousnessʼ, because it burns the fuel which is all things. (This means that)

the seed-syllable of Fire (R), which is contracted consciousness, the nature of

which is the means of knowledge, dissolves into the Māyā perceiver.⁷ (Once

that has happened), the ‘resonance’ (nāda)⁸ etc. (of the following phase,
represented) by the Cruel Letter (krūravarṇa) (PH),⁷⁹ which is the Kuṇḍalinī of

Withdrawal, and its graphic representation (lipi) is of that form,⁷’ dissolves⁷⁶'

into the supreme subject, and so (in this phase) the Māyā subjectivity also
(ceases), and its cessation (abhāva) is (its state as) ‘the Sky (of

consciousness)³. (He refers in this way to) the letter KH, which is the Sky (of

consciousness), and the supreme subject, who possesses (the three) energies of
will (knowledge and action) as its true nature. (By referring to) ‘the three
powersʼ (he suggests the letter E. It is) the seed-syllable of the matrix
(yonibīja), which is the conglomeration (piṇḍībhāva) of the energies of will
(knowledge and action) within the power of the freedom (of consciousness).⁷⁸³

(By saying that) ‘it becomes awareness’ʼ, he (indicates) the extraction of the
bindu (i.e. M at the end). In this way, those who know the scriptures explain that
this is the venerable Pañcapiṇḍanātha in the form of the five letters, beginning

with R and ending with bindu (ie. RPHKHEṀ).⁷⁸ Elsewhere, the dawning (of
Piṇḍanātha) is explained in another manner (from a different point of view)

(bhaṅgyantareṇa).⁷⁶⁴

⁷³⁷ Read agnibījena for agnibījasya.
¹³⁸ Read ityadi for tyādi.
⁷⁹⁹ Read krūravarṇasya for kūṭavarṇasya. Sanderson (2006b: 114 n. 397) disagrees with

Padoux (1990, p. 424, n. 117), who interprets the form of this syllable as RKSKHEM,
which does not exist. It is in fact, RPHKHEM, the reverse of KHPHREṀ (see below).
He proposes emending kūṭavarṇasya (= KS) to kuṇḍalavarṇasya or krūravarṇasya, both
code names for the letter PH. He notes that Abhinavagupta himself probably had
another of these code-names for PH in mind, namely, ravaḥ ʻthe resonance’ or rāviṉī

‘the resonator’ʼ, to which he seems to refer as ‘inner resonant awareness’.

⁷⁰⁰ The shape of the written form of PH, the ‘Cruel Letter’, resembles the shape of
Kuṇḍalinī rising, represented by the bent lines to the sides merging into the straight line

in between, engaged in the progressive withdrawal of outer manifestation into

consciousness, as it ascends step by step.

⁷⁶¹ Read layāc ca for * * ca.

7“¹ The letter E is represented by a downward facing triangle. It is the seed of the Yoni,
and consists of the three energies of will, knowledge and action held together in the

oneness of the energy of the freedom of consciousness (see above, 3/94ab-94cd (94cd95ab)). Notice that the letter AU of the seed-syllable of Parā also contains these three

primary energies, but they are in the forward order of emanation – will, knowledge and
action – whereas here in the letter E, they are in the reverse order of withdrawal.
⁷⁶³ This is the order of withdrawal, that is, the one which corresponds to the process
within consciousness. In his commentary on the next line, Jayaratha quotes the
Kramastotra as an authority that attests that the seed-syllable KHPHREM is meant in
the reverse order.

⁷⁶⁴ Jayaratha tells us that the verse he quotes in the commentary of the next line of the

Tantrāloka is drawn from ‘the venerable hymn’ (śrīstotrabhaṭṭāraka). This can only be
the Kramastotra. It is probable that these two verses, which are set in the same metre as
the Kramastotra, are also drawn from there. Thus, he is furnishing support from this
prime authority to justify Abhinava’s exposition of the syllable KHPHREM as the
dynamism of consciousness when it is engaged in withdrawing the outer phenomena it

294

CHAPTER FOUR
‘The Yogi whose senses have fallen away in the Sky of Śiva

(consciousness) (KH), bliss expanded (within him) by the unfolding of
Kuṇḍalinī (PH), all the cavities (of his senses) burning (with consciousness) (R),
having ascended into the cave of a (beautiful) passionate woman’s (kāminī)
heart (E), (rests) as though in the void (Ṁ), his Heart of the Yoginī
(KHPHREṀ), rises up (recited) spontaneously in the sphere (maṇḍala) of the

Sky of the Heart (M), shining brilliantly (like) countless millions of fires.’”
He concludes this (teaching saying):

zġ ũaũazz Wīaá

S I 82 |

This

(KHPHR̥EṀ)

idaṁ saṁhãrahr̥dayaṁ prãcyaṁ sr̥ṣṭau ca hr̥ṇ matam || 191 I|
(seed-syllable)

is

(called)

the

‘Heart

of

Withdrawal’ʼ, while the preceding one (SAUḤ) is considered to be the
‘Heart of Emanation’. (191cd)

‘This’ is the reflective awareness of the venerable Piṇḍanātha. Although
like the venerable seed-syllable of Parā, it does (also) arise in the sequence of
emanation (sṛṣṭikrama), but because it withdraws duality (into undivided
consciousness) of the letters (of the syllable) beginning with R, it is called the
‘Heart of Withdrawal’, as it is that which predominates. Thus, its arising is
described in the venerable hymn (the Kramastotra) also as taking place by the

process of withdrawal (in the following verse):

‘By the process of merger brought about by the power that consumes

the universe, one should contemplate (cintya) the fierce Wheel, which is the
Great Withdrawal (of the contents of cognition into consciousness) (i.e.
KHPHREṀ), from the Fire of Time (R) up to the end of the energy of the Void

(E), and has reached and is established in this way on the plane of the Sky of

(unconditioned, transcendental) Consciousness (M).’⁷⁶

‘The preceding one’ is (SAUḤ), the seed-syllable of Parā (the
Supreme Goddess) of (all) living beings (jīvaparābīja). Although that arises
through the process of withdrawal also, it nourishes all things. Thus, because it
is predominantly the seed-syllable of Nectar (amṛtabīja), the nature of which is

emanation, it is called ‘the Heart of Emanation’,'™⁷ in accord with the teaching
imparted previously:

has emitted back into itself, thus mirroring the dynamism of the cycle of the Twelve
Kālīs.

”⁶³ This verse cryptically refers to the usual order of the letters of this syllable, namely,

KHPHREM, as it describes the expansion of consciousness (unmīlana) after the
attainment of the Stainless (nirañjana).
7⁶ This is a description of the activation of the seed-syllable KHPHREM in the manner

of its arising within consciousness, that is, in the reverse order, which we have seen is

RPHKHEṀ.

”⁶⁷ Often, if not usually, a Mantra or Vidyā begins with its seed-syllable. However, in

the unusual case of Parā, Her Vidyā is just SAUḤ, which is also its seed-syllable.
Moreover, as Jayaratha points out, although it also arises within consciousness ‘in the

TANTRĀLOKA

295

‘Thus, the universe manifests clearly within this letter S.”⁸ (The wise)

call it the yogi’s ‘Abode of Supreme Nectar”.⁷⁶
He teaches the same in another context:

‘I’ Consciousness is the Vitality (vīrya) and Heart of all Mantras

TTJIĪIHYTJTITITĪTHGT |

SṬTrṝcāīgītrā JTTS JTĒTJTT I -32 |I
īṝḍī̄ fē atṁ ṇaāīīṝ ēeaṁṁēq

fē--ī+ sīēīāī sagīarī ē̄a fē- ē 1 283 1
etadrūpaparāmarśam akṛtrimam anāvilam |
aham ity āhur eṣaiva prakāśasya prakāśatā || 192 ||
etad vīryaṁ hi sarveṣāṁ mantrāṇāṁ hṛdayātmakam |
vinānena jaḍās te syur jīvā iva vinā hṛdā || 193 II
They say that the reflective awareness, uncreated and unsullied,

which is this reality, is (supreme) ‘I’ (aham) (consciousness). This, indeed, is

the luminosity of the Light (of consciousness). This is the vitality (vīrya) and
heart of all Mantras; without it, they would be insentient, like living beings

without a heart.⁷”"⁰ (192-193)

‘This reality,’ taught previously, ‘which is reflective awareness,’
arises as the process of emanation and the rest with the venerable seed-syllable

of Parā etc. as its field (of operation). It is ‘uncreated’ because it arises

spontaneously (by its own innate aesthetic delight) (svarasodita). Thuṣ, it is
‘unsullied’, because it is not sullied by the dirt which is the reflective awareness

of objectivity (idantā), which is its opposite. They say it is ‘I’ (aham)

(consciousness)ʼ. The meaning is that they say that it is the reflective awareness

of (supreme) ‘I’ (consciousness). The point is that the reflective awareness of ‘I’

(consciousness) (aharī) arises (both) in the sequence of emanation beginning

with A (anuttara) and ending with H (as AHAṀ), and so too in the sequence of

withdrawal ending with A (as MAHA).⁷”” As was said before:

order of withdrawalʼ, it is not reversed (to *HAUS) as happens with KHPHREM, the
seed of withdrawal. SAUḤ is the seed of emanation, and so does not reverse within

consciousness even in the process of withdrawal, because it is ‘nourishingʼ, i.e.
emanating inwardly, within transcendental consciousness, just as it does externally
within immanent consciousness.

⁷⁶“ Concerning the Vidyā of Parā – SAUḤ, which begins with the letter S. See below,
30/27-28ab.

⁷⁶⁹ Above, 3/166 (165cd-166ab).

71⁰ Cf. above, 3/223ab and commentary.
⁷⁷! Abhinava describes this process in the PTv p. 85-86. See Dyczkowski 1987a: 185188 for a detailed exposition, including a diagram of this cyclic pulse of AHAM.

296

CHAPTER FOUR

‘The flow (of emanation) (prasṛti) that begins with the Absolute (A)
and ends with H is (the Lord’s) power (śakti), which, once it has encompassed
the entire universe (and withdrawn it back into itself), merges into the

Absolute.³⁷

(He is) saying in this way that the venerable seed-syllable of Parā and

Piṇḍanātha are on an equal level (kakṣya).⁷”⁸ (One may ask,) ultimate reality

(paramārtha) is the radiant manifestation (parisphuraṇa) of supreme
consciousness as the emergence and merger of the wonderful variety of all the
endless number of things, and that (reality) is common to (all) of them, so what

cause could there be for them to be on different levels (kakṣya)? Surely (one

may ask,) how can consciousness manifest in the form of each individual

(thing)? With this question in mind, he says: ‘this, indeed, is the luminosity of

the Light (of consciousness)”.⁷™ Otherwise (devoid of this luminosity which

shines as all things), this supreme Light would not be different from a
(common) jar. As was said before:
‘If the Great Lord were to have a body of (but) one (fixed) form, he

would have to give up His lordship and nature as consciousness and be

(insentient), like a (common) jar.”⁷

Surely (one may ask,) he is discussing the vitality of Mantras, so why
does he say that the essential nature of supreme consciousness is undivided?⁷⁶
With this question in mind, he says that: ‘this (is the vitality (vīrya) and heart

of all Mantras)³. ‘This’ is the principle of consciousness, pervaded by the
reflective awareness of ‘’. The point is that (this is the nature) ‘of all

(Mantras), not just that of the venerable seed-syllable Parā and Piṇḍanātha.

‘Without’⁷”” the vitality which is the reflective awareness of ‘’

(consciousness), (Mantras) would be ‘insentient’. The meaning is that because
(such Mantras) are devoid of the effulgence (sphurattā) (of the light of

consciousness), they are useless (aprayojaka).⁷™⁸ As was said (previously):
⁷”² Above, 3/204cd-205ab.

⁷”³ This implies that the Goddesses of the Trika and Krama systems, of which these are
the seed-syllables, are both equally supreme.

7¹⁴ The question here is that if you say that consciousness manifests as all things and that

that is ultimate reality, why refer to it as reflective awareness and ‘’ consciousness?

What is the purpose of positing these various categories? Abhinava replies that we are
actually talking about the same reality in different perspectives. When talking about

consciousness in itself, it is referred to as the Light. When we talk about it as

manifesting as all things, we refer to it as the luminosity which illumines them, by virtue
of which they are manifest, and as such exist. The ‘luminosity” of the light is its power —
Śakti – to illumine etc., identified with its reflective awareness, the content of which is ‘I
amʼ. This perpetually self-renewing and self-absorbing awareness is represented by the
dynamism of the phases of the inner ‘utterance’ of the two seed-syllables.

7⁵ Above, 3/100cd-101ab.
71⁶ Read akaṇḍam for akaṇḍa.

””⁷ Read vināneneti for aneneti.
”"⁸ The Siádhayogeśvarīmata is not only the first and root Tantra of the Trika, it is also
one of the oldest Bhairava Tantras. The recension that has come down to us begins with

TANTRĀLOKA

297

‘Mantras devoid of the first (letter) (A) and the last (H) would indeed be

(barren) like autumn clouds.”⁷””⁹

Now he says that not only are Mantras vital (and effective) because of

this vitality, other things are also.

The True Repetition of Mantra etc. (iapyādivāstavam)⁷¹⁰

Tāfrā̃ṁz̄aṅcēī] āft̄zrārīzq |
vaīḡ T̄Iā̃ āīīq āaiṣzaī sāāī āāa: | 2X I
akṛtrimaitad dhr̥dayārūḍho yat kiñcid ācaret |
prāṇyād vā mṛśate vāpi sa sarvo ‘sṣya japo mataḥ l| 194 ||

”⁸"Whatever one who is established in this uncreated Heart does or

(however) he breathes or reflects, is all considered to be his repetition of

Mantra (japa).⁷⁸² (194)

an important question: why are Mantras ineffective? The answer given there reveals a
fundamental feature of Tantric Mantras, namely that they are effective if they possess
the vitality (vīrya) of the energy of the letters of the sacred alphabet (mātrkā). Only
Mantras that have been formed by the prescribed ritual procedure from the letters
extracted from a sacred grid (prastāra) in which they are deposited, are effective.

Higher Trika exegesis understands these letters, as we have seen in Chapter Three, as
energies of the reflective awareness of ‘I' (ahaṁ) consciousness. The power Mantras

possess is not a material, physical energy, like electricity. It is essentially the power of
the reflective awareness of the consciousness of the person who repeats them. Mantras

should be repeated maintaining a focused awareness of oneself as essentially
consciousness. That reflective awareness is the effulgent radiance of the Mantra’s
vitality and power. It is this which makes the Light of Śiva consciousness what it is.
Devoid of that, Śiva’s Light would be insentient, incapable of doing or knowing
anything. Just as individual, contracted consciousness has some power to act and know
because some of the radiance of its Light continues to shine, similarly mantras that
participate in the radiant reflective awareness of the one who recites them are functional.

71⁹ Above, 3/223ab.

”⁴⁰ In 4/180cd-181ab, Abhinava introduced the topic of the interiorization of ritual. This
was followed by a digression from 181cd-182ab to discuss the vitality of Mantra, and

how that is represented by the flow of the power of consciousness through the seed-

syllables of emanation and withdrawal. From 194, he continues to examine the
interiorization of the elements of ritual, namely, japa (194), dhyāna (195-199), mudrā
(200), and oblation (201-202). The Tantras and their exegetes repeatedly teach such

interiorizations of ritual. But even so, we rarely find the identifications they make with
inner processes or states to be the same, although they may, of course, be similar. It is
instructive and interesting to compare here what two other related sources say. One is a

passage that comes towards the end of the Śivadṛṣṭi by Somānanda, the teacher of
Utpaladeva of the Pratyabhijñā school. The other is the Vijñānabhairava. See above
note 4,359 to TĀ 4/122cd-123ab for a full translation of ŚDṛ 7/78-106, where the

interior equivalents of worship are described, presented along with passages from the
Vijñānabhairava.

”⁴" MVV 2/127-130ab outlines the repetition of Mantra as follows:

298

CHAPTER FOUR
Whatever outer activity that is proper (and should be done) the yogi

who rests in the reflective awareness of uncreated

‘I'

(consciousness),

penetrated by it, undertakes, ‘all is his repetition of Mantra’. The meaning is

that, as everything for him is the constant recurrence (āvartana) of the reflective

awareness of his own nature as the deity, (it all) shines radiantly as Mantra. As

(he) said (previously):

‘In this way,* wherever (the yogi) abides by virtue of the nature of his own

reflective awareness, there the penetration into the three energies (of will, knowledge

and action takes place), and (so) to that degree manifests three-fold (127) and shines**
nine-fold (as each power is also of the nature of the others). (Then, having multiplied)
the aforementioned wheel of twelve (by nine), the repose (attained) in a moment is the

state of one hundred and eight. (Thus) that state is perceived to be one as well as

hundreds. In this way, whatever this yogi may say, it becomes fit for repetition (as
Mantra) on the path of the absolute (anuttara).”
*referring to TĀ 26/64 = MVV 2/126. **read bhāsamānaś ceti for

bhāsamānasya ⁵***read japayogyāya for japayogāya.

⁷Ṁ² See above, 3/219cd-225ab. Abhinava discusses the nature of mantra in the context of
all three means to realisation. In the sphere of practice of the Divine Means
(śāṃmbhavopāya), there is no reference to any specific Mantra. Practice at that level is
beyond articulated words and thought constructs ~ including those associated with
Mantras. Penetrated by the pure reflective awareness free of objectivity of the supreme
subjectivity of Bhairava consciousness, every word becomes a Mantra, that is, a

powerful invocation and praise of that consciousness. Mantras are also not recited
externally in the Empowered Means. It is replaced by the exercise of reflective

awareness, which is the vitality of mantras, through which the yogi purifies his
awareness from objectivity. As he progresses, his words and thought constructs are
absorbed into this reflective awareness, which ultimately shines with the same
spontaneity and brilliance as it does on the level of the Divine Means free of thought

constructs.
Reflective awareness as the power of consciousness, identified as the Light, is

a core concept of Pratyabhijñā ontology and epistemology. Not fully developed as a

concept prior to Utpaladeva, we find a variety of concepts that prefigure it, especially

soteriological ones. An example is the practice of ‘contemplation’ ~ bhāvanā – as we
find it in the VBh (v. 145), where it is also presented as a higher manner of repeating
mantras: ‘repeated (continuous) contemplation (bhāvanā) of the supreme state is the
(real) repetition of Mantra (japa) here (in this tradition). The Sound (nāda) which
(resounds spontaneously) by itself is Mantra (in the highest sense). Such is that which is

to be recited.”

The Śivadṛṣṭi gets closer to the identification of the repeated recitation of
Mantra as reflective awareness: “l am Śiva”, and so all things take place in accord with

my own will. Thus, this Yoga (is constantly present in my) the mind, namely that ‘Siva
is everythingʼ, (and everything) is always strung together by the continuous flow of my

power. Uninterrupted repetition of Mantra (japa) is that repetition that (persists) in all

states, doing it constantly in many forms and arising present in all things. The supreme
(form of) the repetition of Mantra (is attained) by the practice ‘I am here and so is Heʼ.
‘I abide (here) generating intentions and thus (also) words in (my) mouth.’ That should
be known to be the repetition of (Śiva’s) name, and as truth (sarya) etc. it is of three
kinds, namely (the notion that) ‘I am not bound’ʼ, ‘I am not liberated’ʼ, and ‘those two
(bondage and liberation) are the Impurities (of ignorance that sullies the soul). ŚDṛ
7/83cd-87. See above note 4,359 to TĀ 4/122cd-123ab for a full translation of ŚDr 7/78106.

TANTRĀLOKA

299

‘Therefore, knowing whatever verse or prose (he utters), united with the

first and last (letter) in this way, he sees everything as Mantra.’”⁸³

Thus it is said elsewhere (namely, in the Śivasūtra,) that ʻcommon talk

is (his) repetition of Mantra.’⁴ It is said with the same intended sense by those
who are outside (our tradition) also that: ‘(even just) chatter (for such a one) is

the repetition of Mantra.’ After (having taught the nature of the) vitality of
Mantra, he has in this way taken up the subject of (the nature) of the true

repetition of Mantra and the rest, as announced in the (initial) enunciation (of

the topics of the Tantrāloka). Having in this way expounded there (in that
context) the true nature of the repetition of Mantra, he now goes on to say (the
following), in order to define the true nature of visualization (dhyāna) and the
rest, which is included in the words ‘and the rest’:
Supreme Dhyāna

3qxa rvzaī gftzāalraaīāōtēā|

frīstīã āīaīzā sar saarcāraā̄ērq
] 224 1
yad eva svecchayā sṛṣṭiṣvābhāvyād bahirantarā |
nirmīyate tad evāsya dhyānaṁ syāt pāramārthikam || 195 |I
Visualization (dhyāna) in the highest sense (pāramārthika) is
whatever (the yogi) fashions externally and internally by his own (free) will
out of his own (true conscious) nature, (which is endowed with the power)

of emanation (sṛsṭi).”*⁶ (195)

⁷Ṁ³ Above, 3/225. Also quoted ad 16/275abc.

⁷⁴⁴ ŚSū 3/28 (327 of Kṣemarāja’s recension). See Dyczkowski 1987b: 142-143.
⁷⁸³ T have not been able to trace this reference. Perhaps Jayaratha is drawing here from a
Buddhist text.
7⁸⁶ Verṣes 195-200 correspond to MVV 2/134-140.

yad eva svecchatayā sṛṣṭiṣvābhāvyavaśataḥ puraḥ |
nirṇimīte ʻkṣaviṣayaṁ taddhyānāyāvakalpate |/ MVV 2/134, which is equivalent to TĀ
4/195:
‘Whatever object of sense (the yogi) fashions before (him) by his own (free)
will through the influence of (the universal consciousness which is) his own nature
(endowed with the power) of emanation (srsti), is conceived in order for that to be an
(an object of) visualization.’
The preliminary rites of a pūjā include the visualization (dhyāna) of the deity
who is the main object of worship. Abhinava does not reject this procedure as just

imagination, because this is essentially how consciousness generates all manifest

phenomena within itself. Although the Deity of Anuttara Trika is the Light of

consciousness, which in itself is formless and not objective, it is free to assume the

forms of deities that serve as the objects of meditation and worship. The point is that
any object of the senses can serve as a basis for meditation, as it is an image of the

divine formed by the imagination, provided that the yogi recognizes it to be a creation of

300

CHAPTER FOUR
“‘Whatever’ such a yogi who, by virtue of his own (innate) nature,

which is the agent of the five functions (pañcakṛtya) of emanation (persistence,
withdrawal, grace and obscuration), makes manifest ‘externally or internally’,
such as (the colour) blue, pleasure and the like, ‘by his (own) free will’, is his

‘visualization (dhyāna) in the highest sense’, because its nature is (pure)

consciousness alone. The meaning is that it is not something else (like the

visualized form of a deity) which has a fixed ten-armed form or the like.⁷

Surely, if that is the case, then why do (the scriptures) teach the
visualization etc. (ofa deity) with, for example, a fixed ten-armed form?

frrēn f fsrīṝī faīfrra
fa

kīze/ā ēreḺĒEtEIEaI=ṀĀī²ṭ

ḤĪEXḶAI

nirākāre hi ciddhāmni viśvākṛtimaye sati |
phalārthināṁ kācid eva dhyeyatvenākṛtiḥ sthitā || 196 ||
For those (adepts) who aspire to (particular) fruits, some
(particular) form (through which they may attain them) is present within
the formless abode of consciousness, omniform as it is, as the object of their

meditation (dhyeya).”⁸ (196)

the divine will of his own essential, divine conscious nature. Note also that, like the

repeated recitation of Mantra (japa), Abhinava classifies this practice as belonging to
the Empowered Means, as it involves the purification of thought, i.e. the application of

thought as a means to worshipping and experiencing sacred consciousness.
”⁴⁷ The term dhyāna in the Yogasūtras denotes a state of concentration one may loosely

translate as ‘meditation’. In the context of ritual, the term has an additional meaning.
There dhyāna is the visualization meditation of the deity that is the object of worship,

and so incidentally, of concentration. As a preliminary to worship, the form of the deity

is generated in and through the imagination. The highest development of this creative
power of consciousness is its capacity to generate all things, which the yogi who has

recognized his identity with it possesses. Thus the ŚDr (7/78-80) defines it as follows:

‘Here (what is meant by) dhyāna is that everything is viewed with the eye of
contemplation (bhāvanā) as being omniform; wise (indeed) is that contemplation (cintā)
that sees all things. By whatever organ of sense an entity is perceived, there in each
place Śiva’s state is perceived as (truly) existing – that too is described as being dhyāna.
In whatever perception, (the notion) comes to mind that ‘I am Śiva’, that too is said to
be visualization that (occurs) in that very way within that thought (cintā).’ See above
note 4,357 to TĀ 4/122cd-123ab for a full translation of ŚDr 7/78-106.
According to the VBh (v. 146): ʻVisualizationis an unwavering mind (buddhī),

formless and without support. Visualization is not the act of imagining the body (of a

deity) with eyes, mouth and hands etc.”

Ṃ⁶ This verse corresponds to MVV 2/135 with no variants. Particular objects of
meditation give rise to their own specific fruits because, whatever their form, they are

all within formless consciousness as forms of it. Those yogis who desire some particular
fruit meditate on one or other of the forms. Those who seek liberation contemplate the
formless aspect.

TANTRĀḶOKA

301

‘Formless’ means without a fixed form.

Surely (one may ask,) if the abode of consciousness is omniform, then

how is it that it manifests in a fixed (particular) form by rejecting the
manifestation of its other forms? With this doubt in mind, he says:

qJṛ] ṀīēīcqŪō'tsīī
īd TōIIRT |

Ép_izGVGEEĀEEEVPSĪĒE: ;KKṈI
ã ̄Tvĩārrarēritēr̥vdīq|
īTraTā:: āāīt²āīāq gd PJTHRGTTĪT
I| 22¢ 1I
yathā hy abhedāt pūrṇe ‘pi bhāve jalam upāharan |
anyākṛtyapahānena ghaṭam arthayate rasāt || 197 II
tathaiva parameśānanīyatipravījrmbhaṇāt |
kācid evākṛtiḥ kāñcit sūte phalavikalpanām || 198 II

By rejecting other forms (that are of no use to him, a person who) is
engaged in drawing water spontaneously selects a jar, out of what is
present (before him) replete (initially with all its forms), because (they are,

as yet) not distinguished (from one another).” In the same way, due to the

extending (influence of the) Supreme Lord’s ordinance (niyati), (which
determines that specific causes give rise to specific effects), a particular
form (on which the yogi meditates) generates the conception (vikalpana) of
(that particular) fruit. (197-198)
‘(A person who) is engaged in drawing waterʼ, that is, an individual
perceiver (pramātṛ) who needs something that has the specific (niyata) capacity

(arthakriyā) to draw water ‘selects a jar’ that can perform each function (he
requires) ‘spontaneously° out of the gradation of things (that may be) required
(for that particular job). (He does this) having rejected the manifestation of other
forms, such as ‘gold’ (for which he has no use) ‘out of that which is present
(before him)², associated with countless manifestations such as a jar, ‘replete’

with the manifestations of ‘clay-nessʼ, ‘gold-ness’ and ‘jar-nessʼ etc., because
(in the initial moment of manifestation they) are ‘indistinguished’, that is,

undivided from one another.™⁰ The meaning is that the manifestation of that
(jar) takes place in this way.⁷””'

⁹ MVV 2/136ab: hy abhedasaṅpūrṇe bhāve ‘py udakam āharan, TĀ 4/197ab: hy
abhedāt pūrṇe ‘pi bhāve jalam upāharan There is no essential difference in the

meaning. MVV 2/136cd-137 = 4/197cd-198 with no variants.
”⁰ According to the Doctrine of Manifestation (ābhāsavāda) elaborated in the
Pratyabhijñā, everything is a manifold of manifestations (ābhāsa) of consciousness.

This is true from the most universal level down to the smallest particular. Viewed in this
perspective, an entity is a pleroma of manifestations which are part of the pleroma of all

the countless manifestations of consciousness as each and every thing. Thus, each
object, perception, or indeed, perceiver within consciousness, at one with it, is a single
complete (piūrṇa) whole, as the totality of its manifestation. Moreover, each aggregate is

the one totality (pūrṇatā), which is measureless consciousness. Such then is the

302

CHAPTER FOUR

‘In the same way’, although the abode of consciousness is omniform,
by rejecting other forms (that are not required), by the Supreme Lord’s glorious

power of constraint (which determines that specific causes should give rise to
particular effects), ‘a particular form,’ of whatever it be ‘(on which the yogi
meditates), generates the conception (vikalpana) of (that particular) fruit’.

So it is was rightly said that ‘for those (adepts) who aspire to (particular) fruits,

some (particular) form (through which they may attain them) is present (within

consciousness) as the object of their meditation (dhyeya).’””²

Now he says that the unconditioned (and undivided) form (of
consciousness) manifests to (an individual who has no desire for any particular
fruit, and s0) has no need of anything that has some (particular) fixed function
(arthakriyā) (to get it).

3ṇaq ũrṀkzāī

%…³ a aīōfĩ 1

fāraṁṣfcrádī
aṁ āīaēzōzāsīdq I| 28 1

yas tu saṁpūrṇaḥr̥dayo na phalaṁ nāma vāñchati |
tasya viśvākṛtir devī sā cāvacchedavarjanā || 199 |l

plenitude (pūrṇatā) of consciousness that every single thing, as a manifestation of
consciousness, is all of it. In this way, the nature of every single thing is everything
(sarvaṁ sarvātmakam). This is how everything is experienced in the initial state of

perception. The question now naturally arises, how something which is everything can
be functional in any particular way. Indeed, how can it be distinguished from anything

else, if all things are everything? The answer to this question lies in the manner in
which, at the functional level of day-to-day life, individual entities are conceived with

respect to others and themselves, with regards to their constituent parts (i.e.
manifestations). Certain manifestations are accepted and others rejected, according to

the needs and intentions of the perceiver who wishes to make use of them for some
particular purpose. If someone who owns a golden jar needs money, out of the aggregate
of manifestations that together constitute the jar, he would focus on those related to the

gold from which it is made. But if he wishes to draw water, it would not be of any

concern to him whether the jar is made of expensive gold or just cheap clay. These
relative distinctions are articulated in thought constructs that manifest in the second
moment of perception. Thus, Abhinava explains in the following passage in his
commentary on the Āśvarapratyabhijñā, how the same object appears variously to
different perceivers according to the use they wish to make of it and their state of mind.
“When a person who is depressed and feels that there is nothing (of value for him in the
world) sees the jar, he merely perceives the appearance ‘exists’ (in the form of the
awareness that) ‘it is’. He is not conscious of any other (of its constituent appearances)

at all. An individual who desires to fetch water (perceives) the appearance ‘jar’. The
man who simply wants something that can be taken somewhere and then brought back,
(perceives) the appearance ‘vessel’. The man who desires money (perceives) the

appearance ‘gold’. The man who desires a pleasing object (perceives) the appearance
‘brightness’, while he who wants something solid sees the appearance ‘hardnessʼ. ĪPv 2,

pp. 91-92.

! Read tathātvenāsya for tattvenāsya.

¹°² Above, 4/196cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

303

However, the form of the Goddess of one whose Heart is completely

full and (s0) desires no fruits, is all things, devoid as She (and he) is of

limitations.”³ (199)

Thus (according to this teaching), the visualization (dhyāna) of one who
desires worldly benefits has a fixed form, whereas that of one who desires
liberation has no fixed form. This is the division between (these) domains

(viṣaya) (of practice). As he will say:

‘In the case of adepts (sādhaka) and those who desire worldly benefits,

the (specific ritual) procedure (they should follow) (vidhi) is (rīgorously) fixed
by the constraint (ṇniyati) (which determines that a particular action gives rise to
a specific result).¹™™⁴ (Whereas,) in the case of those who know reality and those
who aspire for liberation, it is free of (any) restriction.’™⁵
Having in this way defined the true nature of visualization, he (now)

also defines that of Mudrā.

Mudrā

ṝz⁵ aām sūchũzrīamkrqaīq|

srtāṣa fkafṝśē aī aṁ aaīīa iī (| 3 0001|
kule yogina udriktabhairavīyaparāsavāt |
ghūrṇitasya sthitir dehe mudrā yā kācid eva sā ll 200 ||

The yogi who, though still in the body (kula),¹⁶ is vibrant with the

inebriation (ghūrṇita) of the abundant (udrikta) and most excellent wine of

³ MVV 2/137 = 4/199 with the following variants: MVV: saṁpūrṇacidvṛttir- “he

whose activity of consciousness is completely full TĀ: saṅpūrṇahrdayo- ʻhe whose
Heart is completely fullʼ. MVV: tasya viśvākṛti dhyānaṁ sarvadaiva vijrmbhate- ⁴and
his visualization (meditation) (dhyāna) which is the form of all things unfoldsʼ. TĀ:

tasya viśvākṛtir devī sā cāvacchedavarjanāt – “and his Goddess is the form of all things,
free as She (and he) is of limitationsʼ.

⁷⁰⁴ Thus, for them, the rite varies according to the results they aspire to attain.

”³ This verse is quoted below as 26/55cd-56ab. 1t also appears above ad 1/122cd-123ab
(123).

⁰⁰ 1 follow Jayaratha, as I must, who explains ‘Kula’ here to mean the body, which is

indeed one of the meanings of the word. But more likely, Abhinava is referring back to
Devī manifest as the divine energies of the body, senses and mind, working together in

the economy of embodied immanence which is Kula. If this interpretation is correct, one

would translate: ‘“Mudrā is whatever be the condition within the body of the yogi who,

(immersed in divine energy of) Kula, is vibrant with the inebriation (ghūrṇita) of the
abundant (udrikta) and most excellent wine of Bhairava (consciousness).” As we shall
see in chapter 32, Mudrā is explained in this way, as the rise of Kuṇḍalinī.

304

CHAPTER FOUR

Bhairava (consciousness), whatever be the state (sthiti) within (his) body, is

Mudrā.””⁷ (200)

(The word) ‘kule’ (is a locative absolute that means) ‘even when there

still is the bodyʼ. ‘The yogi” who has attained oneness with the Supreme Lord

and so, because (his awareness) is firmly fixed there (on this state of oneness),

has forgotten his embodied state (even when he is still in the body), ‘any state
within (his) body’, upraised and the like, is true Mudrā, the epitome (pratikṛti)
of the power of consciousness. (True Mudrā is) not a posturing (of the body)
(saṁniveśa) formed by some fixed (placement of the) hand etc. (as dictated by

ritual procedure). This is the meaning.”⁸ As is said: ‘Mantra is the Sound (of the
resonant awareness of consciousness, whereas) the abiding state (of the body)
(sthiti) is Mudrā’. Those who are outside (our tradition) have also said, with the
same intention: “Mudrā is a certain (undefinable) abiding state.”
Now in order to define the true nature of oblation as well, he says:

Oblation and Recitation of Mantra

3TālTla-TGTāṝũeza
fīāī; |
sTīēā%araīarTrrgarũrvraā:
frēs̄ I] 3 02 1

JaīTīṝ āīg1 aī fāīāTāīkṁīēā
g-: |
3TTT-T
TT-B RITGHTHĪTRTTHT I 3 0R1I

antarindhanasaṁbhāram anapekṣyaiva nityaśaḥ |
jājvalīty akhilākṣaughaprasṛtograśikhaḥ śikhī || 201 I|
bodhāgnau tādṛśe bhāvā viśantas tasya sanmahaḥ |
udrecayanto gacchanti homakarmanimittatām || 202 ||
The fire (of consciousness) burns constantly and intensely, without
need of any other fuel, its awesome flame pouring forth from all the senses.
Phenomena, entering this fire of consciousness, intensifying its glorious

splendour, become the means to offer oblation.⁷”⁹ (201-202)

⁹⁷ TĀ 4/200ab corresponds to MVV 2/139ab. MVV reads: -rasāsavāt for TĀ: -

parāṣsavāt. Then MVV 2/139cd-140ab reads:

ghūrṇamānasya yaḥ kaścit ko ’py udeti yathā tathā ||
śarīragaḥ samāveśo modanadrāvaṇātmakaḥ |
'‘A certain (ineffable) penetration, the nature of which is to delight (modana)
and melt away (duality) (drāvaṇa), arises within the body of (a yogi) vibrant with

intoxication.”
”⁴⁸ The yogi who is at one with God, and thus forgetful of the body, whatever posture he

assumes is a form of the power of consciousness (cit śakti). This is the true nature of

Mudrā.

⁷⁴⁹ TĀ 4/201-202ab corresponds to MVV 2/130cd-131, with the following variants.

MVV

reads

–sadbhāvam

for

–saṁbhāram. MVV:: yo jvalatya- TĀ: jājvalīya-. MVV: —prasṛtāgrasikhāśataḥ TĀ:

TANTRĀLOKA

305

As is said:
‘The (true) offering of libation (tarpaṇa) to fire is the process of
reducing to ashes (all) phenomena in the fire called consciousness, crooked with

the network of the flames of the seven senses.”⁴⁰⁹

My teacher (has said,) with the same intention:
‘Those whose nature is indestructible, minds satisfied (viśvasta) and

(consciousness) extensively expanded, assuming bodies of consciousness,

(offer) the universe perpetually (in oblation to consciousness), making (the

invocation) ‘vaṣar’ with great force. The moment of purification (avabhṛtha) of

those great sacrificers,” engaged in the sport of the perpetual sacrifice of all

sacrificial victims,¹² is (never), I believe, seen to wane (kṣīṇasthiti), even for a

moment.³
⁴³

praṣr̥tograśikhaḥ śikhī. MVV: tatraiva sarvabhāvānāṁ praviśec cid vimṛṣśyate TĀ:

bodhāgnau tādrśe bhāvā viśantas tasya sanmahaḥ.
MVV 2/132-133ab teaches the inner offering to the fire (homa) according to the

Bhairavakrama:

‘Surely, as (their) gross nature has been burnt away, (phenomena) become by
their very nature, forcefully (haṭhāt) in an instant, one with the greatly flaming light of
(awakened) consciousness. This is considered to be the supreme offering to the fire
(homa) according to Bhairava’s tradition (bhairavīyakrama).”

(262).

MVV 2/133 (which follows 133ab in a different metre) = TĀ 3/262cd-263ab

According to the VBh (149), the inner ‘oblation is the offering of all the gross

elements, senses and their objects along with the mind into the fire which is the abode of
the Great Void, by means of the sacrificial ladle of awareness (cetanā)*.²

* Śivopādhyāya defines cetanā as ‘the power that contemplates (and conjoins) all

things’ (viśvānusaṁdhātṛ śaktiḥ).

According to the ŚDr (7/90cd-92ab): ““AI things are forms of Śiva and they
are within Śiva’s fire. I am He – Śiva who is well content!” This is said to be the
supreme offering to the fire (homa). What is not mine in (this) form here, is mine in
(some) other form. Thus, because of the contentment (I feel), I am devoid of craving.
Such is the offering to the fire.”

⁸⁰ According to an Upanisad, the sacred fire is said to have seven flames corresponding
to seven goddesses, the names of which are associated with Kālī. Here the seven flames
of fire are understood to be the energies of the seven senses, which are presumably the
five senses of sight, taste, touch, smell and hearing, along with mind (manas) and
intellect (buddhi).

³ Ṟead -mahāyajināṁ for mahāyajvanāṁ.

⁸⁰² The printed edition reads -saṁtatasarvameyayajana- ‘the perpetual sacrifice of all
objectivity’, whereas MSs Ch, Jh, Ñ, and T read: -saṁtatasarvamedhayajana- ʻ‘the
perpetual sacrifice of all sacrificial victims’. The reading in the MSs, which I have

adopted, is supported by an instance of practically the same expression in another

citation Jayaratha makes from his teacher’s work in TĀv ad 5/66cd-67ab (66cd-66ef).
There the author refers to himself as the sacrificer in the viśvamedhamayayajña – ‘the

sacrifice made of all sacrificial victims’. The sacrifice is no doubt death, of which all
living beings are the sacrificial victims.

¹⁰³ The word ‘avabhr̥ta’ literally means ‘carried off or ‘removed’. In the context of
Vedic ritual, it denotes the ablution of the sacrificer and sacrificial vessels after the

306

CHAPTER FOUR
(The exercise of this reflective awareness) is not only of benefit to

oneself, because it brings about entry into the supreme nature, but also to others.
Accordingly, he (now) says that:

ĀKPETIENIEHIĒETIEEIGṬEIṬ

tnīnī tā mzrtra 7āē 1 3⁰³3 1|
yaṁ kañcit parameśānaśaktipātapavitritam |
purobhāvya svayaṁ tiṣṭhed uktavad dīkṣitas tu saḥ || 203 |I
Whoever has been purified by the Supreme Lord’s (gracious)
descent of power (śaktipāta), (and the teacher beholds) standing before him,
is spontaneously initiated in the manner described, (by the devout practice

of the true recitation of Mantra).³⁴ (203)

According to (the following) words, there is no fixed rule (that only
some particular person is fit to receive initiation; rather it may be) ‘whoever has
been purified by the Supreme Lord’s (gracious) descent of power
(Śśaktipāta)³:
‘(A Brahmin) who knows the four Vedas is not dear to me. (One should
not give initiation to one like him). It should be given (instead) to someone who

is my devotee (madbhakta), even if he be an outcaste (śvapaca),¹⁵ and it should

be taken from him. He is worthy of worship just (as much) as I am.⁷
⁸⁰

completion of a sacrifice that removes their impurities. In this context presumably it
refers to the moment of final purification of these sacrificers themselves once they have
offered all the victims, that is, all forms of objectivity, into the fire of consciousness.

Thus, free of even the latent traces of objectivity that may still lay hidden in their
subjective consciousness, their state of perfect purity never ceases.

⁸⁰* Once duality has been burnt away and, consumed by the fire of consciousness, has

become one with it, the consciousness beyond all means of realisation
(anupāyasaṁviṭti) dawns, and the Light of No Means shines in its pristine glory,

realised in an instant by the disciple who is has thus been made fit, just by the gracious
look of the teacher. See above 2/40, commentary and notes.

⁸⁰³ Liṭerally ‘one who cooks (and eats) dogs’.

⁸⁶Thjs verse looks as if it is drawn from the Bhagavadgītā. There, as here in this verse,
Kṛṣṇa repeatedly refers to ‘my devotee’ (madbhakta) as being of special interest to him.

It is a clear stylistic feature of the manner in which he expresses himself. See for
example BhGĪ 6/16 (of the Kashmiri recension), 7/23, and 18/55. Similarly, the repeated
insistence there, as in this verse, that caste distinctions are not important. What makes a
person a Brahmin are his moral qualities, not birth. One of them is that he views all

people equally without prejudice, and another is that devotion to Kṛṣṇa is paramount.
Jayaratha does not tell us his source. It is possible that it is a lost verse from the Gītā,
but this is unlikely if the reference here is to initiation. There is no evidence that at the
time the BhGī was redacted any developed system of initiation existed other than Vedic

in the Sanskritic tradition. Whereas, on the contrary, it is a major distinguishing feature
of the Tantras, the earliest of which postdate the Gītā.

TANTRĀLOKA

307

Once ‘(the teacher) beholds’ʼ (the disciple) standing before him as the
object of grace, he ‘spontaneously’ abides in his own essential nature by virtue
of (his) steadfast (practice) of the true repetition of Mantra and the rest, as
explained. Thus he, as the neophant who is to receive initiation, is initiated (in
an instant) in the manner described (in the scriptures, with the words,) ‘(the

power of Śiva’s grace) is transmitted (with the intensity and force) of a snake’s

venom . . .ʼ,⁴" and so, by the transmission of that (same illumined) nature (the

teacher possesses), ‘(he is illumined) like the flame (of a lamp) that has arisen

from (another) flame.’⁴⁸ The meaning is that by the waning away of the latent

tendencies of (his) fettered identity (pasśuvāsanā), he has attained (a true)
understanding (adhigama) of the supreme principle.
Surely (one may ask,) one may attain repose in one’s own nature from
(the practice of) just one of these – for example, the true repetition of Mantra –
so what is the use of so many of these (practices), like the repetition of Mantra,
that have been taught in this way? With this question in mind, he says:
Conclusion

Viewing Oneself in the Mirror of Inner Meditation and Worship

STāīē ēīrīdīd aaṁzīhṁahHtō]|

3afd #le: aṁī aīṁrczi f==sttrāg ] Q.xx 1

japyādau homaparyante yady apy ekaikakarmaṇi |
udeti rūḍhiḥ paramā tathāpītthaṁ nirūpitam || 204 ||

⁸⁰⁷ There are two kinds of transmissions of grace. One is mild and takes place gradually.

It is accompanied by effort on the part of the one who receives it. The power of grace is
weak, and its ‘descent’ needs to be repeated many times. But if the disciple is pure and

ready, all he needs to do is desist from exertion and let the power of the grace of Śiva

consciousness shining in the teacher penetrate him. It pervades his consciousness with

great force in a moment. Like the powerful venom ofa poisonous snake, it brings an end
in an instant to the individual subjectivity associated with the body. This is the highest

form of initiation, that takes place by the most intense form of the descent of the power
of grace, which is so powerful, the one who receives it may leave the body permanently

(see below, 13/130).

⁸⁰³ Ṭhe same phrase is quoted above in TĀv ad 2/40 and 3/291 (290cd-291ab). The
context is always the same, that is, the initiation of the disciple into the supreme state by
a direct transmission of Śiva’s grace, by means of the teacher’s gaze. The repetition of
Mantra and the rest which form part of ritual practice begin at the individual means
(āṇavaopāya). As they develop, Mantras operate in the sphere of the Empowered Means

as the awareness by which thought constructs are purified. Then when that is achieved,

they operate in the Divine Means as the ‘I’ which is the essence of subjectivity, by

virtue of which the traces of past actions and the tendency to form constructs are fully

consumed into consciousness, thus protecting from the danger of further relapse. Then

the aspirant who is thus ready to do so enters, transformed and truly initiated through the
gracious look of the teacher, into the pure Śiva consciousness of No Means, once and
for all.

308

CHAPTER FOUR

The supremely stable state (riṭḍhi) arises in each of these actions
(karman), from the repetition of Mantra to the offering of oblation; even so,
they have (each been) described (separately) in this way. (204)
‘In this wayʼ, that is, as the many kinds (of such practices), like the
repetition of Mantra.
Surely (one may ask,) what is the point of this response to the question
as to how it is that many (means) such as the repetition of Mantra have been
described? With this doubt in mind, he says:

gaṛfē ṁāī āāṁa: āaṝrrīaāīj|
fk̄ī āī aTaTā aTīTāTTŪTTĪGTTTḤI Qo, I
hEIEEIEIEHEEIIEHĀR |EstṛESEUTĒH

r̥ĀTTfĀ]
Ñ̄ carīsīaī Taāīad | 3 ⁰ē 1

yathā hi tatra tatrāśvaḥ samanimnonnatādiṣu |
citre deśe vāhyamāno yātīcchāmātrakalpitām || 205 ||
tathā saṁvidvicitrābhiḥ śāntaghoratarādibhiḥ |
bhaṅgībhir abhito dvaitaṁ tyājitā bhairavāyate l| 206 ||

Just as the course of a horse driven here and there in various

places, on level ground or (up and down) hills and dales, comes to be
directed by (the rider’s) will alone, similarly consciousness, (directed) by
various expedients (bhaṅigi), peaceful, most fierce (ghoratara) and so on,
abandons duality in all respects and becomes Bhairava.*” (205-206)

‘Just as a horse driven here and there in various places,’ as is the
playful gait of the vehicle, rocky or dusty etc. land, ‘on level ground or (up
and down) hills and dales, (its course)ʼ circular or otherwise, ‘comes to be
directed byʼ the rider’s ‘will alone’ and is submissive to it. ‘Similarly,
‘⁰” Abhinava is explaining here how the higher forms of Trika ritual he has just
described and the worship of the Trika deities lead to the attainment of supreme

consciousness in the perspective of the Empowered Means, that is, the purification of

thought. The Trika deities, as with those of other Tantric traditions, are variously fierce

or peaceful and benign; by means of them consciousness, directed by the higher
universal subjectivity operating through the individual, traverses the path to liberation,
with its ups and down, terror and tranquillity, thus training his mind until it follows his

will alone. In this way it abandons the false, rebellious notions of duality, with their
pretence of a false independence which, far from being freedom, is really bondage.

These notions, which embody and sustain the sense of difference, are fed by the contrast
between one’s own will and that of universal consciousness. The former, seemingly
free, is actually bound by that very freedom, which is wild and without direction. When
that freedom, which is bondage, is reined in by the true freedom of consciousness,
manifest through its energies in the moments and forms of its worship, notions no
longer obscure the individual’s freedom; rather, of a piece with it, he becomes one with
Bhairava, and shines as the supreme consciousness of Anuttara.

TANTRĀLOKA

309

consciousnessʼ also, ‘(directed) by various expedients (bhañṅgi)’, such as the
repetition of Mantra and the like, that are ‘peaceful and most fierce
(ghoratara)³, that is, said to be one with the three energies, Parā, (Parāparā and
Aparā), who are, respectively, not fierce (aghora), fierce (ghora) and most

fierce (ghoratara) by nature,³"⁰ *abandons duality (dvaita) all around and
becomes Bhairava’. The meaning is that, having first abandoned duality

(bheda), it shines radiantly as the supreme consciousness of the Absolute

(anuttara).³"

Now in order to make the point clear, (so that the disciple may) take it

to heart, he explains (the teaching) by giving another example.

aq̄ḷ ra JR̥ ṀfĨṛ5ī āēēi farīarāq

SJĪī SJTTIĀĀT JTāT āIĪTī fITITT: | Q⁰¹ 1

aṛ fēhcTṬā aTTqGTHĪTTT |

³TIēJĪ ‘S ṬVAHRTTHTĀĪYHḤI Ṝ⁰¢ I
yathā purahsthe mukure nijaṁ vaktraṁ vibhāvayan |

bhūyo bhūyas tadekātma vaktraṁ vetti nijātmanaḥ || 207 ||

tathā vikalpamukure dhyānapūjārcanātmani |
ātmānaṁ bhairavaṁ paśyan na cirāt tanmayībhavet || 208 I|
Just as someone who, observing his own face (repeatedly) again and
again in a mirror before (him), knows that it is the same as his own face, in
the same way, beholding himself as Bhairava in the mirror of thought, that
is, visualization (dhyāna), worship (pūjā) and adoration (arcana), he quickly

becomes of His same nature (tanmaya).³¹² (207-208)

⁸1⁰ Jayaratha means to say that ‘the ‘expedients’ are the forms of awareness of true

repetition of Mantra etc. in relation to the powers Aghorā, Ghorā and Ghoratarā, that are

emanations of the three goddesses, Parā, Parāparā and Aparā. The Aghorā energies
elevate the individual soul. The Ghorā energies hinder its development, whereas the
Ghoratarā energies cast it down to lower levels. See above, notes 3,231 and 3,245.

⁸!¹ Advaita Vedānta understands the Absolute of the Upaniṣads – the Brahman – to be
impersonal. Accordingly, the gender of the word is neuter. Abhinava, on the contrary,
understands the Absolute to be Anuttara – a masculine noun – to be personal, and so

identifies it with Bhairava. Here in this equation Jayaratha, as happens in many places,
brings together these aspects of ultimate reality as consciousness, the Absolute and
Deity.

⁸² See below, 16/38cd-44. Above (TĀv ad 4/2) Jayaratha explained that by practicing

the Empowered Means, thought is progressively purified to ultimately come to rest in
the pure conscious state free of thought constructs by ‘pondering etc. (ādi) on what one

has heardʼ, that is, transmitted through the scriptures and taught by the teacher. The
‘etc.’ (ādi) here implies that this is the first (ādi) way of purifying thought and that there
are others. Here are examples. The standard ritual procedures listed here for worshiping
the Deity can operate as a means to purify thought, thereby transforming it into the

direct insight which is the attainment of the realisation of oneness with it in the
Śāmbhava sphere of practice. This happens if the practitioner applies himself ‘without
delay² (acīram) (above, 4/2). In this context, this means that he should repeat Mantra

310

CHAPTER FOUR
‘Just as’⁷ anyone ‘who, observing his own face (repeatedly) again

and again’, viewing it attentively, ‘in a mirror in front (of himself)ʼ, knows
that that face (in the mirror), which is related to his own as (its) original image,

‘is the same (as his own face)ʼ, by reaching the conclusion that ‘that face is
indeed my own’, considers it to be one with the reflection (in the mirror). In just
the same way, ‘beholding himself’ many times ‘as Bhairava in the mirror of
thoughtʼ, which consists of worship (pūjā) and the rest, he ‘quickly becomes
of His same natureʼ. The meaning is that he attains oneness with (Bhairava).
What is the nature of this state of identity (/anmayībhāva)? He says:

aEPIEEEĒE
TĒ³I IS- ĀR³ EAUIEI
tanmayībhāvanaṁ nāma prāptiḥ sānuttarātmani |
This realisation of identity (tanmayībhāvana) (with Bhairava) is the

attainment within the nature of the Absolute (anuttarātman). (209ab)

So, what happens by attaining⁶² (this identity) within the nature of the

Absolute? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JJTēīī Tā īTTāī *īdā T WJTĀTT I 308II

pūrṇatvasya parā kāṣṭhā sety atra na phalāntaram || 209 ||
That (attainment) is the supreme summit of plenitude, and so there
is no other fruit (beyond it). (209cd)
‘That’ attainment (of identity) within the nature of the Absolute which,

because it is free in every respect of any sense of need (nairākaṅkṣa), ʻis the
and worship etc. in such a way that his thoughts are centred without a break on Deity

and his own pure consciousness. This should be done ‘properly° (añjasa) (ibid.), that is,
without distractions and repeatedly ‘again and again’ (bhūyo bhūyaḥ) (4/7). The

repetition of Mantra, as does worship, entails the activity of the body and mind. As

such, these practices belong to the sphere of the Individual Means, in which the power
to act predominates. Here in the sphere of the Empowered Means, the focus of practice

is the power of cognition. The worshipper is focused on his thoughts and perceptions,
not his actions. It is through them, as they become progressively more immersed in the

purity of the consciousness which is the Deity’s and the worshipper’s ultimate nature,
that he will eventually be graced in a flash of insight with the recognition of their true
nature. Practicing in this way, the notions of Deity, Mantra, worship and the rest become

clear, like a well-polished mirror. Thus ultimately, as in the Śāmbhava Means, the
mirror in which one sees one’s own true nature reflected is the Light of consciousness.

But whereas in that case, it shines directly, free of thought constructs, here in the sphere

of the Empowered Means, the light of the mirror of consciousness shines through them,

in and through each perception. In this way, the Empowered Means with its thought

constructs comes to rest in the Śāmbhava Means, that is free of them and in which the
perceiver recognises his oneness with the Deity. That is his object, which he sees as he

perceives that that is who he is; just as one recognizes oneself in the reflection of one’s

face in a mirror.
⁸1³ Read prāptyāpi for prātyāpi.

TANTRĀLOKA

311

supreme summit of plenitude’, and there could be no other (greater) fruit here
(than this). Here (nothing is lacking, and s0) not even a trace of a sense of need
remains, that one should search for some other fruit. This is the point. An
(indiviḍual) perceiver who feels the need (for something), desiring that
(particular) fruit, initially searches for an appropriate means (to obtain it). It is
like someone who wishes to draw water. Once he obtains a jar, which is the
means to do it, he attains each particular fruit (of its use he needs). Thus,

because a state arises (within him) free of the sense of need, taking the support

(of his) state of indifference, he abides within his own nature. However, that is
not a state of complete (piūrṇa) (satisfaction) free of (all) sense of need, because
at some other time another need arises again. Thus, that is not true

(pāramārthika) (satisfaction), because even though there is still a sense of need,

it is not conceived to be such. Thus, even though the fruit has arisen there (in

that case), one expects another, because there is also another need. However,
when on the contrary there is a true state of plenitude (and complete

satisfaction), there is no (expectation of any) other fruit, because the sense of

need has ceased in all respects.
He says that:

TG TiṬJĨṀĨ
Ũ̄ ̄ Jkca |

srṁā̄cqa fē pḹā ṁōārafcṁkīgeaāīa1 2201
phalaṁ sarvam apūrṇatve tatra tatra prakalpitam |
akalpite hi pūrṇatve phalam anyat kim ucyatām || 210 ||
When (one’s own consciousness) is not in a state of perfect plenitude
(apūrṇatva), all the fruits (of the many spiritual disciplines) are conceived

(prakalpita) (to exist in various forms), according to the circumstances
(tatra tatra). Once having attained (that true uncreated and) unconceived

(akalpita) fullness, pray tell what other fruit is there (beyond that)? (210)

‘(Once having attained the uncreated) fullnessʼ, which is the cause of

complete (perfection), ‘according to the circumstancesʼ,⁸¹⁴ with regards to all

(possible) fruits, (the subject is fully satisfied, and so there is nothing more that

needs be achieved).
He concludes this (teaching) with a note of praise (for this liberating
realisation).

uy aṛīṀfafēr. āsf hzaḷṝt fe aia |
aṇaaq Jātīk’r-zīāḥ gIIJISTH: 1| 222 1
eṣa yāgavidhiḥ ko ʻpi kasyāpi hṛdi vartate |
yasya prasīdec ciccakraṁ drāg apaścimajanmanaḥ || 211 ||

⁸l¹ Read tatra tatreti for * * tareti.

312

CHAPTER FOUR

This ineffable (ko’pi) sacrificial rite (yāgavidhi) takes place in the

Heart of a few (especially graced yogis). He to whom the Wheel of
Consciousness is gracious is liberated in an instant!⁸"⁶ (211)
Now (one may ask), is there something unique one possesses by just

realising (adhigama)³'⁰ (the practice of) this kind of sacrificial procedure
(yāgavidhi), that he has said this? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ī aīī Taī ṀḷṀã haattrrsṣṝdī|

@ThTērzī
fē %ararariī fēe: 1 32211
atra yāge gato rūḍhiṁ kaivalyam adhigacchati |
lokair ālokyamāno hi dehabandhavidhau sthitaḥ || 212 ||

⁸¹³ This verse is MVV 2/141 with no variants. After quoting this verse Maheśvarānanda
says:
tatrāsavasyāntaḥkaraṇaprasādhakatvam | tāmbūlasya śarīraṁ prati bāhyāṇtarobhaya-

śodhakatvam | gandhasya candanādeḥ prācuryeṇa bahiraṅgopasaṁskārakatvam .1|

puṣpāṇāṁ

ca

kramavivakṣā |

tatraiva

keśādimātrādhivāsaprayojakateti

pūrvapūrvaprādhānyāt

‘There (in that sacrificial rite), wine is that which delights the inner mental
organ. Betel is that which, in relation to the body, purifies internally and externally. By

an abundance of fine) scent such as sandalwood, the outer (sacrificial) area is

accordingly purified. The use of flowers is to impart a good smell (adhivāsa) to just the
hair and the like³. MM p. 109

Every Means leads to No Means in its own way. Concluding this section,
Abhinava declares how, participating in the rotation of the great Wheel of

Consciousness of the Twelve Kālīs, thought is purified by its grace, and so is

transformed into the direct experience of this ineffable sacrificial rite, with its own

mantra, fire offerings and the rest, that he has just described. There is no ritual, even in
this exalted form, in Sāmbhava practice. There, the power of the will operates in the first
moment of self-awareness, free of thought constructs, as the stream of the energies of

Speech, symbolized by the letters of the alphabet from A to H, as so many forms of
reflective awareness constituting AHAMṀ – the ‘T’ of the subjectivity of Supreme Śiva.
Thisis just awareness, the freedom of consciousness to be all things without losing its
unconditioned nature, preceding knowledge and action. In the domain of the

Empowered Means, differentiated perception operates with the possibility of an
attendant fall into the sphere of duality. This too is the work of the reflective awareness

which is the freedom of consciousness. But here, instead of generating oneness, as in the

sphere of the Divine Means, it also generates duality. If the latter takes the upper hand,

it conceals the former, and so also vice versa. Coexisting in the insight into the
dynamism of consciousness, the sacrificial rite celebrates within it its plenitude, that

embraces all things. This is unity-in-difference and difference-in-unity.

⁸¹⁶ The word adhigama- means to acquire, and (by extension) to understand. Combining
both, we arrive at the meaning ‘realise’.

TANTRĀLOKA

313

⁸tTHe whose (consciousness) īis firmly established here in this
sacrificial rite (yāga) attains liberation (kaivalya) (even as) the people of the

world continue to see him and he remains within the confines of the

bondage of the body (living the liberated life).³"⁸ (212)

One who will have no further rebirth and has developed (his
consciousness) ‘here’ in this kind of ‘sacrificial rite’, although ‘he remains’

living ‘within the confines of the bondage of the body, the people of the
world’ who are bound, see him as living (his) daily life on the same level (as
they are), in accord with the saying that:
‘the

condition

in

which

there

is

subject

(grāhyagrāhakabhāva) is common to all embodied beings’.""

and

object

(Even so,) ‘he attains liberation (kaivalya)³. The meaning is that by

removing the duality which is the state of subject and object, (everything) shines
radiantly (for him) as his own nature alone, which he has recognised to be Śiva.
This then is the difference between one who is liberated and one who is bound,
namely, that even though their daily life (vyavahāra) is just the same,
phenomena manifest for one who is liberated as (if they were) his own limbs,
whereas for one who is bound, (they appear) in accord with (their specific)
mutually separate nature as completely different (from one another and

himself).³*⁰ As is said:

‘Like Maheśvara Himself, one who is liberated considers common
objectivity to be one with himself, whereas one who is bound, on the contrary,
(thinks) that it is extremely different (from himself).’
Thus, the Lord Himself has said the same concerning the state of
liberation while (still) alive (in the body). Accordingly, he says:

⁸"” Veṛses 212 to 270ab are a commentary on MV 18/74-81.
⁸1³ 212cd = MVV 2/142ab which reads lokenālokyamāno ‘pi for lokair ālokyamāno ‘pi.

Jayaratha accepts the reading here. The singular lokena – ‘by the world’ can also be a
collective ‘by the people’. So, there is no essential difference in the meaning here.
⁸t⁷ Cf. VBh 106ab (105ab). grāhyagrāhakabhāvo hi sāmānyaḥ sarvadehinām. The
printed text of the VBh reads grāhyagrāhakasaṁvittiḥ sāmānyā sarvadehīnām – *the
perception of subject and object is common to all embodied beings'. The second line

continues: ‘however, attention to their relationship is peculiar to yogis alone.” Abhinava
presents a concise paraphrase of this verse below in 10/204. The full verse is quoted in
the commentary. See note there.

⁸2 Cf. ĪP 4/1/20. The experience of a liberated, embodied soul is that all things manifest

as aspects of his own Self, whereas the experience of the fettered is that they manifest
separately from himself, and that every single thing is uniquely different from
everything else.

314

CHAPTER FOUR

The Relativity of Prohibitions and Injunctions (niṣedhavidhitulyatva):
Commentary on Chapter Eighteen of the Mālinīvijayottara

T ī: ŪṃHIR ṬRJSRIRJĪSHT]|
atra nāthaḥ samācāraṁ paṭale ʻṣṭādaśe ‘bhyadhāt |
**1Here (in this regard), the Lord has taught virtuous conduct

(grounded in the transcendence of opposites) (samācāra)² in the eighteenth
chapter (of the Mālinīvijayatantra). (213ab)

āī

fç̄d -āīāfTṣ̄̃ vreaṇīēfēmorg 22 1

ī š -7Ṁ aīēd fōgsīēah

3 ṝḷq ṝcañkaāī frafareāṁṁ
arī | 2z1
qdfāraāīṁ
āīf] Sīarāāāftā⁷T: |
TaTĪ Īī JaTCĪT] TOITTT ST Jq I| 32
4 1I

āTTaTavīg draṁcma-7 |

TGūTTPZIG TTTĪTITTR T aJT I 2Z⁶ I
ccāṝasra
faf= ī nttrzaṟa 1

nātra śuddhir na cāśuddhir na bhakṣyādivicāraṇam || 213 ||
na dvaitaṁ nãpi cãdvaitaṁ liṅgapūjādikaṁ na ca |
na cāpi tatparityāgo niṣparigrahatāpi vā || 214 |
saparigrahatā vāpi jatābhasmādisaṁgrahaḥ |
tattyāgo na vratādīnāṁ caraṇācaraṇaṁ ca yat I| 215 ||
kṣetrādisaṁpraveśaś ca samayādiprapālanam |
parasvarūpaliṅgādi nāmagotrādikaṁ ca yat || 216 ||
nāsmin vidhīyate kūñcin na cāpi pratiṣidhyate |
‘Here (in the practice of this Tantra), there is neither purity nor
impurity, no deliberation on what may (or may not) be eaten (drunk,
⁸²l 4/213cd-221ab is a literal quote of MV 18/74-81. The following section, that extends

from 221cd to 278, is Abhinava’s commentary on these verses. Here Abhinava finds his

way through conflicting statements about Śaiva practice by rejecting some provisional

rules, and providing the arguments that can establish a hierarchy of these conflicting
injunctions and prohibitions concerning ritual purity.

⁸²” Monier-Williams defines the word samācāra as follows: ‘equal manners or customs,

equal or virtuous conduct ib. mfn. equal or similar in practice or in virtuous conduct ib.
m. procedure, practice, conduct, custom, usage, usual way or method.”

We can understand the technical sense of the term from the context to be
‘behaving equally with respect to the opposites'. Concretely what this means is, for

example, viewing what is commonly considered to be pure and impure as a false
distinction, and acting accordingly. A Brahmin who behaves this way may freely

embrace an untouchable, or eat food such as meat, that is normally considered to be
impure. Clearly, if he did that for any other reason, he would be seriously transgressing.

TANTRĀLOKA

315

touched) or the like. There is neither duality nor nonduality.®³ There is no

worship of the Liṅga or the like, neither its abandonment.®⁴ There is

neither

(the

renouncer’s

rule)

of

not

caring

to

own

anything

(niṣparigrahatā) nor (the householder’s) engagement with possessions

(saparigrahatā). (Such practices as having) matted hair, (smearing the
body) with ashes and the like are neither rejected (nor enjoined).²⁵ Such is

also the case with the observance or otherwise of (the ascetic’s) Vows and
the like. Entry into the sacred meeting grounds (kṣetra) etc., the observance
of the Rule etc., (the distinction between) one’s own and others’ (sectarian)

appearance (rūpa), sectarian insignia (liṅga), (initiatory) names and clans
(gotra) or the like —– none are either prescribed or prohibited in this
(Tantra). (213cd-217ab)

fafē ē̃tṁam dṁṁzaṁṁr
a u 221

fe ṁaā āafr fraā- fafaū 1
ṝ̄ arā fkeaērd grriī aāīṝīī 1 22.¢ 1
Tī̄ā āaā aā aaT̄̄ ̄³’d HqṢ|
N fhgoftrra,
gmī farvamft 1 222 1
ī aagyāṁ āī: q ŪāārŪāītraraāī|

[eḶIEGIHEJĒCŠEFAGḺE ŠṬIEEEAI
fT ī Tāṁ ̄⁷ gaīmṝ ērāfā |
vihitaṁ sarvam evātra pratiṣiddham athāpi ca [c: vā] || 2177 I|
kiṁ tv etad atra deveśi [c: deveśa] niyamena vidhīyate |

⁸*³ ṛn the relevant textual sources, the expressions ‘duality° and ‘nonduality° commonly,
and certainly in this context, refer to the perception of a difference or otherwise between

‘pure’ and ‘impure’. From this perspective, Kaulism teaches ‘nondualityʼ in the sense

that it denies that the distinction between purity and impurity has an objective,
ontological basis. Things are not ‘pure’ or otherwise in themselves. This ‘nonduality³ is
not essentially a metaphysical concept. Certainly it may be seen, as Abhinava does, that
the reason for this is that there is only one reality, and so that cannot be contaminated by
anything supposed to exist apart from it. Or these two contradictory views are a mistake,
brought about by the mistaken sense of relative distinctions (bheda), due to the deluding
influence of Māyā (4/254). But it is in actual fact quite possible for there to be no sense
of ‘pure’ and ‘impure’ (as opposed to ‘clean or ‘dirty’) in a dualist world view. One

evident example is Christianity, which is not generally considered to be nondualist.

Indeed, those who are totally devoid of religion may be ‘nondualists’ in this sense
without any ontological implications, for which, anyway, they have no concern. In a

Kaula perspective, the contrast between ‘pure’ and ‘impure’ is emblematic of all forms

of duality. And they are the result of the ignorance of reality that binds by the mistaken
identification with the body.

⁸²⁴ Alṣo quoted above in 4/106-108ab.
⁸²³ See below note 4,930 ad 4/257cd-258ab, where the Kulapañcaśikā īs quoted as

disapproving the growing of matted hair and the wearing of sectarian insignias as do

Śaiva ascetics.

316

CHAPTER FOUR

tattve cetaḥ [c: cetas] sthirīkāryaṁ suprasannena yoginā || 218 II
tac ca yasya yathaiva syāt sa tathaiva samācaret |
tattve niścalacittas tu bhuñjāno viṣayān api |l 219 ||
na saṁspṛśyeta [jh: saṁspṛśeta] doṣaiḥ [c: doṣais] sa padmapatram ivāmbhasā

|

viṣāpahārimantrādisaṁnaddho bhakṣayann api || 220 ||
viṣaṁ na muhyate tena tadvad yogī mahāmatiḥ |

Everything is prescribed here or else (one could say that everything
is) prohibited.³*⁸ Rather, O queen of the gods, what is strictly enjoined here
is that the well pleased (suprasanna) yogi®”⁷ should fix (his) mind firmly on
(ultimate) reality. In whatever way (that is conducive) to that, so should he

practice.³⁸

Even though he is engaged in enjoying the objects of the senses
(bhuñjāno viṣayān api),⁹ he whose mind does not waiver from reality is
untouched by (their) defects, just as a lotus petal is (unaffected) by water.
He who is armed with the Mantras etc. that counter poison, even if he

ingests it, it does not make him lose his senses. Such is a yogi of great
wisdom.’ (217cd-221ab)

In this way, after (teaching) the true nature of the repetition of Mantra
and the rest, (the teaching concerning) the equality of prohibitions and
injunctions announced in the initial enunciation has been introduced.**"

⁸²⁶² MV 18/78ab is quoted in 4/107ab.
⁸⁷ MV 18/78cd-79a is also quoted as TĀ 4/108cd-109a. TĀ 4/109b reads tac ca yasya

yathāstv iti *and that of whoever in whatever way (possible), which is a condensed

paraphrase of MV 18/79cd. Cf. TĀ 4/120cd-121ab and 4/213cd ff. MV 8/79b reads
suprayatnena yoginā – ‘by the yogi who exerts himself well’ for TĀ 4/218d

suprasannena yoginā – ‘by the well pleased yogi’. It seems likely that Abhinava made
this change in the text. The point he sees the MV is making is that the yogi should focus

his attention on ultimate reality with ease. He should not be strained and tense by
exerting himself.
⁸³⁸ MV 18/79cd is also quoted in TĀv ad 4/108cd-109ab.

⁸ Cf. ṭhe following verse, which is also from chapter eighteen of the MV, where we
find the same expression and idea:

svatantraśivatām eti bhuñjāno viṣayān api |

animīlitadivyākṣo yāvad āste muhūrtakam |l
‘He attains Śiva’s free state even as he enjoys the objects of the senses,
abiding for an auspicious moment (muuhūrta) without closing his divine (organ of)
sense.¹ (MV 18/23)

⁸⁴⁰ Ṭhe analysis begins by asking the question whether purity and impurity are intrinsic
to the essential nature of an object. If they are, purification would bring about a
fundamental change in its nature, which is impossible. Moreover, by subscribing to a
materialistic theory of purification, we would have to assume that substances can both
be pure, insofar as they purify objects at an ontological (tattva) level below them, as
well as impure, insofar as they are purified by those above them. If we consider the

mantras to be purifying in all respects, that could only be so by virtue of their identity

TANTRĀLOKA

317

with Śiva. But if that is true, everything else should be equally pure, because everything
is one with Śiva, and there would be nothing to do. But this is not so. The purity of
mantras lies in their ultimate nature as consciousness, that is, Śiva and the Goddess, that
constitutes their purity. Liīkewise, all levels of reality are pure to the degree in which the
yogi recognises their identity with Śiva. This argument seeks to establish that purity is a
form of salvific knowledge, just as the distinction between pure and impure is a form of

ignorance. In other words, their locus has been shifted from the object to the subject.
See Hanneder 1998: 174. Abhinava writes in his Mālinīvījayavārtika:

‘The distinction between pure and impure has no place in discussions of the

highest reality. But caused by (the necessities of) these (discussions), it is entrenched in
the mind of the ignorant. (105) (Opponent,) if (you say that) the distinction called (that
between) ‘purity and impurityʼ is unreal, then (it must be objected that) the very śāstra
you wish to explain contradicts it. Because here existence (sthiti) is predominantly

dualistic, (as is) frequently (demonstrated) by such (teachings) as the impurity of the
tattvas, and therefore (the necessity of their) purification through initiation. (106-107)
(A) (In reply,) we teach (the following). It is not (the case) that duality is completely

absent from this nonduality, for it is taught that an appearance of duality takes place in
the pervading Lord, although he is free of diversity. (108) This indeed is called bondage

to the world (of transmigration) with words like Māyā or ignorance. Those who are
immersed in it are called ‘transmigratory souls’ (and) their firm belief (niścaya) in
purity and impurity and other (such polarities) stems from their anxiety about sarsāra.
(109-110ab) Moreover, this śāstra teaches Śiva (bhagavad) Yoga thoroughly (samyag).
This Śiva Yoga is said to be nondual and beyond dichotomies. Instruction in this (Yoga)
is given in this way: if (something) is imagined to have a certain amount (yāvat) of

division, it is explained again and again.’ MVV 1/105-110ab, 121cd-122ab. Translation
by Hanneder.

TĀ 4/221cd-225ab roughly corresponds to MVV 2/152-156:

“That which is established (rūḍha) here (within consciousness) does not need
purification of any kind anywhere (in any circumstance). The impure is in the world.

How can it be present within Bhairava’s nature? Even if the flux of the gross elements is
impure, what could be applied to purify it? In this way (it would necessarily entail an)
infinite regress as well a vicious circle and futility. When (the notion of) impurity is

obscured, (what is conceived to be) pure dissolves away. (Pure and impure are relative
concepts. So-called purity) is created by (contrasting it with impurity, its) countercorrelate, not by its inherent nature, as is (the colour) ‘blue’.” Thus, (thinking in this
way,) there is no obstinate clinging to objects of sense, whether it is to appropriate or
reject them. The state of the experiencing (worldly) subjectivity (bhoktṛtā) is the

spontaneous outpouring of the Supreme Bhairava’s Self, which is consciousness. Here

(according to this tradition), everything is enjoined (as beneficial) (vihita) as everything
is proper (fit and reasonable) (yujyate) by this path. Having abandoned the path in this
way, nothing (kiṁcana) anywhere (in any circumstance) becomes appropriate (and
reasonable).”

Also:
‘How should one establish what is to be done or prohibited? How can they be

reasonably possible (upapadyante) here (according to this view)? (In other words, as
things are not by their nature alone intrinsically such that they must be enjoined or

prohibited – how can they be made to be s0?). For all is enjoined here and everything

here is (at the same time also) clearly prohibited. When its prohibition has been
explained (as it truly is), whatever is grounded (āśrita) on the path of nonduality,
although prohibited is enjoined, and that too is prohibited. In this way, this ocean of

318

CHAPTER FOUR

a) Commentary on the words ‘here (in the practice of this Tantra) there is
neither purity nor impurity.”

=āz fk ēheṝ 7ī zrai rartṭ-ēzq1 222 1
rāīgīaāīTṝc
fḥ āēāTŪāT fē ā=q
aśuddhaṁ hi kathaṁ nāma dehādyaṁ pāñcabhautikam || 221 |I
prakāśatātirikte kiṁ śuddhyaśuddhī hi vastunaḥ |

““!]ndeed, how can the body and the rest which consists of the five
gross elements be impure?*² How can purity and impurity (be an intrinsic
one's own consciousness pours out (procchalati) within oneself. Thus, all this universe
is beautiful with cosmic bliss.' MVV 2/232-235ab

⁸³¹ Concerning the long discussion that follows from 221¢cd onwards concening the

nature of purity and impurity, Sanderson (2005a: 116) explains that Abhinava ‘takes the

Maālinīvijayottara to be propounding as its final position an enlightened Śaiva
consciousness which enjoys a perfect freedom of practice by embracing and
transcending all the Saiva systems, both those that prescribe specific disciplines and,
finally, nondualist Śaivism, which does not. By prescriptive Śaiviṣm, Abhinavagupta

takes the Mālinīvijayottara to mean both the exoteric or common (sāmānya) Śaivism of
the Siddhāntatantras and a lower Kaula form within the Trika itself, which, though it
throws off many of the externals of exoteric Śaivism, deploys its own limiting structures

in their place. It follows that he took it to include by implication the various Śaiva

systems between these two, that is to say, the Vāma and Dakṣiṇa (Bhairava) systems
and, most importantly, the Mālinīvijayottara’s own non-Kaula form of Trika practice.
The non-prescriptive Śaiviṣm that Abhinavagupta takes the Mālinīvijayottara to have in
mind, is a Trika system beyond even the Kaula level, but an essentialized, internalized

reflex of that level. When these two Kaula levels, with discipline and without, are
distiīnguished, the first is termed the Kula and the second the Kauḷa or, less confusingly,
the Mata. It is to this non-prescriptive level that the Vīrāvalīkula belongs. It is, then, the
highest Tantra only in a penultimate sense, being transcended in the ultimate by the
doctrine of the Malinīvijayottara, which transcends both the uncompromising

transcendence of the non-prescriptive Mata and the compromises of Śiva’s
consciousness, represented by the various prescriptive systems from the lesser Kaula
Trika to the gradualist Siddhānta.”
Sanderson’s assessment may well be correct, but we should not forget that
Abhinava also values highly the prescriptive Kaulism he sees that in the
Mālinīvijayottara is transcended. Thus, the very first teacher Abhinava praises at the
beginning of the Tantrāloka is Matsyendranātha. That is strange if he is the

representative of the form of prescriptive Kaulism that he says should be discarded. The
worship of Matsyendranātha and the other three Kaula teachers that brought Kaula
doctrine into the world in the four Ages (yuga) in the Gurumaṇḍala is standard practice

in all early, developed Kaula schools. We find it in the Krama texts as well as in the

Kubjikā Tantras. The latter present them as the pūrvāmnāya – the ‘preceding tradition’,
in relation to the Kubjikā Tantras that constitute the pasścimāmnāya – the subsequent

tradition. Accordingly, aligning Tika Kaulism, Abhinava presents their maṇḍala for

worship at the beginning of the Kaula rites taught here below in Chapter Twenty-nine.
Clearly, this is a fundamental part of kulaprakriyā of the Trika as it is of the other

Kulas. What then is Kula and Kaula? What Sanderson refers to as the prescriptive Kula

can only be those Kula schools that take Matsyendranātha as the founder of Kaulism, as

TANTRĀLOKA

319

atṭṭribute) of an entity, independent of its manifest nature (prakāśatā)
(which it derives from consciousness)? (221cd-222ab)
‘The body and the rest which consists of the five gross elements’
contains within itself the entire universe of all (the various) types of things
(padārthajāta), in accord with the teaching that: “this group of five (objects of
sense), form and the rest, is the extent of the universe (of experience).⁷⁸³ How
can that be impure at all? or, indeed, pure? Even if there is an external reality,
‘how can purity and impurity be independent of its manifest nature
(prakāśatā) (which it derives from consciousness)?” because it cannot (in
itself) bring about (any) change (vikāra), in accord with the principle that ‘blue

is not other than blue’.³** The point is that (purity and impurity) are not an

Abhīnava does according to Jayaratha who says that he is ‘famous as the one who
brought all the Kula scriptures down to earth (sakalakulaśāstrā-vatārakatayā
prasiddhaḥ). Jayaratha declares that Abhinava mentions him first of all because he was
the original teacher of the Kula modality (kulaprakriyā) of practice. He quotes a passage
stating that the Siddhānta and other Śaiva scriptures pale before the Kulāgama.
Matsyendranātha’s spiritual lineage is recanted in the standard manner we find in Kaula
Tantras (see Dyczkowski 1986: 69-70 and below 29/29cd-33ab). This includes the
listing of the names of his twelve major disciples, six of which are founders of as many
Kaula lineages (29/33cd-42). Abhinava’s Anuttara Trika contains in this way all the

major hallmarks of a Kaula tradition. We see from this discussion that Abhinava does

not prohibit such practices. Indeed, he considers the Kaula sacrificial rite, that involves

offering meat and wine and the like and includes union with a Tantric partner to be the
Foremost Sacrifice (ādyayāga) and as such, the most excellent. One the other hand, he
does not enjoin them either. They may be done, if those engaged in the rite are qualified
to do it, but there is no loss if it is not performed by those who are not qualified, or even
by those who are.

⁸³² Cf. Sarvācāra (as itis called in PTy p. 236) / Sarvavīra (which is the name in TĀv ad

12/24cd: sarvaṁ pañcātmakaṁ devi na tena rahitaṁ kvacit |
‘O goddess, all have (this same) five-fold (elemental) nature. (Nothing)
anywhere is devoid of that.’ See below TĀv ad 12/24cd where the full passage is
quoted.

⁸³³ Subodhamañjarī 2ab, which is also quoted above in TĀv ad 4/149-150ab. The whole

verse is quoted in TĀv ad 3/4, see note there.

⁸³⁴ The perception of the colour blue cannot be made into the perception of anything
else. Abhinava quotes the Buddhist Śaṅkarānanda as saying: “a crow need not be black
in the presence of a white goose’ (nahi haṁsasya śuklatve kākaḥ śvetatvam arhati MVV
1/430cd). If purity and impurity are intrinsic qualities of things, it would not be possible
for the impure to become pure, or vice versa. Moreover, everything that appears within
consciousness manifests in such a way that it is perceived to be different from
everything else. If we see the colour blue, for example, it is perceived to be such

because it differs from all that is not blue. The field of manifestation of consciousness
undergoes continuous change in this respect as one manifestation comes to the fore and

all other possible ones that are not manifest recede into the background. This type of

change is termed ‘vikāra’, that is, an ‘alterationʼ. It differs from the other kind of change
termed ‘vivarta’, which is only apparent change. The first kind of change is like the clay
that can be fashioned into a pot or a plate. The product is a result of an ‘alteration’ of its

material cause (the clay). Apparent change is like the snake seemingly produced in the
place of a rope, when we mistake a rope in a dark room to be a snake. Jayaratha is

saying that if there were to be some reality outside consciousness, it could not bring

320

CHAPTER FOUR

intrinsic attribute (dharma) of an entity (which defines its nature). Thus, as that
which does not possess (a particular intrinsic) quality is not such, (it is
something else), it follows that the distinction between ‘this is pure’ and ‘this is

impureʼ would be compromised.⁴³⁵

(Someone may object that) surely, this is contrary to experience,

because (we do) observe without impediment that (the distinction between)

purity and impurity is a part of the daily commerce of life. (To which we
respond that) this is not so. We do not deny that purity and impurity is a part of

the daily commerce of life. Rather we maintain that they are not intrinsic
attributes (dharma) of an entity. It is the perceiver who determines that ‘this is

pure’ and ‘this is impureʼ. If they were to be intrinsic attributes of an entity, an

impure (entity) could never be purified. Nor could one that is pure become
impure. ‘Blue’ could never also be ‘not blue’ because it is impossible to change
the innate nature (of an entity) into something else. If that were so, it would go

against the principle of the scriptures (śruti) (which say):

‘The wise declare that shining*® gems and everything made of stone are
(equally) purified by ashes and the like,*⁷ and so too with earth.³*⁸
If impurity, which is thus an attribute of the perceiver, were to be

purified by another entity, is that (entity) pure or impure?

about any alteration in the manifestation of consciousness. Consciousness would

continue to manifest, but there would be no alteration within its field of manifestation

and so nothing would appear, and the reality outside consciousness could never
manifest, and hence be experienced to exist.

⁸³³ An entity possesses two types of qualities. One is called ‘guṇa’ and is extrinsic to its
nature. A jar, for example, may be red or black. It makes no difference to its essential
nature as a jar. The other type of quality is called ‘dharma’, which is, on the contrary,
intrinsic to its nature. If the ‘jar-nessʼ of a jar, for example, changes to something else

like ‘cloth-nessʼ, it is no longer a jar. If impurity were to be an intrinsic quality of an

entity, purification would require a change in its essential nature. This means that it
would cease to be one thing (‘an impure entity°) and become another (‘pure entity
).

One could get over this objection by simply saying that ‘purity’ or ‘impurity’ are

secondary qualities, like ‘blue’ or ‘yellow’. However, conceding that amounts to
admitting that nothing is ‘impure’ or ‘pure’ in itself. The point here, it seems, is that if

the nature of something could be changed, then there would be no need to purify or
clean it in some particular way. Moreover, it is indeed possible to purify or clean

something. Otherwise, the scriptures would not explain how to do it. Nor would they

enjoin it if it were not possible. So the question naturally arises that if the distinction
between ‘pure’ and ‘impure’ is just a way of perceiving, how can something which is

impure be purified? Abhinava replies that if outer entities were indeed to be pure or
impure in themselves, they could not be sullied or purified. A so-called pure entity in

the course of cleaning an impure one would itself become impure, and so would need
another to purify it. Thuṣ, the distinction is a perceived difference, not an intrinsic one.

⁸³⁶ MSs Ch and N read taijasādmāṁ for taijasānāī.
⁸³⁷ Read bhasmādibhir for bhasmanādbhir.
⁸³³ Even the most precious stones are made of the element Earth. And only earthen

things can clean other earthen things. Thus, a gem, however precious, may be cleaned

with something that is of little value and is, moreover, not itself clean.

TANTRĀLOKA

321

³īcē̄ 1 Ta Jā: THrāīgŪ1a fēT 1 322 1

STqTaIT¥JTTTATṀĀTTTJT
cJTT f |

aśuddhasya ca bhāvasya śuddhiḥ syāt tādṛśaiva kim || 222 ||
anyonyāśrayavaiyarthyānavasthā ittham atra hi

How can something impure be purified by something which is

similar to it? Here in this way (it would necessarily entail the fallacies) of
falling into a vicious circle, futility and infinite regress. (222cd-223ab)
The meaning is that the view there that ‘something impure’, such as
‘earth’, ‘can be purified by something else which is similar’, that is impure,
such as ‘waterʼ, is illogical. ‘“Here in this way’, as will be explained, this would
entail a vicious circle and a series of other fallacies.
He says that:

JṀĩrd ṣīōt:Ṃ ṂJG³vṀḷ ̄ṀḷTGãTā || 323 1|

³T-ĀĪRJATI ÑTTTJJGŪĀ⁵“ĀTĀ H |

TIJGTSSTT: JGTGĀĪĪT ATTTT TST I QRX I

aTgāīṁ āīT̄īḷṂ āraāīaḷcrāaī āTIa; |

prthivī jalataḥ śuddhyej jalaṁ dharaṇitas tathā || 223 ||
anyonyāśrayatā seyam aśuddhatve ‘py ayaṁ kramaḥ |
aśuddhāj jalataḥ śuddhyed dhareti vyarthatā bhavet || 224 |
vāyuto vāriṇo vāyos tejasas tasya vānyataḥ |
If earth could be purified by water, (it should be possible) for water

to be similarly purified by earth (as they are both equally impure gross

elements). This is a vicious circle. The same applies even if (we admit that
they are both) impure. If (one were to maintain that) impure water could
purify (impure) earth, (one is liable to the fallacy) of futility. (Again, if one
were to say) that the water (is purified) by wind, that by fire, and that again
by something else, (the result would be an infinite regress). (223cd-225ab)
If, for example, earth, which is impure, were to be purified by water,

which is (also) impure, then, because there is no difference between them with

respect to their purification, they would (purify) one another. Thus this would
(result in) a vicious circle. In the same way, if something that is impure were to
be rendered impure by something that is impure, then (also), as there is no
difference between them, this (too) is said to be a vicious circle. Thus, he says:

‘tṭhe same applies even if (we admit that they are both) impure.’ In the same

way (the fallacies of) futility and the rest would apply. Now if impure earth, for

example, were to be purified by impure water, then, because both are equally
impure, (why not admit that earth can purify) itself? What is the use of some

other impure entity such as water? Thus (this would entail the fallacy of)

322

CHAPTER FOUR

futility. Now if earth were to be purified by water and water by air, and that too,
by fire, and that also by something else, like space, and that too by something

else, (it would) thus (entail the fallacy of) infinite regress. In this way, it would

not be possible for something like earth, which is impure, to be purified by
something else which is impure, like water.

(Well then, one may say,) if that is so, then it should be (possible) to

purify (something) with something else that is pure. Thus, he says:

JṃgGĀĪTRGH
TTaATI: ṬIHĪTTJ] JṬGT I 22, 1)
bahurūpãdikã mantrāḥ pãvanãt teṣu śuddhatã || 225 ||

(One could say) that Mantras, such as that of Bahurūpa,³”⁹ are

sacred, (and so purify the profane elements,) and that therefore they are
inherently pure. (225cd)
(Such Mantras) ‘are sacred’ by their very nature.

Surely (one may ask,) if (you say that the) Mantras which are the sounds
(śabda) that are the attributes of the group of five gross elements, space and the

rest,⁸⁴ are pure by their very nature, then why should not Earth and the rest also
not be essentially pure by nature? Thus, he says:

-T. āīā; ṂJadT āīē dōtīḍ ā f=ē ī 1
mantrāḥ svabhāvataḥ śuddhā yadi te ‘pi na kūiṁ tathā |
If Mantras are pure by (their very) nature, why should not (the
elements they purify) also be such (insofar as the inherent nature of all
things is essentially one)? (226ab)

Surely (one may ask,) is there not some other reason why Mantras are

sacred, namely, (their essential) Siva nature? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ftraraūāī ī̄ Ūfçzēz āṁ̃ aar

fēē-

2xē 1

śivātmatā teṣu śuddhīr yadi tatrāpi sā na kim || 226 ||
If (you say) that their purity is because they possess Śiva nature,
why is that not (present) there (in the elements to be purified) also? (226cd)
Surely, if the reason why Mantras are sacred is because of their Śiva

nature, ‘why is that not (present) there’ in the group of five gross elements
‘also’? Śiva nature is said be the essential nature (of all things as) the light of
consciousness. Without that, nothing at all would manifest. Thus, because it

⁸⁴⁹ ‘Bahurūpa’ ‘Many Forms’ is a name of Svacchandabhairava, more commonly known

as Aghora. He is still very popular amongst Kashmiri Hindus today. See below, 22/2021.

⁸⁴⁰ There is a syllabic Mantra corresponding to each one of the gross elements. The
syllable ‘LAM’, for example, corresponds to the element Earth and ‘RAM’ to Fire.

TANTRĀLOKA

323

would not be possible otherwise (for the gross elements to have a) manifest
nature, thatis their nature (also).

Now, although the Śiva nature of Mantras is the same (as that of the
elements), they are discerned (parijñāna) to be such by virtue of (their)

attributes; (that is, that they induce) reflection (manana) and save (trāṇa).³"

This is not the case with Earth and the rest (of the elements. Their Śiva nature is

unknown). The view is that it is because they are different in that respect that
Mantras are pure. Thus, he says:

fṜraīṁṝcāī’āāīTṁ
ī m- rāzāq |

āī ī̄T yaī ēTī Ṁīācātāṣātē
ṬT II Ṝ3I
śivātmatvāparijñānaṁ na mantreṣu dharādivat |
te tena śuddhā iti cet tajjñaptis tarhi śuddhatā || 227 I|
(Again, you may, reply) that one is not ignorant of the Śiva nature
within Mantras (as one is in the case of) Earth and other (elements), and so
they are pure. (Then we would say that) in that case, purity is nothing but
insight (jñapti) into that (Śiva nature). (227)

If that is the case, then purity is said to be the insight that it is the Śiva

nature (of things). Thus, he says: ‘insight (jñapti) into that’.
he says:

And that is the same for Earth and the rest (of the gross elements). Thus,

aīfī s ar aīṀ r̥aṀtar fērgaṣaṁ
yoginaṁ prati sā cāsti bhāveṣv iti viśuddhatā |

(A true) yogi has this (insight with regards to everything), and so all
things possess (this) purity. (228ab)
Those who are (bound) like fettered beasts don’t know that Śiva nature

is present in Mantras also. Thus, as (Mantras) do not perform their functions for
them, they may also be considered to be impure. A (true) Yogi discerns that
(Śiva nature) of Earth and the other (elements), and so they too are perfectly
pure. Indeed, thisis what makes a yogi a yogi, namely, that he discerns that all
this universe is Śiva. As is said:

⁸“! This is a well-known didactic etymology of the word ‘mantra’, which is derived from

man’ and ‘ṭra’. The first is said to mean ‘manana’ – ‘reflection’ (in the sense of deep
thought or concentration) and the second ‘trāṇa’ – ‘savingʼ. These are the two
fundamental and distinctive attributes (dharma) of mantras (at least those that serve as a
means to liberation), namely, that they induce deep reflection and are thereby liberating.

324

CHAPTER FOUR
“Whereas he who knows all these reality levels (tattva) (each) as they

truḷy are is a (true) teacher who, said to be equal to me, reveals the vitality of

Mantras.”²

Thusṣ it has been said that, due to the aforestated reasons (yukti), it is not

possible to establish that (phenomenal) entities (bhāva) can be inherently

distinguished as pure or impure.⁸⁴³

Surely (an opponent may object): “who has said that the distinction
between the purity and impurity of things is (established) by the power of
reasoned argument (yukti)?” (In actual fact) it is established by scripture. Thus,
he says:

GEEEEIENTcV|ĒCAGIEELHHIEP

nanu codanayā śuddhyaśuddhyādikaviniścayaḥ l| 228 ||
(The opponent may now g0 on to object that,) surely the

determination of the purity or impurity (of an entity) and the like is based
upon scriptural injunction (codanā). (228cd)³⁴
‘Scriptural injunction (codanā)² is a statement which enjoins (to
action) (vidhāyaka). As is said: ‘scriptural injunction is a statement that impels

⁸“² MV 2/10, also quoted below as TĀ 13/219cd-220ab. MV 2/10ab quoted in TĀv ad

23/77.
⁸³ bhāvāṉāṁ svātmani śuddhyaśuddhivibhāgo – literally that ‘there is a division

between purity and impurity within the nature of things’.

⁸* From here up to verse 238, Abhinava launches into a discussion framed in terms of

one of the basic problems discussed by the Mīmāṁsā, a school of philosophy that
developed a worldview that served to explain the efficacity of the Vedic sacrifice. The
covert influence of the Vedas is surprisingly substantial in a wide variety of ways in the

Śaiva Tantras, especially those of the Siddhānta; they are considered by Trika scriptures
to be, at best, to be a preliminary entry point to the Tantras. They do not, at this stage of
the development of Āgamic Śaiviṣm, play an overtly major role in either its ritual or
doctrinal context. After the twelfth century, largely because of the changed conditions in

India due to the Muslim domination of the north of India, which brought about a
substantial loss of patronage of Hinduism in all its forms, the Vedic and Tantric
traditions came closer together to sustain one another. This was apparent in many ways.

For example, Vedic recitation assumed a more prominent role in īa Siddhānta ritual
in the temples of South India. It became common practice for ritual worship (pājā) in
general to be done with both Vedic and Tantric Mantras. The orders of renunciates

(sannyāsin) founded by Śaṅkara adopted the worship of Śrīvidyā, attributing this

development to Śaṅkara himself. One could cite numerous examples. Abhinava’s vast
erudition covered all the main systems of philosophy, including the Mīmārīsā, to which
he refers several times in his Tantrāloka and elsewhere. The reason for this was not to

integrate Veda into Tantra. Rather it was to establish an exegesis of Śaiva ritual

procedure and attendant matters, such as in this case, the nature of prohibitions and

injunctions, on the same level of sophistication as the Mīmāṁṣā had done for the Vedas
and their rites. Moreover, references to Mīmāṁsā are necessary in order to defend the
evident differences between the Vedic view and the Tantric, especially concerning ritual
purity.

TANTRĀLOKA

325

(pravartaka) to action’. Whatever is prescribed thereby as being pure is pure,
otherwise it is other than that. As smṛti (declares):
‘The apertures (of the body) above the navel are pure (medhya) in all
respects, whereas those below it are not (amedhya), nor are the (impure)

secretions (mala) that come out of the body."⁸⁴³

‘And the likeʼ⁷ includes what can be eaten and what not.
Surely (rejoins the opponent), if the reason (nimitta) for the distinction
between purity and impurity is scriptural injunction itself, then let that be, what
defect (is there in that)? However, the cause of the absence of that distinction is
(also) an injunction uttered by Śiva, (when He says), ‘here there is neither purity

nor impurityʼ.⁴ He says that:

ṢCTTR] ṬaTaāṁī īīa-īi fdraāītzzr Ú

ittham astu tathāpy eṣā codanaiva śivoditā |

(Our reply is that) we agree, but even so that very injunction is laid
down by Siva (Himself). (229ab)
Surely (one may ask), if in this way there is no difference between (the
injunctions that there is a distinction between ‘pure’ and ‘impure’ and there is
none, as they are both equally) scriptural injunctions, which (of the two) should
be (taken to be) authoritative, on the basis of which we may ascertain
conclusively what is purity, impurity and the rest? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

ā̄īṬ ā̄JTrāātf̄ā ṁ-aā Jīāīīa² | 222 1
kā syāt satīti ced etad anyatra pravitānitam || 229 ||
(If then the opponent asks,) which (injunction out of the many
conflicting ones found in scripture) is the true one? (We reply) that (this

matter) has been discussed at length elsewhere.*⁷ (229cd)

(This matter has been discussed) ‘elsewhereʼ, and so, for fear of
making the book (too) lengthy, it is not discussed here. This is the point. Here

one is free indeed to just understand the (bare) meaning of a word assisted by

convention; (however,) in order to ascertain whether what is said is true or
otherwise, dependence (on other factors) is inevitable, because one must refer to

(some other factors).³* Thus, (a statement) is authoritative only because it has

been uttered by a competent authority (āpta) (not simply because of what it
means). Otherwise, it is certain that, on the contrary (the statement) is not
⁸³ Manusmṛti 1/132.

⁸⁴⁶ See above, 4/213cd.

⁸⁴⁷ See below, 15/170cd-179ab, Chapter Thirty-five and 37/1-32. Possibly Abhinava is
referring to another work, but if it is his, it has been lost.

⁸³ Read paramukhaprekṣitvāt for puruṣamukhaprekṣitvāt, which makes no sense.

326

CHAPTER FOUR

authoritative (apramāṇa). Thus, moreover, the authoritativeness of an
injunction, whether it be Vedic or one (of our own scriptures), depends solely

on the Supreme Lord, Who has made all duties (dharma) directly evident (to

everybody),⁶ and is intent (on acting and instructing) with the desire to elevate

the entire universe, because that is the teaching of all the scriptures. Nor³ is it

possible to say that Vedic injunction is not made by someone, because it is like
(any) literary composition (racanā), and all compositions are preceded (and
dependent on an) agent.⁸! Thus, there is no essential (sartva) difference between

the two injunctions (that is, Vedic, which enjoins a distinction between pure and
impure, and that of other scriptures that enjoin the contrary. They are both
equally injunctions). And so, we don’t know on what basis we can distinguish in
this way between purity (and impurity). Nor is it reasonable (to maintain) that
one renders invalid the other, because both (injunctions) are of equal strength, as
there is no perception of reason as to why one (of the two injunctions) is weaker
than the other.³² (The opponent who supports the authority of the Vedas may
object that) surely, there is a reason why one of them is weaker than another,
namely that other scriptures are ‘outside the Veda’ (vedabāhya).³³ As they say:
‘Generally, everybody follows the path of the Vedas; any scripture

(āgama) that is outside the Veda (vedabāḥya) is (nothing but) deceit.”

Thus, other scriptures are (effectively) refuted by the Veda.
Accordingly, on that basis, the distinction between purity and the rest is sound
(as the Veda suṣṭains it).

Surely, (the fallacy with this argument is that), if that is the case, the
same reasoning (is applicable to the Vedas as being) external to (the Tantras).
⁸⁴⁹ Read -nikhiladharmaḥ for -nikhiladharmā.

⁸³⁰ Read na ca for naca.

⁸³¹ The common meaning of words may be known by just knowing the convention that
particular words have certain meanings. Although this is sufficient to understand the

bare meaning of the words of the scriptures, this is not enough. In order to understand
more that is not directly expressed or implicit, we must refer to the author’s intention.
Moreover, we need to know whether what is stated is correct or not. All this can only be

known from one who knows it, and so is an apt authority. In both cases, in this context,

the author and the authority is Śiva. The Vedic belief, systematically elaborated by the
Mīmāṁsṣā, is that the Vedas are not created. They have no author. They are
‘apauruṣeya³, which literally means that they do not belong to or are made by any
person (puruṣa). The word ‘person’ in this context does not just denote an individual
human being, it also refers to the ‘person’ of Deity. This is not the Śaiva view, which

maintains, on the contrary, that all the scriptures, whether Vedic or Tantric, are uttered
by Deity. Jayaratha, seemingly summarizing the arguments to which Abhinava refers,

advances the following reasons against the Vedic view. One is that the Vedas are

literary compositions, and all compositions must have an author. In this case, the author
can only be Śiva, so it is to His words that we should turn our attention.

⁸³² Cf. below, note 4,909 to TĀv on 4/25 lcd.

⁸³³ When a doctrine or scripture is said to be ‘vedabāḥhya’, which literally means ‘outside

the Veda’, as is Buddhism, for example, it is tantamount to saying that it is heretical. If
Saiva scriptures are ‘outside the Veda’ (which Abhinava would be happy to accept),

their injunctions are from a Vedika’s point of views less authoritative than those of the
Veda or, indeed, not at all. See Dyczkowski 1988: 8-10.

TANTRĀLOKA

327

As they are equally ‘other” (taditaḥ) to (one another), why should the Vedic
injunctions also not be refuted by that (other scripture)? We don’t see any
reason as to why just one (of the two) should be a strong (authority) in such a
way that the other must necessarily be rendered invalid (by it). He says that:

āfēraṁ aṁṀr ṀḷṀṁ

fk ra 1

vaidikyā bādhiteyaṁ ced viparītaṁ na kiṁ bhavet |
If (one objects that the injunctions of the Śaiva scriptures) are
rendered invalid by those of the Vedas, then (we reply by asking,) why

should the contrary also not be the case?³⁸³⁴ (230ab)

Surely, (an opponent may object,) if that is the case, as they (i.e. the
Vedas and the Tantras) are mutually in conflict, then both would be (equally)
devoid of authority. Would the result not be that nothing could be established
(to be true)? (We reply that that is) not so, because they are both (equally)
impelled by the Lord, (whose impulse) is the powerful cause of the
authoritativeness (of scripture). Then (one may object that) is it not easy to

remedy (sutara)° (the problem concerning) the cause of their lack of authority,

namely that they contradict one another, even if there is only one teacher (of
both Vedic and Tantric scriptures). (We say that that is) not so, (differences in

the teaching are not contradictions,) because the teaching is such in accord with
the difference between the people fit (to receive it). The Lord has enjoined

purity and the like as the common general (rule) as applicable to everybody,
whereas this (doctrine) is only for (a few) particular (people).³**® Thus neither of

them are liable to the defect of lacking authority, because both injunctions
pertain to different areas (of applicability). Thus, it has been established that
there is no difference in their essential nature (sattva) (as injunctions).

Surely, (an opponent may ask,) how can there be no difference in their

essential nature (sattva) (as injunctions), even if the injunction concerning
purity and the rest operates for everybody (equally), because in some area (of its

application) it is invalidated (bādha)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

⁸³⁴Cr. below, 4/251ab and commentary. Also, discussion in 15/171cd-179ab.
⁸³³ Read sutaram- for sutarām.

⁸⁰ The distinction between a common, general teaching (sāmānya) and a special or
specific (visiṣṭa) one is a way to allow for the acceptance of the authoritativeness of all
scripture, as all equally taught by Śiva, and at the same time to accommodate a

hierarchy within them. In this perspective, the lowest scriptures are the most general
ones that are accepted by all. From the Trika point of view, the most general, and hence
the lowest, are the Vedas. Higher ones are special and meant only for initiates into the

practices taught by those specific scriptures. Thus, the gradation of scripture
corresponds to grades of initiations. Those who have received a higher initiation have

access to higher scripture, which have specific teachings, whereas those who have had
lower ones only have access to more general ones. Thus the ‘general’ teachings become
more extensive as one moves up, just as the specific ones become progressively more

specific. If the higher, more specific teachings are in apparent conflict with the lower
general ones, these should be abandoned for the former.

328

CHAPTER FOUR

gTĪTTĀT
aTHIī fīfrzēkrṛaīaīaā; IṂ Ḷ30 1

TTaI<T reā: āīāī-āīātzd
fāri |

samyak cen manyase bādho viśiṣṭaviṣayatvataḥ || 230 l|
apavādena kartavyaḥ sāmānyavihite vidhau |
If you were to correctly understand the nature of invalidation
(bādha), (you would see that) it is to be applied in a particular case as an
exception (apavāda) (to a general rule, while the latter continues to be
enjoined) in the common (universally) applied injunctions. (230cd-231ab)
If you were to correctly understand how the invalidation (of one rule by

another) is averted, then (you would see how) the essential nature of any

injunction is not compromised. Thus, those who understand the statements
(vākya) (of the scriptures maintain that) the rule concerning an exception
(apavādavidhi), which is essentially a particular case, invalidates a general rule

(utsargavidhi), which is a general case (normally) applicable in all cases
(sarvatra), because it has no occasion (to be applied). Even though a general
rule is well established, being fixed in all fields (of its application), once a
particular area (of application) of an exceptional rule has been taken into

consideration, it is applied without being invalidated in (some) other area (of

application). As the Cūrṇikākāra says:

‘Once the area (of application) of an exception has been taken into

consideration, then the general (rule) is applied.”

Therefore, even though (an injunction) is subject to invalidation in some

(circumstances), there is no need to doubt that it is devoid of authority, because

in some other area (of application) it is as established as authoritative.
Invalidation is of two kinds, according to whether it (arises) because (two or
more rules) give rise to the same result (samānakāryakāritva) or because (they
are) contradictory. (Take, for example, the injunction that) ‘one should infuse

life into water by means of the ladle (camasa).”*⁷ Accordingly, (this type of)

ladle is generally prescribed to infuse the waters with life (in the course of a
Vedic rite). (However, it is also said that) ‘one who desires domestic animals
should infuse life (into the waters) by milking a cow.” As the person who
desires domestic animals is a particular object (of application of the injunction),

the procedure of milking a cow is an exception which, because it gives the same
result, namely, the infusing of life into the waters, invalidates (the general

injunction as to how this is to be done). (Again, according to the rule) ‘the

sacrificial post has eight supportsʼ, a sacrificial post with eight supports is
prescribed in general for all sacrificial rites. Even so, (this prescription) is
invalidated by the exception (enjoined by the rule that) ‘for the Vājapeya (rite
the sacrificial post) has four supportsʼ, because it contradicts it.
⁸⁷ A camasa īs a veṣsel used at Vedic sacrifices to drink Soma. It is a kind of flat dish,
cup or ladle, which is generally square and has a handle.

TANTRĀLOKA

329

Surely (one may ask), even though this is so, what does this have to do
with the point (being discussed)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

YJṀTJĀĪ
⁷ ūīṛ-ārātfē̄ī āTāāṛṝ̄ṁ I 232 1

if̄q √ aīērī ta ar amfa afīīg 1

śuddhyaśuddhī ca sāmānyavihite tattvabodhini || 231 ||

puṁsi te bādhite eva tathā cātreti varṇitam |

Thus, what is meant here (in the passage from the Mālinīvijayottara

we are discussing)⁸⁸ is that, while (rules governing) purity and impurity
are generally prescribed (for everyone), they are invalidated (in the special
case) of an individual who has awakened to the (true nature) of reality

(tattva). (231cd-232ab)

Although (the rules governing) ‘purity and impurity that are
generally prescribed’ by Vedic injunction are applicable to everybody, in the
(special) case of one who knows (the true nature of) reality, ‘they are
invalidatedʼ, because (for them the rule) is contrary (to it). The meaning is that
they are not, not invalidated (i.e. they are invalidated). The reason for that is

‘thus what is meant hereʼ, that is, that ‘here there is neither purity nor

impurity²⁸⁹ is an injunction (vidhivākya) which is an exception, that applies to
one who knows reality. This is the meaning.

(An opponent may object that) surely it is not right to say that here (in
this case) (this is) an injunction, because it is seen in the everyday world that the
distinction between purity and impurity is not invalidated, as that would be
contrary to other valid means of knowledge, including direct perception (which
testifies that people do commonly observe this distinction). Thus, one must
necessarily consider this (statement) to be a eulogy of the deities (arthavāda)

(not an injunction),* and that is generally said to be in agreement with an
injunction (vidhi). Thus, that (eulogy) has a meaning by virtue of the meaning of
that (original injunction), not in itself. Thus, because there is no (distinction)

between its own nature and that of the other, (the affirmation that it is) a
different (distinct) authority is contradicted.®' Faith in the injunction develops
⁸³Ḷ See below, 4/246cd-247ab.
⁸³⁰ See above, 4/213.c.

⁸t According to the Mīmāṁsā, the Vedas and allied literature consist of two kinds of
statements,

namely,

injunctions

(which

include

prohibitions)

(vidhivākya)

and

descriptive eulogies (arthavāda).
⁸⁶l The opponent now says that another way of overcoming the contradiction between
the two, that is, the Vedic injunction that we must observe the distinction between ‘pure’
and ‘impure’, and the other that denies it, is to say that the Vedic is the original
injunction. The statement in the Mālinīvijaya that ‘there is neither purity nor impurity’

should not be understood to be another injunction, rather it is a eulogy of the Vedic

injunction. In other words, the MV supports the Vedic injunction which seems to be
contrary to it, by saying that for those who are ignorant of the Veda and do not observe
right conduct (dharma), there is neither impurity nor purity. Moreover, without the prior

330

CHAPTER FOUR

by means of eulogy, due to which people engage (in the prescribed procedure)
with reverence. As they say:
‘(When) the power of injunction wanes, its eulogy removes ignorance

(with regard to it).”

Thuṣ:

‘(The yogi) should not worship a Liṅga made of clay, stone, metal,
crystal and the like (made of inert matter), rather he should worship the inner
(ādhyātmika) Liṅga, where (the whole universe of) moving and immobile

things, dissolves away (līna).”“²

(Is what is meant by such injunctions) that the yogi who is free of all
thought constructs, hearing (them), should (reflect on and) execute (them)
(bhāvya)? Or is the eulogy of an injunction which is conceived (in this way just)

something extra (śeṣabhūta) that serves to stimulates the desire (to observe it)?

With this doubt in mind, he says:

TṬṃaāīacdīgī
aīaēī aīēāk Taq I| 23 1
⁸ṀNor can one doubt that the words of the Great Lord (are not

prescriptive but merely) eulogy (arthavāda) or the like.*⁶⁴ (232cd)

injunction concerning purity, the statement in the MV would make no sense
independently. Thus, they are not separate statements. Rather they can only be
understood in light of one another.
⁸² MV 18/2cd-3ab. MV 18/3a is quoted in TĀv ad 27/1. MV 18/2cd-3 is quoted in TĀv
ad 5/121cd (120cd).

⁸³ In the SvTu ad 1/45ab, Kṣemarāja quotes a verse saying that it is stated by his
teacher, Abhinavagupta, in the Tantrāloka (asmadgurubhir api tantrāloke ‘bhihitam).
This reads:
vidhivākyam idaṁ caiva nārthavādaḥ kadācana |
nārthavādābhirūpatvaṁ vākye māheśvare bhavet ||
‘And this is (all) an injunction (vidhivākya); there is never any eulogy (at all
anywhere in it). There is no conformity to (the nature of a) eulogy (arthavāda) in the

words of the Great Lord.”

The second line appears to be a variant of TĀ 4/232cd. Kṣemarāja reads the
third quarter as nārthavādābhirūpatvaṁ for nārthavādādiśaṅkā. The second half of the
line is the same. The first line is practically the same as the first line of the verse quoted
by Jayaratha. The only difference is that Kṣemarāja reads caiva for tantraṁ.

⁸⁶¹ According to the Mīmārṁsā, the Vedas are divided into two parts. One consists of the

verses of the Vedas – the Mantras – and the other the Brāhmaṇa, which consists of all
that is Vedic, but not Mantra (i.e. the Vedas themselves). Again, the statements in the
Brāhmaṇas are of two kinds. Those that are prescriptive (viddhivākya) (for example, ‘he

who desires heaven should offer sacrifice’) and those that are not injunctions but are
purely descriptive or declamatory. The latter statements are called ‘arthavāda’-

TANTRĀLOKA

331

As is said:
“This Tantra is (all) an injunction (vidhivākya); there is never any

eulogy (at all anywhere in it). (It applies) immediately (both) to sins
(pratyavāyeṣu) as well as the fruits of good actions.”
Similarly,

‘The Śaiva Āgama is not eulogy.”⁸⁶⁵
By describing (the words of scripture as those) ‘of the Great Lord’ he
states (their) cause, which is the vitalizing impulse of the Great Lord. The point
is that whatever an intelligent being enjoins (and undertakes) is never useless
(and without meaning).

Again, (if this is so,) one may surmise that in the case of (something)
that is not enjoined by an intelligent being, it may be (devoid of meaning), and
s0 he says:

rāfzṇd fk ar hzxā gad vā-q 1

azāṁfēṣ frṁī gṛ fhzmsīāī sīr

233 1

abuddhipūryaṁ hi tathā saṁsthite satataṁ bhavet |

vyomādirūpe nigame śaṅkā mithyārthatāṁ prati || 233 ||

It is always possible to harbour doubt as to whether the expressed
sense (of a passage) in the Veda (nigama) is false (and so should be
interpreted in a different manner). This is because (the Veda, which

consists of both prescription and eulogy, is eternal) and not the work of an

intelligent being (abuddhipūrva) (as are the Śaiva scriptures), and so is like

‘eulogiesʼ. Eulogies may sometimes be narratives of mythical events with a symbolic

sense (for example, ‘Prajāpati cut off his own fat’). They should not be considered to be

useless or without purpose, rather they should be associated with statements that are

injunctive which they serve to explain or complete. In order to understand their
meaning, the exegete refers to their figurative or metaphorical sense. According to

Abhinavagupta, the Lord's words are not just more or less vain exclamations, they do
not convey a non-literal meaning, but are injunctions that have a well determined sense,

value and specific function. The main sources concening arthavāda are ŚBh 1/2 ff. and
the Tantravārtika of Kumārīḻa (1/2 ff.). Jayaratha writes in his HCC (33/3-6) that:

‘There is only truth in the things taught by the Omniscient One to favour the creatures

out of His compassion (for them). Śaiva doctrine generally consists of injunctions, not

irrelevant descriptions. Indeed, how can He whose activity depends solely on His will
say something false? For what reason would He Who is omniscient and omnipotent say
things that are untrue? If the Lord wished to change the form of things, they would
automatically manifest in a different form, insofar as His action is His will itself.’

⁸³ This statement is quoted again below in TĀv ad 35/40ab. This view can be contrasted
with that of the Siddhāntin Sadyojyotiḥ, who talks of anuvādasūtras
arthavādasūtras as being part of Tantra. See Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha 1, p. 4.

and

332

CHAPTER FOUR

the nature of space and other similar categories (which according to the
Vedic schools of philosophy are eternal).³°⁵ (233)

Here, in the case of the Vedic scriptures, it is ‘always’ possible for
those who examine them, when they hear their prescriptions and eulogies ‘to
harbour doubt’ as to whether their ‘expressed sense is false’, and the subject
(to which they refer) is something unreal (and incorrect). This is because

according to othersʼ view, they are, like the roar of (storm) clouds, ‘not the

work of an intelligent being’, that is, in the form of prescriptions and eulogies

that are not produced by an intelligent being. Thus, because they are as if
emptiness and so are devoid of meaning (and purpose) (anarthakya), they are
said to be ‘like the nature of space’. It is said elsewhere with the same
intended sense:
‘Taking their support from God Who, without beginning, is the Lord, as
a (trustworthy) authority, people have faith in the words of the Vedas. It was
said before that no intelligent person has faith in them (just) because no one
created them.”
Where, on the contrary, the Supreme Lord Who is unconditioned
consciousness (vijīāna) abides in the form of scripture, how could there be
(any) doubt that it is (may be) false? Thus, he says:

srṝñātzātaāīāāāaāg.|

raāīṁcāāī fkāī ēaiṁ fhṭzāīcā aaā̄ Tēf̄ā 1 3 3*1
anavacchinnavijñānavaiśvarūpyasunirbharaḥ |
śāstrātmanā sthito devo mithyātvaṁ kvāpi nārhati || 234 ||

(But) in no case is it possible that (the Śaiva scriptures) are false,
because it is the Lord (Himself) who, perfectly full with the omniformity of

His unconditioned consciousness, abides as the essential nature of the
scriptures (śāstrātmanā). (234)

‘In no case is it possible that (the Śaiva scriptures) are falseʼ, for the
reason given in the rest of the verse.
Surely, (an opponent may ask, that) we have understood that the Lord is
the author (praṇetr) of all the scriptures, but not that He Himself abides in that
form. How can one assert this novel (view)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

GTaT*ITTTT
7T] frTsrī̄gārāī: |
TTTJRṬIĪTTJ-TĪ
fṜīTBTg: āā fk̄ 1. 23. 1
icchāvān bhāvarūpeṇa yathā tiṣṭhāsur īśvaraḥ |

⁸⁶⁰ See below, Chapter Thirty-six.

TANTRĀLOKA

333

tatsvarūpābhidhānena tiṣṭhāsuḥ sa tathā sthitaḥ || 235 ||

If the Lord desires to be phenomenal existence (bhāvarūpa), He is

such. In the same way, if He desires to be in the (form of the scripture)
which declares the essential nature of (His universal phenomenal form), He
is such. (235)

The Supreme Lord Who, by the glorious power of His own desire,

wishing to be phenomenal existence, consisting of perceivers and (their) objects

etc., which are objects of denotation (vācya), abides in that way as the universe,

which is the object of denotation (vācya) (of the scripture). In the same way,
with respect to the Word, just as He by Himself assumes another form as the
universe, which is the object of denotation and consists of perceivers and (their)
objects, so too, desiring to be the denotator which denotes that (universe), He
abides as scripture which denotes (it) (vācaka). This is the meaning.
(Thus,) in this way also, even if in some cases the meaning of (the

scripture) were to be false, that too is not a defect. Thus, he says:

ÉbE|doNEĀCEIGIĪĒĒ³IĒĒṟcṭe|t-I

-īk-āGd:
aāā-d̄ T TJ ġ fāīaāē: I Q³3. |
arthavādo ʻpi yatrānyavidhyādimukham īkṣate |
tatrāstv asatyaḥ svātantrye sa eva tu vidhāyakaḥ || 236 ||
Moreover, even a eulogy which refers to another injunction (or
prohibition) can be false (in the sense that it does not need to indicate a real
object in order to justify the prescription with which it is associated). It has

a normative value (vidhāyaka) (when it appears) independently.*⁹⁷ (236)

Where a eulogy, be it (one by way of) praise or blame etc., becomes
(associated as) an ancillary (aṅga) to another normative prescription
(vidhivākya), be it an injunction or prohibition, then as there (in that case they
are not related) as one thing different to another, then that (eulogy) may be false
without that being a defect at all.⁶ One should not understand its meaning to be
(literally just that) as it is heard to be, but as (referring) either to that which is

enjoined or prohibited (as the case may be), as it is established as an ancillary of
that (prescription). Thus, according to those who know (the nature and form of)
the statements (of the Vedas, eulogy is also an) authoritative (statement), as it
agrees with the normative prescription. As they say:

⁸⁷ In certain cases, according to the Mīmārṁsā, passages that are purely descriptive (and

so in that sense are arthavāda) may assume a normative value. Cf. ŚDr 3/67-68ab and

Gnoli 1968: 52-53.

⁸⁶³ Eulogies⁷ are authoritative if they are a part of injunctions. They just support

injunctions and prohibitions by supplying, for example, a myth relating to their origin.
Thus, it is irrelevant whether they refer to phenomenally real things or not.

334

CHAPTER FOUR

‘Thus, as eulogies are in agreement with a normative prescription, they
are authoritative.”
Moreover,
‘One should not place silver on the sacrificial grass (barhis)³⁸⁹
Regarding the eulogy which is a part (śeṣabhūta) of this prescription,

(we may refer to the following example. It is said that when he who did so):

‘wept (arodīt) and what he wept is Rudra’s Rudra nature (rudratva)³ (so ‘rodīd

yad arodīt tad rudrasya rudratvam). (The meaning of this) eulogy is not to be

understood to be Rudra’s weeping and the like. Rather, (it implies that) ‘one
should not place silver on the sacrificial grass (barhis)³ (because it is said that)
‘within a year there is weeping in the house of one who places silver in front on
the sacrificial grass.” (barhiṣi yo rajataṁ dadāti purāsya saṅvatsarād grṛhe

rodanaṁ bhavati).

Again, if that eulogy does not become an ancillary of (some) other

(prescription), then ‘it has a normative value (vidhāyaka)’, which means that it
establishes (what is to be done) just as heard (on the immediate literal level of

meaning of the scripture).
In the case of a eulogy such as ‘he wept’, it is true, as (the scripture) has
established that ‘Rudra wept and the tear that came from him became silver
(rajata)³ (rudro ruroda tasya yad aśru aśīryata tad rajatam abhavat). This is
true also for the many (symbolically) similar events (to this one that occur in the
course) ofa sacrifice. As is said:
‘Or else (consider this). Although logicians (naiyāyika) make contact
with the supremacy (paratā) (of their) own essential nature, they fall not from
the path of the validity (of a sound means of knowledge. Even as) they declare
the (transcendental) excellence of man, they also describe the way (what

happens and is done) here (in this world correctly,)
just as it is.’

(A eulogy) does not only (have a normative value, and is) true (when it

appears) independently, but also when it is dependent (on an injunction). Thus,
he says:

faftrarazāī-āḶ īērçṁam ar |

ī fīāḥ tar dṁīrṁīaizaq | z3 1
vidhivākyāntare gacchann aṅgabhāvam athāpi vā |
na nirarthaka evāyaṁ saṁnidher gajaḍādivat || 237 ||

⁸“⁹ According to Monier-Willians’s dictionary, barhis is “that which is plucked up’,

sacrificial grass, a bed or layer of Kuśa grass, usually strewn over the sacrificial ground

and especially over the altar (vedi), to serve as a sacred surface on which to present the
oblations, and as a seat for the gods and for the sacrificers.’

TANTRĀLOKA

335

Again, even though (a eulogy) may have become (a subordinate)
ancillary of some prescription, by virtue of its association (with that
prescription), it is not meaningless. This is just as is the case with the letters
‘ga’, ‘ja’ and ‘ḍa’, (which are not meaningful alone, but become so) in

conjunction (with one another).⁵" (237)

Although a eulogy ‘may have become (a subordinate) ancillary’ of a

prescription (vidhivākya), which (may be either an) injunction or prohibition, as

it is conjoined to it, it is ‘not meaningless’. The example here ‘is just as is the
case with the letters ‘ga’, ‘ja’ and ‘ḍa’’. Just as letters that are conjoined
together as parts of a word are not meaningless, so is it with this case. If letters

were meaningless, then when the order of letters (in a word) is changed, one

would not understand some different meaning. Moreover, the aggregate (of
letters), such as (the words) ‘gaja’ (‘elephant’), ‘jaḍa’ (‘insentient’) and ‘gaḍa”

(‘ditch²)” (formed by conjoining these letters) would also have no meaning.*⁷²

(If) the parts are without meaning, (their) aggregate would also be meaningless.
Just as one (grain of) sandy soil cannot yield oil, so too a heap which is an
aggregate (of grains of sand) also cannot do so. In the same way, if eulogy were
to be meaningless (and useless) (even if) associated with (a prescription) the
sense of which is to enjoin or prohibit, (it would not give rise to the impulse) to
respectfully act (as prescribed) or desist (from prohibited action). (Eulogies may
also implicitly serve as prescriptions. Thus, for example, the statement quoted
above) ‘he weptʼ etc. was made in order to deprecate silver, which can make
one weep (with suffering it causes), so that one may respectfully desist from
placing that on the sacrificial grass. Personal experience in daily life is a witness
to this fact. (Indeed, a eulogy may run counter to an injunction and be more
effective. So for example, when someone says to others) “this cow should be
sold”, those who (could) buy it do not act (accordingly, as they would impelled)
by words of praise such as ‘this (cow) gives much creamy milk, is well
behaved, and (and by virtue of her auspicious presence one has a fine) woman,
offspring and sinless subjects.”
Thus, he says:

zqṁdīrcaīdrīaa tarāṝda ād |
īŪēā+
ād̃ va fatttr̥ēīI. Ṃ 2c 1
svārthapratyāyanaṁ cāsya svasaṁvittyaiva bhāsate |
tadapahnavanaṁ kartuṁ śakyaṁ vidhiniṣedhayoḥ || 238 II

⁰ Contiguity with the injunction’s text, on which it depends as eulogy or advice and
with whose form it constitutes a whole, just as letters conjoined together form a whole

with its specific meaning.

⁵ Read gaḍaḥ iti saṁghātasyāpi for ṣoḍaḥ iti | saṁghātasyāpī .

⁴² There are various views concerning the nature of the most fundamental unit of
meaning. For example, according to the Naiyāyikas, a word is the minimum unit of

meaning. Bhartṛhari maintainṣ that it is the sentence, and the Mīmāṁsakas that it is the
individual letter. Abhinava and Jayaratha are here echoing their arguments in support of
this latter view.

336

CHAPTER FOUR

That (a eulogy) conveys meaning is made manifest by our own
consciousness (svasaṁvitti) and (so too) that it is possible for it to override a
prohibition or an injunction. (238)
Now if (one eulogy can) forcefully override (another one), it can
override the sense of a normative statement (vidhivākya) also, which may be
(either) an injunction or a prohibition. Thus, he says: “(it is possible for it to)
override (a prohibition or injunction)ʼ etc.
One’s own consciousness is not the sole (authority and) means
(pramāṇa) that can establish this (fact); (it can also be established by sound)
reason (yukti). Thus, he says:

3fīṁaīāīftā dTṬ+ā̄ xūfraāīrzāaāīṝra |

aI ā̄TJTPāTṛṝtīzārdraimaggakītī I 338 1
yuktiś cātrāsti vākyeṣu svasaṁvic cāpy abādhitā |
yā samagrārthamāṇikyatattvaniścayakāriṇī || 239 ||
The words of scripture (vākya) conform to reason (yukti). Also, they
do not invalidate the direct experience of one’s own consciousness
(svasaṁvid), which (is immediate and extends) to every particular
(samagrārtha) (in an instant). (It is like the knowledge of an expert jeweller,
through) which (he) determines the exact nature of every particular gem
(instantaneously and correctly). (239)

The ‘reason’ is the one expounded previously.³⁷³

Surely (an opponent may rejoin that), agreed that (scriptural statements)
may (operate equally well as) eulogies or prescriptions, why worry about that?
However, even there (in that case), the distinction between purity (and impurity)
etc. declared by the Vedic scriptures is in this way invalidated for the
aforestated reason. Thus, nothing is prescribed as being pure nor impure, and
there is no third polarity. Thus, (does this mean) that the prescription concerning
purity and impurity cannot be successfully (observed)? With this doubt in mind,
he says:

āc⁵s% āar ar aāīggṝg: ũhīāaī |

sraīā īī gacaīāqgg afrazga 1 2xc 1
gfērāīērc-āāũ̃ a gr̥ṁ ftā 1
mṛtadehe ‘tha dehotthe yā cāśuddhiḥ prakīrtitā |
anyatra neti buddhyantām aśuddhaṁ saṁvidaś cyutam || 240 ||
saṁvittādātmyamāpannaṁ sarvaṁ śuddham ataḥ sthitam |
'⁷³ The expert jeweller who ascertains the value of a gem in an instant is the cardinal

example of practice in the immediacy of Śāmbhopāya, free of thought constructs. See

above, 1/184cd-185ab and note.

TANTRĀLOKA

337

May (all come to) realise that the impurity said to be in a corpse, or

what comes from the body, is not present elsewhere (it is solely related to
the body);¹” and that that which is (seemingly) severed from consciousness

is impure.³ Everything is one with consciousness and so is pure.*⁶ (240-

241ab)

It is said in the Vedic scriptures that impurity (inheres) ‘in a corpse’ or
in the secretions (mala) etc. that come from the body, (but) ‘it is not present
elsewhereʼ; that is, not in the secretions (mala) etc. of the body when (they are)

within the living body. Thus, because (purity and impurity) relate to whether
(something is) contiguous to consciousness or not, ‘one should thinkʼ, that is,

aṣ there is no reference to any specific (thing), may all understand (and accept)
that everything ‘which is (seemingly) severed’ from the presence of
‘consciousnessʼ and (is apparently) separate from it, ‘is impure’. This is the
meaning. Thuṣ, all that is one with consciousness is pure. It follows that the
distinction between purity and impurity is, in every case, due to the oneness or
otherwise (of something) with consciousness. This is the view, and it has been

proved.

Nor⁴⁷⁷ is that (view) proved by just reason, it is also (sustained) by the

scriptures.
Thus, he says:

irūEEiiReck |T-cv.ICṈI
aasīṁ aṁzē staāī ītā ṁāstcaēa 1
afcāḥT-rṝṣṣiextēāñgqa
aēṣī 1| Ṝ²2 1

śrīmadvīrāvalau coktaṁ śuddhyaśuddhinirīūpaṇe || 241 ||
sarveṣāṁ vāhako jīvo nāsti kiñcid ajīvakam |
yat kiṁcij jīvarahitam aśuddhaṁ tad vijānata || 242 ||

Moreover, it is said in the venerable Virāvali,˚ in the course of
describing (the nature of) purity and impurity, that life (jiva) is the vehicle
⁸⁴ See below, note 4,879.
⁸⁷³ See below 29/127cd-128ab, where Abhinava explains that meat and sperm etc. are
not impure, because they come from the body, which is proximate to consciousness.
Indeed, their proximity to consciousness makes them pure. Impurity, as he says in this
verse, amounts to separation from consciousness.

⁸⁷⁶ The subject treated in the following passage, that is, the purity or otherwise of Kaula
sacrificial substances (dravya), is taken up again in more detail below from 15/164cd ff.

⁸⁷⁷ Read na ca for naca.

“”⁸ The citation from the Virāvali extends from 241cd to 244ab. Below in Chapter
Twelve, Abhinava discusses the nature of impurity and doubts. Jayaratha ad 12/23cd-

24ab informs us that ‘much is said about this in the seventh chapter (uddeśa) of the

venerable Vīrāvalitantra. This (view) has been corroborated to some extent (with

reference to it) previously°. It appears that he is referring to 4/241cd-244ab. If so, this is
the chapter of the Vīrāvali Abhinava is quoting from.

338

CHAPTER FOUR

(vāhaka) of all things. And there is nothing that is not alive. Know that

whatever is devoid of life is impure.*”⁹ (241cd-242)

(Abhinavagupta) paraphrases (the Tantra, expressing the sense in his
own) words. ‘Life’ is the Supreme Light that gives life and vitalizes all this
(material universe) born of the Elements, by energizing (uttejana) (the powers

of) knowledge and action.⁴" It transports, that is, sustains ‘all things’, namely,

the universe of perceivers and (their) objects. Thus, it is ‘what transports’
(them). The meaning is that it manifests (everything) as well attached

(saṁlagna) to its own (conscious) nature. The reason here (for that is that)

‘ṭhere is nothing that is not alive’. The sense is that nothing at all could

manifest that is (hypothetically) separate from the light (of consciousness).
Again, ‘whatever is devoid of life’ cannot be perceived as one with that, and
(so one should) ‘know that it is impure’, because it is rendered defective by

the odiousness of (logical) impropriety (anupapatti). Thus, one should
understand that (this view of reality) should be abandoned. This is the meaning.
As what is separate from consciousness has in this way been defined as impure,

the (implied) meaning is established that the opposite (namely, all that is not
separate from consciousness) is, on the contrary, pure.
He says that:

TTaṃāīcāifāīzīṟ
āīfṭṝ̄ āīTriāīē̄ I

tasmād yat saṁvido nātidūre tac chuddhim āvahet |
Therefore, that which is not very distant from consciousness

imparts purity.™" (243ab)

⁸⁷”² A corpse is extremely impure. The contents of the body, including excrement, are not
defiling so long as they are in the living body, participating, in a sense in its life. Outside
of the body, the organic whole, its constituents are impure and defiling. Here Abhinava
presents the view that the reason forthis is that they are distanced from consciousness.

Conversely, what is proximate to consciousness is purifying (4/243ab). Abhinava again

appeals to the authority of the Vīrāvali. Noṭe that, although much less impure, the living

body is defiling to varying degrees, according to the caste status of its possessor. If
impurity does not ultimately exist, caste distinctions are similarly false.
⁸*⁰ According to Utpaladeva, the powers of knowledge and action constitute life. Thus,
he declares that:

‘The being of the insentient depends entirely on the sentient; and the powers of
knowledge and action are the very life of sentient beings.” IP 1/1/3
Abhinava comments: ‘. . . That alone has independent existence which shines

independently of other (things). And because what is said to be insentient cannot exist
independently of the light of consciousness, the view that the power of insentient
entities is revealed to (other) insentient entities is baseless. . . .⁵

⁸ This line is quoted below in TĀv ad 29/127cd-128ab. There the reading is as in MS

C tat śuddham āharet for tat śuddhim āvahet. Jayaratha quotes it in the context of the

consumption of sexual fluids produced by orgasm in the course of Kaula ritual. In that

context, the variant reading is more appropriate, for the line would then mean, ‘therefore

that which is not very distant from consciousness is pure and should be eaten’. It

TANTRĀLOKA

339

That is said there (in the Vīrāvalītantra, where we read):
‘Nothing is impure. Everything is established there (in SŚiva
consciousness). Whatever is devoid of that becomes, for that reason, impure.
Surely, none of the great (realized) souls accept the distinction (made)

in this way between purity and impurity, so how could the wise have faith here
(in this view)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

rf̄āēkcāī rā² JTĀĪSTT TATNST | 33 1
avikalpena bhāvena munayo ‘pi tathābhavan || 243 I|
Such was also the (opinion and) condition of the (ancient) sages, by

virtue of (their) state free of (dualistic) thought constructs. (243cd)

‘Such’ (was also the opinion and condition of the ancient sages) means
that the distinction between purity and impurity is due to whether (something) is
at one with consciousness or not. That is said there (in the Vīrāvalītantra, where
we read):
‘In the (ancient) past, the Vedic sages (ṣi) ate beef and human flesh.”
If (the ancient sages) had not known that the purity of the sacrificial
substances (dravya) is their oneness with consciousness, how is it that they
could eat beef and the like, which is contrary to common practice (loka), and
has been banned (bahiṣkṛf) by the scriptures? Thus, according to the following
teaching, when observing outer right conduct (caryā), (the offering to the Deity
and consumption of) sacrificial substances which are contrary to common

practice (loka) and the scriptures are enjoined, in order to destroy (dualistic)

thought constructs:

‘That sacrificial substance which, obnoxious and censored, is abhorred

by the common man (loka) and is banned by the scriptures, should be eaten by

the Heroes (who are adepts in Kaula practice).”
⁸²

appears that 243ab is Abhinava’s own general observation. 243cd-244ab is a more

direct reflection on the passages Jayaratha supplies from the Virāvalī, which, as
Jayaratha implicitly suggests, may well have been in Abhinava’s mind.

⁸⁸² Jayaratha quotes this and the following verse without telling us his source. This may

well be because he assumes it is clear that he is quoting from the same source. Indeed,
they do read well together. Accordingly, I assume that they are also from the Vīrāvalī.

One could cite countless passages from scriptural sources of all traditions of the early

Bhairava Tantras relating to this matter. The following one is drawn from the

Khacakrapañcakastotra (the Hymn to the Spheres of the Five Voids), which
exemplifies the manner in which the five spheres of Yoginīs taught in the Krama school
are worshipped with such sacrificial substances:
“Worship is mystical sexual union (caryākrama). It is sport (krīḍā). The seal
(mudrā) is that exhibited by (the inner mystical) Sound (rava). (The yogi) should offer

340

CHAPTER FOUR
The true nature of all (these Kaula) sacrificial substances (like meat,

alcohol and sexual fluids) is not that they (are just) contrary to common
practice, rather (the point is that they are essentially) supreme consciousness. So
what if they are obnoxious and censored? (That is irrelevant,) because (the real

point is that) there is no difference in the (the essential) nature of consciousness
anywhere (in any circumstance).³³ Thus, the purpose there is only to examine
(the stability of one’s own) mind (citta), that is, whether the mind is one-

pointedly focused on consciousness or not. As is said:

‘The practice of Kaula sexual union (caryā), that is said to be
awesomely formidable (bhīma), is not taught for the sake of enjoyment.
(Rather) it is done in order to observe whether one’s own mind is firm (and
fixed on ultimate reality) or is fickle.”

Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, how is it that the sages have
taught that beef and the like should not be eaten? With this doubt in mind, he
says:

the Great Meat (beef and human flesh), fish, liquor, rum and wine, the sacrificial pap
(caru), the flower (of the first menses), and various kinds of song and instrumental
music. (He should do this) as he meditates and repeats mantras (to the Yoginīs) in their
own respective circles, according to their nature.
Then, having heard with (their) mind delighted the Great Sound (of universal

consciousness) (that emerges) from the supreme emptiness (parākāśa) of the Stainless

(Absolute nirañjana), the Yoginīs known as Bhāsā who reside in the Great Abode (of
absolute consciousness) inside the five-fold sequence, and that move within the mystic
penetration into the seal (mudrā of the energy of consciousness), shake, inebriated with
supreme bliss.

The Khecarī (Yoginīs) reside on the path of emptiness, and have dissolved away

into the Supreme Emptiness (yyoman). The Dikcarī (Yoginīs) are the radiance of the

light of the quarters (dik), and are intent on subtle meditation. The Gocarī (Yoginīs)

experience union (yoga) within the Heart (of consciousness), and are generated by the

Self (ātman) and its opposite (anātman). The Bhūcaṁī (Yoginīs) reside in the circle of
the Root (Centre in the body), and illuminate the Nerve of Brahmā. They know the
states of being (bhāva) and, free of them, are generated from being and nonbeing.”
KhCPS 46cd-52.

⁸³³d Contrary to many peoples’ opinion, even nowadays, the Kaula substances are not

sacred and powerful simply because they are considered impure and obnoxious by the

common Vedic norms and, indeed, most people in general. Kaula practice, at least as
Abhinava understands it, is not about gaining power through transgression. It is about
realizing that everything is equally Siva’s divine consciousness.

⁸* The same verse, which is probably from the Vīrāvalītantra, is quoted below in TĀy

ad 29/101cd-102. There instead of the reading bhīmarūpiṇī– ‘awesomely formidable’,
we find kāmasurūpiṇī – ‘beautiful by virtue of the passion (that it arouses)³. The word

‘bhīma’ means fearful, terrific, terrible, awful, formidable, tremendous and the like. For

a Hindu, eating beef is as obnoxious and sinful as eating human flesh. Ritual sex

practiced in a cremation ground is also bhīma. We find a lengthy and interesting
description of an example of this kind of practice (caryā) in the Brahmayāmala.

Concerning caryā – ‘right conduct’ in general and especially such forms of it, see

Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 1,507 ff. See also below ad 29/98ab-100ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

341

īāīāvīṛē§ q āīā : ũŪāītaī |

lokasaṁrakṣaṇārthaṁ tu tat tattvaṁ taiḥ pragopitam |
In order to protect the common man (loka), they kept that reality

(tattva) secret. (244ab)

Taught this way, the common man, who has not attained oneness with

consciousness, would disrupt the common daily order of life (lokayātrā) by
doing that out of greed and lust. Due to the excellence of ‘that reality’, which is
the nonduality of consciousness, that is the ultimately real (pārāmarthika)

nature (of all things), has been ‘kept secret’ and not revealed by (the ploy of
teaching that) each of the (Kaula) sacrificial substances are defective and the
like. This is the meaning. As is said there (in the Vīrāvalītantra, where we read):
‘once known that everything is of the same nature (samarasa), (the Kaula

sacrificial substance) is criticized etc. again (anyway).’ Again, it is said

elsewhere with the same intended sense: ‘one should not do what they do, but

do what they say.’⁸*

Surely (one may ask,) if this phenomenal world (bhāvajāta) could not
possibly have an external existence (outside consciousness), then what could be
pure or impure, to which this deliberation could be applied? Again, if it were
(possible for some reality) to come into being (outside consciousness), that

would be just as it is when it comes into being, what (difference does) the
perceiver’s knowledge of it (make)? With this doubt in mind, he explains (the

passage from the Vīrāvalitantra he has quoted):

afē: ūaaifN īa] gGTJGĪ T Tvrq I ⁷
1

Éb ṭḺEṈe8ṈEEcḺEEḶC'IṬ
ō

⁸⁸³ One is reminded of chapter 11 of the Bhagavatam, where Kṛṣṇa’s sport with the
cowherd girls (gopi) is described. There too, the Purāṇa warns that one should do what
Kṛṣṇa says, not what he does. Hanneder quotes this line to exemplify the moderate,
balanced view of Trika Śaiviṣm of the relationship between the Vedic and Śaiva Tantric

revelation. He writes (1998: 4):“. . . an important segment of Śaiviṣmis un-vedicin as
much as it is based on a group of scrptures, the Tantras, which are held to be superior to

the Veda. There is in fact a wide range of cults, some of which accept the Veda while

others include it as a lower and soteriologically ineffective revelation. The generally
compromising position with regard to the Veda, however nominal in nature, is perhaps

sufficient to justify the inclusion of Śaivism as a whole into ‘Hinduism’.

Abhinavagupta’s own philosophy is certainly amongst the moderate majority of Saiva
cults that would not openly contradict orthopraxy, i.e. conformity to the rules of caste,

purity and the like, but deny its efficacy in securing liberation. Such a position was
explained, for instance, by the following line of reasoning: God, in order to preserve a
functioning society, created lower scriptures that teach these behavioural rules and
supported them with the promise of reward. Proof for this is, according to
Abhinavagupta’s school, that ‘the wise men’ who propagate these rules do not

necessarily conform to them: “one should not do what they do, but do what they say.”³
For Abhinava’s view of the teachings of the Veda and other ‘lower doctrines’, with

respect to his Śaivism, see below, 37/1 ff.

342

CHAPTER FOUR

bahiḥ satsv api bhāveṣu śuddhyaśuddhī
na nīlavat || 244 |
pramātṛdharma evāyaṁ cidaikyānaikyavedanāt |
Even if things did exist outside (in the outer world independently of
consciousness), purity and impurity are not (objective) as is, for example,
(the colour) blue. They are a property of the subject (pramātṛdharma) (not
the object), because (purity) is the experience of the unity of consciousness

and (impurity that of) multiplicity. (244cd-245ab)

Even if things (bhāva) are admitted to have an external nature (in the

world, outside consciousness), purity and impurity are not, like (the colour)
blue, an attribute of (some outer) thing (vastu), because they cannot change its

manifest (form) (pratibhāsa).³* Rather (purity and impurity are attributes) of
the perceiver. The perceiver, being more (or less) excellent according to
whether he experiences the (purity of the) oneness (or impurity of the)
multiplicity of consciousness, decides that ‘this is pure and that is impure.’
Thus, (whether something is) pure or impure is not fixed (and determined).
What is impure for one person is not so for another. If (the distinction) were to
be an attribute of (the outer) object (vastu), that this is pure and that is impure

would be fixed (and determined). (The colour) blue is not other than blue for

anyone.

Surely (one may object that) the mind of the perceiver, by seeing this
and that object (vastu) (and knowing which one is pure and which one is
impure), becomes tranquil, (and desists from enquiring into) the object of
uncertainty, (namely, as to whether it is pure or impure, as he knows from past
experience which it is), so (if all this assessment takes place with respect to the
object), how is it that purity and impurity are not an attribute of the object
(vastu)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

fe ar āōāqgātsfd īāīṁaāT̄āisr: 1| Q²,
yadi vã vastudharmo ʻpi mātrapekṣānibandhanaḥ || 245 ||
sautrāmaṇyāṁ surā hotuḥ śuddhānyasya viparyayaḥ |
Or even if (purity and impurity) were to be a property of the object
(vastudharma), they would still be conditioned by their dependence on the

perceiver. Wine (surā) is pure for the sacrificer in the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice,
but it is not for someone else.**⁷ (245cd-246ab)

*⁰ Jf ṣomething that is pure is believed to become impure, it makes no intrinsic
difference to its nature; nor is it seen to do so; we do not observe any outer change.
⁸*⁷ See below, 15/170cd-171ab and TĀv ad 29/11-13. Surā is prepared by fermenting

cooked rice or barley, then mixing it with vegetable juice, milk, and the hair of a lion, a
tiger, and a wolf. It is then purified by pouring it through a sieve, and finally, stirred

with the tail of a cow and a horse. Surā is prescribed for ritual consumption in the

sautrāmaṇi, an accessory to the vājapeya and agnicayana, both major Vedic sacrifices.
Cf. Kane, HDh 2.2:1227 ff. The Manusmṛti (11/54), Yājñavalkyasmṛti (3/227) and the

TANTRĀLOKA

343

Even if one accepts that purity and impurity are properties of the object,

even then*⁸ they would still be conditioned by their dependence on the

perceiver. The notion of the duality (and difference between pure and impure)

that arises in relation to a particular perceiver is accepted by him, not by another
(perceiver), because it is possible that there (in his case), a notion that they are
one may arise for him, (and so it would make no difference to him whether that

same thing which is considered to be pure or impure by someone else is so or
not). In this way, what is accepted by a (certain) perceiver to be pure is pure for
him alone, not someone else. Thus, the same wine (surā) (which is otherwise

considered to be impure, when offered in) the Sautrāmaṇī is pure for ‘the

sacrificer² and priest, that is, is fit to be smelt or consumed etc. This is the
meaning. (Thus it is said in that context that): ‘one should smell the wine’.
However, for someone else, who is not the sacrificer of the Sautrāmaṇī, it is on
the contrary impure, which means that (for him) it is not fit (even) to be smelt

etc. As smṛti (declares):

‘Doing violence to a Brahmin, the practice of black magic, smelling
wine and what should not be smelt, deceit and (illicit) sexual intercourse are

said to cause a person to fall from his caste status.”⁸⁹

Therefore, even if (purity and impurity) were to be properties of the
object, and both were not to be conditioned by their dependence on the
perceiver, then wine (for example) would either be pure or impure for

everybody (equally without distinction). Thus, one should understand in this
way that it is generally enjoined (in the Vedic scriptures) that wine is impure,
but (this general rule) is rendered invalid because particular Vedic passages
(Śruti) contradict it with regard to the sacrificer of the Sautrāmaṇī.

Surely, (an opponent may rejoin,) even if one may agree that to this

extent (at least), Vedic injunction is rendered invalid by the injunction of Śaiva

(scripture) in the aforestated manner, (but in the example you cite and many
others like it, according to you) Vedic injunction renders itself invalid, and that
does not seem to us to be logical. With this doubt in mind, he says:

SIḤT SĪTTT] Ḷ TITĪīĪĪT ṬITḤ I Ṝ³I
anena codanānāṁ ca svavākyair api bādhanam || 246 ||
kvacit saṁdarśitaṁ brahmahatyāvidhiniṣedhavat |
Thus (Vedic) injunctions are seen in certain circumstances to be

contradicted even by their own statements (in the sense that generally
Viṣṇudharmasūtra (34) cite drinking surā as one of the five great sins (mahāpātaka),
along with killing a Brahmin, stealing (usually interpreted as stealing gold from a
Brahmin), sleeping with the teacher’s wife, and associating with anyone who commits

one of these four. See Olivelle 2005: 583, Smith 2006: 183, 234.

⁸³* Read tadāpi for tad api.

⁸⁹ Manuṣmṇṛti 11/67.

344

CHAPTER FOUR

applicable norms are subject in certain cases to exceptions). Such is the
case with the prohibitions and prescriptions regarding the killing of a
Brahmin." (246cd-247ab)
‘Their own statements’
regarding exceptions ‘in certain
circumstancesʼ with respect to the area of operation of a general (rule) ‘are
seen’ in accord with the aforestated reasoning to not be subject to any defect in
this way, as being ultimately illogical (and improper). This is what has been
explained (prakāśita). The word ‘even’ implies that (Vedic injunctions are
contradicted even by their own) statements, not just those of other scriptures.
Thus, we have not overlooked anything new by saying that a special injunction
of the Śaiva (scriptures) overrides the general (rule) of a Vedic injunction. So in
order to point out that this is not just a rare instance, rather (such cases) are
frequent (and major ones), he gives an example, (saying that) ‘such is the case
with the prohibitions and prescriptions regarding the killing of a Brahmin’.
Just as the killing of a Brahmin is generally prohibited (with the words): ‘one
should not kill a Brahmin’, it is overridden by the special Vedic passage (śruti):
‘the Brahmin should procure a Brahmin (to sacrifice)’. Such is also the case

with (the general rule that applies to the) impurity of wine. This is the meaning.
Having in this way deliberated on the subject of purity and impurity, (he
goes on) to discuss (how the same reasoning applies) to another (similar) case
also.
b) Commentary on the words: ‘there is no deliberation on what may (or may
not) be eaten or the like.”

TṚṬTRTTFĪSĀT RTTTIĪJT ŠIĪTTT: I 34. I
bhakṣyādividhayo ‘py enaṁ nyāyam āśritya carcitāḥ || 247 ||
The prescriptions regarding what may be eaten etc. have also been
considered in the light of this same principle. (247cd)
One can understand injunctions from the force of the sense of such

statements as ‘(there should be) no deliberation on what may (or may not) be

eaten (drunk, touched) or the like²"' that there is (nothing) here (in this teaching

which says that this) should be eaten or (that) should not be eaten. Their
meaning amounts to (what has been explained) in accord with the same
principle (as applied to the previously quoted cases). This is the meaning.

⁰ See above, 4/230cd-232ab. According to the Indian lawbooks (dharmaśāstra),
penances for the same crime differ according to the caste of the person who commits
them. A Brahmin who kills another Brahmin is not liable to capital punishment, as
would be those who belong to castes below them. The reason given for this is that

Brahmins are inherently more pure, and so do not need to atone for a crime to the same
degree as more impure members of lower castes. So while capital punishment is
enjoined for the latter, it is forbidden in the case of the former.

" MV 18/74b quoted above 4/213d.

TANTRĀLOKA

345

Surely (one may ask,) just as the special injunction of Śaiva (scripture)
overrides a general Vedic injunction, is a Śaiva (scriptural) injunction
(overridden) by a Vedic one in the same way or not? Taking this doubt into
consideration, he begins to explain the meaning of the (Śaiva) scriptures (with
regard to this question).

gdsTiīṁātēī
īīd a HeIT: |

sarvajñānottarādau ca bhāṣate sma maheśvaraḥ |
Maheśvara has said (the following) in the Sarvajñānottara and
elsewhere. (248ab)
(Abhinavagupta) cites that same (scripture, summarizing its purport) in
terms of its sense (arthadvāreṇa paṭhati).

ftzāgftv-vvr̥̄aṟā-u| Q²c 1
3āRITTATTRT] ṬGTTTSTIT |
nararṣidevadruhiṇaviṣṇurudrādy udīritam || 248 II
uttarottaravaiśiṣṭyāt pūrvapūrvaprabādhakam |

(The instruction) uttered by men, ṛṣis, Brahmā,

u, Rudra and

others (ranges step by step from the most general) to progressively more
specific. Thus (the prescription that follows is more specific, and so)

invalidates (the more general one that) precedes it.™² (248cd-249ab)

What is uttered by men is overridden by what is uttered by ṛṣis. What is
uttered by Visṇu is (overridden) by what is uttered by Rudra. He says this (by
stating that): “(the prescription that follows is more specific, and s0)
invalidates (the more general one that) precedes it.’ This is the reason why

each subsequent (scripture) is greater (than the preceding ones). The point is

that is it sound (to maintain that) the general (rule) is overridden by the

particular (one).⁸”¹

Thus, conversely, (the injunctions of lower scriptures) do not render

(those of the higher ones) invalid.

Áccordingly, he says:

⁸⁹? Heṛe Abhinava summarizes in his own words the purport of the passage that follows
(i.e. 248cd-251), drawn from the Sarvajñānottara. Jayaratha supplies the original text
throughout. Here he does not do so, thus confirming that these are Abhinava’s own
words.
⁸⁰³ As higher scriptures teach special cases with respect to the lower ones, they override

the lower ones, but without this entailing their loss of authority in their domains of
applicability.

346

CHAPTER FOUR

ī Jē d’ad’īaāzr̥rdá haT | Q¥2 1
ãĩvī̄̃ gaṁTrd-caīç ṃrīaāq |

na śaivaṁ vaiṣṇavair vākyair bādhanīyaṁ kadācana || 249 ||

vaiṣṇavaṁ brahmasaṁbhũtair netyādi paricarcayet |

(However, the reverse is not the case). One should not consider that

Śaiva (scripture) can ever be invalidated by the words of Vaiṣṇava
(scripture), nor the Vaiṣṇava by those (Vedic scriptures) born of Brahmā,
and so on. (249cd-250ab)
The words of the Vedas is what is meant by ‘those (scriptures) born of
Brahmā’. As Vedic (scripture) (śruri) (itself) says: “Prajāpati created the four
Vedasʼ. Vaiṣṇava (scriptures) are not invalidated by Vedic ones, so what
question could there be of the Śaiva one’s being invalidated in that case (by the
Vedic)? Thus, the point is proved. By the words ‘and so on’, one should
understand that those (scriptures) born of Brahmā are not invalidated by the
words of (the lower) gods and so on. As is said there (in the
Sarvajñānottaratantra):

⁸⁴The words (vākya) of the Vedic sages (ṛṣi) are not invalidated by

(those of) men, similarly, nor are those of the gods*” by the Vedic sages. The

words of Brahmā are not (overridden) by those of the gods, nor are Vaiṣṇava

(scriptures) by (Brahmā) the Lotus Born One.⁸⁹“ And Śaiva (scriptures) are

never (overridden) by the words of Viṣṇu.’

“³* From here to 251ab, Jayaratha supplies a literal citation of the passage Abhinava

paraphrases from the liṅīgoddhāraprakaraṇa of the Kriyāpāda of the Sarvajñānottara.

The passage has been traced in the Sarvajñānottara IFP transcript no. 760 of MS D
15595 deposited in the GOML, Chennai (on p. 70-71) and IFP T 334 copied from MS
D. 5550 of GOML, Chennai (p. 98). Only significant variants are noted. Cf.

Sathyanarayan 2015 intro. by Goodall p. 24-26 for edition of Sarvajñānottara 14/17-24

with translation. The first three lines — 248 to 249ab – introduce the context of the
following, drawn from the Sarvajñānottara, paraphrased by Abhinava and quoted
literally by Jayaratha up to 4/251ab. Goodall’s translation (op. cit.) of these verses
clarifies the context and explains the conclusion in the passage quoted by Jayaratha ad
4/251ab:
‘In whichever varṇa (caste) the embodied soul receives initiation, he should
remain there and constantly protect the Saiva religion (sśivadharmam). He absolutely

must perform, O Skanda, such rituals leading to liberation as are taught in the Śaiva
scripture: to transgress those (rules) would be to transgress [indeed]! This must be
considered to be the command of [the Lord who is] the Cause [of the universe]; it must

never be called into doubt. It is proven; there can be nothing that proves it, nor does
anything that disproves it exist.’ Then it continues ‘the words of the Vedic sages . . . Ṃ

etc.
¹⁰³ RṞead with the IFP transcript daivikaṁ for vaidikaṁ and cārṣibhis for carsibhis.
⁸%⁰ Ṟead with the IFP transcript padmajanmanā for padmajanmajaiḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

347

Surely, (an opponent may ask,) what would be wrong if (scriptures)

were to be overridden in the reverse order? With this doubt in mind, he says:

aāTīd I āTTTRITS Te: TIRATĒITI Ṝ° I

bādhate yo vaiparītyāt sa mūḍhaḥ pāpabhāg bhavet || 250 ||
The fool who overrides this in the opposite order (that is, the words

of superior scriptures by those of inferior ones) is a sinner. (250cd)

‘The opposite order’ (means that) the subsequent (higher scripture) is
invalidated by the prior (lower scripture). As is said there (in the

Sarvajñānottaratantra):

“The sinner*⁷ who overrides (higher scriptures with the lower ones) is a

fool devoid of sense,³* it is said that all (the scriptures are such that) higher ones
are progressively (more) excellent (than the preceding lower ones).”

Thus, as Śaiva scripture is in this way the most excellent of all, one

should primarily apply oneself devoutly to that (as the most important), not
elsewhere (to any other). Accordingly, he says:
Tsāī’daddaī īēh< JEAEIĒE! II |
tasmān mukhyatayā skanda lokadharmān na cācaret |
Therefore, O Skanda, one should not observe worldly
(Brahmanical) obligations (lokadharma), as (one’s) primary (practice).*”

(251ab)

The point is that there is nothing wrong in observing worldly

(Brahmanical) obligations (lokadharma) secondarily (with respect to the Śaiva

ones, if one does s0) without applying oneself devoutly (exclusively to them).

(Indeed, they must be observed just) to preserve (the Brahmanical norms)

⁸⁹⁷ Read pāpī for pāpah. Although this reading is not supported by the transcripts,
Abhinava accepts it, and s0 it has been emended and retained.
⁸⁸ This line reads without variants in the two IFP transcripts T 170 (p. 71) and T 334 (p.

98): yo ‘bhibādhati mūḍhātmāṣanniṣṭho mūḍhacetanaḥ | “The deluded soul who
overrides (higher scriptures with the lower ones) is devoted to what is untrue and his
mind is deluded.” Goodall’s edition (op. cit.) reads: yo hi bādhati pāpātmā sa naṣṭo
mūḍhacetasaḥ | Goodall translates: ‘The wrongful wretch who contradicts [Śiva’s
teachings], he is lost, the fool.”
The line that follows in the transcripts to which I refer is omitted by Jayaratha:
vākyānāṁ vākyavitprājñais tathā guhyaṁ hitaiṣibhiḥ | *Such is the secret of the

scriptures (kept) by the wise who know the scriptures and desire what is beneficial (to
others)³. Goodallʼs edition of this line reads: vākyānāṁ vākyavit prājñas tathā grāhyaṁ
hitaiṣibhiḥ | He translates: ‘the wise man knows these teachings: this is how things are
to be understood by those who desire to attain what is beneficial to them.”

⁸ Cf. above 4/230 ff. and commentary.

348

CHAPTER FOUR

commonly observed in the world (loka).”⁰ That is said there (in the
Sarvajñānottara):

‘(One should not question the propriety of) the mundane (forms of)

conduct (to be observed according to one’s) caste and stage of life, and so too

the rites of expiation (when failing to do s0). One should not question the wellknown (and commonly accepted) (prasiddha) (observance of sound ritually
sustained) relationships (between family members and society) and the laws

(and cultural) norms of (a particular) region (deśadharma).⁰⁰" Once (having

performed all the Vedic rites of passage,) beginning with insemination up to

marriage, such is the extent of Vaidika ritual (obligation). ”² Thereafter, (one

should abide) within (the norms of) the Śaiva (scriptures), and not participate in
those of others. Indeed, O Skanda, one should not observe worldly obligations
(lokadharma) as (one’s) main (and most important) activity.”³

Thus it is said elsewhere:

“⁰⁰Read -saṁrakṣaṇārthaṁ for saṁrakṣaṇārtha.

“⁰! This passage is edited and translated by Goodall (2015: 25-26). He observes that the

nominatives of the first line that are introduced with ye are not connected as grammar
requires by the correlative tān to what follows, which is in the accusative. He emends

saṁbandhãn to saṁbaddhãn, and so tranṣlates ‘the connected’ moral practices specific
to particular regionsʼ.
⁰² ṬFP transcript 760 read naiṣṭhikaṁ (T 334 reads vaiṣṭikaṁ) – (in the same way (if
applicable, the religious duties of)) the celibate Brahmin student’ for vaidikaṁ ‘(such is
the extent of) Vaidika (ritual (obligation))’.

Śaiva scriptures themselves insist that the rules of the Brahmanical socio-

religious order are binding on Śaiva initiates. Śaivas were subject to that order at the

time of theirinitiation, and to the extent that they chose to continue to live within it after
their initiation, they were enjoined to continue to adhere to its rules. These include, as

we read in this passage from the Sarvajñānottara, a Siddhāntāgama, that the initiate

should continue to observe the regulations of caste and the restriction of marriage, just

as they apply to the uninitiated. Indeed, prior to his initiation, he should have undergone
all the standard Brahmanical rites of transition (saṅskāra), and should ensure that they
are performed for his offspring. He should also accept all the usual restrictions on food,

and is subject to all the penances that breaking these rules impose.

Sanderson (2005: 231-232) explains that Āgamic Śaivism: ‘developed in
practice thorough accommodation of the brahminical religion that it claimed to
transcend, thus minimizing, even eliminating, the offence it gave as a tradition whose
scriptures, like those of the Buddhists, were seen to be, and claimed to be, outside the

corpus of the Vedas. These Śaivites were to accept that the brahminical tradition alone
was valid in the domain it claimed for itself and that they were bound to follow its

prescriptions and incorporate its rituals beside their own wherever applicable.
Transgressing the rules of the brahminical socio-religious system known to the Saivas as

the mundane religion (laukiko dharmah), is forbidden in a much-cited passage from the

lost Saiddhāntika Bhārgavottara:
‘So he should not transgress the practice of his
caste-class and order of life even in thought. He should remain in the order in which he

was initiated into the Śaiva religion and (at the same time) maintain the ordinances of
Śiva’” It is cited at e.g. Nareśvaraparīkṣāprakāśa ad 3/76. See also,

Mataṅgpārāmeśyara, Caryāpāda 2/2-7ab.’

TANTRĀLOKA

349

‘Inwardly a Kaula (i.e. Śākta), outwardly a Śaiva, and for common daily
observance, a Vaidika. One should stand firm, having drawn the essence (of the

higher scriptures), like the fruit of a coconut (tree, that protects its juice inside

by its hard shell).”⁰⁰

Surely (one may ask,) if one does not practice the common observances
prescribed by the Law as the primary form (of practice, then can one do so
considering them to be) an ancillary limb of the Śaiva scripture or not? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

T-rāTa-āḍās
aāīṁgīṁ fsī aq I Ṝu2 1

nānyaśāstrasamuddiṣṭaṁ srotasy uktaṁ nije caret || 251 ||
One should practice what is taught in one’s own current (of

scriptures) (srotas), not what is taught in other scriptures.³⁵ (251cd)

‘One should practice’ and observe what is taught (artha) in ‘one’s
own current
(srotas) (of scriptures)³; that is, one’s own scripture, (as where
it says,) for example: ‘one should drink wine to the fill’,⁹⁰⁶ and not, ignoring that

(teaching, observe) what is taught in other scriptures (that say), for example:
‘one should not drink wine’. The Lord has taught scriptures that differ from one

another according to the difference between individuals, who are (variously) fit

(for differing practices). Thus, how can something that has been taught for one
person be that which should be observed by someone else? That is said there (in
the Sarvajñānottaratantra):

‘One whose mind is fixed solely on Śiva and is engaged in pure
meditation (bhāvanā) should not recollect that which is taught in other

scriptures,””⁷ nor (some) other deity.”

“¹ The same verse is quoted by Aparāditya in his commentary (‘īkā) on the
Yājñavalkyasmṛti 1/7. Sanderson (2006: 23) observes: ‘The Śaivas claimed to have

access through their Tantras to a ritual life which was higher and more potent than the
Vedic. But they were Vedic to the extent that like all Hindus of caste, they had been
purified by the Vedic rites of passage (saṁskāraḥ), from conception to investiture

(upanayanam) and (optionally) marriage. Even when they had gone through the

ceremony of initiation (dīkṣā), the Tantric rite of passage which gave them access to
Saiva ritual, they were still bound to conform to the rules of the Veda-based social
system (varṇāśramadharmaḥ) and its local variants (deśadharmaḥ). The Śaiva initiate
therefore saw himself as subject to two levels of injunction: the general or common

Vedic level and the special level reached by initiation.’ See also Sanderson 2007a: 231232.

⁰³This line is a brief paraphrase of a verse from the Sarvajñānottara quoted by
Jayaratha.
“Çf. Kulārṇavatantra 1/99c āgalāntaṁ pibed dravyaṁ,, which means the same.

“⁰⁷ IFP T 760 and T 334 read: na cānyaśāstroddiṣṭāṁ for nānyaśāstrasamuddiṣṭaṁ. The
meaning is the same.

350

CHAPTER FOUR

Those who know the scriptures (āgama) (are of the opinion that) that
(rule) should also be applied in relation to a Tantra with the same (authority,

that is, which belongs to the same or equivalent tradition) (samānatantra),

insofar as those are also different (from one another), because the ritual
procedures (kriyā) and the rest (taught in them) differ. As they say:

‘As (the difference between) a category of Tantras (and others) is

considered to be due to the difference between the various rites etc. (they teach),

therefore what should be done is that which is taught there"⁸ (in just one of
them), and not in accord with another Tantra (of a different school).”⁹

“⁰⁵ Read tasmāt tatra for tasmād yatra.

“⁰⁹ This verse is quoted again below in TĀv ad 8/20cd-22ab and ad 23/12cd-13ab, see
note there. It is quoted by Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha in his commentary (vṛti) on the
Mataṅgatantra ad Kriyāpāda 5/11. In place of tasmād yatra yad evoktaṁ tat kāryaṁ,

the reading there is: tasmāt tatra yathaivoktaṁ kartavyaṁ. The meaning is the same.
The context is as follows.

‘One may freely disregard the (teacher) who has introduced the procedure of

the Paddhati (liturgy) of the Svacchandatantra at this point. This is because it is proper
to supplement a scripture by drawing on another only where a procedure is not explicitly

stated [but evidently required]. In such cases, one may draw on another scripture,
because one is forced to do so by the incompleteness [of the base text]. But one may not

do so in all cases, because that would remove all consistency. This is why we have the
text ‘Tantras are distinguished from each other through their differences in the domains

of ritual (kriyā) (meditation practice (yoga) and observance (caryā)). So one must
follow the instructions of that (scripture which one has adopted) and not those of any
other system.” Moreover, even then (tatrāpi) [when one is obliged to supplement its
information from another source, one should do so] from [a scripture of] one’s own
division of the Śaiva canon, that being the closest, since it has the nature of instruction

within one and the same stream of revelation. One may not do so from another division

[such as that of the Svacchandatantra], because it is too remote from that, and because

this would lead to the undesirable consequence of the presence of practice of a contrary

nature [within Saiddhāntika Śaiviṣm]. This is why I have taught: “It is not proper in [the
practice of] one scripture to do what has been taught in another.”” Translation by
Sanderson (2003: 2-3)

also:

This is a common view. Thus we read in the Pāūrvakāmikā (kriyāpāda) 3/106

yena tantreṇa cārabdhaṁ karṣaṇādyarcanāntakam |
tena sarvaṁ prakartavyaṁ na kuryād anyatantrataḥ || ||
‘One should (perform) all (rites) beginning with attraction up to worship in

accord with the Tantra with which one has begun. It should not be done in accord with a
different Tantra.”
Again:
śaivasiddhāntatantreṇa prārabdhaṁ karṣaṇādikam ḷ
na kuryād anyaśāstreṇa kuryāc cet tantrasaṁkaraḥ ||
tantrasaṁkaradoṣeṇa rājā rāṣṭraṁ ca naśyati |

TANTRĀLOKA

351

However, if the need arises (to understand some detail that is not
explained in one’s own Tantra, one should draw) what is required from another

scripture, otherwise each of the things that should be done of the aggregate (of

ritual procedures) would not be fully completed.”"⁰ In this way, (it is said) in the
Mālinīvijayottaratantra (śrīpūrvaśāstra):

‘Having worshipped the Lords of the Door, there he should throw a
burning flower consecrated with (the Mantra of) the Great Weapon, having

meditated (on it), in order to pacify the obstacles.”⁸¹

(The question that arises here is,) how are the Lords of the Door

worshipped? Thus, in (the case of a) need (like this, to know a ritual procedure

that has not been described, one should draw) what is required from a Tantra
with the same⁹¹² (authority, as is, for example, in this case) the venerable
Triśirobhairavatantra (from which we learn that):

‘(The rites of) attraction and the rest begun according to the Tantra of the

Śaivasiddhānta should not be done according to another scripture (sāstra). If that were
to be done, the (teachings of) the Tantras would be mixed up. Due to the defect of
mixing up (the teachings of the) Tantras, the king destroys (his) kingdom.” PūKā

(kriyāpāda) 3/113-114ab
⁹!⁰ Wallis (thesis p. 110, with reference to Sanderson 2005: 98-99 and n 57) discusses
the rule of supplementation of one scripture with another that Jayaratha is applying here.

“This is the teaching that, when one’s root-text (mūlaśāstra) does not provide adequate

information for the performance of a prescribed action, then one can and maust

supplement it by turning to the other texts within the canon; first to other texts within
one’s sampradāya (samānakalpa), then (if necessary) to texts of a completely different

character (atyantāsamāna) within the canon.’ Referring in this case initially to the MV.,

he then explains that to gather all the necessary information to perform a particular
ritual, one must first turn to the Trika Triśirobhairava (samāna); then to the Mantrapīṭha
Svacchandatantra (samānakalpa),
then to the
Saiddhāntika Anantavijaya
(atyantāsamāna). ʻThe detail Jayaratha gives shows us that the tripartite hierarchy can
be understood in terms of sāmānya [general] versus viśeṣa [particular]: the Siddhānta is

the broad base of the tradition, while the Bhairava Tantras are more specialized and thus

override the rule. . . . Thus in Jayaratha’s example, one finally turns to the Saiddhāntika
texts only to supply the most trivial detail, the formation of a particular mnudrā which is

a part of the common ritual grammar of the whole tradition.’
⁹!T MV 8/16. The printed edition of the MV reads dvārapatīn pūjya for dvārapatīn iṣṭvā.
This and the following passages describe the manner in which the worshipper should

enter the temple in which he is to worship the deity. After bathing, he should stand at

the door of the temple and worship the deities to the sides. Then, in order to purify it, he
should utter the appropriate mantra as he throws a flower into it, visualizing how the
flower is aflame with the divine energy which purifies the temple by setting it ablaze to
burn away its impurities. This procedure is called the ‘Worship of the Door”
(dvārārcana) (see below 15/183cd-191ab). It is part of external worship (bahirarcā)
described below in 15/181 ff.
⁹!² Hanneder (1998: 233) understands the adjective ‘samānatantra’ to mean ‘a common’
or ‘general’ Tantra, which is indeed another meaning of the word ‘samāna’. But here

the sense appears to be ‘the same’. Indeed, the lost 7riśirobhairava was a Trika Tantra,
as is the Mālinīvijayottara. That thīs is the correct translation is clear from the usage of

the term and cognates further ahead.

352

CHAPTER FOUR
‘Then (one should worship) at the base (of the door jamb) on the left,

Nandin, Rudra and the Gaṅgā (Jāhnavī), and on the right Mahākāla, along with
(Bhairava) the Fierce One (daṁṣṭra) and Yamunā.³⁹⁰'³
(Again,) as there is a need (to know) how one should throw a ‘burning
flowerʼ, and because how that should be thrown is not clearly defined in a
Tantra of equal authority, what is required (should be drawn) from the venerable
scripture of Svacchanda, which is like a Tantra of equal (authority, although it
belongs to a different tradition). (There we read that):

‘Having uttered Bhairava’s Weapon’! and holding a flower with pure

intent (bhāvitaḥ), having consecrated it with the Mantra (uttered) seven times

and burning with flames of fire, one should enter the middle of the (deity’s)

abode by applying the Weapon of the Arrow (nārācāstra).’⁰'⁵

(Well then,) how is the application of the Weapon of the Arrow (to be
done)? In the need (to know this,) because one does not perceive (any

instruction as to how that should be done) even in a scripture which is like one
of equal (authority), (one has to draw) the required (teaching) from a Siddhānta

scripture called Anantavijaya, which is of a very different (degree of

authority).”"⁰ (There we read that):

‘Having turned (one’s) hand up flat, extend the third finger and move it
along with the middle finger and thumb that adhere to it repeatedly. (Formed) in

this way, it is said to be the Arrow.”⁰!⁷

⁹!³ This verse is quoted below in the commentary on 15/183cd-190ab, which is a

paraphrase of the entire passage of the Triśirobhairava, from which this verse is drawn.
Jayaratha is citing a very cogent example here. The worship when entering the door of a

temple or location where the rite is to be performed is basic standard procedure. The

MV refers to it very succinctly in this verse. In Chapter Fifteen, where Abhinava
expounds the procedure for daily rites, he must explain the rite of entry in sufficient
detail to be able to perform it. Accordingly, he draws the details from the
Triśirobhairava, which is a Trika Tantra. As the worship of the door is not described in

the MV, Abhinava has had to draw from this Trika scripture to make up for that
omission.
⁹!⁴ Kṣemarāja explains in his commentary on these verses of the Śvacchandatantra that
Bhairava’s Weapon is the Weapon of the form of the Deity Without Parts (niṣkalāstra),

which is HUM PHAT.

⁹!³ SVṬ 2/26-27ab.

⁹⁰ According to Goodall (1998: xlv): ‘this is probably a quotation from the Ur-Vijaya,

the first of the Rudrabhedas in all the lists of the Siddhāntas. (That the work is closely
associated with Ananta is clear from its
‘“ādiṣūra’³ gquoted in the
tantroipattivyākhyāpaṭala of the Bṛhatkālottara (Sanderson *1996b verse 41cd; NAK 1-

89, NGMPP. B

24/59

*‘Kālottara’, f.

52v line 2): athānanteśvaraṁ devaṁ

sarvajñānottareśvaram | ādisūtram idaṁ taṁtre vijaye samprakīrttitam |.

⁹!⁷ Indeed, a description of this maudrā is not found in the SVT. Kṣemarāja describes it in

just a few words, saying that ‘it is applied by impelling the index, middle finger and
thumb, casting (the arrow) into the middle of the house’ nārācāstraprayogas
tarjanīmadhyamāṅguṣṭhapreraṇāt, gṛhamadhyata iti, prakṣipann iti śeṣaḥ (SvTu ad
2/26)

TANTRĀLOKA

353

The fruit of our (endeavour) is the fulfilment (and end of any)

requirement (to be able to understand and apply a teaching), and (one should do)
whatever is required so that that may take place; (in that case,) there is no point
of making an issue of whether (the scripture from which one draws the required
information) is of equal or unequal (authority). If there is a need in this way, one
(should draw) what is required from another scripture, be it of equal or unequal
(authority), until the need is fulfilled. When (there is) none, there is no binding
(rule). When there is a need for the teachings of another scripture, (but) nothing
that relates to that (matter) is present (in those available), one may observe the
practice (which is essentially) meant by (one’s own scripture) (śāstrārtha)

(freely without constraint). As they say:

‘Even though it requires (something else), as long as there is a need, that
requirement itself is the authority, and so one should complete the task in
(some) other way, for if there is no other (way, it is not possible to) follow (and

complete the procedure).”

Surely (someone may ask,) the Lord has taught all these scriptures with

the intention of elevating the entire universe. (Thus) it is necessary to perform

the rites (anuṣṭhāna) taught in each one of them, so that the delusion of
transmigratory existence may be quelled. Let it be like this — what is the use of
(all) this deliberation? With this doubt in mind, he says:

zaī āafsṀ š- āṝaṁ fīēīzāq
āīarṁt] ā% mgraāTaāī-īaazkcŪ: I| 342 1
yato yady api devena vedādy api nirūpitam |
tathāpi kila saṅkocabhāvābhāvavikalpataḥ || 252 ||

For although the Lord has indeed uttered the Veda and the other

(scriptures) as well, even so (they are not all on the same level). This is

because (He has) conceived them in such a way that (their teachings may be

appropriate, according to whether they relate to) the contracted (state of
consciousness corresponding to the dualist point of view,) or not. (252)
There is no dispute that the Supreme Lord Himself is the teacher of all
the scriptures, beginning with the Vedas. However, He has taught two types of
scriptures, according to whether (they relate to) the contracted state (of
consciousness) or its absence. Some are predominantly dualist and some
predominantly nondualist. The scriptures that are predominantly dualist are the
Vedas etc., and those that are predominantly nondualist are the Śaiva etc.
He says that:

TTTTṄTTT
TINS JTITHĪTGT, |

[ēzeEuttÉEĀSIE EfElEEz:ḶHIEUE

354

CHAPTER FOUR

saṅkocatāratamyena pāśavaṁ jñānam īritam |

vikāsatāratamyena patijñānaṁ tu bādhakam || 253 ||

It is said that the knowledge of the fettered (pāśava) (and its
corresponding scriptures) accords with the degree of its contraction
(saṁkoca). The knowledge of the Lord (pati) (and His scripture) is that
which cancels (it) (hādhaka), in accord with the degree of its expansion.
(253)
(By) ‘contraction’ (is meant the dualistic) perception of difference
(bhedaprathā) (between things). The Veda etc. is this (knowledge) ‘of the
fetteredʼ, that is, of those who are in a state of bondage (pasu). (By)
‘expansion’ (is meant) the (nondualist) perception of the non-difference
(abhedaprathā) (of the eṣsential nature of things), due to the absence of
contraction. Thus, as the perception of difference is that which is to be cancelled

(bādhya), it is ‘that which cancels (it)’⁹" Duality (bheda) is transmigratory
existence (sarsāra), and there is no disagreement that it must be brought to an
end for everybody. And (so) in this way, the observance (of the teaching)

(anuṣṭhāna) would be rendered defective by mixing up that which should be
cancelled with that which cancels it, and so what has been stated is sound. Thus

it is said elsewhere:

‘Abandoning the knowledge of the fettered, one should take refuge in
the Lord’s scripture.”
Now he explains (the meaning of the words) ‘there is neither duality nor

nonduality².⁹¹⁰

c) Commentary on the words ‘there is neither duality nor nonduality.”

r̥ š̄ā

ṀaaṀṀũraĩ 1

rāt̄ā³rērcīṁ TadīāahīcāTī-ḥ kTH 1| QU²
idaṁ dvaitam idaṁ neti parasparaṇiṣedhataḥ |
māyīyabhedakḷrptaṁ tat syād akālpanike katham || 254 ||
(The notions that) ‘this is duality (dvaita)’ or ‘this is not (duality)’

contradict one another. Thus, they have been fashioned by the duality
”!⁸ According to Abhinava, what is taught in the Vedic traditions contracts

consciousness (nimīlana), whereas the Trika teachings lead to an expansion of
consciousness (unmīlana). This is because the Vedas are limited, ‘contracted’ scriptures
based on a dualist view of reality (bheda), whereas the Śaiva scriptures are free of

contraction and are grounded in nonduality (abheda). The contraction of nonduality

corresponds to the expansion of duality. Conversely, the contraction of duality
corresponds to the expansion of nonduality. Thus, the latter refutes and cancels out the

former.

⁹!⁷ MV 18/74c; see above, 4/214a.

TANTRĀLOKA

355

(bheda) brought about by Māyā, so how can that be (possible within the
supreme principle) beyond all conception (akālpanika)? (254)
It is said elsewhere (in other nondualist philosophies like Advaita

Vedānta that,) having set aside this inscrutable (kiṅṁīcana) duality, which is

multiplicity, one should take refuge in nonduality, that is, oneness.”⁰ ‘How can
that be (possible)³ in the supreme principle which is nothing but the pulsing

radiance (sphurattā) of one’s own nature and, ‘beyond conception’, that has

absorbed into itself each (of the many) aggregates of thought constructs? The

meaning is that it makes no sense (and is not proper). Thus, as (each) excludes
(the other), they contradict one another, and so (the distinction) is ‘Māyā’,

whose nature it is to conceal itself and is the power of the Supreme Goddess that
wills (all things) (icchāśakti). This ‘duality’ has come about because of that,

and (these notions of duality and nonduality) ‘have been fashioned’ by it. The
meaning is that (they are) just notions impelled (by it).
What is the (scriptural) authority (pramāṇa) here (that supports this
view)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3h T[Tīaraāī
rHĪGhGTĪTPT |

šāTṀarhcāīc
J³aāa aTãĩ’Ṁ̄ 2u,
uktaṁ bhargaśikhāyāṁ ca mṛtyukālakalādikam |
dvaitādvaitavikalpotthaṁ grasate kṛtadhīr iti || 255 ||
It is said in the Bhargaśikhā that he whose insight is (fully) formed
(kṛtadhī) devours death, time, the forces (of obscuration) (kalā) and all the
rest born of the conceived notions (vikalpa) of duality and nonduality. (255)

“⁰ The integral monism of Kashmiri Śaivisṃm teaches supreme nonduality

(paramadvaya), which embraces both duality and unity in the oneness of consciousness
beyond the Māyā of thought constructs that inevitably distinguishes and contrasts them.
Thus Abhinava writes:

idaṁ dvaitamidaṁ neti tadidaṁ ca dvayādvayam |
iti yatra samaṁ bhāti tadadvayamudāhṛtam ||
nanvitthamastu bhedo.api na vayaṁ śabdakāmukāḥ |
astvasau nahi no heyamādeyaṁ vā yathātra vaḥ ||
sarvānugrāhakaṁ pakṣamālilambiṣase yadi |
paramādvayadṛṣṭiṁ tatsaṁśrayeḥ śaraṇaṁ mahat ||
‘Where duality, unity and both unity and duality are equally manifest is said to
be (true) unity. To those who object that in that case diversity (bheda) must also exist,
(we say:) so be it: we do not want to speak overmuch. We neither shun nor accept
(anything) that (manifests to us) here (in this world), as you (one-sided nondualists) do.
If you wish to be supported by the view that favours all, then resort to the doctrine of
supreme nonduality, the great refuge you should adopt’ MVV 1/629-631. See
Dyczkowski 1987a: 36-38.

356

CHAPTER FOUR
Here (according to these teachings), (a true) yogi, who has attained

oneness with supreme consciousness, is he who possesses the ‘insight’, that is,
knowledge, that has attained the goal by penetrating into supreme consciousness
devoid of thought constructs. He ‘devours death, tīme, the forces of
obscuration (kalā) and all the rest’ generated by the impelling power

(anuprāṇanā) of duality (bheda) ‘born of the conceived notions of duality

and nondualityʼ, and makes them one with himself. The meaning is that there

is no notion here (in supreme consciousness) at all in the form of the object and

means of knowledge etc. and birth and death etc. As is said there (in the
Bhargaśikhātantra):

‘(The sage) then devours everything, (be it) death, time, the aggregate

of the forces (of obscuration) (kalā), all that is born of change (vikāra), the
network of notions, (as well as) oneness and multiplicity born of (unsound)

reasoning.” ⁸³!
likeʼ.⁵²²

Now he comments (on the words) ‘no worship of the Liṅga or the

d) Commentary on the words: ‘there is no worship of the Liṅga or the like.”

ftzr- fēṣrqsīrṁī faamāṁqaīa< 1

zītcj ftīgrīāī ē faaatūāīra1| Quē
ze ūdīṁaṁ hīaīāīgfrīcīīm1

siddhānte liṅgapūjoktā viśvādhvamayatāvide |
kulādiṣu niṣiddhāsau dehe viśvātmatāvide || 256 ||
iha sarvātmake kasmāt tadvidhipratiṣedhane |

The worship of the Liṅga is taught in the Siddhānta so that one may

come to know that it is made of the (whole) cosmic order (viśvādhvan).
⁹³! The same verse is quoted by Kṣemarāja in his commentary on 1) ŚSū 1/6 (which

declares: ‘when the Wheel of Energies fuses together, the universe is withdrawn’) and
2) 2/9 (⁴(the yogi’s) food is knowledgeʼ). In the first instance, the reading is
vikārajālaṁ- ‘net of change’ for vikārajātaṁ- ‘born of change’ which is both
Jayaratha’s reading and that in the second instance also. The reading in both places in
the ŚSūvi is, pratipattisātmyaṃ ‘one in nature with perceptionsʼ for pratipattijālam
‘network of notionsʼ. Again, in the first instance the reading in the following quarter is

vikalpajātaṁ- ‘born of thought constructs’ for vitarkajātaṁ- ’born of (unsound)

reasoning³, which is the reading in the second instance as it is in Jayaratha’s

commentary. Combining these variants, we get:

‘(The sage) then devours everything, (be it) death, time and the aggregate of

the forces (of obscuration) (kalā), (all that) is / born of change (vikāra) (/ the net of
change), / the network of perceptions (/ one in nature with perceptions), (as well as)
oneness and multiplicity / born of (unsound) reasoning (/ born of thought constructs).”

“²²MV 18/74d quoted above, 4/214b.

TANTRĀLOKA

357

(But) in Kula (systems) and the like, it is forbidden, so that one may come
to know that the cosmic nature of all things is within (the microcosm of) the
body. Here in (this) all-inclusive (sarvātmaka) (Trika teaching), why should

it be enjoined or prohibited?⁹²⁸ (256-257ab)

The worship of the Liṅga is enjoined ‘in the Siddhānta’, which is a
dualist philosophy, in order to know the nature of ‘the cosmic order’ consisting
of the thirty-six principles. The point is that the Supreme Lord’s Liṅga has
encompassed the entire expanding development (prapañca) of the (cosmic)
path, and so by worshiping it, this entire universe is made (to appear before the
worshiper) in a directly evident manner (sākṣātkṛta). As (the Siddhāntins) say:

‘These (worshippers) engaged in meditation (experience) pervasion
within the Liṅga up to Supreme Śiva, in (its) pedestal (pīṭha) up to Sadāśiva,

and in Brahmā’s Stone (brahmaśilā) (in its foundation) up to Māyā.”⁰²⁴
Again:

‘When Śiva’s Liṅga has been worshipped, libation has been offered to

(the entire) universeʼ.

Again, (on the contrary,) ‘in the Kula (systems) and the like’ that
(adhere to a) nondual view, the worship of the Liṅga is prohibited, as the body
consists of the entire (cosmic) path, and so the direct vision (sākṣātkāra) of that
is easily attained there itself, and so what (beneficial) result (phala) can be had
from the outer Liṅga and the like, which is not fit (for this purpose)? As is said:
‘Worship the inner (spiritual) (adhyātamaka) Liṅga, do not worship the

outer one.”⁵

⁵³ In other words, Trika is superior to both the injunctive, prescriptive Siddhānta and
the transgressive Kula, because it accepts both views, according to circumstance. The

applicability of injunctions is not absolute and invariable. It depends upon the state of
consciousness of the practitioner. Abhinava agrees that the injunctive Siddhānta is the
Śaivism of initiates at the basic level. Higher than that are the schools that he
collectively characterizes as Kula, that rejects normative behaviour, even that of the
Śaiva ascetic (including the Kāpālika!) However, they fall short of the highest level of

nonduality. Just as oneness in metaphysical terms is not established by rejecting duality.
Itis the perfect and complete inclusion of all possible levels. The same applies to praxis.
Abhinava’s insistence on the applicability of injunctions and prohibitions implies that
any one may be applied, according to its utility for a given practitioner. At the same

time, and without contradiction, they can be transcended in the higher states of
consciousness to which Trika gives access, through empowering grace, penetration and

absorption into consciousness. This is not negation of the Brahminical moral order, it is
the affirmation of freedom to both comply and transcend.
⁹³¹ The Liṅga, along with its pedestal, extends for the full length of the series of thirtysix principles. The Brahma Stone is underground, below the base of the Liṅga, which

fits into it. It contains the principles from Earth to Māyā. The base of the Liṅga above
ground is its pedestal (pītha), which covers the first three pure principles beyond Māyā
up to Sadāśiva. The Liṅga itself contains the following principles up to Supreme Śiva.

358

CHAPTER FOUR

Again,
‘One of limited intellect, having abandoned the omnipresent, omniscient

(Lord) Who resides in (His) abode, the Cave of the Heart, bows (with

reverence) to a stone and the like, which is not (at all) worthy of veneration and
(certainly) not Śiva, with the hope that it is.’

Again here, according to the philosophy of Trika (trikadarśana), which

is supreme nonduality (paramadvaya), enjoining or prohibiting (the worship of
the outer Liṅga and the like) serves no purpose at all. So it is said that here (in
this teaching) there is no worship of the Liṅga, (but even s0,) that (practice is)

not (totally) abandoned, as”*⁶ this (reality) is of the nature of all things, insofar
as one should know that this universe is the expansion of the Supreme Lord’s

supreme consciousness. And as everything is the expansion of consciousness,
(we agree that) it may also (be known by) steadfast application to the body or

otherwise. No (purpose is served) by identifying (abhimāna) with the outer

body and the like, which (identification) is an obstacle to the realisation (that
one’s own nature) is all things.”²⁷ This is the point. As (Utpaladeva) says:
‘O Bhava, I salute those venerable (souls) who, without going anywhere

or abandoning any of this, see Your Abode.”⁹⁸

Now he talks about the collection (of ascetic practices), such as (having)
matted hair and (covering oneself) with ashes.

e) Commentary on the words: ‘(such practices of having) matted hair,
(smearing the body) with ashes and the like³

⁹³³ yajed ādhyātmikaṁ liṅgaṁ bāhyaṁ liṅgaṁ na pūjayet | Cf. MV. 18/2cd-3:
mr̥cchailadhāturatnādibhavaṁ liṅgaṁ na pūjayet || 2 I|
yajed ādhyātmikaṁ liṅgaṁ yatra līnaṁ carãcaram |
bahirliṅgasya liṅgatvam anenādhiṣṭhitaṁ || 3 ||
‘The Yogi should not worship a Liṅga made of earth, stone, metal, gems and
the like, rather he should sacrifice to the inner (ādhyātmika) Liṅga where (the whole
universe, with all) moving and immobile things, rests. For (indeed,) the essential nature
of the outer Liṅga is empowered by this (inner Liṅga.’ MV 18/2cd-3ab is quoted in TĀv
ad 4/231cd-232ab; MV 18/3a is quoted in TĀv ad 27/1 MV 18/2cd-3 is quoted in TĀv

ad 5/121cd (120cd).

⁹³⁵ Ṛead iti yata for iti | yata.

⁹³⁷ It is possible to realise cosmic consciousness, that is, the recognition that everything

is an unfolding expansion of the consciousness which is one’s own essential divine
nature, in two ways. One is to recognise that the universe is the body of consciousness

and so experience it as one with it, as one does one’s own body with the contracted

consciousness of our egoic identity (cf. ŚSū 1/14: ‘the perceptible is (His) body.”). The
other is to leave aside all reference to body and be free of the false and binding

identification of the body with consciousness.

⁹²* ŚSt20/10.

TANTRĀLOKA

359

fTrTāāīTṬJTTT āTaTGzāJṬTTTTJ̄ J 34 1

altĠ #ī ṁīsai gaTaTTCYI: |

niyamānupraveśena tādātmyapratipattaye || 257 ||
jatādi kaule tyāgo ʻsya sukhopāyopadeśataḥ |
(The lower Tantras prescribe having) matted hair and the like so
that by entering into (the practice of) the rules (niyama) (and adhering to
them) one may attain a state of oneness (tādātmya) (with Śiva). (Buṭ) in the
(Trika) Kaula (system), that has been abandoned, because it teaches a
means (that is easy, direct and) pleasing (sukhopāya). (257cd-258ab)

‘The rulesʼ, according to teachings such as the following, include
dispassion (vairāgya) and the like:
‘O Maheśvarī, one who has matted hair, or is clean shaven, or has a
topknot (śikhin), or carries a (sacred) staff, or is adorned with the five
insignias,¹²⁹ and has because of (his) carelessness (of the rules indulged in)

sexual intercourse, offends me.’*

‘²⁹ More commonly we come across six insignias (mudrā) worn by Śaiva (Kāpālika) and

Buddhiṣt Vajrayāna ascetics. They are the necklace (kuṇṟhikā), bracelets (rucaka),
earrings (kuṇḍala), crest jewel (Śikhāmaṇi), ashes (bhasman) and sacred thread (of
human hair) (yajñopavīta). See Dyczkowski 1988: 27.

³⁰ This reference is drawn from a Kula work of the same kind as the (unpublished)
Kulapañcaśikā, that proclaims itself to be by Matsyendranātha. Indeed, this verse reads
like an abbreviated version of KuPa 3/20-21ab. Here they read:

jatī muaṇḍī ikhī daṇḍī pañcamudrāvibhāṣitaḥ
pramādān maithunaṁ kr̥tvā mama drohī maheśvari |
KuPa 3/19 is quoted by Kṣemarāja in his commentary on Śivasūtra 3/26. The
entire passage from which both references are drawn reads:

yogavit [k: -vi] kulamārgajīñaḥ medhāvī gurupūjakaḥ [k: kuru-] |

devībhaktaḥ[k: -bhakta] suguptātmā gurur ity abhidhīyate || 17 |

yady api te trikālajāās [k, kh: -jñā] trailokyākarṣaṇe kṣamāḥ |

tathāpi samvṛtācārāḥ [k: -rā] pālayanti kulodbhūtam [k, kh: kulodbhatī] || 18 11

avyaktaliṅginaṁ [k: -taṁ] dṛṣṭvā saṁbhāsṣanti [k, kh: saṁbhāsanti] marīcayaḥ |
liṅginaṁ nopasarpanti atiguptā yataḥ [k: yata; kh: yatat] priye [k: priyet] || 19 1|
jatt muṇḍī Śśīkhī daṇḍī [k: sikhī; kh: bhasmī] mudrāpañcakabhūṣitaḥ [k, kh: -tam] |

vratacaryāsamopetaḥ [k, kh: -taṁ] yastu sevati [k,kh: sevanti] maithunam || 20 |I

vīrapānarato [kh: -ratā] devi mama drohī [k, kh: dehe] maheśvari | Kulapañcaśikā
3/17-21ab
‘A (true) teacher is said to be one who knows yoga and the Kula path and,
wise, worships (his) teacher and, devoted to the Goddess, keeps his (true) nature well
concealed (and protected). Although these (initiates) know the three times and can
aṭṭract (any being) in the three worlds, even so, they keep (their) practice hidden and
protect (the teachings) born from (their) Kula.

360

CHAPTER FOUR

‘Entry’ means practice (abhyāsa), by which one attains a state of
oneness, that is, penetration into the Supreme Lord’s nature. For that reason, the
Siddhānta enjoins (having) matted hair and (smearing) ashes (on the body) and
similar (rules), that can only be successfully (observed) with great difficulty. As
is said:
‘Parting the hairs (on one’s head) in accord with the number of

principles of obscuration, holy souls, energies and Lords of Mantra, and having

conjoined each aspect with the individual souls associated (with them), one
should ind (oneself) with Śiva’s radiant energy before the Lord of (Sacred)

Vows.”

(The yoginīs who are) the rays (of the energies of the deity), seeing (an ascetic)
without (outer) manifest insignia, converse (with him). O beloved, they do not approach

one who bears insignia, for they are very secret.*

‘O Maheśvarī, one who, observing (Śaiva ascetic) vows, has matted hair (or) is
clean shaven, has a topknot (śikhin), carries a (sacred) staff,** (or) is adorned with the

five insignias (of a Kāpālika), who is devoted to drinking alcohol (vīrapāna) and
indulges (in illicit) sexual intercourse, offends me.”

*Quoted by Kṣemarāja in commentary on the Śivasūtra 3/26.
#* Ṛead with the citation in the TĀv daṇḍī- for K: sikhī and Kh: bhasmī.
Kṣemarāja quotes another two verses from the Kulapañcaśikā in NTu ad 8/28

(vol. 1, p. 191). However, they cannot be traced in the two extant manuscripts. They are
also concerned with the maintenance of secrecy:
yan nāsti sarvalokasya tad astīti virudhyate

nigadyate yadā devi hṛdaye na prarohati l

|

etasmāt kāraṇād devi devatābhiḥ pragopitam |
tena siddhena deveśi kiṁ na siddhyati bhūtale ||
‘It is a contradiction (to maintain that) what does not exist in all the world does
exist. O goddess, if one voices that (view), it does not grow in the heart. O goddess, for
that reason it has been concealed by the deities. O queen of the gods, when that has been

accomplished, what has not been accomplished on the surface of the earth?”
“³¹ As Jayaratha just referred to the Siddhānta as teaching such things, it is safe to
assume that the verse Jayaratha is quoting here and the following are drawn from a

Siddhāntāgama. Such practices would be considered in the Siddhāntas to be caryā.
Caryā is a difficult term to translate in one or two words in English. It means something
like ‘behaviour’ or ‘conduct’. It is not just a particular practice or rite, caryā is a way of
referring as a whole to the observances and way of life ofa Śaivite. Under this heading

come, for example, various kinds of ‘vows’ (vrata) that are observed for certain periods
of time or may even be lifelong. They involve, for example, living the wandering
ascetic’s life. This often requires smearing one’s body with ashes, keeping matted hair,

wearing waistbands or other sectarian signs, and the like. Such vows and other forms of
caryā are traditionally described in one of the (ideally) four sections (pāda) of the
Siddhāntāgama that draws its name from it. For definitions, examples and discussion,

see Dyczkowski 2009 intro. 1, p. 508-512. Concerning the contents of a typical
caryāpāda, see introduction to the edition of the Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama p. 138-141.

An example is Rudravrata. This is described in the MTPā (caryāpāda 9/5-21ab) in a
paṣssage that begins:

TANTRĀLOKA

361

Moreover:
‘Those who observe vows, have matted hair (or) shaved heads, and

foremost amongst them, are white with ashes, adorned with sectarian marks on
their forehead (tilaka, puṇḍraka), and (fine) turbans (or shawls) (parta), are like

kings.”²*²

Whereas matted hair, ashes and the like ‘ʻhas been abandoned’, that is,

forbidden ‘in the Kaula (systems)’, that is, in a Kula system (kuladarśana).⁰⁸

This is the meaning. As is said (in Kula scripture):
‘One should not associate, whether through deed, mind or speech, with
anyone who (here) on the surface of the earth bears the (outer) marks (chinna)
(of his ascetic practice, such as) matted hair, ashes and the rest, the flag (which

is the insignia of his order), (the outer signs of the observance), the Vow (vrata)

of the Skull-bearer, the spear,⁰ and the very terrible ascetic’s staff
(khaṭvāṅga).⁵⁸

‘Permitted by (his) teacher (to observe the vow), smeared with ashes, not

accepting (gifts from others), observing silence, holding a trident, always eating (only

what he has received) as alms and content, he should repeat mantra. Next to a solitary

Liṅga, in a cremation ground or under a tree, self-controlled and established in

concentration, he should observe the vow at night. Wearing (just) a single piece of cloth
or naked, having conquered anger and helpful (to others), the wise man fills the earth at

all times with (his) discernment and having done so lives quietly. Then placing ash
thereon and generating (in himself) by (the right application of) reason (yukti) a true
aversion for the world, with an ever pure heart and full attention, he contemplates
(Sadāśiva). MTPā (caryāpāda 9/5-14). For the full passage see Dyczkowski 2009 intro
vol. 1, p. 511. For a discussion on the nature of caryā and Śaiva vrata and its types see
ibid.

508-528.

“³² Read bhūmipā yathā for bhūmipādayaḥ.
⁹³³ Concerning the term ‘darśana’ in the sense of ‘teaching’ or ‘system’ rather than just
‘philosophy, as is its more common and better-known meaning, see Dyczkowski 2009

intro. vol. 2, pp. 329 ff. It appears that the term ‘Kula’ denotes Matsyendra’s reformed
Kauḻism that Jayaratha refers to here as the ‘kuladarśana’. The term ‘Kula’ on the other

hand denotes the form of Kaulism that is still embedded in the Bhairavatantras or has

developed independent Tantras centred on the Goddess of that Kula. Thus we have, for
example, a Kālīkula, a Śrīkula and, indeed, Trikakula. The Kaulism taught in the works

attributed to Matsyendranātha such as the Kulapañcāśika mentioned above or the
Kaulajñānanirṃṇaya are focused on the abstract principles of Kula and Akula, rather than
a specific Goddess. We do indeed find a detailed description of the worship of the inner
Liṅga in the Kaulajñānanirṇaya attributed to Matsyendranātha.

“³⁴ The word ‘ṣūla’, that I translate as ‘trident’, literally means ‘spear” or ‘lance’.
⁹³d Vows such as this came to be totally internalised. More than just integrated into

symbolic ritual implements and actions, they came to be seen as most authentically
observed by inner yogic practice, and thus domesticated. We find a good example in the
Śivasūtra, where it says, ‘the activity of the body is the vow’³ (3/26). Bhāskara
understands the ‘vow’ to be the Great Vow (mahāvrata) of the Kāpālika. The five

insignia of those who observe it are the ascetic’s staff, ashes, ashes, sacred thread,
banner and ornaments. He explains the inner practice of the Great Vow as follows:

362

CHAPTER FOUR
As that is so here in this case (according to the Trika Kaula view):

‘The All-pervasive Lord (vibhu) Himself blossoms forth wherever the
rays (of the senses) unite (within consciousness when making contact with their

objects).”⁰

Such statements impart the teaching concerning ‘the means that is
pleasing’, in order to realise the Supreme Lord’s nature easily without effort,

even when (immersed) in a (pleasing) contact with the objects of the senses.⁹⁷

As is taught (in the Svabodhodayamañjarī):
‘(The teachers who came) before taught (how to bring about) the
cessation (of the activity of the senses and mind) (nirodha) by (repeated)
practice and dispassion (vairāgya). (But) we teach that this cessation (comes

about)⁹³⁸ effortlessly (by desisting from effort).³³⁹

‘(This yogi) performs the Great Vow of abiding in his own unfettered nature.
(His) five insignia (mudrā) are the body, that is, the skeleton, the skull, the anklets, the

backbone, which represents the staff, and the bones, that are those of the hands, feet and

neck. The ashes (he smears on his body) are the supreme radiance (of consciousness),
and the three qualities (guṇa), the sacred thread. His banner is the Great Path and his

ornaments, the senses. His sport is to play amongst the objects of the senses, and he

delights constantly in the cremation ground of the heart (of consciousness) illumined in

his body, speech and mind. Whatever he does is the eternal festival of the Lord of
Heroes.”
Abhinava,

followed

by

Jayaratha,

takes

us

to the

next

interiorization to reflective awareness of sensorial and cognitive functions.

level,

from

“³⁶ This line is also quoted above in the commentary on 1/4. See there for details. The
second line of this verse declares: “For those who possess that same Being and who do
not (need to) take the support of rules and regulation (niyama), (all) talk of meditation
and (outer) worship is a deceit.”

⁹³⁷ Kṣemarāja uses the term ‘sukhopāya’ – ‘the means that is pleasing’ twice in his PrHrṛ.

In the first instance (commenting on the first aphorism), he explains it by quoting the
VBh (verse 106), where it says that:
‘The perception of subject and object is common to all embodied beings. What
is special about yogis is that they pay attention to the relationship (between them)’.
Clearly, the pleasing or easy means in the technical sense here means the

cultivation of this attention, that is, to oneself as the perceiver engaged in the perception

of an object. This requires shifting the normal focus of attention away from the
particular thing that is perceived, coupled with a strengthened sense of self-awareness.
Further ahead, commenting on the eighteenth aphorism, Kṣemarāja supplies more
details of this practice. He writes: ‘there is an easy means by which one can shatter all
the fetters of rigorous (yogic) disciplines . . . The aspirant keeps his mind (citta)
concentrated on (the consciousness which is) the Heart, restraining, in the aforestated
manner, the thoughts (vikalpa) that prevent his abiding in his own true nature by not

thinking of anything at all, and so lays hold of the state free of thought (avikalpa). (With

practice,) he becomes used to regarding his consciousness (cir) as the real perceiver,
untarnished by the body etc., and so within a short time, he achieves absorption in the
unfolding Fourth State (turya) (of consciousness) and the one Beyond the Fourth
(turyātīta).’ For these states, see below, note 5,260.

‘³*⁸ The Sanskrit here is ayatnena, which could be translated simply as ‘effortlesslyʼ. I

have translated according to what appears to be the intended sense. From this point of

TANTRĀLOKA

363

Again, (the words ‘it is neither (accepted nor)) rejected’ etc. have not
been explained separately, because the sense is included in what is meant (here).
The point is that this is the sense (artha) expressed in the first and last part (of
this verse). Here (in this Trika Kaula teaching), on the contrary, that is (neither)

enjoined (nor) prohibited, as (everything is) of the nature of all things. This is
the relation with (what was said) previously. Here, (according to the Trika

teaching, the goal) to be achieved is oneness with consciousness. There, (for
that,) one should take up whatever (practice) at whatever time is close (to that

view, consciousness is restricted due to the effort and exertion. In other words, freedom
is attained by ‘letting go’, that is, participating in the immediacy of ‘being here now’.
The idea is that a method of realizing one’s identity with Deity is taught here that can be

achieved without effort, even when one is immersed in the experience of the objects of

sense.

“³N Syabodhadayamañjarī by Vāmanadatta (alias Vīranātha) v. 12. The second line in

Torella’s edition (see above, note to TĀv ad 3/4) is essentially the same as quoted here,
only the word order differs. There we find: ayatnena nirodho ‘yam asmabhir upadiśyate
| for asmabhiṣ tu nirodho ‘yam ayamenopadiśyate | Torella (2000: 404 note 138) points
out that Vāmanadatta is referring here to Yogasūtra 1/12: abhyāsavairāgyābhyāṁ

tannirodhaḥ – ‘lts cessation (is brought about) by (repeated) practice and dispassion.”

Also BhGī 6/37cd ‘0 Kaunteya, it is grasped by practice and dispassion.’ Abhinava
explains in his commentary
the Bhagavadgītārthasaṁgraha – on this line that ‘by
dispassion enthusiasm for the objects of sense is destroyed. By practice the matters to do
with liberation (mokṣapakṣa) are gradually made the object of experience.’ Torella

points out that Śivopādhyāya, commenting on VBh 129, says (pp. 112-113) that the

practice it teaches is in accord with this one. The meditative practice (dhāraṇā) there is:
‘wherever the mind moves, having by that (very mind) immediately abandoned
whatever (it moves to), it has no fixed place and so, (left without support), one becomes
free of (its) fluctuations.”

Torella (2000: 389) cogently quotes Abhinavagupta’s MVV (2/106-112),

where he explains the practice here, and even quite possibly refers to Vāmanadatta, the

author, as the Master, and this work. There we read:

‘In actual fact, no limb of yoga can serve as a means (to realise Anuttara).
(Anuttara’s) own form is without form, because it is devoid of limitations. The means
(to attainment) is No Means (anupāya), since neither ritual procedures nor suppression
(of mental) states (are required to attain a liberated state of consciousness). This ship (of
the subtle body), devoid of exhalations and inhalations, (is impelled naturally) by a
(pleasingly) conducive breeze (anuvāta) (which follows after the cessation of the

breath). In this way it conveys the Self across the ocean of duality, even though the

mind is immersing (itself) in the juice (of the aesthetic delight) (rasa) of the objects of
sense, like a gaud without holes that has not become wet inside (when floating on
water). The same happens to those who restrain (the natural course of) the mind; like a
horse that is subject to (many) restrictions is, for that reason, running (here and there)

taking innumerable wrong directions. Why does that happen? It is well known that the
mind may delight even in pain; on the contrary, it may even turn away in disgust from

pleasure or knowledge. This is precisely what the Master (Vāmanadatta?) has taught in
his treatise (the Subodhamañjarī?), in many ways. The activities (vṛtti) of the senses
dissolve away solely by indifference (to their objects) and detachment (from them)

(anādaravīraktyā). They rebel to the degree in which they are disciplined (and

restrained).¹

364

CHAPTER FOUR

oneness); (everything) else should be abandoned.”" Thus, what purpose does the
injunction or prohibition to (have) matted hair and the rest serve for us? As he
will say:

‘When and wherever (in any given circumstance) one knows the means
to enter the supreme principle, which is close (to it and most conducive), then
that should be adopted; (every other) should be abandoned.³⁸⁴¹
Now he comments (on the words), ‘the observance or otherwise of (an
ascetic’s) Vows and the likeʼ.
f) Commentary on the words: ‘the observance or otherwise of (an ascetic’s)
Vows and the like’
3ārādāī a Ta-Tṝāīr̥ccaātṝṁā̃ I Ṝc 1

āfaīrezzā ṃ-rdīārczājṝdrā 1
vratacaryā ca mantrārthatādātmyapratipattaye || 258 |I
tanniṣedhas tu mantrārthasārvātmyapratipattaye |
Moreover (the Siddhāntas prescribe) the observance of (ascetic)
vows (vratacaryā) in order to achieve a state of identity (tādātmya) with (the
deity, which is) the reality (artha) denoted by (one’s) Mantra.³²² (But) that
#⁰ Consciousness is one, and as it is all things, injunctions or prohibitions have nothing
to do with it. Oneness with it is the goal, so whatever is near to that state should be
adopted, while what is far from consciousness should be avoided.

““¹ Below, 4/273.

“⁴” We have noted that numerous (mimetic) yows (vrata) Śaiva adepts (sādhaka) can
undertake are described in Śaiva scriptures. These Vows basically involve assuming the

lifestyle and garb of a wandering Śaiva ascetic, who seeks to imitate in this way the

deity he invokes by the continuous repetition of the mantra of which it is the ultimate
reality and meaning (artha). The Vow of Knowledge (vidyāvrata) is a common
example, discussed in Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 1, p. 517-528 and intro. 3, p. 234-236.
This practice and the others mentioned in the following verses are basic to the praxis of
the theistic Kula variety of Tantras. They are centred on the worship of specific
goddesses, notably forms of Kālī and Kubjikā (not yet Tripurā at this early stage). We

have noted that Matsyendranātha reformed these practices by internalizing them and
removing a specific referent to a particular goddess (see above, note 4,933). The two
typologies continued to develop well into the later period, that is, after the 11" century.

The Kaulism of the Anuttaratrikakula takes a middle way. Outer worship, with its
deities, is predominantly dualistic. Internalized worship, predominantly centred on the

universal and formless aspect of consciousness, is dominantly nondualist. The Supreme

Nondualism of the Trika is inclusive. It does not establish its nondualism by rejecting
dualism, rather by encompassing both in the plenitude (piūrṇatā) of consciousness. For
the same reason, Trika does not reject outer worship, although it gives preference to the
inner form. Thus, from this perspective, we can say that there is a progression from
deistic Kula to a more absolutist Kula, to finally reach the (integralist) Trikakaula. This

is indeed how they are sometimes arranged, in terms of a graded hierarchy of initiations,
from lower to higher. This is how it is, for example, in the Niśācāra, quoted above in

TANTRĀLOKA

365

is prohibited (by the Kula Tantras), so one may (come to) realize the
universal nature (sārvātmya) of (the deity, that is the) reality denoted by

Mantra (mantrārtha). (258cd-259ab)

One should carry over (from previous verses) that (the observance of

vows) is taught in the Siddhānta because (this is indicated by the use) of the
word ‘and’. ‘The reality (artha) denoted by a Mantra’ is the (specific) fixed

deity and the like that it denotes (vācya). ‘It is prohibited’ in the Kaula
(teachings).

‘The universal nature (of the reality denoted by (every)

Mantra)² is at one with all things. Here, (in this Trika teaching,) that

(observance) is neither prohibited nor enjoined. All this has been explained

before, and so (there is no need to) exert (oneself) again (to do so here).
Now in order to explain (the words) ‘entry into the sacred meeting
grounds (kṣetra) etc.’,⁹ he says:

g) Commentary on the words: ‘entry into the sacred meeting grounds (kṣetra)
etc.ʼ

TtT2TTTS
TTĪ fJ-TATTS || 2U. I
H-ĪṬTTT-PTĀIJ Tāc-THTTĪTĪCYJT

|

kṣetrapīṭhopapīṭheṣu praveśo vighnaśāntaye || 259 ||

mantrādyārādhakasyātha tallābhāyopadiśyate |

Entry (praveśa) into the sacred meeting grounds (kṣetra) and the
sacred seats, both primary (pītha) and secondary (upapīṭha), is taught (in
Kula Tantras) in order to quell obstacles (to the success of one’s practice).

Now, in the case of one who propitiates (a particular) Mantra (deity) and
the like, (residence in such places) is taught (as a means), in order to attain

that (mastery through it and the benefits it bestows).³ (259cd-260ab)

TĀv ad 1/18 and below by Abhinava himself in 13/300cd-302. Sometimes Kula and
Kaula are treated under a common heading as Kaula.

⁹³ Above, 4/216a.

⁹ Veḍic religion and culture was almost exclusively for householders. Even so,

provisions existed for householders to take a vow for a period of time to go and live and

wander in the forest, away from the comforts and security of their village. Thus, a model
was established that continued to be operational when Śaiva ascetic traditions came to
develop. The first clearly documented ones were the Pāśupatas, who worshipped Rudra
as Paśupati, the Lord of the Creatures. Uttering Vedic Mantras dedicated to him, they
observed the Great Vow (mahāvrata). They certainly already existed in the first century
CE and may well have had precursors some two or three centuries before, if not more.
In their wanderings, Pāśupata ascetics established and discovered Liṅgas, their main

external object of worship. Their spiritual power and wisdom won them the patronage of
local rulers and potentates, and thus contributed substantially to the spread of Śaivism in

the Indian subcontinent. By the time the Tantras began to be redacted in a substantial
way, probably around the sixth or seven century CE, monasteries (maṭha) had been

established and the development of a sacred geography was underway.

366

CHAPTER FOUR
A ‘sacred meeting ground’ (kṣetra) is a place where (Siddhas and

Yoginīs) meet (melāpasthāna). (The primary) ‘sacred seats’ are Kāmarūpa and

the rest. The secondary sacred seats are Devīkotṭṭa and the rest. (Entry into these

sacred places is prescribed) ‘so that (he who propitiates Mantras) can attain’
the accomplishments (siddhi) etc. of his Mantras etc. by the rite (krama) of
Pleasing Union (with the Yoginī) (priyamelāpa) and the likē*⁶ or the means
(nimitta) of that. As is said: “By taking refuge in the sacred meeting grounds,
primary and secondary, and other sacred places (saṁdoha) one becomes pure.’

(Now) he says that this (practice) is prohibited elsewhere (in other

traditions), as well as here (in this one).

īcrīTā-ār.ratarīzg aīaṝatiī I| 3ēo l

āṇēxvī qrtcá ṣīgfācar̃
aflīāq 1

Sacred places are sites where divine beings reside and sacred events have taken
place. Pilgriīmage and sacred place is a major feature of all forms of Indian religion,
indeed, it is of the whole of Asia. Apart from Agni, the god of fire, the deities of the

Vedas reside in the heavens, coming down to earth when they are invoked in the Vedic

sacrifices to receive food offerings made to them in the sacred fires, which are the
primary focus of the rites. On the contrary, these other beings, who nowadays populate
in immense numbers villages, towns, cities and the countryside throughout India, live
down here in the world of men. Local, largely non-literate traditions concerning them
are also very many and variously extensive. In the Sanskrit sources, many such

locations are recorded in the Purāṇas and in the Epics, in which the mythology, legends

and epic events associated with the cults of the deities and beings who reside or have

been there are described. Pilgrimage to the most famous amongst them is still a major
feature of modern Hinduism. This is performed by both householders and ascetics.

Parallel to the sacred sites recorded in the Purāṇas, and sometimes coinciding with
them, are those enumerated in the Tantras. One can trace to some extent the
development of references to such places in the Bhairava Tantras of various schools,
beginning with relatively random and unsystematic ones, to the formation of standard
groupings. These are called, for example, ‘pīṟhas’ ‘sacred seats’, ‘kṣetras’ ‘sacred

fields’ and ‘saṁdohas’ ‘sacred meeting grounds’, of which there are also ‘secondary’

(upa-) varieties. Quite probably they were originally geographical sites visited regularly
by wandering ascetics (rather than householders). Kaulas who did so are said in the

Tantras to meet Yoginīs there, along with whom they worshipped and had ritual
intercourse. Fairly early on, these sites came to be projected into maṇḍalas and the

worshipper's body, where they are worshipped. Here, as elsewhere, Abhinava presents

them and pilgrimage to them as only a means of acquiring yogic accomplishments
(siddhi) by the assiduous recitation of mantras there.
Concerning the sacred meeting grounds where Siddhas and Yoginīs meet
(melāpasthāna), see below, 28/372ab-373cd (28/371-373ab), and concerning the
primary and secondary sacred seats and other sacred sites, see below, 15/80 ff. and
29/59-63. The location of these places and the practice of pilgrimage to them, probably

initially external and then internalized, is discussed in Dyczkowski 2004: chapter 4 –
‘The Inner Pilgrimage of the Tantras’, and in more detail in Dyczkowski 2009:
Introduction, chapter 3 – ‘Sacred Place and Inner Space’.

“⁴³ Read siddhyāder for siddhāder.

“%⁶ There are two types of ritual union that may take place between a Siddha and a
Yoginī – ‘pleasing’ (priya) and ‘forceful” (haṭha). See above, note to comm. on 4/57cd-

58 and below 28/372ab-373cd (28/371-373ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

367

kṣetrādigamanābhāvavidhis tu svātmanas tathā || 260 ||
vaiśvarūpyeṇa pūrṇatvaṁ jñātum ity api varṇitam |
(However, in the Matatantras,)³⁷ travel to the sacred meeting
grounds (kṣetra) and other (such places) is prohibited, so that (one may)
realize the (perfect all-embracing) plenitude (pūrṇatva) of one’s own
nature²⁴ as being the nature of all things, and so this too has been
explained (in the same way). (260cd-261ab)
By the words ‘other (such places)³, are included the sacred seats

(pītha) and the rest. ‘In the same wayʼ, that is, in the aforestated way. That is
said (in the following verse):
‘From this, nothing can be removed nor can anything at all be added

here to it. As the Self is completely full (and contains all things), what is the use

of wandering around (in pilgrimage) to the sacred meeting grounds and other
(such places)?”

Again, as stated before, both (prohibitions and injunctions) are absent
here (in Trika doctrine), and so he says, ‘this too has been explained (in the
same way).⁷ That was said (before, where we read with regard to the worship of
the Liṅga):
‘Here (according to the nondual Trika teaching), that (is concerned with
the all-inclusive) nature of all things, why should (anything) be enjoined or

prohibited?²
⁰⁴⁹

Now he explains (the words) ‘the observance of the Rule etc.”.

h) Commentary on the words ‘the observance of the Rule (samaya) etc.’

TTTTIINĀTa TTGTTŪĪĪTTTRYAT I QēĒA I
ŠṬaTṛāāī āīTrcā’īTrāraiarJaçā |
grarṝēfTīezq ā’TaīJ eaīT J| 2⁶2 1|

samayācārasadbhāvaḥ pālyatvenopadiśyate || 261 |I
bhedaprāṇatayā tattattyāgāt tattvaviśuddhaye |
samayādiniṣedhas tu mataśāstreṣu kathyate || 262 ||
nirmaryādaṁ svasaṁbodhaṁ saṁpũrṇaṁ buddhyatām iti |

“*⁷ See above, note 4,831 concerning the distinction between Kula Tantras that are
injunctive and Kaula/Mata ones that are not.

“³ Abhinava says the same below in 15/81cd-82ab.
“.⁹ Above, 4/257ab.

368

CHAPTER FOUR
It is taught (generally in the Śaiva scriptures) that the essence of the

observance of the Rule (samayācāra)⁰³ should be maintained (once one has
received initiation). (However, the observance of) the Rule and the rest is

prohibited in the Mata scriptures.”¹ This is because (the gradual)

abandonment of this and that, so that the principles (which constitute the

microcosmic and macrocosmic order) may be purified, derives its existence
from relative distinctions (bhedaprāṇatayā). (But these scriptures declare
that knowing this,) ‘one should realize one’s own consciousness to be
(perfect and) all-embracing in all respects (saṁpūrṇa) and unconfined (by
such rules and regulations) (nirmaryāda).’ (261cd-263ab)

‘The observance of the Rule’ consists of ‘this should be done and that
should not be doneʼ. ‘It derives its existence from relative distinctions’,
which consist of having abandoned something, something else is taken up as,

⁵*⁰ Once initiation has been imparted, the initiate is told the rules (samaya) he should
observe. Examples of such rules, listed in eight groups of eight drawn from the
Devyāyāmalatantra, are recorded below in 15/525cd-535ab (521cd-531ab).

“¹ Cf. below 15/156cd-157ab, 169cd-170ab. It is not clear what these Mata scriptures
are. The SYM, as Gnoli believes, is not one of them, for it supplies a set of such rules
(samaya) (SYM 6/45 ff.). Below, a few verses further ahead, Abhinava explains that the

reason for this rejection in the ‘Mata scripturesʼ is that rules, even Kula ones, entail

accepting the duality between what should be adopted or abandoned, which is not
compatible with the oneness of supreme reality (4/269cd-270ab). Thus, Abhinava
considers the Mata scriptures (like the Mālinīvijaya) that set these rules aside to be
higher than Kaula ones. If, as Sanderson suggests, the esoteric system of the Mata is
related to the doctrine of the Trika Kaula Parātrīśikā, then clearly Abhinava considers

the Trika of the MV to be more elevated than it is, because, as he says, it neither rejects

nor accepts this ruling. As he puts it, even if such observances are maintained, or

indeed, even rituals are performed, they cannot break up the unity of the highest reality

(kṛtaṁ vā khaṇḍaṇāya no 29/8d). Rituals are unnecessary, but excess in this case, is not
a defect (ādhikaṁ na doṣayate). The Mata scriptures, Abhinava himself tells us here, are

all those that reject the restrictions of rules and regulations. This is because they teach
the transmission of direct, immediate realization to those who are fit to receive it. They
are, in other words, the higher Kaula scriptures. Kula systems do prescribe rules to
follow, but stress that they are not universally applicable. They are relative, in the sense
that they apply according to circumstance and the condition of the individual

practitioner, ritual requirements etc. Mata/Kaula scriptures however deny their validity
and applicability absolutely. Effectively, they preach the liberated state in this life, in

which the soul is completely unconditioned and free of any restrictions. This applies to
those who are immersed in their own nirvikalpa consciousness, having risen to it by the
removal of vikalpa by their assimilation into the former. Accordingly, Abhinava,
dealing with this matter in the context of Śāktopāya, extends it in this way to the

attainment of the complete plenitude (pūrṇatā) of identity with Bhairava, who obviously

is not bound by any rule or regulation. Abhinava envisages this process as one through
levels or degrees of obligation to observance. This begins with the Siddhānta and the

maintenance of one scripture as the prime authority, through to the Kula practices, and
beyond into the scriptures and teachings of Kaula/Mata, which is sukhopāya. This is

presented by Abhinava as the hallmark of Anuttara Trika, which embraces the

Pratyabhijñā, that teaches this par excellence. In this he is followed by Kṣemarāja in his
Pratyabhijñāhr̥daya; see above note 4,937.

TANTRĀLOKA

369

for example, by abandoning other scriptures, (one) progresses in (the teaching
of) one’s own scriptures. As he will say:
‘He on whom Mantra has not been deposited should not sit (to take part

in the rites). Nor should he resort to other scriptures. Knowledge which is not

fully developed may vacillateʼ by reflecting (bhāvana) on (scriptures) other
(than one’s own).”⁰³

However, ‘the observance of the Rule and the rest is prohibited in
the Mata scripturesʼ, which (in some aspects are) the same (and at the same
level as our own, and in others) differ. And he says that that (is the view) in that

book (with the words) ‘unconfined° etc. That is the supreme reality, namely,
‘one’s own consciousnessʼ, which is self-luminous (svaprakāśa), and so,

because it is not dependent on anything else, it is ‘(perfect and) all-embracing
in all respectsʼ, and so because it is unconditioned (aniyata) by nature, it is
‘unconfined’ and not restricted (by rules and regulations). The meaning is that
(this is what) ‘one should realize’ and experience (for oneself). The point is,
how can the observance of the Rule, which is associated with thousands of
requirements to give up (this) and take up (that) etc., serve as a means to

(attaining a state of) purity within the supreme principle which is like this?⁹³

Now he wishes to explain (the words) ‘one’s own and others’ icons

(rūpa), sectarian insignia (liṅga), (initīatory) names and clans (gotra) or the

like¹⁹⁹ So, in due order, he (first) explains what is meant by ‘one’s own’ and
‘othersʼʼ form.
i) Commentary on the words ‘one’s own and others’ icons (rūpa), sectarian

insignia (liṅga), (initiatory) names and clans (gotra) or the like’

“² Correct kampet etara- to kaṃped etara-.

“³³ Below, 15/570cd-571ab (566cd-567ab).
⁹³ The word ‘nirmaryāda’ (which I translate as ‘unconfined') literally means ‘without
bordersʼ or ‘set limits'. Ethical norms set limits on one’s behaviour, which should not be
transgressed. Consciousness is ‘unconfined’ in the sense that it is not bound by the
restrictions of rules and regulations. There is nothing that consciousness has to do or
desist from. It is not conditioned (niyata) by the law of Karma, that dictates that every
action has its own consequences. This does not mean that Śiva consciousness is

‘immoralʼ; rather, that it is beyond the dictates of any moral code or rules. They should
be followed when Śiva consciousness has not been realised. The point is that true

spiritual development is not measured by the number of rules and restrictions one

observes. What is essential is to develop and maintain an awakened awareness of
consciousness as Śiva’s sacred infinite nature. The observance of rules requires
abandoning some things which are not conducive to achieving a state of purity, or

assuming others that are. The purpose of this is finally to attain and maintain the perfect
purity of Deity itself, and hence be as It is. The Mata Tantras point out that this practice

is necessarily attended by the dualistic perspective of relative distinctions, that can never
be shaken off. The only way to attain the goal is to awaken to one’s own true essential
consciousness nature, which is perfect and all-embracing just as it is. In brief – one
should focus one’s attention on consciousness, not just on the observance of rules.

“³³ Above, 4/216cd.

370

CHAPTER FOUR

Tāaṁ
ēt rrṁṁg
ṁṝ
frīq
ē| 2ē3 1
sīīī
āīzāā tf
āīaīīē ġ pē
fiīq 1
parakīyam idaṁ rūpaṁ dhyeyam etat tu me nijam || 263 ||
jvālādiliṅgaṁ cānyasya kapālādi tu me nijam |
(Similarly, members of a Kuḻa and others distinguish between their
own deities and those of others, reflecting that) “that (iconic) form (rāpa)
belongs to another (school), whereas this is my own, upon which I should

meditate.” “A trident” and the like (are the) sectarian marks (liṅga) of a

different (tradition), whereas the skull and the like are (those of) my own.”
(263cd-264ab)

‘This’ is the meditator (dhyātṛ). ‘The trident and the rest°⁷ (are the

sectarian marks of) another (school), because they arise due to the desire (to
make a show of) outer (things) and the like. ‘My own’ (sectarian mark is the

Skull and the like), which is located in my own body.³³⁸

(Now) he explains the meaning of the words ‘and the rest’, (of the

expression) ‘(bearing sectarian) marks (liṅga) and the rest’.

īīēērTaīvgāīāōīāzaīṝ: āheār || ē¥ I
ādiśabdāt tapaścaryāvelātithyādi kathyate || 264 |

The expression (in the Mālinīvijayottara) ‘and the rest (refers to
other similar matters that set its teaching apart from that of others, such as
the practice of) austerity (tapas), observances (caryā), (auspicious) times of
the day (velā), the lunar days (when special rites are performed) and so

forth (that vary in differing schools and so are all rejected as relative).

(264cd)

‘Austerity’ (includes penances such as) the Cāndrāyaṇa.”⁹ (By)

‘observancesʼ (is meant the Śaiva observance of) right conduct (ācāra) taught

’³⁰ Sanderson suggests the reading sūlādi liṅgaṁ for jvālādiliigaṁ. The reason he gives

is that ‘there is no evidence that a flame was ever a iḷ, insignium and because it is in
any case implausible that it would have been, since the insignia in question are attributes

carried by ascetics that enable those who see them to identify the tradition to which they
belong.” Sanderson 2005b 120 n. 77.

“³⁷ Read śūlādi for jvālādi.

‘³⁸ Clearly, Jayaratha has understood these lines differently. He reads them to mean that
the difference between lower order Śaivites and others of one’s own kind is that the
former carry outer insignia, whereas the others do not, taking inner parts of the body
(like the skull) to be their insignium.

⁵³ The cāndrāyaṇa is a fast which is regulated by the lunar cycle. The food one eats is
decreased every day by one mouthful for the dark fortnight and increased in like manner
during the bright fortnight (see MS 6/20.

TANTRĀLOKA

371

in the section of the Āgamas dealing with that (caryāpāda).⁰⁰ ‘(Auspicious)

times of the day° (are when one should bathe or perform rites, as) for example,

midday and midnight. ‘The lumar dayʼ is the first day of the lunar fortnight
(pratipada) and the rest.

īT vīftk’Traṁarcṝācṁzā
ṃa r-aī |
nāma śaktiśivādyantam etasya mama nānyathā |
The (initiatory) name of this (other kind of Śaivite initiate who

belongs to the Śaiva Siddhānta) ends in ‘Śiva’, ‘Śakti’ and the like (which
varies according to the initiate’s caste and gender), whereas our (initiatory
names) are not the same (and given without such considerations). (265ab)

The (initiatory name) ‘of this’ adept (sādhaka) of Siddhānta (Śaiviṣm)
that is (is given to him) when he takes up (the observance of a) vow or the like
and is determined by (the standard) procedure of casting a flower and so on,⁹¹

may end with ‘Śiva’, ‘Śakti’ and the like’. Thus (examples) are Śikhāśakti and

Īśānaśiva. (The expression) ‘and the like’ (refers to names that end) in ‘Gaṇa’

etc. as, for example, Kavacagaṇa. That is said (in the following verse):

‘One should cast a garland (into a diagram of names). The name of

twice born initiates begins with that and ends with ‘Śiva’. The one for those
who are not (twice born) it ends with ‘Gaṇa’.’
Similarly,

‘Wherever (a flower happens to) fall, a novice has thrown (into the

diagram at random) without any (particular) intention, is the name (he or she)

should be given. In the case of Brahmins, Kṣatriyas or Veśyas, it (should) end

with ‘Śakti’ for women and the word ‘Śiva’ for men. In the case of Śūdras (their

names) should end with ‘Gaṇa’.”⁰²

Those who know the secret (Kaula) scriptures (declare that) ‘(our

(initiatory names)) are not the same’. The initiatory name (pūjānāma) should

⁹⁰ Concerning caryā, see above, note 4,909.
*⁰¹ After receiving initiation, a new name is given to the initiate, according to the

tradition into which he is initiated. If it is Siddhānta Śaivism, the nameṣs end with, for

example, Śiva, for men or Śakti for women. In order to choose it, the initiate is sat down
blindfolded in front of a specially prepared and consecrated diagram, which is divided
into parts, each of which correspond to one of the possible name-endings. He is given a
garland or a flower which he throws into the diagram. The name he is given is selected
according to where it happens to fall. See Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 2, p. 393-394.

“*² Cf. Mṛgendra Kriyāpāda 8/60cd-61. These references clearly tell us that the names
initiates into the Śaiva Siddhānta received were governed by considerations of caste and
gender (cf. SvTu vol. 2 p. 25, where only gender is distinguished). This is not the case
with Kaula initiates. Their names ended with that of the Kaula lineage to which they
belonged. Concerning initiatory names given to initiates in various early Śaiva schools,

see Sanderson 2005a 398-399, n. 179 and 2005b 120 n. 78.

372

CHAPTER FOUR

end with (the name of the particular Kaula) lineage (ovalli), which accords with

one’s own particular lineage, such as ‘Bodhi’ and the rest. That is said (in the
following verse):

‘Bodhi, Prabhu, Yogī, Ānanda, Pāda and Āvali – one should form the

name of the Heroes (i.e. the Kaula adepts) and their wives (by adding) these (the

names of their lineages) at the end.⁷*³
on.

īīā

Thus, for example, (we find the names) Satyabodhi, Viśvaprabhu and so

TṬTTI fšēhīōōāīīēēā: I| 3ē l

ġīṁārṁṝzrāṁraāī ũasrmcāfraī ú

gsaāīṣ7 naī. dTīḡ Ṁ̄ḷ || 2⁴ē 1
gTGHT] āJĪTIT ṜTĀT f̄z̄iāīd̃; Ṃ|
gotraṁ ca gurusaṁtãno mathikã kulaśabditaḥ || 265 ||

śrīsaṁtatis tryambakākhyā tadarádhāmardasaṁjñitā |

ittham ardhacatasro ʻtra maṭhikāḥ śāṅkare krame || 266 ||

yugakrameṇa kūrmādyā mīnāntā siddhasaṁtatiḥ |

Again, the clan (gotra)³™ (of which the Mālinīvijayottara speaks) is

the lineage of teachers which is termed a ‘Kula’ (‘family’) or ‘order²
(maṭhikā). The orders here in Śaṅkara’s tradition (krama) are three and
half, namely, the line of Śrīsantati, the one called Traiyambaka, the half of

““³ Cf. below, 29/29cd-33ab. According to Kaula sources prior to Abhinava, whether
those of the Kālīkrama (also called Kāḹīkula, and then just Krama), the Kubjikā Tantras,

and later Trika Tantras, as well as the Anuttara Trika of the Tantrāloka, six Kaula
lineages were established by six disciples of Matsyendranātha. Called ‘princes’

(rājaputra), their names and related data are given below in 29/33cd-41, see also
Dyczkowski 1988: 70. These lineages (saṁtāna) are termed ‘ovallṝ (or ovalli), defined
as ‘currents of knowledge’ (jñānapravāha) (below, 29/36 and Dyczkowski 2009: intro.

2, p. 397). Initiates into one or other of these lineages were given an initiatory name

(pūjānāma) ending with the name of that of the lineage, as listed here. In this way, by

knowing his or her name, it was possible to know which tradition the initiate belonged.
Here, Abhinava stresses the contrast between the Siddhānta and Kaula
traditions. The latter is ‘one’s own’, and the former that of others. Clearly, Abhinava

understood Anuttara Trika to be a Kula. Some scholars writing about Kashmiri Śaivi

distinguish Kula from Trika as separate schools, along with Krama, Pratyabhi
Spanda, that are integrated into it. But this distinction is hard to maintain. Anuttara

Trika is a Kula (cf. above 1/1) as is Krama. There is no separate ‘Kula system’ʼ, although
Anuttara Trika also contains other elements. As noted, these distinctions and
identifications are accommodated and explained by distinguishing between two
‘modalities⁷ (prakriya) – Tantric and Kauḻa (see above, note 1,138) within Trika. In this
way, there is no need to think of Kula doctrine as being derived from a separate school.
⁶³ Concerning the origin of clans (gorra), first in the Vedic tradition, and those to which
Kaula initiates belong, see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 2, p. 390 ff.

TANTRĀLOKA

373

that and the one called Āmarda.⁰⁵ (In the Half Traiyambaka order there

is) the line of Siddhas (siddhasantati) beginning from (Khagendranātha,

who is the one preceding) Kūrmanātha and, following the order of the
(four) Ages (yuga), ends with Mīnanātha.”⁶ (265cd-267ab)
(The lineage of teachers) is called in two ways, namely, ‘Kula’ and
‘monastic order” (maṭhikā). There are not just (the lineages of) the three and a

half ‘monastic ordersʼ (maṭhikā),⁰⁰⁷ there are others also, and so he says ‘(the

line of Siddhas . . . following the order of the (four)) Ages’. The word

‘preceding’ should be explained to be (read) twice (tantreṇa).⁰⁸ Thus Kūrma is

the (teacher who) brought down (the Kaula teachings) of the Tretā Age. The one
who preceded Kūrmanātha is the venerable Khagendranātha, who brought down
the (Kaula teachings) in the Kṛta Age, and he is at the beginning as is his
(lineage). The word ‘kula’ has not been explained separately, as (its meaning) is
well known (even to) common people, as for example the teacher’s family (of

disciples) (gurukula)*⁰⁹ and so on.

Now he explains the meaning of the words ‘and the like’ (in the

expression) ‘the clan and the likeʼ.

ītēcŪaz+
a * dcgī tēīṁtzēz 1| 351

ḡ aĩf ũ̄ ⁷ fīṁ caamṀm1

ādiśabdena ca gharaṁ pallī pīṭhopapīthakam || 267 ||
mudrā chummeti teṣāṁ ca vidhānaṁ svaparasthitam ḷ
The expression ‘and the like’ alludes to the hermitage (ghara)
(where the teachers resided), the village (which was their begging place)

(pallī), the sacred seats, primary and secondary (pītha, upapītha) (of the

“%³ Concerning these orders, see above note 1,161, TĀv ad 1/7. Abhinava refers again to
these orders below in 36/1 1cd-14.

“%⁶ The Kaula teachings were revealed in each of the four cosmic Ages (yuga) by a
Yuganātha – Lord of the Age. In the first – kṛta – Age he was Khagendranātha. In the

second – dvāpara – Age, he was Kūrmanātha. In the third – rrerā – Age, he was
Meṣanātha. In this, the fourth - kali – Age, he was Matsyendranātha (also called
Mīnanātha). See below, 29/29cd-32ab and Dyczkowski 1988: 80-81 and 2009: intro. 2,
307-11, The worship of these teachers is a standard part of the worship of the teachers in

Kauḻa rites of all Kaula schools (apart from Śrīvidyā). Accordingly, Abhinava teaches
their worship as an essential preliminary to the Kula rites taught in Chapter Twenty-nine
(see 29/29cd-33ab). Indeed, this, like the following elements listed up to verse 268, are

all specific characteristics of Kaula systems. Their absence in the MV indicates that it is
not, eṣsentially, a Kula Tantra. Abhinava understands this to mean that it is amongst the

Mata scriptures, that are higher than Kula.
““⁷ See above, note ad 1/7 and Dyczkowski 1988: 62, 69, 104 and 123.

“³ Sanderson (2005b 121) suggests emending kūrmādyā to kūrmādyāt ‘from the one
who precedes Kūrma(nātha)³.

“⁰⁹ This is the literal meaning of the word ‘gurukula’. In a general sense it simply means
a teacherʼs school.

374

CHAPTER FOUR

goddess), the gestures (mudrā) and the secret signs (chummā).⁰" (These too

are not taught in the Mālinīvījayottara because) the prescribed procedure
for them (all) is (also) established (on the basis of the difference between)
one’s own (school and that of) another. (267cd-268ab)
“The hermitage’ is the particular location of the hermitage (āśrama) (of

each of) the six princes who have the authority (to initiate disciples).”" ‘The
village¹ is the begging place (where alms are collected). As he will say:

“Worthy of veneration are the (six princes) who are qualified (to teach),
and to whom belongs (this) lineage with many divisions which, unbroken and
wonderfully varied, consists of (both) disciples and grand-disciples. (The names
of the members of their respective) lineages (ovalli) end with the words
‘ānanda³, ‘āvaliī’, ‘bodhī’, ‘prabhu’, ‘pāda’, and ‘yogī’. There is (also a
corresponding) set of six hand gestures (mudrā) (one for each one). (They are

made by extending) the thumb of the right (hand and then the following fingers
one after another) ending with the little finger (of the right-hand) and (then) the
littḷe finger from the left (hand). The secret signs (chumma) (correspond to six

places in the subtle body, which) are: the End of the Twelve, Upper Kuṇḍalī,
(the location) of Bindu (between the eyebrows), the Heart, Navel, and Bulb (in

the base of the genitals) (respectively). Śavara, Aḍadilla, Khaṭilla,⁰”² Karabilla,

Ambilla”³ and Śarabilla (are the hermitages). Aḍabī, Ḍombī, Dakṣiṇapallī,⁰”⁴
Kumbhārapalḹī,⁷”⁸ and Akṣarapallī (are the villages). Devīkoṭṭa, Kulādri, Tripurī,

Kāmākhya, Aṭṭahāsa and Dakṣiṇapītha (are the sacred seats of the goddess).
These are the set of six hermitages (ghara), (the villages which are their)

begging-places (palli), and (their) sacred seats (pītha), respectively.”⁰"

⁹’⁰ Above Sanderson (2007: 333) explains: 'The term chummā is seen in nonSaiddhāntika Śaiva Tantras, generally of the Vidyāpīṭha, and the Buddhist Yoginītantras
(/√Yoginīniruttaratantras), appearing also as chumma-, chummaka-/chummakā-, choma-

/chomā, chomaka-/chommaka-, and chommaka-/chommakā. In these sources the term

denotes words or hand-signals, by means of which the initiates recognize each other or

communicate secretly. The word is, I propose, Middle Indo-Aryan, deriving from the

Old Indo-Aryan chadman- *‘a disguise’. In this case they are six, one for each of the
Kaula lineages founded by six disciples of Matsyendranātha. See Dyczkowski 2009: vol

2 p. 360 and vol 3 p. 143 (for the chomā taught in the Kubjikā Tantras).
’" Matsyendranātha had twelve disciples, who were called ‘princes’ (rājaputra). Six of
them chose to remain celibate, in the sense that they would not generate spiritual
offspring, and were not given the authority to initiate others. The other six ‘princes’, on
the contrary, were given the authority to found their own lineages. See below, 29/34, 42-

43.
“⁷² Below in 29/38a the reading is -patṭillāḥ for khaṭṭillāḥ.

‘1³ Read -mbilla- for mbila-.

‘’³MSs Ch and Jh and below 29/38c read ~dakṣiṇabillāḥ for daksiṇapallī.

⁷³ For kumbhārabhillikākṣarapallī 29/38d and MSs ch, jh, read kumbhārikākṣarākhyā

ca.

⁹’⁶ Drawn from below, 29/35-39, with the few minor variants noted there. The source of
these verses is the lost Kulakrīḍāvatāra. In the following verse we are told: ‘If one who
knows (these) conventional signs (sarīketa) and desires accomplishments (siddhi) roams

in the sacred seats (pītha), he quickly attains from the mouth of the Yoginī all that that

TANTRĀLOKA

375

(These are all) ‘established (on the basis of the difference between)
one’s own (school and that of) another.’” The meaning is that (the prescribed

procedure) differs in accord with the procedure (krama) of one’s own lineage.
Surely (one may ask), what is the purpose of imparting the teaching
concerning the teachers and lineages in this way? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

āīarczqṁṁiŪrc̄d
fē i áaī qaPJā Qē 1I
tādātmyapratipattyai hi svaṁ saṁtānaṁ samāśrayet || 268 I|
bhuñjīta pūjayec cakraṁ parasaṁtāninā nahi |
(A Kaula initiate should know these things, because) in order to
attain a state of oneness (with his deity, he) should remain faithful

(samāśrayet) to his own lineage (santāna). He must not enjoy⁹” and worship
he desires.' See Dyczkowski 2009: intro 2, 360 ff, especially 362, for a chart with all
these correspondences, and more.

⁹⁷’ One could also translate, as Sanderson (2005b: 122) does, that he must not eat
together with someone who belongs to a different order than his own. His translation
aṣsumes an unstated object, i.e. ‘food’. The enjoyment meant here may well be what the

assembly experiences together. Cf. KuKh 37/68 and 46/290, both say:

‘(Even) if one is Kuleśvara (himself), directly visible, one should not dine with

others (who belong to a different tradition) (ekapātraṁ na kartavyam). The mantras (of
one who does so) become averse (to him) and (he encounters) obstacles at every step.”
It may appear surprising at first sight, but is nonetheless true, that Kula schools

display a marked tendency to exclusivity. This is enforced in the same way in which

caste diṣtinctions are maintained, that is, through the rules governing ritual purity.
Contact with others entails a transfer from one person to the other of substances that are

to varying degrees polluting, according to the manner of their transfer, their nature, and

that of their source and recipient. Caste status relates to the nature of the source and the
recipient. As higher castes are purer than lower ones, they are liable to be polluted by
them, and so should avoid contact with them. As eating together entails ingesting
substances, that occasion is one in which the contact is most intense. Accordingly,
accepting or otherwise of food, raw or cooked, or even just water, is a universal marker
of relative caste status. The latter is determined by the degree of purity conferred upon

an individual by the initiatory rites to which he has access, in accord with his birth. The
condition of any initiate, including a Kaula one, is analogous, even though access to the

initiation that purifies him does not depend on birth. The ritual purity a Kaula initiate
enjoys entails the existence of the same gradient along which impurity travels between
himself and those of others, (and hence invariably lower), traditions as that between

members of different castes. Accordingly, the interdiction is extended to commensality
with members of other traditions, even if they may belong to the same caste. Thus,
typically, even the Jayadrathayāmala substitutes initiatory for caste status and warns the

Kauḷa initiate:

akulīnaiś ca saṁparkāt tatkulāt patanaṁ bhavet |]

376

CHAPTER FOUR

the assembly (cakra)’™ (of Kaula initiates and Yoginīs) with members of a
different spiritual lineage. (268cd-269ab)

(The Kaula’s) ‘own lineage’ is that of the venerable Amaranātha and
the rest, as the case may be. He who belongs to ‘a different lineage’ is one who
(belongs to) that of the venerable Varadeva and the rest (which are not his

own).⁹”
says:

That (view) is rejected elsewhere (in other higher Tantras). Thus, he

ũṝ=āī raṁāī fihīz avēāī ãī I| 2EḶ 1

³ravzṣī
ṃ āṁ caā- srad

etac ca mataśāstreṣu niṣiddhaṁ khaṇḍanā yataḥ || 269 ||
akhaṇḍe ʻpi pare tattve bhedenānena jāyate |

(But all) this is rejected in the Mata scriptures (of the higher Trika

Kaula), because by this relative distinction (bheda), division (khaṇḍanā)
would (appear to) arise within the (one) supreme reality, although it is
(truly) undivided. (269cd-270ab)

(The unity of the supreme is shattered) ‘by this’, the aforementioned
(distinction between) what is to be adopted and what abandoned as one’s own
and someone else’s lineage etc. This is the meaning. The point is that no such
‘division’ in the form of what is to be adopted and what is to be abandoned is
logically possible ‘within the supreme principle which is undivided’.
Having explained the meaning of the text (in detail), he (now) also adds
(to conclude, a general explanation) in terms of its overall connected sense.

ekapātre kulāmnāye kāryaṁ nānyat kadācana |
yadīcched ātmanaḥ śreyaḥ siddhir vā vīravandite ||
jtvitaṁ suciraṁ vātha [k: nātha] yoginyo melakaś ca vā |

atītānāgataṁ yogaṁ bhāvanā bhāvanāśanī ||

taiḥ
sārddhaṁ bhojanaṁ varjyaṁ pāṇagoṣṭhī ca yatnataḥ |
teṣu saṁbhāṣaṇaṁ varjyaṁ saṁsparśaṁ kiṁ punaḥ priye || JY 4/20/140cd-143
’Contact with people who do not belong to (the same) Kula leads to a fall from

that Kula. O (goddess) praised by the Kaula heroes, in the Kula tradition (that enjoins)

eating together (only amongst members of the same Kula), one should never do
otherwise if one desires the best for oneself or accomplishment, a long life and meetings
with the Yoginīs. (If one desires) the yoga (which is knowledge of) the past and the

future and the contemplation that destroys the phenomenal (fettered state), one must

strenuously avoid eating with them and gatherings (with them) for drinks. One should
avoid talking with them, what to say, O beloved, of touching (them).”

⁹⁸ See below, 28/60cd ff.

⁹’⁹ Amaranātha was the ‘prince’ who founded the first Kaula lineage, and Varadeva, the
second one.

TANTRĀLOKA

377

j) Conclusion

UG ẽ̄Taīfẽ #ḍaāīRṝxrzāaāīaāī: I| 3.o |
tāēarsraa
ũz araṁũũra; ĩra 1

evaṁ kṣetrapraveśādi saṁtānaniyamāntataḥ || 270 ||
nāsmin vidhīyate tad dhi sākṣān naupayikaṁ śive |
Thus, (all these things,) beginning with entry into the meeting
grounds up to the restrictions (niyama) concerning (one’s own) spiritual

lineage (santāna) are not prescribed here (in the higher Trika teaching of
the Mālinīvijayottara), because they are not direct (and certain) means to

realizing Śiva.” (270cd-271ab)

‘Thus’, for the aforementioned reason, ‘(all these things) beginning

with entry into the meeting grounds up to the restrictions (niyama)
concerning the spiritual lineage (santāna)³, which is referred to (here) with
the term ‘clan’ (gotra), ‘are not prescribed here at allʼ. The meaning is that no
(such) injunction as ‘one should enter the meeting grounds etc.” is (imposed) in

this śastra, (the exposition of which) is underway. This is because it is not a
direct means to (attaining) Śiva. This has been explained previously many

times, and so (there is no need to) exert (oneself to do s0) again.”⁴¹
Well then, surely (one may ask,) if entry into the meeting grounds and
the like is not prescribed here at all, does that not amount to a prohibition (of the
same)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3ī īaaā 7 f-īī aa īŪāc²a aU-NḤ 1| Ṝ. S. I|
na tasya ca niṣedho yan na tat tattvasya khaṇḍanam || 271 I|

“* The absence of reference to the sacred seats and the like, that we commonly find in

Kaula Tantras of all the Kaula schools, even Buddhiṣṭ, is an indication that the MV is
not, as a whole, Kaula. Abhinava, who promotes Anuttara Trika, the Kaula form of
Trika, cannot of course accept this. Instead, he prefers to explain the absence as being a
characteristic sign of the higher Kaula character of the Mālinīvijayottara. Indeed, in one
or two places he refers to it as ‘Śrīmata’ to underscore that it is a Mata Tantra, in his
sense of the term. Indeed, it does teach immediate realisation (although it does not stress
it) as taking place in the most intense form of the descent of the power of grace
(Śśaktipāta). Specifically, he sees this in the passage he is examining here, drawn from
chapter eighteen of the MV.

“³ See above, 4/260cd-261ab. Note how Jayaratha here also stresses that the crucial

difference between the Kula emphasis on the practice of venerating the sacred sites and

the rest, and the Mata/Kaula teaching that transcends it as being unessential (i.e. it can
be done or not, it does not matter), is that realisation in the former case is gradual,
whereas in the later it is immediate.

378

CHAPTER FOUR

Nor is that prohibited,”² as it does not compromise (the unity and

supremacy) of that (ultimate) reality. (271cd)

‘That’ entry into the meeting grounds etc. (is not prohibited,) ‘as it
does not compromise (the unity) of that (ultimate) principle’, which is all
things and supreme. (Indeed,) there is no meeting ground or the like which, in
relation to it, is external, and so where could entry etc. be possible? Thus,
(whatever) injunction or prohibition one could make in this regard is just a
modality of thought (vikalpamātra), and so cannot compromise the (one)
essential nature (of all things). This is the point.

Thus, he says:

faararī fk īerzai afaṝīā fa+fcūaiī |
fafrārīttī ar vōīṁī ī taaṄṀvaa aũẽ || zvṜ I
viśvātmano hi nāthasya svasmin rūpe vikalpitau |

vidhir niṣedho vā śaktau na svarūpasya khaṇḍane || 272 ||

Prohibition or injunction, which are both (just freely) imagined
within the Lord’s own nature, are powerless to divide (and compromise the
oneness of the one) whose essential nature is all things. (272)
Therefore, here (in this school), everything is enjoined and (everything)
is prohibited, and so, summing up, the point is that one should not take up (just)
one particular (one to the exclusion of the other).

Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, when one desires to talk about
the supreme principle, how can one establish the distinction which must
assumed between ‘this should be accepted’ and ‘that should be abandoned’?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

māaāvavd 3 āīa frā² aṛ |

3ṛāṝ ātṝ a Jīāṁaī caīdīs āī aiṀṝa || .93 1|

3ī gavī aāāit̄ ũīē sstTrēvṁa

paratattvapraveśe tu yam eva nikaṭaṁ yadā |
upāyaṁ vetti sa grāhyas tadā tyājyo ʻtha vā kvacit |I 273 ||
na yantraṇātra kāryeti proktaṁ śrītrikaśāsane |

⁹³*² Read niṣedho for niṣodho. Rising through successive levels of Śaiva revelation which
illumines the path of the Śaiva schools, beginning with the Siddhānta and up through to

the Kaula and Mata, procedures and teachings change. But even so, the same distinction
prevails between what is enjoined and what is prohibited, even if they are all prohibited.

This clearly indicates that ignorance of the oneness, that can never be compromised, of
the supreme, liberated state has not been achieved.

TANTRĀLOKA

379

When or wherever (in any given circumstance) one knows the

means to enter the supreme reality which is close (to it and most
conducive), then that should be adopted; (every other) should be

abandoned.³ One should not impose restrictions (yantraṇā) here (on
practice). (The same) is said in the venerable Trikaśāsana.⁹* (273-274ab)

(Nobody) disagrees here that the yogi who wishes to enter into the
Supreme Principle should accordingly make his mind firm (and well

concentrated) there. Moreover, there (in that case), when one knows a means
somewhere (in whatever circumstance) which is ‘close’, that is, is (most)
proximate (to realisation), that serves as a means (nimitta) to attain the supreme

nature by the process of violent digestion (of duality into consciousness)

(haṭhapāka),⁹⁰⁵ and takes place suddenly with great force (sahasā), that ‘then

that should be adopted, otherwise (every) other should be abandonedʼ.
‘One should not’, on the contrary, ‘impose restrictions here’ of the sort ‘this
should be adoptedʼ and ‘that should be abandonedʼ. Thus, even when one is

engaged with the objects of sense (viṣayāsaṅga), one may enter the Supreme
Principle at anytime. (The expression) ‘anywhere’ indicates that the proximity
or distance (from the Supreme Principle) of (any of) the means (to realisation) is

not fixed (and invariably determined). The essential meaning of the text

beginning with ‘however’”“ has been explained.

(Now) surely (the question arises) as to what the authority (pramāṇa) is

for this novel teaching (apūrvārthakathana)? With this doubt in mind, he

declares that ‘it is said in the venerable Trikaśāsana’
⁰⁴⁷ (He now) quotes from
that text.
aqHdTī ŠEECĪEIÉICIGGĒEUJGIḤ I| ṜQVS* 1I

3āīāṛāṝ īī-ī ī ad frav aa |
samatā sarvadevānām ovallīmantravarṇayoḥ || 274 ||
āgamānāṁ gatīnāṁ ca sarvaṁ śivamayaṁ yataḥ |

⁹³³ This verse is quoted above in TĀv ad 4/257cd-258ab.
“³* Although Abhinava is quoting in the next verse, Trikaśāsana may well not be the

name of that text, but simply, as the word literally means, ‘the Trika teachingʼ in

general. Or else it may be an abbreviation for the Trikahṛdaya or the Trikasāra or some
other Trika source. At any rate, Abhinava is here again, as above (4/261cd-263ab) in his

own way indicating that the highest Trika teaching is sukhopāya (cf. 4,934) implicitly
taught in the MV.
“³³ See above, 3/261ab (3/260).

“³⁰ See above, 4/218.
³⁷ There can be no doubt here that Jayaratha considered the reference as being to a
specific text. However, it is hard to say whether this is the name of the source or an
alternative name or abbreviation some other Trika Tantra. Abhinava normally refers to
the Trikasāra in the TĀ as ‘sāraśāstra’, so it is unlikely to be that.

380

CHAPTER FOUR

‘All the gods,”⁸ spiritual lineages (ovallī), phonemes of Mantras, the

scriptures and ways (of practice), are equal (samatā), because all things are

Śiva.⁷ (274cd-275ab)

The ‘spiritual lineages’ (ovallī) are the six lineages of (spiritual)

knowledge (jñānasaṁtati) beginning with Bodhi, which are distinct (from one

another) in accord with their relative seniority (jyeṣṭhādibheda).⁰⁹ The ‘ways

(of practice)³ are (various) aspects (prakāra) (of practice), which include (the
basic spiritual and emotive) state (of the adept) (bhāva), mode of conduct

(vṛtti),”⁰ the substances (dravya) (offered to the deity and consumed), the levels
of attainment (bhūmikā) and so on. This is the meaning. The reason here for this
is ‘because all things are Śiva’. As is said (in the Trikaśāsana):

‘All (emotive and spiritual) states and modes of conduct (vṛtti) are equal
in all respects, as are all views (dṛṣṭi) and sacrificial substances, levels of

attainment, and all the lineages (ovallī) as well as all the gods””' and phonemes
in all respects.”

Surely (then, one may ask), who knows that everything is Śiva, for
whom this teaching may grow (and develop in him)? With this doubt in mind,
he says:

q zāaftvzūñāaīā
fSīāīdi Jdafṝ | 3'u,II

aī ṇīafzTḤ-āHTTTTS
JTEI |

sa hy akhaṇḍitasadbhāvaṁ śivatattvaṁ prapaśyati || 275 ||

yo hy akhaṇḍitasadbhāvam ātmatattvaṁ prapadyate |

³³ For -devānāṁ MS K reads: —devīnām and MSs Ch, Jh, and Ñ: —dehānām. The
reading in MS K and Jayaratha’s citation from this source agree.

‘³ The term ovallī /ovalli denotes the six Kaula lineages (Bodhi, Ānanda, Āvali, Prabhu,

Pāda, and Yogin) established by six disciples of Matsyendranātha. See below, 29/32cd39, also Dyczkowski 1988: 69-71. The term and its cognate oli / uli is found commonly

in the Kubjikā Tantras to denote these and other Kaula lineages, and occasionally in

those of the Śrīvidyā school. Concerning the etymology of this term and its cognate oli

as found in the modern North Indian vernaculars, see Turner 1966-71, Sanderson 2005b
12 n. 82, and Dyczkowski 2009: vol 2 p. 397-398.
*⁰ Kaula practice, which involves the offering and consumption of liquor, meat and

sexual fluids, clearly requires a different basic spiritual and emotive state (bhāva) and
mode of conduct (vrti) on the part of the adept than does the observance of ritual purity

and the rest, required for other forms of practice.
”’! The printed edition reads ~devīnāṁ ~ *(all) the goddesses’. This is an unlikely
reading, as a generic reference to gods and goddesses would be masculine. It is unlikely

that
only
goddesses
are
meant.
Thus,
1I
read
-—devānāṁ
for
–devīnāṁ. Although the reading of MS K of verse in the TĀ supports the reading —
devīnām,
the
reading
there

–dehānām of MSs Ch, Jh, and N supports an original -devānām.

TANTRĀLOKA

381

He who attains the principle of the Self, which is essentially

undivided, sees the principle of Siva, Whose essential nature is (one and)
undivided. (275cd-276ab) (275cd-275ef)

Knowledge of the Self is the instrumental cause (nimitta) of the direct

experience (sākṣātkāra) of the Śiva principle. What is (implicitly) explained by
(Lord Śiva, Who) expounds (the scriptures), is that unlike other systems

(darśana), here (in this one) this is not to be attained by exerting oneself to seek
etc. (some other) separate means.

Nor is everybody fit here (for this practice), only some (fortunate few)
who have been sanctified by the most intense (Iīvratama) descent of the power
(of grace) (śaktipāta). Thus, he says:

The Excellence of the Inner Rite

āEāEGŠURIIKI
Jg Td

ŠtiEkṭṭ'iēīī

hī ī fRakī || ṇv 1|

āĩsf īṣaf̃ evraītza: 1

ketakīkuṣumasaurabhe bhṛśaṁ
bhṛṅga eva rasiko na makṣikā || 276 ||
bhairavīyaparamādvayārcane
ko ʻpi rajyati maheśacoditaḥ |
It is only the bee who delights intensely in the sweet fragrance of

Ketaka flowers,⁵”² not the fly. It is only a rare person who, inspired by Śiva,
is attracted to Bhairava’s supreme nondual worship.”³ (276cd-277ab) (276)

Well, what happens by being (devoutly) attached here (to this
teaching)? With this question in mind, he says:

sfxig am faant= sggīṁī vaāṣza:

fkītra rṁṁsr̥ṁ aa- ʻãra

Qv 1|

asmiṁ5ś ca yāge viśrāntiṁ kurvatāṁ bhavadambaraḥ || 277 I
himānīva mahāgrīṣme svayam eva vilīyate |

The clutter of fettered existence (bhāvaḍambara) spontaneously

dissolves away, like snow in the intense heat of summer, for those who find
rest in this sacrifice (yāga).⁹”⁴ (277cd-278ab) (277)

“°² The Pandanus odoratiṣṣimus. Cf. below 13/333cd-336 and 22/45cd-46ab.

“’³ This verse is the same as MVV 2/151. There instead of maheśacoditaḥ MVV reads
na bhedamohitaḥ with no variants.

382

CHAPTER FOUR

Now, having begun (by describing) the one who is fit (to practice this

teaching) in general terms, in order to teach by way of conclusion, (how it is) in

particular, he says:

³T aīīt’r̄āṣ̄T̄ ṬTITTTTTĀT || 3 9¢ 1I

ṬraāīṣtrīārṬaāīsftṁzhīstḷ
arṁēṣiīt aa

alaṁ vãtiprasaṅgena bhũyasātiprapañcite || 278 I|

yogyo ‘bhinavagupto ‘smin ko ‘pi yāgavidhau budhaḥ |
Enough now of (all this) extensive useless discussion! (The matter)
has been discussed at length many times. There is only some
(extraordinary) awakened being (buddha) who, protected on all sides by
praise (abhinavagupta),”⁵ īs fit (to perform) this sacrificial rite

(yāgavidhi).”⁴⁶ (278cd-279ab) (278)

””*⁴ TĀ 4/277cd-278ab (277) corresponds to MVV 2/148cd-149ab. MVV: tatraiva TĀ:

asmiṁ- ca.

’³ Jayaratha explains that this verse suggests an etymology of the word
‘abhinavagupta’. It denotes an individual whose identity with the Lord and His powers
is protected (gupta) on all sides (abhitaḥ), even here on the plane of Māyā, by praise
(nava), i.e. the uninterrupted reflective awareness of his own nature.

⁵⁹ This line also means: ‘only the sage Abhinavagupta is fit for this sacrificial rite

(yāga).” The sacrificial rite - yāga – meant here is, no doubt the Foremost Sacrifice
(ādiyāga) of union between Siddhas and Yoginīs, taught below in Chapter Twenty-nine
as the Kaula procedure (kulaprakriyā), that is, ‘the secret ritual which concerns only
those whose nature is particularly elevated and so fit for it’ (29/1). Cf MVV 2/149cd-

15lab:

alaṁ hi carvyamāṇ

smin saraṣe saṁvidāsave ||

saṁkhyā yeṣu na vidyate |
teṣāṁ ca prakatīkārāḥ kr̥tāḥ prāg eva vistarāt ||
atrābhinavagupte tu tattve ke ʻ'py eva niṣcitāḥ |
‘Now enough of savouring (repeatedly) this delicious (sarasa) wine of
consciousness within which flow forth great outpourings without number, for they have
been elucidated at length before. Some of them have been discerned (niścita) here
within this new and hidden (abhinavagupta) reality.’
We have observed in the very first verse another example of Abhinavagupta’s

word play around his own name. He likes to do this. We find another one in his MVV
(1/13).:

‘We adore the collection of rays of the moon of Śiva, which shine day and

night but are not within reach of everyone, and (therefore) ever new (abhinava) (at
night) and hidden (gupta) (during the day).’ (Hannederʼs translation)
Abhinava refers to himself as the author the Tantrāloka in several places in it.

This is unusual in India, where authors are loath to refer to themselves much, if at all.
One could think of this as a piece with the practice of the poet who marks or ‘stamps’

TANTRĀLOKA

383

Now (the nature of) the object of sacrifice, the one who performs the

sacrifice and so on, in their many branches, ‘has been discussed at lengthʼ.
‘Enough now of (all this) extensive useless discussion’, that is, repeated

examination (of these matters), as ‘there is only some (enlightened being)’

who is beyond this world (alaukika) who is ‘fit for this sacrificial rite

(yāgavidhi)³, described previously, who is ‘protected on all sides by praise
(abhinavagupta)³. (He is) ‘protected’ (gupta) in the sense that his own innate
(spiritual) glory (and power) (vaibhava), which is his nature as all things, is well
protected, even in the state in which it is stolen away by the delusion of Māyā.
(And he is so protected) ‘on all sides’ (abhitaḥ) in (the midst of this) category
(of existence, consisting of both) sentient (beings) and insentient (phenomena),
completely divided up into endless relative distinctions such as those between
perceivers and objects. (His) ‘praise’ (1ava) is the hymn to his own nature, in
the

form of the reflective awareness of the (divine)

attributes

of the

unconditioned noetic subjectivity (jñatva) and agency (kartṛtva) (of his true
conscious nature). Thus ‘some such’³ other-worldly (alaukika) (extraordinary)

person is the author (abhi-nava-gupta), who is such, (and so) is fit here (to
perform this sacrificial rite). This is the meaning.
He concludes this with the first half ofa verse (as follows):

ṢTTRTGTTṀĒTH JITRTTTTṀT fĒṬTT ] Ṝ98 1

ity anuttarapadapravikāse śāktam aupayikam adya viviktam || 279 ||
And so today we have analysed (and discussed) the empowered
means to unfold the plane of Anuttara (anuttarapada). (279cd) (279ab)
(Saying that he has done s0) ‘todayʼ, he reveals that the meaning of the

word ‘āhnika’ (for chapter, accords) with reality.”⁷ This is the auspicious end.

Jayaratha has clearly explained this, the fourth chapter, by means of the
glorious power of sound notions that unfold by virtue of the penetration of Śakti
(śāktasamāveśa).

Thus ends the fourth chapter, called the Elucidation of the Empowered
Means, of the Tantrāloka, composed by the Mahāmāheśvarācārya, the venerable
and most excellent Abhinavagupta, of which there is a commentary called
‘Discernment’ (Viveka), written by the venerable Jayaratha.

(aṅkayati) his name somewhere in his work with his name. Safer than just a reference to
the name of the author in a colophon, he refers to himself as such in the very last verse
of the Tantrāloka (37/85).

“⁷ There are many words in Sanskrit for ‘chapter’. One, which is not very common, is
‘aāhnika’, which literally means ‘day’. Here Jayaratha claims that Abhinavagupta

miraculously composed a chapter a day, and so the literal meaning of the word is also
applicable.

Appendices
to Chapter Four
Introduction to the Appendices of Chapter Four
The Sources of the Kramanaya with Special Reference to
the Assembly of Thirteen Kālīs
‘Supreme Śiva, who is the essential nature of the three energies (of will,
knowledge and action), is Bhairava, the thirty-seventh (principle). The goddess
(bhagavatī) who is said to be supreme consciousness (parasawit) is the thirtyeighth principle, (to which one rises) having gone beyond (Bhairava, the thirtyseventh principle,) making him (assume his) aspect as a seat (for the deity). This
very (goddess) is Caṇdayogeśvarī, who impels the wheel (of the energies of)
emanation that consumes (grāsa lit. ‘devours’) all things. She should be

worshipped either alone in the modality of oneness with all things, or along with
the twelve deities who are the rays (of consciousness).”
– Chapter eight of the Tantroccaya

Krama ontology had a powerful influence on the formulations of postscriptural Śaivism. Itis here that we find the earliest referencesin a Śaiva &ka
context to the dynamic divine consciousness whichis the common view of all
nondualist Śaiva post-scriptural developments in Kashmir from the Śivasūtra
onwards, including the Pratyabhijñā. Kṣemarāja was not wrong to think of the
dynamism of consciousness — spanda
– taughtin the school of that name which
considered the Śivasūtra to be its scripture, to be the teaching of the Krama
system. This he deemed, as do the scriptures, to be the most secret and hence
most elevated tradition, with the Goddess of Consciousness (Saṁvid Devī)

exalted as the highest deity, The term spanda to denote the recurrent pulse of
consciousness is very unusual. It is only in the early sources like the JY that we
find it in relatively common usage. While Somānanda preferred to think of the
dynamism of cognitive consciousness as a flow (prasara), he also understood it
to be a kind of ‘opening out’ (vikāsa, vijrmbha). With Utpaladeva, the powerful
imagery of consciousness as self-luminous light and its appearing in
phenomenal forms as ‘shinings’ (ābhāsa) is certainly prefigured in the shining
(bhāsa) of the cycle of cognitive energies and their objects even the early protoKrama texts delight in. It is quite clear that Utpaladeva studied idealist
Buddhism (Yogācāra) extensively, as did Abhinava, and much of his theories of
cognition and fundamental cognitive consciousness are much influenced by it,
albeit in a ‘reified’ Śaiva Śākta form. Even so, there would be no Śaiva
scriptural support for it were it not for the Krama. Utpaladeva’s delightin the
play of the senses, and the manner they trigger consciousness expansion and
recognition of one’s own and universal Śiva nature, is also inspired by Krama
soteriology. The details are many and worthy of a separate study, which we
must forego here.
It is beyond the scope of this already oversized work to go into the
details of all the developments of the early Kālīkula, also known as the
Kālīkrama. Instead, in this series of appendices, we focus on the goddess Kālī

TANTRĀLOKA

385

and her entourage of Twelve Kālīs. Modified and methodically systematized in
Abhinava’s subtle exegesis of the Kālīs as the deities of the phases of perception
and more, it is the cornerstone of the Krama teachings incorporated into
Abhinava’s Anuttara Tṛika. Although drawn from Krama doctrine, Abhinava

considered this assembly of Kālīs to be the highest teaching of his Anuttara
Trika. He found authority for this view in the Devyāyāmala he learnt from
Śambhunātha, his Trika teacher. There, Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Kālī is Parātītā –

Beyond Parā.¹

Passages that illustrate Krama doctrine concerning these Kālīs are
presented in this Appendix. ranging through the length of the development of
the Krama system from the earliest proto-Krama sources found in the
Jayadrathayāmala to the fully formed Krama system of three texts called
Mahānayaprakāśa. We have arranged them in the categories marking the stages
of this development first in the Tantras and then in post-scriptural sources, as
follows:
1. The Early Krama
Appendix A: Chapter Four of the Mādhavakula, which is the fourth ṣaṭka of the
Jayadrathayāmala. Called the Kālīkramavidhipaṭala,¹ it teaches the rite of
initiation that takes place in front of the maṇḍala of the Thirteen Kālīs.
2. The Formation of an Independent Krama System Within
Scripture

Appendix B: The Wheel of Twelve Kālīs according to The Collection of the

Essence of the Tradition of (Kubjikā) the Goddess of the Tamarind Tree
(Ciñciṇīmatasārasamuccaya), including a hymn by Niṣkriyānandanātha.

Appendix C: Chapter Five of the Kālikulakramapañcaśatika, also called the
Devīpañcaśatika
3. The Early Post-scriptural Development of the Krama system –—
the Works of Śivānanda (Jñānanetra) and His Successors up to
Abhinavagupta
Appendix D: The Kālikāstotram by Śivānandanātha
Appendix E: The Thirteen Kālīs of the Kramastotra by Erakanātha
Appendix F: The Twelve Kālīs of the Kramastotra by Abhinavagupta
4. The Final Form of the Krama System
Appendix G: The Krama Gurus
Appendix H: The Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasimha
Appendix I: The Twelve Kālīs and the Cycle of the Inexplicable according to
chapter nine of the Trivandrum Mahānayaprakāśa.
The technical terminology of these texts is extensive and hard to
understand, especially in their earliest phases of development. Accordingly, the
reader will be assisted by a short introduction to each passage designed to help

her navigate through the text and understand it. We will also take a brief look at
the doctrinal continuities and developments as we go from one passage to the

' See TĀ 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab) and notes.

² 1Y ṣaṭka 4 MSs K fl. 67b-73a and MS G fl. 81a-87a.

386

APPENDICES CHAPTER FOUR

other, s0 as to present the brilliant doctrinal and literary value of these

interesting texts in the perspective of a history of ideas.

First, we will examine the earliest form of the Krama system as it is

found in the Jayadrathayāmala, and then in the Cincinīmatasārasamuccaya.
The teachings of the latter are couched in the terminology and symbolism of the
earliest form of the Krama as we find it in the Jayadrathayāmala, having

advanced to some degree in the density and extent of use of the basic symbolic

constructs originating in the former. From there we will move on to the first
independent Kālī Krama Tantras, of which the Kālīkulapañcaśatika is an
example. I have chosen chapter five, from which Jayaratha draws the

description of the thirteen Kālīs. The full chapter gives us an idea of the manner

of their worship.
Having presented examples of scriptural Krama sources, we move on to
the post-scriptural Krama. This begins with Śivānandanātha, who was three
generations prior to Abhinavagupta. It is with him that what scholars commonly
call the Krama system begins. While this is true in the sense that Śivānanda
(alias Jñānanetra) did indeed initiate a new, more advanced development of the

tradition, he was not absolutely the first to start it. This has been assumed
largely because the earlier scriptural Krama sources have not been available or
have been poorly studied. However, he is the single most important founder
figure, who heads all the genealogies we have that are presented here in
Appendix G. His Kālikāstotra has been translated in Appendix D.
The following Appendix contains the Kramastotra’s description of the
Kaālīs. This important work was written by Erakanātha, who belonged to the
second generation in Śivānanda’s lineage. Jayaratha quotes these verses in his
commentary along with passages from Abhinava’s commentary on it, the
Kramakeḻi. Unfortunately, both have been lost. Abhinava is two generations
after Erakanātha. He follows him closely, first as his commentator and then as
the author of another Kramastotra, in which he revises some details of his
predecessor’s Kramastotra to fit his own hermeneutical perspective.
Finally, we come to the fully formed Krama system expounded in three
texts that are all called Mahānayaprakāśa. Despite their common name, each
one of them makes its own considerable contribution. Even so, they uniformly
follow the same basic teaching and structure in presenting the arrangement and
content of a series of concentric cakras of the energies of consciousness. At this
final stage, the teaching of the Krama system essentially consists of the
exposition of these cakras and matters relating to their theological identity,
practice and soteriology. The translation of the complete Mahānayaprakāśa by
Arṇasiṁha is presented in Appendix H as an example of the final form the
Krama assumes. We conclude in the last Appendix with a passage drawn from
another Mahānayaprakāśa describing the Twelve Kālīs.

Appendix A

to Chapter Four
The Early Krama
Introduction
The Jayadrathayāmala, from which the passage in Appendix A is
drawn, is a long Tantra divided into four sections of six thousand verses called

‘ṣaṭkas’. These were most probably written separately over a period of time by

more than one person. All the manuscripts we have are Nepalese. Unfortunately,
mostly badly corrupt, the oldest is not earlier that the 16" or 17" century.
Sanderson reads a reference Jayaratha makes to his father’s and teacher’s
teacher, Śṛṅgāra, son of Rājānaka Dāśī, as suggesting that he taught this Tantra.¹
Whether that is so or not, Jayaratha knew it well enough to quote from all four
ṣaṭkas, whereas Abhinava only quotes from the fourth one. This may be
because, although it seems unlikely, that this is the only one that existed in
Abhinava’s day. Indeed, he never refers to the Jayadrathayāmala as such or by
its honorific alias Tantrarājabhaṭṭāraka, as Jayaratha and the Tantra itself do.²
He always calls it the Mādhavakula, which is the name by which it knows
itself.³ Mādhava is a name of Viṣṇu. The goddess here is related to the

¹ See note to verse 36 of Jayaratha’s biography of his family°s lineage at the end of his
commentary. There Jayaratha says that he taught him the ‘rājatantra’. Rastogi has

understood this to mean that he taught him political science. Sanderson instead sees a
reference there to the Tantrarāja, which is another name for the Jayadrathayāmala. See

note to that verse.

² See the following note for an example.

³ śṛnuṣva kathayiṣyāmi taṁtrarājaṣya madhyataḥ |
138a k) yathā tan mādhavakulaṁ vaktavyaṁ maṁdaropari (> maṇḍalopari) |/ 4 II
117b kh) yathā ca tatra sā kālā (> kālī) tathā sarvaṁ bṛavīmi te |

yo ʻṣau śāntaḥ parākāśaḥ prapūrṇaḥ [kh g: prapūrṇa] sarvatomukhaḥ | 5 (I
nityaḥ sadasannirmuktaḥ [kh g: -sanirmuktaḥ ] kāraṇātītavigrahaḥ |
ajo hy anantaḥ sarvajño vibhur dhātā śivo ʻvyayaḥ |l 6 ll
akulaḥ [g: akulas] sarvato dikkaḥ paritaḥ saṁvyavasthitaḥ |
tasyodaram idaṁ vyaktaṁ [g: vyaṁktaṁ] avibhedi prakāśabhāk 7 |I
nityānaṁdarasoddāmasvābhāsābharibhāsuraḥ [kh: -ra] |

sa mādhaveti vijñeyaḥ [g: -yo] kuleśaḥ kuḻabhāskaraḥ || 8 II

‘Listen, I will tell (you) the Mādhavakula, that is in the middle of the

Tantrarāja (as a part of it). It should be taught in the manner in which it is (venerated)

on the maṇḍala and because Kālī is present there. I will tell you everything. The
Supreme Sky that is tranquil is completely full and omnipresent (sarvatomukha),
eternal, free of being and nonbeing, its form beyond the (universal) cause. Unborn,

endless, omniscient, and all-pervasive, it is the Benefactor, imperishable Śiva. He is

Akula, who faces (and is located) everywhere. This manifest (universe) is his belly.
Undivided, he possesses (great) light. He should be known to be Mādhava, the Lord of

Kula, who is the Sun of Kula. Unborn, imperishable, tranquil, he generates emanation
and brings about withdrawal. Greatly terrible and most excellent, he is the fierce
Kulabhairava.⁷ (4cd-9)

388

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

Bhairava’s fierce avatāra of Viṣṇu – Narasiṁha. This is a common association

we find in early Krama sources, in which Kālī is identified with Vaiṣṇavīśakti.

We find the same, for example, in the part of the Kramasadbhāva that has been
assimilated into the Kulakaulinīmata of the Manthānabhairavatantra.⁴

The colophon of this chapter tells us that ‘it is called the Tantrācāranirṇaya
(the Teachings Concerning Right Tantric Conduct), belonging to the Kālīkula in the
Jayarathayāmala’. iti jayadrathayāmale kālikule taṁtrācāranīrṇayo [g: taṅtrācāra * *
*?] nāma [g: ?] l¹ 20 l ) The entire chapter is quoted and translated in an Appendix to
Chapter Twenty-nine of the Tantrāloka.
⁴ Narahasiṁha and his consort Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī as Vaiṣṇavī are described as follows in

chapter fifteen of the Kulakaulinīmata:

‘He has eight arms, is associated with thirty Mothers, and he has a Heroʼs Seat.
He is accompanied by Bhairavī and he pervades the channels (253ab). He has the face

of a lion and the body of a man; the Man Lion is beyond measure. He is dark blue like
split lapis lazuli and black like sliced collyrium. He is attended by blue (storm) clouds

that look like crows and nightingales and is the colour of rājāsyagiri (?) and like the

(colour) of Śrīkaṇṭha's throat. He is deformed and is like the throat of the Kālindī (i.e.
the river Yamunā). His form is tamas and he instils fear in both gods and demons. His
face is fierce and he is adorned with the eight snakes. He shines like burning gold and
his face burns with (the brilliance of his) eyes. His body is fat, nails long, and he wears a
tiger's skin. He is adorned with a hundred heads that shine like the fire of (universal)
destruction. His chest is broad and his moustache burns (like) fire, his eyebrows are like

birds (rakṣi pakṣi?). He has a big nose, his eyebrows are twisted, and his glance is
crooked. He has many ornaments and delights in human flesh (259). He roars
repeatedly. His mouth is open and his tongue is a flame of fire. He sits on Yama,
regulating (yamayan) the universe. He bears a tamasic form by which he has blinded the

universe. He shines with sunlike heads as omaments for his head. The turban on his

forehead is adomed with skin of a lotus (i.e. vagina?). He has made a garland for
himself of sun-like heads to adorn himself at the end of cosmic destruction. In (his) right
hand he holds a sword, a pestle, and the lotus of the heart. He holds maces, a skull bowl

filled with the blood of the universe, and a double-headed drum, an ascetic’s staff, the
skeḹeton of a Brahmin, and a wheel which is like millions of suns. His form shines with

the blood of the gods and demons. His lotus feet are adorned with anklets made of the

heads of Rudra. This is the Lion of Destruction, who causes fear and destroys it. This is

the form (he assumes) to accomplish universal destruction. This is the form of the body
of the Person which arises and falls away. This form is hard to behold and bestows the
accomplishment of heroes (vīrasiddhi). This is Yamāntaka, who gives and removes fear

(268).

His energy, which is will, knowledge, and action, has emerged (from him).
Formless and beyond measure, she is the Shining One (virajā), who is free of the

qualities. She is located between the movement of the inhaled and exhaled breath (read

prāṇãpãnacarãntasthã for prāṇāpānāthāntasthā), and is the most excellent mother
(read vara-for cara-), devoid of form (niṣkalā). (Her other aspect,) with form (sakalā),
shines like millions of moons and resides near him. She has three eyes and one face. She
is thin (nirmāṁsā – *without meat’), and her actions are fearsome (bhīmavikramā). She

has four arms and a long nose; her hair burns with lightning flashes. She wears a garland
of skulls, and a skull serves as her crest jewel. She wears a garland made of entrails. She

is greedy to devour the universe. She wears a tiger skin and a shawl of human skin. She
is emaciated and her face is emaciated. Angry, she holds a sword in her upraised hand
(283). In her left hand she holds a skull bowl. In her right hand she holds a man’s head.

TANTRĀLOKA

389

The Jayadrathayāmala teaches the worship of numerous forms of Kālī,³
who is sometimes identified as a fierce counterpart of Lakṣmī. These are
sometimes solitary or arranged in groups (cakra), as are these Kālīs. If the

Mādhavakula is the earliest of the four ṣaṭkas, the list of the names of the

thirteen Kālīs we find in the chapter translated in Appendix A is the earliest
known one.⁶ Be that as it may, Jayaratha quotes it as an authority in his
commentary,⁷ and the names and sequential order is indeed what we most
commonly find. Although they are listed there, and the list certainly served as a
model, they are just one of numerous configurations of Kālīs. However, in the
Kālīkula (also called Kālīkrama) scriptural sources that followed, they assumed
a much more prominent role. Despite its subsequent prominence, only small
parts of the Jayadrathayāmala are dedicated to the emergent Kālīkula, from
which the Krama system subsequently developed. Sanderson (2006b: 23-24 n.
62) helpfully identifies these places, as follows:
‘In the Jayadrathayāmala

Krama teachings are found in [1] the 2nd

saṭka in the kalpa of Vīryakālī (96v8-100r9), in [2] the 3rd in the consecutive
avyapadeśyakālīvidhi, devīṣvarūpanirūpaṇavidhi, and devīkramapaṭala (ff.

2i5r6-226r3), in [3] the 4th in the kālīkramavidhi (ff. 57v61v5), and the

consecutive
sālambakramavidhibheda,
ādyayāgavidhikramārthapūjāpaṭala, and

nirālamba-kramapūjāvidhipaṭala,
vīratāṇḍava-vidhikramajñānapaṭala

(ff. 200v7-2008r6). Initiation before the maṇḍala of the 13 Kālīs (1 + 12) is

taught here in the kālīkramavidhipaṭala (ff. 57v61v5). It is this set of identical
Kālīs that Viśyvāvarta hymns in the last verse of his Tantrarājāvatārastotra,
implying that the teachings of the Tantra culminate here.’

Krama teachings are central to Abhinava’s Kaulism, and the
Mādhavakula was a major source of them. Ādyayāga, which is the centrepiece
of Kaula ritual in Chapter Twenty-nine of the Tantrāloka, is drawn from there.⁸
As this is so, it is very significant that Abhinava hardly refers to Kālīkula
Tantras. In one or two places where it appears that he does, the reference is
uncertain. Even though independent Kālīkula Tantras had developed, he chooses
to follow the Jayadrathayāmala. There we do find references to a ‘kulāgama’,⁰
Her mouth is filled with men’s entrails, her upper crest ornament is the snake
Tārkṣa. She is Māyā, Vaiṣṇavī who, well established, is hard to remove. She is Mohanī
(who deludes all living beings), (but) once known, she gives liberation. She is
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the supreme destroyer of time. She is Bhairavī, the destroyer of time,

said to be the one energy. The one energy abides in many forms, like the moon
(reflected in) water. She is the ray of Fire of the God of the gods, she bestows long life
and accomplishment to men. As Vaiṣṇavī, she is Māyā. Amongst (the devotees of)
Brahmā, she is Gāyatrī. Amongst the Sauras, she is the Queen whose form is light.
Amongst the Arhantas, she is the Mother (Ambikā). Amongst the Bauddhas, she is Tārā.
In the Kula she is Nityā, and amongst those who study, she is Sarasvatī. (289)”

⁵ See Dyczkowski 1988: 85 and 188 n 191.
⁶ JY 4/4/38cd-42ab, translated below in Appendix A.
⁷' See TĀv ad 4/173ab

⁸ See Appendix to TĀ 29 for a translation of passages from the JY concerning Ādiyāga
and its auxiliary Anuyāga in the form of Navayāga.

⁹ See, for example, TĀ28/128b and TĀv ad 32/63.

390

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

but a corpus of texts is not meant. Rather the word ‘āgama’ there has the more

literal sense of ‘what has come (from the past)³ as tradition. The frequent

references to the teachings of the Kālīkrama as oral tradition (mukhāgama) may
be understood to sustain this view. The Jayadrathayāmala, which, along with
the Brahmayāmala, is the earliest known Tantra centred on Kālī and Her many
forms, belongs to a class of Bhairava Tantras of the vidyāpīṭha called
‘Matayāmala’, which were the precursors of the Kaula Tantras. As the CMSS
declares: ‘the knowledge in the teacher’s mouth is obtained within the Mata’.¹⁰
An important form of Kālī of the Jayadrathayāmala is Mateśvarṁī, which
supports the view that it was a Mata Tantra. This type of Bhairava Tantra stood
at the threshold of the transition to Kula Tantras. As a precursor of them, it
contains extensive passages concerning Kaula Kālī teachings. In this Appendix,
one is translated in which initiation into the worship of these Kālīs is described.
In the Appendices to Chapters Twelve and Twenty-nine, there are two more.
The following Appendix contains a translation of a passage from the CMSS,
which belongs to the same form of the early Kālīkrama as we find in the
Jayadrathayāmala.
The term ‘krama’ has multiple meanings. In the most basic literal sense,
the word ‘krama’ means a ‘sequence’. In the context of ritual procedure, a
krama is a liturgy. It is the sequence in which deities are worshipped through the
utterance of Mantras and the corresponding ritual actions that accompany them.
In this perspective, the Kālī- or Kālikā- krama is simply the rite through which
Kālī, her forms and associated deities, are worshipped. Similarly, ‘krama’ may

also denote the sequence of teachers. As such, it is the gurukrama, that is, the
lineage through which the teachings are transmitted. By extension, the krama is
also what is transmitted. In this sense, a ‘krama’ is the school or tradition in

general. Thus, the Kālīkrama is Kālī’s tradition, just as the Śrīkrama is the

Srīvidyā tradition, and Anuttaratrikakulakrama is Abhinava’s Trika school, as

well as what they teach. The krama is not only the entire teaching; it may also
be a particular teaching that is transmitted through it or other schools. The
Kālīkrama existed in this less developed form before it became consolidated as
an independent school with its own Tantras.
Finally, from an ontological perspective, the term may be applied in a
variety of ways to denote the sequence of metaphysical principles (tattvakrama),
world-orders (bhuvanakrama), energies (kalākrama) and the like. In a more

subtle perspective, the fabric of phenomenal existence is woven with the threads
of the sequences of space and time (deśa- and kāla- krama). The common

nomenclature implies that the sequence of the liturgy with its deities and the rest
is more or less implicitly related to parallel ontological processes. These may be
constituents of the inner equivalent of the liturgy – the pūjākrama, or the lineage
and its teachings – the gurukrama. The permeability and equivalence of ‘inner”
and ‘outer’, particular and universal, micro- and macrocosm, fundamental to all
forms of religion in India, is applied here to these identifications with outer
phenomenal processes, which may be internalized in various degrees and

modalities. The activities of the mind, senses, the vital breath and all else to do
with the psychophysical body are governed and sustained by the deities of the
'⁰ CMSS 7/202cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

391

Krama, as are outer objects. These are understood to be their fundamental

nature, as their energies or powers to perform their functions and act creatively
as processes or ‘sequencesʼ. In this perspective, we have essentially a form of
idealism built on the model of the passage of time and the dynamics of
perception.
Accordingly, the most fundamental and all-embracing process is that of
the one reality and ultimate nature (svabhāva) of all things, which is

consciousness. This is the Great Process — mahākrama – that is, the sequence of
emanation (sṛṣṭi) of phenomena from consciousness, their persistence (sthiti)
within it, their withdrawal (saṁhāra) back into it, and the Inexplicable

(anākhya) fourth condition that embraces all of them without being any of them.
These four or analogous sets of four are multiplied by the first three to make
twelve. The independent Krama Tantras teach how each one, consisting of an
assembly of Kālīs, is worshipped in its own right. The worship of these
assemblies (cakra) of Kālīs in this sequence came to be a standard model for the
worship of Kālīs in various forms. This is what we find, for example, in the case

of the worship of Guhyakālī, according to the Mahākālasaṁhitā, possibly
redacted in the Kathmandu Valley in the in the 16" century. Indeed, all the
numerous Kālīs there are generally worshipped in this format.
Collectively, the three cycles of emanation and the rest are the Cycle of
the Inexplicable – Anākhyacakra – and so is where they ultimately culminate
and from which they arise. That this perspective is the original one is confirmed
by the concluding statement relating to the last Kālī and so, by extension, to all

of them – namely, that the last Kālī, who consumes and includes them all, is ‘the
Fourth state, which is the skilful power (cāturya) to set in motion the wheel of
the rays of the architect (tvāṣṭra) of the three processes (of emanation,

persistence and withdrawal).”'™ This dynamic fundamental consciousness is
identified in the later sources and by Abhinava as Saṁviddevī – the Goddess of
Consciousness, an appellation hardly found in the Jayadrathayāmala. This is
surprising because, out of the many names for consciousness in the primary
sources, saṁvid is the standard one in the Jayadrathayāmala. t is also in the
philosophy of the Pratyabhijñā, and was Abhinava’s favourite. It literally means
‘knowing completely or togetherʼ. It is a common term in idealist Buddhist
sources, but generally not in non-Buddhist ones. In the Buddhist idealist context,

the term ‘knowing together’ is particularly appropriate. Idealist Buddhism — the
Yogācāra – maintains that the emptiness of pure consciousness is the one
reality. The world of perceivers and perception is the domain of thought
constructs. It is like a dream, in which we appear unknowing that we are
dreaming, and disappears when we wake up. Where it came from and where it
disappears, nobody can say. It existed, insofar as it is experienced, but it has no
ontological existence — no ‘Being’; it is ‘empty’. But for as long as it appears,
perceivers perceive their objects. The split between these two aspects of the
momentary stream of perception is both the result and necessary attendant factor
of the dream of existence, of which consciousness, as the stream of perception,
is the reality of both ‘known together’. But while the term for consciousness
may be the same, these Śaiva sources and the nondual philosophy that also
'' This is part of the description of Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī, according to the
Kramastotra by Erakanātha.

392
makes

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR
use of it consider the

world,

which

shines with

the Light of

consciousness, to be no less real than it is. Accordingly, the Jayadrathayāmala,

also making use of the common terminology developed centuries earlier in the
Upaniṣads and elsewhere, refers to these aspects of consciousness as the ‘eater’
(bhōktṛ) and the ‘eaten’ (bhogya). These terms denote the perceiver who is
engaged in experiencing the consequences of his Karma. In this view, the world
may be deceptive and binding, but it is not unreal.
Appendix A is a translation of chapter four of the fourth ṣatka,¹² called
kālīkramavidhi (ff. 57v61v5). It describes the circle of twelve Kālīs, with one in
the centre from which they emanate, and into which they dissolve away. They
are like thirteen suns. Again, the Twelve Kālīs are rays of the Sun, identified
with the thirteenth Kālī in the centre. From another point of view, the twelve
Kāḹīs are the one sun in twelve forms, changing every month. So there are two
suns. One is in the centre, and another in twelve forms around the
circumference. According to common belief in India, the sun in each of the
twelve months of the year is a different sun. Accordingly, there are twelve suns,
formed from the rays of the one sun from which they emanate, thereby marking
and generating time. The months, characterized by the signs of the zodiac and in
other ways, are, as Abhinava tells us, the rays of the Goddess in the domain of
objectivity (TĀ 4/146cd), and so the time the Twelve Kālīs measure out and

consume is that of the sun. Every three years, an extra month is added in order

to keep the solar and lunar calendars synchronized. This is the thirteenth sun,
from which the other twelve are said to be derived. In the JY, the centre is the
lamp of Kālī, that shineṣ illuming everything with its twelve rays, and so too
itself.

Analogously, the Seventeen Kālīs relates to the sixteen phases of the

Moon in a lunar month. The seventeenth is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Kālī, who is ‘the
pure digit of the Moon’ (TĀ 1/1) as the energy of the New Moon (amākalā).
Her Mantra is made up of seventeen syllables. Each represented by a Kaālī,
sixteen of them surround Kālasaṁkarṣinī in the middle, just as the twelve Kālīs
of the Sun surrounds the thirteenth, of which they are replicants. Accordingly,
the texts commonly refer to the Twelve Kālīs as a single unit, describing the
nature and activity of the assembly, and then refer to the ‘thirteenth’. The
Twelve and the Thirteenth together represent major polarities — the former
immanence and the latter transcendence. In this way, already in the early
sources, the Twelve took on an extensive identity of their own, paving the way
for Abhinava to eliminate the thirteenth in the centre.
Moreover, right from the start, they were associated with the dynamism
of perception, and the senses through which it operates. The senses are at the
periphery, and the sentient consciousness that illumines and absorbs them, in the
centre. The former is immanent and the latter transcendent. Here, as we often
find, the twelve are identified as the Kula of the deity, in this case the male
Lord. This is a very important association, somewhat cryptically and yet clearly
made in the following lines. It attests to the soundness of the interpretation of
the Kālīs as phaṣes in the cycle of perception that is central to Abhinava’s

'³ The fourth ṣaṟka is said to be especially concerned with the Kālīkrama, that is, the

Anākhyakrama. The preceding three ṣaṛkas are concerned with emanation, persistence
and destruction, respectively.

TANTRĀLOKA

393

exegesis. The twelve Kālīs that are the rays of the Sun of Consciousness are
here the five types of sensory objects and their five ‘abodes” – that is, the field
of the senses, along with the Root of Kula and Sound, which is the ‘resonance’
of sensory perception. So, we read in the Kālikulavidhi:
‘If the five rays (of the senses) within the Shining One (shine) within

the fivefold nature (of their objects), then the one who is the Five Abodes (of the

senses) transcends the five objects (artha). If the Wheel of Lakṣmī (i.e., Kālī)

unfolds within the world, which is the root Kula within the abode of the objects

of perception, then the Sound (of the supernal Sun) is well established. If the
supreme mass of rays present in the twelve rays were to be emitted and

differentiated properly, (the yogi) is then the Lord of Kula.’¹³

Whilst the texts are fairly uniform concerning the surrounding Twelve,
the characterization and identification of the centre varies, although it is clear
that all the variants are essentially the same. Broadly speaking, we observe two
views. As the one in the centre and the twelve around it are polarities, it makes

sense that we find that the Sun of Consciousness in the centre is male and the
periphery female. In the text we are examining, the Supreme Sun (paramārka)
in the centre is a male Sun called Ravi, Bhāskara or, less often, Sūrya. We shall
see that when we get to the DP, the Centre is directly identified with Śiva,
although the text continues, as here, to talk about a Kālī in the centre which is
more basic. Either way, the two are intimately related. The Sun in the centre is
grounded in Kālī, its solar energy (bhānavī), and is the source of the Sun of the
Twelve Kālīs in the circumference. The latter are the aggregate, the ‘family” –
Kula –- of its possessor — Kaula, which is the energy of the Sun – Kaulinī that
transcends it, even as it is its source. Together they are ‘Mahākaula, that is
located in Śiva, the Skyfarer. Free of thought constructs (7). The thirteenth in

the centre is the Sun of Consciousness (cidarka) by whose, will the twelve Suns
unfold. (3cd). In the centre, which is the Summit of all things, the goddess

shines within the inner and outer processes (krama) of her own consciousness.’
So, we read concerning the Centre – the thirteenth — and its unfolding into
twelve. Note how it is both the male Sun and the ultimate Kālī:
‘It is just the Sun, which is the expansion of the abode of the modalities

(of consciousness) (vṛtti), that unfolds. It is twelve, and is located in the twelve,

and it shines within (the reality) within the twelve. He is the leader of the Wheel
of the Kālikās, and has no desire for the mass (kula) of rays of Mantra. They

shine, radiant lights, by the division of the various rays. Their inner supreme
radiant energy (dīpti) shines, differentiating (in various forms). I will tell (you)
that process (krama) that has come down through the oral tradition. The
thirteenth unfolds inlaid with the unfolding rays (of consciousness).” !⁴

The text goes on to list the names of the Kālīs, with Mahābhairavakālī

as the thirteenth. In the DP, she is called, as she is by Abhinava,

Mahābhairavaghoracaṇnḍakālī. Here she is Karaṅkinī, the Skeleton Goddess,

'³ ṬY 4/4/26cd-29ab.
¹⁴ JY4/4/35-38ab

394

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

‘present in each of the divisions.'™ Her visualized form is formidable.

Extremely fierce, She is a voracious Bhairavī (see verses 55-69ab), also called
Tripurabhairavī (62). Herself skeletal, she is adorned with hundreds of skeletons
and ‘casts her eyes (in a frightening) squint’. In her fury, they shine as if
‘casting torrents of thousands of lightning flashes and burning coals.” (57ab) She
is also called Kaṅkāla Kālī – Skeleton Kālī. The Kālikā Kula – ‘familyʼ she
belongs to is accordingly also called the Kaṅkāla Kula (3ab) here. Similarly, in

the CMSS, it is said that this is the oral transmission of the Kālīkaṅkāla. In the
texts that follow, at this first level of development of the Kāli Krama, Kālī often

appears as Kṛśā – the Emaciated One or Kṛśodaṁī – Emaciated Belly. She is also

known at the earliest stage, where it is said, stressing her paradoxical nature, that

as such, thin and emaciated, she has assumed the ‘fullest mode of being’.¹ In
the DP, she is called Śuṣkā –- the Dried Out One, whose ‘belly is very thin’
(krṛśodarī).¹⁷
It is also called, as is the praxis, the Bhānavīkrama. Bhānavī is the
goddess of the sun (bhānu). This is the teaching or tradition of the Bhānavīkula,
also called Sūryakula in the CMSS (7/171-172). We find a reference to this

krama in a verse of unidentified origin quoted by Jayaratha. He does this to
make up for the absence of a specific reference to it by Abhinava, who certainly
knew all this. However, the Krama he had inherited no longer focused on this
aṣṣociation. Even so, he does not omit it entirely. Thus, he refers in the

introduction to his concise presentation of the Twelve Kālīs in the Tantrāloka to
their possible equation with the twelve signs of the zodiac, amongst others (TĀ
4/146cd). Even though he just mentions it in passing, it is very significant. Here,

it is all in all, as the Wheel of the Inexplicable (anākhyacakra), that is, of the

Twelve Kālīs.
She is also called Rāviṇī, Mahākālī in the centre, burning and pulsing
radiantly.¹⁴ She is the female counterpart of Ravi – the Sun. Her name can also
be derived from rāva – meaning ‘sound’, the English cognate is ‘roar’. As such,
it is said of her that ‘the assembly of fierce (deities) is frightened by the deep

sound (of her) HUṀKĀRA.” She flashes forth the Fire that consumes the

universe at the end of a cosmic age. Like the Vedic Fire, the resonance that
accompanies Kālī’s luminosity is the source of all Mantras.
This powerful solar symbolism may well seem strange. The dark
goddess Kālī is naturally associated with the night. Indeed, her Vedic
predecessor is Kālarātrī – the Dark Night – who is repeatedly identified with
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī in the Jayadrathayāmala. Accordingly, one would expect her to
have a lunar nature. Indeed, this is so. As Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, her seventeen syllable
Vidyā is more amenable to identification with the Moon, especially the inner
New Moon of the seventeenth digit. Here it is assimilated into the solar
symbolism (Kālī). She is Bhāskarī, the energy of the Sun, which is associated

'³ pratibhedagatā saikā devadevī karaṅkiṇī JY 4/4/69ab.

'⁶ JY 4/4/84-86ab.
' See Dyczkowski 2009 vol. 2 p. 210-211 for a translation of the visualization and a

drawing. See Appendix to Chapter Thirty for the visualized form of Kṛśodarī given in
the Kālīkulakramakramāṟcana.
'Ś YY 4/4/49cd-54.

TANTRĀLOKA

395

with the digit of the New Moon (amākalā), and possesses its vivifying nectar.¹⁹
Sometimes they are found both together, as happens in the Kramastotra.⁰ We
are told that the Thirteen Kālīs should be worshipped at the End of the Sixteen²¹
as the culmination of the lunar energy of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī.
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī is a major Kālī in the Jayadrathayāmala. The first ṣaṭka
declares that it is dedicated to her. In the later Krama initiated by Śivānanda, she

is the goddess of the Krama. Indeed, Abhinava must have known of the earlier
form of the Krama prior to Śivānanda, for he mentions Kṛṣodarī once, in a

citation he draws from the Mādhavakula.² Iīn Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī’s Vidyā, she is

addressed generically as Mahā-caṇḍayogeśvarī – the Great and Fierce Mistress
of Yoga.² Here and in the CMSS, the Kālī in the centre is never called

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. Karaṅkiṇī is the Kālī in the centre of the Twelve Kālīs. She is
also called Rāviṇī. The thirteenth Kālī listed with the names of the Kālīs is
called Mahābhairavakālikā.²⁴ But whatever the name, we understand from
internal references that her Vidyā is that of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī.
Although not common, we do find references elsewhere in the
Jayadrathayāmala concerning these Kālīs in relation to Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. While

the link to her is not represented often, she is a pervasive presence throughout
the Jayadrathayāmala, especially in the first ṣaṭka. We find another example of
her association with the Kālīs in the following passage, drawn from the third
ṣaṭka. Here as elsewhere, her luminosity and that of her cakra is strongly
emphasized, and so, as a result, her associations with the Moon and Fire, as well

as the Sun.

‘The wheel (cakra) of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī shines with sixteen moons. It is

energized by the thirteen suns, and has the three fires. Shining, it is the

foundation of the shining (of all these lights). Within that, she is who is engaged
in the process of abandoning and consuming (all things) (even as she) is
mounted on the procession (krama) of Sthitikālī (the Kālī of Persistence, that)

unfolds within the abode of emanation.

(When the Wheel) with this form (and essential nature) has descended

(into the world), then that energy (kalā) becomes manifest. Very stable (and
firm), it abides within the abode of fright, laughter, fear, touch, anger and grief.
It is manifest and very stable within (the reality which is immanent) with bliss
(sānanda) and (transcendent) beyond it (nirānanda).

O greatly fortunate one! When that supreme energy (kalā) manifests, by
virtue of which she knows what she knows, and the means by which she knows,

⁹ bhāskarīrūpasaṅyuktā hy amā cāmṛtasaṁyutā |/ Y 2/25/37cd

¹⁰ See below, the description of the twelfth Kāī.
²¹ DP 5/48cd-49.

² FY 4/201194-195, quoted in TĀ 29/75cd-77. This chapter is called Tantrācāranirmaya.

It has been translated in an Appendix to Chapter Twenty-nine.
²³ See Appendix to Chapter Thirty. Abhinava calls her Canḍayogeśvarī in chapter eight
of his Tantroccaya. See passage quoted here at the beginning of the introduction to the
Appendices.

²⁴"In the Kramastotra, both by Erakanātha and Abhinava (see below, Appendices E and
F), she is called Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālī. Clearly, ‘ghoracaṇḍa’ ‘terrible and

fierce’ are adjectives.

396

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

is her body. If (the adept) is properly mounted there (on that plane), then that

energy becomes manifest. Just as the sprout of birth arises (as the twelve Kālīs),

it dissolves away (into the centre). Wherever he goes, if he is mounted on that,
then (that) energy manifests. When the (Goddess of) Light (bhāsā), who
destroys the Kula of the Sun (of the twelve Kālīs), is within the Sun, which is

the Kula of (the energies of) Light (Bhāsākula), then that energy manifests
(within it) as a burning fire.
If the one who consumes the Fire of Time is within the foundation of

the Fire of Time, he too, the Lord of the Heroes, swallows (all things,) and then

that energy manifests. If (he is present) in the abode of the Moon that has flowed
forth from the Thousand Phonemes, then that energy manifests within the
wonderfully varied Skeleton of Time. If the one who is called Birth (jātināmā)
(?), who destroys all things, and brings the Kula to an end, is well established in
that supreme womb, then that energy manifests. In the same way, he whose
universe arises and falls away (while) he is content and located within the Kula

(of the Kālīs), (then) that energy, which is his, manifests.’ ³

² kālasaṁkarṣaṇīcakre ṣoḍaśenduvirājite [gh?: ṣoḍaśaśaṁṅdu-] |/42 1

trayodaśārkasandīpte [g: -pto] vahnitrayasamanvite [gh: -teḥ] 1
bhāsure [gh: tā-] bhāsurādhāre [all except g: -dhāro] tyāgagrāsakramākulaḥ [g: yāga-

]|1 43 I|

sthitikālikramārūḍhaḥ [all MSs: -ḍho] sṛṣṭidhāmni [k: vṛṣṭidhāmni; gh: -dhāsni]

vijṟṁbhate |

avatīrṇas tathā [all MSs except gh: avatīṁrṇa-] rūpas tadā vyajyati sā kalā || 44 |
219a gh) trāsahāsabhayasparśakrodhaśokagṛhāntare |
sānande ‘tha [g: va] nirānande vyaktas tiṣṭhati suṣthiraḥ [g: suṣṭhiraḥ] l| 45 ||

yadā tadā [k: sadā] mahābhāge vyajyate sā parā kalā |

yato jānāti yad vetti yena jānāti tadvapuḥ [g: yadva-] || 46 I|
286a g) tatrārūḍho yadā samyak tadā vyajyati sā kalā |

janmāṅkurasamutthānaṁ [kh gh: janmāṁkula-; g: -na] yāto [gh: yato] jātaṁ [k: jānta]
pralīyate | 47 II
yatra yāti [k: patra yānti, g: yātra jāi] ca tadrūḍho yadā vyajyet tadā kalā |
227b) yadā (> tadā) bhāsākule [gh: ?] bhānau bhāsā bhānukulāntakaḥ [g: sānu-] (> –
ka) !¹ 48 II

jvalajjvalanasaṁsthityā [kh: -jvālana; g: -jvalana] tadā vyajyati sā kalā |
yadā kālānalādhāre [k: -narā-] kālavahniprabhakṣakaḥ || 49 |

5o 'pi [g: sāpi] grasati vīrendras tadā vyajyati sā kalā |

184b kh) yadā candrakulāvāse [kh gh: caṇḍakulā-; g: ca kuṇḍalā-] sahasrārṇavisarpite

[gh: -taiḹ | 5O II
vicitrakālakaṁkāle [k: -la] tadā vyajyati ṣā kalā |

yadā sarvakṣayaṁkaro jãtinãma kulāntakr̥ | 51 1ḷ

tadgarbhaparame rūḍhas tadā vyajyati ṣā kalā |
evam eva jagad yasya kṣayam eti hy udeti [g h: hyadeti] ca l| 52 ||
so nivṛtaḥ [k: nivṛtā; kh: -tto; gh: tivr̥ṇtā] kulāntastho tasya [k: nasya; g: ta *] vyajyati

sā̃ kalā |
JY 3/57/42cd-453ab

This passage is drawn from a chapter called devīsvarūpanirīūpaṇavidhiḥ –- ‘the
manner of describing the goddess's essential nature’. The colophon reads:

TANTRĀLOKA

397

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī is the Kālī related to the Trika goddesses in the
syncretistic Trika Tantra, the Devyāyāmala. Although unfortunately lost, we
know that this must have been so, as Abhinava quotes a passage from there
describing Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī.⁰ Conversely, in the Krama sources, she is the
Supreme Goddess (Parā Devī).”⁷ Here we are examining the teachings of the
Bhānavīkula. The developments we witness, that we will examine further ahead

as we progress through from the Mādhavakula to the CMSS and then the DP,
are taking place within that tradition. As the name of this Kula itself suggests,
right from the very earliest Krama teachings, central to all three is the Supreme
Sun, which is one’s own consciousness. According to the JY, the Kālī in the
centre is the Summit, who ‘shines with the mass of rays (of the light of the Sun).

She who is within that is the Krama, divided into inner and outer.’” (JY 4/4/3)
The inner Krama is that of the senses and mind (cf. ibid. 26cd-29ab). The outer

is that of the worldly temporal order. As the Sun of Consciousness, it is the
eternal Lamp of Kālī that shines illumining all things (6cd-9ab). Self-luminous,
it does not require another lamp to illumine it. This Sun ‘vomits and devours’,
creating and destroying in consonance with the rhythm of perception.
In all these accounts, we are presented with a range of expressions of
polarities that work in consonance, emerge from one another and consume each
other. Accordingly, the inner Sun is consonant with the outer physical sun. ‘The
one who illumines the Sun (ravi) has emerged from the (physical) sun (sūrya).
Ravī is the inner Sun that illumines all the universe.’ (12) The universe the Sun
illumines consists of the Twelve Kālīs. As such it is the thirteenth. It is ‘the
transcendental Sun of all worldly experience (bhoga) by which Kulākula (Śakti
and Śiva) is enveloped, impelled and fashioned. It is the Fourth State of
awakened consciousness (13cd-15ab). The Supreme Sun is one’s own
consciousness, encompassed by the Wheel of Light – its Twelve Rays that, ever
emergent from the Centre, destroy time, absorbing it into the Eternal Light of
the centre. The elevated Kaula Yogi internalizes in this way his outer Mantra,
and externalizes the inner mantra of realised consciousness, and so achieves
oneness. This too is a paradox — that of stillness and the pulse (parispanda)
within the pulse of the bliss of consciousness, experienced like an orgasm in the
iti bhairavasrotasi [g: nāsti; gh: bhaira * srotasi] vidyāpīthe [g: nāsti] śiracchede [g:
nāsṣti] jayadrathayāmale mahātantre [g: nāsti] caturviṁśatisāhasre [g: nāsti]

trtīyaṣaṭke devīṣvarāpanirāpaṇavidhir nāma paṭalaḥ [kh: + 1 57 I] I

²⁶ Note that in the great majority of cases in the printed edition of the Tantrāloka, the
name is spelled Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. This is the spelling in the Mahānayaprakāśa by
Śitikaṇṭha (commentary on verse 6). However, in the manuscripts of the JY, the spelling
is Kālasaṁkarṣanī, as it is in the Mahānayaprakāśa of Arṇasiṁha (verse 210). We also
find this spelling occasionally in some manuscripts of the Tantrāloka. Both spellings are
grammatically correct. We find that spellings of some proper names may be inconsistent

in this way. Another example is a text Abhinava cites that he himself spells in two ways
– Yogasaṅcara and Yogasaṁcāra. In that case, the variant may due to metrical
considerations. Although the spelling Kālasaṁkarṣanī is common in the original
sources, the spelling in the Tantrāloka and commentary has been standardized to
Kālasaṁkarṣinī, as we find in the printed edition.

²⁷ MNP Śitikaṇṭha commentary verse six: parā devī kālasaṁkarṣiṇī.
²⁸ TY 4/4/15cd.

398

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

Bulb of the genital centre (15cd-18ab). In this subtle way, the teaching is that
sexual intercourse, practiced whilst experiencing the dawning of the Sun of
one’s own consciousness and its rays as the activities of the senses, leads to

enlightenment. Thus,

‘Union (saṁyoga) can churn (and destroy the very) root of (this) terrible

transmigratory existence, having taken up the Sky in the centre of the Self and
the Self in the middle of the Sky. By uniting the Sky and Self once, nothing
(else) remains.’ (21-22)

In this way, the Yogi is then the Lord of Kula, a liberated Skyfarer
(khecara), his nature the Sky. As such he is the ‘perceiver of perception’.
Undivided, entering there into the mass (kula) of rays, he is then endowed with
(the state of a) Skyfarer, and the perceiver of perception. Within the inside of
perception, the object of perception perceived shines. The perceiver, who is
neither perception nor its absence (drágādṛdga vā?) is then the Lord of the mass
of rays (raśmikula)³. (29cd-32) Thus, ‘Knowledge, the object of knowledge and

the knower, and the abode which is like the womb of cognition (jñapti) – (it all)

dissolves away in the Supreme Abode (which is the ultimate reality) Devoid of
Ego (nirahaṁkāra).’ (18cd-19ab) Clearly, as we can see from these references,
the idealism of the Krama is well established right from the start. Accordingly,

we are justified in deciphering the many enigmatic statements, which are the

staple of these teachings, in this sense. Indeed, this is what Abhinava has done
in his presentation of the Twelve Kālīs, and so too Jayaratha.

The worship of Karaṅkinī, the thirteenth Kālī, along with the others is

very interesting. We have recovered a rite of initiation here, and worship at the

end of chapter five of the DP.

The Kaula offerings listed here (in the

Mādhavakula) even include human flesh (69cd). An interesting feature of the
animal sacrifice described here (69cd-73ab) is that the Guru who is making the

offering on the behalf of his disciples should vomit. In this way, he replicates
the manner the Goddess Vāmā is said to emit the universe. Another passage in
the Mādhavakula discusses the offerings at length. This has been put in the
Appendix to Chapter Twelve. There Abhinava focus on one of his favourite
themes concerning Kaula practice, which also frequently recurs in the sources,
namely, the overcoming of inhibition or doubts (śaṅikā) with regards to their use.
According to Abhinava, this entails the Śāktopāya practice of purification of
thought (vikalpasaṁskāra). Free of conceptualization, the officiant enters into
the Śtmbhava state in which, with these barriers removed, he identifies with the
deity — Bhairava. Finally, we note that, as one would expect, initiation takes
place by a process of possession (āveśa). This can be immediate for the more
advanced disciple, or gradual for one who is less so. The first takes place solely
by the power of the teacherʼs intense gaze. The latter by the same gaze, but with
the support of fire offerings and mantra.
It is a notable fact that Abhinava has chosen to omit the rites associated
with these Kālīs, although the Ādiyāga he presents as the core of the Kaula ritual

of Chapter Twenty-nine is drawn from the Mādhavakula.⁹ One wonders why

⁹ We have noted that there is an allusion to sexual practice here. We shall see that the
worship and experience of the Kālīs as phases of the cognitive cycle is explicitly related

TANTRĀLOKA

399

this is so. It cannot be part of a general policy of interiorization of ritual;
Abhinava takes a great deal of time to describe Trika rites. Nor can it be that the
Krama rites were too strongly antinomian with respect to common Vedic norms.
Abhinava makes it a point at every turn to establish that these are not absolute
norms. Anyway, in Chapter Twenty-nine he lifts passages from the
Mādhavakula and the DP, where such offerings are prescribed and listed. Thus,
the reason can only be that the Krama itself tended towards internalizing its own
rites, and it was in this form that Abhinava received the teaching. This was but
natural. The deity embodies dynamic cognitive consciousness engaged in
perception. Accordingly, close attention is given to cognitive yoga and its planes
of experience, and Abhinava places it squarely in the domain of the empowered
means, which is the category of practice centred in perception (‘the power of
knowledge’). Abhinava explains this as a process of empowerment and
purification of thought constructs that reduces them to the pure nondiscursive
consciousness (nirvikalpa) of Deity, with which the practitioner is thereby
identified. This is how Abhinava understands the Goddess of Consciousness
devours and consumes everything into emptiness.
Jayaratha distinguishes between the pūjākrama, i.e ,
ritual worship of
the Kālīs, and the saṁvitkrama, their identity as phases in the dynamism of
cognitive consciousness. A liturgy for the worship of the components of the
most developed form of the Krama exists in two Nepalese manuscripts. It is
called Kālikākulapañcakramakramārcana. The colophons tell us that it was the
work of Vimalaprabodha, who was an ascetic renunciate and teacher
(parivrājakācārya).⁰ We know from colophons that he lived in the time of
to sex and the pleasure of the ingestion of meat and the inebriation of wine, in one of the
three Mahānayaprakāśas (see below, the last Appendix).

³ There are two manuscripts of the kālikākulapañcakramakramārcana: MS K: ṄGMPP
Reel no.: A 148/10 Folios: 31 paper. Newari scriptMS Kh: NGMPP A 158/1 NA MS no.

1-

169

Folios:

30

paper,

śrīparamahaṁsaparivrājakācārya

Newari

script.

kālikākulapañcakrama-kramārcanaṁ samāptam ||

The

colophon

reads:

iri

śrivimalaprabodhapādaviracīta

Vimalaprabodha owned a copy of the DP. This is stated at the end of two of the

paramahaṁsaparivrājakaṣaḍanvayācāryaśrī- vimalaprabodhapādānām idam iti]

The six traditions (sadanvaya) is a clssification of Kaula schools based on their
major deities. It did not develop before the 12th century. The earliest dated manuscript
of this Kramārcana belongs to the 12* century. The main deity is Guhyakālī. We would
expect it to be Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, whom the Kālīkrama taught in Kashmiri sources
universally acknowledges as the supreme form of Kālī. Guhyakālī is the principal form

of Kālī of a later development of the Kālīkrama that is popular amongst Newar initiates.
Although many early forms of Kālī are extensively worshipped by the Newars, judging

by the manuscript evidence and what we know of contemporary practice, this particular
form of the Kālīkrama is not well known in the Kathmandu Valley. Even so, all the

manuscripts of early Kālīkrama tracts along with the JY have been recovered in the
Kathmandu Valley, testifying to its early presence in the Valley. It is unlikely that this

Kramārcana as it stands was compiled in Kashmir. There would be little need there to
import a Newar goddess into a Kashmiri liturgy. It is much more likely that its final
form was redacted in Nepal or nearby, where the worship of Guhyakālī was popular.
Thuṣ, although the Krama worshipped in this Kramārcana essentially corresponds to the
one expounded in an internalized form in the Kashmiri Mahānaya sources, it is in all

400

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

Arimalla, that is, in the 11 century, and was a priest at the well-known Paśupati
temple. A number of manuscripts of Kālikrama Tantras bear his name in the
colophons, stating that they belonged to him. Clearly, he was deeply immersed
in these teachings. Arṇasimha refers to a certain Prabodhanātha as the disciple
of Cakrabhānu (MNP A 163). However, it is difficult to identify the two, as
there is a discrepancy of some one hundred years between them. Moreover, if
they are the same, he would be an exception. Śivānanda and the teachers in his
lineage may not have engaged in ritual. This may seem strange at first sight. The
fully developed Krama system as we find it in the three Mahānayaprakāśas,
exemplified by the one by Arṇasiṁha in Appendix H, very much appears to be
interiorization of ritual. Indeed, most of the constitutive elements — cakras,

mudrās, siddhas and the like – are clearly prefigured at the scriptural level,
where rituals are certainly performed. It is possible that the fully developed form
at least was entirely ideal right from the start. However, the existence of
Vimalaprabodha’s liturgy suggests that this was not so. Moreover, I have been
told, a liturgical rite is performed to a set of thirteen Kālīs in temples in Kerala,
that the priests refer to as the Pañcavāha. It would be very interesting to examine
its contents. Research is underway. Until we have a detailed survey of its
contents, it is not possible to say how closely it adheres to that of the
Mahānayaprakāśas. So we will leave the matter as an open question.
Chapter Four of the Mādhavakula, the Fourth ṣaṭka of the

Jayadrathayāmala,

Called the Kāḹlīkramavidhipaṭala,³¹ Which Teaches

the Initiation in Front of the maṇḍala of the Thirteen Kālīs.

67b)

*evaṁ śrutvā bhagavatī haravaktrāmbujādbhutam |

prāha prasannagaṁbhīraṁ punar eva śivaṁ vacam [k, g: vaca; kh: vacaḥ] |I 1 II
śrīdevyuvāca
tṛptāsmi bhagavan samyag jñātaṁ tat paramaṁ padam |
mayā tava prasādena sarveśvara maheśvara || 2 ||
adhunā śrotum icchāmi kaṁkālākhyaṁ kulārṇavam [k: -va] |
yatra sā kālikā devī cidakkocchā (>cidarkkecchā) vijṛṁbhate || 3 | j
81b g) Śśekharādhasthitā [k: -rā, kh: se-] (śekharordhva-) yā sā
raśmipuṁjavirājitā |
etasmin yā kramaṁ bāhyābhyantarabhedataḥ || 4 ||
etad icchāmi bhagavan jñātuṁ suravarārcitam ḷ
68a) evam ākarṇya devendraḥ [g: devendro] prāśya paṅcāmṛtaṁ kulam || 5 ||
cidarkaṁ [kh: vidakāṁ ] śekharīkṛtya uvāca paramaṁ mahat |

probability an adaptation of a Kashmiri liturgy, in accord with Newar preferences. If so,
Vimalaprabodha may have been a Newar or a Kashmiri immigrant into the Kathmandu
Valley.
³¹ YY ṣaṭka 4 MSs K: 67b - 73a and G: 81a - 87a.

³² Manuscripts do not distinguish between the letter ‘b’ and ‘’. I silently read b for v

where required. Often the manuscripts, depending on the scribe, read ausvāra for ‘mʼ or
‘n’. This too I silently standardise.

³³ MS g: unclear up to here.

TANTRĀLOKA

401

Once the Goddess had heard in this way the astonishing (teaching that

had come forth) from Hara’s lotus like mouth, she uttered again a word that is

clear, profound and auspicious. (1)
The venerable Goddess

said:

O Lord! Lord of AIl! Maheśvara! I am satisfied, (now) I have known
that supreme plane by your grace. Now I wish to hear the ocean of Kula called

Kaṁkāla (the Skeleton), where that goddess Kālikā,³⁴ the will of the Sun of

Consciousness (cidarka), unfolds. She who is above on (its) Summit, and shines
with the mass of rays (of the light of the Sun), is she who, within that, is the

Krama, divided into inner and outer. O Lord, I wish to know that, worshipped as
it is by the most excellent gods.
Once the King of the gods had heard this and consumed the Kaula
sacrificial substance (kula) consisting of the Five Jewels, and having placed
the supreme and great Sun of Consciousness on the Peak (of his head), spoke.

(2-6ab)

śrībhairava uvāca
Śrnṇuṣva kathayiṣyāmi rahasyam idam uttamaṁ [g: * * *;(?) II 6 |I
pusṣṭhibhūtaṁ [k, kh: mu-; g: (?)] mahākaulaṁ khecare ‘vasthitaṁ bhavet [k:
haret kh, g: ha * 1] 1

avikalpam asaṁdigdhaṁ prapūrṇam ubhayojjitaṁ [kh, g: -mujhitaṁ] |I 7 |I

cidarkkaṁ śekharībhūtaṁ [g: - * *(?)] tasyāpi pratidīpikā |
kālikā [g: (?)] sā [g: (?)] pradīpā [g: (?)] ca [g: (?)] sadā kālipradīpikā |I 8 II
tatrāntare tatra gatā tantre ‘smin tantravat [k,kh, g: tatra-] sadā |

The Sun of Consciousness
The venerable Bhairava said:

Listen. I will tell (you) this most excellent secret, which is prosperity,

namely, Mahākaula, that is located in (Śiva,) the Skyfarer. Free of thought
constructs and doubt, completely full (and perfect), devoid of both (inner and
outer), (it is the) Sun of Consciousness, which is the Summit, and Kālikā, who is

the illumining light of that also; she who is the Lamp, the eternal Lamp of Kālī.
She is perpetually present there within it, like the Tantra within this Tantra.
(6cd-9ab)

sa ravir bhāsurādhāras tadādhārā [g: (?)] hi [g: (?)] kālikā I 9 ||

³⁴ This Kaālī’ss link to the Ocean of Kula is stated by referring to her in this line of the
Kālīkrama as Kaṁkālakālī (Skeleton Kālī). Here she is called Karaṅkinī, (Skeleton) and
Rāviṉṇī (Roaring One). Other names are Kṛśā (Emaciated), Kṛśodarī (Emaciated
Stomach) and Suśkā (Dried Out).

³⁹ The Five Jewels are feces, urine, spittle, menstrual blood and sperm. Kubjikā in her
aged, Kālī-like form is also said to eat these five Kaula substances.

402

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

saḍāre [g: ṣa * *(?)] vipulādhāraḥ [g: (?)] sodaśoddyotasannibhā [g: * * *(?)
dyota] |
sphurad vamanasaṁgrāsarāvikī sṛṣṭikārikā || 10 |l
sa ravir devatākāraḥ [g: ṣa ravi * * * * *(?)] ṟavir eva [g: (?)] tadākṛtiḥ [g:

(2)II

That is the Sun, which has as (its) foundation the Shining One, the
foundation of which is Kālikā. The extensive foundation within (the Wheel of)

six spokes¹ that is like (the Goddess of) Sixteen Lights who, flashing forth,

brings about the emanation of the Sun that vomits and devours.⁷ That Sun³⁸ is
the form of the deity. The Sun itself is its (physical) form. (I lab)

ravi (>raviḥ) pradīpako [g: (?)] loke [g: (?)] sūryamadhyāt [kh, g: (?)]

samutthitaḥ [kh: (?)]|I 1 T I

ravirantargato bhānur bhāmayaṁty (CMSS > bhāsayaty) akhilaṁ jagat | [kh:

(2)I

bhānavī kaulinī yā sā tatpuṁjabharitaṁ [g: puṁja * * *(?)] jagat [g: (?)] |I 12 I|
tatrotpannā [g:
(?)] mahāmantrā [g: *(?)-] bhairavāṣṭāṣṭayonayaḥ |
82a g) na prakāśena cākāśe nobhayor nobhayojjhite || 13 |I
sarvāvaraṇanirmukte sarvabhogātibhāskaraḥ |
68b) āvṛtaṁ prāvṛtaṁ yena racitaṁ ca kulākulam || 14 ||
sa raviḥ sũryaturyãṁte bhrãjate raudraḍāmare |
The Sun (ravi) (of the Twelve Kālis) that is the illumining Light in the
world has emerged from the middle of the Sun (sūrya) (in the centre). Within
the Sun (of the Twelve Kālīs) (ravi) is the Sun (bhānu), that illumines all the

universe. The universe is filled with the network (of the rays of energy that
emanate from) her, she who is Bhānavī Kaulinī (the Kaulinī of the Sun in the
centre). The great mantras that have arisen there are the wombs (yoni) of the

eight times eight Bhairavas.³⁹ (I 1cd-13ab)

(The transcendental) Sun (bhāskara) beyond all worldly experience

(bhoga), by which Kulākula is enveloped, impelled and fashioned, does not
(shine) by means of the Light in the Sky. Free of all (obscuring) coverings, (that
Light) is not that of either, and (yet) is not devoid of either. That is the Sun
(ravi) that shines within the Raudraḍāmara, within the Sun, that is the Fourth
State. (13cd-15ab)

svasaṁvit [kh: *(?)saṁvit] paramāditya (> -tyo) nityoditamarīcibhiḥ || 15 ||

³⁶ Assuming the symbolism has persisted up to Abhinava, we can understand

ṣaḍāracakra to be the hexagon that represents the union of male and female organs. IfI
have understood correctly, the text is saying that the cycle of the assembly of Kaālīs
operates in the course of this union. Certainly, later sources attest to this practice.

³⁷ Perhaps the text is alluding here to the seventeen syllable Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, of

which the seventeenth syllable, emanated by the first sixteen, is the source of the Śun of
the Kālīs.

³⁸ The Sun with its twelve rays is Kālī in her thirteen forms. Even so, the word for ‘Sun’
is masculine.
³⁹ These two verses are reproduced CMSS 7/166-167. See below for an edition and
translation of the whole passage.

TANTRĀLOKA

403

bhacakraṁ bhãsitaṁ yena sa vai kālaharo(?) [k: -naro, kh, g: -jaro] bhavet |

vāhyam [g: vādya-] ābhyaṁtaraṁ kṛtvā maṁtraṁ cābhyaṁtaraṁ bahiḥ || 16 ||
advaita [kh: (?)] saṁtā [kh: (?)] (> advaitasthita-) maṁtrajño [kh: (?)] maṁtrī
maṁtrodayaṁ labhet |
viviktārthaparisyaṁdanaṁdanodyānakaṁdarāt || 17 ||
prāpyate paramānandaṁ nispaṁdam ubhayojjhitam |
It is one’s own consciousness (svasaṁwid), the Supreme Sun. The
Wheel of Light (bhacakra) has been illumined with (its) ever-emergent rays, by
which Time is removed. Having internalized the outer and externalized the inner
Mantra, the reciter of Mantra, who knows Mantra and is established in

nonduality, attains the dawning of Mantra. He obtains the supreme bliss, that is
motionless (nispanda) and devoid of both. (It arises) out of the blissful garden of
the Bulb (in the genital centre), that oozes the (transcendental) reality that is

separate (from the universe of manifestation). (15cd-18ab)

jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ tathā jñātā jñaptigarbhānibhālayaṁ (> -garbha-) [k: tālayaṁ,
,

l 18 1|

g:

bhālaya]

layaṁ yāti pare dhāmni nirahaṁkāradharmiṇi |
cidānaṁdaparispaṁdagarbhasthaspaṁdarũpayã || 19 l|
vyāptā (.> vyāptyā) paramayā bhāti ṣaḍadhvāvaraṇāṁtige (> -varaṇāntage) |
satvasatvāṁtarāma tyāgālamve bhave nave || 20 ||
Knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower, and the abode
which is like the womb of cognition (jñapti) – (it all) dissolves away in the

Supreme Abode (which is the ultimate reality) Devoid of Ego (nirahaṁkāra). It

shines in the form of the pulse (parispanda) within the womb of the intense
pulsation of the bliss of consciousness as the supreme (state of) pervasion within
that which is at the extremity of (or ‘within’) the enclosure of the Six Paths, in
between Being and Nonbeing, within phenomenal existence (consisting of)

abandonment, and taking the support (of things).⁴⁰ (18cd-20)

saṁyogo ghorasaṁsāramūlanirmathanakṣamaḥ |

ātmamadhye kham ādāya ātmā caiva (> ātmānaṁ ca) khamadhyataḥ || 21 I|

khātmanor ekadhā yogā (> yogād) na kiṅṁcid avaśiṣyate |
antastejo vahistejā [kh: -tejaḥ; g: -tejo] sarvābhāso nirāmayaḥ || 22 ||

58a kh) sāmayaṁ kāyagahanaṁ madhyamaṁ karparaṁ tyajet |

Union (saṁyoga) can churn (and destroy the very) root of (this) terrible
transmigratory existence, having taken up the Sky in the centre of the Self and
the Self in the middle of the Sky.⁴¹ By uniting the Sky and the Self (just) once,
nothing (else) remains. The inner radiant energy (tejas) and the outer one, the
light of all things, devoid of imperfection, should abandon the middle bowl
(karpara) (?), which is the abyss of the diseased (sāmaya) body. (21-23ab)

⁴“⁰ The MSs read satvasatvāṁṅtarāma tyāgālamve bhave nave. This makes no sense. 1
have very tentatively emended to satvāsatvāntare nāma tyāgālambe bhave ca vai |

⁴! In other words, the Void in the Self and the Self in the Void.

404

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

69a) 82b g) khacandracaṁdrikā yena (> tena) [g: (?)] ciccakre carccitā ciram |l

23 I|

mokṣalakṣmyā spandanānte [k, g: spadaṁnaṁte; kh: spandanante] kṛtaṁ
ātmānam ātmanā |
candreśaścandradhāmniṣṭhas tathā [k: tatpas kh: tastha; g: -sthasta]

tatkālikojjhitaḥ [kh: statkālikojhitaḥ; g: sthastatkālikojhitaḥ] || 24 ||
kālikāṅṁtakulāśakto niḥkalo * vijrṁbhate [kh, g: vijṛbhate] |

śubhā [k: śrutau; kh: śubhau; g: subhau] suvigatā bhāti tadbhātmā pūrayej

jagat I 25 II
śucir agniprabhāsātmā tadā kālikuleśvaraḥ |
The moonlight

of the Moon

of the

Sky

(of consciousness)

is

contemplated by that in the Wheel of Consciousness for a long time. The Self is
fashioned by the Self and by the Lakṣmī of liberation within (that) pulsing
(consciousness) (?). The Lord of the Moon who is located within the abode of
the Moon is devoid in that way of that Kālikā. Conjoined to the Kula within
Kālikā, he unfolds undifferentiated (niṣkala). Auspicious, and well dispersed,
she shines. (Her) nature its Light, (she) fills the universe. Then the radiant Lord
of the Kālīkula is the light of Fire. (23cd-26ab)
The Lord of Kula, the Sun with twelve rays
yadā paṁcātmake paṁca raśmayo bhāsurāntarāḥ [k:- narā, kh, g: -rā] || 26 ||
bhavanti paṁcadhāmātmas tadā paṁcārthapāragaḥ |
yadā loke mūlakule lakṣyamāneṣu sadmani || 27 ||
lakṣmicakraṁ vikāśitvaṁ tadā rāvaḥ susaṁsthitaḥ [k, kh, g: rāvasthitaḥ] |
yadā dvādaśarāśiṣṭho raśmipuṁja (> puñjaḥ) paro vamet (k, kh, g: dvamet) ll

28 I|

tāni [kh: (?)] kālayate [kh: (?)] samyak [kh: (?)] tadā kulapatir bhavet |
If the five rays (of the senses) within the Shining One (shine) within the

five-fold nature (of their objects), then the one who is the Five Abodes (of the

senses) transcends the five objects (artha).² If the Wheel of Lakṣmī (i.e. Kālī)

unfolds within the world which is the root Kula within the abode the objects of

perception, then the Sound (of the supernal Sun) (rāva) is well established. If

the supreme mass of rays present in the twelve rays were to be emitted and
differentiated properly, (the yogi) is then the Lord of Kula. (26cd-29ab)
bhavabhāvavinirmukto [kh: -mukta; g: -mu *(?)] bhavabhāvāntaraśmibhuk || 29

II

mayā vipāṭalavyagras tadā kulapatir bhavet [g: patibhavet] |

citkhecaratas tv asthaḥ khātmā [kh: (?)] khakham akhaṁḍitaḥ [kh: (?)] || 30 ||

tatra raśmikulākrāmī tadā khecarabhāg [k: ce * ra, kh: ce * (?); g: cera] bhavet

|

“² The twelve Kālīs that are the rays of the Sun of Consciousness are here, it seems, with
the five types of sensory objects and their five ‘abodesʼ, that is, the field of the senses
along with the Root of Kula and Sound, which is the ‘resonance’ of sensory perception.

TANTRĀLOKA

405

drgadaśīṁ (> -dṛgdarśī) dṛgantarānto (k, kh, g: dṛganartānto) dṛśyadṛṣṭo

virājate || 31 ||

na dṛdgādṛdga vā draṣṭā tadā raśmikuleśvaraḥ |
Free of phenomenal fettered existence, enjoying the inner rays of
phenomenal fettered existence,⁴³ (the yogi) is then the Lord of Kula. Established
as a Skyfarer, his nature the Sky, the Sky of the sky. Undivided, entering there
into the mass (kula) of rays, he is then endowed with (the state of a) Skyfarer,

and the perceiver of perception. Within the inside of perception, the object of
perception perceived, shines. The perceiver, who is neither perception nor its
absence (dṛádgādṛdga vā ?) is then the Lord of the mass of rays (rasśmikula).

(29cd-32ab)

69b) 83a g) abhogabhogasaṁbhogī bhogabhogāgraguhyeśaḥ [g: bhogaṁ-] || 32

I

bhogapiṁḍāṁtako piṁḍī tathā kālikramāgraṇī |

subhāsā lāsate bhāsyaṁ bhāsyaṁ bhāsati tadgatam [g: tada* taṁ] || 33 ||

yasya bhāsyaṁ navābhāsā raśminātho hy asau smṛtaḥ |[kh: (?)]
maṁdiraṁ [kh: (?)] maṁdire līno maṁdiro maṁdirāṁtagaḥ || 34 ||

(The Siddha who is the Lord of Kula) experiences (both) worldly

experience and its absence. He is the Lord, the secret (reality) which is the

foremost experience of worldly experience. Embodied, he brings about the end

of the body of worldly experience, and in that way is foremost in the Kālīkrama.
(The goddess, who is) beautiful light, dances (the dance of) the object of
illumination and illumines the object of illumination present within it. He whose
object of illumination is the Nine Lights* is said to be He who is the Lord of the

Rays. The temple (of the Siddha’s identity) is merged within the temple (of the
goddessʼs identity), and (so) the temple is within the temple. (32cd-34)

The Thirteen Kāḹīs of the Supreme Sun
58b kh) vṛttidhāmavikāsātmā ravir eva vijrmbhate |
dvādaśātmā dvādaśāstho [kh:

bhāsakaḥ || 35 I|

-śastho;

g:

dvāda* stho] dvādaśāṁtāṁta-

maṁtraraśmikulākāmi (> -kī) kālikācakranāyakaḥ |
raśmibhedaprabhedena te sphuraṁti sphuratprabhāḥ || 36 ||
teṣām aṁtaḥ parā dīptiḥ kālayaṁtī virājate |
tat kramaṁ saṁpravakṣyāmi mukhapāraṁparāgatam || 37 ||
pronmiṣadraśmikhacitau jrṁbhaty eva daśatrikam |
It is just the Sun, which is the expansion of the abode of the modalities

(of consciousness) (vṛtti), that unfolds. It is twelve, and is located in the twelve,

and it shines within (the reality) within the twelve. He is the leader of the Wheel

⁴³ The manuscripts read mayā vipātalavyagras; clearly this reading is too corrupt for me
to emend.

⁴ Perhaps these lights are the syllables of the nine-syllable Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī,

that is, KHPHREṀ MAHĀCAṈḌAYOGEŚVARI.

406

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

of the Kālikās, and has no desire for the mass (kula) of the rays of Mantra. They

shine, radiant lights, by the division of the various rays. Their inner supreme
radiant energy (dīpti) shines, differentiating (in various forms). I will tell (you)
that process (krama) that has come down through the oral tradition. The

thirteenth unfolds, inlaid with the unfolding rays (of consciousness). (35-38ab)
sṛṣṭikālī ca [all: ya] saṁhārī sṛṣṭā yā parameśvar |l 38 |

sthitikālī tato ghorā tataḥ saṁhārakālikā |

raktakālī carvayantī [all: carcayaṁtī] raktāgamavibhedataḥ || 39 ||

sukālī yamakālī ca mṛtyukālī bhayāvahā |

bhadrakālī tathā cānyā paramādityakālikā |l 40 ||
70a) 83b g) mārttaṁḍakāḹī kālāgnirudrakālī mahollbaṇā [all: maholvaṇā] |

mahākālakule kālī mahābhairavakālikā || 41 ||

trayodaśavidhā kālī vījñeyā raśmibhedataḥ [k: -bhedaḥ(?)] |
The Supreme Goddess who has been emanated is 1) Sṛṣṭikālī (the Kālī

of Emanation), who withdraws (all things into consciousness). 2) Then (comes)
the fierce Sthitikālī (the Kālī of Persistence), and then 3) Saṁhārakālikā (the

Kālī of Withdrawal). (Then there is) 4) Raktakālī (the Kālī of Blood), who
relishes (consuming emanation), according to the various ways that blood
(rakta) comes forth. 5) (Then come) Sukālī, 6) Yamakālī, and the frightening
7) Mṛtyukāḹī, and another is 8) Bhadrakālī and 9) Paramādityakālikā. (Then
come) 10) Mārtaṇḍakālī, 11) Kālāgnirudrakālī, who is very powerful, and 12)

the Kālī who belongs to the Kula of Mahākāla and 13) Mahābhairavakālikā.

One should know Kālī who is of thirteen kinds, in accord with the division of
the rays (of consciousness). (38cd-42ab)
paramārkaprabhāśānta (> -prabhāsāntāḥ) sphuratsmaraṇadīpitāḥ || 42 ||
bhārūpā paramā kālī kālayantī [k, g: kārayaṁtī] jagatsthitā |
ekadhā triprakārā sā tridhā sā turyagā smṛtā l| 43 II
paṅṁcadhā caiva ṣoḍdhā ca saptāṣṭanavadhā [g: -na * dhā] smṛtā [k, g: -tāḥ] |

daśaikā [g: -kāṁ] daśadhā [g: daṁśadhā] devi tathā dvādaśadhā priye || 44 ||
trayodaśavibhedena grasate sacarācaram |
tenaiṣā kālikā jñeyā tasyā maṁtraṁ śṛṇuṣva me || 45 ||

(They are all) within the light of the Supreme Sun, energized by the

flashing pulse of recollection. The form of the supreme Kaālī is light; she abides
in the universe, generating time. Once (i.e., single), of three kinds, she is

threefold and said to be in the four. She is fivefold, sixfold, and considered to be
seven, eight and ninefold. She is eleven, tenfold and so too, O beloved,

twelvefold.® Divided into thirteen, she devours the mobile and immobile

⁴³ These numbers denote the serial emergence of the Kāḹīs. Kālī emerges by a process
called ‘kalana’, a term that has several meanings, one of which is ‘enumeration’

(saṁkhyāyana). See TĀ 4/173cd-175.

TANTRĀLOKA

407

(universe). Thus, she should be known to be Kālikā. Now listen to her mantra

from me.⁴⁶ (42cd-44)

Rāviṉī
pūjyasiddhāṁs tathā pīthāṁ rāśidvādaśasaṁgatam || 49 |I
saṁlikhya maṁḍalaṁ devi mahādvādaśasaṁmitam |
70b) madhye trayodaśaṁ kāryaṁ rāśivarṇasamanvitam || 50 ||
raktena rajasā devi caturlekhyaṁ prapūrayet |
caturdvārasamāyuktaṁ tatra pūjyaṁ kramottamam || 51 ||
mahākālī madhymā syān madhyād [kh, g: māsyā * dhyād] ghora maholvaṇā [k:
maholva * * (?)] I
sphuratkālāgnilakṣāṇi romakūpe pataṁti hi || 52 |
yasyā garbhe [kh, g: garbha] śikhākoṭi koṭitejo [kh: *; g: te *] vṛjrṁbhate [g:
vrjr * te] l

jvaladvakadhakāra (> -dvādaśadhakārā) rāviṇī bhāsurānanām || 53 |I
vaktrāva vi * niṣdyūta(?) [kh: viniṣṭvā; g: viniṣṭyuta] (> vaktrāntavinisṛtaṁ * *)
sphuratkalpāṁtapāvakam |
gaṅṁbhĩraddhãna huṁkãra trãsitoccaṇḍamaṁḍalam || 54 ||

O goddess, having drawn the maṇḍala measured out by the great twelve

(Kālīs) associated with the twelve rays, the venerable Siddhas and sacred seats,

Mahākālī is the one in the centre who, fierce and very powerful, has (come

forth) from the centre in hundreds of thousands (of forms). Pulsing radiantly,
they fall into (just a single) pore (of her skin). A fire with billions of flames
extends within her womb – she is Rāviṇī, whose face is radiant light, and whose

form burns in twelve ways. The (purifying) Fire that flashes forth at the end of
(a cosmic) Age (kalpa) has come forth from within (her) face. The assembly of
fierce (deities) is frightened by the deep sound (of her) HUṀKĀRA. (49cd-54)

Karañṅkinī, the Thirteenth Kāḹī
anaṁtādiphaṇīṁdreṁdragrāse ghasmarabhairavām (> -vīm)
|
aparṇalakṣaparṇādya muṁḍāpīḍavirājitāṁ [kh: muṁḍo-] [kh, g: -tā] || 55 II
sarvādhvapatikaṁkālamekhalādhāmamaṁḍitām [k: -pari-] |

kālarātrīśataskaṁdhavasitāṁ (k, kh, g: -śataṁ-) bhairavekṣaṇām || 56 ||
vidyudulkāsahasraughakṣepasaṁkāśalocanām [g: vidyu * Ikā-] |
asakṛtpīḍabrahmāṇḍamaṇḍapāṁ bhṛkuṭīmukhām || 57 II
kākālikuḻakṛṣṇābhrā(> kālikā- -bhāṅṁ ) nirasatkekarekṣaṇām |
cala * * śirohasta [kh, g: cala śiro-] ghaṭṭitādhvapaṭīśvarām || 58 ||
mahātaraṇi mudraughakeśarī [kh: keśurī; g: keśu *(?)] kṛta kurpparāṁ [kh, g:
-rā] |

(She is Karaṅkiṇī,) a voracious Bhairavī (engaged in) devouring Ananta
and the rest of the Lords of the Nāgas (at the base of the universe, to go on to
⁴“° The piṇḍa mantra of Kūṭeśvarīcakra (i.e. the assembly of thirteen Kālīs) is extracted
next in code. This is KHPHREM. The mantras of the Kālīs all begin with this syllable
(piṇḍa) followed by the name of the Kālī in the dative and the salutation NAMAH.

408

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

consume the rest above). Naked (aparṇa, lit, ‘without leaves’), she is adorned
with hundreds and thousands of leaves, and is beautiful with a diadem of

severed heads. She is adorned with the power of the girdle of the skeletons of all

the lords of the Path. Her shoulders are clothed with hundreds of dark nights
(kālarātrī) and her eyes are (fierce like) Bhairava’s. Her eyes are like the casting

of torrents of thousands of lightning flashes and burning coals. The awning
(under which she sits) is made of the Egg of Brahma, that torments (its

inhabitants) repeatedly. Her face (is severe) with knitted brows. She shines
darkly like the Kālikā Kuḷa, she casts her eyes (in a frightening) squint. She
moves her head, pressing down on the Lords of the Path. O great goddess who
saves (the afflicted), (her hair is like a lion’s) mane (fastened) by the flux of
Mudrā, fashioned with skulls. (55-59ab)
sphuradūrdhvamahānetravahnijvalitavigrahām || 59 ||
71a) 59b kh) dorddaṁṅḍamuṅḍasaṁghaṭṭasphuranmāyāṁḍagahvarām |
uttasīkr̥tasādākhyāṁ śatakaṁkālamālinīm || 60 ||
aśeṣadevatācakra * * mākramaghasmarām [kh, g: cakra mākra-] |
nīpatītatvagrāvāra kr̥tārabhaṭibhairavām || 61 ||
(Her) great (third) eye throbs radiantly above (on her forehead), its form
burning with fire. She is the abyss of the Egg of Maāyā, that pulses radiantly by
the striking together of the severed heads and arms she wears as a garland of
hundreds of skeletons; voracious, (she invades) all the assemblies (cakra) of

deities ().⁴⁷ (59cd-61)

viśvakṣayakaroccaṁḍabhrūkṣepodbhāsitānanām |
sahasakālamuṁḍaughakṛtatripurabhairavīm || 62 ||
kṛtāṁtaśatakaṁkālakiṁkiṇījāltamaṁḍitām |
mārttaṁḍakaṁdalāpīḍakṛtakaṇṭhasragulvaṇām || 63 ||

kālāgnirudramuṁḍoghamekhalādāmamaṁḍitām |

rudrarājeśvarākrāṁtakṛtanaṁdva (> -nanda-) nitaṁvakām || 64 ||

(Her face) shines with the fierce arching of (her) brow, that destroys the

universe. She is Tripurabhairavī, (whose ornaments) are made of a mass of
severed heads (of men that suffered) a hero’s death (sahasakāla). She is adorned
with a network of hundreds of skeletons (belonging to the Lord of) Death, with
which she is adorned like a net of small bells (kiṅkinī). The sun has been

fashioned like a banner tied as a chaplet around her head, and is mighty with a
garland (around her) neck. She is adorned with a garland as her girdle (made of)

the mass of Kālāgnirudra’s heads. She is accompanied by Rudra, who is the lord
of kings, and she bears Nanda on her hip. (62-64)

85a g) nārāyaṇasphuraddeha * * pretamālāriṇīm [kh, g: sphuraddeha preta-] |
brahmakaṁkālasadvīṇāvādanaikavinodinām [kh, g: -tāṁ] |I 65 |I

aśeṣadevatācakrakramākramaṇaghasmarām [kh: kramā krama-; g: kramā kra
* nagha-] |
nipitatva gamādhāna bhairaveśānabhāsakām || 66 ||

⁴⁷ Line 61cd is so corrupt it is unintelligible.

TANTRĀLOKA

409

aśeṣabhairaveśānadehakarṇāvataṁsakām |
kṣayakṣaṇasphuṭād vāman nṛttacitravinodinīm [k: -cinna-] || 67 II
dhyātvā sṣvadhāmni vitato pūjanīyātha [kh: (?)] maṁḍale |

tadvad evya (> devyaḥ) prapūjye va (> prapūjyāś ca) dhyeyāḥ sarvā
yathārthavat [kh, g: sarvā ya-] |I 68 II
pratibhedagatā saikā devadevī karaṁkiṇī |
(Her) body shines (like that of) Nārāyaṇa, she who is the enemy of the
garland of great ghosts (?).⁴⁸ Her one pastime is playing the good vīṇā made of
Brahma’s skeleton. Voraciously greedy to invade the sequence of cycles of all

the deities * * *,⁴ she illumines the Lord Bhairava. AIl the Lords and Bhairavas

adorn (her) body and ears. Emitting (the universe) because the moment of

destruction is clearly manifest, she delights in the wonderful variety of (her)
dance.
Having visualized her extensively in her own abode, she should be
worshipped in (her) maṇḍala. The goddesses should be worshipped in the same
way. They should all be visualized in accord with (one’s) purpose (yathārtha).
Present in each variety, she is Karaṅkiṇī, the one goddess of the gods. (65-

69ab)

The Worship of Karaṅkinī
The Animal Sacrifice
71b) mahāpaśūpahārādyair jalajai sthalajais tathā || 69 ||
khecaraiś cāpi deveśi devadevī (> -vīṁ) prapūjayet |
mahāśaṁkhārghapātrādau kṛtvārgham alinā mahat || 70 ||
tena saṁprokṣayed ādau paśuṁ ghoreṇa cetasā |
paṣcād ghorāṁ samālaṁvya vṛttiṁ paramabhairavām | 71 I|
dvādaśārkodite mārge rūḍho maṁtresvarātmakaḥ [g: svarā * *(?)] |
vaktrodvamanakotpātapātāt pātayate paśūn || 72 |
60a kh) anyathā paśughātī syād anena rahitaṁ yadā |
O queen of the gods, the goddess of the gods should be worshipped with

offerings of human beings (and beef mahāpaśu), fish, animals and birds, having

made the liquid offering (argha) of great alcohol (ali) in the sacrificial vessel

(arghapātra) fashioned from a human skull and the like (mahāśaṁkhā). One

should first sprinkle the sacrificial animal at the beginning with a fierce
(determined) mind (to do s0). After that, assuming the fierce state of mind of the

supreme Bhairava, (the officiant), his nature the Lord of Mantra, mounted on the
path on which the twelve suns rise, slays the sacrificial animals by the fall of the
portent that is vomited up from his mouth. (If it happens) in another way,
without this (taking place), the animal would be (sinfully) slaughtered (not
sacrificed). (69cd-73ab)

nivedya sahasenaiva dhuned vāyaṁtate punaḥ || 73 |I

⁴⁸ The meaning of the expression * * pretamālāriṇīm īs not clear to me.
⁴ nipitatva gamādhāna; the text here is too corrupt for me to emend.

410

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

tadā vidārya khaḍgena tīkṣṇaśastreṇa vā priye |

85b g) chitvāśipādaṁ vai * * saraktāṁ vinivedayet || 74 ||
padmaṁ dakṣiṇamārāṁ ca dikṣu raktāṁchaṭāṁ [kh: cchatā; g: kṣaṭā] kuru |
Having offered it audaciously, he should make (the victim) tremble and
shake (vāyaṁtate (?)) again. Then having cut it to pieces with a sword or a sharp

weapon, O beloved, and having severed the āsi (?) foot, it should be offered
with the blood (?). The blood should be sprinkled in (all) directions. (73cd-75ab)

kardamaṁ kārayet tatra rūdhireṇaiva bhairavi [k, kh, g: dhairavi] I¹ 75 II
nivedya vividhāṁ bhakṣyān [g: vakṣān] balimaṁtraṁ prakalpayet |
ākaṁṭhataḥ pived raktaṁ madyaṁ vāpi maheśvari || 76 ||
tatas tu vaktrakuṣumaiḥ sphurjad arceta kālikām |
mudrā karaṁkiṇīūṁī ghorāṁ bhairavīṁ vã [kh, g: vãṁ] pradarśayet | 77 ||
lelihānāṁ mahāghorāṁ atha devi pravaṁdhayet |
evam abhyarccayed cakraṁ ([kh:
-yeccakraṁ; yg: -ye
* kraṁ]

yathāvibhavavisṣtaraiḥ || 78 II

O Bhairavī, mud should be made there with just blood alone. Having
offered many kinds of food, he should think of the Mantra for the animal
sacrifice. Blood should be drunk to the full, or else wine, Maheśvaṁī. Then with

the flowers from the mouth, shining radiantly (sphurjad (?)), he should worship

Kaālikā. (75cd-77ab)

He should exhibit the fierce Karaṅkiṇī mudrā or Bhairavī (mudrā). O

goddess, he should form the very fierce Lelihānā (mudrā). In this way, he
should worship the cakra as his means permit. (77cd-78)

Initiation of the Disciple by Possession (āveśa)
tataḥ praveśayec chiṣyaṁ prokṣitaṁ cāvalokitam |
72a) bahir yācanikāyānaṁ sthāpyāsmai tāḍanaṁ kuru || 79 ||
carukaṁ daṁḍakāṣṭhaṁ ca vīrapānaṁ samarppayet |
karayoḥ kṣobhayogena śaktiṁ preravāṁ (> prerya) samāśritaḥ || 80 |I
He should then introduce the disciple who has been consecrated and
viewed (by the teacher). Having parked the vehicle of (his) request

(yācanikāyāna) (?) outside, (the teacher) should strike him. The sacrificial pap,
the stick to clean the teeth, and liquor (vīrapāna) should be placed in (his) hands

and, having impelled Śakti by arousing (her), (the disciple) takes (his) place
(samāśrita). (79-80)

sabhāvāṁtaprayogena sphuradunnāsya yogataḥ |
karāveśaṁ prajāyeta tadāsau samayṝī bhavet || 81 I||
paścāt praveśayed devyā paśum eva kr̥tārthavat |
daṅṁḍavad vaṁdanaṁ kãryyaṁ tena hr̥ṣṭena cetasā || 82 |
paścād ullāsya pūjājyaṁ kramam enaṁ (> evaṁ) tu naktavat (> raktavar) |

86a g) saṁśodhayet tataś chiṣyaṁ pūrvaśaktiprayogavat || 83 ||

TANTRĀLOKA

411

By inwardly applying the true being in association with the elevated
face (?),⁰ the possession by the imposition of hands (karāveśa) (takes place),

and he becomes a regular initiate (samayin). Then (the teacher) should introduce

the goddess'’s sacrificial animal

(i.e., the disciple) like one who has

accomplished (his) task. (The teacher) should (prostrate, straight as) a stick, and

praise (her) with a joyful mind, and then with enthusiasm purify the sacrificial

butter and the liturgy (krama) in the same way, like the blood (of the sacrificial
victim) and the disciple, as (was done) previously, by making use of (his

spiritual) power (śaki). (81-83)

kr̥śāṁ vṛttīṁ samāśṛtya kṛśam (> kṛśām) evaṁ vilokayet |
punaḥ pūrvatarāṁ (³> pūrṇatarāṁ) vṛttiṁ [kh, g: vṛtti] avalaṁvyaiva [kh, g:
avalaṅṁvyeva] sādhakaḥ || 84 ||
60b kh) pūrṇarūpaṁ samālokya kṛśam evaṁ vilokayet
punaḥ pūrṇataraṁ vrttiṁ avalaṁvyeva sādhakaḥ [g: sādhaḥ *] || 85 II
pūrṇarūpaṁ samālokyaṁ [kh: -lokya] mahākāliṁ kulākulam |
paṅṁca bhitvā dhupaṁ [kh: dhapaṁ ] caiva kāyavākcittabhedataḥ || 86 ||
tadā kācais tathākāras tadrūḍhyās tadvilāpakāḥ |
The adept (sādhaka), having entered into the mode of being of (the Kālī

called) Kṛśā (Emaciated), should view (the goddess) Kṛśā, having again
assumed her fullest mode of being. Having viewed the full form, he should view
in the same way the ‘thin’ one. Having again assumed the fullest mode of being,
he should view the full form, the great Kālī Kulākula. (84-86ab)

Having penetrated through the five and dhupa (?) (variously) according
to whether it be the body, speech or mind, then with that form, mounted on that,
they are the destroyers of that (?) (86cd-87ab)

evaṁ ṣaṁbodhya taṁ śiṣyaṁ siddhaṁ bhavati bhãmini l| 87 ||
cidaikyāpūrṇadevatvam ānaṁdaṁ tat svarūpataḥ [k: -kaḥ; g: svarūpaḥ *] |
tadā viddhas tu [k, g: viṁdvastu, kh: vidvastu] jānīyāt tān (> tarṁ)
yathonmādavat [kh: mānya-] priye || 88 II
72b) evaiī tad īkṣiṇaṁ kuryād ācāryo kramapāragaḥ |
yasyevaṁ dīkṣayet samyak [g: samyat] sa mukto bhavabaṁdhanāt || 89 ||
anyathā devadeveśi tilājyānalayogataḥ |
puroktāṁ [g: purāktāṁ] vṛttim ālambya yasya yasyāvalokayet || 90 |l
taṁ taṁ nayati sāyojyaṁ [kh: yojya] vacas tv avitathaṁ mama |
Having awakened the disciple in this way, O fair lady, he becomes

successful (siddha). That is, (he becomes) spontaneously the very nature of
bliss, which is the full divinity of oneness with consciousness. Then he should
be known to have been pierced (viddha) (by the goddess, and is,) O beloved,

like one who is mad. (88)
The teacher who has mastered the Krama should gaze upon (his
disciple) in this way. Whoever he initiates properly in this way is liberated from

the bonds of phenomenal existence. Otherwise, O mistress of the gods, (if that
does not take place in this way,) assuming the aforementioned state of mind,
³⁰ The meaning of sabhāvāṁtaprayogena sphurad unnāsya yogataḥ is not clear to me.

412

APPENDIX A CHAPTER FOUR

whoever he gazes upon, along with (making offerings to) the fire with sesame
seed and clarified butter, he leads to a state of union (sāyujya) (with the deity).³¹
(This will surely be so;) my word is not false! (89-91ab)

anukrame yadā śaktaḥ [g: śakto] kuryād vā vyavahārakam || 91 II
yasya yasya sadaivaṁ [k, g: sahaivaṁ] hi taṁ nayed brahma [k: ta nayed
vasra(?), g: taṁ nayad vrahma] śāśvataṁ [g: * śvataṁ(?)] |

atrārūḍhaḥ sparśayeta yaṁ yaṁ vā prītacetasā || 92 ||
86b g) taṁ muktaṁ nātra saṁdehaḥ [g: -deho] satyaṁ satyaṁ gaṇāṁvike |
evaṁ vidhiṁ tataḥ kr̥tvā paścād evaṁ kramaṁ punaḥ || 93 II
yajeta parameśāni paścāt asyārpayet mahat |
kalaśaṁ cārghapātraṁ vā pūrvoktakramayogataḥ || 94 ||
tenābhiṣecyataṁ devi kramam asmai prakāśayet |
If he is engaged in the consequent process and performs the rite
(vyavahāraka), whoever it be, always (engaged) in this way, he is led to the
eternal Brahman. Whomever (the teacher) who is mounted here (into this state)

touches with a loving mind, he is certainly liberated. There is no doubt here
(about it). O mother of the (attendant) host, (this is) true! true! (91cd-93ab)
Having executed the procedure in this way, and after that, the Krama in
the same way again, O Supreme Goddess, he should offer sacrifice, and then
after that offer a great jar to him or the sacrificial vessel (arghapātra), in accord

with the liturgy (krama) taught before. O goddess, he should be consecrated
with that, and the liturgy (krama) should be revealed to him. (93cd-95ab)

etadabhyāsayogena ṣaṇmāsāt siddhim eṣyati || 95 II
devadevīśvarī [g: * vīśvarī] yatra tatra yāti na saṁśayaḥ |
vahunātra kim uktena vākprapaṁcena sundari || 96 ||
ataḥ parataraṁ nãsti tathyam etad vravīmi te |
evaṁ prāpya mahābhāge kālikramavinirṇayam || 97 II
61a kh) kenacic chubhapuṇyena janmanā paścimena tu |
sadaivābhyasanīyaṁ [g: (?)] hi abhyāsāt svagatir (> su-) bhavet || 98 |I
Success will come in six months by means of this practice, O goddess of
the gods, wherever he may go, no doubt! O fair lady, what is the use of speaking
much and prolixity of speech, there is nothing greater than this, I am telling you
the truth. O greatly fortunate one, once one whose (karma) is auspicious and is
in the last life has obtained the teaching concerning the Kālikākrama in this way,
he should practice it regularly. By practice (his) condition will be good. (95cd-

98)

73a) vācayā pūrvasiddhiś (> pūrnasiddhiṁ) ca sādhayaty [g: sādhayety] eva
nānyathā |
evaṁ rahasyam [g: raha * m] ākhyātaṁ suguptaṁ kālikākramarṁ |) 99 ||
kathanīyaṁ na caiveha śiṣye maṁdaparīkṣite |

³" If the disciple cannot be totally merged into the deity by this initiation, he is conjoined

to it by this milder rite. Although there is no complete āvesśa, he is conjoined to the deity
by the teacher’s gaze as he makes offerings of sesame seeds into the fire.

TANTRĀLOKA

413

anājñayā kathed yo hi sa mahāpātakī bhavet || 100 |l
paśyate narakaṁ ghoraṁ yāvadābhūtasaṁplavam [kh: -hūta-] |
na kadācid asau mucye narakād rauravād iha || 101 I
eva sthitiṁ tam āsthāya varttitavyaṁ tadā naraiḥ |
He accomplishes the complete accomplishment by (his) speech (alone),
and not otherwise. In this way, the secret that has been kept well-hidden has
been disclosed, that is the Kālikākrama. It should not be told here to a disciple

who has been tested little. He who discloses it without permission is a great
sinner. He sees a terrible hell and there will be a most astonishing (and terrible)

calamity. He will never be liberated from the Raurava hell. Having assumed this
condition, men should then abide (in their practice). (100-102ab)

Appendix B
to Chapter Four

The Wheel of Twelve Kālīs According to Chapter Seven of
the Ciñciṇīmatasārasamuccaya – The Collection of the Essence of the
Tradition of (Kubjikā) the Goddess of the Tamarind Tree

The Cinñcinīmatasārasamuccaya is a Kubjikā Tantra. Much of this

short tract, less than one thousand verses long, is dedicated to the presentation of
Kaula schools in four categories called ‘āmnāya’ – ‘sacred tradition’ or ‘ghara’
– ‘house’, symbolically situated in four cardinal directions. This is the earliest
example of this system of classification, that by the thirteenth or fourteenth
century developed into six traditions (sadāmnāya). The division of the ‘currents’
(Śśrotas) of Śaivāgama are also set in directions, but these are the directions
Sadāśiva’s five faces are facing. This classification of Kaula schools implicitly
relates them to directions in the outer world. Indeed, to a degree, they can be
said to be so. The ‘urtarāmnāya³ – the Northern Tradition of the Kālīkula – may
well have originated in the North of the Indian subcontinent, where Odḍdiyāna,

the place with which this āmnāya is related, is located, in the period of the
development of the Krama that follows after the Kālīkrama taught in the JY.
The CMSS refers to Matsyendranātha, deemed to be the founder of
Kaulism in this Age, as part of the pūrvāmnāya – the ‘preceding tradition’. This
ascription is made from the perspective of the Kubjikā Tantras, to which the

CMSS belongs. The Kubjikāmata, the first Kubjikā Tantra, refers to

Matsyendranātha and his school in this way. Here Matsyendranātha and his
Kauliṣm are linked to Trika.¹ This makes good sense, considering the strong
influence Trika had on Kubjikā’s paścimāmnāya. However, this setup is not
built into the Krama teachings presented as those of the uttarāmnāya in the
CMSS. The CMSS’s account of this and the other āmnāyas is borrowed from
the sources of those traditions, incorporating them wholesale. As the CMSS
knows Matsyendranātha and the āmnāya system, it belongs to a later period,
along with other Tantras that do so. Even so, the passage we are examining
belongs to the Bhānavīkula we have been examining as the earliest form of the
Krama, in which Matsyendranātha plays no role.
The Krama of the CMSS appears to be the state in which it was at the
time of Niṣkriyānanda. According to the lineages outlined in the Tantras, he
marks the emergence of the Kālīkula from the Kālīmata of the JY, much as

Śivānanda, three generations later, marks the emergence of the independent
post-scriptural Krama system from the scriptural Kālīkula. As we shall see, the
Yonigahvaratantra and the Devīpañcaśatika know four generations of teachers.
These are, along with their consorts: 1) Niṣkriyānanda and Jñānadīpti, 2)
Vidyānanada and Raktā 3) Śaktyānanada and Mahānanadā, 4) Śivānanda and
Ratnā. Jayaratha quotes the DP, where these teachers are listed, remarking that
they transmitted the secret Kaula tradition, that is, the Krama.³ Out of these four
' See Dyczkowski 1988: 68-71 and 79-84 for a detailed presentation and chart.
² YGT folio 17b.

³ Introḍuction to TĀ 29/43-46ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

415

generations, the CMSS knows just the first two, that is, Niṣkriyānanda and his
disciple Vidyānanda. He is followed by Śaktyanda, about whom we know
nothing. Then comes Śivānanda who, as we shall see in Appendix D, steps out
of scripture into history. Thus we can establish the following relative
chronology: the Mādhavakula
> the passage in the CMSS > the
Devīpañcaśatika, the Yonigahvaratantra and other early Krama Tantras >
Śivānanda, who initiates post-scriptural Krama, that developed into the fully
formed Krama system.
_Conceming Niṣkriyānanda, the CMSS tells u5 that he was also called
by Krodha Muni. Thus, he was called Niṣkriyānanda. He transmitted the
teaching, the essence of which is expounded in the fifty verses attributed to him,
to Vidyānanda. Instead of coming from a deity, the original teaching comes
from Durvās – also called Krodha Rāja or Muni – the Wrathful King or Sage.⁴
He also appears in the tradition of nondualist Śaivism that came down to
Somānanda, as its original recipient from Śrīkaṇṭha on Mount Kailāśa. He holds

a similar position as the original propagator of doctrine in the Śrīvidyā tradition,

where Lopamudrā is said to be his consort.
Both Niṣkriyānanda and his disciple Vidyānanda are described as
ascetics that look like wild tribal Śābaras (182c and 240). Niṣkriyānanda used to
stare up into the sky, a typical posture (mudrā) of Tantric yogis.’ While the later
Krama system founded by Śivānanda came from Oḍḍiyāna, Niṣkriyānanda lived
in a cave to the north of Śrīśaila, a ‘Śivapīṭha’ (184c)in whatis now Andhra

a notorious place commonly portrayed in early Sanskrit
literature as a place where ascetics of this sort reside. There this Krama Yogi,
beloved of the Yoginīs (237ab), had no need of ritual, or even to internalize it.

The text tells us more about the way of life of his disciple Vidyānanda than him,
but no doubt it was much the same. Vidyānanda lived in cremation grounds. As
‘a Siddha devoted to the practice of Yoga’ (182c), he wondered about at night
repeating Mantra, searching for a yoginī as a partner (niśātana), both as a
solitary Kaula adept (vīra), master of Yoga (yogeśvara), and together with
others and their partners in communal sexual rituals (cakracara) (182-184ab).

Originally a disciple of Śīlāciti, who must have been a Kaula, he progressed to
the Kālikā Krama, which is the Knowledge of Inaction, the knowledge of Vāmā.

(184cd-188)

Niṣkriyānanda’s Hymn in Fifty Verses is recorded in the CMSS (7/189240). It is a eulogy of fifty planes (bhūmikā) of Yoga. Indeed, it is strikingly
visionary. Typical of the finest expositions of the teachings of the Kālī Krama,
neither myth nor philosophy, one can only call it ‘mysticalʼ’. Through this
‘Knowledge of Inaction’, Niṣkriyānanda revealed the ‘Kaula nectar’ and how to
drink it (174cd-180ab), which appears to be elevated yogic cunnilingus. This is

the teaching of the Mahākālīkrama, also called Kālikākrama, which is that of the

Twelve Kaālīs, that Niṣkriyānanda transmits to his disciple Vidyānanda. It is the
‘transmission of the Kālīkaṅkāla – the Skeleton of Time’. This is the Kaṅkāla
Kula, which unfolds within the emptiness of the male polarity. (He is the Sky,
⁴ CMSS 7/157cd-160.
⁵ Devotees of Rāma Avadhūta, also called Aghoreśvara of Kinnarām’s lineage in
Benares, venerate photographs of him staring up into the sky.

416

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

which is the Kaula reality of the Kaṅkāla Kula within the Sky.) She is the
energy of Kaula Kaṅkāla, and so is the consuming fire of absorption (grāsa).

The Manthānabhairavatantra refers to a form of Kālī called Kālakaṅkālakaulikī
(KuKh 61/69). She is the Kālī of the Skeleton of Time (KuKh 63/37).
Kālakaṅkāla Bhairava governs the Wheel of Rudras in the cremation ground
called Karavīra (KuKh 6/26), which is linked to the ‘tradition of the North’ and
the Kāḹīkrama in a special way. Clearly, the ‘Skeleton’ represents Time, that
Kālī consumes. Thus, we read:
‘One's own form devoid of form is the form between form and nonform. The undifferentiated reality (niṣkala) is everywhere manifest (udita), free
of Being and Nonbeing. Kālī, the Supreme Goddess who devours the Skeleton

(kaṅkāla), is manifest (uditā) there. Once having drunk from the vessel of the

sprout (kandala) of the Skeleton born of the nectar of the Sky, she is made to
pulsate (ghūrmitā) and to vomit (vamitā), and so the universe comes into

being.*⁶

In other words, the Kālī in the centre emits — ‘vomits’ –— the Twelve

Kālīs that surround her in the manifest world of the time – that of the Year, and

then absorbs – ‘devours’ – it again. Thus:

‘One should contemplate the divine Yoni who contains in herself the
energy within the energy of the Great Time, that is, Kālacakreśvarī (the Mistress
of the Wheel of Time). Thuṣ, she is known as Kālī who devours the Kula of the

Skeleton. The eṣsential nature of Being and Nonbeing is relished by the

consciousness of the Wheel of Consciousness.’

Names of this Krama tradition are derived from how the centre of this
assembly of Kālīs is named or the assembly itself. Here ‘Kula’ – ‘the familyʼ –
denotes the Twelve Kaālīs. The name of the Kula is derived from the deity who
resides in the centre, be it a god or a goddess. It is his or her Kuḻa. In the account
in the CMSS, it is variously called the Kumārī Kula (157ab), Sūrya Kula (171),

and Kaulakaṅkāla (203cd). Here the term ‘krama” denotes the Kālikākrama,
which is the supreme Krama of the Twelve Kaālīs (162), collectively called the
Inexplicable – Anākhyakrama, or just Spanda. More specifically, it is called the
Bhānavīkrama (which is defined in 224). The goddess in the centre is given

various names and corresponding identities. One of the most specific to this

passage is Khaṇḍinī (155), which presumes that her assembly of Kaālīs is called
Khaṇḍacakra,⁶ This is a very unusual and specific name. It is related to the

goddess'’s identity as Kunṇḍalinī, presumably because she ‘breaks apart’

(khaṇḍinī), that is, pierces through the cakras in the subtle body as she ascends
through it. Thus she ‘consumes’ the Kaulika body, absorbing it into herself.
Again, she is called Kāleśvarī – the Mistress of Time – who consumes
the Kumārīkuḹa – that is the Twelve Kālīs. Kumārī is in the centre of the Wheel
⁶ CMSS 7/222.
⁷ CMSS 7/226-229ab (40).

⁸ Srīkubjikāmate khaṇḍacakravicāre amum evārthaṁ pradhānatayādhikṛtyādiṣṭam

māyoparimahāmāyā trikoṇānanda-rūpiṇī | PTV p. 184

TANTRĀLOKA

417

of the Twelve Kālīs; thus, they are her ‘family’ or aggregate of energies and
aspects that she devours (249ab). The supreme abode (sthāna) of Khaṇḍinī is

concerning the Kālīs. Generically, she is called Kauleśvarī, Kaulinīśakti
(defined apophatically as ‘the will’ in 173-174ab), Kauleśī (167) or Kaulinī
(defined in 203cd-204ab). The deity digests (‘devours’) the Twelve Kālīs into

herself and so consumes the cycle of time,⁹ making it one with her eternal
consciousness. As such, she is Kṛśodaṁ (171). Although she consumes
everything into herself, she is thin as a skeleton, to symbolize that she is devoid
of any phenomenal nature (niḥsvabhāva). Thus, she is the all-consuming Void
of consciousness — the Abyss of the Kula of the Twelve Kālīs – Kulagahvarī,
into which they disappear and from out of which they emerge, like the setting
and riṣing sun. Thus, we read:
‘The Void (of the Twelve Kālīs) that has arisen from the Void (of the
Sun in the centre) is within the Wheel of the outpouring (udbhava), divided up
(vibhakta) (into the Twelve Kaālīs). The form of the Kālī of the light of the

Twelve Suns is the Void (of transcendence in the centre), and she devours the
Void (of immanence of the circumference). (188-189)

The two Voids, like the two Suns, are the Twelve Kālis and the

thirteenth. The former is immanent - the Emptiness of phenomena, and the latter

transcendent – the Emptiness of the goddess’s eternal consciousness. Just as

they emanate from one another, they consume each other. We have already

observed that at the earliest stage exemplified by the passage in the JY, the
Twelve Kālīs and the Thirteenth, the one Kālī, are juxtaposed as complementary
polarities. These two Voids — the former the reflection (pratibimba) and the
latter the original image (bimba) – the Wheel and the essential nature, Akula (or
Kaula) and Kula, and the two Suns. According to the teachings of the Sūryakula
(also called the Bhānavīkula) – the Kula of the Sun, the Twelve Kālīs are
reflections that shine like the rays of the sun around the original form (bimba),
which is the thirteenth Kālī in the centre. Thus, in a way, there are two Suns —

the original form (bimba) and its twelvefold reflection that arises from it. The
world of manifestation seemingly consumes its transcendental source even as it

is born from it.

Bhānavī Kaulinī is known to the JY, but only mentioned once, in a

passage found also in the CMSS."⁰ Clearly, there is a continuity from the Mata

of the JY, which is inspired by the energy of the Mata, and transmits it and the
Kālīkrama in general, of which this is a branch. The CMSS stresses that Kāḹī is
the energy of the Sun (bhānavī), consisting of the twelve risen (suns). (204cd).

The text repeatedly refers to the Twelve. This is because the twelve are the one
Sun – ravi. These twelve, in other words, form a unit that is voraciously intent
on devouring (grāsaghasmara), consuming and digesting into the Void of the
Sky of consciousness within which the Sun rises. Although the CMSS preserves
the identity of the Kālī in the centre, the understanding of her nature has become
more subtle by identifying her and her twelve-fold emanation as the Void.

⁹ See verse 172 and note.

!⁰ CMSS 7/166-167 = IY 4/4/11cd-13ab. See below.

418

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

Twelve Kālīs surrounds the one in the centre; each reflect her like so many

mirrors. It is like a single face reflected in twelve mirrors.

‘She is Kṛṣodarī (the Thin One) of the Kula of the Sun. The Wheel has
arisen from that essential nature, and it is established within the rhythm (gati) of

the Sun of the Sun (bhānvarka) of Consciousness. It shines as if it were a

reflection (pratibimba), its sole intent is to devour the original image (bimba).”¹!

Thus, Takṣāvarta says in his Tantrarājāvatārastotra: *ḹ sing the praise

of the sequence-transcending circle of powers animated by the supreme Goddess
that resembles a single face appearing in contact with a series of mirrors.’' As
we shall see in chapter five of the Devīpañcaśatika, translated here in Appendix
C, their maṇḍala is a red circle surrounded by twelve others (fl. 59y3)’

(Sanderson 2006b: 21 n. 55). We find the same in the Kālīkulakramārcana.

According the Trikasadbhāva, as reported by Abhinava in Chapter Thirty-one,
Krama worship is incorporated into Trika by placing the twelve circles around

the centre into the Trika triple Trident Maṇḍala.¹³

This reduplicated oneness is also within the centre, where the opposites
are. As we have seen, they can be male and female. In the CMSS, Kṛśodarī – the
Old Hag – is paradoxically identified with the lovely youthful Kumārī in the
centre (249). She is mentioned in this role right at the start, so it is not just a
detail or a stray possibility. The pair identified with the Goddess of Time
symbolize, no doubt, that her Time is pliable, just as her nature is inscrutable
(anākhya).

Note that the Void in the centre is registered here literally as an absence,

just as it is by Abhinava. We find a list of the names of the Kālīs. Although they
are the same as in the earlier sources, they are only twelve. The last one – the
thirteenth – is not counted amongst them. The ‘thirteenth’ in the centre is not
mentioned at all, even though it is repeated in numerous ways that the shining
brilliance of the luminous deity in the centre is the Twelve Kālīs. The essential

nature and activity of Kālī is to withdraw the world of death and decay back into

the Void of the eternal plenitude of her pure divine consciousness — the Absence
in the centre. The scriptures astound the reader with imageless images of Voids
flowing into emptiness, generating emptiness, consuming emptiness,
contemplated by astonished yogis who with the awesome audacity (sahasa) of
the devastating power of the Void witness the destruction of all phenomenal,
mortal existence in an immensely powerful implosion that gobbles everything

up in a flash of Light that shines with dazzling brilliance.¹⁴
' CMSS 7/172.

². dhatte yan mukurāvaliyyatikaravyaktaika-vaktropamaṁ śāktaṁ cakram apakramam

paramayā devyā tad iddhaṁ numaḥ 27cd Quoted by Sanderson (2006b: 23-24 n. 62)

'³ See TĀ 31/52-58ab and notes.

'⁴ The Pratyabhijñā accordingly couples the Light of consciousness (prakāśa) with its

pulsing radiance (sphurattā), which is made up of its innumerable ‘shinings’ (ābhāsa)

that constitute its manifestation (vyañjana). Given the essential similarity here between
Pratyabhijñā and early Krama doctrine, we would expect this term to appear in the early

scriptural sources. But unfortunately, it does not, although the notion it conveys
certainly does.

TANTRĀLOKA

419

The scriptures tirelessly intensify the vision with ever deepening and
expanding planes of wonder.' The yogi thus rushes along this via negative,
which here, in this most secret and internal process — Krama – is the tradition —
Krama teaching and apocalyptic power of transformation. The language is
mysterious, as is the reality and the experience it teaches. As we read, we are
repeatedly mystified and find ourselves grasping for meaning, when we should
instead be letting go and face the horror of Kāla – Death and its power – Kālī to
discover that this, the End of all endings, is the beginningless Eternity that
engulfs time – kāla – and its power – Kālī, even as it is its source. Unconfined
Space (ākāśa), the Sky (gagana, kha, vyoman), the Place (sthāna) without
location, plane (pada) beyond Being and Nonbeing, Void (sūnya) and
Emptiness (śūnyatā); such is the Womb (garbha) of the One Who is pregnant

with the Void (garbhiṇī). This the Supreme Sun (paramārka) that unfolds like a

lotus, the expansion of Emptiness into Emptiness of the Year of the Twelve
Suns, the Eternity of the perpetual recurrence of timeless Time. For those who

do not know it, their existence severed from this, the Void of their true nature, it

is recurrent death. For those who are true yogis, Skyfarers in the Void of their
pure consciousness nature, it is eternal life.
The influence of the Kālī Krama is strongly felt in the later Kubjikā
Tantras, although it is unknown to the Kubjikāmata, the earliest Kubjikā Tantra.
By the time we reach the Ambāsaṁhitā, the Kālīs appear a couple of times in the
Kubjikā sources. In the Māyāstava (chapter 19 of the Ambāsaṁhitā), Kubjikā as
Mahāmāyā is praised as the thirteenth Kālī in the centre of the circle of twelve.
Moreover, it is stated there that Kubjikā revealed the Kālī Krama to the last of a
lineage of the Nine Siddhas who transmitted the Kubjikā Tantras. In the
Kumārikākhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairavatantra,

Kubjikā’s alter ego is

portrayed in a few places as Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Kālī. The Trika was a major

component of the Kubjikā transmission right from the start. In the Kubjikāmata,

the earliest Kubjikā Tantra, this is clearly evidenced by the fact that six of its
eighteen chapters are drawn from the Tantrasadbhāva, a Trika Tantra, although
it was not influenced by the Kālī Krama.
It is clear that the Kubjikāmata belongs to a later stage of development
of Kauḻism, because of the primary importance it gives to Matsyendranātha and
his disciples. It refers to their tradition as the ‘pūrvāmnāya’ – the ‘first’ or
‘preceding tradition’, in relation to which the Kubjikā Tantras are the
‘paścimāmnāya’³, that is, the ‘subsequent’, ‘last’ or ‘final tradition’. The
Kubjikāmata does link Kubjikā to Kālī, but not to the Kālī of the Kālī Krama,
whereas the Kubjikā tradition that developed in the Manthānabhairava and
continued to grow throughout it into the later Kubjikā Tantras absorbed the Kālī
Krama. It is possible that this happened due to the influence of later forms of
Trika that had integrated the Kālī Krama into themselves. Whether this was so
or not, we know that it is a relatively developed form, as it characterized as the
Uttarāmnāya in the Yogakhaṇḍa (1) of the Manthānabhairava. These are
markers of development. There are others in the CMSS that foreshadow later
developments. One is particularly evident. The eight times eight Bhairavas of
the earlier sources here develops into ‘the knowledge of Vāmā’, consisting of
'⁵ Cf. ŚSū 1/12 viṣmayo yogabhumikāḥ – the planes of union (yoga) are wonder.

420

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

sixty-four energies, with herself as the sixty-fifth. We may take this to be a
precursor of the fully developed Krama, in which these energies are
systematically deployed in Five Assemblies (pañcacakra) of the later
Kramanaya. There, as we shall see, the sixty-four energies are deployed into
five spheres governed, from above to below, by Vāmeśvaṁī, Khecarī, Dikcarī,
Gocarī and Bhūcarī, which is a major feature of the final fully developed form

of the Krama system Kṣemarāja sponsored. '⁶

However, the central feature of the Kālīkrama at this earlier stage is the

cycle of Twelve Kālīs, emitted and consumed by Kāli in the centre. It is this that
Niṣkriyānanda expounds in his hymn of fifty verses. The goddess is twelvefold,
as are the twelve suns in the yearly cycle, a view known to Abhinavagupta, who
also refers to it in his presentation of the Twelve Kaālīs.' Here this feature is so
strongly emphasised that the teaching is the Transmission of the Sun
(bhānavīkrama), because the energy of Kālī is configured in this way. Kālī’s
lunar nature thus takes second place to her solar one. This is the sphere of the

energies of the Inexplicable, which is the cycle of energies beyond the cycle of
creation, persistence and destruction that consumes them into itself. This is the
Skeleton of Time that Kalī, twelvefold, consumes.

Let us turn now to our text.

Chapter Seven of the Ciñciṇīmatasārasamuccaya
Bhairava said:
punar anyaṁ pravakṣyāmi āmnāyagharam uttamam [gh: ghanṇa-] |¹⁸
sāntasvarodayaṁ [k kh gh: -daya] padaṁ janmādhāraṁ tu [k: ti; kh gh: *]

khaṇḍinīI 155 ||

tatroditā devīkalā [k kh gh: devi-] kālī kaulikabhakṣiṇī
[gh: kailika-] |
36b gh) kaulācāraṁ kaulagarbhaṁ [k: kaula * rbhaṁ] kaulodayaṁ [k kh gh: daya] trikaulakam || 156 ||
tasmāt kauleśvarī devī kumārīkulabhakṣiṇī |
I will tell (you) again something else, namely, the most excellent House

(ghara) of the (northern) tradition. The energy of the goddess, Kālī, who
consumes the Kaulika and (is Kuṇḍalini who is) Khaṇḍinī (who destroys all
things), arises within the Foundation of Birth, the plane of the arising of (the

energies of) the letters (svarodaya) (beginning with A and) ending with S. She is

Kaulācāra, contains Kaula, is the arising of Kaula, and (so) is the triple Kaula,¹⁹
and so she is the goddess Kauleśvarī who devours the Kumārīkula. (155-157ab)

'⁶ See Dyczkowski 1987: 129 ff., where these five spheres are explained as planes of

consciousness, perceptions, senses and their objects. The Mahānāyaprakāśa of
Arasiṁha follows a different tradition, where these five constitute the Five Currents
(pañcavāha). They are called 1) Vyomavāmā 2) Khecarī 3) Bhūcari 4) Saṁhārabhakṣiṇī
and 5) Raudreśvarī. See MNP by Arṇasiṁha v. 25-50ab.

'⁷ See TĀ 4/146cd.
'⁸ Verses 155 to 158ab are missing in MS G.
!⁹ ‘Kaula’ is the aggregate of Twelve Kālīs that has arisen from Kula, i.e. Kaulikīśakti,
in the centre. The goddess is triple as Kaula, the emergence of the Twelve Kaālīs from

TANTRĀLOKA

421

20a k) tatrāvatāraṁ [k: tatravatāraṁ] kṛtvā tu yatrastho [all: -sthā] tamaso

muniḥ [k gh: mumi] |I 157 II
khaṇḍinīṣṭhānaparamaṁ niṣkriyājñānamuttamam [k kh gh: niṣkriya-] |
kathitaṁ krodharājasya vedhasaṁkramanaṁ [gh: -gaṁ] kṛtam || 158 II
paramāmnāyadivyaughaṁ [k g gh: -divyoghaṁ] karṇāt karṇaṁ [all: karṇa]
kramaṁ sthitam |
38b g) slokadvādaśanīrbhinnaṁ |[k gh: snokadvādaśanibhinnaṁ; kh g:

slokadvādaśanibhinnaṁ] saṁpradāyapariṣphuram || 159 |I

guruvaktragataṁ devi svānubhūtyaikalakṣaṇam |
kālikaṅkalasaṅkrāmaṁ [all: kāliḥ-; k;: -saṁkrāma; kh: kaṅkalasaṁkrāma; gh:
kakarasaṁkrãmaṁ; g: * kalasaṁkrāma] anākhyapadam uttamam [k kh gh:
anākṣa-; g: -papamuttamaṁ ] || 160 ||
She came down into the world, where Tamasa Muni (that is, Durvāsa,

also called Krodharāja) resides. It is the supreme place of Khaṇḍinī. He was told
the Niṣkriyājñāna of Krodharāja once the transmission brought about by
piercing (of the inner centres) (vedhasaṁkramana) had been completed. This is
the Divine Current (divyaugha) of the supreme tradition that is transmitted by
word of mouth. The radiant manifestation of the tradition is not separate from
the (mantra called) Twelve Verses. It is the (oral) transmission of the
Kālīkaṅkala (tradition) located in the teacher’s mouth. O goddess, its sole

characteristic is personal experience (svānubhiūti), and it is the excellent plane of
the Inexplicable (anākhya). (157cd-160)
devyuvāca
kālibhedaṁ [all: -bheda] kathaṁ nātha dvādaśaiva kathaṁ smrṛtam |

mukhāmnāyaṁ [k kh gh: -nāya; g: mukhyāmnāya] kathaṁ nātha kenopāyena
saṁkramam || 161 I|
kathayasva [gh: -śva] prasādena yena tuṣyāmy ahaṁ prabho [gh: prabhā] |
37a gh) bhairava uvāca
Śṛṇu devi pravakṣyāmi kālikākramam uttamam || 162 |
18b kh) dvādaśaiva paraṁ bhadre [g: * dre] saṁpradāyaṁ vadāmy aham |
aviluptaparāvyāptir bhedabhinnā [all: -vyāptibhedabhinnā] tu svaprabhā [k kh

8 -bhāṁ; gh: -bhaṁ] || 163 ||

vācām
.atītavīśrāntir
yoganidrā
|[kg:
-viśrāntiyoganidrā;
gh:
vācamatītaviśrāntiyoganidrā] guror mukhāt |
labhyate [all: labhate] ca mahājñānaṁ [g: -na] vidyārājena suvrate || 164 |
39a g) krodharājena vikhyātaṁ paścād vidyāṁ parityajet [k: paritejet; gh:

paritejet] |

The Goddess said:
the unity of consciousness, and contains them (i.e. Kaula) as that unity. This emergence
and submergence which is not true action (niṣkriyā) is the manner Kaula operates —

Kaulācāra.

422

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR
O Lord, how is the Kālī division? How is it said to be (the tradition of

the) Twelve? O Lord, what is the oral tradition (concerning this)? By what

means is it transmitted? O Lord, tell me by (your grace,) if you are satisfied with
me. (161-162ab)

Bhairava said:
Listen O goddess, I will tell you the most excellent Kālikākrama. O fair

one, I will tell (you that, namely,) the tradition of the Twelve (Kaālīs), which is

supreme. It is the eternal supreme pervasion, the self-luminous light divided into
various divisions. It is the repose beyond Speech, the sleep of Yoga. O lady of

good vows, (this) is the great knowledge™⁰ one obtains from the teacher’s mouth

by means of the King of Vidyās.”¹ It has been explained by Krodharāja.
Afterwards (once having attained realization), one should abandon (?) the

Vidyā. (162cd-165ab)

kathayāmi mahājñānaṁ [gh: -jñāna] niṣkriyaṁ [k g gh: nikriyaṁ; kh: niḥ

kriyaṁ] śṛṇu suvrate || 165 II

ravipradīpako loke sūryamadhyād vinirgataḥ |
ravir antargato bhānur [k kh: bhānu g: g: bhāṇu] bhāsayaty akhilaṁ jagat ||

166 I

bhānavī kaulinī yā sā tatpuñjabharitaṁ [all: -paritaṁ] jagat |
tatrotpannā mahāmantrā [kh: mahāmāntrā] bhairavāṣṭāṣṭayoṇayaḥ ][g: yodayaḥ] lI 167 I|
20b k) ravibhānumayī devī [g: devi] kauleśī [kh: -śrī] kulagahvarī|

37b gh) kṣobhānandā virāmā [gh: virāma] tu paśyate [kh: paṁśyate]
kulasantatiḥ [k g gh: -santati] || 168 II

I will tell (you) the great knowledge which is Without Action (niṣkriya).

Listen, O lady of good vows. The one who illumines the (immanent) Sun (ravi)

has emerged from the (transcendental) Sun (sārya).² Ravi is the inner Sun that
illumines all the universe. (166) The universe is filled with the network (of the

rays of energy that emanate from) her, she who is Bhānavī Kaulinī. The great
mantras that have arisen there are the wombs (yoni) of the eight times eight
Bhairavas.” The goddess is Kaulesī, who is the Sun of the sun (ravibhānumayī),
she is the Abyss of Kula (kulagahvarī), the bliss of arousal (and also) repose,
she is seen to be the Kaula lineage (santati). (165cd-168)

mahāvyomārṇave śaive bhānavīkuṇḍamadhyataḥ [k gh: -madhyetaḥ] |
tatra pralīnāḥ [all: pralīnās] sarve te bhairavāṣṭāṣṭayonayaḥ || 169 ||
²⁰ This is the definition of the Knowledge of Inaction (niṣkriyājñāna). Thīs is what is
taught here in what follows.

²¹ This is presumably Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī’s Vidyā. See TĀv ad 29/69-70ab and the

Appendix to Chapter Thirty.
²² Arka / Ravi is the Twelve Kālīs, the reflection (pratibimba) of Bhānu / Śūrya, the
thirteenth Kālī, who is the original image (bimba).

²³ CMSS 7/166-167 = JY 4/4/11cd-13ab.

TANTRĀLOKA
bhānavīkuṇḍamadhye tu layacakraṁ sṣvabhāvataḥ |
39b g) vilīne [kh: vilone; g: valīne] svasvabhāvākhye [all:
tatṣvabhāvodayaṁ tataḥ || 170 II

423
-khyaṁ]

bhāvābhāvakṣayakṣīṇaṁ [k kh gh: -kṣayokṣīṇaṁ; g: -kṣoyokṣīnaṁ] yā cinoty
[g: yasvino-, anye: yaścino-] aśarīriṇaḥ |

sā cidā niḥsvabhāvatvād [k kh: niśvabhāvasvā; g: niṣvabhāvatvā; gh:
niścabhāvasvā] sūryakulakṛṣodarī [k kh: cchūryā-; g: chūryo-; gh: cchuryā-] |I
171 I

tatsvarūpoditaṁ cakraṁ cidbhānvarkagatisthitam [k g gh: -sthitaḥ] |
pratibimbam ivābhāti [k g gh: prata-] bimbagrāsaikalampaṭam [k kh: -padaṁ]

l1721|

na kulaṁ kaulinīśaktir na svabhāvodayaṁ tataḥ |
na saṁhãrasya saṁhãraṁ divyo ʻsau [all: dĩyyãsau] sarvabhogabhuk [gh: -tuk]

173 1|

38agh) icchā cinmātradharmeṇa [k: -dhanmeṇa] apṛthagbhāvavartinī |
AII these (mantras that are the) wombs of the sixty-four Bhairavas have

merged there into the middle of the hearth of the Sun (bhānavīkuṇḍa), which is
in the ocean of Śiva’s Great Sky. The Wheel of Merger is, by its very nature, in
the middle of the hearth of the Sun. (170)
Once what is called one’s own (egoic) nature (svasvabhāva) has

dissolved away, its (true) essential nature arises. She Who perceives (the reality
of) the disembodied being which is free of destruction, Being and Nonbeing is

the (disembodied) energy of consciousness (cidā) thus, because it is devoid of
any (phenomenal) nature of its own (niḥsvabhāva), She is Kṛṣodarī (the Thin
One) of the Kula of the Sun (sūryakula). The Wheel (of the Twelve Kālīs) has
arisen from that essential nature, and it is established within the rhythm (gati) of
the Sun of the Sun (bhānvarka) of Consciousness. It shines as if it were a

reflection (pratibimba); its sole intent is to devour the original image (bimba).

(171-172)

Kaulinī śakti (is the inscrutable Anākhyā, she) is not Kula (the Twelve
Kālīs), nor is it (Kaula) the arising of one’s own nature,²⁴ nor the withdrawal of
withdrawal. He is the divine enjoyer of all worldly experience (bhoga). The will
is essentially consciousness alone, and so does not exist separately apart (from
consciousness). Such is the emanation of the omnipresent one. (173-174ab)
Niskriyānanda and His Sexual Yoga
srsṣṭiḥ [all: sṛṣṭiṣ] sarvagatasyaiva saṁhāraṁ kathayāmi te || 174 ||

rasenānandajaṁ (> rasanā-) rūpaṁ yadā [g: padā; gh: yādā] grāhyena [gh:
grā * na] grhyate |
tadā [all: yadā] pratyastamas tatra sa ca taṁ vrṛttigocaram [k: vṛrtti-; kh:
vrttiṁ-] II 175 |I
19a kh) 40ag ) kṣīnavṛttiḥ [k g: -vṛrttiḥ] pralīnatvāj jāyate |[g:
pralīnanvājāyate] paramādbhutam |
trikoṇaṁ tattrikoṇasthaṁ [k kh gh: ta-; gh: -stha] suśiraṁ suśirāgragam [k: grataṁ; kh: ṣuśirāgratam] l¹ 176 ||

²⁴ See above 156.

424

śūnyaṁ

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

|[k gh:

śūnya;

yg:

strānya] śūnyamukhe

[k:

strāṅyamukhai] līnaṁ cittaṁ citāntaroditam [all: -rocitam] |

śūnyamukhai;

yg:

cidanādīmahāyonau [k kh: cipanādihāhānau; g: cidanādicidāhānau; gh:

grhaṁ II 177 II

kandendriyāṇi saṁyojya parasparavidhikrame |
hitvā [g: ditvā] bhāvaṁ na gṛhṇāti [k kh gh: grhlāti; g: grhnāti] yadā

bhāvāntaraṁ [k kh gh: -tara] citiḥ lI 178 II

tadā tat paramaṁ brahma ṣvasvabhãvaṁ pravartate |
etat kauḷāmṛtaṁ siddhaṁ [gh: siddha] yoginībhir udāhṛtam [k: -hṛtaḥ] || 179 |I
21a k) niṣkriyānandapādaiś ca bhūtale saṁprakāśitam [all: saṁprakāsitam] |
Now I will tell you (about) withdrawal (saṁhāra). If the entity (rūpa)
born of the bliss of tasting (rasanā) is perceived as an object of perception, it
then recedes there into the field of the activity (of the senses). Once this activity
has ceased because it has dissolved away (into consciousness), the supreme

wonder arises. There is a Cavity (ṣusira) at the extremity of the Cavity which is
the Triangle within that Triangle.* The Void is merged into the mouth of the
Void, and the mind (citta) arises within the mind. . . . conjoining the senses of
the root (kanda) in the house of licking, which includes kissing and the rest, in
the rite (krama) of the mutual practice (vidhi) and, if abandoning one (emotive)

state (bhāva), the mind (citi) does not grasp another, then the supreme Brahman,
which is one’s own essential nature, manifests (pravartate).²² That, the yoginīs
say, is the Kaula nectar, which has been accomplished and has been revealed in
the world by Niskriyānanda. (174cd-180ab)

³³ This appears to be a reference to saḍāracakra (see above, note 36 to Appendix A), the

hexagon formed by the superimposition of two triangles, one facing up and the other
down – male and female. The two are portrayed here as couples: the Cavity and the
mouth of the Cavity, the Void and the mouth of the Void, and, engaged in this cognitive

Yoga, they are Mind (citta) uniting with Mind (citta).

²⁶ The bliss of Inaction (niṣkriyā) is being taught here. The term reminds us of
‘nirācāra³, which is also considered to be the supreme state. Niṣkriyānanda revealed the
‘Kaula nectar”⁷ and how to drink it, which appears to be elevated ritual cunnilingus.
Reference to this practice is also found in the Jayadrathamala, that declares:
te vīra vīrarājānassadā [g: rājānaḥ sadā] melāpabhājanāḥ ||
ye pivanti sadā viṣṇuṁ [gh: vi *?] bhagaṁ cumvanti [[g: ?] ye sadā | JY 3/38/127cd-

128ab

‘Those are (true) heroes, kings of heroes, who (enjoy) union (melāpa) (with the

yoginīs), those who constantly drink Viṣṇu (i.e., wine) and always kiss the female
genitals (bhaga).”

The practice continued into the late period of Kaulism. Thus, the Yonitantra
assures us that a person who conjoins his mouth to the mouth of the Yoni and repeats the
goddeṣs’s mantra is purified from sin. But by offering the menstrual blood and seed with

mantra to the Yoni he becomes a son of the goddess Kālikā. Yonitantra 3/120. See also

p. 24 of the introduction by Schoterman to his edition of the Yonitantra.

TANTRĀLOKA

425

Vidyānanda, Niṣkriyānanda’s Kāpālika disciple,
38b gh) devyuvāca
kathitaṁ kasyaiva nātha [all: nāthaṁ ] niṣkriyānanda bhūtale || 180 |l
mahākālikrāmaṁ divyaṁ saṁkrāntaṁ [k gh: sakrāntaṁ] kasya saṁkramam [g:
maṁkramaṁ; gh: sakramaṁ ] |
bhairava uvāca
40b g) Śṛṇu devi [g: devī] pravakṣyāmi saṁkrāmaṁ yasya [g: pasya]
saṅṁkramam || 181 I|
śšīlācitir munivaras [k: silācitin munivaraṁ-; kh: silācitīy munivaraṁ-; g:
manivaraṁ-] tasya putras tapodhanaḥ [k kh gh: pūtratapodhanam; g:
putratayodhanaṁ] |
yogābhyāsarato [k g: -rataṁ; kh:
-jyāsarataṁ; gh: -tyāsarataṁ] devi siddhaḥ
[all: siddhaṁ] śāvararūpadhṛk [all: sāvara-] |I 182 ||
vidyānandeti vikhyāto [all: -taṁ] mahādhīravaraḥ [all:

-varaṁ] priye |

śmaśānavāsī [k kh: -vāśī; gh: smaśānavāśi] nityastho niśātanarataḥ [all: nisā-]

paraḥ [all: param] |I 1 83 II

siddhayogīndro [k kh g: -yogendra; gh: -yoyendra] vīraś [all: vīrāś] ca
cakracārarataḥ [k kh gh: -rati; g: -rata] priye |

The Goddess said:

O Lord, to whom did Niṣkriyānanda teach the divine and great

Kālikrama in the world, to whom was it transmitted, and who possesses the
transmission? (181cd)

Bhairava said:
Listen, O goddess, I will tell (you) about the transmission. The excellent
sage Śīlāciti, who possessed the transmission, had a (spiritual) son, rich with

austerity. Ó goddess, he was a Siddha devoted to the practice of Yoga, and bore
the appearance of a (wild tribal) Śābara. O beloved, known as Vidyānanda, he
was most profound and excellent. Always established (in himself), he lived in
cremation grounds and devoutly practiced vigilance at night (niśātana).
O beloved, he was an accomplished lord of yogis — a Hero, and was intent on

the Practice of the Assembly (cakracāra).”⁷ (182-184ab)

śivapīṭhaṁ |[g: -pīṭha] mahādevi [g: -devī] śrīśailaṁ [k g gh: -sailaṁ]
devatāpriyam [gh: priyeṁ] || 184 II
tasya uttaradigbhāge [gh: -vigbhāge] nānāśikharaparvate [k gh: -sikhara-] |
tatra hemamayī divyaguhā [all: divyaṁ-] siddhasurārcitā || 185 ||
39a gh) tatrārādhanakaṁ [all: -dhanataṁ] kṛtvā vidyāśikharam uttamam [k kh
gh: -saviram uttamaṁ; g: -seviram vattama ] |
²⁷ E understand the the Practice of the Assembly (cakracāra) to be sexual union (melāpa)
with yoginīs and attendant behaviour.

426

karoti

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

|[gh:

kaloti]

bhaktiṁ

_([all:

bhakti]

yogīndro

([gh:

yogrīndro]

bhaktiṁ [all: bhaktīs] tīvratarāṁ [all: -rā] divyāṁ [all: divyā] kṛtvā
śāvararūpadhṛk [k kh gh: sāvara-; g: sāva * rūpadhṛk] |
tasya |[gh: tasyan] tuṣṭaṁ munivaraṁ |[k: muniṁ-; g: munivara]
śrīmiṣkriyānandam [g: -niṣkriyo-] uttamam || 187 |I
41a g) amoghavāṇī tasyaiva saṁkrāmaṁ kālikākramam |
19b kh) vāmājñānaṁ tu kathitaṁ pañcaśadbhūmikākramam [k gh: -ṣad-; kh g: -

ṣaṭ-] | 188 II

O Great Goddess, Śrīśaila is a Śivapītha beloved and pleasing to the

deities. To the north of it, on a mountain with many peaks, is a divine cave made
of gold which is venerated by Siddhas and gods. Having worshipped the most
excellent peak of (all) Vidyās there, the lord of yogis practiced devotion,
(wild tribal) Sābara, he practiced a more intense form of divine devotion.

(Thus,) the excellent sage the venerable Niskriyānanda was pleased with him

and transmitted the Kālikākrama²⁸ to him by his unfailing words. He told him

the knowledge of Vāmā, the sequence of fifty planes (corresponding to the
verses of his hymn). (184cd-188)
The Hymn of Fifty Verses to the Kālīs by Niṣkriyānanda
(Kālikākramapañcaśatika)
teṣāṁ bhedaṁ vadiṣyāmi [g: vadikhyāmīi] śrṛṇu sarvaṁ tu pārvati |
vibhaktodbhavacakrāntaṁ [k kh: vibhaktadbhava-; g: vibhaktyād-; gh:
vibhaktādbhava] gaganaṁ gaganoditam || 189 ||
dvādaśārkaprabhākālī [all: dvādaśāṅka-] vyomarūpā khabhakṣiṇī [k kh gh:
ścabhakṣaṇī; g: svabhakṣaṇī] | (1)
sphuratkṣīṇā |g: sphurakṣīṇā] svayaṁ [all: svaraṁ] kṣīṇāt [k: kṣīnan; kh g gh:
kṣīṇan] tat [gh: tan; g: ta] kṣīṇaṁ [g: kṣvīṉṇaṁ] divyagocaram [kh: -śocaraṁ] ||

1901

21b k) kramasaṁhārasaṁhāraṁ [g: kramaṁ-] pāramparyakramānugam | (2)
I will explain the difference between them. O Paārvatī, listen to

everything.

The Void (gagana) that has arisen from the Void is within the Wheel of

the outpouring (udbhava), divided up (vibhakta) (into the Twelve Kālīs). The

form of the Kālī of the light of the Twelve Suns is the Void (of transcendence),
and She devours the Void (of immanence). (1)
She manifests as waned away (kṣīṇā) and, having herself waned away

(kṣīṇa), the divine sphere wanes away. The destruction of the destruction of the
process (krama) (of manifestation) (kramasaṁhārasaṁhāra) has come down

through the line of teachers. (2) (189-191ab)

svakulaṁ [gh: svakṣala] svakulātītaṁ [gh: -kṣalā-] svapadaṁ svapadāntaram ||

191 1

²⁸ Here Kālikākrama specifically means the sequence of twelve or thirteen Kālīs.

TANTRĀLOKA

427

39b gh) spṛṣṭvā kālikramaṁ divyaṁ uditaṁ oghamaṇḍalam [k: ūgha-] | (3)

manonmanapadāntasthaṁ cidarkodayamaṇḍalam || 192 ||

tadbhāvabhāvitarasaṁ viśvaughasphuratejasam [k g gh: viṣvogha-; k kh gh: tekramaṁ MS g ends here] | (4)
bhittvā [all: bhitvā] bodhapadaṁ divyaṁ bodhabhāskarasevitam [all: -vecitam]

l 193 11

drāvitaṁ cinmarīcibhiḥ [all: cinmarīcībhiḥ] pītvā tu rasam uttamam | (5)

citsvarūpaparākāśaṁ [k: -rūpa * rākāśaṁ] sadasadbhāvavarjitam || 194 ||
tadantare [all: tadantaraḥ] mahārasaṁ [k, kh, g: sara-] parākāśavijṛmbhitam
[k gh: parākāsa-] | (6)
The Circle of the Current (ogha) (of the transmission) arises (and the

Sun of the Twelve Kālīs dawns) once one has touched one’s own Kula (of the

energies of the body, senses and mind), which is beyond its own Kula, its own
plane (of being), and what is within its own plane (of being), the divine
Kālīkrama. (3)
Established on the plane Beyond Mind (manonmana), it is the circle of

the rising Sun of Consciousness (bodhabhāskara). It is the radiant energy of the
cosmic current (viśvaugha), which is the aesthetic delight (rasa) sanctified by

that state of being. (4)
Once having pierced through the divine plane of consciousness which is
attended by the Sun of Consciousness, and once it is melted away by the rays of
consciousness, and having drunk the best of juices (rasa) (of aesthetic delight),

(one attains) the supreme Void, which is consciousness and is free of being and
nonbeing.⁹ Within it is the great juice (of aesthetic delight) (mahārasa) that has
expanded forth out of the Supreme Void (parākāśa). (5-6) (191cd-195ab)

antaḥsvollāsaviṣayaṁ [all: -ya] nānāvaicitryacitritam [gh: -citri *] || 195 I|

avināśaparābhūmiḥ [k gh: avināsa-; all: -bhūmi] ka alitejasamudbhavā [gh: va] | (7)

anantā [all: ananta] guptaviśrāntā [all: saptaviśrānta] gaganoditacitprabhā

[all: -svabhām] || 196 I|

sphurattejovikāsaughā [all: -sogha] saṁkrāmantī [all: -nti] paśuṁ balā | (8)
40a gh) bhagaṁ [all: bhaga] bhagapadātītaṁ mataṁ tanmatam uttamam || 197

|

kramaṁ kulākulāmnāyaṁ [all: kula-] yoginīyuktigocaram [all: yogiṇī-; gh: -rā]

(9)

(The Supreme Void) is the field (viṣaya) of one’s own inner outpouring,

and is diversified by many kinds of wonderful diversity (vaicitrya). The eternal

and supreme plane is born from the radiant energy (tejas) of Kālī. (7)
(The supreme plane) is the endless light of consciousness that has arisen

in the Void (of consciousness) and hidden, it is at rest.³ It is the current of the

expansion (vikāsa) of vibrant radiant energy (tejas). Penetrating (saṁkrāmantī)
the fettered soul, She is (its inner) strength. (8)

²⁹ Beyond the Twelve Kālīs, when they have melted away by its own rays, it flows with
raṣa.
³⁰ Here the Void is the Light that arises in Emptiness and is at rest.

428

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

It is the Yoni (bhaga), beyond the plane of the Yoni (of Māyā). It is the

teaching (mata) —that most excellent teaching. (The group of Twelve Kālīs) is
the Krama. The tradition of Kula and Akula (which is its source) is the field of
the contemplation (yukti) of the yoginīs. (9) (195cd-198ab)
kāmaṁ kāmāntaraṁ kāmaṁ tejas [all: tejaṁ] tejeṣu [kh: tejaṣu] maithunam ||

198 I

bhogaṁ bhogāntaraṁ bhogaṁ mataśaktiḥ [k kh: -śakti; gh: yukti] prakīrtitā

[all: -taḥ] | (10)

rudraś ca rudraśaktiś (> rudrena rudraśaktyā) ca yaugapadyena mathitam [k
gh: yugapadmena bhaktitaṁ; kh: yugapadmena bhaṁktitaṁ] || 199 ||
sarudraṁ drāvakaṁ [k: drāvakhaḥ; kh: drāvakhaṁ; gh: -ka] khaṁ [k kh: ke]

khe [gh: ke] kaṅkālakulakaulikam [k: kaṅkākekulakaulike; kh gh: kaṁkokela

kukaulake] | ( 11)
Śaktipiṇḍadravāntasthaṁ [k kh: Sśaktimaṇḍa-; gh: muṇḍavravāntasthaṁ]
bhagayoge [all: bhābhayoge] śivāntake || 200 ||
20a kh) sapiṇḍaḥ [all: sapiṇḍdas] siddhyate rūpī rūpālayapadāntakṛt | (12)
(Kālī, the energy of the Mata,) is Passion (kāma), the (divine) Passion
within (worldly) Passion, the act of union (maithuna), which is the radiant

energy (tejas) within all the energies. The energy of the Mata is said to be
enjoyment (bhoga), (spiritual) enjoyment within (worldly) enjoyment. (10)
Churned simultaneously by Rudra and Rudra’s energy, the Void (kha),
which is the (supreme) Kaula (kaulika) (reality of) the Kaṅkāla Kuḻa (i.e., the

Twelve Kālīs) along with Rudra, melts (all things away) within the Void.” (11)
It is within the flow (drava) of the body of energy (śaktipiṇḍa) (that
takes place) within Śiva in the course of the Yoga of the Yoni (bhagayoga). The

possessor of Form (rūpin) (of ultimate reality), endowed with that body (of

energies) (sapiṇḍa) and internalized within the Abode of Form (of ultimate
reality), is successful. (12) (198cd-201ab)

kulamūlottaraḥ |[all: ālamūlottarā] saṅgabodhottarottarāntaraḥ [k kh:
*vottarottaratāntaraḥ; gh: -⁴*voddharottaratāntaraḥ] || 201 ||

-

22a k) rudraśaktisamāveśāt siddhokto ‘ʻmaraśāsane [all: -sāsane] | (13)

guruvaktragataṁ jñānaṁ labhyate svamate mate || 202 |
bodhabhāskaravijñānaṁ karṇāt karṇe [kh: karṇa] krame sthitam | (14)

Beyond the root of Kula, it is within that which is beyond the beyond of

consciousness of the union (of Rudra and His energy). He is said to be a Siddha

in the Immortal Teaching by virtue of the penetration of Rudra’s energy. (13)

The knowledge (of Inaction) in the teacher’s mouth is obtained within

the Mata of one’s own school (mata). It is the knowledge of the Sun of

Consciousness that belongs to the oral transmission. (14) (202-203ab)
antargagane yā kācit [all: kāviṉ] saṁvidānandanandinī|| 203 ||

40b gh) tatsvarūpaparollāsavikāse [kh: tatstha-; all: -saṁ] sphurat kaulinī |
(15)
³¹ The Void is the Twelve Kālīs, the world, and the source and end of the Twelve Kālīs.

TANTRĀLOKA

429

kaulakaṅkālakalayā [kh: -kaṅkola-] grāsaghasmararūpinī||204 ||
kālī kālāñjanī bhīmā dvādaśoditabhānavī [k: -sobhitabhānakī; kh: bhitabhānakī; gh: dvādasodita-] | (16)
kramākramaṁ [all: kramātkrama] paraṁ kramaṁ [k kh: paraṁ krāma; gh:

paraṁ krãmaṁ ] saṁkrāãmaṁ kãlikākramam || 205 ||

sphuraty antargatā [all: -gato] ghūrmir anākhyaṁ [all: ghṛrmmira-] spandam
urtamam | (1T)

Kaulinī is that certain (inscrutable one) who delights in the bliss of

consciousness shining vibrantly within the inner Void, which is the expansion
(vikāsa) of the supreme outpouring of that essential nature. (15)
As the energy of Kaula Kaṅkāla, She voraciously consumes
(grāsaghasmara). Kālī is the energy of the Sun (bhānavī) consisting of the

twelve risen (suns). Terrible, she manifests Time (kālāñjanī). (16) (203cd-

205ab)

Both process (krama) and its absence (akrama), it is the supreme
Krama, it is the Kālikākrama, which is (the enlightening) transmission
(saṁkrāma). It shines radiantly as the inner pulse of inebriation (ghūrmi), the
supreme and inexplicable (anākhya) vibration (spanda) (of consciousness). (17)

(205cd-206ab)

cidaciccakramadhyastho [all: ~krama * stho] yoganidrānubhāvitaḥ [all: -

mubhāvitaḥ] || 206 ||

śūnyāśūnyāntaragataḥ sa [all: śūnyaṁśūnyāntaragato na] vindati kulātmakam |

(18)

antargalitaciddhāmasvabhāvapadasaṅṁvidaḥ [all: -cidvāma-; k kh: -saṁ * daḥ]

I|207 1

asau [gh: anau] parāparollāsaḥ [k kh: pammaparollāsa; gh: pamyaparollāsa]
kālicakravijrmbhitaḥ | (19)
Located between the cycles (cakra) of consciousness and the
unconscious, it is sanctified by the Sleep of Yoga (yoganidrā). He who is in
between emptiness (śūnya) and fullness (aśūnya) attains the Kula nature. (18)
It is the supreme (transcendental) and inferior (immanent) outpouring
that has expanded out as the Wheel of Kālī of the consciousness which is on the
plane of one’s own nature, the abode of consciousness that has inwardly melted
away. (19) (206cd-208ab)

brahmādidevatāḥ [all: -tās] sarvā [all: sarvān] bhairavānte [all: -vānta]

prakīrtitāḥ [all: prakīṛtitam ] || 208 II
līyate ca paraṁ tejaḥ [all: teja] kālavahnighanīkṛtam [gh: -vāhna-] | (20)
41a gh) citprakāśaṁ [k: cipakāsa; kh: -sa; gh: cidākāsa] paraṁ [gh: para]
guhyaṁ uditaṁ kulabhãskaram l| 209 ||
dvādaśāraṁ sutejāḍhyaṁ [gh: sutejāghṁ] bhūrisūryasamaprabham | (21)
jīvasya jīvanaṁ [all: jīvasañ] jīvaṁ prakāśayati tanmayam [all: tanmanaṁ] ||

210 l|
tenaiva yuktibhedena paśur vedhayate [k gh: pasuṁvedhayate; kh: paśu-]
balam | (22)
śivadhāmāntare [all: śivādvāmāntaraṁ] devi sahasoditabhāvanā || 211 ||

430

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

haṭhakramaparāśaktir vedhayet [k: haṭhakramyaparāśaktivedhayes; kh gh:
haṭha * * parā-] mānavigraham | (23)
All the deities from Brahmā onwards are said to be within Bhairava.
The supreme radiant energy (tejas) dissolves away, made dense by the Fire of
Time. (20)
The light of consciousness, the supreme secret, is the risen Sun of Kula.

It has twelve rays and, endowed with beautiful radiant energy, it shines like
many suns. (21)

It is the life of the living being, and it illumines the living being, which

is of that same nature. In this same way, it causes the fettered soul (and its)

power (bala) to be pierced (with its energy). (22)

Contemplation born of Audacity (sahasa) is within Siva’s abode. The

supreme energy of the Process of Forceful (Realisation) (haṭhakrama) should

pierce through the form of cognition (mānavigraha) (and illumine it). (23)

(208cd-212ab)

vyomātītaṁ vyomapadam uditaṁ [gh: -mudinaṁ] bhānavīkramam || 212 ||
jvālāsahasratejāḍhyaṁ trailokyaṁ grāsaghasmaram | (24)
22b k) 20b kh) tridhāmodayamadhye [k gh: -mādaya-; kh: -mādayamakhya] tu
cittejaparabhāvitaḥ || 213 ||
nirviṣaṁ viṣam ākramya kālakūṭavibhakṣitam [k kh: -taḥ] | (25)
kulaṁ kulākulāmnāyaṁ rasaṁ rasasamudbhavam [k kh: rayasamudbhavaṁ] l||

214 ||
padaṁ padãpadãttaṁ [all: padapadã-] sthãnaṁ [all: sthãna] kaulikam
uttamam | (26)

The Liturgy of the Sun (bhānavīkrama) transcends 1) the Void and is 2)

the risen plane of the Void. It is rich with the radiant energy of a thousand fires.

It is the voracity of the devouring (grāsa) (consciousness that consumes) the

three worlds. (24)
It is supremely sanctified by 3) the radiant energy (tejas) of
consciousness which is in the middle of the arising of the Three Abodes,³² once
having penetrated into the Poison (i.e. pervasion ~ viṣa) which is without

poison, digested by the Peak Syllable of Time (i.e. HRĪṀ). (25)

The plane beyond both (the sphere) with planes (and levels) and that

without is the excellent location (sthāna) of Kula. It is Kuḻa, the tradition of
Kula and Akula, the juice (of aesthetic savour) (rasa) born of the juice (of
aesthetic savour). (26) (212cd-215ab)

garbhasthā garbhaṇĩ garbhã pañcagarbhaprasũyinĩ || 215 l||
41b gh) ekā siddhis triyoniś ca [all: siddhitrayonī ca] udyogakramamālinī [gh:
-krama * linī] | (27)
svarādivarṇavimalaṁ sthānaratavibhakṣitam || 216 ||
tadviśrāmaparābhūmiḥ kālitejaḥprakāśitaḥ | (28)
³² Five more triads follow, marked by numbers as here. Above in 156cd, this triad is
called the Triple Kaula. The triadic form is differentiated (sakala) and the single form
undifferentiated (niṣkalā).

TANTRĀLOKA

431

bodhā bodhayate bodhaṁ svabodhāt paribodhitam [all: para-] I| 2177 ||
cakracāravibhedena [gh: cakrācāra-] saṁkrāmanti parasparam | (29)

Mālinī of the Process of Exertion (udyogakrama) is the one (supreme)

accomplishment (siddhi) with three sources (triyoni). She is 1) the Womb
(garbhā) 2) residing in the Womb (garbha); she is 3) the pregnant (energy of

the) womb (garbhiṇī), who gives birth to five wombs (i.e., KHPHREṀ). (27)
It is pure with all the letters, beginning with the vowels, and the one
devoted (rata) to (that) place has been consumed. The supreme plane of its

repose is illumined by the radiant energy of Kālī. (28)

(She is) 1) the energy of consciousness (hodhā) that awakens 2) the

consciousness that has been awakened by 3) one’s own consciousness.* They
penetrate into one another in consonance with the variety (vibheda) of the
movement of the cycle (of Kālīs) (cakracāra). (29) (215cd-218ab)

svabhūmibhūmim ākrāntaṁ [all: -nta] khecaram ūrdhvakham uttamam [k kh:
khecanmūrddhakha-] (one syllable too long) || 218 II

tadvadvīryāvabhāṣsena [gh: -vabhāse *] piṇḍaṁ [all: pinda] spandataraṁ [all:

piṇḍataraṁ] gatam | (30)

kālākālaṁ [all: -kāla] svakālaṁ ca tyaktvā [k: tyaktyā; gh: bhaktyā] viśrāntayet
[k kh: -yen; gh: -yas] sukhe [k kh: mukhaṁ,; gh: sukhaṁ] | 219 l|

tatsukhe [all: tatsukhaṁ] krīḍate yogī spṛṣṭvā cittejamaṇḍalam | (31)
rūpārūpāntaraṁ rūpaṁ svarūpaṁ rūpavarjitam || 220 ||
bhāvābhāvavinirmuktaṁ sarvatoditaniṣkalam [gh: -la] | (32)
tatroditā parā devī kālī kaṅkālabhakṣiṇī || 221 ||

42a gh) kaṅkālakandalaṁ pātraṁ pītvā [gh: pītyā] vyomāmṛtodbhavam | (33)

(Bhairava) the Skyfarer is the upper, most excellent Void, pervaded by
the plane of the plane of its own (inherent nature). The body (piṇḍa) (of
energies) pulsates more intensely (spandatara) by the manifestation of that
vitality. (30)
1) Once having abandoned time (and its opposite), 2) the absence of
time (akāla) as well as 3) one’s own time, one should bring (all time) to rest

within bliss. Once having made contact (sprṣrvā) with the sphere of the radiant
energy (tejas) of consciousness, the yogi sports in that bliss. (31) (218cd-220ab)
1) One’s own form, 2) devoid of form, is 3) the form between form and
its absence (arūpa). The undifferentiated reality (niṣkala) is everywhere
manifest (udita), free of Being and Nonbeing. (32)

1) Once having drunk from the vessel of the sprout (kandala) of the
Skeleton born of the nectar of the Void, 2) Kālī, the Supreme Goddess who
devours (the Kula of) the Skeleton (kaṅkāla) (of mortal existence),³⁴ has arisen
(uditā) there. (33) (218cd-222ab)

ghūrmitā vamitā sā [k: ya; kh gh: ye] ca tena viśvasamudbhavam || 222 ||
³³ The triadic consciousness dissolves away into pure consciousness at rest. (230cd231ab (41))
³⁴ Cf. below, 228cd-229a (40). This is why this Kālī is called Kaṅkāla Kālī, and the

tradition relating to her is the Kaṅkāla Kula.

432

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

nijadhāmasvarūpastho yogī yogabalāvṛtaḥ [all: yogapalā-] | (34)
khakandarasam ākṛṣya [all: ka- -raso kṛṣya] mahākramavicārakaḥ || 223 ||

paraṁ

bhuktvā

|gh:

parodbhavam ḷ (35)

bhuktyā] paraṁ piītvā paraṁ

drṣṭvā

[gh:

evatṁ samaraso [all: samarasaṁ] bhūtvā kālikramavicārakaḥ || 224 ||

kalpāntakalpitaṁ
.([gh:
kulakalpavikalpitam | (36)

kalpāntavalpitaṁ]

kalpaṁ

[k

kh:

tṛṣṭvā]

kalāṁ]

3) She is made to pulsate (ghūrmitā) and is emitted (vamitā), and so the
universe has come into being. The yogi, enveloped in the power (bala) of yoga,
resides in the essential nature of his own abode. (34)
Absorbing (into himself — ākṛṣya) the juice (rasa) of the root of the
Void, he contemplates the Mahākrama. 1) Having eaten the Supreme, 2) having
drunk the Supreme, and 3) having seen the Supreme, the Supreme arises. (35)
He who contemplates the Kālīkrama, having become one (samarasa) in
this way, the aeon (kalpa) is conceived within the aeon. It is conceived
(vikalpita) by the conception (kalpa) of Kula (the Twelve Kālīs). (223-225ab)

23a k) kālicakram abhedaṁ ca uditāvyaktamaṇḍalam || 225 ||
sthūlaṁ [all: sthūla] sūkṣmaṁ tathā śūnyaṁ [gh: śūnya]

tricaitanyaṁ [all: -tanya] layaṁ gatam [all: -gataḥ] | (37)
21la kh) tatra dhāmoditā kācid viśvākhyā [k gh: visvākhya; kh: -khya]
sumarīcinī || 226 ||
bindunādakṣaye kṣīṇe sthāne citpadamaṇḍale | (38)
bhāvayed divyayoniṁ |[all: -yonī] ca siddhānāṁ pañca garbhiṇīm [all: -

garbhinĩ] l| 227 II
mahākālakalāntasthāṁ [all: -tasthā] kālacakreśvarīṁ [all: kālacakrarī] kalām

[all: kalā] | (39)

The Wheel of Kālīs is the oneness (abheda) which is the risen (udita)

Sphere of the Unmanifest (avyaktamaṇḍala). 1) Gross, 2) subtle and 3) void —
(this) triple consciousness has dissolved away. (37)
A certain (power) with beautiful rays who is called ‘all things’ has
arisen there (in that) abode when, with the waning away of 1) the Drop and 2)
Sound, 3) the Place (sthāna), which is the sphere of the plane of consciousness,

has waned away. (38)
Contemplate the divine Yoni, who contains within herself the five
Siddhas (of the higher energies of consciousness and the elements) and is the
energy within the energy of the Great Time, that is, Kālacakreśvarī (the Misṭress
of the Wheel of Time). (39) (226-228ab)

tena kālīti vikhyātā [all: vikṣātā] kaṅkālakulabhakṣiṇī [all: -kalabhakṣiṇī] || 228
I
bhāvābhāvasvabhāvasya [all: -subhāvasya] ciccakracidacarvitaḥ | (40)
svādasaṁbodhāhlādena [all: -bodha-] sphuratkālikramodayaḥ || 229 ||
bhramadbhramaranirghoṣaṁ [all: bhramadbhramara-] līyate yat pare pade !

(41)

tatra [all: tatroṅ] galitayogendro yoginīnāṁ [k kh: -ṇīnāṁ; gh: -ṇānāṁ] priyo
bhavet || 230 ||

TANTRĀLOKA

433

viśrāntabodhavimalo vedhayet khasvamaṇḍalam [all: ka-] | (42)
Thus, she is known as Kālī who devours the Kula of the Skeleton (of
worldly existence). The essential nature of Being and Nonbeing is relished by
the consciousness of the cycle (cakra) of consciousness. (40)

The Kālīkrama arises (as Kuṇḍalinī,) pulsing with energy by the delight
of the consciousness of (its) savour (svāda). It merges into the supreme plane
with the sound of a flying bee (bhramara). (41)
The yogi who has dissolved away there is the beloved of the yoginīs.
Pure with consciousness at rest, he should pierce through his own sphere of the

Void. (41) (228cd-231ab)

kulakālivibhedena niśreṇikramamāśritaḥ [all: nisroni- -śritam] || 231 |

garbhãdivadgarbhapadaṁ |[gh: -givad-] bhagavat bhagadrāvakam [k gh:
bhagavam-; kh: bhagavas-] | (43)
mahācitkamalānandaṁ [gh: nanda] vikasadbodhabhāskaram || 232 ||

hāsyalāsyavilāso yat [all: -lāsavilāghāt] tad bhrāmyābhrāmyacodakam [all:
bhrāmya-] | (44)
cidādhārahathākarṣakālipūjākramārūḍhaḥ [k gh: cīrādārahathā--kramoruhaḥ;

kh: cīrādāra--kramoruha] || 233 ||

43a gh) hānādānavibhedena tyāgagrahaparikṣaye | (45)
He abides in the tradition (krama) with no line (niḥśreṇi) by piercing
through the Kālī of the Kula (of the Twelve Kālīs). The plane of the womb
(garbha) is like the womb etc. and, like the Yoni (bhaga), it causes the Yoni to

flow. (43)

The expanding (vikasat)³² Sun of Consciousness (hodhabhāṣskara) is the

bliss of the great lotus of consciousness. The (joyous) play (vilāsa) of humour
and dance impels (the universe,) mobile (bhrāmya) and immobile (abhrāmya).

(44)

When grasping and rejection, due to the distinction between taking up
and letting go, has ceased, (the yogi) is established in the liturgy of the worship

(pūjākrama) of Kālī,⁰ which is the forceful attainment (harhākarṣa) of the
foundation of consciousness. (45) (231cd-234ab)

nirīkṣamānas [all: -māna] tattvajño jñānārkaṁ [all: -rka] saṁprakāśayet [all:
-sayet] || 234 |
viśvākāroditaṁ

[k

kh:

viṣvā-;

gh:

visvā

*

roditaṁ]

cakraṁ

viśvasthityāvabhāsakam [k gh: visvāsthityā; kh: viśvāstityā; all: -vabhāsakaḥ] |

(46)

viśvasaṁhārakas tejas [all: visvasaṁhāriyaṁ] tattejogrāsaghasmaraḥ || 235 ||

vividhena vibhāgena
hathākramya-] | (AT)

|[all:

vimārgena]

haṭhakramam

anuttamam

[all:

³³ The word vikāsa and derivatives is common in post-scriptural nondualist Śaiva

terminology, but is surprisingly rare in the Jayadrathayāmala. However, here it appears
several times.

³⁶ The dynamism of the Kālīs itself is worship.

434

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR
(Such a one,) who knows reality, lights up the Sun of Consciousness

(jñānārka) (even as) he is engaged in observing (all things). The Wheel in the

form of the universe is risen (udita) and illumines the abiding state of all things
(viśvasthiti). (46)
That radiant energy (tejas) is universal destruction. It is the voracious
one who consumes (grāsa) that energy. The Process of Forceful (enlightenment)
(haṭhakrama) with its many divisions is the most excellent (anuttama). (47)

(234cd-236ab)

karoti kramiko yogī sa [all: sad] yogī [k: yaugī] yoginīpriyaḥ [k kh: -priye; gh:

priyeḥ] l| 236 ||

23b k) khapakṣabhakṣiṇī [all: - kṣanī] bhakṣyalakṣakṣīṇā [all: bhakṣa-]
sulakṣaṇā [all: kṣalakṣagaḥ] | (48)
sphuratghūrmigatānandanityoditavijrmbhitam
[k
gh:
-ratā-;
kh:
sphuratpurmiratā-] || 237 II
svasvabodhaṁ [all: -vodha] parāmrśya [all: -mṛkṣa] bhāvābhāvaviparyaye [k
kh: -vipayaye] | (49)
The Krama yogi does this and is the beloved of the yoginīs. (The
goddess,) beautiful, and devoid of the objective sphere of enjoyment, devours
the polarity of emptiness (khapakṣa). (48)
(She does this) in order to eliminate (viparyaya) Being and Nonbeing,
once having contemplated her own consciousness, which is the perpetually risen
expansion of the bliss inherent (gata) in the radiant pulse (of consciousness —

ghūrma). (49) (236cd-238ab)

viśrāntas tu [kh: viśrāntasut; gh: viśrāntastut] kvacid yukto [k: -yuktā; kh:
kracidyuktā; gh: kacidyuktā] guruvaktrāt [k: -vaktrā] tu labhyate [k gh:
rabhyate] || 238 ||
nādhor nordhve [k kh: nādhonorddhe; gh: nādhānorddhe] na madhye vā na
bāhyābhyantare `pi [k gh: vāhyebhyantarepi; kh: vāhyentarepi] ca [gh: *] |

(50)

43b gh) 21b kh) vismitaḥ [all: vismṛta] smaryate [k gh: smayate] yatra tatra
[gh: tatrā] kālikramodayaḥ || 239 |
śrīniṣkriyānandanāthena śāvarenaiva [all: sāvarasaiva] bhūtale |
uktā pañcāśikā [all: -sikā] devi kālikākramam uṭtamam || 240 ||

The (yogi) intent (on this process — yukta) rests somewhere (in some

inscrutable place) and obtains (this teaching) from the teacher’s mouth. neither

below nor above, neither in the middle, within nor outside. (50) (237cd-238)

The Kālikrama arises wherever the astonished (yogi) recollects (it). The
venerable Śāvara Niskriyānandanātha has uttered the fifty (verses and revealed)

the most excellent Kālikākrama on the face of the earth. (238cd-240)
devyuvāca

Śrutaṁ deva mayā sarvaṁ [kh gh: sarva] kālikākramapaddhatim |
siddhasaṁdohavijñānaṁ pāramparyakramāgatam [k: pāraṁpaya-;
kramogatam] || 241 ||

kh:

-

TANTRĀLOKA

435

adyāpi [gh: ādyāpi] saṁśayo nātha tvayoktaṁ praśnapūrvakam [all: prasna-] |
dvādaśārkaprabhākālīnāmasaṁjñā [k gh: -sajñā] kathaṁ bhavet || 242 ||

etad ākhyāhi [k: prata-,; kh: pravadākhyā hi] me nātha mantrapūjāsamanvitam ḷ

The goddess said:
0O god, I have heard all the (teaching concerning) the liturgy

(paddhati)⁷ of the Kālikākrama, which is the knowledge of the extracted

essence (saṁdoha) of the (teachings of the) Siddhas, and has come down

through the tradition of the lineage (of teachers). But even now, I have a doubt,

O Lord, you mentioned this before the initial question. What are the names of
the Kālī who is the light of the Twelve Suns? Tell me that, O Lord, along with
their Mantra and rite. (243ab)

bhairava uvāca
śṛṇu devi pravakṣyāmi rahasyaṁ kaulikāgamam [gh: kolikā-] || 243 1|
gopanīyaṁ mahābhadre [gh: -bhaḍe] tathāpi kathayāmi te |
sr̥ṣṭikālī [k kh: -kāli] sthitikālī saṁhāraṁ ca tṛtīyakam || 244 ||

44a gh) raktakālī caturthī ca sukālī pañcamī smṛtā [k: -tāṁ; gh: -taṁ] |
yamakālī tathā ṣaṣṭhī [k gh: ṣastha] mṛtyukālī ca saptamī|| 245 ||
aṣṭamī bhadrakālī ca paramārkā nava smṛtā [all: smṛtāḥ] |
mahāmārtaṇḍakālī ca dāśamī parikīrtitā [all: -tāḥ] || 246 l|
ekādaśī rudrakālī mahākālī tu dvādaśī |
etad [gh: eted-] bhedakramaṁ devi nāmasaṁjñā prakīrtitā [all: -tāḥ] || 247 ||

Bhairava said:
Listen, O goddess, I will tell (you) the secret of the Kaula tradition
(āgama). O great auspicious one, it should be kept secret, but even so I will tell
you. (The twelve Kaālīs are) 1) Sṛṣṭikālī, 2) Sthitikālī, and 3) Saṁhārakālī, the
third, 4) Raktakālī is the fourth, 5) Sukālī, the fifth, 6) Yamakālī, the sixth, 7)
Mṛtyukālī, the seventh, 8) Bhadrakālīis the eighth, 9) Paramārkā (Kālī)is said
to be the ninth, 10) Mahāmārtaṇḍakālī is said to be the tenth, 11) the eleventhis

(Kālāgni) Rudrakālī and 12) Mahākālī, the twelfth. O goddess, this sequence of
the various (Kālīs) is said to be (the one of Kālī’s) names. (243cd-247)
svabhāvā [k: svasvadhā; kh: svasvavā] svasvarūpā ca vyomānte [gh: vyomante]
vyomabhakṣiṇī |
hrūṁ śrīṁ mantreṇa saṁpūjyā [all: saṁpūjya] dvādaśāre sadoditā [gh: -ta] l|

248 I|

madhye tu paramā devi kumārī kulabhakṣiṇī|
dvādaśānte [all: -śāntan] tu saṁpūjyā [all: saṁpūjya] pūrvoktavidhi vallabhe ||

249 I|

gurupaṅktiṣṭathā
[all:
gurupaktitathā]
pāramparyakramāgatā [all: -gatam] |

³⁷ Here, this term refers to a yogic, not ritual, procedure.

pūjyā

[all:

pūjya]

436

APPENDIX B CHAPTER FOUR

bāhye [gh: -hya] tu madhye [gh: -dhya] pṛṣṭhe [all: pṛthve] ca evam eva

kramaṁ nyaset || 250 ||

Kaālī is the essential nature (svabhāvā) (of all things). Within the Void

(vyoman), she devours the Void. Perpetually risen in the twelve-spoked (wheel),
she should be worshipped (there) with the Mantra HRIṀ ŚRĪṀ. The supreme
goddess Kumārī, who devours the Kula (of the twelve Kālīs),is in the middle. O
beloved, she should be worshipped in the aforesaid way within (and at the end

of) the twelve (dvādaśānta). The lineage of teachers, that has come down in due

order through the tradition, should be worshipped then. One should deposit the
Krama (everywhere) in this way, externally, in the middle, and behind. (250)

Appendix C
to Chapter Four
Chapter Five of the Kālikulakramapañcaśatika,

also called the Devīpañcaśatika

The Sequence of Thirteen Kālīs
The next phase of development of the Kālīkrama is characterized by a
number of features. One is the emergence of independent Kālīkrama Tantras.
Another is the figure of Matsyendranātha, who is portrayed as the founder of
Kaulism, from which the Kālīkrama ultimately developed. Thirdly, the location
of the place where these Tantras were revealed. Niṣkriyānanda lived in Śrīśaila,
whichis in eastern central Indiain whatis nowadays Andhra. Now these Krama
teachings are revealed in Oḍḍiyāna, also called the Uttarapīṭha or Śrīpīṭha.¹
Characterized as an oral tradition, it is transmitted through a named lineage of
Siddhas and Yoginīs beginning with Matsyendranātha.
We have seen that the Kālīkrama, also called Kālīkula, is well known to
the Jayadrathayāmala, which incorporates it into its own teachings. However,
although it is a well-developed Kula, it is not yet associated with
Matsyendranātha. This association took place when the Kālīkula assumed an
independent status, with Tantras of its own. Matsyendra and his mythical

predecessors in previous aeons (yuga) are worshiped in the maṇḍala of the

teachers along with their consorts and the spiritual descendants of
Matsyendranātha as a prelude to the Kula ritual described by Abhinavain
Chapter Twenty-nine of the Tantrāloka. A major source of this ritual, called
Ādḍiyāga,is the Mādhavakula, thatis, the fourth ṣaṭka of the Jayadrathayāmala.
The relevant passage is translated in an Appendix to Chapter Twenty-nine.
There is no mention there, or in any other parts of the Jayadrathayāmala, of
Matsyendranātha and associates. Even so, Abhinava begins his version of the
rite with the worship of the Gurumaṇḍala of the four Yuganāthas, thus
conforming the procedure of the Ādiyāga taught in the Mādhavakula to the later
Kaula rites that considered their first teacher to be Matsyendranātha. How far
this was Abhinava’s synthesis, or whether he was drawing from Trika Tantras is
not possible to say. None of the three that survive teach Ādiyāga, nor is the

Trika they teach linked to the Krama, thus rendering their Kaulism weak.

Jñānanetra, who founded the Kashmiri Kālīkrama, belonged to the
middle of the ninth century. Abhinava postdates him by over a century. It is not
clear to what degree the Kāḹīkrama had developed before him. Abhinava does
quote some works that, judging by their name and the context in which he refers
to them, belonged to that tradition. These include the Kālīkula and possibly the
Devīpañcaśatika. Important is the Ūrmikaulārṇava. This is a Kālīkrama Tantra
aṭtributed to Matsyendranātha, which has partially survived in two Nepalese
manuscripts (see bibliography). Abhinava quotes it several times.² However,
' DP 7/13b: jñānaṁ śrīpīṭhasaṁbhavam |

² See Gnoli 1999: 701.

438

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

Jayaratha quotes several more Kālīkrama texts that Abhinava would certainly
have read and most probably quoted, had they been available to him. Notable in

this respect is the Kramasadbhāva.

It is clear from the great attention Abhinava pays to the Twelve Kālīs
that he understood the teaching concerning them to be the fundamental one of
the Krama system he knew. Krama is the most elevated esoteric core of his
Trikakula. The goddess of the Krama, Kāḻasaṁkarṣiṇī, is called Beyond Parā
(Parātītā) in the Devyāyāmala of the Trika, even as she integrates the three
goddesses, Parā etc. of the Trika, into herself as Kālī who is Anākhyā – the

Inexplicable. The Twelve Kālīs are THE universal activity of consciousness

(sāmānyaspanda), THE cycle of consciousness (saṁvitcakra, saṁvitkrama) and
THE Wheel of Energies (śakticakra), the most excellent of all the wheels and

cycles. Thus, they are the culminating experience in all three categories of
practice.
Most of the features of the early teachings were carried over into the
next phase, in which independent Kālīkula Tantras arose. They were relatively
short and just a few. Those we have recovered include the Kramasadbhāva,
Ūrmikaulārṇava, and the Dvyardhaśatika which is derived from the
Yonigahvaratantra ‘brought down to earth’ by Śivānanda. We also have the
Kālīkulapañcaśatika that Jayaratha invariably calls the Devīpañcasṣaṭika. There
we find, for the first time, as far as we can tell, individual descriptions of the

Kaālīs. Before, the texts only supplied their names. As they are reflections of the

one in the centre, the visualized forms are all the same. Nonetheless, there are

significant differences in their character and behaviour. Thus, although short,
this was a very important Tantra of the Kālīkula, and Jayaratha quotes its
description of the Kālīs in full. Noteworthy is that these descriptions are not
visualizations of their iconic forms. Even so, in the same chapter five, it also

outlines how they are to be worshipped. Accordingly, the whole chapter has
been edited and translated in this Appendix.
In the DP, the outbursts of visionary experiences evoked in the Kālīkula
of the Mata of the Jayadrathayāmala settle down into a more clearly defined
theology of Kālī. Even so, the basis remains the same, namely, radiant visions of
Kālī’s luminosity and power as Śiva’s dynamic will_embodied in the
processions of Kālīs, marking the phases of the cycles of creation and
destruction. Again, there is no mention of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. Instead, as before, we
find Kṛśodarī in the centre, or the thirteenth in the series of Kālīs, that is,
Mahābhairavacaṇḍograkālī. As we have observed elsewhere, Śiva sometimes
appears as the Sun in the centre. In the citation below, he alternates with the
Goddess Bhāsā – the Shining One.
Again, in the following passage from chapter seven of the DP, we

observe, as we do in the Yonigahvara, the seed of the later fully developed

Krama system, here called ‘pañcārtha’, the Fivefold Reality. We notice its close

association with the Sun, that is identified here with Siva. Thus, the solar
associations found in the earliest form of the Krama, that is, the Kālīkula
teachings, continue into the second phase, marked by the emergence of
independent Kālīkula Tantras. The following passage from the DP is a good
example.

TANTRĀLOKA

439

‘Śiva, the supreme cause, is Mahādeva, the Eternal Sun, the field of which
is beyond conception. He is beyond Śakti and is supreme bliss, free of qualities and
supports, unchanging, supreme, pure, free of cause and example, present within all

existing things, beyond the Void, free of defects, and omnipresent, the doer of all

things. Free, full of nectar and unconditioned, he is present in all living beings. O
supreme lord! By his awakening, his Kālikā has arisen spontaneously (svecchayā),
the one supreme power endowed with those same attributes. She is subtle,
supreme, tranquil, and delighted by supreme bliss. Śivā has arisen spontaneously
(svabhāvataḥ), stainless, she is (all that is) to be known. She is the Supreme
Goddess (parameśvarī) who, by her own will is (both) Transmental and With

Mind (samanā). (18-23cd)³

The (power) that shares in Śiva’s attributes has arisen without (prior)

reflection (acintitā), like the light of the rays in the sun and (power) to burn
within it. It is Śiva’s will in the form of the Transmental and With Mind, (arisen
as) both dual and nondual. ‘l desire this and that spontaneously (anicchātaḥ lit.

‘without desire’)⁷ – that is this desire within Śiva, who is action that has arisen
as the supreme power who is the Transmental and With Mind. (25)
And (that energy) With Mind generates the Five-fold Reality
(pañcārtha) within this universe. The Transmental, who is Śiva’s capacity (to do
all things - sāmarthya), bestows the most excellent knowledge. She, the
Supreme Goddess, then again spontaneously (svecchayā) devours the universe.
Its permutation is said to be the Light which precedes the mistress of the wheel
of rays. When linked to Moon, Sun and Fire, she generates the seeds of (her)
energies. Her form is one and, transcendent (nirālokā), is the supreme abode.

(28)¹

³ arajaḥ śāśvato bhānuḥ [k, kh: bhrāntaḥ] kalpanātītagocaraḥ |

śaktyātītaḥ parānando guṇāśrayavivarjitaḥ || 18 II
nirvikāraḥ paraḥ śuddho hetudṛṣṭāntavarjitaḥ |
sarvabhāvāntarasthaś ca vyomātīto nirāmayaḥ [g: nī-] || 19 Il
sarvagaḥ sarvakartã [kh, g: -rttā] ca sṣvacchando ‘mṛtanirbharaḥ [k, kh: svacchandā] |

39g-b) nirupādhir mahādevaḥ sarvabhūteṣvavasthitaḥ || 20 l|
43kh-a) tasyāvabodhāt paramā svecchayā parameśvara |

jātā tatkālikā śaktir ekā taddharmadharmiṇī
[g: tarddharmmadharmmīṇī] || 21 ||
sūkṣmarūpā [kh, g: śūkṣma-] parā śāntā paramānandananditā |

svabhāvataḥ śivā jātā vedyarāpā nirañjanā || 22 ||
unmanā samanā sā tu ṣvecchayā parameśvarī |

⁴ yathā raśmiprabhā [g: rāśmi-] sūrye [g: sūrya] bahnau ca dahanātmikā || 23 ||
acintitā samutpannā śivasya saha dharmiṇī |
samanonmanarūpeṇa śivecchā [g: śivacchā] dvayam advayam || 24 ||
tat tad icchāmy anicchātas tadiccheyaṁ [k, kh, g: -da] kriye [g: kriyo] śive |

saṁbhãtã [g: saṁbhãtãṁ tu [g: taḹ parã śaktiḥ [g: śaktij samanonmanarāpiṇī | 25 II

43kh-b, 40g-a) samanā caiva viśve ‘smin pañcārthānāṁ prasūyinī |
unmanā śivasāmarthyā [g: -sāmathyā] dāpayej jīñānam uttamam [k: darpayejjñāna-;
kh: darpayet jñāna; g: darppayejñāna-] || 26 ||

punaḥ sā grasate viśvaṁ svecchayā parameśvarī |

tadvivartaḥ [k, kh, g: -vivarta] smṛto jyotiḥ puñjacakreśipūrvagaḥ [g: puñjacakroṣi-] |l
27 |

kalābījāni sūte ca somārkānalasaṁyutā |
ekākārā nirālokā paradhāmasvarūpiṇī || 28 II

440

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR
She assumes a state of oneness in the middle of one who possesses (her)

radiant energy. She shines present in multiplicity (nānākhya) like the light of

many suns. (That light) is not the moon, stars, it is not the light of the rays of
(the sun), the lord of the sky, nor is it the brilliance of lightning – (it is) is the
beautiful Sun of (the energy) With Mind, and that Light (bhāsā) is seen in the
belly (of consciousness) with the eye of knowledge that is the eye on the path of
opening (unmeṣa). She is not seen otherwise. All (things) shine due to her, Fire,

Moon, Sun and stars. As the division of Sun and Moon, she bestows the plane of

oneness. Thus, she who is the aggregate (kula) of rays and ferocious, the
Supreme One who has reached the final end of Kula, devours duality with the
Yoga of the Fire of (Universal) Destruction.’ (33)³

In this passage, Supreme Śiva is portrayed as the Sun of consciousness.
His divine power, Kālikā (the Little Kālī), possesses all His divine qualities and
shares in His nature as pure Light (bhāsā). As such She is the ŚSun, the one light
which illumines all the lights of the universe – those in heaven, namely that of
the sun, during the day, the moon and stars at night, and the light of the fire on
earth. Indeed, the extreme brilliance of Kaālī is emphasized repeatedly in all
these Kālīkula sources. As the Shining One (bhāsā), she is the Inexplicable
(anākhyā). The Five-fold Reality (pañcārtha) of Emanation, Stasis, Withdrawal,

the Inexplicable and Illumination are the realm of immanence generated by
supreme consciousness With Mind. It is illumined by the Transmental energy
Beyond Mind of the same consciousness. The former the Void of immanence of

manifestation, the latter the Void of transcendence of its gnosis. The focus here,
as throughout, the Kālīkula, is on Kālī as the Void of consciousness which

consumes all Her own manifestations (‘shinings’) by Her light, which is so
bright that the lights of manifestation disappear into its brilliance that thus burns
them up like fire. The Sun is the most obvious natural symbol of this. For
centuries, the Sun of Brahman has been venerated as the One Light which shines
here below, as the Upaniṣads declare, in the domain of time and mortality, and
s0 behind which is the domain of the Immortal.
We turn now to our text.
śrībhairavyuvāca
Śrṛṇu vakṣyāmi tat sarvaṁ vakrād vaktreṣu yat [k, g: ya] sthitam |

akathyaṁ paramaṁ sāraṁ vācyavācakavarjitam || ḷ ||

anyaśāstropamāhīnaṁ durvījñeyaṁ durāsadam |

³ tejas tu [g: tra] yasya madhyasthā saikībhāvatvamāgatā [g: maikī-] |
nānākhyagā tu sā bhāti bhūribhānusamaprabhā || 29 ||
naśaśī tārakābhāvo nāsau vyomeśaraśmibhā |
na ca sā taḍitaḥ prakhyā citrabhānuṣamānasā || 30 ||

44kh-a) sā bhāsā jaṭhare caiva [k kh, g: naiva] dṛśyate jāānacakṣuṣā |

unmeṣamārgacakṣuṣe nānyathā dṛśyate tu sā || 31 ||
pradīpyante tayā sarve [g: sarvva] vahnicandrārkatārakāḥ [g: -tārikāḥ] |
40g-b) ravisomavibhāgena sāmarasyapadapradā || 32 ||

tenāsormikulā [g: tanā-] bhīmā [kh: bhāmā] dvaitabhāvasya bhakṣiṇī |
saṁhāravahniyogena kulaprāptagatā parā || 33 || DP 7/1 8cd-33

TANTRĀLOKA

441

nādyāpi viditaṁ yac ca [g: yavva] siddhānāṁ bodhaśālinām [g: -sālināṁ] |I 2 ||
pāramparyakramāyātaṁ saṁcarantaṁ mukhānmukham 1
tac chṛṇuṣva [k, g: tat-] mahāprājña yathāvat kālikākramam || 3 ||
The venerable Bhairava said:
Listen, I will tell (you) all that has come from (my) mouth and is in the

mouths (of initiates). The supreme essence, devoid of (anything that can be)
denoted (by words) and (any) denotator, cannot be told (to others).

Incomparable (to anything in any other) śāstra, it is hard to understand and hard

to acquire. Even today, it has not been known by Siddhas, (even though they)
possess an awakened consciousness. It has come down through the series (of
masters and disciples) and moves from mouth to mouth. O greatly wise one,

listen to that Kālikākrama, as is proper. (1-3)

g 45a) yat tad brahma paraṁ dhāma vyomātītaṁ nirāmayam |
niṣkalaṁ [k: nikūlaṁ; g: nikṛlaṁ] ca paraṁ śuddhaṁ [k: śuddhi; g: śūddhi]
nirvikāraṁ nirāśrayam || 4 ||
kaivalyaṁ ca nirādhāraṁ sarvavāgjālavarjitam |
niṣṭattvaṁ paramātmākhyaṁ ajaṁ śāntaṁ dhruvaṁ [g: dhruva] śivam [k, g: śi

*J II5 I

bhāvābhāvapadairhīnaṁ [k: -padaihīnaṁ] bhāvanāparivarjitam |

That Brahman that is the supreme abode beyond the Void, free of

disease, formless, supremely pure, unchanging, without support, liberation

(kaivalya) (itself), without foundation, free of all the net of speech, free of the

metaphysical principles, called the Supreme Self, unborn, tranquil, peaceful,
stable, auspicious (siva), devoid of the planes of Being and Nonbeing, and
devoid of meditation. (4-6ab)

hānādānapadair muktaṁ [k: dānādānapadairyuktaṁ] sarvagaṁ parameśvaram

l

61

śaktyātītaṁ guṇātītaṁ sarvadvandvavivarjitam |
akṣarākṣarabhāvena bhāvyaṁ tanna kadācana || 7 I|
na dvaitaṁ na ca vãdvaitaṁ [k: nãdvaitaṁ] dvaitãdvaitobhayojjhitam |
kintu sarvopamāhīnaṁ yasya saṁvittilakṣaṇam || 8 I|
cittāt parataraṁ vāpi śabdāt [k: śraddhāt] parataraṁ sadā |
tasyāvabodhāt paramā śaktiḥ śaktimataḥ parā |I 9 |I

g 45b) akalā ca [g: va] kalārūpā maholkaiva [k: maholkeva; g: mahotkeva]

sutejasā [g: -sī] |

Free of the planeṣs of abandonment and assumption, omnipresent, the

Supreme Lord, beyond Śakti, beyond the qualities (of Nature), free of all

duality, that is never contemplated by any (word) made of letters, neither dual

nor nondual, free of both duality and nonduality, but (also) free of all metaphors.
(Its one) characteristic is consciousness (sarīvitti), and that is also beyond mind,

and always much great than speech (śabda). The Supreme Power, which is
greater than the possessor of power, (emerges) from its consciousness

(avabodha). Free of differentiated energy (akalā), Her nature is differentiated

442

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

energy (kalārūpā), like a great burning coal, She is (full of great and) beautifully

radiant energy (sutejasī) (6cd-10ab)

upamānasvarūpeṇa [k: -ne; g: -rūpena] bhūribhānurivoditā || 10 ||
khakalā khamayī [k, g: khabhayī] khasthā khecarīṣv api durgamā [k: durbhagā]

|
mahākālīkalākhyātā [k, g: -lāyātā] kalāmrtamayī śubhā lI I 1 II

In a metaphorical form, She arises like a great (radiant) Sun. The energy
(kalā) of the Void, She is the Void, residing in the Void. Even amongst the
Skyfarers She is hard to attain. She is called the energy of the Great Kālī. Made
of the nectar of energy (kalā), She is auspicious. (10cd-11)
tasyāḥ kavalanodyatāḥ (?) [k: -tā] kālyaṁśāntapadānugāḥ [k: kālpa - -gā; g:
kālpa -] |
saṁhārakāraṇe [k: -kālane; g: -kālaṇe] yās tu saṅṁsthitā [g: sa-] nāyikā hara ||

12Il

Born from Her (act of) swallowing (all things), they are consonant with

the plane within Kālī’s body; O Hara, the leaders (of the hosts of energies), they
abide in the cause of the destruction (of all things). (12)

tāsāṁ saṁharaṇārthārtham ekaikā [k kh g: ekeyaṁ] bahudhā gatā |
kālarūpāntakāriṇī [k, g: -karaṇī] yatra sā [g: so] śāntimṛcchati [g: -marcchati]

||13 I|

ekaikā sā svasāmarthyāt saṁhārakaraṇodyatā [all: saṁhāraharaṇo-] |
ekaikā ca parā devī jñeyā brahmasvarūpiṇī |l 14 |I
In order for them to accomplish their task of (universal) withdrawal,

each one (of those Kālīs) has become many. (Her essential) nature time, She

brings (all things) to an end. Wherever she is, she bestows peace. By virtue of
her own power, each one is engaged in bringing about withdrawal. One should
know that each one is the Absolute (brahmasvarūpiṇī), (each one) the supreme

(parā) goddess. (13-14)
evaṁ sā [k: syā

:

śā] dvādaśair bhedaiḥ [k:

-dair; g: dvādaśai-]

paramārkaṣvarāpi nī |i. -paramākta(rtha)-; g: paramākka-] |

dvādaśāpi tadutpannāḥ śuddhāḥ [g: śraddhāḥ] prakāśyanirmalāḥ [kh: prakāśa-

J|115 l

g 46a) sūryakotisahasrābhāś candrāyutanibhopamāḥ [k: -sahastrā- -pamā; g: sahastrā-] |
vigrahānte sarvadikkāḥ [k: savadikkā; g: -dikkā] śāntās taddharmam āgatāḥ [k:

-gatā] |¹ 1 6 ||

In this way, she is the Supreme Sun with twelve divisions. And twelve

have arisen from that, which is pure and free of the stain of the object of
manifestation. Their light is like that of thousands of billions of suns and they
are like billions of moons. Present in all the directions within (phenomenal)
form, tranquil, they have attained that nature (dharma). (15-16)

TANTRĀLOKA

443

sarvāstamitabhāvā sā kālī kālāntakāriṇī |

svabhāvapadasaṁrūḍhā [k: -saṁrūḍhāṁ] svaprabhā sā [all: vā] kuleśvarī || 17

I

mahākālīti saṁjñā sā pāramparyakramoditā [k: -kramoṁḍitā] |
sadasadtyaktasadbhāvā [k, g: sadasadvyakta-] paramānandanandinī|| 18 II
Her condition is that of all things that have set (and come to an end).

She is Kālī, who brings about the end of time (and death). Eṣtablished on the
plane of the essential nature (svabhāva) (of all things), a light unto herself, She

is Kuleśvaṁī, and Her name is Mahākālī, who has arisen within the sequence of
the transmission (pāramparyakrama). She is true Being that has abandoned
(phenomenal) being and nonbeing, delighted by supreme bliss. (17-18)
bindusthānācalā [g:

-vācalā] nityā svecchārūpā tu saṁsthitā [g: sa-] |

ekākinī caikavīrā ṣuṣūkṣmā [g: ṣuśūkṣmā] cāvyayā parā ll 19 ||

Immobile in the location of the (dimensionless) Point (bindu) (of the

light of consciousness), she is eternal and abides in the form of Her own
(inherent free)

will.

Solitary

imperishable and supreme. (19)

and

without companion

(ekavīrā),

She is

tāsāṁ nāmāni ye deva dvādaśa [k, g: -śaḥ] śṛṇu bhairava |

sarvakāraṇanirmuktā icchā tu yā [g: pā] tu [g: tī] saṁsthitā || 20 ||

khasvarūpā [k kh: ṣvasvarūpā] khamadhyasthā khacakre ca vyavasthitā [g:
pyapasthitā] |
nirāmayā cāprameyā anuccāryā guṇojjhitā [g: guṇojjhatā] |I 21 I|
O god, Bhairava, listen to their twelve names. She who is free of all
causes, who abides as (the free, omnipotent) will (icchā), Her nature the Void
(kha), located in the Wheel of the Void (khacakra), she abides within the centre
of the Void. Free of imperfection, immeasurable, unutterable, she is free of (all
phenomenal) qualities. (20-21)

phaṭkārāntā mahāghorā grasantī bhairaveśvarān |
ravimadhye nirānandā cinmarīcyantabhāsikā || 22. |
tasyā [k, g: tasya] dvādaśadhāmnāyaṁ [k, g: -dvādaśanā] nāmābhiḥ saha [k, g:

namadena] tac chṛṇu |

(As the Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Vidyā,) She ends with the syllable PHAT. Very

fierce, she devours lord Bhairava. She is the Bliss of Śtillness (nirānandā) who,

in the centre of the Sun (of consciousness) inwardly illumines the rays of
consciousness. Listen (now) to the teaching concerning her twelve-fold (form)
along with (their) names.” (22-23ab)

444

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

The Thirteen Kālīs of the Devīpañcaśatika
Withdrawal of Emanation
1) Sṛṣṭikālī (1) (withdrawal of the emanation of emanation)

mattodayā vyomarūpā vyomasthā vyomavarjitā || 23 ||
sarvā sarvavinirmuktā viśvasmin
nā̃inī |
yā kalā viśvavibhavā sṛṣṭyarthakaraṇakṣamā || 24 ||
yad antaḥ śāntiṃ āyāti sṛṣṭikālīti sā smṛtā |
Arising from me, Her form Emptiness (vyoman) and, located in
Emptiness, She is devoid of Emptiness. She is everything and, free of all things,
She destroys emanation in all this universe. That energy (kalā) whose glorious
power (vibhava) is all things and, capable of serving as the instrument of
emanation, inwardly attains tranquillity, is known as Sṛṣṭikālī.⁶ (23cd-25ab)
2) Sthitikāḹī (withdrawal of the emanation of persistence) (3)

haṁ ṣinī paudgalī yeyaṁ bālāgraśatakalpanā || 25 ||
kalpate sarvadehasthā sthitiḥ sargasya kāriṇī|
yad utpannā tu [ṭ: nta] sā devī puṇas tatraiva līyate || 26 ||

tāṁ viddhi [kh: ciddhi] devadeveśa sthitikālīṁ maheśvara |
‘She is Haṁsinī (the Gander of the Unstruck Sound of the vital breath)
and Paudgalī (the Goddess of the Embodied Soul), Who is (subtle) like the

hundredth part of the tip ofa hair. (She) is conceived (kalpate) to be in the body

of all (living beings, where She) brings about the persistence (sthiti) of creation.

The Goddess Who has arisen (thus), again merges just there (where She arises).
O Maheśvara, God of the gods, know Her to be Sthitikālī.⁷ (25cd-27ab)
3) Saṁhārakālī (5) (withdrawal of the emanation of withdrawal)

caṇḍakālī śuddhavarṇā yāmṛtagrasanodyatā || 27 ||
bhāvābhāvavinirmuktā viśvasaṁhārarūpiṇī |
yatra ṣā yāti vilayaṁ sā ca saṁhārakālikā || 28 I|
‘The fierce (caṇḍa) Kālī, Her colour pure (black), is intent on devouring
the nectar (of phenomena). (Called) Saṁhārakālikā, She is free of being and
nonbeing, Her nature is the withdrawal of all things and is where She dissolves

away.⁸ (27cd-28)

4) (2) Raktakālī (withdrawal of the emanation of the Inexplicable)

⁶ Quoted in TĀv ad 4/148.

” DP 5/27cd-27ab is quoted in the commentary on the description of Sthitināśakālī in

TĀv ad 4/150bcd.

⁸ Quoted in TĀv ad 4/152.

TANTRĀLOKA

445

na caiṣā cakṣuṣā grāhyā na ca sarvendriyasthitā |
nirguṇā nirahaṅkārā rañjayed viśvamaṇḍalam || 29 ||
sā kalā tu yad utpannā sā jñeyā raktakālikā |
That energy (kalā) that has arisen inwardly, that cannot be grasped by
the eye, is not present in any of the senses, and devoid of (phenomenal)

qualities, is free of ego, colours (with attachment the entire) circle of the
universe, should be known to be Raktakālikā.⁹ (29-30ab)

Withdrawal of Persistence

5) Sukāḻī
mahācito [k, kh: mahāncito; g: mahāścito] yathā sadyo urmī [g: ūrmi] madhyāj
jalaukasām [g:jalakaṇāṁ] l| 30 ||
kṣayaṁ yāti tu tatrastho jagat sarvam idaṁ tathā |
yā sā pralayakāle tu akramā kramayogataḥ || 31 II
Like a wave (in which) much (water) is gathered from the middle of the
ocean, present there, is destroyed in a moment, (so too) in the same way all this
universe (arises out of consciousness and therein ceases) at the time of (cosmic)

destruction. (That power which is) devoid of succession (operates in that way)
by (its) association with succession (krama). (30-31)

ahalā [k: aṭṭalā (?)] bhīṣaṇā [k: bheṣaṇā] raudrā kulakaulanirākulā |
alākṣyalakṣā [k: alakṣālakṣa; g: alakṣyālakṣa] nirlakṣā [g: nillakṣā] sukālī

nāma siddhidā || 32 |

‘She is Unstruck Sound (ahalā), t0 frightening, fierce, (both) Kula
(Śakti) and Kaula (the union of Śiva and Śakti), '' She is undisturbed.

Undefinable, She cannot be (perceived or) defined by (any) defining (feature)'²

– She is Sukālī, Who bestows success (siddhi)."³ (32)

6) Yamakālī (4) (withdrawal of the persistence of emanation)

yamarūpasvarūpaṣthā rūpātītasvarūpagā |
sā kalā līyate yasyāṁ yamakālī tu sā smṛtā || 33 |
Yamakālī is said to be (the Kālī) within which the energy (kalā) that is

present in the essential nature of the restraint (of injunctions and prohibitions)

⁹Quoted in TĀv 4/149-150a
¹⁰ Read ahalā in the place of ḍakalā.

' Read kulakaula- for kulakāli-.
'² Read lakṣanirlakṣā for lakṣyanirlakṣyā. The edited text of the DP reads:
ahalā [k, kh: aṭṭalā (?)] bhīṣaṇā [k, kh: bheṣaṇā] raudrā kulakaulanirākulā |
alakṣyā [k, kh: alakṣā] lakṣanirlakṣā [g: nillakṣā]
sukālī nāma siddhidā || DP 5/32.
'³ DP 5/32 is quoted in TĀv ad 4/173ab.

446

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

and in the essential nature (of reality which is) beyond form, dissolves away."⁴

(33)

7) Mṛtyukālī (6) (withdrawal of the persistence of persistence)
paśurūpā [g: pāśū-] svarūpasthā rūpātītādyatītagā |
kharakṣiṇī [k: kara-; g: karajviṇī] kaleśānī [k kh: -ni] mṛtyukālāntapātinī || 34 ||
mṛtyvantakā [k: mṛtyuntakā; g: mṛtyantakā] kalā yasya praviśed dehamaṇḍale |
Established in her own nature, her form is the fettered soul, present in
(the reality that is) beyond, beyond form and the rest, she protects the Sky, she
governs the energies, and falls at the extreme end of the time of death, the
destroyer of death, (this) energy (kalā) enters the maṇḍala of the body. (34-

35ab)

tena hy eṣā kuleśānī mṛtyukālāntapātinī || 35 ||
mrṛtyukālakalā yasyāḥ praviśed vigrahaṁ śiva |
tadā sā mṛtyukālīti jñeyā giriṣutādhava || 36 ||

Thus, She is' the Mistress of Kula, Who descends (pātinī) at the end of

the time of death. O Śiva, Arouser of the Daughter of the Mountains, (when)
Her energy, which is that of the Time of Death, penetrates the form (vigraha)

(of someone’s body),'⁶ she should then be known to be Mṛtyukālī (the Kālī of
Death).¹⁷ (35cd-36)

8) Bhadrakālī ((7) Rudrakālī) (withdrawal of the persistence of withdrawal)
gamāgamasugamyasthā mahābodhāvalokinī |
sarvalokasya kalyāṇī bhadrā bhadrasukhapradā |
yatraiva śāmyati kalā bhadrakālīti sā smṛtā || 38 |I
(bhedasya drāvaṇād bhadrā bhadrasiddhikarīti yā 1)
Present in (the reality) easily attained between the coming and going (of

the breath), She observes the Great Awakened Consciousness (mahābodha) and,

free of the impurity of Māyā, She delights in the nectar of knowledge. She is

auspicious (bhadrā), and benefiting all the world, She bestows auspicious
(bhadra) bliss.'⁸ The energy that comes to rest there is known as Bhadrakālī.¹⁹
' DP 5/33 is quoted in TĀv ad 4/151. Read with the MSs rāpātītā for rāpātīta
'⁹ Read, with the MSs of the DP, tena hy eṣā for om ity eṣā.
'⁶ Read with the MSs of the DP yasya for yasyāḥ. Two lines prior to this one in the MSs

this line is repeated. The second half reads praviśed dehamaṇḍale – ‘penetrates the
sphere of the bodyʼ.

' DP 5/35cd-36.

'⁴ Read with the manuscripts of the DP, bhadrā bhadrasukhapradā for rudrā

rudrasukhapradā.

¹⁹ Read with the manuscripts of the DP, ‘bhadrakālī tú’ for ‘rudrakālītī Notice that

bhadrā or bhadra replaces rudrā or rudra everywhere in these lines. As Jayaratha has

TANTRĀLOKA

447

As She dissolves away (dravaṇāt) duality (bheda), (She is the auspicious one
(bhadrā) Who bestows the (most) auspicious (bhadra) accomplishment.)² (37-

38)

9) (9) Paramārkakālī (withdrawal of the persistence of the Inexplicable)
ekākinī caikavīrā ṣusūkṣmā sūkṣmavarjitā |

paramātmaparāvasthā parāparasvarūpiṇī || 39 ||
sā kalā pararūpeṇa yatra saṁlīyate śiva |
sā kalā paramārkeṭi jñeyā bhasmāṅgabhūṣaṇa || 40 ||
O Śiva, You Whose body is adorned with ashes, the single solitary

energy (without a partner) (ekavīrā), Who is extremely subtle and (beyond it,) is

devoid of the subtle, She Who is the supreme state of the Supreme Self.³ Her

nature both supreme (transcendence) and lower (immanence), She Who is the

energy that merges there² with the supreme nature should be known to be the

Kālī (called) Paramārkā.²³ (39-40)
Withdrawal of Withdrawal

10) Mārtaṇḍakaālī (8) (withdrawal of the withdrawal of emanation)

Śabdabrahmapadātītā ṣaṭtriṁśāntanavāntagā |
brahmāṇḍakhaṇḍād uttīrṇā mārtaṇḍī mūrtir avyayā || 41 I|
sā kalā līyate yasyāṁ mārtaṇḍī kālikocyate |
Beyond the plane of the Sound Absolute (Śahdabrahman), present at

the end of the nine (syllables of Kāli’s Vidyā) at the summit of the thirty-six

(principles), beyond (Māyā, which is) the part that is the Egg of Brahmā

(brahmāṇḍa), She is Mārtaṇḍī, Whose form is imperishable. The energy that

merges within Her is called Mārtaṇḍī Kālikā.²⁴ (40-41ab)

11) Kālāgnirudrakālī (10) (withdrawal of the withdrawal of persistence)

varadā viśvarūpā ca guṇātītā parā kalā l| 42 ||
aghoṣā sāsvarārāvā kālāgnigrasanodyatā |
nirāmayā nirākārā yasyāṁ sā śāmyati sphuṭam || 43 II
just noted that the name for this Kālī is also Bhadrā, it seems unlikely that Jayaratha
himself made these changes. One wonders whether this clearly intentional alteration is
the work of the editors or scribes of the manuscripts of the Tantrāloka and commentary.

²⁰ DP 5/37-38 quoted in TĀv ad 4/158ab. The last line of the text is missing in the
manuscripts that have been recovered of the DP.

²!.
Read with the
paramātmapadãvasthã.

manuscripts

of

²² Read tatra for yatra.

the

DP

paramātmāparāvasthā

for

²³ DP 5/39-40 is quoted in TĀv ad 4/166cd-167. Read with the manuscripts of the DP sā
kāī for sā kalā.
²⁴ DP 5/41-42ab. Quoted in TĀv ad 4/163.

448

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

kālāgniruḍrakālīti sā jñeyāmaravandita |
The bestower of boons, its form all things, transcending the qualities (of

Nature), it is the supreme energy (kalā). Soundless, it is Unstruck Sound

(asvarārāvā), engaged in consuming the Fire of Time. Free of disease and
formless, O (Lord) praised by the gods, She Who clearly comes to rest within

that should be known to be Kālāgnirudrakālī.²⁹ (42cd-44ab)

12) Mahākālakālī (11) (withdrawal of the withdrawal of withdrawal)

rtojjvalā mahādīptā sūryakoṭiṣamaprabhā || 44 I

kalākalaṅkarahitā kālasya kalanodyatā |
yatra sā layam āpnoti kālakālīti sā smṛtā || 45 ||

Burning with (the energy of) menses,² blazing greatly, Her light is like
millions of suns, free of the stain of the powers (of limitation) (kalā), She is
intent on operating (kalanā) Time. There, where She dissolves away, she is

called Kālakālī.⁷ (44cd-45)

13) Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī (12) (withdrawal of the withdrawal of
the Inexplicable)

tejojjvalā [k kh: tejījvalā, g: tejojvalā] mahādīptā sūryakoṭisamaprabhā |

daśasaptaviṣargasthā mahābhairavabhīṣaṇā || 46 ||
saṅhared bhairavān sarvān viśvaṁ ca surapūjita |
sāntaḥ śāmyati yasyāṁ ca sā syād bharitabhairavī || 4⁷7 |I
mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī parā ca sā |

Burning with radiant energy, greatly energized, her light like that of a
billion suns, ‘O (Śiva) worshipped by (all) the gods, She Who resides in the

emission of the seventeen (energies),²⁸ fierce like the Great Bhairava, withdraws

all the Bhairavas and the universe. She within Whom She inwardly comes to
rest is Bhairavī, full (of all things). She is Parā (the Supreme Goddess) who is

²³ DP 5/42cd-44ab is quoted in TĀv ad 4/168.

²⁶ Read with the MSs of the DP, rtujvalā for ṛtojjvalā.
²⁷ DP 5/44cd-45 is quoted in TĀv 4/169-170.

²⁸ The Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, who is the supreme form of Kālī of the Kashmiri Kālī
Krama, consists of seventeen syllables. She is accordingly depicted as being in the
centre, as the seventeenth and highest Goddess, surrounded by Her sixteen aspects,
represented by Kālīs, each of which embodies one of the syllables of the Vidyā. Theṣe
kind of configurations (cakra, maṇḍala) of purely female forms, is an interesting feature

of the Kālī Krama and its predecessor, the Mata, which is expounded in the

Jayadrathayāmala. A striking, well-known example of the same is Śrīcakra of the

Śrīvidyā school, which also consists entirely of female forms. In both these cases, the

Goddess in the centre contains within Herself the male polarity which must, of course,
be present in some form. The Wheel of Sixteen energies, in this case Kālīs, symbolizes

the moon with its sixteen digits. The seventeenth in the centre is understood to be the

emissive energy (visarga) that generates and withdraws the others. This matter is

discussed at length in Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 1, 421 ff and vol. 2, 346 ff.

TANTRĀLOKA

449

Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī (the Fierce, Terrific and Ferocious Kālī of the

Great Bhairava).²⁹ (46-48ab)

pūjyam etad brahmapadme [all: -padme] nirākhye ca nirāmaye || 48 II
soḍaśānte navānte vā cidante [k, g: cidantaḥ] parameśvara |
svasaṁvittikrameṇaiva bāhye [k: vākye; g: vāhya] vātha [k: nātha] trilocana ||

49. 1|

[MS Kh resumes from here] rājavartena [k, g: rājavattena; kh: rāvattena]
rajasā vyomabimbaṁ tu [k: -vidhantu] kārayet |
bimbadvādaśakaṁ bāhye tad rūpam avatārayet || 5O II
kh 57b, g 49a) lohitaṁ vyomarekhāntaṁ [kh: -rekhānta; g: -reṣāntu] dadyāt
sindurakena ca [g: sidūrakena ca] |

viparyayeṇa vā kāryā śuklā [k: śuktā] vā vyomarekhikā || 51 II

niśite śūlacakre vā pūjayet tat svadehaje |

O Supreme Lord, that (group of Kālīs) should be worshipped on the

plane of the Brahman, which is unutterable and free of imperfection, at the End
of the Sixteen or at the End of the Nine within consciousness, or else, O Lord,
Three-eyed One! Externally in accord with the dynamism of one’s own
cognitive consciousness (svasaṁvittikrama). (48cd-49)

Cause a circle (vyomabimba) to be drawn with red lac (rājavarta) and

place twelve dots outside (around it).³N (Then) at the end of a line place a red

(dot made) with vermillion. Or else in the opposite way make a white line; or

else worship that within a sharp circle of spears born from their own body. 5052ab
pañcāśītis tu devīnāṁ koṭayas tatra nityaśaḥ || 52 ||
vyomarūpāś ca tiṣṭhanti mahāsiddhipradā yataḥ |
madhye pūjyā mahākālī bāhye ‘nyā dvādaśa kramāt || 53 ||
pūrvād ārabhya sarvās tāḥ pūjayed yoginandana |
strīveśadhārī bhūtvāsau nagnavāso [k, kh, g: -vāsā] mahāmatiḥ || 54 1|
nirvikalpaḥ [g: -lpa] prasannātmā pūjākarmaviśāradaḥ |
yathā tathā yatra tatra sarvatra vimalāśayaḥ [g: -śaya] || 55 |I

Eighty-five billion goddesses are constantly present there, their form the
Void (vyoman), they bestow great accomplishments. For one should worship
Mahākālī in the centre and another twelve (Kālīs) outside (around her) in due

order. Ó you who delight yogis, they should all be worshipped, beginning from

the east. The man of great intellect (mati) (should do so) wearing women’s

clothes (or) naked, free of thought, content and skilled in the rite of worship. His

²⁹ DP 5/46cd-48ab is quoted in TĀv ad 4/171-172. The last half of the last line reads in

the MSs of the DP -ghorā kālī parāparā. ʻ(She is) Mahābhairavāṇḍograghorā Kālī,
Who is (both) supreme (transcendent) and inferior (immanent).”

³⁰ See TĀ 31/26-29ab, where a form of the Trika Trident maṇḍala is described in the

Trikādbhāva that incorporates twelve ‘voidsʼ, i.e., circles, on the central lotus. See note

there.

450

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

intention pure, (he may do so in any way) it may be, wherever and everywhere.³¹

(52cd-55)

³k- k.

k. sk. + 5k ³?

asyāḥ [k, kh, g: asyāṁ] nāma [k, g: tama; kh: nama] na gṛhṇīyād avācyā [k, kh:
āã
: vācyāvā] ṣoḍaśādhikā || 63 I|
prayatnena vidyā vidyeśvareśvarī |
sakr̥duccāraṇād [g: urvvāraṇād] devyās tiṣṭhati kṣaṇamadhyataḥ [g: kṣa *-] ||

64 I|

ītis tu devīnāṁ kotayo vyomabhāsikāḥ [k, kh: -bhāṣikāḥ] |
tasmān noccārayed devīṁ khecaratvapradāyikām [k, kh: khecaraśca-; g:
khecaranva-] || 65 |I
One should not take her name, she who is (one) more than sixteen

cannot be uttered (avācyā). The Vidyā, who is the goddess of the Lord of
Vidyās, should be kept hidden with effort. By just uttering it once, the goddess

is present in a moment in the midst of 850 million goddesses who illumine the
Void. Thus, the Goddess, who bestows the state of flight, should not be uttered.

(63cd-65)

³k- k. s* sk. . + 5k ³Ī

mantro ‘yaṁ kila kālīnāṁ śrṇuṣv anyad [g: -nyat] vadāmi te || 68 1|
32g-b)
saptadaśākṣarāṁ
[k.,
kh,
g:
saptādaśākṣarā]
kṛtvā
pañcaphaṭkāravarjitām [k, kh, g: -varjitam] |
dvādaśābhyaś [k, g: dvādaśabhya-] caikam ekam ekaikasyā maheśvara || 69 ||
yojyaṁ [g: yojyāṁ] tadādimasyānte paścāt saṁjñāṁ prakalpayet |
phaṭkāraṁ ca tataḥ paścāt tamaḥpādāntavarjitā l| 70 ||
bījarājena [k, kh: bījena] vā pūjyā [kh: pūjya] nāmnā [kh: nāmnā]
cāmaṁtritena [k: -citena; kh: cāsaṁcitena] tu |

sṛṣṭisaṁṅhḥr̥danāmākhyās triyo [Missing 34b to 35a upto here] vividhayo matāḥ

l| 71 I

35kh-b) navākṣarā tu yā devī tasyā etad [k, kh, g: etād] vijrṁúbhitam [k:
vijrmmitam] |

³! The DP goes on to extract the mantras required for the rite in code. First, the bījarāja
(56-57) (KHPHREṀ), then the Seventeen Syllable Vidyā (5/58-61) and navākṣarā (in

5/!65cd-70). After extracting the seventeen syllable Vidyā, the text continues:

¹² The Extraction of the seventeen syllable Vidyā follows from 56cd to 63ab, which here
is:
ÃĀṀ KHPHREṀ PHĀṀ PHĪṀ MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVARĪI PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ

PHATṬ PHAṬ

For the Vidyās of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī and the Kālīs, see Appendix to Chapter Thirty.

³³ Bhairava goes on in 5/66-68ab to extract Navāksarā -- the Nine syllable Vidyā, saying

that it is the Vidyā of the 850 million goddesses that fly in the Void of consciousness. It
is KHPHREṀ MAHĀCAṈḌAYOGEŚVARI.

TANTRĀLOKA

451

This is indeed the Mantra of the Kaālīs, listen as I tell you something

else. Removing the five PHATs from the seventeen syllable Vidyā,³⁴ each of the
remaining twelve (syllables corresponds to one (of the twelve surrounding
Kālīs). After that comes the name of the Kālī followed by PHAT. Or else they

can be worshipped with the bījarāja (KHPHREṀ), addressing each one at a
time by name. They are said to be of three kinds, emanation, withdrawal and the
inexplicable. This is the unfolding of the goddess Navākṣarā (Nine Sylables).³²

(68cd-72ab)

The Worship of Śakti with Kula substances
sāpi [kh: sṣopi] pūrvoktabījasya [g: pūrvākta-] prapañcatve vyavasthitā || 72 ||
tat ṣvayaṁ pūjitaṁ yena viśvaṁ tena prapūjitam |
pūjanīyā mahādeva saṁhārāntakarī parā || 73 ||
na jñãtā triṣu lokeṣu tvadṛte bhaktivatsala |
33g-a) cakraṁ [g: cakra] samastapūrvoktaṁ [g: -pūrvokta] saha cakratrayeṇa

vā || 74 I|

pūjyā [k, kh, g: pūjyāṁ] samayavidyā [k, kh, g: -vidyāṁ] ca dikṣu [k, kh:
dikṣuṁ ] caiva vidikṣu ca |

vyomacakraṁ [k, kh, g: cakra] triśūlaṁ [k: triśālāṁ; kh, g: triśūlā] ca krameṇa

paripūjayet |I 75 II

ekadvitricaturbhedaiḥ [g: -ticaturbhedaiḥ] samādiṣṭaṁ [k, kh, g: samadikka]

yathā param |
She

too,

(the

goddess)

of

the

aforementioned

seed

syllable

(KHPHREṀ), is present in (all) the universe. He who has himself worshipped
(the Wheel) has worshipped the universe. O Mahādeva, (Kālī,) the supreme
(goddess) who brings about the end of destruction, and should be worshipped, is
not known, O dear one of devotion, to be without you in the three worlds. The
entire assembly (cakra) mentioned before (should be worshipped,) or with three

wheels. The basic (samaya) Vidyā should be worshipped in the (cardinal)
directions and in the secondary ones. The Wheel of the Void and the Trident
should then be worshipped in due order in one, two, three and four divisions as
taught. (72cd-76ab)
śaktyā saha paraṁ kṣobhaṁ mantradhyānaikatatparam || 76 ||
kr̥tvā śaktyutthitair [g: śaktyatthitair] dravyaiḥ] pūjayec cakramadhyagaḥ [g: ccakra * * *] ]

samastacakramadhyād vā [g: * * * * * madhyād vā] kāñcid ekāṁ prapūjayet ||

77 1

pūjayed raktavastre [g: -vakte] vā dīpe [k: dīpa] khaḍgeśamūrddhani |
madhye pūjyā punar devī vidyeśānī navākṣarā || 78 ||

³⁴

The

seventeen

syllable

Vidyā

is

HRĪM

(or

KHPHREṀ)

MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVARĪ THṛ ḌHr THr PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAT. See
TĀv ad 29/ 69-70ab and note there.
³³ The nine-syllable form of
MAHĀCAṈḌAYOGEŚVARI.

Kaālasaṁkarṣiṇ’s

Vidyā

is:

KHPHREṀ

452

APPENDIX C CHAPTER FOUR

Having brought about the supreme arousal along with Śakti (the Kaula
partner), the one who is solely dedicated to mantra and meditation and is in the
middle of the Wheel, should worship with substances born from Śakti. Or else
one should worship any one (of the Kālīs) from the midst of the Wheel. She
should be worshipped on a red cloth or on a lamp (i.e. on a piece of meat) or on
the top of a sword. The goddess who is the goddess of the Vidyā, Navākṣarā,
should be worshipped again in the centre. (76cd-78)

bahiścakroditāḥ pūjyāḥ pūrvoktā bhaktivatsala |

sr̥ṣṭyãdyā bāhyataḥ pūjyā madhye saptadaśākṣarā I| 79 ||

nānāvidhāni puṣpāṇi [g: puṣyāni] nānādravyāṇi dāpayet |
33g-b) nānāvidhān paśūn deva dātavyān aviśaṁkitam [k, kh: yaviśaṁkitam] ||

80

O beloved of devotion, the (goddesses) mentioned before that arise from

the outer Wheels should be worshipped. She who begins with emanation should
be worshipped outside and the Seventeen-syllabled (Vidyā) in the centre. One
should offer many kinds of flowers and (edible) substances, O god, one should
offer many kinds of sacrificial animals, without hesitation. (79-80)

reto harāmbu puṣpaṅṁ ca kṣāraṁ nālājyakaṁ [k, kh, g: -hyakaṁ ] tathā |
pauruṣaṁ |[k: pauruṣa] kṣmābhavaṁ cchāgaṁ |[k: chāgaṁ] mīnajaṁ

śākunīyakam [g: śākulīyakaṁ] || 81 II

36kh-b) palāṇḍu |[k, kh:
dravyadvādaśakaṁ śubham |

palāṇḍuṁ;

g:

palāṁduṅṁ]

laśunaṁ

caiva

The auspicious group of twelve substances (consists of) semen, urine
(harāmbu), menstrual blood (puṣpa), faeces (kṣāra) and phlegm (nālājyaka),
human flesh (pauruṣa), beef (kṣmābhava), goat’s flesh (chāga), fish, fowl,

onion and garlic. ⁶ (81-82ab)

ebhir dvādaśabhir deva [k, kh, g: devyo] naivedyais toṣayec chiva [g: -

yaicchiva] || 82 ||

āni yāni dravyāṇi rasarūpāṇi dāpayet |
pūjanīy
āyā] yathānyāyaṁ vittaśāṭhyaṁ na kārayet || 83 ||
paṣścād guruṁ dakṣayet [k, g: -yeta] sarvasvena sureśvara |
ājñābhaṅgo na kartavyaḥ prāṇān [g: prāṇā] tasmai pradāpayet || 84 ||
etat [g: etan] te sarvam ākhyātaṁ kramaṁ kālisamudbhavam |

gopayet prāṇavad yatnād anyathā maraṇaṁ bhavet |l 85 |I
mukhāmnāyagatā vidyā vaktuṁ [k, kh: vaktraṁ] no yujyate hara |
34g-a) yasmāc chrīnāthabhāṇḍāre cintāmaṇir iva [g: vintā-] sthitā || 86 ||
37kh-a) mayā tathaiva hr̥daye vidyeśī gopitā hara |
iti śrīmaduttarapīṭthodbhūte [k: -pīthoddhṛte] śrīśrṛīnāthāvatārite [g: -nāthāva *
rite] śrīkālikākulapañcaśate [k, kh, g: -kule pañca-] pañcamaḥ paṭalaḥ || 5 |1
³° Quoted in TĀv ad 29/17. Note that in TĀ 29/17 the offering and consumption these
substances is said to be taught by Sambhu. Is this Abhinava’s Trika teacher,
Sambhunātha?

TANTRĀLOKA

453

‘0 god, O Śiva, satisfy (the Kālīs) with these twelve (kinds of)

sacrificial food substances, and offer (them) other delicious substances. They

should be worshipped as is proper. One should not be stingy (vittaśāthya,

literally ‘deceitful about one’s meansʼ). O lord of the gods, after that the teacher

should be offered all that one possesses as dakṣiṇa. One should not transgress
(the teacher’s) command. One should offer him (one’s) vital breaths. (82cd-84)
I have told you all the liturgy (krama) that has come from Kālī. (Every)
effort should be made (to keep it secret and) protect it like (one’s) life, otherwise
(if one does not,) death will ensue. O Hara! It is not right to tell (others) the

Vidyā that has come through the oral tradition, for it is like a wish granting gem

in Śrīnātha’s storehouse. In the same way, O Hara, I have hidden the queen of

Vidyās in (my) heart. (82cd-87ab)

This is the fifth chapter of the venerable Kālikākulapañcaśata, that has
come from the venerable Northern Seat (uttarapīṭha) and been brought down to
earth by the venerable Srīnātha.

Appendix D
to Chapter Four

The Kālikāstotram¹

by

Śivānandanātha
The Early Post-scriptural Development of the Krama system – the works of
Śivānanda (Jñānanetra) and his successors up to Abhinavagupta
The final phase of the development of the Kālīkrama was initiated by
Jñānanetra in the middle of the ninth century. Scholars commonly refer to the
teachings of the school he founded, the Krama system. He is said to have
received it as a revelation from the Goddess Maṅgalā, who is identified with

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī in Odḍiyānapītha. Thus, his teachings mark the beginning of
post-scriptural Krama. The names of the system, for example, Kramanaya,
Devīnaya and Mahārtha, are known to the earlier scriptural traditions of the
Kālīkula, also called Kālīkrama. However, with Śivānanda it emerges out of the
anonymity of scripture. Thus, he founded the school that we nowadays call the
Krama system and that bears these same names, especially Mahārtha. He also
‘brought down to earth’ at least one Tantra – the Yonigahvara. Significantly,
this too is said to have been revealed in Uḍḍiyāna – the uttarapīṭha.² Thiīs is
unusual. We are only rarely told who does this. The precedent in this case is
Matsyendranātha. He was the first to bring Kula Tantras down to earth. Kaulism
existed before, but its teachings lay embedded in the Mata and Yāmala,
specifically, the Jayadrathayāmala and the earlier Picumata, the
Brahmayāmala, where it was even less defined. There are indeed several
Tantras that consider themselves to have been brought down to earth by
Matsyendranātha. These are of two kinds: sectarian and non-sectarian. Well
known examples of non-sectarian ones are the Kaulajñānanirṇaya and related
Tantras. Amongst sectarian ones, the earliest that has survived is a Krama
Tantra, namely, the Ūrmikaularaṇava. Subsequently, the Kubjikā Tantras
appeared, attributed to him.
A passage found in the Yonigahvara³ is also found at the beginning of
chapter three of the Devīpañcaśatika, the same apart from the usual minor
¹ * & ÃÁ * * gyoṭṟam (Jñānanetrapādakṛtam) Kī: NAK no. 5-5183 śaivatantra 157 =
NGMPP reel no. A 150/6; size: 32 1/2 x 12 1/2; folios: 35. remarks: Devanāg; page. 21
Page no. 21: itthaṁ svarūpastutirabhyadhāyi samyak samāveśadaśāvaśena | mayā

(sśivenāstu) śivāya samyag mamaiva viśvasya tu maṅgalākhye || ḷ

kṛtīrīyaṁ śrījñānanetrapādānāṁ iti ||
² The colophon of the Yonigahvara reads: ity uttarāmnāye śrī uṁkārapīthavinirgate

śšrīcaṉṇḍabhairave ṣoḍaśasahasre udite [udvite] yonigahvaraṁ samāptaṃ || See
bibliography for the bibliographical details of the sole recovered manuscript of this
Tantra.

¹ Yonigahvara Aṣiatic Society of Bengal catalogue serial number serial no. 5903 MS no
10000 (f1. 17-18a).

⁴ DP 3/1-18ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

455

variants. Listed there are the four Yuganāthas, who were founders of Kaulism in
the four cosmic ages (yuga), and their consorts. Matsyendranātha figures as the

founder of Kaulism in this Age.⁵ He had twelve disciples. A detailed account is

found in the Kulakrīdāvatāra, which Abhinava quotes in Chapter Twenty-nine.⁶
In both the YG and the DP, the passage continues with a lineage of four teachers
beginning with Niṣkriyānanda, noted above. In this way the locus of an
independent Kaula tradition saw its roots in the Kaulism taught by
Matsyendranātha. In this way, Kaulism as a whole is channelled through the
teachings of the lineage of the Kālīkrama that thereby appropriates them. This

connection is strengthened and maintained down the line. The YG and DP texts

begin with the same auspicious verse of invocation, thus emphasizing the tie
between them. We also find it at the beginning of the Devīdvyardhaśatika,
which draws a great deal from the Yonigahvara or some common source. It
reads:
‘I bow to Kālī, the supreme bestower of Being, to my own nature. She is
the Light that has emerged from frying pan (heated by the) Fire at the end (of
Time) She is established in the middle within the three paths of the Moon, Sun
and Fiīre, her state the dissolving away of consciousness, the object of
consciousness, the mind, the senses and (their) objects. ’

⁵ The four Yuganāthas and their consorts:
Kṛtayuga:
Khagendranātha
and
Vijjā
avvã
Dvāyuga: Kūrmanātha and Maṁgalādūti (DP ambā)
Tretayuga: Meśanātha and Kāmamaṁgalā
Kaliyuga: Mīnanāthaṁ and Koṁkaṇāmbā (DP Kuṁkaṇādīti)

(DP

ambā)

⁶ TĀ 29/29 ff. See Dyczkowski 1988: 69-71, 79-81 for charts and detailed presentation.
⁷ yā sāntakāgnikuharotthitabhāsvarūpāṁ
somārkavahnitripathodaramadhyasaṁsthām [k, kh: somākka-] |

ciccetyacittaviṣayākṣavilīnabhāvāṁ [k: cicceta- -virīnabhāvāṁ; kh: cicceta-]

svabhāvabhāvakiparāṁ [k, kh: ṣvābhāva-] praṇamāmi kālīm l|

This is the edited verse at the beginning of the two recovered manuscripts of

the Devīdvyardhaśatika. The same verse that appears at the beginning of the
Yonigahavara and the Devīpañcaśatika is practically identical. Surprisingly, whilst the
version in the Devīdvyardhaśatika is practically correct, the corruptions in these two

texts are exactly the same. It reads in both cases without variants:
yā sāntakāgnikuharothitabhāsvarūpāṁ
somārkavahnitṛthodaramadhyasaṅṁṣthā |

ciccetaccintaviṁśabhāvāṁ

svābhāvabhasaki parāṁ praṇamāmi kālīm ||

Jayaratha knows the Devīdvyardhaśatika, which he calls Sārdhaśatika, quoting

from it the names of the thirteen Kālīs (see TĀv ad 4/149-150a and notes). The
colophon reads:
paramahaṁsaparivrājakauttarānvayācāryaśrīmadvimalaprabodhapādānām iyam iti [k:
-ti; kh: -parivrājaka-uttarāṉvayā- -miti] |
‘This (book) is that of the venerable renouncer and teacher Vimalaprabodha of
the Northern Lineage.”

456

APPENDIX D CHAPTER FOUR

The third phase emerges out of the anonymity of scripture. The oral
transmission along the lineage founded by Jñānanetra emerges in the works of
the teachers of his lineage. The identity of the Krama defines itself progressively
in this way. This process reaches its climax in the system presented by three
texts

recovered

to

date,

all

of

which,

we

have

seen,

are

called

Mahānayaprakāśa. There we find an exposition of basically the same system
with the usual variants. The Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasiṁha has been
translated in Appendix H. The core of this system is the Pañcavāhakrama, the
Sequence of the Five Currents. The Five Currents are essentially the procession
of energies in the five cycles of creation, persistence, withdrawal, the
inexplicable (anākhyā) and illumination (bhāsā).

We find it in both texts in a seed state. Thus, after presenting the
Yuganāthas, the YG goes on to declare that:
‘In the cremation ground (called) Karavīra in the venerable Uttarapītha,

once the venerable Jṅñānanetranātha had extracted the Yonigahvara, which is
most excellent essence of Mantra, he revealed it on the surface of the earth.*⁸

The YG is indeed concerned with the ‘essence of Mantra’, as most of it
is taken up with the extraction in code of the forms of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī’s Vidyā,
that is used for the worship of the cycles (cakra) of emanation (sṛṣti),
persistence (sthiti), withdrawal (sarṁīhāra), the Inexplicable (Anāmā) and
illumination (bhāsā).

Thus, here we find a precursor in this form of the

Pañcacakrakrama, the Sequence of the Five Wheels. The DP also goes on to

describe the same cremation ground. The wording is practically the same, but
there all is that is said is that it is worshipped by the Deity, and other details are
given, but there is no mention of Jñānanetra’s presence there.⁹” Nonetheless,

Śivānanda (i.e., Jīñānanetra) appears as the fourth in line in the lineage founded
by Niṣkriyānanda, according to verses in the common passage mentioned above.
This absence suggests that the DP preceded the YG. If so, the passage in
common we are examining was carried over from there into the YG.

One wonders if this line means that Vimalaprabodha was the author or that the

book was in his possession.

⁸ śrīmaduttarapīthe tu śmaśāne karavīrake |
yonigahvaram uddhṛtya mantrasadbhāyvam uttamam ||
śrījñānanetranāthena bhutalasaṁprakāśitam |

⁹ (DP: śrīmaduītarapīṭhasya [k: śrīmaduttaraṁ-] śmaśānaṁ karavīrakam ḷ

pūjitaṁ devadevena śivena paramātmanā [k, kh: paramātmane; g: paramātmano] l| 3 |I
The cremation ground of the venerable Uttarapīṭha (is called) Karavīra, It is
worshipped by Śiva, who is the Supreme Soul and the God of the gods.

TANTRĀḶOKA

457

The Kālikāstotra by Jñānanetra¹⁰
The first part of the development of the fully formed post-scriptural

Krama system begins with Jñānanetra and continues up to Abhinavagupta and
beyond. The most important text of this period is the Kramastotra by
Erakanātha, who was a disciple of Keyuravatī, a direct disciple of Jñānanetra.
Here the thirteen Kālīs of the Cycle of the Inexplicable (anākhyacakra) are
described and praised. Abhinavagupta wrote a commentary on it early in his life,
unfortunately lost, called the Kramakeli, confirming its unique importance. This

Kramastotra is presented in Appendix E. This period includes Abhinava’s own

important contribution, which is dispersed in his Trika works. Particularly
important is the presentation of the Twelve Kālīs in Chapter Four of the
Tantrāloka and Jayaratha’s extensive commentary. He also presents them in the
Tantrasāra and Tantravaṭadhanika. These are translated in the notes to the
translation. Abhinava also wrote a Kramastotra where they are described. This
is translated in Appendix F.
Indeed, the Krama teachings were developing rapidly in this period. The
fully developed form of the Krama system, expounded in the three works called
Mahānayaprakāśa – Light of the Great Teaching, was probably not known to
Abhinava. Reference to the system of sixty-five in the passage below may well
be an indication that its formation was incipient at an early stage of the
development of the Kālīkrama. The energies that constitute the Great Process —
Mahākrama – of the Great Teaching — Mahānaya – are indeed sixty-five, i.e., 64
Siddhas (= Bhairavas) and their energies (identified as Yoginīs or Śākinīs) and

their leader Maṅgalā, called Vṛṇdacakra (the Wheel of the Assembly, which
Sanderson translates as the Cycle of the Multitude,) or Śākinīcakra. Abhinava
certainly knew the roots from which it developed. Thus, in the PTv, he refers

extensively to the spheres of energy of the goddesses (also called yoginīs)

headed by Vāmeśvaṁī, namely, Khecaṁī, Gocarī, Dikcarī and Bhūcarī (see

Dyczkowski 1987: 129 ff.), which are amongst the spheres of energies taught in

the Great Teaching.

However, the cycle of Twelve Kaālīs, although important and well

known to the Great Teaching, is not at all as central as it is for Abhinava, who

understands this to be THE expansion of Kālasaṁkarṣanī, who is the Goddess of
Consciousness of the Great Teaching, who revealed it to its first exponent
Jñānanetra, alias Śivānanda. The big question is whether the Krama system
expoundedin the three Mahānayaprakāśas already existedin some form at the

beginning of the post-scriptural development initiated by him. Arṇasiṁha (also
called Vīrasiṁha), clearly states that he believed the description that it was all

originally taught by Jñānanetra (MNP A 135), as did the authors of the other
two Mahānayaprakāśas.
Sivānandanātha was considered to be the founder of the final form of
the Krama system, although in actual fact it preceded him. This is because
¹⁰* +. *. * *. gṭoṭṟam (jñānanetrapādakr̥tam) K: NAK no. 5-5183 śaivatantra 157 =
NGMPP reel no. A 150/6; size: 32 1/2 x 12 1/2; folios are 35 and script is devanāgarī.

itthaṁ svarūpastutir abhyadhãyi samyak samãveśadaśāvaśena | mayā (śivenāstu) śivāya
samyag mamaiva viśvasya tu maṅgalākhye || || folio 21a. At the end: kṛtir iyaṁ

śrījñānanetrapādānāṁ iti |

458

APPENDIX D CHAPTER FOUR

tradition maintains he received the teachings directly from the goddess
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, who appeared to him as Maṅgalā, a local goddess of Udḍiyāna.
This is so even though he also appears, as we have seen, as the fourth in the
lineage in the genealogy of teachers beginning with Niskriyānanda.
The sole independent work we have by Śivānanda is his Kālikāstotra. It
is not only a beautiful hymn; it is also dense with meaning. We have travelled a
fair way from Niṣkriyānanda’s Krama into a milder atmosphere. Even so, we are
closer to that than the final form of the Krama that we find in the three
Mahānayaprakāśas. There Krama idealism reaches its ultimate zenith in the
Mahānayaprakāśa, published in Trivandrum, of unknown authorship. At all
stages of its development, the fundamental view is maintained, namely, that
consciousness is the Deity. It is cognitive, and operates its perception of the
ideal universe it generates and withdraws through its activity. In its final phase,
we shall see that this activity is analysed in detail, as marked by the systematic
operation of assemblies of cognitive energies arranged in well-ordered spheres
of operation.
Although there is no trace of the earlier perception of the twelve Kālīs
as the rays of the Sun which is the thirteenth, that is the core and focus of the

Krama teachings in the earlier strata, even so, the model of the twelve with an

encompassing thirteenth is maintained. They continue to be the assembly of
energies of the Inexplicable phase of the dynamism of cognitive consciousness
and retain basic features of their identity. However, they are now just a part of a
larger, more detailed and complex layout. Thus, Śivānanda first refers to the
twelve Kaālīs as the twelve parts of the body of the Goddess Time, and then to
the thirteenth as encompassing them within herself, where they shine as one.'
Note that here, the twelve are formed by the standard phases of emanation,
persistence and withdrawal multiplied by themselves and a fourth phase which
is their ineffable 'repose’ (viśrāma) with consciousness, at one with it. There is
no detailed explicit reference to perception and its operation set into the
relationship between subject and object. Even so, despite the movement away
from the central role it hadin the early Krama, the closeness of Śivānanda’s
relationship to it is his reference to the goddess as Kṛśodarī. Thisis surprising,
as the tradition, when we get to the Mahānayaprakāśas, understands him to
have received the teaching from Maṅgalā, who is considered to be a form of
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī.
Sanderson perceives in this hymn the fully-fledged system that was
going to develop in the three Mahānayaprakāśas, of which the one by
Arṇasiṁha, presented in Appendix H below, is a good example. Sanderson

(2006b: 33-35) observes that in the Kālikāstotra by Jñānanetra, he does clearly

mention the goddesses Khecarī and the following three as the deities of the
sacred seat (pītha) of the core of consciousness which, in the fully developed
Krama, is the first of six phases. However, the following five are found,
according to Sanderson, but only as allusions. They are 1) the Assembly of the

Five Currents (pañcavāhacakra), 2) the Assemblies of Light (prakāśacakra), 3)
Bliss (ānandacakra), 4) the Form of Emptiness (khamūrticakra), and 5) the

Divine Current (divyaugha) of the lineage of the master (gurukrama) also called

'' See below, verses 5 and 6.
² Verse 13.

TANTRĀLOKA

459

the Assembly of the Multitude (vrṇdacakra) or Śākinīcakra, comprising 64
Siddhas and their leader, Maṅgalā.

Sanderson translates accordingly, adding in brackets what he perceives
to be implied:
‘Supreme is the unique (kim api) act, surging up within, in which you
assume your form through your pure creative urge, the shining forth of that
consciousness absolute and spontaneous [as the cycle of the Five Flows]. Then
when you have projected all Time [through the cycles of Illumination and Bliss]
and [your] terrible manifestation as the [introverting] ego through the [cycle of]
Embodiment you eliminate this [ego through the rise of the cycle of the
Multitude vṛndacakram] and so accomplish liberation.’ (3-4)
Although it is possible that Jñānanetra had these categories in mind, it is
far from certain. They certainly do not appear in his two major sources, the

Kālikulakramasadbhāva and the Kālikulapañcaśatika, that Jayaratha calls the
Devīpañcaśatika. However, the thirteen (12 + 1) Kaālīs are, on the contrary, a

well-known configuration. Indeed, it is perceived to be the ultimate one.
Jñānanetra declares in the same Kālikāṣtotra that the Celestial Order —
divyaugha – pours out in these thirteen forms in the same five phases:
‘Supreme is the Mother (Kālī) who saves the world, pouring forth the
Celestial Order by dividing each of the thirteen forms into five.’ (16)

According to Sanderson, in verses eight and nine he alludes to the four

phaṣes that follow these five, that is, the cycles of emanation, persistence,
withdrawal and the fourth, the cycle of the Inexplicable (anākhyācakra), in
which the worship ends. In other words, this is what the whole process leads to
and is its culmination and highest point of development:
‘The unitary nature of (your) essence becomes triple in the aspects of
Emission, Stasis, and Withdrawal; each of these assume four aspects through
Emission, Stasis, Withdrawal and Rest. Supreme is your form, that by thus
dividing your spontaneous essence into twelve, sets in motion the whirl that is
your unfolding (vivarta) as the world.” (8-9)

Again, according to Sanderson, in verses five and eighteen, he venerates
the last of these. Sanderson translates:
‘Supreme are you, O Kālī who, after dividing the body of Time into
twelve, make that same nature shine forth within yourself as one.”¹³ (5)
‘I praise the absolutely transcendent Goddess within that ground that

lies within the state (of the Inexplicable,) in which withdrawal itself is

withdrawal, who is untouched by the prolixities of the existent and the nonexistent that she projects; (she is) manifest in everything at every moment.” (18)
We turn now to the Kālikāstotra by Jñānanetra.

'³ The point is that the 12 Kālīs are the manifestation of the thirteenth Kālī worshipped

in the centre.

460

APPENDIX D CHAPTER FOUR

sitatarasaṁvidavāpyaṁ sadasatkalanāvihīnam anupãādhi |
jayati jagattrayarūpaṁ nairũpaṁ devi te rūpam || 1 II
O goddess, Your formless form, which is the triple universe, devoid of
limitations and differentiation into being and nonbeing, completely pure,
ungraspable consciousness, is victorious. (1)
ekam anekākāraṁ prasṛtijagadvyāptivikr̥tiparihīnaṁ |
jayati tavādvayarūpaṁ vimalam alaṁ citsvarūpākhyam || 2 ||
Your one nondual nature that is one and of many forms, devoid of the
alterations that pervade the universe of flux, perfectly pure and called the nature
of consciousness, triumphs! (2)

jayati tavocchaladecchā yayā svasvarūpavigrahagrahaṇam |
kim api niruttarasahajasvarūpasaṁvitprakāśamayam || 3 I|
Victorious is Your will that surges up (perpetually)! By means of that,
(You) in some (inexplicable way) assume the form of Your own essential
nature, which is the most excellent (nirurtara) (absolute) and spontaneous
(sahaja) light of consciousness! (3)
vāntvā samastakālaṁ [k: tva-] mūrtyāhaṁkāraghoramūrtim api |

nigraham asmin kṛtvānugraham api tu [k: missing] kurvatī jayasi l| 4 II
Having emitted all time as (Your) form (mirti), even though (Your)
form is fearsome as the (fettered soul’s) ego, having restrained (it) within this,
even as You are also bestowing (Your) grace, You are victorious! (4)

kālasya kāli dēhaṁ vibhajya munipāñcasaṁkhyayā bhinnam |
svasmin virājamānaṁ tadrūpaṁ prakurvatī [k: * kurvatī] jayasi || 5 II
O Kaālī, you are victorious (above all others)! Having divided up the
body of Time into twelve, (generating) that (which is your own) nature, You
make it shine radiantly within Yourself
(as one). (5)

bhairavarūpī kālaṁ [k: kāla] srjati jagat kāraṇādikīṭyantam [k: -kīyantam] |
icchāvaśena yasyāḥ sā tvaṁ bhuvanāmvikā [k: stva-] jayasi || 6 l
You, who are the Mother of the Worlds, are victorious. Swayed by Your
will, Time, which is Bhairava, emits the universe beginning with (Śiva, its
universal) cause, up to (a tiny) insect. (6)

jayati śaśāṅkadivārkapāvakadhāmatrayāntaravyāpi [k: -divāka-] |
janani tava kim api vimalaṁ svarūparũpaṁ paraṁ dhãma || 7 II

TANTRĀLOKA

461

O Mother, You whose ineffable (kim api) and pure nature is the
supreme abode that inwardly pervades the three abodes of Moon, Sun and Fire,

are victorious! (7)

ekaṁ [k: evaṁ] svarūparūpaṁ prasarasthitivilayabhedatas trividham |
pratyekam udayasthitilayaviśrāmataś caturvidhaṁ tad api || 8 II
iti vapupañcakaṣaṁkhyaṁ [k: vamu-] vidhāya sahajasvarūpam ātmīyam |
viśvavivartāvartapravartakaṁ [k: -vivartāvivarta-] jayati te rūāpam || 9 ||
The one form of Your own nature (ṣvarūparūpa), divided into
emanation (prasara), persistence and merger, is of three kinds. Again, each one
(of these) is of four kinds, as (its) arising, persistence, merger and repose.
Having thus ordained that Your own innate (sahaja) nature numbers twelve
(aspects), (this) Your form (rūpa) that impels the continuous round of the

apparent change of all things, triumphs! (8-9)

The unitary nature of (your) essence becomes triple in the aspects of
emission, stasis, and withdrawal; each of these assume four aspects through
emission, stasis, withdrawal and rest. Supreme is your form, that by thus
dividing your spontaneous essence into twelve sets in motion the whirl that is
your unfolding (vivarta) as the world. (8-9)
sadasadvibhedaviṣṛter [k: -visṛter] dalanaparā kāpi sahajasamvittiḥ |
uditā tvam eva bhagavati jayasi jayādyena rūpeṇa || 10 ||
There is some (undefinable) innate consciousness (sahajasaṁvitti),

which is intent on destroying what is generated from the duality between being

and nonbeing. O Goddess, (when it) is manifest (uditā), it is You Yourself, Who

are victorious in the form (of the four goddesses) beginning with Jayā (jayādya)
(followed by Vijayā, Ajitā and Aparājitā). (10)
jayati samastacarācaravicitraviśvaprapañcaracaṉormiḥ [k: -normi] |
amalīsvabhāvajaladhau śāntaṁ kāntaṁ ca te rūpam || 1] I|

Your tranquil and beautiful nature, the wave of the deployment of the

ongoing universe, wonderfully various with all that moves and is immobile,
triumphs in the ocean of (Your) stainless nature. (11)

sahajollāsavīkāsaprapūritāśeṣaviśvavibhavaiṣā |
pūrṇā tavāmba mūrtir jayati parānandasaṁpūrṇā || 12 I|
O Mother, this Your iconic form (mirti), which is the glory of all the

universe, completely filled with the expansion of (Your) spontaneous (innate)
outpouring (sahajollāsa) and, full of supreme bliss, triumphs! (12)

kavalitasakalajagattrayavikatamahākālakavalanodyuktā |

upabhuktabhāvavibhavaprabhavāpi tu [k: *] kṛśodarī jayasi l| 13 ||

462

APPENDIX D CHAPTER FOUR

Intent on devouring Mahākāla who, having swallowed up all the triple

universe, is terribly immense, You, O Kṛśodarī (Emaciated One), whose power

is the glory of Being (You) have enjoyed (and consumed) (upabhuktabhāva),
are victorious! (13)

rūpacaryaparivarjitam asamaṁ [k: rūpatraya-] rūpatrayāntaravyāpi |

anubhavarūpam arūpaṁ jayati paraṁ kim api te rūpam || 14 |

Your supreme ineffable nature, devoid of form and deportment, without

equal, that inwardly pervades the three forms, the form of which is experience
without form, is victorious! (14)

avyayam akulam ameyaṁ vigalitasadasadavivekakallolam |
[k: + jayati] prakāśavibhavasphītaṁ jayatīha [k: missingi] taveśi [k: deśāḥ]
paraṁ dhãma || 15 ||
O Goddess (īsī), Your supreme abode, extensive with the glory of the

Light (of consciousness), imperishable, transcendent, non-objective, from which
the wave of discrimination between truth and falsity (being and nonbeing) has
fallen away, is victorious here (in this world). (15)
rtumunisaṁkhyaṁ rūpaṁ vibhajya pañcaprakāram ekaikam |
divyaugham udgirantī [k: udigarantī] jayati jagattāriṇī [k: jattāriṇī] jananī|| 16
The Mother Who is the saviour of the universe, having divided the form

numbering thirteen (units), each one into five parts, pouring forth the Divine
Current (of the teachings),'⁴ is victorious! (16)
bhūdiggokhagadevīcakralasatjñānavibhavaparipūrṇam |
nirupamam acittamayaṁ [k: nirūpamavi * ttamayaṁ] śrīpīthaṁ jayati te pītham

l 17 1|

Śrīpīṭha, Your sacred seat (pītha) which is No-mind, incomparable,
completely full of the glory of knowledge that is pouring out of the wheels of

the goddesses, Bhūcarī, Dikcarī, Gocarī and Khagā,¹ triumphs! (17)
pralayalayāntarabhūmau vilasati sadasatprapañcapariḥhīnām |

¹⁴ See following Appendix G concerning the currents (ogha) of the lineages of teachers
and their division into ‘divine’ (divya), ‘accomplished’ (siddha) and ‘human’
(mānuṣya).
¹³ Abhinava knows this group of four, which he mentions in the PTv p. 39-40. There is

no evidence that the configuration into five, with Vāmeśvarī as the highest above these
four, had emerged in his time or earlier. Even so, it became so well established so

quickly that Kṣemarāja treats it as the basic set in his Spandasaṁdoha (p. 18-21 in

Dyczkowski 1992: 68-70). Thus, looking back synchronically, we have two
progressions. One is that of the group of four (kramacatuṣṭhaya) and the other that of
the five-fold flux (pañcavāha).

TANTRĀLOKA

463

devīṁ [k: * vīṁ] niruttaratarāṁ naumi sadā sarvataḥ prakaṭām [k: -tam] || 18 II

Ibow to the Goddess who, devoid of the phenomenal world of existence

and nonexistence, plays, pouring forth on the plane within the merger of
destruction (pralaya) (into eternal consciousness). She who, (completely
transcendent,) is greater than the most excellent, is always clearly apparent in all
respects (as everything at all times). (18)

yādṛg mahāśmaśāne dṛṣṭaṁ devyāḥ svarūpam akulastham |

tādṛg jagattrayam idaṁ bhavatu tavāmba prasādena || 19 l|

May this triple universe be, by Your grace, as is the Goddess’s own
nature, which is established in transcendence (akulastha), as (l have) perceived
in the Great Cremation Ground. (19)
itthaṁ svarūpastutir abhyadhāyi samyaksamāveśadaśāvaśena |
mayā śivenātra [k: missing] Śivāya samyag mamaiva viśvasya tu maṅgalākhye ||

20 1

O Maṅgalā! may the praise of (your) own nature that I, who am Śiva,

have expressed here (in this world) in this way, under the sway of the state of

perfect immersion (in Your nature) (samāveśa), bring true (samyak) peace (śiva)

to the whole world that is myself! (20)

kṛtir iyaṁ śrījñānanetrapādānām iti ||
This is the work of the venerable Jñānanetra.

Appendix E
to Chapter Four

The Thirteen Kālīs of the Kramastotra by Erakanātha
There can be no doubt that in the original form of the teachings, the

Kaālīs of the domain of the Inexplicable, that is, of the Kālīkrama, were thirteen,
not twelve. We have seen that in the earliest Krama, the thirteenth is the one

form of the other twelve. This is true at this next stage of development; as the

DP puts it, ‘she is the Supreme Sun with twelve divisions.’ (DP 5/15) Jayaratha

vigorously and repeatedly defends the view that Abhinava did not interfere with

them, which is not true.¹

Abhinava³s Trikakula mirrored an emergent development in the primary
sources, in the course of which the cycle of Twelve took an increasingly
independent identity. The distinction between the periphery — the Twelve Kaālīs
– and the centre – the thirteenth Kālī – is repeatedly emphasized in these terms
in the JY. In the account found in the CMSS the Twelve Kālīs continue to be
juxtaposed to the Kālī in the centre, but while she retains her identity, she is
understood to be an evanescent Void. There is no reference to her as the
‘thirteenth’, as we find repeatedly in the JY. Indeed, at the end of this passage,
where the Kālīs are listed, they are just twelve. These are the same twelve we
find in the JY and elsewhere in general, but no thirteenth is listed as one of
them. This is surprising at first sight. One is tempted to think that the system
here is one of twelve, not thirteen Kālīs. But this is not so. Here much emphasis
is placed on the interaction and relationship between the centre and the
periphery. The goddess in the centre is the Void of Consciousness (cidgagana,
cidvyoman). The Twelve at the periphery are as she is in the centre. Emptiness is
generated from the Emptiness that consumes it into its ever-expanding expanse
of pervasiveness, even as it is itself consumed by it. For this to work, the
‘thiṛteenth’ in the centre must be insubstantial. It is this kind of logic, it seems,

that drives Jayaratha to say, defending Abhinava’s presentation, that immanence
and transcendence are not separate from each other ‘like the horns on a bull’s
headʼ (TĀv 4/125). Even so, Jayaratha felt compelled to supply descriptions of
the Kālīs, which he did from what were probably the only sources he knew that
contained them that, that is, Devīpañcaśatika and the Kramastotra by
Erakanātha, both of which taught that there are thirteen Kālīs, not twelve.
The order and names of the Kālīs listed in the Devīpañcaśatika is the
same as the earlier sources; thus, we may justifiably infer that it was the same in
the lost Kramastotra. According to Jayaratha, the extra Kālī missing in the set of
‘twelve plus one’ normally found in the scriptural sources is Sukālī.² He quotes
the Devīpañcaśatika for a description of that Kālī, but is silent concerning
whether she is included amongst the other Kālīs in the Kramastotra. When we
view these descriptions of the Kālīs without assuming that they form a
progression through objectivity to subjectivity, consuming them as they do so,
' Concerning the number and order of the Kālīs, see Jayaratha’s long discussion in TĀv

ad 4/173ab.

² We have observed that in the CMSS, the missing Kālī out of the thirteen is the last
one, thus confirming that it continued to maintain the original twelve plus one model.

TANTRĀLOKA

465

the verses are easier to understand. The names of the Kālīs themselves suggest
their sequential order. Jayaratha has to agree, but explains the discrepancy away
by saying that this is the order in which they are worshipped, rather than the
sequence of the phases of the cognitive processes of consciousness that
Abhinava says they represent. As these two sources do not link the Kālīs to
phases of perception, as Abhinava and Jayaratha do, it may appear that it is
Abhinava’s idea or that of his Krama teachers. But we know that that is not s0,
because their relationship to the cycle of perception is already established right
from the earliest level in the Mādhavakula, although not worked out in detail.³
For Abhinava, this association is not at all a minor detail. It a general

and universally applied principle of Abhinava’s exegesis that every aspect,
phase or process in a sequence of yogic events that constitute a Yoga, and so too
the elements, phases, location, offerings, the officiant himself, and of course, the
deity and the myriad things and matters associated with ritual and yogic activity,
are all the activity of consciousness in one form or another. Abhinava’s
exegesis, where appropriate, explains how this applies in particular instances.

The link with consciousness, its energies, volitional, cognitive or active, is

essential for the Yogas and the rites to be effective, whatever their goal or
purpose may be.
Abhinava changes the sequential order to make it fit better with his
understanding of the phases of the process of perception. Thus, the focus of the
original sources on the phases of the processes of creation etc. is shifted from
there to perception. If we restore the original order, we may make more sense of
what the two texts say about the Kālīs and how, to some degree, they relate to
one another. Freed from having to understand these descriptions in terms of
phases of the process of perception, we find that each Kālī is an embodiment of
the process of withdrawal and absorption, which is Kālī’s activity. Thus, in one
way we may look at them one after another in a sequence as part of a single
process. From another perspective, they are each the whole process. This is even
more true of the sequence from the point of view of consciousness, which is
called the Inexplicable because, as Abhinava himself stresses, one cannot talk
about the cycle of cognitive consciousness as being either sequential or

otherwise (TĀ 4/178cd-180ab).

For the convenience of the reader, I have indicated the three domains

into which the Kālīs are divided. However, one should bear in mind that as
Abhinava has altered the sequential order, they do not correspond to that one.
Jayaratha quotes the Kramastotra, as he does the DP, generally in accord with
the order found in the Tantrāloka. This makes the verses he quotes from these
sources more puzzling. Jayaratha adds further to the difficulty we have in
understanding how they square with Abhinava’s account when he abandons
even that sequential order and quotes the DP for his own mysterious reasons, in
yet another order, as noted in the footnotes of the body of the text of the
translation.
The goddess introduces her exposition of the Wheel of the Kālīs in the
Devipañcaśatika by explaining to Bhairava that she is going to tell him about
the Kālikākrama, which in this case is the sequence of the twelve and thirteenth
³ See JY 4/4/26cd-29ab quoted above.

466

APPENDIX E CHAPTER FOUR

Kaālīs, a teaching that has been transmitted by word of mouth through the
lineages of teachers and disciples. Although the apophasis of the dynamism of
Kālī’s nature is central here, as usual, it is not represented in such a powerfully

radical manner as it is in Niṣkrīyānanda’s teachings.⁴ This is so even though the
Devipañcaśatika declares itself to be a Tantra belonging to the lineage founded
by him.

The description of the thirteen Kālīs is found in chapter five. The

context tells us a great deal about the Kālīs, their nature, and particularly, how
they are worshipped. Comparing the account in the Mādhavakula, we see how
the same basic format of the initiation and worship has been maintained.
Accordingly, 1 have translated all of it. The edition is based on three
manuscripts. Those who are interested can refer to the bibliography for details.
The Krama teachings concerning the Thirteen Kālīs came to be the
focus of a branch of the developing Kālīkula, called the Tradition (krama) or
Family (kula) of the Goddess of the Sun (bhānvī). We are told below in a
reference quoted by Jayaratha’ that the ‘venerable author’ of the Kramastotra
belonged to the Bhāskarakula, which is a homonym. It clear that the form of the
Krama the author of the Kramastotra focuses on is centred on the Twelve Kālīs,
as is that of the Bhāskara- / Bhānavī -kula. This is the focus of Abhinava’s
Krama teachings. although he never refers to it in this way. It may well be that
its development at the scriptural level was taking place around the same time or
soon after, as Abhinava himself does not refer to the sources where this features.

Abhinava presents an exposition of the Twelve Kālīs in Chapter Four.
The brevity of his presentation is compensated by Jayaratha, who writes an
extensive commentary on this important topic. Jayaratha is very troubled
throughout his commentary by the evident discrepancy he observes in the
sequence of the Kālīs in Abhinava’s presentation and these and other sources.
He is obsessed by this problem, returning to it repeatedly in the course of his
commentary on the Twelve Kālīs. Jayaratha admits that all the Krama sources
basically agree on the number and sequence of the Kālīs. This is in fact true,
although they do not say what Jayaratha reports them as saying. Thus, we may
safely assume that the original sequence in the Kramastotra is the one we find in
the Jayadrathayāmala, which is the earliest source to which we have access, and
the Devīdvayardhaśatika that follows after it, both of which are quoted by
Jayaratha.⁰ However, Jayaratha supplies only the verses from the Kramastotra
and the DP that refer to twelve Kālīs, omitting Sukālī, as Abhinava does. When
the occasion arises to refer to Sukālī, Jayaratha only quotes the DP. This may
suggest that she was missing in the Kramastotra also, but this may not be so.
Sanderson (2007: 297) considers the Kramastotra by Erakanātha to be dedicated

to thirteen Kālīs, and refers to Jayaratha's mention of Sukālī as being with
reference to the verse he does not quote from the Kramastotra. However, the

Cidgaganacandrika (224-250) by Srīvatsa describes twelve Kaālīs, building on
the verses dedicated to them in the Kramastotra. The corresponding verses in
the CGC are in my notes to Jayaratha’s commentary, to which the reader is
referred.

⁴ See the Appendix D, above.
⁵ Comm. 4/173ab.

⁶ See TĀv ad 4/149cd-150a and ad 4/17 1-172.

TANTRĀLOKA

467

Jayaratha resolves the issue by first of all asserting that, despite all the
evidence to the contrary, the scriptural sources only talk about twelve Kālīs,
although he does concede that it may appear not to be so. Then in order to
account for the change in the serial order in Abhinava’s presentation with
respect to the one we regularly find in the sources, he distinguishes two
sequences of Kālīs. One is the order in which they are worshipped (pūjākrama).
The other is the order in which the twelve phases of the cycle of consciousness
arise that the Kālīs embody, which is the one that concerns Abhinava.

Below I have restored the sequence in which the Kālīs are worshipped.

This is the serial order followed by the Cidgaganacandrikā, thus confirming that

it is correct. We have noted that even although the CGC follows the
Kramastotra, it omits Sukālī. As Sukālī is invariably found in the scriptural
sources, it appears likely that the omission is in deference to Abhinava’s
presentation, which allows the homologization of the sequence of Kālīs to the
phases of the cycle of perception. This requires that it move through the spheres
of the object, the senses that are the means of perception and the perceiver.
Unsurprisingly, no such homologization is found in the original sources,
including the Kramastotra itself. Divested of Abhinava’s exegesis, the phases
there are only set in the rhythm of emanation and withdrawal within the
Inexplicable.

Withdrawal of Emanation
1) (1) Sṛṣṭikālī (withdrawal of the emanation of emanation)
kaulārṇavānandaghanormirāpām unmeṣameṣobhayabhājam antaḥ |
nilīyate nīlakulālaye (>līnakulālaye) yā tāṁ sṛṣṭikālīṁ satataṁ namāmi ||
I constantly worship Sṛṣṭikālī, Who is the wave (ūrmi) of dense
(uninterrupted) bliss of the Ocean of Energy (kaulārṇava), and contains
inwardly (within Herself) both the unfolding (of the universe when She opens
Her eyes) (unmeṣa) and (its) withdrawal (when She closes them) (meṣa) — She
Who merges (and, at rest, dissolves away) into the Abode of Energy that has

merged (into Śiva).⁷

2) (3) Sthitināśakālī (withdrawal of the emanation of persistence)
vājidvayasvīkṛtavātacakraprakrāntasaṅghattagamāgamasthām |
Śucir yayāstaṁ gamito ‘arciṣā tāṁ śāntāṁ namāmi sthitināśakālīm |l
I bow to Sthitināśakālī (the Kālī of the Destruction of Persistence) Who,
tranquil, abides in the dynamic union (sarṅghatṭa) of the going and coming (of
the exhalation and inhalation) of the wheels of the wind (of the vital channels of
the breath of the chariot of the body), that has yoked (svīkṛta) the two horses (of

⁷ TĀv ad 4/148. CGC 221-224 is a commentary on this verse. The CGC is part of the

explanatory notes to the translation to which the reader is referred.

468

APPENDIX E CHAPTER FOUR

exhalation and inhalation), set out (on its journey). She by Whose (intense)
brilliance, (Fire) the Pure One, has set.⁸
3) (5) Saṁhārakālī (withdrawal of the emanation of withdrawal)
unmany anantā nikhilārthagarbhā yā bhāvasaṁhāranīmeṣam eti |

sadoditā saty udayāya śūnyāṁ saṁhārakālīṁ [jh, t: -kālī] muditāṁ namāmi ||
I bow to blissful Saṁhārakālī Who, endless and containing all things, is

the Transmental (unmanī). She Who, perpetually active (satatoditā), in order to

dawn as (the Goddess) void (of all phenomena), closes in on Herself (nimeṣam

eti) the withdrawal of phenomenal existence.’

4) (2) Raktakālī (withdrawal of the emanation of the Inexplicable)
mahāvinodārpitamātṛcakravīrendrakāsṛgrasapānasaktām |
raktīkr̥tāṁ ca pralayātyaye tāṁ namāmi viśvākṛtiraktakālīm ||
I bow to Raktakālī (the Red Kālī), Whose form is all things, She Who is

reddened (with passion) when the (period of cosmic) dissolution ends (and
creation begins), She Who is attached to drinking the essence (rasa) of the blood

of the most excellent Heroes who offer it with great delight to the Circle of the

Mothers.¹⁰

5) (4) Yamakālī (withdrawal of the persistence of emanation)
sarvārthasaṅkarṣaṇasaṅyamasya yamasya yantur jagato yamāya |
vapur mahāgrāsavilāsarāgāt saṅkarṣayantīṁ praṇamāmi kālīm ||

I bow to the Kālī Who, out of passion for the joyful sport of the Great

(feast of) Consuming (mahāgrāṣa) (all things) retracts (towards Herself and

aṣsimilates) (saṅkarṣayantī) the essential nature (vapus) of the subjugating

restriction (yama) that restrains the withdrawal of all things in order to control

the universe (jagato yamāya).¹
(5) Sukāī²

6) (7) Mṛtyukālī (withdrawal of the persistence of perstence)
mamety ahaṅkārakalākalāpavisphāraharṣoddhatagarvamṛtyuḥ |

grasto yayā ghasmarasaṁvidaṁ tāṁ namāmy akāloditamṛtyukālīm ||
⁸TĀv ad 4/150abc; CGC 225-226.
⁹’ TĀv ad 4/152; CGC 227-228.

'⁰ TĀv ad 4/149-150a; CGC 229-230.

' TĀv ad 4/151; CGC 231-233.
'² The verse from the Kramastotra concerning the fifth Kālī – Sukālī – is not quoted,

only mentioned. See CGC 231, quoted in the notes of the translation.

TANTRĀLOKA

469

I bow to Mṛtyukālī, Who has arisen from timeless (eternity) — (She Who

is) the voracious consciousness that has consumed (grasta) the death of pride

haughty with the ecstasy of the expansion (visphāra) of the host of energies of
the ego (that reflects that “this is) mine”.¹³
7) (8) Bhadra / Rudrakāḥ (withdrawal of the persistence of withdrawal)
viśvaṁ mahākalpavirāmakalpabhavāntabhīmabhrukuṭibhramantyā |
yāśnāty anantaprabhavārciṣā tāṁ namāmi bhadrāṁ śubhabhadrakālīm ||
I bow to the auspicious one, the auspicious Bhadrakālī, Who devours

the universe with the radiant flame of Her endless power that moves with the
terrible knitting of Her eyebrows at the end of phenomenal existence, that
resembles the repose (between phases of creation) of a great aeon

(mahākalpa).¹⁴

8) (10) Paramārkakālī (withdrawal of the persistence of the Inexplicable)
astoditadvādaśabhānubhāji yasyāṁ gatā bhargaśikhā śikheva |
praśāntadhāmni dyutīnāśam eti tāṁ naumy anantāṁ paramārkakālīm ||
I bow to that endless Paramārkakālī, (otherwise called) Bhargaśikhā

(the Sun Who is the Flame of Lord Śiva), within Whom the twelve suns (of the
senses) have risen and set, Who is like a flame (śikhā), the radiance (of which)
is extinguished in the peaceful abode (of pure consciousness).¹³
9) (9) Mārtaṇḍakālī (withdrawal of the withdrawal of emanation)
mārtaṇḍam āpītapataṅgacakraṁ pataṅgavat kālakalendhanāya |
karoti yā viśvarasāntakāṁ tāṁ mārtaṇḍakālīṁ satataṁ praṇaumi ||
I bow constantly to Mārtaṇḍakālī, Who (consumes) to the end the
(aesthetic) essence (rasa) of all things, She Who generates the Sun (mārtaṇḍa)
that has drunk up the Wheel of the Sun (pataṅga) to serve, like a moth

(pataṅga), as fuel for the energy of (the Fire of) Time.¹⁶

10) (11) Kālāgnirudrakālī (withdrawal of the withdrawal of persistence)
kālakramākrāntadineśacakrakroḍīkṛtāntāgnikalāpa ugraḥ |

kālāgnīrudro layam eti yasyāṁ tāṁ naumi kālānalaruḍrakālīm ||
I bow to Kālāgnirudrakālī, within Whom the Rudra of the Fire of Time
dissolves away, the fierce one Who is the aggregate (kalāpa) of (the energies) of

³ TĀy ad 4/154; CGC 234-235.

¹⁴ TĀv ad 4/158ab; CGC 236-238.

'⁵ TĀv ad 4/16167; CGC 239-240.
'⁶ TĀy ad 4/163; CGC 241-242.

470

APPENDIX E CHAPTER FOUR

the inner fire that has embraced (and absorbed into itself) the Wheel of the Sun

pervaded by the procession of time.

I salute the Kālī of the Rudra of the Fire of Time, Who is inflamed with

thousands of (fiery) forms (that rise out of) the Abode of Fire, She Who destroys

the entire universe and everywhere devours the body of death.¹⁷

11) (12) Mahākālakālī (withdrawal of the withdrawal of withdrawal)
naktaṁ mahābhũūtalaye śmaśāne dikkhecarīcakragaṇena sākam ḷ

kālī mahākālam alaṁgrasantīṁ vande hy acintyām anilānalābhām ||
I praise Kālī Who, by Night in the cremation ground, where the great
elements (Earth and the rest) dissolve away, devours the Great Time, along with
the host of the congregation (cakra) (of Yoginīs) who move in the Void of the

directions; She Who, inconceivable, shines like a fire (kindled by) the wind

(anilānalābhā).¹⁴

12) (13) Mahābhairavacaṇḍograghorakālī (withdrawal of the withdrawal of
the Inexplicable)
kramatrayatvāṣṭramarīcicakrasañcāracāturyaturīyasattām |

vande mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālīṁ kalākāśaśaśāṅkakāntim |l

I praise Mahābhairavaghoracaṇḍakālī, She Who is beautiful with the
Moon (that shines) in the Void of Energy (kalākāśa), the essential being of the

Fourth state which is the skilful power (cāturya) to set in motion the wheel of
the rays of the architect (vāṣṛra) of the three processes (of emanation,

persistence and withdrawal).¹

'⁷ This is another verse concerning Kālāgnirudra, that follows on from the one quoted in

TĀv ad 4/168, quoted ad 4/173ab CGC 243-246.

'⁸ TĀv ad 4/169-170; CGC 247-248.
'⁹ TĀv ad 4/171-172; CGC 249.

Appendix F
to Chapter Four
The Kramastotra by Abhinavagupta
Abhinavagupta himself also wrote a Kramastotra' in which he describes
the Twelve Kālīs. After his concise description of them in Chapter Four of the
Tantrāloka, he describes them again briefly in his Tantrasāra, Tantroccaya and
Tantravaṭadhanikā. However, nowhere does he deal with them as extensively as
he does here in his Kramastotra. One of his first substantial works was a
commentary on Erakanātha’s Kramastotra. Clearly, it had made a deep
impression on him at an early age. Thus, it would be not be surprising if that
inspired the title of his own Kramastotra. Indeed, apart from the number and
order of the Kālīs, he follows the style of that Kramastotra, taking care for
example to write it in the same complex metre.
This is one of three works in which Abhinava does us the great favour
of giving us a date of its composition.² He says that ‘I, Abhinavagupta praised
Śiva on the ninth day of the dark (fortnight) in (the month of) Mārgaśīrṣa during
the so called sixty sixth year. (30)ʼ. Note that he says that he did it on this day.
Are we to understand that he wrote all this deep and beautiful hymn in just one
day?
ayaṁ duḥkhavrātavrataparigame pāraṇavidhir
mahāsaukhyasāraprasaraṇarase durdinam idam |
yad anyanyakkṛtyā viṣamaviśikhaploṣaṇaguror vibhoḥ stotre

śaśvat pratiphalati ceto gatabhayam || 1 ||

This is the way (vidhi) to cross over (to the liberated state),

once

having understood the manner of life which is (this) mass of suffering.
(Experiencing) the savour of the essence of the expansion of Great Bliss, this
miserable day (of Māyā), which is its opposite, is reduced to naught. Thus, the
mind, freed from fear, is constantly reflected in the hymn to the Omnipresent
Lord, who is the teacher that burns up the rugged path (of fettered life). (1)
vimr̥śya svātmānaṁ vimrśati puṇaḥ stutyacaritaṁ tathā
stotā stotre prakaṭayati bhedaikaviṣaye |
vimṛṣṭaś ca svātmā nikhilaviṣayajñānasamaye tad itthaṁ
tvatstotre 'ham iha satataṁ yatnarahitaḥ || 2 ||
Having reflected on himself, the one who lauds (You) reflects again on
(Your) laudable conduct (carita), and reveals it in the hymn that has as its

subject the oneness of duality. And so too is one’s own Self contemplated every
time knowledge of the objects of sense (viṣaya) (arises). In this way, free of
fatigue, I am always (present) here in your hymn. (2)

' The Kramastotra was edited and published by K.C. Pandey 1963: 948-951.
² The other two are the Bhairavastotra and vivṛtvimarśinī on the Iśvarapratyabhijña.

472

APPENDIX F CHAPTER FOUR

anāmṛṣṭaḥ ṣvātmā na hi bhavati bhāvapramitibhāj anāmṛṣṭaḥ
svātmety api hi na vinā 'marśanavidheḥ |

Śśivaś cāsau ṣvātmā sphuradakhilabhāvaikasarasas tato 'ham

tvatstotre pravaṇahṛdayo nityaṣukhitaḥ || 3 II

Oneʼ’s own Self, ignored (anāmṛṣṭi), does not rightly know existence.

(Indeed,) without the practice of awareness (there would be no knowledge,)

even that one’s own Self is being ignored. And Śiva is one’s own Self in the
oneness of feeling (rasa) with all of radiantly manifesting existence, and so, my
heart disposed to (uttering) Your hymn, I am constantly made joyful (sukhita).

3)

vicitrair jātyādibhramaṇaparipāṭīparikarair avāptam
sārvajñaṁ hṛdayaṁ yad ayatnena bhavatā |
tad antas tvadbodhaprasarasaraṇībhūtamahasi sphuṭam vāci
prāpya prakaṭaya vibhoḥ stotram adhunā || 4 |I
You have effortlessly attained the heart of the omniscient one by virtue

of the many varied discernments of (the true nature of) the series of (worldly)

errors such as caste and the like. Having attained that clearly within the great
power of speech, which serves as the path for the flow of your awakened
consciousness (bodha), now make the pervasive Lord’s hymn clear (and lucid).

(4)

vidhunvāno bandhābhimatabhavamārgasthitim imāṁ
rasīkṛtyānantastutihutavahaploṣitabhedām |
vicitrasvasphārasphuritamahimārambharabhasāt piban bhāvān

etāṉ varada madamatto 'smi ṣukhitaḥ || 5 II

Shaking off this abiding state on the path of phenomenal existence,
which is (rightly) considered to be bondage, and having turned it into the savour

(rasa) (of aesthetic delight), burnt away duality with the fire of endless praise
(stuti) by the impetuosity of the exertion of the glory that has flashed forth as his

own wonderfully varied expansion whilst drinking these phenomena (bhāva), O
bestower of boons, I, delighted (sukhitaḥ) (by You), am mad with inebriation
(mada). (5)
bhava prājyaiśvaryaprathitabahuśakter bhagavato vicitraṁ
cāritraṁ hr̥dayam adhiśete yadi tataḥ |
kathaṅṁ stotraṁ kuryād atha ca kurute tena sahasā

Śivaikātmyaprāptau śivanatir upāyaḥ prathamakaḥ ll 6 |I

If the wonderfully varied activity (caritra) of the Lord, who possesses
many powers that have spread forth from (His) copious sovereignty over
phenomenal existence, come to rest in the Heart, then how is it possible to
compose a hymn?
Or, if one does so with (the power of that victorious) audacity (sahasa),

having attained oneness with Śiva, the first (and foremost) means (to realise
Him) is to bow with reverence (to Him). (6)

TANTRĀLOKA

473

jvaladrūpaṁ bhāsvat pacanam atha dāhaṁ prakaṭanam
vimucyānyad vahneḥ kim api ghatate naiva hi vapuḥ |
stuve saṅvidraśmīn yadi nijanijāṁs tena sa nuto bhaven
nānyaḥ kaścid bhavati parameśasya vibhavaḥ || 7 II

Inflamed and shining, cooking, burning and making visible — nothing

else at all apart from the body of fire can do that. If I praise each one of my own
rays of consciousness, that which thus bows (in reverence) is none other than the

Supreme Lordʼs glory. (7)

vicitrārambhatve galitaniyame yaḥ kila rasaḥ
paricchedābhāvāt paramaparipūrṇatvam asamam |
svayaṁ bhāsāṁ (> bhāsan) yogaḥ sakalabhavabhāvaikamayatāviruddhair
dharmaughaiḥ paracitir anarghocitaguṇā |l 8 II
That aesthetic savour (rasa), (experienced) when restrictions fall away

in the state of the wonderfully varied beginning is unconditioned, and so is
supreme plenitude without equal.
Self-luminous union (yoga), it is the oneness which is the essential

nature of all phenomenal existence that, with (its) streams of harmonious
atṭributes, is supreme consciousness that is priceless and delightful. (8)

itīdṛkṣair rūpair varada vividhaṁ te kila vapur vibhāti
svāṁśe 'smin jagati gatabhedaṁ bhagavataḥ |
tad evaitat stotuṁ hṛdayam atha gīr bāhyakaraṇaprabandáhāś ca
syur me satatam aparityaktarabhasaḥ || 9 ||
O bestower of boons, Your body shines in many ways with such forms

within this, the Lord’s universe, which is as aspect (arṁśa) of Himself in which
He, (as Your body), is free of duality.

May my heart, speech and the series of outer senses be constantly
engaged in praising that itself, without (ever) giving up the force (of my
intention). (9)
tavaivaikasyāntaḥ sphuritamahaso bodhajaladher
vicitrormiyrātaprasaraṇaraso yaḥ svarasataḥ |
ta evāmī sṛṣṭisthitilayamayasphūrjitarucāṁ

śaśān.kārkāgnīnāṁ yugapad udayāpāyavibhavāḥ || 10 ||
The wonderfully varied mass of waves (of creation) flows forth
spontaneously, (stimulated by its own inherent delight) as the aesthetic savour
(rasa) of the ocean of the oneness of Your consciousness, whose glory flashes
forth within.
These are the glorious expressions (vibhava) that simultaneously arise
and fall away of the Moon, Sun and Fire that are the flashing vibrant radiance
which is emanation, persistence and merger. (10)

474

APPENDIX F CHAPTER FOUR

ataś citrācitrakramataditarādisthitījuṣo vibhoḥ śaktiḥ

Śśaśvad vrajati na vibhedaṁ katham api |

tad etasyāṁ bhūmāv akulam iti te yat kila padaṁ
tadekāgrībhūiyān mama hṛdayabhūr bhairava vibho ||I 1 1 |I
Thus, the state of the pervasive Lord is both various and not, dynamic
(krama) and (yet, at the same time) its opposite. (Ēven so, His) power never
becomes divided in any way at all. O Bhairava! Pervasive Lord! On that plane
your condition (pada) (is known as) Akula – may my heart be concentrated on

that! (1 1)

amuṣmāt saṁpūrnāt vata rasamahollāsasarasān nijāṁ śaktiṁ
bhedaṁ gamayasi nijecchāprasarataḥ |
anarghaṁ svātantryaṁ tava tad idam atyadbhutamayīṁ
bhavacchaktiṁ stunvan vigalitabhayo 'haṁ śivamayaḥ l| 12 ||
From this completely full lake of the great outpouring of aesthetic
savour (rasa), You divide Your own power by the extending flow (prasara) of
Your will. This is Your sinless freedom made of extraordinary wonder. As 1I
praise Your power, I am Śiva, free of fear. (12)
idantāvad rūpaṁ tava bhagavataḥ śaktisarasaṁ

kramābhāvād eva prasabhavigalatkālakalanam |
manaḥśaktyā vācāpy atha karaṇacakrair bahir atho ghaṭādyais
tadrūpaṁ yugapad adhitiṣṭheyam aniśam || 13 ||
Your nature, Lord, like objectivity, is (potent) beautiful power that,
because it is devoid of succession (krama), is the intensely powerful (prasabha)
falling away of the passage (kalana) of time.
May I constantly take the support of that nature simultaneously along
with the power of the mind, speech, the wheels of the senses, and (so too, by
means of common) outer things, like jars. (13)

kramollāsaṁ tasyāṁ bhuvi viracayan bhedakalanāṅṁ

svaśaktīnāṁ deva prathayasi sadā svātmani tataḥ |
kriyājñānecchākhyāṁ sthitilayamahāsṛṣṭivibhavāṁ trirūpaṁ
bhūyāsaṁ samadhiśayituṁ vyagrahr̥dayaḥ | 14 I|
Deploying the outpouring of succession on that plane, You unfold the
formation of diversity (bhedakalanā) between Your own powers within

Yourself. (You do s0) so that the agitated heart may preside over (and rest in)

the triple nature, which is the glorious power (vibhava) of persistence, merger
and the great emanation called action, knowledge and the will. (14)

The Sphere of Objectivity²
³ The original sources may divide the twelve Kālīs into three groups of four, but they
nowhere equate the three groups with the sphere of objectivity, that of perception and

subjectivity. This is Abhinava’s understanding of their domains. Although Abhinava

TANTRĀLOKA

475

1) Sṛṣṭikālī (the emantion of objectivity)
purā sṛṣṭir līnā hutavahamayṝ yātra vilaset
parollāsaunmukhyaṁ vrajati śaśisaṁsparśasubhagā |
hutāśendusphārobhayavibhavabhāg bhairavavibho taveyaṁ
sṛṣṭyākhyā mama manasi nityaṁ vilasatām || 15 ||
Initially, the supreme (parā) emanation is merged (in consciousness).

She is made of Fire that here, beautiful with its contact with the Moon, enters a

state of propense expectancy (aunmukhya) towards the supreme outpouring (of
manifestation). O pervasive lord Bhairava, who possesses the glorious power
(vibhava) of the expansion of both Fire and Moon, this is Your (Kālī) called
Sṛṣṭi. May she always play in my mind. (15) (1)
2) Raktākālī (the persistence of objectivity)
visṛṣṭe bhāvāṁśe bahir atiśayāsvādavirase yadā
tatraiva tvaṁ bhajasi rabhasād raktimayatām |

tadā raktā devī tava sakalabhāveṣu nanu māṁ kriyād

raktāpānakramaghaṭitagoṣṭhīgataghṛṇam || 16 ||

Once the aspect of (phenomenal) existence has been emitted externally
and the most excellent (inner) savouring (āsvāda) (of consciousness has
become) insipid, if You then assume with force the nature of attachment (rakti),
You become the goddess Raktā in all Your emotive states (bhāva). May You
indeed make me free from aversion (gataghṛṇa) in the assembly formed (to

attend) the rite of drinking Raktā (the embodiment of the blood of the sacrificial
victim) (raktāpānakrama). (16) (2)
3) Sthitināśakālī (the withdrawal of objectivity)
bahũirvr̥ttiṁ hãtuṁ citibhuvam udārãṁ nivasituṁ yadã
bhāvābhedaṁ prathayasi vinaṣṭormicapalaḥ (> -lam) |

sthiter nāśaṁ devī kalayati tadā sā tava vibho sthiteḥ
sāṁsārikyāḥ kalayatu vināśaṁ mama sadā || 17 ||

When You reveal the oneness of phenomenal existence, the fickle play

of (its) waves destroyed, in order to destroy the outer state (vṛtti) and reside on
the noble plane of consciousness, (You) the Goddess brings about the

destruction of persistence. May She then, O pervasive lord, always bring about
the destruction of the persistence of my transmigratory existence. (17) (3)

does not refer to this exegetical model much in this hymn, nonetheless for the sake of
clarity and coherence with the account presented by Jayaratha in Chapter Four, I remind

the reader of these domains. The reader is invited to refer there for an account of each
one of the Kālīs, which is indeed coherent with Abhinava’s characterization of them in
this hymn.

476

APPENDIX F CHAPTER FOUR

4) Yamakāḹ (the inexplicable state of objectivity)
jagatsaṁhãreṇa praśamayitukāmaḥ svarabhasāt
svaśaṅkāṭaṅkākhyaṁ vidhim atha niṣedhaṁ prathayasi |
yamaṁ sr̥ṣṭvetthaṁ tvaṁ punar api ca śaṁkāṁ vidalayan
mahādevī seyaṁ mama bhavabhayaṁ saṁdalayatām || 18 ||

Desiring by Your own impetuousness to bring to rest (all things) by
withdrawing the universe, You cause injunction and prohibition, which is called
the affliction of one’s own doubt, to be perceived. Having emitted yama (the
restriction of rules and regulations),⁴ even as You are then again engaged in
destroying doubt, may this great goddess destroy my fear of phenomenal
existence (bhava). (18) (4)

The Sphere of Perception
5) Saṁhārakālī (emanation of perception)

vilīne śaṁkaughe sapadi paripūrṇe ca vibhave gate
lokācāre galitavibhave śāstraniyame |

anantaṁ bhogyaughaṁ grasitum abhito laṁpaṭarasā vibho
saṅṁhārākhyā mama hṛdi bhidāṁśaṁ praharatu |I 19 l|
When the flux of doubts has dissolved away and (Your) glory is
completely full (and perfect) in a moment, when worldly life (lokācāra) has
ceased, and the regulations and power of scriptural injunction has fallen away, O
pervasive Lord, may (the Kālī) called Saṁhāra (who delights in) the aesthetic
savour of one who is greedy (laṁpaṭarasā) to gobble up the endless flux of
objects of enjoyment (completely) all around, strike down the part of duality in

my heart. (19) (5)

6) Mṛtyukālī (persistence of perception)
tad itthaṁ devībhiḥ sapadi dalite bhedavibhave

vikalpaprāṇāsau pravilasati mātṛṣṭhitir alam ḷ

ataḥ saṁhārāṁśam nijaḥṛdi vimr̥śya sthitimayī
⁴ According to Monier Williams, the word ‘yama’, which basically means moral

restraint, has a range of meanings, including: “*m. a rein, curb, bridle, a driver,
charioteer, the act of checking or curbing, suppression, restraint, restraint of words

(silence), self-control, forbearance, any great moral rule or duty (as opposed to niyama,
a minor observance; ten yamas are mentioned, sometimes only five, (in Yoga) self-

restraint (as the first of the eight ancillaries of Yoga); any rule or observance.³ It is also

the name of the god of death, who judges the actions of the dead, consigning them their

appropriate reward or punishment.
In this context, ‘yama’ is the mistaken notion (vikalpa) that vacillates between

right and wrong, restraining the person subject to it by the restrictions of moral law and

regulations. In this, the fourth station of the cycle of perception, which is that of the
inexplicable in the domain of objectivity, yama is the uncertainty of what is right and
wrong, and as a consequence, what one should do.

TANTRĀLOKA

477

prasaṅnnā syān mṛtyupralayakaraṇī me bhagavatī || 20 ||
When the goddesses have in this way destroyed the power of duality in

an instant, the abiding state of the perceiver, of which the (very) life is

conceptualization (vikalpa), can (alam) play joyfully. Thus, having
contemplated the aspect of withdrawal within in one’s heart, may She who is my

Goddess (bhagavatī) who destroys death, and whose nature is persistence, be
pleased. (20) (6)
7) Bhadra/Rudrakālī (the withdrawal of perception)

tad itthaṁ te tisro nijavibhavavisphāraṇavaśād avāptāḥ
saṭcakrakramakṛtapadaṁ śaktaya imāḥ |
kramād unmeṣeṇa pravidadhati citrāṁ bhavadaśām imābhyo
devībhyaḥ pravaṇahṛdayaḥ syām gatabhayaḥ || 21 I|

The plane created in this way by the Krama of the six wheels (of the

first six Kālīs) are these, Your energies, that have been attained by the unfolding
of Your own glorious power (vibhava) of (withdrawal), the third (state). By
unfolding in due order (kramāt), (Bhadrakālī) bestows a strange (and wonderful)

state (daśā) in the world. May I, whose heart is inclined to devotion, be freed

from fear by these goddesses. (21)

imāṁ rundhe bhūmiṁ bhavabhayabhidātaṅkakaraṇīm imāṁ

bodhaikāntadrutirasamayīm cāpi vidadhe |

tad itthaṁ saṁrodhaṁ drutim atha vilupyāśubhatatīr
yatheṣṭaṁ cācāraṁ bhajati lasatāṁ sā mama hṛdi |I 22 ||
I am blocking this plane which causes mental distress due to the duality
and fear of phenomenal existence. So too, I ordain this (state) which is the
inwardly melting juice (of the aesthetic delight) (rasa) at one with awakened
consciousness. Having destroyed in this way blockage, flux and the inauspicious
mass of sacrificial rites (1ati), she behaves (freely) as she wishes. May She play
in my heart! (22) (7)

8) Mārtanḍakālī (the inexplicable state of perception)
kriyābuddhyakṣādeḥ parimitapade mānapadavīm avāptasya

sphāraṁ nijanījarucā saṁharati yã |

iyaṁ mārtaṇḍasya sthitipadayujaḥ sāram akhilam haṭhād
ākarṣantī kṛśatu mama bhedaṁ bhavabhayāt || 23 ||
She withdraws (each time), in accord with her own desire, the

expansion of the plane of the means of knowledge within the plane of limitation
of the senses of knowledge and action of one who has attained (that), dragging

by force (haṭhāt) the entire essence of Mārtaṇḍa, who is on the plane of

persistence. May she drag my duality out of the fear of phenomenal existence.

(23) (8)

478

APPENDIX F CHAPTER FOUR

The Sphere of Subjectivity
9) Paramārkakālī (The emanation of subjectivity)

samagrāsakālī’ kramavirahitā sātmani muhur

niveśyānantāntarbahalitamahāraśminivahā |
parā divyānandaṁ kalayitum udārādaravatī prasannā me
bhūyāt hṛdayapadavīṁ bhūṣayatu ca || 24 1|
Having penetrated within Herself instantly at each moment (muhur), the
Kālī who, devoid of succession, consumes everything equally is a multitude of
great rays that, endless, inwardly grow compact (and strong). May she, the
Supreme (Goddess) Parā who is the receptacle of (the most) exalted respect, be
pleased with me to generate divine bliss, and adorn the plane of (my) heart. (24)

(9)

10) Kālāgnirudrakāḹī (the persistence of subjectivity)
pramāṇe saṁlīne śivapadalasadvaibhavavaśāt
Śarīraprāṇādir mitakṛtakamātrṣṭhitimayaḥ |

yadā kālopādhiḥ pralayapadam āsādayati te tadā devī yāsau

lasati mama sā syāc chīvamayṝ || 25 ||

When the means of knowledge has merged (into consciousness) by the

glorious power that is playing on Śiva’s plane, if the body and the vital breath
etc. and the adjunct of time, which is the abiding state (sthiti) of the limited,

artificial perceiver, attains the play of destruction, may the goddess who flashes
forth playfully (lasati) then, be for me of Śiva’s nature. (25) (10)
11) Mahākāḹī (the withdrawal of subjectivity)
prakāśākhyā saṁvit kramavirahitā śūnyapadato
bahir līnāty antam prasarati samācchādakatayā |
tato 'py antaḥsāre galitā rabhasād ākramatayā mahākālī
seyaṁ mama kalayatāṁ kālam akhilam || 26 ||
Consciousness, called Light, devoid of succession, merges externally
and flows internally from the plane of the Void as that which covers over (and
obscures all duality). Then also, as free of succession, She falls away into the

inner essence with great force. May this Mahākālī generate (and process) all my
(allotted) time. (26) (11)

12) Mahācaṇḍograkālī (the inexplicable state of subjectivity)
tato devyāṁ yasyāṁ paramaparipūrṇasthitijuṣi kramaṁ
vicchidyāśu sthitimatirasāt saṅvidadhati |
pramāṇaṁ mātāraṁ mitim atha samagraṁ jagad idaṁ sthitāṁ
³ Read samagrāsakālī for samagrāmakṣālīṁ.

TANTRĀLOKA

479

kroḍīkṛtya śrayatu mama cittaṁ citim imām || 27 ||
Then having suddenly severed the process (krama) within the goddess,
whose abiding state is supreme and completely full, by the aesthetic savour
(rasa) of the consciousness (mati) of stable continuity (sthiti), She ordains (the

operation of) the means of knowledge, perceiver, perception and all this
universe, having encompassed (them all). May she reside in my mind (citta),
which is this abiding (srhitā) consciousness (citi). (27) (12)
anargalasvātmamaye maheśe tiṣṭhanti

yasmin vibhuśaktayas tāḥ |

taṁ śaktimantaṁ praṇamāmi devaṁ

manthānasaṁjñaṁ jagadekasāram || 28 II
I bow to the god called Manthāna (Bhairava), the one essence of the
universe, Who is the possessor of those energies of (His) glorious power that
abide within the Great Lord who is my own unfettered Self. (28)
itthaṁ svaśaktikiraṇaughanutiprabandhān ākarṇya
deva yadi me vrajasi prasādam |
tenāśu sarvajanatāṁ nijaśāsanāṁśusaṁśāntitākhilatamaḥpaṭalāṁ vidheyāḥ || 29 ||
O God, having heard in this way the continuing series of praises of the
current of the rays of Your own powers, if You become propitious to me, may
You quickly quell by that (grace) the entire veil of darkness of all humanity with
the rays of Your teachings. (29)

satṣaṣṭinām eke varṣe navyamyām asite 'hani |

mayā 'bhīnavaguptena mārgaśīrṣe stutaḥ śivaḥ || 30 |
iti śrī abhinavaguptapādācāryakṛtaṁ kramastotraṁ sampūrṇam ||
I, Abhinavagupta praised Śiva on the ninth day of the dark (fortnight) in

(the month of) Mārgaśīrṣa during the sixty-sixth year. (30)

Thus, the Kramastotra composed by the venerable Abhinavagupta is
complete.

Appendices G, H and I
to Chapter Four
The Final Form of the Krama System
The final development of the fully formed Krama system is
consolidated in three texts that are all called Mahānayaprakāśa – the Light of
the Great Teaching. Abhinava makes no reference to this developed form of the
Krama, and so it appears that it had not yet emerged in his time. But this is far
from certain. The earliest of the three was written in old Kashmiri and
commented on in Sanskrit by Śitikaṇṭha. It has been published in the Kashmiri

Series of Texts and Studies. Sanderson has argued that, although it is commonly
assumed that the author and commentator are the same person, this is far from
certain. The colophons identity the author of this Mahānayaprakāśa as

Śitikaṇṭha.¹

One of the other two is anonymous, and there is no concrete evidence of
where it was written except the circumstance that the sole manuscript is found in
Trivandruṃm. The other Mahānayaprakāśa, by Arṇasiṁha, was most probably
South Indian, as are the Krama works written after them that have survived.
These are two. The first of these is the Cidgaganacandrikā, followed by the
Mahārthamañjarī – the Bouquet of (the Teachings of the) Mahārtha – of
Maheśvarānanda, who quotes it. The latter is composed in seventy verses in old
Mahārāṣṭrian. Maheśvarānanda claims that it was revealed to him directly by the
Goddess. He translated the verses and wrote an extensive commentary in
Sanskrit.
Maheśvarānanda tells us that he lived in the land of the Colas, that is,
modern Tamil Nadu. Perhaps he came from Mahāraṣṭra and the goddess spoke
to him in his native language. He was the grand-disciple of Sivānanda, the
author of the Artharatnāvali, the earliestt commentary
on the
Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava, the root and probably the oldest Tantra of the Śrīvidyā
tradition. Śivānanda was very learned in Kashmiri Śaivism and commented on
the NSA from that point of view. In the Mahārthamañjarī, Maheśvarānanda
presents a synthesis of the fully developed Kashmiri Śaivism – broadly called
Trika – and the Krama, that he refers to as its close relative (sodara), with the
teachings of the Śrīvidyā tradition (saubhāgya-saṁpradaya) that had emerged
hardly two generations before him. To this end, Maheśvarānanda presents a
summary of the main tenets of the fully formed Mahārtha, which he draws from
Arṇasimha’s Mahānayaprakāśa. Sanderson has demonstrated that the
Cidgaganacandrikā by Śrīvatsa elaborates on the Mahānayaprakāśa of
Arṇasiṁha. Thus, this was clearly an influential work in South Indian on the

Krama system.
We know from the many citations Maheśvarānanda makes of the
existence of a good number of Krama works belonging to this final phase, many
written by Maheśvarānanda himself. Some, probably redacted in Kashmir, were
known to Kṣemarāja. An important one is the Kālikākrama, which he quotes in

several places. Unknown to Abhinava, it seems that this Krama text, as well as

¹ The colophons begin: iti śrīśitikaṇṭhācāryaviracite mahānayaprakāśe.

TANTRĀLOKA

481

others Kṣemarāja quotes that are not cited by his teacher, were written after
Abhinava wrote on Trika. Apart from the ‘allusions” Sanderson has identified in
Śivānanda’s Kālikāstotra, that we have examined, there is little in the earlier

Kālīkula works that can be said to indicate directly an articulation of the
complex system elaborated in the Mahānayaprakāśas, although the basic
constituents are indeed prefigured to some degree, as we have seen. The core is
already presented in what is probably one of the last Tantras of the second phase
in the scriptural substratum: the Kramasadbhāva. The importance of this text in
this respect is acknowledged by Śithikaṇṭha.² A fragment has been recovered in
one Nepalese manuscript. Another part of it is preserved in a chapter of a
Kubjikā Tantra called the Kulakaulinīmata. There too we find confirmation that
it is expounding a prototype of this developed form of the Krama.³
Another Mahānayaprakāśa, probably the last in time, is by an
anonymous author. There is only one manuscript of this text, which was
recoveredin the library of Trivandruṃ University. It was published by Gaṇapati
Śāstrī with extensive emendations. It certainly postdates Abhinava but precedes
Jayaratha, who quotes it.⁴ t differs from the other two because it is extensively
influenced by Abhinava’s exegetical models and tools. The author knows the
classification of the forms of descent of the power of grace (śaktipāta) Abhinava
elaborates in Chapter Thirteen of the Tantrāloka, inspired by his teacher
Śambhunātha (Sanderson 2006: 672). He is well conversant with the
classificationin categories of means to realization (upāyabheda). In particular,
he regularly refers to Anupāya as elaborated by Abhinava, that is, as recognition
(which is the Pratyabhijñā view) that comes in a flash of intense transmission of
insight (saṅkramaṇa) (which is the Krama view). This is particularly striking,
because sudden enlightenment through direct transmission (saṁkrāma) is a

major theme of the Krama teachings from their incipience. Abhinava reinforced
the doctrine and found a place for it in his classification of the means to

realization as ‘No Means’. Our anonymous author correlates it to Abhinava’s

distinctive conception of Anuttara, and regularly identifies it, as Abhinava does,
with Anupāya. Again, we observe the regular application of the fundamental
concepts of the Pratyabhijñā. These include the characterization of
consciousness as Light (prakāśa) and Awareness (vimarśa) as the two aspects
and plenitude of its subjectivity (ahaṁbhāva) as AHAṀ. The other two
versions, true to the original Krama view, maintain that the dynamism of

consciousness is free of the restrictions of any and all forms of the ego
(nirahaṁkāra). Indeed, it is by the elimination of the ego that consciousness and

its energies are free to expand to their complete potency.
Along with this basic view of an ultimate subjectivity, the analysis of
perception with which consciousness is identified as the dynamic interplay of
the triad of subject, object and means of knowledge is also taken over from
Abhinava’s exegesis. Accordingly, this Mahānayaprakāśa teaches that the
Twelve Kālīs are markers of phases in the cycle of cognitive consciousness
which is the Goddess and ultimate reality, as Abhinava does. This passage is

² MNP (ŚiKa) p. 86.

³. pañcavāhakramaṁ [n: pañcavāhu-] hyetat [ṅ: hotat] kathitaṁ tava śobhane |
KuKauM 15/159ab.

⁴ See comm. on TĀ 4/125.

482

APPENDIX Ġ,H, I CHAPTER FOUR

presented in Appendix I. These and related features are entirely absent in the

other two Mahānayaprakāśas that thus maintained the basic original form of
these Krama teachings.

Appendix G

to Chapter Four
The EarlyKrama Gurus and their Consorts
Niṣkriyānandanātha
Vidyānandanātha

Jñānadīpti
Raktā

Śivānanda

Samayā

Śakyānanda

Mahānandā

The Krama Lineages according to the Kramakeli
The following is a table of the Krama Teachers as reported by Abhinava
in_his commentary Kramakeli on the Kramastotra, reproduced by Jayaratha in

TĀv 4/173ab.

Pītheśvarīs of the Uttarapīṭha
Śivānanda (Jñānanetra)
Madanikā

Keyūravatī Kalyāṇikā

Govindarāja

Bhānuka

Somāṇanda

rakaṇāḍha (Naverakanātha Hrasvanātha)¹

Ujjata and Udbhaṭṭa onwards²

Bhaāja

HĀĀHJA
Athnavaṣupia
There are two other chronologies of Krama teachers apart from the one
in the Kramakeli. The first is found in the Mahānayaprakāśa, that is commented
' Hrasvanātha’s name occurs in the context of a discussion concerning the number of

disciples Keyūravatī (also called Kakāradevī) had. Jayaratha refutes an earlier view that
she had only three pupils. Instead of Somaraja, he mentions Bhojarāja as the sixth.
Therefore, if we accept him as a pupil of Keyūravatī he, like Erakanātha, would belong

to the close of the tenth century AD. However, the text is not clear whether they were

contemporaries or successors. Jayaratha maintains that Hrasvanātha, Bhojarāja and
Somarāja succeeded one another. He points out that Hrasvanātha quotes Somarāja, and

so precedes him, as he does Bhojarāja, who was Somarāja’s teacher.

Jayaratha says: hrasvanāthenāpi svalipivivaraṇe asya pāthasya dṛṣṭatvāt | TĀv
ad 4/206. Correcting hrasvanāthenāpi for hrasvanāthasyāpi, then it would mean that
Hrasvanātha had written a commentary on the Kramastotra, and that Jayaratha had seen
the original in his handwriting. He saw the second verse praising Kālānalarudrakālī

there in it. Accordingly, he asserts that in the Kramastotra both the goddesses Yamakāli
and Kālāgnirudrakālī were praised in two verses.
² This is Jayaratha's lineage.

484

APPENDIX G CHAPTER FOUR

upon by Śitikaṇṭha. The other one is in the Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasiṁha,
which is several generations later. Sitikaṇṭha tells us that Jñānanetranātha
received the teachings from Makāradevī, that is the goddess Maṅgalā,¹ who is
accordingly called the 'first teacher'.⁴ Maṅgalā was a local goddess in Udḍiyāna,
where the first transmission took place. She is identified with the goddess
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. According to this Mahānayaprakāśa, there are three levels or

‘currents’ of transmission of the teachings. The first is the Siddhaugha – the

Accomplished Current, which is the goddess Maṅgalā herself, who is the first
teacher. The second current is the Mānavaugha, the Current of Men, which is
represented by Netrarājñ, that is, Jñānanetra, whose ‘Eye is the Queen’ʼ, i.e., the
goddess and Hrasvanātha. These three are the ‘firestick of Kula’, that is, a
particular special lineage (ovalliviśeṣa), and so are like the three sacred fires of
the Vedic sacrifice. At the end of the Current of Men comes the Śiṣyaugha – the
Current of Disciples, of which the first and foremost teacher was the venerable
Bhānu (i.e. Cakrabhānu), who had eight disciples, out of which the greatest was

the Queen (rājñī) called Īśānikā.’ Cakrabhānu – the Sun of the Lotuses –— was

given this name because he made the lotus-like consciousness of his disciples
bloom, as does the rising sun.® Clearly, in this account, as in the one reported by

³ || MNP (ŚiKa) p. 49. sśrīmanmakāradevyāḥ pīthavare prāptādeśena
śrījñānanetranāthena vāhyāntarastham ādidevīṣvarūpa-satattvaṁ yat sākṣātkṛtaṁ tad
eva bhūtadayāviṣṭena satā kramārthatayā kathanapūjanābhyāṁ vāntam - iti
ovallīsūcanam, tad eva prastūyate || 9 I|
Commenting on verse nine, Śitikaṇṭha writes: ‘the venerable Jñānanetra, who
had obtained the command of the venerable goddess Makāra in her most excellent seat,
had a direct experience (there of her) true nature as the first (and foremost) goddess,

present both internally and externally. Penetrated by compassion for living beings, it

was that itself that was emitted by speech and worship as the (reality, purport and) goal
of the Krama (kramārtha). The lineage of (the tradition) (ovalli) has been indicated in

this way and it is that which is being presented.”
⁴ śrīmakāradevī ādigururūpā jīyāt | suprabuddhaśrīmaṅgalārūpeṇa ādidevataiva vivṛtā

- iti ṣṭutr āṣūtritā | 2

MNP (ŚiKa) p. 5.

⁵ sā ca siddhaugharūpā mānavaugha (> -ghe) netrarājñī hrasvanātheti trirūpasya

kulāraṇiḥ - kulasya ovallīviśeṣasya araṇiḥ, trayāṇām agnīnām iva utpattisthānam, tataś
ca manavaughasyānte
śiṣyaughāgraṇīr bhānupādaḥ aṣṭānāṁ s
nṇāṁ prabhuḥ,
yanmadhyād
rājñī īśānākhyā
(+
tāṁ)
samadattaṁ .pāramparyanidānam

l 5 1.

(The Goddess) is the Siddhaugha (the Current of the Accomplished).

Netrarājñī and Hrasvanātha are part of the Mānavaugha (the Human Current). This is
the firestick with three forms. The firestick of (this) particular lineage (ovalli) of the

three that are present (here) are as if the three (sacred) fires. And then at the end of the
Human Current, at the beginning (and foremost) of the Śiśyaugha (the Current of
Disciples) comes the venerable Bhānu, who is the lord of eight disciples. In the midst of
the is the queen (rājāī) called Īśānikā, (to whom) the treasure of the teachings of the
series (of teachers) was given. (ibid. p. 107 commentary on verse 5).

⁶ yathā mahādevaḥ aṣṭānāṁ mūrtīnāṁ vikāsakaḥ, brahmā vā tāvatāṁ prajāpatīnām,
aruṇodayo

vā

tāvato

diṅmaṇḍalasya,

śiṣ.yakamalānāṁ vikāsakaḥ, iti | 6 |

tathaiva

bhānuḥ

-

Sśrīcakrabhānuḥ

TANTRĀLOKA

485

Jayaratha from the Kramakeli and, as we shall see, in the one by Arṇasiṁha,
Cakrabhānu was a turning point in the transmission of the Krama teachings.

Moreover, as he is the last mentioned here, he may well have been the teacher of

the author of this Mahānayaprakāśa. If ṣo, it is quite possible that he was one of
his eight disciples. Certainly, whether this is true or not, he preceded
Abhinavagupta. If that is so, one wonders why Abhinava shows no sign of
knowing the fully formed Krama system. Indeed, even Kṣemarāja, who
repeatedly exalted the Krama system as the most elevated secret tradition
integrated into Trika and, particularly, into the post-scriptural Śivasūtra and
Spandakārikā, does not supply any evidence that he knew it in its final form.
We can be fairly sure of Cakrabhānu’s date, as Kalhaṇa refers to him in

the following passage in his Rājataraṅginī as living during the reign of
Yaśaskara, that is, 939 to 948 CE:
‘The king (Yaśaskara) [was ever] ready to exercise control over the
castes and conditions of life [among his] subjects. On discovering that at a
cakramelaka [i.e., a gathering of male and female initiates] a Brahmin ascetic
Cakrabhānu by name had departed from proper conduct, the king, in accordance
with the law, punished him by having the mark of a dog’s foot branded on his
forehead. Infuriated by this, the uncle of that [Brahmin], the magician

Vīranātha, who was the king’s own minister of foreign affairs, then took

revenge upon him.”⁷

Śivānanda was three generations before Cakrabhānu, and so lived
somewhere around 825 to 900 CE. Five generations separate Cakrabhānu from
Arṇasimha. Allowing for the usual twenty-five years for each generation, he
lived about 125 years later, that is, around 1100 CE. Arṇasiṁha supplies us with
an account of his Krama lineages, ending with his two teachers, Somesśvara and

Nāga. Both are the fourth generation after Cakrabhānu, who is the third
generation after Śivānanda. The two lineages are given below.
The other Māhānayaprakāśa īs by Arṇasiṁha, who is also called
Vīrasiṁha.⁸ Arṇasiṁha probably lived in South India towards the end of the
11th century. Arṇasiṁha tells us (in verses 151-166) that there were two
etādṛśī ovallīmāṁ paramparā uditā satī dṛśyate, sā ca nirvikārā upāyasaraṇiḥ,
andhakāre dīpamāleva svaparaprakāśikā dyotate, iti - siddhaugha - mānavaugha -

sśiṣyaughāḥ l 7 |I

‘Juṣt as Mahādeva is the one who unfolds (the consciousness) of the eight
divine forms (mūrti) or Brahmā, the same (number of) Prajāpatis, or the rising sun
(aruṇodaya), the circle of the directions, in the same way Bhānu, that is, the venerable
Cakrabhānu, unfolds the lotuses (of the hearts of his) disciples.
Such is the series (of teachers) of the lineages that is perceived when it is risen.
And it is the undistorted path which is the means (to realisation), like a garland of lamps

in the darkneṣs, it illumines itself and others. Such are the Currents (called) Siddha,
Mānava and Śiśya.⁷ (ibid. p. 108 commentary on verses 6 and 7)

⁷RT 6/108-110.

⁸ Unfortunately, the final colophon in this Mahānayaprakāśa īs lacunose where the name of
the author was written. However, he tells us directly that he is Amasiṁha in one place (253)
and elsewhere (135) he says that the teaching concerning Vṛndacakra was originally taught
by Jñānanetra and was later revealed by Vīrasiṁha, which probably meant himself.

486

APPENDIX G CHAPTER FOUR

lineages of teachers who transmitted the Kālīkrama. The first begins directly

with the goddess Maṅgalā, who manifested in ‘Udḍīśa's seat’ (i.e., Oḍḍiyāna) to

Jñānanetra, whom he calls Śivānanda. The transmission of the Devatānaya then
continued down through Keyūravatī to Vāmana, then Cakrabhānu, who

belonged to the middle of the tenth century, then Iśanikā to Nandaka through
Sajjana to Someśvara.
The other line begins with Cakrabhānu, who wrote the
Pīṭhadvādaśikāstotra. He initiated Prabodhanātha, who wrote the Aṣṭikāstotra,

and may have been the Vimalaprabodha who wrote the unpublished
Devīdvyardhaśatika quoted by Jayaratha, and a Kālīkulakramārcana, which is a
ritual manual for the worship of this Kālīkrama. Prabodhanātha initiated Jayaka,
after whom the line continued through Paiṅka, then Nāga to Arṇasiṁha.

Summing up, the first lineage is as follows:

Śivānandanātha > Keyuravatī > Vāmana > Cakrabhānu > Īśānikā > Nandaka >
Sajjana > Someśvara > Arṇasiṁha
The second lineage is:
Cakrabhānu > Prabodha (nātha) > Jaiyaka > Paṅka > Nāga > Arṇasiṁha.⁹

AIl these teachers are said to have been penetrated and possessed
(samāviṣṭa) by the Deity (samāveśa), immersed in Emptiness and experienced
the Great Wonder. In addition to this, some are positively characterized as
Kāpālika ascetics. Thus, he says of Cakrabhānu that ‘practicing the Great Vow
(mahāvrata), he attained the supreme abode.’ (156) Īśānikā, his direct disciple,

was a female ascetic who was ‘adorned with the five insignias’ of a Kāpālika
(157). Similarly, another of his disciples — Jaiyaka – was a Kāpālika who
observed the same Great Vow (mahāvratin).

Abhinava was certainly well acquainted with the basic Krama principles
concerning the cycles of emanation and destruction. He knew the main

goddesses — Khecarī, Vāmeśvarī, and Bhūcarī – whose nature he expounds as

energies of consciousness and perception in his commentary on the
Parātriṁśikā. However, he shows no signs of knowing about the elaboration of
the Krama system (that is, the Pañcavāha) we find in the three texts called

Mahānayaprakāśa (see below). Even Kṣemarāja, his disciple, does not seem to

know about it, although he refers frequently to Krama concepts. In short, it
appears that the system was developing, and texts were being added to it after
Abhinava’s time and that of his immediate successor.

‘’MNP (A) 152-161, 162-168.

Appendix H
to Chapter Four

The Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasimha
In Praise of the Goddess of Consciousness
sarvottīrṇasvarūpāpi kācid ekānapāyinī |

vibhāti sarvagā saṁvin nānātvena sadoditā || 1 ||
Although transcending all, (the one) consciousness, undefinable, eternal,

ever manifest and omnipresent, shines as the diversity (of the many things of this
world). (1)

tattvatas tu na nānārtharūpā nāpy ekavigrahā |
yāniketā nirātaṅkā khasvabhāvā (yāniketa nirātaṅka khasvabhāvān)¹ namāmi
(namosmi)

tām | 2 |

In reality neither many nor just a single form, signless (aniketa) and free of

fear, I salute that (divine consciousness that is) the Void (kha). (2)

The Root Aphorism
yat pīṭhacakrārcitapañcavāhaprakāśam ānandakhamūrticakram |
aṣṭāṣṭacakraṁ pravirājate tad gurukramaughaś ca catuṣṭayārthaḥ || 3 |I
The current of the Lineage of the Masters (gurukrama), the Four-fold
Reality (catuṣṭhayārtha), manifests as the Wheel of the Sacred Seat (pīthacakra),
worshipped as the Five Currents (pañcavāha), the Wheels of Light, Bliss and the
Form of Emptiness, (which together constitute), the Wheel of Sixty-four Energies.

3)

iti siddhamukhāyātaṁ (-yāta) mūlasūtram idaṁ param |
pīthoditaṁ (-dita) mahāmnāyaṁ (mahāmnāya) saṁpradāyopabṛṁhitam || 4 |I
This is the supreme root aphorism transmitted by the word of mouth of the
Siddhas (the Accomplished Ones). It is the Great Teaching (mahāmnāya) born of
the Sacred Seat (pīṭha) and extended by the tradition. (4)
yat tat sadgurupādābjaprasādāvagataṁ (-pādāvje-) sphuṭam |
dhāmāditritayeneha cakrabhaṅgabhayān manāk || 5 ||
prakāśyate mayā samyag vākyair aviṣamāśayaiḥ |
kudeśikamatenaiva (-mataśvabhra) bhraṁśināṁ bhaktiśālinām || 6 ||
' Only one manuscript of this text has been recovered. See bibliography. Where the text

has been emended, the original reading in the manuscript is noted in brackets after the
emendation.

488

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR
For fear of betraying the assembly (of initiates, cakra), I will reveal herein

by means of the triad of Abode (Letter and Consciousness), correctly and without
ambiguity, just a little of what I have clearly understood by the grace of the lotus
feet of a true master, for the benefit of those who, (although possessing true)
devotion, have fallen by (following) the teachings of a bad master. (5-6)

mahāmelāpasaṁbhūtayuktijñasya pracodanāt |

ekāyanaujakākhyasya svīkṛtyoddhartum udyamam || ] |I
It is the exertion of the vitalizing one (ojaka) who is the sole path (ekāyana
to liberation) and knows the practice born of the Great Union. Impelled (by him I
have) accepted it to elevate (others). (7)

The Sacred Seat
Śśivaśaktyubhayonmeṣasāmarasyodbhavaṁ mahat |

vīryaṁ tasmād deha eva mahāpīṭhe (-pīṭha) samudgatam (-taḥ) || 8 I|

The vitality (vīrya) which is the energy (mahat) generated from the
oneness (sāmarasya) of the expansion of both Siva and Śakti has arisen within
(my) body, the Great Seat (of divine consciousness). (8)

ādyasaṅṁvitsamullāsaḥ (-sa) pīṭhe pīṭhe (pīyas) kṛtāspadaḥ (-dā) |
anantaśakticakraughasvāminī tatra mokṣadā (mokṣayam) || 9 ||
The mistress of the flux of the Wheel of Endless Power bestows freedom,

in whichever of the sacred seats the primordial outpouring of consciousness takes
place. (9)
pṛthivyādimahābhūtapañcake sā (tad) virājate |

akṛtrimamahāvīryasphurattaikasvarūpiṇī || 10 ||
She shines in all the five great elements from Earth onwards, her one

nature the radiant pulse of the uncreated and immense vitality (vīrya of
consciousness). (10)

yā saṅvit saiva satataṁ pīṭhacakraikadharmiṇĩ |
āsthitāpi satāṁ gamyā niravagrahavigrahā || 1] II

The one nature of consciousness is the Wheel of the Sacred Seat, whose

form is free of limitations. Although persisting at all times, this (consciousness) can

be known only to the wise. (11)

vīreśasya sthitāḥ pañca kalā yāḥ satatoditāḥ |
tā eva sarvavarṇākhyaśaktīnāṁ pīthatāṁ gatāḥ || 12 ||
Perpetually active, the five energies of the Lord of the Heroes have
become the Sacred Seat of all the energies of the letters. (12)

TANTRĀLOKA

489

asvarānāhatakalā yahnyarkaśaśirūpiṇīḥ |

pīthaśmaśānakṣetreśamelāpayajanātmikāḥ (-kajanā-) || 13 ||

They are the letter A, the energy of Unstruck Sound, Fire, Sun and Moon,
corresponding to the Sacred Seat, the Cremation Ground, the Lord of the Field,
Union and the Sacrifice. (13)

The Lord of the Sacred Seat
viṣargasthitisaṁhãraprathãgrãsaikaghasmaraḥ |

nirupākhyamahādīptisamullāsanatatparaḥ (nirūpākṣa-) || 14 II

yo
‘dhyuṣṭakalanodrekasvabhāvaḥ
(yoṇudhyuṣṭakalodrekasvabhāva)
praṇavābhidhaḥ |
pīthādhipas tam evāhaṁ nāmāmy (nanāsy) āgamasiddhaye || 15 1
I saḻute the Lord of the SŚacred Seat to attain the teaching (āgama), He who

is called (praṇava), the sacred OM, whose inner nature is exalted by virtue of the

activity (kalanā) of (Kunṇḍaliṇī, the energy) in three folds and one half (adhyuṣṭa),
He who greedily consumes the unfolding perception of emission (visarga),
persistence and withdrawal, and who is intent on generating the Great Light of the
Inexplicable. (14-15)

The Cremation Ground
nirvikalpavikalpātmarūpā niḥśeṣasaṁvidaḥ |
yatrāsaṁketadurdarśe (-darśa) svabhāve (svabhāvaḥ) karavīrake || 16 ||
nityoditamahāgrāsacitau (-cittau) yānti layaṁ sadā |
tacchmaśāne (-na) mahāvīraṁ (mahāvīra) hṛdghatanarataṁ (hrṛ(?)t-) namaḥ |l

17 I

I salute the Great Hero who is intent on the throb of the heart of
(consciousness), in that cremation ground, namely, Karavīraka, which is one’s own
(true inner) nature that, without sign or mark, is terrible to behold, where all

perceptions (sarvid), those accompanied by thought and those free of them, are
constantly consumed in the pyre of the Great Destruction (mahāgrāsa) (that burns
there) ever manifest. (16-17)

The Lord of the Field

mahāsaṁhāravisphārabalenotkaṭamūrtimān |

āvaṭatāṅkasaṁketo (avata- -saṅketa) nirāvaraṇadhāmagaḥ || 18 |I
nirniketāsvarollāsasvarūpaḥ satatoditaḥ |
śrīmatpīṭhavare nityaṁ kṣetrapālo jayaty ajaḥ || 19 I|
The Lord of the Field, residing in the venerable and best of sacred seats,

unborn, is ever victorious. Present in the unobscured abode whose sign (sarṁketa)

is the Wine (tāṁka) of the Void (āvaṭa), (he is) the ever-active outpouring of
Unstruck Sound (asvara) from the Void (nirniketa), and the veritable embodiment

490

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

of martial pride (utkaṭa), by virtue of the force of the engulfing expansion of the
Great Destruction. (18 -19)

The Lineage of the Masters
khecaryādisphuradrūpaḥ śākinyanto gurukramaḥ |
sṛṣṭyādyānākhyaparyantas tathā devīnayaḥ smṛtaḥ || 20 ||
The Lineage of the Masters (gurukrama), radiant (with the energies) that

range from Khecarī to Śākinī, is known as the Teaching of the Goddess (devīnaya),
that extends from Emanation to the Inexplicable. (20)
itthaṁ sthito ‘dvayollāsaḥ (sthitaṁ-) sāmarasyeṇa vartate |
aniśaṁ yatra melāpaḥ (-pe) so ‘niketo jayet (japet) paraḥ || 21 ||

Abiding in this way, the outpouring of nonduality abides as oneness
(sāmarasya), where the union takes place constantly that, free of signs, is supreme
and victorious. (21)
grāhyagrāhakavisphāragrasanaikaparāyaṇaḥ |
paro ʻpi pañcavāhaughaścakrarūpeṇa niṣṭhitaḥ || 22 ||
Although (continuing to be absolute and) supreme, (the one reality), which

is the current of the Five Currents (pañcavāha), well-established as the wheel (of
energies), is solely intent on consuming (grasana) the unfolding expansion of
subject and object. (22)

yatra nirūpanirdhāma vibhātyeko ‘nirodhataḥ (* bhaikhyā anirodhataḥ) ||
sa ko ʻpi rājate nityaṁ mahāyāgamahotsavaḥ || 23 ||
A certain great festival of the Great Sacrifice is where One, devoid of form
and without abode, shines unobstructed. (23)

ittham ādhārarūpo ʻyaṁ (ārādha-) pañcadhā yaḥ sa eva ca |
ekasyaiva svarūpasya kālikākhyasya viṣṭaraḥ || 24 ||
In this way, this five-fold fundamental nature is itself the expansion
(vistara) of the one innate nature (svarūpa) called Kālikā. (24)
The Five Currents
vyomavāmādipañcātmasvarūpasphurito yathā |

guruvaktracidullāsavikāsena (-vikāśena) tathocyate || 25 ||

It is said that the radiant manifestation of the five-fold reality, ranging
from Vyomavāmā onwards, occurs by the unfolding of the outpouring of™
consciousness from the master's mouth. (25)
prathamaspandavisphāradharmiṇī
nirniketanā (nirṇi-) |

TANTRĀLOKA

491

vyomeśvarī tv anicchātaḥ śabdādhiṣṭhātrirūpiṇī (-tṛrūpiṇī) ||26 ||
Vyomeśvarī, the unfolding of the primordial pulse of consciousness
(prathamaspanda), signless, spontaneously (anicchataḥ) abides as the sustaining
ground of Speech. (26)
khecaryākhyasamārūḍhā ciccamatkāranirbharā |
svarasena tu saiveha rūpasvīkāratatparā || 27 ||
Established in (the phase) called Khecarī and full of the wonder of
consciousness, this same (goddess) is here spontaneously (svarasena) intent on
assimilating Form. (27)
nānāviṣayasaṁrambhapãātinī bhũcarī smṛtā |
pratyāvṛttitayā nityaṁ viśvagrāsaikaghasmarī|| 28 II
Descending to the level of the activity of the many objects of sense, she is
known as Bhūcarī who, alone, as the process of reversal (back into consciousness),
constantly devours all things. (28)
saṁhãrabhakṣiṇī (-bhakṣyaṇī) saiva rasasaṁcarvaṇotthitā |
svarūpaprāntacitvattaḥ samārūḍhā nirāśrayā (-yāḥ) || 29 ||
This same (goddess) is Saṁhārabhakṣiṇī – the Devourer of Withdrawal –

arisen to relish the juice of the aesthetic delight (of objectivity inwardly digested).

Endowed with the innermost consciousness of one’s own nature, she is well
mounted (on universal consciousness) and free (of all outer) support. (29)
saiva raudreśvarī jñeyā surabhigrahaṇodyatā |
One should know this same (goddess) to be Raudreśvarī, intent on laying
hold of the fragrance (of the latent traces of objectivity). (30ab)
itthaṁ devīnaye (-name) samyag vyomavāmādipañcakam || 30 |l
daṇḍamuṇḍakrameṇoktaṁ mahānirvāṇasiddhidam |
Thus, the pentad consisting of Vyomavāmā and the others has been
properly explained in the Devīnaya (the Teaching Concerning the Goddess) in
terms of the sequence of the Stick and the Head,² that bestows the accomplishment
of the Great Extinction (mahānirvāṇa). (30cd-31ab)

grāhyagrāhakabhedotthakalpanākṣobhasaṁkhyayā (-bhedotthaṁ-) || 31 |I
sāmarasyamahāhlādadhāmny (-dhāmnetā) etā bhānti devatāḥ |

² These two are the twelve rays of the organs of action along with the vital breath

(prāṇa), and those of knowledge along with the intellect, respectively.

492

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

These deities shine within the abode of the great bliss of oneness
(sāmarasya) by contemplating (saṁkhyā) the disturbance of thought arising from
the division of subject and object. (31cd-32ab)

avarṇapañcapiṇḍārṇarūpayor advayṝī gatiḥ || 32 ||

yatas tasmād ucyate ‘laṁ devīnāṁ (devīnā) saṁsthitaḥ (tasthitaṁ) vapuḥ |
yo ʻnāhatahatottīrṇarāvarūpo ‘svaraḥ (-rūpaḥ svaraḥ) smṛtaḥ |l| 33 1I
suvarṇamūladhāmotthavyomapañcaniketabhṛt (-vyomatpañna-(?)) |
tadgatāḥ parameśvaryo vyomavāmādisaṁjñikāḥ l| 34 ||
The letter A and the five letters syllable (i.e., KHPHREM) are one, and so
there is no more to say. The body of the goddesses abides (in this way). The letter
A (asvara) is said to be the resonance (rāva of consciousness) beyond both struck
and unstruck sound. It is the meeting ground of the Five Voids, arisen from the
abode of the Golden Root (suvarṇamūla). The goddesses who reside there are
those named Vyomavāmā and the rest. (32cd-34)

viṣayagrāso (-grāsa) vyākhyatas (vyākyatada-) tadanyavyomamadhyagaḥ (-

gāḥ) |

makārādiṣvarūpo yaḥ pañcapiṇḍakramoditaḥ || 35 ||
tatraiva vyomavāmādidevyaḥ samyag vyavasthitāḥ |
akramodrekavibhavāḥ paramādvayavigrahāḥ || 36 ||
That is said to be the devouring of the objects of sense that takes place in
the centre of the other (??) Void. It is the letter M and the rest, that has arisen from
the sequence of the five-fold syllable (KHPHREM). The goddess Vyomavāmā and
the rest are properly established there itself, their glorious power bor of the
intensity of the changeless (akrama aspect of consciousness) and from supreme
nonduality. (35-36)

itthaṁ devyo nirāveśamahāvarṇakramoditāḥ |
tattvataḥ sparśasaṁvittilaharyām antare sphuṭam || 37 1|
sāmarasyena bhāntīha vāmādyā devatāḥ sadā |
In this way, the goddesses generated through the sequence of (A.,) the
Great Letter (that, transcendent, is) free of penetration, are in reality clearly
manifest within the wave of the consciousness of touch. The goddesses Vāmā and
the rest shine here eternally as oneness (sāmarasyena). (37-38ab)

The Five Goddesses
tāsām eveha vakṣyāmi devīnām api viṣṭarāt || 38 I|
pañcānām api bhāgena saṁdeśikadṛśāgatam ḷ
I shall now explain at length (each) of these five Goddesses, part by part,

according to the teaching that has come from the masters. (38cd-39ab)

mahāśūnyātiśūnyatvāt (mahāśrunyātiśruṇya-) samyakśāntatarāpi (samyakṛ-) yā

I|39 1|

TANTRĀLOKA

493

sarvavyomāni vāmantī (vamati) vyomavāmeśvarī tu sā |
mahāsaṁhāragagane vāmā teṣāṃm athoditā || 40 ||
divyaugham udgirantītthaṁ tāṁ stuve sparśavigrahām |
Vyomavāmeśvaṁī is the Void beyond the Great Void, and so is correctly
and most perfectly at rest, but even so she emanates (vāmantī) all the voids. She is

their emanation (vāmā), arisen in the Void of the Great Destruction. I praise Her

who thus emits the Divine Current (divyaugha) and whose form is touch
(sparśavigraha). (39cd-41ab)

tasyām anicchayodeti śaśvattaddharmadharmiṇī|| 41 I||
yālakṣyaspandalaharī tām ahaṁ khecarīṁ stuve |
svātantryeṇa sadā saiva carantī sve pare ‘mbare || 42 ||
prathamaspandam āśritya rājate cic ca khecarī|
I praise Khecarī, who spontaneously arises within (Vāmeśvarī) who, ever

endowed with that (same) nature, is the wave of the inscrutable pulse (spanda) of
consciousness. She moves freely at all times in her own Supreme Sky (of
consciousness), established in the primordial pulse of consciousness
(prathamaspanda). Khecaṁī, Who is (pure) consciousness, shines radiantly.

(41cd-43ab)

saivākramaviṣargākhyā (-khya) bhūmau yā carati sphuṭam || 43 |
tasmād bhūcariśabdākhyā tām eva praṇamāmy aham |
The same (goddess,) called the Emission Without Process
(akramaviṣarga) moves, clearly apparent, on the plane (bhāmi of sense objects,)
and so she is called Bhūcarī. To her I bow. (43cd-44ab)
saiva tattvasphurattātmavapuḥ (-sphuratā-) saṁharati kṣaṇāt || 44 ||
svatantrā
(svamantraḥ)
svapadānte
tāṁ
vande
saṁhārabhakṣiṇīm
(saṁ(?)rabhakṣaṇīṁ ) |
Again, this same (goddess), her body the pulsing radiance of (the One)
Reality, withdraws (all things) in a moment. 1 praise Saṁhārabhakṣiṇī (the
Devourer of Withdrawal), She who, free, is within her own abode (svapada).

(44cd-45ab)

pratyāvṛttitayā nityaṁ svarūpatrayabhakṣiṇī || 45 ||
mahāvyomāṇtaniṣṭhātvāt saiva raudreśvarī smṛtā |

Established within the Great Void, she perpetually devours the three innate

natures (of creation, persistence and destruction), as (she) is the process of reversal

(back from manifestation into unmanifest consciousness), and so this same

(goddess) is known as Raudreśvarī. (45cd-46ab)

āsāṁ madhye (madhyāṁ) tu devīnāṁ pādukā (yadikā) sphurati svataḥ || 46 |I
sarvās tatraiva (tadaiva) satataṁ sāmarasyena yānty alam |

494

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

The Master's Sandals (pādukā) shine by themselves in the midst of these
goddesses, and there itself they all perpetually attain oneness (sāmarasya). (46cd-

47ab)

iti sadguruvaktrotthayuktyā yo hy anirodhitaḥ (yenātiraudhitaḥ) || 4⁷7 II
samādhisevitaḥ śaśvat sa mahāmnāyapāragaḥ |
He who, by this practice that has come from the lips of a true master,

possesses perfect concentration (samācdhi) at all times and is not obstructed, has

understood the Great Tradition. (47cd-48ab)

kramākramobhayottīrṇadṛśeha prakaṭīkṛtam || 48 II
vaktrād vaktre (vaktra) samāyātaṁ pañcavāham anargalam |
ittham ekaiva pañcātmarūpeṇa sphurati svataḥ || 49 |I
svabhāvaṁ prakaṭīkartuṁ yā devī tām ahaṁ śraye |
The unconditioned Five Currents, transmitted from mouth to mouth, has

here been clearly elucidated by the teaching beyond both the sequence (of
perception) and its absence. lIn this way, the one (goddess) shines spontaneously as
the five-fold nature. I take refuge in that goddess to make my own true nature
manifest. (48cd-50ab)
The Wheel of Light (Prakāśacakra)
nirṇiketatayā samyak cakraṁ (cakra) visphāritaṁ (visphātritaṁ) mahat || 50 |I
vyomeśvaryāvibhedena khecaryākhyaṁ sadoditam |
The great Wheel called Khecarī, ever active, is made to unfold (by the
Void, which is) free of (phenomenal) signs, at one (avibhedena) with Vāmeśvarī.

(50cd-51ab)

dviṣaṭkadhāmavapuṣā devībhir nityam āśritaḥ (-rā) || 51 |I
svakhakalākalāpotthavibhavo (*kheḥkalā-) vigatagrahaḥ |
The glorious power that, free of limitations, arises from the aggregate of
energies of its own inherent emptiness (svakhakalā), and is always linked with the
goddesses by the body, which is the abode of the two groups of six (senses).³

(51cd-52ab)

tathā cāvyaktarūpā ye nirvibhāgaikavigrahāḥ || 52 ||
svarā dvādaśasaṁkhyākāḥ paśyantīgarbhaniṣṭhitāḥ |
paraprakāśavibhavasvabhāvatvād gurūttamāḥ |l| 53 II

Such also are the twelve yvowels, whose nature is unmanifest, and their one

form undivided. They are the glorious power of the supreme light of

³ These are the five senses and mind (manas) and the five organs of action and the
intellect (buddhī).

TANTRĀLOKA

495

consciousness, and s0, established in the womb of Word of Vision (pasyantī), they
are the most excellent teachers. (52cd-53)
tā (tān) eva prathayantīha (katha-) dikcarīcakravartinaḥ |

nirāvaraṇacidvyomarūpā dvādaśadhāvyayāḥ || 54 ||
saṁvidullāsanārūḍhāḥ (saṁviduktāsanā-) svaprakāśaikavigrahāḥ |
yā (yāh(?)mā) haṁsahaṁsamatyādi (* * haṁsamatyādi) nāmataḥ satatoditāḥ ||

55 ll

Residing in the Wheel of Dikcarī, they unfold here (in this world). Their

nature is the unobscured Void of Consciousness and, twelve-fold, they are eternal.

Mounted on the outpouring of consciousness, their one form is their own inherent

Light and, ever active, are called Unstruck Sound (haṁsa), its possessor

(haṁsamati) and the like. (54-55)

tā eveha samākhyatāḥ khecaryādhiṣṭhitāḥ sadā |
dikcarīcakrarūpiṇyo niyatāgrahavarjitāḥ || 56 II
jayanty akramasadbhāvadarśayantyo nirāvilāḥ |
itthaṁ prakãāśacakrasya saṁsthitiḥ suṣṭhitā parā l| 57 |I
nirviṭarkanirābhāsasvarūpā satatoditā |
Perpetually sustained by Khecarī, pure and free of limitations, they are
said to be the (energies) of the Wheel of Dikcarī. Revealing the essence of the
changeless (akrama) (aspect of reality), they are victorious. Such is the abiding
state, well established and supreme, unmanifest, beyond reason and ever active, of
the Wheel of Light. (56-58ab)

The Wheel of Bliss (Ānandacakra)
indoḥ ṣoḍaśasaṁkhyākāḥ kalā amṛtavigrahāḥ || 58 II
yās tā eva samāśritya koṅkaṇāmbādināmataḥ |

prodito (-tā) raśmivibhavaḥ svasvarūpaikagocaraḥ (-rūpika-) || 59 ||

icchāvikṣobhaparyante rājate nirniketanaḥ (nirṇīketanaḥ) |

The energies of the Moon are sixteen and their form nectar. Once having
taken their place as (the goddesses) called Koṅīkaṇāmbā and the rest, they are fully
active. Arisen, the glorious power (of their) rays, its one field their own essential
nature, shines Void (nirniketana) at the climax of the arousal of desire. (58cd-60ab)

adr̥ṣṭadharmiṇaḥ śāntāḥ ṣvarāḥ ṣoḍaśarūpiṇaḥ || 60 |I

āsphālya madhyam ārūḍhās tābhir eva samāśritāḥ |

dvipañcakendriyadvāraiḥ paravyomaikavigrahāḥ || 61 II

bahirvinirgatā devyo haṭhamelāpakena yāḥ |

The sixteen vowels, their qualities unmanifest, are tranquil. The goddesses,
whose sole form is the Supreme Sky of Consciousness, having embraced them and
risen up to the centre, are penetrated by them and, by (the power of) violent union,
exit by the ten doors of the senses. (60cd-62ab)

496

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

tābhir eva samāśritya samyag rūpādipañcakam || 62 I|

nirvikalpaciduddāmabhairavasyāmitadyuteḥ |

ānandavapuṣo rūpam arcyate nirvibhāgataḥ || 63 ||
The group of five, form and the rest, is the (outer) form of the body of

bliss, which is the unbounded radiance of Bhairava, who is unrestrained (uddāma),

non-discursive consciousness. Rightly penetrated by these (energies), (this group

of five) is worshipped in an undivided way. (62cd-63)

itthaṁ dviraṣṭavisṣphāravibhavaḥ kalpanojjhitaḥ |
niruttaracamatkārapradatvāt (-camatkāraṁ-) prathito ‘niśam || 64 ||
In this way, the glorious power of the sixteen-fold expansion, free of
thought constructs, is ever perceived, bestowing as it does unexcelled wonder
(niruttaracamatkāra). (64)
ānandacakramahimā bhūcaryā sphāritā (sphāritaḥ) sadā |
yatas tasmāt tu nirdiṣṭā [nirdiṣṭo] bhūcarīcakranāmataḥ || 65 |I
tam eva praṇamāmīha jñaptigarbhāntaroditam |
The glory of the Wheel of Bliss is unfolded constantly by Bhūcarī, and so
is named the Wheel of Bhūcarī. I bow to that (wheel, manifest) here (in this world)
within the womb of cognitive consciousness (jñapti). (65-66ab)
The Wheel of Form (Mūrticakra)
vahnũr (vahni-) dvipañcavisphārarūpo nityavikasvaraḥ || 66 ll
kharandhravyomamārgeṇa (ka-) śikhāsaptakasaṁyutaḥ |

aśaktatīkṣṇadharmo ʻsau (-dharmāsau) lelihāno nirantaraḥ || 67 ||

prodito viśvasaṁrambhagrasanāya nirāvilaḥ |
evaṁ saptadaśākhyaṁ tu mūrticakraṁ (-cakra) nirāśrayam || 68 II
niṣṭaraṅgamahāvyomadhāmasthaṁ bhāti niṭyaśaḥ |

Fire, consisting of the ten-fold expansion and possessing seven flames,
perpetually extends by (means of suṣumnā, which is) the Path of the Void of the
Cavity of Emptiness. Piercingly sharp, it constantly licks up (the universe). Pure, it

has arisen to devour the ongoing activity of all things. Such is the Wheel of Form

(mūrticakra), free of (outer) support, called the (Wheel of) Seventeen. Established

in the abode of the Great Void, free of the waves (of manifestation), it shines

perpetually. (66cd-69ab)

praśāntarūpavibhavāḥ ṣvarāḥ ṣoḍaśasaṁjñikāḥ || 69 ||

visargasahitā bhānti parāvāggarbhaniṣṭhitāḥ (-vāgarbha-) |

The sixteen vowels, their energies completely tranquil, shine along with
(the energy of) emission (visarga), firmly fixed in the womb of Supreme Speech.

(69cd-70ab)

varṇabhedakrameṇetthaṁ samāśrityeha tān adhaḥ || 70 ||

TANTRĀLOKA

497

bhāti śaśvaccakravaraṁ (śasvañ-) mūrtyākhyaṁ (-khya) vigatagraham |
Once it penetrates them thus here below, by means of the sequence of the
various letters, the etemnal and most excellent Wheel called Form shines, free of
limitations. (7Ocd-71ab)

ānandacakratanavo raśmayo ye nirantarāḥ || 71 ||
asmābhiḥ (-bhīḥ) kathitāḥ pūrvaṁ gurucakrakramoḍditāḥ |
tā eva ṣoḍaśākārāḥ saṁvidullāsavigrahāḥ || 72 ||
yugapad yānti (yanti) yatrāśu (-su) sāmarasyaṁ viyatpade (vipat-) |

niṣṭaraṅge (nistaraṅgo) nirābhāse pare saptadaśābhidhe || 73 ||

The rays we mentioned previously, that have as their body the Wheel of
Bliss, (emitted) continuously, arise from the sequence of the Circle of the Masters.
Those (energies) of sixteen forms, the outpourings of consciousness,
simultaneously attain a state of oneness (sāmarasya) in an instant within the abode
of emptiness (viyatpada) which, free of the waves (of sensory activity and
thought), is unmanifest, supreme, and known as the (Wheel of) Seventeen. (71cd-

73)

itthaṁ visphārayantīdaṁ yoginīcakram (yogini-) uttamam |
saṁhãrabhakṣiṇĩ devī bhāti saptadaśātmataḥ || 74 ||
tad eva vande satataṁ vimalaṁ sarvadoditam |
Unfolding in this way, this, the most excellent Circle of Yoginīs, the
Goddess Saṁhārabhakṣiṇī manifests as the seventeen (energies). I constantly
praise that (Circle of Yoginis), which is pure and perpetually active. (74-75ab)
dhyānādikalanātītarūpatvād akulātmikām || 75 |I
ambaraughavikāsaikadharmiṇīṁ (aṁvarāgha- -ṇī) maṅgalāṁ [-lā) śraye |
I take refuge in the goddess Maṅgalā, who is the expansion of the current

of the Void that, transcending all the differentiated forms (kalanā) of meditation
and the rest, is thus Akula (the undifferentiated transcendent). (75cd-76ab)

māyāto gālayaty āśu (-āsu) maṅgaleha tataḥ smṛtā l| 76 ||
vīrapañcānanārūḍhā mahāmelāpatatparā |
She is called Maṅgalā here (in this world), because she quickly frees

(gālayati) from Māyā. Mounted on the Hero's Five Faces, she is intent on the
Great Union (mahāmelāpa). (76cd-77ab)

paraviddharasaughena (paravidha-) madanaṁ (madanāṁ) cetasi bhṛśam

(niśaṁ) || 77 II

gamanāt paramākāśe sṛṣṭyādikalanojjhite |
sānākhyācakravapuṣaḥ (lānākhe-) paratattvasya sarvadā |/ 78 II
maṅgaleha tataḥ khyātā nirāvaraṇadharmiṇī |

498

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

(Again, she is called Maṅgalā because) her mind is intensely inebriated
(madana) with the flow of the juice of the aesthetic delight (rasa) that is penetrated
by supreme (consciousness) by moving (gamanāt) in the Supreme Void, free of the
differentiated manifestation (kalanā) of creation and the rest. She is ever (the
goddess) of the Supreme Principle, whose form is the Wheel of the Inexplicable.
So She is called Maṅgalā here (in the world), and Her nature is free of obscuration.

(77cd-79ab)

asyāḥ svarūparūpo yaḥ khakārādivivarjitaḥ || 79 ||
pañcapiṇḍamayo mantro vāktrayojjhitavigrahaḥ |
avarṇasvararūpaś ca vyomeśībhiḥ prapiṇḍitaḥ || 80 ||
pañcabhiḥ sāmarasyena vācako nāma yaḥ sthitaḥ |
Her own most intimate nature (svasvarūpa) is (Śiva,) the one who speaks
(vācaka). He is the five-lettered syllable mantra (i.e., KHPHREṀ), (although,)

devoid of the letter KH and the rest, and His form is free of the three levels of
Speech. He is also the letter A, gathered together (prapiṇḍita) by the five
Vyomesis, (and is) at one with them. (79cd-81ab)
ṣoḍaśādhārasaṁsthānasaṁsthitā (-saṁsthi *) yā citiḥ sadā || 81 II
sphurantī svabalodrekāniyatagrahamuḍdritā (ṣsvavalādrekā-) |

The power of consciousness (citi) that abides constantly within the abode

of the sixteen supports pulses radiantly, and by the intensity of Her innate power is
stamped with the seal (mudrā) of unconditioned perception. (81cd-82b)
tasyā vigatya (vigātya) yugapad vibhedollāsavigraham || 82 |I

nirniketamahājñānaraśmayaḥ (nirṇiketa-) khe (sva) sadoditāḥ |

sāmarasyamayaṁ cakraṁ darśayanty avibhedataḥ || 83 ||

Having eliminated all at once its (outer) form, which is the outpouring of

duality, the rays of the Great Abodeless (nirniketa) Consciousness, ever manifest in
the Void (of transcendence), reveal the Wheel, which is oneness (sāmarasya), as

undivided. (82cd-83)

bhāvābhāvapadottīrṇaviyadvāmapade sthitā |
antarbahīrūpatayā ye tiṣṭhantīndriyātmakāḥ || 84 ||
karās (kanās-) tān eva sahasā tathā svadehaviṣṭaram (kaṇṭha-) |

nayati svabalonmeṣād (-ṣā) nirniketacidambaram (nirṇiketa-) || 85 ||

Established on the emanating plane (vāmapada) of emptiness beyond the
plane of being and nonbeing, (the power of consciousness) leads with sudden force
(sahasā), by the expansion of its inherent power, those rays (of cognitive energy)
that abide inwardly and externally as the senses, along with the expanse of (its)
body, to the abodeless Sky of Consciousness. (84-85)

TANTRĀLOKA

499

The Wheel of the Aggregate
The Jñānasiddhas
yā saiva kathitā sadbhiḥ parā mudrā karaṅkiṇī |
eṣāṁ (āsāṁ) jñānākhyarūpāṇāṁ siddhānāṁ saṁsthitā kalā || 86 |I
mudrayitvā pṛthagbhedaṁ mudreyaṁ karaṇojjhitā (-tām) |
(The energy that does this) is called Karaṅkiṇī, the supreme seal (mmudrā),

by the wise. It is the energy of these, the Jñānasiddhas. This gesture, having sealed
duality, is free of all the senses. (86-87ab)

The Mantrasiddhas
prthivyādiprakṛtyantatattvaviṣṭāravibhramaḥ || 87 ||
dviṣaṭkadviguṇātmā yaḥ pārimityagrahānvitaḥ (-tā) |
tam eva nigalanty (nigalaty) uccaiḥ krodhān mantramarīcayaḥ || 88 II
(+ yatas tasyān) mantrasiddhā yatas tasyā (* * * *) vyvomadhāmakramoditāḥ |
The rays of the Mantra(siddhas) upwardly consume (nigalanti) by (the
force of) Wrath the entire expanse of the play of the twenty-four conditioned
principles from Earth to Nature, as they are the Mantrasiddhas of that (power of
consciousness) generated from the process (operating in) the Abode of Emptiness
(vyomadhāmakrama). (87cd-89ab)

krodhena tattvavibhavaṁ nayaty ugranirākulā (-kulaṁ) || 89 ||

yā māntraṁ (mātraṁ) paramaṁ vīryaṁ sā mudrā krodhinī smṛtā |
The seal (mudrā) that is fierce and (yet) undisturbed, that conducts the

energy (vibhava) of the principles to the supreme vitality of mantra by (the power

of) Wrath is said to be Krodhinī. This most excellent seal is that of the

Mantrasiddhas. Once having sealed what is generated by duality, it is established in

the body. (89cd-90ab)
The Melapasiddhas

eṣāṁ (āsāṁ) mantrākhyarūpāṇāṁ siddhānāṁ saṁvyavasthitā || 90 ||
mudrayitvā vibhedotthaṁ dehe (dehaṁ) mudreyam uttamā |
dviṣaṭkarūpabhedena granthayo ye vyavasthitāḥ || 91 II
tān eva bhedayitvemāḥ śaktayaḥ proditāḥ parāḥ |
mahāmeḻlāpadharmiṇyaḥ
sāmarasyaikavigrahāḥ
krauṇḍalyummeṣavigrahāḥ) || 92 ||
nirāvaraṇacidyyomadhāmasthā bhānti nityaśaḥ |

(MM:

Once the twelve knots have been pierced, these energies arise supreme.

Endowed with the qualities of the Great Union, their one form oneness
(sāmaraṣya), they, established in the abode of the unobscured expanse of
consciousness, shine perpetually. (90cd-93ab)

500

āpūrya

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

.svabalodrekasamutthaṁ

.(-kasvamukhaṁ)

bhedaḍambaram

dambaram) || 93 II
yā sthitā pūrṇavibhavā nirāvaraṇavigrahā (nirāvarṇa-) |
bhairavī saiva vikhyãtā mudrā sadasadujjhitā || 94 |
niṣṭaraṅgavikāsātmasāmarasyaikanirbharā (-vikāśātma-) |
eṣāṁ (āsāṁ) melāpasiddhānāṁ mudreyaṁ bhairavyātmikā (bhairavā-) || 95 ||

(-

Bhairavī is said to be the seal that, having filled the spectacle of duality
generated by the intensity of her innate power, is free of being and nonbeing, her

glorious power full (and perfect) and form unobscured. Bhairavī by nature, this is

the gesture, full to overflowing with the oneness (sāmarasya), which is the
waveless expansion of consciousness, of these Melāpasiddhas. (93cd-95).

The Śāktasiddhas
puryaṣṭakasya gaditā vāsanābījavigrahāḥ |
śaktayo yāḥ sūkṣmatarās tāsāṁ saṁharaṇodyatāḥ || 96 ||
dīptayo yās tīkṣṇatamā vigatagrahadhāmagāḥ |
tā eva kathitāḥ samyak śāktasiddhā nirāmayāḥ || 97 ||
The Śāktasiddhas, free of defects, are rightly said to be (those who) reside

in the abode devoid of limitations (graha) they, luminous and supremely powerful
(tīkṣṇatama), are intent on destroying the most subtle energies said to be (those)

who form are the seeds of the latent traces of the subtle body (puryasṭaka). (96-97)
sarvasaṁhārasaṁhãrarũpã vr̥ttir nirargalã |
yā saiva kathitā mudrā lelihānātighasmarā || 98 II

The seal said to be Lelihānā, extremely voracious and free of all restraint,

is the activity (of consciousness) which is the destruction of all destruction. (98)
āsāṁ śāktākhyasiddhānāṁ devīnāṁ proditāniśam |
mudrayitvā dvidhābhāvaṁ mudreyaṁ paradhāmagā || 99 ||

This seal, ever active, is present within the Supreme Abode, having
sealed the duality of these, the goddesses of the Śāktasiddhas. (99)

The Śāmbhavasiddhas
parādivaikharītyantaṁ (parānvaikharīnityaṁ) vāgullekhacatuṣṭayam |
yatas tasyaiva niratā (niranta) bhedagrāsāya (-ye) dīptayaḥ || 100 ||
sāmarasyapadaprāptidāyinyo yā vikasvarāḥ |
khyātās tā eva śāmbhavyo devyo nirdvayadhāmagāḥ || 101 I
The goddesses of the Śāmbhava(siddhas) reside in the abode free of
duality and bestow the attainment of the plane of oneness (sāmarasya). They are
said to be these very (goddesses) because, expanding, luminous lights, they are

TANTRĀLOKA

501

intent on devouring (the duality of) the four-fold manifestation of Speech, that
ranges from the Supreme to the Corporeal (vaikharī). (100-101)
yāsparśāsparśagagane carantī nirniketanā |

sarvāvaraṇanirmuktā mudrā sā khecarī smṛtā || 102 ||

The seal that, free of all obscuring coverings and without abode
(nirniketanā), moves in the Expanse of No Touch (asparśagagana) and is (herself)

Touch (sparśā), is said to be Khecarī. (102)

taḍillēkhaiva (-kheva) yā vyomni yāntī sarvojjhite pade (game) |

svaprakāśavikāsaikarūpā sā khecarī smṛtā || 103 I|

Khecarī is said to be the lightning flash that travels through the Sky (of
Consciousness), the plane free of all things, her sole nature the expansion of her
own innate light (svaprakāśa). (103)
āsāṁ śāmbhavasidáhānāṁ devīnāṁ prathitā sadā |
mudraṇāyāśu nānātvaṁ (-tve) mudreyaṁ kalpanojjhitā || 104 |I
This seal, free of thought constructs and perceived (prathitā) at all times,
serves to seal in an instant the multiplicity of these, the goddesses of the
Sāmbhavasiddhas. (104)
yathā hy ānāsmitācakre mudrāpañcasvarūpiṇī |

tathaiva pañca devyas tu (devī tu) vartante [vartinī] satatoditāḥ (-tā) || 105 1I

The five goddesses, ever active, abide thus, as does (the one energy which
is) the five seals, in the Wheel of the absence of Egoity (anāsmitācakra). (105)
cakrapañcasamāyuktā (- * * *² *) saṁsthitāpi (* sthitāpi) samantataḥ |
vijñeyā guruvaktrotthayuktyā sadbhir avigrahā (cagrahā) || 106 ||
Formless, everywhere established, and endowed with the five wheels, (her
true nature) should be known by the wise through the practice (yukti) that comes
from the mouth of the master. (106)

The Sequence of Letters
akārādiviṣargāntāḥ (akārāḥ proktāḥ) svarāḥ ṣoḍaśarūpī
vācyās (vyaktās) tā jñānasiddhākhyāḥ (-khya) vijñeyāḥ

(paratādajāḥ) || 107 |I

paradhāmajāḥ

The sixteen vowels beginning with A and ending with visarga are the
objects of denotation (vācya) – which should be known to be the Jñānasiddhas
born from the supreme abode. (107)

kakārādibhakārāntā varṇavyañjanarūpiṇaḥ |

502

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

dviṣatkadviguṇākrāntāḥ (-ṇākrāmūḥ (?)) siddhā (siddha) vācakavigrahāḥ (* * *

kavigrahāḥ) || 108 II

The Mantrasiddhas are the consonants (varṇavyañjana)⁴ ranging from K
to BH. They possess twenty-four qualities and are the denotators (vācaka). (108)
dvādaśākhyās tathā (-tayāḥ) proktā mātrās tā eva saṁsmṛtāḥ |
melāpasiddhāḥ (-siddhā) satataṁ sāmarasyapradāḥ sadā l| 109 |l
Similarly, the Melāpasiddhas who bestow oneness (sāmarasya) at all
times are considered to be the twelve measures (of the letter A). (109)
yakārādihakārāntāḥ (-rāntā) aṣṭau varṇā vyavasthitāḥ |
Śśāktasiddhās tu te jīñeyā jagaduddyotanodyatāḥ (jagadudyota-) |/ 110 ||

The eight letters ranging from Y to H should be known to be the

Śāktasiddhas, intent on illumining the universe. (110)

akārasyeha yāḥ proktāś catasraḥ (catastraḥ) śaktayo ‘mitāḥ |
śāmbhavākhyāḥ siddhavarāḥ saṁsmr̥tās tāḥ sadoditāḥ (satoditāḥ) || I1 II

The four boundless energies of the letter A are said to be the excellent

Siddhas, ever active, called Śāmbhava. (111)

ittham ādyakṣarasyeha catuḥṣaṣṭis tu raśmayaḥ |
nijadehād ullasitāḥ samāś ceśvarigarbhagāḥ (samañceśvari-) || 1 I2 II

In this way the sixty-four rays of A, the first letter, are generated here from

one’s own body, and (all) abide equally in the womb of the goddess. (112)

tathā ca saṁstutã (* * tā) devyaḥ kathaṁ kasmād iti sphuṭam |
procyate ‘tra (mocyate ‘tra) mayā samyaṅ mukhāmnāyadaśābhidaḥ (makhā-) l|

1131I|

Here 1 will explain clearly according to the oral tradition how (these)
goddesses, thus praised, are and from whence (they arise). (113)
sphuṭā ye jñānasiddhākhyā (sphu * * * * * dākhyā) raudrīśṛṅgāṭtakākṛte (cau *
³k * takākṛte) |
⁴ There is an interesting play of words here. The twenty-four consonants represent the

twenty-four principles from Earth to Nature. They are the principles that make manifest

(vyañjana) the inner energies represented by the sixteen vowels. Thus, like the consonants

(vyañjana), that ‘make manifest’ the ‘colour⁷ or ‘type’ (varṇa) of the vowels. The 24

principles consist of the five gross elements, their five corresponding sensations, the five

organs of sense and five of action, the inner mental organ consisting of mind, intellect and
ego, and Nature, which is the immediate source and ‘substance’ of all of them. These

principles serve as the channels through which the energies of consciousness operate, and
so are made manifest, just as the consonants manifest the vowels.

TANTRĀLOKA

503

kalpanāśaktayo (kalpayā-) dīptāḥ parabodhopabṛṁhitāḥ || 114 ||
Those called Jñānasiddhas are clearly manifest within the form of Raudrī’s
triangle. They are the energies of thought, illuminated and intensified by supreme
consciousness. (1 14)
mandraṣiddhāstu (* * * * ṣṭu) vāmāyāḥ sakāśāduditāḥ parāḥ |
śaktayo rāvabimbāśca (-viṁvā ca) sudīptā amitāḥ (yitāḥ sadā) ||

115 II

While the Mantrasiddhas, supreme, arise from Vāmā. These energies, well
illumined and always unlimited, are the very form of the resonance (of
consciousness — rāvabimba). (115)

melāpasiddhāḥ satataṁ prathitā niravagrahāḥ |
ambikāyāḥ parānandanirbharāḥ (-nirbharā) śaktayo ‘mitāḥ || 116 ||
The Melāpasiddhas, perpetually perceived, free of limitations and full of
supreme bliss, are the unlimited energies of Ambikā. (116)
devyaḥ (devyaṁ) saṁsphuritā nityaṁ jyeṣṭhāyāḥ satatotthitāḥ |
śāktasiddhā mahattejobalenotkaṭavigrahāḥ || 1 17 II
spandākhyā nādacidvattā (-cidvyakta) varṇā nityavikasvarāḥ |
The Śāktasiddhas are the goddesses of Jyeṣṭhā. Ever active and perpetually

manifest, their form is immensely powerful (utkaṭa), by virtue of the force of the

vast radiant power (tejas) (of consciousness). They are the letters, perpetually
expanding, that, endowed with consciousness and the resonance (nāda of its
awareness), are called the vibration (of consciousness — spanda). (117-118ab)
kalāś catasraḥ paramāḥ khyātāḥ svātmaprakāśikāḥ || 118 II
kalācatuṣṭayam (-caṭuṣṭam) idaṁ sāmarasyasvarūpatām |

yātaṁ yatrādyavarṇe ʻsmin tadrūpāḥ śāmbhavāḥ smṛtāḥ || 119 ||
There are four energies that, illuminating their own (true) nature, are

said to be supreme. This group of four energies becomes one in A, the first
letter, and the Śāmbhava (Siddhas) (residing) in this (the letter A) are considered
to be of their nature. (118cd-119)

ittham ekasya yugapat sarvadehoḍditās tviṣaḥ |
sarvakalpanakalanānivahavibhramavarjitāḥ || 120 ||
makārarūpam āśritya bhāty anugrahatatparā |
maṅgalākhyā mahālakṣamī vṛṇdacakraikanāyikā || 121 ||
Simultaneously deposited in this way, all the radiant energies that arise
from the body of the one (reality), free of the delusion of all the multitude of
thought processes, into the true nature of the letter M, Mahālakṣmī, who is called

Maṅgalā, the sole mistress of the Wheel of the Aggregate (vrndacakra), shines,
intent on grace. (120-121)

504

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

varṇabhedakrameṇetthaṁ yadyapi prathitāḥ sphuṭam |
tathāpy avarṇamāhātmyaṁ (-māhātayaṁ) na tyajanti kadācana || 122 ||
But even if (these energies) are clearly perceived (individually) in this way
by means of the sequence of the various types of letters (varṇabheda), they never
forsake the great glory (māhātmya) of the letter A. (122)
ekā devīti vā bhāti tisro dvādaśadhoditā |
udyogādikrameṇoccair ekaikā pañcadhotthitā || 123 |I

Or (from another point of view, one could say that only) one goddess, the

third (of the five), manifests and arises twelve times over (as aspects of her own

energy), each of which arises five-fold through the process (of manifestation) that
commences with exertion (udyoga). (123)
tṛtīyenādyakāreṇa (tṛtīyena prakāreṇa) vṛndacakrakramodayaḥ |
ādyanāthoktabhāṣāyāṁ (-bhaṁgyāyāṁ) laghūktyā prakaṭīkṛtaḥ || 124 ||

From a third (point of view, one can say that) the arising of the sequence
of the Wheel of the Aggregate is engendered by A, the first letter, as explained
concisely in the commentary (bhāṣā) uttered by Ādyanātha.⁶ (124)
The Ascent of Consciousness
jhaṭityunmiṣitākhyasya grāhyā (grāhyai) samadṛgātmanaḥ |
yehodeti prathā (prathāt) saiva mahājñānaikarūpiṇī|/ 125 ||
The perception that should be grasped (grāhyā) arises here (in common
daily experience — prathā) at one with the Great Knowledge of (universal
consciousness mahājñāna), and is that of the equal (undifferentiated) perception of
all things, called the (spontaneous and) sudden expansion (of consciousness). (125)
tasyāḥ padārthasaṁrambhaparijñānasvarūpataḥ |
yā vibhāti citiḥ (citi) saiva mahāmantrasvarūpiṇī|/ 126 ||
The power of consciousness (citi) of that (perception), that shines (as all

things), is the complete knowledge of the activity of all that exists (padārtha), and
as such is the Great Mantra. (126)

grāhyagrāhakasaṁśleṣād (grahyagrahaka-)analpāhlādanirbharā |

yā saṁvid rājate saiva mahāmelāpavigrahaḥ || 127 ||

The consciousness that shines, full of the great bliss (āhlāda) that comes
from the contact between subject and object, is the form of the Great Union. (127)

⁵ Perhaps the third goddess who governs the Melāpasiddhas is meant here. There she
appears as the twelve energies (mātrā – ‘measures’) of the letter A.

⁶ Sense and edition uncertain.

TANTRĀLOKA

505

nirvikalpacitau (-cito) yatra jñaptimātre (jñāpti-) sadodite |
sāmarasyadṛśā sarvaṁ sthitaṁ śāktaḥ kramas tu saḥ | 128 II
The Sequence of Power (śāktakrama) is where everything abides by virtue
of the vision of oneness (sāmarasya) in pure consciousness (jñaptimātra) that, ever
active, is the power of awareness (citi) free of thought constructs. (128)
mahāśūnye (-śrīūnye) tu gahane niḥspandākhye ‘niketane (niṣpandā-) |
sahasā vilayaṁ yāti citir (citi) yatra sa śāmbhavaḥ || 129 ||

The Śāmbhava (sṭate) is the one in which the power of consciousness

(citi) suddenly (sahasā) dissolves away into the Great Void called the Inactive

(niḥspanda), that is profound and has no abode. (129)
atipraśāntasaṅhāravilayavyomasāgaraḥ |

tasmād īṣaccittaraṅgarūpajñānam ihoditam || 130 ||

tadaiva parahbodhaikarūpaṁ svaspandavigraham |
mantramūrtitayā (mantro-) śāktaṁ vibhātaṁ (dvibhātaṁ)
(niragrahaṁ) || 131 ||

niravagraham

Cognitive awareness (jñāna) arises here in the form of a subtle wave of
consciousness out of that ocean of emptiness, which is the perfectly peaceful
condition of the dissolving away of destruction. Its form is its innate pulsation
(svaspanda), at one with supreme consciousness, and is the empowered (principle)
free of limitation, made manifest as the Form of Mantra (mantramūrti). (130-131)

tatas tad eva sahasā militaṁ paradhāmani |

yatas tasmād iha khyāto melāpo (melāpa) nirniketanaḥ (nirṇiketanaḥ) || 132 |
Then that same (cognitive consciousness) is united forcefully (sahasā) in

the Supreme Abode, and so is here said to be abodeless Union. (132)
mahāsaṁhāragagane so ‘py antarlayam āgataḥ |
Śśāktakramas tato bhāti sadasatkramavarjitaḥ || 133 I|

That also dissolves away inwardly in the Sky of the Great Dissolution, and
so the Sequence of Power (śāktakrama), free of the sequences of being and
nonbeing, manifests. (133)

punas tad eva saṁvittikalanāparivarjitam |
niruttaraṁ paraṁ yat (yata) tat kathitaṁ vyomaśāmbhavam || 134 ||
Again, that same (principle,) completely free of the cognitive process

(saṁvittikalanā), is the supreme absolute (niruttara), said to be the Śāmbhava state

of emptiness (vyomaśāmbhava). (134)

ayaṁ (idaṁ) śrīvīrasiṁhākhyasvāminā (-svāminyā) saṁprakāśitaḥ |

śrījñānanetranāthasya vṛndacakrodayaḥ paraḥ || 135 ||

506

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

This is the supreme arising of the Wheel of the Aggregate, (taught by) the
venerable Jñānanetranātha, that has been revealed by the master Vīrasiṁha. (135).
bhāvasvabhāvarūpeṇa vṛṇdacakramahodayaḥ |
saṁdarśitas tīvratarapātaviddhadhiyāṁ (-pātraviddha-) satām || 136 ||
The great arising of the Wheel of the Aggregate that takes place in the
form of the inner nature of phenomenal existence within the intellect (dhī) of the

wise, penetrated by the most intense (descent of grace,) has thus been clearly

revealed. (136)

nirdhāmaparamākāśapadān nityavikasvarāt (-ra) |
prasūtāḥ pañcadevyoghabījabhūtāḥ sadoditāḥ || 137 II
The (energies), ever active, that are the seeds of the current of the five

goddesses, are generated from the perpetually expanding plane of the abodeless
and Supreme Sky (of consciousness). (137)

tenaiva pañcacakrākhyakramasvāmī (-kramamvāsvī) vikāsitaḥ (vikāśitaḥ) |
nirvikalpamahājñānaphalaprāptau nirantaraḥ || 138 II
Thiṣ brings about the constant expansion of the Lord of the Sequence of

Five Wheels when the fruit, namely, the Great Knowledge (mahājñāna), free of

thought constructs, is attained without a break. (138)

sa eva prāntacakre tu vīrākhyaḥ pañcakodayaḥ (pañcakoṭyaḥ) |

devatākramaviṣphāram āsphārya phalataḥ ṣadā || 139 ||

He, the arising of the pentad, is called the Hero, (who resides) in the final
Wheel, constantly unfolding the expansion of the sequence of deities
(devatākrama) as the fruit (of this process). (139)
The Descents of Consciousness
prathitā (prathitaḥ) pātavibhavasvabhāvenākramākṛtiḥ |
tasyaiva saṁpravakṣyāmi saṁpradāyaṁ mukhodgatam || 140 I|
The form of the changeless (akrama aspect of consciousness) is perceived
as the innate nature of the glorious power of the descent (pāta of the energies of
consciousness into manifest activity). I will now explain the oral tradition
concerning (its five aspects). (140)
dvandvayugmasvarūpeṇa vāmeśyevoditā sadā (gamā) |
ajasraṁ(ajastraṁ) śāmbhavākhyena gṛhītvā pātam (yātam)āditaḥ || 141 ||

Vāmeśī is perpetually active as the innate nature of the pair of opposites

(dvandvayugma), once having assumed in an instant the first descent (of
consciousness), that is, the one called Sāmbhava. (141)

TANTRĀLOKA

507

aṣṭābhiḥ śāktarūpābhir devībhiḥ prathitā ( prathitāḥ) svataḥ |
khecaryākhyā gṛhītvātha pātāṁśaṁ (pātaṁśaśva) dvitīyakam || 142 ||
The (goddess) called Khecarī is spontaneously (svataḥ) perceived by
means of the eight Śākta goddesses when she assumes the second aspect of the
descent (of consciousness). (142)

dvādaśātmasvabhāvābhiḥ śaktibhiḥ sarvadotthitā (sarvatotthitāḥ) |
bhūcarī sahasāśritya samyagjñānaṁ (-jñātaṁ) tṛtīyakam || 143 ||
Bhūcarī is constantly generated by her own twelve energies when she

enters with sudden force (sahasā) the third (descent), which is that of right

knowledge (saṁyagjñāna). (143).

caturviṁśatiṣvabhāvābhir devatābhiḥ sadoditā |

saṅṁhārabhakṣiṇy āśritya nityaṁ pātaṁ (yātaṁ) caturthakam || 144 ||
Saṁhārabhakṣiṇī is constantly activated by the twenty-four deities when
she enters the fourth perpetual descent (of consciousness). (144)
dviraṣṭaraśmirūpābhir devībhiḥ proditāntagā |
raudreśvarī samāśritya pātaṁ tu pañcamaṁ (pañca *) kramāt || 145 ||
When, in due order, Raudreśvarī enters the fifth descent she, the last (of

the goddesses), is activated by the goddesses who are the sixteen rays (of
consciousness). (145)

itthaṁ kramākramollāsarūpeṇa prathitāḥ (prathitā) sadā |
pañcavāhasvarūpiṇyo devyo ‘nugrahatatparāḥ || 146 ||
The goddesses who are the Five Currents, intent on grace, are perceived in
this way at all times as the outpouring (of consciousness), which is both sequential
and simultaneous (kramākrama). (146)
nirniketadṛśāpīha (nirṇiketa-) tā eva proditāḥ sphuṭam ḷ

jñānādipañcake bhānti pratyekāsmin (pratyekaṁsmi) nirantarāḥ || 147 1
From the point of view of the Abodeless also, these same (energies) are

clearly active here, and shine without a break in each (member of the) pentad from
the Jñānasiddhas onwards. (147)

garbhasaṁkrãmitollāsaṁ bhakṣyaikaikā (-sa bhaṅtyai(?)kaikā) virājate |
devī pañcātmavṛttiṣṭhā paramāmbaradharmiṇī || 148 |I
Each one shines individually once the outpouring (of diversity) that has

been projected into the womb (of consciousness) has been consumed. (Thus,) the

goddess, established in the five modalities of her own nature, possesses the
attributes of the Supreme Void (of consciousness). (148)
tattvataḥ sarvasaṁkalpavarjitā ye nirantarāḥ |

508

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

bhāsante yatra tatraiva (tatremās) tadbhāvaṁ yānti saṁvidaḥ || 149 ||
evaṁ pañcātmavibhavaṁ cakraṁ raudreśyadhiṣṭhitam 1

nirūpākhyamahāgrāsarūpān (-rūpā) na cyavate kadā (sada) || 150 ||

Perceptions (saṁvit), which in reality are continuous and devoid of all

thought constructs (and intentions – sarikalpa), assume that (one essential) nature
wherever they manifest. In this way, the Wheel, which is the glorious power
(vibhava) of the five-fold nature (pañcātman), presided over by Raudreśī, never
wavers from its true nature as the inexplicable and great consumption (mahāgrāsa)

(of perceptions into undifferentiated consciousness). (149-150)
dhāmamudrāvarṇakalāsaṁvidbhāvasvabhāvataḥ |
pātāniketadṛṣṭyādi (yātā-) vṛndacakraṁ prakāśitam || 151 1I

(Thus,) the Wheel of the Aggregate (vṛndacakra), the first (of all),

consisting of the Abodes, Seals, Letters, Energies and Cognition (saṁīvid), has
been explained from the point of view of the descents and the Abodeless. (151)
The First Lineage
uḍātīśapīṭtham (udrītha-) āśrītya maṅgalānandanirbharā (pīṭhayā śrīmanmaṅga-

)|

sadasadbhāsanāveśavarjitā tām ahaṁ śraye || 152 ||

1) 1, having entered Udḍdḍīśa’s sacred seat, take refuge in the goddess
Maṅgalā, who is full of bliss and free of penetration (āveśa) into the manifestations
of the presence (of phenomena) and (their) absence (sadasadbhāva). (152)

tataḥ śrīmacchivānandanāthaguruvaraṁ sadã |

lokottaramahājñānacakṣuṣaṁ praṇamāmy aham || 153 II

2) Then I bow at all times to the best of teachers, the venerable
Sivānandanātha, who possesses the eye of great transcendental wisdom

(mahājñāna). (153)

śrīmatkeyiūravatyākhyā (-keryukhatyākhyā) pīṭhajajñānapāragā |
khacakracāriṇī yeyaṁ tām ahaṁ naumi bhaktitaḥ || 154 ||
3) I bow with devotion to the venerable one called Keyuravatī, who has
grasped all the wisdom born of the sacred seat, and wanders in the Wheel of
Emptiness. (154)

mahāvīravaro yo ʻsau śrīmadvāmanasaṁjñakaḥ |
devīdhāmni ṣadārūḍhas taṁ vande kramabhāskaram || 155 II
4) 1 salute the venerable one called Vāmana, the best of great heroes
(mahāvīra), who, ever established in the abode of the goddess, is the sun (that

illumines the) Tradition (krama). (155)

TANTRĀLOKA

509

tataḥ śrīmaccakrabhānur devatānayadeśikaḥ |
mahāvratadharo yas taṁ vande 'haṁ paradhāmagam || 156 ||
5) Then I salute the venerable Cakrabhānu, teacher of the Devatānaya
(Teachings concerning the Deities) who, observing the Great Vow (mahāvrata) (of
a Kāpālika), has attained the supreme abode. (156)

śrīmadīśānikākhyā yā pañcamudrāvibhūṣitā |

akramakramasantānakovidā (-santānākovidān) tāṁ namāmy aham || 1 57 1|
6) Ī salute the venerable one called Īśānikā, she who is adorned with the

five insignias (of a Kāpālika) and is well versed in the tradition of the Krama
without stages (akrama). (157)
mahānayaparajñānavibhūtisatpradaḥ (-vibhūṣita-) sadā |
śrīmannandakanāmā yas taṁ namāmi khadhāmagam |I 158 II

7) I salute the venerable one called Nandaka, who resides in the abode of
Emptiness and always dispenses the truth of the wealth of the supreme knowledge
of the Mahānaya (Great Teaching). (158)

śrīmatsajjananāmas taṁ (-nāmānaṁ) rahasyakramaṇirbharam (rahasyaṁ-) |
bhedābhedakalaṅkasya (-kalaṅkastu) varjitaṁ praṇamāmy aham || 159 ||
8) I bow to the venerable one called Sajjana who, devoid of the stain of
both unity and diversity, is full of the secret tradition (rahasyakrama). (159)

nirmalasphaṭikaprakhyahṛdayaṁ vigatāmayam |
śrīmatsomeśvaraṁ vande mahāśāsanapāragam || 160 |
9) I praise the venerable Somesvara, whose heart is as clear as stainless
crystal, and who, free of suffering, has mastered the Great Teaching. (160)
teneha kṛpayā mahyaṁ saṁpradatto mahākramaḥ |
yenāhaṁ navabhir vārṇakalaṅkair nāvṛto ‘niśaṃ (-bhir vāṇaka-) |¹ 161 |I
10) Here, by his grace, I was given the Mahākrama, by virtue of which 1
am never enveloped by new stains of obscuring coverings. (161)
The Second Lineage
atraiva kathyate ‘smadbhir (-smābhir-) dvitīyā gurusantatiḥ |
pīthoditamahāmnāyarahasyakramanṇirbharā || 162 |
Now I will relate the second line of teachers, full of the secret teachings
(rahasyakrama) of the Great Tradition born from the sacred seat. (162)

śrīcakrabhānupādais tu paramārthārthapāragaiḥ |

510

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

kṛtaprasādo vīrendraḥ (-de vīrendra) śrīprabodhatapodhanaḥ || 163 |
1 and 2) The Lord of Heroes, venerable Prabodha(nātha) the Ascetic, was

graced (with the teachings) by the venerable Cakrabhānu, who had grasped the

highest truth. (163)
tenāhitaprasādas tu jaiyakākhyo mahāvratī|
jñānasaṁkrāntinirbhrāntaḥ ṣvānandānandananditaḥ || 164 ||

3) Graced by the former, the one called Jaiyaka, who observed the Great

Vow (mahāvratin), was free of error by virtue of the transmission of wisdom (he
received), and was delighted by the joy of his own inherent bliss. (164)
tenāpi ca śrīpaṅkākhyaṁ (śrīpaṅkakākhye) dattaḥ (datta) śrīkramaśāsanaḥ |
bhavatadbhrāntivibhrāntividhvaṁsoccaṇḍadīdhitiḥ (bhavatūdbhrānti-) || 165 ||

4) He gave to the venerable one called Paṅka the venerable Krama
teachings, the powerful rays of which shatter phenomenal existence and the
delusion born of the ignorance (it generates). (165)
tenāpi śrīnāganāmā) deśikapravarāgraṇīḥ) |

kṛtaprasādaparamāhlādodayavighūrṇitaḥ (kṛtaprasādopara-) || 166 ||
5) He (in his turn) graced (with the teachings) the venerable and best of
teachers called Nāga, who was thereby inebriated by the arising of the Great Bliss

(mahāhlāda). (166)

tenāpy ahaṁ mahāmnāyavaro ‘smin paramādbhute |
abhiṣiktaḥ (abhisiktaḥ) kṛto ʻthāṇtacittenāvṛttatejasā (krṛyāśrāntacittenā-) || 167

lI

6) By him I have been given the gift of the Great Tradition in this, the

Supreme Wonder, and initiated by the inner mind enveloped with radiant power

(tejas). (167)

itthaṁ proktā santatis tu dvitīyeṣā mahānaye |

nirāveśasamāveśacamatkāraughanirbharā (-camatkārādya-) || 168 I|

In this way this, the second lineage of the Great Teaching, overflowing
with the flood of the wonder of impenetrable (nirāveśa) mystical absorption
(samāveśa), has been declared. (168)

itthaṁ parasparodbhũtaḥ ṣadgurukramaviṣṭaraḥ |
sthito ‘yaṁ divyasiddhākhyamanujñātakrameṇa ca || 169 |I
The entire lineage of true teachers has developed in this way through the
tradition and is, in due order, the Divine, that of the Accomplished Ones (siddha),
and that known by men. (169)

TANTRĀLOKA

511

saṅṁvitpramāmahādbhūtasamullāsamahodayaḥ h (samvitprāṇamahābhūta- -ya)

|

abhyantaradrśā iti divyo ʻsau sadgurukramaḥ || 170 II
From the inner point of view, the divine lineage of true teachers is the
Great Arising, which is the outpouring of the great wonder of the pure knowledge
(pramā) of consciousness. (170)

vastutaḥ (vasṣtutat) ṣvasvarollāsaḥ (-sa) prathamaḥ śūnyatātmakaḥ |
yo vibhāti mahābhābhis tam ajaṁ deśikaṁ śraye || 171 II
I take refuge in the unborn master who is made manifest by the great rays
(of consciousness), and is in reality the emptiness which is the first outpouring of
one’s own innate vocalic consciousness (svasvara). (171)
The Five Wombs
pañcagranthisamudbhedakaraṇā yoditā citiḥ |
yatas tasmāt pañcadhotthā (-dhottha) praṇavāvartarūpiṇī |I 172 1|
The active power of consciousness (citi) pierces through the five knots and
so arises five-fold as the circulation of Praṇava. (172)
yeyaṁ tasyā niraupamyaśarīrād (-rā) dīptayas tu yaḥ (sā) |

niyatagrahasaṁhāranirmalā yāḥ (ya) samutthitāḥ (samutthitā) || 173 |I

tā eva gaditāḥ (gaṁ-) pañcayonayaḥ paradhāmagāḥ |
niyatagrahasaṁsthānakalpanāparivarjitāḥ || 174 ||

Brilliant flames, pure due to the withdrawal

of (all) conditioned

perception, arise from its incomparable body. These are said to be the Five
Wombs, established in the supreme abode and completely free of the
conceptualization which fashions the configurations (saṁsthāna) of conditioned
perceptions. (173-174)
kavargādipavargāntapañcapañcakaviṣṭaraiḥ (-re) |
vyaktāvyaktākhyaracanā mudriteha samantataḥ || 175 I|
The deployment of the manifest and unmanifest (aspects of reality) is
sealed here on all sides by the twenty-five (energies) of the five classes of letters
ranging from K to M. (175)
ābhir akramarūpābhir yonibhiḥ pañcābhiḥ (pañcabhiḥ) svataḥ |
nirāvaraṇanirdhāma vapus tena (vapuṣasvena) nityaśaḥ || 176 ||
These Five Wombs, free of change (akrama), spontaneously form at all
times the abodeless, unobscured body (of consciousness). (176)
The Sequence of Emanation
akramakramavisphāradrśā (-diśā) nirṇīyate ‘vyayaḥ |

512

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

parahr̥dāntasthaḥ (parāhṛdayatayā) sṛṣṭikramo ‘yaṁ sarvago ʻmitaḥ l| 177 II

Thus will (now) be explained from the point of view of the unfolding of

the processless process (of manifestation), this, the imperishable, omnipresent and

unlimited sequence of emanation (sṛṣṭikrama) that resides within the supreme heart

(of consciousness). (177)

udyogaḥ (udyoga) prathamā (prathamo) yonir dvitīyābhāsa ucyate |
carvaṇaṁ Śśaṁkhayonyākhyā tṛtīyāvartarūpiṇī || 178 II
caturthī padmayonis tu kālagrāsavikasvarā (vi-svarā) |
viśrāntiḥ kathitā devī divyayonisvarūpiṇī I 179 ||
Exertion (udyoga) is the first Womb, while manifestation (bhāsā) is said to

be the second. Relishing (carvaṇa) is called the Conch Womb, which forms the

third circle, while the fourth is the Lotus Womb, blooming with the dissolution of

time (kālagrāsa). (The fifth) is repose (viśrānti), said to be the goddess who is the
Divine Womb. (178-179)
nistaraṅgodadhiprakhyakālīdhāmny avibhedataḥ |
sphurantīyaṁ sthitā nityaṁ sṛr̥ṣṭisaṁvittitattvataḥ |l 180 I|

She abides perpetually undivided as the principle of emanating
consciousness (srstisaṁvitti), pulsating radiantly in Kāḹr’s abode, which is (pure
and calm) like a waveless ocean. (180)
svaṣvarūpā jagadrūpasiddhāliṅgitavigrahāḥ |
devyaḥ prathante satataṁ asparśapadamadhyagāḥ || 181 ||
The goddesses, who are one’s own innate nature, are embraced by the

Siddhas, who are the universe and, in the centre of the (transcendental) state devoid

of contact (with phenomenal existence — asparśapada) perceive (all things —
prathante) perpetually. (181)
The Four Yuganāthas
anayoktadṛśā proktaḥ (proktāḥ) sṛṣṭicakrodayaḥ paraḥ |
niḥsvabhāvaniraupamyaparonmeṣasvarūpabhṛt || 182 ||
jāgratsvapnasuṣuptyākhyaturyonmeṣaprathodayāḥ |
ye sthitāḥ satataṁ proccaiḥ paramādvayadharmiṇaḥ || 183 II
teṣāṁ pramātr̥yapuṣā niṣṭhitā vyomadhāmagāḥ |
khagendrādyāḥ siddhavarāḥ (-rā) sadā bhedagrahojjhitāḥ || 184 1I
vākcatuṣṭayarūpasya samullāsaikahetavaḥ |
te saṁvidraśmayo dīptā nirlakṣā (nilakṣā) niravagrahāḥ || 185 ||

The supreme arising of the Wheel of Emanation has (also) been explained

from this, the aforementioned point of view, to be the supreme expansion (of
consciousness) that is incomparable and devoid of (any phenomenal) nature of its
own (niḥsvabhāva). Those rays of consciousness (sarīvidraśmi) that, luminous

TANTRĀLOKA

513

(dīpta), free of phenomenal signs (nirlakṣa) and limitations, are the sole cause of
the outpouring of the four levels of speech, are the best of Siddhas, namely,
Khagendra and the rest who, always free of the perception of duality, reside in the
abode of the Void (of pure consciousness ~ vyomadhāman) in the form of the
perceiving subject. They are manifestations (udaya) of the perception (prathā) of
the unfolding of the Fourth State, along with (those) called waking, dreaming and
deep sleep which, endowed with supreme unity (paramādvaya), always abide with
the highest (principles). (182-185)
vyaktāvyaktākhyaghaṭanā ṣaṇḍhasvaracatuṣṭaye |

yeyaṁ (peyaṁ) tadbhakṣaṇāyālam utthito ‘yaṁ (-bhakṣaṇāpā-) samantataḥ |l

1861|

parādvayavikāṣaikarūpo niravadhiḥ sadā |
so ‘vatāraḥ samākhyātaḥ paravarṇakramoḍditaḥ || 187 ||
That (i.e., the state of persistence) is said to be an embodiment of

consciousness (avātara) which is generated from the sequence of the Supreme
Letter. It is nothing but the expansion of supreme oneness which, without end,
takes place at all times. It arises all around in order to consume the entire creation

(ghaṭanā), manifest and unmanifest, contained in the four neuter letters. (186-187)

Khagendra
khagaḥ paramahaṁsātmaspandadeho ‘vinaśvaraḥ |
tasyendro ‘sparśarūpo ‘yaṁ (tasyondrosparśa- -yaḥ) khagendraḥ sa nigadyate ||

1881I

The indestructible Skyfarer (khaga) is the one whose body is the pulsation

(of consciousness and vitality) which is the Supreme Self (paramahaṁsa). His
lord (indra) who is this (absolute,) free of contact (with the phenomenal world
asparśarūpa), is said to be Khagendra. (188)

dhāmatritayasaṁhāragrāsako vimaleśvaraḥ (vimaleśvare) |
yo ʻjasraṁ gacchati paraṁ (paraḥ) khagendraḥ so ʻmitaḥ smr̥taḥ || 189 ||
The pure Lord who consumes the destruction of the three abodes (of

emanation, persistence and destruction) and, limitless, attains the supreme (state) in
a moment, is said to be Khagendra. (189)

Kūrmanātha
prathamapratibhonmeṣamahimā yo ‘dvayaḥ paraḥ |

jagadvicitraracanāṁ pr̥thagbhedaprathātmikām || 190 ||
kūrmo ‘ṅgānīva satataṁ garbhe dhatte ‘vibhedataḥ |
sa eva kūrmanāthākhyaḥ kalpanāvaraṇojjhitaḥ || 191 ||

He who is one (advaya), supreme, and whose glorious power is the
unfolding of the first (impulse of the) cosmogonic imagination (pratibhā), who

constantly withdraws into (himself) the womb (of emanation), undivided, the

514

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

wonderful (and diverse) deployment of all things, that is, the perception of

individual differences, as does the tortoise its limbs, is the one called Kūrmanātha,

free of the obscuration of thought constructs (kalpanāvaraṇa). (190-191)
Meṣanātha

svonmeṣeṇa (svonmeṣaṇa) svaātantratvād gṛhītvendriyarūpatām |
aluptānākhyamahimā viṣayagrāmavartmani || 192 ||
yo yuktāyuktaghaṭanāṁ saṁtyajya vicaret sadā |
sonmeṣaḥ (sameṣa) satatodyuktaḥ (satodyuktaḥ) sa meṣākhyaḥ prakīrtitaḥ || 193

I

He who, by virtue of the innate expansion (of his own consciousness) and

freedom, assumes the nature of the senses, without (this thereby) diminishing the

glorious power of the Inexplicable (anākhya Fourth State of consciousness) in the
sphere of the objects of sense and who, abandoning (all) exertion (for what is
conventionally considered to be) right or wrong, moves (freely) at all times, is
known as Meṣanātha who, endowed with the
consciousness), is ever intent (on realisation). (192-193)

expansion

(unmeṣa

of

Matsyendranātha
dyayādvayasvarūpāṇāṁ śāstā yaḥ sarvasaṁvidām |
samanirdhāmavapuṣo mama cchedanena (cchandena) tiṣṭhati || 194 ||
sa eva procyate śrīmān matsyendraḥ (matsyeṁduḥ) kṛtakaḥ paraḥ |
He who is the master of all forms of perception, whether dual or nondual,
whose body is everywhere equally present and (yet) without abode, and abides by

the destruction of egoism, is said to be the venerable Matsyendranātha, the
supreme doer (of all things). (194-5ab)

nistaraṅgaparākāśaparamādvayavigrahaḥ || 195 I|
pratyāvṛttikrameṇemāḥ sāmarasyaṁ nijātmani |
vrttīḥ saṁprāpayati yaḥ sa mīnākhyaḥ prakīrtitaḥ || 196 I|
He whose form is the (one) supreme and nondual (reality) which is the

supreme Void (parākāśa) free of alterations (nistaraṅga), who makes all these
modalities (of consciousness) one in his own essential nature through the process
of reversal (pratyāvṛttikrameṇa), is famed as (the teacher) called Mīnanātha.

(195cd-196)

prollāsanījavisṣphāraśaktyabhinnaprathodayāḥ |
vibhānti sadasadbhedamuktāḥ siddhāḥ samantataḥ || 197 I|
The Siddhas shine everywhere, free of the duality of being and nonbeing.

They are the arising of the undivided perception (prathā) of the energy of the
outpouring of their own expansion (of consciousness). (197)

anayoktadṛśā prokto (proktā) niravagrahavigrahaḥ (niraṁvagraha-) |

TANTRĀLOKA

515

nirāvaraṇaṉirdhāmamahimābhāṣaviṣṭaraḥ || 198 I|

The unconditioned form of reality explained from this point of view is the

expanse of the manifestation of the glorious power (mahimā) that is unobscured
and without abode. (198)

The Sequence of Destruction
śrotādipañcakagaṇaḥ pramātā manasāñjitaḥ (-sāñcitaḥ) |

buddhīndriyeṇa saṁyuktaṁ tathā vāmādipañcakam || 199 ||
evaṁ dvādaśadhāmākhyo (-dhāmastho) yas tv akṣagrāmaviṣṭaraḥ |
sa eva buddhivibhraṁśād (-ṣā) nirvicārapadāśritaḥ (-padasśritaḥ) || 200 |I
The group of five (organs of perception) beginning with the sense of
hearing (together with) the individual perceiving subject, coloured by the mind and
conjoined to the intellect, along with the pentad beginning with Vāmā, constitute
the extent of the aggregate of the senses known as the Twelve-fold Abode. By the
falling away of the intellect, it abides in the state free of deliberation (nirvicāra).

(199-200)

niyatagrahasaṁsthānavarjito ʻkramamūrtimān |
sarvasaṁhãranirataḥ khaṇḍacakrakramaḥ paraḥ lI 201 Il
The very form of the changeless (akrama), devoid of the configurations of
conditioned perceptions, intent on the withdrawal of all things — such is the
supreme sequence of the Broken Wheel (khaṇḍacakrakrama). (201)
ekādaśavidhastīkṣṇaḥ saṁtyaktā (-kta) kalanāvaliḥ |
vuktāyuktadaśātīto nityoditasvadhāmagaḥ (-ditaravadhāmagaḥ) || 202 |
pakārādihakārantā varṇāḥ (varṇā) kṣakārasaṅyutāḥ |
vyaktāvyaktakrameṇeyaṁ kalpanā prathitā tu ṣā |
tadbhakṣaṇaparaḥ (-bhakṣaṇaḥ-) prokto bhāvābhāvatamojjhitaḥ l| 204 ||
nirupādhimahābodharaśmyullāsamayodayaḥ (-cayo-) |
etad (sa) evocyate sadbhiḥ saṁhārākhyo ‘vyayakramaḥ || 205 ||
Powerful (tīkṣṇa) in eleven ways and free of the process of manifestation

(kalanāvali), beyond the plane of good (yukta) and evil (ayukta), established in its
own ever-active abode: this is said by the wise to be the eternal process known as

Dissolution (saṁhāra). 1t is the arising (udaya of the process) consisting of the

outpouring of the rays of the great, unconditioned consciousness that is said to be

free of the darkness of being and nonbeing. t is intent on consuming thought that,
perceived through the sequence of the manifest and unmanifest, abides at all times

within the eleven energies of the letters beginning with PA and ending with HA
(ie., PA, PHA, BA, BHA, MA, YA, RA, LA, VA and HA) along with KṢA. (202205)

grāhyagrāhakavisphāro daśadhā yo vyavasthitaḥ |

pratyāvṛttiṣvabhāvaikarūpo nādodayānvitaḥ || 206 ||
itthamekādaśavidhaḥ saṁvidullāsaviṣṭaraḥ |

516

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

tasyaiva bhedavibhavagrasanāya samutthitaḥ || 207 I|
The ten-fold expansion of subject and object, along with the arising of the

resonance (nāda of consciousness) which is one in nature with (the process of)

reversal (pratyāvṛtti), in this way constitutes the eleven-fold expanse of the

outpouring of consciousness, manifest to consume the energy of its own duality
(bheda). (206-207)
mahābhakṣādirūpiṇyo niśitā dīptayogagāḥ (-māḥ) |
yās tā eveha saṁhāre (-ra) sahasā bhānti niṭyaśaḥ || 208 II

Here, in the state of withdrawal, the mighty energies, Mahābhakṣā and the

rest are in a state of energized union (dīptayogaga) and shine perpetually with
immense force (sahasā). (208)

daśendriyasamārūḍho ‘haṁkāro (-rūḍhe-) madadarpitaḥ |
evam ekādaśavidho bhāti yo bhedaviśrutaḥ || 209 ||
The ego, haughty with inebriation, seated on the ten senses and wellversed in the ways of duality and of eleven kinds, shines in this way. (209)
tat saṅhãrãya satataṁ kãlasaṁkarṣaṇĩ citiḥ |

tasyāṁśuraśmivisphāraiḥ (tatsaṁkṣu-) proditā kramataḥ sadā || 210 ||

The power of consciousness (citi), that is, Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī (the One who
Withdraws Time into herself), arises constantly and progressively (kramataḥ) by
the expansions of the rays of that (the ego’s eleven) aspects in order to withdraw it.

(210)

ayaṁ saṅṁhāracakrasya guruvaktrakramoditaḥ |
saṁpradāyaḥ paraḥ ko ʻpi sākṣāt prakatito mayā || 211

|I

I have (thus) directly revealed this, the supreme and inscrutable (ko'pi)
tradition, born of the lineage of the Master’s Mouth, concerning the Wheel of
Withdrawal. (211)

The Sequence of the Inexplicable
svaṁ svaṁ viṣayam āhṛtya pratyāvṛttikramāgataḥ |
ciccamatkārabharito dvādaśākṣiṣvaro gaṇaḥ || 212 ||
The group of twelve vowels, associated with the senses, full of the wonder
of consciousness, enters the process of reversal (pratyāvṛttikrama), once having
withdrawn back from their respective objects. (212)
yas taṁ saṁhr̥tya sahasā praśāntā dīptayogagāḥ (-yogamāḥ) |
niṣṭaraṅgamahāvyomarūpiṇyas turyacakragāḥ || 213 I|

TANTRĀLOKA

517

Once having withdrawn that (group of twelve) through the force of
consciousness (sahasā), (they become) tranquil and, in a state of energized union
(dīptayogaga), reside in the Wheel of the Fourth State, in the form of the vast,
waveless sky of consciousness. (213)
aprameyaniraupamyasāmarasyaikavigrahāḥ |
nirūpākhyamahāgrāsadhāmasthā bhānti nityaśaḥ || 214 ||
They (thus) shine perpetually in the abode of the great and inexplicable
dissolution (mahāgrāsa), their one form incomparable and objectless oneness
(sāmaraṣya). (214)
akārādiviṣargāntā ye ṣaṇḍhasvaravarjitāḥ |
teṣām evāśu yugapad vyaktāvyaktasvarūpatā || 215 ||
saṁhartum (saṁhatum) uditā devyo nirahaṁkāravigrahāḥ |
nirvikalpamahāvyomadīptayo vigatāśrayāḥ || 216 ||
The goddesses, their form egolessness (nirahaṁkāra), free of (outer)

support, energized by the great sky of consciousness free of thought constructs,

arise to withdraw simultaneously and in an instant (asu), the manifest and

unmanifest nature of these, (the twelve vowels) beginning with A and ending with
Emission, free of (the four) neuter (letters).⁷ (215-216)
parādyā sā udety (parādyunmorūṭity) eva sphuritānandaghūrṇitā (-tāḥ) |
yākramaspandalaharī (-syanda-) vidyullekhaiva (-kheva) cañcalā || 217 |I|
The supreme primordial (goddess) who arises in this way, inebriated by
the radiant, pulsing bliss (of consciousness), is the wave of the processless
(akrama) vibration (of consciousness), as fleeting and fickle as a lightning flash.

(217)

tasyā udayasaṁsthānasaṁhārodrekakalpanā |
trividhā samakālena proditā kalanojjhitā || 218 I|
Her creative imagination (kalpanā) is generated by the intensification of
the state of withdrawal of the configuration (sarṁsthāna) of the arising (udaya of
the energies of consciousness) and, free of the phenomenal process (of creation and
destruction – kalanā), arises simultaneously three-fold. (218)

tasyā hi (pi) triprakārākhyā kalpanā yā samantataḥ |
pratyekaśaḥ (-śa) svarūpo ‘pi sṛṣṭyādikramasaṁjñakaḥ (-ke) |1 219 ||
caturthonmiṣitaṁ (caturthormiśitaṁ) rūpam udyogādivibhedataḥ |

⁷” The so-called ‘neuter’ vowels - r Ṛ 1 Ḷ – are a mix of pure vowel sounds with a touch

of the semi-vowels R and L. As the vowels symbolize the subjective energies and the
consonants the objective ones, they symbolize objectivity in the stream of subjective
cognitive activity represented by the series of vowels. When these are absent, the flow
of inner consciousness is free of ‘outer supportʼ.

518

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

This three-fold creative imagination (kalpanā) (that takes place) all around
is of that (dynamic consciousness). The essential nature of each one (of its aspects)
is called emission and the rest (i.e., persistence and withdrawal).

The fourth,

(fully) expanded form, is divided into (the four moments) of exertion (udyoga)
(manifestation, destruction and the cessation of time). (219-220ab)

evaṁ dviṣaṭkasaṅvittikramo bhāti nirāvṛtaḥ || 220 ||

srṣṭikālyādibhedena prathitaughodadhiḥ (prathitokhadhiḥ) paraḥ |
nirālambavikāsaikamahimā (-vikāśaika-) satatoditaḥ || 221 ||

The supreme ocean of the flux of what has been perceived (prathita) is
perpetually active and is the one glorious power of the self-sustained (nirālamba)
expansion

(of consciousness).

Unobscured,

the twelve-fold

sequence of

consciousness is manifest in this way as Sṛṣṭikālī and the rest. (220cd-221)

tasyaiva haṭhasaṁhãravr̥ttyā durdarśamūrtimān |
kramākramobhayottīrṇaraśmipuñjātighasmaraḥ (-puñjeti-) || 222 ||
svarūpaṁ kartum udyukto niṣṭaraṅgo ʻniketanaḥ |
sparśāsparśapadātītarūpatvād (-padābhīta-) vigatottaraḥ || 223 ||
praśāntātipraśāntaikamahimāvikṛtaprabhaḥ (- mahimākṛtakaprabhaḥ) |
(This) network of rays transcends both process and its absence and,

extremely voracious, its form is terrible to behold. Abodeless and waveless, it is

beyond the plane of contact (with phenomena) and its absence (sparśāsparśa), and
so there is nothing higher. This, the undistorted light of the one glorious energy of
the most tranquil (consciousness), abides intent upon fashioning (in this way) its
own nature by its activity of (sudden and) violent (haṭha) withdrawal (of all things
into itself). (222-224ab)

itthaṁ saṁhãrasaṁhãraraśmyoghaḥ parikĩr̥titaḥ || 224 ||

evaṁ dhāmādibhedena trividhaḥ prakatīkṛtaḥ |

devikākramasadbhāvo ‘py alaṁgrāsaikaghasmaraḥ || 225 ||
Such is said to be the flux of the rays of the destruction of destruction
(saṁhārasaṁhāra), revealed as three-fold in terms of (the sequence of) abodes,

(letters and consciousness); it is the one consuming fire (of consciousness) of the
assimilation of all things (alaṁgrāsa) and the essence of the Sequence of

Goddesses (devikākrama). (224cd-225)

āsāṁ dviṣaṭkadevīnāṁ vamanagrāsatatparām (-grasatat -) |

devīṅ trayodaśīṁ vande tādātmyapratipattaye || 226 ||

I praise the thirteenth goddess, who is intent on emitting and devouring
these, the twelve goddesses, that I may attain oneness (with her). (226)

mahābhairavanāmādībhairavaṁ tritayaṁ sadā |

pratyekasargarūpādi caturdhā saṁvyavasthitam || 227 ||

TANTRĀLOKA

519

Each triad of Bhairavas, namely, Mahābhairava and the rest, abides four-

fold at all times in the form of creation (persistence, destruction and the
inexplicable). (227)
ittham ugrasvarūpo “yaṁ bhairaveśakramaḥ paraḥ |

vibhāti dvādaśātmaikasvabhāvaḥ kālavarṇjitaḥ || 228 I|

In this way this supreme and terrible sequence of Lord Bhairava manifests
devoid of time as the one innate nature of the twelve-fold reality. (228)

The Goddess
tasyaiva satataṁ devī haṭhāt kavalanoditā |
yatas tasmāt samākhyātā devī nāmnopacārataḥ || 229 ||
vastutaḥ ṣvasti naivāsyā nāmarūpaprakalpanā |
mahāsaṁhāracakreśyāḥ sarvottīrṇasvarūpataḥ || 230 ||
The goddess is perpetually intent on devouring him with violent force
(haṭhāt). Thus, she is said to be the goddess (only) in a secondary sense. In fact, it
is wrong to conceive of her as having either name or form, for the mistress of the

great Wheel of Withdrawal transcends all things. (229-230)
cidānandaparispandavibhavaḥ pīṭhatāṁ gataḥ |

yasmāt (yasyā) seheti ṣatataṁ gocaratvaṁ samantataḥ || 231 I|

The glorious power of the pulse (pariṣpanda) of the bliss of consciousness

has become the sacred seat (of cosmic manifestation), and so the (goddess) comes

here, everywhere, and at all times, within the purview of the senses. (231)

avibhinnasvarūpatvād vāmeśvaryā nirākṛte |
tatprasādavaśāt (tāprasāda(?)vaśāt) samyā vṛndāntanāma visphuṭaṁ || 232 ||

When, due to (her one) undivided nature, Vāmeśvarī has dissolved away
(nirākṛta), she, by virtue of that, is equal (santyā in every state and aspect) and is
clearly manifest as the cessation of the Aggregate (vrnda of energies). (232)

mahājñāṅamahāyogakaraṇādikramair api |
na tu gocaratām eti devīyaṁ sarvagā satī || 233 ||
This goddess, present everywhere, is never perceivable, even by means of
the processes that generate the Great Knowledge, the Great Union and the rest.

(233)

guruprasādenāviṣṭā ( -prasādataś citraṁ) kecit taṉmayadharmiṇaḥ |
bhavanti vyomavṛttyaikasvabhāvā nātra saṁśayaḥ || 234 ||
Certain (yogis), penetrated by the teacher’s grace and endowed with that

same nature, are one with the (universal) activity of the Void (of consciousness).

There is no doubt about it! (234)

520

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

bhāvasvabhāvarūpeha sṛṣṭyādīnāṁ virājate |
niṣṭhā tadyugmavisphāravarjitāpi samantataḥ || 235 ||
nirniketamahāsaṁviddharmiṇī (nirṇiketa-) vigatagrahā |
(The goddess is) here the essential nature of phenomenal existence and the
ground state (niṣṭhā) of emanation and the rest. Although devoid of the expansion
of those polarities (yugma), She manifests everywhere free of limitation, her nature
the great and abodeless consciousness. (235-6ab)

The Wheel of the Goddess
itthaṁ mahãnaye bhãti pũjākramamahodayaḥ || 236 ||
udyogasyaikadeśe ‘pi devatācakraviṣṭaraḥ |
prasphuraty (-sphuranty) avibhāgena vyomavṛttyaikatāṁ (vyomavṛntyaikatāī)

gataḥ |I 237 I|

The great arising of the liturgy of the rite of adoration (pāūjākrama)

manifests thus in the Great Teaching (mmahānaya); although just an aspect of the

exertive force of consciousness (udyoga), the extension of the Wheel of Deities
manifests undivided, and has become one with the (universal) activity of the
expanse (of consciousness, vyomavṛtti). (236cd-237)
itthaṁ sadaiva sarvatra devīnām udayaḥ paraḥ |
niṣṭhito ‘pi satāṁ gamyo niravagrahavigrahaḥ || 238 II

Although the arising of the deities, supreme and unlimited, is established

in this way everywhere and all times, it is attainable (only) by the wise. (238)

samastotthavyastadehaḥ samastavyastasvarūpabhṛt (samastavyasta * rūpa-) |
vyastādyas tu samastāntaḥ sthito 'yaṁ devatākramaḥ || 239 ||

The Sequence of the Deities possesses (both) universal (consciousness

samasta) and (all) particular (perceptions vyasta). Its body consists of the
particulars that arise from universal (consciousness) and abides (as all things,)

beginning with particulars and ending with universal (consciousness). (239)
tatraivānārataṁ prodya tridhā pañcamahodayaḥ |
bhāti dīyvyaughavisphāravībhavāntaḥsthito ‘vyayaḥ || 240 ||

Emerging incessantly there itself, the fifteen-fold Great Arising shines and

abides as the imperishable (reality) within the glorious power of the expansion of

the divine flux (of consciousness — divyaugha). (240)

devīcakrodaragato navasaṁhāraviṣṭaraḥ |
samsthito 'pi nirālambamahimākalpanojjhitaḥ || 241 ||
This is the extension of the nine-fold withdrawal (sarṁhāra) that, although

established in the womb of the Wheel of the Goddess, is free of the creative

TANTRĀLOKA

521

imagination (kalpanā), which is the unsupported (self-sustaining) and glorious
power (of consciousness). (241)

The Lord
itthaṁ pīthādhipaḥ (-dhikaḥ) śāśvan (śaśvan) navacakrodayaḥ paraḥ |
cakāsti bahurūpaikarūpo (vahupuṣṭyaika-) niṭyavikasvaraḥ || 242 ||
The Lord of the Sacred Seat, who is the supreme and perpetual arising of

the nine Wheels, shines, constantly unfolding, as the one nature of the many. (242)

sa eva deśikavaro (-varai) rekhākarmādivarjitaḥ |
paramaṇḍalapīṭhaikasvabhāvas tu nirūpitaḥ (-pite) || 243 II
itthaṁ nãnãrthasaṁsthãānadhãāmãditritayātmanã |
He indeed is the best of teachers, described thus as the triad of the abodes
(letters and consciousness), which is the configuration (saṁsthāna) of the many

existing things. (But though) one with the supreme seat of maṇḍala, he is not
drawn (or fashioned in any other way). (243-244ab)

Kāīī
nirlakṣaprathamonmeṣe (-ṣa) ūrvakoṭiṣvarūpiṇī || 244 ||
cakracakreśvarīrūpakrameṇaikaiva (-keva) kālikā |

vibhāty anāratā samyak nirahaṁkāradharmiṇī|/ 245 ||

The goddess Kālikā is the reality which, inscrutable, marks the beginning
of the first expansion (of consciousness into manifestation). One and devoid of all
egoity (nirahamkaradharmiṇī), She shines perfectly and at all times by virtue of
the process (krama) which is the very nature of Cakreśvarī, the Mistress of the

Wheel. (244cd-245)

anayoktadṛśā proktam ekarūpavapuḥ (-puṣpavapuḥ) param |
arāvarāvavisphāraṁ (-ra) mantrapīṭhaman argalam || 246 ||

The supreme Seat of Mantra (mantrapīṭha), which is the expansion of the
Soundless Sound (of consciousness), free of all limitations, whose body is the one

supreme reality, has been explained from this point of view. (246)

Conclusion
itthaṁ vyāvartitāpy (-tāp) eyaṁ nānārthaikatvakalpanā |
nirṇiketasvarūpatvān (-rūpatvā) nayottīrṇaṁ (tayo-) vibhāvyate || 247 |I
Although this conception (kalpanā) of the oneness of the many is brought

about in this way, it has no fixed locus (nirniketa), and so is realised as the

transcendent, beyond the teachings (nayottīrṇa). (247)

522

APPENDIX H CHAPTER FOUR

aprameyamahāvyomavṛttirāpam (apremeya-) anāśrayam |
devīpītham ajaṁ yat tad adhyuṣṭākhyaṁ (apuṣṭyākhyā) nirāvṛtam (narāvṛtā) |l

248 I|

#* * * * * iṇṣpandasaṁdhānojjhitavigraham (nisṣpandasandhānojjhitavigraha) |
sarvatrāvasthitaṁ vande vācātītam anāmayam || 249 ||
(This transcendent reality) is the (all-encompassing) activity of the great
expanse (of consciousness mahāvyomavṛtti), which is not an object of perception

and has no (phenomenal) foundation. Unobscured and unborn, it is the (one)
Sacred Seat of the Goddess and is called Kuṇḍalinī (adhyuṣṭa). 1I praise that

omnipresent reality which, free of imperfections and beyond speech, is free of
(extrinsic) links (and contemplation (sarṁīdhāna) and inaction (nihspanda) * * #*.

(248-249)

yady apy ayaṁ mukhāmnāyayuktyā samtyak (samtyaṅ) nirūpitaḥ |

akramakramasadbhāvasaṁgrahasyaikanirbharaḥ (aṁkra(?)makra-) || 250 ||
tathāpy etat samuttīrṇaṁ (samuttīrṇā) vastu vaktuṁ na pāryate |

samayakṣatibhīrutvāt (-tvā) vijñeyaṁ guruvaktrataḥ || 251 ||

Although this reality, namely, the unitary flux of the totality of the essence
of the processless process (of the activity of consciousness) has been correctly
described according to the oral tradition, even then, (I) cannot say everything about
this transcendental reality for fear of breaking the rule (samaya).
(therefore) leam it (directly) from the masterʼs lips. (250-251)

One should

vimohād iha keṣāṁcid vidyoktyābhāsavibhramaḥ (-vidhoktyā-) |
rājate yena (yona) vijñānaṁ na tena (sa) tattvadaṁ (-dāṁ) sthitam (sthitaḥ) ||

252II

Due to (their) ignorance (vimoha, they suffer from) the illusion that what

has been told (to them) appears to be wisdom. It is because of this that (their)

knowledge appears (to be true but) does not give (access) to reality. (252)
sākṣād mahānayamayaḥ (mahāmayamayaṁ) prakāśaḥ prakaṭīkṛtaḥ |
so 'yaṁ mayārṇasiṁhena saddeśikamukhodgataḥ || 253 1I
tam eva parameḻāpasaṁpradāyopabṛṁhitam (-taḥ) |

vibudhāś carvaṇanty uccair jīvanmuktyātmasiddhaye || 254 ||
1I, Arṇasiṁha, have directly revealed the Light which is the Great Teaching
(mahānaya), come from the lips of a true master. That (teaching), augmented by
the teaching (received) through Supreme Union, is relished by the wise, to attain
liberation in this very life. (253-254)

abuddhaṁ (avu * (?)) manmataṁ yena (yana) madvaktrād abudho janaḥ |
mahānayam ayaṁ śāstraṁ sṣvavikalpair vikalpayan || 255 ||
garjaty abudhabudhīnāṁ punaḥ pānāsavakṣaye (pānāsanakṣaṇe) |
namo ‘stu kṛtine tasmai sadṛṣṭityāgine param || 256 ||
The unawakened, that is, the person by whom my teaching, which has not

been understood by means of (the teachings) from my mouth (or that of a true

TANTRĀLOKA

523

teacher), conceiving the scripture (śāstra) which is the Great Teaching according to
(his) own notions, proclaims it to those of unawakened intellect . . . (?) Salutations
to the creator, to the supreme one who, when the wine (he drinks deceitfully) has
finished, abandons (all things,) including (true) insight and the supreme (reality)!

(255-256)

paramapaṇḍitakulācāryaśrī arṇasiṁhaviracitaṁ (Śśrī * *-) mahānayaprakāśam
(³* # # sk ³* .) aṃāpṭam |)

The Mahānayaprakāśa, written by the most excellent Paṇḍit and

Kulācārya Arṇasiṁha, is finished.

Appendix I

to Chapter Four

The Twelve Kālīs and the Cycle of the Inexplicable

according to Chapter Nine of the Trivandrum Mahānayaprakāśa
yat sargasthitisaṁhr̥ikramamayaiś cakrair upārūpitaṁ (> uparūṣitaṁ)
na (*) svasmāc cyavate manāg api padād viśrāntilābhātmikāt |
āviśyātha tad akramakramakalottirṇaprathaṁ sāmprataṁ
tat saṅkrāmam anākhyacakram ucitair yuktikramair dṛśyate |I 1 II
Seemingly strewn with the cycles (cakra) of the processions of creation,
persistence and withdrawal, (but even s0,) not falling even slightly from its own
plane, which is the attainment of rest. Having entered into that transcendental
extension (prathā) which is the energy of that processless process
(akramakrama), it īs now the transmission (saṁnkrāma) (of realisation) which is
the cycle of the Inexplicable (anākhyacakra), perceived by the appropriate
processes of contemplation (yuktikrama). (1)
itthaṁ gurvātmadevānāṁ kathanādikam ātmanā |
lolībhāvasthitaṁ nityaṁ sarvānubhavabhūmiṣu || 2 |I
abhede ‘pi (-do ‘pi) kilodrekād eteṣāṁ bheda iṣyate |
tam āśrityānurūpeṇa prameyaṁ pratipādyate || 3 |I
In this way, the (Teacher’s) Speech (kathana), (that transmits
realisation) (inner worship – pūjana and transmission of the state of realisation —

saṇkrāmaṇam)¹¹³ of the Guru, Self and Deity, abides as oneself in dynamic

union (lolībhāva) constantly on all the planes of experience. (2). But although
(one and) undivided, due the relative predominance of one or the other, they are

considered to be different. The object of knowledge is grasped in accord with
(the one with which it is) associated (2-3).

prāyo hi maithune madye māṁse ca paridṛśyate |
āsaktiḥ sarvajantūnāṁ viśeṣāt kasyacit kvacit |I 4 II
yadi tattyāgasaṁrambhaḥ pūrvaṁ teṣāṁ vidhīyate |
upadeśo na sa manāg api citte prarohati || 5 II
janmāntaraśatābhyastā viṣayeṣu matir nṛṇām |
jaradgauriva sasyebhyaḥ sā hi duḥkhena vāryate || 6 |I
iti saṁvādatas teṣāṁ parityāgo hi duṣkaraḥ |
abhyasīūyanti te yasmād upadeśakarāya ca || ||
yathāsthitopabhogātmapūrvaṁ yat tūpadiśyate |
tatrādhirūḍhir lokasya śraddhāpūrvaṁ prajāyate || 8 II
Everybody is generally seen to be attached to sex, wine and meat; some
in particular are more so in some places (than others). If the teaching imparted
'!* Concerning these three ways the teacher and deity bring about realisation, see notes
to TAv ad 2/2.

TANTRĀLOKA

525

to them requires that they first give up these things, it does not develop even
slightly in their minds. The mind (mati) of people, that for hundreds of births
has been in the habit (of enjoying) sense objects, is hard to control, just as it is
hard to prevent an old cow (when given the chance) from grazing on (a
farmerʼs) crops. As this example (suggests), it is hard for (people) to renounce
them. Even so, they are in need of instruction. The teaching that is based on the
enjoyment (of these things) as they are is believed by people who are given

there (to these things). (4-8)

prathaikarūpãbhãvãc (> -rūpabhāvāc) ca nirhviyante (> nirvahyate) tataḥ

katham |

prathāyā bhāvaparyantaṁ rūpaṁ tad bhidyate katham || 9 Il
bhedasś ced kalpyate tarhi kalpaneyaṁ na satyabhūḥ |
sphuraṇād eva vai teṣāṁ gālanaṁ nāpi tāttvikam || 10 ||
tac ca kalpair asaṅkhyeyair bahuduṣkaracaryayā |
na cāsti sphuraṇābhāvo (sphura *-) hy anyasyānupalambhataḥ || 1 1 II
abhāvamātraṁ nāsty eva syāc cet tad bhāti sarvadā |
tasmāt tattvam atattvaṁ vā na bhāvena vinā bhavet || 12 ||
svasāmrājyavaśād bhānaṁ satattvātattvayoḥ samam ḷ
If that is explained (to be s0) because cognitive consciousness (prathā)
has a single (uniform) nature, then how can the form of perception be

differentiated (from the initial phase of perception) right up to (the perception
of) phenomena (bhāva)? (9)

If relative distinction (bheda) (between phases of perception and their

contents etc. is considered to be just) conceived (kalpyate), then this notion
(kalpanā) is not true (and real). (But if you say division is) solely due to their

effulgent (manifestation as such) (sphuraṇa), then the falling away
distinctions) (gālana) would also not be real. (10)

(of

And that (falling away could not be brought about, even) with

innumerable thoughts (kalpa) and much action that is difficult to do. Nor (can

we say that consciousness does not possesses this dynamic) effulgence, for one
does not perceive that anything else possesses it. (11)
Nor is there just non-existence (abhāvamātra). For if there were, it

would always be manifest. Therefore, be it reality (tattva) or its absence

(atattva), it would not be possible without phenomenal being (bhāva). (12)
Manifestation (bhāna lit. ‘shining’) is dominated (vaśa) by the empire

of one’s own (consciousness), and so is the same for both what truly exists

(tattva) and what does not (atattva). (9-13ab)

hānopādānakalanātantre tv itthaṁ samarthanā || 13 ||
yathāsthitasya tasyātaḥ svarūpam upapadyate |
etatparijñānamayī jīvanmuktir nigadyate || 14 1I
Thus, the dependence (everyone experiences) on the ongoing
differentiation (kalanā) between giving up (some things and) adopting (others)
is explained in this way, so that the nature of its existence is logically possible in
such a way that a thorough knowledge of it constitutes liberation in this life
(jīvanmukti). (13cd-14)

526

APPENDIX I CHAPTER FOUR

ekaṁ svarūparūpaṁ hi meyamānapramātṛtaḥ |
sargāyvatārasaṅhāramayair ākramya vartate || 15 ||
svaṣvarūpānuguṇyena pratyekaṁ kalanāvaśāt |
sṛṣṭisthityādibhir bhedaiś caturdáhā api tāḥ sthitāḥ || 16 ||
kālagrāsāntam udayāc caturdhā vihito hi yaḥ |
tasya viśrāntir ekaiva tato devyas trayodaśa (devyātra-) |I 1T I|
anākhyacakraprādhānyāt (anyā-) pūjanīyatayā sthitāḥ |
tāsām antyā svaviśrāntir mahāvilayabhūḥ parā || 18 ||
(p. 50) sargāvatārasaṅṁhārāḥ kramātmāno vyavasthitāḥ |
anākhyam akramam api kramātmaiva tadāśrayāt |I 19 ||
The nature of the essential nature (svarūparūpa) (of consciousness) is

one. It abides having crossed over from the object, (the activity of the senses

that are) the means of knowledge and the perceiver, consisting of the creation
(sarga) (of outer objectivity), (its) persistence (avatāra) and withdrawal
(saṁhāra). (15).
Again, each one according to its nature also abides four-fold, due to the
relative distinctions between creation, persistence (withdrawal and the
inexplicable generated) by the process of differentiation (kalanā), which is
(analogously) considered to be four-fold, (beginning with) ‘emergence’ (udaya)

and ending with the Devouring of Tīime (kālagrāsa). (Thus, three times four
makes twelve phases). The state of repose of that (consciousness) is one, and so

the goddesses are thirteen."'* (16-17).

They are the objects of worship because the Cycle of the Inexplicable

(anākhyacakra) (to which they belong) is the main one. Their final state of rest
within themselves is supreme, and is the Great Dissolution (mahāvilaya). (18)
Creation (sarga), persistence (avatāra) and withdrawal (saṁhāra) are

processes; although the Inexplicable is not a process (akrama), in relation to
them (tadāśraya), it is itself the nature of the Krama (kramātmā). (18-19).

akramātmaparāmarśāt kramārūṣaṇarūpiṇaḥ (> kramāruhaṇa-) |
kālasya sahasāgrāsasaṅkramād ittham iṣyate (grā *-) || 20 ||
yasmin yasmin hi viṣaye saṁkrāmanti marīcayaḥ |
tatra tatra hy anāyāsād anākhyasphuraṇaṁ sthitam || 21 ||
Time, which by its very nature is differentiated by succession, is

considered to be such (that is, the Inexplicable) by the transition (saṁkrama)

(into consciousness) brought about by (its sudden) forceful (sahasā)
assimilation. The flash of Anākhya is effortlessly present in whatever object of
sense the rays (of pure consciousness) penetrate (sarṁṅkrāmanti) (20-21).

udyoge nāvabhāsaś cet kathaṁ saktasya sambhave (> —vet) |
acarvito ‘vabhāsaḥ syāt tad amṛṣṭatayā katham || 22 ||
tatsargasthitisaṁhãārarūpe yo yaḥ kramaḥ sthitaḥ |

!"³ The four phases of the cycle of cognitive consciousness, the Inexplicable, are 1)

udaya (Emergence), 2) avabhāsa (Manifestation), 3) carvaṇa (Relish), 4) kālagrāsa
(Devouring of Time). These four are described together in 31-32ab, Relish in 26.

TANTRĀLOKA

527

tatra tatrākramatvena anākhyaṁ prathamaṁ sthitam || 23 ||

atrāntare ʻpi viśrāntiḥ kramākramapadojjhitā |
kālopādher anākramya nāntarīyatayā sthitā || 24 ||
If

no

manifestation

(avabhāsa)

(were

to

take

place)

when

(consciousness) exerts (itself, for that to happen,) how could that which adheres
(sakta) (to it) arise? Manifestation would not be relished (and analysed)
(carvita). (So) how could its state be that of reflective awareness? (22)

Anākhya abides first (of all) as non-successive (akramatvena)
(consciousness), whatever be the process within the creation, persistence and
destruction of that (manifestation) (23).
The repose which is free of the planes of process (krama) and its
absence (akrama) here within (and between them), unaffected by the limiting

adjunct of time, does not abide as something separate from them (antarīyatayā).

(24)

no ced bhāvāntare saṅvit prasaret katham anyathā |
tadrūpamātrāvaṣṭambhāt paricchinnātmarūpataḥ || 25 ||
nīle tāvat sthitaṁ bhānaṁ bhānaṁ ca kila (tila) carvaṇe |
akrameṇa sthitaṁ no cen nīlasaṁvin na sidhyati || 26 ||
ādau nīlaṁ tato bhānaṁ tataś ca yadi carvaṇam |
anyonyaparihāreṇa nīlasaṁvin na tad bhavet || 27 ||
If that were not so, in what other way could consciousness extend
within phenomena? For it would be blocked within (a particular) form alone and

be (fundamentally) conditioned (paricchinna) by nature. (25)
(The light of consciousness which is) manifestation (bhāna) abides in

this way (tāvar) within ‘blue’ and manifestation within the relish (carvaṇa) (of

it). If it were (also) not to persist devoid of succession (akrameṇa), a perception
of (even the colour) blue would not be possible (na siddhyati). (26)

If, (in the course of perception of the colour blue,) blue initially, then
(its) manifestation (bhāna), and then (its) relish (carvaṇa) (were to take place,

with each phase) mutually exclusive from one another, the perception of blue
(nīlasaṁvid) would not be possible (27).

kālakramātmā kathitaḥ kramaś cānyonyavarjanāt |
naivaṁ kācit pratītiḥ syād vividhāṁśābhabhedataḥ || 28 ||
tan niraṁśavidãṁ bhogamayãnākhyānubhāvataḥ |
sarvãnubhavasaṁsṣiddhau lokayātrā pratiṣṭhitā || 29 ||
āmukhād bhāsamānaś ca kramo yo ʻyaṁ vyavasthitaḥ |
yathānubhavam etasya bhede ‘nākhyaṁ sphuṭaṁ sthitam 1| 30 ||
(That) is said to be a temporal process and succession, due to the mutual
exclusion (of the phases through which it passes). (However,) in this way, there
would not be any perception (prarīti) at all, for it would be divided into the

manifestation of (many) varied parts. (28)

The daily life of those who know that (one consciousness), devoid of
parts, is established (pratiṣṭhitā) when all the ascertainment (anubhava) brought

528

APPENDIX I CHAPTER FOUR

about by the direct experience of the Inexplicable (anākhya), consisting of
worldly experience (bhoga), is completely accomplished (sarṁsiddhi). (29)
This (cognitive) process manifesting from any particular thing (āmukha)
is deployed in accord with the ascertainment of its (nature). (In this way,) the
Inexplicable (anākhya) clearly abides within its division (bheda) (into subject,
object and means of knowledge, undergoing the four-fold process). (30)
tatra meyasvarūpasya caturdhā bhedasambhavaḥ |
ādāv akalitollāsas tatsambhogas tataḥ param || 31 |I
tato 'pi carvaṇaṁ tatra virāmas tadanantaram |

evaṁ mānasvarūpe ‘pi caturdhā bhedasambhavaḥ || 32 I|
svaucityena parijñeyo mātṛrūpe tathaiva ca |
atra sarvatra viśrāntir ekaiva nirupādhikā || 33 ||
āsāṁ dvādaśadevīnāṁ parāmarśabalāt sphuṭam |

vikalpavāsanāśūnyaṁ nirvikalpaṁ pravartate || 34 ||

ye tu yoṣidvyasaninas tanmukhenaiva te kramāt |
kālagrāsapade samyak praviśanti nirāśraye || 35 ||

There, the divisions pertaining to objectivity (meyasvarūpa) arise fourfold. First comes an undifferentiated outpouring (of consciousness)
(akalitollāsa). After that comes its enjoyment (sambhoga). Then also (its) relish
(carvaṇa), and after that, repose (virāma) there. (31-32ab)
In the same way, the divisions pertaining to the means of knowledge
(mānaṣvarūpa)

arise

four-fold.

One

should

know

(that

it takes

place)

analogously within subjectivity (nātṛrūpa) in accord with (its nature). Here in
all cases, repose (viśrānti) is one and devoid of limiting adjuncts. (32cd-33)
(Consciousness,) devoid of discursive representation (nirvikalpa),
clearly arises free of (even) the latent traces of thought constructs (vikalpa) by

the power of reflection (parāmarśabala) on these twelve goddesses, (34)
By means of that, those who are addicted to women progressively
(kramāt) enter properly into the plane within which time is consumed (into
consciousness) and is free of (outer objective) support. (35)

kecid darśanamātreṇa tathāṅgasparśanāt pare |
dvīndriyotpattitaś cānye viśrāmyanti nirāśraye || 36 ||
itthaṁ yoṣidvyasanināṁ tiṣro ʻnubhavabhūmikāḥ |

dr̥śyante kālavilaye viśrāntir nīrupādhikā || 37 I|

sr̥ṣṭyasr̥ṣṭyādibhedena (sṛṣṭi-) catasro ‘nākhyadevatāḥ |
prameyabhūmim āśritya kālagrāsaparāḥ sthitāḥ || 38 I|
Some rest within (pure consciousness) devoid of the support (of

objectivity) by just seeing (a woman), others in the same way by touching (her)
limbs, and in the case of others, it is brought about by the two senses. (36)

In this way, those addicted to women perceive three planes of
realisation (anubhava), and when time dissolves away, (they experience)
unconditioned rest. (37)
As the division into the creation of creation (the persistence of creation)

and so on, the Anākhya deities are four who, having taken up (their place on)
the plane of objectivity, abide intent on consuming time (kālagrāsa). (38)

TANTRĀLOKA

529

kṣepārthasya kaler dhātor anvarthānugamāt sphuṭam |
kālīśabdaś catasṛṇāṁ devīnāṁ vācakaḥ sthitaḥ || 39 l|

kṣepo bahirmukhecchātmayoṣitsambhogajanmani |
pravṛttes tāstamyādivaśāt (> tāratamyādi-) kālagrāsaḥ (-mayaḥ) sthitaḥ || 40 ||
The word ‘Kālī’ denotes the four Goddesses clearly, in accord with the

meaning of the root kal in the sense of ‘casting forth’ (kṣepa). (39)

Casting forth into incipient (janman) sexual enjoyment with a woman
who is (the very) nature of extroverted desire which, by its progressively
(developing) engagement, is the devouring of time (kālagrāsa). (40)
evaṁ madyavyasanino ye kecij jantavaḥ sthitāḥ |
teṣāṁ tadāśrayeṇaiva kālagrāso ‘bhidhīyate || 41 |I
tasyāpi darśanasparśapānayogavataḥ (-tā) sphuṭam |
udrekātkarṣato (> udrekot-) dṛṣṭaḥ kālagrāsasya sambhavaḥ || 42 II
praviṣṭe ʻntaḥ śīdhurase (-saṁ) bhedanirharaṇātmake |

sthairyam eti camatkāro vinā viṣayasaṅgatim || 43 ||

pratibimbamahābhogamadhyabhūmivikāsataḥ |
pramāṇabhūmim āśritya catasraḥ kālikāḥ sthitāḥ || 44 ||
śabdasaṅkhyānavṛtteś ca kaler dhātoḥ kilārthataḥ |
sthitisṛṣṭyādibhedena caturdhā kālikodayaḥ || 45 1|
Similarly, some people are addicted to wine. (Now) will be taught how
they consume time (kālagrāsa) by taking that as their support. (41)
Time is clearly seen to be consumed for one who is (engaged in) the
Yoga of seeing, touching and drinking (wine), by virtue of the excellence of (its)
superabundant intensity (udreka). (42)
Once having entered within (the essentially conscious nature,) the rum
that eliminates duality, (the yogic) state of wonder (camatkāra), becomes firm

without (needing to) associate with (outer) objects, (for it happens just) by the
expansion of the Middle Plane (consciousness) of the Great Enjoyment of the

reflection'" (of the Goddess within it). (43-44ab)

Once having entered the plane of the means of knowledge (pramāṇa)

(i.e. the senses and mind), there are four Kālikās. In accord with the meaning of

the root kal, in the sense of the activity of ‘resounding’ (śabda) and
‘enumeration’ (saṇkhāyana), the Kālikās arise four-fold, divided into the
emanation of persistence (the persistence of persistence) and so on.¹¹⁸⁶ (44-45)

evaṁ māṁsavyasanīnām antarāsvādabhūminām |

pramātrṛrīpam āviśya catasraḥ kālikāḥ sthitāḥ || 46 ||

gatārthasya (> gatyā-) kaler dhātor arthasyānugamādimāḥ |
darśanasparśasambhogavirāmodrekatā matāḥ || 47 ||
saṁhārasr̥ṣṭyādīmayaś caturdhāyaṁ kramaḥ sthitaḥ |
strīmadyamāṁsabhogeṣu camatkārānuvṛttitaḥ || 48 ||
"'³³ The twelve Kaālīs are all reflections (pratibimba) of the thirteenth Kālī, which is the

original image (bimba) in the centre.

'!* Cf. TĀ 4/173cd-175. This analysis indicates that the author had seen the Tantrāloka.

530

APPENDIX I CHAPTER FOUR

kālagrāso vyasanināṁ kañcit kālaṁ sphuṭaṁ sthitaḥ (-tam) |

etatparikaras tv anyo bhāvavargo vyavasthitaḥ || 49 ||

yuktyānayaiva tatrāpi kālagrāsamayī sthitiḥ |
anenaivāśayenaiva parabrahmopalabdhaye || 50 ||

In the same way, (another) four Kālikās (are activated,) once having

entered the subjectivity of those who are addicted to meat and are on the plane

of inner taste (āsvāda). (46)
In accord with the sense of the root ‘kal’” as ‘activityʼ (gati), there are

considered to be (four) states of intensity (udrekatā) (occasioned by) the sight
(darśana), touch (sparśa), and enjoyment (saṁbhoga) (of meat, along with) the
cessation (virāma) (in which one rests satisfied once it has been consumed). (47)
This sequence is four-fold, as the emanation of withdrawal (persistence
of withdrawal) and so on, in accord with the wonder (experienced when)

enjoying (making love to) a woman, (drinking) wine, and (eating) meat. (48)

(The state in which) time is consumed that those who are addicted (to

these things experience) continues for some time in a clearly apparent way, and
the other states of being (bhāva) abide in attendance to it. (49)
By this very same practice (yukti), the state (sthiti) in which time is
consumed (kālagrāsa) obtains there also, and by this same intention (āśaya),
(serves) to realise the supreme Brahman. (50)

lalanāmadhumāṁsāni pūjyāgrāṇi viśeṣataḥ |
tad itthaṁ sarvabhãāvãnãṁ sarvãnubhavabhũmiṣu l| 51 ||
(p. 53) mahārthadṛṣṭyā sugamaḥ kālagrāso ʻpy ayatnataḥ |
samyagvastuvicāreṇa (samyaga-) bhāvānām āsvabhāvataḥ (> svasva-) || 52 |I
labdhabodhodayānandaṁ (-bodho *-) vande saṁṣthānam ātmanaḥ |

iti siddhamukhāmnāyayuktyā naivāsti vastutaḥ || 53 1|
vastuṣvabhāvo yatrāyaṁ kālaḥ syāt kalanātmakaḥ |
svaviṣphāramayaṁ (> svavisphāra-) sarvam idaṁ saṁṣthānam ātmanaḥ || 54 |
iti bodhodayānandāt kaḥ kālo grasyate hi yaḥ |
tadgrāsasaṁrambhaparã yãś ca dvãdaśa kãlikãḥ || 55 1|
(This can be done) in particular with the most excellent objects of

worship, that is, a female partner (lalanā), wine and meat, and in the same way
with all phenomena on all planes of experience. (51)

According to the Mahārtha view, time is easily and effortlessly
consumed (kālagrāsa) by correctly reflecting on the nature of reality
(vastuvicāra) as the essential nature of phenomena. (52)

‘I praise the ground (saṁsṣthāna) of the Self, which is the bliss of the
dawning of awakened consciousness attained’ — according to this teaching

(transmitted through) the oral tradition of the Siddhas (siddhamukhāmnāya); in
actual fact, time does not differentiate the essential nature of an entity. (53)

(In reality,) all this ground of the Self is the expansion of one’s own

nature (svavisphāra). Thus, what is (the nature of) the time consumed by the

bliss of the dawning of awakened consciousness, that the twelve Kālikās are
engaged in the act of (its) assimilation? (55)

itthaṁ vicāryamāṇānāṁ na kiñcid iti niścayāt |

TANTRĀLOKA

531

ekaiva cidacidbhogabhoganirbhogalakṣaṇā (cidacidbhogā-) || 56 |

viśrāntiḥ paramā devī kālopādhivivarjitā |
savikalpāvikalpānāṁ sarvāsā (> sarveṣāṁ) saṁvidālayaḥ || 57 |
kramākramapadottīrṇā (kramāt-) tadābhogātmikāpi yā |
acalā spandarahitā sarvaspandopabhoginī || 58 II

Reflecting upon them in this way, (one realises that time) is nothing at
all. Thus, as this is the ascertained teaching (iti niścayāt), there (can) only be

just one state of rest (viśrānti), which is (both) consciousness and its absence,

worldly experience (bhoga) and its absence, as well as (transcendence) devoid

of (all worldly) experience (nirbhoga). (And that state of rest) is the supreme

Goddess, who is devoid of the limiting adjunct of time and is the abode which is

consciousness (sarṁvidālaya) of all (perceptions), be they accompanied by

thought constructs or without. Beyond the planes of process and its absence,

although she is also its blissful expanse (ābhoga), (She is) immobile, without

pulsation (spanda), and
consciousness). (56-58)

(yet)

enjoys

all

the

pulsations

(of universal

pratyakṣabhūtā sarvasyāpy adyāpi vividhair mukhaiḥ |

tathā pūjanasaṅkrāmair upāyair upalakṣitā l| 59 ||

āsāṁ dvādaśadevīnāṁ svarūpavilayāvaniḥ |

trayodaśīti yā devī kathyate hy upacārataḥ || 6O II

upādeyatayā saiva paropāsyatayā sthitā |
trayodaśīnāṁ devīnāṁ svaucityārthānusārataḥ |
abhidhānāni (-nni) vartante hṛdayaṅgamayuktitaḥ l| 61 |I
etāsām abhidhānena yā mantrākṣaramālikāḥ |
kālikākramadrṛṣṭatvād upacāreṇa tāḥ sthitāḥ || 62 |I
She is the direct perception (pratyakṣabhiūtā) of everything (taking
place) now also through many kinds of channels (mnukha). She is experienced

(upalakṣitā) in this way through the (many) means (to realisation), which are

(forms of) worship (pūjana), and transference (saṇkrāma) (of enlightened
consciousness). (59)
The ground of the merger of these twelve goddesses into their own

essential nature is said, in a manner of speaking, to be the thirteenth goddess.

She alone is to be realised (upādeya) and is the supreme object of worship. (60-

61ab)

The names of the thirteen goddesses are in consonance with their own
corresponding (nature, which is their) meaning (artha), (and are such) so that
they may be taken to heart. (61)
They abide in a secondary sense as the garlands of the syllables of the
Mantras (formed) by naming them, because (they) are perceived as the

procession (krama) of Kālikās (rather than phases of perception). (62)

p. 54) melāpadarśane (melāva-) hy atra pratyakṣajñānagocare |

kathaṁ mantrasya sadbhãvaḥ sa pratyakṣo ʻpi vā katham || 63 II
avarṇarājapratyakṣaḥ kāyānubhavabhūmikaḥ |

pañcapiṇḍātmako ʻpi syāt sūkṣmapratyakṣadarśinaḥ || 64 |I
nānyāni mantravarṇāni pratyakṣānīva sarvathā |

532

APPENDIX I CHAPTER FOUR

upacāreṇa tadvṛtti (> -vṛttiḥ) kālikākramagocarā |I 65 ||
(One may ask at this point,) what is the essential nature of Mantra here,
according to the teaching concerning the union (of Siddhas and Yoginīs)
(melāpadarśana)? Or (one may ask), how is it directly apparent (to the senses)?
The direct perception of the letter A, who is the king (of all the phonemes,) is on
the plane of corporeal experience, and so too of the Five-Lettered (Syllable)
(KHPHREṀ) (pañcapiṇḍa), of those who perceive by means of a subtle, direct
perception. No other letters of Mantra are as directly perceived in all respects (as
these are). It is metaphorically (said) that their functional state (vṛtti) is in the
field of the procession (krama) of the Kālikās. (63-65)
tattadvikalpasambhũtavãsanãvedhasaṁkṣayãt |
sarvākāṅkṣāvirahitā viśrāntir jāyate parā ll 66 ||
ittham utthānaviṣaye bhāvānubhavabhūmiṣu |
pratyakṣaḥ sarvajantūnāṁ sthito “sau (sthito *) pūjanakramaḥ || 67 I|
anyair āvarakatvena ye bhāvāḥ parivarjitāḥ |
tair eva jñānīnām itthaṁ jājvalīti parā citiḥ || 68 II
The supreme state of rest, free of all craving, arises by virtue of the

cessation of the penetration (into individual consciousness) of the latent (traces)

generated by each thought construct. This liturgy (pājanakrama) is directly
perceivable to all people in this way on the planes of the experience of
phenomenal existence (bhāva) within the field (of the activity of the senses

operating when) risen from (deep contemplation). Devoid of the phenomenal
states (bhāva) that serve as obscuring coverings, brought about by those other
(kinds of thought constructs), the supreme consciousness of the men of
knowledge burns intensely. (66-68)

Appendix J

to Chapter Four

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Vidyās

The
following
Mantras
are
drawn
from
the
Kālīkulapañcakramakramārcana. The mantras of the thirteen Kālīs are also

found in the Kramasadbhāva, which may well have been their original source.

The colophons of the Kālīkulapañcakramakramārcana tell uṣ that it was

compilled by Prabodhanātha who was a priest in the well known Paśupatinātha
temple in Kathmandu in the 12* century.

Piṇḍanātha Saṁhārabīja
khphreṅṁ/ ma-e-kha-pha-raṁ
Nine syllable Vidyā
khphreṁ mahācaṇḍayogeśvari
Seventeen syllable Vidyā (1)
hrīñ mahācaṇḍayogeśvari thṛ dhr ṭhṛphaṭ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ
Seventeen syllable Vidyā (2)
khphreṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahãcaṇḍayogeśvari kālakāli hūṁ phaṭ

100 syllable Samayavidyā
khphreṁ phat | mahācaṇḍe caṇḍamukhi caṇḍayogeśvari phaṭ | caṇḍaduḥkhavimocani sarvasamayalopavighātani tejovati (tejomayi) amṛtamūrte asiddhasādhani siddhiṛddhiprade nāśaya sarvadoṣān abhimataṁ me prayaccha sarve

sarvage arūpe sarvarūpe hrīṁ phat | khphreṁ phaṭ | hūṁ kroṁ kṣāṁ sarvavidyeśvari phaṭ svāhā |

The Thirteen Kālīs
khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phĩṁ mahãsr̥ṣṭikãli kãlagrasanakãli ambãpãdanamaḥl 1 |
khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahãsthitikãli kãlagrasanakãli ambãpãda namaḥ ||
Nw

||

khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phũṁ mahãsaṁhãrakãli kãlagrasanakãli ambãpãda namaḥ
I| 3 I NW

khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phũṁ mahãraktakãli kãlagrasanakãli ambãpãda namaḥ l|

w

khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahāsukāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda namaḥ l| 5
SW

||

534

APPENDIX I CHAPTER FOUR

khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahāyamakāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda namaḥ l|
6 I| SW
khphreṁ āṅṁ phāṁ phīṁmahãmr̥tyukãli kãlagrasanakãli ambãpãda namaḥ |IT | S
khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahābhadrakāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda
namaḥ
|| 8 I|| SE
khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahāparamārkakāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda
namaḥ || 9 I| SE
khpreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ māhāmārtaṇḍakāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda namaḥ ll
lIOI E
khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahākālāgnirudrakāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda
namaḥ |lI 11 I|NE
khphreṁ āṅṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahākālakāli kālagrasanakāli ambāpāda namaḥ ||
12 I| Front of NE
khphreṁ āṁ phāṁ phīṁ mahãghoracaṇḍabhairṟavikãli kãligrasanakãli
ambāpāda namaḥ | 13 I| Middle

etā raktavarṇā dvādaśārapadmasthā nīlotpaladalaśyāmāḥ |
caturbhujā varatriśūlapadmakādyadharāḥ|raśmirūpā gale
muṇḍamālopaśobhitāḥl| śuṣkāḥ saptakapālaśiromālādharāḥ

piṅgordhvakeśanāgabandhamaulicandrārdhabhūṣitāḥ ||
nūpuravīraghaṇṭāḥ kiṁkiṇījālamaṇḍitāḥ trinetrā

vyāghracarmanivasanāḥ || gauraśavārūḍhāḥ || idṛgrūpaṁ
pīṭhaniketanādi saṁhārakramaparyantaṁ devadevīnāṁ ca
bodhavyaṁ ||
These (Kālīs) are red and are located on a lotus of twelve petals. They

are dark blue (like) the petals of a blue (night lotus). They have four

arms and bear a wish- bestowing gesture, trident, lotus and a skull bowl.

They are rays (of the Kaālī in the centre) and (their) neck is adorned with a

garland of severed heads. Emaciated, they wear tiaras of seven skulls. Their

reddish-brown hair is tied up in a knot by snakes and is adorned with a
half-moon as its crest jewel. Their anklets bear Kaula heroes as their bells and,

(their body) adorned with a network of little bells, they have three eyes, wear

tiger skins and are mounted on white corpses. One should know that such is
the form of the goddesses of the gods (everywhere) beginning with (the
goddesses) in the locations of the sacred seats right up to (those populating) the

process of withdrawal.

dvādaśaiva saṁcintya madhye bhagavatīṁ kr̥śodarīṁ pīnonnatapayodharāṁ
karṇāntāyatamadavighūrṇitadhyānalocanāṁ varadābhayakarāṁ dhyātvā
trayodaśamantreṇaūrdhvasiṁhānanaṁ yaṣṭvādevīṁ pūjayet|l

TANTRĀLOKA

535

Once reflected on the twelve (Kālīs), (next visualize) the goddess in the
center. She is Kṛśodaṁī (Narrow Waist). Her breasts are fat and upraised and her

4 Mahāraktakālī
3 Mahāsaṁhārakālī

2 Mahāṣṭhitikālī

Ww

S Mahāsukālī

Sw

6 Mahāyamakālī

7 Mahāmṛr̥tyukālī ṣ
13 Mahāghoracaṇḍabhairavakālī

N 1 Mahāsṛṣṭikālī

SE

8 Mahābhadrakālī

12 Mahākālakālī

11 Mahākālāgnirudrakālī

10 Mahāmārtaṇḍakālī

E

9 Mahāparamáārkakālī

eyes, extending to her ears, are (immersed) in meditation and rolling with
inebriation. (Her two hands make) gestures of granting boons and (bestowing)
fearlessness. Having meditated (on her in this way) and having worshipped (her)
upper lion face with the thirteenth Mantra, one should worship the goddess.

