CHAPTER THREE
The Supreme Means (Paropāya)
‘The Doctrine of Reflection (pratibimbavāda)

The Light of Consciousness Within Which Everything is Reflected: verses 1-4,
pages 62-70
Only Form is Reflected in a Medium with Form: verses 5-7, pages 70-73

Definition of the Purity of the Medium of Reflection: verses 8-9, pages 73-76

Māyā and Pure Knowledge, Śiva is both the Prototype and its Reflection: verses
10-15, pages 76-85
Only Form is Reflected in a Mirror: verses 16-18, pages 86-88
The Substratum of Reflection and Attendant Causes: verses 19-20, pages 88-91
The Reality and Nature of the Reflected Image: The Teaching of the Mirror:
verses 21-23, pages 92-99

The Reflection of Sound: verses 24-34ab (24-34cd), pages 99-108

The Reflection of Touch: verses 34cd-42ab (35-43), pages 108-118

Consciousness as the Most Excellent Medium of Reflection: verses 42cd-47ab
(44-48), pages 118-123

There is No External Prototype for the Reflection within Consciousness: verses
47cd-59 (49-60), pages 123-132

vii

The Energies of the Lord are the Instrumental Cause of Reflection: verses 60-65ab

(61-65), pages 132-136

The Alphabet of the Fifty Forms of Reflective Awareness

The Sequence of the Arising of (the Fifty Forms) of Reflective Awareness: verses
65cd-66ab (66), pages 136-138

The Letter A as Anuttara and Anākhya, Kula and Akula, Unstruck Sound and
Kaulikīśakti: verses 66cd-67ab (67), pages 138-160
The Letter Ā as the Union of Śiva and Śakti: verses 67cd-70 (68-71ab), pages
160-166
The Letter I as the Power of the Will: verses 71 (71cd-72ab), pages 166-169
The Letter Ī as the Power of Sovereignty: verses 72 (72cd-73ab), page 169
The Letter U as the Power of Knowledge: verses 73 (73cd-74ab), pages 170-172
The Letter Ū as the Decrease of Subjectivity: verses 75 (75cd-76ab), pages 172175
The Neuter Vowels ṛ Ṛ | Ḷ: verses 77cd-81ab (78-81), pages 175-184
The State of Arousal and the Aroused Seed: verses 81cd-87 (82ab-87), pages 185192
The Matrix of Arousal: verses 88-90, pages 192-194
The Neuter Vowels Continued: verses 91-92ab, pages 194-195

The Diphthongs: verses 92cd-93ab, pages 195-196
The Letter E as the Yoni: verses 93cd-95ab, pages 196-200
The Letter AI as the Hexagon: verses 95cd-96ab, pages 201-202
The Letters O and AU as the Powers of Action and the Trident: verses 96cd104ab, pages 202-209
The Trident and the Stainless Principle: verses 104cd-109ab (104cd-108), pages
209-213

The Eight Groups of Eight: verses 109cd-110ab (109), pages 213-215
Bindu – the Point: verses 110cd-114 (110-114ab), pages 215-221

The Sun of the Senses, the Fire and Moon of Subject and Object: verses 115118ab (114cd-117), pages 221-224
The Sun of the Senses: verses 118cd-121ab (118-120), pages 224-226

The Moon of Objectivity and the Fire of the Subject: verses 121cd-123, pages
226-228

The Subject and its Subjectivity: verses 124-131 (123cd-131ab), pages 228-237
Short, Long and Prolate Vowels as Sun, Moon and Fire: verses 132-133 (131cd-

133ab), pages 237-239

The Point of Śiva (śivabindu) as the Light of the Three Abodes: verses 134-136
(133cd-136ab), pages 239-242

Visarga: verses 137 (136cd-137ab), page 242

The Threefold Emission as Śakti, Prāṇa and Parā Kuṇḍalinī: verses (138-141)
(137cd-141ab), pages 242-251

The Dynamics and Forms of Visarga: verses 142ab-146ab (141cd-145), pages
251-255

The Principle of Passion: verses 146cd-148 (146-148ab), pages 256-264
The Emergence of the Consonants: verses 149-154ab (148cd-153), pages 264-272
The Emergence of the Semivowels: verses 154cd-162 (154-162ab), pages 272-

viii
The Emergence of the Śibilants: verses 163-165 (162cd-165ab), pages 278-280
The Sibilant S as the Principle of the Nectar of Poison: verses 166-170ab (165cd-

169), pages 280-289

The Principles of Passion, Poison and the Stainless: verses 170cd-175ab (170-

174), pages 289-298

The Neuter Vowels ṛr Ṛ I LḶ and the Sibilants: verses 175cd-180ab (175-179),

pages 298-301

The Fiftieth Letter, KS: verses 180cd-181ab (180ab-180cd), pages 301-303
The Two Tetrads Y, R, L, V and , S, S, KṢ: verses 181cd-184 (181-184ab),
pages 303-304

The Group of Six Vowels A, Ā, I, I, U and Ū: verses 185-192 (184cd-192ab),
pages 304-311
The Triad A I U: verses 193-195ab (192cd-194), pages 311-312
The Lord United with Emission is AII Things as the Fifty Energies of the Letters:

verses 195cd-197ab, pages 312-314
The Goddess with Eighty-one Parts, Śabdarāśi, Mātṛkā and Mālinī; verses 197cd200ab, pages 314-318
The Oneness (of these Forms of Reflective Awareness)

with Mantra and the Rest

The Cycle of the Flow of AHAṀ that Encapsulates All Things: verses 200cd-

208ab, pages 318-327

The Aesthetic Delight of Śiva’s Power of Emission: verses 208cd-210, pages 327331

The Three Forms of Emission: verses 211-219, pages 331-337

The Triad A IU Continued: verses 220-221ab, pages 338-339

The Five-fold Point (bindu): verses 221cd-223ab, pages 340-344

Mantras are Effective Encompassed by the A and H of AHAṀ: verses 223cd-225,
pages 344-347

The Power of Emission Taught in the Aitareyāraṇyaka: verses 226-228, pages
347-351
Aesthetic Experience as the Arousal of the Vitality of Consciousness: verses 229230ab, pages 351-356

This Vitality is the Source of Life and so Emission is AIl Things: verses 230cd-

231, pages 356-357

Emission is Śabdarāśi, Mātṛkā and Mālinī: verses 232, pages 357-359
Mālinī as Parā and Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī: verses 233-234, pages 359-361

The Aesthetics of Music and the Three Levels of Speech: verses 235-247ab, pages
361-371
The Supreme Triad and the Groups of Six: verses 247cd-250ab, pages 371-373
The All-embracing Wheel of the Twelve Kālikās: verses 250cd-259ab, pages 373-

The Three Ways of Eliminating Creation, Persistence and Destruction: verses

259cd-260ab, page 381

Peaceful Cessation and the Process of Violent Digestion: verses 260cd-265ab,
pages 381-390

ix

The Unfolding Configurations of the Goddesses of Consciousness: verses 265cd-

267 (265-267ab), pages 390-392
The Seal of the Supreme Means is the Awareness that Everything is Reflected in
the
Mirror of Consciousness: verses 268-271ab (267cd-270), pages 393-395
Liberation in This Life (jīvanmukti): verses 271cd-274ab (271-273), pages 395396

The Reflection of the Principles (tattva) in the Fifty Forms of Reflective
Awareness: verses 274cd-280ab (274-279), pages 396-401
I Am the Author of the Cycle of Creation and Destruction that Arises in the
Mirror of My Consciousness: verses 280cd-288ab (280-287), pages 401-407
The Supreme Means is Beyond Ritual: verses 288cd-290 (288-290ab), pages 407408

The Śāmbhava Master: verses 291-293ab (290cd-292), pages 408-410
The Supreme Goal is Siva: verses 293cd-294ab (293), pages 410-41 1

Appendices to Volume Two
Appendix A to Chapter Three: The Moon and the Play of Emission: pages 412-

Appendix B to Chapter Three: The Principles of Passion, Poison and the
Stainless: pages 424-426

Appendi-x C to Chapter Three: Chart of the Sanskrit Alphabet: page 427

Abbreviations
Ajaḍapramātṛṣiddhi
Asiatic Society of Bengal

Atharvaveda

Bodleian Library, Oxford
Brahmayāmala
Bhagavadgītā
Bhogakārikā
B,rhadāraṇyakopaṇiṣad
Chandogyopaṇiṣad

Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya

Dharmālaṅkārakārikā

Devīdyvardhaśatikā
Devīpañcaśataka
Dhvanyālokālocana
Government Oriental Manuscript Library, University of Chennai

History of Dharmaśāstra
Indo-Īranian Journal

Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarinī

Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī

Institut Français d'Indologie de Pondichéry

Istituto Studi Medio ed Estremo Oriente
Iśānaśivagurudevapadáhati
Journal Asiatique

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bombay
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
Jayadrathayāmala
Kashmiri Series Edition
Kaulajñānanirṇaya
Kramanayapradīpikā
Kumārikākhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairavatantra
Kulapañcaśikā
Khacakrapañcakastotra
Kubjikāmata
Kaṣhmiri Shaivism, the Secret Supreme

Kashmiri Series of Texts and Studies

MP
(1 Śk)

MP (2 Tri)
MP (3 AS)
MS
MV

Kramanayapradīpikā
Laghuyogavāsiṣṭa
Mātaṅgaparameśvarāgama
Mahābhārata
Mahānayaprakāśa
Mahānayaprakāśa commented by Śitikaṇṭha
Mahānayaprakāśa by unknown author published in Trivendrum.

Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasiṁha
Manuscript
Mālinīvijayottaratantra

xi
MyVv

Munḍ
MrT

MṛTvVK

MṛKri

NGMPP
NSA
NBT

Mālinīvijayavārtika
Monier-Williams

Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad
Mṛgendratantra
Mṛgendratantravr̥tii Kriyāpāda

Mṛgendratantra Kriyāpāda

Mṛgendratantra Vidyāpāda

Nepal German Manuscript Preservation Project

Nyāyabindu
Nyāyabinduṭīkā

Netratantra

Netratantroddyota
Number
Page
Paramokṣaniīrāsakārikā
Parātrīśikā (= Parātriṁśika)

Parātriṁśikavivaraṇa (Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa)

Pāṇini’s Sūtras, the Aṣṭādhyāyī.
Pūrvakāmikā
Paramārthasāra
Pramāṇavārtika
Pramāṇaviniścaya
Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya

Ricerche e Studi Orientali
Rājataraṅginī

Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha
RṚgveda
Śatapathabrāhmaṇa

Sarvajñānottara

Sva/ŚSubodhodayamañjarī
Swami Lakṣmanjoo
Science of Light

Saṁvitprakāśa

Spandakārikā
Spandanirṇaya

Spandapradīpikā
s̄andasadoha

Śivasūtra
Śivasūtravimarśinī

Śivastotrāvali

Śrīmatotara
Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad
Satsahasrasaṁhitā
Somaśambhupaddhati

Svacchandatantra

Svacchandatantroddyota

Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha
State University of New York Press

Siddhayogeśvarīmata
Tattvatrayaparīkṣā

Tantrāloka

Tatvārthacintāmaṇi
Trika Śāstra Rahasya Prakriyā

Tantrasāra
Tantrasadbhāva

Tantroccaya
Taitirīyopaniṣad
Tantravaṭadhānikā
Triśirobhairava

Ūrmikaulāraṇvatantra
Vijñānabhairava

Vāmakeśvarīmata
Vātulanāthasūtra

Yogavāsiṣṭa
Yonigahvaratantra
Upaniṣad
laghu

gúru

commentary

CHAPTER TWO
The Penetration into Ultimate Reality Devoid of Means (Anupāya)

May Rudra, Who is attended by victory (iaya) and makes the humble

victorious, be, without any means, victorious. As the Lord of Desire, what desire

does He not fulfil completely?

' Abhinava supplies a summary of No Means in Chapter Two of his Tantrasāra (p. 89),
which is as follows:
‘Now we will explain only (the penetration into ultimate reality which is) devoid
of means (anupāya). One who is penetrated by a firm (intense and continuous) descent of
the power (of grace) discerns (the supreme reality) for himself in this way (as will be

explained), after having understood the teacher’s word (just) once. He then has (the form

of) penetration (samāveśa) (into Supreme Śiva) which is permanent and devoid of (any)
means (to realisation). (If one were to ask) that here (in this case) only intuitive
discriminative reasoning (tarka), which is (the most excellent) ancillary of Yoga, (can in
due course attain the goal,) so how is it that he discerns (that supreme reality immediately
without it)? (In response,) it is said that, of what use can (any) means (of realization) be
with regard to this Supreme Lord Who is self (luminous) Light and (our) own Self? īt
(cannot bring about) the attainment of (His) own nature, because it is eternal, nor
knowledge (of it), because it illumines itself, nor (can any means to realisation) remove a

covering (that obscures Him), because it is impossible for there to be any obscuration, nor
(can there be any means to bring about) entry into that (supreme consciousness) because
there is no one who is separate from (the Light) that enters (into it). And so, because it is
illogical that (any means to realisation) can be separate (from the one reality of
consciousness), what (could be) the means here? Therefore, all this one reality which is

(pure) consciousness alone is not measured by time, it is undivided by space,
unconditioned by limiting adjuncts, it is not limited by (any) form, not taught by words,
and not known by (any) means of knowledge. Moreover, (if any of these factors,)

beginning with time and ending with (some) means of knowledge, serve as an

instrumental means to attaining (Śiva’s) own nature, it is only by virtue of His own free
will.
“(Ultimate) reality is free and dense (uninterrupted) bliss and I am that, and there

itself within me all things are reflected” – he who firmly (without any doubts) discerns
(reality) in this way perpetually possesses that penetration of the Supreme Lord which is
free of (all) means (to realisation). He is not subject to any constraint (to practice), be it,
for example, Mantra, worship, or meditation, nor (does he have to observe any prescribed

manner of) conduct.

‘The network of means (to realisation) does not illumine Śiva. Is (the sun with
its) thousands of rays illumined by a pot?’ Discerning in this way, one of noble vision

should penetrate instantly into Śiva, Who is self-luminous Light.

‘Wherever the radiant pulse (of the Light of consciousness) shines, the Supreme
Lord, Who is all things, shines pure within me.’ Once having known in truth that He

Himself is (my own) Self, there is nothing else that needs be done.”

Abhinava explains the teaching concerning Anupāya as he summarizes it briefly

in the Tantroccaya:

‘There (in that case, i.e., when God is realised in an instant), the Light of the

Supreme Lord shines for some (elevated soul) continuously without having to (resort to

CHAPTER TWO

Now, in accord with the view that ‘that which possesses more excellent

qualities than (something else) is said to be above it (and so comes before it)’, it is
(right and) preferable that the more excellent (means), that is, (amongst) the
Individual (means) and the rest, be, for that reason, discussed here (in the
Tantrāloka) first, before one that is less s0. Thus, as No Means is one with the

goal, it is more excellent than even the one pertaining to Śiva (śāmbhava).
Accordingly, in order to expound its nature first, he announces the beginning of
the next chapter with the second half of the verse (the first half of which

concluded the previous chapter).

3TJTI ṬCGRfBITTTGTTĀ

fā 11 2

yat tatrādyaṁ padam aviratānuttarajñaptirūpaṁ
tan nirṇetuṁ prakaraṇam idam ārabhe `haṁ dvitīyam || 1 ||
I now commence this, the second chapter (prakaraṇa), in order to
expound the first (and foremost) plane (taught) there (in the Tantrāloka),
namely, the uninterrupted experience (jñapti) of the Absolute (anuttara). (1)
He (begins by) stating (the final) conclusion (with regards to its nature):

Reality Manifests Fully Spontaneously by Instruction Imparted Just Once

srrīā f agŪ ahīsai? zazaāī

TGTRITRYHTI TATJTT-TTĀTT II Ṝ II
anupāyaṁ hi yad rūpaṁ ko ʻrtho deśanayātra vai |

sakṛt syād deśanā paścād anupāyatvam ucyate || 2 |
(One may ask): “indeed, what use is instruction here with regards to
that (reality), the nature (rūpa) of which is such that there is no means (to
any) means to realisation (ever) again, when the teacher’s word has been properly

understood (just) once. (The teaching he utters) is that “the network of means does not
make Śiva manifest . . .” Reflecting in this way, the man of profound insight penetrates
Śiya, who is self-luminous Light, in an instant.”

Jayaratha starts each chapter of his commentary with a benedictory verse, as is

customary. The word ‘jaya, which means ‘victoryʼ, is in all of them up to Chapter
Thirteen (2: jayakṛta, sajaya, 3: vijaya 4: jayanta 5: aparājitaḥ jayati 6: sujaya sajaya 7:
jayarudra 8: jayakīrti 9: jayāvaha 10: jayamūrti 11: jayotsaha 12: jayada and 13:

jayavarddhana). The word jaya, which means Chariot of Victory, is also part of
Jayaratha’s name. Perhaps in this way he is alluding to himself. Similarly, the word ‘hala,

that means ‘strength’, appears in the benedictory verses of Chapters Fourteen to Twenty-

One. Was someone with that word in his name Jayaratha’s teacher, relative, or friend?
See above, 1/242-244. In a broad general sense, all the Tantrāloka, not just this chapter,

is an exposition of Anuṭṭara.

Literally ‘coming to know’.

TANTRĀLOKA

attain it)?” (We reply that) instruction (in this case) should be (imparted
just) once. The state (realized spontaneously just) after (that) is said to be

devoid of means. (2)

The word ‘indeed’ serves to emphasize (the point,) so that the meaning is

that there (should be) no use at all (of any instruction concerning Ultimate
Reality). He responds here itself (to this objection), saying that “(instruction)

should be (imparted just) once’ and so on. ‘Instruction’ is a synecdoche, by

which one should understand (a number of practices), and thus understand that it
also (includes) the vision of Siddhas (siddhadarśana) and the like. As is said:

‘The vision of Siddhas and Yoginīs, the consumption of sacrificial food

(carubhojana), the (oral transmission, that is,) instruction (kathana), (a direct
The concluding verse of Chapter 2 of the Tantrasāra quoted above in note 2,1 is quoted

by Śivopādhyāya in his commentary on VBH 124, that declares:
sarvatra bhairavo bhãvaḥ sāmānyeṣv api gocaraḥ |
na ca tadvyatirekeṇa paro 'stīty advayā gatiḥ || 124 ||

‘Bhairava’s being is everywhere. It is in the grasp (of the understanding) of
common people also. (He who knows that) nothing else exists apart from Him (attains) the
nondual state. (124) (122)
This practice precedes the Tantras. Patañjali refers to it in his Yogasūtras, where he says:
‘there is a vision of Siddhas within the light of the head’ (YSū 3/32 mūrdhajyotiṣi
siddhadarśanam). There the practice is an internal vision of Siddhas, that is, fully

accomplished yogis, in a state of profound contemplation. In the Trika Kaula context, the

term is better translated as ‘the sight of a Siddha’. Juṣt a glance from a true, fully
accomplished (siddha) teacher directed at a true disciple is enough to liberate him by the
intense descent of the power of grace (śaktipāta) that it transmits (see below, comm.
3/291ab-291cd (3/290cd-291ab) and 13/133). This happens in a moment and is permanent.

Thus, it is No Means. It is a form of ‘transmission through sight’, to which Kaula Tantras

refer as one of the highest forms of initiation. When the disciple is ready, the teacher need
not even say anything. Just a look is enough. Yogarāja (PS p. 186) quotes Abhinava as

referring to the following verse from a Tantra:

‘O beloved, whether out of effortless play or respect, he on whom the gaze of the
(teacher) who knows reality falls, is liberated at that very moment!’
According to the Manthānabhairavatantra, which is a Kaula Tantra, this is a
form of Śāmbhava initiation. It may also take place through a touch and other such ways.

See Dyczkowski 2009: KuKh 33/31cd-38, 45-46.
The earliest passage recovered so far to teach this direct initiation is found in

Chapter Nine of the mūlasūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasaṁhitā, which is one of the earliest
Tantras. It reads (fol. 22v3): yaṁ yaṁ spṛśati hastena yaṁ yaṁ paśyati cakṣuṣā | dhyātvā
tattvaṁ tu medhāvī dīkṣitaṁ taṁ vinirdiśet | ‘Who(m)ever a knower (of the truth) touches
with his hand or gazes at with his eye, that person he takes as an initiate, having
contemplated reality. (cited in Vasudeva 2004: 19).
In a more general sense, darśana, which literally means ‘vision, insight, and

seeingʼ, is a meeting with the being who is seen and who sees. Moreover, it has the added
connotation in that context of a spiritual

‘vision’. For example, the god in the

Śrīkularaodáyoia (the Radiance of the Jewel of Śrīkula) describes one of a number of forms
of the goddess, saying to her that it is the ‘direct vision (pratyakṣadarśana) of you that is free
of the attributes of form and the like and devoid of meditation and limitations’. When the god

CHAPTER TWO

implores the goddess to come out of a Liṅga in which she has hidden herself to appear to him,
he asks her to give him a sight of her– darśana. ʻSeeing’ is a powerful action through which

magical, yogic and liberating power can be transferred from a deity or liberated being.

Darśana īs the experience of the recipient who is blessed by this liberating look. Thus, it is
said in a Kubjikā Tantra that whomever the teacher Ciñciṇīnātha gazes at in this way
reaches the highest level of being. Conversely, ‘sinners gain yogic power (siddhi) (just) by
seeing him (darśana).” Śimilarly, a purifying and empowering climax takes place in the
course of initiation when the aspirant is finally permitted to see the maṇḍala. This ‘seeing of
the maṇḍala’ – maṇḍaladarśana – permits him to enter the maṇḍala, as it were, make

offerings to its inhabitants, and finally become one with the deity in the centre. In such cases

darśana also refers to what is seen, not just the act of seeing. Thus, a dream (svapna) is called

svapnadarśana, which means both what is seen in the dream and lucid dreaming. Similarly,
the word in common usage also means ‘appearance’, as in the expression ghoradarśana with
respect to a deity with a fearsome – ghora – appearance.

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains: ‘Yoginīmelāpa (union with the Yoginī) here is not

Cakrapūjā (worship by the assembly of initiates) which it is in Śāktopāya. It is spiritual.

Yoginīmelāpa [umion with the Yoginī] takes place in samādhi [a state of deep
contemplation when] mātṛamaṇḍalasaṁbodha [the awakening of the congregation of
Mothers takes place]. It is internal within the state of God consciousness. If your Master
thinks that it can’t be done by [his] touch then Siddhadarśana [the vision of Siddhas] takes

place. If not then Yoginīmelāpa [union with the Yoginī] takes place. All this is in the
hands of the master. During Siddhadarśana [the vision of Siddhas] you see the divine
ancient Masters in samādhi. When you close your eyes for your master, he makes you
understand and experience the state of these Siddhas. Siddhadarśana is in touch with
Śāmbhavopāya and Yoginīmelāpa īs in touch with Śāktopāya. Yoginīmelāpa is a sexual
siddhi [accomplishment] and is just [pure higher] Śāmbhavopāya. It takes place, if you are
worthy, by the grace of the master. If you don’t have the capacity you must move to

[lower] Śāmbhavopāya. If not there you must move to Śāktopāya and then to Āṇavopāya.

This may take place through Bhīmacaryā [‘fearful practice’], which is carubhojana
[eating of the sacrificial food offered to the vīra – the male adept by a Yoginī] and it takes
place internally. In Śāktopāya it is external. Here, in Anupāya, it is pure internal
perception.”
” Caru (the ʻsacrificial pap’) is normally rice boiled with milk or just water, although it

may also be more elaborately prepared for Siddhānta ritual purposes, where it is invariably
vegetarian and of relatively secondary importance. In the case of Kaula traditions such as
the Trika and those of the closely related Kubjikā Tantras, as well as the Kālīkrama, it is
normally non-vegetarian, such as cooked meat mixed with garlic and onions, and may also
be mixed with fish (DDŚ 1/83, TS 21/171). But mixed with milk, it may also be

vegetarian (TS 9/53). Vaiṣṇava caru is always so (JY 3 ibid. fl. 75b). Despite the common
Brahminical aversion to the non-vegetarian form, it is considered by Kaulas to be the most
spiritually valuable. As a Kubjikā Tantra declares: ‘it is equal to human flesh (nāraja), and
there is nothing as special as it is’ (YKh (1) 11/12). Conscious of the common rules

regulating food, the goddess teaches in the Manthānabhairavatantra that ‘one should
ingest what should not be ingested ~ there is no defect” (YKh (1) 11/55cd-74ab), but one

should take care to do so in accord with the ritual procedure (krama) (YKh (1) 10/141cd144). Then eating the caru in this Age of Strife (kaliyuga) is like drinking the Soma of the

Vedic sacrifice, but it should be kept secret and not be given to Tāntrikas, that is, to those
who belong to the Tantric sects that are not Kaula and so do not perform animal sacrifices
nor consume the sacrificial meat (YKh (1) 11/159cd-165ab).

It is common Siddhānta practice for the neophytes to be given caru to eat at the
conclusion of the initial purifying rites (adhivāsa) that serve as preliminaries to the rite of
initiation. Similarly, in the Jayadrathayāmala, the initiate is sometimes referred to as ‘one

TANTRĀLOKA

who eats the caru’ (carubhuk). At the conclusion of the rites of initiation taught in the

Brahmayāmala, the teacher gives caru to the initiate to eat, by virtue of which he becomes

‘a knower of the three times’ (BY 15/6). The menses of the Tantric consort is treated as

such, as we find in the following passage:

ataḥ paraṁ pravakṣyāmi guhyacakrāmṛtodbhavam |
tālumārgaṣthitasyātha sādhakasya varānane | 1 |
aṣṭāraṁ cakram ālikhya
pūrvārakād akārādimātṛkā vinyased vudhaḥ || 7 |
k 147b) guhyāmṛtavibhāge tu śakticakraṁ [k: -cakra] prakīrtitam [k: -tā] |
‘Next, I will tell (you) about the (sacrificial substance) that arises from the nectar of

the Secret Wheel for the adept who is on the Path of the Palate. One should draw an eight

spoked wheel . . .
‘The wise man should deposit the letters (mātṛkā) beginning with A from the first
spoke (in the east). Present in the division of the Śecret Nectar (guhyāmṛta), it is said to be the

Wheel of Śakti (1, 7cd-8ab)

niśceṣṭāṁ [k: ṭā] kārayec chaktiṁ [k: chakti] kṣare ca madavihvalām [k: meda-] | 8 II
kṣobhakāle tu nyastavyaṁ śaktipīṭhe mahāyame |
anyaś cāpi prayoktavyaṁ [k: prayoktavya] kṣobhayet [k: -yat] kautukena tz | 9 I|
rajasvalā [k: -rā] tu yā śaktiḥ bhavanti ribhavod bhavet (?) |

raāḥ [k: -ra] svayāgaṁ kārayed vudhaḥ [k: kāmyed vudhaḥ] || 10 |

kh 112a) tarpaṇaṁ tu tataḥ kr̥vā kṣobhaṁ mantrī samācaret |
kṣobhayitvā tato śaktiṁ yoniṁ prakṣālayet tataḥ | 1 1 |

kṣālanaṁ [k: kṣālana] bhāṇḍake [k: bhāṇuke] gṛhyat [kh: gṛhna] aśeṣaraktasaṅyutam [k: -

ta] |
pūrvoktena vidhānena carukaṁ śrāvayet tataḥ || 12 I|

He should immobilize the Śakti, who is disṣtraught with intoxication at the time of
her menses (kṣara). He should deposit (the Cakra) when she is aroused in the Śaktipīṭha, the
great regulator. One should also apply another, and she should be aroused with vehement
desire (kautuka), The Śakti is in menses. The wise man, fasting, should perform his sacrifice

at night and then having lustrated (the Śakti) (‘arpaṇa), the reciter of Mantra should arouse
(her). Then, having aroused Śakti, he should wash (her) Yoni. He should collect the liquid in
a vessel along with all the blood. Then in accord with the procedure taught previously, he
should consume the sacrificial pap (caru) (produced that way). (8cd-12)
tena dravyeṇa mantrajño jñānoghe [k: jānādye] pūjitena tu |

tenaiva tu vidhānena [k: -ne] tribhāgaṁ kārayed vudhaḥ [k: kāmyed vudhaḥ] l/13 |

devyāgnau [k: devyāgrau] tu tato datvād [k: datvān] naivedyāni [k: naiva-] tu dāpayet |
nityaṁ naimittikaṁ [k; -kai] kr̥tvā carukaṁ [k: cakrakaṁ] bhakṣayet tataḥ || 14 ||

devīnām agrataś caiva saha saktyā tathaiva ca |

prāsayītaṁ caruṁ divyaṁ [k: divya] pūjitaṁ vimalātmake || 15 l|
anenaiva vidhānena trirātraṁ kārayed vudhaḥ |

The wise knower of mantra should with that sacrificial substance that is worshipped

in the lineage of knowledge and the same procedure divide it into three parts. Then having
offered it to the goddess and the fire, he should make the food offerings. Then having made

the sacrificial pap (caruka) for the regular and occasional rites, he should eat it in front of the
goddess along with (his) Śakti. Having made (her) eat the divine pap and having worshipped,

CHAPTER TWO

O pure one! the wise man should cause it to be done with this same procedure for three
nights.” (13-16ab) BY 24/1, 7cd-16ab

‘The Trika Tantrasadbhāva prescribes that the teacher should eat it regularly with
his disciples after the worship (pūjā) of the deity at the end of the day (TS 7/124-125ab). It
may be consumed along with the ‘five products of the cow’ (pañcagavya) (i.e., milk, curd,

clarified butter, cow’s urine and dung) as a conclusion to worship (ibid. 9/62cd-63). The

JY_ also enjoins that, offered with Mantra, it should be eaten with the teacher
(JY 1/19/137cd-138ab, fl. 232a). In this way the adept becomes the Lord of the Wheel

(cakreśvara) ŪY 2/1021).

The TS provides for its consumption in the brief, direct initiation
(ekamaṇḍaladīkṣā). The frightening demons (piśāca) who are present there eat it as well
(TS 7/144cd-115ab), and so it also serves as the sacrificial offering (bali) to such beings.
According to the JY, it may be offered by the adept in a cremation ground to the Yoginīs
who come in hoards to consume it (JY 3 fl. 173b). By their grace, the adept attains the
accomplishments (siddhi) of the caru and so becomes their master.
A common practice in the early major Kaula schools that an adept may undertake
is a vow called the Vow of Knowledge (vidyāvrata). Abhinava refers to it in 13/140, 148,
23/31-44ab, 102. But as he uses the term, it is simply a vow of undertaking to repeat
Mantra (or a goddess’s Vidyā) with the attendant prescribed conduct (caryā). In Kaula

practice, it involves pilgrimage to sacred Kaula sites whilst repeating constantly the Vidyā

of the chosen goddess. There the adept (sādhaka) meets Yoginīs and unites with them.
Once they have been duly propitiated, they give him caru. By eating it, the adept acquires
magical and yogic powers and, ultimately, the supreme accomplishment of flight
(khecaratvasiddhi), which is liberation (YKh (1) 15/132-137ab. Concerning the Vow of

Knowledge, see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 1, 517-528). The TS provides for the offering of
caru to the eight Mothers, who each govem a Kula and are embodied in a mortal Yoginī
the adept meets on her lunar day (TS 16/248 ff.). The same Trika Tantra teaches that the
sixty-four Yoginīs offers the caru to the adept, who thereby achieves flight (TS 13/8687ab). After severe and long austerities, the Yoginīs shows themselves to those adepts
who have been consecrated in the Kula and are devoted to it. They offer them caru after
union with them. (TS 18/29-30). The JY also promises that, properly worshipped, the

Kālīkrama Yoginīs will come and give the adept caru (JY 2 f1. 70b), by virtue of which he

becomes their master, like Bhairava (JY 3/15/53-55 (fl. 143a)). At a higher level of
sophistication, the DDS promises that he who knows the seventeen syllables of
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī’s Vidyā attains union with the Yoginīs, and having obtained the caru from
them, ‘flies up into the sky and, like Bhairava, he attains all the yogic accomplishments”
(121-122). There we read:
‘He who attains the Sky of Consciousness which, free of (phenomenal)
supports, arises out of consciousness and so knows the place which is without support, is a

(true) Kaula. All the Skyfaring (Yoginīs) (khecarī) give him their caru just by eating

which he immediately flies up into the Sky. He is worshipped by the congregations of
Yoginīs and is praised by (both) gods and demons. O beloved, once having known the
Kālīkrama in this way, who (would) remain on (the surface of) the earth?’ (ibid.
73cd-76ab)
The key word in this passage is ‘immediately°. In the passage Jayaratha quotes,
this immediacy qualifies it to be a No Means means to realisation. Even so, clearly the

process begins in the sphere of the Individual Means, as it initially involves outer ritual

action, and passes through the Empowered Means in the domain of perception. Those who

are fit to receive the higher empowerment move on from this stage ‘immediately’.

TANTRĀLOKA

silent) Transfer/Transmission (saṁkrama) (of consciousness),’ spiritual discipline

(sādhana) (taught) in the scripture, serving the teacher and so forth is, in brief, 0
fair faced (goddess) (the practice and attainment of) No Means' (nirupāya).

Sanderson (2006: 24) points out that the higher Krama scriptures like the
Yonigahvaratantra ‘teach no rituals of initiation and consecration ~ the post-scriptural

Krama tradition envisaged initiation through the simple act of consuming a sacrament in

the form of the Kaula ‘nectars’ (caruprāśana). In the MP. (2 Tri) (2/4-5), its consumption
is presented as inducing the necessary preparation to receive the Krama teachings, and so
it is implicitly understood that that itself is an initiation. Sanderson (2007: 310 n 255)
translates: ‘For the most part our mundane experience is active by nature. It is therefore

through this that instruction is given in the [five-aspected] process of the Pītha phase of
worship. And it is with this in mind that the Guru transforms the bound soul into a
receptacle of the transmission by having him consume the sacramental substances.' For

the identification of these substances and their initiatory role on the path of nondual
awareness, see Sanderson 2005b, pp. 110-114 (n. 63).
All these occasions that mark the attainment of sudden, direct enlightenment operate,

according to the anonymous author of MP (2 Tri), through the most intense forms of
descent of the power of grace (fīvraśaktipāta) (see below, 13/129¢d-246cd (246ab)
concerning the nine degrees of intensity of the descent of power). ‘In the most extreme
(descent of power) (mahātīyratame), that rests in self-experience (alone), unimpeded

awareness dawns for one without descending to the process of instruction or (worship).

And when the more extreme (mahātīvratare) gets under way (that awareness) dawns as a
result of the Guru's teaching, from nothing but his oral explanation of the aphorisms, of
which the first is “(no sooner) seen (than) lost”.” (MP (2 Tri) 1/20-21. Translation by
Sanderson 2007: 312 and 2006: 70).
' Talk (kathana), that is, the oral transmission, even though it may just be a word or two,
entails traces of conceptualization ~ just enough to grasp and realise the secret Krama
teachings directly. The direct Transfer (saṁkramaṇa) of consciousness is higher than that

as there is no conceptualization at all, just a direct silent transfer of the liberated state of
awareness from Guru to disciple. It is characterized in the MP (2 Tri) (1/9-20, 24), as
Sanderson (2007: 311) explains, ‘as a sudden unfolding of enlightenment brought about

by a non-verbal fusion with the Guru's awareness, which needs no practice to establish
and maintain it. This is the non-sequential process of the Ground of the Primordial

(purāṇādhiṣṭhānakramaḥ). Iṭ is the highest limit of Mahārtha, in which the distinction of
self and other has dissolved.” (ibid. 1/11) and: “This is the process of (immersion) without
means, being free of perturbation (even) by the latent impressions of the distractions that
are reasoning, observance, and the rest. One in whom it is established is the king among

Yogins. He is free of all obscurations, beyond the level of transcending or seeking to

aṭṭain. He needs nothing else to establish (this, since it is) his own nature. (ibid. 1/13-14).

śāstre sādhanam – meaning doubtful. Perhaps worship (pūjana) is meant here. This

would complete a triad commonly found in Krama works, of Transfer (saṁkramaṇa),
Talk (kathana) and Worship (pājana), which are implicitly understood by the author of

MP (2 Tri) to be set into operation on the planes of the three Means of realisation, ranging
from the highest to the lowest, respectively (Sanderson 207: 313). Certainly, this practice,
like serving the teacher, begins, as does the consumption of the sacrificial pap, in the
sphere of the Individual Means.

The first half of the first line is quoted again below in the TĀv ad 2/40. Although

nirupāya is synonymous with anupāya, it is only rarely used by Abhinavagupta (justin
TĀ 2/7 and 13/157). The reason, no doubt, is that anupāya suggests that it is the No
Means of Anuttara – anuttaropāya. A fundamental difference between Anupāya and any

of the three categories of means to realisation is that the ‘penetration without means’

(nirupāyasamāveśa) is instantaneous. There is no sequence or process (karma) of any sort,

CHAPTER TWO

as there is in the domain of the means to realisation, and so it takes place only with the
descent of the most intense power of grace (śaktipāta) (see below, 13/157). Moreover, it is
permanent. Penetration into Śiva consciousness practicing the means pertaining to Śiva –
Śāmbhavopāya –- is also instantaneous, but not permanent. It needs to be repeated, and
repetition (abhyāsa) is the hallmark of practice (abhyāsa).

Cf. below 13/277cd-229ab, where these practices are presented as a form of initiation

which yields direct realisation (Sanderson 2006: 46). The terminology of this passage

leaves no doubt that it is drawn from a Krama source or one influenced by its teachings.
One of the streams of this tradition taught immediate realisation through intense
transmission of spiritual power by ‘no means’ means, such as those listed here. As the
tradition developed, it examined what takes place in this moment of realisation.

Concretely, this amounted to developing further the exegesis of such terms already begun
at their initial formulation, along with systematic insight into the energies, physical,
sensorial, mental and vital, and those within pure consciousness itself that work together
to bring it about. This came to be represented variously within branches of the Krama
tradition, and is understood to take place by entering into the dynamic modality (vṛrri) of
supreme consciousness that arises through the most intense descent of the power of grace
(atitīvraśakūitpāta). It is īmmediately liberating in this life itself, that is, even when the

senses and mind are operant. Indeed, the Krama teaches that the intense and sudden
expansion of consciousness that takes place then is fed by them. In this modality the

cognitive energies of the senses and mind are ‘tummed about’ (pratyāvṛtta) into
consciousness, thus channelling sensations and thoughts into it by a process called
‘haṭhapāka’, which literally means ‘intense’ or ‘violent digestion’. Also called ‘the

Devouring of Time’ (kālagrāsa), it takes place in the timeless moment of ever-present,
eternal consciousness

Operating as channels of cognitive consciousness, the senses and mind function

in consonance with the ṛhythm of the deployment of the cycles of its energies in the
phases of emanation, persistence and withdrawal of perceptions, within the domains of the

subject, object and means of knowledge and their inscrutable procession (krama), which
cannot be accurately described as either sequential (krama) or not (akrama). The goal is to
realise the ‘processless process of the unitary consciousness which encompasses them,
called the Inexplicable (anākhya), as it cannot be defined in any of these terms and is

essentially No Means. Devoid of insight into the immediacy of the Inexplicable, which
views reality directly as it is, rotating, these cycles generate thought constructs that restrict

consciousness by marking and essentially being, the passage of cognitive time. Entering in

this way, empowered by the most intense descent of the power of grace, into the
Inexplicable (anākhya) free of thought constructs, consciousness consumes the duality of
notions based on relative distinctions with great force in an instant. It just happens. The

recipient does nothing.

One of the three texts called Mahānayaprakāśa (Light of the Great Reality),
which expound the teachings of the Krama school in its final, most developed and

sophisticated form, explains that this happens in the Sāmbhava penetration of

consciousness, which leads spontaneously to No Means. Accordingly, it begins with a

eulogy of No Means and the most intense form of the descent of the power of grace. It

even goes so far as to identify the Krama teachings with it (MP (2 Tri) 1/1-23). The
dynamics of this process of realisation are focused around three primary aspects denoted
by terms that appear in the earlier sources, such as the ones from which these lines are
drawn. These are 1) pūjana – Worship as merger into the flow of the energies of
consciousness active at all levels. 2) saṅkrama – a direct Transfer of higher states of
consciousness from the teacher to the disciple. 3) kathana – the imparting of the oral
teachings which, by just the act of hearing them, generate that state of consciousness in the
disciple. The last two of these are found in the text Jayaratha quotes, as immediate ‘no

TANTRĀLOKA

meansʼ means to realisation. The first involves contemplation and immediate experience
of the cycles of energies, as the worship of the goddesses of the energies of the senses and
mind. One could place it, as Abhinava does, as commencing in the sphere of the

Empowered Means, in which thought constructs are purified, resulting in the direct No
Means of the Inexplicable beyond thought. The other two are direct and do not require any
mediation. These three terms encompass the entire process of realisation and so are
implicitly elaborated extensively in the texts, through the exposition of the entire

progression (krama) of the cycle of the energies of consciousness. Thus, according to the

Mahārtha branch of the Krama, which the three Mahānayaprakāśas expound, Talk
(kathana) and Transfer (saṁkrama) along with Worship (pūjana) are three aspects of the
direct transmission of enlightenment by the teacher to his disciple in an instant, without

any means, and so are aspects of No Means (anupāya). In one more common sense,

worship is Kaula ritual, which is characterized by the offering and consumption of Kula

substances, such as meat, wine and sexual fluids. In a higher sense, it is the mindful

consonance of all things with the cycles of cognitive consciousness which is Mahārtha –
the Great Reality taught in the Krama school, and is the knowledge of the Self and the
essential nature of everything. Talk is the reflective awareness of this reality the teacher

communicates to the disciple by his Talk, through the penetration of consciousness

(āveśa), which is Transfer. This is the realisation of the cycle of the Inexplicable
(anākhyacakra), that encompasses all the cycles of creation, persistence and destruction,
even as it transcends them. Neither a process nor not, it is the undefinable dynamism of

the plenitude of consciousness. Thus, the three operate together, flowing forth from the
teacher’s mouth as the true oral transmission which is immediate realisation of No Means.

Here are some references from two of the Mahānayaprakāśas. The author of the first of
them is not known. Śitikaṇṭha is the author of the second one. The former explains the

three and their interrelationship in the following passages:

‘The teacher’s tradition, the glory of which is never lost, and (which) consists of
Talk (kathana), Worship (pūjana) and Transfer (saṁkrama), is (hereby) revealed.’ (MP (2
Tri) 1/5) `. . . And so, (having) abandoned the torment of all the means (to realization), by

virtue of the freedom of consciousness, this (reality) in the form of reflective awareness

and by nature Talk, manifests (prakāśate literally: ‘shines’).’ (7/41) . . . ‘The tradition
(saṁpradāya), the nature of which is Talk, has reached here the supreme conclusion (and
perfection) (niṣṭhā). Doubt is removed by Talk, and Worship is perfect fullness. The
supreme perfection of oneness arises by Transfer, and so one should reflect here (on this)
with an attentive heart. (7/61-62) . . . ‘Thus this (reality) in the form of Worship, abides
as knowledge of Self. It is the flower of the tree of the teaching, beautiful with the
fragrance of consciousness. Then too, unobscured repose, which is Transfer, takes place
preceded by the devouring of time of all the activities (of the mind). Those for whom by
Talk that supreme repose arises, are not dependent on the cycles of creation, persistence
and destruction. (8/22-24) . . . ‘Transfer is the Wheel of the Inexplicable metaphorically
delineated (uparūpita) by the cycles of creation, persistence and withdrawal. Having
penetrated into the transcendental experience (prathā) of the energy (kalā) of that
processless process (akramakrama), it does not fall even slightly from the plane which is
the attainment of rest. By the appropriate processes of sound insight (yukti), it is perceived
right now. In this way, the Talk, (Worship and Transfer) of the teacher, Self and deity

abide perpetually in a state of dynamic union (lolībhāva) on all the planes of experience.’
(9/1-2).

Śitikaṇṭha explains in his Mahānayaprakāśa:

CHAPTER TWO
(This means is applied) ‘(just) once’. It is not (like) the experience of (the

practice of any other) means (to realisation) which is repeated again and again.

This is the meaning. Thus, he says: ‘the state (realized spontaneously just) after
(that) is said to be devoid of meansʼ. (On the contrary,) in (the sphere of the
practice of the) Individual and other (means), (only) instruction etc. that is
contemplated (and applied) more than once, bestows the attainment of the goal.
Thus, that is how it is explained there (in the chapters dealing with the means to

realisation). Here it is not like that and so it is No Means. Just as metaphorical

negation (paryudāsa) (such as when one says that) ‘the girl (is so thin that) she
has no belly (anudarā kanyā), because it is also in the sense of ‘little’, so (too

when we say ‘No Means’) the meaning is ‘litte means’ (alpopāya). The sense is

“Talk (kathana) that is (transferred) from mouth to mouth (in the oral tradition) is
the extending insight (prathā) that determines (the true nature) of the two, namely,
penetration (of consciousness) and worship, which is explained (and imparted)
(pratipādita) in the form of speech. (It is said that:) ‘the sequence of worship which, by its
very nature, is coloured by Talk and penetration, taught figuratively through the lineage
(of teachers), is the cause of the attainment of one’s own nature.” Talk is the (oral
transmission passed on) from mouth to mouth which, independent of all, determines (the

true nature of) worship and penetration; referred to metaphorically by the name

“Mahārtha’ (the Great Teaching), it reveals one’s own (true) nature. May it be clear (and

possessed by all), like a myrobalan fruit (held in one’s) hand. (p. 21-22) Talk, Worship
and Transfer are seen to give life to one another by such activity and in each particular

combination (of the three). (ibid p. 110) . . . If the teacher’s mouth is propense (and turned
towards one) right up to the attainment of the fruit without disagreement, (just) one time
by means of the Transfer, Worship and Talk that have been attained, then all three are
established together in the teacher’s mouth.” (ibid. p. 138)
' No Means (anupāya) is a ‘litle means’ (alpopāya). In other words, in the context of
practice, No Means does not mean that there is literally absolutely nothing to do and there
is no practice at all. There is a practice and something is done, but it is extremely little. As
we have noted, it may be just a glance from the teacher, one may just hear the explanation

of scripture, be suddenly transformed and liberated permanently in a moment when
engaged in serving the teacher, or by receiving the sacrificial food from a Yoginī and so
on. It happens once (sākṛt), in a moment. According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, advanced

adepts can enter Anupāya repeatedly in such moments of ‘no means' or ‘no practice’. But
it seems that Abhinava and the Tantras teach that it happens once and for all.
It is important to make this distinction, that if like ‘an old man basking in the sun’
one does absolutely nothing, one just enjoys spiritual elevation, then one would be advised

to give up any and every spiritual discipline and every other endeavour. They would be
totally pointless for a spiritual seeker. Abhinava was clearly not of this opinion. At the
same time, he did acknowledge that the more elevated the practice, the less the individual

has to do, whereas Lord Śiva is doing more and more through the activity of His grace.

Ultimately, the adept only has to open himself momentarily and everything else is done by

grace. Then he will truly ‘be here now’, once and forever. But this can only happen when

the seeker has attained almost perfect purity. Only such a person can ‘be here now’.
The term anupāya – ‘no means’ – is constructed from the word ‘upāya’” –

‘meansʼ, and the privative prefix ‘an-” – ‘without’, that serves to negate the existence of

that which the word to which it is prefixed denotes. There are two kinds of negation. One
is total or literal negation (prasajjapratiṣedha), such as when one says that a person knows

nothing at all about something (anabhijña). The other is metaphorical negation

(paryudāsapratiṣedha). The example given here is the expression anudārā, which literally

means ‘without a stomach’. When said of a young woman it means that she is very thin,

TANTRĀLOKA

that once one has attained the goal, what is the use of meditation (bhāvanā) and

the like that give rise to useless exertion (and fatigue)? As is said:

‘Śiva does not shine by means of the means (to realisation, rather) they
shine by His grace. “I am He Himself who, self-luminous and the nature of all
things, shine” – hearing these words from the teacher, there are some who are

instantly (sakṛt) convinced and, without repeated reflection (anusaṁdhāna), shine

and abide as (pure) consciousness.”

Surely (one may ask that) from the point of view of total negation

(prasajyapratiṣedha), the main meaning here (of the expression ‘No Means’) is

that there is (absolutely) no means (to realisation at all). Why is it not explained
(in this way)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

aā: fk- Ĩti 1| 3 1

anupāyam idaṁ tattvam ity upāyaṁ vinā kutaḥ |
svayaṁ tu teṣāṁ tat tādṛk kiṁ brũmaḥ kila tãn prati || 3 |

obviously not that she literally has no stomach. The expression ‘anupāya’ in the context of
practice is this type of negation. It does not mean a literal, total negation of all means,

simply that the means is so subtle and direct that it is as if there were no means at all.
However, in metaphysical terms, the first form of negation is meant. The first is from the
point of view of the adept, the second from the point of view of Anuttara. If the Absolute
– Anutṭṭara – were to be an object of realisation, it would not be absolute. It would be an
object as is any other, however great one could imagine it to be. Conversely, and
seemingly paradoxically, if there were no absolute consciousness, which is Existence
itself, no finite thing could exist. In the same way, all practice depends on the existence of
that one reality that cannot be attained by practice. Abhinava leads us through this kind of
reasoning not to persuade us that he is correct, but to inspire the emergence of the pure

reflective awareness which is recognition that Anuttara itself has of Its own nature, free of

all. means and defining objective characteristics. One can say that the first, metaphorical,
negation is a door that flashes open for an instant, that allows entry into Anuttara, which is
in Itself the second kind of negation. We will see that Abhinava’s arguments unfold in

both dimensions of negation at once, to establish their essential oneness realised in a flash

of recognition which takes place once and for ever.

Taken from Tantravaṭadhanikā (2/1-2). The first of these two verses is quoted in MM p.

153. There amī (‘these) is in place of te (‘they’). This work has been attributed to

Abhinavagupta, but Sanderson (2006b: 127, 2007: 379) argues that it is probably not by
him but by someone else with the same name. He thus echoes Mukundarāmaśāstrī, the
editor of the text, who says the same in a note of the edition (p. 5). Both argue that one
would expect Jayaratha to mention that Abhinava himself is the author of these verses, as
he normally does. Whether this is true or not, it was thought to be by Abhinava already
quite early on. Thus, Jayaratha quotes from the Tantravaṭadhanikā again below in TĀv ad
13/120cd-121ab, where he introduces the verses as those of the author of the Tantrāloka
(yad uktam anenaivānyatra).

CHAPTER TWO

(One may ask, how can one realise) that this reality is devoid of
means without (some) means? (Indeed, we agree;) what have we to say to

those for whom that (manifests as) such by itself (spontaneously)?' (3)

As it is taught that, for example, ‘this reality is devoid of means’, there

must necessarily be some means to know (that reality is such), otherwise how

could one establish that its characteristic is that it is other than (any) means (to
realisation)? This is stated (by asking): “((how can one realise) that this reality
is devoid of means) without (some) means?” Thus, there must necessarily be

considered to be some means, such as the teaching (that needs to be imparted just)

once (sakṛdupadeśa), otherwise there would be no experience (jñapti) of the

supreme reality, which is devoid of means.

Surely (one may ask,) there are also some (people) who are seen to have
aṭṭained the goal spontaneously (by themselves) by the power of their own
reflective awareness, so what (need) is there for (some) subtle (svalpa) means'
such as instruction (that needs to be imparted just) once? With this doubt in mind,

he says: “by itself (spontaneously) etc. ‘What have we to say?’ (to those for

whom) ‘that’ reality (rūpa), which is the Supreme Light (of consciousness) that
cannot be attained by any means (anupāya), (manifests spontaneously)? The point
is that scripture (with all its many means to realisation) is not fit to operate with

' One may understand, as Jayaratha does, that Abhinava is saying that he is not
addressing those few who realise Anuttara spontaneously without any means at all. One
may also understand that he is saying that he is justified in teaching that Anuttara is
Anupāya, because there are cases of people who do realise it spontaneously without

applying any means. Understanding him that way, one would translate this verse taking
the first line to be an objection and the second a response, as follows: ‘(One may object:
how can one realise) that this reality is devoid of means without (some) means? (To which
we reply that it is possible, for) what can we say about those for whom that (enlightened

state) is such spontaneously?” See following note.

' The experience of Anuttara is totally spontaneous. It happens without any instruction,

any kind of practice, or even the most powerful and direct initiation, otherwise it is No
Means only in the metaphorical sense. Indeed, there is only Anuttara, as it ever was and
will be, perfect in all respects, lacking nothing. As long as there is any explanation or

anything takes place, however subtle, however quick, the sense of the expression ‘No

Meansʼ can only be metaphorical, not literal. One could say that it is simply a matter of

‘letting go’ – doing nothing in the deepest sense. This leads (without anything taking
place) to the total negation of all means, which is the perennial, timeless experience of

Anuttara itself. The most elevated practitioner stands at this threshold. Flashes of

recognition will in one timeless moment cease, as time is consumed in the eternal

realisation Anuttara has of itself forever. For those who are not yet ready, who are not yet

free of the impurity of ignorance, their sense of being small and conditioned is an

underlying craving that underpins all that they do. They are constantly engaged in finding
ways to get what they want. Even if they desire liberation, ultimately nothing can be done

to achieve it. However, the vast majority of people have a great deal to do to reduce the
ignorance, Māyāand Karma that sullies consciousness. As that process progresses, partial

aspects of Lord Śiva manifest according to the way He chooses to reveal Himself. What
better thing to do, whilst waiting for that final moment of spontaneous insight and
revelation of the One reality without parts or aspects?

' Read svalpenopāyena for svalpenāvyutpannena.

TANTRĀLOKA

respect to that (reality). It is said that ‘the scriptures are like grass for one who
knows reality . . .’ (Again,) with the same intended (sense):

‘Some most excellent (adept) who wishes to cross over the ocean of

transmigration, who neither knows that (reality) very well nor is a fool, is

competent (to practice the teachings of) this scripture.”

It is said in this and other such (teachings) that a person who knows that

(reality) very well is not competent (to practice the teachings of) the scripture.
Thus, we who see from (just) a lower point of view (arvāgdarśin), even though

we have not perceived (that) reality, (our) divine eye being the scripture alone, say

something for those who have received a (partial) descent of the power (of grace)
and desire to ascend (to higher levels). (From that point of view,) it is said that
these (people) could never attain the goal (in any other way), apart from the
means to realisation such (as taught here). As (the author) will say (further ahead):

‘(And he should apply himself in this way because) the soul whose

consciousness is not pure cannot have grace without a means (to realisation).”

Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, then teach some subtle (alpa)

aspect of a means to (realisation), so that those who are to be instructed may attain
the goal easily. What is the use of many other tiring means? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

arīa tā ñaa: a f: fraākī fg: 11 + u
vyac caturdhoditaṁ rūpaṁ vijñānasya vibhor asau |
svabhāva eva mantavyaḥ sa hi nityodito vibhuḥ || 4 II
One should know that the four-fold form of consciousness (vijñāna)

mentioned previously" is the Ubiquitous Lord’s own nature, which is
perpetually manifest (nityodita) and omnipresent.” (4)

'“ Abhinava introduces his commentary to the Bhagavidgītā by making this very point. He

writes:

‘Indeed, it is not possible for one to be a fit vessel of the teaching who does not

possess even a speck of knowledge, nor one who has uprooted the entire expanse of

ignorance. One who is at either of these two extremes cannot be affected by (the teaching).
It is true that some say that also those who are totally ignorant and those who are
completely awake can be instructed, but my reply to them is that such people could, at the
most, be curious about some aspect of what is to be known. But with regard to the
teaching as a whole, they are completely free of doubt. This is the reason why it is said

that doubt consists of the combination of two factors — knowledge and ignorance; and the
teaching serves to eradicate doubt.”

' Below, 2/47cd.
See above, 1/241ab-245ab (1/241-245). One could also translate: ‘One should know that

form of consciousness (vijñāna) that has arisen four-fold . . .’

CHAPTER TWO
The form of consciousness has been said to be four-fold, as the (four)

kinds (of means to realization), No Means and the rest. One should know that that

is the Ubiquitous Supreme Lord’s freedom. Manifesting by virtue of His own

freedom as the wonderful variety of those who are to be instructed by (His)
association with increasing degrees of progressive contraction etc., in accord with
that, He also makes the wonderful variety of each means (to realization) manifest.

Surely (one may ask that this implies) that there is just one (reality) that manifests

in a wonderful (diverse) (vicitra) form. What is that (reality)? With this question
in mind, he says: ‘indeed, it is’ and so on. (It is) ‘perpetually manifest’ in the

sense that (even when manifesting as all things) it does not lose its previous nature
(as pure consciousness). Thus ‘it is the Ubiquitous Lord’ Who is all-pervasive.

This means that He is also present (anugata) when one perceives each (one of
His) wonderful varieties (of manifest forms).
Thus, he says:

UJTHTRĒTTGTT: TRaTTTHĀHHTJTĪ |

etāvadbhir asaṁkhyātaiḥ svabhāvair yat prakāśate |
ke ʻpy aṁśāṁśikayā tena viśanty anye niraṁśataḥ | 5 ||
He shines as these (four forms) and the countless natures (svabhāva)

(of all the means included in them), and so some penetrate (into Him) part
by part while others do so (directly fully), not part by part (niraṁśataḥ). (5)

He shines ‘as these’ four (forms of consciousness) and ‘the countless
natures (ṣvabhāva) (of all the means included in them) because of (the many)
secondary kinds (of means associated with) each (principal one). And ‘soʼ,
because He makes (Himself) manifest with a multiple nature (anekena
svabhāvena) (some penetrate into Him part by part or all at once).

Another possible translation could be: ‘One should regard one’s own nature (svabhāva)

to be the four-fold form of the Ubiquitous Lord’s consciousness (vijñāna) mentioned
previously (or ‘that has arisen’). Indeed, it is the perpetually manifest (nityodita)
Ubiquitous Lord (Himself).”

Another way to translate could be: ‘He shines as these (four forms) and the countless

natures (svabhāva) (of all living beings).” Then the reason for the diverse ways of entry,
directly or part by part, would be explained in two ways, namely, differences in the means
themselves and differences amongst those who apply them.

Cf. above, 1/140-141. The countless means to realisation belonging to the four forms of
consciousness, corresponding to the four categories of means to realisation made manifest
by Śiva, Who becomes them in accord with the countless natures of the innumerable
individual souls. In this case, individual souls penetrate into Him, and become one with
Him, bit by bit in accord with the aspects of Śiva’s states of liberating consciousness
which is revealed to them. Again, He may also manifest as the one reality which is the

essential nature of all things, as the Absolute in the sphere of No Means. Those for whom
that takes place by Śiva’s grace become one with Him completely in an instant.

TANTRĀLOKA

Here (in this context), there is not just this much variety. There is another
(form of variety) also. Thus, he says:

3aēzfṭq

tatrāpi cābhyupāyādisāpekṣānyatvayogataḥ |
upāyasyāpi no vāryā tadanyatvād vicitratā || 6 ||
There (in that case) also, whether the means is dependent on and is
associated with something else (to attain its goal), the variety of means also
cannot be prevented, because (the means inevitably) differs from that (which
is its goal). (6)

The word ‘also’ in the expression ‘the means also’ is not in its proper

prose order; thus, it should be explained to me that (it) ‘cannot be prevented,

because (the means inevitably) differs from that (which is its goal). This has been

discussed at length in the first chapter, and so there is no (need to) exert (oneself)
again.

Having, thus, talked about this by the way, he (goes on to talk) about the
main point.

iirai aāṣe |

ũḷrṁr 1 9 1
tatra ye nirmalātmāṉo bhairavīyāṁ svasaṁvidam |

nirupāyām upāsīnās tadvidhiḥ praṇigadyate || 7 ||

The procedure (to follow) there (in that case)) for those pure souls
who attend to their own Bhairavic consciousness will be explained. (7)
Those certain (few) who are pierced by the most intense descent of the

power (of grace) and, free of the impurity of thought, have penetrated into ‘their
own

Bhairavic

consciousness'

(ātmasaṁvii)

(which

is)

full

(and

all-

encompassing) and so is devoid of means, that is, does not depend (on any means
or anything else). ‘The procedure (to follow) for them, that is, the manner
(prakāra) (for them), which is the process of penetration into full (and all-

encompassing) consciousness, ‘will be explained’ as most excellent along with
reasoned argument (yukti). This is the meaning.
He says just that:

MS C reads: anupāyām.

CHAPTER TWO

Consciousness is Śelf-luminous, Practice Cannot be a Means to Realization

tatra tāvat kriyāyogo nābhyupāyatvam arhati |

(No practice) associated with action (kriyāyoga) can serve there as a
means (to realisation). (8ab)
A means (to an end operates) when the instrument (by which that goal is
aṭṭained) has issued forth, and so (a means) should be considered to be complete
(and not lack anything, if it is to serve as a means). None disagree about this. And
that is not so here (in this case). (Ritual) action and the like (are not independent,

complete means). They are established in consciousness because they are objects
of perception (and so depend on consciousness for their existence); thus, because
they cannot be completely successful (prasiddha) without the power of
consciousness, how can they become means there (to realize that same
consciousness)? Thus, on the contrary, consciousness is the means by which

action and the like manifest externally. This is a reasonable (and correct view).

For this reason, he says:

Jcgad IFTJTIÑ II ¢ 11

sa hi tasmãt samudbhũtaḥ pratyuta pravibhãvyate || 8 lI
On the contrary, one discerns clearly that that (association with
action) is born from that (reality free of all means). (8cd)
‘From that’ reality - of consciousness free of means.
Now, if one says that the action and the like (of the means to realisation)

does not do (anything) (kāraka), rather it imparts knowledge (jñāpaka), that too
does not make sense. Accordingly, he says:

JGRNTĪTT TIṬĒĪ Ṭ TTĪT: RH,_ |I 3 I1
Jayaratha quotes this line below ad 4/9 and ad 3/271cd-272ab (271), where he similarly
explains: ‘what is being said (in such statements) is that there is no means at all within

Bhairava consciousness that imparts knowledge or (induces to right) action, because it is a

priori (ādisiddhā) (and so always known) and ever active (nityodita) (and so does not
require activation).” One could well understand ‘action’ here to mean just ritual action, in

which case Abhinava is saying that rituals cannot serve as a means to realisation.
Although that is also meant, the sense of the term ‘action’ (kriyā) here applies to all forms
of spiritual discipline that require some action on the part of the practitioner, and so
includes Yoga. Abhinava is saying this in the context of No Means. As Jayaratha says, the
point is that practice involving action depends on the power of consciousness. If that is

absent, it is useless. Indeed, in the absence of consciousness no action is possible.

Consciousness gives rise to action, not action to consciousness. See above, 1/150-155.

TANTRĀLOKA

ḹñaptāv upāya eva ṣyād iti cej jñaptir ucyate |

prakāśatvaṁ svaprakāśe tac ca tatrānyataḥ katham || 9 ll
If (someone were to object that action) is the means to (the attainment

of) consciousness (jūapti), (our response would be) that consciousness is (in

fact nothing but) illumination, and that (luminosity shines) there within
(consciousness,) which is self-luminous; how can it arise from anything else
(apart from that same consciousness)? (9)

Here (in daily experience), an insentient entity is such that its nature is not
self-luminous (i.e. manifests by itself), the ligh that shines (and illumines it) is

not its own; rather, it is (the light) of another. Its light (is that of the perceiver, and

s0) is other (para) (than itself). However, what is sentient (that is, the perceiver,)
is self-luminous by nature and it shines with its own light, not by that of another.
The light (of the perceiver) is not that of another (perceiver). Rather, its light is its
own. If that too were to be illumined by another (perceiver), it would be

insentient, because its nature is not the light (of subjective consciousness).

Thus, he says: ‘and that (luminosity shines) there within
(consciousness,) which is self-luminous; how can it arise from anything else
(apart from that same consciousness)? (‘That’) is the luminosity (of
consciousness). Similarly, even if there is (something) else, is it self-luminous or
Alternatively: ‘If (someone were to maintain that if ṭhe way to realization is not through

action then surely) the means should be (founded) on consciousness (jāapti).’ Goodall

(1998: xlī n. 96) notes that this objection is based on a reference drawn from the
Dikṣottara.
Gnoli: ‘Consciousness is luminosity and so cannot, as such, illumine what is already
self-luminous, or then it would not be such, but (rather) illumined by another.” Literally:
‘How can the luminosity in what is self-luminous (originate) from another?”

Read svātmano na prakāśaḥ prakāśate for svātmano na prakāśate. Also, two lines

further ahead, read svātmana eva prakāśaḥ prakāśate for svātmana eva prakāśate.
Pratyabhijñā is understood by these Kashmiri Śaiva exegetes to be the systematic
philosophical (or one could say theological) formulation of the nondualist idealism

underlying all the schools of nondualist Kashmiri Śaiviṣm, namely, Spanda, Krama and

Trika Kula. The root insight that it expounds and justifies by reasoned argument is that

Deity is the sole reality. Utpaladeva refers to Deity, the Supremely Desired - Parameṣṭhin
or Supreme Lord - Parameśvara – as Śiva, or with other synonyms such as Maheśvara.
Abhinava does 5so also, but prefers Bhairava, who is the form of Śiva of the Krama and

Trika Kula. Moreover, he identifies him with Anuttara. Deity is pure consciousness, which
is Light. This is not just a metaphor or a manner of speaking. All that exists is just the
Light of consciousness ~ the Deity ~ that shines in infinite ways. This Light differs
radically from physical light because it has ‘power’ — śakti. This power has two aspects,

which although essentially the same, need to be distinguished in order to understand what

it is. One aspect of the power of the Light is its capacity to do and be everything without

that compromising its oneness. This is called its freedom (svātantrya). It is perfectly free
to do everything because it is the sole reality and so does not depend on anything else. It is
free from dependence on anything else and s0, perpetually at rest within itself, it is free to

do and be everything. The other aspect of the power of the Light is its self-reflective
awareness. Whatever exists, vast or tiny, in the universe, or the pure transcendental Light
itself, is known to be such by the Light itself. The two aspects explain how all things are

CHAPTER TWO

is it otherwise (anyathā)? f it were to be self-luminous, then one should say that it
is of the same nature as the first one (i.e. the self-luminous consciousness). Of

what use would that be? If it were to be otherwise, (the undesired) consequence

would be that that also is insentient. (Moreover,) because it shines in that way, in

order to illumine it, it would require another perceiver (and that another and that
too another and so on), which would entail an infinite regress. Thus, as nothing
would be of the nature of the light (of consciousness), nothing at all would

manifest and so all this (universe) would be (as if) blind.

aṣ they are – each ‘shining according to its own specific nature – and how it is that they
are known to be such.
We have just said that the freedom and reflective awareness of the Light is its
power to be all things and to know itself as such. These fall into three basic categories —
perceivers, perceptions and their objects. Within the Light these are the same. Śiva (the
perceiver by His self-awareness) knows Himself to be all things and more. This is the
‘plenitude’ or all-encompassing ‘fullness’ (pārṇatā) of the Light, which is free of all
concepts or notions (nirvikalpa) that it is any one thing or another. Outside the Light, as it
were, is the domain of thought constructs (vikalpa), in which the universe of perceivers
and their objects are each conceived to be distinct from one another. The unique power of
consciousness thus amounts to externalizing what is contained within it and knowing it as
outside itself by generating thought constructs. To do this the Light freely confines itself,
in varying degrees, to the subjective polarity (i.e. ourselves as perceivers), which illumines

the objective one (i.e. all that we perceive). This is our common daily experience, which

will continue as long as we are confined to the fettered state of transmigratory existence
(saṁṣāra) in which we don’t recognize that we are essentially consciousness, not the body
or mind, which are objective, and that consciousness, unspecified by objectivity is the one
reality. In the meantime, the Light of consciousness shines, self-luminous in the perceiver,
as the very life of his sentience. Radiating out through the mind and senses, it illumines
the outer object which, in relation to the perceiver, is insentient. The sentient aspect – the
perceiver ~ knows himself through the freedom of his self-awareness independently as ‘’,
and so illumines himself. The insentient aspect is not self-luminous in this way. It depends

on another ~ that is the perceiver – to ‘shine’, that is, to appear and be known. The

movement out from the subject to the object generates the duality of the concepts based on
reḹative distinctions. Once the insentient object is known, reflective awareness again rests
in the perceiver, who is the Light of consciousness reflecting on its own nature as ‘ . All-

encompassing Anuttara, that is, the pure Light of consciousness (prakāśamātra), is both

polarities, and so, beyond subject and object, it is neither. It knows and is itself by virtue

of its very nature, which is self-luminous Light. Thus, it is independent and free and can

never be known by any means of knowledge or means to realisation. It knows itself
directly as itself, not as something else. In this sense it is the supreme perceiver although,

and because, it is not related to an object. Cf. ĪP 1/5/11 and commentaries.

" If something illumines itself, that amounts to saying that there are two lights. The ‘first’

light is the one that is illumined by the ‘second’ light which illumines. There is no reason
why the ‘first’ light should not also be illuminating. So the ‘second’ one would serve no

purpose.

‘ Read itprakāśatvāt for iti prakāśatvāt.

Outer objectivity is illumined by another order of reality, that is, the perceiving

subjectivity, which is self-luminous. This is because it is consciousness, which is sentient.
If it were not self-luminous, it would be insentient. Moreover, if consciousness were to be
illumined by another reality, that would again require something else to illuminate it and
s0 on, leading to an infinite regress. Thus, nothing would shine within consciousness and
so all things would be as if blind.

TANTRĀLOKA

He says that:

frārā zaaṁāratk
] aṭa
3ṝtkfr.t|

īzāī ṬaT̄á TTIRTHTYĀAṀT | q0 ||
saṁvitattvaṁ syaprakāśam ity asmin kiṅ nu yuktibhiḥ |

tadabhāve bhaved viśvaṁ jaḍatvād aprakāśyakam || 10 ||
What use are (many) arguments (to establish that) the priṇciple of

consciousness is self-luminous? If it were not to exist (and be such),

everything (would be) unconscious and so could not be made manifest. (10)

In his Mahārthamañjari, Maheśvarānanda also argues that the light of
consciousness is self-luminous. There we read: ‘Here in the extremely extensive unfolding
of the journey of (the daily) world, many entities exist, such as the earth and its support,

and behave (variously). Moreover, it is apparent that the manner of their behaviour

is

distinctive (they do not mix up). The wise should inquire as to what the cause
there (for
this) could be. Nothing else is perceived (to exist) as being separate from consciousn
ess.

In the doubt that that (consciousness could be) denied (to exist), the earth would not be the
earth in its own nature, nor would that which is not the earth. Moreover, how could it
be
separate from that which sustains it? Who would have the skill to curse the possibility that
their natures mutually negate one each other? Only consciousness is capable of illumining
the object, such as the earth, without it mixing (with other objects,) both universall
y and

specifically. (Now,) if that (consciousness) were to be, like an object, illumined

by

(something else,) the light would not be of that nature, for it would not be different
(from
anything) associated with insentience. If consciousness were to be the object
of
illumination of something else, would (its) condition as consciousness be lost or not?
If
not, that other (supposed consciousness) due to which this one is illumiṇed
would be
useless. If it were to be lost, what is the form of this (consciousness)? (You may say)
that
itis illumined by that (other consciousness). (However,) if one were to examine where
the
light of that other (consciousness comes from and conclude) that the other (gets
its light
from) another, then it is clear that the consequence would be an infinite regress. Thus,
the

self-luminosity of that (consciousness) is proved by its very nature alone. (Now,) even

though the light (of consciousness) is, in the aforestated manner, its own light, as its nature
is just pure Being alone, like the object, it would not abandon the state of insentienc
e if,
even though it is its own light, it does not possess some kind of agency. Otherwise (if
this
were not s0), like (any common) entity it would not be its nature to illumine (others).

Therefore, one must accept, even unwillingly, that the characteristic of its agency is

the

repose within itself that the wise know to be ‘I-ness’, which is the ultimate foundatio
n of
objectivity. (Again,) the foundation of the all-pervasive lord (vibhu) is said to be
his
subjectivity (ahaṁbhāva). And this itself is (His) reflective awareness, which is
the

primary sovereignty of the Lord. Thus, God is free and abides as He who endures

everything. MM p. 29-30
Lit. ‘if that were not to exist’.
Read aprakāśyakam for aprakāśakam – literally: “(could not be) an object of
illumination’. Cf. ĪP 1/1/2 quoted above in note 1,555 ad 1/55. No Means is

essentially

‘recognition’ of the Light of consciousness by the discovery of its power of freedom and

reflective awareness. Just as Recognition — Pratyabhijñā

-- is the metaphysical foundation

of Trika, itis also its ultimate goal and supreme ‘practice’, that is, the direct recognition
of
the Light of consciousness as all things and our true nature directly in a flash, unmediate
d

CHAPTER TWO
‘What use are (many) arguments?” He says that no purpose at all is

served by many arguments. There is only one argument, which is the most

excellent of all, namely, if consciousness were not to be self-luminous, nothing at
all would manifest.
(Well then) surely (one may ask,) if no outer action etc. can do anything
here (in this case), then could not the teacher’s knowledge and the like serve as a
means? (In response to) this doubt, he says:

qṬaTJITĪ
āTaī: TRTTT] āIT JhTT |
Tdsī-̄aī TT’aāTGT |I 22 |1
yāvān upāyo bāhyaḥ ṣyād āntaro vāpi kaścana |
sa saṛvas tanmukhaprekṣī tatropāyatvabhāk katham || 1

AII means (to realisation) whatsoever, whether external or internal,
depend on that (consciousness), and so how can they serve as a means to it?

‘Whatsoever’ is taught by the many scriptures, ‘all (means), ‘whether

external or internal depend on that’. The meaning is that (their) success
(siddhi) depends on consciousness. How can that which depends on something to

be successful become a means (to attain it)? This is the point.
Thus, he says:

by any means. Accordingly, in this chapter Abhinava makes systematic use of such
arguments worked out in detail by the Pratyabhi

This verse is quoted in MM (p. 153), which is introduced as follows: atha ca sarvo ‘yam

upāyaprapañcas
|tattatparāmarśakakṣyāviśeṣārurukṣujanāpekṣayā
paryālocitaḥ

pāryantikyāṁ .punar ārūḍhajanādhirūḍhāyāṁ .sṣvasvabhāvaikapāriśeṣyalakṣaṇāyām
avasthāyām upāyatvam eva paryavasyati | tadvyyatireke punar upāyasphurattāyā
evāsaṁbhavāt | yad uktaṁ śrītantrāloke – TĀ 2/11 iti | śrītantravaṭadhānikāyāṁ ca upāyair na śivo bhāti bhānty amī tatprasādataḥ |
sa eyāhaṁ svaprakāśo bhāse viśvasvarūpakaḥ ||
‘Now, moreover, all this expanse of means (to realisation) has been examined in

relation to (a person’s) desire to ascend to one or other particular domain of reflective
awareness. Its condition as a means to realisation culminates in the state which is the
ultimate (most elevated state) of those people who have mounted (to that level), which

amounts to just their own essential nature alone. This is because it is impossible that the

radiant pulse of a means (to realisation could exist if it were to be anything) apart from
that. Aṣ is said in the Tantrāloka (he now quotes 2/11) and so too in the venerable
Tantravaṭadhānikā: ʻŚiva does not shine by (any) means to realisation, they shine by His
grace. He indeed am 1, self-illumiṉating Light, that when it shines is all things.”

No Means in the highest sense is Anuttara, the Absolute, itself. From that perspective,

nothing has ever taken place — whether creation, destruction, bondage or liberation. This is
total absence of practice, as there is none who practices, no goal and no way (cf. below,
2/24ab-26ab (2/24-26)). This is No Means as total negation. A slightly lower perspective,

which lasts just a timeless moment for those blessed with the most intense form of the
power of grace, is a kind of ‘letting go’ in which nothing is abandoned and nothing is

adopted. It is finally giving up all means to know and attain it, and just taking ultimate,

eternal rest in the recognition of Anuttara, which cannot be attained by any means.

TANTRĀLOKA

sãT

fāfē] xzā q 1

fk ām g
āTgtn-t
a āaava 1| 23 1|
tyajāvadhānāni nanu kva nāma
dhatse ʻvadhānaṁ vicinu svayaṁ tat |
pūrṇe ʻvadhānaṁ na hi nāma yuktaṁ

nāpūrṇam abhyeti ca satyabhāvam || 12 I
“Abandon attention (avadhāna) Where are you applying (your)

attention? (Try to) discern that for yourself: attention to that which is full

Quoted in MM p. 162, where avadhānān replaces avadhānaṁ, cinuhi replaces vicinu

and satyabhāvaḥ replaces satyabhāvam. There we read concerning this verse translated
here according to its variant readings:
‘And so, the overall intended meaning is that the state of fearlessness yogis
possess is their essential nature. This is because ultimately the notions of ‘paying

aṭṭention’ or ‘being inattentive’ to one’s own Self in (this) world, which is sanctified by
the oneness with the reflective awareness of the light of the Supreme Lord that is pouring
forth as every form, serves no purpose. That is said in the venerable Tantrāloka:

Abandon (all forms of) attention (avadhāna)! Where are you applying (your)

attention? (Try to) discem that for yourself: attention to that which is full (and perfect)
makes no sense, nor can that which has authentic existence not become completely full
(and perfect).

Moreover, who else teaches whom in this way? Thus, it is indicated that all this
way of teaching from the point of view of reality (ultimately) plunges into a state of
falsity. Thus, because the Supreme Lord who is one’s own Self is full (and perfect), it is

unreasonable to conceive that there are modalities in this way, and so both (attention and

distraction) are useless. It is illogical (to maintain) that there is a division consisting of
‘inner” and ‘outer’. The consequence of that (division), namely that an entity that comes
(out) and goes (in), is not real in accord with the teaching: ‘as everything is Śiva
(sśivamaya), having moved (from one place) where will it g0? (SVT 4/313cd) Thus, one

cannot but accept that those countercorrelated conditions are secondary ascriptions. Now,
according to the sound principle (nyāya) that the individual soul is the most excellent

culminating point, one cannot avoid (accepting) that that which is the meaning (artha) of

the word ‘you’, (existing) independently of that which is the reality (artha) ‘T, is as if
unreal. (As the condition) of thought is that in some circumstances it is true and in others

it is negated, it itself does not exist, and so the condition devoid of thought which is

(simply) its negation is not experienced as being valid. One can understand by oneself that
(the existence of) an entity which is an ordinance (but its) nature is that it does not impel,

what is in the act of taking place of the sort, “his is such in this way”, is here (in this
circumstance) logically untenable.' MM p. 162-163.
Maheśvarānanda quotes this verse (in MM p. 162-3), saying quite clearly that it is from
the Tantrāloka. He introduces it as follows:

sarvākārollasatpārameśvaraprakāśaparāmarśaikātmyapāvane prapañce

praty avadhānānavadhānāder vikalpakalpanāprakārasya paryantato niṣprayojanatvāt |

tad uktaṁ śr̥ītantrāloke – TĀ 2/2 || iti

CHAPTER TWO

(and perfect) makes no sense nor can that which is not full (and perfect) ever

aṭṭain to authentic existence. (12)

kiñca, evam upadiśati kasya ko ʻanya ity anena sarvo ‘yaṃ upadeśaprakāras
tattvadr̥ṣṭāv atāttvikīṁ bhuvam avagāhata ity āsūtryate | yataḥ svātmaparameśvarasya
pūrṇatvopapattyā prakārakalpanānupapatter yathā tathety anayor vaiyarthyam |
‘The modality (of consciousness) in which thought constructs are conceived, with

atṭention or without it etc. with respect to one’s own nature, in this ongoing daily life
(prapañca), holy by virtue of the oneness of the reflective awareness of the Light of the
Supreme Lord Who is pouring forth as all forms, is ultimately without purpose. That is

said in the venerable Tantrāloka (2/12).
Moreover, who else is teaching whom in this way? Thus, it is (thereby) indicated
that all this manner of teaching, from the point of view of (ultimate) reality, plunges into

the plane that is not (ultimately) real. For because the Supreme Lord, who is one’s Self, is
established for good reason to be full (and complete), and conceiving manners (in which
to attain Him) is not reasonably sound, both are without purpose.

bāhyābhyantarātmano vibhāgasyānupapattyā tannibandhanasya – (p. 163)
iti

calitvā yāsyate kutra sarva Śivamayaṁ yataḥ |
nītyā gamāgamarūpasyārthasyāvāstavatvāt tatpratiyoginoḥ

sthānāsanayor

sthānāsthānayor) aupacārikatvam_avipratipannam | puruṣaś cottamāvadhi iti nyāyād
aham arthavyatirekeṇa yuṣmacchabdārthasyāsatkalpatvaṁ cāparihāryam | kvacit sataḥ
kvacin niṣedhaḥ iti sthityā cintāyā evābhāvāt tanniṣedharūpanaiścintyaṁ ca na

prāmāṇyam anubhavati

evam dāssv ety āder apravṛttapravartanātmano
vidhirūpaṣyārthasyātrāsaṅṅṅgatatvam ity ādi svayam ūhyam || 64 1|

As the division between ‘outer’ and ‘inner’ is not logically tenable, that which is
associated with it, that is, (some) entity that comes and goes, and so too its correlates, (that
is) location and where it is not located, are not actually real, in accord with the teaching
‘everything is made of Śiva, and so, having moved, where will it go? Thus (this

distinction of location and motion etc.) is a matter of secondary ascription which is not
ascertained (and known as absolutely existent). According to the dictum that ‘the first
person is the culmination (of the second and third person)ʼ, it is logically inevitable that
the reality (indicated by) the second person independently of the reality of the ‘I’ (of the
first person) is as if unreal. For the situation (then would be), in some circumstance,
existence, and in another, negation; this being s0, there is no thought, and so one does not
experience the validity of that thought-free condition which is its negation. In this way,
one can infer for oneself the (logical incoherence) here of the reality which is injunction
that impels (to action) what has not been impelled, such as ‘in this way (it moves) quickly”
or the like.”

Ṭhe word ‘avadhāna’ literally means ‘attention’, ‘attentiveness’ or ‘intentnessʼ. Swami
Lakṣhmanṇjoo translates it as ‘awarenessʼ, Gnoli as ‘application’ (i.e. to apply oneself to
something). It also connotes paying attention in the sense of being careful, that is,
aṭṭending to something carefully. Jayaratha defines it as ‘concentration’ (ekāgrya). The
object of concentration to which one attends, in this case to attain the ultimate state of
realisation, would be one’s Self as the perceiver. That practice, at the highest level free of
thought constructs, is the Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya), in which all that operates is pure
subjective reflective awareness. Even that must be abandoned to participate in the
perfection and plenitude of Anuttara beyond all means.

! This verse is also found in MVV 2/117. There are no variants. Before this verse comes
the following statement:

TANTRĀLOKA

One should pay attention here (in this world spontaneously) by oneself

(svayam) (to the nature of Anuttara) as that which is being taught. One should
reflect: “(should one apply one’s attention) to that reality which is full (and
perfect) or to (one) that is not?” There (in that case), attention to a reality which is
full (and perfect) makes no sense (as there is nothing more that can be attained
thereby). Attention is a state of concentration (ekāgrya) which is grounded in a
specific object of attention. Thus, it is predominantly based on duality and (so, as
the goal is oneness,) it is incapable of obtaining any result (of the sort).
Therefore, where even attention is not a means (to realization), because it

is afflicted (by the defects of being) incapable (of leading to the goal) and is
(anyway) useless, so what to say concerning meditation (bhāvanā) etc., which are
vitalized by it? Accordingly, he says:

ATaT: ṀK TṬ |

|| 23 11
tenāvadhānaprāṇasya bhāvanādeḥ pare pathi |
bhairavīye kathaṅkāraṁ bhavet sākṣādupāyatā || 13 |I
Thus, how can meditation (bhāvanā) and the like, the very life of
which is attention (avadhāna), serve as a direct means on Bhairava’s supreme
path? (13)

‘Bhairava’s (supreme path) is full (perfect and lacks nothing).
(Well then,) what is said about those who, on the contrary, proceed (along

the path) to the supreme reality which is No Means by this means also? Thus, he

says:

Ti

s̄. || ṇ;ś ||

ye ʻpi sākṣādupāyena tadrūpaṁ praviviñcate |

nūnaṁ te sūryasaṅvittyai khadyotādhitsavo jaḍāḥ || 14 1|
““Only lack of discrimination (aviveka) is here the supreme (form of)

transmigratory existence!” These are (just) vain words! Only the lack discrimination is the
supreme ladder to the attainment of the supreme good!”

Cf. the opening verse of the Anuttarāṣṭakastotra, which is attributed to

Abhinavagupta: ‘Here there is no transfer (of illuminating grace from the teacher)
(saṁkrāma), no creative contemplation (bhāvanā), no (immediate realization) by means of
speech (kathāyukti), no reflection (carcā), no visualization (dhyāna), no sustained
concentration (dhāraṇā), no exertion to practice the repetition of Mantra. “How then, pray

tell, is that ultimate truth well ascertained?”' Now listen to that (teaching as it truly is): Be
neither a renouncer, nor one who accepts – Enjoy (how) everything is bliss, just as you
are!” Cf. also the second verse which is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/333 (331).

CHAPTER TWO

Even those who (seek to) discern that reality with the direct means
are indeed fools who make use of a firefly to perceive the sun. (14)
That is said (in the Saṁvitprakāśa where we read):

‘When Your true nature is directly visible and (You) abide clearly
apparent in all respects, those who apply means (to realization) certainly do not

know You.”

(Now) he says that there is another reason also here (for this).

Everything and AII Means Are the Light of Consciousness

fk amaf== araṁī-kārzāiām|

faēã Ẽrĩs a1g. 1| 2.4 1
kiṁ ca yāvad idaṁ bāhyam āntaropāyasaṁmatam )
tatprakāśātmatāmātraṁ Śivasyaiva nijaṁ vapuḥ || 15 ||
Moreover, the (entire) extent of this external (means to realisation)

and that which is considered to be an inner means, is (actually) just the
Light (of consciousness) alone which is Śiva’s own body. (15)

(Now,) is anything that is here considered to be a means (to realization)
manifest (lit. ‘shines’) or not? If (the means to realization) were not manifest (lit.
‘shine’), it would have no (form or) nature (ripa) at all. So how can it serve as a
means (to realization)? If it does manifest (lit. ‘shine’), then (its) condition is that

of Śiva Himself, Whose nature is Light. It is not logical for there to be anything

else separate from that. So what means (to realization) can it be? As the means, it

should be considered to be separate from the goal, and that does not make sense
here (in this context). So what is the reality of the state (in which) the means and

the goal (are distinguished and related to one another) (upāyopeyabhāva)?

The ‘direct means' is Śāmbhavopāya. See above, TĀv 1/142: sākṣādupāyena iti
śāmbhavena.

Maheśvarānanda quotes this verse in his MM, where he writes:

‘According to the scriptures outside (our own): ‘Knowledge of deity is one thing
and knowledge of scripture is another. That tranquil plane (of existence) is one thing and
what people see is another. This being so, it is not possible for (that to be) a direct means
to the reflective awareness of one’s own Self. As it is (said) in the venerable Tantrāloka . .
. And as it is (said) in the venerable Kulakamala:

‘Those who attend to a path that is devoid of the radiant energy of Śakti make
fire offerings with boiled rice (sthālī) into a hearth without fire.’”” MM p. 6-7.

SP 1/13, also quoted above ad 1/145, and by Śivopādhyāya ad VBH 124 (122).

Abhinava is referring to Śāmbhavopāya again here.
Verses 15 to 28 are quoted in the Īśvarapratyabhijñākaumuḍī. The reading there and in
MSs K, Ch, J, and Jh is parar (‘supreme’) for nijaṁ (‘own).

TANTRĀLOKA

(Now) he says that this is not so just in the case of meditation and the like,

that are considered in this way to be means to realisation, rather (itis so because)

the same applies to other things also.

TJfSTTTTTZTT TāTIGTĪ] hĪIST 1| 2ē |1

3RIITATĪT: RATHṀTY: hTG fṜ &; 11| 2.9 1||
nīlaṁ pītaṁ sukham iti prakāśaḥ kevalaḥ śivaḥ |

amuṣmin paramādvaite prakāśātmani ko ʻparaḥ | 16 ||
upāyopeyabhāvaḥ syāt prakāśaḥ kevalaṁ hi saḥ |

‘Blue’ and ‘yellow’, ‘pleasure’ and ‘pain’ʼ, (indeed all that

manifests,) is only the light (of consciousness, which is) Śiva. Within this
supreme nonduality, which is the Light (of consciousness), what else (could
be) there? (Even the very) relationship between the means and the goal

(upāyopeyabhāva) is only the Light itself. (16-17ab) (16-17cd)

Meditation (bhāvanā) and the like, even though very well known to be

means to realization, have been rejected, so that there may not be even the

slightest possibility of there being anything else at all (apart from the one reality).
He has said in this way: “what else (could be) there?” where there could be even

a possibility of (something serving as) a means (to realization)?

Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, how can one deny (the existence
of) this well-known daily commerce of duality (dvaitavyavahāra) (that prevails)
everywhere? With this doubt in mind, he says:

WITT TTĀR: |

idaṁ dvaitam ayaṁ bheda idam advaitam ity api || 17 II

prakāśavapur evāyaṁ bhāsate parameśvaraḥ |

’ Read with the ĪPKau fl. 14b sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ for sukham iti and with MSs C, Ch, J, Jh,
and N kevalaṁ for kevalaḥ.

“ The state in which the means and the goal are distinguished is one in which the creative

freedom of the reflective awareness of consciousness operates. As the pure light of
consciousness alone (prakāśamātra), the ultimate reality of Anuttara is beyond that. If one
seeks to discern something there - even the oneness and perfection or plenitude (pārṇatā)
of consciousness, this is realised by participating in the reflective awareness Anuttara has
of itself. Then we have entered the highest sphere of the Divine Means, indeed of all
means (cf. below 3/1). There may be countless differences in the forms of its reflective
awareness, subjective and objective, and as the means of realisation. Nonetheless, all that
exists is the Light of consciousness – ‘what else could there be?° There is only the Light of

consciousness in the supreme state of No Means.

CHAPTER TWO
(The notions) ‘this is dualityʼ, ‘this is difference’, and even ‘this is

nondualityʼ also (are nothing but) the Supreme Lord, whose body is Light
and shines (this way). (17cd-18ab) (18)

The intended sense is that the daily commerce of duality also manifests

(lit. ʻshines’), and so its essential nature is the Light (of consciousness) itself. In

order to highlight that this is the view of many philosophers (vādin), he declares
again: ‘ṭhis is difference’ (after having having said ‘this is duality°). Juṣṭ as
when nonduality manifests, it is the one Supreme Lord alone Who is the Light (of
consciousness) that manifests, this is so also when duality manifests. In order to
stress (the nature of) the reality, which is the subject of the metaphor, he adds:

‘this is nonduality alsoʼ, which is (the view) accepted (here).

Surely (one may ask,) agreed that the nature of outer reality (artha) is the

Light (of consciousness) because it manifests (lit. ‘shines’) (and so is a single
reality). But how has this state of mutual distinction (between things)' when (the
condition) of that (Light is one of) difference (bheda) come about? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

raa sr̥āī ga ga - īaifafīṝrf=: 11 2¢ 111
keazeeeIHṈEAF-NR-eEĀHI
asyāṁ bhūmau sukhaṁ duḥhkhaṁ bandho mokṣaś citir jaḍaḥ || 18 I|

ghaṭakumbhavad ekārthāḥ śabdās te ‘py ekam eva ca |

On this plane ‘pleasure’ and ‘pain’, ‘bondage’ and ‘liberation’,

‘sentience’ and ‘insentience’ are synonymous words, as are ‘vase’ and ‘jar,
and these (things) also are just the one (reality). (18cd-19ab) (19)

‘On this plane’ means on the plane of supreme nondual (reality)

(paramādvaya). (All these words) are ‘synonymousʼ. The one Light is the

AIl views of reality belong to one or other of three categories. There are some
philosophies, like the Śārṅkhya and Siddhānta Śaiviṣṇm, which maintain that there is more

than one ontic reality. They are dualist. There are others, like Kashmiri Śaivism, that

maintain that there is only one reality. They are nondualist. A third possible view is that
there are two or more ontic realities, but although they can be separately distinguished,
they are essentially, that is, invariably, related to one another. These philosophies are

qualified dualisms, that can be said to be dualist-cum-nondualist. Abhinava is saying here
that these three views are actually aspects of the ‘body of Śiva’, that is, His variously

manifest and conceived outer nature, which appears in all three modalities.

These views are ‘metaphors’. The Light is all that exists and shines by itself, beyond all
predication. Whatever may be said of it is in the domain of verbal predication, and so is
inevitably metaphorical. But the object of all these metaphors is always this same nondual

reality.
Emend anyonyavi to anyonyatvaṁ.

The ĪPKau reads bandhamokṣau for bandho mokṣaś and ekatvāc chahdās for ekārthāḥ

śabdās. This verse is quoted in the MM p. 165.

TANTRĀLOKA

meaning (artha), that is, the (reality ~ artha) denoted by these (words). If
pleasure and pain etc. were to have some fixed nature of their own as separate
from the Light, only then would this be possible (namely that each word would
denote a completely different entity (artha) which would be the specific meaning
(artha) of that word). This is the point Thus it is said by others (i.e.
Somānanda):

‘The jar knows me as my own nature and I know (myself) as being the

jar’s own nature.

There is a play on words here which cannot fully be translated. The word ‘artha’ means
both ‘meaning’ and ‘thing’. The expression ‘śabdārtha’ can thus mean both ‘the meaning
(artha) of a word (śabda) and ‘the thing (artha) denoted by a word’. Buddhist logicians

have extensively exploited the ambiguity of this and similar expressions as reflecting the
nature of the reality of the entities denoted by words. They maintain that the presumed
outer world consisting of ‘things” exists only as ‘meanings’ of words. The outer world, in
other words, is just a verbal construct, as is a dream or a figment of the imagination. The
domain of thought is the domain of language, which is that of the daily commerce of life
(vyavahāra) lived on the mistaken presumption that an independent outer world exists as
do the seemingly countless perceivers. The view here, although no less idealist, is
radically different. The ‘things° (artha) which are the ‘meanings’ (artha) of words do
exist. Indeed, they are reality (artha) itself, which is the Light of consciousness that shines
as every ‘thing’ which is the ‘meaning’ of the word that denotes it. Moreover, just as all

‘meaningsʼ are ultimately the same ‘reality’, all words are ultimately the one Word, For
this to be possible, word and meaning must exist beyond the veil of thought constructs.
Language is not exhausted in thought and verbal expression, as the Buddhists maintain
who confine it to its illusory world. Thus, according to the Pratyabhijñā, the pure
consciousness beyond the veil of thought resonates, as it were, with the power of its
reflective awareness, which is the highest form of Speech wherein all words and their
meanings are one.
Different words can, of course, denote different things. But their difference is purely in
terms of their manifest form. Their essential nature, as manifestations of consciousness, is
the same. This idea is expressed here through the variety of meanings of the word ‘artha’.
The meaning ofa word is its ‘artha’, which is a thing – ‘artha’. Again, the word ‘artha’

also means ‘reality’. A well-known example of this usage is the word ‘paramārtha’,
which literally means ‘supreme reality’, but is also translated as ‘ultimate reality. This is
contrasted with vyavahārikārtha – ‘the (phenomenal) reality of the (daily) commerce (of

life)’. In all these senses, the Light of consciousness is the ‘meaning’ and ‘thing’ denoted
by words as well as their ‘reality’, that is, ultimate nature. Abhinava is also implicitly
teaching that the practical consequence of this essential oneness is that as all things are
consciousness; anything and everything can serve as a means to realisation that this is the

essential nature of everything, be it the perceivers, what they perceive, or the means by
which they perceive it.

ŚDr 5/105cd. If every single thing is essentially pure Śiva consciousness, then every

single thing should be sentient. Indeed, it should possess the same ommiscient,
omnipresent consciousness. Moreover, the nature of every single thing is the same,
namely, one universal and transcendental reality, which is both everything and yet beyond
every single thing. But if that is true, then all things should be sentient, indeed omniscient,
as is Siva consciousness, which everyone can say is “who I am”. Somānanda does not shy
away from this conclusion. On the contrary, in the following lines he declares what one
could call the charter of the Doctrine of Supreme Nondualism, which proclaims the
universal holistic nature of every single thing.

CHAPTER TWO

Surely (one may ask,) if this is so, would there not also be duality in
relation to the words that denote (these objects)? (In response to this question,) he
says: ʻand these (words) also are just the one (reality)’. (They are) ‘one’
because. (they are all) objects of awareness, and

(saṁvedanay itself.

so (are all) awareness

Surely (one may ask,) if ‘blue’ and ‘pleasure’ etc. are the Light (of

consciousness) itself because they manifest (lit. ‘shine’), then in what form does

that (Light) shine (in itself)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

GRT] āIṬHĪĪN: T¥Ī ĪTIḤ JRĒTYITT] ÁI 3 II
JRRTYITT]
GTHHTAT TGGaTaā ĪṬṬāT |

TJ̄RTTTT āqāT ā TSAT || ṜoII

prakāśe py aprakāśāṁśaḥ kathaṁ nāma prakāśatām || 19 ||
prakāśamāne tasmin vā taddvaitās tasya lopitāḥ |
aprakāśe ʻtha tasmin vā vastutā katham ucyate || 20 ||
na prakāśaviśeṣatvam ata evopapadyate |

How can (any) part (aṁśa) which is not light shine in the Light (of

consciousness) also?” If it were to shine within it, then the distinctions
(between light and darkness) would cease. But if it does not shine within it,
then how can one say (it has any) existence (vastutā)? Thus, it is not
reasonable to maintain that the Light has (any) specific (individual features,
on the contrary it shines uniformly as all things). (19cd-21ab) (20-21)-

‘How can (any) part (aṁśa) which is not light (shine)?” The meaning

(of this question is) in what form would an insentient entity (that is, one which is
‘Or else, all things, being of the nature of all things, are omniscient. All existing

things know themselves and are present in every way. The jar knows me as my own

nature, and I know (myself) as being the jar’s own nature. I know (myself) as Sadāśiva by
nature, and he knows (himself) as being my nature. Yajñadatta (knows himself) as Śiva by
nature, and Śiva as Yajñadatta by nature. The jar knows (itself in the highest state of
consciousness) as Sadāśiva, and he (knows himself) as the jar.

AIl existing things are everything, as everything is everything. Everything

belongs to everything here, as forms of that which is the many (diverse) existing things.
The jar possesses my nature and I possess the jar’s nature. ŚSiva Himself abides (thus,)

knowing Himself as the many (diverse) existing things. Thus, as the (universal) equality

(sāmya) of everything abides in this way in all existing things, everything is described as
being Śiva’s nature (rāpa), which is present everywhere.” 5/105ab-11 1lab (5/104cd-110).
Cf. VBh 105.

There are numerous words in Sanskrit to denote consciousness. The word used here is

saṁvedana which suggests ‘sensation’ or ‘awareness’, as when one senses or is aware of

something. It is a kind of ‘feeling conscious of being aware of something. AIl words are
equally ‘sensations', which are essentially forms of consciousness.

Read with ĪPKau, py aprakāśāṁśaḥ for hy aprakāśāṁśaḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

experienced objectively), such as ‘pleasure’, (manifest)? There (in that case,) if it
were to manifest as the Light (of consciousness) itself, then (that would entail a
logical) fault (with regard to) the nature of (manifest phenomena) such as ‘blue’
and ‘pleasure’ etc., which would not manifest in a fixed external form such as
‘blue etc., and so all that would remain is the Light itself. Now if it were to
manifest in a fixed form which is not (essentially) the Light (of consciousness) by
nature, then its (very) existence would be uncertain (sattāniścaya). The essential
nature (svabhāva) of (any phenomenon) such as ‘blue’ (namely, that it is a
manifestation of consciousness within consciousness,) has never been perceived
without the Light (of consciousness). The statement: ‘(this) manifests in an
unmanifest form is devoid of (any) propriety. He says this (with the words) ‘if

it does not shineʼ etc. Again, apart from ‘blue’ etc., the Light also shines within

(everything else that) is not ‘blue’ etc. Indeed, (all phenomenal manifestation)

such as (the colour) ‘blue’ is an adventitious adjunct (upādhi) (of consciousness, it
is not intrinsic to it), and it is just the unfolding of (consciousness’s) own freedom,
and so is not real (vāstava) (in itself independently).

Indeed, it would be impossible for anything not to be the Light of consciousness,

because then it would not manifest. One can imagine the existence of something that is not

manifest. In that case it would not exist externally, only internally as the notion one has of
it. Rabbits do not have horns. One never sees a rabbit with horns, but it is possible to

imagine one by conjoining a recollected image of a rabbit with that of horns. If in a dark

place it seems that a rabbit has horns, horns do not manifest, the illusionary, imagined
appearance of them does. The essential nature of horns is absent, so the light of

consciousness is not shining as the horns but as an illusion. Thus, the existence of the
horns is ‘uncertain’.
AII things are manifestations of the Light of consciousness according to their own

specific nature (ṣvabhāva). The colour ‘blue’ is just as much a manifestation of the Light
as is the colour ‘yellow’. Even so their own specific nature is as it is ~ ‘blue’ or ‘yellow’.
In other words, the Light shines as the specific nature of each and every thing just as they

appear to perceivers who are not subject to defects in their perception of them. If one were
to say that they are just the Light of consciousness as it is, i.e. in an indeterminate
universal manner, then that would mean that what manifests – ‘blue’ and ‘yellow’ — would
be illusions, as they are according to Advaita Vedānta.

The Sanskrit reads: aprakāśātmanā rūpeṇa prakāśate, which literally means ‘(this)

shines with a form that is not lightʼ.

“ Jayaratha says that the differences between manifestations are secondary, adventitious
adjuncts (upādhi). This again seems to be the view of the Advaita Vedānta, according to
which ultimate reality is the one Brahman, and that the diversity one perceives should be

realized to be an error, not a manifestation of the Brahman. Advaita Vedānta accounts for
diversity as an appearance, in the sense of a ‘seeming to be’, by a number of examples.

Two of those are the most applied and well known. One is that a rope (= the Brahman) in
a dark room (= the state of ignorance) appears to be a snake (= illusory world). This

example illustrates how the Brahman is covered over by mistaken appearance and how
ignorance projects it onto the Brahman. Another example is a pure translucent crystal
(= Brahman) which appears to be red because a red flower (= the illusory world of duality)
is placed next to it. In this example, the crystal is visible, but its colour has seemingly
chanṇged because something has been placed next to it. The rose is just an ‘adjunct’ which

seemingly ‘limits’ or ‘conditions’ the crystal so as to seemingly colour it. The Advaita

Vedānta makes use of this example with reference to the illusory world of the duality and
multiplicity of Māyā – the rose — which, in proximity, as it were, to the Brahman,

CHAPTER TWO

Thus, there is only one undivided Light (of pure Anuttara No Means
consciousness that) unfolds (perpetually), by whose glorious power this universe,
which is the manifestation of each (individual phenomenon), such as (the

experience of) ‘blue’, may shine forth radiantly (sphure). Thus, he says: ‘it is not
reasonable to maintain that the Light has (any) specific (individual features)’,
because the one undivided Light pulses radiantly as each individual manifestation
(ābhāsa). Surely (one may ask, every single manifestation differs from every
other,) the manifestation of ‘blue’ is different from the manifestation of ‘yellow’
and (every other colour). There is indeed a difference (bheda) like this between
them (all). So how is it that it is said (here that) ‘it is not reasonable to maintain

that the Light has (any) specific (individual features)? (Our reply to this

possible objection is that) no, that is not so. This difference (bheda) is (merely)
adventitious and it is not (real in itself). This has been established with reasoned
argument many times. (The experience of) ‘blue’ and the like manifest (lit.

‘shine’) and s0 are essentially the Light (of consciousness). So (in the case of the
light of consciousness) what can be divided by what? One’s own nature is not
divided up by one’s own nature. This is stated as follows: ‘there is no other

‘coloursʼ it to make it appear as Māyā. This association, due to ignorance, gives Māyā (=
the red colour) some tenuous, undefinable existence. But when it is discerned to be
distinct from the Brahman, as falsity is from truth, it ceases to have any existence.
Advaita Vedānta streṣses that the diversity of things is not an inherent
characteristic of the one absolute reality, Brahman. All that exists is the Brahman, but that
does not mean that the Brahman is all that exists. If it were to be so, it would be a
composite reality, and as such, it would be liable to decay and destruction and all the other
defects of a phenomenally existing entity. Advaita Vedānta resolves this problem by
saying that the world of diversity is an adjunct, fictitious reality that takes its support (i.e.
has a kind of tenuous, inexplicable existence) from the Brahman, which is Being itself.
Otherwise, it has no existence in itself. Seen through the crystal, a red rose placed next to

it makes the crystal appear to be red. The colour of the crystal is not that of the crystal
itself, it is adventitiously superimposed on it. It is just an adjunct which those who are
ignorant of the crystal’s true translucent nature may mistake to be a quality or form of the
crystal. Advaita Vedānta stresses that the analogy teaches that the crystal is unaffected by
the change in colour and that it is an error to believe that it is. The example further serves
to illustrate how the Brahman can appear to be the many things of the universe without
becoming many. The Kashmiri Śaivite agrees that multiplicity is not inherent in the
fundamental nature of the Absolute, which is the Light of consciousness, and that the
countless manifestations that shine within it do not affect it. He also justifies this view by
explaining that manifestations are extraneous adjuncts, but he differs from the Advaitin
because he declares that they are real as manifestations of consciousness produced by its

creative power of freedom. He agrees that they have no independent existence, but that
does not mean that they are less than real, because they are not the result of a mistake due
to ignorance, as the Advaita Vedānta maintains. Although the incomplete knowledge of
the true nature of objects is a factor, this is only an attendant, insttumental cause (nimitta).

Thus, as products of consciousness, Abhinava praises the power of adventitious adjuncts
and their function as the reason for the wonderful diversity of this beautiful world, which
is the radiant manifestation of consciousness (see below, 3/118ab (3/118)).

AII that exists is the one Light of consciousness that shines variously, unfolding as the

wonderfully various universe. For the same reason, all means to realisation exist and are
effective because they are essentially one, and reveal the pure Light of No Means
consciousness (anupāyasaṁvitti).

TANTRĀLOKA

consciousness within consciousness, the sole nature of which is Light’, In this
way, when the daily commerce of duality, which is brought about by the

separation (bheda) of the specific nature (svarūpa) (of one thing from another), is
actively (taking place), if it were said to be the Light of one of (its) aspects
(bheda), it would be like an elephant bathing, (that as soon as it has washed,

covers itself with dust). Thus, it would end up again being (as the saying goes)

‘only one, undivided consciousness’.

In the same way, time and space also rest on the plane of the Light (of No

Means consciousness), because they are objects of illumination, and so are (as if)

plunging into oneness with the Light. Agreed (for the moment) that in some way

(time and space) bring about relative distinctions (bheda) within the Light, (even

so) they cannot give rise to duality. (Indeed, they could not,) even if one accepts
that (time and space) are separate from the Light, because here (in the Light, time
is the Light’s) etemal existence (nityatva) and (space its) pervasiveness

(vyāpakatva). Thuṣ, there is only one undivided Light (of consciousness). In this

way, those who mistakenly prefer (some) other (view) which is established® by a

different philosophy (mata) have been completely refuted. He says that:

aras gẼdd | 22 1|

ata ekaprakāśo ʻyam iti vāde ʻtra susthite || 21 I|
dūrād āvāritāḥ satyaṁ vibhinnajñānavādinaḥ |
Thus, now that the view that this Light is one is well established here

(in this way), those who maintain the view that (forms of cognitive)
consciousness (jñāna) are divided (from one another) have in truth been

thoroughly refuted. (21cd-22ab) (22)

Surely (one may ask,) if (multiple, diverse and) divided (forms of

cognitive) consciousness (jñāna) are impossible, why is the word ‘one’ used to
deny (apohana) that? With this doubt in mind, he says:

“ In other words, if you say that duality is inherent in the Light, then that duality would

also be Light, and so all that remained would be the shining of the Light. Thus, one could
not explain the multiplicity and duality that we all experience. Indeed, we would only
experience the Light, or better, the Light which is No Means experiences itself just as it is,
without any distinction between a goal and the means to attain it.

“ Read -vyāpakatvābhyāṅṁ for -vyāpakatvābhyā.

Read matāntarasiddham- for matāntarasiddhim--.

“’ The expression vibhinnajñānavādinaḥ also means ‘the (other) idealists who are different
(from ourselves).' The other idealists are the Yogācāra Buddhists. They also maintain that
the sole reality is consciousness (vijñapti). However, according to them, the everyday

world is an illusion. Thus, they maintain that there are differing forms of cognitive
consciousness. One is real and true, and the other consists of mistaken perceptions (=
forms of cognitive consciousness) of objects that seem to have an independent reality from
the perceiver.

“ An object is determined to be what it is by denying (apohana) all that it is not. This
particular table is known to be just that, because it is not any other table or anything else

CHAPTER TWO

RRĪTTTTTTĪfRTTJĪTITTTĒĀTĪ
II Ṝ3 1I

tṝvaāz ī a# ū#aaī fhzzafhīīziīaā|
prakāśamātram uditam aprakāśaniṣedhanāt || 22 ||

ekaśabdasya na tv arthaḥ saṁkhyā cidvyaktibhedabhāk |
(The one reality) is said to be just the Light (of consciousness) alone

(prakāśamātra), because (the existence of all that is supposed) not to be the
Light is (thus) denied. The meaning of the word ‘one’ (when we say that the

Light is one) is not a number which pertains to the differences between the
manifestations of consciousness. (22cd-23ab) (23)

‘(The existence of all that is supposed) not to be the Light’, that is, the

object of illumination, namely, an external entity such as ‘blue’, is as such (that is,
as an independent entity separate from consciousness) denied. Thus (it is said
that) “only the Light exists. This is the modality (vrtti) of the word ‘one’ (that is,
to indicate uniqueness) because here (in this context) there is no accompanying

(reality). That is said (with the words) ‘the meaning of the word ‘one’ is that

(the one reality) is said to be just the Light (of consciousness) alone’. Not
indeed that it pertains to differences in the light which is the meaning of a number,
such as one, two and three etc. in such a way (yena) that other views may exist
as the counter-correlates to be refuted (by this one).

Thus, he says that not even a trace of the daily commerce of life which

hints at duality (bhedāgūraka) is known here (in the Light of consciousness).

The Light is Undefinable Anuttara Beyond Deity, Meditation and Ritual

Ũa-Ṁk̄ aa-. 1 3 1

| k-aTIJĀĪ ā; |

3ī #ā̄ī īTHTaT̄ aTaT TTSSTTT II/ Ṝ¢I
T TṬšJī: ṬSTṚTHTTIṬSĀTHTĀTS

(see above, note 1,1201). Thus, the determination of an entity’s specific nature entails the
awareness of its counter-correlate, that is, everything it is not, and hence relative

distinction and duality. But this cannot be the case with the Light of consciousness, as no

counter-correlate which is

distinct from it can exist. The question then arises that if we

say, ‘the Light is oneʼ, this would imply the existence of ‘the many’ as its counter-

correlate, which it is not, and hence duality.

“’ The word ‘one’, when we say that “the light is one” is not a number. It is said to be
‘one’ to mean that the Light is all that exists. There is no counter-correlate, that is, a
second ‘non-light’.

“ Views that may be counter to this view are all forms of dualism, and even non-theistic
nondualism, which do not agree that all that exists is the one Light of Deity. Just as the
‘one’ is not a number because there can be no other that may be two or more, so there is
only one possible view, which is not a view because it can have no counter-correlate in
such a way that we can say this is one view as opposed to another.

TANTRĀLOKA

T āī T T F=<ISTĪ ] JITṬT ST]: || 3uII
EIGAÉpḤiEHTIEIE:aTTĀ

naiṣa śaktir mahādevī na paratrāśrito yataḥ || 23 ||
na caiṣa śaktimān devo na kasyāpy āśrayo yataḥ |
naiṣa dhyeyo dhyātrabhāvān na dhyātā dhyeyavarjanāt || 24 ||
na pūjyaḥ pūjakābhāvāt pūjyābhāvān na pūjakaḥ |
na mantro na ca mantryo ʻsau na ca mantrayitā prabhuḥ || 25 ||
na dīkṣā dīkṣako vāpi na dīkṣāvān maheśvaraḥ |

This (Light) is not power, the Great Goddess, as it is not supported
elsewhere (by anything other than itself).® As it is not the support of

anything, it is not God, the possessor of power. As there is no meditator, it is
not an object of meditation. As there is no object of meditation, it is not the

meditator. It is not an object of worship as there is no worshipper, and as

there is no object of worship, it is not the worshipper. This (Light), the
Omnipresent Lord (Prabhu), is not Mantra, the object of Mantra, nor the
one who utters Mantra. The Great Lord (Maheśvara), it is not initiation, the
one who gives initiation, or the initiate. (23cd-26ab) (24-26)

‘This’ is the supreme Light (of No Means consciousness), the nature of
which has been explained. The words ‘powerʼ, ‘possessor of powerʼ and the like

are invariably dependent (on each other) because they are words (denoting things)

that are related (to one another) (saṁbandhiśabda). Thus, after (they 'have)

implicated/alluded (āgiraṇa) the other, they attain rest in their own meaning.
Thus, the ongoing engagement in the commerce (of daily life) is established
(niṣṭha) in duality because of these (interrelated and mutually dependent
opposites). There is no duality (bheda) at all here in the Light, which is (solely)
the one supreme subject. Accordingly, in this way it can never assume (even) a
subtle condition of the daily commerce of life (vyavahāramātratā). Thus, it is not

power (śakti). (Power) exists having associated (itself) with something else, that

is, the possessor of power. (But if one were to say) that the Light alone is one
because it does not depend on (anything else) in order to generate duality (bheda),
then that would contradict (our basic) postulate (pratijñā) (which is that it
manifests as all things by its own power). In the same way, ‘possessor of powerʼ,
as the term is commonly used (vyavahāra), is also not (applicable to) this
(supreme Light). That too exists embracing (as it were) something else, namely,
‘power’. Thus (to say that the Light is either one or the other would) result in
duality. One should know that the same (applies to) the object of meditation and
the rest. ‘Mantra’ is the object of denotation (vācya) of a Mantra, such as OṀ
(praṇava). ʻThe one who utters Mantra’ is the reciter of Mantras. (It is) ‘not

initiation’ because (that) depends on the (ritual) agent and (rītual) action;
(whereas) here (in this case), the cause (hetu) (of liberation) is the power (and

“’ The ĪPKau fl. 15a reads īšaśaktiḥ parādevī for naiṣa śaktir mahādevṝ and paratrãāśr

for paratrāśrito.

CHAPTER TWO

divinity) (prabhutva) present in the great lordship (of the Light) (nāheśvarya)
(and so no initiation is required).
Thuṣ, there is nothing here (in Anuttara consciousness) that assumes (and
gives rise to) duality (bheda), and so he says:

TJITṬTRTTTTHTHĪRTTTTRTĪTRṀT
1I/2./1I

[eeetE EzeḻExct ece -

sthānāsananirodhārghasaṁdhānāvāhanādikam || 27 ||
visarjanāntaṁ nāsty atra kartṛkarmakriyojjhite |

Here (in this reality), which is devoid of (ritual) action, (its) object
and agent, there is no (need to select a) location (for a rite), a seat (or) fix (the
deity in its place). (There is) no lustration, no conjunction (with the Deity),
invocation or (any of the other ritual actions) up to the dismissal (of the

Deity).”(26cd-27ab) (27)

A ‘location’ (sthāna) is a dwelling (prepared) for the Lord by means of
the gesture of installation (sthāpanamudrā). (Preparing) a ‘seat’ (āsana) (for the
Lord) with the gesture of drawing near (saṅmidhānamudrā) renders him

propitious to worship. ‘Fixing (the deity in its place)ʼ (nirodha) is its placement
there (in the same location so that it remains there) without moving. ‘Lustration’

(argha) (is offered to the) eight limbs (of the deity thus installed).” The field of

operation of ‘conjunction’ are the Mantras etc. (that are conjoined to their
appropriate places). ‘Invocation’ (āvāhana) (is the procedure whereby a Deity)
that is not (otherwise) propitious (abhimukha)” (to the worshipper) is rendered
propitious (to accept his worship). ‘Dismissal’ (visarjana) makes (the Deity) that

has become propitious face away (from the worshipper). None (of the phases of

the liturgy) beginning with the invocation (of the Deity) up to (its) dismissal exist

(here in the Light of No Means). Thus, (Abhinavagupta) describes (the Light) in a
way that (also) includes the reason (why this is so, by saying that none of these
things take place) “(in this reality) which is devoid of (ritual) action, (its) object

and agent. (This is) because (the ritual) agent and the rest are in reality only
thought constructs, and as the Light is one with the supreme subject, it cannot be

” Concerning these and other ritual actions performed in the course of the deity’s worship,
see Brunner šsP vol. 1, pp. 188, 198 etc.

” Luṣtration (argha) is water that is offered to the deity in the same way as one would
offer water to a guest. This is done by sprinkling a few drops on the parts of its body,
which may be represented externally by a maṇḍala, consecrated jar, Liṅga or iconic
representation, as the case may be.

” One could also translate ‘lustration consisting of eight limbs’. In the most common basic
form, the deity has six limbs.

” The word ‘abhimukha’, which 1 translate as ‘propitious’, is an adjective denoting
someone who is ‘standing in front, facing towards oneself’. The invocation calls the
atṭention of the deity, who although present, is, as it were, facing elsewhere, so that it turns
towards the worshipper to face him and pays attention.

TANTRĀLOKA

conceived (by thought) and so cannot be taught by any teaching. And so it is said

that ‘it is not this power” etc.

Nor is this (teaching) based solely on reason (yukti); it is also established
(siddha) by scripture. Thus he (now) corroborates (his teaching with that of) the

venerable Bhargaśikhā.

Tq TG rīdrīh

na san na cāsat sadasan na ca tan nobhayojjhitam || 27 ||
durvijñeyā hi sāvasthā kim apy etad anuttaram |

ayam ity avabhāso hi yo bhāvo ‘vacchidātmakaḥ || 28 II
sa eva ghaṭaval loke saṁs tathā naiṣa bhairavaḥ |
Neither

(empirical)

existence

nor

non-existence,

neither

both

existence and non-existence nor devoid of both - that state is hard to know

(indeed) – what could this (undefinable) Absolute (Anuttara) be?
Manifestation (in the form of) ‘this’, which is limited by nature, is an existing

thing (bhāva) in the world, as is a jar, and is (what) exists – this Bhairava” is
not such. (27cd-29ab) (28-29)

See above, 2/24ab-26ab (2/24-26). Ritual action entails a distinction between Deity as

the object of worship and the worshipper who worships. In the pure Light of the oneness

of consciousness, no such distinctions can exist. They are merely concepts which operate
at the level where there is a distinction between the goal and the means to realisation. In

reality, the worshipper and the worshipped are the Light of the one consciousness, which
is our own true nature that is beyond any notions we may have of it, and so cannot be
taught, attained, or even worshipped as if it were some reality distinct from that. There are

no distinctions at all – even between Śiva and Śakti.

‘This Bhairava’ of Anuttara Trika is Anuttara. The Absolute – Anuttara – is Absolute

because it is not relative. It is not some ‘thing’ that can be defined or known to be this or

that in relation to other things. Indeed, it cannot even be said to exist, as do phenomena, of

which one can say ‘this exists’ or ‘this does not exist’. Imaginary objects both exist as

imagined, and do not, as entities independent of the imagination. Anuttara is also not like
that. It is indefinable in phenomenal terms, and so is also called the Indefinable
(Anākhya). Indeed, this is one of the meanings of the term ‘Anuttara’. If one asks what it
is, there is no – an – possible reply – uttara. One or other of four possible ontological
alternatives (catuṣkoṭi), namely, existent, non-existent, both or neither, defines every
phenomenal entity in ontological terms. Nāgārjuna, the founder and great exponent of the
Buddhist Mādhyāmika – the Middle Way – understood Buddha’s proverbial silence when

asked questions concerning the origin and final end of things and whether there is
anything that has ultimate, permanent existence to indicate that nothing can be

characterized in any of these terms. He referred primarily to what we would commonly

believe existed, starting with simple physical objects up to the major categories that
involve all or most things, such as time, space and causality. This means that for

Buddhists like Nāgājuna, all that we experience in the world is illusory. It is not

CHAPTER TWO

Any entity (that can be objectively indicated as) ‘this’, which manifests as
an existing thing (bhāva) present before one ‘in the world’, when excluded (from
all else) that is of the same kind, is said to be ‘(what) exists’ʼ, as does a jar.
Whereas the Light (of consciousness), the nature of which has been explained
previously, and which is full to overflowing with the endless (number of) existing
things (bhāva), ‘is not suchʼ. As it is the Great (universal) Being (of all things)

(mahāsattā), it is not limited (anavacchinna) (in any way) and so is not of that

nature.” In this sense, it cannot be said in common parlance to be existent (sat) (as

is an object).”

ultimately real. Moreover, whatever is conceived to be ultimately real is no different in

this respect ~ it is just a notion. Abhinava understands that only the Absolute is

indefinable in these terms. It cannot be defined as some particular ‘thingʼ, for that would
implicitly entail a relative distinction between itself and something else which it is not.

Moreover, it would be definable as an object in relation to a subject, whereas Anuttara is

experienced in the domain of supreme subjectivity, which is beyond the individual subject
and object. Totally free of objectivity, the very slightest trace of a notion that one has

atṭained or experienced it, marks a fall from consciousness to insentience, from subject to
object, from the universal to the particular, from plenitude and perfection to the
incomplete and imperfect. Maheśvarānanda quotes these verses in the MM (p. 177). There
he says that according to this teaching ‘one experiences one’s own nature as replete with

the intensity of one’s own freedom that transcends all the conditions of thought and its
accompanying realities.”
Concerming the Great (universal) Being (of all things), see above, note 1,677 to TĀv ad
1/83cd-85ab (1/84cd-86ab). The term ‘avacchinna’, which literally means ‘cut off’, can be
variously translated as ‘conditioned’ or ‘limited’. Individual phenomena are ‘cut off, as it
were, from the perceiver and one another. And so, even as the specific nature of each thing
determined in this way is uniquely different and separate from everything else, they also
limit and condition each other. Consciousness, which is one and universal, cannot be ‘cut
off’, determined or conditioned, but is so to the degree in which it is identified with
objectivity, that is, the psychophysical organism.

” Objectivity is experienced as ‘this is’. Conversely, subjectivity is experienced as ‘] amʼ.

“This is’ refers to the innumerable objects. So we say ‘this is blue’ or ‘this is yellow, and

so on. Each ‘ṭhis’ is a limited, confined entity, however vast or small_it may be.
Conversely, ‘I am’ can only refer to one subject, that is, myself. However, subjectivity can

be contaminated, as it were, with objectivity, as when, for example, I identify with the
body or the mind. Then we say ‘I am the body or ‘I am the mind’. In such cases the ‘
am’ also appears to be a limited, confined entity. In reality, however, it is the body or the
mind, that is, the objectivity that has contaminated the subjectivity, which is such. The

pure consciousness of Bhairava Who is the Absolute can never be delimited in this or any
other way.
We perceive objects, whether internal, mental ones or external physical ones, as

‘this is X'. Thus, in cognitive terms, all objectively perceived entities can be characterized

as ‘this’. Similarly, all the perceivers can be characterized as ‘’. Any ‘this’ implies, as

language also dictates, an action. This is what is meant here by ‘being’ – the act of being
of all that ‘is’. However, just as ‘this is’ is not a complete sentence because the generic
‘this’ lacks a predicate (as when we ask, ‘what is this?’), s0 too any objective ‘this’ must
be some ‘thingʼ. Similarly, the first person of the act of being is implied in ‘I’. However,
any predicate of ‘I am’ is always an objective ‘this, he, she or it’. It is true that one can say
‘I am me’, but that too treats the ‘’ as a predicable object. In other words, phenomenal
subjectivity is inevitably associated with objectivity. Thus, that too has a phenomenal,

objective existence. In this way, ‘existence’, and s0 too its counter-correlate, namely,

TANTRĀLOKA

Well, if that is the case, should it be said to be ‘non-existent’ in common

parlance (vyavahārya)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

7 TggaĪTTT ||/28I
asattvaṁ cãprakãśatvaṁ na kutrãpy upayogitā || 29 |

What does not exist and does not manifest is of no use anywhere.

(29cd) (30ab)

The Light (of consciousness) alone is the supreme Being (sartā) of all
existing things (bhāva), and so ‘what does not exist’ and ‘does not manifestʼ is

said to have no nature at all, like a hare’s horn, and so is not of use to the

functioning (arthakriyā) of anything anywhere; (in other words,) it does not
perform any function at all.””
such:

(Now) he says that, on the contrary, the Light (of consciousness) is not

fraza stftṝ c vaktaēīṀ4 ; |

viśvasya jīvitaṁ satyaṁ prakāśaikātmakaś ca saḥ |

Real existence (satya) is (the very) life of the universe, and that is
(Anuttara Bhairava,) who is one with the Light (of consciousness). (30ab)
(30cd)
‘non-existence’ (‘being’ and ‘nonbeing°), are phenomenal. In this sense, the Absolute

cannot be said to ‘be’ or ‘not be’, for the same reason that nothing can be predicated of it.

Although it is the ultimate source of all phenomena, it is not itself phenomenal, i.e.
objective, or indeed subjective, in relation to an object. As long as experience is caught up
in these modalities, it is phenomenal, and hence subject to all its defects. The experience
Anuttara, the Deity, has of Himself and the world is not like this.

The existence of single individual entities is here termed ‘sar’, which means ‘being’,

‘existʼ or ‘true’. Other schools, such as Advaita Vedānta, use the term to denote absolute
Being. The Brahman is ‘sar’. Here universal Being, in which all individual forms of being

– ‘sat – participate is ‘mahāsattā’ – ‘Great (universal) Being’. The feminine word ‘sartā’
derived from ‘sa’ means literally ‘beingnessʼ. It is identified with the power (śakti) of

universal God consciousness as its reflective awareness and freedom. This is the universal

and transcendental Being of Deity. It is not like the existence ~ sat – of individual
phenomena. In more immanent terms, it is the ‘radiant pulse’ +~ sphurattā – of
consciousness. The term ‘prakāśa’ denotes the Light of consciousness and ‘sphurattā’ its

‘radiance’. The former denotes the pure shining of the Light and the latter its shining as
the apparently many things made manifest by it. When they are realized to be the ‘shining’
of the Light, they are experienced as its ‘radiance’. Thus the ‘radiant pulse’ of the Light of
consciousness is the Being of all phenomena made manifest by it as it ilumines itself.

Cf. above, note 1,611.

The word ‘satya’, which I loosely translate as ‘real existence’, is an abstract noun

formed from the word ‘sat’, which means ‘being’, ‘existence’ and ‘real’. Thus ‘satya’
means ‘truth’, in the sense of what truly exists. Thus, a well known saying which
characterizes most essentially the teachings of Advaita Vedānta is that ‘brahma satyaṁ
jagat mithyam’ ‘the Brahman (Absolute) is truth (= real existence, truly existent) (satya)

CHAPTER TWO

(Real existence) is the ultimately real (pāramārthika) ‘life of the
universe’. As the radiant pulse (sphurattā) (of consciousness), it is the (existence

which) gives life to everything, sentient and insentient, nothing at all of this

(idam) manifests without that, and so he says that (Anuttara Bhairava) is ‘one
with the Light (of consciousness). The point is that because (it has) many forms
in this way, it cannot also be said to be ‘non-existent’ (asar) in common parlance

(vyavahārya).

Thus, it is also not (both) being and nonbeing (at once). So he says:

ābhyām eva tu hetubhyāṁ na dvyātmā na dvayojjhitaḥ |) 30 ||
sarvātmanā hi bhāty eṣa kena rūpeṇa mantryatām |

and the world is falsity (mithya) (= an illusion, untrue)’. Abhinava must have had this

saying, or one like it in mind, when he wrote this line. A false, illusory universe is no

universe at all. At most it would be just a dream. Moreover, the consciousness that
generates a false universe by assuming its countless forms would itself be false, in the

sense of ‘untruthful’.

! Jayaratha introduces this line with the statement that it refers to the Light of
consciousness – prakāśa, which is a masculine word. The masculine pronoun saḥ (which I

translate as ‘that’) does not agree with the neuter word satyam ~ ‘real existence’. It can
only refer to Anuttara, Prakāśa or Bhairava, that are all masculine words which denote the
same reality from the three different perspectives Abhinava has in mind.

Advaita Vedānta, following suit from Buddhist nondualists, who stress the falsity of the
world, distinguishes between a relative and absolute truth. The world of daily life and

those who live in it are relatively real. We can distinguish between a mistake and a correct

perception of something. We experience the difference between the reality of daily life

and what we experience in a dream. But it is transitory. Nothing has permanent existence.

Everything exists for some time and then ceases to exist, but ‘what exists’, the Advaita

Vedāntin and nondualist Buddhist would say, ‘cannot also not exist’. Parmenides, one of

the earliest Greek philosophers, for the same reason comes to the same conclusion, which
he stated in what became the classic dictum, ‘everything appears but nothing is’.

Accordingly, he distinguished between Being, which has absolute existence, and the
transitory existence of ‘appearancesʼ. Similarly, the Advaita Vedānta maintains that the

Brahman, which is eternal and unchanging oneness, is absolutely real, existent and true
(pāramārthikasatya). The world of duality is only relatively real; it is just the reality of the
daily commerce of life (vyavahārikasatya). It is real in ‘common parlance’, not ultimately
s0. This is not the Trika view. As Abhinava says:

‘Where duality, unity, and both unity and duality are equally manifest is said to

be (true) unity. To those who object that in that case duality (bheda) must also exist, (we
say:) so be it; we do not want to speak overmuch. We neither shun nor accept (anything)
that (manifests to us) here (in this world), as you do. If you wish to be supported by the

view that favours all, then resort to the doctrine of Supreme Nonduality, the great refuge
you should adopt.’ (MVV 1/629-631, quoted in Dyczkowski 1987: 41, see ibid. Chapter

One for a more detailed discussion).

TANTRĀLOKA

For these two reasons, the nature (of Anuttara Bhairava) is not the
two (existence and non-existence) and is not devoid of the two. He shines as
all things, (so pray tell) in what form should one invoke Him? (30cd-31ab)

@1

‘For these two’ aforestated (reasons), namely, the unconditioned and

luminous (nature of the Light). Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case, should it
not transcend both, that is, ‘existence’ and ‘non-existence’? With this doubt in
mind, he says: ‘it is not the two’ etc. Even at the time when (the relativity of
phenomena as some that) exist and (others that do) not, manifests, that same

(Light) illumineṣ (both as that which is) other (than itself), so how can it be
devoid of existence and non-existence? Thus he says that ‘it shines as all
things’. In this way, it is one with the supreme perceiver (who is pure

consciousness free of thought constructs); otherwise, because of its unconditioned
(unlimited and undivided nature) (anavacchinnarūpa), it could never assume (the

lower) state of ideation (vikalpatā) (of the sphere of objectivity in which one thing

is conceptually distinguished from another). This is the overall meaning. As is

said:

‘O pervasive Lord, non-existence is certainly other than (param)
existence, and existence is other than that. And You are other than non-existence
and existence. Thus, You are (both) existence and non-existence.’
Again:
‘Your nature (rūpa) is not tranquil (and transcendent) or emergent (and
immanent), nor is it (something) in between. O Hara, every single form (and
essential nature of everything) is Yours, of which nothing can be said.’
“ bhāvābhāvāvabhāsakāle’ pi, literally, ‘even at the tīme when being and nonbeing

manifestʼ.

Other translations of param avabhāsate could be that it manifests ‘paramʼ, i.e. the
supreme (reality), or ‘param’, ‘what is beyond (them)’. Another could be, ‘it itself shines
as other than that (param)’. This translation is supported by the reference Jayaratha gives
from the Saṁvitprakāśa a little further ahead. However, I prefer to think of param as

being in concord with saḥ – it (i.e. the light), and understand param to mean ‘other’ (than
itself). From this perspective, two types of manifestation occur within the Light of
consciousness. One is the existence of existing things. The other is their absence or nonexistence. The manifestation of the colour ‘blue’ is accompanied by the manifestation of

the absence or non-existence in that place and at that time of the colour ‘yellow’, and

indeed, everything else. The Light of consciousness not only illumines both, it knows
them to be such. Indeed, that is what making things manifest amounts to. Thus, if we think

in relative terms in order to understand what is happening in relation to them, the Light is
the supreme perceiver. In this sense, the Light illumines what is ‘other’ than itself, that is,
the object, whether it be existent or non-existent (i.e. imagined, or has ceased to exist, or
as the counter-correlate of what does exist, or even total non-existence). Moreover, they

appear within it as manifestations which are forms of Light. Thus, as Jayaratha asks: ‘“how
can it be devoid of existence and non-existence?”

This reference is drawn from the Saṁvitprakāśa by Vāmanadatta (SP 1/29). It seems

that Jayaratha presents the previous quotation as coming from the same source. Although
it cannot be traced to the extant text of the SP, it could well be from it, as none of the
manuscripts of the SP recovered so far are complete, and both verses address the deity —

CHAPTER TWO
And so, we don’t know ‘in what’ conceived ‘form’ it is said to be. This

condition (daśā) is hard to know for perceivers subject to Māyā, whose intellect is
obstructed (upahata) by thought. (Indeed,) for the aforementioned reason, it
cannot be known. This is the meaning. The most excellent of all, it manifests as
the dense (unbroken) wonder of the supreme bliss, which is just (the pure)
experience of one’s own nature alone (svānubhūtimātra), of those who, free of the

activity of thought (vikalpavṛtti), have made the reality of the supreme Self a
direct experience. And so, it is said that ‘such is the (indefinable) Absolute

(Anuṭṭara) .

This is not said only here; (it is said) elsewhere also. Accordingly, he

declares:

3fxrercṁ
sē ŪāīTrcaēva 1| 32 I

ã 1
śrīmattriśirasi proktaṁ parajñānasvarūpakam || 31 ||
Śśaktyā garbhāntarvartinyā śaktigarbhaṁ paraṁ padam |

Itis said in the venerable 7riśirasa that ‘the supreme plane, which is

supreme noetic consciousness (parajñāna), contains within itself (as its
essence, infinite) power by virtue of (that same) power within it.’ (31cd-32ab)

(32)

In order to answer the goddess'’s question, namely: “O god, how is
supreme noetic consciousness (pararṁi jñānam)?” the Lord has talked about this,

the nature of supreme noetic consciousness, here (in this passage). This is the
intended (sense). (The author) quotes that (passage beginning with the word)

‘power’. That which is this supreme plane ‘contains within itself (as its essence,

infinite) power”. The power (of supreme consciousness) is (variously) called the
plane of ‘freedomʼ (ṣvātantrya), ‘reflective awareness’ (vimarśa), and so on.
(Supreme consciousness) contains that (in the sense that that power) is (its)
essence (sāra), and that (power) is not separate from it. Thus he says (that this is
s0) ‘by virtue of (that same) power within it’. (He means that this is so) by
virtue of that same power called ‘freedom’ which is ‘within’ (antaram), that is, at
one with the perceiver, and is ‘at the end’ (antaḥ) of it, and so is the supreme

summit of existence (parā kāṣṭhā).” This is its nature. The meaning is that
Viṣṇu. In the former case, he is the ‘pervasive Lord’, which is the literal meaning of the
name Viṣṇu. In the latter ‘Hara’ literally ‘Saviour’ is a common name of Viṣṇu.

Above, 2/28c (2/28d).
See below, 3/205cd-206ab.
Read -nirṇayārthaṁ for -nirṇayārtha.

Read tacchaktigarbhaṁ for tacchaktigarbha.

The word ‘antar’ can mean both ‘within’ (as I have translated) as well as ‘at the end’.

So Jayaratha explains that the supreme power of consciousness is both ‘within’ it, at one

with it and ‘at the end’ of it, that is, it is at its highest extremity, as the supreme summit of
existence.

TANTRĀLOKA

(supreme consciousness) is characterized by that (power) as its own essential
nature. Otherwise, it would not be supreme. As is said:
‘The (wise) know that the (essential) nature of the light (of manifestation)
(avabhāsa) is reflective awareness; otherwise (if that were not so), the light (of
consciousness), although coloured by the (entities manifest within it), would be

insentient, like a crystal.”

Thus, it is the essential nature (of every single thing and oneself) that
abides within the power (of the Light of consciousness), which is (its) freedom
(and reflective awareness). The meaning is that this is always its nature.” Thus it

‘contains within itself (as its essence, infinite) power’.” The meaning is that,

apart from the power of (its) freedom (ṣvātantrya), it has no other powers. That
same (power) acts (in the sphere of daily life) as many (powers), according to the
adventitious purpose (arthopādhi) (to which it is applied), that is, the particular
object of desire (or knowledge) etc. This is the sense. As is said:

ĪP 1/5/11. This verse is quoted again in full below in TĀv ad 4/184, the first line ad

11/46-47, and the first quarter ad 16/249cd-251ab (250-251). This verse, or parts of it, is

quoted three other times by Jayaratha. See TĀv ad 4/184, ad 11/47 (first line), and ad
16/249cd-251ab (250-251) (first quarter). Utpaladeva explains in his own gloss (vṛtti) of
this verse that objects that appear within consciousness, unlike a crystal, evoke emotive,
aesthetic responses within it. They are ‘savoured by it’. The word he uses here is
‘camatkṛtī, which literally means ‘wonder°. Torella writes: ‘Abhinava (IPVV vol. 2 p.

117) says: ʻcamatkṛti means the act of a person savouring (bhuñjanasya), that īs, the bliss
constituted by the full achievement of fruition.’ Bhuñjana, Abhinava explains later, is he
who, engaged in savouring a sweet taste or the like, unlike a voracious glutton, lets the
experience rest on his cognizing subjectivity, which thus predominates over the objective
part. The state of ‘wonder° (camatkṛti, camatkāra) in its highest form is thus both the act

of ‘savouring the aesthetic object and the plenitude, absolute independence of
consciousness devoid of obstacles (avighnā saṁvit), the savouring of which is in the final

analysis a savouring of one's own self and one’s own bliss, which eludes the mediation of
the world of objects, and even goes beyond that relative and momentary transcendence
that one has in the aesthetic experience of poetry and theatre.’ Torella 2002: p. 118-119,

note 23.

“ The text reads: sadaiva tādrūpyeṇa vartate, which literally means ‘it always abides with
that nature. The Light of consciousness, which is Anuttara and eternal No Means
consciousness, experienced within time is ‘always’ in the form of its freedom, which is its

reflective awareness that gives rise to the countless manifestations and their corresponding
perceptions. The pure transcendence of Anuttara, the Light of Bhairava consciousness, is

invariably at one with the wonderful immanence of its power, which makes Anuttara

manifest and known both as pure Light, within itself, and the radiant splendour (sphurattā)
of its manifestation as all things, externally, as it were. Thus, its power is both within it in

relation to itself as its own nature and extemally in relation to its manifestations.
“ Read -garbhaṁ for ~garbha. The expression ‘śaktigarbham’ can be understood to be an
adjectival compound qualifying ‘the supreme plane’, which is how it has been translated,
i.e. ‘the supreme plane contains within itself (infinite) power’. Jayaratha also understands

it to refer to the power of freedom of the Light, which, as its one power, contains within

itself all its powers.
When consciousness limits itself to assume the form of the perceiver in relation to an
object, its one power assumes many forms according to the purpose to which it is applied

by the perceiver in relation to the object. The same power of consciousness is, for

CHAPTER TWO

‘Thus, the precept (vidhi) is sound (which states) that He is united with
the power of (creative) freedom (svātantrya) alone. Moreover, (the fact that) He

possesses many powers amounts to (His inseparable) union with that (one) power

alone.”

Therefore, in accord with the stated teaching that ‘free (awakened)
consciousness is ultimate reality°, the Light (of consciousness) that is

unconditioned (anavacchinna), by nature possesses (the infinite power of)
freedom and is free of thought constructs, is the supreme principle (tattva). This is
the essential meaning.
Thusṣ, he says, because it cannot tolerate (any) constraining distinction
(niyata-vyvaccheda), it caṉnot be conceived.

na bhāvo nāpy abhāvo na dvayaṁ vācām agocarāṭ || 32 ||
akathyapadavīrūḍhaṁ śaktisthaṁ śaktivarjitam |
(Anuttara is) neither Being nor Nonbeing nor the two (together), for
it is not in the domain of words (vāc).”’ Firmly affirmed (rāḍha) on the plane
of the inexpressible, it is established in power (and yet is) devoid of power.”
(32cd-33ab) (33)
example, the power of the will of the perceiver when he desires some object and that of
his capacity to know when directed at some object to perceive it. The purpose is said to be

‘adventitious’ because all-inclusive consciousness does not and cannot have a purpose or

goal outside itself that needs to be achieved.
“ Above, 1/67 (68).
“ This saying is quoted again by Jayaratha below three more times (ad 9/64, 11/22cd-23ab

and ad 29/92-95). In two of these instances, it is a way of referring to the supreme
transcendental reality as the ultimate ‘place of rest’ (viśrāntiṣṭhāna) in the supreme subject
at the summit of the ascent to the supreme level or plane of consciousness (TĀv ad 29/92-

95). As such, it is the thirty-eighth principle (TĀv ad 11/22cd-23ab). In the third instance
it serves to indicate that, as transcendent Śiva, it is free to assume any form at will (ad
9/64). Cf. above ad 1/90 (91) svatantraprakāśātmā parameśvara eva paramārthaḥ

‘ultimate reality is the Supreme Lord alone who is the free Light (of consciousness).’
Cf. the quote from the Ūrmikaulārṇava in TĀv ad 2/48. The word vācām is the genitive
plural of vāc, which means ‘speech’. Possibly by using the plural here Abhinavagupta may

just simply mean ‘words’ or ‘languages’. It is also possible that he is referring to the levels

of Speech. If so, we may have to understand that the supreme level is not included. But as
Supreme Speech is the reflective awareness of supreme ‘I’-consciousness, perhaps
Abhinava is saying that Anuttara is above that also.

By ‘power’ here Abhinava means the plane of immanence. The ‘plane of the

inexplicableʼ, that is, Anuttara, is ‘established in power’ when it manifests as all things

through the unfolding of its power of freedom and reflective awareness. In itself all that
exists is the pure Light (prakāśamātra) of consciousness, which is Anuttara. From that
perspective, nothing has or ever will take place, nor does anything manifest that is not
Anuttara. Only Anuttara shines in all eternity. As Kṣemarāja puts it: ‘in actual fact nothing
ariṣes and nothing falls away, only the Goddess (bhagavatī), that is, the power of the

TANTRĀLOKA

((Anuṭṭara is) neither Being nor Nonbeing nor the two (together)), ‘for it
is not in the domainʼ (of words). (Any) specification (nirdesśa) is based on (the
phenomenal, specific) being (bhāvapradhāna) (of that which is specified). Thus
because (Anuttara is not s0,) it is not in the domain of words, and so is ‘firmly

affirmed (rūḍha) on the plane of the inexpressible’. This is the meaning. All
this has been explained many times and so there is no need to exert oneself
(further to do so) again.

Thus, he says, those who are (constantly) attentive (avahita) to the

supreme (reality) are those who have achieved the goal.”

For One Firmly on the Path of Anuttara No Means is Required

zfr a ēcdtaftrrāāratfēfīaī: 11 33 1

TTTJ TPTĀSTTTĪTTAĪTĒT:

iti ye rūḍhasaṁvittiparamārthapavitritāḥ || 33 ||
anuttarapathe rūḍhās te ‘bhyupāyāniyantritāḥ |
Thus (iti),, those who are sanctified by the supreme reality which is
consciousness firmly affirmed (rūḍha) (within them) and are firmly affirmed
on the path of the Absolute (Anuttara) are not constrained by (any) means
(to realization and have nothing more to do). (33cd-34ab) (34)

‘Those who are sanctified’ by having removed the impurity of the

distortions of relative distinctions (bhedavikāra) have become fit recipients of (the
realization of) the supreme nondual (reality). (They have been sanctified by) the
radiant pulse (sphuraṇa) of everything manifesting as all things, which is the
supreme reality of consciousness that is ‘firmly affirmed’, that is, has developed
vibration (of consciousness) (spandaśakti), which although non-sequential (akramā)
shines radiantly as (each) manifestation in this way and not that (tathātathā), as it arises
and falls away.” (SpNir p. 5). The Goddess of Consciousness is the power of the Light,

that

is,

the

freedom

which

is

‘the

agency

of the

act

of

manifestation’

(prakāśanakṛiyākartr̥tva). When that operates, Anuttara is ‘established in power’. When it

rests tranqui in its own nature as pure Light, it is, in a manner of speaking, ‘devoid of
powerʼ. Activity — the universe of immanence - and repose
~- transcendence– are not two
moments or aspects of Anuttara. They are both equally Anuttara. Transcendent Śivais

immanent Śakti, and immanent Śaktiis transcendental Śiva. This is one of the reasons
why Anuttarais ‘inexplicable’. Itis neither one nor the other butis at the same time both.
Anuttara is not just ‘imexplicable’ or ‘not within the range of speech’ because it is infinite
consciousness beyond mind. Then it would be as is the absolute Brahman of Advaita
Vedānta, and the manifest world (which is ‘within the range of speech’) would be an
illusory dream – not a creation or manifestation of the Absolute. Moreover, powerless, the
Brahman is not Deity, as is Anuttara. In terms of practice, when one discerns that there is
someṭhing more, as it were, apart from Anuttara, the first and most subtle ‘thingʼ is its

power. Then No Means, experienced as its spontaneous power of freedom and reflective
awareness, is the Supreme Means (see below, 3/1 and comm.).
Read ye cātaḥ parāvahitās ta eva kṛtakṛtyāḥ for ye cāto 'vahitās ta eva paraṁ

CHAPTER TWO

by attaining oneness with that, by the master’s teaching etc. explained (before)

‘thus’ (iti) Therefore they ‘are not constrained by (any) means (to
realization)ʼ, whether external or internal, separate (from that), that is, they are
not dependent on them. As such they are ‘on the path of the Absolute

(Anuṭṭara)ʼ, that is, they rest on the path which, as the dense (uninterrupted)
wonder of full (and perfect) bliss, is the most excellent all and is their own state

(ātmavṛtti) of (perpetually) expanding consciousness. The meaning is that just

by abiding (avasthāna) in their own (innate and spontaneous) aesthetic delight
(svarasa), they have attained that state of oneness (sāmarasya) (with the aesthetic

delight of consciousness). This is the meaning. That is said (in the following line):

‘Be just as you are, go neither inside nor outside. Just abandon the mass

of distortions by the expansion of consciousness.”
Again:

‘The yogi who rests in the power of bliss is one (with the aesthetic delight

of consciousness) (samarasa).”
Again:

‘There is no other means at all apart from the understanding of one’s own
(essential) being (svasattā). The yogi who, following that (essential being and in
accord with it), abides in himself (svastha), is happy.”
He says (in response to the question) ‘and then what?

maṝa atazrkrtaīt-taītaq1
teṣām idaṁ samābhāti sarvato bhāvamaṇḍalam || 34 ||
The word iti serves as a marker of direct speech, as do inverted commas in English. It is
placed at the end of the statement, so its location here at the beginning of this verse
indicates, according to Jayaratha, that the previous verses are spoken as, for example, a
teacher’s instruction. At this level of ‘practice’, which one could describe as total passive
receptivity, the disciple simply hears these words and recognizes the reality which is their
purport. In this case, somewhat paradoxically, the instruction is that it is beyond
instruction.

! The means to realisation serve to expand consciousness that is contracted and delimited

by objectivity. No Means consciousness, which is the Inexplicable Absolute, Anuttara, is,

from the relative finite point of view, in a state of perpetual, spontaneous expansion. Thus,

those who recognise that to be their own consciousness have no need to do anything. They
simply rest in and as that state of perpetually expanding consciousness.

] have not been able to trace the source of this line. However, the sense accords with

the teachings of such works as the Anurtarāṣṭaka, (probably wrongly) attributed to
Abhinavagupta. The following two citations follow directly after this one, connected one

to another with a simple tathā (‘in the same way’, ‘again’). They may well all be from the
same tēxt.

TANTRĀLOKA

puraḥstham eva saṁvittibhairavāgnivilāpitam |

This totality of phenomenal existence manifests equally from all sides

before them as consumed by the fire of the Bhairava that is consciousness.

(34cd-35ab) (35)

Although all ‘this totality of phenomenal existence’ manifests in

relation to the body etc. ‘before them’, that is, those who possess the penetration
of No Means (anupāyasamāveśa), it manifests as full (and perfect) consciousness,
in accord with the teaching ‘“(all) this has emerged from me”, “it is reflected in

me” and ‘“it is not separate from me”” '. This is the meaning. As is said:

‘Just as wood, leaves or stones etc. that have fallen into a salt mine

become salt, in the same way existing things (that have fallen) into consciousness
(become consciousness).”

Thus, he says:

TT] T GTTYTĀĒTTgTTṀĒTTTĪ: |I| 341|
[iEEJGEHENE'EeikEEeEI IHS

T̄̄ Ṁ TÃ̄-Ṭ Ṁ SJIIĪ Ī TITT āT |I 3-.|
fāya

īd::

eteṣāṁ sukhaduḥkhāṁśaśaṁkātaṅkavikalpanāḥ || 35 ||
nirvikalpaparāveśamātraśeṣatvamāgatāḥ |
eṣāṁ na mantro na dhyānaṁ na pūjā nāpi kalpanā || 36 ||
na samayyādikācāryaparyantaḥ ko ʻpi vibhramaḥ |
AIl that remains of their thoughts of (the various) kinds (aṁśa) of
pleasure and pain, doubt and fear, is just (their) supreme absorption

(parāveśa) (in the pure Light of consciousness) free of thought. For them

there is no Mantra, no meditation, no worship, imagination (kalpanā) nor
any wandering (vibhrama) (through the grades of initiation,) starting from

that of a common initiate (samayin) to that of a teacher. (35cd-37ab)

(36-37)

Theṣe lines are drawn from 3/280d-281ab (3/280abc) below. There this is said to be the

experience of the Śāmbhava state experienced through the Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya).

Abhinava is describing the highest level of the Divine Means which leads spontaneously

to No Means. Once everything has been burnt away by the fire of consciousness through
the Divine Means, it becomes one with the consciousness beyond means. The Fire of

Consciousness can be experienced at the highest stages of all the means to realisation, the
Divine (see below, 3/263ab-265ab (3/262-264)), the Empowered (see below, 4/202-203),
and the Indiviḍual (see below, 5/27cd-36). When it has consumed the fuel of the impurity
of duality and stops burning, No Means consciousness dawns.

' In the pure Light of No Means consciousness there is neither teacher nor taught.

Indeed, there are no grades of initiation, as there is no need to perform any rites or even

recite Mantra. This realization dawns in an instant on those who have received the most
intense forms of Śiva's grace (śaktipāta) and been purified (bhāvita) by it (cf. below

CHAPTER TWO
‘For them’, that is, those who have attained a state of penetration (into

pure Śiva consciousness) which is free of mental cogitation (avikalpaka), not only

worldly (laukikya) imaginings (and thoughts of pleasure and pain and the like)

are (as if) nothing; such too are the other-worldly ones (alaukikya). He says this

with the words ‘for them (there is no Mantra)’ etc. ‘Imagination’ (here means

imagining in the course of a rite that the deities have) locations (sthāna)' and the
like.
Surely (one may ask,) if this is the case, then how should the remaining

observance (of such a realised soul’s embodied life) (śeṣavṛtti) be like? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

The Liberated Soul’s Only Purpose is to Elevate Others

qTGTTĀTĪT-TTG-ĪZgHĪTĀTT|

PGISTĀEJEZEEyIḤ

II 3s|

samastayantraṇātantratroṭanāṭaṅkadharmiṇaḥ |
nānugrahāt paraṁ kiñcic cheṣavṛttau prayojanam || 37 ||

One who is armed with the sword (of discernment) that cuts through

the weave (tantra) of all restrictions has no other purpose at all than to grace

(others) in the course of the remaining mode of conduct (of his life after

liberation) (śeṣavṛtti). (37cdef) (38)

‘AII’ and every one of the ‘restrictions’ taught in the scriptures, that is,

the regulations of the sort ‘this should be done and this not’ are a ‘weavye’ (tantra)

3/289ab-290cd (3/288-290ab) and commentary). Abhinava is not denying that ritual can

serve as an efficacious means to liberation realization. It is certainly meaningful, but only
for those who have not received this grace. Nor is it a matter of all or nothing. Ritual may

be performed as long as this goal is not attained. Then it may be discontinued as being of
no further use. Indeed, this may happen, for example, even at the conclusion of the initial
purification in which the officiant identifies with Śiva (cf. 15/283cd-288ab). Of course,
rituals may be performed for others who may benefit from them:

Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh and N laukikyā for laukikya.
'“ Read alaukikyā api for alaukikyaapi. Worldly notions and imaginings concern

peoplesʼ daily concerns, pleasure and pain, hopes and fears etc. Other-worldly notions and

imaginings are those that concern worship and other activities of spiritual life.

Concerning sthānakalpanā the conception or formation of place, see below, 6/1-5.

Quoted below in TĀv ad 4/47cd-48. See below, 2/43-46. In a technical sense ‘śeṣavṛītī

– ‘the remaining mode of conduct’ – refers to post-initiatory observances that initiates

must adhere to until they die, when ideally they achieve liberation. These are described

below in chapter 26. In this context, Abhinava understands the ‘supreme penetration’ into
No Means as an immediately liberating initiation, signalling the beginning of the state of
‘liberation while alive’ – jīvanmukti. Clearly, one who has achieved this has nothing left to
do for himself and has no obligations. Nonetheless, he takes care to maintain his
observance by leading others to liberation by the power he has to grace them and the
various means to realisation. So they continue to serve a means for others but serve no

purpose for himself.

TANTRĀLOKA

because they go on extending (tanyamāna) (like) a network of threads that (woven
together) make up a (piece of) cloth and the like. (He is) ‘armed with the sword

(of discernment) (which serves) as a weapon to cut through it, that is, cut it off
(and bring it to an end) (viccheda). This is the meaning. Just as a sword cuts

through a weave, in the same way this (realised soul who) has penetrated into No
Means (cuts through) the restrictions (imposed) by the scriptures, and so for one

who has ascended (into the pure consciousness of No Means), there is no
contraction at all. This is the sense. The scripture serves to regulate (the
discipline) of those who are in need of instruction and desire to rise (to higher
levels). This was said before. Thus, because he has done (all that) needs be done
for himself, he continues to be present (in the world only) in order to grace others.

Accordingly, he says: (he has) no other (purpose), such as the observance of the
rules (samaya) (of right conduct), ‘than to grace (others).
He says that:

a #tcā fṁ] ēczúcoīh
U TĀGĪT]

ṝd ā sfī=maācōīkārtaīā 11| 38 1

svaṁ kartavyaṁ kim api kalayaṁl loka eṣa prayamnān
no pārārthyaṁ prati ghatayate kāñcana svapravṛttim ḷ
yas tu dhvastākhilabhavamalo bhairavībhāvapūrṇaḥ

kṛtyaṁ tasya sphuṭam idam iyal lokakartavyamātram || 39 I|

(The people of) this world exert themselves, intent as they are in

some way on their own affairs. They do not act at all for the benefit of others.
This verse is quoted in IPVv 1, p. 33-34; there svapravrttin – their own affairs’ reads

svātmavṛttim ‘their own condition’, and dhvastākhilabhavamalo – (he in whom) all the
impurity of phenomenal existence has been destroyed’ reads tyaktākhilabhavamalaḥ ʻ(he
who) has abandoned all the impurity of phenomenal existence’; bhairavībhāvapūrṇaḥ –
‘(he who has) identified with Bhairava, by virtue of which he is full (and perfect) reads
prāptasaṁpūrṇabodhaḥ – ‘(he who has) attained completely full (awakened)

consciousness’.

Abhinava associates the sentiment expressed here in this verse with the first verse

of the ĪP and quotes it in IPVv 1 p. 33-34. The verse reads:
kathaṁcid āsādya maheśvarasya
dāsyaṁ janasyāpy upakāram icchan
samastasaṁpatsamavãptihetuṁ
tatpratyabhijñām upapādayāmi |I 1 I|

‘Having somehow attained the state of a servant of the Great Lord (maheśvara),
which is the cause of attaining all that is of value, and wishing to render service to

humanity, I am establishing (by reasoned argument) the Recognition of that (reality). ĪP

1/1/1

CHAPTER TWO
He goes on to comment:

svātmani nirākāṅkṣatā iti viśeṣaviṣayo niṣedhaḥ śeṣam abhyunujānātīti icchārāpāyā

ākāṅkṣāyā gatyantaravirahāt para eva

viṣayo

(>

“viṣayo) bhavati

na ca

parãpakãraviṣayã (> paropa-) asau yuktā tasya apūrṇasvãtmakair eṣaṇĩyatvãt, asya tu

īśvaradāsyena samastasaṁpatprāptihetunā paripūrṇatvāt svātmani kiṁcid api kartavyam
eṣaṇīyaṁ nāsti | apratihatā ca citsvabhāvatvād icchā | sā parārthaviṣayaiva balāt
saṁpadyate | svasaṁpādya-niyantrito hi na param upacikīrṣet, svasaṁpādyābhāve tu

halād eva paropakāraviṣayā sā bhavati | yathoktaṁ mayaiva śrīṣaḍardhaślokavārtike
tantrāloke
svaṁ kartavyaṁ kimapi kalayaṁlloka eṣa prayatnãnno pārārthyaṁ prati ghaṭayate kāṁcana syātmavṛttim |
(p. 34) yastu tyaktākhiḻabhavamalaḥ prāptasaṁpūrṇabodhaḥ
kṛtyaṁ tasya sphutamidamiyallokakartavyamātram || (TĀ 2/39)
‘A state devoid of craving within oneself’. ‘Craving’, which is desire, (consists
of) the denial of a particular object and the acceptance of what remains. As there is no
other condition (of desire), the other (person) is not an area (viṣay) (of its concern). Nor

does it make sense that helping others is its concern, because the object of desire is that of
those whose nature is unfulfilled (apūrṇa). (However,) one who is completely fulfilled by
(his) condition as a servant of the lord, which is the cause of attaining all that is of value,

there is nothing at all within himself that needs to be done that is desirable. (His) will is

unrestricted because (its) nature is consciousness. It forcefully becomes (desire) that is

concerned with the needs of others (parārthaviṣayā). One who is constrained by what he
must achieve for himself has no desire to act (for the benefit of anyone) else. (But) when

there is nothing to be achieved for oneself, (his) desire forcefully (becomes such that it)
area of concem is to render service others. As I myself have said:
iti | tena ātmano ʻśeṣasaṁpannidhānamahādevadāsyalābhāt saṁpanne upakāre parasyāpi

tam icchann iti apratihatecchāprasaratvād eva parituṣyāmīti prāptakālo yukto me ʻtra āśu
paritoṣaḥ iti prāptakāle liṅga |
(I have) obtained for myself the condition of Mahādeva’s servant, which is the

treasure of all that is of value and so, wealthy and desiring to help others also, I am
completely satisfied because (my) desire flows forth unobstructed. Thus, as (I am one)
whose time has come, it is right (and reasonable) that I should be quickly satisfied here (in
this way).

tad etat upakāram icchan ity asya vyākhyānaṁ parituṣyeyam iti | prasarantyā hi icchāyā

anirodhaḥ paritoṣaḥ paropakāre samarthaḥ, tadviṣayām icchāṁ prasarantīṁ svārthasaṅpādanaprābalyena vā svārthapratighātaparākaraṇatātparyeṇa vā anāśaṅkitaprasara-

nirodhāṁ kathaṁkāraṁ nirundhyām iti tātparyamṃ

‘The explanation of (the sentence) ‘wishing to render service (to others)’ is that
(others) should be made (to feel) completely contented. ‘Contentment’, which is the lack

of impediment to the flow of the will, is capable of assisting others. Desire flows forth
which has that as its concern (viṣaya). Or else (it may do s0) by the overpowering (need)
to achieve one’s own purpose or else with the intention to remedy what impedes (the
achievement of) one’s own purpose. One must in some way block the obstruction to the
(free) flow (of the will to help others) that is free of doubts (and misgivings). This is the

overall sense.’ ĪPVv 1 p. 33-34

TANTRĀLOKA

While he in whom all the impurity of phenomenal existence has been

destroyed and identified with Bhairava, by virtue of which he is full (and
perfect), has clearly only this (left) to do, namely, (attend to) the well-being of

the people of the world. (39)

‘(The people of) this world’ are the category of perceivers (whose

consciousness) is contracted insofar as, in accord with the teaching that ‘(selfish)

desire is the impurity (mala) hereʼ,'' (the fettered soul) believes himself to be

incomplete (apūrṇamanyatā), because he is conjoined with the worldly impurity
of the individual soul (āṇavamala). (Thus, due to this,) he ‘exerts’ (himself)

because of (his) impelling need ‘in some way’. (He says this) to indicate (that he

exerts himself in) all his own affairs in general. (But) ‘intent’ (kalayan) (in this
way), he is not successful (in accomplishing) his own goal, for, as the saying goes
‘that is not accomplished which is (presumed to be) accomplished by someone
(who is himself) not accomplished’.' So how can he manage (to direct) his
activity (pravṛtti) ‘aṭ all’, even a little, for some other (person’s) benefit, and even

if that is done, that activity would not serve (to achieve) anything. This is the
general sense.
But one who, on the contrary, has rendered nought (all) bondage because
he is has been penetrated by (the pure consciousness of) No Means, has thus, by

virtue of his identification with Bhairava (bhairavībhāva), that is, by attaining the
nondual knowledge (of his oneness with) the Lord, accomplished (everything)
within himself, and so, because (nothing else is) needed, ‘he is full (and

perfect). Thus, not propense to anything else, he is at rest in his own Self alone.
‘Only this’" is what he has necessarily (left to) do' for all (the people of) the

world, namely, bring about the recognition of their own (true) nature. The

meaning is that this is all that he has ‘clearly (left) to do’, which does not fade
away, namely, just grace the world. This is the meaning. The point is that he has

'! The expression here is lokakartavyamātram, which literally means ‘just what needs to

be done for the world’. This verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 4/47cd-48.

'" SVṬ 4/105d. Beset by feelings that something is missing, the fettered soul does not

recognize his essential perfection as the all-embracing plenitude (pāūrṇatā) of
consciousness. Thus, all his activities are directed at satisfying the need to be complete
and not lack anything. But he can never achieve this in this way. A true sense of fulfilment

depends on recognizing oneself as the All. As long as one experiences oneself as a limited
individual set apart from everybody and everything else, it is impossible to feel satisfied
and complete. However, those who without means or method recognize that they are
Bhairava reduce all the bondage of craving to nothing. Accomplished within themselves
through the realization of nonduality, they are devoid of all desires, and resting in

themselves without being dependent on anything else, experience themselves to be full
and perfect. Now free of the selfishness that motivates the actions of the fettered, they

have nothing left to do except to work for the benefit of others.
'! One could also translate in a different context: ‘that is not proved by something which

is (itself) not proved. The sense is simply that a proposition cannot be proved to be
correct by another one which is itself not proved to be so.

Read

tasyeyat

for

tasyeyatā

svātmapratyabhijñāpanaṁ..

'! Read kartavyam for granthakartavyam.

and

insert

yat

between

and

CHAPTER TWO

nothing to do for himself because he has attained (all that) needs to be attained. As
the Lord has sung (in the Bhagavadgītā);

‘The man, who delights in the Self, is satisfied by the Self and is content
in the Self, has nothing (left) to do.”
‘O Pārtha, there is nothing at all I must do (anywhere) in the three worlds,

nothing that has not been attained that needs be attained, and (yet) I abide in
action.

Those who (receive) grace from others are of two kinds, namely, those
whose consciousness is pure and those whose consciousness is not pure.
(Abhinavagupta) says (in the following verse) with regard to those whose
consciousness is pure that his imparting of grace (to them) is to that extent (tāvar)

unaided.'

ā ā vafd āīgackāvṁavafaz;|

|I/’5 0 1|
taṁ ye paśyanti tādrūpyakrameṇāmalasaṁvidaḥ |
te ‘pi tadrūpiṇas tāvaty evāsyānugrahātmatā || 40 ||

Those whose consciousness is pure and behold him also become of his

same nature by (his) transmission of that nature (to them). Such is the extent

of his grace!" (40)

‘Those whose consciousness is pure’, by virtue of (their) previous
practice etc., or are recipients of the most intense (tīvratīvra) form of the descent
of the power (of grace). They ‘behold him’ (that is, the teacher) whose nature has

been explained previously, (and so also become of his same nature) ‘by (his)

'! Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh and N kāryaṁ for kārya BhGī 3/17. Commenting on this
verse, Abhinava writes: ‘one who rejoices in one’s own Self alone remains engaged in
activity only because this is the nature of the sense organs, which remain active regardless

of whether one is active or inactive. Such a person does not engage in communication
with other living beings for any selfish purpose. He, knowing his duty, performs it in
accordance with śāstric injunction.’ Translation by Boris Marjanovic (2002: 92).

bid. 3/21.

'” The one who is imparting grace is described in the previous verse. He graces

everybody, both those whose consciousness is pure, that is, free of thought constructs, and
those whose consciousness is not. Verses 40 to 43 concern those whose consciousness is
pure, that is, free of thought constructs. These elevated souls are graced by their teacher

directly without any intermediate aids, simply by participating in the teacher’s absorption

in liberated consciousness free of means. This takes place by participating in the same

spontaneous process of transformation by which the teacher achieved the recognition of

his oneness with Bhairava by His grace unaided by any means. The following verses refer,

by way of contrast, to those whose consciousness is not such. Unable to grace them

directly, the teacher requires some means by which to do so.
! Quoted below TĀv ad 4/47cd-48.

TANTRĀLOKA

transmission of that nature (to them) (tādrūpyakrameṇa), (realising that) ‘he
is penetrated by (the divine consciousness of) No Means (nirupāyasamāveśa).”
Preceded (in this way) by knowledge (jñāna), they make (the one divine
consciousness which shines through the teacher) a direct (experience). Thus, just
by seeing the other (that is, the teacher,) and by the transmission of that
consciousness,' in accord with the dictum stated further ahead that ‘(the disciple
is illumined) like the flame (of a lamp) that has arisen from (another) flame’

. tādrāūpyakrameṇa 1it. ‘by following that same course of development (of

consciousness). Here ‘krama’ means, as Jayaratha says, saṅkrama, i.e. ʻtransferʼ

Once the disciple has been perfectly purified by the fire of consciousness, he is fit to

enter the supreme state of consciousness free of all means. Then ‘by following that same

course of development’, that is, first purification in this way and then the transfer of
expanding consciousness free of all means by the most intense form of grace (see below,
13/130cd-131ab). This takes place when the disciple witnesses that the supreme state of
consciousness the teacher has attained is the same as his own. The teacher merely tells his

disciple to observe his (i.e. the teacher's) consciousness. Then, once the disciple has
experienced his teacher’s state of consciousness, he should pay attention to his own
consciousness to recognise that it is the same perfect, expanding consciousness within

which the teacher is immersed, and which has been transferred to him. In this way the

disciple follows the same course of development as the consciousness of his teacher. The
disciple needs not do anything nor does the teacher; they just observe one another for a
moment to share the same enlightened consciousness beyond means. This is the most

immediate and direct form of initiation.
'! The same phrase is quoted in TĀv ad 3/291ab (3/290) and 4/203. The context is always
the same, that is, the initiation of the disciple into the supreme state by a direct
transmission of the teacher’s enlightened state by means of his gaze. Although Jayaratha
says that this dictum is stated further ahead, it cannot be traced. However, Abhinava does
make use of the same expression, but not with exactly the same wording, as an analogy for
how illumined consciousness is transmitted from teacher to disciple in general. There it

appears that he is paraphrasing the SYM, saying: dīpād dīpavad īdrśaḥ || santāno – ‘a

spiritual lineage (santāna) is like this, namely (a series – santāna – of lamps in which) one

lamp (is lit) from (another) lampʼ (23/27d-28a). The SYM is thus the most probable
source. The same or similar expressions also appear in Krama sources. An example is the

Devīdyyardhaśatikā or the Yonigahvaratantra, from which it shares (most probably draws
from) much material (see below, TĀv ad 4/149 and note). The relevant lines are:
tatkṣaṇāt patāte bhūmau chinnamūla iva drumaḥ |

vedhadīkṣāprayogeṇa saṁkrāntā yasya hṛdguhā |l
tatkṣaṇāj jayate so pi dīpād dīpam ivoddhṛtam |

‘At that very moment, he falls to the ground like a tree cut at the root. He too,

whose heart-cave has received the transmission by the application of the initiation by
piercing (vedhadīkṣā), becomes at that very moment (as is his teacher) like a flame taken
from (another) flame.' DDS 191-192ab (my edition and translation. The last two lines

appear with no variants in the Ūrmikaulārṇava as verse 3/103ab (3/103)). Note the variant

dīpād dīpam ivoddhṛtam (‘like a flame taken from (another) flame’) for dīpād dīpam

ivoditam (like the flame (of a lamp) that has arisen from (another) flame). Although the

reading in the DDŚ appears to be more satisfactory, I have retained the one here, as it is
found uniformly in the two other places it is quoted by Jayaratha. Note also that this
common image of being cut down at the root is also applied to the functioning of sartarka,
which is like an axe that does that (see 4/13).

CHAPTER TWO

they are (also) penetrated by (the divine consciousness of) No Means, and so are

similar to that (in all respects). This is what remains (to be said that is not

expressed directly in this verse).
Again, the vision of Siddhas and the like, which is an occasional cause
(nimitta) of penetration into No Means (consciousness), is of the same nature.

This (teaching) was previously corroborated (by the scripture in the passage)
beginning with: ‘the vision of Siddhas and Yoginīs . . ..' Thus ‘such is the
extent of his grace’, namely that just the sight (darśana) (of him) (liberates the
disciple). Indeed, there is no dependence (at all) on the means (to realisation), and
the rest that will be explained (in the following chapters). This is the meaning.

Surely, (it is said) everywhere (in the scriptures) that initiation is the
means to liberation, with statements such as: “‘liberation is conferred by Śiva’s

initiation’.'™ So how is it that it is said here that that is attained even without

initiation by just seeing (the teacher)? With this doubt in mind, he says:
Knowledge of Reality is Ultimate Ritual Action

ṢTTJTÑGTÑ TTd aIIIT āaTT |
aaīT fē̃yā’ 4īfcaagaāīṁazma 1| 2 11
etat tattvaparijñānaṁ mukhyaṁ yāgādi kathyate |
dīkṣāntaṁ vibhunā śrīmatsiddhayogīśvarīmate || 41 |I
The Ubiquitous Lord teaches in the venerable Siddhayogīśvarīmata

that this complete knowledge of reality' is the primary (form of ritual
action,) ranging from the sacrifice to initiation. (41)

' Read tatsadṛśā for tatsadṛkṣā. Juṣṭ as there is no difference between the flame that

lights another flame and the flame that is lit by it, both are fire, similarly, the disciple and
teacher are both the one consciousness. This example that illustrates the manner in which
the transference (sarṁkramaṇa) of unconditioned consciousness from teacher to disciple

takes place is a common one.

' The full quote is found above in TĀv ad 22.

'MV 4/8d. Also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/229cd-230ab (230).

' Cf. Bodhapañcadaśikā:

yat tattvasya parijñānaṁ sa mokṣaḥ parameśataḥ |
tat pūrṇatvaṁ prabuddhānāṁ jīvanmuktiś ca sā smṛtā ||

‘A complete knowledge of reality is the liberation that comes from the Supreme
Lord. That is the complete plenitude of those who are awake and is said to be liberation

while alive.” (13)

This translation follows Jayaratha’s interpretation. Another, possible translation
is ‘. . . a complete (all round) knowledge of this reality is the primary (form of all ritual

action) ranging from the sacrifice to initiation.’

Tbrzsôk (1999: 217): “Abhinavagupta implies that perfect knowledge is taught under

such (inferior) forms as worship and initiation in the SYM. This agrees with his view that

the teaching of the SYM is the ritualist version of the Kaula or Pratyabhijñā teaching that
final release is obtained through knowledge.”

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The Ubiquitous Lord says’ everywhere in the scriptures, such as the
venerable Siddhayogīśvarīmata, that the sacrifice, fire offerings and the rest are in

their primary modality (mukhyayā vṛttyā) ‘“a complete knowledge of this reality’

explained previously that cannot be attained by any means. This is the (ordered)
relation (between the words of this verse). Thus, the sense (of this verse)

establishes (by implication that) the external sacrifice etc. is secondary, otherwise
(the consciousness of No Means) would not be primary. It is with (the same)
intent (that the external sacrifice) is also prohibited in the sexual practice

(caryākrama).” As is said:

‘The maṇḍala and the sacrificial hearth are of no use at all in this

(initiation), nor is the deposition (of Mantras on the body) (nyāsa) or the like that

precede it. (Ritual) ablution and the like (may or may not be done) as one likes.”
He (now) quotes that:

' The variant in MS K reads caryāsthaṇḍilādy api niṣiddham ‘(with the same intention,

the practice of) religious observances (caryā) and the formation of a sacrificial surface
(altar) and the like are also prohibited’ for caryākrame ‘py etan niṣiddham, i.e. (the

external sacrifice) is also prohibited in (the performance of) the sexual practice
(caryākrama)

'MV 11/2. This verse prefaces a section of the MV dealing with the rites of initiation for

the regular initiate (samayin), apprentice (putraka) and the teacher (ācārya). Consiṣṭent
with his agenda to ground his Anuttara Trika in the teachings of the MV (see above, 1/17),
Abhinava presents these rites as initial points of entry to Kaula practice that is centred on
the rites of sexual union taught below in Chapter Twenty-Nine, which opens with a
paraphrase of this verse (29/8), although they are not taught in the MV. Accordingly, these

rituals consist of the application of purifying energies transmitted through Trika Mantras,

culminating in an intense penetration of Rudra’s power. In this way, the initiation ‘brings
about (both) liberation and enjoyment as well as complete and immediate realisation’
(bhuktimuktikariṁ .samyaksadyaḥpratyayakārikām). Understanding that Abhinava
distinguishes between outer ritual as a secondary form of the primary form of ritual which,

as immediate realisation, is not outer at all, Jayaratha has quoted the MV here. This does
not necessarily mean that the lower must be abandoned for the higher. Nor does it mean

that they need be all practiced in order to rise from one to the other. Thus, Jayaratha
implies here that ritual culminates in No Means, that is, instantaneous realisation brought

about by the most intense penetration of Rudra’s power, heralded by the infusion of the
energies of Mantra. In the following verses, Abhinava indicates that such a succession is

possible, starting from even basic outer ritual procedures.

' By introducing the following verses saying ‘he (now) quotes that’, does Jayaratha mean

the MV or the SYM? As Jayaratha has just quoted from the MV, he may be referring the

reader to that, not the SYM. The verses cannot be traced in either of the extant versions of

the MV or the SYM. Tōrzsók (1999: 217) is of the opinion that the content of the verses
coincides better with the teachings of the Mālinīvijayottara than the SYM, and so possibly

the former is the source. However, there is no reason why Abhinava should refer to one
scripture and then immediately after quote a different one. Thus, reading Abhinava

directly, it would appear he is referring to the SYM. Tōrzsôk (1999: 217) observes: ‘It

seems that the citation by Abhinavagupta . . is indeed a passage from the long redaction

of the SYM; but the passage also shows that there may be important doctrinal differences
between the short and the long recension, the latter being less ritualist We note that

although Jayaratha had a copy of both the SYM and the MV, he does not quote either in
his commentary. This may be because he could not locate the verses there.

CHAPTER TWO

TPIGTĨ TI

T. JIIGĪRT || #3 ||

sthaṇḍilād uttaraṁ tūraṁ tūrād uttarataḥ paṭaḥ |
paṭtād dhyānaṁ tato dhyeyaṁ tataḥ syād dhāraṇottarā || 42 ||
tato 'pi yogajaṁ rūpaṁ tato ‘pi jñānam uttaram |
jñānena hi mahāsiddho bhaved yogīśvaras tv iti || 43 ||

“The skull (tūra) is higher (uttara) than the sacrificial surface
(sthaṇḍila),'™ higher than the skull is the cloth (pata) and higher than the
cloth, visualization (of the deity) (dhyāna), and of this, the object of

meditation. Higher than that is concentration (dhāraṇā), and superior to

that also is the (inner) form born of Yoga, and of that too knowledge (of
ultimate reality) is higher. Indeed, it is by virtue of knowledge (jñāna) that a

great Siddha is the Lord of Yogis.” (42-43)

Fortunately, these issues are apparently resolved for us by Kṣemarāja, who

quotes the line corresponding to TĀ 2/43cd, saying that it is from the ‘venerable

Siddhāmata i.e. the SYM. śrīsiddhāmate ‘pi "jñānena tu mahāsiddho bhaved yogīśvaras

tv iha | NTu ad 16/68ab. Note that iha – ‘here’ at the end of this line reads ii in the TĀ. As
a marker indicating the end of a citation, it is quite possible that Abhinava changed the

reading. If ṭhat is so, it indicates two things. One is that verses 41 to 43 are indeed a single

citation, It would also indicate that Kṣemarāja was quoting from the SYM directly.

' By ‘higher’ (uttara) is meant more elevated. It may also mean that the skull is placed

on the sacrificial ground, and a cloth with a depiction of the deity on the skull. Thus, this

passage outlines a sequence that extends from the items of the external sacrificial rite
(yāga) through stages of meditation to the fully initiated state (cf. 2/41), which marks the

achievement of knowledge of ultimate reality, which is here understood to be the No
Means state of Anuttara, the supreme Light of consciousness.

The sacrificial surface – sthaṇḍila – is a low platform of earth on which the deity is
invisibly installed and worshipped. The deity may also be worshipped in an abstract

representation, termed an ‘unmanifest Liṅga’ (avyaktaliṅga), or an anthropomorphic
representation (a ‘manifest Liṅga’ -vyaktaliṅga), which may be an idol (pratimā) cast in
metal, a painting on a cloth (paṭa), or the outline of the deities or their seed-syllable
mantras carved on a skull or a substitute for it (tāra) (below, 27/9, 19cd-28b).

' Representations of the deity may be drawn on a cloth (cf. below, 6/2-4ab). The

Piṅgalāmata (prakaraṇa 5) deals with this topic.

' Presumably, the deity drawn externally on the cloth is visualized internally.
' The term dhāraṇā literally means ‘the act of holding, bearing, supporting or

maintainingʼ. The visualized image of the deity is sustained by concentration. This leads

to the ‘form born of Yoga’, that is, the single nature that is produced by the union (yoga)
of the yogi and the deity that is the object of his profound contemplation. The final end

and goal of this ascent is the knowledge of ultimate reality. When the yogi attains that, he
becomes fully accomplished (siddha) and the Lord of Yogis.

Note that here once again Abhinava supports the view that Yoga is a higher stage of

development of ritual. We may say that this is a distinctively (but not uniquely a) Trika

view. Kāpālika rites are taught as leading to Yoga, where one would expect them to lead

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The sacrificial surface’ is an area of ground selected (for the
performance of) a sacrifice.' ‘The skull’ is a particular shape that is engraved on

a (sacrificial) vessel and the like. He explains the reason why knowledge is the
most excellent of all, (saying): ‘by virtue of knowledge (jñāna)ī etc. The
meaning is that it is by virtue of (this) knowledge that (a great Siddha) is the Lord
(īśvara) of Yogis.
‘lordʼ.

Thus,in order to emphasize (the point, he) also uses the words ‘great’ and

Again, he explains that with respect to those whose consciousness is not
pure, (the teacher’s) imparting of grace is aided (by some means):
The Means to Realization Serve the Liberated to Grace Others

=ṃō frāāītzāaīī+ fatrīzq || xx
so ‘pi svātantryadhāmnā ced apy anirmalasaṁvidām |

anugrahaṁ cikīrṣus tadbhāvinaṁ vidhim āśrayet | 44 ||

However, if by the power of his freedom he wishes to grace those
whose consciousness is not pure also, even he should take recourse to the

procedure we are about to explain. (44)

to possession (āvesa) by the Deity. Moreover, the stages of this theistic Yoga ultimately

lead to the liberating knowledge of reality. The stress on knowledge may be so strong, as
for examplein the PT, that outer ritualis abandoned altogether.

Read yāgārthaṁ for yāgārtha.
'" Here it seems that Jayaratha does not know the meaning of the uncommon word ‘tūīra’,

which denotes the ‘skull’ or ‘skull bowl’ used for ritual purposes. We find the term in the

BY, which dedicates a long chapter to the Sacrificial Rite of the Skull (tārayāga), and in
the SYM quoted below in a passage dealing with the best types of skull for ritual purposes
and their application (see 27/21 ff., cf. 28/419ab (28/418)).

' One could understand the word as referring to Śiva who is the Lord of Yogis. The

meaning would then be that the yogi becomes one with Śiva. But Jayaratha, it seems, does
not understand it that way, as one would not say of Śiva that heis a great Siddha, because
that would imply that He attained that state of accomplishment to become a great
‘accomplished one’ (siddha). Moreover, we do find many instances of the expression
‘Lord of Yogis’ (yogīśvara) as a title given to fully accomplished yogis. See Dyczkowski
2009: vol. 5, n. 51.
Note also that knowledge of reality is the ultimate aim of Yoga also. Those who
atṭain it are liberated without practicing Yoga, but even so are the greatest yogis.

This verse and the first line of the one that follows are quoted by Jayaratha belowin

TĀv ad 3/292ab-293ab (3/291cd-292), andjjust the verse in TĀv ad 4/47cd-48. One could
also translate: ‘However, if by the power of his freedom he wishes to grace those whose
consciousness is not pure also, even he should abide by the procedure that (remains to be
observed) in the future (after he has attained perfection).’ In the primary sources, the term
‘vidhī’, which is most commonly used to denote ritual procedure, can also denote yogic
praxis. Abhinava uses the term with reference to content of the Tantrāloka he is going to
present. It commences with an exposition of the means to realisation in the following
chapters. The teacher can free the disciple whose consciousness is pure in an instant with

CHAPTER TWO

(The teacher graces) ‘by the power of his freedom’, not by the restriction
imposed by the scriptures, because it was said before that (the consciousness of

No Means) serves to cut through them.

So, of what kind is the procedure that will be (explained)? He says:

EEEUGUEIEHUICIEEECHĀṬÚṈPH!RṬ
anugrāhyānusāreṇa vicitraḥ sa ca kathyate |

parāparādyupāyaughasaṅkīrṇatvavibhedataḥ || 45 1|
This (procedure) is said to be wonderfully various (vicitra), in accord
with (the differences between) those who are the recipients of grace (favoured
by it) (anugrāhya), and because of the diversity of the means (to realization),

according to whether they are superior or inferior etc., and combinations (of
them). (45)

‘Superior or inferior” is a term denoting two terms, of which one
remains (implied) (ekaśeṣa). Thus, the supreme (para) (means) is the one

pertaining to Śiva (śāmbhava), the inferior one (apara) is the Individual (Means),
and the middling one (parāpara) is the Empowered (Means). ‘Combinations (of
them)ʼ (occur) because (one means) is associated (and aided) by another means.

In order to grace others, it is not only proper that he should abide by the

procedure that will be (explained); (he should) also (attend to) the scriptures etc.

that teach it. Thus, he says:

TēaqTTTYTITRITR̄FTTTRITĪĪCT ||/¢5 1
tad artham eva cāsyāpi parameśvararūpiṇaḥ |
tadabhyupāyaśāstrādiśravaṇādhyayanādaraḥ | 46 ||

just a gracious look or the like. However, in the case of those disciples whose

consciousness is not pure, he has to make use of the means to realisation. Moreover, as we
are told below in verse 46, he should maintain a regular ritual observance. In other words,
although he is liberated in life (jīvanmukta), in order to help his disciples, he behaves as
do the du:
Śaivites who believe that the only liberation possible comes after death
(videhamukti): Śee above, note 1,362.

Ṣee above, 2/38.

'! The means to realisation, their types and interrelationship etc., is almost always

examined from the point of view of the disciple. Here, in the context of this exposition of

No Means, the perspective is from the teacher’s point of view. He is fully realised, so none
of the means apply to him. Even so, he may appear to practice them in order to aid his

disciples. He needs, anyway, in order to fulfil his freely accepted responsibility, to help
others, know the various means, and apply them.

' MS Ch, Jh, J, ṄN, and T read: -sāhityārthah Ś‘in order that (one means) is

(harmoniously) associated (and aided) by another means.”

TANTRĀLOKA

Moreover, although he is the Supreme Lord, for that purpose alone

(that is, gracing others),' he also (should continue to) respect (the practice)

of hearing and studying the scriptures etc.' that are the means to that
(identification with Bhairava). (46)

Not only those who desire to (attain higher levels of consciousness)
should take up (and practice the teachings of) the scripture, he should do so as
well. This is the meaning of the word ‘alsoʼ. As is said:

‘Although one who knows (ultimate) reality is free of doubt, he should
not abandon the restriction (imposed by) the scripture, which is the practice of

those who desire liberation. This is the command of the Supreme Goddess.’

Surely (one may ask,) would he not lose (his) freedom in this way by

paying attention to the means (to realisation) (upāyamukhaprekṣitva)? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

aṁ āītt atṁ ī-T |
īTrṁtrā: ṭā’sgaāgŪraā: (| .9 11
na hi tasya svatantrasya kāpi kuṭrāpi khaṇḍanā |

nānirmalacitaḥ puṁso ʻnugrahas tv anupāyakaḥ || 47 II
(This can do him no harm). Nothing in any circeumstance
compromises him, free as he is. (And he should apply himself in this way
because) the soul whose consciousness is not pure cannot receive grace

without a means (to realisation). (47)

. He is not dependent in himself on (any) means (to realisation), as is one
who desires to ascend (to higher levels of consciousness), in such a way that (his)
freedom would be compromised. Rather, as he has done (all that) needs to be done
within (and for) himself, he accepts that for the sake of others. Insofar as the
consciousness of others is not pure, grace will not be successful without the
See above, 2/35ab-38ab (2/35-38). This verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 4/47cd-48.

These are the duties, amongst others, of the regular initiate (samayin). Thus, we read in

the Svacchandatantra:

‘The regular initiate is purified in this way; (thus) he is fit to utter (the scripture
repeatedly) (vācana) (to elevate his intellect), listen (to it), study, make fire offerings and

worship etc.” SVT 4/79

Kṣemarāja defines the two Abhinava mentions here as follows: śravaṇam
arthabodhaḥ; adhyayanaṁ vedavat satatapāṭha āgamarahasyaḥ | ‘Listening’ (means)

understanding the meaning (of the scripture). ‘Studyingʼ (means) the continuous
recitation, like the Veda, of the secret of the (Śaiva) scriptures. SvTu ad 4/79

Literally: ‘the grace of the soul whose consciousness is not pure is not without means.

This verse is quoted below ad 4/47cd-48.

CHAPTER TWO

(application of) the means (to realisation). Accordingly, (Abhinava) also said that

‘even he should take recourse to the procedure we are about to explain’. As is

sung (in the Bhagavadgītā):

‘Just as the ignorant act impelled by attachment, O Arjuna, so should the
wise man act (but) without attachment, desiring to do good to the world.”
This is not just said by us, as our own personal idea, rather it is said

everywhere by the Lord (Himself) and the earlier teachers. So in order to show

that the meaning of all this chapter is not contrary (to the teachings of the
scriptures), he says:

The Dissipation of Doubt by the Teacher, Scriptures and Faith

aTT aī gīrcāTHrṝcīēēñra: 11 e 1
Śśrīmadūrmimahāśi tre siddhasaṁtānarūpake |
idam uktaṁ tath

matṣomānandādidaiśikaiḥ || 48 ||

This (teaching is not a product of our imagination); it is stated in the

great scripture, the venerable Ūrmi, which is (the teaching of) the lineage of
Above, 2/44d.

' BhGī 3/25. Abhinava comments: ‘The purpose behind performing acts even by such a

person who has already attained perfection, and therefore has his mind fully satisfied, is to

educate people. Here Lord Kṛṣṇa gives himself as an example. The actions which are
one’s duty should be performed without expecting their fruit. Furthermore, if one who has
already attained perfection would not perform any act, then chaos would prevail in

society. This is because people would not follow the well-established path and a firm faith
(in that well-established path) would be shaken. In such a situation people would not be
able to experience the consequences of their past deeds or to follow right knowledge.

Therefore, they would become indifferent. Because ordinary people are not purified by the
right knowledge, inactivity of any enlightened person would do them great harm by

making their minds unstable. Therefore, the enlightened man should never act in such a
way that would harm ordinary people.’ Translation by Boris Marjanovic (2002: 94).

Ś This is the Úrmikaulārṇava, a Krama scripture attributed to Matsyendranātha quoted

by Abhinava several times throughout the Tantrāloka. By referring to the ŪKau along
with Somānanda, Abhinava is aligning the nondualist Śaiva tradition with Kaulism as both
teaching Anupāya. How this is so in the former case is clear from Jayaratha’s citation of
the Śivadrṣṭi. But how this is the case in the latter instance is not so clear on the basis of

the references Jayaratha has chosen. One wonders why he did not choose other references.

For example, in chapter two of the fragment of the Ūrmikaulārṇava that has survived, we
find a description of degrees and visible signs of the ‘initiation by piercing’ (vedhadīkṣā),

in which the disciple is overwhelmed by an intense descent of the power of grace

(tīvraśaktipāta). This is identified, as it is in the MV, with Rudra’s power (rudraśakti),

that gives rise to three forms of penetration (āvesa), namely, (those) pertaining to Śiva

(śāmbhava), Power (śākta) and the individual soul (āṇava) (see above, 1/168-170). In that
context the ŪKau teaches what we have seen is essentially Anupāya (see above note 2,4):

TANTRĀLOKA

the Siddhas (Matsyendranātha and the rest) as well as by (our) teachers,
including the venerable Somānanda and the rest. (48)

‘The great scripture, the venerable Ūrmi’, is (the teaching of) the
lineage of the Siddhas of the venerable Ūrmikaula. In this way he also indicates

(the clarity and) undecaying nature (of the teachings) in the lineage (of teachers)
belonging to the Pādovalli.' There (we read):
‘A void (śūnya) is nothing at all. That Void (which is ultimate reality) is

not empty (aśūnya); it is not vacuity.'"" Why should one not think that what is not
anything is not nothing at all?”

Questioned (in this way) by the goddess, the Lord (replied) beginning

with (the words:

‘One should know here (with regard to this question) that the Self from
which Śiva’s attributes have been removed is void. One should understand that
Śiva is void (in the sense that He is) pure (and His) form is formless

(amārtavigraha).

And ending with (the following), He said much:

‘‘It does not existʼ, ‘it does exist’, and ‘it does not not exist’ – that which

these polarities do not touch is not in the domain of words, and so is said here to
be (ultimate) reality (tartva). ‘What will not be, will not be and what will be, (will)
not be other than that’ – having reflected in this way, the wise man should not
dwell in thought. That (reality) is omnipresent, subtle and totally devoid of
limitation (upādhi).”

‘It is stated by (our) teachers, including the venerable Somānanda

and the rest,’ that is, in the Śivadṛṣṭi etc. As is said there:
tīvraśaktinipātena samyaggurvāvalokanāt ||
vedhayen nātra saṁdehaḥ pātayet parvatāny api |

‘By the fall of intense power, due to the proper gaze of the teacher, (the disciple

is) pierced. There is no doubt here (about this) and it makes even mountains fall to the
ground (let alone the disciple who thus falls to the ground enlightened).” ŪKau 2/244cd245ab

Ovall is a term for a Kaula lineage and its tradition. For an etymology and history of

this term, see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 2, 307 n. 2, 397. Matsyendranātha, to whom the
Ūrmikaulārṇava is aṭṭributed in its colophons, is said to have had six diṣciples who

transmitted his teachings. They each founded a lineage – ovalli – named after themselves.
The pādovalli is one of them. See below, 29/36 ff. and comm.; also Dyczkowski 1988: 70-

71.
Cf. SVT 4/292cd: ‘That which is not void is said to be the Void. (What is) ‘void’ is said
to be nonbeing.” Concerning ‘nonbeing’ and voidness, see Dyczkowski 2004: 51 ff.

' Cf. above 2/32ab (2/32cd).

CHAPTER TWO

‘What (use can) meditation (or any outer instrumental) means (karaṇa) be

with respect to Siva Who is perpetually active (and manifest) (satatodita)? . . .

(When something is) known to be gold just once, does (further) reflection
(bhāvanā) become a means (to know more)? When one has known (just) once,

with firm understanding, Śiva’s omnipresent state by means of (any) means of
knowledge (pramāṇa), the scripture or the words of the teacher, there is nothing

to achieve by

(any) means (karaṇa) anywhere or even by meditation

(Now) he says that one should pay attention to that (reality) everywhere:

TTIĀTTTTJÑFTTTATHTĪTĀTSTTTTĪTT

EESI%Ee} EĀE'Eú-EEAPKGĀI

guror vākyād yuktipracayaracanonmārjanavaśāt
samāśvāsāc chāstraṁ prati samuditād vāpi kathitāt |

vilīne śaṅkābhre hṛdayagaganodbhāsimahasaḥ

prabhoḥ sūryasyeva spṛśata caraṇān dhvāntajayinaḥ || 49 ||

When the cloud of doubt has been dissolved away by the words of the

teacher, by the purification (unmārjana) brought about by (this) composition
of a multitude of (sound) arguments, by faith in the scripture or by all (of
them) imparted together, (then) touch the feet (that are the rays) of the sunlike Lord, whose glorious power shines intensely in the Sky of the Heart and
+
who triumphs over darkness!

' The adjective ‘udita’ literally means ‘rsen up. The expression is commonly applied to

the sun, which, as in English, is ‘risen’ or has dawned. In a technical sense, the term is
used to refer to the manifeṣt, immanent state of Śiva. The Light of consciousness is ‘risen
upʼ out of itself, as it were, as the radiant effulgence (sphurattā) of its manifestations. This

is the ‘emergent’ ‘risen upʼ state of the Light, which is perpetually just as it is and hence is

‘perpetually risen upʼ (sadodita). At the same time, without contradiction, the Light is at

rest (viśrānta) within itself. So one can translate udita, as I do here, not literally as ‘risen

upʼ but as ‘active’. These two – ‘active’ (udita) and ‘tranquil’ – are opposites. As
fundamental as “‘immanence’ and ‘transcendenceʼ, they are one in the ‘supreme
nonduality of Śiva consciousness. See below, 29/119-120 and Dyczkowski 1987: 100102.
' ŚḌr, 7/101cd and 7/5-6. The last line (7/6cd) is quoted in TĀv ad 10/216cd-217ab and

ad 15/274cd-275ab. The word karaṇa has a range of meaning. The relevant one here, in a

common non-technical sense, is ‘an instrumental means’. It is the intermediary between

the cause – kāraṇa – and the effect – kārya, as the instrument through which it is effected.
If Somānanda was referring to yogic practice, a ‘karaṇa’ is a means to develop it. As such,

it technically denotes locations in the subtle body that mark stages of ascent of the vital

breath as the practice of Yoga develops to ultimately result in merger. Gnoli translates as
‘ritualʼ, but that is not a common usage of the word.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The disciple’s doubts are removed) ‘by the words of the teacher°, the

foremost of which is the teaching (that needs to be imparted just) once
(sakṛdupadeśa). The ‘composition’ that is in accord with the scriptures, of a
‘multitude’ of such ‘(sound) arguments’ (yukti) such as: ‘the Self itself is the
Lord, Who is omniscient and does all thingsʼ, serves as a means to establish one’s

own view and refute that of others. ‘The purification (unmārjana)’ brought
about by that is the removal of the dust of intellectual ignorance. It is due to that,
that is, the dawning of intellectual knowledge by virtue of the firm stability of
one’s own self-reflective awareness. This is the meaning. ‘The scripture’ is the
nondual scripture (advaitāgama) that has been well established by the Lord.
‘Faithī (samāśvāsa) in that is (firm) conviction (pratyaya) (that arises from
personal insight). (Binding doubt may be removed either) by (one of these)

individually, that is, by the teacher, the scripture (or) one’s personal insight for
those who are the recipients of the most intense form of the descent of the power
(of grace), or else ‘by all (of them) imparted together’, that is, by these three
(together) also for those who are the recipients of an intense, middling and the
other forms of the descent of the power (of grace). ‘Doubt’ is thought (vikalpa). It
is a ʻcloud’ because it shrouds (consciousness). When that ‘has been dissolved

awayʼ (the Lord triumphs).
The ‘Heart ’is just reflective awareness which, because it is unlimited

(anavacchinna), is the Sky there which shines intensely and (is the subjectivity
that) knows and acts (jñatvakartṛtva). ts ‘glorious power’ is (its) radiant energy
(tejas). Thus, the Lord Who ‘triumphs over the darkness’ of the ignorance,

which is the clinging (upāśrita) perception of duality as the obscuring covering of

one’s own (true) nature, is the Supreme Self Who, as the nature of all things
(viśvātmaka), generates (and hence excels all things). (His) ‘feet’ (caraṇa)
(which are His rays are) so called because they move (cara). They are (all forms
of) knowledge, including that of the individual (means to realisation) and the rest.

You (all), who were mentioned previously as the recipients of the most intense
etc. forms of the descent of the power (of grace), ‘touch’, that is, contemplate
(Him) as superior (yathottara) as (your) own (true) nature itself. This is the

meaning. Thus, He is said to be like the sun. It is proper (and agreeable) to touch
(his) (pāda) feet,' removing as it does the darkness, when the cloud (of
ignorance) has been destroyed by (His) intense shining in the sky (of the Heart).
Now he concludes the matter of (this) chapter with the first half of a

verse.

' The adjective viśvātmaka can mean, as 1 have translated, that the Supreme Self is ‘the

nature of all things’ as well as ‘is all things’.
' The word ‘caraṇa’, which we read in the verse, means both ‘ray’ and ‘foot’. Similarly,
the word ‘pāda’, in this context, means both ‘ray’ and ‘foot’. Lord Śiva is the sun of

consciousness that removes the darkness of ignorance by the touch of His rays/feet. Lord

Siva is the teacher. The touch of the feet of a true teacher removes the darkness of
ignorance because, in reality, the devotee is touching the feet of Lord Śiva and is being
touched by them. He experiences this as the realisation that the teacher, that is, Lord Śiva,

is who he really is.

CHAPTER TWO

idam anuttaradhāmavivecakaṁ vigalitaupayikaṁ kṛtam āhnikam |
This chapter, which examines the abode of the Absolute (Anuttara)
free of (all) that can be attained (by any) means, is complete. (S0ab)

(By the expression) ‘(all) that can be attained (by any) means’, is
(meant any) means (to realisation). This is the auspicious (end of this chapter).
Jayaratha, who is engaged in seeking a hundred means to understand each
verse (of the Tantrāloka), has (thus) quickly commented (in brief) on this chapter
concerning No Means.
Thus ends the second chapter, called the Elucidation of No Means, of the
venerable Tantrāloka, composed by the venerable teacher (ācārya)
Abhinavagupta, that has a commentary called ‘Light’ (prakāśa).

CHAPTER THREE

The Supreme Means (Paropāya)
(He who is the embodiment of) victory is victorious, manifesting within

Himself, although it is (the Void) Sky (of consciousness), like a city in a mirror,
all this wonderfully diverse universe of words and meanings.'

After (the teachings concerning) No Means, in order to expound the
Divine Means, now that its turn has come, he announces (the beginning of the
next chapter) with the second half of the verse, (the first half of which concluded
the previous chapter).
atha paraupayikaṁ praṇigadyate padam anuttaram eva maheśituḥ 1|
Now the plane of the Supreme Lord, that is, Anuttara (the Absolute),

which is attained by the supreme means (paraupayika), will be explained .
The Light of Consciousness

Within Which Everything is Reflected
' A king who is victorious in battle over another king has thereby excelled him and made

the vanquished subservient to himself. Śiva, who is victorious over all, thereby excels
everything and makes all things dependent on Himself and includes them within His
dominion. This is just as the reflections are dependent for their existence on the mirror that

far excels them.

The Supreme Means (paropāya) is Śāmbhavopāya. See above, 1/290ab (1/288cd). One
could also translate the expression ‘paraupayika’ as ‘the supreme goal’. Here, as

throughout, the previous chapter is connected to the one that follows by the literary device

of having the first half of a verse concluding the previous chapter and the second half

introducing the second (see above, note to intro. to 1/335ab). The two lines read together
tell us how Abhinava understands the progression of his liturgy (paddhati) or modality
(prakriyā) of practice and that of the levels and forms of reality with which it is consonant.

Cf. below note to 8/5 for the use of the term ‘prakriyā’ in this sense applied to cosmology.

.Abhinava begins his presentation of the Supreme Means, that is, Śāmbhavopāya, with an
exposition of the Doctrine of Reflection (pratibimbavāda). This maintains that all that is

objectively perceived, whether outer objects, sensory perceptions or inner cogitations,
shines within consciousness at one with it as do reflections with the mirror in which they

are reflected. But while the reflections (pratibimba) in a mirror are those of an original
object (bimba) outside the mirror, these reflections are produced by the inherent power of

the mirror of Bhairava’s consciousness.

The idea that all that exists, with or without outer physically objective content,

appears within consciousness, through which it is made manifest, is not new. The

Buddhist idealists (Yogācāra) had made it a cornerstone of their idealism, for which they
found support in some of the Buddhist sūtras, especially the Gaṇḍavyūha. But for them, it
serves to illustrate that the world is just an unreal appearance. It appears, but has no
independent nature of its own, like a reflection in a mirror. However, Abhinava, following
the lead of Utpaladeva, takes care to stress that the reflections are real. The face reflected

in the mirror is my own. It is a true reflection, not a mistake.

Abhinava teaches that he who experiences that the whole of reality, with all its
levels, is reflected within the mirror of his own consciousness free of thought constructs,

CHAPTER THREE

realises his true nature as Bhairava. This is liberation whilst alive in the body (jīvanmukti)
(TĀ 3/271cd-272ab (271)). The mirror is the Void of consciousness, devoid of space, time
and form (ibid. 3/23). Flowing, as it were, within it, this awareness is full and perfect

subjectivity, the stream of the energies of AHAMṀ (ibid. 3/268cd-271ab (268-270)). These
Abhinava expounds here from verse 70 onwards, having first focused on the ground of

their unfolding, that is, the mirror of consciousness and its properties. Śāmbhavopāya is
essentially the realization of this subjectivity to be one’s own and that the mirror is one’s
own true Bhairava nature. See below, 3/268ab (3/267cd) ff. For a brief introduction to the

Doctrine of Reflection (pratibimbavāda), see Dyczkowski 1986, 47, 66-68.
This teaching was well known to Abhinava before he wrote the Tantrāloka.

Indeed, without it there could be no teaching concerning the supreme egoity of AHAM.
Thus, he presents it first in in his commentary on the PT, where he writes (p. 167):
svatantraḥ paripūrṇo ʻyaṁ bhagavān bhairavo vibhuḥ |
tan nāṣti yan na vimale bhāsayet svātmadarpaṇe ||

‘Free and completely full is this Lord, the omnipresent Bhairava. There is

nothing that exists that he does not make manifest in the pure mirror of His own nature.”
in

the

Abhinava expounds the Doctrine of Reflection again briefly after the presentation

Tantrāloka

the

Tantrasāra,

and

then

again

at

length

in

the

Iśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥ivimarśinĩ (IPVv vol. 1 p. 156-175). This is a commentary on
Utpaladeva’s ĪP and his commentaries on it, the vrrri, the vivṛti and the tīkā. The first of

these has been recovered. As the subject is not discussed there, Utpaladeva must have
taught it in one or both of the other two. Jayaratha, who had access to the /ākz, tells us that

Utpaladeva did treat the subject there (see TĀv ad 3/8). See ĪPVv√ ad ĪP 1/2/8 and also ad

ĪP !/5/11 and 2/4/19.

If we take Jayaratha’s commentary into consideration, the presentation in the

ĪPVV does not make many substantial additions. Jayaratha must have gone through it
carefully himself and incorporated the basic points there into his commentary. Thus, he
takes care to tell the reader that the teaching is expounded by Utpaladeva in his ākā.
Abhinava extends and fills out the details. One substantial addition, for example, is his

amplification of the examination and refutation of the Sāṁkhya theory of reflection of
consciousness within the intellect.
The Sāṁkhya maintains a dualist view in which there are two primary realities.
One is Prakṛti – Nature. It encompasses the gamut of reality levels from Earth up to

Unmanifest Prakṛti. These are the five gross elements, the five sensations, five senses, five
instruments of action, and the inner mental organ consisting of the ego (ahaṁīkāra), mind
(manas) and intellect (budāhi. Mind generates thoughts and notions. It also formulates
intentions that direct the activity of the psychophysical organism. The intellect determines
the nature of the data presented to it by the senses. All the activity of the psychophysical
organism is appropriated by the ego as being what is done or perceived by the particular
individual soul that views it. The reality levels (Lattva) emerge one by one from Prakṛti.

Áccordingly, the inner mental organs generate the senses; these, sensations; and sensations

the gross physical elements. Thus, one could call this yiew an idealism. But it is a very
unusual one, because the entire domain of Prakṛti, like Prakṛti itself, is insentient (jaḍa).

One could say that it is like a vast computer.

The other major reality consists of innumerable individual souls – puruṣa. Each

one a dimensionless point of pure sentient consciousness, it views the activity of the
psychophysical organism with which it is associated. The point of contact between the two
is the intellect, which is like a mirror with two sides. One side faces downwards.

Reflecting the activity in the domain of Prakṛti, it ascertains its nature. The other, facing

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), if Anuttara (the Absolute) itself is the nature of the
Supreme Means, that subject has been dealt with previously, so what is the
purpose of undertaking this other chapter? (With this question in mind) he says:

TRTYHT
JTĪTF TĪĒĪd T T: |

prakāśamātraṁ yat proktaṁ bhairayīyaṁ paraṁ mahaḥ |

tatra svatantratāmātram adhikaṁ pravivicyate |l 1 I|

The pure Light (of consciousness) (prakāśamātra) expounded (in the
previous chapter) is Bhairava’s supreme glory. (Apart from that Light,
anything) more one may (conceive to) discern there (for the purpose of
instruction and practice) is only (His) freedom. (1)
upwards, reflects the light of consciousness, that thus illumines the cogitations of the
intellect, and by extension, the entire activity of the reality levels below it.

Abhinava systematically refutes this view. The problem is that Prakṛti and its
products are insentient (jaḍa), quite the opposite of consciousness, which is not (ajada). He
accepts that the mechanism of perception at the individual level is largely as the Sāṁkhya

describes it, but insists that it is only possible if consciousness itself is all the reality levels
and that they are, essentially, its energies. Only in this way can the ontological gap
between objective Prakṛti and the perceiver be bridged.
Once he has established that, he proceeds to expound the Doctrine of Reflection.

He does so well aware that he has already presented it in his 7āantrāloka, which he quotes
several times. The whole passage is in the ĪPVV vol. 1 p. 156-175. There Abhinava quotes

TĀ 3/6 (on p. 159), 3729 (on p. 164), 3/28 (on p. 165), 3/24d-34ab (34cd) (on p. 165),
32cd-33 (on p. 165), and 3/23 (on p. 168). The variant readings are recorded in the notes
to the verses here.
From his usual perspective of practice, Swami Lakshmanjoo (2003: 32) explains:
‘The Doctrine of Reflection (pratibimbavāda) is meant for advanced yogins. The
theory teaches them how to be aware in their daily activities, while talking, while walking,
while tasting, while touching, while hearing, while smelling. While they are doing all
theṣe various actions, they see that all of these actions move in their Supreme
Consciousness. Their vision, their perception, heretofore limited, becomes unlimited. The
mode of their actions becomes absolutely unique. They see each and every action in their
God Consciousness. They exist in the state of Sadāśiva. Each and every act of their life

becomes glorious. This is the awareness that comes from the practice of pratibimba

[reflection].
Cf. above 1/91ab (1/91cd). In the commentary, Jayaratha refers to the means that is

closest to the goal, which is consciousness, that is predominantly based on the freedom of
consciousness. In this, the highest sphere of practice, the practitioner attends directly to
consciousness. To be more precise, consciousness itself reflects on its own nature by its

own nature, by virtue of its inherent power of freedom to do so and all else. This freedom
is its reflective awareness. In actual fact there is no distinction between consciousness and
its reflective awareness. It is made only when descending below the level of No Means,
for the purpose of practice. In this, the highest sphere of practice, it is the power of the will
of consciousness to discern its own subjective nature, both transcendentally and
immanently as all things shining within it as its radiance (sphurattā) and universal Being
(mahāsattā. Thus, although this verse refers specifically to the Śāmbhava Means, at the

CHAPTER THREE

(Anutṭtara is said to be) ‘the pure Light (of consciousness) (alone),
because (that is its) predominant (fundamental nature) (prādhānyāt). The Light is
not devoid of reflective awareness, nor is it reasonable (to maintain that it should

be so). (It was) ‘expounded’ in (the previous) chapter concerning No Means.
‘(Apart from that Light anything) more (one may discern) is by merely

conceiving (kalpanāmātra) (it to be s0). In reality, an entity’s own nature
(svabhāva) is not separate (from itself). If it were to be so, that would not be (its)
own nature. The ‘freedomʼ (svatantratā) (of the Light of consciousness which

one may discern in this way) is the agency of the act of manifestation
(prakāśanakriyākartṛtva), and its essential nature (tattva) is such, namely, that it
makes all things manifest (prakāśayati literally ‘illumines’) by its own free will
on the screen of its own (conscious) nature.
He says that:

3. JāHTT.

JĀTḤ YTHITJI JAT-ṀÑT |

yaḥ prakāśaḥ sa sarvasya prakāśatvaṁ prayacchati |
The Light (of consciousness) is that which illumines all things (and

makes them manifest). (2ab)

The agent (engaged in) the act of making (all things) manifest is the
supreme subject called Anuttara (the Absolute). It is the Light of all the universe
of subjects and objects which ‘illumines’ them, that is, gives (them their) manifest
state (prakāśamānatva, lit. ‘luminosityʼ). The meaning is that it makes
same time it also alludes to the other means, all of which are based on this freedom of
choice, which is the reflective awareness of consciousness. As this freedom develops, it

strengthens its three aspects of will, knowledge and action in the corresponding spheres of
the means to realisation. The practice of spiritual discipline is a free choice, and spiritual
growth is marked by the development of the power to choose freely. The freedom of

consciousness is its power to will, that is, decide. Developing through to a clear

understanding of how and what to do to implement its decision, it issues out into the
action that accomplishes its goal. In this way also, all the means to realization are
grounded in this one, the Means of the Will (icchopāya). Consciousness at this level is
completely free of thought constructs and free of individuality; it is entirely unconditioned
by ignorance, past action, its latent traces, habits and obsessions or anything else, and so is
perfectly free to choose and effect its decisions. The individual fettered soul participates in
various degrees in this freedom by the grace of the empowerment (śaktipāta) freely given
by Lord Śiva. In the domain of the Empowered Means taught in the following chapter, this

progressively dissolves away thought constructs, and with it the dominant sense of

individual existence that binds individualized, contracted consciousness. At this level of
practice, taught in this chapter, consciousness, free of thought constructs, is experienced as
universal Śiva consciousness, present in every experience, perception, thought and action
as their ultimate ground and source.

Read sarvaṁ for sarva.

Lit. ‘it bestows upon everything a manifest state (prakāśatva).
prakāśamānatāṁ prayacchati, which literally means: ‘imparts (their) luminosity and so

illumines them. Each and every thing is ‘shining’ within consciousness, at one with it. In
other words, they are the ‘act of shining’ – prakāśamānatva – of the Light of
consciousness in those particular ways.

TANTRĀLOKA

(everything) manifest at one with its own nature. As everything (viśva) is in a

manifest state, nothing at all can exist (or come into being) that is separate from
that (Light of consciousness which makes all things manifest). If one accepts that

it is separate from that, then it would not be associated with its manifest state
(prakāśamānatva), and so would not manifest. He says that:

ũñaatkzzārīzaī fē-i grad 11 3 11

na ca tadvyatireky asti viśvaṁ sad vāvabhāsate || 2 ||
Nor is the universe separate from it. Otherwise, if it were to be so, it

would not appear (at all). (2cd)

The (sense of the) word ‘otherwise’ is that of (provisional) acceptance (of
the opposing view).

Surely (one may ask,) if this is so, then only the Light (of consciousness)

shines, (in which case) the universe would not manifest; and yet the universe does

manifest. How can that be? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Srāīst TTHTTIT’. GJTTSTTĪTTTTĪT|

Ṁad̃; gtTcdeRTe--Tī
JTJiā: || 3 1|
ato 'ʻsau parameśānaḥ svātmavyomany anargalaḥ |
iyataḥ sṛṣṭisaṁhārāḍambarasya pradarśakaḥ l| 3 |I
Thus, the Supreme Lord, free of restraints, exhibits in this way in the

Sky of His own nature the great clutter (ādambara) of emission and
withdrawal. (3)

‘Thus’, as anything that is (hypothetically) separate from the Light (of

consciousness) is not associated with the light (of manifestation) (bhānāyogāt)
(and so is not manifest), it follows that the Supreme Lord Himself (Who is the

Light of consciousness) displays this wonderful cosmic variety (viśvavaicitrya) on

the screen of His own Self by the glorious power of his unfettered freedom in

such a way that, although it is not separate (from Him), it is made to be so.
Therefore, although in this way this wonderful cosmic variety pours forth (from
consciousness and comes into being and is not an illusion), nothing more than
Him has arisen within His own essential nature, which is the pure Light
(prakāśamātra) (of consciousness, and so it makes no difference to it at all). In
order to make this clear, it has been described here as the ‘sky’. Thus, with this
(verse, Abhinavagupta declares that) the universe is a reflection within
consciousness, and provides an occasion (to expound) the Doctrine of Reflection
Read 2b with MS Kh and J as sad vā na bhāsate instead of the sad vāvabhasate (Orit is
reality (sar) that manifests (not an illusion)).
' The Light itself is pure consciousness, which has no phenomenal form and so is as empty
as the sky. Moreover, all that manifests within it is a manifestation of consciousness, at

one with it, and so that too is as it is.

CHAPTER THREE

which was enunciated (previously and is discussed in detail here). Just as
particular forms, separate from one another, are reflected in a (medium of
reflection) such as a mirror, which, although they are not separate (from the
mirror), manifest as if they were, such also is the case here (with phenomena
made manifest within the mirror of consciousness). He says that:

€É|E’tskcccīxPEIPREE'trEHRIIR
nirmale makure yadvad bhānti bhūmijalādayaḥ |

amiśrās tadvad ekasmiṁś cinnāthe viśvavṛttayaḥ || 4 I|

Just as earth, water and the rest (of the gross elements) manifest

(reflected) within a stainless mirror (separately from one another) without

mixing, so do the modalities of all things (viśvavṛtti)'' within the one Lord of
Consciousness. (4)
(tis said in the) Subodhamañjarī:

This verse is a reworking of one quoted from an unknown source in TĀv ad 3/21-22.

See there.
! Jayaratha explains, as the following verses warrant, that the ‘“modalities’ (vrtti) are the

five kinds of sensory activity of the five senses, that correspond to the five gross elements
and sensations. One could also understand the expression ‘viśvavṛttayaḥ’ just to mean the
cosmic modalities or activities of the Lord of Consciousness. These are signalled in the
previous verse as ‘the great clutter (ādambara) of emission and withdrawal’, rather than
modalities of consciousness that subjectively are the five kinds of sensations, and
objectively, their source – the five gross elements.

' Abhinavagupta goes on to discuss up to verse 64 how everything that appears in any

form does so within consciousness, like an image in a mirror, establishing that that is so
by logical argument.
Note that the second line of this verse is drawn from the Kāmikāgama (see
below, commentary on 3/21-22 and note). It appears from these references that the basic
features of the Doctrine of Reflection were already outlined in the version of the
Kāmikāgama Abhinava consulted. From these references (see particularly the last one in
the commentary on 3/21-22), it appears that it presented the world of Māyā as an illusion

in some sense, just as the reflections in a mirror are unreal. Although Abhinava and

Utpaladeva take care to refute this view, Abhinava quotes the Kāmikāgama nonetheless,
no doubt because he wished to take the support of the authority of scripture. The striking

absence of references to scriptural sources is clear evidence that it was not a well-known
doctrine at the primary scriptural level. The Siddhāntas, that are for the most part dualist to
varying degrees, would have no need of it. It seems that the Kaula and proto-kaula
seriptures of the Krama, Trika and Mata did not refer to it to any great extent. If they had
done so, Abhinava would certainly have referred to them. Absent alsoin the nondualist
Śaiviṣm of Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi, we can only conclude that it was Utpaladeva who
formulated it. He may well have been inspired by the Buddhiṣṭ Yogācāra, from which he

adopted several key doctrines that he converted to a nondualist Śaiva perspective, as he
did this one. We need not be surprised, as we have clear precedents of borrowing and
adapting from these sources, as well as exchange, by the Krama and its āntecedents at the

level of original Tantric revelation.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘This group of five (objects of sense), form and the rest, is the extent of
the universe (of experience) which is perceived by the corresponding five senses,

that is, the sense of sight and the rest.

Thus, in accord with this teaching and the like, everything is just the five
(types of objects of sense), that is, form (which is the object of sight) and the rest.
' The senses function like sentient mirrors in which their corresponding objects are

reflected. Sense objects have no intrinsic nature of their own, independent of the activity
of the senses. This is verse 2 of the Svahodhodayamañjarī (also called Subodhamañjarī)

by Vāmanadatta, son of Harṣadatta. Itis also quoted by Bhagavatotpala in his commentary

on Stanza 51 of the Spandakārikā. See Dyczkowski 1992a: 175 and ibid. 304-305 for an
account of the author and character of the text. This text has been translated into Italian by

Gnoli (1989) but without the edited text. Torella (2000) has published an edition and

translation into English (see bibliography). Jayaratha quotes the first line of this verse
again below in TĀv ad 4/149-150ab and ad 4/221cd-222ab. Verse twelve of this short
tract is quoted in TĀv ad 4/257cd-258ab. 1t is interesting and instructive to read the

preceding and following verse (Cf. below, 3/19).

‘I bow to the condition (saṁsthānam) of the Self in which the bliss of the
dawning of (enlightened) consciousness arises. (I do s0) by thoroughly examining the
nature of consciousness (and thereby ascertaining) that phenomena possess no
(independent) existence of their own. (1)
This group of five (objects of sense), form and the rest, is the extent of the

universe (of experience), which is perceived by the corresponding five senses, that is, the
sense of sight and the rest. (2)
Sight in all (its) states abides in the mind of embodied beings. The teachers in the
past taught that everything is dissolved away for one whose (mind) has dissolved away.’

(3)

The first verse is quoted in the Mahānayaprakāśa, published in South India.
There we find the following brief commentary on that verse.

‘According to this teaching (yukti), which is that of the oral tradition of the

Siddhas, in actual fact things have no nature of their own (that can serve as a locus) where

time can be a measure (kalanā) (of their passage through time). Everything is an

expansion of oneself. This is the condition (sarṁsthāna) of the Self. Thus, as it is due to the
bliss of the dawning of (enlightened) consciousness, what time is consumed? (Thus,) those
who are intent on the act of consuming it are the Twelve Kālīs (who consume thought and

with it the notion of time).” (MP (2 Tri) 9/52cd-55)
In other words, time and its passing cannot affect anything, because no thing is
anything in itself. Every thing is the expansion of the unfolding of consciousness. This is
because the bliss of the dawning of awakened consciousness is the experience of Eternity.
Time is consumed by the Twelve Kālīs (see below 4/146cd ff.), because they consume the
false notion of time’s existence, which is at the root of the false notion that things have an

existence of their own independent of the perennial processless process of the perpetually

unfolding dynamism of consciousness.
Cf also SBUM 20: ‘Sensorial faculties, when bereft of perceptible objects and
void, are dissolved into the Self. The happiness of Isolation arises in one who attains the
melting away of the sensorial faculties.' Cf. VBh 136: ‘All contact with pleasure, pain,
and the like occurs through the senses. Therefore, (knowing this,) one who, having
abandoned the senses, is established within himself, (undistracted by their activity,) abides
within his own (true) nature.”

CHAPTER THREE

He (now) illustrates how the condition of the aspect (of consciousness
corresponding to) the object of sense is (that of) a reflection.
Only Form is Reflected in a Medium with Form

sadṛśaṁ bhāti nayanadarpaṇāmbaravāriṣu |
That which manifests (reflected) in the eye, in a mirror, in the sky, or
in water is similar (in nature to them). (5ab)

‘Similar (in nature), that is, of the same type. The radiant energy of the
sun or the moon, which is neither (too) intense nor weak, is present ‘in the sky’.
Those who know the teaching concerning the Shadow Man (chāyāpuruṣa) see a

reflection there (in the sky) which is shaped like a (human) body. As is said:

‘Aṣsociation with the reflection of form takes place within the radiant

energy present in the sky.”

Or else, by way of analogy, for (all) other (kinds of) sense object,' one

can explain (the same in terms of) the domain of the reflection of sound, in which
case it would be the echo (of one’s own voice) in the sky (which) one experiences

(as if it were the sound made by) someone else. In the same way, (all of the five
types of sense objects have their corresponding senses and Elements in which they
manifest as) reflections, (as for example,) the (various) flavours, such as pungent
(kaṭu) and bitter in the saliva (dantodaka), (the pleasure of) a woman's caress on

Various signs accompany impending death according to whether it is more or less

imṃanent. Observation of these signs permits the yogi to take recourse to the appropriate
yogic procedures to avoid the moment of death. This practice is called ‘Cheating Death’
(kālavañcaṉna). 1t is taught in the Tantras of several traditions, including the
Saṭsahasrasaṁhitā of the Kubjikā school. Chapter Twenty-Nine and Thirty-Five of that

Tantra ḍeal with it at length, and it is further explained in detail in the commentary. One of
the major signs of approaching death is the vision of a figure of a person called the
Shadow Man (chāyāpuruṣa), who can be observed reflected in the sky by practicing
concentration and repeating Mantras for this purpose. One practice is to gaze into the sky
and come to experience it as the Sky of Consciousness (cidvyoman). There the yogi

perceives the goddess Bindumālinī (Garland of Points) who shines like crystal. When this
happens, he can perceive the Shadow Man, who is said to have three forms: 1) supreme, as
the Sky of Consciousness, itself; 2) middling, as a deity; and 3) inferior, consisting of
Mantras. Contemplating his three-fold form in this way, the yogi’s inner and outer senses
dissolve away, and he spontaneously sees nothing but the Sky of Consciousness. Thus free
of thought, he overcomes time and conquers death. One is reminded of the dialogue in the
Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad (2/1/12) between the sage Gārgya and the king Ajātaśatru
concerning the nature of the Brahman. ‘Gārgya said: “this being who identifies himself
with the shadow, I meditate upon as Brahman.” Ajātaśatru said: “Please don’t talk about
him. I meditate upon him as death.” He who meditates upon him as such attains his full

term of life in this world, and death does not overtake him before the completion of his
term.

Read with MS T nabhaḥsthe for nabhasthe.
Read viṣayāntaropalakṣaṇatayā for viṣayāntaropalakṣaṇaparatayā.

TANTRĀLOKA

the skin, which is the field of touch, in (places) such as the Root (centre in the
genitals), and smell in the nose, which is the field of smell.
He illustrates that (teaching by way of the following example).

er f:: frāṀ ēT Ṁ̄THaīaa- || &, 1
tathā hi nirmale rūpe rūpam evāvabhāsate || 5 |I
In this way (only the) form (of an object) manifests (when reflected in
another object with) form, (provided that the latter is) free of (the obscuring)
impurities (which prevent reflection). (Scd)
Here (in this world), only the three gross elements Earth, Water and Fire
possess a form (and so can reflect form). Earth, as for example, a mirror; Water, a
still (clear) pool; the eyes, in which the (element) Fire (shines) and the like,

possess the translucent (svaccha) quality called ‘formʼ,” which is the standing
together (saṁsthāna) of a configuration (of parts) (saṁniveśa) in such a way that

(we perceive that) it is the reflection of that (particular object with form). That

alone manifests there, not touch or the other (sensations), because (the reflection)

of touch and the rest can only arise in (their corresponding) supports (ādhāra),

such as (touch in) the Root (centre in the genitals), which is the locus of bliss, and

so that is projected (into it) (pratisaṁkrāmati). Thus, the point is that (a reflection
is) projected where the (corresponding) quality of translucence is present.
This (view) is not unreasonable. In order to understand this, he gives (the
following) example (which is relevant) here.

ÉEETUIḤEAGEISEḻZEE:ṭett-dḤ

qafa 1| 5 1
pracchannarāgiṇī kāntapratibimbitasundaram |
darpaṇaṁ kucakumbhãbhyāṁ sprśanty api na tṛpyati || 6 ||
She who is full of passion (yet) hides (her desire from her lover’s
sight), although touching with her breasts the mirror beautiful with the

reflected image of the beloved, is even so not satisfied. (6)

' The term ‘svaccha', which literally means, ‘clean’ or ‘pure’, and its synonyms ‘vimala’
and ʻnirmala’, meaning literally ‘free of impurity’, denote the quality objects may possess
by virtue of which they can reflect other objects within themselves. I translate these terms,
for want of a better word, as ‘translucence’ and cognates. There are five varieties of

translucence, one for each of the five types of sense objects that correspond to the five

senses. Form is perceived by the eye. So that which can reflect a visible form within itself
‘possess the translucent (svaccha) quality called ‘form’.” They are ‘translucent’ (svaccha)

with respect to form and so can reflect it. Similarly, other objects and senses are
transḷucent to smell, taste, touch, and sound. Their quality of translucence is named
accordingly, translucence to smell (gandhasvacchatā) and so on. Cf. above, note 1,619.
' This verse is quotedin ĪPVv 1, p. 159. There -rāgiṇī reads -kāminī, darpaṇaṁ reads
mukuraṁ (the meaning is the same) and tṝpyati – ‘satisfied’ reads hṛsyati – delights’.

CHAPTER THREE

When a woman beloved (of her lover) ‘who is full of passion (yet) hides
it due to some obstacle, such as the presence of the teacher, and has not managed
to get to see etc. (her lover) directly, considers (herself to be) satisfied that ‘I have
seen the beloved (in a way) nobody else can be aware of, even if (only) by means
of a reflection in a mirror, and so sees (her) lover. Thus by (saying that the mirror)
is ‘beautiful’, (the teacher) also suggests that it gives rise, for example, to (that)
most excellent delight that has unfolded by the sight (of the beloved). (Thinking)
‘may I experience his touch also’ in the same way, that cannot be known to

others, even though she tries, she does not get (to feel) it, because touch is

not

projected into the mirror, and (so she) is ‘not satisfied’, that is, she does not

experience (it). This is the meaning.

Surely (one may ask,) if form is reflected here (in the mirror), why is not
touch, which invariably accompanies each particular (form), also not reflected?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

ī fē xṛīsai fṝnōī xvṁa aer aa: |

na hi sparśo ‘sya vimalo rūpam eva tathā yataḥ |
nairmalyaṁ cātiniviḍasajātīyaikasaṅgatiḥ || 7 |I
(Thus,) because it can only (reflect) form, it is not capable of

reflecting (vimala) touch in this way. And the purity (which is the capacity of
an entity to reflect another) (nairmalya) consists of the single, compact
coming together (of its constituent parts,) which are (all of) the same type. (7)

‘It’ is the mirror. (Its) form is capable of reflecting (vimala), that is, it is
translucent (svaccha) ‘in this way’. A mirror translucent in this way accepts only

the reflection of a face. This is the sense. What is said to be that ‘purity (which

is the capacity of an entity to reflect another) (nairmalya)? (In response to this
question,) he says that ‘the purity (in this sense that an entity possesses, consists

of) the extremely ‘compact” (coming together of its constituent parts) which,
uncontaminated by entities of a different type, are ‘(all of) the same typeʼ, as are

the atoms of form in a mirror. They come together as one without (any)

associates, because there is nothing (else) of a different type. (Thus, what is meant

by) ‘purity (which is the capacity of an entity to reflect another) (nairmalya)
is the compact cohesion (of the medium of reflection), because it is its compact

(uniform) nature, which (amounts to) the close proximity (of all its parts), because

they are arranged (in such a way that) there is no gap (between them), and (the

surface, smooth and uniform,) is free of depressions and elevations. If
one
perceives that the form of a mirror or (a similar medium of reflection) is unsullied

by entities of a different type (such as dust particles), that are not of the same type

Insert with MSs Jh and Ñ rāpaṁ. Read tatheti rāpam vimalaṁ svaccham | evaṁ hi

svaccho darpaṇo mukhasyaiva for tatheti vimalaṁ ṣvaccham eva hi aṣvacchasya
darpaṇa
iva mukhasya.

TANTRĀLOKA

(as the material of the mirror), then it is fit to reflect form. However, if (the
mirror) becomes sullied by entities of a different type (than the material of which

it is made), such as tears, dust and the like, then it is not (capable of doing s0).

One can ascertain this is certainly so by both the presence and absence (of these

conditions, as for example, when there is dust on a mirror, we see that it cannot
reflect anything, whereas, when there is none, it can). If (an entity) possesses the
particular quality called ‘translucence’ (ṣvacchatā) with respect to that which

posits a reflected image (within it), then it accepts a reflection of that (within

itself). Thus, (if there were no such limiting conditions, then) in accord with (such
statements) as ‘form itself manifests form’, the mirror to which we have referred
would also be reflected in the face. Thus, (as this is not s0,) the relationship

between the original image and (its) reflection is not indiscriminate (aviśeṣa). This
too is stated (implicitly in this verse).
Now he discusses that same (matter) in a different way.

Definition of the Purity of the Medium of Reflection

aafrāvīarkārēz azīāta a |

TT TGHTT |I ¢ 11
svasminn abhedād bhinnasya darśanakṣamataiva yā |
atyaktasvaprakāśasya nairmalyaṁ tad gurūditam || 8 I
The teacher (Utpaladeva) has said that this ‘purity’ (which is the
capacity an entity possesses to reflect another) (nairmalya) is (its) capacity to
manifest in identity with itself, within itself, something (else which is)

different from it, without thereby loosing its own clearly apparent form. (8)
Read rāpapratibimbayogyaḥ for rāpapratibimbayogaḥ.

In order to reflect an image, the parts of the mirror must form a single compact whole.

In other words, there should be no cracks in the mirror, and it should be uniform.

Moreover, all the parts of the mirror must be of ‘the same type’. The parts of a mirror may

be made of differing material, but even so, the mirror can reflect images only if these

materials are all capable of reflecting images, and so are of ‘the same type’. This is not the
case with materials of a ‘different type’. Dust, for example, on a mirror is of a ‘different
type (i.e. one that cannot reflect images) than the material of which the mirror is made,
and so prevents the formation of a clear image in the mirror (Cf. ĪPVv on 1/2/28, vol. 1, p.
158). AIl these conditions apply to consciousness, which is capable of reflecting
everything, as it is one and compact, that is, possesses a single, uniform nature, and there

is no question of there being anything else of a ‘different type’ that can sully it.

The text reads —svaprakāśa-, which literally means ‘own light’. The mirror remains
clearly visible whatever may happen to be reflected within it. Compare this analogy with

the classic example given by the Advaita Vedānta of the nature of the world in relation to
the Absolute (Brahman), namely, the rope and the snake. When seen lying in some dark
place, the rope looks like a snake. Similarly, the Brahman appears to be the world, seen in

the darkness of ignorance. But in this example, the world covers and conceals the
Brahman, like the snake the rope. This is because the snake is an illusion which replaces,

for the ignorant, the true rope. The world reflected in the mirror of consciousness does not

CHAPTER THREE

The mirror, for example, does not abandon ‘its own clearly apparent
formʼ (svaprakāśa) even when something else is reflected (within it. (Similarly,

consciousness) is not obscured, as its (essential self-luminous (svaprakāśa)
nature) free of thought constructs (avikalpa) (continues) to shine. (Again, when
the mirror,) taking the support of the absence of division within its own nature,
(reflects) something ‘which is different from it’ and in a different place (than
itself, which) deposits a reflection (within it), such as a mountain, it serves to
make the sight (of that mountain) manifest because (that) other thing has been
encompassed (within it). The sense (of this verse is that) the reflection is not in

some place outside the mirror’s location - not even a tiny bit. The capacity there

(in the mirror) to reflect (an object), as opposed to a wall or the like (which does
not have this capacity), is (this) ‘purity’ (nairmalya). What we have said is not

just our own idea, and so he says: ‘the teacher has said’; that is, the teacher who
was the teacher (of Abhinavagupta’s) teacher, the venerable Utpaladeva, has
explained all this (matter concerning) reflection and its true nature in the
Pratyabhijñā-kārikādyayaṭīkā with the words beginning with: “Now, just as the
form of an entity . . . and ending with: ‘this is not possible for (something that is)
insentient. . . .ʼ. This is the meaning.
conceal it in this way. This is because the mirror is revealing a real reflection which does
not negate the reality of the mirror.
The self-ilumiṉṇating Light of consciousness always shines unobscured, whateyer
may appear within it. An appearance (ābhāsa) which, in terms of this analogy, is like a
reflection, is clothed in thought constructs. AIl that appears is the shining of the Light. The
details, as it were, of the one radiance, are sketched out by the notions, which also form as
a part of the same activity of consciousness, that serve to identify them individually, as
distinct from others. So, for example, the experience ‘this is a chair’ (which implies that it
is not a table or anything else) is a notion (vikalpa). This does not mean that it is incorrect.
There are both correct and incorrect notions. Notions in themselves are not false, nor do
they falsify that of which they are notions. According to this view, they simply serve the
useful function of making the daily commerce of life, which is based on such distinctions,
possible. The experience that all that appears (and is being conceptualized as consisting of
countless mutually independent entities) is just the shining of the Light of consciousness.
It is free of thought constructs. It is the way universal, transcendental consciousness
experiences itself. If it were not to ‘shine’ and experience itself, nothing could appear or
be experienced as this or that and as other than the perceiver. Thus, this is the ‘clear form”
of consciousness which, self-luminous, reflects everything within itself without being
obscured thereby.

Read with MS N atyktaḥ pratibimbite ‘pi instead of atyktapratibimbite ‘pi.
Read garbhīkr̥tanyartharthatvāt for garbhīkṛtaṇyartharthatvāt.
Read aṇumātreṇāpi for aṇumātre ‘pi.
° The expression for the ‘capacity to reflect’ that a medium of reflection possesses is

pratibimbagrahaṇa-sahiṣṇutā, which literally means ‘capacity to grasp a reflection’.
IP 2/4/19a. MS K and G add: bhedābhedavirodhinaḥ | ābhāsabhedād ekatra cidātmani

tu yujyate || `(this is not possible for (something that is) insentient) in which oneness and

separation exclude (one another). It is (only) possible for (everything to be together) in
one place within that which is consciousness by nature because (objective) manifestations

(differ and are) separate (from one another).

Jayaratha is telling us that the Doctrine of Reflection (pratibimbavāda) was first
expounded by Utpaladeva in his commentary on his own lśvarapratyabhij-nākārikā, the
Pratyabhijñā-kārikādvayaṭīkā (also called just ‘tīkā’). See above, note 2,3.

TANTRĀLOKA

He says (the following) in order to explain that that ‘purity’ (which is the
capacity an entity possesses to reflect another) is of two kinds – primary and
secondary.

ītcz raaṁṁai afaraīaa aa |

āīzzzaī 11 Ṝ 11

nairmalyaṁ mukhyam ekasya saṁvinnāthasya sarvataḥ |
aṁśāṁśikātaḥ kv āpy anyad vimalaṁ tattadicchayā l| 9 ||
Only the Lord of Consciousness is endowed in every respect with
(this) purity, (which is the capacity to reflect) in its primary form. Anything
else which (we commonly say) is free of impurity (and so capable of
reflection) is so partially and (only) in certain circumstances, (and even then,
solely by virtue of the Lord’s) specific intention (in each case that it be s0). (9)

‘The primary form’ (of purity, that is, the capacity to reflect, belongs to
consciousness,) because it is capable of reflecting the entire universe of form,

(sound and touch, etc.), and so is said (to be s0) ‘in every respect’. Everything
perceived adheres (saṁlagna) to consciousness, and so it is translucent (svaccha)

in every respect, whereas ‘in certain circumstances’ʼ, (kvāpi) as happens, for

example, in a mirror, it is so ‘partiallyʼ. (Thus,) the other, secondary kind of

capacity to reflect (nairmalya) is such that it takes the support of (some) partial
(aspect) such as form, and having done so, is capable of reflection (nirmala) in

only some circumstances (kvacir) and to (just) some extent (kiñcir). Otherwise, if

(as the saying goes with regard to consciousness,) ‘anything may manifest
anywhereʼ, then one would (expect to) perceive the reflection of touch in a

mirror also. In that way, there would be no difference (between the mirror’s

capacity to reflect) and the primary one (of consciousness). He says that the

reason (nimitta) for the capacity (of a medium of reflection) to reflect is only the
freedom (of the Lord of Consciousness which ordains it, with the words): “(by
virtue of the Lord’s) specific intention (that it be so)ʼ. It is ‘specific’ with
respect to form, (in the case of a mirror) for example, and so it is not capable of
reflecting ‘touch’ etc. there (in that case). Thus, the sense (of this verse) has been

established, the point being that it is its power (to freely ordain this limited
capacity to reflect) that is operating in this way.”
Thus, he says:

Read sparśapratibimbarṁ for śparśaḥ pratibimbaṁ.
Consciousness reflects all possible types of sensations within itself and so is

‘translucent’ (svaccha) in every respect and in all cases. Anything else which has a
capacity to reflect phenomena, is only partially capable of doing so, that is, it can reflect
only some aspect of an object. A mirror, for example, can only reflect the form of an

object, not its taste or anything else. The primary capacity to reflect in this way is an

innate attribute of divine, universal consciousness. The Lord’s power of freedom ordains

that this or that entity should act as a reflective medium for a particular class of objects,
and so its capacity to reflect is secondary.

CHAPTER THREE

Māyā and Pure Knowledge, Śiva is both the Prototype and its Reflection

1| 2 ||
bhāvānāṁ yat pratīghātivapur māyātmakaṁ hi tat |
teṣām evāsti sadvidyāmayaṁ tv apratighātakam || 10 |I
(AI1]) phenomena (bhāva) (have two aspects; one corresponds to
their phenomenal nature, which is) Māyā, and offers resistance (to
penetration and union with other phenomena). Their (other aspect is the
universal, undivided ground of consciousness set in relation to phenomena,
which) is True Knowledge (sadvidyā) that does not offer resistance (so as to

sever consciousness off from the manifestations reflected within it). (10)

(One aspect of consciousness is phenomenal and) ‘offers resistance’,
because (each entity is, as it were,) in conflict (with every other, and so) does not

allow other (entities) to penetrate it. This is the meaning. (The nature of) that

(resistance) is Māyā, because it conceals (the nature of all things as one with the
Light of consciousness). Its nature is this Supreme Goddess (Parameśvarī)’s
power of action (kriyāśakti). Thus, because it is primarily grounded in duality and
because of the gross state of objectivity, (consciousness) is not translucent there

(in that phenomenal dualistic aspect). This is (what is meant by) the incapacity (of
phenomena) to bear (grahaṇa) a reflection (within themselves, as does
consciousness). Now (that aspect of consciousness which), on the contrary, does

not offer resistance to the body (vapus) of phenomena consists of True
Knowledge, which is the power of knowledge. Thus, in relation to that
(previously mentioned aspect), it is translucent (svaccha) to that, and so is capable
there (in that aspect) to bear a reflection (within itself). Accordingly, the

difference (between the two is that the) previous (one) is a reflection (within
consciousness), whereas this one grasps it (as a reflection within itself). In this
way, the Supreme Lord (Parameśvara) Himself, by the glorious power of His own

(innate) freedom, shines as the wonderfully varied manifestation of each original
object and (its) reflection etc. This is the (overall) intended sense (of this verse).

The word ‘bhāva’ literally means ‘existence’, and by extension, an existing entity. As

that is a manifestation in consciousness, the word can be appropriately translated as
‘phenomenonʼ, that is, a phenomenally existing entity as opposed to absolute Being.

Read māyāsvarūpaṁ gopanakāritvāt for māyāsvarūpagopanakāritvāt.

There are two aspects of consciousness. One is ‘solid’ as it were and consists of
phenomena that appear within it, each different and separate from one another as well as

from their perceivers, like the reflections in a mirror. The other is the opposite. It allows
penetration of things into itself, as does a mirror its reflections. Although not stated
explicitly, these two aspects effectively correspond to the object and the perceiver. The

former is the domain of Māyā, that is, duality in which the power of action operates as
Mayā itself. The latter is the domain of ‘true knowledge’, that is, insight into the essential

oneness of all things as the Light of consciousness. They work together, as do the
translucent and opaque sides of a mirror.

TANTRĀLOKA

He says that (in the following verse).

tad evam ubhayākāram avabhāsaṁ prakāśayan |
vibhāti varado bimbapratibimbadrṛśākhile || 11 |I
(Śiva), the Bestower of Boons, manifests in all things as both the

original image and its reflection, in the course of having illumined that

manifestation (of consciousness), which has both forms in this way (so that
He is one with all things, although they are separate from one another). (11)
‘Both forms’ (are the two aspects of consciousness, namely, one that)
offers resistance and (one that) does not. The essence of that is just the
manifestation (of consciousness) alone (ābhāsamātrasāra). It is not ultimately

real (tāttvika) (independently of consciousness), and so he says: ‘having
illumined that manifestation (of consciousness). And it is said that:

‘Therefore, that one Great God (Mahādeva), Who is endowed with
(absolute) freedom manifests two-fold, as the emergence (into manifestation) of
(both) the (original) object and its reflection.’

(Now,) having established with reasoned argument (upapādya) in this

way, in accord with (one’s own) experience (yathāpratīti), the true nature of a

reflected image, he says the following in order to refute the view of certain

Naiyāyikas (empiricist logicians), who maintain that even though (in actual fact) it

is ones own face itself that is perceived (in a mirror) by means of the rays of
(vision emitted by) the eyes that have been reversed back, (the perception of) the

face (as being) in the mirror is a mistake (bhrānti). (Rather,) on the contrary, as
there is no third polarity apart from truth and falsity, there is no reflection at all
(and so what we see in the mirror is actually our own face, not a reflection of it).
In order to refute this view, he says:

JṬJIE ÑTTSĪTT HRBITTPRZGTĀṀĀT|
fiṝx a aaṁ raṝatt TṬaTT || 23 11
yas tv āha netratejāṁsi svacchāt pratiphalanty alam |
viparyasya svakaṁ vaktraṁ gr̥hṇantīti sa pr̥cchyate || 12 I|
The text reads: svātantryopahitaṣthitiḥ, which describes Śiva, Mahādeva as one whose
‘abiding state is conjoined with freedomʼ.

Jayaratha introduces the following verses by explaining that there are philosophers of
other schools who accept the doctrine of reflection, but do so according to their own

understanding of it.

Read darpaṇe mukham for darpaṇamukham.

CHAPTER THREE

One who questions (our analogy, saying that reflections are not in fact

different from their original object), says (a person who sees his face in a
mirror does not really see a reflection). It is enough (to admit) that the rays of
vision (which issue from his eyes), reversed back, are reflected from a pure
(reflecting surface), so that (in fact) he sees his own face. (12)
As the author refers (to the opponent) as ‘one’ in the singular, he indicates
that this is not the view of all Naiyāyikas. This is said by some who wish to

quarrel. This is the_sense (of this statement). Thus, the authors of (the

commentaries on the Īśvarapratyabhijñā called) ‘vrtti’ and ‘bhūṣaṇa’ along with
others (in the sections dealing with the Doctrine of Reflection) have not touched
upon this (controversy) at all. (The rays of vision are) ‘(reflected) from a pure

(reflecting surface)ī ‘reversed backʼ, that is, returned back from an external
mirror or the like (to the person who, making use of the mirror, views his face
directly by means of them). This is the meaning. Again, here by means of the
predicate ‘reflected’, (qualifying the rays of vision, he states) the cause (of

perception of one’s own face). Otherwise, if (the rays) were not facing towards

one's own body, how could they also perceive their own face? (As this is so, the

opponent) ‘questions’ (us, asking) ‘what is your intention in accepting the view

(you maintain)?
He states just that (in the following verse).

ṜradT TrSTTCTFSSITṬIT:|
ī̄ḷa saī a hīss̃; aT̄ṀM 3 11 q3 1
dehād anyatra yat tejas tadadhiṣṭhātur ātmanaḥ |

tenaiva tejasā jñatve ko ‘rthaḥ ṣyād darpaṇena tu || 13 I|

(In reply we would ask) if the person from whose body the light (tgjas)
(of vision) emerges were to see himself elsewhere by the same light which he

(thus) sustains, then of what use would the mirror be? (13)

If the perceiver who, open-eyed, himself sustains his own light (tejas) of
vision that comes forth externally from (his) body, were to perceive his own face
by that same light turned back on itself, then, because in that case (tatra) other

things, including walls, could also serve as causes of reflection (of what is) in

front (of them), of what use would the mirror be? Now (what would you reply if
one were to ask) how it is that only mirrors and the like are the causes of the
reflection (of objects, whereas) walls and the like are not? (The only reply you
The ‘vṛttī (‘short commentary’) on the ĪP was written by its author, Utpaladeva. The

‘bhūṣaṇa’ (‘Ornament’) has not been found, and its author is unknown. Maybe Jayaratha
uses the plural as an honorific. If so, he would be referring to one author, who could only

be Utpaladeva. Perhaps it was another name for the vivṛti or ṭīkā. Otherwise, we must

assume the existence of other early commentators on the IP, as Jayaratha suggests. But if
they existed, we have no other references to them.

Read puraḥpratiphālana- for purah pratiphālana-.

TANTRĀLOKA

could give is to admit that) this (fact, namely, that mirrors can reflect images and
walls cannot,) is a gratuitous (svacchanda) verbal (distinction). We cannot see any

reason here as to why, although equally resistant (to accepting the rays of vision),
mirrors and the like (are mediums of reflection, whereas) walls and the like are

not such. Well then (we would ask), is the reason (for that) that there is a greater

amount of the quality called ‘translucence’ (svacchatva) here (in the mirror)? (The
opponent would reply that) it is not so. Translucence is not the cause of the
resistance (to the rays of vision). If that were to be so then, because light is
translucent and is present (everywhere) in an illumined space (nabhas), it would

not afford occasion for anything (to be reflected in it), whereas, on the contrary,

(its luminosity) is an instrumental cause (nimitta) of the perception of a reflection

of that (original object). Thus, this (view) would entail a (fundamental)
contradiction in the reason (hetu) (advanced for this distinction between those
things that are mediums of reflection and those that are not). Therefore, (the

opponent continues,) as that is the case, (then one could propose) that the cause of
the resistance (to absorption of the rays of vision of a medium of reflection) is due

to its (solid, physical) form and the like. However, (we would reply,) that is the
same in both cases (namely, the mirror and the wall). Or else, (if you say that this

is s0) because now, (as it happens,) the reflection has been brought about by the
mirror and it would be (possible) to perceive one’s own face without a mirror
also, then what is the use of that (mirror)?
(Moreover if, as the opponent maintains,) the rays of vision are turned
back (on themselves) in this way by the power (a medium of reflection has to)

reflect (them back, and so) they perceive one’s own face, it would be logical that

If the image we see in the mirror is just our own face perceived by the rays of the eyes

that have been turned back on themselves, then even walls could act as mediums of
reflection. If you say that only mirrors and the like act in this way, you would be
arbitrariḷy attributing this property to them. If a mirror and a wall are equally opaque, there
is no apparent reason why only the former should act as a medium of reflection and the

latter not.

If you say that the reason why mirrors make the rays of vision turn back on themselves

is because they possess the capacity to reflect, whereas walls does not, it amounts to
saying that mirrors are more ‘resistant’ to the rays of vision than walls, because the former
do not absorb the rays of vision and so reflect them, whereas the latter do. Thus, the
translucence of the mirror would be the cause of its greater ‘resistance’, which would be a
contradiction.

The opponent denies that the ‘translucence’ of the mirror explains why it reflects an

image, whereas the wall that is not translucent like the mirror does not. The reason for this
is that, according to the opponent, the face seen in the mirror is not a reflection. He
maintains that the person viewing the mirror sees his own face by means of the rays of

vision that come from his eyes, just as he sees any other object. The difference is simply

that in the case of other objects, the rays of vision go out to it and stay there, so that

iltumined by them, the object is perceived. Admitting that mirrors are mediums of

reflection because they have some degree of transparency and so reflect objects within

themselves would amount to accepting that his theory is wrong. So the opponent rejoins

that being transparent or ‘translucent’ does not account for the difference between a mirror
and a wall in this respect. Light is perfectly transparent and yet it does not reflect images

within itself. If light where to have the ‘solidity’ required to reflect back the rays of vision,

then the sky being filled with light would not allow anything to be reflected in it. Whereas

itis by this light that one sees the original image.

CHAPTER THREE

(one would perceive it) in its own place, not elsewhere, that is, within a mirror or
the like. Thus, he says:

T qYaTT āra-√ frSt T TgT II 7% 1|
viparyastais tu tejobhir grāhakātmatvam āgataiḥ |
rūpaṁ dr̥śyeta vadane nije na makurāntare || 14 ||
(Moreover, if these supposed) rays (of vision were to be) reflected
back (in this way), when they assume the condition of the perceiver
(grāhakātmatva) (who views himself in a mirror, he) should see (his own)
form by means of them within his own face, not within the mirror. (14)
(If the opponent’s view were to be correct, then a person viewing himself

in a mirror should perceive the reflection of) the ‘form’ associated with his own

face ‘within his own face’, that is, where his own face is located. This is the
meaning. The point is that the perceiver perceives the object of perception located
only in its own place. The perception of (the colour) ‘blue’, abandoning (as it

were) the location of ‘blue’, is nowhere seen to be divided off (from the colour)

‘blue’. One should understand (that the rays of vision are said to assume) ‘the
condition of the perceiver’ (in the sense that they are) intimately related
(saṁbaddha) to the perceiver. Sustained by (the conscious) Self (ātmādhiṣṭhita),

they function as the perceiver. However, (a question arises): is the Self that

supports the rays of vision that have come forth externally, disembodied or

embodied? In the first case, (that is, if the Self, which is the sustaining ground of
the rays of vision, is disembodied,) the body would not be the locus of empirical
experience (bhogāyatāna), because empirical experience, the hallmark of which is
the sense of its being external (bahirbuddhi) (to the body), (would) also arise even
without (the body). In this way, (the opponent’s) own view that ‘the body is the

locus of empirical experience’ would be contradicted.

The perception (of the face by means of the rays of vision) with an

embodied support would be like that of the original object, not otherwise. Thus,
he says:

TA TT-TTJI TTHĪTTGṀT |
ī c-Tā JāTVT ĪRTRTaTĒTTTT; || Ṟ.4, 1I
! There is a play on words here that cannot be translated adequately. There are two

meanings. One is ‘when the rays have returned back to the perceiver’ and another, ‘when

the rays assume the condition of the perceiver”. Jayaratha accepts both. I have chosen the
latter, although the English is somewhat clumsy, because it helps the reader understand

Jayaratha’s explanation better.

If the rays of vision function as the perceiver in relation to their object, they must be

grounded, as the perceiver is, in the conscious Self that sustains it. If that is so, the
question arises whether this is an embodied Self or not. This is a very pertinent question,
because the experience of daily life is that of an embodied soul.

TANTRĀLOKA

svamukhe sparśavac caitad rūpaṁ bhāyān mam ety alam |
na tv asya spr̥śyabhinnasya vedyaikāntasvarūpiṇaḥ || 15 ||
(Moreover,) that (reflected) form within one’s own face which is
‘mine’ should (also) manifest (as capable of being) touched. Nor should it be
an isolated object which is (perceived to be) different from (the face of the
one who sees it) that can be touched. (15)
If this, one’s own form (reflected in a mirror), were to manifest as one’s

own face, then there would be an inverted perception (pratipattiy (of it) as the

locus of (one’s own) subjectivity as ‘this is my form’, not, on the contrary, as ‘this

is the form of something which is solely objective,’ that is, as the locus of
objectivity. Here (in this case, attribution in this way of a subjective status to an
objective, external entity) is the (sole) common perception of those who lack

inteḹligence, such as children (and fools). An intelligent person (on the contrary,

perceives that) ‘this is my face, reflected here’. (So) accept (this view) — what is
wrong (with that)? Moreover, as it is a reflection (pratibimba), (one) perceives it

to be different from the original object (bimba), because it is not possible to deny
that such is its nature there (in that case).

Moreover, if the manifestation of one’s own form were to manifest in

one’s own face itself, then its touch should manifest also. Agreed that these two
configurations of form (i.e. the face and its reflection) may be devoid (of other
qualities) such as weight and smell and so on, however they are nowhere seen to

be devoid of ‘touch’, because it is invariably associated with them by (its very)
nature. However, one perceives form to be separate from touch (and devoid of it)
in the reflection of form. Nowhere (in no case) is a mirror that contains the
reflection of a fire perceived to be hot. Just as when that form (rūpa) manifests,

the (intrinsic) quality of that (form), namely, the configuration (sartniveśa)° (of
its constituents), certainly manifests (along with it), similarly, if one were to

perceive one’s own face itself (in the mirror), such should be the case with touch

also, which is (a quality) invariably associated with that. Thus, it is unreasonable
to say that it is one’s own face itself that is perceived (in the mirror, not a
reflection).

Surely (one may object that) therefore it has been (effectively) stated (in
this way that) ‘this is an illusion’. (We reply that) if one were to consider the
perception of one’s own face (in a mitror) to be an illusion and (justify this view)

by saying that it is perceived in the mirror, (not where one’s own face is really
located,) then if that is the case, that is itself (all that there is; there need be no real
face). The real face cannot be perceived (directly by the person who is viewing his
face in the mirror, so) what is the use of accepting (as you do) that perception (of
it) does take place? If it were to be an illusion, it would manifest as being

sparśavat, literally ‘possessing touch’.

Only foolish people and children fail to recognize the difference between their own face

and its reflection. They wrongly believe when they see their face reflected in a mirror that

itis their own face, not a reflection. In this way, they mistakenly attribute subjective status
to an object.

Every ‘form’ is composite in nature and includes other attributes. In this sense the
‘formʼ of an object is the configuration of its parts, qualities, functions and so on.

CHAPTER THREE

superimposed (on the original face) and not as the real (vastutattva) (face) also. If
when mother-of-pearl appears to be silver, the mother-of-pearl were also to be
manifest, the manifestation of silver would be done away with by that and so there
would not be an illusion. (Moreover,) if in this way the face is (actually) truly

perceived, then what (kind of) illusion is it? Even assuming that (the reflection) is

an illusion, (the question arises whether) the mirror manifests (falsely) as the face,
or does one's own face (falsely appear to be) that of someone else? (To both these

questions we reply that this is) not so. The first case (is not so) because the mirror
manifests unaffected (akhaṇḍa lit. ‘undivided°) (by the reflection within it). When

(mother-of-pearl) appears to be silver, the mother-of-pearl should not also be
manifest, Nor (can) the second (alternative hold good). If that were the case, (it
would mean that someone else’s face is reflected in the mirror and) then
everybody, indifferent (to the reflection), would not care to make up and decorate
their own face. Therefore, as there is no illusion, one must accept that that is

another (type of) entity (vastu) called a reflection, which differs in character from
the original object. Thus, he says:
Read ~bhrāntyabhāvād- for -bhrāntyabhābād-.

Maheśvarānanda in his Mahārthamañjari defends at length the veracity of a reflection

in a mirror. He does this in order to establish that, in the same way, all that manifests,
reflected within consciousness, is neither illusory nor a transformation of the medium of
reflection, but belongs to a third category of its own. In doing so he also points out the
logical inconsistencies of the Advaita Vedānta view that the world is an illusory projection
onto the real Brahman, produced there by ignorance of the Brahman’s true nature. These

problems are solved, Maheśvarānanda maintains, by admittīng that the world is a
reflection within the mirror of consciousness, produced there by its own creative freedom.
Thus he writes:

‘This ability the Supreme Lord possesses to reflect the universe (within Himself)
is said to be His most excellent freedom, that those who know the inner (nature of things)
should examine. As all things (viśva) manifest within the essential nature of the Light (of
consciousness). No other manner apart from reflection is experienced to be the appropriate

(way to explain how manifestation takes place).

Surely (one may ask,) is (that reflection) an apparent change (vivarta) (in the
mirror) or a real transformation (pariṇāma)? It is not an apparent change. Otherwise called
a mistake, (an apparent change) is said to be (a kind of) knowledge of something else (that
differs from the entity one secks to know) that is projected elsewhere (than it really is
located). (If one holds this view,) one must accept that either the universe is projected in
this way onto the Self, or the Self onto the universe. There, in the first case, it is like the

snake’s nature seen in a snake, that it is projected onto a rope. In the same way, having
seen the uniyerse somewhere else (i.e. outside oneself), it is projected into the Self.
However, (this view is not sound, because) one does not experience that this universe is

negated at a subsequent time, like (the existence of) the snake (projected onto a rope).
Will its negation be established by (some) means (yukti)? No (it will not). What

is this means? Is it sound reasoning (tarka) or an authoritative means of knowledge
(pramāṇa)? Not the first, because it is essentially an accessory. This is because it is not

accepted (that reasoning alone can) establish the nature of something independently,

without the aid of a valid means of knowledge. Nor is it the second (alternative). What is
an authoritative means of knowledge? Is it direct perception or scripture or, indeed,

inference?

It is not the first, because nobody has witnessed the negation (of the universe) by
direct perception. (In fact, it is quite the opposite,) because the behaviour of all things in

TANTRĀLOKA

terms of their functional efficacy and the like (continues) unsublated. Scripture states that

‘the Brahman is one without a secondʼ, ‘there is no multiplicity hereʼ, etc. The meaning of
that is (as follows): the Brahman does not differ from the Self and the Supreme Lord. No
perception of duality in any form befits him.

One should consider this. What is the condition of the manifest extending

(manifold of phenomena) (prapañca)? With regards to that, we have (this) to say: (The
condition of phenomena is such) that it is in consonance with the behaviour of language,

because initially it is perceived to be objective, (but) in the Brahman all this extending
(manifold of phenomena) is like the sky and the wind; it is not multiple. It does not
become the locus of the perception of duality. So what of that? The essential nature of the
Brahman is perceived to be undivided by perceiving (everything to be) a reflection, which
is so by virtue of its freedom (as previously) established. One should listen (to the
scriptures that teach that), otherwise (if that were not s0), there would be no reality (satya)
here at all, or the Doctrine of Emptiness would be the undesired consequence. Nor is the
third (altemative correct). It is denied by the aforementioned scripture, because (all that)
can be perceived (would be) false, like the silver (seen in the place of) nacre and the like,

and because the invariable mark that proves its existence (liṅga) transcends time. In this

way, one can understand by reasoned argument (for oneself) that (the view of the Advaita
Vedānta) is not proven (asiddha), and (suffers from) other similar (defects). This (matter)

is not (discussed) at length for fear of making the book too big.

Moreover, (one may ask,) who is the perceiver who projects this extending
(manifold of phenomena) into the Brahman? If (you say) it is that Brahman itself, then
that would entail the unwanted consequence that the Brahman has no (veridical)
foundation (adhiṣṭhāna), because it has been accepted that he is the one who makes the

projection. Well then, can both purposes be met by (maintaining that) it takes place

through (different) aspects (aṁśa) (of the Brahman)? (p. 150) No, because in that case
also, the undesired consequence (arises) that he is liable to error. Alright then, what (if we
say that) the individual soul projects (the error) and the Brahman is the (veridical)
foundation? No, because (you) do not accept a dualist view and also because it is
inevitable that that (error) has, in (some) aspect (aṁśataḥ), its locus in the Self.
Surely then one must naturally accept that duality (bheda) is (just) a notion. Does
that work? (We reply,) no (it does not), because (in this way you have) set about to call

(duality essentially) apparent change. Moreover, what is that which is similar (to the

Brahman that it is can be) projected onto the Brahman? If you ignore that (question), how
is it that it does not lead to an undesired consequence? It is well known that the Brahman
and the manifest extending (manifold of phenomena) (prapañca) are (totally) dissimilar,
because they are (separate contrary) divisions, as is truth (in relation to) falsity and the

like.

(Nor is it the other way around). The view that the Brahman is projected into all

this (universe) is not commonly accepted because it violates the limits (of your basic

presuppositions) and because it entails the undesired consequence that the Brahman is

false and that one should consider it to be extremely insignificant (as is the world with
respect to the infinite Being of the Absolute).
And so there is nothing inappropriate in explaining that the apparent change
(vivarta) of all things is its abiding (vartana) as the marvellous variety which is the
process of reflection (in the mirror of consciousness) in the manner described. As is stated

in the Kramakeli:

“The apparent change of that (consciousness) is considered to be the aggregate of

rays (as the Kālīs), preceded (and governed) by the Goddess of the Wheel.”

CHAPTER THREE
It is explained here (in the Kramakeli) that ‘apparent change is the abiding

(vartana) in a variegated form, not because of ignorance, but rather by virtue of the
freedom (of consciousness). Thus, the common everyday business of (the phenomenal)
world (viśvavyavahāra) takes place by virtue of the Great Being, which is the freedom of
consciousness which is (in a state) in between what is well known as being and nonbeing;

and because it is necessarily explicable (in these logical terms), the view which is the
opposite of that, namely, that it is inexplicable, has also been refuted.
Can the same can be said in this way with regards (to the view that the world is a)
real transformation (pariṇāma) (of the Brahman)? A real transformation is the assumption
of another form (by something) that is similar to it, such as, for example milk, that
(assumes the form of) curd by the destruction of its prior form (as milk). Now there (in
that view) also, (the question arises whether) it is the Brahman that changes into the
universe or does the universe change into the Brahman? This is (the question) that needs
to be asked. It is not the first (alternative), because that would result in the undesirable

consequence that the essential nature of the Brahman is destroyed. Nor the second,

because that would result in the universe (possessing the inherent attributes of the
Brahman), such as being, consciousness and bliss. (That cannot be so, because) if one

were to accept that (view), then the universe (that comes forth) from the presence of the

Brahman would be not different from it in all its forms (as it is), and also because the view

that a real transformation (takes place in the transition from cause to effect) is not logically
sound. In the same way (by the same argument), one should understand that the worldly
view that they are one, as is the ‘tree-ness and “śiṁśapa-ness’ (of a śiṁśapā tree), is also

refuted.

Surely (an opponent may object that) the doubt that (the world is) an illusion
cannot be avoided also, (according to the view) of the doctrine of reflection. There (in that
view), the rays of vision (that come from the eyes), blocked by the translucent substance
of a mirror or the like, are reversed back and (so) perceive their own self, for (such is the
common) well known (and accepted view of how perception takes place in this case).

‘Thuṣ, the perception that there is a person in the mirror is considered to be a mistake. For
is that not sublated at a subsequent time, (when one perceives) that there is no person in
the mirror? (We say) no (that is not s0).
The Supreme Goddess as (the cosmic) reflection assumes a position that is
faultless, because it is not a (common) worldly one. (It is one) within which, for the stated

reason, dependence on the existence of an original object (bimba) does not arise. If that
were to be the case, then there would be occasion for the doubt that manifestation of the

reflection is false, because (it would have to) conform to the presence or absence of the

original object (corresponding to that of the presence or absence of the reflection).
However (in reply to this objection), we say that even in the case of a (common) worldly

mirror or the like, there is no negation (of the veracity of the reflection) that would be

conducive to (establishing its) falsity, what to say of the other-worldly (mirror of
consciousness).

Surely (an opponent may object that) it is said that the person is not in the mirror.

Is that not experienced as a negation (of the prior experience of the person seen reflected
in the mirror)? No (it is not). If the person were to be projected onto the mirror, then it
would be possible for there to be (a subsequent) negation that ‘he is not there’, (but that

does not happen) because (the reflection) is not experienced in that way (i.e. as the actual
presence of the person in the mirror). All that is perceived there is just the ‘shade’ (of the
person), not the person to whom it belongs, because this is how it is experienced. Thus,
because people of sound intellect do not perceive that the person is in the mirror, there is
no subsequent negation. This is the essential point.
Nor is it proper (to consider the reflection to be) false, because it does not
(possess) the functional efficacy (of a real entity). (This is because) many kinds of

TANTRĀLOKA

functional efficacies (of the reflection) are perceived by those who look into a mirror, or

the like. For example, (they can see themselves) brushing their teeth (which does actually
take place). (This is not so with) nacre (mistaken for silver), for example ~ it is in no case
capable of functioning like (real) silver.

Surely then, (the opponent rejoins,) this manner of reflection transcends the

(logical) confines of what is well known to be existent? (No,) one is not able to talk about

it as transcending (either) the well-known or little-known confine (of what is logically

considered to be existent). Well then, surely that entails that there is a third position apart
from ʼtrue and ‘false’ (or ‘existent’ and ‘non-existent’)? (Indeed, that is) true! The third
position is the transcendent (alaukika), which is extremely great, proclaimed to be the
freedom of the Supreme Lord, as is said in consonance (with this view) in the venerable

Stotrāvali:

‘There are two conditions of logically possible phenomena, namely, ‘existent’
and ‘non-existent. Crossing over (those polarities), (I offer my) salutations to the third
(condition), which is the wonderfully varied (state of Lord) Śiva.’ (ŚSt 3/1)
Surely then, if one says that one does not perceive the original image separately
when a conjunction of the reflection (with the medium of reflection) takes place (read —
yoge for <yogo) (is that not s0?). (Yes, that is) true. What can be done about that? This is
why we repeatedly say that that (act of reflection within consciousness is) the Supreme
Lord’s freedom. Well then, surely, let the original object be just that (i.e. the reflection).
What about that? No (that is not s0), because (the reflection) does not possess the
characteristic of that (original object). The original object (is a composite entity that can)
be associated with something else. It is an independent entity because it is perceived to be
such, just as (conversely) the face and the like in contact with the mirror is not. As is said

in the venerable Tantrāloka:

‘But, (someone may object): “How can there be a reflection if there is no original
object?”” (To which we reply) “what can we do? (There is no denying) that that (this
cosmic reflection) is indeed (clearly) visible!” Surely then” (argues the opponent), “one

should call that the original object.” Certainly not, (we reply,) because it does not possess
the characteristics of one. (If you ask) “what is said to be the original object?” (we reply

that the original object is an entity which is) not associated with any other (entity). It has
an autonomous (existence) and manifests in accord with its authentic
(sadbhāsamāna) – like the face (of our example).” TĀ 3/50cd-52ab (52-53)

nature

(p. 152) Surely then, is it not possible to characterise in this way a reflection also
(like the original object)? No, (that is not s0), because it is observed to be such (i.e. a
reflection). As is said there itself:
‘(The wise) say that a reflection is that which necessarily manifests in association
with another (that is, the medium of reflection), and so cannot manifest separately from
that (medīum of reflection), as is the case with a face (reflected) in a mirror. (All) this
(idam) is (inextricably) mixed together (misra) with consciousness; it cannot manifest
separately from consciousness. So why not say that (all) the categories of existence
starting from the highest are a reflection within consciousness? TĀ 3/55-56 (56-57)

Surely (one may ask,) is the doctrine of reflection according to the Buddhist view
different from the one we propose, or is it the same? (In response to this question,) it is
said that according to them the object of perception is reflected within consciousness, but
not consciousness within the object of perception. The object of perception places a

CHAPTER THREE

Only Form is Reflected in a Mirror

FTqTITHTJ} ṬTJVTTATATTRfĪ; |

ḶIC AI

rūpasaṁsthānamātraṁ tat sparśagandharasādibhiḥ |
nyagbhūtair eva tad yuktaṁ vastu tat pratibimbitam || 16 ||
That which is reflected (in a mirror) is said to be a (real) entity (vastu)
(in its own right and not an illusory appearance). (However, all that is
reflected) is just the existence (and configuration of its) form
(rūpasaṁsthāna), of which (the other aspects of the prototype), such as (its)
touch, smell or taste are repressed. (16)

reflection within our consciousness (as we understand it to be), and so too in that
(consciousness as conceived) by the Buddhists, but (they do) not (maintain that)
consciousness is (also) within the object of perception. According to the view of the
consciousness, so too consciousness gives rise to a reflection within the object of

knowledge. Both of these are forms of the radiant effulgence of the Supreme Lord, who is

the (supreme) perceiver. With respect to the excellence of the translucence (of
consciousness), one does not experience any difference between them. (The light of

consciousness reflected within the intellect and that within which things shine and are
made manifest are not different). . . . And so that which is reflected on both sides (i.e.
within individual consciousness and extemally), is said (equally) to be this wonderful

variety of the universe. As I myself have said in the Saṅvidullāsa:

‘Like the mutual reflections of two mirroṛs (one within the other), so are the
endless (progressively more) internal adherences of Śiva and Śakti.’
There also (in the Tantrāloka it is said):
‘(AIIl) this (idam) is (inextricably) mixed together (misra) with consciousness; it
cannot manifest separately from consciousness. So why not say that (all) the categories of
existence starting from the highest are a reflection within consciousness?’ TĀ 3/56 (57)
The doctrine is the same. Moreover there (according to that view), the reflection
of the object of knowledge (vedya) (takes place) within the perceiver (vettr), who is
consciousness (vitti), and (so too) consciousness within the essential nature of the object
of knowledge. The arousal (into manifestation) of all this in this way depends in all
respects on the dynamism (saṁrambha) of the freedom (of consciousness). One should
deduce also in this way that the view of (the nature of a) reflection we have advanced is
proudly proclaimed to differ from the doctrine of reflection (advanced by) the Sāṁkhya
and others, as it differs from (the view that causality is) apparent change or any other
(commonly held view). As they say:
‘Thus, O Supreme Lord! Śambhu! He who maintains that the world (prapañca) is
an illuṣion, (he) that it is a material product (kārya), the dualist, and the nihilist, do not
come in touch with Your (true) abiding state, even slightly.’” MM p. 149-152.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘That which is reflected’ there in the mirror, for example, is not, for the

aforestated reason, an illusion, and s0 is real (sat), (although) only the existence
(and configuration) of its form (is reflected there), because it is devoid of touch
and the rest (of the qualities of the original object). (The reflection is a real) entity

(vastu). 1t is not unreal (avastu). However, (the other aspects of the original
object), such as (its) touch, are repressed. That is a reasonable (view). Otherwise,

there would be no difference between (a reflection) and the original object.

Therefore, the point is that a reflection is a third (ontological) category (along
with ‘real’ and ‘illusoryʼ).

He says (in response to a question concerning) what this repressed state of

touch and the rest is, that:

TIaT JTPITĪĀTTTTCATĀĪSṢJHTṬḤ: |
3 āāī¥Trr-īāīTcdīsarādṀsṣattkd: 1| 2.9 1|
nyagbhāvo grāhyatābhāvāt tadabhāvo ʻ‘pramāṇataḥ |
sa cãrthasaṅgamābhãvãt so ʻpy ādarśe ‘navasthiteḥ || 17 ||

(This) state of repression is because (these aspects) are not

perceptible, as there is no means of knowing (them), and this is because there
is no contact with the object (of these perceptions), as that (touch or smell, for
example) are not present in the mirror. (17)

‘This’ absence of (any) means to perceive touch etc. is because they ‘are
not presentʼ (in a mirror). If touch and the rest were to be present here (in the

mirror) then the senses would unite with (each of) them, and the perception

(jñāna) that arises from their contact would become a means to know (them) there

(in that case). The point is that as (this does not take place,) touch and the rest of

that which is being perceived of that (original object reflected in the mirror)
cannot be perceptible.

āēa aōea 1

zḷ a sūīaā-: || 9. 1|
ata eva gurutvādir dharmo naitasya lakṣyate |

nahy ādarśe saṅsthito ‘sau taddṛṣṭau sa upāyakaḥ |l 18 II
Thus, the weight and other attributes (of the original object) are not

apparent (in the mirror), and they are not present in the mirror, because it
(only) serves as a means to seeing it. (I8)

They are ‘repressed’ in the sense that they cannot be perceived, because there is no
means, in the case of a mirror, to reflect them, and so they are not perceived there.

A reflection belongs to a third ontological category, which is neither that of the original

reflected object nor an illusion. The world manifests within consciousness as does a
reflection within a mirror. As such, it is not an illusion, nor could it be the original object,

as it does not and cannot manifest independently of the mirror of consciousness.

CHAPTER THREE
‘Thus’, because touch and the rest are not present (in the mirror, the

reflection is not the original object). If that which is reflected (in the mirror),
present (there) as just the existence of the form alone (of the original object), were
also to possess (the qualities of) touch and the rest, then each quality (of the
original object), such as its weight, would also manifest (there in the mirror). (In
response to the question) concerning the proof (pramāṇa) of their absence (and
hence that the reflection differs from the original object), he says: ‘they, that is,
‘the weight and other attributes (of the original object), are not present in the
mirror”. If the qualities, such as the weight of a mountain, for example, reflected
(in a mirror), were to arise (along with the reflection of its form), then, associated
with them, the mirror would also be immovable (as is the mountain). (But) that is

not the case, and so (this quality) is not present in the reflection also. He states

this, (saying): ‘the weight and other attributes (of the original object) are not
apparent (in the mirror). Surely (one may ask,) one sees everywhere (in every

case) that form is invariable associated with touch, and such is the case in the

original image. So why is only form projected into the mirror? With this question
in mind, he says: ‘because it (only) serves as a means to seeing it’, that is, when

it is seen, the existence of (its) form alone is present in the manifestation one sees.
This is the meaning. The mirror, for the aforestated reason, is translucent to form
alone and so is a means to its manifestation, not of touch and the rest also. This is
the sense (of this verse).
Surely (one may ask,) just as the mirror is a means to see that (reflection
of form), so too are other things like the light (that illumines the mirror). If (all of
these) are equally without distinction, a means (to the manifestation of the
reflection), then why is (the mirror) said to be the substratum (of the reflection)?

With this question in mind, he says:

The Substratum of Reflection and Attendant Causes

3-aṇ |

āēHI, I| 28 1|
tasmāt tu naiṣa bhedena yad bhāti tata ucyate |
ādhārastatra tūpāyā dīpadṛksaṁvidaḥ kramāt |/ 19 ||
Therefore, the substratum (ādhāra) (of a reflection) is said to be that
which does not manifest separately (from the image reflected within it), while
(the attendant) means are, in that case, in due order, a lamp, sight and
consciousness. (19)
As, for that reason, the reflection ‘does not manifest separately”

independently of the mirror, because (the mirror) pervades (the reflection), as oil

does sesame seeds, it is said to be ‘the substratum’ of that (reflection). Again,
here (in this case), light and the rest are the means to know a reflection that has

ariṣen (in the mirror). This is how (the mirror) differs from those (other attendant

causes). He says that ‘in that case, in due orderʼ, (because) the manifestation of

the emergence (of the attendant instrumental causes) at one with the mirror (is

TANTRĀLOKA

successive). Even if the mirror is close (to the original object) and the reflection

has also arisen (within it) at a subsequent time, without a lamp, what would be its

function (kas tadvyavahāraḥ)? Who would know that (their) face is reflected in a

mirror in the dark? Similarly, even if the face is reflected (in the mirror) and there

is light, what would be their function for someone who is blind? Even if (the
person present there) is not blind, if there is no contact between the senses and
(their) objects because there is some defect in the assemblage of such (attendant
causes) and so the knowledge of that (reflection) has not arisen, who would

discern it? Thus, these (attendant means collectively) arisen together are the
means to perceiving it. The essence of the nature of a reflection is just (pure)
manifestation alone (avabhāsanamātrasāra) (no physical entity is made
manifest). Thus this is what is primarily stated here (in these verses).
Surely (one may ask,) for the aforestated reason, the lamp and the rest are
(all) equally capable of bearing a reflection, so why should they also not make

that (reflection) manifest at one with themselves (as does the mirror)? With this

question in mind, he says:

ṁcaiīaṁ fjvīeṣtaāqaaā 1| 3 1
dīpacakṣurvibodhānāṁ kāthinyābhāvataḥ param |
sarvataś cāpi nairmalyān na vibhādarśavat pṛthak || 20 ||
Insofar as these (attendant causes), the lamp, sight and consciousness,
are not solid and are perfectly transparent, the image is not (reflected)
separately (within them) as it is in the mirror. (20)
It is true that the lamp and the rest are capable of bearing a reflection
within themselves. However, (the manner in which they do so differs from that of

a mirror). Although the reflection in a mirror is not separate from it, even so it

manifests (as if it were) being separated (from it). It is not like that here (in the

case of the attendant means). Thus, he says: ‘the image is not (reflected)

separately (within them) as it is in the mirror°, because the lamp and the rest
are not solid. A mirror (on the contrary) is solid, and so a face reflected in it is
manifest (within it as if it were) separate (from it), because its substratum is firm
(and stable). The light of a lamp, however, is not solid, and so is as if one (with
the reflection). (Moreover,) there (in that case), because there is no stabiḹity, (the

reflection) does not manifest in that way, just as (it does not) in a pool, for
example, which even though translucent (nirmala) is not still, and so even if a
face is reflected in it, it is not perceived (there). Such is the case here also. This is
the overall sense.
Surely (someone may point out that), in the same way, water also is fluid
and so is not solid, thus even when it is motionless, a reflection should not
Ī The manifestation of the original object is of an object. In the case of a reflection, which

is not a physical object, it is just a manifestation. One could translate: ‘a reflection is

essentially (just) an appearance alone’. But that may seem to imply that the reflection is an
illusory ‘appearance’, which is not what is meant here.

CHAPTER THREE

manifest separately (within it). (To this we reply that this is) not so. Water is
indeed solid (to some extent), it is not like the sky (which is not at all, so) that

when one rotates an arm, there is no obstruction (to its movement). That is not the
case here (with water) also. Thus, here (in this case), the arms of a person who is
swimming across (a stretch of water) exert an effort to pass through (the water).

However, that (too) is relative. Water is not as solid as Earth. Nor is Fire (as solid
as Water). (Even s0,) solidity is not said to be (entirely) absent in Fire; however,

in relation to (Water) it is very little, (and so) cannot manifest a reflection

separately (within itself). Otherwise, lamps etc. would be (imperceptible,) like

space, because (they too are) formless. However, consciousness is (totally) devoid

(of solidity), and so because it is formless, a reflection does not manifest
separately there (within it).
Again, the front (portion of) a mirror, for example, is translucent, not the

back, and so, taking the support of the back portion, like a screen, the reflection
manifests in the front portion. However, in this case (the light of the lamp) is

translucent everywhere, and so even if a face, for example, is reflected by one part

of it, it is not perceived by means of (some) other part of it. (ēach of the
aforementioned attendant conditions, that is,) the light and the rest, are reflected

inwardly, because (the reflection) is enveloped (by them. However, they do not

manifest as separate, independent reflections).
Or else, (take the example) of a piece of glass or crystal. They are
translucent everywhere (in themselves), and so, because one could not reasonably

explain why one sees something placed nearby them, they do not obstruct (the
course) of the rays of vision. Such is the case with the (light of a) lamp and the
rest. Not being solid, they are translucent everywhere, and so (an image passes
through and) out by the other part (which in this case is not solid), and so a
reflection does not develop there (in the light of the lamp etc.), because it has no
other portion which is not translucent (malin) and obstructs it.
Again, because consciousness is translucent everywhere and is self-

luminous, it does not have even a trace of objectivity, and so how can a
reflection manifest there separately (from it)? When (the light of) a lamp extends
out (to illumine the space around it), or one is perceiving the Man of Shadow
(cchāyāpuruṣa), one can see (its) reflection in the radiance of the sky. Or else
the reflection (of it) one can see in (another person’s) eye is due to the power of
the subtle elements (of form) etc., it is not in the luminous (taijasa) sense of sight
because that is always imperceptible, rather (it is reflected) in the watery eyeball.

Thus, there is no defect (in this view).

Read with MSs Ch, Jh and N tasyāvṛtatvāt for tasyāvṛtatyāt.
Ṛead svaprakāśa iti for ṣvaprakāśeti.
See above, note 2,14.
Alternative translatio: ‘A mirror is solid and so can reflect a stable image in such a way

that it appears to be separate from it. This is not the case with the lamp or the light and the
other (attendant factors), because they are not stable. Water, for example, can only reflect

an image when it stands motionless in a tank. This is because water is solid to a certain

extent, although less so than Earth, but more so than Air, for when we wave our arms

through the air, we do not feel any impediment obstructing their course. Fire is also solid,
although less so than Water, and so to the extent to which it is solid, it is capable of
manifesting a reflected image as if it were separate from itself. Otherwise, if a lamp, for

TANTRĀLOKA

In order to (clarify that) this explanation of the nature of a reflection is not

just our own idea, he says:

example, were to be formless, it would be imperceptible like the sky. This is not the case

with consciousness, because it is formless, and so the reflection (within it) does not

manifest separately from it.
Again, a mirror, for example, only reflects (images) on its front surface, not the
back. Nothing presented to the surface of the dark rear part (of the mirror) can be
reflected. The reflection manifests on the ‘clean’ (svaccha) front part. This is not the case
with consciousness, (each of the aforementioned attendant conditions) reflects in all its

parts. Thuṣ, although a face, for example, is placed there within it, it is not made manifest
(as a reflected image) by one of its parts reflecting another (as happens with a mirror).

This is the case with glass or crystal that are translucent everywhere (in themselves). As

the light that comes from the eyes travels through (the crystal) unimpeded, the image is
not reflected within it. The same is the case with the (light of a) lamp etc. This is because

they have no inner solid (blackened) portion to serve as a barrier for the incoming rays so
that they may be reflected on the other translucent portion (as happens with a mirror).

Again, consciousness being pure in all its parts, and because it is self-luminous,
does not have even a trace of objectivity. So how can the reflected image manifest there
(within it) as if it were separate from it? Moreover, when a lamp emits (its light) or when
one perceives the Man of Shadow reflected in the sky, it is apparent due to the subtle

elements. The reflection is seen in the eye also but is not (reflected) in the effulgent sense
of sight itself, because it is always imperceptible, rather (it is reflected) in the watery

eyeball. Thus, there is no defect (in this view).”

Abhinava reports twice in these two verses that the ‘compassionate’ (krpālu) ‘God of
the gods’ (devadeva) is speaking. Thus, he appears to be suggesting that he is quoting
directly from scripture. However here Abhinava does not name his source. Clearly
Jayaratha could not identify it, suggesting instead that there is no one source. This is
possible, but not likely. When Abhinava wishes to make the point that a procedure or a
doctrine is found in many scriptures, he generally names a few examples. If, as Jayaratha
maintains, the Doctrine of Ṛeflection is ‘generally found everywhere’ in all schools of the

Śaivāgama, Abhinava would normally have made that point by citing names of Śaivāgama
of various schools, but he does not. Thus, it seems more likely that he is drawing from a
single source. I have not been able to trace this reference in the sources available to me,
nor indeed, could Jayaratha. Compelled, it seems, to locate this source or sources, he
resorts to this ploy.
I have not been able to trace all the sources of Jayaratha’s six citations. The

second citation is certainly drawn from the Kāmikāgama, as it is also quoted by Abhinava,

who tells us that (see above, 1/65ab (65cd)). The Kāmikāgama was most probably not

avaiḷable to Jayaratha. Even Kṣemarāja does not appear to have had access to it. If so,
Jayaratha is quoting Abhinava’s citation, not the original. This precludes the possibility
that the fourth citation, which is the source of TĀ 3/4 (see below note 3,58), is from there.
The sixth citation is VBh 135 (133), concerning which see note 3,59 and 60. Whatever

Jayaratha says, the striking absence of references in Abhinava’s presentation is evidence
that the Doctrine of Reflection was not a well-known doctrine at the primary scriptural
level. The Siddhāntas that are, for the most part, dualist to varying degrees, would have no
need of it. The Kāmika in this respect would have been an exception, as it is in others also.
This is probably why Abhinava quotes the Kāmikāgama –he wished to take the support of
the authority of a Siddhānta. The Kaula and proto-Kaula scriptures of the Krama, Trika
and Mata did not refer to it to any great extent. Although the internalization of elements of

ritual by viewing them reflected in a mirror is well known in Krama ritual, it need not be
significant, as we commonly find it in rites of other schools as well. If there had been
more concrete references beyond that, Abhinava would certainly have cited them. Absent

CHAPTER THREE

The Reality and Nature of the Reflected Image: the Teaching of the Mirror

TḠ7 āaāz =ftrd āttḍsā |

īTadāōG_ || Ṝ? 1|

Gr̄ATT

etac ca devadevena darśitaṁ bodhavṛddhaye |
mūḍhānāṁ vastu bhavati tato ‘py anyatra nāpy alam || 21 ||
pratīghāti ṣvatantraṁ no na sthāyy asthāyi cāpi na |
svacchasyaivaiṣa kasyāpi mahimeti kṛpāḻunā || 22 ||

The compassionate God of the gods has revealed this in order to

develop the (awakened) consciousness (bodha) of those who lack intelligence,

(saying that all that exists is an image reflected within consciousness and
hence is quite) real (vastu), (although) it is not also capable (nāpy alam) of
being elsewhere (that is, outside the mirror of consciousness). Nor is it
complete (as it lacks some aspects of the original image). (But although it)

offers resistance (to merger with other reflections), it is not independent
(rather its existence depends on the mirror). It is neither (fully) permanent
(sthāyin) nor (totally) transitory (asthāyin). It is (produced) by the power
(mahimā) of some (peculiar, higher reality) which, translucent (svaccha),
(reflects all things within itself). (21-22)

The related (order of the words in this verse are): ‘the compassionate
God of the gods has revealed this’ʼ, the true nature of a reflected image, ‘in
order to develop the (awakened) consciousness (bodha) of those who are
stupid’, in the manner to be explained. By saying in a general way that He ‘has
revealed’ (this doctrine), the point is that (He has done so generally) everywhere
(in the scriptures). That is said (in the following passages):
‘One should worship the goddesses, the rays (of light), (that serve) as the
organs of sense, as if they were the original object (reflected in the mirror of
consciousness).”
Again (it is said in the Kāmikāgama):

also in the nondualist Śaivism of Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi, we can only concluḍe that it was
Utpaladeva who formulated the Doctrine of Reflection. He may well have been inspired
by the Buddhisṣṭ Yogācāra, from which he adopted several key concepts that he converted

to a nondualist Śaiva perspective, as he did this one. We need not be surprised that this
took place. We observe several cases of borrowing and adaptation from these sources, as

well as exchange, by the Krama and its antecedents at the level of original Tantric

reveḷation. One could say that Utpaladeva made use of the same license in the

development of his philosophy of recognition.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Just like water or a mirror (when images are reflected in them, Deity)

pervades all things,° both moving and immobile (and assumes their form).”
Again:

‘(Deity) manifests real and unreal things (vastu) in the manner of a
reflection in a mirror.”
Again:
‘Just as (phenomenal) entities, excluding (each other), manifest (when

reflected) within a stainless mirror separately from one another, so do the

modalities of all things (viśvavrtti) within the one Lord of Consciousness.”
Again:

‘His entities are reflected inwardly (within Him) like (reflections within) a
transḹlucent gem.
Again (it is said in the Vijñānabhairava):
‘There is neither bondage nor liberation for me. These frighten the

(fettered) individual soul. (But in actual fact,) this (world) is (just) a reflection of

the intellect (buddhi), like the (reflection of the) sun in water.”

Read with MSs Ch, Jh and N sarvaṁ for sarva.
This line is quoted above, as 1/65cd (66cd) where it is prefaced with the statement that

‘God is (both) formless and omniform’ʼ, and Abhinava tells us that it is from the

Kāmikāgama.

The Sanskrit of this verse reads:

yathāntarnirmalādarśe bhānti bhāvā virodhinaḥ |
anāmiśrās tathaitasmiṁś cinnāthe viśvavṛttayaḥ ||
Verse 3/4 above is clearly derived from it. That reads:

nirmale makure yadvad bhānti bhīmijalādayaḥ |

amiśrās tadvad ekasmiṁś cinnāthe viśvavṛttayaḥ || 4 I|
‘Juṣṭ as earth, water and the rest (of the gross elements) manifest (reflected)

within a stainless mirror (separately from one another) without mixing, so do the
modalities of all things (viśvavrtti) within the one Lord of Consciousness.' TĀ 3/4
VBh 135 (133). The printed edition of the Śivopādhyāya’s version of the VBh reads:
bhītasyaitā vibhīṣikāḥ – ‘These frighten one who is fearfu’. MSs K, Ch and
Ānandabhaṭṭa’s version of the VBh read: hālasyaitā vibhīṣikā –- ‘These frighten a childʼ.
This variant echoes the following verse, which is part of the introduction to the

meditations (dhāraṇa) taught at the beginning, which says:

aprabuddhamatīnāṁ hi etā bālavibhīṣikāḥ |

mātṛmodakavat sarvaṁ pravr̥ttyartham udāhṛtam |/ 13 II

CHAPTER THREE

‘These (notions of His nature) are for those whose intellect has not awakened,
(like reprimands) that frighten children, like a sweet a mother (gives a child), all (this is
said) to impel (them) to act (for their own advancement).’ (13)
These two verses encapsulate, as it were, the meditations with the teaching that
the world is illusory, and so they too are provisional, not ultimate. Thus, the verse

Jayaratha quotes comes as a conclusion of the previous two that teach:
atattvam indrajālābham idaṁ sarvam avasthitam |

kiṁ tattvam indrajālasya iti dārdhyāc chamaṁ vrajet || 133 ||
ātmano nirvikārasya kva jñānaṁ kva ca vā kriyā |
jñānāyattā bahirbhāvā ataḥ śūnyam idaṁ jagat || 134 ||
‘““AII this (universe) is without reality, like a magic show (indrajāla), for what
reality is there in a magic show?” By the firmness (of this conviction), one attains peace.
(133) (131)

How can an immutable Self possess knowledge or action? (And yet all) external

entities depend on perception (jūāna) (in order to be known). (Clearly) therefore this
universe is empty (of any existence of its own). (134) (132)
See the following note, in which Śivopādhyāya’s commentary is translated. It is
clear that the VBh taught that the world is illusory, and this was well understood by both
commentators, Ānandabhaṭṭa and Śivopādhyāya. ‘Thus, the former understands this to be a

license to integrate Advaita Vedānta in places in his exposition. Śivopādhyāya’s approach
is exemplified by his commentary on VBh 135 (133), translated in the following note.
Jayaratha understands that Abhinava is following in the tracks of the
Vijñānabhairava and similar sources that maintain that the world is illusory. This is
confusing. We have noted many times that it is a fundamental tenet of the nondualist
Śaiviṣm. Abhinava suṣṭains that this is not so. Appearaṇce is a real manifestation. Here it
seems he is saying the opposite. But that is not so. The teaching that the matrix of time,

space and form is insubstantial as is a reflection in a mirror, as he affirms in the following

verse, is, as he says here, ‘in order to develop the (awakened) consciousness (bodha) of
those who lack intelligence.” Thus, he echoes the VBh, interpreting it in such a way as to

maintain the doctrine of ‘supreme nonduality’ intact, by not denying the reality of the
world manifestation ultimately but only provisionally for the sake of instruction; thus
incidentally allowing for divergence in texts like the VBh that proclaim themselves to be
Trika.

Śivopādhyāya

comments:

deśakālādyaparicchinnatvāt,

mmama

cinmātrarūpasya

paricchinnasyaiva

na

bandho,

bandhamokṣabhāvāt,

mokṣo

kevalam etāḥ

bandhamokṣādikalpanā māyāśaktivaśāt aparāmrṣṭasvarūpasya bhītasyaiva dviīyāt vai

bhayaṁ bhavati iiti dvaitatrastasya, na tu cidadvaitaparāmarśaśīlasya vibhīṣikāḥ
caṭakabhītyutpādanaśālirakṣaṇārthāḥ palālapuruṣādyāḥ | tattvajñāninas tu kiṁ kariṣyanti
etāḥ – anena bandhanam, idaṁ na kartavyam, idaṁ kartayyam, anenaiva mokṣaḥ, ity

nistraiguṇye pathi viharatāṁ ko vidhiḥ ko niṣedhaḥ |

iti śukamumyupadeśāt | uktaṁ ca kalhaṇakavinā

śālīn palālapuruṣo ʻvati yaḥ kṛśānu -

dagdhānanaś caṭakapeṭakabhītidānaiḥ |
trātuṁ sa eva vihito vipine vidadhyāt

kiṁ tatra bhañjanakr̥tāṁ vanakuñjarãṇãm ||

TANTRĀLOKA

There, to this extent, this reflection is a real entity (vastu), because it
manifests (just as it is); what is manifest is not unmanifest." None disagree here

(about this). Nor is there any perception that sublates it, for none arises at a

subsequent time. Śurely (one may ask,) if this is s0, it would be right to consider
(a reflection) to be of the same type as (any) existing thing (vastu) that is
commonly well known (prasiddha) (to exist), otherwise the reality (of an entity —
vastutva) would not be fixed (and determined), and so a hare’s horn, which has no
form and (cannot be) touched etc., would also be (a real) entity. And as there is no
other type of existing thing than the one commonly well known (to exist), then
iti | yathā sūryasya bimbam eva pratīpaṁ jalamadhye asti, tathā buddhir eva
parĩimũtaviṣayã – baddho ʻhaṁ mukto ʻham ityākārā pratīpā iti (p. 121) mama kim
āyātaṁ, buddhyādyavabhāsakatvena tadatītatvāt – iti buddhim eva tyajet |

‘My (true) pure consciousness nature is neither bound nor liberated, because it is

not delimited by space and time and the like. Bondage and liberation pertain only to what

is limited. These thoughts of bondage and liberation are those of a frightened man who,
(under the) influence of the power of Māyā, does not reflect on his own (true) nature. (Itis
said in the Upaniṣads) that ‘fear arises due to a second (other, apart from me)ʼ. One who
reflects on the nonduality of consciousness (is not affected by) frightening things. (For
him they are) like scarecrows, whose purpose is to protect paddy fields by frightening the
sparrows (that eat the rice). How will thoughts such as ‘one is bound by thisʼ, ‘this should
be done’, ‘liberation (is attained) only in this (way)ʼ, affect those who know reality? For
Śuka teaches: ‘travel playfully along by the path free of the three qualities — what is

prescribed and what is prohibited?
And itis also said by the poet Kalhaṇa:

‘The scarecrow in the rice field whose face is thin and burnt impels (to action) by
instiḹling fear in the multitude of sparrows. If he is used to save (someone) in a forest,
what could it do there (to protect from) wild, destructive elephants?’
Just as (the apparent movement of) the solar orb (reflected) in the middle of
water is reversed, so too the intellect. (Its) limited objects in the form of, for example, ‘
am boundʼ (or) ‘I aṃ liberatedʼ, are reversals. Thus, one should abandon the notion
(buddhi), ‘what has happened to me?’ because it is (only) a manifestation of the intellect
(budāhi) eṭc., and because it has passed (anyway).

l The same expression is found again below in TĀv ad 3/23, 4/12, 5/155cd-156ab
(5/154cd-155ab), 9/159 and 28/355b. Everybody experiences that the colour blue, for

example, manifests as that colour, not as yellow or anything else, nor that it does not
manifest at all. There is no question that this is how it appears, that is, manifests. One may
question the reality of that manifestation as being just an appearance, in the sense of
‘seeming to be’. There may be differences of opinion about what it is that is manifesting
that way. Philosophers and others may reflect on how it manifests that way, how it is
known, and much more, but none can dispute that ‘what is manifest is not not-manifest’.
We do not perceive at some other time that the reflection we have seen is not as it

appeared to be, or did not in fact appear at all, as happens with an illusion. The perception
we have of a snake in the place of the rope we mistake in the darkness to be a snake, is

invariably at some subsequent time sublated by the perception of the rope, and we
discover our mistake. This does not happen with reflections in a mirror. We never

perceive that we have perceived the mirror mistakenly to be the reflection within it. Nor is

the perception of the reflection sublated by another subsequent one which is known to be
correct with respect to the previous one, understood to be incorrect and false.

CHAPTER THREE

how could it be real (vastubhūta)?

A real entity that has come into being

(utpanna) externally can move from place to place; how is it that that is not the
case with this (i.e. a reflection)? (In response to this question,) he says that ‘it is
not also capable (nāpy alam) of being elsewhere (that is, outside the mirror of
consciousness)ʼ. (The reflection is) ‘not elsewhere’, (apart) from the location of
the mirror, in (some) other place. This should be associated to all (similar cases).
Moreover, an external form etc. is invariably associated with touch etc. That is not
(so in the case of a reflection), and so he says, ‘nor is it complete’, that is, it is
not sufficient (to include every quality of the original object), because here (in the
mirror), only the abode (and configuration) (saṁhsthāna) of form manifests, devoid
of touch etc. One should link the word ‘not’ (to each word), on the analogy of the

eye of a crow.®

An external (entity), such as a mountain, obstructs everything, and

everything (obstructs) it, because it has a (physical) form. This is also not so (in

this case). Thus he says that (the reflection) ‘offers resistance (to merger with

other reflections)ʼ. The word ‘not’ should be linked here (to these words) also.

Otherwise, how could (a reflection) enter into an unbroken®° mirror? It doesn’t
make sense (to say that the reflection enters) through the back of the mirror,
because if that were so (without the blackened portion that lines the back of a
mirror), the mirror would not be a mirror (adarśana).
Every external (entity) depends on a cause in order to come into being.

Nothing is born of itself. Moreover, when (an entity) has come into being, it is not

dependent on any other (entity for its existence), as is the case with a jar when the
(potter’s) wheel etc. are set aside (once it has been made). Again, no (reflection)
at all, disregarding the mirror etc., which is the instrumental cause of its coming

into being, attains existence independently (by itself). A reflection is not
perceived anywhere without a mirror etc. That is said (with the words): ‘it is not
independent (rather its existence depends on the mirror)’. Thus, in itself

“ See above, note 38 to comm. on verse 1/1.

Here it seems that Jayaratha may not be right. The text does not say that a reflection
does not offer resistance. Read as it stands, it makes good sense to say that a reflection

maintains, as it were, its own form. It is not penetrated by other reflections. However, it is
clearly true that a reflection is not solid, as is an external object. Moreover, if we
understand the ‘resistance’ to be in relation to the mirror, which is solid and external, then

the reflection is not ‘resistant’. If it were, then it could not penetrate, as it were, the mirror.

Understanding the matter in this way, Jayaratha takes recourse to a standard linguistic
feature of Sanskrit, namely, that a statement of negation of one thing amongst a number of
others can stand for the negation of all of them. In this case, a series of predicates that
would apply to an external object are negated with respect to its reflection. Thus,

Jayaratha is right that, according to Sanskrit usage, it could also apply to this predicate. He
justifies his interpretation by saying that only solid external objects with fixed forms are

‘resistant’ to penetration. However, a mirror, although solid and with a fixed form, is
‘penetratedʼ by a reflection. The reflection merges with the mirror and so it is not
‘resistant’ to penetration. Although Jayaratha’s argument is not unsound, the immediately

apparent meaning makes good sense, and so I have chosen to translate accordingly.

“’ Read anyathāsyābhagne for anyathāsya bhagne.

“ Another possible translation could be: ‘because if that were so (without the blackened

portion that lines the back of a mirror), the mirror (would be transparent glass, and s0)

would be seen (to be a mirror).’

TANTRĀLOKA

(svayam), (a reflection) is neither stable nor unstable. Accordingly, he says that ‘it
is neither (fully) permanent (sthāyin) nor (totally) transitory (asthāyin).” An

external entity (vastu) that has come into being is said to be permanent because (it
persists) for an extended period of time; otherwise, it is (said to be) transitory.

Now, (a reflection) does not attain existence independently (apart) from the mirror
etc. So, what is associated with time (in the case of reflection) in such a way that

(one can determine) whether it is permanent or transitory? Therefore, (a
reflection) does not belong to the same (ontological) type as does what is
commonly well known to be an existing thing, and so it is unreasonable (to
maintain that) the manifestation (of a reflection) is not a real entity (avastu), as is,
for example, a hareʼs horn.

Now, (something) does manifest. What is that said to be? Thus (in

response to this question,) he says: ‘it is (produced) by the power (mahimā) of
some (peculiar, higher reality) which, unsullied (and translucent) (svaccha),
(reflects all things within itself)’. This is the power of a translucent mirror and

the like that makes manifest this real entity (vasru) called ‘a reflection’, which,

different in character from (something) unreal (avastu) (which does not manifest
as it truly is), is essentially just (pure) manifestation (ābhāsamātrasāra). Thus,

justas the entities that the Lord makes manifest īn a mirror etc. are essentially just
manifestations (ābhāsa), so too (are all things reflected) in consciousness; they

have no external existence. (The Lord has) taught this in order to develop the

(awakened) consciousness (bodha) of (the ignorant), who are attached to external

things. Thuṣ, all this (world) is essentially just a manifestation (of consciousness,
and s0) one should not be attached to external reality (artha), so that (if we

maintain this attitude of mind), the delusion of duality may cease.
Thus, he says:

gagqaāīm

qfaī

3ī T--āTTTRT
T

aīaēqcā aaīa fēfi am frsrfr

na deśo no rūpaṁ na ca samayayogo na parimā
na cānyonyāsaṅgo na ca tadapahānir na ghanatā |
na cāvastutvaṁ syān na ca kim api sāraṁ nijam iti
dhruyvaṁ mohaḥ śāmyed iti niradiśad darpaṇavidhiḥ || 23 |I

“’(There) neither place (exists) nor form, nor association with time,

nor measure (parimā); nor do (entities) conjoin with one another, nor do they

not. There is neither mass, nor illusion (avastutva), nor (does anything have)

any essence of its own. Delusion certainly ceases (for one whose insight is
such). This, the teaching of the mirror, is thus imparted. (23)
“’ Quoted in ĪPVv 1, p. 168, no variants.

CHAPTER THREE

It has been established that a reflection does not attain a separate
independent, existence apart from the mirror. Therefore, (the reflection) does not
have (its own) separate location (set apart) from the mirror. Thus, he says:
‘neither place (exists)ʼ, and in the same way, (the reflection) has no ‘mass’

(ghanatā), that is, a solid form. This is the meaning. Otherwise, (a reflection)
would have a separate location (of its own apart) from the mirror. This is because
it is not possible for the same place in space that is occupied by a mirror, which
has (a physical) form, to be occupied by some other (entity) that has a (physical)
form. This is (simply) because entities with (physical) forms exclude (one
another) in the same place (whereas the reflection and the mirror do exist together
in the same place). Thus, (a reflection) has ‘no form’. The meaning is that it does
not possess the quality called ‘form’. It is (has) just (a particular) shape (miārta).
This is the point.

Thus (for the same reason), it is not associated with time. (The passage of

time) is in relation to the (difference) between the previous and subsequent
existence of something that has attained (its own) separate (independent)
existence. However, as has been said many times, (a reflection) has no separate
(independent) existence apart from the mirror. (Again, for) that (same) reason, (a
reflection) has no ‘measure’ (parimā). (It has) no size, because it is only possible
for an (independently) existing entity to have (a specific size). Otherwise, how

would it be possible for something like a mountain, which is very big, to be
reflected in the location of a mirror, which is limited (in size)?
Moreover, even if many things are (reflected and) manifest together
within a miror, they are not mutually tightly conjoined with one another (so as to
be crushed together). Thus, he says: ‘nor do (entities) conjoin with one
another°ʼ. Surely (one may ask,) when a village or the like manifests (in a mirror),

and many things (each with their own) separate place manifest (together) in the

one limited space of a mirror, they are (all) in one place, as it not reasonable that it

be otherwise. Then, because (the many reflections) mingle with one another, it is

logical that they should be in a single homogeneous state (ekapinḍībhāva). If that
were not so, then the village would not manifest there (in the mirror).

Accordingly, (responding to this possible question), he says: ‘nor do they not
(conjoin with one another), because (otherwise) all things would manifest as

(completely) separate from one another, and as we have said many times, ‘what is
manifest is not unmanifest° (that is, manifestation is just as it is manifested to

be). Thus, (the cosmic reflection in the mirror of consciousness) is not an illusion
(avastutva), and so he says that ‘nor (is it an) illusion’, because all things
manifest (just as they are). (But) in this way also, it does not have even a little true

nature (rūpa) of its own which (would) give it reality. Thus, he says: ‘nor (does
anything have) any essence of its own’. Thus, in this way, the nature of a

reflection is essentially just (pure) manifestation (ābhāsamātrasāra). May the

limited knowledge, which is the perception of duality, that those who maintain the

“ Read parimite for pārāmate.

’ The same expression is found above in TĀv ad 3/22 and below in TĀv ad 4/12,

5/155cd-156ab (5/154cd-155ab), 9/159 and 28/355b. See note 3,61 above ad 3/22.

TANTRĀLOKA

existence of an external reality (outside consciousness) have decided (is correct),

cease. This is the meaning.”

“This is the teaching of the mirror’ which, different from a wall and
other such (opaque objects), is a kind of entity that is capable of bearing a

reflection (within itself). It is ‘thus imparted’, that is, taught. Being such, it
illustrates this fact (artha), namely, that (all) this universe is located within
consciousness like a reflection in a mirror. Nothing exists externally which is
separate from that, and so one should not apply (one’s efforts) there (rather, one

should attend to how everything abides within consciousness as its outer
manifestations and not be attached to anything).
(Now,) in terms of the reflection (of form) established in this way, he
defines (the nature of) a reflection of sound by means of another (set of) terms
(abhidhāna) consonant with that. Thus, he says:

The Reflection of Sound

gaa vaṀĩāsaā sṁārarraaṝ |
rrazzā Jūfará aq, uāgaārī TaāT 1| 3z

jJiḤHĒG-EĒ hēteEze SĀṬCIHḤI

itthaṁ pradarśite ʻmutra pratibimbanavartmaṇi |
śabdasya pratibimbaṁ yat pratiśrutketi bhaṇyate || 24 ||
na cāsau śabdajaḥ śabda āgacchattvena saṁśravāt |
tenaiva vaktrā dūrasthaiḥ śabdasyāśravaṇād api l 25 l| missing in ĪPVv quotation
pithirādipidhānāṁśaviśiṣṭachidrasaṅgatau |
citratvāc cāsya śabdasya pratibimbaṁ mukhādivat || 26 ||

”"Now (that the teaching) has been explained in this way in terms of

the (formation of a visual) reflection there (in the mirror of consciousness, we
will discuss) the reflection of sound, which is (otherwise more commonly)
called an echo. That (echo) is not (as some would have it) a sound generated

from (another) sound.” This is because one who produces a sound hears it

approaching (towards himself and not receding away). Moreover, those who

stand far off do not hear it (at all, let alone more loudly, as they should if the
Cf. Dyczkowski 1987: 47 ff.
”' TĀ 3/25ab, 26-28, 30cd-34ab (34cd) is quoted in ĪPVV 1, p. 165.

” Gnoli notes that ‘according to the Vaiśeṣika, there are three kinds of sound, namely,

sound that is born from contact, from separation (exemplified respectively by a drum and
the splitting of a bamboo), or from (another) sound. The sounds perceived through the ear

are always ‘generated from sound’ʼ, in the sense that every sound generates, in the part of
the space contiguous to it, another sound, and so on, like the waves of the sea that push
against one another, until it reaches the space of the cavity of the ear.

CHAPTER THREE

echo were to be generated out of the original sound and so, strengthened,
would travel further). Again, this sound varies according to the particular
(form) of the cavity with which it is associated, be it the cover, for example,

(or any) part of a jar or any other vessel. Therefore, (an echo) is a reflected
image, just like a face or anything else (reflected in a mirror). (24-26)

(An echo is called) ‘pratiśrutkā’ (in Sanskrit for two reasons; one is that)

it is heard (śrur) as a reflection (pratisaṁkramaṇa), or (the other is that a sound

which is) heard (śravaṇa) that is similar (prati) (to another sound) is an echo

(pratiśrur). Here, (in the case of an echo,) according to the Naiyāyikas, there is no
reflected image anywhere (of any sort), because, unlike the reflection of form
(which according to them) takes place by perceiving one’s own face because the

rays of vision (from the eyes) are reflected in the mirror, (this is not s0) in the case
of the ears. It is not possible for a reflection or the like to take place (there), and so

the echo is (the result) of imagining (parikalpana) the original sound to be such,
which conceals that (fact). This is the intended sense (of these verses).

Now there (in this regard, we reply that) the reflection of form has thus
been sufficiently established (to exist). In order to establish the existence of the

reflected image of sound etc. in the same way, taking up the question posed by
that view, he points out its defects, (saying) ‘that (echo) is not . . .’ and so forth.
(According to the opponent,) ‘that’ echo is ‘(sound) generated from (another)

soundʼ. Thuṣ, it is not generated from the conjunction or separation (of objects

that thereby produce sound). (The echo) is the original sound (produced) from
itself, because it has arisen from (itself as) its own cause. This is the sense. It is
perceived to be proceeding from the location of the mouth (of the speaker). Thus,
the perceivers who are close to (him) hear the original sound at its most intense,
not, on the contrary, the last (part of the sound), which is the weakest. On the
contrary, those who are distant (hear) the last (part of the sound), not the first.
Again, the perceivers who are close by hear the echo (produced) by that same
speaker as ‘approaching’, impelled towards his own face. Thus, perceivers who
are far away in a place like a canyon or cave do not hear (the original sound),

because it is then not impelled towards them. The original sound resting in the
location of the space of the ear of the many who hear it does not assume separate,

different forms. (Everybody hears the same sound.) If it were (to be different), its
activity would not be as a single object for all those who hear it (and so those who
hear it would not respond in the same way). Again, the echo is not a sound born
from sound, because a sound which is truly born from sound would be of the same
type as (the originating) sound, and that is not perceived. (This is evident from the
fact that) the same sound becomes diverse according to the space ‘with which it

is associated’, of the particular cavities, large and small, that are parts of
particular materials, such as, for example, ‘the cover (of a jar)ʼ; that is, (such
things) as the cover of a cooking pot which in its lower portion contains warm

water that (about to boil) makes a sound. Therefore, just as the reflection of a face
is (in actual fact present) in a mirror and the like, so too (the echo) of that original
sound is (present) in the ether (nabhas). Thus, he says: “(an echo) is a reflected

image, just like a face or anything else (reflected in a mirror).
” Read with MSs Jh tatsannidhavartibhiḥ for tatsavidhavartibhiḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

Here (in this case, the echo should be considered to be) a reflection, not
only because it belongs to a different type than the primary sound which serves as

(the original) entity (vastubhūta), but also because it belongs to the same type as a
reflection of form. Thus, he says:

ṢGTI]
JTTR &ITiTATTĀĪĀT |

fcaf-r 11 3.9 11
idam anyasya vedyasya rūpam ity avabhāsate |

yathādarśe tathā kenāpy uktam ākarṇaye tv iti || 27 ||
Just as (an image reflected) in a mirror manifests as if it were the
form of some other object, indeed such is the case (with an echo) which is
heard as if “I hear (something) uttered by someone (else)”. (27)
Just as, for example, in a mirror, the form associated with one’s own face,
although a perception of oneself (ahantāpratyaya), is experienced as an object
associated with something else (i.e. the mirror), in the same way, the word uttered
by oneself, even if one could consider it to be uttered by oneself, ‘is heard as if “I
hear (something) uttered by someone (else)””. Thus, because it is belongs to the
same type as a reflection, here (in this case) also, (the echo is) a reflection. This is

the intended sense. The word ‘indeed’ (emphasizes the intended) meaning in

relation to what (was stated) previously.
Surely (the question arises that), if some speaker utters a sound and it is
projected (and echoed) (pratisaṁkrānta) in the space of, for example, a distant
cave, why is it heard (only) by those who are present in those specific places, and
not by others? Thus, he says:

fnaṁtzārarāīreā vfāraz ara 1
G{EEIḤṀIGI LĒIE-ĀITKEFCT:

ĀEYAII

niyamād bimbasāṁmukhyaṁ pratibimbasya yat tataḥ |
tanmadhyagāḥ pramātāraḥ śṛṇvanti pratiśabdakam || 28 I|

Just as the original object must necessarily face directly in front of its

reflection, therefore (for the same reason), (only) the perceivers who stand

between (the original sound and its echo) hear the echo. (28)

Just as in the case of (a reflection) in a mirror, the reflection must

necessarily face directly in front of the original object, similarly, the perceivers
who are between the two, that is, the original object and the reflection, hear the
echo as (an ongoing sound) directed towards the original (source of the sound).

” TĀ 3/28cd reads in IPVV 1, p. 165 – tanmadhyagās tu srṇvanti pramātāro na dāragāḥ |
“(only) the perceivers who stand between (the original sound and its echo) hear (the echo),

not those who are far away.”

CHAPTER THREE

Those who, on the contrary, are far away (from the source of the sound) in (some)

separate place, such as a canyon or cave, do not, because (the echo) is then not

directed towards (them).

Surely (one may ask,) if this is the case, then how could the perceivers,
who for some reason have not heard the form of the sound considered to be the

original object, even if they are in the middle (between the sound and its echo),

perceive the echo directed towards the original (source of the sound)? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

ezdT'EEEIṀIEṭzp-ṂKEd

zavaīcc%}
fl̄aā rvāzfīd ā? ā]. || 2< 1
mukhyagrahaṁ tv api vinā pratibimbagraho bhayet |
svapaścātsthaṁ priyaṁ paśyeṭ taṁkitaṁ mukure vapuḥ || 29 ||
It is possible to perceive a reflection without perceiving its original
object. One sees the pleasing form (of the beloved) who stands behind one’s

back, etched (as it were) in a mirror.” (29)

‘Itis possible’ to perceive a reflection by being in an appropriate (yogya)

place (to do so). By describing (the beloved) as standing behind one’s back, he

gives the reason why the beloved, who is the original object (of the reflection in

the mirror) and (has suddenly,) unsuspected, approached (his lover), is not seen
(directly).
Surely (one may ask,) according to the aforementioned argument, the
reflection is not perceived to have a separate (independent) existence (of its own)

apart from the mirror, so how can it face the original object? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

sāṁmukhyaṁ cocyate tādṛgdarpaṇābhedasaṁsthiteḥ |
What is meant by (the reflection) facing directly in front (of its

original object) (sāṁīmukhya) is (its) existence at one with the mirror (in this

way). (30ab) (30cd)

The mirror that faces that kind of original object is thus (because it faces

it) at one (with it, in the sense that) there is a oneness of nature (ekātmya)
(between its reflection and) the mirror. Due to this, the reflection (exists, and its)
‘existence’ is its presence (avasthāna) (in the mirror). Thus, that itself is (what is

meant by saying that it is) ‘facing directly in front’ (of the original object); that

is, the mirror faces the original object. Again, because the (existential) state (vṛtti)

of that (reflection) is not independent (anadhika) of that (original object and the
” Quoted in ĪPVV 1, p. 164. There, svapaścāt sthaṁ reads paścād gataṁ and vapuḥ reads

Read with MS K saṁsthitiḥ for saṁsthiteḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

mirror), it is essential that the mirror be facing directly in front of the original

object. Otherwise, the reflection would not even arise (utpatti). One should
understand that, in the same way, it is (possible) to perceive the reflection of
sound and the like because the original (sound) is facing directly in front of the

space (ākāśa), for example, (through which it is transmitted and echoes).
He says that (in the following verse).

JHHITṀJ] VI TJTT TTTTTTÑ|

ataḥ kūpādipithirākāśe tatpratibimbitam || 30 ||
vaktrākāśaṁ saśabdaṁ sad bhāti tatparavaktrvat |

Therefore, the space in the mouth in which a word resounds that is

reflected in the space of a cavity as, for example, in a well, appears as if it

were spoken by someone else. (30cd-31ab) (31)

‘Therefore’ʼ, because of the particular (kind of) oneness between the

original object and the substratum (of its reflection) facing it, (which takes place)

in the aforestated manner. When the space associated with (someone) who is

speaking, along with sound (he makes), which serves as the original object, is
reflected in the space of, for example, a well, a state of oneness (abhedavṛtti) with

that arises. Thus it ‘appears’, that is, manifests. This is the meaning. As sound is
a quality, it inheres in the possessor (of that) quality. For that reason, (sound) is

dependent on it, and so it makes sense that the reflection of that (sound) (should

take place) within the possessor of that quality (i.e. space), along with the
possessor (of that quality, i.e. the original source of sound). Thus it is said that
‘the space (in the mouth is reflected) in the space (of the well). In order to
make (the opponent of this view) accept that the space of, for example, the well,
faces directly in front of the space of the face, he (says), by way of example, that
‘(it appears) as if it were spoken by someone else’. The meaning is that (there)

within that (space) there (appears to be) another speaker, apart from the original

”” The word ‘anadhika’ literally means ‘not (something) more (than). The reflection in
the mirror is not ‘something more’ in addition to the mirror. Nor is it ‘something more’ in
addition to the original object.

Ś It is necessary that the mirror faces the object and manifests in a state of unity with it for
the reflection to be possible.

” Read with the quotation in ĪPVV 1, p. 165 tatparavaktrvat for tatparavaktavat, lit. as if
it were a different speaker to that.”

“ In India, sound is considered to be a quality of space, rather than air. Thus, the reflection

of sound, that is, an echo, arises within space. As the medium of sound, space is
substantial, that is to say, an ‘ether’ rather than a vacuum.

! The resonant space of the face is the original object with respect to the space of the well,

which, as it is at one with it, manifests there. As sound is a quality associated in this way

with its substratum, it is derivative, and so the substratum of that quality is reflected in the
substratum of the same quality, in this case, space within space. Thus, the space in a well
can be considered to be ‘facing’ (that is, to be at one with,) the space of the face.

CHAPTER THREE

(prakṛta) speaker, who speaks back (as it were, to him). Juṣt as the space of the
liṣtener associated with (the sound of the echo, which is as if) the speaker who

speaks back, lays hold of the reflection of the space along with the sound

associated with the (original) speaker, so too does the space of the well (which
serves as our) example.

Here (in this world), once the perception (jñāna) that arises from a
particular sense organ has perceived its corresponding reflection (i.e. the sense of

sight, form, hearing, sound and so on), it distinguishes (the particular) sense object

(from others). Otherwise, (if) cognition (were to be, as the opponent maintains,)

formless (nirākara), (it could not distinguish one object from another) because it
would be common equally to many objects, such as (the colours) blue and yellow,

and so there would be no necessity (niyama) (regulating the specific form of

perceptions in correspondence to their objects, such as) ‘this is the perception of
blue and ‘this is the perception of yellow’. Therefore, perception (jñāna) has a
form (sākāra). If it were not to have a (specific) form (ākāra), its (specific
appropriate) condition with respect to the function of each (organ of sense)
(pratikarma) (i.e. that the eye should see form and the ear hear sound) would not
logically be possible. Even if there is (the specific appropriate) condition with

respect to the function of each (organ of sense), it would be logical to maintain
that it (would not be possible to) establish (siddhyer) that the entity that has given

rise (to a particular perception) is that sense object itself, because that would entail

(the undesirable) contingency (prasaṅga) (and inconsistency) that, if what gives
rise to (a perception) is not specific to it, its object (for example sound in this
case,) could be that of sight or (any of the other senses, equally).
Now then, if (you ask,) is (not perception) specific to a particular object
of sense, because its existence (sattā) is generated by virtue of the function
(karman) (of the object, such as the colour) blue, not the eye (or the other senses)
in this way? (We reply that) that is not so. The function (karmatva) (of an entity is

its) agency (kārakatva), (that is, the capacity to give rise to a specific effect,) and
that depends on the activity (with which it is involved and is) invested (in it)
(kriyāveśa). Otherwise, (if that were not s0, and an entity were to be inactive,) it

would (only) just be an existing thing (vastumātra) (with no specific function or

causal efficacy), not the agent (that implements some function or gives rise to an
effect). We are engaged here in reflecting on (the nature and manner in which an
object of sense, such as the colour) blue, is penetrated by the action called
‘perception’, so how can that be its function prior to that (taking place)? Nor is it

possible to establish that (a perception) is specific to a particular object of sense
by (maintaining that a formless cognitive consciousness of that object of sense)

Read ~kriyāveśam eva for ~kriyāveśa eva. If, as the opponent maintains, perception is

essentially formless, but assumes a specific form in conformity with the object of

perception, because the function of the object in the cognitive process is to give rise to its

corresponding specific form of perception, the question arises as to how the object
acquires this function. Perception, from this point of view, is an activity. It is because of
this activity that any phase or aspect of perception has a specific function. If one maintains
that the function of an object is to generate a specific perception, that would mean that it

has this function prior to the act of perception taking place and therefore independently of

it, which would imply the impossible situation that it is not an object of any perception, or
conversely, that it could be perceived even without the senses or perception taking place.

TANTRĀLOKA

generates it. Again, if (you) say that although (formless cognitive consciousness)
generates (perceptions) equally without distinction, the specific (form of each
perception) is created by the essential nature of the entity (perceived), (that
amounts to) indicating a way of fleeing from (the problem, instead of facing it).
So enough of much (discussion)!
Thus, also the senses that have perceived that (particular) reflection apply
themselves (as it were) to grasp the specific distinction (pariccheda) between each
object of sense. This has been well exemplified by saying that (the echo appears
to be) ‘as if it were spoken by someone else’. He has indicated (by means of this

example) that although this (perception) takes place only in the one who hears
(the echo), even so, because of the determination (to effect a purpose) etc. on the
part of the speaker and (the echo) that speaks back, they must necessarily face

directly in front of each other. Again, it is possible that the (people who are)

listening (to one another) do not face each other, but in that case, we observe that

(such people who are) listening (to each other) in this world (of daily life) say: “]

did not hear what he said.”

Again, commonly the space of the face reflected in the space of a well, for

example, appears to be that of another speaker, and so the sound is heard as if it
were uttered by someone else. This is the meaning. As the reflection is one with
(the original object) in this way, it (is said to be) facing the original object. So it is
rightly said that: ‘the original object must necessarily face directly in front of its

reflectionʼ.

Thus, (only) a perceiver who is present in (some) place between the
original image and the reflection perceives each one, not someone else (who is
somewhere else). Accordingly, he says:

āīTr T 3ā] 11| 32 1

ā̃ 7 saf
yathā cādarśapāścātyabhāgastho vetti no mukham || 31 II
tathā tathāvidhākāśapaścātstho vetti na dhvanim |

Just as someone who stands behind a mirror does not perceive the

face (reflected in it), similarly, he who stands behind this sort of space does
not perceive the sound (of the echo). (31cd-32ab) (32)

The ‘face’ is the reflection of someone else’s face. ‘He who stands
behind this sort (of space) - that faces the original object, that is, in some place
like a canyon or a cave. This is the meaning. ‘“He does not perceive the sound’,
that is, the echo. This implies that, by denying just the perception of the reflection,

(the reflection does exist and) is actually present (there, but not perceived). The
point is that the absence of perception (jñāna) does not imply that the object of
perception does not exist. Thus, even though a reflection has arisen, (the

perceiver) does not perceive it, because (he) is not located in an appropriate place

(to do s0). This is the meaning. Although, the point has already been made by
Ẽ Quoted from verse 3/28ab above.

CHAPTER THREE

(saying previously that) the original object must necessarily face directly in front
(of its reflection) and so on, even so, it is stated again in order to stress that (an

echo) belongs to the same category as the reflection of form (insofar as both are
equally reflections and so have the same properties and requirements).
Surely (a question arises) here. Does (an echo) belong to the same
category as the reflection of form in some aspects (arṁśāṁśikayā) or in all respects
(sarvasarvikayā)? In the first case, even if it belongs to the category of sound that
is generated from the (original) existing sound but is such only in some aspects,
for example, that it appears to be (the original) and the like, then that (partial)
form would be the one applicable (prasakta) (as the form of the reflection). If it
were not so because (it is perceived) in all respects, then when the reflection of the
form (of someone’s face) arises (in a mirror), one would perceive the hands and
(all the other parts of the body constituting) the original object. However, that is
not so here (in daily life). Thus, he voices (this) question.

śabdo na cānabhivyaktaḥ pratibimbati tad dhruvam || 32 ||

abhivyaktiśrutī tasya samakālaṁ dvitīyake |

kṣaṇe tu pratibimbatvaṁ śrutiś ca samakālikā || 33 ||

Mft is (sure and) certain that (only) a word which is not unclear
(anabhivyakta) is reflected (and heard as an echo). (In the first moment) it is
heard at the same time as it is clearly (uttered), (however) in the second
moment (only) the reflection (i.e. the echo) is heard at the same time (as it
takes place). (32cd-33) (33-34ab)

Here (in daily life), a word which is to some degree (tāvar) ‘unclearʼ, that
is, not (fully) uttered, does not become a reflection (i.e. an echo). Thus, it is

certainly the case that when in the first moment it is manifest by striking the organ
(of speech in the right) place, it becomes an object of the sense of hearing. Then it

is heard again in the second moment in the course of hearing it as a reflection (i.e.
an echo). Thus, when the perception (pratīti) takes place at the time its condition

is that of a reflection, there is no (perception of the sound that is) considered to be

the original object which, (once it) has been uttered, ceases. Thus, here (in this

case, argues the opponent), it is not of the same kind as the reflection of form,
because there (in that case) the original object is (still) perceived even when the

reflection (appears in the mirror). (In response to this objection, Abhinava goes on

to say) that this is not s0.

“ These lines are quoted in in ĪPVV 1, p. 165, samakālikā reads samakālake with no
change in meaning.

The question that is raised here is whether an echo should be considered to be like the

reflection of form in a mirror. They are similar but not the same in all respects. Thus, there
can be no doubt that in both cases the original source of the reflection must be clearly

TANTRĀLOKA

tulyakālaṁ hi no hastatacchāyārūpaniścayaḥ
Indeed, a (clear and) certain perception (niścaya) of a hand and the
form of its shade do not occur at the same time. (34ab) (34cd)
‘(A clear and) certain perception’ (niścaya) is a manifestation (of
consciousness)
the
nature
of
which
1is
reflective
awareness

(vimarśātmāvabhāṣa).’ Even there (in that case) also, there is no perception
(pratīti) of the original object when (its) reflection (is perceived). It is not
logically possible (yukta) to perceive the hands etc. of the (body that serves as the)
original object (when one is) perceiving (its) reflection, because two perceptions
that arise simultaneously block (one another) (virodha). Nor is this (perception of
a reflection and its object) based (simultaneously) on both, like the perception of a
(single) varied (object) (citrrajīāna), because the original object and (its)
reflection are in (two) locations, distant (from one another), and so do not
perceptible. We can clearly see the original mountain that is reflected in the mirror.
Similarly, the sound from which an echo is formed must also be clearly audible, otherwise
it could not produce an echo. However, an opponent to the view that both are equally

reflections of the same type, one of form and the other of sound, points out that in the case
of a reflection of form, the original and its reflection can be seen together. This is not the
case with an echo, which invariably follows after the original sound has ceased. Abhinava
responds that this distinction is not correct. Like the echo, the reflection is also not
perceived in the same place as the original object.
A word is heard directly just when it is uttered by the speaker, whereas the echo is only
perceived later. The original sound no longer exists when the echo is heard. Someone may

object that if that is so, an echo is not analogous to a form reflected in a mirror, as in that

case the original object can be perceived at the same time as the reflection. Abhinava
replies that that is not so. They are two objects that are perceived in two separate acts of

perception that take place one after the other. Likewise, we perceive the hand and its shade
separately.

See above, note 1,25 for a justification of the translation of the term ‘vimarśa’ as

‘reflective awarenessʼ. Clearly, here the term denotes an aspect or phase (in this case the
final one) of the process of perception. Indeed, it may denote all of perception and
everything to do with it, including memory, the capacity to distinguisl

e object from

another (apoha), and hence the denotation of the object perceived (sa
), recognition
(pratyabhijñā), cognizance of the relationship (saṁbandha) between objects perceived,
cogitation or thought (vikalpa) in general, and more. Moreover, vimarśa is not restricted

just to the sphere of objectivity, it also includes the capacity the perceiver has to be aware

of himself, his inherent powers as perceiver and agent, and so on. In short, just as prakāśa

– ‘light’ denotes all that appears, whether in the domain of objectivity or subjectivity, both
immanently (when subject and object interact) and transcendentally (as the pure
consciousness which is reality-as-such), vimarśa denotes the immanent perception and

transcendental experience of it, respectively. In all cases, aspects and forms, vimarśa is
indeed ‘reflective’, because immanently, it cogitates on the expanse of objectivity, and
transcendentally, it ‘bends back’ onto itself into the expanse of subjectivity. Just as any
and every thing perceived in any way is the Light of consciousness, so too the perception
of it in any form is its inherent power of reflective awareness. So, just as the Light is one,
even as it shines in countless forms, and yet is beyond them, so too is the reflective
awareness of that Light, which is one with it as its power, although of countless forms.

CHAPTER THREE

manifest (together) unseparated (from one another). (Well then,) surely (one may
ask,) even if the hand etc. (of the original object) is not manifest (pratibhāsa),
(when attention is directed to its shade,) does it not (continue) to be present?
(Reply): no, it does not. (According to us,) manifestation (ābhāsa) itself
establishes the existence of all things (sarvavastu-vyavasthāpaka). Īt is not
possible to determine the existence or non-existence of anything (artha) apart
from (its manifestation). That is absent here (in this case), and so what is the

means of knowledge (by which) one can determine that the original object
(bīība), in this example, the hand, truly exists (when its shadow is perceived)?

(Well then. the opponent may say that in the case of sound,) in the second
moment (when the echo is heard,) the sound does actually exist, (even though) its
state is one in which it is in the process of coming to an end. However, (even so,
the original sound) is not perceived when it becomes a reflection (i.e. echo). (We
reply that) here (in this case) also, the original object and (its) reflection are not
perceived simultaneously, and so (the nature of an echo) is of the same kind as is
that (of the reflection of form).
Having reasonably established in this way the true nature of a reflection

by refuting the view of (these) Naiyāyikas, he begins to make his main point.’
The Reflection of Touch

vaz̄ īV'ā ī-<. ardīrtd g-=. |1 3., 1|

Ta. JirF-rāTGa-GḺṬGJT: ||/38 1I
vastuno ʻvasthānam asṣṭi, which literally means: ‘there is the condition of an existing
entity’. When perceiving the reflection, the condition of the original object is not that of a
manifest existing entity, at least in relation to that particular perceiver. Existing things are
manifest entities. This is the fundamental view of all forms of existential
phenomenologies. As Heidegger put it, ‘however much seeming, just that much being’.
(See Dyczkowski 1987, p. 54 ff.) Existence in itself, independent of consciousness, is no
existence at all. From this perspective even subatomic particles possess a degree of
consciousness. Indeed, they, like all else, are forms of consciousness. Inert, insentient

matter, totally devoid of consciousness, does not exist.

In the section that follows, up to line 42ab, Abhinava goes on to tackle the other three
objects of sense and their sense organs, that is, touch, taste and smell. In order to establish

that all that is perceived by the senses is a reflection in the mirror of consciousness,

Abhinava must establish that all the objects of the five senses are reflections (pratibimba),
not original images. Form and sound are external objects, and so are perceivable to any
number of perceivers simultaneously. Accordingly, the analogies — reflections in a mirror,
echoes in a cave -- are externally perceivable. The situation with the other three objects of

sense and the manner they are perceived is not the same. They are internal and are known

only to the person who perceives them, but even so they arise from outer original objects,
and so their corresponding sensations are reflections. Even sound and form, although
external, are never directly perceived. They too are experienced, second-hand, as

reflections.

TANTRĀLOKA

itthaṁ pradarśite ʻmutra pratibimbasatattvake || 34 ||
prakṛtaṁ brũmahe tatra pratibimbanam arhati |
śabdo nabhasi sānande sparśadhāmani sundaraḥ || 35 I|
sparśo ‘nyo ‘pi dṛdhāghātaśūlaśītādikodbhava |
parasthaḥ pratibimbatvãt svadehoddhũlanãkaraḥ || 36 ||

Now, having explained here in this way the nature of the reflected

image, we turn to the main point. There (in that context, we note that)”
sound can be reflected in space, and a beautiful tactile sensation (sparśa) (is
reflected best) in the (genitals, which is the) blissful abode of touch.
(Similarly,) another (opposite, painful tactile sensation), which is present
elsewhere (parastha), such as that which results from a violent blow with a
spear or severe cold, (rakes) one’s own body (with pain, causing it to become)
pale, because (the sensation) is a reflection (within it). (34cd-36) (35-36)

“ The last three lines (i.e. TĀ 3/35-37ab (36-37cd)) are quoted in MM p. 148. TĀ 3/37ab

(37cd) is omitted in the quotation. It is an explanatory aside. Indeed, the continuity of the
text improves by omitting it. Indeed, if Jayaratha had not commented on it, one would be
tempted to consider it to be a latter addition. _There, 35c (36a) reads
cānandasparśadhāmani ʻthe abode of the touch of bliss’ for sānande sparśadhāmani ʻthe
bliṣsful abode of touch’. Maheśvarānanda comments: iti śrītantrālokasthityā 1) viyati
pratiśrutkātmā śabdaḥ, 2) aṅganānusmṛtyādāv ādhāracakre pratyāsannakarkaśasparśānusanáhānāt saukumārya-śālināṁ śarīreṣu sparśaḥ, 3) anyajanāsvādyamāṇatintīṇyādyanusandhānād
dantodake
rasaāḥ,
4)
candanādidhūpanāvasthāyāṁ

gandhaḥ,
5)
smaraṇotprekṣādāv
ātmamanasy
anyajanānubhūyamānasvabhāvo
harṣa-śokāvirbhāvaśceti
sārvatrikam
.etat
pratibimbasampatsaubhãāgyam | evañ ca bāhyeṣu darpaṇādiṣu bimbasavyapekṣaḥ
pratibimbopalambhaḥ | svātmarūpe punar etad vaiparītyam, aśeṣasyāpi viśvavaicitryasya

pratibimbatayānubhīyamānatvāt |

‘According to this teaching (sthiti) of the venerable Tantrāloka (all the objects of
the senses are reflections). 1) Sound as an echo is in the sky. 2) Touch (is reflected) within
the bodies of those who possess the beauty of youth by contemplating the close and
intense touch within the Wheel of the Foundation when recollecting women and the like.
3) Taste (rasa) is (reflected) in the saliva by pondering on (the taste) of, for example,

tamarind sauce that others do not savour. 4) Smell is (reflected) within the nose when

incense and the like is used to fumigate (dhūpana) (something). 5) The arising of joy and
sorrow that is experienced by other people is (reflected) in one’s own mind when
recollecting, imagining or the like. The good fortune of the wealth of the reflected image
is everywhere (in all the senses).
And in this way, the perception of a reflection within an outer mirror or the like
depends on the existence of an original object (bimba). However, within one’s own nature,
on the contrary, it is quite the opposite, because the entire wonderful diversity of the
universe is experienced as a reflection.’
Maheśvarāṇanda then quotes verse 3/49ab (3/49).
Read tintiḍy for tintiṇy. According to Apte, tintiḍī, variously spelt tintiḍa, tintiḍikā, and

tintīḍikā, means ‘a sour sauce made from tamarind’.

Read nānyajanāsvādyamāna- for anyajanāsvādyamṃāna-.

CHAPTER THREE
He says that ‘there’ and so on, that is, that being the case, ‘(sound can be

reflected) in space’ʼ, because the purity (nairmalya) (which is the capacity to
reflect) sound is only (present) there, and that when it is ‘present elsewhere’

(also) it ‘can be reflected’ (in its corresponding medium of reflection). This is the
(natural order and) connection (between the words in these verses), and the same

(corresponding statement) should be added everywhere (to all the examples given

in these verses).

The appropriate tactile sensation to enjoy sex is reflected in ‘the blissful

(abode of touch), that is, a particular substratum (ādhāra) (of pleasing tactile
sensations in the body), namely, in the Root, which is the abode of bliss (in the

genitals), (as well as), for example, the Heart and the palate.”' This is because the
purity (nairmalya) (which is the capacity to reflect) touch is present there in such

a way that it is also possible (to experience) the pleasure etc. of the emission of
(sperm, which is one of the vital) constituents (dhātu) (of the body). Thus, (this
tactile sensation) is said to be ‘beautiful’ because it generates excellent bliss.

‘Another (opposite) tactile sensation is not beautiful because it is painful. Thus,
when it is reflected in a particular substratum (of painful tactile sensations in the

body,) such as the anus (mattagandha), the stomach, the Channel of the Tortoise
(kīūrmanāḍī), and throat etc., (it causes one) to faint and the like (with pain). (An

object of a tactile sensation) ‘present elsewhere’ is one that is experienced as
being something else (and elsewhere, apart from the sensation itself).” The point
is that the primary (mnukhya) (original sensation is experienced) there. This (is an
example that) stands for the characteristic (manner of perceiving tactile
sensations) (upalakṣaṇa). Thus, the same is possible, for example, by recollecting

or imagining (a sensation of that) nature (rūpa). How is its status as a reflection
! Read kande hṛtālutalādau ca ādhāraviṣeśe for kandahrtālutalādau ādhāraviṣeśe.
Without making this emendation, the meaning would be that all these places within the
subtle body are ‘the abode of blissʼ, but although they may indeed be blissful to
experience, it is only the Root (kanda) which is specifically said to be such.

The Tortoise Breath is one of the fourteen forms of the vital breath. It causes the eyes to

close. Presumably because one closes one’s eyes when in pain, the channel along which

this vital breath travels is sensitive to pain. See Gorakṣaśataka (34-37), quoted in

Dyczkowski 2009 vol. 8, note 21, see note 23. According to the SvT 7/312, Kārmanāḍī
(the Channel of the Tortoise) is located in the knees, and its corresponding form of the

vital breath gives rise to anxiety. When a person dies, the residue of this breath in the body
makes the limbs of the corpse contract, the joints bend, and it dries out.

“ Form, which is external, is reflected in a mirror or other appropriate external media of

reflection. A tactile sensation, which is internal, is reflected in the appropriate inner
medium of reflection. Pleasing tactile sensations are reflected in the subtle centres of the
genitals, for example, as well as the heart and elsewhere. Painful tactile sensations are
reflected in corresponding inner centres like the anus and the stomach. They are not the

original object, because the source of the sensation is experienced as being separate and
different from it. The spear that strikes the body and rakes it with pain is not itself the

pain. The spear is outside the body. Similarly, the pleasant sensation of a gentle caress is
not the caress itself.

We can feel corresponding tactile sensations by imagining or recollecting the things that

bring them about. In this case, although both the original object and the sensation are
‘internal’, they can still nonetheless be distinguished from one another as the original
object and its ‘reflection’ in the centres of touch.

TANTRĀLOKA

apparent? (In response to this question,) he says (that a painful sensation) ‘(rakes)

one’s own body (with pain and causes it to become) pale, because (the tactile

sensation) is a reflection (within it)’. Moreover, (in this way he has) declared
that there is a no difference (between the two forms of tactile sensation), as the

experience of pleasure and pain is the same (insofar as they are both tactile

sensations which are reflections within the body).
Surely (one may ask,) as it is causally effective (arthakriyākārin), why is

the tactile sensation not the primary (original object) itself? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

ī N TGTTĒTĀTRTĀĪTTGĒTYTTḤ|

na caiṣa mukhyas tatkāryapāramparyāprakāśanāt |
This (tactile sensation) is not itself the primary (original object)
(mukhya) because it does not manifest a continuous series of its effects. (37ab)

(37cd)

‘Primary’ (means) the original object. The effect of that touch, namely,
bliss and the rest, does not manifest (in that way) in a continuous series, that is, go
on continuously (uninterrupted) (prabandhena). When a cause is immediately

(sākṣāt) present, (its) effect arises without interruption.”” That is not the case here,

and so (the tactile sensation reflected in the centres of touch in the body) is not the

primary (original) one.

He refers to (how) the same (phenomenon of reflection takes place)
elsewhere also (in the case of the other organs of sense).

evaṁ ghrāṇāntare gandho raso dantodake sphuṭaḥ || 37 ||
The same is clearly the case with smell (‘reflected’) within the nose,

and taste (‘reflected’) in saliva.” (37cd) (38cd)

If the cause is close at hand, the effect should not appear to be separate from it.

Moreover, a certain sequence (of effects) should be observable as the effect emerges from

its cause, neither of which is the case here.
The pleasure the lover feels from the beloved’s gentle caress continues as long as he
continues to touch her. When he stops, it ceases. If the sensation of pleasure were to be the
original object, it would not cease that way.

°’ Abhinava himself supplies the following concise summary of the Doctrine of Reflection
(pratibimbavāda) in his Tantrasāra: ʻIf one is not able to enter there into the unbroken

circle which has been explained to be the Śiva principle, the nature of which is Light, then
beholding (His) power of freedom to be (as if) something else, he experiences Bhairava’s

penetration, which is free of thought constructs. The teaching concerning this is as
follows. All this mass of phenomena is just a reflection in the Sky of Consciousness,
because it possesses the characteristic mark of a reflection. This is the characteristic mark
of a reflection, namely, that it cannot manifest separately (from the medium of reflection),
and that it manifests mingled with other (reflections). That is a reflection, like the form of
a face in a mirror, like taste in saliva, smell in the nose, an erotic touch in the organ of

CHAPTER THREE

‘Saliva’ possesses the attribute of purity, (which is the capacity to reflect)

taste, and so serves as the ground of the sense of taste. This is the meaning.
Accepting in this way that the reflection of taste etc., are also of the same
type as the reflection of form, like the echo, he explains (their) condition as they

arise:

aeṟṛ ā ¥U Jfdfattērā

fr fē ōana 1
hḷBc:takt-it
|ēcc

fī fke- ās | 3¢ 1
yathā ca rũpaṁ pratibimbitaṁ dr̥śor

na cakṣuṣānyena vinā hi lakṣyate |
tathā rasasparśanasaurabhādikaṁ
na lakṣyate ʻkṣeṇa vinā sthitaṁ tv api | 38 |

bliss, or the touch of a lance or thorn in the organ of inner touch, and an echo in the sky.
Taste (rasa) is not the primary (original object), as one does not perceive the effect (of the

medicinal rasa), that is, the quelling of disease and the like. Nor are smell and touch the

main (original objects), because there (in that case), there is none who is the possessor of
those qualities, and so they are not associated with one another, nor do they give rise to (a
corresponding) series of effects. Nor is it that they do not exist, because (we all) see (their
effect), which (in the case of a blow by a lance,) makes the body pale (with pain), and (an
erotic caress leads to) the emission (of the vital seed). Nor is sound the primary (original
object), because one hears the echo as approaching (oneself in such a way that one thinks,)
‘someone is speaking.” AIl things (are reflections) within the Light of the Supreme Lord,
just as (all) that manifests in this way is reflected (within its medium of reflection).
Surely (one may ask,) what could the original object here (in this case) be? (To

which we reply,) let there be none at all! Surely (then, would that not mean that the

reflection) is without a cause? Well then, the question (really essentially concerns) the
cause (of the reflection), and so what is the use of reasoning concerning (the nature of) the
original object? The cause could only be the Supreme Lord’s power, otherwise called

‘freedomʼ. The Lord is the nature of all things, because He sustains the reflection of all

things (within His conscious luminous nature). All things are of the nature of
consciousness (saṁvid), (the universe is) the place where consciousness (caitanya)
becomes manifest. That itself is all things. Its condition as the sustainer of reflection
(pratibimba) is such that here (that everything is) reversed (pratīpa) (and so the ‘one’ is

reversed into ‘many’, lower principles come first, and higher ones come next). Moreover,

the nature of the Supreme Lord as all things is not thereby unperceived (anāmṛṣṭa),

because it is logically impossible for the nature of that which is consciousness not to be

perceived. If its nature were not to be perceived, it would in actual fact be insentient.
(Again,) this perception (āmarśa) is (the inner Speech of pure ‘ consciousness, which is)
not based on a convention (as is outer language), rather it is said to contain the Supreme
Sound, which is none other than the pure conscious nature alone. That perceives the

aggregate of energies of the Supreme Lord even as (and to the degree in which it) deploys

alḷ things. TSā p. 10-12.

TANTRĀLOKA

Just as in the absence of someone else’s eye, a form reflected in (one’s
own) eyes (dṛk) cannot be seen,” so too taste, touch and smell, for example,
are not perceived when there is no sense organ (capable of perceiving them),
even though (they are) present. (38) (39)
It has been said many times that here (according to our view), a reflection

is essentially just a manifestation (avabhāsanamātrasāra) (of consciousness), and

manifestation (avabhāsana) depends on the sense organ that perceives its
corresponding object, aided by the inner (mental) organ which sustains it. This is
because although (a medium of reflection) such as a mirror may be present close

by, and the pertinent sense organ, which in this case the sense of sight, is present
(but) it is not sustained (adhiṣṭhita) by the inner mental organ, how can the
reflection of a face or the like manifest (avabhāsa) (to the perceiver)? Thus, a

form reflected in the ‘eyesʼ, that is, in the eyeballs that are governed by the sense
of sight, is not perceived in the absence of someone else’s sense of sight. The

meaning is that it does not manifest without the operation of some other organ of
sight.

In order to explain that not only is another (perceiver’s) sense of sight
required to manifest a form reflected, for example, in a mirror, which cannot
discern it (by itself), (it is also required to perceive a reflection) in one’s own

eyes, (even though) both (one’s own eyes and those of the other person) are
capable (of discerning form), he says: “(a form reflected) in (one’s own) eyes
(cannot be seen). The point is that the eye (by itself, even if its object) is as close
to it as is collyrium (placed in it), is not capable to discern it (by itself) alone.
Thus, it does not manifest without the operation of some other sense organ. This is
the overall meaning. In the same way, although a flavour or the like is reflected
(in its corresponding organ of sense), it is not perceived, that is, does not manifest,

without the operation of one’s own organ of sense. This is the meaning. Here (in

this case), one can perceive that the inner (mental) organ is the basis (adhiṣṭhāna)

of the sense of sight and the other senses, otherwise their manifestation would not
be logically possible. We do not state this just by ourselves (as our own idea).
(Clearly, if it were to be) otherwise, even if the sense of sight, for example, was
actively engaged, it could not discern anything (without the support of the inner
mental organ).

Surely (one may ask,) here (in everyday life), form and sound (for
example) are within the (sense of) sight and hearing, whereas their reflection is
externally linked with the mirror and space (respectively). This is how the

external reflection is discerned by the sense of sight and hearing of another
(perceiver). This makes sense. However, in the case of touch and the like, it is
reflected in the Root (centre) etc. within the body, and so is located there. The
stream of that (sensation experienced by) another (perceiver) is invariably (only)

inferable, and so it cannot be the object of the external sensory perception of
somebody else. So how is it that he has said that it is like the reflection of form,
that cannot be perceived when there is no sense organ (capable of perceiving it, as
in this case there is the appropriate sense organ, but even so its object cannot be
perceived by someone else)? He says that:

A form reflected in one’s own eyes cannot be perceived if there is no other eye to see it.

CHAPTER THREE

fka:

af:r̥aaīa:
aN . |

na cāntare sparśanadhāmani sthitaḥ
bahiḥspr̥śo ʻnyākṣadhiyaḥ sa gocaraḥ |
Moreover, the abode of touch is internal, (so) that which is located”
within it is not the object of someone else’s mind and senses, (as they can
make) contact (only) with external (objects). (39ab) (40)
‘The abode of touch is internal’ because it functions (and is present)
within the body. It is an example of a type (upalakṣaṇa) which thus also includes
the senses of smell and taste. ‘It is not the object of someone else’s mind’ʼ, as
touch, which is internal, cannot be perceived (by others), the reason for which is

given by the qualification ‘(they can make) contact (only) with external
(objects)’. What is indicated (by the word) ‘it’ (ie. the abode of touch) is in
relation to the word ‘object’ (of someone else’s mind). As it functions (and is

present) within the body in this way, the (cognitive) field of the sense of touch and
the like, that is, the Root (centre) and the rest, is not like the eyeballs, which are in

the purview of the senses of another perceiver.
Touch and the like, present there (in the body), are made manifest by the
activity of one’s own senses, sustained by the inner (mental) organ. Thus, he says:

āīst-āhczrxaākrrfiṝ=a

ĀTSTTT-Ī āTRTJTĀRṬ ṜTI || 3

ato ‘ntikasthasvakatādṛgindriya
prayojanāntaḥkaraṇair yadā kṛtā || 39 ||
tadā tadāttaṁ pratibimbam indriye
svakāṁ kriyāṁ sūyata eva tādṛśīm |

Therefore, it is (only) when an (object) is (sufficiently) close to its
corresponding organ of sense and this is applied to it by the inner mental

organ that (the object’s) reflection, grasped in the (cognitive field) of the
sense organ, gives rise to its appropriate response (kriyā). (39cd-40ab) (41)

“Therefore’ʼ, for the aforementioned reason, that is, that (sensation) is
internal. Thus, (perception takes place) when each of the senses are conjoined in
due order with the inner organ, beginning with the mind (followed by the intellect

and the ego), and the ‘(object) is (sufficiently) close’ and contiguous with ‘its
“ Read sthitaḥ for sthitam.

TANTRĀLOKA

corresponding organ of sense’,' which, as the appropriate one for that object, is

the one fixed (for that task), and not (damaged) by blows or the like, is not

defective. An example is the skin with respect to touch, which is (its) object.
Sensory perception (indriyajñāna) takes place when there is an impulse (preraṇā)
produced by the inner (mental) organ applied to perceive touch, because the
external tactile sensation, which serves as the original object, is nearby. It is
possible for cognitive consciousness (jñāna), which has perceived (its object), to

discern each particular object of sense which is fixed (for its corresponding sense
organ) because, as was said before, touch and the like, having assumed (the form
of) a reflection, ‘gives rise’, that is, effects, its own, ‘appropriate’ function,

which, considered to be that of the original object, (is the experience) of pleasure

and the like (that touch etc. can give). This is the meaning.""' Thus here (in this

case, the reflection and all else is) real, because the relationship between subject

and object is like this in all circumstances.

Again, he (now goes on to) say that, in the absence of the original external

object, touch that is recollected, for example, although reflected in its own field
(of sensory perception), is not truly causally effective.

āī T ŪaTHTGTĪTTḺT
rafTtkāī
aī fkō atar̃; 1| zc 1

na tu smr̥tãn mānasagocarād rṛtā

bhavet kriyā sā kila vartamānataḥ || 40 ||

ataḥ sthitaḥ sparśavaras tadindriye

samāgataḥ san viditas tathākriyaḥ |
The response (kriyā) which results from recalling (some past

sensation), which is (entirely) mental, is not effective (r7ā - lit. ‘real’), because
(the effectiveness of a response) depends on the actual presence at the time
(vartamānataḥ) (of its object). Therefore, (an effective) corresponding
response results (only) when the most excellent (i.e. sexually stimulating)

touch (sparśavara) is reflected (samāgata) in its appropriate organ of sense
and so is experienced (within it). (40cd-41ab) (42)

It is said that (one) recalls (the past experience), because the external
(object) does not arise (in the same manner) as the object of (memory) was in the

past. (But), even if, for example, a fragrant bandhūtka (flower)' does not exist

' Read tādṛgindriyaṁ ghātādya- for tādṛgindriyaghātādya-.
'l The necessary factors for sensory perception to take place are: 1) proximity of the

object to the senses. 2) The sense organ should not be damaged. 3) It should be the
appropriate sense organ for the sense object which is to be perceived. 4) The sense organ

should be linked to the inner mental organ. The sense organ thus performs its function by
perceiving its corresponding object.

2 Ṭhis is the flower of the Pentapetes Phoenicea.

CHAPTER THREE

externally, it can still be an object (viṣaya) of mental perception. This is the sense
(of this verse). (By stating that a recollected sensation) is ‘not effective’, (he)
intends (to say) that it is not (entirely) not (effective). (One experiences) the

pleasure etc. of a caress or the like, even if it is only recollected, however it is not
‘real’ (satya) because its development (pravṛtti) is not continuous. The reason

here for that is ‘because (the effectiveness of a response) depends on the actual
presence at the time (vartamānataḥ) (of its object)’. The word ‘actual’ signals
the cause, insofar as that functional (response) (arthakriyā) (can only take place)

if the external (object) is truly present at the time. In other words, that it exists.

This is the meaning. He says that (with the words) ‘therefore . . .' and so on.
Therefore, as stated, ‘touch, arising as the external, original object, is most
excellent and, ‘reflected (samāgata) in its corresponding organ of sense’ʼ, that

is, having deposited (its) reflection in the perception (jñāna) of the sense of touch,
it is, therefore ‘experienced (within it), and so the ‘corresponding response
resultsʼ, which is in actual fact (effective and) performs its own function. This is

the meaning.

Surely (one may ask,) as in this way only (a present,) existing object can

deposit a reflection (in a medium of reflection), a caress and the like which is
absent externally is not reflected (in its corresponding organ of sense), so what is
it that can perform (its) function in the memory etc., if that (too) is conceived to
be unreal also? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3TTaTa7Tāē=a

a Ta- ūttrātr̥̄drttḍāzāaī 11 2 1|

asaṁbhave bāhyagatasya tādṛśaḥ

sva eva tasmin pratibimbitas tathā || 41 I|

karoti tāṁ sparśavaraḥ sukhātmikāṁ

sa cāpi kasyām api nāḍisaṁtatau |

In other words, we may experience the same response from a caress we recollect, but it

is not ‘realʼ, because unlike a direct present experience, one that is recollected is
interrupted, it has no continuity, and it is not part of the series of experiences that are
associated with it when it is experienced directly at the present time.

' Another, looser, more discursive and explanatory presentation (rather than translation)

of Jayaratha could be as follows. Some say that because an object of recollection is only
within the purview of the mind, it cannot stimulate sensory activity, because that can only

occur when (an object of perception) is present. An object of recollection is not present
externally. It is a past experience. (To this view we reply that) although there is no
external (object of sense), such as smell, (a recollected object) is still nonetheless an object

of mental perception. By recollecting (the activity of) the sense of touch, one may feel a
pleasant sensation, but that is not real (satya), because there are no ongoing (sensations

normally) associated with it. In short, only an object that is present can be causally
effective and bring about a (true) sensation in all respects. Although a remembered
sensation or inner experience does give rise to forms of perception, it is not the (same as

the) direct perception manifest in external sensory activity.

TANTRĀLOKA

In the absence of an external (source of stimulation), one’s own

similarly sexually arousing touch (sparśavara) reflected therein in the same
way generates pleasure, and that also (only) in a certain place within the

network of the channels (of the vital breath, as for example, in the genitals).

(41cd-42ab) (43)

(Even) when there is no external original object, one that is similar to it

may be made manifest by the thoughts produced by recollecting (it) and the like.
(In this way,) (even if) a tactile sensation is not external, reflected in the field (of
the sense of) touch and the like, (it) performs the function which conforms to its

nature in the same way, that is, (it may give rise) to the perception of illusory
(sexual) pleasure. This is the meaning of (the first part of the) sentence.
Surely (one may ask,) there are many fields of tactile sensation (in the
body), such as the Root (kanda) (in the genital centre in the base of the subtle

body). And so, is touch reflected everywhere (in the body) or only in certain
places? With this doubt in mind, he says ‘(only) in a certain place in the

network of the channelsʼ, that is, in a particular substratum (ādhāra) within the
network of the channels, such as the Bulb (kanda), (because they have the

capacity to reflect this sensation). This is the meaning. The Root etc. are primary
(centres), and so (according to the circumstances), some particular supporting
In his PTv (p. 51), Abhinava quotes the VBh (verse 70) as saying: ‘O mistress of the
gods, by filling the memory with the pleasure of a woman brought about by licking,

churning and embracing (her), even in the absence of a consort (śakti) thereis a flood of
bliss. The sense is that by ‘filling’, thatis, by the tactile sensation recollectedin that field

of touch, reflected in the central channel of energy, which is supreme and uncreated, even
in the absence of that primary (original outer) touch of the consort (who embodies the

energy of consciousness), it arouses the vitality (vārya) whichis theinner touch of the
energy (of consciousness).” He then goes on to quote VBh (verse 69), which says: “The
bliss (sukha) that culminates (during orgasm) with penetration into Śakti, aroused by
union with a woman (śakti), is that of the Brahman, which is said to be one’s own
(inherent) bliss.”

janmādhārasya suśroṇi paryāyān śṛvataḥ param |

janmasthānaṁ tu kandākhyaṁ kūrmākhyaṁ sthānapañcakam || 7-31 ||
matsyodaraṁ tathaiveha mūlādhāras tathocyate |

marududbhayahetutvāt, madhyanāḍīkandarūpatvāt, kūrmākāratvāt, pṛthivyādivyomāntatattvapañcakasthānatvāt matsyodaravatsphuraṇāt, mūḻabhūtatvāc ca janmādi ākhyāyate ||

‘Next, O fair-hipped lady, listen to the synonyms of the Foundation of Birth. The
place of birth is called the Bulb (kanda), the Tortoise, and Group of Five Places. The

Foundation of the Root is also said to be the Belly of the Fish.” NT 7/31-32ab

Kṣemarāja explains: ‘lt is called (place of) birth etc. because (as the Foundation
of Birth) it is the cause of the arising of the Wind (of the breath). (It is called the Bulb)
because its form is the bulb of the middle channel, (similarly, it is called the Tortoise)
because its form is that of a tortoise, (it is called the Group of Five Places) because it is the
location of the five realities ranging from the Earth to Space, (it is called the Belly of the
Fish) because it throbs like the belly of a fish (out of water), and (it is called the
Foundation of the Root) because it is the root.”

CHAPTER THREE

(mediums of tactile sensations) arise for some (people) where they possess the

most excellent purity (which is the capacity to reflect tactile sensation).” Touch

is reflected there within them just as the roof of the palate (is the locus of

articulation) of the neuter (vowels ṛ RṚ 1 L) (and other places in the mouth are loci
of articulation of other vowels). This is the (overall) sense.
Having reasonably explained the nature of a reflection in this way, he
relates this to the main point:

Consciousness as the Most Excellent Medium of Reflection

īṬēēaā āansgx fari fa#ēvaīq|
tena saṅvittimakure viśvam ātmāṉam arpayan || 42 ||
nāthasya vadate ‘muṣya vimalāṁ viśvarūpatām ḷ

Therefore, the All (viśva), placing itself (in the form of a reflection)

within the mirror of consciousness, bespeaks (vadate) of this, the Lord’s pure
cosmic form. (42cd-43ab) (44)
‘Therefore’, for the aforestated reason, ‘the All, placing itself’ (in the
form of) a reflection within consciousness which, by virtue of its most excellent

purity, is (like a) mirror, and so, having been established by (both) reason and
(direct) experience, ‘bespeaks of”, that is, makes manifest as one with one’s own
nature ‘this pure’ and impeccable ‘cosmic formʼ of the Lord Whose nature is
consciousness, insofar as it does not manifest as separate from consciousness.

Indeed, a face (reflected in a mirror) does not manifest independently from the

mirror which is its substratum (of reflection). This is the sense. Thus, the meaning

in a nutshell is that this entire universe is the form of the one Supreme Lord,

Whose nature is consciousness. As is said in the Prajñālaṁkāra:

‘Thus, in this way, the universe is, in the manner explained, the form of

some (inexplicable and) unique entity, devoid of parts (reality), (and so) what is it

of us that decays (kiṁ naḥ kṣīyate)?

Abhinava writes in the ĪPVV (I, p. 159): “There are certain centres in the body, like the

genitals, heart, and palate etc., that are by nature the substratum of bliss. The tactile
sensation of sexual pleasure, (even if) not experienced directly, but (only) inferred,

thought about, imagined etc., is reflected within them (so intensely) that it may even bring
about an emission of seed.”

Ṁ Ṟead -arpayan for -arpayat.

This is a quote from the Prajñālaṁṅkārakārikā by Śaṅkarānanda. Bihnemann (1980)
has identified many of these references (but not the following one) in the sole recovered

Sanṣkrit manuscript photographed in Tibet by R. Saṅkṛtyāyana, deposited in the Bihar
Research Institute, Patna. See following note.

! Concerning Śaṅkarananda and his works, including the Prajñālaṁkārakārikā, see entry

in the Appendix concerning sources and authors under Dharmālaṅkāra.

TANTRĀLOKA

(He says) ‘bespeaks” (which is a verb in the middle voice, that is used) in

the sense of ‘manifestation’, in accord with the rule śāsanopasaṁbhāṣā.

Surely (one may ask,) if the universe is not separate from consciousness,

because that consciousness is its essential nature, is their relationship that between

substance and quality? Yes, it is indeed that. He explains this by means of an
external example.

3zdJḹ āī TT-TRTŪJṬGṬT; ÑTf̄fkzārāī; || 53 1

eṛ fēraft; āī sNfātkzrāṁṣāq 11 »x 1

yathā ca gandharūpasprgrasādyāḥ pratibimbitāḥ || 43 ||
tadādhāroparāgeṇa bhānti khaḍge mukhādivat |
tathā viśvam idaṁ bodhe pratibimbitam āśrayet || 44 ||
prakāśatvasvatantratvaprabhṛtīṁ dharmaviṣṭaram |
(When) smell, form, touch, taste and the rest are reflected (in their

corresponding medium of reflection), they manifest coloured with (the
aṭṭributes) of their supporting medium, as is a face, for example, (that is

reflected) in a sword. In the same way, this universe, reflected within
consciousness, assumes all its properties, starting with (its) luminosity and

freedom. (43cd-45ab) (45-46)

Here (in daily life), when form and the rest are reflected (in some medium

of reflection), (we see that) they manifest qualified by the adventitious (qualities)

of their supporting medium (of reflection), as is a face in a sword, which is

coloured by (the sword's) qualities, such as its upraised (appearance in those
places where the sword has ridges) and the like, or in a large or small mirror in

which (the face appears to be) in the same way (large or small). This universe is

also reflected in the Light (of consciousness) in the same way, and so it assumes

as its own its attributes, such as luminosity and the like. This is the meaning.

Insofar as the universe is not separate from the Light (of consciousness),
that is its ‘luminosityʼ (i.e. manifest nature). Otherwise, disassociated from the
luminosity (of consciousness), nothing at all would manifest (lit. ‘shine’). Thus,
its own freedom (ṣyvātantrya) is because of its luminous (manifest) nature. Insofar

as the insentient universe, which consists of (the perceived qualities of outer
objects) such as ‘blue’, ‘pleasure’ and the like, is (experienced to be as if) separate
from the light (of consciousness), it is not self-luminous, it does not manifest by

itseḻf but by virtue of another (reality, namely, consciousness). Thus, as it

depends on something else (to make it manifest, its fundamental, characteristic

'!Pā. Sū. 1/3/47. The rule śāsanopasaṁbhāṣā enjoins that vadate (‘bespeaks’) should be

in the middle voice (ātmanepada), as teaching (śāsana) is involved.

! Literally: ‘(its) light is not (generated) by itself’.

CHAPTER THREE

attribute is) dependence (pāratantrya), (not freedom). This is the point." And so
all this objectivity is the body of the Supreme Lord, Who is the Light (of
consciousness), and because His nature is Light, He is all things (and the inner
nature of the universe – viśvātmaiva). That is said (in the following line):

‘Although the Absolute (Brahman) is (equally in each) place, (t is)

omniform, unsurpassed and inconceivable.’'"
Again,

“The nature of each single metaphysical principle (tattva) is also (all) the

thirty-six principles.’

Surely (one may ask,) it has been established previously that out of form

and the other (objects of the senses), only some in particular circumstances

(according to the medium of reflection, sense organ etc.) become reflections. How
then is it that the entire universe consisting of form and the other (objects of the

senses) is reflected in the one consciousness (bodha)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

azgṝ ā aī: ā Ta asaĨĨ ŨĨqṬ |I `ś , 11|

yathā ca sarvataḥ svacche sphaṭike sarvato bhavet || 45 I|

pratibimbaṁ tathā bodhe sarvataḥ ṣvacchatājuṣi |

'' Jayaratha understands Abhinavagupta to mean that the universe of phenomena has two

aspects. One is the subjective aspect, which is its manifest nature. This is due to its

oneness with consciousness, and so is sentient. It is this which makes it an independent
reality. The other is the insentient, objective aspect which, as such, is apparently separate

from the Light of consciousness, but in actual fact depends on it for its existence. This is
how it is with the body. Although separate and distinct from our Self, it is also not
separate from it. In the same way, the universe is the body of the Supreme Lord. Another,
perhaps more accurate understanding of what Abhinava is saying is that the universe has

an autonomous, independent existence, because it is a reflection within universal
consciousness insofar as its autonomy (‘freedom’) and existence (‘luminosity’) are
attributes of that consciousness.

'! See above, TĀv ad 1/165, where the same line is quoted, and note 1,1001. It is quoted

again in TĀv ad 4/98, 12/5 and 28/375cd-376ab.

'' The original Sanskrit of this line reads: ekaikasyāpi tattvasya ṣaṇriṁśattattvarāpatā. It

is quoted with variants in the MM p. 65, where Maheśvarānanda says that it is from the
Tantrāloka. However, it is not found in the printed edition. Jayaratha does not say it is
from the Tantrāloka, as he normally would if it were. Thus, it is likely that

Maheśvarānanda was mistaken. In the MM this line reads: ekaikatra ca tattve ‘pi
sattriṁśattattvarūpatā iti – ‘“The one nature of (all) the thirty-six principles is present all

together in (each) principle also.” Maheśvarānanda continues: ‘It is said that all this

wonderful diversity of everything is in all respects the effulgent pulse (sphurattā) of the

Light of the Supreme Lord. As is said in the Śivadṛṣṭi:

‘Thus, the Śiva nature all things possess is the same in every way. The distinction

between superior and inferior (pure and impure) and the like is said to exist here (in this
world) by people who (simply have blind) faith (that that is so).” 1/48

TANTRĀLOKA

Moreover, just as a crystal that is clean in every part (sarvataḥ)
reflects an image everywhere (within itself) (sarvataḥ), similarly (everything
is reflected) in all respects (sarvataḥ) within perfectly pure (awakened)
consciousness (bodha). (45cd-46ab) (47)
(If one says) with regards to a crystal that it is ‘(clean) in every part’, it
means that it is so in all places, be it in front or behind etc. (When one says s0)

with regards to consciousness, it so with respect to all (kinds of sensory objects),

including form and the rest. Even if a crystal is clean in every part, only the
reflection of form is possible within it. Thus, this example is not the same (in all
respects) as consciousness, which can grasp the reflection (of all kinds of sensory
objects, that is) form and (all) the rest. (But even though the example is not

perfect,) it is stated with the intention to establish that (the capacity) entities
possess to grasp a reflection is higher according to (their) greater degree of purity.
In this way, the front portion of a mirror is clean (in this sense), the sword on both
sides, and the crystal in every part, thus (they are arranged in a) hierarchy
according to the degree in which they can grasp a reflection in consonance with
their degree of translucency (svacchatā). In this way, consciousness has a much
greater capacity to reflect than crystal also,''® because it is translucent in every
part, and so is capable of grasping the reflection of (all the objects of sense),
including form. This is the intended meaning.
Surely (one may ask,) what is this capacity to reflect (that consciousness
possesses) which more excellent than that (of the crystal) also? Thus, he says:

T-̄-TqTJaT
TI JRATBTTTTTGTḤ_||/<ē /1I

atyantasvacchatā sā yat svākṛtyanavabhāsanam || 46 ||
ataḥ svacchatamo bodho na ratnaṁ tv ākṛtigrahāt |

(The characteristic of an entity that possesses) the most excellent
capacity to reflect (svacchatā) is that its own form does not manifest (when

something is reflected within it)."” Thus, consciousness has the best capacity
'! Only the upper part of a mirror is translucent, a (polished) sword is so on both sides,

and a crystal everywhere within it. These things and others similarly can be arranged in a

hierarchy in this way in terms of their capacity to reflect. Consciousness is the most

translucent and so is at the top of the scale.

'! Maheśvarānanda quotes TĀ 3/46cd (48ab) in MM (p. 28):

‘The Self of worldly people shines unclearly, even though it is extremely evident,
like the excellence of a gem enveloped by the radiance of its own rays.’ (MM 9)
The Supreme Lord is the (true) nature of the Self, because it possesses the

excellence of the Light (of consciousness), and because it is capable of pervading the
entire world. Opening up to ever higher levels, the serial development of the flame (of
consciousness), which is the conception of the universe of thought, (the Lord) is

‘enveloped’; that is, He is as if perpetually shrouded, just as (is the Brahman), according

CHAPTER THREE

to reflect, not a jewel, because (one can) perceive (the jewel’s) form. (46cd47ab) (48)
Here (according to us), the Light (of consciousness) is self-luminous, and
so it is (the Light) of its own nature that shines (as all things), not that (of some)
other (reality). Thus, it does not depend on anything else, and so it does not come
into contact with even a trace of objectivity. Therefore, it is not perceivable by
another (act of) perception, as is a crystal, in such a way that (its) form could also
manifest (along with the reflection within it). Here (in everyday life), only what is
translucent (svaccha) can assume the reflection of what is not translucent, like a
crystal jewel (that can reflect) a white cloth. There is nothing more translucent

(svaccha) than the Light (of consciousness), which is one with the supreme
subject, (that could reflect the Light of consciousness within it in such a way that)

it would be capable of grasping its form (ākāra) also."" So it is rightly said that:

‘(the characteristic of an entity that possesses) the most excellent capacity to

reflect (svacchatā) is that its own form does not manifest (when something is

reflected in it).” A crystal, for example, on the contrary, can be perceived, and so
in relation (to consciousness) is not translucent (svaccha). (An entity) lacks the

capacity to reflect (svacchatva) to the degree in which it can be clearly

to the teaching (prakriyā) of the Upaniṣads (that declare that), ‘(once the Brahman)
created that (universe), he entered into it.”
There (with regard to that), the venerable Tantrāloka (declares that):
‘(The characteristic of an entity that possesses) the most excellent capacity to

reflect (svacchatā) is that its own form does not manifest (when something is reflected
within it).” (TA 3/46cd (48ab))

(Although the Self) of ‘worldly people’, that is, the perceivers who act in this
world viewed as objectivity, is (and should) be an object of (their) awareness, posited as it
is in the sphere (of consciousness which is that of) most evident clarity. (Even so,
consciousness) abides in a state of obscurity, because (although it shines intensely) like
the orb of the midday sun, due to the extensive radiance of each of the series of (its) rays,
one cannot perceive the (sun that) possesses (those) rays (directly).
Just as, due to the absence of light one cannot ascertain the excellence of (even) a

most highly valued piece of jewel-bearing rock because it is enveloped completely by the
great mass of (its) shining rays, similarly there is a doubt (concerning the excellence of)
the Self because it is not clearly (manifest), obscured as it is by the unfolding flow

(prasara) of its own energies. As it possesses both natures (evident and obscure) in this
way, (the Self) is fit to engage in all of daily life. I have said that myself in the
Samvidullāsa:

‘When the Light of the great perceiver unfolds (arciḥprarohe) and it is not very
clear, I perceive (the world) externally. Light is required to perceive the appearance of the

Self, which is (like) the dawning of the sun and its concealment.”

! We have seen that one reason a crystal is more translucent (i.e. capable of reflection)
than a mirror is because it reflects everywhere within itself. Another reason is that when it
reflects something within itself, its own form is less apparent than that of a mirror. Thus,
on both counts, consciousness is the most translucent of all, because there is nothing that
can grasp the form of consciousness, whereas, on the contrary, consciousness can perceive

the form of even the most translucent object.

TANTRĀLOKA

perceived." This is the general sense (of this verse). (It was said) previously, with
the same intended (meaning):

‘Only the Lord of Consciousness is endowed in every respect with (this)
purity, (which is the capacity to reflect) in its primary form. Anything else which
(we commonly say) is free of impurity (and so capable of reflection) is so partially
and (only) in certain circumstances . . .
It is said in this way that the capacity to reflect is of two kinds, according

to whether it is primary, (in the case of) consciousness, or secondary, (in the case
of) some other things (that are translucent). In this way, a mirror and the like is
translucent, a crystal more so, and consciousness, the most. This is the intended
(meaning).
Even if the universe arises in this way in all respects (sarvataḥ) as a
reflection within consciousness, there is thus a certain (important) difference,

which can be understood by the power of sound (intuitive) reasoning, between

(the manner in which a reflection takes place within consciousness) and (a

common) external reflection. Thus, he says:

There is No External Prototype for the Reflection within Consciousness

yfērã ftr- areaN a-lā̄ | v.s 1

pratibiṃmbaṁ ca bimbena bāhyasthena samarpyate || 47 |
tasyaiva pratibimbatve kiṁ bimbam avaśiṣyatām |

"A (common) reflection is deposited (in a mirror) by an externally

located prototype (bimba), but if, (as is the case with the cosmic reflection,) its

original object is itself a reflection, what, pray tell, could remain of it?

(47cd-48ab) (49)

'! Read sphuṭā vedyatā for sphuṭāvedyatā. In other words, objectivity and the capacity to
reflect are inversely proportional. The pure consciousness of the supreme subject, which is
totally devoid of objectivity, is therefore supremely capable of reflecting objectively
perceived entities of whatever form or type they may be.

Above, 3/9abc.

l TṜ 3/47cd-48ab (49) is quoted in MM p. 148. There are no variants. Maheśvarānanda
couples this verse with this one in the Cidgaganacandrikā:
vahnivārimukurādiṣu sphuṭaṁ svacchavastuṣu kumāribimbatā |
mantritā saha paricchadena yat tena bimbam anavekṣitaṁ tava |l
‘(The lover) invites along with (her) retinue the original form of the young
woman clearly (reflected) in such translucent things as fire, water, or a mirror, for he has

perceived Your original form (bimba) in that way (tena).’ CGC 1/195

Lawrence ((2005) 33: 591) observes: ‘This leads to a question regarding which

Abhinavagupta does give inconsistent answers in his texts ~ whether or not there is a
prototype object (bimha) for the reflection (pratibimba) that is the universe. Sometimes

CHAPTER THREE
No one disagrees here that an external original object such as a face

deposits (its) reflection in, for example, a mirror. But if the external (entity) which

is considered to be the original object is itself understood to be a reflection, then

what original object (bimba) could remain which is a real entity (vastu) capable of
depositing a reflection? Nothing at all could be (such). This is the meaning. All
agree that there is no other separate (vicchinna) entity (apart from the reflection
within consciousness), just as (the externally perceived colour) ‘blue’ or (the
internal sensation of) ‘pleasure’ are not separate (vicchinna) from the perception

(jñāna) (the perceiver has of them).

Surely (one may ask,) even if that is the case, how could a reflection arise
without a cause? Should one (not) say that there is some cause which serves as the

original object? With this doubt in mind, he says:

aṇgīṝōḷ]ḷ ērxvī ffsftzricrmfitrza 11 x¢ 1
at úhṁēraīaṁtcr ātkszeīṁ ṣrq |

yad vāpi kāraṇaṁ kiñcid bimbatvenābhiṣicyate || 48 |I

tad api pratibimbatvam eti bodhe ‘nyathā tv asat|

Even if one argues that some cause (must exist) to serve as the
original object, (our response would be that) even that assumes the nature of
a reflection in consciousness, otherwise it would not exist. (48cd-49ab) (50)
Here (in this case, one could ask) whether whatever cause one considers

to be the original object, which is capable of depositing a reflection (within

consciousness), is separate (atirikta) from consciousness or not? If it is not
separate, then, for the aforestated reason, it is itself a reflection, not the original

object. Whereas if it is separate, it would not be known, and so (would be) nothing

at aall. So it is rightly said that: ‘if, (as is the case with the cosmic reflection,) its

original object is itself a reflection, what, pray tell, could remain of it? He
summarizes that (point as follows).

1I|/#8, 1|

faaī āfkrāaā -rī 1
Abhinava indicates that there is a bimba and sometimes that there is not. His basic point is
that there is no himba if it is conceived as something external to consciousness. However,
he always makes it clear that there is an efficient cause (nimitta) rather than a material

cause (upādāna). That cause is none other than Śakti, variously identified as the Kaulikī
Śakti, Supreme Speech (parāv.
semantic intuition (pratibhā), the Unsurpassed
(anuttara), agential self-determination (svātantrya) and the various /modes of selfrecognition (vimarśa, parāmarśa and so on).”

' The Sanskrit literally means: ‘none accept that just as an entity such as ‘blue’ or
‘pleasureʼ is distinct (vicchinna) from the perception (of it), in the same way there is

another entity which is distinct from that also.”

' Above, 3/48ab (49cd).

TANTRĀLOKA

ittham etat svasaṁvittidr̥ḍhanyāyāstrarakṣitam || 49 ||
sāmrājyam eva viśvatra pratibimbasya jrmbhate |
In this way, this, one’s own consciousness, guarded by the weapon of
sound reason, unfolds everywhere here as the empire itself of reflection.
(49cd-50ab) (51)
The word ‘itself’ is out of sequence, thus, (placing it correctly, the

meaning is that consciousness unfolds as the empire) of reflection ‘itself’, not

indeed (as that) of the original object also. This is the meaning. (It unfolds)

‘everywhere’ (within consciousness), not as happens (with the reflection) of a

face and the like, that is outside (the medium of reflection). The point is that there
(in that context, consciousness possesses) the capacity of both the original object
and (its) reflection. This is the sense (of this verse).
Surely (one may ask,) as they are mutually dependent on one another,
how can there be a reflection without an original object? Thus, he says:

3 fhrarz fsxē vāfērai N TSTq 1| uo 1

nanu bimbasya virahe pratibimbaṁ kathaṁ bhavet || 50 ||
kiṁ kurmo dṛśyate tad dhi nanu tad bimbaṃm ucyatām |

Buṭ (someone may object): “How can there be a reflection if there
is no original object?” (To which we reply) “what can we do? (There is no
denying) that that (this cosmic reflection) is indeed (clearly) visible!” “Śurely

then” (argues the opponent), “one should call that the original object.” (50cd51ab) (52)

He responds to that (objection, saying): ““‘what can we do?” and so on.
‘“It is (clearly) visible!” The point is that something that is seen cannot be

impossible. “Śurely,” (rejoins the opponent), “we are not, indeed, denying what is
seen, by saying this, however what we are saying is that one should not refer to
this perceptible universe as a reflection but rather as the original object.” He says

that (with the words): “Surely then”’ (argues the opponent), “one should call

that the original object.”

He refutes this (objection as follows):

rgīīṁ# aiṝ #-zrāT TG aaī |

naivaṁ tallakṣaṇābhāvād bimbaṁ kila kim ucyate || 51 ||
anyāmiśraṁ svatantraṁ sad bhāsamānaṁ mukhaṁ yathā |

TĀ 3/50cd-52ab (52-53) is quoted in MM p. 151-2. There are no variants.

CHAPTER THREE

Certainly not, (we reply,) because it does not possess the

characteristics of one. (If you ask) “what is said to be the original object?”
(We reply that the original object is an entity which is) not associated with
any other (entity). It has an autonomous (existence) and manifests in accord
with its authentic nature (sadbhāsamāna) – like the face (of our example).
(51cd-52ab) (53)
(The external universe is not the original object) ‘because it does not

possess the characteristics of oneʼ, that is, because it does not possess the
characteristics of an original object. What is the characteristic of an original

object? He says (in reply to this question, an original object) ‘is not associated

with any other (entity). It is quite different (vyāvṛtta) from (anything else, be it)

of the same or different kind (jātīya). This is the meaning. Thus, it is
‘autonomousʼ, that is, established in its own nature alone (svarūpamātraniṣṭha),
because it is illogical (to maintain that) the condition of being posited in some
other thing be that of something else (other than itself). If that were to be so, it
would not be separate from it. This is the sense. (He states that there) is

uncontroverted (abādhita) proof (pramāṇa) that such is its nature (by saying that
it) ‘manifests (in accord with its authentic nature)’.

In the same way, after™ the definition (of the nature) of the original
object, in order to'” complete the picture (by examining the nature) of the
reflection which, being on an equal footing with that (of the original object),
should (also) be defined, (he examines the nature of the medium of reflection

which is) its foundation, in order to highlight what has been established by the
Buddhist iḍealists (sarvavādin). (He does this in the following verse) by
encompassing

the

meaning

of (the

following

stanza

Prajñālaṅkarakārikā (by the Buddhiṣṭ Śaṅkarāṇanda):

drawn)

from

the

‘It is said that the nature of a reflection is the reproduction of the form of
something else without (this entailing) the loss of (the medium of reflection’s)
own nature, as is the case, for example, with the surface of a mirror or a sword.

ēṭṟaIEEHJEEĪEEc-ET€ĀT

IHEHI

svarūpānapahānena pararūpasadṛkṣatām || 52 1|

pratibimbātmatām āhuḥ khaḍgādarśatalādivat |

'“ Read-lakṣaṇānantaraṁ for lakṣaṇānantara.
' Read kartuṁ for kartu.

Buddhiṣṭ idealists – Vijñānavādins – are called those who maintain the view that

everything
is
– sarvavijñānavādin, that is, sarvavādin for short.

consciousnes$

Jayaratha’s remark supports the view that the Doctrine of Reflection (pratibimbavāda)

expounded here may well be, to some extent at least, inspired by Śaṅkarānanda, although

the notion that the world is in some sense a reflection within Śiva’s consciousness is
kṅown to the Śaivāgamas. Cf. above, 3/21-22 and note.

' Patṇa manuscript fl. 22a1-2; see above, note 2,109.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The wise) say that the form of a reflection is similar to that of

something else without (this entailing) the elimination of (the medium of
reflection’s) own form, as is the case, for example, with the surface of a
mirror or a sword. (52cd-53ab) (54)
Here (in common daily life), the similarity of (the medium of reflection),

for example, a mirror, with the form associated with something else, such as a
face, without this entailing the abandoning of its own specific physical, circular

etc. form, is its nature as the reflection. It is certainly not the (literal) assumption
of that form (on the part of the mirror). Philosophers of all schools ‘say’ this. The
sense is that nobody disagrees here (about this). If (the mirror) were to be of that
form, then even if the body (vapuṣ) of the mirror is uniformly smooth (slakṣṇa),
when it takes up (into itself) the reflection of a face, which is (in places more)
elevated (and in others) depressed, it would not be smooth (and even any longer).
Similarly, (if this were to be s0,) when a mirror is associated with the reflection of
a town or the like (which is pluriform), (the mirror) would be multiple because it

assumes a multiple form. (However, this does not happen). Thus, just as the unity
of the perception of variety (citrajñāna) is not lost, even though one perceives
many (things together,) as, for example, in a bird with variously coloured feathers
(citrapataṅga), because as the form is similar to many things (perceived at once

together), there is oneness, not multiplicity. In the same way, when a mirror, for

example, is conjoined with the reflection of many (things together), it does not
have many forms. Thus, the (illogical) contingency that (the mirror becomes)

multiple does not (arise). (The reflection) is only similar to (the original object); it
is not the same (as the original object) just because it is similar (to it). A cow is

not a wild cow just because it is similar to a wild cow. Therefore, (to avoid these

contingencies), the condition (of the mirror) as the bearer of a reflection is its

form, as similar to the original object (but not its identity with it).™ This is the
overall meaning.

He corroborates (this view) by paraphrasing (his source):

3h ] fd ārTīSf] saēṁ-hāraāTq
|| u3 11

STTFÇTIHT
T GTIT āTIIT: |

uktaṁ ca sati bāhye ʻpi dhīr ekānekavedanāt I| 53 |I

anekasadṛśākārā na tv aneketi saugataiḥ |

'! The mirror, without its own particular round or other form being affected, appears as

the other person’s face and the like, with which it is related. Similarly, although the

reflected form may be located on higher or lower ground, the mirror continues to retain its
plane surface. If that were not so, when a city is reflected in a mirror, the mirror would
become multiple, as are the buildings of the town. This is not the case. Rather, it is like the
multifarious perception of a picture in which, although many forms are perceived in a
single act of perception, the perception itself remains a single, unified whole. The
reflection is only similar to the original object. It is does not have the same nature.
Although a wild cow may be similar to a domestic cow, it is not the same as a domestic
Cow.

CHAPTER THREE
The Buddhists say that the one (apprehending) intellect (dhī), in the

presence of an external reality, has a form which appears to be multiple due
to its perception of many (objects together), but (even so) is not more than
one. (53cd-54ab) (55)

‘(The Buddhists) say’ ~in the Prajñālaṁkārakārikā and other (works). As

is said there:

‘Therefore, the one (apprehending) intellect, in the presence of an external

reality, has a form which appears to be multiple due to its perception of many

(objects together), but (even so) this does not entail its being more than one.”

Surely (one may ask,) in this way also, nothing would have been said
about the defining characteristic of a reflection. Posing this question first, he (then
goes on to) define it.

f-āā fṁṭcrarza
garī fē ūçzad 1| u

TRIIĪTJTIRĪĪT-ṬTTTTTTĪJ-TÁ|
scṝsrastaṁṁ
mēdī aēṁ ai 11 4. 1

nanv itthaṁ pratibimbaṣya lakṣaṇaṁ kiṁ tad ucyate || 54 1|

anyavyāmiśraṇāyogāt tadbhedāśakyabhāsanam |

pratibimbam iti prāhur darpaṇe vadanaṁ yathā || 55 1|

Surely, (you may well ask,) if this is the case, what then is said to be

the (defining) characteristic (lakṣaṇa) of a reflection? (The wise) say that a
reflection is that which necessarily manifests in association with another (that
is, the medium of reflection), and so cannot manifest separately from that

(medium of reflection), as is the case with a face (reflected) in a mirror.
(54cd-55) (56)

Here (in this regard), the Buddhist idealists (sarvavādin) say that a

reflection is that which is ‘in association’, that is, at one ‘with another’ which

serves as its substratum (as does), for example, a mirror. This is because it is

‘associated’ with it in the sense that it is not separate from it. Thuṣ, it cannot
manifest individually independently, separately from the mirror that can bear the

form of that (reflection). The meaning is that (the reflection) is dependent on (the
mirror). In this way, he has explained that (the reflection is) opposite (by nature)
to the original object, which is (on the contrary) said to be unassociated with

132 Patna manuscript fl. 22a 5-6 of the Prajñālaṁkārakārikā.

'3/55 (56) is quoted in MM p. 152. There are no variants.
' Read sarvavādina for sarva eva vādina.

TANTRĀLOKA

(anything) else and is independent. That has been said previously many times
and so there is no need to labour (the point) again here.
Now he relates (all this) to the main point.

īāaāīf: ā̃ fē vf̄tkrs 7 rvaT 1|| uē 1
bodhamiśram idaṁ bodhād bhedenāśakyabhāsanam |

paratattvādi bodhe kiṁ pratibimbaṁ na bhaṇyate || 56 ||
5(AII) this (idam) is (inextricably) mixed together (miśra) with

consciousness; it cannot manifest separately from consciousness. So why not
say that (all) the categories of existence starting from the highest are a
reflection within consciousness? (56) (57)

“Why not say that ‘this’ universe of metaphysical principles and world

orders etc. is ‘a reflection within consciousness?” The point is that one must

refer to it in this way because, like the face (reflected) by the mirror, so too (all)

this has become one with consciousness. Thus, that cannot manifest separately
from consciousness, just as the face (cannot manifest separately) from the mirror.

The point is that none of these phenomena could manifest apart from the light (of
consciousness). As is said (in the Kālikākrama):

‘Cognition (jñāna) manifests internally and externally in the form (rūpa)
of each particular thing. Apart from cognition, nothing has (any) existence (of its

own). Thus cognition (jñāna) is the nature (rūpa) of all things.' Entities are not
made objects of the senses by anything apart from cognition (jñāna). Cognition

' A reflection is not autonomous (svatantra), as is the original object. On the contrary, it

is dependent (paratantra) on something else for its existence. Indeed, nothing can
manifest apart from the Light of consciousness.

3/56 (57) is quoted in MM p. 152 with substantial variants. There the verse reads

bodhyamiśram idaṁ bodhyād bhede vāśakyabhāsanam |

jñānasmṛtyādi bodhye kiṁ pratibimbaṁ na bhaṇyate ||

‘(AIl) this (idam) is (inextricably) mixed together (miśra) with the object of
consciousness (bodhya); or if it were separate from the object of consciousness and could

not manifest, so why not say cognition and memory etc. are a reflection within the object
of consciousness?”
Read ‘bodha- – ‘consciousness’ for ‘hodhya- – ‘object of consciousness’. By
emending the text, we arrive at the following meaning, which makes much more sense:
‘(Al]) this (idam) is (inextricably) mixed together (miśra) with consciousness

(bodha); or if it were separate from consciousness and could not manifest, why not say
cognition and memory etc. are a reflection within consciousness?”

“ Alternatively, one could equally well translate jñānarāpaṁ tato jagat ‘therefore, all

things are a form of cognition.’

CHAPTER THREE

(jñāna) has assumed that nature," and it is because of that that (every object) is

perceived.
Again:

‘Cognition and the object of cognition are experienced (together)
simultaneously and so are essentially the same.”
(An opponent may object that,) well, if (what is being) said is that,
although the universe bears in this way the characteristics of a reflection, it is the
original image and that it has no cause, then say it – what is wrong with that? (To
which we reply that this is not s0). Indeed, there is no disagreement (that the

universe is a reflection within consciousness). Nor is it the responsibility of the
learned here (to justify the fact that the uniyerse which manifests as a reflection
within consciousness is not the original image). They are concerned with what is

real (not opinions). And nor could one do' otherwise, because it has been

established here (with reasoned argument) that (the universe) possesses the
characteristics of a reflection, and (also) because the characteristics of an original

object cannot be attributed to it. He says that:

' The last two lines are quoted in the NTu ad 21/1cd-53ab. There instead of jāānaṁ

tadātmatāṁ prāptam – ‘cognition (jñāna) has assumed that nature’, the reading there is

jñānaṁ jñeyātmatāṁ yātam – ‘cognition (jñāna) has become of the nature of the object.’
The reading in the ŚSuvi ad 3/30 is yātam – ‘become’ for prāptam - ‘assumed.

!9 The Sanskrit reads etasmāt avasīyate, which could also be translated ‘(it falls away)

from that (nature and) ceases.’ Torella suggests in his talian translation of the ŚSūvi that
the meaning is that ‘one may thereby deduce that it is the nature of the object'.
Theṣe lines could well have been written by a Buddhist idealist (vijñānavādin).
This is even more true of the line that follows in the citation in TĀv ad 3/56 (57).

Jayaratha quotes this passage again in his commentary on 5/81ab (80cd), where he tells us
that it is drawn from the Kālikākrama. Maheśvarānanda (MM p. 9) quotes it, saying that it
is drawn from the Devikākrama. However, Yogarāja, who also quotes these verses in his
commentary on the Paramārthasāra (p. 90), confirms that they are from the Kālikākrama.
Kṣemarāja quotes the second verse in NTu ad 21/54ab without stating his source, whereas
he quotes both verses, stating that they are from the Kālikākrama, in his commentary on

ŚSu 3/30. He also adds the following three lines, the last of which is also cited here by
Jayaratha:
astināstivibhāgena niṣedhavidhiyogataḥ |

yugapadvedanāj jñānajñeyayor ekarūpatā |

‘The essential nature of (phenomenal) entities as cognition is the foundation of
(their condition as) objects of cognition. (These are) divided into (two kinds) — existent
and non-existent, and associated with prohibitions and injunctions, (are considered to be

impure or otherwise) due to the power of the imagination (bhāvanābalāt). Cognition and
the object of cognition are experienced (together) simultaneously and so are essentially the
same.ʼ

Ṟead kartur for kartu.

TANTRĀLOKA

q āīHīāaḥ sãT 11 u. 1

lakṣaṇasya vyavasthaiṣākasmācced bimbamucyatām |
prājñā vastuni yujyante na tu sāmayike dhvanau || 57 1|
If this is the condition of the defining characteristic (of a reflection),
how can (anything that appears within consciousness) be said (without

reason) to be an original object? The wise apply (themselves) to what is real,
not to what is commonly said to be the case! (57) (58)

‘Without reason’ means without a cause.

Surely, (objects the opponent,) if it is said that the universe is a reflection,
as it bears the characteristics of one, let that be. We are not (particularly)

concerned here (about that). But how can (a reflection) have (any real) existence

without a cause, (whatever it may be, that is) referred to as the original image?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

ātaraza fēr firai rafēzaf:
fē ã vŨẼērĩ fk fē-ã araaaṝ 11 u

nanu na pratibimbasya vinā bimbaṁ bhavet sthitiḥ |

kiṁ tataḥ pratibimbe hi bimbaṁ tādātmyavrtti na || 58 II
(The opponent may object that,) “Surely, a reflection cannot exist
without an original object!” (To which we reply,) “So what! The original
object is not inherently identical with its reflection.” (58) (59)

‘So what!” If there is no original object, so what? The meaning is that (it

makes) no difference at all. A reflectionis not one with the original object as is
‘tree-ness with the ‘Siṁśipā-ness’ (of a Śiṁśipā tree), in such a way that if there
is no original object, there could not be a reflection also. He says that:

sīē ēaid |

q Td-īs% TdāaaT 1| u8 11
ataś ca lakṣaṇasyāsya proktasya tadasaṁbhave |
na hānir heṭumātre tu praśno ‘yaṁ paryavasyati || 59 ||
Thus, the aforestated definition (lakṣaṇa) (still holds good, even) in
the absence of that (original object). There is no harm (to our view, that

maintains that all phenomena are reflections within consciousness even if
they have no corresponding original object). Ultimately, this question
pertains only to the cause (of the reflection). (59) (60)

CHAPTER THREE

‘Thus’ because the original object and (its) reflection are not in a state of
oneness (tādātmyavṛtti),' ‘the aforestated’ (definition) concerning the universe
(being a reflection) ‘(still holds good, even) in the absence of that’ original

object. Surely, (says the opponent,) we do not disagree about the definition of the
reflection; (the question is,) how can there be (a reflection) without an original

object? This is what we say. Is it not illogical (to maintain that) things come into

being without a cause? With this doubt in mind, he says: “(Ultimately, this
question) pertains only to the cause (of the reflection).” A cause is of two
kinds, namely, material (upādāna) and instrumental (nimitta). An example of a

material cause is the clay from which a jar (is made). The instrumental cause is,
there (in the same example), the stick and the like (utilized to make the jar). The
original object (bimba) is not the material cause of the reflection (because it is not
produced in the way something is produced from a material cause). The form (of
the material cause), like the clay (from which) a jar (is made), is altered, and then
(continues) to exist in accord with the (form of the) effect. Such is not the case

here with the original object, because even when the reflection arises, (the original

object) is perceived to be separate (from it) and unchanged. Therefore, here (in

this case), the original object (bimba) is an instrumental (not a material) cause, as
is the stick (that spins the potter’s wheel to produce) a jar.
Thus, the question only concerns the (nature of the) instrumental cause
(of the reflection), not anything else. Accordingly, he says:

The Energies of the Lord are the Instrumental Cause of the Reflection

ṝāt a faTkrīaā āīīdram az=. |

a aṭṝrēaĩ̄ aā || o 11
tatrāpi ca nimittākhye nopādāne kathañcana |

nimittakāraṇānāṁ ca kadācit kvāpi saṁbhavaḥ || 60 lI
There (in that case also, the question refers) to its instrumental cause
and not at all to its material cause. Now, instrumental causes (are not

inherently necessary), they (only) arise occasionally in certain circumstances.

(60) (61)

Instrumental causes are not (invariably) present in every aspect (of the
causal process). Thus, he says: ‘its instrumental cause’ etc. Here (in this
example), the potter, propelling the wheel by striking it with his hand, may
fashion a jar even without a stick. However, even if he is very skilful, the potter

cannot fashion a jar without clay. Thus, unlike the material cause, it is not

'"! The expression ‘tādātmyavṛtti more literally means, ‘state of having the same nature’.

‘Oneness’ is the common essential nature two or more things share in common. Clay jars,

cups, and bowls, for example, are all essentially ‘one’ in the sense that they are all made

of clay. They are all equally clay. As Abhinava has said above (2/22ab-22cd (22cd-23ab)),
the sense of the word ‘one’ when one says, ‘all is one’, is not numerical. The original

object and its reflection are not essentially the same in such a way that if there is no
original object there can be no reflection.

TANTRĀLOKA

necessary to make use of an instrumental cause (to produce an effect). Therefore,

a reflection is possible even without an original object, because there is another
(instrumental) cause that is (as) capable (of producing the effect, as is) the

material cause, and serves to replace it. He says that:

fThrTī TITTR] ShTTTTĀTTJT: | Ṝ¢ I
ata eva purovartinyāloke smaraṇādinā |
nimittena ghanenāstu saṁkrāntadayitākṛtiḥ || 61 ||
Therefore, (it is quite possible that) by a powerful instrumental cause,
such as (a fond) memory, the form of the beloved is projected into the light
before one. (61) (62)

‘Therefore’ʼ, because it is possible for a reflection to arise even when

there is no original object due to some other instrumental cause. ‘The light’ can

bear a reflection of the form of (the original object, and so is a relevant example).

(The cause) is ‘powerful' means that it is essentially (a form of intense)
contemplative imagining (bhāvanā) (of the original object); otherwise (if it were
not powerful in this sense, every) object of recollection would manifest before all

those who (have the capacity to) recollect. The beloved is far away, and so, not

present nearby, in this case there is no original object (bimba). But even so he can

perceive its effect, that is, (her) reflection. Thus here (in this case), one must admit
that there is some other instrumental cause (of the reflection), such as memory,

because the reflected (form) of the beloved could not manifest at any time
separately (that is, objectively and clearly to her lover) (vicchedena), without
some cause. He says that:

fāī_ fērs īāī Tv 11 .3 1

anyathā saṅvidārūḍhā kāṇtā vicchedayoginī|

kasmād bhāti na vai saṁvid vicchedaṁ purato gatā || 62 ||
Otherwise, (if this were not s0,) how could the beloved, who resides
within consciousness, manifest separately from it (that is, objectively)?
Consciousness (does not appear) before us in a state of separation
(objectivised without cause). (62) (63)

' In actual fact, only memories that are a particular focus of attention appear, as it were,
vividy before some individuals at particular times. For example, the beloved from whom

the lover is separated seems to appear before the lover who remembers her intensely, and
manifests to him as the object of his recollection.

CHAPTER THREE
‘Otherwise’ - if the beloved were not to be (as if) reflected (in the space

before her lover) by some other instrumental cause, such as memory. This is the

meaning. (The beloved) ‘resides within consciousness’. The sense is that an
entity (vastu) that resides within consciousness does not manifest (separately) as
cut off (vicchedena) from it. If consciousness were to be cut up, it would be
insentient (because only an objective, insentient reality is subject to delineation),
and so (in the absence of consciousness), nothing at all would manifest, and so all

this (universe) would be (as if) blind.' An entity that rests in consciousness is

perceivable, and so is not separate (from consciousness) (adhika). Thus, that too
could not manifest as a (separate) delimited entity (cut off from consciousness)
(vicchedena). Thus, he says: ‘consciousness (does not appear) before us in a
state of separation (objectivised without cause)’.

Surely (one may ask,) if this is the case, the relationship between subject

and object would not exist, and so would not all (this) daily commerce (of life)

come to an end? (Our reply to this objection is that this is) true. In terms of
supreme consciousness there is not even a trace of duality, thus everything is
(nothing but) consciousness itself. If so, (asks the opponent,) what could the
object, or even the subject, be? (We reply that only) if that same (consciousness),
having concealed its own nature by virtue of its own (innate) freedom, makes
(itself) manifest as contracted (delimited) (saṁkucita) perception (jñāna), (only)

then is all this dualistic commerce of daily life, consisting of subject and object
(possible). He says that (in the following verse):

zrr= fāfkear vīś agzāvṣī+ |1| 3 1
ata eyāntaraṁ kiñcid dhīsaṁjñaṁ bhavatu sphuṭam |

yatrāsya vicchidā bhānaṁ saṅkalpasvapnadarśane || 63 |
Therefore, there must be some (other) intermediate (state between
supreme consciousness and its object), which (free of thought constructs) is
clearly evident, namely, the (apprehending) intellect (dhī), where, by virtue of

The word viccheda literally means ‘cutting asunder, cleaving, piercing, breaking apatt,

division,

separation,

interruption,

discontinuance

and cessation’

In

a technical

philosophical sense, it denotes the manner in which the conditioned, delineated identity of
individual entities are ‘cut off’ from one another as well as the perceiver, and are thereby
specifically, objectively defined. This is not the case with consciousness, which is always

and everywhere the same. If it were to be subject to limitation in this way, cut up into
parts cut off from one another, it would be objective and hence insentient, that is, not
consciousness at all. Thus, without consciousness nothing could ever be known to exist or
manifest. Cf. above note 2,60.

' Adhikam literally means ‘(something) moreʼ. The things that manifest within

consciousness, each according to their own type, that is, physical, sensorial, mental etc.,

are real entities (vastu). Even so they are not independently real, that is, ‘something more’

than consciousness and separate from it, as is, for example, Nature (Prakṛti), according to

the Sāṁkhya view.

TANTRĀLOKA

its delimitation (vicchidā), the manifestation (of a reflection can) appear

(distinctly defined) while seeing a dream or imagining (saṅkalpa). (63) (64)

‘Therefore’, because delimitation (viccheda) is not possible in relation to

supreme consciousness, there must be a certain, limited (sarṁkucita) subject, who
(although not objectively perceivable) is clearly evident (susphuta) and whose

nature is free of thought constructs (nirvikalparūpa). Also called cognitive
consciousness (jñāna), it must abide in the middle between supreme

consciousness and the object of knowledge, where ‘the manifestation' of the
reflection (of the original object) takes place ‘by virtue of its delimitation’, that
is, separation (from consciousness), in the imagination, a dream or the like.

(Thus,) because the original object is absent, (by applying) some other
instrumental means such as intense recollection, the beloved’s reflection, placed

thereby in (his) imagination etc., may manifest to (her) bereft (lover). This is the
sense (of this verse).

Just as it is possible externally in this way for there to be a reflection in
the memory etc. (brought about) by some other instrumental means, even if there
is no original object, such is the case here. Thus, he says:

ato nimittaṁ devasya śaktayaḥ ṣantu tādrśe |
Therefore, the energies of the Lord must be the instrumental cause
(of the reflection of the AIl), which is like that. (64ab) (64)
‘Thereforeʼ, for the aforementioned reason, namely, because (a
reflection) depends (for its existence) only on an instrumental cause (and not a
material one), the instrumental cause of the cosmic reflection ‘of the Lord’, Who

is the principle of consciousness, the nature of which is illumination (dyotana),

must be (His) energies of knowledge and action etc. In this way, there is no defect

possible (in this view). This is the meaning.
He said previously that: ‘(the fact that) He possesses many powers

amounts to (His inseparable) union with that (one) power alone.”' In accord with
this view, (the Lord’s) energies are, in reality, only (His one) power of freedom,

Thus, by virtue of His own lordship alone, He bears the form of all things within

Himself. This, in a nutshell, is the meaning. As (Utpaladeva), the author of the
Pratyabhijñā, says:

‘There (in the case of a crystal, the) form it possesses is that of an

adventitious (object reflected within it), because it is placed (next to it), whereas

that of the principle of consciousness is due to its own lordship.”
i Above, 1/67cd (68cd).

Ṭhis reference is in prose as is one below

in TĀv ad 3/70ab (3/70) which is identified

simply as a reference from the Pratyabhijñā. There is no indication that they are drawn
from one of Utpaladeva’s lost commentaries (fkā or vivṛt) on his own
Pratyabhijñākārikā. It is more likely that the Anupratyabhijñā is a work by an
independent author.

sense:

CHAPTER THREE
The author of the Anupratyabhijñā also (says,) with the same intended

‘O Lord, as does a bright" mirror (a reflection), You display the sphere

of phenomenal existence within Your own pure (svaccha) nature by (Your

glorious) power (prabhāva), (but) without (the need of an) original object.”
He concludes that in this way the universe is a reflection within

consciousness.

gc fafi rḷ īaitaṀraaũ
|I : ||

īa-š ī ac-̄avīca: |

itthaṁ viśvam idaṁ nāthe bhairavīyacidambare || 64 |I
pratibimbam alaṁ svacche na khalv anyaprasādataḥ |
This universe is in this way a reflection within the Lord, that is,
within the translucent Sky of Bhairava’s consciousness, (arising there)

unaided by anything else (outside it). (6dcd-65ab) (65)

‘Anything else’, if (the Lord) were to have to look to another (reality and

be dependent on it,) His freedom would be compromised. This is the point. It is

said that (the Lord’s) freedom (to become all things) is (His) reflective awareness

(of His own nature as both transcendent and all things). This is its primary nature.

It is impossible for the Light (of consciousness) to be devoid of self-awareness,
nor would it be logical (for it to be so). Indeed, this is the essential difference

between Him, as the one Who bears the form of all things, and insentient (objects

that have the capacity to reflect other things), namely that He is reflectively aware
of all things (as shining within Himself as the radiance of His Light). As is said
elsewhere by (Abhinava) himself:

‘The entire universe shines inwardly here within the Self just as variously

arranged (reflections) (vicitraracanā) do within a mirror. The difference (between
them) is that (awakened) consciousness (hodha) contemplates the universe (within

itself) by the activity of the essence of its innate reflective awareness, whereas the

mirror is not such (and does not).”

The Sequence of the Arising of (the Fifty Forms) of Reflective Awareness
(Paramārśodayakrama)
AII (our teachers) proclaim that this reflective awareness is the supreme

(form of) Speech (vāc), which is not (based on a) convention (as spoken

Read with MSs ñ and t prasanna- ‘bright’ for prasenā, which has no meaning.

S Compare the equivalent of this and the following four verses with the earlier MVV

1/890-894, translated below in note 3,159.
This verse is found in Abhinava’s Tantrasāra, (p. 19). With it, he concludes his

exposition there of Śāmbhāvopāya.

TANTRĀLḶOKA

languages are), rather it manifests spontaneously by itself (svarasodita),' and
does not differ from the essential nature of pure consciousness. Thus, he says:

sā-ar’tkraī
aāīa fšaraācā c riī; 1| Ṝ., 1
āī ḷ yh aĩ T-T? ēra 1
ananyāpekṣitā yāsya viśvātmatvaṁ prati prabhoḥ || 65 |I
tāṁ parāṁ pratibhāṁ devīṁ saṁgirante hy anuttarām |

The independence (ananyāpekṣitā)' of the Lord with respect to His

being all things is that supreme creative intuition (pratibhā)' (our teachers)
call the Goddess, who is (the feminine) Absolute (anuttarā). (65cd-66ab) (66)
‘(The Goddess who is the) Absolute’

is the aesthetic rapture

(camatkāra) of the sovereignty of (the Lord’s) unsurpassed Freedom. This is the
meaning. Thus, (She Who is the Absolute’s) creative intuition (pratibhā) is

endowed with the manifestation of the aggregate of the endless powers (of
absolute consciousness), beginning with Anuttara (the Absolute, symbolized by

the letter A,) onwards. This is the meaning. In this way, he furnishes an occasion
(to expound the teachings concerning) the sequence of the emergence of (the fifty
phases of) the reflective awareness (of absolute consciousness).

Everything manifests here in two ways, as words and (the things that are
their) objects of denotation. (It is said) there (about this that): ‘the Light (of
consciousness) itself shines primarily as the universe of objects of denotation
(vācya).” This is said in order to bring to stress that everything is a reflection
' Cf. ĪP 1/5/13 quoted above in note to TĀv ad 1/83cd-85ab (84cd-86ab). ĪP 1/5/13-14
quoted ad 4/181cd-182ab.
'! The Sanskrit word here for ‘independence’ ananyāpekṣitā - literally means ‘the state
of not being dependent on another’. Bhairava’s freedom means that he does not depend on
anything else that could hypothetically exist apart from himself in order to embody
himself as the universe.

' Saṇḍerson (2005a p. 98) translates ‘pratibhā’ as ‘creativity’. As pratibhā is also a

capacity to understand, and is equated with the instinct animals possess as a limited form
of it, adding ‘intuition’ or even ‘intelligence’ to the translation of the term contributes to a
better understanding of a term that cannot be translated in one or two words. Bhartṛhari

was the first to use this word in a technical sense extensively. As a cognitive linguist and
Sanskrit grammarian, his focus was on accounting for the capacity to understand and
make use of language, which he called pratibhā. As the Tantras consider the world to be a

creation of the ‘language’ of Mantras, it was but natural that Abhinava should perceive at

its ultimate level a cosmogonic dimension of the faculty of pratibhā, identified with

Bhairava’s power, the Goddess.
' Instead of ratra – (it is said) ‘there’ (about this that), MSs Ch, T, and D read tataḥ –
‘thus’.

' If we think of the creative autonomy, which is the reflective awareness of

consciousness, as the supreme form of Speech, manifestation is understood on the analogy

of its articulation. In this perspective, the stream of manifestation that flows from the pure

unity of divine consciousness has two aspects: word (śabda), and meaning (artha) (see
above, note 2,53). The former is the denotator (vācaka) and the latter the object of

CHAPTER THREE

within consciousness. (Analogously,) reflective awareness also emerges (as the

progressive development) of each (form of) reflective awareness, starting with
Anuttara (the Absolute) (A) and Ānanda (Bliss) (Ā) onwards. Accordingly, he
(now) also (goes on to) expound the sequence of emergence (of the forms of)

reflective awareness (parāmarśodayakrama).

The Letter A as Anuttara and Anākhya

aa 4: .

akulasyāsya devasya kulaprathanaśālinī || 66 ||
kaulikī sā parā śaktir aviyukto yayā prabhuḥ |

“(This freedom) is Kaulikī,' the Supreme Power from whom the

Lord is never separated. She is endowed with the unfolding (perception) of
denotation (vācya). The ‘object of denotation’ or the ‘meaning’ of words is the manifest

world of objectivity made of ‘things’ (artha), which are ‘meanings’ (artha). These include
both outer, physical objects and their qualities, as well as the ‘inner’ objects of thought
and imagination. These are the countless manifest forms of the ‘Light’ aspect of
consciousness. Analogously, ‘words’ or ‘denotators’ are forms of the reflective awareness

of consciousness.

There are fifty aspects or ‘powers’ of the one universal power of consciousness, that is,

the freedom (svātantrya) which is its reflective awareness (vimarśa). Symbolized by the

fifty letters of the Sanskrit alphabet, they unfold or arise progressively, one power after
another, as do the letters of the alphabet recited in alphabetical order. The first two letters

are A and Ā, which represent Anuttara and Ānanda, that is, the Absolute (anuttara), from
which develops bliss (ānanda). In this way they progress from A, the first letter, to H, the

last, to form the cycle of AHAM, the ‘ of the divine universal and transcendental self-

awareness of Bhairava’s Light of pure consciousness, expounded in the previous chapter.
The progressive emergence or ‘articulation’ of the energies of the reflective awareness,

symbolized by the letters of the alphabet, was described previously by Abhinava, first of
all in the MVV (1/890 ff.), then in the PTv (p. 165-192. In Jayadeva Singh’s translation,

Mātṛkācakra (the Cycle of the Letters) is taught in p. 161-184). For a detailed and clear
explanation of the symbolism of the letters and the process of emanation, mainly based on
the TĀ and PTv, see Padoux 1990, p. 223-329.

Ṭhe contemplation of the symbolism of the letter A is very detailed. Jayaratha refers to

its earlier Trika form through citations of the Tantrasadbhāva and other sources in his

commentary. The details are discussed in the notes. The same teaching is carried over into
the Krama system as well as the Kubjikā Tantras and Śrīvidyā. The contemplation of A

(although, of course, not in the same way) is a central feature of the Buddhist practice of

Mahāmudrā.
From the perspective of the Trika of the PT, elaborated extensively by Abhinava,
the letter A stands for Anuttara and is Akula. Its power is the unfolding perception of the

totality of all things in their fundamental nature as the flow of the energies of pure selfawareness i.e. AHAṀ (‘T) of Bhairava/Śiva, the supreme perceiver. As Abhinava is about

to describe in detail, it encompasses the energies of the letters from A to H, that are as
many forms of reflective awareness (parāmarśa), that extend through, even as they

TANTRĀLOKA

produce, the reality levels (tattva) from Earth to Śiva in a perpetual cycle. Abhinava

explains:

‘The letter ‘A’ is a measure of the power (of consciousness) (kalā), which does
not belong to the domain of Māyā; it transcends hearing, spontaneous, it is the wonder of
one’s own nature, which is the great sea (of consciousness) that, without waves, rests in

the Great Light. It is present (equally) in both two phases, initial and final (of perception),
as the completely full (and all-embracing) ‘I-nessʼ as (the initial) outpouring of the power
(of consciousness) and (the final) reflective awareness of all things.’ PTv p. 27.

' According to Maheśvarānanda, Kaulikīśakti is the state of aroused intent (aunmukhya)

of consciousness towards manifestation. Like a seed about to sprout, it contains within
itṣelf all that is to be emitted. His exposition (in MM p. 39-40) begins by citing

Somānanda:

‘‘When a (sheet) of waveless water is about to become extremely (agitated and
full of) waves, paying attention to the start (of this transition), one experiences that state of

intent (aunmukhya).’ ŚDr 1/13cd-14ab

In accord with this doctrine (expounded in) the Śivadṛṣṭṅ, in such (verses), if
(consciousness) is intent on extermnalizing the reality present in the Heart of one’s own

consciousness, its nature such as taught (previously), then it is commonly called ‘Śakti’.

And that intent is (accompanied by the powers of) will, knowledge and action. As (is said)

in the venerable Śivadṛṣṭi:

‘In this way, Śiva is made of consciousness, he himself is suprṛeme contentment,

and it is that which assumes a state of intent (to emanation) and (becomes the states of) its

own will, knowledge and action. It is that itself which is the state of existing as (an

embodied) living being, ranging from (those beings whose body) is made of power,

ending (with those who dwell in) hell.’ ŚDr 1/39-40ab
with:

As (it is also said) in the venerable Kulamāūlāvatāra (in a passage) beginning
‘The power of the will has come forth from Śiva, the ultimate cause (of all

things), who, without beginning or end, is tranquil. (Then) knowledge (comes forth) and
then action.’
It ends with
‘Living beings and the fourteen worlds have been created by that (power).
Whatever is made of Speech, all that is the outpouring (udbhava) of Mātṛkā.’

And as is (said) in the brief commentary (vṛtri) of the venerable Pratyabhijñā:

‘the desire of one whose body is consciousness is free to abide as the nature of all things

and is, with respect to the universe, (its) causal state which is (its) agency . . . etc.’

After quoting TĀ 3/66cd-67ab (67) and MV 3/5-9, Maheśvarāṇanda continues:

‘And the same (is said) in the venerable Parāsukta also:
‘0 Goddess, Your perpetual intent (unmukhyatva) towards phenomena that by
their very nature (spontaneously) flow forth (from consciousness), heralded by emanation,
is described by those who know the scriptures as the will, by virtue of which You know
and ordain (the existence) of every single thing.’

CHAPTER THREE

And (it is also said) in the Pūjārahasya:
‘The four, namely, intent, will, knowledge and action, are the pulsation

(spandana) of the God of the gods, who is the Bhairava of Consciousness

(bodhabhairava). The intent of the Great Lord (towards creation) that comes about by the
cessation of (His transcendental) aloofness is all this universe — what (use) are reasons (to
prove this – none at all!).ʼ

' Sanderson (2005a: 98) unpacks the sense of this verse by translating the technical terms

into their essential metaphysical purport, which will be outlined in this note, as follows:

‘It (i.e. pratibhā) is the supreme power of Universality (kaulikī śakti), the ability
of this (asya) deity (devasya) [Bhairava] [embodied in the sound a (akulasya) to manifest
the universe (kulaprathana-śālinī) [through] [transcending it (akulasya)], the power with
which the Lord is ever one (aviyukto yayā prabhuḥ).’

Akula and Kula are, in the most basic sense, simply the transcendent deity/Self

and its power. But instead of referring to the Kaula male polarity as Bhairava (=

Paramaśiva) or abstractly as the Light of consciousness, and the female simply as the
Goddess or Śakti, Abhinava chooses to indicate right from the start that this is a Kaula
Trika teaching. We are told below (3/144ab (3/143)) that Akuḷa is the abode of Anuttara,
and that Kaulikī śakti is its emission (visarga). Here we understand that the flow of the

emission is the extending perception which manifests progressively as all the principles of
existence from Śiva to Earth, as the fifty energies of the reflective awareness of supreme,
all-embracing ‘’ consciousness (pūrṇāhāntā). This is Lord Anuttara’s supreme power

(parāśakti), the creative energy of the Absolute, that is, its freedom and pure reflective
awareness. It is experienced at the very beginning of the process of emanation as
containing all the energies that will be progressively differentiated from it and emitted,
one by one, in the ‘processless process” described in this section. Accordingly, Abhinava
introduces in this way the exposition in the PTv of the unfolding of the energies of the
letters as aspects and forms of the flux of reflective awareness of Anuttara embodied in the
Goddess Parā:
“(This) power of reflective awareness, the Supreme Goddess (parameśvarī) Parā,
is the most excellent freedom of the venerable Bhairava, who abides as ‘full’ (of all
things), ‘thin’ (devoid of them), and both together as well as devoid of both. Even though

there is no stain at all there of either succession or simultaneity, in accord with the
aforestated teaching, the consciousness who is the venerable (goddess) Parā is a single
(uninterrupted) mass of the reflective awareness of her own innate nature, which consists
of the endless numbers of future mergers and emergences (of the universe), and so (it is
said that): ʻthis pervasive God Bhairava is free, completely full (and perfect). There is

nothing that He does not make manifest in the pure mirror of his own nature.’ On the basis
of this principle, succession and its absence is manifest in the centre of Her own nature,
which cannot bear (asahiṣṇu) either succession or simultaneity. Thus, in accord with (its
manifestation), one should reflect on this succession, because the absence of succession is

present within consciousness as preceded by that. (But this is just a manner of speaking),
as the explanation of it is invariably that it is (a process with) successive (phases). And in
this way, all this reflective awareness in the form of Speech is successive, whereas (the

aspect) devoid of succession consists of internal consciousness. Thus,, the venerable Parā,

Who is ever such and thus wonderfully various (vicitrā), is the Supreme Goddess (of the
Supreme God) and so, in accord with its succession, it is designated as (the letters) A

onwards.” PTv p. 165-167

TANTRĀLOKA

Kula (which is the energy) of this god (Bhairava, who is) Akula (symbolized

by the phoneme A). (66cd-67ab) (67)

Here (according to this teaching), the supreme reality (paraṁ tattvam) is

the Light (of consciousness) alone. It is Anuttara (the Absolute), which is supreme
reflective awareness. (Called) Anākhya (the Inexplicable), it is full (all-inclusive

and perfect), and cannot be given a specific designation such as Śiva or Śakti.

Initially that (supreme reality), wishing to manifest the universe out of its innate

freedom, makes the state of Śiva and Śakti manifest within itself.' As (the wise)
say (from the point of view of emanation):

' In the Mālinīvijayavārtika, Abhinava outlines the dynamism of Anuttara, symbolized

by the letterA that generates the primary vowels, short (A I U) and long (Ā, Ī ̃):
anuttarasyākārasya parabhairayarāpiṇaḥ |

akulasya parā yeyaṁ kaulikī śaktir uttamā || 890 ||
ša evāyaṁ viṣargas tu tasmāj jātam idaṁ jagat |

tasya prakṣobhayogyatvaṁ prakṣobhakalanodayaḥ !| 891 I|

prakṣobhapūrṇatābhāvāt tadakulakramonatā |
iti ṣaṭkasvarūpātmavimarśāndolanoditam || 892 ||
anuttarasvabhāvatvād ādyasyaiva vijṛṃbhitam |
sa eva bhagavān antar nityaṁ prasphuradātmakaḥ | 893 I|
antaḥsthasarvabhāvaughapūrṇamadhyamaśaktikaḥ |
svecchākṣobhasvabhāvodyaj jagadānandasundaraḥ || 894 |

‘1) Akula is Supreme Bhairava, Anuttara, the letter A. Its most excellent energy

is 2) Kauḻikī, who is Parā (the Goddess Supreme) (Ā). That is this emission (visarga) from
which this universe is born. Its competence (yogyatva) to be aroused (to further levels of

development (I), the emergence of the process of arousal (prakṣobhakalana) (), the state
of complete arousal (U), and because of that, the decrease of the procession of Akula
(akulakramonatā) (Ū). This is the unfolding of the first (letter A) that, because it is
Anuttara, arises as the swinging back and forth of the reflective awareness of itself and the

essential nature of the group of six (vowels, i.e. A, Ā, 1, and U, Ū).

This itself is the Lord (bhagavar) Whose nature pulses effulgently inwardly
perpetually, (empowered with the) energy of the centre, which is full with all the flux of
phenomena located within (Him) and beautiful with the Cosmic Bliss that has arisen from

the essential nature of the arousal of His own will.’ MVV 1/890-894.
' When Śiva and Śakti unite, there is both and yet neither. As Abhinava said at the
beginning of this chapter, if one discems ‘something moreʼ in the pure Light of
consciousness, that is Śakti, which is its freedom and reflective awareness. In this elevated
way Abhinava understands the interplay of the opposites, their emergence and dissolving
away, which is the supreme, universal and transcendental activity of Anuttara (cf.

Dyczkowski 1987: 100 ff.). The development of the concept of Anuttara is one of the most
important contributions Abhinava has made to the theology and philosophy of Trika. This

he understands to be the Deity called Bhairava in the Trika (Kaula) context and Supreme

Śiva in the (purely Śaivite) context of the Pratyabhijñā, although he never or very rarely

mentions Anuttara in the body of his commentaries on the Īśvarapratyabhijñā. But, careful

not to ignore this fundamental concept of ultimate reality he expounds in the context of his
Tṛrika exegesis, he chooses to praise this as the supreme nondual reality in the auspicious

verse (maṅgalasśloka) with which every work begins, at the beginning of his commentary
(vimarśinī) on the Īśvarapratyabhijāā, where he writes:

CHAPTER THREE

‘T always (sadā) offer salutations to the circle of rays of the Lord Absolute

(Anuttaranātha), (that circle) which is called Śiva and Śakti and bestows higher
(transcendental) and lower (worldly) fruits.’

Similarly, it is said elsewhere with the same intended meaning (from the

point of view of withdrawal):

‘Ruḍra and Rudra’s power have dissolved into (the transcendent) Beyond
Mind (amanaska).”
Moreover:
‘O omniscient one, know that to be Kula, devoid of Śiva and Śakti, (as the
reality) from which this variegated universe arises and wherein it sets.’

The Letter A as Kula and Akula
Kula (the immanent mass of Śiva’s energies) is full (all-inclusive)
supreme consciousness, characterized in this way. Akula is (commonly)
characterized as Śiva. It is made manifest as (the one, transcendental reality)
which is other than (Kula). (Akula) shines at one with the Light and possesses that

supreme (power) that by its very nature fills the universe."" Thus (it is said that):

‘his powers are the entire universe . . ..

‘I praise that nonduality which is all things, and its nature Supreme Śiva and

Śakti. Initially it makes the ‘I’, which is taught to have (these) two aspects (śākhā),
manifest from the Unmanifest (i.e. Anuttara) which is full (and perfect). Then in order to
divide up (and distribute) its own energy (kalā) out of its own nature, it (assumes) the
condition of expansion, ongoing flow, and withdrawal.”
Bhaskara explains this verse in the opening verses of his own commentary,
illumining how transcendence perpetually tends to immanence by the One forming itself

into Śiva and Śakti. The thirty-sixth principle is Śiva, Who, beyond emanation, is

provisionally transcendent, until emanation takes place. The thirty-seventh principle is
Bhairava, that is, Supreme Śiva Who is immanent. The thirty-eighth is the Goddess

Inexplicable (anākhyā), identified with both Parā and Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the Supreme
Goddesses of the Trika and Krama, respectively (cf. below 6/180ab-180cd (6/179cd178ab)). As the Inexplicable, She is absolutely transcendent, as any talk of Her nature

inevitably leads down to the lower principles as the immanent thirty-seventh or the
transcendent thirty-sixth (see below, 11/21-27). Thus Bhāskara writes:

‘The aggregate of principles numbering thirty-six from Śiva to Earth are, on the
plane of the thirty-seventh, formed by ascending into the field of (universal cognitive)
consciousness (miti) and then into the plane of the thirty-eighth, and again into that
(immanent) consciousness. (Thus,) some (inscrutable) Supreme Lord, Who plays (in this

way), deploying (all things artistically), is victorious.

' ’Akula – transcendental Śiva, comes forth, as it were, from Kula – cosmic Śakti, and
Kula comes from Akula, neither of which are either Śiva or Śakti, even as they are both.

Thus, there is no difference between immanence (the universe) and transcendence (the

pure eternal unchanging Absolute). One becomes the other without either becoming
anything else, or anything really taking place, even as everything is going on. This is the

TANTRĀLOKA

According to this view, Kaulikī is (the supreme) power whose nature it is

to be ‘endowed’ (and shine as) the unfolding (perception) (prathana) of the

universe, that is, Kula, which is the expansion of (Akula’s) energy
(Śāktaprasara). Thuṣ (it is said) that ‘Kaula is (the abiding state of) being within
Kula and is Akula. Kaulikī śakti is that within which that (Kaula state abides) in

oneness." ‘The Lord’, whose nature has been explained previously, ‘is never
mystery of the supreme reflective awareness and freedom of Bhairava, Who is Anuttara.
As Abhinava explains:

‘The Supreme Lord’s power of freedom is the will (inherent) within His own

nature. The expansion (of this power) is (in a potential, as yet) not unfolded state. lts

essence is thus the reflective awareness which, in conformity with this condition

(tathāvidha), is inner dense (eternal and uninterrupted) consciousness that, (inscrutably)
such, is said to be (the letter) A. This state can be called the will in which the object of

desire has not emerged, and so is just the reflective awareness which is the (very) Being
(sattā) of the Absolute (Anuttara). The Supreme Lord perpetually contemplates His own

(transcendental) nature even as He also contemplates (His own) form, which is the plane
of the energy of (transcendent) Akula, (even as) He directs (His awareness) at the same
time to the energies of (immanent) Kula. Nonetheless, there is a difference between
consciousness as Akula and the reflective awareness of Akula. (The form of consciousness
of the sphere of Akula, i.e. the letter A) thus corresponds to the plane of the reflective
awareness of Bhairava, the possessor of power.” PTv p. 167-168

Having established in this way Anuttara as No Means, unchanging and beyond
conception, we move on to examine the details of its wonderful power. The One is ever
One. Whatever takes place does so through, and as, its energies that radiate from it as do
rays from the sun, the first of which are Śiva (the One) and Śakti (the Many).
See above, note to TĀv ad 1/111cd-112ab (1 12).
'Ṁ Concering the many definitions of Kula, see below, comm. 29/4, where Jayaratha
supplies most of them. In this context it is sufficient to point out briefly here that Kula,

which means literally ‘family or ‘aggregate’, is a very significant way of referring to

Śakti, understood to be the totality of Siva’s energies manifest as the unfolding universe.
Transcendental Śiva in relation to it is Akula – ‘not-Kula’. The all-encompassing energy
of Kula is Kaulikīśakti. As the energy of Anuttara symbolized by the letter A, the first
letter of the alphabet corresponding to the initial and hence most primary of all energies of
Anuttara, it unfolds as all of them. This is how Abhinava explains it in the PTv:
‘A is the (totality of the) power (kalā) (of the Light of Anuttara) which is not
subject to Māyā, beyond hearing (i.e. instruction), uncreated, wondering at its own
(essence, which is the) waveless sea of consciousness resting in the great Light (of the

Absolute). It spreads from the first to the last stage (of emanation) as the condition of
fullness of the supreme ‘ (pūrṇāhantā) in its total awareness of the universe, (produced)
by the effulgent unfolding of (its) energy (kalā).’ PTy p. 27.

'“ PTv p. 61-62. The preceding lines set the context: The all-encompassing energy of
Kula is Kaulikīśakti. At the microcosmic level Kula is the body and Kaulikī is the vitality

and power of consciousness within it. There too, immanent Kula is transcendental Akula

and transcendental Akula is immanent Kula.

iyaṁ .sphuraṇamayī śaktiḥ kulasya nāyikā Śarīraprāṇasukhādeḥ . sphurattādāyi
brāhmyādideyatācakrasya vīryabhūtā nikhilākṣanāḍīcakrasya madhya madhyamarūpā

jananasthānakarṇikālīṇgātmā asti | tatraiva ca kule bhavā kularūāpā kaulikī yadvākule

CHAPTER THREE

separated’ from her, that is, whose nature is never caused to be other than that.
This is the meaning. Moreover, in this way, Kula, which is characterized as the
letter A, is the body (of Akuḻa). It is also called the First Letter (ādyavarṇa).
That too is the Deity (deva). (t is said in the Śvacchandatantra that):

The Letter A as Unstruck Sound
‘The god (deva)' who resides in the chest of living (breathing) beings
spontaneously utters (the Mantra) not uttered by anybody and that none

obstructs.

bhavam akulātmakaulaṁ tat yasyām antaḥ tādātmyena asti sā kaulikī kulaṁ hi
akulaprakāśarūḍham eva tathā bhavati

‘This power which is (in the Heart of consciousness) made of the radiant pulse

(of consciousness) is the mistress of Kula, that is, of the body, (its) vital breath and (the

experience of) pleasure and the rest, to which she imparts the vibrant effulgence (of
consciousness) (sphurattā). She is the vitality of the assembly of the deities, Brāhmī and
the rest. In the middle of the wheel of all the senses and vital channels she is the Centre,

which is the Liṅga in the calix that is the place of birth. The state of being (bhavā) just
there, which is Kula, is Kaulikī, or else as the state of being in Akula, she is
(transcendental) Akula. Kaula is (the abiding state of) being within Kula and is Akula.
Kauḻikī śakti is that within which that (Kaula state abides) in oneness. It is Kula itself that,

mounted on the light of Akula, is such. PTv p. 62

In what follows, the letter A is presented in two aspects — sonic and graphic. At the

corporeal level, the former is the Unstruck Sound of the breathing. At the level of pure

consciousness, it is its self-reflective awareness, which is Supreme Speech. The parts of
the graphic form of the letter A, described after that, symbolise the energies and aspects of

Unstruck Sound as the explication of the energy of Anuttara – the letter A.

“ SVṬ 7/59. The reading in the SVT is haṁsaḥ for devi – ‘O goddess’ – as found here.

The reading devi is also found in one place where Kṣemarāja quotes a quarter of this verse

in his commentary on the SVT (4/257cd). In two other places he quotes it there, we find
the reading is devaḥ -– ‘god’ (Sv√Tu ad 1/69, 4/196), and in one place, haṁsaḥ (ibid.
6/20ab). This verse is quoted again below and in the commentary on 3/147cd-148 (147148ab), 4/181cd-182ab, 5/132cd-133ab (5/131cd-132ab) and 8/388-394ab (387cd-393). In
all cases the reading is devaḥ. Accordingly, here also read devaḥ for devi. While this is the
accepted reading in this citation, there can be no doubt that one of the manuscripts
Kṣemarāja had before him of the SvT read ‘haṁsṣaḥ’ for ‘devaḥ’, because he comments on

that reading as follows:

haṁsaḥ prāgvyāvarṇitasatattvaparaniṣkalabhaṭṭārakaḥ, tadadhiṣṭhitatvān madhyamaḥ

prāṇo ʻpi nirṇītavyāptisāraḥ | ṣvayam uccarate aśeṣaṁ vācyavācakakramam ullaṅghya
paramābhedasāra-mahāmantravīṛyātmanā sphurati | yato ʻsya na kaścid uccārayitā

pratihantā vā asti, asyaiva sarvakartṛtvena paramātr̥rīpatvāt | ata eva cāyam anāhata ity
udghoṣyate, itaravarṇavat sthānakaraṇābhighātānabhivyaktatvād anastamitatvāc ca | sa
cāyaṁ prāṇinām urasi hṛdaye jīvitasyāpi jīvitabhūtaḥ sthitaḥ | kecid eva tv
avadhānadhanā etatsattām āviśanti ||
‘Haṁsaḥ is the supreme formless Lord (paraniṣkalabhaṭṭāraka) whose nature has

been described previously. As it is sustained (and presided over) by that, the Middle

Breath is essentially the pervasion taught (here). ‘He utters spontaneously’ (means) he

pulses radiantly, having transcended the entire procession of denotators and (all that) they

TANTRĀLOKA

denote (in the cosmic order), as the great vitality of Mantra, the essence of which is

supreme oneness. For there is no one who utters it or obstructs it, because, as the agent of

all things, he is the supreme perceiver. Thus, he is proclaimed to be Unstruck Sound
(anāhata), because he is not made manifest as other phonemes are by the striking (of the
vital breath) on the locations and instruments (of articulation). He abides within the heart
in the chest of breathing beings as (the very) life of life itself. (Only) a few who pay
aṭṭention (to it) enter into that Being.' Commentary on SvT 7/59.

' The Mantra, also called ‘ajapa’ -’unrepeated’ – is Haṁsa (‘I am he’) or, reversed, So

‘ham (‘He am F’). According to the SVT 4/257 and commentary (recorded further ahead in
this note), the sound of the exhaled breath (prāṇa) is (as one would expect) HA (> HAMṀ)
and that of the inhaled breath (apāna) is SA (> SO). Haṁsa, literally ‘wild goose’ is the

Self – ātman. There is some uncertainty, both in the later texts and amongst modern
practitioners, as to whether it is not the other way around, that is, that exhalation is SO (or

SA) and inhalation is HAM. We know that Abhinava agreed with this teaching. Thus,
below in TĀ 6/24cd-27, referring to the Sun of exhalation, Abhinava says, echoing the
Triśirobhairavatantra that:

‘(lts living essence is) the exhaled breath (prāṇa) that corresponds to the Point

(bindu), the Day and the Sun that abides (motionless, gathered together) in one place
(ekatra) (in the Twelve-finger Space above the head.”

In his translation of the Vijñānabhairava, Jayadeva Singh inserts the following
verse into the text of the printed edition:
sakāreṇa bahir yāti hakāreṇa viśet punaḥ |
haṁsa-haṁsety amuṁ mantraṁ jīvo japati nityaśaḥ ||
‘(The breath) exits with the letter S and should then enter again with the letter H.
(Thus) the individual soul constantly repeats the mantra ‘Haṁsa, Haṁsa’.
Although not found in the printed edition of the VBh, we can presume, as has

been done traditionally, that this verse is drawn from the VBh. This is because Ksemarāja
quotes it in his commentary on the Śivasūtra (3/27). Although he does not identify his
source, we can be fairly certain that it is the VBh, because just as after this verse he goes
on to quote VBh 156 (154) The two verses can be read as a pair (yugma):
ṣatśatāni divārātrau sahasrāṇyekaviṁśatiḥ |

japo devyā vinirdiṣṭaḥ sulabho durlabho jaḍaiḥ |I

‘It is taught that the repeated recitation (iapa) of the goddess (Who is the Mantra

HAṀSAḤ) takes place 21,600 times in the course of one day and night. It is easy to attain

(by the wise, but) too hard to acquire by the foolish (who lack awareness) (jaḍa).’ (quoted

in TĀv ad 6/23cd-24ab)

The first of these two verses apparently contradicts the authoritative
Svacchandatantra. One wonders why that is. This same verse is found in the Yogabīja

(verse 146), which postdates the VBh by some centuries. There, by way of a simple
variant reading, it says, as the Svacchandatantra does, that the breath exits with letter H,

not S, and enters with the letter S, not H (hakāreṇa bahir yāti sakāreṇa viśet punaḥ 1).

There we read:

CHAPTER THREE
‘(The breath) exits with the letter H and should then enter again with the letter S.

(Thus,) the individual soul constantly repeats the mantra ‘Haṁsa, Haṁsa’.

This reading is supported by the Niruttaratantra in what is clearly a variant

reading of this verse, where we read:

haṁkāreṇa bahir yāti saḥkāreṇa viśet puṇaḥ |
haṁsaṁ tu paramaṁ mantraṁ jīvo japati sarvadã ||
‘(The breath) exits with the letter HAṀ and should then enter again with the

letter SAḤ. (Thus,) the individual soul constantly repeats the supreme mantra ‘Harṁsa’.’
(quoted by Silburn (1961: notes p. 40)

It seems to me that the simplest and most satisfactory explanation for this conflict

in the sources is simply scribal error. I take the correct version to be the one reported in
the

Yogabīja,

assuming,

quite

reasonably,

that

it

drew

this

verse

from

the

Vijñānabhairava. While the matter is easily solved in this way for the sources that belong
to the Yogaśāstra of the Gorakhanātha Haṭha Yoga tradition, as does the Yogabīja,
confusion remains elsewhere about which way round the sounds go, including the
Kashmiri tradition. Thus, Swami Lakshmanjoo, commenting on VBh 24, teaches that
exhalation is SAH (> SO) and inhalation is HAMṀ, and so did Muktānanda, who followed

his lead, and Gurumayi continues to do. The practice taught as a part of Kriyāyoga by the
followers of Yogānanda and other modern teachers such as the Sikh Caraṇa Śingh of Sant
Mat and Yogi Bhajan, as well as Revant Singh (‘Guru Maharajī’), is the other way around.

All of them teach SO ‘HAM, rather than HAṀSA, and that SO is inhalation and HAM is

exhalation, not the other way around.
The problem – whether exhalation is SA or HAṀ – seems to have been a
problem from early on. Thus, it appears that the author of the Yogabīja (147) feels obliged

to offer an explanation for the difference between the practice of HAṀSA and SO ‘HAM.

He does this by explaining that there are two types of breathing. One is outside the central

channel of suṣumnā. In this kind of breathing the sound of the breath is HAṀSA. The
other kind of breathing is within the channel of suṣumnā. Thus, the Yogabīja declares that:
‘According to the guru’s teaching the repetition is reversed in the central channel
(suṣumnā), and becomes SO ‘HAṀ, SO’ HAM.’ (Mallinson and Singleton (2017) p. 32).
However, in both cases exhalation is HAMṀ and inhalation SAH / SO.

For Śivopādhyāya, who lived in 17" century Kashmir and commented on the VB,

the problem is more acute, and he solves it in a similar, although more sophisticated way.
We have noted that in his version of the VBh, the verse we are discussing is not found, as
itis not in that of Ānandabhaṭṭa, who commented on the VBh a century or so before. Even
s0, it appears from Śivopādhyāya’s extensive commentary on VBh 156 (154) that he knew
it in the form we find nowadays in the printed edition of Kṣemarāja’s commentary on the
Śivasūtra. Thuṣ, he begins by explaining that HAṀSA is the natural sound of the breath.
HAM is the sound of inhalation and SAH the sound of exhalation. Together they make
HAMSAḤ, that is identified with the Trika goddess Parā, referred to in that form, he says,

in VBh 24 and 81.

prāṇaḥ saḥ ity evaṁrūpaḥ prakāśo vrajet bahiḥ niḥsaret jīvaḥ aham ity evaṁprakāraḥ
kṣapārūpaḥ, prāṇasya bahirniḥsaraṇe apānasya antaḥpraveśane jīvātmatā saṁbhavati iti

‘The exhaled breath (prāṇa) is SAḤ. In this form, the Light (of consciousness)
‘exits’, that is flows out (manifesting outer objectivity). The living being (the inhaled

breath) (jīva) is ‘AHAM’ (I); in this modality it is the Night (of the absence of

TANTRĀLOKA

objectivity). When the exhaled breath flows out and the inhaled breath enters in, there is
life . . . ‘Further ahead he says: sonaḥ apāno – hakāraḥ sakalavedyavargapoṣakatvāt,
jñātṛtvāt sakārātmā sūryaḥ `The Moon is the inhaled breath, which is the phoneme HA,
because it nourishes all that is objective (vedyavarga). As it is the perceiving subject, (the
exhaled breath) is the Sun, which is the phoneme SA.’
However, Śivopādhyāya goes on further ahead to apparently contradict himself
when he says:
prāṇasya hr̥dākāśāt ārohaṇena prāṇātmakatayā ham iti, dvādaśāntāt avarohaṇena
apānadaśayā sa iti varṇa dvayotpattiḥ | jīvasya jīvatvametadvarṇadvayavyaktabhāṣaṇena
haṁsa - harseti mantreṇa jīvo japati sarvadā |
‘Rising from the space of the Heart, the vital breath as the exhaled breath (prāṇa)
is HAM. (Then,) by descending from the End of the Twelve, as the state of the inhaled
breath (apāna), it is SA. Such is the origin of the two phonemes (that constitute HAṀSA).
(Thus,) the life of the living being (i.e. individual soul) is (formed) by uttering these two
phonemes clearly. (As is said in the Svacchandatantra):

‘the living being repeats mantra incessantly with the mantra Haṁsa, Haṁsa.””
But we need not wait long to discover how Śivopādhyāya reconciles the two.
HAMṀSAis the formin the fettered state and SO ‘HAMṀin the liberated one. In the former

case, HAMis the individual ego of the fettered soul that rises to the End of the Twelve,
but it then descends down with SAḤ, emitted from there (by the visarga – H) into the

embodied state to take up its place in the Heart. This is the breathing of the fettered. Thus
Sivopādhyāya goes on to stress that:

iti, uktatvāt jīva eva japati, na tu parameśvaraḥ - haṁsa iti mantreṇa
nyānābhimānaghaṭanāt, īśvaradaśāyāṁ tu pūrṇāhantātmakatayā ahaṁ (p. 136) saḥ, so
˚ham, aham idam ityādivimarśācchuritatvāt idaṁ tyājyam, idam upādeyam, idaṁ mama,

na idaṁ mama iti hāna -- samādānadharmitvāt haṁsatvam |

‘Thus, as is taught (here), it is just the living being (i.e. the individual soul (jīva))

who recites (this mantra), certainly not the Supreme Lord, because the repetition of the
mantra ʻHAMṀSA’ is produced by identification with the limited (conditioned bodyin the
state of alienation). (The experience) on the plane of the Lord (īśvaradaśā) is full
subjectivity (pūrṇāhamtā), because it is clothed with reflective awareness that “I am He”
(ahaṁ saḥ), “He am ” (so ʻham), “I am this” (aham idam), and the like. The (experience
in the fettered state is that of) HAṀSA, because its nature is that of rejecting (hāna) and
accepting (samādāna). (Thus, it is because of that that the fettered soul feels that) ‘this

should be abandonedʼ, ‘this should be accepted’, ‘that is mine’ and ‘this is not mine’.”

After a long description of the dynamics of the breathing cycle with its internal

resonance of Unstruck Sound as HAMSA aligned in detail with phases of perception, that
is, the dynamism of consciousness, he concludes by quoting Maheśvarānanda’s

Mahārthamañjarī and commenting on it:

somaḥ apāno – hakāraḥ sakalavedyavargapoṣakatvāt, jñātṛtvāt sakārātmā sūryaḥ
haṁkārasaḥkārayoḥ
astaṅgatayoḥ
satoḥ
madhyatuṭiḥ
ūddhartavyā

māṇikyamālinyādivat | ṣakārasya astaṅgamanaṁ svahrdaye visarjanīye hakārasya ca
svahr̥dayasaṁpuṭīkaraṇalakṣaṇe anusvāre yadā viśrāntiḥ tadā madhyamā tuṭtiḥ –

CHAPTER THREE

vibhajyāyasthānakṣaṇalakṣaṇo yaḥ kālakhaṇḍaḥ sa uttruṭitavyaḥ, tadānīm ahaṁ saḥ iti
vimarśa utpadyate | haṁsamantraśliṣṭaḥ ahaṁ saḥ, so 'ham iti mahāmaṇtraḥ, sa eva
vimr̥ṣṭavyaḥ svātmapratyabhijñānopāyatvāt |

‘The venerable Maheśvarānanda has said with regard to this:

‘If (you) wish to know the perpetual undifferentiated outpouring of (your) own

heart, then when the Sun and Moon set, the intermediate instant (between them)
(madhyatuṭi) should be split apart.’ (MM v.56)

The Moon is the inhaled breath, which is the phoneme HA, because it nourishes
all that is objective (vedyavarga). As it is the perceiving subject, (the exhaled breath) is
the Sun, which is the phoneme SA. When the phonemes HAM and SAḤ have set, the

instant between them (that is, the two movements of the breath) should be split through, as
the rubies on a necklace (are pierced by the thread). The phoneme SA sets in one’s own
heart, which is the aspirate (visarjanīya) (H) (at the end of SAḤ). when the phoneme HA

rests in the anusvāra (M) (of HAṀ) that (initially, prior to exhalation) encapsulates one’s

own heart, that is the intermediate instant (zuṭi). It is the fraction of time which is the
moment in the place where (the two) should be separated. (t is this) that should be split

apart. (Thus, fragmented into the smallest possible extension of time, time effectively

ceases). Then the reflective awareness arises that “I am He” (ahaṁ saḥ). AHAṀ SAḤ (the
breath of duality) is associated with the mantra HAṀSA, (whereas) SO ‘HAM (the breath
of nonduality), is the Great Mantra. It is that which should be reflected upon, because it is
the means to recognizing one’s own (true) Self.
One cannot help feeling that Śivopādhyāya is here accounting for why some say

that HAṀ SAḤ are inhalation and exhalation respectively, and others the reverse. Entry

and movement within suṣumnā takes place between the two breaths. Thus, the Yogabīja
teaches virtually the same precursor of the liberated state as does Śivopādhyāya, who is
inspired by the Mahārthamañjarī. But why should either of them, and Śivopādhyāya in
particular, go to these lengths? The answer can only be because they are addressing an
iṣsue. Thus, in the following part of his commentary (translated below in note 6,176),

Śivopādhyāya goes on to quote a passage from the Vīrāvalī that Abhinava cites in 6/74cd-

75, in which the Night of inhalation is clearly declared to be SA and the Day of

exhalation, HA. Śivopādhyāya considered this passage to be so important that he
comments on it in extensively and in detail, to conclude that SO ‘HAM is experienced at

the higher, liberated level, saying:

asyām parāparābhūmau sakāra – hakārasaṁghaṭātmako (p. 141) ya ānandaḥ sa

mahānandaḥ tanmaye yajñe so ‘ham iti vimarśarūpe anucaran tiṣṭhan – tayā paśyantyā
saha ekībhūtaḥ san parāsvarūpo bhaved eva ity arthaḥ
‘In this realm of supreme (transcendence) and its (immanent) counterpart
(parāparabhūmi), the bliss which is the pulsing union of the phonemes SA and HA is
‘Great Bliss’. He who, ‘following along and abiding’ in the sacrifice made of that (bliss),
its nature the reflective awareness of “he am 1” (SO ‘HAM), is one with that Speech of

Vision, and being so, is Parā by nature. This is the meaning.”

The word ātman is of uncertain derivation. Some derive it from the root at, which
means to move or wander. The ārman is thus that which ‘wanders’ (atati) from life to life.
Orthers derive it from the root an – ‘to breathe’. Although this is not strictly justifiable by

the common rules of Śanskrit philology (but nor is the other derivation for that matter),
this seems more likely. The reason for that lies in the cognates anima in Latin and the

word ‘animal’ in English, and others which have the sense of ‘breathingʼ, i.e. ‘living’

TANTRĀLOKA

being, as when we say ‘animate’, in the sense of ‘giving life to’. In German the word
‘atman’ means ‘breathing’. Attention to the Unstruck Sound of the breath leads to the
insight of its essential nature as the ‘resonance’ of the self-reflective awareness of the

Light of Śiva consciousness, which is Śakti (that is Kula) the first to issue forth from it, as

it were, is the energy of Anuttara.
Kuṇḍalinī is called Haṁsa because of its intimate association with vitality and

breathing. As the supreme form of Speech and the source of the lower orders of Speech,
Kuṇḍalinī is also the supreme form of the vitality of the breath (prāṇanarūpā), the vehicle

through which Speech is generated. At the lower level of articulate Speech, the breath

rises and descends in the usual way, making the sound HA – SA as it does so (comm. SvT
4/257). This unstruck sound is the lowest order of Divine Sound (nāda) (corresponding to
Śaktikuṇḍalinī). The middle level (parāpara) of Sound is Haṁsa, as the sound of the
breath rising in suṣumnā (corresponding to Prāṇakuṇḍalinī), while the supreme form

(para) of Sound is the pure reflective awareness of consciousness (vimarsa)
(corresponding to Parākuṇḍalinī). Kṣemarāja understands this to be the meaning of the
following verse in the Svacchandatantra, as he explains:

mantrā evaṁ sthitāḥ prāṇe haṁsoccāras tathocyate |

hakāras tu smṛtaḥ prāṇaḥ svapravr̥tto halākṛtiḥ l| SVT 4/257 I
yo ʻyaṁ halākṛtiīr anacko hakāro ʻnāhatadhvanyātmā – svayam uccarate devi (SVT 7/59)
iti bhāvinītyā svapravṛttaḥ – nādākhyaṁ yat paraṁ bījaṁ (kālottara 1/5) iti

tantrāntaroktadrśā sarvasya ṣvataḥ sphuran sa eṣa prāṇaḥ prāṇanāparaparyāyo jīvaḥ,

smṛto guru-pāramparyeṇāvicchedenādhītaḥ | atha ca dhūlibhedānusāreṇa halākṛtir
aśeṣaṁ viśvaṁ garbhīkr̥tya kuṇḍalinyākāraḥ prasuptabhujagarūpaḥ | svapravrtaḥ iti
svayam eva nādāmarśa-rūpatāṁ nimajjya prāṇātmakaṁ rūpam āviśya sthitaḥ | yataḥ
pāramesī bodhākhyā śaktir viśvaṁ garbhīkṛtya parā kuṇḍalikā satī vimarśarūpatayā
nādātmavarṇakuṇḍalikātmanā sphuritvāntarnimajjitaitatsvarūpā prāṇa-kuṇḍalikātmatayā

bhātīty āmnāyaḥ | evaṁ ca vyākhyātarūpaḥ prāṇa eva haṁsa ūrdhvam adhaś ca

svarasena vahan hānasamādānadharmakahakārasakāravimarśarūpatayā sphuraṇāt ||

SVT 4/257

‘Mantra present in this way in the vital breath is thus called the utterance of

Harṁsa. The exhaled breath (prāṇa) is said to be the letter H, which is impelled by itself,
and its shape is (bent like) that of a plough. (SvT 4/257)

‘This Unstruck Sound (anacka) in the shape of a plough, the letter H, which is
the resonance of Unstruck Sound, is ‘O goddess, uttered by itself.’ (SYT 7/59) According

to this teaching, which will be (imparted) further ahead, it is impelled by itself. Now

according to the view of a different (school of Tantra), ‘the supreme seed is called Sound.”
(Sārdhatriśatikālottara 1/5a) (This means that) that is this vital (exhaled) breath that

flashes forth by itself (spontaneously), which is otherwise called vitality (prāṇana), and is

considered to be the individual soul (whose nature is) taught (in this form) without a break

by the tradition of the masters. Now, in terms of the difference (between its types, when it
is subtle as) dust, (then the vital breath) has the form of a plough. Having encompassed
within itself all the universe, (its) form is coiled (kuṇḍalinyākāra); that is, its shape is that
of a sleeping serpent. It is ‘impelled by itself’ (means that) having submerged
(spontaneously) by itself (its) nature as the reflective awareness of Sound, it abides (as
such), having entered into the form the nature of which is the vital breath (prāṇa). Thiīs is

because the Supreme Goddess, who is the Śakti called ‘awakened consciousness’ (hodha),

encompasses within herself the universe, and having done so, is the Supreme Kuṇḍaliṇī,
who as such flashes forth by virtue of her form as reflective awareness as Varṇa

CHAPTER THREE

Transcending struck sound, which arises by striking the loci of
articulation, and Unstruck (Sound) which has the aforestated nature, (the Deity)

shines perpetually as (their) mutual Light endowed with supreme reflective

awareness. That is said (in the following verse):

“The dynamic modality of consciousness (cidgati), which is great and free
of (all) irregularities (and difficulties) (mahāviṣama), transcends both ‘struck
and ‘unstruck’' (Sound). Arising from the throb (ghaṭana) of the Hero's”!
Heart, it is the Sound (rāva) that unfolds as the Goddess (and by means of Her)
(devyā).”
The Grapheme of the Letter A as Kaulikīśakti
(Kaulikī is) the supreme (parā) power of (the god Akula). It is the

unfolding (perception) of the body of Kula and so is praised (as supreme). The

point is that (She constitutes) and forms (arambhikā) that body, thus she is called
‘Kaulikṝ’.” In this way, She is the (Goddess) Parā Herself, that is, the subtle
power (called) Kuṇḍalinī. Having attained the state of union (with Śiva), which is
that of their mutual oneness (sāmarasya), related to one another as (Śiva) the
‘churner and (Śakti) the ‘churnedʼ, She is in (Her) risen state (utthitā), and so,

assuming the form of will, knowledge and action, 1) She unseals (unmudrayantī)
Raudrī’s state, (whose symbolic) form is (the triangular) water chestnut, and,
2) assuming Ambikā’’s state, (she unseals her) form as the crescent moon, which
(has the shape of) the letter ‘U’. 3) And (then), presiding over (Her) state as

Jyeṣṭhā, she makes (Her) form manifest as a clear (straight) line that rests in
the Point (at the base of) the letter ‘R’, that is, the Fire of Time that has risen

Kuṇḍalinī, who is Sound. Having done so, she is merged inwardly, and that essential
nature (svarūpa) shines as prāṇakuṇḍalikā. This is (the teaching of) the tradition. And so,
in this way the vital breath, its nature such as explained, is itself Haṁsa, flowing

spontaneously above and below, because it flashes forth in the form of the reflective

awareness of the letters HA and SA, whose nature is to let go (hāna) (of the breath in
exhalation) and take (it) back (samādāna) (through inhalation), respectively.’

! Read with MS Kh, supported by the reading of MSs Ch and Jh, -sśālītaretara- for –
śālisitatara-.
' Instead of mahāviṣamacidgatiḥ – ‘the dynamic modality of consciousness (cidgati)
which is great and free of (all) irregularities (and difficulties) (mahāviṣama), MSs G, N,
T, Ḍ read: mahāviṣama-sadgatiḥ – ‘the dynamic modality of being (sadgati) which is
great and free of (all) irregularities (and difficulties) (mahāviṣama).

” Presumably, ‘unstruck sound’ in this case is the sound of the breath. The Sound heard
with the divine inner ear is the pure resonance of consciousness. Just as consciousness is
Light, it is also Sound, which is heard by the power of the Goddess, Who is Śiva’s grace.

'" Kaula practitioners are called ‘heroes’ (vīra) because the energy of Kuṇḍalinī is
working within them, and so they possess the vitality (vīrya) or vital seed which is Śakti.

'” In a common, non-technical sense, Kauḻikī liṭeṟrally means a young woman belonging

to a good family (kula). Here this is the name of Śakti, because she belongs to the Kula (in
the sense of ‘aggregate’), which is the body of energies of Śiva, Akula.

TANTRĀLOKA

out of the lunar Point. In this way she generates the body of the first letter (i.e.

'“The same is said in the venerable Tantrasadbhāva (in a passage
beginning with): '
' Creation may be understood on the analogy of speech production. According to Vedic
belief, the world is created through, and as, the utterance of the Vedas. The Tantras of all
traditions similarly describe creation as the utterance of the Mantras of the Supreme Deity

or the Void. Here the analogy is with writing. The sequence of written letters (lipikrama)

corresponds to that of the uttered phonemes (varṇakrama). From the former perspective,
creation begins with the drawing or ‘unsealing’ of the letter A, from which all the rest of
the letters proceed in due order. As each part of the letter is written, the one original
unmanifest (= ‘unwritten’) creative energy of Kuṇḍalinī assumes the form of the

fundamental energies of will, knowledge and action, through which the world of sounds

and forms (words and meanings, spoken and written) is generated, even as speech is

formed by the articulation of the letters of the alphabet.
This teaching concerning the letter A is drawn from the Tantrasadbhāva, which

Jayaratha appropriately goes on to quote. The written form of the letter A is in Śāradā

script. We may note in passing that this is evidence that this Tantra was redacted in

Kashmir or the western Himalayas, where this script was prevalent. In Śāradā script, the
letter A looks like a downward facing triangle from the upper right-hand corner of which

hangs a straight line with a slight protuberance at the bottom of it. Raudrī (the Fierce One)

is the triangular part of the letter that is written first. It looks like the triangular letter E, the

shape of which is compared to a water chestnut (see below, 3/94ab-94cd (3/94cd-95ab)

and commentary). The upper semi-circle above is drawn next. Called the Half Moon
(ardhacandra), it looks like the letter ‘U’ when written below a consonant. This is

Ambikā (the Little Mother). The ‘arm-like’ shape to the right of the triangle, written next,
looks like the letter ‘R’ in old Śāradā script.
The letter ‘R’ is universally considered to represent fire, and here is identified
with Jyeṣṭhā. It is written starting from the top down to the knob at the bottom. Thus this
‘clear straight line’ representing Jyeṣṭhā (the Eldest), ‘comes to rest’ in the ‘point’ at the

bottom. This is the ‘lunar Point’ from which the Fire of Time rises, which is Vāmā (the
Woman).

' In the accounts that follow, we notice inconsistencies. Jayaratha notes this in his

commentary on the VM (p. 29), where he compares the quotes that he presents here from

the Tantrasadbhāva and the Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava (= Vāmakeśvaramata), stating that ‘in

this way the collocation of these (goddesses) is not consistent. (Indeed,) how could that be,

if here (in the following passage), it is said that Ambikā is ‘the arm’, that is, is in the form
of a clearly evident line (āsām evaṁ sanniveśavattvaṁ naikāntikam iti kuta ihāpi etat syāt,
yad ambikāyāḥ ity atra spaṣṭarekhākāraṁṅ bāhutvam uktaṁ). However, in the long

passage quoted from the Tantrasadbhāva, ‘(Ambikā’s) form is that of a crescent moon,
which is the letter U. Moreover, Vāmā’s name is not even mentioned
(ukārātmakaśaśāṅkaśakalākāratvaṁ, vāmāyāś ca atra nāmāpi na spṛṣṭam).’ He concludes

after having quoted the passage from the NSA quoted below, that: ity ādāv ambikāyāḥ,

śrīsarvavīrādau ca tatra tatra varṇāntaro-ddhārādāv api nava nava āsāṁ sannīveśaḥ
prakāśita iti varṇāntaroddhāramātre ‘pi yatra niyatamāsāṁ rūpaṁ nāsti tatraivam ādāv
anyatra kā vārteti nāsty eva atra pariniṣṭhitaṁ kiṁcit nibandhanam iti niścayaḥ |
‘In this and other (places), such as the venerable Sarvavīra, and in (particular)
extractions of other letters that take place here and there (in the sources), a novel
collocation of these (goddesses) is revealed. Thus, even (in the case of) just an extraction
of the letters (to form a mantra), their form is not fixed (and invariable). If that is so there

CHAPTER THREE

‘That subtle and supreme power is said to be Stillness (nirācārā).’"
(in such cases), what to say elsewhere (in others). Thus, there is no fixed established (rule)
here (in this regard). This is a sure and certain (ascertainment). (VM p. 30)

'" The following is a very important passage from the Tantrasadbhāva, one that has been

seminal for the core symbolism of the formation and configuration of the energies that

constitute the letter A adopted by several systems, the best known of which are the Trika

itsef and Śrīvidyā. Śrīvidyā it seems received these teachings, in part at least if not totally,

through the Kubjikā Tantras. It is noteworthy that in both cases the letter A is replaced by
the seed-syllable AIM. The reason this could be done was probably because the Tantras of
these traditions originated far from Kashmir, where the script differed.

The passage Jayaratha quotes is found in the manuscripts of the Tantrasadbhāva.

It is quoted by Jayaratha partially in VM p. 29, and in full by Kṣemarāja in his
commentary on ŚSū. 273, which 1 have translated with explanatory notes elsewhere (see
Dyczkowski 1992b: 72-74). Even so, it is so important and interesting that it is worth
restoring the portions omitted by Jayaratha. It begins:
‘O Goddess, that Divine Mother (mātṛkā) Who is filled with the supreme
effulgence (of consciousness) pervades this entire universe from the highest form
(Brahmā) to earth. O beloved Goddess worshipped by all the gods, just as the all-

pervading phonemic energy (varṇa) (of the letters) is present in the letter ‘A’, so is that

which is pervaded (by mātṛkā) ever established there (in that power). So I will clearly
explain to you the sense of the final conclusion (the scriptures have reached concerning
Her nature).”

'” TS 1/215cd. The goddess is Rudra’s energy, the god’s omnipotent will. Desiring him
rather than creation, She reverts to the original oneness of their union. She emerges from
the god who is the transcendental Void to then unite with him. Beyond the confines of
time, successively and yet simultaneously, there is both separation and merger in perpetual
stillness. This Stillness (nirācāra) is the condition of transcendental being, which is the
source, ground and ultimate nature of the moving universe. Thus, the Kuhjikāmata declares
that: ‘the entire universe is stillness (nirācāra) and (yet) is devoid of stillness’. (KM 2/107)

The lineage of accomplished adepts (siddhakrama) and the path they teach are all eṣtablished

in the Stillness (ibid. 1/44-46) of the ‘motionless’ flow of vitality in the emptiness of the

supreme state, which is this Stilness itself (ibid. 25/232cd). The adept who recites the Mantra
in conjunction with this Stillness is purified and protected from all defilement:

‘Standing, waking, sleeping, moving, enjoying and intent on sex - the one who
observes Kaula practice (caryā) and who is still (nirācārin) (remains always) pure by
recollecting Mantra.' (ŚM 11/207cd-208ab)
The adept begins the practice of constant recollection by repeating the Vidyā
immersed in the Yoga of Stillness, in a cremation ground or some appropriate solitary place

or sacred site. The ŚM explains how he should do this as follows:

‘O fair-faced lady, one should repeat the Vidyā (in conjunction) with the Yoga of
Stillness. Stillness is power (śakti). One should repeat (the Vidyā) that is within her
(garbhagatā). (Straight) in the form of a stick, one should lead her along until she is within
the Cavity of Brahmā. By practicing the plane of Stillness, one attains the plane of Stilness.’

(Ibid. 9/95cd-97ab)

‘By the practice of the Yoga of Śtillness, one obtains the fruit. She whose nature
is movement (cāra) moves, (and her movement is) divided into (downward) motion (cāra)
and upward motion (uccāra). That should be known as Stillness (nirācāra). Stillness is not
other (than this). (This is) where actions (cāra) cease, along with the activities (karman) of

TANTRĀLOKA

”"(ÁO well-formed Umā, wrapping itself inwardly around the Point

(bindu) of the Heart, it slumbers there in the form of a sleeping serpent and is

aware of nothing at all.'™ The goddess, placing in her belly the fourteen worlds,

along with the Moon, Fire, Sun, and stars, (sleeps) as if rendered unconscious by

poison.'™ 0 beloved, She is awakened by the supreme resonance which is

awareness (jñāna), and churned by (Śiva’s) seed (bindu) that is within Her.
Such indeed is the chuming that takes place within Śakti’s form (vigraha) by the
force of (its) rolling around (bhramavega) (within her). These very brilliant sparks

of light arise initially by (her) being pierced (by it)),' if she who is the subtle
power (called) Kuṇḍalī is awakened by it.

O beloved, the all-powerful (prabhu) Drop (bindu) consisting of four

energies' present in the belly of (that) Power straightens by the union of the
speech, mind, and body. When a pure (nirmala) state arises, that is said to be Stillness.’
(Ibid. 19/337cd-339)
In other words, this Stillness is the highest condition of the movement of the
breath when it has reached the summit of existence, beyond the End of the Twelve above

the head. The Bliss of Stillness (nirānanda, i.e. nirācārānanda) (Cf. KuKh 2/4cd-6ab and

2/32-34ab) is the supreme bliss that is the ultimate end of all fettered existence. Extending

down into the body and into the consciousness of the individual soul who resides in it and
the entire world, the same Stillness is Śiva, Who is the universal agent (KuKh 13/7), and

s0, in its immanent aspect also, it remains the abode of the power of bliss. There,
extending upwards through the central channel between the two breaths, now stilled, the
goddess travels through it, awakening the individual soul to its true infinite nature. Thus,
the Yoga of Stillness serves to still the restless movement of phenomenal, fettered
existence. The Śāmbhava Path, taught in the Kubjikā and Trika Tantras as the supreme
one that leads to liberation, is that of Stillness. Void of all exertion and conceptions, it is at
once the means and the goal.

'”" The passage that begins here and ends with ‘rilliant sparks of light’ is not part of

Jayaratha’s citation of the TS. Found in Kṣemarāja’s citation of it in his commentary on
ŚSū 273, it has been added here to complete the sense.

'” Conceming the Point (bindu) as supreme consciousness resting in the lotus of the

Heart, see below, 3/11 1ab-112cd (3/111-113ab). Unconcerned with outer manifestation,
Śaktikuṇḍalinī rests here in her own nature alone (see below, ad 3/138ab-141ab (3/137cd140)), full of the potential energy of the power of action.

'” From the perspective of the exegesis of the Anuttara Trika based on the
phenomenology of the Pratyabhijñā, the Moon, Fire and Sun represent the object, subject
and means of knowledge, respectively. The stars symbolize differentiated perceptions

(vikalpa). A1 is absorbed in the pervasion (or ‘poison’, viṣa) of the reflective awareness of

‘T consciousness in the state of deep sleep (susupti) of Śaktikuṇḍalinī.

' The vitality (vīrya) of Śiva’s seed (bindu) is activated by the one-pointed and

repeatedly refreshed awareness of the movement of the breath. The resonance (nāda) of
the reflective awareness permeating the breath as the supreme life-force thus aids in the
churṇing and arousal of the spiritual power of Kuṇḍalinī.

' The following passage corresponds to TS 1/220-224. It is also partially quoted in the

VM p. 29.

' The energies that constitute the fourfold Drop (bindu) are, it seems, the potential form

of the four energies that will develop from it. These are – Jyeṣṭhā (the Eldest), here called
Rekhinī (the Line); Raudrī (the Fierce One), here called Rodhinī (the Obstructress); and

Ambikā, also called Ardhacandrā (the Half Moon). The fourth is Vāmā. From the
phenomenological perspective of Anuttara Trika, these aspects or energies (kalā) of bindu

CHAPTER THREE

churṇer and the churned. (Kuṇḍalinī) is then called 1) the power Jyeṣṭhā, who is

located between the two points (bindu of subjectivity and objectivity). (Then)

aroused by the Drop, she becomes the Line, which is the Kuṇḍalinī of Nectar
(Amṛtakuṇḍalinī). Her name should be known to be Rekhinī, within whom both

Drops (bindu of subjectivity and objectivity) are present (and reconverted into

their true nature, which is Śiva and Śakti).

2) (When she is said to flow) in three channels (in the form of triangle),
she is called Raudrī. She is said to be Rodhinī (the Obstructress), because She

blocks the path to liberation."

3) (To overcome this obstruction, Kuṇḍalinī becomes) Ambikā, whose
form is a crescent moon, (and is otherwise known as) the Ardhacandrikā (the Half

Moon).'" In this way the one supreme power becomes threefold.’

It is also (said) in the Vāmakeśvarīmata (in the following passage),

beginning with:

are subject, object and means of knowledge, together with the ‘Inexplicable’ (Anākhyā),
which is the transcendental consciousness of the pure noetic state (pramitibhāva) that
contains the other three as a single, undivided whole.
' Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that the yogi experiences Jyesthāśakti in a state of
introverted contemplative absorption (nimīlanasamādhi) when subject and object fuse
with the rise of Kuṇḍalinī. However, the yogi must inevitably emerge from this state of
contemplation. This emergence (vyutthāna) is due to the power of Raudrī, who distracts

him from the absorption of contemplation and causes the power of his awareness to flow
out through the three channels of will, knowledge and action into the domains of
individual subjectivity, the senses and objectivity, respectively.

' Jayaratha (VM p. 38), commenting on this sentence, says: ity atra ca

ukārātmakaśaśāṅka-śakalākāratvaṁ, vāmāyāś ca atra nāmāpi na spṛṣṭam | ‘Here the

form of the crescent moon is the letter U and Vāmā’s name is not even mentioned.”
Swami Lakshmaṇjoo explains that Ambikā is the energy that allows the yogi to
re-enter into his own introverted absorption and then again emerge from it again
repeatedly, in an arch-like movement like that of the breath, to ultimately achieve a state
of pervasive awareness equally present inwardly and externally.
' These three energies correspond to those of the absolute (anuttara) (A), the will (icchā)
(I), and the expansion (unmeṣa) (U) of the power of knowledge, from which all the other
phonemic energies emerge (see below, 3/220cd-221ab). The first of these energies

operates in the superior yogi whose mind has dissolved away (cittapralaya) in the unity of
cosmic and transcendental consciousness. The second operates in the yogi when his mind
is awakened (cittasaṁbodha) and experiences the world with his senses illumined by the
power of awareness. The last power operates in the inferior yogi, who limits himself to

enjoying the stillness of resting his mind (cittaviśrānti) in introverted contemplation.
The end of the passage begins with ‘by the union and separation of these
(powers), the nine classes of letters are born’. The Tantra goes on to describe how from
the letter A, formed in this way from the energies of Kuṇḍalinī, the power of Speech, the
letters of the alphabet, and their energies are generated. Then from them issue fundamental
Mantras, until finally progressively emerging from the body of the Deity formed in this

way, at one with the human body, they all work together to form common, daily speech.
' Called Vāgabhava (Essence of Speech), AIṀ is the sonic equivalent of the central

triangle which is the core and most powerful and sacred part of Śrīcakra, as it is of the
Saṁvartāmaṇḍala of the goddess Kubjikā. The root Tantras of Śrīvidyā, the

Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava (also called Vāmakeśvaramata) and the Yoginīhṛdaya, take over the
teaching concerning the energies that constitute ‘A’, incorporating them into the seed-

TANTRĀLOKA

‘O Dear one, Tripurā is the supreme power, the first born here (in the

sphere of immanence). . . . 1) Vāmā, having gulped down (everything) without

remainder, abides (in the form of) the seed and the sprout (of creation).' 2) Then

Jyeṣṭhā (assumes the form) of (the slanted line, which is) the Topknot (śikhā). 3)

(Then) O Supreme Goddess, (when) she assumes the (triangular) form of a water

chestnut, (she is) Raudrī, who devours the universe.

syllable of Tripurā - the Goddess of the Three Cities. The ‘Three Cities’ are the corners of

the trangular AIṀ, and the core of Śrīcakra. Jayaratha sees the evident parallels (although
he could not have understood the historical connection that brought them about), and so

quotes first from the original Trika Tantrasadbhāva, and then the Vāmakeśvaramata.

The ‘body° of the seed-syllable AIM is a downward facing triangle, which is the
form of the letter E. The triangle represents the source of all things which, as primal
potencies, constitute the triangular matrix of the energies of the Goddess'’s Womb (yoni)

(see below, 3/94cd-95ab). This energy is worshipped as the goddess Raudrī. The slanting

line to the side on the ‘head’ of Raudrī is her topknot, which is Jyeṣṭhā. The point and the
semi-circle above it are the ‘seed and the sprout’, respectively. They represent the nasal

resonaṅce – Ṁ – at the end of the utterance of AIṀ. Tapering off into silence, the AI,

which is the sonic form of the totality of manifestation, is absorbed into it. AIṀ is central
to the symbolism and Mantra practice of Śrīvidyā, because the triangle of the original A is

there the core seed-syllable AIM.

The

preceding

line

(ie.

VM

4/8cd)

reads:

praviśya

paramārgāntaḥ

sūkṣmākārasvarūpiṇī ‘Having entered into the Supreme Path, her form is subtle.’

'! Read with NSA 409a kavalīkr̥aniḥśeṣā for kavalīkraniḥśeṣa-. √M 49b reads

kavalīkr̥ta-niḥśeṣabījādyaṅkuratāṁ

gatā - ‘(Vāmā, who is) the seed that has gulped down

(everything) without remainder, assumes the state of the first sprout (of creation).’

' VM 4/8cd-10ab. Introducing these lines in his commentary on the Vāmakeśvaramata,

Jayaratha writes:
‘Abiding in this way at one with the supreme perceiver, (this power) manifests

the emanation, persistence and withdrawal of all the universe.’ He goes on to explain:

‘She has entered into the Supreme Path and is one with the supreme perceiver,

and so ‘Her form is subtle’, that is, cannot be known (as an object), and because she is
inherent in that (perceiver), she is the foremost within one’s own nature, and She has also
made all the universe (prapañca) one with her own beginningless nature. She is Parā śakti

who, by virtue of the glory of her own freedom, has, as (her) intent towards the unfolding

flow of all things, become the sprout of the desire to pour forth externally. (In other
words,) she has assumed the form of Kuṇḍalinī. Vāṃā emits (in the form of a sprout) all
the universe that has been swallowed up (by her). Then after that, desiring to raise it up,
she (becomes) Jyesṭhā, (the flame-like) topknot (śikhā), who assumes the form of a clearly

(drawn) line in the shape of the staff of all the Path right up to the Fire of Time. Then
again, desiring to withdraw the universe, she generates, by a process of envelopment

(udveṣṭanakrameṇa), the form of a triangle which is the oneness of the weave of the
(three) energies, beginning with the will. (Engaged in that,) she is called Raudrī. The
meaning is that she makes the first phoneme (A) manifest here. (The phoneme A) gives
life to all the phonemes, and is the triple abode of emanation, persistence and withdrawal

that is sketched out on the screen of its own nature.

Then immediately after saying this, Jayaratha goes on to quote, as he does here,

the passage from the DP beginning with ‘Emanation is above’.

CHAPTER THREE

In this way, that Supreme Power is the one Supreme Goddess
(Parameśvarī), the three-fold Goddess Tripurā, who is Brahma, Viṣṇu and Īśa.”
O beloved, she is the power of knowledge, action and will. She emanates the

Triple World and so she is called Tripurā (She Who has Three Abodes).

It is also said elsewhere (in Krama scriptures), with the same intention,

that this'” (power) consists of three abodes (dhāman), namely, emanation,
persistence and withdrawal. That is said (in the Devīpañcaśataka):
‘Emanation (sṛṣṭi) is above, and it bestows supreme bliss. She is the
supreme energy (kalā) of the (lunar) Drop (baindavī) that rains down (divine)

nectar (pīyiiṣa). One should know that destruction,® the Great Fire of Death that
destroys (the universe), is below. Terrible (ghora), he is encircled by flames and,

hard to bear, he is the repository of (all) the luminaries. Between them is the
supreme radiant energy (tejas), beautiful with the bliss of both. (That energy)
should be known to be ‘Descent’ (avatāra) (which is the state of persistence). It
is Siva, who pervades (all things), and is (generated) by both (together) mutually

penetrating one another, that is, Fire in the Moon and Moon in Fire (īṭibha). One
should know the Moon to be creation (srsti), while Fire is said to be destruction
' Cf. TS 1/240 (= KuKh 40/129cd-130ab) ‘0 god, Brahmā is associated with Vāmā.

Viṣṇu is said to be Jyeṣṭhā. O Great Lord, Rudra is with Raudrī, and (the wise) know that

Īśvara is with Ambikā.’

'l NSA (= VM) 4/4ab, 9-12ab.
Read asyāḥ for asya.

DP 4/3-7ab. The first line is also quoted above in the commentary on 1/1, as is a line

from the following quote, which cannot be traced in the extant Devipañcaśataka. The DP
is an important Krama text. Jayaratha quotes from it below in his commentary on the
paṣsage in which the Twelve Kālīs are described. In this way, Jayaratha coordinates three
traditions, namely, Trika, Śrīvidyā and Krama, as teaching the same concerning the letter
A, each in terms of its own system.

' Above, in TĀv ad 1/1, the citation of this line reads along with MSs of the DP:

paramānandarūpiṇī– ‘(its nature) is supreme bliss’ – instead of paramānandadāyinī–. Ś‘it

bestows supreme bliss’. This passage is quoted in the VM p.104. There the reading is
paraṃānandanandinī –- delighting in supreme bliss.’
DP MSs read: sśāmbhavī instead of baindavī, as do MSs G, Ch, Jh, and T, D reads:

' Read with the MSs of the DP, saṁhāro vijñeyo for saṁhārakṛjjñeyo. The MSs of the

DP read arciḥ for agniḥ, which means the same.

' The word ‘avatāra’ does literally mean ‘descent’, as I have translated. In common

usage, the word denotes a descent of deity into the world to take up residence here, in an

animal or human body. Most commonly, the word is used to denote the ten ‘incarnations’

of Viṣṇu. The term in Krama texts like this one denotes the state of persistence (sthiti)
between emanation (srṣri) and withdrawal (saṁhāra). The centre between the two is
where realisation takes place of the fundamental state of Permanence, which is free of
these two polarities. It also clearly implies that here in the Centre, a descent of supreme
consciousness takes place, which may be literally embodied in a human being born from
the union of emanation the male polarity – and withdrawal – the female.

TANTRĀLOKA

(saṁhāra). The Descent is said to be the Sun, the Supreme Lord, who is
(persistence) located in the centre (between the two).””
' VM p. 104 reads parameśvari – ‘O Supreme Goddess° for parameśvaraḥ –- Śthe

Supreme Lordʼ.

Chapters 2, 3, 4, and 5 of the DP expound the phases of creation, persistence,

withdrawal, and the Inexplicable, respectively, from the Krama point of view. This
passage concerns the experience of persistence, here called avatāra. t is also quoted by
Jayaratha in his commentary on VM 4/8cd-10ab. The practice taught here is multiple,
according to the context. The simplest way to understand and practice is to visualize pure

Śiva consciousness above the head in the form of the Full Moon, that drips vitalizing,
blissful nectar into the body. This drops as an oblation into the Fire of embodied divine
consciousness that, stoked by it, blazes up to consume duality and generate a higher state
of embodied consciousness, in a body of pure consciousness.
Fire is Kāmatattva – the principle of Passion. The Moon is Viṣatattva – the
Principle of Poison, or Pervasion. They are the initial and final moments of orgasm, in

which the sexual fluids of the partners are emitted. Intemally, they are the two breaths,

exhaled (prāṇa) and inhaled (apāna), respectively. The practice is essentially for the

partners to attend to the breaths and develop awareness of the centre between them. The
Vijñānabhairava (68) teaches:

‘(When making love), one should place one’s mind made of bliss in the middle
(between the) ‘Fire’ (of the arousal of desire at the beginning) and the ‘Poison’ (of the
pervasive consciousness of its appeasement at the end), or else filled only with the vital
breath, (the mind) should be united with the bliss of passion (smarānanda) (which is the
bliss of consciousness generated by the union of Śiva and Śakti).
Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: “This is Śāktopāya. Between the energy of will
and knowledge, icchā and jñāna, make your mind rest. . . . Vahni [fire] is will and viṣa
[poison] is knowledge. Or between the rise of sexual excitement and the appeased state of
that act. When the rise of sexual excitement takes place, that is the state of vahni, and
when the sexual excitement is appeased, that is viṣatattva. . . . Make your mind rest
between these two states. Between the energy of the will and knowledge, or between the

rise of sexual excitement and its appeased state. . . . He is united in smarāṇanda [bliss of
passion]. Smarāṇanda means the union of Śiva and Śakti, and he attains the state of
supreme ānanda [bliss]. Snarānanda does not mean the ānanda of the sexual act. . . . in
the present context you must not take it that way. You must see that smarānanda īis the

ānanda which arises in the union of Śiva and Śakti or rudrayāmala. 1t is the state of
cidānanda [bliss of consciousness]. It is nimīlana [introverted contemplation]. When you
are married, you rest your mind between will and knowledge. When you are married, you

put your mind in the beginning of sex excitement and in the end when it is appeased.
Vahni is will and Viṣa is knowledge.

For instance, this is a handkerchief. What is this? This is will. This is a
handkerchief, this is knowledge. Between these two movements you must make your
mind rest. Your mind must remain there. Soon after will, your mind must stop and not
move to knowledge. It should come out from will. This is in between. For instance, look at
this. There are two movements. I want to join these two fingers. They are not yet joined.

When I am about to move them for joining, that is will. When it is joined, that is
knowledge. But this movement must not take place. You have to come down from this
first movement, but you should not reach the second movement. Do not let your breath
move out there. If you let your breath move out after this act, or after this state, the
concentrated point, you have not achieved anything. You have to maintain the breath
inside. You will not die there. This is not kumbhaka [breath retention]. It is automatic

Again:

CHAPTER THREE
‘One_should contemplate the extensive brilliance (tejas) emitted from

Kālāgnirudra (the Fire of Time, rising up through the body from the tip of the

right toe) as clear and intensely effulgent. O goddess, above (on the top of the

head, visualize) the digit of the Moon, peaceful (śāntā) with the aesthetic savour

(rasa) of the Bliss of the Nectar of the Full (Moon)." Then by associating both

with the Fire (of intense desire) and the Pervasion (viṣa) (of the tranquil state of
consciousness following emission, visualize the) brilliance (tejas) (which is Fire)

and the Moon that flows forth from that. Then, by the clearly evident mixture of

the Fire (of the female seed) and the Moon (of the male seed), the ŚSun, which is

Descent (avatāra), (dawns).

Then from its presence (come forth) the (phases of) emergence and

vanishing away (prabhavāpyayau); from this, the universe with all its diversity

(comes into being). The learned man who has grasped the meaning (of the

teaching) should meditate on that in the form of the Sun of Consciousness,

which is right understanding (yukti).”

kumbhaka, automatic nimīlana [introverted contemplation].’ See Swami Lakshman Joo

2002: 75-77. Cf. ibid verse 62: “When the awareness has abandoned one object and
remains fixed without moving onto another object, then through the state between (the

two), the supreme realisation will unfold’ (translation by B. Báumer). Concerning the

Principles of Passion and Poison, see below, 3/166 (166ab) ff. and Appendix B concerning
that.
Concerning the visualization of the Fire of Time rising up through the body, see VBh
52 and Dyczkowski 1987: 211 and 1992: 103-104.

°! This sentence is also quoted above in TĀ ad 1/1 as here, just after a passage from the

DP.

The word ‘viṣa’ literally means ‘poison’. ‘Fire’ denotes the initial state of arousal
(kāmatattva) that precedes sexual union and ‘Poison’ the pervasive state of consciousness
experienced at its consummation.
MSs Ch, Jh, Ñ, T, and DḌ read —cidekarūpam ‘(meditate on that) whose sole nature is

consciousnessʼ
for
–cidarkarūpam “(meditate on that) in the form of the Sun of Consciousness.”
This passage cannot be traced in the DP. Even so, it is consonant with its Kāḹīkrama
teachings. Thus, we find the same basic practice taught in the following passage in the DP:
kālāgnyadho vahnipuñja – ūrdhve pīyūṣamaṇḍalam |

44kh-b) madhye ‘rkarāpaparamā [k, kh, g: -pā paramādhī] dhītattvasyāvalambinī | 36 ||

manogarvau [g: manogarvyo] tathordhvādho [kh: tathorddhādho; g: tathoddhādho]
viṣarūpau sthitau ṣadã |
ūrdhve [kh, g: ūrddhe] sṛṣṭiḥ parā proktā śaśāṅkasakalopamā || 37 ||

ūrdhvamārgasya [kh, g: ūrddha-] cādhastādagnirāpā mahojvalā |
41g-a) ubhayorbhāvayordeva [g: ubhayobhāva-] madhyāt saṁyogasaṁbhavaḥ || 38 ||

jñeyo ‘vatāro [g: jīeyau-] deveśa sauraṁ [k, kh: saura; g: sauraḥ] paramakāraṇam |

dīptaklālasaṁyogadhyānād ekātmatāṁ gatā || 39 ||

tadopalabdhībhāvena (g: tadopalavvibhāvena] prāpyate kālikākramaḥ |

‘The Fire of Time, a mass of (flames of) fire, is below. Above is the (lunar)
Circle of Nectar. In the centre is the supreme (energy) in the form of the Sun (arka), that

takes its support from the principle of the intellect. In this way, the mind (manas) and the

ego, above and below, always abide as the Pervasion (viṣa) (of the tranquil state of

consciousness following orgasm). It is said that emanation is above and is like the Full

TANTRĀLOKA

Moreover:

Then arises Unstruck Sound (asvara),® which is the one universal

light (samāloka) that gives birth™ to the seed of the energies (kalā) of Fire, Moon

and Sun, present in the subject, object and means of knowledge (respectively).’

Here (according to these sources), the Supreme Lord (Parameśvara)

possesses just three main powers, and so it is this way that that nature of his is
predominantly described. However, elsewhere (in Tantrasadbhāva, it is said
concerning the form of the letter A that):

Moon. Below the Upper Path is the greatly flaming (energy) in the form of Fire. O god,
union takes place from the centre of (these) two states. O Lord of the gods, one should
know that to be the Descent (avatāra) of the Sun, the supreme cause (of all things).

(ÉĒmanation) becomes one by meditating on the union with the energized nectarine blood

(kīlāla). Then the state of insight (upalabdhibhāva) one attains is the (dynamism of
universal consciousness, which is) the sequence of the Kālīs (kālikākrama).” DP 7/36-

40ab

We have seen that Fire (vahni) and Pervasion (viṣa) represent two phases of the
yogic practice involving sexual union. Fire, also called the Principle of Passion, is the
initial phase, in which the energy of desire is stimulated to form a powerful intention to

unite the polarities of consciousness, Śiva and Śakti, experienced externally as the partner

engaged in union, and inwardly as the Moon of the mind above, and the Fire of
subjectivity, permeated by the power of desire (icchāśakti), flaming up from below.
Pervasion, also called the Principle of Poison, is the pervasive expanded state of
consciousness experienced in the climax of union. The first is experienced as emanation,
and the second as withdrawal. The Fire of the former melts the Moon of the latter, which
is experienced as a flow of nectarian transformative bliss. The Sun of persistent, stable,
iltumined consciousness dawns by contemplating these two phases and fusing their radiant

energies together in the centre between them. The Sun dawns as it descends into the
perpetual present, as the self-replenishing cycle of the energies of cognitive consciousness

embodied in the Kāḹīs. Inwardly they generate the ilumined intellect of the Transmental
(unmanā); externally it may be embodied as an enlightened being born of this union.
In his commentary on the VBh (p. 140), Śivopādhyāya quotes this verse and attributes

it to Vāmananātha. He was the author of the (A)dvayasaṁpattivārtika, which was,

effectively, a brief commentary of some verses of the VB. It has been edited by Gnoli; see
bibliography. For details and translation, see below note 3, 634 ad 37202cd-203ab.
The term asvara means both the ‘vowel A’ and ‘without vowels’. The latter meaning is

synonymous with the term anacka, in which ‘ac’ stands for the vowels, and the privative
prefix an means ‘without’. It is not possible to articulate a phoneme without a vowel, and

s0 anacka (‘what is without ac’) denotes the Unstruck Sound of the resonance of the

reflective awareness (vimarśa) of the universal Light of consciousness. When this arises, it

generates within itself the triad of Sun, Moon and Fire, that symbolize the spheres of the

means of perception, its object, and the perceiver, respectively (see below, 3/122ab-124ab

(3/121-123)).
Read with the citation in the VBh and MSs Ch, Ñ, Ḍ, Jh, and T -prasūtibhāk for –

prasr̥tibhāk. Also read with the citation in the VBh <pramātṛgaḥ for –pramātṛdaḥ.

By ‘elsewhere’, Jayaratha probably means elsewhere in the Tantrasadbhāva. Indeed, a
variant of this verse is indeed found in the manuscript of the Tantrasadbhāva. There it
reads as follows:

CHAPTER THREE

‘Raudrī is the head of the letter A® The mouth is said to be Vāmā.

Ambikā is said to be the arm, while Jyeṣṭha is said to be the weapon (āyudha).’"

According to this other variant view, (the letter A) is also said to have
four aspects. In this way, Parā Herself, Who as such is the power Kuṇḍalinī, is not
separate from the essential nature of that (letter A). So it is said (that She is the

power) ‘from whom the Lord is never separated’. The same is said (in the
following verse):

‘The letter A (that represents Śiva, the transcendental absolute) and the
letter H (that represents Śakti, His emanation,) abide (together) simultaneously.

Like the sky and wind, there is no division between them.’

The Letter Ā as the Union of Śiva and Śakti and Mātṛsadbhāva
Śire raudrīṁ [k, kh, g: raudṛī] nyaset [kh: nyase] pūrvaṁ vaktre vāmā prakīrtitā [k, kh, g:

ambikā bāhur ity uktā jyeṣṭhā caivāyudhaṁ smṛtam || TS 1/230

Instead of akārasya śiro raudrī the first quarter reads: Śire raudrīṁ [k,. kh, g:
raudrī] nyaset [kh: nyase]. The meaning is, ‘one should initially deposit Raudrī on the

head.” The rest of the verse is the same.

See above, notes 3,172 and 3,173.

Poṣsibly TS 1/230, also quoted in VM p. 29 and MP (1 Śk) p. 30. Cf. ibid. TS 1/240 (=

KuKh 40/127cd-128ab): ʻHaving abandoned Raudrī who is on the head, (then comes)

Jyeṣṭhā, who is the weapon (āyudha). 0 handsome one, Vāmā is Kuṇḍalinī, and Ambikā

is energy. In the next verse we are told that Ambikā is Kuṇḍalinī. In other words, all of
them are Kuṇḍalinī. Raudrī is the triangular part of the grapheme called ‘the head’. Vāmā
‘the mouth’, which is the Point (bindu)) above Ambikā, who is the semicircle crowning the

grapheme. Jyeṣṭhā is the straight line to the side, called ‘the armʼ and also, appropriately,

Rekhinī (the Line), and is identified with the Kuṇḍalinī of Nectar.

Cf. the Saṁketapadáhati quoted in commentary by Amṛtānanda on YHṛ 2/63cd64ab:
akāraḥ sarvavarṇāgryaḥ prakāśaḥ paramaḥ śivaḥ |
hakāro ʻntyaḥ kalārūpo vimarśākhyā prakīrtitaḥ ||

anayoḥ sāmarasyaṁ yat parasmin mahasi sphuṭam |

vāmādyaiḥ piṇḍito yo ‘sāv avarṇaḥ parikīrtitaḥ ||
ādāv asya śiro raudrī vaktra vāmā prakīrtitā |
ambikā bāhuṛ ity uktā jyeṣṭhā caiva nakhāgragā ||

‘The phoneme A is the first of all the phonemes. It is the Light (of

consciousness), Supreme Śiva. The phoneme H, which is the last energy (kalā) (and part

of the stream of phonemes), is said to be called ‘reflective awareness’ (vimarśa). The

oneness of these two within the supreme glory (nahas) is clearly evident. The phoneme A

is said to be the aggregate (of the phonemes) formed by Vāmā and the rest (of the
goddesses). Its head, at the beginning is Raudrī. The face is said to be Vāmā, Ambikā the
arm, and Jyeṣṭhā is at the end of the topknot (read śikhāgragā for nakhāgragā).”

"! This verse is also quoted ad 3/200cd-201ab. Concerning AHAMṀ and the leters, see

notes 1,18 and 1067; 3,3 and 3,154 to 3,156. See also Dyczkowski 1987: 186 ff. for more
details and a graphic representation of the cyclic dynamism of AHAṀ.

TANTRĀLOKA

Although in this way there is no division between them, they each become

prominent individually, and so rest in their own nature in the state of (Bhairava)

alone without companion (ekavīra) (of Anuttara), and the power of (His)

consciousness (citśakti) (alternately). Again, (it is said that): ‘there is no Śiva
without Śakti and no Śakti without Śiva. AIl emanation (prasara) is the two in
union (yāmala).’” According to this, the teaching of (our) great teachers, the form

of the two in union (yāmala) is their mutual propensity (unmukhya) to one another
(so that at each moment immanent Śakti merges into transcendental Śiva and
transcendental Śiva unfolds into immanent Śakti). Then, when (the two are in

union in this way,) the universe is created. Thus, he says:

=ṁṛ a #gz stṁ ad: |1 ē.o 11|

rrītsṁ:
aīhī āaāī fē-a fagsa 1

tayor yad yāmalaṁ rūpaṁ sa saṅghatṭa iti smṛtaḥ || 67 ||
ānandaśaktiḥ saivoktā yato viśvaṁ visṛjyate |
Cf. below, 3/72ab (3/72cd). The term ekavīra, which literally means ‘Solitary Heroʼ, is

also found in the feminine – ekavīrā (e.g. below 29/46cd-48). It denotes the iconic form of
a deity when it is alone without a partner.

Jayaratha is making an important point here. The oneness of Śiva and Śakti, His power,

is frequently affirmed in the Tantras. One wonders, if they are one, what the point is of
referring to them separately. Normally, if we say that something is the same as something
else, we mean that it is a mistake to think that they are different. There is only one thing

called by different names. But in this case, although Śiva and Śakti are the same, it is also
important to distinguish between them (cf. above, 1/69 (70)). Despite their oneness, they

each have a nature of their own, which is at the same time the nature of both of them.
When they rest, as it were, in their own specific nature, they are distinct as the male deity

and the power of His essential conscious nature, the former transcendent and the latter

immanent. Transcendent Deity is the one reality. This is the male aspect. Its immanent
energy is all that exists. Their union is the one reality unfolding as all things, which is
Deity and its power.
The eternal rhythm of cosmic creation and destruction is consonant with the
pulse of the union and separation of Śiva and Śakti. This pulsation – spanda – is the

blissful relationship between these two aspects, through which the universe unfolds. The

emission of cosmic manifestation (visarga) pours out between these two poles. It is the
result of their conjunction, just as through the bliss of orgasm (visarga) the male and

female seed mingle, and man – the microcosm - is born. The yogi who witnesses this
union experiences the birth of a higher level of consciousness within himself. He
recognizes the all-powerful pulsation of his consciousness as it moves between Śiva’s

transcendental consciousness and the radiant emission of His immanent power within

himself (see Dyczkowski 1987: 99 ff.). He experiences the union of these as Bliss —

Ānanda – which is represented by the letter A, and so denotes their union. A is the
transcendental Śiva aspect and Ā the female Śakti. Although union takes place in both
domains, it is the Śakti aspect which, as the blissful power of the supreme emission,
nurtures emanation (29/120-121), and so is union itself.

CHAPTER THREE

Their united form (yāmala) is termed dynamic union (saṁghaṭṭa).
That is said to be the power of bliss (ānanda, Ā), from which the universe is

emitted (into consciousness). (67cd-68ab) (68)

The ‘dynamic union’ (saṁṅghaṭṭa) of Śiva and Śakti, (respectively) called

Akula and Kaulik, is (their) ‘proper (samyak) striking (together) (ghaṭṭa), that is,
motion’ʼ which is (their) pulsation (spanda), that is, the (dynamic) outpouring of
their own nature (ṣvātmocchalatā). Thīs is the meaning. Thus, the second letter
(Ā), which is the power of bliss, arises from the (dynamic) union (saṁghaṭṭa) of
A (Anuttara) and A (Anuttarā) (the Absolute and its power), which are the Light
(of consciousness) (prakāśa) and (its) reflective awareness (vimarśa). The

creation (sarga) of the universe (in the form of the progressive emergence of the

energies), starting with the will (icchā), (flows forth) from that. Similarly,
emission (visarga) (arises) from the emergence of bliss in the union (saṅghaṭta)

of the male and female (partners) in the course of the practice of Kaula sexual

intercourse (caryākrama). Here (in this context) Śiva and Śakti have a distinct

(vicchinna) nature, as transcendent and immanent, respectively. Even s0, although

(the one reality) is immanent (as all things), it is (also the) transcendent (Absolute
beyond). Thus, as there is no determined (fixed) limitation (on the one reality), it

is full (all-inclusive and perfect in all respects) (pūrṇa).

"Cf. above, 1/1. Sanderson (2005b: 98) translates saṅghaṭṭa – dynamic union – as
‘passionate embrace’. The reason for this is simply that the same word is used for sexual
intercourse, which is, of course, dynamic.
Cf. below, 29/450. The wording ‘she is said to be the power of bliss’ is the same as
3/210c below. There the context is the experience of beauty, which is generated by the
power of bliss.
' The word ‘caryā’ literally means ‘observance’, ‘practice’, ‘performance’ or ‘(right)
conduct’, in the sense of due observance of rites and customs in general, and especially in
this context, religious observance of all sorts. This includes the observance of vows and

the rules of right ethical conduct, avoidance of what is prohibited and so on. In the context
of Kaula procedure (kulaprakriyā), observance also involves the practice of sexual union
to have enlightened progeny, and/or else, to attain higher states of consciousness, that is,

more elevated internal forms of reflective awareness. This is why caryā here is understood
to be kaulacaryā, i.e the rahasyacaryā (secret practice), of which the krama is the
procedure, as well as the sequence (krama) or progressive development of consciousness
from more to less contracted states. Abhinava uses the expression ādiyāgacaryākrama in

28/41a. Ādiyāga is a rite that involves the sexual union. Abhinava considers it to be the
most elevated rite. Jayaratha refers to it several times in his commentary on this section

concerning the symbolism of the letters and elsewhere. See comm. on 3/82 (82cd-83ab),

83 (83cd-84ab), 86-87, 89, 94cd-95ab, 95cd-96ab, 227, 228, 4/144, 5/122 (121), and 5/125
(124). See also note 3,463. A quote in TĀv ad 4/243cd repeated ad 29/101cd-102, states

that this is also done in order to examine whether the mind is firmly fixed on supreme

reality of Śiva and Śakti consciousness when engaged in ritual union with a partner. The
point is that, although sexual union must, of course, commence as a practice belonging to
the category of the Individual Means, it is can only be accomplished successfully in a state
of consciousness free of thought constructs, characteristic of the Śāmbhava Means. Setting
aside first of all identification with the body, freed of the sphere of objectivity in which
thought (vikalpa) prevails, the individual identity of the partners merges into pure
subjectivity of the vowel energies of AHAM, that have not yet flowed out into the
objectivity of the energies of the consonants.

TANTRĀLOKA

Accordingly, (Abhinavagupta) says (in the following verse) that it is
proclaimed in all the scriptures to be the supreme goal (paramopeya).

TTṬTTA

Taā. ṁzā ēza a fēN. m. wy. |
šaāTRaTTGIR
aI NT ̄TTŪTĪ || RR 1|
TGITSTTTṀ
aJTI TTITATĀ THṬT |

r Ṁĩg-r̥aad aĨṝāĩ || o |
parāparāt paraṁ tattvaṁ saiṣã devī nigadyate || 68 ||

tat sāraṁ tac ca hṛdayaṁ sa visargaḥ paraḥ prabhuḥ |
devīyāmalaśāstre sā kathitā kālakarṣiṇī|l 69 ||
mahāḍāmarake yāge śrīparāmastake tathā |
śrīpūrvaśāstre sā mātṛṣadbhāvatvena varṇitā |/ 70 ||
The reality (tattva) that is higher than supreme (transcendence) and
lower (immanence) is said to be this Goddess. That is the ‘Essence’ (sāra),

and that is the ‘Heart’ the supreme emission (visarga), which is the
Lord. In (the section of) the Devīyāmala dealing with the (maṇdala of the)
"” Cf. below, 4/181cd-182ab and TĀv ad 4/182cd-183.

Ṁ Emending prabhuḥ ‘(which is) the lord’ to prabhoḥ `of the Lord’, the meaning would
be ‘ṭhe supreme emission of the Lord’. This makes more sense, as visarga is the power of
Lord Śiva, which is the Goddess. Sanderson (2011: 98) understands ‘prabhuḥ’ not as a

noun – ‘the Lord’ ~ but as an adjective of the supreme form of emission, which is thus
‘prabhuḥ’ in the sense of ‘omnipotent’. Again, he translates supreme visarga, not literally

as ‘emission’, but as ‘state of absolute potential’. He does so because no ‘emission’ of any
content takes place at this supreme (i.e. transcendental) level. Indeed, we have seen that

Maheśvarāṇanda also explains that the power Kaulikī is the state of potency or ‘intent’
(aunmukhya). Even so, I understand Abhinava uses this term (and it is his own in this
sense) to underscore the dynamic creative — emissive — state of the power of
consciousness. Thus, below, the Heart, which is supreme visarga, is said to be
‘perpetually active' (satatodita) as the universal pulse of consciousness (sāmānyaspanda),
‘which is the outpouring (of consciousness) within one’s own nature’ (4/183). Below we
will see that there are three levels, forms, or states of ‘emission’. The supreme one is the

emissive power of supreme consciousness (visargaśakti). It is indeed an omnipotent
potency at this level, but even so, it is also dynamic. It emits, as it were, incessantly, in
perfect tranquillity in the eternity of consciousness, consciousness itself, as it were, which

is thus ‘ever new’, renewed by its supreme inscrutable dynamism. The process of

manifestation is this same ‘emission’ operating at the intermediate and lower levels of

unity-in-difference, which is that of perception, that links the unity of the subject and the

diversity of the object, and that of duality, which is that of its object, respectively. Thus,

this ‘emission’ is seemingly triple. The image of Śiva (Light) perpetually emitting Himself

as His own divine power into Himself as the Goddess who is Himself and through Himself
is both aesthetically and theologically significant. This is indeed ‘a state of absolute
potentialʼ, but it is essentially dynamic. The three powers of will, knowledge and action
fused in the Heart of consciousness are not static. Rather they constitute the state of
perpetual transcendental equilibrium of their flow into one another, embraced in their

CHAPTER THREE

Great Ḍāmara Sacrifice (yāga), She is called Kālakarṣiṇī (the Destroyer of
Time) who is situated on the head of the venerable Parā (the Supreme).

In the Mālinīvijaya (śrīpūrvaśāstra) she is described as Mātṛsadbhāva (the
Essential Being of the Mothers). (68cd-70) (69-71ab)

(The reality beyond) the ‘supreme’, that is, the transcendental Śiva

nature, and the ‘lower’ immanent nature of Śakti, is the Supreme, which is full

(all-inclusive and perfect in all respects). (It is) the ‘Essence’, called the venerable

dynamic, inscrutable unity, which we perceive as the waves of the ocean of consciousness
in and through each act of perception. Cf. below, 3/102cd-104ab.

Saṇderson (2005b: 102 n 38) points out that here the word ‘yāga’ denotes the maṇḍala.

He extracts two more cogent meanings from the sources of the term yāga, which most
commonly denotes the sacrificial sacrifice. One of these is ‘pantheon’. In this sense the
word yāga means ‘that which is worshipped’ (ijyata iti yāgaḥ). He supplies examples of
this usage. Thus, Kṣemarāja says, commenting on SVT 2/158b: yāgaṁ tatraiva vinyaset –
‘one should place the object of worship (yāga) there’ ijyata iti
yāgo mantragaṇaḥ - `yāga

is that which is to worshipped, that is, the hoard of mantra (deities).’ For more examples,

see Sanderson 1990: 31, n. 2: ‘For yāgaḥ in this sense, lit. ‘that which is worshipped’
(ijyata iti yāgaḥ), see also SvT 13/I and NT 16/58ab; SVT 4/522ab (yāgaṁ saṁhareta);

BY f. 210v3 (yāgaṁ . . . aśeṣar tatra vinyaset). TŠā p. 191 (upasaṁhrṛte yāge).

Another meaning of the term yāga is ‘that on which (the deities) are worshipped’
(atrejyanta iti yāgaḥ), that is to say, the maṇḍala. Examples of this usage are found in the
Mṛgendra Kriyāpāda, 8/136 and in the Tantrāloka itself (see below, 31/43a, 46c-47a and
53ab). The term Ḍāmarayāga, in the sense of a variant of the Trika Trident maṇḍala as
taught in the Devyāyāmala, is found below in 31/100ab. For the use of the term to denote
the section of the work in which that maṇḍala is taught, see TĀ 15/335cd.

‘Dāmara’ is a Kashmiri word for a feudatory, baron, or landowner. It can also mean, as

it does here, ‘warlockʼ or ‘magician’. The Ḍāmaras are central Asian people who settled in
the Kashmir Valley centuries before Abhinavagupta, The presence of this term may be
tentatively taken to be evidence that the Devyāyāmala (= Devīyāmala) originated in
Kashmir. The Sacrifice of the Warlocks takes place in a cremation ground, where
assemblies of Yoginīs and Siddhas gather. There the Trika Trident maṇḍala is drawn with

ashes of the dead, and offerings made to it of bodily fluids. This invokes the Goddess, who
penetrates the adept and gives him a vision of her pervasive presence (yyāpti) everywhere.
See also below, 13/351cd, 15/335cd, 30/54cd-55ab and 31/100cd.
! The name ‘Kālakarṣiṇī’ or ‘Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī’ (in the scriptural sources, more commonly

called Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī) literally means ‘she who drags time (into herself)’. Time is the
hallmark of the flow of cognitive events that manifest between the polarities of subject

and object in the course of perception, and more so of the flow of the breath, and hence
life itself. Time measures out the flow of mundane objectivized experience. Time is thus
emitted by the dynamism of unitary consciousness with and through the flux of perception
through this polarity formed by its self-limitation. The withdrawal of time back into
consciousness and the power that brings that about thus annuls this polarity, and with it

mundane fettered existence.

Read srīparāmastake sthiiā for śrīparā mastake tathā. See below, commentary on
15/254, where Jayaratha quotes this line with this reading.

MV 8/39-41ab. Below in 30/45cd-47 two versions of Mātṛsadbhāva are given. The first
is KHPHREṀ which is clearly from the Krama school and HSHPHREM which is drawn

from MV 8/39-41ab. See, 31/97-100 and 15/250cd-253. These lines are quoted below ad
15/252cd-255ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

Sārabhaṭṭāraka (Lord of the Essence) etc. (t is) the ‘“Heart’, that is, the secret of
the venerable teaching concerning the Heart (hṛdayanaya). (It is) the ‘supreme’
(form of emission), because the middling (parāpara) and lower (apara) (forms of

it) will be explained (further ahead).

One should connect (the phrase) ‘in the Devīyāmala’ with ‘in the Great
DḌāmara sacrifice (yāga) (as referring) equally to the same (scripture), that is to
say, that (the latter) is one place in (that) book which first discusses (this

matter). It is said there (in the Devīyāmala):

‘The goddess Parā is in the middle of that (Trika Trident). Parāparā is on
the right (prong) and Aparā is on the left prong. Listen to what is above the
middle prong. She who is the goddess Saṁkarṣiṇī, Parātītā (Beyond the Supreme),
is located (there).
(She) is also said to be Mātṛsadbhāva there (in the Mālinīvijayottara,
where we read):

Peṛhaps emend sārabhaṭṭārakaḥ – Lord of the Essence – to sārabhatārikā – Miṣṭress
of the Esṣsence. The nine-syllable Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Vidyā is sometimes called ‘the Essence’.

See TĀ 30/54-55ab commentary and note.
See below 3/211 ff.

Abhinava clearly states below in 15/355cd that the Dāmarayāga is a part of the
Deyyāyāmala.

This verse is quoted in full below in TĀv ad 31/97. Jayaratha quotes the last line ad

30/54-55ab, where the nine-syllabled Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī is extracted. Clearly
Jayaratha thought that this is the Krama version of the Mātrṛsadbhāva. Cf. TĀ 31/97: ‘The
Goddess who destroys time (kālāntakā), who is established beyond Parā (parātītā) as the

(pure) will alone, devours the wheel of the trident continuously.’ The Trident maṇḍala

constantly recurs throughout the Tantrāloka, as it is the object of worship for all Trika
rituals, beginning with initiation and represented inwardly in a number of ways. Thus for
example, below in Chapter Fifteen, Abhinava presents a description of how the Trident is
visualized in the body, worshipped internally and externally, as the core of both the

common, basic initiation into Trika Śaiviṣm and the daily worship (nityāpūjā) of the Trika
initiate. The Maṇḍala, along with its accompanying Mantras and deities is THE
characterizing feature of a Tantric system. Part of the primary core of the system is
dedicated to a description of the maṇḍala, the deities who reside in it, their symbolic

valence and the rites centred on it. Other examples like the Trika Trident of the three-fold

goddess Mālinī/Parā are Śrīcakra for Śrīvidyā/Tripurā, and the Saṁvartāmaṇḍala of the
goddess Kubjikā. The same is true of Buddhist Tantric systems, ranging from the
Dharmadhātu and Garbhadhātu Maṇḍalas of the Kṛriyā Tantras to Cakrasaṁvara,
Kālacakra, and other maṇḍalas of the Yoga and Anuttarayoga Tantras.
Chapter Thirty-One below is dedicated to the presentation of variant forms of the
Trika Maṇḍala drawn from a number of Trika Tantras. The one found in the Devyāyāmala
is described in 31/85cd-100, where the relation to the Great Dāmara Sacrifice (and
maṇḍala) is reiterated, as is the presence of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī (ibid. 31/97-100). This Trika
Tantra is especially important for Abhinava, who quotes it not less than thirteen times, as

it represents a branch of Trika that has syncretised with the Krama of the goddess

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. There she is considered to be the supreme deity of the Trika, as she is

(secretly, as it were,) by Abhinava in his Anuttara Trika, in which she is the highest form
of Parā, the supreme Trika goddess. As such, Kālasaṁkarṣinī is sometimes referred to as
Parātītā – ‘Beyond the Supreme’. Accordingly, she is appropriately visualized here on
Parā’s head above the Trika Trident.

CHAPTER THREE

‘This is taught, namely that this is the supreme essential being (sadbhāva)
of the Mothers (mātṛ).
The Letter I as the Power of the Will
After (Abhinava) has defined the powers of consciousness and bliss in
this way, he talks about the energy of the will (icchāśakti).

EĒKIĒALIAJHIICCḺKEEĀ

ÇGJTIĪTPTĀĪRTI
YTĒĪ āI TTTJ: || 92, 11
saṅghatte ʻsmiṁś cidātmatvād yat tat pratyavamarśanam |
icchāśaktir aghorāṇāṁ śaktīnāṁ sā parā prabhuḥ I| 71 I|
The reflective awareness that (emerges) from the conscious nature

within this union (of Śiva and Śakti) is the power of the will (icchā) (I). She is

Parā (the Supreme goddess), who is the source (and power) (prabhu) of the
energies Aghorā (latent within Her). (71) (71cd-72ab)

MV 8/4lab. Also quoted below in TĀv ad 4/177-178ab. Cf. sadbhāvaṁ

mātrṣaṁghasya hr̥dayaṁ . . . ibid. 20/36a. ʻ(This seed-syllable) is the essence of the
group of Mothers, its heart’. The form of Mātrṛsadbhāva in the MV is extracted in 8/39-40.

There it is HSHPHREMṀ. Cf. below 15/250. Observe that here, Abhinava refers to a

manner of referring to Parā and her seed-syllable (‘the Heart syllable) as the ‘essence of

the Mothersʼ, which, as a description of it, coincides with the proper name of the seedsyllable (KHPHREṀ) of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. Accordingly, below in 30/45cd-46 Abhinava
presents KHPHREM as Mātṛsadbhāva, then quoting MV 8/39-41ab and commenting on

that in 30/47-49ab, he presents HSHPHREM as the Essence of the Mothers and also of
Bhairava. Thus, he very clearly makes the point that the two are essentially the same.

The Mothers appear in the texts, inscriptions and sculpture as early as the 2 or

3" century CE. They are mentioned both as nondescript hordes (gaṇa) and more
commonly, as an early important grouping of seven (corresponding to the Pleiades), and

then as eight directional energies of gods who are their consorts, and from whom they

derive their name. The first of them, for example is Brāhmī (or Brāhmāyanṇī), the consort
of Brahmā (see below, 3/109cd-110ab (109) and note). The Tantras identified the Mothers

as the energies of Speech embodied in the letters of the alphabet. The eight Mothers came
to govern the main phonemic categories of the fifty letters, each of which are themselves

Mothers. Indeed, the term may be applied to the syllabic contents of Mantras governed by

fifty ‘Little Mothers' (mātṛkā). This appears to be the most immediate sense of this line

which Jayaratha quotes from the MV (/41ab). Thus, it comes at the conclusion of a series

of depositions of mantras, their ‘limbs’ and letters onto the body of the Trika worshipper,
which transforms it into that of the deity and so serve to purify him and prepare him to

worship it. Accordingly, Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the form of Kālī who is the goddess of the
Krama, is addressed as Mātṛṣadbhāva, the Essence of the Mothers, with reference to her

sacred sonic body. The word for ‘mother’ < mātṛ – also means ‘perceiver’, so by a happy

play of words, Her name is understood in the Anuttara Trika perspective as representing

Her true essential nature as the dynamic consciousness which is ‘the Essence of the
Perceiverʼ.
” We have seen (above, note 3,218) that the word ‘prabhu’ may be used as an adjective
meaning ‘powerful’ or a noun meaning ‘lord’, in the sense of ‘one who is powerfulʼ or has

TANTRĀLOKA

(The experience) within this union, the nature of which has (just) been

explained, accords with the dictum ‘bliss is the nature of the Brahman’. This is

because (pure) consciousness (cir) predominates. (Whereas) the reflective
awareness that arises within the supreme subject as the desire to emit (itself into

the sphere of objectivity) is this power called the will (icchāśakti) (who governs
the Aghorā energies, of which it is said):

‘Similarly, Śiva’s Peaceful (Aghorā) energies bestow on men the fruits of

Śiva's abode. The knowers of that (reality) call these powers supreme (parā).’"

As Aghorā (energies), described in this and other ways, are just the pure
freedom (of consciousness), they are devoid of the Ghorā energies that generate
duality and the others. (The power of the will is their) ‘source’ (prabhu), that is,

the cause (nimitta) of (their) origin (prabhava) (and power). It has encompassed

the endless aggregates of energies, and so she should then be called Parā
(Supreme),

who

conjoins

(her

devotees)

to

what

is

most

excellent

(sarvotkarṣayoginī). Thīs is the meaning. So too, with regards to the main point,
the arising of the third letter (I), which is the energy of the will (icchāśakti), has
been described in this way.

And that is the power of the will (of which there are two moments. It is

said (in the Śivadrṣṭi that):

power over others. It may also mean ‘source’. Thus, the same word serves to denote the

goddess both as the power and the source of the energies.

See above, note to TĀv ad 1/242.
" MV 3/33. The three hordes of Mothers called Aghorā, Ghorā and Ghoratarā, that is,

Not Terrible, Terrible and Most Terrible, are the attendants of the goddesses Parā,
Parāparā and Aparā, respectively. The first are governed by the energy of the will, and so
Jayaratha refers to them here. The second group, which is governed by the power of

knowledge, is mentioned further ahead (3/74 (74cd-75ab)), as is the third group, governed
by the power of action (TĀv ad 3/103cd-104ab). These three types of energies are
described in the MV. They are mentioned several times, and as they function together, it is
convenient to define them in one place, as they are in the MV, where we read:

‘The Extremely Terrible (Ghoratarā energies) are said to be the lower (aparā)
ones; embracing the individual souls (rudrāṇu) attached to sense objects, they cast them
down to ever lower levels.
The Terrible (Ghorā powers) are the middle ones (parāparā); like the previous
(ones), they engender attachment to the mixed fruits of action and block the path to

liberation.
Similarly, Śiva’'s Peaceful (Aghorā) powers bestow on men the fruits of Śiva’s
abode. The knowers of that (reality) call these powers supreme (parā).’ MV 3/31-33. See
Dyczkowski 1992a: 70 (with reference to SpSaṁ p. 21) and ibid. 337 note 47, with
reference to Kṣemarāja's quotation and explanation of these verses in his SpNir p. 67-68.

The Aghorā energies are those that are ‘not Ghorā’, that is, Not Terrible. The privative

prefix indicates that they are devoid of the other energies, Most Terrible and Terrible, who
operate in the spheres of duality (bheda) and unity-in-diversity (bhedābheda),
respectively. As energies of Parā, they are experienced in the nondual consciousness of the
perceiver. Śimilarly, the Terrible Ghorā energies of Parāparā are experienced in the
domain of the means of knowledge, and the Most Terrible Atighorā energies of Aparā in
the domain of the objectivity. See below, note 3,245 and 3/103cd-104ab.

CHAPTER THREE

‘When however (after resting within itself), consciousness is (in a state)

propense (unmukhitā cittā) to instigate the emanation of the (wonderfully) various
deployment of the many phenomena by the expansion of the joy of the glorious

power which is the inherent attribute of consciousness, that is (then) the first

moment of the will (prathamā tuṭi).’

Thus, (the power of the will,) which is the initial pulsation (of creative
consciousness) (ādyaspanda) described (here) and elsewhere, is (just) the bare

propensity to externalization (bahiraunmukhya), which is the pure will
(icchāmātra) unsullied by (the objectivity) to be emitted. (This is one aspect.) Or
else, in its external form (within the sphere of the object of desire), assuming the

nature of the exertion which, coloured with each particular object (viṣaya) of

desire, is the arousal (prakṣobha) (that stimulates), it is endowed with
sovereignty (aiśvarya) (over all). Thus, (the will) is of two kinds. That is said
in the venerable Pratyabhijñā:

ŚDr 1/7cd-8. Read with printed text of the ŚDr cittā for cintā. 1/8d is quoted below ad

15/335cd-338. See above, notes 1,1105 and 1,1213 and below, 3,236 and 3,241.
The meanings of the word ‘kṣobha’ given in Monier-Williams’ dictionary are:

‘shaking, agitation, disturbance, tossing, trembling and emotion. It is commonly used in a
general non-technical sense to denote the ‘agitation’, ‘disturbance’ or ‘arousalʼ felt by a
lover who is romantically engaged with his or her partner. In the present context, in its

technical sense, it denotes the activation of the energies of consciousness which entails
their ‘disturbance’, that is, ‘arousal’ʼ, from their potential, unmanifest state of rest

(viśrānti). In this state the energies, creative states, and manifest forms of consciousness

abide as potentials, waiting, as it were, to be actualized. This is their ‘undisturbed’,
‘unaroused’, ‘unactivated’ state, in which they abide together in a harmonious balance
with one another and the fundamental reality that sustains them, within which they are
contained, at rest. These potencies emerge and become active when they are ‘aroused’ and
their substratum is ‘disturbed’. The disturbance’ or ‘arousal’ in this case is the
conjunction of the will with an object or more specific intention. The will is now directed
at a goal, although it is still internal, that is, within consciousness. It is in a state of
heightened intent. In this, the second moment of the will, it is doubled, as it were. The
universe, which is to be emitted, now shines within consciousness as the intended

universe, over which consciousness (as it contains it within itself and is its source) is
complete master. Analogously, one form of reflective awareness follows after another,
marking the unfolding of emanation through a series of such ‘disturbances’ that ‘arouse’

and ‘activate’ potentials into actualization by processes of intensification, conjunction and
degrees of definition and objectification. As the context demands, one or other translation
may be more appropriate; even s0, all the meanings are intended to varying degrees.

Read aisvaryabhajamānā for aiśvarya bhajamānā.

The first kind is the first moment of the pure will. It is the initial stir or tension of
intention. It is like the instant when a wave is just about to form in a still sheet of water, or

a sprout is just about to burst from its seed, or when one is just about to clench one’s fist
(cf. ŚDr 1/13cd-17). It is represented by the vowel I ~ icchā - meaning will or desire. In

the first moment, no specific object of desire has developed. Consciousness is still at rest
in itself, although primed to emerge out of itself and pour out into manifestation. The
second is the immanent will, now actively directed towards the goal of emitting the outer
universe of manifestation, which is the objectivity that has aroused it out of its initial
repose. However, this is not the common desire of individual subjective consciousness
which views its object of desire outside itself, and so is beyond its control. At this stage,
the object of desire, that is, everything which is to be emitted, is still within consciousness,

TANTRĀLOKA

‘(When the power of consciousness) is only in the form of the pure will

(icchāmātra), it is distant from (all) that is (yet) to be emitted, whereas when it
assumes the nature of a certain (inscrutable) exertion, it is close (to the sphere of

emanation).

The Letter Ī as the Power of Sovereignty
(Now) the first form (of the will) has been described. In order to describe
the second (form), he says:

ãṇa rers7 zātṝvrs aōīaā |
Tṛi: T ēzāī sīīāī: JIHĀTTĒĪ: |I 92 1I
saiva prakṣubdharūpā ced īśitrī samprajāyate |
tadāghorāḥ parā devyo jātāḥ śaivādhvadaiśikāḥ || 72 ||
If this same (power of the will) is in its aroused (prakṣubdha) form, it
becomes lIsitrī (the Sovereign One) (Ī). Then the supreme goddesses
Aghorā, who are the teachers of the Śaiva path, come into being. (72)
(72cd-73ab)
‘Then’, when the power of the will (icchāśakti) is aroused (and activated)
and is (in its aspect as) Lordship, the supreme goddesses Aghorā are born, that is,

manifest externally. This is the meaning. That itself is (the power of the will’s)
sovereignty, namely, (its) external manifestation as each of the endless number of
particular powers. Moreover, because the difference (between all these energies)
is not (yet) clearly manifest in that way, their activity consists in manifesting their
own innate nature; accordingly, they are called ‘the teachers of the Śaiva Path’.

Thus, they do not obstruct the path to liberation, as the Ghorā and other powers
(do). This is the meaning. So too, with regards to the main point, the arising of the

fourth letter (I) has been described in this way.

and so completely under its control. This form of the will is thus the sovereign power of

consciousness that governs the universe. It is represented by the vowel I – Īśika, meaning
sovereign power.
These lines are in prose. They cannot be traced in the Utpaladeva’s published works.
Perhaps they are drawn from the lost 7īkā or Vivṛti by Utpaladeva on his ĪP.

Read tadāghorāḥ for tadā ghorāḥ.
The vowels represent phases of the expansion of cosmic consciousness within Śiva
from Himself as transcendental Anuttara (A). Here, at this pure level, ‘external’ and
‘internal’ are relative terms with respect to states that are experienced by the self-reflective
awareness of Śiva consciousness. Here the ‘outer’ universe is experienced as the countless

energies of consciousness. The sovereign power of Śiva, by virtue of which He is the

sovereign Lord of all His energies, is His will, ‘aroused’ in this state by the outpouring of
the energies within him representing the countless manifestations He wills into being.

Thus, at this stage, the form of reflective awareness is one of external phenomena
experienced as the energies of the omnipotent will which, although differentiated, are
experienced within and at one with consciousness. The reflective awareness consciousness
has of itself here is as the supreme perceiver, as it is in all the forms of reflective

CHAPTER THREE

The Letter U as the Power of Knowledge

Having defined the power of the will with two aspects, he goes on to

describe the power of knowledge.

TTTHJTTTTJIĪ
: JṬŪTJCGHĪTG: |

svātmapratyavamarśo yaḥ prāg abhūd ekavīrakaḥ |

jñātavyaviśvonmeṣātmā

jñānaśaktitayā sthitaḥ || 73 |

The reflective awareness of one’s own nature that, prior (to its
aroused state), dwelt alone without companion (ekavīraka), and is (at the
same tīme) the expansion (unmeṣa) (U) of the (objective) universe which is
(yet) to be known (jñātavya), abides as the power of knowledge. (73) (73cd74ab)
Here indeed, (the reflective awareness of one's own nature) is ‘prior’ to
the aroused state, because before that there is no separate object of awareness, and

so it rests within its own nature alone. Thus, it is ‘alone without companion’

(ekavīraka). As the power of knowledge, that same reflective awareness which

was (before), abides as (the inner) expansion (unmeṣa), that is, the initial stir

(ādyaḥ pariṣpandaḥ) of the desired universe as the inner object of enquiry. This

is the teaching concerning the fifth seed.

awareness represented by the vowels. In the sphere of duality, the forms of reflective
awareness are those of the contracted consciousness of the individual perceiver, with
respect to which phenomena are experienced as independent of it, although they are not.
Thus, whereas at the lower level the countless ‘desires’ and ‘intentions’ of which

phenomena are the object and result mislead, at this level they are sacred energies, that is,

goddesses who elevate consciousness.
Cf. above the last line of TĀv ad 3/66cd-67ab (67).
! We have seen that the will, first as a potent tendency, and then applied to its object of
intent, develops into the initial moment of perception of the inwardly willed universe.
Expanding and vibrant, it is the source of the cosmic perception which generates, even as

it contemplates, the unfolding objectivity within it. This
s initial stage, that is, the first
moment of perception, which is the desire to see (didṛkṣā). In the second moment it is
articulated in the thought construct which identifies its object. Thus, the former can be

experienced directly by paying careful attention to the pure conscious state between the
falling away of one thought and the arising of another. As the Stanzas on Vibration teach:

‘The expansion of consciousness (unmeṣa) that takes place when one is engaged

in a single thought should be known to be the source from which another arises. One

should know that for oneself. (SpKā 41, cf. below 8/4-8; see Dyczkowski 1992a: 255-

256)
There are numerous symbolic representations of the Sanskrit alphabet in the Tantras.

They are also found in the Purāṇas. Virtually all of them consider the vowels to be

feminine and the consonants masculine. Here it is the other way around. The vowels are
Śiva’s seeds (bīja), which are deposited in the wombs (yoni) of the consonants, thereby

TANTRĀLOKA

He (now) links that with the point of view of his own system (darśana).

TSTAĪTRTT ṬATṬGHTĪEATTAET]_II A

1I

iyaṁ parāparā devī ghorāṁ yā mātṛmaṇḍalīm |
sr̥jaty avirataṁ śuddhāśuddhamārgaikadīpikām || 74 ||
This is the Middling (Parāparā) Goddess, who emits without ceasing
the Ghorā circle of Mothers, which is the sole illuminator of the pure-cumimpure Path. (74) (74cd-75ab)
As is said concerning the Ghorā (circle of Mothers):

‘The Terrible (Ghorā powers) are the middle ones (parāparā); liīke the

previous (Most Terrible ones), they engender attachment to the mixed fruits of

action, and block the path to liberation.

‘(They illumine) the pure-cum-impure (Path)ʼ, in the sense that they do
not cast (the ignorant) down into increasingly lower (states), as do the Ghoratarā

(Most Terrible powers) and others.
Here (in this case), like the power of the will, the power of knowledge is
also of two kinds, according to whether the object of knowledge is more or less
fertilizing them and rendering them articulate. Speech embodied in the sound of the Vedas

has been venerated as sacred since early Vedic times. The notion that the phonemes of which

Speech is composed are also sacred and hence deities in themselves goes back at least to the
earliest Upaṇisads, although initially there was no distinction between male and female
phonemes. In the Chāndogyopaniṣad (2/22/3) we read:

‘All vowels are the embodiments of Indra; all consonants are the embodiments of

Prajāpati; all consonants are the embodied. If one should reproach a person for [the
pronunciation of] his vowels, he should tell that one: “I have taken refuge in Indra. He will
answer you.”” (Hume’s translation)

Abhinava’s ‘own system’ is the Trika expounded in the MV, from which he draws the
following verse.
4MV 3/32, see above TĀv ad 3/71 (71cd-72ab) and note.

The lowest, Most Terrible (Ghoratarā) energies only throw down the individual soul to
lower levels. The peaceful, Not Terrible (Aghorā) energies elevate it. The middling ones

keep the soul from developing by making it attached to worldly enjoyment. This is how

they ‘illumine’ the impure path, that is, the binding domain of Māyā. However, they also
illumine the pure path, which is the domain of developing Śiva consciousness beyond it.

Thus, at times, they help the fettered soul to perceive the higher spiritual realms, even
though its vision is obscured by attachment. Accordingly, these energies are related to the

expanding power of knowledge. However, without the Aghorā energies of the will to
realisation, the soul cannot rise to them. Even so, it perceives that this is the pure realm of

liberated consciousness well enough at least to maintain the present level of its fettered
condition without falling further. See above, note 3,232.

CHAPTER THREE

predominant (with respect to subjective cognitive consciousness).® The nature

(of the power of knowledge) when the object of knowledge is not predominant

has been explained there (in that context); now he describes its nature when it

does predominate.

The Letter Ū as the Decrease of Subjectivity

3aTaTHTGT
f̄-̄āīTTa TAT āTT 1| 4 1|
jñeyāṁśaḥ pronmiṣan kṣobhaṁ yadaiti balavattvataḥ |
ūnatābhāsanaṁ saṁvinmātratve jāyate tadā l| 75 ||
When the objective aspect, in the process of expansion, is aroused
(out of its state of rest within itself), an appearance of a lessening (ūnatā) (of
subjectivity) (Ū) takes places within pure consciousness due to the powerful
(influence of its arousal). (75) (75cd-76ab)

When the objective aspect becomes prominent (udrikta) with respect to
cognitive consciousness (jñāna) and so is clearly apparent, (the power of
knowledge) ‘is arousedʼ, that is, assumes a varied form as each particular (object
of knowledge), such as ‘blue’, ‘pleasure’ and the like. Then, because objectivity

predominates, a decrease of cognitive consciousness (jñāna), that is, a state of
incompleteness (apiūrṇatva), manifests within the pure cognitive state

(jñānamātra), and it comes to be contracted. This is the arising of the sixth letter.
He (now goes on to) discuss that further.

The word jñeya, which is translated here as ‘object of knowledge’, literally means

‘what needs to be known’. As such, in this case, it is not yet known extermally in a fully
defined way as a particular entity or reality. This phase is marked by the initial
‘expansion’ or ‘opening upʼ, that is, activation of the power of consciousness to know the

contents of its own manifestation. The next phase, in which the object of knowledge
becomes more predominant, marks the descent into the sphere of outer manifestation,

where the ‘object of knowledge’ that ‘needs to be known’ presents itself to an individual
perceiver, separate from it, who wishes to know it. This he comes to do through the

normal process of perception, which culminates ideally in the formation of a clear, distinct
and correct notion of what the object is. The form of reflective awareness of this phase is

that of the limited, conditioned forms of consciousness. This aspect is thus appropriately

called ‘Decrease’. However, this is taking place within the inner domain of consciousness,
where it is experienced through and as a form of its own reflective awareness. Thus, its

own unconfined plenitude is never compromised. Indeed, encompassing limitation, it is in

a ṣense all the more complete. See above, note 1,434 and below, 3,273.

Each of the three energies of will, knowledge and action are in two basic states,

namely, ‘unaroused’ and ‘aroused’. The former is the condition when they rest in their

own energy as potencies; the latter when they operate actively in relation to their object,

with which they are identified, and which may or may not be internal, that is, at one with
consciousness. See below, 3/82 (82cd-83ab), where the term is defined.

TANTRĀLOKA

Tarāāīīzaai fkaftrṝā-y 3=zxīī |

rūḍhaṁ tajjñeyavargasya sthitiprārambha ucyate |
rūḍhir eṣā vibodhābdheś citrākāraparigrahaḥ || 76 |

idaṁ tadbhedasaṁdarbhabījaṁ cinvanti yoginaḥ |

When that has developed (rūḍha), it is said to be the beginning of the

persistence (sthiti) of objectivity. This state of development (rūḍhi) amounts
to the assumption of diverse forms by the ocean of consciousness.™ Yogis

discern this (stage) to be the seed of the weave of duality (bhedasaṁdarbha).
(76-77ab) (76cd-77)

(When) ‘that’ manifestation of a decrease within pure consciousness ‘has

developedʼ, that is, once (its) development has taken place, ‘it is said to be the
beginning of the persistence (sthiti) of objectivity’, consisting of each particular
(object), such as ‘blue’ and ‘pleasureʼ. It is not persistence directly manifest
(sākṣāt), because that takes place when the power of action (arises, which
generates duality, so that objectivity is projected outwards). (So) what is its
development? It is said that ‘this state of development (riḍhi) (amounts to the

assumption of diverse forms by the ocean of consciousness)’. By this is meant
that (at this stage) there is no object of cognition of any sort separate from
cognition, rather it is that (cognition) itself (which manifests) as each particular
manifestation.
Thus because ‘(the ocean of) consciousness’ has assumed ‘diverse
formsʼ, this has been explained to be the decrease of pure consciousness, which is

the sixth (letter). ‘Yogis discern’, that is, know this as being the cause of ‘the
weave of duality’. Those who are not yogis do not, because (they are only)

Perceptions are like waves that rise and fall from the ocean of consciousness. When the
wave just begins to form, as evidenced by a subtle tension that forms on the surface of the

water, this is the state of ‘expansion’ or ‘opening up’ (u1meṣa). Nothing has happened yet,
just the surface has been primed, as it were, and so is filled with the energy that will burst

into the actual powerful thrust of the wave that emerges from it. The initial state of rest

thus decreases as the ocean of cognitive consciousness heaves up to the sky above, the

domain of objectivity in which perceptions and their objects rise up out of subjective

consciousness to then recede back into it. Thuṣ, this stage is said to be a state of Decrease

(ūnatā), (Ū), from the point of view of the subjectivity of oceanic universal consciousness,
which, for objective perception to be possible, must contract down to focus on the
particular object perceived by a particular subject. Thus, perfectly ‘full’ and all-embracing

subjective consciousness is no longer so. At this stage everything is still within

consciousness, s0 also called the Wave (ārmi) (Ū), it is the inner movement of

consciousness heaving and ebbing within its infinite Being, as all things rise and fall away
within it. In this way, the ‘contraction’ of the waves does not compromise the plenitude of
the sea.

Read with MSs C and Jh and Jayaratha bhedasaṁdarbha- for bījasaṁdarbha-.

CHAPTER THREE

conscious of gross duality, which is essentially (the product of Māyā, which is)

the power of action. This is the meaning.

Indeed, here (according to this view), this is the group of six (forms of)

reflective awareness which constitute the main (forms) of supreme reflective

awareness because, uniting with one another or with objectivity, all (the forms) of

reflective awareness arise. As (Abhinava) will say (further ahead):

‘Just the group of six vowels (A, Ā, I, Ī, U and Ū) alone is the root (of all
the others) here in the series of letters.

Yogis inwardly attend to their oneness with their pure conscious nature. This means

that they focus their attention on the essential subjectivity of consciousness, not on its

object, as those who are not yogis do. Thus, they escape the duality generated by the
power of action, that is, Māyā, which operates by disassociating the perceiver from the
perceived by the processes of identification of the subject with the psychophysical
components of the sphere of objectivity induced by the ignorance of his true purely
subjective identity with consciousness. The power of action is identified with Māyā at the

individual level, because it is the power to act in the state of ignorance of oneness that

generates duality, and hence the binding Karma that originates from that ignorance and

sustains it. At the universal level within consciousness, we shall see that the power of
action is the power of consciousness, which, embracing within itself all its energies,
generates and sustains their ebbing and flowing even as it rests tranquil in its deeper,

fundamental nature.

" Below, 3/185ab (3/184cd). These six letters symbolize the primary aspects of the

reflective awareness of supreme consciousness. This is because all the subsequent aspects,
symbolized by the letters of the alphabet that follow, are generated from them by their
combining together in various ways and associations with objectivity. They represent the

primary pre-discursive state of consciousness, when reality is still not objectivised

externally, and consciousness is experienced as containing within itself all things.
Reversing this perspective, Abhinava explains how these phases of reflective awareness
operate in the course of mundane perception in his commentary on the Parātrīśikā:

‘Every time knowledge (vijāāna) (of any quite ordinary) thing, such as a jar,

ariṣes, one experiences that the perception (jñāna) is self-luminous and variegated by the

(various) parts of the jar, which is the object to be known (Ū). There also, in this same

variegated form, one can experience an initial subtle outpouring (of the perception) of, for
example, a jar. This is because one perceives that anything may arise from any one thing

in some circumstance or other, but not from non-existence (U). (The same may be said
with regards to) ‘lordshipʼ, which is proved (to be as it is) by the testimony (pramāṇa) of

one’s own consciousness (that experiences it directly). Indeed, it is nothing but an

expression of the freedom of consciousness, and consists of the (immanent) intention of
coming into being of (some phenomenal) entity (bhāva) (). That state of freedom, dense
with consciousness, completely full (and perfect), that consists of (the first) condensation
of that thing (l), is perceptible (in the same way). (Finally,) one is free to the degree that
one abides within oneself, dense with bliss. Thus, the presence of (this inner) bliss is also
undeniable (Ā). The possessor of power, Anuttara, the venerable Bhairava, whose essence
is a supreme ineffable aesthetic delight, shines (resplendent) everywhere as the agent (who
does everything and is present in all things) (A). When contemplating the nature (of the
six moments of) Anuttara, Bliss, Will, Lordship, Expansion and Decrease, by considering
them separately (one by one), they rest on the plane of knowledge. (Then) these divine

energies of consciousness fall (and operate) all together, not otherwise than consciousness

in itself and for itself. This is because (consciousness) is perfectly full and so is devoid of

TANTRĀLOKA

There (amongst them), Anuttara and (its) Bliss (ānanda) (are both) just
pure consciousness alone, and so in terms of that (consciousness), there is no
difference (bheda) between them, and so there is no question of objectivity

(prameya) (arising there).

The Neuter Vowels r Ṛ I L
(Next Abhinava) begins to explain the four-fold form of the power of the
will (icchāśakti), (symbolized by the letters ṛ Ṛ 1 Ḷ). when it is coloured by the

object of desire (iṣyamāṇa).

gBIfṁrfkúTTP AJṀĨTTTJTT

aTI |] g. 1]

icchāśaktir dvirūpoktā kṣubhitākṣubhitā ca yā l| 77 I|
iṣyamāṇaṁ hi sā vastu dvairūpyeṇātmani śrayet |

The power of will is said to have two forms, aroused and unaroused.
It deposits the desired reality (iṣyamāṇaṁ vastu) in two forms within itself.
(77cd-78ab) (78)

The object of desire (has two forms), because a) it is the pure Light alone

(of its manifestation as desirable), and b) is (in a state of) rest (viśrānti) (within it).
Thus, the vocalic resonance (śruti) of (the letters) R and L is here (amongst the
diversity, because it is the adventitious limitation of objectivity that divides (all things up)
and that exists solely as perceivable through the body.’ PTy p. 170-171.
The jar of this example is still one with subjective ‘I’ consciousness here in the

sphere of the reflective awareness of the vowels. As it progressively reaches the states of
awareness of the domain of the consonants, it comes to be perceived by the individual
perceiver as an external, objective ‘this’. Moving back and inwards, Abhinava argues, we

must admit these preceding stages that lead back, one from the other, to the fundamental
consciousness of Anuttara.

The moment Anuttara is experienced, its essential Bliss arises, which brings the

polarities of Śiva and Śakti together, and dissolves them into the supreme reality they

themselves are. Reflective awareness oscillates between the transcendental stillness and

the pulsing activity (spanda) of consciousness, which is the emission (visarga) that flows
from the union of Śiva and Śakti. This is the bliss (ānanda) of the dynamic

interpenetrating union of immanence and transcendence. There is never any duality in this
whole process. It is the eternal state of being, free of all possible objectivity, which is the
very life of Reality. The remaining following four forms of primary reflective awareness

mark stages of the inner development of objectivity within consciousness. However, at
this stage, that is, within the series of states symbolized by the vowels, it is experienced as
one with it, and so does not break up its unity.
See also below, 3/175cd-179ab (175-178). Concerning the four neuter vowels, see PTv

Singh p. 189 ff., 210 ff., and 214-215.

Read vastu dvairūpyeṇa- for vastudvairūpyeṇa-.

CHAPTER THREE

vowels), because their nature is to illumine and to paralyse (respectively).” He
says that (in the following verse):

The following passage from the TSā (p. 12-14) summarizes what has been said up to
now and what follows: “There (amongst the aggregate of energies that constitute the

Lordʼs freedom), three are thus the main energies of the Supreme Lord; namely, Anuttara,
the Will (icchā), and the Expansion (unmeṣa of knowledge). These are the three forms of

reflective awareness, A, 1 and U. The entire unfolding flow (prapañca) of energy is
formed (and contemplated) (carcyate) from these three. Rest within Anuttara (A) is Bliss

(ānanda – Ā). Rest within the Will (icchā -- 1) is Sovereignty (īśana –- Ī). Reṣst within the

Expansion (unmeṣa of knowledge – U) is the Wave (iirmi – Ū) (of inner manifestation),

which is the beginning of (the unfolding of) the power of action. This the triad of (the

forms of) reflective awareness – Ā, Ī and Ū. Here the first group of three forms of
reflective awareness (that is, A, I, and U) are solar, because their essence is a part of the
Light (of consciousness). The other group of three (forms of) reflective awareness (that is,

Ā, T, and Ū) are lunar, because they are predominantly the joy which is the essential nature
of repose (in the first three forms of reflective awareness of consciousness). This is such

as long as the objective aspect (karmāṁśa) does not enter (into the form of reflective

awareness). If the object, which is called (respectively) the object of desire and dominion,
enters into the Will (I) and Sovereignty (D), it is divided into two types. (These are the
seeds of Fire and Earth, formed) by the sound R, (which arises) by virtue of the Light (of
consciousness), and the sound L, (that arises) by virtue of the repose (of consciousness), as

the nature of these two, as light and inertia, respectively. The object of desire and
dominion does not present itself here in a fully evident state, as an external object. If that
were s0, then it would just be an external phenomenon (kārya), not Will and Sovereignty.
Thuṣ, because they are not clearly evident, R and L are present as a resonance which is not
yet (fully) determinate, that is, without having the consistency of the consonants. (In a
nutshell we say that) these four letters – ṛ Ṛ I Ḷ. – are ‘neuter’ because they combine in
themselves the image of consonants as they do vowels.”
In his commentary on the Parātrīśikā, Abhinava explains:
‘(Anuttara,) which is such (i.e. the plane of the reflective awareness of Bhairava),

in the course of its unfolding (prasarantī) is the power of Bliss, Ā. When it has unfolded

(completely) (prasṛtā), it is full (unconditioned) will (icchā), (represented by the letter) I.
The same will, desiring to perceive (jighṛkṣantī), is sovereign lordship (īśāna), by virtue

of the freedom, which is the impending power of knowledge. (t is represented by the
letter) I. In the act of expansion (unmiṣantī), it is the power of knowledge, consisting of
the expansion (unmeṣa) of the object of desire (iṣyamāṇa) in its universal state
(sakalabhāva). (It is represented by the letter) U.

The consciousness (saṁvid) of Anuttara, which is in a state of expansion

(unmiṣatā), is decreased (unībhūtā). The cause of this decrease is the contraction
(saṁkoca) (of subjective consciousness) brought about by the totality of all things, (which

emerge) after (the initial) expansion (unmeṣa) of the inner vital principle of all things.
Tending to expand further, diversity begins to progressively manifest inwardly in a state
which is unevident (asphuṭa), similar to the objectivity (perceived by) the inner mental
senses. This state of impending expansion thus decreased, encompassing within itself all

things that are thus ‘carried’ (iūḍha) by it is the teat (ūḍhaḥ) of the wish-granting cow
(anaṅgadhainavī), which is supreme Deity. (The initial expansion of consciousness thus

decreased is) the power of knowledge, that has flowed forth (prasṛtā) and is well evident

(susphuṭā). (It is represented by the letter) Ū.’ PTv p. 168-169

Abhinava writes in the first section (khaṇḍa) of the MVV:
(A) yaḥ prakāśaḥ sa evāyaṁ pratibhāti tathā tathā |

TANTRĀLOKA

sīTexzgfTTtrzī

ÇTJHṬIrJTHṬJT̄:
TRĀĀĪTṬIe] eITT |

aciradyutibhāsinyā śaktyā jvalanarūpayā || 78 II
iṣyamāṇasamāpattiḥ sthairyeṇātha dharātmanā |
(Moreover, the absorption which is) the attainment (samāpatti) of

the object of desire takes place either (for a moment) by the power
naiva cānyasya kasyāpi sa tu bhāty eva kevalam |||

sa eva paramodāraḥ saryasyaivāvabhāsakaḥ |
svatantra iti tasyecchā śaktiḥ [śaktisvātantryeti pāṭhaḥ] svātantryasaṁjñitā ||

(Ā) sa ca svātmani viśrāntas tadanyābhāvayogataḥ |
svātmaviśrāntir evaiṣā devasyānanda ucyate ||

(I) svātantryamahimā vāsya svarūpād apṛthakṣṭhitiḥ |

svaprakāśe nije dhāmni bhāsayed bhāvavibhramān |I

(I) bhāsanā ca kriyāśaktir iti śāstreṣu kathyate |
yayā vicitratattvādikalanā pravibhajyate ||
(U) bhāsanānavabhāte ca kathaṁ nāma prakalpate |
tad asyāntaḥsthitaṁ bhānaṁ jñānaśaktir ahaṁ smṛtā ||

‘(A) This is that Light (of consciousness) that shines in this way and that. It is not

(the Light) of any other at all. It is that alone which shines. That alone is supremely

luṣṭrous – it illumines everything. It is free (and independent), and so its will is the power
termed ‘freedom’ (svātantrya). (86-87)

(Ā) And that is at rest within itself by association with the non-existence of
(anything) else. This repose within itself is said to be God’s bliss.

(I) Or else His abiding state, which is not separate from His own essential nature,

is the glorious power of His freedom, and he shines forth the restless activities of
phenomena within his own self-illumined abode. (88-89)
(Ī) The act of shining (and illuminating) (bhāsanā) is said in the scriptures to be

the (Lord’s) power of action, by virtue of which one perceives the progressive effecting
(kalanā) of the various reality levels (tattva) and the like. (90)

(U) How does one conceive (anything) if the illumination (of the Light of

consciousness) does not shine? That is its inner light, the power of knowledge, which is
said to be ‘ (the experience of subjectivity). (91)

Such is the extent of the God’s nature as just His own nature alone. That is called
‘Unmeṣa’ (‘opening up), and so the pervasive Lord possesses five powers. (92)

triśaktir ekaśaktir vā devo vā kevalaḥ sthitaḥ |
Śśaktir evātha devī sā sācaśāstre (> sāra-) nirūpyate ||

vakṣyate ca jagaddhātuḥ kathitetyāditaḥ param |
saikā saty anekatvaṁ vai gacchatīti maheśinā ||

The God possesses three powers, one power, or abides alone. Now (His) power is
the Goddess, who is described in the Trikasāra (Sāraśāstra). It will be taught that ‘iṭ is
said that (the power) of the Benefactor of the universe . . . etc.” The Great Lord has said

that ‘She, being one, becomes many”. (93-94)
MV 3/5ab, 6ab

We have observed already (above, note 1,1015) that samāpatti, which 1 translate as

‘aṭṭainment’, denotes, according to the technical nomenclature of Yoga, the highest form

CHAPTER THREE

(symbolized by the letters ṛ Ṛ), whose nature is Fire and lights up briefly, or

else with the stability (of the power symbolized by the letters 1 L), which is

Earth by nature. (78cd-79ab) (79)

of contemplative absorption. It is the ‘attainment’ which is the third and highest level of
the series bhāvanā (deep meditation), samādhi (perfect concentration in total mental

stillness), leading to samāpatti, the attainment of perfect absorption in consciousness.

Abhinava must indeed have this technical sense of the term in mind, but clearly does not

use it to denote just the ultimate degree of yogic attainment, as it is for the followers of
Pātañjali and the Sāṁkhya. In this case, which we can take as a typical example, it is an
‘attainment’ in the sense of reaching a certain stage. Thus, there are forms and levels of

‘aṭtainment’. The point of using this term in such contexts is its added implicit yogic sense
of a state of contemplation in which its object is attained by absorption into consciousness,
where all the levels are the same and equally ultimate.

The vowels ṛ and R are articulated by lightly touching the soft palate with the tip of the
tongue to make a vocalic ‘R’ which sounds like ‘RI’ and ‘RT’. If the tongue is held in that
position longer the semivowel ‘RA’ is produced. Similarly, 1 and LḶ are produced by

lightly touching the hard palate to make a vocalic ‘L’” which sounds like ‘LRI’ and ‘LRT.

Although the tongue does make contact with the palate, it is so slight and fleeting that

these four letters are considered to be vowels, although they are recognized to contain a
trace of the semivowel sounds ‘R’ and ‘L’, along with I and Ī. They differ in this respect
from the other vowels, in which there are no such traces of consonant sounds. Moreover,
they do not combine with the vowel ‘A’ to produce other vowels, as do the other vowels,
and so they are called ‘neuter letters” (ṣaṇṟhavarṇa). The four neuter vowels represent four
forms of introverted reflective awareness that do not develop further, and so are not (male)
‘seeds'. Nor are they the basis of further development within the vowel series, and so are

not (female) ‘matrices’ (see below 3/91). From this perspective they are called ‘neuter” for
this reason.
Located between the primary vowels and the diphthongs, as their loci of
articulation require, they are a sort of break in the phonemic series which is reflected in

the sequential arising of the corresponding forms of reflective awareness. Their peculiar
nature is also highlighted by the existence in Tantric texts in general of two series of

vowels, one consisting of all sixteen and the other of twelve, in which these four are not
included. The former series represents the sixteen digits of the Moon and the latter, the
twelve energies of the Sun. The former symbolizes the inner consciousness of objectivity

at one with it, and the latter, pure perception free of it.
The trace of objectivity in this case is the object of desire. This is not external.
Rather it is 1) the pure Light of consciousness alone, and 2) repose (viśrānti) within it.

Theṣe are symbolized, respectively, by the letters R and L, which are the sonic forms of
Fire and Earth. The first is luminous and the second is the object of desire posited within
itself. 1) ṛ is the momentary aspect of the power of the will (icchāśakti) that is

undisturbed, that is, when the object is still merged within it. 2) Ṛ is the momentary aspect
of the power of the will that is disturbed, when the object of desire is projected outside it,
but is still within consciousness. 3) 1 is the stable aspect of power of the will that is

undisturbed. 4) Ḷ is the stable aspect of power of the will that is disturbed. The object of
desire here is the realisation of the Light of consciousness.

Swami Lakshmanjoo describes the states represented by these vowels as forms of
absorption in consciousness that do not allow the yogi to proceed further. In other words,

they represent a possible break in the progressive flow of awareness. Formed from the
letter I and the semivowels R and L, they represent a peculiar intermediate state of
consciousness which is neither fully subjective nor objective, but draws from both. The
will (I) is active. There is sufficient freedom, that is, power of the will of universal
consciousness, to enter into the state of supreme subjectivity, but not enough to maintain

TANTRĀLOKA

it. This is the state of awareness the vowels ṛ and R symbolize. This state is like Fire,

which burns intensely as r, or even more so as Ṛ, but even though it is extremely energetic
and brilliant, it quickly burns out for lack of the fuel of objectivity. The yogi who

experiences this state enters into the supreme state of subjectivity with tremendous
enthusiasm and force, but he soon falls out of it, back into the lower spheres of objectivity,
thrown out of it into the disṣtractions of the world of thought constructs. The states

represented by ] and Ḷ are the opposite. These are weighed down, as it were, by Earth,
which is the grossest of the principles, represented by the letter L. Thus, they are

impediments to further progress, for the opposite reason. The yogi who experiences these

states has sufficient freedom to enter the pure, supreme subjectivity of consciousness, but

cannot get out of it and develop the creative freedom through which the objective sphere is
emitted from the higher subjective consciousness. Thus, although he can enter the highest
level of contemplation (samādhi), he cannot emerge out of it. It appears to those who see

him in that state that he has fallen into a coma.
However, whether intense and fleeting or stable, they are four states of the
reflective awareness of the supreme subjectivity of Śiva consciousness, and so, as we read

in the next line, they are blissful. But as the energy of the will, which is an essential
element of the four states of awareness symbolized by the four neuter vowels, does not
operate and develop further, they remain confined within themselves. Thus, these four

forms of awareness represent states of pure absorption solely in their own essential nature
(svabhāvamātra) and so do not move beyond. This is a state of the pure wonder of

consciousness (camatkāramātra). As such they are called ‘the seeds of nectar”
(amṛtabīja). But this wonder is a kind of emptiness, void of outer objectivity, equated with

blissful deep sleep (suṣupti) (PTv p. 228). Thus, in order for the process of emanation to
continue, it has to jump beyond it like ‘the leap of a frog’, from the series of basic vowels
to the diphthongs that follow. In the following passage from the PTv, Abhinava supplies

more details that help us understand the nature of the states of awareness these letters
symbolize:

‘Now we will examine the power of action in the course of its extending forth
(prasarantī). Action is essentially (the inner) active exertion (saṁtrambha) (of reflective

awareness), which is will and knowledge that assume the nature of ‘prior’ and
‘subsequent’, consisting of the wonder of the beautiful variety (vaicitrya) of the mutual
combining together of (their) nature one with another. There (with regards to this power of
action and its activity), all that (will appear later and) is mixed up, combined, and
interrelated with others, (takes place) by first assuming a form (intermediate between the

initial series of six vowels and the diphthongs formed by combining them), which is like a
void that is not perceptible to the senses. (Thus, traversing the gap between the first series
to the next) is like the leaping of frogs. There (however), the body consisting of the

Absolute (anuttara – A) aṇḍ of bliss (Ā) does not fall away, (and the energies that follow

nevertheless continue to be made of them,) because they are indescribable, and are both
the substratum of all cognitions and their ultimate plane of rest. (On the contrary,) the
active exertion (saṁirambha) extending from the energy of the will (I) to that of
sovereignty (Ī) can be successive, and so can spread out in this way (either) within itself
(as the neuter letters), or on the plane of the Absolute (Anuttara) and Bliss (ānanda) (that
unite with I and Ī to give rise to E and AI). Thus, when it spreads within its own body,
which is void, it initially assumes a luminous and igneous form (represented by the letters)
r and R (respectively). For how can one deny that (the two vowels) I and Ī are present and

associated with the letter Ṛ, the nature of which is luminosity? As the illustrious
(grammarian) Puṣpadanta says (concerning r ānd R): “This is also established by (their)
similarity with the sound R.”

CHAPTER THREE

In accord with sayings such as ‘His powers are the entire universe . . ’,

this (aspect of the) power (of the will) is of two types, namely, Fire (jvalanarāpā)

and Earth (dharātmā), and so the object of desire (also) has that (same two-fold)
nature. In other words, the ‘(absorption which is) attainment’ (samāpatti),
(which) is the manifestation of the power of the will (icchāśakti) in a state which
is not separate (apṛthagbhāvena) (from the object of desire), is also of two

kinds. Thus, the meaning is that it has four forms. Even though the will was said

previously also to have attained the object of desire (when it made the transition
from Will to Lordship), and so assumed an aroused (kṣubdha) state, it was not in
such a clearly evident (sphuṭa) form as it is now. Thus, it is said to be (attained)
‘with stability°. (However,) here (in this case) also (as in that one), the object of
desire is not perceived to be as stable as is an external (object of desire). If it were

to be so, (the arousal of the will would give rise to) its (corresponding concrete)

result (kārya), not (just the inner ideal counterpart of the) object of desire (as that
which is desired) (iṣyamāaṇa). Thus, as R and L are not clearly (manifest, as they
are when they represent the external elements of Fire and Earth), here (in this
case) they are just (their) phonemic resonance (sśrutimātra). (Their) condition is

not like that of the directly apparent consonants (vyañjana) (R and L).
That is said (by saying that it) ‘ligghts up briefly°. (The form of reflective

awareness ṝ and R of the Light of consciousness as the object of desire) is

momentary, and so manifests briefly. Such also is the object of desire (which is

the Light of consciousness), because here (in this case) it is just a mere shadow.
Thus, here it is just the resonance of a letter (varṇasruti), not one that is directly
apparent (sākṣādvarṇa). Juṣṭ the resonance of a letter is not a letter (varṇa). Thus,
according to (Pātañjali) the author of the Great Commentary (on Pāṇini’s

grammar), (this vocalic resonance), like a ‘man-lion’, belongs to a separate
(phonemic) category (of its own). Thus, (such is) this group of four letters,
because they possess a ‘shade’ of both (vowels and consonants). (Pātañjali says
that): ‘the four – ṛ Ṛ I Ḷ. – are the neuter group.” So, in accord with this dictum,
(this group of four vowels) is everywhere called ‘neuterʼ.

When one wishes to enter into the stable form of voidness (although no longer

luminous), one (first) ascends (progressively) through the stages of luminous
consciousness (bhāsvararūpasaṁvitti). Then, (the letters) ḷ and L (are formed) by entering
the stable form (of this void), when it is with the sound of the letter L, which possesses the
stable condition which is the Earth (of which the letter L is the sonic form). Finally,
Sovereignty (l). prolonged as long as possible, by crossing over the entire phenomenal

naṭure (of objectivity), attains the condition of unmoving voidness, which is the prolated
form (plutatva) of the syllable. This is in conformity with the rule: ‘there is no long form
of the phoneme L.’ (see Kāśikā on PāSū 1/1/9), whereas the prolated form of the letters A

and the other (vowels) is (only a) greater lengthening of their long (dhīrgha) form.” PTv,

p. 172-174.

See above, note to TĀv ad 1/111cd-112ab (112). In place of jagat sarvaṁ we almost
always find the variant jagat kṛtsnaṁ, which means the same.

Read dviprakārā for dviprakārāyā.

Ṭhe phonemes r Ṛ 1 Ḷ are vocalic resonances of the fully formed consonant sounds of
the phonemes R and L. Abhinavagupta understands their phonetic quality to represent the
peculiar presence of these elements within consciousness, which account for states of
contemplative absorption.

TANTRĀLOKA

Thuṣ, the undisturbed will (which is not separate from the object of

desire), enveloped (ācchurita) by the power of Fire (which is the radiant energy of

the Light of consciousness experienced in a flash), is ṛ; disturbed (in the state of

the will that manifests as the object of desire), it is R. Enveloped in the same (twofold) manner by the power of Earth, (by which further development is blocked,) it
is and Ḷ. Here (in this case), as the object of desire, which is essentially first Fire

(and then Earth), is (attained) by appropriating (upādāna) its own essential nature
alone (as there is no outer object of desire), it becomes stable (due to the power of
Earth, and so the stream of reflective awareness remains confined within it). Thus,
the appropriation of some other quality (viśeṣaṇa) is not (required) for that

purpose.

Surely (one may ask,) if one accepts that another (form of) reflective

awareness of the power of the will arises by the (contemplative) attainment of the

(ideal) object of desire (in the manner described), why (does this) not (take

place) by the (contemplative) attainment of the (ideal) object of knowledge of the
power of knowledge? With this doubt (in mind) he says:

3TTYTĒaTATRA
JaṬTT AṬAT II 93 1I

unmeṣaśaktāv asty etaj jñeyaṁ yady api bhūyasā l| 79 ||
tathāpi vibhavasthānaṁ ṣā na tu prācyajanmabhiūḥ |

Even though that objectivity is present abundantly in the power of

expansion (unmeṣaśakti) (that is, the power of knowledge), it is the place
where it develops (vibhavasthāna), not its prior origin (which is the power of

the will.. (Thus, no other forms of awareness originate from the power of
knowledge). (79cd-80ab) (80)
‘Even though objectivity, which is Fire etc., ‘is present abundantlyʼ in
the power of knowledge, that power of knowledge is (only) ‘the place where it
developsʼ, it is ‘not its prior origin’, which is the power of the will. The meaning
is that it is not, like the power of the will, the place where it originates. (Thus, the

power of knowledge (jñānaśakti) does not give rise to an alternative series of
forms of reflective awareness, as does the will). The manifestation of the

aggregate of phenomena that has arisen as the object of desire within the power of
the will takes place within the power of knowledge, and manifests in an external
form within the power of action (kriyāśakti). Thus, as the emergence of the object

of knowledge within the power of knowledge is not something new (apūrvatayā),
the (contemplative) attainment of it there does not give rise to (any) other (forms
of) reflective awareness. Thus, as the object of desire arises within the power of
the will as something new, it is termed in this way (in that case). Although all

l Read tadarthaṁ for tadartha.
Less literally, but more clearly, one could translate: ‘contemplative absorption in the

(ideal) object of desire’. The four neuter letters represent forms of contemplative
absorption, the object of which is the undefined condition of ‘being desirable’, rather than

a specific object of desire.

CHAPTER THREE

existent things arise within supreme consciousness also because it is full of all

things, even so their condition there is just as consciousness alone (saṁvitmātra)

(not as independently defined entities).
Moreover, it is said here (according to this teaching) that what is as if a
separate manifestation (takes place) here because (at this stage, consciousness)

aṭtains a state of subtle (inner) expansion (kiṁciducchunatā) (like that of a seed

about to sprout), and so he says:

ÇTJTYIHṜT: TRJTTHĀ THT] I Z

II

icchāśakter ataḥ prāhuś cātūrāpyaṁ parāmrṛtam | 80 I|

kṣobhāntarasyāsadbhāvānnedaṁ bījaṁ ca kasyacit |

Thus the (wise) call the four-fold form of the power of will ‘Supreme
Nectar (parāmṛta). As no further arousal (takes place), this is not the seed of
anything. (80cd-81ab) (81)
(This four-fold form of the power of the will) is ‘Supreme Nectar”,
which is the supreme wonder (paracamatkāra) (of pure reflective awareness),

because it rests within its own nature alone. This is the meaning. As he will say:

‘(This group of four letters) is said to be nectar, because it rests within its own

nature. But surely (one may ask, it is said that) ‘the vowels are considered to be
seed(s) . . . Thus in accord with this (view, the four ‘neuter’ letters r Ṛ | Ḷ.)

possess the state of seeds because they are included amongst the vowels, and that
(seed state) is said to be one that arouses (prakṣobhaka) (the further development
of forms of reflective awareness), whereas here (they are said to be) resting in

themselves alone, and so that is inconsistent (with their being considered to be
vowels, which as such should arouse further forms of reflective awareness). So
would that (be s0) when there is further arousal? With this doubt in mind, he says,

‘it is not the seed (of anything)ʼ, because (the group of four neuter vowels) rests

in its own nature alone. Thus, because it is not the cause of (some) effect of its

own, as it does not give rise to (any) subsequent arousal (of further

developments), it is like (a seed) that has been burnt (and so cannot sprout). (It is

said to be like that,) the seed state is not entirely absent (in it) in every respect.

(Moreover,) thereis no separate category apart from (those of) the seed (vowels)

and the womb (consonants), which are Śiva and Śakti (respectively), so that that
Below, 3/92ab.
MV 3/10d.

In the PTv Abhinava explains:

‘This group of four (phonemes) is called sterile, just like a seed that has been

burnt, because they participate in the nature of voidness, and not because they do not
possess the nature of a seed at all. No (state), in fact, exists apart from that of Śiva and
Śakti, who are (respectively) seed and womb: there is no (third) state in addition to these
two to be found in the Mālinīvijayottara or in any other treatise. In the pleasures of this

world, too, the same sort of rest, that is, of bliss, is to be found. This is why these
(phonemes) are called the four seeds of nectar.” PTv p. 174 (translation by Padoux).

TANTRĀLOKA

(group of four) may (be considered) in this way (not to be vowels), because it is
(clearly) stated that:
‘(She is) of two kinds, because (her) nature is (both) seed and matrix. The
vowels are considered to be the seed, (whereas) the matrix is considered to be

(formed by the consonants beginning with) K.’

MV 3/10cd-l1a; also quoted in PTv p. 148 and explained. The third quarter is also

quoted below ad 3/180cd (180ab). By referring to the preceding verses in the MV, it is
clear that the subject is the Goddess. We have noted already that the vowels are generally

considered to be feminine, and the consonants, masculine (above, note 3,239). In the MV,

as in the Tantrāloka, it is the other way around. Thus, in the course of listing the alphabet
deities resting in Rudraśakti, the MV declares that the first sixteen, which correspond to

the vowels, are seeds (ibid. 3/19cd), and the remaining thirty-four consonants are wombs
(ibid. 3/24ab). The Siddhayogeśvarīmata, the root Trika Tantra, muṣṭ have sponsored the

same distinctively Trika classification.
Abhinava quotes this verse in the PTv (p. 148), and goes on to explain that,
according to what it teaches: śiva eva hi pramātṛbhāvam atyajan p. 149) vācakaḥ syāt

ca
sśaktr
eva

bhede

hi
vācakaḥ
pratipādyapratipādakobhayarūpapramātṛṣvarāpā-vicchinna
eva
prathate
Śśivātmakasyarabījarūpā śyānataiva śāktavyañjanayonibhāvo bījād eva yoneḥ prasaraṇāt
iti – samanantaram eva nirṇeṣyāmaḥata eva svarātmakabījavyāmiśrī-bhāvaś ced yoneḥ
tatsamastaphalaprasavo hanta niryatnaḥ - ity apavargabhogāvakṛṣṭapacyāv eva
bhavataḥ bījavarṇo ʻpi svātmani yoniyarṇo ’pi tathaiva –- iti kiṁ kasya bhedakam – iti

kathyamānaṁ nāsmān ākulayet ye vayam ekāṁ tāvad anantacitratāgarbhiṇīṁ tāṁ

.giraṁ

saṁgirāmahe

api

vyavahārapade

p.

150)

laukikakramikayarṇapadasphuṭatāmayī eka-parāmarśasvabhāvaiva pratyavamarśakāriṇī

anyaiś
ca
.etatprayatna-sādhitam
iha
vca
.etāvad
upadeśadhārādhīśayanaśālinām aprayatnata eva siddhyati iti nāsmābhir atra vr̥thā
vaiyākaraṇagurugṛhagamanapūtaśarīratāviṣkriyāmātraphale nirbandho vihitaḥ evam eva
navātmapiṇḍaprabhr̥tiṣy api mālāmantreṣv api ca kramākrama-pūrvāparādibheda-

codyapratividhānaṁ siddham eva evaṁ bhagavaṁ maāliny eva
pāramārthikamadhyamādhāmaśaktisatattvam ata evoktaṁ śrīpūrvaśāstre

mukhya-

yatheṣṭaphalasaṁsiddhyai mantratantrānuvartinām |

nyasec chāktaśarīrārthaṁ bhinnayoniṁ tu mālinīm |
iti bhinnayonitvaṁ ca nirṇītam

‘Śiva Himself Who, (never) forsaking His (inherent) subjectivity is (rightly)
(considered to be) the (universal) denotator (vācaka); (whereas) Śakti Herself, Who is
immersed in the objective aspect, is the object of denotation (vācyā). (Thus,) even on (the
plane of) relative distinctions (bheda), the denotator is (always) perceived (prathate) (and

manifests) as not being separate from the essential nature of the (perceiving) subject

(pramātrṣvarūpa) in its two aspects as the denotator (pratipādaka) and the object of
denotation (pratipādya). The state of the matrices, that is, of the consonants which are

Śakti, is a condensate of the seeds, that is, the vowels, which are Śiva. This is because, as

we shall explain further ahead, a matrix extends out (and so is derived) from a seed.
(Thus, the objection that could be raised has no ground, namely that) if the
matrices are already mixed with the seeds, that is, the vowels, all their fruits would arise
(spontaneously) without effort (niryatna), both liberation and worldly benefits, without
having to first cultivate them. Moreover, the seed phonemes would be matrices within
themselves and, analogously, matrices (would be seeds), so there would be nothing to
distinguish them from one another. None of these (objections) can disturb us, we who

CHAPTER THREE
He will say further ahead and there itself resolve (this issue):

‘Two classes, namely, the cerebrals and dentals, arise from (the will)

sullied by the object of knowledge, (which has two forms,) according to whether

it is fleeting (kṣipra) or stable (sthira).”

So it is reasonable to say that this is ‘not the seed (of anything).

Surely (one may ask,) if this is so and the state of these (neuter vowels) is

not that of a seed (vowel), then by default, should it be that of a matrix
(consonant)? With this doubt in mind,

in order to avoid this

(possible

contingency), and establish the difference between a seed and a matrix, he
explains their nature.

proclaim that Speech, which is essentially consciousness, contains within itself the infinite
variety of things. In daily life, although it is subject to Māyā, Speech is the Light (of
consciousness) which is reflectively aware (pratyavamarśākāriṇī) (even though) it

consists of the clearly evident (manifestation of common) empirical (laukika) phonemes

and words which are successive and in a clearly apparent state. While (all) this is

explained by others with great difficulty, here, for those who base themselves on the
foundation of (this) teaching in this way, it is (obvious and) established effortlessly. For
this reason, we have not been too concerned to visit the homes of the masters of grammar
in vain, to get (nothing) from that except the foul smelling body (of the dead letter). (What
we have said also serves to refute similar possible objections) with regards to Mantras,
such as the one consisting of nine letters (navātman), (long) garland-like ones

(mālāmantra) and so on, that is, how we justify the procedure that there should be a

‘prior” and a ‘subsequent’, succession and non-succession etc. (at the same time). (The
point is that according to this view, Speech is both one and multiple, that is, nonsuccessive and successive.) In this way, the main and ultimately real abode of the Middle
Speech is the goddess Mālinī who is Śakti and Her essential nature. (see also TSā p. 213214 and 327-328). Thus it is said in the Mālinīvijayottara:

‘In order that those who are followers of the Tantras and Mantras may achieve
the desired fruits, the knower of Mantra should project into the acts of deposition (of
Mantras onto the body) which have not been performed in accord with their specific
procedures (viśeṣavidhi), Mālinī, whose (seeds are) mixed with the matrices, in order to

obtain a body of power. (MV 3/35-36)

This mixture (of seeds) with the matrices has thus been explained.’

T Ã 3/152 (151cd-152ab). We shall see further ahead that the classes of consonants are
derived from the vowels. The cerebrals and dentals are derived from the vowels ṛ and 1.
Thus, the four ‘neuter’ vowels are seeds, because they do, in fact give rise to further
development, but not within the vowel series, where they are ‘not the seed of anythingʼ,

that is, further states of reflective awareness within Śiva consciousness that lead
progressively to its emission into the sphere of objectivity. See below, note 3,495.

Tn the brief aside that follows in the next three verses, Abhinava defines what he means

by ‘arousal” (kṣobha), in order to distinguish the nature of the seed (i.e. a vowel) that
‘arousesʼ (i.e stimulates to manifestation), and the matrix (i.e. consonant) that is ‘aroused’

(i.e. made manifest as the metaphysical principle it symbolizes). He does this in order to
explain why the neuter vowels are not seeds in the full sense.

TANTRĀLOKA

The State of Arousal and the Aroused Seed

prakṣobhakatvaṁ bĩjatvaṁ kṣobhãdhãraś ca yonitã || 81 |
The seed state (symbolized by the vowels) is the state that engenders
the arousal (prakṣobhakatva) (of consciousness when it is emitting its
manifestations), while the ground of arousal (kṣobhadhāra) is the matrix
(yonitā) (symbolized by the consonants). (81cd) (82ab)
Surely (one may ask,) a seed, which is considered to be the causal state

(ofa plant), is insentient, so how can it independently (of other factors) be capable
of giving rise to another form?™ With this doubt in mind, he says:

īlrr ārēx-z 1| ¢3 1
kṣobhakaṁ saṁvido rūpaṁ kṣubhyati kṣobhayaty api |
kṣobhaḥ syāj jñeyadharmatvaṁ kṣobhaṇā tadbahiṣkṛtiḥ l| 82 ||
The agent of (this) arousal (kṣobhaka) is the (yery) nature (rūpa) of
consciousness (itself), which is (both) aroused and arouses also. (This state of)
arousal (kṣobha) is an inherent attribute of objectivity, and (the actual act of)
arousal (kṣobhaṇā) is the projection of that (objectivity) outside
(consciousness). (82) (82cd-83ab)
‘The (very) nature (rāpa) of consciousness (itself) is primarily ‘the
agent of (this) arousal (kṣobhaka)’. Thus, because consciousness contains within

itself both the cause and object of arousal, it is (that which is) ‘aroused’, It

sustains objectivity, which is as if tending (unmukha) to the extroverted state (of
consciousness), and is as if threaded inwardly (by consciousness, in such a way
that it is at one with consciousness, forming a single whole,) on the analogy of the

yolk of a peahen’s egg And that, aroused in this way, arouses; that is to say,

makes (objectivity) manifest in an external state. He says that (with the words)

Concerning the formation of the matrix and seed, see PTv p. 183-184, translated below
in note 3,319.
Only consciousness can assume and generate new forms. An insentient entity is

confined to its own fixed, determined (niyata) form. See below, 3/101ab-101cd (3/101cd-

102ab).

! The colour of the yolk of a peahen's egg is single and uniform, even though the bird

born from it has brilliant multicoloured feathers. This standard analogy (nyāya) is ‘a
comparison usually brought in to explain how what looks one and simple may actually
contain all the potentialities of multiplicity and complexity.” (lyer 1995: 58 n. 1)

Bhartṛhari uses the same analogy to explain how words prior to their articulation exist as a
single potential energy (kratu), that is as an ‘inner word’ within the speaker's
consciousness (VP 1/51).

CHAPTER THREE

‘(this state of) arousal’ etc. ‘(The actual act of) arousalʼ is the impulse
(preraṇā) which is (the act of) sending forth etc. of the object of arousal. This is

the meaning.

He explains that concisely, whilst (implicitly) including (a reference to)

the secret practice (rahasyaprakriyā) (of ritual and yogic sexual union).

ÉgEIEVURECRIGAŪĒIĒEEĀAĀA

antaḥsthaviśvābhinnaikabījāṁśavisisṛkṣutā |
kṣobho ‘tadicche tattvecchābhāsanaṁ kṣobhaṇāṁ viduḥ || 83 |I
(The state of) arousal (kṣobha) is the desire to emit the seed aspect (of
consciousness), which is one and undivided from the universe present within
it. (The wise) know that the act of arousing (kṣobhaṇā) is the manifestation of

a desire (to turn away from itself on the part) of (ultimate) reality, even when

(that transcendental, introverted consciousness originally) has no desire (to

do s0).” (83) (83cd-84ab)

The ‘universe present within’ is (the whole) class of phenomena

(bhāvajāta), which (in these vocalic forms of reflective awareness) is the object of

the sovereignty (of consciousness) and the rest,”™ that abides at one with the

(supreme) perceiver. As the power of dominance (īṣaṇā) and the rest are (all)
consciousness there (in the sphere of the vocalic forms of reflective awareness),
the specific (nature of each one) has not been differentiated (from the others and
consciousness). Thus, the nature (riūpa) of consciousness, which is one without a

second, is itself ‘the seed aspect’, as that which gives rise to everything (viśva),

because it is full of all existing things (and states of being) (bhāva). (The seed

aspect) is a special type of cause, namely, the desire of that (conscious) nature to
emit (all things), which (unlike other forms of desire) is unique in that (it effects

its goal) without depending on anything else. The association (saṁbandha) with
that desire to make the universe of subject and object manifest as if it were
separate (from consciousness) is ‘(the state of) arousalʼ.
‘Even when (that transcendental, introverted

consciousness

originally) has no desire (to do so)ʼ, that is, when it is not directed externally
towards (outer objective) phenomena such as the body, ‘blue’ and the like because
of (its) indifference (towards them). ‘The manifestation of a desire (to turn

1 Cf. below, 3/86-87.
” The triad Anuttara (A), Bliss (Ānanda – Ā) and the Will (lcchā -- I), that precedes
Sovereignty

(īṣaṇā– ) is ‘unarousedʼ, that is, entirely devoid of ‘objectivity’. Sovereignty is the

‘aroused’ form of the Will (see above, 3/72 (72cd-73ab)). The vowels that follow are also

in different ways ‘aroused' by ‘objectivity’ which, as we shall see (in verse 85) consists of
the triad of A, Ā and I. The Sanskrit word for ‘object’ here is ‘jñeya’, which literally
means that which needs/must/should be known’. We have seen that ‘’Siva is referred to in
this way (above note 1,434 to 1/35). Here it is Anuttara and its will, that is, the power of
its freedom, oneness within which is its inherent bliss (ānanda).

TANTRĀLOKA

away from itself on the part) of (ultimate) realityʼ, which is the manifestation
(of that desire), as the intention to direct itself externally (towards outer

objectivity, that takes place) because (that) state of indifference has fallen away
(and consciousness is actively engaged in impelling the act of manifestation), as
(when one says) for example, ‘he impels the arrow’. The teachers etc. ‘know’ this

to be ‘the act of arousingʼ.

In the course of Kaula sexual practice (caryākrama), the man who desires

to emit seed is himself (spontaneously) aroused and arouses the woman. This is
not explained here because it is very secret and (moreover) it is not the subject at

hand. (The manner of practice) is only inferred, according to (its) application.
Having defined in this way the nature of the seed, he explains that of the
matriX.

ṬFāTITTJTĀT

ōṀ: JTI=TTHI: 1123 1|
yadaikyāpattim āsādya tadicchā kṛtinī bhavet |
kṣobhādhāram imaṁ prāhuḥ śrīsomānandaputrakāḥ || 84 |
This desire is fulfilled when it has attained a state of unity (with the

desired aim). This, the disciples (putraka) of the venerable Somānanda say,

is the location (and foundation of the state) of arousal (kṣobhādhāra).” (84)
(84cd-85ab)

The desire which is related to the supreme subject is fulfilled when it has
‘aṭṭained a state of unity° with phenomena such as the body and ‘blue’, which
are perceived objectively (idantāvimṛśyena), and with (the consonants) beginning
The state of arousal (kṣobha) is the intent of consciousness to emit the seed of the
potential universe out into the sphere of outer manifestation, that is, the ‘matrix (yoni),

with which it becomes one. In this state it is consciousness that is being ‘aroused’ into

assuming a manifest form. The state of arousal matures into the ‘act of arousalʼ, when
consciousness is actively engaged in impelling the ‘seed’ into the ‘womb’, and so passes
on from being aroused to being arousing. Jayaratha goes on to point out the application of
meditative absorption in these states of reflective awareness in the course of Kaula sexual
uniōn.

Read bījasiṣṛkṣuḥ for bīja sisṛkṣuḥ.

Who these ‘disciples of the venerable Somānanda’ may be is unclear. Jayaratha says

Abhinava is referring to Utpaladeva and others. We may take the plural to be an honorific.
If ṣo, Abhinava is referring to only one disciple, who one would expect to be Utpaladeva.

However, I know of no extant work the great author of the Īśvarapratyabhijñā has written
that voices this view or indeed, deals with this subject. In his commentary on the
Parātrīṣikā Abhīnava repeatedly refers to Somānanda as an earlier commentator.
Abhinava takes him to be the author of the Śivadṛṣri. Perhaps Abhinava is referring to the

students who studied the Parātrīśikā. Although he revered him, preferring to study his
commentary rather than that of others before writing his own, he does criticise his views
in one or two places. Could this be another instance?
” The following verses, 85-89 (85cd-89), comment on the two preceding verses, 82-83

(82cd-84ab).

CHAPTER THREE

with K (that represent the metaphysical principles in the sphere of objectivity). It

is fulfilled in the sense that, by resting within its own nature alone, it becomes full
(and all-inclusive), in accord with the principle (nyāya) that ‘these cosmic waves
of Bhairava are my very own’.” ‘The disciples of the venerable Somānanda’,
namely, the venerable Utpaladeva and the others, who are the objects of his

compassion, say that that is ‘the location’, that is, the field of operation (viṣaya),

of ‘the arousal’, which is the freedom of consciousness. In the course of Kaula
sexual practice (caryākrama) also, a man’s desire is fulfilled when a state of

oneness (sāmarasya)” has been attained. This is the characteristic feature of the

matrix (yoni), which is ‘the location of arousal’

The nature of the seed and the matrix has been indicated in (these verses),

beginning with ‘present within’' (now he) himself (goes on) to explain (the
same), along with the secret practice (rahasyaprakriyā) (of ritual and yogic sexual

union), so that those who are the objects of (the Lord’s) grace may take it to heart,
because it is the supreme (practice) to be adopted.

IEGIĒIGIEEIT-ēIĒAEĒZEḤĀḤ

TRAHT TÇ āīīst gaTIGTĪST
a IIc&U 11
saṁvidām īṣaṇādīnām anudbhinnaviśeṣakam |
yaj jñeyamātraṁ tad bījaṁ yad yogād bījatā svare |l 85 ||
The seed (byja) is just (pure) objectivity alone (jñeyamātra) (of Śiva
consciousness that needs be known), which is not (yet) differentiated into the

VBh 110ab (109ab), quoted in full below ad 5/71cd-72ab (71). See there for details.

The printed edition reads vibheditāḥ (as we find the second time this line is quoted ad
5/71cd-72ab (71)) – ‘differentiatedʼ – for vinirgatāḥ – have come forth’; MSs Ch, Jh, Ḍ:

N, T: read vicitratā ‘wonderfully various’.

” Several words denote ‘oneness’ (aikya) from different perspectives. For example,

tādātmya means literally ‘having that same nature’; abheda means ‘absence of difference’;
‘advaya’ means ‘not two'; advaita means ‘without a second’; and ‘sāmarasya’ means
‘equalness of flavour’ or ‘sameness of juicesʼ. The common shift of meaning of the word

rasa from ‘juice’ to aesthetic sentiment or emotion is reflected in this word for oneness,

which is thus implicitly understood to be oneness of emotions or sentiments and s0, by
extension, state of Being. While this fits as a way of referring to the oneness of sentiment
of two people in love, in this case it also implies the mingling and becoming one of the
sexual fluids of the two partners.

" Concretely, what this means, in terms of the symbolism of the letters, is that the vowels

combine with the consonants. Indeed, they must for the consonants to be articulated.

Whereas it is possible to pronounce vowels alone, that is not so with the consonants. The
vowels are the musical sound (svara), as it were, of the consonants made manifest. In this
sense they are in the location of the vowels when they are ‘activated’ and applied to
articulate consonants. The former are the male seeds of Śiva consciousness in the inner
sphere of subjectivity, and the latter are wombs or matrices of the principles ranging from
Earth to Māyā in the outer sphere of objectivity. In this way they are the location of the

aroused state of the vowels. Combining the two generates the universe of words and
meanings.

See 3/83ab (83cd) above.

TANTRĀLOKA

(succeeding) forms of consciousness beginning with ‘sovereignty’ (iṣaṇā),

(symbolized by the letter ). The seed state (bījatā) is present in the vowels by
virtue (of their) association (yoga) with this (pure, inner objectivity). (85)

(85cd-86ab)

(The consciousness in which) no division has (yet) arisen between (the

various forms of) consciousness, beginning with ‘sovereignty’ (iṣaṇā) onwards, is
objectivity (jñeya) that must be known. (As such it is) the supremely real nature of
consciousness which, because it has not assumed (any) particular form of
consciousness, from the will onwards (moving in reverse), is only the Supreme

Lord’s undifferentiated nature (rīpa). That very (teaching is given in the
following verse from the Īśvara-pratyabhijñā):

‘God, whose nature is consciousness itself, makes manifest phenomena
(arthajāta) within (Him) externally by the sway of (His own) will (alone), without

(any) material cause, just like a yogi (who creates from nothing what he imagines

by his yogic power).”

Thuṣ, according to this view, the ‘seed’ is the (Lord’s outwardly oriented
consciousness, which is the) main (mukhya) cause (of everything), because, being
full of all things, it generates externally the universe located within by its own will
alone. This is the meaning. Surely (one may ask,) if this is the case, then how can
the vowels also possess (this) seed state? With this doubt in mind, he says that
‘the seed state (bjatā) is present in the vowels by virtue (of their) association
(yoga) with this (pure, inner objectivity)ʼ. (The seed state is present in the
vowels) ‘by (their) association’ (with it), that is, because they are vitalized by it

(and vitalize it). Thus it is right (to maintain that) the vowels possess the (inner)
seed state (of objectivized consciousness), because they give rise to each (of their

corresponding consonant) letters (that represent aspects and forms of externally
objectivised consciousness). This is the point. Nothing else apart from the

Jayaratha means from the will (I) to bliss (Ā) and the Absolute (anuttara). No
objectivity arises in these first three phases. In other words, the objectivity — jñeya – which

‘needs to be known’, within the inner spheres of the phases of vocalic reflective

awareness, is the pure consciousness which is ultimate reality.

P 1/5/7. Cf. ‘Just as it is possible for there to be many forms (created) by the will of
yogis (who desire to create them), nor is there any means of any sort apart from the Lord’s
will (that consents to it), such as the clay and the rest (required to make a pot). In the same
way, it is the Lord’s will alone that arises as that.’ ŚDr̥ 1/44-45ab, see also ibid. 3/35-37.

This is why the first three letters are also vowels, even though they are free of
objectivity. They are not ‘vitalized’ by the objectivity that begins to emerge in the fourth
phase, they ‘vitalize’ it.
The order of the letters of the Sanskrit alphabet is determined by basic phonetic
principles. The series of vowels are articulated progressively from the back of the throat to

the mouth, as are the consonants. The former differ from the latter because the tongue

does not touch the points of articulation in the throat and mouth. Thus, the vowels are
called ‘without touch’ (asparsśa) and the consonants, ‘touch’ (sparśa). The former are

understood to be the cause of the latter if we understand an effect to be a consolidation of
a particular form of its cause. The difference is just a ‘touch’. In this perspective the outer
objectivity, separated from the subject, represented by the consonants, is the ‘condensed

CHAPTER THREE

freedom of consciousness is capable of generating other (novel) forms (differing,
aṣ it were, from itself and each other). This is the sense (of this verse).

Having explained the meaning of the word ‘seed’, he explains (what is
meant by) ‘arousal’ʼ, in its two aspects as bringing about (arousal) and being (itself
aroused and activated).

fṀrrc- 1|] ¢ 11

y Iīṝ. gārīṃī] g qPĪĪ̄TFRITGT]|I
GTāGTRTĪRIĪYTTTĪ
TĪTRI TJIT II ¢C

tasya bījasya saiyoktā visisṛkṣā ya udbhavaḥ |
yato grāhyam idaṁ bhāsyad bhinnakalpaṁ cidātmanaḥ | 86 ||

haṭhād yad audāsīnyāṁśacyāvanaṁ saṁvido balāt || 87 I|

The intent to emit (viṣisṛkṣā) mentioned previously is the
outpouring (udbhava) of that seed, due to which this object of knowledge
(grāhya) (ultimately) manifests as if it were separate from the conscious

nature. This is arousal (kṣobha). The act of arousing (kṣobhaṇā) is that which
causes the consciousness of other perceivers who are silent (tūṣṇīṁbhūta) (in
the sense that their attention is not directed outside themselves) to be
forcefully (haṭhāt) (drawn away and) fall from the detached (transcendental)

aspect (audāsīnyāṁśa) of consciousness by its (inherent) power. (86-87)

The ‘outpouring’ is (the inner) exertive state (of consciousness that flows

out through emission to generate objectivity) (udyantrtā) ‘due to which this
form of the inner objectivity, at one with it, represented by the vowels, which is thus its

cause.

In the following three verses, Abhinava defines what he means by arousal (kṣobha), the

act of arousal and the foundation of arousal (kṣobhādhāra). Arousal is the desire to emit

all things, which heralds the outpouring of objectivity from the pure conscious nature in
such a way that it manifests as if it were separate from it. The act of arousal is the arousal

of consciousness from its introverted to its extroverted state. In its introverted state, it

views itself alone, full of all things and yet beyond them, as they are nothing but
consciousness itself. This is the state of the supreme perceiver, blissfully at rest in His own

infinite, inexplicable nature. In the extroverted state, consciousness contracts to assume
the form of the individual perceiver, who views the outer world as separate from himself.
The act of arousal is the powerful impulse of consciousness which pulls it away, as it
were, from its introverted to the extroverted state. The foundation of arousal is the

fundamental identity of the inner and outer states of subject and object in the one unitary
consciousness. This is not a static condition. On the contrary, it is the perpetual renewal of
their oneness. The very moment a distinction between them as the object of desire and the
one who desires it arises within consciousness, it is fulfilled. The repose of consciousness
within itself is the foundation of the arousal that brings about this distinction. If this
fundamental unity were not to exist, nothing would take place.

Cf. above, 3/83 (83cd-84ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

object of knowledge (grāhya) that is, phenomena including the body, ‘blue’

and the rest, as well as (the series of consonants) beginning with K (that represent
their essential metaphysical constituents), are ‘as if it were separate’ from the
proximity of ‘the conscious nature’. (In other words,) it makes (the object of
knowledge) manifest as being in the process of separating (from the conscious
nature), although it is not separate from it, so that it may subsequently manifest
(fully as if independently of the perceiver). ‘This is arousal’, which is (just the
pure inner) exertive state (of consciousness) alone (udyantṛtāmātra). In the

course of Kaula sexual practice (caryākrama) also, ‘bliss’ and so forth (follow)

after (the state of) arousal.
The ‘other perceivers’ are ‘silent’, that is, because of (their) indifference,

they are not intent on external phenomena.” They are the subjects who abide as

the body etc., as distinguished from (the objects outside the body) such as (the

colour) ‘blue’ and implicitly (arthāt) ‘blue’ and the like, which are (their) objects
of knowledge. They are ‘(drawn away and) fall from the detached
(transcendental)

aspect (audāsīnyā”"mśa)

(of consciousness)

‘forcefully

(haṭhāty’, that is, by the employment of force (balātkāra), which is the

manifestation of a desire (to turn away from itself on the part) of (ultimate) reality
(that is, transcendental, introverted consciousness), even if (originally) it has no

desire (to do s0).”™ (Thus,) ‘the fall from’ (their transcendental) detachment (that

is, introverted state), in which there is no engagement (pravartana) in the

extroverted state, is (its) manifestation as the propensity to the extroverted (outer

state). This takes place ‘by its (inherent) power,’ that is, by taking the support of
its own (inherent) vitality, characterized as the freedom which is the agency of

Note that Abhinava uses two different words for ‘objectivity’. In the previous verse, he
used the word ‘jñeya’, which, as we have noted, also means ‘that which is to be known’,
implying its identity with Śiva. Here he uses the word ‘grāhya’, which literally means

‘that which is to be grasped’, to denote the object of the inner and outer senses which is
‘grasped’ by them, impelled by the agency of the perceiver, which is distinct from them as

the one who ‘grasps’.

The inner effortless ‘exertion’ (udyama, udyantṛtā) of consciousness is a kind of
upsurge or ‘outpouring’ within it that impels the emergence of the energies and conditions
which ultimately consolidate into objective, outer manifestation that appears to be separate

from consciousness. This is how Abhinava defines the ‘arousal’ of consciousness from the

unmanifest inner states to the progressively more external outer states of objectivity. Cf.
ŚSū 1/5 ‘exertion (or upsurge) is Bhairava’. Kṣemarāja comments: ‘the upsurge (or

exertion of consciousness) is the sudden emergence of the highest level of intuition
(pratibhā), the outpouring (ucchalanā) of consciousness consisting of the (ever) extending

awareness (vimarśa) (it has of its own nature). It is Bhairava because He is full of the
entire universe insofar as He is the unity (sāmarasya) of all His powers and has
assimilated into Himself every discursive perception (kalpana). (He appears in this form)
to those (yogis) who, devoted to Him, are solely intent on the inner reality (of all things),

in order to make their own Bhairava-nature manifest. See Dyczkowski 1992b: 22ff. For
the identification of ‘intuition’ or ‘creative imagination (pratibhā) with Bhairava’s
freedom, see above 3/65cd-66ab (66).

Swami Lakshmanjoo: ‘This is ‘arousal’. Its power consists in making the awareness of
other experiencing subjects who stand aloof [indifferent) to be forcibly distracted from

their indifference.”

Cf. above, 3/83 (83cd-84ab).

CHAPTER THREE

consciousness present there (in these perceivers). (This process of transformation

from the introverted to the extroverted state of consciousness is) called ‘the act of

Having explained the verse (sūtra) (which defines) the seed, he (now) also

explains the verse (which defines) the matrix.

The Matrix of Arousal

visisṛkṣāsau yad vimarśāntaraikyataḥ |
kṛtārthā jāyate kṣobhādhāro ‘traitat prakīrtitam | 88 II
The foundation of arousal (kṣobhādhāra) is said here to originate
when this desire to emit, although (just) arisen, becomes inwardly one with

the reflective awareness (in which the inner subjective awareness and its
object are united), and so attains its goal. (88)
Although the supreme subject’s desire to emit, which is characterized as

(his) aroused state (kṣobha), has (just) arisen, it ‘attains its goalʼ, that is, becomes
full (and complete), by resting within its own nature alone (the moment it arises).

(This happens) by having taken its support from the oneness (between subject and
object). The reflective awareness of objectivity (idantā) is, by its very nature,

different from (and opposite to) the reflective awareness of subjectivity. (But)

because (at this stage of emanation both are) established in pure consciousness,
and because no difference is attributed between the object of awareness and

awareness (itself), that (awareness is one with) its object of awareness, that is,
phenomena, which include the body, ‘blue’ and so forth, as well as (the series of

consonants) beginning with K (which represent their constituent metaphysical
principles). That is ‘hereʼ, in the verse concerning the matrix that begins with
? Note that the introverted condition which is a state of ‘indifference’ or ‘detachment’

(audāṣīṇya) that the dualist Sāṁkhya (which informs the Yoga of the Yogasūtras)
considers to be an aspect of the liberated state of the individual soul (who is understood to

be pure consciousness), is here considered to be just one aspect of it. In its introverted
state, consciousness is aloof from manifestation, which therefore does not take place. In

order for consciousness to manifest externally, it must assume its other extroverted

‘aroused’ aspect. This transition is the ‘act of arousal’. The dualist Sāṁkhya maintains that
objectivity is a separate reality, independent of consciousness. Accordingly, they use the
same term to denote the ‘arousal’ of unmanifest objectivity into the manifest state by its
contact with consciousness that ‘looks out’ towards it. The Sāṁkhya maintains that this

manifestation of the countless particulars in the sphere of objectivity is the reason why the
individual soul, fascinated by them, is bound. Here, according to Abhinava, the ‘exertion’
or influence of consciousness that arouses objectivity is its freedom, not the binding
ignorance which is the result and cause of the soul’s lack of detachment from objectivity.
These two verses are 3/82-83 (82cd-84ab) above.
See above, 3/83 (83ab-84cd).

TANTRĀLOKA

‘having attained a state of unity (with the desired aim), ‘saidʼ, rightly said, to

be ‘the foundation of arousal (kṣobhādhāra)’. Having explained (these
definitions) word for word, he explains (them) according to (their) essential

purport.

gi aaī fs-- feazafq 11 ¢< 1
tatas tadāntaraṁ jñeyaṁ bhinnakalpatvam rcchati |
viśvabījād ataḥ saryaṁ bāhyaṁ bimbaṁ vivartsyati || 89 ||
It is due to this (arousal) that that inner objectivity is considered to

be as if separate (bhinna) (from consciousness and diverse). It is from this,
the seed of all things, that all the outer image (bimba) will become manifest.

(89)

‘It is due to this’, because of the aforementioned state of arousal

(kṣobha), which is the desire to emit (all things on the part of consciousness), that

the ‘imner’ Being which abides at one with the subject and ‘that’ ‘objectivity’
which has been as if (barely) outlined (āsātrita) (within consciousness), and is ‘as
if separate (bhinna)’ (from it and diverse), that is, enters a state in which it is in

the process of being separated (from consciousness). ‘It is from this, the seed of

all thingsʼ, that is, from the first letter (A Anuttara) (in the sphere of oneness),
and from Mahāmāyā (in the sphere of duality), that ‘all’ states of being (and
phenomena) (bhāvajāta), that is, (the following forms of reflective awareness)

beginning with Ā (Ānanda – Bliss), along with the metaphysical principles,
worlds and the rest (that constitute) the ‘outer’ (process of) manifestation, which
takes place by means of division (and separation) (vicchedena), (arises). (t is the)
‘image’ (bimba), that is, the reflection (pratibimba) (within consciousness), which
is characterized as the form of the object to be known (jñānīyākāra). It ʻwill
become manifestʼ, that is, clearly apparent (sphuṭībhaviṣyati), (in the succeeding
phases of emanation) as each particular (outer object), such as the body and
‘blue’, and as (the expanse of language made of) words and sentences etc., just as
they are (according to their own individual nature) (yathāyatham). This is the
meaning.
In the course of Kaula sexual practice (caryākrama) also, the (same) seed

itself which has variously comes forth (bhedena prasṛtaṁ sat), assumes the form

of female, male or eunuch.”

Nor is what (he has) said (just his) own idea. So he says:

See above, 3/84 (84cd-85ab).

Read ṛcchati for icchati.

” According to the common Indian view, a predominance of the male seed over the

female when they conjoin in the course of conception produces a male child, whereas

when the female seed predominates over the male, it is female. When they are equal the
child is genderless, in the sense that it bears both male and female characteristics.

CHAPTER THREE

iazlEeaetaĀEticfĒyṭE: Ṃḷ

Tr̥Jṛ āārā=a: ||Qo ||
kṣobhyakṣobhakabhāvasya satattvaṁ darśitaṁ mayā |
śrīmanmaheśvareṇoktaṁ guruṇā yat prasādataḥ I| 90 II

I have expounded the true nature of the relationship between the

‘arouser” and the ‘aroused’ (kṣobhyakṣobhakabhāva) by the grace of (my)
teacher, the venerable Maheśvara, who taught it to me. (90)

The syntax of (this verse) is ‘I have expounded’ ‘the true nature’ (of
this relationship) as taught by (my) ‘teacher’, who was previously hailed (and
venerated in the line) beginning with ‘the Master Maheśvara, who is another of

Once having explained this (matter) thus by way of (this) digression, he
(now continues) to expound the subject at hand.

The Neuter Vowels Continued

prakṛtaṁ brūmahe nedaṁ bījaṁ varṇacatuṣṭayam ḷ

nāpi yonir yato naitat kṣobhādhāratvam ṛcchati || 91 ||
We will (mow return to) discussing the main point. This group of four
letters (r Ṛ 1 Ḷ) is not the seed (of any further states within the vowel series),

neither is it a matrix, because it is not considered to be a location of arousal.

(These four vowels are not matrices). The will of none of any (of these
four) reaches its goal (as it does in its other forms), once having attained oneness
(with the reflective awareness, in which the inner subjective awareness of the
vowels and their objects, the consonants unite), as happens with the consonants K

and the rest, and so does not become (a matrix, which is) the location of arousal.”
Above, 1/9. It is clear from this acknowledgement of Maheśvara, i.e. Śambhunātha,
that Abhinava did not entirely invent this symbolic interpretation of the alphabet. Of
course, symbolic representations of the alphabet are a fundamental aspect of all major
mantric systems, as they are of those of the Trika Tantras. Nonetheless, many details must

have been his own insight; certainly, the fundamental conception that the phonemes
represent forms or phases of reflective awareness.

We will see further ahead in verses 149 ff. that the consonants arise from the three main

vowels A, I and U. The four neuter vowels participate in this process only secondarily as
aspects of the Will – I, which generates the semivowels R and L (see below, 3/154cd157ab (154-156)). They are not seeds of further developments in the vowel series, but do

generate phases of development in the series of consonants.

TANTRĀLOKA

Moreover, ‘this (group) is not the seed (of any further states within the vowel

series) “as no further arousal (takes place),' because there is no mention of
(it being) a prior cause (of some subsequent effect). Thus, as this group of four
letters, it rests within itself alone, because it does not arouse (further

developments); it consists of the supreme wonder (of consciousness). He says
that:

ātmany eva ca viśrāntyā tat proktam amṛtātmakam |
(Moreover,) it is said to be nectar, because it rests within its own

nature. (92ab)

Other forms of reflective awareness do not only arise from their
conjunction (saṁghaṭṭa) with objectivity, according to the manner in which it
takes place; (they also arise) by (pouring forth) into each another. He says this (as
follows).

The Diphthongs

-NN 1| 83 1
3ōffnāēā7zTTAĪGĪrgUI|
itthaṁ prāg uditaṁ yat tat pañcakaṁ tatparasparam || 92 |
ucchaladvividhākāram anyonyavyatimiśraṇāt |

The group of five (vowels) mentioned previously (A I Ī U Ū), pouring

forth within each other, assume various forms by mixing together with one
another. (92cd-93ab)

The group of five are Anuttara (A), the will (icchā – I), Sovereignty

(īṣanā -- Ī), Expansion (unmeṣa – U) and Decrease (ūntā – Ū). (Itis said with
regards to) the power of bliss that: “bliss is the nature of the Brahman’ In
accord with this view, the power of bliss (Ā) is not separate (vyatiriktā) from

consciousness (A), and so is not mentioned separately. ‘Pouring forth’, that is,
.Cf. above, 3/80cd-81ab (81).

Quoted from 3/81a (80c) above.
Cf. above, 3/83 (83cd-84ab).

See above, note TĀv ad 1/242. This quote from the Upanisadsis repeated seven times
by Jayarathain TĀv 1/242, ad 3/71 (71cd-72ab), ad 3/92cd-93ab, ad 4/139, ad 28/332ab,
ad 29/97cd-98ab, and ad 29/127cd-128ab.

One would expect all six of the first six vowels to be part of this group; however, ā is
omitted. According to Jayaratha, the reason for this is that Bliss is inherent in the pure

consciousness of the absolute - Anuttara (A). It does not develop out of it, as do the forms
of reflective awareness represented by the other long vowels, that develop out of their
corresponding short vowels. Indeed, thereis a substantial difference between the will (I)
and sovereignty (Ī), the initial expansion of knowledge (U) and the decrease of

CHAPTER THREE

coming into being ‘within each other’, not one by one, they ‘assume’ and are of

‘various forms’, that is, many letters. This (does not take place) serially, each one
established in its own state, rather (it takes place) when (they) conjoin

(saṁghaṭṭa). (He says) this by saying (that this takes place by their) ‘mixing
together (with one another).' Thus by mixing together the letter A or Ā with
the letter I or Ī, the form ‘Eʼ is generated. When these two (A and Ā) are mixed

together with the letter U or Ū, the form ‘O’ is generated. Again, if the letter I (is
mixed together) with the letter A, (we get) Y and the letter U with A (produces)

V.” They are not mixed with any other (form of) reflective awareness apart from
(these) five, and so he says, ‘with one anotherʼ.
He will say:

‘That same (power of the will) sullied by the object of knowledge (is
again of two types), according to whether it obtains (its) object fleetingly (śīghra)
or is stable (sthira), and so when intent on a different (power from itself, i.e. A

etc.), becomes (the letters) R and L.

The Letter E as the Yoni
(However,) the subject (of this verse is the manner in which) a different

(form) of reflective awareness emerges (other than those represented by the

vowels). This does not apply here, because the emergence of the diphthongs
(sandhyakṣara) (which are still vowels) is the subject here. He (now) explains
this.

subjectivity (Ū). This is not the case with consciousness and bliss, which are essentially

the same. The experience of consciousness is bliss, and that of bliss, consciousness. Cf.
PTy p. 183-184, translated below in note 3,319.

The term here for ‘conjoin’ ~ ‘saṁghaṭta’ – īs also used to denote the union of Śiva and
Śakti. In that context it is explained to be the state of dynamic union which is the pulsing
activity (spanda) of consciousness. See above, 3/67cd-68ab (68) and commentary.

These euphonic changes, which are a basic feature of the Sanskrit language, are

understood in this context to represent developments within consciousness. A, Ā, I, Ī, U

and Ū are the six basic forms of reflective awareness. All the other letters arise from
various combinations of these six. Thus, essentially, only these forms of reflective
awareness arise in various combinations with one another. Considering the long vowels to
be a variant form of the short ones, they reduce to three, that is, A, I and U. These three

generate the other vowels and, by extension, as we shall see, the consonants. Thus, these
three forms of reflective awareness, namely, the energies of Anuttara, Will and
Knowledge, are equated with Trika as the source of all manifestation. See below, 3/192
(191cd-192ab).

In some phonemic combinations, the vowels I and U reduce to the semivowels Y and V

respectively.

The momentary variety corresponds to the vowels r and R, the stable variety to the
vowels ] and L These two pairs develop into R and L, respectively.

Below, 3/155cd-156ab (155).
The vowels represent introverted states of reflective awareness in which objectivity is

ideal, that is, still one with subjective consciousness. The consonants represent extroverted
states of reflective awareness in which objectivity is experienced outside the perceiver.
Here we are examining how the internal states evolve.

TANTRĀLOKA

3īṣjī.. T: āaī] āgīT=: TTSJGT II 33 II

yo ʻnuṭtaraḥ paraḥ spando yaś cānandaḥ samucchalan | / 93 Il
tāv icchonmeṣasaṅghaṁtād gacchato 'tivicitratām |
The Absolute (A), which is the supreme vibration (spanda) (of
consciousness), and bliss (ānanda – Ā)), pouring out of itself (samucchalan),
become wonderfully various by union (saṅghaṭṭa) with (the powers of) the
will (icchā, I) and expansion (unmeṣa, U) (that is, knowledge). (93cd-94ab)
Those two letters, A and Ā, which are denoted by the words Anuttara and

Ānanda, conjoined with the will and expansion, that is, the letters I and U, form
phonemic combinations (sarṅtdhi) in accord with the rule ādgunaḥ," and so from

that ‘become wonderfully various’, that is, become the letters E and O, that

develop further as (other vowels), that differ from those that are being conjoined

together.

Having explained in this way just the emergence of the letter E, summing
up, he also defines its nature.

TTÑTGTTCTĪ
gSBJTTTĪ frAISTT 11/q¥# 1
frirvifr dgTaāāīāīag-zq 1
anuttarānandacitī icchāśaktau niyojite || 94 ||

trikoṇam iti tat prāhur viṣargāmodasundaram |

When the consciousness of the Absolute (A) and of Bliss (Ā) are

conjoined to the power of the will (I), that is said to be the Triangle (E),
beautiful with the fragrance of emission. (94cd-95ab)

PaSū 6/1/87. ‘When (any of the) vowels come after A (or Ā), let guṇa be the single

substitute for both. The term ‘guṇa’ denotes the vowels E and O, produced by the

phonemic combination of A (or Ā), followed by I and U, respectively.

The letter E, representing consciousness as the source of emanation, is formed by the

union of the Absolute (A) and its Bliss (Ā) with its omnipotent Will (I). Similarly, when

they unite with the expansion of the Knowledge of its own unconditioned nature, the
power of the inner activity of consciousness (kriyāśakti), represented by the vowel ‘0’,

emerges.

Further union of E and O with A or Ā gives rise to the letters AI and AU, respectively.

In most North Indian scripts, the letter E looks like a downward facing triangle, which

is the way the trīangular symbol (yoni) of the Goddess, the source and womb of all
manifestation, is commonly represented. Thus, it appropriately represents the energy
within Śiva consciousness through which the emission of all things takes place.

Concerning the symbolism of the letter E as the Yoni, see Dyczkowski 2009, intro. vol. ,
306, 335-336.

CHAPTER THREE
The Absolute (A) and Bliss (Ā), that is to say, either one or the other, are

placed together in phonemic conjunction (sarṁdhi) within the Will (I). That is the
Triangle, namely, the letter E, the parts of which are (the two letters) conjoined.
‘The letter E is variously called ‘trikoṇa’ (the Triangle), ‘ekādaśama’ (the
Eleventh (vowel)), ‘vahnigeha’ (the Abode of Fire), ‘yoni’ (the Womb), and

‘śrṅgāṭa’ (the Water Chestnut).”

In accord with such statements, (the letter E) is said to be called the

‘Triangle’, because it consists of the three corners called will, knowledge and
action, and also because this is its form in the sequence of the graphic

representations of the letters of the alphabet (lipikrama). This is the meaning of
the sentence. In accord with the teaching given further ahead, namely, ‘the

emission (visarga) of that Lord (Akula) is called Kaulikīśakti,’ emission
(visarga) is the Supreme Power (parāśakti).. Her ‘fragrance’ is the outpouring
(ullāsa) (of the energies of consciousness) up to the power of action, (that
develop) with the progressive emergence of the Bliss (of emission). It is
‘beautiful’ with that. It arises perpetually (nityodita) (and is constantly active)
there, and so consists of the supreme bliss of the power (śakti) (of consciousness).
This is the meaning. (It is called the) ‘Triangle’ to indicate that it is (the genital
centre), the Foundation of Birth (janmādhāra), also called the ‘Mouth of the

Yoginī’. The sense is that the Supreme Power (parāśakti) arises from that. As is
said:

“‘When (Kuṇḍalinī), whose form is crooked (kuṭila), rises from the sacred

seat of the Water Chestnut (in the Foundation of Birth).

! JY 4/54/12cd-13ab (MS K fl. 211b, Kh f. 199a, G fl. 284a). MSs of the JY read

yonigam for yonikam. The meaning is then ‘(the Abode of Fire) present in the Womb
(yoni).” This verse is drawn from chapter 54 of the fourth ṣatka of the JY, which is also

called Mādhavakula. In this chapter, called varṇavidhāna – ‘the Regulation concerning

the Lettersʼ, the code names for the letters of the alphabet are listed in alphabetical order.
It begins with OM and then proceeds in alphabeṭical order through the alphabet. Jayaratha

quotes a line from this chapter below, in which the names of the letter H are listed (see
TĀv ad 3/142cd-143ab (142))

t Below, 3/144ab (143cd). Cf. above, 3/67ab (67).
" “The mūlādhāra is in the form of a śpigāta (water chestnut), an equilateral
tetrahedron. Swami Achalananda 2007: 37. This line is drawn from the NSA, otherwise

known as the Vāmakeśvaramata (4/12cd). The entire passage is quoted in the comm. on
YHṛ 2/672. There instead of the reading kuṭilarūpiṇī ‘whose form is crooked’, we find
‘kuṇḍalarūpiṇī’ whose form is (like) an earring’. Both these are common ways of
describing Kuṇḍalinī who is ‘crooked’ or ‘coiled’ in her dormant state, straightening when

she awakes and rises. The passage is worth quoting in full:

‘When (Kuṇḍalinī), whose formis crooked (kuṭila), rises from the sacred seat of
the Water Chestnut (in the genital centre), having pierced through the sphere of Śiva’s

Sun, She melts the sphere of the Moon andis delighted by the supreme bliss of the flow of

nectar that arises from that. She, a woman of good family (kulayoṣif), having abandoned
Kula (the cosmic body), goes to the supreme Person who is devoid of (any) characteristics
and qualities and is free of the (immanent) form of Kula. Then, She whose nature is free,

TANTRĀLOKA

Moreover:
‘The Triangle is said to be the female organ (bhaga). It is the secret
Maṇḍala located in the sky (of consciousness). Its corners are will, knowledge and

action. The Ciñcinīkrama is in the middle of that.

Those who are outside (our tradition) similarly say, with the same

intended (sense):

‘That divine (reality) in the centre (of the Maṇḍala), whose form is (that
of) the letter E, is adorned with a hexagon (ṣaṟkāra). It is the abode of all forms of

pleasure, the casket of the jewels of awakened consciousness (hodha),

laying hold of the Lord of the Universe, is satisfied by (travelling along) that path and,
having again become alone, she sports by herself. (Thus,) She Who is unmanifest Tripurā
has become manifest. NSA 4/12cd-16ab.
In this context, Kuṇḍalinī is identified with the Goddess Tripurā who ‘resides in
the three cities of the Triangle. In its immanent form within Kula, that is, the sacred body
of energies of the microcosm, the Triangle is the genital centre (janmādhāra lit. ‘the
foundation of birthī). In its supreme form, the Triangle is within transcendental
disembodied Akula, at one with it. Thus, the three energies that constitute the Goddess’s
three-fold aspect, as the powers of will, knowledge and action, fuse into the one power of
freedom and reflective awareness, which is Śiva’s essential nature. Then she is again
‘alone’ as the one reality, not because, as when she was sleeping, She is alone without
Siva, the Supreme Person.
This verse is found in the Ciācinīmatasārasamuccaya (5/14cd-15ab), which is an
important Kubjikā Tantra. Ciñcinī is a common name of the goddess Kubjikā, who is the
deity of the Cīñca, that is, the tamarind tree. The Ciñcinīkrama is the ‘sequence’ or liturgy
of the mantras of the goddess Ciñcinī that are used to worship Her and through which she
generates the universe. A basic form of Kubjikā’s maṇḍala īs indeed a triangle that

represents the goddess'’s womb (bhaga, yoni), from which the universe originates. This
triangle, which is in the centre of the full Sañvartāmaṇḍala of the goddess Kubjikā, is
derived from the Trika triangle, which serves sometimes as a substitute for the Trika
Trident. It was incorporated into the centre of Śrīcakra, and so all three traditions have the
same to say about it (see Dyczkowski 2009, intro. vol. 1, 281 ff.). Although Jayaratha

could not have been aware of the concrete historical continuity between these Triangles,
their essential identity was clearly evident to him, and so he quoted these passages from

Tantras of the two schools to suggest that. Cf.

trikoṇamaṇḍalaṁ pūjyaṁ śaktitrayasamanvitam |

tanmadhye cetanaṁ cintyaṁ liṅgaṁ vai paścimāmukham ||

‘One should worship the Triangle manḍala, which has the three powers (of will,

knowledge and action), and think that consciousness (cetana) is in the centre of that.

(This) indeed is the Liṅga that faces west.’

This verse is cited below ad 5/122 (121). The source is most probably a Kubjikā

Tantra, because the reference to the Yoni as a Liṅgam facing west is commonly found in
those sources, whereas it is very rare elsewhere.

This configuration, a downward facing triangle enclosed by a hexagon, is a common

one. Thus, we notice it, for example, at the core of Durgā’s Yantra, as well as that of
Sūrya, the Sun. Even so, it seems likely that Jayaratha is quoting a verse from a Kubjikā

CHAPTER THREE

In the course of Kaula sexual practice (caryākrama) also, it is the place
made of supreme (spiritual) bliss, where (the seed) flows (prasara) as the
expansion (sphāra) (of consciousness) associated with the blissful fruit of orgasm
(visarga).

Tantra which describes the centre of Kubjikā’s Saṅvartāmaṇḍala. The next letter — AI –- is

represented by a hexagon. Concering the development of the Triangle to a hexagon, see
the PTv (p. 79). There Abhinava explains that at the centre of the Triangle ‘the goddess is

in the act of churning Bhairava Who is supreme bliss’, which thus generates the hexagon.
This, the divine level, reflects the human level of practice in which the partners,

identified with Śiva and Śakti, are the two triangles. The former is the power of
knowledge, the latter that of action. In the case of the deities, the dynamism (mudrā) of

knowledge is internal and the dynamism of action is external. In the case of practice by
Kaula adepts (vīra), it is the other way around (see Bāumer, 2011: 205-206). The

trangular vowel E is the archetype within Śiva consciousness of the matrix of consonants,

which correspond to the outer principles ranging from Earth onwards, and the yowels of

the seeds of inner Śiva consciousness by which they are fertilized. Abhinava clearly

implies in the following passage in the PTv that this union of Śiva and Śakti is the inner

process within consciousness corresponding to outer physical union.

‘The condensed state of consciousness, which although formless and (pure)

consciousness alone, is the power of action. This, in accord with the aforestated principle,

arises by the progression (krama) of the six energies (of A Ā I Ī U and Ū). The five

powers (A I U R and L) that have flowed forth (prasṛta) (to form the consonants (see
below 3/150-153ab (149cd-152)), multiplied by six to make thirty, which, along with the
six, make the thirty-six (metaphysical principles). Śiva’s seed (sivahīja), having
condensed in this way by (the power of) its own freedom, abiding somewhere (in some

inscrutable manner) in the (empowered) body of Śakti as the flower (of menses)
(kuṣumātayā), is called the matrix (yoni). That same ‘flower’, in accord with the principle
enunciated previously, is the triangle of the object of perception, perception (itself) and the

perceiver (grāhyagrahaṇagrāhaka). (However), in actual fact, it is the plane of birth
(prasūtipada) only when it is united with the seed, because it is only then that it is really

(the fertilized) flower (of menses). At any other time, it is called (a ‘flower’) in this way,
as its (potential) competence (to be so) (yogyatayaiva). In this way that flower, as the

triangle, is the matrix (yoni). The Supreme Goddess Bhairavī, the venerable consort

(mudrā), is the triangle which is divided (threefold) in a clearly evident manner as the

object of perception and the rest, the Moon (of the object), the Sun (of the means of
knowledge), and the Fire (of the subject), emanation, persistence and withdrawal, Iḍā,
Piṅgalā and Suṣumnā, Dharma, Adharma and the mixture (śabala) (of the two) and so on.
It is thus called the matrix (yoni) as it is the foundation (ādhāra) of the source (yoni) (of
all things), which has this form (of a trīangle) (tadrāpayonyādhāratayā). The same is

taught in the Kubjikāmata (in the section) concerning khaṇḍacakra, that is predominantly

dedicated to this subject. (There we read): ‘above Māyā is Mahāmāyā, which is the bliss
of the triangle (trikoṇānanda).’ 1t is thus taught in the venerable Trikatantrasāra that the
union of Śiva and Śakti, which is the single condensed state of this kind of seed and
flower, should be worshipped by ourselves (svayam) by means of our own self alone
(svayam svātmanaiva). (There we read): ‘one whose nature is the dense (state of) Śiva and

Śakti is so by virtue of the contemplative absorption (samāpatti) of Śiva and Śakti. He

should worship the supreme triad which is (formed by) the union of Śiva and Śakti.’ PTv

p. 183-184.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Letter AI as the Hexagon
Another (form of) reflective awareness, characterized by a diphthong

(saṁdhyakṣara), not only emerges by the union (yoga) of the Absolute (A) and
Bliss (Ā) within the Will (), it happens here also (with the letter E, to generate the

next state of reflective awareness, symbolized by the diphthong AI). He says this
(in the following verse).

TTTRH-GYTH
T ĒĪRṬITR |I Q., 1|

Ṁṣĩa. vrztafrg 1

anuttarānandaśaktī tatra rūḍhimupāgate || 95 ||
trikoṇadvitvayogena vrajataḥ ṣaḍarasthitim |

When the powers of the Absolute (symbolized by the letter A) and

Bliss (symbolized by the letter Ā) become firmly established there, it assumes
the condition of the hexagon (ṣaḍarasthiti) (symbolized by the letter AI),
brought about by the union of the two (triangles, A and E). (95cd-96ab)
(Both) the Absolute (that is, the letter A), which, in accord with the

teaching imparted before, consists of the three energies Raudrī (Ambikā and

Jyeṣṭhā), and Bliss (that is the letter Ā), which is simply just the essence of its

expansion (sphāra), have the form of a triangle. Thus, by the union (yoga) of the

two triangles, characterized as the letters A and E, ‘it assumes the condition of

the hexagon (ṣaḍarasthiti) (symbolized by the letter AI)’, that is, (this union)
manifests the form of the letter AI. (This happens) ‘when the Absolute
(symbolized by the letter A) and Bliss (symbolized by the letter Ā) become
firmly established there’ in the triangle also, that is, when in accord with the
progressive (application of the rules of) phonemic combination (we arrive at the

application of the rule) ‘vṛddhir eci’, (the vowel E) develops (further to form

the letter AI). This is the meaning. (The letter AI) is not written in this form

because it is very secret. (Instead) a line is drawn above the letter E to indicate its

reduplicated condition.

® Diphthongs are vowels formed by the conjunction of vowels, and so are called
‘saṁṅdhyakṣara’ (iterally: ‘conjoined letters') by Sanskrit grammarians.

" We have already noted thatin old forms of Śāradā, the Kashmiri script, the letter A is

like the letter E, triangular. See above, note 3,210.
See above, ad 3/66cd-67ab (67).

PāSū 6/1/88. ʻ“When ec (i.e. any of the vowels E, O, AI and AU) follows A, let vrddhi

be the single substitute for both.’ This rule, along with others that support it, enjoins the
process of further modification or increase of the primary vowels I and U, that have

become guṇa, i.e. E and O, by conjunction with A or Ā. Thus, the progressive
development of the vowels takes place from 1 > E > AI and U > O > AU by conjunction
with A or Ā, two successive times.
So instead of the ‘secret’ hexangular form, the letter AI is written as we find in the
common Devanagari alphabet.

CHAPTER THREE

In the course of Kaula sexual practice (caryākrama) also, the condition
which is that of the Seal of the Hexagon (ṣadaramudrā) is formed by the

encapsulated state of the two triangles of a Siddha and Yoginī (engaged in the
yoga of sexual union).

The Letters O and AU as the Powers of Action and the Trident
He (now goes on to) say that, just as a different (form of) reflective

awareness arises in the union (saṁghaṭṭa) of Anuttara (A) and Bliss (Ā) with the
letter E, in the same way, (that also happens in union) with the letter O.

T JTTPTSTĪṬ ṬTTTTATĪ TTĪ |I/ 2ē 1

Ūamg |
ta evonmeṣayoge 'pi punastanmayatāṁ gate || 96 ||
kriyāśakteḥ sphuṭaṁ rūpam abhiyyaṅktaḥ parasparam |
These same (powers of the Absolute – A and Bliss – Ā), when in union

(yoga) with Expansion (unmeṣa) (U), also again become one with it (and so it

becomes O), to then mutually fully manifest the power of action in its evident
form (symbolized by the letter AU). (96cd-97ab)
‘These same’ powers of the Absolute (A) and Bliss (Ā), in union (yoga)

with Expansion, the letter U, form a phonemic conjunction (sandhi) that generates
the letter O. Even when that has taken place, if they ‘again become one with it’,

that is, they become one with the essential nature of the letter O through the
progression of phonemic conjunction (sandhikrama), then, when the Absolute and
Bliss have ‘mutually’ assumed the nature of the letter AU, the ‘evident form’ of

the power action, characterized by the letter AU, is made ‘manifest’ ‘fully, that
is, all around (entirely).. This is the meaning, namely, that ‘the evident form is

manifest in all respectsʼ. Thus, the form of the power of action (symbolized)
within the conjoined letters (is progressively), in due order: unevident (asphuta)
(E), evident (AI), more evident (O), and (finally) most evident (AU). This is what

has been explained (in these verses).

Cf. below, 4/137 and TĀv ad 5/70cd-71ab (70). According to Swami Lakshmaṇjoo
(personal communication), the sides of the triangle in this case are marked by the three
main channels of the vital breath in the body, namely, Suṣumnā, Iḍā and Piṅgalā, which

correspond to the energies of the will, knowledge and action, as well as Fire, Moon and
Sun etc., respectively. This triangle is outlined in the Foundation of Birth of both Siddha
and Yoginī, and so when they unite, they form the Seal of the Hexagon (sadaramudrā).

With a Point in the centre, it is a common representation of the union of Śiva (the upward

facing triangle) and Śakti (the downward facing one) emitting their seed in the centre. It is

represented by the diphthong AI (see above, 3/95cd-96ab).
Just as Mantra represents the knowledge aspect of consciousness, Mudrā – the
Seal - represents that of action. Thus, the union of the two triangles is dynamic. It is from
this act of union that the process begins that develops into emission, experienced by

Siddhas and Yoginīs, and experienced as that which generates the cosmic order formed by

TANTRĀLOKA

its ‘release’ (viśleṣa). Thus, the sixteenth energy of the inner process of emission within

Siva consciousness develops into its release within the matrix (yoni) of the energies that
constitute the cosmic order. In the following passage from the PTv, Abhinava refers to the
two conjoined triangles as two seals (mudrā). The seals (mudrā) are the two sexes, male

and female; the power of action predominates in the former and that of knowledge in the

latter. Both sexes are present in every living being, one in a clearly manifest form and the
other latent. Kṣemarāja, commenting on a verse from one of Utpaladeva’s hymns (ŚSt

14/12), says that the seal of Maheśvara is stamped everywhere and consists of knowledge

and action, that are the two sexes. He quotes an unknown source as saying ‘one does not
see creatures anywhere that are not marked with a wheel and a vajra. The universe is
marked by the female and male organs (bhagaliṅga); thuṣ, it is the universe of the Great
Lord (Maheśvara).”
In the PTv, Abhinava writes: ‘In the case of a union of a (human) couple
(yāmalayoga), the heroes (and the goddess should be worshipped) by means of (the
emission) generated from the union with the Tantric consort (dūtī). (This emission) is the

arousal (kṣobha) of the eternal bliss (of consciousness present in the genitals, which is) the

sense organ of bliss (ānandendriya). Even in the state in which the hero is alone, (the

worship of the Goddess takes place) by the yoga of resting in the bliss of his own essential
nature. Even in the case of a common man, the triangle (of the genitals), which is the

abode of the flowing forth of the sense organ of bliss, located below the bulb, produces by

applying one’s mind, an arousal of bliss insofar as there is at the base of that organ and in
the part where it ends, (an increased) thickness (due to) union, in regards to which it is

said: “in between fire and poison. . . .

Thuṣ, in this way the worship of the heart is union with bliss (ānandayoga). As is

said in the Trikatantrasāra:
‘Worship is the flowing forth of bliss, and should be imagined in the triangle. By

means of flowers, incense and perfumes etc., it satisfies (and gives joy) to one’s heartʼ.
AII that exists is threaded through with two seals (mudrā), because it is

essentially the power of knowledge and action. The only (difference is that whereas) the
seal of knowledge emerges inwardly within the goddesses and the seal of action

externally, in the case of heroes it is the other way around. Penetration (into
consciousness) comes about in the normal way or the reverse. It is with regard to this that

it is said that the power of action is offered into the Liṅga that consists of the power of
knowledge.” PTv p. 222-223
VBh 68. These two terms are explained in the Pratyabhijñāhr̥daya, where viṣa

(derived from the root viṣ in the sense of ‘pervasion’ (yyāp)) represents the expansion and
flow (vikāsa, prasara) of consciousness, and ‘fireʼ, contraction. See TĀ 3/170cd-171

(170-171ab).

That the pervasive presence of the powers of knowledge and action together

constitute the life of living beings is taught in ĪP 1/1/4. See also PTv p. 26-27.

Prior to the break represented by the four neuter letters, the powers of will and

knowledge had developed in their two forms, that is, independently, and at one with their
inner objects. Now, the power of action unfolds after the break or ‘void’, represented by

the neuter vowels. This takes place in four, not just two, phases. The object of this activity,
that is, its purpose and result (kārya), is not discussed here, as that can only be an external

product (kārya) of consciousness, which is in the domain of objectivity. Ranging from

Māyā down to Earth, this is the outer sphere of the consonants, which are generated from

the inner sphere of the vowels by, through and as this activity. The source of action is the
Triangle. Externally this is Mahāmāyā, which is also represented by a triangle
symbolizing the womb (yoni) of the Goddess, from which creation issues forth. Inwardly,
it is the source of the blissful activity of consciousness fulfilled in the plenitude of the

union of the couple, Śiva and Śakti, in which it becomes clearer. Next it becomes still

CHAPTER THREE

(Now) surely (one may ask,) just as another (form of) reflective awareness
is said to arise through the union (saṁghaṭṭa) of the Absolute (A) and Bliss (Ā)

with the Will (I) and Expansion (U), why does this not happenin the same way

with Sovereignty (I) and Decrease (Ū), which are their aroused (forms)? With this

doubtin mind, he says:

gGBTHṬTT:
&IH : TṬīFrēāGTT IIQ'

icchonmeṣagataḥ kṣobho yaḥ proktas tadgater api |l 97 II

te eva śaktī tādrūpyabhāginyau nānyathāsthite |

Although, the aroused state (kṣobha) of the (powers of) the Will and

Expansion (previously) explained (to be Ī and Ū) may be associated (again)
with those same energies (of the Absolute (A) and Bliss (Ā)), they assume this
same form (namely, E, AI, O, AU), not some other state.” (97cd-98ab)
The arousal explained previously, characterized as Sovereignty (Ī) and
Decrease (Ū), of the Will (I) and Expansion (U of knowledge), ‘may be

associated (again)ʼ, in accord with the rule ādguṇaḥ’ and other (rules of

phonemic combination), with the energies called the Absolute (A) and Bliss (Ā),
when an occasion for phonemic combination (sandhi) arises. (However,) ‘they

assume this same form’, that is they certainly retain the same form, namely, AI

and AU, and so ‘not some other state’, that is, they do not abide as some other
(form of) reflective awareness. (The point is that) no other (form of) reflective

awareness is said to arise by their union with the Absolute (A) and Bliss (Ā).

more clear and then fully clear as the activity of all the energies of consciousness that

emerge from it and recede into it like the waves of the sea. When we get to emission

(visarga) at the end of the vowel series, they will be emitted externally.

We have seen that according to the rules governing the conjunction of letters (sandhi),
if A (or Ā)is joined to a following 1, it becomes E. Conjoined to a following U it becomes

O. If these two letters are again conjoined to A or Ā, they make AI and AU, respectively,

which are essentially forms of E and O. Thus, they are not vowels of a different type.

Similarly, the corresponding states that mark the progressive development of the energies

of consciousness from I to AI and U to AU are essentially varieties of the same basic state,
thatis, the energies of the will and knowledge of consciousness, respectively.

Read icchonmeṣagata for icchonmeṣasatka.

PaSū 6/1/87. ‘Guṇa [ie. E and O]is the single substitute of the final A and Ā of a

preceding word, and thesimple vowel at the beginning of the succeeding one.’ Thus, A or

Ã̄+Torī=Eand
AorĀ + U or Ū = 0.
We have seen that according to the rules governing the conjunction of vowels (sandhi),

when 1 or Ī is preceded by A or Ā, they combine to form E. Further union with A or Ā
resultsin AI. Thisis where the process ofincrementation ends. The union with another A

or Ā results in the same AI. The same applies to U > 0 > AU.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely, (one may ask, if, as you yourself have declared,) ‘only the
Absṣolute (Anuttara), the one Light, shinesʼ," then (you must concede that)
nothing else at all could possibly exist, because (if something were to exist,) that
would be afflicted by the (abiding conceived and uncertain) option (vikalpa) as to
whether (His manifestation) is separate or not from (His Light). Then how is it

that it was said that it itself shines forth variously to this extent (and in this way),
up to the power of action? He says that:

TaTṬGTTTTT?
-IHRT TGATĪTTĪ ||/Q¢ 11

nanv anuttaratānandau svātmanā bhedavarjitau || 98 ||
katham etāvatī eṣā vaicitrī svātmani śritiḥ |

(One may ask): “Surely, the Absolute and Bliss are, in themselves,
devoid of differences (bheda); how then is this wonderfully diverse emanation

within them (possible)?”” (98cd-99ab)
He answers that (question):

Śṛṇu tāvad ayaṁ saṁvinnātho ʻparimitātmakaḥ || 99 ||

anantaśaktivaicitryalayodayakaleśvaraḥ |

Listen then! This Lord of Consciousness is unlimited, the master of
(all) the phases (kaleśvara) of the arising and falling away of (His) infinite and

wonderful variety of energies. (99cd-100ab)

Indeed, the nature of this Lord of Consciousness is the Absolute and

Bliss. In accord with the dictum that ‘His powers are the entire universe, while the

Great Lord is the possessor of powerʼ, (He is free to operate) the progressive

differentiation (kalana), that is, projection, as separate from His own nature ‘of
the arising and falling away’, that is, unfolding (unmeṣa) and retraction (nimeṣa)

‘of (His) infinite and wonderful variety of energies’. Thus, because He is free,

He is ‘unlimited’, that is, because He does not assume a (limited) fixed (niyata)
form there (in that case), His nature is unconditioned (by anything else)
(anavacchina). This is the meaning.

l Cf. above ad 3/66cd-67ab (67) ‘Here (according to this teaching), the supreme reality

(paraṁ tattvam) is the Light (of consciousness) alone. It is Anuttara (the Absolute), which

is supreme reflective awareness.’

In the place of katham etāvatīm enāṁ vaicitrīṁ svātmani śritau, read katham etāvatī
eṣā vaicitrī svātmani śritiḥ.

See above, note to TĀv ad I/1 1 lcḍ- 12ab (112).

CHAPTER THREE

Surely (one may ask,) why should this Lord of Consciousness not
manifest in a fixed form? With this doubt in mind, he says:

STIRTTRTT]
ṬṬI] ṀĪTRT || 2 00 /|

asthāsyad ekarūpeṇa vapuṣā cen maheśvaraḥ || 100 |l
maheśvaratvaṁ saṁvittvaṁ tad atyakṣyad ghaṭādivat |
If the Great Lord were to have a body of (but) one (fixed) form, he

would have to give up His lordship and nature as consciousness and be
(insentient,) like a (common) jar. (100cd-101ab)

If the Great Lord were to abide in any fixed form, then, like (any common
object) such as a jar, He would not be the Great Lord, nor (indeed) would He be
consciousness. His status as the Great Lord and nature as consciousness is (His)

manifestation as each specific thing denoted by speech, and (the speech itself,
which) denotes (it) without (any limitation or) fixed form. Thus (it is said that):
‘we see this, the one form of consciousness, as (the constant) transformation (of

its) many forms as, for example, joy and despair. Name them there as you like.”
According to this (way of) reasoning, consciousness manifests in this way in
many forms. There is no disagreement here (about this).

Nor is the instrumental cause of (His) manifesting as each individual form

ignorance or the like, because that would be afflicted by the (abiding conceived

and uncertain) option (vikalpa) as to whether (His manifestation) is separate or not
from (His Light). Rather it is His very nature (to manifest in this way). It is

proclaimed everywhere (that that is His) freedom, which is (His sovereignty, that
is, His) status as the Great Lord. If His essential nature were to manifest in a

This statement is not found in the PTv but the basic idea behind it is. There we read:

svarūpāparijñānamayatadvaiṣamyanivṛttau

malābhāvāt

paripūrṇa-bhagavadbhairavabhaṭtārakasaṁvidātmikā

krodhamohādivṛttayo

eva

yad

hi

uktaṁ

śrīṣomānandapādaiḥ – sukhe duḥkhe vimohe ca sthito 'haṁ paramaḥ śivaḥ | iti | p. 42)

duḥkhe ’pi pravikāsena sthairyārthe dhṛtisaṁgamāt | ityādi | krodhādivṛttayo hi
ciccamatkāratādātmyāt anyathā tatsvarūpalābhasyaiva ayogāc ca |

‘Due to the absence of Impurity (of limitation) (mnala), when the imbalance
(vaiṣamya) of the modes of the mind caused by the absence of recognition of the (true)
essential nature (of consciousness) ceases, the states of anger, delusion and the like (are
experienced as expressions) of the completely full (unlimited and perfect) consciousness

of Lord Bhairava Himself. As the venerable Somānanda has said: ‘Śiva’s nature is the

flow of His (own energies). (SDr 3/94) Similarly, ‘whether I am joyful, suffering or
deluded, I am Supreme Śiva abiding (in all states).” (Ibid 7/105) ‘(There is bliss) in
suffering also, due to the expansion (of consciousness) that takes place by attaining
steadfast endurance in the reality of the stability (of Śiva consciousness).” (ŚDr 519) The
mental fluctuations of anger and the like (exist) because they are one with the wonder (that
is the experience of consciousness. That is so) because otherwise (if that were not s0) it
would not be possible for them to assume their own nature (svarūpalābha).’” (PTv p. 41-

42)

TANTRĀLOKA

(fixed) conditioned form, He would not (possess the status of) the Great Lord, nor
that of consciousness. (Instead) the logical consequence would be that (He is)

insentient. A jar and the like are insentient. (This amounts to saying that He is) not

the Supreme Light, (but rather is a) fixed (conditioned) manifestation, the nature
of which is ‘this manifests here now’, (whereas the Light of consciousness
manifests as all things, everywhere, at all times).

That itself is the difference (between the Lord and anything that is)
insentient, namely, because (He is) self-illuminating Light, He is not (divided up
and) conditioned by anything else. It is said everywhere that the characteristic
(lakṣaṇa) of an insentient entity is that it possesses a limited (conditioned)

(paricchinna) nature, which is its condition (as an object), that is known by
another (that is, the perceiver). He says that:

sT̄ fr̄ GATI 1I| 202 11

āma aḷar v-īī |

paricchinnaprakāśatvaṁ jaḍasya kila lakṣaṇam || 101 I|
jaḍād vilakṣaṇo bodho yato na parimīyate |
Indeed, circumscribed (and conditioned) manifestation (paricchinnaprakāśatva) is the characteristic of (all that is) insentient. Consciousness
differs from the insentient because (it is not an object, and s0) is not delimited

(na parimīyate) (by anything).” (101cd-102ab)

Sanderson (1992: p. 303 n 79) tramsḻates: ‘The mark of the unconscious is evidently
that its manifestation is circumscribed.’

The word parimīyate is the present third person singular passive of the verb derived

from either the root mī or mā. According to Monier Williams, the former has the sense of
‘lessen, diminish, destroy and the passive (as here) ‘to perish, disappear’. The latter

means ‘to measure out, apportion, prepare, arrange, fashion, make, show, display, and
exhibitʼ.
The first line is quoted below ad 9/151cd-152ab and ad 13/189cd. The full verse is
found in the ĪPKau fol. 2b. It corresponds to MVV 1/80. Line 3/102ab is also MVV
1/372cd, where Abhinava tells us that he has already said this in his

Prahodhapañcadaśikā (also called Bodhapañcadaśikā), to which he also refers in the
MVV. Indeed, it is verse eight of the printed edition. The first quarter verse there reads:
uktaṁ .mitaprakāśatvaṁ (it has been said that limited manifestation’) for

paricchinnaprakāśatvaṁ (‘limited (conditioned) manifestation’). The expression
‘parimīyate’ means ‘measured out’, ‘marked out’, ‘assessed’, ‘specified’ or ‘known’ in a
specific, delimited manner. The sense is that as consciousness is not specified or known as
any single thing, it is free to unfold as everything. The verses just before in the MVV
(1/76-79) explain why this is so:
‘There is (just) one Light (of consciousness) which, by virtue of (its) freedom,
shines multiform (citrrarūpa). In reality it is not multiform nor is it not multiform, because
(if it were to be either it would entail) the fallacy of duality. If it were possible that a cloth

were to manifest (literally: “for there to be the light of a cloth’) when a jar manifests (lit.
‘when a jar shines’), that would not be the manifestation (lit. ‘light’) of a jar, (rather) it
would be a dual manifestation (lit. a double light
dviprakāśa) (of both a jar and a

cloth). Moreover, that too exists; it is not so that it does not. You maintain that the light (of

CHAPTER THREE
As that is so, such then is this unfolding (of consciousness) as all things

(viśvaprasara) (i.e. unlimited and unconfined). Accordingly, he says:

-I<qTA
d TāTTāgēfirāT, |
tena bodhamahāsindhor ullāsinyaḥ svaśaktayaḥ || 102 ||

āśrayanty ūrmaya iva svātmasaṅghaṭṭacitratām |

Thus, its own powers arise like waves out of the great ocean of
consciousness and, uniting with each other, assume diverse forms. (102cd103ab)
‘Thuṣ’, because (the Light) shines as the many forms mentioned
previously, ‘its own powersʼ, that is, (the powers of) the will and the rest, which

are its own nature, arise out of consciousness like waves from the ocean. By

‘uniting with each other’, that is, by their mutual dynamic union (lolībhāva),

they ‘assume diverse forms’. The meaning is that they manifest as each subject
and object, and as each (form and act) of reflective awareness.
That itself is the form of the power of action. Thus, he says:

E|cEEee|eezlā

svātmasaṅghaṭṭavaicitryaṁ śaktīnāṁ yat parasparam || 103 II
etad eva paraṁ prāhuḥ kriyāśakteḥ sphuṭaṁ vapuḥ |

(The wise) say that this union of (these) powers with one another in

wonderfully diverse ways is the supreme and evident form of the power of

action. (103cd-104ab)

‘Supreme and evidentt means most evident. Thus, because it is

predominantly based on duality, (the Extremely Terrible powers) of that
consciousness) of that (cloth) was not as a jar. And if (one were to consider) that the
characteristic of the light as being the expansion of the own nature because it is
(essentially) consciousness is unsound, then what is this useless clutter of words (as
manifestation could not be explained otherwise)?

See above, note 1,51.

” Jayaratha explains that as the supreme form of the power of action, it is its externally

most evident form, that is predominantly based on duality. What he means is that in this

aspect the power consciousness possesses to act operates through the individual subject,
who is thereby the agent of action, and as such, reaps its consequences. Thus, this is not

the subtle activity of universal consciousness, which is not ‘evident’, that is, cannot be

perceived by the senses or even conceived by the mind. It is the outer ‘most evident’ result
of the power of action, that generates the Karma that binds its agent. Accordingly, this is

TANTRĀLOKA
(consciousness which operate here are binding.
teaches):

As the Maālinīvijayottara

‘The Extremely Terrible (Ghoratarā powers) are said to be the lower
(aparā) ones: embracing the individual souls (rudrāṇu) attached to sense objects,

they cast them down to ever lower levels.

One should understand that the Ghoratarā (Extremely Terrible) powers,

characterized in this way, who preside over the Impure Path (that is, the domain of
Māyā), are the instrumental cause (of bondage, as they are forms of the power of
action that generates Karma), whereas the Aghorā (Not Terrible and Ghorā —

Terrible) energies are born from powers of the will and knowledge (respectively,
and s0 do not necessarily degrade the individual soul).
(From a higher, internal point of view,) it is said that this is the state of the
Lord’s Trident, as it consists of the union (saṁghaṭṭa) of the three powers (of will,

knowledge and action).

The Trident and the Stainless Principle

sṁṁē rṇtyarhē |1 z 1|

asmiṁóś caturdaśe dhāmni sphuṭībhūtatriśaktike || 104 ||
triśūlatvam ataḥ prāha śāstā śrīpūrvaśāsane |

Thus the (Lord and) teacher has said in Śrīpūrva’s teaching (the

Mālinīvijayottara), that the Trident is the state that arises when the three
powers (of will, knowledge and action) are fully evident (and completely
manifest) in this, the abode of (AU,) the fourteenth (vowel). (104cd-105ab)
‘Thus’ this is the supreme (form) of the power of action, because it is

(fully) evident ‘when the three powers (of will, knowledge and action) are
fully evident’, which is here the reason for that. The reason why (AU) is said to

be the Triḍent is because the three powers are (fully) evident (and completely

manifest) here (at this stage) as the three prongs (ara) which are will,

said to be the domain of Śiva’s Extremely Terrible (Ghoratara) powers that operate in this
way.
MV 3/31, also quoted below ad 4/23cd-24ab (the first line. see note there), ad 8/35cd42ab, and 13/279cd-280ab. See above, note 1,231.

" Paraphrase of MV 4/25cd.

? Śiva’s Triḍent is the core of the Trika maṇḍala, to which Abhinava repeatedly refers
throughout his Tantrāloka (see above, note 1,220). Here Abhinava refers to the MV as the

authority that establishes the innermost form of the Trident as the union of Śiva’s three
energies represented by the phoneme AU. These are its prongs. Here Jayaratha calls them

‘rays’ (ara), which is a term normally used to denote the main parts of a geometric

maṇḍala. He may have had in mind another version of the maṇḍala, in which the Trident

is represented by the corners of a triangle the three sides of which are its ‘rays’ (see above,

CHAPTER THREE

knowledge and action. This is the sense. As is said there: “. . . the fourth one (is
pervaded) by the Trident.

It is not only the Lord who has said here that by the penetration

(samāveśa) of (and into) the three powers (of will knowledge and action) the state
of the Trident (arises), the masters who have understood each of (the many)

teachings (artha) of the scriptures (have also declared that it gives rise to) the
Stainless (nirañjana) (state of consciousness). Thus, he says:

āīī, īṬ̄TTTaTācfā1TT: || 704 1

nirañjanam idaṁ coktaṁ gurubhis tattvadarśibhiḥ ll 105 ||
śaktimān añjyate yasmān na śaktir jātu kenacit |
And the masters who perceive the true nature of reality (tattva) call
this the Stainless (nirañjana). This is because it is the possessor of power, who
is ‘stained’ (añjyate) (that is, made manifest), while (His) power is (the cause
of all manifestation and so) is never (‘stained’, that is, made manifest,) by
anything. (105cd-106ab)

(The word) ‘and’ is out of sequence. Thus, (according to the intended)
syntax (anvaya), (the sense is) ‘and it is called the Stainlessʼ (nirañjana), which is
the fourteenth abode, characterized by the lettr AU, because (as the
Vijñānabhairava teaches):

note 1,796). Anyway, referring to the prongs of the Trident in this way, the transition from
one representation to the other is easy.

The power of action can operate in two ways, according to how we understand it to be

‘most evident’. One we have just mentioned, namely, that it is ‘most evident’ externally

when it generates and sustains the energies that bind the souls attached to the world of the

senses through their Karma. The other way is internal and is the very opposite. When in a
state of balance (sāmya) in which the positive effects of the energies reinforce each other,

they are the pure state of consciousness. This is the way in which the power of action of
consciousness is most evident to awakened yogis, that is, as the summation of the activity
of the powers of the will, knowledge and action that operate in relation to objectivity,
whether externally projected or, in this phase, internally. Entry into this pure, liberated
state is purifying and liberating.

MV 4/25b. The whole verse is quoted below ad 4/186cd-188ab (which is a paraphrase

and explanation of it), ad 11/89, and along with the preceding verse, ad 16/221-222
(221cd-223ab). It is quoted by Abhinava himself in PTv p. 242. The verse explains how

the four letters of SAUḤ, the seed-syllable of the goddess Parā, pervade the four Eggs

which span the metaphysical principles from Earth to Śakti (see note to TĀv ad 4/186cd188ab). Jayaratha’s reference here serves to confirm that the Tridentis the letter AU. The
connection of SAUḤ with the Eggs is not relevant in this context. Indeed, it seems that
Abhinava is not referring to this verse in the MV. However, there is no direct reference in

the printed edition, which could be the one to which he refers. Moreover, it seems that it
was not found in the manuscript(s) Jayaratha had before him.

TANTRĀLOKA

21 1

‘Just as the directions and (their) divisions etc. are known by the light of a

lamp and the rays of the sun, in the same way, O beloved, Śiva (is known) by

(means of His) power (Śakti).

According to this teaching, the possessor of power is the Supreme Light,
which is ‘stained’” by (His) power. The meaning is that it is made manifest to the

limited (conditioned) perceivers, that is, (secondarily conditioned) by limiting
adjuncts. (A limiting) adjunct (upādhi) is (defined in this system) as the
manifestation (vyakti) of the self-luminous, supreme Light (of consciousness),

which generates (something that is apparently) different (parakartṛkā) (from
itself). Again, Śakti is the agent of manifestation (abhivyaktṛ), and the means to
‘stain’ (that is to make) that (Light manifest as the universe of phenomena). Thus,

(as Śakti is the means by which the Light manifests in this way,) it is not possible

for (Śakti) also to be ‘stained’ (that is, made manifest) ‘by anythingʼ. The sense is
that an unknown instrumental means cannot become a cause (by means of which

it may be known).

Surely (one may ask,) the powers of the will etc. are (secondarily)

conditioned by their own field of operation (viṣaya), that is, the object of desire
and the rest, so how can it be said that that power is not ‘stained’ (that is, made

manifest,) by anything? With this doubt in mind, he says:

icchā jñānaṁ kṛiyā ceti yat pṛthak pṛthag añjyate || 106 ||
tad eva śaktimat svaiḥ svair iṣyamāṇādikaiḥ sphuṭam |

(When one says) that will, knowledge and action are each individually
made manifest by their own respective objects of desire (knowledge or
action), it is (in fact) the possessor of power (that thus becomes) clearly
evident.√ (106cd-107ab)
VBh 21. Also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/202-204.

Ṭhe three energies operating together constitute the one power of Śiva consciousness,

through which everything is made manifest. Śakti is thus like the tuminosity of the light,
by virtue of which it illumines, and so makes manifest, objects within it. Thus, as it
illumines everything, nothing can illumine it, and so it cannot be known in the same way.
Although it is thus the source of the ‘stain’ which sullies, as it were, the oneness of the
consciousness with the multiplicity of its manifestations, it itself can never be made
manifest and ‘stained’. As such, Śakti is called the Stainless. In this context Śakti is the
power of action (kriyāśakti) in which all the other energies are summated, and so, as it
contains them, it is the Trident of the three energies.
The poṣsessor of these powers is the consciousness that desires, knows and acts. The
power of the will is experienced by the one who wills, if he pays attention to himself as
the person who desires. Similarly, the powers of knowledge and action are experienced by

paying attention to oneself as the knower and the agent. The exercise of the reflective

awareness of one’s own subjectivity is the practice of Śāmbhavopāya. Everybody can

catch their own subjectivity in an instant, but very few people can maintain it for much
more than that in everyday life. Aesthetic experience and intense emotions are
experienced within subjectivity, and so on such occasions it can be considerably

CHAPTER THREE

Whereas the powers characterized as will, knowledge and action ‘are

each individually made manifest,’' that is, (separately) as different (from one
another) (bhedena), by their own particular objects, that is, the objects of desire,
knowledge and action (kārya), (it is their) power holder (who becomes) ‘clearly
evident’; that is, (His) nature is (always) full (complete and all-embracing). The

meaning is that He Himself is the supreme Light that has encompassed within
Himself an endless (number of) powers. Power is the powerholder’s very own

nature (svaṁ rūpam), however, because of the different results (of the activity of

His power), a difference (between its energies) is projected (onto the one power),
and so, because it is coloured by the object of desire etc., (the same energy)
behaves as the will and the rest.
Surely (one may ask,) if when the powers of the will and the rest are made
manifest individually by (their corresponding) object of desire and the rest, (it is)
their (nature as) the possessor of (these) powers (which is thereby made manifest),
what then is their nature (when they) arise together (collectively)? With this

question in mind, he says:

āē] q JÑGTR] || 20'9 1||
EĒRE..
ēeēE= E Ē iEFG Ḥ!
etat tritayam aikyena yadā tu prasphuret tadā || 107 ||
na kenacid upādheyaṁ svasvavipratiṣedhataḥ |

However, when this triad manifests as a unity, it cannot be
conditioned by any (desired aim, knowledge or action), because they cancel

each other out. (107cd-108ab)

Again, if ‘this triad’ of will, knowledge and action manifests as one

(sāmarasyena), that is, as the power of action, then (the powers of the) will etc.

and the object of desire etc. are cancelled out by their own specific objects of
desire etc. Thus knowledge and action are not made manifest (lit. ‘stained’) by
the object of desire, nor are will and action by the object of knowledge, or will
and knowledge by the object of action, and so, as their nature is such, they cancel
each other out, and so (the triad in this state) ‘cannot be conditioned’, that is, it

cannot be made manifest (lit. ‘stained’). As he will say: ‘The goddess action is

the Stainless.

heightened or intensified. But while that is an opportunity to exercise that reflective
awareness, it is transitory, however intense it may be.
The yogi who enters this pure state of reflective awareness is freed of the effects of all
three forms of objects, whether those of desire, knowledge or action. This is because they
fuse in the Trident, each retaining its identity but operating together with the others in

such a way that they form a harmonious, balanced unity. Out of balance, one predominates
over the others, which serve to sustain it in focusing on its goal. The power of the will, for

example, develops into its object of desire, sustained by the knowledge of what it is and
the action required to attain it. Similarly, when the power consciousness has to know
comes to the fore, the will sustains and impels it, and action unfolds it to consolidate its
goal, which is the knowledge of its object. When action predominates, it is impelled by the

TANTRĀLOKA

Thus he says (in the next verse) that this (triad of energies, at one in this
way,) is called the Trident.

tṁTṁā ardīrō1 1| g0¢ 11|

lolībhūtam ataḥ śaktitritayaṁ tat triśūlakam || 108 II
yasminn āśu samāveśād bhaved yogī nirañjanaḥ |
Thusṣ, that Trident is the (dynamic) fusion of the triad of energies. By

penetration (samāveśa) (and becoming one) with it, the yogi quickly becomes

stainless (nirañjana). (108cd-109ab) (108)

‘Thereforeʼ, because it is unconditioned (anupahita), ‘ṭhe (dynamic)

fusion of this triad of energiesʼ, which even though (individually in) conflict

(with one another), has attained an undivided state, should (rightly) be called the
Trident. Not only is (this triad) itself stainless within this unconditioned form, the
yogi who has attained that oneness with it by penetrating that (unconditioned)
Being (sattā) is also stainless.
Now he concludes by referring to another (reality) which should (also) be
known (and realised).
The Eight Groups of Eight

AtIEKEECTGIRI-ĒAIGAEĀHIERCAI

TGITRFTTHĪÑRṬITRTRIRATTTĪ
TĀAT |

itthaṁ parāmrtapadād ārabhyāṣṭakam īdr̥śam || 109 1|

brāhmyādirūpasaṁbhedād yāty aṣṭāṣṭakatāṁ sphuṭam |

In this way, this group of eight (vowels) which is such, starting from

(those on) the plane of the Supreme Nectar (r Ṛ 1 L), by uniting with the

(eight Mothers), Brāhmī and the rest, evidently becomes eight groups of

eight. (109cd-110ab) (109)

will and guided by knowledge. But, penetrating one another in the Trident free of the

‘stain’ of manifestation, their objects, on the contrary, cancel each other out in the manner
described, and consciousness free of objectivity unfolds.

Below, 3/173b (172d).

The Mothers, important precursors of the Yoginīs, are known from the first centuries of
the common era as attendants of the Goddess, Rudra and other forms of Śiva. We find
references and lists of names of the hordes of Mothers (mātṛgaṇa) in the Mahābhārata, in
which they are not ordered in any specific grouping. The worship of the Circle of Mothers

(mātṛmaṇḍala) is well attested in references in sources prior to the 6" CE, when Tantras
began to appear. We find a reference in a Sanskrit play by Bhāsa, who lived in the 2
century CE, to the worship of the Circle of Mothers at a crossroad. There is another in the
Sanskrit play Mṛr.cchakaṭika (the Little Clay Cart) by Śūdraka, who lived some time

CHAPTER THREE

‘This group of eight which is such’ as explained before, ‘from (those)
on the plane of Supreme Nectarʼ, that is, beginning from the four neuter letters
before the 6 century. The astrologer Varāha Mihira, who belong to the beginning of the

6 century, refers to Mothers in his Bṛhatsaṁhitā, as the deities of leamned Brahmins, who
knew the liturgy (krama) of their maṇḍala (Bhat: 571, BṛS 60/19). As a well-defined
group of Seven Mothers, they appear prominently for the first time in the Sanskrit sources
in the Devīmāhātmya, which was redacted prior to the emergence of the Tantras, which
took place around the sixth or seventh century CE. There they are depicted as drinking the
blood of the wounded demon Raktabīja to prevent it falling on the ground and thereby

generating other demons. According to the DM, the Seven Mothers are generated from
their male counterparts, from whom they derive their names in the feminine. Although
they are their energies, contrary to the common convention, they are not represented as
their wives, possibly because they were originally independent, non-Brahminical deities.
According to the DM (8/14-20), they are: 1) Brahmāṇī; 2) Māheśvarī; 3) Kaumārī (from
Skanda); 4) Vaiṣṇavī; 5) Vārāhī; 6) Nārasiṁhī and 7) Aindrī. As usual, we find several

variants (see Banerjee op. cit.). Thus, one of the earliest datable references to the Seven
Mothers is the fifth century Bihar Stone inscription of Skandagupta (438-467 CE), which

omits Nārasiṁhī and has Cāmuṇḍā as the seventh Mother, which is a much more common

configuration (Fleet 1898: Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, p. 47). The Seven Mothers

continued to be represented for centuries all over India, first in early cave temples and
then in temples, often on the walls, as guardian deities. They were commonly carved on
stone slabs flanked by Vīrabhadra and Gaṇeśa. A fine example is found on the wall of the

6 century temple of Paraśarāmeśvara in Bhuvaneśvara, Orissa. They are also depicted as

freestanding figures (see Banerjee 1974: 505-508). Once very popular throughout the
subcontinent and in the Śaiva Tantras of all schools, their popularity started to wane
around the tenth century. Accordingly, the Mothers barely figure in the sacred geography
of Varanasi described in the 14 century Kāśīmāhātmaya of the Skandapurāṇa. Thus,

although practically always incorporated in the primary maṇḍalas of all Śaiva Tantric

schools prior to this time as guardians, they are a minor feature of Śṛrīcakra, which, as
considerable other evidence suggests, developed around the 10" century or just after.
However, their worship did continue in a few places. In Orissa they are still
prominently present in many temples, where they are worshipped as a group. There each
of them also has a large separate temple of its own (see Panikkar 1997: 74ff., who
provides an overview of their location in various regions of India from the 5th century).

As guardians of the quarters, the Seven Mothers naturally become eight. They are still

worshipped extensively as a group of eight by the Newars in Nepal, both Śaiva and
Buddhiṣt. They are a major group for all cults of the Bhairava Tantras, and persisted

throughout their development. Moreover, each of these generates another group of eight,

thus forming a set of powerful protectors of 64 Yoginīs. The configuration of Eight
Mothers appears in the BY, which is one of the earliest Bhairava Tantras, and in the latter,

milder cult of the SvT. They are also found in the SYM, which is the earliest Trika Tantra.

Both configurations are found in the Tantrasadbhāva, an important early Trika Tantra.
There they are worshipped around the prongs of the Trika Trident, which emanate the

64 Yoginīs. Groups of eight Yoginīs associated with each Mother is well attested (see
Dehejia 1986: Appendix 2). Indeed, given the presence of vast numbers of Yoginīs in the

Tantras of the Vidyāpīṭha, including those of the Trika, and the prominence of the Mothers
in these configurations,
significant that Abhinava has chosen to largely ignore them. It

makes sense in the context of his perspective, which promotes the worship of
consciousness through its energies. In their sonic form, as letters and Mantras, they are

experienced as aspects of its universal energy of reflective awareness. See also note 4,498

to TĀv ad 4/149-150ab.

. {rītrikaramakule’pi uktam -

TANTRĀLOKA

(r Ṛ I Ḷ) right up to the seed of the Trident (AU) (that is, E, AI, O, and AU). The
nature of the group of eight, Brāhmī and the rest, is such that each one is of the
nature of all the others (sarvasarvātmaka). Thuṣ, each letter is mixed (with every

other), as (each letter is the reality) denoted by the group of eight goddesses, and
so (it) ‘evidently becomes eight groups of eight’. The meaning is that it
manifests (collectively) as sixty-four. Thus, Brāhmī is the letter ṛ and (so on,)

progressively in this way, up to the letter AU, which is Yogīśvarī. Then again,
Māheśvarī is the letter r, and here (in this case), Brāhmī is the letter AU or the
letter ṛ. One should understand (this progression) in this way in the other cases
also.

Bindu - the Point

Although the wonderful diversity (of the power of consciousness)

manifests" in this way up to the power of action, supreme consciousness does not
lose its own (unconditioned, transcendental) nature. In order to make this clear, he
explains the nature of the Point (bindu) (which is the next vowel).

āī āa aTq: J2fāq 1| 220 11

atrānuttaraśaktiḥ sā svaṁ vapuḥ prakaṭasthitam ||

kurvanty api jñeyakalākāluṣyād bindurāūpiṇī |

110 ||

Although here (at this stage), the power of the Absolute (Anuttara)

manifests its own form clearly, due to the impurity (kāluṣya) brought about
by the (subtle) differentiation of objectivity (jñeyakalā), (it assumes) the form

of the Point (bindu). (110cd-111ab) (110)
aṣṭāṣṭakavibhedena mātṛkā yā nirūpitā |
tad eva kulacakraṁ tu tena vyāptam idaṁ jagat ||

iti mātr̥kājñānabhede vistarato nirūpitam eṭat (PTv p. 192-193)

‘It is also said in the venerable Trikarammakula: Mātrkā that is described as
divided into eight times eight. That itself is the Kulacakra, by which this universe is
pervaded.’ That has been extensively described in the Mātṛkājñānabheda.”

” As each of the eight is of the nature of everything else, each of the letters are all the

eight goddesses, and so make a total of sixty-four.

The names of the eight Mothers vary. The ones we find in the TĀ (below, 8/241cd-

244ab) are listed with their corresponding letter: 1) Brāhmī (r), 2) Māheśvarī (R), Kaumārī
(1), Vaiṣṇavī (l.), Vārāhī (Ē), Indṛāṇī (AI), Camuṇḍā (O) and Yogeśvarī (AU). Note that

this is an unusual setup. The Mothers are commonly represented as governing the eight
classes (varga) of the alphabet (see SvT 1, p. 29, SpNÑir pp. 66-69 on SpKā 45 and
Dyczkowski 1986: 199).

Read parisphurantyāṁ for parīsphurantyā.
Abhinava will conclude his exposition of Bindu, the Point (below in verse 134) by

declaring that its highest form, Śiva’s Point (Śivabindu), is the pure Light of consciousness
alone (prakāśamātra), which is the most fundamental ontological definition of Anuttara.

Here he sets out by distinguishing the Point from Anuttara by saying that, although
essentially the same, the Point is associated with objectivity. In the long passage that

CHAPTER THREE

Here (at this stage,) even though (consciousness and the forms of its
reflective awareness) are in this condition, ‘the power of the Absolute’ is as its
nature was described previously (without change). ‘The differentiation’, that is,
the subtle division (pariccheda) of ‘objectivity°, which is phenomenal existence

consisting of (both) subject and object, due to which the ‘impurity’, that is, the
contraction (of consciousness) that conceals the essential nature (of the Absolute),

on the basis of which it ‘“manifests its own’ self-luminous ‘form clearlyʼ, that is,

although it establishes (itself) as perceptible to all (sarvasaṁvedyatā), (its pure

conscious nature persists in) ‘the form of the Point (bindu)’. ‘The Point

(vindu)” is the one who knows (vetti), that is, the autonomous subject (engaged)

follows (up to verse 134), we will see that this essentially means that the Point is the Light
of consciousness, when understood to be shining in and as the three domains of the means
and object of knowledge along with the knowing subject, symbolized by the three

luminaries Sun, Moon and Fire. This will lead to a concise discussion of their relationship

and relative status, with respect to one another. As a prelude to that, Abhinava sets the

stage by referring to the scripture, which declares that there are three Points in the body
that correspond to three spheres in the ascending hierarchy of metaphysical principles,
thus constituting the triadic Trika universe.

Saryasaṁvedyatā also means ‘all that is perceptible’. Anuttara is always manifest, in

that it is self-iluminating, as the subject and is all that is perceptible together.

The word is ‘bindu’ (lit. ‘point’ or ‘drop’). It can also be read as ‘vindu’, as the letter V

is generally not distinguished from the letter B in manuscripts. In this form, ‘hindu’ (=
‘vindu’) is said to derive from the root ‘vid’, in the sense of ‘to know’. Bindu represents
the supreme Light of consciousness, which shines as Anuttara without changing in the
sphere of all that is perceptible, which includes all individual perceivers as well as objects.
As such, Bindu/Vindu īs the ‘knower’, who never becomes an object.
Once the activity (parispanda) of the power of action comes to an end, two other

pulsations of consciousness take place, symbolized by the nasalized vowel (anusvāra,

bindu) (A)M and the surd aspirate (A)Ḥ, called emission (visarga, visarjanīya), which is
the sixteenth vowel. Bindu ~ the Point - is the manner in which consciousness (Anuttara,
A) manifests after the emanation of the first fourteen vowels. Visarga ~ emission ~ is the
creative fecund power of A. Consciousness as bindu is no longer absolute consciousness,

although one with it. It is a limited state of consciousness, which presupposes the previous
emergence of the power of action, which corresponds to that of the individual soul
(puruṣa). Abhinava explains in the PTv (p. 176-177):

‘Once will (I) and knowledge (U) have developed in this way by entering into the
nature of Anuttara (A), after they have abandoned the dynamic state (pariṣpanda) of this
kind of adventitious limitation, they merge into the sphere of Anuttara (to form) AṀ, with
a body in which all that remains is just the Point (bindu), in the form of awareness
(vedanā). 1t is the principle of the Individual Soul (puruṣa) and consists of (pure)

consciousness alone, which attains the being of nonduality (abhedasattā). In this way the

pulsation of the power of action ends with the letter AU. This letter contains within itself
both will and knowledge, and so it is described in the Trika scriptures (saḍārdhaśāstra) as

the Trident, in such teachings as ‘the fourth one (is pervaded) by the Trident.’ Conversely,

the Point is the state in which all that remains of everything is awareness (vedanā) alone.
The Supreme Lord emits (visṛjari) (this same) totality (viśva), of which all that remains is

just awareness (in two ways, that is, either inwardly) within Himself, in order to make it

one, and directly (sākṣāt) from Himself, as (an external) creation (nirmāṇa). The first
(takes place initially) with the predominance of the possessor of power. Now (the second,)

TANTRĀLOKA

in the act of perception. His nature (rīūpa) is the undivided, supreme Light, as is
that (of the power of the Absolute). (Thus,) even (when the Absolute manifests) in
this way (as the perceiver, it) does not fall from its own nature. This is the sense.
Thus, he says:

3fāzaraī fkararī rārqāīT-aiT 1 922 11
sīftrī yarīa a;

fars: āī fḵ . 1

uditāyāṁ kriyāśaktau somasūryāgnidhāmani |l 1 1 1 II
avibhāgaḥ prakāśo yaḥ sa binduḥ paramo hi naḥ |
That undivided Light, (which continues to shine) in the abode of the
Moon, Sun and Fire (even) when the power of action arises, is our Supreme
Point. (111cd-112ab) (111)

‘That Liīght’, which is devoid of the limitations (imposed) by

adventitious adjuncts (upādhi) such as pleasure and pain™ and is the full (perfect,
all-inclusive), is the supreme (Light). It is ‘undivided’ even when ‘the power of
action arisesʼ, that is, manifests as each wonderfully diverse (configuration of
experience) based on the Sun (Moon and Fire, that symbolize) the means of

knowledge, (object and perceiver, respectively) which, differentiated
(avacchinna) by pleasure and pain etc., are conditioned (and fixed) (niyata).
But even though thisis so, (the Light of consciousness) does not fall from

its own innate nature, and so is the most excellent (of all) (atyutkṛṣṭa). According
to our philosophy (darśana), (it is) the Point (bindu), the sole nature of which is

the supreme subject, who, (always) free (even) in the course of the act of
cognition, is Śiva, the Supreme Lord. This is the meaning. As he will say:
‘The pure Light (of consciousness prakāśamātra), present here when the
three abodes (of subject, object and means of knowledge) manifest, is referred to
in the scripture as the ‘Point’, and is considered to be the Point of Śiva

(Śivabindu).”

He has not said this out of his own imagination. Thus, he says:

ī dīgē aĨSĀ |I 223 1|
TTTTTVRGJTĀ
TAĪ -TYITHTYTTTTa: |

tattvarakṣāvidhāne ca tad uktaṁ parameśinā || 112 ||
hṛtpadmamaṇḍalāntaḥstho naraśaktiśivātmakaḥ |
as the power of emission (visarga), predominates as ~ (A)H. It enters (into this state) when

the expansion of the power of action at the end of the letter AUis complete.”

Cf. below, 3/115 (114cd-115ab).
TĀ 3/134 (133cd-134ab).

CHAPTER THREE

boddhavyo layabhedena bindur vimalatārakaḥ || 1 13 ||
The Supreme Lord has said in the Tattvarakṣāvidhāna that the Point
(bindu), the immaculate saviour (vimalatāraka), which is the nature of Man,

Power and Śiva, and resides within the circle of the Lotus of the Heart,

should be realized by the differentiated merger (layabheda) (of consciousness,
first in the End of the Twelve above the head, then in between the eyebrows,
and finally in the Heart). (112cd-113) (112-113ab)
The Point (bindu) is the supreme Light (of Śiva consciousness) that

makes (all things known,) and desires out of its own innate freedom to manifest

the universe. In accord with the saying: “Bindu, present in three places, should
be contemplated in one place alone,”

‘it should be realized by differentiated

mergerʼ. (This is done) by the repose (of consciousness) separately in (three)
places, namely, in the End of the Twelve,™ between the eyebrows, and in the

Heart (as the three members of the triadic reality of Trika, that is), as Man, Power

and Śiva. The meaning is that it shines radiantly (prasphurita) (in these places) as

The expression ‘vimalatāraka’, which describes the supreme Point of the pure Light of

Anuttara, can be translated as ‘immaculate saviour’, as I have done. It can also mean ‘pure

star’. The Light shines in the darkness of objectivity like a bright star ~ a dimensionless
point in the heavens.

These correspond to the three Trika goddesses, Parā, Parāparā and Aparā.
Read with MS T tristhāneṣu gataṁ for triṣu sthānagato.

There is no evidence that Jayaratha had access to the Tattvarakṣāvidhāna, otherwise
one could suppose that this line is drawn from there.

There are two Ends of the Twelve – one is below and the other above. Abhinava explains
that the distance from the left toe to the Snake of Brahmā, that is, the Cavity of Brahmā on the
crown of the head, where a form of Kuṇḍalinī resides, is eighty-four finger breadths. Twelve

more are added to get to the End of the Twelve, and twelve more again for the same distance
below the body. This makes a total of one hundred and eight fingers (see below, 7/68cd70ab). This figure may also be arrived at in another way. One may reckon that there are

eighty-four fingers up to the forehead, ninety-six up to the Cavity of Brahmā, and one

hundred and eight up to the End of the Twelve (see below, 16/100cd-113 and note). Note that
at times the End of the Twelve is identified with the Cavity of Brahmā, which is also located
at the end of a space of twelve fingers” breadths from the point between the eyebrows. See the
Appendix B to Chapter One, concerning the structure of the End of the Twelve.
The End of the Twelve and the phases of Sound that trace it out is a common

feature of the doctrine concerning the Yogic body in most if not all the early Śaiva and
Kaula Tantric traditions. Mention of the lower End of the Twelve is uncommon, whereas
the upper one is mentioned frequently in the early sources prior to Abhinava.
Subsequently, although it continues to figure prominently in Siddhānta sources, references

to it become rare in the Śākta Tantras of the North. The End of the Twelve is the abode of
Kuṇḍalinī in her raised (ūrdhva) state as the Transmental in the early sources. In the later
ones it shifted down, as it were, to become the Wheel of a Thousand Spokes (sahasrāra)
in the head (see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 1, p. 474 ff.). The upper End of the Twelve
marks the summit of the subtle body, and with it the limit of immanent existence. The
deities of each tradition reside there in the centre of their mmaṇḍalas. Despite the

differences in the contents of the End of the Twelve from one school to another, the
phases of ascent and its overall structure are essentially the same in the Kubjikā Tantras,

the Śaiva Siddhānta, the Kashmiri Śaiva texts and their ṣources.

TANTRĀLOKA

the three principles, Śiva, Vidyā and the Self, which are (the powers of) will

(knowledge and action). The meaning is that in this way also, because of the

predominance of (its) contracted state, (the Point that) ‘resides within the circle

of the Lotus of the Heart’ has begun to develop on the plane of duality. (But)

even so, it has not fallen from its own innate nature (as the one supreme Light of

consciousness). And so he says that it is ‘the immaculate saviour’. It is

‘immaculate’, that is, pure, because it is (nothing but) consciousness alone, even
(in the midst of) the outpouring of each particular, wonderfully diverse

(manifestation). Thus, it is the ‘saviour’ from the ocean of transmigratory
existence.
Not only does it not fall from its own nature by manifesting as (this)

wonderful diversity which is the object of reflective awareness, it also (does not

do 50) as each particular (act of) reflective awareness. So he says:

sṝ--afamm fṝzzāvīatāza ú| qg2 11
yo ʻsau nādātmakaḥ śabdaḥ sarvaprāṇiṣv avasthitaḥ |
adha-ūrdhvavibhāgena niṣkriyeṇāvatiṣṭhate || 1 14 ||
This (Point) is the Word (śabda), of the nature of the Sound (nāda)
(which resounds as the vitality of the life force) present in all living beings.

Divided into the downward (flow of apāna, inhalation) and the upward (flow

of prāṇa, exhalation), it abides (constantly in its own nature, and so is) free of

action. (114) (113cd-114ab)

Here (according to this teaching), the Point (is the perceiver) who intends
to generate each (specific act of) reflective awareness. It is ‘the Word, of the

nature of Sound’. The meaning is that it manifests as being of that nature.

‘Wordʼ is that which resounds (śabdayati), that is, contemplates the universe as

The Principle of the Self (ātmatattva), along with the Principle of Knowledge

(vidyātattva) and that of Śiva (śivatattva), form a well-known triad in the Śaiva Āgamas,

where they appear as a tripartite division of the principles of existence (tattva) (see above,
note 1,776). The series of principles are divided into three parts in this way, so that they

can conveniently be purified. This is commonly done as a part of the preliminary
purification of most Śaiva and Kaua rituals by rinsing the mouth three times (a procedure

called ācamana), whilst offering salutation to each of the three in turn. According to the

standard Siddhānta division of thirty-six principles, the Principle of the Self extends from
Earth up to the end of the jurisdiction of Māyā. Then the Principle of Knowledge extends
from there up to and including the principle of Śakti. Finally, the Principle of Śiva consists

of just the principle of Śiva. Here they are equated with the domains of the powers of
action, knowledge and will, which correspond to the specifically Trika triad of Man
(nara), Sakti and Śiva, which in the form of Points (bindu) are located at the Heart, middle

of the eyebrows and the End of the Twelve, respectively. They are imagined one after
another from the Heart onwards, dissolving into each other as the lower principles
dissolve into the higher, to finally leave the pure supreme Light of Śiva consciousness,
which is the supreme Point.

See above, 3/11 1ab (3/11 1).

CHAPTER THREE

one with itself. (It is) reflective awareness, which is Supreme Speech (parā vāk),
and is ‘of the nature of Sound’ (1āda). Sound is that which ‘resounds” (nadati),

that is, manifests as the vital force (jīvakalā) of all (living beings). It is the energy
of the New Moon (amākalā), which is half of the half of H

(hakārārdhārdha). It is (commonly) taught everywhere as being in its primary

modality (as Unstruck Sound), the Vowelless (letter A) (asvara),% and its
essential nature manifests in that form as such. (It is said that) ‘the letter AṀ™

abides as the inner controller of all the lettersʼ.”™ According to this teaching, ‘it

abides divided into the downward (flow) and the upward (flow)’, as the vital
force (prāṇana) which is all the letters from the Absolute (A) to the Seed of the
Trident (AU) (śulabīja) (internally, downward,) or else (externally, upward,) up to

H (which is the last letter of the alphabet). This means that the entire aggregate of
(the forms of) reflective awareness (symbolized by the vowels and consonants) is
the essence of its expansion (sphāra) (as their progressive emanation).
Again (from another point of view), ‘it abides divided into the

downward and the upward (flow)’ of ‘all living beings’, as the form of the flow

of exhalation (prāṇa) and inhalation (apāna), which are the Sun and Moon
(respectively). The sense is that it is the supreme life force (jīvakalā). In this way
also ‘it abides (constantly) free of action’, that is, even when it pulses radiantly

as each wonderfully diverse (form of reflective awareness) up to the power of
action, it does not fall from its own essential nature (as the pure Light of

consciousness). This is the meaning.

Surely (one may ask,) when the power of action has arisen, the Light (of

consciousness) shines as (the confined and) conditioned (pratiniyata) (light) of the
See below, 3/139ab-142ab (3/138-141), commentary and notes.

“ ‘Half of half of H’ is one of a number of terms used to denote the ‘Unstruck Sound’ of the

energy of consciousness, which Kashmiri Śaivism identifies with the power of self-awareness

(vimarśa) that it possesses, that is, self-consciousness. In this perspective, consciousness is

Light, and its awareness is Sound (nāda) or Resonance (rāva) – both common terms in the

Tantras. As the ‘Half of H, it is visarga, the last of the sixteen vowels. It is represented
graphically by two dots, written one above the other. So half of that is the Point (bindu). A
purely nasal sound, it is not articulated by the air striking the vocal chords, and so aptly
denotes this ‘Unstruck Sound’. See above, notes 1,16, 1,23, and below note 3,436.
There is a play on words here. The term ‘asvara’ can mean two things. One is ‘without
svara’, that is, the vowels, and so ‘Vowelless’. No phoneme can be articulated without a
vowel sound, and so the Vowelless is the unutterable Unstruck Sound. It also means the
‘vowel A’, and so denotes Anuttara, with which the Point is, in the manner outlined,
identified.

` MSs Ch, Jh, N, T, and D read: akāraḥ for aṅkāraḥ.
The ‘inner controller’ (antaryāmi) is the individual Self or ‘inner soul’, that guides and

supervises the activity of the psychophysical organism. This is said to be the role and state
of bindu (‘the letter (A)Ṁ’) with respect to all the letters, that is, all the forms or energies
of reflective awareness that flow within consciousness and manifest as all the
metaphysical categories (attva) from the Śiva principle down to Earth.

In short, the Point, identified with the supreme Light of the Absolute, which shines in

the sphere of objectivity, is its vitalizing force. It is experienced within the body as the

vitality of the vital breath, that is, as a silent inner resonance, by the yogi who pays close

attention to the movement of the breath, abiding in the pure consciousness free of thought
constructs, of the Śāmbhava state.

TANTRĀLOKA

Moon (of objectivity) and Sun (of the means of knowledge) etc., differentiated

(avacchinna) by pleasure, pain and the like, whereas (on the contrary,) that which

makes everything manifest, both itself (as the perceiver) and (all) else, and is,
moreover, undivided, is said to be the supreme Light. Is that (bindu) of that
nature, or is it something else which is the object of illumination (prakāśya) of
that (Light)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Sun of the Senses, the Fire and Moon of Subject and Object

- ahṀrrṣit
sā’ TJTTE ṀT || 22., 1I
hlādataikṣṇyādi vaicitryaṁ sitaraktādikaṁ ca yat |
svayaṁ tannirapekṣo ‘sau prakāśo gurur āha ca l| 1 15 II

This Light is inherently independent in itself of the wonderful

diversity of pleasure (hlāda) (the Moon affords) and (pain of) the sharpness

(taikṣṇya) (of the rays of the Sun) and the like, or white and red etc. (115)
(114cd-115ab)

“This’ supreme ‘Light’ does not in itself depend on ‘the wonderful
diversityʼ, which is the pleasure (the Moon affords) and the (pain of) the sharp
(rays) etc. associated with moon and the sun etc., and the (colours) white and red
etc. It has no fixed (conditioned) form (niyatarūpa), and so (its) nature is not the
same as (any of) that. Moreover, it is self-luminous, and so is not an object of that

(Light’s) illumination (prakāśya); therefore, it is not the Sun (of the means of
knowledge) etc., nor that which is illumined by them, rather its sole nature is the
supreme subject who impels (and vitalizes) (anuprāṇaka) the three abodes of Sun
(Moon and Fire). By the two ‘etc.’s’ (of the expressions ‘refreshment (the Moon
affords) and the sharp (rays of the Sun) etc. or white and red etc.’), one should

understand the burning (of fire) that arises from the various types of fuels and the

multiple colours.”" We are not the only ones to say this. The same is said by the
Lord, that is, Vāsudeva (Kṛṣṇa). As (we read in the) Bhagavadgītā:

In the hot summer months in India the moon at night is experienced as pleasantly
cooling after a hot summer’s day. The moon's light is said to give ‘hlāda’, that is,
‘refreshmentʼ, ‘pleasure’, ‘gladnessʼ, ‘joy°, or ‘delight’. Conversely, the hot summer sun is
painful. Its rays are ‘/īkṣṇa, that is, ‘sharpʼ, ‘hot’, or ‘fiery’. The third member of this
group is fire which burns, which is signalled by the ‘etc.’. The colours white and red are
emblematic of all colours, which are signalled by the ‘etc.’.

Fire burns, so does fever and craving, and so all three are denoted by the same word in

Sanskrit, i.e. ‘dāhaka, that is, ‘(something that) burns’. Thus, ‘fire’ here stands for the
craving that burns (dāhaka) with the fuel of the objects of craving (dāhya). Similarly, the
moon represents the pleasure of the objects of the senses, whereas the blazing summer sun

the suffering they can cause. Like the outer luminaries, their three counterparts light up, as
it were, the world of individual experience with these three feelings. Raw physical

sensations are the perceptions of the qualities of things, one may call their ‘varied

coloursʼ, illumined, as it were, by the feelings they evoke of pleasure, pain or attachment.

CHAPTER THREE
‘Neither Sun, Moon nor Fire illumine it, and once gone there they do not

return – that is my supreme abode.

zs gat

ī āīāhGṬaGTĪ TGTRINITRT TT: | 225 1|
fe-rafṝ fist fe q afatcca aivra 1
Both these parallel series are made manifest by the Light of consciousness, which is not as
they are, that is, objects of its illumination which are manifest contents of experience. The
Light of consciousness illumines itself. It does not depend on another light, as they do, to
manifest as consciousness. Nor does it have any fixed form.

BhG 15/6. Abhinava comments: ‘in that (highest abode) there is no place for the sun,

etc., because the sun, etc. are bound by time and space. They are also objects of
knowledge and are used by sense organs as the objects of experience. However, the
highest reality transcends the sun etc. because it is beyond the division of time and space,
because it itself possesses knowledge and because it sets the sense organs into motion.’
Translation by Boris Marjanovic. Cf. the Kaṭhopaniṣad:

As the one fire has entered the world and becomes corresponding in form to every form,

So the one Inner Soul (antarātman) of all things is corresponding in form to every form

and yet is outside.
As the one wind has entered the world and becomes corresponding in form to every form,

so the one Inner Soul of all things is corresponding in form to every form, and yet is
outside.

As the sun, the eye of the whole world, is not sullied by the external faults of the eyes,

so the Inner Soul of all things is not sullied by the evil of the world, being external to it.

‘The Inner Soul of all things, the One Controller, who makes his one form manifold —

The wise who perceive Him as standing in oneself, they, and no others, have eternal

happiness!

Him who is the Constant among the inconstant, the Intelligent among intelligences,

The One among many, who grants desires — the wise who perceive Him as standing in

oneself,

They, and no others, have eternal peace!
“This is it!” – thus they recognise the highest, indescribable happiness.
How, now, shall I understand ‘this’? Does it shine (of itself) or does it shine in reflection?
“The sun shines not there, nor the moon and stars, there lightning shines not, much less
this (earthly) fire!
After Him, as He shines, doth everything shine, this whole world is illumined with His
Light.

Kmow thou the soul (ātman, Self) as riding in a chariot, the body as the chariot.

Know thou the intellect (buddhi) as the chariot-driver, and the mind (manas) as the reins.
The senses (indriya) they say, are the horses; the objects of sense, what they range over.
The self-combined with senses and mind wise men call ‘the enjoyer’ (bhoktr).
He who has not understanding (avijñāna), whose mind is not constantly held firm ~
His senses are uncontrolled, like the vicious horses of a chariot-rider.’ (KU third valli 3-5
translated by Hume)

TANTRĀLOKA

yan na sūryo na vā somo nāgnir bhāsayate 'pi ca |
na cārkasomavahnīnāṁ tatprakāśād vinā mahaḥ || 116 ||

kim apy asti nijaṁ kiṁ tu saṁvid itthaṁ prakãśate |

(As Kṛṣṇa has said in the Bhagavadgītā, there is a reality) that neither

Sun, Moon nor Fire (can) illumine, nor do the Sun, Moon or Fire have any
power of their own without its Light; rather, (the truth is that) consciousness
shines in this way. (116-117ab) (115cd-116)
The supreme abode does not make (itself) manifest in one (particular)
fixed form such as the sun. It is self-luminous (svābhāsa), and so is not an object

of illumination of the sun etc.; on the contrary, the sun etc. are the objects (of its)
illumiṉation, and so without that Light (of consciousness) they would not shine.
Thus, the supreme Light shines as the sun and each (of the luminaries), and so he
says: ‘rather (the truth is that) consciousness shines in this way’.

Surely (one may ask,) if that is the case and all three are (equally) without
distinction the radiant energy (tejas) (of consciousness), where (does) this
diversity of being the ‘sharp (burning rays of the sun) etc. (originate from)? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

-aTā-ā̄īā’TaTkTTTITTĀRḤ: || 22 11

JaTdī ṀaāīṀḷ ũtvaīmamaktara7g |

svasvātantryaprabhāvodyadvicitropādhisaṅgataḥ || 1 17 II

prakāśo yāti taikṣṇyādim avāntaravicitratām |

The Light (then) assumes (a further) consequent diversity of being,
for example, (painfully) sharp (like the sun’s rays), by being associated with
the multiple limiting adjuncts (upādhi) generated by the power of its own
creative freedom. (117cd-118ab) (117)
The limiting adjunct (upādhi) (in this case) is the earthen and watery etc.
substance that comes into being by the power of the freedom of one’s own (innate

consciousness). Due to that, the Light (of consciousness) has taken on a

(particular) specific (nature), that is to say, it also assumes the form of the radiant
energy (tejas) (of the Sun), (and so also) ‘assumes (a further) consequent

diversity of being, for example, (painfully) sharp (like the sun’s rays).’ The
The fire is associated with the earth element because this is where it burns. The moon is

associated with water, because its pleasing cooling effect is like water. Moreover, it is said

to release nectar (see below, 3/139ab-142ab (3/138-141) and notes). The sun’s radiant
heating energy (tejas) associates it with the fire element. These three represent the basic
categories into which objective phenomena can be divided, namely, solid, fluid and

energetic. The Light of consciousness freely assumes these forms, thereby generating the

seeming adventitious limitations due to which the Light appears to manifest in these ways.
They are called ‘aḍjuncts’ and said to be ‘adventitious’ because they do not really divide

up the Light, even though it shines as the many varieties of phenomena that are of this

CHAPTER THREE

meaning is that it manifests in that form. The supreme Light itself manifests as

Fire when associated (saṁbhinna) with the manifestation of earthen and other
similar (solid material) substances. Affected (upahata) by the manifestation of
watery (liquid) substances, it manifests as the Moon, and coloured (uparakta) by

the pure radiant energy (tejas) alone (of luminous energetic entities), it manifests
as the Sun. As it does so, it manifests the wonderful diversity of the burning
(craving of fire) (dāhakatva), the pleasure (of soothing moonlight), the sharp (pain

of the hot blazing sun) and the like.
Surely (one may ask,) how can that wonderful diversity, which in this
way excels one’s own (essential conscious) nature also, be due solely to

association with limiting adjuncts (upādhiyoga)? He quells this doubt by giving
an example (of how this is possible).

The Sun of the Senses

IP-=cādT
ṬYĀTIT ṬIJITTTT |

durdarśano ‘pi gharmāṁśuḥ patitaḥ pāyasāṁ pathi ll 1 18 II
netrānandatvam abhyeti paśyopādheḥ prabhāvitām |
Although it is hard to look at the sun (directly), when it is reflected in

(a tranquil) stretch of water” the eye delights — behold the glory of
limitation! (118cd-119ab) (118)

Even (the blazing hot summer) sun (rīkṇāṁśu) that troubles the eyes,
when it is reflected in a still lake and the like, is no longer hard to look at, and so

becomes pleasing to see. This power of limitation is seen everywhere (to be such),

that it excels the nature of that which it limits.
(Now) he goes on to say that the light of the sun etc. is limited in this, and
so depends on the Light of consciousness in order to illumine itself. Thus, he says:

ftrarārcṝ

sūryādiṣu prakāśo ‘sāv upādhikaluṣīkṛtaḥ || 119 ||
saṁvitprakāśaṁ māheśam ata eva hy apekṣate |

The light of the Sun and the rest is sullied (as it were) by the limiting

adjuncts (upādhi) (created by the Lord). Thus, it depends on the Light of
consciousness of the Great Lord. (119cd-120ab) (119)

type. Just as the red flower placed near a crystal seems to colour it red but does not really

do so. Concerning the nature of limiting adjuncts, see above, note 2,60.

1. Read with MS Jh pāyasāṁ for pāthasāṁ.

TANTRĀLOKA

The difference between the supreme Light and the insentient light of the

Sun etc. is indicated by the word ‘consciousness’ used here (in this context).
In this way also, he explains the nature (of the Sun, Moon and Fire) as
they are (inwardly experienced) (yathāsaṁbhava) (as forms of the Light of

consciousness).

TGNTNITTĀ Ṭ̄ATh TA JTSĀT TRJT || 230 ||
TG-TNTNTIYTATĪ
ṬHTH ST |
prakāśamātraṁ suvyaktaṁ sūrya ity ucyate sphuṭam || 120 ||
prakāśyavastusārāṁśavarṣi tat soma ucyate |

`The (pure) Light alone (prakāśamātra), well manifest and clearly

apparent (sphuṭa), is said to be the Sun, while the Moon is said to be that
which rains down the aspect of the illumined entities which are their
(blissful) essence. (120cd-121ab) (120)

(When one says that the Light of consciousness is) ‘well manifest’, it

means that it is (essentially) unassociated (with limiting adjuncts) such as the

watery substances and the rest (mentioned previously). The sense is that (the

essential) nature (rūpa) of the Sun is ‘the (pure) Light alone (prakāśamātra)’.
Hence its state is that of the means of knowledge. That is the form (of
consciousness the Sun) is meant to represent, namely, (pure) cognition

(jñānamātra) alone which is ‘clearly apparent’, that is, witnessed (directly) by
everybody.

AII objective entities that are illumined (by the Light of consciousness)

consist of pleasure, pain and illusion, and so, with respect to (their) two aspects,
(physical and experiential, their) ‘essence’ and most excellent ‘aspect’ is the bliss

that brings joy and the like (that comes from the experience of objectivity as an
aspect of the Light of consciousness). Thus, in accord with the saying ‘the Moon

Normally, the sphere of objectivity is experienced with a mixture of feelings of

pleasure, pain or indifference. But that is because we are not attending to its essential
Being, which is the Light of Śiva consciousness. If we experience it that way, we
recognize that it is nothing but the shining of the Light of consciousness, and as such, we
experience its essentially blissful nature. Then it seems to be oozing with blissful lifegiving and medicinal nectar as does the moon (see below, 3/139ab-142ab (3/138-141) and

notes). Moreover, just as the moon shines with the light of the sun, so does the Moon of
objectivity shine with the Light of the Sun of the senses, mind and other means of

knowledge, which are also nothing but the Light of consciousness as pure cognitive
consciousness, free of thought constructs and s0 all sense of duality. In between shines the
perceiver, who, also realized to be the Light of consciousness alone, is Fire. This burns
between the rising and setting of the Sun of perception and the Moon of objectivity, as

does the fire that is piously tended and worshipped at dawn, sunset and midday. In short,

when the three aspects of all empirical experience - subject, means of knowledge and
object, are recognized to be the Light of consciousness alone shining in these spheres, then

they are said to be the Fire, Sun, and Moon, respectively. From the perspective of the

power of the Light, they correspond to its powers of will, knowledge and action,
symbolized by the powers of the Fire, Sun and Moon, to illumine and heat.

CHAPTER THREE

rains down nectar, it sprinkles all this phenomenal existence with that (nectar)

which it rains down, that is, (it makes all things) of the very nature of bliss. That

(essential state of) being (sat), which is such, and is the pure Light of that
(objectivity), ‘is said to be the Moon’. The meaning is that (the Light of
consciousness is then) indicated by the word ‘Moonʼ.
Thus, (the Moon represents) objectivity. This is because the objective

aspect which is pleasure (āhlāda) is predominant (in that aspect of the Light of

consciousness). (It is said) of them with this intention, in order to explain that they
are the powers of knowledge and action, that ‘this, the power of knowledge of the
supreme (Light), shines (tapati) in the form of the Sun’ and ‘Śiva’s power of
action shines (tapati) in the form of the Moon.’
And so, in this way:
The Moon of Objectivity and the Fire of the Subject

gai aṛīṭrrḷrg:
ãī a ũad | 222 1|
sūryaṁ pramāṇam ity āhuḥ somaṁ meyaṁ pracakṣate || 121 I|

The (wise) say that the Sun is the means of knowledge, and the Moon

is said to be the object. (121cd)

Having defined the nature of the Sun and Moon in this way, he (now)
defines that of Fire also.

T-āT-HfTJTTI

a-tēkkīkeath;rt°II-ĀIIECI

anyonyam aviyuktau tau svatantrāv apy ubhau sthitau |
bhoktṛbhogyobhayātmaitad anyonyonmukhatāṁ gatam || 122 ||
tato jvalanacidrūpaṁ citrabhānuḥ prakīrtitaḥ |

yo ‘yaṁ vahneḥ paraṁ tattvaṁ pramātur idam eva tat | 123 I|

(Although) they are both independent, they are not separate from one
another, and of the nature of the enjoyer, the object of enjoyment and both
(together), they became intent on one another. Then the flaming conscious
nature (which arises between them) is called Fire (citrabhānu, lit. ‘Many
Rayed One’). This, the supreme principle of Fire, is indeed that of the
subject." (122-123) (121cd-123ab)

’ Cf. below 3/138-141 (137cd-141ab).

The perceiving, knowing subject is identified with Fire because it incinerates the object
and thereby continuously obliterates duality in the process of perception, to recreate it in

every new perception.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘They are both’, that is, the Sun and Moon, ‘independent’. They operate
independently of one another as the means and object of knowledge

(respectively). Even so, ‘they are not separate from one another’. As it is

necessary
that
they
(must
invariably
be)
perceived
together
(sahopalambhaniyama), they are not different (from one another). Nowhere
does one perceive cognition (jñāna) that is not ‘coloured’ (ārūṣita) by (that is,

associated with,) an object of knowledge, or an object of knowledge
(independently) without cognition. As they say:

‘The essential form (svarūpa) of cognition (jñāna) devoid of a referent
(upāśraya) cannot be perceived, like that of (a perfectly transparent) crystal (with

nothing reflected within it).”
Again:

‘Thus there is no object of perception without perception.”

Thus, as these two, the Sun and Moon, are the perceiver and the

perceived, they derive their being from their intent (aunmukhya) on one another.

The ‘enjoyer’ is (the individual soul who ‘enjoys” worldly experience, he is) the

contracted perceiver, consisting of the intellect and the rest (of the inner and outer
senses). The means of knowledge is also the enjoyer, because it is of that same
nature (tanmaya). The ‘object of enjoyment’ is ‘blue’, ‘pleasure’ and the like.
The state of being (sa1) (in which they are) ‘both together’ is (their) state of
dynamic union (lolībhāva). That which is of that nature is the union (saṅghaṭta)

of the enjoyer and the object of enjoyment. This is the meaning.
Thuṣ, in this way, because rays (bhānu) of many (diverse and wonderful)

(citra) forms, consisting of cognitions (māna) and their objects etc., are produced

by the union of the enjoyer and the object of enjoyment, the ‘Fire’ (which arises in
this way) is called (the Many Rayed One). As is said: ‘Fire, the Pure One, arises

l This expression is found in the well know formulation by the Buddhist Dharmakīrti in

his Pramāṇaviniścaya (in 1/54ab), quoted by Abhinava in the ĪPVv (vol. 2, p. 78). Ētad

dhi

sahopalambhaniyamād

abhedo

nīlatadhiyor

iti

prasadhayituṁ nirūpitam. ʻfor all this has been explained in order to make it clear that
(the various objects) such as blue are nothing but forms (ākāra) of consciousness,
according to (the principle stated by Dharmakīrti): ‘As it is necessary that they (must be
invariably) perceived together, there is no difference (abheda) between blue and the
cognition (of blue).’”” Quoted in Ratie 2010: 445.

The word upāśraya, that I have traslated in this context as ‘a referent’, literally means
‘leaning against, resting upon, any support for leaning against’. The object of perception

acts as a ‘support’ for the cognitive consciousness (jūāna) that knows it, giving it a form
consonant with its object. Cognition as such remains cognition. If it were not to do so, its
object would not be perceived. But even so, it is not known as such, that is, devoid of
content. It exists but cannot be ‘objectively perceived. The example is a pure crystal that
is so perfectly translucent, it is invisible. But if an object is placed near to it, it is coloured
by itand so becomes visible. A red flower, for example, appears to redden it.

Read sāryacandrāīma for sūryācandrātma.

CHAPTER THREE

by the dynamic union (saṅghaṭṭa) of the Sun and the Moon.” It is the limited

(conditioned) perceiver whose nature is consciousness, which is predominantly
Fire (jvalana) (in this aspect), because it burns away the duality (bheda) which is

the division between the means and object of knowledge. This is the meaning. (In

other words,) it is the union (saṁmelana) of the means and the object of
knowledge. This (too) is the meaning. The nature of Fire is also like this, and so
its state is that of the perceiver (pramātṛ). Thus it is said ‘the supreme’, that is,

unique, ‘principle of Fire is indeed that™ of the subject’.

Surely (one may ask,) as the fire’s light is dependent on another, and (this
state of dependence) was said previously to be insentience, how can it be the
principle (tattva) of the subject, whose nature is one with (pure) sentient

awareness (cetanā)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Subject and its Subjectivity

ūfṝza q fsnraāīaṟc-arṭzī
TJTTĀĪCTHTTTH]
fRTETI JAÑēa: 11/22% |I
saṅṁvid eva tu vijñeyatādātmyād anapekṣiṇī |
svatantratvāt pramātoktā vicitro jñeyabhedataḥ || 124 ||
Consciousness itself, which by virtue of its freedom is at one with (all)
that is to be known (vijñeya), and so is (in all respects) independent, is said to
be the subject that is wonderfully various (vicitra) due to the diversity (bheda)

of the object of knowledge. (124) (123cd-124ab)

‘Consciousness itself, by virtue of its freedomʼ becomes one with ‘(all)
that is to be knownʼ, that is, with Fire, which is (both) the enjoyer and the object

of enjoyment, and so is said to be ‘the subject’ Thus it is said that

This line is quoted again below in TĀv ad 5/72cd-73ab (72) and ad 29/150cd-153ab,
where the context warrants that it is probably drawn from the Yogasañcara.

Ṟead yo ‘yam for yoyam.
The limited individual subject, who is both agent and perceiver, is associated with

objectivity in countless ways, so too with the perceptions of it. Fire represents the total
situation of the subject identified with the object, for example, the body set in relation to
the object which is external to the body, and the rest that the subject identifies itself with.

‘The condition of this subject is that of the ‘enjoyer’ or ‘eater’ of the object of enjoyment.

The analogy is well known and ancient in India. The Upanisads (Munḍaka 3/1/1 and
Śvetāśvatara 416) explain how the ‘enjoyer’ perceives the world by quoting a verse from
the Veda (Ṛk 1/164/20) that gives the famous example of two birds sitting on a tree. One

eats its fruits, while the other watches. According to Śaṅkācārya, the commentator, the

tree is the body. The fruits are the consequences of the actions (karman) of the body that
cling to it. The bird that eats them is the individual soul, subject to its Karma. The bird
who watches him, detached, is the Supreme Self, the Lord (īśvara). The bird who eats the

fruitis the ‘enjoyer’, who is such because he is consuming through the activity of the body

(i.e. the senses which are the means of knowledge and perception’) the fruits of the actions

(‘objects”) of the tree of the body on which it rests. From the nondual Śaiva point of view,
the ‘enjoyerʼ is the synthesis of these three, which work together to make up its ‘enjoying

TANTRĀLOKA

(consciousness) is ‘independent’. The point is that even though consciousness
has assumed the nature of Fire (that is, the individual perceiver), it has not fallen
from its own nature. Surely (one may ask,) if subjectivity belongs to
consciousness itself and, as its (subjectivity) cannot be undivided, how could it

logically be possible for the subject which is also of that (same) nature to possess

(this) wonderfully various state? With this doubt in mind, he says that (the

subject) is ‘wonderfully various (vicitra) due to the diversity (bheda) of the

object of knowledgeʼ. The meaning is that it is due to the ‘diversity’, that is, the
wonderful variety of the object of knowledge, which is due to the diversity

(bheda) (of the sphere of objectivity, consisting) of the group of principles (tattva)

(within the sphere of Māyā), beginning with the Force (of limited agency)

(kalā).” Even though the limited capacity to act etc. of the Force (of limited

agency) and the rest (the principles) are common (to all individual perceivers),
there is a hierarchy (of perceivers). This (hierarchy) is perceivable by everybody,
insofar as (everybody can perceive that) they have authority over (only their own)
specific activities (karman). It is due to this that there is a diversity of subjects
(pramātṛbheda), (each of whom) is endowed with the glorious power (māhātmya)
of limitation (upādhi).
subjectivityʼ. At the same time, as the subject, which can never be an object, it remains
essentially pure, free consciousness. When he knows this, he is liberated. As the Upaniṣad
puts it:
‘(Both) on the same tree, the individual soul (puruṣa) is immersed (in suffering)
and continuously deluded, is worried by (his) impotence. (But) if he sees the other, his
adored Lord and his glory, he is free of sorrow.” Muṇḍakopaniṣad 3/1/2

There are thirty-one principles (tattva) ranging from Earth to the Force (of limited
agency) (kalā), which is at the extreme limit of Māyā, the domain of objectivity. Within
this domain, each of the categories of existing things and the individual entities

themselves are all different from one another. It is, one could say, the kingdom of
difference, relative distinctions and duality which is the objective world of the individual
perceiver.

The Force (of limited agency) infuses a limited capacity to act (kiṅcitkartṛtva) into the

individual perceiver. Other principles down to Earth each contribute to building the
individual subjectivity, as perceiver and agent, by furnishing the mind, senses, perception,
and, extemnally, outside this psychophysical body, outer physical objects. These together

constitute its total experience of itself, mind, senses and world in which it lives, formed by
and for the ‘enjoyment’ of its Karma, that is, both its production and its consequences.

There is only one supreme perceiver (parapramātṛ), namely, Deity who is pure
consciousness. The infinite number of individual perceivers at the lower levels belong to

one or other type of perceiver (see above, note 1,463). Even so, they are all essentially the

one perceiver, who is diversified by the objectivity with which it is set into relation, and

marks the domain of its activity. The lowest level of perceivers, the sakala subjects, for

example, operate within the domain that extends from the individual soul down to earth.
This is the extent and degree of their ‘authority or competence in which they can act as

agents and the range of principles in which and with which they operate.
Again, at the same level, the perceiver may be of various kinds, according to
whether he is identified with the body (deha), intellect (buddhi), vital breath (prāṇa) or the
void (of deep sleep). in which case he is the perceiver related to each of these,
respectively. Thus, we find references to the ‘embodied subject’ (dehapramātṛ), the
‘intellectual subject” (huddhipramātr), the ‘subject of the vital breathī’ (prāṇapramātṛ) and

CHAPTER THREE

(Next) he explains that for this reason Fire is also like this.

gI’TTCTRT-ṬCAATrTĀTTTTR:|
T TGaTT-c’ÇçāēaāTTT-RĪTT-T |I g4 1
somāṁśadāhyavastūtthavaicitryābhāsabṛṁhitaḥ |

tata evāgnir uditaś citrabhānur maheśinā || 125 ||

The Great Lord has called Fire Citrabhānu (the Many Varied Rayed

One), because it is intensified (bṛvhita) by the manifestation of variety”
(vaicitryābhāsa) derived from the entities that are its fuel as aspects of the

Moon (of objectivity). (125) (124cd-125ab)

Thus, due to the wonderful diversity of the subject, the Lord has called
Fire Citrabhānu (the Many Varied Rayed One), because it has many varied rays in
the forms of the enjoyer and the object of enjoyment etc., and is the wonderfully
varied unfolding (sphāra) of each cognition (māna) and its object etc. The parts,

that is, energies (kalā) etc. of the Moon, which is the object of perception, are the

entities to be burnt (and serve as its fuel), that is, those that are to be assimilated

the ‘subject of emptiness” (sūnyapramātr). They are distinguished here by their
competence to act in these domains and experience them. Even so, there is only one

ultimately real (pāramārthika) supreme subject, who is both perceiver and agent. The
levels and forms he freely assumes are characterized by the sphere of objectivity in which
he acts and perceives. As the subject, he is always essentially free of objectivity; whatever
the form or sphere with which he is identified, it is not intrinsic to his nature. It is just a
secondary adjunct projected onto it. While the Advaita Vedānta decries this phenomenon
as the result of ignorance of the true nature of the subject, namely, the Self (Ātman) who is

one with the absolute Brahman, here it is seen to be the ‘glorious power of limitation’,

because through it supreme consciousness generates diversity, without being divided up
by it.

The word vaicitrya, which I translate here as ‘variety’ and also in other places as

‘wonderful variety’, denotes a single varied unit. Other terms such as bheda also denote
variety but in the sense of ‘difference’. If we wish to stress that several objects seen

together are different from one another, we would say that there is ‘bheda’, i.e. a

difference or relative distinction between them. Understood as part of a single perception
of many things together, we would say that the perception is ‘vicitra’, i.e. ‘varied’. The
perceiver is always the same but appears to be varied due to its association with various

objects, such as the body, senses or mind and their forms and contents. Feelings of
pleasure or pain seem to alter the perceiver into one that enjoys pleasure or suffers pain.
These are inner objects. The same is true with outer objects. It seems that the perceiver
who views a jar differs from the same perceiver who views a cloth. But he is the same.
There is difference (bheda) between the jar and the cloth, but only a variety (vaicitrya) of
states of the one perceiver. This seems to be especially so when the perceiver is in
different states of consciousness. He differs, for example, when awake and asleep. States
of consciousness correspond to the hierarchy of seven perceivers, that range from the
mundane perceiver up to Śiva the supreme perceiver, who is totally free of them. The

difference between these perceivers is not in their inherent nature, It is due to their
relationship with their object, according to its form and degree of apparent separation from
them.

TANTRĀLOKA

into itself. “It is intensified (bṛṁhita), that is, it assumes a specific form, ‘by the

manifestation of variety (vaicitryābhāsa)ī that arises by the (progressive)

hierarchical (sequence of perceivers) and in other ways from them.” This is the
meaning.

Surely (one may ask,) he has explained that the variety (vaicitrya) of the
subject is (in fact) that of the limitations (upādhi) imposed on it by the object, and
that the object does not manifest separately (from the subject), because it depends
on the subject (in order to be made manifest in perception). So let us set aside
further discussion concerning the nature of (the subject’s) variety; but how then
can one account for the subjectivity of this consciousness? With this question in
mind, he says:

fcafcīīārcrrasñf
sīaṁ vraāīṁaarā 1| 225 1
jñeyādyupāyasaṅghātanirapekṣaiva saṁvidaḥ |

sthitirmātāham asmīti jñātā śāstrajñavad yataḥ || 126 ||
The perceiver (mātṛ) is a state of consciousness independent of the
consonance of the (instrumental) means (upāya) (of perception), namely, the
object of knowledge and the rest, (and is self-established in the immediacy of

the awareness that:) “I am” (aham asmīti); (and so, latently containing

within itself all knowledge,) is the knower (jñātṛ), like one who knows the
scriptures (but does not wish to explain them and so remains silent). (126)
(125cd-126ab)
The reflective awareness of ‘I am’ is ‘a state of consciousness’ which is

‘independent’ of the objectivity, consisting of each (manifestation of) ‘blue’,
‘pleasure’ and the like, that serve subjectivity as the (instrumental) means (of
! The Fire represents the subject, who is of various kinds, according to his corresponding

object of perception and perceptions themselves. Accordingly, the Fire of subjectivity is
called ‘Many Rayed’, to suggest this diversity in the unity of the one perceiving and acting

consciousness. To the degree in which subjective consciousness is free, it assimilates and
makes its object one with itself. As subjectivity develops from the lowest embodied one to
the highest of Supreme Śiva, the mistaken, limited identification of the subject with the
object, ranging from the body right up the whole of manifestation of consciousness,
progressively decreases as he absorbs it into consciousness. Thus, the subjective aspect is
like a consuming fire that increases as it burns up its fuel, until ultimately when it has
burnt it all up, it bums out. Thus, it reverts to the essential consciousness, which is

undefinable as subject, object or means of knowledge.
The exclamation ‘ am’ (aham asmi) has ancient roots that go back to the earliest
Upaniṣads. Thus, for example, we read in a well-known passage in the

Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad (1/4/1): “The Self alone existed in the beginning of this (creation)
in the shape of the Person (puruṣa). Looking about he saw no one else but himself. He
said: “I amʼ (aham asmīti). Hence came the name ‘I’ (aham).’ lt is as if the One comes to

know of its own existence by uttering ‘’ and thereafter becomes the creator. Thus, further
on in the same Upaniṣad (Ś/5/4) it is said that aham – ‘I – is the secret name of the god
who creates.

CHAPTER THREE

perception). The meaning is that the ‘perceiver’ is the ‘knower’, whose nature is
the reflective awareness of supreme ‘I’ (consciousness). The independence of the

reflective awareness of ‘I’ from objectivity indicates that it is different in

character from a thought construct (vikalpa). The reflective awareness of ‘T’, such
as ‘I aṃ thinʼ, is only a thought construct, because it arises in relation to its
counter-correlate, ‘non-thinnessʼ, which is the object of negation. The (specific)

form (of a thought construct) depends on its counter-correlate which it is not (and

with which it is contrasted). Again, the ongoing (pravartamāna) reflective

awareness of ‘I’ within the Light, which is the supreme subject, is not a thought
construct, because it can have no counter-correlate, as that would be conditioned

by the notion (vikalpa) that it is separate or not (from the supreme perceiver).
As (Utpaladeva) says:

‘The nature of the reflective awareness that ‘I am’ is the Light (of

consciousness) and its body Speech (vāc); even so it is not a thought construct

(vikalpa), which is said to be an ascertainment (viniścaya) dependent on two (co-

relative concepts, namely, assertion and negation).”

The immediate perception of an entity is followed by its labelling as a table or a chair,

according to what it is. This thought construct is formed by distinguishing it from all other

things that are not tables, that is, its counter-correlates. The pure ‘I’ consciousness, which

is not identified with the body or anything else objective, cannot be labelled in this way or

that, as there is no counter-correlate ‘I am notʼ, and s0 it is not a thought construct. The
subject is autonomous in the reflective awareness of ‘ am’, as this has no negative
counter-correlate in the same way as ‘l am fat’ has in relation to ‘thinness’. This can only
occur at the ideative level, where every affirmation correlates with a negation. See
following note.

TP 1/6/1. Utpaladeva himself comments on this verse in his vṛtti: ‘The reflective

awareness that ‘I amʼ within the Self of the Light (of consciousness) cannot be called a
thought construct (vikalpa) even if it is essentially associated with ‘discourse’ (sābhilapo
‘pi), since (the inner speech of consciousness) is Supreme Speech. Indeed, (a thought
construct) is an ascertainment (niścaya) preceded (and based on) negation of (its)
opposite, and it is not possible here (as regards the pure Light (of consciousness)) for

anything to exist which is its opposite.’

The term vikalpa is analysed in the ĪPVv (vol. 1, p. 274) in four different

compatible ways, as follows. 1) ‘Putting together what is different (and separate)’

(bhinnasyāpi yojanā), or conceiving as a manifold what is one (ekasyāpi vaividhyena
kalpanā). 2) Differentiating or dividing off (vicchedana) the imagined notion (kalpana) of
another form from a manifold (of possibilities) which are doubtful (vividhasya ca
śaṁkītasya rūpāntarasya kalpanaṁ vicchedanaṃ). 3) Once divided off (vibhajya),

removing it from other (possible applicable notions) (kalana) and protecting (palana) it by
making it enter into the perceiver’s mind (vi-kal-pa). 4) Conceiving in many ways
(vividhaṁ kalpanam) in the sense that at some time it has something that is being affirmed
and something that is being negated as its object (vidhāyamānaniṣidhyamāṇatayā) (ibid. p.

281).

The main characteristic of a vikalpa is that of projecting the object outside the ‘I
and knowing it in terms of separation as ‘this’. As is said in chapter six of the first section
of the Īśvarapratyabhij~ñā, the first verse of which Jayaratha cogently quotes, the focus

here is the ‘theory of exclusion’ (apohavāda). Simply stated, it maintains that an entity is
identified by the formation of a thought construct (vikalpa) which represent its nature
positively as ‘this’, on the basis of the negation or exclusion (apoha) of its counter-

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) agreed that the reflective awareness of ‘’ is the
subject’s innate nature and that it differs in character from a thought construct, but
how does this serve our purpose? (Does this mean) then that without objectivity

(the subject) would be devoid of subjectivity?" With this doubt in mind, he says

(concerning the reflective awareness of ‘’, that it is) ‘like one who knows the

scripturesʼ, that is, like one who knows the scriptures but has no desire to explain
them. Even so, (his) knowledge of the scriptures abides at one with him, and so it

is said that he is ‘a knower’. The same is the case with the supreme subject
within whom, because he is full of all things, objectivity abides.

Surely (someone may object that) a perceiver is said (to be such) because
of (his) relation to the knowledge (that results from perception) (pramā), and

(this) knowledge (arises) from the means of knowledge whose field (of operation)

is the object of knowledge which is separate (from it), so how can (the perceiver
correlates, that is, everything else which it is not. This theory was first formulated by the
iḍealist Diṅnāga, the founder of Buddhist logic, in his Pramāṇasamuccaya. There it was

originally applied to words as expressing a specific meaning by exclusion of all other

ones. (Concerning the development of this theory in Diṅnāga’s works, see Frauwallner
1959: 9106).
Then Dharamakīrti, his great commentator, extended the application of the

process of exclusion (apoha) to all cases where universals may operate. In this way, the
theory serves the Buddhists as a means to distinguish one entity from another without

having to postulate the existence of some imperceptible universal ‘own nature’. Hindu
philosophers would say that a table is identified as being a table because it possesses the
characterizing attribute of ‘table-ness' common to all tables. This view does not need to

refer to any such universals, focusing instead on each particular as it is, as determined by
its not being anything else. The Buddhists developed various theories, more or less realist,
some of which (for example, that of the Ratnakīrti,)) came close to the Pratyabhijñā,
namely, that words (and hence vikalpas, which are thought constructs clothed in inner
speech) rest on a reality which is mainly affirmative, qualified by the implicit negation of

its opposite. There are three moments in this process: 1) imagining what is other than the

object intended, 2) superimposing it onto the object, and 3) negating it (IPVV 2, p. 289
vikalpayet aropayet niṣedhec ca). Or one can say that ‘every apprehension of all objects of
knowledge involves the act of superimposing of the manifestations to be excluded’ (ibid.
p. 290). See Torella 2004: 128-129, n. 3 and 4. Concerning the nature of thought
constructs ~ vikalpa – as generally understood in various schools of Indian thought, see

Matilal 1986: 313-315.
If subject and object are relative to one another, there could be no subject without an
object, or, indeed, vice versa. The dualist Sāṁkhya maintains that the individual soul is a
perceiver as long as it relates to the sphere of objectivity (i.e. Prakṛti). Separated from it in

the liberated state, it is pure consciousness devoid of subjectivity. Subjectivity (the sense
of ‘U and ‘mine’) is the ego, which is part of the inner mental organ, and hence it is in the
sphere of objectivity. Similarly, Advaita Vedānta, which maintains that the sphere of

objectivity is illusory, argues that when the ignorance of that fact is removed, the pure

conscious Self which is the Absolute Brahman that remains as the Real, is not a subject.
Subjectivity, in this sense, is as illusory as Māyā. From these perspectives the question
arises, how can there be a pure ‘I’ consciousness devoid of an object?

The text reads: tatra jñātr̥tvam ucyate literally: ‘it is said that there is ‘knowership’
there.” Consciousness knows itself as ‘I am’ and so is not deprived of its subjectivity even

without reference to an external object, because objectivity is at one with that pure ‘’
consciousness.

CHAPTER THREE

who is) devoid of an object and the rest possesses subjectivity? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

&N |

āī q āī āīqaāī āaāī JJGQTATITTAT ||23 11
ajña eva yato jñātānubhavātmā na rūpataḥ |

na tu sã jñãtr̥tã yasyãṁ śuddhajñeyãdy apekṣate || 127 |

The knower (jñātṛ) who, by his very nature,” is the direct experience

(anubhava) (which is pure awareness free of thought constructs) is no
‘knower” at all; the state of subjectivity (jñātṛtā) is absent in that which is
dependent (even) on the pure (inner) object of knowledge (at one with
consciousness, or on anything else). (127) (126cd-127ab)
He who is called the ‘knower” in relation to the means of knowledge and

the rest, and consists of limited knowledge, ‘is no ‘knower’ at all’. He is not the

perceiver. This is the meaning. As explained before, the nature of the subject is
independent of (all) else, because (unlike the object, which depends on the subject
to be an object, the subject) does not look to (and depend on) any other (reality to
be the subject). One should not think that that is dependent by nature (on
something else), because it is unreasonable to maintain that that which is supreme
(para) is established in something else other (than itself) (paraniṣṭha) (which is,

necessarily, inferior to it). He says this (in the line) beginning with ‘the state of
subjectivity (jñātṛtā) is absentʼ.
Surely (one may ask,) if this is the case, how can one deny (the existence
of that) which is everywhere said (by everybody) to be subjectivity? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

HTAd q ī JTHTTqTÑATFTTTĪ || Q2¢ /11
tasyāṁ daśāyāṁ jñātṛtvam ucyate yogyatāvaśāt |
mānataiva tu sā prācyapramātṛparikalpitā || 128 ||

It is called subjectivity on that leve™” (of Māyā on which

consciousness is obscured by objectivity), because it is fit (to become such,
and can moreover distinguish one object from another). This (level)

corresponds to that of the means of knowledge (mentally) conceived
Ṟead svarūpataḥ for na rāpataḥ.

“ The object depends on the subject to be perceived, whereas the subject is conscious of
himself, independently of any object, and so is superior to it. Something which is inferior
is dependent on something else which is superior to it, not the other way around.
Otherwise, how can what is superior be said to be such, if it is dependent on something

which is inferior to itself?

Symbolised by the letter R.

TANTRĀLOKA

(parikalpita) by the (supreme) subject, that precedes it (and on which it

depends). (128) (127cd-128ab)

(It is called subjectivity) ‘on that’ (level) within that limited subject’s
nature. This is the meaning. (This is so) ‘because it is fit (to become such), as
(the limited individual subject) distinguishes objects (from one another). This
level is (mentally) conceived (parikalpitā) as (its) means of knowledge (pramāṇa)

(through which the pure subjectivity of consciousness knows outer objects) by the
supreme subject who is proved to exist (a priori) right from the start

(ādisiddha)' and precedes it. The meaning is that it is made manifest as such

because its nature is essentially limited (saṅṁkucita, literally ‘contracted’)
cognitive consciousness (jñāna). Once the supreme subject, out of his own innate
freedom, has concealed his own essential nature and made (himself) manifest as

limited cognitive consciousness, he also generates the object of knowledge
separately (as distinct from himself).

Surely (one may ask,) if supreme consciousness manifests in the form of

perception (māna) and the rest, then how is it that (consciousness) does not recede
(astamaya) (and cease)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3xōrzaiū

šfzta at rpḹī īpramṁ 1) 2 1
Abhinava is distinguishing here between two types of subjectivity. The first is the

supreme subjectivity. This is pure ‘’ consciousness, which is independent of outer

objectivity, as it contains it within itself. Thus, it is completely free of its inherent
limitations, including the duality of relative distinctions, time and space etc. The other,

inferior subjectivity is within the domain of Māyā, which the sphere of objectivity and

duality. This perceiver is ‘nothing at all’ in itself. It exists solely in relation to the object. It

is conceived as a mental construct by the supreme subject, which thus precedes it, to serve
as the means through which it knows the sphere of relative distinctions. The supreme
subject does not perceive any outer object. Delimiting itself by aspects of that objectivity,
that is, the body and mind, which it projects externally, its concomitant contracted state of
consciousness is fit to perceive outer objects as distinct from itself and distinguish them
from one another. The lower conditioned ‘contracted’ subject is thus an instrument, or
means of knowledge, of the higher subject, whose existence is independent and a priori.

! The perceiver is a priori. lts existence is established right from the start (ādisidáha). It
must exist for perception to be possible and, moreover is known to be prior to the
perception or knowledge of anything. To deny its existence entails the denial of all that
could be perceived and hence exist. The subject's existence is established before any

means to ascertaining the existence of anything is applied, because it is by the fact of its
existence that any means to know anything is possible. See above, note 1,404.

The terms ‘udaya’ and ‘astamaya’ denote two aspects of the eternal, and hence nonsuccessive, activity of consciousness. They are used in the common non-technical sense to

denote the rising — udaya and setting – astamaya of the sun. Cognitive consciousness (that

is, consciousness engaged in the act of perception) arises or emerges out of its essential
indeterminate transcendental nature to then recede back into it out of the sphere of
cognition into repose within its own essential nature. Thus, the question is cogent. When
consciousness emerges in this way, does not its essential, unconditioned nature not recede
and cease?

CHAPTER THREE

ucchalanty api saṅṁvittiḥ kālakramavivarjanāt |
uditaiva satt pīūrṇā mātrmeyādirūpiṇī || 129 ||

Even when consciousness pours out of itself in the form of subject and

object etc., free as it is of the sequence of time (kālakrama), it is in an
emergent (uditā) (state which is) full (pūārṇā) (and all-inclusive). (129) (128cd129ab)

‘Even when consciousness pours out of itself’ externally ‘in the form
of subject and object etc.’, because, in accord with the dictum ‘this Self has
shone forth (just) onceʼ, there is no division (viccheda) in the act of
manifestation (avabhāsanakriyā), and so because it is undivided by time, it is
‘emergentʼ, as it does not fall from its (innate) pure conscious nature, and its

nature necessarily (niyamena) (never) recedes (anastamitarūpa). This is the

meaning. Thus, it is full, that is, because it rests in its own nature alone,

(consciousness) does not depend on anything else. This is the meaning.

ŚSurely (one may ask, if) consciousness (is such as you say, it) is an
activity (kriyā), and so like (any) other activity, must certainly be considered to be

conditioned by time, so how is it that he has said that it is free of the procession of
time (kālakrama)? With this doubt in mind, he says (the following) to explain that
worldly activity, such as cooking, is conditioned by time, but not (that) of this
(consciousness).

FaĪxATITTĪG
T TIrrd JTaT I|/230 |1
pākādis tu kriyā kālaparicchedāt kramocitā |
matāntyakṣaṇavandhyāpi na pākatvaṁ prapadyate || 130 |l
However, it is right to maintain that (all other forms of) action, such
as cooking, conditioned as they are by time, take place in a sequence. Thus
(food is) not fully cooked if even just the last instant of time (necessary for the
cooking to reach completion) has not elapsed. (130) (129cd-130ab)

Here worldly activity, such as cooking, is ‘conditioned by time’, and so

is considered to be (invariably) sequential (kramavyāptā). This is why if (even)

‘the last instant of time’, that is, the one that just precedes the second instant in
which the result (of the action) comes about, is missing, then even if many

instants have passed (previously, action) is not functional in that way in everyday

life, because (that activity’s) own (specific) nature is not complete. But if that
(activity) were also to be like the act of manifestation, which is unconditioned

(anāvacchinna) by time, then the act of cooking and the like would be
accomplished in daily life (vyavahāram iyāt) the very first instant (it begins).
Thus, worldly activity such as cooking is sequential; this is not the case with the
eternal (activity) of consciousness. As they say:

See note above in TĀv ad 1/57.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Succession pertains to (common) worldly action and is due to the power
of time. However, (succession) does not apply to the Lord’s eternal (activity), just

as (it does not) to the Lord (Himself).

Thus, because consciousness is not measured by time (akālakalita), even

though it abides in the form of the subject, means and object of knowledge, it does
not fall from its primary form, which is (pure) consciousness alone
(saṁvinmātra). He says that (as follows):

sŪī || 232 1|
itthaṁ prakāśatattvasya somasūryāgnitā sthitā |
api mukhyaṁ tat prakāśamātratvaṁ na vyapohyate || 131 ||
In this way, the Light (prakāśatattva) abides as the Moon (of the
object), the Sun (of the means of knowledge), and the Fire (of the subject),
but even so, its primary form as pure Light (prakāśamātra) is not negated
(vyapohyate). (131) (130cd-131ab)

Surely (one may ask,) let that be so on the plane of the manifestation of
all things as objects of denotation (vācya), but what is said to be the form of the
Sun, Moon and Fire, in terms of the manifestation of all (their corresponding)

denotators (vācaka), in such a way that the essential nature of the Light (of

consciousness) is not compromised by (their) manifestation? Is there not even a

thought (given to this)? With this doubt in mind he says:

Short, Long and Prolate Vowels as Sun, Moon and Fire

iIkḷēecckiḷkikiteziec i ãīH 3=̄T

aqāc

II 23x

1I

fkzāṉ |

TP 2/172. Utpaladeva explains in his own brief commentary (vrtti): ‘The activity of
(phenomenal entities) that, due to the power of Māyā, manifest as differing from one

another, is successive, because it is under the sway of the power of time. However, (the
activity) which is the reflective awareness of the Self, and is without beginning or end, and
the very nature of the Lord, is not.”

Abhinava has talked about the Fire, Sun, and Moon as the domains of the subject,
means and object of knowledge, within which consciousness operates as the spheres of
reality which the energies of the forms of reflective awareness define and thereby bring
into being. These are the ‘objects of denotation’ (vācya) that words and language denote.
We can talk about the perceiver and the agent, how he perceives or acts, and the object of

his perception and action. Now he moves on to describe the inner form of the Fire, Sun
and Moon within in the series of vowels as the energies and forms of reflective awareness
themselves which, denoting them, are the parallel inner nature of their extemal denoted

nature.

CHAPTER THREE

JGRTYTṜ ṬTTTGTTTTA JTGHĪRaT 1|/8233 1I
eṣāṁ yat prathamaṁ rūpaṁ hrasvaṁ tat sūrya ucyate |
kṣobhānandavaśād dīrghaviśrāntyā soma ucyate || 132 I|
yat tat paraṁ plutaṁ nāma somānandāt paraṁ sthitam |

prakāśarūpaṁ tat prāhur āgneyaṁ śāstrakovidāḥ || 133 |I
The first form of these (vowels) is short and is called the Sun. (The
long form) (dīrgha) is called the Moon, because it is brought about by an
extended (dīrgha) rest (in the external object) due to the arousal (of the
subject out of himself), and (also because it is the source of) the bliss (ānanda)
(of sense contact). The prolated form, which comes next, follows that of the
bliss of the Moon. Supreme and of the nature of Light, those who know the
scriptures call it Fire. (132-133) (131cd-133ab)
‘The first form of these’ the aforementioned seed (vowels) reach is

unaroused. It is subtle and so ‘short’, consisting of (just) one (phonemic)

measure. (Thus, for this reason,) and because (they are) predominately the pure
Light (prakāśamātra) (of consciousness, they are) the Sun (of the means of

knowledge). Again, ‘it is called the Moon’ because it brings delight, and also

‘because it is brought about by an extended (dirgha) rest’ in the external state
(of the object) ‘due to the arousal (of the subject out of himself) and (also
because it is the source of) the bliss (ānanda) (of sense contact)ʼ. As it is
aroused and gross, it consists of two measures, that is, to say it is ‘extended
(dīrgha). All those ‘who know the scripturesʼ universally teach this. This is the
meaning.
Again, apart from these two, single and double measures, short and long,
those who know the scriptures refer to the other, prolated form of three measures,
as the nature (rūpa) of the subject, which is that of Fire. It is because of this that
when the bliss of the Moon is established, that is, develops, within the Sun, which
is the Light as the means of knowledge, taking the support (of the Moon), the
supreme, most excellent reality (atyartha) abides, manifest as the subject. This is
the meaning. It was said before that ‘the form of the subject is the union of the
means and the object of knowledge’. The short state (of the vowels) is Sun, the
long is the Moon, and the prolate, Fire. This is the state (of consciousness) as the

three abodes (symbolized by the vowels).

√yowels in Sanskrit are of three kinds: short (hrasva), long (dīrgha) and prolated
(pluta). A, I, U, ṛ, 1 E_ and O are short. The time it takes to utter them is one measure

(mātra). Ā, I, ŪŨ, RṚ, LḶ, AI and AU are long. The time it takes to utter them is two

measures. The prolated forms are articulated by extending the vowel sounds further as, for

example, when one is shouting A – A – A. The time it takes to utter them is three or more

measures. Abhinava explains that these measures represent degrees of intensity of
consciousness in the three phases of perception. The inception of perception is marked by
the activation of the means of knowledge, for example, the senses. It grows in intensity

with the apprehension of the object, and finally resting in the perceiver, satisfied that he
has known the object and is the foundation of the entire process, it is at its most extensive
and intense.

TANTRĀLOKA

In this way here also, (just as the three are all equally vowels,) the
supreme light does not fall from its own innate nature (despite the three forms in
which it shines). This is said to be the state of the Point (bindu). He says this (in

the following verse).

The Point of Śiva (śivabindu) as the Light of the Three Abodes

aā 11 g3 1
atra prakāśamātraṁ yat sthite dhūmatraye sati |

uktaṁ bindutayā śāstre śivabindur asau mataḥ || 134 ||

The pure Light (of consciousness prakāśamātra) present here when

the three abodes (of subject, object and means of knowledge) manifest is
referred to in the scripture as the ‘Point’, and is considered to be the Point of

Śiva (śivabindu). (134) (133cd-134ab)

This Point (to which Abhinava is referring) is one with the supreme

subject, and so is not (the vowel sign) found in Mantras, which are (just)

objects. Thus he says that it ‘is considered to be the Point of Śiva
(Śivabindu)’. The meaning is that (the Point) is the free, supreme subject who, as
the undivided Supreme Light, is free in the act of perception. As was said before:
‘That undivided Light (which continues to shine) in the abode of the

Moon, Sun and Fire, even when the power of action arises, is our Supreme

Point.”

Surely (one may ask,) it is not logical (to say that) the Point is some other

form of reflective awareness, because it is included along with (that) particular
(form of) reflective awareness called (the letter) M, which will be discussed

later." There is no difference at all between their perceptions (pratīti). The

“’ Thiṣ verse is quoted by Śivopādhyāya ad VBh 91. This is the Supreme Point

(parabindu), see above, 3/110ab-116ab (3/110-116). With this statement Abhinava
concludes his exposition of the nature of the Point as the fundamental Light of

consciousness, when it shines as the supreme subject that illumines the triad of subject,
object and means of knowledge.
N Seed-syllable mantras may end in visarga, but they most frequently end in anusvara,
written as a point (bīndu) above the succeeding consonant and so is called ‘bindu’. The
beṣṭ-known example is the Vedic syllable OM which is the model for any seed-syllable

mantras taught in the Tantras, such as AIṀ, ŚRĪṀ, HRĪṂṀ and so on.

Above 3/11lcd-112ab (111).

The lettrr ‘M’ at the end of a Sanskrit word is reduced to anuṣvāra (that is bindu, the

Point) if the following word does not begin with a vowel. Accordingly, it can be
considered to be a reduced form of the consonant ‘M’. As we shall see, the series of
twenty-five consonants corresponds to the twenty-five principles ranging from Earth to the
fettered Individual Soul, the last of these is denoted by the consonant M. See below,
3/154ab-154cd (3/153cd-154ab) and commentary.

CHAPTER THREE

difference between perceptions (prarīti) is due to the difference (bheda) between
the objects perceived. So how can this (bindu) be different from that (letter M)?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

TēT= TATĪ TṬRBITTTHJHAT |

TGōāī; īāāTTa’VRTCTHĪTRATTT: ||/734 1
makārād anya evāyaṁ tacchāyāmātradhṛd yathā |
ralahāḥ ṣaṣṭhavaisargavarṇarũūpatvasaṁsthitāḥ || 135 ||
This (Point) (Ṁ) is different from the consonant M, bearing (as it
were) merely a shade of it, just as (the letters) R, L and H abide in the form
(and state) of the neuter vowels (ṛ Ṛ 1 L) and emission (visarga) (H). (135)
(134cd-135ab)
The letters Ṛ, L and H assume the condition of the neuter vowels (r Ṛ 1 Ḷ)

and visarga (H), and although they possess the same bare phonemic resonance
(Śrutimātra), they differ from the letters R etc., which will be explained (further

ahead)." Similarly, hindu īs also (different) from the letter M." This is the
meaning of (this) statement. It was established previously that a phoneme is not

just the bare resonance (śruti) of (that) phoneme.

Surely (one may ask,) the power of the will (icchāśakti) is ‘coloured’ by

the desired aim, (which is represented) by the letters R and L. Thus, there (in that

case,) as it bears (even) just the shade (of the desired aim), it is reasonable (to
maintain that it) is a different (form of) reflective awareness; but to what can the

letters M and H be attributed to as ‘colouringsʼ, that these may also (give rise to)
other (forms of) reflective awareness? With this doubt in mind, he says:

āAĪ G; |

ã 1 235 l
ikāra eva rephāṁśacchāyayānyo yathā svaraḥ |
tathaiva mahaleśādaḥ so ‘nyo dvedhā ʻṣvaro ‘pi san || 136 ||
Just as the letter I (changes into) another vowel by a ‘shade’ (chāyā)
of the letter R, in just the same way A, although also not a vowel, has two
other aspects (by association) with a part of H and M (i.ee. H and Ṁ). (136)
(135cd-136ab)
! See 3/155ab-156cd (3/154cd-156ab).
! The consonant M represents the principle of the individual soul (puruṣa). There is a

‘shade’ of M in the Point. Thus, just as the former represents the individual subject set in
reḷation to external objectivity, so the Point represents the universal, transcendental
subjectivity of consciousness in relation to internal objectivity, that is, the experience of
the triad of subject, object and means of knowledge as being within consciousness and

made manifeṣt by it.

Cf. above, TĀv ad 3/78cd-79ab (79).

TANTRĀLOKA

Just as the letter I becomes another form of vowel, namely, the neuter

(letters ṛ and R), by a touch (cchāyā) of a part of the letter R, “In just the same
way A, although also not a vowelʼ, that is, although also the Light of the

Absolute (anuttaraprakāśa), is ‘Ā, the first letter (of the alphabet), which
(represents) the power of consciousness. Taking the support of a part of the letters

M and H as (its) limiting adjuncts, it sustains their bare phonemic resonance

(Śśrutimātra), and so ‘has two (other) aspects’." The meaning is that, as the

Point (bindu) and Emission (visarga), it (assumes two) other forms of reflective
awareness. The Absolute (anuttara) itself is the Light (of consciousness) which,

having concealed its own innate nature out ofits own freedom and having made
the plane of Śakti manifeṣt, manifests (itself) in the form of the ‘contracted’

(saṁkucita) subject. Thus, in accord with the saying: ‘the letter A and the letter H,
these two abide (together) as one’, and ‘the letter M is located in our Heart
along with Śaktiin the form of the lettrr H’, (the Light of the Absolute, the letter

A)is coloured by the letter M, whichis the ‘contracted’ subject." Thus, thereis
no defect (doṣa) (in this view).

Surely (one may ask,) how can the Absolute itself become emission
(visarga) etc. by (being) coloured in this way? With this doubt in mind, he says:
See above, 3/78ab-81ab (78-81).
! Read ‘a’ for ‘ah’. We have seen (above, note 3,304) that the vowel A (a-svara) can
also represent the Vowelless (asvara) Unstruck Sound of the Light of Anuttara.

! In order to pronounce the last two vowels, that is, anusvāra (Ṁ) and visarga (H), a
short A must be prefixed. Thus, we have to utter AM and AḤ. Thisis also sometimes
represented when writing them. Thus, in this case the vowel A sustains their vocalic
sounds and s0, resonant with them, is of two kinds.

1 Jayaratha quotes the full verse from which this line is drawn below in TĀv ad 3/200.

The second line tells us that, like the wind and the sky, the two cannot be separated. This

example, amongst others, is commonly given to illustrate how Śiva and Śakti are one.

There,in that context, Jayaratha quite rightly quotes this verse as referring to entire series
of letters from A to H as representing the reflective awareness of Śiva, whichis his
essential nature. However, the context hereis not the same. If this lineis to make sense

here, one would need to emend reading akāraś – ‘the letter A’ to aṁkāraś - ‘the letter

! The inhaled breath (apāna) is the vital essence of the individual soul (jva) and so is

sometimes called jīva. For example, the VBh (24a) declares that ‘the exhaled breath

(prāṇa) (travels) upwards, whereas the inhaled breath (jīva)is below.’ The sound of the
exhaled breathis Sa. The sound of the downward flow of the inhaled breath is Ha and
endsin the anusvāra Ṁ. Thuṣ, the two letters AṀ and Ha ‘abide as one’. Again, the

inhaled breath comes to rest in the heart. Thisis the location of the individual soul, the
‘contracted’ subject, whichis thus appropriately represented by the letter M. The anusvāra

M which represents the ‘uncontracted’ individual perceiver thus condenses or ‘contracts’
in the body whereit abidesin its other, lower (apara) form.

CHAPTER THREE

Visarga

asyāntarvisiṣṛkṣāsau yā proktā kaulikī parā |
saiva kṣobhavaśād eti viṣargātmakatāṁ dhruvam || 137 ||
The inner intention to emit of that (Light of the Absolute) is called
Kauḷikī, the supreme (power) (parā). By (Her) arousal She Herself most
certainly (dhruvam) assumes the state of emission (visarga). (137) (136cd-

137ab)

“The inner intention to emit of that first letter, which is the Light of the

Abṣolute (anuttara), was previously said to be ‘Kaulikī, the Supreme (power)’
in such (statements as): “Kaulikī is the Supreme Power from whom the Lord is

never separated.'" It is ‘the inner intention to emit’, that is, the inner reflective

awareness that abides at one with the subject. It is certain that ‘She Herself’, ‘by
(Her) arousalʼ, that is, by (Her) extroverted state, ‘assumes the nature of
emission (visarga), and having done so, manifests the state in which (She) pours

out (of the Absolute) by the progressive emergence (of the forms of reflective

awareness), beginning with Bliss up to the power of action.

He says (the following to establish that) this is not just our own idea.
The Threefold Emission as Śakti, Prāṇa and Parā Kuṇḍalinī

hGṬ WaGRĪ JTHTTTTBTRTĪTĪ || g3¢ 1I
!° Viṣarga is the last of the sixteen vowels. It is a soft aspirate that sometimes comes

within or, much more commonly, at the end of a word. It produces an aspiration of the
preceding vowel, projecting it out, as it were, into a final aspiration as, for example, the
sound ah(a) or ih(a). The name of this vowel, which literally means ‘emission’, accords

with its phonetics. See above, note 3,357.
2" Above, 3/66cd (67ab).
Cf. TSā (p. 14-15): ʻIf the Absolute (A) and Bliss (Ā) flow through the Will and the
rest (that is, I, U, and Ū), then (the result is) the two letters E and O. By the union there
again of the Absolute (A) and Bliss (Ā), two letters (are produced, namely) AI and AU.
This power of action is that which the same group of four letters, namely, E, O, AI and

AU (constitutes). Then when all that has been created (kāryabhūta) at the end of the
power of action and is just about to re-enter into the Absolute, it is to that degree
essentially awareness (saṁvedanasāra), and so as the Light (of consciousness) alone, it

abides in the form of a Point (bindu), (that is the letter) AM. Then just there, the emission
of the Absolute (anuttaraviṣarga) takes place. (This is the letter) AḤ. In this way, the

Lord Anuttara manifests as the Lord of the Family — Kuleśvara – and is endowed, in truth,
with just one power, Kaulikī (Who generates the Family), which is the power of emission
(visargaśakti).” Cf, below, 5/68cd (5/68ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

3 āī |1 2338 11
hlāāaāktzzAIEEMUEviczaAHEmI

q Ū̄ āafōīfa 11 x0 1
ftrazzārāfr

-īrza aftzgexfxuaī. 11 ṇ42, 1

uktaṁ ca triśirahśāstre kalāvyāptyantacarcane |

kalā saptadaśī yāsāv amṛtākārarūpiṇī || 138 II
parāparasvasvarūpabindugatyã visarpitã |
prakāśaḥ sarvavastūnāṁ visargasahitā tu ṣā || 139 ||
Śaktikuṇḍalikā caiva prāṇakuṇḍalikā tathā |

viṣargaprāntadeśe tu parā kuṇḍalinīti ca || 140 ||
Śivavyometi paramaṁ brahmātmasthānam ucyate |

viṣargamātraṁ nāthasya srṣṭisaṁhāravibhramãāḥ || 141 ||
It is said in the Triśiraḥśāstra (the Triśirobhairavatantra) aṭ the end of

(the section) that deliberates on the pervasion of power (kalāvyāpti): “The
form of the seventeenth energy (of the Moon) is (the immortal) nectar (which
is the supreme form of emission). It has emerged by the activity (gati) of the

(two) points that are the essential nature of the intermediate (parāparā)
(form of emission). This (power) is the light of all things; endowed with

emission it is 1) the Kuṇḍalinī of Power (Śaktikuṇḍalikā) (which is the
This line 3/138cd (138ab), is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/1. There instead of kalā

saptadaśī tasmād amṛtākārarūpiṇī – ‘Therefore, the form of the seventeenth energy (kalā)
(of the Moon) is (the immortal) nectar (which is the supreme form of emission), it reads

kalā saptadaśī yāsāv amṛtākārarūpiṇī. ‘The form of the seventeenth energy (of the Moon)
is (the immortal) nectar (which is the supreme form of emission).’ I take the latter to be

the correct reading. The word ‘tasmāt’ - ‘therefore’ here is redundant.

The two Points are visarga, which is written as two points one above the other. There
are three forms of emission. The supreme one (para), which is A, the lower one (apara),
which is H, and the intermediate one (parāpara), which is H, and is the emission, is here

identified with Kuṇḍalinī. See Padoux 1990: 280-282, who discusses this passage at
length.

Read prakāśaḥ for prakāśyaṁ. The emended reading is found in the quotation of these
lines in footnote 2 p. 180-181 of the PTv.

Read viṣargasahitā for viṣargarahitā.
Kuṇḍalinī literally means ‘a coiled female snake’. It may also mean ‘she who wears an

earring (kuṇḍala)’. The latter meaning (which is actually the most literal), is not

commonly found in the texts. A significant reference in the Mālinīṣtava, a hymn of praise
addressed to Kubjikā in chapter four of the KuKh, praises the beauty of her cheek

‘adorned with an earring’. Thus, Kubjikā emulates the Vedic goddess Aditi, who is the
mother of the Vedic solar gods, who is also said to be beautiful because of her earrings. In
that case, the reference is probably to the solar orb, which is appropriate as Aditi is the
goddess of the dawning sun. It is difficult not to link the two references, especially

CHAPTER THREE

lower form of emission). (It then assumes the form) of 2) the Kuṇḍalinī of the
Vital Breath (Prāṇakuṇḍalikā), at the (initial) extremity of emission (visarga)

(whichis the intermediate form of emission and that of) 3) the Supreme

Kuṇḍalinī (Parākuṇḍalinī) (in the final extremity of emission, whichis its

supreme form). (This power) is (variously) called the ‘Sky of Śiva’, ‘the

Supreme Brahman’ʼ, and the ‘Abode of the Self’. The moving to and fro

(vibhrama) of emanation (ṣṛṣṭi) and withdrawal (saṁhāra) are nothing but
the emission (visargamātra) of the Lord.’ (138-141) (137cd-141ab)

(Itis said) there (in the Triśirobhairavatantra), `at the end of the section

that discusses the pervasion of power (kalāvyāpti)’, that is, when the occasion
arises to discuss the doctrine concerning the unfolding of the energy (kalā) called

Amā (the New Moon). Thisis the meaning. There, when the goddess asks:

because the name ‘Kuṇḍalinī’ (who Kubjikā embodiesin a special way) cannot be easily
derivedin any other way. See Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 2,3.

See below, 3/215cd-219 for a different version of the three kinds of emission. These are
the three forms of Kuṇḍalinī according to the 7riśirobhairavatantra. The first, the

Kuṇḍalinī of Power, is at rest as a potential spiritual energy. She sleeps coiled up at the

base of the spine. The second form, the Kuṇḍalinī of the Vital Breath, is straight, and as

the energy of the vital breath, moves upwards through the wheels (cakra) of the subtle

body from the initial extremity of her emission. The third form, Supreme Kuṇḍalinī, is

again at rest, but now above, in the End of the Twelve at the final extremity of her

emission. Swami Lakshmanjoo (2003: 117-118) explains that: ‘this Kuṇḍalinī is not
known or experienced by yogins. t is so vast and universal that the body cannot exist in

its presence. t is only experienced at the time of death. It is the heart of Śiva. This whole

universe is created by Parā Kuṇḍalinī, exists in Parā Kuṇḍalinī, gets its life from Parā
Kuṇḍalinī and is consumed in Parā Kuṇḍalinī. When this Kuṇḍalinī creates the universe,

Śiva conceals His real nature and is thrown into the universe. When the uniyerse is

created, He becomes the universe. There is no Śiva left which is separate from the

universe. Thisis His creative energy. And when Kuṇḍalinī destroys the universe, Śiva’ s

natureis revealed. So, the creative energy of the universe is the destructive energy of Śiva,
i.e. it is the revealing energy for the universe and the concealing energy for Lord Śiva.
And the destructive energy for the universe is the creative energy of Lord Śiva,i.e. it is the
concealing energy for the universe and the reyealing energy for Lord Śiva.’ See Silburn

1997: 44 ff.

‘ Kashmiri Śaiva ṣources generally understand the sixteenth energy to be the New Moon
(amākalā). This is followed by the transcendent seventeenth energy, whichis mergedin the
Heart, the pure ‘T’ consciousness thatis the core of reality and the core ground or ‘abode’

(ālaya) of all manifeṣṭation. It is within transcendental Śiva, dominating all the aspects of His
creative and self-delimiting power. t is the energy of consciousness (citkalā) of the absolute
(anuttara) and is also called the ‘energy of nectar’ (amṛtakalā). Transcendent, it contains in a

potential form the other energies.

The word ‘kalā’ means both ‘energy’ (as I have translated) as well as ‘digit’, in
this case, of the Moon. According to whether it is waxing or waning, the Moon increases

or decreases by one digit every night. There are just over twenty-eight and a half days in a

lunar month, which for ease of calculation are taken to be thirty. Thus, it increases and
decreases by fifteen digits in one lunar cycle. These are believed to derive from a ‘hidden’
digit or lunar energy, which is identified with the phase of the New Moon (see below
6/96ab-98ab (6/95cd-97) and commentary). This is called Amā from which the name
‘amāvasya’ for the New Moon as that which resides – ‘vāsya’ ~ in the digit called ‘Amā’

TANTRĀLOKĀ

‘O Great God Maheśvara, the pervasion of energy which is called the

parts (pada), please explain (that) very concisely.' To which the Lord replies,

in order to impart the teaching: ‘that which is the seventeenth energy . . ” What is

(taught) here (in the Tantrāloka) is corroborated in some cases by (literally
quoting) the words (of the Tantra) and in others by (reference to their intended)

sense. 3) There (in the Triśirobhairavatantra, we read:) ‘(The wise) say that
there is an immortal (amṛtā) energy (kalā) within man, who consists of sixteen

energies (kalā).

According to this and other teachings, ‘the seventeenth

In some cases, as here, this is identified with a seventeenth energy, from which all the

lunar energies are derived. See Appendix A to this chapter, where this lunar symbolism is
described in more detail. The source and fundamental nature of the energy of emission,
which is the sixteenth vowel, is understood to be a seventeenth energy or form of

reflective awareness. As the unmanifest, infinite expanse of original consciousness within
which everything is contained, from which it arises and dissolves away, it is referred to in
this passage as ‘the Sky of Śiva’, ‘the Supreme Brahman’ and the ‘Abode of the Self’

There are three forms of the power of emission (visarga), namely, Supreme
(parā) which is Anuttara (A), Intermediate (parāparā) which is H, and Lower (aparā),
which is represented by the letter H. These correspond to Parā, Prāṇa and Śakti Kuṇḍalinī,

respectively. They are the spheres in which the energy of the Moon of objectivity emits.
At the supreme level the emission of consciousness is its pure potential energy, which is

the source and ground of all the energies. As such it is represented as the seventeenth digit
of the Moon, which generates and nourishes the others. At the next, intermediate level,
objectivity is emitted within the subjectivity of the absolute consciousness of the supreme

subject in such a way that the universe of objective manifestation is one with it. At the
lower level, objectivity is made manifest as a separate reality set apart from consciousness,

which at this level manifests as the limited, individual subject. These three aspects of the
one emissive energy, that is, Kaulikī, the Supreme Power of Akula - transcendental
consciousness – correspond to the three forms of Kuṇḍalinī described here.

According to a reference from the 7riśirobhairava quoted above (in TĀv ad 1/83ab-

84cd (1/83cd-85ab)), the ‘parts’ are the stages of the sonic development of the syllable
OM. These mark the ascending degrees of pervasion of emission (visarga), here identified

with that of the New Moon.
In other words, in some cases Abhinava quotes his source directly, and in others he
paraphrases.

See Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 1,346 ff. This line is most probably drawn from the
Triśirobhairava. 1t is also quoted below ad 5/64cd-66ab (see there). The first half is

quoted ad 24/13-16. Abhinava himself quotes it in the following passage of the PTv (p.

180-2): ʻThis Supreme Lord (parameśvara) emits in this way the All, which extends from

the Earth (principle) up to Power (which is the thirty-fifth principle just below Him), and

so consists of the various forms of reflective awareness represented by the consonant)
letters from K to KṢ (all the vowels being within Him, the Śiva principle). This power of
emission (visargaśakti), which consists of this process, is called the ‘sixteenth digit (of the
Moon)ʼ in the scriptures. (Thus) ‘(the wise) say that there is an immortal (amṛ1ā) energy
(kalā) within man, who consists of sixteen energies (kalā).” This teaching is not found in
the Sāṁkhya or the Vedānta, but only in the Śaiva schools. This power of emission which

inheres in the Supreme Lord is, moreover, the seed of the plane of supreme bliss. When

(the vowel) beginning with this letter A (i.e. AḤ, that is, emission) starts to become dense,
aṣsuming the nature of a matrix (that is, the consonants), then, when it assumes the state of
the matrix, without falling for this reason from its nature, which is an expression of its

nature, it is called ‘the plane of emission’.” It is quite clear that Abhinava identifies this
energy with the sixteenth part of the person made of sixteen parts. This is just as we find

CHAPTER THREE

energy (kalā) called Amā (the New Moon), whose form is ‘half of half of the
letter Hʼ (hakārārdhārdha) (that is, Unstruck Sound), and is indicated by such
in its precedent in BṛUp 1/5/14-15 (quoted below in note to comm. 6/95cd-96). However,

Jayaratha understands it to be the seventeenth energy (see above, note to TĀy ad 3/138-141).
From one point of view, the seventeenth energy is the transcendental energy of the

supreme form of Kuṇḍalinī, that is, when she is in the raised state in which she is the
energy of transcendental Śiva fused within him. This aspect of Kuṇḍalinī is the ‘Void of
Consciousness (cidvyoman), the final and supreme plane beyond the gross, elemental
vacuum. It is the Void of Śiva that is the supreme state, Nonbeing (see Dyczkowski 2004:

51ff.), which is the pulse of the experience of Being’.

Here Jayaratha says that the seventeenth energy is called the New Moon

(amākhyā saptadaśī kalā). He appears to have implicitly made this identification above in
TĀv ad 1/1, where he quotes this line from the 7riśirobhairava. He does so explicitly

when he quotes it his commentary on the NSA (p. 115). However, below in TĀv ad

6/96ab-97ab (6/95cd-96), he says that it is the sixteenth energy (anākhyā soḍaśī puṇaḥ

kalā). In that case, the verse on which he is commenting cannot be understood in any other
way. In other words, he is following Abhinava. So there is some confusion as to which

one is the New Moon, the sixteenth or the seventeenth digit, and how they relate to one

another, despite the general distinction made between them. This confusion is resolved in

the later Kubjikā tradition by assigning the Full Moon to the sixteenth digit and the New
Moon to be the seventeenth. The symbolic coupling of the two is not common, even

though the symbolism of the energy of the New Moon (amākalā) is well known to most, if

not virtually all Tantric traditions. Abhinava refers only to the energy of the New Moon as
the source of the other lunar energies. He never refers to the Full Moon, even though both
these phases of the Moon are considered to be particularly important times in the liturgical
calendar.
Moreover, there is some confusion here concerning the identity of this ‘vivifying
energyʼ. According to TĀ 6/96ab-98ab (6/95cd-97), the energy of the New Moon is the
sixteenth digit. This accords with the usual astronomical reckoning of the phases of the moon.

But in this passage, according to Jayaratha, the New Moon is the seventeenth digit that
‘vivifies' the other sixteen. He may well be mistaken. Certainly, he is not in agreement with

Abhinava, who considers the seventeenth energy to be the ‘release’ (visleṣa) of emission,
which is the sixteenth (visargasyaiva viśleṣa iti saptadaśī kalā | MVV 1/889ab). What is
‘released’ is the emitted universe (see below 5/69ab (5/68cd)). In the PTv (p. 201- 202)

Abhinava explains:

‘According to the Vādya (?) and other scriptures, the sixteenth digit, which is

emission (visarga), becomes in the process of its release a seventeenth digit. (It is said
that): ʻthe seventeenth digit is the Goddess, Whose form is (Unstruck Sound, called) the
half of the half of H (hakārārdhārdha).’ But (one may ask,) emission is half of the letter
H, and the release (which divides it off) is the half of this half. But how can a single

phoneme which is devoid of parts be differentiated in this way? (We reply that) according
to us, all that exists is devoid of parts, insofar as nothing exists apart from the one Light
which is consciousness. Even so, consciousness, by virtue of its freedom, makes the image
of parts manifest, without for that reason compromising (its own) partless state. As this is
so (generally), what contradiction is there if this happens also in this case? The birth of the
letters can only be explained in this way. . . . In some scriptures, such as the Mata etc., it is
accepted that the release of emission, taking as its base the sphere of Anuttara, becomes an

eighteenth digit.’ See above, note 1,673.
Abhinava devotees a great deal of space in his works to an exposition of the

metaphysical status and activity of the power of emission (visarga), whereas the Kaula

traditions prefer to focus their attention on what is emitted, rather than the process of

TANTRĀLOKA

words as ‘Kaulikī’ and ‘Supreme’ʼ, is (nothing but pure) consciousness alone
(cinmātrasvabhāvā). Her ‘form is by nature (immortal) nectar’, because she is

never destroyed (literally ‘never sets'), as She is perpetually active (nityoditā
emission. Thus, Abhinava’s contribution is not only substantial and profound, it is also

original. In his Mālinīvijayavārtīka, he outlines a number of the essential features of visarga
and relates them to the lunar symbolism of the energies of the vowels which concern us here.

He is discussing, as he often has occasion to do, the phases of the cycle of perception. He has
talked about the twelve phases of the cognitive consciousness engaged in the operation of the
means of knowledge and the unfolding of subjectivity symbolized by the Sun and Fire,
respectively. Next he proceeds to an exposition of the sixteen phases of the cycle of cognitive

consciousness in relation to the sphere of the object (meya), symbolized by the Moon. The
‘object which is ‘that which is to be known’, is ultimately Śiva, the pure conscious nature

whose power is the '' consciousness ‘which is to be known'. Accordingly, the sixteen phases

leading to the perception of any object, if correctly and fully experienced, culminate in the

liberated condition of the sixteenth phase, the sixteenth energy of the Moon. The passage is
long; even so the exposition is so masterly and insightful that itamply warrants full quotation:

‘First (come) 1) manifestation (prakāśa) and 2) perception (ālocana), and then 3)
intention (saitkalpa) and 4) consent (abhimati), followed after by 5) certainty (niścaya) and
6) confirmation (anudṛśa). Then come the two, 7) discernment (viveka) and 8) detachment
(āsaṅgitā), (then) 9) the state of agency (kartṛtāsthā), 10) (the experience of) non-distinction
(avyvaccheda) (between objects), 11) the manifestation of the common (ground of all

objectivity), 12) (a state in which there is) no disturbance from the many acts of reflective

awareness (nānāvimarśāprakṣobha), 13) complete experience of (the sphere of) the object
(pūrṇameyaprayedana), 14) complete subjectivity (pūrṇapramātṛtva), 15) (pure cognitive)
consciousness (sarvitti), (and finally) 16) (the liberated) condition of Bhairavī (the power of
consciousness) (bhairavībhāva). To the degree in which objectivity (meyamaya) is made
manifest in this way sixteen-fold, that is said to be the Moon of consciousness (vijñāna),
considered to be the basic state (sthiti) of the sixteen energies.’ MVV 1/880cd-884.

Once the inner flow of energy within Śiva has traversed through the first fourteen
energies symbolized by the vowels,

‘then, by attaining (the pure) consciousness of (Śiva's and one's own) essential
nature, the basic state of Bindu (the fifteenth vowel, is established). Then within (that
consciousness of Bindu), whose form is filled with the entire aggregate (of energies), the
empowered emission (visarga) (takes place), that is called ‘ejection’ (vikṣepa) (of the energies
within Śiva into the outer domain). The reḷease (visleṣa) of (that) emission itself (which

impels the outpouring of these energies) is the seventeenth energy. The eighteenth (energy

mentioned) in some places (in the scriptures) is that same (seventeenth energy, that develops)
due to (its) association with the (cosmogenic) arousal (prakṣobha) (of its energy). This, the

excellent and supreme Kaulikī energy of Akula, whose form is the absolute (anuttara) and
nature supreme Bhairava, is this emission (visarga). From that this universe is born. [. . .) And

that (emission) itself is God (bhagavat), whose nature shines perpetually within, and is
endowed with the energy of the centre, which is full of the current of all the things within

(him). Beautiful with Cosmic Bliss (iagadānanda) generated from (his own) essential nature
(that he has) aroused by (his) own will, he shines perpetually, beautiful with the juice (rasa)
(of the aesthetic savour) of complete emission. That is the (pulsing) union (sarṅghatta) of Śiva

and Śakti, said to be (their) love (sneha).. MVV 1/887cd-891ab, 893cd-895.

The relationship between the sixteenth and seventeenth energy of the Moon and
their nature is discussed extensively in Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 1, 346ff and 421 ff.
Concerning the eighteenth, see ibid. p. 349 ff.

See above 1,17 and previous note.

CHAPTER THREE

literally ‘perpetually risen’), and also because She nourishes the sixteen energies

(of man), namely, the inner (mental) organ and the rest (of the senses).

As he has (thus) explained the nature of the supreme (para) (form of)

emission, which is the bliss (of the supreme Light of consciousness), and is going

to explain that of the lower (apara) one, which is the letter H (further ahead), (he

now explains) the intermediate (parāpara) (form of) emission. It possesses two
Points (bindu) that are established within it as its own nature and the gross

creation (ātmabhūta), and are called (together the vowel) visarga (visarjanīya).
Their ‘activity’ is the (unfolding) flow (of awareness) (prasaraṇa) that takes

place by (the manifestation of consciousness) in that (inner and outer) form. ‘It

has emerged’ by means of that (activity). The meaning is that (the energy of

emission) pours out (of consciousness) as the intention to make each specific form
(of reflective awareness) manifest. Thus, ‘it is the light’ (of consciousness) ‘of
all thingsʼ, that is, subjects, objects and means of knowledge, which although not
separate (from them, shines as if) separate (from them). The meaning is that (at

this level the energy of the New Moon) is each individual conditioned light (of
manifestation).
1) Again, when (on the contrary,) this same (energy) is devoid of
emission, that is, (devoid of) the tendency to externalize and so rests in Herself
alone, She is (called) Śakti Kuṇḍalinī, because (her) form is like that of a sleeping

snake. As long as (She is in this state, She is in Her) Lower (aparā) (form),

and Her nature is (pure) consciousness alone.

“ The sixteen are the five sense organs of knowledge (jñānendriya), the five of action

(karmendriya), the five sensations (tanmātra), and the inner mental organ. See below, note
to 3/154ab (3/153). Cf. BṛUp 1/5/14-15, quoted below in note to comm. 6/96ab-97ab
(6/95cd-96).

In the remaining part of this paragraph, Jayaratha explains the nature of Prāṇa

Kuṇḍalinī, which is the intermediate (parāpara) form. The following short paragraph is
about Śakti Kuṇḍalinī, which is the lower (apara) form. He then returns to a description of

Parā Kuṇḍalinī, the supreme form.
The graphic representation of visarga, the sixteenth vowel, is two points drawn one
above the other. One point represents the inner state of Śiva consciousness experienced in
introverted contemplation with ‘the eyes closed’ (nimīlanasamādhi). The other represents

the outer, cosmic state of Śiva consciousness experienced in extroverted contemplation

‘with the eyes open’ (unmīlanasamādhi). Thus, visarga stands at the interface between

inner and outer, emitting both states inwardly and externally. Swami Lakshmanjoo

explains that the two points represent that from one point of view everything is created,

and from another nothing is created at all, because everything is consciousness. As he puts
it (2003: 118): ‘these two points are said to be Śiva and Śakti. In the real sense however,

these points are not Śiva and Śakti; they are the revealing point and the concealing point.

The former marks the revelation of Śiva as Maheśvara, the Great Lord of the universe,

which is His manifestation in cosmic form. The latter is Anuttara Śiva, the pure Light of

absolute and universal Śiva consciousness.

Kuṇḍalinī means ‘the coiled one’, as is a sleeping snake.
Ṟead aparā for parā. Thīs emendation means that Śakti Kuṇḍalinī should not be
understood as the supreme – parā - form of the energy of emission, but the lower ~ aparā
– form. The name indicates that in this state Kuṇḍalinī is ‘śakti’ in the sense of latent,

potential power. The ‘sleeping’ form of Kuṇḍalinī in the perspective of these teachings is
also above, as it were, in the supreme state in which there is no desire to emit externally,

TANTRĀLOKA

2) “({It then assumes the form) of the Kuṇḍalinī of the Vital Breath

(Prāṇakuṇḍalikā) at the extremity of emission (visarga)ʼ, that is, in the initial
phase (of emission), which is the tendency to externalization. In accord with the

saying that: ‘the initial transformation of consciousness is into the vital breath’,

just as the ‘lower’ is also pure consciousness. Here is the link between the flow of
emanation that moves from the supreme level to the lower and the flow of withdrawal that
moves from the lower level to the supreme. First there is, as it were, a downward flow of
emission into the sleep of objectivity, in which pure consciousness rests unknown. This is

the movement of emanation. This is followed by the upward flow back up into pure

transcendental Śiva consciousness at the extremity of the outpouring of emission. The
forms of the energy of emission that mark the stages of the upward flow are forms of the
liberating energy of Kuṇḍalinī.
To sum up: there are three levels of emission (visarga), which are identified in

this passage of the 7riśirobhairava with three forms of Kuṇḍalinī. Jayaratha’s exposition

starts with 1) the supreme form of Kuṇḍalinī, and then passes on to 2) the intermediate and

3) lower forms, successively. Then she ascends again to 2) the intermediate and then 3)

supreme form. These are as follows:
1) Parā Kuṇḍalinī is the goddess Parā, who is Kaulikīśakti, identified with the
Nectar which is the seventeenth energy of the Moon. She is pure consciousness alone at

rest in its own nature, within which flows the supreme flow of emission, which is the bliss

of consciousness at one with it when thereis no outer flow. Itis represented by the Point

(Ṁ) whichis Half
of the Half
of H.

2) Prāṇa Kuṇḍalinī. Thisis the outpouring of the intermediate (parāpara) form of
emission as the intention to make all things manifest. It is the outpouring of the light of

consciousness which manifests as and through the spheres of the subject, object and
means of knowledge, as each individual particular form of each of them set in relation to
one another. This
is the level in which the first transformation of consciousness arises as

the vital breath. Itis represented by visarga (H), whichis Half of H.
3) Śakti Kuṇḍalinī is the lower form,in which thereis no emission of higher
states and Kuṇḍalinī rests in herself alone, unlike the supreme form in which she rests
within pure consciousness, the possessor of śakti. This level is represented by the full

letter H.

In this way, the play of emanation of lower and higher states and their withdrawal

is the flow of emission (visarga) brought about by the union of transcendental Śiva and

immanent Śakti.

Abhinava himself quotes this aphorism belowin 6/12ab, and Jayaratha tells us thatit is

from a work by Kallaṭabhaṭṭa.
Kṣemarāja quotes it in the ŚSūv ad 3/43 and tells us it is
from the Tattvārtha-cintāmaṇi. ltis also quotedin the TĀv ad 5/6 and ad 5/44-48ab, TĀ

6/12, ad 15/297cd-303ab, 17/83-85ab, and 28/218cd-219ab, and along with two other
sūtras ad 28/338cd-340ab. The sense is that when consciousness first enters the
psychophysical organism, it is in the form of the vital breath (prāṇa), which vitalizes and

thus sustains the inner mental organ (6/12). Kṣemarāja quotes this in his commentary on
PrHṛ 17, that declares that: “by the expansion of the centre one acquires the bliss of

consciousness.” He explains there that:

sarvāntaratamatvena
vartamānatvāt tadbhittilagnatāṁ
vinā ca kasyacit api
svarūpānupapatteḥ [g: svātmatvānupapatteḥ iti pāthaḥ] saṁvid eva bhagavatī madhyam |
sā tu māyādaśāyāṁ tathābhūtāpi svarūpaṁ [g: svātmasvarūpamiti pāṭhaḥ] gūhayitvā p.
38) prāk_saṁvitprāṇe pariṇatā iti nītyā prāṇaśaktibhīūmiṁ svīkṛtya avarohakrameṇa
buddhidehādibhuvam adhiśayānā nāḍīsahasrasaraṇim [kh: nānānāḍīti pāṭhaḥ] anusrtā |
tatrāpi ca palāśaparṇamadhya-śākhānyāyena ā brahmarandhrāt adhoyaktraparyantaṁ

CHAPTER THREE

she makes (Herself) manifest first of all in the form of the vital breath. This is the

meaning.

3) And (then) in the same way, by the progressive reversal

(pratyāvṛttikrameṇa) (of this process of externalization) within (the inner)

‘extremity’ (of emission), that is, in the final phase of propensity towards the

introverted state (antarbhāvaunnmukhya) (of consciousness, she assumes the form
of) supreme (pure) consciousness alone, at rest within itself as Supreme

Kuṇḍalinī. This is the meaning.

In this way, the seventeenth energy (of the Moon), which is (pure)
consciousness alone, is called ‘the Sky of Śiva’, ‘the Supreme Brahman’, and
the pure ‘Abode of the Śelf’. The meaning is that it is called by these (and other)

conventional terms. In that way (it is said) in the venerable Triśirobhairava itself
(where we read):

‘(That which is) termed ‘the Sky of Śiva’ is the plane (called) ‘the

Supreme Brahman’.”

Then when asked by the goddess ‘what is said to be the Abode of the

Self?” (the god replies in a passage) beginning with ‘She who is called Kuṇḍalinī
should be known to be above all the Paths (of creation) (adhvan).’ Then (he goes
on to say):

prāṇaśaktibrahmāśrayamadhyama-nāḍīrāpatayā
sarvavr̥tīām udayāt tatraiva ca viśrāmāt |

prādhānyena

sthitā

tata

eva

“The Goddess (bhagavatī) who is consciousness alone is the Centre because She
abides as the innermost nature of all things and because, without adhering to (Her as) that
ground (of projection) (bhitti), it is not possible for anything to have a nature of its own.
Even though She is such, having concealed Her own nature on the plane of Māyā, and
having assumed the plane of the energy of the vital breath, ‘in accord with the teaching
that `the initial transformation of consciousness is into the vital breath’, resting on the
plane of the intellect and the body etc., she follows the path of the thousands of channels
(of the breath – nāḍī). Moreover, there also she is predominantly present in the form of the
Central Channel, that like the middle vein of a palāśa leaf extends from the Cavity of

Brahmā down to the Lower Face. It is grounded in the Brahman and the power of the vital
breath, because all the fluctuations (of the mind) arise and come to rest there.

evaṁbhūtāpi eṣā paśūnāṁ nimīlitasvarūpaiva sthitā | p. 39) yadā tu uktayuktikrameṇa
sarvāntaratamatve madhyabhūtā saṁvidbhagavatī vikasati yadi vā vakṣyamāṇakrameṇa

madhyabhūta brahmanāḍī [kh: madhyā brahmanāḍīti pāṭhaḥ] vikasati tadā tadvikāsāt
cidānandasya uktarūpasya lābhaḥ – prāptirbhavati | tataśca prāguktā jīvanmuktiḥ !| 17 ||

Even though She is such, She abides as the contracted nature of the fettered
souls. If the Goddess of Consciousness, who is the Centre, expands as the inner nature of
all things by the process of the practice taught (here), or if by the process that will be
taught (next), Brahmā’s Channel, which is the Centre, expands, (then) by virtue of that

expansion, one attains the bliss of consciousness, the nature of which is as has been
taught. And so (he attains) the liberation in this life taught previously.’

See also SSūvi 3/43 with Ksemarāja’ṣ commentary below in note 28,317 to TĀv

28/338cd-340ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Devoid of (the knowledge) that arises (from the application of any)

means of knowledge, incomparable, devoid of duality, beyond the plane of the
gross elements and Space, the supreme plane within the Sky of Consciousness,

the laying hold (saṁīrambha) of the absence of phenomenal perception, it is

Nonbeing, the supreme state (gati). One should know that to be the Sky of Śiva,
the sustaining ground (ādhāra) of all things. The one who fills (pṛṛṁúhākatva) and

the filling (itself) (bmṁīhattva), that is subtle and present within (all things), that
is said to be the Supreme Brahman, the goal (lakṣya) that transcends definition
(alakṣyaka). °”
Again:

‘The first division of the plane (of the Absolute) is said to be that which is
not to be abandoned, but even so it is beyond (all the) planes of existence
(bhūmikā) and is said to be the Abode of the Self (ātmasthāna).”

The Lord has explained their nature (by saying) this and more. (It is also
said) in this way that the basis/connection (nibandhana) of the coming into being
of the movements (vibhrama) of emanation and withdrawal of all things, that is,
of each (individual) perceiver and object of perception, is the supreme

consciousness of the Supreme Goddess. Thus, he says that ‘(the moving to and
fro (vibhrama) of emanation (srṣṭi) and withdrawal (saṁhāra)) are nothing
but the emission (visargamātra) of the Lord”.

Surely (one may ask, all that exists) is only one undivided consciousness,

and so there cannot be anything separate (and different) from it. So what can be

emanated and withdrawn, that (consciousness) may (be said) to do it? With this

doubt in mind, he says.

The Dynamics and Forms of Visarga

svātmanaḥ svātmani svātmakṣepo vaisargikī sthitiḥ |
1 MSs ch, jh, ñ̃, t: pramāṇoktena rahitam –- ‘devoid of (all that is) stated by (any) means
of knowledgeʼ.
#2 h, jhī -vyomāntaṁ paraṁ padam.

Read bhāvāpratyaya- for bhāvapratyaya-.

Concerning representations in the Tantras of ultimate reality as Nonbeing, see
Dyczkowski 2004: Chapter Two.

Read bṛṁhattvaṁ for bṛhattvaṁ. The word Brahman, which denotes the absolute in the

Upaniṣads, is commonly said to derive from the root bṛh which according to MonierWilliams means ‘to be thick, grow great or strong, increase’. The causative means ‘to

make big, increase, expand further, promote.”

46 Ch, Jh, T, and D read: lakṣabhūtam alakṣakam for lakṣyabhūtam alakṣyakam.

Instead of tad aheyakam – ‘that which is not to be abandoned’ʼ, MS Jh read tad
ahetukaṁ – ‘that which is without cause’, MS N reads: tad atucchakam – ‘that which is
not negligible’.

In other words, the supreme, pure emission of the Lord is the Goddess Who
encompasses the universal activity of emanation and destruction.

CHAPTER THREE

The state (sthiti) of emission is the projection (kṣepa) of one’s own
nature from one’s own nature into one’s own nature. (142ab) (14lcd)

This is the ‘state of emission’, which is that of operating emanation and
withdrawal. It is the ‘projection’ ‘from one’s own nature’, not indeed from a

material cause (upādāna) such as Māyā or Nature (prakṛti), ‘into one’s own
natureʼ, not indeed into some limited (specific) place anywhere or at (some

particular) time, ‘of one’s own nature’ and not indeed of any other, be it subject,
object (or perception).

‘Projection (kṣepa)ī is the effulgent radiance (of

consciousness) (parisphuraṇa) as the wonderful diversity of each particular

manifestation (ābhāsa), in an outer and inner form. Thus, as (consciousness) does
not depend on (something) else, it is full (and all-inclusive). The sense is that

supreme consciousness manifests radiantly as (the metaphysical principles within
Māyā, symbolized by the consonants) from K to H.
Thus, he says:

fēīḷ taaḤaze_ sTvamācādīīā || 232 1I

Ṝ: Jmī aāz+ ] īḷg

visarga evyam utsṛṣṭa āśyānatvam upāgataḥ || 142 I|
haṁsaḥ prãṇo vyañjanaṁ ca sparśaś ca paribhāṣyate |
EÉmission itself, most excellent (released and very clear) has
assumed a condensed state (as H). The emission released in this way,
assuming a condensed state (as H), is technically termed the ‘Wild Goose
(haṁṣa), ‘the vital breath’, ‘consonant’ (yyañjana) and ‘touch’ (sparśa).
(142cd-143ab) (142)
142cd is quoted below ad 3/147cd-148 (147-148ab). The reading there of the first half
in the printed edition is: visarga eva suspaṣṭam – ‘emission itself, very clearly evident’.
Here in the printed edition it is: visarga evam utsṛṣṭa [c: uspaṣṭa; jh, ñ, t, d: utkṛṣṭa] –- ‘the

emission released in this way’. However, it is the reading below, i.e. visarga eva –
‘emission itself’ that Jayaratha comments on. Thus, attested in two places, this reading has
been adopted.
The reading here, in the printed edition, utṣṛṣta ~ ‘(the emission) released’ is in
MS C: suspaṣṭa and in Jh, NÑ, Ṭ, and D: utkṛṣṭa – ‘excellent’. Below we find the reading

suspaṣṭaṁ – ‘very clear, which is supported here by MS C. All three of these readings
(suspaṣṭam – ‘very clear’, utkṛṣṭa – ‘excellent’, and utṣṛṣta – ‘released’) make good sense.

The second reading – ‘excellent’ can be taken to mean ‘in the most excellent state’, which
is its condition when it is utṣṛṣta – ‘released’. The latter, which is not attested in the MSs,
may well be a silent emendation of the editor of the second reading. In doubt, I present a
translation of all three readings.
“ At the individual level Haṁsa, the Wild Goose, represents the sound of the movement
of
the
breath,
which
is
s0 ʻhaṁ – meaning ‘I am That’. Another term for Unstruck Sound, it also occasionally
appears in the feminine form harhsī or haṁsā. The masculine forms denote Unstruck
Sound; the feminine, its energy. See above, note 1,750; 3,167, 474; Padoux 1990, pp. 139142.

TANTRĀLOKA

Here (according to this teaching), through the progressive development of
each particular (form of this) wonderful diversity, ‘emission (visarga) itself’,
assuming a gross state, which is the letter H, is called by such names as the ‘Wild
Gooseʼ. The meaning is that it is called this way in all the scriptures. This is the
meaning. That is said in the venerable Tantrarājabhaṭṭāraka: ‘The letter H is
variously called Haṁsa (the Wild Goose), Śūnya (the Void) and Prāṇa (the vital

breath)." (Also in (the etymological dictionary called) the Nighaṇṭu (we read):

‘(The letter H is variously called) the thirty-third consonant, Dvikubja (Double

Humped Back), and Sparśa (Touch). And (so) it is said in this way that the
gross form of emission is the letter H.
Surely (one may ask,) according to the saying: “His powers are the entire
universe, while the Great Lord (Maheśvara) is the possessor of power,” the
universe is the expansion (sphāra) of just (His) own power alone, that is, of the

supreme Light of the Absolute (Anuttara). There is no dispute about this.

However here (it said to be) otherwise (where it is written that): ‘the movements
(vibhrama) of emanation (sṛṣṭi) and withdrawal (saṅhāra) are nothing but the

emission (visargamātra) of the Lord.'“ How is that? With this doubt in mind, he
says:

3ITTT T #I ācaTāōī=̄Ḹ II ¥3 11
ftrācraa

anuttaraṁ paraṁ dhãma tad evãkulam ucyate || 143 ||
visargas tasya nāthasya kaulikī śaktir ucyate |
l JY 4/54/46cd-47ab (MS K f1. 213, Kh f1. 200b, G fl. 286a) reads:

haṁṅsaṁ śūnyaṁ tathā prāṇaṁ mahānādaṁ [kh: -nāvaṁ|] mahākalā |
mahācchāyā dvikuyjaṁ ca hakāraṁ nāmabhiḥ smṛtam |

‘The letter H is variously called Haṁsa (the Wild Goose), Śūnya (the Void), and

Prāṇa (the vital breath and exhalation), Mahānāda (the Great Sound), Mahākalā (the Great

Energy), Mahācchāyā (the Great Shade), and Dvikubja (the Double Humped Back).’ Cf.

above ad 3/94cd-95ab (for the letter E), and below ad 3/166 (165cd-166ab) (for the letter

S).

Read trayastrīṁśavyañjanaṁ for trayastriṁśo vyaījanaṁ.

“ The letter H is called ‘double humped back’ because this is what its written form looks
like.

‘ ‘Sparśa’, which literally means ‘touch’, is the collective name of the twenty-five

consonants constituting the five classes of letters from K to M, so-called because they are

formed by the complete contact of the tongue with the loci of articulation. The letter H is

also called this because it is produced by the movement of the breath though all the loci of
articulation, that is, the back of the throat through to the lips. See Appendix C containing a
chart of the Śanskrit alphabet.
See above, note to TĀv ad 1/I1 lcd-112ab (112).
“ ṬĀ 3/141cd (3/141ab).

CHAPTER THREE

The Supreme Abode – the Absolute (Anuttara) – is called Akula,
whereas the emission (visarga) of that Lord is called Kaulikī śakti. (143cd-

144ab) (143)

(He has said) the same (previously, where we read): ‘Kaulikī is the

Supreme Power, from whom the Lord is never separated.'" What is established
(and concluded) here is the (teaching) with which (this section) began. Nothing
new has been said. This is the point.

Surely (one may ask,) why has the term ‘emission’ been applied to the

power (of consciousness) (śakti)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ferāṁīaāī araaī āaāṟā=TaāhTTT 1| 6 1|
rz’rrr̄atk-aār̥htárā rsrifa: |
visargatā ca saivāsyā yadānandodayakramāt ||l 144 ||
spaṣṭībhūtakriyāśaktiparyantā procchalatsthitiḥ |
The emissive state of this (power) is its abiding condition (of
perpetually) pouring forth (procchalatsthiti) which, by the progressive
emergence of bliss (and the other forms of reflective awareness) in due order,
is the state that the power of action, having become (fully) evident, ultimately

reaches. (l4ddcd-145ab) (144)

This is ‘the emissive state’ (visargatā) of this Kaulikī energy, namely,

the agency (engaged) in the act of emission. This ‘power of action has become
(fully) evidentʼ, that is, has attained a (fully) evident state, because, ‘by the

progressive emergence of blissʼ, will and the rest, it (has assumed) the form of
the manifestation of (various) different (bhinnāvabhāsa) (inner states of reflective
awareness), which ‘ultimately reaches’ the state of the outpouring (of the

creative energy of consciousness), as (its) radiant manifestation as the wonderful

diversity of each of the other (forms of) reflective awareness.”

Surely (one may ask,) agreed that emission is the cause of this wonderful
diversity, but that itself is that (diversity) — how does that make sense? He quells
this doubt by advancing an (appropriate) example:

“ The last line is quoted in the comm. on 3/94ab-94cd (3/94cd-95ab). Also, see above,

3/67ab (3/67) and below, 5/68ab (5/67). The whole verse is quoted by Sivopādhyāya ad

VBh91.
See above, 3/66cd (67ab).

? Flowing from the Absolute and progressively developing as the energies of the forms
of reflective awareness starting with Bliss up to action, the activity of consciousness

becomes progressively clearly manifest. When it finally reaches the point that it is pouring
forth into outer manifestation, the power of action becomes fully evident as the emissive
power of consciousness that emits all things out of itself. This state of perpetual
outpouring is the emissive state of consciousness.

TANTRĀLOKA

fe-xt taa aīaṁzaṀṝtāīaēṟa; || ṇ4 1|

viṣarga eva tāvān yadākṣiptaitāvadātmakaḥ || 145 ||
iyad rūpaṁ sāgarasya yad anantormiṣaṁtatiḥ !
Such is the extent of the emission itself that, encompassing (the entire
expanse of its transformations), it is of that same nature. (Śimilarly,) such is
the form of the sea, namely, an endless series of waves." (145cd-146ab) (145)
‘Such is the extent’ of its measure. “Emission itsel’ is not (strictly
speaking) a cause of that, because the relationship between cause and effect is
associated with duality (bheda), and there is no duality here (in this case), so how

could that be possible? “' This is the sense (of this verse), because
‘encompassing’ and containing (all) this up to the power of action, such is its
nature. The meaning is that it consists of the infinite (forms of) manifestation, as

each particular (entity) denoted by speech (vācya), its denotation and the rest.

As (emission) is in this way the agency of the act of emission, there is also
another teaching (concerning it) elsewhere (in the scriptures); and so he says:

“’ The fullest, most evident form of the power consciousness has to act is all this process
of arising and falling away each instant of the ever-new manifestations of consciousness
brought about by the coming together and separation of its countless energies. Likened to

the waves of the sea (see above, 3/102ab-103cd (3/102cd-104ab)), the same simile is

applied to visarga, which is thus unambiguously identified with the power of action. The
difference, we are told here, is that visarga is the ultimate state the power of action

reaches, namely, the universal pulsation (sāmānyaspanda) of consciousness. Cf. below,

4/184-185ab.

The universe is the body, as it were, of the emission of consciousness. It is not caused
by its emission; it is the emission itself.

Eyerything is the projection of the nature of emission, which contains within itself all
things. Conversely, the nature of emission is all that is contained within it.

““ Now Abhinava states overtly, albeit in the symbolic terminology of the Trika Kaula

Tantras, that there is another dimension to the understanding and practice of the teachings.
This is technically called caryākrama. Jayaratha has had occasion to refer to it already in a

number of places as a parallel interpretation of these inner forms of reflective awareness
that arise for Siddhas and Yoginīs when engaged in the Śāmbhava Yoga of sexual union
(see above, note to comm. on 3/67ab-67cd (3/67cd-68ab)). In this way he unobtrusively

lets us know that hidden behind this exposition of the activity of universal consciousness

couched in the symbolism of the letters of the alphabet lies the possibility of this practice

in the Śāmbhava ṣṭate.
Coming out in the open, as it were, Abhinava teaches first, in the context of

viṣarga (H), the nature of what is technically called Kāmatattva – the Principle of Passion
(in this and the following verse). Then, in the context of the reality symbolized by the
letter S, he teaches Viṣatattva, the Principle of Poison (in verses 166 to 171ab), and
finally, Nirañjanatattva, the Principle of the Stainless (in verses 172ab (171cd) to 175ab
(174)), represented by the letter AU (see above, 102cd to 108). Thus, the three are
understood in Trika terms as the experience of SAUHḤ, the seed-syllable of the goddess
Parā. The principles of Passion, Poison and the Stainless are complex symbolic concepts
found in the Kaula Tantras and affiliated schools in general (not just Trika) that aim to

CHAPTER THREE

The Principle of Passion

ata eva visargo 'yam avyaktahakalātmakaḥ || 146 1|
kāmatattvam iti śrīmatkulagahvara ucyate |
Thus, this emission, which is the energy (kalā) of (the sound) H (as
yet) unmanifest, is called the Principle of Passion (kāmatattva) in the
venerable Kulagahvara. (146cd-147ab) (146)

Thus, for the aforestated reason, ‘this emission’ is ‘unmanifest’, because

it is just pure Sound (nādamātra), and so the division between the letters has not
been differentiated (within it). It is ‘a part (and energy of the sound) H, that is,
it is that part which is (Unstruck Sound, called) Half of the Half of the letter H

(hakārārdhārdha). 1t is ‘called the Principle of Passion (kāmatattva) in the
venerable Kulagahvaratantra’. ‘Passion’ is desire (icchā). Its ‘principle’ is its

full (and perfect) form, which is not obstructed anywhere (in any circumstance);

This is the meaning.
He (now) quotes that same text.

TTTRRTT=TTF
HRHTTTS ATTTĒTT |I Ṛ¥9 1I
āTFFTRTTS=S
ġ aTT¥IHTTGT |
- fkīṁ Haīa āR=aṬTTSSTTḤ
I 23¢ 1|
yat tad akṣaram avyaktaṁ kāntākaṇṭhe vyavasthitam || 147 |
dhvanirūpaṃ anicchaṁ tu dhyānadhāraṇavarjitam |
tatra cittaṁ samãdhãya vaśayed yugapaj jagat || 148 ||
(There we read) ‘a letter (akṣara) (can be heard) located in the throat
of the beloved, which is not clearly articulated (avyakta), in the form of a
resonant sound (dhvanirūpa) (that arises spontaneously,) independent of the
will, and is devoid of meditation and concentration. Applying (one’s) mind
express the totality of the dynamics of absolute consciousness experienced through sexual
union practiced as a form of Yoga in a state of consciousness free of thought constructs,
that brings about its realization. They represent the three moments in the Union (which is

what ‘Yoga’ literally means) of the polarities of existence actualized concretely in the
sexual act, in its prelude, climax and repose. See Dyczkowski 1992a: 279-281, reproduced
in Appendix B to this chapter.

Read -gahvare for ~guhvare.
See above, notes 1,16 and 3,432.

Ṟead with MSs C, Ch, and Jh –—avyaktaṁ for —avyakta.

TANTRĀLOKA

there, one should bring (all) the universe (of living beings) under (one’s)

control all at once.
with:

““’And there (in the Kulagahvaratantra we read in a passage) beginning

See Padoux 1990: 283. The sound of visarga (h), the last of the series of vowels, is a

soft aspiration that resonates with the sound of the vowel that precedes it. Thus, if the

preceding vowel is A, the sound is AHA. So, for example, the word rāmaḥ is pronounced

‘rāmaha’. Similarly, hariḥ is pronounced ‘harihi’ and guruḥ, ‘guruhu’. Thus, one can say
that the aspirate ‘hī of viṣarga is a half of the consonant H, which would be its fully
manifest form. As a form of reflective awareness, visarga is understood to be the

spontaneous, unobstructed emission of the preceding series of vowels ~ Aha, Āha, hi, thi
etc. that, emitted from their locus of articulation, condense as it were into the consonants
articulated in the same places. Thus, it is both a ‘part’ and an ‘energy’ of H.
Emission takes place spontaneously, like the sighs of pleasure that come from the
mouth of a woman during sex. Just as these sounds are the result of the intensely

passionate desire to reach a climax, so too does emission emerge out of the plenitude of
the energies with Śiva consciousness that at this junction pour out spontaneously into
emanation. The desire is as intense as it is free of any object of desire that can condition or
limit it in any way. In the context of sexual Yogic practice, this moment is appropriately

called the Principle of Passion (kāmatattva), that is, the essential, fundamental reality of
the climax of passion. The Yogi concentrates on the sounds that come from his partner’s
mouth, recognizing that what is taking place is a powerful manifestation of the pure
energy of the will of universal consciousness. He is not carried away by the force of desire
for an object of desire; instead, he contemplates the intensity and spontaneity of its

emergence. Thus, he witnesses the emergence of the energy of the will that impels every
action and every perception in its original pure form, undefined by any object of desire or
limited to any particular subjectivity. It is experienced as a state of plenitude, that is, as the
perfect contentment of resting in one’s own conscious nature without desire for anything
else. This is the ‘full form of desire. Kāmatattva is not just ‘kāma’, that is, sexual desire,
it is its ‘tattva’, that is, the ultimately real nature of sexual desire, which is not a mere
physical urge, but the microcosmic aspect of the universal will that engenders the
outpouring of each and everything from the plenitude of absolute consciousness. As such
it is identified with its emissive energy (visargaśakti). The Kaula Tantras refer to the
former as ‘Kula’ and the later as ‘Akula’. In its supreme form, Kula, the power aspect, is
the Unstruck Sound (anāhata) of the pure resonance (nādamātra), whichis the reflective
awareness of consciousness. Externally it manifests as the sound ‘HĀ HĀ’ the Tantric
consort spontaneously makes in a state of passion at the beginning of sexual union.
Absorbed in the joy of making love, the mind is temporarily free of objective referents,

thus allowing the underlying consciousness, resonant with awareness, to become clearly

manifest. The outward flow of the breath (prāṇa) which emerges from consciousness as
its first transformation is now experienced within it as the vehicle of the blissful power of
emission, and the force of the universal will that, perfectly full (pūrṇa) and unobstructed,
instigates the flow of emission and spontaneously assumes the concrete physical form of
the sounds of lovemaking.
MM p. 165: vratopavāsādyupadravabahulopāyaprayojakānantaśāstrāntarasaṅkaṭe ‘pi
prapañce śrīmadanuttarakramapraṇayanapravīṇasya parameśyarasya parāmakāruṇyamātropapāditeyam āsmākīnā yāmalī siddhiḥ, yā śrīkulagahvarādiṣu ‘Even though there exists the ongoing development of many means, applied by
the endless scriptures inwardly cluttered together, such as vows, fasts and other such

calamities, the Supreme Lord who is skilful in conducting the venerable Anuttarakrama
possesses this, our Accomplishment of the Couple in Union (yāmalī siddhi), that has been

CHAPTER THREE

‘Now, O fair hipped one, especially because of your love and devotion,
the Principle of Passion (kāmatattva) will be explained and then the Principle of
Poison (viṣatattva).’
And having explained (in the following lines, beginning with) ‘there is a

letter . . .ʼ, (the Tantra continues):

‘The great souled adept (sādhaka) should fix his mind (citta) there. (In
that way) O fair lady, the females of the gods, Kinnaras, Gandharvas, Siddhas,

Vidyādharas, Yakṣas, Nāgas, Piśācas and divine women come under (his) control,
what to say of (human) men and women!

(Abhinava paraphrases) this (passage), referring to it in terms of its
intended sense, (saying) ‘applying (one’s) mind there, one should bring (all)

the universe (of living beings) under (one’s) control all at onceʼ. ‘There is a

effected solely out of his supreme compassion. It is this that, according to the (following
teaching), is the oneness of the flavour of liberation and worldly enjoyment. (It is said) for

example in the venerable Kulagahvara: . . . Maheśvarānanda then goes on to quote TĀ

3/147cd-148 (147-148ab) and explains that ‘(the scripture) indicates that it is possible

because

it

is

the

oneness

of

worldly

enjoyment

and

liberation

(bhogamokṣasāmarasyātmakatayopapādyata ity āsūtryate).’ He then goes on to quote TĀ

2/19.
. See below, 3/169ab (3/168cd) ff.

According to Abhinava, the yogi makes use of the Principle of Passion (kāmatattva) to

aṭṭract to himself all he desires by the process of ‘covering’ (ācchādana), that is,

‘pervading’ all things with the energies (kalā) of his consciousness and then extracting the
things he desires from amongst them. Thus, he experiences that it is his own
consciousness that extracts out of the pleroma of possibilities whatever manifests before

him. Abhinava refers to this process in the course of expounding Śiva’s state as

Vāmadeva, the third of his five faces corresponding to His five energies of consciousness
(as Īśāna), bliss (as Tatpuruṣa), will (as Sadyojāta), knowledge (as Vāmadeva), and action

(as Aghora). He explains in the first chapter of the MVV:

‘Therefore this god is called Vāma (‘One Who Emits’) because he emits his

power of (awakened) consciousness (bodha) (in the course of) emitting in all directions
the life-giving (impulse of) consciousness (cidānuprāṇā), beautiful with bliss which is the
state of ‘own’ and ‘other’ emitted by the outpouring of the (great) mass (bhara) of

consciousness (bodha), desiring (thereby) to appropriate everything into (his own)

consciousness by means of (his own) body, which is nothing but consciousness
(cidekavapuṣ). But even though this, his own body (of consciousness) which is such, is

bestowed (thereby) to (all) existing things (bhāva) by the increase of the power of his own

(awakened) consciousness, wishing in reality to appropriate (them), (he thereby)
withdraws the relative distinctions (bhida) between them. Thus, He, the Supreme Lord,
‘runs contrary’ (vāma) to the state of duality. (271-274)

That kind of knowledge (of reality and Deity) unfolds here, exuding streams of
beauty. (What) is said to be beauty (in this case) is the appropriation (and internalization)

of these different (divided) phenomena (bhāva), and the wonderfully various aspects of
(worldly) experience, by its own (inherent) power. (This is because) the power of

consciousness (citi) that pours forth by the light of the power (kalā) of its own desire (to

know) (kautuka lit. ‘curiosity’) colours (makes manifest and delights in) (rañjayet)
everything with the colour (and passion) of its own nature, and it colours (manifests and

TANTRĀLOKA

delights in) all things and its manifestation takes place (spontaneously) by virtue of its

own (passionate) nature. (275-277)

If one whose mind is dedicated to nothing else abides for (just) a moment in

(this) wealth of the essence of the rays of this state of the outpouring (of consciousness
into manifestation), which is the emergence of the intense desire to appropriate (it), what
does he, the knower of Yoga, not attract and what does he not create (by his imagination)?
Thus, it is said in the scriptures (śāstra) that one who is not (himself) passionate (arakta)

does not create desire (rañjayer) (in others). (279)

(So it is said that): ‘that which is established in desire, in the centre of desire,

encapsulated by the goad of desire, should attain (every object of) desire by (this) desire,

and should conjoin (this) desire into (all) desires.” (280)

Desire (kāma) is the wish to appropriate. With desire as a cover (āchādana), the
one who desires attains everything, for this (world) is the principle of desire (kāmatattva).
For the world (viśva), which is subject to the goad of desire, once it has been projected

into one’s own supreme Self and has properly (attained) stability (therein), manifests as
the slave (of consciousness), as it is gradually fully covered over by the power (kalā) of

(awakened) consciousness that has poured out from it by (this) method, which is verified

by (one’s inner spiritual) experience (adhyātmasiddha). (281-283ab)
This is because (yataḥ) when one’s own (true nature) arises, the life force
pervades the subtle body, and having done so, attracts all things (to itself) by the act of

making that reality, that is, the principle of passion (kāmatattva), clearly evident. This is

what is to be kept secret in the circles of Siddhas, (for once known,) what is it that has not

been revealed? (Thus,) after emerging (in this way) from the bliss of (his transcendental)
emptiness, the Lord (deva) abides (vartamāna), his nature pouring forth, and having

unfolded his own powers, becomes active (pravartate). (283cd-286ab)
This verse is drawn from the NṢA/VM (4/45cd-46ab). There the reading is

kāmodarapuṭīkr̥tam – ‘encapsulated by the belly of desire’ for kāmāṅkuśaputīkṛtam –
‘encapsulated by the goad of desire’. According to Śivānanda and Vidyānanda, this verse

refers to five forms of kāma, represented by the five seed-syllables HRIṀ KLĪṀ AIṀ
BLŪM STRĪṀ. The ‘belly that encapsulates the first two forms of desire is AIṀ. Thus,

the complete series is AIM HRIM AIM KLĪṀ AIṀ BLŪṀ STRĪṀ. At the most basic

level this is a Mantra used to attract women. In this perspective, this verse is teaching that

the practitioner who is engaged in repeating this Mantra is ‘established in desire.” A
deeper way to understand and practice is to engage in all desires (especially passionate
love) in a spiritual state by applying the Mantra constantly. Abhinava understands ‘desire’
here, as he has just described it, to be the powerful intention of consciousness that pours
out from within it, to manifest as all things by generating the duality between them, even
as it intends to withdraw it and make them all one with itself. Manifestation is here
understood to be that of the universal will that operates in and through each individual
things as its will to be as it is.
In his commentary on the NSA (p. 114-115), Jayaratha comments on the variant

form of this verse, along with the line that follows, which says: ‘that which is established
in desire, in the centre of desire, encapsulated in the belly of desire, should attain (every
object of) desire by (this) desire and should conjoin (this) desire into (all) desires. Having

done what is desired by means of desire, he who is established in desire should arouse the

universe.’ He writes: ‘Here indeed ‘by (this) desire’, that is, by the desire for the
outpouring of the initial pulsation of the power (of consciousness) to take place, ‘he is
established in desire’, that is, abides in the Foundation of Birth, which is the place where
it arises. (In other words,) the practitioner is (then) one whose contemplation

(anusandhāna) is bound fast (there) by the falling away of other possible objects (of

aṭṭention) (vedya). ‘Eṣṭablished in the centre of desire’ (means) in the centre of desire
which is the yoni (that is said to be) ‘the sphere of the sprout of passion’ (NSA 2/34d). By

CHAPTER THREE

letter (akṣara) which, because it is always radiantly manifest, can only be

established (to be such) (siddha) by one’s own experience. It is imperishable
(akṣara), that is, its previous (original) nature (as consciousness) is not lost,

because it emerges perpetually (from transcendental consciousness) (nityodita).

Thuṣ it ‘(arises spontaneously), independent of the will’

‘The god (deva) who resides in the chest of living (breathing) beings,
spontaneously utters (the Mantra) not uttered by anybody and that none

obstructs.

the word sprout is meant the Cavity of the Beak of a Crow, which is the Liṅga of Touch
(sparśalīṅga), within which is the desire that is being made manifest. And that is ‘that

Passion which has no head (śirorahita). According to such sayings it is the energy of
(Unstruck Sound), which is H devoid of vowels (anackahakalā), the form of which is the
energy of the vital breath in the centre (within susumnā) (madhyaprāṇaśakti). ‘By (this)

desireʼ, that is, by the seed of the King of Passion (kāmarāja) (i.e. KRĪṀ), ‘what is
desiredʼ, that is, the beloved whose nature is undivided from its utterance, is
‘encapsulated in the belly of desire’. What ‘head’ (i.e. ‘passion’) is ‘encapsulated’? It is
(the energy of) the New Moon, concerning the nature of which it said: “the form of the

seventeenth energy (of the Moon) is nectar. It is well encapsulated in ‘the belly, that is,
in the Knot of the Throat, which is located in the uvula (at the back of the throat), because
(there) it is hard to split apart. One who is fixed there for a moment is ‘established in

desire (kāma)’, that is, having attained (the principle which is) devoid of mind (amana)
that is located there in the head (ke), and travels to the End of the Twelve (above the
head), certainly ‘should attain (every object of) desire’, that is, becomes propense to

achieving success (siddhi). Then ‘in (all) desires’ʼ, that is, in all things designated with
that word, by (the process of) moving (within them) and falling away, characterized as
entry (into them) and exiting (from them), in accord with the saying, ‘the consort’s gaze
(śaktidr̥ṣṭi) should be attracted by the one who has fixed (his) gaze (upon her), (he should
cast his gaze into the consort’s eyes and contemplate how the emission from his eyes,
which is Unstruck Sound, enters them and then returns back from them into his. Thus, by

this swinging back and forth, he can bring her and all things under his control, as
explained further ahead).”

’"The word ‘akṣara’ means both ‘letter’ or ‘syllable’ and ‘imperishable’. We find the
same play on words in the Upaniṣads, where we find the famous question, ‘what is that
knowing which all this is known?” (kasmin jñāte sarvam idaṁ jñātaṁ bhavati). To which
the reply is ‘that is the imperishable’ (tad akṣaram). The Upaniṣad then goes on to
expound the nature of the ‘imperishable’ as the Brahman as well as the syllable – akṣara –

OM. In this case, it is the manifestation of Unstruck Sound that flows in the breath as the
sound a woman utters when making love. This is so, Jayaratha explains, because even
though it becomes audible in this way, it does not lose its original nature. This is
evidenced by the spontaneous nature of both. The sound of the breath is also spontaneous,
and so maintains its essential original nature, in the same way and for the same reason.
'This is why Jayaratha goes to such lengths to establish the difference between sound (or
any action) which is intentional (‘depends on the will’) and one that is spontaneous,
thereby reflecting the spontaneity (‘perpetual activity°) of consciousness.

’ SVT 7/59. The deity is Haṁsa, which is the Unstruck Sound spontaneously made by the

breath. This verse is quoted by Jayaratha several times as a standard definition of the
Unsṣṭruck Sound of the breath, understood to the microcosmic equivalent of the Unstruck

Sound of the resonance of universal Siva consciousness. Accordingly, it is sometimes

identified with Formless (niṣkala) Śiva directly. See above, note 3,473 in TĀv ad 3/66cd-

TANTRĀLOKA

Thus, in accord with this teaching, (Unstruck Sound) is uttered
(spontaneously) by itself, and so does not depend on the desire of (some) other
(being) to utter it. This is the meaning. If it were to be dependent on that, (the
desire to do so) would (only) be occasional (kādācitkatva), and so it would not be
perpetually emerging (from consciousness and constantly manifest). This is the

point." Thus it is described elsewhere (in the passage quoted below) as ‘innate

(sahaja) and ‘self-originating (svayaṁbhū).’ Thusṣ, it is ‘not clearly articulated

(avyakta). A clear articulation is (produced by the breath) striking the places of
articulation (sthānakaraṇa) etc., and that depends on the will (to do s0). How can
that be so for this (sound)? Thus (in response to this question, he says that) it is ‘in

the form of a resonant sound (dhvanirūpa)’. (It is said that):

‘That supreme seed called Sound (nāda) is present in all living beings.
67ab (67) for details. This verse is also quoted below in TĀv ad 4/181cd-182ab, 5/132cd-

133ab (5/131cd-132ab) and 8/388-394ab (387cd-393).

‘’ The sound so ‘ham or haṁ sa produced by the flow of the breath replicates the

primordial Sound of creation, and that resonates when the vital force flows out of
consciousness in the first moment of creation. It happens spontaneously without any

specific aim or intention, as no object has yet emerged that could be its focus. Thus, the

regular, constant rhythm of the breathing mirrors the perpetual outpouring of
consciousness into manifestation. This is how it is experienced by paying close attention

to it. While this practice is basic and can be done anytime, it is particularly easy to pay
attention to the breath and the sound it makes when making love (cf. below, 3/167ab167cd (3/166cd-167ab)). The sounds that a woman or a man naturally make when making

love are an especially excellent object of concentration that focuses attention very
powerfully. Thus focused, consciousness, freed of thought constructs, spontaneously

reflects back onto itself to view what is taking place as its spontaneous outpouring within

itself of itself. The Kulagahvaratantra teaches that this practice of Divine Sound should

pervade both the initial phase, in which the yogi experiences the Principle of Passion, and

the final phase when he experiences the Principle of Pervasion, also called ‘Poison’ (see
below, 3/168ab-170ab (3/168-169)). As the Principle of Passion, it is the ‘HA’ of
exhalation, and as that of Pervasion, it is the ‘SA’ of inhalation. The advanced yogi thus

experiences with each cycle of the breath the fullness of Passion and the fulfilment of
Peṟvasion.

Sārdhatriśatikālottara 1/5ab. Rāmakaṇṭha, commenting on this line, rejects the view

that what is meant here by ‘Sound’ is the ‘inner resonance’ (antaradhavani) that, making

contact with the various loci of articulation, assumes the form of phonemes. Rather, he

says ‘because (the ‘supreme seed’) exists even in the states which are the impulse (to
speak) etc., it is the seed of the notion (buddhi) of that object of denotation which is the

act of denotation (abhidhāna) that is accomplished with effort and ‘is present in all living

beingsʼ. The lines that follow are helpful in understanding what is meant here:
‘It is the supreme bestower of liberation, and moreover, it bestows divine
accomplishments. O Mahāsena, having known that, the teacher becomes one who destroys

the fetters (of his disciples). All, including cowherds, children, foreigners, those who

speak the vernaculars, and even living beings who (live) in water, always speak that. Once
having known the gross, subtle and supreme (form of speech), one should go about one's
word as he chooses. The gross is said to be (the audible) word. The subtle consists of

thought. That which is devoid of thought is said to be supreme.’ lbid. 1/5cd-8

Kṣemarāja quotes the first half of this line in the SvTu ad 4/257cd. There he
comments on it, saying that, ‘according to the view stated by another Tantra that (Śound)

CHAPTER THREE

Again:

‘Extremely subtle, pervasive, and pure, it denotes (vācaka) the principle

of the vital breath (prāṇatattva).’

According to this view, its nature is perpetually emergent (pure divine)

Sound alone (nādamātra). This is the meaning. Thus, there (in that case), as it is

extremely subtle and pervasive etc., it is devoid of meditation and the like, which
is based on a (corresponding) gross object of meditation etc. The meaning is that

it cannot be disturbed (akṣobhya) by an object of meditation and the like, which is
(necessarily) associated with limitation. (But,) although its nature is such, when
making love (upabhogha) (this Sound), arising spontaneously, manifests in the
throat of the beloved, whose distracted (mental) activity (vaikalyā) has ceased
because, overcome by absorption (samāvesa) in the joy of sex (ratisaukhya), (all)

objects have fallen away from the inner, mental organ. Thus, even though (this

Sound) is eternally manifest (as the resonance of the reflective awareness of

consciousness), at that time it assumes a particular (definable and objectively
perceptible) condition (and location) (avasthāna).

Thuṣ, even though emission (visarga) is subtle in this way, because it is
Unstruck Sound (anāhata), by assuming a subtle, impending gross state

(kiṅciducchūnatā), its condition (and location) is clearly manifest (sphuṭa) in the
beloved woman's throat (as the sound) ‘Hā Hā’, which, in the course of being
perceived, is taken to be an appearance (nidarśana) (of the inner subtle sound).

Thus, this is not only perceivable by yogis; it is perceived by everybody. This (is)
the sense (of this verse).

Thus, by (saying) this, the nature of the letter H (as a manifestation of the

Unstruck Sound of emission) has also been taught by the way (as related to it)
(prasaṅgāt). However, because of (its) gross state, the condition (and location of
Unstruck Sound) is clearly (externally) manifest (as H), but not so (as Unstruck
Sound), because (that is its) subtle state. This is the only difference (between
them, otherwise, they are both the same Sound of consciousness). Thus, it was

said previously: “Emission itself, (most excellent, released and) very clearly
evident, has assumed a condensed state (as the letter H)."" As these two (aspects
of emission), intermediate (parāpara) and inferior (apara), are implicitly
mentioned (here), the nature of the letter H is not discussed further ahead (as it has

been already described here). Moreover, it is (also) said elsewhere:

is this vital breath, that is the life force (prāṇana), otherwise called ‘the living beingʼ (jīva)
of all, that pulses radiantly by itself (spontaneously).’ tantrāntaroktadṛśā sarvasya svataḥ

sphuran sa eṣa prāṇaḥ prāṇanāparaparyāyo jīvaḥ.

TĀ 3/142cd (142ab). There the reading is ursṛta – ‘released’ for suspaṣṭam – very

clearly evident’. See there for a discussion of the variant readings.
The supreme (para) form of emission is the activity of consciousness engaged in

emanating and withdrawing its phenomenal manifestation, as described previously. The

gross form is the inferior (apara) one, and the subtle the intermediate (parāpara).

By ‘elsewhere’ Jayaratha may well mean elsewhere in the Kulagahvara, which is the
source to which Abhinava refers in 3/146cd-147ab (146). These two verses are quoted
again by Jayaratha as a pair in the same order below in TĀv ad 29/158cd-160ab, which

may be drawn from the Yogasaṅcāra. The possibility that they are drawn from the same

source is precluded not only by the fact that the wording does not coincide, but also

TANTRĀLOKA

‘That phoneme (akṣara) which is unclearly articulated (avyakta),™ which
has arisen from the beloved’s throat, supreme (spontaneous and) innate (sahaja),
is said to be ‘Sound’ (nāda). It is Reality (tattva), which is the perpetual

(nityodita) recitation of Mantra.’
Again:

‘The (sound) Hā Hā (that arises) in the cavity (of the beloved’s) throat,
(born) of savouring the aesthetic delight (rasa) of eternal bliss, is the recitation (of

Mantra) that gives joy, and, self-originating (svayaṁbhū), is the experience
(vedaka) of the Principle of Passion (kāmatattva).’
There (according to the Kulagahvara), (the mind of the adept (should

be) properly (applied) to this type of emission, which is Unstruck Sound
(anāhata).

‘Those whose mind is overcome by the extremely pleasing penetrative
absorption (samāveśa) (in the joy of sex) recite (this Mantra constantly) without

a break (avicchinna) during the festival of sexual union with women. (Their)

minds fixed here, the Lords of Yoga attain the supreme Yoga. That Passion,
which has no head (śirorahita), has as its abode a passionate woman’s heart.

Now, the consort’s gaze (śaktidṛṣṭi) should be combined with that of he who has
fixed (his) gaze (upon her). (Thus,) the will, without a doubt, disturbs the most

excellent of women, even if she is proud.”

In accord with the stated teaching (nīti) there, one should meditate on the
emission, which is the energy of Unstruck Sound (anackakalā) called Passion,
that has come forth from one’s own eyes and has penetrated into the eyes of the
because Jayaratha does not cite it anywhere, and so it is not likely that he had access to it.
In this case, the wording does coincide to some extent, leading one to suppose that the

source is indeed the Kulagahvara.
’’ Read with MSs Ch, N, and DḌ ‘avyakta’; that is not possible, as it is clear here that
Abhinava draws from these verses in 3/146cd-148 (146-147ab) .ṅ’ – ‘unmanifestʼ or
‘unclear for ‘akṣobhyaṁ’ – ‘cannot be disturbed’. Cf. above, 3/|47cd-148 (147-148ab).

ṂSs jh, ñ, t read: vedana – ‘awarenessʼ or ‘feelʼ.
! Jayaratha introduced the previous verse saying that is said elsewhere’, referring to the

Yogasañcara. He introduces the following passage as being ‘there’, referring to the text

that is the focus of attention, that is, the Kulagahvara.

“ ṞRead sādhakasya cittaṁ for sādhakaś cittaṁ.
“ The word ‘samāveśa’ also means ‘penetration’, thereby alluding, no doubt, to the
penetration of the sexual organ as well as contemplative absorption or penetration into the
expanded state of consciousness, free of thought constructs.

‘ Foṛ atrāsaktadhiyo – ‘(their) minds fixed here’ MS reads 7: atyāsaktadhiyo- ʻ(Their)
minds extremely fixed’.

In his commentary on the NṢA (p. 114), Jayaratha explains that ‘That Passion, which

has no head (śirorahita) is ‘the energy of (Unstruck Sound), which is H devoid of vowels
(anackahakalā), the form of which is the energy of the vital breath in the centre (within
susumnā) (madhyaprāṇaśakti).’

CHAPTER THREE

consort (sādhya). And (then) meditate (on the emission of energy) that has

come forth from the eyes of the consort and has penetrated into one’s own eyes.
Thus, by this process (krama) of coming and going (like a) swing

(dolāyantrakrama), taking it up again and again (fully) in all respects, and made
(oneself and the consort undistractedly) attentive, independent of (all) else, ‘one

should bring the universe’, that is, all (living) beings that take birth, ‘all at
onceʼ, not gradually, ‘under (one’s) control’. The meaning is, one should make
everything manifest as consisting of one’s own nature, or one should make
(everything) dependent on one’s own Self (for its existence).
Now having described with examples the nature of emission as explained,
he begins to explain the (progressive) emergence of the consonants.
The Emergence of the Consonants
The word ‘sādhya’ literally means ‘one who is to be attained or brought under (one’s)

controlʼ.

As Jayaratha explains, this passage teaches another way in which Unstruck Sound

manifests in the course of lovemaking, and how the partners can contemplate it through
the energy that takes place when they gaze at one another. Mindful of the deeper reality of
consciousness, not the body, senses or mind, the passion of love is experienced as the

energy of the reflective awareness of the resonance of divine consciousness. The power of
the gaze is well known in India from ancient times, as it is in many cultures around the
world. One could cite many examples. Vedic ritual prescribes, as does Tantric, that on
occasions the priest should look at the sacrificial area, utensils or offerings as part of the
process whereby they are purified and energized. It is a way in which the male energy of
the priest unites with their female energies. The fertile union of polarities is generally a
major feature of all aspects of Vedic ritual, as it came to be also in the Tantric, centuries
later. A major aim of Vedic ritual was to sustain and enhance fertility and growth. To do
this, the rite should reflect what happens in the world. The rain that falls from the sky was

thought to be male seed that fertilizes the earth. The gods, satisfied with the food they
received in the sacrifice, thus returned it to those who offered it a hundredfold. But for this
to be possible, the sacrifice must also be fertilized. For this to happen, the sacrificer
(yajamāna) would symbolically offer his wife to the officiant (adhvaryu). Their union

took place through a look. Normally modestly crouching behind an umbrella in the
sacrificial area, otherwise entirely occupied by men, at the appropriate moment her eyes

met those of the priest. This was called ‘intercourse through sight’ (dṛṣṭimaithuna). The
goddess Kubjikā and Her Bhairaya similarly have an intense rapport just by looking. Her
gaze is so powerful the god falls into a swoon. She too is disturbed by His gaze (see
Dyczkowski 2009: vol 1, p. 38 ff).

‘ Read āsamantāt for ā-samantāt.

“ The series of vowels, sixteen as are the energies (kalā) of the Moon, represent the

unfolding states of reflective awareness within Śiva and Śakti. The remaining thirty-four

letters represent the forms of reflective awareness corresponding to the remaining thirtyfour reality levels, ranging from Sadāśiva to Earth. These are the 25 consonants,

corresponding to the reality levels ranging from Earth (K) to the individual soul (M), the
4 semivowels, 3 sibilants, one aspirate (H), and the conjunct KS. They are reversed in the

PTv p. 144-146, where he explains why this is so. See Padoux 1990: 313-314.
Abhinava outlines the development of the energies symbolized by the letters for
the first time in the Mālinīvijayavārtika. He presents a much-expanded version in the

he reworks the presentation in its final, most well-ordered form here. The first part of the

TANTRĀLOKA

presentation of the vowel series in the MVV has been translated above in notes 3,158

(ṂMVV 1/890-894), 3,431 (MVV 1/880cd-884, 887cd-891ab, 893cd-895). Here is the rest.
The Vowels
anuttarā sthitiḥ pūrvam ānandeccheśanānyataḥ |

udayaś conatāveśa iti
ṣaṭkaṁ vyavasthitam || 884 |I
anuttarāt samārabhya jñānaśaktyantam īdṛśam |
icchaiva tu kriyāśaktim (> -r) īśanena samāsthitā || 885 ||

icchādi yac ca tatpūrvānuttarānandasaṁgateḥ || 886 ||
tadādiśleṣayogena saṁdhyakṣaracatuṣṭayam |

tataḥ svarūpasaṁvittilābhād bindvādikā sthitiḥ || 887 II
‘Anuttarā (A) is permanence (sthiti) and is the first. Then (come) Bliss (ānanda)

(Ā), will (icchā) (I), and sovereignty (īśana) (), emergence (udaya) (U), and penetration
into decrease (ūnatāve’sa) (Ū) – such is the ordering of the group of the six (primgry
vowels). (884)

Such is (the series) beginning with Anuttara and ending with the power of
knowledge. Will (I) itself, abiding together with Iśana (I), as it lays hold of the power of
action (and assumes) aspects of a part of the condition (sthiti) of the Light (of
consciousness), assumes a neutral state. (885-886ab)

‘The group of four diphthongs (is formed) by the union with the will and the rest,
that come first with the union of Anuttara and Bliss that precedes them. (886cd-887ab)

‘Then the condition of Bindu etc. (which is that of the perceiver) comes about by
aṭṭaining the consciousness of one’s own nature.’ (887cd)

A. and Ā are combined to form Ā. Thisis then conjoined with primary vowels I and U.

They follow after A and Ā in the series of vowels, but their conjunction takes placein
such a way that the vowels I (and Ī) and U (and Ū) come first, and then A and Ā. Thuṣ I
(or Ī) + A (or Ā) first becomes E, then with an added A (or Ā), AI. SŚimilarly U ad Ū

become O and AU. If they are conjoined the other way around, for example, A (or Ā) with
I (or ) following, the semivowel Y is produced, and similarly with U (or Ū), V.

After the description of visarga (verses MVV 1/888-899, translated above in note

3,432) comes an account of the formation of the consonants.
The Letter H and the Consonants
hakāro nāma viśveṣāṁ vyañjanānāṁ prasūtikṛt |

sa eva ca punarbinduyogāt svām eva bhūmikām || 900 II
anuttarām āśrayate so 'haṁbhāva iheṣyate |
atraivāvarṇajaḥ kākhyas tadanyaś ca ivarṇajaḥ || 901 I|
tata eva hi rephāṁśacchāyopādher-ṛvarṇataḥ |
tavargas tata evātha dharācchāyopadhikramāt || 902 I|
tavargas tatparaḥ paścād uvarṇād yaralāś ca vaḥ |
ivarṇavargāc covarṇāt krameṇety ata eva hi || 903 II
antaḥsthā ity asīāś ca ivarṇād dviprabhedaśaḥ |

śaṣasānāṁ samudbhiūtiḥ śuddhopādhikalāyujaḥ || 904 1|

‘The phoneme H generates all these consonants, and then that same (phoneme),

by union (yoga) with the Point (HAMṀ), rest on its own most excellent (anuttarā) plane (of

CHAPTER THREE

r t faaīīza zã aãaãṇaī ftaf

ata eva visargāsya haṁse yadvat sphuṭā sthitiḥ |
tadvat sānuttarādīnāṁ kādisāntatayā sthitiḥ || 149 ||
Thus, just as the state (sthiti) of emission is clearly evident in Haṁsa
(H), in the same way (the vowels) starting with the Absolute (A) are
established as the consonants from K to S. (149) (148cd-149ab)

Thus, for the reason explained previously, just as the gross state of

emission itself is as the letter H, in the same way, (the consonants) from K to S
(are the gross form of the) vowels, (and so) the (vowels) themselves, beginning

with A, manifest in that way."' This is the meaning.

being) (A), and is considered here to be the state of (oneness experienced as) ‘I am He’.
(so ʻhaṁbhāva). (900-901ab)
Here the gutturals are born from the phoneme A and the other (consonants) from
the phoneme I. Then the palatals (tavarga) (emerge) from the phoneme r, which is an
adjunct of the shade of an aspect of the (letter) R. Then after that, come the dentals, by the
successive (emergence of) the adjunct of the shade of Earth (i.e. 1). Then after (that), from

letter U, come (the semivowels) Y, R, L and V thus, from the category of the phoneme 1

and that of U in due order. The semivowels and the sibilants (are derived) from two
varieties of the phoneme 1. Ś, S and S arise from the will, associated with the energy of

adjuncts of the Pure (principles Sadāśiva, Īśvara and Śuddhavidyā, respectively). (904)
icchāyā eva viśvo hi prasavo bahudhā sthitaḥ |
ata eva hi sasthānabhāvo yuktatvam arhati || 905 II
jīvasyaiveyam āśyānasthitir yonyātmikā yataḥ |
saivānuttaradevasya śaktir atra nirucyate || 906 ||

tatraivāntaḥsthatattvāni parāvāgbhūmikākramāt |
avarge Śivatattvaṁ tu kādau hānte śivāntakam || 907 II
iti saṁpuṭayogo 'yaṁ triṁśakārtho nirūpitaḥ |
evaṁ pūrṇānavacchinnaciddevī
syād yadi sphuṭam || 908 II
The birth of all things from the will is of many kinds. Thus, it is right that (it
assumes) the condition of the location of S. This is the condensed (gross) state of the
individual soul, for it is the source (yoni) (of the universe). It is that which is here

explained to be the power (śakti) of the God Anuttara. (905-906)
The principles (corresponding to) the semivowels are there by the sequence of
the planes of Supreme Speech. The Śiva principle is in the vowels (avarga), and the one
ending in Śiva (i.e. Śakti) in (the consonants), beginning with K and ending with H. This
union (yoga) brought about by the encapsulation (of the vowels and consonants) is

explained to be the reality (taught in the) Parātriṁśikā (triṁśakārtha). If (this is) clearly
apparent (sphuṭa) in this way, the goddess of consciousness, is full (to completion) and
unconditioned.” (907-908)

‘“ See above, 3/143ab (3/142).

! Indian phonetics understands the consonants to be derived from the vowels. The reason

for this can be understood by referring to the chart of the Śanskrit alphabet in Appendix C,

where it is found. The first thing we notice is that unlike the Roman alphabet, the order of

the letters is determined by phonemic principles. Thus, the initial letter A and its

TANTRĀLOKA

He says that:

TTTTG-TTa.
AfT: TṬJTTĪĪ. TjZT |
TāNTTĀTHTTTTJ
TāIT ā&Ī ĒZ: || Q40 |
anuttarāt kavargasya sūtiḥ pañcātmanaḥ sphuṭam ḷ
pañcaśaktyātmatāveśa ekaikatra yathā sphuṭaḥ || 150 ||
The birth of the gutturals, that are five, from the Absolute (A) is

clearly evident (sphuṭa), just as the penetration of (all) five energies into

each one (of the five vowels) is clearly evident. (150) (149cd-150ab)

(The gutturals) ‘that are five’, which is the reason for ‘the penetration
of (all) five energies into each one (of the five vowels), that is, within the

Absolute, Will and the rest. Although the energy of consciousness (cicchakti) is
the predominant one of the Absolute (A), in accord with the dictum ‘everything is
everywhere’ʼ, it consists of (all) five energies. Thus, the gutturals that are
generated from it are five. One should know that the same applies elsewhere (in

the other categories of consonants that are also in groups of five).

ṢTJITh! TāJTTATRTGJTĪĪ]
ŪGTTT: |
ṬrĨl;; ŪṬJTTJĀṬGT] JĪṬṬŪRḺTTĀ;. 1| 2.42, |I|

aI ṬH JTRTĪTĀÑĪRATHITJĀTTI

sīā a~āī̄ḥ āĨgJT---T 1| 2.42 11

ī fēi aa |
icchāśakteḥ ṣvasyvarūpasaṁsthāyā ekarūpataḥ |
cavargaḥ pañcaśaktyātmā kramaprasphuṭatātmakaḥ || 151 I|
yā tūktā jñeyakāluṣyabhāk kṣiprasthirayogataḥ |

lengthened form Ā are articulated at the back of the throat. These are guttural yowels. The

letter I (and its lengthened form Ī) that follow are articulated in the middle of the mouth.

They are palatal vowels. Again, U and Ū are labial vowels. AIl the phonemes are
articulated in one or more places along this span, from the back of the throat to the lips.
This is also the case with the consonants: gutturals pronounced at the back of the throat,
cerebrals at the soft palate, palatals at the hard palate, dentals at the back of the teeth, and
labials from the lips. The difference between vowels and consonants is that the former are
produced without the tongue resting on the locus of articulation, whereas the consonants
are. Thuṣ, the consonants are understood to be derived from the vowels.

Read as we find in the commentary ~tāveśa for ~tovaśa.

The five gutturals, K, Kh, Ġ, Gh and N, are derived from the five energies latent in A,
namely, those of Anuttara itself, bliss, will, knowledge and action, respectively. The same

applies to the five members of the other four classes of consonants. The difference is that

they are understood to be the energies inherent in the corresponding energy (i.e. vowel)

which generates that class. See Appendix C, where there is a chart of the Sanskrit
alphabet.

CHAPTER THREE

dvirūpāyās tato jātaṁ ṭa-tādyaṁ vargayugmakam || 152 1|
unmeṣāt pādivargas tu yato viśvaṁ samāpyate |

The palatals (originate) from the single, unitary form of the power of

the will (I) established in its own inherent nature. (These too) consist of the

five powers, which becomes gradually more evident (as the powers are

progressively more intensely extroverted).
Two clḷasses, namely, the cerebrals and dentals, arise from that (same
will), which is said to be sullied by the object of knowledge, and has two

forms, according to whether it is fleeting (kṣipra) or stable (sthira). The

labials (arise) from (the power of) Expansion (U), thereby (the emanation of)
the universe (of consonants) is complete. (151-153ab) (150cd-152)

(The palatals originate) ‘from the single, unitary’ undisturbed, not
indeed from the disturbed also, ‘form of the power of the will (I) established in
its own inherent natureʼ, untainted by an object of desire. This is the meaning.

As the extroverted state of the (five) energies of consciousness (bliss, will,
knowledge and action) becomes (gradually) clearly manifest, so do the (the
members of the five categories of consonants) beginning with the gutturals, which

are their corresponding expansions (sphāra). Thus he says (that this takes place as
the five powers) ‘become gradually more evident’. ‘That’ power of the will

(sullied by) ‘the object of knowledge’ʼ, that is, the object of desire, has ‘two

forms’ (fleeting and stable), as the letters ṛ and 1 (respectively). It is stated

(here) that the five categories of consonants, from the gutturals onwards, emerge

from the five (corresponding vowels) beginning with the Absolute (A) in the same
way. Thus, (the vowels and corresponding categories of consonants) are (defined)
along with their loci of articulation by (a series of definitions,) beginning with:
Read with MSs C and Ñ kṣiprasthirayogataḥ for kṣipracarayogataḥ. This is also the

reading found in the citation of this sentence in TĀv ad 3/81ab (3/81).

After this come the four ‘neuter’ vowels, in the emptiness of which further inner
emanation of the vowels is blocked. See above, 3/78ab-81ab (3/78-81) and Padoux 1990,

pp. 254-262. We read in the PTv p. 182: ʻThe gutturals are a condensation of A, which is

guttural; the palatals of I, which is palatal; the labials of U, which is labial; the cerebrals of

r. which is cerebral; the dentals of ḷ, which is dental; Y and Ś are palatal; R and S are
cerebral; L and S are dental; V is both dental and labial.’ In the TSā (p. 15-16), Abhinava
explains: ‘lt is said in the scriptures that these sixteen (forms of) reflective awareness have

the nature of seeds. That which is born from them, namely, the consonants, are matrices.

In this context the gutturals are derived from the Absolute (A), the palatals from the pure
Will (I), the cerebrals and dentals from the Will which has an object (), the labials from
Expansion (U). These classes (of consonants) are five, as five are the energies from which
they originate. (The semivowels) Y, R, L are derived from the three forms of the Will (I);
V from Expansion (U), the three sibilants S, S and S from the three types of Will (I). H is
born from emission (H) and KS from the union of two matrices (Kand S).”

Read ṛkāraḻkārarāpāyāḥ for ṛkāraRkārarāpāyāḥ. Cf. above, 3/79ab (3/19). Verse
3/152ab-152cd (3/151cd-152ab) is quoted above in the comm. on 3/81ab (3/81). The

fleeting form of the will (corresponding to r) generates the cerebrals, and the stable one
(corresponding to 1), the dentals. See previous note.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘A, the guttural consonants, H and emission are guttural” onwards. It is said
elsewhere (in some other text):
‘The second class (of letters are the gutturals” which), consisting of the

five energies, (are generated) from Akula (A). After that come (the cerebrals, that
are generated) from the will which, (established in itself), is not sullied (by the

object of desire). (Next comes the form of the will) that bears Fire (r) and Earth
(I), to which belong the two, namely, the palatals and cerebrals. Then the labials
are born from Expansion (U) (of the power of knowledge). These are said to be
the consonants (sparśa).”

Surely, (it is said that):

‘O lady of good vows, the principles beginning with Earth and ending

with the Person (puruṣa) are present, in due order, in the five categories (of

consonants), beginning with the gutturals and ending with the labials.’

’’ Quoted from the Kāśikā in Laghuṣiddhāntakaumuḍī (rle no. 15) on PāSū 1/1/9. The

other classes of letters have been defined in the same way. See Appendix C for a chart of
the Sanskrit alphabet.
Unfortunately, Jayaratha does not tell us the name of the text he is quoting from here. It
is probably the same as the one from which he quotes in his commentary on the following

verses, the references from it establish that this much, at least, of Abhinavagupta’s
presentation of the symbolism of the alphabet is not entirely without a scriptural basis. The

following passage is drawn from a source that understands the symbolism of the alphabet,

which is the basis of Abhinava’s cognitive exegesis of it. The second reference is certainly
drawn from a scriptural source. We may safely presume it is a Trika scripture, possibly the

SYM, whilst the higher exegesis is certainly Abhinava’s own. The basic structuring of the
alphabet and the terminology (i.e. A for Anuttara, 1 for Icchā etc.) can well be original.
This reference supports this view. However, one wonders, if this is so, why Abhinava does
not refer to his scriptural basis for it. That U stands for unmeṣa, a typically Kashmirian

term, suggests that the original sources are from there. The series of unlabelled citations
that follow concerning the symbolism of the alphabet may well all be from this same

source.

? The first class of letters are the preceding sixteen vowels. A note at the bottom of the

Sanskrit text explains that: ‘the (variant) reading (found in some manuscripts, namely) ‘the
first class (of letters), does not agree with the (normal) procedure, insofar as according to
the texts (śāstra) the (consonants) begin with the gutturals, which are the second class of
letters.”
The letters correspond to the metaphysical principles (tattva), as follows. The vowels
from A to H are the Śiva principle. The gutturals from K to N are the five gross elements —

Earth, Water, Fire, Air and Space. The palatals from C to Ñ correspond to the five subtle

elḷements, smell, taste, form, touch and sound. The cerebrals from T to N correspond to the
five organs of action, the feet, hands, anus, genitals and speech. The dentals from T to N
represent the five organs of knowledge, present in the nose (smell), tongue (taste), eye
(sight), touch (skin) and ears (hearing). The labials from P to M represent the mind, ego,
intellect, Nature (prakṛti) and the individual soul (puruṣa). The semivowels Y, R, L, V

represent the principles of Attachment (rāga), limited knowledge (vidyā), limited agency

(kalā) and Māyā, respectively (see PTv p. 113). The sibilants, Ś, Ṣ and S represent
collectively, the principle of time. According to another interpretation (in PTv p. 117),
these three and the following H and KS correspond to the principles of Mahāmāyā, Pure

Knowledge, Īśvara, Sadāśiva and Śakti, respectively. Notice that the sequential order of

CHAPTER THREE

the principles with respect to the letters is reversed. The vowels are contained in the Śiva

principle, so we would expect that the first consonant (K) which follows would

correspond to the principle of Śakti, which follows immediately after that of Śiva.

However, the series begins with the Earth principle, which is the lowest, and progresses
upwards. Abhinava explains the reason for this reversal in the PTv. All the letters are
contained within Parā as forms or aspects of the reflective awareness that is Her essential
nature. Thus, here there is no difference (bheda) between them and consciousness. At the

level of Parāparā, a unity-in-difference (bhedābheda) is formed between them. This leads
to the sphere of Aparā, which is that of the duality of relative distinctions (bheda). Parā

corresponds to the level of Supreme Speech (parāvāc) and Parāparā to the Speech of

Vision (pasyantī). Abhinava explains:

‘The Speech of Vision is the goddess Parāparā; she is the power of the supreme

power’s own nature. She is like a mirror, within which the form (svarūpa) of the goddess
Parā shines like a reflection. The form, which always remains the same in the reflected
and original image, just as, for example, the bare awareness of a face (reflected in a
mirror), is not said to be a reflected (image), as it remains the same (as both the original

image and the reflection). Conversely, that which appears there as both the same (as the

original form) (tathā) and (yet) otherwise (anyathā), like the form of a face (reflected in a

mirror), with the preceding and subsequent, left and right etc. reversed, so that (one can
say) that ‘this itself is just that’, then it is said that ‘that’ is reflected (in the mirror and
possesses the characteristics of a reflected image). Moreover, that (reflection) has the

same qualities as the (original reflected object), and is not something of a different sort
(vijātīya). (It is our own face we see in the mirror, not that of someone else). Analogously,
full of (all) the principles beginning with Earth, which by virtue of the process described
previously (by virtue of which every single thing is everything), (each) are full (and
perfect consciousness). The body of the goddess Parā is deposited as a reflection (in the

mirror of Parāparā), abiding (ever present) as encompassing (all the forms of) reflective
awareness (represented by the phonemes K and the rest, which are each) in this way innate
(sahaja), uncreated, supremely real and undecaying etc. (This reflected image) consists of

the various principles, beginning with Earth and Water, which, as objects of reflective
awareness, are at one with Parā, without any change in the (forms of phonemic)
awareness, K and the rest (of the letters), which are (anyway) by nature, immutable. It
reflects (this image) in (that) homogeneous (sajātīya) and stainless mirror, as the

indication of the outpouring in that way of relative distinctions. Thus, Earth and rest of the
principles are reversed (as are images in a mirror). That which is the principle of Power
(śaktitattva) in supreme consciousness is that of Earth within the nature of Parāparā and

that which is the principle of Earth (there) is the principle of Power (within

Parā). . . . Within the (supreme) reflective awareness which is Parā, the (metaphysical)
principles are solely reflective awareness, and (that) reflective awareness is the supreme
reality as the empowered form (śāktarūpa) of (the phonemes) from K to KS, thus there

(within it there is perfect) nonduality. However, within Parāparā (the state is one of) unityin-difference, as is that of a reflection (in relation to the mirror). The sense of all this is
that Parāparā, who is (as is Parā) reflective awareness, and has as Her body the garland
(mālā) of_phonemes from K to KṢ, bears (within Herself) the reflections of the

(metaphysical) principles present within the Goddess Parā, Who is above (and superior to)
Her. When (that state prevails), (the sequential order of) the principles, present in these
(forms of) reflective awareness that are the inaudible and non-phenomenal (amāyīya)

(phonemes) ranging from K to K, is reversed with respect to which of them is above and
which below, because the lower (principles serve as the) abode of the reflection of the
original images that are (the principles) above. (Thus, the principle that was above is now

TANTRĀLOKA

According to this teaching, the twenty-five (consonant) letters beginning
with K and ending with M correspond to (the principles) beginning with Earth and
ending with the Person (puruṣa); (however) the universe is not (thereby)
complete, because there are other principles also. So how is it that he has just said
that ‘thereby (the emanation of) the universe is complete’? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

āa TEGT || 243 1|
TTTHĪTT}ḺT: SīhHTTFTTYVĀTTT |
jñeyarūpam idaṁ pañcaviṁśatyantaṁ yataḥ sphuṭam || 153 II
jñeyatvāt sphuṭataḥ proktam etāvat sparśarūpakam |
As this (universe), which is the object of knowledge, is clearly

manifest (sphuṭa) up to the twenty-fifth principle, because it is the object of

knowledge and (fully) evident, such is said to be the (nature and) extent of the
consonants (sparśa). (153cd-154ab) (153)

‘As this’ universe begins with the Earth principle (and extends) ‘up to

the twenty-fifth’. In accord with the saying ‘the Person (puruṣa) is the twentyfifth,’ the universe (extends) up to the principle of the Person (i.e. the individual

soul). It is ‘the object of knowledge’ because it is (fully) evident. So it is said that
‘thereby (the emanation of) the universe is complete’. (The principles beyond)

begin with Necessity (niyati) (which is the first of the six obscuring coverings of
the individual soul, and) ‘it is said that this group of six obscuring coverings
(kañcuka) along with Māyā are the inner (subtle) body (antaraṅga) of the
individual soul (aṇu).” In accord with such teachings, (this group of principles is)
extremely closely associated with the (individual) perceiver, and so is as if
undivided (from him). Thus it is not said to be (part of) the universe, which is
the gross object of knowledge separate (from the individual perceiver). This is the
sense (of this verse).

Thus, the extent of (principles) up to the twenty-fifth one is the universe,
because it is the object of knowledge as it is (fully) evident. They are ‘touched’ by
the senses and so (the consonants are called) ‘sparśa’ (which literally means

‘touch’). (Thus,) the form (and nature) (rāpa) of that (universe of objectivity)

consists especially of the consonants (sparśa) beginning with K and ending with
below and vice versa, so that what is in the higher image is also in the lower).” PTv p.
144-147.

! Read abhinnam iva for abhinnam eva.

We noted above (see note 3,285) that consonants differ from vowels, because they are
articulated by the tongue touching their locus of articulation, and so are called ‘touch’
(sparśa) letters. Here Jayaratha, by means of a play on words, indicates that they are
called this also because they represent the principles in the sphere of objectivity where
perception takes place by ‘touch’, that is, contact between the senses and their objects.
Theṣse include both the outer senses and physical objects and the inner senses and mental
objects. Moreover, there is contact between the individual perceiver and the
psychophysical orgaṇiṣm.

CHAPTER THREE

M. This is (the meaning of ‘touch’) in terms of the denotator. In terms of the
objects of denotation, it is said (in the Bhagavadgītā):

‘0 Son of Kunti, cold and heat, that give pleasure and pain and always

come and pass away, are just contacts (sparśa) (of the senses with their objects).

O Bhārata, bear them patiently.”

Here (in this context), although the individual soul possesses subjectivity,

and the senses (karaṇa) the status of a means of knowledge because (they serve as

his) instruments (karaṇa) (of perception), (they are nonetheless) said to be

objective with reference to the other (higher) perceivers, beginning with that of
the void (of deep sleep) onwards. So there is no defect (in this view).
Having defined the emergence of the consonants in this way, he also
explains that of the semivowels (antahstha).

The Emergence of the Semivowels

zraṀkag
aī ēṁ ggfiiāfrācāa: |I guz|

EEĀ|PiFIEFEEAḺa=IṬRCTHHI

TGGFTTITTTRT ÁTTĪRĀJĪTRHT |I g4E, |]

icchāśaktiś ca yā dvedhā kṣubhitākṣubhitatvataḥ l| 154 ||

sā vijātīyaśaktyaṁśapronmukhī yāti yātmatām |

saiva śīghrasthiropāttajñeyakāluṣyarūṣitā || 155 |I
vijātīyōnmukhatvena ratvaṁ latvaṁ ca gacchati |

tadvad unmeṣaśaktir dvirūpā vaijātyaśaktigā || 156 |I
vakāratvaṁ prapadyeta sṛṣṭiṣārapravarṣakam |

The power of the will (I) is of two kinds, according to whether it is
aroused or undisturbed. It assumes the nature of (the letter) Y when intent

(promukhī) on an aspect of a power which is of a different kind than itself.

That same (power of the will) sullied by the object of knowledge (is again of

two types), according to whether it obtains (its) object fleetingly (śīghra) or is
BhGī 2/15. Abhinava comments: ‘cold and heat etc. are only connected with the sense
organs. They do not have direct contact with the Self.”

Alṭhough the individual soul is a subject in relation to the lower principles, he is part of

the sphere of objectivity of higher orders of subjects above it. Moreover, although
objectivity does exist for those subjects who are above, the level of the individual soul
who is the twenty-fifth principle, it is not ‘clearly manifest’.

According to the basic rules of euphonic combination (sandhi) of phonemes in
Sanskrit, when the vowel I is followed by a different vowel, it reduces to the semivowel
Y.

TANTRĀLOKA

stable (sthira), and so when intent on a different (power from itself, that is,
r Ṝ and I L,) becomes (the letters) R and L. In the same way, the power of

Expansion (U) is of two types, and when associated with a power of a

different type becomes (the letter) V, from which rains down the essence of
creation (srṣṭisāra). (154cd-157ab) (154-156)
This power of the will is of two kinds, according to whether it is aroused
or undisturbed. ‘When it is intent (promukhī) there ‘on an aspect of a power
which is of a different type than itself’, that is, the Absolute (A) whose nature is
consciousness, and the occasion arises for the phonemic conjunction (sandhi)
(with other vowels) in accord with the rule ‘the vowels I, U, ṛ and 1 become Y, V,
R and L (respectively) when followed by a vowel (of a different type from

itself),. it ‘assumes the nature of (the letter) Y’, that is, it manifests as the
letter Y. This is the meaning.

That same power of the will (sullied by the object of knowledge) is again

of two types, fleeting (sīghra) (r) or stable (sthira) (l), in accord with its condition
as described previously, namely that ‘it lights up for an instant . . . .’ (In these

two modalities) it ‘obtains (its) object’, that is, the desired object, when sullied
by that, and being so, is intent on (an energy) which is of a different type than
itself, namely, the Absolute (A). Then in accord with (the same rule) of phonemic

conjunction, which is that ‘the vowels I, U, ṛ and 1 become Y, V, R and L
(respectively) when followed by a vowel (ofa different type from itself), it unites
with it and so ‘becomes (the letters) R and L’, that is, manifests as that. This is

the meaning.

In the same way, the power of Expansion (U) (that is, knowledge) ‘when

associated with a power of a different type’ is of two kinds, and when, as

before, it is conjoined in phonemic combination with the Absolute (A), it
manifests (itself as) the letter V. The same is said (in the scripture);

‘By uniting with a power which is different (from itself), the will (I) has

become (the letters) Y, R and L. (Similarly), O fair-faced lady, the power of
Expansion (unmeṣaśakti) becomes (the letter) V.

The phrase ‘rains down the essence of creation (sṛṣtisāra)’ indicates the

capacity (of the letter V) to nourish (apyāyakāritva), because it is the seed syllable

Read sīghrasthiro- for śīghrataro-. The momentary variety corresponds to the vowels ṛ

and Ṛ, the stable variety to the vowels ] and L.. These two pairs develop into R and L,

respectively.
. Pā. 6/1/77 iko yaṇaci. The semivowels are understood to be produced from the vowels,

in accord with this rule, by a process of ‘reduction’ (sarṁprasaraṇa). Thus, is reduced to
Y, Uto V, ṛ and Ṛ to R and I, L. to L. The euphonic combinations that take place between
the vowels we have observed in the vowels series takes place by processes of

‘augmentation’. For example, A + I > E and A + U > 0.
“' The context there, the reader will recall, is the emergence of the letters r Ṛ and ] Ḷ. in

the vowel series. The whole verse (3/79ab (3/79)) reads: ‘(Moreover,) the attainment of

the desired object takes place either (for a moment) by the power (symbolized by the

letters ṛ Ṛ), whose nature is Fire and lights up for an instant; or else with the stability (of
the power symbolized by the letters 1 L), which is Earth by nature.’

CHAPTER THREE

of Water. In the same way, one should understand that (the letters) Y, R and L

have the power to dry out (śoṣakāritvaṁ), burn (dāhakatva) and paralyse
(stambhaktatva), respectively.
Surely (one may ask,) in accord with the teaching about to be imparted,
even when the power of the will is sullied with the object of desire, it is capable of
generating other (forms of) reflective awareness also. So, conjoined with the

Absṣolute (A), (we agree that) it generates its effect, namely, another (form of)
reflective awareness. Now, how can there be a difference in its (product) as the

letter Y and the rest? It is said that ‘the effect differs due to the diversity of the

causeʼ, and the cause here (in this case) is just one, namely, the union of the Will
(I) and the Absolute (A). So how is that? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ṢGVTITTTATĪI TĪTTHATĪĪ: II/249 11
Eīzztkīitis-vrIĀĒtIĀ
icchaivānuttarānandayātā śīghratvayogataḥ || 157 |

vāyur ity ucyate vahnir bhāsanāt sthairyato dharā |

The will itself, associated with the Absolute (A) and Bliss (Ā), is called
Wind (V) by (its) conjunction with velocity (śīghratva), Fire (R) by virtue of
(its) luminosity (bhāsana), and Earth (L) due to (its) stability (sthairya).

(157cd-158ab) (157)

Here (in this case), it is just the will itself, not the desired object also,
which, associated with the Absolute and Bliss, that is, united with either
optionally, ‘by its conjunction with velocityʼ, that is, having assimilated into

itself the latent impression (sarṅskāra) of velocity as a limiting adjunct, ‘is called
Windʼ. The meaning is that it assumes the form of the letter Y, which is the seed
of the Wind. In the same way, ‘by virtue of its luminosityʼ (it assumes) the

attribute (of Fire), which is luminosity. Again, ‘due to its stability° (it possesses)
the attribute (of Earth), called stability, which is the cause of the capacity to
sustain (dhṛti), assuming it as a secondary ‘colouring’ adjunct (uparañjaka). The

meaning is that Fire makes (the will) manifest in the form of the letter R, which is
the seed of Fire, and Earth (in its) form as the letter L, which is the seed of Earth,

respectively.

‘Bliss is mentioned (here) with the intention of implicitly referring to the
other heterogeneous powers, including Expansion (U) and the rest. Thus, united
with the Absolute (A) and the rest, the will is of various kinds by association in

Tṛansformed into seed-syllable Mantras by adding anusvāra - M, these letters have the
power to do this. VAṀ is the seed (bīja) of Water, which experienced as the source of the
Divine Nectar of consciousness, gives a sense of satisfaction and fulfilment. YAM is the
seed-syllable of Wind and so dries out excess fluid in the body. RAṀ is the seed-syllable

of Fire. By repeating it many times it heats up the body and burns. LAM is the seed-

syllable of Earth, which imparts solidity and stability. It paralyses thought or can be used

to block the progress of opposing forces.

TANTRĀLOKA

this way with (these) limiting adjuncts, and so (its) effect is also diverse. So what
was said is reasonable (and correct).
(Now) he explains why the term antahstha (which literally means ‘located
within, in between or at the end?) is applied here (to the semivowels).

ṢG JhH-ā-HT
TT fīrIT |I u¢ 1

TBTTTTĪTTTATHTĪ ] āĪRI: |

idaṁ catuṣkam antaḥstham ata eva nigadyate || 158 II
icchādyantargatatvena ṣvasamāptau ca saṁsthiteḥ |
Thus, the reason why this group of four (letters) is called semivowels
(antaḥstha) is because they are contained within (antaḥ) the will etc., and
because they come at the end (anta) as the abiding state in which (the powers

have reached their) final conclusion within themselves. (158cd-159ab) (158)

‘Thusʼ, for the aforementioned reason, the word ‘etc.’ (in the

expression) ‘the will etc.’ refers to Expansion (U) (which is the power of
knowledge), because (the semivowels are contained) within (antar) (the powers

of) the will and Expansion, as they are in a state of oneness (within them), and

(s0) in the same way, (the semivowels are at one) within themselves (that is, with
each other), because their one (common) nature is the perceiver. (This is the final)

and proper ‘conclusion’, that is, (their) manifestation as one (ekātmyena). (That is
their) ‘abiding state’ there, because they abide at one with the perceiver. Thus,
the four (semivowels) beginning with Y and ending with V (ie. Y, R, L and V)

are called ‘antaḥstha’ (‘abiding within’) in this way all the texts. This is the
meaning. As is said:

He is explaining the emergence of V = Water. Note that these are not the gross

elements. They are the elements reflected in Puruṣa, the individual soul.

In the sense of ‘located at the end’, the semivowels represent the state at the final

extremity of the influence of the will.

Read ādiśabdena for ādi śabdena.
! We have just noted that the common reason why the semivowels are called ‘antaḥstha’

is because they are located – stha – at the end – antaḥ of the series of consonants in the
normal Sanskrit alphabeṭical order. The semivowels (Y R L and V) are called antaḥstha –

lit. ‘located in between’ʼ, because their place of articulation is in between that of the
vowels and the consonants, and so they share some phonetic characteristics of both.

Moreover, they come at the end — anta – of the series of consonants in the Sanskrit

alphabet and between

anta – them and the sibilants. The word ‘antaḥstha’ also literally

means ‘located within’, which is the meaning in this context. The word ‘antaḥ’ means

‘within’ because the Elements of which the semivowels are the symbols, namely, Earth,
Water, Fire and Air, are within the powers of the will and knowledge (‘Expansion’) and
the perceiver. They are in a state of oneness with each other, the energies of consciousness
and the perceiver, because they are all essentially the same perceiver and his powers.

Moreover, they arise by penetration into (anta) the power of the will (). In other words,

they represent the insight that the gross elements are derived from the will and knowledge
of the reflective awareness of consciousness. They are not just outer physical entities.

CHAPTER THREE

‘(The semivowels) are called antaḥstha (‘abiding within’) because they
enter within (the power of) the will etc.
Surely (one may ask,) just as the powers of the will and the rest conjoined
with powers of a different type than themselves give rise to different (forms of)
reflective awareness, is this also so or not when they are associated with a power
of the same type? He says:

TSTTTTāRTTTTITTT-ATITT T ĪSTIÑ_|| Ṟ48 1|

TIHTṀĨTG TIg; ŨTITAĀTTTTTTHT |

sajātīyakaśaktīnām icchādyānāṁ ca yojanam || 159 1|
kṣobhātmakam idaṁ prāhuḥ kṣobhākṣobhātmanām api |
The (wise) say that the conjunction of the powers of the will etc. with
those of the same kind (as themselves), whether they are aroused (as long

vowels) or unaroused (as short vowels), is an aroused (long vowel). (159cd160ab) (159)
The ‘aroused’ (vowels) are the long ones and the ‘unaroused’ (vowels),

the short ones. If the powers of the will and the rest, which are of this form
(aroused and unaroused), are conjoined with powers of the same type (as
themselves), then the union (yoga), which is (their) phonemic conjunction
(sandhi), takes place (in accord with the rule) ‘the (vowels) A I and U are

lengthened when a homogeneous (vowel) follows’. Then those who know the
scriptures (and grammar) (śāstra) well say, that is, explain, that ‘it is an aroused

(long vowel)ʼ. The meaning is that it an extended (form of) reflective awareness,

which is of the same type, not a different (form of) reflective awareness of another

type. Thus I + I = , I + I = Ī, Ī + Ī = T. In ṭhis kind of union (yoga), (the result) is
the ‘aroused’ long letter I. This is the intended sense.
He (now) says that something peculiar (happens) in the case of the
Absolute (A) in this kind of form (of reflective awareness) also.

They represent the qualities and aspects of experience of ‘stability, ‘nourishment’ etc.

which the reflective awareness of consciousness imparts both to its outer manifestations

and the perceiver. All this is experienced by ‘abiding within’ at the ‘final end’ of
objectivity within consciousness. The semivowels and their relation to the Kañcukas are
discussed in an Appendix to Chapter Nine, along with the sequential order of the

Kañcukas.
Ṛīs YU> V ṛ>R I > L.
! The basic vowels A, 1, and U when short symbolize the unaroused state of
consciousness, and the long (Ā, Ī and Ū), the aroused. When they combine, whether
aroused (i.e. long) or unaroused (i.e. short), they always produce a long vowel, which is
aroused.
PaSū 6/1/101 akaḥ savarṇe dīrghaḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

āaīm aīr. aīīīā: a: || 2ē2 l|

sī fṣtmfṁ gaa

anuttarasya sājātye bhavet tu dvitayī gatiḥ || 160 ||
anuttaraṁ yat tatraikaṁ taccedānandasūtaye |
prabhaviṣyati tadyoge yogaḥ kṣobhātmakaḥ sphuṭaḥ || 161 1|
atrāpy anuttaraṁ dhāma dvitīyam api sūtaye |
na paryāptaṁ tadā kṣobhaṁ vinaivãnuttarātmatã || 162 ||
When the Absolute (A) (conjoins with vowels) of the same type (i.e. A
or Ā), there are two possibilities. If one (of the two) Absolutesis capable of
generating Bliss (Ā), then the conjunction (yoga) whichis arousal (i.e. Ā) that
takes placein this union (yoga)is clearly evident. But if the second Absolute
Abode (A) is not also capable of generating (Bliss, Ā) (as is the first,) then the
essential nature of the Absolute is free of arousal. (160cd-162) (160-162ab)
Again, there are two possibilities when the Absolute (A) is in union with

(another) vowel of the same type (i.e. A or Ā). Thus, there (in that case), ‘if one

(of the two) Absolutes’ becomes ‘capable of generating Bliss (Ā), then’ when it
is associated with the other Absolute, the arousal which is Bliss (Ā) that takes

place in this union (yoga), that is, relationship, is clearly evident' union (yoga).

As before, the phonemic conjunction (sandhi) (takes place as normal) with no

impediment, as for example, ‘daṇḍāgra’ - ‘the end of a stickʼ (which is formed by

combining daṇḍa- with agra). This is one kind. Now, if one Absolute is united

with a second Absolute and is not capable of generating Bliss (A), then instead of
Bliss (Ā), which is arousal by nature, (in accord with the rule) ‘ato guṇe’, jṭ
assumes the form of the subsequent (A) and so (remains) the Absolute (A), as

!" When the letter A is conjoined to another A, a long Ā is produced. But when a second

A is added to that, it continues to be Ā. Thus, the second A that has been added remains,
as it were, A. These two possibilities are also exemplified by two possible ways in which
the letter A at the beginning of a word can be conjoined with the letter A at the end of a
previous word to form a compound. For example, daṇḍa- + agram = daṇḍāgram (‘the end

of a stick’). In the case of a few suffixes, the vowel is not lengthened. For example, sīra-

+ antam = sīmantam ( ‘the parting of the hair’). These two possible phonemic conjunctions
(sandhī) symbolize how the Absolute both rests in itself as the pure Absolute (A) or

develops itself by itself initially through a process of self-reproduction to Ā, symbolizing
the inherent bliss of the Absolute as the union of absolute Śiva and absolute Śakti.

Polarizedin this way without losingits essential identity, the Absolute goes on to generate

all its energies and forms from the union of these polarities.
Read with MSs Ch and Jh sphuṭo for sphuṭa.

PaSū 6/1/97. Fully stated, this rule says that ‘when a short A, which is not at the end of
a word, is followed by guṇa (A E and O), then in the place of both the preceding and the
following letter the single substitute is the form of the following i.e. guṇa.’

CHAPTER THREE

happens (in the case of the word) ‘sīmanta’ – ‘the parting of the hair (literally,
‘the end of the border”) (which is formed from sīma and anta). This is the second

kind.

Having discussed this (case) thus by the way, (he returns to the main)
point and describes the emergence of the sibilants.

The Emergence of the Sibilants

TṬ aJI āIT ṜII aI TAĀT ĒĪTaT |

f-ḷ ra-gŨŨīĩarṁ | 23 1

Tīa āII] TaTHTTṬTTKĪTĪTTT |

āfeṝī=ā ēzē fũd y-—m-afrāzāá fkaā 1| 2=u 1
icchā yā karmaṇā hīnā yā caiṣṭavyena rūṣitā |

śīghrasthairyaprabhinnena tridhā bhāvam upāgatā || 163 |I

anunmiṣitam unmīlat pronmīlitam iti sthitam |
iṣyamāṇaṁ tridhaitasyāṁ tādrūpyasyāparicyuteḥ || 164 ||
tad eva svoṣmaṇā svātmasvātantryapreraṇātmanā |
bahirbhāvya sphuṭaṁ kṣiptaṁ śa-ṣa-satritayaṁ sthitam || 165 ||
The will assumes three states, according to whether it is devoid of an
object (karman) or is coloured by an object of desire (iṣṭavya), (the latter
being of two kinds) according to whether it is momentary (śīghra) or stable.

The object of desire (iṣyamāṇa) thus resides within this (will) in three ways,

according to whether it has not unfolded (anunmiṣata), is in the course of

unfolding (unmīlat), or is fully unfolded (pronmīlita), without this entailing a
fall from (the will’s) inherent nature (tādrūpya) (as the object of desire). That

same (will,) externalizing itself by virtue of its own ‘heat’ (āṣman), that is,

by the (autonomous) impulse of its innate freedom, clearly becomes the three

(sibilants) (āṣman) Ś, S and S. (163-165) (162cd-165ab)

The sibilants are called ūṣman in Sanskrit, which literally means ‘heat’. H is also a
‘hot’ letter. See below, 3/180ab (3/179).

l Ṭhe sibilants, Ś, S and S are palatal, cerebral and dental, respectively. In the PTv, Ś Ṣ S

H and KṢ are equated with the Five Brahmās. These are the five faces of Sadāśiva, thatis,
Sadyojāta (W), Vāmadeva (N), Aghora (S), Tatpuruṣa (E) and Īśāna (see below note
15,337). Abhinava identifies them with pure-cum-impure principles. There is a problem
with the third one, that is, Aghora, who is identified with Sadāśiva. S is elsewhere
identified with pure sar. Sadāśiva (also called Sādākhya), which is the name of the reality

level where objectivity, as bare ens, undifferentiated and undefined, first begins to emerge
out of the pure subjectivity of consciousness with which it is still one. This conception of
the semivowels and sibilantsis not foundin other Śaiva texts, but we do observe it in the
Vaiṣṇava Ahirbudhnyasaihitā (c. 7 or 8"" cent) (16/83-87) and the late Lakṣmītantra
(19/12-19ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

Here he explains in this way the condition of the object of desire

(aiṣṭavya), analysing it as ‘not unfolded’ (anunmiṣita) and so on. When the will
comes to assume a three-fold state of being (bhāva), the object of desire is also of
three kinds, as (it is said that):
‘only the form of the (pure) will alone (icchāmātra) is far from the object
to be emitted.”
According to this teaching (nīti), (the object of desire) has ‘not unfolded’,
that is, it is has not come forth (anullasita) (and become manifest) within the

nature of the pure letter I. It is ‘in the course of unfolding’, that is, in the act of

coming forth (and becoming manifest), within the nature of the letter r, which is

(the will) stained with the ‘momentary° object of desire and ‘fully unfolded’,
that is, has come forth (and is manifest) within the nature of the letter 1, which is
(the will) stained with the ‘stable’ (form of) the object of desire.
Surely (one may ask,) (the will) has fallen from its own particular nature

due to the various types (bheda) of objects of desire, namely, ‘momentary and

the rest. So why should they not be called three distinct fields (viṣaya) (of the
will), rather than one with three aspects? With this doubt in mind, he says that

(this takes place within the will) ‘without this entailing a fall from its inherent

nature (tādṛūpya). The sense is that (the will) does not fall from (its own) nature,

characterized as the state of the object of desire,$ even when there is a difference
according to whether it is momentary etc. Thus the object of desire, although

three-fold in this way, has emerged in an external form ‘by virtue of its own

‘heat’ (āṣman), which is the ‘freedomʼ (of the innate nature of the will). This
being so, it manifests (in its) three-fold form as (the letters) Ś, S and S, which are
called the sibilants (iūṣman). Thus he says ‘that same (will) etc. As in this way
the object of desire cannot be separate from that (will), the will also has three

aspects, and so ‘by virtue of its own ‘heat”, manifests in this way as (these)

three (forms of) reflective awareness. This is the over-all meaning. As is said:

(kalā).

‘The will itself pervaded by its own heat has assumed three aspects

Thus, it is said that the locus of articulation of these (letters) and of the
will (the vowel I) (is as follows). ‘(The vowel) I, the palatal consonants, Y and Ś
The sibilants are called uṣman – ‘warmʼ by grammarians. Swami Lakshmaṇjoo
explains that ‘Ś is Śuddha Vidyā, that corresponds to states of the will symbolized by I

and Ī, in which the object of desire not unfolded. S is the Īśvara, which is the reality level

(tattva) corresponding to the state symbolized by r Ṛ, in which the object of desire begins

to fleetingly unfold. S is Sadāśiva, which is the reality level (tattva) corresponding to the

state symbolized by 1 L,, in which the object of desire has fully unfolded, at one with
consciousness. They are said to be ‘warm’ because the warmth, which the bliss of Śiva’s
own nature, is never absent in any of them.’ (personal communication from George

Barselaar drawn from Swami Lakṣshmanjoo’s commentary on the Tantrāloka)

The will and its object are inherently one, so the state of the object is essentially that of
the will.
Read sīghratvādibhede for śīghratvā dibhede.

CHAPTER THREE

are palatal’, ‘(the vowel) r, the cerebral consonants, R and S are cerebralʼ, ‘(the

vowel) 1, the dental consonants, L and S are dental’. The expansion (of
phonemic reflective awareness) that has also been revealed by this (teaching) is up
to this much. Accordingly, he says:
The Sibilant S as the Principle of the Nectar of Poison

faã rēr |

tata eva sakāre ʻsmin sphuṭaṁ viśvaṁ prakāśate |
amṛtaṁ ca paraṁ dhāma yoginas tat pracakṣate l| 166 ||
Thus, the universe manifests clearly within this letter S. (The wise)

call it the yogi’s` ‘Abode of Supreme Nectar’. (166) (165cd-166ab)

‘Thuṣ’, because the fully unfolded (pronmiīlita) object of desire has

emerged in an external form, it is said with this same intended (meaning) that:

‘the three Eggs (that extend up to the end of Māyā) are pervaded by the letter
S.” And so also because it nourishes all things (it is said):

The locus of articulation of the vowel I and the palatal Ś is the same. Thus, the latter is

considered to be derived from the former. Analogously, cerebral $ is derived from r, and
dental S from .

The following verses indicate this teaching is meant for those engaged in sexual yogic

practice. Thus, it may well be that Abhinava suggests a second meaning for the word
‘yogin’ which is its literal one, namely, ‘one who is in union’. The inner experience of

seed-syllable SAUḤ in the course of sexual union is described in the following passage,

that continues up to line 175cd (175ab).

This half line corresponds to MV 4/25a. The second half of this lineis quoted abovein

TĀv ad 3/104cd-105ab. See note there. The entire verse is quoted below in TĀv ad
4/186cd-188ab, whichis a paraphrase and explanation of it ad 11/89, and along with the

preceding verse, ad 16/221-222 (221cd-223ab), and by Abhinava himself in PTv p. 242.
The division of the metaphysical principles into the four Eggs, in the perspective of their
outer, emanated state, is conceived in the domain of thought, whereas the sphere of the

Divine Means is free of thought. Abhinava refers to the pervasion of S in relation to the

Eggs below in Chapter Four in the context of the Empowered Means, in which thought
operates (see 4/186cd-188ab). There as here, he presents it as part of SAUḤ, the seed-

syllable of the goddess Parā (see below, note 3,651). In his commentary there, Jayaratha

accordingly and rightly quotes the full verse in the course of his explanation of how the
four letters of the syllable correspond to the four Eggs (a notion peculiar to the Trika) that

span sections of the metaphysical principles from Earth to Śakti (see above, note 3,344).

According to Jayaratha,in the sphere of the Śāmbhava Means, SAUḤis experienced as
just the initial S, which is Śakti in the domain of pure Śiva consciousness, free of

differentiating conceptualization.
The passage beginning with this verse up to 17lcd (171ab) deals with the
Principle of Pervasion, and so can be read directly after verses 147ab (146) to 148cd
(1I48ab), which deal with the Principle of Passion. We have seen that the latter is visarga.

The Principle of Pervasion is S, and the Stainless Principle described next (3/172ab-174ab
(171cd-174)) is AU which, as the union of the two, completes Parā’s form as the syllable

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Soma (The Moon), Aṃṛtanātha (the Lord of Nectar), Sudhāsāra (the
Essence of Wine), Sudhānidhi (the Treasury of Wine), Saḍrasādhāra (the

Foundation of the Six Flavours)” – the letter S is called by (all these) names.

Thus, from (this) point of view, it is said to be the Seed of Nectar

(amṛtabīja), and so the teachers call it the ‘Abode of Supreme Nectar.’” The

meaning is that they say (it is this) in all the scriptures.

Śurely (one may ask,) is the nature (of the phoneme S) experienced in this
form anywhere, or not? With this doubt in mind, he says:

āza TIJTT |

TĨRTRRũRITTŪTTYTHTITĒJ
|I Z€U II
kṣobhādyantavirāmeṣu tad eva ca parāmṛtam |
sītkārasukhasadbhāvasamāveśasamādhiṣu || 167 ||

That same Supreme Nectar (is relished) at the beginning, middle

and end of (the sexual) arousal (of sacred intercourse). (First,) in the sounds

SAUḤ. The final visarga is the Principle of Passion, through which it is generated
externally as the culmination of the Stainless power of action in its most evident form,
which is the summation of the activity of all the energies of Śiva consciousness. This is
the form in which Śiva’s outer manifestation is experienced within Him. Moving in the

flow of these energies of reflective awareness, the adept recognizes his own true nature in

this way as operating everywhere both externally, in the sphere of Māyā, and within Śiva

consciousness.
Ṭhe flavours are a standard set of six kinds, namely: sweet (madhura), sour (amla),

salty (lavaṇa), pungent (kaṭuka), bitter (tikta) and astringent (kaṣāya). It would be
incorrect to translate the word rasa here as ‘sentiment’ (i.e. love etc.), because they are

more than six. Seven or eight sentiments (rasa) are most commonly enumerated by writers
on aesthetics and devotion. The basic seven are: love (śṛṅgāra), heroism (vīra), disgust
(bībhatsa), anger or fury (raudra), mirth (hāsya), fear (bhayanaka), compassion (karuṇa),

and wonder (adbhuta). Abhinavagupta includes tranquillity (śānta) as the eighth. We also
come across others such as paternal fondness (vātsalya).

JY 4/54/45cd-46ab (MS K f1. 213a, Kh f1. 200a, G f1. 286a).
[tis universal practice in all Tantric traditions to give names to letters and seed-syllable

Mantras. The Trika Tantras may call the letter S Nectar (amṛta), just as we have seen
thesṣe Tantras refer to the letter AU as the Trident (triśūla). Often the names denote
properties or the nature of the reality the letter symbolizes. A common example is the
letter L, which is called Dharā, that is, Earth, and does, indeed, represent that principle.
‘The same is true of the letters Y, R and V, which we have seen denote Water (āpa), Fire
(vahni) and Air (vāyu), and are called by those names. Abhinava explains why the letter S
is called Nectar (amṛ1a) on the basis of this principle.

Cf. below 5/143. In the following passage, Abhinava explains how the letter S contains

all the others and conveys the meaning and actual reality of the things expressed by some

words beginning with the letter S. Gnoli sums up his argument as follows: ‘The letter S

expresses by itself the meaning of various words that begin with it, such as satya

(‘existence’). Moreover, it conveys it directly, as an experience of the reality to which they
allude. Here they are said to be particularly evident in the states of consciousness that
develop in the course of making love. The power of a single phoneme is exemplified also

CHAPTER THREE

in daily experience and in common speech. Examples of this are particles such as ‘ca’
which means ‘and’. Another example is the privative prefix ‘a’, which negates the

meaning of the word to which it is added. The noun ‘mūla’ means ‘root’. The adjective
‘amūla’ means ‘without root’. The same is true of markers of case added at the end of a

word. All these examples express a particular meaning which is not objectifiable in a
noun, whichis inseparable from the things conjoined, negated and so on. Abhinavagupta

concludes that each letter of a word expresses a meaning, although this is not evident to
most people. The various etymologies, sanctioned by tradition, of words such a ‘mantra’
(manaḥ trāṇate, that is, it ‘protects, saves the mind’) and ‘dīkṣā’ (meaning ‘initiation’)
(which ‘gives' – ‘dā’, knowledge and ‘destroys’, ‘kṣi’, ignorance) and the like, are based
on this power of expression single syllables and letters possess.' (note 464 to Gnoli’s
translation of the PTv p. 153-154) ‘. . . This power to convey meaning is especially
evident in the first letter of a word. Thus ‘S’, for example, orients and conditions various

words, imparting to them to some degree and form some common meaning. The ones
mentioned by Abhinava include sa (truth, reality), satya (truth, existence), sattā (Being),

sadbhāva (essence), sukha (pleasure), sītkāra (the sound of lovemaking), sāmya (equality,
equilibrium), samyak (correctly), samāveśa (penetration), and samādhi (contemplative

absorption). Just as the true (paramārthika) meaning of words, case endings, particles etc.

becomes evident through their concrete function in language, so too the true meaning of
these words, which begin with the letter ‘S’, is revealed and can be experienced
(upalakṣya) in erotic arousal (kṣobha), that takes place in sexual union in the course of the
Foremost Sacrifice (ādiyāga) [concerning which, see above note 3,216 and below 3,530].

Such is their profound, real (paramārthika) meaning.” (Gnoli ibid. p 300, note 464 to PTv
p. 239) Thus Abhinava says:

‘(Some things) are especially excellent, such as is, for example, amongst the

forms (of female deities, like Parā,) those with four arms, three eyes, full (breasts) and thin
(waist), and amongst (sacrificial) substances, wine and other alcoholic beverages. (This is
because) they cause us forcefully to attain that real existence (tāṁ sattām) (to which they
refer). The same is the case with the written letters (lipyakṣara) (that serve as a means for

the one who reads them to attain) the plane of the real letters (which are energies of

consciousness). Such is the case with this letter (S), which amongst all the letters (is

especially excellent). Thus, as the letter S, which is the nectar of supreme bliss, pours
forth, it does so encompassing (within itself) the entire network of letters. The ultimately

real (paramārthika) form (vapuṣ) of existence (satya), pleasure (sukha), wealth (sampat),
Being (satā) and the like can be experienced (upalakṣya) in the sounds (sītkāra) and
exuberance (samullāsa) of lovemaking, in the throb of the penis (śepakampa), in the
contractions and expansions of the vagina (varāṅga). This is the true non-māyic nature of
‘existence’ (satya) and the rest. (But, one may ask, how can just one letter contain
implicitly within itself all the others? The reply is that) those who are skilful (in
understanding) the (outer signs) that mark (the inner impulses and perceptions) of the
heart of others are able to select the (best and) intended (word amongst others) by just one
letter, whether it is located at the beginning, middle or end (of the word); for example, the
letter G of the (words) gagana (sky), gavaya (wild cow) and go (cow). By means of that
alone, they penetrate into the real word. In this way, each letter expresses by itself the true
nature (of the thing denoted by the word of which it is a part). As is said (in YSū 3/7): ʻaṣ
there is a reciprocal superimposition between word, meaning and notion, (they generate) a
mixture (of all three as a single whole). By (the discipline of) fixing (one’s attention)
(saṅyama) on the distinction between them, (one acquires an) understanding (jñāna) of
the sounds (ruta) of all living beings’. Thus (for the same reason, a similar thing happens)

generally in the case of these monosyllables, such as (the privative) letter ‘a’ (prefixing a
word) or (the particle) ‘ca’ (meaning ‘and’), markers of case and so forth. Eyen (here) on

TANTRĀLOKA

of love making (sītkāra), (then) in the pleasure (sukha) (of the act),” which is

the essential being (sadbhāva) (of the Brahman), and (finally) in penetration
(samāveśa) (into consciousness), which is contemplative absorption

(samādhi). (167) (166cd-167ab)

That Nectar, which is the (immortal) Supreme Abode, manifests in the

beginning, middle and end of ‘arousal’, that is, of the Foremost Sacrifice
(ādiyāga) (of ritual intercourse), in the ‘sounds of love making’ and the rest.
Thus, because it intensifies (this) state of Supreme Bliss, (it is said that):

the plane of Māyā (each one, although it has no independent) existence, expresses a

meaning which is quite real (paramārthika), such as negation, conjunction and the like,
which is undivided from the particular things that are negated or conjoined. (Its meaning is

not like that of complete words,) it is not objective and is immersed in the plane (of
consciousness) of the subject (who understands it). This was what the venerable Bharthari
meant when (he wrote), discussing the nature of a sentence:
‘According to some, the nature of a sentence is present in the first word;
according to others in the various words, individually, aided by the others.”

What we have said also justifies the etymologies one finds in the exegetical

books of the Veda and sacred Śaiva texts of the words ‘mantra’, ‘dīkṣā’ and the like, on
the basis of the communality of the syllables and phonemes. These meanings are the result
of divine decree, not (common) convention, and so are not known to ordinary people.
Such then is the letter S (with which the Trika seed-syllable SAUH begins).’ PTv p. 238241.
In the beginning of the second section of his Vākyapadīya, Bhartṛhari lists

various opinions concerning the manner in which a sentence conveys meaning. One,
which he rejects, is that the meaning of a sentence is conveyed by its initial word.

Subramania Iyer (1977) explains with reference to VP 2/17-18: ‘(The vṛtti) seems to say
this: the very first word of a sentence denotes its meaning as qualified and delimited by

the meanings of other words of the sentence which are yet to come, they do not say
anything new, they only make clear and patent what is already latent in the first word. The
very first word is as good as the sentence.’
The word ‘sukha’ in common usage simply means ‘pleasure’, as opposed to pain
(duḥkha), or just a general state of wellbeing, contentment, comfort, or even happiness.
Here sukha specifically denotes the pleasure experiénced during sexual intercourse. We
find the same usage in for example in VBh 69, as well as below, 5/144 (5/143).

Cf. below, 5/144 (5/143) where S, the first letter of SAUḤ, is again explained in this

way. There, practice is in the sphere of the Individual Means, that is, objectivity, as it
involves the subtle body and the rise of Kuṇḍalinī. Here in the domain of Śāmbhavopāya,
which is within the sphere of subjectivity, there is no Mantra or Kuṇḍalinī Yoga, just an
elevation and expansion of consciousness.

The Primary, Main, First, Primordial or Foremost Sacrifice (ādiyāga) is clearly

identified with ritual sexual union (maithuna) by Jayaratha below in the comm. on 29/7. It
is defined below in 29/164 as that by means of which the ‘essence’ (sāra) of things, that

is, the nectar of consciousness, is extracted and made one’s own. It is the Foremost or
Primary Sacrifice, because it is concerned with the Principal Wheel (mukhyacakra) and is
the Kaula Sacrifice. The Krama sources repeatedly describe the orgiastic assembly of
beings in sacred sites, especially Oḍḍiyāna and the cremation ground 'there called
Karavīra, on the fourteenth of the dark fortnight of the Great Śiva’s Night (śivarātri). This
was the original or ‘primordial” sacrifice. As Sanderson (2006: 26) explains: “The Krama
teaching is seen as the explication of the dynamic structure of the ultimate reality

embodied and made manifest in that sacrificial assembly, the process of Krama worship is

CHAPTER THREE

‘The supreme energy (of consciousness), perfectly pure, plays here (in the
Foremost Sacrifice) in its uniqueness. 1) Powerfully and all at once (rabhasai) (in
the beginning), it brings about the emergence of the wheel of the rays of the
senses, which 2) as the interiority of the aesthetic delight (rasa) of supreme bliss,

it attains stability there (within it in the middle). 3) (Finally,) it dissolves away
here (to0) by the destruction of limitation (bhara) on supreme consciousness.’

In accord with the practice (yukti) taught here, the first (things that occur)
are the sounds of love making and the rest that arise because the wheel of the

senses is propense to arousal. After that, by resting there (in that state, the yogi)

penetrates (samāveśa) into the bliss which is supreme oneness (sāmarasya). Then

after that, by being firmly established there (in that state, the yogi experiences
that) the Being (sar) of the Brahman is the (pure) Being (sartā) (within them), in

accord with the saying ‘Being is the supreme Brahman’ The penetration
(samāveśa) (that takes place) there by the submergence of the embodied and other
such forms of (lower, conditioned) subjectivity, along with the emergence of the
(supreme) subjectivity of consciousness, is itself contemplation (samādhi). (This)
is the effulgence (pariṣphuraṇa) (of the Brahman) as the supreme energy (or
aspect – kalā) of consciousness, which manifests there in the loci of bliss (i.e. the

genitals) and in other such places.

seen as the means of realizing it through re-enactment’. This ‘re-enactment’, which the
texts proclaim is the ‘ultimate secret hidden in the heart of the Yoginīs’, need not have
outer riṭual forms. The ‘re-enactment’ came to be analysed in progressively more minute
detail as the developing awareness of the phases and energies of the dynamism of

cognitive, divine consciousness in clearly and systematically ordered spheres and levels of
activity. This is operant all the time, but is especially easy to grasp in moments of psychic
and emotional intensity, such as sexual intercourse, or when one experiences the wonder
of beauty. It is central to the Kaula modality of practice (kulaprakriyā). Indeed, it is its
most basic characterizing feature, as presented by Abhinava below in Chapter TwentyNine.

This verse describes the phases of the mystic experience of the Foremost Sacrifice, as
signalled by the numbers.

sad iti brahma paramam. This statement appears to be drawn from an Upaniṣad.
In the first principle, that of Passion, all the energies are drawn together, fused into the

unity of consciousness just as it is about to pour out into the womb of the created order; in
this one, the creative power of intent is fully expanded. As such, it pervades all the
moments of union, as it does at the universal level, the entire cycle of creation and
destruction, in the second pervasive principle of Poison. It is the experience of the
Absolute (Brahman) as universal Being (sar), in which all things are gathered together in

the unity of expanded consciousness. Its symbol is the full moon that oozes the vitalizing

nectar of life (amṛta), that feeds and sustains the sphere of objectivity. The verse Jayaratha
quotes from an unknown source describes how the energy of consciousness in this state
functions and is experienced at the highest levels of blissful spiritual awareness.
The pervasive, blissful awareness of the Principle of Poison (viṣatattva) is
experienced by yogis in all three moments of sexual union ~ at the beginning, when the

senses are stimulated into activity, then in the course of lovemaking when they delight in

the blissful absorption of union (sāmarasya), and finally at the end when they merge into

it completely to become fully absorbed. The yogi moves through three corresponding

forms of mystic absorption (samādhi), in which the powers of supreme consciousness

manifest. First comes the absorption that takes place in the resonance of consciousness

TANTRĀLOKA

Moreover, in this way, its state as the Supreme Brahman should (also) be
stated. So he says:

tad eva brahma paramam avibhaktaṁ pracakṣate |

(167cd)

It is said that that alone is the supreme, undivided Brahman. (168ab)

(The Upaniṣad declares that) ‘all this is indeed the Brahman’. In accord
with this teaching, the Brahman is the pervasive form (of consciousness, of which
the reflective awareness is symbolized by the letter S). This is the meaning. Thus,
it is said to be ‘undivided°. The point is that (only) that which has a fixed, limited

nature can have divisions. That ‘is said’ in the venerable Parātriśikā and
elsewhere. There (we read that) the same is said (with reference to the letter S in

the section dealing with the) formation (uddhāra) of (SAUH), the seed syllable of

Parā: ʻO fair hipped one, the third Brahman . . . The ‘third Brahman’ is the
manifest in the sounds of lovemaking (sītkāra). After this, during the act itself, follows the

blissful experience of repose (sukhasadbhāva). This leads to the final stage, which is total

penetration into consciousness (samāveśa), through which bodily subjectivity is
submerged, to give way to the emergence of the pure subjectivity of consciousness. All

this, as Jayaratha explains, is made manifest in the sexual centres and other parts of the
body and mind, known as the ‘Centres of Bliss’ (ānandasthāna).
” sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma quoted again below ad 4/1 1 7cd-1 18ab.

Read srīparātriśikādau for śrīparātriṁśakādu.
PT 10a. Abhinava explains: ‘The Heart is Bhairava. As the plenitude (of
consciousness), dense and compact with the power of bliss, which contains the energy of

the universe and is the separation of emission (from its source), and the outpouring (of
consciousness into manifestation), it is the Brahman. This (Brahman), as its very name

suggests, is great, pervasive, nourishes (all things), and is nourished (by them). It is not

like (the Brahman) of the Vedāntins, which is not dissimilar from the absolute void of the
Buddhiṣṭs. This Brahmanis the ‘third’ with respect (to the other two members of the Trika
triad, namely) Man (nṇara) (i.e. the world) and Power (śakti). Thatis to say it is Śiva alone,
the supreme plane. Thisis whyin our scriptures andin this one itself, this Heartis said to
be the most excellent object of worship." (PTv p. 221). Further ahead (PTv p. 224-230),
Abhinava supplies sixteen explanations of the nature of the Third Brahman, which is

identified with the Heart. The number sixteen relates to that of the sixteen vowels that are

held within Śiva consciousness as aspects of its reflective awareness.
One could say that the essential purport of the Parātrīśikā, more commonly
called Parātriṁśikā, is the exposition of SAUḤ, at least that is so as it is presented in the
brief commentary (laghuvṛtti) (quite probably mistakenly) attributed to Abhinavagupta.
Each major Tantric school is centred on a main deity whose Mantra (or Vidyā if a
Goddess) is the principal one of that school. A seed-syllable (bīja) like this one
corresponds to that Mantra, which recurs regularly in all the main Mantras of that school
and in many of its subsidiary ones also. It is so central to the Trika system of Mantra

practice that this syllable of Parā, the Goddess of the Trika (6/219ab (6/218), 15/331cd334ab), is identified with the Heart, which is the supreme level of Speech, the pure
reflective awareness of supreme consciousness. As such, it is the essential vitality and

power of all Mantras (below, 4/181cd-182ab), and one with Bhairava (6/126ab (6/125)).

As the seed-syllable of Parā, the supreme Goddess of the Trika, Abhinava repeatedly

CHAPTER THREE

letter S (which is the third sibilant). As (is said in the) Bhagavadgīta: ‘The

statement ‘orṁī tat sat (‘ OM That Being’) is said to be the three-fold (nature) of

the Brahman.”

As it is the pervasive and nectarian form (of the reflective awareness
symbolized by the letter S), elsewhere it is also called ‘the Principle of Poison’

(viṣatattva). He says this.

returns to an exposition of its ultimate nature (tattva) and practice here in the Tantrāloka.
Indeed, he returns to it at key points in his presentation of each of the means of realisation.

It appears here, as we can see, at the culmination of his exposition of the fifty forms of
reflective awareness of the pure ‘’ consciousness, the contemplative absorption into

which is the Śāmbhava means to realisation, presented as the Principles of Passion,
Pervasion and the Stainless. In the following chapter on the Empowered Means, it is again

presented as part of the highest practice, that reaches perfection in the recognition of the
universal activity of consciousness (sāmānyaspanda) free of thought constructs (see
below, 4/186cd-189ab). Then in Chapter Five, which deals with the Individual Means
(āṇavopāya), it is presented in relation to the practice of yoga sustained by the power of

action of consciousness. There Abhinava teaches how the parts of the syllable are
deployed in the subtle body and assimilated to the upward movement of the breath; he
traces its journey up to its merger into supreme consciousness in the End of the Twelve

(see below, 5/54cd-58ab and 5/143-145 (5/142-144)).

BhGī 17/23ab. In his commentary on the Gītā, Abhinava first explains that OM denotes

the scriptural injunctions that one must observe all one’s life. Tar (‘that') expresses the
absence of desire for the fruits of actions in the Brahman, and sar (‘Being’) praise. He then
offers an alternative explanation: “Or by the word OṀ is meant the fully pacified nature of

the Brahman in which the universe rests. The word tat expresses the aspect of the

Brahman when the Brahman assumes the form of freedom (ṣvātantrya), in which the
unfolding waves of the universe exist only as the intense awareness (parāmarśa) of all
that exists inwardly within the Brahman. The word ‘sar’ stands for the fully developed
aspect of the Brahman who, in order to make it manifest, takes recourse to his power of
freedom (svātantrya) and will (icchā). Although fully complete in itself, the Brahman
takes on the form of the universe because of its extraordinary nature. [. . .] In other words,

we can say that in the first place the fully pacified form of the Brahman is presented.

Second, the unfoldment of that Brahman is presented, which takes place as a result of
contact with the waves of the will (icchā) in the form of the desire to give (ditsā), to

sacrifice (yiyakṣā) and to perform austerities (titapsā). Lastly, its fully manifested form,
dominated by the variety of worldly activities such as charity (dāna), sacrifice (yajña) and
austerities (tapas) is presented. However (although apparently different) all these three
aspects are in reality equal forms of the one undivided Brahman. Having this in mind, (to)

whom, what, how, wherefrom, where and by whom any fruit of action could possibly
come?”’ Commentary on BhGī 17/23ab. Translation by Boris Marjanovic.

The Principle of Passion (kāmatattva) was explained above in verses 3/148ab-148cd
(3/147-148ab) as the gross form of emission (visarga) (H), and the Stainless in 3/105ab-

108ab (3/105cd-108) as the fully evident form of the power of action (AU). Now

Abhinava goes on to talk about the Principle of Poison (S). We have seen that these three
together form SAUḤ, the seed-syllable of Parā, the supreme Trika goddess. Abhinava
concludes by teaching the nature of this triad in verses 171ab (170) to 175ab (174). The
teaching concerning these three Principles is also found in the Vijñānabhairava (verse 68)
and in Kubjikā Tantras. It appears, therefore, that this is an important Kaula sexual

practice, not confined only to the Trika school.

TANTRĀLOKA

3aṛā TTaā--- āT̄TTTR̥JTGŚ II 2£¢ I1

TJJZTHT PJTTĀÑTTAĪĒTTT |I ṞēR II
fthīīāācāṁīzēraz a TTHITITq̄ I

uvāca bhagavān eva tac chrīmatkulaguhvare || 168 ||
Śaktiśaktimadaikātmyalabdhānvarthābhidhānake |
kākacañcupuṭākāraṁ dhyānadhāraṇavarjitam || 169 ||
viṣatattvam anackākhyaṁ tava snehāt prakāśitam |

The Lord Himself has said that in the venerable Kulagahvara,

which is so called in agreement with its meaning, derived from the oneness of

power (kula) and its possessor (gahvara). “Out of love for You (O goddess),
the Principle of Poison (viṣatattva), (which is Unstruck Sound, otherwise)
called Devoid of Vowels (anacka), has been revealed. Its form is that of the
Cavity of the Beak of a Crow, and it is devoid of visualization (dhyāna) and
meditative support (dhāraṇa). (168cd-170ab) (168-169)
Read ~gahvare for ~guhvare.

Abhinava is referring us to the lost Kulagahvaratantra for teachings concerning the
three principles of Passion (kāmatattva), Poison (viṣatattva) and the Stainless (nirañjana)

that he expounds in these and the following verses. If the association of these three with
the three letters of the syllable SAUḤ was originally taught in the Kulagahvara, it was
most probably a Trika tantra. Otherwise, Abhinava made this alignment with Trika, which
is less likely. The Kubjikā Tantras repeatedly draw from Trika Tantras. In this, and many
other ways, their close relationship to the Trika Tantras is evident. The union of the
energies of the reflective awareness of these letters are those of the union of Śiva and
Śakti, which is mirrored by the outer union of the Kaula adept (vīra) and his partner (dāti).

Cf. 32/47cd-48. Jayaratha glosses the expression ‘the Cavity of the Beak of a Crow’ in

his commentary on the NSA (p. 114) as referring to the clitoris, which is ‘the sphere of the

sprout of Passion’. He writes: “by the word sprout is meant the Cavity of the Beak of a
Crow, which is the Liṅga of Touch (sparśaliṅga) within which is the passion that is being
made manifest (see above, note 3,471). He goes on to say that the ‘passion’ meant in this

context is Unstruck Sound in the form of the energy of the vital breath in the centre of
suṣumnā (madhyaprāṇaśakti). Here, commenting on 32/47cd-48 below, he explains that
‘the energy of Unstruck Sound (anackakalā) has the form of the Cavity of the Beak of a

Crow’. It is heard by forming the mouth in the shape of a kiss, which is thus called the
Seal of the Kiss (cumbikāmudrā). The Yogi’s ‘mouth’, in this context, is his own essential
nature which, taking the support of the energy of the vital breath in suṣumnā, the Central

Abode (mmadhyadhāman), makes the means and object of knowledge one with the
perceiver there in the Centre. This takes place by means of the Unstruck Sound heard
there in the Cavity, that is, in the Void between the Moon of inhalation (apāna) and the
Sun of exhalation (prāṇa). In this way, according to the Kāmikāgama, the yogi attains the

liberated state of flight.
Abhinava sṭates all this concisely when describing the elevated yogic experience

of ‘touch’ in the PTv (p. 274), where he writes: āhrṛtāmṛtasparśaḥ prodyannādānusāra-

cumbikālakṣaṇakākacañcupuṭamudrāmudritaḥ touch that has laid hold of the Nectar (of
consciousness) and is sealed with the seal (nudrā) of the Cavity of the Beak of a Crow,

CHAPTER THREE

(The Kulagahvaratantra) ʻis so called in agreement with its meaning’.
As is said there itself:
‘Kula is said to be power (śakti) and gahvara is also the possessor of
power. The oneness of the experience (vedana) of both is said to be
Kulagahvara.
(Abhinavagupta) quotes from that same book, (where it says), ‘the cavity

of the beak of a crow’ etc. (The passage begins with) ‘out of love for You (O
goddess)!” The second person (is appropriate) as it is essentially (the person) of
the vocative. (The god will impart the teaching to the goddess) because it is to be
taught, and because (she is) the object of (the god’s) compassion.
The ‘Principle’, which is everywhere unobstructed, ‘of Poison’, that is,
of the pervasive form (of consciousness) , has been revealed, that is, it has been
which is the Kiss (cumbikā), consonant with the (ever) arising Sound (of consciousness in
the flow of the breath).

A revealing reference to the Beak of the Crow is found in Chapter 31 of the
KukKh, which is drawn from the Kulagahvaratantra, to which Abhinavagupta refers here

and utilizes for his exposition of the six types of piercing of the inner centres of the subtle

body by Kuṇḍalinī and other inner principles (see below 29/239cd-241ab and 29/243cd-

254ab. See Dwivedi and Rastogi 1987: vol. 1 255, 256, 268 and 270 for a list of these

references). There we read:

‘The Supreme Energy moves up joyfully (ullasanī) through the Six Wheels and

the Sixteen Supports (of the subtle body). Located in the encapsulated cavity of the Beak
of the Crow, she destroys the aspect (which relates to the manifest, differentiated) letters
(akṣapakṣa). She, the Supreme (Energy), pierces the Point in the centre of the palate at the
End of Sound. (KuKh 31/43-44ab)

Again:

‘(There is a) place made of the Beak of the Crow, which is devoid of upper and
lower. It is a (Wheel of) sixteen spokes that possesses great lustre and is located in the

middle of the Circle of the Palate. There that certain (subtle Energy) called ‘she who
desires everything’, sports. If a (subtle) tactile sensation (sparśa) occurs within that place,
(the teacher) then pierces (all) fettered souls and (each one) attains the supreme abode.
(Thus) he should recall the omnipresent Śiva.” (ibid. 31/118cd-120)

Here the End of Sound is the Supreme Principle, the ‘Place of the Unmanifest’,

which is ‘devoid of Sound’ (ibid. 31/65). According to this source, Kuṇḍalinī emerges

from the navel as Haṁsinī (the Swan), the energy of Unstruck Sound, and penetrates into
the Supreme Principle as Kākinī (the Crow) – the energy of the Beak of the Crow, which
is another aspect of Unstruck Sound. At the same time, she persists unchanging in the
middle between the two as the Haṁsinī, who swims in the lake of transmigratory
existence.
Jayaratha’s citation from the original clearly demonstrates that 3/168cd-170ab (168-

169) and 3/173-175ab (172cd-174) are drawn from the Kulagahvara. The verses in
between are Abhinava’s explanation.

The word viṣa, which literally means ‘poison’, is derived from the root ‘viṣ’ in the

sense of ‘pervasion’. The name of the deity Viṣṇu, is derived from the same root and so
literally means ‘pervasive one’. So too here, the word viṣa can also means ‘pervasion’.
Accordingly, Kṣemarāja in his Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya (p. 44), commenting on VBh 68,
derives the word viṣa in this way as relating to the pervasion (yyāpti) of the expansion

TANTRĀLOKA

experienced, when the oneness (sāmarasya) which is the mutual union (of the
couple who embody Śiva and Śakti) takes place. This is the meaning. And that is
Unstruck Sound, and so it is (correctly) denoted by the term ‘Devoid of
Vowelsʼ. Thus, because it is perpetually active (and manifest) (satatodita), it

does not depend upon meditation and the like (to be experienced). (An object of
meditation) is established (niṣṭha) on a fixed (conditioned) (niyata) object of

meditation or the like (which is not the case here). This is the overall sense.
Moreover, its form is like that of the Beak of Crow because the shape (of the letter
H, which in this context is termed) ‘Devoid of Vowels’, has two humps

(dvikubja).

Surely (one may ask,) the subject at hand here (is the letter S, which) is
the Seed of Nectar (amṛtabīja), and it is not possible for it to have such a form,
because it was mentioned in relation to the letter of the (Principle of) Passion (i.e.

H), so why are they spoken of (together) as in agreement (with one another)
(saṁvādita)? The Lord has also said (in the Kulagahvara):

‘Now (I will explain) briefly (how) that which is the Principle of Passion
is (also) the Principle of Poison. Listen, O (fair lady) whose eyes are (like those of

a) gazelle.”

So what then is the purpose of calling the Principle of Passion, the

Principle of Poison? With this doubt in mind, it is said:

The Principles of Passion, Poison and the Stainless

kāmasya pūrṇatā tattvaṁ saṅghaṭṭe pravibhāvyate || 170 ||
viṣasya cāmrṛtaṁ tattvaṁ chādyatve ‘ṇoś cyute sati |

The plenitude (pūrṇatā) of Passion (Ḥ) is the Principle

experienced in (sexual) union, (whereas) the Principle of the Nectar of Poison

(vikāsa) or extending flow (prasara) of consciousness and Fire to the contraction and
withdrawal of objectivity back into consciousness. atra vahniḥ anupraveśakrameṇa
saṁkocabhūḥ viṣasthãnam prasarayuktyã vikãsapadam viṣḷr̥ vyãptau iti arthãnugamãt.

A consonant devoid of any vowels sound cannot be pronounced. Thus, the name
‘Devoid of Vowels’ appropriately denotes Unstruck Sound.

See above, comm. on 3/143ab (3/142), where the letter H is said to have this shape.

Indeed, this is what it looks like in Kashmiri Śāradā script.

The following mediation (dhāraṇā) taught in the Vijāānabhairava, and its explanation,

helps us to understand the practice taught here in the Kulagahvara.
vahner viṣasya madhye tu cittaṁ sukhamayaṁ kṣipet |
kevalaṁ vāyupūrṇaṁ vā smarānandena yujyate || 68 II

CHAPTER THREE
‘(When making love,) one should place one’s mind made of bliss in the middle

(between the) ‘Fire’ (of the arousal of desire at the beginning) and the ‘Poison’ (of the
pervasive consciousness of its appeasement at the end); or else, filled only with the vital

breath, (the mind) should be united with the bliss of passion (smarānanda) (which is the
bliss of consciousness generated by the union of Śiva and Śakti).’ (68)
Kṣemarāja explains in the Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya (p. 44) that the term Poison - viṣa
– is derived from the root viṣ, in the sense of ‘pervasion’ (vyāp), as the expansion and flow
(vikāsa, prasara) of consciousness. ‘Fire’, on the contrary, denotes the state of contraction
or withdrawal into consciousness. Swami Lakshmanjoo (1994: 102, notes 13 and, 14)

explains this meditation as follows: ‘When you are in the sexual act (viṣa tattva) and you

are elevated and situated in the expansion of your nature then at that very moment of
union you will gain entry into Kuṇḍalinī. If, however, you are given to the sexual act, then
this sexual act will cause you to fall. This is also viṣa tattva but in that case you are carried
away from your nature. So, in viṣa tattva, when, in that act, you do not get entry into your

nature, that act is poison for you. For those who are elevated, this same poison is actually

ecstasy (amṛta).
Commenting on this

verse in the

VB,

Swami

Lakshmanjoo explains:

‘smarānanda is the bliss of, joy of, the sexual act. But in fact, you must not take it that

way. You must see it is the ānanda risen in the union of Śiva and Śakti (that is)

Rudrayāmala. This is cidānanda [bliss of consciousness] i.e. nimīlana [introverted

samādhi.. . . When you are not married, you put your mind rested between will and

knowledge. When you are married, you can put your mind in (between) the beginning of
the sex excitement and in the end when it is appeasedʼ ‘kevalaṁ vāyupūrṇaṁ vā -- [or else
filled with the vital breath] don’t let your breath move out. There, you must not let your

breath move out. If you let your breath move out – after this act, or after this state – if you
leave your breath out and in, you are gone, you have not achieved anything. You have to
maintain the breath inside. You won’t die; there you won’t die.
Your mind is rested between will and knowledge that comes out of the will.
‘Knowledge’ here is the point in between nirvikalpa and vikalpa. You must not reach
vikalpa. “What is this?. is will — must move out of that but don’t get to ‘this is a

handkerchief°. (This is) Śāktopāya when moving with support and Śāmbhavopāya when
resting in the centre without support (nothing either side).

Ānandabhaṭṭa comments:

‘By this meditation, that is, (this) meditation on the bliss (experienced) in the Fire

or in Poison also, which is harder (kaṛhinatara), one must place the mind (there) by
meditating on (this) bliss. Or else also in the centre between exhalation and inhalation (the
mind) is united with the bliss of passion that makes one forget all the objects of sense.

When meditating on passion all objects of sense are forgotten. ‘Or else filled only with the

vital breath’, even though there is no breath control. There (in that case) also, nonduality is
realized by the falling away of duality. This is the sense (of this statement). For, as those

who know ultimate reality (maintain,) the meditation on bliss when suffering in Fire and
Poison etc. is ultimate reality. It is said the experience of bliss (a man has) with a woman
without union with a woman is itself ultimate reality.”

Śivopādhyāya comments:
‘(When making love,) one should place the mind made of bliss in the middle

(between the) ‘Fire’ (of the arousal of desire at the beginning) and the ‘Poison’ (of the
pervasive consciousness of its appeasement at the end); or else, filled only with the vital

breath, (the mind) should be united with the bliss of passion (smarānanda) (which is the
bliss of consciousness generated by the union of Śiva and Śakti).

TANTRĀLOKA

(is experienced) when the obscuration it brings about falls away from the
individual soul. (170cd-171ab) (170)
‘Fire’ is the plane of contraction (of the power of the vital breath), that takes

place by the process of entry (into a state of consciousness free of thought constructs). The
location of ‘Poison’ is the plane of expansion (of the power of the vital breath), that takes

place by means of spreading forth (of emission) (prasarayuktyā).

(One must first experience) the state of contraction, that is, the repose of that

(vital force) on the plane of upper Kuṇḍalinī, attained by the process of piercing (the dam
between) the eyebrows, by the subtle power of the vital breath that unfolds upward,
pulsating above the nasal cavity.

Having prepared the power of the vital breath within the lower Kuṇḍalinī in the

secret foundation (of the genitals), which is the sixth mouth (of the Yoginī), expansion in

the form of the spreading forth (of emission) takes place as the contemplative absorption

(āveśa) into the tactile sensation (experienced) on the plane of its root, tip (agra) and

centre. “One should (then) place, that is, imagine, the mind made of bliss by means of
meditation (bhāvanā) in the middle, (between the) ‘Fire’ (of the arousal of desire at the
beginning) and the ‘Poison’ (of the pervasive consciousness of its appeasement at the

end), that is, in the central channel (of the vital breath) which is the knot of emanation
(sṛṣṭigranthī).

OŌnce having given up meditation on the exit and entry of the breath, (then) by

virtue of this meditation, one should place the mind made of bliss in the Lord who is the
expansion (of consciousness) in the centre (between the two breaths), that is the cause of
(their) going and coming, and the one who fuses the two into one. (Or) else filled only
with the vital breath’, without (any) relation to the sphere (of its) ascent and descent, (it is)

filled with the energy of the vital breath, the nature of which is the energy of Unstruck
Sound (anackakalā) that, located in
instantaneously (akramoccāra).

the central

channel,

is uttered (upwards)

After that, (the mind) becomes the bliss of passion (smarānanda) and is united

with the bliss of passion. The bliss of passion is greater than (any) other (kind of) bliss,
because due to that one forgets all objects of sense.
Or else (there is another explanation). ‘Fire’ is above the genitals and four finger

(breadths) below the naval. There is a support of the breath there called ‘fire, which is
counted amongst the sixteen supports of the breath. One should know that a foundation of
the breath called ‘Poison’ is in middle of the genitals. The mind made of bliss is placed in
the middle between these two supports of the breath. Yogis’ traditional teaching declares

that (only that) meditation should be practiced which is of the kind that has been heard (by

word of mouth) and understood (mata). Thus, one attains the bliss of passion
(kāmāṇanda). The sixteen seats are taught in the Kula tradition as, for example, (in the

passage beginning with):

‘One should know that Kula is below the genitals. In between the two is that

which is called ‘Poison’. It is said that the Power that impels the Point and Sound
(corresponding to exhalation and inhalation) is in the base. Then four finger (breadths)

above is that which is called ‘fire’. Below the naval is a foundation of the breath and in the
naval itself is the one called ‘the jar

See above, 3/144ab (3/143).

! This appears to be Abhinava’s own explanation of the meaning of these symbolic terms,
which continues up to 173. Jayaratha supplies the passage in the Kulagahvara to which

Abhinava alludes in 3/174-175ab (173cd-174). He does not do so for the previous verses

i.e. (170cd-171ab) (170) onwards, probably because they are Abhinava’s own.

CHAPTER THREE

Surely (one may ask,) the Lord has described the nature of the Principles
of Passion and Poison in the Kulagahvara, (where he has said that they are both)
the sixth energy of the vital breath (prāṇakalā), which is the (pure) life force
alone (prāṇanā-mātra) that is common to (all) the five vital breaths, prāṇa
(exhalation) and the rest. (He did not say) it is just prāṇa (exhalation) alone,
because its nature could not be like this, as its activity (vṛtti) would then be
dependent on the will of another (that is, the individual subject,) in (all) the states

of exhalation (recaka) and the rest. Thus, it would be possible to impel

(uccāryamāṇatva) and block it etc.

However, the exhaled breath (prāṇa) is the specific nature of the Principle
of Passion (it is not the common nature of both), and that of the Principle of
Poison is the inhaled breath (apāna). Thus, they are the letters H and S

(respectively). That is said (in the following verses in the Kulagahvara):

‘(The letters) S (of the Principle of Poison) and H (of the Principle of

Passion), are the knowledge of Night and Day, that move down and up
” According to Swami Lakshmanjoo (commenting on this verse in the VB): “Kāma

indicates Prāṇa as well as exhalation and up [the upward movement of the breath]. Viṣa
indicates Apāna as well as inhalation and down [the downward movement of the breath].
The union of Kāma and Viṣa is thus the bringing together of the five Prāṇas which gives

rise to a sixth aspect (prāṇakalā). Both are one and they impel or give life to all things as

they are Pure Vitality (prānaṇamātrā).

The word uccāryamāṇatva literally means ‘a state of utterance’. The breath is ‘uttered’ʼ,
that is, ‘impelledʼ.

Theṣe states arise spontaneously in the expanded state of consciousness and the

energies generated thereby during sexual union. Unstruck Sound arises spontaneously in

the flow of the breath (cf. above, 3/148ab-148cd (3/147-148ab) and commentary).
Jayaratha is saying here that the particular forms of the vital breath differ in this respect.

Here Jayaratha states clearly, as we have already seen, that the letter ‘H’ represents

Kāmatattva, the Principle of Passion - experienced through the outward flow of the breath
(prāṇa). The letter ‘S’ represents Viṣatattva ~ the Principle of Poison ~ experienced in the
inward flow (apāna). This is confirmed in the following reference from the Kulagahvara
quoted by Jayaratha. The phoneme S is the inhaled breath, which moves down and is

symbolized as the Night. Exhalation, symbolized as the Day, is H. The point is that
Kāmatattva as prāṇa = HAM and Viṣatattva as apāṇa = SA together make HASA; with the
Point (anuṣvāra) which is the Stainless, together the three make HAṀSA, which at a

deeper level of consciousness itself is AHAṀ. This is formed by the union first of the

breaths of the partners such that as when one exhales the other inhales, and both stop
together. At the deeper level of consciousness this is the experience of the supreme

subjectivity of AHAMṀ.

This passage is quoted by Śivopādhyāya in his commentary on the Vijnānabhairava (p.
138). He does not identify the source but mentions that it is quoted by Jayaratha, saying:

jayarathas tu – sahābhyāṁ – sakārahakārābhyāṁ jāto japaḥ sahajo ‘kṛtrimaḥ –
‘(according to) Jayaratha, the repetition of Mantra which is innate (spontaneous) and

natura is brought about by S and H, that is, by the two letters S and H’. He goes on to

quote this passage and comments on the meaning of the difficult compound
‘kṣapādiīnāmānau’ – ‘they are the knowledge of Night and Day - saying that atra
kṣapādināmānau iti kṣapādinābhyām ā samantāt mananaṁ jñānaṁ yayoḥ iti
yathākraṃmam apānasya-prāṇasya ca kṣapayā dinena ca śāstrīyo vyapadeśaḥ – “(this)
means that by means of Night and Day there is (complete) all around (ā) knowledge

TANTRĀLOKA

(respectively). They dislike one another like the mad elephant and the ram. What

can block _them except the vitality (vīrya)™ which is great Unstruck Sound
(asvara)”

Again:
‘(Moving) up is the Point (bindu), which is the Sun, exhalation (prāṇa),

the Day and the half part (hhāgārdha). It is the part governed (adhiṣṭhita) by the

Siddhas and is the worship of Khecarī. (The other) is below, it is Sound (nāda),
inhalation (apāna), the anus (mattagandha), the Night, and the Moon. (It is) the

part governed by Khecarī, to which the Siddhas should attend, and is merger.

Even so, although this is so with regard to their specific nature, it is

possible for them to be the (same pure) life force alone (prāṇanāmātra) in both

cases, because the particular is based on the universal. Thus, it is taught that they

are eṣsentially one. It is with this intention that the Lord has called the Principle

(manana) (of all things at all times) within the two. (Thus,) inhalation and exhalation are
denoted in the scriptures as Night and Day, respectively.”

‘Vitality’ (vīrya) here means the life force (prāṇana) which impels both inhalation and
exhalation, as it does the other forms of the breath of which it is their common nature.

Here identified with Unstruck Sound (asvara – lit. Devoid of Vowels and hence

unpronounceable), it rises as Silent resonance between the two breaths. Śivopādhyāya

(VBh p. 140) quotes Vāmanātha as saying: “Having (first) contemplated Unstruck Sound
devoid of the vital breath (between inhalation and exhalation) with the undivided Speech

of Vision by the Yoga of the touch (which is contact with) pure consciousness
(cinmātrasparśa), he dissolves away into the supreme plane (of existence).’

Read with Śivopādhyāya mattau for matau and muktvāsvaraṁ for mukṭvā svayaṁ.
The breath is divided into two halves, corresponding to exhalation (prāṇa) and

inhalation (apāna). Here the locus of exhalation corresponds to the anus (mattagandha),
the locus of inhalation (apāna) is normally the End of the Twelve above the head.

The corresponding opposites of the Principles of Passion (prāṇa) and Poison (apāna),
respectively, are: S and H, (flowing up) above and (flowing down) below, the Point and

Sound, Sun and Moon, Day and Night, emanation (which is not stated) and merger. When
experienced in this way, both phases are acts of worship. Breathing is worship of Khecarī,

the Skyfaring Goddess, Who embodies and flows like the wind in the expanse of pure
consciousness Beyond Mind. There it is worshipped by the Siddhas, that is, the

accomplished yogis who have attained liberation and live forever. On the embodied

immanent level, they reside in the senses, worshipping perpetually the energy of
consciousness that flows through them from the Emptiness of the transcendental

perceiving consciousness into the Emptiness of the radiance of immanent consciousness

shining as all things.

! Both the Principles of Poison and Passion are the pure vitality of consciousness

(prāṇanamātra), the universal breath that sustains the other breaths in the body. As such,
in their universal form as the resonance of consciousness (nāda), they are essentially one,
although in their specific form they differ as the two breaths of exhalation and inhalation.

The yogi should concentrate on the sound of the breath as he unites with his consort, and
the ṛhythm of her breathing in the Foremost Sacrifice (ādiyāga). If he succeeds in
maintaining an undistracted state of awareness, he will experience the breaths as these two

principles. He will realise that although distinct they operate together. The Principle of

Passion is experienced as a state of plenitude, that is, as the perfect contentment of resting
in one’s own conscious nature without desire for anything else. This is how the sexual act

begins when performed in the spiritual state of consciousness that arises when Kunḍalinī,

CHAPTER THREE

of Passion, the Principle of Poison. Here (in this verse he explains) how this

(view) is consistent. Thus the ‘plenitude of Passion’, and that of the Principle of

Passion also, is the absence of craving for anything else, of repose in oneself
alone. It is the ‘Principle’, that is, the ultimately real nature (of Passion), which

‘is experienced in (sexual) union’. Everybody experiences it directly when (they

experience) the intense arousal (of passion), which is the mutual oneness (and

common sentiment) (sāmarasya) (of the partners engaged in intercourse). This is

the meaning.
The Principle of Poison obscures the innate plenitude of knowledge and
action of the individual soul, that is, the limited perceiver (who identifies with the)

body etc. and is (subject to) ‘the obscuration’ of the limitation (it brings

about). When it ‘falls away’, (the individual soul’s) complete (and perfect)
(pūrṇa) nature emerges, because the division (vibhāga) of subject and object has

fallen away. Then the ‘Nectar’, which is the ‘Principle’ (tattva), namely, the

plane of the expansion (of consciousness) (vikāsadaśā), is ‘experienced in
(sexual) union’. This is the connection (with what was said) previously.

Surely (one may also ask,) what is the cause (nimittam) of the obscuration

of (the soul’s) innate plenitude of knowledge and action? With this doubt in mind,
it is said:

zaṛṝṝ vīPcṁtīṁ JHHITC-ATGYSṀTŪTE: || 2.92, 11
vyāptrī śaktir viṣaṁ yasmād avyāptuś chādayen mahaḥ || 171 II

Poison is an all-pervasive power and so obscures the glory (of the

individual soul) who is not pervasive. (171cd) (171ab)

the universal vitality of the breath, is awake and active within the partners, united by the

common rhythm of their breath. Then the yogi experiences with his partner the Principle
of Poison as an expansion of consciousness, through the falling away of the limited,

conditioned bodily consciousness that obscures the innate plenitude of knowledge and
action, which his and his partner’s universal nature naturally possesses. Thus, freed of the

duality that divides subject and object, he experiences the expanded state (vikāsadaśā) of
consciousness in which it pervades all things, even as all things abide within it as its
universal manifestation. In this way, the infinite radiance of the pervasive power of
universal consciousness engulfs the tiny light of individualized consciousness and fuses it

within itself. Then both partners recognise that: “I am not nor is there anyone else. I am
only the energies (of consciousness). (below, TĀ 29/64).

The innate, unlimited capacity of the individual soul to know and act is obscured by
Māyā, the Supreme Lord’s power of obscuration. Thus ‘Poison’, like Māyā, has two

aspects. One obscures and contracts consciousness, and the other, when the first aspect is
not active, expands and illumines. Whether one or other aspect operates depends on the
mindfulness of the yogi and, as always, Lord Siva’s grace. This is how Māyā functions

generally. It obscures the worldly minded and illumines those who attend to Lord Śiva by
dedicating their thoughts to Him, thereby purifying them. Cf. below, 4/11 1cd-113ab.
The Nectar (amrta) which bestows life, health and ultimately immortality is the
expansion of consciousness one experiences when in the plenitude of the Principle of
Passion, and the individual subjectivity is freed of the limitations of dualistic thought
constructs in the course of exhalation. It thus develops into the realisation of the
perpetually expanding state of consciousness (vikāsa), of the pervasion of the Principle of
Poison, experienced in the course of inhalation.

TANTRĀLOKA

The ‘power’ of the Supreme Goddess is called Māyā, whose nature is to

conceal (the individual soul’s) own (true) nature. The ‘glory° (of the individual

soul) is (its) innate plenitude of knowledge and action. ‘Poison’ pervades
(everywhere) externally and s0 it can also cover the knowledge and action of the

individual soul who is not pervasive. This is its projection (āropa) here (in this

case).

In this way, it is not only the Principle of Passion or the Principle of
Poison, it is also the Stainless Principle. Thus, he says:

f̄N̄̄ ̄T@GaT || 293 ||
nirañjanaṁ paraṁ dhãma tattvaṁ tasya tu sãñjanam |
kriyāśaktyātmakaṁ viśvam ayaṁ tasmāt sphured yataḥ l|/ 172 ||

Ṭhe Stainless (nirañjana) is the Śupreme Abode, while its priṇciple

(is the powerholder) who is ‘stained’ (sāñjana) (that is, made manifest). This
is because it is from that that the cosmic nature (viśvamaya), which is the
power of action, manifests. (172) (171cd-172ab)

172 (I7lcd-172ab) is Abhinava’s own explanation. Thus, instead of quoting a

scriptural source, Jayaratha quotes Abhinava to explain Abhinava.

The plenitude of the Principle of Passion, which, as we have seen, is the power of the

universal will (icchāśakti) in which all things are contained in the state of withdrawal

(nimesa), develops spontaneously into the power of knowledge (jñāna), which is the state

of expansion (unmeṣa) (symbolized by the letter) of the Principle of Poison. These two

aspects of the pulse of consciousness (spanda) fuse in the universal activity of the power

of action (kriyāśakti) through the mediation of the Absolute (anuttara) (A), which is its

ground and ultimate nature. We have seen that this state, symbolized by the vowel ‘AU’,
is one in which absolute consciousness presents itself in its clearly evident, universal
activity, as the ever changing and diverse combination of its countless energies that arise
from it and fall back into it like the waves of the sea. In this state, the activities of all the
energies of absolute consciousness fuse into the power of action. The outer manifestation

of these energies is of three basic types, according to whether they are aspects of the
powers of will, knowledge or action. They emerge successively in this order out of their

repose in consciousness, and become active, assuming as their support the energies which

precede them. Thus, the power of action contains within itself the other two powers and so

is three-fold. As such, it is called the Trident of Power, on the three prongs of which are

seated the Supreme power (parā) of unity (abheda), the Middle power (paraparā) of
unity-in-diversity (bhedabheda), and the Lower power (aparā) of diversity (bheda). When

these three energies balance each other out in this way, they do not condition their object.

When the power of the will acts alone, it conditions the object of desire and is itself

apparently limited by it. The same is the case with the powers of knowledge and action

with respect to their objects. In this state, the object of desire does not condition

knowledge or action, the object of knowledge does not condition the will or action, and

similarly, the object of action does not affect either knowledge or the will. Thus, the
consciousness of the yogi who penetrates into this triad, becoming one with it, is
unconditioned, and so is pure and stainless (nirañjana). “Añjana’ means a ‘stain’ or

‘colouringʼ, and hence by extension, it denotes manifestation, which seemingly stains or
colours consciousness. Thus ‘nirañjana’ is not only the stainless but also the unmanifest.

CHAPTER THREE

The fully unfolded object of desire emerges in an external form, and so
‘the cosmic nature consisting of the power of action’ (manifests). The

‘Supreme Abode’ that fills (all things with life) is the radiant energy (tejas) of the

Moon, which is the letter S. That is the Stainless.

‘However, when this triad manifests as a unity, it is not conditioned by
any (desired aim, knowledge or action), because they cancel each other out.

Thus, in accord with the view stated previously, (the Stainless) is
not conditioned by anything. This is the meaning. Again, the ‘principle’ of the
Abode of the Moon, which is the power of action, is the place of rest, which is the

powerholder, who is the Supreme Light (of consciousness). That is ‘stained’.

“This is because it is the possessor.of power who is ‘stained’ʼ (añjyate)
(that is, made manifest), while (His) power is (the cause of all manifestation, and

s0) is never (‘stained’, that is, made manifest,) by anything.

In accord with this previously established view, it is correct (that the

powerholder is the one who is made manifest) by the agency of (His) power,

which is the means by which (all things are) made manifest; thus ‘this is because
it is from that that (the cosmic nature (viśvamaya), which is the power of
action) manifestsʼ, that is, from the presence (sakāśāt) of power. In accord with
the teaching that ‘Śiva’s power (śaivī) is said here (in the scriptures) to be (His)

mouth, His own power makes (him) manifest (as all things). This is the
meaning.

Surely (one may ask,) the three Principles of Passion and the rest are the
three powers of will (knowledge and action); how then is it that this nature is
ascribed just to (the Stainless, which is) the Seed of Nectar (amṛtabīja) alone?
With this doubt in mind, he first defines the difference (vibhāga) (between) them,

and (then) firmly (establishes) that they are undivided.

But how can this energy be said to be unmanifest if it operates throughout the manifest

order, which is the sphere of the play of the energies of consciousness? The answer,
Abhinava says, is that the energies make their objects and possessor manifest, not
themselves. The activity of the will, for example, is made evident by the subject as the one

who desires and also by the object of the will that is perceived to be desirable. Thus, this
energy which, as the activity of all the energies together, is not conditioned by anything
nor conditions anything, is unmanifest. It is experienced through the fusion of Passion and

Poison, that is, the two breaths, the powers of the will and knowledge, in the Heart, the

centre of consciousness. There they form the Seed of the Heart – the syllable SAUḤ – that

represents the forces and processes that operate in and through the act of creation (s

In this way the yogi is empowered by the universally creative energy of consciousness that

contains all things within itself.
Above, 3/107cd-108ab.

Above, 3/106ab.

VBh 20d; also quoted in TĀv ad 1/1, 1/73 (74), 3/194 (3/193cd-194ab), 6/252ab

(251cd) and 29/273cd-274ab. The word ‘ṇukham’ can means either ‘face’ or ‘mouth’. As
the ‘mouth’, it is that through which Siva teaches the liberating knowledge of the

scriptures, and s0, as Śakti, it is the foundation of every means to enter and become one
with Him. It is also the channel through which His power in multiple forms flows out of

him and operates in the sphere of manifeṣtation.

TANTRĀLOKA

fraī ḷīāaā 3ad || q93 11
icchā kāmo viṣaṁ jñānaṁ kriyā devī nirañjanam |
etattrayasamāveśaḥ śivo bhairava ucyate || 173 ||

Passion is the will, Poison is knowledge, and the goddess° of action is

the Stainless. Penetration (samāveśa) into this triad is said to be Śiva (the
transcendent) and Bhairava (the immanent). (173) (172cd-173ab)

(Śiva is called) Bhairava because (He is) full (and all-inclusive), as He is

(immanent as) all things (viśvamaya), and so it was said that: ‘that alone is the

supreme Brahman

Having explained that by the way, he (now gets back) to the main subject
and says:

atra rūḍhiṁ sadā kuryād iti no guravo jaguḥ |

viṣatattve sampraviśya na bhūtaṁ na viṣaṁ na ca || 174 ||
grahaḥ kevala evāham iti bhāvanayā sphuret |

Our teachers°" have said that one should always establish (oneself)

here (in the pervasive Principle of Poison). Once having entered into the
Principle of Poison, no ghost, poison or (malevolent) planet (can harm one for
whom) all that manifests by virtue of (his) meditation (bhāvanā) is ‘I alone’
(exist). (174-175ab) (173cd-174)
‘One should always establish (oneself)ʼ, that is, enter ‘here’, into the
pervasive nature which is the Principle of Poison. What happens by being

established here? With this question in mind, he says: ‘in the Principle of
Poisonʼ etc. A ‘ghost’ may be a Yakṣa or the like. (The influence of a
malevolent) ‘planet’ is the (mistaken) notion on the part of the limited perceiver

It is tempting to emend devī ‘goddess’ to devi ‘O goddessʼ, were it not that this quarter

verse is quoted above ad 3/107cd-108ab with this same reading.

Above, 3/168ab (167cd).

’ Abhinava may well be alluding here to Śambhunātha, referring to him with an
honorific plural. If so, he taught Abhinava the Kulagahvara also. Jayaratha supplies the
passage in the Kulagahvara to which Abhinava alludes. He does not do so for the previous
verses (i.e. 3/171cd-173 (171-173ab)), indicating clearly that they are Abhinava’s own.

CHAPTER THREE

that that which is not the Self (i.e. the body etc.) is the Self. This is the intended

(meaning). Now, one who, on the contrary, has penetrated into the supreme

subject, who is the pervasive nature (of the Principle of Poison), by the practice of

meditation (bhāvanā), the state of supreme nonduality emerges as (pure) ‘T
(consciousness,) by virtue of which nothing separate (from him that can) cause

(some) calamity (upadrava) (to befall him) may manifest. This is the sense (of
this verse). As is said in the venerable Kulagahvara:

‘If one perceives (the reality which is) void, devoid of support, free of

meditation (dhyāna) and concentration (dhāraṇa), sustaining all the (energies of
the) letters (in the manifest state) and peaceful, devoid of all the letters (in the
unmanifest state), just consciousness alone, pure, the antidote to poison, (and

perceives) neither ‘this’ nor ‘I’ (but everything) only as (pure) Being alone
(bhāvamātreṇa), (then) no poison, no (malevolent) planet, no sin, no Yakṣa,

Rakṣasa, Piśāca or other (demons can do any harm).”

Surely (one may ask,) it was said previously that (once) the will (icchā) is

stained by the object of desire no subsequent disturbance is possible, and so by

such statements as ‘this is not the seed of anything’, (this state of the will) was

termed ‘neuter” (as the forms of reflective awareness represented by the vowels ṛ
RṚ 1 Ḷ). (However,) further ahead here (we read that): ‘that (same power of the

will) said to be sullied by the object of knowledge etc.’”" and ‘(one type of the

will) obtains (its) object fleetingly (sśīghra) . . . and ‘(the form of the will) is

coloured by an object of desire (iṣṭavya).’ Such statements also declare that a
subsequent disturbance (that arises) from the neuter letters does exist, so how can
one establish (and consistently maintain) that they are neuter (and hence cannot

give rise to subsequent developments), as stated previously?°” He resolves this
doubt by saying:

The Neuter Vowels r R 1L and the Sibilants

sīāīṁh d T’gaṁ || 2.94 ||

The word for planet is ‘graha’, which literally means ‘laying hold of’, because planets

do that to people under their influence. The same word is used for the kind of grasping
which is the assumption of a mistaken notion.

” Above, 3/81b (81d).

Above, 3/155d (I55b).
Above, 3/155c (155a).

3/163b (162d).

The question is very cogent. As Jayaratha notes, ṛ and l, associated with the will in

various ways, are involved in the production of the palatals and cerebrals (ad 3/151153ab), as are the semivowels L and R (3/154cd-157ab (154-156)). Essentially, Abhinava

responds by saying that the ‘neuter” letters are forms, aspects or ‘bodies’ of the will. This
is what is operating, instigating new forms, not the forms of reflective awareness
represented by the ‘neuter lettersʼ. Rather, they represent the aspects which sully the will

with objectivity. This does influence the products to which it gives rise, but they do not
generate them. They are all products of the will.

TANTRĀLOKA

fkr aai || g%' 1||
JTTI= JTTTĀTTS|
IĪJTĪ TGṬJ Tq I

nanv atra ṣaṇṭhavarṇebhyo janmoktaṁ tena ṣaṇṭhatā l| 175 ||
kathaṁṅ syād iti ced brūmo nātra ṣaṇṭhasya sotṛtā !

tathāhi tatragā yāsāv icchāśaktir udīritā || 176 ||

saiva sūte ṣvakartavyam antaḥsthaṁ sveṣṭarūpakam |
yat tv atra rūṣaṇāhetur eṣitavyaṁ sthitaṁ tataḥ l| 177 I|

bhāgān na prasavas tajjaṁ kāluṣyaṁ tadvapuś ca tat |

“But surely,” (someone may object,) “you have said here that
(other letters) are born from the neuter vowels (r R I L), so in what sense are
they sterile?” If (you were to ask this,) we say (in response) that the neuter
(letters themselves) have no power to give birth (to any other letters). In fact,

the aforementioned power of the will, present there (in association with these

vowels) (tatragā), generates its own product, which is its own desired object
(sveṣṭa) present within it. The object of desire (R) (eṣitavya), which sullies (the
will) and resides here (within it), is not the aspect from which (any other
form of consciousness) is generated. (On the contrary,) the impurity (kāluṣya)

which is the body of that (will) is generated from that. (175cd-178ab) (175177)

‘You have said that (other letters) are born . . ’’, that is, the cerebrals
etc. (This is the question): ‘We say that the sterile vowels (themselves) have no

power to give birth (to any other letters).” This is the reply: He establishes this
(view) by reasoned argument (by saying,) ‘in fact’ etc., for this reason, ‘the

aforementioned power of the will’ present in the ‘neuter” (letters) makes its own

product, namely, the cerebrals etc., externally manifest according to its own

fixed (and determined) form, although it is ‘present within’, at one with itself.
The object of desire, which (may be) stable or fleeting and is present (in the will),
is the instrumental cause of the staining (process) (rūṣaṇā) that generates ‘the

impurity (which sullies the will). Its purpose is completed with this much alone.
It is not capable of giving rise to any other product (kārya). Thīs is the overall
šsēnse.

And that impurity, or (one could also say) its instrumental cause, the
object of desire, is the ‘body” of this will. The meaning is that it is one with it.
Nothing else could possibly exist that is separate (and different) (aririkta) from the
will, which is one with the Light (of consciousness). This is (the overall) sense.

Thuṣ, in reality, it is the will which is predominant and so gives rise to each one of
its own products. So it has been rightly said that (the will) ‘generates (its own
product)ʼ.

See above, 3/|54cd-158ab (154-157).

Ṛead kāryaṁ for kārya.

CHAPTER THREE

Surely (one may ask,) as everything is of the nature of all things (in the
inner states of emanation), is not the seed state of the neuter (letters) denied in this
way also? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3TTGTYTA]
3TF TṬRTĀT fṜg: II 79¢ 1|
3 eTFTTĀĪṬAĪT-TTTTĀĪTa’:|
jñeyārūṣaṇayā yuktaṁ samudāyātmakaṁ viduḥ || 178 |I
saṇṭhaṁ kṣobhakatākṣobhadhāmatvābhāvayogataḥ ḷ
(The wise) consider the (so-called) neuter (sterile letters) to be a single
composite unit (sannudāya) (consisting of the will) in association with the

colouring of objectivity, insofar as it neither arouses (other forms of reflective

awareness) nor is it the locus of arousal (because this group is not considered

to consist of either vowels or consonants). (178cd-179ab) (178)

‘(The wise) consider a neuter (letter) to be a combination (melanā) of
the will and the object of desire, and so here (in this case), it does not arouse
(other forms of reflective awareness) and is not the ground of arousal. Thus, even
if the will (by itself) alone gives rise to another state of arousal (that generates
other forms of reflective awareness), it does not entail the denial (that the neuter
letters) are seeds (i.e. vowels). This is because the neuter (letters) are a single

composite unit (and so they are not produced individually from one another in a
series). So he rightly has said: ‘the neuter (letters themselves) have no power to

give birth (to any other letters).”'
Having discussed this (matter) by the way, he goes on to talk about the
main subject:

TGTHṬŪFT TTSTTṬĀTGTTTI] II29, 1I

3fā #ri aī] TTITRGĪT-T|

etadvarṇacatuṣkasya svoṣmaṇābhāsanāvaśāt || 179 ||
ūṣmeti kathitaṁ nāma bhairaveṇāmalātmanā |

Bhairava, the immaculate, has called this group of four letters (Ś, $, S
and H) ʻhot’ (iṣman), because it is made manifest by its own (inner) heat.

(179cd-180ab) (179)

See above, 3/77cd-81ab (78-81).

The ‘neuter’ letters do not give rise directly to other forms of reflective awareness.
Further developments that do occur are due to the will, which is their underlying nature.

Even so, the neuter letters are called ‘seeds’, as are the other vowels, because collectively
they constitute a special group of vowels, and s0, as such, retain the nature of vowels.

The three sibilants and the lettrr H are called ‘āṣman’ by Sanskrit phonologists. The
term literally means ‘hot’, which Abhinava explains in this context in this way. See above,

3/163-165 (162cd-165ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

The group of four (letters) includes the letter H (because, like the other

three,) it is born from the Absolute (anuttara) (directly), as was stated before

(from a different) perspective (bhaṅgyā), namely, that it is the energy of the
Absolute which is emission (visarga). This (group of four letters) is the

‘condensed’ (gross) form (of the Absolute – A). Thus, it shares the same locus (of
articulation) with the Absolute (A) (and is made manifest) ‘by its own (inner)
heatʼ, that is, by its own radiant energy (tejas), which is the freedom (of

consciousness). Its manifestation does not depend on the wilE or the Absolute,

as do other forms of reflective awareness; rather (this group manifests) by (the
power of) its own excellence (māḥhātmya) alone. This is the sense (of this
statement). Although it was said (before) that the gutturals and the other (classes

of consonants) are born from the Absolute and the rest one by one (progressively),
even then this takes place by the application of other energies (apart from) that (of
the Absolute). Thus, it has rightly been said that (this group of four letters is in a
class of its own), ‘because it is made manifest by its own (inner) heat.’

The Fiftieth Letter, KS
The letters from K to H are not only denoted separately (as various types),
such as ‘consonants” (sparśa) (or semivowels) etc.; they are also (defined
collectively), not separately. So he says:

kādi-hāntam īdḍaṁḥ prāhuḥ kṣobhādhāratayā budhāḥ l 180 1

The wise call this (series of consonants that ranges) K to H the
ground of arousal. (180cd) (180ab)
(The series of consonants is called) ‘the ground of arousal’, that is, the

matrix (yoni). As is said:

‘(The vowels are considered to be seed, whereas) the matrix is considered

to be (formed by the consonants) beginning with K.’

Further arousal (of other forms of reflective awareness) does not only
come about when the seeds (that is, the vowels) are united with other seeds in the
manner described, it also (occurs) when a matrix unites with another matrix. Thus,
he says:

yonirūpeṇa tasyāpi yoge kṣobhāntaraṁ vrajet |

See above, 3/142cd-143ab (142) and commentary.
Read icchāyā for icchā yā.

MV 3/11a. MV 3/10cd-11a is quoted above in TĀv ad 3/80cd-81ab (81).

CHAPTER THREE

Further arousal takes place when one matrix (yoni) unites with
another (to form a conjunct consonant). The fiftieth letter (KS), for example,

(is formed in this way). (181ab) (180cd)

The matrix consists of (the consonants) beginning with K. When it
‘unites with another” (matrix), ‘further arousal’ takes place. The peak syllable

(kūṭabīja) called KS, which is the letter that serves to complete the fifty letters of
the alphabet (mātṛkā), serves as an example of a further arousal (that takes place

by the union of two consonants). It is formed from the letters K and S, that are

impelled (and vitalized – anuprāṇita) by the Absolute and Emission, and, located

at the beginning and end (of the series of consonants), encompass (all the other

consonants that represent objective reality), and so all the energy (of the letters)

(mātṛkā) and its essential nature is revealed by it all at once simultaneously.

That has been said by the venerable Kṣemarāja:

‘all that up to the end of the energy of the letters (mātṛkā) has been

revealed at the end (of the series of letters) by the peak seed syllable (KS), which

KṢ represents the conjunction of all the consonants. As such, it symbolizes the
pervasive presence of the deity of consciousness that contains all things within itself (see

below 6/237ab (236cd)). Exterally, it is the whole of objective reality manifesting
simultaneously as a united whole. Internally, it is vitalized by the union of the Absolute

and its power of emission, that contains within itself all that it emits and the power
through which it is emitted. We have seen that the consonant series is understood to be a
‘condensation’ of the vowels. Moreover, all the vowels ultimately derive from A, the

Absolute, which is the first of this series, which by the power of Emission (visarga) at the
end of it, is emitted into the matrix of the consonants to thereby form and unite with them.
So, their union is ‘the essence of the consonant series encompassed by KS, in which they

are all manifest fully and simultaneously. Thus, their inner emission held within
consciousness fills it and, intensely aroused by it, is on to the brink of overflowing when
the inner emission is finally ‘released’ externally by the union of its energies. Such is the
role of this state of reflective awareness in Kaula ritual also. KṢ is formed from two

consonants, that is, matrices (yoni), and so is, as it were, more intensely female. As such it
represents the female Kaula partner (ḍitti). At the corporeal, microcosmic level, the inner

intimacy of consciousness is represented by the Middle Abode of suṣumnnā, which expands
pouring forth the flow of Unstruck Sound, with which it resounds, into outer immanent
manifestation and up into the transcendental plenitude of Anuttara. Thus, Abhinava writes:
‘AII the (forms of) awareness (vedanā) are in reality, (supreme) ‘’
consciousness, and, ultimately real, consist of the reflective awareness (of pure

consciousness). Thus, it is established that the Supreme Lord, who is full of the power of
bliss, (abides), emitting (vaman lit. ‘vomiting’) and devouring all that is present within
Him, is emission (visarga) itself. When (this emission) condenses, it becomes the letter H
and then finally KS, by the wonderful variety of endless unions (of all the letters). The
letter (KS) appropriately (represents the state of) arousal of (the energies of) the
phonemes, formed by union with the matrix of Śakti, who is the (Kaula) consort. By
resting (in the reverse process) in the state (dasā) of Unstruck Sound (anāhatanāda) (H), it
becomes emission (AH), within which all the varied forms of existence reside,
overflowing, in the central abode of suṣumnā. Released, (emission) penetrates into the
Stable Abode (dhruvadhāman), which is the plane of the Absolute (anuttara) (A). PTy p.

TANTRĀLOKA

is the essence of the union of the Absolute and Emission, by encompassing (all

the consonants) with the letters K and S."

Surely (one may ask,) it was said (before that): ‘this (universe), which is

the object of knowledge, is clearly manifest (sphua) up to the twenty-fifth

principle. Thus the twenty-five letters beginning with K and ending with M

have been taught to be objectivity, and so as such, their sole nature is duality
(bheda). So how is the nature of the two groups of four (letters) that follow after
(these ones)? Thus, with this doubt in mind, he says:

The Two Tetrads Y,R, L, V and Ś, S, S, KS

hrar

ŪTaTTaTT #T |I 2¢3 1|

tannidarśanayogena pa-ncāśattamavarṇatā || 181 ||

pañcaviṁśakasaṁjñeyaprāgvadbhūmiṣusaṁsthitam |
catuṣkaṁ ca catuṣkaṁ ca bhedābhedagataṁ kramāt || 182 I

ādyaṁ catuṣkaṁ saṁvitter bhedasaṁdhānakovidam |

bhedasyābhedarūḍhyekahetur anyac catuṣṭayam || 183 |I

These two tetrads (Y, R, L, V and Ś, S, S, KS), (which come after) the
previously well-established plane of the group of twenty-five (consonants
from K to M), correspond successively to duality (bheda) and nonduality

(abheda). The first tetrad (represents) the capacity of consciousness
(saṁvitti) to contemplate (and conjoin) (saṁīdhāna) duality. The other tetrad

(represents) the one caused by virtue of which duality (bheda) is firmly
established in nonduality (abheda). (181cd-183) (181-183ab)
‘Duality’ (bheda) is (all that is) separated from the presence of

consciousness. This is the meaning. Thus (the first group of four ~ Y, R, L, and V)

is said to be (the phonemic form of) the gross elements Air and the rest.

! This reference is drawn from Kṣemarāja's commentary on ŚSū 2/7 (‘the awakening of

the Wheel of Mātṛkā’), where he briefly describes the progressive development of the

letters of the alphabet. Māṭṛkā -– the Little Mother – is the Goddess of the alphabet, the
fifty letters of which constitute her body. See below, 3/198-200ab.
Above, 3/153cd (153ab).
Literally ‘division’ ~ bheda and ‘the absence of division’ – abheda. The ‘division’
between one thing and another is the relative distinction between them, i.e. one is not the
other nor are they anything else. So ‘bheda’ can also mean ‘differentiation’ as well as

‘duality’. The privative prefix ‘a’ of ‘abheda’ means that it is not ‘bheda’. Positively
stated it means ‘oneness’ as absence of difference, separation, differentiation, and duality.

CHAPTER THREE

‘Nondualityʼ (is the state of the other group of four). This is because its sole
nature is the radiant energy (tejas) of the power (śakti) (of consciousness) as it
arises from the power of the will.

It has been established just now that the group of letters from K to H is

vitalized (anuprāṇita) by the vowels. In order to explain this, he says:

dāá aṀa G |

Tzaxī] āīā.: ṀṀ-; 1| 2. |
itthaṁ yad varṇajãtaṁ tat sarvaṁ svaramayaṁ purã |
vyaktiyogād vyañjanaṁ tatsvaraprāṇaṁ yataḥ kila || 184 1|
In this way, before it becomes manifest, that whole group of letters
consists of the vowels. Therefore, a consonant (vyañjana) (is so called)
because these vowels are its very life breath, (as it is their manifestation)

(yyañjana). (184) (183cd-184ab)

‘In this wayʼ, that is, in accord with the principle (niti) stated previously,

‘that whole group of letters’, which has been described, ‘before’ it emerges (out

of consciousness) ‘consists of the vowels’. In its (inner) form it is present within

the vowels as a potency (śakti),”" otherwise it could not manifest in this (outer)

form by the conjunction and disjunction of this and that (vowel in the manner
described). This is the overall sense.
Thus, that group of letters is made manifest (vyajyate) (by the vowels) as
an externally manifest reality (sat), and so (this group of consonants) is called

vyañjana (‘manifestation’). (The consonant series and the corresponding twenty-

five principles it represents) is not a novel product (utpādya) because it exists
previously also as the vowels. (A question arises at this point): is this reality

(tattva) such because of the proximity of the agent of manifestation (vyañjaka)

(that is, the vowels) and that which is to be made manifest (vyaṅgya) (namely, the

consonants) and not otherwise? With this doubt in mind, he says (that this is s0)

‘because these vowels are its very life breath’. This group of manifest

(abhivyakta) letters is vitalized (anuprāṇita) by the vowels; otherwise, devoid of

vowels (anacka), it could not be uttered.”
And so, in this way, it is said that ‘the vowels are the root cause of all the
lettersʼ. He says that (in the following verse):

The Group of Six Vowels A, Ā, I, Ī, U and Ū

=JTT]
T TT J TJGT. ŪTYTT: || q¢4 ||
Vowels make consonants manifest; they cannot be pronounced without them.
Áccordingly, consonants are called ‘vyañjana’,which literally means ‘manifestation’.

! Read evāntaḥśaktyātmanā for evāntaḥ śaktyātmanā.

See note 3,543.

TANTRĀLOKA

svarāṇāṁ ṣaṭkam eveha mūlaṁ syād varṇasaṁtatau |
saḍ devatās tu tā eva ye mukhyāḥ sūryaraśmayaḥ || 185 ||

Just the group of six vowels (A, Ā, I, , U and Ū) alone is the root (of

all the others) here in the series of letters. They are six deities who
correspond to the principal rays of the Sun. (185) (184cd-185ab)
The ‘group of six’ consists of the (vowels) beginning with A and ending
with Ū. The word ‘just’ serves to distinguish them from the other vowels. The
sense is that the form of those (other vowels) also is only the unfolding
(development) of this (group of six vowels). It is said in this way that these six
(vowels) are the light (of consciousness), which serves to make the other vowels
manifest. Thus, because their nature is Light, it is also said elsewhere with
reference to them that ‘the rays of the Sun are the six deities’. Accordingly, he
says: ‘they are six deities . . .” etc. As is said:
‘(The six goddesses) are Dahanī (Burner), Pacanī (Cooker), Dhūmrā

(Smokey), Karṣiṇī (Attractive), Varṣiṇī (Rainy), and Rasā (Tasty).”

They are the ‘principal’ (rays of the Sun) because the powers to burn and
the rest (embodied in these six) are established in the Light (of consciousness)

alone. As is said:

‘Here, only six vowels are said to be the principal ones and the root cause
(of the others). Their form is Light and so should be known to be‘the rays of the
Sun.
It is possible for (the vowels) to possess a lunar form also, not just a solar

one. Thus, he says:

TĪRTṬ ŪJĪĪHTT-TTṢRTI
āa ; |
srāīsā ḍiīrraá ṇē īza aT1]: || 2¢8. ||
saurāṇām eva raśmīnām antaś cāndrakalā yataḥ |

ato ʻtra dīrghatritayaṁ sphuṭaṁ cãndramasaṁ vapuḥ || 186 ||

Insofar as the digits of the Moon reside (by reflection) within the rays

of the Sun, thus the three long vowels here (in this context) have an evidently

lunar nature (vapus).” (186) (185-186ab)

In his commentary on the Parātīśikā, Abhinava explains: ‘That (series)is the Supreme
Lord Bhairava’s two powers (i.e. the groups of short lunar vowels – A, 1, U, and the long
solar vowels < Ā, I, Ū). The function of the firstis to fill its own nature and so it is ‘full’.

It is never separate from the energy of the Moon, and so as it abides together with (saha)
Umā (Śiva’s consort, which is that energy), its nature is Soma (the Moon). This (creative)
activity (kalanā), called ‘will’ (icchā), is the state of repose in its own inherent bliss
(svānandaviśrānti), and is called the Great Creation (which is consciousness as the source
of all creations in the past, present and future). . . . The second (energy) is (on the

CHAPTER THREE

This has already been established before and so there is no need to do so

again here.

Surely (one may ask,) all existing things are different from one another,

so how can the digits of the Moon arise within the rays of the Sun? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

Tzgy ar-aāī īrai SŪrRḠJ̄ āTTT |

rax 7 fē īaā a aqmṝ fk a- |

candraś ca nāma naivānyo bhogyaṁ bhoktuś ca nāparam ḷ
bhoktaiva bhogyabhāvena dvaividhyāt saṁvyavasthitaḥ || 187 1|

ghaṭasya na hi bhogyatvaṁ svaṁ vapur mātrṛgaṁ hi tat |
ato mātari yā rūḍhiḥ sāsya bhogyatvam ucyate || 188 II

The Moon is not different (from the Sun), and the object of
enjoyment is not different from the enjoyer. It is the enjoyer alone who
abides as the object of enjoyment (bhogyabhāva), because he is two-fold (as
both the enjoyer and enjoyed). It is not the intrinsic nature of a jar to be an

object of enjoyment, (its objectivity is) present in the subject (upon which it

depends).” (The jar’s) objectivity is thus said to be its resting within the
subject. (187-188) (186cd-188ab)

‘The Moon is not different’ from the Sun, because it is its object of
enjoyment. The object of enjoyment is said to be the object of knowledge
(prameya). The intended sense is that the object of knowledge is subordinate to
the means of knowledge, and so is not separate (atirikta) from it. And that object
of enjoyment, which is such, should also not be separate from the enjoyer,

because in fact all entities rest within the experiencing subject, and so the enjoyer
contrary) ‘empty’ (riktā), because it IS (engaged in) expelling (recana) the totality of
(outer) phenomena, which is its own nature, and so by expelling that, it is ‘thin’ (kṛśā). Its
function is to cause the sphere of phenomena to flow forth (from consciousness)
(prasaraṇa) and illuminate (prakāśana) (it). It is the Sun, and its nature is the desire to
withdraw the (immanent) consciousness of Kula, which is its own nature. (As such,) it is

the energy of the Great Destruction (mahāsaṁhāraśakti), called knowledge.
Again, the activity of creation and destruction may be reversed in relation to so-

called phenomenal being (bhāvākhyaṁ rūpaṁ) or our own consciousness, as each one of
them possesses within itself the nature of the Sun as well as that of the Moon, (as can be

ascertained) by the close examination (paryālocanā) of (their) flow (prasara) and
(tranquil) nature prior to that.’ PTv p.170

Cf. Sp.Ka 29: bhoktaiva bhogyabhāvena sadā sarvatra saṁsthitaḥ `It is the enjoyer
alone who always and everywhere abides as the object of enjoyment.”

The jar becomes an object of knowledge only when a perceiver perceives it. Thus
‘objectivity, in the sense of being an object of cognition, is derived from the subject. It is
not an intrinsic quality of the object.

TANTRĀLOKA

himself manifests in both forms. This is the point. Thus, he says: ‘it is the enjoyer
alone who abides as the object of enjoyment’ and so on.

Surely (one may ask,) as they are contrary (to one another), how can the
object of enjoyment and the enjoyer be one? With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘it
is not the intrinsic nature of a jar to be an object of enjoyment’ and so on. (An
object) such as a jar does not (in itself) possess the status of an object of
knowledge; (objective) perceptibility (jñeyatā) is not its own (intrinsic) attribute.
If that were to be so (that is, if perceptibility were to be a property of the object),
its (perceptibility would be the same) for all without distinction, and so everybody

would be omniscient. Therefore, (perceptibility) is an attribute of the perceiver,

because it is by virtue of the arising of his knowledge of the nature (of the object)

that (its) special (atiśaya) (specific nature) is perceived.”” Thus, it is said that the

repose of the jar etc. within the perceiver is its status as an object of knowledge.”
As is said: ‘the object of enjoyment is not different from the enjoyer’.

He now applies this (insight) to the subject in hand.

JTṬ TTTYJTTHTNĪĒTaa|

dā ũr̄aṁsēīteā a-I 11 z¢2 11
anuttaraṁ parāmṛśyaparāmarśakabhāvataḥ |

saṅghaṭṭarūpatāṁ prāptaṁ bhogyam icchādikaṁ tathā || 189 I|
When the Absolute (A) has assumed the form of a couple in union
(saṁghaṭṭa) by virtue of its (two-fold) state as (both) the object of awareness
and the subject who reflects upon it, (it becomes) an object of enjoyment
(that is, Bliss, Ā). The same is the case with the will (I) and the other

(vowels). (189) (188cd-189ab)

If perceptibility were to be an intrinsic attribute of the object, it would be perceived by

every perceiver at all times. Thus, it must be a quality of the subject, because it is by virtue
of the arising of the knowledge of the nature of the object in the subject that it is
perceived. This is why objectivity is said to be the repose of the external object of

knowledge within the knower.

In other words, the objectivity of an entity exists by virtue of its relation to the

subjectivity of the subject. The object perceived by the subject ‘rests’ in it, in the sense
that it is known within the subject. The perceiver is not just ‘within’ the body or mind. The
subject is the expanse of consciousness that lights up as all that manifests within it and is

known to it. The ‘enjoyer is the same consciousness experienced as an individual

perceiver who identifies with a particular body and mind. Despite this mistaken

identification, consciousness remains pervasively present as the subject that perceives

everything within its expanse, at one with itself. An entity that is totally independent of

consciousness can never be an object of knowledge. To be an object of knowledge, it must
be related to the perceiving consciousness, and that can only be possible if it shares a
common nature with consciousness. Thus, at the level of the ‘enjoyerʼ, i.e. the individual
perceiver, consciousness has two aspects ~ the enjoyer and the object of enjoyment.

According to basic rules of phonemic combination, when a simple short vowel, that is,

A, Iand U, comes in contact with another short vowel of the same kind, they fuse to form

the equivalent long vowel. Thus A + A = Ā, I + I

=T and U + U = Ū. Theṣe vowels, which

also belong to the vowel series, are here understood to represent their corresponding forms

CHAPTER THREE
The Absolute, characterized as (A), the first letter (of the alphabet),is the

supreme nature. Once it has manifested within itself the state of the enjoyer and

the object of enjoyment and ‘has assumed the form of a couple in union
(saṁghaṭṭa), because (the two) are mutually intent on one another, it is said to be
‘the object of enjoyment’. Otherwise, there would neither be subjectivity
(bhoktṛtva) nor objectivity (bhogyatva), because they depend on one another.
Thus, by the union of two letter As, objectivity, characterized as the letter Ā,
arises. This is the meaning.

Undertaking to talk about the (nature of the) object of enjoyment here (in

this context), it is principally discussed in terms of that (Anuttara). When the Will
(I) and Expansion (U) also attain the form of a couple in union (sarṁghaṭṭa) within
themselves in the same way as the enjoyer and the object of enjoyment, they
assume the nature of the object of enjoyment as Sovereignty (aiṣaṇa) (I) and

Decrease (ūnatā) (Ū), (respectively).® Accordingly, it was well said (before)

that: ‘thus the three long vowels here (in this context) have an evidently lunar

nature (vapus)."
Surely (one may ask,) let the object of enjoyment be such, there is nothing

wrong in that. However, if the enjoyer has many forms, that would undermine
(your) nondual (view of reality). Does this not refute your own philosophy? With
this doubt in mind, he explains that the status of will etc. is as the object of
enjoyment, certainly not as the enjoyer.

TT̄TTIJETĪ
JĪSGṀI T #TĪ I| 280 ||
anuttarānandabhuvām icchādye bhogyatāṁ gate |
saṁdhyakṣarãṇãm udayo bhoktrrūpaṁ ca kathyate || 190 |I

The emergence of the diphthongs, which is said to be the enjoyer,
takes place when the will and the rest become objects of enjoyment of the
states of the Absolute (A) and Bliss (Ā). (190) (189cd-190ab)
of reflective awareness, which are ‘doubled’ as the couple, which is the unity within
consciousness of both subjective and objective aspects of the Absolute, Will and

Expansion of the power of knowledge as Bliss, Sovereignty and Decrease, respectively.

The presence of objectivity in this way explains why these vowels are represented by the
Moon. The Moon is the symbol of objectivity because it ‘shines’ by the light of the means
of knowledge (for example the senses), just as the moon shines by the reflected light of the

sun.

The noun ‘anuttara’ is masculine. In this case, Jayaratha takes ‘anuttara’ to be an

adjective, agreeing with the neuter ‘rīpam’ – ‘formʼ or ‘nature’. Thus ‘anuttara’ here

Imeans ‘the most excellent’, or, as Jayaratha glosses, ‘supreme’ nature.
“ The object of enjoyment of Anuttara (A)is Bliss (Ā), that of the Will (I), Sovereignty
(I), and -+that of Expansion (i.e. Knowledge) (U), Decrease (Ū).

l Above, 3/186cd (186ab).

“2 Ṭhe diphthongs are the vowels AI and AU. They are formed from E and 0 by adding
the letter A or Ā. Similarly, E and O are formed from I and U by adding A (not Ā, because
the result would be AI and AU). We have seen that A and Ā (the Absolute and Bliss), the
Light of consciousness and its reflective awareness as ‘’, are a kind of pure subjectivity

TANTRĀLOKA

Although the will and the rest are enjoyers with respect to themselves,

even so, with respect to the Absolute, their subjective status®" comes to rest. Then
‘the diphthongs emerge’, that is, they are emanated (from consciousness). One
should understand the use of the plural (when he says), ‘of the states of the
Absolute (A) and Bliss (Ā), to be with respect to (their) manifestations, and this

emergence (of the diphthongs) takes place when subjectivity predominates.
Accordingly, he states that it ‘is said to be the enjoyer’. Thus, here (in this state
of awareness), the will and the rest are in a secondary (subordinate state with

respect to the subjectivity of the Absolute and Bliss).® This then is the difference
between the semivowels and the diphthongs, even though (they both) equally
consist of the union of the will etc. and the Absolute. In the case of the
diphthongs, the Absolute is predominant and the Will etc. are subordinate,
whereas in the case of the semivowels, the Absolute is subordinate and the Will

etc. are predominant. It is established (siddha) in this way that the Absolute itself

is the one, supremely real enjoyer. As it is self-luminous, it is not possible for it to
bear even the faintest trace of objectivity within itself, so how can it be an object
of enjoyment? On the contrary, it is the Will and the rest that are the object of
enjoyment. Thus, it is they that are the object of enjoyment (not the Absolute).
Thus, he says:

3TTTTT-=TIĪ

çaṛlt:āṁ raīa a UāTaā JTṣaṁ || 232 1|
anuttarānandamayo devo bhoktaiva kathyate |
icchādikaṁ bhogyam eva tata evāsya śaktitā || 191 ||
Itis said that the enjoyer himself is (in the highest sense) God, Whose
nature is the Absolute (A) and Bliss (Ā). The will and the rest are just the

object of enjoyment, and so (for that very reason are) His empowered state
(Śaktitā) (also). (191) (190cd-191ab)

Although Bliss (Ā) is the object of enjoyment (bhogya) (of the Absolute),

it is not separate from the Absolute (A), and so is also the enjoyer. In order to
explain this clearly, (he also) mentions Bliss here (in this context). (In the

expression) ‘just the object of enjoyment’, the word ‘just’ serves to (emphasise)
that (the object is) separate (and distinct) (vyavaccheda) from the enjoyer. The
subjectivity (of the powers of the will etc.) with respect to Sovereignty (I) and the
devoid of an object. Their added presence generates the subjectivity of the individual

‘enjoyer’, who acts in the outer world and experiences it. Conversely, this kind of

subjectivity is subordinated to the pure subjectivity of the will and knowledge represented

by the basic vowels, I and U, that come just after the Absolute (A) and Bliss (Ā), and so
are objective with respect to them.

Read bhoktṛtā for bhogyatā.
Read guṇībhūtam for guṇabhūtam.
Ṛead ~bhūtecchādikāni for —bhūtecchākāni.

“° The Lord’s energies constitute His empowered state or states as Śakti (śaktitā). This is
what is meant by objectivity at this level.

CHAPTER THREE

restmentioned (previously) is not ultimately real. (Although) essentially the
object of enjoyment, (they appear to be the enjoyer only) because they are

imagined (kalpana) to be such. And ‘so (for that very reason),’ because (they

are) the object of enjoyment, objectivity itself is the state of the energy (of

consciousness) (śaktitva)." With this same intended (sense) (we read in the
Maṅgalaśāstra): ʻHis powers are the entire universe, while the Great Lord is the
possessor of power.
Sureḷy, in this way (one may ask,) does this not again entail that the

enjoyer and the object of enjoyment are two (separate realities)? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

1| g23 1|
bhogyaṁ bhoktari līnaṁ ced bhoktā tad vastutaḥ sphuṭaḥ |
ataḥ ṣaṇṇāṁ trikaṁ sāraṁ cidiṣyunmeṣaṇātmakam || 192 ||

If the object of enjoyment merges into the enjoyer (as it must in order

to be experienced, and so is not independent of him), it is in reality (nothing
but) the enjoyer which, clearly evident, (alone remains). Thus, the essence of

the six (vowels A, Ā, I, I, U and Ū) is the triad (trika) consisting of

consciousness (A), desire (iṣi) (I) and expansion (U). (192) (191cd-192ab)

Here (in this world), the object of enjoyment cannot acquire even
existence (sartā) within itself without the enjoyer,” so how can it be an object of
enjoyment (at all)? If it (is such because) it rests in the enjoyer, then all that

remains is just its enjoyer. There is no object of enjoyment at all that is separate
from it. Thuṣ, it is the enjoyer himself that unfolds directly (as both), and so the
doctrine of nonduality is not compromised at all. In this way, each of the three
long (vowels), which are the object of enjoyment, rest in (their corresponding)
three short (vowels), which are the enjoyer. Thus, the three short (vowels) (that is,

A – Anuttara, I – the Will and U – Knowledge) are the primary basis (pradhāna)

(of the rest). This is the overall sense (tātparya) (of this verse). He says that

“’ We have seen that the will (I) is the subject with respect to the power of Sovereignty.

But it is the object with respect to the Absolute. Subjectivity and objectivity are such in
relation to each other, neither has any independent existence beyond the notion formed of
consciousness and its contents one with it, as related this way. This does not mean that

they are illusory notions. Although they are not ultimate (pāramarthika), they are not

unreal. Consciousness is a multi-layered reality generating and withdrawing the lower

layers, more or less distant from the ‘ultimately real’ one, which is what they all are. The
oneness of consciousness is maintained because all the forms, layers and dimensions of it,
including subjectivity and objectivity, are its powers.

“ See above, note to TĀv ad 1/11 lcd-112ab (112).

“ Ḷiṭerally: “Here the object of enjoyment does not dare to acquire (even) just existence
within itself without the enjoyer.”

l Concerning the three primary vowels, short and long, see above, note 3,251 to TĀv ad
3/76-77ab (3/76cd-77).

TANTRĀLOKA

(with the words beginning with) ‘thus.. Consciousness' (here means) the

Abṣolute and ‘desire’, the will.
Surely (someone may object that,) because the enjoyer is multiple, the
doctrine of nonduality is compromised in this way also. Thus, is that state itself
not the defect (in this view of nonduality)? With this doubt in mind, he says:
The Triad A IU

tad eva tritayaṁ prāhur bhairavasya paraṁ mahaḥ |

tat trikaṁ parameśasya pūrṇā śaktiḥ pragīyate || 193 II
(The wise) say that that same group of three is Bhairava’s supreme
glory."" That Triad (Trika) is proclaimed to be the Supreme Lord’s power in
all its fullness.
(193) (192cd-193ab)
‘That same group of three’, namely, the Absolute (A), Will (I) and

Expansion (U) mentioned previously, of ‘Bhairava’, (the one) reality which is
full (and complete) because it does not depend on anything else, ‘(the wise) say’

is the ‘supreme’ radiant energy (tejas) of the power that fills the universe, for (it
is said that):

‘Moreover, (the fact that) He possesses many powers amounts to (His

inseparable) union with that (one) power alone.”

In accord with this and other teachings imparted previously, that very

‘Triad’ (Trika) is Being (sar), which is full (all-inclusive) and (compactly
inwardly) united (saṁghaṭṭita). It is the ‘Supreme Lord’s power°, characterized
as (His) freedom (svātantrya), considered everywhere (in this teaching to be the
most excellent), as it is that from which this unfolding (flow) of the universe of
words (vācaka) and (the things they) denote (vācya) (originates). The sense is that

this Triad (Trika) encompasses all things.

! This is exactly the way the freedom of the Light of consciousness, which manifests as

the fifty forms of phonemic reflective awareness, is described. See above, 3/1. This line is
quoted in TĀv ad 33/22-24 and 3/192 (191cd-192ab) is quoted below ad 3/248cd-249.
’” Above, 1/67cd (68cd).
saryākṣepeṇa vartate – literally ‘abides drawing together everything’. Although the
word ‘trika’ can also be used in a non-technical sense simply to mean ‘triad’, the allusion
is to the Trika principle, that is, reality itself. The school is called Trika because the whole
of reality is triadic. It can be explained in all respects with reference to the unity of just

three basic principles, which in one way or another encompass all others. Together they
account for every possibility and level, and represent the all-encompassing plenitude of

the one reality that encompasses the three as the ineffable, inexplicable oneness, which is

understood to be the fourth. See Dyczkowski 1987: 176 for a chart of the major triads and

the fourth transcendent beyond them.

CHAPTER THREE

He says that:

āJTH-TT 1|2X% 1|
tenākṣiptaṁ yato viśvam ato ‘smin samupāsite |

viśvaśaktāv avacchedavandhye jātam upāsanam || 194 ||
As everything (viśva) is encompassed by that (triad), when this is

properly worshipped, He who is the possessor of all powers and free of

limitation is (truly) worshipped. (194) (193cd-194ab)

As all this ‘is encompassed’ by (this) Triad (Trika), he who has

penetrated into (this) Triad (Trika), which is the Supreme Reality that is solely the

power of the freedom (svātantryamātra) (of Bhairava’s divine consciousness), is

free of limitations (anava-cchinnasvabhāva). Thus, in accord with the dictum that

‘Śiva’s power (śaivī) is said here (in the scriptures) to be (His) mouth (which is

the entrance to the realization of one’s own Śiva nature), he effortlessly

penetrates by means (of this Triad) into the powerholder also, who is full (and allinclusive). This is the meaning (of this) statement.
Moreover, all this which is encompassed (within Trika) is essentially its
unfolding expansion (sphārasāra) and is not subject to limitation. Accordingly, he

says:

āraṀ vaad |

ity eṣa mahimaitāvān iti tāvan na śakyate |

(However,) it is not possible (to say) that (even) this is the (full) extent
of (His) glory, for it is impossible to determine its extent. (195ab) (194cd)
‘It is not possible’ to delimit (and discern the Lord’s powers
individually). Thus, He, the Lord Himself Who is the Absolute (anuttara), has
assumed the form of all things by (the power of His) own freedom (ṣvātantrya).
Accordingly, he says:

The Lord United with Emission is AII Things as the Fifty Energies of the
Letters

āa: TāTGFĀTṬIĪTT: |I/2X4 11
[EEENĒEZEZEIIEEIREE'TVET
tasmād anuttaro devaḥ svācchandyānuttaratvataḥ || 195 ||
viṣargaśaktiyuktatvāt sampanno viśvarūpakaḥ |

! VBh 204; also quoted in TĀv ad 1/1, 1/73 (74), 3/172 (171cd-172ab), 6/252ab (251cd)
and 29/273cd-274ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

Therefore, God Who is the Absolute (anuttaradeva), by virtue of His

absolute freedom, and because he is united with the power of emission, has a

cosmic form (viśvarūpaka) (and is all things). (195cd-196ab)

(The Deity) is free and absolute because (of His) union (yoga) with the

power of emission.®" The power (sāmarthya) of (the Lord’s) freedom is in (His)
emission, because it is (His) capacity to perform the five functions (of emitting,
sustaining, and withdrawing (all things), as well as gracing and obscuring (the
individual soul)). (Thus,) the power of the Absolute is (rightly) called ‘emission’

(visarga). As was said previously:

‘The Supreme Abode – the Absolute (Anuttara) — is called Akula,

whereas the emission of that Lord is called Kaulikīśakti.’

ŚSurely (one may ask,) in (His) cosmic form (as all things) in this way, (the
Lord) is many. Does this not compromise (your view of) nonduality? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

EREINIHUMEUBNMt7itrHIIRXCII

tarar. vṝṣaīṣāa fīkzar 1
evaṁ pañcāśadāmarśapūrṇaśaktir maheśvaraḥ |l 196 ||
vimarśātmaika evānyāḥ śaktayo ʻtraiva niṣṭhitāḥ |
In this way, the Great Lord, Whose power is full because of (these)
fifty (forms of) reflective awareness, is only one and His nature is reflective

awareness. (All) other powers are included here (within them).” (196cd197ab)

The ‘fifty (forms of) reflective awareness° are (the letters) beginning

with A and ending with KS. (He is) ‘one’, because there is no difference (bheda)
between power and the powerholder. Surely (one may ask,) it was said before that
(His) powers are unlimited, so how does that square with (saying) that they are
(just) fifty, which is a fixed limit (on their number)? With this doubt in mind, he

has said that ‘(all) other powers are included here (within them)’. The ‘other’”
(powers) arise by the union and separation of these (fifty letters that constitute all
words, such as,) for example, ‘ghataḥ’ (jar) and ‘paṭaḥ’ (cloth). (They are all)
‘included here (within them)” because no (other) separate (atirikta) (form of)
reflective awareness is logically possible apart from (these) fifty.
l Thus, according to Jayaratha, we should translate: ‘therefore, because God Who is the

Absolute is united with the power of emission, (He is endowed) with freedom, and (His)

state is absolute and so has a cosmic form.’
! Above, 3/143cd-144ab (143); also quoted below ad 5/67cd-68ab (67).
'’ The Lord’s powers are innumerable. They are formed by the coming together and
separation of the energies of the letters that make up words.

CHAPTER THREE

Thus, (for example,) by counting in due order the half measures (of the
letters), the goddess consisting of eighty-one parts will also be included in the

fifty letters. Accordingly, he says:

The Goddess with Eighty-one Parts, Śabdarāśi, Maātṛkā and Maālinī

zaī amī-āīatīza 1| 2<.9 11
ekāśītipadā devī hy atrāntar bhāvayiṣyate || 197 I|

(Thus,) the goddess consisting of eighty-one parts (pada)" will be

included here (in the fifty letters). (197cd)

“Will be includedʼ, that is, will ultimately be included in that (series of
fifty letters). As he will say:.619
‘It is said that the time (that is, duration) of the thirty-three consonants is
half a measure (ardhamātra) (each), the five short vowels one measure (each)
(mātrā), the eight long ones two (each), and the prolated L, three. These are the

eighty-one half measures (mātra) taught (to us) by our teacher. It is on this basis
that the Lord has taught the mantra consisting of eighty-one (parts). The Goddess
who consists of eighty-one parts is Śakti, who is said to be Śiva by nature.’
Surely (one may ask,) as (all) other (forms of) reflective awareness are
included here, the fifty (forms of) reflective awareness are the main ones. Does

this not once again entail that they are a limited fixed (number)? With this doubt

in mind, in order to clarify that (this unified reflective awareness in these fifty

forms) cannot® assume (any) limitation, and to clarify that (other divisions) are
not real (in themselves), he explains how the particular (forms of reflective
awareness) arise (collectively) by association (yoga) with each particular
(corresponding) limiting adjunct.

TGJJYTGAĪTT
YTATTT T ‘a: |

3TIHYāSTTĀTI
TTTTa JIĪTFA TĪqH ||/[R¢ I
’ The Vyomavyāpin Mantra, which consists of 81 parts (pada), is well known in many

Siddhāntas. It consists of a series of salutations to Rudra with various names, the first of
which is Vyomavyāpin – ‘he who pervades the Sky (of consciousness’ ~ from which is
derived the name of the whole Mantra. See the Appendix to Chapter Thirty, where the

complete Mantra is recorded. Concerning this Mantra, see below, note to 6/227. There, the
same reference to the energies of this Mantra recurs. Here in Śāmbhavopāya, this, one of

the most important Mantras of the Siddhānta, is integrated into the 50 forms of reflective
awareness that constitute supreme subjectivity. In Chapter Six, that deals with the cycles

of time projected into the breath and so teaches an Āṇavopāya, it appears in its form as

energies, again associated with the alphabet, but there as units of measure of the resonance
of the Unstruck Sound of the flux of the breath. Conscious of the parallel, Jayaratha quotes

the relevant verses from the Tantrāloka there.
Beḻow, 6/226-228ab (225cd-227cd).
2 Read avacchedādhānāsāmarthyaṁ for avacchedādhānāsāmarthya.

TANTRĀLOKA

TGāTTTYĪTFGṬ q a TTTTIĪTHTH |

ekāmarśasvabhāvatve śabdarāśiḥ sa bhairavaḥ |
āmṛśyacchāyayā yogāt saiva śaktiś ca mātṛkā || 198 II
sā śabdarāśisaṅghaṭṭād bhinnayonis tu mālinī |
prāgvan navatayāmarśāt pṛthagvargasvarūpiṇī || 199 ||
ekaikāmarśarūḍhau tu saiva pañcāśadātmikā |
Bhairava Who is the Assembly of Sounds (śabdarāśi), (abides) within
(the ‘I’ consciousness which is) the state of the essential nature (svabhāvatva)
of the one reflective awareness (of pure ‘I’ consciousness). And (His) power,
that is, Mātṛkā, is (the state which arises) by (His) association with (just) the

shade (that is, a subtle trace,) of the object of awareness. This (power)

becomes Mālinī, in which the (seed vowels) are mixed in with the matrices (of

“ The body of Bhairava as the Assembly of Sounds (śabdarāṣi) consists of the fifty

letters of the alphabet arranged in the normal alphabetical order. Each letter is governed by
a Bhairava, who presides over some part of the body of the Bhairava of the Assembly of
Sounds (śabdarāśibhairava). Mātr̥kā is the Goddess, the female counterpart of this
Bhairava, who, like him, consists of the letters of the alphabet (see below, 15/116cd-120).

Just as the letters of Bhairava’s body are fifty Bhairavas, that of Mātṛkā are fifty Yoginīs

(who are also called Mātṛkās). Mātṛkā embodies the powers of fifty forms of reflective
awareness symbolized by the letters. As these develop into the objective sphere, Mātṛkā is
said here to be affected by ‘the shade’ of objectivity. Cf. below 15/130cd-131ab: “Mātrṛkā

is the power, one with Bhairava in His form as the Assembly of Sounds. The various

aspects of objectivity in it are not yet manifest but are yet to come, thus it is called Mātṛkā
(lit. ‘Little Mother’), because (this energy) contains in a potential state (the manifest
universe, like an expectant) mother. The fifty phonemic deities of Śabdarāśi Bhairava are
also commonly deposited along with those of Mālinī (see below, 15/130cd-133ab),

another alphabet goddess. In this way, Śiva and Śakti, which they represent (see below,

33/20-21), are unitedin one body.

Abhinava is continuing to explain the nature of the letters collectively. What he
says here would be immediately meaningful to those who perform or are even just
acquainted with the ritual of Trika and related schools. Specifically, he is explaining here
in his elevated terms the relationship between three sets of depositions (1yāsa) of letters
on the body. These are visualized on the parts of one’s own body (or may sometimes be
projected onto that of another person), corresponding to those of the deity. This is a way

of purifying the worshipper’s body and preparing it and him for identification with deity

in order that, made one with it in this way and other ritual procedures, he can worship the
deity. Each letter is deposited on the body by touching or imagining that part and
repeating a mantra which contains the letter and invokes the deity of that letter and
sometimes also a sacred place associated with it. Projecting the alphabet onto the body in
this way is very common practice. They may be projected together onto the body, one

after another, in this or another sequence. Abhinava explains here how that procedure
reflects what is happening within consciousness in relation to its manifestation of
objectivity.

CHAPTER THREE

the consonants), by coupling with the Assembly of Sounds. (Then again)

she (assumes) the nature (of the nine) individual classes of letters° by the
application, as before, of a nine-fold act of reflective awareness. When a
reflective awareness of each individual (letter finally) affirms itself, this same

(power assumes) the nature of the fifty (forms of reflective awareness).
(198-200ab)

(There is only) ‘one ((form of) reflective awareness)ʼ. As (Bhairava’s ‘

consciousness is purely subjective, and so) devoid of (any) object of awareness, it
is alone (niḥsahāya lit. ‘without companion’). ‘Reflective awareness’ (āmarśa) is
(both) the act of reflective awareness (āmarśana) and the perceiver (pramātṛ) who

reflects (parāmarśaka). 1t is the fifty letters (that form by a progressive non-

“ The letters in the Mālinī alphabet are not in the same serial order of the normal Sanskrit
alphabet embodied in Mātrṛkā. The consonants and vowels are mixed together (cf. below,
3/233). Mālinī is the Goddess Parā, the supreme goddess of the Trika. Other Goddesses,
Tripurā, for instance, are related to the Mātṛkā alphabet, rather than Mālinī. The Assembly

of Sounds and Mātṛkā are very well known to a wide range of Śaiva and Śākta schools,
whereas Mālinī is much less so. Indeed, when we come across it in other traditions,

especially when it is substantially present there, it is a clear sign of their close relationship
to Trika Śaivism. A cardinal example is the tradition centred on the goddess Kubjikā, who

is also identified with Parā as Mālinī, and so it is not surprising that the Mālinī alphabet is

an important part of the Kubjikā rites and Mantras. Concerning the Mālinī order of the
alphabet, see below, 15/121-145. The sequential order of the letters of the Mālinī alphabet

is listed below in 15/121-125ab.
“ The nine classes of letters, as we have seen, are in due order: 1) vowels, 2) gutturals, 3)

palatals, 4) cerebrals, 5) dentals, 6) labials, 7) semivowels, 8) sibilants, and 9) the conjunct
letter KS. Classes 2 to 6 include also their corresponding nasals.

2By ‘as before’ is meant, in the previous exposition of the development of the letters.
At the initial level, the letters that constitute the body of Bhairava, arranged from to A
to H, are His pure ‘I’ (ahaṁī) consciousness. As usual, the male polarity is transcendent,

beyond manifestation and objectivity. The fifty energies of the fifty limbs of pure ‘I’

Bhairava consciousness are the aggregate of His powers, that generate, constitute and
contain the universe of manifestation within and one with consciousness. Finally, the two

combine. Male vowels and female consonants mix. The initial state of withdrawal of the
ideal cosmos pours out as impregnating seed into the receptive womb-like consciousness

of objectivity and duality. Fertilized in this way, the energies of the letters go on to
develop in two stages. First comes the collective articulation of the letters in their nine
corresponding spheres of emanation; then the forms of reflective awareness are clearly

delineated, one by one. Thus, we have come full circle in yet another aspect of the same
self-perpetuating cycle of ‘’ consciousness.

The perceiver reflects on its own subjectivity as the self-reflective awareness of ‘I’. The
perceiver also reflects on all that manifests objectively as ‘this’. Both aspects of reflective

awareness, inner and outer, unfold through and as the fifty phonemic energies of Speech.
Inwardly, most fundamentally, they are embraced within the one pure ‘I’ consciousness,
which thus articulates itself, as it were, as the inner —’utterance’ (śabdana, jalpana) of
Supreme Speech (parā vāc), which is free of all delineating conceptualization. Directed

outwardly, the Speech of reflective awareness articulates progressively from the
supramental intuitive level to the mental, and then out into audible speech. Both are
Speech; the former free of notions, thought constructs and mental representations, the
latter their very substance. These are the phases of the wave of the act of reflection of the
perceiver who ‘reflects'. See below, note to 4/126.

TANTRĀLOKA

temporal process of) ‘enumeration’ (sarkalanā)” ‘within (‘I’ consciousness,

which is) the state of that ‘essential nature’ called ‘Bhairava Who is the

Assembly of Soundsʼ.

‘(His) power, that is, Mātṛkā, is (the state which arises) by the
association’ (yogār) with the object of awareness. (Within) that same Mātṛkā, ‘by

coupling with the Assembly of Sounds’, that is, by the oneness of power and the
powerholder, brought about by their mutual (progressive) mixing, like salt and
sour gruel (āranāla), the matrices (yoni), that is, consonants, are (interspersed

and) conjoined (bhinna) with seed (vowels). As Her nature is such, (She is called
Maālinī for three reasons). 1) (The letter) ‘M’ (of the name Mālinī) represents (the
objective universe of) denoted meaning, (vācya) which is the counter-correlate
(pratiyogya) (of the perceiver, who is the denotator – vācaka). Ālanī
is (the energy

that) contemplates it (vimarśikā). 2) (Mālinī in the sense of) malate (‘she

holds’), sustains (dhatte) the universe within (Her) own nature.® 3) (In the sense

of) mālayati (‘she possesses), (Śhe) internalizes everything, and so is called

Maālinī.

(Mālinī is the alphabet) that begins with (the letter) N and ends with PH.
It is a state of (Mātṛkā) which is such because its seed (vowels) and matrix

(consonants) are unstable (visaṁasthulatvāt), as the consonants are mixed (with

the vowels)."™ (Then by the application of the nine-fold state of reflective

awareness, she assumes) ‘as’ said ‘before’, the form (of the nine classes of letters,

divided into groups of) sixteen (vowels), five groups of five (consonants), two

groups of four (consisting of the four semivowels and three sibilants and H), and
one (the letter KS). That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

“ The term saṁkalanā literally means ‘enumeration’. The fifty forms of reflective

awareness that constitute Bhairava’s inner nature emerge progressively, as it were, within

the one pure reflective awareness of His own ‘I’ consciousness, which is at once the act of
reflective awareness, the agent of that act, and the reflective awareness itself. Together
this timeless activity forms and is this same ‘I’ consciousness. This is how Abhinavagupta
explains the nature of Bhairava as the Assembly of Sounds.
The name Mālinī simply means ‘she who (wears) a garland’ (mālā). It happens to be
the name of women who belong to the māli caste, the members of which earn a living
growing flowers and making garlands. In Orissa and other parts of India, mālinīs are

particularly sought after as midwives. The coincidence of their names is indeed
interesting; however, the early Tantric texts do not, as far as I know, take note of it. We

notice many such remarkable coincidences. Indeed, the texts do sometimes make the
connections, but not in this case.
In the common format of a didactic etymology, Jayaratha (probably drawing
from some textual source,) presents three meanings of the name ‘Mālinī’. According to the

first etymology Malinī is the energy of reflective awareness (‘ālinī’) that contemplates
(vimarśikā) the objective universe (ma), which is denoted (vācya) by the combination of
energies of the letters that form the words that denote it (vācaka).

“2’ Cf. TĀv ad 3/232 below.
“ Ṭhe root mal, from which the name Mālinī is here said to derive, assumes two roots.
One is mal, which belongs to the first class of roots, and the other is malaya, which

belongs to the tenth. The root mnal means to hold or possess. Concerning these didactic
etymologies of the name Mālinī, see below 15/130cd-133ab.
T Mātṛkā and Mālinī are described below in 15/117cd-133ab.

CHAPTER THREE

“The (letters) are of nine kinds, in accord with the division of the classes
(of letters). Divided into the individual categories, (the Goddess Mālinī) shines

brilliantly with fifty rays.’

The Oneness (of these Forms of Reflective Awareness) with

Mantra and the Rest (nantrādyabhinnarūpatva)

So having defined in this way the essential nature of each one of the fifty
letters separately (bhedena) as well as all together (abhedena) also, he (now)
refers in brief to (a topic) related to that, as announced previously, namely, (how
the energies of the letters) are not separate from Mantras etc.
The Cycle of the Flow of AHAṀ that Encapsulates All Things

uEIHrGEEĀENĪEEIE-AHHIĪETEII

itthaṁ nādānuvedhena parāmarśasvabhāvakaḥ || 200 ||
śivo mātā piṭṛtvena kartā viśvatra saṁsthitaḥ |

Śiva’s nature, pierced through (anuvedhena) in this way with (the
divine) Sound (nāda) (of consciousness), is reflective awareness. As both the

Mother and Father, He is the (one universal) agent present here everywhere.

(200cd-201ab)

‘In this way, that is, in the way that has been explained and will be

explained (further ahead), He who is ‘pierced through with Sound’, that is, by

the energy which is the letter H, and become one with it, is thereby the Absolute
(Anutṭara), the Supreme Lord, and Śiva Himself.

‘The letter A (that represents Śiva, the transcendental absolute) and the
letter H (that represents Sakti, His emanation) - these two abide (together) as one.

Like the sky and wind, there is no division between them.”

In accord with this dictum, (Śiva) is the (pure) reflective awareness (of
AHAṂ, ʻT), consisting of the letters A and H, whose nature is the supreme

vitality (vīrya) of Mantra. This so because He alone, whose sole nature is the
supreme perceiver, is the ‘“agent present here everywhere’ within the fifty letters
‘as both the Mother and Father’. The meaning is that He shines radiantly
(prasphurita) as the Absolute and (its power of) emission.
WV 3/11bed.

“ This verse is also quoted above in TĀv ad 3/66cd-67ab (67); see note there. Read
literally, all this verse is saying is that A, the first letter of the alphabet, symbolizes Śiva,

and that H, the last letter, symbolizes Śakti. Jayaratha understands this, in the perspective
of Abhinava’s Trika exegesis, to be a reference to AHAM, that is, pure ‘’ consciousness.
This is the highest level of Speech. Here the first creation that appears when power of
action ‘opens upʼ is the Sanskrit alphabet in its normal order (mātṛkā), i.e. from A to H.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) in this way has not the nature of the fifty letters
been explained in terms of duality (bhedena), not nonduality (abhedena)? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

gā 1| 2. 1

visarga eva śākto ‘yaṁ Śivabindutayā puṇaḥ || 201 II
garbhĩkr̥ãnantaviśvaḥ śrayate ʻnuttarātmatām |

When, as Śiva’s Point (Śivabindu), this, the emission of power
(Śāktavisarga), has again encompassed within itself the infinite universe, it
assumes the nature of the Absolute. (201cd-202ab)

Here, (according to this teaching,) this is ‘the emission of power, that is,

the radiant manifestation (parisphuraṇa) of the Absolute, that is, of the Supreme

Lord, in its gross form (as all the forms of reflective awareness) up to the letter H.

Then, having ‘again’ reversed this process (pratyāvṛtya) and encompassed the
entire aggregate of words and (their) meaning as the single form (rūpa) of the

subject who is the undivided and supreme Light (of consciousness), it ‘assumes

the nature of the Absolute’, that is, it assumes the form of the Point (bindu),
which is the undivided and supreme Light (of consciousness), so that it may be

the reflective awareness of (the pure) ‘’ (consciousness of the Deity, the

Absolute). The overall sense is that once the Absolute itself has made the energy
which is the letter H manifest, it brings it to rest within its own nature, which is

the undivided Light (of consciousness). As he will say:

‘The universe manifests within (cognitive) consciousness (saṁvitti), and

indeed, as (pure) consciousness (saruvidā), (manifests) there also. These three,
merged (into each other) by uniting in pairs, are Bhairava’s one, supreme nature,

which is (pure) ‘T’ (consciousness).

Surely (one may ask,) although it rests in the undivided and supreme

Light (of consciousness), does not the reflective awareness of ‘I’ (consciousness

essentially) consist of a state of duality (bhedamaya)? (In response to this
question,) he says:

The forward movement begins with A, the Absolute, and ends with the gross, fully

manifest form of emission, which is its ‘radiant manifestation’ H, passing through the
Point (M). This AHAM forms the first half of the cycle. From there it reverses, moving up

on the other side of the circle to form HA – M – A. H emits into the Point, which, as the
supreme perceiver, gathers everything up into itself to then become A, the pure Light of
the Absolute. See Dyczkowski 1987: 186 and 187 for a description and graphic
representation of this process.
“ Below, 3/207-208ab.

CHAPTER THREE

s-lTzētrzāīaī̄dR.
aaīdāṀT a-: JĪ: || 3oR 1I

aparicchinnaviśvāntaḥsāre svātmani yaḥ prabhoḥ || 202 ||
parāmarśaḥ sa evokto dvayasaṁpattilakṣaṇaḥ |

The characterizing feature of the reflective awareness of the Lord

within His own nature, which is the inner essence of the undifferentiated
universe (viśva), is characterized as the attainment of the dyad

(dvayasaṁpatti) (of Śiva and Śakti).% (202cd-203ab)

“ The immediate literal sense of the expression ‘dvayasaṁpattī’ is ‘the attainment of

duality’. However, this meaning clearly makes no sense here. One is tempted to take the
reading to be ‘advayasaṁpanī’, the initial ‘a’ dropped in accord with a common rule of
phonemic conjunction (sandhi). The meaning would then be ‘the attainment of
nonduality’. As we can see by his commentary, Jayaratha clearly did not think so. It seems

that he understood this unusual expression to be as explained in a short tract called the
Dvayasaṁpattivārtika. This is a brief commentary (vārtika) in twenty-three verses on two

verses of the Vijñānabhairava. It has been edited by Gnoli and translated into Italian (see

Bibliography). The author – Vāmanadatta – should not be confused with the homonymous
nondualist Kashmiri Vaiṣṇava who wrote the Sarṁvitprakāśa (better named Viṣṇustuti). He

was the son of Rātridatta. This Vāmanadatta was not a Vaiṣṇava and was the son of
Harṣadatta. He also wrote the Subodhamañjarī| Śvabodhodayamañjarī. The former

certainly preceded Abhinava, who refers to his work. The first verses of the

Dvayasaṁpattivārtika supply a meaning of the expression ‘Dvayasaṁpatti’. If Abhinava

uṣed this unusual expression in this sense here, as Jayaratha suggests, he most probably
knew the tract. We read there:
‘Having contemplated the letter A, which is Unstruck Sound (asvara) and the

omnipresent Supreme Lord, when yogis rise from contemplation, their Śiva nature
becomes clearly apparent in this way. Thus, the yogi, who is made of Śakti, his body
consisting of Nāda and Bindu, established on the plane without support, (accomplishes)
the attainment of the dyad (dvayasampatti) (of the union of Śiva and Jh (2-3)
Śivopādhyāya quotes verses 5 to 19ab of the Dvayasaṁpattivārtika ad VBh 90
(89) (p. 78-79). The passage further clarifies the use of the term. It reads as follows:
ahaṅkāramayī bhūmir buddhibhūmeḥ parā hi sā |

tayā vyāptam idaṁ viśvaṁ jñātā saiva vimuktidā || 5 II
saṁvidrūpā parā śaktir abhinnā parameśvarāt |
jñānaśaktiḥ punaḥ saiva mantrarūpā pradarśyate || 6 |
ahaṁkāṟraḥ smṛto mantraḥ śivaśaktyātmarūpakaḥ |
yad atrādyam avarṇākhyaṁ sa śivaḥ parameśvaraḥ |I 7 II
‘The plane of the ego (ahaṁkāra) is indeed superior to that of the intellect

(buddhi). All this universe is pervaded by it, and once known, bestows liberation. (5)
Itis the supreme power who, undivided from the Supreme Lord, is the power of
knowledge and seen in the form of Mantra. (6)

AHAṀKĀRA is considered to be Mantra and its nature is Śiva and Śakti. The

first one here that is called ‘A’ is Śiva, the Supreme Lord (parameśvara).’ (7))

TANTRĀLOKA

Śivopādhyāya comments that ayam ahaṁkāraḥ_aparimitāhaṁbhīmiḥ,
pūrṇāhantā ity arthaḥ | ‘this ego is the unlimited plane of AHAṀ. The meaning is that it
is full (and perfect) subjectivity (pūrṇāhantā). In this way, he revises the earlier view
common to the Krama system that the individual ego (not an absolute ego) is the highest

of the organs of sense and the pervasive controller of them all. Once this is experienced, it

dissolves into the Void of consciousness that is Without Ego (nirahaṁkāra), Without
Support (niralamba), Convention (niḥsaṁketa), Unnameable and Inexplicable (anākhya).
nādabindvātmakaṁ yac ca sā

śaktir aiśvarī smṛtā |

dvayam etat samākhyātaṁ bījabhūtaṁ carācare || I|

ajjhalādyāś ca ye varṇās te ‘nenaiva hi mudritāḥ |
Śabdabrahmeti tat prāhur yoginas tattvacintakāḥ || 9 ||
aprāṇam aṣvaraṁ dhyātvā paśyantyā nirvibhāgayā |
cinmātrāmarśayogena nilīnaḥ syāt pare pade || 10 ||

‘And that which is Nāda and Bindu is this Śakti who is called ‘Aiśvaī’. These

two are said to be the seed in the moving and immobile (universe). All the letters that are
(like) burning coals are stamped with this. Yogis who meditate on the true nature of things

call it Śabdabrahman. (8-9)

Having meditated on Unstruck Sound (the letter A (asvara)) without the vital
breath, by means of the undivided Speech of Vision, by the Yoga of awareness of pure
consciousness alone, he is dissolved away into the supreme plane.’ (10)
tathā hi siddhair ādiṣṭaṁ kvacit siddhāntasaṁgrahe |
nābher ūrdhvaṁ vitasti tu kaṇṭhādhastātṣaḍaṅgulam || 1 1 ||

hr̥dayaṁ madhyadeśe tu hṛmmadhye kamalaṁ smṛtam |

padmamadhye sthitā sūkṣmā karṇikā tripathopagā || 12.||
tanmadhye saṅṣṭhito hy ātmā hy akārādisvarūpadhṛt |
akārāntaḥ paraṁ sūkṣmaṁ cinmātraspandalakṣaṇam || 13 ||
tasyāpy upāsā vijñānabhairave kathitā yathā |
abindum avisargaṁ ca ------|I 14 I
So iindeed have the Siddhas taught somewhere in the Siddhāntasaṅgraha
(Compendium of the Teachings) that ‘a palm above the navel and six fingers below the
throat, in the place in between, is the heart. In the middle of the heart there is said to be a

lotus. In the middle of the lotus there is a subtle calix close to the crossing of three paths.
(11-12)

In the middle of that is the Self, that bears the form of letters beginning with A.

At the end of the letter A is the supremely subtle, its characteristic the pulse (spanda) of
pure consciousness. Its observance (upāsā) is taught in the Vijñānabhairava thuṣ: “O

goddess, by repeating the great lettrr A without bindu or visarga, the flood of knowledge

that is the Supreme Lord arises all of a sudden.’ (VBh 90) (13-14abc)

Śśaktir aiśvarī|

bījabhūtā kuṇḍalinī sārdhatrivalayātmikā l 15 ||
prāṇaśaktir iyaṁ dehe hakārākhyā nadaty alam ḷ
karṇāntarvivare yogī sthagitvā lakṣayet sphuṭam || 16 ||

The second energy, Aiśvarī, who is without foundation, is in the location of the

Self. As the seed, She is Kuṇḍalinī, (the Snake) with three and a half coils. This is the

power of the vital breath in the body. Called the letter H, it resounds plentifully (alam).

CHAPTER THREE

‘The reflective awarenessʼ of ‘’ ‘of the Lord’, that is, of the Supreme
Lord and Absolute ‘within His own nature’, which is the most excellent in the
midst of the endless universe, is ‘the attainment of the dyad (of opposites)’,
because the reflective awareness of objectivity (idantā) which is its countercorrelate that is to be removed also arises (with it). The meaning is that (the

Lord’s subjectivity) manifests in association with duality (bhedanibandhana)

(between itself and objectivity).

Surely (one may ask,) agreed that the reflective awareness of ‘I’ within

the body etc. is associated with relative distinctions, because it has a countercorrelate (that is, the body etc. itself, which is not ‘I’), but surely there is no such

counter-correlate’ in the case of the Light which is the supreme perceiver,

because it would then be conditioned by the notion that there is (some reality)

which is separate or otherwise from it. Accordingly, he says:

Once the yogi has blocked the cavity of (his) ears, he perceives it clearly (within them).
(15-16)
bindurūpā bhruvor madhye saṅsārajananī śivā |

lakṣyate yogibhir nityaṁ bhrājamānā svatejasā | 17 ||
tasya bindos tu candrārkau vāmadakṣiṇanetrayoḥ |
nirāśrayau tu tau kr̥tvā viśed brahma sanātanam |I 18 II

Between the eyebrows, Her form is Bindu. She is Śivā, the mother of the
universe. She is perceived by yogis to be always shining with her own radiant energy. The
Moon and Sun of that Bindu are in the left and right eyes (respectively). Rendering them
free of support, he should enter into the eternal Brahman. (17-18)

(19)

It is also said in the scripture venerated by the Siddhas, the Vijñānabhairava.’
The rest of the text, not quoted by Śivopādhyāya, states:

“-Listen well, O goddess, to this traditional teaching. I am telling (it to you).
When the eyes are well fixed, liberation is immediate. Having contracted the (opening) of
the ears, s0 too the lower doors (of the anus and the genitals), meditating on Unstruck
Sound, enter the Cavity of Brahmā in a moment.’ (VBh 113-114) (20-21)
This (is the teaching) that has come from the mouth of the Siddhas, and (the
Lord) Himself has uttered. Those who have achieved complete accomplishment by means

of this path attain the abode of the yoginīs. (22)

This is the work of the son of the one born in the country of the JākaCs (> Ḍāka),
a lion in the forest of Mīmāṁṣā, Harṣadatta by name.’ (23)

“ This and the following verse form a pair. This one refers to Śiva’s reflective awareness
of His own nature as the essence of all things at one with Him. The other, the reflective
awareness He has of Himself directly as the Absolute, at one with that same reflective

awareness, which is understood here to be His power inherent within Himself to emit all

things. The power of emission is not emission itself. Whereas the first case is the pure

reflective awareness of the absolute, the second takes note, as it were, of what could be
other than that, namely, finitude, but only to immediately set it aside. Of course, both are
the same. This distinction is made here simply as an aid to understanding what cannot
really be grasped by our finite, necessarily dualistic intellect.

Read pratiyogī
for pratiyogino.

TANTRĀLOKA

STTTTTTTTĪ-RRTVIHGTṢATHĪ] || 203 1|I

fāīt: |

anuttaraviṣargātmaśivaśaktyadvayātmani || 203 ||
parāmarśo nirbharatvād aham ity ucyate vibhoḥ |

The reflective awareness inherent in the nondual nature of Śiva and

(His) power, that is, the Absolute and emission, is by virtue of (its)

overflowing plenitude (nirbhara) said to be the ‘I’ of the All-pervasive Lord.

(203cd-204ab)

The ‘nondualʼ (nature) of the two, Śiva and Śakti, who are the Absolute

and emission (respectively), is their nondual oneness (sāmarasya), in which there
is no separate reflective awareness that “(this is) Śiva” and “(this is) Śakti”. Thus,
as this is the case, there is not even the possibility that a counter-correlate exists.

This is the overall sense.

‘The reflective awareness’ within the nature of the supreme Light, which
is such, of the ‘All-pervasive Lord’, Who is the Absolute, ‘is said’ in all the
scriptures without exception, to be the ‘I’ which is the effulgent activity
(sphurattā) of its own (true) nature alone (without an object), in accord with the

view that: ‘the repose of the light (of consciousness) within its own nature is said
to be the state of (pure) ‘I’ (consciousness) (ahaṁbhāva).’ This is so because,

‘by virtue of its overflowing plenitude’, He is full (perfect and complete in

every respect), as there is nothing else (within His own nature) He could need
(that He could be lacking and on which He would be dependent) (apekṣaṇīya).

This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask,) agreed that the reflective awareness of ‘I’ is the
effulgent activity (sphurattā) of one’s own (true) nature alone. But what does this
have to do with our purpose, if in this way the essential nature of the fifty letters is
not declared to be (a single) undivided (reality)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TTTRIITI TJfTīTTaT JTTFFTTSTTTĪ |] 2o%5 1|

aI frsīaā̃ |
anuttarādyā praṣṛtir hāntā śaktiṣvarūpiṇī || 204 1
pratyāḥr̥tāśeṣaviśvānuttare 5ā vilīyate |
The flow (of emanation) (prasṛti) that begins with the Absolute (A)

and ends with H is (the Lord’s) power (śakti)," which, once it has
” A privative ‘na’ or the like is required.
APS 22cd also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/55 and below ad 3/221cd-223ab, and
6/238cd-239ab (238). Abhinava himself refers to this line in TĀ 5/61cd-62ab.
“ This verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 4/192-193. There we find the variant

viśvasvarūpiṇī for śaktiṣvarūpiṇī, i.e. ‘the flow (of emanation) (prasṛti) from the Absolute
(A) that ends with H is the nature of all things.” This amounts to the same as saying that
the Lord’s power is all things. Also read with that version vilīyate for nilīyate.

CHAPTER THREE

encompassed‘” the entire universe (and withdrawn it back into itself),
merges into the Absolute. (204cd-205ab)

‘The flow (of emanation) from the Absolute, the first letter, ‘is (the
Lord’s) powerʼ, because it generates (all) the other (forms) of reflective

awareness from Bliss onwards. It is the effulgent activity (sphurattā) (of the Light
of consciousness), which in its gross form ‘ends with H’. Again, in accord with
the rule (of Pāṇini’s grammar): ‘let an initial phoneme together with a final ‘IT”
(letter) be a name for the intervening phonemes and for itself’, ‘the entire
universe’

beginning with Bliss (Ā) and ending with the Seed of Nectar

(amṛtabīja) (H) is ‘encompassed’, that is, withdrawn (and incorporated into
itself), by that (power) in the form of the letters A and H.
(Then,) being such, (that power) ‘merges’® and comes to rest ‘in the
Absoluteʼ, that is, within the supreme nature which is the undivided Light (of
consciousness), in such a way that the reflective awareness of ‘’ arises, by virtue
of which there is (one) reflective awareness of all the letters without distinction
(abhedena), as happens by means of the procedure of ‘encompassing
compression’ (pratyāhāra) (grammarians use to denote a group of letters all
together by noting just the first and the last of the series).
Surely (one may ask,) if (you) intend to say that according to the standard
Pāṇinian manner (of denoting a series of letters by mentioning the first and the
last in) an ‘encompassing compression’ (pratyāhāra) (thus collecting them
together), the reflective awareness of all the letters (arises) simultaneously, and
that that takes place as a particular (form of) reflective awareness consisting of the
letters A and H, then what is the purpose of stating that it rests again in the

Absolute? With this doubt in mind, he says:

I āṬIT. W 1| 3o, 1|
tad idaṁ viśvam antaḥsthaṁ śaktau sānuttare pare || 205 ||
tat tasyām iti yat satyaṁ vibhunā sampuṭīkṛtiḥ |

“ The expression qualifying the Lord’s power — ‘pratyāhṛtā’ – can also mean ‘withdrawn
back (into itself)’. Indeed, this is the meaning which is apparent at first. However,
Jayaratha sees another meaning which would be apparent to the those acquainted with the

nomenclature of Sanskrit grammar. Grammarians in their grammars for convenience refer

to a series of letters by mentioning just the first and the last. These two form what

grammarians call a pratyāhāra –- an ‘encompassing compression’. The alphabet begins
with
the
letter
A
and
ends
with
H.
The
A H of AHAṀ – ‘ encompasses all the energies of the letters, which thus constitute the
stream of the reflective awareness of Śiva’s pure ‘I’ consciousness. Cf. below, 6/239ab
(6/238).

ādir antyena sahetā Pā. 1/1/11. One of the ways Pāṇini makes his Sanskrit grammar

concise is to name letters in eroups, at the end of which comes a marker termed ‘IT”. Such
groups are called ‘pratyāhāra’, an ‘encompassing compression’. See previous note.

“ Read vilīyate for nilīyate.

TANTRĀLOKA

This universe (rests) within power (śakti),, and that within the
Absolute which is supreme, and that (again) within that (power).° Thus

verily (in this way), the All-pervasive Lord encapsulates (saṁpuṭīkṛti) (the
universe of power). (205cd-206ab)

Although the reflective awareness of all the letters collectively is achieved
in accord with the procedure of ‘encompassing compression’ (pratyāhāra) by
means of the form (of reflective awareness) consisting of the letters A and H, even
s0, he says this in order to illustrate (how) the Absolute encapsulates power; that

is, the energy of H (hakalā), which is all things (viśvarūpa). Again, in accord with

the

dictum

(of

the

Maṅgalaśāstra,,/

‘His

powers

are

the

entire

universe . . .’ ‘the universe’ is at one with (Śiva’s) power. Moreover, in accord
with the dictum ‘indeed power is not different from the powerholder’, power also
rests within the Absolute. Thus, because power and the powerholder are not
separate from one another and the Absolute is the powerholder, it is present within

(its own) power. Thus, power arises out of the Absolute and (comes to) rest there

itsell Thus indeed the ‘All-pervasive Lordʼ, that is, the Absolute,
‘encapsulates’ (His) power by the union (yoga) of (its) initial and the final

(phonemic energies).
Thus, the scripture also (declares) the same. Accordingly, he says:

tena śrītrīśikāśāstre śakteḥ sampuṭitākṛtiḥ || 206 ||

(Thus, the Lord has taught) the encapsulated form of power in the

venerable 7ṝīśikā scripture. (206cd)

The venerable Parātrīśikā is so called because it is the governing power

(īsā) of the three (tri) scriptures that expound (the three forms of) power as Parā

(Parāparā

As is ṣaid there:

and

Aparā).

Cf. above, 2/31cd-32ab (32).

“ The dot above the word AHAṀ – ‘’ – iṣ called bindu or anusvāra (lit. ‘that which

follows the vowelsʼ). The pure reflective awareness of AHAM is perpetually repeated and
reinforced in the core of Anuttara. As such it is its universal pulsation (sāmānyaspanda).

Juṣṭ as it reaches, as it were, in the ‘processless process’ of this timeless activity, the end
of H, passing as it does so through all the prior forms of reflective awareness, it begins
again with A, rotating, as it were, on the pivot of the Point (bindu), the letter M. Thus A –
Anuṭṭara – flows out into the energy of emission up through to H, and then that is again re-

absorbed into A. Thus, this process is appropriately termed ‘encapsulation’ here. Cf.
above, note 3,536.

See above, note to TĀv ad 1/I1 lcd-112ab (112).
“ The universe emerges from and returms to Anuttara, the Absolute. Thus, at the
beginning and end of all the letters, it is in the centre of them.

Conceming the names Parātrīśikā and Paratīṅśikā, see the entry under this name in
Appendix volume concerning the sources.

The three scriptures are the Siddhayogeśvarīmata (also called Siddhā), Anāmaka and
Maālinī-vijaya. See above, note 1,202.

CHAPTER THREE
‘There the Hero should sacrifice to creation (sṛṣṭi) and then again to the

seat. Having encapsulated creation, he should then perform the sacrifice.’
He (summarizes and) concludes this (teaching), (saying):

1|

saṁvittau bhãti yad viśvaṁ tatrãpi khalu saṁvidã |
tad etat tritayaṁ dvandvayogāt saṅghātatāṁ gatam || 207 ||
ekam eva paraṁ rūpaṁ bhairavasyāhamātmakam |

“ PT 29cd-30ab. The context is as follows:
‘One should fashion the seat mentally by means of flowers consecrated with the
four states (of consciousness, i.e. waking, dreaming, deep sleep and the Fourth). There the

Hero should sacrifice to creation (srṣṭi) and then again to the seat. Having encapsulated
creation, he should perform the sacrifice, that is, the sacrifice to the goddess, who is great,
full as she is of all things, endowed with all the limbs and blessed with Mantra, twentyseven times. She should be worshipped well here with fragrant flowers; worship her with

supreme devotion and offer your own Self.’ PT 29-32ab (p. 261-262)

The seat or throne is the base or pedestal on which the deity sits or stands. It

symbolizes the All, imagined to be the support (ādhāra) of the deity that is to be sustained
(ādheya) by it. The All here consists of the first two letters of the Mantra of the Heart,
SAUḤ, which encompasses all thirty-six principles. The deity which is the object of
worship, that is, consciousness, is the power of emanation (srsti), the freedom and divine
creativity that expresses itself through the sounds of the alphabet. It is emission ~ H,
which is the third letter of the Mantra. The sacrifice, in this context, is the contemplation
and worship there (tatra) in the support (ādhāra) of the seat, that is, in the All (AU), of
consciousness or emission, AH, and, inversely, consists of the contemplation and
adoration of the support (the All, AU), in consciousness or emission, AH. Consciousness,
which was previously sustained (ādheya), becomes in this way the support (ādhāra). The
‘enclosure’ or ‘encapsulation’ (sampuṭīkaraṇa) of consciousness is this process, namely,

that consciousness, from being sustained, becomes the support. It is enclosed, covered, in
all its various aspects, by the All, now sustained by it, in the same way that the All, with
all its various (constitutive) elements (the principles etc.), each individually and all

together, was previously enclosed and covered by it. Abhinava notes that the sole purpose

of this meditation is to reinforce the notion that our ‘’ consciousness is present in the All,
and that at the same time, the All rests on consciousness and consists of it (see MVV

1/908 ff.). He observes that the same concept is expressed in different words in the BhGī

(6/31), where it is said: “He who sees me in all things and sees all things in me, I am not
lost to him, and he is not lost to me. After this meditation, the officiant should sacrifice to
the Goddess. According to Abhinavagupta, She is emission, the sixteenth vowel (H),

which, considered in its two aspects, transcendent and immanent, is converted into a kind
of seventeenth vowel, which is identified with Anuttara. Concerning ‘encapsulation’ see
also PTv p. 262 and TSā p. 200.

TANTRĀLOKA

The universe manifests within (cognitive) consciousness (saṁvitti) and
indeed, as (pure) consciousness (saṁvidā), (manifests) there also. These three,

merged (into each other) by uniting in pairs, are Bhairava’s one supreme
nature, which is (pure) ‘I’ (consciousness). (207-208ab)

This ‘universe’, which is power, that is, the energy of H (hakalā),

‘manifests within consciousness’, that is, within the supreme nature, which is the

Absolute, and has emerged from that itself. This is the meaning. ‘Indeed, as

(pure) consciousness, it manifests ‘there also’, that is, it rests ‘there alsoʼ, even

though its nature is such, within the Absolute. This is the meaning. As is said (in
the scriptures):

‘where this wonderfully diverse (citra) universe has emerged and where it

comes to rest (āstameti).”

‘These three’, (cognitive) consciousness (sarvitti), the universe, and

(pure) consciousness (sarṁvidā) ‘uniting in pairs’, that is, by uniting with one

another, are ‘merged (into each other)’, and having conjoined are (the pure) ‘I’
(consciousness) which is ‘supreme’, that is, most excellent, as the abode of rest of

the Light of the subject, object and (means of knowledge), and is ‘one’ because

there is no other (form of) reflective awareness to serve as its counter-correlate. It

is ‘Bhairava’s nature’, which is the supreme reflective awareness that is (His)
own nature, that is, of (Bhairava), the one whose sole form (vapus) is the Light (of
consciousness), and Who, full (to overflowing) with all existing things, is

dependent on none other and whose dynamic state is full (and perfect in every
respect) (pūrṇavr̥tti). This is the meaning.

Surely (one may ask,) it was said before that Kaulikī śakti is the emission
(viṣarga) of Akula, the supreme abode. Moreover (even s0), She is not separate
from the powerholder. Thus, as it is logically unsound (to maintain) that Her
radiant manifeṣtation (parisphuraṇa) (as Bhairava’s emission) is separate from
(the powerholder), how is it possible (for Her to come to) rest there (in the

Abṣolute) again (thereby implying that She was separated from it previously)?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Aesthetic Delight of Śiva’s Power of Emission

raī. āeaḥ as ad || 3c 1
īTd g T=dTsṣāT-Ṁṝczdta4; |
viṣargaśaktir yā śambhoḥ setthaṁ sarvatra vartate || 208 ||

tata eya samasto ʻyam ānandarasavibhramaḥ |

This, Śiva’s power of emission, is present everywhere in this way. All

this play of the aesthetic savour of bliss (ānandarasa) (comes) from that.

(208cd-209ab)

CHAPTER THREE

She is who is said to be the ‘power of emission’ (visargaśakti) of the
abode of Akula, which, (as both the) supreme good and its supreme cause (for
others), in the manner to be explained, is ‘present everywhere’ʼ, that is, manifests
radiantly as the unity (abheda) (of the subject), the unity-in-diversity
(bhedābheda) (of the means of knowledge), and the diversity (bheda) (of the

object). This is the meaning. This external (world) (bāhya), which consists of

words and what they denote, and is the expansion (sphāra) made of the Bliss
(ānandamaya) (of consciousness), unfolds due to this.

Surely (one may ask,) the outer (world) consists of pleasure and pain etc.,
s0 how is it said to be made of Bliss? Having encompassed (the essence of this
objection) and with this doubt in mind, he explains how that is possible:

aṁfē ṁgd īā ṛdṝ āī kc--=h 1| 3

tathāhi madhure gīte sparśe vā candanādike || 209 l|

mādhyasthyavigame yāsau hṛdaye spandamānatā |
ānandaśaktiḥ saivoktā yataḥ sahṛdayo janaḥ || 210 l|
The vibration in the Heart (that one experiences) while (hearing) a
sweet song, (feeling a gentle) caress, or (smelling fragrant) incense and the
like, when the state of indifference (nādhyasthya) (towards them) ceases, is
said to be the power of bliss, due to which a person is sensitive to beauty

(sahṛdaya). (209cd-210)

“ The concepts of bliss (ānanda), savour of aesthetic sentiment (rasāsvāda) and emission
(viṣarga) are fundamentally the same. In this context, consciousness is conceived to be a
force, vitality, or energy, as well as the vital seed – sperm ~ which initially rests in itself.

A show, music, a pleasing sensation or whatever is experienced to be pleasing and
beautiful elicits the arousal (kṣobha) that stimulates this vitality, which, as happens in the

most apparent way in the sexual act, enters into a state of emission, which is at once bliss

and the savour of aesthetic delight. As Abhinava says in the MVV (1/897-898ab): ‘the
supreme radiant energy (tejas) that presides over the central channel (nāḍr) and gives life

to all the body, aroused by (the beauty of) the season, flowers (and the like), enters into a

state of emission, by virtue of which it is engaged in the act (of savouring) the wonder of

bliss.” Sweet song, a pleasing picture, the sight of a beautiful woman or handsome man, all

these are full of a ‘juice’ (rasa), which the senses relish or ‘taste’, and which, like food,
feeds consciousness, revealing the innate delight and wonder (camatkāra) which is its own

reflective awareness. The senses are the organs of this ‘tastingʼ (āsvādana, rasanā), and
the bliss of repose within subjective consciousness is its fruit. Abhinava writes:
‘Once one has overcome distraction, the pleasure one enjoys through the

sentiments of love etc. expressed in poetry or drama, for example, differs from the
pleasure derived from sense objects. This is because (one gains access to it) by the
removal of such obstacles as the anticipation of possible personal gain. So, once freed of
these impediments, the experience (pratīti) is one of ‘relishing’ (rasanā), “tasting’
(carvaṇa), or ‘contentment’ (nivṛti), and is, in fact, repose in the cognizing subjectivity. It
is right to describe it in these terms because the Heart, that is, self-awareness (parāmarśa),

TANTRĀLOKA

If ‘the state of indifference’ of any perceiver (who is experiencing a

beautiful) object of sense here (in this world), such as a (sweet) song, ‘ceases’,
(and s0) by abandoning (his insensitive) indifference (to its beauty, experiences a

sense of) ongoing oneness (ekatānatā) with it, (he) then (experiences) ‘the

vibration’ which is the pulsing effulgent nature (parisphuradrāpatā) (of

consciousness) as the state of oneness (with the aesthetic object) (tanmayatā)

‘in the Heartʼ, that is, within (awakened) consciousness (bodha), which is the

place where the universe is established (viśva-pratiṣṭhāsthāna). (This vibration)
‘is called the power of blissʼ in all the scriptures (sāstra). This is the meaning. As
is said (in the Vijñānabhairava):

‘The yogi who (experiences) the oneness of the unparalleled joy of

savouring singing and other such (beautiful) objects (of sense, his) mind fixed

(and well concentrated on that), becomes of that same (blissful) nature by

identifying with it (tanmayatvena).

is (in this experience) the predominant factor. Although the light (prakāśa) aspect, centred

on the object, is also present, the sensitivity (on the part of the subject) to its aesthetic
quality (sahṛdayatā) is a result of ignoring (this objective aspect) . . . When one tastes
sweet or other juices (rasa), contact with the object of sense represents an obstacle (to the

blissful experience of its purely pleasurable potential). Similarly, in the case of poetry and
drama etc., although there may be no such obstacles, their latent traces continue to be
perceived. Even then, however, by removing the partial obstruction that arises in this way
(we) gain attentive Hearts, and that is supreme bliss.' ĪPVv 2, p. 178-179.
Although this happens to everybody to some degree, it is only those who are

sensitive to beauty, that is, who ‘have a heart’, who can savour the relish of beauty

intensely and thereby, if they exercise their awareness, find rest in the expansion of
consciousness it induces for long periods of time. It is a matter of intention and attention
to the original state of subjective consciousness free of thought constructs wherein one

experiences beauty, and indeed joy, from anything in the sphere of objectivity. Thus,
Abhinava understands these practices to belong to the Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya).

“ There are many terms that denote the state of oneness in Sanskrit. Many are virtually
synonyms. In some cases, however, a particular expression denotes a specific aspect,
form, or state of oneness. This is the case with the expression ‘tanmaya-’, which literally

means ‘(being) made of that’. This expression is reserved for the oneness aesthetically
sensitive people experience with the aesthetic object. For example, we experience this
kind of oneness when beautiful music transports us far away from our daily life with its

cares and countless thoughts. We become the music. This oneness is essentially a state of
intense undistracted absorption, without which it would not be possible to experience the

beauty of anything. Indeed, yogis who can still their mind and maintain a steady state of
concentration, experience every object they attend to as beautiful. Clearly, this is easier to

do when the object is in itself beautiful and attractive. So the Yogi is advised to fix his
mind on anything that delights and satisfies it. Accordingly, the VBh (74) teaches: ‘Fix the
mind wherever it is satisfied. There Supreme Bliss manifests.”

“ This is a common definition of the Heart, conceming which, see Dyczkowski 1992b:
42-46.
VBh 73 (72). This verse is also quoted below in TĀv ad 3/229 and 3/239cd-240ab.
Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains (Báumer 2007: 96-97): ‘the yogi whose mind is focused on
the unparalleled ecstasy while experiencing these musical tunes is united or has become
one with that unparalleled bliss. The yogi experiences this when he becomes one with that

CHAPTER THREE

(It is said in the Īśvarapratyabhijāā that):

‘That is the radiant effulgence (of the Light of consciousness as the

manifestation of all things), the great (universal) Being (of all that exists),

unconditioned by time and space. As the essence (of all things) that (Supreme

Speech) is said to be the Heart of the Supreme Lord.N

The pulsing effulgent nature (parisphuradrūpatā) (of consciousness)

described in this and other (ways), which is not (subject to) the experience of the
sound of muṣic and when his mind is absorbed in the one collective sound of music, not
the different notes, [just the] nāda [aesthetically pleasing sound] that prevails in all the
seven notes. When you concentrate on that collective sound there of that string instrument,

concentrate on the beauty of sound... An elevated yogi can enter in samādhi through the

feeling of that sound which is not a sound in any sound. Abhinava says you can rise very
high in that collective meaning suggested in poetry.
Elevated
souls
can
rise
even
by
the
ordinary
talk
of

life... Fully elevated souls can rise in ordinary talk also, even when hearing bad names

from anybody.”

Śivopādhyāya

trayasthasvarāvṛttyā

ādiśabdena

comments:

uccāraṇaṁ,

gāyanaṁ

~

hālākapāṭhakanivartitaṁ

sparśarūparasādi-grahaṇam,

tena

ūrdhvamadhyādhogrāmaSśabdanam

yat

iti

yāvat,

Śśravaṇendriyavrttyā gītaśabdagrahaṇaṁ taccamatkaraṇam, evam atisundararāpavad

darśanacamatkāraḥ, tathā madhurādirasacarvaṇāsvādaḥ, tasmāt hetoḥ yat _aṣamaṁ

anupamaṁ –- svānubhavagamyaṁ saukhyam, tena yā ekatā, tadṛīpaḥ ātmā yasya yoginaḥ,
tasya manorūḍheḥ hetoḥ yat tanmayatvaṁ ~ śāktasparśāveśaḥ, tena hetunā tadātmatā parabrahmamayatvāpattiḥ

bhūḥ || 73 I|
‘Singing’ (denotes the entire range of music beginning with) vocal, that is,
utterance (uccāraṇa), formed with the notes of the three registers (grāma), namely, the

upper, middle and lower, up to the production of (musical) sound (śahdana) by a

percussionist on a percussion instrument (hālāka(?)). The words ‘other such’ refer to the

perception of touch, form, and taste etc. Thus, the savouring of the objects of sense, such
as sound, by means of the function of the sense of hearing, included (implicitly) in the
word ‘singingʼ, is the sense of the wonder that that brings it about. In the same way, there
is the wonder (aroused) by seeing something that possesses a very beautiful form. Such
too is the savour of the relish of a sweet juice and the like. The ‘unparalleledʼ, that is,
incomparable ‘joy that can (only be) understood by one’s own (personal) experience
(produces) the ‘oneness’ of the Yogi who is of that nature. (His) ‘mind is fixed’, (and for)
that reason, of that same (blissful) nature. His identification with it is a state of entry
(āveśa) (into a higher level of consciousness brought about by) contact with Śakti
(sāktasparśa). It is for that reason that ‘(he becomes) of that same (blissful) nature’, that
is, (he) attains the nature of the Supreme Brahman. This too is Śāmbhavopāya.

“ IP 1/5/14. Also quoted ad ad 5/139-140 (138-139) and 29/126cd-127ab; ĪP 1/5/14cd
quoted
ad
1/174cd-176ab;
ĪP 1/5/13-14 quoted ad 4/181cd-182ab. Utpaladeva explains in his own brief commentary
(vṛtti): ‘It is by nature luminous and vibrating, it is the subject of this luminous vibration;

it is not to be understood as the counterpart of nonbeing, (as) it also pervades nonbeing:
permanent because untouched by space and time. It is the power of the activity of
consciousness, whose essence is reflective awareness. It constitutes the foundation of the
Self of the Supreme Lord, who is all things; the various Āgamas call it the ‘Heart’.'

TANTRĀLOKA

common manifestations of pleasure and pain etc. of worldly enjoyment (bhoga),
is proclaimed everywhere (by our teachers) to be the freedom, reflective
awareness and bliss (of absolute consciousness). By virtue of its glorious power
(māhātmya), every person, (however) insensitive (jaḍa) (and deprived of
consciousness), is said to be one who is conscious (sacetana). Thus, a person who

desires (to experience something that) gives (him) extraordinary joy in (this)
world also (not just in higher mystical states) is well known as one who is

‘sensitive to beauty (sahṛdaya)’. Although all this cosmic extension
(viśvaprapañca) is the unfolding expansion (sphāra) of the power of bliss
(everywhere at all times), even so it is said to be such here (specifically) because

it is clearly perceived (here in this way).
Such is this, the greatness of the power of emission, namely, this
unfolding expansion (sphāra) of the universe of duality (bheda) (as the object),
unity-in-difference (bhedābheda) (as the means of knowledge), and unity

(abheda) (as the subject), which, due to the influence of limiting adjuncts

(upādhi), is the three-fold nature of the power of emission as well. He says this:
The Three Forms of Emission

ftīTHāTTTHĪTN: TTITTICCGTĀTTTS:| 32Ṝ 1I

pūrvaṁ visr̥jya sakalaṁ kartayyaṁ śūnyatānale |
cittaviśrāntiṣaṁjño ‘yam āṇavas tadanantaram | 211 I|
dṛṣṭaśrutāditadvastupronmukhatvaṁ svasaṁvidi |
cittasaṁbodhanāmoktaḥ śāktollāsabharātmakaḥ || 212. |I
tatronmukhatvatadvastusaṅghaṭṭād vastuno hṛdi |
rūḍheḥ pūrṇatayāveśān mitacittalayāc chive || 213 |
prāgvad bhaviṣyad aunmukhyasaṁbhāvyamitatālayāt |
cittapralayanāmāsau viṣargaḥ śāmbhavaḥ paraḥ || 214 |

“’1) “ṛnitially (the form of emission) is that of the individual soul

(āṉavaviṣarga), and is called the ‘Repose of the Mind’ (cittaviśrānti) (within
“ Read loke ‘pyānandātīśayakārthyeva for loke ‘pyānanáātiśayakāryeva.

“ Read prasiddhaḥ for prasiddhiḥ.

“ Verses 211-214 are Abhinava’s explanation of a passage in the Tattvarakṣavidhāna

cited in verses 215cd-219.

CHAPTER THREE

duality). (It takes place) once (consciousness) has emitted its entire (sakala)
product into the Fire (that consumes the transcendental) Voidness (of

consciousness).

2) After that (the second, empowered emission - sāktavisarga is) the

overflowing

plenitude

(bhara)

of

the

exuberance

of

empowered

(consciousness, which is experienced) when things that are heard or seen etc.

are propense (pronmukha) (to merge) into one’s own consciousness. It is

called the ‘Awakening of the Mind’ (cittasaṁbodha).
3) The supreme emission, which is that of Śiva (śāmbhavavisarga), is

called the ‘Dissolving Away of the Mind’ (cittapralaya). It comes about by

(A) the union (saṁghaṭṭa) of (outer) reality (vastu) (with consciousness) by its
intent there (towards consciousness), that takes place by (B) (its)
establishment in the Heart (of pure self-reflective consciousness) brought
about by complete (pūrṇatayā) penetration (āveśa) (into Śiva consciousness).

(Thus, this emission takes place by) (C) the merger of the limited mind into
Śiva (that this union with consciousness brings about), along with (D) the

dissolving away of all possible limitation that could be brought about by

some future intent (towards contracted states of consciousness), as was the
case before (this state of emission is attained). (211-214)
1) “Voidnessʼ is the undifferentiated (niṣkala) form (of consciousness)

which is the destruction of phenomenal states (bhāva) “. Its ‘fire’ is the
““ The teaching here is the recognition that consciousness is emitted into all three levels,

and is all of them, by virtue of its power of emission that ‘operates everywhere’ at all
levels. We need to recognize, by attending to the force of the intention to perceive, that
emission takes place whatever we perceive at the individual level. It also takes place when

we withdraw from the outer world into meditation and attain the thought free absorption

realized at the empowered level. Finally, the same emission culminatesin penetration into
Śiva consciousness at the supreme level.

“ Read viṣrṛjya sakalaṁ for visṛjyasakalaṁ.
““ Voidness is the state of consciousness free of objectivity, and hence, duality. The Fire

that destroys it thus generates the duality of phenomenal existence, marked by the

emergence of the dualistic mind. In this first form of emission, it comes to rest in
consciousness.

“ Abhinava explains briefly in the TSā (p. 15-16): “When that (power of emission)
becomes active, all the forms of reflective awareness, represented by the classes of letters

etc., beginning with Bliss up to all this externally created existence, ultimately become the

external metaphysical principles. This emission is of three kinds, that is, 1) the individual

emission (āṇavaviṣarga), which is the Repose of the Mind (cirtaviśrānti), 2) the
empowered emission (sāktavisarga), which is the Awakening of the Mind, and 3) the

divine one (sāmbhavaviṣarga), which is the Dissolving Away of the Mind. In this way, the

power of the Lordis (present)in the emission that generates all things.’

Consciousness is emitted into the three spheres of duality, unity-in-diversity and

oneness, corresponding to the Trika triad of the individual soul– Nara, Śakti and Śiva,
respectively. Generatedin the process of emission, they are stages in which consciousness

unfolds, emitting initially all phenomena, subjects and their objects by limiting itself to the

contracted form of consciousness of the individual perceiver, here called ‘mind’ (citta). To
do this, universal unitary consciousness, which shines as all things reflected within itself

in the fully awakened state of full and complete reflective awareness, must deny itself, as

TANTRĀLOKA

differentiated (sakala) form (of consciousness) that consists of all phenomena,
and is contrary to the (Voidness of the undifferentiated form) because it destroys

it. ‘Initiallyʼ, that is, first of all, engaged (pravṛtta) in the modality devoid of
objectivity (anidaṁ), ‘once (consciousness) has emitted’, not (once) established

or withdrawn,® the ‘entire’ universe consisting of subjects and objects, which is

this kind of ‘product’, its manifestation there in this and that form is the ‘mind’.
According to the view that ‘mind (citta) is (the power of) consciousness

(citi) that has descended from the level of (pure) awareness (cetana), and is
contracted by the object of thought,’ (mind) is contracted (saṁkucita) noetic
consciousness (jñāna), the nature of which is the union (sarṁghatta) of (the power
of) consciousness and the object of thought (cetya). Its ‘repose’ is the ultimate
extreme (parā kāṣṭhā) (of extroverted consciousness) when it (tends towards and)
is intent on duality. (This is) the gross (form of) emission (visarga) (represented

it were. Thus, from that awakened state, it enters into a state of deep sleep, which is the
undifferentiated ‘voidnessʼ in which the individual subject rests in itself, devoid of outer
objects. Burning as it were with the fire of its own innate energy full of all things, it

consumes this Emptiness, which is filled with the first emission of all phenomena. This is
the level of the mind, that is, contracted individual consciousness set in relation to the
object of thought, towards which it faces, intent on it. When the first emission reaches its
climax here, it rests on this level, directed externally into the sphere of duality.
Accordingly, it is called the Repose of the Mind. One could also call it Repose IN the

Mind. At this, the basic level of duality, consciousness rests in the mind orientated
towards the outer world of duality. Without insight into this level of emission, it simply
ends there, in the contracted state. Although not stated explicitly, one may understand that
it can also be experienced by those who possess insight as the inner outpouring of the

individual perceiver, who, although essentially at rest in himself, emits the constant flux of
thoughts and object-centred perceptions in which the individual mind is engaged, but
without this distracting his self-awareness. Thus, although the mind is active on the

surface, it rests deep within the inner core of subjectivity from which it and its activity is
emitted.

“ Read nikhilabhāvamaye fo nikhile bhāvamaye.

““ Sanderson (1990: 357) explains that this voidness or vacuity is ‘fire-like in the sense
that it causes the dissolution of the countless states that precede it in the natural cycle of
cognition.’

““Read visṛjya na tu sthāpya saṅhārya vā for viṣr̥jyaṁ na tu sthāpyaṁ saṁhāryaṁ vā.

“ Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya, sūtra 5. Kṣemarāja explains in his commentary that the individual

perceiver, identified with the mind, is essentially always the Goddess of Consciousness,
who has freely contracted down to assume this condition. As this contraction is

progressively removed by the strengthening of reflective awareness of its true essential
nature, consciousness expands out to assume, step by step, the subjectivity of higher
perceivers. The first are those still in the realms of Māyā but free of outer objectivity, and
then those in the higher pure principles beyond Māyā. Conversely, the perceivers who are

predominantly subjected to contraction develop in a downward series, ranging from the
‘void’ perceiver in deep sleep down to the perceiver who is fully identified with the body.

Thus, the lower subjectivities mirror the highest one of the Lord Himself, in which, as
contracted forms, Śiva’s powers of knowledge, action and Māyā are reduced to the play of
the three emotional qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas, to which they are subject. This is
what is meant when it is said that the perceiver at the level of Māyā is mind (citta).
““ This sentence can be understood in two ways. One is as translated. It can also mean

‘the ultimate extreme of intent on duality°. Both meanings, it seems, are intended. On the
one hand, consciousness has reached its limit of contraction in terms of its perception of

CHAPTER THREE

by) the letter H.° It is associated with the individual soul (nara) and it is called
‘Individual’ (āṇava) because (at this stage) duality (bheda) predominates.

2) ‘After that when things that are heard or seen etc.’ The ‘etc.’

refers to things that are touched, smelled etc. that also (constitute) the reality

(vastu) which is such, namely, the universe well known (to all) as consisting of

the moving (living) and the immobile (inanimate). When it is intensely
‘propense’ (to enter into) ‘one’s own consciousnessʼ, it manifests as one with
one’s own consciousness by the coming to prominence of the undifferentiated
state (niṣkalarūpatā) (that corresponds to) the removal of the differentiated

(sakala) form, which is the division between subject and object.” That is said to

be the empowered emission (śāktavisarga), which is predominately unity-indifference (bhedābheda). t is this subtle emission which is the ‘Awakening’

(saṁbodha), that is, right (samyak) (awakened) consciousness of the repose within
one’s own consciousness ‘of the Mind’ (citta), that is, contracted noetic
consciousness (jñāna).

3) In the same way (‘the supreme emission, which is that of Śiva
(Śāmbhavavisarga)’, takes place) ‘there’ within one’s own consciousness, ‘by
the union (saṁghaṭṭa) of (outer) reality (vastu) (with consciousness) by its
intentʼ, that is, by the mutual intent ‘of (outer) reality’, namely, the universe,

with (one’s own inner consciousness), on one another. (It takes place) there itself

(‘by its establishment’), that is, development, ‘in the Heart’, which is the

supremely real nature, characterized as consciousness. It is ‘brought about by
complete (pūrṇatayā) penetration (āveśa)” into (awakened) consciousness
(bodha), which is FAĪ Who is consciousness, by the development (uttejanena
literally: “intensification’ of His) agency (kartṛtva) and the other (powers), by
subordinating (to Himself) the limited subject who (identifies with) ‘limited’

contracted, emptiness etc.” Thus, limited, contracted knowledge ‘that could be

brought about by some future intent (towards contracted states of
consciousness), that is, external manifestation, ‘as was the case before’ in the

(previous emission) of the individual soul, is ‘dissolved away’, and there is also
objectivity and so rests there, in the sense that it does not contract further. On the other
hand, the repose of the mind is the highest state of consciousness. Translating the
compound cittaviśrānti as ‘repose in the mindʼ, we get the first meaning. If it is translated
as ‘repose of the mind’, we get the second one.

We are not told the letters to which the other two forms of emission correspond, but
one would suppose they are AH and A.

The Empowered Emission is the state of unity-in-diversity that arises when the duality

of subject and object is brought into the unifying fullness of awareness, and thus by
‘totalizingʼ it, it shines as one with pure consciousness. Thus, it is the awakening or

enlightening of the mind, where delimited fragmented knowledge rests within the Light of

infinite consciousness.
“”” Note that the undifferentiated state of the Void, with which this process of emission

begins (cf. below, 6/9), is also a state free of the distinction between subject and object.
But in that case, it is because it is the emptiness of deep sleep, in which there is no object.
In this case, the undifferentiated state within consciousness is the result of the merger of

both into the unity of consciousness.

“’ The individual subject is formed from a state of limited consciousness that is
conditioned by its identification with the perceiver of emptiness in deep sleep, the vital
breath, mind and body.

TANTRĀLOKA

no longer even (any) possible future contraction (of consciousness). Thus, by the

most excellent ‘dissolving away of the mind’ʼ, that is, by the removal of the

contracted state (of consciousness) by taking its support from the fullness (of
consciousness, the mind) manifests as the (pure) consciousness of one’s own
(true) nature alone. (That effulgent manifestation) is ‘the supreme emission,

which is that of Siva (śāmbhavavisarga)’, and predominately based on
nonduality (abheda), is Bliss. That is the power of emission of the Supreme

Goddess (parameśvarī) (and Hers is the emission) which manifests intensely

(parisphurati) in this way and that. It is said to be of three kinds, as (the emissions

of the Trika triad) of Nara (the individual soul and the world), Śakti and Śiva. It is

thus rightly said that the power of emission is present everywhere (in all three

domains of duality, unity-in-difference and nonduality).

Thus, this was said by the Lord Himself, and so he says:

tattvarakṣāvidhāne ʻto viṣargatraidham ucyate |

Thus, it is said in the Tattvarakṣāvidhāna" that emission is of three

kinds. (215ab)

‘Thus’, for the aforestated reason, he both quotes that (Tantra) literally

(word for word) and (paraphrases its general) meaning.

GTRTTINITAIRIĀTAĪ.
TGZ ṢS |I 324 I

fidt: fāc'zg frrdaīēērtī; | 32ā 1

ā fkfaīāā aē̄ 1| 32 1

“’ The supreme form of emission, which is that of Śiva Himself, is the ever-emergent

bliss (ānanda) of nondual consciousness. It is the manifestation of the plenitude of oneʼs

own pure consciousness that takes place by the removal of all the limitations that contract
it, by the power that emerges by the dissolving away of the lower mind (citta). Unlike the
emission that takes place at the individual (āṇava) level, confinement in any way of the
spontaneous expansion of consciousness is no longer possible now that the conditioning
imposed on it by the delimiting knowledge of finitude that arises by the tendency to
externalization has been eliminated. This is ensured because the limited, conditioned
forms of subjectivity, commencing with that at the level of the emptiness of deep sleep,
have been subordinated to the unfolding agency of Śiva’s own subjectivity, as outer

phenomena are deposited within the heart of consciousness as the universe, intent on its
Own conscious nature, is conjoined with it in such a way that they are mutually intent on

one another. Thus, the power of emission (visargaśakti), which is the Supreme Goddess
(pārameśvarī) Herself manifest in this way, is of three kinds, corresponding to the Trika
principle, which embraces the individual level of duality (Nara), the domain of unity-in-

diversity of Śakti, and the oneness of Śiva. Thus, the power of emission abides and

operates everywhere at all levels.

“’ See also below, 29/141.

CHAPTER THREE

īta: a fsēzṁīzā frmrōasrr: |

hṛtpadmakośamadhyasthas tayoḥ saṅghaṭṭa iṣyate || 215 ||
visargo ‘ntaḥ sa ca proktaś cittaviśrāntilakṣaṇaḥ |
dvitīyaḥ sa visargas tu cittasaṁbodhalakṣaṇaḥ || 216 ||
ekībhūtaṁ vibhāty atra jagad etac carācaram |
grāhyagrāhakabhedo vai kiñcid atreṣyate yadā || 217 ||
tad āsau sakalaḥ prokto niṣkalaḥ śivayogataḥ |
grāhyagrāhakavicchittisampūrṇagrahaṇātmakaḥ || 218 II
trtīyaḥ sa viṣargas tu cittapralayalakṣaṇaḥ |
‘It is said that the union (saṁghaṭta) of the two (namely, mind and
thought,) takes place in the centre of the calix of the lotus of the Heart. That
is said to be the inner emission, and its sign (lakṣaṇa) is the repose of the
mind. The sign of the second emission is the awakening of the mind. This
entire universe, mobile (living) and immobile (insentient), shines here as one
(ekībhūta). (This emission is of two types). When there is a subtle division
here between subject and object, that is said to be (immanent and so is) ‘with

aspects’ (sakala). (The second type) is united with (transcendental) Śiva, and

so is “‘without aspects’ (niṣkala). The sign of the third emission is the
dissolving away of the mind. It is full (and perfect) cognitive consciousness
(saṁpūrṇagrahaṇa) that corresponds to the cessation (vicchitti) (of the
distinction between) subject (grāhaka) and object (grāhya). In a state of
oneness (ekībhāva), it is subtle, complete knowledge (vijñāna), satisfied in its

own nature. (215cd-219)

1) The ‘Heart’ is (awakened) consciousness (bodha). That is itself the

‘lotus’ because it opens out externally. In the centre of its calix°" is the supreme

summit (parā kāṣṭhā) (of consciousness). The ‘union’, which is contracted
(object-centred) knowledge, of the power of consciousness (citi) and the object of
thought (cetya), (takes place) there. This is the emission of the individual soul
(āṇavaviṣarga) that is called the Repose of the Mind (cittaviśrānti). It comes at

the end of the Śaiva and Śākta emissions, (and s0) is the third or first (depending
on whether we follow the descending progression of emissions or the ascending

“’ The subject is called here the ‘grāhaka’ that is, ‘one who grasps’. The object is the

‘grāhya’, ‘that which is to be grasped’. The resulting perception, of which these two are
its inner and outer polarities, is ‘grahaṇa’ – ‘the act of graspingʼ, that is, pure cognitive
consciousness that ‘grasps’ the nature of things, just as they are, namely, at one with itself.

’ See below (29/140), where these three moments of union, emergence and rest
(29/115cd-116ab) are equated to three forms of emission (visarga).

“’ Read kośamadhye for kośamadhyaṁ.

TANTRĀLOKA

one). It is said to be predominantly based on duality (bheda), as it is so to the

highest degree.

2) Again, the second emission is the empowered one (śāktavisarga),
called the Awakening of the Mind (cittasambodhana). By virtue of this
(emission), this mobile and immobile universe, which is this wonderfully diverse
manifestation of subject and object, shines here in a state of oneness (as a single
whole) (ekībhūta), that īs, it shines effulgently as just the (pure) consciousness of
one’s own nature. This empowered emission ‘with parts’ (sakala), which (takes

place) when the distinction between subject and object manifests, is said to be
immanent (as all things). Again, when the consciousness of one’s own nature
which, as the supreme good, is beneficial (to all, arises) in a state of oneness, then

(this emission is) ‘without parts’ (niṣkala), and is transcendental. Thus, (the
empowered
emission)
is
predominantly
based
on

unity-in-difference (understood as being both the immanent reality as all things

and the transcendental reality beyond everything).
3) Then again, the third one is Śiva’s emission, called the Dissolving
Away of the Mind (cittapralaya), by virtue of which (both) subject and object are
established in consciousness alone, which brings about the ‘cessation’, that is,
destruction (of the difference between them), and so, in the absence of (any)

constraining limitations, such as the emptiness (of the subjectivity in deep sleep)
and the other (states of conditioned subjectivity), that ‘cognitive consciousness’ʼ,
which is ‘full’ and (grasps reality perfectly and) correctly (samyak), is the

supreme Light (of consciousness). This is the meaning. Thus, it is ‘the state of

oneness’ which is (experienced as) the penetrating (āveśa) (absorption) in one’s
own pure consciousness, and so it is ‘subtle’; and because it is one with the
subject, it cannot be known by any other. Thus, as there is no limited knowledge
or even any possibility of it, it is ‘kKnowledge’ (vijñāna) which is (completely) full
(and perfect). Thus, because there is nothing else at all that it could desire, it is

‘satṭisfied in its own nature’, that is, it rests in itself alone. Thus, this (emission)
is predominantly based on nonduality (abheda). That is the power of emission
(visargaśakti) of the Supreme Goddess (parameśvarī), (variously) called Kauḻikī
etc., which shines effulgent as each particular (form of) reflective awareness. This

is the overall meaning.

Nor have we voiced just our own idea; Thus, he says:’’

“’’ Abhinava has talked about the Trika Triad A I U above (193-195ab (192cd-194)); here
he resumes his exposition after a substantial digression from 195cd to 219 (192cd-219). The
following passage (TĀ 3/220-225) is drawn from the SYM. It is a very important
reference for Abhinava and a fine example of Abhinava’s higher exegesis. Presented and
maodified in his own way, it is the prime authority for his presentation of pure ‘’' — AHAMṀ
as consisting of fifty forms of reflective awareness symbolized by the fifty letters as he has

expounded them from verse 70 onwards. Indeed, this is the only scriptural source that
Abhinava presents as an authority for his exegesis. For a detailed exposition see
Dyczkowski 2004: 29-49.

I have noted below that it is not clear from where Abhinava draws his basic

structure of the alphabet. The citations Jayaratha supplies are apparently from the scripture

that is the authority for it. Unfortunately, he does not tell us their source. It is likely that

they are from a common source, which I believe was most probably the
Siddhayogeśyarīmata. Jayaratha introduces the passage with a simple ‘that is said there’.

CHAPTER THREE

The Triad A I U Continued

frēftrāīsan: srttaṣārũtaã 1

aĩ gvsfcīt āīṁ stīavā frzarsēī 1| 3zc 1

fḥ arvīaaa: . |

nirūpito ‘yam arthaḥ śrīṣiddhayogīśvarīmate |

sātra kuṇḍalinī bījaṁ jīvabhūtā cidātmikā || 220 ||

tajjaṁ dhruvecchonmeṣākhyaṁ trikaṁ varṇās tataḥ punaḥ |
This matter (artha) has been taught in the venerable
Siddhayogīśvarīmata, (where we read that) here the seed (of all things) is
Kuṇḍalinī. (She is) life and her nature is consciousness. The Triad (Trika)
called the Stable One (A), Will (I) and Expansion (U) is born from that, and
then (from this triad all the other) letters. (220-221ab)

The power of emission of the Supreme Goddess (parameśvarī) is pure

consciousness alone (saṅvinmātrā), and as She has encompassed all the universe

within Herself, She is rightly called Kuṇḍalinī, and Her form is the energy of
Unstruck Sound (anackakalā). She is ‘the seed here’ in (this universe, of) word

and meaning, because She is hard to remove, as She is everywhere the cause of
ignorance and the like. In reality, She is the ‘life’ of all states of being, because
they are established in consciousness. The sense is that nothing at all can manifest
apart from consciousness. That is said there (in the Siddhayogīśvarīmata):
‘She who is Kuṇḍalinī is said here to be the womb (yoni) of the universe.
One should know Her to be the (smallest) fraction of time (tuṭi). She is the life
The first time he does that (ad 220-221ab), we can be sure it is the SMY, as he identifies

the source of a part of Abhinava’s citation as being from there. We can assume that the
passages in the commentaries of the following verses introduced in this way are from the
same source, otherwise Jayaratha would most probably have signalled that it is not.
Certainly, they all reflect the basic structure of the alphabet and the terminology related to
it found here. Thus, Jayaratha justifies the identification of the vowels with Śiva – ‘seed’,
and the consonants with the śakti-‘matrix’ (yoni) in one of these citations. This is a very
unusual identification. Most commonly (if not always), the vowels are feminine and the

consonants masculine. This reversal can be said to be one of the defining characteristics of
this symbolism here and a good example of it.

“” Veṛses 3/220-225 are quoted by Kṣemarāja, commentary on ŚSū 2/7:

(mātṛkācakrasaṁbodhaḥ). According to the published text, they are said to be from the
Siddhāmrta. But as no text with name is quoted anywhere and Abhinava has just stated

that he is drawing from the Siddhayogīśvarīmata, 1 take this to be an error for
‘Siddhāmata’, which is a common way of referring to the SYM. In any case, Kṣemarāja is
quoting directly from the Tantrāloka. This is clear because the verses from the SYM
Jayaratha quotes differ. This is not surprising. Abhinava says that he is presenting the
maltter (artha) taught in the text rather than a direct citation. Kṣemarāja may well have

been aware of this; nonetheless, he treats Abhinava’s reworking of a passage from
scripture as scripture itself.

TANTRĀLOKA

within the universe also. She is said to the seed (of all things) and her nature

consciousness."!

The reading ‘mātrā’ (meaning ‘measure’, found in some manuscripts

instead of ‘sātra’) is wrong, (as) it does not yield any extra acceptable meaning

(artha). As is the meaning, so is its application (of which in this case there would

be none)." Rather, that would entail (accepting) a meaning which is not in accord
(with the overall sense), and is an inappropriate word. So (having said) that,
enough of so much (detailed analysis).® From Her, who is such, arise three

(forms of) reflective awareness, called the Absolute (A), Will (I) and Knowledge
(U), and from these three (forms of) reflective awareness, all the other forms of

reflective awareness emerge in the manner that has been and will be described
(further ahead). That is said there (in the Siddhayogīśvarīmata): ʻThe letters arise

after the three powers have arisen’.

He (now goes on to) analyse this (process).

“! Ṭheṣe are the first lines of a passage Jayaratha quotes from the SYM, which continues
in the series of quotations in the commentary to this and the following verses up to 225,

that are most probably drawn from the SYM (see previous note). Although they cannot be
traced in the short Nepalese recension of the SYM, the idea that by recognising the Mantra
nature of all utterances one can master speech is consistent with the teaching in the short
version of the SYM, edited by Tōrzsók (1999: 218).
“ The word ‘mātra’ in common usage is a neuter noun meaning a ‘measure’. The
feminine nātrā is an adjectival form agreeing with ‘Kuṇḍalinī’. In fact, we do find this
term in the Tantras to denote Kuṇḍalinī as the measure of Mantric energy. If we accept
this reading, the sentence would say: “She who is the measure/energy Kuṇḍalini is said to
be the womb (yoni) of the universe.’ The Vedic syllable OṀ, which serves as the model or

Tantric seed-syllable Mantras such as HRIM, ŚRĪṀ etc., is analysed in the Upaniṣads as

consisting of three or three and a half measures. The first three (A U M) are audible, and

correspond to waking, dreaming and deep sleep. This means that in the course of its
audible utterance, the one who recites it traverses these three states. The ‘half measure’ is
the silent upward-moving resonance of consciousness in the fourth state, in which the
Brahman is experienced. It is the silent resonance of the Unstruck Sound of Kuṇḍalinī,

who is the energy of the vital breath (prāṇaśakti) and speech (vācchakti). As such, she is

the ‘measure’, as the spiritual energy — mātrā –- of this resonance that transports individual
consciousness encapsulated in the current of the upward streaming vital breath into

transcendental consciousness.

“ Here Jayaratha objects that referring to Kuṇḍalinī as the ‘measure’ is incorrect in this

specific sense, and adds nothing to the meaning in its general sense as ‘śakti’. One
wonders whether Jayaratha’s rejection of the reading ‘mātrā’ is justified, if the only
reason for it is that he finds no applicable meaning in the word, when clearly this is not
true.

“ It is clear here that this reference is from the Siddhayogīśvarīmata, which Jayaratha

apparently continues to quote up to the commentary on 225. If so, we can say that this
much, at least, of the basic framework of the symbolic representation of the alphabet on

which Abhinava’s exposition is based is drawn from both the Mālinīvijayottara and the

Siddhayogeśvarīmata, although he interprets it in his own way.

“ Jayaratha supplies the passages that are Abhinava’s sources of these verses. Thus, we
can easily observe the skill with which Abhinava condenses them together. He does this so
well that, although Jayaratha knows that this is what Abhinava is doing, he attributes these
verses to him as an ‘analysis’ of what has just been stated.

CHAPTER THREE

The Five-fold Point (bindu)

rī || 232 1

fkaī-a

fē a:

ā ity avarṇād ityādi yāvad vaisargikī kalā || 221 ||
kakārādisakārāntā visargāt pañcadhā sa ca |

bahiś cāntaś ca hṛdaye nāde ‘tha parame pade || 222 ||
bindur ātmani mūrdhānte hṛdayād vyāpako hi saḥ |

Ā arises from the letter A, and so on, up to the power of emission.
(The consonants) from K to S are born of emission. And this, (the Point
(bindu),) īs five-fold, namely, 1) external, 2) internal, 3) within the heart, 4)
within Sound, and 5) within the Supreme Abode. The Point within the Self
pervades (the body) from the heart up to the extremity of the head

(mūrdhānta). (221cd-223ab)

The first ‘itī’ (of ā ity avarṇād – ‘Ā arises from the letter A’) reflects on
the essential nature (of A), whereas the other (iti of ity ādi – ‘and so on’) on its
modality (up to the power of emission). Thus, just as Bliss (Ā) arises from the
Absolute (A), in the same way Sovereignty (śirrī– Ī) arises from the Will (icchā
–1), and Decrease (inatā – Ū) from Expansion (unmeṣa – U). Thus ‘the power of
emission’, the nature of which is the letter H, and is such, arises at the end (of the
series of letters) beginning with K and ending with S. The meaning is that all the
letters have arisen (in this way). That is said there (in the Siddhayogeśvarīmata):

‘The letter Ā is born from the letter A, and it is said that Ī (is born) from

the letter I. The letter Ū is (born) from the letter U, and the neuter (group of
letters) from the letter r. The vowel AI is in the letter E, and the letter AU in the
“ The reference in the ŚSūvi (p. 32) reads mārdhānte (‘within the extremity of the headʼ)

for mūrdhāntaṁ (‘up to the extremity of the head’). My practically literal translation is

supported by the passage Jayaratha himself quotes from the SYM. According to that,

Bindu is within five forms of the Self, located in five places within the subtle body,

ranging from the heart up to the End of the Twelve. Jayaratha lists the same locations, and
so must also have understood Abhinava in this way. I have therefore translated in accord
with the immediate sense supported by the SYM. Jayaratha reworks the meaning of this
passage in order to accommodate the Trika triad of Nara, Śakti and Śiva into the five. To
do this, he understands the passage to mean: the Point (bindu), is five-fold, namely, 1) (as

the Point itself then) 2) externally within the Heart (as Nara –- the individual soul) and 3)

internally (within the Heart as the state of rest). (Then) 4) (externally within) Sound (as
Śakti) and 5) (interṇally) within the Supreme Abode (that is, within the End of the Twelve
as Śiva). (Residing) within the (fivefold) Self, (the Point) pervades (the body) from the
heart up to the extremity of the head (mārdhānta).

TANTRĀLOKA

letter O. The letter M is anusvāra (which literally means ‘following on from the
vowelsʼ), and H is said to be emission.”
Moreover,
‘There are said to be thirty-two energies, beginning with the letter K and
ending with the letter S.”
One should say ‘ending with the letter Mʼ, in which case (it would imply

that what is meant is) ‘starting with the (class of consonants,) that begins with the

letter Kʼ. In order to explain that the gutturals are consonants and that they are

born from the letter A (grammarians define the gutturals as follows): ‘A, the

gutturals, H and emission are guttural’. So, in accord with this view (niīti), the
gutturals, the letter H, and emission arise from the letter A alone. The term

‘power of emission’ refers in general to emission, and so indicates that it is both

the supreme (transcendent) (para) and lower (immanent) (apara) (form). Thus, as

all this arises just out of emission, emission itself manifests as each particular
(form of) reflective awareness. This is the meaning.

It is one with the supreme subject, and by encompassing (within itself) the

entire universe, shining forth as A and H in an internal and external form, it
manifests the state (which is the Trika triad of) Nara (the individual soul), Śakti

and Siva. That is said there (in the Siddhayogeśvarīmata):

‘That is said in this way to be the Point (bindu), attaining which the
universe exists. The Garland of the Point is deployed by (its) division into thirty-

eight parts (kalā). It is said that all things associated with (the letters) beginning
with A and ending with M are pervaded by the Point.’

Thus he says that ‘this, (as the Point (bindu),) is five-fold’. ‘And’
(implies) a reason, namely, that emission itself is 1) ‘the Point’, that is, the
autonomous subject (engaged) in the act of perception (vidikriyā). 2) (īt is

present) in its external form within the Heart as Nara because, even though it is in
its external form, 3) it rests within the internal nature. 4) It (is present) ‘in Sound’
(nāda) as Śakti, and 5) in its inner form (antārūpatā) ʻwithin the Supreme
Abodeʼ, that is, manifesting as Śiva within the End of the Twelve, (the Point) has
(thus) five modalities.
Thus, it is also located in the (centres in the) body, (arranged along its
axis from) the heart to the head, namely, in the heart, throat, forehead, at the End
of Śakti (śaktyanta) (in the Cavity of Brahmā at the top of the head),% and in the
This is probably a reference to a projection (nyāsa) onto the body of Mantras divided
into iḥṭ
parts. The well-known group of five Mantras known as the Five Brahmās,
that invoke Śiva’s five faces as Vāmadeva, Sadyojāta, Tatpuruṣa, Aghora and Īśāna, is
divided in this way. (Sanderson 2009: 63 n 69). Concerning these five, see below, 15,338.

‘ Jayaratha says the same above in TĀv ad 3/(110cd-111ab) (110).

“V We know from the reference below that the End of Śakti is the End of the Nose. The
term nāsā, which literally means ‘nose’, denotes the energy of Kuṇḍalinī, who is

sometimes called nāsikāśakti, ‘the energy of the nose’. This is because She governs and is,

essentially, the energy of the vital breath, just as She is that of Speech (vācchakti) and

CHAPTER THREE

End of the Twelve. But although it has five aspects in this way, in fact it

ultimately amounts to having just three forms, and so there is no need to doubt at
all that there is a contradiction between what was said previously and (here)

subsequently. Surely (one may ask,) how can (the Point), which is only one, be
present in the Heart and the other places? (Thus, in response to this question,) he
says that ‘it pervades (the body). As is said there (in the Siddhayogeśvarīmata):

‘One is the Outer Self (bāhyātmā). The Inner Self (antarātmā) is the
second one. The third one is the Self of the Heart (hrṛdayātmā). The fourth is the
Self of Sound (nādātmā). The fifth is the Supreme Self (paramātmā). In this way,

the

Point

is

of

five

kinds.

O Goddess, it is in the Heart, the throat, the forehead, the end of the nose (in the
Cavity of Brahmā), and in the End (of the Twelve). Thus, the Point pervades (the

body).

In this way, Anuttarā itself, which is this power of emission of the

Supreme Goddess (Parameśvarī), having made (Her) gross (cosmic) form

manifest up to the letter H, again brings it to rest within Her own nature, which is
the Absolute (A), because She does not fall from Her own nature. (She does this)

in order to illumine this reflective awareness of ‘I', which is the supreme vitality
of Mantra at one with the subject, within which all the universe has been
withdrawn. It is proclaimed in all the scriptures (śāstra) that, (as Utpaladeva
says):

consciousness (cicchakti). Commenting on ŚSū 3/45, Kṣemarāja explains that the word
nāsikā denotes the power of the vital breath (prāṇaśakti), because it ‘moves on a crooked

path’ (nāsate). Cf. below, 15/336-338, Dyczkowski 1992a: 174 ff. and 2009 intro. vol. 1

p. 24.

The upper extremity of the flow of this energy comes to rest in the Cavity of
Brahmā on the crown of the head. The Cavity of Brahmā on the crown of the head is also
called ‘the End of the Twelve’, because it is at a distance of twelve finger breadths from
the tip of the nose. Thīs, it seems, is what Jayaratha means to say, and so the End of the

Twelve to which he refers here is the one at a distance of twelve fingers above the head.
Indeed, there seems no other way to read what the SYM itself says these places are,

namely, the Heart, the throat, the forehead, the end of the nose, and in the End. ‘The end
of the nose, which Jayaratha glosses as ‘the end of Śakti’, must be above the forehead,
and the ‘“End’ must be above that. Abhinava refers to the SYM as saying that ‘(the Point)
pervades (the body) from the heart to the extremity of the head (mūrdhānta).’ This would

lead one to suppose that the “End’ is ‘the end or extremity of the head°. This is most
probably the Cavity of Brahmā, which is indeed located at the highest extremity of the

body. If this is so, the End of the Nose/Śakti should be somewhere between the forehead

and the Cavity of Brahmā. However, we do not find many, if any, references, to this
location in the early Śaiva Tantras, as they do not refer to a Thousand Petaled Lotus within

the cranium, in which a series of similar places are said to be located. So it is possible that

Jayaratha is correct.
The equivalences are as follows: 1) Outer Self – heart; 2) Inner Self – throat; 3) Self of
the Heart – forehead; 4) Self of Sound – Cavity of Brahmā; 5) Supreme Self – End of the

Twelve.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The repose of the light (of consciousness) within its own nature is said to

be the state of (pure) ‘’ (consciousness) (ahaṁbhāva).!

That is also the supreme reality of Mātṛkā. It is taught with this intention
that: `ṭhere is no Vidyā greater than Mātṛkā.’ It bestows the accomplishment
(siddhi) which is both worldly enjoyment (bhukti) and liberation to those yogis
who have fully understood its nature in this way (i.e. as pure ‘I consciousness),

otherwise (if it is not known), on the contrary, assuming the form of joy and grief
etc. by pervading (anuvedha) each and every word (vācaka), it binds the

“’’ APS 22cd, also quoted above ad 1/55, 3/203¢d-204ab and 6/238cd-239ab (238).
Abhinava himself refers to this line in TĀ 5/61cd-62ab. The absolute ‘l’ consciousness is
the reflective awareness that the Light of consciousness has of its own nature.
Contemplating itself, it ‘rests’ within itself, in the sense that it does not issue forth into the

cycle of emanation and withdrawal. This notion, which one could say is the most
fundamental one of the philosophy of the Pratyabhijñā, does not appear in the Tantras

themselves, at least not in this form. However, the notion that deity and hence reality
deploys itself as the universe of the energies of the letters is well represented in the
Tantras in general. Equating the former with the latter, as is uniformly done by these Trika

masters, then we can indeed say that, in that form, it is well known to the scriptures.
However, although the energies of letters are said to be those of the Goddess, in the

Tantras themselves, Her identification with the reflective awareness of the Light of
consciousness is unknown to them. For an extensive discussion, see Dyczkowski 2004: 29
ff.

’ SVT 11/199b. A Vidyā’ is a Mantra of a goddess. This statement and the verse from

the Spandakārikā quoted below, as is the full verse of the APS quoted above, are also

cited by Kṣemarāja in his commentary on ŚSū 2/7. Clearly Jayaratha modelled his
commentary on that of Kṣemarāja.

“’ At the most basic level of Mantra practice, Mātrkā is the Goddess who embodies all the

energies of the letters, which are also called mātṛkā. The letters in their normal

alphabeṭical order, understood to be such, are arranged in consecrated grids (prastāra); the

most common is the Meruprastāra, which is in the form of a triangle. The teacher
constructs the Mantra, into which he initiates his disciple, by drawing letters from this

grid. In this way, the letters as parts of the body of Mātṛkā are sacred and powerful, and so
serve to elevate the soul. Otherwise, as profane letters that constitute the words of
common speech and what they represent, they throw it down into the realms of thought
constructs clothed in speech. Moreover, as we have seen, Anuttara Trika adds a further,
deeper dimension to the understanding of Mātṛkā, which, containing all the letters from A

to H, is AHAM, the pure self-awareness of Śiva consciousness.

Concerning mātṛkā, see Dyczkowski 1992b: 19 ff., with reference to ŚSū 1/4: “It

is a fact clearly proved (siddha) by personal experience that speech is invariably

associated with thought, while thought is the source of speech; they stand and fal
together. Mental representation, which orders the influx of sensations and presents us with

a balanced meaningful picture of the outer physical environment, memory, the elaboration

of ideas, and the shifting tide of emotions, are all intimately connected with language. . . .

To grasp the basis of language is to come in touch with the very cause of our daily life.
The creative awareness (vimarśa) through which language becomes meaningful and by

virtue of which we can articulate our intentions and ideas both to ourselves and to others,
is Mātṛkā. (Dyczkowski 1992b: 20)
When we hear something that pleases us, we feel happy, just as we are saddened

by hearing something we do not like. The power words have to affect us in this way is due
to the presence of that reflective awareness within them, here called Mātṛkā, which relates

CHAPTER THREE

fettered souls. Devoid of the fruit which is worldly enjoyment and liberation,
(Mātṛkā) is fruitless. This, in brief, is the meaning. That has been said (in the
Stanzas of Vibration):

‘This, Śiva’s power of action, residing in the fettered soul, binds it, (but)

when (its true nature) is understood and it is set on its own Path, (this power)

bestows success (siddhi).’

This is not only the case with regards (to Mātṛkā, that is, the letters) itself,
it is also so with respect to Mantras, whose quality is to ‘reflect’ (manana) and to

‘save’ (trāṇa). Thus, he says:

Mantras are Effective Encompassed by the A and H of AHAṀ

#-āī; Ḥg: ŪāevŪad I| 323 II
ādimāntyavihīnāstu mantrāḥ syuḥ śaradabhravat || 223 ||
Mantras devoid of the first (letter) (A) and the last (H) would indeed

be (barren) like autumn clouds.® (223cd)

‘The first” (letter) is the Absolute (Anuttara – A); ʻthe last’ is the letter
H. Thus, ‘Mantras’ also ‘devoid of the first and the last’ (etters, that constitute)

the reflective awareness of ‘’, that is, not understood to be of that nature, ‘would

be (barren) like autumn cloudsʼ. The meaning is that they do nothing. That is
said there (in the Siddhayogīśvarīmata).
‘Mantras devoid of the first (letter) (A) and the last (H). do not make one

successful (siddhikara), because, ignorant of (their) root source, they are as

them to us. For example, if we hear a doctor tell us that we are very ill, we are disturbed,
just as, conversely, we are happy to hear someone tell us good news. This is because we

do not just hear sounds coming from the other person’s mouth or even just words, we
experience that they relate to us.

“’ ṢpKā 48. See Dyczkowski 1992a: 259-263 for an exposition of the meaning of this
verse. Mātṛkā is commonly identified with the power of action (see, for example, NT

28/38).
“’ The pure ‘T consciousness Mātṛkā represents not only vitalizes the energies of the

letters it encompasses, it also vitalizes the Mantras made from them. Thus they ‘reflect’, as

their vital energy is essentially the pure reflective awareness of ‘I’, and ‘save’ because,
identifying this awareness as that of fundamental consciousness, it liberates from the

mistaken, binding identification with the body and mind.
% Cf. MM p. 68: yathoktaṁ śrīkaṇṭhīyasaṁhitāyām -

ādimāntavihīnās tu mantrāḥ syuḥ śaradabhravat |
guror lakṣaṇam eṭāvad ādimāntaṁ nivedayet ||
Here, Maheśvarānanda identifies the source of this and the following line as the
Śrīkaṇṭhīyasaṁhitā. They are practically as we find them in the TĀ, with minor
variations; notably, he reads ādimānta- for ādimantya-, which is found uniformly in all the

references supplied by Jayaratha. As Jayaratha presents the source of the first line, we

know that Maheśvarānanda was in actual fact quoting directly from the Tantrāloka.

TANTRĀLOKA

fruitless as (barren) autumn clouds or a sky flower or a hare’s horn or the son of a

barren woman or, O goddess, the (sexual) fluid (drava) of a eunuch. They are

then as fruitless as Brahmins without the (sacred) fire. Mantras devoid of the first
(letter) (A) and the last (H) are as fruitless as that, like one who drinks the water

of a mirage.ʼ
If, on the contrary, (letters) are understood to be essentially the supreme
vitality of Mantra, which is the reflective awareness of ‘T, then they give rise to
each and every one of (their desired) results. This is the general meaning. As he
will say:

‘They say that the reflective awareness, uncreated and unsullied, which is

this reality, is (supreme) ‘’ (aham) (consciousness). This, indeed, is the
luminosity of the Light (of consciousness). This is the vitality (vīrya) and heart of

all Mantras, without it, they would be insentient, like living beings without a

heart. Whatever one who is established in this uncreated Heart does, or (however)

he breathes or reflects, is all considered to be his repetition of Mantra (iapa).’

And 5o, a thorough knowledge of that is the primary characteristic of a

teacher. Thus, he says:

guror lakṣaṇam eṭāvad ādimāntyaṁ ca vedayet |
pūjyaḥ so ʻham iva jñānī bhairavo devatātmakaḥ || 224 |I
The characteristic of a teacher is just this, namely, that he should
know the first and last (letters of the alphabet — A and H). He who knows
(this) is as worthy of devotion as I am (so’ham iva). He is Bhairava (Himself),

the deity.” (224)

Thus, the Lord has said that (the teacher) is as worthy of worship by
everybody as I am (aham iva), full (to overflowing with) all things, and because

he possesses (this) knowledge etc., (his) nature is the illumination (of the Light of
consciousness) (dyotana). As is said there (in the Siddhayogeśvarīmata):
‘The teacher who attains the first and the last (letter) is worthy of worship
(pūjya) in the assembly of yogis and is to be worshipped (even) more in (this)

worldly existence.' (The deities) free him of defects (cchidra) and grace him.
They bestow boons on him and look after him like a son. O Goddess, he becomes
worthy of respect everywhere, just as you orI am. O fair lady, he is a man of
knowledge (jñānin) and is the most excellent of practitioners (sādhaka). He is said
’ MSs Jh and T read dravyam for dravam.
““ Below, 4/192-194.

“ This verse is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/334 (333).
MS T reads bhuvi ‘in the world’ for bhave ‘in (this) worldly existence’.

CHAPTER THREE

to be the most excellent of all. He knows the divine (daiva)™' and bestows all the

accomplishments (siddhi). He is (a true) ascetic (yati) and a learned man
(paṇḍita). He (indeed) is said to be Lord Bhairava.

Thus, not only does this kind of teacher naturally (svabhāvataḥ) know
Mantras to be the vitality (vīrya) of the radiantly shining supreme power (of
absolute ‘’ consciousness), (he also knows that this is the nature) of any, even

(the most ordinary) verse drawn from a common worldly (book) (laukikam api

ślokādi). So he says:

ślokagāthādi yat kiṁcid ādimāntyayutaṁ tataḥ |
tasmād vidaṁs tathā sarvaṁ mantratvenaiva paśyati || 225 ||
Therefore, knowing whatever verse or prose (he utters) united with

the first and last (etter) in this way, he sees everything as Mantra.” (225)

‘Thereforeʼ, because ‘he’, that is, the teacher, possesses (that) most
excellent knowledge, reflecting on all that is external, be it verse or (anything
anyone says,) as a form of the reflective awareness of (universal) ‘I’
(consciousness), experiences directly that it does the same work (as Mantra. This

is described in its very definition, namely, that a Mantra is so-called because it is)

‘reflection (manana), which is the knowledge of all things, and it saves (trāṇa),

that is, it bestows grace on the soul (lost) in the world of transmigration

(saṁsārin).” As this is so, that (common saying, whatever it may be,) is also the
same reflective awareness of ‘’ (consciousness) that is connected to the first letter

(A) and the last (H). This is the meaning. The point is that nothing can manifest

apart from the supreme subject’s essential nature, which is the Light (of
consciousness). That is said there (in the Siddhayogīśvarīmata):
‘Verse, prose, metre (vṛtta), song, declaration, praise, (or) long prose

metre (daṇḍaka) – if they are conjoined with the first and the last (letters), they

too are Mantras. Then what to say of the one who grasps it (tadgraha)!”™
” Alternatively, one can translate daiva as meaning ‘fate’

7 Abhinava is paraphrasing the lines from the SYM quoted here by Jayaratha.

” This is one possible translation; another could be ‘what to say of (the Mantra called)
Tadgraha” There is a long Mantra called Tadgraha, which is described in the Trika
scripture called the Tantrasadbhāva, from which it is drawn by the Kubjikāmata. This
Mantra is set in the form of anuṣṭubh (śloka) verses. So it is possible that this verse serves

to
justify the classification of Tadgraha as a Mantra, although it is in this form. For the
details and the complete Mantra, see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. vol. 1: 282 and 641. The
mantra is recorded in KM 17/71-76; it is reproduced in Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 13 p. 1516. Note that the meaning is also: ‘they too are Mantras, then what to say of the one who
receives it (tadgraha).

TANTRĀLOKA

And this, (the full extent) of the unfolding of all things (viśvasphāra), is
the power of emission itself. The Lord has not only said this in the scriptures of
the schools (naya) closely related to us, He has said (the same) in those others that
are outside (our traditions and public) (bāhya). He says this:

The Power of Emission Taught in the Aitareyāraṇyaka

fērtxtīkfāāa ādĩ 7 frēfta |

viṣargaśaktir viśvasya kāraṇaṁ ca nirūpitā |
aitareyākhyavedānte parameśena vistarāt || 226 ||

The Supreme Lord has declared at length in the Vedānta called

Aitareya™ that the power of emission is the cause of the universe. (226)

‘The Supreme Lordʼ, who assumed the role of the sage Aitarīya, (has

declared this) ‘at length’. (Indeed,) this is the main subject of his entire book (i.e.
the Aitareyopaniṣad). This is the sense.
He corroborates this (view) by paraphrasing (the text):

1| 33%
yal lohitaṁ tad agnir yad vīryaṁ sūryenduvigraham ḷ

The word ‘hāhya’ means ‘extemal’. In this context it can refer to a school, view or
scripture etc. that is ‘external’ to the Trika and related scriptures. It may also refer to those
that are ‘externalʼ, in the sense of public, that is, that they are not ‘iīmner’ secret scriptures.

From the Trika point of view both meanings apply to the Vedic corpus with respect to

these scriptures, even though the Vedas should, strictly speaking, only be accessible to

authorized Brahmins.

” The following passage from here to 331 is a loose paraphrase of references drawn from

the Aitareyāraṇyaka, quoted by Jayaratha in the commentary. Abhinava refers to it
generically as ‘vedānta’. Normally, this is a way of referring to the Upaniṣads, but it may
also be used in a general sense to indicate all revealed Vedic literature that comes after the
Veda (which is the literal meaning of the word ‘vedānta’). Note that by Supreme Lord,
Abhinava means Śiva. Throughout the Tantrāloka thisis one of the ways Abhinava refers

to Śiva as he who utters scripture. Of course, Vedikas would not accept that Śiva also
spoke the Vedas. Clearly, the point of making this reference is to establish that the

teachings he expounds concerning visarga, especially in the basic literal sense of emission

of male seed, is well accepted in general. It is not just a Kaula teaching. Abhinava refers to
Vedic beliefs, practice and ritual in several places in the Tantrāloka to make this point,
even though in his Śaiva perspective, they are inferior with respect to the Kaula
equivalents and their scriptural basis, which as such, are in no need of justification from
Vedic authorities. His intention is rather to point out that Kaula belief and practice is not

as outrageous as the orthodox followers of the Veda and related sources believe. There are
equivalents in the Vedas.

CHAPTER THREE

a iti brahma paramaṁ tatsaṅghaṭtodayātmakam || 227 ||
The red (flow of menses) is Fire, while (its) vitality is in the form of

the Sun and Moon. The Supreme Brahman is (the emission) ‘H’ that arises
from their union.” (227)
It is ‘redʼ, that is, energized (dīpta) (and shining), because it is one with
the Light (of consciousness), and so is the Abode of the Absolute (anuttaraṁ
dhāma). Moreover, because it is one with the subject, it is Fire. Its ‘viṭality is the
unfolding (expansion) (sphāra) of the power (of consciousness), which is
knowledge and action. As the means and the object of knowledge etc., its form is
the Sun and Moon. Such is the nature (and form) of these two, namely, the red
(menstrual blood) (of Fire) and the vitality (of sperm of the Sun and Moon).

‘Their union’ is their oneness. It ‘arisesʼ, that is, its form is perpetually effulgent
(with manifestation) (prasphuradrūpa), because it never sets. That is said to be
‘the Supreme Brahman’, which is the oneness (sāmarasya) of Śiva and Śakti,
the letters A and H. May this (pure) ‘I (consciousness) (AHAṀ), which is one
with the supreme subject and is the supreme (form of) reflective awareness, arise
and, by its glorious power (māhātmya), may all this creation (srṣṭi) (of the

universe of) words and meanings, manifest. As (the Lord has) sung (in the
Bhagavadgītā):
‘The supreme Brahman is the imperishable (reality) which is one’s own
(essential) nature (svabhāva), said to be the Inner Self (adhyātma). (Its) emission
(visarga), which generates (all) that lives and exists (as well as their fundamental

state of Being) (bhūtabhāva), is called ‘action’ (karman).””

Brief paraphrase of Aitareyāraṇyaka 2/3/7-8, which is quoted by Jayaratha in the
commentary.
BhGT 8/3. Abhinava explains: ‘The supreme Brahman (is so called) because it is

(infinitely) extensive (brhar) (and full) and because it fills (bṛrṁṅhaka) (and nourishes all
things), and so it should be called the Inner Self, as (that is one’s) ‘own’ abiding inherent

nature (dharma) called consciousness. The emission of the Brahman, whose nature is

consciousness, is the manifestation of the outer state (bahirbhāva), and the inner
manifestation of the externalized state that takes place by virtue of the freedom (of the
Brahman), which is the Lordship of all the energies it has encompassed in itself as its
undivided (and unconditioned) (aparicchinna) external nature. (That emission) generates,
in due order, (all that lives,) that is, the perceivers from Brahmā onwards, and (all that)

exists, that is, insentient entities; (thus, it) manifests the wonderful variety of sentient and
insentient beings. In the same way, it gives rise to the (fundamental) state of Being
(bhūtabhāva) (of all things), which is the (truly existent) reality (satyatva), from which all

the unfolding expansion of what runs contrary to it has fallen away.”

By perceiving two meanings in the expression bhūtabhāva as a) living (bhūta)
and insentient being (bhāva) and b) fundamental state of Being, Abhinava expounds the
profound insight that the emission of the Absolute simultaneously generates all things
(subjects and their objects), even as it generates and is the fundamental Being which

transcends and sustains them. In this way, creation not only does not obscure the
Brahman, it reveals Him.

TAṄNTRĀLOKA

This same eṣsential nature (svarūpa) (of all things) has been described
previously at length, there is no (need) to make an effort here again (to describe it
further).

In (the context of) Kaula sexual practice (caryākrama), ‘redʼ is the
menstrual discharge, which is the juice (rasa) of digested food (pakvānnarasa),

and that is ‘Fire’, of which the digested (food) is menses; or else it (can be

understood to be) the ‘vitality of all the menstrual discharge, which has as its

fruit (sexual) bliss. This
(saṣṭhagrahaparyāya).

is

the

sense,

taking

it

to be

a

genitive

(Indeed, it is within the man that this one (i.e. the Self) is initially
conceived): “That which is this sperm (reas) is this radiant energy (tejas) which,

derived from all the limbs (of the body), he bears the Self (of his future offspring)
within (his) Self. (When he pours that into a woman then he begets itṭ).

According to this and other statements there (in the Aitareyāraṇyaka), it is

the Sun and Moon,' because it is made of radiant energy (tejas) (and so is the
Sun), and because it nourishes (and so is the Moon). Thus, because it is the Three

Abodes (of the Fire, Sun and Moon), both these (together) (that is, the menstrual
discharge and sperm) is supremely holy (pāvana), and denoted by (various) words

such as ‘kuṇḍagola’." (Itis said in this regard that):

‘Of these (tatra), the liquid offering (argha) (contained in the sacrificial

veṣssel is produced) by union with the female Kaula consort (śakti).”

In accord with (this) teaching (nīti), which will be imparted further ahead,

it is said to be the supreme thing to be adopted (paramopādeya). 1t is the

‘Supreme Brahman’, that arises perpetually (nityodita) from their union, and is

Read tatparipāko ‘ṛtavaṁ for tatparipāko ‘nnaṁ.

” The text reads: yal lohitaṁ tad agnir, which can be understood in two ways. One is
‘that which is the red (menses), that is Fire’ or else ‘that which is the red (menses) is its
Fire.” After having explained the expression assuming the first meaning, he now explains

it from the point of view of the second meaning, which ‘has the sense of a genitive’; that

is, the Fire of the red (menses). The first meaning takes menstrual blood to be one of the

bodily constituents (dhātu) produced by the digestion of food. The Fire with which it is
identified in that case is the fire that digests food, the digested product of which is
menstrual blood. In the second case, the Fire, that is, vitality or energy, is the fire of the

menstrual blood.
Aitareyāraṇyaka 2/5. The same line is found in Aitareyopaniṣad 411, where saṁbhūtam

replaces the reading saṁbhūya. The additional text in brackets, found in the Upanisad, has

been added to complete the sense. According to this Vedic belief, it is the man who
initially becomes pregnant. The woman is the bearer of his seed. While this belief is most

probably a remnant of a prehistoric notion, it serves to illustrate in the Vedic context how

the Self is self-sustaining and self-regenerating. In the present context, it coincides with

the notion that everything is contained within Śiva as His seed.

”"! Read sūryacandrarāpaṁ for sāryācandrarūpaṁ.
”' The term kuṇḍagola commonly denotes the mixture of female (kunḍa) and male (gola)
sexual fluids. See above, note 1,77.

Below, 29/15b.

CHAPTER THREE

egoity (ahaṁbhāva), that (it) has assumed within the conditioned (niyata) body
and the rest, due to which this creation (sarga), male, female and neuter (takes

place). As is said there (in the Airareyāraṇyaka):

“This (menstrual) blood within a woman is the form of Agni (Fire), and so

should not be despised. Now this sperm within man is the form of Āditya (Śun),

and so should not be despised.””

Again: ʻAḤ (emission) is the Brahman. The ‘ is present there.”

Thusṣ he says that the universe is (emission’s) glorious power (vaibhava).

JGHTTST
T] JS=TTYITĀTĪRF I 2A¢ II
tasyāpi ca paraṁ vīryaṁ pañcabhūtakalātmakam |
bhogyatvenānnarūpaṁ ca śabdasparśarasādikam || 228 II
His supreme vitality is the energy (kalā) of the five gross elements. As
the object of enjoyment, it is food, which consists (of the sensations of) sound,

touch, taste and the rest.” (228)

The five objects of sense, sound and the rest are aspects (arīśa) of the five

gross elements, Earth and the rest. That is the ‘supreme vitality’ of the supreme
Brahman, whose nature is such, as has been explained. ‘His powers are the entire

universe . . .' According to such statements, it is the unfolding (expansion)

(sphāra) of (His) power that has attained its supreme stage (parā koṭi) as (the
Brahman’s) glorious cosmic power (viśvavaibhava). Thīs is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask,) if this unfolding (expansion) of that (vitality
consists of the five objects of the senses), sound and the rest, and it is one with the
enjoyer of that, then why is that (i.e. the enjoyer) also not such? With this doubt in
mind, he says (that the Brahman’s vitality) ‘as the object of enjoyment’, not

indeed as the enjoyer, is ‘food’, not, on the contrary, the eater of food. In (the

context of) Kaula sexual practice (caryākrama), this same (vitality assumes) the
form of the body and the rest, made of the five gross elements, by the union of the
red (menstrual blood) and sperm (vīrya). And that (is said) there itself (in the

Aitareyāraṇyaka):

‘He who knows (his own) Self as (the hymn) uttered five-fold, and from
which all this arises, is a sage. Earth, Air, Space, Water, and Light (are the Self,

the five-fold hymn. From him all things arise, in him all things are dissolved
uitareyāraṇyaka 2/3/7.
”" Ibid. 2/3/8.

”" Read, in accord with Jayaratha’s explanation and the reading of MS C,
šabdasparśarasādikam for śabdasparśarasātmakam. The usual sequential order is: sound
(śabda), touch (sparśa), form (rūpa), taste (rasa), and smell (gandha). The change here
can be explained as an accommodation for the metre.

' See above, note to 1/11 1lcd-1 12ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

away. He who knows this is a refuge for his friends.) To him who knows food and

the eater of food, is born the eater of food and possesses food. Food is Water and

the Earth, as it is from that that food is made.””"

Surely (one may ask,) what proof (pramāṇa) is there that ‘this unfolding

(expansion) of that (vitality) is (the five objects of the senses), sound and the
rest’? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Aesthetic Experience as the Arousal of the Vitality of Consciousness

JTasfī] 733T āīāTZĪTTTTṀR; |

ṇãq 1| 22< 11
śabdo ‘pi madhuro yasmād vīryopacayakārakaḥ |

tad dhi vīryaṁ paraṁ śuddhaṁ visisr̥kṣãtmakaṁ matam || 229 ||

Even a sweet sound intensifies the vitality (vrya) (of consciousness),
and so is that vitality itself; its nature, the desire to emit (visisṛkṣā), is

considered to be supremely pure." (229)

”! Aitareyāraṇyaka 273/1. The addition which completes this passage, not quoted by

Jayaratha, has been put in brackets. We have already noted that one of the main goals of
the Vedic sacrifice is to obtain food from the gods who, having received the offerings of

food made to them, graciously bestow it by fertilizing the earth with the vital seed of rain
(see above, note 3,487, also below 3/230-231). In the later Vedic texts, this cycle came to

be understood as aspects of the one reality, that is, the Brahman identified with food
(anna). This doctrine, already taught before the Upanisṣads, is expounded most extensively
in the Taittirīyōpaniṣad, which is largely dedicated to it. For example, we read there:

‘From food, verily, the creatures are born, whatsoever dwells on the earth.

Moreover, by food, in truth, they live. Moreover, into it also they finally pass. For truly,

food is the eldest of all beings; therefore it is said to be all the medicinal herbs. Verily,

they obtain all food who worship Brahman as food. For truly, food is the eldest of all
beings; therefore, it is said to be all the medicinal herbs. Creatures are born from food and

by food they grow. It is eaten and eats (all) creatures and so is called food.” TUp 2/2/1
(Humeʼs translation)

Thus, the Brahman as food has two aspects (mmukha), namely, food (anna) itself

and the eater of food (annāda). The former is the world, which is the object of enjoyment
(bhogya – lit. ‘that which is to be eaten’) and the latter, the enjoyer (bhoktr lit. ‘the eater°).

He who has realised that his own Self is the Brahman, realises that he is both. Thus, the
Upaniṣad ends with the ecstatic declaration of the realised seer:

‘Iam food! I am food! I am food! (aham annam)

I am the eater of food! I am the eater of food! I am the eater of food! (aham

annamādaḥ) TUp 3/10/5

” Cf. above, 3/208¢d-210 and note 3,651. Abhinava explains in the PTv: “Śiva, Who is

the emission of the vitality of the Great Mantra (ahaṁ) which is Supreme Speech, unites
with the emanation emitted by the Supreme Goddess Who is full to overflowing with the
issue (to which she gives birth), which is the condensed form of the vitality (vīrya) (of the

seed of Śiva consciousness). All that enters in the same way, through the external and

internal (mental) senses, onto the plane of the Central Channel (of the vital breath), which

CHAPTER THREE

is essentially the vitality that gives life to all the limbs of the body, in the form of
awareness (cetanā), and the vital breath (prāṇa), is called ‘vigour’ (ojas). It (is present) in
all the limbs (of the body) as that which gives them life in the form of the vitality (of
consciousness) which is undivided from that (influx of the senses). Then, entering again

through the channels of sight and hearing etc., the form and sound etc. which intensifies
(consciousness) (bṛrhaka), because it is their nature to intensify it, they awaken the Fire

of Desire (kāmānala), which is (essentially) the arousal of this vitality (vīryakṣobha). As is

said (this takes place): “by the (sweet) talk (between lovers) (ālāp) or by touching the
limbs (of the body)” and so on.
For one (whose consciousness) is intensified by the (inner) force (bala) (of the

Self), which precedes (perception) that has developed by (the perception of the beauty of

any) one thing amongst others, such as a (beautiful) colour, is capable of serving as an
instrumental means to bring about the aforementioned arousal (of vitality), which can be
applied to all the objects (of the senses), because everything is of the nature of all things.
(Moreover,) the same arousal takes place by recollection, imagination or the like, because
it is nourished by the infinite number of (meaningful) words (śabda) etc. that reside (as a

potential) in the mind (manas), which consists of all things. Only (that) great vitality,
consisting of all things and fully developed, nourishes and creates, not one that is

undeveloped (apiūrṇa) and decayed, like that of children and the aged.
When (that) arousal of vitality takes place, the source of joy (sukha) is the

freedom consisting of the power of bliss, which is completely full Bhairava consciousness,

and is the great emission (mahāviṣarga) consisting of the pulsation (spanda) (of
consciousness), unmeasured by time or space, of (that same) vitality which, because it
consists of its own (conscious) nature, is (one and) undivided. (Thus) also, (in the same

way, a beautiful) form (rūipa) (beheld) through the eyes brings joy (to them) by means of
the release (visleṣa) of the great emission, which is the arousal of that vitality
(vīryakṣobha). (The same applies) to a sweet (melodious) song etc., (heard) through the
sense of hearing. (However,) in the case of the other senses, (all) else (that enters) within

them effervesces only in itself, and so does not attain a completely full state of emanation

(of bliss).
The same is the case with those who are not nourished by that vitality, that is,
who, like stones, are devoid of the bliss of passion (madanānanda), which is this kind of

arousal of vitality. (For them,) neither the form of a most beautiful young woman nor the

most tender and melodious song that comes from the mouth of (an innocent young)
woman, results in the fullness of bliss. To the degree in which this vitality does not
nourish (consciousness), the wonder (of the experience of beauty) decreases. A total
absence of wonder is insentience itself. (Conversely,) aesthetic sensitivity (sahṛdayatā) is
(a state of) penetration into a heightened (state of) wonder which is the arousal of the

vitality (of consciousness). Only he whose heart is nourished by this endless nourishing
vitality and is dedicated to the practice of attachment to this (form of) enjoyment (by

contemplating fine art or spiritual practice) possesses the dynamism of the most excellent
(unfolding act of) wonder (which is the capacity to relish beauty in this way). (Moreover,

this kind of person experiences) this same wonder even when suffering. The nature of
suffering is, essentially, a particular kind of wonder (camatkriyā), brought about by the

absence of all hope that arises when the inner joy, which is the vitality and expansion (of
consciousness), consisting of the arousal (of love) a son gives or a lover, or (the shock of a
fond) memory, or the sight of something similar, or a cry (for help) and the like (when one
thinks that the son or lover has gone and all that has ceased and) will never exist again.
That was said (by Somānanda with the words): ‘by the expansion (of Siva consciousness)

even

in

(ŚDr 5/9c) PTy p. 45-49.

the

midst

of

suffering.”

TANTRĀLOKA

(Any of) the five (objects of the sense, including) ‘sound’ and the rest,
that are (aesthetically) pleasing (hṛdyāḥ), intensify the vitality which is the
Supreme Brahman. Thus, those who are attentive to that, (experience) the
supreme outpouring of consciousness instantly. This is the meaning. As is said:
‘The yogi who (experiences) the oneness of the unparalleled joy of
savouring singing and other such (beautiful) objects (of sense, his) mind fixed
(and well concentrated on that), becomes of that same (blissful) nature by

identifying with it (anmayatvena).””

The venerable Praśastibhūtipāda also (says the following) with the same
intended meaning (abhiprāya):
‘The worship (arcā) of the righteous (sar) is the nourishment of their

being (that they enjoy) when they experience those things that are pleasant here,
(fine) to behold, their form beautiful, like a beautiful woman.

The point is that if these (things) were not in this way the Supreme
Brahman by nature, how could those who attended carefully to each one,
(experience) an expansion (of consciousness) (vikāsa)?

Surely (one may ask,) is the Supreme Brahman who is such, tranquil

(śānta) (that is, transcendent,) or various (citra) (that is, immanent)? With this

doubt in mind, he says that it is ‘that (vitality) itself . . ’ The purpose of the word
‘itself’ is to remove (this) doubt.” (So he goes on to say that) ‘its nature (is) the
”" VBh 73 (72). This verse is also quoted below in TĀv ad 3/239cd-240ab and above in

See the note there.

ad

3/209cd-210ab.

”" The point Jayaratha is making is that the emphatic enclitic hi’ ‘(that) itself’ indicates

as it stresses that the vitality of consciousness is the supreme transcendent Brahman (the

‘supremely pure’), which tends by its own inherent intention to emit itself and manifest as
all things. This is the answer to the question. The Absolute as the Brahman is

transcendent, insofar as no creation has taken place. It is also immanent, in the sense that it
is on the verge of expanding and pouring itself out as all things. Above (see note 3,445),

the word ‘Brahman’ was derived from the root bṛh, in the sense of to grow strong, expand
or fill. When the Absolute is understood to be the transcendental source, it is called

Anutṭara. It is called Brahman when the intention is to indicate its blissful state (ānanda)

that develops, out of its inner spontaneous joy, into the emission of consciousness as all

things. This state of arousal (kṣobha) at the absolute, universal level is mirrored at the
microcosmic level by the desire that impels the senses towards their objects. This is
especially intense and hence more easily accessible to introspection in the case of the
desire to see or hear, for example, a beautiful object or sound. Viewed in the reverse

perspective, the object enters consciousness, as it were, through the channels of the senses,

and is consumed. This takes place by the blissful ‘vitality’ of consciousness, which, like

the fire believed to be in the stomach, ‘digests’ the object, and so produces the ‘juice’

(rasa) of aesthetic sentiments, as does digestion the ‘juice’ (rasa) which the body
metabolises and so gives it strength and vitality. Cf. below, 3/262ab (3/261) ff.

Notice that by discussing the processes at work in aesthetic experience here,

Abhinava indicates that it is part of the Divine Means, that is, the means to realization

based on the will of consciousness (in this case as ‘the desire to emit’), and is grounded in

CHAPTER THREE

desire to emit’. The meaning is that because (this vitality is the Absolute’s) desire
to create, its essential nature is always that of each (particular) outpouring of the

wonderful variety of all things. It is ‘considered to be’ such by everybody.
Nobody could possibly disagree here (about this).
Although this is so, is (that vitality, the Supreme Brahman) transcendent
or immanent? With this question in mind, he says:

tad balaṁ ca tad ojāś ca te prāṇāḥ ṣā ca kāntatā |

That (vitality) is strength (bala), vigour (ojas), the vital breath and
beauty (kantatā). (230ab)
the direct experience of consciousness as the ‘’, which dynamically engulfs objectivity
and incorporates it into itself.

Read, as does the Aitareyāraṇyaka, sa prāṇaḥ for te prāṇāḥ. We will encounter the

application of vitality, strength and vigour of consciousness in relation to the activity of
the dynamism of the vital breath further ahead in the context of practice in the domain of
the Individual Means (see 6/62cd). There they relate to the power of consciousness
operating in the body through the vital breath, experienced as the vital force that gives life

to the body, senses and mind. Here, in the domain of Śāmbhavopāya, the same power is
experienced directly as the vitality of the pure ‘I’ consciousness, which is its very life. It is

the vital and vitalizing living sentience of consciousness itself, which in the body assumes
the forms of the vital breaths. Here, in the domain free of thought constructs, its distinctive

feature is that it is experienced directly within consciousness, unmediated by the body,
senses or mind as its beauty.

” In his earlier work, the PTv, Abhinava explains the same interconnection between the

reflective awareness of consciousness, emission, aesthetic experience and orgasm, as
aspects of the same arousal of the vitality of consciousness (vīryakṣobha). One may talk
about one or the other in these terms; each implies the others. Thus, he writes:

‘Bhairava’s state, which is transcendental Akula devoid of the waves (of
emanation) and is the stable abode (dhruva) (of supreme consciousness), manifests when
all the forms of the vital breath etc., which are in the channels of the senses, are

completely full (of vitality). (Only then) can one penetrate into the great central abode of
suṣumnā and attain a state of identity with the arousal of the (innate) powers of one’s own
(consciousness). Then, (when this has been attained) and duality has fallen away in all

respects, one penetrates into a state of wonder which is the egoity of the reflective

awareness (of consciousness), loaded with (all its) completely full (and perfect) powers.
(Bhairava’s state manifests) by the release of the emission of this vitality of the Great

Mantra (ahaṁ). (This takes place) by penetrating into the union (yāmala) of Rudra (and
his power), which is the bliss of completely full emanation. (Proof of this is that) one’s
own consciousness (itself) witnesses in the (preliminary) throes of orgasm (kampakāla)
the pleasure of an inner tactile sensation, which consists of the (intense) desire that all the
arousal of the vitality (of consciousness and the vital seed) may pour forth, when one has

(managed) to lay firm hold of the strength (bala) of the exuberance of that vitality within
the central channel, which is both polarities (male and female in a state of oneness beyond
all polarities). Nor (does all) this (take place) with respect to our conceived (kalpita) body.

One may also, through instruction and experience, enter by means of these practices into
the stable abode which is the Great Goddess who is emanation (sṛsṣṭi), freedom and bliss,

and consists of the union of Śiva and Śakti, which is the supreme Brahman. This is

TANTRĀLOKA

The meaning is that that same (vitality) shines effulgent as each (of these)

particular forms. That is said there (in the Aitareyāraṇyaka):

‘He is this life, he is the breath, he is existence (and non-existence) . . . He

is death and the undying (nectar of immortality) (amrta).’"™ ‘This (Self) is the
Brahman, Indra, Prajāpati, (all the gods and the five gross elements.) And it is
sung (gīta) (in the Netratantra also):

‘That is the vitality (vīrya) of all (forms of) vitality, that indeed is the
strength of the strong, that is the vigour (ojas) of the vigorous, it is everything,

eternal, unmoving and firm.”

achieved by the release of the emission of the vitality (and seminal seed) of the Great
Mantra (ahaṁ) . . .’ (Abhinava then goes on to quote VBh 69 and 70 also quoted below in

TĀv ad 5/72ab-72cd (5/71cd-72ab)). PTy p. 49-50.

” Aitareyāraṇyaka 211/8.

Jbid. 2/6/1.
7 The expression ‘it is sung’ (gīta) almost always introduces a passage from the
Bhagavadgītā (see for example above, TĀv ad 1/161, 2/39, 2/47, and 3/226cd-227ab).
However, this reference cannot be traced there, rather it is found in the Netratantra
(1/24cd-25ab). The subject is Śiva’s own nature (svabhāva), which is ‘pure, pervasive and
facing everywhere’ (ibid. 1/22cd). In the previous line to this reference, Śiva says that: ‘it
is my own, my own vitality, known (only) to oneself (svasaṁvedya), and is my supreme
abode. Kṣemarāja comments:

‘Itis ‘my own’, that is, the light of consciousness of my own self, of which (this
is) ‘my own vitality’, that is, the ‘strength’ which is the power of reflective awareness that
fashions everything. As the venerable Kālīkula (declares):

‘The reflective awareness of that God who is the foremost of the gods and who is
supreme consciousness, is (His) supreme power which, endowed with knowledge, is
omniscient.”
It is ‘known (only) to itself’, that is, it is its own light and is ‘my supreme
abode, (I who am) Umā’s husband. It is ‘the vitality (vūrya) of all (florms of) vitality° of
the wonderfully varied Mantras and Mudrā. That itself is ‘the strength of the strong’, the
wind and the like. ‘That is the vigour (ojas) of the vigorous’. As is said:
“Vigour (tejas) which is generated by the wise from the Void of consciousness is

engagement (in action) (pravartana), independently of (any) reflection of being capable or

not (of achieving its goal).”
And that is ‘everything’. Its nature is all things. It is ‘eternal’, undergoing no
seeming change and ‘unmoving’, not undergoing (real) transformation, it is ‘firm’ and

permanent.”

The whole passage reads:

yat svarūpaṁ nijaṁ śuddhaṁ vyãpakaṁ saryatomukham || 22 ||
sarvabhūtāntarāvasthaṁ sarvaprāṇiṣu jīvanam |

yogagamyaṁ durāsadaṁ duṣprāpam akṛtātmabhiḥ |) 23 ||
svaṁ syavīryaṁ svasaṁvedyaṁ mamaiva paramaṁ padam |
tad vīryaṁ sarvavīryãṇãṁ tad vai balavatãṁ balam || 24 ||
tad ojaś caujasāṁ sarvaṁ śāśvataṁ hy acalaṁ dhruvam |

things.

CHAPTER THREE
Now he describes the process by which (the Brahman) manifests as all

This Vitality is the Source of Life and so Emission is AII Things

at āg -eūd || 330 l1|

raīaā fsī feakrār 11 32 1

tasmād vīryāt prajās tāś ca vīryaṁ karmasu kathyate || 230 ||

yajñādikeṣu tadvṛṣṭau sauṣadhīṣv atha tāḥ punaḥ |
vīrye tac ca prajāsv evaṁī visarge viśvarūpatā || 231 ||

From that vitality are born the creatures, and these are said to be the
vitality (and vigour) in (all) rites, including (Vedic) sacrifices and the rest,
these of rain, and this of the herbs, and these again of the vitality (of the male
“That which is one’s own nature, pure, pervasive, facing everywhere, present in
all things, the life within all breathing beings, attainable by Yoga, hard to accomplish,

difficult to acquire by those who are unformed, it is one’s own vitality, known to itself, my

own supreme plane. That is the vitality (vīrya) of all (forms of) vitality, that indeed is the
strength of the strong, that is the vigour (ojas) of the vigorous, it is everything, eternal,

unmoving and firm. (22cd-25ab)

sā mamecchā parā śaktiḥ śaktiyuktā svabhāvajā || 25 ||

vahner ūṣmeva vijñeyā raśmirūpā rave riva |
sarvasya jagato vāpi svã (> sā) śaktiḥ kāraṇātmikā || 26 ||
sarvajñādiguṇās tatra vyaktāvyaktāś ca saṁsthitāḥ |
saivecchā jñānarūpā ca kriyādiguṇaviṣṭṛtā || 27 ||
jñānādiṣadguṇā ye te tatrasthāḥ prabhavanti hi |

sā vai mahākriyārūpā saṁsthitaikā kriyā matā|| 28 ||
aṇimādiguṇānaṣṭau karoti vikaroti sā |

evatṁī mamecchā jñānākhyā kriyākhyā śaktir ucyate || 29 ||

sūryacandramasau vahnis tridhāmaparikalpanā |

trinetrakalpanā mahyaṁ tad artham iha dr̥śyate || 30 ||
dahanāpyāyane tena prākāśyaṁ vidadhāmy aham |
That is my will, the supreme power, endowed with power and born of one’s own
nature. One should know it to be like the heat of fire or like the rays of the sun. Or else
also that power is the cause of all the universe. The qualities of omniscience and the rest,
manifest and unmanifest, are established there. (25cd-27ab)
She (i. e. that Supreme Power) is the will, and her nature knowledge, extensive

with the qualities of action and the rest. The six qualities of knowledge and the rest are
present there and powerful. Her nature is the Great Activity and considered to abide as the
one (universal) activity. She produces and transforms the eight yogic powers (guṇa) to
make oneself small at will and the rest. (27cd-29ab)

In this way, my will is called the power of knowledge and action. They are
conceived to be the three abodes of Sun, Moon and Fire, and my three eyes, of which the
meaning is seen here. I ordain that (all that is to be) illumined be burnt and nourished by
that.’ (29cd-31ab) NT 1/22cd-31ab

TANTRĀLOKA

and female seeds), and this of the creatures. In this way, emission is of the
nature of all things. (230cd-231)
‘The creaturesʼ are in the form of female, male etc.” (living beings).

‘These’ are the creatures (sacrificed) in the sacrificial and other rites. (They are)
‘said to be the vitality (of all rites), that is, (their) cause. This is the relationship
(and prose order of the words). The same should be applied to what follows here.
‘These’, the sacrificial and other rites, (are the cause of rain, and these) ‘of the
herbsʼ, that is, food and the like, (and these) of ‘the vitality’, which is the male

and female seed. In this way, the supreme Brahman is the cause of everything as

the nature of each individual thing, by being the impulse (of the mind) (javībhāva)

for one who is sluggish (ajavan).” Thus, that is said to be its (immanent) nature
as all things.” (Accordingly, he says) ‘in this way emission also is of the nature
of all thingsʼ. As is said there:

‘Now from that comes the emission (srsti) of semen (retas), the gods are
Prajāpati’s semen, the semen of the gods is rain, the herbs are the rain’s semen,

food is the semen of the herbs, the semen of food is semen, the semen of semen is

(all) the creatures (prajāḥ).”

Similarly, elsewhere also (we read):
‘The offering discharged into the fire attends, as is proper (samyak), on

the Sun. Rain is born from the Sun, and from rain, food, and from that, the

creatures.'

So too the Bhagavadgītā:
‘From food come the living beings, and from clouds food. The clouds

come from the sacrifice, and the sacrifice arises from action (karman).””

In this way, that is the same power of emission, which makes all things
manifest within itself as each (act and form) of reflective awareness. It is
variously named in the Āgamas, and so he says:
Emission is Śabdarāṣi, Mātṛkā and Mālinī

ZaTST: T TāĪTTFI TṬṬĀT āI

Ifdīṁ |

JTãāj’r̥̄hTGTITHTPTĪ
TĪ TSIAIĪ |I/333 1|

” The ‘etc.’ here refers to creatures that have no specific gender.

The literal meaning of ajavañ javībhāvena is ‘by being swiftness for one who is slow’.
Read etad viśvarūāpam for etad viśvaṁ rūpam.
Aitareyāraṇyaka 2/1/3. The passage ends with: ‘The semen of the creatures is the heart.

The semen of the heart is the mind. The semen of the mind is speech. The semen of

speech is action. The completion of action is man, the seat of the Brahman.”

N Manusmṛti 3176.

” BhG 3/14.

CHAPTER THREE

Śšabdarāśiḥ sa evokto mātrṛkā sā ca kīrtitā |
kṣobhyakṣobhakatāveśān mālinīṁ tāṁ pracakṣate || 232 ||
This same (emission) is called the Assembly of Sounds (Śabdarāṣśi)
and also Mātṛkā, and by the penetration (āveśa) (of the consonants, which
are the) objects of arousal, and (the vowels) that arouse them, it is said to be

Maālinī. (232)

‘The Assemblyʼ is the undivided nature and cause of ‘soundsʼ, that is,
gross words divided into syllables and sentences etc. ‘Mātṛkā’” is the Mother (of

the universe), unknown (ajñātā mātā) by fettered souls, whose nature is

described in such verses (as):
‘O renowned lady, this (Mātṛkā) is said to be the source (yoni) of all

Mantras and Vidyās, present in all Mantras at all times.”

The two-fold secondary (āgamika) designation of the power of emission
when it is unaroused, because it abides solely in its own nature alone, has been
indicated in this way (as the Assembly of Sounds and Mātṛkā). Moreover, (Her)
aroused state has another name. Thus, he says ‘the objects of arousal’ etc. The
objects of arousal are the matrices (which are the consonants). The seeds (which
are the vowels) ‘arouse (them)’. (Thus,) their state in the act of arousal is that of
the reḷation between the agent and the act. ‘Penetration’ (āveśa) there (into that
state) is the dynamic unity (lolībhāva) which is the mutual union (sarṁīghaṭṭa) of
one with the other. Thus, She whose matrices, that is, the consonants, are

disarranged (bhinnā), that is, divided up by the seed (vowels), being such, is

Abhinava here integrates his understanding of his key concept of emission (visarga)

with the male and female forms of the alphabet, representing the phonemic forms of Śiva
and Śakti and their union, represented by the Mālinī alphabet (see above, 3/197cd-208ab
and notes).
Cf. ŚSūvi on 1/4 (the ground of knowledge is Mātṛkā), where Kṣemarāja writes ajñātā
mātā mātṛkā viśvajananī ‘Mātr̥kā is the unknown mother, the mother of the universe.”
tattatsaṁkucitavedyābhāsātmmano

agniṣṭomayājy

asmi

ityādi

jñānasya

“smi

sthūlo

vāsmi

tattadavikalpakasavikalpakāvabhāsaparāmarśamayasya

tattadyācakaśabdānuvedha-dvāreṇa śokasmayaharṣarāgādirūpatām ādadhānā

‘(This empirical) knowledge is (essentially) the manifestation of each particular
restricted object of perception. It is (also) the reflective awareness of the manifestation of
each (perception, which is both) with and without thought constructs of the form of ‘I am
incompleteʼ, ‘I am thin’ or ‘fat’, ‘I am (a Brahmin) who performs the Agniṣṭoma’ and the
like. (In this way,) by means of the penetration of (corresponding) particular words,
(Mātṛkā) assumes the form of (emotions) such as suffering, surprise, delight, and

aṭṭachment.”

We may note by the way in passing that the expression literally means ‘one who
is not known to be a young motherʼ. It could be a way of referring to a single mother who

is concealing herself.

” Mantras are the sonic bodies of the gods they invoke, and Vidyās those of the
goddesses.

TANTRĀLOKA

Mālinī, who sustains (malate)™ the universe and places it in Her own nature, and
so she is all things (viśvasvarūpiṇī). This is the meaning.
Surely (someone could ask), how is it that she, being such, is all things?
He says:

Mālinī as Parā and Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī

fzazstqvī 1 233 1
bījayoṇiṣamāpattiviṣargodayasundarā |

hi parā śaktir nirṇītā viśvarūpiṇī|| 233 ||
Mālinī is (the goddess Parā), the supreme power, (who,) beautiful

with the emergence of the emission (brought about) by the (mutual)

contemplation (samāpatti) of the seed (vowels) and the matrix (consonants), is
said to be all things (viśvarūpiṇī). (233)

Mālinī ʻis the supreme power” which is the light of the Absolute

(anuttara). The mutual ‘contemplation of the seed (vowels) and the matrix
(consonants), which are Śiva and Śakti, the rays (of Her Light), is the oneness
(sāmarasṣya) which is their mutual union (saṅghaṭṭa). ‘The emergence of the
emission’ (brought about) by that (union) is (Her) effulgent manifestation
(parisphuraṇa) (as all things) in this and that form. Thus, She is ‘beautifulʼ, that
is, most excellent, and so Her nature as all things is taught in the Mālinīvijayottara
(Śrīpūrvaśāstra) and elsewhere.

Surely (one may ask,) there is only one supreme absolute (anuttarā)

consciousness, as it is not possible to perceive anything else separate from that.

Even Śiva and Śakti cannot be separate from it, so what is the condition (vārtā)
of Her nature as all things? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TT T#a T āāTṀTT hĪHTĪ |
JITrāTtk̄çaTTīā aīṁōcā JTĪT || Q3% 11|
eṣā vastuta ekaiva parā kālasya karṣiṇī |
Śśaktimadbhedayogena yāmalatvaṁ prapadyate || 234 |
This (power), which is in reality the only one and supreme (parā)

(goddess Parā), is (Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī), who draws (and absorbs) time (into
” The root mal means to possess or to hold.
” Read just tadatirekena for tat tadatirekeṇa.
” Cf. below, 6/7cd.

CHAPTER THREE

herself). By union (yoga) with the powerholder aspect (of absolute

consciousness), (She) assumes the state of the (united) couple (yāmala) (Śiva

and Śakti). (234)

Time (kāla) is Bhairava. It differentiates (kalayati), that is, emits, the

universe from Śiva to Earth. ‘This’ absolute consciousness ‘attracts’ (time), that
is, makes it manifest as dependent on Herself. This is the meaning. The point is
that nothing at all could manifest apart from Her will. As is said:

‘O Mother of the Worlds, You are victorious. You are She by whose will

Time, which is Bhairava, emits the universe, beginning with (Śiva, its universal)

cause, up to (a tiny) insect.””

” Clearly, by describing the supreme power in this way, Abhinava is implying her
identity with Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī (She Who Attracts Time), the form of Kālī who is the
supreme Goddess of the Krama school. Note also that instead of ‘this (power), which is in

reality only one and supreme (parā), one could equally well translate ‘She is in reality the
one and only (goddess) Parā’. Similarly, in the previous verse, instead of ‘Mālinī is the
supreme power (parā), one could also translate: “Mālinī is the power (called) Parā’. Thus,

Abhinava quotes the Trikasāra as saying: ‘the essence of this universe is the power Mālinī
(who is) Parā’ (IPVv 2, p. 206). By this play on words, Abhinava is telling us that Mālinī

is not different from Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī (see above, note to comm. on 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab),
cf. below 6/180-181 (179cd-181ab)). They are the same because they are both equally

Śiva’s supreme power, who is the goddess Parā.

Abhinava is equating Maālinī, that is, Parā, the supreme Trika Goddess, with
Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī, the supreme (parā) Krama Goddess, saying, as Sanderson (2007: 377)

explains, that: ‘the first self-limitation that she manifests is that of her pairing with
Bhairava, that is to say, of the relationship between her as power and him as the powerful,
though in reality she transcends that duality. Moreover, her union in this way completes

the parallel with Mālinī who, as we have just seen, embodies the conjunctio of Śiva and
Sakti represented by the vowels and consonants, respectively.
” See below, 3/252cd-253ab and commentary, for the various meanings of the root kal,

from which the word kāla, meaning time, and the name of the Goddess Kālī, are derived.

Kālikāstotra v. 6. Half of this verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 4/132, 168 and 173ab.

The first three quarters of this verse is quoted in the Mahānayaprakāśa by Śitikaṇṭha (p.
6). There he explains that ‘according to this saying, time is Bhairava and His nature is
Sound (nāda), in the form of exhalation (prāṇa). As is said: “Everything (in the universe),
moving and immobile, is the food of exhalation.’ Having devoured that exhaled breath,

which assumes the nature of Bhairava, and having brought it to an end, attaining the plane

of the inhaled breath (apāna), which is the cessation of Sound, what is She (then)? It is
said that because new waves (of manifestation) are endless, so too without end are the
energies (of consciousness) which, in the form of waves, (the Goddess) is engaged in
devouring. As scripture (declares):
‘The goddesses have emerged from the pores (of the skin of the cosmic being),
burning with lustre because (they) illumine (the whole) universe, and having emitted the
universe, they who have devoured the universe are, in an instant, (just a) mouthful for

Thuṣ, free of desire both within the body and outside, the unfolding power of the

will stilled, (the Goddess) is free of adventitious adjuncts and undivided.” (MP (1 Śk) p. 7

We shall see in detail in Chapter Six that the breathing cycle is the microcosmic

equivalent of the cycles of time. Of all the deities, Kālī is most intimately associated with

TANTRĀLOKA

Making the secondary, adventurous (aupādika) distinction between the

Light (of consciousness) and (its) reflective awareness manifest, ‘(She) assumes

the state of the (united) couple (yāmala) (Śiva and Śakti), by virtue of which
(the one reality) is termed ‘power’ and ‘powerholderʼ. It has been said many times

that, in actual fact, reflective awareness is not separate (and distinct) from the

Light (of consciousness), nor is that (separate from awareness).

Surely (one may ask,) if that is so, let it be, but how can there be any

question of (that consciousness) being all things? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

The Aesthetics of Music and Three Levels of Speech

T aāraīT7 TTā̄dīTr̥TTHAaTTHTT
II 234 1
tasya pratyavamarśo yaḥ paripūrṇo ʻhamātmakaḥ |

sa svātmani svatantratvãd vibhãgam avabhãsayet || 235 ||
The reflective awareness of this (couple) is perfectly full ‘I’

(consciousness) which, by virtue of its freedom, makes division (vibhāga)

manifest within its own nature. (235)

‘T’ (consciousness) is the supreme reflective awareness, which is not
subject to conventional expression (asārṁketika), ‘of this’ couple (Śiva and Śakti).

The point is that it is ‘perfectly full’ because (‘T consciousness) becomes a
notion (vikalpa) (only) when (its) limited, conditioned state (prevails). The

time (kāla), as her very name suggests. Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī ‘attracts’ or draws time towards
herself, by drawing the flow of the breath (below 15/335cd-338) into herself and
consuming it into her eternal conscious nature, from which it originates (below 6/7-12). It

is possible that Jayaratha drew his reference from here, as it appears that he has this

passage in mind which describes how Kālī, as Kālasaṁkarṣanī, the Goddess Who Attracts

Time, assumes her state, which is ‘free of adventitious adjuncts’. Here Abhinava contrasts

this state with the other, in which, as absolute consciousness (anuttarā saṁvit), the
Goddess freely initially assumes the ‘secondary, adventitious distinction’ between the
Light of consciousness — the possessor of power — and its reflective awareness, which is

its power (cf. above, 3/1).

” The following passage, beginning with 235 up to 248ab, in which forms of musical
sound are equated to levels of Speech, is entirely a product of Abhinava’s own insight.

7 Jayaratha quotes 3/235-237ab and 3/248ab in TĀv ad 5/98-99ab (97cd-98).
” Puṛe ‘I consciousness is the reflective awareness that the Light of consciousness has of
its own nature. These are two aspects of the same reality, which thus form the pair of

united opposites. Awareness is power ~ Śakti, whois displayed as the universe; and Light
the powerholder – Śiva, who illumines and makes the universe of the countless energies of
the one power manifest. This ‘I’ consciousness is quite different from the common ego
sense. The latter is a limited form of self-reflective consciousness generated and

conditioned by its identification with the psychophysical organism. Moreover, it is not the
real ‘U’ consciousness. It is a construct, a notion which always implies an objective
predicate such as ‘I am the body” or ‘I am so and so’. As such, it is a thought construct,

CHAPTER THREE

‘division’ (it manifests within its own nature is its) cosmic form (as all things).

This is the meaning.
This being so, (the power of reflective awareness, which is the supreme
level of Speech) is of three kinds, called (the Speech) of Vision (paśyantī) and the
rest. Thus, he says:

Tṝrṁ ṃēaqmī īqaī āadcafrvēzā 1| 23ē 1|
vibhāgābhāsane cāsya tridhā vapur udāhṛtam |

paśyantī madhyamā sthūlā vaikharīty abhiśabditam || 236 ||
When division manifests, its form is said to be of three kinds, called
(the Speech of) Vision (Paśyantī), the Middle One (Madhyamā) and gross,

Corporeal Speech (Vaikharī). (236)

and like all other thought constructs, it is a kind of ‘inner discourse’ formed from the

‘conventional expressionsʼ of language. The supreme reflective awareness of
consciousness is the supreme form of Speech (parāvāc), which is innermost discourse
(śabdana, abhilāpa). The fundamental ground (bhitti) of all language, it is not based on
linguistic convention (saṅketa), and ‘is not subject to conventional expression’. (see
below, note 4,401 to 4/126).

7 The great grammarian and cognitive linguist Bhartṛhari is the first to refer, albeit
briefly, to the levels of Speech in this sense. Notoriously, however, he omits reference to

Supreme Speech, reserving supremacy for his concept of the Word Absolute ~—
śabdabrahman. Although Somānanda draw a good deal from Bhartṛhari, and nondualist

Kashmiri Śaivites would go on to draw more, Somānanda engages in long and bitter
criticism of Bhartṛhari for this omission in Chapter Four of his Śivadṛṣṭi. But although
Somānanda establishes to his satisfaction the supremacy of Parā Vāc (ŚSupreme Speech),
he hardly makes use of the concept in his presentation of nondualist Kashmiri Śaiviṣm.

We find out the reason for this in Utpaladeva’s Pratyabhijñā version of nondualist
Saivism. There Supreme Speech is the reflective awareness (pratyavamarśa) of the Light
of consciousness, which is its freedom to shine as all things without compromising its
oneness or taking recourse to illusionist theories of its manifestation as such. It is the
supreme subjectivity — ‘l-ness' ~ ahantā, of that Light. But although the very foundation
of his system and, at the time of its formulation, a feature totally unique to it, Utpaladeva
hardly makes an effort to present it as Supreme Speech. This is true even though it is vital

to his system that the core and foundation of consciousness be its power of nonconceptual

discursivity, through which nonconceptual (nirvikalpa) and hence unconditioned
consciousness can pour out into the realm of conceptualized manifestation (vikalpa). In

other words, Speech even in the profound Silence of transcendental consciousness is never
lost. Utpaladeva is fully alert to the richness of this formulation, but he does not dwell
much on Supreme Speech as the highest of the hierarchy of the levels of Speech. This was
left to Abhinava, who developed it fully and made ample use of it in his exegetical
method. Engaged in a profound exegesis of Trika Śaivism, he expounded the foundation
of all Tantric practice and the fullness of its flowering in Trika Kaulism. To do this he had
necessarily to tackle the primary elements of Tantric practice, of which the foremost can
be said to be Mantra. Mantra is a form of non-worldly (alaukika) language which is not

bound by the conventions of common speech. Indeed, it frees consciousness from them,
allowing thought constructs that are formulated in and through worldly conventional

TANTRĀLOKA

language to be absorbed into the Supreme Speech of supreme subjectivity, which is the
essential vitality of Mantras (mantravīrya). Thus, the following passage, with which he
commences his commentary on the Parātrīśikā, is one of the first and best expositions of
the levels of Speech, focused primarily on the ‘language’ of Mantras that they serve to
explain. Thus, concerned more in this context with theology than philosophy, he presents

Supreme Speech as Śiva’s power of Speech.

‘The Supreme Lord, who is made of the five tasks (of emanation, persistence,
withdrawal, obscuration and grace), is always united (ākrānta) with the supreme (parā)

power, which is grace. Thus, in actual fact, his one nature is grace (alone). (Indeed,) one

should not think that Śakti differs from Śiva. This power is the reflective awareness which
is the grace (that graces all) the world. Initially, as the Speech of Vision, which is

(essentially) reflective awareness, it is not separate from the (countless) hundreds of

powers (contained within it) that will be delineated (in the following stages of
development). It is well_established (nirūḍhā) first of all in consciousness that,
unmeasured by time and space, is the supreme Great Mantra. As such (tāva), (at this
stage) this power is still undivided into question and answer, which will (begin) to appear
in the Speech of Vision. Again, this (power) is the nonduality of the consciousness of all
perceivers, and is perpetually present (at all times and every level of Speech).

Then comes the Speech of Vision, which contemplates each object of desire,
awakened by its corresponding cause, as just a bare trace of consciousness. It is like the
perception of the eye of a peacock's feather, in which are traced the impressions of many
perceptions of existent and (imagined) non-existent (things, out of which) memory reflects
on (just) some, because (that) accords with (the cause) that awakens the seed of a memory.

No duality appeared here in the initial moment of perception (prathamajñāna), wherein

particular words and (their) referents are one.

Again, the Middle Speech (of thought), once having reflected on the difference

between those two, word and its referent, is the operation of reflective awareness, that

takes place when they both equally share (the mind as their) common ground
(sāmānadhikaraṇya).

Corporeal Speech (is the level of Speech where) the difference between the two,

(word and its referent,) is (fully) evident.

As this is the condition (vyavasthāyām) (of Speech), which is proved to be such
(directly) by one’s own experience, the plane of Supreme Speech is essentially the
ultimately real trace (of consciousness) which is power of the words (of Mantra) that do
not pertain to the realm of Māyā (amāyīya), and, ultimately real by nature, is not
(language dependent on) convention (asāṁketika) and not (a man-made) creation
(akṛṭaka). According to the reasoning that will be expounded (further ahead), it arises as

the aspect (of Mantra which is) the vitality of Mantra (mantravīrya) (read
mantravīryabhītāṁśenoditā for mantravīryabhūtāṁśacoditā).
In reality, (this Supreme Speech) also abides on the subsequent levels, that is, the
Speech of Vision and the rest, for without it, the consequence would be that the Speech of
Vision and the rest would be devoid of the Light (of consciousness), because (Śupreme

Speech is the power of consciousness) that would entail their insentience (jaḍatā).
There (at the level of Supreme Speech), there is no dévelopment at all of relative

distinctions (bhedakalanā) such as ‘this’, ‘thusʼ, ‘here’ and ‘now’. Therefore, beginning

with the emission of the vitality of the supreme Great Mantra up to the manifestation of
the difference between things that has issued forth from Corporeal Speech, this (Supreme
Speech), which is one’s own aesthetic experience (of one’s own nature) (svacamtkṛti),

shines resplendent (sphurati), having taken rest within its own Self, which is the Light (of
consciousness). That which has shone forth vibrantly in this way is ultimate reality of

CHAPTER THREE
‘Its’ (form), that is, Supreme Speech, is the reflective awareness which is

(pure) ‘T’ (consciousness). Reference to its ‘gross’ (form) refers by implication to
its other two (states, namely), supreme (as the Speech of Vision) and subtle

(Middle Speech). Again, 1) the supremacy of Supreme Speech consists of its not
being dependent on anything else. This is its form, which is greater than the

supreme one (paratara). 2) That same Supreme Goddess (i.e. Supreme Speech)

is called (the Speech of) Vision (pasśyantī), because She manifests predominantly

as the perceiver (drṣṭr, lit. ‘the seer’) of the light of consciousness (directly),
because diviṣsion is not (yet) clearly evident and the sequence of words and
meanings has not arisen, (although) She intends by virtue of Her freedom to
manifest (Her) outer form.

3) After that, although the division in the sequence of words and

meanings has been delineated (āsūtrita), (this level of Speech is rightly) called the
Middle One (madhyamā), as it is predominantly the act of (internal mental)

perception (darśana), and so is located between the ‘seer” and the ‘seen’,

established as it is in the intellect (buddhi) alone (as the speech of thought), which
is both clear (as distinct words) and (yet) unclear, (because it is not external)
(sphuṭāsphuṭa).
4) Then again, (Supreme Speech) is called Corporeal (vaikharī) because it

is present in the body (vikhara), and also because the perceptible (aspect of
Speech) predominates, and division is clearly evident by (its) assuming (the form

of) the sequence of each of the specific phonemes (that constitute spoken words

generated) by the power of the exertion (the speaker) applies to the loci (of

articulation). In this way, (Supreme Speech) is of three kinds when its state as all

things manifests.”

(perpetual) uninterrupted continuity (anavacchinatā) (of supreme) ‘T’'-consciousness
(aham). This will become clear further ahead.

In the centre of that (‘I' consciousness) within the Speech of Vision, where the
aspect (of unitary consciousness) within which diversity (in a potential state) is (subtly)

delineated (and about to appear), and also within Middle Speech, where relative
distinctions manifest (bhedāvabhāsa) (as thought constructs in the mind); there, in both
cases, within (their) nature (rūpa) as the powers of knowledge and action, which are the

essence of Sadāśiva and Īśvara, that same (Supreme Speech is present as) the aesthetic
experience, which is ‘I’ (consciousness) as the full modality of the aesthetic experience of
all objectivity that has been internalized (into consciousness). (This modality) is the
Speech of Vision and the Middle One that, in actual fact, (thereby) contemplates its own
Self (svātman), which is supreme consciousness.’ PTv (p. 3-7)

” In other words, the four forms of Speech are, from the lowest to the highest, gross,

subtle, supreme and greater than the supreme. Verse 235 defines the ‘greater than supreme
levelʼ of Supreme Speech, which Abhinava explains is ‘spontaneous, that is, is perpetually
active (uditā) as consciousness, which is the state of repose within its own nature, and,

never setting and eternal, it is the ‘’, which is said to be the supreme soul’s primary
freedom and sovereignty, the mastery which is absence of dependence on anything else.”
(ĪPv 1, p. 206). Verses 237-245ab deal with the gross forms of the three levels of Speech,
verses 245cd-247ab with the subtle ones, and 247cd-248ab with the supreme. Concerning
the levels of Speech in general, see above, note 1,225.

” Vedic Indians believed that the universe was created by a sacrifice performed by the
gods, because it was on that occasion that the Vedas were intoned, and so, made manifest,

the sacrifice was enacted. Thus, the belief developed that the world is created by Speech
and so is essentially Speech.

TANTRĀLOKA

(Now) he says that they are not only individually gross, (subtle and

supreme) in this way, each one of them is also of three kinds (in the same way).

raṁṝq fīaī = mrsqēTdāca|
aī axāadfgTTī īTasTTĪT || 239 1

aI JḺ̄̄Ī Tag ṬYTĪ] āTĪTIJJTTā |

tāsām api tridhā rūpaṁ sthūlasūkṣmaparatvataḥ |

tatra yā svarasandarbhasubhagã nãdarūpiṇĩ | 237 ||
sā sthūlā khalu paśyantī varṇādyapravibhāgataḥ |

Each of these has three forms as gross, subtle and supreme. The gross

form of the Speech of Vision (Paśyantī) is, there (in that context), that of
(musical) sound, composed of a pleasing arrangement of notes (svara), (which

although sung) are not differentiated into distinct letters (or words). (237238ab)

” In his PTv, Abhinava explains at great length how the energies of the letters are

distributed in the realms of Speech, and so he does not need to go into that here. Note that
at the level of Supreme Speech (parā vāc) they are one, so there as here it is not part of the

scheme. Here he is concerned with the aesthetic, musical quality of Speech, implicitly
assuming that music is a form of language. Although we may experience the beauty of an

object, be it poetry, painting, music, or the world around us and that of the imagination,

aesthetic experience is grounded in the sentiments experienced in the subjective domain

free of thought constructs, which is that of Śāmbhavopāya. Before discussing the nature of

the quintessential vowels A I and U, from which the other vowels (except the four ‘neuter
ones) are derived, he focuses briefly on the nature of the vowel sounds — svara. This leads

him ṭo talk about music. This is because there are two senses of the word ‘svara’. It can

mean the resonant vocalic sound of the vowels, from which they draw their name (i.e.
svara). The same word may also denote a musical note or intonation. The Upaniṣad

declares that Veda must be recited with the right intonation, which means, essentially, in

tune. It is the intonation, musical sound (svara), which is its sacred power. Indeed, the
seven notes were discovered in India in this way. The accents or tones of Vedic recitation
were originally three, namely, ‘raised’ (udātta), that is, acute, ‘lowered’ (svarita), that is,
grave, and ‘not raised (or lowered) (anudātta), that is, unaccented. As more were added,
they finally became seven. The svara was understood from eatly on to serve as a means to
communicate emotion. If I ask someone in a raised harsh tone of voice ‘who are you?’ it
clearly suggests that I am angry with a person who I feel is being too self-assertive. I am
saying ‘who do think you are, to behave in this way?’ With no accent and in a normal tone

of voice, it is simply a question. Clearly, intonation is an integral part of language, and so
is muṣic, which conveys, as does intonation, emotions. By extension, the ability of

language to convey emotions, that is, not just describe them but transmit them to others so
that they feel them too, is termed svara, which is what constitutes music. In the following
passage, Abhinava indicates that the connection between language, music, and emotions is

their common ground in the reflective awareness of consciousness, which is free of
thought constructs.
‘These energies (kalā) (of the letters) inculcate the experience of the (emotive)
modality of the mind (cittavṛti), which is the source of joy alone (hlādanāmātra), (not
just sensory pleasure,) (and so are) called ‘svaras’ (vowels, notes etc.). This is because

CHAPTER THREE

He now analyses this (secondary) gross sequence of the three forms of

Speech. ‘In this context the arrangement of notes’ ṣadja”" and the rest is their
mutual dynamic union (lolībhāva) with one another. Thus the ālāpa (portion of a

rāga), is the fixed part (of the Rāga), in which the (notes) ṣaḍja and the rest
form single (melodic units), and is not divided into the fixed letters etc. (of the
musical composition that follows), and so (this form of Speech) is beautiful, and

because of the excellence of (its) ‘sweetness' (mādhurya), its nature is

(aesthetic) delight (āhlāda). Thus, the initial (section of the Rāga,) which consists
of just (musical) sound, is indeed the gross form of the Speech of Vision. This is
what remains (to be said to complete the sense).
Surely (one may ask,) in this way, the ālāpa, whose nature is such, should
also be produced by the impact of the breath on the locus (of articulation), so why

should it not be simply Corporeal Speech? With this doubt in mind, he says: (this

musical sound is) ‘not differentiated into distinct letters (or words)’. Indeed, it

is because it is not differentiated into distinct letters (or words), that (that sound)
possesses a ‘sweet’ (pleasing musical quality) (mādhurya), due to which
everybody likes it (āsakti).' There (can be) no dispute that sweet (things) please
they vocalize (svarayanti), express in words (śabdayanti), and indicate (sīcayanti) (states
of) mind (citta), and bestow (rānti) their own (ṣvam) essential (emotive) nature in this

way. Thus, transmitting (themselves) into the supreme perceiver, they bestow their own

(svam) nature as the matrices (which are the consonants) K and the rest, distributing
(rānti) them as they make them manifest externally. (Vocalic sounds – svara) are (outer)
sound (nāda) (and the inner resonance of reflective awareness), which (articulated) serve
to indicate mental states (cittavṛtti. Alone or in conjunction with (the consonant)
matrices, (articulated for example) in cries (for help, words expressing) love, lauds (of the
divine), and so forth, they manifest the (respective) mental state of compassion, love,

tranquillity and so on. Each of these sounds are present right from the start in (all

creatures), infants and animals. (The manifestation of these emotions takes place

completely) independently of impediments such as linguistic conventions and the like.

(This is) because they are close to consciousness, assuming as they do the form of vowels
(or musṣical sounds) (svara) and tones of voice which indicate emotions (kāku) and the
like. Thus, the forms of intonation (udātta and so on of Vedic recitation) are said to be ‘a
quality of the (denoted) entity because they are the musical notes starting with ṣadja (i.e.

the note ‘Do’ or ‘C’) which give rise to the experience of mental (emotive) states. PTv
202-204.

7S Ṭhe seven notes are called ṣaḍja (sā, ṛṣabha (re), gandhāra (ga), madhyama (ma),
pañcama (pa), dhaivata (dha) and niṣadha (ni). Their abbreviated form, used in notation,

is noted in brackets.
”! The performance of a Rāga usually begins with a section called ālāpa (which literally
means ‘pleasing conversation between loversʼ). Slow and without rhythm, the notes of the
Rāga are sung in pleasing melodic combinations of nonverbal sounds. They should flow
gracefully into one another to form single pleasing melodic units which induce a deep

meditative mood. The ālāpa is followed by a composition set in a rhythmic cycle (tāla).
Whereas there are no words in the first, ālāpa, section, in the second section, the words of
a vocal composition are clearly audible.

7? The aesthetic quality of good music is, from the Indian point of view, its ‘sweetness’
(mādhurya), which is the opposite of the ‘harsh’ (paruṣa) quality of unmusical sound.

” The word here is ‘āsakti’ which literally means ‘the act of adhering or attaching oneself
firmly behind, devotedness, attachment, diligence, and application’. In the context of

aesthetic experience, the term ‘āsakti’ denotes the kind of attitude towards the aesthetic

TANTRĀLOKA

people. On the contrary, in other cases, because (common articulated speech is)

divided up into letters (and words), it is (by comparison) ‘harshī (that is, not
musical) (paruṣa), and none like it. This difference between them (sweet and

pleasing, harsh and unpleasant) is proved by one’s own experience. This is the

(overall) sense. He (now goes on to) say that.

aīgd ṁh#ezaai || 33¢ 1

āēkaa qra |
avibhāgaikarūpatvaṁ mādhuryaṁ śaktir ucyate || 238 1|
sthānavāyvādigharṣotthā sphuṭataiva ca pāruṣī |
The (delightful) sweetness (mādhurya) (of music), which consists of
(the harmoniousness of) its undifferentiated unity, is called (its) ‘power’
(Śakti). The fully evident (articulation of words) produced by the impact of
the breath on the loci (of articulation) is (by comparison) harsh. (238cd239ab)

That (delightful quality of musical sound) here (in this context), for yogis

who (appreciate and) like it, affords them (in an instant and) with great force
(sahasa), a state of (pure) consciousness (at one with it). Thus, he says:

īzaaqḹī Tīazqṛaṁ āfarf̄afrā̃: 1| 238 11

tad asyāṁ nādarūpāyāṁ saṁvitsavidhavrttitaḥ || 239 ||
sājātyāt tanmayībhūtir jhagity evopalabhyate |
He who is (immersed) in this (musical) sound, (close to) consciousness

and similar to it, experiences in an instant a state of oneness with it

(tanmayībhūti), by virtue of the character it shares in common (with

consciousness) (sājātya). (239cd-240ab)

(This sound is) ‘(close to) consciousness and similar to it’ because the
(sense of) great distance (and separation from the object one experiences) on the

Middle (and Corporeal levels of Speech) does not arise. Thus, it is said elsewhere:

‘The yogi who (experiences) the oneness of the unparalleled joy of

savouring singing and other such (beautiful) objects (of sense, his) mind fixed

object necessary to experience its beauty, namely, a combination of ‘attachment’,
‘attraction’ and ‘attention’. AIl of which are meanings of the word in common usage.

Read, as the editor of the printed text suggests, sājātyāt tanmayībhūtir- for

sājātyāntarmayībhūtir-.

CHAPTER THREE

(and well concentrated on that), becomes of that same (blissful) nature by

identifying with it (anmayatvena).””

Surely (one may ask,) some people, even though their minds attend to
music and the like, do not (experience this) state of oneness (with it)
(tanmayībhāva). So how is it that you have said this? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

EkIE EEIĪGEIĪĒAGĒḺEEEEĀEÉTĀI

yeṣāṁ na tanmayībhūtis te dehādinimajjanam || 240 ||
avidanto magnasaṁvinmānās tv ahṛdayā iti |

Those who do not experience (this) state of oneness (with the
beautiful object) and the submergence of (their identification with the) body
etc. (into universal consciousness), (whereas, on the contrary, their)
consciousness and minds are submerged (by objectivity), are (considered to
be) insensitive to beauty (ahṛdaya). (240cd-241ab)
Those who in this world in the presence of (any) most (aesthetically)

excellent object such as music and the like (are filled with) wonder by a state of

oneness (with it) are said to be sensitive to beauty (sahṛdaya), otherwise, it is
well known (that those who do not experience these things) are ‘insensitive to

Having analysed the gross form of the Speech of Vision in this way, he

(goes on) to also define that of the Middle Speech.

fkfzrrī a saātTr: 11 zg 1
T TÇPTÇPRTGĀ-FṬT THRJĀTĪTTĪT |

yat tu carmãāyanaddhãdi kiñcit tatraiṣa yo dhvaniḥ l| 241 ||

sa sphuṭāsphuṭarūpatvān madhyamā sthūlarūpiṇī|

The sound that comes from (a percussion) instrument made of

stretched skin is both indistinct (insofar as it cannot produce words set to
music) and (yet is in tune and so is also) distinct. Thus, it corresponds to the
gross form of the Middle Speech. (241cd-242ab)

‘The sound that comes from (a percussion) instrument made of
stretched skinsʼ, such as (the double-headed drum called) mrdaṅga, by striking it
with the hands, is ‘distinct’, that is, (more) clearly manifest in relation to the
VBh 73 (72) quoted above ad 3/209cd-210ab and 229.

7 Cf above, 3/209cd-210.

” Read ahṛdayāḥ for parahrdayagā, which means ‘(those whose) heart (i.e. aesthetic
sensitivity) is centred on something elseʼ.

TANTRĀLOKA

previous one (that is, the singing of the notes of a Rāga, which is the gross form of
the Vision of Speech), because ṣaḍja and the rest (of the notes to which the drum

may be tuned) form a single (melodic unit). And it is ‘indistinct’ because the
division into fixed letters (and words) does not manifest. Thus (because it is in

between, this form of Speech,) it is rightly called the Middle One.

That too can possess a ‘sweet’ (pleasing musical quality) (mmādhurya),
because here (in this form of Speech) it has, in the same way, an undivided aspect.
Thus, people are attracted (āsakti) here (to this) also. Accordingly, he says:

T=JṬṬJITRTTTTTT=ṬT
3Ṝd TĒTT II/2%3 1I

madhyāyāś cāvibhāgāṁśasadbhāva iti raktatā || 242 ||
avibhāgasvaramayī yatra syāt tat surañjakam |
The attractive quality (raktatā) of the Middle (form of Speech)
essentially stems from the aspect which is undivided (into articulated speech).
(A sound) which consists of (a single, continuous) undivided note is very

pleasing. (242cd-243ab)

Surely (one may ask,) can this (gross aspect of this form of Speech) also
give rise to (the same) feeling of attraction (āsakti) as does (the gross form of) the
Speech of Vision? With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘((A sound) which consists
of (a single)) undivided (note) and so on. (This form of) Speech, which in some

cases ‘consists of (a single continuous) undivided note’ which is ‘very
pleasingʼ, indeed is capable of creating a feeling of attraction. This is the

meaning. Thus, by the feeling of attraction (one has) here (in this case also, one
experiences) a state of oneness (tanmayībhāva) (with the beautiful object). This is

the point. In this (way, he has) also indicated the difference between (the gross
form of the Middle Speech) and the Corporeal one.
Śurely (one may ask,) what is the proof that the reason for this feeling of
atṭraction here (in this case) is the (aspect of this form of Speech, in which there
is) an absence of division (into articulate speech)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

ifzuṛī fē ttá avaāi āīūaa: 1 Qx3 11

avibhāgo hi nirvṛtyai dṛśyatāṁ tālapāṭhataḥ || 243 |I
kilāvyaktadhvanau tasmin vādane parituṣyati |
” In Indian classical music the percussion is tuned to the base note – tonic – in which the
Rāga is sung or played. All the notes are in tune with it, thus forming a single unit with the
same base note.

CHAPTER THREE
The absence of division (in this sense) is pleasing; witness (for

example,) the effect of playing a regularly recurrent rhythm (tālapāṭha).
Indeed, (everybody) is completely satisfied by (a musical) sound (dhvani)
(which is just one note, and hence is, one could say,) unmanifest (music).
(243cd-244ab)

‘Witnessʼ, that is, experience directly, that ‘the absence of division (in

this sense)ʼ is the reason for (its) being pleasing. This is the meaning. (One cannot
claim) that something that has been seen (and experienced) has not been seen.
This is the point. (The word) ‘indeed’ refers to the reason (for this, which is that)
everybody is ‘completely satisfied by (a musical) sound (dhvani) (which is just
one note, and hence is, one could say,) unmanifest (music), in which division
(into words) is absent when playing a recurrent rhythm (tāla)’, such as (the
one called) ‘cañcupuṭa’, accompanying a song. This is the meaning. The point is
that the proof here (of this) is one’s own experience itself.

Having explained the gross form of the Middle Speech in this way, he
(now) defines (that) of Corporeal Speech also.

aqI g ŪRḺTI aTĪTTTJḺTHĪ T T |I Q5¥ |I

yā tu sphuṭānāṁ varṇānām utpattau kāraṇaṁ bhavet || 244 ||

sā sthūlā vaikharī yasyāḥ kāryaṁ vākyādi bhūyasā |

Gross Corporeal Speech (Vaikharī) is the cause that generates clearly

(articulated) phonemes, and its products are the many words and the like.
(244cd-245ab)
‘Clearly” (articulated phonemes) are those that one who listens can

(clearly) hear to be distinct from one another. Thus, because (they are) ‘harsh’

(and unmusical), here (in this case), people are not attracted (to them).
Having defined the three gross forms in this way, he (now) talks about the
subtle (ones) also.

ATFṬYFTCTTA ÇATTTCATTIRTT |
asmin sthūlatraye yat tad anusandhānam ādivat || 245 ||
prthak pr̥thak tat tritayaṁ sūkṣmam ity abhiśabdyate |
Each of these three, in their gross aspect, is preceded by a specific
(well determined) intention (anusandhāna) (to produce a particular sound).
These three (forms of intention) are called the subtle (form of the three levels
of Speech). (245cd-246ab)

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The intention’ that precedes the three aforementioned gross forms (of
Speech), that is, the desire which is, for example, the intention to sing, is said to
be the individual subtle (forms) of the Speech of Vision, the Middle One, and
Corporeal Speech. He gives an example (of each one) in due order.

1|

saḍjaṁ karomi madhuraṁ vādayāmi bruve vacaḥ || 246 ||
‘I produce (the note) Sa’, ‘I play (the drum) sweetlyʼ and ‘I speak’.

(246cd) (246cd)

The three intentions, namely, the desire to sing, sound (the drums), and

speak, are the three subtle forms (of the three levels of Speech). This is the
meaning.

What is the proof here (in this case)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

PTTaTṬTĀTTTĀ
TTT fēēcō 1
prṛthagevānusandhānatrayaṁ saṁvedyate kila |
Indeed, one can (clearly) perceive (in this way) that there are three

individual (specific) intentions (corresponding to the subtle forms of the three
levels of Speech). (247ab)

‘One can perceive (in this way)ʼ, in the sense that this is proved by one’s

own experience.
Having explained the three subtle forms in this way, he (now) also talks
about the supreme ones.

The Supreme Triad and the Groups of Six

TGTRIfT rJATI JāGITTITHHT
I Q¥9 I

etasyāpi trayasyādyaṁ yad rūpam anupādhimat || 247 I|
tat paraṁ tritayaṁ tatra śivaḥ paracidãtmakaḥ |

The triad that precedes these three, whichis free of limiting adjuncts,

is the supreme triad. Śiva, whois supreme consciousness, (manifests) there
(at that level). (247cd-248ab)

The three (kinds of) intention, namely, the desire to sing and the rest, that

are ‘free of limiting adjuncts’, are in the initial state (of consciousness) which is

not tainted (with any) (uparañjaka) desire to sing and the like. This is the (pure)
principle of consciousness, which is the initial stage (koṭi) of desire, and is the

supreme form of the three. Surely (one may ask, the sense of saying that) it is free
of limiting adjuncts is that it is not possible for there to be even just a chance of
(the presence of) duality (bheda) here in this (pure) conscious principle; so how is

CHAPTER THREE

it said that its form is three-fold? With this doubt in mind, he says, that ‘Śiva, who
is supreme consciousness' (manifests there). The meaning is that the three, the
Speech of Vision and the rest, manifest here (at this level) at one with Śiva, Who
is supreme pure consciousness. As is said:
‘(The mass of) existing things rests in the Self of the Lord (and thus)

manifests. If they were not to do so, the act of reflective awareness, which is the

will (icchāmarśa), would not take place.””

Surely (one may ask.) it is not logically possible for the supreme Light,
which has no parts, to manifest in parts (vibhāgena). So what is the cause
(nimirta) of (this) three-fold nature there (within the supreme Light) also? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

T JGaTĒṬĪṢ J; || Q%¢ 1|1

TTI WBI T TTGTṬ fkaīṛ |

STTTTtr̄̄TīaīT
cī frTrT 1| 3%¢ 11
vibhāgābhāsanāyāṁ ca mukhyās tiṣro ‘tra śaktayaḥ || 248 II
anuttarā parecchā ca parāparatayā sthitā |
unmeṣaśaktir jñānākhyā tv apareti nigadyate || 249 ||

There are three principal powers here that are responsible for the

manifestation of (these) divisions. They are the Absolute (Anuttarā), which is

the Supreme (Parā power), the will, which abides as the Middle One
(Parāparā), and the power of expansion called knowledge, which is said to be

the Lower (Aparā power).” (248cd-249)

The three short vowels were explained before to be the powers of the

supreme principle, that is, Bhairava, (when) he said:

” IP 1/5/10. Also quoted in TĀv ad 8/362-364ab (361cd-363), 9/8ab, 10/300cd-301ab,
and 15/202cd-203ab. By quoting this verse Jayaratha suggests, as Torella (2002: 118)

writes in a note, that: ‘“The will to produce anything — at every level — presupposes an
object that is in some way present, ‘shining’ within consciousness. Volition, in order to be
such, must be connected with the desired object that ‘limits’ it from within, that gives it

content. The will of the Lord, therefore, presupposes the shining of all objective reality,

which, not being separate from the subject, shines as the ‘I’ shines.” In this context, the
desire to sing, for example, necessarily rests, for it to be possible, in Śiva consciousness
which, as the ‘I’, is Supreme Speech, of which the other levels of Speech are

manifestations and rest within it.

” Abhinava previously explained that these three energies correspond to a) the freedom
which is the source of the procession (krama) of the energies and manifestation, b) the

intention to generate that process, and c) the process itself. See above, 1/5. Cf. also

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Thus, the essence of the six (vowels A, Ā, I, Ī, U and Ū) is the triad

(trika) conṣisting of consciousness (A), desire (iṣi) (I), and expansion (U). (The

wise) say that that same group of three is Bhairava’s supreme glory."”®

Now he talks (in more detail) about (this) manifestation of division.

JT¥SṬITṬTTTTTT: TZ THCIṀTGT: |
kṣobharūpāt punas tāsām uktāḥ ṣaṭ saṁvido ‘malāḥ |
The āṇysṇgṭiae six pure states of consciousness, (symbolized by

the letters A, Ā, I, Ī, U and Ū), are generated by the arousal of these
(powers). (250ab)

The aforementioned six states of consciousness, ending with Decrease
(Ū̃), (arise) when ‘these three powers assume their disturbed form. Even when
they are in an aroused state (propense to manifestation), they do not fall from their
own essential nature (which is consciousness), and so are ‘pure’. Thus, they are
fit to manifest other forms of consciousness by uniting with one another. That was

said (previously):

‘Just the group of six vowels (A, Ā, I, I, U and Ū) alone is the root (of all

the others) herein the series of letters. They are six deities who correspond to the

principal rays of the Sun.’”
Thus, he says:

The All-embracing Wheel of the Twelve Kālikās

3TRTa HT-TITr-TTPTTĪTRTTT|I 24c 1|

āsām eva samāveśāt kriyāśaktitayoditāt || 250 ||
saṁvido dvãdaśa proktā yāsu sarvaṁ samāpyate |

These (six forms of consciousness) emerge as the power of action,®
and so, by penetrating (samāveśa) (into one another), are said to be twelve
Above, 3/192cd-193ab (192).
Cf. above 3/192-194 (191cd-194ab) and see note 3,306.
Above, 3/185 (184cd-185ab).
The last vowels, E, AI, O, and AU, are collectively the power of action. As this power
comes at the end of the series that emerges into functionality within consciousness, it
contains all the others that precede it. Thus, the power to act implies the power to know

and will, just as, at the limited level of consciousness, an action accords with what one
knows. Both depend on the intention to know or to do. Intimately related, they penetrate
one another. Activity is stimulated by the will, with its desires and intentions, and
knowledge directs the form and course of action to fulfil that desire.

CHAPTER THREE

forms of consciousness.
contained). (250cd-251ab)

Within them everything is concluded

(and

‘These’ six (forms of) consciousness, arise as the power of action, and so,
by uniting with one another, they are ‘said to be twelve (forms of)

consciousnessʼ. The meaning is that by assuming the form of the diphthongs etc.,

they are made manifest as the twelve (vowels) without the (four) neuters. These

(forms of) consciousness, arranged within the supreme subject (paramātranta) as
(the twelve phases of) the process (of perception, are absorbed progressively into
consciousness), in the way to be explained, beginning with (the phase

corresponding to) the object of perception.’ And so, for this reason, and as there
is no separate (atirikta) (reality apart from consciousness), everything is (brought

Abhinava explains (TSā, p. 17-19): ʻ‘1) Thuṣ, in this way, when reflective
awareness is undivided, then there is just one Lord. 2) When the reflective awareness
(arises) as seed and matrix, there is (both the Lord as) the possessor of power and (His)

power. 3) When the group of eight (classes of letters) are contemplated individually in

association with the Lord of the Wheel (of energies), there are 4) nine classes. 5) When
each single (form of) reflective awareness predominates, then its state is fifty-fold (as the

individual letters). 6) When engaged in the reflective awareness of all possible divisions of
the parts (consisting of half measures, the Lord’s) form consists of eighty-one units. In

actual fact, there are just (these) six (forms of) reflective awareness. Linked with their
flowing forth (as A, Ā, 1, ḹ, U and Ū) and reinforced reflux (as E, AI, O, AU, the Point and

Emission), there are twelve that nourish the Supreme Lord’s plenitude, (that encompasses)
all the powers. (Their nature) is reflective awareness, and so these energies, the

Goddesses, are called the (Twelve) Kālikās.
These forms of powers are the pure (forms of) reflective awareness within Pure

Knowledge, that assume (there) the nature of the Vidyeśvaras (i.e., Mahāmantra subjects)
and Vidyā (i.e., the Mantra subjects) as the supreme-cum-inferior (sphere of existence),
because (consciousness is minimally) contracted (at this level) by just a mere (initial)

unfolding of Māyā. Again, within (the sphere of) Māyā, the divisions and differences are

clearly evident, (and so the forms of reflective awareness) assume the state of the
phenomenal (māyīya) letters. They are those which, having first become operative on (the

levels of the Speech of) Vision (paśyantī), the Middle One (madhyamā) and Corporeal
(vaikharī), ultimately assume the nature of the external (metaphysical) principles. Even
though these are Māyic (letters), even when they are seen to be (gross, lifeless) bodies,

they are resuscitated (and given new life) by these pure forms of reflective awareness
which, such as explained, function as (their very) life. Then they (again) possess (spiritual
power and) vitality (vīrya). And they, being such, bestow (both) worldly benefits (bhoga)

and liberation. Thus (to conclude), he who perceives himself as the (place of) rest of all
(these forms of) reflective awareness, that is, as reflecting all the diverse creatures and

world-orders,

attains

liberation

in

this

life

by

virte of SŚiva’s

penetration

(śāmbhavasamāveśa), free as it is of thought constructs. And (s0) here too, as before (in
the sphere of No Means), (he is) not (liable) to any constraint by (the practice of) Mantra

and the like.”

7 Jayaratha is referring to the exposition of the Twelve Kalīs, which begins below from

verse 4/148 onwards. There we will see how the twelve phases of perception, that range
from the subject through the senses and other means of knowledge to the object and back,
are worshipped and experienced as phases in the dynamism of the power of universal

consciousness. By recognizing that they are energies of divine consciousness, the supreme
perceiver, they are absorbed back into it. Thus, all things are realised to be one with
consciousness, and that nothing can be separate from it.

TANTRĀLOKA

to completion and) satisfied, and (so he says that) ‘within them everything is

concluded (and contained)ʼ. Such is the main Wheel of Energies (śakticakra),
because here (all) the other energies are included (within it) in the way explained

here before and (as) will be explained (further later).” He says this:

ṬG TFBĒTĀṀ II Q4, |I
etāvad devadevasya mukhyaṁ tac chakticakrakam || 251 1|
etāvatā devadevaḥ pūrṇaśaktiḥ sa bhairavaḥ |

Such is the God of the god’s principal Wheel of Energies, by virtue of

which the God of the gods is Bhairava, Who is endowed with all power

(pūrṇaśakti). (251cd-252ab)

These same twelve (forms of) consciousness are revealed, for example, in
the Krama system (darśana) with a name (i.e. Kālī) that accords with their nature.

In order to explain this, he says:

īō’rṁākc-- fēē--TaīTāTa 11 2u2 11
ṢTĪrTTTĀTĪT; ṀTĪTĒT:GHIGJaRT: ṬaṬE |
parãāmarśātmakatvena visargākṣepayogataḥ || 252 ||
iyattākalanāj jñānāt tāḥ proktāḥ kālikāḥ kvacit |
These (powers) are in some places (in the scriptures) called Kālikās,
because their nature is reflective awareness, and because they project, emit,

enumerate and know (all things). (252cd-253ab)

(The name ‘Kālikā’ is derived from the root) kal in the sense of
‘resounding’ (śabde) and, (shares with the roots) kila and bila the sense of
‘projection’ (kṣepe). kal (also has the sense of) ‘enumeration’ (saikhyāne),
‘activity’ (or state) (gatau). In accord with the meanings of the root, the Kālīs, that
is, those very Kālikās (‘Little Kāḹīs’) ‘project’ (kalayanti), that is, reflect

(parāmṛśanti), ‘emit’ (kṣipanti), that is, (create all things by) emitting (them out

7 See, for example, above 1/108cd-112ab (109-112).
This is the Wheel (or cycle) of Twelve Kaāīs. It is described in detail in Chapter Four,
which deals with the Empowered Means, because the recognition of the cyclic activity of
cognitive consciousness absorbs thought constructs into the immediacy of the direct
experience of pure, nonconceptual consciousness (cf. ŚSū 1/6: “when the Wheel of
Energies fuses together, the universe is withdrawn’). Even so, Abhinava presents the
experience of the Twelve Kālīs at key points in the other means to realisation also (in the
context of the Individual Means, see below, 5/27cd-36). The experience of the Twelve

Kālīs, although a Krama teaching, is so central to Abhinava’s Anuttara Trika that he opts

for a version of the Trika Maṇḍala, the Trika Trident, that incorporates the Twelve Káālīs.

See below, 4/173cd-175, for a more extensive explanation.

CHAPTER THREE

of themselves) (visrjanti) and withdraw (them back) (saṁharanti), that is,

‘enumerate’ (them) (gaṇayanti).

These (twelve Kālīs) are also mentioned in the scriptures of our kindred

schools (naya), not just in the Krama system etc. So he says:

J{drcrēt
aīzāḥ aã Tā̄Ta TĀT I A43 I

śrīsāraśāstre cāpy uktaṁ madhya ekākṣarāṁ parām || 253 ||
pūjayed bhairavātmākhyāṁ yoginīdvādaśāvṛtām |
It is also said in the venerable Sāra scripture that one should worship
the (Goddess) Parā, Who is the one syllable (SAUH), and is called
Bhairava’s Self, surrounded by twelve Yoginīs. (253cd-254ab)
there:

‘In the Śāra scripture’ means in the venerable Trikasāra. As is said
‘(The Goddess) Parā, who is the one syllable (SAUH), is in the middle.

She is beautiful (and white like a) conch, the kunda flower, and the moon.” She
has four arms, four faces,™ and is surrounded by twelve Yoginīs.’”
See below, 4/173cd-175 and commentary, where these didactic etymologies are

discussed in more detail.
71 See below, 30/27-28ab.
”! Abhinava refers to the Trikasāra with various names as many as fourteen times in the
Tantrāloka and also elsewhere. Clearly this was an important Trika Tantra that has,
unfortunately, not been recovered.

”” The iconography of the goddess Parā, as found in the Siddhayogeśvarīmata, is similar
to that of Sarasvatī and Vāgīśvarī, the goddess of Speech. There she has just two hands, in
which she holds a rosary in one and a book in another (see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. vol. 2,

p. 132-133). Parā is worshipped in a surprisingly large number of forms in many

traditions, not only Trika. The name ‘Parā’ means ‘supreme’. It is not surprising that it is

common for a Śākta Tantric school to identify its supreme goddess with Parā, or to
include the goddess in their pantheon. It need not necessarily imply a direct connection
with Trika. In some cases, however it clearly does. For example, the identification of the

goddess Kubjikā with Parā is most certainly due to their very close historical connection.

The goddess Kubjikā is identified directly with Mālinī, who is very specifically the Parā of
Trika, in a way no other goddess is. Indeed, the connection is so close that it would not an

exaggeration to say that Kubjikā and her tradition are a major offshoot of Trika Śaivism.

The Srīvidyā tradition also identifies its goddess Tripurā with Parā. In that case also, it is

indicative of a connection with Trika, although there it is mediated by its closer link with
the Kubjikā tradition. In the case of the Krama school, the connection with Trika and its

supreme goddess Parā is a syncretism. As we can see in this example, the 7rikasāra

incorporates into its rituals elements from the Kālīkrama. We know from the references in
the Tantrāloka that the Devyāyāmala is another Trika Tantra that did the same.

”” Note that here Parā is said to have four faces. This is surprising. No other attested
forms of Parā are like this. Most of them have just one head. See Sanderson 1990: 32-42

for a detailed comparison of the iconic forms and features of the goddess Parā found in
multiple

traditions.

See

especially

the

summarial

table

on

p.

comparing

TANTRĀLOKA

She ‘is called Bhairava’s Self’, as the inner and outer nature of all things,
and ‘Parā” because She protects (pālana) and fills (pūraṇa). Thus, in accord with

the meaning (of Her name), She manifests knowledge (khyāti) all around by (Her)

full (and perfect) nature. This is the meaning. The difference between ‘Kālikās’
and ‘Yoginīs’ is simply (their) the name; it (does not relate to any) difference in

reality. This is indicated (by referring to the Kālikās here as Yoginīs). The

venerable Trikasāra itself says, in its own way, that these (forms of)
consciousness are essentially each of (the twelve forms of) reflective awareness
(corresponding to the vowels, beginning with the Absolute (A). There (in the
Trikasāra we read) beginning with:

‘Accordingly, I will now explain the most excellent procedure concerning
Speech (vāgvidhāna) (to attain liberation, eloquence and learning).”
Speech is the main (topic and dominant reality, and so the Tantra

continues):
‘That seed is conjoined with the twelve vowels, in due order, and these

are in this way the goddesses . . . ‘”’

11 forms described in 18 texts. Note that all have one head except the one in the

Piṅgalāmata, where she has three, and here in the Trikasāra, where she has four.
7 Sanderson (2006b: 108 n. 374) has traced a reference to a ritual procedure (kalpa) of
the Mahālakṣmīmata in the Jayadrathayāmala (satka 4 ff. 223r3-v3) in which Bhairava,
red and churṇing (Manthānabhairava), similar to Svacchandabhairava, with five heads and
ten arms, is in the midst of a circle of twelve Yogeśvarī (also called Devīs). These are:

Siddhi. Ṛddhi, Lakṣmī, Dīpti, Mālā, Śivā, Sumukhī, Vanārī, Nandā, Harikeśī, Hayānanā,
and Viśveśī. These names coincide with twelve Yoginīs worshipped around the Trika
goddess Parā, according to the Mālinīvijayottara (20/46-47), where they are presented as
the goddesses governing the twelve fertile vowels, omitting the four infertile ‘neuter’
ones. Thuṣ, in Abhinava’s Trika, into which Krama is embedded, these twelve may be

substituted by the Twelve Kālīs (see Sanderson 2006: 74). Although Abhinava was a
Krama initiate, received instruction in it, and venerates the Krama Goddess Kālāṁkarṣaṇī
as the supreme form of Parā, and hence as the highest principle, his exegesis is primarily

Trika oriented. As Sanderson (2007: 356-357) has pointed out, we find another example in

Abhinavas Kramastotra. There he presents the holder of the twelve powers as
Manthānabhairava, and Kṣemarāja follows suit (see ŚSū p. 26 and Spandanirṇaya p. 6).
Sanderson (2007: 357) suggests that a precedent for this identification, which cannot be
found in Krama sources, is the Kalpa mentioned above.

7’ Many types of Yoginīs proliferate in the Tantras of the traditions associated with the

Bhairava current of scriptures. There are, for example, Ḍākinīs, Śākinīs, Kākinīs,
Bherunḍās, Nityās, Lāmās, Ḍāmarīs and many more types. The many Kālīs described in
the early Tantras such as the Jayadrathaāyāmala may also be understood to be a type of
Yoginī. Amongst them, just as happens with the other types of Yoginīs, some Kaālīs rise to

the status of a Supreme Goddess. A very well-known Nityā Yoginī who has developed in
the same way is Tripurasundarī.

” In other words, a series of twelve Mantras is formed by reciting the twelve vowels
successively with the seed-syllable. So, adding the anusvāra which transforms letters to

syllabic Mantras, the first would be AṀ SAUḤ and the next ĀṂ SAUḤ and so on. Each

one corresponds to a goddess who attends on Parā.

CHAPTER THREE
These (twelve Kālīs) will be discussed at length in the (fourth) chapter

dealing with the Empowered Means,”” so (there is no point in) exerting oneself

excessively (to talk about them) here.

(Now he goes on) to say how (these twelve goddesses) are said to

(constitute) the main (group of deities).

TGā̄T: TTRT āēJT JāTd |

Tōl Ṭāāē 7t 7ṇāa II Qu!, 1|

zz ī fBfīa -ārāvrar-rdaīī|

tābhya eva catuhṣaṣṭiparyantaṁ śakticakrakam |l 254 ||
ekārataḥ samārabhya sahasrāraṁ pravarṭate |

tāsāṁ ca kṛtyabhedena nāmāni bahudhāgame || 255 ||

upāsāś ca dvayādvaitavyāmiśrākārayogataḥ |
śrīmattraiśirase tac ca kathitaṁ vistarād bahu || 256 ||
iha no likhitaṁ vyāsabhayāc cānupayogataḥ |
From (just) these (twelve energies) alone emerges (every) wheel of
energies, right up (to the full complement of) sixty-four. (So too the wheel)

with one spoke up to that of a thousand spokes.” They have many names in
the scriptures, according to their various functions. The ways they are
worshipped (upāsā) are (also various), according to whether the form (of
their worship) is dual, nondual or mixed. This has been explained at length in
”7 See below, 4/122cd-180ab.
” Gnoli translates these lines to mean: ‘From (just) these (twelve energies) alone emerges
(every) wheel of energies, starting with (the wheel) with one spoke to that with sixty-four
and one thousand spokes.”
Another possible translation could be:

‘From (just) these (twelve energies) alone emerges (every) wheel of energies,
right up (to the one with) sixty-four (energies), starting with (the wheel) with one spoke to

that of one thousand spokes.

An assembly of sixty-four energies dominated by a sixty-fifth is taught in the
Krama. Ḍivided into five groups, they constitute the Pañcavāha, that is, the Fivefold

Current of the energies of Vāmeśvarṁī, Khecarī, Dikcarī, Gocarī and Bhūcarī. Although this
teaching is a fundamental part of the very core of the Krama system taught in the three
Mahānayaprakāśa, it would be the sole reference Abhinava makes to this Krama doctrine,

which is not very likely. Moreover, unlike some Trika Tantras like the 7rikasāra and
Devyāyāmala that had incorporated Krama doctrine, none of the many references from the
Triśirobhairava indicate that this important Trika Tantra had also done so. So it is unlikely
that this is the intended sense there. It is more likely that in its first chapter it taught

sixty-four varieties of assemblies of energies (śakticakra), as my translation suggests.

TANTRĀLOKA

the venerable Traiśirasa (Triśirobhairavatantra), but not written here for fear
of going into too many details, and also because it would serve no purpose to
do so. (254cd-257ab)
(This)

has been explained ‘īn the scriptures’ in general, and in the

venerable Triśirobhairavatantra in particular. Thus, the point is that one should
follow that (teaching as taught there in) the first chapter.”™

Surely (one may ask,) if this is so, then do the Aghorā and other energies

present in the processes of creation and the rest also unfold (along with these
ones), or not? With this doubt in mind, he says:

tā eva nirmalāḥ śuddhā aghorāḥ parikīrtitāḥ || 257 I|
ghoraghoratarāṇāṁ tu sotṛtvāc ca tadātmikāḥ |
sṛṣṭau sthitau ca saṁhãre tadupādhitrayātyaye || 258 |I
tāsām evaṁ sthitaṁ rūpaṁ bahudhā pravibhajyate |

Those same (powers), stainless and pure, are called Aghorā. They are

established in creation, persistence and withdrawal, as well as in the passing
away of these three limiting adjuncts (xpādhi),® by generating the (powers)

Ghorā and Ghoratarā, that are of their (same) nature. Their nature, which

abides thus’ (evaṁ sthitaṁ rāpam), is divided in many ways. (257cd-259ab)

Although (the Aghorā energies) are devoid of impurity, even so, (their)
perception and activity is intense. Thus it is said that they are ‘stainless and

pureʼ. ‘The passing away of the three limiting adjuncts’, namely, creation

” Jayaratha has also referred the reader back to the first chapter of the Triśirobhairava for
this subject above ad 1/11 1cd-112ab (112) and ad 1/114cd-115ab (115).

7 See below, 29/57. Creation and destruction concer the content of consciousness.

Consciousness itself is not liable to either. It is because the contents are transitory that it

seems that consciousness is s0 also. Transitoriness is not intrinsic to consciousness. It is an
‘adjunct’

which

apparently

limits

consciousness,

making

eternal,

non-temporal

consciousness appear to be otherwise. Concerning limiting adjuncts, see above note 2,60.

7 Concerning these three categories of energies, see above, note 3,231. Abhinava takes
care to integrate the Twelve Kālīs into his Trika in every way he can. He does it here by

identifying them with the Trika goddesses that are Aghorā (Not Fierce), Ghorā (Fierce),

and Ghoratarā (Most Fierce), taught in the Mālinīvijaya. The three types of energies,
operating in the four phases of creation, persistence, withdrawal and the unconditioned,

become
twelve.
As there are innumerable energies of each type, they generate countless energies in this
way.

Read evarṁ sthitaṁ for eva sthitaṁ.

CHAPTER THREE

(persistence and withdrawal, uncovers the state of pure unconditioned
consciousness called) the Inexplicable (Anākhya). It has been accepted (by the

masters that this state arises by) ‘the passing away of the three limiting
adjunctsʼ, in order to state that it is reasonable (to maintain) that just as the (one)

nature of these twelve forms of consciousness is divided up in the sequence of the
Inexplicable, it is so also in the very same way in the sequences of creation and

the rest.”

Surely (one may ask,) it has been said that the three limiting adjuncts,

creation and the rest, pass away in the sequence of the Inexplicable

(anākhyakrama). Is thīs (passing away) a kind of non-existence that is prior (to

their coming into being), or is it the kind of non-existence that comes about after

(their) destruction?””™ With this doubt in mind, he says:

The cyclic arising and falling away of the energies of consciousness that rise out of it
and fall back into it mark the formation and dissolving away of each instant of perception.
From the perspective of the conditioned consciousness of the individual perceiver, this is

experienced as the passage of time. The temporal process of creation, persistence and

destruction is made one with Bhairava’s pure consciousness in the fourth phase called the
Inexplicable (Anākhya). Creation, persistence, and destruction are phases in the sequence

of the cycle of consciousness called the Inexplicable. It is called ‘Inexplicable’ because

this sequence (krama) is the dynamism of consciousness, which manifests as that of its

contents. But while the latter is set in time, the former is not a temporal process. So it
cannot be described as either a process or as not being one (below, 4/178cd-180ab).

Moreover, it cannot be defined as any one of them. The other three are also sequences

(krama). There is a sequence of creation
rama), persistence (sthitikrama), and
destruction (saṁhārakrama). The goddess Kālī as Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī and some other forms
is worshipped in association with these ‘kramas’. Major deities are normally worshipped

in conjunction with their attendant entourage. This is also the form they take in the
liturgies of these Kālī traditions. Abhinava knows them of course, but their outer forms do
not concern him much. He prefers to focus on them as the energies or phases of the

activity of consciousness they embody. These are summated in the cycle of the

Inexplicable, which as their source and in which they are contained, is considered to be the
main one (mukhyacakra). Accordingly, as we shall see in Chapter Four, although
Abhinava does refer to the other sequences and cycles, it is only in passing, to indicate
that they are integrated into the twelve phases of the sequence of the Inexplicable.

” There are various views concerning whether ‘non-existence’ has some kind of
existence or not. The empirical realism of the Nyāya maintains that the absence (= non-

existence) of something must exist, otherwise it would not be a real absence. According to
the Nyāya, there are various types of ‘non-existence’. One is absolute or total
non-existence (atyantābhāva). A hare’s horn does not exist ~ never did and never will.

‘Mutual non-existence’ (anyonyābhāva) is another type. The table in front of me can be

there in front of me because everything else, apart from the table, does not exist where the

table is located. Conversely, the table is the sole thing that is not amongst all the non-

existent things there. The existence of one precludes that of the other. A table is not a chair
and vice versa and so they are ‘mutually non-existent’. Again, ‘prior non-existence’

(prāgabhāva) is the condition of something before it is produced by its cause and so

comes into being. This ‘non-existence’ has no beginning, but it has an end. Conversely,
the ‘subsequent non-existence’ of something when it ceases to exist (pradhvaṁsābhāva)

has a beginning, but no end.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Three Ways of Eliminating Creation, Persistence and Destruction

upādhyatītaṁ yad rūpaṁ tad dvidhā guravo jaguḥ || 259 ||

anullāsād upādhīnāṁ yad vā praśamayogataḥ |

The teachers have said that the form which transcends (these)
limiting adjuncts is of two types, according to whether limiting adjuncts do
not emerge, or due to (their) cessation (praśama). (259cd-260ab)
(The first alternative, namely, that they) ‘do not emerge’, is the non-

existence that is prior (to their coming into being. This is when in) the initial
phase (prākkoṭi), the supreme principle, (rests in itself) like a waveless lake.
(These) limiting adjuncts emerge from that when, by its own freedom, (it

assumes) a state propense to externalization. (The other alternative, namely, that

the form which transcends these limiting adjuncts is attained) ‘due to (their)
cessation (praśama), that is, the non-existence that follows destruction.
He (now) says that there are two kinds of cessation.

Peaceful Cessation and the Process of Violent Digestion

STBJṬHRJTGĪĪ

praśamaś ca dvidhā śāntyā haṭhapākakrameṇa tu || 260 ||
alaṁgrāsarasākhyena satataṁ jvalanātmanā |
Again, (their) cessation (praśama) is of two kinds, according to
whether it takes place peacefully (śāntyā) (by the normal procedures of
initiation etc.), or by a process of violent digestion (ha¢hapāka), brought
about (in an instant by Bhairava), who is called the One Who (Delights) in

the Aesthetic Savour of Devouring Completely (alaṁgrāsarasa), and whose

nature burns perpetually.™ (260cd-261ab) (260cd-260ef)

Although the possibility of attaining liberation by a sudden flash of insight is accepted

by all the major Kaula traditions, the sudden, violently powerful attainment of realisation
is an especially central feature of the teachings of the Krama school. The ultimate,

liberating realisation takes place by an intensely powerful assimilation of the energies of
consciousness that pour back into it by a reversal (pratyāvṛtti) of their outward flow. Thus,
the Goddess of the Krama is the power of consciousness, appropriately worshipped as

Kālī, for whom the entire universe is just a morsel she gulps down in an instant. In this

perspective, the paradigm that represents reality is time – the cycles of creation and

destruction – and eternity, which encompasses and transcends them. Time is the common
denominator of the energies of consciousness, thought, the breath and the senses, that
operate on the plane of duality. By consuming one of them into eternal consciousness,

CHAPTER THREE

they are all consumed, and with it, time. Accordingly, this practice is taught in all three
means to realisation. Here, in the sphere of practice of the Divine Means, the energies of
the cycles of creation and the rest are consumed directly. In the Empowered Means, they
are consumed by consuming the thought constructs associated with perception. Thought

constructs and time are also consumed at the level of the Individual Means, but in that
case, they are specifically those which identify consciousness with the constituents of the

psychophysical organism, that is, the mind, the breath and the body. The activity of the

senses, external and mental, is engaged at all three levels in corresponding modalities.
Thus, in that sphere of practice, the assimilation of time into eternal consciousness is
mediated by stages of Yoga and the breath. Accordingly, Krama sources use the same

term – ‘grāsa” – which literally means ‘gulping down’, ‘consumption’ or ‘eatingʼ, with
reference to the process of assimilation of . thought (vikalpagrāsa), the breath

(prāṇagrāsa), time (kālagrāsa), and everything completely (alaṁgrāsa). Ultimately, this
takes place in an instant. Indeed, how could it be otherwise, if time is annihilated? Thus,
one of the three Krama texts called the Light of the Great Teaching (mahānayaprakāśa)

declares that ‘those for whom prior and subsequent has come to an end, and who desire

the Great Reality (mahārtha), there is no other way for them apart from the (sudden)

forceful assimilation of thought.” (MP (2 Tri) 1/32) This takes place by adopting the

attitude of Great Audacity (mahāsāhasavṛtti). The process of Devouring Completely
(alaṁgrāṣa) is born from the Great Audacity (māhāsāhasa) of intense awareness. (ibid.

2/29ab). The Krama sources teach that this may take place in the moments of the greatest
intensity of sensory awareness, as happens, for example, when making love or when one is
inebriated, angry, or even intensely confused. Time and the passionate desire for temporal
existence arise together. But ultimately both pale before the reality which is untouched by
time:

“Thus, time and desire, which depend on one another, are not ultimately real.

They have both arisen from that nature which is not measured by time (akālakalita) and is

free of desire. Where they are both eaten up by the reversal (of the energies of the mind

and senses back into consciousness) is the essential nature of the Supreme Lord, Who (like
a) gourmet delights in devouring all things (viśvagrāsarasika).’ (ibid. 6/16-17)
The power of consciousness operates through the psychophysical organism as its

corporeal, prāṇic, sensorial, and mental energies. These are the constituent energies of
perception, and so accordingly in the Mahānayaprakāśa, the Krama text quoted below,
they are themselves called perceptions. They are set into operation in the state of
expansion and outward flow (unmīlana) of consciousness. The consciousness of the
fettered soul is restricted by thought constructs, and so this outpouring is not only
moderate, it also contributes further to the formation of those same thought constructs.

Free of the restrictions they bring about, consciousness expands in the Śāmbhava state

with such great force that it consumes these energies of perception and all else with it into
itself. Thus, the outward flow (of unmīlana) turns into the inward flow of withdrawal

(nimīlana) in the experience of the bliss of consciousness (cidānanda). This is the
Complete Devouring (alaṁgrāsa) or Violent Digestion (haṭhapāka) of the energies of
consciousness that, expanding with great force, engulfs them, withdrawing them back into

itself. This momentously liberating event is a focal point of the Krama teachings.
According to these Karma teachings, sixty-four energies radiate from the sixtyfifth, which is the Supreme Goddess of consciousness. They constitute five spheres of
manifestation, ranging from supreme consciousness down to outer objectivity. The
Devouring or Violent Digestion (alaṁgrāsa/haṭhapāka) of these cognitive energies that
constitute the Assembly of the Multitude (vṝndacakra) is the core process of Ādyayāga, in

TANTRĀLOKA

which the union (melāpa) of Siddhas (the senses) and Yoginīs (their objects) takes place.
The Mahānayaprakāśa (Trivendrum) teaches:
alaṅṁgrāsaṁkramaḥ so ʻyaṁ mahāsāhasajanmabhiḥ |

adhikapriyamelāpād dhaṭhamelopalakṣaṇaḥ || 29 ||
antaḥkāye ‘pi ye bhāvā hy uktāḥ karmendriyaiḥ sphuṭāḥ |
tatkṣaṇe vismṛtis teṣām ākāṅkṣāyāḥ parikṣayāt || 30 ||
(p. 8) sāntarīyakaviśrāntir yo ʻyaṁ yāgaḥ syasākṣitaḥ |
atrānuguṇyam etasyā devyāḥ sañcetyate sphuṭam || 31 ||

dṛśyate yat tayā pṛthvī (> bahiḥ pṛthivī) tattatkarmavyapāśrayā |
sa yāgo yatra bhāvānāṁ viśrāntiḥ samanantaram || 32 ||

‘This is the process of Complete Consumption born from the Great Audacity
(mahāsahasa). lts characteristic is violent union that take place by the most pleasing union
(melāpa) (of Siddha and Yoginī). Those states (bhāva) mentioned (before) that are also
within the body, clearly manifest (sphuṭa) by the organs of action, are in that moment
forgotten, for (all) craving has ceased. This inner repose which is this sacrifice (yāga),
witnessed by itself, is clearly contemplated here in accord with the Goddess’s (nature).
What she sees externally by taking the support of each of (her particular) activities is the
sacrifice (that takes place) here immediately after the repose of (these states of) being

(bhāva).’ MP (2) 2/29-32

Elsewehere the Mahānayaprakāśa explains how this takes place.
avikalpavikalpasaṁvidāṁ sakalaṁ vr̥ndam anujjhitakramam ḷ
udayādimayaṁ (-mayā) yadantare haṭhapākena galaty anāratam ||
anubhūya guruprasādataḥ paraviśrāntidaśām anuttarām |

|l

sarvotkrṛṣṭasvabhāvasya śivasyāpi mahātmanaḥ |

sthitaḥ saṅkocasaṁskāraḥ kā kathānyeṣu jantuṣu || 29 ||
ato nityāvadhānena svasvarūpamayasthiteḥ |

sarvāgrahagrāhavaśāj jīvanmuktiḥ prakāśate || 30 |
tac cāvadhānaṁ viṣayiṣyarūpapariśīlanāt |
avikalpavikalpātmasthairyarūpatayā punaḥ || 31 I|

‘The entire aggregate of perceptions, both with thought and without, (abides)
without abandoning the process (of its dynamic stillness), consisting of its arising etc.,
continuously melts away inwardly by Violent Digestion, having experienced by the
teacherʼs grace the most excellent plane of supreme repose.

Even Śiva, the Great soul whose nature excels all (else), possesses a trace

(saṁskāra) of contraction, what to say in the case of other living beings? Thus, by constant
aṭṭention to the abiding state (sthiti) which is one's own essential nature, by laying hold
(grāha) of all (one’s own) obstinate intention (āgraha) (to achieve it), liberation in this life

manifests. That attention is practiced by attending to the innate nature of the subject who
experiences the objects of sense (viṣayin), by the firmness (sthairya) which is thoughtless

thought (avikalpavikalpa). (29-31)

vikalpaśṛṅkhalābaddho hetukāryātmako hi yaḥ |
nānāvidhāgrahagranthivāsanāvedhabṛṁhitaḥ || 32 ||
na śakyo ‘sāv apahnotuṁ kila alpātmavedanāt |

tasmāt svarūpadārḍhyena sarvāvaraṇabhedinā || 34 ||
parāvadhānarūpeṇa sthātavyaṁ parayoginā |

CHAPTER THREE

ato viśvasya saṁsthāne yanmukhena yadāgatam || 35 ||
tanmukhenaiva tat tasya haṭhapākena līyate |
One who is bound by the chains of thought, whose nature is the product (of a
previous Karmic) cause, (his fettered state) intensified by the penetration of the latent
tendencies of the knots of many kinds of obstinate inclinations (āgraha), is not capable of
removing (that), because of (his limited) awareness of himself (alpātmavedanāt).
Therefore, the best of yogis should abide firmly fixed (sthātavya) by (the practice) of supreme

atṭention, which is the firmness (of his grasp of) his own nature (svarūpadārḍhya), that breaks

through all obscuring coverings. Thus, the universe is dissolved away into its ground
(saṁsthāna) by means of its Violent Digestion (haṭhapāka) through the same channel by

which it has come (into being). (35cd-36ab) (7/32-36ab)

viśvaṁ prakāśādhīnatvāt tanmayatvāc ca vastutaḥ || 36 ||
saṅvitsvarasavāhitvāc chūnyaṁ sthāpayituṁ yathā |
tathaiva haṭhapākena pratyāvṛttikramātmanā || 37 |
nirāvaraṇatāṁ netuṁ śakyaṁ saṁsthānaśīlanāt |
etasmin vidite samyaṅmuktiḥ saṁsārabhūmitaḥ (-nām) || 38 |

Just as (it is possible) to establish emptiness (śūnya), because (the existence of) all

things depends upon the light (of consciousness), and (that existence) is in fact of that nature,

and because it is transported by the innate aesthetic delight (svarasa) of consciousness, s0 too

by the Violent Digestion (hathapāka) which is the process of reversal (pratyāvṛttikrama) (of

extroverted objectivity back into consciousness), it is possible to lead (all things back) to
(their original) unobscured condition by attending (śīlana) to (their) foundation (sarsthāna).

Once that is known, (the yogi achieves) perfect (samyak) liberation from the plane of
transmigratory existence. (36cd-38)

satsampradāyo guruṇā sarvāvaraṇabhedakaḥ |
miūrticakre hy ahaṅkāraḥ pramātrātmā ya utthitaḥ || 42 ||
svātmaṣaṅkocasaṁhārapūrve sahaṭhapākataḥ |
bhāvasaṁskārarūpasya raśmivṛndasya sarvataḥ || 43 ||
tiṣṭhato bījabhāvena mātṛmelāva(>pa)rūpiṇaḥ (mātra-) |
nirvikalpavikalpāṁśān bhāvābhāvadvayānugān || 44 |I
vinirbhidya vinirbhidya saṁharaty āntarān api |
The true teaching that breaks apart all obscuring coverings by (its) intensity
(guru) within the Assembly of Dīvine Forms (mūrticakra) is the Ego (ahaṁkāra) that is
the perceiver who has arisen (there). Heralded by the withdrawal of the contraction of
one’s own Self by the complete Violent Digestion of the aggregate of rays that are the

latent traces of (the previous) states of being, (the yogi) abides in the seed state of the

union of the perceivers. Breaking apart repeatedly the parts (aṁśa) (of cognitive
consciousness) that, with and without thought, are in consonance with the two states of
being and nonbeing, he withdraws (them as he does all) others also. (42-45ab)

nirvikalpavikalpāṁśāḥ prāyaḥ saṅkalanāvaśāt | 45 ||
sambhavanti catuṣṣaṣṭiḥ pratītīnāṁ svabhāvataḥ |

tatrāpi jñeyasaṁskārābhijñarūpāḥ pratītayaḥ || 46 |I

sambhavanti catuṣṣaṣṭiḥ sopānakramayogataḥ |
anyā -- api ca tanniṣṭhā haṭhapākaikalampaṭāḥ || 47 I|

TANTRĀLOKA

(The cognitions that), with and without thought constructs, are the parts (arsa)
(of consciousness), normally (prāyaḥ) (spontaneously) by their very nature become by

their combination (and differentiation) (saṅkalana), the sixty-four perceptions (that are the

cognitive energies of the Krama) (praṁīrṁ). Sixty-four perceptions, that are the knowledge

(abhijña) of the latent traces of objectivity, arise there in hierarchical succession.
Although they are other (than the one consciousness, they too are) merged within that

(consciousness), longing solely (for their) Violet Digestion (haṭhapāka) (into it). (45cd47)

jñātṛbhogasvarūpiṇyas tatsaṁkhyā eva vastutaḥ |
jñātṛbhogasvarūpāṇāṁ marīcīnāṁ kadambakam || 48 ||
pratyekaṁ haṭhapākena grasituṁ tatra vartate |
tac ca sphutāsphuṭatvena vartate ‘nubhavād api | 49 ||

jñeyasaṁskārarū

i (jñeyaṁ-) pratītīnām anukramāt |

paraviśrāntilakṣaṇam || 50 ||
na kṣaṇaṁ cyavate rūpaṁ yasyāḥ sā pāramārthikī|

Numbering in fact that many, they are the experience of the knower (jāātṛbhoga).
(Together they are) the aggregate (kadambaka) of the rays that are the perceiver’s
experience. Each is present there to be devoured by Violent Digestion and exists due to
the experience (anubhava) of it as clearly manifest (sphuṭa) or otherwise. The nature of
that (goddess of consciousness) who is supremely real does not waver even for a moment
from the (state of) supreme repose (that takes place) in due order of all these perceptions

that are the latent traces of objectivity. (48-51ab)

sarvottīrṇā sarvamayī sarvasarvātmakaprathā || 51 II
avibhinnā vibhinneva yā kācit pārameśvarī |

vyapadeśātigā tasyāḥ svasvarūpamayasthiteḥ || 52 ||
pañcaṣaṣṭipratītitvam upacāreṇa gīyate |

raudreśvaryā ayaṁ sphāraḥ prādhānyena vyavasthitaḥ || 53 ||
saṁskārahathapākātmā grāsavyāpārapāragaḥ |
saṁhãrabhakṣiṇĩrãpãd vyomeśyantaṁ hi yat sthitam || 54 |
cakrasaṁsthānam etasya nijacakrakramāntare |

nirvibhajya svakaṁ rāpaṁ haṭhapākakriyātmakam || 55 ||

She who is the experience that every (single) thing is all things transcends all
things and is all things. She who is that certain (inscrutable) Supreme Goddess is
undivided (and yet) is as if divided. Her abiding state, which is her own essential nature, is
beyond instruction. She is metaphorically proclaimed to be the sixty-fifth perception.

(51cd-53ab)
This expanded state (of consciousness) is predominantly arranged in order by

Raudrī, beyond the process of assimilation (grāsa) (into consciousness), it is the Violent
Digestion of the latent traces (of past experience). Present from Saṁhārabhakṣiṇī (She

Who Devours Withdrawal) up to Goddess of the Void (Vyomeśī), it is its deployment in
the assembly (cakra) (of energies) within the process of its own assembly (of energies).
(This deployment) is the activity of Violent Digestion (that takes place) without first

dividing up its own nature. (53cd-55)

pratyāvṛttyā svasvarūpe nirāvaraṇasundare |
icchāsaṁskāravirahe kṣīṇā

viśrāmyati svataḥ l| 56 ||

paradhārāsamārūḍhasāmarasyāvasānabhīūḥ |

eṣā kṛśatanur devī sarvecchāvilayāvaniḥ || 57 ||

CHAPTER THREE
(One kind of cessation takes place) ‘peacefully’, that is, by a tranquil

process of gentle digestion (madhurapāka). Thīs involves the worship of the

teachers etc. first of all, then, once having obtained initiation, as an ordinary

initiate (samayin) and the rest,™ one takes care to observe all the regular and

occasional rites, so that when one dies, the limiting adjuncts, that is, creation and

the rest, pass away. Thīs is the meaning. One should not say that the ‘peaceful”
cessation (praśama) of creation and the other limiting adjuncts is simply a
spontaneous one (ṣvārasika). If that were to be so, the teachings of the scriptures

and the like would be useless (which is not s0), because limiting adjuncts do not

cease (spontaneously just) at any time (by themselves, for no reason). So
enough of this excessive" (exertion to establish what is impossible)!

anapāyapadaprāptyai kaiścid evābhyupāsyate |

yāṁ () yāṁ (yā) svacakre cakresī tāṁ tām āviśya yuktitaḥ l| 58 (I
raudreśvarī sarvacakrāṇy āmūlād grasati svayam |

ato vr̥dakrame sarvam upādeyatayā sthitam || 59 ||
By reversing back into her own unobscured and beautiful nature, devoid of

(even) a trace of desire, (the goddess of consciousness), extremely subtle (kṣīṇā),
spontaneously brings (all the energies) to rest. The ultimate state of oneness (sāmarasya)
mounted on the supreme plane, this Goddess whose body is thin (kṛṣatanu), is the ground
in which all desires dissolve away. It is worshipped by those (few) who have attained the
eternal plane. (56-58ab)
Once each of (the forms of) the Goddess of the Assembly (Cakreśī) have entered
into her own assembly (svacakra) by (this) method, Raudreśvarī herself devours all the

assemblies up to (their very) root. Thus, everything that is in the Process of the Aggregate

(of the energies of consciousness) is present as that which is to be taken up (and
assimilated into consciousness).” MP (2) 7/1-2ab, 29-38, 42-59

The ‘devouring’ of time, and with it all the limitations that constrict individual

consciousness, consumed by absolute consciousness, is likened to the digestion of food.
According to common Indian belief, a fire burns in the stomach (called jaṭharāgni) which,

consuming food, burns and so heats the body. The food in the stomach becomes chyle,
which is called ‘rasa’, literally ‘juice’. The same word is used to denote the sentiments

evoked by a beautiful object. This ‘rasa’ is produced by the assimilation of the object into

the subjective consciousness via the senses of the aesthetically sensitive perceiver whose
consciousness is, as it were, nourished by it and so grows strong and intense.

”Ṁ The word ‘pāka’ literally means ‘cooking’, and by extension it also means ‘maturation’

and ‘digestion’. The process by which fruits mature on a tree or food is digested is called

‘pāka’. In this technical sense, the word denotes the process by which the soul’s impurities
(mala) ‘mature’ and become ready to be removed by initiation, like ripe fruit which falls

from a tree. Madhurapāka literally means ‘sweet digestion’. It denotes the process of

gentle, gradual absorption into the oneness of consciousness. It is the opposite of
haṭhapāka which is the ‘violent digestion’ of the thought constructs that generate and are

the limiting adjuncts that condition individual consciousness and prevent its absorption
into unconditioned Bhairava consciousness.

” There are four main categories of initiate. First comes the ordinary or regular (samayin)

initiate. He may choose to become an adept (sādhaka), whose practice is centred on the
repetition of Mantra (japa). Alternatively, if he is fit to do so, he can go on to be a

Spiritual Son (putra), who serves as an apprentice to the teacher (ācārya), who is at the
final level of initiation he aspires to receive.

” According to the common Siddhānta view, initiation removes the impurities that cover
the soul, and s0, freed of these impediments, it is conjoined by the teacher to Śiva. The

TANTRĀLOKA

The (supreme) reality that (delights), that is, is greedy for ‘the aesthetic
savour (rasa) that (results) there from devouring, that is, making completely one

with itself, creation and the rest, is (variously called) Bhairava Who Devours

Completely and the like. Thus, burning perpetually without a break, his nature
shines radiantly with (objectivity), which appropriately (in this way and that)
(yathāyatham) serves as its fuel. By means of this kind of ‘violent’ process that
transcends (the temporal) process, that is, by the compelling force which is the

teaching that is imparted just once (sakṛdupadeśa),'™ (everything is) ‘digested’,

that is, made one with the fire of consciousness. This is the process by which
creation and the other limiting adjuncts pass away. This is the meaning.
Here (in this world), it is indeed desirable for everybody that the three
limiting adjuncts of creation and the rest pass away, and so it is essential to search
for some special means that can bring that about, and that is said to be of three
kinds. (The first kind) there (of these three) has been explained to be the one in
which limiting adjuncts do not arise. This (is very difficult), and so has been

completely discarded, because what is required is that those that have arisen pass
away, and for that there is a particular means called ‘peaceful’. Although it takes
place slowly and can bring about their passing away (only) when (a person who
practices this means) dies, it functions under the jurisdiction of the weak descent
of the power (of grace).”” The third (form) of cessation, brought about by violent

digestion (haṭhapāka), (functions) under the jurisdiction of the intense descent of

the power (of grace). This particular means is worthy of being taught by means so
that by that, limitiīng adjuncts may be destroyed immediately. He says that (as
follows):

question naturally arises that if this is so, why is the disciple not liberated? The answer is
that he is indeed liberated, but some residual Karma remains which has started to take its
effect (prārabdha). t is this Karma that keeps the initiate in the body, and is naturally
exhausted in the course of the initiate’s lifetime. He must however take care not to
accumuḷate more Karma which would accrue if he fails to observe the precepts and
perform or participate in the enjoined regular and occasional rites. This is the path of the
Siddhānta, that favours the kind of liberation which takes place after death (videhamukti).
The Kaula traditions like the Trika, on the other hand, favour liberation in this life
(jivanmukti). The slow process of maturation takes place by the support of a weak descent
of the power of grace (mandaśaktipāta). Immediate and perfect accomplishment (sādyaḥ

siddhi) of liberation in this life takes place by an intense descent of the power of grace.
Either way, Jayaratha points out that it is a mistake to believe that liberation is simply
atṭained by ‘being natural’ or ‘letting go’, if that means just relaxing and doing nothing.
Grace is essential, but so is the cooperation of the recipient, whether it is by his
observances or being prepared, by his purity and openness, to receive the most intense,

liberating grace. See above, notes 1,340 and 1,362.

Read atyartham | sārvātmyena for atyarthaṁ sārvātmyena.

”! We have seen that the teaching ‘imparted just once’ liberates the disciple who, blessed
with the most intense form of grace (śaktipāta), enters in an instant into the pure
consciousness of the absolute of No Means (anupāya). See above 2/2-3 and commentary.

” The empowering power of grace ‘descends’ from the deity and so is appropriately

called a ‘descent of power” (śaktipāta). This is of three basic kinds: intense (tīvra),

middling (madhya) and weak (manda). These are described in detai| further ahead in
Chapter Thirteen.

CHAPTER THREE

Rṇ_WTRYYIHd
JTĀĪTd ēa 1I|/2ē2 |I

3RI 3SNd ŪCTĪRCTTT|

haṭhapākapraśamanaṁ yat tr̥īyaṁ tad eva ca || 261 ||
upadeśāya yujyeta bhedendhanavidāhakam |
This cessation brought about by violent digestion, the third type,
which burns the fuel of differentiation (bheda), is (especially) worthy of being
taught. (261cd-262ab) (261)

The reason here why it is ‘worthy (of being taught)ʼ is because it ‘burns
the fuel of differentiation (bheda). The point is that this alone has the supreme
capacity (sāmarthya) to destroy relative distinctions (bheda) with great force
(sahasā).

Thus, he says:

qīaṁ: gã aafdaṁ
ēa: || 3ā2 lI
fēīrafa stafaaṃmt

ā afkŨī: 1

nijabodhajaṭharahutabhuji

bhāvāḥ sarve samarpitā haṭhataḥ || 262 ||
vijahati bhedavibhāgaṁ
nijaśaktyā taṁ samindhānāḥ |

AIl existing things offered forcefully (haṭhataḥ) (in an instant) to the
fire that burns in the stomach of one’s own consciousness, abandon the

division of relative distinctions, and by their own power, they are (its) fuel.™
(262cd-263ab) (262)

79 The difference between one object and another is the relative distinction between them.
A table is a table because it is not a chair or anything else. When everything is recognised

to be consciousness, it is experienced as essentially that one reality. That does not mean
that the relative distinctions cease in the sense that individual objects (or perceivers) no
longer exist, or the realisation dawns that they never did, as when one wakes up from a
dream. Tables and chairs do exist, but they are perceived in accord with their specific

nature through thought constructs focused on relative distinctions. Pure, thought-free

conscious-ness perceives everything as one with itself. The two work together as the
‘inner” subjective aspect of consciousness and the ‘outer’ objective one.

This verse corresponds to MVV 2/133, where it appears in the context of an exposition

of the inner fire sacrifice (homa). MVV reads bhāvāḥ samyakṣsamarpitā yuktyā ʻexiṣṭing
things offered properly by means of meditation (yukti)’ for bhāvāḥ sarve samarpitā
hathataḥ `al| existing things offered forcefully’. And jahati bhedavibhāgaṁ
nijaśaktyā
taṁ samindhate yasmāt ‘thīs is because (they) abandon the division of relative
ctions
and by their own power fuel that (fire) for vijahati bhedavibhāgaṁ nīijaśaktyā taṁ

TANTRĀLOKA

‘AIl existing thingsʼ, (including the states of) creation and the rest,

‘offered forcefully’ in the fire of consciousness, ‘abandon the division of
relative distinctionsʼ, which means that they manifest radiantly as possessing one
nature, which is consciousness (bodhaikarūpa). Surely (one may ask,) if all

existing things are, each according to their own nature, separate from
consciousness, how is it that they manifest at one with that? With this doubt in
mind, he says that ‘by their own power, they are (its) fuel’. The meaning is that

stimulating (uddīpayantaḥ) consciousness ‘by their own power’, which is
consciousness, they make it manifest. The point is that if they were not
(essentially) consciousness by nature, they could not be perceived.

Surely (one may ask,) what comes about in this way? With this doubt in

mind; he says:

haṭhapākena bhāvānāṁ rūpe bhinne vilāpite || 263 ||
aśnanty amṛtasādbhūtaṁ viśvaṁ saṁvittidevatāḥ |

When, by (this process of) violent digestion, the differentiated nature

of things is destroyed, the deities of consciousness feed upon the universe
(thus) turned to nectar. (263cd-264ab) (263)

Having first awakened the fire of consciousness ‘by (this) process of
violent digestion’, and by destroying ‘the differentiated nature of things, the
universe is turned to nectar°; that is, becomes one with consciousness. Then the
goddesses of consciousness, that is, the goddesses who govern the senses
(karaṇeśvarī), ʻfeed upon it’, that is, reflect on it as one with supreme

consciousness.

This is the

meaning. Moreover,

the

(common) interaction

(vyavahāra) between the enjoyer and the object of enjoyment is also implied here

in order to understand the main point being discussed in specific relation to that

(process).

Then what (happens)? He says:

ṬĪ ḍḺTĒTRTJITT-T || 2ē¥ 1

ftrzāmitā zan¥TTJHG |

tās trptāḥ svātmanaḥ pūrṇaṁ hr̥dayaikāntaśāyinam || 264 ||
cidvyomabhairavaṁ devam abhedenādhiśerate |
(When) they are satisfied, they rest at one with God Bhairava, the Sky
of Consciousness, Who, (as) their own full (and complete) (pūrṇa) nature,
resides solitary in the Heart. (264cd-265ab) (264)
samindhānāḥ (they) abandon the division of relative distinctions and by their own power,
they are (its) fuel.”

CHAPTER THREE
When ‘theyʼ, the deities of consciousness, ‘are satisfied’, and do not

depend on anything else because they have attained oneness with supreme

consciousness, then (Lord Bhairava) ‘resides solitary in the Heart’, and rests
(solely) in the reflective awareness which is the essence (of all things), and so is

‘full (and complete)ī and does not crave for anything else. Thus (he is) ‘God’,
one with the (supreme) principle of illumination. (He is) ‘Bhairava, the Sky of

Consciousnessʼ, the Supreme Principle which is the Supreme Light. (The deities

of consciousness) ‘rest at one’ (with Him), that is, manifest radiantly as one with
(Bhairava, Who is) their own essential nature. This is the meaning. Now here (in

this context, he) as before alludes to the worldly activity (vyavahāra) of the Lord

Surely (one may ask,) as these (goddesses of consciousness) rest in the
supreme nature which is consciousness and there is nothing separate from it, how
can they possess this twelve-fold nature? With this doubt in mind, he says:
The Unfolding Configurations of the Goddesses of Consciousness

TJ ja-īũTaāRrāīāgād: || 3ē II

evaṁ kr̥tyakriyāveśān nāmopāsābahutvataḥ || 265 ||

āsāṁ bahuvidhaṁ rūpam abhede ‘py avabhāsate |

Although their nature manifests in unity (abheda) in this way, it is of
many kinds, for many are their names and manner of worship (upāsā), due to
their functions and operations. (265cd-266ab) (265)
(Their) ‘function’ is to see form and the like. (Their) ‘names’ are ‘the
deity of the sense of sight’ and the rest (of the senses), and (their) ‘manner of

” The previous phase, which is experienced by yogis in the elevated manner described in
the previous verse, is for others the common interaction between himself as the individual
perceiver – ‘the enjoyer’ and the object – ‘the enjoyed’. In the same way, this second

phase, which is experienced by yogis as the process of absorption of duality into
consciousness that ‘feeds’ the deities of the senses, is the manner in which Bhairava acts
constantly in daily life. Every perception is an offering to the deities of consciousness. At
the end of each perception, when the offering has been made and they are satisfied, they

come to rest in Bhairava, their Lord. In this way, all things come to rest in the sacred
Emptiness in the pulsing, vital core of pure consciousness.
7 The twelve Kālīs, as we shall see in detail in Chapter Four, are the goddesses of the
twelve phases of the universal activity (sāmānyaspanda) of consciousness. They
correspond to the emanation, persistence, withdrawal and their ineffable oneness, in the
domains of the object, means of knowledge and the subject. In some contexts, as here,

they are identified with the twelve goddesses of the senses. These are the five senses of

knowledge (jñānendriya), namely, hearing, taste, sight, smell and touch; the five senses of
action (karmendriya), that is, hands, feet, speech, the anus and genitals, and the two inner
organs of mind (manas) and intellect (huddhi).

TANTRĀLOKA

worshipʼ is the merger (vilāpana) etc. (into consciousness) of their own activity
(vṛtti), which is that of perceiving form and the rest (of the objects of sense).’
” Consciousness flows through the senses that it itself generates, as its instruments of

perception. Consequently, the same phases operate through each of the senses in each act

of perception. Jayaratha is using Krama terminology here. The sequence of consciousness

(saṁvitkrama) can be variously analysed. There are two main formats found in Krama

sources. One is a sequence of four phases and another of five. Both end with ‘merger”

(vilāpana) (more literally this term means ‘dissolving away’. One could also translate this

term as ‘destruction’ or ‘cessation’). Clearly, Jayaratha must be referring here to the fourfold sequence (kramacatuṣṭaya). Thīs is: 1) the initial exertion (udyoga) within the body

of the absolute to transform itself into the universe of finite experience. 2) lts
manifestation (avabhāsana) within the absolute. 3) The relishing (carvaṇa) or reflective
awareness of its appearing within consciousness. 4) Its merger (vilāpana) or withdrawal

back into the absolute when it resumes its pristine form as the radiant, Inexplicable power

(anākhyaśakti) of pure consciousness. This final phase is also sometimes termed the
Devouring of Time (kālagrāsa) (e.g. in a quote in TĀv ad 4/125).
Sanderson (1987, p. 14ff.) concisely describes the five-fold process as: ‘the

projection of content, immersion in content, retraction of content into the state of latent
impression within the subject, and finally the dissolution of these subjective impressions

in the implosion of consciousness into its pristine, non-discursive potentiality. In some
traditions, pure luminosity (bhāsā) is worshipped as a fifth phase englobing these four as
its creative vibrancy.”
Thus, the five-fold sequence consists of 1) manifestation (ābhāsana), 2)
attachment (rakti), 3) reflection (vimarśana), 4) deposition of the seed of future

manifestation (bījāāvasthāpana) and 5) merger (vilāpana). 1) Manifestation (ābhāsana)
takes place by the same process by which the powers of the senses unfold progressively in
the act of perception, manifesting in this way each individual particular in the field of

awareness. 2) Attachment (rakti) is the phase in which the emitted manifestation persists

for some time without folding back into consciousness, which is now outwardly directed
to the field of cognition and carries with it the powers of the senses that, thus projected

outwards, are ‘coloured’ (rakta) by their object. In this phase the extroverted subject

manifests as the means of knowledge and so is affected by objectivity. In this way
objectivity becomes clearly manifest through the manifestation of the means of
knowledge, that is, the senses. 3) Reflection (vimarśana) is the next phase, which is that of

withdrawal. Once having apprehended his object, the subject turns back in on himself to
rest within himself and thus experience the wonder (camatkāra) of the aesthetic delight of

the reflective awareness of his own nature. 4) The Sowing of the Seed (bījāvasthāpana)

comes next. In the case of the perfected yogi, this process ends in the previous phase and

is contained in the consciousness of Śiva’s self-revelation in the state of grace. The yogi,
full of the power of devotion, contemplates the multiplicity of particulars and then

withdraws completely into the unity of consciousness. In most cases, however, a residue
remains even when the subject has withdrawn from the object into himself. This residue
functions as the seed for future states of conditioned consciousness. So, on the one hand,
the subject is absorbed in the delight of his own undivided nature, while on the other, the
residue instigates further emission and withdrawal. This residue is in the form of doubt or

uncertainty about the nature and consequence of further activity. This inner doubt assumes

spontaneously the form of the thought constructs that veil consciousness and leave the
individual soul perplexed and deluded, thus obstructing his absorption in his own

authentic nature (svasvarūpānu-praveśa). 5) Finally, ‘merger’ (vilāpana) corresponds to

Siva’s operation (kṛtya) of grace, which marks the cessation of the limiting adjuncts

(upādhi) that the cycle of creation and destruction impose upon the fettered soul. This
comes about, as described above, by the process of digestion (pāka) or immediate

CHAPTER THREE

The point of saying that ‘although their nature manifests in unity (abheda), it

is of many kindsʼ, is to indicate that (their diverse form is purely) conceptual
(kālpanika) (and not ultimately real).
Surely (one may ask,) if they are of many kinds because of the diversity
(bheda) of functions etc. (of consciousness), and the perception of form and the
rest (of the objects of the senses) is a twelve-fold function because there is no

other function (of consciousness) apart from that, then there should not be a form
(of consciousness) which is either more or less than that twelve-fold form. So how
is it that it was said (before that) ‘from (just) these (twelve energies) alone

emerges (every) wheel of energies, right up (to the full complement of) sixty-

four?” With this doubt in mind, he says:

1Il

TIPT-RaTHTIIJfTTafakāR: 1| 28. 11
āsām eva ca devīnām āvāpodvāpayogataḥ || 266 ||
ekadvitricatuṣpañcaṣaṭsaptāsṭanavottaraiḥ |

rudrārkānyakalāsenāprabhṛtirbhedaviṣṭaraḥ || 267 ||
Again, according to the way in which (these) goddesses merge

together (āvāpa) and unfold (udvāpa), they become extensively diverse (by
combining in groups of) one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten,
eleven, twelve, thirteen, sixteen, eighteen and so on (infinitely). (266cd-267)
(266-267ab)

(The goddesses) ‘merge together’ (āvāpa), that is, (they) gather together
and ‘unfold’ (udvāpa), that is, expand (vikāsa). The point is that by virtue of their
own freedom, they constantly contract and expand (freely) like a lotus (that opens
and closes as the sun rises and sets).
Thus, one related matter leading to another in this way, (we have) come
(to the end and 50), concluding, he introduces (and returns to) the main point:
assimilation of the residue of the outwardly directed activity of consciousness engaged in
the cycle of manifestation, thus restoring it to its original and authentic form as the

universal vibration of consciousness. By an intense descent of the power of grace
(tīvraśaktipāta), consciousness consumes duality as does a blazing fire, fuel. In this way,
the powers of consciousness return to their original source, the possessor of power. By
their unfolding (udvāpa) and retraction (avāpa), they align themselves with one another in

diverse ways, to build up the variegated picture of cosmic manifestation as they increase
in number and complexity, to then again collapse back into their source. See Dyczkowski
1992a: 61 and 180-181.

The eyes see, the ears hear and so on, and s0, distinguishing between the activities and

functions of the various senses, we consider the senses to be different from one another.
But in actual fact, they are all the activity and function of the one consciousness, which
operates variously.

Above, 3/254ab.

Çf. above, 1/109cd-112ab (110-112) and below, 6/179 (178cd-179ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

The Seal of the Supreme Means is the Awareness that
Everything is Reflected in the Mirror of Consciousness

āīḡT JāasJ frz7sād |
alam anyena bahunā prakṛte ‘tha niyujyate |
Enough of all these many other (secondary details), now we shall
apply (ourselves) to the main point. (268ab) (267cd)
(Enough of all these) ‘other”, that is, secondary (details) relating to the
exposition of the Divine Means. The main form (of practice of this means to
realisation) has been described as being three-fold, that is, that all things are

reflections within consciousness and the rest," so that those who are close (to that

reality) may attain in just a moment (jhatiti) that (supreme) nature (of

consciousness), which is free of thought constructs.® As there are many matters

to understand in relation to this, he says in brief for these (yogis) that ‘we shall
apply (ourselves) to the main point’, so that they may not forget those things
that are being taught, namely, that the universe is a reflection within
consciousness and the rest.

Now, after this and from this (place) onwards, he eulogises the main point

(of this exposition of the practice of the Divine Means), namely, that all things are
reflections within consciousness and the rest (that this implies). This is the

meaning. Thus, he says:

ṝ aāz f+ f : 1

TJTIT̄ JRIÇTĪJāhcT: āīTāā; || 3ā8 1I

“lAccording to Swami Lakshmanjoo (2003: 17), the teachings concerning the Divine

Means relate to three aspects of experience at this level. They are that 1) all things are

reflections within consciousness, 2) the sequential emergence of (the forms of) reflective
awareness (parāmarśodayakrama), and 3) the undivided nature of Mantras etc.
(mantrādyabhinnarūpa), which is the reflective awareness of pure ‘I’ consciousness. We

have seen that these three are indeed the basic forms of practice in the sphere of the Divine
Means taught here in Chapter Three.

The word ‘jhatitī’ literally means ‘very quickly’. The practice of the Divine Means

essentially involves being aware of being conscious and recognizing that consciousness is

Deity, Who is one’s own true nature. This reflective awareness is the same at all levels,
and brings about instantaneous contact with the one divine consciousness. We seldom
experience the plenitude of Siva’s presence and ourselves as essentially one with it,
although it is immediately and directly present in this way. This is because we are as

quickly distracted by our thoughts. AIl spiritual practice thus ultimately serves the purpose
of removing the distraction and other obstacles to maintaining that awareness, that is
constantly renewed ‘very quickly’ at each instant.

CHAPTER THREE

F-āTṬJIĒĀTṬTTGTG-T āīT IAT |

saṁvidātmani viśvo ʻyaṁ bhāvavargaḥ prapañcavān || 268 ||
pratibimbatayā bhāti yasya viśveśvaro hi saḥ |
evam ātmani yasyedṛg avikalpaḥ sadodayaḥ || 269 ||
parãāmarśaḥ sa evāsau śāmbhavopāyam udritaḥ |
pūrṇāhantāparāmarśo yo ‘syāyaṁ pravivecitaḥ || 270 1|
mantramudrākriyopāsās tadanyā nātra kāścana |
He within whose conscious nature the universe and this (whole)

category of phenomena (bhāvavarga), freely extending (prapañcavat), appears
as a reflection, is in truth the Lord of the universe! In the same way, he

within whose nature this kind of reflective awareness, free of thought
constructs, arises constantly, is indeed stamped with (the seal of) the supreme

means (śāmbhavopāya). (Thus,) for one who possesses the discernment

(pravivecita) which is the reflective awareness of ‘I-ness’ in all its fullness
(pūrṇāhantā), there is nothing else (which differs) from that here of any kind,
be it Mantra, Mudrā, ritual or worship. (268cd-271ab) (268-270)
The adept (sādhaka) and the rest (of the various kinds of practitioners)
who possess the most intense descent of the power (of grace), within whose

consciousness the ‘universe’ of subjects and objects ‘freely extendingʼ in their

various divisions and subdivisions etc. and ‘this (whole) category of phenomena

(bhāvavarga) shines as a reflection as does a city in a mirror, that is, even though
it is being separated (as it were from his conscious nature), it manifest as not
separate from it, that is, as his own nature alone, is indeed ‘the Lord of the

universe’, that is, shines at one with the Lord Who is the Supreme Light. This is
the meaning.
Again, when one for whom the category of phenomena manifests in this

way (within his consciousness) like a reflection (in a mirror), this kind of

(perfectly full) ‘’ (consciousness) shines radiantly (prasphurita) within his own
nature as (this whole) category of phenomena. (Thus,) in this way, the ‘reflective
awareness arises constantly°, which is the direct experience of the Self
(ātmasākṣātkāra). Such a one is ‘stamped with (the seal of) the supreme means
(śāmbhavopāya)ī, which means that (his consciousness is) regulated (and
maintained) (niyamita) (in this state) by the attainment of its own appropriate

(corresponding) goal (upeya).

Thus he ‘possesses the discernment (pravivecita) which is the reflective

awareness of ‘I-ness” in all its fullness (pūrṇāhantā)) as every field (of
consciousness). In other words, here for one in the supreme means, there are no

(kinds of) ‘“Mantra, Mudrā, ritual or worshipʼ” of any kind which differ from
(the

spontaneous

practice

of)

the

reflective

awareness

of

full

(and

all-encompassing) ‘l-nessʼ. The meaning is that they shine at one with one’s own

nature, the sole nature of which is the supreme subject. The point is that they are
of no use to one who rests on this plane (of consciousness). As is said:

TANTRĀLOKA

‘For one who, dedicated to the practice of freedom (svacchandaceṣṭā),

has obtained even a little of this (alchemical) potion (rasa), the conduct (caryā)

consisting of contemplative trance (samādhi), Yoga, vows, Mantras, Mudrās, the
repetition of Mantra and other such observances (caryā) appears to be like
poison.”
And (Abhinavagupta himself) will say:
‘Ritual ablution, (the observance of a) vow, the purification of the body,

concentration (dhāraṇā), the application of Mantras, the formation of the cosmic

order (adhvakḷpti) (by intense meditation), sacrificial rites, oblation, repetition of
Mantras and contemplative trance (samādhi) – all these, or any other (means) one

could conceive based on duality (bheda), are not applicable here at all.

Liberation in This Life (jīvanmukti)
(He now goes on) to say that the great soul who is close to (the practice
of) the Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya), although three-fold in this way, attains
liberation (even when he is still) alive.

fBīā. |1 Qvg 11

bhūyo bhūyaḥ samāveśaṁ nirvikalpam imaṁ śritaḥ l| 271 I|
abhyeti bhairavībhāvaṁ jīvanmuktyaparābhidham |
He who enters repeatedly into this state of penetration (samāveśa)
(into pure Bhairava consciousness) free of thought constructs, attains
Bhairava’s state (bhairavībhāva), otherwise called liberation in this life.
(271cd-272ab) (271)
Sureḷy, (one may ask, he said) previously that ‘(no practice) associated

with action

(kriyāyoga) can serve there as a means (to realisation).’ What is

being said (in such statements) is that there is no means at all within Bhairava

consciousness that imparts knowledge or (induces to right) action, because it is a
priori (ādisiddha) (and so always known) and ever active (nityodita) (and so does

not require activation). So how is it that he has said this now, namely, that this
state of penetration (samāveśa) (into pure Bhairava consciousness) free of thought
constructs is the means here? With this doubt in mind, he says:

za TJ JÃĨI ST̄̄-JT̄THĨÃÃ 11 293 1

ī JTTTTTTTTTTTĀTTTĪT|

Below, 3/289cd-290 (289-290ab).

4 Above, 2/8ab see there. Also quoted below in TĀv ad 479.

CHAPTER THREE

a: |

ita eva prabhr̥ty eṣā jīvanmuktir vicāryate || 272 ||
yatra sūtraṇayāpīyam upāyopeyakalpanā |
prāktane tv āhnike kācidbhedasya kalanāpi no || 273 ||

tenānupāye tasmin ko mucyate vā kathaṁ kuṭaḥ |

From this point onwards we will discuss (the nature of) this (state of)
liberation in life (īvanmukti), (which is such) even though this notion that

there is a means and a goal (persists) there in a subtle form (ṣūātraṇayā). In

the previous chapter there was (no question of) any formation of division
(bheda), for (at the level) free of means, who is liberated, how and where?
(272cd-274ab) (272-273)
The point is that ‘even though (the notion that there is a means and a

goal persists) in a subtle form’, it will become clearly evident (sphuṭā) in (the
means to realisation taught in) subsequent chapters. (At the level free of means
there is no question of) ‘division’ into the agent, instrument, material cause and
the like. Thus, he says: ‘who is liberated, how and where?”

And (s0) here (now) he explains the nature of (the relationship) between

the means and the goal.

The Reflection of the Principles (tattva) in the Fifty Forms of Reflective
Awareness

fēkcūī qŪṁīg{ ōīzāīdrazat 11 3.9% 11
ṚIHaṬTJGRTT TATĪT̄ JTHTHTTITTIT II Q'4 1

Ūīṁi ũRaTaTĪTTTḤ I| 3SĒ 1|

ezikkzrEf:eilii=zZīeatcstzI

nirvikalpe parāmarśe śāmbhavopāyanāmani || 274 |
pañcāśadbhedatāṁ pūrvasūtritāṁ yojayed budhaḥ |
dharām evāvikalpena svātmani pratibimbitām || 275 ||
paśyan bhairavatāṁ yāti jalādiṣv apy ayaṁ vidhiḥ |
yāvad ante paraṁ tattvaṁ samastāvaraṇordhvagam || 276 ||
vyāpi svatantraṁ sarvajñaṁ yac chivaṁ parikalpitam ḷ
The Awakened One should apply the fifty aforementioned kinds of
reflective awareness free of thought constructs, (here) called the Divine

Means (śāmbhavopāya). Beholding the Earth (principle) reflected within

one’s own nature by means of this (reflective awareness) free of thought
constructs, it assumes Bhairava’s nature. This (same) procedure is applied

TANTRĀLOKA

(to all the other principles) also, from that of Water onwards right up to the

last, (where the yogi reaches) the supreme principle beyond all obscuring
coverings, which pervades (all things), is free, omniscient, and conceived to
be Śiva. (274cd- 277ab) (274-276)
‘Aforementioned’ in the first chapter, as was said (there):
‘Fifty varieties of this penetration are described (in the
Maālinīvijayottaratantra) in accord with (how) these (three) clearly apparent
categories (bheda), located amongst the thirty-six metaphysical principles (tattva),

are discerned (and conjoined together) (abhisandhitaḥ).’

‘One should apply’. The meaning is that one should conceive each one,

one at a time, as a means (to realisation). He says that (with the words) ‘the Earth

(principle)ʼ and so on. ‘Beholding’ just ‘the Earth (principle)ʼ alone, ‘reflected
within one’s own nature by means of this' knowledge ‘free of thought
constructsʼ, not indeed by means of thought constructs alone, that is,
experiencing it directly as the pure consciousness (saṅvinmātra) of one’s own
innate nature. Thus, because everything is of the nature of all things, ‘it assumes
Bhairava’s natureʼ, that is, it manifests as the supreme Light (of consciousness).
This is the meaning. He teaches that the same is the case with the other principles
also, (saying) ‘also from that of Water onwards’ etc. ‘Beholding’ the network
of principles beginning with Water up to Śiva ‘reflected within one’s own
nature’ by means of the modality (vṛrti) (of consciousness) free of thought
constructs with ‘this (same) procedure’ʼ, ‘it assumes Bhairava’s nature’.

Surely (one may ask,) if the supreme principle ‘pervades (all things),

then how is it that having set aside the thirty-five principles,” it is said to be just

the thirty-sixth? With this doubt in mind, he says that it is: ‘conceived to be
beyond all obscuring coverings’. In actual fact, its sole nature is the supreme

subject who is" the knower and agent of that (aggregate of thitty-five principle).

Thus he says that it is: free and omniscientʼ.
Surely (one may ask,) if the supreme principle is Bhairava whose sole
nature is the supreme perceiver, then how, being Bhairava, can it become a means
(to realisation) in the course of the act of perception? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

iGtzeeīaḷ+tciecaīEīīztḤṬCICCṈṬ

tad apy akalpitodārasaṁviddarpaṇabimbitam || 277 ||

paśyan vikalpavikalo bhairavībhavati svayam |

“ Concerning the thirty-six principles (attva), see below, 9/49cd ff. and 10/97cd ff.
Above, 1/186cd-187ab.
Read pañcatriṁśattattvāny ujjhitvā for pañcatriṁśattattvīm ujjhitvā.
Read -svabhāvaparapramātrekarūpam for -svabhāvaparapramātreka rāpam.

CHAPTER THREE
The (yogi) free of thought constructs, beholding that (Śiva) also

reflected in the noble and uncreated (akalpita) mirror of consciousness,
becomes by himself (spontaneously) Bhairava. (277cd-278ab) (277)

(He does not attain realisation) only by (perceiving) the other principles
(as reflections in the mirror of consciousness), but also (just) the supreme
priṇciple, that is, Bhairava, whose sole nature is the one supreme perceiver of (all)
that. As (Utpaladeva has) is said:

‘(The Lord, by virtue of His freedom, which is the absence of duality,

having fashioned (his own)) Self (ātman), that (abides) unforsaken (by that)

freedom, (with notions that He is the Lord (Iśa) and the like, behaves (as such in

daily life).

In accord with this line of reasoning, (Bhairava, the supreme principle of
consciousness), has conceived the state in which there is a goal to attain and the
means to attain it (upāyopeyabhāva) within His own nature by (the power of) His

freedom, (and so made realisation possible by this practice). This ‘consciousness’

is ‘noble’ because it is not a created (thought construct), and is uncontracted by
this or that limiting adjunct. It is a ‘mirror” because of its most excellent capacity
to reflect (svacchatā). The adept (sādhaka) etc. who is ‘free of thought
constructs’ and has penetrated into the Supreme Means (śāmbhavopāya),
beholding (that supreme principle) reflected there (within it), that is, (experiencing
it) directly as being of that (same pure conscious) nature alone, ‘becomes by
himself’, independent of anything else, ‘(spontaneously) Bhairava’. The
meaning is that he shines effulgent as (that same) uncreated (and unconceived)
(avikalpita) noble consciousness. This is the meaning.

Surely (a question arises). If it is said that by means of the supreme
principle (the yogi at this level of practice) penetrates into the complete (and
perfect) nature (of the liberated state of consciousness), let it be (we agree), but

how is that possible by means of (partial) aspects, namely, the Earth (principle)
and the rest? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3zī ī̄ḥ J. ṬYĀTHĀRCTTTĪTJT II Ṝ29¢ 11|

T̄aāTTRhhhRITJTaT: 1|/398 1I

- ]P 1/5/16. A variant of this verse is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/72 (73), see note there.

Also quoted below, in TĀv ad 9/159 (partially), 11/10cd-12ab, 28, 15/315-317 and ad
29/126cd-127ab (IP 1/5/16a). Torella in a note to this verse quotes Abhinava (IPVV 1, p.
108) as saying: ʻ‘Although freedom and dependence are two diametrically opposed
realities and mutually exclude one another, Parameśvara [the Supreme Lord] in his

supreme freedom combines them (yojayati) when he creates different perceptions such as
Īśvara [the Lord], the Self etc. This idantā [objective] component makes them able to

become the object of meditation, worship, teaching and so on, and, on the other hand, their

unveiled ahantā [subjective] component ensures the attainment of their true nature.”
(Torella’s translation; square brackets mine)

TANTRĀLOKA

yathā raktaṁ puraḥ paśyan nirvikalpakasaṁvidā || 278 II
tattaddvāraniraṁśaikaghaṭasaṁvittisuṣthitaḥ 1
tadvad dharādikaikaikasaṅghātasamudāyataḥ || 279 ||
parāmṛśan svamātmānaṁ pūrṇa evāvabhāsate |
One sees (something) initially, such as (for example) the red (colour of

a jar), by means of (the aspect of) consciousness that is free of thought
constructs and which (subsequently), by various means (dvāra), (develops

into) a single stable and undivided perception of a jar. In the same way, for
him who reflects upon his own nature through the unified emergence of each
one of these (principles), starting with Earth, one after the other, it manifests
(in all its) plenitude. (278cd-280ab) (278-279)

Indeed, everything here (according to us) is the perceiver. ‘nitially°, first

of all, by means of cognitive consciousness (jñāna) free of thought constructs, one
perceives directly ‘the red (colour)ʼ, which is a quality that secondarily
characterizes (a jar), as well as the deployment (of its parts), such as (its) broad
base and bulbous shape. Each of (its) parts, including (its) red colour and the rest,

made manifest by (the perceiver’s) own will etc., serve as a means (to perceive a
jar, in such a way that) one rightly (says), ‘I have perceived (jñāta, literally

‘known’) this jar’. Thus the understanding or ‘consciousness’ by which it takes
place is that of the one main (object) in relation to (its) parts that is correctly

(perceived), without being less (than it is), as separate (from consciousness and
distinct from other things), and as undivided and without parts, in accord with its
own specific characteristic nature (svalakṣaṇa), which consists of the coming
together of many manifestations of universals (sāmānyābhāsa). Satisfied in this

Ṭhe ‘means’ are the aspects (aṁ5a) of the object, such as the round shape of the jar

that, progressively perceived, combine to make up a clear image of the manifest form of
the object.

" A specific characteristic nature (svalakṣaṇa) is unique to each particular entity in space
and time. This term and the concept it denotes have been adopted with important
modifications by the Pratyab!

the main points as follows:

, the philosophy of Anuttara Trika. Torella summarizes

‘The svalakṣaṇa Dharmottara understands as . . . ‘unique character, unique
reality’ (NBT p. 70) is for the Buddhist logicians, the object of direct perception.

Dharmakīrti . . . describes it as follows: ‘capable of causal efficacy, dissimilar from

everything else, not being the object of a word and not being known in the presence of

signs that are different from it’ (PV 3/1-2); and ‘that which, owing to its being far or near,
determines a difference in the form that appears in cognition’ (NB 1/13). The svalakṣaṇa,
says Mokṣākaragupta (TBh p. 11), ‘is something real, unique, determined by a space, time

and form, which are peculiar to it. He gives the example of a particular jar, capable of

containing water, with a definite place, time and form, different from what belongs to the

same or a different class. The svalakṣaṇa strictu sensu is an absolutely undivided reality; it
is an instant (NBT p. 71). The term svalakṣaṇais borrowed by the Śaiva authors to denote
‘an entity having a character whichis onlyits own, consisting in a determined place, time

CHAPTER THREE

way, (the perceiver) abides free of any (further need and) expectation (to know
more), and rests in its own nature alone.

In the same way, ‘he who reflects' ‘by means of (the aspect of)

consciousness that is free of thought constructs’ ‘upon his own nature’ʼ, by
taking the support of the ‘unified emergence’ ‘of each one of these (principles)

starting with Earth’, that is, Earth, Water and the rest, one by one, or, in the

same way, the unified (whole) of the gross elements, etc., consisting of Earth and
and form which ‘contract’ its own nature’ (IPv I p. 86) The basic difference with the

Buddhiṣṭs lies precisely in conceiving of place-time-form not as the intrinsic nature of
things, but as the contingent contraction of an entity whose real nature is, on the contrary,

expanded (vikāsitabhāva eva, vitaātmā c'. ŚDr 5/6c), ‘open’ (cf. ĪPVv p. 27). Though

appearing as a unitary entity, the svalakṣaṇa, in Utpaladeva’s view, is in fact formed by a

number of ābhāsas, i.e. universals, which have become a particular owing to their mutual
delineation and their connection with space and time.” (Torella 2002: p. 890)

The specific individual identity of an entity – its svalakṣaṇa – is constituted by a
particular configuration of manifestations (ābhāsa) that occur at a particular time (or
period of time) and place, which are themselves manifestations. Utpaladeva explains:

‘The essential identity (tartvam) – which is by nature absolutely undivided

(abhinnam eva) – becomes one and manifold because of the division into internal
[absolute ‘I’ consciousness] and external [objective] manifestation. (It becomes manifold)
because of the multiplicity of the manifestations of the individual realities (svalakṣaṇa),

constituted as they are by the different combination of external manifestations such as
place, time and shape.’ (vṛtti on ĪP 2/2/2 Torella’s translation, square brackets are mine.)

According to the Pratyabhijñā (certainly not the Buddhiṣṭs), the manifestations

which constitute ‘individual realities” (svalakṣaṇa) are not in themselves specific to any

entity, They are universals (sāmānya) that are common to any number of corresponding

particulars. The most universal of manifestations is that of existence (sattābhāsa), and the
most specific is the unitary manifestation of the specific identity (svabhāva) of an entity.
Consciousness shines as all manifestations and is itself just manifestation alone
(ābhāsamātra). The activity of the Light of consciousness is ‘shining’ (bhāsana) and

shines as a ‘manifestation’ (ābhāsa), which is how it shines. The pure direct experience,
free of thought constructs, of things just as they are, is as manifestations of consciousness.

The specific nature of an object is established by the unifying power of the mind

(anuṣandhāna) of the individual perceiver, who distinguishes various manifestations as
distinct from others according to his inclination, practical needs and specific experience
(IP 273/3). Each manifestation, although universal, has its own particular functional or

causal efficacy (arthakriyā), that is, capacity to give rise to a particular effect or meet the
purpose for which it is required (see above, note 1,1106). Manifestations out of the

pleroma that manifests in the initial cognitive consciousness in the first moment of
perception are selected according to the needs of the perceiver, and groups of
manifestations are formed, arranged in consonance with a predominant one
(sāmānadhikaraṇya). One who ṣees a gold jar, for example, and needs money, will focus

on the manifestation ‘gold’. Another person who simply needs a vessel to carry water, the
other manifestations of the jar, such as its hollowness, shape and size, are the focus of
attention. These configurations are, as Utpaladeva says, the objects of words, and hence
thought constructs that are made of words (see ĪIP 2/3/4-5 and commentaries). Thus, the

desire which stimulates the impulse of the perceiver to perceive an object which serves his
purpose is fulfilled when it has been discursively determined, that is, framed in a notion of
the sort ‘this is a jar, which serves the purpose of carrying water. Then consciousness

again rests in its own nature alone, which is free of the dichotomy of subject and object.

TANTRĀLOKA

the rest, or, in the same way, the (unified) whole (samudāya) consisting of fifty

(units) beginning with Earth, (consciousness) ‘manifests (in all its) plenitude’.

The meaning is that it shines radiantly as (the pure) consciousness of one’s own
nature alone.
Surely (one may ask,) this universe which is the (unified) whole

(samudāya) of (all) the principles from Earth onwards manifests as divided up
(and separate from consciousness) (bhinna). So how can that be (realised) in this

way to be just one’s own pure consciousness alone by the (power) of reflective

awareness? With this doubt in mind, he says:

I Am the Author of the Cycle of Creation and Destruction
that Arises in the Mirror of My Consciousness

nzāa vṁratkraīg 11 3¢o 11
nafmirē
īī frīa: a am: 1
matta evoditam idaṁ mayyeva pratibimbitam |l 280 ||
madabhinnam idaṁ ceti tridhopāyaḥ sa śāmbhavaḥ |

tkécAll) this is born from me”, “it is reflected in me” and “is not
separate from me” – three-fold is this Divine (Śāmbhava) Means. (280cd281ab) (280)

In accord with what was said (before), namely, ‘everywhere here (in all

these verses), the personal pronoun ‘I’ denotes only pure, (awakened)
consciousness (bodha). (these verses refer to that). (Accordingly, the reflective
awareness that everything has emerged) ‘from me’ (means that) this universe of
subjects and objects has arisen from supreme (awakened) consciousness (bodha),

not from ignorance (or anything else)."“ (Moreover,) even though (everything) is

See above, 1/186cd-187ab and note.

TĀ 3/280cd-281ab (280) is quoted in MM p. 148. Instead of idaṁ ceti ‘(all) this . . .
andʼ, the quotation reads jagac ceti ‘the universe . . and’.

t After quoting this verse in the Mahārthamañjari (MM p. 148) Maheśvarānanda goes on
to quote Abhinava’s Tantravaṭadhānikā as saying:
yathādarśe ghaṭādīnāṁ sthitir miśretarātmikā |

‘Juṣṭ the condition (of the reflections of) jars and the like within a mirror is a
combination (of one with the other) and (also) otherwise (that is, every one single and
independent of other), in the same way, the state of these phenomena (reflected) within
me is wonderfully various.' TVDh 2/3
The printed text reads cidātmani – ‘within consciousness’ for mamātmani – ‘within me’.

l Above, 1/131cd (132ab).

i Advaita Vedānta maintains that the universe is not a real creation. It is not produced

from some second reality like the Prakṛti of the Sāṁkhya or from an aggregate of causes.

Rather, it is only apparently generated, due to the mistaken belief that it has an

CHAPTER THREE

such, ‘it is reflected in me’, that is, within consciousness (bodha). Although it

is not separate (from it), it abides (there within it), in the process (as it were, of)
being separated (from it), but not as cut off (from it) (vicchinna). In the same way

also, when it is being withdrawn, (the yogi practicing the supreme means
experiences that this universe) ‘is not separate from me’, that is, in its ultimately
real form as (awakened) consciousness (bodha), not as (a material universe) made

of atoms (paramāṇu) generated by the coming together of bi-atomic (dvyaṇuka)

etc. (units) by a process of progressive differentiation of parts.®" Thus, it is
reasonable indeed to maintain that because everything (viśva) is just (this)
reflective awareness, that it is consciousness alone (saṁvinmātra). In this way,

reflective awareness itself is the essential nature of this, the Divine Means. So he
says: “ṭhree-fold is this Divine (Sāambhava) Means’.
Such

is

the

(intimate)

association

of

creation

(persistence

and

withdrawal) and of the reflective awareness of ‘’ consciousness. He also
indicates this in this way. Accordingly, he says:

g. fk#ṝṝ. daadg āzacdāt
#aī || 2¢2 |I

sṛṣṭeḥ sthiteḥ saṁhṛteś ca tad etat sūtraṇaṁ kṛtam || 281 ||
yatra sthitaṁ yataś ceti tadāha spandaśāsane |
That (reflective awareness thus) forges this link (which contains

implicitly within itself and connects together) creation, persistence and
withdrawal. As is said in the Spanda teachings: “that in which all this
creation is established and from whence it arises . . .” (281cd-282ab) (281)

That is not said just by us, but by our teachers also, and so he says ‘that

in whichʼ etc. That is said there (in the Stanzas on Vibration):

‘That in which all this creation is established and from whence it arises is

nowhere obstructed because it is unconditioned by its very nature.’

independent existence of its own, whereas, in actual fact, it is nothing but the Brahman. In
this sense it is a product of ignorance. See following notes.

1 Śaiva nondualism maintains that the world is not an illusion born from ignorance. It
exists just as it appears to do so, including illusory or mistaken perceptions. But that does

not mean that it is a separate reality created by consciousness and then severed from it.

Rather, it continues to rest at one with consciousness, like a reflection within a mirror;

otherwise it could not exist.
Thjs is the materialist view of the Vaiśeṣika. As Torella (2011: 68) explains: ‘The four
elements [earth, water, fire and air] are constituted by atoms (paramaṇu: ‘extremely

smallʼ), which cannot be divided further and are capable of combining together ‘in
increasingly more numerous aggregates – bi-atomic (dvyaṇuka), tri-atomic (tryaṇuka) and
s0 on, thus becoming accessible to perception as molecules etc.”

1 Read sṛṣṭyāder for sṛṣṭyādayo.

SpKā 1/2. See Dyczkowski 1992a: 78-80,147 and 186-190. Abhinava states here that

the Spanda teachings operate on the level of Śāmbhavopāya, which īs the insight grounded
in pure nondiscursive consciousness (nirvikalpa) that all objectivity arises out of it, is

TANTRĀLOKA

(When he says) ‘from whence it arisesʼ, he refers to creation, and (when

he says) ‘that in which it is established’ as not separate (from it) and as (if) being
separated from it, (he is referring) to persistence and withdrawal,

Surely (one may ask,) how can one say that (cognitive) consciousness
(samvir) is the agent of creation etc.” One should say that it has a different

characterizing feature, as some Vedāntins (braḥmavādin) (say who declare that)
‘that experience (of the Absolute) (anubhūti) is unborn, immeasurable (ameya),
endless, and its form is the bliss of the Self’. (Thus, in accord with) this
(teaching), should not the unique (asādhāraṇa) nature of that (absolute
consciousness) be said to be (transcendental and inactive), as established by those
(Vedāntins who maintain this) other view? With this doubt in mind, he says:

etāvataiva hy aisśvaryaṁ saṁvidaḥ khyāpitaṁ param || 282 |
viśvātmakatvaṁ cety anyallakṣaṇaṁ kirṁ nu kathyatām |

sustained by it and returns to it. Jayaratha quotes this verse from the Stanzas on Vibration

to say that although consciousness manifests and is all things, this does not mean that it is

obscured by them. Advaita Vedānta, on the contrary, maintains that the manifest universe
does obscure the consciousness of the absolute Brahman, as does the illusory snake, the
rope seen in the dark that is mistaken for a snake. The illusory snake covers over the real

rope as long as the rope is not known to be the true nature of what appears to be a snake.

Implicitly countering this way of understanding the nature of things, Abhinava quotes this
verse as a conclusion to the following passage, which is thus effectively his commentary

on it.

‘Now, how is it that everything is said to rest in this way in Śiva’s nature? In

reply to this question, we have this to say. The existence or non-existence of things here
(in this world) cannot be established in any other way except (by admitting) that they rest
in consciousness. Those things that rest in consciousness are manifest, while their

manifest state (prakāśamānatā) is one with consciousness, for consciousness is the light
(of manifestation) itself. If one were to say that they are other than the Light (of
consciousness) and (yet) manifest, it would amount to saying that (whatever manifests as,

for example, the colour) blue, is separate from its essential nature (svarūpa) and yet (is

still) blue. Thus, it necessarily follows that all these things (of the world) rest in
consciousness in this way, and their properties (vṛtti) are none other than those of

consciousness. Nor is it reasonable to maintain that consciousness is subject to duality. If
(one were to affirm that) the duality of daily life (bkedavyavahāra), brought about by the

reḹative distinction between things, were due to some other consciousness abiding within
consciousness, whose sole nature is light, it would amount to saying that one part of it is
unmanifest, and so devoid of consciousness. Again, if these, the objects of knowledge, at
one with (consciousness), the essential nature (of all things), were capable of dividing
themselves (off from one another), they would also divide consciousness by their own
power. (Thus, as) they are incapable of assuming relative distinctions by themselves, the
(perceived) distinction between them is brought about by the pure indeterminate
awareness (saṁvedana) (which is consciousness).” (PVv 1, p. 4-5)

CHAPTER THREE

This

(creativity)

itself declares

the

supreme

lordship

of

consciousness, and is its cosmic nature. Pray tell what else could be its
characterising feature? (282cd-283ab) (282)

“This (creativity)ʼ, that is, (the capacity) consciousness possesses to bring

about (kāritva) creation etc., is its ‘lordship’ and ‘cosmic nature’. And it
‘declares’ and expresses its ‘supreme’, most excellent (nature) as different in
character from (the absolute of) those who maintain other views. This is the

meaning. This is indeed the primary and unique characteristic of that
(consciousness), namely, that by its (own innate) freedom it shines radiantly as the

nature of all things. Thus, ‘pray tell what else could be its characterising
feature?” The point is that by saying that, nothing is said. If that were so, (and
someone were to say that) on the contrary (that is not s0,) he could not prove that

the cause of the wonderful diversity of all things is (something else apart from the

Lord’s freedom), such as ignorance or the like, because (all other views) suffer
from (the defective) notion (vikalpa) that (the world) is either separate or not

(from that supposed cause). Therefore, the primary characteristic of that
(consciousness) is that it brings about (kāritva) creation etc. So what has been said

is reasonable.
Thus he says that, reflecting in this way on (the capacity to) bring about
creation etc. within his own Self, (the Yogi) attains oneness with supreme
consciousness (sarṁvid).

1| 2¢z 1

xea fcassvar |

gcfftṝreṛitisdīīsī̄zkaīa+ 11 2¢4 11

f+# zafṁ raāfēzfṁ va-rzafñ 1

svātmany eva cidākāśe viśvam asmy avabhāsayan || 283 ||
sraṣṭā viśvātmaka iti prathayā bhairavātmatā |
saḍadhvajātaṁ nikhilaṁ mayy eva pratibimbitam || 284 ||
sthitikartāham asmīti sphuṭeyaṁ viśvarūpatā |

sadoditamahābodhajvālājaṭilatātmani | 285 ||
viśvaṁ dravati mayy etad iti paśyan praśāmyati |

“I, manifesting the universe in my own Self, the Sky of Consciousness,

am the creator who is all things (viśvātmaka)” – by this insight one becomes

Bhairava. “The entire cosmic order (ṣaḍadhvajāta) is reflected within me
alone, I am the agent of persistence!” – (with this insight) this (one’s own)
cosmic nature becomes evidently apparent. “The universe melts away into

l The principal characteristic of consciousness is that it generates, sustains and destroys

every experience and hence all things. Thus, it is Deity.

TANTRĀLOKA

me, whose nature is the scorching fire of the great, perpetually active
(satatodita) consciousness” — seeing thus, one becomes peaceful. (283cd286ab) (283-285)

Surely (one may ask,) in this way also, the universe persists as a latent
trace in the form of that which is to be emitted etc., and so how can its perfectly
tranquil condition arise? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ST--rāīTçTTATTĀTT: II 3¢ II
vōni: flīa taāeṝṁcgcaát
gaīvī: 1
anantacitrasadgarbhasaṁsārasvapnasadmanaḥ || 286 ||
ploṣakaḥ śiva eyāham ity ullāsī hutāśanaḥ |
The Fire (of consciousness) that pours forth (enflamed with the

awareness that): “I am indeed Śiva, who burns the mansion of the dreams of
transmigratory existence with its endless and wonderfully diverse (worlds,

which are its) wombs of existence.” (286cd-287ab) (286)

‘Transmigratory existence’, consisting of each of the metaphysical
principles, is the unfolding (manifestation) of all things (viśvasphara), which (is
transitory, and so) because it is without essence, is a ‘mansion of dreams’. (If it

were) a mansion of waking experiences, when it is burnt away there would be the
possibility that something remains. It has ‘wombs’, which are the worlds. They

are beautiful because (they are ‘countless and wonderfully diverse’). They are
‘endlessʼ, because, in the manner that will be explained (in Chapter Eight), the
Path of Space (consists of) innumerable (worlds), and ‘wonderfully diverse’,
because they consist of many configurations. (The Fire that) ‘burnsʼ it draws its
strength from the reflective awareness, “I am the creator” etc. Thus, by practicing

constantly, the ‘Fire’ that pours forth is the reflective awareness that ‘“I am
indeed Śiva”” who is unbroken (unconditioned) consciousness, and it makes even
the latent traces of all things one with one’s own consciousness. This is the

meaning. Just as nothing remains in a house when a fire arises within it, even if it
is furnished with many protecting enclosures (anekāvarakaprāya), simīlarly,

(nothing remains) of the universe when Śiva’s nature has poured forth (and

become manifest).
Surely (one may ask,) as (consciousness) brings about creation etc., the

direct experience of consciousness within one’s own Self is conditioned
(avacchinna) by creation etc., then how could oneness with unconditioned

consciousness be possible in that way? With this doubt in mind, he says:

This

verse corresponds

to

MVV

1/1091.

There

the

first line

reads:

aśeṣacitracidgarbha- instead of anantacitrasadgarbha-. The verse there means: “The Fire
(of consciousness) that pours forth (enflamed with the awareness that): “I am indeed Śiva,

who burns the mansion of the dreams of transmigratory existence with all the wonderfully
diverse wombs of consciousness.”

Read with Ch and Jh: saṁṅvitsākṣātkāraḥ for saṁṅvitsātkāraḥ.

CHAPTER THREE

Sīīc%di

ṬAṬAITgG
nṝft feōa
-- ī x.. 11 2¢9 1

[ENtVĒ']

jagat sarvaṁ mattaḥ

prabhavati vibhedena bahudhā
tathāpy etad rūḍhaṁ
mayi vigalite tv atra na paraḥ l| 287 |
tad itthaṁ yaḥ
srṛsṣṭisthitivilayam ekīkṛtivaśād

anaṁśaṁ paśyet sa
sphurati hi turīyaṁ padabhitaḥ |

titrhe entire universe with (all its) diverse (aspects) emerges out of

me (in many ways, and is also established here in the same way within me (in

my pure consciousness), from which (all duality) has fallen away and nothing

else (remains).” He who sees (the cycle of creation and destruction) in this
way without parts because creation, persistence and withdrawal has been
unified (and so) has penetrated the Fourth state (of pure, divine
consciousness), shines radiantly (as supreme consciousness). (287cd-288ab)
(287)

AIl this ‘universe’ of many kinds arises out of supreme (awakened)
consciousness as separate (from it) (vicchinnatayā). Although it has arisen in

this way, it rests there within consciousness. Also, in the same way, when the
universe has been withdrawn back into it, ‘nothing else’ at all remains, just
(awakened) consciousness itself. ‘He who sees’ creation and the rest,
experiencing (them) directly as the one undivided consciousness by the falling
away of the division (of the cycle) of creation and the rest as ‘without parts’,

because ‘in this wayʼ, that is, in the manner explained, consciousness threads
This passage continues to 3/293cd-294ab (293).

The word ‘vicchinna’ literally means ‘cut off’, ‘separated’, ‘divided upʼ and so, by
extension, conditioned. This is the sense when it is said that something is ‘vicchinna’ by
something else. The manifestation of consciousness as all things does not intrinsically

‘divide it upʼ or ‘condition’ it. Even so, the universe of subjects and objects manifests as a
reality that is ‘divided up’ and ‘separate’ from consciousness, which ‘conditions’ it to the
degree in which it is not recognised to be nothing but pure Śiva consciousness. See above,

note 2,60.

TANTRĀLOKA

through all the stages (of the cycle of creation and destruction), and because it

‘has been unified’, that is, is one with consciousness, has penetrated (and is
penetrated by) the Divine Means, and (so) having attained the ‘Fourth state’,
‘shines radiantly’ as the supreme consciousness, which is the Inexplicable

(anākhya). This is the meaning. The singular of the word ‘he’ indicates that

many are not fit here (for this practice).
Thus, he says:

The Supreme Means is Beyond Ritual

TaRT-TTĪTT JĪHATJTJĪĪTBĒT II Ṝ¢¢ 11

tad asmin paramopāye śāmbhavādvaitaśālini || 288 ||
ke ʻpy eva yānti viśvāsaṁ parameśena bhāvitāḥ |
Indeed, only a few, sanctified (bhāvita) by the (most intense grace of
the) Supreme Lord, attain faith (and perfect satisfaction) in this, the supreme
means, which is the repository of Śiva’s oneness. (288cd-289ab) (288)

‘Sanctified’ means purified (adhivāsita) by the most intense descent of

the power (of grace) by the Lord (on those whom he) has made fit here (in the
practice of the supreme means to receive it). Thus, it is said that (they are) ‘only a

few°. Not everybody is a fit recipient of this kind of grace (śaktipāta). This is the
point. As they say:

‘There are hundreds of worshippers, and devotees are thousands, but

those who are fit recipients of the Lord’s grace, who are (fully) satisfied, are (just)
two or three, not (even) five (or six).”

The reason why this (means) is supreme is that it is ‘the repository of

Śiva’s onenessʼ, (whereas) the other (means) Individual (āṇava) and the rest are
dualistic (bhedarūpa), and so are not supreme. This is the sense. Thus, here the
diverse means (to spiritual development), such as (ritual) ablution, are not
applicable here (in the domain of the Supreme Means) at all. He says that:

aTT ōīā cṇfaz’īī nrzārsTT 1| 2¢8 1

Ṣ̄aTĨTRFGTT]
TIT TT ŪT ZSIS 1| 380 ||
snānaṁ vrataṁ dehaśuddhir dhāraṇā mantrayojanā || 289 ||
adhvakḷrptir yāgavidhir homajapyasamādhayaḥ |
Concerning the Inexplicable (anākhya), see above, note 2,75; 3,160, 3,797 and below
4,406. Here it is identified with the Fourth state of realised consciousness, concerning

which see below, 10/227cd ff.

CHAPTER THREE

ityādikalpanā kāpi nātra bhedena yujyate || 290 ||
Ritual ablution, (the observance of a) vow, the purification of the
body, concentration (dhāraṇā), the application of Mantras, the formation of
the cosmic order (adhvakḷpti) (by intense meditation), sacrificial rites,
oblation, repetition of Mantras and contemplative trance (samādhi), (all
these, or any other means) one could conceive based on duality (bheda), are
not applicable here (at all).” (289cd-290) (289-290ab)
Surely (one may ask,) if the diverse means (to spiritual development) are

not applicable here, then how can a teacher (ācārya) who has penetrated this

(Supreme Means) grace someone else (who has not)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

The Śāmbhava Master

TÑJGṀĒĪT-TTTAKJ
TÇ fzrāī] |

parānugrahakāritvaṃ atrasthasya sphuṭaṁ sthitam |

yadi tādr̥ganugrāhyo daiśikasyopasarpati || 291 ||

The teacher who is established herein™ evidently graces anyone who

approaches him, if he is fit to be graced in this way. (291) (290cd-291ab)

(One who is fit to be graced) ‘in this way’ possesses (the capacity to

practice) the Supreme Means. (AIl the teacher needs to do) is just look at him or

talk with him and he thereby achieves the goal within himself. (As is said) in
this respect, ‘. . . (he is illumined) like the flame (of a lamp) that has arisen from

(another) flame.

So what is the use of the diverse means (to spiritual

development in that case)? This is the point.
Surely (one may ask,) if (a disciple) who is not like this is engaged in
worshipping that (teacher who is such), then what can he attain there (in that case)
by it? With doubt in mind, he says:

At this point the transition is made from the Śāmbhava Means to No Means (anupāya).

Cf. below, 2/35cd-37ab (36-37). These lines are quoted above ad 3/268cd-271ab (268270).

One who is established ‘herein’, i.e. in No Means, the culmination of the Śāmbhava
Means, becomes not just one who is himself liberated, he is also a teacher who can
liberate others if, by Śiva's grace, they are capable of practicing the Supreme, i.e.
Śāmbhava Means. Cf. above 2/33ab (2/33ca) ff.

Cf. above note to 2/2.
Clearly Jayaratha understands that here Abhinava is talking about the highest level of
the Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya), which is No Means. Cf. above TĀv ad 2/40, where

this phrase is quoted, as it is below ad 4/203.

TANTRĀLOKA

athāsau tādrśo na syād bhavabhaktyā ca bhāvitaḥ |
taṁ cãrãdhayate bhãvitādr̥śãānugraheritaḥ || 292 ||
tadā vicitraṁ dĩkṣādividhiṁ śikṣeta kovidaḥ |

Now if (the disciple) is not such, (but even then,) purified by devotion

to Rudra (Bhava) and impelled by (the thought that) there will be such grace

in the future, worships that (teacher), then the skilful (learned teacher)
should impart initiation and (whatever other) wonderfully diverse (practice
the disciple is fit to receive). (292-293ab) (291cd-292)

(If (the disciple)) '‘is not suchʼ, that is, does not possess (the capacity to

practice) the Supreme Means, because the most intense descent of the power (of

grace) has not taken place. Now, in accord with the teaching (of the MālinīVijaya,
which declares that) ‘there, that is the first sign, namely, sound unwavering
devotion to Rudra,’'' (the disciple) is governed (and sustained) by the first sign,
namely devotion to Rudra, which indicates a descent of the power (of grace). The
reference to (one form of the) descent of the power (of grace), (here) called

devotion to Rudra, and the absence of reference to the other signs suggests (those
of the other forms of grace), beginning with the weakest (mandamanda).

In this way, even if (the disciple) possesses only the weakest and other
(lower forms of) grace, and is not engaged in worshipping a proper teacher who

knows only the Individual and other (lower means) pertinent (to those lower

levels of grace), but rather ‘worships that’ (teacher) who is said to be absorbed

(in the practice of) the Divine Means, (reaches the goal). This is because (a

disciple) who is ‘impelled by (the thought that) there will be such grace in the
future’ does not even obtain (that possible) future grace which pertains to the
Supreme Means from a teacher who knows only the Individual Means. This is the

point. Thuṣ if, for the aforementioned reason, there is no other way for the
disciple, (the teacher,) desiring to elevate (him), the diverse means are certainly
useful, in accord with the saying that:

‘(The teacher should) not disregard (his duty) to rescue (his disciple) from
the world of transmigratory existence when the time comes (to perform) the rite

(through which the disciple is initiated).

“ MV 2/14ab. Also quoted in TĀv ad 13/73, 13/117cd-1 19ab. The full passage (i.e. MV

2/13-16) is paraphrased and explained in TĀ 13/214-216, where the other four signs of the

penetration of Rudra’s power (rudraśakti) are described.
Abhinava discusses the types of grace (śaktipāta) and their characteristic features at

length below in Chapter Thirteen (see 13/129 (129cd-130ab) ff.).

The full verse is quoted ad 15/35cd-36ab. It reads:
na cãvajñã kriyākāle saṁsāroddharaṇaṁ prati |

CHAPTER THREE

Thus, he says: ‘then (the skilful (teacher), should impart initiation and
(whatever other)) wonderfully diverse (practice the disciple is fit to receive))’
Thusṣ it was said previously:
‘However, if by the power of his freedom he wishes to grace those whose
consciousness is not pure also, even he should take recourse to the procedure we

are about to explain.”

(The practice the disciple is fit to receive) is ‘wonderfully diverse’, in

accord with the differences between those who are the recipients of grace. As was
said before:
“This (procedure) is said to be wonderfully various (vicitra) in accord
with (the differences between) those who are the recipients of grace (favoured by

it) (anugrāhya).”

Surely (one may ask,) the relationship between cause and effect is fixed in

accord with the dictum that ‘repeatedly weaving threads of hemp, one obtains the
wonderful variety (of cloth produced by) the weaving shuttle and threadʼ. Thus, if
the grace (a disciple) who is this kind of recipient of grace (receives) directly from

a teacher who is endowed with the penetration of the Divine Means has occurred

by (the practice of) the procedure (prakriyā) pertaining to the Individual Means,
then how could he possess the grace which pertains to (practice of) the Divine

Means, even if it is (to take place) in the future? With this doubt in mind, he says:
The Supreme Goal is Śiva

bhāvinyo ‘pi hy upāsās tā atraivāyānti niṣṭhitim || 293 I|
etanmayatvaṁ paramaṁ prāpyaṁ nirvarṇyate śivam |

mantradīkṣāyratādeśe śiṣyadhruṅ nārakī bhavet |I
‘(The teacher should) not disregard (his duty) to rescue (his disciple) from the
world of transmigratory existence when the time comes (to perform) the rite (through

which the disciple is initiated). (The teacher) who harms (his) disciple (by doing
otherwise) when (Śiva has given) the order (ādesśa) (that he may observe) a (sacred) vow
and (be given) Mantra initiation, goes to hell.’

Abhinava quotes the first line literally as TĀ 23/29cd. He paraphrases the second
line in 23/30 and tells us that he is referring to the Siddhātantra, i.e. the
Siddhayogeśvarīmata, which we can thus safely assume is its source. The expression
‘saṁsāroddharaṇa’ to rescue (his disciple) from the world of transmigratory existence’
refers specifically to the initiation imparted to a dying or recently dead disciple to liberate

him from future rebirth.

Above, 2/44. Also quoted below TĀv ad 4/47cd-48. 2/44d quoted in TĀv ad 2/47.
Above, 2/45ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

(AII forms of) worship, even those in the future, (ultimately develop
and) become well established (and fulfilled) (niṣṭhitata) here (in the profound)

realization that: “the supreme goal, which is such, is Śiva.’” (293cd-294ab)
(293)

‘The future’ (forms of worship) are those of the Individual and other
Means, which will be explained (further ahead). They give access to one another,
and so as there is nothing apart from that to search for, (the transition from lower
to higher means is essentially) the development within the Divine Means itself.

He says this (by declaring that all forms of worship) ‘become well established
(and fulfilled) (niṣṭhitata) here’. Thus it is proclaimed everywhere that their
‘supreme goal’, which is the most excellent (goal of life) (sśreyas), is ‘of this

natureʼ. Noṭhing is possible without that state of rest. This is the point. Thus,
even though there are many means, the goals are not many. It is with this intention
that he said previously:

‘Both these two penetrations (Individual and Empowered) are directed

towards the ocean of (consciousness) free of thought constructs. Indeed, nothing
could exist that is not established in it. This is why (the Lord) has said that “one

should not imagine that there is (any) difference here in the fruit which is
consciousness (attained by applying oneself to the various means of

realisation).”

He concludes with the first half of a verse:

ṣf̃ vaāfṁr ghērē ̄vīr̥aaṁr-q 11 2 ||
iti kathitam idaṁ suviṣṭaraṁ paramaṁ śāmbhavam ātmavedanam || 294 ||

So, we have explained at length this, the supreme insight into one’s
own nature pertaining to the Divine (śāmbhava) Means. (294)
A certain Jayaratha who, pouring out (with the enthusiasm of) the
penetration of Śiva (consciousness), is (the veritable) oneness (sāmarasya) of the

savour of the unique juice (rasa) (of aesthetic rapture), has explained this, the

third chapter (of the Tantrāloka).

The third chapter called ‘the Revelation of the Divine Means’ is complete.

dt is part of) this, the Tantrāloka, composed by the great Śaiva Master, the most

excellent and venerable Abhinavagupta, along with the commentary called
‘Viveka’ (Discernment), composed by the venerable Jayaratha.

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo: ‘As all the means lead one to the other, finally culminating in

Sāmbhavopāya [the Divine Means], all means to the realisation of Śiva augment the

growth of Śāmbhavopāya.’
Above, 1/226cd (227ab).

Appendix A

to Chapter Three
The Moon and the Play of Emission
According to common Indian belief, the moon is the visible form of the

divine source of life-giving nectar (soma, amṛta) which, as it gradually wanes,
empties out to outwardly feed the universe and, internally, the breath, body, senses
and mind. During the bright fortnight, as the moon waxes, it gradually reabsorbs

into itself from its hidden source what it had lost in the dark fortnight. In this way,
the moon increases and decreases. This cyclic process of nourishment and self-

regeneration is believed to be grounded in an unchanging, underlying reality that
persists as the permanent element that guarantees the continuity and regularity of
this process. The Kubjikā Tantras conceive the permanent underlying element to
be the Energy of the New Moon (amākalā). This is the seventeenth energy of the
Moon. The sixteenth is the energy of the Full Moon. This conception, and the
complex, intimate interaction between these two energies which we will now
examine, is derived from an ancient model. It is a natural model derived from the
common observation that the moon waxes and wanes during a period of
approximately thirty days.
The Moon is not only the natural symbol of the cycle of time; it is also the

sacred vessel of the nectar of immortality. The association of the Moon with

nourishing nectar that falls from heaven is a very ancient one. In Vedic times, it

was associated with the Soma, which became in later times one of the names of
the moon. Soma was offered to the gods as the supreme spiritual drink, drunk by
both the gods and those who worshipped them for nourishment, both physical and

spiritual. Talking about early Vedic religion, Hillebrandt points out that: “The

moon is a drop of the golden Soma in heaven, or a bowl containing the drink of
the gods. This concept is original to this name Soma, while several other forms of
manifestation and activity of the moon inspired the imagination in other directions

and created new personifications.'' He also notes that: ‘Indian ritual has preserved

an ancient tradition; the rare phenomenon that a concept of the early Aryan period
continues almost without change up to the classical writings of India can be

observed here; the only difference is that in the Vedic period one believed that one
drank ʻthe nectar of the moon’ itself when one had pressed Soma.”
The notion that the fifteen visible phases of the moon are grounded in an
invisible sixteenth lunar energy which sustains this process by inwardly

replenishing the lunar energies that spill out as vivifying nectar into the universe is

already well established in the later Vedic period. The Moon, which in this period
is considered to be male, reflecting the general dominance of the male gender in

the Vedas, is identified with Prajāpati – the Lord of the Creatures. Prajāpati

emerges in the later Vedic period as the prototype of the one supreme God of

classical Hinduism. Prajāpati’s claiṃ to his unique supreme status lies in his
completeness, and his completeness is denoted by his identification with the Year.

The Year encompasses all of creation and its perpetual renewal in and through the
Hillebrandt 1980: vol. 1, p. 216.

1bid. p. 210.

TANTRĀLOKA

fire sacrifice of which Prajāpati, as the Year, was worshipped as the embodiment.
The sacred, liturgical and hence cosmic integrity of the Year, and the god who
embodies it, is marked by the regular performance of sacrifices offered on the
days of the new and full moon. So, although Prajāpati as the year is represented as
having 720 parts, which are the days and nights of the year (which Vedic Indians
reckoned for convenience was 360 days long), he is more fundamentally divided

into sixteen. These are the fifteen days of the lunar fortnight, to which a ‘hidden’
sixteenth is added which is the source of the others. Prajāpati is already said to be
sixteen-fold in the Yajurveda as he is in the later Śatapathabrahmaṇa, where he

is explicitly said to possess the sixteen energies of the moon. The same text even
talks of a seventeen-fold division. which, as we shall see in the following
discussion, also contended for recognition in Tantric traditions centuries later. The
following passage from the Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad eloquently summarizes for us

the teachings concerning Prajāpati and the Moon:

‘That Prajāpati is the year. He is composed of sixteen parts. His nights,
truly, are fifteen parts. His sixteenth part is steadfast. He is increased and
diminished by his nights alone. Having, on the new moon night, entered with that
sixteenth part into everything here that has breath, he is born thence on the
following morning [as the new moon]. Therefore, on that night one should not cut
off the breath of any breathing thing, not even of a lizard, in honour of that
divinity.
Verily, the person here who knows this is himself that Prajāpati with the
sixteen parts who is the year. The fifteen parts are his wealth. The sixteenth part is
his Self (ātman). In wealth alone [not in Self] is one increased and diminished.’”

Although in what follows we shall concentrate on the lunar symbolism of
the goddess, we should note that some sources, for example, the Kubjikā Tantras,
do not forget the older, coexistent male counterpart. The following passage
presents a form of Bhairava who governs the energies of the Moon, as did his
Vedic predecessor, Prajāpati. In this case however, he is not alone. Seated in the
‘primordial maṇḍala’, that is, within the Point (bindu) in the centre of the

maṇḍala, he is enveloped by the feminine Yoni. Just as the deity is male, so are
the surrounding attendants, the Siddhas who embody his sixteen lunar aspects:
‘Asitāṅga, who is the Lord of Kula, abides in Bhairava’s power of bliss.

He is in the primordial maṇḍala, surrounded by the sixteen Siddhas. The maṇḍala

whose nature is the Skyfarer is (the Point) located in the abode of the primordial
Yoni. One obtains the fruit of the accomplishment of the Command by
worshipping it. This is the primordial (āḍi) maṇḍala, the most excellent of all. All
the diverse maṇḍalas originated here.”

Vaj. Saṃ. 8,36.

SBr 727217.

ŚBr 9/27272 – soḍaśakalāḥ prajāpatiḥ.

ŚBr 2.73.

Brṛ Up 1/5/14-15 Humē’s translation.
bhairavānandaśaktiṣṭhaṁ [kh: -stha] asitāṅgaṁ [kh, g: asitāṅga] kuleśvaramṃ |

ādimaṇḍalamadhyasthaṁ [kh: -stha] siddhaiḥ ṣoḍaśabhir vṛtam l

APPENDIX A TO CHAPTER THREE
Out of the thirty lunar nights, three were considered in Vedic times, as

they still are today, to be the most important. These are Amāvāsyā – the New

Moon, Paurṇamāsī, the Full Moon, and the eighth night (asṣṭaka), the Half Moon
days. According to the Brāhmanṇas, all the nights are concentrated in two nights.
Those of the waxing moon are all in the Full Moon, and those of the waning moon

in the New Moon.” Purified by the gods, these are auspicious days to perform
sacrifices.' Most important amongst them is the Darśapūrṇamāsa iṣṭi, performed

on these days.' Dange' explains:

“The name touches two concepts — (l) Darśa iṣṭi (sacrifice); and (2)
Pūrṇamāsa iṣṭi. The first is to be performed to coincide with the New-moon day

(amāvāsṣyā), while the other with the Full-moon day (paurṇimā). The word darśa

is generally taken to indicate the day on which the moon is ‘seen’ only by the sun;
hence it is not seen at all by the creatures on the earth. This concept corresponds
to the name amāvāsyā, which word indicates ‘stay° (vāsa; hence, vāsyā is the day

for such stay) and ‘near’” (amā), the belief being that on this day the moon stays in

close proximity with the sun. This concept is well explained by the ŚBr. It says

that in the dark half of the month, the moon draws gradually near to the sun; and
on this day of amāvāsyā she (he, here) is totally near the sun who swallows him

and places him in himself. The next day, he is cast out by the sun, and seen as the

first digit in the western sky. This is symbolic of temporary death and rebirth.
Hence, for whomsoever one desires that he should be immortal (by renewal of

birth), him should the other take in himself, and cast forth a fresh one.”

Unknown as a deity in the Ṛgveda, an entire hymn is dedicated to the

goddess Amāvāsyā, the New Moon, in the Atharvaveda." There she declares that
the people of good deeds like Indra dwell in her. Among them are mentioned,

perhaps for the first time, the Siddhas, the mythical precursors of Tantric adepts.
She has generated the universe and gives men nourishing food (puṣṭa) and wealth

(vasu).' The ŚB supplies a fanciful etymology of the name. On one occasion,

Indra hurled his thunderbolt at the demon Vṛtra, but fearing that he had not killed

him, fled in fear. Agni, who dwelt – vas — together ~ amā – with him on that, the

darkest of nights, found him. On the night of Amāvāsyā, the moon, which is
ādiyonipurasthaṁ tu maṇḍalaṁ khecarātmakam |
ādimaṇḍalakaṁ hy etat pravaraṁ [g: pravam] uttamottamam ḷ
atrotpannāni sarvāṇi [kh: -nī] maṇḍalāni [kh: -ṇī] anekadhā || ŠM 19/278-281.

ŚBr II/I/TIA.

TaiS 2/5/6/4-6.
'' For summaries of these rites see Kane 1974: vol. 2, pt. 2, chapter 30 and Dange 2000:

vol. 1 p. 78 ff.

' Dange 2000: vol. 1,78.
' ŚB 1/6/4/4 ff. etāṁ rātrīṁ iha āvasati tasmād amāvāsyā nāma | Tbid. 1/64/5.
! Kāṭhakasaṁhitā 37/14.
' This is AV 7/79.

' AV 7/19/4.
'” ŚB 1/641-5.

TANTRĀLOKA

identified with Soma, the food of the celestial gods," comes down to this world
and enters the waters and plants. Thus, in this sense also, she ‘lives together’ in
this case not with the gods, but with men. The cows that eat and drink on this day
produce milk imbued with wonderful, nourishing and curative lunar energy. In
this way the performer of the sacrifice reproduces the moon that becomes visible

in the western sky, the quarter later associated with the goddess Kubjikā. The

Full Moon, also not mentioned in the Ṛgveda as a deity, is praised in the hymn
following the one to the New Moon in the AV. There she is praised as the

foremost amongst those who are to be worshipped (prathamā yajñīyā), and makes

heaven accessible to those who do so and bestows inexhaustible wealth. We may

note finally that Amāvāsyā was already considered in the AV, as it is in the later
literature, including the Tantras, to be the night in which devouring demons are
abroad. It is a night especially well-suited for black magical rites. This is because

Amāvāsyā can fulfil all desires, including those that are ‘black’ like her.

This lunar symbolism provides the images that represent both the abstract
metaphysical and soteriology doctrines of the Kubjikā Tantras and play an
important role in other Tantric (especially) Kaula traditions, as they do in the

Tṛrika, to which we now turn. In these Tantras, the sixteenth part (kalā) of

Prajāpati is now the sixteenth energy (kalā) or digit (kalā) of the Moon, called

Amaā (ḍerived from the word amāvāsyā). As if hidden in a dark cave, it is never

visible. Secretly it feeds the waxing moon in the bright lunar fortnight, feeding it
with the nectar that it releases at it wanes in the dark fortnight. This nectar,
Abhinava tells us, is ‘drunk by all the gods”, the celestial ‘shining onesʼ. One is

reminded of the old Siberian shamanic belief that, as the moon decreases, the stars

that progressively become more visible are born from fragments of the moon’s
celestial light. Inwardly, the gods are the energies of the senses and mind.

‘Nectar (amṛta) in the form of the moon is divided into sixteen, then again

into two. All the gods drink the other fifteen digits: The energy of the New Moon

(amā) hidden in the cave (of the Heart” in the End of the Twelve) is the remnant

ŚB 11/2/5/3.
ŚB 1/6/4/15.

AV 7/80.
AV 7/80/2.

KauśīBr 47/23 which refers to AV 1/16.
KauśīBr 59/19 which refers to AV 7/79.
See below 6/95cd-97 and commentary.

The Heart in this case is not the centre in the chet. It is the Supreme Principle which is
the ultimate source and end of all the others. According to Abhinava, this is the Goddess.
Transcendental Śiva is the thirty-sixth principle. Immanent Bhairava is the thirṛty-seventh.
He is the ‘supreme’, beyond which is the Goddess who, totally free of all objectivity, is

the Inexplicable – Anākhyā. She is the Heart of consciousness whose pulsation generates

the waxing and waning of the breath in consonance with the unfolding and withdrawal of
aspects of her nectarine energy. As Abhinava says:

‘Creation and absorption rest in this way together in the vital breath (prāṇa). This
(rests) in cognitive consciousness (sarvid) and that in pure consciousness (cinmātra) free

of objectivity. And pure consciousness is the goddess who is Parā and the Supreme
Goddess (Parameśvarī). She is the thirty-eighth principle, the Heart that is beyond the

APPENDIX A TO CHAPTER THREE

that fills and satisfies the universe. The fifteen digits of the moon empty
themselves out in this way one after the other. But this is not the case with the
empty sixteenth (digit), which nourishes as does water and nectar.
Jayaratha explains that:
‘Nectar in the form of the Moon is divided into sixteen and then again into
two, as the fifteen digits that are perceivable in a white form and as the digit in the
form of very pure water, which serves as their substratum. . . That (lunar energy)

nourishes the universe as it includes the play of the (other) fifteen (lunar) digits.

Thusṣ this (digit called) Amā should be taught to be the New Moon (amā

because it resides (vasanāt) together simultaneously with the fifteen (visible)
digits (of the moon).

Abhinava identifies the sixteenth energy of the Moon with visarga.

Visarga literally means ‘emission’, and has clear sexual connotations, as the word

also means ‘orgasm’. It is also the name of the sixteenth and last of the series of

vowels. This is so because it denotes the aspirate vowel, which requires an
‘emission’ of breath to articulate it. In various places throughout his exegetical
works, Abhinavagupta develops the key notion of the power of emission
(visargaśakti). According to most schools, including the Kubjikā Tantras, which
are typical in this respect, the sixteen vowels are female. This is because they
represent the sixteen energies of the female Moon. In Abhinava’s set-up they
represent stages in the expansion of energy within transcendental Siva
consciousness, which is also lunar, but the Moon in this case retains, as it were,
the more ancient masculine gender. The consonants, ranging from K to KS, are
the series of principles (tattva) below Śiva. The consonants are ‘empowered

wombs’ (sśāktayoni) formed by the ‘condensation’ of the vowels. The energy of
emission extends down through them, spreading out in this way through the entire
series of principles below Śiva. Śiva’s divine consciousness courses through the
first fifteen vowels, that contain all that is to be emitted through the energy of
emission, which is the sixteenth vowel. The energies within Śiva develop
progressively, as it were, compounding one with the other until they reach the
fullness of their development in the energy of emission, through which the inner
contents of Śiva pour out into outer manifestation through and as the remaining
principles. And so, this energy is said to vitalize the universe. As Abhinavagupta

explains:

‘The Lord (ever united with his power of emission) emanates the
universe. The power of emission (visargaśakti) extends from the Earth to Śakti
and from (the consonant) K to KṢ. This is said to be (amā kalā) the sixteenth
energy (ṣoḍaśakalā) in the following verse: “With the Person made of
consciousness, that is, Śiva who consists of the sixteen energies (kalā), the

sixteenth energy is known as the ‘energy of nectar’ (amṛtakalā).’ This is not the
view of either the Sāṁkhya or the Vedānta, but only of the Śaiva scriptures
supreme. Therefore, the essence of cognitive consciousness is, by its very nature, this
(perpetual) pulsation (spandamāna).’ TĀ 6/179cd-182ab.

TA 6/95cd-97.

TANTRĀLOKA

(śāstra). The supreme Lord’s power of emission (visargaśakti) is the seed of the

highest beatitude.”

Abhinava devotes a great deal of space in his works to an exposition of
the metaphysical status and activity of the power of emission (visarga). This
insight into the dynamism of the one ultimate reality receives relatively scanty
attention in the scriptural sources, and so should be largely, but not entirely,

credited to Abhinava’s genius. It is not possible, nor necessary in this context, to
present a full exposition of Abhinava’s complex and profound conception; we will
limit

ourselves

to

a

brief analysis

of the

following

passage

in

his

Maālinīvijayavārtika, where he outlines a number of its essential features and

relates them to the lunar symbolism of the energies of the vowels which concern
us here. He is discussing, as he often has occasion to do, the phases of the cycle of
perception. He has talked about the twelve phases of the cognitive consciousness
engaged in the operation of the means of knowledge and the unfolding of

subjectivity symbolized by the Sun and Fire, respectively. Next he proceeds to an
exposition of the sixteen phases of the cycle of cognitive consciousness in relation

to the sphere of the object (meya), symbolized by the Moon. This begins with a
list of these phases. We have noted already that the ‘object’, which in Sanskrit is
called meya, which literally means ‘that which is to be known’, is ultimately Śiva,
the pure conscious nature. Abhinava teaches that it is ‘I’ consciousness, and is

‘that which is to be known’. Accordingly, the sixteen phases leading to the

perception of any object, if correctly and fully experienced, culminate in the

liberated condition of the sixteenth phase, which is equated with the sixteenth

energy of the Moon, as it is in the Kubjikā Tantras and those of other schools,
although from a quite different perspective. The passage is long; even so, the
exposition is so masterly and insightful that it amply warrants full quotation:

‘First (come) 1) manifestation (prakāśa) and 2) viewing (ālocana), and
then 3) intention (saṅkalpa) and 4) consent (abhimati), followed after by 5)
certainty (niścaya) and 6) confirmation (anudṛśa). Then come the two, 7)
discernment (viveka) and 8) detachment (āsaṅgitā), (then) 9) the state of agency
(kartṛtāsthā), 10) (the experience of) non-distinction (avyavaccheda) (between

objects), 11) the manifestation of the common (ground of all objectivity), 12) (a

state in which there is) no disturbance from the many acts of reflective awareness
(nānāvimarśāprakṣobha), 13) complete experience of (the sphere of) the object
(pūrṇameyapravedana), 14) complete subjectivity (piūrṇapramātṛtva), 15) (pure

cognitive) consciousness (sarvitti), (and finally) 16) (the liberated) condition of

Bhairavī (the power of consciousness) (bhairavībhāva). To the degree in which
objectivity (meyamaya) is made manifest in this way, sixteenfold, that is said to be
the Moon of consciousness (vijñāna) considered to be the basic state (sthiti) of the

sixteen energies.

Abhinava then goes on to list the first fourteen energies, symbolized by
the vowels he describes in detail in the third chapter of the Tantrāloka. Then he
presents in his usual brilliant manner an exposition of visarga, the sixteenth. Once

PTy p. 63 (Singhī’s edition).
MVV 1/880cd-884.

APPENDIX A TO CHAPTER THREE

the inner flow of energy within Śiva has traversed through the first fourteen

transformations, Abhinava explains:

‘Then, by attaining (the pure) consciousness of (Śiva’s and one’s own)

essential nature, the basic state of the Point (bindu) (the fifteenth vowel, is
established). Then within (that consciousness of the Point), whose form is filled

with the entire aggregate (of energies), the empowered emission (visarga) (takes
place) that is called ‘ejection’ (vikṣepa) (of the energies within Śiva into the outer
domain). The release (visleṣa) of (that) emission itself (which impels the
outpouring of these energies) is the seventeenth energy. The eighteenth (energy

mentioned) in some places (in the scriptures) is that same (seventeenth energy,
that develops) due to (its) association with the (cosmogenic) arousal (prakṣobha)

(of its energy).

This, the excellent and supreme Kaulikī energy of Akula, whose form is

the absolute (anuttara) and nature supreme Bhairava, is this emission (visarga).
From that, this universe is born. [. . .] And that (emission) itself is God

(bhagavat), whose nature shines perpetually within and is endowed with the

energy of the centre, which is full of the current of all the things within (him).
Beautiful with Cosmic Bliss (jagadānanda) generated from (his own) essential
nature (that he has) aroused by (his) own will, he shines perpetually, beautiful

with the juice (rasa) (of the aesthetic sayour) of complete emission. That is the

(pulsing) union (saṁghaṭṭa) of Śiva and Śakti, said to be (their) love (sneha).

Now that Abhinava has outlined the cognitive, metaphysical and

theological dimensions of the power of emission, he proceeds in his usual allusive
manner to indicate how it functions in its microcosmic counterpart at the

individual embodied level of consciousness.

‘Once one has attained entry here into the plane of full (and perfect)
emission, one (truly) practices the teaching which says that by ‘(kissing,) licking
(lehanā) and sex (manthana) and the like (there is a flood of bliss)’. In this way,

having laid hold of (Suṣumṇā,) the (common) Channel in the Centre (between the
partners identified with Śiva and Śakti), the supreme radiant energy (tejas) (of

Similary, Abhinava says in his PTv that certain scriptures admit an eighteenth energy
which, transcendent, represents the condition beyond all differentiation:

‘At some places in the Mata Śāstra, etc., there is assumed to be an eighteenth kalā or
phase in the state resting on anuttara or the transcendental by means of the visleṣa or

separation of visarga, i.e. by means of the second dot, viz. the half of visarga (:). So the

phenomena of the fifty phonemes, or in other words the entire universe, is ‘one’ without

succession.” PTv p. 69, translation by Singh, 1988: 188.

MVYV 1/887cd-891ab, 893cd-895.

Abhinava is referring here to āVBh70, which teaches: “0 mistress of the gods, even in

the absence of a woman (śakṁi) there is a flood of bliss by filling one’s memory with the
(sexual) pleasure (had with a) woman by licking, churning and pressing.' The previous

verse is worth citing also: ‘The joy experienced (during sex) by union with the female

partner (śakti) who is (initially) excited and concludes with penetration into her (and

contemplative absorption in Śiva’s power) (śakti) is the bliss of the reality of the Brahman,
which is said to be the bliss of one’s own (essential nature).”

TANTRĀLOKA

consciousness) vitalizes the entire body (of both). Then, (when) (the female

consort’s) sexual energy (r1u) has been aroused from the start, one should proceed

to the state (induced by orgasm), which is ejaculation (visṛṣṭi), the (spiritual)
wonder of bliss. That (wonder experienced) alone is incomplete, but (when it is)

complete, it is God (himself). Thus, the one energy of emission (vaisargikī śakti)

itself unfolds (in this way).

Abhinava next goes on to describe succinctly how the energy of emission
travels cyclically through all the phases, marked by the progressive display of the
energies of consciousness embraced in the encompassing dynamism of pure ‘’
consciousness ~ AHAM:

‘The same emission is aroused by the double exertion (of the two
partners). The letter H (symbolizes) the (energy) that generates the consonants

(symbolizing the sphere projected outside Śiva’s consciousness). And then again

S, by union with the Point (M) brings (all things) to rests in Absolute (A), which is
the plane of one’s own (essential transcendental nature,) (all of which) is here

considered to be the state of ‘I am He’ (so ‘haṁbhāva).

This then is how the energy of emission operates on two levels
simultaneously: inwardly, it flows through our own ultimate identity. Outwardly,
it flows as cognitive consciousness and, at times, as seminal fluid. This is the
sixteenth energy of the Moon, that flows through the seventeenth, which releases
it, and the eighteenth, which is the aroused state of the seventeenth. This way, the

sexual union Abhinava describes here culminates in emission. The seed is not
retained. This possibility finds support in the Tantras of several schools. The
product of this union, ideally between Siddhas and Yoginīs, is collected and

offered as a sacred substance (dravya) to the deity by ingestion.
Let us now return to the ‘inner nature’ of this, the sixteenth energy, taught

in Abhinavagupta’s Trika. We have seen that it is the emission, that is, the

dynamic, creative energy of Śiva, through which he manifests as all things. United
with his emissive energy that generates and absorbs the universe, and animated by
it, Śiva rests in himself even as he contains in a potential form all manifestation,

just as the splendid, multi-coloured peacock is present in the juices of its egg
(mayārāṇḍarasavat), or the banyan tree in its seed. The highest principle is Śiva
in union with his energy, identified in the following passage with Speech (vāc).
The fifteenth energy is the Point. This represents the perceiver, the individual
living being resting in himself. The sixteenth energy represents the dynamic
aspect of the Point when it moves, ascending and descending, resonant with the
inner ‘unstruck sound’ that permeates and sustains the dynamism of the vital

breath. This Unstruck Sound as, Jayaratha says, is the Sound said to be ‘the

energy of the New Moon (amākalā), that is the

‘half of half of H’

(hakārārdhārdha), everywhere taught to be basically devoid of vowels
(asvara).’
MVV 1/896-899ab.
MVV 1/899cd-901ab.

MM p. 75 and PT verse 25.
See TĀ 3/113cd-1 14ab and commentary.

APPENDIX A TO CHAPTER THREE

‘Half of half of Ha’ is one of a number of terms used to denote the
‘unstruck sound’ of the energy of consciousness which Kashmiri Śaivism
identifies with the power it possesses of self-awareness (vimarśa), that is, selfconsciousness. ‘Half of Ha’ is visarga. Visarga is the last of the sixteen vowels. It

is a soft aspirate that comes within or, much more commonly, at the end of a

word. It produces an aspiration of the preceding vowel, projecting it out, as it

were, into a final aspiration as, for example, the sound ah(a) or ih(a). The name of

this vowel, which literally means ‘emission’, accords with its phonetics. It is
represented graphically by two dots, written one above the other. So, half of that is

the Point (bindu). A purely nasal sound, it is not articulated by the air striking the
vocal cords, and so aptly denotes this ‘unstruck sound’. The Kubjikā Tantras refer
to the energy in the New Moon, (called the Half Moon in the following passage,)
in the same way. In the KuKh we read:

‘There is an all-pervasive and subtle energy (kalā) of Unstruck Sound that
rains down (nectar). Know that that is the Island of the Moon sustained by the
State beyond the Fourth (turīyātīta). White as the moon, snow or the jasmine

flower, (it is as fine) as a hundredth part of the tip of a hair. . . The measure of
Half of Half of Ha, (it is) located in the centre of the Half Moon.

This lunar energy is roundly identified in the Kubjikā Tantras with the
seventeenth one beyond the sixteenth, which is emission, as it is in the Kashmiri
Śaiva texts. Abhinava repeatedly describes in various perspectives in his
Tantrāloka how the phases of cognitive consciousness — subjective, perceptive
and objective —~ arise within consciousness and through it. These three are
symbolically identified with three natural ‘lightsʼ, namely, Fire, Sun and Moon,
respectively. Referring to the Moon in one place, Abhinava teaches that the
perception of objects is a sacred activity like the offering of oblations in a fire.
This is because they are imbued with the sacrality of the divine, inner Moon
whose spiritual power is its seventeenth energy loaded with lunar nectar.

‘Now the Moon (of objectivity), consisting of sixteen energies, shining

radiantly, desiring to devour (its) emission (visarga), (its seventeenth aspect,

known as) the Vivifier (saṁjīvanī), emits the nectar of immortality (amṛta) into
the fire of (individual) consciousness (bodha). That indeed is the divine nectar

(that drips from) the tip of the sacrificial ladle made of the powers of will,

knowledge and action (that flow through) the subtle channels (of the senses) as a

libation to the goddesses of consciousness, (the sacred powers of the senses).

If the nectar of emission (visargāmṛta) is thus emitted into the fire called
(individual) consciousness (bodha), the entire cosmic order is offered as oblation.
For the emission of the Lord of the Absolute (anuttaranātha) is the Mistress of
Kula (kulanāyikā), and its arousal (kṣobha) is the (letters of the Sanskrit alphabet)
ranging from Ka to Ha, whose expansion (prasara) is the sequence (paddhati) of
metaphysical principles (ranging from Earth to Śakti).
The letters AM and AḤ are the Lord and Mistress of Kula, while the
universe is said to be the supreme release (visśleṣa) of (their) emission. In this way
KuKh 35/35cd-38.

TANTRĀLOKA

this, the vitalizing energy (sarṁjīvanī kalā) (of the Moon), consists of the intellect,

vital breath, the qualities (guṇa), body and the internal and external sacrificial
substances. It should be worshipped, offered as oblation and contemplated.’
Jayaratha explains that: ‘the sixteen energies are the (vowels) beginning

with the letter A as well as the senses (buddhīndriya) and the restʼ. A little further

ahead, he quotes the following line from the Triśirobhairavatantra, reminiscent

of the Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad quoted above.

‘(The wise) say that there is a part (kalā) that is nectar within the Person
(puruṣa) consisting of sixteen parts. Accordingly, he explains that the Vivifier
(saṁjīvinī) is: the seventeenth (lunar) energy (kalā) called Amā (the New Moon),

that is the cause of the life (saṁjivana) of the universe. It emits ‘the nectar of

immortality, which is a special vital constituent (dhātu) that nourishes the one
who possesses sixteen parts.”

Notice that there is some confusion here concerning the identity of this

‘vivifying energyʼ. According to the first reference we examined from the
Tantrāloka, the energy of the New Moon is the sixteenth digit. This agrees with
the usual astronomical reckoning of the phases of the moon. But in this passage,
according to Jayarartha, the New Moon is the seventeenth digit that ‘vivifies’ the
other sixteen. Abhinava himself, as we have seen, considers the seventeenth
energy to be the ‘release’ (viśleṣa) of emission, which is the sixteenth. In the
passage we are examining, what is ‘released’ is the emitted universe. Kashmiri

aiva sources generally understand the sixteenth energy to be the New Moon

(amākalā). This is followed by the transcendent seventeenth energy, which is
merged in the Heart, the pure ‘’ consciousness that is the core of reality and the
core ground or ‘abode’ (ālaya) of all manifestation. It is within transcendental
Śiva, dominating all the aspects of His creative and self-delimiting power. It is the
energy of consciousness (citkalā) of the absolute (anuttara) and is also called the

‘energy of nectar’ (amṛtakalā). Transcendent, it contains in a potential form the
other energies. Swami Lakshmanjoo explains:
‘In Śaiva philosophy the world of experience is likened to the moon

which has fifteen phases. There is also a sixteenth phase and this sixteenth phase

is known as the sixteenth kalā. It is called amākalā that is ever-present even
during the dark phase of the moon. The seventeenth kalā is even above that. The
seventeenth kalḷā refers to the flowing out of the universal nectar of God
Consciousness. It is called the seventeenth because it has nothing to do with the

TĀ 5/64cd-69.

The source is not identified in this place. However, in the commentary on TĀ 3/137cd141ab,

where

this

Triśirobhairavatantra.

line

is

gquoted,

we

are

told

BṛUp 1/5/14-15.

TĀ 6/95cd-97.

visargasyaiva viśleṣa iti saptadasī kalā MVV 1/889ab.

there

that

it

is

from

the

APPENDIX A TO CHAPTER THREE

objective world, the cognitive world or the subjective world. It is above all

theṣe.

The Triśirobhairavatantra, an important Trika scripture that has

unfortunately been lost, contained a substantial passage concerning the energy of

the New Moon. Abhinava quotes the following from there:

‘Itis said in the Triśirobhairavatantra at the end of the section discussing

the pervasion of power (kalā): “Therefore, the form of the seventeenth energy
(kalā) is in the form of nectar. It has emerged by the activity (gati) of the (two)
points that are (symbols of) one’s own essential nature that is (both) supreme

(transcendent) and inferior (immanent) (aparāpara). This (power), the light of
all things, when devoid of emission (in its supreme, transcendent aspect), is the
Kuṇḍalinī of Power (śāktakuṇḍalinī). (Then, in its immanent aspect, it assumes

the form) of the Kuṇḍalinī of the Vital Breath (prāṇakuṇḍalinī) and (then), at the
extremity of emission (visarga) (when it has been fully exhausted), (it is) the
Supreme (parā) Kuṇḍalinī. (This power) is called (variously) the ‘Sky of Śiva’,

‘ṭhe Supreme Brahman’ and the ‘Abode of the Self”.

Jayaratha explains:
‘Consciousness initially assumes the form of the vital breath (prāṇa)’.
According to this dictum, (consciousness) initially manifests in the form of vitality
(prāṇarāpatā). Then, through progressive reversal (pratyāvṛttikrameṇa), it

assumes the form of supreme pure consciousness, which rests in itself as Supreme
Kuṇḍalinī in the innate nature, which is the final, ultimate extremity of the
propensity to internalization. In this way, this, the seventeenth (lunar) energy
(kalā) which is pure consciousness (saṁvinmātrā) is called ‘the Sky of Śiva’ and
so on.
So from one point of view, the seventeenth energy is the transcendental

energy of the supreme form of Kuṇḍalinī, that is, in the raised state in which she is

the energy of transcendental Śiva fused within him. A passage quoted by

Hughes 1997: 97,n. 5.

Abhinaya introduces his reference from the 7risirobhairavatantra (TĀ 3/137cd) saying

that he is drawing from the end of a section discussing the pervasion of power (kalā)
(kalāvyāptyantacarcana). Jayaratha explains that in the section to which Abhinava refers,

the Triśirobhairava discusses the ‘doctrine concerning the unfolding of the essential

nature of the energy called Amā’ (amākhyakalāsvarūpasphārasiddhānta).
Jayaratha understands ‘parāpara’ here to refer to the intermediate form of emission
which is active between the supreme (para) and inferior (apara) form. But there is no

reason, it seems to me, to introduce this distinction here, which Abhinava deals with

elsewhere. A less forced interpretation is that the two points of visarga represent
immanence and transcendence. This accords with an explanation Swami Lakshmajoo once
gave of the two points of visarga. These, he said, represent the paradox that while, on the
one hand everything is emitted from Siva (which is the immanent aspect of visarga),
nothing is ever outside Śiva (which is the transcendent aspect of visarga).

Read prakāśaḥ for prakāśyav.
TĀ 3/137cd-141ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

Jayaratha in his commentary from the 7riśirobhairavatantra explains that this
aspect of Kuṇḍalinī is the ‘Void of Consciousness (cidvyoman), the final and
supreme plane beyond the gross, elemental vacuum. It is the Void of Śiva that is

the supreme state, Nonbeing,' which is the pulse of the experience of Beingʼ.
But we have seen that the energy of the New Moon (amākalā) is also the sixteenth

one, laden with nectar. So here too, there is some confusion as to exactly which is
the New Moon. Is it the sixteenth or the seventeenth digit, and how do they relate
to each other?
This confusion is resolved in the later Kubjikā tradition by assigning the
Full Moon to the sixteenth digit and the New Moon to the seventeenth. This
appears to be a novel concept. The symbolic coupling of the two is not common,
even though the symbolism of the energy of the New Moon (amākalā) is well

known to most, if not virtually all Tantric traditions. Abhinavagupta in his

extensive survey of the Tantras refers only to the energy of the New Moon as the
source of the other lunar energies. He never refers to the Full Moon, even though

both these phases of the Moon are considered to be particularly important times in
the liturgical calendar.
Concerning Nonbeing as the supreme state, see Dyczkowski 2004: 51ff. and below,
chapter 2 p.394 ff.

Comm. on TĀ 3/137cd-141ab.

Appendix B
to Chapter Three
The Principles of Passion, Poison and the Stainless
The principles of Passion, Poison and the Stainless are complex symbolic
concepts found in the Kaula Tantras and affiliated schools that aim to express the
totality of the dynamics of absolute consciousness experienced through sexual
union practiced as a form of Yoga that brings about its realization. They represent
the three moments in the Union (which is what “Yoga’ literally means) of the

polarities of existence actualized concretely in the sexual act, in its prelude,
climax and repose.
Kāmatattva - the Principle of Passion.
This is the power of the universal will (icchāśakti) identified with the

emissive energy (visargaśakti) of absolute consciousness. The Kaula Tantras
refers to the former as ‘Kula’ and the later as ‘Akula’. In its supreme form, Kula,

the power aspect, is the unstruck sound (anahata) of the pure resonance
(nādamātra), which the Kashmiri exegetes identify with the reflective awareness
of consciousness. Externally, it manifests as the sound ‘ha-ha’ the Tantric consort
spontaneously makes at the beginning of sexual union. Absorbed in the pleasure
of love making, the mind is temporarily free of objective referents, thus allowing
the underlying consciousness, resonant with awareness to become clearly
manifest. The outward flow of the breath (prāṇa) which emerges from
consciousness as its first transformation is now experienced as the vehicle of the
blissful power of emission, and the force of the universal will that, perfect (pārṇa)
and unobstructed, instigates the flow of emission and spontaneously assumes the

concrete physical form of the sounds of love making.
Viṣatattva - The Principle of Poison.

Just as the letter ‘Ha’ represents Kāmatattva experienced through the
outward flow of the breath (prāṇa), similarly the letter ‘Sa’ represents Viṣatattva
experienced in the outward flow (prāṇa). In the first principle all the energies are
drawn together, fused into the unity of consciousness just as it is about to pour out
into the womb of the created order; in this one the creative power of intent is fully

expanded. As such, it pervades all the moments of union as it does, at the
universal level, the entire cycle of creation and destruction. It is the experience of
the Absolute (Brahman) as universal Being (Sat), in which all things are gathered
together in the unity of expanded consciousness. Its symbol is the full moon that
oozes the vitalizing nectar of life (amṛta) that feeds and sustains the sphere of
objectivity. Jayaratha quotes a verse from an unknown source to describe how the
energy of consciousness in this state functions and is experienced at the highest
levels of blissful spiritual awareness:

‘The supreme energy (of consciousness), perfectly pure, plays here in its

uniqueness. Powerfully and all at once (rabhasat), it brings about the emergence

TANTRĀLOKA

of the wheel of the rays of the senses which, by the aesthetic delight (rasa) of

supreme bliss, attains stability there (within it). Here (too) it dissolves away by
freeing itself of the burden of supreme consciousness.”

The pervasive, blissful awareness of Viṣatattva is experienced by yogis in
all three moments of sexual union ~ at the beginning, when the senses are
stimulated into activity, in the course of love making, when they delight in the

blissful absorption of union (sāmarasya), and finally at the end, when they merge

into it completely to become fully absorbed. The yogi moves through three
corresponding forms of absorption (samādhi), in which the powers of supreme
consciousness manifest. First comes the absorption that takes place in the
resonance of consciousness, manifest in the sounds of love making (sītkara). Then

comes the blissful experience of repose during the act itself (sukhasadbhāva). This
leads to the final stage which is total penetration into consciousness (samāveśa),
through which bodily subjectivity is submerged to give way to the emergence of

the pure subjectivity of consciousness. All this, as Jayaratha explains, is made
manifest in the sexual centres and other parts of the body and mind, known as the
‘Centres of Bliss’ (ānandasthana).
Viṣa and Kāmatatīva are aspects of the pure vitality of consciousness
(prāṇanamātra), the universal breath that sustains the individual breaths in the

body. As such, in their universal form as the resonance of consciousness (nāda),
they are essentially one. In their specific form, Kāmatattva is exhalation (prāṇa),

the sound of which is ‘Ha’, and Viṣatattva is inhalation, the sound of which is

‘Sa’. The yogi must concentrate on the sound of the breath as he unites with his
consort in the Foremost Sacrifice (ādiyāga). If he succeeds in maintaining an

undistracted state of awareness, he will experience the breaths as these two
principles. Kamatattva is experienced as a state of plenitude, that is, as the perfect
contentment of resting in one’s own conscious nature without desire for anything
else. Kāmatattva is not just ‘kāma’, i.e., sexual desire, but the ‘tattva’, i.e., the

ultimately real form of sexual desire which is not a mere physical urge but the
microcosmic aspect of the universal will that engenders all things. When the

sexual act is performed in the spiritual state of consciousness that arises when
Kuṇḍalinī is awake and active, the yogi experiences an expansion of

consciousness through the falling away of the limited, conditioned bodily

consciousness that obscures the innate plenitude of knowledge and action which
his universal nature naturally possesses. Thus, freed of the duality that divides
subject and object, he experiences the expanded state (vikāsadaśā) of
consciousness in which it pervades all things even as all things abide within it as
its universal manifestation. In this way, the infinite radiance of the pervasive

power of universal consciousness engulfs the tiny light of individualized
consciousness and fuses it within itself.

Niranjanatattva - the Stainless Principle.
The fullness of Kāmatattva which, as we have seen, is the power of the

universal will (icchāśakti) in which all things are contained in the state of

withdrawal (nimesa), develops spontaneously into the power of knowledge
(jñāna), which is the state of expansion (unmeṣa). These two aspects of the pulse

APPENDIX B TO CHAPTER THREE

of consciousness (spanda) fuse in the universal activity of the power of action
(kriyāśakti) through the mediation of the absolute (anurtara) that is its ground and
ultimate nature. This state, symbolized by the vowel ‘AU’, is one in which

absolute consciousness presents itself in its clearly evident, universal activity, as

the ever changing and diverse combination of its countless energies that arise

from it and fall back into it like the waves of the sea. In this state, the activities of

all the energies of absolute consciousness fuse in the power of action. The outer
manifestation of these energies is of three basic types, according to whether they
are aspects of the powers of will, knowledge or action. They emerge successively

in this order out of their repose in consciousness and become active, assuming as
their support the energies which precede them. Thus, the power of action contains

within itself the other two powers and so is three-fold. As such, it is called the Tri

dent of Power, on the three prongs of which are seated the Supreme power
(parasakti) of unity (abheda), the Middle power (parāparā) of unity in diversity
(bhedabheda), and the Lower power (apara) of diversity (bheda). When these
three energies balance each other out in this way, they do not condition their
object. When the power of the will acts alone, it conditions the object of desire
and is itself apparently limited by it. The same is the case with the powers of

knowledge and action with respect to their objects. In this state, the object of
desire does not condition knowledge or action, the object of knowledge does not

condition the will or action, and similarly, the object of action does not affect
either knowledge or the will. Thus, the consciousness of the yogi who penetrates
into this triad, becoming one with it, is unconditioned, and so is pure and stainless
(nirañjana). ʻAñjana’ means a ‘stain’ or ‘colouring’ and hence, by extension, it

denotes manifestation, which seemingly stains or colours consciousness. Thus
‘nirañjana’ is not only the stainless but also the unmanifest. But how can this

energy be said to be unmanifest if it operates throughout the manifest order, which
is the sphere of the play of the energies of consciousness? The answer, Abhinava
says, is that the energies make their objects and possessor manifest, not

themselves. The activity of the will, for example, is made evident by the subject
as the one who desires, and also by the object of the will that is perceived to be
desirable. Thus, this energy which, as the activity of all the energies together, is

not conditioned by anything nor conditions anything, is unmanifest. It is

experienced through the fusion of Kāma and Viṣa, i.e., the two breaths,

knowledge and the will, in the Heart, the centre of consciousness. There they form
the Seed of the Heart ~ the syllable SAUH – that represents the forces and

processes that operate in and through the act of creation (srsṣṭi). In this way, the
yogi is empowered with the universally creative energy of consciousness that

contains all things within itself.

TANTRĀLOKA

Appendix C
to Chapter Three
Chart of the Sanskrit Alphabet

Vawels

Guṅturai

Palatāiṣ

Labials

a

]

||S JĪ][B3 =

Denalṣ

e

Cavbralṣ

u

i

Nasals_SGutaralṣ

1T i sḥ | f |Sr
ai

o0

au

|_aṃ || aḥ

Jĩ €sḤJuit spirte Nasal:
Consanants

.. Ã

cha

7 7

c- C

.. dpa

pha

ta

[HH+ĀHT

Semi-vowels
(anthasta)

Sibiḷaṉt.

tha

tha

Palatalṣ Cerebrals Dentals

q

a

ya || ra

la

Palatals Cersbrals_Dentals

aa;ṇaṂ | 3
| Tsa ] TĀ

sa

Áṣspirate

Guttirals

B

ha || kṣa

ja

da

ḍha J[ ṇa

dha

|3

|na

āba hbha
+ nma