CHAPTER NINE

The All-pervasive Lord, who is perfectly full by virtue of His
inherent freedom, manifests, devoid as He is of limitation, in countless
forms. (52cd-53ab)
Śiva, who is supreme, manifests in countless, limited forms as living

beings (bhiūta), phenomena (bhāva) and the worlds etc., having set aside
(varjayitvā) (all) limitation within his own nature. The meaning is that His
nature is the unlimited, supreme light (of consciousness), because, even so, his
previous nature (prior to manifesting in this way) is not lost (pracyuta).

Surely (someone may object) that it was said (before) that a
metaphysical principle (tattva) is the pervasive presence of a single nature in

many places (anekatra). How is that (so) here (in this case)?
The Five Pure Subjects

kAÉEIRIĪ-cIḶEEFA ĪĒCEIEEAHHIH'EHI

aarftṝr-afṝ]
mī īṝṁ aard ā-ata || u 1 |

śāṁbhavāḥ śaktijā mantramaheśā mantranāyakāḥ || 53 I|
mantrā iti viśuddhāḥ syur amī pañca gaṇāḥ kramāt |
svasmin svasmin gaṇe bhāti yad yad rūpaṁ samanvayi || 54 |ḷ
tad eṣu tattvam ity uktaṁ kālāgnyāder dharādivat |
The Divine (śāmbhava) (subjects), those Born of Power (śaktija), the
Great Lords of Mantra, the Lords of Mantra and the Mantras - these are
the five groups of pure (subjects), in due order. Whatever be the inherent

nature (rūpa) that shines in its own respective group in conjunction (with

it) is said to be the (particular) tattva amongst these ones. As is (for
example) the Earth (principle, that extends through all its worlds), starting

with Kālāgni. (53cd-55ab)

(The tattva) ‘amongst these ones’ʼ, that is, the five principles beginning
with Śiva. What is their corresponding group? With this doubt in mind, it is said
that the Divine (śāmbhava) and the rest are ‘these five groups’ʼ, ‘in due orderʼ.
Thus, the Divine (subjects) are within the Śiva principle and so on up to the

Mantra (subjects), within the principle of (Pure) Knowledge, respectively.
Concerning this triad, see above, note to 8/15cd-16ab.

'I Cf. above, TĀv intro to 9/2.
“ Concerning these perceivers, see above, 1/77-80 and 4/230 and notes, 9/90cd ff. and
103. 9/138 ff., 10/3 ff. 10/127cd ff. and commentary.

' The five types of subjects experience the corresponding reality levels (tattva) on

which they reside. Thus, the Divine (śāṁṅúbhava) subjects experience Sivatattva, those

TANTRĀLOKA

The Divine (subjects) are those who belong to Śambhu, who is the Supreme
Light. All existing things (bhāva), that is, the world-orders and the rest, have

each attained a state of oneness (tādātmyavṛi) with their corresponding (reality
level), because otherwise it would not be (logically) possible (for them to shine

with) the supreme illuminating (light). As was stated before:

‘The supreme (universal) nature (rūpa), that is permeated without a

break (niviḍa) by the Light (of consciousness) shines within (the worlds) we
have discussed with their many varieties. Associated (anvita) (and inherent
within) them (as their common nature), it is Deity who is Śiva, the one

(reality).”

(The subjects) Born of Power (śaktija) are Anāśrita and the rest. The
Mantramaheśa (subjects) have been explained before. So too in this way, within
the Self of the Mantramaheśas etc. in their own two categories (there are the two
priciples described in the following verse from the Īśvarapratyabhijñā).
‘However, the principle called Sadāśiva (sadākhya) (arises) first of all
due to the prominence (udreka) of the internal state (i.e.

the power of

knowledge). Then comes the (principle) of Parameśvara (i.e. Īśvaratattva), when

the external state predominates.”'

For the reason stated here and elsewhere, the form (of consciousness)

that manifests in consonance with the coming to prominence of the inner state

(and then the external state) etc., is said here, with reference to that, that they are

the principles of Sadāśiva and Īśvara. Itis not with reference to the presiding
deity (at these reality levels). This is because Śiva’s state (śivatva) always
(sadā) shines as the inner form (of universal consciousness), and the Īśvara
(principle) as the outer form. In this same way, Brahmā and the rest (of the
causal deities) would also be counted as separate principles (tattva). Otherwise

(if this were not s0), because they are not different from the causal states (over

which they preside as deities), they would possess two opposite natures

(ardhajātīya) (by asserting that they are also tattvas).® Again, if that were to be

s0, the undesirable consequence would be that a king, even if he be the lord of
all the earth, would be a separate reality (tattva) (from the earth and its
creatures) because he governs the earth, and that is not so. Thus, what has been

said is logically sound (yukta).

Born of Power (śaktija), Śaktitattva, the Great Lords of Mantra, Sadāśivatattva, the

Lords of Mantra, Īśvaratattva and the Mantra subjects Śuddhavidyātattva.

' Above, 9/2ab.

ardhajātīya

is the maxim – nyāya – of ‘being half aged’ (ardhajaratanyāya), that

indicates that it is impossible for two opposite and conflicting qualities to reside in the
same substance, or combining two opposite attributes in a single individual at the same

time, just as person cannot be simultaneously both young and old.
" Saḍāśiva is Śiva shining inwardly, while Īśvara is His shining forth externally.
Śivatattva etc. must not be confused with presiding deities of the Tattva. Śivatattva etc.
represent various states of being of the One Lightin all its degrees of self-awareness,

according to the extent that experience is internalized within consciousness, and so one
with it. Thus, it includes all the manifestations associated with it, including the
corresponding perceivers and Lords associated with each tattva.

CHAPTER NINE

He says that:

The Six Causes Are Not Tattvas

eṁkrś 7 7īãd 11 uā 1

gerī] īTvãã šfã ī 7:: |

JGaTTTTTJTVITJTTTTITJTTHT I/w. 1I
G% GāĪTITTYĒTTTATTA
a; |
=fṝ ṝḶṁ sarkī īá āē a-kvm || uc 1

ÉE| Etee

Ṭaī ṬāTJITI. Ṭ TTTT-T
JT |I 48 1|1
tena yat prāhur ākhyānasādṛśyena viḍambitāḥ || 55 ||

brahmā nivṛttyadhipatiḥ pṛthak tattvaṁ na gaṇyate || 56 ||

s tu pṛthag gaṇyanta
brahmaviṣṇuhareśānasuśivānāśritāṁmani || 57 I
satke kāraṇasaṁjñe ‘rdhajaratīyam iyaṁ kutaḥ |
iti taīmūlato dhvastaṁ gaṇitaṁ na hi kāraṇam || 58 ||
yathā pṛthivyadhipatir nṛpas tattvāntaraṁ na hi |
tathā tattatkaleśānaḥ prthaktattvāntaraṁ katham || 59 ||
There are those who, without serving (and listening closely to) a
teacher, have culled from books their own chosen views. Misled by the
similarity of names, they ask why Sadāśiva and the rest should be
counted separately, if Brahmā, the Lord of the power of Cessation

(nivrṛtti,, is not considered to be a separate principle. Again, (they ask) the

reason for this contradictory (presence in one thing of two different
natures), in the case of the group of six termed ‘causes’ (kāraṇa), that is,
Brahmā,
Viṣṇu, Hara (i.e. Rudra), Īśāna (i.e. Īśvara), Suśiva (i.e. Sadāśiva)

and Anāśrita.' (Those who advance such objections are, for the reasons

stated above,) radically refuted. A ‘cause’ is not counted (among the
metaphysical principles). Just as a king, the lord of the earth, is not a

is the name ofa metaphysical principle (tattva), as well as that of one of the

causal principles (karaṇa), concerning which see above, 6/185cd-192ab.
' See below, TĀ 11/51-53 and note 11,104, for a chart of the five Forces (kalā), of

which Cessation (nivṛti) is the first. They are five spheres of energy that encompass
sections of the thirty-six principles. Each one is governed by a presiding deity, called a
Lord of a Causal Principle (kāraṇeśvara), as listed. For more details of these deities
which are a common feature of Śaiva cosmologies, see above notes 1,232 and 570.

' See above, note 8,25, for a chart of the domains of the Causal Forces.

TANTRĀLOKA

reality separate (tattva) (apart from the earth). Similarly, how can the
Lords of a particular sphere of energy (kalā) be considered to be (another)
reality (tattva), separate (from it)? (55cd-59)

‘The similarity of namesʼ, by the similarity of the name Sadāśiva (of

the Causal Deity and the principle).

The Pure Path

tad evaṁ pañcakam idaṁ śudáho ʻdhvā paribhāṣyate |
tatra sākṣāc chivecchaiva kartryābhāsitabhedikā || 60 ||
.That group of five principles is in this way termed this ‘Pure Path’.
There Siva’s will acts directly to differentiate the manifested. (60)

The Impure Path Emitted by Aghoreśa
Surely (one may ask), if this is so, (then) who is the agent on the impure
path? With this doubt in mind, he says:

#T-JITEJBTĪTGJTTPĒTTGII] |

Sfq̄vāṇēāiīṝ: gsīdtē fādazg 11 eg 1
īśvarecchāvaśakṣubádhabhogalolikacidgaṇān |
saṁvibhuktum aghoreśaḥ sṛjatīha sitetaram || 61 ||
Here (according to our teachings), Aghoreśa emits the Impure Path
in order to provide worldly experience to those sentient beings whose

craving for worldly experience (bhogalolikā)' has been aroused by the
Lord’ʼs will. (61)

(The craving for this lower creation) is ‘aroused’ by the will of the
‘Lord’ mentioned previously, who is pure freedom.
' Cf. BhoKā 3: ʻThe craving for worldly experience arises for those sentient souls who,

due to (their) Impurity, have been reduced by the Lord (to being propense to worldly

experience) within the sphere of phenomenal existence, in accord with the condition of
(their) Karma.’ See below 9/62, TĀv ad 9/64, also 9/84cd-86, 143, 225 and 13/78-79.

' See below, 9/143 and 225. Aghoreśa, also called Ananteśa or Ananta, is the form of
Śiva that creates the impure levels of reality within the domain of Māyā, of which it is
the first principle, just below the five ‘pure’ principles generated directly by Śiva
Himself.

CHAPTER NINE

‘The disturbance (kṣobha) (brought about by) this (Impurity) called

‘craving’ (lolikā) is its clearly evident propensity (aunmukhya) to act as a

concomitant cause (of Karmic impurity). That too is due to the lord’s will.''

In accord with this teaching, imparted further ahead, the craving for

worldly experience is propense to (act as a) concomitant cause of the Impurity
of Karma. It is the (fundamental) Impurity of the individual soul (āṇavamala),

the nature of which is craving (abhilāṣa). Those that have this kind (of

Impurity) are sentient beings, that is, those whose Self is contracted. ‘Aghoreśa

emits the Impure Path in order to provide worldly experience’ by

establishing a means for each one of their worldly experiences. ‘Here’
(according to our teachings), Aghoreśa, who is the first of the
Mantramaheśvaras, elsewhere called Ananta, ‘emits the Impure Path’. This

means that he makes it manifest externally as the wonderful diversity that
extends from the Force (of limited agency) down to Earth, heralded by the
arousal of Māyā. (Itis said in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘The desire for worldly experience (bhoga) arises in that (soul) by the
Lord’s will. (Then,) the Lord of Mantra, having penetrated Māyā with (His)
energies, created the universe in order to accomplish the means of worldly

experience for one who desires it. '
Again,

‘Śiva is the agent on the Pure Path, and Aṇanta is said to be the lord on

the impure one. '“

Surely (one may ask),

‘The (binding) Impurity of all transmigrating beings (bhavin), starting
with the gods, is of three kinds. There also (amongst them), it is the one
(Impurity) of Karma alone that is the principal cause of transmigratory

existence.”

According to this teaching, although Impurity is everywhere (said to be)

of three kinds, it is (the Impurity) of Karma which is primariḷy the cause of

' Below, 9/143.

' TĀ 9/147 abc: ‘the impurity of these souls is violently avakened by the Lord’s will.”

' MV 1/24cd-25. Alṣo quoted ad 9/147-149ab; paraphrased below as 9/148-149ab. See

note there. MV 1/25d is quoted in in TĀv ad 4/131, The previous two lines from the
MV are quoted below in 9/120cd-121ab.

' Kiraṇatantra vidyāpāda 3/26cd. Quoted above, TĀv ad 1/1 (first quarter) and 8/331332 (330cd-332ab), and below TĀv ad 10/224cd-225ab, 13/1 13cd-1 14ab.
" ĪP 3/2/10. Read with the printed edition and MSs N and Th bhavināṁ for bhāvināṁ.

The second line is also quoted below in TĀv ad 13/104. Utpaladeva explains in his vṛtti:
‘(All the living beings that are) subject to transmigration, starting with the gods up to
immobile (plants), have three Impurities. (Of these,) it is (the Impurity) of Karma alone

that instigates transmigratory existence.”

TANTRĀLOKA

transmigratory existence. Here, however, craving (lolikā) is said to be the cause
of creation. How is that? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Nature of Mala

e aātzazṣaṁ || ē.2 |1

aṇūnāṁ lolikā nāma niṣkarmā yābhilāṣitā |
apūrṇaṁmanyatājñānaṁ malaṁ sāvacchidojjhitā || 62||

The greed (lolikā) to which individual souls are subject is an

(intense) objectless (niṣkarma) craving. It corresponds to the perception
(they have of themselves) as incomplete (apūrṇamanyatā). This is the

(fundamental) Impurity of (their spiritual) ignorance, (which is purely
generic and) devoid of (any specific) limiting (referent). (62)
The (intense) craving to which individual souls are subject is
‘objectlessʼ, because it is not (an actual) action (directed at a goal); (rather, it is)

just desire alone, and because it does not a have a fixed object (viṣaya), it is
‘greed’ ‘devoid of (any) specific limiting (referent)ʼ; that is, (it is just the

sense) of need (they feel) within themselves. Thus, ‘it corresponds to the sense

they have of themselves as incomplete’, and so it is ‘the ignorance’, that is,
contracted knowledge, due to the ignorance of (their own) nature as full (and
complete) knowledge (i.e. consciousness). Thus, as that which conceals one’s
own nature, it is (said to be binding) Impurity (mala) (that is defined in the
following lines).

‘This, the Impurity which pertains directly to the individual soul

(āṉavaṁ malam) brought about by the obliteration (of the knowledge) of one’s

own true nature, is of two kinds. It is the loss of the freedom of (its innate)
consciousness, and so too (along with it), the lack of consciousness of (its

innate) freedom.”'

The meaning is that, according to (this) teaching, the (impurity) called
‘Individual’ (āṇava) is everywhere said to be of two kinds. In this way, although
the impurity of Karma alone is the primary cause of transmigratory existence, it
is this (āṉavamala) which is said to be the main one, as it is the cause of that
(karmamala) also. As is said: ‘the instigating cause (of Karma) is called craving

' This verse introduces a discussion concerning the nature of maala that continues up to

verse 9/88ab. The dualist Śaiva Siddhānta maintains that it is an independent material
substance which sullies the soul. It cannot be removed by spiritual knowledge, although
its removal leads to it. Rather, it requires direct physical intervention to remove it, and
that is the rite of initiation. Concerning the dualist conception of mala, see
Rāmakaṇṭha’s commentary on Kiraṇatantra 2/11

ff. and Goodall (1995) p. 149 ff.

' ĪP 3/2/4 also quoted above, TĀv ad 1/23 and 5/106 (105cd-106ab). 3/2/4d is quoted

in TĀv ad 9/93cd-95ab See above, note to first reference.

CHAPTER NINE

. ." This alone is the disposition (which is fit and favourable) for the limited

(fettered) condition (aṇu1ā) of the individual (fettered) souls. When that exists,

they become subject to each (particular) limitation.
He says that:

yogyatāmātraṃm evaitad bhāvyavacchedasaṁgrahe |
malas tenāsya na pṛthak tattvabhāvo ‘ṣṭi rāgavat || 63 ||

Impurity (nala) is just (the soul’s) disposition, (which is fit and

favourable) (yogyatāmātra) to accrue future limitations. Therefore, it is not
a separate principle in itself, as is, for example, attachment (rāga). (63)
(Impurity (mala) is) ‘just (the soul’s) disposition, (which is fit and

favourable) (yogyatāmātra), because no limitation has been directly accrued.
Here (in this world of duality), an entity (vastu) is conditioned by another entity.
An entity has its (own) separate existence, and that (impurity) is not an entity of
any kind; rather, it is just ignorance of one’s own full (and perfect) nature. Thus,

it is rightly said that this ‘Impurity (nala) is just (the soul’s) disposition,

(which is fit and favourable) (yogyatāmātra) to accrue’ each (particular)

‘limitation’.
Surely (someone may ask), according to the Sāṁkhya, attachment

(rāga), which is defined as ‘the absence of dispassion’,' is a quality of the
intellect, and is considered to be the craving for this and that object of the senses

(viṣaya). So what is the purpose (of admitting the existence) of this other

principle of Attachment (rāgatattva), which is like this, along with (basic)
Impurity? With this doubt in mind, he says:

niravacchedakarmāṁśamātrāvacchedatas tu sā |
rāgaḥ puṅṁsi dhiyo dharmaḥ karmabhedavicitratā || 64 ||

(The principle of) Attachment (rāga) is present within the

individual soul as (an undefined desire), conditioned by the aspect of
objectivity (karman), free of specification. (The attachment which is) a
quality of the intellect (differs from this in so far as) it is various, according
to its diverse objects (karman). (64)

' ṢYṬ 3/177a. This half line is also quoted below in TĀv ad 9/88cd-89ab and as the

first half of a full line ad 13/83-84 and ad 13/110cd-11 1ab.
'! Read avairāgyalakṣaṇo for vairāgyalakṣaṇo.

TANTRĀLOKA

Itis ‘free of specification’, that is, without (any) specific quality. Thus,

(the form of) that craving (lolikā) is, ‘may I possess something’, which is
conditioned only by the object (of desire) in a generic form. It is the attachment
(rāga) that is considered to be a quality of the individual soul, and is
everywhere reckoned to be a separate principle (tattva), which is (one) amongst
the five coverings (kañcuka). (The attachment) which is a quality of the intellect
is the unfolding of that same (generic attachment) that extends up to the external
(object), due to which an apprehension (adhyavasāya) may arise, such as
hunger, thirst, or the desire for sexual intercourse, (brought about) by the variety
which is the diversity (bheda) of each particular object (of desire).
Again, (all that exists) within the (fundamental Impurity) of the

individual soul (āṉṇavamala) is just a propensity to outline' the object of desire

in a general way, from which (originates) this kind of outpouring (of desire). He
says that:

TPTT-TI
T TATRTTATJTḤ |
apūrṇamanyatā ceyaṁ tathārūpāvabhāsanam |

And this sense of oneself as incomplete (apūrṇamanyatā) manifests

in this form (as attachment). (65ab)

‘And’ indicates a reason, namely, as ‘this sense of oneself as
incompleteʼ is the defining characteristic of (fundamental) Impurity of the
individual soul (āṇavamala), it ‘manifests in this form’ as attachment and the

absence of dispassion, that are considered to be a quality of the individual soul

and the intellect (respectively). The meaning is that it is that (sense of oneself)
that manifests in this way and that. Thus, it is like a sprout within (the
fundamental) Impurity of the individual soul (āṇavamala), it becomes a bud

within (the principle of) Attachment (rāga), and finally blossoms and attains

fruition within the intellect.' Now, enough of (s0) many secondary matters.'

Surely (one may ask), it is our established view (siddhānta) that free
(and independent) consciousness is ultimate reality (paramārtha). Where is this

Impurity that is separate from that?' With this doubt in mind, he says:

raxúī aaī īa: || ē., 1
TāTTTITTTT TÇĀTTTTĪ TG- |
[ē3 Read -viṣayallehanonmukhatāmātraṁ for ~viṣayallehatonmukhatāmātraṁ.

' Although this process binds the individual soul who is subject to duality, from the

perspective of Śiva consciousness, it marks the stage through which Śiva makes things
manifest. Śiva is perfectly free to do or become anything. He has simply to desire it.

When he does s0, His desire assumes the form of its object. In other words, the
universal power to do anything focuses on a particular desired aim, assuming its form as

it does so. This then develops into the object itself, projected externally.

' AIl that manifests in all these forms in nothing but the mistaken supposition of our

incompleteness (apūrṇatā).

'“ Read tadatiriktaḥ for tattadatiriktaḥ.

CHAPTER NINE

svatantrasya śivasyecchā ghaṭarūpo yathā ghaṭaḥ |l 65 ||
svātmapracchādanecchaiva vastubhūtas tathā malaḥ |

When the will of Śiva, Whois free, (assumes) the form of a jar, it

becomes a jar. Similarly, Impurity is (Śiva’s) desire to conceal His own
nature, that has assumed a substantial form (vastubhūta). (65cd-66ab)

(Impurity) ‘has assumed a substantial formʼ because (Śiva) own

nature is concealed. Here (according to this view), the Supreme Lord first

conceals his own essential nature, which is full (and perfect) knowledge and

action, by His own will (to do s0), and then makes the contracted state of the

Self manifest. Thus, it is proclaimed everywhere that his nature is contracted

consciousness (jñāna). That is

said (in the Mālinīvijottara):

‘(The wise) prefer (the view that) Impurity (mala) is ignorance, (not a

material substance as the dualists maintain).”

Sureḷy, (an opponent may object,) the light (of consciousness) is

supreme and undivided in all respects, so how can this which is called

‘Impurity assume a substantial nature (vasturūpatā) separately from that? With

this doubt in mind), he says:

yathaivāvyatiriktasya dharāder bhāvitātmatā | 66 ||
tathaivāsyeti śāstreṣu vyatiriktaḥ sthito malaḥ |

Like the Earth (and the other principles, which although) not
separate (from consciousness) are conceived to have a nature of their own,
in the same way, according to the (Śaiva) scriptures, (Śiva’s) Impurity is

(independent and) separate (from Him). (66cd-67ab)

Although Impurity is not in actual fact separate from the supreme Light

(of consciousness), it manifests as Earth and the rest (of the principles), as

separate from the Light. The ‘scriptures’ are the Svāyambhuva and other
(Āgamas). Asis said there, (in the Svāyambhuvāgama and elsewhere);
‘Now, it is said that the (fundamental) beginningless Impurity of the

(countless) individual souls is their (basic) fettered state (paśutva).
“ Read ghaṭarūpā for ghaṭarūpo.

'“ MV 1/23c. The complete lineis quoted abovein 1/23ab and again belowin 9/120cd,

in TĀv ad 9/98cd-99ab, and paraphrasedin 13/49cd.

' SvāSūSaṁ 2 33/1ab. Also quoted above ad 1/46. See note there.

TANTRĀLOKA
Again:

knowledge.”

‘Impurity

is

said to be that which differs from pure

Again: “Thus it is said to be the impurity of individual souls.’
(An opponent may say that) its manifestation thus as separate (from

consciousness) is not a new (view) at all, such that the enthusiasm of others (for
it) may be laudable (as the best view). (In actual fact, the view that) its separate
state (from consciousness) is free (and independent) is (the one that is truly)

praiseworthy.

(Our response is that) that is not so. Thus, he says:

aafkā: aāq

sfd vīhaīzāq || ē.

vyatiriktaḥ ṣvatantras tu na ko ʻpi śakaṭādivat || 67 ||

(Indeed,) nothing is separate and independent (from consciousness)

in the way a cart (is separate from the ground).” (67cd)

Here external things, such as carts, exist independently and are separate
from one another; that is not so with this (Impurity), because it would not be
possible for it to manifest as different (and separate) in relation to the supreme

Light (of consciousness).'” That (supposedly) second (reality) is (also)
contiguous (to the Light of consciousness) in this way. Thus, even though the
nature of indiviḍual souls is not mixed up (i.e. remains separate and distinct), it

may impart (this) impurity in the form of āṇavamala to this degree only. Thus,
as (the light of consciousness) is pervasive, there is no difference with regards to
what is proximate to it (i.e. all things are equally proximate to consciousness).
So why should (that Impurity also) not veil the individual souls liberated by
Śiva? Thisis (essentially) whatis said (in this verse).

cāfṣctaṁ aārgfz: fkraāçchrpnī

fēē-r 1

tatsadvitīyā sāśuddhiḥ śivamuktāṇugā na kim |
If that impurity were to be a second (independent and permanent
reality along with that pure reality), why should it not be present in Śiva

and the liberated soul? (68ab)

' Read yad amalaṁ jñānaṁ for yena malaṁ jñānaṁ. This and the following line cited

by Jayaratha cannot be traced to the Svāyambhuvāgama. Jayaratha quotes, it seems,

from two or three Siddhānta sources to establish that this is the common view.

'"" The following verses (68-83ab), refuting the dualist Śaiva view of fundamental

Impurity (mala), are elaborated below in 13/41cd-128.

'”! The literal translation of asya bhedena bhānāyogāt īs ‘because, as different (from it,

its) light is not associated with it. The Light of consciousness is the manifest nature of
things. It is their ‘light’. If Impurity, or indeed anything else, were to be totally different
from the Light, it could not manifest and hence exist. Thus, objects can be separate and

independentin relation to one another, but not in relation to the Light of consciousness.

'” Cf. below, 13/61cd.

CHAPTER NINE

Surely, (the dualist opponent maintains, that) although Impurity (mala)
is pervasive, it can conceal the essential nature, which is knowledge and action,
of each individual soul, with an individual power for each. As they say:
‘(Many and) various are the powers of Impurity that obscure the

qualities of each soul (individually).”™

Thus, as the concealing power is (various) due to the variety of changes
(an individual soul may be subject to), (Impurity) does not affect (the soul)
whose changes have ceased. Thus, it would not obscure liberated souls also (as

it does those that are not). Moreover, it does not obscure Śiva because His pure

(unfettered) conscious nature has no beginning.”

'” The Tatvatrayanirṇaya by Sadyojyotiḥ verse 11cd. This line is quoted again below

ad 13/44cd-45cd. The complete verse reads:

māyāvikārayoge karmayutaḥ kāraṇaṁ malo bhavinām |

malaśaktayo vibhinnāḥ pratyātmānaṁ ca tadguṇāvarikāḥ || 1 1 II

‘Impurity, linked with Karma, when associated with the transformations of

Māyā, is the cause of transmigrating (fettered) souls. The powers of Impurity are (many
and) separate, and they conceal the (essential) quality (guṇa) of each (individual) soul
(separately).”

Aghoraśivācārya explains in his vṛtti:
karmabhogārtham eva śarīrāder iṣṭatvān nirmalasya muktātmanas tadasaṁbhavāc ca
śarīrādiyogo nāṣṭi | tad uktaṁ śrīmatsvāyambhuve- tadbhāvabhāvino bhā
sarve
māyātmakāḥ paśoḥ iti, tathā- karmataś ca śarīrāṇi vividhāni (viṣayāḥ kārakāṇi ceti
tatratyaḥ pāṭhaḥ '1) Śśarīrīṇām iti | nanv evaṁ cen malasyaikatvād ekamokṣe
sarvamokṣaprasaṅgaḥ

ata

-~malaśaktaya
iti

._malasya
pratyātmaniyatānekaśaktitvād ekasyāḥ pākena nivr̥ttau tadāvāryasyaiva mokṣo na
sarvasyeti bhāvaḥ |I II ||
‘(The individual soul) is not (in actual fact) linked to the body etc., because the

body etc. is considered to serve the purpose of experiencing (the consequences of)

Karma, and because that does not arise (nor is possible) in the case of a pure, liberated
soul. That is stated in the venerable Svāyambhuva (32/13): ‘the conditions of the fettered

soul who is experiencing them are Māyā by nature.’ (Thus) the many varied bodies,

objects of sense and inducing causes (arise) from the Karma, which is such, of

embodied beings.”
Surely (one may object), if Impurity is in this way one (and the same for all

fettered souls), would not the contingency (arise) that (when one soul is liberated,) all
are liberated? Thus, he says that ‘the powers of Impurity are (many). The sense is that
each of the souls is constrained by the many powers of Impurity, and so when one
(power) ceases (to act) by maturing, (only) the soul who is covered by it is liberated, not

all of them.”

'" Liberated souls differ from Śiva only in this respect, namely that the purity of their

consciousness begins from the moment they are liberated, whereas the purity of Śiva’s

consciousness has no beginning. Thus, Śiva’s liberated state has no beginning (He is

anādīimukta), whereas that of liberated souls does (they are ādimukta). Thus, Śiva
cannot be obscured by Impurity, because that would mean that there would be a
beginning to His pure state, when that Impurity is removed.

TANTRĀLOKA

He says that:
The Paralyzing Power of Impurity

rōaī ũīḡ} āīaārcā dfā: o Tav I| š. 11

aīa: grTTāṁhcũa

malasya roddhrī kāpy asti śaktiḥ sā cāpy amuktagā || 68 I|
iti nyāyojjhito vādaḥ śraddhāmātraikakalpitaḥ |
The view that Impurity has a peculiar paralyzing power (roddhrī
śakti), and that that is present (and operative) in souls that are not
liberated,'” is (a totally) illogical view conceived on the basis of just (blind)
belief alone. (68cd-69ab)
Even if one accepts that it is the power of Impurity (rather than Impurity
itself) (that affects) ‘the souls that are not liberated’, not those that are
liberated or Śiva (Himself), it obscures (souls) as does that (Impurity itself) just

by its close proximity, thus (this view is subject to the same) defect mentioned
before. As (this power) is obscuring, everything would be obscured (by it) or

nothing at all. Thus, where has this ascertainment (that one soul should be
obscured and not another) come from, that it should be necessarily so? Reality

(vastu) is not especially favourable to your view that (it should reflect) ‘may
something be obscured and something (else) not.’ The sense is that (insentient

things are confined in their own nature, as is their behaviour), the colour blue of

something is not blue (if it is the colour of something else).
Now (you may say that) those (powers) are many. Thus, due to the

variety of (their) permutations, one (of them) blocks some (particular soul) or
not, in such a way (that it accounts for the) distinction between liberated and the
fettered (souls). (We reply that) this is not so. Here (in this world), every entity
is conceived to possess (its own specific) power; otherwise (if it did not), its

particular tasks (kārya) could not be logically accounted for. This is just as fire
possesses the power to burn, because otherwise (if it did not, the fact that) its
burns would not be logically possible. Moreover, that (power) is the very nature
of (that) entity. However, differences are projected onto it due to the differences
in its functions (vyāpāra). As they say:
‘Power (in the sense of functional efficacy) is the nature of (every type
of) thing. The difference (between one thing and another) is a projection due to

(the perception of) the diversity of the result (of the functional efficacy of each

Thus, the diversity of (the one power) is due to the diversity of (its)
functions, due to which an entity is said to have many powers. Just as fire has
many functions, such as burning and cooking, so it has many powers, such as
'” See below, 13/50 ff. _

Also quoted above, TĀv ad 1/68. Cf. TĀ 1/69.

CHAPTER NINE

the power to burn and to cook.'” It is not logical for each single power to be
diverse of itself (svataḥ). This is because there is no difference in its essential

nature, and because its function is one and there is no other means to know it

(than its function).
(One may ask that, although it is true that) to account for what is
evident experience, it (may be) necessary to postulate (some) unseen (factor),

and that can be accounted for by (just) one power. So, what is (the use of the
futile) effort to postulate an unperceived multiplicity of powers?' If in this way
Impurity has a power that functions as an obscuration (of the soul), then it
would envelop everything. (If not, then) what would become of its undivided
(nature) (abheda), by virtue of which (it) would be one? (And that power is
indeed conceived to be one;) thus (when he says) ‘Impurity has a peculiar
paralyzing power (roddhrī śakti), it is mentioned in the singular. Thus, it is
said that it ‘is a totally illogical (view)ʼ etc. As Impurity is subject to change
(parīṇāma), it is insentient (jaḍa), and its paralyzing power that (you) accept
(exists) does not operate by itself in this way because of its insentience. As that
is s0, there (can be) no such reflection (abhisaṁdhāna), as ‘this (fettered soul)

should be enveloped and that (liberated one should) notʼ. Thus, it would operate
with respect to everything, so that all (the souls) would be enveloped (by it). In
this way, what would be the validating authority (pramāṇa), even in the case of
the Lord (Himself), that He is the one whose nature is pure consciousness, and

that this (soul) is not beginningless pure consciousness?'™ It right to reflect on
that, because (we have) set out to determine the nature" of (that) beginningless

etc. (state) of obscuration.

He says just that:

aiz a razdd || ē< 1|

roddhrī śaktir jaḍasyāsau svayaṁ naiva pravartate || 69
svayaṁ pravrttau viśvaṁ syāt tathā ceśanikā pramā |
'” Distinctions are superimposed according to different functions of the same entity.

Power, the essential, specific nature of an entity, has distinctions superimposed upon it,
according to the various results it gives rise to. So it is that a single entity, though

having (or being) one power, is endowed with many powers. Fire, for example, has the

capacity to burn and cook etc., and so fire, though one, appears to have various powers,

according to its various functions, for a power is not something different from it, and all
the functions are aspects of a single one (cf. above, 1/69).

'” Although it is true that to account for what is evident experience, it may be necessary

to postulate some unseen factors in this case, where all the functions of fire can be
accounted for by one power alone, it would be futile to postulate an unperceived

multiplicity of powers.
'” The power of concealment Impurity has is one and universal, and so should obscure
all individual souls. As it is insentient, how can it decide, “I will conceal this soul” or “I

will not conceal the other one”? Thus, you would have to admit that even God Himself
would be affected by Impurity, if you persist in considering it to be some autonomous
entity thought of as the ‘“power of concealment’.

' The word svabhāvaṁ needs to be added to complete the syntax.

TANTRĀLOKA

This paralyzing power (of Impurity, which you maintain is)

insentient, does not (and cannot) operate by itself. If it is set into operation
by itself, it would (affect) everything, including the knowledge of the Lord.
(69cd-70ab)
To this extent, there is no disagreement here, namely that what is devoid

of consciousness is governed (and sustained) by consciousness. Well then, if

(the opponent were to maintain that) the Supreme Lord Himself impels that

(paralyzing) power (of Impurity) in this way, that also is not so. Thus he says:

rsq īzt āṝ vtñvēḷq-] 11 sc 1|

malasya roddhrīṁ tāṁ śaktim īśaś cet saṁyunakti tat | 70 ||
kīdṛśaṁ praty aṇum iti praśne nāsty uttaraṁ vacaḥ |
Again, if you say that the Lord (directs and) applies this paralyzing
power of Impurity, there would be no reply to the question, ‘“to what kind

of individual soul (would He choose to do s0)?” (7J0cd-71ab)

‘What kind’ (of individual soul is subject to the power of impurity)? Is

it unsullied (nirmala) or sullied (samala)? In the first case, it would be applied

to liberated souls. Thus, there would always be transmigratory existence. Again,
in the second case, its application would be useless, because (the soul) would
already be associated with Impurity before that also. Its application would not
make sense if it were to both also. Thus, as there is no solution here (to this

problem), he says: ‘there would be no reply to the question’ etc.'

(Some maintain) that, like a jar that can be covered by a cloth, even if

individual (fettered) souls are enveloped by Impurity, this does not alter (their)
the nature; rather, (it merely) prevents the perceiver from having (any)
'l See below, 13/56cd, 66.

" In short, Impurity cannot obscure consciousness. Compare the discussion in TĀ

9/71cd-84ab with the same discussion in MVV 2/157-186, translated in the following
note. The verses are not reproduced, but the basic concepts and arguments are largely

the same as we find there. MVV 2/157 onwards, Abhinava discusses the nature of
initiation. In that context, he talks about Mala, Māyā ānd Karman. He begins by
showing that nothing, including Impurity (mala), can be an obscuring covering
(āvaraṇa) of the soul. By its very nature, consciousness cannot be covered over (āvṛta).
In this way, he counters the Siddhānta view that Impurity and the like are a separate

reality. Karman is discussed at length in MVV 2/187-206, translated below in note
9,203. The nature of Karma and its ‘maturation’ is discussed, and then how the agent is

ultimately the Lord in MVV 2/202ff. Cf. TĀ 9/90cd-141, which discusses the nature of
Karman in relation to the Deconditioned by Dissolution (Pralayākalā) and

Deconditioned by Consciousness (Vijñānakalā) subjects. Concerning Mayā, compare

TĀ 9/142-166ab with MVV 2/207-216. Concerning all these matters, see also the long
commentary on S√T 5/88d. Abhinava goes back to this discussion below in Chapter

Thirteen, in the context of his exposition of the descent of the power of grace
(śaktipāta), where he discusses what occasions it and the like.

CHAPTER NINE

knowledge of it. Moreover, if that is so, it would be Śiva’s own Impurity, as the
knowledge which it obscures has (Him) as its object.
He says that:
Impurity is not in actual fact an Obscuring Covering of the Soul

malaś cāvaraṇaṁ tac ca nāvāryasya viśeṣakam |I 71 |I

upalambhaṁ vihanty etad ghaṭasyeva paṭāvṛtiḥ |

malenāvṛtarūpāṇām aṇāūnāṁ yat satattvakam || 72 ||
Śśiva eva na yat paśyet tasyaivāsau malo bhavet |
'(Some maintain) that impurity is an obscuring covering (āvaraṇa)
that does not alter the nature of what it covers, (but merely) prevents one
' The arguments advanced in 9/71cd-74ab are practically reproduced below in 13/63-

65. The following discussion from 9/71cd to 84ab concerns whether Impurity can really
be an obscuring covering that envelops the fettered soul, as the Siddhānta affirms.
Abhinava himself says that he has discussed this matter elsewhere (9/84ab), which

could only be in MVV 2/157-186, which is translated here for the reader’s convenience.

Cf. also below TĀ 13/63-65.

tathāhi dīkṣā nāmeyaṁ yā malānāṁ nikartanī|

sā bhedavādināṁ pakṣe kathaṁ nāmopapadyate || 157 I|

tathāhi yo malo nāma sa kathaṁ citsvabhāvakam |
ātmānam āvṛṇīte kva vibhor āvaraṇakriyā || 158 |I
na ca prakāśas tamasā jātu saṁvriyate yataḥ |
prakāśodaya evāyaṁ dhvāntadhvaṁsakriyātmakaḥ || 159 ||
kiūṁ cāyaraṇam uktaṁ hi raśmyāder gatidharmiṇaḥ |
pratighātātmakaṁ tat kiṁ vibhor agatidharmiṇaḥ || 160 l|
‘Such is this initiation, that it severs Impurities. How can that be possible,
according to the view dualists maintain? Śimilarly, how can Impurity envelop the Self,
the nature of which is consciousness? Where does the pervasive Lord’s act of
obscuration (operate)?

For indeed, light (can never be) obscured by darkness. (This is why) this
dawning of light is the act that destroys darkness. What is an obscuring covering said to
be? (If you say that) it blocks the moving rays etc. (of light), how can (it affect) the
pervasive Lord, who is immobile? (157-160)
api vã jñeyatāmātratirodhaiva(-dhānaṁ) hi saṁvṛteḥ |
patādinā ghaṭādeḥ syān na svarūpānyathāsthitiḥ ||/ 161 II
na cātmānaś cidātmatvāj jñeyatvam adhiśerate |
tad āvaraṇam eṣāṁ tu śabdeṣv api na śobhate || 162 ||
nanv īśvarasya te jñeyā aṇavaḥ katham īdṛśam ḷ

TANTRĀLOKA

cidātmakaṁ hi na jñeyaṁ cidātmatvatirohiteḥ |l 163 |I

saṁvij jñeyeti [vijñeyeti pāthaḥ] śabdo ‘yaṁ vandhyā me jananīty adaḥ |
vākyaṁ smarayatīva svaṁ svātmasabrahmacāri yat | 164 ||
Or else, (if you say) that the act of obscuration (of the light of consciousness)
obscures only (its objectively knowable) objectivity, (that is not correct). The nature of a
jar that is covered by a cloth, for example, does not change, (whereas, if it is explained

in this way, the obscuration of light would entail a change in its nature). Nor is the Self
objectified, for its nature is consciousness, (that can never become an object). That that
(objectivity) is the obscuring covering of these (souls) is not appealing even in the
words (with which it is stated to exist). (161-162)
Surely (one may object), these individual souls can be known (objectively) by
the Lord. As its nature as consciousness has been obscured, how can (the soul), which is
such, and nature consciousness, not be an object of knowledge? (We reply that) saying
that consciousness is an object of knowledge (is like saying something that is as
impossible as) “my mother is barren.” This kind of statement is like inducing one to
recollect that one’s own Self is celibate (it does not give birth to anything) (?). (163-

164)

kiṁ ceśvarasya sārvajñyaṁ tāvatā pratihanyate |
āvṛtāṉ vetti nāṇūn yan na tv eṣāṁ kācana kṣatiḥ || 165 ||
nanv anāvaraṇe nīle jñātur āvaraṇe sati |

na darśanaṁ tathābādhā [tathāvāṇuriti pāṭhaḥ] na sarvajño malāvṛtaḥ || 166 I

maivaṁ tatra hi dr̥graśmīn gacchataḥ pratihanti tat |
paṭādi na tu [paṭādivan neti pāṭhaḥ] vijñātur asty āvaraṇasaṁbhavaḥ || 167 II
malaś cāvyāpako vyāptur āvāraka iti sphuṭam |
ghate ʻpi vyoōmni saṁdadhyād aśūnyatvaṁ svarūpataḥ || 168 II

Moreover, the Lord’s omniscience is destroyed in this way. He does not know
the souls who are enveloped (in darkness), and their (obscuring darkness) can never be

destroyed. (Surely the opponent may object that,) if the colour blue is devoid of an

obscuring covering, (then it is) the perceiver (of that blue who) is obscured. This being
s0, (he) does not see it. (We reply that) there is no impediment in this way. The
omniscient one is not enveloped by Impurity. (165-166)

Itis not so that in this way (Impurity) blocks the rays of vision in the course of

their movement. It is not possible that the knower can have an obscuring covering, as a
cloth (can be for a jar). It is clear that (if) Impurity, which is not pervasive, were to be
the obscuring covering of the pervasive (perceiver), (then it would like) the space within

a jar assuming (spontaneously), by its very nature, a condition that is not empty. (167168)
ātmanaś cādhikāryatvān (> nā-) malaḥ kiṁcitkaro na cet |
kathaṃ āvaraṇāyaiṣa śakto nanu ca bhoḥ kimu || 169 ||
malasadbhāvamātraṁ hi tasyāvaraṇam ucyate |

malena sa dvitīyo ʻṇur āvṛtaḥ paribhāṣyate || 170 ||

hantāṉnena nayenaiṣa [eveti pāṭhaḥ] śivamuktātmanām api |
sthitam āvaraṇaṁ satyaṁ malasadbhãāvamãtrataḥ || 171 II|
kiṁ cāvṛto malenātmā malam eva na vetti kim |
tadasaṁvedane tasya kiṁ malāntaram ucyate || 172 ||
If (you were to say that) Impurity does not do anything to the Self, because it is
not subject to (Impurity’s) authority to do so, then how could it be capable of covering it

CHAPTER NINE

(at all)? Surely sir, (retorts the opponent,) could one not say that the obscuring covering
of (the soul) is just the mere existence alone of Impurity? The soul, which is that second

(separate reality), is defined as being enveloped by Impurity. (169-170)

(To this we reply that,) indeed, according to this doctrine, the truth would be
that Śiva and liberated souls would also have an obscuring covering, due to just the

mere existence of Impurity. Moreover, does not the soul that is enveloped by Impurity

know (that) Impurity? If it is not aware of it, what other Impurity is said (to exist)?
(171-172)

nanv ataḥ kiṁ malaṁ veĩttu (> vettus) [vettum iti pāṭhaḥ] tarhi vidyākale vinā |
sarvajñatvaṁ bhavet tac ca malaṁ viditam eva sat |l 173 ||

jahātvātmābhyupāyais tais tair vicitraiḥ prakalpiaiḥ |
kiṁ cãvaraṇam etena yasyātmani bhavet tataḥ l| 174 |
ghatādau jñātr̥kartr̥tve katham asya bhaviṣyataḥ |

nanu vidyākale kiṁcijjñatvakartṛtvade smṛte || 175 |I
itthaṁ vimũḍhamatayo vañcyante na tu paṇḍitāḥ |

jaḍasvabhāvã mãyaiṣ tatsũtiś ca kalãdikaḥ || 17 ||
acidātmā kathaṁkāraṁ cidabhiyyañjanakṣamaḥ |

Surely then, is not the knower of Impurity, devoid of limited knowledge and

agency (vidyākalā), omniscient, and (so) that Impurity is known (by him)? Once having

abandoned (that limited knowledge and agency, along with all) those various conceived
means to (attain) the Self, what obscuring covering (remains,) that it may thus serve as

such within the Self? (173-174)

How will it be possible that in the future (an insentient object) such as a jar is
destined to possess agency and a perceiving subjectivity? Surely, Vidyā and Kalā are
said to bestow (on the soul, not a jar,) a limited capacity to know and act. (175)
Such are those whose minds are deluded (that they believe this). The wise are
not deceived. Thī
Maāyā, which is insentient. Kalā and the rest are born from it. How

can that which is not conscious be capable of manifesting consciousness? (176-177ab)
abhivyaktā ca cidvibhvī kiṁcittvādiviśeṣaṇaiḥ |1 77|I
viśeṣyatāṁ kathaṁ nāma sāṁśavastūcitaṁ hi tat |
nanu devaḥ kalāvidyākaraṇo vyañjayec ciṭam || 178 II
vyanaktu sarvato hanta nāsyāśaktir athāgrahaḥ |
male sadātane cāsya kathaṁ muktir bhaviṣyati || 179 ||

raudrī (roddhrī) śaktir malasyāsti sā ca kvāpi nivartate |

kvāpi pravartate ceti dhig idaṁ māūḍhabhāṣitam || 180 ||
jadānāṁ ko ʻnuṣaṁdhiḥ syāt taṁ vinaitat kathaṁ bhaveĩ |
atha tatrāpi devasya hetutābhyupagamyate || 1 81 ||
kiṁ nimittam asau devas tāṁ śaktiṁ saṁpravartayet |

pravartitāṁ vā kiṁ nãma tãṁ nivartayate punaḥ || 1 82 ||

(The opponent replies that) the power of consciousness is made manifest with
specifications such as ‘limited’. (Our response is,) how can (consciousness) be
differentiated? That is possible (only) in the case of an entity with parts. (177cd-178ab)

Śurely (the opponent may reply), deity, who possesses limited agency (kalā)

and knowledge (vidyā) as (his) instruments, manifests consciousness. (To which we
reply,) fine! let him make it manifest, our contention does not concern (his) lack of
power. If Impurity is eternal, then how will liberation (from it ever) take place?

(178cd-179)

TANTRĀLOKA

from perceiving it, like the cloth that covers a jar. (In that case, it would be

the perceiver who is affected by it and not the object). It is Śiva who would

not"™ (be able to) see the nature of individual souls obscured by Impurity,

and so this Impurity would (effectively) be His. (71cd-73ab)

Surely (an opponent would object that), if that is so, by covering over
the cognitive subjectivity and agency, which is the essential nature of the

indiviḍual souls and Śiva (Himself), why should (their) essential nature be

destroyed? Thus, he says:

frīī---āTTITGATTITTTT |] 93 ||

ah-Td̃d|

ibhor jñānakriyāmātrasārasyāṇugaṇasya ca l| 73 II
tadabhāvo malo rūpadhvaṁsāyaiva prakalpate |
(The opponent): Impurity has the power to obstruct (the consciousness of the
soul), and that ceases in some circumstances, whereas it operates in others. (Reply:) fie
on this foolish talk! What conscious intent (anusaṁdhi) can insentient entities possess?
(The opponent:) Without that, how is this possible? (Reply:) Now here (in this case)
also, (in order to account for this,) one accepts that the deity is the cause (of
obscuration). Why does this deity impel that power (to action)? Once it has been
impelled, how does he bring about its cessation again? (180-182)

svātantryād iti cet pūrṇaṁ tad evāśṛīyate na kim |

malasya dhvāntarāpasya na ca pāko

'ṣti kaścana || 183 |

sa hy anyatādānayogād dhanty amuṣya dhruvātmatām |
etena malasaṁbandhād īśvarecchāpracoditaḥ || 1 84 ||
bhogalobhakathāviṣṭaḥ paśuḥ
nugrhyate |
iti yad bhaṇyate mūlahataṁ tajjanitaṁ tataḥ || 185 |

svātmapracchādanakrīḍāmātram eva malaṁ viduḥ |

svatantro hi vibhuḥ kiṁcit kiṁ na svãtmanĩ bhãsayet || 186 ||

If (you say he does that) by virtue of (his) freedom (to do s0), why is it not
complete (freedom)? Nor is there any kind of maturation (pāka) of Impurity, the nature
of which is darkness, (that could account for a gradation). By bringing about a change
(in the nature of the soul’s consciousness), it (would) destroy (the soulʼs) stable abiding
state (dhruvatā) (which is consciousness). Thus, (we maintain that the soul is) impelled
by the Lord's will (in this way) because it is associated with Impurity. (183-184)

(The opponent says that) the fettered soul who is immersed in greed for

worldly experience is aided (in its craving) by creation. (We reply that,) if one says that,
then what is generated by that is struck at the (very) root (of its existence). Thus, (the
wise) know the Impurity is just the play (of the Lord), to obscure Himself. The

all-pervasive Lord is free; why should he not manifest anything (he wishes) within

himself?” (I85-186) MVV 2/157-186.
The conclusion is that Impurity cannot be a separate, independent reality. If it
were, it would affect Śiva and could not be removed. It does exist, but it is produced by
consciousness, that is, Śiva Himself Who by means of that freely obscures Himself, and
by removing it, illuminates Himself.”

'“ Read na yat for ca tat. (see MVV 2/165)

CHAPTER NINE

Knowledge and action alone is the essence of the All-pervasive Lord
and that of the host of individual souls. The absence (of knowledge and
action) is Impurity (mala), which serves to destroy the (very) nature (of the
fettered souls). (73cd-74ab)
The ‘essence’ (of the Lord is His) one nature. This the meaning. ‘Their
absenceʼ (affects all individual souls,) because it destroys (their) knowledge and
action.

Surely (the couple) knowledge and action (together constitute) an

attribute (dharma) of (both) Śiva and individual fettered souls; however, (it is

not just a secondary quality, it is) an inherent one (inextricably linked to their
very nature). If that is removed by Impurity, then what happens thereby to the
possessor of (that) attribute? Is its essential nature destroyed?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

srī=gfdr
aāī ũa: aaṁ ē-ī 1| .9x ||

dharmād dharmiṇi yo bhedaḥ samavāyena caikatā l| 74 |I
na tadbhavadbhir uditaṁ kaṇabhojanaśiṣyavat |
According to you (and we agree), an attribute is not separate from
its possessor, as the followers of Kaṇāda maintain; (rather,) they are in a

state of oneness by way of (their) inherence (in one another). (7J4cd-75ab)

As was said before:
‘Unlike Kaṇāda’s view, in the Supreme Lord’s scripture, there is not
said to be any substratum of the powers (to which they are related) as its

attributes (that are separate from it in themselves).

This is discussed there, and so one should understand it from that

(discussion). For fear of (making) the book (too) long, (we will) not exert
(ourselves) here (to explain it) again. Thus, it is your view (also, as it is of the

dualist Siddhāntas,) that the nature of knowledge and action is nothing more
(apart from) Śiva or that of the individual souls, whose (essential) nature is

consciousness alone. As is said:

‘Those powers are (something) more than action, (but) they are not

more (and separate from) the nature of consciousnessʼ'

' See below, 13/63 and above, 1/158 and note. If one admits the Vaiśeṣika view, that

qualities are separate from their possessor, one could postulate that Impurity affects only

the qualities of knowledge and the action of the soul, which is conjoined or separated

from them without this essentially changing or affecting it, just as a change in the colour

of a jar does not bring about an essential change in the jar. This view, however, is not
accepted by either the followers of the Siddhānta or its opponents.
Above, 1/158.

TANTRĀLOKA

Moreover, removing that from them in this way by Impurity, their
(very) nature is destroyed. Thus, it is well said that Impurity serves to destroy
the (very) nature of the All-pervasive Lord and the individual souls.
Surely (an opponent may object that), even if (their) nature is not
destroyed, will it then be like, for example, a cataract that covers the eye? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

āīTṬddd T īīṁ matġ ¥Iā-Td 1 | cy ||

ā̄araīa ācaf |
nāmūrtena na mūrtena prāvarītuṁ ca śakyate || 75 ||
jñānaṁ cākṣuṣaraśmīnāṁ tathābhāve saraty api |
(Impurity), whether it has a form or not, cannot veil noetic

consciousness (jñāna), which (is formless), even though (the fettered soul)

continues to transmigrate (saraty api). That is so with the rays of vision'
(that can be covered by a veil). (75cd-76ab)
‘(Imnate spiritual) knowledge’ is the nature of the Self, which is

formless, pure consciousness. Nor is it logically possible (yukta) for this kind of
knowledge of the Self (ārmajñāna) to have an obscuring covering (āvaraṇa) due
to anything, be it formless or with form, because that which is formless cannot
cover (and obscure it). But when ‘that is so’ (i.e. something has a form), it can

be covered over (by something else that has a form). The rays of the eyes' or

the sun, for example, are material and so possess a form. Thus, it is possible (for
them to be obscured by) a cataract, clouds and the like, that have form. This is
the intended sense.
Surely (one may argue), what is the need to obstinately determine
whether (what obscures consciousness) is formless or not? That (Impurity) has

come in order to obscure (the soul), and as that (which is obscured) is the

perceiver (jñātṛ), (that which obscures it) must be objective (jñeya). Moreover,

(the soul which is) such (i.e. the perceiver), maintains a state of transcendental
detachment (tāṭasthya) (from it); for such, according to your view, is the

relationship between subject and object. In this way also, it could not veil (and

obscure the soul’s) essential nature (as the perceiver), because (their) state is
(quite) different (bhinnavṛtti). Moreover, because (the soul is) thus (essentially)

pure (nirmala), its knowledge and action is full (and free of all limitations).
Thus (if this is s0), would not everyone be omniscient? He says that:

' MS Ch reads - kriyādikāḥ -- action etc.” for kriyādhikāḥ – ‘more than action’. If we

accept that reading, the meaning would be: ‘action etc. are those powers, they are not
more (and separate from) the nature of consciousness.

'Ś Jayaratha explains that this is because the rays of vision are corporeal, whereas

knowledge is not.

' Concerning the belief that the eyes emit rays by which external objects are perceived,

see above 3/12 and notes.

CHAPTER NINE

q Tā a P TT: fṜ JTS T TrT |1| .oē 1|
ar], ũā. ũ. īd
fš rq |
sa eva ca malo mūrtaḥ kiṁ jñānena na vedyate || 76 ||
sarvageṇa tataḥ sarvaḥ sarvajñatvaṁ na kiṁ bhajet |
That same Impurity has a form (and does not). Why is it not

perceived by consciousness (jñūāna) that is all-pervasive? Thus, why

should not everyone be omniscient? (76cd-77ab)

One should add the (privative) letter ‘a as both coalescing and not

(with the word malo) in the expression malo (a)mūrtaḥ.'' (Consciousness) is

‘all-pervasive’ in the sense that, because it is not obscured by Impurity, it
pervades and knows everything. Thus, because (each soul’s essential) noetic
(jñatva) nature is unconfined, everyone, that is, all individual souls, (would be

omniscient).
Surely, if (someone were to ask that,) it is (commonly) seen that,
because darkness consists solely of the absence of light, it obscures the light
even of something that is formless. Will that not be the case with Impurity also?
(We would reply that) that is also not so. Thus he says:

3J āāāTTYTRĀṬJfĪTTGTTTHITTTY: II /ç 11
yaś ca dhvāntāt prakāśasyāvṛtis tatpratighātibhiḥ || 77 ||
mūrtānāṁ pratighas tejo ʻṇūnāṁ nāmūrta īdr̥śam |
Again, (someone may point out that) light is covered by darkness
(which is formless). (But we say) that this (obscuration) is brought about by

the opposition between the atoms of fire, which have a form, and other
atoms, which are contrary to them, as opposites. (Obscuration understood)
in this way is not formless. (77cd-78ab)

Some are propense (to the view) that darkness is just the absence of
light, others that it is a form which is just darkness (outwardly) projected, that

manifests the absence of light.' Light that continues to be present (avasthita)

can be obscured by this, in this way. Another way is the interruption of the

existence (sthiti) (of the light). (This is possible) because (light) has a form. The
' See below, 13/65.

" In this way, we arrive at two meanings that Jayaratha says

are equally correct. The

first assumes that the two words malo mūrtaḥ are the result of euphonic conjunction of
the word malaḥ and amūrtaḥ, to make malo ‘mirtaḥ, and so means ‘Impurity which is

without formʼ. The second assumes that there is no privative ‘a’ at the beginning of

mūrtaḥ, so malaḥ + mūrtaḥ reṣults in malo mūrtaḥ, which means ‘Impurity which has

formʼ.
' Read -mātram ato hi mārtam for -mātraṁ hi mārtiḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

atoms of darkness, which are contrary to the atoms of light, that (also) have a
form, destroy them. Thus, the two are related to one another as opposites, not as
that which is obscured and what obscures. Thus, this is not the (appropriate)
example here (in this case).
Surely (one may ask), when the insentient is presided over by
consciousness, if it does anything, let that be so; what could be (logically)
wrong (with that) (ko doṣaḥ)? But where does its capacity to obscure
consciousness (come) from? Thus he says:

T Tā-TI-HTTTRĀTATI TG:; ã̄̄H: | l 9¢ .11

na ca cetanam ātmānam asvatantro malaḥ kṣamaḥ || 78 I|

Impurity (is insentient); it is not free (that is, sentient), and (so)
cannot obscure one’s own conscious nature (which is inherently free and

sentient). (78cd-79a)

If (one says that what is insentient can obscure consciousness, and
gives) wine as an example, that is also is not a viable equivalent (samāna) here.
Thusṣ he says:

- T Ṭaā

aafṝrz'-1

-tkkna vācyaṁ ca madyāvṛtinidarśanam 1

The example of the obscuring effect alcohol (has on consciousness)

is not appropriate.” (79b)

An insentient entity, even something like wine, cannot obscure one’s
own consciousness by itself (alone), but (only when it is) sustained by
consciousness. An insentient (entity) would not be able to do anything without
the impulse of consciousness (to act).

Such is your (view) also. Thus he says:

3k ṂyaĨzar%’ šīē: āī īē aad || 9 1|

TTHTGĪTTTI:
JTA: Ṝaī. fkō |

uktaṁ bhavadbhir evetthaṁ jaḍaḥ kartā na hi ṣvayam || 79 ||

svatantrasyeśvarasyaitāḥ śaktayaḥ prerikāḥ kila |

You (yourselves maintain) as much, saying that an insentient entity

is not an agent (independently) by itself. Indeed, (it is) these energies that

' Inebriation affects the vital breath etc., which is presided over by the Self, it does not

obscure the Self.

CHAPTER NINE

belong to the Lord, Who is free, that impel (to knowledge and action).
(79cd-80ab)
It is said that ‘an insentient entity is not capable of engaging in action
(pravṛtti) and desisting from it by itself (independently).” ‘Thus, because the
Lord Himself then makes the fetters cease, he bestows liberation to individual
souls, like a ram bound by a rope (is released from it by its master).”
Then what (happens)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

|| ¢© 11|
mēi q̄ TG g GHGHTWĒGTHĀI
ataḥ karmavipākajñaprabhuśaktibaleritam || 80 ||
madyaṁ sūte madaṁ duḥkhasukhamohaphalātmakam |
Thus, impelled by the strength of the power of the Lord
(prabhuśakti,, who knows (the degree of) the maturity of (the soul’s)
Karma, wine inebriates, resulting in pain, pleasure, and delusion. (80cd-

81ab)

Thus, although insentient, wine and the like obscures one’s own
consciousness by the impulse of the Supreme Lord’s power, and having done

so, is inebriating. However, (it affects the Self) that has assumed a contracted
state, and consists of the vital breath etc., not the (essential) pure consciousness

nature, because, for the aforestated reason, it cannot obscure it.
Surely (one may ask), in this way, would not Impurity also, impelled'
by the power of the Lord who is free, obscure all sentient souls? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

aī Ta TTITIT: || ¢8 1
frīa ifā īrrzi īaēā aaīaā 1
na ceśapreritaḥ puṁso mala āvṛṇuyād yataḥ || 81 II
nirmale puṅsi neśasya prerakatvaṁ tathocitam |
Nor is it (right to say) that Impurity, impelled by the Lord, covers

the soul, because if the soul is (essentially) pure, it is not proper that the
Lord impel (Impurity) in this way (as it would also affect liberated souls).

(81cd-82ab)

Although Impurity here (according to the common Śaiva view) has no
beginning, (even so,) the Lord’s impulse must be applied right from the very

start to (its) binding state (to make it functional),' because an insentient entity
' Insṭead of -preritam eva read -prerita eva.

' Instead of -preraṇamāditaramupayuktam read -preraṇamādita upayuktam.

TANTRĀLOKA

cannot carry out (any) task (kārya) without the support of consciousness. Thus
(the question is), to which (souls) would the Supreme Lord impel Impurity to
bind (them)? Are they the sullied (samala) or unsullied (nirmala) ones? There,
in the first case, His impulse would be useless, because (they are already)

conjoined to Impurity before that. In the second case, it is not possible (for Him

to apply it), as that (would entail the undesired) consequence that it could also
be (directed) towards liberated souls. Thus, it is said:

‘if the soul is pure, it is not appropriate that the Lord impel (Impurity to

affect it).”

On the contrary, as there is no difference in the purity (of their

consciousness), which is full (and perfect) knowledge and action, (both) the
Supreme Lord and individual souls could instigate Impurity in order to block
(nirodhāya) one another. Or else just the individual souls (would do that) to the

Lord (whereas He would not be able to block them), because in relation to a

single (being), the many possess greater power (sāmārthya) (with respect to just

one). As they say:

‘When those who possess conflicting qualities come together, those

who possess the (prevailing) quality are the majority.”

He says that:

Tã frsc#rīa
a ā-q #-- 1. ç. 1

tulye nirmalabhāve ca prerayeyur na te katham || 82 ||

tam īśaṁ prati yuktaṁ yad bhiūyasāṁ syāt sadharmatā |

Again, if both are equally pure, why should (the souls) not be the

ones who impel (Impurity) towards the Lord? For those who possess the

(prevailing) quality are the majority. (82cd-83ab)

Now, concluding this (subject), he continues with the main point.

īV TTTaTT-TT TFJĪṬSṬTTTḤ II é3 1|
tena svarūpasvātantryamātraṁ malavijrmbhitam || 83 ||
nirṇītaṁ vitataṁ caitan mayānyatrety alaṁ punaḥ |
Therefore, (the varied) expansion (vijrmbhita) of Impurity is only

(an expression of) the freedom (inherent in the Lord’s) own nature. 1

have explained (all) this extensively elsewhere, and so let this suffice. (83cd-

84ab)

'“ This line is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/37-38ab.

CHAPTER NINE

‘Elsewhere’ means in the first chapter etc.
The Nature of Impurity Continued
Nor is (the way the nature of Impurity is understood) inconsistent
anywhere. Thus he says:

TGISTGTHJTTTTTITT JĪRARTTAT ||/C

TṚTTTTTṢJ] TTTTĪTRATJTT: || çU, 1

EhEIEktḻē:E: t-ṣṭtutḤI
Ṣ̄ATTaāJTJITTGTT
TĪT WTHT II/¢FE /

malo ʻbhilāṣaś cājñānam avidyā lolikāprathā || 84 1|
bhavadoṣo ʻnuplavaś ca glāniḥ

ahaṁmamãātmatātaṅko māyāśaktir athāvṛtiḥ || 85 ||
doṣabījaṁ paśutvaṁ ca saṁsārāṅkurakāraṇam |
ityādy anvarthasaṁjñābhis tatra tatraiṣa bhaṇyate || 86 ||

"ṛImpurity is given a number of names in various places (in the

scriptures) in accord with its nature. Thus, for example, (it is called) desire

(abhilāṣa),” ignorance, nescience, craving (lolikā), absence of insight

(aprathā), the defect of phenomenal existence (bhavadoṣa), the boat of the
soul (anuplava), lassitude (glāni), aridity (śoṣa), delusion (vimūḍhatā), the
Śee above, 1/23 ff. and below, 13/41cd ff. Abhinava is also referring to MVV 2/157-

186, translated above in note 9,183.
' Lines 84cd to 88ab are Abhinava’s summary and brief didactic etymology of the
terms for Impurity.
' Concerning desire (abhilāṣa), see note 13,65, with reference to SYTu 4/105.

See below, 9/143-144ab.

! See above, note to 1/I81cd-182ab and below, 12/20cd. The Stanzas on Vibration
teach:

‘Lassitude ravages the body, and this arises from ignorance, but if it is
eliminated by an expansion of consciousness (unmesa), how can (ignorance), deprived

of its cause, continue to exist? The expansion of consciousness that takes place when
one is engaged in a single thought should be known as the source from whence another
arises. One should experience that for oneself.’ SpKā 40-41
From a different perspective Abhinava explains:

‘Ignorant that (there) in the Heart (one) savours within oneself the joy of

supreme wealth, immersed as it is in the body, the vital breath and the rest, it is afflicted
by a lassitude (glāni) without equal. (But) if the supreme goddess who delights in giving
birth to all the universe (is within our hearts), may she play (there in all her) plenitude,
(blazing forth) as does an offering to the fire (havi).’ PTv p. 111

TANTRĀLOKA

state of ‘I’ and ‘mine’, fear, the power of Māyā, the veil, the seed of defects,
the fettered state (paśutva), and the cause of the sprout of transmigratory

existence (saṅsāra). (84cd-86)

Surely (one may ask), which one (of these terms for Impurity) accords
with its nature? With this doubt in mind, he says:

fzṝ] af vaf aāī gaī ũa--fx ya=m: |
TaTRTŪT] ÑGRTTISTI] ātī āTJaKIT II ZS 1I
asmin sati bhavati bhavo duṣṭo bhedātmaneti bhavadoṣaḥ |
mañcavad asmin duḥkhasroto ʻṇīn vahati yat plavas tena || 87 ||

It is called

‘the defect of phenomenal existence’

because

phenomenal existence is due to its existence. It is duality (bheda) and so is
defective. (Again, Impurity is called) a ‘boat’ because, like a raft, it
transports the souls within this current of suffering. (87)

Surely (one may ask), why has he not explained how all (these terms for
Impurity) accord with its nature?

JTH=] TTRTT: JT-aTGTTÁṬGTĒTT]|

Śeṣās tu sugamarūpāḥ śabdās tatrārtham ūhayed ucitam |

The forms of the remaining (names) are easy to understand and

their proper meaning can (easily) be inferred (for oneself). (88ab)

Thuṣ, for fear of making the book too long, we have not explained that.
Thus, one can infer it for oneself.

Concerning Karma”
This expression is drawn from MV 1/23d. See above, note 9,167 for cross-references.

Karman is discussed at length in MVV 2/187-206, translated here. MVV 2/157-186
is translated above in note 9,183. Abhinava starts out by talking about the nature of
Karma and how it ‘matures’, and then how it is the Lord who ultimately brings it about

in MVV 2/202ff. Cf. below TĀ 9/90cd-141, where Karman is discussed in relation to

the Deconditioned by Dissolution (Pralayākalā) and Deconditioned by Knowledge
(Vijñānakalā) subjects.

In the previous part of this discussion concerning Impurity, Karma and Maāyā

Abhinava concluded that, in order to explain how the consciousness of individual souls

can be obscured, we must admit Śiva Himself does it, for He alone is free to do
anything, and so makes this possible also (see above, note 9,183). The discussion now
turns to Karma as another possible alternative reason. Thus, Abhinava begins:
yac ca karmāpīi nāmeṣṭaṁ tat tāvat pravicāryatām |
tathāhi karmasaṁbandhe sthite ‘pi katham īdṛśaḥ || 187 II
mahāpralaya ucyeta mahāsṛṣṭiś ca vā katham |

CHAPTER NINE

nanv īśvarecchayā tatra karmāyāti niruddhatām || 188 I|
karmaudāsīnyayogena karmāntaram apekṣatām |
īśvaro 'tha na vā pūrvapakṣe saṁbhava eva ca || 189 ||

na saṁbhave sa kutrāṁśe caiśvaryam adhigacchatu |

karmataḥ sarvam evedaṁ syāt sṛṣṭipralayādikam || 190 |
‘If Karma is also believed (to account for the soul’s fettered state), so should
one enquire into that? Again, when there is a relationship (between the soul and) Karma,

then how is the Great Destruction said to be, or how is the Great Creation?

Surely, there (during the Great Destruction), Karma is blocked by the Lord’s

will. In a state of detachment from Karma, does the Lord require other Karma or not?

The prima facie view is that that is possible (saibhava); if that were not possible (and
so He is not in need of anything else), in what aspect (avitśa) would one accept (that the
Lord’s) lordship (to act freely) is found? (If there were none, then) all of this creation
and destruction would be (totally) dependent upon Karma (and the Lord would become
redundant). (187-190)
atha karmānapekṣo vā karmaṇnāṁ rodhanaṁ tataḥ |
sadā niruddhāny eveśaḥ karmāṇi kurutāṁ vibhuḥ l| 191 ||
nanu teṣāṁ ṣvabhāvo ‘yaṁ yad bhogaprasavātmatā |

kathaṁ ṣvabhãva eṣa syād yaḥ paropãdhitãṁ gataḥ || 192 |

anapekṣo hi bhāvānāṁ svabhāvaḥ karmaṇāṅṁ tataḥ |
īśaiṣaṇānapekṣāṇāṁ yad rūpaṁ tat svakaṁ vapuḥ l|| 193 II
kiṁ ca pralayalīnãni karmãṇi sthitibhãñjy api |
kiṁ prabodhayate devaḥ kiṁ nu dṛ(sṛ)ṣṭair hi taiḥ kr̥tam || 194 |
malapākāya cet so ‘pi sudūram apasāritaḥ |

kiṁ cātmā vibhur evaiṣa sa kiṅ nāma karoti hi |l 195 ||
iti pūrvaṁ vicāraś ca viṣṭareṇa prapañcitaḥ |

Or else, if (the Lord) does not depend upon Karma, then Karma would be
blocked (for it would serve no purpose, and anyway) this all-pervasive Lord would
always block Karmas. (But) surely, it is their nature to generate the experience which is
the consequence of Karma (bhoga). How could it be (their) nature if it is conditioned by
something else? (191-192)

The innate nature of existing things and Karmas does not depend on (anything

else). Thus, the nature of things that are independent of the Lord’s will is their own

innate nature (vapus). Does the deity awaken the Karmas that have dissolved away in

the course of (universal) destruction, even if that involves the destruction of their state
(and nature as Karmas, as being in that state)? Again, what do they do when they are
emitted (again when a new creation begins)? (If you say this process) serves to mature
Impurity, that (possibility) has been removed to a great distance (for then Karma would
ultimately destroy itself). Moreover, the Self is all-pervasive, so what does this (Karma)
do (to it)? Thus, (as it is important), the deliberation (on the problem of the existence of

Karma) has been considered extensively at the beginning (of this discussion). (193196ab)

mrṛddaṇḍacakrasūtreṣu dhīmān karteśvaraḥ sthitaḥ || 196 ||
kumbhakārasya kartṛtvaṁ kutrāṁśe nv avatiṣṭhatām |
akṛṣṭapacyabījeṣu prarohaprasavādike || 197 ||
pūrvaṁ karotu hetutvaṁ na sasyeṣv iti ko nayaḥ |

idaṁ duṣkṛtam etac ca sukṛtaṁ phalabhedataḥ l 198 ||
iti yat pravibhaktaṁ kiṁ tatrāsyecchaiva jrṛmbhate |

TANTRĀLOKA

svatantro yady asau kasmāt parapīḍākarīṁ nijām || 199 ||
icchāṁ gṛhṇāti yo nityaṁ karuṇārasanirbharaḥ |
(Abhinava begins by establishing that Karma exists.) The Lord, who is an

intelligent agent, is present amongst the clay, the stick, (the potter’s) wheel and the rope

Now, in which aspect should the potter’s agency be present? If seeds have not been
sown previously, then how could that serve as a prior cause of their sprouting and
growth etc., and (the production of) crops? What doctrine is this (that maintains that
effects are produced solely by material causes)? (196cd-198ab)

‘This is done well” and ‘that is done badly° are distinguished according to the
difference in the consequences (of these actions). Is it (just the Lord’s) will that unfolds
there (surely not)? If he is free (and independent), then why does he, who is always full

of the sentiment (rasa) of compassion, assume as his own the desire to cause others
suffering (as happens when someone acts badly)? (198cd-200ab)

nanu ṣyabhāvāt tat tādṛkkarmātaḥ phaladāyakam || 200 |I

prāyaścittādikaraṇāc chāmyec ceti vicārayaṉ |

devas tathaiva tanute śāstraṁ citropadeśakam || 201 |
śaivaṁ svabhāva etādṛk karmaṇām iti ko nayaḥ |

bījam aṅkurasaṁsūtiṣyabhāvam iti mādṛśaḥ l| 202 ||

pūrvavṛddhavyavahr̥ter vijñātuṁ prabhaviṣṇavaḥ |
īśvaras tu nijecchāto vinā na hi kadācana || 203 ||

avalokitavān karmaphalavaicitryacāturīm |

Surely (the opponent may say that) that kind of Karma thus gives rise (to its
corresponding) consequence by its (very) nature (to do so). Or else, reflecting (on what

he has done wrong, one who has made bad Karma) remedies (its consequences) by
means of rites of atonement and the like. Deity accordingly lays out the scripture that
imparts (that) varied Śaiva teaching. Such is the nature of Karma. What doctrine is this?

(200cd-202ab)

It is the nature ofa seed to give birth to a sprout. It is the Lord (īśvara), who is
like me, who is capable of knowing that, on the basis of (the knowledge of) the
development of what was done previously. Nor could he ever perceive the skilful and
wonderful diversity of the consequences of Karma without his own will (to do s0).
(202cd-204ab)
tasmād devaḥ sarvakartā yadi syāt
kartāraḥ sṣyur nātmmavargāḥ kathaṁcit |

no kartāras te ‘pi cet karmavandhyān
uddiśyainān sarvakartā na devaḥ || 204 ||

itthaṁ ca bhedadṛṣṭyedaṁ karma nāma na mu(yu)ktimat |
etāvān atra saṅkṣopo (> saṅkṣepo) vyāso ‘nyatra tu darśitaḥ || 205 ||
saṁvedanātmako deva ekas tasmāt svataḥ khalu |
sarvakartā sa vaicitryāt karmayogīti bhaṇyate || 206 ||

Therefore, if deity is the agent of all things, then the (individual) souls would

not be agents in any way. And if they are not agents, then deity would not be the agent
of everything, with reference to those who are devoid of Karma (because they are not
agents). (204)
In this way, from the point of view of duality, Karma is not logically possible.
Such is a concise (presentation) here (with regards to that), an extensive one has been
presented elsewhere. (The point is that) deity is of the nature of cognitive awareness

CHAPTER NINE

Surely (one may ask), how (can it be said that the meaning of the
expression): ‘the cause of the sprout of transmigratory existence’

(saṁsārāṅkurakāraṇam) is easily understood to be in accord with nature (of

Impurity)? Should we understand it to mean that transmigratory existence itself
is the sprout, or that (Impurity) is the cause of the sprout of transmigratory
existence?”™ Now its turn has come, he praises the Impurity of Karma, in the
course of remedying this doubt, explaining first of all the appropriateness (of
this matter) to the object of enquiry, which is the topic (at hand).

TTTṀTTTĪ
S| TTIX 3TĪ || ¢¢ ||
Jqcltṝ
rqafa asĩ a 1
saṁsārakāraṇaṁ karma saṁsārāṅkura ucyate || 88 II
caturdaśavidhaṁ bhūtavaicitryaṁ karmajaṁ yataḥ |

Karma, the cause of transmigratory existence, is said to be the
sprout of transmigratory existence” because the fourteen kinds of the
wonderful variety of living beings are born of Karma. (88cd-89ab)
The second half (of this verse states) the reason why Karma is the cause

of transmigratory existence. Thus, transmigratory existence is the Impurity of
Maāyā, which is described as follows:

‘Itis said that the body, world and form are (the Impurity) of Māyā.’”

The sprout (of the impurity of Māyā) is like a sprout, the cause of which

is the Impurity of Karma, and its cause is the (essential Impurity of) the
individual soul (āṇavamala). As is said:

(saṅvedana) and so is (just) one indeed. It is the agent of everything that, because of
(this) wonderful diversity (vaicitrya), is said to be associated with Karma.” (205-206)

MVV 2/187-206.
Ṁ MV 1/23d. Quoted above in 1/23ab and elsewhere. See note there.

saṁsāra eva aṅkuraḥ.

ṣaṁsārasyā”kuras tasya kāraṇam.
Abhinava iīs referring here to

MV

1/23cd:

malam

ajñānam

icchanti

saṁsārāṅkurakāraṇam || ‘(The wise) prefer (the view that) impurity is ignorance (not a
material substance as the dualists maintain). It is the cause of (Karma, which is) the
sprout of transmigratory existence (saṁsāra).' This line is quoted verbatim above as

1/23cd and below as 9/120cd, in TĀv ad 9/99cd-100ab, and paraphrased in 13/49cd.

MV may be elaborating on Svārṁbhu. 1/17c: malaṁ saṁsārakāraṇam In the MV, this

line comes just after a description of the Vijñāna- and Pralayakevala.

See above, 8/119-120. The fourteen kinds of living beings are listed in MV 5/7-9,
quoted above in note 8,1009.

SVṬ 4/105a ad 13/49. SVT reads: śarīrabhuvanākārā māyīyāḥ parikītītāḥ | `It is said

that the bodies, worlds and (phenomenal) forms are (the Impurities of) Māyā’. The

reading here is: śarīrabhuvanākāraṁ māyīyaṁ parikītītam | The same reading is found
below ad 13/49, and so has been retained. The next line says, ‘Karma is the cause of
worldly experience (bhoga), whereas Impurity here is craving.”

TANTRĀLOKA

‘(the soul’s essential) Impurity (/nala) and Karma are the instrumental
cause (nimitta), the effect (of which) follows after.’

‘The instigating cause (of Karma) is called craving (abhilāṣa). . . .
As (this) wonderfully various transmigratory existence arises in this

way due to Karma, everybody exerts (themselves) to remove that. Thus, he
says:

3T TJ ūTGRJTTTIIRTTTĪTRTĪT ||/¢8 11

ata eva sāṁkhyayogapāñcarātrādiśāsane || 89 ||
ahaṁmameti santyāgo naiṣkarmyāyopadiśyate |
Therefore, according to the teaching of the Sāṁkhya, Yoga,

Pāñcarātra and others, the renunciation of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ leads to
freedom from Karma. (89cd-90ab)
‘The teaching’ means the scriptures. This is what is taught there,
namely, one whose mind is fixed in the Supreme Brahman, whatever he does,
considering that ‘I am not doing anything?, abandons (his) sense of self
(ahantā). And, as there is no attachment there (in that case,) he also does not

obstinately cling to the sense of ‘mine’, (reflecting that,) “by having done this,

nothing belongs to me.” (Thus,) he may achieve freedom from Karma, so that he

may not (be subject to) transmigratory existence, which has this as its sole
(direct) instrumental cause. As is sung (in the Bhagavadgīta):

‘“Actions (karman) do not stain me, nor do I have desire for (their)

fruits.” He who knows me in this way is not bound by (his) actions.’

‘Having abandoned attachment to the fruits of (his) actions, always
content and free of (all outer) support, although he is engaged in action, (it is as
if) he does nothing at all.’

1 ṢVṬ 3/176ab. Also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/23 and ad 5/106 (105cd-106ab), and
below ad 13/49.

" SVT 3/177a. Also quoted above in TĀv ad 9/62 and in the first half of a line quoted
ad 13/83-84, and ad 13/110cd-11 1ab.
Note that as Abhinava goes on to talk about the condition of the Vijñānakevalin, it is

clear that this is the level that the followers of the Sāṁkhya and the like attain. Cf.
above 4/230, where Vaiṣṇavas, Vedāntins and others like them who conjoin with
supreme Prakṛti attain the level of Pralayākala, which is below that.

Karman is discussed at length in MVV 2/187-206; see above, note 9,203 for a

translation. Cf. TĀ 9/90cd-146.
This reference is drawn from BhG 4/14, the following three are ibid. 4/20, 5/7-8ab
and 5/10, respectively.

CHAPTER NINE

“The pure soul who has known the Self, conquered the senses, and is
intent on (the practice of) Yoga (yogayukta), he, the Self of all living beings

(sarvabhūtātman), although he acts, is not stained (by his actions). (He,) the

knower of reality, (always) engaged (in Yoga,) considers: ‘I do nothing at all.’”

‘He who, taking up actions (whilst established) in the Brahman, having

abandoned attachment, is not stained by sin, like the lotus leaf (that is not
wetted) by water.
Surely (one may ask), if that is so, is he not a liberated (soul)? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

The Karma of the Seven Perceivers

frṣ+ī fē fer romosaā--āt 1| <o 1|

ṣza Taa; |

niṣkarmā hi sthite mūḷamale ‘py ajñānanāmani || 90 ||
vaicitryakāraṇābhāvān nordhvaṁ sarati nāpy adhaḥ |
kevalaṁ pārimityena śivābhedam asaṁspṛśan || 91 I|
vijñānakevalī proktaḥ śuddhacinmātrasaṁsthitaḥ |
Although (the Vijñānakevalin) is devoid of Karma, he does not

move (sarati) upwards (to higher levels) because ignorance, the root

impurity (i.e. āṉavamala), persists, nor downwards (to the lower ones)
because (Karma, which is) the cause of the variety (of worldly experience),
is lacking. Thus, due to his (conditioned) limited nature (pārimitya), heis

isolated (in consciousness), without coming in touch with Śiva’s unity.
(Thus,) the ‘one whois isolatedin consciousness alone’ (vijñānakevalin)is

said to be well-established in pure consciousness alone (but is devoid of
freedom). (90cd-92ab)

‘Althoughʼ’ is not in the correct (prose) order with respect to the
meaning. Thus, (what is meant is,) although ‘(the Vijñānakevalin) is free of
Karma’, he does not transmigrate (saṁsarati) ‘upwards’; that is, to the Pure
Path, because of the abiding presence (avasthāna) of the root Impurity of

This subject is treated up to verse 97ab. It is an important subject for Abhinava, who

returns to it repeatedly throughout the Tantrāloka. See above, 1/77-80 (78-81), 4/2932ab (the perceivers that correspond to levels of liberation reached by other schools). He

deals with the subject extensively and in detail in Chapter Ten, setting out the main

points in 10/3-18, and going on to discuss associated matters (such as the nature of

perceptibility in 10/19-78ab).
Gnoli suggests the emendation kevalaḥ for kevalaṁ. But if we maintain the reading
in the printed edition, the meaning would be ‘only because of (his) conditioned nature’.

TANTRĀLOKA

Individuality (āṇava) called ‘ignorance’. Nor (does he move) ‘downwards’ to

the impure one because ‘the cause of variety’, that is, the impurity of Karma,
‘is lacking’. He is ‘isolatedʼ.
‘Those (souls) who are Isolated in Consciousness are above Māyā and

below Pure Knowledge.”

According to this teaching (yukti), although his sole nature is pure

consciousness (bodha), he resides between the pure and impure path because of
the loss (of his) freedom, that is, because of the presence of contraction of his

own nature, brought about by a trace of the defilement of individuation

(āṇavamala). ʻDuē to his (conditioned) limited nature (pārimitya), he has not

attained oneness with the Supreme Lord who is consciousness, that is not
disassociated from (its) freedom. (As such,) he is (a soul) who is Isolated in
Consciousness Alone (vijñānakevalin); that is, his nature is consciousness alone

(kevala) which is devoid of freedom. He is everywhere ‘proclaimed’ (to be
such). As is said:

‘Those who, even though their nature is pure consciousness, do not
possess the most excellent agency (of consciousness), and their own nature is
fashioned separately by the Lord (bhartr) due to the passing away of their
agency, and who, although their nature as consciousness etc. is one, are separate
from one another by the difference (bheda) in the Lord’s will that they be such,

are those who are Isolated in Consciousness Alone (vijñānakevala).

” Somadeva (2004: 170) points out that, according to the MV (2/1-9), the Pralayākala

are located in Māyā, and the Vijñānākala in the interstice between the pure and impure
universe. Abhinava, however, locates the latter in Mahāmāyātattva, which is an

independent principle between Māyā and Śuddhavidyā. He cites no authority for this.
Possibly because there is none, he resorts to reasoned argument. Thus, he writes in the
PTv (p. 117-8):

‘There must necessarily exist another principle above the principle of Māyā

and below the principle of (Śuddha) Vidyā, wherein abide the Vijñānākalas. As has

of) Pure Knowledge.” If (the level of) Mahāmāyā did not exist, then since the level of
Maāyā is occupied by the Pralayākalas, and the (principle beginning with Śuddha) Vidyā
by the Mantra-regents etc., what then would be the level of the Vijñānākalas?’
(translation by Somadeva (2004: 170-171))

The Vijñāṇakevalins cannot

ascend, because Āṇava Mala, in the form of Ignorance,

still persists, but neither do they transmigrate down to the Impure level below Maāyā, for
there is no Karma Mala anymore. Thus, they reside between the Pure and Impure levels
(i.e. Śuddha Vidyā and Māyā) so that, although their nature is pure consciousness, they
have no freedom. They are of finite size because their innate nature is contracted down

to finite dimensions, due to the Impurity of Individuality, to which they are still

They are called Vijñānakevalin, as they are endowed with consciousness (vij

alone, but not freedom. See below 13/275cd-276ab. For an extensive, detailed
presentation of the Seven Perceivers (saptapramātṛ), see Chapter Ten; for a basic
description, see 10/3-18.

CHAPTER NINE

Surely (one may ask), is he always out of touch with Śiva’s unity, or
not? With this doubt in mind, he says:

fraāīē mrqaq |1 22 1
T-T-ĀYITTTRTI

sa puṇaḥ śāṁbhavecchātaḥ śivābhedaṁ parāmṛśan || 92 ||
kramān mantreśatannetṛrūpo yāti śivātmatām |

(When,) on the contrary (punaḥ), by Śiva’s will, contemplating (his)

oneness with Śiva, he progressively assumes the form of the Mantra
gercaivers, (then their) Lords, and (then their) Lords, he (finally) attains

iva’s nature. (92cd-93ab)

The sense is that ‘progressively°, or even instantaneously, according to

the degree of the excellence of his reflective awareness (of his) oneness with

Śiva, that is, due to its (intensity and) stability (dārdhya), he becomes a
Mantramaheśvara. As is said:
‘At the beginning of the creation of the universe, desiring to emit (it),
He awakened by His own will the eight souls who are Isolated in Consciousness

Alone (vijñānakevalin).

The ‘Lordsʼ are the Lords of Mantra, and their lords are the
Mantramaheśvaras.
the Impurity of Individuality (āṇavamala), and that is the cause of (the Impurity
of) Karma. Why should it not generate its own product, and so be repeatedly
subjected to transmigration? How is it that he says that, on the contrary, by
(rising) progressively as a Mantra (perceiver) and the rest (of them on the pure
level), he attains Śiva’s nature? Summarizing this question, he voices another
(in relation to it), and addresses it.

|| 3 1|

7 gd aīarīq

This verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 13/275cd-276ab. Preferring to ignore

Jayaratha’s interpretation of this verse, Somadeva (2004: 171) translates this last

sentence (i.e. kramān mantreśatannetṛrūpo yāti śivātmatām) differently: ‘“By the will of
Śambhu he may experience non-difference from Śiva and in due order (in accord with

the intensity of his experience) he attains identity with Śiva in the form of a Mantra-

regent [mantreśvara] or a Sovereign of the Mantra-regents [Mantramaheśvara].” But this
translation
may
not
be
correct.
Cf.
below
9/96cd:

MV 1/18cd-19ab. This verse is paraphrased below in 10/139cd-140ab and quoted in
full in the commentary there.

TANTRĀLOKA

ī f: mī āarāō fxztāī ākzrq 1) Q 1

nanu kāraṇam etasya karmaṇaś cen malaḥ katham || 93 ||
maivaṁ sa hi malo jñānākale didhvaṁsiṣuḥ katham || 94 |I
hetuḥ syād dhvaṁsamānatvaṁ svātantryād eva codbhavet |
But surely (one may ask), if the cause of this Karma is the Impurity
(of Individuality), why should it not generate the series of Karmas in the
case of the subject who possesses consciousness alone (vijñānākala) also?
(We reply:) not so! How can the Impurity of the (Vi)jñānākala, which is
about to be destroyed (by itself), be a cause (of further Karma)?

(Moreover,) the process of its (self-)destruction proceeds (thereafter
spontaneously and) independently. (93cd-95ab)
(He says that) ‘(the impurity of the (Vi)jñānākala is) about to be
destroyed, (and its (self-ydestruction proceeds (thereafter spontaneously
and) independently), because (the individual soul cannot do that by itself), in
accord with the teaching (concerning the Impurity of Individuality to which it is

subject, that it): is also the lack of consciousness of (its innate) freedom.’ (It

is about to be destroyed) because the duality which is the false arrogation of
subjectivity (ahaṁbhāva) to the body and the rest (of the psychophysical

organism) has inwardly ceased. Thus, because it is incapable of giving rise to its

own effect, he says ‘how can it be a cause (of further Karma)?’ On the contrary
(it can indeed). By virtue of its own excellence, which is its propensity to
destruction, the process of its destruction or its subsequent destruction itself
may arise. For it is not so that a seed intent on perishing will germinate once
more. And when it is in the process of perishing, or when it has perished, it is
not possible to expect anything else (from it), precisely because it is intent on
perishing.
It is with this same intention that the sequence beginning with

Vijñānākala (Consciousness Deconditioned) (perceivers) has been conceived
everywhere (in the scriptures). Thus he says:

fc-afqṛdqnmrazcṁnzārg
fsrṝ=a 11 2.u 1

IRHTī; GTTTTJTTTTJ]
TTJHĪTJT ; |
ftīāTTT-PBT-TITĀTPIĪTRTĒTĪ |I ē /1

ĪP 3/2/4d. The full definition of the nature of the Impurity of Individuality

(āṇavamala) īs: As it conceals one’s own nature, this is the soul’s (essential) Impurity
(āṇavamala). t is two-fold (as) the loss of the freedom of (its innate) consciousness and
so too (along with it) the lack of consciousness of (its innate) freedom.” Quoted in full

above in TĀv ad 1/23, 5/106 (5/105cd-106ab) and 9/62.

These perceivers are called both Vijñānākala – Consciousness Deconditioned and
Vijñānakevalin – Iṣolated in Consciousness Alone.

CHAPTER NINE

didhvaṁsiṣudhvyaṁsamānadhvastākhyāsu tisṛṣv atha || 95 |I
daśāsv antaḥkṛtāvasthāntarāsu svakramasthiteḥ |
The Vijñānākala (Consciousness Deconditioned) perceivers,
Mantras, Lords of Mantras, the Great Lords of Mantras, and (Śiva), the
First, are conceived to exist (because they) correspond to the three
(principal) stages of the expected (impending) destruction (of the Impurity

of Individuality)
(didhvaṁsṣiṣu), the process of its destruction
(dhvaṁsamāna), and (fully) destroyed (dhvasta). The (two) intermediate

ones are contained within them in accord with their own sequential order.
(95cd-96)

The intermediate stages are a) somewhat in the process of destruction

(kiṁciddhvaṁsamānatva), and b) somewhat destroyed (kiṁciddhvastatva). The

reason for their inclusion (amongst the three main stages) is because they are ‘in

accord with their sequential order°’. The point is that the stages that follow

after the expected (impending) destruction (of Impurity), namely, (the actual)
process of its destruction (dhvaṁsamāna) or the state when it is (fully)
destroyed, do not arise all of a sudden without a break. Thus the nature of the
conceived to be in these five stages, corresponding respectively (to Mantras),
Lords of Mantras, the Great Lords of Mantras, and ‘the First (ādi)ʼ, that is,

Śiva, (Whose existence) is established right from the start (ādisiddha);

otherwise (if it were not), the Lords of Mantras and the rest could not be

conceived (to exist) in this way. Thus, because of the difference in their

condition in this way, the (states of) deep sleep and the Fourth (in which they
are) is of many forms. The meaning (of these lines) has thus been established.

Thusṣ he says:

Five progressively more pure perceivers correspond to the five stages of the

destruction of the Impurity of individuality. These are: 1) Vijñānākala: the expected
(impending) destruction (of Impurity) (didhvaṁṣiṣu), 2) Mantra: somewhat in the
process of destruction (kiṅciddhvaṁsamānatva). 3) Mantreśa: in the process of
destruction (dhvaṅsamāna). 4) Mahāmantreśa: somewhat destroyed (kirṁciddhvastatva)

and 5) Śiva: (fully) destroyed (dhvasta).

Cf. ĪP 1/1/I: “What sentient being can disprove or prove (the existence) of

Maheśvara, who is the agent and knower within himself, who is proved (to exist) right
at the start (as his own nature)?
The inherent and ultimate nature of each sentient being is the self-luminous
Light of consciousness, which is present within them as the agent and knower. With

nothing objective to distinguish it, it is one and the same in all sentient beings and even
Śiva Himself. Thus, Śiva cannot be disproved to exist, for anyone who denies Siva

exists would be denying his own existence. For the same reason, no proof need be

advanced to prove His existence, as the very act of doing so, right from the start,
establishes his existence as that of the one who seeks to do so.
Read na tadīśādikalpanety eva for tadīśādikalpanety eva.

TANTRĀLOKA

īāā gd qã d aeaqd agaaī |
tataś ca supte turye ca vakṣyate bahubhedatā |

It is for this reason that, as we shall explain later,® there are many

subdivisions in the states of deep sleep and the Fourth. (97ab)

Therefore, it is well said that the (impending) destruction of the root
Impurity is not an instrumental cause of Karma.
He says that:

The Nature of Karma”

āī: TāT-īīTeaTī-̄r̥īadāTtka: 1| Q. 11

ataḥ pradhvaṁsanaunmukhyakhilībhīūtasvaśaktikaḥ || 97 ||
karmaṇo hetutām etu malaḥ katham ivocyatām |

Thus, pray tell, once its power has been rendered into a (mere)

residue (khilībhūta) by its incipient destruction, how can Impurity (i.e.

āṇavamala) become a cause of Karma? (97cd-98ab)

The point is that if, on the contrary, the power (of Impurity) is not
destroyed, it would again become the cause of Karma, (which is not the case if
its power is) ‘rendered into a (mere) residue (khilībhūta)’. And this has been

said having accepted that that is so. (Moreover,) in actual fact, (fundamental)
Impurity does not bring this about. Thus he says:

fē a aiīq

noraīā: ē fṇarcv5] || <.¢ ||

kūṁ ca karmāpi na malād yataḥ karma kriyātmakam || 98 II
kriyā ca kartṛtārūpāt svātantryāṉ na punar malāt |
Moreover, Karma also is not (in itself) due to Impurity, because

Karma is action, and the cause of action is certainly not Impurity, but the
freedom (of the subject), which is agency. (98cd-99ab)
See below, 10/227cd ff.

what sense are they so? To answer this question, Abhinava now embarks on a
discussion about the nature of Karma in general and in this context in particular. It
extends from 97cd to 146. This is followed by an exposition of the nature of Māyā up to

verse 154ab and 164cd-166ab.

CHAPTER NĪNE

The meaning is that ‘Impurity’ is not an agent and it is not free (to act).
The relationship between cause and effect is, as was established before, that
between the agent and the deed.
Surely, if that is so, how is it that it is said: “(The wise) prefer (the view

that) Impurity is ignorance (not a material substance as the dualists maintain). Is
it the cause of (Karma which is) the sprout of transmigratory existence

(saṅsāra)’? With this doubt in mind, he says:

aI TT-GA GĀIPĒTF@GGTĪT
āGBHT ||/8¢ 1I

fāaī āī ā īgrṝa fa--- Ta a. |

yā tv asya karmaṇaś citraphaladatvena karmatā || 99 |
prasiddhā sā na saṅkocaṁ vinātmani malaś ca saḥ |
The Karmic state (of the soul) is well known (to all) because it gives

rise to the various consequences of its Karma, and that (never occurs)

without the contraction (of consciousness) within the soul, which is (the
soul’s fundamental) Impurity. (99cd-100ab)
That is (the soul’s) Karmic state ‘because it gives rise to the various

consequences (of Karma)’. Without the (prior) contraction (of the soul’s

consciousness), it is incapable of giving (rise to its) particular consequences.

(That) contracted state itself is (the soul’s fundamental) Impurity, and so is

(only) figuratively (said to be) its cause. The soul who experiences the

consequences of Karma (bhoktṛ) is in a contracted state (of consciousness) and

considers within himself the diverse auspicious and inauspicious consequences
(of Karma) to be what he must experience. It is due to this that his condition is
various as a deity, human being and so on.
He says that:

[EīzzṚTH:_AEEIREPTCEIĒÉT-EFĪHTEYYII
{Fráraā
rã ta zafzṛfṝ: |
vicitraṁ hi phalaṁ bhinnaṁ bhogyatvenābhimanyate || 100 |l
bhoktaryātmani teneyaṁ bhedarīūpā vyavasthitiḥ |
The subject who experiences the various and diverse consequences

(of Karma) considers within himself that this is what he must experience.
This state of duality is due to this. (100cd-101ab)

Thuṣ, Impurity is not a cause, material or auxiliary, of (the soulʼs) own
good fortune (saṁpatti) (or otherwise); rather, it just lends a hand to the
implementation of the effect (kāryakaraṇa) (of the soul’s Karma). Thus he says:

MV 1/23cd, quoted above 1/23 and below 9/120cd. and 9/98cd-99ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

TITTJTrJT TTI: GṜ̄I TS. |
iti svakāryaprasave sahakāritvam āśrayan || 101 ||

sāmarthyavyañjakatvena karmaṇaḥ kāraṇaṁ malaḥ |
(Karma) takes its support (from Impurity) as an attendant cause, in
order to give rise to its effects, (and so) Impurity (can be said to be) the
cause of Karma as that which makes its power (to bestow its fruits)

manifest. (101cd-102ab)

The sense is that, without (the soul’s) contracted state, (Karma’s)

limited power to give rise to its various consequences is not made manifest.

Surely (an opponent may object that) in this way the Consciousness

Impurity associated with the contracted state (of their) freedom. Thus, this
would contradict the (view held) there that the Consciousness Deconditioned
(perceiver) is conjoined to (just) one Impurity (i.e. āṉṇavamala). Rather, it is

taught that the Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver) (pralayākala) is conjoined

with (the Impurity of) Karma (as well as āṇavamala), and so would that not

entail the (undesirable) consequence that (it is a Dissolution Deconditioned
(perceiver)? He voices this doubt:

īã āīHqGRTTTHGTATṬ
fkā: #eTT 1|| 02 1

īa dgmṁ ātxī ārgaṝ: |
nanv evaṁ karmasadbhāvān malasyāpi sthiteḥ katham || 102 ||
vijñānākalatā tasya saṅkoco hy asti tādṛśaḥ |
(An opponent may object that,) if in this way both (fundamental)

Impurity and the essential nature of Karma persist, then in what sense can
perceiver)? (Surely,) a similar contraction of consciousness persists (in him,
as that of the lower subjects still under the sway of Karma). (102cd-103ab)

In what sense can one say that (the Consciousness Deconditioned

perceiver) is conjoined to two (types of) Impurity? (The opponent) says that

“((surely) a similar (contraction of consciousness persists (in him as is that
of the lower subject still under the sway of Karma)).’ Thus, as before (on the
previous lower level), he is fit to manifest the capacity of Karma (to bestows its

fruits), as is proper to the state of (the lower perceivers, that is,) the Dissolution
Deconditioned (Pralayākala) and the rest (i.e. the Sakala perceivers below).

He responds to that (objection).

CHAPTER NINE

arāgīṣaiī Hṛd7zī a© || g03

maivam adhvastasaṅkoco ‘py asau bhāvanayā dṛḍham || 103 1
nāhaṁ karteti manvānaḥ karmasaṁskāram ujjhati |
(We reply that this is) not so, (because) even though the contracted
state of (his consciousness) has not been eliminated, by the intense (practice
of) contemplation (bhāvanā), he cultivates the notion that he is not an agent

(of any action) and abandons the latent impressions of Karma. (103cd104ab)

The ‘(practice of) contemplation (bhāvanā) is the renunciation etc. of

(notions of) ‘I’ and ‘mine’. Thus, because of his inactive state (naiṣkarmya),
he is not conjoined to the Impurity of Karma, and so (his) state is that of a
Consciousness Deconditioned (perceiver).

Surely (one may ask), when the latent impressions (of past Karma)
cease, there would be no assessment (anusaṁdhāna) of ‘prior’ (action) and (its)
‘subsequent’ (consequence), and so would that (not entail) that he would not be

a perceiver? With this doubt in mind, he says:

q TTAN.. WIAG ] TTāUGRVĪ|
phaliṣyatīdaṁ karmeti yā dṛḍhā vṛttir ātmani l/ 104 ||
sa saṁskāraḥ phalāyeha na tu smaraṇakāraṇam |
The (latent Karmic) impression that serves to bear fruit here (in
this world) is the firm sense (vṛtti) that one has within oneself that ‘this
Karma will give rise to its consequencesʼ. It is not (the one that is) the cause

of memory.™ (104cd-105ab)

(This sense is) ‘firmʼ because it has no beginning. The latent

impression which is the conception (bhāvanā) within oneself (variously) termed
‘sense’ (vrtti) and the like is of two kinds, that is, either with a beginning or

without. It is not the first (of these two) that,
ciated with (a past) experience,
is awakened by the power of awakened consciousness (prahodha), as the cause
of recollection that nourishes the perceiver’s state as a perceiver who connects
(the present with the past) (anusaṁdhātṛtva). Again, the other is the latent
The ‘contemplation’ ~ bhāvanā meant here is the sound intuitive reasoning (sattarka)

that “I am Śiva and all this universe is the outpouring of my glory.” See above 4/2 ff. It

is more than just abandoning the individual ego.
Latent impressions are of two kinds - with a beginning and without a beginning. The
former are the ones that give rise to memory, while the latter are those that give rise to
the various fruits of actions. See below, 28/324cd ff., where Abhinava discusses the role
of memory at the time of death according to the teachings of the Bhagavadgītā.

TANTRĀLOKA

impression (which is the residue of past) action (karmavāsanā), due to which

action (karman) gives rise to (its) various consequences.

Surely (one may ask), if the latent impression of Karma has been
removed, what has happened in this way that Karma does not accrue its
consequences? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TTTSTT TgIIĪ TE ĪT TTTT II g°4 11

apradhvaste ʻpi saṅkoce nāhaṁ karteti bhāvanāt II 105 ||
na phalaṁ kṣīvamūḍhādeḥ prāyaścitte ʻtha vā kṛte |

Even when the contracted (state of consciousness) has not been

eliminated, (the actions) for example of a drunkard or a fool, or once (one
has) performed an atoning penance, do not bear fruit, because (in such

cases one) thinks: “It is not I who acts, I did not do it” (nāham kartā).
(105cd-106ab)

(Even when the contracted (state of consciousness)) which is the
attendant cause (of Karma) ‘has not been eliminated’ and is still present, (it
does not) bear fruit. (By ‘fruit’) one should understand that it means (the fruit
of) good and bad Karma. ‘ʻA druṇkard or a fool’ does not consider that ‘I am

doing this’. Something done without having reflected (on it) is (as if) it had not
been done. So how can (that action) give rise to (its) consequences? t is said by
others, with the same intended sense, that ‘there is action and the like (after)

rising out (of a state of deep meditation).

(Karma) does not give rise to its corresponding consequences by

meditating on its cessation, (reflecting that) ‘it is not I who act’ once ‘(one has)

performed an atoning penance’ (or) by the weakening of the attention
(anusaṁdhāna) to this and that particular object. As they say:

‘Having sinned and repented, one is freed from that sin. By abstaining
(from further sin, thinking) ‘may I not act in that way’, one is purified.”
Surely (one may ask), as this is so, does this amount (to saying) that it is
not Karma that instigates the arising of (its) consequences, rather it is the
intention (behind it) (abhiṣaṁdhāṇna)? (Yes indeed,) that is true. Thus, he says:

aṁ ṁazfraṝfx: |

yanmayādya tapas taptaṁ tad asmai syād iti sphuṭam || 106 ||
abhiṣaṁdhim ataḥ karma na phaled abhiṣandhitaḥ |

" A repentant person thinks “ wish I had not done so”.

? This citation is from the Yogasūtra or its commentary (bhāṣya).

CHAPTER NINE
The action of one whose clear intention is (of the form): “may the

austerity I have practiced today be for this (other person’s benefit)” does
not bear fruit (for himself), by virtue of his intention. (106cd-107ab)

(The intention) is ‘clear’ because it is firm. ‘The action’ in the form of

austerity (performed) with the intention of the one who does it that it may be for
(the benefit of) someone else does not bear fruit for himself. As they say: ‘there
is no fruit (of action) that has not been desired (and striven after).”

Surely, in that way, because the action and (its) fruit are not on the same
level, how does one exert oneself for others when what has been done has been
destroyed, and what needs be done has not come about? With this doubt, in
mind, he says:

q Hāīā ṁHRTGFATT 1| Z0 11

TGJTTT fĪRTTRTTTĪ
WHGTTTC |

tathābhiṣaṁdhānākhyāṁ tu mānase karmasaṁskriyām || 107 |
phaloparaktāṁ vidadhat kalpate phalasampade |
He who cultivates (kalpate) the Karmic impression of that intention
in (his) mind bestows (the future) fruit with which it is coloured (to the
person for whom he intends it to be). (107cd-108ab)

Offering the latent impression, that is, intention in (his) mind, that “may

(this), austerity and the like be Karma that bears fruit for others”, it ‘bestows

(its) fruit’ (to them). The meaning is that (that latent impression) becomes
capable of bestowing its fruit in that way. The sense is that the condition of
Karma and its consequence is in accord with (one’s) intention. As they say:
‘Depending on how and what he intends (and deliberates on)

(abhiṣaṁdatte), each (action) bears for him the corresponding fruit in the same

way.

Thus, the rule (codya) is not the same when the intention that the fruit

of one’s own (actions) is that it should bear its fruit for someone else.
Surely (one may ask), the (normal) condition of Karma and its (relation

to its) fruit would cease if it were to depend in this way on just intention alone.
Thus, anybody (just) by intending that (a particular Karma) should not bear fruit
(for himself), even though he may do this or that, would not be subject to
consequences (of his actions). Would heaven and hell (which are the
consequence of good and bad actions) not cease? (We reply) that that is true if
someone is intensely intent (in this way). He says that:

In other words, the actions of a person who has no selfish intentions do not produce
Karma and its consequences.

TANTRĀLOKA

q TTFcaīīā
ārdT ṁGū]d |
yas tu tatrāpi dārḍhyena phalasaṁskāram ujjhati || 108 II
sa tatphalatyāgakṛtaṁ viśiṣṭaṁ phalam aśnute |
(However,) he who there (in that case) also abandons the latent

impression of the fruit (of his action) by the firmness (of his intention to do

s0) enjoys a special fruit, generated by abandoning it. (108cd-109ab)

Again, ‘he who there (in that case) abandons’ also ‘the latent

impression of the fruit of (his) action by the firmness (of his intention to do

s0), in accord with the teaching (that) ‘he who discharges his duty (kāryaṁ
karma) without concern for the fruit of (his) action’, gives up attachment (to

it. By his detachment from the fruit (of his actions) ‘he enjoys a special’
supernal (lokottara) ‘fruit’ generated (from that detachment). The meaning is
that he attains the plane beyond Māyā. As is said in the Bhagavadgītā:

‘The wise, endowed with intelligence, renouncing the fruit born of
action, are freed from the bondage of (repeated) birth and attain the plane free of
(all) troubles.”
Surely (one may ask), if this is so, then scripture (would attest) that
even fishermen, for example, by just staying awake at night would partake of
the fruit of (observing the vigil) of Śiva’s Night (Śivarātri). Moreover, how
could the law books” (smṛti) (injunction to practice) penance be explained with

respect to those who drink what is prohibited unintentionally? Do they not
reflect (and intend that): ‘we act in this way for that purpose?”

It is said here (regarding this objection): where is this intention
(anuṣaṁdhāna) applied? Is it to the nature of (his) action, or to (its)
consequence? It is not to the consequence. One who, killing a Brahmin,
(thinks,) “may I not go to hell (for the) sin of killing a Brahmin’ is not in this
way released (from his sin), because in actual fact everybody is frightened (of
going to) hell (and so would think that anyway). On the contrary, even if (its)
consequence is evident (to him) (ḍṛṣṭa), the result he desires, namely, that (his
action should) not be the cause of painful (consequences), would not thereby be

so. This is because that very moment hundreds of other defects are seen to arise
(that he could not forsee and prevent by wishing them to be otherwise). Nor
would there be any (good) result from (his) being merciful. This is because no
intention was formulated to have the fruit of acting only out of mercy (for his
victim).

(If the intention is applied to) the nature (of his Karma), that (Karma) is
here (as it is, it cannot be changed). The fisherman did reflect “I am awake”,

BhGĪ 6/lab. The following line says: ‘“He is a (true) renunciate, he is (a true) yogi,
not one who is without the sacred fire and without the sacred rites.’

BhGI 2/51.

CHAPTER NINE

because, unlike the drunkard or the fool, he was not deranged (asvastha).
However, he attained only limited fruit (from his vigil), because (he did this) not

because of (his) firm (intention to stay awake for spiritual reasons) in that way,
but out of ignorance. The same view is held by the Buddhists also, (as we can
gather) incidentally (from the story they tell) of a certain insect that

circumambulated a venerable caitya, who

in the course of his

circumambulation was elevated (from his humble condition). (What he did) was
not (just by chance with no clear intention,) as happens with a tuft of grass
(blown about) impelled by the wind. Thuṣ, it is fitting that by (his submission
to) the Lord’s sovereignty he was led near to (the spiritual) power of (that
sacred) building (vastu) and in the next life found the true path (of Dharma).

(Conversely,) in the case of (one) who drinks what is prohibited unintentionally,
without considering that it should not be drunk, has the same intention (as one
who does, thinking) “I am drinking this”, so that his penance is prescribed (in

the Law books) (smṛta) as one who has done (something wrong), without
examining (what he is doing). However, (the atoning penance prescribed) is less
than that (of one who does so) intentionally. As Manu (says):
‘Penance (is prescribed for both) those who (misbehave) unintentionally

and (those who do s0) intentionally. (But) what is prescribed for those who does
so intentionally is double that (prescribed for those who do s0)

unintentionally.

Thus, (our view is sound that) the condition (vyavasthā) (of the

reḷationship between) Karma and its consequence is determined by the intention
(behind it). Now enough of much (discussion).
He now relates (what has been said) to the main point:

anayā paripāṭyā yaḥ samastāṁ karmasaṁtatim || 109 ||
anahaṁyutayā projjhet sasaṅkoco ‘pi so ‘kalaḥ |
He who abandons the entire stream of Karma by disassociating

himself from it (anahaṁyutayā) is, by this process, a Vijñānakevalin
Read caityabhaṭṭārakaṁ for caitaṇyabhaṭārakaṁṅ.

This verse is not found in the Manusmṛti commonly available.

After this digression from 97cd onwards concerning Karma, Abhinava returns to the

main point to talk about the Vijñānakevalin who has abandoned Karma.
Anahamyutayā lit. not associating the ego (with it)’. The Vijnānakevalin at his level
of subjectivity does not experience himself as an agent. He does not feel, as do the

lower-level subjects who are affected by the impurity of Karma, that he is the agent of

actions with Karmic consequences. In other words, he does not associate his ego with
Karmic action, thinking “I am doing this for a particular purpose to benefit me in some
way or avoid suffering.” His actions are not (an) ahamyuta- ‘conjoined (yuta) with the
‘T (aham)ʼ.

TANTRĀLOKA

(akala), (who is free of Karma) even though (his consciousness is still)
contracted. (109cd-110ab)
(The perceiver becomes) Vijnānakevalin ‘by disassociating himself”
(from) ‘the entire’ (stream of Karma, both) auspicious and inauspicious, that is,

by not being attached (to the fruit of his action) ‘by this’ (process), namely, (by

all the ways stated) up to the renunciation of the fruit (of action).
Surely (someone may object that), in this way, anyone who, gripped by
hatred, may focus his intention on (his) enemy (with the resolve that) “may (the

fruit of) my own evil deed accrue to him” so that, though he has done something
wrong, he will not suffer the consequences. Would not the condition of (the
relationship between) Karma and its consequence become confused
(viṣaṁṣṭhula) in this way? He says that:

īrzṝ gġsaafḥ’frārdṁīznfōcāfaā: 11 ṇzo 11

k-ḵzEṈERĀEE ḤīictāTEEHḤI

nanv itthaṁ duṣkṛtaṁ kiṁcid ātmīyam abhiṣandhitaḥ || 110 ||
parasmai syān na vijñātaṁ bhavatā tāttvikaṁ vacaḥ |
(Someone may object that) surely in this way one can (transfer)

whatever evil deed one has done (to someone else simply) by one’s own
intention (abhisaṁdhitaḥ) that it may (accrue) to another. (We reply that)

no, (this is not possible); you have not understood the true meaning of (our)
words. (110cd-111ab)

(The opponent may affirm that) ‘in this way’, the relationship between

Karma and its consequence depends solely on the intention (of the agent). This
consideration (codya) is with respect to one who has not understood the

condition of (the relationship between) action and (its) consequence. (So he says

that) ‘you have not understoodʼ.

He establishes that by reasoned argument.

īa jrṭṣaāaṃ rzaravṁāzrāercāṁ 1| 222 11

srhrāraṝazz

āī gGBātṁcdṁ ’īazaṁōra aT || 2.3 ||

tasya bhoktus tathā cet syād abhiṣandhir yathātmani l/ 111 II
tad avaśyaṁ parasyāpi satas tad duṣkṛtaṁ bhavet |
parābhisandhisaṁvittau svābhiṣandhir dṛḍhībhavet I| 1 12 I|

abhiṣandhānavirahe tv asya no phalayogitā |

na me dusṣkṛtam ity eṣā rūḍhis tasyāphalāya sā |l 113 |I

CHAPTER NINE

If the intention (abhisaṁdhi) of the other person who is to reap the

fruits of action (bhoktṛ) is the same as that within oneself, then (the

consequences of) the evil deed will certainly accrue to him also. One’s own

intention is (sustained and) made firm in the consciousness of someone
else’s intention (if the other person is determined to act in the same way

together with oneself), but if (that) intention is absent (on the part of the
other person), it cannot bear fruit for him. (Therefore,) he who firmly
determines that: “ṭhis is not my evil work,” it does not bear its
consequences for him. (111cd-113)
If the person who commits the evil deed (formulates) the intention

within himself that “may (the consequence of) that (evil deed) accrue to him”,
and the other person he wishes to bear the consequence similarly intends that
“may that (accrue) to me,” it would (certainly) happen that way. This is because
one’s own intention to be the recipient of (the fruit of) that (action) becomes
firm within the consciousness of the intention that is related to the other
(person’s) good and bad deeds. The meaning is that he is resolute to be the one
who suffers the consequence of that (action), whereas, how can one who does

not have this intention for himself in this way experience its consequences?

Rather, one perceives that the contrary intention spontaneously develops (within
himself), namely, “may that evil deed not be mine”. In actual fact, all this world
is frightened of sin, the reason for that is only its consequences. So how can it
be in this way that another is subject to the consequences of someone else’s evil
deed just by the intention of that other (person)? This is what he is saying,
namely, that an action gives rise to its consequences because of the intention of
the agent. The consequence does not arise when it is someone else’s intention
(that it do so for oneself), because there is no intention of one’s own to be the
recipient of (the fruit of) that (action).

Now, if someone does something without (any specific) intention (that
it have some particular result) for himself or another, does it give rise to its
consequences, or does it have none? Briefly including (this question), he
presents the accepted view:

aIRTT W-

TTHIYTIPJYTTTR’T: |I| 22% 1|

parābhiṣandhivicchede svātmanānabhiṣaṁhitau |

dvayor api phalaṁ na ṣyān nāśahetuvyavasthiteḥ || 1 14 |
When the intention of the other person (to experience the fruits of

Karma) ceases and it is also not intended by oneself, the consequence
accrues to neither of the two, because this condition is the cause of the
destruction of (Karma and its consequences). (114)

‘(Neither) of the two’ refers to the two who are the objects (viṣaya) of
the agents of the act of projection of (the consequence of action). ‘The cause of

TANTRĀLOKA

destruction’ is the condition of the object of intent of both oneself and the
other.
Surely (one may ask), (clearly) the other person does not (formulate) the
intention “may his evil deed be mine”. In the same way, (instead of wishing
that) “may (his) good deeds be mine”, (he should intend) “may that not be

mine”. So how is that it was said that (that well-wisher may effectively
formulate the intention) “may the austerity I have performed today be for this

(other person’s benefit)”? With this doubt in mind, he says:

araṁ srīckōītaT 11 22.. 1|

sukhahetau sukhe cāsya sāmānyād abhiṣandhitaḥ |
nirviśeṣād api nyāyyā dharmādiphalabhokṭṛtā || 1 15 ||

duḥkhaṁ me duḥkhahetur vā stād ity eṣa punar na tu |
sāmānyo ‘py abhisandhiḥ syāt tad adharmasya nāgamaḥ || 116 ||
Everyone generally intends to be happy and acquire the cause of
happiness. Thus, it makes sense that they should all without exception (wish
to) enjoy the fruits of the virtue (dharma) and the like (of others). It is also

(everyone’s) common intention not to suffer or acquire a cause of suffering,
and so one does not accrue evil actions (adharma) (from others). (115-116)

AII people desire happiness and to get rid of suffering. Thus, it makes

sense that everybody (shares this) ‘common intention’ for themselves with

respect to happiness and its cause, not indeed for suffering and its cause. Thus,
it is rightly said that ‘the other person accrues the fruit of good action, not that
of evil deedsʼ. “(They should all) without exception ((wish to) enjoy the
fruits of the virtue (dharma) and the like (of others))’, even if there is no
such (intention on the part of another that) “may the austerity I have practiced
today be for this (other person’s benefit)”. This is the meaning.
Having explained that by the way, he continues with the main point.

TJ r̥̄ TṀYTĀTHTA
T |

3Tāēgaaī aaī faār. āafka. 1|I gz 11

prakṛtaṁ brūmahe jñānākalasyoktacarasya yat |
anahaṁyutayā sarvā vilīnāḥ karmasaṁskriyāḥ ||

117 I|

The point of what we are saying is that all the latent impressions of

Above, 9/106c.

CHAPTER NINE

destroyed (because he is disassociated from them) by not considering them
to be his own (anahaṅyatayā). (117)

(By saying that this is so for) ‘(the Vijñānakevalin) who behaves (cara)

in the manner described’ is recollected all that should be known, mentioned
previously, that logically explains the absence of Karmic Impurity (in his case).

Thus (for this reason), the Vijñānākala has no Karmic Impurity. As there is no

need for him to do (anything) to make this capacity (to destroy the traces of
Karma) manifest; (it is clear that) the Impurity (of this perceiver) is about to be
destroyed. (Spontaneously,) by its very nature, it is in the process of being

destroyed by the progression (of stages), beginning with the condition in which
it is being destroyed to some degree, and the subsequent (stages, until) it is fully

destroyed.

He says that:

q ūīā TTHTJTT |I/22¢ |1

tasmād asya na karmāsti kasyāpi sahakāritām |
malaḥ karotu tenāyaṁ dhvaṁsamānatvam aśṇute ||

118 I|

Therefore, he neither has any Karma, nor does Impurity (continue
to) serve as an (attendant) concomitant cause of anything, and so it is in the

process of being destroyed. (118)

‘And so’, because (the fundamental Impurity of individuality) is not a

concomitant (attendant) cause (of the development of further Karma, it is in the

process of being destroyed).
Surely (one may ask), when Impurity has been destroyed, the egoity
(ahaṁbhāva) (of pure consciousness) arises everywhere as (the experience that)
‘I am everything’, as it is such both in relation to Karma and its consequence.
As that is so, would he not be associated with the Impurity of Karma again?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

TḠTTTHVAT
T ēāTHīzṝTāīq 1| 22R 1
apadhvastamalas tv antaḥśivāveśavaśīkṛtaḥ |
ahaṁbhãvaparo ʻpy eti na karmādhīnavr̥ttiām ||

119 ||

See above, 9/93cd-95ab.
These are the three main stages in which Karmic impressions are progressively

destroyed – 1) cessation of acquisition of new Karma, 2) no stimulus from one’s own
innate Impurity, that is, ignorance, to produce more Karma, 3) the destruction of the
previous Karma.

TANTRĀLOKA

He in whom Impurity has been destroyed, dominated (vasīkṛta) by
his inward absorption (āveśa) in Śiva, being (entirely) intent on the egoity
(of pure consciousness) (ahaṁbhāva), does not become subject to Karma.

(119)

The reason for (his) not being subject to Karma is because he has been

dominated (vaśīkṛta) by his absorption (āveśa) in Śiva.

This Impurity is thus the cause of the sprout of transmigratory
existence. Having in that context also included (an exposition) of the nature of
the sprout of transmigratory existence amongst all the aforementioned things to
be understood (prameya), he corroborates (this view) with the teaching of the
venerable Mālinīvijaya.

T TFĨTHĨYIĨT |
TGōT̄ṝrēē’ṁ TāHTgTRĪTOT_ || g20 11

uktaṁ śrīpūrvaśāstre ca tad etat parameśinā |
malam ajñānam icchanti saṁsṣārāṅkurakāraṇam || 120 ||
dharmādharmātmakaṁ karma ṣukhaduḥkhādilakṣaṇam |

The Supreme Lord has said as much in the Śrīpārvaśāstra. ‘(The
wise) prefer (the view that) Impurity is ignorance, (not a material
substance, as the dualists maintain). It is the cause of (Karma, which is) the

sprout of transmigratory existence (saṁsāra). Karma is (both) virtue
(dharma) and vice (adharma), and the characteristic sign of (Karma is that

we experience) pleasure, pain, and the like, (that are the consequences of

Karma).’ (120-121ab)

He declares the thread of (the sequence of the consequences of) Karma

there (in that context).

aāāqa-aīī: a āīā ēqāaā: || 222 11|
lakṣayet sukhaduḥkhādi svaṁ kāryaṁ hetubhāvataḥ || 121 ||
The result of one’s own (Karma) is experienced as pleasure, pain,
and the like, in accord with (their Karmic) causes. (121cd)
(The result of one’s own (Karma)) ‘is experiencedʼ, that is, established
as that which instigates one’s own being (to be subject to its consequences).
Veṛses 120cd-121ab are MV 1/23cd-24ab. The first line is also quoted above in

1/23ab in TĀv ad 9/98cd-99ab and paraphrased below in 13/49cd. MV 1/23c is cited in
TĀv ad 9/65cd-66ab.

Read kāryaṁ for kārya.

CHAPTER NINE

This is the meaning. (One may ask) what renders it apparent? With this doubt in
mind, he says, (the results that are) ‘in accord with (their Karmic) causes.”

Surely (one may object) that, because of the principle that ‘causes do
not necessarily (produce their) effects (immediately and in every case), in
what way can a cause invariably (niyamena) establish (the nature of its) effect?

na hi hetuḥ kadāpy āste vinā kāryaṁ nijaṁ kvacit |
hetutā yogyataivāsau phalānantaryabhāvitā || 122.||
There is no cause anywhere ever devoid of its own effect. The causal
state (hetutā) is the capacity (yogyatā) (to produce an effect). It is

established to be such by its consequent result. (122)

What (is a cause’s) ‘capacityʼ? (In response to this question, he says):
‘it is established to be such by its consequent result.’ Thus, the Naiyāyikas
and others accept that the causal condition is (the result of) an aggregate (of
causal factors). (Accordingly, the meaning is that) the aggregate (of causal
factors together constitute) a cause. It is said that ‘causes do not necessarily
(produce their) effects (immediately and in every case)’ in relation (to a single

cause), not the aggregate (of causal factors).
Surely (one may ask), if that is so, does the causal status of fire, for

example, which is also aṣsociated with an aggregate (of causal factors), exist
prior to its product, or not? With this doubt in mind, he says:

pūrvakasya tu hetutvaṁ pāramparyeṇa
(The entity) that precedes (its effect) is indirectly a cause (before it

has given rise to its products). (123a)

Thusṣ, the explanation (given above), that the characteristic sign of
(Karma is that we experience) pleasure, pain and the like (which are the
consequences of Karma). This explanation contains that of the genitive
ascriptive compound (ṣaṣṭītatpuruṣa) (sukhaduḥkhādilakṣaṇam, ī.e. ‘the
characteristic sign of (Karma is that we experience) pleasure, pain and the like

(that are the consequences of Karma)).

The same dictum is quoted above in TĀv intro to 1/161 (see 1/161 for Abhinava’s
response) and TĀv ad 4/59.
The word yogyatā that here translate as ‘capacity literally means ‘competence’. A
cause is a cause because it is fit to produce its own effect.

T We know that the nature of a Karma by its effect, that is, consequence.
See above, 9/121b.

TANTRĀḶOKA

+ s

s .

. + f, Ṭ qq |

qTḤ TRZṀTII || 233
k- -k. -Ã ÃN

K. A

faṭ |

lakṣyate sukhaduḥkhādyaiḥ samāne dṛṣṭakāraṇe || 123 ||
citrair hetvantaraṁ kiñcit tac ca karmeha darśanāt |
Moreover, (the variety) one experiences of pleasure, pain, and the

rest, even when (their) perceived cause is the same, indicates that there is
some other cause (apart from that one). That is Karma, because it is seen
(to be operating in this way) here (in this world). (123bcd-124ab)

One should not think that (he says) ‘moreover’ because (what was said)

previously is not (fully) stated; rather, it is to highlight, by carrying over (āvṛtti)

(what was said in the previous line), that it is to be taken together as (a single)
cumuḷative (statement) (samuccaya). Even if the ‘perceived cause is the same’

for every single person, such as service (of the teacher), study and the like, the
variety of joys and sorrows etc. ‘indicates’, that is, one infers that there is some
other cause which is said to be unperceived to some degree, as it could not
logically be explained otherwise. This is the meaning.
Moreover, because it gives rise to a specific result, one must accept that
it is due to some particular (cause), and ‘that’, he says ‘is Karma’. But even
though if this (causal state) is a quality of Karma, why could it not (something
we experience) also be due, for example, to (some) unknown evil spirit? With

this doubt in mind, he says that (this is s0), ‘because (Karma) is seen (to be

operating in this way) here (in this world).” The sense is that in all

circumstances here (in this world) one sees a variety of results due to the variety

of Karma.

He (now logically) justifies (this view).

z=tīa-axá
ṁdḥ #d ārad |

svāṅge prasādaraukṣyādi jāyamānaṁ svakarmaṇā || 124 |
dṛṣṭam ity anyadehasthaṁ kāraṇaṁ karma kalpyate |
Observing in one’s own (present) body that, for example, (tranquil,)

well-disposed (prasāda), or troubled (rakṣa) (states of being) arise due to

one’s own action, one conceives that the Karma (accumulated) in another
(previous) body is the cause (of one’s present condition). (124cd-125ab)

‘Observing in one’s own (present) body that, for example,
(tranquil,) well-disposed (prasāda), or troubled (rakṣa) (states of being)
arise due to one’s own action’, such as smearing it with dust. In accord with

CHAPTER NINE

dictum that ‘one conceives the unseen to be like what is seen’, one infers that

the cause (of the present condition) is Karma, not an evil spirit or the like.
However, that (Karma) is present, that is, accumulated in another (previous)

body. This is the meaning.
Nor should one consider that there is no such parallel (example) here.
Thus he says:

GTN-T-JGṀŪ
TāÇ WṜĪWS TT: || [34 II

ihāpy anyānyadehasthe sphuṭaṁ karmaphale yataḥ || 125 ||
kṛṣikarma madhau bhogaḥ śarady anyā ca sā tanuḥ |
It is evident here (in this world) also that action and its fruit are
present (and experienced) in different bodies. Thus, (for example, the
farmer) sows his crops in the spring and reaps them (bhoga) in the autumn,
(when his) body differs from (the one he had before). (125cd-126ab)
Nobody disagrees that ‘here (in this world) also’ the body changes

every moment. There is no disagreement (with the view) that ‘Karma is

accumuḷated in one body and its consequence in another. Thus, land is
ploughed and the seed is sown in spring and its fruit (the harvest is reaped) in

autumn, and because of the variety (of these) situations, this makes for a

difference (in his) the body. Thus, it is rightly said that ‘one infers that the
Karma (accumulated) in another (previous) body is the cause (of one’s present
condition)ʼ.
Surely

(one

may object that that) would (entail

the

unwanted)

consequence that what has been done is destroyed and what has not been done
accrues (the experience of the consequence of Karma)? With this doubt in mind,
he says:

JTGHITIVT TWTS] āTSTT: || Nē 1II

anusandhātur ekasya saṁbhavas tu yatas tataḥ || 126 ||
tasyaiva tatphalaṁ citraṁ karma yasya purātanam |
Insofar as the subject who links together experience (anusaṁdhātṛ)
is one and the same, it is he alone who accrues the varied fruit of that, his
past action. (126cd-127ab)

“I experience today what I have sown before’ - because of the unity of
this ascertainment (anusaṁṅdhāna) (which links the two experiences together),

insofar as the foundation of Karma and its consequence is not different, what
sarīrakṣaṇikatve means literally ‘the body is momentary°.

TANTRĀLOKA

has been done is not destroyed, nor does one accrue (any consequences) from
what has not been done. Thus, it is rightly said that the action and (its) result are

in the different bodies (that exist on those two occasions).
Surely (one may object), this may be so if there is a perceived

connection (anusaṁdhāna) between (Karma and its consequence), but does

anyone (perceive this) in the case of Karma from a previous birth and (its)
consequence here (in this one)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

1I 22 1I
JTSTTAHTĀĪTET
TSĪTT TTĒGT |
ḷ ṀTPaTTTGHTTJTITṬTHT |I/22¢ I

kṣīvo ʻpi rājā sūdaṁ ced ādiśet prātar īdṛśam || 127 ||
bhojayety anusandhānād vinā prāpnoti tatphalam |
itthaṁ janmãntaropãāttakarmāpy adyānusandhinā || 128 ||
vinā bhuñkte phalaṁ hetus tatra prācyā hy akampatā |
If a drunken king orders his cook in the morning to prepare a
particular kind (of food) (ūdṛśaṃ) (for him at midday), he obtains that

result without connecting (the two events) together (because he is drunk).

In the same way, one also experiences the consequences (of the Karma)
accrued in another life, (even) without consciously connecting it today (in
the present to the previous experience). The reason for this is the previous
unwavering (intention to act in a way as to give rise to a particular result).

(127cd-129ab)

A drunken king does not experience the connection (between his

previous action and its result), such that (he is aware that): “I ordered the cook

yesterday (to cook a meal) and so I got to enjoy the result of that command
today in this way”. (The king ordered the cook) ‘to prepare food (for him)’
means (he issued the order, saying) “prepare a meal”. This is the meaning. In
the same way, here (in everyday life) there is no logical defect (in the notion
that) one gets the result of the Karma of a previous life even without the
perception of a connection (anusaṁdhāna) (between them).

Surely (one may object) that it was said before that the condition (of the

relationship) between Karma and its consequence depends solely on the
perception of a connection (between them), so how is it that now (this view is)

reversed? With this doubt in mind, he says, ‘the reason for this is the previous
unwavering (intention to act in a way as to give rise to a particular result)ʼ.
(Karma gives rise to its) consequence (phala) here (in this case) due the
firmness of the impressions derived from the previous firm, unwavering
intention: “I will do this”. That itself is the impelling cause (prayojaka) here (in
this case). Nothing (else is) required at all (to explain the nature of) the

consequence (of Karma) and its relationship (to it). This was established

previously. Thus, it is essential that the latent trace of the prior intention of the

CHAPTER NINE

Karma, which is propense to give (its) fruit, be firm (and stable) in this way,
because otherwise (the Karma) would not be such as it (normally) is
(tathātvāyogāt) (and so give rise to its fruits). Thus (the latent trace of the prior
intention in the case of Karma), which is not propense (to bear its fruit), cannot

possess that firmness (and stability) in the same way. Thus, it possible by some
means to prevent (that kind of Karma from) giving rise to its consequences. The
point is that it is possible there (in such cases) that, for example, an inner
suspension (of the karmic process) may take place.
He says that:

GĨNI GTÃITJ aT || 2.38, 11|

ata eva kr̥taṁ karma karmaṇā tapasāpi vā || 129 ||
jñānena vā nirudhyeta phalapākeṣv anuṉmukham |
Therefore, the Karma produced (in the past), which is not propense
to the maturing of (its) consequences (phalapāka), can be checked by

(performing a) ritual, by (practicing) austerity, or by knowledge. (129cd130ab)

‘Therefore’, because it is necessary for Karma to be propense (to give
rise to its) consequences for there to be a preceding unwavering intention (for it
to do s0). ‘It can be checked by (performing a) ritualʼ, such as ritual initiation

(kriyādīkṣā)," which makes (Karma) unfit to bear its fruit. This is the meaning.

Thus, Karma, which is propense to give its fruit, cannot be blocked.
ÁAccordingly, he says:

Tē#ṁrd zṣṝarq qqā: #H TS%H 1|1| 230 ||

št=zzṟām-acvi
frīz īē vz 1

ārabdhakāryaṁ dehe ‘smin yat punaḥ karma tat katham || 130 ||
ucchidyatām antyadaśaṁ niroddhuṁ na hi śakyate |
(However), how can the Karma that has started to have its effect
(arabdhakārya) in this body be eliminated? (It cannot). That which has

reached its final stage (of completion) cannot be suppressed. (130cd131ab)

Phaḷapāka literally means ‘maturing of the fruit’.

Initiation can be imparted by means of a rite (kriyā), or in other more direct ways,

such as the imparting of knowledge (jñānadīkṣā), or just transfer (saṁkramaṇa) of the

teacherʼs state of enlightened consciousness to the disciple. See above, note 1,1020.

? See below, 13/237.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘How can (that Karma) be eliminated?’ It cannot be eliminated in

any way. Thīis is the meaning. The reason for this is that it ‘has started to have
its effect’. To the extent that (the Karma) has not begun to produce (its) effect,

it can be prevented from beginning to do so by some (other) intermediate
means. Thus (in that circumstance),

it is possible (yukta) to block (its

production). However, when, on the contrary, it has begun to produce (its

effect), because it has commenced (to do s0), how can it be suppressed? Thus it

is said: ‘that which has reached its final stage (of completion) cannot be
suppressed’. With the same intended sense, it is declared everywhere that:
‘only (the Karma) that has begun (to take effect) (prārabdha) should not be

purified (in the course of initiation) “. . . that (Karma) by which this (body is

sustained can only be destroyed) by the experience (of its consequences).

SVT 4/141d also quoted below in 15/27. This is an instruction issued to the teacher

who is initiating his disciple. Initiation is a process of purification from binding

Impurity, including that of past Karma. The Tantra instructs that Karma that has started
to produce its effect should not be removed. Otherwise, the disciple would die, as he
continues to inhabit the body in order to experience the consequences of Karma. Cf.

above, 1/36-51, also TĀv ad 1/43, where the same is quoted.

Kiṟaṇa vidyāpāda 6/20d. This quarter verse is also quoted below in TĀv ad 15/27-29

and ad 19/27cd-29ab. It is quoted repeatedly by Saiddhāntikas. See for example, by
Sadyojyotiṣ ad Tattvasaṁgraha 37 (whole verse), by Aghoraśivācārya ad
Ratnatrayaparīkṣā 165cd-166ab (whole verse), again ibid. ad 315 (whole). This quarter
verse is quoted by Rāmakaṇṭha in his commentary (vṛtti) on the Sārdhatriśatikālottara
ad 2/1ab, also Mataṅgapārameśvaravṛtti (Kriyāpāda p. 150 line 17. Kṣemarāja quotes it
in SvTu ad 3/174 and ad 4/67. The entire verse, which Kṣemarāja states is from the

Kiraṇa, is quoted in the commentary on S√T 4/119ab. It reads:

anekabhavikaṁ kaṟma dagdhaṁ bĩjam ivāṇubhiḥ !
bhaviṣyad api saṁruddhaṁ yenedaṁ tad dhī bhogataḥ l
Goodall (Kiraṇa: p. 384 n 645): ʻ[instead of dagdhaṁ bījaṁ] we must read
dagdhabījaṁ in compound and understand it as a bahuvrīhi [attributive compound
qualifying karma]. Admittedly only one manuscript has this; but it is supported by the
commentaries of Rāmakaṇṭha and Tryambakaśambhu and by the commentary on
Śataratnasaṅgraha 88 (p. 91), and the expression has parallels in other Tantras, for

example, Svacchanda 4/148cd.”

“The action of many existences has its seeds burnt, so to speak (iva), by mantra

(in initiation). Future (action) too is blocked; (but) that by which this (body is sustained
can be destroyed only) by experience (of its consequences).’ KiT 1/6/20 (Goodall’s
translation 1998: 383-4)
It is useful to quote the verse that follows also, along with Rāmakaṇṭha’s
commentary (translation by Goodall, Kiraṇa p. 383-384):
‘(Only) when the body collapses (does the soul attain) liberation. Otherwise
(initiation) which gives immediate liberation (sadyonirvāṇadā) may also be effected by
mantra-souls (anubhiḥ) that are eternally established, and therefore they link (souls) to

Śiva. (Kiraṇa VP 6/21)

Rāmakaṇṭha: ‘“Now (tāvaṁ), in the initiation that grants immediate liberation, it

is (here) taught that all previous accumulated actions without exception are destroyed

CHAPTER NINE
Again, the initiation that bestows immediate liberation, for example, is

imparted when death is immanent. In that case also it is because the fruit (of

Karma) is practically exhausted, thus it is possible to purify the (remaining)

Karma, which is not propense (to fruition), and so there is no defect (in our

view). It is said (further ahead):

‘having observed that the disciple is consumed by old age and is
severely afflicted by illness, (the teacher) should cause him to quit (the body),

and then conjoin him to the Supreme Reality.’

The Karma that determines lifespan and caste, that initiates (the
existence of) the body, should not be blocked, because it has begun to take

effect. However, the present or past (Karma accrued) in (this) body will give

rise to (its) effect, that is, just the experience of (its) consequence (bhoga), in

(some) days, months or years. Is it possible to block that or not? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

aī gd- || 2-32. ||

Éa-k
EivtRHúṭ-EzsĀp.

tatraiva dehe yat tv anyad adyagaṁ vā purātanam || 131 ||
karma taj jñānadīkṣādyaiḥ śaṇḍhīkartuṁ prasahyate |
The other (kind of) Karma (that has not started to take its effect),
whether it is present (action) or past, can be neutralized there, in that same

body, by the initiation of knowledge" and other (means). (131cd-132ab)

through experience (bhoga) before their time, even without producing their (ordinary

expected) fruit, by the power of the mantras. But in the initiation which does not grant

immediate liberation, because the soul wishing to receive immediate liberation is not

entitled to it, the mantras are not used to destroy the body, but rather to protect it,

because that body of past actions by which this body is sustained (ārabdham) and the
way in which it is sustained, can be destroyed only by experiencing, not by this (power

of mantras). As for that body of action called ‘future’ because it is to be performed after
initiation, it is taught (here) that it is blocked by this (power of the mantras), because it
lacks the strength to leave traces of itself (from which results would spring), since
actions (in order to have their results) must leave traces in matter (prakṛtau). And so, all
actions without exception are rendered such that their seeds are burnt, with regard to

(their capacity to affect) the initiate, by the power of the mantras; they do not again
become fit to keep their traces. And in initiation that grants immediate liberation,

although these (actions) are destroyed because of the power of the propitiated mantras, it
is taught that the body remains sustained, as with the spinning of the (potter’s) wheel.
Thus, the fault that the body should die absolutely after initiation does not apply (in
either case).”

dattaprāyaphalatvāt “because the fruit has virtually (all) been given’.
Abhinava quotes these lines below in 16/182 and 19/8, telling us both times that they
are from the Gahvaratantra. Jayaratha quotes this verse again in TĀv ad 13/236-238.
Kṣemarāja quotes it SvTu ad 4/148cd-149.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The other (kind of Karma)’ is the present one, that has not started

to have effect, (and so) ‘can be neutralized’. The meaning is that it can be

destroyed by eliminating its competence (yogyatā) to bear fruit. The general rule
is that ‘only (the Karma) that has begun (to take effect) (prārabdha) should not

be purified. Thus, because this is not said to be a special (case) in this way,
one does not do so (i.e. desist from eliminating it). ‘Other (means) are
Mantras and medicinal herbs. (Concerning) that it is said:

‘Those (Karmas) which are said to be incidental (āgantu) here are

pacified by medicinal herbs, the recitation of Mantras and the offering of

oblations.'

The employment of mercury for medical purposes (rasāyana) and the

like can assist the Karma already operant that determines a lifespan, so that one
who (lives) for a long time may be intent on carrying out (his chosen) tasks

without interruption. In this way, those who are intent (on doing s0) may
conquer, that is, impede for a while, (their) appointed time of death (kālamrṛtyu),
although it must necessarily happen. That is said (in the following verse):

‘Those great souls who have achieved success in the medicinal use of
mercury (rasāyana), asceticism, the repetition of mantra and yoga – (these) wise
ones, free from indolence, overcome even their appointed time of death.”

Again, when one makes use of poison and the like (to harm another

person), it burns within the short-lived one (who takes it), not within anyone
else. (However,) all the evildoer who makes use (of the poison to kill) another
(person) has is the feeling of self-arrogation (abhimānamātra), whereby he

thinks that “I have done this”. Such is the case with this power (sāmarthya)

(initiation) possesses, that has as its field of operation the Karma created by the
body, that inṣṭigates the commencement (of its consequences)

(ārambhakakarman). As such, (although) unseen, (that power functions) for (an
outer visible) purpose, that can also be accomplished by (other outer means)
such as medicinal herbs. (If someone has little faith that this is possible), what

faith can there be in that when the purpose is also unseen (as is the case with the
removal of Karma in the course of initiation)? Thus, one should not say “what is
the use of initiation?” (but rather believe that it is effective). Medicinal herbs

and the like do nothing new (and miraculous) that should lead to a lack of faith

(in their efficacy, nor does initiation). So enough of this extensive (discussion).

Concerning the initiation of knowledge (jñānadīkṣā), see below, 16/249, 304cd306ab.

Read adya for sadya.
SYṬ 4/141d, quoted above, TĀv ad 9/130cd-131ab, see note there.

Ṭheṛe are special cases when this general rule does not apply. An example is the
initiation of a dying man. But here no such special provision is made, and so the general
rule applies. In other words, the Karma that can be neutralized is one that has not begun
to take effect, not the one that has begun to do so.

l Ṟead with MS N -pradānaiś for -pradhānaiś.

1i6

says:

CHAPTER NINE

What is the destruction (of Karma)? With this question in mind, he

fē hōi zeaṁ ÇT || q32 11|

tathā saṁsṣkāradārḍhyaṁ hi phalāya dṛḍhatā punaḥ || 132 1
vadā yadā vinaśyeta karma dhvastaṁ tadā tadā |

In this way, the firmness (drdhatā) and stability (dārdhya) of the

latent impression (of past action) determines its fruit. To the degree to

which (this intensity) decreases, Karma is destroyed. (132cd-133ab)

‘In this way’ means in accord with the development of the prior
intention (anusaṁdhāna). It has been established that the latent impression (of

Karma) that has developed (in intensity) in this way is the cause of (its)

consequence here (in this world), whereas the decrease of the stability (of the
intention) that instigates the production of its fruit is said to be Karma that has
been destroyed, blocked, removed and neutralized, because it does not produce
its effect. As (this takes place) due to those two, (namely, lack of intensity and

stability), it is said that there is no restriction at all here (in this case) with
regards to time (that is, how recent or old the Karma may be). In a nutshell, the
meaning is that, in this way, everybody’s Karma, even if it was produced under
the sway of delusion, is destroyed immediately (akrameṇa) by the initiation of
knowledge and the like, even without (them having) the experience which is its
consequence (bhoga).

He says that:

ato mohaparādhīno yady apy akṛta kiñcana || 133 ||
tathāpi jñãnakãle tat sarvam eva pradahyate |

Thus, whatever one who is under the sway of delusion has (done or)
failed to do, is all burnt away, when insight (dawns) (jūānakāle). (133cd-

134ab)

‘Whatever (one has (done)), whether auspicious or inauspicious, (is
all burnt away) ‘when insight (dawns)’, that is, the moment (supreme)

consciousness is experienced directly. This is the meaning.

he says:

What is the authority here (for this view)? With this question in mind,

TANTRĀLOKA

sTṚṣēTīe-: TāTṬGĀTTI: || 23% 1|

uktaṁ ca śrīpūrve ‘ʻhānādānaḥ sarvadṛg ulvaṇaḥ l| 134 ||
muhūrtān nirdahet sarvaṁ dehastham akṛtaṁ kṛtam |

It is said in the venerable Mālinīviyajottara that he who sees all

things and does not take up or reject (anything) and is powerful, should

burn up (in an auspicious) moment all (the residual traces of what) he has
done (that he should not have done) and what he has not done (that he
should have done) present in the body. (134cd-135ab)
Here, one who ‘sees all things’ is he who knows all things as a form of
pure consciousness, and s0, as all relative distinctions have ceased, ‘he does not

take up or reject (anything) and so is ‘powerfulʼ, as one who has renounced
the distinction (vibhāga) between what is to be rejected and adopted. In a
moment he ‘should burn upʼ all that has been badly and well done that is
‘present in the body’. The meaning is that he should makes it one with the fire
of knowledge.
Surely (one may ask), how is it possible that Karma is present in the
body of one for whom everything is firmly established in consciousness?
Taking this doubt into consideration, he himself explains what is meant by the
expression ‘present in the body.’”

āa- ae TaTH'¥aT || 234 1|

ṁī%} ād aza |

Ṝ̄FaāTTTTJTIT

3īṁīōhōa aaṁqzṝra arī fē hzhar 1

TgI UJ TTT āīIST āRGTTTa: 1|| 23 1
dehastham iti dehena saha tādātmyam āśritā || 135 ||
svācchandyāt saṁvid evoktā tatrasthaṁ karma dahyate |
dehaikyavāsanātyāgāt sa ca viśvātmatāsthiteḥ || 136 ||
akālakalite vyāpinyabhinne yā hi saṁskriyā |
saṅkoca eva sānena so ‘pi dehaikatāmayaḥ || 137 II

(The expression) ‘present in the body’ refers to consciousness itself

which, by (its) freedom, has assumed a state of identity with the body. The
Karma present there (within embodied consciousness) is burnt away by
abandoning the latent impression (vāsanā) (which brings about this)

oneness with the body. This is brought about by (realizing) one’s own

Read srīpūrve for śrīpare. This emendation is confirmed because 135ab (from ‘burns
upʼ’ onwards) is a literal citation of MV 18/21ab.

CHAPTER NĪINE

nature as all things in the undivided, pervasive, eternity (of consciousness).

That latent impression is, essentially, a contracted (form) of consciousness
(saṁkoca). Thus, that too consists of the oneness (of individualized
consciousness) with the body. (135cd-137)
(Itis) ‘consciousness itself’. The sense is that all empirical existents are
the (abounding) expanse (sphāra) of (pure) consciousness. ‘(The Karma)

present thereʼ is firmly established in consciousness conditioned by the body.
This is the meaning. Such is the burning away of Karma, namely, the
subordinate state of the latent impression of identification with the body

(dehāhaṁbhāva), because the notion of one’s own identity (ātmabhimāna)

within consciousness that dwells (within its) identity as all things is primary.
This is (the realisation of) ‘one’s own nature as all things’. It is not logically
possible for there to be any latent impression of the body etc. as separate (from
consciousness) within the conscious nature, which is the one, nondual ultimate
reality (paramārtha) that is eternal and (all-)pervasive. And that (latent
impresṣsion exists) when there is a contracted (state of consciousness), and (that)

contraction is one with the body etc. So it is rightly said that by generating
everything in a state at one with consciousness, Karma is burnt away. As is sung
(in the Bhagavadgīta), with this (same) intended meaning:
‘Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer in sacrifice,
whatever you give away, whatever austerity you practice, O Kaunteya, do it as

an offering to Me.’

Concluding this (teaching), he introduces another:

UTTIHTGṀ JTF TT AI GĀTTHI |

TṬṬGTTGTT-T.NI: ŪTĪ Ṁ̄ā āŪTTT |I 23¢ /|1

Tīā: JJGTSGRIK JATITTTIITT: 1

akd Ṭ- T. 1| 238 1|
etat kārmamalaṁ proktaṁ yena sākaṁ layākalāḥ |

syur guhāgahanāntaḥsthāḥ suptā iva sarīsṛpāḥ || 138 ||
tataḥ prabuddhasaṅṁṣkārās te yathocitabhāginaḥ |
brahmādiṣṭhāvarānte ‘smin saṁsaranti puṇaḥ punaḥ || 139 ||
This is said to be Karmic impurity with which the Dissolution

Deconditioned (pralayākala) subjects are associated. Like sleeping serpents,
they reside deep in the abyss of the cave (of Māyā). Then, when their latent
(karmic) impressions are awakened, they reap their appropriate
BhGī 9/27.

Note the gender change here from the regular masculine of malaḥ to the neuter.
There are several instances.

TANTRĀLOKA

consequences and transmigrate repeatedly in this (universe) ranging from

(the world of) Brahmā down to (that of) plants. (138-139)

That ‘ʻwith which’ (they are associated) is Karmic impurity. Dissolution
Deconditioned (pralayākala) perceivers are bound by two impurities (that is,
Karma and Māyā). ‘The abyss of the cave’ is the womb of Māyā. This
(expression) indicates that they pervade (all lower reality levels) up to this
much. ‘Then’ means after their stay in Māyā (is over), when (a new) creation

begins. The latent impression (in this case) is the latent trace (vāsanā) of Karma,

due to the variety of which it is said that they partake of that as is appropriate
and ‘transmigrate repeatedly’, that is to say, they are emitted (onto the lower
reality levels) by Aghoreśa. (Thus) it was said before that:
‘At the end of his Day, the universe dissolves into Māyā, and at the end
of the Night, which is the same length (as the day), Gahaneśa creates them

: 7)266
again.

Surely (one may ask), do they all without distinction travel downwards,
or (do they travel) upwards also? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3 T̄. Ṁj̄TTāāīTGT JISṬTT |

WITTĪTTĪTTTTTTTITR JGĀ TaT: |I 20 1|

kEĪKEIEREAEHIEEIEIEEIGEI

aēia. | 2.x2 11
ye puṇaḥ karmasaṁskārahānyai prārabdhabhāvanāḥ |
bhāvanāpariniṣpattim aprāpya pralayaṁ gatāḥ || 140 |
mahāntaṁ te tathāntaḥsthabhāvanāpākasauṣṭhavāt |
mantratvaṁ pratipadyante citrāc citraṁ ca karmataḥ || 141 II
Vijñāṇakevalin subjects have just the one basic āṇavamala. Pralayākala subjects
have two malas – Karma and Āṇava. Neither of the two subjects have Māyīyamala, as
they reside in principles that are above Māyā, experiencing the state in which the

phenomenal universe is dissolved away at the end of a cycle of creation. This state of
withdrawal (saṅhāra) is the Night. When the period of withdrawal ends, a new Day
begins. Jayaratha quotes the following verse in this regard:

‘At the end of that Day, the Universe dissolves into Māyā; when this Night

comes to an end, Gahaneśa creates (it) once again.

The Vijñānākalas at that time progress upwards into the pure principles
(śuddha tattva), where their Āṇavamala is also exhausted, with just the latent traces of it
remaining. Some Pralayākalas ‘wake upʼ instead back on the lower sphere of the impure
principles, and are reborn in physical bodies. Some, whose Karma has exhausted, may
rise – ‘wake upʼ – at the pure level. Pralayākala escape karmic retribution only until the

next cosmic dissolution.

Above, 6/155cd-156ab (155).

CHAPTER NINE
Again, those who have started to practice meditation (bhāvanā) in

order to destroy the latent impressions of their Karma, (but are

themselves) dissolved away in the great destruction up to unmanifest

Nature (mahat) (at the end of a cosmic cycle) before their meditative

practice has reached perfection, assume the diverse states of the Mantra
(subjects) brought about by their diverse Karma, and according to the
degree in which the inner (impression) of their meditative practice

(bhāvanā) has reached maturity. (140-141)

(This happens) ‘before their meditative practice has reached

perfection’. The sense (of saying this is that,) had they achieved that, their

status would be that of Consciousness Deconditioned (perceivers) (vijñānākala).
‘The inner (impression) (these perceivers have) is the latent impression (of

past Karma) (they) possess (dattavāsānā), according to the (degree in which
their) latent trace of Karma is destroyed. (The word) ‘diverse’, in accord with

the maxim of the eye of a crow,® qualifies both Karma and the degree in which

the inner (impreṣsion) of their meditative practice (bhāvanā) has reached

maturity. Thus, it is said that the state of the Mantra (perceiver) is diverse,
according to whether it is stained (sājana) or stainless (nirañjana). The sense
is that the effect is various, according to the diversity of the cause. It is not
possible (to explain this diversity) otherwise, as the Dissolution Deconditioned
(perceivers) are the material cause (upādāna)” of the Mantra (perceivers). As

they sa

‘The being of the Mantra (perceivers) is graced by that of the

Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers).”

Moreover, it is said in the Mālinīvijayottara" that the material cause of

the Mantramaheśvara (perceivers) are the Consciousness Deconditioned ones
(Vijñānākala), and of the Mantreśvaras the Fully Conditioned (Sakala)
(perceivers). Thus, as the remaining ones, it is established that the Dīssolution
Deconditioned (perceivers) are the material cause of the Mantra (perceivers).

See above 4/14 and Singh 1989: 37.

The crow is believed to have only one eye, that shifts from one side of its head to the

other as it moves it. The analogy (nyāya) refers to a quality that is applicable equally to
two or more things, alternately or together.

In other words, the diverse states of the Mantra subjects which the Dissolution

Deconditioned perceivers become is brought about both by their prior diverse Karma

and by the diverse degree in which the inner (impression) of their meditative practice
(bhāvanā) has reached maturity.

Ṛead pralayākalopādānatve for pralayākalopādanatve. The term ‘upādāna denotes

the material cause of something, as for example, the clay of a jar. The Mantra perceivers

are ‘made’ from the Dissolution Deconditioned perceivers, in the sense that the latter
evolve into the former.

]t seems from this statement that the line Jayaratha has quoted is drawn from the MV,
but it cannot be traced in the printed edition, nor can the rest Jayaratha says.

The impure level is the basis of the pure, in the sense that it is the ‘contracted’ or
limited form at the equivalent pure level. There are several examples of this principle in

differing contexts. We have observed it in the formation of the consonants from the
vowels. Normally, as a mirror image of the pure level, the impure level is reversed with
respect to it. Thus, whereas the vowel series begins with Anuttara, the highest principle,

TANTRĀLOKA

Now he concludes the main point.

The Nature of Māyā
the consonants begin with Earth, which is the lowest. In accord with this logic, we
would expect the Mahāmantreśvara (= Mantramaheśvara) perceivers to be the
counterparts at the pure level of the Sakalas, at the impure. The counterparts of the

Pralayākala perceivers. One wonders whether to emend the text here or whether
Jayaratha is mistaken.

” This subject is discussed from here up to verse 166ab, cf. MVV 2/207-216 which is
as follows:
māyā ca nāma viśvasya yā kāraṇam iti sthitā |
sā dharaṇyantatattvāṁśagarbhā nityā yadi sphuṭam || 207 ||
pralayo na kadācit syān nanu sa vyaktibhāvataḥ [vyaktyabhāveti pāṭhaḥ] |

vyaktiṁ nāma na jānīmo vijñānaṁ grāhyatā yataḥ || 208 II
tadīśvaraparajñānagrāhyatāsti sadātanī |
tasyām avidyamānāyām īśvaraḥ kāraṇaṁ kutaḥ || 209 ||

‘Māyā abides as the cause of the universe. It contains (all its) aspects within
itself, ending with the principle of Earth. If it were to be perpetually apparent (sphuta),
cosmic destruction (pralaya) would never occur. Surely, (someone may object that that
takes place) because it manifests (as such, and so that too is a kind of manifestation)
(vyaktibhāva). (Our response to that objection is that) we know of no such thing called
‘manifestation’ (vyakti) (out of unmanifest Māyā), for objectivity is (ultimately)

consciousness (vijñāna), and so the objectivity (grāhyatā) of the supreme knowledge of
the Lord of that (universe) is eternal. How can the Lord be the cause of its absence?

(207-209)

sphuṭaṁ prakurute kumbhaṁ tadvad īśe bhaviṣyati |
maivaṃ antarbahīrūpakaraṇapravibhedataḥ || 210 ||
sphuṭāsphuṭādivijñānaṁ yuktaṁ kumbhākṛti sphuṭam |
īśvarasya sphuṭodārapūrvavijñānaśālinaḥ || 211 |I
ko na jñāto bhaved bhāgo yatrāpi vyaktyapekṣitā |
(The opponent rejoins:) (the potter) makes the jar apparent (sphuṭa). It will be
like that (also) within the Lord. (Our reply is that) no! that is not so, for that would entail

that there is a difference between internal and external instrumental causes. (What is)

sound (yukta), is that there is consciousness (that is variously) apparent (sphuṭa) or not
(asphuṭa) etc. The form of the jar is clearly apparent. What part (bhāga) of the Lord,
Who possesses the prior consciousness (vijñāna), which is clearly apparent and noble, is
not known, even where that (part) depends on (its) manifestation? (210-212ab)
satkāryavādināṁ deśe kāraṇe ʻpi sphuṭaṁ sthitam || 212 ||
viśvam ity api māyāyāṁ sphuṭaṁ syād asamañjasaṁ |
vyāpakāś ca śivātmānas tattvaiḥ sākaṁ parasparam || 213 ||
kathaṁ ca nāma vidyantāṁ vyāpakatvatirohiteḥ |

vikāsaḥ paramo vyāptiḥ saṁvido bheda ucyate || 214 |

According to those who maintain that the effect is pre-existent in the cause
(satkāryavādin), the universe clearly abides within the place which is its cause, and so it
should also be apparent within Māyā. (According to us this is) incorrect (and illogical).

CHAPTER NINE

ST=ī āīāHTGJGTTTHTT-ĀTETTHaTTĀT |

TITĪ ĀṜSĪ STFHRITTTTĀTTTĪ
T̄: |I| 232 11
asya kārmamalasyeyan māyāntādhvavisāriṇaḥ |
pradhānaṁ kāraṇaṁ proktam ajñānātmāṇavo malaḥ ll 142 |I
This Karmic Impurity flows along the path within Māyā. Its
fundamental (material) cause (pradhāna) is said to be the soul’s innate
Impurity (āṉṇavamala), which is ignorance. (142)
(The soul’s basic impurity) is the ‘fundamental cause’ (of Karma),
because it makes each of (its) powers (sāmarthya) manifest. The sense is that it
has no capacity at all to give rise to its effects without its assistance (as an
auxiliary cause). As is said:

‘The power Karma possesses to gives rise to the birth (of the soul in an
embodied state) is never without (the soul’s fundamental) Impurity. An

individual soul (aṇu) is nowhere seen to be born free of ignorance.”

Surely (one may ask), fine, let it be (as you say, but) then what is said to
be the disturbed state introduced previously (in the following words):
(The individual) souls are pervasive and, (essentially) Śiva by nature, are (related)

mutually (to one another), along with the reality principles (tattva). (Pray tell me, their)

pervasive state is obscured, and so how would they be known? (In reply to this question,

we say that) the supreme pervasion is the expansion of consciousness, and that is said to
be unity (abheda). (212cd-214)
māyīyaṁ kañcukavrātaṁ tathā karaṇasaṁcayaḥ |

vicāritaḥ pūrvam eva kāryavargaś ca carcitaḥ || 215 ||

yāvac chivapadādhyāsavandhyaṁ visvaṁ na visṣphuret |

tatsvātantryakathāmātram etad ity avadhāryatām || 216 ||

The aggregate of obscuring coverings (kañcuka) is made of Māyā, and so too

the aggregate of instrumental means (of perception and action). This has been
expounded (vicarita) previously, as has the category of the resultant (gross material)

products (kāryavarga). (The conclusion is that,) as long as the universe is devoid of the
superimposition (adhyāsa) of Śiva’s plane (pada), it would not be manifestly apparent.
Understand that (all this discussion) is only talk concerning (Śiva’s) freedom. (215216)

BhoKā 126cd-127ab. The printed edition reads: janmādijanikā for janmābhījanikā
Aghorašśivācārya comments:
ajñānahetunā malena rahitasya muktātmano

janmādarśanāt karmānuṣṭhānādarśanācca malayuktasyaiva karmārjanaṁ tadbhogo vā
upayujyate ||

‘It is reasonable (to maintain that it is the soul) that, conjoined to Impurity,
accrues Karma or has the experience of its consequence (bhoga), because one does not
see the birth of a liberated soul who is devoid of Impurity, which is the cause of
ignorance, and also because he is seen to be dedicated to Karma.”

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The craving for worldly experience has been aroused by the Lord’s

With this doubt in mind, he says:

ā || 23 1|
kṣobho ‘sya lolikākhyasya sahakāritayā sphuṭam |
tiṣṭhāsāyogyataunmukhyam īśvarecchāvaśāc ca tat || 143 ||
The disturbance (kṣobha) (brought about by) this (Impurity) called

‘craving’ (olikā)”™ is its clearly evident propensity (aunmukhya) to act” as

a concomitant cause (of Karmic Impurity). That too is due to the lordʼ’s
will.” (143)
“(To act) as a concomitant causeʼ, that is, of Karmic impurity.
Surely (one may ask), if that is achieved by the power (sāmarthya) of
this reality (i.e. the fettered soul’s inherent craving) itself, what purpose is
served here (in this case) by the Lord’s will? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3 sīēfgetram
fēr aāṁN eaī aa
na jaḍaś cidadhiṣṭhānaṁ vinā kvāpi kṣamo yataḥ |
This is because an insentient entity can in no circumstance do
anything if it is not sustained by consciousness. (144ab)

Surely (one may ask), if the Lord were in this way to conjoin Impurity

to individual souls separate (from Himself) by His own will (as He chooses),
would that not amount to a dualist view? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TTT. || QAK 1I
[EEEFRSILIEIR FCHEEIEIETEI

aṇavo nāma naivānyat prakāśātmā maheśvaraḥ || 144 ||
cidacidrūpatābhāsī pudgalaḥ kṣetravit paśuḥ |
The individual souls (aṇu) are none other than Maheśvara (the
Great Lord) Who is the Light (of consciousness). Manifesting (as a mixture

” Above, 9/61a.

See above 9/84cd-86.
tiṣṭhāsāyogyatā literally means (intent) ‘to be fit to wish to abide’.
See MV 1/24cd and above, 9/61.

CHAPTER NINE

of) the sentient and the insentient, (He is variously called) the individual
soul (pudgala), the witness of the field (of the body) (kṣetravit) and the

fettered soul (pasu). (144cd-145ab)

The individual souls (aṇu) are nothing at all other then Maheśvara, who
is the Light (of consciousness), and who, out of His own free will, shining forth

within Himself as sentient and insentient, is the ‘individual soul (pudgala)’.

(This name) is derived from the root puth in the sense of ‘violence’ (hiṁsā) and
‘creation of affliction’ (saṅkleśana). (From it,) by adding the nominal suffix

(kvip), (is derived the) the noun pudgala, (that denotes the individual soul,)

insofar as (its) intellect is intent on violence (puthā, hiṁsā), because it falls
(galati), and because (of its) affliction (kleśa). He is called ‘pasu’ because of
the bondage (pāśyatva) arising from considering himself to be the body, which
is the field (kṣerra) wherein the seeds of Karma grow (and so is also called

‘kṣetravid’ – the witness of the field of the body). This is the meaning. That is

said (with the words): ‘Śiva Himṣelf has assumed the state of the fettered

soul,

Surely (one may ask), when He assumes the state of a fettered soul,

what happens by (His) manifesting (in a state which is a mixture) of the sentient

and insentient? With this doubt in mind, he says:

fhrzvaraa
x aār frrfom fnīsrazrā; 1 g 4 1

fraaṁ ftaa: rīsāqī |

” cidacidrāpatābhāsī could also be translated as ‘making manifest (a mixture of) the
sentient and the insentient.”

Literally ‘knower of the field’ of the psychophysical organism. See BhG 13/1 ff.
" kvip is ‘the denominative affix zero applied to any substantive in the sense of
behaviour asvati, gardabhati etc. kvibanta, a substantive ending with the kṛt suffix kvip
(zero affix) added to the root to form a noun in the sense of the verbal action (bhāva).

The words ending with this affix having got the sense of verbal activity in them quite
suppressed, get the noun terminations su, au, jas etc. and not tit aḥ etc. placed after

them; cf. kṛdabhihito bhāvo dravyavad bhavati. However, at the same time, these words

undergo certain operations peculiar to roots simply because the kṛt affix entirely

disappears, and the word formed appears like a root; cf. kvibantā dhātutvaṁ na jahati
Kaiyaṭa’s Prad. on 7.1.70. Abhyankar, Kashinath Vasudev Abhyankar: `A Ḍictionary

of Sanskrit Grammarʼ. Oriental Institute, Baroda 1977.

According to the Yogasūtra, as noted in Monier-Willians’s Sanskrit dictionary. there
are five kleśas, that is, impediments to progress in Yoga. They are: 1) ignorance

(avidyā), 2) egotism (asmitā), 3) desire (rāga), 4) aversion (dveṣa), and 5) tenacious
clinging to mundane existence (abhiniveṣa). The Buddhists say that there are ten. Three

concern the body – namely, murder, theft and adultery. Four relate to speech – namely,
lying, slander, abuse and unprofitable conversation. Three relate to mind, that is,
covetousness, malice and scepticism.

PS 5d. This quarter verse is also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/222-223 and 1/331 (330);
cf. ad 6/41cd-42ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

cidrūpatvāc ca sa vyāpī nirguṇo niṣkriyas tataḥ ll 145 1|
bhogopāyepsuko nityo mūrtivandhyaḥ prabhāṣyate |
acittvād ajñatā bhedo bhogyād bhoktrantarād atha || 146 ||
By virtue of its conscious nature, (the soul) is said to be pervasive,

devoid of the qualities (of Nature), and thus, inactive. (It) desires to acquire
means to enjoy (what it wants), and is eternal and formless. As it is (also)

devoid of consciousness, it is ignorant. Again, (because it is ignorant,) there

is a (sense of) difference (bheda) (between itself), the object (of its

experience) (bhogya), and other experiencing subjects. (145cd-146)

‘Devoid of the qualitiesʼ, that is, (the qualities of) sattva and the rest
(of all that is) insentient, beginning with Nature (prakṛti). ‘Thuṣ’, it is said that
their modalities (vṛtti) also do not arise (for the soul), and so it should be

explained to be inactive, because it is devoid of the qualities. It ‘desires to
acquire means to enjoy (what it wants). (The soul) desires to acquire the
means, that is, the causes etc. of (pleasing) worldly experience (bhoga), and so
is solely attached to that. (It is) ‘formless’, which means that it is devoid of
form. ‘It is ignorant’, in the sense that it wrongly considers itself to be the
insentient body etc. Thus, due to (its) insentience, (it is) incapable of
encompassing everything (within its consciousness). Moreover, because it is
encompassed within (the confines of) of the impurity of Māyā, which is the
unfolding perception of duality (bhedaprathā), (the individual soul’s personal
existence) is separate in all respects (from everything else). Thus, it is said that:
‘there is a (sense of) difference (bheda) (between itself), the object (of
experience) (bhogya), and other experiencing subjectsʼ. That is said (in the
scriptures):

“The individual souls are (a mixture of) the sentient and the insentient . .

Again:

‘The fettered soul (paśu) is eternal, formless, ignorant, devoid of the
qualities (of Nature), inactive, impotent, and all-pervasive. It resides in the belly
of Māyā, deliberating on the means (to have the) worldly experience (bhoga)

(which is the consequence of his actions).

" This is an explanatory paraphrase of Kiraṇatantra 1/15, which is quoted by Jayaratha
in the commentary.
Cf. 9/145a Maheśvara is cidacidrāpatābhāsī – ‘manifesting (as a mixture of) the
sentient and the insentient’. I could not trace this quarter verse in the Kiraṇatantra, from
which the following verse Jayaratha quotes is drawn. It is apparently part of the verse(s)

Abhinava paraphrases in 9/144cd-145ab.

° Kiṟaṇatantra 1/15. Goodall (1998: 193), following Rāmakaṇṭha’s somewhat strained

interpretation, translates the second sentence: ‘It is situated (variously) in the belly and

(upper) edge of Māyā and in deliberation among (effects, which can be grouped under
the heading) experience (of accumulated karman) and (the faculties of sense and action,
which can be grouped under the heading) the means (to experience).

Abhinava quotes part of this verse in the ĪPVY vol. 3, p. 274, and the complete

one (with no variants) in PTv p. 254. There he explains that ‘ritual procedure (vidhiḥ) is

CHAPTER NINE

In this way, these souls are separated off (from Śiva), even though they
are not different from Him, and (their innate) Impurity is awakened by the
Lord’s will. Due to this, because of the variety of (their) Karma, each of their
(corresponding forms) of transmigratory existence arises. He says that:

TG ŚATTJTTTTRYT |I
RṬRĪ # +

+ +

x + I

teṣām aṇūnāṁ sa mala īśvarecchāvaśād bhṛśam |
The Impurity of these souls is forcefully awakened by the power
(vaśa) of the Lord’s will. (147abc)
he says:

This (teaching) is not established just by sound reasoning alone. Thus

šzīaveza

TrĪRBRTGTTHTI TTTPRT. || 2¢ 11

. . . . tathā coktaṁ śāstre śrīpūrvanāmani || 147 |I
īśvarecchāvaśād asya bhogecchā saṁprajāyate |
bhogecchor upakārārtham ādyo mantramaheśvaraḥ l| 148 I|
māyāṁ vikṣobhya saṅṁsāraṁ nirmimīte vicitrakam |
The same is said in the scripture (śāstra) called Śrīpūrva (i.e. the
Maālinīvijayottara): ʻThe desire for worldly pleasure (bhoga) arises in him
by the power of the Lord’s will. Thus, (Aghoreśa, alias Ananta,) the first

Great Lord of Mantra, disturbs Māyā, and goes on to fashion the diverse
action (kriyā), and the one who knows it is knowledge (jñāna). He who does not possess

these two (i.e. the power to act and know) is a fettered soul. . . . (the quoted verse
follows). By just knowing this, although he is a fettered soul, he becomes an agent and a
knower, that is, one who possesses ritual action and knowledge (of it), with respect to
the act of associating himself with the objects of the senses.' Abhinava’s explanation
appears to be guided by Rāmakaṇṭha.

The first Mantramaheśvara is Aghoresśa, alias Ananta, who the leader of eight Lords

of Mantra. He is the creator of the lower principles (from Māyā to Earth), that make up
the so called ‘impure creation’. This is generated from Māyā. Śiva Himself is directly
the creator of the ‘pure creation’, that is the five ‘pure principles’. He produces these

directly from His energy.

TANTRĀLOKA

world of transmigration (saṁṣāra) in order to assist (the soul) who desires

worldly (experience).” (147-149ab)

That is said there:
‘The desire for worldly experience (bhoga) of that (soul) arises by the

power of the Lord’s will. (Then,) the Lord of Mantra, having penetrated Māyā
with (His) energies, created the universe, in order to accomplish the means for

worldly experience for one who desires it.’

Nothing at all can possibly exist that is separate from that, not even
Māyā. He says that:

māyā ca nāma devasya śaktir avyatirekiṇī l| 149 I|
bhedāvabhāsasvātantryaṁ tathāhi sa tayā kṛtaḥ |
And Māyā is God’s power, which is not separate (from Him). It is

(His) freedom to make duality (bheda) manifest.” (The Great Lord of
This is a paraphrase of MV 1/24cd-25. The MV (1/25cd) says: jagad utpādayāmāsa

māyām āviśya śaktibhiḥ – ‘(the Lord) generated the universe having penetrated Māyā
with (His) energiesʼ. It seems that Abhinava read ‘vikṣobhya’ – ‘having disturbed’ for

‘āviśya’ – ‘having penetrated’. Kṣemarāja’s citation of this line (NTu p. 273) accords
with the former reading. But Jayaratha reads the latter (see TĀv at 9/40cd-41ab, 9/61b
and 9/148cd-149ab). The variant most probably arose as a need to maintain the

nondualist view ascribed to the MV. The act of penetration implies a separate
penetrating reality, whereas ‘arousal’ can take place with respect to a power at one with
its possessor. See Somadeva (2004: 181). These verses form the conclusion of the

discussion on mala that extends from 9/142 to 149b.

MV 1/24cd-25. 9/148-149ab is a paraphrase of MV 1/24cd-25, that is quoted by
Jayaratha here and above ad 9/61. MV 1/25d is quoted in TĀv ad 9/40cd-41ab. MV
1/25 is quoted ad 4/131.

Lord Śiva’s Māyāśakti is a form of His freedom (svātantrya). Swami Lakṣhmanjoo,
commenting on TĀ 9/149-152, quoted in his commentary on the Paramārthasāra 2010:

Xv, says:

‘The energy of Māyā is that illusive energy of Lord Śiva, where you don’t find

any distinction between the illusive energy of Lord Śiva and ṣvātantryaśakti; when you

cannot differentiate God consciousness and individual consciousness (bhedāvabhāsa);

you feel that this whole universe is one with God consciousness, but you don’t feel it
exactly . . . you are gone, you are always away from God consciousness, and you feel
that still you are in God consciousness, that is Māyāśakti; you are in ignorance (but) you
don’t feel that you are ignorant; misunderstanding begins from Māyāśakti.’

In the Secret Supreme (p. 47), Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: ‘svātantryaśakti
is that state of energy that can produce the power of going down and coming up again,
both at will, whereas Māyā will give you the strength of going down and not the ability

of rising up again; Māyāśakti is that universal energy which is owned by the individual

CHAPTER NINE

Mantra) is such (as He is)," fashioned by that (power of Māyā). (149cd150ab)

The Supreme Lord plays the game of pouring forth the entire universe.
(This) freedom to make duality (bheda) manifest (which) He possesses is said to
be the power of Māyā. Not separate from the Him, it ‘measures out’ (mīnāti)
and
cdestroys’
(hinasti)
by
the
perception
of
incompleteness
(apūrṇatāprathana). In the same way it has poured forth (samullāsita) this
manifestation of diversity (bhedāvabhāsa). Thuṣ, by figuratively referring to the

cause as the effect, that (same Māyā) is itself said to be the manifestation of

duality.

He says that:
Maāyā as the Night

aī maṝ frrm

ādyo bhedāvabhāso yo vibhāgam anupeyivān || 150 ||
garbhīkr̥tãnantabhãvivibhãsã sã parã niśã |
The first manifestation of division (bheda), that has not (as yet)
become divided, and contains within itself the infinite number of future

manifestations, is the supreme Night (of Māyā) (parā niśā). (150cd-151ab)

being, the individual soul. And when that same universal energy is owned by the
universal being, it is called svātantryaśakti.”

! This verse is Abhinava’s gloss on the previous one quoted from the MV. Abhinava
consistently maintains a nondualist view. The MV is his most elevated scriptural

authority, and so it should support this view, indeed, authorize it. However, Sanderson
(1992: 302 has pointed out, MV (1/26-35) is effectively advancing a dualist Śaiva

Saiddhāntika view of the nature of Māyā. He points out (ibid.) that this understanding of

Maāyā (like that of the Śiddhānta) ‘upholds the doctrine that as Śivais of the nature of
consciousness he can only be the efficient cause (nimittakāraṇam) of the universe, and
that the stuff of which the universe consists, its material cause (upādānakāraṇam), must
be a source outside Śiva’s nature. For the nondualists, of course, there can be nothing
outside Śiva’s nature. They
assert. . . that Māyā is Śiva’s Power (Śšakti). If it is his
power, then according to a principle aceepted by both dualists and nondualists, it must

be an aspect of his identity. Thus Māyā ceases to be something outside the
consciousness that constitutes the essence of Śiva and souls and becomes instead the
power of consciousness to project plurality within itself so that it appears to be limited

from outside by something that it is not.
The Supreme Night is the first appearance of duality, as yet undifferentiated,
containing within itself the endless number of future manifestations. Māyāśakti as the

Night (Niśā) is equivalent to unmanifest, fundamental Nature (avyaktapradhānaprakṛti)

of the Śāṁkhya, that contains all the principles below, that are to be made manifest in a
potential form. The Night of Māyā has three aspects (8/298b-337a). The first, definedin

this verse, is termed the Supreme Night. Itis her aspect as Śakti (Śiva’s power), that

contains in a potential form (i.e. as śakti – ‘potency°) everything within herself that will

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The first manifestation of division (bheda) here has not (yet)
become divided, as it is just the bare desire to pour forth externally, and so is as

if a (mere) indication (of the impending creation). That is ‘the supreme Night’.

The meaning is that it is the Great Māyā. Thus, it is said that in its extroverted
state it contains within itself the division (of duality) that is to come into being,

as does the kidney bean (śimbikā) its fruit; (and so he says that it) ‘contains

within itself the infinite number of future manifestations’.

Maāyā as a Principle or Reality Level (tattva)
Having defined the nature (of Māyā) as Power (śakti), (Abhinava) says

(the following), in order to define its nature as a metaphysical principle (tatva),
by summarizing (garbhīkāreṇa) (and explaining) the meaning of the scripture
(that declares):

Moreover, (Māyā) is one (ekā), all-pervasive (vyāpinī), subtle

(sūkṣmā), undifferentiated (niṣkalā), the receptacle of the universe (jagato
nidhi), without beginning or end (anādyantā), undecaying (vyayahīnā). (She is)

what is other than

Śiva (aśivā) (inauspicious, unconscious and Śiva-less). (She

is the goddess) Īśānī (the Governess of the dominion of Maāyā, who is thus able

to act, and is) said to be undecaying.

be made manifest as the lower reality levels unfold. The second aspect of Māyā is as a
metaphysical principle – Tattva – that is defined in verses 151cd-152, The third is Māyā

as the Knot – Granthi – which binds the fettered soul, defined in verses 153-154ab. The
second and third are forms of the first.

MV 1/26 is quoted in the introduction to TĀ 9/151cd-152, which is essentially an

explanation of this verse. The reading of the first line here, which is accepted by
Vasudeva in place of the reading in the edition of the MV of the KSṢTS, is: sā caikā

vyāpinī sūkṣmā niṣkalā jagato nidhiḥ. The edition of the MV of the KSTS reads sā
caikā vyāpinīrāpā niṣkalā ʻAnd (Māyā) is one, her nature is (all) pervasive and,
undifferentiated, is the receptacle (nidhi) of the universe.' MS K reads the last half of
the first line: niṣkalasya svabhāvajā – (And (Māyā) is one, her nature is (all) pervasive
and) is born from the essential nature of undifferentiated (Śiva)’. MS Kh reads the last
half of the first line: niṣkalasya śivātmanaḥ – (And (Māyā) is one, her nature is (all)
pervasive), (the power of) the one who is partless Śiva’. The reading from niṣkalā to
kathyate (i.e. from the middle of the first line to the end of the second) is drawn from
MS Gh. I have added the following verse i.e. MV 1/27.

" One could translate anādyantāśiveśānī (without beginning and end (She is) not

auspicious (aśivā) (or Aśivā), (the goddess) Īśānī (the Governess).’ Again, one could
read anādyantā śiveśānī (‘without beginning and end (She is) Śivā, (the goddess) Īśānī
(the Governessʼ). Sanderson (1992: 301) suggests ‘able to act’ as a translation of Īśānī
and reads Aśivā, as does Jayaratha, and was intended. The name ‘Śivā’ for the goddess
is well attested and makes sense. Leaving the text as it is would mean that the goddess is
called Aśivā, which is not at all a common name. Or else the word may be construed to
be a privative – ‘she who is not ‘śiva’, i.e ‘not auspicious’ or ‘what is other than Śiva’.

At firṣṭ sight, this would not seem be an appropriate way to describe the divine power
that governs the universe. However, in the next verse (9/151-152ab), which is

essentially an explanation on this verses, Abhinava’s characterization of Maāyā as
‘insentient’ may be understood to be a gloss on ‘aśivā’ as ‘she who is not Śiva’, that is,

‘she who is not consciousness'. Jayaratha supports this interpretation by quoting from

CHAPTER NINE

āīá aāIaaāī sTīē āi-., 1|| 2.42. ||

frravrārcāfārīaraṁkcáaṁī gaākrvm 11 2.2

sā jaḍā bhedarūpatvāt kāryaṁ cāsyā jaḍaṁ yataḥ || 151 I|
vyāpinī viśvahetutvāt sūkṣmā kāryaikakalpanāt |
Śśivaśaktyavinābhāvān nityaikā mūlakāraṇam || 152 ||
(Māyā) is insentient because its nature is duality (bheda) (and so is
devoid of the oneness of consciousness), and because its product is

insentient.” (Even s0,) it is the cause of all things, and so is all-pervasive
scripture. Sanderson (1992: 301 n 72) cogently points out that ‘the pāda could be

analysed as anādyantā śivā īśānī. Abhinavagupta has chosen this analysis in MVV
1/174ab (māyātattvasvarūpe hi śiveśānīti vakṣyate), but evidently, to make the

nondualist’s point that Māyā, after all, is Śiva’s śakti (śivā) and therefore identical with
him.’ Sanderson goes on to examine references in dualist Śaiva sources to Māyā as

whichis variously understood by Siddhāntins as a separdte reality, thatis the
opposite or contrary to Śiva or without Siva or ‘baneful or ‘unconscious’. Abhinava’s
explanation of this verse in the following lines aims at removing its most probably

original dualist sense and replacing it with a nondualist one. In that perspective, Māyāis

not, like the Prakṛti of the Sāṁkhya, the material cause (upādāna) of all the lower 31
impure principles and Śiva (as Ananta), just an instrumental cause (nimitta) that

precipitates their creation fromit. Māyā as Śivāis Śiva’s Śakti, and s0 is one with him.
Herein these lines, Abhinavais glossing the epithets of Māyā listed in MV 1726.
Thus, he tacitly glosses the expression as ‘asivā’ – “not Śiva’ as ‘insentient'. Śivais
consciousness,

and s0 Maāyā, which is the absence of Śiva, is devoid of consciousness.

Again, the Mālinīvijayottara says that Māyā is ‘undifferentiated’ (niṣkalā), which

Abhinava explains means ‘one’. While Abhinava further explains that by saying that is
‘without beginning or end’ (anādyantā) and ‘undecaying’, the MV means simply that it

is eternal. He gives reasons for why Māyā possesses these attributes even as he glosses
the terms that denote them. Jayaratha systematically follows suit.

Sanderson (1992: 301 n 72) has located a number of references to ‘a.
Siddhānta sources (traṇslations iin square brackets are mine): ‘see e.g. Mṛg VP 9.

ckam aśivaṁ bījaṁ jagataś; and Pauṣkara quotedin ŚaivaParibh p. 88 nityaikā vyāpinī

vasturūpā karmaśra

Its meaning is not free from

disagreement. Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha on the Mrṛgendra’s definition says simply that it is called
aśiva- because it causes ignorance (MṛgVṛ VP p. 187: asivaṁ mohakatvāt). The

expression avivekākulam full of non-discrimination’ that occurs in the Svāyambhuva’s
definition of Māyā quoted in the SiddhSūVṛ p. 18 may well have been intended as an
explanatory synonym. Trilocanaśivācārya’s definition of Māyā in the SiddhSārāv 8
includes the words asivakaraṁ mohakam and appears, as this shows, to be based on the
Mrg, as explained by Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha. For him, then, asivam in Mṛg means asivakaram

‘causing what is asiva’, which his commentator Anantaśambhu explains as follows:
śsivajñānavyatiriktatvād evājñānakaram ‘causing ignorance, because it is void of Śiva-

knowledgeʼ. These glosses can be taken as explanations in context of the word aśiva-, in

its common sense of ‘inauspicious’ or ‘hostile’. But Bhojarāja seems to taking it to
mean ‘Śiva-less’, when he includes śivāsaktā, ‘not attached to Śiva, in his definition of

māyā in TattvPrak 38. Aghoraśiva ad loc. Takes ‘not attached’ to be ‘not internally

TANTRĀLOKA

(vyāpinī). (Moreover,) it is subtle (sūkṣmā), because it (cannot be perceived
directly). It is only conceived to exist because (all this is) its product. It is
eternal (nityā) because it is invariably associated with Śiva’s power, and
one (ekā), because it is the root cause (of all phenomena). (151cd-152)

‘((Maya) is insentient) because it’s nature is duality (bheda)’. The

nature of the insentient is that it is made manifest as delimited (by time, space

and form, perceived as it is as) “ṭhis is manifest now (in this moment,) here (in
this place).” As (Abhinava) has said previously:
‘Indeed,

circumscribed

(and

conditioned)

manifestation

(paricchinnaprakāśatva) is the characteristic of (all that is) insentient.”

Thus, (Māyā’s) name is such because (it denotes all that is) delimited
(and perishable) (mnīyate), and is (accordingly) discerned (paricchidyate) by
Yogis as what is to be abandoned (and transcended). Accordingly, it is said to
be ‘aśivā’ (i.e. ‘what is other than Śiva’, inauspicious, insentient). As (the wise)

say:

‘Aśivā (inauspicious, insentient Māyā) inculcates (in fettered souls) the
perception of difference (bhedaprathā).”
It is said that if (Māyā) were to be not to be insentient, its product would
also be such. (But this is not so,) ‘because its product is insentient’. If the

product of Māyā, namely, the Force (of limited agency) and the rest (of the
coverings — kañcuka) were to be sentient, then there would be numerous (forms

of) consciousness (cetanā) within this one body, which would entail that the
assumption (upādāna) of the individual soul (puruṣa) (into the body) is useless.
‘Itis the cause of all things (and so is all-pervasive). The meaning is that it is
related to or ‘hostile’ (asamavetā). Others took aśiva- to mean ‘unconscious’ (jaḍa-,
acetana-). This is the sense recognised by Abhinavagupta in TĀ 9/152ab.

° Cf. Ṭatvaprakāśa 38:

śaktaya ihāsya karaṇaṁ māyopādānamiṣyate sūkṣmā |
ekā nityā vyāpinyanādinidhanā śivāsaktā |l
“The energies are (the Supreme Lord’s) instrument. Subtle Māyā is considered

to be the material cause. It is one, eternal, pervasive, without beginning or end, it is
united with Śiva.
Also Bhogakārikā 119cd-120ab:

acidvatām anekatvād vināśitvaṁ suniścitam ||

nānekā sā tv ato nityā māyā yady apy acetanā |

‘As insentient entities are many, they are certainly destroyed, (whereas Māyā)
is eternal, even though it is devoid of consciousness.”

”” Above, 3/101cd. See note there. This line is also quoted below ad 13/189cd. The

following line says: “Consciousness differs from the insentient because (it is not an
object, and s0) is not delimited (na parimīyate).”

CHAPTER NINE

the cause of all things, (both) instrumental causes and effects, as the source
(mukha) of (their) countless streams (of manifestation, the purpose of) which is

to furnish worldly experience (bhoga) to the individual soul. As is said:

‘All-pervading (vyāpinī) (Māyā) fashions all phenomena everywhere by

the currents (of experience running through) all the abodes of the universe in
order to (supply) worldly experience (bhoga), because the (number of)

individual souls is endless.’

Thus (Māyā) ʻ‘apportions (and measures out) (māti) (everything)
everywhere. It is ‘subtle’, that is, it is unknown to everybody. Thus, the sense is

that it is conceived to exist by those of lower vision, because otherwise, (if it

were not to exist, its) products could not be explained (anupapatti). ‘(It is

eternal,) because it is invariably associated with Śiva’s power’. Śiva is

BhoKā 120cd-121ab. Read puruṣānantyād for puruṣānantya-, as does the edition of
the BhoKā. Aghoraśivācārya’s vṛtti supports this reading, saying:

māyāyām ānantyān nocyate srotasāṁ saṁkhyā || iti | eṣā ca kṣīradadhinyāyena na
sarvātmanā pariṇāmameti, kintu ghṛtakīṭaṉyāyenaikadeśeneti mantavyam |l
‘As that which is within Māyā is endless, one does not say that the currents (of
experience) have number. That (Māyā) is not transformed (completely) in all respects
(sarvātmanā) (when this happens), in accord with the analogy of milk (that changes
into) curd. Rather, one should consider that it takes place in one place (in single

instances), on the analogy of clarified butter (that gives rise) to worms (within some
parts of it).

If we accept the reading here (i.e. puruṣānantyabhogāya), the translation would
be, ‘in order to (supply) worldly experience (bhoga) to the endless number of individual

souls.”

See also the previous verse:

acidvatām anekatvād vināśitvaṁ ṣuniścitam || 119 ||
nānekā sā tv ato nityā māyā yady apy acetanā |

‘It is certain that insentient entities will be destroyed because they are many,

whereas Maāyā is not many, and so is eternal, even though insentient.’ BhoKā 119cd-

120ab
The root mā (2 P), from which the word Māyā is derived here, means ‘to measure (by

any standard), mete out, mark off, measure across (= traverse), compare with, apportion,

grant, prepare, arrange, fashion, form, build, make, show, and display.” AlIl these

meanings are applicable to what Māyā does, which is essentially to delineate in specific

measures and forms the manifestations of consciousness, defined and conditioned in
relation to one another. Thus, the one Light of consciousness manifests dynamically as

the countless streams of phenomena, each of which is ‘cut off’ from the others with
which they are set into relationship by the power of the freedom of consciousness

which, operating in this way, is Māyā.
Those of ‘lower vision’, to whom Jayaratha is referring, are the dualist Siddhāntins,

who maintain that Māyā is an independent insentient reality with respect to

consciousness. They maintain that, as such, it is eternal. Here Abhinava argues that it is
eternal because it is Śiva’s power, which is one with him, not because it is an
independent reality apart from him.

TANTRĀLOKA

eternal and so is (his) power, because it is invariably associated with Him, and
is ṣaid (for that reason) to possesses the attributes (dharmiṇī) of that (same)
nature (dharma) (it shares in common with Śiva,) (and so shares his qualities).

(Thus, it is also) ‘eternal’, and so is also said to be ‘without beginning or end’

and ‘undecaying (vyayahīnā) (in the Mālinīvijayottara)." Thus it is also
(called Māyā,) because it is derived – yātā – from the negation, which is the

destruction (of unity), denoted by the word ‘mā’ – ‘no’.

MV 1/26. Jayaratha quite rightly understands that Abhinava is explai ing and

reworkingin nondualist terms the definition of Māyā given in the Mālinīvijayottara

verse 1/26 he quotes as an introduction to Abhinava’s explanation of them. See
Sanderson 1992: p. 303-304.

Here the word ‘Māyā’ is derived from ‘mā’, which, literally meaning ‘noʼ, denotes

‘denial’” or ‘negation’ of the essentially unitary eternal nature of reality, which amounts
to its destruction. In other words, plurality, and the transitoriness invariably associated
with it, is constantly regenerated by the power which apparently destroys the unity of
the one reality of which it is its power. She has ‘yātā’, i.e. proceeded from that. Māyā is
that which ‘proceeds from negation’. In other words, in universal terms, Māyā as Śiva's
power is the freedom he has to deny (and so, as it were, ‘destroy’) his oneness, to form

himself into the infinite number of individual entities, each different from one another.
The same takes place at the individual level of cognition, in the course of the transition

from the pure consciousness of the perceiver free of determinate perceptions (vikalpa) to
that of the determinate perception of individual objects. Abhinava explains, commenting
on P 1/6/3:

tadatatpratibhābhājā mātraivātadvyapohanāt |

tanniścayanam ukto hi vikalpo gahṭa ity ayam |l
‘For we call vikalpa the ascertainment of certain things (tanniścayanam) (e.g.)

‘jar’ arrived at through the exclusion of its opposite (atadvyapohanāt) by the knowing

subject only (mātraiva) in whom that and the opposite of that are manifested
(tadatatpratibhābhājā).’ (Translation by Torella)
evaṁ ca tatpratibhāṁ ghaṭābhāsam, atatpratibhāṁ ca aghatābhāsaṁ pramātā bhajate

– sevate tāvat tadavīkalpadaśāyāṁ citsvabhāvo.asau ghaṭaḥ cidvadeva viśvaśarīraḥ

pūrṇaḥ, na ca tena kaścidvyavahāraḥ, [na kecid vyavahārāḥ – KṢṬS] tat

māyāvyāpāram ullāsayan pūrṇamapi khaṇḍayati bhāvam, tenāghatasyātmanaḥ
paṭādeścāpohanaṁ kriyate niṣedhanarūpam, tadeva vyapohanamāśritya tasya ghatasya
niścayanamucyate ghaṭa eva iti, evārthasya saṁbhāvyamānāparavastuniṣedharūpatvāt,
eṣa eva paritaśchedāttakṣaṇakalpāt paricchedaḥ ad ĪP 1/6/3 p. 244-245

‘Thus, both the images of ‘this’, i.e. ‘jar, and of ‘not-thisʼ, i.e. ‘not-jarʼ, are

present within the subject. Therefore, in the state of indeterminacy, jar is one with
consciousness, and like the latter, it is omniform and perfect. Hence it is of no use in

practical life. Therefore, the subject, while manifesting the activity of Māyā, splits this
perfect being, i.e. manifests it as delimited. Through that (manifestation of the activity
of Māyā), he differentiates jar from non-jar, self and cloth etc. The differentiation
consists of negation. And we speak of certainty about the jar – ‘this is a jar and nothing
else’ – on the basis of that very differentiation only, the chief characteristic of which is
negation. For the meaning of the word ‘eva’ is the negation of all other things that can
possibly exist (at that place). This determinacy (vikalpa) is so called because it cuts a
thing off on all sides (from everything else).”

CHAPTER NINE
Moreover, Śiva is the one autonomous (svatantra) reality (padārtha),

and Power is His essential nature (ātmabhūtā). Thuṣ, in accord with the axiom
that ‘that which is not separate from the undivided, is (itself) undivided’,
(Māyā) is also said to be one (ekā) (in the Mālinīvijayottara). As she is one, she

has no parts and so is said to be ʻundifferentiated’ (niṣkalā). It is said to be ‘the
root cause (of all phenomena)ʼ because, by His power Śiva manifests the
universe externally, although (it continues to be) established within (Him).
Thus, it is the ‘the receptacle of the universe’ (jagato nidhi), and so is also said

to be (the goddess) Īśānī (who governs the universe and acts).

Moreover, (Śiva) ‘measures out’ (māti) the universe within her, that is

to say (iti), that it is by means of her that Śiva ‘marks off’ the multitude of
phenomena (bhāvamaṇḍala) and establishes it as separate (from Himself and
divided within itself), although it is not divided off from His own nature.
Surely (one may ask), others say of Nature (prakṛti) that it is the root
cause (of all phenomena), so how is it that Māyā is called this here? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

JTITTṚTGTT
Td ēī4 aēiṬ īa: |
TIT
Taī ḠHūīq, āāīd4 -TT a ṀaT; II 243 11
anekātma sarvaṁ kāryaṁ yathā ghaṭaḥ |

pradhānaṁ ca tathā tasmāt kāryaṁ nātmā tu cetanaḥ ll 153 ||
Every insentient (entity) is both diverse (anekātmā) and the product

(of a preceding cause,) as is, as for example, a jar. Fundamental Nature
(pradhāna) is such; therefore, it is an effect (of a preceding cause, not the

basic cause of objective phenomena, as the Sāṁkhya maintain). This is not
the case with the Self, which is conscious. (153)

Here is set forth the inference made for the sake of others in the form of
a five-membered (syllogism). Thus: 1) Fundamental Nature (pradhāna) is a
product (kārya) because, being insentient, it is multiple. 2) Being insentient, all

Sanderson (1992: 304) prefers to translate īṣānī, as this, he points out, is what

Abhinavagupta intends to say, namely, ‘able to act’. He explains that this means that
Iśānī / Māyāis ‘able to give birth to the universe of its transformations, not because it

possesses this power in itself, needing only the stimulus of Ananta in order to be

activated, but because
it is the power of action (kri
kti) inherentin Śiva himself. This
interpretaton of īśānī is implicit in the Tantrāloka: Abhinavagupta gives the ‘root
causeʼ as a single gloss covering both ‘the receptacle of the universe’ and ‘able to act’;
and he evidently intends the word cause (kāraṇam) here to be analysed both as ‘that out

of which things are made and as ‘that which makes things'; thatis, as both the ‘material
cause and the ‘efficient cause’. For confirmation, we have an earlier analysis of this

passage in the Mālinīvijayavārtika: “when (Śiva’s) power of action reaches its most

intense extroversion, it becomes Māyā: and the evidence for thisis that it will be called
śiveśānī in [the verse of the text which defines] the nature of māyātattvam.’ (kriyāśakteḥ
sphuṭaḥ sphāro māyātvaṁ pratipadyate || māyātattvasvarūpe hi śiveśānīti vakṣyate |
MVV 1/173cd-174ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

that is a product is multiple, 3) as is the case with a jar. 4) What is not a product,
being sentient, is not multiple, as is the case with the Self. 5) Being insentient,

fundamental Nature (pradhāna) is multiple, and so is a product. This has been

established many times by Vedikas (vedavādin), and so out of concern for not
making the book too long (this matter has not been discussed) extensively. What

is the use of being excessively harsh by dealing blows to one who has fallen?

Again, although Māyā is insentient, it is one, and so it is a cause, not a product.

This too is proved. Thus, moreover, because the cause precedes (the effect), (the

nature of Māyā) is mentioned first in the teaching concerning the Path of the
Principles etc.
He says that:

ata evādhvanī proktā pūrvaṁ māyā dvidhā sthitā |
Therefore, (Nature) is preceded on the Path (of
manifestation) by Māyā, which abides (sthitā) two-fold. (154ab)

cosmic

(Māyā’s) condition (avasthāna) is said to be two-fold, as the Principle
(tattva) and the Knot (granthi). It ‘abides (sthitā) two-fold’, according to

whether the cause is considered to be to be in an activated (ucchiūna) form (just

about to give rise to its effect) or not (anucchūna). Thīs the overall sense.
Surely (one may ask), it was said before that Māyā is the Lord’s power,
which is invariably concomitant (with Him), so how can it assume the condition
of a metaphysical principle, which (requires that it be) described as separate
(from Him)? Surely, (one can continue to object) that one is saying very little
(in response) that, likeē Māyā, the powers of the supreme sovereignty (of the

Lord), that is, the Force (of limited agency) and the rest, are also a group of
principles. As is proclaimed with this same intention: “His powers are the entire

universe....””

Thuṣ he says:
The Force (of Limited Agency) (kalā) and the
Other Coverings (kañcuka)

Read tad caitanye for tad acaitanye.
9 The form here, as in other places further ahead in Jayaratha’s presentation, is that of

the standard five membered syllogism. These are 1) Pratijñā – statement of what is to
be proved. 2) hetu – the reason 3) udāharaṇa – example, 4) upanayana – application,
and 5) nigama – conclusion. See above, note to 1/265cd-269ab (264-266).

See above, note 1,154 to TĀv ad 1/7; see note 4,126 ad 4/38 for a definition of Māyā
as the ‘Knot’, and also note 8,23 ad 8/9-10, and note 8,27.
See above, note to TĀv ad 1/111cd-112ab (112).

Mayā is the application of the power of Śiva’s freedom, which serves to negate His
essential unconditioned and uncontracted consciousness, in order to assume the

conditioned and contracted consciousness of the individual soul, that identifies with the
psychophysical organism it inhabits and vitalizes. Initially, this takes place by a total

removal of self-awareness, as in deep sleep. Thus, the soul in the sphere of the principle

of Māyā can neither do nor know anything. It has no desire for anything, nor any sense

CHAPTER NINE

Ũṝ-q 1| Ṟuz 1|
jtEḵEEIe/Ntfezgtttisc|rxrcHHI
yathā ca māyā devasya śāktir abhyeti bhedinam || 154 ||
tattvabhāvaṁ tathānyo ‘pi kalādis tattvaviṣṭaraḥ |

Just as Māyā, which is the Lord’s power, assumes the condition of a

differentiated metaphysical principle, the other extensive (manifestation) of

the principles from the Force (of limited agency) (kalā) onwards occurs in
the same way. (154cd-155ab)
He explains this:

fīēzvrṁhzāī fēfr-kddīgṣōāīTcārr 11 2uu 11

&ãīt #vr-aĩĨ |

niruddhaśakter yā kiṁcitkartṛtodvalanātmikā || 155 11
nāthasya śaktiḥ sādhastāt puṁsaḥ kṣeptrī kalocyate |
The Force (of limited agency) (kalā) is said to be the power of the
Lord, which strengthens the limited capacity to act (kiṅcitkartṛtā) of the
soul, whose powers have been blocked, and casts it down (kṣeptrī) (onto the

lower levels of embodied existence). (155cd-156ab)

The powers of (the fettered soul residing in the principle of Māyā) have
been blocked because its (true) nature has been hidden (by Maāyā). It is cast
‘downʼ into the condition of the subjectivity (identified) with the vital breath
(prāṇa) and the rest (of the psychophysical organism). The use of the term
of time passing, or its location in space. The obscuring coverings (kañcuka) are powers

of consciousness, or to be more precise, aspects of the power of Māyā. Each of them,

like Māyā, corresponds to a separate reality level or metaphysical principle that is
emitted from Māyā. Despite their name, they actually free the individual soul from this

five-fold obscuration of

ā, but only to a limited degree. Thus, Kalā infuses the soul

with limited agency (kiṁcitkartṛtva), Vidyā with a limited capacity to know (kiṁcijñātṛtvā), Rāga with a focused desire, Kāla with the sense of the passage of time, and Niyati
the principle of causal or Karmic necessity that ensures that Karmas give rise their
appropriate consequences, and causes their effects.

Here the term kalā is derived from the verb kal in the sense of kṣip, to throw. For the

meaning attributed to the root kal, see above 3/252cd-253ab and 4/173cd-175. Cf. MPĀ

Vidyāpāda 9/17-18ab: iyaṁ ca kalayantīī bhogeṣu kṣipantī jagat kalā ity ucyate ‘This

(Māyā engaged in) instigating (souls) into worldly experiences (bhoga) (which are the
consequences of Karma) and casting (down) the universe is called ‘kalā’.” “Kalā’ is an
instigating force. It infuses limited, conditioned agency into the Void of Māyā. Thuṣ, the

Sāṁkhyā principles that are comprised in Prakṛti, that ranges from its unmanifest,
undifferentiated state down to Earth, arise from it, because it is through them that this
limited agency operates.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘kalā’ here (in this case) is (to indicate) that it is the reason for the casting down

(of the individual soul to the lower levels).
He applies this same (line of reasoning) elsewhere (to the following
principles) also.

j f-raṬaaāīsaīī sī=T: ŪGTTĪT: ||/gUE 11

ftravtkēraī
ta s-āīaṁgaā-a |

evaṁ vidyādayo ‘py ete dharāntāḥ paramārthataḥ || 156 ||
Śśivaśaktimayā eva proktanyāyānusārataḥ |
In the same way, and in accord with the aforesaid reason, (all) these
(principles), ranging from Impure Knowledge up to Earth, are in reality
(paramārthataḥ) Siva’s powers. (156cd-157ab)
‘In accord with the aforesaid reason’ means, following the same line

of reasoning. Thus, just as the power of the Lord that strengthens the (individual

soulʼ’s) limited capacity to act (kiṅcikartṛtva) is called Kalā, similarly, the
power (it possesses) to perceive to a limited degree (kirṅcidvedana) is called
Vidyā, and so on.

Surely (one may ask), if the group of principles comprising Kalā and

the rest are made of Śiva’s power, then of what is Māyā the cause? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

qṬeṃlṀlḹ̃ ācṉarvrīṝ %pōīGT¥TAaT |I /74 11

3TT TJaT HTa āaāīTTTSTTĀHaK 1124¢ ||
tathāpi yat pṛthag bhānaṁ kalāder īśvarecchayā || 157 ||
tato jaḍatve kāryatve pṛthak tattvasthitau dhruvam ḷ
upādānaṁ smṛtā māyā kvacit tatkāryam eva ca || 158 II
Even so, the individual manifest nature of (each of the coverings),
from the Force (of limited agency) onwards, is due to the Lord’s will. Thus,
from the point of view of their states as insentient products and separate
states as Principles, or in certain cases its products, Māyā is considered to
be (their) stable (dhruva) material cause (upādāna) from the Force (of

limited agency) onwards. (157cd-158)

‘Even s0’, although they are made of Śiva’s powers. Thus, because they
are fashioned by the Lord’s will and (possess) an individual manifest nature, the
nature of Kalā and the rest is to be divided (and distinct) (bheda). (For these

In other words, according to this view, Māyā replaces Nature (prakṛti) as the material

cause (upādāna) of objective phenomena. The material cause of Nature is the Force (of
limited agency) (kalā). See below, 9/214.

CHAPTER NĪINEĒ

reasons,) they are insentient and therefore (phenomenal) products, and because
of that they are separate (from one another). Thus, it is right that Māyā (be
considered to be their) cause here. Thus, it is said that ‘Māyā is considered to
be (their) material cause (upādāna)’, and ‘in certain cases’ such as
Unmanifest Nature, ‘its productsʼ, that is, from Kalā onwards (are the material
cause).

Surely (an opponent may object that) the individual manifest nature (of

the coverings) is the reason for establishing (that it is as separate) part (of

Maāyā). (However,) that is not (manifest in that way) to one who maintains

lower views, such that the Force (of limited agency) and the rest (of the

coverings) are (separate principles), as are Earth and the rest. With this doubt
in mind, he says:

a srṝ-ī-gāfsrā |

tathāvabhāsacitraṁ ca rūpam anyonyavarjitam |

yad bhāti kila saṅkalpe tad asti ghaṭavad bahiḥ || 159 ||
(We maintain that) the form that manifests variously within
thought (saṅṁkalpa) in this way, (with its various aspects) exclusive of each
other, exists externally (outside the perceiver), as does a jar. (159)

The (objective) ‘formʼ (of consciousness) that is ‘varied’, by

manifesting separately ‘in this way’, is multiple, as the insentient and as a
(phenomenal) product etc. Thus, (this) form (of objective consciousness, of
which its various aspects) exclude one another, manifests within free conceptual
constructs (vikalpa) ‘externally, as does a jar’. According to the principle

(nyāya) that ‘what is manifest is not unmanifest’, it has the (same) existence
as (any) existing thing (vastusar). This is the meaning.
The application here (of this line of reasoning is) as follows. 1) The
group of principles beginning with the subtle elements (tanmātra) is external
because it manifests separately within the functions of the mind (saṁkalpādi).
" Read bhāgasiddhau for bhāgāsiddho.

The point seems to be that the five coverings (kañcuka) constitute a single unit as

powers or aspects of Māyā, of which they are in this way an integral part. Accordingly,

they differ from the reality levels (tattva) below them, that extend from the individual

soul (puruṣa) down to Earth, in that the difference between them is inherent in their
nature. It is not specifically due to the Lord’s will. In other words, the five obscuring
coverings operate together. The difference between them is just conceptual.
Nonetheless, this does not mean that it is unreal, or indeed, non-existent. Everything is a
manifestation of consciousness, including the products of the imagination.

The same expression appears above in TĀv ad 3/21-22, 323, 4/12, 5/155cd-156ab

(154cd-155ab), and below TĀv ad 28/355b See note at TĀv ad 3/21-22.
! The expression I translate as ‘function of the mind’ is sarkalpādi,

i.e. conception and

the rest. The inner mental organ consists of manas, ahaṁkāra and buddhi. Their

TANTRĀLOKA

2) Whatever is separate within the functions of the mind is external, like a jar. 3)

What is not external does not manifest as distinct (from other things and

consciousness), as is the case with the Supreme Self. 4) The group of principles
beginning with the subtle elements (tanmātra) manifests separately (and
independently). 5) Therefore, it is external. Although the manifestation of the
Supreme Self is separate, (in accord with the dictum) ‘this Self has shone forth

(just) onceʼ , it is like a flash of lightning that does not develop further.

Its nature as fundamental, unconditioned self-awareness (ahaṁbhāva) is
not obscured, in accord with the saying;
‘(The Lord, by virtue of His freedom, which is the absence of duality,

having fashioned (his own)) Self (ātman), that (abides) unforsaken (by that)
freedom, (with notions that He is the Lord (Iśa) and the like, behaves (as such in

daily life)).

Or else (one may object that) the line of reasoning ‘like the universal,
particulars are the objects of denotation because they are objects of perception’
is based on negative concomitance alone (kevalānvaya). (But we reply that that
is) not so here (in this case) when it is existence that is to be proved, because the
means (sādhana) pertains to existence, is externally established. When it is

unproved, contradictory, and uncertain, the reason advanced (hetu) (to establish
the) nature (of something) both as existent or non-existent should be said to be

an invalid one, in accord with the following argument (yukti):
‘How is it possible to establish the existence (sattā) of something
(bhāva) the nature (dharma) of which is fallacious (to reason) (viruddha), that
is, takes the support of both (alternatives, that is, existence and non-existence,)
that are logically in conflict (with one another) (vyābhicārin)? When
(something) is not proved (to exist), it does not possess the characteristic
atṭribute of an existing thing (bhāvadharma).”
Surely, (someone may object that,) even though a sky-flower or the like
does manifest separately (and distinctly) within thought etc., it has no outer
existence,

and

so

is

not the

validating

reason

(heru)

inconclusive (anaikāntika)? He says, with this doubt in mind:

(advanced here)

corresponding functions are saṅkalpa (conception), abhimāna (self-arrogātion) and
adhyavasāya (ascertainment).

" The full version of this saying is ‘this Self shines forth but once, it is full (of all

things) and so can nowhere be unmanifest.’ See above, note in TĀv ad 1/57.

TP 1/5/16a. The full verse with variants is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/72 (73) (see note
there); also TĀv ad 3/227cd-278ab (277) and below ad 11/10cd-12ab, 28 and 15/315317.

” Particulars can be designated, for they are objects of knowledge, (conversely to)

universals – this proof is based on negative concomitance alone (kevalānvaya); but the
probandum is eṣtablished, nonetheless. The attributes of Being do not stand unproved,
because positive and negative concomitance cannot be demonstrated, for how could it
be possible for an existing entity to have mutually conflicting attributes (i.e. both
existence and non-existence)? External entities are proved to exist. It could not be

otherwise, for no probans that was self-contradictory and ambiguous, as is one to which

is ascribed both existence and non-existence (at once), could stand as a basis for a
logical proof.

CHAPTER NINE

afTṛaīTkaī |

khapuṣpādy asti tāṁ brūmas tato na vyabhicāritā |
(Accordingly,) we say that even a sky-flower, for example, exists.
Thus, there is no exception (to the general principle that whatever
manifests within consciousness is real). (160ab)
‘Thuṣ’, because a sky-flower and the like has external existence (in
relation to consciousness).
Surely (one may object) that this declaration (abhidhāna) is illogical
(viruddha), because all perceivers are a witness (to the fact that) sky-flowers

and the like do not exist. (We say that) that is not (a contradiction). Thus he

says:

aṬÑ āTafēzzTTqīē TRTYIT. || 2ē 11
khapuṣpaṁ kāladiṅmātṛsāpekṣaṁ nāstiśabdataḥ || 160 II

dharādivat # k s. . k. ik 5. i+ |

The non-existence (or otherwise, of anything, including a) skyflower, like that of the Earth (principle) and the rest, depends upon the
subject conditioned by time and space. (This is clear from the fact that it is
he who says): “it does not exist”. (160cd-161a)

Thus the (syllogistic) application here (of this line of reasoning is as
follows). A sky-flower, for example, is non-existent in relation to a subject
conditioned by time and space, because it is the object of the application of the
expression ‘“it does not exist” (that only a conscious perceiver can formulate).
The field of application of the expression ‘“it does not exist” is non-existent in
relation to a subject conditioned by time and space, as is Earth and the like.
What is not non-existent in relation to a subject conditioned by time and space
is not the field of application of the expression ‘“it does not exist”, as is the case
with consciousness. Sky-flowers and the like are the field of the application of
the expression ‘“it does not exist”. Therefore ‘non-existence’ (is a relative term),

dependent on the (existence) ofa subject conditioned by time and space.
Again, expressions such as “I do not perceive this (object) to be here
now” (indicate) that ‘non-existence’ is an expression of everyday parlance
which is dependent on

(conditions)

such as time etc.

(operant) within

consciousness. As has been stated many times (before), this (perception of nonexistence) is related to the limiting adjuncts (upādhi) of that object of
perception.
Surely (one may object that), if that is so, does that not mean the end of
the common daily fact of the total non-existence (of things)
(atyantābhāvavyavahāra)?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

TANTRĀLOKA

. . . . tathātyantābhāvo ‘py evaṁ vivicyatām |
Consider (the notion) of absolute non-existence (antyantābhāva) in
the same way. (160-161ab)
(The same logic applies to absolute non-existence) ‘in the same way”
as (it does to) the non-existence of a sky-flower. This is the application here.
The (notion) of absolute non-existence depends on a subject (conditioned by)
time and space, because it is the object of the expression “it does not exist”.
Whatever is the field of the expression “it does not exist (at all)” depends on a
subject (conditioned by) time and space, as does prior non-existence. All that is
not dependent on conscious subjects in time and space is not the field of the
expression ‘“it does not exist”, as is the case with consciousness. However,
absolute non-existence is the object of the expression “it does not exist (at all)”,
as it is dependent on the subject (conditioned by) time and space.
Now that he has established (with sound argument) the existence of the

principles of the subtle elements etc., he goes on, by the way, to establish the
existence of the body and the (corresponding) world orders also.

eeikegGḷ:
Ē E+

TaI ṜṬ! 3d Tī̄ā Tsāīīā J āt. || 2.2 ||

fkaī yaīvaṝ: 1
yat saṅkalpyaṁ tathā tasya bahirdeho ‘sti cetanaḥ || 161 1|
caitravat sauśivāntaṁ tat sarvaṁ tādṛśadehavat |
yasya deho yathā tasya tajjātīyaṁ puraṁ bahiḥ || 162 |
ataḥ suśivaparyantā siddhā bhuvanapaddhatiḥ |
Whatever can be imagined (sarkalpya) (to exist on the authority of
the scriptures) in this way is sentient (cetana), and possesses an external

body like (any common man, such as) Caitra. Every (creature) up to

Suśiva has a body like that. As is its body, so is the external world of the

same type. Thus the series of worlds up to Suśiva are proved to exist.
(161cd-163ab)

‘Whatever can be imagined (sartkalpya)’ (to exist on the authority) of

the scriptures ‘in this way’ as an embodied creature ‘is sentient’, that is, is

sustained (and presided over) by consciousness, and it ‘has a body like that’.

! Read sarvaṁ for sarva.
The world of Suśiva is that of Sadāśiva, who govems the principle that bears his

name. See above, 8/366 (365cd-366ab).

So, for example, the worlds and the bodies of the beings that reside in the Earth
principle are made of Earth.

CHAPTER NINE

The meaning is that it possesses an external body, sustained by consciousness.
According to whether (consciousness) is, for example, pure or impure, it is ‘of
the same type’, that is, has an (appropriate) corresponding nature.
These are the two (syllogisms) that apply here (in this case). 1) The
realities up to Suśiva poṣsess an external body sustained by consciousness, like
(any common man), such as Caitra. 2) Conversely, what does not possess an
external body sustained by consciousness is not an object of the imagination
rooted in the authority (of the scriptures), as is the case, for example, with a jar.
3) The realities up to Suśiva are an object of the imagination rooted in the
authority (of the scriptures). Therefore, they possess an external body sustained
by consciousness. Embodied beings up to Suśiva, because they are embodied
beings, are aṣsociated with their (own) specific worlds that have an
(appropriate) corresponding nature. Every embodied being is associated with a
particular world that has an (appropriate) corresponding nature, as is the case for
example with Caitra, who (lives) on the earth and possesses a terrestrial body.
Conversely, one who is not associated with a particular world of a
corresponding nature is not an embodied being, as is the case with Supreme
Śiva. Thus, embodied beings up to (the level of) Suśiva are associated with
particular worlds appropriate to them.
Surely (one may ask), it has been proved in this way that the (Karmic)
experience of individual souls is that of (their own) ordained worlds. Would that
not contradict (the view) that all the Path (of the world orders) is binding

without distinction for all individual souls, because (they must) experience (the
consequences of their Karma throughout it)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JT---TĪ TīT. I āāTaāē-dTaq || 2ē3 |1
ātmanāṁ tat puraṁ prāpyaṁ deśatvād anyadeśavat || 163 |
ātmaṉām adhvabhoktṛtvaṁ tato ‘yatnena siddhyati |
(AII) souls should attain their own world, because it is the space (in
which they reside), just like any other (ordinary) space (living beings
require to live in). Thus, it is proved without effort (in this way) that
individual souls are subjects who experience (the consequence of Karma)
(bhoktṛ) on the Path (of the cosmic order). (163cd-164ab)
(All souls) ‘should attain their own world’, that is, all that is present
within each reality level (tattva), because it is fit to be experienced as the
consequence of (their) Karma (bhogya). This is ‘(proved) without effort’,

because there is no need of any other means to prove it (pramāṇa) (apart from
their own direct experience). (The syllogism that) is applied here (is as follows).
1) AIl that pertains to a particular world is the consequence of the Karma
indiviḍual souls are bound to experience (bhogya), ‘because it is the space (in

which they reside)ʼ. 2) The space (in which they reside) is the (object of their)

experience, (which is the consequence of their Karma,) as is, for example, a
village. 3) (What cannot be experienced) by individual (embodied) souls is not a

TANTRĀLOKA

place, as is (the case with) another individual soul. 4) Each particular world
order is (such a) place, and so 5) is the object of experience (bhogya) of (all)
individual souls.
Once defined this thus by this way, he continues with the main point.

atr g ārai fPṃīāTīdīT-ĀTāTGTT 1| 2E4 11

sā māyā kṣobhamāpannā viśvaṁ siūte samantataḥ || 164 1|

daṇḍāhatevāmalakī phalāni kila yady api |
tathāpi tu tathā citrapauṛvāparyāvabhāsanāt || 165 |I
māyākārye ʻpi tattvaughe kāryakāraṇatā mithaḥ |

Thus, when Māyā is disturbed, it generates all things all around

(itself) (instantly and simultaneously). Indeed, (it is like the) fruits (that fall

from a) tamarind (āmalakī) (tree) struck by a stick." Even so, although the
flux of the principles (is in every part equally) the product of Māyā, (and

their production is not temporal), they are mutually related to one another
as cause and effect because they are variously made manifest as preceding
and succeeding (one another). (164cd-166ab)

The meaning of this statement is that when Māyā is disturbed, ‘it
generatesʼ the universe non-sequentially (i.e. instantly and simultaneously),
but even so ‘the flux of the principles’ beginning with Kalā ‘are related to
one another as cause and effect in various ways, ‘because they are variously
made manifest as preceding and succeeding (one another) because (the
order and manner in which it takes place) is variously defined in each scripture.
‘Indeed’ (this is taught) in the Āgama. As is said in the venerable
Svacchandatantra:
‘The principle of Māyā is the seed of the universe. It is eternal, allpervading and imperishable. Having fashioned the class of individual souls who
are established in that, the Lord should disturb (Māyā) all at once. Juṣt as the

fruits of the Badarī when struck by a sword or stick fly out (of the tree) all
around, sideways, above and below.”

l This analogy is drawn from SvT 11/60. The Āmalakī is the Emblica officinalis, i.e.

tamarind.

The Badar is the jujube tree.
SVT 11/59-60. SVT reads tayāvyayam for tathāvyayam, -daṇḍāhatāyāś ca for –—
daṇḍāhatāyāś tu, and adhastāc ca for adhastāt tu.

Commenting on 11/59, Kṣemarāja says: ‘The ‘principle of Māyā is the seed’;

that is, the cause ‘of the universe’, beginning with Kalā and ending with earth. It is

‘eternal’ because its power operates as the first of all (at the impure level, as the initial

negation of oneness, as) ‘not thisʼ (anidaṁprathamikatā), and so is also ‘all-pervadingʼ.

CHAPTER NINE
Maāyā is not the only cause (although it is the primary one), and the

universe that extends from Kalā to Earth, the effect. Rather, its product, such as
Kalā etc., also possesses the same (causal) nature. This is the sense of the words

‘even s0’. That mutual (relation of cause and effect between them) is expressed
by saying that they are ‘mutually (related) to one another’. Thus, an effect is
(also) a cause, (just as) what is a cause is (also) an effect, just as Kalā is an

effect in relation to Māyā, whereas it is a cause in relation to Vidyā.
Surely (one may ask), if each scripture defines the relationship of cause
and effect between the principles differently, then to which one (of these
scriptures) does the teaching here (belong)? With his doubt in mind, he says:
The Five Coverings (kañcuka)

aI āaTaāīTIRT
aGHT Z¥T āGJT || 2Eē ||

sā yady apy anyaśāstreṣu bahudhā dṛśyate sphuṭam || 166 ||
tathāpi mālinīśāstradrśā tāṁ saṁpracakṣmahe |
Even though it is clearly apparent that (the nature of this causal
relationship is) variously (conceived) in other scriptures, we will (limit

ourselves) to explain it from the point of view of the Mālinīśāstra. (166cd-

167ab)

Iṭ is not ‘eternal’, that is, never destroyed, as a principle (amongst the other principles),
because it is said that ‘then (comes) Māyā (after the preceding principles). (Moreover,

that is so) also, because (further ahead) it will be established that its withdrawal (occurs

periodically). The principle of Māyā, which is such, ‘Having fashioned the class of
individual souls (that are established in that’, (their) knowledge and action is hidden due

to that (Māyā) and are made manifest onto (Māyā’s) own screen. And then having again

observed that (principle of Māyā), which is such, with the power of knowledge, (the
Lord) ‘should disturbī it ‘all at once’, that is, simultaneously.
Thus the Supreme Lord renders (the individual souls) subject to (the chain of)
cause and effect of Fundamental Nature (pradhānakāraṇakārya). This is heralded by the
progressive operation (kalanā) of the obscuring coverings (kañcuka) Kalā, Vidyā, Rāga,
Kāla and Niyati. (They are in the form of) limited agency, limited noetic subjectivity
(jñatva), craving, temporal differentiation, and its emergence due to the necessity (of
karmic consequence) (read -niyatotthāpakatva- for -niyatotthāpaka-) (respectively).

They consist of the lack of reflective awareness (of the essential) nature (of the soul)
which does and knows everything, is free of craving, is undifferentiated by time and is
all things.

How is the Lord? It is said that he is penetrated by the power of the will and by

the power of action. According to (the following) teaching, taught in the venerable
Maālinīvijaya, just after the mere intention (icchāmātra), he makes (Māyā) manifest by
means of the power of action:

(When assuming a state of intent towards Her task of the form) – ‘may all this

be such” and that very instant makes it so, (the Lord’s power) is called activity here (in
this world).” MV 3/7cd-8ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), although Māyā is insentient, having set aside (the
fact that it is) a product (of the higher pure principles) because it is one, (not

multiple,) it is said to be the cause (of all the lower, impure principles). (If that

is s0,) the same should be said about Kalā and the rest (of the principles below

it), because as (they are all) insentient, there is no difference (between them and

Māyā) insofar as their unitary (nature is concerned). There (with regards to
that), in order to refute the definition of oneness in terms (of the principle) that
‘what is not prohibited according to a different view is accepted (by us)’, (he

goes on to) establish (by reasoned argument) that (Māyā is in fact) multiple (and
diverse).

GllcāHī d-HTaī-ā; aJāaāīdT || 28.9 11

kalādivasudhāntaṁ yan māyāntaḥ saṁpracakṣate || 167 ||

pratyātmabhinnam evaitat sukhaduhkhādibhedataḥ |

(The group of principles ranging) from the Force (of limited
agency) up to Earth, that is within Māyā and will be described (further
ahead), differs for each individual soul. (This is clear from the fact) that,
for example, the joy and suffering (each one experiences are) different.

(167cd-168ab)

Surely (one may ask), even if there is no difference in the essential

nature of the (principles ranging) from the Force (of limited agency) onwards,

the difference between the joy and suffering (of each soul) would not (thereby)

be denied. With this doubt in mind, he says:

|I/ 2ā¢ 11
TaTTĪTĪ TT TĀĪTŪ;
R̄T JJad |

ekasyām eva jagati bhogasādhanasaṁhatau || 168 II
sukhādīnāṁ samaṁ vyakter bhogabhedaḥ kuto bhavet |
If the universe were to be a single aggregate of means to worldly
experience (bhoga), (the experience of) pleasure and the like would be the
same for all (souls). How then could one account for the differences

(between each individual’s) experiences? (168cd-169ab)

" Cf. BhoKā 105cd-106ab: ‘The wise should know the aggregate of the means of

experience ranging from Kalā to the Earth to be dependent on the individual
experiencer. Otherwise, the evident diversity between pleasurable experiences etc.
(amongst individuals) would be unaccountable.” See also, Tartvasaṁgraha 24cd-25ab.

bhogabhedaḥ kuto bhavet – more literally: ‘from where would the differences
(between each individual’s) experiences (come)?”

CHAPTER NINE

The meaning of ‘the universe’ (here) is the state of bondage
(anapavarga), characterized by (the rounds of) birth and death. ‘The aggregate
of means to worldly experience’ (consists of the reality levels) from the Force
(of limited agency) to Earth. (The experience for all) ‘would be the same’ as
simultaneously common (to all).

(However,) here at least, there is no

disagreement that a diversity of products (kāryabheda) is due to a diversity
(bheda) of causes. If the means to worldly experience, that is, (the principles)

ranging from the Force (of limited agency) to Earth, is the same for each

indiviḍual soul, how is it that there is this difference in the experience (they all
have) of pleasure and the like?
Surely (one may say) that that will be so because of the difference
(between each soul’s) Karma. The cause (nimitta) of joy (and suffering) etc. is
Karma, and that differs for each soul. With his doubt in mind, he says:

na cāsau karmabhedena tasyaivānupapattitaḥ || 169 ||
Moreover, that is not due to the difference (in their) karma, because

it is just that which has not been reasonably established. (169cd)

It is ‘just that’ difference (in their) karma (that has not been

established). It is said that although the souls are various in this way, the

(principles) from the Force (of limited agency) to Earth, which is the aggregate
of (their) worldly experience, is one (and the same for all of them). And as that

(aggregate) has no beginning, it is simultaneously firmly associated with all the
souls that belong to the realm of transmigration. Firmly associated (with them

all) in this way, it would be applied equally, along with all the (individual)
souls, to (their) Karma. Thus, as (the aggregate’s) assumption of Karma would

be (the same) without distinction with respect to all of them, how could it ordain

a variety of Karma (for each one)? Thus also, although there is a difference

between individual souls, there (would be) no difference in (their) Karma.
Moreover, it follows that, as its product, (there would be) no difference (in their
experience of) pleasure and the like.
In this way, the (principles that range) from the Force (of limited
agency) to Earth, which (constitute) the aggregate of means to worldly
experience, differs for each individual soul due to which there is a difference

(between each individual’s experience) of pleasure and pain etc. He says that:

tasmāt kalādiko vargo bhinna eva kadācana |
aikyam etīśvarecchāto nṛttagītādivādane || 170 ||
Therefore, the group (of principles) ranging from the Force (of
limited agency) onwards is different (for each individual, but) sometimes

TANTRĀLOKA

they become one in accord with the Lord’s will, as happens, for example,

during a dance (performance) or concert. (170)

As the Bhogakārikā'says:
‘The wise should know the aggregate™™ of the means to worldly

experience (ranging) from the Force (of limited agency) to Earth is fixed (and

determined separately) for (each individual) experiencer.” Otherwise, the

perceived difference (bheda) between pleasurable and other (such experiences

different individuals have) would not be (logically) possible.
Again, if one considers the diversity to be based on the diversity of
Karma rather than the variety (of individuals)," (then,) because (the aggregate

of the principles which_ are the means to worldly experience would be)

associated (saṁbandhāt) (equally) with (all the individual) agents, it (would
C. below, 10/85-88.

BhoKa 105cd-108ab.

Read, as in the BhoKaā, sarithatiḥ for sahatiḥ.
Aghoraśivācārya comments: ‘The same is said in the Tattvasaṁṅgraha: `The host of
principles beginning with Earth are fixed (and determined) for each individual soul up
to the end of Kalā. (Thus,) this (fettered soul) wanders under the control of Karma in all
the bodies born of the (various) world orders.’ (24cd-25ab)
If all were to have one subtle body, the perceived difference between (different
peoplesʼ) experience (bhoga) would be illogical.”

Aghorasivācārya comments: ‘Surely, (one may object,) even if the subtle body were

to be one (and the same for all), due to the difference in Karma, would there not be a
difference (between each person’s) experience, which is its fruit? Then that would (also)
be logically untenable.”

" The BhoKā reads bhedāt tad bhedo for bhedān na bhede. The meaning is then:

‘(Again,) if one considers the difference of that (experience) to be due to the diversity

Karma.”

Aghoraśivācārya comments: ‘The difference between (peoples’) experience is
logically established (siddhyati) by the difference (of their) Karma. When the difference

between (peoples') experience has been established, one can infer that there is a

difference (in their past) Karma. The meaning is that this entails the logical defect of
mutual dependence.

Surely (then), the difference between Karmas is logically established as being

due to differences of the agents, and due to the difference between Karmas, there is a
difference in (their) experience. (Surely then, in that case there would) not be the logical
defect of mutual dependence. (Is that not s0)? Thus (to counter this reply), he says:
‘again if, etc.ʼ.

Read as, in the BhoKā, sambandhād yugapat for sambaddhā yugapat – ‘(Then the

aggregate of the means to worldly experience, thus) firmly associated.” The commentary

says: ‘Itis not logically possible for (individual) souls that are enveloped in Impurity to
be the agents of Karma without being associated with the subtle body etc. (consisting
of) Kalā and the rest; (thus,) that aggregate of principles, which is one and in the form of

the subtle body, by its association simultaneously with all the agents, goes on creating

Karma. How (then) does it create (many) varied separate Karmas? (If this is the
question, we reply that) that is not so. This is the meaning.
Surely, (would that not be correct) if (we were to say that) the difference in the

Karmas is due to the different things each person wishes to do? (To this suggestion, we
reply that,) no, that (is not so,) because the desire to act (also) arises because of the

CHAPTER NINE

g0 0n) producing (the same) Karma (through them) simultaneously. So how
could it produce differing Karmas due to the diversity of (their) agents?”
(The syllogism) applied (prayoga) here (in this case is as follows). 1)
The aggregate of principles from Force (of limited agency) onwards differs for
each individual soul because it brings about the diversity (of experience) of
pleasure and pain etc. (they each have). 2) Whatever brings about a diversity (of
experience) of pleasure and pain etc. differs for each individual soul, as is the
case, for example, with the body. 3) What is not different for each individual
soul does not bring about a diversity (of experience) of pleasure and pain etc., as
is the case with Māyā. 4) Therefore, the aggregate of principles from the Force
(of limited agency) onwards, which brings about a diversity (of experience) of
pleasure and pain etc., differs for each individual soul.
Surely (someone may object that) in this way what is being saidis that
the diversity of (the aggregate of principles) from the Force (of limited agency)
onwards alsois due to the diversity of individual souls. (However,) if (one were

to object that) here (according to your nondualist view), the difference between
individual souls is not ultimately real, so howis it possible that this (difference)
be theirs also? (We would reply that,) agreed! This is why (Abhinavagupta) says
that ‘sometimes they become one in accord with the Lord’s will, as happens,
for example, during a dance (performance) or concert’. ‘They become one’
because, in this aspect at least, relative distinctions fall away. Although all
perceivers and (their) objects are made of one (and the same) principle of
consciousness, and that is their common nature, even so, the firmly fixed

manifestation of duality (bhedāvabhāṣa) that is generated by the power of Māyā

does exist. However, there (in that case) also, their oneness manifests emitted in

some aspect, according to the modality of the individual production (prasava)
(from Māyā for each soul, of the principles that are the means to its worldly
experience). Why should this not be so everywhere (in every case)? (In response
to this question,) it is said that (it takes place) ‘according to the Lord’s will’.
Thus, because these (principles essentially) consist of Śiva’s nondual
(nature), it is possible for them to be pure (i.e. nondual) also. Thus he says:

TTIHTT ĪH-āī-] |

eṣāṁ kalāditattvānāṁ sarveṣām api bhāvinām |

śuddhatvam asti teṣāṁ ye śaktipātapaviṭritāḥ |I 171 II
relationship with the subtle body. And because that (subtle body, according to you,) is
one (and the same for all the souls), it is also not logically possible that there is a

difference in the desire to act. Thus, because the difference of the experience that has
(thus) been well examined would otherwise be logically impossible, one maust
necessarily accept that thereis a different subtle body for each person.”

kariṣyati – literally ‘will it’.

TANTRĀLOKA

These principles from the Force (of limited agency) onwards, as

well as all those that will be, are purified for those who are sanctified by

grace (Śaktipāta). (171)

The ones that ‘will be’ are the Force (of limited agency) and the rest,

because they will be explained (further ahead). (In response to the question,)
which one is purified? (He replies that) ‘those’ (will be purified). And which are
those? (They are the principles of) ‘those who are sanctified by grace’.
Surely (one may ask), as (all the principles) from the Force (of limited

agency) onwards are (equally) without distinction means to worldly experience,
what difference is there between purity and impurity? With this doubt in mind,
he says:

TI] TTRCT TFTÑ I|293 |I
kalā hi śuddhā tattādṛk karmatvaṁ saṁprasūyate |
mitam apy āśu yenāsmāt saṁsārād eṣa mucyate || 172 |

The pure Force (of limited agency) generates activity (such as
meditation or worship), which is (pure) as it is. Although limited, (this
action) quickly frees (the fettered soul) from this transmigratory existence.

(172)

(The activity which is) ‘as it is’ has as its object the worship and
meditation of the Supreme Lord.
The same is taught elsewhere also.

UEBEAERIHVĒṬGĒITĒVĒHI

rāgavidyākālayatiprakṛtyakṣārthasañcayaḥ |
itthaṁ śuddha iti procya gurur mānastutau vibhuḥ | 173 ||

The

teacher (Vidyādhipati)

has said in

the Mānastuti (i.e.

Pramāṇastotra) that in this way, (the principles) of Attachment, (Limited)

śakúipāta literally means ‘a descent of power’, that is, empowerment that comes from

the deity above, which purifies the lower levels, thus making them one with the purer
higher levels. The types of śaktipāta are described below in 13/121 ff.

Abhinava refers back to this passage below in 17/115ab. All the verses recovered in

citation from the Pramāṇastotra are set in the thirteen-syllable metre called
Mattamayūra.

CHAPTER NINE

Knowledge, Time, Necessity, and Nature, along with the senses and their

objects, are pure in this way." (173)

(The pure forms of the other five coverings are) ‘in this way’, that is,

like the (pure form of the) Force (of limited agency). Thus (by the purifying
action of grace), Attachment generates attachment for the Goddess alone.

Similarly, Impure Knowledge becomes discernment (viveka), which has that as
its object. Time is the time spent (kalana) with the teaching etc., that concerns
that (Siva) as its object. The (constraint of Karmic) Necesity (niyati) (becomes)

the discipline (niyamana) of worshipping Him etc. In the same way, one can
infer (for oneself) anything else (that arises by an act of grace). Nor is that just
our own idea. The ‘teacher” Vidyādhipati (has said this in his) ‘Mānastuti’, that
is, the Pramāṇastotra.

Kalā – the Force of Limited Agency
Having explained this by the way, he (goes on) to talk about the main point.

evam eṣā kalādīnām utpattiḥ pravivicyate |
māyātattvāt kalā jātā kiñcitkartrtvalakṣaṇā || 174 ||
(Now is the time) to reflect on how the (principles), including the
Force (of limited agency) and the rest, arise (one by one) in this way. The
Force (of limited agency) arises from the principle of Māyā, and its

characteristic is limited agency (kiñcitkartṛtva). (174)

Concerning the creation of the pure principles, see below 17/99cd-115ab. In
17/115ab Abhinava refers to the Pramāṇastuti as teaching that the senses are of two

kinds, pure andimpure.

See below, 9/213-214 and MV 1/27. This, the first of the obscuring coverings

(kañcuka) not only obscures its essentially omnipotent Śiva nature it enlivens its limited
consciousness (caitanyodbalana). This ideais expressedin the Siddhāntas in general.
See for example, Kiraṇa 1/16, Kiraṇavrtti 4/28, Svāyambhuvasūutrasaṁgraha 1/10 and
Haravijaya 6/126. According to the Mrṛgendravidy īpāda 2/5ab the soul’s innate
sentience (caitanya) consists
of both the power of knowledge and the power of action:

“The nature of consciousness

is knowledge and action and thatis always present in the

Self’ (caitanyaṁ dṛkkriyārūpaṁ tad asty ātmani sarvadā). The same is said in the
Parākhya 2/70cd and in the Mataṅgavidyāpāda 6/33cd where we read: “According to
this inference, the nature of consciousness is (both) knowledge and action’
(anenaivānumānena citir jñūānakriyātmikā). Also Pauṣkara 5/3cd-4ab:

caitanyaṁ jñatvakartrtvarāpaṁ tad balam ātmanaḥ l
kalayā vyajyate tat tu tasyaiva hi tiraskṛtam |

TANTRĀLOKA

That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘That (power of Māyā) generated the principle which is the Force (of

limited agency) (kalātattva), due to union with which the individual soul has

come to possess the capacity (to be an) agent . . . .

Surely (one may ask), it is said that the Self is of itself both knower and
agent, and that it is by its power (kalā) that the limited agency (of the individual
soul) is generated. How is that? With this doubt in mind, he says:

nrr fē frraīg iīē ftraṁṭaa
īr. 1

gṬTITHaTTĪ
Ta TT RTITĒĒ: |I| Ṟ9.4, 11
māyā hi cinmayād bhedaṁ śivād vidadhatī paśoḥ |
suṣuptatām ivādhatte tata eva hy adṛkkriyaḥ || 175 I|
Maāyā engenders the separation of the fettered soul from Śiva, Who
is consciousness, and (the soul) assumes a state like that of deep sleep. Thus,
it is devoid of both knowledge and action. (175)
(Māyā) engenders the separation (of the individual soul) from Śiva,

Who is consciousness, even as it hides (Māyā’s) innate nature (svarūpa). As the

soul is thus not of the nature of consciousness, it is plunged into a state like one

who is in a coma (murchita). (Accordingly, he says that it) ‘assumes a state
like that of deep sleep’. ‘Thus’, because it assumes a state of deep sleep, it is

‘devoid of both knowledge and action’, (and so, not inactive and ignorant, its
innate) complete (and perfect) knowledge and action have been obscured. This

is the meaning.

‘The nature of consciousness is agency and noetic subjectivity. That is the

(inner) strength of the Self. That is made manifest by the power of limited agency (kalā)

(even as) it is obscured (by it). See Goodall 2004: 233 n 319)

The following passage from the Parākhya defines the first of the obscuring
coverings:
‘(Kalā) always has the form of the (limited) power of the agency of souls; she
increases their strength (tatsāmarthyopabṛṁṅhikā). And just as a medicinal herb, (though
it is itself) insentient, because of its power (enlivens consciousness) in one who is

tormented by poison, so too, in the (process of the) soul’s attaining of a revelation of its

(innate power of) consciousness, an instrument must necessarily be made, (and that
instrument is) kalā. (Only) then, when he has had his activity enlivened by kalā
(kalodbalitavṛttkaḥ), does the soul become extroverted towards the objects of
experience (viṣayānveṣi). Only in such a one (whose faculties have been enlivened by
Kalā) (tatraiva) does another instrument arise from kalā: the limited power of
knowledge (vidyā). When joined with this other instrument he becomes slightly fitter
(for experience) (yogyaḥ) and discriminated (vivecayer). Parākhya 2/28-30.

MSs K, Ch, J, h, N. T and D read punaḥ for pumān.

% MV 1/27abc; also quoted below in TĀv ad 9/189cd-190ab.

CHAPTER NINE

Surely (one may ask), in this way the universe would be insentient, or it
may not be, because due to the obscuration of (its) power of knowledge, it is not

perceived in the way it actually is. Having expressed this doubt, he says (by way
of response):

ēṬJT I JAT |I Ṟ 6Ē, |I
kalā hi kiṅcitkartr̥tvaṁ sūte svāliṅganād aṇoḥ |
tasyāś cāpy aṇunāṇyonmyaṁ hy añjane sā prasūyate || 176 ||
The Force (of limited agency)" generates the limited capacity for
action (kiñcitkartṛtva) of the soul by embracing it with itself, and that too by
the individual soul. (Thus,) mutually (embracing) one another, when (they
are) in contact (añjana), that (Force) gives birth (to its result). (176)
Surely (one may ask), agreed that the soul is embraced by the Force (of

limited agency), otherwise its limited capacity for action would not arise, but

what is the purpose of the soul’s again embracing that? With this doubt in mind,
he says: “mutuallyʼ. (The meaning of) añjanaṁ is contact (saṁśleṣaḥ).

He (now goes on) to logically establish this same (point) by means of an

example.

fe aī aī

sadyonirvāṇadīkṣotthapuṁviśleṣe hi sā satī |

śliṣyantyapi ca no sūte tathāpi svaphalaṁ kvacit || 177 II
(For) when the soul is disengaged from (that Force) by the initiation
that bestows immediate Nirvāṇa (nirvāṇadīkṣā), although it is still

attached (to the soul), it does not generate its fruits in any circumstance.
(177)
In the course of the initiation that bestows immediate Nirvāṇa, the

individual soul is conjoined (to a level) above the Force (of limited agency), and

so is separated from it. Even s0, like other (forms of) initiation, as this Force (of

limited agency) ‘is still attached (to the soul)ʼ, even if as just a latent trace, it

Read kalām for kalā. See TSā p. 80.
A much less forced understanding of the meaning of the word añjanam, which

literally means ‘stain’ or ‘impurityʼ, is Māyā. In which case the translation would be,
instead of ‘it gives birth to it within (their) contact (añjana), ‘it gives birth to it within
the stain (añjana) (of Māyā). Cf. the expression below (15/308d): māyāñjanāñjitam i.e.

‘stained by the impurity of Māyā’. See also below, 9/179.

This initiation is described below in Chapter Nineteen. The soul, by virtue of this

initiation, transcends the plane of conditioned agency.

TANTRĀLOKA

does not generate’, that is, give birth to ‘its fruit’, which is the limited capacity
for action etc. within the soul ‘in any circumstance’ at all. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), the Force (of limited agency) generates its
product by its own power alone, so what is the use of its attachment to the
individual soul? He quells this doubt by means of an example.

3ṬTd JITI ṬTTgTĒŌĪ

SIfTa || 2.9¢ |1
ucchūnateva prathamā sūkṣmāṅkurakaleva ca |

bījasṣyāmbvagnimṛtkambutuṣayogāt prasūtikṛt |l 178 II

The Force (of limited agency) (kalā) is like the initial swelling of a

seed and the subtle power of (its emerging) sprout that (finally) germinates
(completely) by (its) association with water, fire, earth, and its (nourishing)

integument (kambutuṣa). (178)

Just as the swelling of a seed, which is its initial state (when it is about

to sprout), or after that the subtle sprout which is its limb generates its product
by its association with water etc., in the same way, the Force (of limited agency)
etc., which is a product of Māyā, (gives rise to its product) when it is associated
with the individual soul. So it has rightly been said that ‘the Force (of limited
agency) generates its own fruit when conjoined with the individual soul.” (By)
‘fire’ here is meant just (its vital) heat (tejas) alone.

Surely (one may ask), just as in the case of a cloth which is produced by

the conjunction of threads, (every) single thread is (its) material cause. In the
same way, in accord with the teaching: ‘similarly, by the union of Māyā with

the individual soul, the energy (kalā) of consciousness manifests, Maāyā,

not the individual soul, is the material cause (upādānakāraṇa) of the Force (of

limited agency), which is born from the conjunction of Māyā and the individual

soul. How can we determine this (with certainty)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

exvakiēiyāēIUE2CĒEEATEzefḤI

fēē-ġ nīa frsā’tīīg 1| zez 11|
kalā māyāṇusaṅyogajāpy eṣā nirvikārakam |
nāṇuṁ kuryād upādānaṁ kintu māyāṁ vikāriṇīm || 179 ||
The ‘skin’ of a seed is made of two layers, called kambuka and tuṣa, hence the name.
It is believed to be the cause of the swelling of the seed when the other conditions are

right for this to happen. See below, 9/212.
" Read cetanākalā for cetanā kalā.

ṂMPA Vidyāpāda. 9/15ab.

CHAPTER NINE

This Force (of limited agency) is born of the union of Māyā with the

individual soul. The soul which even so does not change, does not act as
the material cause, rather it is Māyā that undergoes transformations

(vikāriṇī) (does s0). (179)

‘The soul does not act as the material cause. The meaning is that the

soul is not the material cause of that (Force (of limited agency)). The reason for
this is that ‘it does not change’. The material cause is that which, (even) once

its nature has changed, continues to exist as a pervasive presence
(anugāmitvena) in (its subsequent) effect, like clay in the jar (made from it).

This is not so (in the case of) this (Force (of limited agency)). This is because
(the soul) is eternal (and unchanging), as its one nature is consciousness. Thus,

although (the Force (oflimited agency)) is born from the union of both, it
id
that its material cause is Māyā alone. (As he says,) ‘rather it is Māyā that
undergoes transformationsʼ. The meaning is that (Māyā) is diverse (bhinnā)
due to the diversity of the transformations of each of its modalities (tattatvṛtti).
Surely (one may ask, alright agreed), let not the soul be the material
cause of the Force (of limited agency), because it does not change. (But) from
whence this fixed rule that it be (just) Māyā itself? It is said that the cause of
transmigratory existence (are the three,) Mala, Māyā and Karma conjoined
together. Having posed this question, he says:

H@āTTTĪTI HTṬ HTṬHTCṬTĀITUIT] |

t aaīṝ, āēākrīāa gGag aTaa TTd 11 2¢o ||
malaś cāvārāko māyā bhāvopādānakāraṇam |
karma syāt sahakāryeva sukhaduḥkhodbhavaṁ prati || 180 |
Impurity (mala) is the obscuring covering (avāraka) (of
consciousness). Māyā is the material cause (upādāna) of phenomenal

existence (bhāva), (that is, the principles from Kalā to Earth,) whereas
Karma is the concomitant cause of the arising of pleasure and pain. (180)

Although they are (all three) equally causes of transmigratory existence
and, as such, (each) produces (its own) predetermined (pratiniyata) effect, the
task (kārya) of (the soulʼ’s innate) Impurity is to veil (its) knowledge and action.

Kalā etc., which are the products of Māyā, can only develop when contact with the

auxiliary cause, that is, the soul, is maintained. The soulʼs union with Māyā gives rise to

the conditioned mind. However, Māyā, not the individual soul (aṇu), is the cause of
Kalā, which is born from the union of Māyā and the soul. Cf. above, 9/176.

The material cause is that which, although it changes, continues to exist in its
subsequent effect, as is the case with clay and a jar made of clay, etc. This is not the
case however with the soul, because it is nothing but pure consciousness, which is

eternal (and hence unchanging). Thus, Māyā is Kalā’s material cause, though it comes
into being through the union of both (the soul and Māyā). For ‘Māyā undergoes

transformationsʼ, that is, Māyā is changing, as it is differentiated by (its) various
transformations brought about by each of its functions (vṛtri).

TANTRĀLOKA

Thuṣ, its capacity (sāmarthya) reduced to this degree, how could it also generate
the Force (of limited agency), which stimulates its limited capacity for action,
which is the opposite of that? As the concomitant cause (along with that),
Karma is the instrumental cause of pleasure and the like (the soul experiences),
which, pertaining to the objects of the senses, have as their material causes
(their experience of) for example, (the scent of) garlands, incense and the like,
made of the qualities of sartva and the rest (according to whether they are
pleasing, energizing or painful). Thus, as it is the remaining one (out of the
three,) Māyā is the material cause of phenomena that extend from the Force (of
limited agency) up to Earth. This is the apportionment (vibhāga) (of the
functions of the three Impurities).
In this way, one must admit that there must be some instrumental cause

which serves to strengthen the limited capacity for knowledge and action of the
individual soul whose consciousness has been obscured by obscuring Impurity.
That cannot be Karma, because the power (it possesses) has been well
examined, (so it is clear that it serves) solely to give rise to the worldly
experience (bhoga) (which is the consequence of Karma). Thus, all that remains
(that could possibly be the cause of that) is just the Force (of limited agency).
Accordingly, he says:

rPÚEEFEETEEEFCEAEAEETṬḺ
E¢EIEREIÉEZPĀĪNEcPIISEIFSIBEEIHI 2¢2g

1l

atāḥ saṁcchannacaitanyasamudhalanakãryakr̥t |
kalaivānantanāthasya śaktyā saṁpreritā jaḍā || 181 ||
Thus, it is the Force (of limited agency) that performs the task of

strengthening the obscured consciousness (of the indiyidual soul).
Insentient, it is impelled by Lord Ananta’s power (not by SŚiva directly).
(181)

‘Consciousness' is the agency of the activity of the power of
consciousness (citi). This is the meaning. Surely (one may object that) it is a
contradiction (contrary to the very nature of things that) the Force (of limited
agency), which is insentient, strengthens consciousness. Thus, with this doubt in
mind, he says that ‘it is impelled by Lord Ananta’s power°.
Surely (one may say that,) if this is so, the power of the Lord (Himself)
(īśaśakti) should strengthen it (directly). What is the use of the Force (of limited
agency)? With this doubt in mind, he says:
T-ITTITITThŪĀTK z. Talāīṝā

na ceśaśaktir evāsya caitanyaṁ balayiṣyati |
tadupodbalitaṁ tad dhi na kiṁcitkartrtāṁ vrajet || 182 ||

CHAPTER NĪNE

Śiva’s power will not strengthen the consciousness (of the soul
directly). (If it were to be) strengthened by that (power directly), that (soul)

would not become (just) a limited agent, (but would be omnipotent, as the

Lord is Himself). (182)

The first ‘that’ (in the second sentence) refers to the power of the Lord,

whereas the other (‘that’ refers) to consciousness (which is the soul). If the

Supreme Lord (parameśvara), independently of the Force (of limited agency)
etc., were to strengthen the agency etc. of souls in bondage with His own power
(directly), as He does that of liberated souls, then that would (take place) at all
times and circumstances. Thus, he says that ‘it would not become a (merely)
limited agent’. As they say:
‘Saṁbhu does not make (the limited powers of the soul) manifest

without (the aid of) the fetter (that binds it), because not all (souls are) the field

(of the operation of His power) (viṣaya). It is not like the power of the agency of
a liberated soul (he makes manifest), that is free of association with impurity
(añjana).”

Surely, there is no disagreement that the agency of the individual soul is
directed to the worldly experience (hhoga) which he must have (due to his past
Karma). What

we do not understand

is which of the two

(kinds of)

implementing agents (kāraka) is the Force (of limited agency)? It is not Karma,
because, as that which strengthens consciousness, its field of operation is not the
activity of enjoying (worldly experience). Nor is it an instrument (karaṇa) (of
action). That is an object of the impulse of the agent, whereas this impels the
agent also. So how can it become an instrument (of action) as is, for example,
(the limited capacity for) knowledge (which is the instrument through which the
agent acts in order to know something)? There, in that

case (if it were to be an

instrument of action), the agency (of the Force (of limited agency)) would be,
like other implementing agents, far removed (from direct contact with the soul).

Taking into consideration the question (of whether) it is an instrument (of
action), he goes on to criticize (this view).

aāa; || 2.¢3 1
seyaṁ kalā na karaṇaṁ mukhyaṁ vidyādikaṁ yathā |
paṅsi kartari sã kartrī prayojakatayā yataḥ |l 183 II
This Force is not, like Knowledge (vidyā) and the rest (of the

coverings), a primary instrument (karaṇa) (with respect to the senses), for
it acts (directly) in the soul, that is, in the agent, as that which impels it

(prayojaka). (183)

“ However, see below, 9/246 ff.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The covering called) Knowledge is a) ‘primary’ (instrument). The

meaning is that it is supreme (param) with respect to the intellect and the rest of

the inner (mental) organs (karaṇa) (of perception).

‘The instrument by means of which the individual soul (puruṣa)
generates the object of worldly experience (bhogya), having impelled the
intellect and the rest (of the components of the inner mental organ), and then
again the worldly experience (bhoga) within the object of experience, is (the
covering called) Knowledge (vidyā). That is the supreme instrument (of the

soulʼs knowledge).”

The activity of (the Force (of limited agency)) that impels to action
(prayojaka) is established in the object of (its) impulse, that is, ‘in the soul, that
is, in the agent, which is (its) field (of operation). Although, with regard to
(their) agency, both (the Force and the soul) are thus specified by (their) activity
as impellers (to action), the object of (that) impulse is only the individual soul

who, with respect to the action, is the main directly apparent agent, by virtue of
the (limited degree of) independence it possesses (svātantryayogāt). That is said
(in the following verse):

‘He makes the power of the agency (of the soul) manifest, and so His

energy (kalā) impels (to action). Then, in the course of worldly experience

(bhoga), it is the individual soul who, conjoined with (that) energy, makes (the

psychophysical organism) an agent (kartṛkāraka).'
(It is said):

‘O (wise) Brahmin, having thus equally experienced both (the soul and

its limited agency), that abide as if they were not different from one another,

(the wise) have said that that which generates the agency (kartṛkāraka) of living

beings (functions) within the prescribed activity of (its) worldly experience.

Here vidyāis referred to as an ‘instrument’ – karaṇa. The same usage is observedin

Parākhya 4130 and 35, as it is in other Śaiva texts. Goodall 1998: 206 fn 138 and 2004:
234 n 326 refers to other examples in Tattvasaṁgraha 12, and Mataṅgavṛtti ad
vidyāpāda 10/4cd. Here it is said to be the supreme instrument.

Tattvasaṁgraha verse 12. Aghoraśiva comments: ‘The instrument by means of
which” “having impelled’ the group of (inner) senses, that is, the intellect, ego and the

rest, ‘the individual soul’ generates ‘the object of experience’, and within that ‘object of
experience’ experiences, is the instrument of the Self called ‘Knowledge’. As that is

most excellent, it is said to be ‘supreme’. This is (what) is said (here): (a person) goes
(somewhere) by means of a horse, by a road, by (the light of) a lamp. As in (these)
examples, the fruit is attainable by many means also (not just one). But even s0,) Vidyā
is the supreme means (karaṇa), for it is by that alone that one knows the object of
experience (which is to be enjoyed).

"Read kartrṛkārakaḥ for kartṛkārakam.

Mṛgendratantra vidyāpāda 1/7. I s also quoted below, along with the previous four
verses, in TĀv ad 9/190cd-191ab. Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, commenting on this verse, says:

‘‘The living being is the fettered individual soul, who has not attained the worldly

experience (that accords with his Karma). When the activity of the worldly experience
prescribed (for him) arises in the aforestated manner, the teachers ‘have said’, i.e.

CHAPTER NINE
As the soul and the Force (of limited agency) are (related to one

another) in this way, in accord with this teaching, as the object of impulse and
the impeller, the difference between (the soul and the Force (of limited agency))
is not discernible, because (together) they constitute a single agent and impeller
(of its agency). Even so, if by the grace of the Lord, the knowledge which
discriminates between the two arises for somebody, then that discriminating
(insight) (viveka) (follows), which distinguishes between Māyā and the
indiviḍual soul, because all Karma is destroyed. (Thus, his) state (becomes that)

of a Consciousness Deconditioned (perceiver), by virtue of which this soul does
not wander (again) down below Māyā. Thus he says that:
Discriminating between Māyā and the Individual Soul

TēāT-cajīcc- aa] ÇGakōaāīiā |

fāāTTīTPGT
TTITTĀTTĪ aTIT-TT ṬTT] ||7¢. 1I
alakṣyāntarayor itthaṁ yadā puṁskalayor bhavet |

māyāgarbheśaśaktyāder antarajñānam āntaram || 184 |
tadā māyāpuṅvivekaḥ sarvakarmakṣayād bhavet |

(Although) the difference between (the soul and the Force (of
limited agency)) is not discernible in this way (because of their close
association), if an inner knowledge of the soul and the Force (of limited
agency) arises by the power of the Lord of the wombs of Māyā, then an
inner discriīminating awareness (viveka) (follows), that distinguishes

between Māyā and the soul, because all Karma is destroyed. The soul
and no longer wanders below the level of Māyā. (184-185)
‘The Lord of the wombs of Māyā’ is Ananta. The words ‘and the rest’

in the expression ‘power and the rest’ refers to (the powers) of knowledge and
the rest, that are indicated by that. That is said (in the following passage):

taught, that that is ‘that which generates agencyʼ, called the Kalā of the (individual)
soul. They have said that, as the enjoyer of the worldly experience (which is the
consequence of Karma), it is (the individual soul’s) agency. Kalā is the cause that
‘generates and makes the power of (the soul’s limited) agency, because it strengthens

it.’
This is the insight that the soul and Māyā differ and are separate from each other. The
Sāṁkhya uses the same term with relation to the discrimination between the individual
soul and Nature. The isolating insight of the difference between the soul and Māyā is

mediated by the Force (of limited agency). Similarly, that between the individual soul
and Nature is mediated by the mind.

See below, 13/273cd-274ab. Verse 185 is quoted in the commentary.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘However, O one of firm vows, he who having piously and rightly

examined (the nature of things) by the lamp of the eye of knowledge, born of
the lotus face of the (primal) cause, (realizing that) “this is the individual soul

and this the inauspicious Force (of limited agency), abode of imperfection,”
having known the difference between them, without a doubt returns to being
established within himself.”
(It is an)

‘inner (knowledge))

means that, with respect to the

discrimination between the soul and Nature, it is (more) internal.

Surely (one may ask), the destruction of all Karmas is achieved by the

knowledge (that arises) by discriminating between Nature (prakṛti) and the soul
(puruṣa). So what is this (talk) of discrimination between Māyā and Puruṣa?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

dhīpuṁviveke vijñāte pradhānapuruṣāntare |
api na kṣīṇakarmā syāt kalāyāṁ tad dhi saṁbhavet || 1 86 ||
Even once one has achieved a discriminating insight between the
intellect and the soul, or that between the soul and Nature, Karma is not
destroyed, because it can arise (as long as) the Force (of limited agency)

(continues to exist). (186)

The discriminating insight ‘between the individual soul and Nature’

is of the same nature as ‘the discriminating insight between intellect and the
individual soul’. This is the meaning. The discrimination or lack of
discrimination between Nature and individual soul takes place by means of the
intellect. The lack of discrimination amounts to the notion that the shadow of
consciousness projected (onto the intellect) is the agent (of action)
(kartṭvābhimāṇa). It is said (according to the Sāṁkhya) that discrimination is
(on the contrary) the notion that consciousness, which is like the steady flame of

a lamp, because the transformations brought about by fluctuation (of the mind
due to) the objects of the senses have ceased, is not the agent (of action). It is
said that the discrimination between Mayā and the individual soul, mediated by
the Force (of limited agency) (kalādvāraka), takes place in the same way. Even

though (the lower level of discriminating) ‘insight’ (has been achieved, as long
as) the Force (of limited agency) (continues) to exist, the Force (of limited
agency) itself is the direct instrumental cause of Karma, because it makes the

limited capacity for action (of the individual soul) manifest.
Moreover, it is said:

Read with MSs N, Th: caiṣā for caiṣāṁ and doṣālāyāśubhā for doṣālāyā śubhā.
Verses 186-187ab are quoted below in TĀv ad 13/274cd-275ab.

CHAPTER NINE

‘And the Isolation (as liberation) of the Sāṁkhyas is certainly
indefensible, because the Karma they have which is to be experienced above the
principle of the guṇas is not destroyed, because it has not been perceived (and

experienced).

When discrimination (arises) in this way between Nature and the

individual soul, its Karma up to Nature is destroyed. When discrimination

between the Force (of limited agency) and the individual soul (arises), (it is

destroyed) up to Māyā, due to which he (never) transmigrates below it. He says
that:

g TīaTāīI īa- 7T=fT] II z¢9 1
ataḥ sāṁkhyadrśā siddhah pradhānādho na saṅsaret |
kalāpuṁ
sor vivēke tu māyādho naiva gacchati || 187 ||
Therefore, he who has reached perfection, according to the

Sāṁkhyā view, no longer transmigrates below the level of Nature. When

(he) discriminates between the Force (of limited agency) and the individual
soul, he never goes below the level of Māyā. (187)
‘According to the Sāṁkhyā view’, that is, as the Sāṁkhya doctrine
(maintains, he no longer transmigrates below the level of Nature,) by virtue of

(his) discriminating insight between Nature and the individual soul. This is the
meaning. One should understand that that is accomplished by the process of
sustained meditation (dhāraṇā) on Nature etc., as taught in our philosophy.
Otherwise, (if he does not achieve this,) he transmigrates once again below it.
As was said before:
‘At the beginning of a (new) day (of creation), Śrīkaṇṭha again emits
those who have mastered the Sāṁkhya or the Veda and the like. Therefore, this

kind of liberation is not proper (and complete) (samyak).

Surely (one may ask), if this is so, when will (this soul) travel upwards
again above Māyā? With this doubt in mind, he says:

malād viviktam ātmānaṁ paśyaṁs tu śivatāṁ vrajet |
Seeing that one’s own nature is separate (and free) (vivikta) from

Impurity (mala), one attains Siva’s state. (188ab)

Paṟamokṣanirāsakārikā (by Sadyojyoti with commentary by Rāmakaṇṭha) verse 53.
See below, 13/274cd-275ab.
Above, 6/152cd-153ab (152). AIso quoted above in TĀv ad 1/34.
This line is quoted below in TĀv ad 13/277ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), although discriminating insight is of three kinds,

one should consider the perceiver to be as it is (constantly), and that its nature is

pure consciousness alone, so how is it that that (insight) happens (only)

sometimes and to some (particular person, not another)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

1|2¢¢ 11

sarvatra caiśvaraḥ śaktipāto ‘tra sahakāraṇam || 188 II
The Lord’s grace (śaktipāta) is the concomitant cause everywhere

here (at all these three levels of discriminating insight). (188cd)

Surely, here (the Lord’s) grace is the same (in all cases). How is it that
there is this difference in the three forms of discrimination and their result?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

zaā q fc:
māyāgarbhādhikārī yo dvayor antye tu nirmalaḥ |

In (the first) two (cases), it is that of (Ananta), who presides over
the Womb of Māyā, while in the latter case it is pure. (189ab)

Those who preside over the Womb of Māyā are Ananta and the rest.

(The first) two cases are the discrimination between (the soul) and Nature, and

(between it) and Māyā. Thus here (in these cases), they do not culminate in

liberation. ‘The latter case’ is the discrimination (between the soul) and

Impurity. It is ‘pure’ because it ultimately culminates in liberation.
Surely (one may object that) this is Māyā itself (which operates in this
way). What is the use of there being something else different from it? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

seyaṁ kalā kāryabhedād anyaiva hy anumīyate || 189 ||
anyathaikaṁ bhaved viśvaṁ kāryāyety anyanihnavaḥ |
One can infer that this Force differs (from Māyā), as their products

are different. Otherwise, (if there were to be no difference between them,)

l Read -dhikārī yo for ~dhikārīy

See above, 6/148 and below, 13/273cd- 275ab. The three types of discrimination are:
1) Diṣcrimination between Puruṣa and Prakṛti. 2) Discrimination between Puruṣa and

Maāyā. 3) Discrimination between Puruṣa and Mala. This last one alone brings about
liberation.
Read ~dhikārī yo for <dhikārīyo.

CHAPTER NINE

every product would originate from one (cause) alone, and so all the
other (principles) would stand negated. (189cd-190ab)
(This Force differs (from Māyā),) ʻas their products are different’.
Maāyā causes the soul to be as if in a coma (thus losing all its power to act and
know), whereas this (Force gives) it a limited capacity to act (kiṁcitkartṛtva). It
‘differsʼ, that is, (it differs) from Māyā. ʻOtherwise’ – (if there were to be) no
difference (between them). The ‘one’ (cause) is the principle of Māyā. Thusṣ (if
that were s0), all the products, including the limited capacity to act and the rest,
would arise from that alone, which would entail the negation (as unnecessary)

of all else, that is, the categories from (Impure) Knowledge onwards. He says
that (with the words,) ‘all the other (principles) would stand negated’.
Surely (one may ask), it is said in the venerable Mataṅgatantra etc. that
the Force (of limited agency) bestows a limited capacity to act (on the soul
deprived of its faculties by Māyā). That is (said) there (in the Mataṅgatantra),
beginning with:
‘O sage, those (souls) whose nature has (only) slightly unfolded, and

whose form (mūrti) is penetrated by the Force (of limited agency), fickle
(tarala) and pulsing intensely, they enter the state (of impending manifestation,)
swollen (like seeds about to sprout).

Whereas, in the Mālinīvijayottara, (the Force (of limited agency) is

said) to bestow the capacity to act in general (without qualification as ‘limited’).
As is said there:

‘That (power of Māyā) generated the principle which is the Force (of
limited agency) (kalātattva), due to union with which the individual soul has
come to possess the capacity (to be an) agent. . . .

Here the description of the sequence of principles has been taken up (on

the basis of) the authority (of the Mālinīvijayottara) (tadadhikāreṇa); so how is
it that, on the contrary, it is said (here that) it bestows (just) a limited capacity to
act (to the soul)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

iti mataṅgaśāstrādau yā proktā sā kalā svayam || 190 |I
kiṁcidrūpatayākṣipya kartṛtvam iti bhaṅgitaḥ l

Read viśvakāryāya or viśvaṁ kāryāya.
MPĀ Vidyāpāda 9/9.
MV 1/27abc. It is also quoted in TĀv ad 9/174. Abhinava refers to MV 1/27abc
below in TĀ 9/190cd-191ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

The (generic) term ‘agency’ (kartṛtva) (that we find in the

Mālinīvijayottara) implies ‘limited agency’. This (interpretation) is
confirmed in the Mataṅgatantra and other (Tantras), where this Force is

(explicitly) said to consist of limited (agency). (190cd-191ab)

The sense of this statement (is as follows). “This Force is (explicitly)
said’ ‘in the Mataṅgatantra and other (Tantras)’ to bestow limited agency (to
the soul). As it is impossible for the individual soul to possess a full (and
unlimited) agency by its own capacity alone, the ‘agency’ the Mālinīvijaya says
(it bestows on the soul) ‘implies limited agencyʼ, (referring to it) thus in
general terms. By ‘other (Tantras) is meant the Mṛgendra and others. That is
said there (in the Mṛgendra):

‘The power of the agency of the individual soul is, like the Lord’s
power, eternal. She is Vibhvī (the Pervasive One). She does not manifest within

phenomena that are covered by darkness (tamas) without assistance. It is that

radiantly energetic principle called the Force (of limited agency) (kalā) that aids
(the individual soul). Once Hara has aroused Maāyā, it acts (to make the power

of agency manifest). That is the supreme ancillary to the ongoing activity

(pravṛtti) (of the (individual) self) (pravṛttyaṅga).

Then, having by means of that, like a lamp, rent asunder the dense

darkness of the soul whose consciousness is pure, it partially (ekadeśa)

illumines it.

Abhinava is referring to MV 1/27abc.

Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha comments: “Although the power of the agency of the individual soul
is, like Śiva’s power, eternal and pervasive, because it has been heard (from the

scriptures) to be such in the case of one who is liberated, even so, because (the soul) is
enveloped by beginningless Impurity, it does not manifest in the things that need to be

done without assistance. The principle called Kalā is that which assists it, that is,
capacitates it. Hara is the Lord Ananta. He saves (harati) the individual souls, who are

on the lower (levels), in order to liberate them from the consequences of Karma
(bhoga). He arouses Māyā, that is, makes it propense to give birth (to its products), and

having done so acts, that is, makes manifest (Kalā and its other products). It is for this

reason that the principle called Kalā is the supreme ancillary to the ongoing activity
(pravṛtti) of the (individual) self, which gives it the capacity which is agency, because it

is due to that alone that it pervades (every action).
It would not be capable of acting if its agency were not to be energized by that.
It possesses a radiantly energetic state, because it is the cause of illumination of the

individual soul by the removal in one place of (its) innate Impurity.”
Narāyaṇakaṇṭha comments: ‘When Māyā is propense to give birth (to its products),

that (same) Maheśvara mentioned before pierces like a lamp through the dense darkness

of the soul, whose power of consciousness is very sullied by the radiant energy of the

priṉciple called Kalā, (but only) partially so, because it (only) illumines to a limited
degree. (Having done s0,) it makes the agent conditioned by Impurity partially manifest,
that is, it strengthens (its agency).

Necessity (niyati) is also subtly implied by the word ‘Kalā’. Now, in order to

state that the word Kalā, in accord with its function, denotes both Kalā and Niyati, he
says (the following).”

CHAPTER NINE

The root (dhātu) ‘kal’" (is used in the sense of) ‘(progressive)

differentiation’ (saṅkhyāna lit. ‘’enumeration’) and ‘impulse’. (Thus) that Force

(kalā of limited agency) (partially) removes the darkness (of the sullied soul)

and impels it.

‘O (wise) Brahmin, having thus equally experienced both (the soul and
its limited agency), that abide as if they were not different from one another,

(the teachers) have said that that which generates the agency (kartṛkāraka) of

living beings (functions) within the prescribed activity of (its) worldly

experience.ʼ

Vidyā - Limited Cognitive Subjectivity

Surely (one may ask), how is it possible for (the soul) devoid of

consciousness to possess (any agency at all), even one qualified as a limited
one? With this doubt in mind, he refers to the birth of another principle also,

that bestows (on the soul) a limited capacity to know.

ftxrz̄fatrē a āīḍcāá ṁai d-q |1| 2.32 |
kiṁcidrūpaviśiṣṭaṁ yat kartṛtvaṁ tat kathaṁ bhavet || 191 ||
ajñasyeti tataḥ sūte kiṁcijjñatvātmikāṁ vidam |
It is not possible for a (soul) devoid of consciousness (ajña) to
possess the capacity to act, (even if its capacity to do so is) qualified (in this
way) as limited (agency). Thus, a limited form of cognitive consciousness
Read with the Mṛgendratantra ka ity eṣa for kalayaty eṣa.
Read with the MṛT, tamasaḥ for tamasā and preraṇaṁ for preraṇe. Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha

comments: ‘There is one root ‘kal’ whose (semantic) function is the sense ‘(progressive)
differentiation (sarṁkhyāna). There is another root ‘kal’ (in the sense of) ‘casting away’
whose (semantic) function is the sense of ‘removing’. There (in that case), first of all,

the function of Kalā when it is active, is in accord with its nature, and has as its purpose
‘casting away’, that is, the partial casting away or removal of the darkness, which is (the

soulʼs) Impurity. The second function accords with the sense of (progressive)
differentiation (saṅkhyāna), as (the soul) is regulated (niyamanāt) by another meaning
of the word ‘kalā’, which is regulation (niyari). Now he says the following) in order to

state the cause of the agency of the ŚSelf and Kalā.”

‘ Mṛgendratanīra vidyāpāda 1/3-]. The last verse is also quoted above in TĀv ad

9/183.

Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha comments: “The living being’ is the fettered individual soul,
who has not attained the worldly experience (that accords with his Karma). When the

activity of the worldly experience prescribed (for him) arises in the aforestated manner,

the teachers ‘have said’, i.e. taught, that that is ‘that which generates agency’, called the
Kalā of the (individual) soul. They have said that as the enjoyer of the worldly

experience (which is the consequence of Karma), it is (the individual soul’s) agency.
Kalā is the cause that ‘generates’ and makes the power of (the soul’s limited) agency,
because it strengthens it.”

TANTRĀLOKA

(vit) is generated (within it) from that (Force (of limited agency)). (191cd-

192ab)

‘From that’ (refers to) the Force (of limited agency), as that is the

subject (being discussed). That is said (in the following verse):

‘As one does not observe that the capacity anybody has to act is devoid
of knowledge (jñāna), thus, the absence of (complete) perception (of reality),
which is ignorance, has arisen from the Force (of limited agency).”
The point is that even in the state of limited knowledge (the individual
soul possesses), the full (and unconditioned) capacity to act (of consciousness)
is pervaded by complete (pūrṇa) knowledge.
Surely (one may ask), the followers of the Sāṁkhya do not accept that

the Self has the capacity to act (kartṛtva), and so let it be, as stated, that the

Force (of limited agency) is the principle that bestows that to it. Again,
according to them, its subjectivity (jñatva) is bestowed upon it by means of the
intellect etc. So what is (the use) of this (principle of limited cognitive
consciousness you say does this)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

EIEst rygfṝ ar fsēar gfzaŪvrāītoī I| 2XR 1II

TaTG] JTJAT] HGTJTT āTTTTJ |

ri fafaātē FrTarr 11| 3<3 1

buddhiṁ paśyati sā vidyā buddhidarpaṇacāriṇaḥ || 192 ||
sukhādīn pratyayān mohaprabhṛtīn kāryakāraṇe |
karmajālaṁ ca tatrasthaṁ vivinakti nijātmanã I| 193 I|
That (limited) cognitive consciousness (vidyā) observes the intellect,
and therein distinctly discerns (vivinakti) the perceptions (pratyaya) of
pleasure and those of delusion etc., according to their own nature, present
within the mirror of the intellect, along with (the series) of causes (i.e. the
gross elements and senses), (their) effects and interconnected network of
actions (karman). (192cd-193)

The word ‘delusion’ here secondarily also denotes (the quality of)

obscuring darkness (tamas). Thus, the meaning is that (he is referring to the)

fifty apprehensions (pratyaya) of obscuring darkness, delusion and the rest,
called ignorance (viparyaya), disability (aśakti), contentment and

accomplishment etc. (taught in the Sāṁkhya).” As is said (in the Viṣṇupurāṇa):
Jayaratha is referring here to Sāṁkhyakārikā 46, that states:

‘This creation of notions (pratyayasarga) (that takes place through the intellect
(buddhi) is called ignorance (viparyaya), disability (aśakti), contentment (tuṣṭi) and
accomplishment (siddhi). Due to the (mutual) suppression of the qualities (of Nature)
(guṇa) (brought about by) imbalance, there are fifty varieties (bheda). (46)

CHAPTER NINE

‘Obscuration (tamas), delusion (moha), great delusion (mahāmoha),
darkness (tāmisra), and the one called binding (darkness) (andhatāmiṣra) —

(this) is the ignorance with five aspects that has come forth from the Great

An instrument (serves as) a cause. Thus ‘causes and effects’ are the

senses (which are the instruments of perception) and the gross elements. (The
intellect) ‘distinctly discerns (vivinakti), that is, knows by means of the
discrimination which is of the nature ‘this is pleasure, not suffering or delusionʼ.
Thus it is said that (it does s0) each ‘according to their own nature’, which is

distinctly their own and different from (every) other. That is said (in the
Mālinīvijaya):
‘“(This

limited)

knowledge

discerns the

action

(karman)

of that

(individual soul), its effect and cause (of its activity).
Surely (one may ask), the instrument (through which) the individual
soul (operates) within the intellect, which is objective (vedya) and qualified by
each specific perception (pratyaya), is (the principle of the limited capacity to)
know (vidyā). Again, what is the purpose it (serves in the course of the soul’s)

perception of the objects of sense? There (in that case), the intellect itself is such
(and so no other principle is required)." With this doubt in mind, he says:
There are five forms of ignorance (or error), twenty-eight of disability arising
from the impairment of the (sense) organs (and intellect). Contentment has nine forms

and accomplishment eight. (47)

These fifty, and their subdivisions, are listed in Kārikās 48-51, and described in

some detail in the commentary by Vācaspati Miśra.
Viṣṇupurāṇa, 1/5/5. Note that the five forms of ignorance listed here are those found
in Sāṁkā 48, that refers to their varieties (bheda), which are described by Vācaspati
Miśra in his commentary.

T MV 1/28ab.
The following verse will address this question. Cf. Parākhya 431:
‘Discrimination is (ordinarily) understood to be connected with the (faculty

called) buddhi (and takes place) always (only) when objects have been perceived. It
cannot be connected with the limited power of knowledge (vidyāyāḥ), since it is buddhi
that illumines itself and other objects.”
Goodall 2004: 235-6 n 328: ‘This is a stock objection on Sāṅkhya lines (cf.
Mṛgendra (vidyāpāda) 11/9ab, and its answer in 11/14-15ab as well as the following

passages mentioned by Torella 1998: 55, fn 2: Mataṅga (vidyāpāda) 10/5 and 19,
Tattvasaṁgraha 14-16, Bhogakārikā 93cd-98ab, Tattvaprakāśa 47. In taking over the

Sāṁkhya conception of a tripartite internal organ of ‘thought;’ and at the same time

adding above that in the evolutionary scale a tattva – vidyā, the Saiddhāntikas have to
justify that these things fulfil different functions.”
As Torella (1998:55) observes: ‘the kañcukas (kalā, vidyā, rāga, kāla and
niyati form a foreign body with respect to the Sāṅkhya basis of the tattvas. . .’, and

further, they give ‘theimpression of doubles, having an uncertain status, so much ss0 that
not only all the Śaiva philosophers but also some of the Śaiva scripture themselves feel
bound to answer the objections they already foresawin the opponents’ minds, and to

highlight the specificity, for example, of rāga ‘Attachment’ and vidyā ‘Science’, with
respect to their seeming doubles, avairāgya and budáhi.

TANTRĀLOKA

Perception Within the Intellect

aṁ fīv atāīzfT 1| 2<x 1
According to the Sāṅkhyakārikā (second half of verse 37), it is the buddhi that
is responsible for discriminating between prakṛti and the soul: saiva ca viśinasti punaḥ
pradhānapuruṣāntaraṁ sūkṣmaṁ. The Śaiva justification for having vidyā as well is

that buddhi cannot examine itself, and therefore the soul must have an additional

instrument of cognition. See Sadyojyotis’ argumentation in the Bhogakārikā (93cd98ab):
‘Without an instrument, an agent is not known to act with respect to an object.
Therefore, there must exist an instrument, and that is vidyā, which discriminates among
the awarenesses of the intellect. (Objection:) the soul’s (tasya) intellect is like a lamp,
that illuminateṣ itself and others: (thus) the soul has an instrument; what will he do with
vidyā? (Response:) A lamp can be an instrument for the soul in perceiving stumps and

such like external objects, but for perceiving the lamp, the faculty of sight (is necessary
as a further instrument). We must accept that the same is the case for the intellect too

(i.e. to grasp that too, we require a further instrument). For that (intellect), being itself
not separate (from what it illuminates) (aviviktā), because of its being made up of the
three guṇas, it is not capable of displaying itself distinctly (vivekena) when it has taken
up the form of external objects. And as vidyā, which is beyond the guṇas and separate
(viviktā), it is capable of displaying distinctly (vivekataḥ) the objects of experience
(vedyam) for the soul. There is no need to be excessively niggardly in this (viz. in

acknowledging the existence of this ‘extra’ tattva, vidyā).’

- . . For Rāmakaṇṭha and other Saiddhāntikas, the viveka that is now assigned to
vidyā rather than to the buddhi cannot have the same soteriological function. It seems

rather to be a term that covers experiencing the various modes of knowing (discerning,

remembering etc.) that the buddhi presents to it. Thus Rāmakaṇṭha remarks in his
Mataṅgavr̥tti ad vidyāpāda 10/5: “Moreover, the body (aṅga) of all the daily business of

experience and the object of experience etc. is the intellect, because its nature is

determinating perception (adhyavasāya). That (Vidyā) is capable of discerning that
(determinate perception). This is what is being taught: the intellect is various according
to the diversity of (the type of its) perceptions (pratyaya), (which include) determinate
perceptions (adhyavāsaya), memory, intuition (pratibhā) etc. That by which it is known
is vidyā, which is the supreme instrument (paramaṁ karaṇam) (Tattvasaṁṅgraha 12d);
as the nature of the intellect, which is associated with Prakṛti, is not to be its own object,
that is, (it is) not an instrument capable of (self) awareness, because the object is
external (to it). Thus (the existence of) vidyā is proved.”
Kiraṇavṛtti ad 1/16cd-17:

‘Even for a soul in which (the working of) mala has been stopped, there has to

be a further common instrument (karaṇāntareṇa) for consciousness, that consists in the
functions of the intellect that will be explained in due course, such as memories, creative

imagination, notions and the like, because it is consciousness, like cognitions of the

objects by the senses. And it is not buddhi that is the instrument (needed) here; for that

is (among its) objects. Nor is it ahaṁkāra or any other (faculty), because they will be
said to be the means of other actions, such as the support of the body, and so cannot be

established to be the means in this case to0. And so that instrument (that is needed) for
(the enablement of) these forms of consciousness) (tatra) is vidyā. Thus a further bond

is established.' Goodall’s translation. Cf. TĀ 9/210ab.

CHAPTER NINE

buddhisṣ tu guṇasaṅkīrṇā vivekena kathaṁ sukham |
duḥkhaṁ mohātmakaṁ vāpi viṣayaṁ darśayed api || 194 II
(This must be so, for otherwise) how could the intellect, which is full
of (the insentient) qualities (guna) (of Nature), perceive the difference
between the (sensations of) pleasure, pain and delusion (that arise from
them)? (194)
By (saying that the intellect) ‘is full of (the insentient) qualities (of

Nature)ʼ, it is stated (that the intellect) does not differ from them, and

moreover, that it is insentient. It is said:

‘(The intellect), which consists of the three qualities, is incapable of
making known, (simply by its own) discernment (viveka), the form of the
objects of sense and itself, as it (itself) is not discerned by itself (to be separate

from the object).”

Surely (one may object) that, you have said that as if you did not know

the Sāṁkhya view. As the intellect is full of (insentient) qualities (guṇa), how
can it make known (its) object, consisting of pleasure and the rest (of the inner
sensations), by means (of its own) discriminating discermment (viveka)?

Although completely covered over in every way by the (darkness of) ramas, the
nature of which is to obscure (everything), it operates only in certain
circumstances (kvacit), insofar as (the obscuration) is slowly removed by rajas.
(Thus,) although sartva illumines (everything) equally, it progressively makes
(only) specified (niyata) pleasure and the like manifest. Thus, we accept that the
intellect, consisting of the three qualities, progressively makes known (its)
object, that is, pleasure and the rest, by means of (its own) discriminating

discernment (viveka).
(We reply that, that is) true, the intellect displays (its) object, which is

pleasure and the other (perceptions corresponding to the three qualities), as does

a mirror (the reflections within it). However, we say that (it does not do s0)
discerningly (vivekena), (distinguishing one perception from another,) as it

(itself) is full of (these) qualities (guṇa) (of Nature). Although the intellect

Ṣee above, 8/253cd-260ab and below, 9/220cd-222.
% BhoKā 96cd-97ab. The following verse and commentary says:
‘Vidyā (however), which is beyond the qualities (of Nature) and so is separate

(from it), is capable of making the object of knowledge known by (its discriminating)
discernment to the individual soul (who is the perceiver). Here (in this case, the
opponent to this view) should not be overly hostile (to it).” (97cd-98ab)

Commentary by Aghor
a: “The intellect consists of the three qualities (of
Nature), and so, as its form is discerned to be that of an object (as distinguished from the
perceiver), that is, as (an objective) activity (karmatā) (of Nature), it is not selfilluminating, as is a lamp or the like. However, Vidyā is beyond that, and so, being
separate from the form of the object, it illumines the object of knowledge of the

individual soul independently of (any) other instrumental cause.

TANTRĀLOKA

consists of the three qualities, and, contrary to (outer sensations,) such as the

colour blue, (the sensations of) suffering and the like are projected onto it by the

predominance of sartva (which imparts the luminous reflective quality of the
intellect); even so, how could it discern between them individually (and
separately from one another)? It is not the case, for example, that when

suffering is perceived, the (same) distinguishing discrimination (viveka) by

means of which (that takes place) should (give rise to) the ascertainment of
pleasure and like (at the same time). Nor is the mere perception (darśanamātra)
alone the awareness of (a specific) object (viṣayasaṁvedana), due to which
there may also be a discriminating discernment (viveka) (that distinguishes one
sensation from another. This is because the intellect’s) vital activity (jīvita) is
ascertainment (adhyavasāya) (of the nature of a particular object, not the
discrimination of its difference from others). As is said (in the Sāṁkhyakārikā):

‘what is perceived (dṛstam) is the ascertainment of each object.’
Thus, because suffering and the rest (of the sensations) are (just)
initially perceived (by the intellect), it cannot discriminate (between them), and
because it is insentient, it not capable of consciously integrating
(anusaṁdhātum) (perceptions). Therefore, although pleasure and the like are

projected into the translucent intellect, it needs to be perceived (bhāvya) by
some kind of discriminative (discernment) (viveka). That is said to be and that is

the supreme instrument (of perception) called (impure) Knowledge (Vidyā).

This is what is being stated. He says that:

svacchāyāṁ dhiyi saṁkrāman bhāvaḥ saṁvedyatāṁ katham |
tayā vinaiti sāpy anyat karaṇaṁ puṁsi kartari || 195 I|

(Again,) how could a phenomenal entity (bhāva) projected into the
translucent (svaccha) intellect be an object of sensation without this
(impure knowledge)? Therefore, it too (must be) another instrument (of

perception) which is (unlike others) within the individual soul, who is the
agent. (195)

‘Objects of sensation’ are those that are objects of ascertainment by
means of discriminative discernment (viveka). This is the meaning. ‘Thisʼ is

(impure) Knowledge. ‘It too’ (must be an instrument of perception) with

Sāṁkā 5a. Vācaspati Miśra explains that ‘prativiṣayam denotes that which impinges
upon each particular object i.e. the sense organ. (Its) function (vṛrri) is contact with the
object. Thuṣ, it stands for the sense which is in contact with object; knowledge
depending on that is adhyavasāya (ascertainment). It is the cognition which is the result
of the operation of the intellect (buddhi).”

Read karaṇaṁ for kāraṇav; cf. above 9/183 and commentary.

CHAPTER NINE

relation to the intellect. ‘The agent’ is (engaged in) the object of ascertainment
(adhyavasāya).
Surely (one may object that) the intellect is like a double-sided stainless
mirror. The shade of the individual soul is projected onto one side, by virtue of
which it is rendered sentient, and being such, it can determine (the nature of)

phenomena projected onto the other side. Thus, what need is there to admit the
existence of another instrument (of perception) called (impure) Knowledge? He
says that:

TŪṀĒTJTRITT

-īq a: fgGā aī 11 2.9 11|
nanu cobhayataḥ śubhrādarśadaśīyadhīgatāt |

puṁsprakāśād bhāti bhāvaḥ maivaṁ tatpratibimbanam || 196 ||

jadam eva hi mukhyo ‘tha puṅsprakāśo ‘sya bhāsanam |
bahiḥsthasyaiva tasyās tu buddheḥ kiṁ kalpanā kṛtā || 197 ||

Surely, (one may object that) a phenomenal entity is made manifest
by the light of the individual soul (puruṣa), which is reflected in the
intellect, that is like a double-sided radiant (well-polished) mirror (that

reflects this light on the one side and the object on the other). (We reply

that,) it is not so, because the reflection (of the soul in the intellect would
be) insentient (and so incapable of perceiving the image reflected within it).
If the light of the individual soul were to be the primary one that illumines
an external object (directly), what would be the use of conceiving (the
existence) of that intellect? (196-197)

Here (according to this view), it is said that the intellect is

insentient,

and so it is not (logically) sound (to consider) that it is itself (directly) the
illuminator of (its) object. Even when the light of the soul is projected (onto it),
its insentient (nature) does not cease. It was logically established previously that
a reflection is capable of associating solely with its own (appropriate) substrate
(adhikaraṇa). Juṣṭ as is the case, for example, with an external mirror. Although
(the person called) Caitra is reflected within it and (he is) sentient, the mirror
does not assume his consciousness. Rather, there (within the mirror, the

reflection) is incapable of doing anything by itself, as is the case with (anything

that is) insentient. In the same way, although the light of the soul is projected
into the insentient intellect, because it is capable of associating only with that, it
becomes insentient, and so how could that also be capable of illuminating (its

The hypothetical opponent objects in this way that there is no need to postulate the

existence of the principle of impure Knowledge (Vidyātattva). See Pandey 1963a, pp.
378-379.

d Read darpaṇam asya for darpaṇasya.

TANTRĀLOKA

own) objects? Now, let it (itself) be by itself the illuminator of (its) object. As is
said, ‘if the light of the individual soul were to be the primary one that
illumines (an external object), and so in this way, if it were to be directly the

illuminator of the external object, what is the use of the intellect (buddhitattva)
conceived to be in between (them)? Thus it is said: ‘what would be the use of
conceiving (the existence) of that intellect?”

If, in this way, nothing at all were to manifest separately from the
primary Light of the Self, all things would be the Light (of consciousness) itself,
and (the one) nondual (reality) would manifest in all circumstances. Thus, all

this daily business of duality, which is (essentially) the relationship between the

perceiver and the perceived and the like, would cease. It is this (subject) that has
been taken up in order to reflect upon it. Thus, this definition would be contrary
to the sense (of the teaching) (artha) that was announced (as the subject at
hand). Thus he says:

srṁazyfx
7 dazz fs-īāī̃ 1
abhedabhūmir eṣā ca bhedaś ceha vicāryate |

The plane on which (the light of the soul illumines outer objects
directly certainly exists, but it) is that of unity (abheda). Here we are
concerned with (the level) of multiplicity (bheda). (198ab)

Once the supreme Light (of consciousness) has concealed its own

nature by its own free will, when it makes its own ‘contracted’ nature manifest,
then all this daily business of duality arises. Thus, the individual soul knows, by
means (of the principle of impure) Knowledge, the objects, namely, pleasure,
pain and the like, projected into the intellect through the channels of the senses,
as mutually distinct from one another. Thus, there is no defect at all in
conceiving (the existence) of the intellect and the rest (required for this to take
place). He says that:

THṬTGf£TTĪTT
TaT fJTĒVIĪT-R; |I28.¢ 11
tasmād buddhigato bhāvo vidyākaraṇagocaraḥ || 198 II
Therefore, (the point is that external) phenomenal existence (bhāva)

present (reflected) in the intellect is the field (of operation of the perceiver’s
Impure) Knowledge, which serves as an instrument (of perception). (198cd)
Surely (one may ask), phenomenal existence, which is the field (of the
operation of Impure) Knowledge that serves as an instrument (of perception), is
the object of perception (vedya), and that is external. Thus, how is it said (to be

such) in this way? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Taī tṁṝfkr=ṁ d raṁ ssīēcd a

bhāvānāṁ pratibimbaṁ ca vedyaṁ dhīkalpanā tataḥ |

CHAPTER NINE

The (actual) object of knowledge is the reflection of phenomena (in
the intellect). Thus, it is (necessary) to posit the existence of the intellect.
(199ab)
The aforementioned logical fallacy (would arise) if (phenomena) were

to be perceived directly.
Surely (one may ask), the (nature) of (the soulʼs) limited capacity to act
has been thus logically established by the arising (of its) limited capacity to
know. Now, that is equally limited here (in all cases), so how is it that it knows
and does this (particular thing and not another), to some limited extent? With
this doubt in mind, he talks about the principle of Attachment that accounts for

this.

Rāga – the Principle of Attachment

ffeq āēd TāT=ā=aNK
3 ā- 1|1 228 1

kiñcit tu kuṟute tasmān nūnam asty aparaṁ tu tat I 199 1|
rāgatattvam iti proktaṁ yat tatraivoparañjakam |
Insofar as (the soul) acts (in its own) limited way, there must

certainly be some other (principle) that attracts (the soul) (to apply itself)
there (in that way). That is said to be the principle of Attachment

(rāgatattva). (199cd-200ab)

It is said that the Force (of limited agency) and (impure) Knowledge
only accounts for the limited, that is, incomplete (state of the individual soul).
Even though this is so, the (activity and knowledge of the soul) is directed to a
(particular) fixed entity. Thus, some other instrumental cause must necessarily

be considered to exist here (in this case), due to which the attachment of the

individual soul is (directed) only there (to that particular objective). And what is

that? Thus (in response to this question), he says: ‘that is said to be the
principle of Attachment
Mālinīvijaya):

(rāgatattva)’.

Moreover,

it

is

said

(in

the

‘Attachment (rāga) also makes him take pleasure (and be attached) to

his own worldly pleasures, even if they are impure.”

The followers of the Sāṁkhya say that the instrumental cause here (in
this case that accounts for the soul’s attachment) is a quality of the intellect,
which is the lack of dispassion (avairāgya) (towards particular objects). Thus,
what is the use of (postulating the existence of) this other (cause), namely, the
principle of Attachment? With this doubt in mind, he says:

MV 1/28cd; also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/37-38ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

3 ḶīaNTTGHTi āāīTaārātṁgfīrā: | 3oo l|1
fīcēraft

na cãvairãgyamãtraṁ tat tatrãpy ãsaktivr̥titaḥ || 200 ||
viraktāv api trptasya sūkṣmarāgavyavasthitehḥ |
That (is more than) merely a lack of dispassion (avairāgya), for it
functions there also as (a positive) attachment (āsakti), and (anyway), even
when one who has been satisfied (and so becomes) indifferent (to his object
of desire), (he continues to) harbour a subtle attachment (that impels him
to desire it again). (200cd-201ab)
‘That’ is the principle of Attachment. (It functions) ‘there also’, that is,
when there is a lack of dispassion. The sense is that that is the cause when one
clings in this way to a lack of dispassion also. Even when there is no lack of
dispassion on the part of one who craves the cessation (of craving), there (still)
exists, from a subtle point of view, (some) attachment, because the perception
(pratipatti) ‘ʻmay something be mine’ (even if it is the cessation of desire) is not
absent. This is the greatness of the principle of Attachment, namely, that
(because of that,) all the qualities (dharma) within the intellect, including the
lack of dispassion and the rest, manifest as (its) particular (forms), right up to

their outer (manifestation). That is said (in the following passage):

‘The qualities (dharma) etc. (of the intellect) are the tender sprouts of
the latent trace of attachment. Thus, all this constitutes the category of
attachment (rāgavarga). These outpourings of particular (desires) are counted as
the qualities of the intellect.”
Similarly, aversion (dveṣa) is also its unfolding flow (prasara). (That

too is due to attachment, but) there (in that case), it is the craving to destroy etc.
what is undesirable. Therefore, wherever there is (an intention of the sort) ‘may

something be mineʼ, be it with regards to what needs to be adopted or
abandoned, it is just a universal craving which is the principle of Attachment,
whereas its (unfolding) development (prapañca) (as particular desires) is
something else. This has practically (all been) described previously, and so
enough of much (more talk about this matter).

Surely (one may ask), the individual soul possesses a limited nature due

to the Force (of limited agency); due to (impure) Knowledge, it has (its own)

separate object (of perception); due to the (principle of) Attachment (and

According to the Sāmkhya, this is one of the qualities of the intellect. Cf. TSaā (8 p.

82): ʻ(That the intellect is subject to) attachment can be observed (from its states of)

indifference as well as in the other qualities of the intellect, as is demonstrated by the

fact that even those who have eaten, for example, and are satiated, are still subject to an
inward attachment, even though they do not desire food and the like, because if this

(attachment) were not to continue to exist in a latent state, the absence of indifference

could no longer arise.”

CHAPTER NINĒ

Necessity), its capacity to act (kartṛtva) is led to finally (focus) on a (particular)

fixed (and determined) (niyata) entity. It is also differentiated by Time;
otherwise, the perception that ‘T did, I am doing, and I will do’ would not be
logically possible. Thus, he talks about the principle of Time that brings that
about.
Kāla – the Principle of Time

hTṜÇṬGTĪTCTVTT]
āricd hōārcāā: || 202.|1
kālas tutyādibhiś caitat kartr̥tvaṁ kalayaty ataḥ || 201 I|
kāryāvacchedi kartṛtvaṁ kālo ʻvaśyaṁ kaliṣyati |

(The Mālinīvijayottara declares that) time measures in tufis and

other (units of time the activity of) the agent (kartṛtva). Thus, time is the
necessary measure (of the activity of the form of) agency that is conditioned
by its products (and not that of universal consciousness). (201cd-202ab)
Surely (one may ask), the capacity consciousness has to act (kartṛtva) is
its freedom, and that is not separate from it. So how can its eternal being be
associated with time? With this doubt in mind, it is said (that the limited agency
of the soul is) ‘conditioned by its products’. The capacity to act is of two
kinds, pure and conditioned by Māyā (māyīya). There, the first is unconditioned
self-awareness (ahaṁparāmarśa), and is unaffected (anārūṣita) by (its) product.

The other is affected by (its) product, as is, for example, the act of making a pot
or a cloth. Thus, it is ‘necessary’ to consider this (latter type) to be ‘measured
outʼ, because its (very) life is the successive manifestation of existence, and

(then subsequent) non-existence of the product and the action (that produces it).
This is the meaning. Through this, the perceiver, although limited, is in this way

differentiated by it. The meaning (of this verse) is thus established. That is said
(in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘Time, which is determined (by units) beginning with a moment (tuṭi),
9 also

measures out (and conditions) (kalayati) him.
Surely (one may ask): there is no disagreement that a person who
requires that an action be performed for a special purpose (arthakriyā) takes up
something and abandons something (else). So where does this rule (niyama)

come from that a person who wishes to cook desires to have fire, not a clod of
earth (loṣṭa), and that one who desires heaven (offers) the Jyotiṣṭoma (sacrifice),

See above, 6/64.

9/201cd is a paraphrase and explanation of MV 1/29cd, quoted by Jayaratha. kālo ʻpi

kalayaty enaṁ turyādibhir avasthitaḥ l|.

We have seen in Chapter Six that a ‘tai’ is an eighth of a second. But, as in this case,

the word may also denote a very small span of time in general.

MV 1/29cd. The full passage is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/37-38ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

not a falcon? Thus, one must admit that there is certainly some reason (nimitta)

here (for that). What is that? With this doubt in mind, he says:
Niyati – the Principle of Necessity

srr fafvē āīdīīvēz 1 303 1
niyatir yojanāṁ dhatte viśiṣṭe kāryamaṇḍale || 202 ||
Necessity (niyati) conjoins (the cause) with its own particular

aggregate of products (kāryamaṇḍala). (202cd)

Necessity is the assumption of the fixed rule (niyama) that ‘just this

effect should (arise) from this (particular) cause.’ Thus he says that (Necessity)

‘conjoins (the cause) with its own particular aggregate of productsʼ. That is
said (in the Mālinīvijaya):
‘Necessity (niyati) conjoins the individual soul to (the fruits of) his own

action (karman).

Thus, (it is because of the principle of Necessity) that a person who
requires that an action be performed for a specific (fixed) purpose (arthakriyā)
must take up a specific (fixed) (niyata) entity (to do that). Thus, there is no

defect.

Surely (one may ask), because we are engaged in describing the
relationship of cause and effect between the principles, the Force (of limited
agency) is accordingly said to be a product of Māyā. Again, according to the
venerable Svacchandatantra:
‘The Force (of limited agency) has arisen from that, and so too (impure)
Knowledge, Attachment, Time, the principle of Necessity, the individual soul

and Nature.

" MV 1/29ab. Also quoted above in TĀy ad 1/37-38ab.

SVT 11/63cd-64ab. Kṣemarāja’s commentary is interesting: kevalam etad ucyate

kañcukapañcakavalitāḥ pumāṁso bhoktāraḥ, bhogyasāmānyarūpā ca prakṛtir yugapad
eva māyātaḥ sambhūtāḥ, bhoktṛbhogyayoḥ parasparāpekṣitvāt, ato ‘tra kalādīnāṁ

yugapad eva tasmād iti māyātattvād udbhava uktaḥ | śrīmālinīvijaye tu kalāto

vidyādicatuṣṭayaṁ prakṛtiś ca, śrīrauravādau tu kalā rāgavidye prasūya, avyaktaṁ
janitavatītyādir āgameṣu yaḥ krama uktaḥ tathā kvacit kañcukānāṁ catuṣṭayaṁ kvacit
trayam iti saṅkhyānyathābhāvo ‘pi dṛśyate, na tatra bhramitavyam |

‘Only this is said, namely that the individual souls who experience the

consequences of Karma (bhoktṛ) are enveloped by the five kañcukas, and Prakṛti is the

universal nature of the object of experience. They have arisen simultaneously from
Maāyā, as the experiencer and the object of experience are mutually dependent on one
another. Thus it is said here that (the five Kañcukas), beginning with the force of limited
agency (kalā), have come forth out of that principle of Māyā simultaneously. According

to the venerable Maālinīvijaya, the group of four beginning with Vidyā (comes) from
Kalā, and so too Prakṛti. According to the venerable Raurava and other (Āgamas),

CHAPTER NINE
Are the group of four principles beginning with (impure) Knowledge,

like the Force (of limited agency), a product of Māyā, or not? With this doubt in
mind, he says:
Maāyā and the Coverings Working Together

faraṁ īāṣa frafā: ñīvgr-īqtzaq 1

+

+

+ || 303 ||

vidyā rāgo ʻtha niyatiḥ kālaś caitac catuṣṭayam ḷ|
kalākārṟyarṁ š š šk škk s+. + . . ...
I|203abc Il
The four (principles of impure) Knowledge (Vidyā), Attachment
(Rāga), Necessity (Niyati) and Time (Kāla) are the products of the Force (of
limited agency) (Kalā). (203abc)
Avyakta is generated after Kalā has generated Rāga and Vidyā. The sequence that is

taught in the Āgamas is such that in some places there are four Kañcukas and in some
three. One observes that the numbers vary. One should not be confused there (by this).’

kadalīgarbhadalavan modakādirasādivat |
kadambagolavac citrāḥ kañcukāś citrasaṁvidaḥ l

iti śrītrikasāranirāūpitanītyā kaścid rajyan vetti kaścic ca vidan rajyatītyādiḥ puṁsāṁ

vicitrapratītikzamāṉuṣā̃rī kañcukakramo.anyathā.anyathā ca sambhāvyate, pratipuṅñ
kalāditattvakramasyoktatvād iti tadanusāraṁ tattacchāstrāvatārakais tathā tathā
kramabhedamātrapratipādanam etat kṛtam, antarbhāvānantarbhāvāc ca saṅkhyābhedo
‘pi darśitaḥ | vastutaś ca kūñcit karomītyādipratipañcakākṣiptatattvapañcakakañcukavalitāḥ pumāṁso bhoktāraḥ, kiñcidaṁśātmā bhogyasāmānyarūpā prakṛtir
māyāto yugapad eva udbhūtā iti etat tantroktamṃ eva jyāyaḥ pratibhāti |

‘The Kañcukas are varied forms of consciousness. (They are folded into one

another) like the leaves of a banana plant. (The pervade one another) like the taste of a
sweet (modaka), and are wonderfully various, like the buds of a Kadamba tree.’

According to this teaching, which is imparted in the venerable Trikasāra, (any)
one (of the individual souls), for example, perceives in the course of being affected
(rajyan vetti), and another is affected in the course of perceiving (vidan rajyati). The
sequence of the Kañcukas can change in accord with the variety of the cognitive process
(pratītikrama). Thīs is because the sequence of the principles from Kalā onwards is

taught with respect to each individual soul. Only differences in the sequence (not the

content) have been variously established in accord with that by those who have brought

the individual scriptures down to earth. Moreover, (they have) presented a different
number (of the Kañcukas) (in various places), because (some are) included and others
not (in that group, but either way continue to be considered to be metaphysical
priciples). In actual fact, (whatever the variants in the scriptures), the individual souls

are enveloped by the five Kañcukas included in the set of five (types of) perception,

such as “I am doing something”. It appears best (to understand) that what the Tantras
teach is that Prakṛti, which is the universal object of (Karmic) experience, arises
simultaneously from Māyā, as consisting of some (limited) parts (kiñcidaṁśātmā).’

TANTRĀLOKA

This sequential order, namely, (first) Necessity and (then) Time, is

stated here in accord with the (view of the) Mālinīvijayottara. There, Time is

mentioned after Necessity. The intention (behind) teaching that Time comes
first is that the function of Necessity is to regulate what is in the sphere of the
relationship between cause and effect. And that is that the cause precedes, and
the effect follows after. How can this (be so) without the conditioning of time
(which is required for there to be a sequence of events)? Or else, (one may

think) that it is taught in this way because (in actual fact they) arise
simultaneously, and so there is no intention of saying that they are in sequence.
Although it is said in the Mālinīvijaya that ‘(Force) then emitted (the principles

of the capacity for limited) Knowledge (Vidyā) and Attachment (Rāga), this

amounts to saying with the words ‘the four (principles) are the products of

the Force (of limited agency) (Kalā) that the Force (of limited agency) is the

uncontradicted and (general) cause (of all of them), without distinction. This is

so because it is agreed that Necessity and Time are products. (Moreover,) no
other cause is mentioned directly, and (also because it said that they arise) ‘from
just (that)ʼ, as by the word ‘just’, this Force (of limited agency) is (implicitly)
stated to be equally the cause of (all the principles) up to Unmanifest (Nature).
Surely (one may ask), all things (viśva) are thus of two kinds, as subject
(bhoktṛ) and object (bhogya). Is this (group of principles) beginning with the
Force (of limited agency) part of the subjective aspect or otherwise? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

..... . ...9 bhoktṛbhāve tiṣṭhad bhoktṛtvapūritam || 2034 II
Abiding within subjectivity (bhoktṛbhāva), (the product of the Force

(of limited agency)) is filled with subjectivity (bhoktṛtva). (203d)

(The product of the Force (of limited agency)) is ‘filed with

subjectivity because it is located within subjectivity. Although empirical

subjectivity (bhoktṛtva) is afflicted by the (Impurity of) Individuality (āṇava)
and the other (Impurities), it is ‘filled” with the Force (of limited agency) etc.
By assuming the limited capacity to act (imparted to it), (the soul’s subjectivity
is) strengthened (upabṛṇṅḥita), that is, brought to the completion of (its) task
(kārya). Thus, because (the soul) possesses the nature (dharma) of these
(principles), they are located within the experiencing subject (bhoktr). And, in
the same way, once the supreme perceiver has been initially deprived of the

wealth of (its) lordship by Māyā, (its) limited aspect (kirṁīcidaṁśa) is brought

As the cause precedes (the effect) and the effect is subsequent, if time did not exist to
determine (their order), how could this (regular succession) be possible?

MV 1/27d. ‘That (power of Māyā) generated the principle which is the power (of
agency) (kalātattva), due to union with which the individual soul comes to possess the
capacity (to be an) agent. Then it emitted (the principles of the capacity for)
knowledge (vidyā) and attachment (rāga). (This) knowledge discerns the action
(karman) of that (individual soul), its effect and instrument (of its activity).” MV
1/27-28ab

CHAPTER NINE

down from the midst of the abundance of that lordship by means of the Force
(of limited agency) and the rest (of the kañcukas). (Then,) experiencing the state
of limitation, (the supreme perceiver) is said to be the fettered soul.
It is established (siddha) beyond dispute that there (in that case), the

Force (of limited agency) and (Impure) Knowledge are attributes of that
(fettered soul). There is no disagreement at all that subjectivity and agency are
attributes of the perceiver. Attachment is also (the soulʼs) attribute, because it is

the cause which (impels) it to engage with the object of enjoyment. If it were to
be an attribute of the object of enjoyment, nobody would be free of attachment
towards it, because the object of enjoyment would be attractive (rañjaka) for all
without distinction. And it is said (by Sadyojyotis):
‘Here, (by) attachment (is meant) the activity produced within the
individual soul when it is intensely attached, in order to (induce) worldly
experience (bhogya). If attachment (rāga) were to be a quality of the object,

none would be free of it.”

Tattvasaṁgraha by Sadyojyotis v. 10. Aghoraśiva comments:
nanu mataṅgādau prakṛtirāgayor madhye puruṣatattvaṁ śrūyate | tat satyam | tasya tu
cetaṉatvāṉ nityatvāc ca bhuvanādyādhāratvenādhvatvaṁ na saṁbhavati | tathāhikalādipañcakayuktasya bhoktr̥tvena puṁstvamalenānātmādāv ātmā-bhimānarūpeṇa
yoga iti dĩkṣāyāṁ tatsthãna eva tacchuddhyartham āgameṣu prakramitatvād ūrdhvaṁ
puruṣatattvatayā pāṭhaḥ śrūyate | ataś cācāryeṇa tadvarṇanam upekṣitam |
māyātattvānantaraṁ tu paśuṣvarūpaṁ vakṣyati | asmin nari puruṣe yena janitābhilāṣe

bhogyavastvādānāya pravrttir bhavati, so 'tra śaive śāstre rāgo jñeyaḥ | abhilāṣātmanā
kāryeṇa rāgatattvasidáhir ity arthaḥ |

‘Surely, (someone may ask): it is said in the Mataṅga and other (scriptures)
that the principle of the individual soul is in the middle, between Prakṛti and Attachment
(raga). That is true. It is not possible for it to be part of the (objective) cosmic order

(ahvatva) as the foundation of worlds etc., because it is conscious and eternal. Even so,

it is conjoined to the five (kañcukas), Kalā and the rest, and as such is the subject who

experiences the consequences of Karma (bhoktr). Thus, because of the Impurity specific
to the individual soul, it is united (yoga) with (the psychophysical organism) that is not
the soul etc., by the false arrogation (abhimāna) that it is the soul. Thus, because

according to the scriptures that place is traversed in the course of initiation in order to
purify it, one hears of a reading (in the scriptures) that, as the principle of the individual
soul (puruṣatattva), it is (further) above. Thus, the teacher (i.e. Sadyojyotis, who wrote
the Tattvasaṁgraha) has not cared to describe it (here). He will talk about the nature of
the individual soul after (describing) the principle of Māyā. Once the individual soul,
who has known what he desires, is engaged in acquiring (his) object of enjoyment, one
should know that here according to (Āgamic) Śaivisṃ (śaivaśāstra), (his condition is
called) Attachment (rāga). The meaning is that the principle of Attachment is proved to
exist (siddhi) because of (the nature of its) result, namely, desire (abhilāṣa).”
nanv avairāgyalakṣaṇo buddhidharma evābhilāṣahetur iti sāṁkhyāḥ, tad ayuktam,

vāsanārūpasyākāryakaratvāt, tasya vā kāryakaratve buddheḥ sarvadānantavāsanā-

yogena puṅso yugapad viruddhānantapratipattivaiśasa (> -viśeṣa-) prasaṅgāc ca |
pratyakṣarūpasyāpi bhogyatvān nābhilāṣahetutvam | nanu viṣayaguṇa evābhilāṣahetur
astu, tan na, viṣayasaṁnidhānamātrād eva ṣarvasya sarāgatāpatter vītarāgābhāvaprasaṅgāt | tasmād vītarāgadarśanānyathānupapattyābhilāṣahetur grāhakagato rāgo

TANTRĀLOKA

Such is the case with Tīme also. Initially indicating an ordered

succession (krama), such as ‘I was thin, now I am fat, and by making use of (the

appetizer called) Aśvagandhā and clarified butter, I will become fatter,’ it
clearly manifests as linked to the perceiver. Again, this (perceiver),
differentiated as it is by Time, preceded by the manifestation in relation to itself
of the sequence of past (present and future), it differentiates the object of
knowledge associated with it also, (so that it experiences) what this was, is and
will be.

Again, Necessity is the constraint (that ensures that each) cause (has its
own) effect and, as was explained before, the relationship between cause and

effect ultimately comes to amount to just the agency (of consciousness). And

agency is an attribute (dharma) of the subject, because due to its constraint, the
subject considers that “I am just this and do (this)”.
Thus, Time, Attachment, Necessity, and (Impure) Knowledge are the
instruments (nimittika) of the Force (of limited agency) (kalā). The reflective

awareness that “I now know this and act” is proper to the subject, not the object.
Thus, it is rightly said that ‘the Force (of limited agency) and the rest is present
within subjectivity.” It is because of its association with (subjectivity) that that

supreme consciousness arises as (if) other than itself, namely, as the state of

limitation, which is that of the worldly experiencing subjectivity. He says that:

‘bhyupagantavyaḥ | etad evāha bhogyaviśeṣa iti | na ca karmaiva rañjakaṁ bhaviṣyatīti
vācyam, tasya phalajanana eva caritārthatvāt, anekatattvaparikalpanābhāvaprasaṅgāc
ca | nanu māyāyā mohakasvabhāvo rāgo 'ṣtu, tan na, yato na māyāyāḥ sākṣān
mohakatvam, api tu kāryadvāreṇaivety adoṣaḥ || 10 lI
‘Surely, according to the followers of the Sāṁkhya, the cause of desire is a

quality of the intellect, the characteristic of which is the absence of dispassion
(avairāgya). (According to us,) that is not a reasonable (view). This is because a latent

tendency (vāsana) cannot give rise to an effect. Or if it did, the undesired consequence
would be that the intellect, as it is always associated with endless (numbers of) latent
tendencies, would (give rise) to an endless number of (individual) specific (mutually)
conflicting perceptions (pratipattiviśeṣa) within the individual soul. (Again,) direct
perception is also not the cause of desire, because it is the object of experience (bhogya)
(which is a consequence of Karma). Surely (then), the cause of desire is just a quality of
the object of the senses (viṣayaguṇa). (We say that) that is not so, because that would
entail that everybody would be subject to attachment (sarāgatā), with the undesirable
consequence that (nobody) would be devoid of attachment. Therefore, as it would

otherwise be logically impossible to observe that (anybody) is devoid of attachment, one

must accept that the cause of desire is attachment (rāga), (and that that is) present in the
perceiver. It is this that is said to be ‘a particular object of experience (which is a
consequence of Karma) (bhogyaviśeṣa). Moreover, one should not say that Karma
itself will be a future cause of attachment (rañjaka), because it has fulfilled its function
in giving rise to (its) consequence (phala), and also because the undesirable
consequence would be that there would be no conception of the many (associated)
principles (tattva) (involved) (anekatattvaparikalpanā-bhāvaprasaṅgāt) (?) Surely

(then, you may say,) let attachment be the deluding nature of Māyā. That is not so.
Maāyā is not directly delusory; rather, (it is so) through its products. Thus, there is no
defect (in the view that attachment is associated with the perceiver).

CHAPTER NINE

māyā kalā rāgavidye kālo niyatir eva ca |
kañcukāni ṣaḍ uktāni saṅvidas tatsthitau paśuḥ || 204 1|
Maāyā, the Force (of limited agency), Attachment, (Impure)

Knowledge, Time (Kāla) and Necessity are said to be the six coverings
(kañcuka) of consciousness. As long as they persist, (universal
consciousness) is the fettered soul. (204)

Cf. MVV 1/836-843:

tad itthaṁ puṅṁsi ciddharmavibhavãmodaśāli i |
mātṛtvadāyi yat proktaṁ ṣaṭkaṁ kañcukasaṁ, itam || 836 ||
tad ekaikasya mānatvaṁ kecana pratipedire |

anye tv ekasya sarvānyasacivasyeti manvate || 837 1

‘In this way, the group of six called Kañcukas is said to bestow subjectivity to

the individual soul endowed with the fragrance of the glorious power of (its) conscious
nature (ciddharma). Some accepted that perception (mānatva) belongs to each one of
them (individually). (836-837)
anye kadāpi kasyāpi kathaṁcit kvacanety api |

anye dvayor dvayor anye trikadvayaniyogataḥ !| 838 I
anyonyānugrahād anye bodhenānyonyato ‘pare |

anye tu guṇasāmyātmaprakṛtim eva mānatām || 839 ||
Others (maintain) that sometimes, for (one) of them, in some way, and
somewhere, (in some cases, one or other particular Kañcuka is predominantly
operative,) and others (that perception rests with) two of them at a time; others
(maintain that it is the result) by the application of three and two (of them at a time);

others (declare it takes place) by the mutual grace of one another; others by
consciousness of one another; others (maintain) that cognition (māntā) is Prakṛti as the
balance (sāmya) of (its three) qualities. (838-839)
mukhyatvena viduḥ suptamattamūrchādidarśanāt |
sa yatraiva pramātāyaṁ yataḥ supta iva sthitaḥ l| 840 ||
saivāsya mātr̥tā mānameyayor apravedanāt |

anyonyam avikāryatvāt prasupte’ pi tathāvidhe || 841 ||
kevalaṁ prakṛtiḥ seyaṁ jānāmity abhimanyate |

tatra mukhyaṁ tu taīmānaṁ yat puṁsaivãnudarśanam l| 8421
tac ca śuddhaṁ nirvikāraṁ sadasadrūpatojjhitam |

itthaṁ ke ʻpy abhimanyante sāṁkhyakañcukasaṁśrayāt || 843 ||

They know that to be so primarily by observing (unconscious states) such as
deep sleep, madness, and coma. Wherever this perceiver is in a state of deep sleep, this
is so because his subjectivity is not experienced in perception (māna) and (its) object.

This is because they are not mutually modified when in deep sleep of this sort. (840841)

He considers that I only know that ‘this is Prakṛti.’ There (in that case), that
perception (māna) is a consequence of the perception of the individual soul alone. And

TANTRĀLOKA

(They are called) ‘coverings’ because they cover (the soul). The word

‘theyʼ (in the phrase) ‘as long as they persist’ refers to the coverings. That is
said (in the following passage):
‘Māyā, the Force (of limited agency), Impure Knowledge, Attachment,
Time and Necessity – these are the six Coverings (kañcuka) of the limited
(indiviḍual) soul, because they cover it.”

Surely (one may ask), (it is said) everywhere (in the Śaiva scriptures
that) the (gross) body and the City of Eight (which is the subtle body) etc. is
objective (vedyarūpa). (Whereas,) what is called ‘the fettered soul’ (pasu), ‘the
worldly experiencing subject’ (bhoktṛ) and ‘the individual soul’ (aṇu) is he who
possesses this inner limb, that is, the covering which is the group of six
Coverings. As is said (in the Paramārthasāra):

‘The group of six Coverings, which includes Māyā, is said to be this

inner limb of the individual soul.

that is pure, without modifications and devoid of an existent or non-existent
(phenomenal) nature. Some consider this to be so in this way by basing themselves on

the number of Kañcukas.’ (842-843)

Maāyā is not always counted amongst the six Obscuring Coverings, as happens,
for example, below in TĀv ad 29/271, where Jayaratha reckons them to be only five –

kaleti kañcukapañcakopalakṣaṇam. Other Śaiva scriptures may enumerate just three, as
happens, for example, in MPā Vidyā 11/33cd: rāgavidyākalākhyena kañcukatritayena

vai. See also Śivatanuśastra, cited below in 9/211cd. For more details see Goodall ad

Parākhya 4/43-44.

” PS 17cd. PS 16cd-17 is quoted above ad 1/39-40. The preceding line (PS 17ab) is

quoted below ad 11/14cd-18. It reads:
adhunaiva kiṁcid evedam eva sarvātmanaiva jānāmi |

‘I know just now, (that I do) just this little, (affected) in all respects (by
attachment).
Yogarāja comments on this verse:
itthaṁ svatantro.api bodhaḥ svamāyayā yathā aṇutvaṁ prāptaḥ, tathaiva

nakriyāśaktī (p. 47) saṅkucite aṣya paśurāpasya vidyā –- kale – iti ucyete |

rājñā apahr̥tasarvasvasya anukampayā jīvanārthaṁ kiṁcid dhanaṁ stokaṁ
dīyate, tathaiva aṇutvam āpannasya bodhasya apahṛtasarvajñatvādeḥ kiṁcitkartrtāparamārthaṁ jñatvam upodbalyate, – iti jñatvasyaiva prādhānyāt kālādīnāṁ (>

kalādīnāṁ) jānātinā (> jñānādīnāṁ) anvayo darśitaḥ | idaṁ kañcukaṣaṭkam
uktarāīpayā māyayā yuktam aṇoḥ āṇavamalāpahastitasarvajñatvādeḥ
svarūpācchādakam, svarṇasya kālikeva antaraṅgaṁ nijaṁ kathitam |

‘Although consciousness is free (and independent) in this way, once it has

assumed the atomic state (of an individual soul) (aṇutva) by (the power of) its own
Maāyā, its powers of knowledge and action are contracted in the same way. They are
(then) called the limited capacity to know (Vidyā) and act (Kalā) (of consciousness,

when it is) in the form of a fettered soul. Just as one gives some small amounts of

CHAPTER NINE

money out of compassion to a king who has been deprived of (his) wealth (so that he

may) live, in the same way, in the atomic state of (this) afflicted consciousness, which

has been deprived of its omniscience and the like, (its) limited agency and capacity to
know is strengthened. Thus, as the capacity to know is the main one, the succession (and

connection between the kañcukas) has been presented as beginning with Kalā. ʻThis is
the group of six Obscuring Coverings (kañcuka), which includes Māyā, the nature of

which has been described. It covers (and obscures) the essential nature of the individual

soul whose omniscience etc. has been removed by Āṇavamala, (This obscuring
covering,) which is like a stain on gold, is within (the soul), that is, is its own (most
fundamental Impurity).
kiṁrūpa? – ityāha adhunā ityādi | adhunaiva jānāmi iti so.aṇuḥ vartamāna’tayā, idaṁ

prāk mayā jñātaṁ, jānāmi, jñāsyāmi – iti; evamapi kṛtaṁ, karomi, kariṣyevā –- iti

jñānakriyāsvarūpeṇa bhāvān api tathā kalayan avacchinatti ca – ity eṣo 'sya kālaḥ |

tathā kũṁcideva iti avacchinnameva karoti, (p. 48) sarvaṁ kartwh na alam;

ghaṭamātrakaraṇāya prabhavati, na paṭādau; – ityetad asya aṇoḥ kalātattvam |
idameva iti niyatāt kāraṇāt niyataṁ kāryaṁ yat arthayate, yathā vahnereva dhūmaḥ,
aśvamedhādikarmaṇā eva sṣvargādiphalam, na sarvasmāt; – ityevaṁ niyamena
svasaṁkalpakr̥takarmaprabandhasamuītha-puṇ) ipuṇyaiḥ ātmā niyamyate yena, tat
asya niyatitattvam ḷ

What is its nature? He says ‘now’ etc. ‘I know just now’. That individual soul
(experiences that) as the present time. (He may also experience that) ‘I came to know

this before (in the past) (or) ‘I know’, ‘I will know (and so on). Similarly, ‘it has been
doneʼ, ‘I am doingʼ, or ‘I will do, (the two being) knowledge and action. (In this way,)
as you go on operating (your powers) (kalayan), you determine (the nature of things)
(avachinnatti). Thuṣ, this is his (sense of) time. In this way, ‘he does something’, that is,

(whatever) he does is limited. He is not capable of doing everything. He can only

manage to make a jar (for example), not a cloth. This is the principle of limited agency
(kalātattva) the individual soul (anu) possesses. ‘Just this’ — a cause is fixed (and
specific), and so the effect it brings about is fixed (and specific). Just as only fire
(produces) smoke, and heaven is the fruit of performing an Aśvamedha sacrifice or the
like. (This effect is not produced) from (each and) every thing. In this way, that which
restrains the Self by regulating it with the merit and demerit that arises as a consequence
of action that has been done (impelled by a particular) intention – that is its principle of
Necessity (niyati).
tathā sarvātmanā iti yā iyam apūrṇammanyatā, sarvaṁ mama idam upayujyate;
bhūyāsaṁ, mā kadācīt na bhūvam; – ity etat paśoḥ rāgatattvam | buddhidharmo yo
rāgaḥ, sa ekatra kutrāpi kāṇtālakṣaṇe ‘rthe anyat apohya, atra me rāgaḥ iti
abhiṣvaṅgamātraṁ, na sarvākāṅkṣāmayasya rāgatattvasya samānaḥ | tathā jānāmi iti
kirṅcideva purovarti ghaṭādikaṁ, na punar dūravyavahitaṁ vastu; – iti vidyātattvam |

sśuddhavidyāpekṣayā kārikāyām avidyā iti kathītam, na punar vedanābhāvāt |

māyāsahitaṁ bhedaprathāyuktam (p. 49) etat kañcukaṣaṭkaṁ paśoḥ – iti || 17 |

In the same way, ‘in all respectsʼ. This is the notion that (the fettered soul has
that) it (lacks somethings and s0) is incomplete. “All this is useful for me.” “May I not
be (like this) ever again.” This is (the manifest result of) the fettered soul’s principle of
Attachment. The attachment which is a quality of the intellect is (focused) somewhere in
one place, that is, on some object like the beloved, (whilst it) rejects (everything) else.
“This here is my attachment” is just a (particular) attachment. It is not the same as the

TANTRĀLOKA

How is that here said to be the six Coverings of consciousness? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

TḠTaFTTĀÇTH JCTTTJTĀTṬ |I| 3oU 1I
dehapuryaṣṭakādyeṣu vedyeṣu kila vedanam |
etatṣaṭkasasaṅkocaṁ yad avedyam asāv aṇuḥ || 205 ||

That individual soul (aṇu) is not an object of knowledge. It is the

awareness (vedana) that is this group of six, along with the contraction
(they bring about) present in the (physical) body, the City of Eight
(puryaṣṭaka) (which is the subtle body) and the like, that are objects of
knowledge. (205)

The individual soul is said in the scriptures to be the ‘awareness’ which
is the agent of the act of perception (vidikriyākartṛ) that has become limited,
contracted by this group of six (coverings) beginning with Māyā. Present in the
midst of the body and rest which are objective, because it is one with the
perceiver, it is not an object of perception. This is the meaning. This itself is
said to be the twenty-fifth principle, which is the individual soul that is
(variously) termed ‘pumān’, ‘aṇu and ‘pudgala’ in the Mālinīvijaya. Śupreme
consciousness itself, due to the influence of Māyā, has become in the aforestated

way the individual soul. Thus, the birth of the principle of the individual soul

has been taught in various places in the scriptures, such as the venerable
Svacchandatantra. Thus, one should understand (avaseya) here also (in the
same way). That is said in the venerable Mṛgendratantra as well, beginning
with the general (statement) that

‘The product (janya) of the Knot (of Māyā) consists of the Force (of
limited agency), Time, (Impure) Knowledge, Attachment, the individual soul

(nr) and Mother (Prakṛti)” . . . (and ending with) ‘(then) from that (principle

principle of Attachment, which is the (universal) craving for anything (one may desire
in general).
In the same way, “I know just something that is in front (of me), such as a jar,

not something that is located at a distance. This is (the result and characteristic feature

of) the principle of limited knowledge (vidyātattva). (This is why) it is called

‘ignorance’ in the verse, in relation to Pure Knowledge, not because there is no

sensation (vedana) (or knowledge at all). (This is the group of six Obscuring Coverings)

‘which includes Māyā’, that is, is linked to the ongoing perception of duality
(bhedaprathā). Thīs is the fettered soul’s group of six Obscuring Coverings (kañcuka).”

Concerning the subtle body, see above, note to 8/163-164.
MṛT vidyāpāda 10/1ab. Read with the printed edition, vidyāgranthijanyaṁ

kalākālavidyārāganrṛmātaraḥ for vidyāgranthijanyakalākālavidyārāgānymātaraḥ.

Jayaratha is referring us to the entire passage in Mṛgendra vidyāpāda 10, from

verse 1 to 18, which is indeed very relevant and worth quoting in full, along with the

commentary by Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha. These verses are as follows.

granúhijanyaṁ kalākālavidyārāganr̥ṇātaraḥ

CHAPTER NINE

guṇadhīr garvacittākṣamātrābhiūtāny anukramāt |I | |]
tattavāt prathamataḥ kalābhidheyayoḥ kalāniyatyoḥ, kālasya, nṛśabdenoktṣya
p.
ca puṁspratyayahetos tattvav
vyaktānāṁ, mātr̥śabdena ca prakṛtir avyaktākhyā tatsakāśād guṇāḥ, tebhyo buddhiḥ,
tasyā ahaṅkāraḥ, tasmāt taijasād buddhindriyāṇi manaś ca, vaikārikāt karmendriyāṇi,
bhūtādisaṁjñāt mātrāśabdenoddiṣṭāni tanmātrāṇi, tebhyo bhūtānīty asmād anukramād
etadgranthitattvato ‘bhivyaṅgyam || 1 II

‘The product (janya) of the Knot (of Māyā) consists of the Force (of limited

agency), Time, (Impure) Knowledge, Attachment, the individual soul (nṛ) and the
Mother (Prakṛti). (Then from that proceed) the qualities, the intellect, ego, mind, senses,
subtle elements (mātrā) and gross elements (each one from the other), in due order. (1)
Commentary: First of all, from the principle of Māyā comes the manifestation
of the particular (aspect of that) principle which is the cause of the individual soul’s
(capacity to) perceive, namely, (the manifestation) of the Force (of limited agency)
(Kalā) and Necessity (Niyati), that (are here) called (together) Kalā. (Then comes that)

of Time, and (then that) of the individual soul, (here) called ‘nṛ’. Again, from the
principle Kalā comes (the manifestation of) Vidyā, Rāga and Avyakta. Prakṛti is called

Avyaktā, (here denoted) by the word ‘mother’. From that (proceed) the qualities, from

them the intellect, from that the ego, and from its energetic (aijasa) (aspect), the organs

of perception and the mind (manas); from its altered form (vaikārika), the organs of
action, and from the (form of the ego) called ‘gross element’, the subtle elements. (here)

given the name ‘mātrā’ and from them. the gross elements. Thus. that which is to be

made manifest (proceeds) in this sequence from this principle of the Knot (of Māyā).

vidhatte dehasiddhyarthaṁ yat sākṣād yat padāntarāt |

yathā yunakti yad dhetos tādṛk tad adhunocyate || 2 ||

aśuddhādhvanyadhikṛto nanteśanātha ātmanāṁ dehādikḷptyai granthitattvāt yat
ād avyavadhānena kalādikāryaṁ vyanakti, yac ca padāntarāt sthānāntarāt kalāder
vidyārāgādi vyanakti, tad yasmāt kāraṇād abhivyaktaṁ padārthaṁ yena vā prakāreṇa

yunakti dehādisiddhau yojayati, tat tādṛg idānī kathyate | 2 1I

Now will be explained how (Anantanātha) ordains (their manifestation) in
order to accomplish (the formation of) the body, and how he conjoins (what arises from
Māyā with) the (material) cause. (2)
Ananteśanātha is appointed (to preside over) the Impure Path. He makes
manifest Force (of limited agency) (Kalā) and the rest of (his) product (kārya)
(continuously) without interruption from the presence of the principle of the Knot (of

Maāyā) in order to fashion the body etc. He manifests from another plane, that is, from

another place, Kalā and the rest, Vidyā and Attachment etc. The reality (padārtha) that
is made manifest from a cause or the manner in which he conjoins it, that is, (the
manner in which) he adds to the accomplishment of (the formation of) the body etc., –
(all this) will now be explained as it (truly) is.
kartr̥śaktir aṇor nityā vibhvī ceśvaraśaktivat |

tamaśchannatayārtheṣu nābhāti niranugrahā || 3 |I

tad anugrāhakaṁ tatvaṁ kalākhyaṁ taijasaṁ haraḥ |

māyāṅṁ vikṣobhya kurute pravṛttyaṅgaṁ paraṁ hi tat || 4 |I

TANTRĀLOKA

aṇor ātmanaḥ śivaśaktivad yady api nityā
vyāpikā ca kartṛśaktir muktau
tathāvidhatvasaṁśravaṇāt,
tathāpy
anādīimalāvṛtatvāt
karaṇīyeṣvartheṣu
na
niranugrahā sā ābhāti | tasyā anugrāhakaṁ samarthakaṁ kalākhyaṁ
tattvaṁ harati

bhogamuktyartham adhovartino ‘nūn iti, haro

‘nanteśaḥ māyāṁ vikṣobhya

prasavonmukhīṁ kr̥tvā kurute abhivyanaktīty arthaḥ | yasmāt kalākhyaṁ tattvaṁ paraṁ
pravr̥tyaṅgam ātmanaḥ kartrṛṣvarūpasamarthanaṁ, tenaiva vyāpṛtatvāt | na hy asau
tenānuttejitakartṛbhāvaḥ pravartituṁ śaktaḥ syāt | taijasatvaṁ cāsya sahajamala-

tiraskaraṇeṉāṇor ekadeśena prakāśanahetutvāt |/ 4 | erad evāha

The individual soul’s power to act as an agent (kartṛśakti) is eternal and
pervasive as is the Lord’ power. (However,) as it is covered with the darkness (of

beginningless Impurity), it does not manifest within the things (that need to be done)

without assistance. The reality that assists it, is the radiant energy (taijasa) called Kalā
(the Force of limited agency). Once Hara (the Saviour) has aroused Māyā, he fashions
that supreme limb (of the soul) that enables it to act. (3-4)
Although the individual soul (aṇu), that is, the Self (ātman), possesses the

power of agency which is eternal and pervasive when liberated, because it is heard

(from the scriptures) that it is so. Even then, because it is enveloped by beginningless
Impurity, it does not manifest without assistance in those things that need to be done.
That which assists that (power of agency) is the principle called Kalā (the Force of
limited agency) that gives (the soul) the capacity (to do s0) and saves (harati) the souls
that are below in order that (they may have) worldly experience and (attain) liberation.
Hara is Ananteśa. Once he has aroused Maāyā, that is, made it prone (unmukha) to give
birth (to its products), he makes it manifest. This is the meaning. This is so as the
principle called Kalā is ‘the supreme limb (of the soul) that enables it to act’, that is,
empowers (its) nature as an agent, because it is pervaded by that. He is not capable of
acting if his agency is not energized by that. It is ‘radiant energy’ because, by obscuring

the innate Impurity of the soul, it is the cause of its partial (ekadeśena) luminosity. He
says that:

tena pradīpakalpena 'tadā chimaciter aṇoḥ |
prakāśayaty ekadeśaṁ vidārya timiraṁ ghanam | 5 (I
sa eṣa prāg ukto maheśvaras tadā tasmin māyāprasavābhimukhyakāle
‘timalinacicchakter ātmanas tena taijasena kalākhyena tattvena kiṁcitprakāśakāritvād
dīpaprāyeṇa nibiḍaṁ tamo nirbhidyaikadeśaṁ prakaṭayati malāvacchinnāṁ kartr̥tāṁ

samupodbalayatti yāvat | kalā-śabdenoddeśasūtre niyatir api lāghavād upakṣiptā | 5 |I
tayoś ca kalāniyatyor anv-arthakalāśabdābhidheyatāṁ vaktum āha

That (radiant energy), like a lamp, then partially (ekadeśam) illumines the

individual soul, of which the consciousness has been obscured, having rent asunder (its)
dense darkness. (5)

This same Maheśvara, mentioned before, then at the time when Māyā is prone
to give birth, partially penetrates through the dense darkness of the Self, whose power of

consciousness is extremely sullied. (He does this) with the radiant energy that is the
principle called Kalā (Force (of limited agency)), which is like a lamp, because it only

illumineṣ to some small degree. Having done so, he makes the agency conditioned by
Impurity manifest and strengthens it. In the sūtra in which the topic is announced,
Necessity is also included with the word ‘kalā’ – Force (of limited agency), (but not

CHAPTER NINE

mentioned directly,) in order to be concise (lāghavāt). Now in order to explain how the
two, Force and Necessity, are denoted by the word ‘Kalā’, in accord with their
etymology, he says:
kala ity eṣa yo dhātuḥ saṅkhyāne preraṇe ca saḥ |
protsāraṇaṁ preraṇaṁ sā kurvatī tamasaḥ kalā || 6 |I

kala ity eṣa saṁṅkhyānārthavṛttir eko dhātuḥ | kala kṣepa iti protsāraṇārthavṛttir anyo
dhātuḥ !| tatraikadeśe tamaso malāsya kṣepaṇaṁ protsāraṇaṁ kurvāṇāyāḥ kalāyāḥ

kṣepārtha-vṛttiprakṛtibhūtaḥ prathamaḥ, dvitīyas tu saṁkhyānārthavrttiḥ kalanādi yat
tayā niyamanāt kalāśabdāparaparyāyā niyateḥ | 6 |I

The root kal (conveys the sense of) ‘enumeration’ (i.e. progressive
differentiation), and ‘impellingʼ. Kalā removes the darkness (of the Impurity of the
individual soul) and impels (it to act). (6)
‘Kal’ in the modality in which it means ‘enumeration’ is one root. ‘Kal’ in the

sense of ‘to cast forth’, in the modality in which it means ‘removal’, is another
(different) root. Applying it in one place to the darkness of Impurity, it casts it forth, i.e.

removes it. Engaged in that, it is in the modality that means ‘casting forth’ as its nature,

it is the first (root). The second in the modality that means ‘enumeration’. It
progressively differentiates etc. (kalana) by (its) regulating restraint (niyamana),
Necessity (niyati), which is the other meaning of the word ‘kalā’.

idānīm ātmanaḥ kalāyāś ca kartr̥kārakatām abhidhātum āha
ity etad ubhayaṁ vipra saṁbhūyānanyavatsthitam |

bhogakriyāvidhau jantor nijaguḥ kartr̥kārakam || 7 |I
jantor anāsāditabhogasyāṇor yo bhogakṛiyāvidhis tasminn utpādye, iti anena
prāguktena prakāreṇa, etat ātmakalākhyaṁ kartrkārakaṁ nijagur upadidiśur guravaḥ |
tair hi bhoktrtayā kartṛtvenāsyoktaḥ, tasya kartṛśkater upodbalakatvāt kārakaṁ hetuḥ

kartrī kalā

'prayoktryadi mahīprāntam.……
I" (11/30cd)
ityādina tasyā eva prayoktr̥śabdena vakṣyamāṇatvāt | kathaṁ caitad dvayaṁ sthitam ity

’saṁbhūyānanyavat ekībhūyālakṣitavyatirekam iti yāvat | uktaṁ ca
bṛhaspatipādaiḥ 'jantor vibhāty atiśleṣāt sā dvitīyeva cetanā | iti | viprety āmantraṇena
vaktā śrotāraṁ munim avahitaṁ karoti |I 7 |I
Now, in order to explain that the soul and Force (of limited agency) (Kalā) are
(related to one another as is) the agent to (its attendant) implement (karaka), he says:

O Brahmin, both abide (and operate) together as if they were not different from
one another. (The teachers) have taught that they are the agency and (its attendant)
implement of the person (who operates) in the prescribed manner with respect to the
activity which is the experience (that is the consequence of its Karma). (7)
The prescribed manner with regard to the activity of experiencing (the

consequence of its Karma) (is such) as to make it arise within the person who has not
aṭtained the experience (which is the consequence of its karma). Thus, the teachers have

taught that, in the aforestated manner, this (pair) called the individual soul and Kalā are

the agent and (its attendant) implement (kāraka). Due to them, (the individual soul) is

TANTRĀLOKA

said to be an agent, as the subject (bhoktṛ) (who experiences the consequences of
Karma). As it strengthens its power as the agent, the implement (kāraka) is the cause,

and Kalā is the agent. (It is said further ahead that) ‘(the means by which the individual

soul (achieves its) purpose is the series of tartvas) beginning with (the agent), that

applies (the instruments of action), up to earth.’ (MṛT vidyāpāda 11/30cd) This is

because in such (statements) (kalā) will be called ‘(the agent) that applies (the
instruments of action) (prayoktṛ). How do these two abide (together)? He explains that
‘both abide (and operate) together as if they were not different from one another°.
(Acting) as one, no difference is perceived (between them). The venerable Bṛhaspati has
said: ‘as it is very closely connected, that (kalā) shines as if it were a person’s second
consciousness. By the invocation, ‘O Brahmin’, the speaker induces the sage who is
liṣtening to pay attention.
vidyātattvasya vyāpāraṁ vaktum āha

evaṁ vyaktakriyāśaktir didṛkṣur gocaraṁ drśaḥ l
bhajaty anugrahāpekṣāṅṁ svayaṁ draṣṭum aśaknuvan |8 II
tadarthaṁ kṣobhayitveśaḥ kalām eva janikṣamām |
tattvaṁ vidyākhyam asr̥jat karaṇaṁ paramātmanaḥ || 9 |
uktena

prakāreṇa

vyaktā

kriyāśaktir

yasya

sa

tathāvidho.aṇur

gocaraṁ

prativimbitaviṣayaṁ buddhyākhyaṁ draṣṭum icchur dr̥śo jñānasyanugrahāpekṣāṁ

bhajate jñānaśakty-anugrahapekṣata iti tātparyam | ṣvayaṁ draṣṭum aśaknuvann iti
viśeṣaṇabhāvena hetīpanyāsaḥ ṣvayaṁ boddhum asamarthatvād ity arthaḥ | tadartham
ananteśaḥ kalāṁ tattvāvirbhāvanasahāṁ prakṣobhya janyajananābhimukhīṁ kṛtvā
ātmanaḥ paraṁ prakrṣṭaṁ karaṇaṁ vidyākhyaṁ sṛṣṭavān | paratvaṁ cāsya sākṣāt
sādhyasyaivopakārakatvāt taduttejitajñānaśkater antaḥkaraṇabahiṣkaraṇair yoga iti

teṣām aparatvam | 9 || yad uktaṁ

In order to explain the function of the principle of Knowledge, he says:
(Once) the power of action is manifest in this way, the field of perception (i.e.
the intellect) of one who wishes to perceive requires assistance (from the power of

knowledge). By itself (alone), it is incapable of perceiving. For that purpose, the Lord
(Ananta), having aroused (kṣobhayitva) the energy (kalā) that is capable of perceiving,
has emanated the supreme instrument of the soul, that is, the principle called Vidyā. (8-

9)

Once the power of action of the individual soul, which is such, has been made

manifest in the manner that has been taught, desiring to see the ‘field’, which is the
reflected object called the intellect, the perception requires the assistance of knowledge.
The sense is that there is a need for the assistance of the power of knowledge. The
reason (hetu) (for this) is presented in the form of an adjective (of the soul), (with the
words,) ‘By itself (alone) it is incapable of perceiving’. The meaning is that that is so
because it is incapable of knowing (anything) by itself. ‘For that purpose’ Ananteśa
aroused the energy, along with giving rise (to the corresponding) principle, and made it

prone to generate its product, after which he emanated the ‘supreme’, most excellent
instrument (of the individual soul), called Vidyā. It is supreme because it is a direct aid

to the attainment of what is to be achieved. The union of the power of knowledge, that
has been energized by that, with the inner and outer senses, is their lower (apara)
(aspect). As is said:

CHAPTER NINE

tena prakāśarūpeṇa jñānaśaktiprarocinā |

sarvakārakaniṣpādyam avaiti viṣayaṁ param | 10 ||
tena vidyākhyena tattvena prakāśakatvāt jñānaśaktyabhivyañjakena sarvair
buddhindriyaiḥ
.karmendriyair
yathāsvaṁ
.nivartyaṁ
.paraṁ
.kartrviṣayāt
kāryātmakaviṣayāt anyat jñeyākhyaṁ, yadvā paraṃ iti avyavahitaṁ viṣayaṁ
pratibimbitabāhyaviṣayatvena saṁnikr̥ṣṭaṁ buddhitattvam avaiti jānāti | vidyākhyena
karaṇeṉa kila pratibimbitasrakcandanādibāhyaviṣayā bhogyarūpā buddhir gṛhyate |
yadāha kheṭakanandanaḥ

'buddhir viṣayākārā sukhādirīūpā samāsato bhogyā |'

(+ bhogye bhogo bhoktuś cidvyaktir bhogyanirbhāsā l) ( ta saṁ 13 )
iti | tathā

ravivat prakāśarūpo yadi nāma mahāṁs tathāpi karmatvāt |
karaṇāntarasāpekṣaḥ śakto grāhayitum ātmānam || ( ta saṁ 14 ) i1i || 1O |I
(The intellect,) by virtue of that (Vidyātattva), because its nature is light,
stimulated by the power of knowledge, knows the other field (of operation), which is a
product of all the attendant causes (kāraka) (namely, the senses of knowledge and

action). (10)

(The result) can be achieved by all the senses of knowledge and action,
according to their own nature, by means of that principle called Vidyā, because it

illumines by making manifest the power of knowledge. It is ‘other than the field of
operation of the agent, which is the field of the product of action and is called the object
of knowledge. Or else ‘the other” (param) (can be understood to) mean ‘unconcealed’
(i.e. clearly perceptible). The principle of the intellect knows the object as the external
object reflected (within it), that is close by (as there is nothing between it and the

intellect). The intellect perceives the outer object of experience, such as a garland or
incense, reflected (within it), (with the aid of) an instrumental means (karaṇa), called
Vidyā. As Kheṭakanandana has said:

‘The intellect (assumes) the form of (its) object, which is (the experience of)
pleasure and the like, that is, in brief, the object of experience (bhogya). The experience

of the object of experience is the manifestation of the consciousness of the subject
which is (coloured by) the manifestation of the object of experience.’ (TSaṁ 13)
Again:

‘If the nature (of the intellect) is light like the sun and even if it is (very) great,
it is an object and so is dependent on another means (karaṇa) to be able to perceive

itself. (TSaṁ 14)

rāgatattvābhivyaktim āha
tadabhivyaktacicchaktúidrṣṭārtho ‘py apipāsitaḥ |
naiti taṁ janakaṁ rāgaṁ tasmãd evãsr̥jat prabhuḥ |I 1 1 I|
tena vidyākhyena tattvenābhivyaktajñānaśaktitvāt dṛṣṭārtho ‘py anur apipāsito
‘saṁjātābhilāṣaḥ san naiti na bhogyāharaṇāya gacchati | atas tasyābhilāṣasya janakaṁ
rāgaṁṅ tata eva kalātattvāt prabhavanaśilo ʻnanteśanāthaḥ sasaṇja |/ 11 II

TANTRĀLOKA

Now he talks about the manifestation of the principle of Attachment.
(Now) even though an object has been perceived by means of the (clearly)
manifest power of consciousness, (but the soul) does not thirst (to have it), he does not
approach it. Thus, the Lord emanated Attachment, which gives rise to that. (1 1)
Although the soul has perceived the object, because (its) power of knowledge

has been made manifest by means of that principle called Knowledge, he does not thirst

(to have it); that s, a desire (for it) has not arisen. This being so, he does not approach it;
that is, he does not go to eat the object of enjoyment. Thus, Anantanātha, who have the
power (to do so), emanated from the principle of the Force (of limited agency) the
attachment that generates his desire.
sa tena rañjito bhogyaṁ malīmasam api sprhan |
ādatte na ca bhuñjāno virāgam adhigacchati || 12 ||
tena rāgeṇa rañjito janitābhiṣyaṅgaḥ so “ṇur /malinatamam api māyīyabhogyam
abhilaṣann upāharati, na caivam upabhuñjāno virajyate | curādīnā maṇiṁ jantatvāc ca

sprṛhann ity aduṣṭam || 12 ||

Coloured by that (Attachment), desiring the object of enjoyment, sullied

though it may be (api), (the soul) lays hold (of it for himself), and moreover, (even if he

has) enjoyed it, does not become free of desire (for it). (12)

Coloured by that attachment, that is, one in whom attachment has been

generated by desire, ‘desiring the object of enjoyment, sullied though it may beʼ, that is,

desiring the object of enjoyment that is in the domain of Māyā (māyīyabhogya), he eats
it up; (but although) he enjoys it in this way, he is not disaffected. A thief (continues) to
desire a gem because he knows (its value). So (this teaching) is not defective.
kālatatvanirūpaṇāyāha
iti pravṛttaḥ karaṇaiḥ kāryarūḍhaiḥ sabhauvanaiḥ |

bhogabhūmiṣu nā bhuṅkte bhogān kālānuvartinaḥ || 13 |
iti evamuktanītyā kalotejitakartṛtvaḥ san pravṛtto bhogodyuktaḥ nā puruṣaḥ
kālenānuvartinas tāsu tāsu bhogabhūmiṣu sukhaduḥkhādirāpān bhogān bhuṅkte | kaiṛ
bhuṅkte cityāha bhauvanadehasahitaiḥ karaṇair buddhindriyaiḥ karmendriyais
trividhenāntaḥkaraṇena | malinatvāt kriyājñānaśaktyoḥ karmendriyabuddhīndriyāṇām
apekṣā | kīdṛśaiḥ karaṇair ity āha kāryarūḍhair avibhutvato niraśrayāṇām eṣāṁ

bhūtatanmātrātmaka-kāryāśrayasthaiḥ
sadbhiḥ
1|
uktaṁ
ca
kheṭakanandanena
etat kāryaṁ daśadhā karaṇair āviśya kāryate ceṣṭām |
avibhutvāt karaṇāni tu kāryam adhiṣṭhāya ceṣṭante || iti | 13 ||
In order to describe the principle of time, he says:
Thus, (in this way, his agency, energized by the force of limited agency,) the
soul is engaged (in experience) (pravṛtta), in accord with (the passage and moment of)
time. He experiences (on each of his) planes of experience, the experiences (of pleasure

and pain and the like,) with (his inner and outer) senses, and (the body), consonant with

CHAPTER NINE

the world (in which he resides), mounted on (the gross and subtle elements etc. that are
the) products (kārya) (of Māyā). (13)
In this way, according to the stated teaching, (the soul’s) agency, energized by

the Force (of limited agency), ‘is engaged (in experience) (pravṛtta), that is, intent on

worldly experience, (Thus,) the individual soul, ‘in accord with (the passage and

moment of) time’, experiences the experiences of pleasure and pain etc. on each one of
the planes of experience (of the consequences of Karma). With what does he experience
them? He says, with (the outer) senses, along with the body, consonant with the world

(in which he resides), the cognitive organs of sense, the organs of action, and with the
three kinds of internal organs. He says that they are ‘mounted on (the gross and subtle

elements etc. that are the) products (kārya) (of Māyā), because as they are not
pervasive, they are without support, and so, as they are not (by themselves) engaged in
action etc., they exist, taking the support of the products (of Māyā further down the
chain), that is, the gross and subtle elements. And it is said by Kheṭakanandana (i.e.
Sadyojyotis):
‘Having entered that tenfold product (kārya) (of Māyā, i.e. the five gross and
subtle elements) with the senses, (the soul) induces action. As they are not pervasive,
the senses act, having taken (that) product (of Māyā) as a support.’ (TSaṁ 4)
atha ko ʻasau kālo nāma, kuṭa utpannaḥ, kiṁ vā karotīti | atrocyate
truṭyādipratyayasyārthaḥ kālo māyāsamudbhavaḥ |

kalāyann āṣamutthānān niyatyā nīyataṁ paśum | 14 1
truṭilavanimeṣamuhūrtādeḥ pratyayasya jñānasyārtho nimittaṁ yaḥ, sa kālaḥ | ‘sa
mūrtam āste, praharaṁ bhrāmyati ityādipratītir ajasraparivartino yasmād bhavati, sa
māyāta utpannaḥ paśutvena malena yuktam ātmānaṁ kalayan kāla ity ucyate | yad

jalayantrabhramāvegasadṛsīhiḥ pravr̥ttibhiḥ |

sa kālaḥ kalayaṁs tāvat kālākhyāṁ labhate tataḥ ||

kīdṛśaṁ paśuṁ kalayann ity āha ā samutthānān niyatyā niyataṁ, niyateḥ samutthānaṁ
svakāraṇād abhivyak
tata ārabhya yāvat saṁhāram asau paśuṁ karmajanite
sukhaduḥkhopabhoge niyacchati | na cāyaṁ kālasya vyāpāras tasya kalanamātra eva
caritārthatvāt | 14 | atra parāśaṅkā

Now what is this ‘Time’, where has it arisen from, and what does it do? It is

said here (in response to these questions):

Time is the cause (artha) for the perception of a truti (also called tuṭi) and
other (measures of time,) and it arises from Māyā measuring out (in time) the fettered
soul who is conditioned (niyata) by the Necessity (of causal consequence) (niyati) right
from when it arises. (14)
Time is the instrumental cause of the perception, that is, knowledge, of a rruti
(4 seconds), lava (half a second), nimeṣa (twinkling of the eye) and muhūrta (48

minutes) etc. Time is said to be that which measures out the Self, that is conjoined to

Impurity as its fettered condition. It arises from Maāyā, and it is due to that that (the

TANTRĀLOKA

individual Self) who is constantly active has such perceptions as ‘he stands for a
muhūrta and wanders about for a praharaʼ’. As is said:

‘Time, measuring out (kalayan) (the fettered soul) by the activities (of things)
that (go on repeatedly,) like the flurry of the rotation of a waterwheel, thus (tāvat) gets
the name ‘time’ (kāla).
How is the fettered soul that (Time) is measuring out (kalayan)? He says that
‘he is conditioned (niyata) by the Necessity (of causal consequence) (niyati) right from
when it arises’. The ‘arising of Necessity’ is (its) manifestation from its cause.
Beginning from that up to the destruction (of the universe), it induces the fettered soul to
experience the pleasure and pain born of Karma. This is not the function (vyāpāra) of
Time, because its task is completed by just (simply) measuring out (time).
Here others have (the following) doubt:
sasādhanasya bhogasya karmatantratayā jaguḥ |
kecin niyāmakaṁ karma yad anyad atiricyate || 15 |I
avaśyaṁ tāvad bhogas tatsādhanāni ca bhoktaḥ karmādhīnāni tadapekṣāṁ vinā
bhogavaicitryasyānupapatter ity uktam | tan niyāmakatvaṁ ca tasyaiva bhaviṣyati |
tataś ca yad anyan niyatyākhyaṁ tattvaṁ kalpyate, tad atiricyate niṣprayojanatvāt tad

adhikībhavati | tathā coktaṁ

yasmāc ca yena ca yathā ca yadā ca yac ca

yāvac ca yatra ca śubhāśubham ātmakarma |
tasmāc ca tena ca tathā ca tadā ca tāc ca
tāvac ca tatra ca vidhātrvaśād upaiti |ḷ

athātra parihāraḥ
Some have said that Karma is that which regulates (niyāmaka) the experience
(bhoga) (of the individual soul), along with the means to it, because it (all) depends on
Karma. Whatever else there is, is distinct from that (and is not essential). (15)
It is thus essential for experience (bhoga) (to be possible), and the means (for
it), as well as the one who experiences it, to (all) be dependent on Karma. For without
being dependent on that, the variety of worldly experience (bhoga) would not be
(logically) possible. That will be the regulator of itself (i.e. karma determines karma).
Thus ‘whatever else there be’, that is, principle that (may be) conceived, called
Necessity, is ‘distinct from that’ and is (an unnecessary) extra, because it serves no

purpose. And that has been said in the following way:

‘From what’, ‘by what’, ‘in what way, ‘when’ and ‘what’, ‘to what degree’,
‘where’, one’s own auspicious and inauspicious action, he approaches according (to the

ordinance) of the (Lord), who ordains it (vidhātṛ) ʻfrom that’ ‘by that’, ‘in that way’,
‘then’ʼ, ‘that’ ‘to that degree’, and ‘there’ʼ.
Now the refutation here (of that view):
bhogo ‘rthāḥ sarvatattvānāṁ so 'pi karmaṇibandhanaḥ |
karmaivāstu śarīrādi tataḥ sarvam apārthakam || 16 ||

CHAPTER NĪNE

mā bhūn niyatitattvaṁ, tadanyāny api bhogasādhanāni tattvāni karmanibandhanāny
eva, teṣāṁ cāvaśyaṁ karmāpekṣitvāt karmaiva kevalaṁ bhogasādhanam aṣtu yad vinā
anyāni akiñcitkārīṇi | tathā ca sati śarīrendriyaviṣayādeḥ sarvasyānarthakyam || 16 ||
Worldly experience (bhoga) is the purpose (artha) of all the principles of
existence, and that too is based on Karma. (Well then,) let the body etc. be Karma, thus

(it would follow that) nothing is separate (and distinct). (16)

Let there not be a principle of Necessity or any other principles that (may be

considered to be) means to worldly experience that are rooted in Karma. As they are
necessarily dependent upon Karma, let Karma alone be the means to worldly
experience, without which the others do nothing at all. That being so, the body, senses
and (their) objects etc are all useless.

atha dehādisāpekṣaṁ tatpumarthaprasādhakam |
nanu dehādisavyapekṣaṁ karma puruṣārthasādhanasamarthaṁ, na kevalam | na hy
ekaṁ janakaṁ, kiṁ tarhi, sāmgryeva kāryajaniketi || atrocyate
Now, (some may say that) the accomplishment of that individual soul’s
purpose depends upon the body etc. (17ab)
Surely (someone may object), Karma, which is dependent upon the body etc.,

is not capable of accomplishing the individual soul’s goal alone. There is not only one

creative cause (janaka). Well, what then (is the cause)? It is the whole composite (of
factors) that generates the required result (kārya). Here (with regard to this,) it is said:
tato niyatisāpekṣam astu karma niyāmakam || 17 |I

evaṁ

tarhi

yathā

dehendriyādibhiḥ

svasvavyāpārapravṛttaiḥ

saha

puruṣārthasādhana-kṣamam,
evaṁ
.svakāryaniṣpādakanīyatitattvasāpekṣaṁ
niyāmakam astv iti na kaścid doṣaḥ || 17 Il

karma

.tat

Thus, let Karma, which is dependent on Necessity, be that which regulates (the
soul’s worldly experience). (17cd)
In this way then, just as Karma is capable of accomplishing the soulʼ’s purpose
(in association) with the body and senses etc. that are engaged in performing their own

respective functions, in the same way, may that which regulates (the soul’s worldly
experience) be dependent upon the principle of Necessity, that produces its own
(corresponding) effect. Thus, there is no defect.
puṅstattvaṁ tata evābhūt puṁspratyayanibandhanam |

āpūrakaṁ pradhānāder bhauvane rudrasaṁśrayam | 18 I
saṅhārasamaye yad ananteśanāthena viśrāmitaṁ, tataḥ tasmād eva
māyātattvāt puṁstattvam āvirabhūd ity arthaḥ | puṁspratyayanibandhanam iti

puṅspratter hetuh, anena māyāgarbhasthebhyo

‘dhikārirudrāṇubhyas taitad-

bhuvananivāsibhyaś ca vailakṣaṇyam uktaṁ teṣāṁ puṁspratyayāyogāt | tac ca
puṅstattvaṁ pradhānādes tattvavrātasyāpūrakaṁ puruṣārthatvena kāryasahitasya
pradhānasyeṣṭatvāt | evaṁ chātrahetukatvād adhyayanasya 'chātrā adhyāpakāḥ’ ity

TANTRĀLOKA

of Māyā) the principle of the individual soul arose, which is the support

(nibandhana) of individual soul’s (capacity for) perception.’

And as that is not defined in that way in the Mālinīviyaja, we have not
stated it here.
ādivad āpūrakaśabdo jñeyaḥ | bhauvane cādhvani tat puṁstattvaṁ rudrasaṁśrayam

tathā coktaṁ śrīmatsvatantre

ataḥ puṟuṣatattve tu bhuvanāni nibodha me |
divyāmbhaḥ salilaughe ca .....

..II( 1011066)

ityādi | puṅrāgasaṅpuṭitarūpaṁ ca etat puruṣatattvaṁ rudrāṇām āśrayatveneṣṭam |
yathoktaṁ śrīmatkiraṇe

vāmadevo ‘tha bhīmaś cāpy ugraś ca bhavasaṁjñakaḥ |
sarveśānaikavīrau ca pracaṇḍaś ceśvaraḥ pumān ||
umābhartā hy ajo ʻnanta ekaś caiva śivas tataḥ |

rāgatattve sthitā hy ete rudrās īīvrabalotkaṭāḥ ||

atraiva puruṣo jñeyaḥ pradhānagṛhapālakaḥ iti || 18 II

(Then) from that (principle of Māyā), the principle of the individual soul arose,
which is the support (nibandhana) of the individual soul’s (capacity for) perception. It
completes (the other principles below,) starting with Fundamental Nature (pradhāna),
and is the shelter of the Rudras in the worlds (on the lower part of the Path). (18)
The principle of the Self that was brought to rest by the Lord Ananteśa at the
time of universal destruction ‘(then) arose ‘from that’ itself, that is, from the principle
of Māyā. This is the meaning. (It is) ‘the support of the individual soul’s (capacity for)

perceptionʼ, that is, it is the cause of the individual soul’s perception. This states the

difference between individual souls who are Rudras with authority (over particular
worlds) within Māyā and those (souls) who reside within each particular world, because
(the former) are not associated with perceptions (those other) individual souls have.
Moreover, that principle of the individual soul ‘completes’ the aggregate of principles,
beginning with Fundamental Nature. This is because Fundamental Nature, along with
(its) products, is preferred (over the others) as (fulfilling) the purpose of the individual
soul. In the same way, the cause of study are the students. One should know that the
word ‘fulfilment’ is like (saying) ‘the students and the teachers’. That principle of the

individual soul is ‘the shelter of the Rudras’ ‘in the worlds’, that is, on the Path. And

that is said in the venerable Svatantra (i.e. Svacchandatantra):

Next know from me the worlds in the principle of the individual soul. They are

Divyāmbha, Salila and Ogha. . . (10/1066)

The principle of the individual soul is encapsulated by the individual soul and

Attachment, and is considered to be the refuge (āśraya) of the Rudras. As is said in the
venerable Kiraṇa:
‘Vāmadeva, Bhīma, Ugra, the one called Bhava, Sarveśāna, Ekavīra, Pracaṇḍa,
the individual soul (called) Īśvara, Umābhartr, Aja, Ananta, Eka and Śiva – theṣe are the

Rudras in the principle of Attachment, fierce with their great strength. One should know
that the individual soul who guards the house of Fundamental Nature is here.’”

‘’MṛT vidyāpāda 10/18ab.

CHAPTER NINE

Surely (one may ask), does the group of six coverings occur in this
same sequence everywhere (in the scriptures), or not? With this doubt in mind,
he says:
Impurity and the Sequence of the Coverings According to the Śivatanu

iEcdr-ucē

uktaṁ śivatanuśāstre
tad idaṁ bhaṅgyantareṇa punaḥ |
āvaraṇaṁ sarvātmagam

aśuddhir anyāpy ananyarūpeva || 206 ||

Again, this is taught in a different way in the Śivatanuśāstra.

(There we are told that) an obscuring covering (āvarṇa) pervades the entire

soul. Although the impurity (aśuddhi) differs (from it), it is as if it were not
different (from it). (206)

As the impurity of individuality (āṇavamala) is the cause of the sprout
of transmigratory existence, it is said to be ‘an obscuring covering’. That is
said there (in the Sivatanuśāstra):

‘Therefore, (impurity) pervades all souls. It differs (from them), (but)

manifests as if not different (from them). The cause of the sprout of
transmigratory existence, it is (the Impurity of) individuality (āṇṉava), which is

the impurity (asuddhi) of (individual) consciousness (cetas).”

‘ AII the verses 9/206cd-212 are drawn from the Śivatanu. Sanderson (Vienna handout
p. 8) refers to Abhinava’s citation here of the Śivatanu as ‘paraphrasedin Āryā verse:

Jayaratha cites the original verses that are in the same metre. If we compare Jayaratha’s
citation with Abhinava’s, we can observe how Abhinava’s paraphrase is inflated by his

remarks and explanation. There can be no doubt that this is what has happened, because
in the commentary ad 9/207-208ab, Jayaratha suggests a variant on Abhinava’s reading
that coincides with that of the original verse he goes on to quote, introducing it saying:
tad uktaṁ tatra. that is sad there’. ‘There’ must be the Śivatanuśāstra.

Abhinava’s reworking of the first line of this verse glosses the soul’s Impurity as an
obscuring covering. As such, it affects each soul separately, although all fettered souls

are subject to it. The expression sarvātmagata- can equally well mean both ‘pervades
the entire soulʼ as well as ‘pervades all soulsʼ. The latteris meant in the Śivatanu itsef,
as the reference to the many souls that follows tells us. However, Abhinava, it seems,
prefers to focus on just the one individual soul. This makes sense. Otherwise, the

condition of any one soul would be the same for all the others.

“ The same expression is found in the MV 1/24d, but there the cause of the sprout of
transmigratory existence is said to be ignorance, which is considered to be the true
nature of āṇavamala. The statement in the MV begins by saying that the wise prefer that

TANTRĀLOKA

ŚSurely (one may ask), how can it be that this one (impurity) can be both

different and not different (from the individual soul at the same time)? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

ETCTEIIḤ

fē ṁzgṁh-aāta: 1

Śśivadahanakiraṇajālair
dāhyatvāt sā yato ʻnyarūpaiva |
anidaṁpūrvatayā yad

rañjayati nijātmanã tato ʻnanyā || 207 ||

sahajāśuddhimato ʻṇor

īśaguhābhyāṁ hi kañcukas trividhaḥ |
(This obscuring impurity) differs from (the individual soul) because

it can be burnt away by the network of the rays of Śiva’s fire. (However,
from another point of view,) it does not differ from it. This is because it
stimulates attachment (within the soul and stains it) (rañjayati) by its own

(essentially impure) nature (nijātmanā), on the basis of an initial (lack of

discernment) that (this Impurity) is an objective reality (distinct from the

soul) (anidaṅpūrvatayā). (Thus,) the covering (kañcuka) is of three kinds.
(One is derived from) the individual soul that possesses (this) innate

impurity (sahajāśuddhimat), along with (the other two), from the Lord (īśa),
and the Cave (of Māyā) (207-208ab)

(Impurity differs from the soul) ‘because it can be burnt away’. (He is
saying) in this way that it is passes away. The sense is that accretion (āgama)
and passing away (apāya) pertain to something which is separate (from that, to
which it is added or removed). (It differs) ‘from’ all (individual) souls. Or else,
if the acceptable reading were to be (Impurity differs from the soul) ‘because it
view (see above 1/23). Thus, it appears that there were other views that did not

specifically identify mala with ignorance. Here is one. Note also this evidence that MV
existed before Bṛhaspati, and was respected as scripture by him, as it was by the other
early Siddhāntins, who also quote from it.
“This impurity ‘colours' the soul with the ‘colour’ of passionate attachment and
desire. It can affect it this way because its action is preceded by and based on a sense
that the psychophysical organism and its functions are not objective, and so distinct
from the core of consciousness, which is subjective. Thus ‘impurity’ is not different
from the individual soul in the sense that it is intimately associated with it in this way.
On the other hand, it is different because it can be removed.

CHAPTER NINE

can be flooded with the river of the nectar of consciousnessʼ, (then) that is
said there (in the Śivatanuśāstra):

‘(Impurity) is removed from these (the souls) below, once they are
completely flooded with the river of the nectar of consciousness that, pure,
oozes from Śiva’s Moon.% Thus (Impurity) differs from them.”

Initaally it is said in this way that it is proper that the obscuring
coverings can be burnt away (and so differ from the soul). (Whereas, Impurity is
subsequently said to exist) ‘on the basis of an initial (lack of discernment)

that (this Impurity) is an objective reality (distinct from the soul)ʼ, because

it is associated (with the soul) from beginningless time. Thus, because it is
innate (sahaja) (to the soul), and the difference (between it and the soul) cannot

be perceived, like copper and Verdigris, (it is said that) it does not differ from it.
That is said there (in the Śivatanuśāstra):

‘Like the power of consciousness (citi), (Impurity) is conjoined (and
present) within individual souls and associated (anubandhinī) (with them) from

beginningless time. It goes on staining (them with attachment) by its activity,
and so appears not to differ (from them).”

Bondage is of three kinds, the Impurity (of the individual soul), along
with the two called Īśaśakti and Māyā. It is like a covering (that envelops the
soul), and so is bondage in the form (of the soul’s) covering (kañcuka). In this

way, (as described in the verse cited above, the first kind is derived) from the
individual soul (aṇu), who is enveloped by the Impurity of Individuality
(āṇavamala). (The second one is) Iśa (the Lord), (that is to say) His power to
bind (nirodhaśakti) that sustains (and presides over) Impurity (mala).” (The

third is) the ‘Cave’, that is, Māyā, which is the location of the condition (and

persistent existence) (avasthiti) of Karma. That is said (elsewhere).

“The covering (kañcuka) of three kinds arises out of the Cave, the
Supreme Lord and the individual soul whose consciousness (cetas) has been

pierced through with great innate darkness in this way."

“ Abhinava says śivadahanakiraṇajālair dāhyatvāt – (This obscuring impurity) differs

from (the individual soul) because it can be burnt away by the network of the rays of

Śiva’s fire. Jayaratha refrains from saying that Abhinava is departing from the text of
his source, the Śivatanu; instead, discretely, he suggests that Abhinava had a variant
reading before him in his manuscript. The text Jayaratha sees
s and eoes on to quote

‘(Impurity differs from the soul) because it can be flooded with the river of the nectar of
consciousnessʼ. The two readings are both, as they should be, in Ārya metre.
1 As suggested by Sanderson (2006b: 55 n 24), read sivaśaśinaḥ for śivaśāśinaḥ
Ū In other words, in this context, ‘the Lord’ binds the soul by his obscuring power of
Impurity (mala).

The metre of the following verse is anuṣṭhubh. Itis thus unlikely that it is from the
Śivatanu, as all the other citations are in Ārya metre.
Goodall 2004: 242 fn 346 cont: (‘That they are the only three kañcukas in the
Raurava is confirmed there by 10/98-101. Accordingly they appear also to be the only

TANTRĀLOKA

three in the Śivatanuśāstra (cited in TĀ 9/208cd-212ab), for the text may well have
closely followed the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha. Jayaratha ad loc., following the lead given

by Abhinavaguptain his avatārikā in TĀ 9/206ab, asserts that the Śivatanuśāstra too

knows six Kañcukas (including Māyā as the sixth), arguing that kāla and niyati are not

mentioned not because they are not held to exist but because they are purified (in

initiation) when one purifies the other three, and to this effect he quotes a prose
statement that he attributes to the Ruruvṛrti and which therefore may have belonged to a
lost section of Sadyojyotiṣ’s commentary on the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha (it would not
be surprising to (find Sadyojyotiṣ reading these missing tattvas into the
Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha, for, as we have seen (fn 302 on p. 229), he reads them into

Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha 219). In fact the Śivatanuśāstra does appear to ṛefer to three
other entities as kañcukas (in TĀ 9/208ab), but these are mala, māyā and Śiva (by which

is presumably meant his nirodhaśakti).
Mataṅga Vidyāpā da

kañcukatrityāvidáhaḥ kālena kalitas tathā |

niyatyāliṅgitaś ceti pañcadharmā paśuḥ smṛtaḥ ||
‘Pervaded by the three coverings (kañcuka), differentiated by time, and

embraced (tightly) by Necessity, the fettered soul is said to have five qualities.”

Goodall 2004: 242 fn 346: ‘As Torella points out (1998: 58), kalā, vidyā, and rāga form
a special inner group amongst the five kañcukas even where the existence of kāla and

niyati is acknowledged. For example see Mataṅgavidyāpāda 11/33cd-34ab, 12/1, 12/25,
and 14/2. In the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha they are the only Kañcukas. For example in
Raurayasūtrasaṁgraha 1/7Ṭ.
‘He (viz Ananta) caused kalā to arise that is appropriate (to the soul) and that

accompanies the soul (through sasāra). Līnked with this (kalā) the soul attains
experience born of (i.e. consisting of) happiness and unhappiness. And (he caused to
arise) a further (instrument) Iparām), vidyā, which makes (the soul) aware of the tattvas
and of karman, which consists of merit and (demerit. It is she) who causes

souls to

discriminate all the things that are good and bad. And (then he caused to arise) raga,
which impassions, whose nature is pleasure in the objects of the senses. Once He has
caused Prakṛti to arise out of this ‘shakingʼ, he created out of (the tattva) guṇa (all) the

instruments and effects, beginning with (the instrument) buddhi.’ (ibid. p. 237 fn 328)
Sanderson (Vienna handout p. 8) cites relevant passages cognate to TĀ 9/211c-212b.
These are Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha Vidyāpāda:

kalodbalitacaitanyo vidyādarśitagocaraḥ l| 1/10
rāgena rañjitaś cāpi buddhyādikaraṇais tataḥ |

māyādyavaṇīparyantatattvabhūtātmavartmani || I/II

bhuṅkte tatra sthito bhogān bhogaikarasikaḥ pumān |

“(The soul’s) consciousness is strengthened by the power (of limited agency)
(kalā), the field (of its object) is made known (darśita) by (the power of limited)
knowledge (vidyā), and it is coloured by attachment (rāga). Thus, along with the
instruments (of perception), beginning with the intellect, the individual soul abides there
on the path of the metaphysical principles (pertaining to) itself, ranging from Māyā up

CHAPTER NINE

The sense is that (the soul) possessing the three bonds in this way is fit

to be united with the Force (of limited agency). Thus it is said elsewhere that
‘consciousness bound by the three (fetters) is in union with the force (of limited
agency) . . . Thus he says:

ṝ̄ fārarafTza

-rvva fgsīdṁ ēaī JGGRTĪ II 20 |1

āzEṭEiUec¥

feēaṁ aīṛaa ora .

ṢITĪTRCĪTĒṬHTJT I|208 1I

fafāē raĩdrṁ-r

gTrāTaTTĀTT āTTTT: |I 320 ||

TaYĪTĀĪTTA:

tasya ávitīyacitir iva

svacchasya niyujyate kalā ślakṣṇā || 208 I|

to Earth. Delighting solely in worldly experience (bhoga), it experiences the
consequences (of its past actions) (bhoga).

Kiraṇa

tasyāśuddhasya saṁbandhaṁ samāyāti śivāt kalã |
tayodhalitacaitanyo vidyākhyāpitagocaraḥ ||

rāgena rañjitaś cāpi pradhānaṁ ca guṇātmanā |

buddhyādikaraṇānīkasaṁbandhād badhyate paśuḥ || 1/16-17
‘Kalā from Śiva joins this impure soul. The bound soul’s consciousness is
empowered by this (kalā), the sphere (of the operation of the senses) is made known by
vidyā, and it is also stained by passion. And matter (pradhānaṁ ca), which consists of
the gunas (viz. sattva, rajas and tamas) (is joined with the soul). And the soul is bound
through its connection with the organs (of sense and action) beginning with buddhi and
with the army (of gross and subtle elements). Kiraṇatantra 1/16-17, Goodall’s

translation.

TANTRĀLOKA

anayā viddhasya paśorupabhogasamarthatā bhavati |
vidyā cāsya kalātaḥ
Śaraṇāntardīpakaprabhevābhūt || 209 ||
sukhaduḥkhasaṅṁvidaṁ yā
vivinakti paśor vibhāgena |
rāgaś ca kalātattvāc
chucivastrakaṣāyavat samutpannaḥ || 210 ||
tyaktuṁ vāñchati na yataḥ
saṁsṛtisukhasaṁvidānandam |
evam avidyāmalinaḥ
samarthitas triguṇakañcukabalena || 211 ||
gahanopabhogagarbhe
paśur avaśam adhomukhaḥ patati |
A weak force (kalā ślakṣṇā) (which is the limited power to act) is,

likeē a second consciousness (citi), conjoined to that pure (soul).

Penetrated by this,' the fettered soul is capable of experiencing (the
consequences of Karma) (upabhoga). The (limited capacity for) knowledge

(vidyā) (the soul) possesses is (derived) from (this) Force (which is its

limited capacity to act). Like the light of a lamp set in an alcove (śaraṇa), it
discerns the fettered soul’s sensations of pleasure and pain (each)
separately (from one another).
From (this same) principle, the Force (of limited agency), arises
(that of) Attachment. (Colouring the impassioned soul) like red dye
(kaṣāyavat) a clean cloth. It is due to this that (the soul) does not wish to

give up the joy of the experience
transmigratory existence.

(saṁvid)

of the pleasures

of

‘Thus sullied by ignorance and rendered capable (to know and
act) by the strength of (this) threefold covering, the fettered soul falls
! Jayaratha supports this reading, saying that the soul is essentially pure. However, at

this stage of development, the soul is already pervaded by fundamental Impurity —
āṇavamala, so one would expect Abhinava to say that the soul here is impure.

‘ Read viddhasya for vidvasya.

Cf. Parākhya 4/38, ‘Infected by the subtle raga (sūkṣmarāgopraktaḥ), the coarse
(passion) is to be known as its effect. This raga of the soul is powerful, like red dye

(kṣāyaḥ) in a garment. It is that by means of which there then arises in the soul (asya) a
slight tendency to lust (nanāg laulyam) after external objects.”

! The following verse from the epic poem the Haravijaya by Rājānaka Ratnākara,
composed c. 830AD, is, as we can see from the content and the wording, clearly

inspired by Abhinava’s source, the Śivatanu.
trividhena kañcukamalena rūṣitān

gahanopabhogakuharābhipātinaḥ

apakr̥ṣya pudgalagaṇān guhābilād
avadātatāṁ nayasi dūram icchayā ||
‘Sullied by the three-fold Impurity of the obscuring coverings (kañcuka), the
hosts of souls fall into the cavity of the worldly experience of the Abyss (of Māyā).

CHAPTER NINE

helplessly down headlong into the womb of the worldly experience
(upabhoga) of the Abyss (gahana) (of Māyā).' (208cd-212ab)
(The power to act of the fettered soul is as if) ‘a second’
(consciousness), because, in the stated manner, the one innate consciousness is
enveloped by the three coverings (kañcuka). (However,) it is (essentially)

‘pure’ by its very nature. (The power to act is) ‘weak’ because it is the first
(force) that is differentiated (from Māyā). The meaning is that it is subtle. As the
light of that (impure Knowledge) is limited, it is said to be ‘like the light of a
lamp set in an alcoveʼ. The Self is likened to a ‘clean clothʼ. (lt is) ‘sullied by

ignorance’. The meaning is that it is ‘sullied’, that is, its full (capacity to) know

and act is obscured by the ignorance which is the impurity (mala) of
individuality (āṇavamala), and by the two, namely, the power of the Lord and

Maāyā, which it secondarily denotes. It is ‘capacitated (to know and act) by

the strength of (this) threefold covering’, that is, by a particular power

(sāmarthya), which is strengthened by the limited capacity to know and act etc.

(it has) due to the strength of the covering. (This,) three-fold, consists of the

Force (of limited agency) (which restores part of its capacity to act), Knowledge

(which restores part of its capacity to comprehend), and Attachment. This is the

meaning.

In this way, the six coverings are (presented) here from (this other)

different point of view, along with the three coverings of the impurity of
individuality and the rest. The point of not referring to the (other two coverings,

namely) Time and Necessity, is that the purification of the Force (of limited
agency) and the other (two coverings) amounts to the purification of these (other

two) principles (also). As is (taught in) the Ruruvṛtti:

Having dragged them from the crevice of the Cave (of Māyā), You purify (them) and
lead far by (Your) will.' Haravijaya 6/127
Instead of trividhena kañcukamalena, the text of the TĀ reads triguṇakañcukabalena
(but see following note). Instead of gahanopabhogagarbh,e /Abhinava has
gahanopabhogakuhara-.

!Instead of trigunakañcukabalena, read, as does Jayaratha, trividhakañcukabalena.
! ] ranslate ‘upabhoga’ as ‘worldly experience’. To be more precise, it is the
experiencing of the consequences of Karman.

! Thuṣ, according to Bṛhaspati also, there are six obscuring coverings, Kalā, Vidyā,

Rāga and the preceding three. Sanderson (2001: p. 62 n 33) draws attention to passages
in the Siddhānta where we find the same teachings couched in the same terms i.e. bala-

/udbalita-, samarthita-. Thus, Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha 1/10-11 sṭates that: “His

consciousness strengthened (udbalita) by the Force (of limited agency), the field of (his)

senses displayed by (limited) Knowledge and so too tainted by Attachment, thus the
individual soul intent (and delighting) solely in worldly experience, by means of the
cognitive senses and the rest, experiences the worldly experiences (that are the
consequences of Karma) on the path of the gross elements and reality-levels beginning
with Māyā up to Earth.’ See Sadyojyotis, Svāyambhuvavṛtti thereon, where udbalita is
glossed as samartitha. Also, ibid. 1/12, 3/3ab and vṛtti; Kiraṇa vidyāpāda 1/16bcd;

MPA vidyāpāda 6/104cd and cf. IP 3/2/I1ab kalodbalitam etac ca cittattvaṁ
kartrtāmayam.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘one should perceive that that (pair of Time and Necessity) is pure when

the Force (of limited agency) and the other (remaining two coverings) are pure.

The absence of reference (to the other coverings) is with this intention, not

because (they) do not exist.

(It is said that the soul in this state falls) ‘down headlong’ because of
(its) intent on the experience (in the realms of) Māyā (māyīyabhoga).
Surely (one may aṣk), even with regards to the nature of things,

Impurity (mala) serves to obscure (the soul), and so it would be proper to say
that it is an obscuring covering. Why then is it said that the coverings are (just)
six? With this doubt in mind, he says:

GTTaRJGTĪ:
TRJĪTR ṬTIT I|/ 222 1I

etena malaḥ kathitaḥ
kambukavadaṇoḥ kalādikaṁ tuṣavat I| 212 ||
Thus, the Impurity (mala) of the individual soul is said to be like the
inner integument (kambuka) (of a seed), and the Force (of limited agency)

and the rest, like the outer one (tuṣa)." (212cd)

‘Thus’ – by calling the six coverings beginning with Māyā (in this
way). (The Impurity of the individual soul) ‘is like the integument (of a seed)’,
that is, it is internal because it is (the most) internal (covering of the soul). The
group of six coverings is like the second covering of the individual soul once it
is enveloped in this way by Impurity (mala), and so it is said to be ‘like the
outer oneʼ. That is said (in the scriptures, where we read):

‘In this way, the inner impurity of the individual soul is like the inner

integument (kambuka) (of a seed), whereas the coverings (kañcuka) would be

like the outer one (tuṣa).

!” This short prose section must have belonged to a lost part of Sadyojyoti’s
commentary on the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha.
! See above, 9/178-179 and note.

! The original Sanskrit reads:

evaṁ ca pudgalasyāntarmalaḥ kambukavat sthitaḥ |
tuṣavat kañcukāni syuḥ ....
.... II
Jayaratha does not expressly say this line is from the ŚT. It is most probably
not. It is set in {loka, whereas the verses we know are from the ŚT are all in āryā metre.
As Jayaratha generally quotes an original source when he can, and he normally does in
the case of the Śivatanu, suggests that TĀ 9/212cd, which reiterates the same view and

shares some of the wording, may not be from ŚT, even though it is in āryā metre. The

analogy is a common one, so this line may well be drawn from another source. Cf.
Svāyambhuvaṣūtra quoted in SvTu.

CHAPTER NINE
He concludes this (subject saying):

ḶekEivktezkietvREāúG7IEIcōabH

frtrīī| ēccd ṁ drqd+ṁa 1| 22

evaṁ kalākhyatattvasya kiṁcitkartṛtvalakṣaṇe |
viśeṣabhāge kartṛtvaṁ carcitaṁ bhoktrpūrvakam || 213 II
In this way it has been explained (how) the agency of the principle
called the Force (of limited agency) (operates) in association with the
enjoying subject (bhoktṛpūrvaka) in the particular (rather than universal)
aspect (of subjective consciousness), the characteristic of which is limited
agency. (213)

In this way, the characteristic of the Force (of limited agency) is agency
that is specified as being limited. It is present there ‘in the particular (rather
than universal) aspect (of subjective consciousness) as the qualified aspect
(viśeṣyāṁśa), which ‘has been explained’ to be (its) agency, which is the
enjoying subject. The meaning is that it has been taught (in this way), having
explained it as bestowing (on the soul its condition as) an enjoying subject, by
the progressive arising of (the principles of impure) Knowledge and the rest, in
the aforestated manner.

Surely (one may ask), (its) limited state is located in the particular

aspect (of universal consciousness). With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Sequence of Emanation of the Coverings

̄7ŨĨ ũãẽ fi JIT JJT JĨI |1 32Y 11

athānādir malaḥ puṁsāṁ paśutvaṁ parikītītam |
tuṣakambukavaj jñeyaṁ māyājam aṅkurasya úu ||
‘Now the beginningless Impurity individual souls possess is said to be their

fettered state. One should know that that (seed) of the sprout (of saṁsāra) is born of

Maāyā, and that (Impurity) is like the inner and outer integument (of a seed).”

Cf. also Tattvaprakāśa 18:
eko hy anekaśaktir dṛkkriyayoś chādako malaḥ puṁsām |
tuṣakambukavaj jñeyas tāmrāśritakālimāvad vā |l
‘The one (soul) possesses many powers. The Impurity (mala) of the individual

soul is the (obscuring) covering of (its powers of) knowledge and action. One should

know that that (Impurity) is like the inner and outer integument (of a seed) or like the
Verdigris on copper.

TANTRĀLOKA

viśeṣaṇatayā yo ʻtra kiñcidbhāgas tadotthitam |
vedyamātraṁ sphuṭaṁ bhinnaṁ pradhānaṁ sūyate kalā || 214 ||
The Force (of limited agency) generates Fundamental Nature
(pradhāna), which is the pure (generic) object (vedyamātra) that is clearly

evident and different (bhinna) (for each individual soul). It has arisen from

that" (Force’s) limited (objective) aspect (kiñcidbhāga) as its specifying
characteristic (viśeṣaṇa) (which differentiates one individual soul from
another). (214)
Here

(according

to

us),

although

the

(universal)

agency

(of

consciousness) is in itself unconditioned, it becomes limited because the field
(of its operation) is limited. Thus, limitation is present in the objective aspect.
Then, when that aspect has manifested in the form of the impeller (to some
particular goal) (prayojakākāreṇa), ʻthe Force (of limited agency) generates

Fundamental Nature (pradhāna)’ which, in relation to the particular objects of
knowledge that will come into existence (as the evolutes of Nature), is the

object of experience as the universal nature (of all that is) objective. That is said
(in the Mālinīvijayottara, where we read):

‘Then (Māyā) generated the Unmanifest (Nature) (avyakta) from the

principle of the Force (of limited agency).

Again, it is multiple, since it is determined by each individual soul, and

so is ‘different’ (for each one). Moreover, although (the coverings), beginning

with the Force (of limited agency), are also such, it is clear that in relation to

them (Fundamental Nature) is gross. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), subject (bhoktṛ) and object (bhogya) are mutually
dependent on one another, so how can one reasonably justify that they arise
successively? Subjectivity is nothing at all without objectivity, and (similarly,)
objectivity is (nothing) without subjectivity. So how is it that it is said that the
Force (of limited agency) generates objectivity (only after) having generated
subjectivity? With this doubt in mind, he says:

aṁ fṝ #rīa 7 ũīāē- rāad |

ÉaaūIEEEIEIEPdRtczrc-dHICEYNHII
samam eva hi bhogyaṁ ca bhoktāraṁ ca prasūyate |

kalā bhedābhiṣaṁdhānād aviyuktaṁ parasparam || 215 1|
The Force (of limited agency), directed by the intention to give rise
to multiplicity (bhedābhisaṁdhanāt) (and unite it), generates both (the

2 That is, from that Force.

“l Read tadamśaṁ prayojakākāreṇa for tadamśaprayojakīkāreṇa.
MV 1/30ab.

CHAPTER NINE

Karmic) subject (bhoktṛ) and object (bhogya) together (simultaneously).

They are not separate from one another. (215)

‘The subject’ (in this case) means the subjectivity present in the

subject. This is so because both subject and object are ‘not separate from one

anotherʼ; that is, they are dependent (on one another). In actual fact, in accord

with the teaching that ‘it is the enjoyer alone who always and everywhere abides

as the object of enjoyment’, the two are one, and so even though there is no
difference (between them), having reflected (abhisaṁdáhāya) on the phenomenal
difference (māyīyaṁ bhedam) (between them), in order to indicate that they are
not separate, that is, that they are mutually dependent on one another, it is said

that (the Force (of limited agency)), ‘directed by the intention to give rise to

multiplicity (bhedābhisaṁdhanāt) (and unite it), (generates both (the
Karmic) subject (bhoktr) and object (bhogya) together (simultaneously)).
Surely (one may ask), what is the purpose of them not being
disconnected in this way? With this doubt in mind, he says:

bhokṭṛbhogyātmatā na syād viyogāc ca parasparam |
It would not be possible for them to be subject and object, were
they to be disconnected from one another. (216ab)
(By) ‘disconnected’ (is meant) that they are not mutually dependent on
one another.

SpaKā 29cd (= 2/4cd). The complete verse and previous one says: ‘“Everything arises
(out of) the individual soul, and so he is all things, because he perceives his identity with

the awareness (he has) of them. Therefore, there is no state in the thoughts of words or
(their) meaning that is not Śiva. It is the enjoyer alone who always and everywhere
abides as the object of enjoyment.” Rājanaka Rāma comments: “Why is there no state

that is not Śiva? (The reason for this is) because ‘the individual soul’ʼ, that is, the Self,
‘is all things.” (Ilts omniformity is) the immanent form (viśvarūpa) (of cognitive
consciousness, which is equivalent to) the perception of the mutual exclusivity (of
individual phenomena). The point is that the daily commerce of life (vyavahāra) that the

individual soul (experiences) can only arise on the basis of an underlying unity between

subject and object. But how is that (unity) possible? (It is possible because) ‘everything

arises (out of) the individual soul, and so he is all things, because he perceives his

identity with the awareness (he has) of them.’ The essential nature (svabhāva) of

whatever is perceived objectively (saṁvedya) (whether it belongs to the physical

sphere,) like a jar, (or the mental,) like the feeling of pleasure, consists of the awareness
or the perceptive consciousness (sarīvedana) (the soul has of it). Therefore, (the soul)
perceives (his) identity with it, in the sense that (he realises that he, as) consciousness,
does not differ from it. It is because of this that ‘everything’, all existing things, ‘arise’
and come into being, and so the soul is all things. The point is that, by carefully

atṭending to (the nature and basis) of the commerce of the soul’s daily life (vyavahāra),
one realizes this reality (vastu) as it truly is. Thus, (the soul) emits and brings into

existence his own object of cognition in the act of becoming conscious (of it). Only that
which is perceived attains a specific nature of its own (in the field of manifestation), not
one that is not. (Dyczkowski 1992a: 107-108).

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask, if) this condition of subject and object of this sort
were not to exist, (then what would happen)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ī fkē-ĩ 1 32 1
vilīnāyāṁ ca tasyāṁ syān māyāsyāpi na kiñcana || 216 ||
If their (state as subject and object) were to dissolve away (into
consciousness), Māyā would also be (as if) nothing. (216cd)
The sense is that, if the ‘disruption’ characterized as the nature of

subject and object were to dissolve away, then there would not be
tranṣmigratory existence. As is said (in the Stanzas on Vibration):

‘An individual who, (though) desirous of doing various things, (yet is)
incapable of doing them due to his innate impurity, (experiences) the supreme
state (paraṁ padam) when the disruption (of his false ego) ceases.
Surely (one may ask), how is it that it is said elsewhere that the arising
of the enjoying subject and object takes place successively, (beginning) initially
with the Force (of limited agency), from which (is produced) the nature of the

enjoying subject (bhoktr), (and then) the pair, (impure) Knowledge and
Attachment, (followed by) the principle of Nature? Thus, he says:

SpaKā 1/9. Rājanaka Rāma explains: ‘true enough, (God and the individual soul) are

one in the state (that arises when the latter makes contact with his own innate power).
Even s0, he (is subject) to the ‘impurity° of attachment etc., rooted in the notion that the
Self is the body etc. (This impurity) is ‘innate’, in the sense that it is born along with
him (sahaja) (when consciousness contracts down from the universal level). It is due to

this impurity that (he is full of) desire, greedy for (a few) short moments of fleeting
happiness, and thus rendered helpless in the action he takes to gain those objects that are
the means to it. He is, in other words, poor in power, for although he may wish to, he
cannot achieve his goal. Such a person’s ‘supreme state’, namely, the absolute
(niruttara) (beyond which there is nothing higher), would manifest according to its true
nature the moment ‘the disruption’ of the negative effect of Māyā, that is, the egoity

(ahaṁpratyaya) that takes its support from the conditioned body etc., ceases and is
destroyed. It melts away like a heap of snow by coming in contact with the light of the

sun of the authentic ego (svābhāvikāhaṁpratyaya), that transcends all fictitious
supports. (Thus,) at that level, the unity between what is called the (universal) Self
(ātman) and the individual soul (puruṣa) becomes manifestly apparent as the supreme
(para) and inferior (apara) (states of absolute) consciousness. This stanza declares this
(state) to be establishment in one’s own nature.
The impurity (to which) the individual soul (is subject) may well be explained
variously in other schools of thought. Here however, (according to this system, this
impurity) consists only of this, namely, the projection of the ego (ahaṁpratyaya) onto

(objects) such as the body etc., which are dependent, transitory and lifeless. (This

egoity) is not in itself false (upapanna), insofar as (it continues, in actual fact, to) abide
in a reality quite different in character from these (transitory objects). Every notion of
the transitory, profane nature (saṁsāritva) (of the individual and the world) is
conditioned by this circumstance alone. When this ceases, (one attains) the supreme
state of purity, that is, the manifestation of one’s own essential nature (svasvabhāva).’

Dyczkowski 1992a: 87-88.

CHAPTER NINE

ftt: 11 329 1|
nanu śrīmadrauravādau rāgavidyātmakaṁ dvayam |
sūte kalā hi yugapat tato ‘vyaktam iti sthitiḥ II 217 II
Surely (someone may object that), according to the venerable
Rauravāgama and other such (scriptures), the Force (of limited agency)
generates the two, Attachment and (limited) Knowledge, simultaneously,
and Unmanifest (Nature) (just) after that. (217)

(The word ‘tataḥ’ means) ‘after that’; that is, ‘(just) after the unfolding

of the pair, Attachment and (Impure) Knowledge.” That is said (by Sadyojyotis
in the Bhogakārikā, which is part of the Rauravavṛtti)
were

‘From the other part (skandha) of the Force (of limited agency), these
generated, namely (limited) Knowledge, Attachment and Nature

sequentially, (the first two) as a pair and (the last) individually."

The same statement (pāṭha) with different words (is also found in) the

venerable Ruru:
‘From the Principle of the Force (of limited agency) arose the two
principles, namely, Attachment and (limited) Knowledge. And then the
Unmanifest (arose) (avyaktaṁ ca tatas).
There would be agreement (between the two views) if (all three

principles were to) arise together (simultaneously), (so that one could simply
say that) ‘Attachment, (Impure) Knowledge and Nature arose’ (from the Force
(of limited agency)). However, (when Abhinava) quoted the line (from the

Rauravasaṁgraha) that says ‘And the Unmanifest (arose) from / after Māyā
(māyāto ‘vyaktakalayor), he did so keeping in mind the difference (between the
interpretation of the two) commentators. There, according to (Bṛhaspati), the
author of the vārtika, the pronoun ‘that (in the statement ‘and the Unmanifest
Sanderson (2006b: p. 51 n 17), following Jayaratha, identifies the following verse as
being from the Rauravavṛtti by Sadyojyotiṣ. But it is not found, as he says it is, in the

Mokṣakārikā section of that commentary. Rather it is taken from the section of it called
Bhogakārikā (104cd-105ab). As Sanderson notes (ibid.), Sadyojyotis gives the same
interpretation of the order of emanation stated in the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha in his
Tattvasaṁgraha (24ab), where he writes: avyaktarāgavidyāḥ kalāsamutthāḥ kalā ca
māyājā | ‘ṭhe Unmanifest, Attachment and (limited) Knowledge arise from the Force (of
limited agency), and the Force (of limited agency) is born from Māyā.

Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha (= Rauravāgama vidyāpāda) 2/15abc. 1t is also cited by

Aghoraśiva in his commentary (dipikā) on the Mṛgendrāgama, 2/10-11. See above,
9/40cd and commentary, where Jayaratha quotes the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha (2/14-15).
Note how he refers to it here simply as ‘Śrīruruʼ

TANTRĀLOKA

(arose) from that (avyaktaṁ ca tatas)) refers to Māyā, whereas (Sadyojyotis),

the author of the vrtri, (says) that it (means) ‘subsequently° (ānantaryam).
He offers a solution:

3s̄ fradT #a: T̄ā aī aā̃- |

ūad 1| 32¢ 1
uktam atra vibhāty eṣa kramaḥ satyaṁ tathā hy alam |
rajyamāno veda sarvaṁ vidaṁś cāpy atra rajyate || 218 ||
It is said here (in this regard) that it is true that this order of

succession (of these principles) does manifest (as you suggest, but it is not
the only possible one). (So let) this much (discussion) suffice. Indeed, (in
some cases,) something may initially be an object of attachment and (then
only) subsequently be cognized. (In other cases, the soul) becomes attached
to it as it is being fully cognized (or has been). (218)
Intending to say that (the difference in the sequences of these principles
taught in the scriptures) is established as (notions) in the intellect, it is said that
this (succession) of one following the other has no support. (Thus,) it is true that
this order of succession (of these principles) which you accept does manifest
here. (So let this much discussion) ‘suffice’. The meaning is that the succession
of (the principles of) Attachment and (Impure) Knowledge also is

interchangeable (paraspara). Something may at first cause the soul to be
attached and (so) know it, or knowing it becomes in all respects attached (to it).

Why should this also not be the sequence?
Surely (one may ask), if that is the case, how is it that you have said that
subject and object arise simultaneously? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ṀG-. ĩs aī āīīq fāiaīg | 22< 1

We have seen above ad 9/40cd that, according to Bṛhaspati’s interpretation of this

sentence, as he presents it in his vārtika on the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha, the meaning is
‘and the Unmanifest (arose) from that (Māyā) (avyaktaṁ ca tatas).’ In other words,
according to Bṛhaspati, Attachment (rāga) and (the limited capacity for) Knowledge
(vidyā) arise from the Force (of limited agency) (kalā), and the Unmanifest (avyakta)
from Māyā. Sadyojyotiṣ however maintains that all three are derived from the Force (of
limited agency) (kalā). The first two emerge from it together as a pair, and then the
Unmanifest alone, afterwards. The translation here is in accord with the meaning given
by Sadyojyotiṣ in his vrtti on the same. Jayaratha comments here on this divergent
interpretation, as pointed out by Abhinava. See Sanderson 2006 p. 51 n 51.

One view is that Attachment, Limited Knowledge, and Unmanifest Nature

come into being together. Another view is that Unmanifest Nature and the Force (of
limited agency) arise out of Māyā. So in this case tataḥ would mean ‘fromʼ, i.e., that
‘(Force arises) from Maāyā’, rather than ‘then’ (after Māyā) (as translated above).

CHAPTER NINE

tathāpi vastusatteyam ihāsmābhir nirūpitā |
tasyāṁ ca na kramaḥ ko ʻpi syād vā so ‘pi viparyayāt || 219 ||
Even so, we have described the (very) being of reality (vastusattā)

here, and there is no succession in it at all (because everything is

interdependent). Even if there were to be, it could also be reversed. (219)

‘Even so’ means even when their succession is conceived (to arise) in

this way. ‘The (very) being’ is the ultimately real arising ‘of reality’, which is

subject and object. This is the meaning. ‘There is no succession’ (in it),

because they are mutually dependent on one another. As is said by (Abhinava)

himself elsewhere: ‘Here (in this case), it is said that their emanation takes place

by the true (vāstava) path, which is devoid of succession.”

If one says that here (in this case), that having set aside the being of

reality (which is subject and object), succession exists just as a conceived
possibility (saṁbhāvanāmātra), however, on the contrary, that may also be in

reverse, namely, that subjectivity arises after the arising of the object.”

Therefore, one should not be engaged in a controversy here (about this). Thus
he says:

tasmād vipratipattiṁ no kuryāc chāstrodite vidhau |
Therefore, one should (concern oneself with the essential, and) not
incite controversies concerning the ordinance of scripture. (220ab)
(One should not incite controversies concerning) ‘the ordinance of

scriptureʼ, taking the support of the ordinance of the Rauraśāstra. This is the
meaning. What is meant there is just that the three principles beginning with
Attachment have come forth from the principle of the Force (of limited agency).
Thus again, their arising may be either simultaneous or otherwise. (A reasonable

view) can be arrived at by the reflection (vicāra) which is the examination of

their nature, certainly not just by the meaning that is stretched out according to

what one has heard (from the scriptures). Thus, what we have said is the best
(view).

Surely (one may ask): It is said that Fundamental Nature (pradhāna) is
(pure, generic) objectivity as such (vedyamātra). (However,) there is no
objectivity separate from the awareness (vedana) of pleasure and the like, which
has a specific nature. With this doubt in mind, he says:

“ TSā p. 84. He continues: ‘it is also said that (this is s0), even though there is a
manifestation of succession.

Read bhogyotpādānantaraṁṅ īnstead of bhogotpādānantaraṁ.

TANTRĀLOKA

Pradhāna – Fundamental Nature

ī ũaaṁī aq gag atṁīēa: || 220 1|
JTT JTāTā: JIT TGĀTRITTHRHĪTTE: |
evaṁ ṣaṁyedyamātraṁ yat sukhaduḥkhavimohataḥ || 220 l||

bhotsyate yat tataḥ proktaṁ tat sāmyātmakam āditaḥ |

In this way, (the existence of) this pure (generic) objectivity (is

inferred from) what one experiences from pleasure, pain and delusion.
Thus, it is said that (that exists) originally as the state of (balanced) equality
(sāmya) (between these three). (220cd-221ab)

The existence of ‘pure (generic) objectivityʼ (is inferred) in the stated
manner (from) the experience of pleasure and the like, in accord with the logical
principle that (Fundamental Nature exists) ‘because it is apprehended from the

effect (it produces). Thus, because a particular is preceded by a universal, ‘it
is said to exist originally as the state of equalityʼ, that is, (prior to them as
their) undivided nature. The meaning is that it is discerned as (their) cause.

Surely (one may ask), according to the followers of the Sāṁkhya,
Nature (prakṛti) is the (balanced) state of equality of sattva, rajas and tamas. So
how is 'it that it is said here that it is inferred (to exist) from (their
corresponding) experience of pleasure and the rest? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

The Guṇas – the Three Qualities of Nature

TGTITATT JHTNĪ ṜIG SSĪ II Ṝ32 1|

ēZTH ṬUIĀ; JHTYTĀTHĀĪTT: ||/3RR II

SaṁkKā 8b. This statement is drawn from SāṁkKā 8, which proposes this as a means

to proving the existence of Fundamental Nature (pradhāna prakṛti). The whole verse
states that:

saukṣmyāt tadanupalabdhir nābhāvāt kāryatas tadupabdheḥ |
mahadādi tac ca kāryaṁ prakṛtisarūpam virūpaṁ ca ||
‘That (Fundamental Nature) is not perceived, because it is subtle, not because it
does not exist, and (also) because it is apprehended from (its) product. And that product
(kārya) is the intellect (mahad) and the rest (of the principles that follow below it),
which is both similar to Nature (as that is its material cause) and dissimilar (from it
according to its specific nature).’ Vācaspati Miśra elucidates the point: “when we find
that direct sense perception does not apprehend objects whose existence is proved by

more powerful means of knowledge, one should understand that the senses are

incapable of perceiving it (not that it does not exist).”

CHAPTER NINE

sukhaṁ sattvaṁ prakāśatvāt prakāśo hlāda ucyate || 221 ||
duḥkhaṁ rajaḥ kriyātmatvād kriyā hi tadatatkramaḥ |
mohas tamo varaṇakaḥ prakāśābhāvayogataḥ || 222 ||
Pleasure is sattva because it is light, and light is said to be joy
(hlāda). Suffering is rajas because it is action, and (that) action oscillates
between that and its absence (tadatatkrama). Delusion is tamas, which

covers over (and obscures the mind), because it is associated with an

absence of light. (221cd-222)

Surely (one may ask), it has not been proved that the nature of pleasure
is light. Pleasure is just pleasure, not light. Thus it is stated that ‘light is said to
be joy (hlāda). It is `joyʼ because it consists of (the aesthetic delight which is)

the wonder of self-awareness (ahaṅcamatkāra). Suffering is (both) light and its

absence. As light, it is pleasure; otherwise, it is delusion, ‘because it is action’.
This is because (activity) is sequential, as it is both being (as what is being
aṭtained by acting) and nonbeing (as that which is yet to be attained or has
passed). Surely (one may ask), agreed that suffering is sequential in this way,
but how is its nature action? Thusṣ it is that (action) ‘oscillates between that
and its absence (tadatatkrama)’, that is, light and its absence. That is said (in
the Sāṁkhyakārikā):

‘(The qualities) are of the nature of pleasure (priīti), pain (aprīti – ‘what
is not pleasurable’) and dejection (viṣāda). Their purpose is to illumine
(prakāśa), act (pravṛtti) and restrain (respectively). . . . Sattva is buoyant and
illuminating. Rajas is desirable, stimulating and mobile. Tamas is heavy

(sluggish) and obscuring.”

1 See below, ad 13/3-4 note 13,4.
” Saṁkā. 12ab, 13abc. One of the most concise and best accounts of the nature and
functions of the three qualities of Nature is found in Bhagavadgītā 14/5-20 (the
translation is by Cidbhavānanda):
‘Sattva, rajas and tamas – these guṇas, O mighty-armed, born of Prakṛti, bind

the indestructible one fast in the body. Of these, sattva, being stainless, is luminous and
unobstructive. It binds, O sinless one, by creating attachment to happiness and

attachment to knowledge. Know rajas to be of the nature of passion, the source of thirst

and attachment; it binds fast, O Kaunteya, the embodied one by attachment to action.

But know tamas to be born of ignorance, deluding all embodied beings; it binds fast, O
Bharata, by heedlessness, indolence and sleep. Sattva binds one to happiness, and rajas

to action, O Bharata, while tamas verily veils knowledge and binds one to heedlessness.

Sattva asserts itself, O Bharata, by predominating over rajas and tamas; and rajas, over
sattva and tamas; and tamas, over sattva and rajas. When the light of knowledge beams
through all the gateways of the body, then it may be known that sattva is predominant.

Greed, activity, the undertaking of actions, unrest, longing – these arise, O best of the
Bharatas, when rajas is predominant. Indiscrimination, inertness, heedlessness and

delusion – these arise, O joy of the Kurus, when tamas is predominant. If the embodied
one meets with death when sartva is predominant, then he goes to the pure worlds of
those who know the highest. Meeting with death in rajas, he is born among those

attached to action; dying in tamas, he is born in the wombs of the deluded. The fruit of
good action, they say, is sāttvika and pure; verily the fruit of rajas is pain, and ignorance

TANTRĀLOKA

(Itis said) in the venerable Pratyabhijñā also:
‘In the Lord there is Being, bliss, and activity, Within the limited

subject, there is that, the absence of that, and the two together. The latter
constitutes Rajas, which is pain and is composed of sattva and tamas mixed

In this way, that undisturbed form of sartva, rajas and tamas, which is

their state of (balanced) equality, is said to be Fundamental Nature (pradhāna).
Surely (one may ask), if the undisturbed form is that of Fundamental
Nature, how can it manage to give birth to (its) products? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

srṝzjerxqā fastīa 7 aāq āraā: J || 323 1I

ta ete kṣobhamāpannā guṇāḥ kāryaṁ pratanvate |
akṣubdhasya vijātīyaṁ na syāt kāryam adaḥ purā || 223 ||
uktam eveti śāstre ‘smin guṇāṁs tattvāntaraṁ viduḥ |

When these qualities are disturbed, they generate their product.
This is because a product of a differing type (from its cause) cannot
originate from one which is stable in itself (lit. undisturbed). We said

before that, in the scripture (we follow, the wise) know that the qualities
are an independent principle (from Nature). (223-224ab)

The ‘product’ consists of the intellect and the rest, which is ‘of a
differing type (from its cause)ʼ, because the qualities (are disturbed, and, not

in their original state of equality, are) out of balance. This was said before (in
Chapter Eight) when the Path of the Worlds was described, and so no effort is

is the fruit of zamas. From sattva arises wisdom, and greed from rajas; heedlessness and
error arise from tamas, and also ignorance. Those who are fixed in sattva go upwards;
the rājasikas remain in the middle; and the tāmasikas, abiding in the functions of the
lowest guṇa, go downwards. When the seer perceives no agent other than the guṇas, and
knows Him who is higher than the guṇas, he enters into My being. The embodied one,

having crossed over these three guṇas out of which the body is evolved, is freed from
birth, death, decay and pain, and attains to immortality.”
“]P 4/6. Utpaladeva comments in his vṛtti: ‘The Infinite agency within the Lord, which

is essentially aesthetic delight (camatkāra). is called activity and consists of the supreme
light (of consciousness) and bliss. Whereas, on the contrary, within the individual self,

this light and bliss have become objectively knowable realities, as (the qualities of
Nature called) sattva and tamas. Their absence is tamas. Sattva and tamas – or lightbliss and their absence – although two distinct entities, are united with one another to
form rajas. The activity and pain (that occur) within (the domain of) the limited subject
are called rajas.”

See above, 8/253cd-260ab.

CHAPTER NINE

made here again (to do so). The sense is that one should understand that from

there. That is said there beginning with:

‘The principle called the qualities (guna) is located above the intellect,
(but is) below Nature (prakṛti). Indeed, the intellect is generated there when
they are disturbed. A cause that is not out of (its basic) state of balance (is not

ready) to generate its effect.

And ending with:
‘(Our reply is that) this is not so, because (the causal process takes place
in three stages. The initial stage) retains within itself a reflective awareness of
its causal nature. (Secondly, there) then occurs the intermediate arousal (of the
cause, which renders it propense to generate its effect). Then, (from that comes)

the effect, just as happens with a seed, its swollen condition (ucchunatā), the

sprout and so forth."
Thus,

it

is

established

by

sound

reasoning

(yukti)

in

the

Mālinīvijayottara, to which he is referring, that ‘(the wise) know that the
qualities are an independent principle’ from Nature, and that it is the second,
disturbed form of Māyā which, propense to generate its product, is like a knot.
The meaning is that the venerable Śrīkaṇṭhanātha and the rest (of the sages)
know this as what is to be taught. That is said there (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘then the qualities (were produced) . . .

The division of the world-order (corresponding to the qualities) was
explained here (in this book) previously, as was the Knot (of Māyā). Thus he

says:

bhuvanaṁ pr̥thag evātra darśitaṁ guṇabhedataḥ || 224 ||
(Accordingly,) a separate world-order has been described here (in

this book), associated with the Qualities. (224cd)
Above, 8/254-255ab (253cd-254).

Above, 8/260 (259cd-260ab).
“T MV 1/30bc. The entire verse says: ‘Then (Māyā) generated the Unmanifest (Nature)

(avyakta) from the principle of the Force (of limited agency). Then (from that), the
Qualities (were produced), and from them, the intellect with its eight qualities.
Similarly, the ego (originated) from the intellect.”

“ See above, 8/257 ff. The effect is the Cosmic Intellect (mahat), followed by the
succeeding principles, which are the heterogeneous inequality of the Qualities (guṇas)

previously described above in 8/253cd-260ab (see also above, 8/248). We have seen
that, according to the MV, the Qualities (guṇa) are a separate principle, representing
Nature’s ‘disturbed’ aspect, that is, the state in which it is propense to generating its
products. This condition is identified with the Knot (granthi) of Māyā, which is its
disturbed aspect; whereas the principle (tattva) of Māyā is the undisturbed aspect. See

MV 1/30 and above 8/255.

TANTRĀLOKA

That was said before:
‘There are three lines of teachers present in the qualities of tamas, rajas
and sattva. They consist of thirty-two, thirty, and twenty-one members,

respectively.”

Surely (one may ask), as (Māyā) is insentient, how can it become
propense to generate (its) products, due to which it can be in a disturbed state?

With this doubt in mind, he says:

šat-īavagxrltṅāh
Ja J |

īITcaīa aād-īī. JGT AāT"= JTTT || 324 1
īśvarecchāvaśakṣubdhalolikaṁ puruṣaṁ prati |
bhoktṛtvāya svatantreśaḥ prakṛtiṁ kṣobhayed bhṛśam || 225 ||

SŚvatantreśa violently disturbs Nature (prakṛti). He does this for the

individual soul who, (helplessly) disturbed under the sway of the Lord’s
will, is craving (for worldly experience), so that he may become the enjoyer

(bhoktṛ) (of the fruits of his actions)." (225)

‘Svatantreśa’ is the Lord Śrīkaṇṭha." That is said (in the following

passage):

‘Fundamental Nature (pradhāna), which is such, is initially associated
with Brahmā. Touched by the rays of Śrīkaṇṭha, it becomes manifest (vyakti) at
that very moment (as the sphere of objectivity).”
Thus, the objection levelled at the followers of the Sāṁkhya does not
apply to us. (Their view explains neither how the soul can achieve liberation,
nor how Nature generates it products. According to them,) the individual soul is
unchanging, and so there (can be) no difference between the states of bondage
and liberation. Thus, why should Nature not act to generate (its)
transformations, beginning with the intellect onwards, for one who is liberated,

(as it does) for one who is bound, because its nature, which is (constant) activity

(pravṛtti),, has not ceased? Moreover, (Nature) is insentient, and so cannot
reflect that “(the soul) has seen me (and understood the way 1 bind it), and so I
will not act with that purpose again.” Thus, there is no (possibility of)
liberation. He says that:
Above, 8/261 (260cd-261ab).

See above, 9/61 and 143.
l See above, 6/149-152.

prakṛte sukumārataraṁ

id nāstīti me matir bhavati |

yad dr̥ṣṭāsmi iti puṇardarśanam nopaiti puruṣasya |

‘My opinion is that nothing is more shy than Prakṛti: knowing that ‘I have been

seen’, She no more comes within the sight of Puruṣa.’

CHAPTER NINE

tena yac codyate sāṁkhyaṁ muktāṇṉuṁ prati kiṁ na sā |
sūte puṅso ‘vikāritvād iti tan nātra bādhakam || 226 ||
Therefore, the objection levelled at the Sāṁkhya, namely, that there

is no reason why Nature should not generate (its products) here for the
liberated soul (as it does for the fettered) because the soul (is, whether

bound or free, equally) devoid of alterations, is not a hindrance here
(nātra bādhaka). (226)

‘Therefore’ ‘here’, in our view, (these objections do not apply,)

because (according to us, Nature) is disturbed (and so generates its binding
products) for this kind of fettered (niyata) soul, by the agency of Svatantreśa.
Having explained this by the way, he (now goes on) to talk about the
main point.

Buddhitattva – the Intellect

TTJGRITJI;
TTTIIST JTRTTTTaTaĪT 11 /32 1|
guṇebhyo buddhitatvaṁ tat sarvato nirmalaṁ tataḥ |

puṅsprakāśaḥ savedyo ‘tra pratibimbatvam ārchati || 227 ||
The principle of the intellect (arises) from the qualities (at the

instigation of Śvatantreśa). It is pure in all respects (sarvataḥ). Thus, the

light of the soul deposits its reflection here, along with (that of) the object of

knowledge. (227)

Therefore, that (intellect arises) because of the agency of Svatantreśa.

This is the meaning. That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara): `. . . from (the

qualities) the intellect with its eight qualities (was produced) . . . ‘Thus’,
because it is pure in all respects (it can reflect both the light of the soul and the
outer object within itself).

Surely (one may ask), as the light of the soul is unobscured, it may

(indeed) deposit (its) reflection here (in the intellect), (but) that is not so in the
case with the outer object, and so how can that be (reflected in it)? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

Read puṅso ‘vikāritvād for puṁsṣo vikāritvād.
MV 1/30c.

# Read savedyo for sa vedyo.

MV 1/30c. See above, note 9,433 for the full verse.

TANTRĀLOKA

faāydfaraāi
ṝaāmar at |

aīgāī 1| 23¢ 11

JTTTTTJTTHTYT āTĪSTĪ ṬSSTSIṀTGH II 2ĠŠ II
viṣayapratibimbaṁ ca tasyām akṣakṛtaṁ bahiḥ |
ataddvāraṁ samutprekṣāpratibhādiṣu tādṛśī | 228 ||
vrttir bodho bhaved buddheḥ sā cāpy ālambanaṁ dhruvam |
ātmasaṅvitprakāśasya bodho ‘sau taj jaḍo ‘py alam || 229 ||

Ṭhe reflection of the object (viṣaya) within it may be either

external, that is, fashioned by the senses, or unmediated (by them), as

happens when imagining, intuiting and so forth. The activity of the intellect
is the cognitive consciousness (bodha) (it has of objects). And (so,) although
(its cognitive) consciousness (bodha) is insentient, insofar as (the intellect)

has as its firm support the Light of the consciousness of the Self, it is
(monetheless) capable (alam) (of perceiving its object). (228-229)

The reflection of external objects within the intellect is two-fold,
namely, mediated by the senses and unmediated by them. An example of the
former is direct (sensory) perception, and of the latter, imagination. By the
words ‘and so forth’ is meant dreaming and the like. The point is that here (in
this case), the entity that manifests (in the intellect) is one it has itself

established there. Such is the intellect’s ‘activity’, which is its capacity to

reflect (within itself) objects of knowledge, both in association with the senses
and without them, and is (essentially) ‘the cognitive consciousness’ (bodha) it
possesses that makes (internal and external) objects (viṣaya) manifest. This is
the syntax (and prose order of this verse).
Surely (one may ask), the intellect’s cognitive consciousness
(buddhibodha) is insentient, so how can it make (its) object manifest? With this

doubt in mind, he says that ‘it has as its (firm support the Light of the
consciousness of the Self). That intellect is a separate emergence of the light
‘of the consciousness of the Self’, that is, the cognitive consciousness of the
individual soul. It is its “firm support’, that is, the firm foundation of the

reflection (within it). This is the meaning. Therefore, because it is the locus of
the manifestation of the consciousness of the Self, it is the cognitive

consciousness which is the activity of (the intellect); although insentient, it is

‘sufficient enough’, that is, capable of illumining (its) object (and making it

manifest). That is said (in the Bhogakārikā):

‘Cognition (bodha) is considered to be a modification (vṛtti) of the mind
because it is the locus of the manifestation of the (fettered) soul’s cognition,

Theṣe two verses are a commentary on Bhogakārikā 46 which is quoted by Jāratha in
the commentary.

CHAPTER NINE

which is light that takes its form from objects, mediated or not by the sense
organs, as the circumstance may be (kvacir).

Ahaṁkāratattva – the Principle of the Ego
Having in this way described the nature of the intellect as an instrument

(of perception), he also talks about its nature as a cause.

JGRTN. TIṀĒJ JTGTTTITTTT |I 33° 1I|
buddher ahaṁkṛt tādṛkṣe pratibimbitapuṅṁsṣkṛteḥ |
prakāśe vedyakaluṣe yad ahaṁmananātmatā || 230 l||
From the intellect arises the product of the ego (ahaṁkṛt). It is the
(false) notion of the ego within this kind of light, sullied by objectivity, of
the activity of the individual soul reflected (in the intellect). (230)
‘The product of the ego’ has, in other words, arisen (from the
intellect). That is
said (in the Mālinīvijayoitara), (where we read that) ‘similarly,

the ego (originated) from the intellect. (The ego) is the (mistaken) notion of
oneself as ‘I’ (that arises when conceiving that) “I do and I know this” within
‘this light’, which is the modification (vṛtti) of the intellect ‘sullied by

objectivity and is ‘this kindʼ, that is, the locus of the manifestation of the light
of the individual soul. Surely (one may ask), the cognitive consciousness of the
intellect is just an object (vedya), because it is an object of experience (bhogya)
(of the individual soul), in accord with such teachings as:

BhoKā 46. Aghoraśivācārya comments: indriyadvāro ʻyaṁ ghaṭa ityādibāhya-

viṣayādhyavasāyarāpaprakāśasadanapekṣaś cāntarasmṛtipratibhādiprakāśo vāśabdād

vakṣyamāṇo bhāvapratyayalakṣaṇaś_ca prakāśaḥ puruṣabodhasya
vyaktiṣṭhānatvād
hodhākhyo mater buddher vṛttir_jñeyā | tato ‘dhyavasā
diliṅgā buddhiḥ
siddhyatīti | tad uktaṁ śrīmanmr̥gendre - iti buddhiprakā
ṁ bhāvapratyaya-

lakṣaṇaḥ | bodha ity ucyate bodhavyaktibhūmitayā paśoḥ ll iti I| 46 I|

‘The light (of consciousness), in the form of the ascertainment of an outer

object mediated by the senses, such as ‘this is a jar’, is true and independent. Due to the

word ‘or’ʼ, the inner light (of consciousness in the form of) recollection, a flash of
intuition (pratibhā) and the like (is also meant). As will be explained, the light of the
consciousness of the individual soul, which is the apprehension of cognitive states
(bhāvapratyaya), is called cognitive consciousness (bodha), because it is the place

where (perception) becomes manifest. One should know that that is the activity (vṛtti) of
the intellect. Thus, the intellect, of which the characteristic mark is (the capacity) to
form determinate perceptions (adhyavasāya), recollect and the like, accomplishes (its
task). That is said in the venerable Mṛgendra (vidyāpāda 11/8): “This is the light of the
intellect, the characteristic feature of which is the apprehension of cognitive states
(bhāvapratyaya). t is called ‘cognitive consciousness’ (bodha) because it is the plane

on which the cognitive consciousness of the fettered soul manifests.”
MV 1/30d. The full verse is quoted above in note note 9,433.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘This cognitive consciousness of the intellect,™" concerning which a

litle has been said (leśokta) (briefly), is experienced by consciousness

(cetana); (thus) its objective status, by virtue of which it arises and is

experienced, is proved.”

Thus, how is it that the (mistaken) notion of self (ahamabhimāna) can
take root within this (cognitive consciousness of the intellect), which is
objective (idantābhājana)? With this doubt in mind, he says that it is ‘(the

light) of the activity of the individual soul reflected (in the intellect), with

reference to the manifest individual soul. This is the meaning.
Even though this is so, this (mistaken) notion of self does not (arise)
within the Self. Rather, (it arises) within the intellect, which is not the Self,

because it is the same transformation of the reflection of the Self as the
foundation of the intellect. He (now goes on) to talk about (the ego’s) unique
task (kārya).

arg; ā-rēzaṝ |

tayā pañcavidhaś caiṣa vāyuḥ saṁrambharūpayã |
prerito jīvanāya syād anyathā maraṇaṁ punaḥ || 231 I|

" The printed edition of the BhoKā reads buddhidharmo – ‘aṭtribute of the intellect’ for
buddhibodho

Ś‘cognitive

consciousness

of the

intellect’

The

commentator,

Aghoraśiva, seems to be aware of this variant. Thus, introducing this verse, he says: ‘He
concludes (the teaching concerning) the cognitive consciousness of the intellect, which
is the apprehension of (various cognitive) states (bhāvapratyaya) that has in this way
been stated in brief. Clearly, we should understand the ‘attribute of the intellect to be
the cognitive states consciousness perceived by the cognitive consciousness (hodha),

which is the fundamental nature of the individual soul.

! Commentary: ‘because it is an object of experience.’

“ BhoKā 64. In his commentary, Aghoraśiva refers his reader to the Mataṅga and other
Āgamas for the bhāvapratyayas – cognitive states – and notes that he has presented and

explained them extensively in his Mṛgendravṛttidīpikā. The following line and
commentary reads:
sa cāpy anubhavo bhogo bhoktāraṁ gamayaty alam |

asya bauddhasya jñānasyotpattyapavargayogitvena bhogyatvam eva, na tu bhoktṛtvam,
tasya sarvadā grāhakarūpeṇa sthirasyaiva svasaṁvedanasiddhatvād ityuktam ||

‘And that experience is the consequence of Karma (bhoga) that is sufficient to
make the experiencer understand it. (65ab)
What is stated (here) is that this knowledge the intellect possesses, because it
arises and falls away, is only objective, certainly not subjective, because (if it were), it
would always be stable in the form of the perceiver, as that is proved to exist by one’s

own self-awareness (svasaṁvedana).”

CHAPTER NINE

The five-fold vital breath is impelled by that (ego) in the form of

the exertion (saṁīrambha) (that impels it), so that (the individual soul) may
give life (to the body). Otherwise, (were it not to do so, the body would)

die. (231)

(This) ‘exertion’ is that of the ego. Its activity (vṛrti) is exertion. But

even so, as activity and its possessor are of the same nature, that is said to be a
form (of the ego). That is said (in then following passage):
‘Exertion is the activity of the ego, which impels the vital breath (vāyu)
(of five kinds) formed (by its) five actions, so that (the individual soul) may

give life (to the body).

“ This is prāṇa (exhalation), apāna (inhalation), udāna (Upward Moving Breath),

vyāna (Pervasive Breath) and samāna (the Equalizing Breath). The first one is described
extensively in the first half of Chapter Six above. The remaining four are described
there in 6/186-216ab (185cd-215).

" This is an explanatory paraphrase of BhoKā 33, which is partially quoted in the
commentary.

BhoKā 33abc. Cf. BhoKā 30 quoted below ad 9/237. Commentary by
Aghoraśivācārya:

jīvanāya śarīradhāraṇārthaṁ .praṇayanāpanayanādipañcakarmakṛtas tattadvṛttibhedena prāṇāpānādisaṁjñābhājo vāyoḥ pravartakaḥ saṁrambhātmako yaḥ
prayatnāḥ, so ʻhaṅkāravṛttir ity ahaṅkārasiddhiḥ | yad uktaṁ śrīmanmrṛgendre

atha vyaktāntarād buddher garvo ʻbhūt karaṇaṁ citaḥ |

saṁrambhād yasya ceṣṭante śārīrāḥ pañca vāyavaḥ l (vi. 1120) iti |

tatra praṇayanaṁ sūkṣmadehasyoráhvādhonayanaṁ prāṇasya vyāpāraḥ | apanayanam
adhaḥprāpaṇaṁ malāder apānasya | annādeḥ rasarūpasya sarvagātreṣu sāmyena

nayanaṁ samānasya | vinamanam aṅgānāṁ vyānasya | unnāyanam āntarasya dhvaner
varṇatāprāpaṇam udānasya | pañcakarmakṛta iti ca prādhānyād uktam | udgārādikartrtvena cāsya vāyoḥ śravaṇāt | yad uktaṁ śrīmatkālottare
udgāre nāga ity uktaḥ kūrma unmīlane sthitaḥ |
kṛkaras tu kṣute caiva devadatto vijrmbhaṇe ||
dhanañjayaḥ sthito ghoṣe mṛtasyāpi na muñcati || (ibid. 10/12-13) iti II

‘(So that it may) live, that is, so that it may bear a body, it is ‘formed by its five

actionsʼ, that impart the exhaled and inhaled (breath) etc. (to the body). According to its
various activities, it is called ‘inhalation’ (prāṇa) and ‘exhalation’ (apāna), and impels

the ‘vital breath (vāyu). Its nature is the exertion that is effort, which is the activity of

the ego. In this way (the existence and function of) the ego is established (to exist). As is
said in the venerable Mṛgendra, ‘Now, from intellect (formed) after (and from) the
manifestation (of the qualities of Nature), the ego arose as an instrument of

consciousness. It is by its activity (saṁirambha, vyāpāra) that the five vital breaths of

the body act (performing each their own functions). (Vidyāpāda 11/20) There (in that
regard), ‘imparting exhalation’ is the function of exhalation (prāṇa), which is that of
leading the subtle body up and down. The ‘imparting of inhalation’ is (the function of)
inhalation, which is transporting excreta and the like downwards. (The function of)

samāna (the equalizing breath) is to transport food, such as cooked rice in the form of
raṣa, to all limbs of the body. (The function of) vyāna (the pervasive breath) is to make
the limbs (of the body) pliable (vinamana). (The function of) udāna (the upward moving
breath) is to elevate (unnamana) the inner resonance (of the breath) and make it assume

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Otherwise’, (if it were) not to be the impeller (of the vital breath). In
this way the task (kārya) of the ego is to impel or not (the vital breaths),
beginning with exhalation (prāṇa), due to which all live and die.

The difference between this ego and the sense of ‘’ (ahaṁbhāva),

which consists of the freedom of pure consciousness that rests within its own
nature alone and arises spontaneously (svarasaodita) (by itself), is only that it is
located (abhiniviṣṭa) within the insentient intellect, which is not the Self. He

says that:

ḷaēa || 32 1|

ata eva viśuddhātmasvātantryāhaṁsvabhāvataḥ |
akṛtrimād idaṁ tv anyad ity uktaṁ kr̥tiśabdataḥ || 232 ||

Thus, the term ‘creation (of the ego) (kṛti)' indicates that this

(created ego) differs from the ego that is uncreated and perfectly pure

freedom. (232)

the state of phonemic (sound). The principle (forms of the vital breath indicated by the

statement it is) ‘formed (by its) five actionsʼ has (thus) been stated. (Five other)
functions of this vital breath, such as expulsion (of vomit), (are known) because they
have been heard (from the scriptures). As is said in the venerable Kālortara ‘Nāga (is
the wind that operates) when vomiting. Kūrma is present when the eye opens, Kṛka
when hungry, Devadatta when yawning, Dhañjaya is present when roaring (ghosṣa) and
does not abandon (the body) even when dead.” (10/12-13)
kiñca, buddhikāryād ayaṁ ghata ityādigrāhyādhyavasāyarūpāt pratyarthaṁ
bhinnarāūpāt pratyayād atyantabhedena bhāsamānaḥ sarvārthagrahaṇe ‘py ekarūpo

˚ham iti grāhakādhyavasāyarūpaḥ pratyayo ‘haṅkārasyaiva vṛtir ity āha-

anyo ‘ṛthapratyayo ‘paraḥ | 33 I|

ahaṅkāravr̥ttyātmakapratyayo ‘rthapratyayād anya ity arthaḥ ||
‘However, a determinate perception (adhyavasāya) of an object such as ‘this is
a jar’ is the product of the intellect, and is a different perception for each entity
(perceived), and so (each one) manifests as totally different (from every other one).
(However,) even when every (single) thing is being perceived, the ‘ is one. Thus, the
perception, which is the determinate perception of the perceiver, is (ultimately) an
activity (vṛtti) of the ego. Thus it is said that: ‘the perception of an entity is other (than
that of the perceiver, which is other (than that).” (33d) The meaning is that the

perception which is the activity of the ego is different from the perception of an object
(artha).”

Thusṣ, it follows from what was stated in verse 230.

Abhinavagupta is referring to the word ‘ahaṁkṛtī’ which, synonymous with the term

ahaṁkāra, denotes the limited, phenomenal ego. He says that this term indicates that it
is a product – kṛti – of pure ‘I consciousness — ahaṁ, which serves as its agent, that
operates the psychophysical organism and impels its animating vital forces. The word

ahaṁkāra means ‘I am the one who actsʼ.

CHAPTER NINE
‘This’ creation of the ego is created (and artificial, and so) ‘differs’

(from the authentic uncreated ego). Surely (one may ask), what is the proof

(pramāṇa) that it is created (and artificial)? With this doubt in mind, he says
that that is so because (it is indicated to be such) by the term ‘creation’ (of the

ego). In the Mālinīvijayottara it is called a ‘creation of the egoʼ (ahaṁkṛta).
(The word) ‘creation’ indicates that it is created (and artificial), because its
meaning is that it does (something) in this (or that) way (karoter evam
arthatvāt).
Concluding this (point), he introduces another.

The Inner and Outer Senses are Instruments and Products of the Ego

frīaza vīējftīāēr. aāīTaāvīāā7; || 233 1
ity ayaṁ karaṇaskandho ʻhaṅkārasya nirūpitaḥ |
tridhāsya prakṛtiskandhaḥ sāttvarājasatāmasaḥ || 233 II
We have described one aspect of the ego, namely, (the ego) as an

instrument of cognition (karaṇaskandha). (Now we come) to its material

aspect (prakṛtiskandha), which is three-fold, namely, sāttvika, rājasika and

tāmasika.̃ (233)

It is ‘three-fold’ because it has as its limbs each one (of the three
qualities) of sattva and the rest.
There (in that context), he describes the material aspect
(prakṛtiṣkandha) of the sāttvika (part).

TTATĀTTITĀTTĪYTĀITTTT: TjZT |

] ṀTT ŪaTṢ W’TĪ || 23% I
sattvapradhānāhaṅkārād bhoktraṁśasparśinaḥ sphuṭam |
manobuddhyakṣaṣaṭkaṁ tu jātaṁ bhedas tu kathyate || 234 ||
The ego (ahaṅkāra) is located in the insentient intellect (buddhi), which is not the
Self. Thus, it differs from the self-awareness (ahaṅbhāva), which is spontaneously

(born of itself), and consists of the autonomy of pure consciousness resting in itself
alone.

Cf. BhoKā 35:
anye cāhaṅkṛtiskandhās trivargajanakās trayaḥ |
taijasādikanāmānaḥ kramaśaḥ sāttvikādayaḥ ||

‘The other aspects of the ego differ (from this aspect). They are three, and

generate three categories, called ‘radiantly energetic’ (taijasa) etc., and are, in due

order, sāttvika etc.

TANTRĀLOKA

The group of six, which consists of the mind (mmnanas) and the five

senses of perception, arises from the predominantly sāttvika egoity when it
is clearly associated with the subjective aspect (bhoktraṁśa). We shall (now)

describe the difference (between introverted and extroverted senses). (234)

The existence of the qualities, rajas and tamas, are also (implicitly)

indicated by (saying) ‘predominantlyʼ, for their functions are mutually
associated with one another. (The group of six senses) ‘is clearly associated

with the subjective aspect’, because the sense of ‘I’ (ahaṁpratyaya) reflects on
their nature directly. ‘The group of six, which consists of the mind (manas)
and the five senses of perception’. The scriptures declare that ‘there are six
senses (along with) the mind (manas), and so the senses of perception are
associated with the mind (mmanas). This is the meaning. That is said (in the

following verse):

‘The ear, skin, eyes, tongue, and nose along with the mind (– this group

of six) is sāttvika, because it is linked to the light (of consciousness), and so is

effulgent with sattva.

MIT vidyāpāda 12/3. This is also quoted by Aghoraśivācārya in his commentary on
the Tattvasaṁgraha ad 6-7 and in his vṛtti on the Tattvaprakāśa ad 55. It is part of a set
of verses describing how the principles below the ego are derived from its three forms —
sātvika, rājāsika and tāmasika – a doctrine taken over from the Sāṁkhya and to which
Abhinava also subscribes. Thus, the following verses read:

vāṇī pāṇī bhagaḥ pāyuḥ pādau ceti rajodbhavāḥ |
karmānvayād rajo bhūyān gaṇo vaikāriko ʻtra yaḥ ll
‘(The organs of action, namely) speech, the hands, genitals, anus and feet, are
born from rajas. They are associated with action, and so are rājasika. It is the ego which
in this case has undergone transformation (vaikārika).” (4) (see note below ad 9/253 for

commentary by Aghoraśiva)

śabdaḥ sparśaś ca rūpaṁ ca raso gandhaś ca pañcamaḥ |
guṇāviśiṣṭās taamātrās tanmātrapadayojitāḥ |l

‘Sound, touch, form, taste, and smell, the fifth, are the subtle elements

(tanmātrā of sensation), not (yet) qualified by specific qualities (as happens when a

specific sound for example is heard). They are conjoined to the plane of (the unmanifest
state of particular sensations) as ‘just that’ (tanmātra) (sound for example without
specific form). (5)

prakāśakarmakrdvargavailakṣaṇyāt tamodbhavāḥ |
prakāśyatvāc ca bhūtādir ahaṅkāreṣu tāmasaḥ |l

(The gross elements) are born from the tamas (of the ego), as they are different
from the groups (of the cognitive senses that are sāttvika) light and (the rājasika organs
of action) that perform actions. And also, because they are the objects of illumination

(of the activity of the inner and outer senses), amongst (the forms of the ego), the gross

elements etc. are tāmasa. (6) ṀrT vidyāpāda 12/4-6

CHAPTER NINE

Surely (one may ask), although they arise from just one ego, how is it
that mind has everything as its object, whereas that of the others is confined?
With this doubt in mind, he says that ‘we shall (now) describe the difference
(between them). The difference concerns the object (of sense), according to
whether it has been generated (as an outer object), in accord with the necessity
(of conforming to the law of causality), or otherwise (as a mental object created

by the mind). This is the meaning. He says that.

āUSr:iEEEIH EIEIEEITTEI

dī-āīākqcāá frTT’Prczāēa: || 234 1|
mano yat sarvaviṣayaṁ tenātra pravivakṣitam |
sarvatanmātrakartrtvaṁ viśeṣaṇam ahaṁkṛteḥ || 235 ||
The mind has all (sense data) as its object. Thus, it is said here that
the ego (from which it is produced) has as its defining quality (viśeṣaṇa)
that it is the agency (that produces) all the subtle elements (of sense data).
(235)

means because the mind has all (sense data) as its object. ‘It is

said hereʼ everywhere in the treatise' (i.e. the Sāṅkhyakārikā), in such

statements as, ‘from the tāmasika (ego), which is (called) the first of the gross

elements, arise the subtle elementsʼ. Thus, there is no disagreement that the

subtle elements arise from the predominantly tāmasika ego. Again, it is possible
for tamas to be present even in the predominantly sāttvika ego because their
functions are mutually associated with one another. As is said:
‘All things are mutually associated with one another; all things are
present everywhere.”
Thus, the mind (manas) arises out of the sāttvika ego, which is

specifically characterized by that (omnipresence), and so it is that (the mind) has
all things as its object. As mind (manas) has all (sense data) as its object in this
way, one knows this, namely that the ego is the cause of all the subtle elements,
by virtue of which mind and sound, along with the rest (of the sensations), are

related to one another as perceiver and perceived.

Jayaratha, it seems, is referring to the Sāmkhyakārikā with the word ‘śāstra’, and it is

that which he goes on to quote. The Āgamas and their commentators largely follow the
Sāṁkhyain their understanding of the Tattvas from Prakṛti onwards, and so he says that
there is no disagreement here with the general Āgamic Śaiva view. Accordingly, we
observe several times that Jayaratha quotes from the Sāṁkhyakārikā, juxtaposing it with

references from Saiddhāntika sources.
SaṁKā 25c. The full verse declares: ‘The sāttvika group of eleven (consisting of the

mind and the ten sense organs) arises from the modified (vaikṛta) ego. From the

tāmasika (ego), (which is that of the reality levels) beginning with the gross elements,

arise the subtle elements, and both from the taijasa (i.e. rājasika aspect of the ego). It is
quoted below ad 9/271cd-272ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

Moreover, in this way, this triad, consisting of the intellect and the rest,

(together constitute) the inner mental organ, as (each one is engaged in its own)
unique activity. He says (that):

āulEīōēeEEetz ḵ:ṟ-HEa ; IĪEEEHI
buddhyahaṁkrṛnmanaḥ prāhur bodhasaṁrabhaṇaiṣaṇe |
karaṇaṁ bāhyadevair yan naivāpy antarmukhaiḥ kṛtam || 236 ||
The intellect, ego and mind are said to be, respectively, the organs
of cognition (bodha), exertion (saṅīrambha) and solicitation (eṣaṇa). (These
functions) are not performed (as some would have it) by the introverted

external senses. (236)

‘Cognition (bodha) is the ascertainment (adhyavasāya) of (the nature

of the) object of sense, such as sound. ‘Exertion’ is (mistaken) self-arrogation
(ahamātmā-bhimāṇa). ‘Solicīitation’ is the will (icchā) which is intent

(saṁkalpa). In so far as here (each one of these is an) activity (kriyā), one must
accept that it takes place by means of an instrument (to execute it). And that is
not the sense of hearing or the rest (of the external senses) that will be described

further ahead, because their field of operation (viṣaya) is that of external action,
and because these (three, intellect, ego and mind) are internal by nature. Thus,
as it is a means to accomplish an inner activity, it is other than (the outer
senses), and is said to be called the inner (mental) organ, which (consists of)

‘the intellect, ego and mindʼ. That is said (in the Bhogakārikā):

‘(The functions) called will, exertion and cognitive consciousness are

not accomplished by the (external) means discussed previously (i.e. the senses).
(Thus,) in order to accomplish that, instruments, that is, the inner mind, ego and
intellect (are required) to carry them out (and so are proved to exist).”

See BhoKā, 28-29.

BhoKā 27. Read as in the published edition sādhanaiḥ for sādhaneḥ and tatsiddhau

karaṇāny for

tatsiddhaṁ karaṇaṁ tv. Aghoraśivācārya comments:

iha hi pr̥thivyādīmāṁ tattvānāṁ svakāryair eva siddheḥ kāryāntarahetutve

anekatattvaparikalpanābhāvaprasaṅgāc
sādhanāni, tāṇi_ mano ‘haṅkāra-buddhyākhyāny āntarāṇi

ca
|yānīcchādisiddhau
karaṇānīty antaḥkaraṇa-

siddáhiḥ | tatrecchāśabdenaikāgratāparaparyāyo ‘vadhānātmakaḥ saṅkalpo vivakṣitaḥ |
sa manaso vṛttiḥ | saṅrambhaś

ca prayamo ‘haṅkārasya | bodhaś cādhyavasāyo

buddher iti etac ca prapañcayiṣyate |1

‘Here (according to this view), the Earth and other principles are proved (to
exist) by virtue of their effects. The proof for the existence of the inner mental organ is

that inner instruments called mind, ego and intellect are the means to accomplish the
will etc. (It could not be otherwise,) because there is no proof (pramāṇa) that there is
another cause for (their) products, and because it would entail the undesirable

CHAPTER NINE
‘Buddhyahaṁkṛṇmanaḥ’

(i.e.

intellect-ego-mind)

is

a

copulative

compound (dvandva) when (the three are) taken together (as a single unit).

Surely (one may ask), the sense of hearing and the rest are outer senses, but
even so, turned inwards, they are internal. Taking them together, they become

means to cognitive consciousness and the rest. So what is the use of teaching the

existence of another inner (mental) organ? (In response to this possible

objection, he says) that, even when introverted, the external senses are incapable

of cognitive consciousness and the rest (of the functions of the inner mental
organ). This is the meaning. If the external senses were turned away from the
outer (world) and experienced together as introverted, (thus) generating
cognitive consciousness and the rest (of the function of the inner mental organ),
there would be no perception of the intellect and the rest when sound and the
rest of their (outer objects) are being perceived (ālocanāvasara). If (one)

maintains (iṣṭa) that the perception of sound (śabdālocana) and the like is that

of those (sensorial functions) that are not associated with the outer (object), then
how is it possible for (the senses that are thus) associated (with the outer object)

to possess the cognitive consciousness and the rest (required for this to take
place) when they are introverted at the very same time (as they operate
externally to sense the outer object)? (If you were to maintain that that) it is seen
(to take place) simultaneously, it would not be logically sound (yukta) to say
that the introverted external senses experienced together serve as the means to
cognitive consciousness and the rest. That is said (in the Bhogakārikā):

‘If the object (purpose) (artha) of the intellect were to be that of the
introverted (senses), the perceptions of the outer object (performed by the outer
senses) and the will and the other activities (of the inner organ) would operate

consequence that there would be no conception of the many principles (below them, that
is, the senses, sensations, and gross elements). There by the word ‘will’ is meant
‘intention’ (saṁkalpa), which is attention, otherwise called ‘concentration’. This is the
function (vṛtti) of the mind (manas). And that of the ego is exertion (saṁīrambha), that
is, effort. The cognitive consciousness of the intellect is ascertainment (adhyavasāya).”

“ Cf. BhoKā 25: “The senses are hearing, touch, sight, taste and smell. Their function

(vṛtt) is perception of sound (śabdālocana) and the rest when they are in the presence
of sound etc.”

BhoKā 29. Printed edition of the BhoKā reads citer arthaṁ for citādyarthaṁ,

bāhyārthaṁ for bāhyārtha- and sārdhaṁ for sākaṁ. The previous verse (i.e. 28) says:
)
cchādiṣādhanam ḷ
Śśibikodvāhinaravadekāpāyena tās tataḥ || 28 I|

‘The inner and outer organs experienced together serve as the means for (the
operation of) the will and the rest (of the functions of the inner mental organs). Thus,
like the two men carrying a palanquin, when one of them departs, they (cease to
operate).
Aghoraśiva comments:
yato ‘ntarmukhāni bāhyāni ca karaṇāni śibikodvāhinaravat saṁbhūyecchādīnāṁ
kriyāṇāṁ .sādhanaṁ .bhavanti, bāhyārthālocanapūrvāṇām •evādhyavasāyādīnāṁ
darśanāt, avadhānādinā vinā bāhyārthagrahaṇāsaṁbhavāc ca |

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), let the vital breath itself, which abides undivided
from consciousness, perform the functions of cognitive consciousness and the
rest (directly); what is the use of these inner (mental) organs? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

Tī̄ īṬ-ā āTT] STRTIḤ ṀTTĪITTT : |

fiā] 1| 33 1
prāṇaś ca nāntaḥkaraṇaṁ jaḍatvāt preraṇātmanaḥ |
prayamecchāvibodhāṁśahetutvād iti niścitam || 237 I|
Nor (is it sound to maintain, as some do, that) the inner (mental)
organ (consisting of the mind, intellect and ego) is the vital breath, because
(in itself, it is essentially) insentient. Moreover, it is certain that its nature
as the vital impulse (preraṇa) is because of the exertion (of the ego), the will

(of the mind), and the cognitive consciousness (of the intellect). (237)

The vital breath is insentient. Thus, it is certain that it cannot be the

inner (mental) organ. This is the syntax (of this verse) (saṁbandha). Or else,

(one may) surely (say that) even though it is insentient, it is perceived to be an
instrument (of perception) impelled by an agent that precedes it. With this
doubt in mind, it is ṣaid that ‘its nature as the vital impulse (preraṇa) is
because of the exertion (of the ego), the will (of the mind) and the cognitive
consciousness (of the intellect)’. There cannot be an instrument which is
impelled (to perform its function) without an exertive force (prayatna) (to impel

it). An exertive force is preceded by a will (to exert it), and the will by a
tataś citerātmano

bhogākhyaṁ prayojanaṁ

sādhayatām

antar-

mukhāgatānām antaḥkaraṇānāṁ caśabdād bahiṣkaraṇānāṁ vānyatarasyāpi
vargasyāpāyena tiṣṭhatāṁ satāṁ tā icchādikāḥ kriyāḥ śabdādibāhyārthabuddhayo vā

puruṣārthasādhanatayā noipadyante, yathā śibikodvāhinor madhyād ekasyāpāye
tadudvahanakr̥iyā na dr̥śyate || 28-29 ||

The inner and outer organs, operating in unison like the two men who carry a

palanquin, serve as the means for the activities of the will and the rest. External entities

cannot be perceived without the attention etc. (of the mind) and the perception of the
ascertainments (of the intellect), that are preceded by viewing the outer object (with the
sēnses).

The object (artha) of consciousness (citi), that is, the Self, is its aim, which is
called (worldly) experience (bhoga), that needs be attained. Thus, (for these reasons,) by
the cessation of the introverted inner (mental) organs, or (which is implied by the word
‘and’) the external (sensory) organs, which is the other category (of senses), those
actions such as the will and the rest or the perceptions of outer objects, such as sound
and the rest, do not arise as the means to attain the objectives (artha) of the individual
soul, (as they would) were they to be in place. Just as when one out of the two who are
carrying a palanquin departs, the act of carrying it is no (longer) seen (to take place).”

“ See BhoKā 30. According to Aghoraśiva, some of the materialist Lokāyatas sustain
this view.

Read vāsyādikartrā for vāsyādi kartrā.

CHAPTER NINE

cognitive consciousness (that possesses it). Thus, even if one accepts that the
vital breath is the inner (mental) organ, one must necessarily accept the
existence of another instrument that gives rise to cognitive consciousness and
the rest, which is (its) product. That is said (in the Bhogakārikā):

‘Others consider the inner (mental) organ to be the vital breath, which is

(empirically) manifest sentience (vyaktacetana). (However, the vital breath) is
devoid of exertive force, (and so) how can it be an instrumental means to

accomplish that?

Surely (one may ask), as there is no difference with regards its internal

(mental) nature, let there be just one inner (mental) organ; what is the use of its

being three-fold? With this doubt in mind, he says:

zte A iJḤE-

āJT || 33¢ |1|
avasāyo ‘bhimānaś ca kalpanā ceti na kriyā |
ekarūpā tatas tritvaṁ yuktam antaḥkṛtau sphuṭam || 238 II
The ascertainment (avasāya) (of the intellect), the self-arrogation

(abhimāna) (of the ego), and the conceptualization (kalpanā) (of the mind)

BhoKā 30. The printed edition reads prayatnair na for prayatnena. However,
Aghoraśiva comments on the reading found here. He says: anye lokāyataikadeśāḥ

praṇayanādivr̥tibhir jīvanādihetubhūtaṁ bhūtapariṇāmaviśeṣād abhivyaktacetanaṁ
prāṇākhyam āntaraṁ vāyum evāntaḥkaraṇam āhuḥ | asya dūṣaṇam āhaprayatnair na vinā so ‘sti tatsiddhau karaṇaṁ tu kim || 30 ||
prāṇātmanas tāvad vāyoḥ kadācitkatvena prayatnapūrvikā pravṛttir dṛśyate | yad āhuḥpreraṇākarṣaṇe vāyoḥ prayatnena vinā kutaḥ (pra. vā 1/54) iti | tataḥ saṁrambhātmakaprayatnasiddhau kenāpi karaṇena bhāvyam ity antaḥkaraṇasidáhiḥ | vakṣyati ca

saṅrambho ʻhaṅkrter̥ vr̥ṭṭiḥ iti l 30 lḹ

‘“Othersʼ are those who are in the same place (in their views) as (the
materialist) Lokāyata. They say that (empirically) manifest sentience, which is called
the vital breath (prāṇa) and is the inner wind, is itself the inner mental organ. This is

because, due to a particular modification of the gross elements, it is the cause of life and

the like, due to functions of (the vital breath) that impart life (praṇayana) etc. (In the

next line he points out) the defect of this (view).

‘“(However, the vital breath) is devoid of exertive force, (and so) how can it be
an instrumental means to accomplish that?” (30cd)
It is perceived that the activity of the wind, the nature of which is the vital
breath, is occasional (that is, not constant), and so is preceded by (and based on a
regularly intermittent) effort. As they say: how can the wind (of the vital breath) be

impelled and dragged back without effort?” Thus, one must admit that in order to
accomplish the effort which is (this) exertion, it must take place by means of some
inṣtrument. Thuṣ, the inner mental organ is proved to exist. As he will say ‘exertion is
the activity of the ego (BhoKā 33c. Quoted above ad 9/231).

TANTRĀLOKA

do not constitute a single (uniform) action. Clearly therefore, it is
reasonable (to assert) that the inner mental organ is three-fold." (238)
Ascertainment (avasāya) (of the intellect), the self-arrogation

(abhimāṇa) (of the ego), and the conceptualization (kalpanā) (of the mind) are
separate and distinct (activities) and so ‘do not constitute a single (uniform)

action’. The sense is that, even though the object of the ascertainment (of the

intellect) of what is considered (by the ego) to be distinct (and differentiated

from all) else (by the mind) is the same, (each has) a separate task (to perform).
That is said (in the Bhogakārikā):

‘(Mental) construction (klṛpti), reflection (mati) and recollection (smṛti)
– these arise denoting different things, namely, the will, exertion and cognitive

consciousness. Thus, the inner (mental) organ is three-fold.'

Surely then, (one may ask,) a sense organ cannot be unperceived. The
intellect, like the mind and ego, is not perceptible (sarṁvedyā); so how is it
reasonably possible for it to be an organ (of sense)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

3ī Ḷ gfŪTaāī TTTITTT āAṬI /|
TNaaTdPTṬĒRTTGTTgĪeTT: || 338 11
na ca buddhir asaṅvedyā karaṇatvān mano yathā |
pradhānavad asaṁvedyabuddhivādas tadujjhitaḥ || 239 ||

’ Cf. BhoKā 47 quoted by Jayaratha in the commentary.

’ BhoKā 47. Read, as in the printed edition of the BhoKa, kḷrptir for kapir, and smṛtiś

ceti for syatiś caiva. Edition reads -bodhākhyās for ~bodhārthās. According to
Aghoraśiva, this verse describes the three types of cognitive consciousness of the
intellect (buddhībodha). He explains that: ‘there (in that case) (mental) construction
(kḷrpti) means conceptualization (kalpana) and brilliant intelligence (pratibhā).
Reflection (mati) is cogitation (manana), knowledge (jñāna) and ascertainment
(adhyavasāya). In this way, the distinctions (within the) inner mental organ due to the
diversity of the products of the will etc. is established. . . . Although there are secondary

types of recollection and the rest, because their purpose is to give rise to cognitive

consciousness, (they are are) a function (vṛtti) of the intellect. However, the functions

which are the will and the rest serve different purposes. (And so) they are separate

(distinct) causes (of distinct effects). This is the sense (of this verse). Thus because of
the diverse tasks of the will etc. the difference (between the components) of the inner
mental organ is (proved and) established.' These are the three standard buddhivṛttis

taught in the treatises of the Śaivasiddhānta, that are equivalent to the cittavṛttīs of the

Yogasūtra (1/6); namely, pramāṇa (perception), viparyaya (misapprehension), vikalpa
(thought construction), nidrā (sleep) and smṛti (memory). The term ‘vṛtt’ has manifold

interrelated meanings. One is simply ‘fluctuation’. The YSū famously defines Yoga as
their blockage. Other relevant meanings are ‘mode of conduct’, ‘course of action’,

‘behaviourʼ, ‘mode of being’, ‘nature’, ‘kind’, ‘characterʼ, ‘disposition’, ‘state’,
‘condition’, ‘being’, ‘existing’, and ‘occurring’ or ‘appearing’. Briefly, we can say that a

vṛtti of the mind (citta) or intellect (buddhi) is its state or condition, with its

corresponding ‘function’ or ‘activity°.”

CHAPTER NINE

Moreover, the intellect is not (as some maintain) imperceptible
(asaṁvedya), because it is a sense organ, as is the mind. (A truly
imperceptible entity), such as (Fundamental) Nature (pradhāna), (is not a

sense organ). Thus, the theory that the intellect is imperceptible thereby
stands refuted. (239)

‘The theory that the intellect is imperceptible’ is accepted by the

Sāṁkhya. The logical formulation (prayoga) here (of that view) is as follows.

The intellect is perceptible because it is an (inner) organ of sense. An organ of

sense is perceptible, as is the mind. What is not perceptible is not an organ of
sense, as is Fundamental Nature. The intellect is an organ of sense and therefore

is perceptible. (If the) reason as to why it is perceptible is because it is

associated with the qualities (of Nature), (our response is that) in this way”

(this reason) is not (unequivocally) exclusive of all other (possibilities). Thus,

such views should be ignored. (As Sadyojyotiṣ has said):

“The mind (citta) consisting, like (the other senses), of the (three)

qualities (guṇna), is considered to be perceptible. And (so, to maintain the view
that) the intellect (huddhi) is also imperceptible is (merely) gratuitous sophistry

on your part.

1 According to Jayaratha, this is the view of the Sāṁkhya.

‘ Read tathānenā- for pradhānenā-.
BhoKā 48. The printed edition of the BhoKā reads kicid iṣyate for cittam iṣyate,
which is a better reading.

anu pṛthivyādīnāṁ viṣayatvena bhogyatvād indriyāṇāṁ ca tadgrahaṇahetutvād astu
bhogasādhanatā, buddhes tu indriyārthasannikarṣād ātmany utpadyamānāyāḥ
saṁvedanarūpatvān na bhogasādhanatā, api tv ātmaguṇataiveti naiyāyikādayaḥ, ata

āha-

‘Surely, (someone may object that) the Earth and the rest (of the gross
elements) are the objects of the senses and so are objects of experience, and moreover,

as the senses are the cause of their perception (grahaṇa), (for those reasons) let it be
(agreed) that they are the means to (their) experience (bhoga). The intellect is not a
means to experience (in this way) because it is not close to the objects of the senses
(read indriyārthāsannikarṣād for indriyārthasannikarṣād) and because its nature is
(sensory and mental) awareness (saṁvedana) of what is generated within itself. Rather,

as the Naiyāyikas and others (maintain), it is a quality of the Śelf. Thus he says:
tulye guṇāṉvitatve tu saṅṁvedyaṁ kiñcid iṣyate |
buddhiścāpi hyasaṁvedyā dhanyā tārkikatā tava || 48 II

‘The mind (citta) consisting, like (the other senses), of the (three) qualities
(guṇa), is considered to be perceptible. And (so, to maintain the view that) the intellect
(buddhi) is also imperceptible is (merely) gratuitous sophistry on your part.’
ayam
abhiprāyaḥ

dvividho
‘tra
bodho
‘dhyavasāyātmako
‘nadhyavasāyātmakaś ca | tatra yo ʻdhyavasāyātmakaḥ, sa sarvadā grāhakarūpeṇaiva
bhāsamānatvād ātmanaḥ svabhāva eva 1| yastv anadhyavasāyarūpaḥ, sa
utpattyapavargayogitvena bhāsamānatvān na puṁsaḥ svabhāvaḥ, nityasyānityasvabhāvatvāyogāt, tatsvabhāvatve cānityatvaprasaṅgāt | na ca nityo ‘nubhūyate, tato na

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), let this be so with regards to the inner (mental)

organs; however, with regards to the (outer) organs of perception as also the
ego, like the mind, what is the reason (nimitta) that they should have a fixed
(determined) object? With this question in mind, he says:

YTaT-TTTGṬHTHTNTS

aT #I -zvḷ āīa īS] TajaāṀkēaā || 2śo ||
śabdatanmātrahetutvaviś
ā tv ahaṁkrtiḥ |
sā śrotre karaṇaṁ yāvad ghrāṇe gandhatvabheditā || 240 ||
When this product of the ego is qualified as the cause of the
sensation (tanmātra) of sound, it (operates) as the sense organ (karaṇa)
within the ear. (Similarly,) insofar as (that is so) when it is associated (and
qualified separately) (bheditā) with the (sensation of) smell, (it operates as
the sense organ) within the nose. (240)
In the case of the mind (manas) it has produced, the condition of the

ego as the instigator (of the senses)is its special (specific) characteristic as the

agent of (all) the subtle elements, without distinction. However,in the case of

the (five) cognitive senses, (it operates) in a restricted manner in such a way that
they (each) have (their specific) fixed object. As is said (in the Tantrasāra):

puṅsaḥ ṣvabhāva iti | yasya saḥ svabhāvaḥ sā buddhir bhāvānām adhyavasāyato-

tpādikā dharmajñānādyaṣṭaguṇā buddhir iti | tataś ca viṣayādhyavasāyarāpatvād
bhāvapratyayātmanā sattvādiguṇatrayānvitena svarūpeṇa bhogyatvāc ca buddher api

saṁvedyataiva, na tv ātmaguṇatvam ḷ

‘This is the intended sense: consciousness (bodha)
of two kinds —
determinate (adhyavasāyātmaka) and indeterminate (anadhyavasāyātmaka). There, the
one thatis determinate always shines as the perceiver (grāhaka), and so is the essential

nature of the Self. The one that is indeterminate manifests in association with (the

liberating) cessation (apavarga) of the arising (of binding determinate perceptions), and
so is not the essential nature of the individual soul, because that which is transitory
(anitya) by nature is not associated with what is eternal. If that were to be the nature (of
indeterminate consciousness), the undesired consequence would be that it is not eternal.

Nor is (the individual soul) experienced as being eternal. Thus, it is not the essential
nature of the individual soul. That of which it is the essential nature is the intellect. The
intellect, that possesses eight qualities, that is, dharma, knowledge and the rest,

generates the determinate perception (adhyavasāya) of phenomena (bhāva). Thus, the
intellect also is an object of perception (saṁvedya), not a quality of the soul. This is

because its nature is the determinate perception of objects of sense, as it is essentially
the perception of phenomena. (Moreover,) as it possesses the three qualities (of Prakṛti),
sattva and the rest, it is, by its very nature, an object of experience.

The argument adopted by Sadyojyotis is inconclusive, because Prakṛti also

consists of the three qualities, butis not for that reason perceptible.
Read prayojakatvaṁ for prayojakaṁ.

CHAPTER NINE
‘In the case of the mind (mnanas) (it has) produced, (the ego, which is

its) creator, is endowed with the capacity to generate all the subtle elements,
whereas in the case of the sense of hearing, it is qualified by the capacity to
generate (only the subtle element of) sound, (and so on with rest of the senses)
up to that of smell, in which case it is endowed with the capacity to generate

(just the subtle element) of smell.

As they are produced by the ego in this way, the (sense organs) are

restricted (to their own specific) fields (of operation) (viṣaya). The sense of

hearing apprehends just sound alone, not tactile sensations and the rest; the skin
just tactile sensations alone, not (anything) else, (and so on) up to the sense of
smell (that apprehends just) odour alone. As for those who, on the contrary, say
that ‘that which is born from my ego (ahaṁkṛt) is not the cause of the constraint

(that each sense should have its own particular object), have not understood
(our) description (nirūpaṇa) of that ego’s nature.

Surely (one may ask), others (i.e. the Naiyāyikas) have said that (the

senses) are derived from the gross elements, because the restrictions (inherent)

in the relationship between the perceiver and the perceived cannot be logically
explained otherwise. As they say:
“The senses of smell, taste, sight, touch and hearing are (derived) from

the gross elements.

Thus, as it is made of Earth, the sense of smell apprehends odour alone,

not flavour and the rest, (and so on) up to the sense of hearing which, because

’ BhoKaā 4lab. According to Aghoraśiva, the Siddhāntīn commentator, the ego is

understood by these others concretely as a material cause of the senses, which is not

how it is understood here, that is, as the agent of the activity of the senses. Aghoraśiva
explains:

‘Although it has been stated that (all the senses) are equally produced by the
ego, how is it that the senses have different tasks (to perform)? Accepting (in response
to this question) that this should be so, because the sense of hearing and the rest arise

variously, as happens with pieces of raw sugar and refined sugar that are

transformations of sugarcane juice, dependent on the constraint that (each) perceives (its
own corresponding object), namely, sound and the rest, we accept that it is Karma,
which bestows the goals of (each individual’s life), that regulates (these
correspondences). Thus he says:
‘that which is born from my ego (ahaṁkāra) is not the cause of the constraint
(that each sense should have its own particular object) which bestows the goals of (each
individual”s life). (Rather,) Karma. which is impelled by Śiva (bhava), is the cause (of
this).”

We do not accept that the cause of the constraint that (each organ of sense must

have its own) object (of sense) is born from the ego. Rather (the cause is) Karma which

is presided over by Śiva.

Nyāyasūtra 1/1/12. So Earth > smell, Water > taste, Fire > sight. Air > touch and
Space > hearing.

TANTRĀLOKA

its nature is Space, apprehends (only) sound, not touch and the rest. (But we
maintain that that view) is not sound. Thus he says:

ṃfṝkhcāṁāārsarzq framītgāraāv3
bhautikatvam ato ‘py astu niyamād viṣayeṣv alam |
Thus, enough (of this view that the senses) are of a gross, material
nature, (simply) because of their necessary connection with (their specific)

objects." (241ab)

It has been established that the (senses apprehend their own) fixed
(specific object) because they are generated from the ego, which is (variously)
specified by each particular (sensorial) function (vṛtti). ‘Thus, enough’ of what
other say, namely, that (the senses) ‘are of gross, material nature because of

their necessary connection with (their specific) objects’. The meaning is that
this (view) is not worth talking about at all.

If one were to say this, then Air should be perceivable by the sense of

touch, because it has (its) same (material) nature, and that is not the view (you)

have chosen, because (it is commonly) accepted that Air cannot be apprehended
(by the senses). (Now,) a substance (dravya) that is visible and can be touched
is apprehensible by two senses. And Air is (such) a substance, so how is it that it

could become apprehensible by (just one) organ of sense (i.e. touch)? Moreover,
the sense of touch should not be able to apprehend the three substances Earth
(Water and Fire) and the tactile sensations associated with them, the
characteristics of which are such as explained (previously), because its
(material) nature is Air, and also because it has been said that there is a
restriction on the relationship between the perceiver and the perceived, in accord

with the progressive advance of the nature (prakṛti) (of the elements in their
naturaḷ serial order, such that the succeeding members cannot apprehend the
previous or subsequent ones). Similarly, the sense of sight, the substance of
which is Fire, should apprehend (only) the form associated with it, not Earth and
the rest also (that it senses), because Fire is its material nature. In this way, an
action, universal, or the inherence (that relates a substance to its necessary

inherent qualities), should not be directly perceptible to the senses, because the

senses are of a gross, material nature, and are not of the same nature (as action
etc.). (But even s0,) all that is perceived. Therefore, one should say that the
senses do not have a gross, material nature. As the Bhogakārikās (teach):
‘There are four (forms of) tactile sensation that pertain to the (element)
Air, associated in due order with four substances (i.e. Earth, Water, Fire and

Air). (The sense of touch) perceives three (of these) substances, not Air.

!° Cf. BhoKā 37: “Others maintain that the cognitive organs of sense are of a gross

material nature because they are necessarily linked to (their own corresponding) objects,

for a reason that is not proved.
BhoKā 38. The printed edition of the Bhogakārikā

reads marutā tvacā instead of

marutaḥ kramāt, and the second line reads dravyāṇy aniyataṁ caiva gṛhṇāti marutā

CHAPTER NINE
Moreover, the sense of sight (perceives) three substances (i.e. Earth

Water and Fire) and the forms within them. Thus, no fixed rule is conceived to

exist with regard to the senses and (their) objects (such that each sense organ

has only its own specific type of object).

(Another defect in this view is that) because (the senses are gross and)

material, clearly there would be no conceptions (buddhi) that can come by way
of the senses of embodied beings of Karma, universals and inherence.”
Surely (one may ask), you have thus refuted (the view that the senses
have a gross) material nature, because you have explained in another way the
reason given for this, namely (each of the senses) is subject to the fixed
condition dictated by its nature and so has (its own) fixed object. What then is
the sound reason (that this is s0), if (the senses are accepted to be) produced by

the ego? With this doubt in mind, he says:

=rē rōīṁ trvaāṁ fsraṁtraāzitatz 11 2 1

hrj-s

r̥ T

ahaṁ śr̥ṇomi paśyāmi jighrāmītyādisaṁvidi || 241 ||
ahaṁtānugamād āhaṅkārikatvaṁ sphuṭaṁ sthitam |

It is clear that they are produced by the ego, because the (forms of)

perception “T hear”, “I see” or “I smell” and the like are (always)

associated with the ego. (241cd-242ab)

(By the expression) ‘and the likeʼ, “I touch” and “ taste” (are meant).

(This is) ‘clear’ means that it is proved by one’s own experience.

Their nature as instruments (of perception) is established, because (the

senses) are products of the ego, and not otherwise. Thus he says:

GTṬGTTT
JT āAJIāTTTTĀTTĪ: || Q/4Ṝ II
samam instead of dravyāṇāṁ tritayaṁ caiva gṛhṇāti na ca mārutam. Thus, the verse

there means:

‘(The sense of touch) apprehends four (forms of) tactile sensation, associated
with four substances (i.e. Earth, Water, Fire and Air), along with Air and the sense of
touch (included amongst them).”

Ibiḍ. 39. Read with the printed edition, kalpyate for kalpane.
1bid. 40. Aghorasśiva explains: ‘accepting that (the senses are each) fixed to (just one
corresponding) object, in order to establish that the senses are (gross and) material,

(entails that) no conceptions could arise by means of them of Karma, universals and
inherence, which are entities the existence of which you accept are separate from the
elements and (their) qualities.”

Thus, as the senses are all associated with the ego, that differentiates them one from
the other, it is not necessary to suppose that hearing, for example, is related to sound
alone, because it is generated from Space, of which sound is a quality.

TANTRĀLOKA

karaṇatvam ato yuktaṁ kartraṁśaspṛktvayogataḥ || 242 ||
kartur vibhinnaṁ karaṇaṁ preryatvāt karaṇaṁ kutaḥ |

Therefore, it is reasonable to maintain (yukta) that their status as
instruments of action (karaṇa) depends on their contact with an aspect of

the agent. An instrument of action which is independent (vibhinna) of the
agent would be an object of the impulse (of some other principle). Thus,
how could it be an instrument (of action of that agent)? (242cd-243ab)

Therefore, it is reasonable to maintain (yukta) that their status as

instruments of action (karaṇa) is because they are produced by the ego, (and
also because) they are penetrated by the reflective awareness of the ego
(ahaṅparāmarśa) and make contact with an aspect of the agent. Oṭtherwise, if
one prefers (to maintain) that the instrument of action is independent (vibhinna)

of the agent, ‘it would be an object of the impulse (of some other principle).
Thus, how could it be an instrument (of action of that agent)?” Rather, as it
is the object of impulse, (it would be) an action (not an agent of action). This is
the meaning.
Nor is it possible for there to be action without an instrument (by means

of which it takes place), and so there (in that case), one needs to seek another

instrument (to account for it), and as that is independent of the agent, it can only

be an object of (its own) impulse. If there were to be another instrument there

(in that case), that would entail an infinite regress (as that too would require
another instrument to impel it and so on). Thus he says:

āTTṬĀTaTJTĪ ṬĀTTĪTTJTJĪ |1 Q¥3 1
karaṇāntaravāṁchāyāṁ bhavet tatrānavasthitiḥ || 243 ||

As another instrument is required (to impel it and that another), in

that case (tatra) there would be an infinite regress. (243cd)

In this way, gripped by (the false) notion that (he is) the body and the
rest (of the psychophysical organism), the perceiver is contracted, having
separated his own body (from the totality of the field of consciousness) by
himself, by virtue of (its) contact with (his) subjectivity (ahantā). Thus,
although (just) parts of one’s own (body), the sense of hearing and the rest (of
the senses) are rendered into the means to (execute) the act of perception

(ālocana) etc., with sound etc. as (their) objects. He says that:

tasmāt svātantryayogena kartā svaṁ bhedayan yapuḥ |

Read kartraṁśa- for kartraśa-.

“ Read śabdādiviṣayitayā for śahdādiviṣayayā.

CHAPTER NINE

karmāṁśasparśinaṁ svāṁśaṁ karaṇīkurute svayam || 244 ||
Therefore, the agent, by virtue of (his) link with the freedom (of
consciousness), differentiating his own body (vapuṣ) by himself
(spontaneously) (svayam), fashions that part of himself which is in contact
with the active (objective) aspect (karmāṁśa) into an instrument of action.
(244)
‘Therefore’, because it is not logically possible that an instrument be
separate from the agent (who makes use of it). (His) ‘link with the freedom (of

consciousness) is penetration (āveśa) into (his)
state as an agent. This is the
meaning. ‘That part of himself’, that is, the sense of hearing and the rest (of
the senses) ‘which is in contact with the active (objective) aspect’, that is,
which is associated (saṁbaddha) with sound and the other objects (of the
sēnses).
Surely (one may ask), if that is so, how is it that, for example, when (the

agent acts in such a way that we say) “he cuts with a knife”, the knife, although
separate from the agent, serves as an instrument (of his action)? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

2Rīq II 2%śú, 1|
karaṇīkṛtatatsvāṁśatanmayībhāvanāvaśāt |

karaṇīkuṟute ʻtyantavyatiriktaṁ kuṭhāravat || 245 ||

(The agent) converts something else quite distinct from himself, for
example, a knife, into an instrument (of his activity) by considering it to be
coextensive (lanmayībhāvanā) with that aspect of himself that has (also
been thus) transformed into an instrument. (245)
The contracted perceiver considers a part of himself to be coextensive
with an aspect of himself, such as the senses of knowledge and action, that has
been (thus) transformed into an instrument (for his use). (This is) the notion

(abhimāna) (he has) that it is undivided from him. By the power (of that

identification, he) converts something else which, in relation to (his) hand and
the other (organs of action which are limbs of his body), is completely distinct
from himself, such as a knife, ‘into an instrument of his activity’. The
meaning is that he makes it into the best means to (execute) the act of cutting.

(Thus,) it is established that the aspect of himself that the agent has
separated
(from himṣelf) in this same way becomes a primary instrument (of his activity).
He says that:

TANTRĀLOKA

Impure Knowledge and the Force of Limited Agency

šīrṛz̄ fraṁaā grī ai q |

tenāśuddhaiva vidyāsya sāmānyaṁ karaṇaṁ purā |
jñaptau kr̥tau tu sāmānyaṁ kalā karaṇam ucyate || 246 ||
Thus, initially, (the soul’s) generic instrument with respect to its
cognition is impure Knowledge, and with regards to (its) action, it is said to

be the Force (of limited agency).N (246)

‘Initially’ means ‘beforeʼ. The particular extension (prasara) of the
body's (functions), namely, the organs of knowledge and action etc., (manifests)

after (and from) (impure) Knowledge (vidyā) and the Force (of limited agency)

(kalā) (respectively).
Surely (one may ask), the Force (of limited agency) is everywhere said
to be the agency that impels (the individual soul) to action (prayojakakartṛtva);
so how is it that it is defined (in this context) as an instrument (of the individual
soul)? Thus he says:

3 īrīāēgīai ātaraī; hqaītzaī |

nanu śrīmanmataṅgādau kalāyāḥ kartṛtoditā |
tasyāṁ satyāṁ hi vidyādyāḥ karaṇatvārhatājuṣaḥ || 247 ||

But surely (someone may object at this point) that according to the

venerable Mataṅgatantra etc., (limited) agency arises from the Force (of

limited agency), and it is only when that exists that (impure) Knowledge

and the rest become fit to be instruments of action. (247)

The sense is that the condition of being an instrument and the like
pertains to those (entities) that are employed by an agent.
He replies (to this objection):

ucyate kartṛtaivoktā karaṇatve prayojikā |

tayā vinā tu nānyeṣāṁ karaṇānāṁ sthitir yataḥ || 248 ||

Quoted below in TĀv ad 10/12cd-17.
See above, 9/183 and 190cd.

CHAPTER NINĒ

(In reply to this objection, we) say that (the Force (of limited

agency)) is said to be the agency present in the instrument (of sense) which

is the directing (causal) agent (prayojikā). This is because none of the
other instruments (of sense) could exist without it. (248)

‘Present in the instrument (of sense) means ‘when the instrument (of

sense) is presentʼ. (The Force (of limited agency) as) ‘the directing (causal)
agentʼ is (its) main (aspect), whereas its condition as an instrument (of sense) is
the secondary one. The meaning (of this verse) is thus established (and clear).

The reason why its state as the agent is primary is by way of its being (separate
and distinct). ‘This is because none of the other instruments (of sense) could
exist without it.”
By defining that (Force (of limited agency) as) the agency which impels
(the individual soul) to action, it does not belong to the category (to which) an

instrument belongs. Thus he says:

TT ṬA GT /
ataḥ sāmānyakaraṇavargāt tatra pṛthak kṛtā |
This is the reason why (the Mataṅgatantra and other texts)
considered it to be separate from the category to which generic instruments

(of perception) belong.™" (249ab)

(The Force (of limited agency) is) ‘considered . . . to be separate’

(from the category to which generic instruments (of perception) belong) because
(its condition as a specific) instrument (of perception) is not primary.
Surely (one may ask), if that is so, how is it that because, like (impure)
Knowledge, it makes contact with the aspect which is the agent, it is said that
the Force (of limited agency) is the primary instrument (of perception)? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

zorā frsī fēafī: 11 ¢< 1

vidyāṁ vinā hi nānyeṣāṁ karaṇānāṁ nijā sthitiḥ l| 249 ||

A causal, directing agent – prayojaka (lit. ‘that which establishes and impels to a

goal’) is that which impels an agent to act in a particular way for some purpose. An

instrument of action is required for the agent to implement and attain the goal to which
it has been impelled by the causal agent.

That is without the impelling agency of the Force (of limited agency), which is
converted into the senses.

“M.Read ataḥ sāmānya- for ato ‘sāmānya-. The Force (of limited agency) is

metaphorically said to be the generic instrument, whereas, in reality, it is the agent
which impels to action. According to Jayaratha, the Force (of limited agency) is in the

primary sense the causal agent, and only secondarily the instrument of action.

TANTRĀLOKA

kalāṁ vinā na tasyāś ca kartṛtve jñātṛtā yataḥ |
kalāvidye tataḥ puṅso mukhyaṁ tat karaṇaṁ viduḥ || 250 ||
Without (the principle of impure) Knowledge (vidyā), the other

instruments (of sense) would have no (independent) existence (sthiti) of

their own. Without the Force (of limited agency), that (principle of impure
Knowledge) would not (exist), because cognitive subjectivity (jñātrtā)

(exists) when agency (exists). Accordingly, (the wise) know that the Force

(of limited agency) and (impure) Knowledge are (together) the soul’s
principal instrument (of action and cognition). (249cd-250)
‘The other’ external and internal senses are separate to some degree

from the agent. The sense (of this verse) is that, although they differ (from the

agent) to a certain degree, by considering (bhāvanayā) them to be undivided

from (impure) Knowledge etc. that are parts of oneself (svāṁśa) (as the
individual agent and perceiver), they (serve) as instruments (of action and
perception). Moreover, that (impure) Knowledge has no (independent) existence
(of its own). (This is) ‘because cognitive subjectivity (jñātṛtā) (exists) when
agency (exists)ʼ. The sense is that, without the agent (of action), there would be

no agent of the act of perception (jñānakriyā) also. ‘Accordingly’, because the
status of (impure) Knowledge as an instrument also depends on the Force (of
limited agency). That which is dependent is the instrument of something else
(which is the agent), and that (instrument is) also seen (sometimes) to possess

an instrument, as is, for example, a knife, that depends on the hand.”

Surely (one may ask), take for example the sense of sight in relation to

form – in what circumstance is the status (of the sense of sight) as an instrument

(of perception) observed by discriminating between the two? With this doubt in
mind, he says, indicating what was said before as the reason (for this):

āafērq 1

ī T TAT |I 342 1|
ata eva vihīne ʻpi buddhikarmendriyaiḥ kvacit |
andhe paṅgau rūpagatiprakāśo na na bhāsate || 251 |
Thus, although the blind man’s senses are deficient, it is not the

case that form does not manifest in part to him in some circumstances.

Similarly, it is not so that the lame man, deficient in his organs of action,
does not experience motion (at all). (251)

‘Thus’, because the Force (of limited agency) and (impure) Knowledge
are the primary instruments (of the contracted, individual subject by means of

which he acts and perceives), ‘in some circumstances’ʼ, that is, occasionally at
some time, (even one who is blind or lame sees something and moves). This is

! This verse follows on from verse 246. The verses in between are an aside.

Read hastādhīmakaraṇabhāvakuṭhārādivat for hastādhīmakaraṇabhāvadātrādivat

CHAPTER NINE

the meaning. The blind and lame man are examples indicative of (any)

deficiency in the cognitive senses and organs of action. It is not the case (that

form) does not manifest (to a blind man); rather, it does do so (to some limited

extent). This is the meaning.

Surely (one may ask), if, for example, form may manifest to the blind,
that means that there is no need for the sense organs of perception and action.

With this doubt in mind, he says:

RTWHTdā TāTA;: JTTTTĪ JTRTT |I| ṜUR II
kiṁtu sāmānyakaraṇabalād vedye ‘pi tādṛṣīi |
rūpasāmānya evāndhaḥ pratipattiṁ prapadyate || 252 ||
However, insofar as this takes place by the power (bala) of their

generic organs (of knowledge and action respectively), their object is
similarly (generic); thus the blind man (for example) perceives colour in a

generic form (rūpasāmānya), (and nothing more). (252)

The form etc. of the things that are behind and to the sides of Mount

Meru are for those who are blind also, as they are for us, manifest in a generic

(non-specific) way. When something manifests in an undefined form etc., they
(like us) do not engage with (that) outer entity.

Having explained that by the way, he goes on to discuss the main point.
The Organs of Action

iGR eṢeē - I

tata eva tv ahaṅkārāt tanmātrasparśino ʻdhikam |
karmendriyāṇi vākpāṇipāyūpasthāṅghri jajñire || 253 ||
The organs of action, namely, speech, the hand, the organs of
excretion, the genitals and the feet, arise from this same product of the ego

when it is in greater contact with the subtle elements (of sense data).
(253)

(The organs of action arise) ‘from this product of the ego’ mentioned

previously as having three aspects (skandha).” This is the meaning. Surely

(one may ask), it was said that that contact with the subtle elements takes place

also when the ego is predominantly sārtvika. Thus, what is the difference
The cognitive organs of sense arise due a prominence of sartva in the tripartite ego
(ahaṁkāra). Similarly, the organs of action arise from the ego when rajas predominates.

See above, 9/233.

TANTRĀLOKA

between that and this (contact)? With this doubt in mind, he says that it is

‘greater’. The meaning is that, even though that contact (with the subtle
elements) begins on the plane of cognition, in this case it is predominantly one
of action, and so ultimately results in (the generation of a) product of action
(kārya). (The ego’s) rājasika (aspect) is made manifest by this. That is said (in
the Mṛgendratantra):
‘(The organs of action, namely) speech, the hands, genitals, anus and
feet, are born from rajas. They are associated with action and so are rājasika. It

is the ego which in this case has undergone transformation (vaikārika).’

And as he will say:
‘(Some) have said that this group of senses originates from the rājasika

Again, in this case as before, he clarifies (how the organs of action) are
products of the ego because they are penetrated by it (ahaṁkārānuvedhāt).

E-|c-ṞeGU EEEIĀEE ĀĀḤ

rf asēfBhar ēēīdṝāī āēāfT=z 3 q I| 2x 11|
MIT vidyāpāda 12/4. The previous verse, which lists the six organs of perception

(buddhīndriya) that are derived from the sāttvika ego, is quoted above ad 9/234. Cf.
SāṁKā 25 quoted above and below ad 9/271cd-272ab. This and associated verses
quoted above in note to Aghoraśiva quotes both verses together in his commentary
(vṛtti) on the Tattvaprakāśa v 55. He introduces them saying:
tatra teṣu madhyāt taijasā.ahaṅkārān manobuddhīndriyāṇi jāyante, vaikārikāt
karmendriyāṇi, bhūtāder api tanmātrāṇītyarthaḥ | na ca taijasato mana eva vaikārikād

ubhayarāpāṇīndriyāṇīti vyākhyeyam, mīlavacanavirodhād yuktivīrodhācca | sattvasya

prakāśarūpatvena bodhahetutvam, rajasaḥ kriyāhetutvaṁ yuktam |

“There amongst them, mind (manas), intellect and the senses are born from

taijasa ego. The organs of action from the vaikārika (ego), and so too the gross
elements, (from which are generated) the subtle elements. This is the meaning. One

should not explain that Mind (manas) alone is (generated) from the taijasa (ego), and
the senses of both natures from the vaikārika (ego). This is because it would contradict
the root statement, and is (also) contrary to reason. As sattva is light by nature, it is the
cause of the intellect. (Analogously,) it is sound (to maintain that) rajas is the cause
action (and the associated senses).”

Similarly, commenting on the previous verse, Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha says concerning
the senses of perception: sśrotrādibuddhīndriyapañcakasya manasaś ca prabodhavattvāt
prakāśānvayo Ś‘sti, ataḥ sāttvikā ete devāḥ | sa ca sāttvika eva | tatprakṛtir
ahañkāraskandhas taijaso nāma jñeyaḥ || vākpāṇipādapāyūpasthāḥ pañca rājasā devāḥ

| teṣāṁ karmendriyatvāt rajobahulo vaikārikākhyo haṅkāraskandhaḥ prakṛtibhūtaḥ ll

‘The five organs of perception, that is, hearing and the rest as well as mind

(manas), are like awakened consciousness (prabodha), and so are developments
(anvaya) of Light, and so these gods are sāttvika. And that (light) is also sāttvika. One
should know taijasa is of that nature as a part of the ego (ahaṅkāraskandha). Speech,
hands, feet, genitals and anus are the five rājasic deities. They are organs of action, and

s0 have much rajas, and are called the mutated (vaikārika) part of the ego by nature.”

Below, 9/271ab.

CHAPTER NINE

vacmy ādade tyajāmy āśu visṛjāmi vrajāmi ca |
iti yā ʻhaṁkriyā kāryakṣamā karmendriyaṁ tu tat || 254 ||
The organs of action are aspects of the action of the ego
(ahaṁkriyā), which is capable of producing the result (represented by the
notions that) “I speak,” “I pick up”ʼ, “I abandon”, “I emit” and “I move
quickly”. (254)
‘“-I emit” (the vital seed) because it is the fruit of the bliss of emission.

Surely, subjectivity (ahantā) penetrates through the sense organs of cognition
also, so what is the difference between them and these (organs of action)? With
this doubt in mind, he says that (the ego) ‘is capable of producing the result’
(represented by these notions). Although they are the products of the activity of

the ego, the sense of indicating that (the ego) is on the same level is that it is just
the support (of the activity of each sense organ), not the sense organ (itself).
Thus he says:

hāṈāīkzeāt=ta -c-sk---c çI

tena cchinnakarasyāsti hastaḥ karmendriyātmakaḥ |
Thus, the hand continues to exist as an organ of action of one whose
(physical) hand has been cut off. (255ab)

‘Thus’, because it is the activity of the ego that can produce (this)

result. This is the meaning. (In this way,) it is established that the activity of the

ego has all the body as its support, and those (organs of action) are also such
(that is, pervade the body). As he will say:

‘Therefore, they say that the organs of action, like the skin, pervade all

the body but function primarily in their (own particular) place. . . ”

“The hand continues to exist as an organ of action’. The function (of
an organ of action) is independent of its (immediately) visible basis (e.g. the
hand, in the case of the act of grasping). (In fact, it is itself) the basis (of its

function), as an aspect of the agent.

Surely (one may ask), if that is so, how is it that the activity (vyavahāra)
of the five fingers (functions) as the organ (of action called) the hands? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

tasya pradhānādhiṣṭhānaṁ paraṁ pañcāṅguliḥ karaḥ || 255 ||
The (physical) hand consisting of five fingers is merely its principal

locus. (255cd)

Below, 9/260cd-261a.

TANTRĀLOKA

(By saying that the hand is) the ‘principle (locus)ʼ, he indicates

implicitly that there is another secondary locus (of the organ of action called the
hands). Thus, it is possible for one who, for example, has no hands to pick
(something) up with (his) mouth.

Surely (one may ask), animals, for example, can pick (things) up with
(their) mouth. However, that is not (equivalent to) the organ of action (called)

the hand. The body, which is the abode of (their) worldly experience, bestows

(upon them) the experience which is the fruit of each (of their) actions

(karman), by means of each of its own limbs (thus there are no specific organs
of action). With this doubt in mind, he says:

TGTTT JaT ā aT āTĪ fērā |

a mṃītīzaā ā] fsī f dva fkī 11 2uē 1
mukhenāpi yad ādānaṁ tatra yat karaṇaṁ sthitam |
sa pāṇir eva karaṇaiṁ vinā kiṁ saṁbhavet kriyā || 256 ||
Picking up (something) with (one’s) mouth also (indicates that) an
organ of action is present there. This is the hand. Without an instrument,
how could action be possible? (256)

(The organ of action) ‘is present there’ in the act of picking up. (This

is what it is.) It is not said to be the mouth or the like. In this case, the use of the
instrumental case (when he says ‘with (ones) mouth’) denotes the organ of

action that is present in a material entity (prakṛtyartha). The mouth is a material
entity. It is not proper for it to be (considered to be a) sense organ because, as its

nature is material, it does not make contact with an aspect of the (sentient) agent
(kartraṁśa). Nor is the sense organ completely united with the agent. This was
logically established previously. Thus, one must accept that some basis for that
(action) exists which is characterized by that (action) and makes contact with an
aspect of the agent, where the sense of the instrumental (as when one says “I

grasp with my mouth”) ultimately amounts to the condition of an organ (of
action), and that (in this case) is said to be the hand. (Accordingly, he says that)
‘this is the handʼ. Thus, the intended sense (of the word) ‘hand’ and the like is

just the basis (of that action, rather than the hands themselves). As is said by
others:

‘one does perceive (some) subtle movement and (the act of) picking up

(even) in the case of those whose hands and feet have been severed.””

Surely, (one may ask): the visible face, for example, is a fashioned

(entity) (klpta), (whereas) an organ of action is not visible and can (only) be
imagined (kalpya). (It is said that) ‘when there is a contradiction between a
fashioned (entity) and one that is imagined, (one should know that) the
Read adhiṣṭhānamātre for adhiṣṭhānamātra.

“ Nyāyamañjari chapter 8.

CHAPTER NINE

fashioned one has the form of a fashioned (entity).” In accord with this

principle, it is sound in this case that it has the form of a fashioned (entity). Has

this been stated? With this doubt in mind, he says ‘without an instrument, how

could action be possible?” The mouth, for example, is fashioned as a part (of
the body), not as an organ of action. It is said that it is not appropriate that its
condition be such (i.e. an organ of action). Thus, one should conceive

something else to be the organ of action, as no action is possible that does not
have an instrument (by means of which it can take place).
In this way, conceiving (the existence) of the cognitive senses would

also be fruitless. Thus he says:

tathābhāve tu buddhyakṣair api kiṁ syāt prayojanam |
And if it were so (that action without an instrument to implement it

is possible), what use would the organs of perception be? (257ab)

Surely (one may ask), the senses depend upon intellect (in order to

function). Thus, the act of picking up and the like is dependent on the senses. So
what is this? It is as if with (just) hope (alone) all is accomplished. With this
doubt in mind, he says:

īzā̄ || 3u.s 11

darśanaṁ karaṇāpekṣaṁ kriyātvād iti cocyate || 257 ||
parair gamau tu kāraṇaṁ neṣyate ceti vismayaḥ |
Others say that sight requires an organ of sense (to implement it)

because it is an action, but walking does not. This (view is truly) surprising.
(257cd-258ab)

The ‘others’ are the Naiyāyikas and the like (who hold the same view).

They say that ‘the act of perceiving smell”' for example, (is invariably)

preceded by (and depends on) an organ of sense” because it is an action, like
the act of cutting (that requires a tool to execute it).” By ‘walking’ is meant
the act of walking, which is the function of the organ (of action called the) feet

(pādendriya). This serves implicitly as an example (upalakṣaṇa) of (all bodily
activity, such as) ‘taking and the like. (The Naiyāyika’s view is) ‘surprising’

Iṇ other words: If we can act without having to make use of the organs of action, why
should we also not be able to perceive objects without the organs of sense?

! Ṟead with MSs Ch, N, Th, and D, gandhādyupalahdhi- for gandhādyapalabdhi-.

karaṇapūrvikā – ‘preceeded by an organ of sense’. Every act of sensory perception
must invariably be preceded by the presence of the organ of sense through which it
takes place.

This line is not from the Nyāyasūtra. Maybe it is drawn from the Nyāyamañjarī.

TANTRĀLOKA

(because) in this way the cause of action would not be uniformly the same,

(which would mean that) the act of walking could also take place without being

preceded by (and depending on) an instrument (to implement it). Thus, it would
not be possible to establish that the act of seeing is also preceded by (and
dependent on) an instrument (to implement it). This is (indeed an) astonishing
(view) the Naiyāyika (sustains), – one that even as it connects together here (the
act of perception with the Self), it severs (that connection) elsewhere (in the

case of bodily action).
This is the great wonder, namely, that according to that philosophy,
walking and the rest are five kinds of action, (whereas) perception (jñāna) and
the rest are nine kinds of special qualities of the Self.° There (according to
them), even if it is a main form of action, walking is not preceded by (and
dependent on) an instrument (of action), (whereas) cognition, which is a quality
(of the Self), is preceded by (and dependent on) an instrument (of perception).
(This indeed) is a unique definition (of the relationship between the senses,
perception and action)!
He says that:

TTÑĪTATTITTĀĪT] ṬḺ TĪTGTT] II 3U¢ I

gamanotkṣepaṇādīni mukhyaṁ karmopalambhanam || 258 |I
punar guṇaḥ kriyã tv eṣā vaiyākaraṇadarśane |

(According to the Vaiśeṣikas,) walking, raising the hand and the

like are the main (forms of) action. Moreover, (they maintain that)
perception is a quality (of the soul). The grammarians, however, (rightly)
consider this to be action (also). (258cd-259ab)

‘Perception’ is cognition, the nature of which is seeing. As is said (in

the Vaiśeṣikasūtra):

‘casting upwards (utkṣepa), casting down (avakṣepa), bending
(ākuñcana), stretching (prasāraṇa) and moving (gamana) are the five

actions.”
(icchā),

‘Cognition (buddhi), suffering (duhkha), pleasure (sukha), desire
aversion (dveṣa), exertion (prayatna), reflection (bhāvanā) on

righteousness (dharma) and unrighteousness (adharma), are particular qualities

of the soul.

See commentary to the following verse.
The text here reads: utkṣepaṇāvakṣepaṇākuñcanaprasāraṇagamanāni pañcaiva

karmāṇi | īt is a variant of Vaiśeṣikasūtra 1/1/7: utkṣepaṉam avakṣepaṇam ākuñcanaṅ

prasāraṇaṁ gamanam iti karmāṇṉi |

Cf. Vaiśeṣikasūtra 16: rāparasagandhasparśāḥ saṁṅkhyāḥ parimāṇāni pṛthaktvaṁ

saṅyogavibhãgau paratvãparatve buddhayaḥ sukhaduḥkhe icchādveṣau prayatnāś ca

CHAPTER NINE
Surely, (the grammarians may object), the meaning of the root ‘to
is an action, which is perception (jñāna), not a quality (of the soul, as the
yikas maintain). Thus he says, ‘the grammarians, however, (rightly)

consider this to be action (also)’. By saying this, the grammarians are not

criticizing (the Naiyāyikas). It is (merely) a conventional rule that a root denotes
(verbal) action. Whereas the Naiyāyika and others (who agree with them)
consider cognition (jñāna) to be amongst the group of qualities of the soul. How
can he (logically) justify this denotation? Thus, this (view) contradicts what he
himself says, namely, that although it is a quality, cognition is an action, and so
it is acknowledged that it is preceded by (and dependent on) an instrument (of
perception); but this is not the case with (bodily) motion and the like, even

though it is an action.
He says just that:

kriyā karaṇapūrveti vyāptyā karaṇapūṟvakam || 259 ||
jñānaṁ nādānam ity etat sphuṭam āndhyavijrmbhitam |
(The Naiyāyika’s) view is that perception requires an instrument,
because (every) action invariably does so. (However, he maintains) that the

act of grasping (ādāna) does not. (This view) is clearly a consequence (of
his) blindness! (259cd-260ab)
‘((This view) is clearly) a consequence (of his) blindness!’. The
meaning is that (the Naiyāyika’s blindness) is the delusion (he suffers from),

which is the lack of reflection on (the consistency between what he said) before

and subsequently.
Surely (one may ask), we do agree that walking and other (such actions)
are preceded by (and dependent on) an instrument (to execute them). However,
we do not agree that they are (invariably) dependent on a (single) fixed

(predetermined) (niyata) organ of action, such as the feet (to walk). Those who
are lame walk, for example, on their knees, and snakes on their bellies also.
Thus, with this doubt in mind, he says:

‘Form, taste, smell and touch, and numbers are the permutations; separation,

conjunction and disjunction, otherness and non-otherness are the notions; pleasure and

pain, desire and aversion, and the exertions are the qualities.’

T Read gamanādāv iva for gamanādāv iti. According to the grammarians, knowledge

is an action (kriyā) whereby the meaning of a verbal root may be known, and thus is not

a quality. The Naiyāyikas, on the other hand, consider the various forms of cognition,
namely, perception (buddhi) and the rest, to be qualities of the soul. They classify

casting upwards (utkṣepa) etc. as actions. But even though they consider perception to

be a quality, like an action it requires an instrument to execute it which, Jayaratha points

out, is a contradiction; all the more so because the Naiyāyika and the related Vaiśeṣika
does not posit the existence of organs of action to execute it.

TANTRĀLOKA

Tī̄TT] āĪTzTTPĀTRRATGÇGTTRT]
TeTTT |I 3£o 1I
Tcē̄ī 3frī--fd
a; īaī - |

tasmāt karmendriyāṇy āhus tvagvad vyāptRṇi mukhyataḥ || 260 ||
tatsthāne vṛtimantīti mataṅge guravo mama |
Therefore, my teachers of the Mataṅgatantra (such as Aniruddha)

say that the organs of action, like the skin, pervade (all the body), but
function primarily in their (own particular) place. (260cd-261ab)
‘Therefore’ʼ, for the aforestated reason, those who maintain that the
senses are a product of the ego say that, because the feet, for example, (in
themselves are not the organ of locomotion called ‘the feet’), just (one of its)
supports (adhiṣṭhāna), (all) the organs of action pervade the entire body, as does
the sense of touch. However, the function (of a particular organ of action) is
primarily (located) in a (particular) place, for example, in the feet, which is the
presiding support (of that function). It is because of this that everybody
considers the sense organ to be (located) just there. However, in actual fact, the
entire body is supported by them (adhiṣṭheya). Thus, there is no contradiction
wherever one perceives the result of their activity (in any part of the body). We
do not say that this is our own idea; (rather) ‘this is the view of my teachers of
the Mataṅgatantra’. (These teachers) are the venerable Aniruddha and the rest

of the commentators on the Mataṅgatantra This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), be it so. Walking and the other actions (of the

body) cannot be accomplished without the feet and the other organs of action

that precede them (as the means to that). (Even s0,) how is it that the number of

organs of action is fixed as just five? Others are required also, as there are other
(bodily) actions as well, such as vomiting. As (the Naiyāyikas) say:
‘How is it that the two limbs, that is, the throat and the chest, are not

said to be organs (of action) as (the former) vomits food, and the latter embraces

etc. (women’s) jar-like breasts and carries (heavy) loads?
Read vṛttim asti for vrttim anti.

Aniruddha is mentioned below in 13/293cd-295ab as being a commentator on the

MPĀ. Although Jayaratha does not think so, it is possible that Abhinava is referring to

just one teacher in the honorific plural. It seems unlikely that more than one teacher
taught him just the Mataṅgatantra, although he may well have had more than one who
taught Śaiva Siddhānta. An example is Dharmasiva, to whom he refers twice (see TĀ
21/50-58 and 37/62c). He may well have also had earlier teachers in mind, whose works
he studied. Somānanda, for example, refers to ‘the teacher Vyākhyāni’, who wrote an
unrecovered commentary (tīkā) on the Mataṅgatantra (tathā mataṅgikāyāṁ
vyākhyānigurṇoditam | ŚDr 3/14cd). See Sanderson (2006 (2): 45 note 9) concerning
this little-known figure in the history of Śaiva Siddhānta. The commentary by
Rāmakaṇṭha is the only one that has survived. He also preceded Abhinava or may have

been a senior contemporary.

Read cāṁśa- for cāṁsa-.
"" Nyāyamañjarī chapter 8.

CHAPTER NINE

Surely, (the grammarians may object), the meaning of the root ‘to
know’ is an action, which is perception (jñāna), not a quality (of the soul, as the
Naiyāyikas maintain). Thus he says, ‘the grammarians, however, (rightly)
consider this to be action (also). By saying this, the grammarians are not
criticizing (the Naiyāyikas). It is (merely) a conventional rule that a root denotes
(verbal) action. Whereas the Naiyāyika and others (who agree with them)

consider cognition (jñāna) to be amongst the group of qualities of the soul. How
can he (logically) justify this denotation? Thus, this (view) contradicts what he
himsṣelf says, namely, that although it is a quality, cognition is an action, and so
it is acknowledged that it is preceded by (and dependent on) an instrument (of
perception); but this is not the case with (bodily) motion and the like, even

though it is an action.

He says just that:

fhaī ōīvṛr̥atfā aaraaāḹ āṬJā-] 1| 38 1|

kriyā karaṇapūrveti yyāptyā karaṇapūrvakam || 259 ||
jñānaṁ nādānam ity etat sphuṭam āndhyavijrmbhitam |

(The Naiyāyika’s) view is that perception requires an instrument,

because (every) action invariably does so. (However, he maintains) that the

act of grasping (ādāna) does not. (This view) is clearly a consequence (of
his) blindness! (259cd-260ab)

‘((This view) is clearly) a consequence (of his) blindness!°. The

meaning is that (the Naiyāyika’s blindness) is the delusion (he suffers from),
which is the lack of reflection on (the consistency between what he said) before

and subsequently.
Surely (one may ask), we do agree that walking and other (such actions)

are preceded by (and dependent on) an instrument (to execute them). However,
we do not agree that they are (invariably) dependent on a (single) fixed
(predetermined) (niyata) organ of action, such as the feet (to walk). Those who
are lame walk, for example, on their knees, and snakes on their bellies also.
Thus, with this doubt in mind, he says:

‘Form, taste, smell and touch, and numbers are the permutations; separation,
conjunction and disjunction, otherness and non-otherness are the notio
lēasure and
pain, desire and aversion, and the exertions are the qualities.”

Read gamanādāv iva for gamanādāv iti. According to the graammarians, knowledge
is an action (kriyā) whereby the meaning of a verbal root may be known, and thus is not
a quality. The Naiyāyikas, on the other hand, consider the various forms of cognition,
namely, perception (buddhi) and the rest, to be qualities of the soul. They classify
casting upwards (urkṣepa) etc. as actions. But even though they consider perception to
be a quality, like an action it requires an instrument to execute it which, Jayaratha points

out, is a contradiction; all the more so because the Naiyāyika and the related Vaiśeṣika
does not posit the existence of organs of action to execute it.

TANTRĀLOKA

īĪ] ārĪĪ-zTPTR̄CTaGGTTJTI TeTT: || 2ēo 11

tasmāt karmendriyāṇy āhus tvagvad vyāptRṇi mukhyataḥ || 260 ||
tatṣṭhāne vṛttimantīti mataṅge guravo mama ḷ

Therefore, my teachers of the Mataṅgatantra (such as Aniruddha)

say that the organs of action, like the skin, pervade (all the body), but
function primarily in their (own particular) place. (260cd-261ab)

‘Thereforeʼ, for the aforestated reason, those who maintain that the

senses are a product of the ego say that, because the feet, for example, (in
themselves are not the organ of locomotion called ‘the feet’), just (one of its)
supports (adhiṣṭhāna), (all) the organs of action pervade the entire body, as does

the sense of touch. However, the function (of a particular organ of action) is

primariḷy (located) in a (particular) place, for example, in the feet, which is the
presiding support (of that function). It is because of this that everybody
considers the sense organ to be (located) just there. However, in actual fact, the
entire body is supported by them (adhiṣṭheya). Thus, there is no contradiction

wherever one perceives the result of their activity (in any part of the body). We

do not say that this is our own idea; (rather) ‘this is the view of my teachers of
the Mataṅgatantra’. (These teachers) are the venerable Aniruddha and the rest

of the commentators on the Mataṅgatantra This is the meaning.

Surely (one may ask), be it so. Walking and the other actions (of the

body) cannot be accomplished without the feet and the other organs of action

that precede them (as the means to that). (Even s0,) how is it that the number of

organs of action is fixed as just five? Others are required also, as there are other
(bodily) actions as well, such as vomiting. As (the Naiyāyikas) say:
‘How is it that the two limbs, that is, the throat and the cheṣt, are not

said to be organs (of action) as (the former) vomits food, and the latter embraces

etc. (women’s) jar-like breasts and carries (heavy) loads?”

Read vrttim asti for vrttim anti.
Aniruddhais mentioned belowin 13/293cd-295ab as being a commentator on the

MPĀ. Although Jayaratha does not think so, it is possible that Abhinavais referring to

just one teacherin the honorific plural. It seems unlikely that more than one teacher
taught him just the Mataṅgatantra, although he may well have had more than one who

taught Śaiva Siddhānta. An example is Dharmaśiva, to whom he refers twice (see TĀ
21/50-58 and 37/62c). He may well have also had earlier teachers in mind, whose works

he studied. Somānanda, for example, refers to ‘the teacher Vyākhyāni’, who wrote an

unrecovered commentary (tīkā) on the Mataṅgatantra (tathā mataṅgikāyāṅ
vyākhyānigurṇoditam !| ŚDṛ 3/14cd). See Sanderson (2006 (2): 45 note 9) concerning

this little-known figure in the history of Śaiva Siddhānta. The commentary by
Rāmakaṇṭhais the only one that has survived. He also preceded Abhinava or may have
been a senior contemporary.

Read cāṁśa- for cāṁsa-.
" Nyāyamañjarī chapter 8.

CHAPTER NINE
(Thus,) one should say that the throat etc. are organs of action,

otherwise it would not be possible to logically account for such (bodily) actions
as vomiting. Thus, (the number) of organs of action would not be fixed. He says
that:

āzar-afq

nanv anyāny api karmāṇi santi bhūyāṁsi tatkṛte || 261 I|
karaṇāny api vācyāni tathā cākṣeṣv aniṣṭhitiḥ |
Surely, (one may object that the number of) organs of action is not
fixed, because there are many other actions apart from these. For that
reason, one should say that there are as many instruments of action (as

there are types of action). (261cd-262ab)

Surely (one may ask), what is the benefit (phala) of saying this here, for
that has been refuted by others. Accordingly, he says:

EḶGĀCEEIGIĒTEAtHKĀEGUṬCCEI

nanv etat kheṭapālādyair nirākāri na karmaṇām || 262 ||
yat sādhanam tad akṣaṁ syāt kintu kasyāpi karmaṇaḥ |
(Our reply is that,) surely Kheṭapāla and others have refuted (this
objection by saying that) not every means of executing an action needs to be
an organ of action. Rather, it is so (only) in the case of certain (specific)
actions (such as walking or grasping). (262cd-263ab)

‘Kheṭapāla and others’ means the venerable Sadyojyotiḥ and others.

As he says (in the Bhogakārikā):

“(The number of the) organs of action (is limited, determined) by these
(particular) specified actions, such as the sexual pleasure (ānanda) (associated

with the emission that takes place in the genitals). They are not innumerable

because actions (are s0).”
BhoKā 23.

Aghoraśiva commments: bhaved ayaṁ doṣo yady asmābhiḥ

śarīraikadeśavṛttīni tānīṣyante | tvagindriyavat teṣāṁ sarvaśarīravyāpakatveneṣṭatvād
ivāyaṁ bhrūkṣepaṇādivyāpāraḥ pāyvāder iva jīrṇavirecanādyātmaka iti
ām apy ānandādiṣv evāntarbhāvān na tadbhedād atrendriyānantyasiddhiḥ

eva ānandādibhiḥ prāguktaiḥ pradhānabhūtaiḥ karmabhiḥ pañcaiva

karmendriyāṇi siddhyantīti nānantatā karmendriyāṇām, tattatsaṁjñās tu teṣāṁ tatra
tatra viśeṣādhiṣṭhānād ity avirodhaḥ || 23

TANTRĀLOKA

They have also said that. I do not say that (every) means (to execute) an
action is an organ of action. Rather, that the means (to execute all bodily)

actions (whatever they may be), such as the bliss (of emission), are these (same
five) organs of action.

This (seemingly) attractive and direct remedy (for this problem) is
certainly not our own. Thuṣ he says:

TGHTHTGTTTTRTTTTT-TTJT- II RĀ I

aifē |
etan nāsmatkṛtapraśnatr̥ṣṇāsantāpaśāntaye || 263 ||

na hy asvacchamitaprāyair jalais trpyanti barhiṇaḥ |
(This reply however) is not good enough to quell the suffering that
comes (from the intense) thirst (for the truth aroused) by the question put
to us. Peacocks are not satisfied with a little dirty water! (263cd-264ab)
The meaning is that this is not enough to quell our suffering (due to the

intense) thirst (aroused in us) by (this) question others have raised. In this way,

(one) agrees that other (kinds of) action and instruments (to implement them)
accepted by others exist (but this does not solve the problem).
Surely (one may ask), if this is so, what is the remedy here that for those

like you, is attractive (and direct)? He says:

3=aī̄ ĨTaĨTR̥T ṢĨJTĨ HĨTA |I 2Y II

T=JĀTGTCRTĀTJTTTṀĀTGHḤ|

ucyate śrīmatādiṣṭaṁ śaṁbhunātra mamottaram || 264 |
svacchasaṁvedanodāravikalāprabalīkṛtam |
(Now) will be stated my reply here (to this objection), taught to me
by the venerable Śambhunātha, and (powerfully) strengthened by the
‘There would be this defect if we were to maintain that (all) the activities (of

the organs of action) take place in one part of the body. Like the sense of touch, (each

organ of sense) would pervade the entire body, for such is the contention. Thus, an
action like (an enticing) arching of the brows of that same (body) would be below like
the expulsion of waste (jīrṇa) from the anus, whereas the arching of the brows and the
like are amongst (those actions that are) sexually delightful (ānanda). Īt is not (an
action) separate from that, so that the existence here (in this case) of innumerable senses
(could be) established. Rather, the organs of action are established to be just five, by
(the innumerable) actions which are predominantly, for example, sexual pleasure (as
one of the five types of action), mentioned previously. Thus, the organs of action are not
innumerable. (This is a reasonable view, and is) without contradiction, for (the organs of

actions) have a particular name, according to each specific circumstance because they
preside over particular (types of action).
Read bhavaddṛśām for bhavādṛśām.

CHAPTER NINE

expansion (of my) noble and pure (translucent) consciousness. (264cd265ab)

The reason (why our reply is correct), namely, that it is proved by our
own consciousness, is stated by means of the adjectives ‘pure’ etc., (that
qualify) that (consciousness).
He says that:

zz ṁīā¥māaṟcṁ faTvzrd || 3ā4 11

iha karmānuṣandhānabhedād ekaṁ vibhidyate || 265 ||

tatrānusaṁdhiḥ pañcātmā pañca karmendriyāṇy ataḥ |
Here (according to this teaching), action is one, (but) it is divided
(and diversified) by the difference in the intention (to act) (anusaṁdhāna).
There (in that case, this) intention (is basically) of five kinds, and so the
organs of action are five. (265cd-266ab)
‘There (in that case), that is, when there is a difference in the
intention which is the reason (nimitta) for the difference (between one’s)

actions. This is the meaning. (This intention) is ‘of five kinds’, that is, of five
types, and (the organs of action are five) because (this) intention is of five types.
Thus, (he goes on to) state the differences between (these) actions
brought about by differences in (one’s) intentions.

rtaāīēa7ēārzā zaīa fiāa fē-ṁ || z=ē 1

TJITāRfGīīḤ ā’] TaTJTĀT II QēS 1I
Tā.: ṂJIId aT] āĪT āaII fE aa |
tyāgāyādānasaṁpattyai dvayāya dvitayaṁ vinā || 266 ||
svarūpaviśrāntikṛte caturdhā karma yad bahiḥ |
pāyupāṇyaṅghrijananaṁ karaṇaṁ tac caturvidham || 267 1|
antaḥ prāṇāśrayaṁ yat tu karmātra karaṇaṁ hi vāk |
Read -vikāsaprabalīkr̥tam for -vikalāprabalīkrtam. īt appears that Śambhunātha was

aware of this dispute concerning the number of the organs of action. As this is a rather

obscure technical detail, it suggests that he was learned enough in the Siddhānta and
Nyāya to be aware of it. Moreover, we observe his didactic method is based more on

direct experience than logical argument. He convinced his disciple that this is the correct
view by inducing in him an expansion of his pure translucent consciousness free of
thought constructs. This is conviction achieved through direct experience, induced by

the teachings of a Master. Moreover, it is yet another example of Abhinava’s exegetical
method, which is the revelation of the manner in which the object of his exegesis is
grounded in consciousness. It is clear from this example that he inherited this method

from his Trika teacher.

TANTRĀLOKA

The four external actions (are those done) in order to abandon, to
grasp, to do both, and to rest within one’s own nature without the two.
These (actions) correspond (respectively to those of) the excretory organs,
the hands, the feet, and the genitals, that are four kinds of organs (of
action). Inner action is based on the vital breath. Indeed, its organ is
speech. (266cd-268ab)
Here (according to us), every person’s intention is divided into four

kinds, (according to whether it is formulated) in order to abandon what is to be

abandoned, grasp what is to be grasped, to do both, or to rest within one’s own
nature by abandoning both. Thus, (bodily) action, which has that as its

instrumental cause (nimitta), is also such (that is, of four kinds). As (bodily)

action is such, the external organ of action is also of four kinds, called the
excretory organ, hands, feet, and genitals, respectively.
Although all (forms of) action entail union (with one thing and)
separation (from another), this is especially so in the case of motion. (Thus,)
moving with the single intention (of achieving a (certain)) result, such as
reaching a village, involves first abandoning one particular place and then
taking up another. Thus, the field of operation (viṣaya) of the organ of
locomotion (called

‘the feet’) is the one action that consists of (both)

abandoning (one place) and taking up (another). Thus it is said (that in this case,

the intention is) ‘to do both’. Again, (another intention is) ‘to rest within one’s

own nature’. It is said here (in this case), that it is solely the experience of bliss,
otherwise termed the ‘rest’ (that comes with complete satisfaction) (nivṛti).

There in some way the disturbance (which is the anxiety that) ‘this should be
abandoned and that adopted’ comes to rest, even if it is preceded (by acts of)
renunciation and acceptance.
‘(Inner action) is based on the vital breath’. The basis (adhiṣṭhāna)
of speech is the vital breath alone. Having thus assumed that as (its) basis, (the
organ of speech) becomes the most excellent means to (engage) in the action
which is speech (vacanakriyā). Although action is of four kinds, namely,

abandonment and the rest, it can (only be the action) of what has come into

existence. (Only) an entity (of which the existence) has been established
(siddha) is abandoned, grasped or experienced as the abode of rest, whereas the
action which is speech is engaged in generating words. This is the difference

(between it) and the previous (forms of action). Thus, the word ‘indeed’ (serves

to indicate) that it is different (from the others).
Surely (one may object that) the vital breath alone generates a word,
which consists of various (combinations of) letters, by the conjunction and
separation of the various instruments (of articulation in their respective)
location. So what could be (the purpose) of an organ of speech? As they say:

‘The vital breath rises from the navel, it is extended in the chest,
changes (variously) in the throat, and having struck (the organ of articulation in)
the head, it is turned around in the mouth. Moving (thus), it makes many kinds
of words manifest.”
" Read pāyupāṇipāda- for pāyupādapāṇi-.

CHAPTER NINE

(To this question, our response is that) that is not so. In this way, a
word, which consists of various (combinations of) letters, would be uttered all
the time. There would be no moment in time in which the vital breath would not
flow conjoining with and separating from the various instruments (of
articulation in their respective) places. Therefore, one must accept that there is
an organ of speech which is separate from that, and which, by virtue of (its)
support (adhiṣṭhāna) and in no other way, is the vital breath, capable of
producing words.
Surely (one may ask), it is said that the function of the cognitive organs
of sense is the apprehension (ālocana) (of their objects). What is the function of
the organs of action? With this doubt in mind, he says:

EjāHt r’tt EEIH-CīfEy EHHÚĪELYAI
uktāḥ samāsataś caiṣāṁ citrāḥ kāryeṣu vṛttayaḥ || 268 II

(These,) stated in brief, are the various functions of these (organs of
action, engaged in their corresponding) tasks. (268cd)
(The functions are) ‘various’ because they are (many kinds of)
abandonment and assumption etc. (They are listed here) ‘in brief” because they

include in themselves all actions. The sense is that no other action of any sort
apart from this is possible. Thus, as there is no other (kind of) action, there is

also no need to conceive (of the existence of) any other organ of action, as that

would be achieved by including it in just these alone.
He says that:

Ṭīazaīz fē 7 - aaī zza |

tad etadvyatiriktaṁ hi na karma kvāpi dṛśyate |
tat kasyārthe prakalpyeyam indriyāṇām aniṣṭhitiḥ || 269 1|
No action is observed anywhere apart from this. What purpose
(does it serve) to imagine there is an indefinite number of sense organs?

(269)

“‘What purpose (does it serve)ī means ‘why’.

Surely (one may ask), it has been stated in this way that there are five

organs of action, and that they have five fixed (determined) functions, namely,
rejection and the rest. (However, one may) wander about by means of the hands
and grasp (something) with the foot also, so how is it that their functions are not
mixed up with one another? With this doubt in mind, he says:

atōr āāgāī ] gāT-N Tūg Tēī: I| 30 |

TANTRĀLOKA

etat kartavyacakraṁ tadasāṅkaryeṇa kurvate |
akṣāṇi sahavṛttyā tu buddhyante saṅkaraṁ jaḍāḥ || 270 ||
The senses perform this array of functions in such a way that (the
function of one sense organ) is not mixed up (with that of another). (Only)
the foolish think that because (the senses) function together
(harmoniously), they intermix (and so usurp each other’s functions)
(saṁkara). (270)
“This’ (function of the senses, namely) rejection, grasping and the rest,
‘is not mixed up (with that of another)ʼ. The hand does not wander about or

the foot grasp, rather the hand and foot, located in a single support, wander and
grasp in due order because (the organs of action) pervade the entire body and
because the five fingers, for example, that are parts of the body, are (only) the
primary support (of the organ of grasping, but not the sole one). (The senses)
‘function together (harmoniously)’ because they are (all) present (together) in
the one support (which is the body). This is the meaning. ‘The foolish’ are
those who do not know the difference between the support (adhisṭhāna) and

what it sustains (adhiṣṭheya). In the same way, the cognitive organs of sense
would not exist if their functions were to get mixed up, because the power of
sight and hearing of the eyes and ears arises in just the one (physical) locus
(golaka) (of each of the senses).

own.

Having thus refuted the view of Akṣapāda etc," he concludes with his

ukta indriyavargo ʻyam ahaṅkārāt tu rājasāt |
(Some) have said that this group of senses originates from the

rājasika ego. (271ab)

‘This’ (group of senses) is that of the organs of action, because this is
what is being discussed.
Having in this way defined the material aspect (prakṛtiskandha) of the

ego as sāttvika and rājasika, (he goes on) to talk about it as tāmasika.

īā:TĪGgRG ĀĪHTIRTGTTTT: || 3S? 1I

JTTĪRT-TTTTTTZḤḤ S[T’T, |

l Concerning Akṣapāda, also called Gautama, one of the founders of the Nyāya school

of philosophy, see above, TĀv ad 4/230.
' Although Jayaratha affirms that this is Abhinava’s view, it is in actual fact that of
Sadyojyotiṣ; see below 9/275cd-276ab. According to Abhinavagupta, the senses of
action are generated by the sāttvika ego, which is influenced to a certain degree by the
subtle elements. See above, 9/253 and TSā p. 88.

See above 9/233.

CHAPTER NINE

tamaḥpradhānāhaṅkārād bhoktraṁśacchādanātmanaḥ || 271 I|
bhūtādināmnas tanmātrapañcakaṁ bhūtakāraṇam |

The primarily tāmasika ego obscures the subjective aspect
(bhoktṛaṁśa). It is termed the (ego, which is that of the reality levels)
beginning with the gross elements (bhūtādi). From it originates the group of

five subtle elements, which is the cause of the gross elements. (271cd-272ab)

‘(The primarily tāmasika ego) obscures the subjective aspect

(bhoktraṁśa) because it predominates as having originated from the objective

aspect. It is called the ‘first of the gross elements’ because it is the cause of the

subtle elements, that are the cause of the gross ones. Thus, it is called ‘the cause

of the gross elementsʼ. And it is said (in the Mṛgendratantra):
Sound, touch, form, taste, and smell as the fifth – (these are) the
subtle elements, (variously) specified by the qualities (of Nature) and
conjoined to the plane (pada) of the subtle elements." (Their) state is that of

" These two verses are found in the Mṛgendratantra as vidyāpāda verses 12/5-6.

Jayaratha does not tell us where he is drawing these verses from, but there can be little
room to doubt that he is quoting from the MrT. He has quoted MrT vidyāpāda 12/3 ad
9/234 and MrT vidyāpāda 12/4 ad 9/253. Those two verses along with the ones here
present the complete account found in the MfT of how the three forms of the ego,
sāttvika eṭc. develop to form the principles (tattva) below it.

These two verses are not found in the printed edition of the MV. However,
Somadeva (2004: 11 note 32.1-3) has identified them as the first two of three additional
verses that come after verse 1/32 of the printed edition of the MV that are found in two

manuscripts. One is MS C 4106 (V) Banaras Hindu University library, Varanasi and the

other is MS no. 488. Collection of 1875-76 in Deccan College, Poone. Although we do
find verses from the MV in references that cannot be traced in the printed edition, these
two are probably not.
Read with MS V and P guṇaviśiṣṭās for guṇā vĩ

! Narāyaṇakaṇṭha comments on this verse in MrT

vidyāpāda 12/5:

Śśabdasparśarūparasagandhā avīśiṣṭaguṇā anabhiyyaktaviśeṣatvena tāvanmātrapade
bhūtaprakr̥itvarūpe yojitās tanmātrāśabdena jñeyāḥ | tāvatyaś ca mātrās tanmātrā iti
striliṅgo 'yam iha tanmātrāśabdaḥ | guṇāviśiṣṭatvaṁ caitāsām ittham- yathā pṛthivyāṁ
khaṭakhaṭādirūpaḥ śabdaḥ, sparśaś ca śītoṣṇaḥ, rūāpam api anekavidhaṁ śuklādi, ṣaḍvidhaś ca raso gandhaś ca surabhyasurabhirāpo ‘ṣṭi | naivaṁ tatkāraṇabhūtapr̥thivītanmātrāvasthitā viśeṣā upalabhyante, api tu aviśiṣṭaguṇapañcakamātraṁ
prthivītanmātram eya manyate |

‘Sound, touch, form, taste, and smell, without specific qualities, should be
known by the word ‘tanmātra’. As no specific qualities are manifest, they are on the
plane (pada) of just essential basic existence (tāvanmātra), linked to their material
nature, which is that of the (five) elements (bhūtaprakṛti). The word ‘tanmātrā’ is
feminine here (and literally means) ‘just these alone’ (in the sense of a purely generic

‘soundʼ or ‘touch’ etc. unspecified as a particular one). The absence of specifying

qualities in their case (corresponds to a nondescript) sound such as a ‘khaṭa khaṭa’ in
(the case of) Earth; touch that is warm and cold, form also that is of many kinds, such as
white and the like, taste is of six kinds (sweet (madhura), sour (amla), salty (lavaṇa),
pungent (kaṭuka), bitter (tikta) and astringent (kaṣāya)), smell that can be fragrant or

not. Particulars are not perceived in this way to be present in the subtle element of Earth,

TANTRĀLOKA

tamas because they differ in character from the category (ie. the senses) which

is formed from light (i.e. the organs of cognition) and action (i.e. the organs of
action). Moreover, because (they are) objects of illumination (prakāśya) (that

require illumination), the ego here (in this case), (which is that of the reality

levels) beginning with the gross elements, is tāmasa.

Surely (one may ask), how is it that it has been said that the group of the

organs of action has arisen from the rājasika ego? The followers of the
Sāṁkhya maintain that the mind (manas) and the senses of cognition and

action”” arise from the sāttvika ego (ahaṁkāra), whereas the subtle elements
arīse from the tāmasika aspect, and both arise from the rājasika aspect. As they
say:

‘The sāttvika group of eleven (consisting of the mind and the ten sense

organs) arises from the modified (vaikṛta) ego. From the tāmasika (eg0), (which

is that of the reality levels) beginning with the gross elements, arise the subtle

elements, and both from the taijasa (i.e. rājasika aspect of the ego).

Dispute Concerning the Origin of the Inner and Outer Senses

From Sāttvika and Rājasika Ego

TGTTJFTĪTRTTTHTTTT: 1I 392 1I

ṢdT TSTNTRZITT:
TYJṀTṀHī 3 |

which is its cause, rather the subtle element of Earth is considered to be just the group of
the five (subtle elements as yet) unspecified (avisiṣṭa) (by specific particulars).”

MṛT vidyāpāda 1216. Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha comments on the first line of this verse saying:

prakāśakṛt sāttviko buddhīndriyamanolakṣaṇo yo vargaḥ, yaś ca karmakṛt rājasatvād
vyāpārapravr̥ttaḥ karmendriyavargaḥ, tābhyāṁ vargābhyāṁ vailakṣaṇyaṁ vaiṣādṛśyaṁ
yasmād etāsāṁ tanmātrāṇām atas tamobhavā etāḥ ||
‘The group consisting of the cognitive organs of sense and the mind (manas) is

formed from light and is sāttvika. The senses of action are rājasa, and so are formed

from action (karman) and are engaged in activity (vyāpāra). As they are different from

these two groups, these subtle elements are tāmasika.
prakāśyatvācca bhūtādir ahaṅkāreṣu tāmasaḥ || 6 ||

‘. . . because (they are) objects of illumination (prakāśya) (that require
illumination), the ego here (in this case), (which is that of the reality levels) beginning
with the gross elements, is tāmasa.’ (6cd)
eṣu cāhaṅkāraskandheṣu madhyād yo ʻyaṁ bhūtādir ahaṅkāraskandhaḥ, sa
yasmāt prakāśyaḥ tatkāryasya tanmātrātmano manobuddhibhyāṁ buddhindriyaiś ca
yogibhir upalabhyatvāt, tato ‘yaṁ tāmaso vijñeyaḥ |
The aspect of the ego, amongst the aspects of the ego, which is that (of the

lower reality levels) beginning with the gross elements, should be known to be tāmasa,
because it is the object of illumination of its product, that is, the subtle elements,

because they are perceived by the mind and the intellect and by the cognitive organs of
sense linked to them (as their objects).”

Read manobuddhikarmendriyavargaḥ for manobuddhīṁáriyavargaḥ.

SāṁkKā 25; partly also quoted above ad 9/235.

CHAPTER NINE

manobuddhyakṣakarmākṣavargas tanmātravargakaḥ || 272 ||
ity atra rājasāhaṅkṛdyogaḥ saṁśleṣako dvaye |
(The followers of the Sāṁkhya maintain that there are) two
(groups), namely, the mind, the intellect, and the organs of knowledge and
action (on the one hand), and the group of subtle elements (on the other).

(Their) association here with the rājasika ego conjoins within the two (and
stimulates them). (272cd-273ab)

Here the ‘two (groups) are the groups of eleven senses and five subtle

elements. ‘(Their association with the rājasika ego) ‘conjoins (and stimulates
them)ʼ, because it stimulates the process of union (between them) (saṁdhāna),

which is (their) propensity to generate (the sensory perception which is its)
result. The sāttvika ego that operates (pravartamāna) as (just) the existence of
the senses is inactive, and so requires the rājasika (ego) to set it into operation,
as does the tāmasika (aspect) also, that operates as the existence of the subtle

elements.

Surely (one may ask), what (is the use of) of this Saiddhāntika view

(you have) advanced or that of the Sāṁkhya; the analysis undertaken here of the

The subtle elements are the five sensations registered by the senses. Perception is the

act of conjoining the one with the other. They senses are not just passive spectators; they

are actively engaged in the apprehension of sensations. These three factors, the senses,

their objects, and their union, are understood to be three aspects of the ego, as all
perception is inevitably related to it, coordinated by it, and initiated by it. The result is

sensory perception, the content of which is what is presented to the senses. These are the

‘subtle elementsʼ, which in Sanskrit are appropriately called tanmātra, that literally
means ‘just or only (mātra) that (tar)’. These are the qualilia (= ‘what things’), raw
sensibilia (= sensory data). They are like the patches of colour and light a camera

registers. According to this view, the senses are extensions of the ego, because they are
its instruments. We have noted above that an outer object, like the camera, is an
extension of the hand, both of which operate to perform the task I have set them to do,

and so are extensions of myself (= ego). Thus, in this sense, the ego generates the

senses, which are its instruments and sets them to work. Again, the sensory object to

which the operation of the senses is directed is also necessarily related to the ego, and
analogously, is an extension of it, as that to which it reaches out through the instruments

of the senses. According to this view, the two — sense object and sense organ ~ are
linked by the ego, which is their common source and referent. Thus, the ego generates

the senses and their objects, and links them together by stimulating the senses to
perceive or act on their respective objects. The ego thus has three aspects. There is a
sāttvika one. The word ‘sattva’ literally means ‘being-ness’ (sat-tva). As the instruments
of the ego, they derive their ‘being-nessʼ from it. As such they are derived from the

sāttvika ego. So we have the experience that the sense of sight is ‘my eye’. The same
ego activates the senses, it sets them to work. So we have the experience of ‘my vision’.

The ego is actively engaged and so possesses the quality of rajas, which is that of
activity. Thus, the aspect of the ego in this case is the rājasika one. Finally, the object of
the operation of the senses is also related to the ego as ‘what I see’. This ‘what’ is
objective. Thuṣ, it relates to the ego, which is forgetful, as it were, of itself as ‘T’. In

other words, the subjective aspect is obscured. The quality of the ego that obscures is

called ‘tamas’, which literally means ‘darkness’. Thus, the aspect of the ego that comes

to the fore in this case is the tāmasika one.

TANTRĀLOKA

causal relationship between the states of the principles of existence (tāttvika) is
based on (the teachings of) the venerable Maālinīvijayottara (and so are
irrelevant). And it is said there that:
‘That (ego) is of three kinds. From the energetic (rājasika ego)
originated the mind (manas), which is the lord of the senses; then from (its

original sārtvika) transformation, the senses; and the subtle elements (of sensory

sensations) from the third (tāmasika kind).

Including this doubt with regards to that, he accordingly presents the

differences between the (various) explanations (offered of these three aspects of

the dynamism of sensory perception).

ST3 aJṬ̄i-ī sī TTĀTRĒTTTTT ||3.93 1|
ṃTTĪTxzTHaTTā% ṃ aTīã |

T̄a. q aīṁtāēī aīṁ garTTzaīS]3 1| 2%z 11
ṬSTT, JITJTRTHTTITĪT
ā=TT |
anye tv āhur mano jātaṁ rājasāhaṁkṛter
yataḥ || 273 ||
samastendriyasañcāracaturaṁ laghu vegavat |
anye tu sāttvikāt svāntaṁ buddhikarmendriyāṇi tu || 274 ||
rājasād grāhakagrāhyabhāgasparśīni manvate |
Others say that (only) the mind (manas) has arisen from the
rājasika ego, and so, skilful in circulating through all the senses, it is light
and swift. Again, others believe that one’s own inner (mind has arisen)
from the sāttvika (ego), (whereas) the organs of knowledge and action, that

are in contact with both the perceiving subject and the object of perception,
(have arisen) from the rājasika ego. (273cd-275ab)

‘The rājasika egoʼ is referred to as radiantly energetic (taijasa). The

external senses have the mind (manas) as their support and exert themselves to

operate within their own (respective) field (of operation) (viṣaya). This is what
is meant by saying that (this aspect of the ego is) ‘light’ and ‘circulates
skilfully through all the sensesʼ. Thus, it is called here ‘the lord of the senses’
because it is the presiding support of all the outer senses. As others have said,
with the same intended (sense):
“The characteristic sign (liṅga) of (the presence of) the mind (manas) is

that it is not possible for (many) perceptions (jñāna) (to take place)

simultaneously.”
MV 1/31.

" Nyāyasūtra 1/1/16. Vidyābhūṣaṇa (1981: 8) explains that according to the

Naiyāyikas: “It is impossible to perceive two things simultaneously. Perception does not
arise merely from the contact of a sense-organ with its object, but it requires also a
conjunction of the mind. Now the mind, which is an atomic substance, cannot be

CHAPTER NINE

Surely one does perceive, in the following way, the arising (of several)
perceptions simultaneously:
‘(Five) brown Brahmins eating dry (seed) cake that is fragrant, cool,
and long, simultaneously have five mental perceptions (buddhi) (of what they
are doing).
With this doubt in mind, he says that (the rājasika ego engaged in
perception is) ‘swift’, that is, moves swiftly. The sense is that, although there is
a sequence here (in this process of perception), it is (as fast as) a needle piercing

through a hundred lotus petals, and so is not perceived. As (the mind) is active

in this way, it is linked to the quality of rajas. Thus, it is rightly said that: ‘the
mind (manas) arises from the rājasika egoʼ. (Again, others believe that one’s

own inner (mind) arises from the sāttvika (ego)). Thus it is established that, as
that which remains (of the three to be mentioned), the sense organs of cognition
and action are (derived) from the rājasika ego, which is termed ‘mutating
(vaikārika). The sāttvika (ego) is termed ‘radiantly energetic’ (taijasa) because
the nature of radiant energy (tejas) is light, and so it is called this way. The
rājasika (ego) is termed ‘mutatingʼ (vaikārika) because it predominantly
(consists of) specific actions (viśiṣṭakriyā). Thus, because they are united with
that, it is said that they ‘are in contact with both the perceiving subject and

the object of perceptionʼ.

Siddhāntins do not accept that (view). Thus he says:

GaTTGT] TTĪ FĪTRATTI:’TRḺT II/394, 1|I

kheṭapālās tu manyante karmendriyagaṇaḥ sphuṭam || 275 ||
rājasāhaṁkṛter jāto rajasaḥ karmatā yataḥ |

The followers of Kheṭapāla (i.e., Sadyojyotis) consider that the
organs of action are clearly born from the rājasika ego, because activity
relates to rajas. (275cd-276ab)
(According to Sadyojyotis, the organs of action are born from) ‘the
rājasika egoʼ, not from the sārtvika one. (The nature of) an effect must
necessarily conform to (the nature of its) cause. The cognitive organs of sense
illuminate, whereas the organs of action act. Thus (he maintains that) it is
conjoined with more than one sense organ at a time, hence there cannot occur more acts
of perception than one at a time.”

Clearly some part of the text is missing regarding the second view Abhinava
presents. This has been replaced here with the root text noted in brackets.

2 Read rājasikād ahaṁkārāt for sātvīkād ahaṁkārāt.
See BhoKā 36 and 43-44.

TANTRĀLOKA

reasonable that the two originate from the ego of a corresponding nature. As is
said (in the Bhogakārikā):

‘The group of cognitive senses, along with the mind, illuminates (the
objects of sense). Thuṣ, it originates from the sātrvika ego, in accord with its

own nature.!

‘The group of the organs of action which execute action, originates
from the rājāsika mutating (ego), so that the result here (in this world) conforms

to (its) cause.”

If it were to be otherwise, when they arise and are fashioned (from it),

the undesired consequence would be that they would (continue to be) in a causal

state in all changes and permutations. Thus, in this way, how is it that the
group of subtle elements does not arise from that? Or the two groups (i.e. the

organs of action and the subtle elements) also from the tāmasika ego? As he
says (in the Bhogakārikā):

‘The state associated with (the rājasika) mutating (form of the ego)

would not be capable of checking (vinivārayitum) (the one that originates) from
the sāttvika (ego) when the sāttvika and rājasika groups (i.e. the cognitive
senses and those of action) arise and are fashioned from it.
Surely (an opponent may say that) fine, let it be (as you say), we do not
disagree here (about this). It has (already) been established that the relationship
between cause and effect is varied. However, one should think about what is
correct according to the Mālinīvijayottara. It is on the basis of that that we have
BhoKā 36.
BhoKā 43. Read with the printed edition, vaikṛtād for taijasād. Aghoraśivācārya

comments: rajasaḥ pravṛttihetutvād rājasād vaikārikākhyād ahaṅkāraskandhāt
kriyāhetuḥ karmendriya-vargo jātaḥ | yasmāt kāraṇānuvidhāyitvaṁ kārye dṛśyate.
‘As rajas is the cause of activity (pravṛtti), the group of organs of action which
is the cause of action originates from the part (skandha) of the ego which is rājasika and
is called ‘mutatingʼ (vaikārika). Thus, one can observe in the effect the conformity to
(its) cause.ʼ

If the organs of action were to arise from either the sāṁtvika or tāmasika ego,
deprived of the dynamic instigating energy of rajas, they would remain in their original
inactive state as passive potential causes of action.
√ BhoKā 44. Aghoraśiva, the commentator, introduces this verse saying:

ata
eva
sattvasya
prakāśatvāt
prakāśasya
buddhīndriyavargasya
sāttvikādutpattiruktā | anyathā bhinnasvabhāvayor anayor vargayor ekasmād
evotpattyabhyupagame kāraṇāniyama-lakṣaṇo ʻnavasthādoṣaḥ prasajyata |

‘Thus, as sattva is light, it is said that the group of cognitive organs of sense

arises from the sārtvika (ego). Otherwise, if one were to accept that these two groups
(i.e. the organs of sense and action), with differing natures, originate from one (and the
same form of the ego), the undesired consequence would be the defect of instability,
which is that (they would not have their own) fixed (determined) cause.”

CHAPTER NINE

set out to describe the true relationship between cause and effect. Thus he

says:

q Jī’ STaT TITTSPĪTT: |I 2OĒ II

śrīpūrvaśāstre tu mano rājasāt sāttvikāt punaḥ || 276 ||
indriyāṇi samastāni yuktaṁ caitad vibhāti naḥ |
ÁAccording to the Śrīpūrvaśāstra, the mind (manas) (originates) from

the rājasika (ego), and all the senses from the sāttvika. This (view)
appears to us to be the most sound. (276cd-277ab)

It appears to us that (the teaching) in the ‘Śrīpūrvaśāstra’ (i.e. the
Mālinīvijayottara) is sound, namely that the mind has arisen from the rājasika
ego, whereas the sense organs of cognition and action (are produced) from the
sāttvika ego.
He (now) explains the soundness here (of this view).

The Functions of the Senses in the Course of Perception

āaīēẽ aTaāqdtṁmaīī gTrraā-T 11| Q9.9 11

d̃; Ṣ-: |

tathāhi bāhyavṛttīṅām akṣāṇāṁ vṛttibhāsane || 277 II
ālocane śaktir antaryojane manasaḥ punaḥ |
In this way, the power of the senses that functions externally is
(applied to) perception (ālocana) when (their outer) operant mode
(vṛttibhāsane) manifests, whereas (the function of) the mind (manas) is to

unite (perceptions) internally. (277cd-278ab)

‘The senses that function externally are the senses of sight and the
rest, in their external state. This is the meaning. The capacity (of the senses
applied) to the act of (immediate) apprehension (ālocana) alone, which is the
manifestation of their functions free of determinate perception (avikalpa) (that

serve to register the existence of their object), is said to be ‘the power (of the

senses applied just to) perception when (their outer) operant mode

manifests.” Adopting the variant reading ‘entity’ (in place of ‘operant mode’),

the meaning is that (what manifests is) that which is perceived (by the senses).
Read tāttvikaṁ kāryakāraṇabhāvaṁ for tāttvikaḥ kāryakāraṇabhāvo.
Abhinava is referring to MV 1/31; cf. Sākā 25, quoted above at note 9,462.

The compound vrttibhāsane, meaning ‘when the (outer) operant mode manifests’,

may be understood to qualify ālocane – ‘perception’, in which case one would translate
‘the perception which is the manifestation of (the senses’ outer) operant modes.” The

TANTRĀLOKA

Considering the matter in detail, the aspect which is (outer) action, such
as speech, manifests following on from (and in accord with) the (immediate)
perception (ālocana) of the cognitive organs of sense. That same (action) is the
activity (vyāpāra) of the mind, which is ‘to unite (perceptions) internallyʼ. It
is (the state of) rest within the perceiver, (associated with) the intellect and the
rest (of the senses), and is the root of the relationship (between them), consisting
of difference (with respect to their individual nature as relata), and non-

difference (abheda) (with respect to their foundation). (This) activity is the
oneness of the many external sequences of moments as the inner perceiver. This
condition is not on the level of indeterminate perception (avikalpadaśā),
because the operational mode (of the senses and mind) is the experience at each
individual moment of manifestation (whereas indeterminate perception is
universal and not sequential). Thus, (an action) of the sort “I am speaking”

arises from the perceiver as the first determinate perception (vikalpa) of the
words that are the field of operation of speech. It takes place by a descent from
contact with the (subjective) agential aspect (kartraṁśa) due to the prominence
of contact with the (objective) aspect (kāryāṁśa) (which is the task to be
executed). It is the subtle (īṣar) manifest activity (parisṣphuraṇa), which is the
primary operant mode of the organs of action, due to which the (perceiver) is

not like one who is dumb. (Thus,) action such as speech, as it is conceptual

(vaikalpika), is the mental activity (mānasavyāpāra) of the Māyā perceiver.

Surely (one may ask), what is the authority here (for this analysis of the
activity of the senses)? In response to this doubt, he says:

TṬRTI TT-ISJSJĀITĀ
JT II 3.9¢ 11

TRṢATGTITI TTṬḺTTTTHĪAT ṜfT 1

uktaṁ ca guruṇā kuryān mano ‘nuvyavasāyi sat || 278 1|

taddvayālambanā mātrṛyyāpārātmakriyā iti |

And the teacher (Utpaladeva) has said that the mind, reacting (to
what it receives through the external senses), determines (what it is,
generating thereby the thought processes (kalpana) associated with action
and the like), that are based on the two of them (unity and diversity), and
consists of the activity of the subject. (278cd-279ab)
The teacher (to whom Abhinava refers) is (Utpaladeva), who was the

author of the venerable (Īśvara)pratyabhijñā. As is said there:

‘The mind (manas) reacting (to what it receives through the external
senses) determines (what) it is, and generates the thought processes (kalpana)

phrase ‘the power of the sensesʼ, i.e. the manifestation of their operant modes, denotes
(the sensesʼ) capacity to cognize the manifestation of their own non-conceptualized (i.e.

directly experienced) operant modes. Taking the reading to be ‘vastu’, i.e. ‘entity, the
meaning is ‘when an outer entity manifests’. The reference would then be the perception
of the object of the senses, rather than their operant mode.

CHAPTER NINE

related to action (karman) and the like, that are based on the two of them, and

consist of the activity of the perceiver.”

The mind, in the course of determining (the nature of the) entity
perceived (vyavasita), for example, by the sense of sight, brings (the initial
sensory perception) to the stage in which its nature is ascertained. Then, after
the thought processes (kalpanā) (related to the perception of the object are
over), it generates the thought processes (kalpana) associated with action and
the like, based on the two, that is, the unity (of the perceiving and acting

subject) and diversity (of the object). Such is the subjectivity of the Mayā

perceiver, that is said to be ‘the activity of the subject’.
In accord with the principle (nīti) that ‘on the plane of indeterminate

perception (nirvikalpa), this, the Lord’s state, is also that of the fettered soulʼ,
each phenomenal entity would manifest as one (abhedena) (with all the others).

So how can the journey of the everyday life (lokayātrā), which consists of
(both) the oneness (abheda) (of the perceiver) and the diversity (bheda) (of the
outer world), be accomplished (nirvavet)?
Moreover, here (according to us), the subtle elements (are derived from)

the tāmasika ego, which is the first (of the series of principles beginning with)
the gross elements (bhiūtādi). Thus he says:

The Subtle Elements Born from the Tāmasika Ego

STRTT: |I 292 1
tānmātras tu gaṇo dhvāntapradhānāyā ahaṁkṛteḥ || 279 ||

The group of subtle elements (arises) from the predominantly

tāmasika ego. (279cd)

Surely (one may ask), how is it that the group of subtle elements does
not arise from the sāttvika ego, as do the two groups of senses of cognition and
action? With this doubt in mind, he says:

atrāvivādaḥ sarvasya grāhyopakrama eva hi |
None disagree here that that objectively perceivable reality (grāhya)
commences (from there). (280ab)
Nobody disagrees here that this is the beginning of the objectively

perceivable (reality) (grāhya), which is a permutation (of the ego). Thus, it is
Drawn from ĪP 2/2/3. See Torella 1994b p. 159 and note 8.
Cf. TPVv vol. 3 p. 314: sā pūrvabhāvinī nirvikalpadaśā yasyām aiśvaro bhāvaḥ ‘That
is the plane of indeterminate perception that precedes (determinate perception). The
Lordʼs state (bhāva) is within that.’

Read vikaraṇātmaṇo for varaṇātmano.

TANTRĀLOKA

the object of illumination, not indeed the illuminator, so how can it arise from
the sāttvika ego? That is stated (in the Bhogakārikā) (where we read):

‘The group of subtle elements, unlike the (other) two groups (i.e. the

organs of cognition and action) is the object of illumination, and so originates

from the tāmasika ego. (Accordingly,) it is called ‘the first of (the series of

principles beginning with) the gross elements (bhūtādi).”

Analysing the group of subtle elements, he explains:

mN= 11 2¢ 1

agīar fē īardi Taitaīāāa]

prṛthivyāṁ saurabhānyādivicitre gandhamaṇḍale || 280 ||

yat sāmānyaṁ hi gandhatvaṁ gandhatanmātranāma tat |
The generic principle of smell (gandhatva), present in all the many

kinds of smells, such as sweet-smelling perfume, which is other than that
(i.e. foul smelling) and the like, belong to the Earth principle, and is called
the subtle element of smell. (280cd-281ab)

‘Others’ are (odours) that are not sweet smelling. The expression ‘and
the like’ denotes (various) kinds (of these smells). Thus, it includes the smell of

clarified butter, and barley corn etc., that may be strong or weak etc. That is
said in the Bhūparīkṣā (the Examination of Earth):

‘(Earth is) associated with the smell of clarified butter, barley corn,

cooked rice, and wine.”

‘Many (kinds of smells) are particular (smells). This is the meaning.

‘Genericʼ (is the universal smell of the element Earth), not a particular (smell).

The sense is that one should contemplate it (bhāvya) by means of particular
(smells) that are grounded (niṣṭha) in (the generic smell of Earth), that is not a
particular (smell). Thus it is said that a subtle element is, for example, smell
itself alone, undifferentiated into particular (smells).

Moreover, because that (subtle element of smell) is universal and is

associated with all particular (smells), it is pervasive. Thus he says:

! BhoKa 45. The printed edition of the BhoKā reads mātrāsaṅgho for mātrāvargo.

See above, note to 8/162.

Read ghṛtākṣatajādi- for ghṛtakṣatajādi-.

Read ghṛtākṣata- for ghṛtakṣata-.
Not a single word of Jayaratha’s citation is found in the verse (9/280cd-281ab)
he is commenting on. Probably Abhinava is writing independently here, echoing
common doctrines as found, for example, in the Sāṁkhyakārikā or Vaiśesikasūtra.

CHAPTER NINE

JIIā. q̄ TdTT TḍēṬGT] T JTT II 2¢2 II

aaṁ īga |

vyāpakaṁ tata evoktaṁ sahetutvāt tu na dhruvam || 281 ||
svakāraṇe tirobhūtir dhvaṁaso yat tena nādhruvam |

Thus, it is said to be pervasive, and because it has a cause, it is not

stable (and permanent). (However,) as destruction is (essentially) its

disappearance into its cause, it is not unstable (and impermanent). (281cd-

282ab)

It is not the case that because (a subtle element is pervasive and s0) is
unconditioned by space, it is also unconditioned by time. Thus he says that
‘because it has a cause, it is not stable (and permanent)’. The sense is that

what is created is certainly not eternal. Even so, because it is not seen to be
destroyed at the end (of the time in which it experienced in some particular
object), it is not perishable. Thus, he says that ‘it is not unstable (and
impermanent)ʼ. This is so because, according to our view, destruction is the

merger (of an entity) into its (original cause). The product (kārya) of an entity
that undergoes inner transformation is its external manifestation, and its repose
again there (within) itself is (its product’s) destruction. Thus it is proved that (a
subtle element) is not permanent in a transcendental sense (kūtasthanityam),
(rather it is permanent as an entity that is) perpetually changing
(pariṇāminityam) (whilst maintaining its essential identity).
He indicates that the same (applies) elsewhere (to the other subtle
elements) also.

G TāITRJT=TĀT-JTSTT
āĀĪSTT ||/ 3¢3 1I
evaṁ rasādiśabdāntatanmātreṣv api yojanā || 282 ||

The same also applies to the other subtle elements, ranging from

taste to sound. (282cd)

Surely, what is the use of these unperceived universals (aviśeṣa)?
(Surely,) should not one (just) accept (the existence of) the particulars that are

perceived directly, due to which all this journey of daily life can logically be
accounted for? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JṢITIIĪ

JṬTSṢTYA
GJI JTITTṬJITTĪ

(This is so) because particulars are necessarily preceded by a
generic, non-specific state (aviśeṣiṇīdaśā). (283ab)
(That is) ‘necessarily’ (so). The point is that one should accept that to

be the (unperceived) cause in relation to (its perceived) effect.

TANTRĀLOKA

He now describes their material nature (prakṛtirūpatā).

The Order of the Production of the Gross Elements

TṬāTTRTYĪTTTTJTI] TĀTHTTTTT |I/2CK I

āṬgaṁ-tfī ãTī TazTaĪTGTTT |

kṣubhitaṁ śabdatanmātraṁ citrākārāḥ śrutīr dadhat || 283 ||

nabhaḥ śabdo ʻvakāśātmā vācyādhyāsasaho yataḥ |
tad etatsparśatanmātrayogāt prakṣobhamāgatam || 284 ||
vāyutāmeti tenātra śabdasparśobhayātmatā |

When the subtle element of sound is disturbed, it becomes the

Space element, which sustains the diverse forms of sound. This is because

sound is space, which is (the space) that makes room (avakāśa) for the

superimposition (adhyāsa) within it of the entities denoted by words

(vācya). When that is disturbed by conjunction with the subtle element of
touch, it becomes the Air element (vāyu), which is therefore both sound and
touch. (283cd-285ab)

‘Disturbed’ means (a cause’s) state of propensity to giving rise to its
effect. (The Space element) ‘sustains the diverse’ particular ‘forms of sound’.

It is (implicitly) stated in this way that its sole quality is sound. Surely (one may
ask), how can sound be Space? With this doubt in mind, he says ‘sound’ etc.
For sound ‘is the space that makes room’ʼ, and because it is the space that
makes room, the cause is in accord (anuguṇa) with (the nature of) Space.

Although (Space) is also space that makes room, (sound) is its cause, as it
‘allows for the superimposition (adhyāsa) of the entities denoted by words
within it’. Thus, just as a word makes room within itself for the object it
denotes, because it allows for (its) superimposition (adhyāsa), in the same way
Space, which is its product, allows all things (to be deployed within it). ‘That’

is the subtle element of sound. ‘Therefore’, because the subtle elements of
sound and touch are the causes (of the Air element), it is ‘both sound and

touch. The meaning is that possesses both qualities of sound and touch.

Read śrutīr for śratīr.

One could add ‘and the identification with (the entities denoted by words within it).’

The term adhyāsa means ‘superimposition’. The term is commonly used by Advaita

Vedāntins to denote the mistaken projection or ‘superimposition’ of an illusory entity

onto a real one. To quote the classic example: when a rope in a dark room is mistaken
for a snake, what takes place is the mistaken superimposition (adhyāsa) ofa snake seen
elsewhere onto the rope, due to the similarity of their appearance. In this case, the
superimposition of the denoted meaning onto the word is not a mistake. See, for

example, YSū 2/17 ‘there is a state of reciprocal superimposition between words,
meanings and ideasʼ, and Vyāsa's commentary.

CHAPTER NINE

Surely (one may ask), according to others, sound is only the quality of
Space. As they say: ‘There the qualities of Space are sound, number, change,

separation, conjunction and division.’ Thus how is it that it is said here that
Air also possesses that quality? With this doubt in mind, he says:

r<. āēāT. GāTTTTTTTT
ZSTT |I Q¢U 1I

3TNTT-ĠJTJ ṬÑṬTRTTTTT 11| 2¢ē. 11|

fa: aṣṛã 1
anye tv āhur dhvaniḥ khaikaguṇas tad api yujyate || 285 ||
yato vāyur nijaṁ rūpaṁ labhate na vināmbarāt |
uttarottarabhūteṣu pūrvapūrvasthitir yataḥ || 286 ||
tata eva marudvyomnor aviyogo mithaḥ smṛtaḥ |

Others say that sound is solely the quality of Space. That is also

correct, because Air does not assume its own nature without Space. This is
because the prior condition is present in the subsequent elements. Thus, it
is said that Air and Space are not separate from one another. (285cd-

287ab)

‘That’ (is also correct), namely that sound is a quality of Space, for Air
without Space cannot assume its own nature. The meaning is that its nature is
(invariably) associated with it. Each prior condition, for example that of Space,
is present in subsequent elements, such as Air (in this example). Thus it is said
that Air and Space are not separate from one another. That is said (as follows).
“Therefore, Touch itself is Air, and they say that, in the same way, that which
precedes is the cause of what follows.™ Thus, this is primarily the quality of
Space, which is associated with (Air). In other words, because Air is associated
with (Space, Sound is) is secondarily ascribed to it.

vrazzqaīī
q āU] ā̄ JJITTTTĀĪT |I 3¢9 1
fatr. Ṁ̄daḶ. aaTãũffttk sē- 11 2.¢ 1
śabdasparśau tu rūpeṇa samaṁ prakṣobham āgatau || 287 ||

tejastattvaṁ tribhir dharmaiḥ prāhuḥ pūrvavad eva tat |
tais tribhiḥ sarasair āpaḥ sagandhair bhūr iti kramaḥ || 288 II
This looks like a Vaiśeṣika- or Nyāyasūtra. Itṭ is certainly the view of the Vaiśeṣikas,

shared by Naiyāyikas.

See below, 9/297cd-299ab.
This also looks like a Vaiśeṣika- or Nyāyasūtra, or at any rate, is drawn from the
same source as the previous reference.

TANTRĀLOKA

When sound and touch are disturbed together, along with form,
(they become) the element Fire, that is (endowed with these) three qualities.
(The teachers) say that, as before, (the same takes place) in the case of
Water, which is (a product of) these three, along with (the subtle element
of) taste, (while) Earth (is characterized by these four), along with (the
subtle element of) smell. This is the order (of their production). (287cd-288)
‘(Fire, that is endowed with these) three qualitiesʼ, is characterized

by them. Just as the quality of sound is ascribed to Air, in the same way, sound
and touch are ascribed to Fire, the form (of which is its) primary (quality). This
is because, ‘as before’, the previous condition is present in the subsequent
element (in the series). This is the meaning. (Earth is characterized) by these

four, ‘along with (the subtle element of) smell’. That is said (in our source):

‘Space, which is characterized by just one quality, originates from the

aroused” subtle element of sound, which allows for its superimposition

(adhyāsa) (within itself). Wind (is characterized) by the aroused qualities of

sound and touch. O lady praised by heroes, these two qualities are seen to

belong to it. Fire arises by the aroused qualities of sound, touch and sight. Thus,
those who know the three fires teach that it possesses three qualities. Water
arises by the aroused qualities of sound, touch, sight and taste. Thus, O most
excellent of women, Water possesses (these) four energies. Earth arises by the
five aroused qualities of sound and the rest (of the subtle elements). Thus, one

always perceives that Earth possesses all the qualities.”
Surely (one may ask), smell and the rest of the group of qualities is
perceived directly, there is no state (vṛtti) of any (gross element), be it Earth or
the rest, that is separate (and independent) of them, or else, if that were to be so,
one would have to accept the existence of something that has close affinity with
the qualities and (the elements) that bear (them). With this doubt in mind, he
says:
Earth

- vaa: fāaī svcīpŪaza: |
tatra pratyakṣataḥ siddho dharādir guṇasañcayaḥ |

The content and wording in places indicate that Abhinava had the following passage
in mind when he wrote verses 283ab-288.

! One could also translate kṣubhita less literally as ‘activated’.
In this passage, the god is speaking to the goddess, whom he addresses as being

‘praised by the heroesʼ. ‘Heroes' (vīra) are the adepts of the Bhairava and Kaula

Tantras. Thus, this appellation indicates that this passage is probably not drawn from a
Siddhānta source. Moreover, the reference here to qualities as energies further supports
this hypothesis.

CHAPTER NINE

Direct perception proves that Earth and the other (gross

elements) consist of the aggregate of (these) qualities. (289ab)

The meaning is that the nature of (the gross elements) consists of ‘the
aggregate of qualitiesʼ, because it is not different from smell and the rest of the
group of qualities. That is said (in the Bhogakārikā):
‘In this way, Earth and the rest are not separate from smell and the rest
of the group (of qualities), as taught before, and are proved to exist by the direct

perception of people of this world (loka).’

The point is that there is no perception of Earth and the rest (of the
gross elements) as separate from them. He says that:

fa-ṁĠ r: 11 2¢< 1

nahi gandhādidharmaughavyatiriktā vibhāti bhūḥ || 289 I|

Earth certainly does not manifest separately from the aggregate of
the qualities of smell and the rest. (289cd)
The notion that (something is made of) Earth, for example, arises (only)

when one perceives one or other of (its qualities, namely) smell and the rest, not
otherwise. Thus, Earth and the rest (of the gross elements) are not separate from
smell and the rest (of the qualities). When they are not perceived in something,
what is perceived differs from it, as does Earth from Water. That said (in the
Bhogakārikā):
‘If smell and the rest (of the qualities) (that Earth possesses) are not

perceived, the notion (that something is) Earth certainly does not arise. (Rather,)
(the notion that it is) Water or the rest (of the gross elements) arises (instead),

even if they are not perceived also. (Thus,) Earth is not other than (the qualities

of) smell and rest (of the qualities), whereas it is separate from Water and the

other (gross elements).”

Read dharādir for dharāḍi. Without this emendation, the meaning would be: ‘There
direct perception proves (the existence) of the aggregate of the qualities of Earth and the

other (gross elements).” While this statement is not incorrect, the emendation is
supported by the commentary and what follows.

BhoKā 12abc. The printed text of the BhoKā reads -vrātopetā for vrātābhinnā and
abhiprasiddhā for pratyakṣasiddáhā.

To put it another way: nothing that is Earth manifests apart from the aggregate of the
qualities of smell and the rest.

BhoKā 15-16ab. The printed edition of the BhoKā reads dharitryāṁ – ‘in Earth’ for

dharitryāḥ –- ‘of Earth’. There is no essential difference in the meaning, but even so the
text should be emended, if we accept that this is Aghoraśiva’s reading, as can be

understood from his commentary, which is as follows:

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), if smell and the rest (of the qualities) are

themselves Earth, then because they are one with Earth, they should not be
perceived successively. With this doubt in mind, he says:

Jfs 1| 3<o 11
yathā guṇaguṇidvaitavādinām ekam apy adaḥ |
citraṁ rūpaṁ pate bhāti kramād dharmās tathā bhuvi || 290 ||
According to those who maintain that a quality and what it
qualifies are two (distinct realities), a single, varied (citra) colour (design)
(rūpa) on a cloth appears gradually. This is just as happens with the

qualities within Earth. (290)

Here (with regard to this question), even if a quality and the (substance
it) qualifies are different, as Kaṇāda and others (maintain), this ‘varied colour
(design)” made of white, green, blue and so on, although one, the quality which
is called the colour (of the cloth) is perceived gradually, as the cloth, which is
the possessor of (that) quality, is unrolled. In the same way, Earth, for example,
is one, and so smell and the rest of the qualities present in Earth are also one;

(even s0,) we perceive them gradually (one after another, not all at once). There
is nothing wrong in that. That is said (in the Bhogakārikā):
‘Earth and the rest (of the elements) are said to be varied by nature and
distinct (from one another) because of (the diversity of their) qualities. They are

made manifest gradually,” just as is a variously coloured (design) on a
wrapped-up cloth (which is gradually spread out).”

hi yasmāt kāraṇāt, viśeṣarūpair gandhādibhir guṇair agṛhītair viśeṣyāyāṁ dharmirūpāyāṁ dharitryāṁ kadācid buddhir notpadyate, dravyāntareṣu tu jī
ṣv agrhīteṣv

apy utpadyata eva | tasmād gandhādibhyo bhūmir ananyā, jalādibhyo ‘anyaiveti | 15 II

‘Itis for this reason, namely, that because the qualities, smell and the rest, that
specify (Earth) are not perceived within the object of specification, that is, within Earth,
which is the bearer of these attributes, the notion (of Earth) never arises. Rather it arises

within other substances, such as water, that are also not perceived. Therefore, Earth is

not other than smell and the rest (of the qualities), whereas it is other than water and the
rest (of the elements).

Ṛead, with the printed edition, kramavyaṅgya for kramasaṁkhyā.
BhoKā 13. The commentary explains: ‘The earth and other (elements) mentioned
(here) are distinct from one another due to the (diversity of their) qualities, that is, smell
and the rest. They are seen to be varied by nature due to the difference in their forms,

such as dry land, stones, mountains, rivers and seas. Thus, they are made manifest
gradually, as is a wrapped-up cloth on which is present a varied form (that becomes

visible as it is unrolled). It is impossible to perceive the entire nature simultaneously of
Earth and the rest (of the elements), which when viewed (are seen to be) diverse, with
differing forms (primary and) secondary, nearby, and in accord with their nature,

CHAPTER NINE
Surely (one may ask), this is not (always) the same, because one does

perceive the varied colour on, for example, a cloth that is spread out all at once.
Thuṣ, with this doubt in mind, he says:

] fēīā̄d aa g mīafa faī |

EefEiEkīEkGEēṣcE|ēṭI
[ē' HIRTHI
yathā ca vistṛte vastre yugapad bhāti citratā |
tathaiva yogināṁ dharmasāmastyenāvabhāti bhiūḥ || 291 ||

Just as the variety (of a design) appears all at once on an extended
piece of cloth, in the same way Earth manifests to yogis as the unitary
totality of its qualities (dharmasāmastya). (291)
distant. Rather (their) nature is made manifest by the senses, or (by way of) inference,
gradually (krameṇa).’

This verse is quoted by Maheśvarānanda (MM p. 51). In the context of explaining

Krama teachings, he writes:
kṛtyapañcake ca parameśvarasya sṛṣṭisthitisaṁhāreṣu triṣu na kvacid api
vaiṣamyam | uparitanayoḥ punar yadā vyāmohyamānapaśujanāpekṣayā samayabhraṁśāpādanādirūāpam etaccittasya vyyākulīkaraṇam, yadā ca kāruṇyotkarṣād
etaddoṣavyudāsenāsya bhūyaḥ svarūpalābhapradāyitvam, tadā tirodhānam anugrahaś
ceti tatkṛtyadvayaṁ vyapadiśyate | yadā punaḥ,
yathā ca vistṛte vastre yugapad bhāti citratā |

tathaiva yogināṁ dharmasāmastyenaiva bhāti bhiūḥ || TĀ 9/291

iti śrītantrālokasthityā paśupramātrādyavacchedavyapohena viśvam eva kāryatāyā
anusandhīyate, tadānākhyā bhāseti tatkṛtyadvayavyapadeśa |
‘Out of the Supreme Lord’s five operations, there is no difference in any
circumstance (kvacit) īn the (first) three, namely, emanation, persistence and
withdrawal. However, that is not so (punar) with regards to the following two. These
two functions are called obscuration and grace, in relation to (the condition of) deluded

fettered souls. If the disturbance of their mind brings about, for example, a fall from the

Rule (that is the Lord's act of obscuration); (or) if that defect is removed by the
excellence of (the Lord’s) compassion, and the realisation (lābha) of (their) own nature
is bestowed upon (the fettered once) again, then (the Lord graces them). If, on the

contrary (it happens that):

‘Just as the variety (of a design) appears all at once on an extended piece of
cloth, in just the same way the Earth element manifests to the yogi as the unitary totality
of its qualities (dharmasāmastya).’

According to this teaching of the venerable Tantrāloka, if one contemplates the
universe as a product (of consciousness) by removing the limitation (avaccheda) of the
fettered perceiver etc., then these two functions are called Anākhyā (the Inexplicable)
and Bhāsā (Luminosity). These two are the supreme states taught in the Krama system.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The unitary totality of its qualities’, that is, of the qualities of smell
and the rest (of Earth, are experienced) as a unity, all together and
simultaneously. When the varied colour of a cloth manifests (together) all at
once, it is because it is spread out. Here (in this case, Earth) manifests ‘as the

unitary totality of its qualities’ by virtue of the ability yogis (possess), who
have accomplished (the practice of contemplating) Earth and the rest (of the
elements), by the excellence of the nature (dharma) (they acquire) born (of the
practice) of yoga.
This kind of ability yogis possess, which is the reason for this, is absent
in those who are not yogis. Thus, according to the means (by which it is
perceived), the smell and the rest (of the qualities) of Earth, for example, are
perceived gradually (or all at once). This is not a relevant objection (codya),

namely, that because Earth and the other (elements) have a single (undivided
nature) how can smell and the rest be perceived gradually? Thus, he says that:

TRITRYTGRṬT-ĪTTFTTKTT
ṬTI TaT : |

3ṬṬRÑGṬRṬTI JHTPĪRHATIĀ: |I/3R2/1I
gandhādiśabdaparyantacitrarūpā dharā tataḥ |
upāyabhedād bhāty eṣā kramākramavibhāgataḥ || 292 ||
Thusṣ, the Earth, which has a varied form due to (its qualities), that

range from smell to sound, can manifest either gradually or all at once,
according to the means (by which it is perceived). (292)

Surely (one may ask), if no difference arises in the (essential) nature of

Earth, for example, and (its) smell and the rest (of its qualities), in accord with
the principle that ‘if (something) manifests in accord with the means (by which

it is perceived), how can that be due to the difference in the way it is
conceived?” How is it that (when we experience) that Earth has smell, there is a
difference in the way it is conceived (buddhibheda) as a quality (viśeṣaṇa) and

the bearer of (that) quality (viśeṣya)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

iGREĒFEe

tata eva kramavyaktikr̥to dhībheda ucyate |
sṣaṣṭhīprayogo dhībhedād bhedyabhedakatā tathā || 293 |
Thus it is said that the difference (in the way) something is
conceived (to be) is brought about by the (form of the) manifestation of

succession. It is due to these different ways of conceiving (the nature of the
same thing) (dhībhedāt) that we use a genitive, and (there is a relationship

CHAPTER NINE

between) what is differentiated (bhedya) and that which differentiates
(bhedakatā) (when referring to it). (293)
‘Thus’ the manifestation (of the qualities of the elements) is gradual or
(all at once) without succession (kramākramāvabhāsa), due to the different

means (by which it is perceived, or purpose to which it is put to use). (An
example of the) use of the genitive is ‘the smell of Earth’. The relationship
between that which is differentiated and that which differentiates it is the
relationship between a substantive (viśeṣya) and an adjective (viśeṣaṇa). This is
the meaning. An example is ‘Earth smells'. That is said (in the Bhogakārikā):
“The reason these (gross elements) become the objects of the various
perceptions of (substances that are) denoted as substantives (viśeṣya) and
qualities (viśeṣaṇa) is because they are made manifest gradually

(kramavyaṅgya).

He (now) concludes the main point.

dt aāī aaā 1
tena dharmātirikto ‘tra dharmī nāma na kaścana |
Thus here (according to us), there is no bearer of qualities at all

that is separate from them. (294ab)

‘Thus’, because the (gradual) successive perception (of something, as
for example, first a jar and then its colour,) cannot take place otherwise.
In this way, it is has been stated that Earth and the rest (of the gross

elements) are not separate from the multitude of (their) qualities, that is, smell

and the rest. Well, what are they, where are they, how many are they, and what
are they like? With this doubt in mind, he says:
The Qualities of the Elements

TTTTTṀTT. ṭĪRTTAT. fīd |1] 27 1|
For example, ‘the smell of earth’ and ‘odourous earth’ (gandhavatī– lit. ‘possessing
smellʼ
).

l BhoKā 14. Aghoraśiva explains: amī dharādayo 'rthāḥ kramavyaṅgyatvād dhetoḥ

surabhir iyaṁ prthivīyādmāṁ

tadbhāvavyapadeśasya ca viṣayatāṁ prāpnuvanti |

‘‘These’ things, such as Earth and the rest, become the objects of the

denotation of their condition and ‘the various peīceptionsʼ, that is, diverse cognitions
(jñāna), in the form of that whichis qualified (viśeṣya) and (the qualities that) qualify

them (viśeṣaṇa), such as the Earth, of which this is the smell. ‘The reason’ for this is
‘because they are made manifest graduallyʼ.”

Cf. above 1/158-160 and commentary. In other words, there is no difference between
qualities and that which is qualified by them.

TANTRĀLOKA

hEiaaEi
UEEIiEĀEEIḤEF;JIEŪUIÚETTSI

tatrānekaprakārāḥ syur gaṇḍharūparasāḥ kṣitau || 294 ||
saṁsparśaḥ pākajo ʻnuṣṇāśītaḥ śabdo vicitrakaḥ |
Śśauklyaṁ mādhuryaśītatve citrāḥ śabdāś ca vāriṇi l/ 295 I|
śuklabhāsvaratoṣṇatvaṁ citrāḥ śabdāś ca pāvake |
apākajaś cāśītoṣṇo dhvaniś citraś ca mārute || 296 ||
varṇātmako dhvaniḥ śabdapratibimbāny athāmbare |
There the smell, colour and taste of Earth are of many kinds. (Its)

touch is a derived product (pākaja), which is neither hot nor cold, and
(its) sound is varied. Water is clear, white, sweet, and cold, and the sounds

within it are various. Fire is clear, luminous, and hot, and the sounds within

it are various. (The tactile sensation) of Air is natural to it (apākaja); it is

neither hot nor cold, and the resonance within it is various. The (quality) of
Space is sound, which consists of phonemes and the echoes (pratibimba) of
sound. (294cd-297ab)
They are ‘of many kinds’. There (in that case), 1) smell is of two kinds,
fragrant and otherwise. 2) Colour is of many kinds, that is, white and yellow etc.

3) Taste is of six kinds, sweet etc. A ‘derived product’ (pākaja) is so called

because it originates from the union with another substance and (its production)
depends, for example, upon the place (of its production) and the time it takes.
That is said (concerning Earth, namely):

4) ‘its tactile sensation, being neither hot nor cold, is a derived product.”

“ The word pākaja here translated as ‘derived product’, literally means ‘produced by

cookingʼ. Depending on the element, one or more of its qualities may be a natural
quality of that element, which are ‘not produced by cooking’ — apākaja. Other qualities
may be derived by combining with others and in other ways. An example is the firing of

a clay jar. To do that, a kiln is required, which is located in a proper place. It should be

heated for the required amount of time to acquire its colour and consistency. In this way,
the soft dark clay becomes a hard red jar. Similarly, the combination of two or more

metals, or the addition to them of other substances, changes their qualities, which are

thus acquired or derived, that is, ‘produced by cooking’, pākaja.
The Sanskrit reads: sparśo ‘syā anuṣṇāśītatve sati pākajaḥ | ḹ have not been able to

trace this reference, nor the one that follows a little further down. Abhinava writes:

saṁsparśaḥ pākajo ʻnuṣṇāśītaḥ (‘touch is a derived product (pākaja), which is

neither hot nor cold’) TĀ 9/295a Īt is clear from the close similarity of the wording

that this was Abhinava’s source. Similarly, a little further ahead concerning Fire,
Jayaratha quotes the line ‘there (in that case), clear and luminous are form, and hot is

touch.

tatra

bhāsvaraṁ

ca

rūpam

eva

sparśaḥ.

C.

CHAPTER NINE
5) (The sounds within Earth) are ‘varied’, because they (may be any

number of sounds and noises), such as ‘khaṭa khaṭa’ and the like. The three

‘clear white (sweet and cold)’ are the objects of form, taste and touch
(respectively). As is said:
“‘White, sweet and cold are form, taste and touch.”

(Sounds within Fire are) ‘various’, because they (may be any number
of sounds and noises) such as ‘chala chala’ and the like. One should understand
the same variety (to be present) in the (elements) that follow after (also), as for

example, (the sounds) dhama dhama and catṭa caṭa etc. ‘Clear and luminous’
are (qualities found in) form. It is said (in the following line concerning Fire):
‘there (in that case), clear and luminous are form, and hot is touch.’

((The tactile sensation) of Air is) ‘natural to it (apākaja). That is said
(as follows):
‘the tactile sensation (of Air), neither hot, nor cold, is natural to it.
‘(Sound), which consists of phonemes’ʼ, means made of the sounds of
words. It is said (concerning) ‘echoesʼ that, ‘according to the learned, the

striking of an echo arises within space.’

śuklabhāsvaratoṣṇatvaṁ citrāḥ śabdāś ca pāvake: ʻfire is clear, luminous, and hot, and
the sounds within it are various.’ TĀ 9/296ab The rest of the passage is clearly drawn

from the same unidentified source.

BhoKā 11cd. Just as Abhinava draws a good deal from Sadyojyotis’s Bhogakārikā,

similarly Jayaratha draws from its brief commentary (vṛti) by Aghoraśivācārya. Here,
for example, it seems that Jayaratha’s commentary is an abbreviated version of
Aghoraśiva’s commentary on BhoKā 11. Although probably not Abhinava’s source,

nonetheless the account in the Bhogakārikā 9-11 is instructive and worth quoting in full,
as is Aghoraśivācārya’s commentary, in which he quotes the parallel passage in MṛT

12/27-29. Here it is:

gandhaḥ kṣitau rasaḥ ṣoḍhã madhuraḥ kṣmãkabandhakaḥ |
śuklādi śuklaṁ bhāṣvac ca rāpaṁ kṣityādiṣu triṣu |/ 9 |I

aśītoṣṇau mahīvāyvoḥ pākajāpākajau pṛthak |
jale śītaḥ śikhinyuṣṇasparśo.ayaṁ saṁvyavasthitaḥ || 10 ||
Śśabdas taddravyajanitaḥ pr̥thag bhūtacatuṣṭaye |

pratiśabdakasaṁghāto nabhasy evodito budhai | 1 1 II

‘Smell is in Earth. Taste, which is of six kinds, (such as) sweet, is (in) Earth
and Water. White etc. and the radiantly luminous form (of fire) are in the three, Earth
and the rest (i.e. Water and Fire). Cold and hot are in the Earth and Wind. The two are,
separately, innate (to the element that may be innately cool as water or hot as fire for
example)) (apākaja) or the product of the process of (its) development (pākaja) (as for
example is hot water). Coolness is in Water. This contact with heat is located within
Fire. Sound is produced from that substance (Earth), and separately in the four gross

elements. According to the wise, the striking of an echo arises within Space.’ (BhoKā 911)

TANTRĀLOKA

tatra gandáhaḥ surabhyasurabhirūpaḥ kṣitāveva | rasaḥ kṣmājalayoḥ | tatra kṣitau
kaṭṟvamlalavaṇamadhurakaṣāyatiktarāpaḥ | jale tu madhura eva | rūpaṁ ca

kṣmājalāgniṣu | tatra kṣitau śuklaraktapītakṛṣṇādyanekavidham | jale tu śukiam eva |

agnau bhāsvadrīūpam ) teṣu savāyuṣu sparśaḥ sthitaḥ | sa ca mahyāṁ vāyau ca

pratyekam asīto ʻnuṣṇaḥ | kaḥ punar mahīvāyusparśayoḥ parasparaṁ bhedo ‘ta āha
pākajāpākajau pṛthag iti | mahyāṁ sparśaḥ pākajaḥ, vāyau tv apākaja ity ayam

evānayor bhedaḥ | asya copalakṣaṇatvād rūpādayo '‘pi mahīguṇāḥ pā
eva | jale
punaḥ svābhāvikaḥ sparśaḥ śīta eva | agnāv uṣṇa eva | śabdaś ca bhūmyādiṣu caturṣu
tais taiḥ pārthivādibhir dravyaiḥ parasparaṃ āhatya jātaḥ | nabhaṣi tu pratiśruk

Śśabdātmakaḥ |

‘There, smell, which is fragrant or otherwise, is in Earth alone. Taste is in

(both) Earth and Water. There, in Earth, (taste) is bitter, sour, sweet, astringent and
pungent. (The taste) in Water it is only sweet. Form is (present) in Earth, Water and
Fire. There in Earth it is of many kinds, including white, red, yellow, and black etc.
Within Water it is only white. Within Fire (form) is radiantly luminous. Touch is present

in (all of) them, including Wind. That is (present) within Earth, the Wind, and in each

one, it is hot (or) cold.
What then is the difference between the touch present in Earth and Wind? He
says, (in the first case) it is a derived product (pākaja); (in the latter) not, separately.
Touch in Earth is a derived product, in Air it is not. This is the difference between them.
This is because they are perceived (upalakṣaṇa) to belong to it, that form and the rest

are qualities of Earth and are derived products. Again, within Water, touch is inherently

natural and cool, (whereas) in Fire it is hot. Sound is present in the four, Earth and the
rest, and is born by the mutual sticking together with each of the substances, namely,

Earth and the rest. The nature of Sound within Space is an echo.

nanu vaiśeṣikādibhir āśrayād anyatro(trānu)palabdher ākāśaikaguṇaḥ śabda iṣyate, tad
ayuktam, pratyakṣāgamabādhitatvena hetoḥ kāḷ
yāpadiṣṭatvāt | yataḥ śabdāśraya
eva bheryādau śabdaḥ śrūyate | kiñca, pṛthiv
tāvat kaṭakaṭādikaḥ śabdo dṛśyate,

jale _chalacchalādiḥ,

agnau dhamadhamādiḥ,

śakaśakādir vāyau,

nabhasi

ca

pratiśabdātmaka iti | etac cākāśaikaguṇatvaṁ śabdasya viṣtareṇāsmābhir mṛgendravr̥ttidīpikāyāṁ pratikṣiptam | uktaṁ ca śrīmanmrgendre

Surely (one may ask), according to the Vaiśeṣikas and others, as no other

substratum is perceived, sound is the solely the quality of Space. That is an unsound
(view), because the reason for this is contradicted by (both) direct perception and the

scriptures, and because with the passing of time it fades away. As that is so, sound is

heard within kettledrums and the like, that are the substratum of sound. Moreover, one

perceives a degree of sound such as ‘kaṭa kaṭa’ in Earth, ‘chala chala’ in Water, ‘dhama
dhama’ in Fire, ‘śaka śaka’ īn Air, and an echo in Space. In the Mṛgendravṛtidīpikā, 1

have refuted at length (the view that) the sole quality of Space is sound. And it is said in
the venerable Mrṛgendra:

pañcasu śabdo ’yaṁ sparśo bhūtacatuṣiaye |

bhasvad agnau jale śuklaṁ kṣitau śuklādy anekadhā|

rāpaṁ triṣu raso ʻmbhassu madhuraḥ saḍvidhaḥ kṣiau ||

gandhaḥ kṣitāv asurabhiḥ surabhiś ca mato budhaiḥ iti | 9-11 I|

CHAPTER NINE

Surely (one may ask), according to others, sound is the sole quality of
Space, which is devoid of (all) tactile sensation. As they say:
‘Unlike touch, sound is not the specific quality (of any one gross
element). This is because, being directly perceptible, it is not preceded by a

cause (or) quality, and because for that reason it is not considered to be a
substance, and moreover, is perceived elsewhere, other than in its (original)

locus (āśraya).”

So how is it that it is said here that sound is also a quality of Earth and

the rest that possess (the quality of) touch? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Sound and its Echo

7z āīīa a 1| 3<Ū 1|

yat tu na sparśavad dharmaḥ śabda ityādi bhaṇyate || 297 I|
kāṇādais tatsvapratītiviruddhaṁ kena gṛhyatām |
The followers of Kaṇāda say that sound, unlike touch, is a quality
(only of space). Who could accept (such a view, that) runs contrary to one’s

own experience? (297cd-298ab)

‘(This view) runs contrary to one’s own experience’ means that it is

contradicted by (one’s own) experience.

He gives a reason for that.

aa | 33¢ |1

paṭahe dhvanir ity eva bhāty abādhitam eva yat I| 298 I|

What appears, without being contradicted (by experience), is that

the sound is in the drum (not in the ear).% (298cd)

‘The wise consider that smell, fragrant and otherwise, is in the (element) Earth.
Taste is in Earth and Water. There (the taste) in Earth is of six kinds, that is, sweet (and

the rest, i.e. bitter, astringent, salty, sweet, sour and pungent). In Water it is just sweet.
Form is in Earth, Water and Fire. There in Earth it is of many kinds – white, (red,

yellow, black) and so on. In Water it is only clear (white). In Fire it is luminous. Touch
is present in (these) four Elements. This (subtle) sound in the five. Within both Earth

and Air, it is neither cold nor hot. (Whereas it is both) cold and hot in Water and Fire.
(MrṬ 12/27-29)
According to the Vaiśeṣikas, sound is not perceived at its source (e.g. the drum), but
elsewhere, viz. ‘in the ether contained within the cavity of the ear’. If the sound
(according to the Vaiśeṣika) were to have, for example, a conch as its substratum, when
(the conch is) covered its (sound) may not be perceived (but it remains possible to do

s0). Whereas, when the cavities of the ears are obstructed it can never be perceived in

TANTRĀLOKA

The sense is that for this reason, (the sound) is not perceived elsewhere,
other than in its (original) locus (āśraya).

Surely (they may say that,) if the sound is in the drum, it is because the

drum is (its) cause; otherwise, (its) appearing (to be so) would not be possible.

With this doubt in mind, he says:

na ca hetutvamātreṇa tadādānatvavedanāt |

This is because we do not have the idea of receiving (ādāna) that

(sound) just because (the drum) is the cause (of it). (299ab)

The perception (we have)is certainly not just ‘as the drumis here, there

is sound,’ rather, ‘this soundis where the drumis’. Thus, the reason (advanced
to sustain this theory)is not proved. This is the sense (of this statement).
Surely (one may ask), as the sense of hearing does not act, it does not

reach the location of the drum, so how can it serve as an instrument to perceive
sound which is in that place? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JITTāā-TSGFFPIĪ
T T aTd I| 323 |1

śrotraṁ cāsmanmate 'haṁkṛtkāraṇaṁ tatra tatra tat || 299 |l|
vr̥ttibhāgīti taddeśaṁ śabdaṁ gṛhṇāty alaṁ tathā |
According to us, the cause of the sense of hearing is the ego. It
operates in the various places (where it is projected) (tatra tatra), thus it is

capable (alam) of sensing the sound which is in that place (i.e. in the drum).
(299cd-300ab)

The reason as to why this is so is that ‘the cause of the sense of

hearing is the egoʼ. Moreover, the nature of (this form of the) ego is rajas, and
so it is acts. Thusṣ, its product, the sense of hearing, also acts. Thuṣ it is said that
‘it operates in the various places (where it is projected) (atra tatra). The

meaning is that it operates and acts in each particular location of (its) object.
Thus, the sense of hearing ‘is capable’ of perceiving sound also in the location
of the drum in the form located there, which is sufficient (for it to be perceived).

The followers of Kaṇāda say here (about this) that:

‘Once the sound born from the initial sound that originates from the
conjunction and separation (of two or more objects striking together) has by a
successive series of waves reached the location of the space delimited by the
any.” According to the Vaiśeṣika, sound (śabda) is an attribute of space (ākāśa), not of
the air which rise to tactile sensations (not sounds). See Vaiśeṣikasūtra 211/24-28.

Read anyathāsiddho’ yam ayabhāsaḥ for anyathā siddho yam avabhāsaḥ.

CHAPTER NINE

cavity of the ear, which is considered be that which hears (it), it generates the
perception (jñāna) of its own object.”

In order to refute that view, he continues:

3qTal gHTarīi ’TGḤATIHTGT
I| 300 1|
JIR=T. JIṜ TI V=Tf= TAT |

aṝṝ | 302 1|

a daa+ #i] 1

yas tv āha śrotram ākāśaṁ karṇasaṁyogabheditam || 300 ||
śabdajaḥ śabda āgatya śabdabuddhiṁ prasūyate |

tasya mande ‘pi murajadhvanāv ākarṇake sati || 301 ||

amutra śrutir eṣeti dūre saṅvedanaṁ katham |

Some say that when the echo (Śabdaja) of the (original) sound

reaches the space confined (bhedita) in the (cavity of the) ear, which is in
contact with the (inner) ear, it gives rise to the sensation of sound
(Śabdabuddhi). However, how can (this explanation) account for the fact
that when one hears even dim drumming, one senses that this sound comes
from a distance? (300cd-302ab)
The intended sense is that the reason (given by others to support the
view that sound is sensed in the ear, namely that it is, as they say,) ‘therefore

perceived elsewhere, other than in its (original) locus (āśraya), is not proved

(to be correct). Kaṇāda, who explains (the matter) this way, (by saying that the

sound is) dim because it is close to ceasing, does not also (thereby) indicate that
it is not fit to be heard. If ‘this’ (sound) where the drum is located, once it has
reached the location of the space (in the ear), which is considered be that which
hears it, (actually) perceives the sound of the echo which is close to ceasing,

then the cognition (pratipatti) one should have is that this sound is here in the
ear, and not ‘because it is distant, it is in the drumʼ. Thus, the view that the
perception is that of the sound present in the space of the (cavity of) the ear (not
in the distant drum) is refuted simply by one’s own experience. This is the
point.
He (now) states the reason here (for this).

JTTĪGĪRITĪTHĀĪIIKĪ QÇTTRQTTĪHĪTTdT

nahi śabdajaśabdasya dūrādūraravoditeḥ || 302 II
śrotrākāśagatasyāsti dūrādūrasvabhāvatā |
Ṁ An echo is ‘sound born from soundʼ (śahdaja). See above, 3/25-7.

TANTRĀLOKA

Once the echo of a sound, whether distant or near, enters the space

of the (cavity of the) auditory organ, it would be neither distant nor near.
(302cd-303ab)

Whether a sound arises from a sound that is far away or close by, there

would be no difference in itself due to the distance or proximity of the cause,

because there would be no difference between their contact with the location of
the space within the ear.

Surely (one may ask), (alright,) let it not be that the sound born of (the

original distant) sound is the object of the perception of distance as a modality
(vṛtti) of the sense of hearing; (rather,) let it be so that the first (original sound)
that extends up to the ear is such that it is (experienced) as being located in a
diṣṭant place. With this doubt in mind, he says:

gsad || 303 1|

3|
ās} gad -a;aTṭ sūī-Nd: || 3ox 1|
na cāsau prathamaḥ śabdas tāvad vyāpīti yujyate || 303 II
tatrasthaiḥ saha tīvrātmā śrūyamāṇas tv anena tu |
kathaṁ śrīūyeta mandaḥ san na hi dharmāntarāśrayaḥ || 304 ||
Moreover, it makes no sense (to say) (na yujyate) that the first
(original) sound is thus pervasive. (If that were true,) then why should

those who are there (close to where the sound originates) hear that it is very
loud, and (those at a distance), along with them, perceive it as soft? (The
same object) cannot possess differing (conflicting) qualities. (303cd-304)

‘The first (original) soundʼ is the one that originates from, for
example, a drum located in a distant place. In this way, this first (original) sound
of the drum is heard by nearby listeners as very loud. How is it that this listener
in a distant place hears it as soft? It is not possible that that same loud sound can
possess another (conflicting) quality (at the same time), namely, that it is (also)
soft. This is because one (and the same) thing cannot have (mutually)

conflicting qualities. Thus, the reason (advanced for this view, namely that) the
perception of that (sound takes place) within the drum, which is its basis, is not
established (siddha) (as valid).

Surely (one may ask), the (Vaiśeṣikas), who are the followers of
Kaṇāda, have advanced three reasons to refute (the view) that sound is a quality
similar to touch. How can that (view) be refuted by refuting just one reason (out

of the three)? (This cannot be so,) because the (other) two reasons are not

defective. With this doubt in mind, he says:

ĨĪT gaT TT: |

ī fḵ 7 ̃=ā: 11 30y 1

CHAPTER NINE

etac cānyair apākāri bahudheti vṛthā punaḥ |

nāyastaṁ patitāghātadāne ko hi na paṇḍitaḥ || 305 1I
This (Vaiśeṣika view) has been refuted in many ways by others – it
is useless to weary oneself again. Who is not skilled in beating a fallen man?
(305)
(The Vaiśeṣika view has been refuted by) ‘others’ such as Jyotsnākāra,
who say the following. (According to the Vaiśeṣika), the conjunction (saṅityoga)

(between two things) is a quality, as is touch. Even so, these others maintain that

it is brought about (pūrvaka) by a quality without a (prior) cause. Otherwise, (if
that were not s0,) the conjunction between substances that are products (kārya)
(of prior causes) would be derived from (another) conjunction (saṅyogaja).

This is because the conjunction of products is preceded (and brought about) by

the conjunction of (their) causes. Thus (if that were true), the conjunction which

is the result of the action of both things (conjoined), that differ from one another
(as) a piḷḷar and an eagle (that is perched on it), or of (just) the eagle, would not
be possible.
Nor is conjunction possible if it is a substance, because being a

substance, when division takes place, that would cease to exist. Thus, these two
reasons for (how) conjunction (takes place) are not exclusive (of other possible

explanations).’

On the contrary, taking conjunction itself as an example, (in attempting)

to establish (sādhana) that (conjunction) is a quality like touch, by (saying that
conjunction) is preceded (and brought about) by a quality that has no cause, and
that it is a substance, it is contradicted (viruddha), because the means to

(establish that) is a means that serves to establish the contrary. Again, with
regards to the view (that it is like) the baking of a (clay) pan, it is most evident
that (that reason also) is not exclusive (of other possible ones), such as the

baking of pots and the like. Moreover, it is not proved that it is preceded (and
brought about) by a quality without a (prior) cause with respect to another,

because the quality (called) sound is itself a material cause, and because it is

accepted that a product of the quality (called) sound does arise. The same is the

case with its status as not being a substance. If one were to object that it is a
substance because there is sound in a conch and the like, then how is it that it is

not heard (when the conch is not being blown)? We say (that that is so) because,
(although sound) is (present there, it is) unmanifest. The change into manifest

sound from something of which the sound is an unmanifest (quality) is
something that differs from it. Therefore, sound is a quality of both something
which possesses touch and does not. Thus, one should consider (that all this

reasoning) is futile.
Having in this way described the sequence of the principles from Śiva
to Earth, he explains the relationship (between them, which is that) between the
pervader and the pervaded.

Read saṅyoge ‘naikāntikatvam for saṁyogenānaikāntikatvam.

Read -pūrvakatvāyāvaddravya- for -pūrvakatvadravya-.

TANTRĀLOKA

ŪaT |

fṝī aaīaī āīaī-] JārīTd || 30E. 1|

guṇādhikatayā tiṣṭhan vyāptā tāvān prakāśate || 306 ||
To the degree in which the mass of reality levels (tattva) of these
(principles) from Earth onwards abide pervaded by those that precede
them to that degree, (each) manifests with progressively excellent qualities.

(306)

(The principles) ‘that precede them’ are those that come before them
(in the ascending serial order). Thīis is the meaning. Although the principles are

thirty-six here (according to us), they are primarily of three kinds, as Nara, Śakti
and Śiva. To the degree in which (the inherent) attribute (dharma) of those

(principles), which is consciousness made of light, becomes (progressively)

more evident, (the more it) it excels (visiṣyate). Thus, that which possesses a

(more) prominent (and excellent) (viśiṣṭa) quality than something else pervades
it. as does Śiva Śakti, and Śiva and Śakti, Nara. As others have said with the
same intended sense:
‘Māyā, Being (sa), and finally the Lord (īśa), are the three principles

called the Self (ātmatattva), Knowledge (vidyātattva) and Śiva. (Each) with

respect to the one which precedes (progressively) possesses (more of the) light
which is consciousness.”
It is said in this way that. although the quality which is their nature as
consciousness (ciddharmatā), present in the principles consisting of Māyā and
the rest, which (collectively) are Nara, is not prominent (aviśiṣṭa), that is, is less,
even s0, just as in the descending sequence, the gross quality of their objectivity
increases progressively; so too (conversely), in their ascending sequence, (this,)
their specific (and most excellent quality) (viśeṣa), progressively (increases). To
the degree in which the quality (of consciousness of) the preceding principle
goes on increasing (with respect to the ones that follow), it pervades the

principles from Earth onwards, as does Water Earth, and Fire (Water) and so on.

Surely (one may ask), as is the case with fire and smoke, the cause
invariably accompanies (its) effect and so pervades it, and (conversely), the
effect invariably accompanies that and so is pervaded (by it). Or else, like an
actor who is covered by a curtain, the subtle, (which is the actor’s true identity,)
is pervaded, and the gross, (which is the role he plays,) pervades (it). So what is
(all this) talk here of the progressive excellence of (the Principles’ respective)
qualities (guṇādhikya)? With this doubt in mind, he says:
The Mutual Relationship Between Higher Tattvas and Lower Ones

āTI TTTTĀĪ ā̄IT fkō 1
aī īdīṀṀḍ̄a-; fk̄̄ Ṁ̄gaaĩ r-. || 3 09 1||

CHAPTER NINE

vyāpyavyāpakatā yaiṣā tattvānāṁ darśitā kila |

sā guṇādhikyataḥ siddhā na hetutvān na lāghavāt || 307 ||
Indeed, (the scriptures) explain that this relationship between the
principles, namely, that of the pervader and the pervaded, is established on
the basis of the progressive excellence of (their respective) qualities. It is not
based on the causal status (of the higher principles with respect to the
lower), or their (relative) subtlety (lāghava). (307)
Illustrating how causal status and subtlety are not the invariable criteria
(to establish the hierarchy of the principles), he establishes it with reasoned

argument.

srkgTttṁ aī fē aaraī fēratzīṁ azen
ahetunāpi rāgo hi vyāpto vidyādinā sphuṭam |
The principle of Attachment (for example) is pervaded by that of
(Limited) Knowledge, although it is clearly not its cause. (308ab)
(Limited Knowledge) ‘is not the cause’ (of Attachment) because, in

accord with the teaching that ‘Unmanifest (Nature), Attachment and (Limited)

Knowledge arise from the Force (of limited agency)ʼ," Attachment and
(Limited) Knowledge arise together from the Force (of limited agency).

sdarṁtcqdrīṁHcg=dd ād:

] vmṝā a rīttā f-nfrzā arī+

|| 30¢

Il

3TII āATĀGĀĪṬGRI TĒḺT || 3 0, 1|
tadvinā na bhaved yat tad vyāptam ity ucyate yataḥ || 308 ||
na lāghavaṁ ca nāmāsti kiñcid atra svadarśane |
gunādhikyād ato jñeyā vyāpyavyāpakatā sphuṭā || 309 ||
(An entity) which would not exist without (another entity, and so

depends on it for its existence,) is said to be pervaded by it. This is the
reason why (there is no mention) of ‘subtleness’ (lāghava) (or ‘grossness’)
at all (even) by name here in our system (darśana). It is clear therefore that

the relationship between the pervader and the pervaded is based on the
progressive excellence of the qualities (of the members of this

relationship).” (308cd-309)
Cf. above, 9/217.

The lower principles could not exist without the higher ones that pervade and
penetrate them. Abhinava explains in the PTv (p. 140-141): ʻNow, the various principles

(Earth and the rest) cannot exist without those that, respectively, precede them, such as
water and the rest, which thus, in this sense, constitute their own (essential) nature. The

Earth (principle) cannot exist without the Water (principle), because one can (clearly)

TANTRĀLOKA

‘(An entity) which would not exist without (another entity)” means
that it would not become manifest (without its prior existence). The sense is
that, according to the doctrine of (the universal) manifestation (of consciousness
as all things) (ābhāsavāda), apart from manifestation there is nothing else at all

that can serve as a means (pramāṇa) that makes known the existence of

(phenomenally) existing things (bhāva). Thuṣ it is said here, anything that does
not manifest without the aid (anugraha) of something (else) is pervaded by it,
and the other is that which pervades it. ‘Here in our system (darśana)ī means
the Trika teachings (trikaśāstra), the nature of which is essentially the
nonduality of consciousness alone. The intended sense is that, in terms of
supreme consciousness, there is nothing at all either gross or subtle.
‘Thereforeʼ it is unsound (to maintain) that the reason (nimitta) for the state

(which is that of the relationship between) the pervader and the pervaded is
(their relative) causal status and subtlety.
Surely (one may ask), all thatis saidin the Mālinīvijayoitara is that the
(relative) condition of (the principles) as being above and below (one another)is
due to the progressive excellence of the qualities, not (their) condition as the
pervader and the pervaded. So how is it that it is said to be that? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

azṝ 1| 320 ||
yo hi yasmãd guṇotkṛṣṭaḥ sa tasmād ūrdhva ucyate |
ūrdhvatā vyāptr̥tā śrīmanmālinīvijaye sphuṭā || 310 ||
perceive fluidity (inherently) within its solidity (as when one observes heated metals
melt). Thus, in accord with this principle, the gross elements cannot exist without the

subtle ones, and these without the unfolding of the senses, and the senses also without
the ascertainment (adhyavasāya)( which is the function of the intellect). AIl these

cannot exist separately apart from (Nature,) the root cause, which in its original, subtle

undivided form (pervades them all). The root Nature (mūlaprakṛti) is the object of
enjoyment (bhogyā). How can that exist without the enjoying subject (bhoktrṛ), which
due to this varied object of enjoyment, is contracted, and due to (this) contraction is
subject to various bonds, namely, time, the force (of limited agency) and the rest (of the
obscuring coverings) which have been posited within its own nature (svātmārohita)?

How can the contraction of unbroken (undivided) consciousness be possible without its
freedom which, also called Maāyā, is the cause of (this) contraction? The freedom to

contract (consciousness) implies a series of grades of contractions, which have as their
essence the uncontracted state (of consciousness). That could not exist if there were not
(a unitary consciousness which unfolds in stages from being) slightly uncontracted,
uncontracted, slightly expanded, and (then finally,) expanding (fully). (p. 141) (Thus,
ultimately,) all this that is (manifest and) perceived would be nothing without Bhairava
who, free and completely full, is the essence of perception (prathā). Thus, this
sequential development (krama) of the principles is proved to exist by its own
consciousness (svasaṅvitsiddha).’

CHAPTER NINE
It is clearly (stated) in the venerable Mālinīvijaya that ‘whatever

excels something else in quality is said to be above it.” The elevation (of a
principle along the ascending order of principles) corresponds to (the
degree of its) pervasion (with respect to that which is on a lower level).™
(310)

He certainly does not mean to say in this way that (the principles that)
come first and (those that follow after) above (them) are determined by (their)
location in space or by time; rather, it is the (degree of) excellence of (their)
quality, due to the gradation of the state of (their) nature as consciousness
(ciddharmatvatāratamya). That itself is said to be (their degree of) pervasion.

Thus it is said that ‘the elevation (of a principle along the ascending order of
principles) corresponds (the degree of its) pervasion (with respect to that

which is on a lower level)ʼ.

(He goes on) to say (how much) in this way it ultimately amounts to.

TaRTHTṬ] fTSTĪT JT] 1

fkemk 1| 222 11

ataḥ śivatvāt prabhṛti prakāśatāsvarūpam ādāya nijātmani dhruvam |
samastatattvāvalidharmasañcayair
vibhāti bhūr vyāptṛtayā sthitair alam || 311 I|
Thus, the Earth (principle), having gathered into itself the stable

luminous nature (of all the principles) from Śiva onwards, can shine (and

become manifest) with the aggregates of (all) the qualities of the entire
series of principles, that abide as (the one reality) that pervades it. (311)
‘Thuṣ’, as the relationship (between the principles is that) of the
pervaded and the pervader, (Earth) is endowed with the excellence of (all their)
qualities, and so, ‘having gathered into itself’ the excellence of the quality

which is called (their) nature as consciousness (ciddharmatā) from Śiva

9/310ab is a literal quote of MV 2/60ab, which is also quoted above in TĀv ad
5/157cd-158 (156cd-157). Abhinava himself quotes the same line in MVV 1/213ab with
reference to Īśāna, Sadāśiva’s upper face. Before quoting this line, he writes: ‘the state

of the upper face is that of Īśāna, because (his) qualities are superior in every respect.
When one is devoid of the differentiation (kalanā) of direction and time, no concepts of
spatial divisions exist.’ MVV 1/212

The concept of the pervader and pervasion (vyāpti) is characteristic of Śaivite
speculation, and refers essentially to the capacity of one thing to influence another, viz.

to pervade it. Each mantra, Mudrā and state of consciousness has, from this point of
view, its power, that is ‘its sphere of pervasion’.

TANTRĀLOKA

onwards, the Earth, having pervaded all the principles,”° shines (and becomes
manifest) with ‘the aggregates of (all) the qualities’ associated with all the

principles ‘that abide’, realised in their full (all-embracing and perfect) form
‘as (the one reality) that pervades it’. This is the meaning.
He (now) applies the same (teaching) elsewhere (to other cases) also.

evaṁ jalāder api śaktitattvaparyantadhāmno vapur asti tādṛk |
The nature (vapuṣ) of the principles ranging from Water to the
abode of Śaktiis such as well. (312ab)
(The nature of the principles ranging from Water) ‘is such as well’, that
is, (such that each principle) is pervaded by each of the preceding principles.
This is the point.
Surely (one may ask), the relationship between the pervader and the
pervaded obtains (equally for) these (principles) also, so what is peculiar (to

them)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

fk qāt vṁkṁ

#%ē: 1| 323 1

kiṁ tūttaraṁ śaktitayaiva tattvaṁ
pūrvaṁ tu taddharmatayeti bhedaḥ || 312 ||

However, the difference is that the lower (principle) is the power in

relation to the higher, which is the possessor of that attribute. (312cd)

‘The lower (principle) (in the ascending order) begins with Earth
onwards. The ‘the higher” (is the subsequent one) beginning with Water. The
possessor of that attribute is the powerholder. This the meaning. Thus, the
nature of the Earth principle is power, and that of Water is the possessor of
power. The principle of Water, along with Earth, is power, and the principle of
Fireis the possessor of power, (and so on,) until the principle of Power, which
is power, and Śiva, the possessor of power. Thus it is said by others that: “This
Śakti, consisting of the thirty-five principles, is said to be that of Lord Śiva

Himself.”

This is taught extensively elsewhere, and so one should understand it
from there. Thus he says:

” Read samastatattvaṁ vyāpyeti for samastatattvavyāpyeti.
This lineis also quoted abovein TĀv ad 9/2ab and below ad 11/28.

CHAPTER NINE

fāā̃-ē: 11 323 11
anuttaraprakriyāyāṁ vaitatyena pradarśitam ḷ
etat tasmāt tataḥ paśyed vistarārthī vivecakaḥ || 313 I

(I have) explained all this extensively (in my commentary on the
Parātrīśikā, that is) in the Anuttaraprakriyā. He who wishes to go into this
matter in detail should consult that work. (313)

The ‘Anuttaraprakriyā’ is the venerable Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa. Thīs is
the meaning.
He concludes this (chapter) with the first half of a verse.

iti tattvasvarūpasya kṛtaṁ sanyak prakāśanam || 314 ||
(314)

Thus, the nature of the principles has been correctly expounded.

(By saying) ‘correctly he indicates the difference between (his
exposition and that of) the Bhogakārikā and other (works).

Refuting the view of Śaṁkaranandana, Sadyojyotiḥ, Devabala, Kaṇāda

and others, the one called Jayaratha, has explained the ninth chapter.

Thus ends the ninth chapter, called the Explanation of the Principles, of

the Tantrāloka composed by the venerable Mahāmāheśvarācārya, the venerable
and most excellent Abhinavagupta, which has a commentary called
‘Discernment’ (Viveka) written by the venerable Jayaratha.

CHAPTER TEN
The Division of the Principles (tattvabhedanam)
(Śiva, who is) the veritable icon of victory, flashing radiantly with the

conquest of transmigratory existence, holding the sharp Trident, radiantly
energized by piercing through each of the principles of existence (tattva),
conquers the Supreme.
Now he commences with the second half (of the verse begun at the end

of the previous chapter), in order to expound the division of these same
principles into fifteen etc.

Tdũz̄TT || ẽ ||
ucyate trikaśāstraikarahasyaṁ tattvabhedanam |I 1 ||

The Division of the Principles, which is a (sacred) secret found only in

the (Maālinīvjayottara, which is the acme of) Trika scriptures, will (now be)

taught. (1cd)

' This chapter is the second half of the exposition of the Path of the Principles

(tattvādhvan). Accordingly, Abhinava ends this chapter saying: ‘thus we have explained

the Path of the Principles at length’ (10/310ab). The first part ~ Chapter Nine – dealt
with the nature of the thirty-six principles; this part deals with the series of seven

perceivers who experience them and related matters. By Trika Tantra, Abhinava means
here the Malinīvijayottara, as he tells us himself in the following verse. Indeed, it
appears that in the Trika Tantras this subject is taught only in the Mālinīvijayottara (2/17ab). Certainly, it is the only surviving Trika text that teaches this (Somadeva (2004):
196 note 26). Neither Abhinava nor Jayaratha quote any other Trika scripture that refers
explicitly to this teaching. Abhinavagupta expounds it lucidly in chapter nine of his
Tantrasāra.
The importance of these perceivers was acknowledged from the very beginning
of the exposition of post-scriptural nondualist Śaivism. Thus, Somānanda refers to
Vidyā, vidyeś Mantra and Mantreśvara perceivers (ŚDr 1/31), as well as those who
are paśu, Śānta, Kevaleśa, Kevalaśambhu, Pralayakevalin and Vijñānakevalin (ibid.

1/41c-43). They are treated systematically by Utpaladeva in the third section of his IP,

concerning the Śaiva revelation (āgamādhikara) (IP 3/2/6-9 that deals with the nature of
the perceivers,) just after he has briefly presented the nondual version of the Tattvas.

There he skilfully reworks in nondualist terms the basically Siddhānta teachings
concerning the triple Impurity (IP 3/2/4-5 translated in note 268 in TĀv ad 1/23),
gradation of the principles, their corresponding hierarchy of seven perceivers, and
related topics. The continuing presence of these teachings in the work of Kṣemarāja (see
for example, PrHṛ p. 6-7) is a further testimony of their continuing importance for Trika

Śaivites.

This chapter of the Tantrāloka is divided into clearly defined sections relating
to this matter. These include a discussion about the nature of perceptibility crafted

around the refutation of the Mīmāṁsṣa view that perceptibility is a quality of perceivable
objects, independent of the perceiver. The perceivers are graded according to their state
of consciousness as waking or otherwise. Thus, these states are discussed in this context
in the primary sources, just as they are by Utpaladeva in brief (IP 3/2/13-17). Here,

CHAPTER TEN
He says that:

Introduction to the Seven Perceivers

TRi
TaāīTī] ḠTTTTṬTITTT] |

eṣām amīṣāṁ tattvānāṁ svavargeṣy anugāminām |

bhedāntaram api proktaṁ śāstre ‘tra śrītrikābhidhe || 2 ||

Here

in

the

scripture

(śāstra)

called

SŚrītrika

(i.e.

the

Maālinīvijayottara), another (way) also has been taught of dividing up (and

classifying) these principles, which inhere in (and pervade) (anugāmin)
their respective groups (of particulars, of which they are the universals). (2)

following the Mālinīvijayottara, which is inspired by Kaula teachings, they are treated

in more detail by including their subdivisions. The following passage up to 10/186ab is
a detailed exposition and explanation of it.

The teachings concerning these perceivers, generally commonly presented as

an integral part of the Tattva system, is taught, in various forms and degrees of
sophistication, in most of the early Siddhānta, especially the Mṛgendra and the
Svāyambhuvāgama. They are also found in the Tattvaprakāśa attributed to Rāja Bhoja,
Tattvasaṁgrahaḥ, Tattatrayanirṇaya and Bhogakārikā, all by Sadyojyotiṣ, and the
Ratnatrayaparīkṣā, by Śrīkaṇṭhasūri. Conversely, with the important exception of the

Mālinīvijayottara, we do not find it in the Bhairava Tantras. Accordingly, Jayaratha
states that this topic which is ‘appropriate for the philosophy of the Siddhānta and the

like (which are dualist) (siddhāntādidarśanasamucitam) (TĀv ad 10/6-7ab).

Why then does Abhinava refer to it as a unique secret of the Trikaśāstra? We
cannot say that it was just a manner of speaking, for he reaffirms this at the beginning of
chapter nine of the Tantrasāra (sa ca saptadhā ṣaḍardhaśāstra eva paraṁ parameśena
uktaḥ). Perhaps this is because in many of the Siddhāntas, there are only six perceivers,

not seven, as Pralayākala is not mentioned. Or does he mean that it is THE one secret of
Trikaśāstra? In the next line, he tells us that the MV is called the venerable Trikaśāstra.
So perhaps he means that it is the one, in the sense of most excellent, disclosure of a
most fundamental teaching found in the MV. Or that this is the sole place in all the

Trika scripture that it is taught as the ‘secret’ of what is taught concerning this in the
Siddhānta. Certainly, it is a very important topic for Abhinava, who refers to it at length

in his previous Trika works, the MVV and the PTv. Indeed, it is so integral to his Trika

Śaiviṣm that he has already had occasion to expound it succinctly towards the beginning
of the Tantrāloka (above, 1/77-80 (78-81)), and then again in 4/29-32ab. Jayaratha

similarly refers to it on several occasions, for example ad 1/187cd-188ab and ad 1/191.

The general references to levels of subjectivity, in terms of the forms of objectivity
associated with it (whether corporeal or mental etc.), are considerably more. Indeed, it is

a fundamental feature of the Trika understanding of the nature of the Self and
consciousness.
Read eṣām for teṣām as found in the MV 2/1a and suggested by Sanderson (Somadeva
2004: 191 note 14).

Cf. above, 9/2.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Another (way) also of dividing upʼ (these principles) is into fifteen
etc., with respect to (how they have been divided up) previously (into thirty-six,
is taught) ‘in the scripture (śāstra) called Śrītrika’, that is, the
Mālinīvijayottara. That is said there, beginning with:
‘Now the unfolding (prapañca) of these same principles, beginning
from Earth, will be explained briefly in due order . . ” and ending with ‘Śiva,

directly apparent, is not divided.
He says that:

The Seven Perceivers as Possessors of Power and Their Innate Nature

dadāú'ī āāTTddq |I 3 1|

EAIEIBEIHEELÉIIETCĀHESINETIT

fvraār ī firaī+ aāhrīhrvrrṝēr#a: 1| 4 1
śaktimacchaktibhedena dharādyaṁ mūlapaścimam |
bhidyate pañcadaśadhā svarūpeṇa sahā narāt || 3 1|
kalāntaṁ bhedayugghīnaṁ rudravat pralayākalaḥ |
tadvan māyā ca navadhā jñākalāḥ saptadhā punaḥ || 4 1I
mantrās adīśāḥ pāñcadhye mantreśapatayas tridhā |
śivo na bhidyate ṣvaikaprakāśaghanacinmayaḥ |l 5 II

(The principles) ranging from Earth up to the Root Nature (mila)

are divided into fifteen, according to their powers and possessors (i.e. the
individual souls), along with (their) ‘Innate Nature’ (svarūpa). There are

two divisions less from the individual soul up to the Force (of limited
agency). There are eleven (divisions) (rudravat) when (the ‘essential
nature) becomes a Dissolution Deconditioned (subject) (Pralayākala), and
like that also (the form of it called) Māyā. There are nine (divisions) when
Deconditioned) (subjects), seven when (the essential nature) is the Mantra
(subjects), five when (the essential nature) is the Lords of Mantra, and

three when it is the Great Lords of Mantra. Śiva, Whose nature is

consciousness, which is nothing but dense, uninterrupted Light, has no

divisions. (3-5)

MV 2/Iabc, 2/7cd. See below, TĀv 10/5 and notes.

Chapter ten is dedicated to the teachings of MV 2/1-46ab. These verses (10/3-5) are a

summary of MV 2/1-9.

Somadeva (2004: 141ff.) observes that the basic idea of progressing to the state of

release by traversing progressively higher orders of reality, that is, ‘the conquest of the

CHAPTER TEN

principles or / planes of existence’ (tattvajaya / bhīūmikājaya) is commonly taught in
Saiva scriptures. However, in the Māli
yottara it is taught in great detail. Moreover,
‘the crucial innovation is the idea that it is possible to attain to the highest state of Śiva
not only by traversing along the tattvādhvan [the Path of the Principles] to ever higher
realities, but that one may stop at any given reality and then ascend obliquely through
fifteen levels of subjective experients, telescoping them inwards as one progresses
towards the experiential mode of the higher perceiver. Any tattva [reality principle]
(Sakala souls only have access to the realities from earth up to matter [Prakṛti]) can
provide the basis for this practice. When meditative immersion into the pure, abstract

object-ness of the tattva (e.g. its svarūpa or ‘own-form’) is achieved, the Yogin

proceeds not to the next tattva of the ontological hierarchy (as would the Saiddhāntika
Yogin), but to the awareness of himself being immersed in the object. His own Sakala
self thereby becomes the next ‘own-form svarūpa that he must contemplate as though it

were an external thing. As each higher perspective is gained, the lower apperceptive
states are folded in and become inactive and objectivized: the divisions, or the refraction
(bheda) of the tattva, thus collapse in pairs (i.e. one experient and his cognitive power).
In such practice, the Yogin in a sense never really transcends the reality upon which the

ascent is based. . . . The Yogin thus makes an epistemological value judgement instead
of an ontological
experiential level [i.e. perceiver] (pramātṛbheda) tied to the same reality.”

p. 192-3.

‘At the very lowest level things exist in their own form (svarūpam = svaṁ
rūũpam), unaffected by any perceiving awareness. Abhinavagupta interprets this not as
ontological existence but as phenomenological existence. Since his system admits to

nothing external to consciousness, he understands the ‘own form’ of reality to be the

awareness of that reality when that awareness is completely devoid of any trace of selfconsciousness. The lowest perceivers in the hierarchy, the Sakala-experients, are only

capable of perceiving objects based upon the realities from earth up to the unmanifest
matter (Prakṛti) (below 10/101). They can also perceive other Sakala experients

transmigrating within these realities (below 10/102). Sakala-experients are seen as a

different category from the preceding own-nature (svarūpa) because they are aware of
themselves, however vaguely, as being aware of the perceived thing. To be precise, they
are aware of themselves secondarily, but are focused primarily on an external object. If

such an experient should turn his attention inwards, and succeed in directly perceiving
the self which is observing the external thing, then, because the next level of the
ontology, the Self (Puruṣa), has become the object of his cognition, he is no longer a
Sakala-experient but necessarily must be a Pralayākala-experient. This stage is different

from the preceding one, because the perceiver is no longer just there in the background,
but has become the object of direct perception; it is the stage where one is observing

oneself being an observer of an object. Similarly, if one succeeds in turning even this

stage into an object of cognition, i.e. if one rises to the state of being an observer who is
watching the watcher of the watcher of the object, then one is no longer a Pralayākala-

new experiential level is surmounted, the preceding perceivers are folded into
objectivity, they lose their relative subjectivity because they are perceived as mere
objects from a more expanded state of the subject. In this way the Yogin ascends

through the hierarchy of perceivers, subsuming at each new level the previous stages of
perceiverhood to the svarūpa of his cognition.

Each experient, furthermore, has a conscious energy (śakti), which functions as

the instrument, or faculty (karaṇa) of his cognition. At the lowest level there are seven
classes of cognisors, and therefore also seven categories of cognition (the energies of the
cognisors), and there is the own-form. Ordinary consciousness of external objects is thus

TANTRĀLOKA

‘((The principles) ranging from Earth up to the Root Nature
(mūla)) are divided (into fifteen), according to their powers and possessors
(i.e. the individual souls), (along with (their) ‘Innate Nature’ (svarūpa)).’
The possessors of power and the powers, namely, those beginning with Śiva and

(the power of) the will, which will be explained (further ahead), are each seven-

fold, and so are ‘dividedʼ into fourteen kinds. There are twenty-four principles

‘ranging (from Earth) up to the Root Nature’ʼ, that is, ending with

Fundamental (Nature) (pradhāna). This is the meaning. ‘Along with (their)
‘Innate Nature’ (svarūpa), that is, as their own externally perceived insentient

nature, uncoloured by the perceiver, means of knowledge and the rest, as is, for
example, Earth distinct from (its) qualities, smell and the rest. As he will say:
‘The Earth’s ‘Innate Nature’ there (in that case) is that which,
insentient, abides separately, before it is affected by limiting adjuncts’ such as
the subject and means of knowledge.”

‘There are two divisions less' (corresponding to the) group of six
principles ‘from the individual soulʼ; that is, beginning with the principle of
the individual soul ‘up to the Force (of limited agency)ʼ. The sense being that
they are of thirteen kinds. Even though here (according to our view), everything
is of the nature of all things, and so it is logically correct that the fifteen-fold
nature is everywhere (present in all cases), nonetheless, supreme consciousness
initially pours forth in its complete form as each principle by encompassing (in
its own nature) each one of the (preceding) lower principles in such a way that
here each of the subsequent ones exists without being (separate, distinct and)
independent (avyabhicāreṇa) from the condition of each of the previous ones.
Otherwise, in accord with the aforestated principle that: “what does not rest
there (is as unreal as) a sky-flower, the very existence (satā) of the principles
from Earth onwards would not manifest. Again, as each of subsequent
principles is merged into the nature of the correspondingly subsequent one, they

are progressively brought to rest within consciousness itself, as it comes by

degrees in this way into prominence. Thus, (as they all) rest in consciousness,
a complex phenomenon with fifteen aspects arranged in seven concealed layers of
introverted self-awareness. As one of these pairs (of the perceiver and his energy) is
retracted at each stage of the Yogin’s ascent, the initial fifteen-fold division shrinks to
thirteen, to eleven, to nine etc. until the indivisible stage of Śiva is reached. There is no

danger of infinite regress because this is a reductive series.’ See below, 10/103-113 for
the details.

Read -upādhibhira for -upadhibhir-.

Below, 10/9cd-10ab.

Above, 8/3cd, also quoted in comm. on 1/6, 5/82cd-83ab (82), 6/21-22ab, 7/62cd63ab, and 13/112cd-113ab.

There are fifteen divisions from Earth to Prakṛṅi, in that there are seven divisions

pertaining to both Śiva and Śakti. The fifteenth is their ‘own form’. This is the external,

inert form of the twenty-four principles up to Prakṛti, which is as yet unaffected by
divisions into subject, object and means of knowledge. It is like Earth, for example,

devoid of (all its qualities) starting from smell. Although (the principles) have been

variously divided, even so, everything being of the nature of everything else, each
division again consists of these fifteen. Thus, each principle encompasses within itself

CHAPTER TEN

they cannot give (any) experience (bhoga) that is separate from that
(consciousness). Thus, the two divisions of its own (level) may decrease, (but

not the ‘Innate Nature’,) in such a way that here (in this case) as the group of six
starting with the Dissolution Deconditioned (subjects), along with their powers,
is the perceiver of the Conditioned (perceiver) along with (his) power, it

becomes (with respect to them) the ‘Innate Nature’ (which is being perceived),

and so are thirteen-fold. As is said:

‘The consciousness that perceives within all this, which is everything,
the great expansion of its own (innate) vitality (vīrya) by checking it (within

itself) arises there initially (suddenly and with great) force (haṟhāt) in order to

execute its particular design (kārya). This is because it is (thereby) established
in increasingly lower principles, as it was established in the previous (higher

ones).' Otherwise, they would not continue to exist, due to the destruction of

the previous (higher and subtler categories). Moreover, the aggregate of lower
categories dissolves into the previous innate nature (of the higher ones), as they

are incapable (nālam) of offering experience (bhoga). Thus, in this way, the
diminishing state (of consciousness) there is associated with (increasing)
relative distinctions (bheda).”

The Conditioned (perceiver) (sakala) along with its power assumes the
state of the ‘Innate Nature’ (of the succeeding level), and as that is so, (its)
‘Innate Nature cannot be divided up in this way. (Division is a) relative
distinction (bheda) that takes place on the basis of (the existence) elsewhere of

the counter-correlate (with respect to which the nature of an entity is specified

to be what it is, as other than that). It gives rise to the deployment of relative
distinctions (bhedasaṁkalanā) such as ‘this is an object’, ‘this is a perception
(māna), and ‘this the perceiver (mātṛ)’. On the contrary (punar), the objectivity

the principles below it. Supreme consciousness shines forth (all the principles) in all its
fullness, and so each subsequent (tattva) does not waver from (the essential nature) of

the ones that precede it. Again, as each subsequent group (of categories) marks the

dissolving away of the previous ones, (as they progressively dissolve away) they
gradually come to rest in pure consciousness. Their omniscience is thus based on the
extent to which this process has proceeded. Thus resting in consciousness, there is no
way of ascribing any separate objectivity (bhoga) to them, and so this leads to a wilting

away of the split within (consciousness). So it is that the numbers of divisions go on
decreasing.

'! This verse consisting of this and the following sentence is also quoted below in TĀv

ad 10/3-5.
' The essential nature of Sakala, and indeed all the perceivers, is in itself undivided, as

it is eṣtablished within itself, together with its powers. Division is a matter of relative

distinction. It is the relative difference between two or more things or constituent

elements of perception. Everything is consciousness. There is no difference in the

essential nature of things. The subject differs from its object and objects from one

another, so too their corresponding perceptions. They are each ‘counter-correlates’ of

one another, that is, they differ with respect to one another. Each entity is known to be
specifically what it is by not being anything else.

TANTRĀLOKA

of an object is no division at all within its own essential nature. Thus, as there

is no division of the ‘Innate Nature’ (of anything) within its own (essential,
independent) nature, it is rightly said that two divisions progressively decrease
(at each step towards the pure undivided consciousness of Śiva). Asis said:
‘Relative distinctions do not divide up the ‘innate nature’; (rather, they
differentiate) the deployment of relative distinctions. (An entity differs from

others) when (its) counter-correlate (i.e. all that it is not) ordains (by its
existence) that (something) elsewhere (is other than itself). Thus, because (in the
case of the ‘innate nature’) that (counter-correlate) does not exist, it is said that

here there is a progressive decrease of two divisions present in their own
(corresponding level of perceivers). Thus, because there is no division within
the completely full (and perfect) Śiva principle, (its) condition is one that cannot
be divided.”
There are eleven (divisions) (rudravat) (pertaining to the) Dissolution
Deconditioned (subject) (Pralayākala), that is to say, once he has become the

‘Innate Nature’ (viewed by the higher perceivers). One should understand that

that is also so mutatis mutandis in the case of the subsequent (perceivers) from
the Consciousness Deconditioned (subjects) onwards. Thus, here (in this case),

the subjectivity of the five (perceivers) beginning with the Consciousness
Deconditioned is (divided into) eleven (aspects). (Here the term) “Māyā’

denotes the second (type of) Dissolution Deconditioned, who are (in a state of
deep sleep), devoid of objectivity (apavedyasuṣupti)' because (they are in a
state of aloof transcendence tātasthya). Thuṣ, that (kind of perceiver) is also

' Divisions do not divide the innate nature, but rather divide the products of relative

distinctions. They are posited in the counter-correlate (of their essential nature), and
therefore cannot exist except in that sense.

Thus, it is reasonable enough to say that relative distinctions are progressively
assimilated, as things are not essentially different from one another.

! Abhinava quotes MV 2/5d, that concisely states ‘rudravat pralayākalaḥ’. I have

translated by unpacking into the intended sense as follows: “There are eleven (divisions)

(rudravat) when (the ‘essential nature’) becomes a Dissolution Deconditioned (subject)
(Pralayākala).” Jayaratha here explains literally that the Dissolution Deconditioned

(subject) (Pralayākala) is ‘rudravat’. “By the word Rudra is indicated the number
eleven. The ‘vat’ at the end means ‘pertain to’ (arhati).

' See above, 4/230.
' According to this scheme, there are seven types of individual soul, arranged along the

axis of the 36 principles. They differ from one another according to the form and degree

of Impurity (mala) to which they are subject. The first four are at the impure level of the

Tattvas, that is, from Earth to the end of Māyā. The first one is called Sakala (lit.

‘possessing all the forces of limitation’). It is subject to all three forms of Impurity
(mala) – Āṇava, Māyīya and Karma. Its domain ranges from Earth to Nature. The
second one is called Pralayākala (lit. ‘devoid of the forces of limitation in dissolution’).

Its domain extends from the individual soul to the beginning of Māyā. The lower
principles have dissolved away, as happens in the periods of cosmic destruction
(saṁhāra), and the soul is as if in deep sleep. There are two kinds of Pralayākalas,
according to the depth of their sleep. The first kind is in savedya (lit. ‘with objectivity’)

deep sleep, in which it experiences latent traces of objectivity (vedya), and so is

conscious to a degree. This type resides in the domain of the obscuring coverings

CHAPTER TEN

elevenfold. This is the meaning. (The next one, that is, the Consciousness

Deconditioned subject, is) ninefold, because it is the (object of the) subject
(consisting) of the four (perceivers above it, namely) Mantra and the rest, along
with their powers. (The divisions of the Mantra subject who comes next) are
‘seven’, because (he is the object of the) subject (consisting) of the three
(perceivers above it, namely) the Lords of Mantra and the rest. The (divisions
pertaining to the) Lords of Mantras are ‘five’, because (they are the object of
the) subject (consisting) of the Great Lords of Mantra and Śiva, along with their

powers. (These are) threefold, because (they are the object of the) subject

(consisting) of Śiva along with his power. Śiva is devoid of divisions and so is

‘consciousness, which is nothing but dense, uninterrupted Light’. Difference

(bheda) depends on the existence of a counter-correlate (of that which is seen to
be different from it), and no other counter-correlate of any sort could exist in
relation to the Light (of consciousness). This has been said before (many times),

so let this suffice. And it is said (in the Mālinīvijyottara):

‘The Earth principle is differentiated by the division of (seven) energies

(śakti) and (seven) powerholders (śaktimat), and (so), along with its Innate

Nature (svarūpa), it should be known to be fifteen-fold.

((The subjects who are) the possessors of power (are seven); they are

said (to range) from Śiva to the Conditioned One (Sakala). The wise should

know that, in the same way, their (corresponding) powers (are seven).)

Those who aspire to (their) respective fruits should know that in the
same way (as the Earth principle, each) separate (principle in) this great

manifold of principles, from Water to Nature, is divided into these (fifteen)

divisions. (4)
One should know by this same procedure that (each of the principles

ranging) from the principle of the Individual Soul to the Force (of
Obscuration) (kalā) is thirteenfold.™ The (savedya) Dissolution Deconditioned
(Pralayākala) (subjects are each) elevenfold. (5)

(kañcuka), that extends from the individual soul to the Force (of limited agency). The

second type resides in the Māyā principle above. In this state it does not experience the
duality of the lower principles and so is free of Māyīyamala. However, it is destined to
wake up on the lower level.
Somadeva explains (op. cit. p. 177) that ‘the two-fold division of the
Pralayākala experients into savedya-pralayākala and apavedya-pralayākala (see MV

2/5d-6a) is forced upon the system to avoid inconsistencies in the homologies of
hierarchies elaborated in the second chapter of the Mālinīvijayottara. While teaching the
introspection of the realities, the Malinīvijayottara states that there are two realities
(tattva) in the eleven-fold division of the Pralayākala. This must mean that there are two
ontological levels.” Concerning the ‘divisionsʼ and their formulation, see below, note

10,24.

'É Quoted in TĀv ad 1/196, see there.

Read with the KSTS edition of the MV, as required by the metre, puṁstattvāt tu for

puṅstattvāt .
Vasudeva (194: n 22) writes in a note to his translation of this passage: ‘The Sakala
perceivers in their energy and energy-holder aspects have become merged into their
own-nature. The experient of this stage is the Savedya-Pralayākala. The

Mālinīvijayottara makes no direct mention here of any experient in the thirteen-fold

TANTRĀLOKA

One should know that Māyā (that is, the level of the apavedya
Dissolution Deconditioned subjects) is also like that. The Consciousness
Deconditioned (subjects) (Jñānakevala) are ninefold, the Mantra (subjects) are

analogously sevenfold, the Lords of Mantra (Mantreśa) are fivefold, the Lords

of the Lords of Mantras (i.e. the Great Lords of Mantra) are threefold. 2Śjva,

directly apparent, is not divided.

Surely (one may ask), what are the powers and their possessors,

indicated by the statement that they are ‘divided according to their powers

and possessorsʼ in such a way they are fifteen? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

TTā āaīī JTīTĒATT--TTGJ |I 1|1
[GḵCEISEHEEGAIEE-ṬĀEENITEAḤ
śivo mantramaheśeśamantrā akalayuk kalr |
śaktim antaḥ sapta tathā śaktayas tac caturdaśa || 6 |I
svaṁ svarūpaṁ pañcadaśaṁ tadbhūḥ pañcadaśātmikā |
The powerholders are seven, namely, Śiva, the Great Lords of
Mantra, the Lords, the Mantras, the deconditioned pair (of subjects)
(akalayuk), and the Conditioned (perceiver) (kalin). Along with their
powers, they number fourteen. The fifteenth is (their) own ‘Innate Nature’
(svarūpa). (Thus the ‘Innate Nature’ of) Earth has fifteen aspects. (6-7ab)
division.’ Note that although pramātr can be translated as ‘perceiver’ or ‘experient’, as
Somadeva does, it is arguably better to translate the word as ‘subject’ here, because that
allows for the possibility that the subjects at some levels may also act. In that case, they

do not just perceive or experience.

Although the reading here and in TĀv ad 10/124cd-127ab is pralayākalaḥ, read with
the KSTS edition of the MV, the plural pralayākalāḥ. Vasudeva prefers to retain the

singular, although all the other perceivers listed are plural.

MV 2/7b is quoted in TĀ 10/121cd and in TĀv ad 1/196 and 10/188cd-190ab.

TĀ 10/3-5 is an abbreviated paraphrase of MV 2/1-9. Jayaratha quotes here MV 2/2
and 4-7ab. MV 2/3 has been inserted in brackets to complete the reference. The MV

2/7ed-9 continues: ‘The division (of the principles) has been explained very briefly; (in
actual fact) it is endlessly extensive. In the same way, the garland of the worlds is
clearly divided up by these divisions. (7cd-8ab) Yogis worship it (by the practice of)

yoga, and should know it in order to secure success in yoga. Whoever, O Śāṅkarī,

knows even one of these principles or worlds, will attain the fruits of yoga.’ 8cd-9. (MV
2/7cd-8ab is quoted in TĀv ad 10/150-151ab.)
We observe that the emphasis here is on the world orders and principles. By
this practice it is possible to get out of the bondage of these levels at any point by

experiencing the corresponding perceiver as one’s own consciousness encompassing the
perceivers and principles above and below it.
The divisions of the principles are as follows. 1) Earth (Pṛthvi) — Nature (Prakṛti) –—

15, 2) Puruṣa – Kalā – 13; 3) Pralayakalā + Māyā -- 11; 4) Vijñānakalā – 9; 5) Mantra –

7; 6) Mantreśa – 5; 7) Mahāmantreśa – 3; 8) Śiva – 1

CHAPTER TEN

Reality Level (tattva)
1. Earth > Nature
2. Puruṣa > Kalā

3a. Māyā

Own Nature

Perceivers

Tattva
Sakala- /śakti (unfolded

15. Sakalaśakti > Siva
13. Savedya-Pralayākala-

śakti (dormant

Śiva

coverings)
Savedya-Pralayākalacoverings)

Apavedya-Pralayākalaśakti (dormant
coverings)

śakti > Śiva
1l. Vijñāṇākalaśakti >
11. Vijñāṇākalaśakti >
Siva

4. (Mahāmāyā)

Vijñānākalaśakti > Śiva
Mantra-/ śakti (about to

7. Mantreśvaraśakti > Śiva

6. Īśvara

Mantreśvara-/śakti

Mantramaheśvaraśakti >

7. Sadāśiva

Mantramaheśvara- śakti/

3: Siva

5. Suddhavidyā

awake)

(awakening)

9. Mantraśakti > Siva

Śiva

The first member of this list has seven divisions for each subject below it, and
seven for each of their powers, which together with its own nature makes fifteen

divisions. Similarly, from Pralayākala to Mahāmantreśa, the number of types is arrived
at by considering the number of subjects below them, to make, e.g., the divisions within

them, with always an extra one for their innate nature. Again, Māyā is trans-empirical
and so is Apavedya, and is considered to be a second type of Pralayākala. Accordingly,
it also has eleven divisions. Finally, Śiva is one and undivided, for divisions are always
made on the basis of what is other than the innate nature, while there is nothing apart
from Śiva that can serve as a basis for any such relative distinctions.

Divisions do not divide the innate nature. They divide the products of relative

distinctions. They are posited in the counter-correlate (of their essential nature) and
therefore cannot exist except in that sense. The gradual elimination of secondary
divisions within the one Self is said to be possible due to the absence of division within
Siva Tattva, which is totally full; thus (in reality), there is nothing to be divided. See
MVV 1/956 ff.

Mahāmāyā is above the principle of Māyā and just below the pure principle of Pure
Knowledge. It separates the pure principle above up to Śiva from those below, that

extend from Māyā to Earth. Abhinava explains:

‘In this way, there must be another principle above Māyā,

which is below the

principle of (Pure) Knowledge, where the Consciousness Deconditioned (vijñānākala)
(perceivers reside). As is said: ‘the Consciousness Deconditioned (vijñānakevala)
(perceivers) are above Māyā (but) below (the principle of Pure) Knowledgeʼ. In the
same way, the Dissolution Deconditioned (pralayākala) (perceivers) reside on the plane
of (the principle of) Māyā, and the Vidyeśvaras on that of (Pure) Knowledge. What
intermediate principle called) Mahāmāyā were not to exist? Thus, although it is true that
the Consciousness Deconditioned (are perceivers) who have fallen from the plane of

(Pure) Knowledge, nonetheless, for them the perception of diverse objectivity (separate
from themselves), associated with the aggregate (of countless) phenomena consisting of

relative distinctions (bheda) and various things different from one another, does not

arise. Thus, the Impurity called Māyīya does not arise (for them). Accordingly, it is said

in the Maālinīvijaya, that ‘there the Consciousness Deconditioned (perceivers) have only
one Impurityʼ. (MV 1/22) (This means that they) are conditioned (solely by) the

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The Lords’ are the Lords of Mantras. ‘The deconditioned pair (of
subjects) (akalayuk) are the Consciousness Deconditioned (Vijñānākala) and
the Dissolution Deconditioned (Pralayākala) (subjects). ‘The Conditioned
(perceiver) (kalin) is the (fully) conditioned one (sakala). The ‘powers’ are
the seven beginning with the will, associated with (the subjects) beginning with
Śiva. That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘The subjects who are the possessors of power (are seven) from Śiva to
the Conditioned one (sakala). The wise say that the powers are, in the same way

(also), seven).

‘(Their) own ‘Innate Nature’’ is Earth and the rest (that correspond to

level of subjectivity).
Surely (one may ask), it is proclaimed everywhere in our philosophy

that the universe consists of the (triad of) Śiva, Śakti and the individual soul
(nara). So how is it that this is discussed here with reference (avalambhya) to

the division of perceivers, (a topic) which is (more) appropriate for the
philosophy of the Siddhānta and the like (which are dualist)? Taking into
consideration this doubt, he explains that with reasoned argument:

(fundamental) Impurity of the individual soul (āṇavamala), which is ignorance.

Awakened by grace to the plane of (Pure) Knowledge, (the Consciousness

Deconditioned perceivers) enjoy the state of Mantra, Mantreśvara and the rest (of the
perceivers in the sphere of the pure principles). Thus, it is said there itself (in the
Maālinīvijaya) (in the passage) beginning with ‘he awakened the eight souls (pudgala)

who are Consciousness Deconditioned . . . and ‘having conjoined them to the condition

of Mantra and Mantreśvara (perceivers) . . . etc. (MV 1/18cd-21ab) Some texts
consider Mahāmāyā to be an appendage (śesa) of the principle of (Pure) Knowledge,

insofar as it is said that Māyā, which is the impurity of relative distinctions, does not

exist (for Consciousness Deconditioned perceivers). Again, in some (texts,) (Mahāmāyā
is considered to be) an appendage (puccha) of Māyā, because they are conditioned by
the existence of the Impurity of ignorance and so is not considered (to exist) separately.
(This is as is said) in some texts (with regards to the principle of attachment, where we
read) that (the principle) of Attachment is attached to the individual soul (and so is not

considered to be separate from it), or just as here, in the venerable Trika scriptures,
Necessity and Time are not described separately (as existing independently of one
another).” PTv p. 117-119

MV 273.
These divisions, with their triads of power, possessor of power and innate nature, are

well-known to the Siddhāntas. Indeed, it is as basic to their cosmology to outline them,
as are the thirty-six Tattvas. But although the gamut of the principles is related to the

hierarchy of souls in this way, referencing them in cognitive terms to the dichotomy of
subject and object is the work of nondualists. Utpaladeva does this in his
Īśvarapratyabhijñā but does not specifically refer to this as Trika doctrine. Abhinava

does so by making the standard alignment in his higher exegesis of the triad of subject,
object and means of knowledge with the Trika goddesses, just as he does at the very
beginning of the Tantrāloka, where he praises them as the deities of Anuttara Trika.

CHAPTER TEN

The Three as the Trika Goddesses and Polarities of Perception

ī Tā TTGTHTTTĀT] GafĒJTT: |

tathāhi tiṣro devasya śaktayo varṇitāḥ purā || 7 ||
tā eva mātrmāmeyatrairūpyeṇa vyavasthitāḥ |
In this way, the three powers of the Lord (namely, Parā, Parāparā

and Aparā) described previously are established in this way in a threefold form as subject, means and object of knowledge. (7cd-8ab)
He describes the three-fold form (as follows):

TIJĪ HTṬRŪIST JHTĪTJI: TTTT: II ç /I

parāṁśo mātṛrūpo ‘tra pramāṇāṁśaḥ parāparaḥ || 8 II
meyo ‘paraḥ śaktimāṁś ca śaktiḥ svaṁ rūpam ity adaḥ |
The subject here (in this case) is an aspect of the Supreme (power)
(Parā). The aspect which is the means of knowledge (corresponds to) the
Middling (power) (Parāparā), and the object of knowledge is the Inferior
(Aparā) (power). Moreover, they are the powerholder, power, and Innate
Nature (respectively). This is (the point) (8cd-9ab)
‘This is (the point) is the reflection on the meaning of the stated

(teaching) (vākyārtha). Thuṣ, the subject, which is ‘an aspect of the Supreme
(power) (Parā)ʼ, is the possessor of power. The aspect which is the Middling

These are precisely the terms in which Abhinava characterizes the Trika goddesses, as
he does the Twelve Kālīs, that is, as phases of the cycle of cognitive consciousness,

thereby aligning Trika and Krama as participating in the fundamental dynamism of the

goddess of cognitive consciousness — Saṁviddevī. He does this in several key places in
his Tantrāloka. See above, 1/2-5, 107-108 etc.
A fundamental feature of Abhinava’s exegesis is his identification of the
Triadic Goddess with the three polarities of perception. This is how he praises the three

goddesses – Parā, Parāparā and Aparā, right at the beginning of the Tantrāloka (verses

2-4). The hierarchy of perceivers distributed along the range of the principles (tattva) is
found in several Siddhāntas. Although found in the Maālinīvijayottara, it is not a
specifically Trika teaching. Indeed, the MV most probably draws it from the
Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha, an important early Siddhānta. This is not Abhinava’s view. We
have seen that at the very start of his exposition he declares that it is a secret teaching

found only in the Trika scriptures, specifically, the MV. This would not be true if
Abhinava were not to perceive and project the Trika triad of goddess into the three
constituent factors of this ascending hierarchy of powerholders, powers and their

essential nature, as he does here.

TANTRĀLOKA

(power) (Parāparā) is the means of knowledge, which is the power (of the

possessor of power). The aspect which is the Inferior (power) (Aparā) is the

object, which is the

‘Imnate Nature’. Moreover, (although) it was said

(previously) that the powerholders and powers are of seven kinds, this is (in
fact) intended to be a secondary classification. Thus, if (the Trika triad of) Nara,
Śakti and Śiva, which is the primary one, is established here, there is no defect.

Thus, out of these 29 (three, namely) the possessor of power and the rest,
he defines the ‘Innate Nature’ first accordingly.
Fourteen Divisions Pertaining to Earth

EḵetaRuEGEEEEEEIEEEĪHṬEI
IṬT-TRṬTTTRITĀĪTTĀH|
tatra svarūpaṁ bhũūmer yat pṛthag jadam avasthitam || 9 l
mātṛmānādyupadhibhir asañjātoparāgakam |
The Earth’s ‘Innate Nature’ there (in that context) is that which,

insentient, abides separately before it is affected by limiting adjuncts such
as the subject and means of knowledge. (9cd-10ab)

Thus, there are three equivalent triads:
Perceiver (mātṛ)

Supreme aspect

Possessor of Power

Means of

Middling (parāparāṁ-

Power (śakti)

Knowledge
(pramāṇa)

Object

Lower (aparāṁśa)

(Śaktimat)

Own Nature (ṣvarūpa)

Jayaratha tacitly acknowledges that the identification of this triad of power,

possessor of power and ‘own nature’ with basic Trika triads, such as Śiva, Śakti and
Nara, is not found in the scriptural sources. But he affirms that this is not a problem, as
the basic triad, whether stated or not, is a Trika one. Nor is it in conflict with the

commonly known one, which is secondary.
Read eṣāṁ for eṣā.

Read -upādhibhira for -upadhibhir-.
This ‘own nature’ is not in itself any of the components of perception, nor is it

intrinsically affected by them. It exists in itself independently of perception.

Nonetheless, however purely objective existence may be defined in relation to the

perceiver and perception, it is always part of the cognitive process. However, in this

perspective, the other two elements of this process (the perceiver and perception) are
only ‘limiting adjuncts’ (upādhi), that is, adventitious secondary characteristics of the

pure objectivity of the essential ‘own nature’. The common example is the red colour

imparted to a crystal by placing the chine-rose next to it. When the flower is removed,

the crystal reverts to its original colourless transparency. Objectivity is inevitably
associated with the perceiver and perception, but they are not inherently related.

CHAPTER TEN

(The Earth’s ‘Innate Nature’ exists as such) ‘before it is affected by
limiting adjuncts’. The intended sense is that if it were to be affected by them,

then it would be the nature of (power and) the possessor of power themselves.

He (goes 0n) to say that even though it is only of one kind, the
possessors of power and the powers are the reason why it is associated with
fourteen secondary (divisions).

gaītefrarazq āīāfvraāīa a7 1| 20 ||

sakalādiśivāntais tu mātr̥bhir vedyatāsya yā || 10 ||

śaktimadbhir anudbhūtaśaktibhiḥ sapta tadbhidaḥ |
sakalādiśivāntānāṁ śaktiṣūdrecitātmasu || 11 ||
vedyatājanitāḥ sapta bhedā iti caturdaśa |

(However,) its objectivity (vedyatā) is divided into seven by the

perceivers (ranging) from the Conditioned (perceiver) (Sakala) to Śiva,
who are the possessors of power whose energies have not (yet) emerged.

(Another) seven divisions are produced by (the same) objectivity when the
energies of (the perceivers ranging) from Conditioned to Śiva predominate.
Thus, there are fourteen (divisions pertaining to Earth). (10cd-12ab)

He indicates the predominance of the possessors of power here by
saying that (it is so when their) ‘energies have not (yet) emerged’ʼ, and (that
their) energies (are predominant), by saying that (it is so) ‘when the energies of
(the perceivers) predominate’. In reality, power and its possessor are (never)
separate from one another. However, by taking their (relative) predominance
into consideration (prayojakīkṛtya), (it is possible to) designate (one as) ‘this is
the possessor of power” and ‘this is (his) power°.
Surely (someone may ask): the seven perceivers beginning with
Conditioned ones are well known everywhere (in the Siddhāntāgamas). So let
that be, what can be wrong with that? (However,) their powers are not
mentioned anywhere (there). Who are they? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Jayaratha is saying here that although the teaching concerning the series of perceivers

is found in Śaiva Siddhānta sources, the notion that they possess powers of their own is
not. Indeed, the MV is in fact the source of this innovation, the details of which
Abhinava works out in the following verses.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Ascent Through the Seven Perceivers
and the Elimination of Ignorance

q āhēz:

TTīīdī; T TT TTTāR: ||/23 1I

TraRIPṬHTTrTTTT || 2
Td̄aT ṜIṬg{TdTTII 1T ṬṀTTaNÑT] aāīgaāī

1I/ Q

II

T TṬ-HPTTTIĪ GATTTĀGHTfĀTJTSTT |

F T-JTRJIHTĪ TĪ WIĪFēeād̃ II2ē |1|
GTT-TITTTI

fvrraz āa ī aṁ āt ṁ T 1 29
sakalasya pramāṇāṁśo yo ‘sau vidyākalātmakaḥ || 12 I|
sāmānyātmā sa śaktitve gaṇito na tu tadbhidaḥ |
layākalasya mānāṁśaḥ sa eva param asphuṭaḥ || 13 1I
jñānākalasya mānaṁ tu galadvidyākalāvṛti |
aśuddhavidyākalanādhvaṁsasaṁskārasaṅgatā || 14 ||
prabubhutsuḥ śuddhavidyā mantrāṇāṁ karaṇaṁ bhavet |
prabuddhā śuddhavidyā tu tatsaṁsṣkāreṇa saṅgatā || 15 ||
mānaṁ mantreśvarāṇāṁ syāt tatsaṁskāravivarjitā |
mānaṁ mantramaheśānāṁ karaṇaṁ śaktir ucyate || 16 ||
svātantryamātrasadbhāvā yā tv icchāśaktir aiśvarī |
Śivasya saiva karaṇaṁ tayā vetti karoti ca |l 17 ||
1) The nature of the aspect of the Conditioned (sakala perceiver),
which is (his) means of knowledge (pramāṇāṁśa), is the generic (capacity

for limited) knowledge (vidyā) and action (kalā), rather than their
individual instances (tadbhida). That is considered to be (his) power.

2) That same aspect of the means of knowledge also belongs to the

Dissolution Deconditioned (layākala perceiver). However, it is unmanifest
(asphuṭa).

covering of the Force (of conditioned agency) and (the limited capacity for)
Knowledge is in the process of fading away (galat).
Concerning these two generic means of knowledge, see above 9/246-250.
The present tense of the present participle galad cannot be taken literally, because that
would ,mxpḷy that these limited powers are gradually ceasing in the course of the

CHAPTER TEN

4) The instrument (of perception) (karaṇa) of Mantra (perceivers) is

Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā) in the process of awakening, associated with
(the residual) latent traces of the impure knowledge and agency (kalana)

that have been destroyed.
5) The means of knowledge of the Lords of Mantra (mantreśvara) is
Pure Knowledge which is fully awakened, (although it is still somewhat)
associated with the same latent impression.
6) (The knowledge) of the Great Lords of Mantra (mantramaheśa)

is the same (awakened Pure Knowledge, but it is) devoid of these latent

impressions. (This) Pure Knowledge is their instrument (of knowledge),
which is said be (their) power.

7) Śiva’s instrument is (the Goddess, His) sovereign (aiśvarī) power

of volition, whose essential nature is freedom alone, by which He knows

and acts. (12cd-17)

1) (The means of knowledge of the Conditioned (sakala perceiver) is

said to be) ‘generic’ because (his capacity for limited) knowledge (vidya) and

action (kalā) comprises (saṁgrahāt) (generically) the unfolding (prasara) of

particulars, namely, (the cognition and activity of) the organs of knowledge

(buddhi) and action (karmendriya). Thus it is said (that that is so) ‘rather than
their individual instancesʼ. The sense is that if it were otherwise, there would

be an endless number of powers, due to the diversity each (specific) activity (of
the senses). As was said before:

‘Thus, initially (the soul’s) generic instrument with respect to its
cognition is impure Knowledge, and with regards to action, it is said to be the
Force of (limited agency).”
Read icchāśaktir for icchā śaktir.

3.

Perceiver (pramātṛ)
Unemerged Power

Power of the Perceiver (pramātṛśakti)
Predominant Power

2 Pralayākala
3 Vijñānākala

Kalā (limited capacity to act)
Vidyā and Kalā indistinct
Vidyā and Kalā fading

1 Sakala

Vidyā (limited capacity to know)

4 Mantra

Pure Knowledge (Śuddhavidyā) awakening

5 Mantreśa

Pure Knowledge awake

6 Mahāmantreśa

Vidyā and Kalā latent

Laṭency of Vidyā and Kalā latent

7 Śiva

Pure Knowledge awake

No traces of Vidyā and Kalā

Power of the Will (icchāśakti)

This table is drawn from Somadeva (2004: 199).

See below, 11/67.

Above, 9/246. Concerning the generic means of knowledge, see above, 9/246-50.

TANTRĀLOKA

2) (The Dissolution Deconditioned perceiver possesses) ‘that same’
(means of knowledge), namely, (that same limited capacity to) know and to act,
‘however’ the sole difference is that is ‘it is unmanifest' (asphuṭa). The
intended sense is that (this is so because he is unconscious and inactive,) like a

sleeping serpent.

about to fade away (galat)’. The meaning is that it is propense to being
destroyed in the course of fading away.
4) (The Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā) Mantra (perceiver)) ‘is in the
process of awakening’; it is not (yet fully) awake. If it were to be so, it would
not be associated with (the residual) latent traces of the impure knowledge and

agency.

5) When (in the case of the Lord of Mantras) it is fully awake, it is
aṣṣociated with the latent trace, in the process of being destroyed, of the (the
residual) latent trace of the impure knowledge and agency. Thus, it is said that it
is ‘associated with the same latent impressions’.
6) ((The knowledge) of the Great Lords of Mantra (mantramaheśa) is
the same (awakened Pure Knowledge, but it is) ‘devoid of these latent
impressionsʼ. Thus, it is also devoid of the latent impression which is in the
process of being destroyed, which means that that latent impression is
(completely) destroyed. The sense is that now not even just (the mere) scent of
impure knowledge could possibly arise.
7) ‘The means of knowledge’ of the Lords of Mantra (mantreśvara),

that is, Pure Knowledge, is both the means of knowledge and ‘instrument (of
knowledge), which is taught there (in each particular instance) to be (their)

‘power.” Its ‘essential nature is freedom alone’. That was said before:

‘He has only one attribute, that includes all the others. Thus, the precept

(vidhi) is sound (which states) that He is united with the power of (creative)

freedom (svātantrya) alone.’

Thus, it is said to be (Śiva’s) ‘sovereign (aiśvarī) power’ ‘by which He

knows and acts’. This applies to all (the perceivers). (Thus, just as the fully)
Conditioned (perceiver) also acts by the power which is (his) impure (capacity)
to know and act, one should understand the same (to apply analogously in the

case of every) other (perceiver).

In this way, defining by the way the nature of the powers of the

Conditioned and other (subjects), he (goes on to) discuss the main point.

āṁũ: || 2. ||
“ Above, TĀ 1/66cd-67ab (67cd-68ab).

. Juṣṭ as (Śiva) knows and does all things by the power of his freedom, similarly, the

lower perceivers know and act to varying degrees according to the power of their
impure, limited capacity to know and act.

CHAPTER TEN

ā śivāt sakalāntaṁ ye mātāraḥ sapta te dvidhā |
nyagbhūtodriktaśaktitvāt tadbhedo vedyabhedakaḥ || 18 II
(Thus,) the seven perceivers from Śiva to the Conditioned one
(sakala) are of two kinds, according to whether their power is subordinated

(to them and dormant) (nyagbhūta) or predominates (udrikta) (over them

and is stimulated to act)." This same distinction (also applies to) the object
of knowledge (and so) divides (it) up. (18)

Surely (one may ask), if the object of knowledge were to be divided up
due to the differences (between) perceivers, as there are countless perceivers,

the same (object, for example the colour) blue, would not be known (to be) one
and the same, rather it would be different (for each perceiver), and that is not so.
One does not perceive any difference at all in the essential nature of (the colour)
blue, even when perceivers differ in accord with (their own) particular location,

time and state. So, taking this doubt into consideration, he explains with
reasoned argument (why that is s0).

Perceptibility
Arguments to Establish That the Perceptibility Common to Several
Perceivers of an Entity is an Intrinsic Quality of its Nature (vastudharma)

Apparent to Them as a Manifestation of Consciousness

! The two conditions — operant and dormant – are denoted by the terms — udrikta and

nyagbhūta (cf. below, 10/99). The former literally means ‘intensified’,

‘increased’,

‘something extra’ or ‘predominant’. The latter literally means ‘suppressed’,
‘subordinated’, ‘diminished’. The sense of the two opposites in the present context

corresponds to the pair manifest/unmanifest, operant/dormant, expanded/withdrawn and
the like. Neither are without the other. In some instances, one is ‘increased’ and ‘more’

– udrikta – and hence predominant, and the other is ‘decreased’ or ‘less’ — nyagbhiūta –
and hence subordinate to it.

This subject extends from verse 19 to 78ab. An entity may be perceived or not; its

perceptibility remains unaffected. I may not see one of Saturn’s moons; indeed, I may

not know it exists.

Even so, it is intrinsically perceptible. Its perceptibility is not an

adventitious quality as is the colour of a jar. It is intrinsic in the very nature of an object,
as is the clay of a jar. Gnoli (1999: 245) explains: “‘Perceptibility (vedyatā) is a quality
or attribute of the object, indeed, it is its ‘own body” (vapus), without which it could not
be perceived. In this sense, it is identified with its ‘luminosity° (prakāśamānatā). The
reality of ‘perceptibility’ is not always evident, even if it is always present in varying

degrees. ‘Perceptibility’ is especially manifest when, for example, we become aware
that something is perceived (or is ‘perceptible’) by others also. Let us take the classic

example of a jar. I can perceive the jar in itself, not conditioned by other factors, in
which case, what I perceive is its ‘own nature’ (svarūpa). The perception of this vase is

in itself always due to the quality it possesses of being ‘perceptible’. However, although

this ‘perceptibility’ is present, it does not count; it remains as it were latent, and does not

bring about in me any particular effects (arthakriyā). But I can see this same jar as the
jar of other perceivers who are seeing it, for example, about to be stolen by a thief. The
moment I become conscious of this fact, the jar, perceived thus or ‘perceptible’ by

others, elicits various reactions in me, for example, I may try to hide it from the thief

TANTRĀLOKA

tathāhi vedyatā nāma bhāvasyaiva nijaṁ vapuḥ |

In this way, perceptibility (vedyatā) is an entity’s own intrinsic

nature (vapus) (independent of its perception). (19ab)

He has indicated (and introduced) in this way the object of enquiry
(prameya) that was enunciated (in the initial) enunciation (of topics), called
‘an attribute of an entity’ (in itself, independent of its perception)

(vastudharma).

Surely (one may object that) this proposition (prarijñā) (i.e. that
perceptibility is intrinsic to the very nature of entity) is not proved. There is no
difference at all between the perception of (the colour) blue and blue (itself).

Rather, a perceiver’s perception (of an object) arises (only) when he was
previously ignorant (of it). It is said concerning perceptibility (pratyakṣaṭva) or
imperceptibility (parokṣatva) as an attribute (dharma) of an object (of sense
that):

who has seen it, or something else. ‘Perceptibility°, a quality inherent in the jar, but not

apparent when I view it in itself, becomes a reality and apparent to my vision, and

determines particular effects and reactions. According to the various types of subjects
that can perceive some particular thing, it presents itself in fourteen ways, that give rise

to as many meditations. These fourteen modalities are due to the various aspects in
which the object is perceived. At this point, one could think, objects Abhinavagupta,
that then these fourteen modalities are due to the diverse subjects who perceive it, not to
the jar in itself, that remains always the same (lit. ‘equal to itself’). This objection (he

replies) would be valid if subject and object were two separate entities, as other schools
maintain; however, subject and object are not two separate realities; rather it is the
subject himself who realizes himself for what he is, in the measure in which he creates
and knows the object, without which it would be just a vain abstraction. ‘Perceptibility
in this sense remains a quality of the object.’

Above, TĀ 1/297ab (295cd).

Translating the term vapus is problematic. It can mean ‘form’ or even ‘body’, as well
as ‘nature’ or ‘eṣsence’. The perceptibility of an entity is the quality it possesses of
being knowable to a perceiver, by virtue of its immersion in consciousness. As it
appears in its own specific way, according to its own nature. It defines the nature of the
entity not just as a secondary quality, like blue, that is linked to its object by

conjunction; it is a vital, inherent attribute – dharma – of that entity – vastu. It is a

for example, the earth-ness of a pot. It is a universal (sāmānya)
vastudhārma, a
rather than specific quality (viśeṣa). Even so ‘perceptibility differentiates and specifies

a particular entity and has a specific form for each one. Thus, it is like an entitys ‘own
nature’ (ṣvabhāva), not as its fundamental, abstract essence, but the specific way in
which it is perceived. Thus, it is both its body / form and nature. The ‘formʼ of an entity

means simply its shape and the like. This is not an inherent attribute of an entity. Jars

may have many forms, but their ‘perceptibility° as a jar is common to all of them and
fundamental to their nature. It is an attribute – dharma – of its nature as an ‘entity’ –
vastu. By translating vapus as ‘nature’, we miss this important sense of the word.

However, we should not be misled by the translation ‘formʼ as referring to just a
physical form.

CHAPTER TEN

‘an object (of sense), although not immediately perceptible (parokṣa),
becomes perceptible (pratyakṣa), and one that is immediately perceptible
becomes imperceptible, due to distinctions (in its location in) time and space
and the like.”
Although this is true, (this fact) relates (not to the object, but rather to)

the perceiver. With this doubt in mind, he (goes on) to state a reason (as to why
this is s0).

īv āīi aftf f ēa sfr̄raaīma 11 2< 11
caitreṇa vedyaṁ vedmīti kiṁ hy atra pratibhāsatām || 19 ||
(If perceptibility is entirely objective, pray tell,) what manifests
here (in the perception that): “I perceive (the blue) that is perceptible to
Caitra”? (19cd)
(Fine, let it be that) in the case of the perception of just (the colour) blue
alone as “I perceive blue”, one does not know that objective (perceptibility —
vedyatā) is an attribute of the object. (But then one may ask,) in the case of the
perception “I perceive the blue that is perceptible to Caitra”, whether just (the
colour) blue alone is perceived, or ‘blue’ characterized by its perceptibility to
Caitra? There in the first case, there would be no difference between the two
perceptions (pratīti), namely, “I perceive blue” and “] perceive the blue that is
perceptible to Caitra”. (But) that is not so, as that would be contrary to
experience. In the second case, (one may ask,) is the perceptibility of blue to

Caitra a characteristic associated with (the object) itself, or with the perceiver?
It is not in this way (a characteristic) associated with the perceiver, because a

relationship between a qualifier and the qualified is not logically possible
between two things belonging to two distinctly different categories, as they
belong to (entirely) different (existential) domains. Thus, as (it is intrinsic to the

object) in itself, what has been postulated is proved to be correct, namely that:
‘perceptibility (vedyatā) is an entity’s own (specific) formʼ.
Surely, (an opponent may object,) although there is a difference

between the categories to which they belong, the perception (prarīti) “(this)

thing has been known’ (jñāto ‘arthaḥ) (does involve) a relationship between a
qualifier and the qualified. In the case of the perception, ‘ perceive the blue
that is perceptible to Caitra, I know the entity Caitra knows. Thus, the sense of
what is being said here is that knowledge (of something) belongs especially to
the perceiver, not to the object. He says that:

sērvīd |

nanu caitrīyavījñānamātram atra prakāśate |

Above, 10/I9ab. Also quoted below ad 10/55cd-56ab and ad 10/68cd-69.

A ‘thingʼ is qualified as its ‘being known’ as it is that qualifies it.

TANTRĀLOKA

vedyatākhyas tu no dharmo bhāti bhāvasya nīḷavat || 20 ll

“’Surely (someone may object that) all that manifests here is just

Caitra’s consciousness (vijñāna). (According to us,) perceptibility is not a
quality of an entity, as is, for example, the colour blue. (20)
‘Here’ means in the object (of sense), such as (the colour) blue.

Surely (an opponent may object that,) knowledge is an action (the
existence of which) can be inferred from its result, and that that result is a
property of the object (viṣaya) termed ‘manifested-ness (prakatatā), which is
‘perceptibility” (vedyatā). Having stated the objection of (the Mīmaṁṣsaka)

school of Kumārila, he refutes it:

Verses 20 to 28ab are a statement of the view of the opponent, who does not accept

that ‘perceptibility is a quality of the object. The following discussion carries on for
seventy-eight verses. The cognition of an entity as perceived by this or that subject is

different from the perception of something in itself. This contention affords a basis for a
long discussion on the nature of perceptibility (vedyatā). The conclusion being that it is

an objective property of an entity. All this discussion is implicitly a refutation of the
view held by the Mīmāṁsākas. According to them, knowledge is an action the existence

of which can be inferred from its fruit, that is, ‘manifested-nessʼ, and is considered to be
a property of the object. ‘Perceptibility° (vedyatā) is, in their view, this alone.

Concerning Prakaṭatāvāda see see Pārthasārathi Śāstradīpikā p. 37-38, and Ganganath

Benares 1942 p.86.

“ Cf. Nareśvaraparīkṣā:

nanv ātmā svayamaparokṣatayā grahītr̥tvenāyaṁ pratyartham alabdhabhedaḥ

prasphuraty eva, tadhalāt tu arthaprakaṭatākhyo dharmaḥ pratyarthaṁ bhinna
evotpadyate, tāto ‘rthabhedasiddher adoṣaḥ iti kaumārilāḥ | tad api ayuktam, arthasya
sarvāṉ praty aviśeṣāt sarvātmaprakaṭatā syāt iti sarvasya sarvajñatāprasaṅgaḥ | na,
tmajanyatvāt prāpyakarmavad asya – iti cet tad ayuktam, tadaprakāśe tasyāpy
iddáheḥ, prakāśe tu grãmaprãptivad ubhayaniṣṭhatā iti saṁvitpakṣa eva, sa ca
nirākṛtaḥ,
‘The followers of Kumārila (point out) ‘surely, as the Self is directly apparent

to itself (aparo.kṣa) as the perceiver, this manifests with respect to each entity without
being divided. By that power, the (primary) attribute (dharma) called ‘the manifestedness of an entity (arthaprakaṭatā) arises as different for each entity. Thus, there is no
defect in establishing (siddhi) the difference between things. (To them we reply that,)
that also is not logically sound (ayukta); (for if that were to be so,) an entity would be

manifestly apparent in all respects to everybody without distinction. Thus, the undesired

consequence would be that everybody would be omniscient.
(If you say,) ‘no, because it is produced for (just some) particular Self, like the
Karma it must assume’, (then) that is (also) not logically sound. This is because if (some
entity) were not manifest, then that (manifested-ness) also would not be established (to
exist). If it does manifest, then, just as when one reaches a village, this (condition is)
present in both (the one who reaches the village and the village itself which is reached),
(the manifestation) would be the polarity of consciousness itself, and that
(manifested-ness said to be present in the object) would stand refuted.
na arthadharmatve Ś‘pi svatvasutatvādivad ulūkādiparihāreṇa ālokajanitārthaprakaṭãdivad vã viśītãtmasambandhĩ asau dharmas tatra bhaviṣyati tato nãtiprasaṅgaḥ
ity uktam | api cāsā̃v arthasya prakāśātmako vā syāt prakāśavīṣayarūpo vā, pūrvasmin

CHAPTER TEN

Jaṛāī T aīaī sṁ aēd -a.: |

raī: aaī rīadñitē¥a,_ i| 32 1|
vedyatā ca svabhāvena dharmo bhāvasya cet tataḥ |
sarvān praty eva vedyaḥ syād ghaṭanīlādidharmavat |I 21 |I
If perceptibility were to be by its very nature a quality of an entity,

then it should be perceivable to everybody, (just as are all its other
qualities,) such as its (form being) that of a jar, blue, and so forth. (21)

kalpe ‘rthaḥ svata eva tadā prakāśet iti ātmanaḥ prāgvad aprakāśanād asiddha eva syāt
| naṇv adhunā prakāśamāno ‘rthaḥ katham asiddhaḥ | satyam, ātmāntaravat svata iti
ātmāntarasyāsiddha eva | nanu tadbalāt prakāśata iti | kim ataḥ, tasya tu na prakāśate
iti sarvadā parokṣa eva | atha dviīīyaḥ pakṣaḥ tatra tu arthasya kaḥ prakāśaḥ iti
vācyam | nanv ātmaprakāśa eva, satyam, tasya tv aviśeṣāt arthaviśeṣavyavasthā
nopapadyate ity atraiṣa doṣaḥ sthita eva | nanv arthāhitākāraviśeṣasaṅvedanād ātmano
‘rthaviśeṣavyavasthāpakatvam, ato naiṣa doṣaḥ, iti pañcāṅgādhikaraṇāḥ |
(Itis also) not so if it were to be an attribute of the entity, for it would be like
giving birth to oneself; or else, ignoring (the view of the Vaiśeṣika) Kaṇāda (Ūluka) and
the like, it is like the manifested-ness of an entity produced by a light (that shines on it).
df this is so,) that quality (of manifested-ness) will be related there to a particular
(individual) soul (not to all of them). Thus (in this way), it is said, there would not be a

logically undesirable consequence.

Again, is that (manifested-ness) of an entity its ‘light’ (i.e. manifest nature), or
is it the object of the light (prakāśaviṣaya)? In the first alternative, the entity would then
shine by itself, and because, as before, the Self does not illumine (it), it would not be
established (to exist) (asiddha). (But) surely, how can an entity that is manifesting (lit.
‘shining’) at present not be established (to exist)? True, (if) one’s own (Self) is like that
(of another) Self, (the existence of the Self as ‘one’s own’) of another Self would not be
established (siddha).

Surely, it shines by virtue of its power (bala). What of that? Its (manifestedness) does not shine, and so it would always be beyond the senses. Now, the other view
(pakṣa). One needs to say there (in that case,) what is the light of the entity? Surely, it is

its own light alone. True. (But then,) as it is not different from that, the particular
condition of an entity cannot be logically possible (everything would be equally the
same light). This is where the defect of this view is. Surely (then), the particular nature
of an entity is established by one’s own particular sensory perception (saṁvedana), the
form of which is associated with the (perceived) entity. Thus, there would not be this
defect. These are the pertinent (arguments) of the five limbs (of this syllogism).”
Nareśvaraparīkṣā commentary to 2/5

Referring to MVV 1/60, Hanneder (1998) explains that it contains ‘a succinct allusion

to the discussion of perceptibility in the Trika, which is a response to Mīmāṁsaka
doctrine of manifested-ness (parkaṭatā) understood as a quality of objects. This is

discussed in TĀ 10/19 ff and IPv on 1/5/2, where Utpaladeva has stated that the object,
in order to be perceptible, must consist of light. But it is not possible to account for the

process of sensory perception only by supposing a ‘light in the object’, i.e. the object’s

manifested-ness, because then all objects would be manifest to everyone at all times.

Abhinavagupta brings out this criticism levelled at the kṣaṇikavādins [Buddhists who

maintain the doctrine of momentariness] and the Mīmāṁsakas by Utpala, and says:

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The same fault is to be found in the (Mīmāṁsaka) doctrine of ‘manifestednessʼ: if (as in this doctrine) the light is completely merged with the body of the object,
then the existence of the light as connected to the perceiver, as in (the perception) ‘the
light manifests to me’, is difficult to account for” (IPv 1, p. 155 ff.)
Torella (1994a: p. 112): ʻIn formulating the Śaiva position, Utpaladeva is

implicitly critical particularly of the Buddhist and Kumārīla’s thesis . . . For Kumārila,

on the contrary, an added quality called ‘manifested-ness’ (parkaṭatā) occurs in the

object, from whose presence a former cognitive act is inferred. In both cases, the light is
not separate – as Utpaladeva also maintains – but it is found, so to speak, completely
resolved within the object (. . .) According to Utpaladeva, there is an illumination of the
thing (whose essence is light) by the light of the subject.’

This is not fair to the Mīmāṁsaka theory of perception, which, at least in
sophisticated accounts, supposes two ‘lights’, one inside and one outside, i.e. belonging
to the perceived objects themselves, both of which meet in the process of perception. Cf.

Mānomeyodaya (p. 10 f.): ʻHere, in the case of the eye and the ear, there is a difference
of view in regard to functioning by reaching the object. So, they too being external

senses, like the sense of touch etc., it has to be made out that they too function by

reaching the object. And again, since the sense of sight perceives mountains etc., which

are much larger, we have to acknowledge for it an extended field of light at the end,

which is made out of the nature of light. Similarly, since just at the moment of opening

the eyes, Saturn and other distant objects are perceived, it has to be assumed to become
one with the pervasive external light, even at the moment of coming out. Nor does there

result the possibility of seeing the Gaṅgā from Kerala, for the reason that the external
light is all-pervasive; because it becomes one only with that part of the light which is
taken hold by the unseen potentiality.” (Raja and Shastri’s translation) (Hanneder (1998:
162 note 20).

The outcome of the discussion here in the Tantrāloka is the deconstruction of

the subject and object of knowledge: on the outside there are no real objects, only a

manifestation of light, which is identical with consciousness, and on the inside ‘there is

no definite subject in the act of knowledge
ʼ (67cd) The discussion deals, for
example, with the interpretation of the phrase ‘object-light’ (arthaprakāśa), namely,
whether it should be understood as a subjective or an objective genitive, with a

causative meaning, whether metaphorical meaning is involved here, under which

circumstances can metaphors be used at all etc.’ Hanneder (1998: 161)
Abhinava takes up the discussion in the Mālinīvijayavārtika:

‘(If we say that) objects appear variously, because they are pervaded by light,
then the world would be manifest (viśvaprakāśa) to everybody all the time. (But) if

there is light which is called knowledge (i.e. light belonging to the subject, the object)

becomes manifest. (62cd-63)
If, however, (one were to suppose that) an object is different from the light, it
would (still) be cognized as having light as its essence. For if we say, ‘this object is
without light’ (i.e. does not manifest), the doctrinal position (śaraṇa) would be darkness
(i.e. ignorance of the object). (64)
But if (theoretically speaking) this non-light, which has the nature of an object,

would manifest, it would certainly disappear, because its nature, which is to be without
light, would perish. And even the Creator is unable to turn something into light which is

not (already) of the nature of light. (65-66ab)
(Opponent:) But so far (your position means only that) the state of objectivity
appears as soon as there is light. (66cd) (A) This might be the case, the reality

(vastusthiti) is, that in this way something different from the light would shine; and if

CHAPTER TEN

The designation ‘jar, blue, and so forth’ refers predominantly to a
phenomenal entity (bhāva). In this way, ‘jar-nessʼ is the arrangement of the
constituent parts (saṁmiveśa) of (that) entity (bhāva) and ‘blue-nessʼ its colour
(rūpa). By saying ‘and so forth’ (he refers to its other) qualities, such as its
being an effect (of a prior cause) or the cause (of a subsequent effect) and the

like. Just as they are (perceivable) ‘to everybody’, so too is the quality called

‘perceptibility°. (But) if that were to be so, the (undesired) consequence would

be that (nothing), including blindness, (would prevent it being perceived), and
(as that would be true of all phenomena,) everybody would be omniscient.
Surely (the opponent may rejoin that), if you maintain that perceptibility
is a notion that is generated by (some) fixed (determined) (niyata) perceiver, it
is (apparent to just) some (particular individual), not everybody, this is not so.
Just as a cloth produced by a weaver is not just for himself, (rather it is) for all,

without distinction, similarly, perceptibility is also (common for) all, without

distinction. It is not a logically sound rule (niyama) that it is just for the one who
produces it. He says that:

ÉbEtcx ē'īEtktczḵhcaĀ
2.

JTaTAJĪÑ

atha vedakasaṁvittibalād vedyatvadharmabhāk |
bhāvas tathāpi doṣo ‘sau kuvindakṛtavastravat | 22 ||

Now, (if one were to say that) an entity possesses the property of

perceptibility by the strength of the consciousness of the subject, that would
entail the same defect (as before), as is the case with a cloth woven by a
weaver (which is perceptible to everybody equally). (22)

‘The same defect (as before) is that (the object possessing this

quality) would be (perceptible) to everybody (equally in all circumstances).
Surely (the opponent may object), the perceptibility (of an object) is a product

of the intellect, which depends on (the existence and perception of a particular)
the nature of (this) object, which is different from light would become light (i.e.

manifest), then it would not be this object that is manifested. (67-68ab)

So forget about (the theory of) a separate light; it is for this reason that Siva is

in this way (tathā) described as only light. The highest Siva alone shines with

inconceivable power and moves around without restraint because of his autonomy. In
this way he is not impaired by the various form in which he appears. (68cd-70ab)
(However,) this does not imply that there is also some kind of omniscience in
everything, (for we see differing limited experiences e.g.) ‘I Caitra, perceive the pot, not
the cloth.” But ‘he (i.e. someone else) perceives it’. “This cloth does not perceive

(anything), ‘I know both pot and cloth,’ ‘I will perceive or I will not’, ‘I have known

before or (sometimes) I have not,’ ‘I come to know gradually, suddenly, in both (and) in

neither ways.” I know everything’, and ‘I know nothing.” ‘I do not have the nature of an
objectʼ, ‘certainly (nanu) I do not exist’ and ‘l am always everything,” ‘I, being one, am
the world; how can the world be different (from me). In these and other ways this one
light appears (variously).” (70cd-74) MVV 1/62cd-74 Translation by Hanneder (1998).

TANTRĀLOKA

fixed (specific) subject. If so, as the object and the subject are mutually
dependent on one another, how is it not (the case) here that, like (the notion of)

‘two’ (dvitva) (or more), the perceiver is not also in the same condition (of

dependence for its existence on the object, as the object is on the subject)? (We
reply that) this is not so, because the object is insentient and so is not, like the
subject, linked to the intellect. Thus, as it is gross, there is no question that it is a

product of the intellect, which, like (the notion of) there being two (dvitva) or

more, depends on (the existence of) the perceiver.™ Thus, that (problem) is

resolved in another way.

Moreover, if perceptibility were to be, like the colour ‘blue’, a quality

of (the outer phenomenal) entity, then (the question arises) whether that is

(itself) objective (vedya) or not. If it is not objective (i.e. an object of
consciousness), then it would be nothing at all. An entity that is not associated
with consciousness does not exist.’”' This has been stated elsewhere many times.
The object being insentient, it can have no association with the intellect
(of the subject). On the other hand, if ‘perceptibility° were to be considered a
quality of the object much in the same way that blue is, then whether perceived
or not, it still remains ‘perceptible’. It has been explained many times already
that an object that is not associated with consciousness has no being of its own.
Now, (if perceptibility is objectively) perceptible (vedya), then that too should
be considered to be an object of perception, as is (the colour) blue and the like.
Otherwise, it would not be perceived. Moreover, in the same way, in that case,
(the perceptibility of that perceptibility) would require another (perceptibility
for it to be perceptible), and that too another one (and so on). Thus, that would

clearly (result in) an infinite regress that severs (the possibility of any object’s
perceptibility at it very) root, and so it would not be possible for anything to be
perceptible, with the (inevitable) consequence that the universe would be as if in
a coma. He says that:

ṝāĩ āardcaaiaṝ: || 33 1

vedyatākhyas tu yo dharmaḥ so ‘vedyaś cet khapuṣpavat |
vedyaś ced asti tatrāpi vedyatety anavasthitiḥ || 23 |
tato na kiñcid vedyaṁ syān mūrchitaṁ tu jagad bhavet |

Again, if this (hypothetical) quality called ‘perceptibility is itself
imperceptible, (then it is no more real then) a sky-flower. But if it is
perceptible, then there should be perceptibility there (in that) also, and (so
that would result in) an infinite regress. Thus, nothing would be
perceptible, and the (entire) universe would be (as if) in a coma. (23-24ab)

Read dvitvādivat pramātrapekṣā- for dvitvādivadapekṣā-.

" The Sanskrit reads nahi vastutvaṁ labhate, which literally means ‘does not attain the
condition of being and entity.”

CHAPTER TEN

Surely (the opponent may rejoin that), the form of a perception (jñāna)
that illumines each specific entity in such a way that it is fixed (and regulated)
with respect to each (cognitive) act, such as ‘this is the perception of blue’ and
‘this is the perception of yellow, is due to each specific limiting adjunct to
which it is subject. In the same way, one could say that the (perceived nature
and) form of an entity is affected by the specific perceiver (engaged in its
perception as its) conditioning adjunct. Thus, it would be possible to (logically
account for) the (fixed) regulation (that connects it to the perceiver, who is in)

relationship (with it such that one knows that,) ‘this is only Caitra’s object of

perception and this (other) is Maitra’s.’ He says that:

ā4T āTIĪT aṇq, |

nanu vijñātrupādhyaṁśopaskṛtaṁ vapur ucyatām || 24 ||
bhāvasyārthaprakāśātma yathā jñānam idaṁ tv asat |

Surely (the opponent may rejoin that), one could say that (the

perceptibility) of an entity is (its very) form (vapus), affected by the
subjective aspect (engaged in its perception) as its conditioning adjunct. It
is the manifestation of the object, and is equivalent to the perception (one
has of it, such as ‘this object is perceptible to Caitra, Maitra, and is blue’.

Our response to this theory is simply that) this is untrue. (24cd-25ab)

(The opponent may say:) as there are many cognizing subjects, it is not
logically sound (to maintain that objects of perception are affected by their
perceivers, which function as) aspects of (its) conditioning adjuncts. (Our reply

is that,) if that were to be so, (the illogical) consequence would be that the outer

object for Caitra differs from (the entity) perceptible to Maitra. (But that cannot
be so, as that would entail a change in perception). That same perception of blue
cannot become a perception of yellow. Nor is that logically admissible (by the
opponent also), because (it is generally) accepted that the essential being (sattā)
of every external thing is one (and the same for everybody).
Moreover, (a question arises:) is (the object) affected by perceptibility
with respect to (just) one perceiver, or is it affected by a perceptibility (common
to) all perceivers? There (in the first case), because it is affected by
perceptibility with respect to (just) one perceiver, (that entity) would not be an
object of perception (vedya) for another perceiver. But even if it were affected
by a perceptibility (common to) many perceivers, it would not be (perceptible)

to anybody individually, and so the entire universe would be (as if) in a coma.
He says that:

In other words, one could object that the conscious subject, like a limiting condition

(upādhī), would distinguish one thing from another, just as consciousness is distinct and
qualified by a particular object (that serves as a limiting adjunct). But this is

unacceptable, because it would imply the loss of unity of the object. Indeed, it would
vary according to who knows it. Moreover, as Jayaratha says, a perception of blue can
never become a perception of yellow.

TANTRĀLOKA

ḶezāEbeBEEIEIF EEtGEIIIIIEINI
qTTJIJTT hrā̄īaāadī |

ekavijñātṛvedyatve na jñātrantaravedyatā || 25 ||
samastajñātṛvedyatve naikavijñātṛvedyatā |
(According to this theory, if an entity) is perceptible to one subject,
it is imperceptible to another one. But if it were to be perceptible to all
subjects, it would not be perceptible to only one. (25cd-26ab)
Thus, an entity does not possess any (intrinsic) perceptible objectivity
(vedyatva) (of its own). Accordingly, he says:

ā--T || Qē /I
tasmān na vedyatā nāma bhāvadharmo ‘sti kaścana || 26 ||
Thus, perceptibility is not some property of an entity. (26cd)
Surely then, (one may ask,) how could an entity become the object of an

act of perception? With this doubt in mind, he says:

bhāvasya vedyatā saiva saṁvido yaḥ samudbhavaḥ |
The perceptibility (vedyatā) of an entity is an outpouring of (the
perceiver’s) perception (saṁvid) (of it). (27ab)
Sureḷy, if consciousness were to be one thing and the entity (artha)

(which is its object) another, how is it that on the coming into being of
(something quite) different (i.e. cognitive consciousness), the other (i.e. the

object, comes to) possess an additional (quality) called ‘perceptibility°? A cloth,
for example, is not affected at all by the coming into being of a jar. Moreover,
consciousness is not different from oneself (and so is common to all perceivers).
Thus, its arising is with respect to all (things and perceivers) without distinction,
and so it would not be possible to logically account for the regulating principle
(niyama) (that determines a particular perceiver’s) relationship (with a specific
object). With this doubt in mind, he says:

fē aā faārrīārīd 11 3.9 11
arthagrahaṇarūpaṁ hi yatra vijñānam ātmani || 27 |]
samavaiti prakāśyo ʻrthas taṁ praty eṣaiva vedyatā |

CHAPTER TEN
Indeed, whenever there is a (form of) consciousness (vijñāna) within

oneself in the form of the perception of an object, it aligns itself with the
entity to be made manifest. Just this is its perceptibility in relation to that
(particular subject). (27cd-28ab)

Here (according to this view, a particular) perception is born from the

entity (perceived); thus, the condition of an entity as an object of sense (is that
of its perception). Although it remains the same irrespective of (the operation of
the senses), sight and the rest, of the (perceiver who) generates it, its status as an

object of sense is fixed and determined by the very nature of the entity (itself,
which is such,) so that (the experience that) ‘this is the perception of blue and

this is the perception of yellow’ is possible. And that (perception), which is
such, abides inwardly ‘within oneself” as independently established (to be such
aṣ it is) (ayutasiddha) by the power of the aggregate of (factors), specified as
(that which) has and has not been perceived. It is with respect to just that

(perceiver alone) that that entity is made manifest. ‘Just this’ is said to be an

entityʼs perceptibility. (According to the opponent,) there is no defect (in this
view).

He responds to this (as follows).

rat a

ā || 2¢ 1

3TaT TJā T JḍTJĪT Gaaf̃ afdīā |

atra brūmaḥ padārthānāṁ na dharmo yadi vedyatā || 28 II
avedyā eva te saṁsyur jñāne saty api varṇite |
Our reply (to all this) is that, if perceptibility were not to be a
property of things, they would be imperceptible even when the (state of)

cognitive consciousness (jñāna) (inherent in individual consciousness)
described above arises. (28cd-29ab)

The meaning is that, even when cognitive consciousness (jñāna), in the

form of the perception of an entity, is aligned (with it) within oneself, (it would
not) in that way also (affect that) entity at all (and so it would nonetheless

remain imperceptible). The entity and the cognitive consciousness (of it) do not
possess the same nature, nor do they share a common basis (ekādhikaraṇatva),

because their nature as the object (of perception) and the perceiver is different.
This is because, even if the nature of (that) cognitive consciousness is the
perception of (that) entity, it is (present and) aligned within the perceiver (not
the object). As is said with the same intended sense by others also:
‘. . . the supreme state (parāvasthā) (of any entity is the fact of its)

appearing (bhāsana).”

Even if something is predominant (and excels), it would not (make any
difference) at all to anything else. Now if (someone were to respond that) the

cognitive consciousness of an entity is (its) light (by virtue of which it is

TANTRĀLOKA

illumined and known) because it is generated from (that) entity, (we say) that
that is not so. That which is generated from something, like smoke from fire, is

not its light. (Indeed,) it is other than that, and, present in it, it is a sign (liṅga)
(of the fire’s existence). If (you were to say that,) let (the nature of an entity) be
determined (nṇiścīyeta) by the invariable concomitance (avinābhāva) of the two

(i.e. the object and its objective perceptibility), (in response, we would point

out) here (in this case that) there is no (sure and certain determinate) knowledge

(niścaya) of that (objective perceptibility), because even when there is no
(external) entity,” as happens, for example, in the case of an (optical) illusion
(bhrānti), the cognitive consciousness, which is the manifestation (prakāśa lit.
‘light’) of that arises. Thus, it is rightly said that (if your view were to be
correct, all) ‘things would be imperceptible’.
He strengthens (his position further) by presenting (the following)
example.

3qaṛtē gggeTēē%
#grxīaá Tcaī || 2¢ 1

yathā hi pṛthubudhnādirūpe kumbhasya saty api || 29 l|
atadātmā paṭo naiti pṛthuúbudhnādirūpatām |
tathā saty api vijñāne vijñātṛṣamavāyini || 30 ||
avedyadharmakā bhāvāḥ kathaṁ vedyatvam āpnuyuḥ |
A jar is an object with a large round base etc. A cloth differs from
it. It does not assume the form (of a jar with its) large round base and the
rest, even if (a jar) is present (near it). Similarly, how can entities that do
not possess the quality of perceptibility come to have it, even if the cognitive
consciousness (vijñāna) inherent in the subject is present (near it)? (29cd-

31ab)

Indeed, the form of a jar is (like a) large (fat) belly with a round base.
Thus, because it possesses (this) vertical and horizontal extension (in that form),
it cannot assume the form of a cloth, the form of which is not (like a) large (fat)
belly with a round base. Similarly, (phenomenal) entities (bhāva) that are
(intrinsically) unmanifest (aprakāśa) in themselves would not manifest

(prakāśamāna) when cognitive consciousness is present, even if it is the light of
the entity inherently present (samavāyinī) in the perceiver. This is the meaning
of the statement (made in these verses).

Read vināpy arthaṁ for vināpy artha.
The point of the example is that it is impossible for two separate entities, like a jar and

a clḷoth, to be identified with one another. The same is true of perception and any

phenomenal entity. If the entity were not to be already in itself ‘light’, i.e. manifest, it

could not ‘light upʼ i.e. manifest.

CHAPTER TEN

In this way, according to your view, it is not only that the entity (which
is the object of perception) would not manifest (prakāśate lit. ‘shine’), indeed
nothing at all would. This other great defect would be a consequence (of your
theory). Thus he says:

srṁd̃ gaãī aaṁ aṁ-q a--aã̄ || 32 l|

JATYTTTT T TcGfqṝ-āīJaHīdT]

STaTĪ TTCTTTIAJTT
TĪḤ Tq I/32 11

āī, a sṝf ai |

anarthaḥ sumahāṁś caiṣa dṛśyatāṁ vastu yat svayam || 31 I
prakāśātma na tatsaṁvic cāprakāśā tadāśrayaḥ |
aprakāśo manodīpacakṣurādi tathaiva tat || 32 |
kiṁ tat prakāśatāṁ nāma supte jagati sarvataḥ |
See for yourself this (other) great defect (in your theory). (If) an
entity (vastu) (were) not (to be) the light (of consciousness and hence
manifest), then the consciousness of it could also not be light, nor (would
the Self which is) its support, nor the mind, lamp, eye or the rest. What

would then be made manifest, with the universe completely (immersed in

this way) in (deep) sleep? (31cd-33ab)

There is no disagreement here that the outer entity, which is the

occasional (instrumental) cause (nimittakāraṇa) (of perception), is (in itself)

unmanifest (aprakāśa). (It follows therefore) that the cognition which has that
as its object (viṣaya) and is the result (of its action) is also unmanifest by nature,
because when the object manifests (lit. ‘shines’), the light (of cognition) does

not shine (in such a way that the cognition itself manifests). The cognition of
(an object of sense) is not (itself) cognized when (that) object is cognized,

because cognition and the entity (perceived) do not manifest simultaneously.

(The wise) say that (in the following way):

‘The two forms, that is, ‘this is cognition’ and ‘this is (its) object’, do

not manifest (together) simultaneously, because there is no perception of
difference (between them).”
‘Its support’ is the Self, which is the (necessary) inherent cause (of
perception) (samavāyikāraṇa). The mind, along with the circle of (the senses,
including) the eye and the rest, (along with the) inner mental organ, are, like
(their) object, ancillary causes; as such, the intention is to say that they are
occasional (instrumental) causes (of perception). (All of that) is unmanifest by
nature (aprakāśātmaka), because (they are) always beyond the purview of the
senses (parokṣa). Again, the lamp (which illumines the object) is an occasional

TANTRĀLOKA

(instrumental) cause. Even though, according to your view, it illumines itself

and the other, nonetheless, it is not perceived, (and so) cannot be such.
(We are) engaged in reflecting on (the nature of) perceptibility

(vedyatva), and so its condition (vārtā) is also in this way said to be like that of

an entity. Thus, (if) when an entity is made manifest, the aggregate (of attendant

causes and conditions), that is, this aggregate (of causes), is unmanifest, then

nothing at all would manifest, and so all this (world of objectivity) would be (as
if) blind. Again, one’s own mind is not directly perceived (pārokṣya), and so,
even though it is linked to that (aggregate of attendant causes), it is not an
inherent cause (samavāyikāraṇa), and is unmanifest (also). Thus, because it is
implied in the sense (of what is stated) here, it is not mentioned separately.

Surely (one may ask), the nature of cognitive consciousness (jñāna),

like that of a lamp, is to illumine (its) object. (Thus,) of what is it said that ‘even

if cognitive consciousness, the nature of which is to illumine the object, is
present, the object does not manifest’? (For in this way,) the nature of

phenomena

(which

is

essentially

unmanifest)

could

be

associated

with

(anything) else (aparyanuyojya) (that could make them manifest). He says that:

73 -Ḷ JaTTT 11 33 1|

jñānasyārthaprakāśatvaṁ nanu rūpaṁ pradīpavat || 33 ||
“Then

surely”,

(you

may

say,)

is

the

very

consciousness to illumine phenomena (artha) like a lamp.” (33cd)

nature

of

(It is commonly said) here (in this world) that ‘Caitra lives’. Juṣt as the

excellence called ‘life’ belongs to Caitra, not someone else, similarly, (the

experience that) ‘an entity manifests’ is a certain excellence (that) entity itself
possesses, not cognitive consciousness. It is with the intention (of stating this)

that he responds (to this objection) by progressively delineating several true and
false views, prefacing them with (friendly) mockery.

a: 1

a 3mā a |

ad 1| 3. 1
apūrvam atra viditaṁ narīnr̥tyāmahe tataḥ |
arthaprakāśo jñānasya yad rūpaṁ tan nirūpyatām || 34 ||
arthaḥ prakāśaś ced rūpam artho vā jñānam eva vā |
athārthasya prakāśo yas tadrīūpam iti bhaṇyate || 35 1

(Indeed, you have) now understood something new here, and so

(this makes us) dance intensely (for joy). Now, pray tell me the nature

A lamp illumines an object at a distance and itself, but it need not itself be seen to do

that.

CHAPTER TEN

(rūpa) of the cognitive consciousness (jūāna) which is the light (i.e. manifest
nature) of the object (arthaprakāśa). Is it the (common nature of both the)
object along with the Light (which illumines it, such that they are together
on a common level)? Or is it the object together with the Light (in such a

way that the latter is added on to the former)? Or is cognitive consciousness
the light of the object? (34-35)

Now, pray reflect on the meaning (of the statement that) this is said to
be ‘the nature (rūpa) of the cognitive consciousness (jñāna) which is the

light (i.e. manifest nature) of the object (arthaprakāśa). Is it (the common
nature of) the object and light (of consciousness that illumines it), so that they
share a common level (sāmānādhikaraṇya)? (Or is it) ‘the object together with
the Light’ (in such a way the latter is added on to the former and form) an

aggregate (samuccaya)? Or else, indeed, is ‘the light of the object’ just a
relationship (between two distinct entities)?
The first two views there are advanced as just possible options; they are
not the intended (views) of the opponent, and so, without (bothering to) refute
(them), he goes on to analyse the third view, in order to refute it.

r̥d̄ ādf gṣhī ā7 Tg GSR: |

ēfz, fēaa: 1| 3ē 1
sṣaṣṭhī kartari ced ukto doṣa eva duruddharaḥ |
atha karmaṇi ṣaṣṭhy eṣā nyarthas tatra hṛdi sthitaḥ l| 36 ll
(If we say that the last of these alternatives is the correct one,) then

the genitive (of the expression: ‘the light of the object’) is one which refers
to the subject (as its attribute) (kartari ṣaṣṭhi). In this way, the previously

stated fallacy, which is hard to remedy, results.” Again, if the genitive is
one which refers to that which it qualifies as its object (karmaṇi ṣaṣṭhi) (this

expression effectively means ‘the light which illumines the object’). Thus, it
implicitly bears a causative sense. (36)
Again, if the object (artha) is the cause (of its own) manifestation, so
how is it that this excellence (atiśaya) is (attributed to its) cognition
(jñāna)?
(What purpose is served by attributing it to cognition?) It has been said many
times (already) that the excellence of one thing is of no consequence at all (to
anything) else. It was said before that: ‘A jar is an object with a large round base
° Abhinava uses the same intensive narīnṛtyāmahe in MVV 1/104a to express the same
sense of triumphant
joy.

See above, 10/28cd-31ab. If this were to be so, the object would light up
independently of consciousness, and these would be two
The Sanskrit reads ‘yadi nāmārthasya prakāśanakri

distinct, differing realities.
rṁ kartṛtvaṁ’, which literally

means ‘if the agency of the act of illumination belongs to the object’. The form of the
Sanṣkrit clearly induces the notion that inert entities possess ‘agency” as if they were
sentient, hence the following discussion.

TANTRĀLOKA

etc. (A cloth differs from it. It does not assume the form (of a jar with its) large

round base and the rest even if (a jar) is present (near it)).” (Your view) would

entail (this same) fallacy which is hard to remedy, namely, that one thing
assumes the nature of something else. Now (if) the entity (perceived) is the

object of the act of illumination (prakāśanakriyā), then, inactive, it does not
cause (that to take place), for an action arises when it is caused to do so. Thuṣ, it

is established (siddha) that ‘cognition causes the object™ to shine’. The
operation of the relationship between the impeller and the impelled
(prayojyaprayojaka-vyāpārabhāva) is characterized as the behaviour (ācaraṇa)
of that which is capable of (impelling) that, and differs from (the impelled,
which is, for example,) the act of sending (preṣaṇa), solicitation of instruction
(adhyeṣaṇa) and the like. Moreover, in this way, because the operation
(vyāpāra) of the impeller is established in the activity of the impelled, the object
(artha) that is manifesting (lit. ‘shining’) shines by virtue of the cognition (of

it).

(Our response to this analysis of the act of perception is) that it makes
no sense, because the application of cognition is useless in the case of an entity
that manifests by itself, independently of the activity of (anything that) impels it
(to do s0).
Now, one may say that the entity is unmanifest (lit. ‘does not shine’) (in
itself, but) unlike (unreal entities) such as a sky-flower, it manifests as fit (to be
made manifest), and so, as it is functional (in this sense) (savyāpāra), it can be

the object of the application (prayojya) (of cognition that impels its

manifestation). But that too is not sound (ayukta). Something which is in itself

unmanifest is incapable of manifesting, even with the aid of something else, just
as a palace that is not white cannot shine as radiantly white
(aśvetaprāsādaśvetanavat). Moreover, describing the competence (of an object
to be manifest) as being (its) unmanifest manifestation (prakāśāprakāśatayā)
again is incapable (of accounting for its manifestation), and serves no purpose,
and so does not surmount (the same logical) defect. Thus, (the contention that)

the light of the object is the form of cognitive consciousness (jñānasya rūpam)
is not sound. He says that.

TaTHT āITI T fkaT 11 319 1
tathā cedaṁ darśayāmaḥ kūṁ prakāśaḥ prakāśate |

aprakāśo ʻpi naivāsau tathāpi ca na kiñcana || 37 ||
Above, 10/29cd. The following line is added in brackets for the sake of clarity.

“ Read jñānam arthaṁ for jñānam artha.
" If ‘perceptibility is an inherent quality of the object alone, it would be perceivable
independently. We need to account for why some things are perceived by some
perceivers and not others. The solution proposed here is that cognition activates and
impels the object’s perceptibility to become manifest, thus ensuring that the object is
perceived through an act of perception. The response to this complex argument is
simply that if the object is inherently perceptible, it would ‘shine’ by itself, it would not

need the light of cognition to illumine it.

CHAPTER TEN

We explain this (matter) as follows. Is it the (manifest) light
(prakāśa) that manifests? (Surely not, for then it would be manifest

independently of whether it is perceived or not). Nor is it that which is

unmanifest, (because if this is its nature, it could never be otherwise). So

that (both those views reduce both the object made manifest and cognition)
to naught. (37)

‘Is it the (manifest) light (prakāśa) that manifests?” The (implicit)

sense (of this question is that,) no, (it is not that which) manifests, for (as it is

already manifest,) that would serve no purpose (and be futile). Moreover, ‘nor
is it that which is unmanifest’ that manifests, because it is (inherently)
incapable (of manifesting). If that were so, the external entity, which is the
object of illumination, and the cognitive consciousness (jñāna) that illumines
(it) would not be anything at all. ‘So (both those views reduce both the object
made manifest and cognition) to naught.”
Surely (one may object that), if this is so, how is it that it is well known
even in daily (life) that a relationship between the impeller and the impelled

does form, such as when (for example one perceives that) ‘Devadatta leads

Caitra to the village’. Thus he says:

tarhi loke kathaṁ ṇyarthaḥ . . .… . . . .

(The opponent may ask,) how then can we explain the use of the
causative in common usage? (38a)
The sense is that, whether he goes or does not go, the activity of the
impeller makes no difference to the one who is impelled. Here itself he responds

(to this objection).

..... . ... ucyate cetanasthitau |
mukhyo ṇyarthasya viṣayo jaḍeṣu tv aupacārikaḥ || 38 I|

It is said (in reply) that the causative finds its application in its

primary (literal sense when the two subjects of the causative, namely the

causal subject and that which it affects,) are conscious beings. In the case of
insentient objects, its use is (only) metaphorical (aupacārika). (38bcd)
“ In other words, it already shines (in which case the action of the causative would be
useless), or it does not shine (in which case the causative would be impotent).

“ The basic presupposition here is that only a sentient being can impel an object or

another sentient being to action. The arrow shot from a bow is impelled primariḷy by the

archer who pulls the bow string with the intention of shooting an arrow. The primary,

most fundamental, form of a causative relationship is one between what is impelled and

TANTRĀLOKA

In reality, the sense of a causative is the intention (abhiprāya) (with
reference t0) both the impeller and the impelled. There (in that case), even
though the impelled is engaged in its (own) activity independently, it is
characterized by an awareness of its dependence. Moreover, even if the impeller

is independent, (in the presence of the) impelled, (the impeller) understands the

dependence (the impelled has on him), and (so) the characteristic feature of the

intention

(abhiprāya)

(he has)

within himself is the awareness of the

dependence (of the impelled on himself). Due to this arises the primary
reḷationship, which is that between the impelled and the impeller, and is the
coming together (melanā) of both intentions. Where on the contrary, (this)
intention that is animated by conscious reflection (anusaṁdhi) does not arise,

because the impelled, the impeller or both are insentient, then that does not exist
there. One should explain it (vyahartavya) in those circumstances
metaphorically (as if it were s0) (lakṣṇayā), as for example (when an archer is
said to) make an arrow move, a heap of dung (kārīṣa) teaches, and (a violent)
wind blows down a mountain. He says that.

7Ta;: |

-aĩ̄, Ūa āāraāitīza īfrā: āaTṝat fē 11 3< 11
kE
ŠEINEAĀĪE:
EE

rnaēāa sũtzaivaszfā- 1
TfTTTGTTĪS-ĀĪSTT
ōIĒ AARTTST |I , 11
GUEEEIIĒH

I

fJīārrBRVHN STHÑT STAT |I <R 1I

zaf sī sēṭ |
zRfiṝ. aī-ád̄Ūaī kaitqaī 1| 3 1|
tathāhi gantuṁ śakto ‘pi caitro ‘nyāyattatāṁ gateḥ |
manvāna eva vakty asmi gamitaḥ svāmineti hi || 39 ||
svāmy apy asya gatau śāktiṁ buddhvā svādhīnatāṁ sphuṭam |
paśyan niyṛttim āśaṁkya gamayāmīti bhāṣate || 40 ||
preryaprerakayor evaṁ maulikī ṇyarthasaṅgatiḥ |
tadabhiprāyato ‘nyo ‘pi loke vyavaharet tathā l| 41 |

that which impels it. The impulse that instigates action or change is, from this point of

view, a conscious intention. Physical, insentient objects that are seen to impel or change
other objects, as for example a strong wind that causes a landslide, are said

metaphorically to ‘do’ that, as one would say a sentient agent does something.

The causative relates ultimately to both the impeller and the impelled, in such a way

that the impelled is characterized as a dependent entity set into activity by an

autonomous one, while the impeller, though autonomous (from this point of view), is
nonetheless ultimately dependent (to be an ‘impeller’), on its association with the
impelled, which again requires it to impel it.

CHAPTER TEN

śaraṁ gamayatīty atra punar vegākhyasaṁskriyām |
vidadhat prerakammanya upacāreṇa jāyate || 42 ||
vāyur adriṁ pātayatīty atra dvāv api tau jaḍau |
draṣṭṛbhiḥ prerakapreryavapuṣā parikalpitau || 43 ||
Thus (for example), although Caitra is capable of moving (by

himself), when he considers that his activity (gati) depends on someone else,

he says: “my master makes me move”. His master is also aware that
(Caitra) has the power to move (by himself, but) observing that (Caitra’s

action) clearly depends on him, considering the possibility that (he may
choose to) cease (doing what he is told), says: “I make him move!” (and

Caitra does s0). The causative is used in this way in its primary sense with

respect to (two subjects such as these, who are) the impeller and the
impelled (with respect to one another). It is with the intention of denoting

this (same relationship) that (the causative) is applied in common usage to
other things also. (So, for example,) when (an archer) is said to make an

arrow move, (what is happening is that he) imparts an impression
(saṁskriyā) to it, termed ‘speed’. He considers himself to be the impeller (of
the arrow directly), and becomes so by secondary ascription (upacāreṇa),
(whereas in reality, it is the kinetic energy imparted to it that causes it to
move). When both elements are insentient, as for example when (a violent)
wind blows down a mountain, the relationship between them as the

impeller and the impelled is (merely) imagined by those who see it. (39-43)

(The relationship between) the impelled and the impeller (is illustrated

by the examples of an archer who is said to) ‘make an arrow move’ and ‘(a

violent) wind blows down a mountain’ (i.e. causes a landslide). (Caitra’s
master) ‘reflects that (Caitra) is also (free to choose) not to move’. The

meaning is that, although he is able to move, he may also not move at any time,
due to (his indifference), depression, or the like. Thus, even though he moves

(by himself independently), one must necessarily admit that, as one who is

impelled (to do s0), (he is made to move) by the activity (vyāpāra) of (someone
who) impels (him). This is the sense (of what he is saying). ‘In this way’, as the
union (melanā) of the intention of the impelled and the impeller. This is the

meaning.

‘It is with (that) intention’, that is, in order to reflect on the primary

nature of the causative. This is the meaning. (A causative relationship) as the
impelled and the impeller ‘is applied in common usage to other things also’
that (are insentient, and so) stand aloof (from one another). ‘Thus’ (for
example), this archer draws (his bow) and releases (the arrow) due to the
exertion of (his) will, (and so) ‘imparts an impression (saṁtskriyā) termed
‘speed’” (to the arrow), by virtue of the relationship (between them as) the
impelled and the impeller. (Once he has) drawn the bow, then (comes) the

activity of the fingers, that arises from the conjunction of his own fingers in
accord with (āpekṣā) the exertion (that follows) after the intention of releasing
the arrow. It is due to that that the fingers are separated from the bowstring.

Then, when (that) conjunction ceases, the bow impels the movement of

the bowstring by the conjunction with the string, depending on the (degree and

TANTRĀLOKA

form of) the residual impression (of the archer’s action), that places (the arrow)
that is mounted on the bow (dhanuḥsthasthitasthāpaka).
Thus, it assumes within the bowstring an impression, ‘termed ‘speed”ʼ,

which depends on its own (corresponding) causes. Depending on that
(impression), when the arrow and the bowstring are conjoined, the impulse (that
impels the arrow) arises. The first action that arises within the arrow, that is,
(its) motion, depends on that impulse which generates the latent impression

called ‘speed’ within the arrow, due to which, up to when it falls, each

succeeding action takes place.

It is considered to be the impeller by itself. That is the cause (bīja) of
the metaphor (upacāra) here (in this case). As (the bow) is considered to be the

impeller, it is, by way of secondary ascription, said by people (loka) to be the
impeller (of the arrow). In actual fact, the nature of the impelled and the
impeller is mutual dependence (parasparāpekṣa). Now when the impelled is

insentient, and so its condition as being such is not a conscious assessment

(anuṣandhāna) of dependence, how then could the impeller, even if (capable of

making such an) assessment, possess the primary status of an impeller with

respect to that? Thus, because it is considered to be the impeller, its condition
“ The movement of the arrow is understood to be a chain of actions. The Buddhist

idealists give the same example to explain how every single action, in accord with the

doctrine of momentariness, consists of a chain of actions. Indeed, as each of these

actions also consists of others, ultimately, there can be no action. This is not the Śaiva
view. Ultimately, action is the result of the power to act of consciousness, that operates
through the instrument by which action takes place – in this case, the bow and the entire
psychophysical organism of the archer. The power of action emerges by the impulse of
the will. Concretely in this specific case, this is the intention of the archer. Action is the
activity of an agent. Thīs is clearly evident in the case of the action of a sentient being.

which is taken as the model of all action, including that of insentient entities. These may

be impelled to action by a sentient agent, as is the case of an arrow shot from a bow by

an archer. The impulse to action on the part of an insentient entity may also be due to
another insentient entity. A strong wind may cause a landslide. In that case we say, “the

wind has blown down a part of the mountain”, as if the wind were a conscious agent. A

nondualist Śaivite has no problem with this because he maintains that whatever takes

place does so within consciousness, and is ultimately a manifestation of consciousness,

and so, in that sense, nothing is insentient. Dualist empiricists, such as the Naiyāyikas,
cannot accept that. While they agree that the relationship between something that impels

another entity to action is expressed as if the impelling causal entity were sentient, that,
he says, is just a metaphor. The wind causing the landslide is as if it were a sentient

agent of that action, whereas in actual fact it is a mechanical process. To put it another
way, the nondualist Śaivite agrees with Bhartṛhari, that language reflects what is

actually the case. Verbs denote actions. Verbal action is governed by the persons, first,

second or third, singular, dual or plural. In the case of causative verbs, this is especially
clear. According to Bhartṛhari, the agent of verbal action is ultimately the cognitive
linguistic consciousness of the Śabdabrahman. In short, the wind is quite literally, as
language implies, a sentient agent. This matter is discussed by Bhartṛhari in the chapter
of the third part of his Vākyapadīya called samhandhasamuddeśa.

“° The relationship between the impeller and the impelled is modelled on the
relationship between the master and his servant. The master decides he wants the
servant to do something and so knows, “I want him to do this”. Similarly, the servant

CHAPTER TEN

as such operates in the world (of daily life) because of secondary (metaphorical)
asṣcription; as is said (here, it) ‘becomes so by secondary ascription
(upacāreṇa) .

Thus (similarly), in such cases as (when it is said that) ‘a heap of dung

(kārīṣa) teachesʼ, the impeller is insentient, and so, even though it is impossible

for that which is impelled to be such in a primary sense, it is considered to be

the object of impulse, and so for that reason, the one who is taught behaves as
the object of impulse by secondary (metaphorical) ascription (upacāra). Thus,
(the relationship between them as the impeller and the impelled is) ‘(merely)

imaginedʼ, that is, secondarily ascribed. The cause (bīja of that ascription) in
that case is the power of the wind, which is the act (karma) of dividing up the
parts (of the mountain it blows down).
(Now) he concludes that (point).

r̥? īē̄ ūa-N ī TGaT vādTṣgfa: |

JTRTT-TT fāīTā̄ṁdār̥̄TTTT TaT ||/"5 11
itthaṁ jaḍena saṁbandhe na mukhyā ṇyarthasaṅgatiḥ |
āstām anyatra vitatam etad viṣṭarato mayā || 44 ||
T have gone into this matter at length elsewhere, so let it suffice here
to say that because (one or more of the elements) in such a relationship is

insentient, the causative is not used in its primary (literal) sense. (44)

(Such a) ‘relationship may be with something that is not insentient, or
with something else that is. Even so, there is much to say about whether the
causative, characterized as behaving (ācaraṇa) in the same way (as that which

is sentient), has, for example, as its field of operation an action which is in the
course of taking place, or else one that is not. This is not gone into at length

(here), so ‘let it sufficeʼ, as (this matter has been discussed at length)

‘elsewhere’, for example in Prakīrṇakavivaraṇa.

He (now) relates (what has been said) to the main point.

ÉEṢEAYEIR:PEEEIESTIĪĒT

arthe prakāśanā seyam upacāras tato bhavet |
Thus, (says the opponent, let us admit that) the illumination of an
object (by consciousness) is (just a) metaphor. (45ab)
(According to the opponent,) ‘thus’, because, as has just been stated, a
causal relationship between the insentient, the sentient, and some other

who is impelled by his command to do that should be conscious that “I am being
impelled to do this.”

“’ It appears that the Prakīrṇakavivaraṇa is a commentary Abhinavagupta wrote on all,

or more probably, on just a part of Bhartṛhari’s famous work on Sanskrit linguistics and
grammar, the Vākyapadīya. See Appendix volume concerning sources.

TANTRĀLOKA

insentient entity is not a primary one. It is a ‘metaphor (upacāra). In the case
of a mountain and the wind (for example), the relationship between the
instigated (prayojya) and the instigator (prayojaka), as that which falls and that
which causes it to fall (respectively), is not primary, because they are
insentient. That is so also in the case of the relationship between cognitive

consciousness (jñāna) and (its) object (artha), as the illuminator and the object

of illumination, and (when one says) ‘cognitive consciousness causes an object
(artha) to ṣhine’. The Naiyāyikas (view) entails that even cognitive
consciousness (itself) (jñāna) is insentient, as is an (insentient) entity (artha),
because (according to them) it is an object of knowledge. However, the Self is

sentient by being associated with it. As they say: ‘that (Self) is sentient because

it is associated with consciousnessʼ."

This (point) will be clarified presently, and so no effort is made to do so
here. If one accepts that, then (it follows that), just as the behaviour of a
mountain, which is the object of instigation (of a violent wind), is to fall, and
that does actually take place, so here (in this case), one must accept that (an

insentient) entity, which is the object of instigation (of cognitive consciousness),
does manifest (lit. ‘shine’) (because it is impelled to do so). (Thus, the opponent

continues by) saying that:

astu ced bhāsate tarhi sa eva patad adrivat || 45 ||
(Our response is: alright,) let it be (as you say, but if) it manifests

(and it is said metaphorically to be illumined by perception, it would be)
like (saying that) a mountain falls (blown down by a strong wind, even
though it is insentient and hence cannot really do anything). (45cd)

Having accepted that,

(then

it

is

indeed)

said

metaphorically.

(However,) in actual fact, that too is not possible here (in this case, i.e. the

illumination of an object by perception,) because there is no reason (nimitta)

Ś See above, note 10,65.

“’ The Naiyāyikas maintain that the contents of a cognition is known by another
cognition. Even ifI know something, knowing that “ know that I know that that is so”
requires, according to the Naiyāyika, another cognition. The Pratyabhijñā, like the

Yogācāra Buddhiṣṭs, maintain that a cognition is self-revealing; it can be known by an

act of self-perception (ṣvasaṁvedanasaṣamvedya). If this were not so, another cognition
would be required that knows that “I know that I know”, and then another, and so on ad
infinitum, and so nothing would be known with certainty. The Naiyāyikas are, of course,

aware of this possible fallacy. In response, they maintain that, although there is a
possibility of infinite regress in this way, the process comes to a halt when the perceiver
is satisfied, even if he cannot be absolutely certain. This view is criticised here, because
it treats perception as if it were an object, which as such would be insentient. See below,
note 10,110.

According to the Naiyāyika, the Self is not inherently conscious. It is a substance that

can possess the quality of sentience that is imparted to it by cognition. He argues that
this is so because when no cognition takes place, as for example in deep sleep, the Self

is insentient. See below, note 10,74.

CHAPTER TEN

(for such a metaphorical ascription). It is not reasonable for there to be metaphor
without a reason for it. Thus he says:

3a- fifrr̄ āTfī fēc +aa 1

[iuezitE/búīdiĀ‘GEĀ

] fēs̄īcṁa āq I1 1|

3R: #%} TIT TaISĨT JaTq āT |

upacāre nimittena kenāpi kila bhūyate |
vāyuḥ pātayatīty atra nimittaṁ tatkrṛtā kriyā || 46
girau yenaiṣa saṁyoganāśād bhraṁśaṁ prapadyate |
iha tu jñānam arthasya na kiñcitkaram eva tat || 47 II
upacāraḥ kathaṁ nāma bhavet so ʻpi hy avastu san |

A metaphor must necessarily be determined by some cause

(nimitta). Take the case of the expression ‘the wind causes (the mountain) to
fall’. The cause is the movement generated by that (wind) on the mountain,

due to which the conjunction (between its parts) is destroyed and so (part
of it) falls. In this case, cognition does nothing to the object, so how can this

metaphor apply? And even if it were (applicable, that would be so) as (the
object) is unreal (avastu).” (46-48ab)
(A metaphor is determined by) ‘some’ such (cause) as the one meant by
what has been said. ‘The movement’ is the action that brings about the division
of the parts (of the mountain), which is ‘generated’ by conjunction with the
wind, which is a substance like ‘speed° (vega). The action (commences) by the

conjunction (of the mountain with the wind); from that (results) the division of
the parts (of the mountain), then conjunction (between) the parts is destroyed,
then (part of the mountain) falls. Thus, (part of the mountain does actually) fall;
it is real because in this case (atra) it has a cause. In this case (atra), on the

other hand, in accord with the line of reasoning (yukti) that ‘according to the

view that the object is (self-manifest and so is) the most excellent (of the factors
that accounts for its manifestation), all (perceivers would be) omniṣcientʼ,” the
cognitive consciousness of the object does nothing (to make it manifest). Thus,

(the question would arise that,) as there is no cause (for the object being

metaphorically said to be manifest by itself), how can the metaphor hold?
(Moreover,) even when that cognitive consciousness arises, how is it that the

object manifests? Or else, even if the metaphor were to have no cause, would it
thereby exist? Thus (in response to this question), he says: ‘and even if (the

Even if we accept that consciousness does not really illumine an object, but is said to

do so metaphorically, the object would only be ‘as if illumined’. That would amount to

saying that there is no object. It only appears that something is illuminated by
consciousness.
” Cf. the argument above in 10/21-26.

TANTRĀLOKA

metaphor) were (applicable), (that would be so,) as (the object) is unreal
(avastu)’.
In a metaphor, the object (of the metaphor) cannot in actual fact be

made to be of the same nature as that with which it is compared, so that an
unmanifest (aprakāśa) entity may become so by metaphorically (ascribing) a
manifest condition (prakāśatva) to it. A child who is metaphorically said to be
fire does not become fire such that he may also perform the functions of (fire),
such as burning.
He says that:

Ḷaṁ: ṂJa-TYTTTTTGT: |II #¢ 11

āīgīa ftrz: ē ? aēcar-rama:|

aprakāśita evārthaḥ prakāśatvopacārataḥ || 48 II
tādṛg eva śiśuḥ kiṁ hi dahaty agnyupacārataḥ |
One can say metaphorically with regards to an unmanifest entity
that it does manifest, (but even so) it remains (unmanifest) just as it is. Does

a child (really) burn just because he is metaphorically said to be fiery?

(48cd-49ab)

An ‘unmanifest” (entity is such because) it has not become one that

possesses the attribute of ‘manifested-ness” (prakāśatā). ‘It remains the same’
means that it has not lost its prior nature as unmanifest.
Surely (the opponent may object that), if a metaphor is entirely false,

how is it that common daily usage (to say), for example, that ‘a child is fieryʼ, is
everywhere, without exception, well-known? Moreover, in the case (of that

example), the association of similar qualities, such as ‘liveliness’, that are found
along with that with which he is being compared, is true and is the reason

(nimitta) such a metaphor is possible. (Our response to your assertion is that)
that is not so. Even then, what is the real reason in this case (atra) that we may

metaphorically ascribe manifestation to an entity? Therefore, the metaphor in
this case (atra) is not a real entity. Thus he says:

ftraī aṇṀ-gdr-m a tt ũ̄aaṁ: ā a 1 8, 1
rrrvṝcārvaī q fēē īsĪś a car 1

Śiśau vahnyupacāre yad bījaṁ taikṣṇyādi tac ca sat | 49 ||
prakāśatvopacāre tu kiṁ bījaṁ yatra satyatā |
The reason (bīja) why he is metaphorically called ‘fiery” is (his)

liveliness and the like, which is a real (reason). But (if something is

unmanifest,) what could be a (similarly) real reason (bīja) for the metaphor
(that ascribes to it) a luminous (manifest) state? (49cd-50ab)

CHAPTER TEN

The liveliness (taikṣṇya) and the like of a child which is like the intense
energy (taikṣṇya) and the like of fire is in actual fact s0, and so is ‘real’. What is

(an analogous) reason (for saying metaphorically that something that is
unmanifest manifests)? Nothing at all. This is the meaning.

Śurely (the opponent may ask), what is the use of searching for a true or

false cause (for the metaphor)? A conscious person, while knowing the distinct

(separate) nature of the object and that with which it is compared, intent on
(some) purpose, behaves in this way (in daily life saying), “the child is fiery”. In

just the ṣame way, with (some) purpose in mind, which is appropriate for this or
that (common day to day) activity, behaves (in daily life saying,) “this entity is
manifest”, even though it is not manifest by nature. With this objection in mind,

he says (in response):

fāz ft ī g sŪmī. ¥ fḵē Tēaṃ 1| u 1
STAJTRITITHaF:
ḤṬIṢṬṬ JTG-YTĪTad: |

- sīāīc: || ug 1|
€Ébeavi;crE cE-AN-EĀĒIHḤ
siddhe hi cetane yukta upacāraḥ sa hi sphuṭam || 5O Il
adhyāropātmakaḥ ṣo ʻpi pratisandhānajīvitaḥ |

na cādyāpi kim apy asti cetanaṁ jñānam apy adaḥ || 51 ||
aprakāśaṁ tadanyena tatprakāśe ‘py ayaṁ vidhiḥ |
It is clear that a metaphor is logically possible (only) when (the
subject of the metaphor is) proved to be conscious. This is because it is (a

kind of) superimposition (adhyāropa) which is also based on the (conscious)
unification (of elements perceived separately, as is a metaphor). But up to

now (as you have presented your case), there is no conscious principle of
any sort, even that cognition is not (in itself) luminous (aprakāśa) (as is

consciousness). (If you were to say that a cognition) is ilumined by another
(cognition), then the same argument (would apply as before).” (50cd-52ab)

According to your view (as a Naiyāyika), there is no (conscious) unifier
(of elements perceived separately). If it were to be sentient (cetana), that would
be the Self or consciousness (caitanya) or cognition (jñāna) (itself). Up to now
(however, you have) failed to prove that the Self is sentient, insofar as you

accept that it is in itself insentient, (and only) becomes so when associated with

cognition (jñānayoge). (You account for the fact) that entities may be sentient
” See above, 10/45.
” The opponent here is a Naiyāyika. According to the Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika view, the Self is
a kind of substance which may possess the quality of consciousness. Consciousness is

not the intrinsic nature of the Self. The Naiyāyika maintains that it is not even an
inherent invariable quality of the Self, such that without it the Self would not exist, as is,
for example, the clay-ness of a clay jar. Consciousness, he says, is a secondary non-

inherent quality, like the colour of the jar. He points to cases when there is no
perception, such as in deep sleep, as proof that that is so. Perception takes place by the

TANTRĀLOKA

(by saying) that, just as cognition is associated with Self
by way of (inseparable)

inherence (samavāya), similarly, because they are products (in the same way,

the experience of) pleasure and the like arises because of the (inseparable)
single inherence in one reality of the object, the senses and the rest (of the
factors involved in perception).

Again here (in this view also), we fail to see a constraining reason

(nimitta) as to why sentience should be due to inherence, because inherence and

the like is not in one (and the same) reality.” If you say that, although there be
no difference in the relationship (of the inherence of cognitive consciousness in
the Self, which explains its sentiency, and the inherence of cognitive
consciousness in the object that makes it manifest), rather this difference is

based on the nature of the thing itself, (then you already) show signs of
abandoning that (view). He says that (with the words): ‘up to now (as you have
presented your case), there is no conscious principle of any sort, even
cognitionʼ.
Nor can what takes place (vyavahāra) be explained by (saying that)
sentience (cetana) is (present) within cognition (jñāna), the nature of which is

consciousness, because as it is a quality, it would be inappropriate to designate
it as the possessor of (that) quality. (If, however, you were to admit) that that
cognition (jūāna) is self-luminous (that is, manifests by itself independently),
that would (in fact) be reasonable; however, that is not so (according to you).

Thus he says (that, according to you): ‘even that cognition is not (in itself)
luminous (aprakāśa) (as is consciousness)ʼ. It is ‘not luminous’ because that

is considered to be unmanifest at the time when the object (of sense) manifests.
Surely, (the Naiyāyika may rejoin,) we do not consider, as the Śāvara

(Mīmāṁsakas) do, that cognition is not directly perceivable (parokṣa), and (so)
is always (only) inferable. Rather, (we maintain that) after the object has been

perceived, (this perception) is known by another cognition brought about by the

conjunction of the mind (manas) with the Self. So then how can it be

unmanifest, such that it cannot be said to be sentient? He says that (in the
following words): “(if you were to say that a cognition) is illumined by
another (cognition), then the same argument would apply as before.”
‘The same argument’ regards the manner in which the manifestation
of an entity (should be explained). If an entity were to be made manifest by

another cognition (jñāna), then the relationship (between them) would be that
between the instigated and the instigator, and that does exist (in this case) in

some way, whether it be primary or secondary. (However,) the manifestation

operation of the cognitive apparatus, the senses and mind etc., that possesses in the

course of perception the quality of sentience required for that to be possible. When
perception is taking place, the possessor of that sentience is the Self, which is the locus

of ascription of personal individual existence, as when we say, “I myself am the

perceiver”. In other words, the Self is simply the factor that determines that perceptions
are not free-floating streams of cognition without a subjective referent. But that referent

is not an ‘T, which is a factor of perception; it is the substance, as it were, of which the
factors constituting perception (jñāna), are qualities. Amongst them, consciousness is an

inherent quality.

” According to the Nyāya, consciousness is an inherent quality of perception, not the
Self. The Self appears to be sentient in the course of perception; otherwise, not.

CHAPTER TEN

(prakāśana) of the entity is not accomplished (siddha). According to the Nyāya,
consciousness is an inherent quality of perception, but not the Self. The Self
appears to be sentient in the course of perception, otherwise not. Even if
cognition is in this way the object of another cognition, the primary modality of
the causative is not (operative), and so the manifestation (of cognition) would

not be established (siddha). It is not logically tenable for there to be a
(conscious) unifier (pratisaṁdhātr) of what is insentient and unmanifest. In the

absence of a (conscious) unification (of elements perceived separately), the
superimposition (adhyāropa) based on it is not logically possible.® As that is so,
how could a metaphoric ascription be sustained here? So enough of much
(discussion).

Surely, (the opponent may rejoin,) although a lamp is an object of

illumination of something else (i.e. cognition), yet it serves as a light of (an
outer) object. Such should also be the case with cognition. So how is it that it is
said that cognition, which is not manifest by nature (aprakāśarūpa), does not
manifest the object (artha), because it is the object of another (succeeding)

cognition? Thus he says:

ī3] īī ē̄z JahīNT. ā¥HĪQJT || 42 1|

nanu pradīpo rūpasya prakāśaḥ katham īdṛśam || 52 |
Surely, (you may object,) how is it that a lamp illumines the form

(of something) in this way? (52cd)

Surely, all the logical defects stated previously apply here (in this case)
also. Thuṣ he says:

=mīft 3 āarxāaī. fā. 7 gfthīāāhcr:1
atrāpi na vahanty etāḥ kiṁ nu yuktivikalpanāḥ |
(To which we reply,) do not these series of arguments apply here
also? (53ab)

‘These series of arguments’ means the various kinds of sound reasons
advanced previously, rooted in the primary and secondary (types of) causatives.
Here (in this case, the example advanced) is not only totally refuted (as
valid) by sound argument; there is also a lack of correspondence (between the

example and cognition, which it exemplifies). Thus he says:

Saying that an object ‘shines’, i.e. manifests or appears because it is illumined by

perception, implies that the object is inherently unmanifest. To say that ‘it shines by the
light of perception’ is a metaphor is equivalent to saying that the ‘luminosity’ of

perception is superimposed on the object. It is like the snake that is superimposed on a

rope and seen in its place. But this is not possible in this case, because only a sentient
perceiver could connect the image of a snake seen somewhere at some time with the

rope that is present before him.
kathaṁ pradīpo rūpasya prakāśaḥ literally means ‘how is the lamp is the light of
formʼ.

TANTRĀLOKA

3qṬīṁ āJḹ- T ãīdī d JAIVTT || 43 ||

yādṛśā svena rūpeṇa dīpo rūpaṁ prakāśayet || 53 ||
tādṛśā svayam apy eṣa bhāti jñānaṁ tu no tathā |
A lamp illumines the form (rāūpa) (of an object) by its very nature,

and it is thus that it ilumines itself also. (According to you,) this certainly is
not the case with cognition. (53cd-54ab)
‘This is not the case (with cognition), because (according to you,) it is
not self-luminous. Thus, the word ‘certainly’ (stresses that this case) is

different. Thus, when an object is made manifest, the lamp illumines itself,
cognition certainly does not.” Thus (it is said that), ‘that is not proved which is

established by an unproven argument’. The point is that, according to this axiom

(nyāya), how could cognition (jñāna), which does not itself shine, illumine
something else? He further strengthens (the view that there is a) lack of
correspondence (between the example and cognition, which it exemplifies,) in
another way also.

TCTTŠṬ SṬTĪ JTYTTS GTĪ-ĀTṀJĪ || W¥ /11

pradīpaś caiṣa bhāvānāṁ prakāśatvaṁ dadhāty alam || 54 |
anyathā na prakāśeran na bhede cedṛśo vidhiḥ |

Again, the lamp gives sufficient light to the things (it illumines);
otherwise, they would not shine. (However,) the same applies (to cognition
only) if it is there is no difference (bheda) (between it and the object). (S4cd-

55ab)

(The lamp) ‘gives light’; that is, bestows luminosity (to the objects it
lights up,) by strewing its own light (all around). This is the meaning. It is due
to this that the false report of those who spread false rumours is that, even
though a cloth is blue, it is falsely (said to be) red.™ In this way, objects would
not manifest (lit. ‘possess light’) without them assuming luminosity (from
something else). That is said (with the words): ‘otherwise they would not

shineʼ. Thus it is said (by implication), that in (the light of a) a dim lamp,

” The Nyāya does not agree that cognitions ‘illumine’ themselves; that is, they are not
known in themselves to themselves. They are known by subsequent cognitions. See
above, note 10,69.

” As suggested by the editor of the printed text, read dadhāty for dadāty.

“ One person can deceive another concerning the nature of an object that is not clearly

visible, because it is not well illuminated. This can happen because the light that

illumines it may be of varying intensity, according to the degree and spread of its rays.
If objects were to be self-luminous, that would not be possible.

CHAPTER TEN

nothing at all would manifest (lit. ‘shine’) (and so the light is said to be)

‘sufficient’. The meaning is that it is sufficiently capable (of illumining objects
by its) light. Again, it been stated many times that cognition contributes nothing
more to the object. If cognition were to do something to the object, it would,
like the lamp, contribute to (its) luminosity, and so one would have to say that it
is one with it. The lamp gives luminosity to the object by a secondary function,
that is, the strewing of its own light (all around itself), whereas here (in this
case), it is not possible for cognition to have any (such) secondary function.
Now, it is not possible in any way for (cognition) to illumine the object if it is
not one with it. Thuṣ, it is said that this kind of ability to bestow luminosity on
the object on the analogy of a lamp ‘applies (to cognition only) if there is no
difference (bheda) (between it and the object)ʼ. Therefore, it is proved that the
light (of consciousness) itself shines forth as the (manifest) body of each

particular object as the unfolding of its own power.
He says that:

THḤṬTGRTYT
TGTT ṬaĨ: ṬŪāT; frā: 1| u.y 11

tasmāt prakāśa evāyaṁ pūrvoktaḥ paramaḥ śivaḥ || 55 II
yathā yathā prakāśeta tattadbhāvavapuḥ sphuṭam ḷ
Therefore, the nature of each individual thing (bhāvavapus) is
clearly apparent (sphuṭa), in accord with the manner in which this, the

Supreme SŚiva, of whom we have spoken previously and is Light alone,
shines. (55cd-56ab)

(The Supreme Śiva) ‘of whom we have spoken previouslyʼ, beginning
from the first chapter. As was said in countless different ways:
‘The supreme reality (paraṁ tattvam) of the object (of perception) is

Śiva, Who is the Light (of consciousness), for that which is not Light can
neither be illumined (i.e. be made manifest), nor even have (any) existence

‘In accord with the manner’ (Supreme Śiva’s light shines) as (each
individual thing), such as (the colour) blue, (they are clearly apparent). This is
the meaning. If, for the aforementioned reason, the light and the object are one,
then the luminosity of (for example, the colour) blue, would be its own intrinsic
nature (dharma) as its ‘bluenessʼ. So it was rightly said that ‘perceptibility

(vedyatā) is an entity’s own (specific) formʼ.
Thus he says:

Above, 1/52ab. Also quoted in TĀv ad 1/26 and 1/54. The next line is given in
brackets for the sake of clarity.
B
2 Above, 10/19ab; also quoted above in TĀv ad 10/19cd and ad 10/68cd-69.

TANTRĀLOKA

evaṁṅ ca nīlatā nāma yathā kācit prakāśate || 56 ||
tadvac cakāsti vedyatvaṁ tac ca bhāvāṁśapṛṣṭhagam |

Thus, perceptibility (vedyatva) manifests in the same way that

something (which is blue) manifests (its) ‘blueness’. It is associated with an
aspect of the object (bhāva) (and not with the subject). (56cd-57ab)
Surely (one may ask), (the single) undivided (akhaṇḍa), specific
characteristic (of an entity) (svalakṣaṇa) is the manifest nature (prakāśātmaka)
of (that) entity, which is its undivided objectivity (at one with consciousness)

(abhinnam idam). There (in that case), is (its) perceptibility an attribute
(dharma) that belongs to the aspect which is the object, or to the aspect which is
the light (of consciousness)? With this doubt in mind, he says that ‘iīt is
associated with an aspect of the object (bhāva) (and not with the subject)ʼ.
Thus, engaged in comprising in this way the power of the authority that
arises from the Mīmāmasaka view (śāvaramata), although it is of two kinds,
(our position) does not (sustain and) contribute to an incorrect view. Thus he

says:

a āT-̄: 1 u.9 1]

araīi aāt af-r. 1

phalaṁ prakaṭatārthasya saṁvid veti dvayaṁ tataḥ l| 57 II
vipakṣato rakṣitaṁ ca sandhānaṁ cāpi tanmithaḥ |
Thus, the fruit (of all this reasoning is that the) two (views, one
realist, which maintains) that ‘perceptibility’ (prakaṭatā) (is a property) of
the object, and (the idealist view, that) it is consciousness (which is a

property of the subject), do not run contrary to our view, (which is that)

they are mutually associated (and sustain one another). (S7cd-58ab)

According to the followers of Kumārila, ‘manifested-nessʼ (prakaṭatā)

is present in the object, (whereas) the followers of Prabhākara (maintain that) it

is present in the perceiver. Thus, because of what was said before, namely that

there is no difference (abheda) between the object and the light (of
consciousness), (they sustain one another) and ‘do not run contrary to our

view’ʼ. If ‘manifested-ness' were to be an attribute of the object, the object
would be (clearly) manifest to everybody, and so all would be omniscient.
The Mīmāṁsakas, Kumārila and Prabhākara maintain, according to Abhinavagupta,

that “perceptibility” (prakaṭatā) is a property of the object, and that the cognition of the

object is a property of the subject. The contradiction between these two views can be
resolved by admitting that the knower and the known are essentially the same.

CHAPTER TEN

Again, if consciousness (of that) were to be an attribute of the subject, and not at

all of the object, it would be beyond the reach of the senses (parokṣa), because
such is its original form.
It is not reasonable to say that an object is perceptible to everybody now
without distinction, in that the subject (in reality) is one, and no objects exist (as
entities separate from the subject). On the Māyā level, however, even though the
subjects are different from one another, nonetheless the object, manifesting by
its association with the subject, is necessarily experienced individually by each
subject as pleasant or otherwise. Thus, although consciousness is an attribute of
the subject, it does not abandon its relationship with the object, because the
object is essentially the subject. Thus, (the fallacies) of either the omniscience

(of the subject) or absence of perceptibility (on the part) of the object finds no
footing.
Thusṣ, they are mutually associated in such a way that there is no (real)
distinction between the two views, that perceptibility is a (property of the
object) or of the (subject’s) consciousness. This is the meaning. In this way, it is
proved that perceptibility (vedyatva) is, to this extent, a property of an entity
(bhāvadharma) itself, as is, for example, the ‘blueness’ (of the colour blue).

ae1 || uc 1

āa] 1

ā rvaf̃ ī aārrnt aīaaq || u

tathā hi nibhr̥taś cauraś caitravedyam iti sphuṭam || 58 Il
buddhvā nādatta evāśu parīpsāvivaśo ‘pi san |

seyaṁ paśyati māṁ netratribhāgeneti sādaram || 59 ||
svaṁ deham amrṛteneva siktaṁ paśyati kāmukaḥ |

Thus, the thief restrains (himself), conscious that (what he intends
to do) is clearly perceptible (vedya) to Caitra. He is not quick to take
(anything), although full of desire to do so. Similarly, the lover who, full of
respectful devotion, (is aware that his beloved) is looking at him with a
sidelong glance, sees (and feels as if) his own body is being sprinkled with

nectar. (58cd-60ab)

The meaning is, just as ‘a thief’, although intent on the desire to lay
hold of (and steal) some particular object, ‘is not quick’ (to do s0), that is, (does

not engage) in increasing degrees of reflecting (on how to do it). This is

because, having understood that it is clearly certain that Caitra knows (that he

intends to do s0), he does not take it, even though it is supremely (needful for
him) to have it. Thus, he is not able to either take or abandon it. Thus, because

This verse connects to verse 10/56cd-57ab.
The above are two examples of how ‘being known’ affects the subject of the
knowledge – the thief suffers for it, while the lover feels pleasure.

TANTRĀLOKA

of his deluded condition of uncertainty, he suffers and so ‘restrains (himself)’,
and remains (immobile), like (a figure) drawn in a picture. This is the meaning.

Similarly, the lover (feels that) “his is my most beloved, who cannot be attained

even with a hundred desires.” ‘Full of respectful devotion’, not indeed with
just (lustful) desire as for a prostitute, (considers that) she is looking at me ‘with
a sidelong glance’, not (just) like one who is indifferent. “(Indeed,) she does

not stop looking at me for even a moment.” (Thus, he) ‘sees (and feels as if) his
own body is being sprinkled with nectar’. The meaning is that he experiences
the supreme, most excellent bliss within himself. If awareness of that object
were to be (just) a quality of the perceiver, then how is it that the thief would
not take the thing (he wishes to steal) because Caitra has known (his intention),
and the lover should experience his own body to be as if sprinkled with nectar
because (his) beloved is looking (at him)? Thus, it is rightly said that
perceptibility is a property of an entity (bhāvadharma). Two examples have
been given in order to illustrate the various functional efficacies of perceptibility
associated with the object. The first, that it causes suffering, and the second,
(blissful) pleasure.

Surely (one may ask), if the object is (essentially) made of
consciousness, then its perceptibility (vedyatva) is said to be consciousness. But
consciousness is not an attribute of the object (artha), so how is this

perceptibility a property of (a phenomenal) entity (bhāvadharma)? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

EIEEEEIĒIiEIĒeIIVḵTEĀHAĒ

na caitaj jñānasaṁvittimātraṁ bhāvāṁśaprṣṭhagam || 60 ||
arthakriyākaraṁ tac cen na dharmaḥ ko nv asau bhavet |

(Perceptibility) performs (its own) function (arthakriyākara), (which
is to make the object perceptible,) and is associated with an aspect of the
(perceptible) entity (itself) (bhāva). It cannot amount to just the state of
awareness of its cognition (jñānasaṅvitti). (In short), if it is not an

(inherent) attribute (dharma) (of the entity itself), then what could it be?

(60cd-61ab)

Nor is this perceptibility just consciousness alone, which is cognition,

as it is ‘associated with an aspect of the (perceptible) entity (itself) (bhāva)’.

Thus, it is separate from that pure consciousness, and so it is an attribute of the
aspect which is the (perceptible) entity. As that is so, what is its association
(nibandhana) with it? Thus, it is said that ‘(perceptibility) performs (its own)
function’ʼ, and that function was described previously. If (one were to say that)

it is an (inherent) attribute (of the object), (we reply) that is not (the view we)
prefer (to maintain, for then) the blue (colour), for example, of that (entity)
would also be some (inherent) attribute (of it). So it is said, ‘then what could it

be?” By saying that it is (consciousness) alone suggests that awareness of its
cognition is more that (its) perceptibility. And that which is ‘more’ is either the

CHAPTER TEN

entity (itself) or its (inherent) attribute. (However,) perceptibility is not thus the
entity (itself). It is its perceptibility. It is certainly not just perceptibility (itself).
Therefore, it is an (inherent) attribute of that (entity), and so it was rightly said

that ‘perceptibility (vedyatva) is a property of an entity (bhāvadharma).
Surely

(then,

one

may

object)

that

here

(in

this

case),

the

aforementioned defect (applies), namely, that if perceptibility were to be an
attribute of the (perceivable) entity, then (that attribute) should be (perceptible)

to all. (We declare that) that is not so. Thus he says:

īTRGTTCTṬJ= gTĀTTTRTTT |

yac coktaṁ vedyatādharmo bhāvaḥ sarvān api prati || 61 Il
syād ity etat svapakṣaghnaṁ duṣprayogāstravat tava |
(The objection) that has been voiced, namely, that perceptibility is

an attribute of the (perceivable) entity; (as such,) it would be (perceptible)

to all – (our response to that reply is that,) like a weapon badly handled,
this (response itself) confutes your own view, (not ours). (61cd-62ab)
It is your delusion, namely that, (like) the mace of Varuṇa (vāruṇnī
gadā), because it is ‘badly handled’, that is, used against Vāsudeva, who is not
fighting, killed the one who was known to have that weapon (śrutāyudha). In
the same way, applying (this logical) fallacy to my view, you would demolish
your own. Moreover, even if cognition does not impart (some special) quality
to the object, and if, according to your view, it assumes a state of perceptibility
because that special quality is not specific (to any one perceiver), then it would
be perceptible to all. On the contrary, according to our view, only Śiva, who is
free and whose nature is the supreme light (of consciousness), exists. Nothing
else at all exists in relation to Him. Thus, because nothing (else) exists, to whom

would He manifest? Thus he says:

3Taāa

aTṀYIYYATTHTTTTRT̄]
I ĒR II

asmākaṁ tu svaprakāśaśivatāmātravādinām || 62.||
anyaṁ prati cakāstīti vaca eva na vidyate |
We who are the votaries of the doctrine that only Śiva exists and is
self-luminous never say that He manifests to another. (62cd-63ab)

Below, 10/132c.

Read vedyatādharmo for vedyatādharmā.
Read wvatpakṣaṃ eva for matpakṣam eva.

TANTRĀLOKA

It was said before that although the perceivers are different (from one
another) on the plane of Māyā, the object, such as (the experience of) pleasure
and the like, is of the nature of each particular perceiver (that cognizes it), and

so it is fixed (and determined) with respect to each one.

(This view is) not only logically sound according to the doctrine that

there is only one perceiver and (one) reality; it is (true) also when there (is

considered) to be a difference between the perceiver and the object of
perception. Thus he says:

gdīaāĨtṁ ṁũc a rzafṁ ās:. 11 =3 1

sarvān prati ca tan nīlaṁ ṣa ghaṭaś ceti yad vacaḥ || 63 |I
tad apy aviditaprāyaṁ gṛhītaṁ mugdhabuddhibhiḥ |
Those of dull intellect say: “that colour blue and this jar (are
equally visible) to everyone”, without understanding what is meant by that.

(63cd-64ab)

Are we examining (nidarśayāma) the nature of the colour blue (of an

object) in order to make its perceptibility hold good for everybody without
exception, or just that perceptibility (is perceivable to only one perceiver)?
(Those who say that it is equally visible to everybody are foolish people, who
say s0) ‘without understanding what is meant by that’; that is, accept this
without having reflected (on the matter). This is the meaning.

He explains that with reasoned argument.

ḶIEAIJIETAEEARIGUSEIEZIṬĪĒTĀṬ

āa stz. fē 3 ṁṁī ā ṛaāq īca: 1

āaī. tīTūgNgRĪST|

na hi kālāgnirudrīyakāyāvagatanīlimā || 64 ||
tava nīlaḥ kiṁ nu pīto maivaṁ bhũn na tu nĩlakaḥ |
na kañcit prati nĩlo ʻsau nīlo vā yaṁ prati sthitaḥ | 65 ||
taṁ praty eva sa vedyaḥ ṣyāt saṅkalpadvārako ‘ntataḥ |

(Consider this:) the blue colour of Kālāgnirudra’s body is

certainly not your (common) blue. Is it yellow (or any other colour then)?
Certainly not! But nor is it blue. Either this blue (does) not (manifest as)
such for anybody, or else it (manifests as) blue (only) for the (person) who

Kālāgnirudra – the Rudra of the Fire of Time – is a particular form of Śiva; see above,
4/164-167.

CHAPTER TEN

stands before it; and ultimately, (the same would be the case even if it is

only) imagined.” (64cd-66ab)

The quality called ‘blue’ perceived in the body of Kālāgnirudra cannot
be considered to be that of Caitra’s (body). It is not right to say that an attribute

(dharma) present in the possessor of (that) attribute (dharmin) is also present in

another bearer of attributes as its own. By saying that it is present in
Kālāgnirudra’s body is meant that it is impossible to perceive it elsewhere as the
aṭṭribute of something else. Surely (one may ask), if the (colour) blue is present
in something else (anyagata), and is not so for someone else, would it be yellow

for him? Thus he asks: “is it yellow?” To which he replies “certainly not! But
nor is it blue”. One should not consider it to be yellow or blue. It is not

logically possible for the red colour of a jar to be the red colour of a cloth.
Thus we do not understand what the sense of the view is that (the colour) blue
(manifests equally) for everybody. If the sense of (your) view is that (the colour)
blue is the same for all, as it is perceptible, (then) what is to be proved
(dārṣṭāntaka) has been made into the example (dṛsṣṭāntīkṛta). (Thus, you have)
declared something that is contrary to your own view; thus it is said that (it is
said) by ‘those of dull intellect’. Here (according to) our view, on the contrary,
there is no separate manifestation (avabhāsa) of subject and object in relation
the supreme subject, and so what could manifest to whom? Thus he says: “this
blue (does) not (manifest as) such for anybody°. Although there is an evident
division between subject and object in relation to the lower (phenomenal)
subject, but as the object (artha) is of the nature of the subject (anyway), in
accord with the aforestated reasoning, blue would be perceptible (vedya) to that
(perceiver) to whom (the colour) blue (appears). Thus he says: ‘or else it is blue
(only for the (person) who stands before it)’. Surely (the opponent may
object), we do not observe any cause (nimitta) at all for a fixed rule that (the

colour) blue (of this example must always be) perceptible (vedya). (Simply) due
to differences in (its) location and time, for example, it may also become out of

reach of the senses (parokṣa). With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘ultimately (the
same would be the case even if it is not an object of direct perception, but)

Gnoli writes in a note to his translation of these verses: ‘Thus the notion that this is

‘equal for all’ cannot be sustained even from the point of view of the opponent (whether
he be a Naiyāyika or of any other school). According to Abhinavagupta, a quality

(dharma), whatever it may be, is not equally the same for everybody; moreover, it
differs according to the possessor of that quality (dharmin). The colour ‘blue’ that

appears related to the body of Kālāgnirudra is not the same ‘blue’ that appears in

relation to Caitra, because one cannot say that the same quality that belongs to a

particular possessor of that quality belongs also to another. Thus the assertion that the
quality ‘blue’ appears equally with reference to all without distinction is erroneous.
From the Śaiva point of view, which maintains that there is only one subject, the colour
‘blue’ cannot be (be said to) to be set in relation to just one particular, determinate
subject. Moreover, to say that the colour ‘blue’ that appears with reference to a
particular subject is also ‘perceptible’ for him is a completely imaginary assertion. One

should bear in mind that according to this school, a quality or potency (dharma, śakti) is
not separate from its possessor, as the Vaiśeṣika maintains. See above, 1/158.”

Read lauhityam iṭi for mālinyam ity.

TANTRĀLOKA

only imagined.’ One for whom it is not perceptible (even) by the imagination,

the colour blue also would not be (manifest as such) to him. Apart from a

perception (vedana) as (the colour) blue, blue is nothing at all, for it has been

declared (many times) that existence (sartā) is (nothing but) manifestation
(prakāśamānatā) itself.

According to your view (mata), although (everything) is equally ‘other’

without distinction with regards to an attribute that depends on another, one

does perceive in other cases that there is a regulating principle (niyama) (that
determines what that ‘other’ should be). How is it that it is not similarly
admitted here (in this case)? Thus he says:

ñī Ggīdd marī || ēē |1

yathā cārthaprakāśātma jñānaṁ saṅgīryate tvayā |l 66 ||
tathā taj jñātryedyatvaṁ bhāvīyaṁ rūpam ucyatām |

Just as you declare that cognition is the light of (a particular)
object, you should also say that the perceptibility (of an entity) for a

perceiver is the form (rūpa) of the object (he seeks to) perceive (bhāvīya).

(66cd-67ab)

You have said that the nature of cognition (jñāna) is that it is

universally (sāmāṅyena) the light of (any) entity (perceived). (But) although it
is the light of all things without distinction, even so, because it is not possible
for (cognition) to be simultaneously in conjunction with an endless number of
entities,” it is accepted (in your view) that cognition is (not associated with all
things in the same way, and so is) the light of (only some) fixed (determined)

entity, (with the result that one perceives that) ‘this is the cognition of blue’ and
‘this is the cognition of yellow’.” Such is the case in our view also; the quality

called ‘perceptibility° belongs to the object (the perceiver seeks to) perceive, or

else (we) say that it is associated with a (specific) fixed (and determined)
perceiver (so that a perceptible object is not for this reason perceived by one and
all simultaneously). What is this inappropriate obstinacy (on your part) that
what is perceptible to one perceiver should also be so to another in the same
way? Now, just as the creativity (of a cause), for example, does not assume a

(different) constraining basis (nibandhana) other than (its effect), that is also
just the same here (in this case) also. It is (our) contention that, on the plane of

Maāyā, perceptibility is a product of the (individual) perceiver. Thus, the
Naiyāyika’s (empirical analytical) method (prakriyā) is based on the daily
business of life (vyavahāra), which (takes place) on the plane of Māyā. This is

the tradition of the ancients.”

Read samārthānantyāyogāt for sāmasamanantyāyogāt.

“ Read pītajñānam iḍam iti for pītajñānam iti.

Read nibandhanāntaraṁ nāśrīyate for nibandhanāntaramāśrīyate.
Gnoli translates the last line as ‘The ‘perceptibility° on the part of a (particular)
sentient subject is a property of the object. He writes in a note: “According to the

CHAPTER TEN

We do not see even a tiny (possibility of an) occasion for the
application of that (perceptibility) to something else (other than the specific
object viewed by a particular perceiver). Thus he says:

aīs fa: ā#īlrṣaīṁ aar āa 11 . 11

na ca jñātātra niyataḥ kaścīj jñāne yathā tava || 67 |I
arthe jñātā yadā yo yas tad vedyaṁ vapur ucyatām |
Unlike you, (we do not maintain) here (in our view) that the subject

is fixed (and determined) (niyata) in the course of cognition. You should

say that the perceptible objective nature of an entity (vedyaṁ vapus) (is
always the same,) whoever the perceiver may be or whenever (he may be
present). (67cd-68ab)

We do not consider, as you (the opponents) do, that it is possible for

there to exist an autonomous entity separate from the cognition (of it), and that

similarly, the perceiver is separate from the light of the object, so that the
question may arise as to why should an entity that is manifest to one perceiver
not be so for another perceiver also. According to our system, in accord with the
manner of the formation of the couple, that is, mutually compatible subject and
object, the perceiver of (a particular object) is the consciousness associated with
the manifestation of (that) entity. What is not such could not be the perceiver of
that (object), for how could that (object) be manifest (to the subject otherwise)?
Thus, it is proved that the perceptibility (of an entity is such only for a specific)
fixed perceiver.
One who, although he has heard us say this repeatedly, (nonetheless)
ignores it, will become the object of ridicule. Thus he says:

aṝāḷca Jīaia, | ._ ||

tattadvijñātrvedyatvaṁ sarvān praty eva bhāsatām || 68 II
ity evaṁ codayan manye vrajed badhiradhuryatām |

opponent, a quality maintains its identity for all subjects, but appears in relation to a
particular subject in the form of ‘this is yellowʼ or ‘this is blue’. Thuṣ, if we say that

‘perceptibility, which is a quality of the thing, appears in relation to a particular subject
and not to others, you would have no reason to object.’

“ Iṇ the sense of pre-existent, already formed, separate from Śiva, and something apart
from the manifest nature of the object, just as the opponent maintains that the object is

independent of its cognition. According to this Śaiva view, the conscious subject is not a
separate reality from the object; on the contrary, it is a subject to the degree in which it

moves out towards the object and contains within itself all things.

TANTRĀLOKA

na hy anyaṁ prati vai kañcid bhāti sā vedyatā tathā || 69 ||

He who insists that the perceptibility (of a particular object
apprehended) by the particular subject (who perceives it) should be
manifest to all has, I believe, reached the limit of deafness. That

perceptibility (as we understand it to be) (vedyatā) does not manifest in this

way to any other (subject).” (68cd-69)

(The opponent has reached) ‘the limit of deafness’. What is being said

in this way is that a deaf man does not hear at all, whereas although (the

opponent) does hear, he does not listen, and so excels him also (in deafness).
‘That perceptibility (as we understand it to be) (vedyatā) does not manifest
in this way,’ that is, in a state of oneness, ‘to any other (subject)’, the nature
of which is the consciousness associated with the manifestation of that entity.
The meaning is that an entity would not become perceptible to him.
Thus, does what was said before, namely that ‘perceptibility (vedyatā)
is an entity’s own (specific) formʼ. make you angry without cause? Thus he

says:

Ṭ=S ṜTTTTT GTTCATTJTJTĪ|
bhāvasya rūpam ity ukte keyam asthānavaidhurī|
(I fail to understand) what this misplaced aversion is (on your part

to our) saying that (perceptibility) is an integral part (rūpa) of anything
(which is perceivable). (70ab)

Surely (the opponent may object that), according to the view that
perceptibility is a property of an entity (hhāvadharma), perceptibility itself also,
like (the colour) blue, for example, is associated with the perceptibility that
penetrates into the essential nature (of something) that is separate from itself,
(and that perceptibility would similarly require another and so on;) thus this
would entail an infinite regress.” How can that (fallacy) be avoided?

' According to Abhinava, talk of ‘any other’ (subject) or ‘all other° (subjects) makes no
sense, because the subject is one only and identified with Śiva, who is free and
independent in all respects. Moreover, all objects are one with him.

“ Above, 10/19ab, also quoted above in TĀv ad 10/55cd-56ab.
” The colour blue is known to the perceiver because it is perceptible. Its perceptibility
inheres in the object of which blue is a quality. But in order to perceive that
perceptibility, it must itself possess that same quality of perceptibility. If so, then that

perceptibility would also have to possess that quality, and so on, leading to an infinite
regress. This is because each of the ‘perceptibilities' are qualities of different things. Cf,

above, 10/23-24cd: ‘Again, if this (hypothetical) quality called ‘perceptibility is itself
imperceptible, (then it is no more real then) a sky-flower. But if it is perceptible, then
there should be perceptibility there (in that) also, and (so that would result in) an infinite

regress. Thus, nothing would be perceptible, and the (entire) universe would be (as if) in
a coma.ʼ

CHAPTER TEN

a- -ñfamīoī fī̄gnaāaī 11 90 11
EEEISI
anena nītimārgeṇa nirmiūlam apasāritā || 7O |I
anavasthā . . .… . . . . . . . . . .
This line of reasoning totally precludes (the possibility) of an

infinite regress (which would be the case if ‘perceptibility° were to be itself
perceptible). (70cd-71a)

‘This line of reasoningʼ, namely, that just as it is not reasonable that

the perceptibility (of something) to one perceiver be related to another
perceiver, in the same way, because the same reasoning holds good, (the
perceptibility of one thing is not) related to the perceptibility of (something)

He explains that with reasoned argument:

. . . tathā hy anyair nīlādyaiḥ sadṛśī na sā |
vedyatā kintu dharmo ʻsau yad yogāt sarvadharmavān || 71Ī ||
dharmī vedyatvam abhyeti sa sattāsamavāyavat |
Perceptibility is not like the colour blue or other (qualities of an
object). Rather, it is (a fundamental) attribute (dharma) (of an object), like
Being (sattā) and inherence (samavāya). Conjoined with that (yad yogāt),
the substratum

(dharmin), that

perceptible." (71bcd-72ab)

possesses all

the qualities, becomes

Surely (a question arises that the opponent must address). According to
your view, is perceptibility just a quality (like all others), or does it belong to a
different category of qualities (guṇapadārtha), as essentially cognition
(jññānarūpa)? In that case (tatra), if it were to be just a quality alone, it could not
be associated with another quality called ‘perceptibility°. While if (you consider
it) to be a quality of cognition, then according to the principle that ‘qualities (are
themselves) without qualities’, how can (perceptibility) have a quality of the
same type (sajātīya) as itself, which is an (additional) subsequent perceptibility
ṇ ṭhis case, the ‘something else’ is the perceptibility of the perceptibility. The first

perceptibility renders the object to which is related perceptible. The second is the
perceptibility of the perceptibility, which is something different.

T In other words, by possessing this attribute called ‘perceptibility, an object, along
with all its properties, becomes perceptible. This includes the perceptibility itself.

TANTRĀLOKA

(with reference to itself) (vedyatāntaram)? Just like that, if the quality called
perceptibility were to be one of a different type (vijātīya) than (the quality)

‘bluenessʼ, it could not in that way be its (additional) subsequent perceptibility

(that makes it perceptible). This is how (perceptibility) differs from blue and

other such qualities. Rather, that (same) quality of perceptibility is the cause of
the behaviour of its own substratum, as perceptible by virtue of its state of
inherence (samavāyavrtti) with it. Although the body (of the entity, which is)

the bearer of the qualities, is sullied with all (its) qualities, it is in itself devoid
of perceptibility and its absence. (Thus,) without that (quality of perceptibility),
it would be impossible to say that it is perceptible (vedya).
Surely (the opponent may object that), if the quality called perceptibility
is also in itself not perceptible (vedya), (its function) is not (successfully)
accomplished (asiddha). Thus, how could the bearer of the attributes be made to
behave

(as

such

in

daily

life)

by

association

with

itself

(alone)

(svasaṁṅbandhena)? In the course of remedying this doubt, he advances an
example (to say that it is a fundamental attribute of a perceivable entity) ‘like
Being (sattā) and inherence (samavāya). In this way (anena), the specific
(features) of the qualities and functions (karman) (of things) have also been
(noted and) characterized.

He cḷarifies that:

trōrīe: VGTIYGTATT; |

1 s3 11|
=rrṁ-] AfTrīī JJGTNGG
TN T |

sṭī aṉ Ṁkeṛā: || usx 1

Taāī] JTāTTRTRHTRaTHHTIT:|

brūṣe yathā hi kurute sattā saty asataḥ sataḥ || 72 ||

antyo viśeṣo vyāvṛttirūpo vyāvṛttivarjitān || 73 II

vyāvṛttāṉ śveṭimā śuklam aśuklaṁ gamanaṁ tathā |

tadvan nīlādidharmāṁśayukto dharmī svayaṁ sthitaḥ || 74 ||
avedyo vedyatārūpād dharmād vedyatvam āgataḥ |
(An opponent may object at this point that,) what you are saying
amounts to this, namely, (that perceptibility) acts as does Being (sattā) that,
when it is present, makes what does not exist existent. So too, inherence

conjoined (to something) conjoins things that are not conjoined. The last
In other words, the perceptibility of the qualities of blueness or roundness of a jar
would not be possible if perceptibility were to be an attribute of those qualities. Then, as

perceptibility is a quality like any other, that too would have to be the bearer of the same
quality, and that too, in an infinite regress. Moreover, qualities are not the possessor of

qualities, only substances are.

CHAPTER TEN

(particular) quality (viśeṣa) (of an entity) is separation, (that makes things)
that are not separate, separate. Brilliant white (makes) what is not white,
white. In the same way, movement (makes something move). Similarly, the
bearer of attributes (dharmin) endowed with all its qualities, such as blue
and the like, (although) in itself imperceptible (avedya), becomes, by virtue

of the quality of perceptibility, perceptible. (72cd-75ab)

(The word) ‘makes’ is to be added to all these statements. (Being)

‘when present’ as it is by (its very) nature. ‘(Inherence) conjoined (to

something)ʼ. “(When something is) conjoined (with inherence)’ means that it
performs (its own) function by

itself (svayaṁ vṛttirāpaḥ).

‘The last

((particular) quality (viśeṣa) (of an entity)) is the condition, amongst (those)
eternal substances that are the endings (of things) called ‘the end’, is the end of

the arising and destruction (of something in particular). ‘A particular” is that
which separates off (an entity from all others), because it specifies in all respects
(the entity) which is own substratum. This is the meaning. That which is

‘briliant white’, that is, itself white, makes what is not white, white. This is the
meaning. In the same way, (movement) makes that which is not moving, move.
This is the sense (of this statement). One should add to (to what follows that, in

the same way, an entity becomes perceptible) when perceptibility, having come
(to be inherent in it,) abides (as such). Indeed, this is your philosophy, according
to which Being (sartā), which is the supreme universal, (common to all existing

" Gnoli: ‘Assuming this view, the following contradiction arises. Just as ‘blue is by its

very nature existent, so also ‘perceptibility should be by its very nature perceivable.
However, as ‘perceptibility is that by virtue of which something becomes perceptible,
one and the same thing would have two contrasting qualities, namely, perceptibility and
the capacity to make it perceptible (vedakatvam). We shall see that Abhinava counters
this objection by saying that ‘perceptibility is ultimately equivalent to ‘selfluminosity”.”

Qualities can be linked to a substance in two ways: by inherence (samavāya) or

conjunction (sarṁyoga). The ‘clay-nessʼ of clay is an inherent quality of clay, in the

sense that without it, clay would not be clay, and so is linked to it by way of inherence.
The colour of the clay, on the other hand, is an adventitious quality. It can vary without
this entailing an inherent change in the clay. Thus, this kind of quality is linked to the
clay by conjunction (sarityoga). These two kinds of qualities are often distinguished by

calling them ‘dharma’ (‘attribute’) anḍ ‘quality’ (guṇa), respectively. The point being
made here is that the inherence that links an attribute to the bearer of that attribute does

not require that there be another inherence to link the first inherence to the attribute. If
that were to be so, that would lead to an infinite regress, and so inherence would be

impossible, and clay could have no ‘clay-ness’, as the Buddhists maintain. In other
words, inherence both inheres in the substance and causes other things to inhere in it,

according to their nature. Thus it ‘it performs (its own) function by itself’.
According to the Nyāya’s radically realist way of thinking, the end of an entity is
‘some thing’. That is evident, they say, because it is named ‘the endʼ, as is any existent

thing. Moreover, it is eternal, as there can be no end of the end. There are as many
‘endsʼ as there are things that come to an end. All of them are made of an ‘eternal
substance’ (nityadravya). The ‘endʼ, like the other things presented here as examples, is
both the end itself and it brings to an end what it is associated with, by way of

inherence.

TANTRĀLOKA

things), is of two kinds, namely, Being which is the essential nature (of things)

and (Being) by inherence (sāmavāyinī). In that case (tatra), (Being) by

inherence (sāmavāyinī) is present in substances, qualities and actions (karman),
whereas Being which is the essential nature (of things) is present in universals,
particulars, and inseparable concomitance (samavāya). As is said:

‘Being generates three categories (of things) (padārtha).”
There (in that context), substances (qualities and actions) neither exist

nor do not exist (in themselves), by their very nature. They exist due to the

inherence of Being (sartā) (within them). As Being exists by its very nature
alone (eva), (to ask) whether it exists or not is mere (senseless) questioning.

Another kind of universal is also implied in this way. This is so because a cow
is not a cow by its inherent nature (ṣvarūpeṇa), nor is it not a cow. It is a cow by
its association (abhiṣaṁbandha) with (universal)

‘cow-ness’.

‘Cow-ness’,

however, is such of itself (svataḥ), and so does not entail union (yoga) with
another universal (jāti). Juṣṭ as an effect, whether a universal within (its) cause
or in a particular (quality), is not in itself functional by nature (svayam
avṛttirūpam), (but is s0) by virtue of (its state) of inherence (within them).
(However,) inherence, present within its own substratum, is functional in itself
(svayam), and so does not require another (subsequent) functioning of inherence

or the like (for it to inhere within it).
Attributes such as qualities and actions that are the causes of the notion
of exclusion (and difference) (vyāvṛtti) are here (considered by Naiyāyikas to
be) particulars (viśeṣa) which serve as the counter to the doubts that (may) result
from the association with universals that are the causes of the apprehensions
(pratyaya) complying with (the specific nature of phenomenally) existing

things.'” The particulars that are the endings of those (particulars) are proved

(to be existent) (siddha) by the direct perception of yogis, because otherwise, for

those

who

are

like

me,

it

would

not

be

logically

possible

(mādṛśāmanyathānupapattyā) (to establish that). Amongst eternal substances,
(‘endingsʼ) are the cause of the notion of total exclusion (atyantavyāvṛtti) (of
everything that exists), and they assume (a condition) which differs in character

from both being of the same type or of a different type (sajātīyavijātīya) (from

anything else). (They occur when the particulars) are destroyed (pralaya), or
Read with MS K, paryanuyogamātram for paryanuyogapātram.
' One may have a general notion that something is present. This is a universal. It is

specified and identified by association with a particular quality (viśeṣa) that
differentiates that particular entity from others. Thus, it is freed from the doubt of it

being something else. When a pillar or the stump of a tree is seen at a distance on a

foggy night, the universal ‘stump-ness’ is perceived, but its identity is uncertain. So one

may ask oneself, “is this the stump of a tree or a man?” If by further examination, some
defining details are perceived, it is possible to determine with certainty which one of the
two options it is, by exclusion of one or the other (see above 1/249cd-250ab (248) ff.).

“ ‘TṬhe end’ as an eternal substance (see above note 10,105) is unique. There is nothing

else which is of the same type. It is not a ‘thing, that it can be of a different type from
anything else.

CHAPTER TEN

else when they are the cause of doubt due to their conjunction with a universal

(sāmānyayoga).”

Again, phenomena (bhāva) are not intrinsically (svarūpeṇa) exclusive
of one another (vyāvṛtta), nor are they not so. Rather, it is by (their) union
(yoga) with (the universal which is) ‘exclusion’ that they are exclusive of one
another (vyāvṛtta). In this way, they are made to be exclusive (of one another)
by the particulars (associated with each one). However, particulars are in
themselves (svayam) exclusive by nature, and so cannot be conceived to be
either exclusive (of one another) or not. Again, a cloth is neither intrinsically
(svarūpāt) white nor otherwise; (rather,) it is white by its association
(saṁbandha) with the quality ‘white’. The quality ‘white’ (is such) by virtue of
its white nature, another ‘white’ which is inherently concomitant with it
(samavāyin) is not added on to it (to make it such).

Again, just as one who is moving (gantr) is not in himself (svayam) one
who moves, nor is he otherwise. (Rather,) it is because of (his) union (yoga)

with the act of moving (gamanakriyā) that he is one who moves. The act of

moving is such by its very nature, and so does not require another (act of)
moving within itself (to move). In this way, although an entity (bhāva) may be

endowed with all (its) qualities, it is not in itself (svayam) perceptible (vedya) or
not. It is perceptible by virtue of (its) association (saṁbandáha) with
perceptibility (vedyatā), whereas perceptibility is of itself, by its own nature,
perceptible, and so it is not reasonable to maintain that it is either perceptible or
otherwise. With this, (the discussion) comes to rest.

Surely (an opponent may object that), just as Being (sattā) exists by its

very nature, so too perceptibility is perceptible by its very nature. (However,) by

saying that, (one implies that that) same essential nature could come to possess
the perceptibility (vedyatva) (of an object) as well as the subjectivity
(vedakatva) (of a perceiver), and that is not logically sound because (they are
mutually) contradictory. With this doubt in mind, (he responds) by bringing
self-perceptibility (svayaṁsaṁvedyatā) to rest within the self-luminosity (of the

light of consciousness).

TṬGTNTII TTS-TJIGHTTT JaHTYTITT]

vedyatā bhāsamānā ca svayaṁ nīlādidharmavat || 75 ||

!” Ṣee previous note 10,105 and 107.
'! The light of consciousness by virtue of which all things ‘shine’, that is, manifest,

whether as objects or as their respective perceivers, illumines itself. Otherwise, it would
fall to the level of an object of manifestation and so, reduced to a particular, could not
be the universal Light that shines as all things. Moreover, for the same reason, the Light
of consciousness is not and cannot be an object of perception of another consciousness.
Consciousness, and hence cognition, which exemplifies it epistemologically as does

manifestation ontologically, is self-cognitive. It is perceptible by its own consciousness
(of itself) (svasaṁvedanasaṁvedya). If this were not so, a cognition would require

another cognition to perceive it, and that too another, and so on, leading to an infinite
regress that radically precludes perception. See above, note 10,69.

TANTRĀLOKA

aprakāśā svaprakāśād dharmād eti prakāśatām |
(This objection does not affect us at all. The truth is) that
perceptibility (vedyatā), like other qualities, such as blue and the like, is
unmanifest (aprakāśa) in itself (svayam), (but) manifests (‘shines’) by virtue

of that quality of self-luminosity (that is the inherent nature of
perceptibility, which is not perceptible in the manner of an object). (75cd76ab)

If perceptibility manifests itself, then by its nature (as an object of
illumination), which is appropriate for an insentient entity like (the objectively
perceived colour) blue, although unmanifest (‘not shining’), becomes manifest
by virtue of its own nature, which is called ‘self-luminosity’, and shines by itself
alone. It certainly does not assume the state of an object (karmabhāva) in
relation to itself (svāpekṣayā). This is the meaning.
Thus, one should not consider perceptibility (vedyatā) to be itself
perceivable (vedyā) (as an object). Thus he says:

rērdī aq fāzā-d saīṂ gaāf Ṁra--; 1] ē 1

gas:

prakāśe khalu viś ntiṅṁ vedyaḥ śrayati cet tataḥ || 76 ||
nānyā kācid apekṣ
a kr̥takṛtyasya sarvataḥ |

If objectivity'"™ thus abides at rest (in this way) in the light (of

consciousness), it depends on nothing else, and has accomplished its task in
every respect. (76cd-77ab)

Perceptibility (vedyatā) is the repose of the perceptible (object) (vedya)
as an insentient entity in conditioned (pāratantrya) (subjective) consciousness.
Does (that state of) repose (within consciousness) also depend on something
else, so that perceptibility is present in perceptibility also? Thus, (in response to
this question, he) adds that, what ‘has accomplished its task in every respect’
‘depends on nothing else’.
Surely (one may ask), if perceptibility is essentially repose in the Light

(of consciousness), then how can it (also be) an attribute of phenomenal
entities? With this doubt in mind, he says:

flraīd’ aāā-zāīaradd
fira7 1] ots 11

arāaī rā 3=z |

yathā ca śivanāthena svātantryād bhāsyate bhidā l| 77 ||
nīlādivat tathaivāyaṁ vedyatā dharma ucyate |
'" Read vedyaḥ for viśyam.

CHAPTER TEN

Just as Lord Śiva freely makes (the many objects) manifest as
divided off (from one another) (bhidā), it is said that, in the same way, (he

makes) this quality, perceptibility, (manifest), as (He does) blue and other
(qualities). (77cd-78ab)

(Perceptibility) is a ‘quality’ of a (phenomenal) entity.
Surely (the opponent may object): Agreed that perceptibility is a
property of an entity (bhāvadharma), why should there be a doubt about that?
But how (do you explain) this diversity in this way (of the perceptibility of
objects) when there are many (different) perceivers? Even if there is a difference
between perceivers, there is no difference at all within itself of (the colour) blue

(they perceive individually). With this doubt in mind, he says:

Progressive Differentiation of Bhairava’s Aspects
Does Not Limit Him

īṣ fiz fē tdá vrraṁrṁszqḹ
āī 3Iī I| 9¢ 11
ṝē ] fn- ūārvrd-rōaīqfīr|

3ara-ṁa-Ḷ gJITATQGYATT: &T: ||/93 1|
evaṁ siddhaṁ hi vedyatvaṁ bhāvadharmo ʻstu kā ghṛṇā || 78 Il
idaṁ tu cintyaṁ sakalaparyantoktapramātṛbhiḥ |
vedyatvam ekarūpaṁ syāc cāturdaśyam ataḥ kutaḥ l| 79 |I
(The opponent may now go on to say:) Agreed then that in this way
perceptibility has been proved to an intrinsic attribute of an entity
(bhāvadharma). Why, (after all, should one) be so averse (to this view)?
(Even so,) one should reflect on how it is that, if perceptibility is one for (all

the) subjects, (beginning with Śiva) up to the Fully Conditioned One

(sakala) at the end, how is it that (it is said to be) of fourteen kinds?
(78cd-79)
He responds to that (question):

tzzRVttṭHE--EiEḺEḺAE

ēaiī rīāīa vva 1| ¢o 1
&] āTSTTTRITTĀCTTĪṢTĪTJṬTGTJĒH: |

ucyate paripūrṇaṁ ced bhāvīyaṁ rūpam ucyate |
tad vibhur bhairavo devo bhagavān eva bhaṇyate || 80 ||
atha tannijamāhātmyakalpito ʻṁśāṁśikākramaḥ |
'! See above, 10/10cd-12ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

sahyate kiṁ kṛtaṁ tarhi proktakalpanayānayā || 81 ||
It is said, (in response to this query,) that if we are talking about the
perfectly full (and complete) nature of things, then that is said to be the
Blessed One (bhagavat) Himself, the all-pervasive Lord Bhairava. Now, (if
we are reflecting on how) He (bears within Himself and) tolerates the

progressive differentiation of His aspects (aṁśāṁśikākrama) that is
conceived by the glory (māhātmya) of His own (power), what does this

conception (of the distinction between these levels), as outlined above,

effectively do (to either compromise Bhairava’s plenitude or undermine
our views)? (80-81)

The nature (rūpa) of phenomena, which is such, (manifests as both)

complete (pūrṇa) and incomplete (apūrṇa). There, (in that context) (when an

entity manifests in its) complete form, then its own light (svaprakāśa) (i.e.

manifest nature) is the supreme light (of consciousness) that blossoms forth in

that way, and so (the very notion of it) being ‘somethingʼ loses all meaning.
Again, the nature which is incomplete, in the form of qualities and their
possessors etc., is conceived in that way by the Supreme Lord’s power of
freedom. Thus, we must accept (the existence of) all this business of daily life

(vyavahāra), which is based on duality (bhedānuprāṇita). So, what has this
conception of (the nature of the one conscious reality as a hierarchical) series
(krama) of fifteen etc. (components) wrongfully transgressed, that there is such
an aversion to it?
That one (colour) blue, manifesting in this way by the progressive
differentiation of each

of its particular aspects

accordingly rendered (variously) diverse. Thus he says:

is

Whatever Be the Form, Something Manifests That Is its Nature

TṬā] ā̄ī TīTḡJTHCTĪTTTTCTT || ¢ 1
ata eva yadā yena vapuṣā bhāti yad yathā |
tadā tathā tat tad rūpam ity eṣopaniṣat parā || 82 ||
The supreme secret (upaniṣad) is therefore this. Whatever be the
form, in whatever way something manifests at a certain time, that then is
its nature. (82)

‘Whatever be the form’ʼ, that is, perceptible by (the hierarchy of)
perceivers, beginning with the those that are fully conditioned (sakala) onwards
up to Śiva, with (their power)in an emergent state or otherwise, (is its nature).
' Instead of udriktānudriktaśaktikasakalādi- Th reads: udriktānudriktaśaktikasakalādi-

CHAPTER TEN

This is the meaning. ‘That is its nature’ which is perceptible to the Fully
Conditioned or Deconditioned through Dissolution (perceiver) etc.

Surely (one may ask), if the perceptibility (of an object) for each

(individual perceiver in the hierarchy), from the Fully Conditioned One (sakala)

onwards, is made to differ in some way due to the difference between the
perceivers (at differing levels), (but) even so, that (perceptibility) is one,

because the diversity of (their) purposeful action (arthakriyā) is not the
instrumental cause (of any difference in its nature). Thus, (the object) that is

perceptible (vedya) (to them must) also be one (and the same), and this
conception of a (hierarchical) series of fifteen etc. (components) is just (an
imaginary) notion. With this doubt in mind, he explains the (nature of the)

diversity of the functional efficacy (of the perceptibility of the various
perceivers) in order to establish that there is a difference of perceptibility (at

each level).

Collective Perception
An Object Manifests Differently When Viewed
by Several Perceivers Together

īIT J̄ ST-TITĪ 3īIId]Ī āT̄ṀTTA |
-JI] TTTTTTT fJIĪIĒFTTT 1|/¢3 11

EbEa|ēclēezt-vḵišxsrezḤIṈAḤ
caitreṇa vedyaṁ jānāmi dvābhyāṁ bahubhir apy atha |
mantreṇa tanmaheśena śivenodriktaśaktinā || 83 ||
anyādṛśena vety evaṁ bhāvo bhāti yathā tathā |
arthakriyādivaicitryam abhyety aparisaṁkhyayā |l 84 1|
An entity manifests variously, according to whether I know it to be
a perceptible object (vedya) for Caitra or two or more (subjects), Mantra,
the Lord of Mantra, or Śiva when His power is emergent, or otherwise.

Similarly, (this state of knowing what others know) becomes a countless

variety (of things), such as purposeful action (arthakriyā) and so on. (83-84)

As an entity manifests, so is (its) functional efficacy.. . . “Otherwise’

means when (Śiva’s) power is not emergent. In this way, ̃ is various,
A perceiver that is completely conditioned by all the forms of Impurity (mala)

will perceive the blue to be an independently existent entity that differs from all others
and the perceiver. As the soul’s Impurity is removed, higher degrees of subjectivity

emerge that perceive the same colour blue in varying forms and degrees of oneness with

the perceiver and other objects. The purpose of the previous complex discussion is to

logically establish that the same object may appear variously in this way to perceivers

on different levels.

TANTRĀLOKA

according to whether I know it to be a perceptible object (vedya)) ‘for Caitra’ .
Summarily justifying (what he has said), he clarifies it.

A Show Delights an Audience of Many Perceivers

Tī̄ī ī-HTGqTITTĀĒSTĪTRTT|

TĀTÑ |II Z& 1|I
tathā hy ekāgrasakalasāmājikajanekṣitam 14;

nṛttaṁ gītaṁ sudhāsārasāgaratvena manṇyate || 85 ||
In this (same) way, one experiences (manyate) the song and dance

viewed by an audience of embodied (sakala) perceivers, who attend to it

one-pointedly, to be (a veritable) ocean of the very essence of nectar. (85)

For, in the same way, the people in the audience, all focused on the
song and dance, take it to be an ocean of nectar-substance.
Here (in daily life, we observe that) one perceiver in the midst of the

members of an audience who are viewing (a show), by the firmness (and

stability of his concentration), values'" the excellence called ‘perceptibility

(common to) many (perceivers) of, for example, dance and song. Considering (it

to be excellent, he) reflects on that as the (very) essence of the wonder (that has

reached its) ultimate level and is solely in the purview of his own experience.
The excellence of the dance etc. is the collectivity (saṁcetya) of the object of
many perceivers, (formed) because it is the object of each one of them
indiviḍually. It is due to that, that in this aspect, which is such, the perceivers

are one.

He says that.

ṃa’JJāāīTāTá JĪRTTTHTTRT || ¢F. 1I1
tata evocyate mallanaṭaprekṣopadeśane |
sarvapramātr̥tādātmyaṁ pūrṇarūpānubhāvakam || 86 ||
'!" Read with MSs G and C: ~janekṣitam for janaḥ khalu.
' Cf. below, 27/373cd-380ab.

'! Read manyate for mayeti.

'' IḤ makes a great a difference if a person listens to music alone or if he hears it

together with others. The aesthetic delight each individual experiences is amassed in the
one experience of the collective subjectivity that emerges when, by the intense
concentration of each individual, the lower daily discursive consciousness is
transcended, and they enter the wonder of the oneness of a higher, universal

subjectivity. Accordingly, Abhinava discusses aesthetic experience above in Chapter

Three, which deals with Śāmbhavopāya. See 3/229 f.

CHAPTER TEN

Thus, it is taught in the teaching concerning a show of wrestlers or
actors, that a state of identity (develops) between the subjects (who view it),

that gives rise to a (blissful) experience of plenitude. (86)

‘Thuṣ’, the reason being that it is (the common) objectivity of many
perceivers. ‘It is taught’ by everybody. As (is said) in the venerable
Pratyabhi
‘The perceivers who are located in one place and all equally engaged in
perceiving any one object, such as a jar, attain a state of oneness with that (and
with one another) in (this) aspect, which is only just this much.”
‘Plenitude’ is the full (and complete) form (of consciousness), which is
so much (iyad) that, as all other objects of awareness having fallen away
because there is no craving there for anything else, it is (pure) reflective
awareness (parāmarśana) (itself).
Surely (one may ask), the perception (saṅvitti) of the dance etc. of each
(perceiver) is thus separately engaged, so what is the use of (a collective)
objectivity for numerous perceivers? Thus he says:

hḶEGIEIEEIEISTexĀtrti

h. T̄A TṬJTKIT] THTHĀ YTISSI fF̄T | ¢. 11
tāvanmātrārthasaṁvittituṣṭāḥ pratyekaśo yadi |
kaḥ saṁbhũya guṇas teṣãṁ pramãtraikyaṁ bhavec ca kim || 87 ||
If each (spectator) were to be satisfied with just as much awareness
of the object (as he individually possesses and nothing more), then what
quality do they have in common? What would the oneness of (these)

perceivers (pramātraikya) be? (87)

'! See Gnoli 1985: 56-57 n. 3, and also below: 28/373cd-380ab.

GF.ĪP I/S/I vol. 1pp 238-9:

tatrāpi kvacit ābhāse pramātRn ekīkaroti nitambanīnṟtta iva prekṣakān tāvati hi teṣām
ābhāse aikyam
‘There (in that case) also, when in some circumstance a (single unified)
manifestation (of consciousness occurs,) making (many) perceivers one (within it), as
does the dance of a beautiful woman the spectators. Such indeed is their oneness in (the
presence) of (a single) manifestation (of consciousness they view together).”

When the spectators of a show are combined as one cognisor, the reality of
their common perception is reinforced. In ĪP 1/5/1, the argument for a unity of cognisors
is that all cognisors are ultimately just consciousness projected from the limited
perspective of embodied (sakala) subjects. Sometimes the Lord unifies these various

limited perceivers, joining them as one in relation to their common object, in this case

the dancer, i.e., they are so rapt in their attention to the dance that they have no
perception of the ‘self’ and ‘other’. This view is a way of solving a major issue in
aesthetics, namely, whether it is a purely personal experience, or it is also that of another

TANTRĀLOKA

What (added) quality is there (if) in this way the multiple perceptibility
of the perceivers who are members of an audience were (all) brought together
(into a single collective whole)? None at all! (All that would happen is) that the

excellence of the wonder, witnessed by one’s own experience, would be
concealed (nihnava). Thīs is the meaning. Surely (one may object that),

experience of wonder in this way is because of the oneness of the perceivers in
just this aspect. With this doubt in mind, he says ‘what would the oneness of
(these) perceivers be?” The seed (cause), by virtue of which one is fit (to
experience) the essence (of the collective aesthetic) delight (ānandasaṅṁdoha) of

this kind, occurs when the subjects become one through the falling away of
relative distinctions (bheda) (between them). (This is) brought about by the
progressive growth of the reflective awareness, consisting of the repose within
their own Self, (even though) the one object may manifest as variously

perceptible (to different perceivers).
Thus he says:

Ṭ] TPIĀTTITTĀEIṀTS
T=T II ¢ I
yadā tu tattadvedyatvadharmasaṁdarbhagarbhitam |
tad vastu śuṣkāt prāgrūpād anyad yuktam idaṁ tadā || 88 II
(svagataparagatatva). These verses (TĀ 10/83 ff) are addressed to this issue in an

originally epistemological context, i.e. whether an object is a common object of
perception to more than one perceiver.
“When ‘I’ know something that is known by Caitra or by two or more people,

this state of my knowing what others know becomes a variety of things, such as
purposeful action and so on. For, in the same way, the people in the audience, all

focused on the song and dance, take it to be an ocean of nectar-substance. For that
reason, it is said that the identity of all cognisors with reference to spectating engenders

an emotional effect which is full in form (cf. TĀ 10/87). If singly the spectators’ minds
are satisfied by objects being just so (tāvanmātrārtha), what quality do they have in
common, and how can they become a unity of cognisors? (cf. ibid. 10/88) But when an
object is contained in an arrangement whose property is the state of being known by
various people, then this object is other than its formerly dry form. The reasoning here is
that, in general, the state of being known is not ‘dry’, i.e. it is not confined merely to
itself, but is known in relation to other things by a consensus of cognisors. Thus,
Abhinava argues for the notion of inference — that inference does not depend on
pervasion as a process existing in objects, fire and smoke, as known by a single

cognisor’s mental continuum, but rather by a unity of cognisors who, although distinct

from one another, are made one in respect of both an appearance of smoke and an
appearance of fire. The epistemological unity of cognisors in respect of the object of
knowledge underlies the inferential process. Only in this way can we speak of
inferential knowledge as new and unperceived before, and not as something known

from a previous experience (IPv 2/4/15 vol. 2 pp 182-185) Kuanponpol 1991: p. 19-20,
n 19.

' ekasmin hi vastuny anekavedyatāvabhāsa eva literally means, ‘there is the

manifestation of many perceptibilities in one entity°.

CHAPTER TEN

If that show (tad vastu) contains within itself the aggregate of each

one of the qualities of perceptibility (corresponding to each spectator), then
it is reasonable (to maintain that) it is different from its prior arid form
(before it is viewed by an audience). (88)
The ‘prior arid formʼ is practically without aesthetic relish (rasa),
because it can (only) be experienced (saṁvedya) by each perceiver individually.
(The subsequent one) ‘is different’. The meaning is that it is (the experience of
the show) that has penetrated into another form (of consciousness), which
generates the most excellent (aesthetic) wonder (camatkāra). The reason here
(for this) is that the oneness of the perceiver ‘contains within itself the

aggregate of each one of the qualities of perceptibilityʼ.

Perceptibility does not only perform in this way various functions
(arthakriyā) in the (everyday) world in relation to the Fully Conditioned
(sakala) perceiver; (it is taught in) the scriptures that it does so also in relation

to other (types of) perceivers. Thus he says:

Each Particular Perceptibility (vedyatva)

Performs its Own Function

ÉEEEvIFĀPVE ĒZIEŠEITHĀHAI
hIPIEeEEÉEEEEEIĒĪŪTĪĒE;TGĀḤ

śāstre ʻpi tat tad vedyatvaṁ
tārthakriyākaram |
bhūyasaiva tathā ca śrīmālinīvijayottare || 89 ||
ṣadvidham adhvānam anenādhiṣṭhitaṁ smaret |
iṣṭhānaṁ hi devena yad viśvasya pravedanam || 90 II
tadīśavedyatvenetthaṁ jñātaṁ prakṛtakāryakṛt |
Each particular perceptibility (vedyatva) performs (its own) specific
function (arthakriyā). (This is true not only in daily life,) but also generally
in the scripture. The same (is said) in the venerable Mālinīvijayottara, (with
the words) ‘in this way he should recall how the six-fold Path is sustained

by (Śiva). (The point is that) it is the Lord’s experience (pravedana) of all

things (viśva) that is (their) sustaining ground. When (the universe) is
known in this way as the object of the Lord’s perception (vedya), it
performs its natural function (of elevating consciousness by means of ritual
action). (89-91ab)

Line 90ab is MV 9/39cd. MV reads tataḥ for tathā.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Generally° means everywhere (in the scriptures), without exception.

He gives an example beginning with the words ‘in this way’. And having

himself explained (the passage), he goes on to relate it to the main point with
the words (that it is the Lord's experience of all things that is their) ‘sustaining
ground’. Our (view of the nature of the) universe is not, as the dualists
(maintain), that it is separate (from consciousness) so that, as they say, there is a
relationship between (Śiva and the universe as) the sustainer and the sustained.

Thus it is said that ‘it is the Lord’s experience (pravedana) of all things

(viśva) that is (their) sustaining ground’. The (universe) is made of
consciousness, and the perceptible (sarṁwvedya) is the object (vi.

consciousness. Thus it is said to be the sustainer (as well as) the sus
Known thus in this way to be Śiva’s object of perception as the many kinds of
perceptibility, the natural (prakṛta) universe characterized as the Six Paths
performs its natural function, which is the rite of initiation and the rest. The
meaning is that it is capable (thereby) of (performing) this kind of function
(arthakriyā). In thīs way, one attains each (particular) fixed (and determined
metaphysical) principle as (the corresponding level of) perceptibility for the
Mantra, Mantreśvara and the rest (of the higher perceivers). Thus, the function
(arthakṛiyā) (of their perceptibility) here is various in countless (ways).

Concluding that (point), he begins another.

Definition of Own Nature (ṣvarūpa)

j fs raāraaī īH| ṂJTaā̄ ṂTIT 1| 82 1|
TādTĀTHAT
] TRTTTĪT WTTT |
evaṁ siddhaṁ vedyatākhyo dharmo bhāvasya bhāsate || 91 ||
tadanābhāsayoge tu svarūpam iti bhaṇyate |

It has been proved in this way that this quality termed
‘perceptibility° manifests as that of a phenomenal entity (bhāva) (not the

perceiver). When it does not manifest, (what remains) is said to be (an
entity’s) essential nature (svarūpa). (91cd-92ab)

‘When it does not manifest’ means when there is no reflective
awareness of the attribute (of an object) called ‘perceptibility°. Thus, devoid of

other manifestations (ābhāsa), such as unconsciousness (sarṁmiūrchana) and the

like, reflecting (that this is the colour) blue, that is, (not as a particular, but as)
each single generic manifestation (ābhāsa), that is said to be the fifteenth
' The universe of experience is based on the subject’s (God’s) awareness of it; in fact,

they are one and the same thing; it is this awareness that gives being to phenomenal

entities, making them causally effective within their own sphere of activity. Pure
consciousness is both the substratum and what it supports, the awareness and the object
of awareness. The universe exists by virtue of the fact that it is Śiva’s object of
awareness.

CHAPTER TEN

(component of the fifteen, at the level of Fully Conditioned perceiver, and is an

entityʼs) essential nature (just as it is in itself devoid of its perceptibility).

3ITĪTTIRJTTGKTATĪSĒGTT II82 11
JṬ-T āJT āTṬII ĪāTJTĪTTAaTI; |
upādhiyogitāśaṅkām apahastayato ‘sphuṭam || 92 ||

svātmano yena vapuṣā bhāty arthas tat svakaṁ vapuḥ |
The form in which something (artha) appears in an indistinct
manner (asphuṭa) to oneself (that is, the subject), who has eradicated (the

last trace of dichotomizing thought constructs, which are the) doubt
(concerning) its association with limiting adjuncts (upādhi), is its own
nature (svakaṁ vapus). (92cd-93ab)
The ‘doubt (concerning) its association with limiting adjuncts’ is
another doubtful manifestation (ābhāsa) (that may not be that of the true nature

of the object). The (nature of the) entity is ‘indistinct’, because it would (only)
be distinct when it enters into the condition in which it (manifests) in accord

with its own specific characteristics (svālakṣaṇyāt), by association
(saṁmirchanā) with the manifestations of (its) location (in space) and

(existence at a particular) time. This is the overall sense (bhāva).

‘The form in which (something (artha) appears to) oneself’, that is,

the perceiver, is ‘its own nature’, which is (its own) essential nature (svarūpa)

as a generic (rather than a particular object)." Reflective awareness (vimarsśa)

posited here on the plane of Māyā, that is, on the conceptual level (vikalpadaśā)
of awareness, operating (pravartamāna) in order to remove other qualities that
have been projected onto it, separating off (every) other manifestation from the

condition (of the object in which it manifests), in accord with its own specific
characteristics (svālakṣaṇyāt), although (that manifestation, as are all others, is
consciousness, and s0) not (essentially) different (from it), contemplates the

blue alone in a generic form (i.e. as ‘bluenessʼ). It does not also make contact
with Being, that is invariably concomitant with (an entity’s) ‘own nature’
(svarūpa). So, in the state of the reflective awareness of (pure, generic) ‘blue’
! Thus, an entity’s own essential nature is a ‘generic” or ‘universal’ (sāmāyātmaka)

image of that thing, beyond the images of time and space etc. that define it. In that
sense, it is not clearly apparent, when it manifests as a specific, particular entity located

in a specific place at a specific time. Then it appears in accord with its own specific

characteristics (svalakṣaṇa).

4 AII trees possess the same essential nature (svabhāva). In other words, it is the

generic nature common to all of them. But that can only be known in the specific
instance of a particular tree. Unspecified, the object appears to be vaguely something

that looks like it could be a tree. It is, in other words, unclearly manifest. The clarity
required to identify the object only emerges when its specific form, location and time is
ascertained, thus differentiating it from everything else that it is not. This is achieved by
the reflective awareness that is the power of consciousness operating through the
perceiver.

TANTRĀLOKA

alone, how could there be any possibility of its being coloured by (that) other
atṭribute called ‘perceptibility? This is the overall meaning.
Surely (one may object that), (if) the intention is to conceptually
(vikalpena) differentiate one attribute from another, one should differentiate the

perceptibility which is in relation to another perceiver. It is not so that without
that there would be no ‘own nature’. How could one conceal the perceptibility
to the perceiver of that (entity)? With this doubt in mind, he says:
Perceptibility, Manifest and Unmanifest
SITTĨḤ _IHCTĪ TEITT]TĀTIST] II ~33

F. TT TJWTT] JIṬ TTRYT |

1I

jānāmi ghaṭam ity atra vedyatānuparāgavān || 93 ||

ghata eva svarūpeṇa bhāta ity upadiśyate |

(When one says) “I know the jar”, what one is saying is that the jar

manifests according to its own nature, uncoloured by (its objective)

perceptibility. (Otherwise, one would say: “I see that this jar is visible to me
or to someone else”). (93cd-94ab)

Surely, here (in this case), (the experience that) “I know” is basically
(tāvat) perceptibility (just for) oneself, as the object of the act of cognition
(jñānakriyākarma). For it is said that it is necessary that perceptibility to another
perceiver must exist; if it were not in the purview of oneself (or other
perceivers) etc., then ultimately (everything, including) a louse, would not be
perceptible (vedya), even to an omniscient being and the like. So how is it that

it said that ‘the jar manifests according to its own nature, uncoloured by (its
objective) perceptibility”?
He says that:

nanu tatra svayaṁvedyabhāvo mantrādyapekṣayā || 94 ||
api cāsty eva . . . . . . . . . .
(An opponent may object that,) surely, there (in that case),
perceptibility (can exist) in itself (svayam) (without being conscious of it),

and so too in relation to Maitra and others. (94cd-95a)

' Read upadisyate for apadiśyate.
' Read krimiḥ sarvajñāder api na vedyo for krimisarvajñāder api vedyo.
' Read maitrādy for mantrāḍy.

CHAPTER TEN
This consideration (codya) refers to what one has not noticed. We did

not say that the jar is uncoloured by (its objective) perceptibility by its own
nature. Rather, we said that ‘the jar manifests uncoloured by (its objective)

perceptibility.

Nor is it the case that when (one experiences that) “I know the jar”, that

one inspects whether “here (in this case) I know what is perceptible to me and
what is perceptible to one who is omniscient.” (The awareness that) “l know? is

just the reflective awareness of knowing, that rests in my subjective reality
(asmadarthaviśrānta). Thus he says:

.... . . nanv astu na tu san pratibhãsṣate |

(Our reply to this objection is that) this is true – it exists, (but) it

does not manifest. (95b)

Nor is it everywhere the case that although (something) is perceptible to

oneself, it is always so, devoid of obstacles, to the reflective awareness of its
nature. Thus he says:

Ṁṇ7 fẽã, |] g..11

ṁāf afafa ṁ ōsá aṁq aērvīd |

avedyam eva kālāgnivapur meroḥ parā diśaḥ || 95 ||

mameti saṅvidi paraṁ śuddhaṁ vastu prakāśate |

(When one is aware that): “the body of Kālāgnirudra is
imperceptible to me, (as are) the regions beyond mount Meru”, the real
(thing in itself) (vastu) shines within consciousness in its supreme, pristine

form. (95cd-96ab)

' The perceptibility of a specific object relates to a particular perceiver. Perceptibility

is a quality of the entity out there. It is its objectivity with respect to the perceiver, who
perceives it with all its qualities. The manifestation of the thing in itself is unspecified
by its particular qualities, and so is also devoid of perceptibility; that is, it is not an

object with respect to a particular perceiver. This is the manner in which it manifests. It
is not intrinsically imperceptible. The quality of perceptibility, i.e. the objectivity of an
entity, is specified with respect to a perceiver. Thus, what is perceptible to one or more
perceivers may not be to others. Moreover, its association with specific perceivers is
only a part of the properties of an object’s perceptibility. Thus, for example, by virtue of
its perceptibility, a perceiver not only perceivers the object; he also knows that it is
perceptible to other perceivers also. This may not always be his concern, and so he may
not take note of that, in which case the object is not perceived as being such. But that
does not mean that it is not so. If the first perceiver pays attention, and wishes to do so,
he will perceive that the object is perceptible to other particular perceivers.

' An image of the absence of perceptibility is formed in such notions of things that do

exist but cannot be perceived. They are objective and yet are not perceived to be such.
Even so, they exist within consciousness not as perceived, but as ‘things in themselves’.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The entity is in its) ‘pristine formʼ. The meaning is that it (shines

within one’s own consciousness), devoid (of any) reflection aṣsociated with
perceptibility to oneself or to others.
Surely (the opponent may object that), if the pristine entity manifests (at
all), then its perceptibility is (proved and) established (siddha), whereas it would
be a contradiction (to maintain that) what is not perceptible (i.e. is not an object
(an
of perception) manifests. (Our response here is, that is) true, however,
(within
s
entity) is perceptible (as an object of perception) because it manifest

it is
consciousness); it is not that it manifests in consciousness because

perceptible.

_II 8ē I
JTHTTTt̄

srrrṁīa rā f: aī āār]q=c|

bhātatvād vedyam api tan na vedyatvena bhāsanāt || 96 |
avedyam eva bhānaṁ hi tathā kam anuyuñjamahe ḷ
(An entity is) perceivable (vedya) because it manifests, and it is not

perceivable

(avedya)

because

it

does

not

manifest

as

perceptible.

Manifestation is like that — whom should we blame? (96cd-97ab)

‘It is the pristine entity (vastu), which is just its ‘own nature’ alone. It

is ‘not perceivable (avedya)'. The meaning is that it is not associated with

another manifestation, namely, perceptibility. The reason here (for this is that)
‘it does not manifest as perceptible.”
Surely (one may ask), it is said that ‘the sight of something that is not in
the purview of the senses is not possible.’ In accord with this view, when
perceptibility is not manifest, how can an object (of perception) manifest
(independently just as its) own nature (svarāpeṇa)? With this doubt in mind, he
(of
says: ‘Manifestation is like that’ etc. Manifestation is the light
e
reflectiv
by
life
given
consciousness), and that (light), as has been explained, is
but
jar,
the
s
awareness. (Now in the notion,) ‘I know the jar, this light illumine
outside
Although this idealism, like any other, maintains that nothing exists
being
without
exist
therefore
and
ness,
conscious
within
exist
may
things
sness,
consciou

perceivable. Existence is not necessarily equated with perception. When an entity is

property of
perceived, it is an object of perception (vedya) and possesses the
perceived
be
cannot
or
d
perceive
not
is
it
when
But
‘objectivity, it is also perceptible.

It
for any reason, it does not cease to exist, i.. it does not drop out of consciousness.
possess
not
does
it
if
even
is,
that
attribute,
that
of
devoid
is
it
if
even
exist
to
continues
the attribute (dharma) of a perceptible object. As such, it is just the bare thing in itself–
yvastu. It is a real, existent entity – vastu, not an unreal, non-existent one –

avastu. Even

i 1 cannot see them, Meru and the regions beyond it do exist. How do they exist?

as a
Simply as an ‘existent thing’ – vastu, not as an object in relation to myself

perceiver.

Īi0 , other words, the same thing can manifest as ‘perceptible’ and ‘imperceptible’.

That is how things manifest. See above, 10/7-12ab. Verses 97cd ff. follow after verse

above.

CHAPTER TEN

not ‘perceptibility°, insofar as the notion of ‘perceptible’ is in that case absent. It
has been demonstrated that in certain cases, for example, that of Kālāgnirudra,
there is, on the contrary, an awareness of ‘non-perceptibility”
(avedyatāparāmarśa)? Who then should we criticise, if when an object

manifests, the manifestation of perceptibility does not (necessarily) take place?

In this way, the conception of the (hierarchical) sequence of fifteen

(aspects) etc. is concretely real. Thus he says:

The Procedure Regarding the Principles (tattvavidhi)
Relating to the Seven Perceivers
Fully Conditioned (sakala) Subjects

U ṬJCJIĀd
# āgssrōīēā: I| Q.9 l1
3TTTTTI JTISS-AĀTĪ

evaṁ pañcadaśātmeyaṁ dharā tadvaj jalādayaḥ || 97 1|
avyaktāntā yato ‘sty eṣāṁ sakalaṁ prati vedyatā |
In this way, the Earth (principle) has fifteen aspects, as do those
(principles) from Water to Unmanifest Nature, insofar as they are

perceptible (vedyatā) to the Fully Conditioned (sakala) (subjects). (97cd98ab)

After dealing with the object of perception, namely, the nature of an
entity (in itself) (vastudharma), with this (verse) he has announced the
procedure concerning the metaphysical principles, that had been enunciated in
the initial enunciation (of topics).
Surely, the location of the Fully Conditioned (perceiver extends) up the
Force (of limited agency), according to the following statement (in the
Mālinīvijayottara):
‘The individual souls, who possess (the principles) from the Force (of
limited agency) (kalā) to Earth, should be known to be Fully Conditioned

(sakala) (by those who desire to bring this condition to an end)ʼ.

So how is it that it is said (here that its) subjectivity extends (only) up to

Unmanifest Nature? With this doubt in mind, he says:

āṬSāĪd̄ hPTEIN &II] āHtraidT Ṃ|| 2¢ |1

'! Literally ‘they possess perceptibility with respect to the Fully Conditioned (sakala)

(perceivers).”
MV 1/35abc.

TANTRĀLOKA

yat tūcyate kalādyena dharāntena samanvitāḥ || 98 ||
sakalā iti tatkośaṣaṭkodrekopalakṣaṇam |

It is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara) that the Fully Conditioned

(sakala) (subjects) possess (the principles) ranging from the Force (of
limited agency) up to Earth. (But this is only) a secondary characterization
(of these perceivers, which serves to) indicate that, (in their case, all) six
coverings (kośa, i.e. kañcuka) have emerged (and are functioning). (98cd-

99ab)

This statement does not in actual fact declare that the location of the
individual soul extends up to the Force (of limited agency). If it were to do so, it
would be contrary to the scriptures, that say, for example, that the individual
soul is the twenty-fifth (principle). Rather, (what is meant) is that the six
coverings, beginning with Māyā, have emerged (udrikta) (and are functioning).
In the case of the Deconditioned by Dissolution (perceiver, which is the next
one above), they are not emergent (anudrikta) (and functional), whereas in the

case of the Deconditioned by Consciousness (above that), they have been
destroyed.
He says that:

EāFGIMEAEHIEHQJIAET-EAHHÚICAĪ
ṄETḤ JJTG=TK q…JT [EṭEEEAE

āīīākōīzq tāātāc%hgaāī šh fla: 1| zo0 1|
udbhūtāśuddhacidrāgakalādirasakañcukāḥ || 99 ||

sakalā layasaṁjñās tu nyagbhũtākhilakañcukāḥ |
jñānākalās tu dhvastaitatkañcukā iti nirṇayaḥ || 100 |I
The Fully Conditioned (sakala) (perceivers) are those in which the
six coverings, namely, impure Knowledge, Attachment (rāga), the Force (of
limited agency) (kalā) and the rest, have emerged (and function) (udbhūta).
In the case of those called (Deconditioned by) Dissolution (Pralayākala)

(perceivers), all the coverings are in abeyance (nyagbhūta), whereas (in
the case of the) Deconditioned by Consciousness ((Vi)jñānākala)

' The passages from the MV just quoted by Jayaratha that Abhinava is referring to here

may lead one to think that the subjectivity of Sakala perceivers extends from Earth up to
the Force (of limited agency) (Kalā). However, these perceivers are the individual souls
who belong to Puruṣa, the twenty-fifth principle, whereas Kalā is the thirty-first. Thus,

the Sakalas experience the range of principles from Earth to unmanifest Nature

(prakṛti),. which is the twenty-fourth principle. In order to explain this apparent
contradiction, Abhinava clarifies that the MV is referring here only to the expanded
state of the six obscuring coverings (kañcuka). It is not teaching that these realities are

objects of cognition for the Sakala perceivers.
'√ Read sakalā layasaṁjñās tu for sakalālayasaṁjñās

tu. Abhinava refers to the

pralayākala perceivers here as layasaṁjña, i.e. ‘called dissolution’.

CHAPTER TEN

(perceivers), these coverings have been destroyed. This is the teaching.
(98cd-100)

Surely (one may ask), as the objective aspect, that is, the body etc., is
(so) predominant, the Fully Conditioned (perceiver) is not primarily a perceiver,
so how can there be fifteen aspects? With this question in mind, he says:

TRITĀA
TāTG: TIAGYATT: fRāT |g02 1
tena pradhāne vedye ‘pi pumān udbhūtakañcukaḥ |
pramātāsty eva sakalaḥ pāñcadaśyam ataḥ sthitam || 1OI II
Thus, even though the object of knowledge predominates, the
individual soul, whose coverings have emerged (and function), is a
perceiver, that is, the Fully Conditioned (sakala) one. Thus, the condition in
which there are fifteen aspects (undeniably) persists. (101)
Thus, although the object of knowledge, which is the body etc.,
predominates in the Fully Conditioned (perceiver), even so, because the
coverings, namely, the Force (of limited agency), limited knowledge and the
rest that stimulate the knowledge and action (of the individual soul) are

functional," it is in this way a perceiver. Thus, (the existence of the) condition
in which there are fifteen aspects is (logically) unassailable.
Surely (someone may object that), it is right that the condition in which
there are fifteen aspects be present in the individual soul also, as it is the Earth

etc., because the objective aspect predominates (at that level also). (So) how is it
that it is said that ‘there are two divisions less from the individual soul (up to the

Force (of limited agency))? With this doubt in mind, he says:

J=V TITĪHĪATIS
TAĠST S 1|
TGJTTTRGAT THTSTITT TIJ f 11 g02 1
pāñcadaśyaṁ dharādyantarniviṣṭe sakale ‘pi ca |
sakalāntaram asty eva prameye ‘trāpi mātrṛ
hi || 102 ||

The condition in which there are fifteen aspects is within the Fully
Conditioned (subject), who is present in (the principles) from Earth

' We have seen (above, 10/12ab-18) that the powers of the seven perceivers are
distinguished from one another by the prominence or absence of the two obscuring
coverings of Kalā and Vidyā and the degree of manifestation of Pure Knowledge. Here

the perceivers themselves are distinguished from one another according to the degree in
which the six obscuring coverings are present.

Read, as the editor of the printed edition suggests, jñānakriyo- for jñānakalo-.
' Above 10/3d-4a.

TANTRĀLOKA

onwards.' Here, (in this case) also, the perceiving subject (of the Fully
Conditioned subject) (mātṛ), within the object of knowledge, is another
Fully Conditioned subject. (102)
(Abhinava) has emphasised that the objective aspect is predominant (in

the Fully Conditioned perceiver, by saying that it) ‘is present in (the

principles) from Earth onwards’. Thus it is said that (it is present) ‘within the
object of knowledge’. The sense is – how can one account for that in this way
if the perceiver is one? (The answer is that) there is ‘another Fully

Conditioned (sakala) subject’. If there were to be a Deconditioned by

Dissolution perceiver here, there would be the condition in which there are
thirteen aspects. So, everything is in its own (proper) place.
Surely (one may ask), what is the use of this condition, in which there
are fifteen aspects, taught in this way? With this doubt in mind, he says:
The Fifteen Aspects Related to the Fully Conditioned Subject

JPĪJĪĪTRTṢÇITTGTTGTS]T|

āTxg 1| 203 1

eṭIVIEETIḤIUErAEḤĒ
STI
HTRTĪSJT:
ṀITHI JITI firaī- || 2°% 1|

sthūlāvṛtādisaṅkocatadanyavyāptṛtājuṣaḥ |
pītādyāḥ sthirakampratvāc caturdaśa dharādiṣu || 103 1|
svarūpībhūtajaḍatāḥ prãṇadehapathe tataḥ |
pramātrtājuṣaḥ proktā dhāraṇā vijayottare || 104 ||
(The various aspects of the object of knowledge, such as its
qualities,) beginning with (the colour) yellow, (can be contemplated in the

principles) ranging from Earth (up to Nature) in fourteen ways,
In other words, the sakalas (fully conditioned subjects) can be seen from fifteen

different points of view.

' According to chapter 12 of the Mālinīvijayottara, each of the various principles, from
Earth up to Nature, can be the object of fourteen different forms of meditation. Jayaratha
understands Abhinava here to be referring to a set of meditations (dhāraṇā) that

constitute chapter twelve of the MV. In a concluding verse of that chapter, it says:

‘The Earth principle should be practiced thus in fifteen ways so that yogis with
the desire to enjoy its fruits may attain accomplishment in yoga.' MV 12/39
However, Abhinava says here that there are fourteen meditations (dhāraṇā).

This may be the number, ifI have reckoned them correctly. But I may well be wrong, as

the ones beyond the ninth are not specifically enumerated. It is also quite possible that a

part of the text has been lost. If not, it is possible that Abhinava was aware of this
discrepancy, and accounts for it apparently, by saying that the Earth itself is the
fifteenth, as their ‘innate nature, which thus cannot be an object of meditation.

CHAPTER TEN

(corresponding to the seven levels of perceiver), according to whether it is
1) gross (sthūla), 2) obscured (āvṛta), 3) at its incipience (ādi), 4) contracted

(saṁkoca), 5) the same (tat) (contraction but to a lesser degree), 6) contrary
(anya) (to it), and 7) pervasive (vyāpta). (They are of two kinds,) because
(each of them) can be immobile (sthira) or mobile (kampra). (The fifteenth

aspect) is insentient, and consists of the innate nature. These meditations
(dhāraṇā) are taught in the (Mālinī-)Vijayottara. TOhey attain a state of

subjectivity on the planes of the body and the vital breath. (103-104)

It is said in the Mālinīvijayottara with regards to this, that within the

twenty-four principles that range from Earth to Unmanifest Nature, for each
principle, along with meditation on the ‘Innate Nature, which is insentient,

there are fourteen meditations. There, (in that case, these are as follows). 1)
Gross (sthūla), which pertains to the Fully Conditioned (perceiver), who

possess (all) three Impurities (mala), including that of Individuality (āṉava) and
the rest.

2) Obscured

(āvṛta),

which is the obscuring covering of the

Deconditioned by Dissolution (pralayākala) (perceiver). In accord with the
etymological derivation (of the word, it consists of) two Impurities (there is no

Māyīya Impurity). 3) Incipience (ādi) pertains to the Deconditioned by
(āṉṇavamala). 4) Contracted (saṁkoca). The contraction of the Mantra subjects
(in relation to expanded consciousness) is their obscured condition, because
their material cause is the Deconditioned by Dissolution (perceivers). 5) The

contraction of the Mantreśvara (subjects), denoted (here) by the word the ‘same
(tat)’,

is

gross, because their material

cause is the Fully

Conditioned

(perceivers). 6) Contrary (anya) (to that) is the expansion (of consciousness)
of the Mahāmantreśvara (perceivers), (that develops) as the contraction ceases.
7) Pervasive (vyāpta). Śiva’s pervasive state is because he is devoid of the
limitations of time and space and the like. (The seven perceivers) possess and

practice (these meditations) as their support (ālambana).' This is the
meaning.

Surely (one may ask), in this way, there would be seven meditations
(dhāraṇā), not fourteen. With this doubt in mind, it is said, ‘(each of them) can
The first group of principles (from Earth to Nature) can be the object of perception

and concentration in fourteen different ways. The subject who concentrates is a limited
subject, related to the planes of the body, the vital breath etc. It must be admitted that
Abhinava’s conflation of these meditations with these fourteen is somewhat forced, as
the reader can see for himself, by referring to that chapter in the translation of the
Mālinīvijayottara.

! The word here for ‘meditation’ is dhārṇā, which literally means ‘a support’.
“ Iṇ brief: 1) Gross (sthūla) – the Sakala condition, characterized as having all three

impurities (mala). 2) Obscured (āvṛta) – Pralayākala, with two impurities (there is no
4) Contracted (saṁkoca) – Mantra subjects, which are in a contracted condition in
relation to expanded consciousness. Contracted, they are fashioned from Pralayākalas.
5) Same (tat) — Mantreśa still contracted, but less than the Mantras, they are fashioned
from Sakala subjects. 6) Contrary (anya) — Mahāmantreśa are in a state of expansion. 7)

Pervasive (vyāpta) – Śiva.

TANTRĀLOKA

be immobile (sthira) or mobile (kampra).” The immobile (aspect) (sthira) is

the powerholder. He does nothing (and is immobile), because of the repose (he
enjoys) within himself. The mobile (aspect) (kampra) is Śakti, who is active

(savyāpāra), and (whose) nature (is the universal and transcendental) vibration
(of consciousness) (spanda). Thus it is said here (in the Mālinīvijayottara), with

regards to the Fully Conditioned (perceiver) and its power, that ‘in the same
way, one should recollect the body. However (it should be) inactive. So too,

‘one should recollect the body that is active.”

These (subjects) reside on the plane of the subject (who identifies with)

the body, vital breath and intellect etc., in accord with the (extent and) manner

duality has fallen away. Thus it is said that ‘they attain a state of subjectivity

on the planes of the body and the vital breath’. These are (described) there

(in the Mālinīvijayottara) with regards to the meditations (dhāraṇā) on the

‘Innate Nature’, the Fully Conditioned (perceiver), the powerholder, and power.
As is said there, beginning with:

‘One’s own body, shining like gold and streaked with lightning, is the
abode of the Fourth State (turiya).
Meditations on the (perceivers) Deconditioned by Dissolution
(pralayākala) and Deconditioned by Consciousness (vijñānākala) etc. are
(performed) in the vital breath and the rest (to which they correspond). As is
said (there):
‘One should meditate on the one present in the Heart, extending (for a

span of) twelve fingers in the Fourth (State).

By the words ‘beginning with’ (when he says) ‘beginning with (the

colour) yellow, the (colours) white and the rest, (that are the qualities of) the

principles of Water and the rest, are (implicitly) included. AIl of that is

discussed at length in the Mālinīvijayottara. It should be grasped from there, (in
the section) beginning and ending (with the following verses):
‘Again, he who, (initiated) by the teacher, has first of all completed the

process which is the procedure (to attain) penetration (āveśavidhikrama), should

begin to conquer the planes (of existence) (bhūmikā) in accord with the

experience of (his Karmic) tendencies (vāsanā).

‘These meditative supports (dhāraṇā), beneficial to yogis, relating to

the principles beginning with Earth, are said in brief to be twenty-four, each of

which is of fifteen kinds.”
' MV 12/29ab.
' MV 12/26a.

' MV 12/22cd.

' MV 12/30ab.
“ MV. 12/20cd-21ab.

'"! MV 16/16cd-17ab. A long passage in the Mālinīvijayottara (12/20cd to 16/47) is

dedicated to a series of meditations (dhāraṇā) on the principles ranging from Earth to
Maāyā and beyond. From this, Jayaratha has selected the part that describes the series
of
meditations (dhāraṇā) on twenty-four principles (tattva), from Earth to the Intellect.

CHAPTER TEN

Here, for fear of making the book too long, each word has not been

explained.

Having described (the level of the Fully Conditioned perceiver, of

which there are) fifteen (aspects), (he goes on to) describe (the others),

beginning with (that of the perceivers that are Deconditioned by Dissolution,
which has) thirteen (aspects).

The Thirteen Aspects Related to the
Deconditioned by Dissolution Subject

aza] Ṝī JḤ: GTÃAT JR-Ĩ |
TṬGGāT: Ggahĩaī aāī āīāa JHTGĀT |I go 1|1

JHIG - fēēr |
TĪRTT TSJTThATĪTTFTRTSTT
|I 2°F 11|
ITGEgI
TIT TTTĪ GĀTĪTHB; |

yadā tu meyatā puṅsaḥ kalāntasya prakalpyate |
tadudbhãtaḥ kañcukāṁśo meyo nāsya pramātrtā || 105 ||
ataḥ sakalasaṁjñasya pramātrtvaṁ na vidyate |
trayodaśatvaṁ tacchaktiśaktimaddvayavarjanāt || 106 ||
nyagbhūtakañcuko mātā yatas tatra layākalaḥ |

If (the series of principles) ranging from the individual soul to the

Force (of limited agency) is considered to be objective (that is, not as
aspects of the subject,) the aspect that arises out of this (group of

priṇciples), namely, the obscuring coverings (of the individual soul)
(tadudbhūtaḥ kañcukāṁśo), becomes an object of knowledge, and so is not

(a part of his) subjectivity." Thus, (at this level, the subject) termed ‘Fully
Conditioned” (sakala) does not possess subjectivity (pramātṛtva). By

shedding two (of its aspects, namely,) that of power and its possessor, it has

thirteen (aspects). The covering of the subject there is in abeyance, and so

(this is the level of) the Dissolution Deconditioned (layākala) (subject, who
is) immersed in Maāyā. The Consciousness Deconditioned (subjects)
(vijñānākala) are, analogously as before, (the subjects in relation to this
group). (105-107)

These verses from 105 to 113ab are all together in the printed edition. The have been

divided up for easy reading.
'If we read tadodbhūtakañcukāṁśo for tadudbhūtaḥ kañcukāṁśo, the meaning would
then be: ‘the beings whose obscuring coverings are in a state of emergence become an

object of knowledge.”

'! Read yatas for yuktas.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The principles ranging from the individual soul to the Force (of
limited agency) are the six beginning with the principle of the individual soul

and ending with that of the Force (of limited agency). This is the meaning. (At
this level, the Fully Conditioned subject is deprived of his subjectivity,) because
the aspect of the group of six coverings that arises out of this (group of
principles) becomes an object of knowledge. (The Dissolution Deconditioned
subject at the next level) ‘has thirteen (aspects)ʼ, because the Fully
Conditioned (subject) has become the ‘Innate Nature’, as (it) and its power are

the object (of that higher level perceiver).' Surely, (one may object,) that it is
said here that the Fully Conditioned (perceiver has become) the object of the
Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver, who is its) perceiver. Well then, what is
the condition of the Consciousness Deconditioned and the rest (of the perceivers
above that)? With this doubt in mind, he says that ‘the Consciousness

subjects in relation to this group)’. The meaning is that their subjectivity is (in
relation to the perceivers that precede them, such that they are their objects).
(This is) just as happens (at the level below, in relation to) the Fully
Conditioned subject, (who is the object of the perceiver at the next level above

it).

The Eleven Aspects Related to the Dissolution

Deconditioned (pralayākala) Subject

IiḺ- EEFĪĒTETRṬNŪHĀTHI

aīsṝḷ] īa: kgāāēā aa īaāī gGaTRTĪI || 0c 1|

HrAĪRĪHTRSGT TJTTĒĪAITHTTĪ |I/8°8, 11
māyātattve jñeyarūpe kañcukanyagbhavo ‘pi yaḥ |
so ʻpi meyaḥ kañcukaikyaṁ yato māyā suṣūkṣmikā I| 108 II
vijñānākala evātra tato mātāpakañcukaḥ |
māyāniviṣṭe ‘py akale tathety ekādaśātmatā || 109 1|
When the principle of Māyā is the object of knowledge, (the subject

in whom) the coverings are in abeyance also becomes an object of
knowledge. As Māyā (at this level) is the unity of the coverings (fused
together within it), it is extremely subtle. Thus, the subject here is
152 When, however, one is considering how the knowable, consisting of the principles

ranging from Puruṣa to Kalā, are, then the (sakala subjects), which are characterized as

being in a state in which the kañcukas are in an emergent condition, are then no longer
subjects, but objects of awareness. This is the reason why the Sakalas are no longer

subjects with respect to these Tattvas (from Puruṣa upwards), which due to the absence

of the two aspects of the Sakala subjects, that is, Power and the Powerholder, have

thirteen aspects only.

' Along with the Mantra and other subjects above it.

CHAPTER TEN

object of knowledge for him) is the Dissolution Deconditioned (pralayākala)

subject, who is immersed in Māyā. In this way, it consists of eleven
(aspects). (108-109)

Surely (one may ask), when the principle of Māyā is the object of

knowledge, the coverings are in abeyance (within the subject) also. (So) how

can it be known? With this doubt in mind, he says that this is because ‘Māyaā (at
this level) is the unity of the coverings (fused together within it). For this
reason also, it is ‘extremely subtleʼ, that is, the divisions (within it) are
undifferentiated. The intended sense being that (this is its) condition as the

(generic) cause (of the principles below it). ‘Thus’ the Dissolution
Deconditioned (subject), within whom the coverings are in abeyance, has
become the ‘Innate Nature’ (at the next higher level).

The Remaining Subjects Up to Śiva

3JVṬSTNI T-ATIIIH HIṬT |I 220 11

T JēaTGqJa[ṝaār̄ā-Ta q āiaāī] 1| 222 |1

3GgGTTFTISTĪ TTTTI T-ITTT: |

āarcararāī Tā aaāṀērT. Ṁ̄ Ṁfõra: 11 222 11

ṬTTI āahāīGrc-aTTTĪTGGōTTTIF: /|

vijñānakevale vedye kañcukadhvaṁsasusthite |
udbubhūṣuprabodhānāṁ mantrāṇām eva mātṛtā || 110 I|
te ‘pi mantrā yadā meyās tadā mātā tadīśvaraḥ |
sa hy udbhavāt pūrṇabodhas tasmin prāpte tu meyatām || 1 1 I II
udbhūtapūrṇarūpo ‘sau mātā mantramaheśvaraḥ |
tasmin vijñeyatāṁ prāpte svaprakāśaḥ paraḥ śivaḥ || 1 12 II

pramātā svakatādātmyabhāsitākhilavedyakaḥ |

When the object of knowledge is the Consciousness Deconditioned

(subject), whose coverings have been completely destroyed,' only Mantra

(perceivers), whose consciousness is about to awake, are the subjects.'°

When these Mantra (perceivers) are the objects of knowledge, then the
subject is (Mantreśvara), their Lord, within whom the fullness of

consciousness is in the process of arising. When he becomes an object, the

subject is the Great Lord of Mantra, within whom the full (and complete)

form (of consciousness) has dawned. (Finally,) when (he has) become an

' kaīñcukadhvaṁṣasusthite, which literally means ‘(who is) in a good state because

(his) obscuring coverings have been destroyed.”
' mantrāṇām eva mātṛtā literally means, ‘subjectivity belongs to the Mantra (subjects)

alone.”

TANTRĀLOKA

object, the subject is Śiva, who, supreme and self-luminous, manifests all

objectivity as one with Himself. (110-113ab)

‘(When the object of knowledge is the Consciousness Deconditioned

perceiversʼ subjectivity,) ‘only Mantra (perceivers) are the subjectsʼ, not

indeed the Consciousness Deconditioned (perceiver) also. So here (at this level,

the aspects) are nine. Their Lord is the Lord of Mantras.' (Finally, Śiva
manifests all objectivity) ‘as one with Himself’. The intended sense being that

(he) certainly (does) not (manifest it as) a unity-in-difference etc. (bhedābheda),

aṣ is the case with Mantra, Lord of Mantras, and other (higher perceivers). That
was taught at the very beginning of (this) chapter, and so (there is no need to

exert the same) effort (to do so) again here.

Surely (one may ask), when (Śiva) also has become an object of
knowledge, who is the perceiver? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Śiva

Self-Luminous Śiva

fkraā: raāraṝ īḷ Ṁīaī āaaTãTTHTYTI |1 223 11

śivaḥ pramātā no meyo hy anyādhīnaprakāśatā || 1 13 I|
meyatā sā na tatrāsti svaprakāśo hy asau prabhuḥ |
Śiva is (always) a subject, and (never) an object. Objectivity

(meyatā) is a manifest state of being which depends on another (reality to

become manifest). That is not the case there. (Śiva) is the Lord Who is His

own Light. (113cd-114ab)

Objectivity is a state that (derives its) manifest nature from another
light. And that (state of objectivity) does not belong (to Śiva), because He is His

own Light. So how can Śiva (ever), like other (lower) perceivers, be an object of

perception? This is the meaning.
Surely (one may object) that the manifestation of all things is achieved
by means of the light (of consciousness), which is other than they are. (If you
agree that that is true,) what is the use of also accepting (that the perceiver

shines) by its own light? ' With this doubt in mind, he says:

' When the objects of consciousness are the Vijñānākalas, in which the obscuring

coverings have been destroyed, Mantra alone can be the experiencing subjects who are
in the process of reawakening. When these same Mantra subjects have become objects
of awareness, then the Mantreśas are the subjects within which total consciousness is in
the process of coming into being. These too then becoming object of awareness, the

Mahāmantreśas are the subjects within which total consciousness is fully manifest.
' paraprakāśatvenaiva sarveṣāṁ prakāśaḥ sidáhyati, which literally means, ‘the light
of all things is achieved because it is the light of another’. An object is illumined and
made manifest by the light of consciousness, which is the perceiver. It shines by the

CHAPTER TEN

TṬGTÑṢ TTĪTYGTTTT TTT II 22: 1I
3TṬGĪIRĪTPTYIcd RITTTTIT Ç@TTŪ

āāy qd feã aaṁ sJsã Ũṁa fẽ ā-̃ 11 22. 11
svaprakāśe ʻtra kasmiṁścid anabhyupagate sati || 1 14 ||
aprakāśāt prakāśatve hy anavasthā duruttarā |
tataś ca suptaṁ viśvaṁ syān na caivaṁ bhāsate hi tat II 115 II
By not admitting the existence of some self-luminous (principle),
(the consequence would be that) the luminous (manifest) state (prakāśatva)

(of the things that appear would be derived from something else) that is not
light (aprakāśa). (This would require another to make it manifest, and that
too something else and so on, resulting in) an infinite regress that is hard to
overcome. Thus the (entire) universe would be (as if) asleep. It does not

manifest in this way! (114cd-115)

If one admits that the light (prakāśa) (of what manifests is derived from
something else) ‘that is not light (aprakāśa), the notion that there is another
perceiver (that perceives the perceiver that is not intrinsically manifest in itself)
would not come to an end, (for just as the first perceiver required a second to
perceive it, so too the second would require a third and that a fourth and so on).

Thus, one would clearly fall into an infinite regress that severs the (very) root

(of perception), so that nothing at all would manifest. Thus, the universe would

be as if in a coma. (The result would be that) this establishes what comes to

amount to the reversal of the contention (prasaṅgaviparyaya) of what is being
contended (prasaṅga). (Thus he says) ‘(it does not manifest) in this way!”

Surely (one may rejoin), if the universe does manifest (which it does),
then in accord with the view that ‘if the initial (view) is such (as accords with

reality), then why hold fast to an aversion (to it)?’'S let us agree that that

(universe) itself is self-luminous. What is the need of (some other) intermediate
(avāntara) (light)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

anyādhīnaprakāśaṁ hi tad bhāty anyas tv asau śivaḥ |
light of another. The perceiver, on the contrary, shines by its own light. It is known by

itself and appears by itself to itself. In other words, the perceiver illumines both the
object and himself by the light of his own innate consciousness. There is a difference

between the state of the manifestation of consciousness which is self-luminous —

svaprakāśatva, and the state of the manifestation of an insentient object which illumined
by another – paraprakāśatva. The question here is that, if it is agreed that the object

‘shines’ by the light of another, what is the use of adding that that light is self-luminous?

' The same line is quoted below in TĀv ad 11/28. There we are told that the author of

the ĪP and others hold this view.

TANTRĀLOKA

That (universe) does (in fact) shine, (that is, manifests,) possessing a
light (which is its manifest nature) that depends on another, and that other

is Śiva. (116ab)

The universe manifests dependent on ‘anotherʼ, that is, the perceiver. It

certainly does not (manifest) by itself (svataḥ). Thus, its light is dependent on
that. And the ʻother’ (on which it depends for its light) is Śiva, the (supreme)

perceiver. This has been soundly established previously many times. Moreover,

it is accepted that (Śiva) is self-luminous, otherwise nothing at all would
manifest.
As that is proved to exist right from the start (even before one begins to
argue about its existence) (ādisiddha),' a means of knowledge that establishes

(the nature of something) does nothing with respect to that. Thus he says:

ṢAT TTĒT fr̄̄-ḍfhṣraT: || 225 1|
mṃ-rā fk ī stīa. a tdrghaīca:: |
ity asya svaprakāśatve kim anyair yuktidambaraiḥ ||
mānānāṁ hi paro jīvaḥ sa evety uktam āditaḥ |

116 ||

Thus, as (Śiva) is self-luminous, of what use are other vain

arguments? We explained at the very beginning that (Śiva) alone is the
supreme living essence (jīva) of (all) the means of knowledge. (116cd-117ab)

Rather, the successful application (siddhi) (of any of) the means of
knowledge depends on that (self-luminous consciousness), and so (it) precedes
them. This was logically established in the very first chapter. As was said

there:’

‘Indeed, this Light (of consciousness) shines at all times; so, as it
cannot be denied, what is the use (of applying) contrived means of knowledge to
it? (AIl that needs be done is to recognise that the One Light exists, and that it

illumineṣs the manifestation of all things). The (many) means of knowledge give
life to all things (vastu) (because it is by means of them that they appear to the
sentient subject), while the supreme living essence (jīva) of those (means) also

is that same Supreme Lord (Himself, Who is the true identity of the perceiver).”

'N Śiva is the universal and transcendental perceiver. If he were not to exist, there would

be no perceivers, and nothing would manifest to anybody. Thus, His existence is proved

‘right from the start’. Also because those who disputes His existence can only do so
because they exist, and their existence depends on Siva, who is Being itself. See above,
note 1,462.

Read yad uktaṁ for tad uktaṁ. These verses are TĀ 1/54-55.

" 1 read, as does Jayaratha, sarvadaiva for sarvatraiva. However, the reading
‘sarvatraiva’ – ‘everywhere indeed’ may be better. The ‘denial’ to which this verse

refers is a cognitive process whereby a particular object perceived by the senses, or even

imagined, is identified by ‘denying’ that it is anything else. Clearly, this is not possible
in the case of the light of consciousness, that shines everywhere as everything.

CHAPTER TEN
Surely, objectivity is present within Śiva, even though He is self-

luminous; otherwise, teachings such as ‘this Self has shone forth (just) onceʼ

could not be logically justified. So how is it that it was said that Siva is not an
object of knowledge?” With this doubt in mind, he says:
The Supreme Lord Makes Śiva into an Object of Instruction

raifta aāvṝīsṝ

SYĀĪTRRTTTRSĀAT
TÑATḤ |
nanv asti svaprakāśe ‘pi śive vedyatvam īdṛśaḥ || 117 I|

Śbyupadeśyopadeṣṭrtvavyavahāro ‘nyathā katham |

SŚurely, (the opponent objects), although Śiva is self-luminous, He is
objectively perceivable (vedyatva)' (to some degree). Otherwise, how

(could) the common interaction (vyavahāra) like this between (Śiva) the

teacher and the taught (be possible)?° (117cd-118ab)

(The interaction between Śiva as the teacher and those he teaches is)
‘like thisʼ, in the sense that all people are a witness that it has been a (standard)
convention (nirūḍha) for a very long time.
Having accepted that, (he goes on) to qualify (in specific terms what is
meant by that).

aqcā 3 q aī d: ŪT¥ aTāT] || Ṟ2¢ 11
hīī rarrvmṁfēāra ātrarTaā̃ |
satyaṁ sa tu tathã sr̥ṣṭaḥ parameśena vedyatām || 118 Il
nīto mantramaheśādikakṣyāṁ samadhiśāyyate |
(We say that) this is quite true. However, (the Śiva who is the object
of instruction) is created in this way by the Supreme Lord. He is led (down)
to an objectively perceivable state and is brought to rest on the planes of
the Mantra (perceivers) and the Great Lords of Mantra etc. (118cd-119ab)

Ṭhe sense of this statement is that the Self shines in the perpetual present, and s0, in

temporal terms, all the time. See note above in TĀv ad 1/57.

Read, as the editor suggests, upadesyo- for upadeśo-.
I Śiye vedyatvam literally means that there is some degree of ‘objectivity within Śiva’.
Çoncerning the distinction between the teacher and the taught – the one who replies
and the one who questions — and how they are ultimately two aspects of the one
consciousness, see above 1/257cd-258ab (256).

TANTRĀLOKA

(We agree that) this is so, howeverin accord with the view that ‘He

binds Himself by Himself’,' the Supreme Lord, by virtue of His own freedom,

has led Śiva (down) to an objectively perceivable state, because he has been
created as the object ofinstruction in that way. (Thus, as he is such,) he assumes
the condition of one who rests on the level of the Great Lords of Mantra and the
other (perceivers, progressively downwards). This is the meaning.
Surely (one may object that), in this way, Śiva’s essential nature
(svarūpa) itself would not be known (pratyavamrṛṣṭa). Thus, even if meditation

(bhāvanā) and the like is done there (on that), it would be useless. With this

doubt in mind, he says:

Taāīṛ]ã daāīsāī āīāatgafaz: 1| 223 1|
tathābhūtaś ca vedyo ‘sau nānavacchinnasaṁvidaḥ ||
pūrṇasya vedyatā yuktā parasparavirodhataḥ |

119 |

(Although Śiva is) aṉ object of knowledge (in this way), He remains
just as He is (tathābhūta). How can that which is full and unlimited
consciousness logically be an object of knowledge? - for they are mutually
contrary to one another. (119cd-120ab)
Although Śiva is an ‘object of knowledge’, because he rests on the
level of the Great Lords of Mantra and the other (perceivers), ‘He remains just
as Heis’; thatis, Śiva Himself, whois full and unlimited consciousness. Thīsis
the meaning. Objectivity is not logically possible within this (the highest

perceiver), who is such. (This is) because (the) sentience (of consciousness) and

the insentience (of objectivity present) in one place are contrary (to one
another).
Surely (one may ask), if Śiva himself is in this way an object of
knowledge, then how is it that contemplating Śiva (śivabhāvanā) in grass or
leaves and the like, not different as they are from that same (objective) state,
does not bear fruit? With this doubt in mind, he says:
Śiva is Not Objective and is Undivided

āaqī ī fkaī-kaā 1| z3 1|

tathā vedyasvabhāve ‘pi vastuto na śivātmatām || 120 ||
ko ‘pi bhāvaḥ projjhatīti satyaṁ tadbhāvanā phalet |

' See below, 13/104, where Abhinava appears to comment on this statement. We are
reminded of BhGT 6/5: “Let a man raise himself by his own self; let him not debase
his friend, himself his foe.’
himself. For he is himself

CHAPTER TEN

Thus, in fact nothing whatsoever, even if it is objective in this way,
ceases to be Śiva. It is because of this that meditation (bhāvanā) on that

(particular aspect of reality) bestows its (own) fruit. (120cd-121ab)

‘(Nothing) whatsoever’, be it grass, a leaf, a stone or the like (ceases to
be Śiva). This is the meaning. As the revered teacher' has said, with this same

intended (sense):
‘O Pervasive Lord, come forth from the grass, leaf, stone, wood, wall,
earth (sthala) and water! Go and save me! Where indeed is Your abiding
presence absent (sthiti)?
Nor is that mentioned in the scriptures as (a doctrine that is) not

unproved; rather (on the contrary, it is taught) because it is logically sound.’

Thus he says:

Tīrṁ ftra. raṁ ftr̃ 11 z22 1
śrīpūrvaśāstre tenoktaṁ śivaḥ sākṣān na bhidyate || 121 I|

Thus, it is said in the Śrīpūrvaśāstra (i.e. the Mālinīvijayottara) that

‘Siva, (Himself) is not directly (sākṣāt) divided”. (121cd)

Surely (one may ask:) (by stating) here that Śiva is not divided, he is

saying that duality is (totally) denied (bhedaniṣedha), not that (Śiva) Himṣelf is
divided (and subject to duality) by attaining another (lower) plane (of
existence). With this doubt in mind, he says:

ḤraīcŪcīaī#: qṃHIT: TH,ĀṬGaī: |
sākṣāt padenāyam arthaḥ samastaḥ prasphuṭīkṛtaḥ |
The entire matter (artha) (expounded above) is clearly expressed by
(the use of) the word ‘directly’. (122ab)
The fifteen-fold (state) and the rest (of the series) has been taught by

refuting in this way that the number (of aspects) is less. Now, dealing first with
that same doubt in the way it may possibly arise, he says (the following), in
order to (further) strengthen (this view) by refuting that there is a greater
number (of aspects than we have stated that there are).

'Ś Ṭhe reality that surrounds us should thus be contemplated as Śiva.

Jayaratha refers to an ācārya in the plural as a sign of respect. This verse is not found

in Utpaladeva’s Śivastotrāvali or Ṅārāyaṇabhaṭṭa’s Stavacvintāmaṇi. It is probably not

drawn from one of Abhinava’s hymns, as we would expect Jayaratha to refer to him as
more than just ‘our revered teacher’. Perhaps this is from a work by Kalyāṇa or another
of Jayaratha’s teachers.

' Omit ata eva.

” MV 2/7b (literal quotation).

TANTRĀLOKA

īTATGTaTZT: fTTTTTRYHI WT ||/222

[eEetuEēEGEEĀAEĀEEIrḤI

nanv ekarūpatāyuktaḥ śivas tadvaśato bhavet || 122 ||
tribhedatā mantramahānāthe kātra vivāditā |
Surely, Śiva is one. (Let us admit that) by His (own) will He is

divided into three aspects, when (the object is) the Great Lord of Mantra.”
What disagreement could there be here (about this)? (122cd-123ab)

Where else (could) there be (any) dispute (about this)? With this doubt
in mind, he says:
Deep Sleep and Awaking
Divisions of the Other Subjects from Thirteen Onwards

TGATYTHATIĪ
āAI #afōōzīzaī: || 223 1|

maheśvareśamantrāṇāṁ tathā kevalinor dvayoḥ|| 123 II

anantabhedataikaikaṁ sthitā sakalavat kila |

Just as the divisions of the Fully Conditioned (sakala) (perceivers)
are endless, so too are those of each one (of the types of perceivers, namely)

the Great Lords of Mantra, the Lords of Mantra, the Mantras, the

Consciousness Deconditioned (vijñānākala), and Diīssolution Deconditioned
(pralayākala) (perceivers). (123cd-124ab)
‘Just (as the divisions of) the Fully Conditioned (sakala) (perceivers

are endless), all (of them) differ (from one another), beginning with (their)

body and the rest (of the psychophysical organism they inhabit), due to which

there is a difference in (their) family lineage (santāna). Thus he says:

TīTī āaāīā īā JHIITā WōTHN. || QRY II

īāT TāGTCYTTI
TRIṬA ġ TaṬTaT |
TṢā HTTGĪNITĪ T-HTIT-TŪĀĀT ||g2ē 1I

'” Read tribhedatā mantramahānāthe for trivedatāmantramahānāthe. The three aspects
are the ‘own nature’ or the object of knowledge consisting of the aforementioned Great
Lords of Mantra, and the subject, thatis, Śiva in His two aspects as power and the

possessor of power.

CHAPTER TEN

šīraīaāā Jd a: āa ā q ú #N, |
tato layākale meye pramātāsti layākalaḥ || 124 ||
atas trayodaśatvaṁ syād itthaṁ naikādaśātmatā |
vijñānākalavedyatve ‘py anyo jñānākalo bhavet | 125 ||
mātā tad ekādaśatā syān naiva tu navātmatā |
evaṁ mantratadīśānāṁ mantreśāntarasaṁbhave || 126 ||
vedyatvān nava sapta syuḥ sapta pañca tu te katham |
Thus, (we maintain) that when the Dissolution Deconditioned
(pralayākala) (perceivers) are objects of knowledge, their subject is

(another) Dissolution Deconditioned (pralayākala) (perceiver). Thus, in this

way, there are thirteen divisions, and not eleven. Again, when the
knowledge, the perceiver is another Consciousness Deconditioned
(vijñānākala) (perceiver), and so the divisions are eleven, not nine.
Similarly, when the objects of knowledge of another Mantra or Lord of
Mantra (mantreśa) are Mantras and the Lords of Mantras, the divisions
should be nine and seven (respectively), how could they be seven and five?

(124cd-127ab)
This

is

so because

there are endless numbers

of Dissolution

Deconditioned and other (perceivers). The word ‘mantreśa’ (denotes) the Lords
of Mantra. Thus, the Mantra (perceivers) arise, and (so do) their Lords (as

distinct types of perceivers). There (in that case), when a Fully Conditioned
(perceiver) is the object of another Fully Conditioned (perceiver), the main

group of seven perceivers along with their powers exists, and so the fifteen-fold
(condition obtains). Again, when the Fully Conditioned (perceiver assumes) the
condition of the ‘Innate Nature’, then the group of six perceivers, (namely) the
Dissolution Deconditioned and others along with their powers (alone) exist, and
so the thirteen-fold (condition obtains). (Up to this level,) there is no dispute (as

to the number of divisions). When a Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver) is
the object of another Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver), because of the state

of (deep sleep these) perceivers (are in), the (same) thirteen-fold condition

perceiver), for the same reason there (in that case), each perceiver has two extra

divisions. So how is it said that:

' See above, 10/3-5. The question raises concerns about how perceivers perceive one

another. The nature and number of gradations has been discussed in terms of the
realities the perceivers perceive. Somadeva (2004) (p. 201-2) summarizes the problem
raised here as follows: ‘If they perceive one another, should this not alter the number of
apperceptive levels? When a Pralayākala perceives a Sakala, then admittedly there are
thirteen levels. (The Sakala who has become the svarūpa, and the (1) Pralayākala,
(2) Vijñānākala, (3) Mantra, (4) Mantra, (5) Mantreśvara, (6) Śiva and their energies).
But if one Pralayākala perceives another Pralayākala, surely the number of levels ought

to remain the same. Therefore, the Pralayākala stage should be thirteen-fold as well, and

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The (savedya) Dissolution Deconditioned (Pralayākala)'” (subjects are

each) elevenfold. (5) One should know that Māyā (that is, the level of the
apavedya Dissolution Deconditioned subjects,) is also like that. The

Consciousness Deconditioned (subjects) (Jīñānakevala) are ninefold, the Mantra

(subjects) are analogously sevenfold, the Lords of Mantra (Mantreśa) are

fivefold.”

Having acknowledged that (teaching), he responds:

3=aqd JTTTTTTI āGGHĪI fēh-] gP¥R: || 22 1|I|

ucyate satyaṃ asty eṣā kalanā kintu susphuṭaḥ || 127 I|
yathātra sakale bhedo na tathā tv akalādike |
(In reply,) we would say that this calculation is (in some respects)
correct. However, there is no very clear division in the Dissolution
Deconditioned (akalā) (perceivers), as there is here in the Fully Conditioned
ones. (127cd-128ab)

Surely (one may ask), what is this ‘very clear division’ (found) in the

of the Fully Conditioned (perceiver), which is not so in the case of the
Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers) and the rest? With this doubt in mind,

he says:

E EIHTGCVIĒRECTA A-ĀIṬAKVĀI

EúUEētzizzEEzzziIEa/TIGIḤ

anantāvāntaredṛkṣayonibhedavataḥ sphuṭam || 128 ||
caturdaśavidhasyāsya sakalasyāsti bheditā |
not eleven-fold, as is taught in the Mālinīvijayottara. The same augmentation by two

levels should also apply to the subsequent stages. Abhinavagupta answers this objection

by questioning the perceptibility of the mutual differentiation among the higher
experients. This mutual differentiation is clearly perceptible among Sakalas, e.g. one
Sakala can perceive another Sakala and be aware of the distinction between them. But

among Pralayākalas, this is not so. For them this differentiation is latent
(saṁsṣkāramātrāt), and it serves merely to distinguish them from the Sakalas. Jayaratha

elaborates that the Apavedya-Pralayākala [who is in deep sleep without an object] has
no self-awareness at all, and the experience of the Savedya-Pralayākala [who is in deep
sleep with some objective content] is comparable to ‘I have slept wellʼ; neither is aware
of external objects or experients. This kind of differentiation is completely absent for
Vijñānākalas and the higher experients; they are distinguished into individuals by Śiva’s

auṭonomous will alone.”
'” Although the reading here and in TĀv ad 10/3-5 is pralayākalaḥ, read with the KSTS
edition of the MV the plural pralayākalāḥ. Vasudeva prefers to retain the singular,

although all the other perceivers listed are plural.

' MV 2/5d-6. Also quoted above in TĀv ad 10/3-5.

CHAPTER TEN
The Conditioned (perceivers) are clearly divided into fourteen

kinds, according to the species (yoni) of this kind to which they belong, each

of which has countless subdivisions. (128cd-129ab)

(The species are of) ‘this kind’; that is, they are implicitly understood
to exist (upalakṣyamāṇa) by direct perception. (The Conditioned perceivers) are
‘divided” (into various kinds), such as gods, human beings, and so on. This is

the meaning.
Surely, it is said everywhere (in the scriptures) that the Dissolution

Deconditioned (perceivers), whose latent traces

have awakened, become

(accordingly) particular Fully Conditioned (perceivers). Just as there is no

difference (between) those (Dissolution Deconditioned perceivers), how is it

that there (is a difference between) Fully Conditioned (perceivers)? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

ṜirIṬ I| 22 |

layākale tu saṅskāramātrāt saty apy asau bhidā || 129 ||
akalena viśeṣāya sakalasyaiva yujyate |
In the case of the Dissolution Deconditioned (layākala) (perceiver),
this division exists only as a latent impression, and so does not serve to
distinguish them from one another, as it does the Fully Conditioned
(perceiver). (129cd-130ab)

Although this division exists, it is only as latent impressions, in which
case there is no association with (defining) particulars. The cause of the Fully

Conditioned (perceiver’s) state is (activated) by (a process of) of specification

(viśeṣaṇa). However, as the Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver) is in a state
(of deep sleep, which is) devoid of (any) object of perception (apavedya), (he
experiences that) “T am not conscious of anything”. Even when he is in a state
(of deep sleep), with an object of perception (such that he recalls it, thinking) “1

slept well”, where there is not even (a faint) awareness of outer reality, what

question could there be there (in that case) of being aware of another perceiver,
due to which (the division here) could be thirteen-fold?
Again, there is no difference between Consciousness Deconditioned
perceivers, even in the form ofjust latent traces. Thus he says:

āīaāī ā fiṝ || g3c 1

vijñānakevalādīnāṁ tāvaty api na vai bhidā || 130 l|
Śśivasvācchandyamātraṁ tu bhedāyaiṣāṁ vijrmbhate |

TANTRĀLOKA

In the case of the Consciousness Deconditioned (perceivers), even

this degree of division is absent. The unfolding of Śiva’s freedom alone
serves to differentiate them from one another. (130cd-131ab)

Although they (all) possess one nature, which is pure consciousness
etc., the nature of the mutual distinction between them is solely the unfolding of
the Supreme Lord’s freedom (to manifest as He chooses). Thuṣ it is said that

‘ṭhe unfolding of

anotherʼ. As is

Śiva’s freedom alone serves to differentiate them from one

said (in the Iśvarapratyabhij ā).

‘Although the Consciousness Deconditioned (perceivers) possess the

same (common) characteristics, such as (their nature as pure) consciousness,
(and so are indistinguishable), the mutual difference (that exists) between

them' in this way is due to the difference in the Lord’s will (that creates them
separately).

Thus, if there is no difference between Consciousness Deconditioned
(perceivers), because in their case their one (common) nature is pure

consciousness etc., (well then,) what is the condition of the Mantra (perceivers),

Lords of Mantra, and Great Lords of Mantra who, possessing complete
knowledge and (the power to) act, are above them? (Abhinava) has not
explained this (directly) in his own words. Thus, the difference between the
Fully Conditioned (perceiver), the Dissolution Deconditioned one, and other
(perceivers)

is

such,

namely,

that

here

(in

this

case)

the

Dissolution

Deconditioned and the other (perceivers) are not the objects of perception of
other Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers) etc. Thus, the Lord has not taught
that the numbers (of their aspects at succeeding levels) is any more (than it
should be).

He says that.

ṢATYTIT TTYJÑTāTT TTFJIET 1| 232 11

ity āśayena saṁpaśyan viśeṣaṁ sakalād iha || 131 ||
' Read with the printed edition teṣām for yeṣām.

'” ĪP 3/2/]. These Consciousness Deconditioned subjects are similar to the Puruṣas

(individual souls) characterized by the Sāṁkhya. According to that view, there are an

infinite number of individual souls who are all identical, as each one of them is a nonfinite point of consciousness. Moreover, they are detached from Nature and hence

devoid of any objective characteristics that could differentiate them from one another. A

common criticism levelled against this notion is that individual souls that have no form,

location in space or time, are indistinguishable. How then can they be said to be many?
Consciousness Deconditioned (perceivers), detached as they are from Māyā, are very

similar to the Puruṣas of the Sāṁkhya. In this case, however, they are different from one
another because they are each created separately by the Supreme Lord, Whose existence
the Sāṁkhya does not admit. Here, each one is the result of the Lord’s specific choice,
His will.

CHAPTER TEN

layākalādau novāca trāyodaśyādikaṁ vibhuḥ |
Observing that they differ from Conditioned (perceivers), it is with
this intention that the Omnipresent Lord has not said that the Dissolution
Deconditioned (perceivers) etc. have thirteen etc. aspects. (131cd-132ab)
(The group of) fifteen and the rest (of the diminishing series of aspects),

which has as its root (cause) the perceptibility which is a property of
phenomenal entities (bhāvadharma), has been established as being (just) so

much (with respect to the levels of the objectivity of the corresponding

perceivers).
Now in order to refute that (view, the opponent) questions whether the

perceptibility which is the root of that (view) does not exist in relation to the
Dissolution Deconditioned and Consciousness Deconditioned (perceivers).

Ta-q šṇārā] TatṝḤ; fkk-] ōārēō̄ 1| q32 1|

ōṭHEHEEĒtGVKIĒCTAI-IḤ.

nanv astu vedyatā bhāvadharmaḥ kintu layākalau || 132 ||
manvāte neha vai kiñcit tadapekṣā tv asau katham 1
Surely (an opponent may object that), even if perceptibility is
conceded to be a property of an entity, the Dissolution Deconditioned and
Consciousness Deconditioned (perceivers) are not conscious of anything, so
how can that (perceptibility exist) in relation to them? (132cd-133ab)
The Dissolution Deconditioned and Consciousness Deconditioned
(perceivers) are similar to yogis, who are immersed in contemplative absorption
(samādhi) devoid (of content, like) hibernating snakes, and so know nothing at

all. Thus, it is surprising, (but a fact nonetheless, that) those (two types of
perceivers) have no conscious subjectivity (veditṛtva), and so how could

perceptibility be (considered to be) a property of phenomena in relation to them
also?
He responds (to that objection).
The Awakening of the Dissolution and Consciousness
Deconditioned Perceivers

gIa āfdāṁīT-īārdṣfār-Teatzrd 1| 233 1I

TKTSTṬHITHYṄ TTTāsĀIĪT dḍāṀāoli

fṣfarrg āīīsaa īaāraīa var

|| Z3¥%

1|

śrūyatāṁ saṁvidaikātmyatattve ‘smin saṅvyavasthite || 133 II
jade ʻpi citir asty eva bhotsyamāne tu kā kathā |

TANTRĀLOKA

svabodhāvasare tāvad bhetsyate layakevalī |/ 134 ||
dvividhaś ca prabodho ‘sya mantratvāya bhavāya ca |
Listen carefully! In this (our view), that maintains that reality is the
oneness of consciousness, consciousness (citi) is present in that which is
established within this (oneness), even if insentient; so what to say of beings
who, (asleep), will awake! When the time comes for his own awakening, a
Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver) will be divided” into two (types), as
is (his) awakening, according to whether (it serves to make him) into a

Mantra (perceiver) or (gives rise to) the life of transmigratory existence
(bhava) (for him as a Conditioned perceiver). (133cd-135ab)

According to our philosophy,” that (maintains) that ultimate reality is

the nonduality of consciousness, consciousness is present wherever there is (an
object), such as (the external colour) blue and the (inner experience of) pleasure,
even if insentient. So what to say within the perceiver such as the Dissolution
and Consciousness Deconditioned ones, who are about to awake? Dissolution
and

Consciou:

s

Deconditioned

(perceivers)

possess

the

(sentient)

subjectivity (veditṛtva), due to which perceptibility is also a property of an

entity.

Surely, if that is so, when (do they) awake, and who does so? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

JATTTRaATTAHTTTHST
TTTT T ||/231 1
bhāvanādibalād anyavaiṣṇavādinayoditāt || 135 ||
yathāṣvaṃ ādharauttaryavicitrāt saṁskṛtas tathā |
līnaḥ prabuddho mantratvaṁ tadīśatvam athaiti vā || 136 ||
svātantryavarjitā ye tu balān mohavaśīkṛtāḥ |
layākalāt svasaṅskārāt prabuddhyante bhavāya te || 137 ||
Those who have been purified by the power of meditation
(bhāvanā) and the like taught in the Vaisṇava and other schools dissolve
(into their respective levels of consciousness). According to whether their

own (condition) is of a higher or lower order, they attain either the state of
a Mantra (perceiver) or that of a Lord of Mantra when they awake.

However, those Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers) who are devoid of

freedom and have been forcefully brought under the sway of delusion wake
'” Read with MS T bhetsyate for bhotsyate.

'” Read with MS Kh asmad for asmin.

CHAPTER TEN

up to a life of transmigratory existence due to the latent traces of their (past

Karma).” (135cd-137)

The meaning is, (the perceivers who have risen to the level of Māyā and
have fallen asleep there awake at different levels of subjectivity,) ‘according to
whether they are of a higher or lower order’. ‘Those who have been
(purified by the power of the meditation and the rest) taught in the Vaiṣṇava

and other schoolsʼ (attain to varying degrees of subjectivity), according to
whether (their) own (condition is of a) higher or lower order. This has been

taught extensively before, and so enough of (this unnecessary) effort (to explain
this again). That was said before:

‘Again, those who have started to practice meditation (bhāvanā) in
order to destroy the latent impressions of their Karma, (but are themselves)
dissolved away in the great destruction (at the end of a cosmic cycle) before
their meditative practice has reached perfection, assume the diverse states of the

Mantra subjects brought about by their diverse Karma, according to the degree
in which the inner (impression) of their meditative practice (bhāvanā) has

reached maturity.”

‘Those who are devoid of freedom’ are those who are devoid of

power, because they attend to observances (anuṣṭhāna) such as meditation
(bhāvanā) taught in other (lower) schools, as are those of the Vaiṣṇavas and the

like. This is the meaning. Thus it is said that they ‘have been forcefully

brought under the sway of delusion’.
Not only the Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers) wake up in two

ways – the Consciousness Deconditioned (perceivers) do so also. Thus he says:

arī šīg īq ggdrastī aī 1| 23¢ 1I1

jñānākalo ʻpi mantreśamaheśatvāya budhyate |

mantrāditvāya vā jātu jātu saṁsṛtaye ‘pi vā |l 138 II
may awaken to become a Great Lord of Mantra, a Lord of Mantra, Mantra
and the rest, or he may sometimes (wake up to return) to transmigratory
existence. (138)

By the words ‘and the rest’ (is) not meant that (the Consciousness
Deconditioned perceiver may wake up) to become Śiva (directly). Thus, he
specifies that (he may wake up) to become a Lord (or) Great Lord of Mantra.
The ‘Lords’ are the Lords of Mantra (perceivers).
' Ṣee above, 1/31-32 and 9/138-141.
' Above, 9/140-141.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Although (the Vijñānakevalin) is devoid of Karma, he does not move

(sarati) upwards (to higher levels), because ignorance, the root impurity (i.e.
āṇavamala), persists, nor downwards (to the lower ones), because (Karma,
which is) the cause of the variety (of worldly experience), is lacking. Thus, due

to his (conditioned) limited nature (pārimitya), he is isolated'" (in

consciousness), without coming in touch with Śiva’s unity. (Thus,) the ‘one
who is isolated in consciousness alone’ (vijñānakevalin) is said to be well-

established in pure consciousness alone (but is devoid of freedom).

Thus, according to this previously stated teaching (yukti), one should
say that the awakening (of these perceivers) is to become Mantras, Lords of
Mantras and Great Lords of Mantras. So how is said it that, on the contrary,

they may also awaken (to return) to transmigratory existence? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

sāānā fk fesīfrāītrṝasszq
ftzra |

avatāro hi vijñāniyogibhāve `sya bhidyate |
(This) descent (avatāra) (into the world) is divided (into two kinds.

He may be born) either as a yogi, or as a man of knowledge (vijñānin).
(139ab)

According to our philosophy, the Consciousness Deconditioned
(perceiver) descends (into this world either as) a man of knowledge or as a
Yogi, and (his) transmigratory existence is not like that of other (souls). Thus it

is said that: ʻhis descent (avatāra) (into this world) is divided (into two

kinds)ʼ.

He (now) corroborates what has thus been
concerning his awakening (by referring to scripture).

soundly

explained

ũ fgggsīīāg: 1 g32 1|

rrgīṁ 1

uktaṁ ca bodhayāmāsa sa sisṛkṣur jagatprabhuḥ l| 139 1|
Thus, it is said in the Śrīpūrvaśāsana (i.e. Mālinīvijayottara) that:

‘Desiring to emit the universe, the Lord awakened the eight (souls who are)
Isolated in Consciousness.” (139cd-140ab)
That is said there:

'“ Gnoli suggests the emendation kevalaḥ for kevalaṁ. If we retain the reading in the

printed edition, the meaning would be ‘only because of (his) conditioned nature’.

' Above, 9/90cd-92ab.

' Paraphrase of MV 1/18cd-19ab.

CHAPTER TEN
‘At the beginning of the creation of the universe, desiring to emit (it), he

awakened by his own will the eight souls who are Isolated in Consciousness

Alone (vijñūānakevalin).

Surely, there is at least no disagreement that the two unawakened (types
of) Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers) are devoid of conscious subjectivity

(veditṛtva). Awake, the two attain the nature of Conditioned or Mantra

(perceivers) etc. (Their) perceptibility in relation to that, as a property of (their

phenomenal)

state,

is possible then, not in

relation to the Dissolution

Deconditioned (perceivers themselves), for in this way also, the sequence of the
fifteenfold etc. (states) would be compromised. With this doubt in mind (he
again cḷarifies the nature of perceptibility):
Perceptibility of Objectivity is a Potential that Actualizes
Upon Waking for Those Fit to Perceive

TRJTGTTTTTTTHTTHaTĪ SaITĪ

ataḥ prabhotsyamānatve yānayor bodhayogyatā l| 140 ll
tadbalād vedyatāyogyabhāvenaivātra vedyatā |
(What is meant) here by perceptibility is a condition that is
favourable to perception. Thus, the power (bala) of the competence these
two (perceivers) possess to be awake (and conscious) (bodhayogyatā), which

is (implicit) in their future awakening, makes it possible for (the Earth and
the other principles) to be perceptible to them. (140cd-141ab)

Thus, in accord with the aforestated reason, the conscious subjectivity

(veditṛtva) of ‘these two’, that is, the Dissolution and Consciousness
Deconditioned (perceivers), must necessarily manifest ‘in their future

awakeningʼ; that is, in the state of intent to awaken, prior (to that awakening).
The competence (they possess) to awaken and, in relation to that, also the

perceptibility (in a potential state, as) a competence for it, arises with respect to
the Earth and other (principles). Thus, what occasion is there here for (these

teachings to be) undermined?'

(Now) he illustrates that (point).

' MV 1/18cd-19ab. Also quoted above, in TĀv ad 9/92cd-93ab.
'! Although these two perceivers are asleep, they are capable of awakening. This

potential state or ‘competence’ (yogyatā) extends to the potential consciousness of
entities that are separate from them, that are also fit to be perceived. Here Abhinava

points out that perceptibility is a property of an entity that abides in a potential form in it
when the perceiver sleeps, just as the capacity to perceive it abides as a potential in his
own consciousness. Although he is asleep, he remains capable of perception, and his

object is similarly capable of being perceived. Waking, in other words, is an

actualization of these potentials. Thus, the two type of perceivers can be characterized

as such, even though they are in deep sleep, on this basis.

TANTRĀLOKA

aṁṝē mīafr:sfṁ frāsrvr̥karraāīa 11 2x2 1

tathāhi gāḍhanidre ‘pi priye ‘nāśaṅkitāgatām || 141 ||
māṁ drakṣyatīti nāṅgeṣu sveṣu māty abhiṣārikā |
The same is the case with the lover who comes to meet her beloved
in secret (abhisārikā). Even though (her) beloved is in deep sleep, she
thinks: “(When he awakens,) he will see me (and know that) I have come
with confidence (in our love)”, and cannot contain herself (for joy). (141cd-

142ab)

Having considered that the beloved is unconscious (mmūḍha) because (he

is) in deep sleep, and so (she will be) perceptible (to him only) in the future,

(even s0) in this way ‘the lover who comes to meet’ (him) is extremely joyful.
Thus, it is (for this reason that) it is said that, even though he is sleeping, (he
does possess) a subjective consciousness (vidittva), as the capability (yogyatā)
(he has for it), that is linked to the relationship with the awakened consciousness
of phenomenal existence (bhāvabodha) (he will have when he wakes up).
He (now) links this (example) to the main point.

rāŪ tādīaāīq || 233 1I
aṃrī--qttfd gsṁstā arṝ aāīra ā |

|| 2%33

II

frāī ft īī. ā- faērcr-d 1
evaṁ Śivo ‘pi manute etasyaitat pravedyatām || 142 ||
yāsyatīti srjāmīti tadānīṁ yogyataiva sā |
vedyatā tasya bhāvasya bhoktṛtā tāvatī ca ṣā l| 143 |

layākalasya citro hi bhogaḥ kena vikalpyate |

Śiva also thinks the same way: “That will become perceptible to
him, and so I am emitting (the world again).” The world (bhāva) is not

perceptible to that Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver) (pralayākala) at
that time (when he is immersed in sleep), but (it is potentially) fit (yogyatā)
to be so. Such also is his condition as an experiencing subject (bhoktṛtā).

Indeed, worldly experience (bhoga) is so diverse that who can conceive (of
its variety)? (142cd-144ab)

priyasya gādhanidrāmūḍhatvād bhāvinīm api svātmani tadvedyatāṁ saṁbhāvya
translated more literally, means: ‘having considered the perceptibility within herself (to
her lover) that will be there in the future, because the beloved is (at present) unconscious
(mū̃ḍha) in deep sleep . . .

CHAPTER TEN

When the Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver) etc. wake up, the
world (bhāvajāta) ‘will become’ fully ‘perceptible’, not (as it is) now, as just
fit (to be s0). Thus, for this reason, Lord Śiva also reflects that “I fashion this

couple, that are in conformity with one another, as subject and object.” The

meaning is that ‘at that tīme’, in the state of the Dissolution Deconditioned
(perceiver) etc., perceptibility is a property of an entity (bhāvadharma) as a
capacity (yogyatā) (for it to be so). Surely (one may ask), agreed that the
perceptibility of the world (bhāva), whether secondarily ascribed or primary,
exists as just a capacity (for it). (But) how can that be a conscious subjectivity
(veditṛtā) in this way? That is (his) condition as an experiencing subject
(bhoktṛtā) (of the consequences of Karma), and (so too,) worldly experience
(bhoga), which is the experience of pleasure and pain etc. (that are the

consequences of Karma). Thus, when that is absent, how could a state of

conscious subjectivity and perceptibility, which depends on that, abide in
Dissolution Deconditioned and other (such perceivers)? With this doubt in
mind, he says: “(Such also is his) condition as an experiencing subject’ etc.
‘Such’ means in the form ofjust the competence (to be perceptible), which is
different in character from the state in which the experience of pleasure and pain
etc. proliferates.
Surely (one may ask), what is this new definition (of subjectivity),

namely that (this perceiver’s) condition as an experiencing subject is linked to
the relationship with future phenomenal experience (he will have when he
wakes up)? It is not right to say that a child has literally become (a venerable)

elder because of his (possible) future condition as an elder." So, with this doubt
in mind, he says that ‘indeed, worldly experience (bhoga) is so diverse . . .ʼ.

The worldly experience of experiencing subjects is of many kinds, due to the
variety of location, time, state, the specific characteristics (of each thing), and

more.

Just as worldly experience (bhoga) is the clearly evident experience of
pleasure and pain etc., it is not such (in the case of these perceivers), and so,
although (the perceptibility of) future (experience) is even more unclear (than

the things in the present when they sleep), in the same way,' the commerce of
worldly experience (bhogavyavahāra) is due just to the competence (for it. This
must be s0,) because worldly experience arises variously this way and that, as is

appropriate for each particular experiencing subject."
He illustrates (and explains) that.

zaṛ aṛ fē āfatā: fe īī. īṣōgāīssga: 1| xx 1|

aṁ īīaīai 7 qard |
' Read bhāviṣthavirabhāvena for bhāvanāsthavirabhāvena.

' Instead of bhoga iti na niyantumucitamasphuṭe ‘pi tathābhāvāt | evaṁ read bhogas
tathā evaṁ.

' When the Deconditioned perceivers wake up back into daily worldly life the

experience they have is, naturally, different for each one. This can only be the result of
differences in the perceivers themselves and their past Karma etc. If their condition
when they are asleep were to be totally uniform for all of them, they would all wake up

to the same experience of things that are perceptible to them.

TANTRĀLOKA

yathā yathā hi saṅvittiḥ sa hi bhogaḥ sphuṭo ʻsphuṭaḥ || 144 ||
smṛtiyogyo ‘py anyathā vā bhogyabhāvaṁ na tūjjhati |
Worldly experience (bhoga) is clearly evident or not, according to

the type (and degree) of consciousness. Whether it can be recollected or
otherwise, it does not give up its condition as an object of experience
(bhogyabhāva). (144cd-145ab)

‘According to the type ((and degree) of consciousness), (worldly
experience (bhoga) manifests to the perceiver) either as clearly evident,
unclearly or ‘otherwise’. The meaning of ‘otherwise’ is that (something) is not
fit to be recollected because it is not clearly evident,' as for example is grass or
gravel one has seen (but) not consciously noticed (vimṛṣṭa), when travelling

along a road.
He gives an example here with regard to this very matter.

Jīha vdād aīstī #r̄d sÚīa ũ |

gāḍhanidrāvimūḍho ‘pi kāntāliṅgitavigrahaḥ l| 145 ||
bhoktaiva bhaṇyate so ‘pi manute bhoktṛtāṁ purā |
He who is embraced by his beloved is said to be one who enjoys
(her), although he is unconscious and in deep sleep. Indeed, (when he
awakes) he also thinks (himself) to have been such before (when he slept).
(145cd-146ab)

‘He is said’ by people (to be enjoying his lover’s embrace), and ‘he
also’ when well awake, (thinks himself to have been such) ‘before’, when in a

state of deep unconsciousness.
The relationship between the enjoyer and the enjoyed is not due to just a
(potential) competence (for that) only in the state of unconsciousness, it is so in
the state of consciousness also. Thus he says:
The Subjective Response to an Object Varies

3āTHITTTĪSTT TĪTRTGaĀJ TT II 7%Ē I
ṭhiEaEiḻ|ḻeṭEtEiú|ṇṭEt.t&
utprekṣāmātralīno ‘pi kāñcit kulavadhūṁ puraḥ || 146 ||
saṁbhokṣyamāṇāṁ drṣṭvaiva rabhasād yāti saṁmadam |
' Read asphutatvān- for sphuṭatvān-.

CHAPTER TEN
A man who sees a beautiful woman standing before him, even

though he is absorbed in just imagining" that he will enjoy her in the

future, becomes suddenly full of passion. (146cd-147ab)

The intention that has the beautiful woman as its object is (his)
‘imaginingʼ. ‘He will enjoy her’. If fate decrees, he will have sexual
intercourse with her. This is the meaning. Thus ‘suddenly’, immediately after

seeing (her), due to (his) agitated desire, he is ‘full of passion’, as if he had

acquired a (great) acquisition. He becomes as blissful as (he would be having)

sexual intercourse (with her), due to which his condition is that of the enjoyer

(of that, even though it only takes place in his imagination).
Surely (one may ask), even if that beautiful woman is being enjoyed (in
this way) by just being fit (for that), is she an object of enjoyment just for some

one (particular person), or is she is so for all, because there is no difference in

that (competence with regards to anybody). With this doubt in mind, he says:

āīīa ç̄zaī īṉ GHTITTATITT II 24.9 11

tām eva dṛṣṭvā ca tadā samānāśayabhāg api || 147 I|
anyas tathā na saṁvitte kam atropalabhāmahe |
(If) another (man), once having seen that same (woman) is not

gripped then by the same sentiments, even though he has the same
disposition (āśaya), whom do we blame? (147cd-148ab)

‘Then’ means at the time when there is passion on the side of either one
(but not the other). ‘“Even though he has the same disposition’, that is, he has
a similar latent tendency (vāsana) to attachment (rāga) and the like.

Surely this view is liable to the criticism of a follower of the doctrine

that an effect has no (fixed) cause, for (in the example you suggest), though the

cause is one and the same, the effect occurs in some circumstances, while in
others it does not. With this doubt in mind, he explains (the matter with

reasoned argument) by means of an example:

II| Z3¢

loke rūḍham idaṁ dṛṣṭir asmin kāraṇam antarā || 148 ||
prasīdatīva māgneva nirvātīvetivādini |
It is a well-established fact of common daily life that, independent

of other causes, the vision of some people is as if favourable, that of others
as if submerged, and for others still, it is as if extinguished.” (148cd-149ab)
'! Read utprekṣāmātralīno ‘pi for utprekṣāmātrahīno ‘pi.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Itis a well-established fact of common daily life that the vision’ (of

people varies). Even if there is no difference in the cause, the effect may (arise)

anywhere (in innumerable circumstances). Thus, it is ‘independent of other

causesʼ, because there is no well-known cause (at times that explains certain

results). Thus, although there is no difference in the perceived aggregate of
causes, due to (some) unperceived (cause beyond the reach of observation),

worldly experience, such as a gracious (lover’s) look, may happen anywhere (in
innumerable circumstances). Thus, even in a state of (wakeful) consciousness,

by perceiving the relationship between the enjoyer and the enjoyed as a

competence (to be s0), and because the state of the Dissolution Deconditioned
and other (such perceivers) also arises in that way (tathābhāvopapatti), the
division of the states of fifteen (aspects) etc. aspects is proved to exist (siddha).

He concludes.

itthaṁ vistaratas tattvabhedo yaṁ samudāhrtaḥ || 149 ||
In this way, this division of the principles has been explained

extensively. (149cd)

Primary and Secondary Varieties of Perceivers
and the Perceptibility of their Object
Surely (one may ask), one and the same Earth is experienced (vedyate)
by the Conditioned and other (perceivers) singularly at once or sequentially

together as two, three, and so on. Thus, how is it that there could be no more

than the fifteen-fold and the rest? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JGTT-ĀTATĪ
TCTĒAI TTaīdī; TR [I/QU0 1|1
Śśaktiśaktimatāṁ bhedād anyonyaṁ tatkṛteṣv api |
bhedeṣv anyonyato bhedāt tathā tattvāntaraiḥ ṣaha || 150 ||
bhedopabhedagaṇanāṁ kurvato nāvadhiḥ kvacit |
The mutual difference between (these) powerholders and (their)
powers, and the mutual difference between those created by them also,
along with the other principles, (are so many) that (even if one were to) go

on (continuously) enumerating (all these) major and minor differences,
there would be no end to it anywhere. (150-151ab)
“ In other words, although the causes may be the same, the effects may vary according
to the individual that experiences them.

This verse is a gloss on MV 2/7ed-8ab which is quoted by Jayaratha.

CHAPTER TEN

The wonderful diversity of the world-orders etc. abides in the same
way. Thus he says:

ā̃ t faskrṁṝṣā raāīzfāfr: ferā: 11 zuz 1
tata eva vicitro ʻyaṁ bhuvanādividhiḥ sthitaḥ || 151 I|
Thus (because of that), the procedure concerning the world-orders

and the rest is wonderfully diverse. (151cd)

That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘The division (of the principles) has been explained very briefly; (in
actual fact,) it is endlessly extensive.' The garland of the worlds is clearly

divided up in the same way by these divisions.’'

He illustrates the wonderful variety here (in that case).

ī aJTaā̄ T WSa-āT āīld aēūTē || Ú2 1I|
pārthivatve ‘pi no sāmyaṁ rudravaiṣṇavalokayoḥ |
kā kathānyatra tu bhaved bhoge vāpi svarūpake || 1 52 ||
(Thus,) although both the worlds of Rudra and Viṣṇu equally

belong to the Earth (principle), they differ both in the experience they

afford and in their innate nature. What then to say (of the difference
between them and other world-orders) in other cases? (152)

Whereas the worlds of Rudra and Viṣṇu (both) equally belong to the

Earth (principle), the experience (bhoga) (of them and their) nature (svarūpa) is

varied. So what to say of these two in other cases, that is, (the experience and
nature of) the world-orders etc. that are Earth, Water and the rest? Thus it is

said: ‘“what then to say (of the difference between them and other world-

orders) in other cases?”

Surely then, please explain in detail that by virtue of which the worldorders etc. are wonderfully varied in this way. With this question in mind, he

says:

a īī fērzā āameaaī aāã ṝrgz |

sa ca no vistaraḥ sākṣāc chakyo yady api bhāsitum ḷ|
tathāpi mārgamātreṇa kathyamāno vivicyatām || 153 I
'Cf. TĀ 10/150-151ab.
' MV 2/7cd-8ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

Although it is impossible to give a direct and detailed account (of all
these differences), even so, as we go on sketching a rough outline, reflect
(on this teaching). (153)
In this way, in this case (atra), because of ‘the mutual difference

between (these) powerholders and (their) powers’ etc., ‘the detailed account’
of the differences, primary and secondary, has (just been) indicated by
statements that (simply) mention (them). The extent is thus stated in just a brief,
general way (diṅmātreṇa).

There (in that context), it was said previously, that there are fourteen
main kinds of powers and (their) possessors. Moreover, by their mutual

division, there are (other) secondary divisions. Thus he says:

TaTĪ| TIJJIĒĪTTTTĀTA ŪGT TĪḤ

FTHTTTTZTTTST{
TITĀ aTĨ: ||Q4 11
saptānāṁ mātr̥śaktīnām anyonyaṁ bhedane sati |
rūpam ekānnapañcāśat svarūpaṁ cādhikaṁ tataḥ || 154 ||
(Thus,) the mutual conjunction of the seven powers of the

(Conditioned and other subjects) gives rise to forty-nine divisions, with an
extra one for the essential nature (of the subject). (154)

(There are) ‘forty-nine’ (divisions), because the seven powers of the

Conditioned and other perceivers are multiplied by those same seven.
Surely (one may ask), how can a power which is associated with one
thing divide up something else? (Just) because a cloth has many long threads
(connected to one another, a nearby) jar does not become such (as is the cloth).
With this doubt in mind, he says:

JTTHJITRJTFITĪ GYaISĀḤ ṜṬāīT; |I Qu. ||

sarvaṁ sarvãtmakaṁ yasmãt tasmãt sakalamãtarĩ |

layākalādiśaktīnāṁ saṁbhavo ʻsty eva tatvataḥ || 155 1|

Everything is of the nature of all things; thus, it is possible for the
powers of the Dissolution Deconditioned (pralayākala) and other (subjects)
to be really present in (each) Conditioned (sakala) subject. (155)
Surely (one may object that) this may in fact be possible, however it is
not perceived in this way (so what difference does it make?). With this doubt in
mind, he says:

q mgīszq

sa tv asphuṭo ʻstu bhedāṁśaṁ dātuṁ tāvat prabhur bhavet |

CHAPTER TEN

(Firstly,) agreed that it is not clearly evident (asphutṭa), (but it is
nonetheless) sufficiently capable of imparting (their) secondary divisions

(bhedāṁśa). (S6ab)

Referring to what is actually taking place in reality (vastuvṛtta), he
begins here to explain (and illustrate these secondary) divisions (and types).
This is the intention.
(He begins by saying that,) conjoined mutually in this way, the

possessors of power (and their powers number) forty-nine. (Then,) due to the

mutual differences amongst (the divisions) and those created by them, it is
indicated in this way that there are many modalities. Thus he says:

aṇadī || 2u5 ||
teṣām api ca bhedānām anyonyaṁ bahubhedatā || 156 ||
(Secondly,) there are many (more) divisions, as the various aspects
(of these divisions) are mutually interchangeable (as before). (156cd)
They are ‘mutually interchangeable’; that is, when they are thus being

divided, ‘there are many (more) divisions'. Thus, (the aforementioned) forty-

nine (aspects) multiplied by forty-nine make two thousand four hundred and one
modalities. This is the meaning.

(Now) he analyses (the divisions) that are said to be ‘along with the

other principlesʼ.

ōzERÉGEUḤSbRicfE

iI

JGTTCṬGĪYT] FTHRAṬ-TĪ |I g49 11
mukhyānāṁ bhedabhedānāṁ jalādyair bhedane sati |
mukhyabhedaprakāreṇa vidher ānantyam ucyate || 157 ||
(Thirdly,) the (forty-nine) primary subdivisions can be further
divided by those of the Water and other (principles). Thus, just on the basis
of their principal divisions alone, (the variety of forms) of the procedure
(vidhi) is said to be endless. (157)
‘The primary subdivisions’ are the forty-nine subdivisions. If one
were to enumerate their secondary ones, ‘(the variety of forms) of the
procedure (vidhi) is endlessʼ, so what could there be to say (about them)? They

‘can be further divided’ into one, two, three and so on successively. ‘On the
'“ Literally ‘parts of divisions’.
Ṣee above, 10/150d.
' The Conditioned and other perceivers who experience the Earth and other principles

can be one, two, three or more, amongst which are the Conditioned (perceivers) and
other who reside in them. It is to them, it seems, that Abhinavagupta alludes, with the
expression ‘and other (principles).

TANTRĀLOKA

basis of their principal divisionsʼ, that is, the principal fourteen-fold division.

Thus, the principal divisions are also divided up with respect to the Earth and
the rest (of the principles) into one, two, three and so on successively; thus (in
this case) also, ‘(the variety of forms) of the procedure (vidhi) is endless’.
Thus, the procedure is such as to be in accord with this.
Their variety is not just this, it is also of another kind. Thus he says:

T-vNI āTRTJ¥JTTRĀaṢIT: 1|

I]āṛg] Jā-aāira TaTĀTT TRCT I|ṞuÇ_ II
sakalasya samudbhūtāś cakṣurādiṣvaśaktayaḥ |
nyagbhūtāś ca pratanvanti bhedāntaram api sphuṭam || 158 II
(Fourthly,) another distinct type (bheda) is determined by the
powers of vision and the other (senses) of the Conditioned (sakala)
(perceiver), according to whether they are active (samudbhūta) or
suppressed (nyagbhūta). (158)
It was said previously:
‘The nature of the aspect of the Conditioned (sakala perceiver), which
is (his) means of knowledge (pramāṇāṁ5a), is the generic (capacity for limited)
knowledge (vidyā) and action (kalā), rather than their individual instances
(tadbhida). That is considered to be (his) power.

But even so, because a universal is invariably associated with
particuḻars, it is said that the powers of sight and the rest (of the senses) must
necessarily arise (and be included) here. According to whether the powers of
sight and the rest (of the senses) are active or supressed, they contribute another

division.
He applies the same (principle) to the Dissolution Unconditioned and
other such (perceivers) also.

evaṁ layākalādīnāṁ tatsaṁskārapadoditāt |

pātavāt prakṣayād vāpi bhedāntaraṃm udīyate || 159 ||

(Fifthly,) similarly, another division arises, according to whether

the latent impressions of the (past Karma) of Ḍissolution Deconditioned

(pralayākala) and other such (perceivers) are increasing or diminishing.”"
(159)

' Above, 10/12cd-13ab.

Read ~trāvaśyaṁbhavī for -trāvaśyabhavī.

! Ṣee above 10713.

CHAPTER TEN

The ‘latent impressions’ are the traces (vāsanā) (that remain of the
activity) of the powers of the sense of sight and the rest (of the senses). This is
the meaning. The Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver), like the Conditioned
one, possesses the power which is (the individual soul’s limited capacity for)
knowledge and action. However, because it is in the form ofa latent impression,
it is not clearly evident in the same way (as it is in the case of the Conditioned
perceiver). As was said:
‘That same aspect of the means of knowledge also belongs to the
Dissolution Deconditioned (layākala perceiver). However, it is unmanifest

Surely (one may ask), what happens to perceptibility with the
emergence and obscuration of the powers of the sense of sight and the rest (of
the senses), in such a way that another division may arise? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

arñēīrvzāa frrcszi faēī-īa fēra 7 1

fecaī ārzzāī-dāa sīārīsrrzāīTzai 11 2ē2 1|

nyakkṛtāṁ śaktim āsthāyāpy udāsīnatayā sthitim |
anāviśyeva yad vetti tatrānyā vedyatā khalu || 160 |l
āviśyeva nimajjyeva vikāsyeva vighūrṇya ca |
vidato vedyatānyaiva bhedo ‘ṭrārthakriyocitaḥ || 161 I
Perceptibility for someone who perceives with his (sensorial)
faculties unaroused, whether through indifference or inattention, without
participating (in the experience), clearly differs from that of someone who
cognizes (the object) 1) as if penetrating (and participating actively in the
experience) (āveśya), 2) as if immersing (into and making himself part of it)
(nimajjya), 3) (whose consciousness) is as if expanding (vikāsya) and is
4) iṉnebriated (vighūrṇya), so that having cognized it, the perceptibility,
differing, gives rise to the appropriate effects (arthakriyā). (160-161)
The meaning of ‘without participating (in the experience)ʼ is like the
grass or gravel (on the side of the road that goes unnoticed as we travel along it)

because (attention is) spread out (urtānatayā). (The series of states beginning

with that of one who) ‘cognizes (the object) as if penetrating (and
participating actively in the experience) (are such that) the succeeding is
superior to the preceding one. (Thus) 1) ‘penetration’ (āveśa) is a state of
oneness (with the object that arises initially when relishing its aesthetic quality)
Above, 10/13cd.

The perception of a subject X of an object I perceive and he perceives generates the
quality called ‘perceptibility°.

TANTRĀLOKA

(tanmayībhāva). 2) ‘Immersion’ (nimajjana) īs entering into (the essential

underlying consciousness which is the basis of this oneness). It is an attentive

clinging (to it) (āsaṅga). 3) ‘Expansion’ (vikāsa) is the unfolding (of
consciousness impelled) by the enthusiasm for (the beauty of the object). 4)

‘Inebriation’ (vighūrṇana) is the pulsation (spandana) (of consciousness) which
is (its) outpouring that results from the propensity towards it. It is ‘cognized’ in
the sense that the power (of awareness) is abounding (udrikta).

Surely (one may ask), as the result (i.e. the perception of the object) is
the same (in all these cases), what is the use of this (other) type (bheda), which
is essentially merely a verbal (distinction)? With this doubt in mind, he says that

‘differing, it gives rise to the appropriate effects (arthakriyā).” Something

seen by someone whose power (of awareness) has not arisen is as if unseen,

(and s0) it would not nourish (the perceiver’s sense of) satisfaction (nivṛti).
Whereas, on the contrary, one whose power (of awareness) has arisen,

perceiving a (beautiful) sensory object, a supreme (sense of the) most excellent

wonder (ensues). Thus, this type (bheda) (of perception) has had an effect. So
why do you say it is essentially
just a verbal (distinction)?

(Now), by means of an example, he further strengthens (this view of the

act of perception), which includes (reference to) both positive concomitance
(when the right conditions are operative) and negative concomitance (when they
are not).

3TRITTĪTĀTTN GTĀĪTJTTRĀTTT |
HCṬTHIT šīā gTīṬdīāāhz[tzāq II <G~

II

anyaśaktitirobhāve kasyāścit
susṣphuṭodaye |
bhedāntaram api jñeyaṁ vīṇāvādakadṛṣṭivat || 162 ||

The perception of beauty is another modality or type (bheda) of perception. It
happens when the power of awareness is intense. We have seen that the object and its
perceptible objectivity can be experienced in many ways. Here Abhinava is talking
about the phases in the act of perception, when its aesthetic quality is perceived. He

does not specify this, because any object may potentially be perceived this way. Of
course, this form of perception operates most easily for most people with regards to
what are commonly experienced as beautiful objects. But for those who have a fully
developed sensitivity to the consciousness that underlies all perceptions, they can be
immersed in the wonder of aesthetic delight that is that consciousness, at any time, by

any object.
Here Abhinava lists four stages in which this takes place. 1) First, there must
be a sense of oneness with the object, as happens for example, when we are absorbed in
liṣtening to music we appreciate. 2) This is followed by the ‘submergence’ of all

dichotomizing thoughts and notions of personal subjectivity into the unity of that

consciousness. 3) The removal in this way of constraints that condition and contract
consciousness leads naturally to its expansion. 4) The final result is the experience of
the blissful pulse of consciousness as one’s own nature. This is what makes a person
aesthetically sensitive (sahṛdaya). Cf. above, 3/209cd-210.

A perception, even the most trivial, is impelled by a sense of need (ākaikṣā) to know

its object. Once known, this need is quelled, and it is replaced by a sense of

‘satisfaction’.

CHAPTER TEN
Again, another type (bheda) is determined by the obscuration of one

power and the (concomitant) clearly evident emergence of another, as

happens, for example, to the sense of sight when someone plays the vīṇā.
(162)

The power of the sense of sight etc. of one who is playing the vīṇā,
decreases, and that of (his) sense of hearing (correspondingly) increases.

He (now) analyses the (manner in which) the power (of the senses) is

concealed and heightened.

1|

JTGHĪGTGATJ̄
TÑ-aTT ārgaTT] |I ZĀ 1I
tirobhāvodbhavau śakteḥ svaśaktyantarato ‘nyataḥ |
cetyamānād acetyād vā tanvāte bahubhedatām || 163 |I
This (spontaneous) concealment and heightening of the power (of

the senses) may be due either to (the operation of) the power (of the senses
in relation) to one another (as happens, for example, when one plays the
vīṉā), or some other (cause, such as Mantras or drugs), which may be

conscious or not. Thus, they are in their turn the source of many other
divisions. (163)

In some cases, the power of the sense of sight, for example, is
heightened or concealed (spontaneously) by itself, due to the attention or lack of
it (on the part of the perceiver to some object). In some circumstances (this may
happen because, as with one) who plays the vīṇā, the power of his sense of
hearing, for example, (is heightened in relation to that of) the other (senses). In
some circumstance, it may be some other (cause), such as Mantras or drugs. AIl

(of these factors contribute,) whether they be conscious or not. Thus, (the
number of possible) divisions (bheda) is endless.

āTSNĪ JTaTĪĪ aJT |

aāafõīā fi: || zē 1|

evam etaddharādīnāṁ tattvānāṁ yāvatī daśā |

kācid asti ghaṭākhyāpi tatra saṅdarśitā bhidaḥ ll 164 ||
In this way, the varieties (of perceptions) have been described (that

arise) there in accord with the particular state, (such as the one) called

‘jar’, of the principle commencing with Earth. (164)

‘There’ means in the state (daśā) (of cognitive consciousness) called ‘a

single jar’. How many differences can there be in a (single) principle, that
possesses in this way countless states? Who indeed is capable of saying that?
This is the intended sense.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), what has been said, namely, the emergence and
concealment of the power (of the sense), is a property (atiśaya) of that
perceiver, not of something else. So, associated in this way with this kind of
variety, how could it pertain to an entity, such as a jar, which is an object of
perception? With this doubt in mind, he says:

īā: Tā̄? Tā f 1| qē.4 1

Ṝira aṟairā |

atrāpi vedyatā nāma tādātmyaṁ vedakaiḥ saha |
tataḥ sakalavedyo ʻsau ghaṭaḥ sakala eva hi || 165 ||
yāvac chivaikavedyo ‘sau śiva evāvabhāsate |
tāvad ekaśarīro hi bodho bhāty eva yāvatā l| 166 ||

Here (in this case) also, perceptibility is one with (the
corresponding) perceivers. Thus, the jar that is perceptible to a
Conditioned (perceiver) (sakalavedya) is itself conditioned (sakala). To the

degree in which that (object) is perceptible to Śiva alone, it is just Śiva who
manifests. To the same degree (as in all these cases), consciousness

manifests as possessing one body (which is all things). (165-166)

‘Thuṣ’, it is proved that because of the oneness of the perceiver and the
perceived, whatever be the entity perceivable (vedya) to any perceiver, its nature
is that of the perceiver. It has been established many times before that the nature
of an entity is that of the particular perceiver (who perceives it). To the degree
that consciousness (bodha) manifests in the form of subject and object, it

consists of the oneness (tādātmya) with each particular thing, and its nature is
the undivided, supreme light (of consciousness). That is said (in the following

verse):

‘O dear one, if there are no perceivers, how can these be objects of
perceptions? Therefore, subject and object are one reality, and impurity does not

exist.

Having established in this way that the fifteenfold (division is) within
the Earth and other (principles), (he goes on to) define (how the teaching
concerning the entire fifteenfold nature) as a whole, with relation to (each

single) principle, is found in the scriptures. This is because it is present in
phenomena and the world-orders etc., (both) in its individual components

This verse is also quoted below in TĀv ad 29/9. Kṣemarāja quotes it in his

commentary on the Śivasūtra 1/1 (p. 8 Chatterjee’s edition), where he tells us that it is
from the Ucchuṣmabhairavatantra.

CHAPTER TEN

(vyasta) (distributed over all the principles) and as a whole (samasta) (within

each one).

The Perceivers and Their Aspects in Relation to the
Principles from Earth Onwards

IJĪT WTRTIS FTTTTSTd āYJT |

arṁcq ūitēṝd ṃarāva Ṭ̄Ttāī || E. I|

ā; JṬGHTN: JGTYIT |

g ū ftrṣ-āīṝīsā frd aaṁ ā-̄- || 2ē.c 1|

ā m-ārcaā; || 2ē8 ||

adhunātra samastasya dharātattvasya darśyate |
sāmastya evābhihitaṁ pāñcadaśyaṁ puroditam || 167 I

dharātattvāvibhedena yaḥ prakāśaḥ prakāśate |

sa eva śivanātho ‘tra pr̥thivī brahma tanmatam || 168 I
dharātattvagatāḥ siddhīr vitarītuṁ samudyatān |
prerayanti śivecchāto ye te mantramaheśvarāḥ |l 169 |
Now will be explained how these fifteen aspects, which have

previously been described as a whole (in the Mālinīvijayottara), relate to the

Earth principle as a whole. The Light which shines at one with the Earth
principle is Lord Śiva. As (the Veda) declares: ‘Brahman is the earth’. The

Great Lords of Mantra are those who by Śiva’s will are intent on attaining
the accomplishments (siddhi) associated with the Earth Principle. (167-169)
The Earth principle has previously been described ‘in general terms’.
The fifteenfold (division) is divided into two types, namely, as individual
components (vyasta) (distributed over all the principles), and as a whole
(samasta) (within each one). ‘Now’ that the time has come, ‘will be explained’

only (how the components) as a whole (are present in the Earth principle),
without

(reference)

to

the

(distribution

over

all

the

principles

of the

components) individually, that serves (as we have seen) as a means by which
other secondary modalities (prakāra) (of the components are formed). This is
because that is ‘described’ in that very way in the Mālinīvijayottara, which is
cited (here). There (in that context), he accordingly describes the group of seven
perceivers, which is the root of that, (with the words beginning with,) ‘(the
Light which shines at one with) the Earth principle’. Surely, Śiva is called
‘Brahman because he fills (brrṁīhaṇār) all the principles. So how can he be
established in a limited way (as some particular principle)? With this doubt in
mind, he says: “Brahman is the earth’. As the Veda (śruri) declares: “This

Brahman is (in truth) the earth’. (The Great Lords of Mantra are) impelled by

Śiva’s will. The intended sense is that Śiva is the one who impels (them, and
then through them, the succeeding perceivers).

TANTRĀLOKA

Who then are those that are impelled? With this doubt in mind, he says:

šr̄āTNITa TTI THTĀTRTgITHT:
TṬĀT |
ITTTTT āTTITI-TSJ fJrāīēzraī || q.o |

preryamāṇās tu mantreśā mantrās tadvācakāḥ sphuṭam |
dharātattvagataṁ yogam abhyasya śivavidyayā || 170 |
na tu pãśavasāṁkhyīyavaiṣṇavãdidvitādr̥śã |

aprāptadhruvadhāmāno vijñānākalatājuṣaḥ !| 171 |

tāvat tattvopabhogena ye kalpānte layaṁ gatāḥ |
sauṣuptāvasthayopetās te ‘tra pralayakevalāḥ || 172 ||
The Lords of Mantra are the beings (the Great Lords of Mantra)
impel, and (their own) Mantras clearly denote them. Those who are in the

Consciousness Deconditioned (vijñānākala) state have practiced the Yoga of
the Earth Principle. Their view is not the dualist one of the fettered, such as
the followers of the Sāṁkhya or Vaiṣṇavas, but (they have practiced this
Yoga) in accord with Śaiva doctrine, without (however) reaching (Śiva’s)

Stable Abode (dhruvadhāman).”
Thus, those who, after enjoying the experience of this principle,
have dissolved away (in the Water and other principles) at the end of an

aeon (kalpānte) and are immersed in deep sleep, are the Dissolution
Deconditioned (pralayākala) (perceivers) here (atra) (of this principle).

(170-172)

The Lords of Mantra (mantreśa) are the hundred Rudras etc., and are

the objects of denotation (vācya) of their respective mantras. As is said:

‘The Lords of Mantra are impelled (by the Great Lords of Mantra).
They are placed on the plane of the aspect of the object of denotation by (their)
power, and abide as (the beings who range from) the hundred Rudras up to
Viriñca (i.e. Brahmā). (Whereas) Śiva’s Mantra (perceivers) are born from the
disturbance brought about by the inner flow of the energy of Sound (nāda).
They are the denotators of that (denoted aspect) and are intent on the

dispensation of their respective fruits.’"

Dhruva is the highest state, according to the earlier Śaiva Pāśupata schools. See

above, 8/144-147ab (143cd-146).
This passage appears to be drawn from the same source as the passages quoted below

in TĀv ad 10/178-181ab and ad 10/182. The latter appears to refer to Trika doctrine. If
that is so, the source is a Trika scripture.

CHAPTER TEN
The ‘dualist view’ (of the Consciousness Deconditioned perceivers) is

the view of relative distinctions. (They have practiced Śaiva Yoga, but)
‘without reaching (Siva’s) Stable Abode’, because they have dissolved away
inwardly, (but) without having attained the completion of (their practice of)
meditation (bhāvanā). It was said before that once the Earth (principle) and the

rest dissolve away, that is to say, Water and the rest, in the course of, for
example, cosmic dissolution (pralaya), the location within the principles of the
Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers) is progressively higher. (Thus, they are)
‘immersed in deep sleep’. The meaning is that they are in deep sleep.
Surely (one may object that) the nature of the Dissolution
Deconditioned (perceivers) is that of the principle they have merged into.
(However,) that is not possible in the state of deep sleep, which is just the mere
presence (saṁbhava) of a residual trace of the subject (associated with) the body

etc. So how can they assume that state? With this doubt in mind, he says:
The Nature and Types of Deep Sleep

a: || 2. 1|
sauṣupte tattvalīnatvaṁ sphuṭam eva hi lakṣyate |
anyathā niyatasvapnasaṁdṛṣṭir jāyate kutaḥ || 173 ||
It is clearly evident that (all) the principles are merged in deep
sleep. Otherwise, where could the things seen in dreams, (which have a

fixed,) determined nature, arise from? (173)

‘Otherwise’ means, if those principles were not merged (into the
consciousness of the Dissolution Deconditioned perceiver). One perceives here
(in daily experience) that just as dreaming and deep sleep necessarily (follow)
after the waking state, so does dreaming (necessarily) follow after deep sleep.

One who does not assume this, that is, the repose of the (activity of the) inner

(mental organ) and the outer senses, does not enter into the dreaming state.

Thus, deep sleep, which necessarily precedes the dreaming state, is (its) cause.
One should consider the arising of an effect be in accord with the nature of (its)

cause. Thus, as the essence of the state of deep sleep is the merger of those
principles (into objectless consciousness), one perceives that creation that takes
place in a dream consists of the phenomena and world-orders etc. that are proper
to those principles. Just as (one), for example, (experiences) climbing a

mountain (in a dream, which is part of) what is merged in the Earth, so too, for

example, the crossing of the sea (is part of) what is merged in Water.
Surely (one may object) that, if the principles dissolve away in deep
sleep also, and that is the dissolving away of all objectivity, then what occasion
would there be for one who has woken up for the memory that is born from the
residual trace of the experience of that (particular) fixed object to occur? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

TANTRĀLOKA

raāT-Ṁ gafṝcṁēzzāratrīzaaṣtdīa || .% 1|
sauṣuptam api citraṁ ca svacchāṣvacchādi bhāsate |
asvāpsaṁ sukham ityādismṛtivaicitryadarśanāt |/ 174 ||
Deep sleep also manifests variously, according to whether it is lucid,
nonlucid or the like (svacchāsvacchādi). (This is proved by) the perception
of the various memories (one has of it), such as: “I slept well” and so on.
(174)
(Deep sleep manifests) ‘variously’, because it consists of the three
qualities (of Nature). Thuṣ it is said to be ‘lucid, nonlucid or the likeʼ. There
(in that case), lucid (svaccha) (deep sleep) is predominantly based on (the
quality of) sattva, and so (gives rise to the memory) “I slept well”. Nonlucid
(asvaccha) (deep sleep) is predominantly based on tamas, and so (gives rise to
the memory,) “I was not conscious of anything”. By including ‘or the like’ he
refers to (the third intermediary category), which is lucid-cum-nonlucid
(svacchāsvaccha). This is predominantly rajas, and so then (one recalls that) “I
slept uncomfortably”. Such are the ‘various memories’. There is no (such) rule

that all that is perceivable dissolves away in deep sleep, otherwise this would be
unaccountable, and so the (experience of) recollection one who awakens has

would stand contradicted. This is the intended sense.

Nor should one say that this memory has arisen from the experience of
the pleasing tactile experience of the featherbed (mattress). Thus he says:

zṇēa q īi geā frzēa vīgeā |

yadaiva sṣa kṣaṇaṁ sũkṣmaṁ nidrãyaiva prabudáhyate |
tadaiva smṛtir eṣeti nārthajajñānajā smṛtiḥ || 175 |I

Recollection (of having slept deeply) takes place then, just at the

very subtle moment when one wakes up from sleep. It is not (the same as
the) memory which results from cognition, (which in its turn) originates
from an object. (175)

‘Then’, that (recollection of sleep) may (happen) in this way ‘when’,

first of all, one wakes up, then (follows) the experience of comfort (sukha) and

the like, and then the memory which is born from the latent trace associated
with that (experience of comfort) (arises), just when one is waking up. (We do
not agree that it does) not happen in this way here (in daily life), because
waking up and recollection exist (i.e. take place and are experienced together) in
one (and the same) moment. He says that ‘then, (just at the very moment)
when one wakes up from sleep’, the recollection (of it arises).

CHAPTER TEN
Thus, even if (when one has just woken up and) the awakening is not

firm (and well established), the experience of the one who awakens is a
successive series (of experiences of events, that follow one another very

quickly), like (something) illumined (unmiṣita) by a flash of lightning. Those

who say that (the cause of his) recollection (of sleep) is because of this kind of

experience should (simply) be ignored. Thus he says:

cāa: |1 2Ūē 1|
tena mūḍhair yad ucyeta prabuddhasyāntarāntarā |
tūlikādisukhasparśasmṛtir eṣeti tat kutaḥ || 176 ||
The (view of) those simple-minded people who say that what one
who awakens from sleep recollects is actually a successive series (of
experiences) that start (after he has awakened), consisting of the pleasing
sensation of the mattress and the like, is groundless. (176)
‘Groundless’ means without cause.

r̥TRRTTRTĪ
TAT. TāTT šṜ ṬGGT: || 2.999 1|
māyākarmasamullāsasaṁmiśritamalābilāḥ |
dharādhirohiṇo jñeyāḥ sakalā iha pudgalāḥ || 177 I|
The souls (pudgala), sullied by impurity (mala) mixed with the
outpouring of Māyā and Karma, who reside here in the Earth Principle,
should be known as Conditioned (sakala) (perceivers). (177)
(The words) Māyā and the rest serve to declare that these (souls) are
bound by the three impurities.
Having taught what concerns the seven perceivers, in order to teach in a
general way (the nature) of their seven powers, he says:
The Seven Perceivers and Their Powers
€īṞ’/EIESIEEATSMISSTEEAMIEIEEETSGEI

TJT] āTTNaTT JTTT TGT TRGT II Q9¢ 11

aT; |

īm: GaTT-TTVĪTTTJRṬĀĪRIGĪTTĀTT: | g\
TĀ 10/177-179 = MVV 1/977-979.

1l

TANTRĀLOKA

TTRTĒĪĪTTTTT] ÑRTHRRTTTSITTR. I 2¢° 11

asyaiva saptakasya svasvavyāpāraprakalpane |

prakṣobho yas tad evoktaṁ śaktīnāṁ saptakaṁ sphutam || 178 II
śivo hy acyutacidrūpas tiṣras tacchaktayas tu yāḥ !

tāḥ svātantryavaśopātta grahitṛgrāhyarāpikāḥ' || 179 |
tridhā mantrāvasānāḥ syur udāsīnā iva sthitāḥ |

grāhyākāroparāgāt tu grahitrākāratāvaśāt | 180 ||
sakalāntās tu tās tiṣra icchājñānakriyā matāḥ |

It is said that the disturbed condition (prakṣobha) of these seven

(subjects that results) when they are engaged in their respective tasks is
cḷearly (their corresponding) seven powers. Śivais the (eternally) persistent
(acyuta) conscious nature. He possesses three powers, that by virtue of (His)

freedom have assumed the forms of (the energies of) the perceiver and the
perceived. By virtue of their form as the perceiver, they are the three kinds
(of pure perceivers), ending with Mantra, that (undisturbed) are as if aloof
(udāsīna) (from all activity). Whereas, coloured by the form of the object,
those three, that are known to be (the powers of) will, knowledge and
action, are (the three impure perceivers), ending with the Conditioned
(Sakala) (subjects). (178-181ab)
‘Their respective tasks’ is their own activity, such as paralysing
(higher states of consciousness) and the like, and creation etc. This is the
meaning. That has been explained in detail elsewhere by that same (scripture),

as follows:

‘There within the (principle) called Earth, making manifest diverse
things (each) separate (from one another), displaying paralysis (stambha) and

the other (accomplishments), she is Śiva’s power within the Earth. 2) The

"MVV 1/978d reads tataḥ for sphutam.
" Read with MVV 1/979d -grahitṛgrāhyarāpikāḥ for -grahītrākāratāvaśāt.

Read grahītrākāratāvaśāt grāhyākāroparāgāt tu for grāhyākāroparāgāt tu

grahĩtrãkãratãvaśāt.

After MVV 1/977-979, that Abhinava reproduces here with explanatory supplements,
he writes:

grahītṛbhāgodrekeṇa grāhyabhāgocchalattvataḥ |
sapta sapteti yat tv ekaṁ jaḍamātraṁ narātmakam ||
tat svarūpaṁ tatas traidhaṁ pratitattvaṁ vyavasthitam |

“They are (in two groups of) seven, (one or the other, according to whether) the

subjective part predominates (or) the outpouring of the objective aspect. There is one
(moment) that is purely insentient (jadamātra). It is Nara, and that is the ‘own nature’
(svarūpa). Thus, each reality level (tattva) is ordered in three ways.' MVV 1/980-981ab

CHAPTER TEN

(power) of the Mantramaheśa (subjects) ordains here this varied state, from the

Conditioned (perceivers) to Śiva, of creation, destruction, persistence, grace,

and (its) withdrawal. She has authority here over (this) principle, andis 3) the

power of the Lords of Mantra (mantramaheśāna), present on the plane of

consciousness, that impels the individual souls with great force (hāṭhāt).

amongst the groups of Mantra (perceivers) of that principle. 4) The power of the

Mantra (perceivers) is she who is considered to awaken to the essence

(sadbhāva) of the Earth principle, which is yellow (pītala) etc., and saves from
what is contrary (vipakṣa) to that. 5) The power of the Consciousness

Deconditioned (perceiver) (jñānakevalī) is the subtle state (tāvanmātra) of

Impurity. She bestows a right enthusiasm for the expanse of the enjoyment

(bhogābhoga) of that principle. 6) The power present in the Dissolution

Deconditioned (perceiver) is the disposition (unmukhatā) to experience (the

consequence of Karma) (bhoga) within that (principle), due to (its) propensity
to (activate) the Karma present in that principle when the expansion of the
waking (state) takes place. 6) The power which is the means to the experience
(which is the consequence of Karma) (bhoga), residing in the Conditioned
(sakala) individual souls, is associated with the many states created by the
external and internal senses. She is the state when (the individual soul)
penetrates into the activated state (vyakti) of Māyā, Karma, and the

(fundamental) Impurity (mala) (of the soul).

Surely (one may ask), it is proclaimed (repeatedly in
i various) contexts
in our philosophy that the nature of the universe is Śiva, Śakti and Nara. So how
is it that thisis said here as (ifit were) something new? With this doubtin

mind, he says: ‘Śiva (is the (eternally) persistent (acyuta) conscious nature).’

Thereis no dispute that Śivais thus (tāvaṁ) the supreme perceiver, and that his
nature is eternal consciousness. His power, the nature of which is will,
knowledge and action, shining forth in a pure and impure form, pours forth the
group of six perceivers. There (amongst them), the three, Mantra, the Lord of
Mantra, and the Great Lord of Mantra, do not depend on objectivity etc. (to be
subjects), and so possess a pure subjectivity. The three (lower perceivers,
namely) Consciousness Deconditioned and the rest, do depend on objectivity
etc., and so the subjectivity they possess is impure. Thus it is said that (He
possesses three powers, that) by virtue of (His) freedom’ (assume the form of
the subject), and ‘are coloured by that of the object’. ‘The three kinds (of
pure perceivers), ending with Mantra’, consist of the Great Lords of Mantra,

the Lords of Mantra, and the Mantra (perceivers). This is the meaning. They are
‘as if aloof (udāsīna) (from all activity)ʼ, that is, they are undisturbed. The

sense is that, if they were to be disturbed, their state would be that of (their

respective) powers.

He (now) concludes (this point).

Concerning the source of this passage, see above, note ad 10/170-172.

Sanderson notes (1992: 297) that here ‘Jayaratha finds Abhinavagupta explaining

how the triadis implicitin the [teachings of the] Mālinīvijayottara (even though not
explicit). This is with reference to the surprising fact that although the triad of Śiva,
Śakti and Man is a hallmark of Trika, it is nowhere mentioned explicitly there in the

Tantra Abhinava takes to be the very acme of a Trika Tantra.

TANTRĀLOKA

saptadhetthaṁ pramātṛtvaṁ tatkṣobho mānatā tathā || 181 I|

In this way, there are seven kinds of subjectivity. In the same way,
its disturbed condition corresponds to the state of the means of knowledge.
(181cd)

‘The state of the means of knowledge’ is in the form of Śakti. This is

the meaning.
Surely, (one may ask that,) in this way, (only) the fourteen-fold
condition would have been mentioned, or else the two-fold, consisting of Śiva
and Śakti. With this doubt in mind, he says:

Own Nature and Conclusion

EṢPHSGĪREIEEEENEITE:Ḥ!

f# ʻfīērrsrā-̄. || q¢3 1
yat tu grãhĩtr̥ãrũpasaṁvitsaṁsparśavarjitam |
Śuddhaṁ jaḍaṁ tat svarūpam itthaṁ viśvaṁ trikātmakam || 1 82 |
That (aspect) that has no contact with consciousness, that is, the
subjective nature (grahītṛtārūpa) (of the perceivers), pure and insentient, is

(what is meant here by) ‘Own Nature’ (svarūpa). The universe is triadic
(trikātmaka) in thīs way. (182)

It is ‘pure’ʼ (insentience), because it has no contact with consciousness.

Thus, the meaning is that, the insentient (jaḍa) is the primary basis of
objectivity (vedyatā), and so its nature is Nara. As is said:
‘If (in the course of perception) insentience becomes clearly apparent,
because there is no recollection of (the object’s) penetration into the perceiver,
then the ‘Innate Nature’ (svarūpa), which is Nara, arises due (to that state of)

dependence (it has on the perceiver) (pāratantryāt).

That is said to be the way in which the (Trika) triad is the ultimate
reality present within the sequence of the fifteen-fold etc. Thus it is said that
‘the universe is triadic (trikātmaka) in this way’.
He (now) applies this (teaching) elsewhere also.

Tj raṁ āẽzzrṝai
meatā
evaṁ jalādy api vaded bhedair bhinnaṁ mahāmatiḥ |

Iṭappears that the reference to Nara here as a Trika teaching identifies the source as a

Trika Tantra. See above, note ad 10/170-172.

CHAPTER TEN

The wise man should explain how Water and the rest (of the other
categories) are also divided in the same way, with (the equivalent) divisions.
(183ab)
Surely, no one disagrees that the (couple) Śiva and Śakti is (eternally)
persistent consciousness. (Moreover,) it has been said that Śakti, shining as will,
knowledge and action, manifests as the group of six perceivers. But as (Śiva’s)
Śśakti is one and the same in all circumstances, then (śakti) should also possess
this fifteen-fold (state) right up to the level of the Great Lords of Mantras. So
how is it that that itself has not been described, setting aside the thirteen-fold
and other (divisions)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Šā] T-TTTĪ-TSS ṬAGYĪTT: |

af=īa: 1| 2¢3 1
anayā tu diśā prāyaḥ sarvabhedeṣu vidyate || 183 1|
bhedo mantramaheśānteṣv eṣa pañcadaśātmakaḥ |
tathāpi sphuṭatābhāvāt sann apy eṣa na carcitaḥ || 184 ||
From this point of view, this division into fifteen aspects occurs
generally in all the divisions up to the Great Lords of Mantra. Even so, it is
not (so) clearly evident (at these levels as it is at the lower ones), and so is
not discussed (at length). (183cd-184)
(One may ask: This division into fifteen aspects occurs) ‘in all the

divisions up to the Great Lords of Mantra’; that is to say, the Dissolution
Deconditioned (perceivers) and the rest. The sense is that (if that is so,) what has

been said concerning the thirteen-fold and other (divisions) is contrary to the
logic (underlying this teaching) (nyāya). (In response to this objection, we say
that) this is indeed true, however, like the thirteen-fold and other (divisions), it
is not clearly evident (at these levels) and so is not mentioned here.

Surely (one may ask), the succeeding lower nature, merged into the
(corresponding one) before it (in the ascending order), abandons its own nature.
As a consequence, there would not be any place for the fifteen-fold etc. (states
of the ascending series of perceivers, up to the Great Lords of Mantra). With
this doubt in mind, he says:

Undivided Śiva’s Five Aspects

ũṝr=ī gfri srī #īqã az ṣaifā fē 1
TATITTĒTTHGATTRTI TJGTRT] ÁI Ṟ¢.. 11

etac ca sūtritaṁ dhātrā śrīpūrve yad bravīti hi |

TANTRĀLOKA

savyāpārādhipatvenetyādinā jāgradāditām || 185 ||
abhinne ‘pi śive ‘ntaḥsthasīūkṣmabodhānusārataḥ |

The Creator Himself has declared the same concisely in the
Śrīpūrva (i.e. the Mālinīvijayottara), where He says that, even though (Śiva)
is undivided, (He has five aspects,) ‘because of (1) (His (purposeful) activity

and (2) sovereignty (savyāpārādhipatvena) etc.’."√ Thus, with these words,

the states of waking and rest are attributed (even to the one undivided)

Śiva, in accord with His subtle, inner consciousness. (185-186ab)

The Lord ‘has declared the same concisely’ in the Mālinīvijayottara,
namely that, although Śiva is (one and) ‘undivided’, he is the waking and other
(four states of consciousness). (Thus,) just as (he is) the waking and other (states

without this compromising His unity), it is (also) possible for him to be fifteenfold and so on, (progressively) at successively higher levels (and yet remain

one). (It is said) here:

‘Although (Śiva is) undivided, even so, (his nature is) fivefold because
of (1) (His (purposeful) activity and (2) sovereignty (savyāpārādhipatvena), and

because (3) he impels consciousness (independently of and) in the absence of

both these (two powers of knowledge and action in pure volition), and (also)

because of (4) the cessation of volition (in his power of bliss), and because (5)
(as consciousness itself,) he is established within himself. Thus is explained

what needs to be understood concerning the five-fold division.’”
'" MV 2/34c.

See below, 10/227cd ff.
" MV 2/34cd-35ab. MV 2/34cd-35ab is paraphrased and thereby explained below in

10/309. It is also quoted in TĀv ad 10/309. The last line has been added to complete the

sense. This translation is guided by Somadeva’s translation, which is based on

Sanderson’s interpretation (2004: 211) but does not follow it entirely. The translation of
‘savyāpārādhipatvena’ – ‘because of (His (purposeful)) activity (vyāpāra) and lordship
(adhipātya) – follows Jayaratha, and is most probably what Abhinavagupta himself
intended. However, Sanderson, as Somadeva reports (2004 ibid. note 63), considers the
traditional exegesis of this compound to be ‘awkward because it takes adhipatva to refer
to knowledge.” Accordingly, Somadeva translates, ‘because he is able to deploy
(adhipatva) his (two) functions (svavyāpāra)’. One may perhaps remark pertinently that

the identification of ‘lordship’ (or ‘ability to deploy?) with knowledge is not without

good reason. A common Sanskrit saying declares: ‘jñānaṁ yasya balaṁ tasya’ – ‘he
who has knowledge has power°. Indeed, knowledge is power, and power is ‘lordshipʼ .

We may observe that the text of the MV does not actually confirm that the five
states of consciousness relate exclusively to Śiva. All it says is that the pattern of five
can be traced back to Śiva. Even so, Abhinava understands that these five reflections

within Śiva are the ultimate source of the lucid (i.e. self-reflective) experience of the
five states of consciousness. In addition, Abhinava understands that ultimately, Śiva is
the one and only perceiver who experiences these states. The perceived differences at

various levels are due to the inner operation of Śiva’s reflective awareness of himself as

the perceiver in these states, which he experiences in the manner described, as aspects of

his essential freedom to manifest them. Thus, in this way, Śiva continues to be one even

as he possesses five aspects (see below, 10/227cd-230).

CHAPTER TEN

(The implied meaning is) that (1) Śiva’s waking state, which is
predominantly (His) power of action, is due to ‘(His purposeful) activityʼ. (2)
(His) dream sleep, which is predominantly (His) power of knowledge, consists
of the creation of (countless) individual (particulars) due to His own freedom,
by virtue of (His) ‘sovereignty°. (His) state of deep sleep is predominantly (His)
power of volition, with himself as the impeller (of knowledge and action), in the
state of indifference preceding (dreaming and waking) (independently of and) in
the absence of both knowledge and action. (His) Fourth state is predominantly
the power of bliss, by virtue of the fulfilment of the object of desire, and also by

the cessation of that (volition). (His state) Beyond the Fourth is predominantly

(His) power of consciousness which,

as the Bliss

devoid of Action

(nirānanda), is due to the state of repose (viśrānti) (He experiences within

His) own nature that is completely full (and perfect), because it is the nature of

all things, as everything. Such is (Śiva’s) nature as the five states (of

consciousness). This the meaning.
(It was stated) here (above):

AIl this Path, which is of six kinds and very extensive, that will be
described (in the following chapters), is well-established in this way (tāvat) all

together (ekatra) within the vital breath.”

According to this teaching, just as the Path of the Principles is external,
it is also internal within the vital breath. Thus, he begins to define the fifteen-

fold and the rest as present there also.

Concerning nirānanda, see Dyczkowski 2009.
Cf. MVV 1/50-51. According to Jayaratha, these five aspects of Śiva as the five

states of consciousness correspond to His five powers of action, knowledge, will, bliss

and consciousness. ‘(Purposeful) activity’ is the power of action (kriyāśakti) and the
waking state. ‘Lordshipʼ is the power of knowledge (jñānaśakti) and dream sleep. The

‘absence (of the above two) and independence from them is the power of the will

(icchāśakti) and dreamless sleep. Meditation (being full and contented by the object of
desire) is the power of bliss (ānandaśakti) and the Fourth state (turiya). Śiva’s ‘state of
repose within Himself is the power of consciousness (citśakti) and the state Beyond the

Fourth (turiyātīta). Thus, just as

Siva possesses these five aspects without it

compromising His undivided oneness, it is also possible for him to have the series of
fifteen etc. aspects also and remain one. The correlations, according to Jayaratha are as

follows:

My

Power

Purposeful activity
Lordship
Absence of both

Action
Knowledge
Will

Self-Establishment

Consciousness

Ceṣsation of Volition
Above, 6/5.

Bliss

State of Consciousness
Waking
Dreaming
Deep Sleep

Fourth State

Beyond the Fourth State

TANTRĀLOKA

Perceivers and Phases of Perception in the Cycle of the Vital Breath

The Projection of the Fifteen Divisions into the Vital Breath

TTI JNTYĪTFT̄
T-īdīc fāfērzai || 2¢5 11

adhunā prāṇaśaktisthe tattvajāle vivicyate || 186 ||
bhedo ‘yaṁ pāñcadaśyādir yathā śrīśaṁbhur ādiśat |

We will now discuss how this division into fifteen etc. is found in the
group of principles present within the energy of the vital breath, as taught
by the venerable Śambhunātha. (186cd-187ab)

frĩTā ḍea: ũzT arī; |]| 2. 1
samaste ‘rthe ‘tra nirgrāhye tuṭayaḥ ṣoḍaśa kṣaṇāḥ || 187 I|
sattriṁśadaṁgule cāre sāṁśadvyaṅgulakalpitāḥ |

Sixteen tīme-units of the breath (tui) (are as many) moments
(kṣaṇa) (of perception, discernible) here in all that is perceivable. Each
See above 6/5. This teaching, which Abhinava tells us concerns Khecarīcakra,

extends up to verse 10/226ab.

Concerning this passage from 10/187cd-226ab, see also TSā p. 102-105 and MVV
1/977-991. TA 10/187cd-188ab is equivalent to MVV 1/981cd-982ab, that reads:

kiṁ cārthe khalu nirgrāhye tutayaḥ ṣoḍaśa kṣ ṇāḥ ||
sapādadvyaṇgulāveśāt pratyekaṁ parikalpi

‘Moreover, sixteen time-units of the breath (tufi) (are as many) moments
(kṣaṇa) (of perception discernible) here in perceivable reality. Each is formed

(parikalpita) by penetrating two and a quarter finger (breadths) (into the 36 fingers
breadths of the movement of the breath).”

Above, 6/64d. We have seen above (note 671) that the tui (corrupt for trur lit
‘fragment’) is a unit of time commonly used in the Siddhāntas although, surprisingly

less so in modern Indian astronomy. It is applied to measure spans of time in the cycle

of the breath and perception. We have seen that, in the course of inhalation or
exhalation, the breath traverses a distance of thirty-six finger spans. This takes two

seconds, which comprise sixteen tuṛis. Thus, a tuṭi is one-eighth of a second inside the
breath, and is the time taken for the breath to move a distance of two and a quarter

fingers' breadth. This teaching, imparted to Abhinava by his Trika teacher

Śambhunātha, equates these units of time related to the breath with the ‘moments”

(kṣaṇa), that are the units of the act of perception, as is the usage in the verses that

follow, up to 196. Although the two terms are sometimes used interchangeably, in this

context, in order to make sense of what Abhinava is saying, we need to distinguish the
parameters to which the two measures refer here. It seems that Jayaratha is not clear

CHAPTER TEN

(one) is conceived to occupy two and a quarter finger space within the

movement (of the breath), which is thirty-six fingers (long). (187cd188ab)

The meaning of ‘all that is perceivable’ is (any) entity that can be

perceived (vedya), as are, for example, the principles (tattva), phenomena

(bhāva), and the world-orders.

The term ‘moment’ here (in this context) refers to a particular (span of)
time, consisting of two moments, as defined (in the Svacchandatantra as

follows):

“(One) moment (kṣaṇa) is said to be one-eighth (of the time it takes for)

a man to close his eyesʼ. As is said: “One should know that a tuṭi consists of
about this distinction, or at least does not clarify it. Instead, he confuses the reader by

referring to the Svacchandatantra. It is clear that Abhinava is equating a ‘tuṭi’ with a

‘kṣaṇa’. But if we take the two as measures of time as being within the same parameter,

then, as Jayaratha himself points out, the use of the term kṣaṇa here is anomalous.
Normally, two of them make a tuṛi. He cannot fail to notice this, but tries to circumvent

the problem by saying that this is a special case. Moreover, we are not told anything by
simply taking the two to be synonyms, as Jayaratha does. We find an application of the

transposition of the act of perception to the movement of the breath in the commentary

by Śivopādhyāya on VB 24:

ūrdhve prāṇo hy adho jīvo visargātmā paroccaret |
utpattidvitayasthāne bharaṇāt bharitā sthitiḥ l
‘The exhaled breath (prāṇa) (haṁ) above and the inhaled (jīva) (saḥ) below,
(the goddess) Parā who is emission (visarga) should be uttered forth (and made manifest
in this way) within the two places where they originate. (The yogi attains) the state of
plenitude by filling (them with the power of awareness).’
In a long commentary on this meditative practice (dhāraṇā), Śivopādhyāya

supplies several ways in which to do it, which he classifies as belonging to one or other

of the three categories of means to realisation (upāya). He tells us that the following
way of applying attention to the flow of the breath belongs to the Empowered Means,
just as Abhinava implicitly tells us the practice he is describing here does (see below
10/200cd-203 and note). Śivopādhyāya explains:

‘The exhaled breath is ‘above’ as the most excellent. It is the extending flow
(prasara) of (the powers of) will, knowledge and action, which impels (and give life)
(anuprāṇaka) to all things. The one ‘below’ is the lesser one, as the one which is to be

contemplated as objectivity (idantā). It is the exhaled breath (jīva) which is the object of

will, knowledge and action. As its nature is the Moon, it is the cause of the abiding
living condition (jīvitasthiti) of those subject to transmigration. She is that goddess Parā,
who is uttered forth in (that) form as the three powers, and as Middling (parāpara) and
Inferior (apara), that is, abides perpetually moving as the most excellent, extends as the
radiance (of consciousness) (sphurattā), at one with all things. Having made it so, in the
‘place of origin’ on the plane of the object of knowledge, and the one which is indicated
by the word ‘second’, which is the dynamic union of the illuminator and the object of
illumination on the plane of the means of knowledge, and so in the abode of rest of both
of them, which is on the plane of the subject. ‘By filling’ them in the way taught (in the

TANTRĀLOKA

two moments . . . . Furthermore: ‘One tuṭi (that is, one-eighth of a second
[inside the breath], is the time taken for the breath to move a distance of) two

and a quarter fingersʼ breadth.
He analyses that.

TTaī: ŪWaTZT JĪĪHHTIAT: 11 Q¢¢ 11

Ta-Tq JTRṛaTc-TTARTTHTaHTTT: ||/g¢8 1

sfaarradī

tatrādyaḥ paramādvaito nirvibhāgarasātmakaḥ || 188 II
Śivasūtra that says,) one should sprinkle the Fourth into the three (states of waking,
dreaming and deep sleep) like oil. ‘The state of plenitude’ results by flooding with the
bliss of the Fourth state, which is the venerable (goddess) Parā.’ (p. 18)

” Somadeva (2004: 392-393) MV 17/6-7: ‘Retention is known as five-fold. One of

these follows after inhalation. The second is retention after expulsion. Another two
(intermediate stages) occur within these two (extremes) and the fifth takes place in the
neutral state. This (retention) also becomes infinite by counting other points (of
suspension along the course of the breath) separately.”
Retention is thus classified according to the amount of air retained in the body.
Besides the five main points of suspension along the inspiration or expiration of the

breath, there are said to be an infinity of others. In the Tantrāloka, Abhinavagupta has

expanded this teaching to incorporate the fifteen-fold refraction into the breath. The
course of the breath (prāṇacāra), measuring thirty-six digits (aṅgula), is divided into

units of two and one quarter digits each. The resulting sixteen divisions are identified as

‘moments’ or ‘instants’ (tuṭi) of the cognitive process, which can be utilised to realise
Śiva by retreating to the second ‘moment’, which represents this liberating grace. Since
at the extreme end of objectivization, the inner perceiver coalesces with the inner object,

moments fifteen and sixteen, although they manifest as discrete phenomena in the

stream of the breath, are counted as a single epistemological instant, and the whole
fifteen-fold refraction of the realities can thus be homologised with the breath.
Abhinavagupta divides the fifteen perceivers into four groups. At the end of the breathstream is the inert svarūpa pair, then come the limited experients, the pure experients,

and at the other end, the pair of Śiva and Śakti. Although Abinavagupta does not
explicitly refer to this passage of the Mālinīvijayottara, these four groups fit so neatly
between the Mālinīvijayottara’s five major points of rest along the course of the breath
that he may well have had it in mind.”

The five subvarieties of retention
1. pūritād anu
(following inhalation)

<

3. dvayor ante

(intermediate point)

5. svabhāva
(neutral)

2. recakāt paścāt
(following exhalation)

4. dvayor ante

(intermediate point)

SYT 11/201ab. The following reference is SYT 11/201c.
Above, 6/64a.

>

CHAPTER TEN

advitīyo grāhakollāsarūpaḥ prativibhāvyate |
antyastu grãhyatādātmyāt svarūpībhāvam āgataḥ || 189 ||
pravibhāvyo na hi pṛthag upāntyo grāhakaḥ kṣaṇaḥ |

There (in that context), the first (of these moments) is that of

supreme nonduality, which is the undivided aesthetic delight (rasa) (of

Abhinava gives us his explanation of the phases of this cycle of perception linked to
the breath in the following passage in the Tantrasāra.

‘Now (follows) a description (of the how) the divisions (of the reality levels are

present) within the one perceiver by being established (within him) as the vital breath.

Here (in everyday life), the vital breath, which consists of sixteen units of time (tui),

arīses in the course of the perception of (any object, such as the colour) blue,

(extending) up to (its) immersion (āveśa) into objectivity (thus laying hold of it). The

first unit (always remains) one and undivided. The second is the (initial) outpouring

(ullāsa) (into a distinct form) of the perceiver. The last one is at one with the object, and
(s0) is of that nature. The penultimate one is the perceiver that has become (fully)
evident. In between is a group of twelve moments. Amongst them, the first group of six

is (consciousness) free of thought constructs, that veils (the form of consciousness

consisting of) thought constructs. Amongst these six moments, one is the innate nature
(svarūpa) in itself, and the remaining five moments (mark the progressive expansion of

consciousness,) even as they are engaged in veiling (the form of consciousness

consisting of) thought constructs. (The first of these five corresponds) to the intention
(of consciousness) to unfold (unmimiṣā), and (the next to) its being about to unfold
(unmiṣattā), which, because it is a fully evident action, (necessarily) takes up two
moments, as (a single) pulse cannot last just an instant. (The fourth moment is that) of
the unfolded (state of consciousness), and (the fifth, coupled with it, corresponds to its)
state as the agency of its own products. Thus, because of the fivefold nature of thought

(construct formation), which is to be concealed in this way, and because the innate
nature (of consciousness is counted separately), there are six moments (of
consciousness) free of thought constructs. Then again, (just after that,) there are
(another) six moments (in the formation of the state of consciousness with thought
constructs). (These are:) 1) the state free of thought constructs in the process of being
destroyed (dhvaṁsamanatā), 2) (its) actual destruction (dhvarsa), 3) the intention to
unfold (unmiṣiṣā) thought, 4 and 5) the state (in which it is) about to unfold (unmiṣattā),
consisting of two moments, and 6) the unfolded state itself. (The condition of
consciousness which is that of being) the agency of its own product (i.e. thought) is said
to be essentially subjectivity, and so is not counted separately again. In this way, those
who are rich in discrimination, who follow the teaching of a (true) teacher, discern (this)
fifteenfold state in each (of its) divisions (one by one) everywhere (throughout all the

reality levels, extending from the Earth onwards).

As thought decreases, the number of moments (Iuṭi) also decreases, as happens,

for example. when one (experiences) happiness (and one forgets the troubles of the

past), until the state free of thought (is attained). (Even) ordinary people, by (bringing)
thought to rest in that state (of consciousness) consisting of (pure) subjectivity (ahantā),
which is reflective awareness, the flow of the thought of objectivity (idaṁbhāva)
covered over by subjectivity, consider it to be as if unmanifest, like those who, resting in

the joy (they feel at times, consider that) the state of suffering (does not exist,) and that

by the decrease of thought it is that alone that manifests. And so it is that
Abhinavagupta’s venerable teacher (has taught him) that this is attention to the
relationship between subject and object.

TANTRĀLOKA

consciousness), while the second is perceived to be the outpouring of the
subject. The last (moment) is at one with the object of knowledge, and so
assumes the condition of the Innate Nature (ṣvarūpa). The penultimate

(moment), which is that of the experiencing subject (in its fully evident
state), cannot be discerned separately. (188cd-190ab)

The ‘first is a moment of time which is a ufi (in the vital breath). It is

‘undivided’. As is said: `. . . . . . . . Śiva, directly apparent, is not divided.

What is meant by saying ‘the outpouring of the subject’ is the outpouring of
Śakti, which is that of the six perceivers (and their respective spheres of
objectivity). ‘The last’ is the moment of time which is the sixteenth tuṭi (in the
vital breath). It ‘is at one with the object of knowledge’ʼ, in accord with the
When this fifteenfold condition obtains to the degree in which the duality

(bheda) which is clearly manifest objectivity decreases, as (the moments) decrease two
by two, (it continues) up to absorption (āvesa) into Śiva, that takes two moments. There

the first moment is full (and complete) in all respects, (whereas) the second, practiced

with the practice that is absorbed (aviṣṭa) into the cause of all knowledge, serves to
atṭain omniscience and omnipotence. (This is) not s0 (in the case of) the first (of these
two final moments). As the venerable Kallaṭa said, ‘during the falling (transition) of (the
second) moment. Here (in this context), by the word ‘falling’ is (meant) the Goddess,
the venerable Kālī, Mātrṛsadbhāva, Bhairava, creative intuition (pratibhā) etc. (who
‘falls’ as grace on the practitioner). Now enough of disclosing (such) secret (matters).
By practicing (the succeeding) moments pertaining to the Great Lords of Mantras etc.,

(one obtains) the corresponding accomplishments (siddhi).’ TSā p. 102-105

(cf. VB 103, that declares that ‘the relationship between subject and object is common
to all embodied beings. The difference with yogis is that they pay attention to the

relationship between them.” Can it be that this teaching was imparted to Abhinava by

Śambhunātha when he explained this dhāraṇa in the VB to him? However, another

possible translation is: ‘such is this attention to the relationship between subject and

object Abhinavagupta’s teachers (teach).' Perhaps not, because the same reference is

found in the passage of the MMV, without mentioning any teacher. We can be sure,
however, that Abhinava did learn this practice from his Trika teacher, for he tells us a
little further ahead that ‘ have revealed this division (bheda) based on the vital breath
under the custody of Khecarīcakra in this way at the divine command of the venerable
Śāmbhunātha.’ (10/226cd-227ab))
Bhagavadutpala quotes Kallaṭa as saying this in his Pradipikā on the Stanzas on
Vibration (translation p. 159).

TĀ 10/188cd-190ab is derived from MVV 1/982cd-983 that reads:
tatrādyaḥ paramādvaitanirvibhāgarasātmakaḥ ||
antyas tu grāhyatādātmyān na pṛthak pravibhāvyate |
upāntyas tatsyvarūpasya grāhakaḥ paribhāvyate ||

‘There (in that context), the first (of these moments) is that of supreme
nonduality, which is the undivided aesthetic delight (rasa) (of consciousness). The last

(moment) is at one with the object of knowledge, and s0 is not discerned separately. The
penultimate one is discerned to be the perceiver of its essential nature” MVV

1/982cd 983.
MV 2/7b; also quoted above TĀv ad 1/196. The whole passage (MV 2/1-9) is quoted

in TĀv ad 10/5; see there and note.

CHAPTER TEN

degree in which objectivity intensifies. Surely (one may ask), three tuṭis are
deployed here, as (the pair) Śiva and Śakti, and as the Innate Nature. Thus, with
respect to the remaining twelve, thatis, the (six) perceivers and their powers,

that are going to be described further ahead, there would be one extra turi.

(Now,) is that included within the Innate Nature (which is objective), or is it
allotted to the subjective aspect? (It is said in response to this) question that,
although the last remaining (moment) cannot be described, (the yogi) discerns it
prior (to its arising by experiencing) the preceding penultimate moment as
having occurred in adherence (praṅga) with the last moment, by perceiving that
(the last moment is about to take place but) has not yet come. (The last moment
can only be known in this way,) it ‘cannot be perceived’ (directly). (The
penultimate moment cannot be perceived) ‘separatelyʼ, that is, from the last
moment. (It is) ‘penultimate’ (upāntya), that is, (very) close to the last
(moment). It is the fifteenth moment, which is a rutṭi (within the breath). There

the rest (of the moments) attain a state of (fully empowered) propensity
(ucchūnātā) (ready for outer manifestation), and having done so, at the end,
(pure) objectivity itself pours forth. This is the sense.

In this way, he (now) analyses the remaining twelve moments (in the
breath) (tuṭi), as the Mantramaheśvara (subjects) and their (corresponding)

powers.

Ṭdīāã̃ erTmāa eroīza q aĪfkz#a || 80 |1|

iEēeaṉaeRIFCTG|Ez/TclEṇ:Ḥ

tṛtīyaṁ kṣaṇam ārabhya kṣaṇaṣaṭkaṁ tu yat sthitam || 190 ||
tan nirvikalpaṁ prodgacchad vikalpācchādanātmakam |

The six moments from the third (to the eighth) are non-discursive

(nirvikalpa), and consist of the (progressive) falling away of the obscuration

of discursive ideation (vikalpa). (190cd-191ab)

Śiva, Śakti, the first two, and the pure objectivity which is the Own Nature (svarūpa),
three separate moments (tui). The twelve moments that follow the first two correspond
to the six subjects and their powers, leaving one moment extra (16 -15 = 1), which is the

penultimate.

These six moments represent the first three powerholders, that is, Great Lords of
Mantra, Lords of Mantra and Mantra, along with their respective powers. These

perceivers are the experiencing subjects of the three pure principles, that is, Sadāśiva
(who experience that ‘ am all this (universe), with an emphasis on the subjective
aspect), śvara (who experience that ‘all this (universe)is me’, with an emphasis on the
objective aspect), and Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā) (who experience that ‘ am all
this (universe) and all this (universe) is me’, in which the subjective and objective
aspects are equally balanced). The pure principles are aspects of the experience of
oneness of subject and object, and so are in the domain of pure nondiscursive
(nirvikalpa) consciousness.

Instead of this verse, the MVV continues:

ādyaṁ ca ṣaptakaṁ tatra nirvikalpakatāṁ gatam |
kramoṉmiṣadvikalpāṁśacchāyācchādanakovidam ||

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The third’ (moment) is such with respect to the first and second.

(This) group of six moments (consists of the three) powerholders and (their
three respective) powers.

Surely, one may ask, how can one ascend here? The obscuration of
thought constructs would (inevitably) be present. With this doubt in mind, he

says:

āīza ftraē%ú fx vmaṁkcaīī
faz: 11 2<2 1
tad eva śivarūpaṁ hi paraśaktyātmakaṁ viduḥ || 191 I|
(The wise) know these (six moments) to be Śiva’s nature, which is
the Supreme Power. (191cd)
The traditional teaching is that that group of six moments are made of
Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā), and so, in terms of the powerholder and (his)
power, they progressively (attain) Śiva’s nature itself, and so too that of Śakti.
Havingin this way explained (the nature) of one group of six moments,
he (now) talks about the next one also.

fiātā eqñṁāī mmqzraā+q |

fhīārāqēlezāīī TSJGaaī TāI || 22 ||
dvitīyaṁ madhyamaṁ ṣaṭkaṁ parāparapadātmakam |
vikalparūḍhir apy eṣā kramāt prasphuṭatāṁ gatā || 192 ||
The second, middle group of six moments is the plane of the
Intermediate (parāpara) (power). (It corresponds to the phase of the)
development of discursive thought (vikalpa) that has become progressively
more evident. (192)

‘The first group of seven there has assumed a state (of consciousness) devoid
of thought constructs. It is skilled in covering over, as it gradually unfolds, the shade of

the aspect (of consciousness) which is thought.’ MVV 1/984

This lineis a literal reproduction of MVV 1/985ab. These six moments are Pure

Knowledge, and so arise progressively by Śiva’s power, and thus are the Supreme

Power, which according to the scripture is Śiva by nature. Thus, although thought
constructs are present at this level, they are in the process of being consumed by Śiva’s
power, and so do not obstruct the development of higher levels of consciousness that are
free of thought constructs, which are themselves aspects of that same power.

TĀ 10/192is developed from MVV 1/985cd-986ab, that reads:
dvitīyaṁ saptakaṁ tatra parāparapadātmakam ||
vikalpa iti saṁgītam iti bhedo 'vabhāsyate |

‘The second group of seven there is the (intermediate) plane. (Both) supreme

and inferior (parāpara), it is said to be (the plane of) thought. (In this way) duality
(bheda) is made manifest.’ MVV 1/985cd-986ab

CHAPTER TEN

It is the middle (group) because it is located between the first group of
six (moments) and the penultimate one. Thus, it is said to be ‘the plane of the
Intermediate (parāpara) (power), because the first group of six (moments) is

Supreme, and the Innate Nature which consists of the last and penultimate
moments is the Lower (power and level) (apara). ‘The development of

discursive thought (vikalpa) is due to its nature as Māyā. (It becomes more
evident) ‘progressivelyʼ to the degree in which objectivity (idāntā) becomes
(more) prominent.

Surely (one may ask), as Śiva’s nature is undivided, Śakti is the seed
there (of each) division. (However,) the flow (of Śakti) is threefold as will,
knowledge and action, so what occasion is there to determine that there are
(these) groups of six (moments)? With this question in mind, he says:

fr̄ārvqrfṁāī ḷīgq gdīzq: úũaākaī 7TaāT: || g33 11
saṭke ʻtra prathame devyas tisraḥ pronmeṣavṛttitām |
nimeṣavṛttitāṁ cāśu spṛśantyaḥ ṣaṭkatāṁ gatāḥ || 193 |I
Here, with regards to the first group of six (moments), the three

Goddesses are in the act of unfolding (pronmeṣa), and (then), quickly

touching the state of closure (in on themselves) (nimeṣa), they become a

group of six (forms of awareness). (193)

‘The act of unfolding’ refers to the condition of power. The ‘closing

in’ refers to the condition of the powerholder.

The first group of six moments is at the Parā (Supreme) level, the last and
penultimate at the Aparā (Inferior) level, thus the second group of six moments between

them is at the Parāparā (Intermedic e) level. Discursive ideation (vikalpa) becomes
progressively more evident as objectivity (idantā) becomes prominent.
nimeṣavṛttitāṁ cāśu spṛśantyaḥ, literally ‘in the course of quickly making contact
with the state of closure’. The three Goddesses as Parā (Supreme), Parāparā (Middling),

and Aparā (Inferior) correspond to the energies of will, knowledge and action.

The unfolding condition (pronmeṣa) corresponds to that of power (śakti), whereas the

closed-in condition (nimeṣa) corresponds to that of the possessor of power. The former

is the immanent outpouring of the power of consciousness, as the three goddesses of its
three energies, into the three domains of manifestation of unity, unity-in-diversity and
duality, of the perceiver, the means of perception and its object. Just as the unfolding of
power marks the development of outer immanent manifestation into objectivity, its

closing in reverses it back into the transcendental subjectivity of the possessor of power.
This dynamism is experienced as taking place within consciousness. In other words, it is

experienced by consciousness itself within itself as it own activity. In other words, it is
the self-reflective awareness of the supreme subjectivity as ‘l am everything and
everything is meʼ. As we shall see, the following group of six moments mark the same

dynamism, when it is experienced externally, that is, objectively, not subjectively. It is
the experience that ‘that objectivity is everything and everything is that objectivity.” At

TANTRĀLOKA

He applies the same (principle) elsewhere (to the case of the other group

of six moments).

3TITE
JIa TTTTJATĪ fkRēfāT. | 28 11
JIIST=#
T ē: TTT--ĀGGJTĀTT:: |

fSTrfkrṁsagṁsī
īg: Ū’aṝṁrzzaṁ: || 24, 1
evaṁ dvitīyaṣaṭke ʻpi kiṁ tv atra grāhyavartmanā |
uparāgapadaṁ prāpya parāparatayā sthitāḥ || 194 ||
ādye ʻtra ṣaṭke tā devyaḥ ṣvātantryollāsamātrataḥ |
jighrkṣite ‘py upādhau syuḥ pararūpād avicyutāḥ || 195 ||
The same also occurs during the second six (moments); however,

here (in this case, it takes place by following) the path of objectivity. Once
the plane on which (the Goddesses) are tainted (with the object of
knowledge) has been reached, they abide as Parāparā. (However,) here (in

the case of) the first group of six, even though these Goddesses are about to
be affected by the adjunct (of objectivity), they do not fall from Parā’s
nature, because this takes place by the outpouring of the freedom
(svātantrya) (of consciousness) alone. (194-195)

Surely (one may ask), if the same three goddesses are present in the two
groups of six (moments) by virtue of the dynamism (vṛtti) of the unfolding and
withdrawal (that takes place) in the same way, then let there be just one group of
six, what is the purpose of the second one? With this doubt in mind, he says
‘however here (in this case, it takes place by following) the path of
objectivityʼ.
Surely, if these stages, that is, will, knowledge and action, are separate
(and distinct), then there is no (added) excellence to knowledge when the will is
placed within it, and to action when both are placed within it. (Indeed.) they
would be destroyed, for it is said that:
‘This is because it is (thereby) established in increasingly lower
principles, as it was established in the previous (higher ones). Otherwise, they
would not continue to exist, due to the destruction of the previous (higher and

subtler categories).

With this doubt in mind, he says:

sfāā sāīāara; akrarrzārq |
E|ṈĒGCAEVITĒ

its most developed level, it is as if there is no perceiver. One cannot resist pointing out
that this is the perspective of most modern Western science.

This verse is quoted above in TĀv 10/3-5 as part of a longer passage; see there.

CHAPTER TEN

asti cātiśayaḥ kaścīt tāsām apy uttarottaram |
yo vivekadhanair dhīraiḥ sphuṭīkṛtyāpi darśyate || 196 II
The wise, who are rich in discrimination, have clearly explained
that of those (three Goddesses), the previous with respect to what follows

possesses a certain (superior) excellence. (196)

(The teaching) here is of two kinds. (Now) he presents the other view.

aaa ga fag: |1 28. 11
kecit tv ekāṁ tuṭiṁ grāhye caikām api grahītari |
tādātmyena vinikṣipya saptakaṁ saptakaṁ viduḥ || 197 |I
Some (maintain that), placing the moment (tuṭi) in the subject and

that within the object together as one (with each other), (the remaining

fourteen moments) consist of two groups of seven. (197)

‘Some (maintain) that there (in that case), ‘placingʼ the fifteenth

‘moment’, which is the penultimate, and the one ‘within the object’, which is

the last moment, (corresponding to) the Innate Nature, ‘together as one (with
each other), that is, by making the last and penultimate one, just as we have
described, (they) define it as the Innate Nature. Then, out of the remining
fourteen, they define the first group of seven moments as the seven pertaining to
the perceiver, and the other as the seven pertaining to its power. Such is one
view. Thus, placing a certain (subtle) moment in the subjective aspect, and so
by implication, defining the one in the last (moment) as the Innate Nature, and

the other fourteen in the same way (as the aforestated view), (we arrive at)
another view.
Surely (one may ask), if (there are various views) in this way, then
which of these is (most reasonably) adequate (upapanna)?

fk āīPaāci1: || 22. 11

tad asyāṁ sūkṣmasaṁvittau kalanāya samudyatāḥ |
This view amounts to considering the final moment (tuti), in which the object is

prominent, to be one with its essential nature, that is, the subject, which is represented
by the penultimate moment. Abhinava has attributed this teaching, in the form in which
he presents it, to his Trika teacher Śambhunātha. This reference to others who hold

different views on the subject makes one wonder who they may have been. Whoever

they were, it clearly indicates that such teachings were being orally transmitted. One
wonders what else was being transmitted and who were the people involved. As this

teaching is part of Trika, it would appear that there were other Trika lineages in Kashmir
in Abhinava’s day.

TANTRĀLOKA

saṅṁvedayante yad rūpaṁ tatra kiṁ vāgvikatthanaiḥ || 198 |I
(Yogis) who are intent on discerning (one by one) (kalanāya) (the
aspects that arise progressively) within this subtle consciousness experience
(its) form (in this way, and so establish that it is s0). So what is the use of

arguing? (198)

Whatever is established (siddhyati) by (the direct) experience
(saṅvedana) of those yogis who experience (the entire range of levels) in this

way is the valid authority (pramāṇa) (in this case), nothing else. So what is the
use of (mere) words, devoid of (personal) experience, whether they be our
babble or that of others? Thus, (he implicitly) indicates that our view, that is, the
one
expounded
previously,
is
proved
by
personal
experience
(svasamvedanasiddha), which informs us that the one subject, in a disturbed and
undisturbed condition (i.e. propense to manifestation and resting in itself), is
both power and powerholder, respectively. Thus, from this point of view, these
two moments should always be considered together and not separately. Such is
the inner nature of the penultimate moment. It is the preceding potential
condition (ucchūnatā) of the final instant, which blossoms forth as the plenitude

(of fully expanded consciousness). Enough (then) of much (talk).
(Now) he concludes this (teaching).

ṬS TJCJTIcT |1| 2.38 1|
evaṁ dharādimūlāntaṁ prakriyā prāṇagāminī |

guruparvakramāt proktā bhede pañcadaśātmake || 199 ||
Such is said to be the configuration (prakriyā) of the fifteen aspects

pertaining to the principles from Earth to Nature (Prakṛti) within the vital

breath, according to the line of (our) teachers. (199)

By (saying) that (this teaching) is ‘according to the line of (our)
teachersʼ, its connection to what is the commonly accepted and established
(view) is effected. Having taught in this way the fifteen-fold (division), he (goes
on) to teach (the nature) of the thirteen-fold and the rest (of the divisions).

" In other words, this view is based on personal experience. This may well have been

Abhinava’s, or at least that of his teacher Śambhunātha. Anyway, this personal

experience informs us that the one subject, in a disturbed and undisturbed condition (i.e.
propense to manifestation or resting in itself), is both power and powerholder,

respectively. Thus, from this point of view, these two moments should always be

considered together and not separately. Such is the inner nature of the penultimate

moment. It is the preceding potential condition of the final instant, which blossoms forth

as the plenitude of fully expanded consciousness.
Above in 10/186cd-187ab, Abhinava declared that he is going to present this

teaching as it was taught to him by Śambhunātha. Clearly, ‘the line of teachers’ can only
be that of his Trika lineage.

CHAPTER TEN

kramāt tu bhedanyūnatve nyānatā syāt tuṭiṣv api |

As the divisions gradually decrease, so do the moments (tuti)

decrease als0. (200ab)

‘As the divisions gradually decrease’ to the thirteen-fold, eleven-fold
and s0 on, (so do the moments) ‘decrease’ by being placed within (and merging
into) the polarity corresponding to (their) the Innate Nature. As two divisions,
for example (those of) the Conditioned (perceiver) and its power, decrease, so
too two moments (decrease correspondingly). As he will say (further ahead):
‘Just as the divisions decrease two by two in this way, so also the

moments (tuṭis) clearly decrease successively two by two.

(This happens) because the moments are placed, two by two, into the
polarity corresponding to (their) the Innate Nature. The decrease amounts to the
loosening of the tenacious abiding (of consciousness) as a (lower level)
perceiver, not the destruction of the Innate Nature. The number of moments
(ruṭi) in the movement of the breath, which is thirty-six finger breadths (in

length), remains thus (tāva) unaffected. Thus, (what is happening) here (in this

case) is that by the dissolving away of the Conditioned and other perceivers
affected by discursive thought (vikalpapramātṛ), the perceivers free of

discursive thought emerge progressively (at ever) higher (levels), to the degree
in which consciousness abounds (udreka).
He says that:

tasyāṁ hrāṣo vikalpasya sphuṭatā cāvikalpinaḥ || 200 ||
TĀ 10/200ab = MVV 1/987cd, where the second half of the line reads: turīnām api

yo mataḥ instead of nyānatā syāt tuṭiṣv api. The whole verse reads:
kramāt tu bhedanyūnatve tuṭīnām api yo mataḥ ||

vikaḷpaṣya ca nirhrāso nirvikalpopalakṣaṇam ḷ

‘As duality (bheda) gradually diminishes, so do the aṭis also. This is

considered to be the shortening of thought (vikalpanirhrāsa), which implicitly
characterizes (the state of consciousness) devoid of thought constructs. MVV 1/987cd988ab.

Thus, the tuṭis clearly decrease two by two as the aspects progressively
decrease two by two. Thus, as the subjects, commencing with the Conditioned one on
the plane of discursive ideation (vikalpa), dissolve away, and so progressively ascend to
higher levels, the subjects free of discursive ideation (nirvikalpa) emerge as pure

consciousness becomes progressively more prominent.

Below 10/205.

TANTRĀLOKA

As the (duality of the perceiver’s) ideation (vikalpa) decreases,
nonconceptual (consciousness) (nirvikalpa) (becomes increasingly) evident.
(200cd)
This happens as the division of the perceivers (pramātṛ) decreases.

Surely (one may ask), here (in this case), in this way the condition of

the sixteen moments (vuti) is like that of the fifteen-fold, so how can the
tenacious abiding (of consciousness) as the Conditioned and other (lower-level

perceivers) be loosened, due to which the (state) free of discursive thought
becomes (increasingly) evident and discursive ideation decreases? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

zaṛ f: frgaan: varrrqaaṝ 1

fzzmaa ūz-a gafayṁatī 1| 202 1

fhecāfazīT-īāoīāṁ ā TṀ || 3. |
yathā hi ciraduḥkhārtaḥ paścād āttasukhasthitiḥ |
viṣmaraty eva tad duḥkhaṁ sukhaviśrāntivartmanā || 201 ||
tathā gatavikalpe ‘pi rūḍhāḥ saṅvedane janāḥ |
vikalpaviśrāntibalāt tāṁ sattāṁ nābhimanvate || 202 |I

Just as a person long afflicted by suffering, who subsequently

regains (his normal) state of health (sukha), forgets that pain because he

rests in (his present) happiness, so is it with those people who are

established in (pure) consciousness (saṁīvedana), in which ideation (vikalpa)
has ceased, have no notion of (even its) existence (sattā), because it has (all)

come to rest. (201-202)

(A person who regains his health forgets) ‘that pain’ he experienced

previously for so long. (Similarly, when dualistic thought) ‘has (all) come to
restʼ, that is, ceased, (it does so so completely that there is no notion of even

the) ‘existence’ of ideation. Pain experienced in the past leaves behind its latent

trace (in the memory), but even though it (may be) well developed, it is as if
non-existent, because it is not reawakened due to the power of the rest (one
experiences) in the pleasure (of the present). Similarly, for those who are on the
plane free of ideation (nirvikalpa), because ideation has ceased, conceptual
being (vaikalpikī sattā) does not arise, even in the presence of that disturbance

(which arouses thought). So it is that they directly perceive pure consciousness

free of all thought forms, by virtue of which this imperfection of transmigratory
(saṁsāra) existence comes to an end.

Thuṣs, one must pay careful attention just here. Thus, he says:

TĀ 10/201-202 is MVV 1/988cd-990ab. MVV reads vṛttiṁ – ‘state for sattāṁ –
‘existence’.

CHAPTER TEN

aīta

vikalpanirhrāsavaśena yāti
vikalpavandhyā paramārthasatyā |
saṁvitsvarūpaprakatatvam itthaṁ
tatrāvadhāne yatatāṁ subuddhiḥ || 203 ||
Ultimate reality, devoid of ideation, becomes the clearly evident

state of the essential nature of consciousness in this way by (the

progressive) decrease of ideation. The wise man should make an effort to
pay close attention there (to that process). (203)

Nor is that just our own idea. Thus, he says:

GpikēzeEḻḻEEĀIEEEĒIṈI

Ṣā aI TJ āīTṁ’ dRTTgaTI
āa ||

0 ||

grāhyagrāhakasaṁvittau saṁbandhe sāvadhānatā |
iyaṁ sā tatra tatroktā sarvakāmadughā yataḥ || 204 ||

"This is the attention that is said in various places (in the

scriptures) one must pay to the relationship between the perception of the

object and the perceiver, for (this attention is the veritable) wish-granting
cow who fulfils every desire. (204)

(This taught in) ‘various places (in the scriptures) such as the

Vijñānabhairava. As is said (there):

‘The perception of subject and object is common to all embodied
beings. What distinguishes yogis (from the others is that they pay careful)
atṭention to (their) relationship.”
TĀ 10/203 = MVV 1/990.
TĀ 10/204ab = MVV 1/991ab MVV 1/991cd reads: iyaṁ sā bhaṇyate tatra

yatheṣṭaphalayogataḥ – ‘It is said there (with regards to that in the Vijñānabhairava) in
relation to (whatever) fruit (yogis) desire’ for iyaṁ sā tatra tatroktā sarvakāmadughā
yataḥ ll

Ṁ VB 106 (105) TĀ 10/204 is a paraphrase of VB 106 (105), quoted by Jayaratha in

full. It is also cited in MM p. 154 and in ŚSūvi on sātra 1/18. A variant of the firsṭ line
is quoted in TĀv ad 4/212.

In Śivopādhyāya’s version of this verse, we find the reading viseṣo ‘sti for

viśeṣo ‘yaṁ, found here and in Ānandabhaṭṭa’s version. The latter reading is also found

in the citation of this verse in the MM p. 154 and in the ŚSūvi on sūtra 1/18. A variant

TANTRĀLOKA

Those who are firmly rooted on the plane of Māyā find rest (even) in
the presence of the disturbance (engendered by the interaction between) subject

and object (by recollecting that) “This is the object and that is the subject”.

Again, those who are established on the plane of consciousness beyond thought
should pay attention, even when that disturbance occurs, to (the place) from
which the emergence (udaya) of subject and object (as distinct polarities
occurs), or to where they come to rest, so that all the fruits one may desire are
attained.

Having explained that by the way, he goes back to the main point.

#am |

evaṁ dvayaṁ dvayaṁ yāvan nyīūnībhavati bhedagam |

tāvat tuṭidvayaṁ yāti nyūnatāṁ kramaśaḥ sphuṭam || 205 ||
Just as the divisions decrease two by two in this way, so too the

moments (tufis) clearly decrease successively, two (at a time). (205)

The penultimate and the last two moments (kṣaṇa) (after) the twelve
moments (7uṭi) associated with the powerholders and (their) powers, belong to
the polarity (pakṣa) of the Innate Nature. Thus, two moments remain that are

within Śiva. Accordingly he says:

Penetration into Śiva and Attaimment of the Goddess of Intuition
in the First Two of the Sixteen Phases of Perception

rā ta ftrarāā fkafz: ũũaṣṁ

ata eva śivāveśo” dviṭuṭiḥ parigīyate |
Thus, penetration into Śiva is said to take two tuṭis. (206ab)
of the first line is quoted above in TĀv ad 4/212. The expression ‘grāhyagrāhaka’ may

be taken to be a copulative compound – ‘the object and the subject’, or as an attributive

one – ‘the subject (ie. perceiver of) the object’. Itis found commonlyin both se
in
the text of the TĀ and even more so in Jayaratha’s commentary. Indeed, the relationship
between subject and object is a major object of attention here! Those who fail to attend
to it carefully are lost in the world of objectivity, deprived of all but a trace of their
essential subjectivity. Śivopādhyāya comments: ‘(The perception of subject and object)

is ‘common’ and without difference for ‘all embodied beings' ranging from Sadāśiva up

to a louse, whereas Yogis ‘(pay careful) attention’, that is, do not forget the nature of the
perceiver.”

Twelve tuṭis correspond to the six powerholders and their powers. The last and

penultimate together correspond to the inner nature of the subject, thus making fourteen.
What take: place in the two remaining moments is explainedin the following verse.

Readsivāveśo forśivāveśe.

CHAPTER TEN
Surely (one may ask), Śiva is undivided and is one in essence (ekarasa),

with completely full and unbroken consciousness. So how can there be two
realities (artha) there? With this doubt in mind, he analyses the two moments
(tuṭi) as the powerholder and (his) power.

ekā tu ṣā tuṭis tatra pūrṇā śuddhaiva kevalam || 206 ||

dvitīyā śaktirāpaiva sarvajñānakriyātmikā |

There, the first (of these) moments is (completely) pure and full.

The second is Sakti, who is universal knowledge and action. (206cd-207ab)

(The first moment is) ‘pure’, in the sense that it is completely
undiṣturbed (by duality), because it is full (and all-encompassing). The
‘diṣṭurbed (ṣṭate corresponds to) the plane of Śakti, who, as is said, is

‘universal knowledge and actionʼ’.”

Thus, one who is attentive here (to the second moment) possesses (the

subjectivity) which is the agency and knowledge of all things (viṣaya). Thus he
says:

aṁī fēē ī āfr ēf āT 1| 3 9 1|
tasyām avahito yogī kiṁ na vetti karoti vā || 207 ||
What does the yogi who pays attention to this not know or do?
Nor is there any inconsistency here. Thus he says

q: TīaSā qS: || 3 ¢ |1
tathā coktaṁ kallaṭena śrīmatā tuṭipātagaḥ |

lābhaḥ sarvajñakartrtve tuṭeḥ pāto ‘parā tuṭiḥ || 208 II
The

venerable

Kallata

has

said

the

same

(in

the

Tattvārthacintāmaṇi): “one atṭains omniscience and omnipotence when the
l RṞead śaktirūpaiva for śivarūpaiva.
5 Ṭhe disturbed or aroused state of Śiva’s full and perfect consciousness is that of His
power, one with Him, in which the powers of the plenitude of consciousness are aroused
and active. Śakti is said here to be sarvajñānakriyātmikā – Śall knowledge and action by
nature. The meaning is that every perception and every action is Sakti.

TANTRĀLOKA

moment passes (tutipāta)”, whereby is meant the second moment.
(207cd-208)

The word for ‘passes’ here is ‘pāta’, which literally means ‘fall’. The sense here is

simply of the passing of the (first) moment (tu/ipāta) (rather than its ‘fall’), in order to
achieve entry into the second. This line is also quoted in the PTv p. 103. Instead of the

reading here, i.e. tuṭipāte sarvajñatādayaḥ, there we find the variant: tuṭipāte
sarvajñatvasarvakartr̥tva-lābha[ṇ]. Abhinava quotes it again in MVV 1/177ab, where
the reading is tutipāte ‘pi sarvajñasarvakartṛtvalabdhṛtā. See above, note to 4/151, for a

translation of the passage where it appears.

The Yogi attains omnipotence etc. in the second moment, because he witnesses

himself then as consciousness, that is, as the means of knowledge (pramāṇa) which
relates subject and object. The following moment (after he has experienced his essential
nature this way), he attains all the attributes of consciousness, because he recognizes

himself then to be that consciousness. The recognition that everything that takes place is

a manifestation of the cognitive activity of consciousness is the goal of the practice of
the Empowered Means, which is achieved by the purification of thought. This amounts
essentially to the removal of doubt. In this context, doubt is not just the uncertainty

about what to do or the nature of something. Obscuring the capacity for intuitive insight
(pratibhā) of consciousness, it generates thought constructs and so is the fundamental

cause and result of its contraction and all its consequences. Abhinava explains:

“We will now describe here the plane of Supreme Speech wherein abides the

non-conventional, permanent, authentic and pure conscious nature. Each and every

thing is of the nature of all things. This (realization) is permanently manifest in
(Bhairava), who is pure consciousness, while this supreme and venerable Goddess, even
though she is endowed with the most excellent form of oneness, encompasses within
herself (all the levels of Speech), from the Voice of Vision (paśyantī) onwards, with the
corresponding unfolding of the Middle (parāparā) and other (energies), and so, being

such, consists of the totality of every single thing that constitutes the endless variety (of
manifestation). One cannot say of her that that which is not there is elsewhere.
‘Contemplate this, the first (and highest level) called ‘intuition’ (pratibhā),
which is the Goddess Consciousness, who is devoid of (even a tiny) trace of the
impurity of contraction. In this way, whatever (exists), mobile (living) and immobile

(inert), resides within consciousness, which is one with the venerable Lord Bhairava, in
an absolute, undecaying (eternal) form, consisting of the essence of (its) vitality (vīrya)
alone. (This is s0) because it is inferred to be in that state by the perception of each of
the infinite variety (of aspects) that are perceptible when the emanation of the many

phenomena takes place, (as initially each) entity (vastu) is about to arise, (and then
progressively becomes) slightly evident, then slightly more and more, and then evident,
and so on. Those who have attained the most excellent (state) of (contemplative)
atṭention (avadhāna) (to the progressive development of manifestation) in this way, all
of a sudden (realise it to be) the uncontracted ultimate reality (of consciousness), which
is its uncreated nature. (These are the yogis) who have been purified by supreme grace,
who with the pestle of progressive practice (abhyāsakrama) have (gradually) crushed
the stain of doubt (vicikitsā), which has countless synonyms, such as ‘uncertainty’
(apraīyaya), ‘the tremor (lack of confidence) (kampa) and so on. However, the plane of

consciousness attained by those who are still in doubt is instead subject to contraction,
due to (the objective) reality that has manifested to just a limited degree (within it, and
s0) is not (the manifestation of) uncreated (consciousness). As the venerable Kallaṭa has

said: one attains omniscience and omnipotence when the (first) moment passes
(literally: ‘falls’) PTv p. 102-104

rest.

CHAPTER TEN
As is said in the Tattvārthacintāmaṇi:
‘When the moment passes, (the yogi attains) omniscience and the
Abhinava further explains in the Mālinīvijayavartika (1/175cd-177) that:

asty eva pūrvakoṭyāṁ hi sarvam eva vyavasthitam |I175 II
tathāhi ṣvagṛhāt kvāpi yiyāsoḥ prathamakṣaṇe |
yāvat kiṁcana kartavyaṁ yac ca tanmadhyavṛtti tu |76 |I
tuṭipāte `pi sarvajñasarvakartr̥tvalabdhṛtā |
tata eva viśeṣāṁśaniṣkampakuśalātmanām |11
77 ||

‘Everything is contained in the first moment. For instance, when one wishes to

leave his house for a certain place, he (will) to some extent (kiṅtcana) (know) in the first

moment how far he has to go and what lies in between. For this reason, those who

possess unswerving (niṣkampa) skill in (noting) minute details ‘attain, even in a

moment, omniscience and the universal power to actʼ.

This practice begins in the sphere of the Empowered Means and finds its
completion in the sphere of the Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya). Thus, the following

verses of the MVV go on to describe the immediate realisation that takes place in the
sphere of the Divine Means, using the same example of the skilled jeweller who
discerns the value of a gem in a moment, found above in verse 1/184cd-185ab (which is
a variant of MVV 1/179); cf. also above, 1/229.

tuṭipāte sarvajñatādayaḥ. A more complete version of this aphorism is quoted by

Bhagavadutpala
in
his
commentary
on
SpKā
22:
tuṭipāte
sarvajñatvasarvakartr̥tvasarveśitādayaḥ | ‘When (the first) moment passes (‘falls’
‘transits), (the yogi attains) omniscience, universal agency and lordship etc.’
Bhagavadutpala comments: ‘This (state), endowed with the omniscience and

other (attributes of pure consciousness), is elsewhere termed the ‘Passing of the

Moment’ (tuṭipāta). When (the first) moment passes, (the yogi attains) omniscience,
universal agency and lordship etc., and (so) that should be examined with reverence, in
accord with the Master’s teachings.’ (Dyczkowski: 1992a: 159)
The context in which this aphorism is quoted tells us much about the practice.
In the context in which Bhagavadutpala presents it, the ‘moment’ that passes here refers
to the state of consciousness just when intense emotions begin to arise. Here Abhinava
is telling us that that is the state of Śiva consciousness free of thought constructs. From
the citations that Bhagavadutpala has conveniently brought together for us in his

commentary on SpKā 22, we observe that this practice is well accepted by Kashmiri
Kaulas of this period.
We also observe a development of doctrine. This becomes apparent if we

arrange the citations in chronological order. The earliest source cited here is the
Vijñānabhairava. There can be little doubt that it predates the Spandakārikā, that has
drawn from it. We have noted that the Kumārikākhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairavatantra
considers the VB to be a Trika Tantra on the same level of the MV, suggesting its
antiquity. As far as I have been able to observe, this practice in this form is not found
any other surviving Tantra of the early period. The meditation taught in the VB is
quoted by Bhagavadutpala, as follows:

‘Just when anger begins and ends, when in fear, grieving, (facing a) deep pit, or

fleeing from battle, when (intensely) curious, or when hunger starts or ends, the Being
of the Brahman stands close at hand.’ (VB 118) (116)

TANTRĀLOKA

He explains that by saying ‘whereby is meant the second moment’.
The passing (pāta), that is, waning away (apacaya) and decrease (hrāsa), of the
first moment (continues) up to the second moment.

Surely (one may ask), how does the one who is attentive to the second
moment attain omniscience and the rest? Surely, that is how it is in the first
moment. With this doubt in mind, he says:

ri fkē. ̄ ārai aī ōīd aT qcvīīīā || 308 1|
ādyāyāṁ tu tuṭau sarvaṁ ṣarvataḥ pūrṇam ekatām |

gataṁ kiṁ tatra vedyaṁ vā kāryaṁ vā vyapadeśabhāk || 209 ||
In the first moment all has become one and complete (pūrṇa) in all
respects, so what object of awareness or action can be taught there? (209)
The Spandakārikā (verse 22) teaches:
‘Spanda is stable in that state one enters when extremely angry, intensely

excited, running, or wondering what to do.”

As we can see, there is no reference to Spanda in the VB. Although the VB
does teach that Bhairava is omnipresent and nothing exists apart from Him ((124) (122),
and that cosmic waves arise out of him like waves of the sea or flames from a fire ((110)
(109)), the VB strongly emphasises tranquil ‘waveless’ (nistaraṅga) pure consciousness
free of thought as the goal. As Bhairava says to the goddess, concerning the 112
meditations he has taught:
‘O Goddess! I have revealed (these) one hundred and twelve teachings
concerning (the state) free of the waves (of the fluctuations of thought), knowing which
a person possesses the knowledge (that frees from bondage).” (139) (137)

The other two sources Bhagavadutpala quotes in his commentary can safely be

assumed to postdate the Spandakārikā. Both of them present the experience of Spanda
as the fundamental realisation of successful practice. One is the Hymn to the Mysteries
(Rahasyastotra), of unknown authorship, that declares:
‘They say that the state of unconditioned (mental) activity that one reaches

when overcome with anger, intense joy, or reflects on what to do, is (O Lord) Your
vibration (spanda), that bestows the inner strength of one’s own nature (ātmabala).”
He also quotes the following, but does not tell us where it is from or who wrote
‘Whenever, wherever and for whatever reason, all the powers (of
consciousness) dissolve (back into it), the emergence of the pulse of consciousness
(spandatattva) is at that time and in that very place, clearly apparent.’ For: ‘The senses,

pained by anger, delighted by pleasure, and confused by uncertainty become intensely
active.”

CHAPTER TEN
(He mentions the) ‘object of awareness and action’ in relation to

knowledge and action in due order.
In this way, it is the second moment which is the instrumental cause of
the accomplishment (siddhi) of omniscience and the rest. Thus he says:
The Arising of the Others Perceivers in the Subsequent Moments

feraf fraṁṝ šīṝ aīcṀā 11 220

T-TTṬTTATFJTFH-AIRT: PHĪTRaT: |I 222 1I

ato bhedasamullāsakalāṁ prāthamikīṁ budhāḥ |

cinvanti pratibhāṁ devīṁ sarvajñatvādisiddhaye || 210 ||
saiva śaktiḥ śivasyoktā trtīyādituṭiṣv atha |
bṇaṉtrādhināthatacchaktimantreśādyāḥ kramoditāḥ !| 211 I|
Thus, the wise contemplate (and discern) (cinvanti) the first (energy
of the initial) outpouring of duality (in the second moment) in order to
attain omniscience and the rest. This is the Goddess Intuition (Pratibhā).

She is said to be Śiva’s power.
In

the

subsequent

moments,

from

the

third

onwards,

the

Mahāmantreśas (mantrādhinātha) and their powers, followed by the
Mantreśas and the rest, arise progressively. (210-211)
It is called ‘the first (energy)” with respect to the aspect (aṁīśa) which

is the outpouring of duality. The sense is that (it is) just here, that is, the
division, which is meant to be indicated first of all. Thus, it is called ‘Intuition’,

because it is capable of designing ever new forms.” ‘She’ is the initial

Intuition, which is the second (moment). Surely, it is said that Śiva’s power
resides in the second moment. (So) what (is present) in the third and
(subsequent moments)? With this doubt in mind, he says: “(In the subsequent
moments), from the third onwards, (the Mahāmantreśas and their powers,

followed by the Mantreśas and the rest, arise progressively).”
Surely (one may ask), just as it is said that one who pays attention to the
second (moment) possesses the accomplishment of omniscience etc., then in the
same way, what would be the accomplishment (attained) in these moments?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

: The printed edition and some MSs carry two readings here ~ mantrādinātha- ‘the

first Lord(s) of the Mantra etc. (perceivers), and mantrādhinātha- ‘the higher

(presiding) lord(s) of the Mantra etc. (perceivers).” The second appears to be the better
reading, and so has been accepted. The epithet clearly refers to the Mahāmantreśa
perceivers. Cf. below ad 224ab, where the same expression occurs.

Pratibhā is the genius of Śiva’s creative imagination. Moreover, it is His power of
omniscient insight into His own nature and things made manifest by Him.

TANTRĀLOKA

Accomplishments by Attending to the Moments and

Closing the Gap between Subject and Object

āīg āar’afzraī+īdkd1|
IKEAIENHCEIEIEHĀHṬḶCĒEḤI
tāsu saṁdadhataś cittam avadhānaikadharmakam |
tattatsiddhisamāveśaḥ svayam evopajāyate || 212 ||
Placing the mind (citta), solely intent on concentrated attention, in
these (moments of perception), penetration (samāveśa) into their respective
accomplishments (siddhi) takes place spontaneously. (212)

‘Their respective accomplishments’ are (each of) those (yogic)
accomplishments (siddhi), such as the ability to make one’s body heavy at will,
taught in the chapter on meditation in the Mālinīvijayottara and in other
scriptures.
Now, surely, Śiva’s power itself manifests as all things everywhere, and
s0 because it is everywhere the same (in all circumstances), so how is it that the

accomplishment of omniscience etc. would not arise (in the subsequent
moments also)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

fērī gftamācaraaīsītrarṁsr 1| 223 1
ata eva yathā bhedabahutvaṁ dūratā tathā |
saṁvittau tutibāhulyād akṣārthāsaṁnikarṣavat || 213 ||

Thus, just as distance is the (interposition) of many distinct (units

of space between one thing and another), similarly, in the case of
consciousness, (there is distance between ourselves and a direct experience
of it,) due to the many moments (of the phases of perception that are
interposed between it and ourselves that separate it from us, creating a
gap,) like the separation (asaṁnikarṣa) (we experience) between the senses
and (their) objects. (213)
(By saying) ‘thus’ (he gives a reason, namely that this distance within
consciousness) is due to the progressive arising of the Great Lords of Mantra

and the rest (of the perceivers). He induces (the disciple) to take this (teaching)

to heart by means of an example, namely (that the phases of perception
interposed between the second moment and ourselves, separating it from us,
create a gap, which is) ‘like the separation (asaṁmnikarṣa) (we experience)
between the senses and (their) objects’. The senses are separate from (their)

See above, 10/21 lcd.
Read mantrādhināthādīnāṁ for mantrādināthādīnāṁ.

object

CHAPTER TEN

due

to

the

presence

of other

interposed,

concealing

entities

(vyavadhāyaka). In the same way, because the many moments, caused by the

many distinctions, are (an interposed) obscuration for yogis also; this is so ‘in
the case of consciousnessʼ.
(He now) talks about what happens in the opposite case.

I=

yathā yathā hi nyūnatvaṁ tuṭīnãṁ hrãsato bhidaḥ |
tathā tathātinaikaṭyaṁ saṁvidaḥ syāc chivāvadhi || 214 ||
Śivatattvam ataḥ proktam antikaṁ sarvato ‘mutaḥ |

The more the separation

(bhid)

between the

moments

(of

perception) diminishes, the closer consciousness approaches, until it finally
ends in Śiva. Thus the Śiva principle is said to be the closest of them all.
(214-215ab)
‘Thus, (the Śiva principle) is said to be the closest (of all)’, because
the closeness of consciousness is the cause of the decrease of separation. As no
particular (case) is specified, (this applies) everywhere (in all cases, with respect
to all the divisions and all things). As is said (in the Stanzas of Vibration):

‘. . . there is no state that is not Śiva.
Thus, because everything is Śiva, no effort, which is the deception
(dhaukana) of (the application of) means (to realisation) and the like, is required
by great souls to penetrate into him. The application of effort (yatnayoga) is
(required only) to attain what is distant.

He says that:

fēēr || 3z., 11

aṃ |

ata eva prayatno ʻyaṁ tatpraveśe na vidyate || 215 ||

yathā yathā hi dūratvaṁ yatnayogas tathā tathā |

Therefore, no effort is required to penetrate into Him. The
application of effort (yatnayoga) is in proportion to the distance (between us

and Him). (215cd-216ab)

ṢpKā 29b. The whole verse reads: ‘Therefore there is no state in the thoughts of
words or (their) meanings that is not Śiva. It is the enjoyer alone who always and

everywhere abides as the object of enjoyment.”

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Therefore’ there is no occasion (to apply any) means (to realisation),
such as meditation or the like, with regards to SŚiva (directly).
He says that:

fōī frkTRTYTĪTT || 22ē /11

sT |
bhāvanākaraṇādīnāṁ Śive niravakāśatām || 216 ||
ata eva hi manyante saṁpradāyadhanā janāḥ |
Thus, those who possess the wealth of a (true spiritual) lineage
consider that meditation (bhāvanā), a means (to realisation) (karaṇa) or the

like have no place in Śiva. (216cd-217ab)

‘Meditation and the like’ is assiduous application to that which is to

be achieved by meditation (bhāvyamāna) and the like. It is not right (to consider
that Śiva) can be attained by meditation or the like. It is not possible for him to
be an object of meditation or the like, because (Śiva) is one with the perceiver.
(Somānanda) says that:

‘there is nothing to achieve by (any) means (karaṇa) anywhere, or even

by meditation (bhāvanā).

Surely (one may ask), how is it that effort is applied only to what is

distant, not to what is nearby? He quells this doubt by giving (an appropriate)
example.

eṝ fēē gar-ī 1

tathā hi dṛśyatāṁ loko ghaṭāder vedane yathā || 217 ||
prayatnavān ivābhāti tathā kiṁ sukhavedane |
So, as one can observe in everyday life, it seems as if one makes an
effort to perceive (an outer object) such as a jar, but not so (an inner)
pleasing sensation. (217cd-218ab)
! Abhinavagupta is referring here to ŚDr 7/6 (the second line of which is quoted by

Jayaratha), and also to Somānanda, who wrote it. See above, TĀv ad 2/48, where the

entire passage is quoted. “(When something is) known to be gold just once, does

(further) reflection (bhāvanā) become a means (to know more)? When one has known

(just) once, with firm understanding, Śiva’s omnipresent state by means of (any) means

of knowledge (pramāṇa), the scripture or the words of the teacher, there is nothing to
achieve by (any) means (karaṇa) anywhere or even by meditation (bhāvanā). ŚDr 7/5-

: ŚDr̥ 7/6cd, also quoted in TĀv ad 15/274cd-275ab. ŚDr 7/5-6 quote in TĀv ad 2/48.

CHAPTER TEN

‘One makes an effort because one is intent on the desire to know

(something) and the like.
Surely (one may ask), (all) one need accomplish is just (the sort of)

interiority which is like (the inner experience of) pleasure, for example, so that

the means may
(sukhopāya).

be

(spontaneous

and)

pleasing

(requiring

no

effort)

Interiority and Externality as the Expansion and
Contraction of Consciousness

iuḻBEĀEAUEETT“EĒEEEE:ġ
āntaratvam idaṁ prāhuḥ saṁvinnaikaṭyaśālitām || 218 Il
tāṁ ca cidrūpatonmeṣaṁ bāhyatvaṁ tannimeṣatām |
(The master Utpaladeva) says that interiority (anantratvam) is a
state of close proximity to consciousness. It is the expansion (unmesa) of the
conscious nature, whereas externality is (its) withdrawal (nimeṣa).®

(218cd-219ab)

This interiority is said to be the radiant manifestation of consciousness,
that is not far away. Thus it is said that ‘(the wise) say that interiority
(anantratvam) is a state of close proximity to consciousness’.
Surely (one may ask), in this way, its condition is the same as, for

example, (the inner) experience of pleasure. With this doubt in mind, he says

that (the wise) say that (this interiority) ‘is the expansion (unmeṣa) of the

conscious natureʼ. What he means to say here (by declaring that interiority is)
this state of close proximity to consciousness, is that it is (the state in which) the
conscious nature is the fundamental (reality of all things). Thus, (with the
words) ‘exteriority is (its) withdrawal (nimeṣa)’, it is said that (what is meant
here by) ‘exteriority’ is the submersion of consciousness.
Although pleasure and the like are perceptible only to the inner (mental)
organ, in accord with the saying that ‘exteriority is separation (bheda) from him
(the perceiver),®’ they possess the main characteristic of exteriority, namely,
Kṣemarāja uses the term sukhopāya, ‘Pleasing Means’, in his Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya

(KṢṬS p. 2) to denote the immediate recognition of one’s identity as Śiva, that is, what

Abhinava terms No Means (anupāya).

Abhinava refers to Utpaladeva in the standard honorific plural – prāhuḥ -– ‘they say’.

He is referring to ĪP 3/1/3ab: ‘Iśvara is opening outwards (unmeṣa), Sadāśiva is closing
inwards (nimeṣa).’ Śee above, 6/167cd-168ab (167) and note.

P 1/8/8d. The whole verse states: “Even this (mental) representation (ullekha) within

(the sphere of) discursive thought (vikalpa) is an external perception that is separate
(pṛthak pratha) (from every other one and the perceiver). Interiority is a condition of

oneness with the knowing subject (pramātraikyātmyam), exteriority is separation

(bheda) from him.” Utpaladeva himself explains: ‘Although the representation of a jar
and the like within (the sphere of) discursive thought is not in the purview of (the

TANTRĀLOKA

that they are perceived to be separate (and distinct from each other and the
perceiver). Thus, it has been said elsewhere many times, that they are external.
Surely, if this is so, namely that Śiva’s interiority amounts to the fact
that the conscious nature is the fundamental (reality of all things), as that
consciousness is self-luminous, it should be luminously (manifest) in all

circumstances. Thuṣ, all things are extremely close to it, why should it not shine
(and manifest) at all times? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Śiva only Apparently Distant

āīcāagaṁ 1| 32 11
bhavināṁ tv antiko ʻpy evaṁ na bhātīty atidūratā || 219 ||
Even though (Śiva) is close to those subject to transmigration
(bhavin) in this way, he does not manifest (as such, and so the idea arises
that He is) very far away. (219cd)
(Śiva is close) ‘in this wayʼ, that is, in the manner described. Those
individuals who are subject to transmigration are for that reason devoid of this
kind of reflective awareness (parāmarśa), which is why it does not shine (and is
not clearly manifest) in all circumstances (sarvataḥ). This is the sense. Thus, as

they do not possess this self-awareness, consciousness appears to them to be
distant, due to which this (external) clatter (dambara) of transmigratory
existence is so great (iyat). As is said:

‘The mere absence of self-awareness alone is so great a sin that, having

arisen in just such (a small) measure, (it is so much) words cannot describe it.
Surely (one may ask), here (in daily life) distance is said to be of three
kinds, due to distance in space, time and (divergence of) nature (svabhāva), and
yet (none of these are) possible in the case of (pure) consciousness, so how can

you say that about it? With this doubt in mind, he says:

zasfī ahṁrr̄d

dūre ‘pi hy antikībhūte bhānaṁ syāt tv atra tat katham |
senses) such as sight, even so, it is external, because it is a (form of) manifestation that
is separate (from the subject). Indeed, interiority is the reflective awareness ‘I’
(ahaṁvimarśa), (whereas) exteriority is (the reflective awareness) ‘this’. In this way,

such things as jars possess both kinds of externality, namely, their condition as objects

of cognition of the two instruments (of perception), namely, the external (senses) and
the inner (mind). However, in the case of pleasure and the like, they are solely objects of
the inner (mental) senses.”

This verse is quoted in MM p. 27, where it is identified as belonging to the

Mokṣopāya, which is also called the Yogavāsiṣṭa. It cannot be traced in the printed
edition in either its full version or the smaller one called Laghuyogavāsiṣṭa.

CHAPTER TEN

(Something) although distant, once it is close by, manifests (as
such), but how is that possible here (in the case of consciousness, which is

always present and near)? (220ab)

Alṭthough an entity may be far away, by the dint of (one’s) effort, (its)

manifestation comes to be close by; in other words, it (can be said to be) in a
state of close proximity. However, (this is not the case) within consciousness,

which cannot be made distant, as there is no departing from it or the like.
Thus, having refuted that there is distance (from us) in space within
consciousness, (he sets about) to refute (its distance) in time also.

Consciousness is Everywhere Full, Emergent

and Devoid of Succession

fērr wraārād kgd fē aaa;

na ca bījāṅkuralatādalapuṣpaphalādivat || 220 ||
kramikeyaṁ bhavet saṁvit sūtas tatra kilāṅkuraḥ |
bījāl latā tv aṁīkurān no bījād iha tu sarvataḥ || 221 ||
saṁvittattvaṁ bhãsamānaṁ paripūrṇaṁ hi sarvataḥ |
Moreover, consciousness (sarṁīvid) is not successive (kramika), as are
the seed, sprout, creeper, petals, flowers and fruit etc. The sprout is born
from the seed, the creeper from the sprout, not from the seed. Here, in this

case, consciousness (samvittattvam) manifests in all circumstances (sarvataḥ)

as completely full (and perfect). (220cd-222ab)

‘Consciousness is not successive (kramika)ī because it is not
differentiated by time. He describes the successiveness of the seed and the rest
with the words ‘(the sprout) is born (from the seed, the creeper from the

sprout)ʼ. If the creeper were to arise from the seed, then the sprout and the
creeper would not be successive. This is the point. One should understand that,
in the same way, the petals arise from the creeper, not from the sprout, which is
why they are successive (in relation to one another). Consciousness, on the

contrary, is not divided up in space and time, and so it shines everywhere at all
times, which is why it is completely full (and perfect) in all circumstances.
Surely (one may object that), because the effect did not exist previously
(when the cause did) in the causal state (kāraṇadaśā), (it had not yet) come (into

existence). Thus, because consciousness here (in daily life) is the effect, and
(this) is occasional, a distance in time arises, because (consciousness) has arisen
in that state (that is, as the manifestation of phenomena of which it is the cause).
So how is it said that consciousness (saṁvid) is not successive (kramika)? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

TANTRĀLOKA

aa 1|322 1|
sarvasya kāraṇaṁ proktaṁ sarvatraivoditaṁ yataḥ || 222 |
(Consciousness) is said to be the cause of all things because it is
(constantly) emerging (into phenomenal existence) (udita) everywhere.
(222cd)
Now when consciousness is the effect, is consciousness itself the cause,
or some other insentient entity? As we have established with sound argument

many times before, it is unreasonable (to maintain that) an insentient (reality)
can serve in this way as a cause. (Moreover,) it is illogical (to maintain) that

there is a difference between one consciousness and another, thus consciousness
is just one and undivided. So how can it be the cause of something or (indeed)

the effect? The reality which is consciousness (saṁvittattva) is the cause of all
things. This universe is nothing but the unfolding of its freedom (to be all things
without that affecting its oneness). Thus it is said that ‘it is (constantly)
emerging (into phenomenal existence) (udita) everywhere’. As (it has no
particular) location, because it is emerging everywhere (constantly into
phenomenal existence) (udita), distance between the innate nature (svabhāva)

(of things) has also been refuted.
ŚSurely (one may object), let consciousness in the form of the subject be

the cause of all things, but how then could it (also) assume the form of the

resultant noetic consciousness (pramiti) of objects of knowledge, such as jars,
that are distinct determinate (pratiniyata) entities? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

ih.eḵṟveu.

āāīa fīaīs #ā #īa 11 222 1|
tata eva ghaṭe ʻpy eṣā prāṇavṛttir yadi sphuret |
viśrāmyec cāśu tatraiva śivabīje layaṁ vrajet || 223 ||
Thus, if this modality of the vital breath (linked to the phases of

perception) (prāṇavṛtti) manifests within (the perception of) even just a jar,

and immediately takes its rest there, it merges (there) into Śiva, the seed (of
all things). (223)
‘Thus’ because it is the cause of all things, as it is applied by the
omnipresent emergence (of consciousness), ‘the vital breath (linked to the
phases of perception) (prāṇavṛtti)’ has been described as being fifteen-fold etc.
It ‘manifests’ and comes to rest, that is, it arises and dissolves away as dictated
by necessity (niyati) ‘even with regards to a jar’. Even so, there (in that case
also), it merges ‘into Śiva, the seed (of all things), whose nature has just been
described. The meaning is that (it does so in order) that it may shine
(everywhere) in all circumstances as the reflective awareness of the completely

CHAPTER TEN

full (and perfect) light (of consciousness). This is the meaning. (It takes rest
there) ‘immediatelyʼ. (This is) because the division of the sequence of
powerholders and (their) powers, that is subject (upanata) to the succession of

moments (tuṛi) interposed between them, is essentially (nothing but) the light
(of consciousness) alone, and so is said to have no (independent) reality (of its
own).

Thus he says:

na tu kramikatã kãcic chivãtmatve kadãcana |

(224ab)

There is no succession ever of any kind within Śiva’s nature.

Surely (one may ask), it has been said that the state of rest (within

consciousness) as Śiva’s nature (takes places) through the series (of perceivers,

namely) Mantra, their Lords and their Great Lords (in turn). Although this
sequence is not (ultimately) real (in itself) (atāttvika), it is not non-existent
(asat), because it manifests in this way by Śiva’s will, and that (same) Śiva is
the cause of all things. (Now,) agreed that that is so with respect to (His)

condition as the supreme cause, but how is it possible to set aside the subsidiary

causes, namely, the Mantra (perceivers), their Lords and the rest? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

Mantreśas and the Other Perceivers are
Instruments of Consciousness

I

anyanmantrādhināthādi kāraṇaṁ tat tu saṁnidheḥ || 224 ||
T One could also translate ‘as the completely full (and perfect) light and reflective

awareness (of consciousness). But that would be missing the point. As all the content of
experience is the shining of the light of consciousness, the perception of anything is
ultimately an act of reflective awareness of that consciousness. This is so from the point
of view of both consciousness and its content. It is a reflective awareness that points
back, as it were, to consciousness as the awareness it has of itself. At the same time, any

perception of anything is an act of reflective awareness, in the sense that it reflects on its

nature, coming ultimately to know what it is as a manifestation of the light of
consciousness and hence that light itself. This timeless activity of awareness is
experienced by yogis in consonance with the flow of the breath. In that way, although
the activity of consciousness is not divided up in time or space, the yogi experiences the
sixteen aspects of a single undivided consciousness as so many moments in the
movement of the breath, corresponding to moments in the act of perception.

Read with MS K ukzā for uditā.
Read, as suggested by the editor mantrādhināthādi for mantrādināthādi. The same
expression appears above in 10/211cd. See note there.

TANTRĀLOKA

śivābhedāc ca kiṁ cātha dvaite naikaṭyavedanāt |
The other (perceivers), that is, the Mantreśas (mantrādhināthādi)
and the rest (are in reality only instruments of consciousness, but if they
are sometimes considered to be) causes, it is because of their close
proximity (sarṁīmidhi) (to consciousness), (as well as their) oneness with Śiva

(śivābheda), and finally because in (the state of) duality (in which we reside,
we) experience (them) as being closer (to us on the plane of duality).

(224cd-225ab)

Just as clay, (continuing) to be one (and the same), by (passing)
successively through a series of the phases (in which it is in the shape of) a

small (flat) platform, heap, and ball etc., is the (material) cause of a jar. Thusṣ, it

is sound (to maintain that) the ball (of clay) and the rest, as such are not the
cause, because there no continuity (anuvṛtti) (with them) in the same way (as
there is with clay), in the nature of the effect. Thus, it is right to say that each
state (of change in the shape of the clay is just) an instrumental cause (of the

jar), as is the (potter’s) stick and the like, (not a material one). (The nature of) an
instrumental cause is such that, even if it is used to bring about an effect, it
should not compromise (the causal status of) the cause. In the same way, here

(in this case), Śiva, who is completely full (and perfect) consciousness, is the
cause of the universe, because He (passes) successively through the states of the
Mantra (perceivers) and their Lords etc., that are made manifest by His own

will. It is not just because of this that the states of Mantra and their Lords
(should be considered to be the material) cause (of the universe). Rather, they
are just instrumental causes insofar as they are used by (Śiva), the agent (for this
purpose). They are not engaged in making the universe manifest, nor is the
status of Śiva, who is full (and perfect) consciousness, as the cause (of all

things), compromised, even if that were to be so. Thus, like the powers of the

will and the rest (of Śiva’s powers), it is right (to consider) the Mantra

(perceivers) and their Lords etc. to be instrumental causes. Accordingly, it is

said that ‘the other (perceivers), that is, the Mantreśas and the restʼ, are (in
reality only) instruments (of consciousness). This is the meaning. If the Mantra
(perceivers) and their Lords etc. are said to be causes, that is so (secondarily) for

the purpose of instruction, as (when it is written in the scriptures that):

‘Śiva is the agent on the Pure Path, and Ananta is said to be the lord on

theimpure oneʼ.

He says that (by stating if) they, that is, the Mantra (perceivers) and

their Lords, ‘(are sometimes considered to be) causes, it is because of their
close proximity (saṁmidhi) (to consciousness). (This is s0) just as the

presence of spatial and temporal factors, the ether etc. (concur)in the production

of a jar. (Again,) Śiva is thus said to be the cause (of all things). Mantra
(perceivers) and (their) Lords are also referred to in that way because of their

” Kiṟaṇatantra vidyāpāda 3/26cd. Quoted above in TĀv ad 1/1, 8/331-332 (330cd-

332ab), 9/61, and below ad 13/113cd-1 14ab.

CHAPTER TEN

‘oneness with Śiva (śivābheda)’, just as the jar and (its) cause, the clay, are
one. (Another reason is) ‘because in (the state of) duality (in which we reside,
we) experience (them) as being closer (in relation to us on the plane of
duality)ʼ. They (appear) to be become progressively closer in relation to the
Maāyaā perceiver on the plane of duality, just as an assassin appointed by the
command of the king (draws closer to his victim).

This itself is the supreme goal. Thus, one should firmly establish (one’s
aṭṭention on this).

The Lord of Khecarīcakra

ṝāī fēī ē tā7 srv’̄T. || 224 11
ṭEṂ GṭFiEEeE'rd IEI H
anayā ca diśā sarvaṁ sarvadā pravivecayan || 225 ||
bhairavāyata eva drāk ciccakreśvaratāṁ gataḥ |

He who is constantly analysing all things at all times in accord with

this teaching becomes, in a short time, the Lord of the Wheel of
Consciousness, and so Bhairava Himself. (225cd-226ab)
He (now) concludes (this) subject.

a czi ũōṝīī īa: gHINṀĒIĪTd: ||3ē I
aI JāĪēā: #īHraTĀTTJATĪT|

sa itthaṁ prãṇago bhedaḥ khecarīcakragopitaḥ || 226 l|
mayā prakaṭitaḥ śrīmacchāmbhavājñānuvartinā |
I have revealed this division (bheda) present in the vital breath

under the custody of Khecarīcakra" in thīs way following the divine
command (ājñā) of the venerable Śāmbhunātha.” (226cd-227ab)
Khecarīcakra is the cycle of perception experienced as the stream of awareness,

flying like the wind through the unconfined expanse of eternal consciousness. The

expanse or Sky of Consciousness is Bhairava, and the flow of awareness the goddess of

consciousness (Saṁviddevī), here called Khecarī – the Skyfarer. She is experienced in
the immediacy of the present when consciousness is freed of the notions (vikalpa) of

‘past’ and ‘future’. Abhinava explains this in chapter one of the Mālinīvijayavārttika,
where he writes:

‘How can something be divided (from a place) where it does not rest? And how

can the present be a limit with regard to these two, or they have a limit with regard to it
(the present)? Would not everything become the limit of everything else in this manner
(tadvad) (i.e. if this were accepted)? (140-141)
For this reason, it is said (iti) that past and future are immersed in the
consciousness that is called present. If one brings about a state of rest in this only, and if

+

TANTRĀLOKA

the whole circle of rays of conceptualization stand still for a moment without becoming

manifest in this (present consciousness), then one has annihilated one’s individual
existence and relishes (carvaṇāṁ labhate) only the vibrant experience (of the nectar) of
one’s own immortality (i.e. the transcendence of time), (in which) flows an abundance
(saṁdoha) of ambrosia that is the highest bliss. (142-144)

For, to explain, when the moon is full of the mass of rays of the sun, and does

not wish to emit them again, then it is for a moment established in a state of rest in the
fullness of its own orb. It is (then) called ‘vessel for the gratification of the constituent
deities inside (consciousness). (145-146)

In this way, one rests in the light emitted by the moon of one’s own

knowledge, (a light) which exists within the heart (i.e. consciousness), which is made
manifest (añcita) by the mass of rays of the sun that illuminates the world and which is

beautiful with the essence of the nectar of the vast consciousness inside. Since the flood

of one’s own inner nectar is not released outside, it is revolving and surging up only
inside, and acquires (–ātmakaḥ jāyate) the knowledge of the ‘I’, which gratifies the
circle of the deities inside oneself. As long as (it does this) (yāvat), the process of one’s

sensory perception (svakaraṇakramaḥ) is suspended. (147-150ab)

While the mass of rays is restrained, (their) power (vibhava) (that causes
manifestation) is absent, and consequently neither past nor future is divided from the
present. (150cd-151ab)
(But) how (can we speak of) the present as long as they (past and future) are
not divided from it? For it is through the nature of past and future that the present
becomes separate. (151cd-152ab)
Therefore (tad), when a meditator (yogī) intent on devouring time comes to rest
in this limit of consciousness for only a moment (tutiḥ), he at once becomes ‘one who
moves in the void (of consciousness). (152cd-153ab)
For it is taught that time, which is the appearance of the world, is (yaḥ . . . sa)
the vibration (saṅsphāra) of the rays of one’s own consciousness that is projecting
(kalana) (the world). The absence of the world is (also) it (i.e. time); it is nothing else.
Therefore, one who has restrained all the (six) orders (adhvan) by restraining the rays of
his own (consciousness), who is completely immersed in the devouring of time,
spontaneously (svayam) becomes ‘one who moves in the void (of consciousness)’.

(1I53cd-155ab)

This has been said by Śiva (parameśa) in the SŚrīdāmaratantra: After

immobilizing one’s circle of rays and tasting the supreme nectar, he should dwell in the

bliss within the present that does not divide this from both past and future.” (155cd156ab)

Even the so-called restraint (of the rays) does not exist in this (present) which
is free from contraction. As this is absent, there is no vibration (of the raśmicakra) in it,
and how could there be (subsequent) devouring and contentment? (157)
But in the manner described (above), restraint, appearance, devouring etc.

appear. And there is no other reality in the world than appearance in this way. (158)

But enough of this long narration of the (secret) discourse about Khecarīcakra;
or its use (ko yogaḥ) for the process of perception, which is hidden ever new (i.e. again
and again)? (159)ī (Hanneder’s translation (1998))

ity alaṁ khecarīcakragoṣṭḥyālāpena bhāyasā
ko vābhinavagupie'’smin yogaḥ saṁvedanakrame l19|
This verse makes much more sense by simply emending ‘yogaḥ’ to yogyah.

CHAPTER TEN
He now describes the waking and other (states) enunciated in the initial

enunciation (of the topics treated in the Tantrāloka).

A Description of the Waking and Other States
(jagradādinirūpaṇa)” from a Kaula Point of View

atraivādhvani vedyatvaṁ prāpte yā saṁvid udbhavet l| 227 ||
tasyāḥ svakaṁ yad vaicitryaṁ tad avasthāpadābhidham |
The inherent (svakam) variety (vaicitrya) of the consciousness that

arises when (it) has assumed a state of objectivity here on the Path (of
‘or else who is fit (yogya) for this process of perception, that is hidden ever
anew (i.e. again and again) (except Abhinavagupta)?

This teaching is imparted in verses 10/186cd-227ab.
Abhinava had written a work on the states of consciousness, to which he refers in the
PTyv but which has not been recovered. Abhinava, following the lead of the MV,

integrates three dimensions of degrees or levels of integration into consciousness set
into the standard framework of the layers of the reality principles (tattva). One is the
hierarchy of seven perceivers we have examined. Consonant with that are two more.
The first is discussed here (verses 227cd ff.). These are the five possible states of
consciousness of these perceivers, namely, waking, dreaming, deep sleep, the Fourth
(turīya) and Beyond the Fourth (turīyā-tīta). For them to operate as stages of ascent to

the supreme state of consciousness which is the one Beyond the Fourth, the yogi must
experience them consciously, lucidly aware of himself as being in those states.
Accordingly, Somadeva (2004: 204) refers to them as ‘states of lucidity’. I prefer to call

them states of consciousness, as is commonly done, in order not to create unnecessary

possible confusion as to what is being discussed. Somadeva notes that, just as the ascent

through the thirty-six reality principles is accelerated by introspecting the seven
corresponding levels of subjectivity, so too, as Somadeva writes: ‘the method of
traversing the states of lucidity is a short-cut within this short-cut. Rather than follow
even the shorter hierarchy of perceivers to its end, the Yogin can branch away from that
path and traverse the phases of lucidity. Again, this traversal can begin at any given
level the Yogin may find himself at. If the yogin can recognise the pentadic structure of
his awareness, he may rapidly advance to the state of Śiva ‘beyond the Fourth’
(turyātīta).”

The source material for this exegesis of the five states of consciousness in
relation to the seven perceivers is found in MV 2/25-35, which is quoted below in TĀv

ad 10/309. Concerning the states of consciousness, see also ĪP 3/2/15-17 and above

6/78cd-84ab and notes. This is preceded (ibid. 2/36-46) by a presentation of the
corresponding four states of Kaula Yoga, which Abhinava teaches in 10/231 to 286. See

below, note to 10/229cd-230 with regards to Śambhunātha, whom he acknowledges as

having taught the basis at least of his sophisticated explanation of these states, without
which MV 2/36-46 would remain in need of explanation. This is not to say that the
explanation given by Śambhunātha and Abhinava is the ‘correct’ and only possible one.
Up to now, we have uncovered no other.

TANTRĀLOKA

cosmic manifestation) is denoted by the word ‘state’ (avasthā). (227cd-

228ab)

‘Here’ the consciousness, which is each (of the series of) perceivers

beginning with Śiva (Himself), pours forth into the Path of the Principles (world
orders and spheres of energy), that has been described as the fifteen-fold
sequence and the rest, and has assumed a state of objectivity as the Innate
Nature. This (consciousness), which is such, possesses ‘the inherent (svakam)

variety (vaicitrya)’ which is connected with each of the objects made manifest
by its own (free) will. (Moreover, it is the variety) which is associated with each
(state of consciousness), whether one (in which the object) is common (to all

indiviḍuals, as is the waking state), or peculiar to one individual alone (as is
dreaming). That is denoted as the ‘state’ of, for example, waking. This the
meaning
He (now) analyses the states and levels.

gIT a q̄

ã |

jāgrat svapnaḥ suṣuptaṁ ca turyaṁ ca tadatītakam || 228 I|
iti pañca padāny āhur ekasmin vedake sati |
(The teachers) say that the levels are five, when there is one subject.
They are waking, dreaming, deep sleep, the Fourth, and the one beyond the
Fourth. (228cd-229ab)
‘The one beyondʼ is (the state) Beyond the Fourth. (There are five

states) ‘when there is one subject’. When there is more than one perceiver, the
waking (state may be that) of one (perceiver), and the dream (state that of)

another. Thus, there would not be five states (but many). It is only with respect

to one perceiver (alone) who is in (these) states that they could be such.

Surely (one may ask), if that is so, then that would entail that Śiva, Who
is one and whose nature is that (state) Beyond the Fourth, is also (subject to) the
waking and other states. With this doubt in mind, he (states clearly that) he
agrees (that this is s0).

#aī 1| 330 11
tatra yaiṣã dharãtattvãc chivãntā tattvapaddhatiḥ || 229 ||
tasyām ekaḥ pramātā ced avaśyaṁ jāgradādikam |
tad darśyate śaṃbhunāthaprasādād viditaṁ mayā || 230 ||
” avasthāpadābhidham could also be translated ‘called ‘level’ (pada) and state
(avasthā) .

CHAPTER TEN

If there is (only) one subject throughout this series of principles
ranging from Earth to Śiva, the waking and other states must necessarily

(be his states). (I will now describe them as) I have learnt them by the grace

of Śambhunātha. (229cd-230)

‘(If there is only) one (subject)ʼ, be it the Conditioned (perceiver) or

Śiva. By saying that these ‘must necessarily (be his states)’, he indicates that

otherwise, (if the states of consciousness were not to be Śiva’s states,) they

would not exist. We are not (just) voicing our own idea. Thus he says that ‘I
have learnt them by the grace of Śambhunātha’.

He says that:

The Waking State
Much of what Abhinava says in here and in what follows is his own explanation. He
does not cite any source for his interpretations, instead he refers to his Trika teacher,
Sambhunātha, as his authority for them.

The following section extends from 10/231 to 10/284cd-286. It is an exposition

of the states of consciousness put in correspondence to the levels of the perceivers. It is
the subject of MV 2/36cd-46ab. This brief but very dense classification of the varieties
of four states of consciousness, ranging from waking to the Fourth, is no less obscure.

Abhinava offers a sophisticated explanation, that he says is derived from the oral
tradition transmitted to him by his teacher Sambhunātha, concerning the meaning of this
passage of the MV. In verse 287, with which Abhinava concludes this section, he again

acknowledges that his source is Śambhunatha, to make that absolutely clear to his
readers. Here then, we have yet another example of how Śambhunātha’s Trika teaching

is to a large extent, if not fundamentally, an exposition of the Mālinīvijayottara. We
have seen that he identifies it with the whole of the Trika teaching (trikaśāsana,

trikaśāstra). We know that Sambhunātha taught him other Trika scriptures also; for
example, the important Devvyāyāmala, but it seems this was his primary focus. Indeed,

it may well be that sitting at the feet of Śambhunātha, having been initiated by him with
the initiation taught in the MV, learning it and the oral tradition that augmented it from

him, that he was insṣpired to take up the journey that led to the production of the
Tantrāloka. Indeed, he states, with a mixture of pride and humility, that he did it at his

guru’s command (ājñā) and presented it to him for his approval (37/70-71).

But note that although Jayaratha comments on this passage, he quotes very
little from scripture. It was not simply because he could not find appropriate passages.

Although this may well be true, clearly he was aware that the source was the oral

tradition, not scripture.
Our normal waking consciousness, rational consciousness as we call it, is but one

special type of consciousness, whilst all about it, partitioned from it by the flimsiest of
partitions, there are potential forms of consciousness entirely different. We may go
through life without suspecting their existence, but apply the requisite stimuli, and at a
touch they are there in all completeness, definite types of mentality which probably
somewhere have their field of application and adoption. No account of the universe in

its totality can be final which leaves these other forms of consciousness quite
disregarded. (William James (1919: 388)

From here onwards, Abhinava integrates the states of consciousness into the
four stages of Kaula Yoga, following the lead of the MV 2/36-39ab, where he says:

TANTRĀLOKA

efrsngar -ītēī=rq ēhēram |

TSGTTT Taī TTscdGaīēḤ II 332 1I

yad adhiṣṭheyam eveha nādhiṣṭhātṛ kadācana |
saṅṁvedanagataṁ vedyaṁ taj jāgrat samudāhṛtam || 231 ||

The waking state is said to be that in which objectivity (vedya) is in

the purview of awareness (saṁīvedanagata). Indeed, it is (invariably) that
which is sustained (adhiṣṭheya) (by consciousness), never the sustaining

subject (adhiṣṭhātṛ).” (231)

‘Furthermore, the different technical appellations of these states are revealed.
‘Corporeal’ (piṇḍastha) and ‘Everyway Propitious’ (sarvatobhadra) are considered to

be the two (other) names of the waking state. They consider the dream state to have two

names: Abiding in Place (padastha) as well as Pervasion (vyāpti). There also two
(terms) for the state of deep sleep: Abiding in Form (rūpāstha) and the Great Pervasion

(mahāvyāpti). The Fourth State is technically called ‘Accumulation’ (pracaya) and
Beyond Form (rūpātīta). The discerning (vicakṣaṇa) (i.e. jñānin) consider (the state)
Beyond the Fourth to be the Great Accumulation (mahāpracaya). Thus is taught how

this (five-fold) differentiation recurs in each division of the reality principles (tattva).’
(ṂV 2/36-39ab)

After a general definition of the five states of consciousness, he goes on
analyse the first into four basic subdivisions. The fifth has none. The names of these

four are drawn from the Kaula nomenclature found in the MV 2/43-46c. They are 1)
Corporeal (piṇḍastha), 2) Abiding in Place (padastha) (= dreaming); 3) Abiding in

Form (rūpastha) (= deep sleep), and Beyond Form (= the Fourth). Each of these has
four subdivisions, which serves as the framework for an epistemological analysis of the
states of consciousness, of which Abhinavagupta offers his own explanation, based not

on scripture, which apparently does not contain any, but on the one he received from his
Trika teacher Śambhunātha.

This terminology is introduced in MV 2/39c-42; see below under 10/241-2.

According to Somadeva (2004: 208), Abhinava ‘first explains the five phases of lucidity
by introducing a gradation centred on the object of cognition. Objects of cognition
appear to the perceiver in differing degrees of objectivity. At the waking level they are
completely ‘objectivized’ or ‘supported’ (adhiṣṭheya) by consciousness. During dream,
knowable entities operate as ‘instruments of objectivization’ (adhiṣṭhānakaraṇa) and in

deep sleep they are the ‘agents of objectivization (adhiṣṭhātṛ).’ In the perspective of the
exposition of the states of consciousness, objectivity is understood to be that aspect of

consciousness which is sustained (adhiṣṭheya) by the perceiver who is the sustaining
subject (adhiṣṭhātṛ). The implied sense of this terminology is that the yogi who
cultivates the lucidity of knowing himself to be the perceiver in a given state of

consciousness is lucidly aware that it is his subjectivity which ‘sustains’ the sphere of
objectivity in that state of consciousness which is thereby sustained by it. Thus the third
necessary factor required to explain and categorise the states of consciousness is the
tself of ‘sustaining’ (adhiṣṭhāna) the objectivity ‘sustained’ (adhiṣṭheya) by the
sustaining perceiver.”
As Somadeva rightly points out, this process is one of ‘objectivation’ of

consciousness, which is related to it as the ‘objectivizer’. Abhinava distinguishes the
states of consciousness from one another in the perspective of these distinctions, one

CHAPTER TEN
The sense of ‘indeed’ is to make it clear that (the waking state) ‘is

never the sustaining subject’. (Moreover, the waking state is) ‘in the purview
of awarenessʼ, otherwise it would not be objective. This is the point. It has been
said many times that (the degree and form of objectivity is relative to the state
of the perceiver, nothing is) within itself either objective or otherwise.
He goes on to discuss that in more detail.

f̄r̄arazoīyaī. īazr. fāḥ aṀkrar
sī 11 33x 1
JHTHTT-ĪTTJHTGT
TTṬTAT |

aaī sīTaī āṬā] 1|| 333 II
caitramaitrādibhūtāni tattvāni ca dharāditaḥ |

abhidhākaraṇībhūtāḥ śabdāḥ kiṁ cābhidhā pramā || 232 ||

pramātṛmeyatanmānapramārūpaṁ catuṣṭayam |

viśvam etad adhiṣṭheyaṁ yadā jāgrat tadā smṛtam || 233 I|
The waking state is said to obtain when 1) living beings (bhūta) such

as Caitra and Maitra, 2) the (elemental) principles (tattva) from Earth
onwards, 3) words, which are the instruments of denotation (abhidhā), and
(the verbal) knowledge (pramā) (that is the result of) denotation (abhidhā),

(as well as) 4) the tetrad consisting of subject, object, means of knowledge

and knowledge itself, in short, all this universe (that manifests) is that

which is sustained (by consciousness) (adhiṣṭheya).”™ (232-233)

differing from the other in accord with the predominance of one or the other in relation
to the other two.

The MV (2/40a) (cf. below under 10/241-2) lists just three types of things which are

‘sustained’ (adhiṣṭheya) in the waking state, that is, are its content objectively perceived
by the perceiver who ‘sustains’ (addhiṣṭhātṛ), namely, living beings (bhiūta), (elemental)

principles (tattva), and words, which are the instruments of denotation (abhidhā). The
first Abhinava explains to mean ‘living beingsʼ in the specific sense of other people.
Just as in English one says ‘Tom, Dick and Harryʼ to mean each and anybody, similarly

in Sanskrit one says ‘Caitra and Maitra’. It is only in the waking state that we perceive

others and interact with them. Again, Abhinava narrows down the metaphysical
priṇciples perceived in the waking state to those which concretely constitute objects.

Other higher principles, starting from the sensations, senses and mind, are not perceived
objectively in the waking state. Moreover, they are not specific to it. They are

operational in the waking state, but they are also functioning in dream states and so are
not specific to the former. Next, the MV refers to the act of denotation (abhidhā); that

is, the naming of outer objects as this or that, which takes place when awake. Abhinava

explains that outer spoken language — ‘words' — is meant here, and the verbal
knowledge which results from it and is associated with it. There the inner speech of
thought operates in the dream state, but it does not serve to denote outer objects, much
less to communicate knowledge to others. Now Abhinava adds a fourth category of his
own, not mentioned (but may be said to be implied) in the MVT. These are the four
factors constituting perception, ranging from the subject to the resultant perception. We

have observed in many contexts that this perspective is central to Abhinava’s exegesis.

TANTRĀLOKA

The expression ‘living beings’ refers to all things that are not insentient,
that is, (all living beings,) beginning with demons (paiśāca) and ending with
human beings, insofar as they are included within the fourteen kinds of creation
of living beings (bhūtasarga). Although ‘words’ belong to (a category)
included amongst the (elemental) principles of Earth and the rest and so are

objects of knowledge, their state is that of a means of knowledge, because they

instil conviction (pratyaya) in others. Thus it is said that they are ‘the
instruments of denotation (abhidhā). Denotation is the perception of meaning
(arthapratītṭi), and so is the result (of the use of words). In this way ‘the waking

state is said to obtain when’ ‘the tetrad consisting of subject, object, means
of knowledge and knowledge’ is the nature of (the universe, which is)
‘sustained (by consciousness) (adhiṣṭheya). The meaning is that this is the
waking state.
Analysing the relationship between the sustainer and the sustained, he
illustrates (what they are).

Tgdú āīa f’tī] ārHē̄ || 33% l|

3qIq aṁaaāī
aēīzaa fēa |
Ea eae PS FCIGI-IEEIVGĀIṬCTINAI

tathā hi bhāsate yat tan nīlam antaḥ pravedane |
saṅkalparūpe bāhyasya tad adhiṣṭhātṛ bodhakam || 234 ||
yat tu bāhyatayā nīlaṁ cakāsty asya na vidyate |
kathañcid apy adhiṣṭhātṛbhāvas taj jāgrad ucyate || 235 ||
That (imagined) colour blue that manifests in that way within one’s

(own) awareness, which is the conscious intent (saṅkalparūpa) (to īmagine
it), is the sustaining noetic consciousness (adhiṣṭhātr bodhaka) of the

(supposed) outer (blue). However, (the state in which) the blue that

manifests externally (outside the perceiver) has no sustaining subjectivity of

any kind is said be the waking state.”” (234-235)
Whatever manifests,

such as

(an

imagined colour)

blue,

within

cognitive consciousness (jñāna), which is the conscious intent (saṅtkalpa) etc.

Moreover, as Somadeva (2004: 220 n. 74) observes: ‘This at first sight trivial matter
becomes significant latter on. It will become clear at TĀ 10/262-263b that
Abhinavagupta insists on counting four categories of knowable entities simply because

this enables him to explain why the purely subjective and unitary deep sleep state can
have four subdivisions.”

A certain subjective element exists in waking experience, in that the external object is

apprehended in the mind of each individual, but even so, the object of the individual

perceiver’s awareness is external and thus common to all. The existence of this

objectivity, which is experienced as independent of the perceiver and his intentions or

imagination, is the characterizing feature of the waking state. Indeed, the experience of
objectivity in this way is the waking state itself.

CHAPTER TEN

(to imagine it), at one with it, serves as its sustaining noetic consciousness,
because it is that which manifests (avabhāsaka) and knows (bodhaka) an

external object of knowledge (bodhya), such as (the colour) blue. This is the

meaning. Thuṣ, as the external (colour) blue is an object of knowledge, it cannot
possibly be understood to be (adhigantum notsahate) a ‘sustaining subjectivity
of any kindʼ. Thusṣ, it is said everywhere to be the waking state, because its sole
nature is that which is sustained (by consciousness) (adhiṣṭheya). Thus, is it
rightly said that (the state that) is sustained (by consciousness in this case) is the
waking (state).

Surely (one may ask), (the members of) this four are (all) equally

sustained (by consciousness); is it possible that there is some difference between
them, or not? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ī Trī̄ JI ̄TT. T TT |

ā: gJJGṀJ WHIĨT T I. |
tatra caitre bhāsamāne yo dehāṁśaḥ sa kathyate |
abuddho yas tu mānāṁśaḥ sa buddho mitikārakaḥ || 236 ||
prabuddhaḥ suprabuddhaś ca pramāmātreti ca kramaḥ |
(Consider) Caitra, who appears there (before you). His physical

(corporeal) aspect is said to be the ‘unawakened’ (abuddha) (aspect of the
waking state). The perceiving aspect (mānāṁśa) (of the waking state which

renders the body sentient) is the ‘awakened’ (buddha) (one). The agent of

perception (mitikāraka) is the ‘well awakened’ (prabuddha) (aspect, as it
consists of the intellect etc.), while (his) bare cognitive consciousness alone
(pramāmātrā), (which rests in its own essential pure conscious nature,

unsullied by objectivity,) is the ‘fully awakened’ (suprabuddha) (aspect of
waking). This is the order of the progression (of the aspects of
consciousness in the waking state). (236-237ab)
‘The physical (corporeal) aspect’ is the object of knowledge, because
the body consists of the gross elements. The activity of that (body) consists of

the impulse of the vital breath etc., and so makes contact (saṁsparśa) with it.

Thus, (it is) the state of the perceiving aspect (mānāṁśa) which is said to be

‘awakenedʼ. It was said before that contact with the vital breath etc. makes (the

body and the senses) conscious. ‘The agent of perception’ operates (the act of)

perception. The agent of perception is (thus) the aspect which is the perceiver
(pramātraṁśa). This is the meaning. And because it consists of the intellect and
the rest (of the inner mental organ), it is said to be ‘well awakened’. The ‘fully
awakenedʼ is the ‘bare cognitive consciousness alone’, because it is (pure
cognitive) consciousness alone (sarṁvvittimātra) which, devoid as it is of the

stain of objectivity, is the state of rest within one’s own nature. Thus, it is the
aspect which is the resultant noetic consciousness (pramā).

TANTRĀLOKA

Nor are (the four aspects of the waking state, namely) ‘unawakened’

and the rest we have talked about just our own idea. Thus he says:

23. 1

cāturvidhyaṁ hi piṇḍasthanāmni jāgrati kīrtitam || 237 ||

(Therefore, as it is grounded in bodily consciousness,) (this) four-

fold state is said to be within the waking state, that is technically called (in
Kaula Yoga) ‘Corporeal’ (piṇḍastha) (which literally means ‘Abiding in the

Body?). (237cd)

Surely, (one may ask that,) the five levels (pada) of waking and the rest

are (commonly) said to be different from one another, so how can this apparent
mix-up of waking and dreaming, waking and deep sleep etc. (be taken to be
well-known and) commonly accepted (prasiddhi)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

sīaaṝẽ qx ftē vāīṁr faa- |
jāgradādi catuṣkaṁ hi pratyekam iha vidyate |
The four, which are the waking and other (three states of

consciousness), are present here in each one of the four. (238ab)

(AII four states are present in) ‘each one’ mutually, that is, waking in

waking, dreaming in waking and so on. Thus (as each state continues to be

defined individually, this view) does not contradict (the well-known and)
commonly accepted (prasiddhi) (view that there are four states of
consciousness). Thus (this teaching) has been established (to be correct).

Thus, The Corporeal (piṇḍastha), which is the Kaula expression for the waking state,

is four-fold: 1) unawakened (abuddha), 2) awakened (buddha), 3) well awakened
(prabuddha), and 4) fully awakened (suprabuddha). Abhinava declares in his PTv (p. 8)
that he has discussed in detail the hierarchy of the subdivisions of the states of
consciousness in his lost commentary on the Mālinīvijayottara called Śrīpūrvapañcikā.
Here he suggests that these states of consciousness are subdivided because the levels
and forms of attainment of levels of Kaula Yoga are subdivided in this way.

! According to the MV (2/36-39%ab), the waking state is termed ‘Corporeal’

(piṇḍastha); it is that which is sustained (adhiṣṭheya) and is the state of the Conditioned

(sakala) perceiver. Abhinava adds that the waking state also includes the other three

states of consciousness. The first four states are mutually divided from waking to deep
sleep within in the Fourth state. There is no state of the fourth in the fourth, The
sixteenth is the indivisible state Beyond the Fourth (see below 10/238-240ab). It
pervades all of them and so is not counted separately (see following verse). These
sixteen states of lucidity correspond to the sixteen phases of Kaula Yoga (ŚSomadeva

2004: 221). We may note, by way of contrast, that Kṣemarāja (commenting on ŚSū 1/8-

10) discerns nine states, constituted by the three – waking, dreaming and deep sleep – in
each other. The Fourth state (turīya) is that of the one underlying consciousness, and so

is not counted amongst them, or one may take it to be a tenth state present in all the
others. See Somadeva 2004: 213-216.

CHAPTER TEN
Here (in the context of Kaula Yoga, the states of consciousness) do not

only have this nature, (they also possess) an unawakened etc. nature. Thus he

says:

STīJssīdē= ṝssīṁczrṁrīq gaaī || 23¢ 1

jāgrajjāgrad abuddhaṁ taj jāgratsvapnas tu buddhatā || 238 II
ityādi turyātītaṁ tu sarvagatvāt pṛthak kutaḥ |

The waking-waking (state) is (called) Unawakened (Abuddha). The

waking-dreaming (state) is (called) Awakened (Buddha), and so on. The

The correspondences are 1) Unawakened (Abuddha) waking-waking, 2) Awakened
(Buddha) waking-dreaming 3) Well Awakened (Prabuddha) waking-deep sleep, 4) Fully

Awakened (Suprabuddha) waking-Fourth state. These four stages are found in the
Svacchandatantra and elsewhere independently as a complete series in itself. For a
detailed analysis, see Goudriaan (1992: 139-173). Lucid dreaming, called
svapnaṣvātantrya (lit. ʻfreedom when dreaming’), which includes lucidity in deep sleep,
is an important part of the practice taught in the Spandakārikā. If we understand the

Fourth state to be that of lucidity, we observe that the Śivasūtra already taught that in
the aphorism Jayaratha quotes. Indeed, if we understand the Fourth state to be, amongst

other things, a state of lucidity (i.e. self-awareness) in the other states of consciousness,
the practice of lucid dreaming, what could be called Dream Yoga, is a major feature of
the Sivasūtra. t is even more so in the Spandakārikā. It is taught in the Vijñānabhairava
(read svapnasvātantryam for svātantryam). The VB was clearly an important source for

the Spandakārikā and so may well have been for these teachings also. The Six Yogas of
the great Buddhist yogi Naropa include Dream Yoga. We know that Naropa came to
Kashmir in 1052 and stayed there for seven years to study Buddhist Tantric yoga.
Clearly, Dream Yoga was well known to the Buddhists by then. In all probability, they

were already practicing it in the ninth century, when the Śivasūtra and Spandakārikā

were composed. Indeed, they may well have inspired their Śaiva counterparts in this

practice.

Be that as it may, the point is that the author of the Spandakārikā probably had
access to Kaula teachings such as these. The author refers to the Fully Awakened yogi

whose ‘perception of that (reality) is constant (and abides) unaltered in all three states,

whereas others (perceive) that only at the end of the first.’ (SpKā 17) The commentator,

Rājānaka Rāma, refers to the other yogis as the three types we find here, namely,

Unawakened, Awakened and Well Awakened (SpKāVi p. 55). In his commentary,
Rājānaka Rāma refers to how yogis perceive ‘the highest reality in dream and deep
sleep. This he says is the Self. This can be said to be the ultimate level of being aware of
oneself whilst dreaming as dreaming or in deep sleep, that is, lucid dreaming and deep

sleep. He writes:

‘The teaching here concerning the manner in which (the enlightened) perceive
(upalabdhi) the nature of the Self (ātmatattva) bears upon two points. One relates to
one’s own true nature (svaṣvarūpa) as pure (transcendental) consciousness, independent

of everything else, and is the one we are discussing at present. The latter, which we have

yet to tackle, relates to the (immanent, universal nature of the Self) as all things
(viśvātmaka), and its Wheel of Energies. This teaching, in both its aspects, (finds its
application) in two states, namely, those of deep sleep (which relates to the

TANTRĀLOKA

state Beyond the Fourth is omnipresent, and so how can it be reckoned

separately? (238cd-239ab)

Surely (one may ask), it was said that there are five states (of

consciousness). It has been stated that the nature of the group of four (states)
is ‘Unawakened’ etc. What then is the nature of the state Beyond the Fourth?
With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘the state Beyond the Fourth is
omnipresent, and so how can it be reckoned separately?”
According to the teaching of the Śivasūtra, ‘the Fourth (state) should be
sprinkled like oil into the three (states).”™ There (according to that teaching
also), the Fourth state is also everywhere undivided, so what to say of the state
Beyond the Fourth? (It is all the more so!).

ÉEEAĀE'AEE-ĀEIĒ] EÉIE ajH̃_

11 23< 1|

uktaṁ ca piṇḍagaṁ jāgrad abuddhaṁ buddáham eva ca || 239 ||

prabuddhaṁ suprabuddáhaṁ ca caturvidham idaṁ smrtam |

It is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara) that this (waking state, otherwise
known as) ‘Corporeal’ (piṇḍaga), is of four kinds, namely, Unawakened
(Abuddha), Awakened (Buddha), Well Awakened (Prabuddha) and Fully
Awakened (Suprabuddha). (239cd-240ab)
transcendental, pure conscious aspect of one’s own nature) and dreaming (which relates
to its immanent uniformity). However, just as (these) teachings are of no use to the Well
Awakened in (any) of the three states, similarly, the Awakened generally requires (n0
instruction in order) to perceive reality (while dreaming or in deep sleep), because he

can do so effortlessly. This is because he can perceive the highest reality in the manner
described, spontaneously, merely by reflecting on the consciousness present in these
two states. Thus, when in a state of alert awareness (praboddhadaśā),
he reflects on his

state of deep sleep which, because all thought constructs (vikalpa) based on objectivity

(vedya) have ceased, is devoid of all diversity (niṣkalā), he spontaneously perceives the

Self (ātmatattva), which is the ever present (nityāvilupta) and pure conscious subject
(cetayitrmātra) at rest within his own nature alone, free of all external influences
ga). Again, when he, wakeful, reflects on his own dream state, made of the
fabrication of the multitude (cakra) of wonderfully diverse phenomena (bhāva), both
conscious and unconscious (of which it consists), (each) clearly manifest, though devoid
of any specific cause of their own, he then perceives the reality of the Supreme Lord in
the manner illustrated (before), by the power of his own alert, wakeful awareness
(prabodhabala). (This reality) is the agency (kartṛtā) of the Lord, who is the supreme
cause and one’s own true nature. It (brings about) all things (freely) by its own will
alone, independently of any other (attendant) cause. The unawakened, on the contrary,

neyer reaches the end (of his endeavours), even if he exerts himself countless times, just

as (one who pours) water into a calabash (full of holes can never fill it for) it drips

(constantly). (SpKāVi p. 57-58 Dyczkowski 1992: 95).

See above, 10/228cd-229a.

$Sū 3/20; quoted again below in TĀv ad 10/294cd-297.

there:

CHAPTER TEN
‘It is said’ in the venerable Mālinīvijayottara (śrīśrīpūrva). That is said

“The Corporeal (piṇḍastha) is of four kinds, Unawakened (Abuddha),
Awakened (Buddha), Well Awakened (Prabuddha) and Fully Awakened

(Suprabuddha).

Although the four states are mutually mixed together with one another

in this way, that which has been called the ‘physical (corporeal) aspect is on
the plane of the object of knowledge, and is the primary waking state. Thus he

says:

EEVEṭECĀtez bGte1tzerHIHIIEYHI
meyabhūmir iyaṁ mukhyā jāgradākhyānyad antarā || 240 ||
The waking state pertains primarily to the plane of the object of
knowledge and (only) secondarily to the others. (240cd)
‘The othersʼ are, for example, the dream state, which corresponds to

the aspect which is the means of knowledge. When (the waking state) is present

in the midst of those (other states), it is secondary. (Thus, he says it pertains to

the other aspects) ‘secondarilyʼ.

Surely, one may ask, what is the authority (that attests to the view that)

the plane of the object of knowledge is itself the primary waking state? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

JTTJITTĀTTĪ ĪSTĪSTTRA S-IT |
[ieẽeziEtHHŪTEiEIIZIETĪḤCPAĀI
bhūtatattvābhidhānānāṁ yo ʻṁśo ‘dhiṣṭheya ucyate |
‘That aspect of the creatures, principles and names, which is said
to be sustained (by consciousness) (adhiṣṭheya), they say in the venerable
Mālinīmata, is the corporeal state (piṇḍastha). (241)
Surely (one may ask), in this way the Corporeal (state) is said to be the
primary one on the plane of the object of knowledge; then the doubt arises that
MV 2/43.

Above, 10/236a.

Similarly, the dream state, for example, pertains primarily to the means of knowledge
and only secondarily to the object.

Ṁ MV 2/40b incorrectly reads yogo for yo ‘hñīśo.

MV 2/40abc. These lines have been explained above in 10/232-235. See below
10/284cd-286 for MV 2/40cd-42.

TANTRĀLOKA

(the primary one) is not the waking state. Thus he says that, this is (just) another
term for the waking state itself.

rá ṁ̄Rarĩd 1| 242 1
laukikī jāgrad ity eṣā saṁjñā piṇḍastham ity api |

yogināṁ yogasiddhyarthaṁ saṁjñeyaṁ paribhāṣyate || 242 |
(The scriptures) explain that Yogis have also termed what is
commonly called waking ‘Corporeal’ (pindastha) in order to attain
perfection in Yoga. (242)
That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara): “Corporealʼ (piṇḍastha) and
‘Everyway Propitious' (sarvatobhadra) are considered to be the two (other)

names of the waking state.’

Surely (one may ask), why has (the waking state been) termed

Corporeal, in order to attain perfection in Yoga? With this doubt in mind, he
says:

sītr̥̄zgucrēamīaza

īēīl̄ā fṁ ftvexṝ frā fīvē fē ftftcaṇ 11 223 1
adhiṣṭheyasamāpattimadhyāsīnasya yoginaḥ |
tādātmyaṁ kila piṇḍasthaṁ mitaṁ piṇḍaṁ hi piṇḍitam || 243 ||
The ‘Corporeal’ (piṇḍastha) (state) is the oneness (tādātmyā) the
yogi (attains) who is seated in the midst of the contemplative union with

(the principles) sustained (by consciousness) (adhiṣṭheyasamāpatti).” (In
MV 2/36cd.

Somadeva translates this expression as ‘immersion into the objectivized’. See above,

note 1,1015 concerning the meaning and technical sense of the term ‘samāpatti’, found

in the Tantras and treatises on Yoga, as the acquisition of a level or state of
contemplative absorption. One could, according to the context, translate simply as

‘attainment’ or, as Somadeva does here ‘immersion’. There can be a series of such
‘atṭṭainments or ‘immersionsʼ yogis can achieve on the way to the highest ‘attainment’.

Abhinava and Jayaratha commonly use the word in this sense. Thus, for example,
Abhinava refers to the ‘supreme (contemplative) attainment (samāpatti)’ in his

Maālinīvijayavārtika (MVV 1/18 quoted above in TĀv ad 1/1). It is used with reference

to phases in the states of consciousness or perception. For example, we are told that

when consciousness is free of thought constructs, ‘the object of realization is said to be
directly (perceived and) attained ((jñeyasamāpatti) in an instant’ (above, 1/171cd).

Abhinava uses the term to denote at once the ‘attainment’ and ‘contemplative

absorption’ of a phase of reflective awareness. Thus, there are fifty of them,
corresponding to the emergence (udaya) of another form of reflective awareness in the
series of fifty that constitutes the cycle of AHAM (see eg. 3/78cd-79ab (79)). Indeed, all

stages of development or phases in the processes that constitute the activity of

CHAPTER TEN

that case,) the body (pinḍa) is the limited (mita) aggregated totality (piṇḍita)

(of the entities encompassed by the pervasive unity of the principles).”
(243)

(The Yogi) immersed in a certain type of contemplative absorption

(samādhi) iīnduced by his continuous meditation on (an objective reality)

sustained (within consciousness) (adhiṣṭheya), such as the Earth (principle), is,
by virtue of the identification with the yogi’s consciousness (ekātmya), termed
in the scriptures ‘Corporealʼ (pinḍastha literally ‘Established in the Body’). It is
because of this that the perceived aggregation (of the gross elements,) Earth and
the rest, formed into the (physical) body, by abandoning the fragmentation
(brought about by the processes that) tear it asunder, is the true body

(satpiṇḍa), that has encompassed within itself each and every thing and is allpervasive.
This is not the only alternative technical term for the waking state, there
is another one also. Thus he says:

JṬHGTTĪTFGTI āJĪTTTT Q Tgeād |

at̄ rarāāī || 3%̄ ||
prasaṁkhyānaikarūḍhānāṁ jñānināṁ tu tad ucyate |
sarvatobhadram āpūrṇaṁ sarvato vedyasattayā || 244 ||
For the men of knowledge (jñānin) who are solely intent on

(cultivating) meditation (prasaṁkhyāna), this (state) is called ‘Everyway
consciousness, or to be more precise, its reflective awareness (vimarśa), can be termed a
‘samāpatt’. Śo we observe the expression kiñcidut
natā-samāpatti Ī.e.
(consciousness) attains a state of subtle (inner) expansion (kirīciducchunatā) (like that

of a seed about to sprout) (see TĀv intro. to 3/79cd-80ab (80)).
Here the MV declares that there are three forms of it, corresponding to the

sustained (adhiṣṭheyasamāpatti) (‘immersion into the objectivized’), sustaining
(adhiṣṭhānasamāpatti) and sustainer (adhiṣṭhātṛṣamāpatti). These may be compared to a
scheme of three immersions in the object (grāhyasasamāpatti), act of perception
(grahaṇasamāpatti) and perceiver (grihītrṣamāpatti) found in Bhoja’s commentary, the
Rājamārtaṇḍa, on the Yogasūtra.

This is Abhinava’s explanation. The term piṇḍastha literally means ‘located or
present in the bodyʼ. The ‘body’ in this case is not the gross physical body, it is the

totality of entities in the purview of the yogi’s consciousness (cf. ŚSū 1/14 dṛsyaṁ

śarīram – ‘the perceptible is the body’). Viewing them in this way, immersed in the
contemplation of his oneness with all the principles of existence (tattva), he is seated in

their midst. This is the yogi’s waking state, technically called Piṇḍastha.

2 Ṛead viśararutaparihāreṇa for viśarārutāparihāreṇa.

4 Amongst Vedāntins, those who were prasaṁkhyānavādins were those who, like

Maṇḍana and Vācaspati Miśra, maintained that hearing the scripture (śahda) by itself
did not lead to the direct realisation of the Brahman, but did so only by means of
prasaṁkhyāna, that is, meditation, devotion, contemplation, reflection, deliberation, and

study etc. combined. Sureśvara and most of the latter Vedāntins rejected this view.

Rather, they championed a direct, sudden realisation of identity with the Brahman by

TANTRĀLOKA

Propitiousʼ (Sarvatobhadra), because it is completely filled with the
essential being of objectivity (vedyasattā).” (244)
‘This (state)ʼ is the waking state. In response to the question as to what
is the reason for denoting it in this way, he says that that is ‘because it is
completely filled with the essential being of objectivity’.
just hearing the teaching. Abhinava uses the term in the more precise sense of reflection

or meditation, as opposed to Yoga or ritual action. It is this, not Yoga or ritual that,

above all, leads to the realisation of Anuttara. This unbroken continuous ‘very subtle’
reflection leads ultimately to a perception, which is perfectly stable and ultimate, of
Śiva’s omnipresence. The term in this sense appears at least six times in the PTv (p. 3738, 136, 177, 225, 226, 272-3, and 278), and so too in ŚDr 7/5cd-6. It is not as

prominent in the Tantrāloka as a term in itself. It appears most frequently, as it does
here, as a modality of experience within the states of consciousness. See below, 10/246,

262, 275ab (prasaṁkhyātā), and 280cd-281ab, where it means ‘intuitive insight’.
For the contraposition of prasaṅkhyāna and Yoga Cf BhGĪ 3/3: “As taught by

Me since ancient times, O Blameless One, there are in this world two kinds of

disciplines: the Yoga of knowledge for the followers of the Sāṁkhya and the Yoga of

action for yogis.’ Utpaladeva in his ¢īkā comments on the term, saying: sāvadhānānāṁ

vivekīmāṁ vidambhanābhīrāṇām ca (it is for) ‘those who are attentive, discerning, and

fearful of being deceived.’ (IPVv 3, p. 89)

Now that he has talked about how the waking state is experienced in the stage of
Kaula Yoga called the Corporeal, Abhinava goes on to refer to the first stage of
knowledge a man of knowledge (jñānin) experiences, namely, Everywhere Propitious
(sarvatobhadra). After this come Pervasion (vyāpti), Great Pervasion (mahāvyāpti),
Accumulation (pracaya), and Great Accumulation (mahāpracaya). These are forms and
degrees of prasaṁkhyāṇa in the sense of ‘reflection’, ‘contemplation’, ‘realisation’ or,

as translated here, ‘intuitive insight’. Abhinava considers it to be Knowledge, rather
than Yoga, and of a higher order than ordinary meditation (bhāvanā), as he says in the
PTy (p. 272):

‘In this way I have expounded in detail the nature of the Absolute, where
meditation (bhāvanā) and the like have no scope, something where only bare intuitive
insight (prasaṁkhyāna), culminating in the firmness of (self) realisation (pratipatti),

which is taking to heart (the true nature of consciousness) characterized by the firm (and
uninterrupted experience of) wonder (camatkāra).

In Pātañjali’s Yoga tradition, prasaṁkhyāna “‘designates the penultimate
transformation of the illuminative mind-substance (prakhyārūpaṁ cittasattvaṁ)
(Yogasūtrabhāṣya on sūtra 1/2) . . . [it] lasts from the first bare perception of the
distinction (anyathākhyāti) of the Śattva and the Self (puruṣa) until the stage of the
‘Dharma Cloud’ (dharmamegha). In its initial stages, prasaṁkhyāna serves to
investigate
the
defects
of
sensory
object.
Thus . . . ʻthe mind of one who perceives the defects of sensory objects possesses
dispassion (vairāgya) by the power of prasaṁkhyāna.’ (Yogasūtrabhāṣya at 1/15). The
Nyāyavārttika (4/2/2) defines it as the ‘knowledge of distinction’ (vyatirekadarśana),

such as ‘these souls are not the bodies and the rest (of the components of the psycho-

physical organism). In his commentary (tātparyatīkā) (loc cit), Vācaspati defines it as

‘the knowledge of reality that arises from contemplative absorption (samādhi).’
(Somadeva 2004: 224, 225).

CHAPTER TEN

What is the intention behind assigning this term (to the waking state) for
those (yogis) who are intent on (cultivating this form of) intuitive insight? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

TaBITã | Qu, 11
sarvasattāsamāpūrṇaṁ viśvaṁ paśyed yato yataḥ |
jñānī tatas tataḥ saṁvittattvam asya prakāśate || 245 ||
The principle of consciousness manifests to the man of knowledge
(jñānin) to the degree in which he perceives the universe to be completely
filled with the Being (sattā) of all things. (245)
In this way, there are three terms (for a state of consciousness). How are

they restricted to certain instances (avadhāraṇa)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

[ũexibērrezietaveekTHEacĀ!

āīaṁ tft vva- arīfctzrarz fatk: 1| azē 1

lokayogaprasaṁkhyānatrairūpyavaśataḥ kila |
nāmāni trīṇi bhaṇyante svapnādiṣv apy ayaṁ vidhiḥ || 246 ||
The terms are said to be three as they relate to three different
aspects (of the same state when seen from the point of view) of daily life
(loka), Yoga and meditation (prasaṁkhyāna), respectively. This same
procedure also applies to dreaming and the other states. (246)
He applies the same elsewhere to other cases also, (saying) ‘this same
procedure also applies to dreaming and the other states’. The common
(daily) terms are dreaming (svapna), ‘deep sleep’ (suṣupti), and the Fourth

(turya). The yogic terms are Abiding in Place (padastha), Form (rūpa), and
Beyond Form (rūpātīta). The gnostic terms (jñāniyā) terms are Pervasion

(vyāpti), Great Pervasion ((mahāvyapti), and Accumulation (pracaya). Again,
according to the teaching explained further ahead, the yogi does not practice

(pratapet) in the state Beyond the Fourth (turīyātīta) (and so it has no specific

yogic designation). The two terms, with reference to the common (daily) (sense

and from the perspective of) intuitive insight, are said to be Beyond the Fourth
(turiyātīta) and the Great Accumulation (mahāpracaya), respectively.
Having thus described the waking state, he also describes the dream

state.

3 Read yogī for yogo.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Dream State

JTRĪTTTRTTJTTTTA
āTd |

|| 2<. 1|

yat tv adhiṣṭhānakaraṇabhāvam adhyāsya vartate |

vedyaṁ sat pūrvakathitaṁ bhũtatattvābhidhāmayam || 247 I|
tat svapno mukhyato jñeyaṁ tac ca vaikalpike pathi |

The dream state prevails in the primary sense (mukhyataḥ) when

the aforementioned objectivity (vedyar sat), which consists of living beings,
principles and denotations (abhidhā),” is the instrument of objectivization

(adhiṣṭhānakaraṇa), and that objectivity is in the sphere of imaginative

ideation (vaikalpike pathi) (247-248ab)

Again, those referred to as ‘living beings’, such as Caitra and Maitra,

who dwell in the waking state, (may also) be present in the (inner mental) action

(that consists of) the objectivization (adhiṣṭhitikriyā)” (of the mental

perception of) principles and living beings, by the crossing over (āskandana) (of
the perceiver) onto the plane of the (mind and senses, that constitute) the means

of knowledge. That is the dream state ‘in the primary sense’, which is

primariḷy based on cognition (māna) (alone, without an outer object,) that

manifests the latent traces (cchāyā literally ‘shade’) of objectivity (previously
experienced in the waking state).™ This is the meaning. (This is the dream
state) in the primary sense. It is also possible to have other varieties that are not
primary, such as waking in the dream state etc. This is the point.
Surely (one may ask), the nature (of the living beings etc.) is such (and
is the same in both of) the two states (pada), namely, the one with thought

” Śee above, 10/241.

] translate the expression adhiṣṭhānakaraṇa as ‘the instrument of objectivization’,
which is effectively what it means. More literally, it is ‘the instrumental cause of the
foundation’. The entities perceived in a dream, of one or other of the three types listed
here, are instrumental means to establishing the foundation that grounds the entity

perceived in a dream in objectivity. An entity perceived in a dream is an object because
of this. An object perceived in the waking state is objective because it is external, that is,

outside the perceiver. In the case of a dream object of the perceiver, it is the foundation,

or ground of his perception, and he, as the perceiver, ‘presides over the foundation’

(adhiṣṭhātrṛ).
Jayaratha uṣes the same expression below in the commentary on 10/257-258ab,
where he writes: ‘dream is an instrument of action (that consists of) objectivization.”
(adhiṣṭhitikriyākaraṇaṁ svapnaḥ).

The state of consciousness when dreaming is one in which there is no outer object set

in relation to the perceiver, as happens in the waking state. Nonetheless objects are

perceived. This can only be because the cognitive state of the dreamer itself generates
them, stimulated by the latent traces left behind by previous perceptions of objects had
when awake.

CHAPTER TEN

constructs and the one without. So on what basis has this been stated
(concerning the nature of the things that are experienced when dreaming)? With
this doubt in mind, he says (clearly that) ‘that objectivity is in the sphere of
imaginative ideation (vaikalpike pathi). The (same) is said (in the Śivasūtra):

‘dreaming consists of thought constructs.”

Surely (one may ask), everybody’s personal experience is a witness to
the fact that when sleeping one experiences this and that thing by the activity (of
consciousness) free of thought constructs (avikalpakavṛtti). How is that? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

Waking in the Dream State

JāhftũúhTR@TTTT-ITĀTHTTT ||/QŚ¢C 1I

GTRCIṢATĪ
TT; TIR TaāTaTTTT |

vaikalpikapathārūḍhavedyasāmyāvabhāsanāt || 248 II
lokarūḍho ‘py asau svapnaḥ sāmyaṁ cābāhyarūpatā |
The dream state in everyday (waking) life is the same (as dreaming
when asleep), because (in both cases) objectivity manifests equally in the

sphere of thought, and so (both are) equally internal. (248cd-249ab)

The dream state develops also ‘in everyday (waking) life’, assuming as
a basis the manifestation of mentally conceived entities that are the same (as
those in a dream), that is, that they are not (perceived) in common (with other
perceivers), along with other (common features). Nothing new is being stated in
this way. (As he said before,) ‘that objectivity is on the path of imaginative
ideation’.” Surely (one may ask), how is it that the manifestation of entities is
the same in this way when dreaming and thinking? With this doubt in mind, he
says ‘(both are) equally internal’. The point is that because (its) nature is not

external, (thought) in this case (like dreaming) is not common to all and
(possesses) the rest (of its characteristics).
Here (in this context) he (now) analyses (the nature of) an entity, even

when it is mentally conceived in this way, into two kinds, according to whether
it (manifests) clearly or indistinctly.

3GRIGHTTgGTTTTTHTITĀÑTR] I Ṝ%48 I

7āq |

utprekṣāsvapnasaṅkalpasmṛtyunmādādidṛṣṭiṣu || 249 ||

ŚSū 1/9. Conversely, as Abhinava explains in the following verse, thoughts are

dreams. See Dyczkowski 1992b: 29 ff.

Ṣee Jayaratha ad 10/257-258ab says: ‘Dream is an instrument of action (that consists

of) objectivization.’ (adhiṣṭhitikriyākaraṇaṁ svapnaḥ).
Above, 10/248b.

TANTRĀLOKA

vispaṣṭaṁ yad vedyajātaṁ jāgran mukhyatayaiva tat |
When objectivity manifests very clearly (and distinctly) (vispaṣṭa) in
the imagination (utprekṣā), a dream, an intention (saṁkalpa), memory,
when drunk (unmada), or other such perceptions (dṛṣṭi), waking is the
predominant state (within dreaming). (249cd-250ab)
One should also say that that (applies) to fear and the like (which are

‘other such perceptions”). As is said:

‘The evident and undisputed cognition that seemingly (iva) manifests

by the force of one’s state of mind (bhāvanā) when frightened or the like, (is

considered to be a) direct perception, not created by the imagination

(akalpaka).

By (the influence of) intense terror or love etc., the objects of perception
(vedyajāta) appear very clearly (and distinctly), as (though visibly) present, as
(does a foe) drawing a bow (ātatāyin) (when frightened), or the beloved
(nāyikā) etc. (when one is in love). Thus passion, grief and the like (is implied)

by the expression ‘other such (perceptions). That is said (in the next verse):

‘Overcome by passion, grief, fear, a thief, sleep and the like, (people)
see even non-existent things as if standing before them.
‘(Waking) is the predominant state (within dreaming)’ (in such

cases), because what is clearly (perceived) is not common to all, (thus the state

of the perceiver possesses) the characteristics of (both) waking and dreaming.
Thusṣ, because the entity is mentally conceived (and not common to all, the state
is that of) dreaming, and because it is very clearly (and distinctly perceived,) it
is that of waking. Thus, he is saying that this (is the state of) waking in

dreaming (svapnajāgara).

Having described waking in dreaming in this way, he (now) also
describes dreaming within dreaming.

Dreaming Within Dreaming

ÉGÚSEIEIETzL-ĀEzGI ELTT-ĀIEKĀĪṬRTEHI

yat tu tatrāpy avispaṣṭaṁ spaṣṭādhiṣṭhātṛ bhāsate || 250 ||
vikalpāntaragaṁ vedyaṁ tat svapnapadam ucyate |
This is a quote from Pramāṇaviniścaya (1/28) by the Buddhisṭ idealist and logician
Dharmakīrti.

Drṛamāṇavīniścaya 1/29.

Read spaṣṭatvasyāsādhāraṇajāgradsvapnalakṣaṇatvāt for spaṣṭatvasyāsādhāraṇa-

jāgrallakṣaṇatvāt.

CHAPTER TEN

The dream state is said (to prevail whilst dreaming) when the
objectivity within thought (vikalpāntarga) is not clearly (and distinctly)
manifest (avispaṣṭa), (whereas) the sustaining (consciousness which is the

objectivizing agent) (adhiṣṭhātṛ) underlying it is. (250cd-251ab)

Thus, (when) the objects of cognition, included (and submerged)

amongst the (various imagined) mental representations, ‘are not clearly (and
distinctly) (avispaṣṭa)) manifest there in the imagination etc., although the
susṣtaining underlying (consciousness which is the objectivizing agent)

(adhiṣṭhātṛ) is (as clearly manifest as in) the waking state, (then) ‘the dream

state is said (to prevail whilst dreaming)ʼ. As that is dreaming within the

dream state, the primary (state in this case) is dreaming. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), it has been stated that the distinction between
waking and dreaming is determined by whether (the objects perceived in those

states) are clearly (and distinctly perceivable) or not. (Now,) that (same) state of

clarity and its absence is also perceived to be due to proximity or distance (of an

object,) such as a temple. So how is it that (the difference between the two)

amounts to just this alone? With this in mind, he says:

īcā T̄a ada TagHd R̄ĨĨāTīr̥_ || 342. 1II
tadaiva tasya vetty eva svayam eva hy abāhyatām || 251 ||
(One who is in this state of consciousness) knows spontaneously for

himself (svayam) just then that this (object) is not external. (251cd)

‘(One who is in this state of consciousness knows) just then’, without
any reflection, that ‘that’ is an imaginary object ‘spontaneously for himself”,
not from the words of a competent authority, as happens when one sees
something in the dark or two moons (because of some visual impairment). This
is the meaning.

THTHrīTTĀTTĀĪRATaGTĀĪTAĀTTĪTT|
pramātrantarasādhārabhāvahānyasthirāt mate |
(It is not external,) because (he) understands that it is purely
personal, transitory, and unstable. (252ab)

The point is that when an entity is external, it is common to all

perceivers and is stable (that is, enduringly the same).

Theṣe lines describe the Dream-dream state. It is the state of lucid dreaming, that is,

the state in which one is conscious when dreaming that what one is experiencing is a

dream. The same state arises when ‘daydreaming and one is conscious of being

immersed in thought and that the thoughts are like dreams. The ‘sustaining
consciousnessʼ is one’s own, within which dreams and thoughts arise, and by which
they are created.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), is waking in dreaming (the only) variety (of
dreaming) or is there another (variety) also? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ttzdt JTĀḤ 11 242 1|

TaāīTīd̃ ḡakṇd aā̄gd gaītca |

tatrāpi cāturvidhyaṁ tat prāgdiśaiva prakalpayet || 252 ||
gatāgataṁ suvikṣiptaṁ saṅgataṁ susamāhitam |
(As before,) like the previous state, one can make out four kinds
there also. (They are called) ‘Gone and Come’ (gatāgata), ‘Well Dispersed’
(suvikṣipta), “Well Conjoined’ (saṅṁgata) and “Well Concentrated’

(susamāhita). (252cd-253ab)

The sense of the word ‘also’ is that, not only is the waking state of four
kinds, so is dreaming. ‘(As before,) like the previous state’, as present in (the
field of) the object (of perception) etc., and as present in dreaming within
dreaming etc. He says that here (with the words) ‘Gone and Come’ etc. These
four varieties are named in accord with their nature. They are (called), in due
order: 1) (Gone and Come (gatāgata)) because (waking within dreaming) is

associated with the ‘going and coming’ that arises from the movement of the
breath (that extends) for thirty-six fingers breadths. 2) (The second variety of
dreaming is called Well Dispersed (suvikṣipta)) because (dreaming within
dreaming involves mental) contact with entities that are manifesting as distant in
time and space. 3) (The third variety of dreaming is called Well Conjoined
(saṁgata)) because (deep sleep within dreaming) is linked with (the pure) mind
pramātrantarasādhārabhāva literally means that ‘the state of (the object perceived in

a dream) is not common to other perceivers.' The lucid dreamer who is conscious that
he is dreaming understands spontaneously that he is dreaming, because the things he

experiences are personal – others do not experience them. Moreover, he sees that they
are very short-lived. One who wakes up from a dream recollecting what he experienced
when dreaming is similarly aware that what he saw in a dream is like that, and so he
knows that what took place when he was dreaming was not an external event.
Read with MS Kh -jāgrad iti for jāgrādy eva.

TĀ 10/253ab, 275cd, 283cd, 294cd-296, 297 are quoted in MM p. 157 and 158. Line

253ab is a direct quote of MV 2/44ab. There are four varieties of dreaming: 1) Waking-

dreaming (Jāgrat-Svapna). In this state, objectivity (prameya) dominates. It is called
‘Gone and Come’ (Gatāgata) because it is associated with the coming and going of the
breath that moves in a cycle the distance of thirty-six fingers through the body. 2)
Dreaming-dreaming (Śvapna-svapna). In this state the means of knowledge (māna)
dominates. It is called ‘Well Dispersed’ (Suviksipta), and is the state in which arise
mental representation of a reality far from (the individual) in terms of both time and

space. 3) Deep sleep-dreaming (Suṣupti-svapna). In this state subjectivity (miti)
dominates. It is called ‘Well Conjoined (Saṁgata). It is a purely mental state, associated
with thought forms of various types. 4) Fourth state-dreaming (Turiya-svapna). In this
state pure cognitive consciousness (pramā) dominates. It is called ‘Well Concentrated’
(Susamāhita). It is the state in which consciousness is concomitant with its own
conceived objects of awareness.

CHAPTER TEN

alone (manomātra), its sole condition (vṛtti) being (just) intention to
conceptualize (sarṁtkalpana). 4) (The fourth variety of dreaming is called Well
Concentrated (susamāhita)) because (in the fourth state within dreaming) the

mind is directed solely to one mentally conceived object.

That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara), beginning with: ‘(the wise)
consider the dream state to have two names: Abiding in Place (padastha) as

well as Pervasion (vyāpti). . . ʼ and ending with ‘Abiding in Place is of four

kinds, namely, Gone and Come (gatāgata), Well Dispersed (suvikṣipta), Well

Conjoined (saṁgata) and Well Concentrated (susamāhita).”

Dreaming, like waking, has three kinds of names. Thus he says:

úTē JīṛṂ JgGdsāTīā: 1| QU: 1|

atrāpi pūrvavan nāma laukikaṁ svapna ity adaḥ || 253 ||
bāhyābhimatabhāvānāṁ svāpo hy agrahaṇaṁ matam |
sarvādhvanaḥ padaṁ prāṇaḥ saṅkalpo ʻvagamātmakaḥ || 254 ||
padaṁ ca tatsamãpatti padasthaṁ yogino viduḥ |
Here also, as before, (this state has three names,) of which the first
is the (common) daily one (laukika), namely, dreaming. A dream (ṣvāpa) is

considered to be the absence of the perception of things that are normally
considered to be external. The ‘Place’ (pada) is (where) the entire Cosmic
Path (is located). It is the vital breath, (or) the conception (sarṁkalpa)

which

is

(inner)

understanding

(avagama).

(The

corresponding)

contemplative state (samāpatti) is known to yogis as ‘Abiding in Place’
(padastha). (253cd-255ab)

Why is the word ‘dreaming’ (commonly) employed here in daily life
also? With this doubt in mind, he says: “a dream (svāpna) is the absence of the
perception of things that are normally considered to be external’. (Again)

‘the ‘Place’ (pada) is (where) the entire Cosmic Path (is located)’. It is a

location (within the movement of the breath), as is taught (above) in chapter six.
(Deriving the word pada from the root pad, in the sense of ‘to know’,) Pada is
that by means of which one knows everything (padyate jñāyate ‘nena sarvam),
because its nature is ‘understanding’ (avagama), and so it is also ‘conception’
(saṁkalpa). Pada īs said to be that oneness and the location of that (oneness),
and so it is said that (the corresponding) contemplative state is (called) ‘Abiding
in Place’ (that is, located in that oneness). Thus, the meaning is that (pada) is

' MV 2/37ab, 2/43d-44ab.

The projection of the Cosmic Path into the vital breath is described above in Chapter
Six.

" See above, 6/4cd-5 and 11/93 f.

TANTRĀḶOKA

the state of oneness with the vital breath and conceptio The denotation (of
those who experience this as) ‘yogisʼ indicates that (th
tate is in) the field of

yogisʼ (experience).

In the same way, he applies another term (to denote this state) as the

field (of experience) of the men of knowledge also.

̄l aaāT--aT
āTIT a Jffttcṁāī JSI] |
vedyasattāṁ bahirbhūtām anapekṣyaiva sarvataḥ || 255 ||
vedye svātantryabhāg jñānaṁ svapnaṁ vyāptitayā bhajet |
Dreaming is (a type of conceptual) cognitive consciousness (jñāna)

which, with respect to the object of knowledge, is creatively free.
Independent in every way of external objectivity (vedyasattā), (for the men
of knowledge,) it abides as the state (termed) ‘Pervasion’ (yyāpti). (255cd-

256ab)

Dreaming for men of knowledge is only conceptual cognitive
consciousness (vaikalpikaṁ jñānam eva) which is free, having abandoned in

every way the condition of dependence (on objectivity), which is essentially the

exteriority (of the object with respect to the subject). (Thus free) with respect to

the object, of which all that manifests is just its own essential nature, it conjoins
and separates (its own imagined forms) and ‘abidesʼ, that is, behaves ‘as the

state (termed) ‘Pervasion’ (yyāpti)’" This is the meaning.

Just as the object of knowledge predominates in the waking state, so
does the means of knowledge here (when dreaming).
Cf. Somadeva (2004) p. 227-8. In other words, the dream state is for accomplished
yogis, one of pure understanding and ‘conception’ of the cosmic order which is
experienced inwardly within the vital breath. Sleep is generally considered to be a state

in which the outer senses are at rest, and so the breath which vitalizes them becomes
dominant. There is no outer object. Instead, in the ‘locus’ of sleep one can experience
the Cosmic Order as a reality within consciousness. This is real, but not experienced in
the common waking state of consciousness, which focuses instead on the countless

particular objects presented to the individual perceiver. The Cosmic Order is universal,
and so experienced within the sphere of the conceptualizing inner cognitive

consciousness that perceives in terms of the parameters of perception as such which
operates universally. There the Cosmic Order is ‘understood’ and ‘conceived’ within the
vital breath. Free of outer objectivity, the Cosmic Path is experienced and understood to
be one with its ideal representation within consciousness. Abhinava is here referring to

the highest form of dreaming, in which the Yogi ‘dreams the cosmic dream’. This he

creates in a sense by rightly ‘conceiving’ it to be as it is, and so is not unreal, although
linked to the creative imagination of consciousness, which conceives the Cosmic Order

as its cosmic thought.
! Gnostics experience dream as a form of internal knowing which operates on the
cognised entity in whatever way it wants, completely independent of its external
existence. Therefore, they call the dream state ‘pervasion’.

CHAPTER TEN

TTJRĪTā
TaAT Taā̄-Ī aITTJĪĪTTT: 1| QAṢ |I|

mānabhūmir iyaṁ mukhyā svapno hy āmarśanātmakaḥ || 256 ||
The dream (state) primarily corresponds to the sphere of the means

of knowledge and its nature is (mental) awareness (āmarśana). (256cd)

As it is the means of knowledge that predominates, (it is said that) ‘the
dream (state) is (mental) awareness (āmarśana)’. ‘(Mental) awareness’ is
mental determinate assessment (mānasāvasāya), and so is the (final and certain)

assessment (niścaya) (which marks the successful culmination of perception).
This the meaning.

Surely, it was stated that the instrumental cause (karaṇa) of dreaming is
the act of objectivization (adhiṣṭhitikriyākaraṇa), so how is it that it is said here
to be (mental) awareness? With this doubt in mind, he says:

vedyacchāyo ‘vabhāso hi meye ‘dhiṣṭhānam ucyate |

The manifestation of a trace (chāyā) of objectivity within the object

of knowledge (perceived in a dream) is said to be the sustaining
(objectivizing consciousness) (adhiṣṭhāna) (within it). (257ab)

Deep Sleep

gqaat#ṝTēīq ijāīz: JāT̄ āTṬJTT I| Qu9 1I
STJJĪ fōākc a ālsaiī ṢI TJ fḷ 1| 3u¢ /11

yat tv adhiṣṭhātṛ bhūtādeḥ pūrvoktasya vapur dhruvam || 257 ||
bījaṁ viśvasya tat tūṣṇīṁhbhũtaṁ sauṣuptam ucyate |
anubhūtau vikalpe ca yo ʻsau draṣṭā sa eva hi || 258 ||
na bhãvagrahaṇaṁ tena suṣṭhu suptatvam ucyate |

The state of deep sleep is profoundly silent.™ It is said to prevail

when the body of the creatures and the rest mentioned above (i.e. the

principles and denotation) is (one with) the sustaining consciousness

(adhiṣṭhātṛ), which is the fixed (eternal) (dhruva) seed of all things.

The same cognizing subject who is present in the direct experience
(proper to the waking state) and in the thought (proper to dreaming) is
present (in deep sleep also). There is no perception of phenomenal existence
Veṛṣes 257-258ab are found only in MS G.
"" Read adhiṣṭhātrṛ bhūtādeḥ for adhiṣṭhātr̥bhūtādeḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

(bhāva), and so (the state in which he reposes in himself alone) is called

deep sleep. (257cd-259ab)

The same perceiver who is said to be (present) in waking and dreaming
is also present in deep sleep. The perceiver is (so called) because it perceives
(pramiṇoti). Now, because it is a perceiver, it must necessarily exist and be
known (bhavitavya) by the disturbance (kṣobha) (of the presence) of the object

and means of knowledge etc. So how is it that he says that (the state of deep
sleep is one in which the perceiver rests in himself, devoid of object and means
of knowledge, and so is) ‘profoundly silent’? With this doubt in mind, he says
that ‘there is no perception of phenomenal existence’. The perceiver is not
‘phenomenal existence’, that is, the object of knowledge or ‘perception’, that
is, the means of knowledge. This being so, there is a state of silence, and so
all the commerce of daily life is brought to an end (samutsīder). Thus, without
the disturbance brought about by the object and means of knowledge etc., the
perceiver is also at rest within his own nature alone, due to which this state is
proclaimed to be in every respect one of proper (and good) (susthu) (deep)
sleep.
Surely (one may ask), if this is so, then how is it that the deep sleep
common people (experience), which is an attribute of the inner mental organ, is
also said to be (the state of) ‘deep sleep’? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Ṭīṝārātkāṁi fṣḹ ggai aād aHI: || 3UR /11

EIERÉIEIṀĒAVGAAezeḻīĒzIEGI

tatsāmyāl laukikīṁ nidrāṁ suṣuptaṁ manvate budhāḥ || 259 ||

The wise consider common sleep (laukikī nidrā) to be deep sleep

because they are the same (in three essential respects). (They are both) the
seed state (of other forms of consciousness), (they are both equally) devoid
of perception, and are silent. (259cd-260ab)

What is it that is ‘the same’ (with the deep sleep of yogis and common
folk)? With this doubt in mind, he says that (they are equally) ‘silent’. Now
what is the cause of this silence? With this doubt in mind, he says that it is ‘the
seed state’ (of other forms of consciousness) because of its relationship to
future possible results (kārya). Moreover, (they are both equally) ‘devoid of
perception’ because there is no awareness (saṁvedana) of outer objects.
suṣṭhu suptatvam ucyate ‘is said to be the state of sleeping well’. The word susuptam

– ‘deep sleepʼ – is derived from suṣthu suptam ‘sleeping wellʼ

The word for ‘perceiver’ or ‘subject’ is pramātr. The word derived from the root

‘man’ in the sense of ‘to measure with prefix ‘pra’. Engaged in the act of perception,

the perceiver ‘measures’, that is, knows the object.
Read ca tūṣṇitvam evaitat for catuṣṭvam evaitan na.

CHAPTER TEN

Like waking in waking, for example, this is the primary (form of the)
state of deep sleep. Thus he says:

TaT TīḺYI TīT ṬṬRīēTT fīTTIT |I 3ēc ||
mukhyā mātṛdaśā seyaṁ suṣuptākhyā nigadyate || 260 ||
This state called deep sleep is said to be the primary plane (dasā) of

the perceiver. (260cd)

As before, that (state of deep sleep) also has two names, according to
whether it is the field (of experience) of yogis or men of knowledge. Thus he
says:

[EETCIEPfE_ĪEIHIZḤIEFĀE ĒĀI

=TÉ TTHHIṬTĪTGTĀT
#TTTT fṜg: 1] 3ē2 1

rūpakatvāc ca rūpaṁ tattādātmyaṁ yoginaḥ punaḥ |
rūpasthaṁ tatsamāpattyaudāsīnyaṁ rūpiṇāṁ viduḥ || 261 ||
prasaṁkhyānavataḥ kāpi vedyasaṅkocanātra yat |
nāsti tena mahāvyāptir iyaṁ tadanusārataḥ || 262 ||
Insofar as (the perceiver) metaphorically (rūpakatvāt) (identifies
with the object of cognition, he is himself called) ‘Form’ (rūpa). Yogis (call)
the state of identity with that (subject) ‘Established in Formʼ (rūpastha).
(The wise)

know

that

those

who,

by means

of the

corresponding

contemplative attainment (samāpatti), are endowed with the subject’s form
(rūpin), are in a state of transcendent detachment (audasīnya) (from all

phenomena with form). The contraction (to which consciousness is

subject due to) objectivity does not occur here. Thus those who possess

intuitive insight (prasaṁkhyāna) (call it), in accord with that, the ‘Great
Pervasion’ (mahāvyāpti). (261-262)

‘Formʼ (rūpa) is the subject. As the universe is essentially the subject
alone, (the subject) gives (shape and) form (rūpayati) to each ‘individual”
phenomenon. (In other words,) by making it one with itself, (it makes it seem as
One could also translate ‘(the wise) know that those who, by means of the

corresponding contemplative attainment (samāpatti), are endowed with the subject’s

form (rāpin), are in a state of transcendent detachment (audasīnya) (from all

phenomena with form).” Either way, the point is that yogis in this state lose all interest
in external objects.

Here, as the transcendent aloofness realized by formed phenomenal entities is not

total, the deep sleep state can be easily distinguished from Tūriya, where all phenomena

entirely disappear.

TANTRĀLOKA

if it had a form of its own, and so) gives it form. ‘(The wise) know’ that that
(inner) state of oneness within yogis is ‘Established in Formʼ (rūpastha). The

meaning is that they behave in that way. Surely (one may ask), if yogis are at
one with the perceiver in this way, what is the difference between the Fourth
state and deep sleep? With this doubt in mind, he says that ‘those who, by
means of the corresponding contemplative attainment (samāpatti), are
endowed with the subject’s form (rūpin), are in a state of transcendent
detachment (audasīnya) (from all phenomena with form)’. Here (in this

state), by virtue (of their) contemplative attainment of the perceiver’s nature,
(yogis) are detached from forms, that is, phenomenally existing things. (The
sense is that these objective forms) are in abeyance (anudreka). (Objectivity)
does not totally fall away in all respects, as happens in the Fourth state, so that
there would be no difference between it (and this state of deep sleep). ‘Thus’,
the reason (for this) is because ‘the contraction (to which consciousness is
subject due to) objectivity does not occur’. This is the meaning.
‘Accordinglyʼ, that is, in accord with (the experience of) those who possess

intuitīve

insight

(prasaṁṅkhyāna),

(it

is

called the

(mahāvyāpti)). That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara);

Great

Pervasion’

‘There are also two (terms) for the state of deep sleep: Abiding in Form

(rūpastha) and the Great Pervasion (mahāvyāpti)

Here also, as is the case with the Corporeal (piṇḍastha) and other states,
there are four varieties. Thus he says:

ūaā rai -7 fr 1

udāsīnasya tasyāpi vedyaṁ yena caturvidham |

bhūtādi tadupādhyuttham atra bhedacatuṣṭayam || 263 ||

uditaṁ vipulaṁ śāntaṁ suprasannam athāparam |

Although the subject is detached (in this way, the potential) object

of knowledge is of four kinds, in accord with the limiting conditions
corresponding to the creatures and the other (categories mentioned above).
Thus, (deep sleep has) four varieties, namely, ‘Emergent’ (udita),
‘Extensive’ (vipula), ‘Peaceful’ (śānta) and ‘Well Content’ (suprasanna),

which is another. (263-264ab)

One can also understand ‘rāpa’ to be derived from the root ‘rup’, which means ‘to

break upʼ. In this sense, Jayaratha explains that the perceiving subject ‘breaks upʼ the
compact oneness of objective reality, and having broken it up into pieces, identifies it
with himself.
MV 2/37cd.

Line 10/264ab is MV 2/45ab, which is quoted by Jayaratha here in the commentary.
In deep sleep also, even though the subject himself is not at all interested in or perturbed

CHAPTER TEN
Although the perceiver (in deep sleep) is free of the disturbance brought

about by objectivity and the rest, the (potential) object of knowledge (to which

he is indifferent), namely, living beings and (elemental) principles etc., gives
rise to the distinction between (bheda) the Emergent and the other (states of

deep sleep), that will be described further ahead. Thus, (the object of
knowledge) is of four kinds. For the same reason also, there are four varieties

(of deep sleep), namely, Emergent and rest, due to the power of the limiting
conditions (imposed by the four kinds of objects). This is the meaning of this
sentence. (The first variety of deep sleep) is Emergent, because it is the state in
which (objectivity) exists as the latent traces alone. (The second is) Extensive
(Vipula), because it is the same, (but the latent traces) proliferate (and mature).

(The third) is Peaceful (śānta) because (in it) the latent traces have dissolved

away. It is Well Content (suprasanna), because it is a state of propensity (to
relish) the aesthetic savour (rasa) of the emerging state of (pure) ‘’
(consciousness) (ahaṁbhāva). That is said (in the Malinīvijayottara):

‘Those who think about yoga should know that Eṣtablished in Form is
of four kinds, namely, Emergent (udita), Extensive (vipula), Peaceful (śānta)

and Well Content (suprasanna), which is another.”

The Fourth State”
Now, in due order, he defines the Fourth state.

aq JHīā-ḥ GU JHṬGUÑ fFūēr |I 3ēxz 11

by the object of cognition, he is still considered to be of four kinds, as is deep sleep
itself, because the objects he is indifferent to are of four kinds. These are 1) living
beings, 2) elemental principles, 3) denotations, and 4) the four fundamental

epistemological categories of subject etc. which Abhinava has added to the three found
in the MV.
MV 2/44cd-45ab.

Kṣemarāja says in his commentary on PrHṛ sātra 8 (KSTS p. 20):

yadā yadā bahirmukhaṁ rūpaṁ svarūpe viśrāmyati tadā tadā bāhyavastūpasaṁhāraḥ
antaḥpraśāntapadāvasthitiḥ tattadudeṣyatsaṅvitsaṁtatyāsūtraṇam – iti sṛsṭi-sthitisaṁhāramelanārūpā iyaṁ turīyā saṁvidbhaṭṭārikā tattatsṛṣṭyādibhedān udvamantī
saṁharantī ca sadã pũrṇã ca [kh, ṁ: saṁpãũrṇã ceti pãṭhaḥ kr̥śã ca ubhaya rũpã ca
anubhayātmā ca akramam eva sphurantī [g: krameṇaiva sphurantī iti pāṭhaḥ] sthitā

‘Each time (consciousness spontaneously) orients itself towards the outer

(world), while resting in its true inner nature, then outer reality (vastu) is withdrawn,
and the condition is that of the inner tranquil state. Indicating the flow (santati) of
consciousness with respect to that each time, this Fourth State, which the Goddess of
Consciousness who is emanation, stability, withdrawal and union, emits and withdraws,
each one of these divisions, namely, emanation and the rest, is always full, depleted,

both (together) and neither of the two, abides, flashing forth (the one reality that is) free
of succession. The yogi who is established in that state is blissful, as all the
differentiation between subject and object ceases for him.

TANTRĀLOKA

yat tu pramãtmakaṁ rũpaṁ pramãtur upari sthitam || 264 ||
pūrṇatāgamanaunmukhyam audāsīnyāt paricyutiḥ |
tat turyam ucyate śaktisamāveśo hy asau mataḥ || 265 ||

The Fourth state is considered to be penetration into (the reflective
awareness which is) the power (of consciousness) (śaktisamāveśa), and it is
said to occur when (the body of the creatures and the rest) becomes a form

of cognitive consciousness (pramā) which is superior to that of the subject,

who is no longer transcendentally aloof (as he was in deep sleep), but intent

on the process of developing (perfect) plenitude. (264cd-265)

‘The subject’ (meant here) is the limited one. The full (unlimited

subject) is of four kinds. The intended sense is that (this is) just the unfolding of
(his) freedom. He explains the superior state (of the limited subject, by saying

that he is) ‘no longer transcendentally aloof, but intent on the process of
developing (perfect) plenitude’. Surely (one may ask), what is happening in
the Fourth state, that one becomes intent (unmukha) on attaining one’s own true

nature from the mere abating of indifference? Anticipating this doubt, he says:

‘(it) is considered to be penetration into (the reflective awareness which is)
the power of consciousness (śaktisamāveśa)’, for penetration into the power
which is reflective awareness is the primary (factor) of that (intent). That is what

is meant.

Surely (one may ask), is this intent on the process of developing
(perfect) plenitude total (piūrṇa), or not? If it is not total there (in that case), then
(that would be) the waking and other states (not the Fourth). If it is total, then

(the state would be) Beyond the Fourth. So how is this Fourth state different
(from the others)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Somadeva (2004: 229) explains this verse with reference to the ones that follow: ‘In
the Fourth state knowable entities appear as awareness on the verge of reaching
plenitude because indifference is abating. It is also an immersion into Śakti. This

awareness is the Goddess who is inaccessible by any means directly since she is herself
the awareness: ‘I perceive’.

Abhinavagupta has defined the Fourth state as one in which the higher unconditioned

perceiver is directing his attention to the process of regaining the plenitude of

consciousness that is taking place spontaneously within himself as that consciousness.

In other words, he is sustaining and participating in that process just by being intent on

it. Indeed, it is from this intent that that process, with which it is a direct continuity, is

set underway. The same intent operates in all the states of consciousness, but in a

limited way, because there the perceiver is limited and he is confronted with an
objectivity, whether actual or potential, felt to be separate from himself. In other words,

all perception, whether of outer objects in the waking state or inner imagined ones when
dreaming or even the ‘silence’ of deep sleep devoid of objective perception, is the result

of this impulse inherent in consciousness to regain or recognize its inherent plenitude.
This is because the completion and fulfilment of a perception takes place when the
perceiver, once having known the object and thereby satisfied, returns to a state of rest
within his own conscious nature, which is inherently full and perfect. In the three

CHAPTER TEN

nrr-āīqa
fiīa ṁṭ fcā a 1 =sē 1
sā saṁvit svaprakāśā tu kaiścid uktā prameyataḥ |

mānānṉ mātuś ca bhinnaiva tadarthaṁ tritayaṁ yataḥ || 266 ||
Some (might) say that this self-luminous consciousness differs from
the subject, object and means of knowledge insofar as these three (all tend
towards it and) exist for its sake (tadartham). (266)
Some say that because the (pure) consciousness, which is the Fourth

state, is self-illumining, it is separate from (and independent of) the object
(subject and means of knowledge, none of which are s0). This is the meaning of

(this) statement. Otherwise, (if that were not s0), (by accepting) the view which
maintains that (consciousness) illumines something other than itself

(paraprakāśavāda) or, as it is similar to that, the view that (consciousness is)
imperceptible (aparokṣavāda), it would not be possible to establish that there is

a difference (in nature) between the perceiver and perception (pramāṇa). This is

because (consciousness) is (understood to be, like perception or the perceiver in
relation to their object, just an illumining) light (that makes it manifest). Surely

(one may ask), how is it that (consciousness) is self-luminous? With this doubt
in mind, he says (that it is so) ‘insofar as these three (all tend towards it and)
exist for its sake (tadartham). The meaning is that (that is so) insofar as the

three (states of) waking and the rest (have their object and) purpose within that
consciousness (artha). (That which has that as its purpose), possessing that
craving or need which is desire (arthana), is intent (ummukha) on resting within

consciousness. This is the meaning. Otherwise, (if this were not so, then
consciousness,) as the repose of waking and the other (states), would be intent

on an ulterior state of rest (within another more fundamental reality, and that too

on another, and so on,) which would result in an infinite regress. This is the
point.

In response to the question as to how they come to rest within that

(consciousness), he says:

mundane states of consciousness, the perceiver is limited and individual. In the Fourth

state, he is the unlimited, universal perceiver. Accordingly, the intent (aunmukhya) on
the developing plenitude of consciousness is not full and perfect and uninterrupted in
the case of the limited perceiver, who is also not so, whereas conversely, it is so in the

higher state of consciousness in which the perceiver is so.

The Fourth State (Turīya) is essentially consciousness that, self-luminous, is thereby
distinguished from the state of the object, that of the means of knowledge and the

individual subject. At the same time, all three rest within it as the states of waking,

dreaming and deep sleep, respectively, and are thus directed towards taking their rest in
pure consciousness. Were they not to rest in Tūrīya as self-luminous consciousness, then

Turiya itself would have to find its ontic basis in some other state, which again, if not
self-existent, would require another, leading to an infinite regress.

TANTRĀḶOKA

femcaṁttfṁ
sā ēas ē#ērsttarṁ 1| 2=. 1
meyaṁ māne mātari tat so 'pi tasyāṁ mitau sphuṭam ḷ
viśrāmyatīti saivaiṣā devī viśvaikajīvitam || 267 ||

The object comes to rest in the means of knowledge, the latter in the

subject, and (the subject comes to rest most) clearly in this (pure)
awareness (mniti), which is thus the Goddess (devī), Who is the sole life of the
universe. (267)

(She is called a goddess -) ‘devī’, because, luminous with her own light,

she shines." She is ‘the sole life of the universe’ because everything, the

object (of knowledge, the means to it and the subject,) find rest here. As is said
(in the Saṁvitprakāśa):
‘(In the course of perception,) the object (becomes subjective, and s0)

assumes the state of the subject, and the subject (becomes) consciousness. If it is
true that consciousness is Your essential nature (ātman), then (for that reason)

this universe is made of You.”

Surely (one may object that) this (consciousness) is the fruit of (the

application of) the means of knowledge (to its object). Thus, the object etc.
are its life, it is certainly not theirs. So how is it that he said that? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

T gVTTfTT-a-VTāTJĪĪĪ
ārcd

RHTTTATTTAT TYATĪTJṬITTĀT ||/2¢ 1I
JHTTI TīTTTTTI
TT ṬĀTJTT |

Ṁ. I || 3ē8 1|
rūpaṁ dr̥śāham ity aṁśatrayam uttīrya vartate |
dvāramātrāśritopāyā paśyāmīty anupāyikā || 268 |I
pramātrṛtā ṣvatantratvarūpā seyaṁ prakāśate |

saṁvit turīyarūpaivaṁ prakāśātmā svayaṁ ca sā || 269 ||
Transcending the three aspects, namely, form (of objectivity), the
vision (of the means of knowledge), and the ego (of the subject), (the
Goddess) is (the very act of perception, which takes the form of the state of
" The word ‘devī’ (‘goddess’) is derived from the root ‘dī’ in the sense of to shine.

See above, 1/100-102 (101-103) for other similar etymologies of the masculine form

‘deva’ (‘god’).

SP 1/31. Also quoted above ad 1/124 (124cd-125ab). See note there.
d Read ity ato for mitirato.

CHAPTER TEN

awareness,) “I see”. Thus, all the means to realizing it are only indirect

(dvāramātra) (provisional, instrumental and) based on them. (In short,)
She is the state of subjectivity (pramātṛtā), which is the freedom beyond the

means to realization (anupāyikā), that shines (thus). Such is consciousness,
the Fourth state, spontaneously luminous in itself. (268-269)

‘Form’ʼ is the object, ‘vision’ is the means of knowledge, and the ego is
the subject. ‘She’ (is the Goddess), Who is the sole life of the universe. Pure
and supreme consciousness, she transcends in this way ‘the three aspects’ (as
the act of perception which takes the form of the state of awareness) “I see”.

Then after the outward flow in this form, She returns back (into herself). The
instrumental means (dvāra) for her to rest within her own nature is the means

(upāya) characterized by the three, namely, object of knowledge and the rest,
based on just this, (and is generated) by her. However, within her own nature
she is the state of supreme subjectivity, which is freedom (itself devoid of)
means (anupāyā), which (in her case) need not be employed, and are not

appropriate. This is the meaning.

Surely (one may object) that, we see that the Light, the form of which is

the Fourth state, abides on the plane of the fruit (of perception), which is

separate from its object, means and agent. No consciousness of any sort
manifests (parisphurati) which is separate from that, that can be indicated by
means (of the expression) “I see”. With this doubt in mind, he says that ‘that

shines (thus)°. That pure consciousness which is the supreme perceiver shines
(spontaneously) by itself (in itself). It is not on the plane of manifestation of
thought constructs such as “I see” and the like. This is the meaning. She is the

essential nature of the Light which, considered to be the Fourth state, (shines as)
“I see”. Thuṣ, if she were not to shine, for even a moment, nothing at all would

manifest.

See following note.
This translation assumes an emendation of dvāramātrāśritopāyā to dvāramātrāśrito-

pāyāḥ. However, it seems, judging by Jayaratha’s explanation, that he has at least

partially accepted the unemended reading, taking the compound as qualifying the

Goddess of Consciousness. His somewhat forced interpretation seems to be that the
Goddess in herself as the Fourth state is the pure consciousness, ‘l see’, which is direct
insight, devoid of means. She is also the means based on the object, means of
knowledge and the individual perceiver when she is present or based (asritā) on them as
just indirect or provisional means. However, a more literal understanding of the

unemended text would make the goddess herself the means or having them as her
means. Anyway, this extra digression is not essential to what Abhinavagupta is saying,
namely that the Fourth state is the pure perception, which is the state of the supreme

perceiver devoid of this triad. In his TSā (p. 106), Abhinava says the same, practically
word for word, omitting this extra statement.

The first three states of consciousness are experienced at the level of the contracted
state of consciousness of individual subjectivity. These are marked by the three aspects
of perception, namely, the object of knowledge, which dominates in the waking state,
the means of knowledge, which dominates when dreaming, and the subject, which

dominates in deep sleep. In terms of perception, the interaction of these three factors

produces perception itself as a cognitive state of knowing (miti). This Abhinavagupta
says is the Goddess of Consciousness ~ the Inexplicable (anākhyā). The word for

TANTRĀLOKA

Thus he s:

THHTHVĪTTTI-ĪTTS aT ṬT: |I 390 11
IĠÉIEKEEFTRIsERĀSĒCCVFIiĪ
tatsamāveśatādātmye mātṛtvaṁ bhavati sphuṭam |

tatsamāveśoparāgān mānatvaṁ meyatā punaḥ || 270 ||
tatsamāveśanaikatyāt trayaṁ tattadanugrahāt |

(The pure) subjectivity (of consciousness) is clearly evident (sphuta)
in the state of oneness (tādātmmya) with the penetration of that (the Fourth
State) (samāveśa). The means of knowledge (operates) due to the influence

(uparāga) of that penetration, and objectivity (exists) because of its

proximity (naikaṭya) to it. Thus, the three exist by the grace of each of these
(relationships with the penetrating contemplative absorption of the Fourth
State, that is, by oneness, influence and proximity). (270-271ab)

Subject, (means, and object of knowledge are such) according to their

distance in relation to the Fourth state. Thus he says that ‘((the pure)

subjectivity (of consciousness) is clearly evident (sphuṭa)) in the state of
oneness (tādātmya) with the penetration (of the Fourth State) (samāveśa).
(The means of knowledge (operates)) due to the influence (uparāga) of that

penetration, and (objectivity (exists)) because of its proximity (naikaṭya) to

it..

According to the doctrine that consciousness is other than the result of
the (application of) a means of knowledge, and in accord with what is well
known to the scriptures, he says:

3atz%arī-īgṣṁī aaTHTHAT || Q2 1|
TrTṬIṬJGTI-ÑĪT-TATTIÑĪT
TAT |

vedyādibhedagalanād uktā seyam anāmayā || 271 ||

mātrādyanugrahādhānāt savyāpāreti bhaṇyate |

consciousness — sarvid – is feminine, thus clearly underlining that it is the Goddess of
Consciousness who is reflective awareness (vimarśa) and freedom (svātantrya). In

terms of the states of consciousness, this is the Fourth state. Abhinava describes it here

as the experience “ḹ see”. There is no object of experience. Nor is there any means of
knowledge, sensorial or mental; it arises spontaneously. Moreover, the “” is not that of
the limited individual perceiver, it is the ground or fundamental consciousness of all
perceivers, and indeed, of all that manifests and hence exists in any form, including the
other states of consciousness.

Read, as suggested by the editor, -nugrahādhānāt for -nugrahādānāt.

CHAPTER TEN
(That supreme power) is said (in the Maālinīvijayottara) to be

‘immaculate’ (anāmaya), because the duality (bheda) brought about by
objectivity and the rest (that is, the subject and means of knowledge) has

fallen away. It is said to be ‘active’ (savyāpārā) because it bestows grace to
the perceiver and the rest. (271cd-272ab)
‘It is said’, that is, it was said previously. ‘It is said to be ‘active’
(savyāpārā). and ‘immaculate’ in the Mālinīvijayottara, as will be attested a

little further ahead.

He now applies (this doctrine) from the perspective of all the views
(darśana).
SITJICṬEITT ṜGJTT ṜITThcddd S&dTRJTH_I| Q9Ṝ

II

a ṁŪTṁ ā fzaī ṁaī m fcraī 1
jāgradādy api devasya śaktitvena vyavasthitam || 272 ||

aparaṁ parāparaṁ ca dvidhā tat sā parā tv iyam ḷ

The states of waking and rest are also the Lord’s power, which is of
two kinds, namely inferior (apara) (as waking and dreaming) and middling
(parāpara) (as deep sleep). This, (the Fourth State), is that supreme (parā)
(power). (272cd-273ab)
Thus, the three (states of) waking and the rest, are the Supreme Lord’s

power, which ‘is of two kindsʼ. ‘That’ is (the Lord’s) power which is ‘this’

consciousness that is the Fourth state and the Supreme (Goddess). Thus, waking
and dreaming are the inferior Aparā (power), and deep sleep, Parāparā, (the
middling one), whereas the Fourth state is Parā (the supreme power).

Here (in this case) also, as before, there is a variety of designations (of

this state). Thus he says:

FTGTTṬRTĀĪHTT==ZTA ṬTTHT-TAT |I 2%3 1|

at āai: ú| 3.% l
GTTTĪī STITĀTGTA STAĀṬ TaT |
rūpakatvād udāsīnāc cyuteyaṁ pūrṇatonmukhī || 273 ||
daśā tasyāṁ samāpattī rūpātītaṁ tu yoginaḥ |
pūrṇataunmukhyayogitvād viśvaṁ paśyati tanmayaḥ || 274 ||
prasaṁkhyātā pracayatas teneyaṁ pracayo matā |

This verse is a gloss on MV 2/41, which is quoted below as 10/285. See there.
See below 10/284d-287, which is MV 2/40d-42.

TANTRĀLOKA

Free of the (transcendental) detachment of the subject in deep sleep
(rūpaka), this, (the Fourth state), tends towards fullness (pūrṇatonmukhī).
Yogis (call) contemplative union (samāpatti) within it ‘Beyond Form’
(Rūpātīta) (which is the conscious subject). Tending towards fullness as it

is, the man who meditates with intuitive insight (prasaṁkhyātṛ), at one
with it, sees the universe gathered (within it into a single whole)
(pracayataḥ). Thus this, (the Fourth State) is called

(pracaya). (273cd-275ab)

‘Accumulation’

The contemplative union within this Fourth state is called ‘Beyond

Formʼ (rāpātīta), because it is beyond the ‘form’ which is the limited subject. (It
arises) because (consciousness) is free of the (transcendental) detachment of the
subject (in deep sleep), as (the Fourth state) is one that is propense (and tends)

towards the plenitude (of pure consciousness, (whereas in deep sleep the

individual perceiver rests in itself). (It is called ‘Accumulation’) because (the

man who possesses intuitive insight) ‘sees the universe (gathered within it) as

(a single) wholeʼ, as it is (a mass of the) rays (of the Light of consciousness)
and so is ‘at one with it’. This is said because it is perceived (to be the state one

has come to possess and is one’s own), like an amḷa fruit (held in the palm of
one’s hand). This is the meaning. That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara): ‘The
Fourth State is rightly called ‘Accumulation’ (pracaya) and Beyond Form

Surely (one may ask), as they are mixed together with one another

within that (state of consciousness) also, is it possible or not for it to have four

forms, like the waking and other (states)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

īraamaqq
r̥̄czī aeraād fk 1 3't, 1
gfe fkv sra7 ī fãā ft vīaā 1
naitasyām aparā turyadaśā sambhāvyate kila || 275 ||
saṁvin na kila vedyā sā vittvenaiva hi bhāsate |
No second Fourth state (i.e. Fourth-fourth) is possible in this (state).

Consciousness (saṁvid) is not objectively perceptible (vedyā). It only
manifests as the conscious sentience (vittva) (of the perceiver). (275cd-

276ab)

See above, 10/261-262.

See above note to 10/245.

MV 2/38ab. Printed edition of the MV reads pracayaṁ for pracayo.
Although both the Fourth state and deep sleep are states of consciousness in which
there is no objective perception, they differ a great deal. This is because in the former
case objectivity is absent, as it is experienced to be one with consciousness; whereas in

the latter it is absent, because the perceiver is unconscious and so does not perceive it.

Thus, Abhinava writes:

‘In states of inebriation, (deep) sleep, unconsciousness and the like, the object
is not perceived directly, because there is no knowledge of some particular object.

CHAPTER TEN

The Fourth state is supreme consciousness, which is one with the
knower. It does not even make contact with the plane of objectivity. So how can
it assume the nature of both subject and object in such a way that it may rest in
both conditions as the Fourth state of the Fourth state?
Surely, if that is so, is it possible or not that there can be states of the
Fourth (state) in waking and the rest? With this doubt in mind, he says:

STTJCṬTT=] TTRITRTHIṢHT
ṬTaT āa: || Q%9ē 1I

s̄ī̃ fa-arac- |
TÑĨATT-TT
T qdrĪhīī #īzā: 1|| QÚt 11

jāgradādyās tu sambhāvyās tisro ‘syāḥh prāgdaśā yataḥ || 276 |
tritayānugrahāt seyaṁ tenoktā trikaśāsane |
manonmanam anantaṁ ca sarvārtham iti bhedataḥ || 277 ||
The three states of waking and the rest can arise (in the Fourth

state as well), because, as it is the prior (initial) state (prāgdaśā), the three
exist by its grace. Therefore, it is said about it in the Trikaśāsana (i.e. the
Maālinīvijayottara) that it is variously (bhedataḥ) (called) ‘Beyond Mind’
(manonmana) (which is waking in the Fourth State), ‘Endless”’ (Ananta)

(which is dreaming in the Fourth State), and ‘All Things’ (Sarvārtha)
(which is deep sleep in the Fourth State). (276cd-277)
Waking and the other states ‘can arise (in the Fourth state)’. They are

the unfolding of the (creative) freedom of supreme consciousness. Thus, he says

that that is ‘because the three exist by its grace’. Thus, this (consciousness) is

said in the Mālinīvijayottara to be of three kinds, in accord with the nature of
the waking and other (states). Thus (he says) ‘therefore’ etc. ‘Therefore’ʼ,
because (the Fourth state) graces the three states of waking and the rest. (The
Fourth state experienced) when awake (is called) ‘Beyond Mind’ (manonmana),
because (as in the waking state) it is primarily free of thought constructs, as it
goes beyond its activity, which is to think (manana). Endless (ananta) (is the

name for the Fourth state when it is experienced) whilst dreaming because,
independent of the external world and the senses etc., it is not subject to the

limitations of space and time etc. ‘All Things’ (sarvārtha) (is the name for the

Fourth state experienced) in deep sleep, because (in that state) all things abide as
(a unified) potential (śakti) (within consciousness).

However, in the supreme state (of consciousness), (every) particular object of
knowledge is absent. The difference (between them), even though the object is not

perceived equally (in both cases), is due to the fact that in states of inebriation and the

like, a form of obscuration (mohāveśa) predominates, whereas (on the supreme plane,)

this is the Fourth state (of consciousness), because perception takes place at one with the

perceiver. (PTv p. 10)
277cd is MV 2/45cd, and so Trikaśāsana here clearly means the MV. Abhinava has
replaced satatoditam – ‘ever Risen’ in the printed edition of the MV with iti bhedataḥ

‘divided into’.

TANTRĀLOKA

Beyond the Fourth

Having defined the Fourth state in this way, he (now) defines the state

Beyond the Fourth.

R̥ÚUIĀEIEEEEHEĒEHĀ

ũē̄ |I 2.9¢ 1|
yat tu pūrṇānavacchinnavapur ānandanirbharam |
turyātītaṁ tu tat prāhus tad eva paramaṁ padam || 278 I|
(The wise) say that the nature (vapuṣ) of the state Beyond the
Fourth (tūryātīta) is that which lacks nothing (pūrṇa), is undivided, and is
overflowing with bliss. That itself is the supreme plane (pada) (of
consciousness). (278)
Surely (one may ask): Beyond the Fourth is the fifth plane (of
consciousness). Is there another plane beyond that also, or not? With this doubt
in mind, he says that it is ‘the supreme plane (pada) of consciousness)’. It is
‘supreme’ because it does not require anything else, as it is the abode of
supreme rest. Thus, it is said that ‘the nature (vapuṣ) of the state Beyond the

Fourth (tūryātīta) is that which lacks nothing (pūrṇa), is undivided, and is
overflowing with bliss.”

Surely (one may ask), just as the terms for the four states of waking and
the rest are said to be three as they relate to three (different aspects of the same
state, when seen from the point of view) of daily life (loka), Yoga and intuitive

insight (prasaṁkhyāna), in the same way are they said to be (three) here (in

this case) also, or not? With this doubt in mind, he says:

EIḶEZÉṢṬAIḤ EEIGKAEH

aī īaāaṁ āa: || 3.98 1|

nātra yogasya sadbhāvo bhāvanāder abhāvataḥ |
aprameye ‘paricchinne svatantre bhāvyatā kuṭaḥ || 279 ||

yogābhiprāyatas tena nāmāsmin nādiśad vibhuḥ |

There is no meditation (bhāvanā) or anything of the sort (in this
state), and so there is no yoga here. Where is the object of meditation
within (a reality) that is not objectively perceivable (aprameya) and is
unlimited and free? Thus, the Lord has not taught any yogic name for it.

(279-280ab)

See above, 10/246.

Read, with MS G: yogābhiprāyatas for yogādyabhāvatas.

CHAPTER TEN

‘Thus’, because there is no yoga (in this state). The same is said in
Chapter Two and elsewhere (with regards to Anuttara, the Absolute beyond all
means of attainment).

Thus, as (the state) here is one with consciousness, only intuitive insight
(prasaṁkhyāna) attains it. Accordingly, its name is with reference to that. Thus
he says:

THATTGṀTTTTR̥T ṬJĪTṀATIT: |I|/3¢0 11
prasaṅṁkhyānabalāt tv etad rūpaṁ pūrṇatvayogataḥ || 280 ||
anuttarād iha proktaṁ mahāpracayasaṁjñitam |

This state (rūpa) (can only be attained) by the power of intuition

(prasaṅkhyāna).” For this reason, and because it is full (and perfect) and
is Anuttara (the Absolute), it is called here the ‘Great Accumulation’

(mahāpracaya). (280cd-281ab)

(The word) ‘this’ (in the expression) ‘this state’ refers to the (state)

Beyond the Fourth. Surely (one may ask), the term ‘Accumulation’ was used for
the Fourth state. What is the reason for its being greater than that also? With this
doubt in mind, he says that is ‘because it is Anuttara (the absolute)’ and

‘because it is full (and perfect)’. Anuttara is the Fourth state. There (in the

case of the Fourth state), the nature (rūpa) of consciousness is only
transcendent. Here (in the case of the state Beyond the Fourth), although it is

also such, (its nature) is also immanent. Thus, it is additionally (said to be)
‘great’. That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘The discerning (vicakṣaṇa) (men of knowledge) consider (the state)

Beyond the Fourth to be the Great Accumulation (mahāpracaya).

pūrṇatvād eva bhedānām asyāṁ sambhāvanā na hi || 281 ||
tannirāsāya naitasyāṁ bheda ukto viśeṣaṇam |

See above 10/245.
Somadeva (2004: 230): ‘In this state perceived entities appear in the form of
unlimited plenitude, replete with beatitude (ānanda). . . . Gnostics call this state the

Great Accumulation because it is plenum greater than the purely transcendent fourth
state.
The nature of the state Beyond the Fourth as Anuttara (the absolute) refers to its
transcendence, which is experienced as the Fourth state. Its plenitude characterizes its
immanence. Thuṣ, as the experience of both aspects, it is ‘great’.

MV 2/38cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

There can be no question of any divisions within it, because it is

perfectly complete (pūrṇa). Thus, in order to refute (this possibility, the
Mālinīvijaya) does not mention any specific division within it. (281cd-

282ab)

Surely, (it is said in) the Mālinīvijayottara:
‘Beyond Mind (manonmana), Endless (ananta), and AIl Things
(sarvārtha) (are terms for the Fourth state), (whereas) there (in the case of the)
the Great Accumulation (mahāpracaya), the sole term is this, namely, Ever

Arisen (satatodita).

Thus, according to this, in the case of the Great Accumulation also there
is said to be (only) one variety, namely, ‘Ever Arisen’. So how is it that he
declared that there is not said to be (any) subdivision on the plane Beyond the
Fourth? With this doubt in mind, he says:

qāāTeatṁdrāázaāīTcagqā 1| 2¢2 II
satatoditam ity etat sarvavyāpitvasūcakam || 282 ||
(The Mālinīvijayottara says that) it is ‘ever arisen’ (satatodita) (i.e.

‘perpetually active’ or ‘eternally manifest?). This indicates that it pervades
all things (it is not a reference to one of its types). (282cd)

Just as in such statements as ‘Sattva is subtle and illuminating, ṣatrva

is said to have this or that nature as subtle and the like, similarly here (in the

case of the state Beyond the Fourth) also, (by saying that it is) ‘ever arisen’,
(its) undivided nature, which is its all-pervasiveness, is made kmown

(prakāśita).
says:

What is the proof (pramāṇa) here (of this)? With this doubt in mind, he

ī Ṝī tg vraf vē: #arm āzs |
na hy eka eva bhavati bhedaḥ kvacana kaścana |
That which is one is nowhere subject to division of any sort. (283ab)
Divisions divide (things up, distinguishing them from one another) in

relation to (their) counter-correlates; thus, how can there be only one division?
(Indeed,) it is said that (a single variety) is just (an entity’s) own nature itself.
Thus, to say that here (in this case) there is (only) one division is the

babbling ofa fool.

MV 2/45cd-46ab.

CHAPTER TEN

Taakā ftzarā%īītmz

turyātīte bheda ekaḥ satatodita ity ayam || 283 ||
mūḍhavādas tena siddham avibheditvam asya tu |
(Some maintain) that there is one division in the state Beyond the
Fourth, namely, the ‘Ever Arisen’ (i.e. eternally manifest). This is a foolish
view (not worth considering), and so it is established that (undivided,) it has

no divisions. (283cd-284ab)

Thus, the scripture (says) the same. Accordingly, he says:

śrīpūrvaśāstre tenoktaṁ . .……

Thus it is said in the Śrīpārvaśāstra (Mālinīvijayottara):
As (the explanation of the state called) Established in the Body
(pinḍastha) has been previously corroborated (with scripture), he (goes on) to

quote (the passages relating to the state called) Abiding in Place (padastha) and
the rest.

rāT fē: 1| 2¢ 1

T-āTĀTTTA:

TṬTTd Ṭ TIĪtḥ: TāATTTTĪTTTAT |I Ṝ3¢&._ 11|
3s Somadeva (2004: 230-1) rightly points out that ‘Abhinavagupta claims that no
explanatory division has been taught for this state. The expression ‘Ever Arisen’

mentioned in the Mālinīvijayottara is merely a pointer to its all-pervasiveness, but is not

a subdivision. It would be absurd to divide something into a single division. In this,
Abhinavagupta appears to be distorting the Mālinīvijayottara, which plainly mentions
another term (satatodita). The phrasing of the Mālinīvijayottara is ambiguous, and

Abhinavagupta’s polemics indicate that there are three ways to interpret this passage.
Firstly, the four stages could be taken as collectively referring to Accumulation. This

would violate Abhinavagupta’s scheme by enumerating four and not three sublevels for

the fourth state: Transmental, Infinite, All-accomplishing and Permanently Liberated.

For Abhinavagupta this is unacceptable, because the existence of the ‘fourth state in the

fourth’ reduces awareness to a cognized entity, a logical impossibility. Secondly, the
view so vehemently denied by Abhinavagupta, the Ever Arisen, could be taken as the

one (and only) synonym of the Great Accumulation. The Ever Arisen would then
amount to a yogic term for the highest level. Abhinavagupta’s problem with this

interpretation is that it elevates yoga to an equal status with gnosis. While his

Tantrāloka aṭtṭempts an assimilation of ritual (kriyā) and yoga to gnosis (see above
1/150-153), the Mālinīvijaya actually teaches the supremacy of perfected yoga (see MV

4/33-41).
See above, 10/240cd-241 for MV 2/39c-40ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

frrrzī fr-rra: r]a:: īāīcā--af |
ṇjīṁīa: fērāī šaāṁ a fāfzaī fagaa 11 z.c. 1
. padastham aparaṁ viduḥ || 284 ||
mantrāṣ tatpatayaḥ seśā rūpastham iti kīṟtyate |
rūpātītaṁ parā śaktiḥ savyāpārāpy anāmayā || 285 ||
niṣprapañco nirābhāsaḥ śuddhaḥ ṣvātmany avasthitaḥ |
sarvātītaḥ śivo jñeyo yaṁ viditvā vimucyate || 286 I|
(The wise) know that the other state (in which the creatures etc. are

instruments of objectivization of the substratum consciousness) is (called)

‘Abiding in Place’ (padastha). The Mantras, their Lords (i.e the Lords of
Mantra), along with (their) Lords (i.e. the Great Lords of Mantra), are said
to be ‘Abiding in Form’ (rūpastha). The Supreme Power, which is stainless
and active, is “Beyond Formʼ (rūpāñīta). Śiva should be known to be
transcendent (niṣprapañca), unmanifest (nirbhāsa),'“ pure, established in
His own nature, and beyond all (states); once He is known (the fettered

soul) is liberated. (284cd-286)

Cf. use of the term nirbhāsa – ‘unmanifest’ in the maṅgala verse at the beginning of

ĪPv, where Nirābhāsais Śivain a ‘pure transcendent state. The self-awareness whichis
‘I’ (ahaṁ)is its first manifestation:

nirābhāsāt pārṇād aham iti purā bhāsayati yad

dviśākhām āśās te tadanu ca vibhañktuṁ niījakalām |
svarūpād unmeṣaprasaraṇanimeṣaṣṭhitijuṣas –
tad advaitaṁ vande paramaśivaśaktyātma nikhilam ||/ ] II
‘I praise that nonduality, the All, the nature of which is Supreme Śiva and
Śakti. From the Unmanifest (nirbhāṣsa) plenitude (pūrṇa), it initially manifests as ‘I’.

Then in order to divide its own power into two branches, it assumes the state of
unfolding (emanation), the flow (of persistence) and closureʼ.

10/284cd-286 is a literal quotation of MV 2/40d-42. See above See above, 10/271cd-

272ab, where Abhinava glosses MV 2/41. Somadeva (2004: 232) translates this passage
as follows: “The other (condition, in which they appear as instruments of

objectivization,) is termed Abiding in Place (padastha). Mantras, Lords of Mantras with

their Lords (i.e. sovereigns of the Lords of Mantras ~ Mahāmantreśa) are known (to
correspond to) Abiding in Form (rāpastha). Beyond Form (rūpātīta) is the transcendent

power untainted though immersed in activity. Śiva should be known to be free of
diversity (niṣprapañca), unmanifest (nirbhāsa), pure, established in His own nature, and
beyond all (states and things). One is liberated when He is known.’

CHAPTER TEN

‘The
other’
(state
is
an)
instrument
of
objectivization
(adhiṣṭhānakaraṇa), whereas (the individual) perceiver predominates (over the

means and object of knowledge) in deep sleep. Thus, he says that ‘The
Mantras, their Lords (i.e the Lords of Mantra), along with (their) Lords
(i.e. the Great Lords of Mantra)’ (abide in the Fourth state in deep sleep).
‘Powerʼ is consciousness, and sheis, as was said previously, the form of the

Fourth state. (Śiva is) ‘transcendent’ means that his nature (is one and)

undivided. Thus it is said that He is ‘established in His own nature’ and is

‘unmanifest’ and ‘pure’.”™ He is ‘beyond all’. that is, He is beyond all (the

states), including the Fourth and the rest. The meaning is that He excels
everything else.
Surely, it was said before that “(I will now describe them as) I have

learnt them by the grace of Śambhunātha’, so is what he has stated (just) his
own idea or not? With this doubtin mind, he says:

ÉIEtUIÉIETECṬAHIIT|EE

iti śrīsumatiprajñācandrikāśāntatāmasaḥ |
śrīśaṁbhunāthaḥ sadbhāvaṁ jāgradādau nyarūpayat || 287 ||

Śambhunātha described the essence of the waking and other states
(to me); the darkness (of his ignorance) dissipated by the moonlight of the
venerable Sumati’s wisdom. (287)
The venerable Sumatinātha was his teacher’s teacher, from whom he

received this (teaching) through the succession of teachers.
Now he begins to describe the nature of these (states) according to the
view of other teachers also.

The Waking and Other States of the Seven Perceivers
Kaula Yogic state

Epistemic Equivalent

Abiding in Place

Sustaining Process
(adhiṣṭhāna)
sustainer (adhiṣṭhātr)

Abiding in the Body

Abiding in Form
Beyond Form
Siva

Suṣtained (adhiṣṭheya)

Consciousness (sarṁvid)

Perceiver
Conditioned / Dissolution
Deconditioned
Consciousness
Deconditioned
Mantra, Mantreśa,
Mantramaheśvara
Supreme Power

‘Pūrṇa - full’ and pure are synonyms. Pūrṇatvād eva ca śuddhā kṣobharahitā TĀv

ad 10/206, where kṣobha is defined as śaktidaśā.

Above, 10/230cd.
Jayaratha is mistaken here. Sumati was directly Śambhunātha’s teacher. See above

concerning how this error has arisen ad 1/213 note 1,1127.

TANTRĀLOKA

anye tu kathayanty eṣāṁ bhaṅgīm anyādṛśūú śritāḥ |
yad rūpaṁ jāgradādīnāṁ tad idānīṁ nirūpyate || 288 I|

We will now describe the nature of the waking and other states
according to what others say, who see it from another point of view. (288)
others.

The ‘others’ are (Utpaladeva), who wrote the Īśvarapratyabhijñā, and
He says just that:

āzfrrītyca araṁēraraā fk a: 1
TSI-GPHTHĪRĪJAT
TĪ: TT. I| 2¢8 1

BJaTTGT] TTTISĀĪ TGJGRTTSIHĪ ] |I 3Ro 11

3āTē%āā Taā; āa@TTTa; ||382 1|
tatrākṣavrttim āśritya bāhyākāragraho hi yaḥ |
rat sphuṭam āsīnam anubandhi puṇaḥ punaḥ || 289 ||
ātmasaṅkalpanirmāṇaṁ svapno jāgradviparyayaḥ |
layākalaṣya bhogo ʻsau malakarmavaśān' na tu || 290 ||

sthiro bhaven niśābhāvāt suptaṅ saukhyādyavedane |

jñānākalasya malataḥ kevalād bhogamātrataḥ || 291 ||

“The waking state consists of the perception of external forms

based on the activity of the senses. It is clearly evident (sphuṭa), stable, and
(the experiences had in it) folow on from one another coherently,

repeatedly (without contradiction).

The dream state is the opposite of waking. It consists of the creation
of subjective thought forms, and constitutes the experience (bhoga) of the
Dissolution Deconditioned (pralayākala) subject, which is determined by
(his) innate impurity (āṉṇavamala) and Karma. It is unstable, because (the
impurity of) Māyā is absent.
The state of deep sleep coincides with the absence (of all sensations)
of pleasure and the like. It consists only of the pure experience
This view is presented by Utpaladeva in the ĪP 3/2/15-17, quoted in the commentary

here.
MVV reads layakarmavaśān.
6 Read with MVV sthiro for sthirī

Veṛses 289-299 correspond to MVV 1/999-1009. TĀ 10/289-291 = MVV 1/999-

1001.

CHAPTER TEN

(bhogamātrā) (devoid of objective content) of the Consciousness
Deconditioned (vijñānākala subject, which is determined by his innate
(āṇava) impurity alone. (289-291)
‘The waking state’ is the perception of a reality (artha) which, because
it is external, is common to all perceivers as the field of operation of all the
senses. Again, as that reality is external, ‘it is clearly evident (sphuṭa) and
stable’; that is, abides (constantly) as a clearly evident (state of) manifestation
(ābhāsa). Thus, as no contradiction (bādha) arises (to sublate them), ‘(the
experiences had in it) follow on from one another coherently repeatedly’.
The meaning is that the field (of the waking state) is a clearly evident and stable
(outer) reality. That is said (in the Īśvarapratyabhijñā):
‘The creation (of phenomena), which is stable because it is the field (of

operation) of all the senses, insofar as it is external, and (so) is common to all

perceivers, is the waking state.”

The reason why ‘the dream state is the opposite of waking’ is

because ‘it consists of the creation of subjective thought forms’. As the

reality there (when dreaming) is solely the field of operation of the mind, it is

not common to all perceivers, nor is it the field of operation of all the senses,

and (the experiences had in it) do not follow on from one another coherently and

repeatedly. That is said (in the Īśvarapratyabhijñā):

‘The clearly manifest creation of phenomena solely within the domain
of the mind which, because they are mistaken to be objects of the senses, is

considered to be the dreaming state.”

Again, here (when dreaming), what was said about (the content of the
experience when awake, namely that) it is clearly manifest, is not the case. (For
this reason,) and also because it is not the field of operation of all the senses, it

is the opposite of waking. Thus, there is no contradiction. Saying that ‘it
constitutes the experience (bhoga) of the Dissolution Deconditioned
(pralayākala) subject’ means that here (in this state) the experiencer (bhoktṛ) is
the Dissolution Deconditioned (subject). It is thus (implicitly) indicated that the
perceiver in the waking state is the Conditioned (sakala) one. That is said:
‘There (in that case), objectivity is in the Innate Nature (ṣvarūpa), and
the perceiver is considered to be the Conditioned (sakala) one. Power, which is

“TP 3/2 17.

TP 3/2/16. Utpaladeva himself explains in his brief commentary on this verse (vṛtti):

‘The individual soul’s dreaming state is the Lord’s creation of the manifestations of
forms and the like, (that are perceived) by the power of the mind alone, even when the
powers of the sense of sight and the rest are inactive. This is an illusion, because after
the manifestation of a form, for example, which (in the waking state is perceived in)
common with other subjects, has lasted as such (for as long as the dream lasts), it does

not continue (later) at some other time.”

TANTRĀLOKA

considered to be that of the Conditioned (perceiver), assumes the form of

perception.

Surely (one may ask), how is it that here the experience (bhoga) of the
Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver) does not become stable, as is that of the

Conditioned one? With this doubt in mind, he says that ‘it is unstable because

(the impurity of) Māyā is absent’. The experience of (the Dissolution
Deconditioned perceiver) arises due to its association with the two impurities of
Individuality and Karma. (But) because there the impurity of Māyā is absent, it
does not develop, because it does not acquire a locus, such as the body, (that it
may do s0). That is said:
‘The

experience

(bhoga)

of

(the

perceiver)

called

Dissolution

Deconditioned arises because of the presence of the impurity of Karma. (But)

because Māyā is absent, it does not become stable.

(The state of deep sleep coincides with the absence of all sensations of)

‘pleasure and the like’. The expression ‘and the like’ refers to (outer

sensations) of sound etc. That is said (in the Īśvarapratyabhijñā):

‘The state of deep sleep, which is similar to cosmic destruction, (obtains
when (the subject) rests solely on just (the plane of the void or the vital breath)
alone. It may be associated with the impurity of Māyā or not, according to

whether objectivity is present or absent.) And it is ‘the state (of
consciousness which is) devoid of objects of perception . . . . šõ
Here, it seems, is another verse Jayaratha quotes from Abhinava’s anonymous
source.

This appears to be another citation from Jayaratha’s unnamed source.
“TP 3/2/15b. The remaining part of the kārikā has been added in brackets. These are

the two kinds of deep sleep. One is total in the sense that in that state the perceiver
perceives nothing at all and so is completely devoid of any objective experience of
anything. This is deep sleep ‘without objectivity’ (apavedyasuṣupti). This is the

condition of emptiness of objectivity. It is quite different, indeed quite the opposite of
the emptiness of subjectivity. The former is totally exclusive and so incomplete
(apūrṇa), whereas the latter is absolutely inclusive and all-embracing and full of all
things (pāūrṇa). The first kind of deep sleep exists as unknown objectivity. In the second

kind of deep sleep, the sleeper is immersed in the flux of the vital force, which although
beyond the inner cognitive apparatus, is experienced as a recollection of having slept
soundly and that it has passed.

Utpaladeva explains in his brief commentary on this verse (vṛtti): ‘(When the
subject) rests in the emptiness (of total deep sleep), there is no object, and so the
Impurity of Māyā does not exist. (But when the subject abandoning the mind merges)
into the vital breath (prāṇa) etc., the state of (his) deep sleep is (experienced in
retrospect as transitory, and s0 is) similar to cosmic destruction. He (still) possesses (and
is affected by) the Impurity of Māyā, because (in this state there is some) association
with a (subtle) touch of pleasure and the like (that he recollects as his having slept well
when he wakes up).

Ibid. 32/13d. The reference here is to the form of deep sleep devoid of objectivity
(apavedyasauṣupti). The complete verse states:

CHAPTER TEN

What remains to be said is that that is the state (pada) of the
Consciousness Deconditioned (perceiver). The reason for that is that here (in

this case), the proper experience for him arises only from the (impurity of)
Individuality, the sole nature of which is craving (abhilāṣa).
Surely (one may ask), do Consciousness Deconditioned (perceivers)
also possess the impurity of Individuality and the competence to have the
experience of which it is the cause? With this doubt in mind, he says:

‘aāīī; aādā’sTTTTRāĪT- TSISTST: |

qṬakTaaTHT- JT-TTTTĀ; |

#agfk̃ raavīaṁā |
bhedavantaḥ svato ‘bhinnāś cikīrṣyante jaḍājaḍāḥ |
turye tatra sthitā mantratannāthādhīśvarās trayaḥ || 292 ||
yāvad bhairavabodhāntaḥpraveśanasahiṣṇavaḥ |
bhāvā vigaladātmīyasārāḥ svayam abhedinaḥ || 293 |I
turyātītapade saṁsyur iti pañcadaśātmake |
(Although the Consciousness Deconditioned subjects) are in
themselves undivided (from one another because they are all one with
consciousness), they are separated (from each other by the Lord’s will.
Thus, differentiated in this way, they are both) sentient and insentient.
When they are established there in the Fourth State, they become
(successively) the three, namely, Mantras, Lords of Mantras, and (then)
Great Lords of Mantra. (This process continues) until (all) things, ardently

desiring (sahiṣṇu) inward entry

into

Bhairava’s

consciousness,™

(gradually) lose their own individual essence and, in themselves undivided,

become established on the plane Beyond the Fourth State. (Such is the
correspondence between the five states) when the divisions are fifteen. (292-

294ab)

Although those who are Consciousness Deconditioned (perceivers) are

undivided because (their) on nature is consciousness etc., even so ‘they are
separated’ by the Supreme Lord’s will. Thus, because they differ (from one
another), they are insentient, and because they do not, they are sentient. So it is
“When the void, which is absence of the intellect and the rest (of the inner

mental organ), is the plane of the agency (of the subject who is inactive), subjectivity
(ahantā) (in which objectivity consists of) just latent traces (of past action)
(saṁskāramātriṇī), (that is) the state (of consciousness) devoid of objects of
perception.”

MVV reads ~bhairavabodhāṁśapraveśa- ‘entry into an aspect of Bhairava’s

consciousness’

–bhairavabodhāntapraveśa- ʻīnward entry into Bhairava’s consciousnessʼ.

for

TANTRĀLOKA

said that ‘“(they are both) sentient and insentient’. As (the venerable
Utpaladeva) says:
‘Although the Consciousness Deconditioned (perceivers) possess the
same (common) characteristics, such as (their nature as pure) consciousness,

(and so are indistinguishable), the mutual difference between them in this way
is due to the difference in the Lord’s will (that creates them separately).
the

‘They are established there’ in the waking and other states. (They are)
Conditioned, Dissolution Deconditioned, and the Consciousness

Deconditioned (perceivers) who, as befits (them), having attained the nature of

Mantra etc. (perceivers), abide as the perceivers in the Fourth state, because
they are the material cause of the Mantra and other (perceivers). That is said (in

the source text):

‘The experience (bhoga) of deep sleep arises solely from the Impurity
(of Individuality) in the absence of the awareness of the means (to experience)
particular (forms) of pleasure and pain etc. and consists of their generic (feeling)

which, when awake, is recollected. (The perceivers) there (in that state are the)

Consciousness Deconditioned (subjects). (Although) they are not in themselves
divided (from one another, because they are all equally consciousness), they are
separated (by the Lord’s will. Thus, as they are differentiated,) they are
insentient, (and they are also) sentient (because their essential conscious nature

is undivided). The Fourth state is such that once they have entered there into it
in this way, they assume, by virtue (of their) freedom, the state of Mantras,

Lords of Mantra, and Great Lords of Mantra, in due order (respectively)

The point is that all (the perceivers in the Fourth state) are orientated
towards (attaining) rest within supreme consciousness. Thus, in the state (pada)
Beyond the Fourth, as all phenomena, whether subjects or objects, are desirous
Read with the printed editions of the ĪP, teṣām for yeṣām.

The condition of the Vijñānakevala subjects is defined in ĪP 3/2/7. These

Consciousness Deconditioned subjects are similar to the Puruṣas (individual souls)
characterized by the Sāṁkhya. According to that view, there are an infinite number of
individual souls that are all identical non-finite points of consciousness. Detached as

they are from Nature, and hence devoid of any objective characteristics that could
differentiate them from one another, a common criticism levelled at this notion is that
individual souls that have no form, or location in space or time, are indistinguishable.
How then can they be said to be many? Consciousness Deconditioned (perceivers),
detached as they are from Māyā, are very similar to the Puruṣas of the Sāṁkhya. In this
case, however, they are different from one another, because they are each created

separately by the Supreme Lord, the existence of whom the Sāṁkhya does not admit.
Each one is the result of the Lord’s specific choice, His will.

It is clear from the wording that Jayaratha is quoting Abhinava’s source. But,

unfortunately, as elsewhere, he does not name it.

In the Fourth state, the Conditioned perceivers of the waking state become Mantras;
the

Dissolution

Deconditioned

perceivers

become

Lords

of Mantra,

Consciousness Deconditioned perceivers become Great Lords of Mantra.

and

the

CHAPTER TEN

of becoming one with supreme consciousness, they ‘(gradually) lose their own
individual essenceʼ. Thus, ‘in themselves undivided’, they manifest in the
form which is just Śiva and Śakti alone. This is the meaning. The word ‘until’
refers to the sequence of the falling away of duality to the degree (the level of
the perceiver becomes progressively) higher. The states of waking and the rest
have thus been explained in the fifteenfold sequence. (Accordingly, he declares
that) ‘(such is the correspondence between the five states) when the

divisions are fifteen.”
Although there is a difference of perspectives, (Abhinava)
accommodates (the teachings concerning them as having) as their intended
purport, one (and the same) nature of the states of waking and the rest.
The Waking and Other States from Another Point of View

aT] aṬṛ] Bē ] Ṭōīāīcf̄ī -aa-TTT 1| ṜQ%

gzcaṝzexrīṁ 3 qd a šg:

TTRTṬRĀTṬHĪTTT] 3JGITGÚSTJT |

ũúqḍ JddRJ TṬaTTIT I| 3<ē 1I

ārãĩt I IIGÚI EEE 3ṬṢṬJT_ II ṜR819 II
yasya yad yat sphuṭaṁ rūpaṁ taj jāgrad iti manyatām || 294 ||

vyad evāsthiram ābhāti sa pūrvaṁ” svapna īdṛśaḥ |

asphuṭaṁ tu yadābhāti suṣuptaṁ tatpuro 'pi yat || 295 ||

trayasyāsyānusaṁdhis” tu yad vaśād upajāyate |
srakṣūtrakalpaṁ” tat turyaṁ sarvabhedeṣu gṛhyatām || 296 ||
yat tv advaitabharollāsadrāvitāśeṣabhedakam |
turyātītaṁ tu tat prāhur itthaṁ sarvatra yojayet || 297 I|

(Again, from yet another point of view,) one should consider

waking to be the state of one to whom a particular form appears clearly
(sphuṭa). (If) it manifests without stability and has been previously

(perceived in some form when awake,) such is dreaming. (The state of the

perceiver is) deep sleep when nothing manifests clearly, as previously

(when awake, but does so subsequently when he wakes up and thinks ‘I
MVV reads: tad evāsthiram ābhāti svarūpaṁḥ.

Ṛead with MM p. 157: suṣuptaṁ tatpuro ‘pi yat for suptaṁ tattatpuro ‘pi yat.

MVV:: ṟritayaṣyā-.

According to the reading in the MVV (see above, note 10,383) the meaning is:

‘(Dreaming is such) that that (same) essential nature (of something perceived when
awake) manifests (in a dream) without stability.”

TANTRĀLOKA

slept well’). The Fourth state is that by which these three are united. Grasp
how, like the thread of a garland, it extends through all the divisions!
Finally, (the wise) say that the state in which all division has melted away,
due to the outpouring of the fullness of nonduality, is Beyond the Fourth.
(The wise man) should apply (this method) everywhere, (to all the varieties)

in this way. (294cd-297)

" TĀ 10/253ab, 275cd, 283cd, 294cd-297 are quoted in MM p. 157. Maheśvarānanda

presents an overview of the teachings given here in his auto-commentary of verse 61 of
the Mahārthamañjarī. Translated, this is as follows.

‘The yogi carries a wonderfully varied (citrrā) rosary of gems, arranged as the
series of sacred times (parvan) of waking, dreaming, deep sleep and the Fourth, strung

together with the single thread of reflective awareness. (61) (p. 156)

Waking and the rest are all ‘sacred times’ (parvan) vitalized by the passage of

time, that is, particular states. There, (with regards to them,) in terms of common daily
life, the waking state is a product of (the activity of) both the external and internal
senses, once reality (artha) has been made into an object of the senses as one that is

common to all (perceivers). The dream state consists of thought, which is essentially the

creation of (a personal) reality (artha) that is not (experienced) in common (with
anybody else). Its cause is theinner mental organ alone. Deep sleepis the absence of the
manifestation of realityin any form. Asis saidin the venerable Śivasūtras: ‘Knowledge
(born of sensory perception) is the waking state’. ‘Thought constructs are dreaming’.
‘Deep sleep is Māyā, the lack of discernment’. (ŚSū 1/9-10) As is also said in the
venerable Pratyabhijñā:
‘The waking state (obtains when) creation is common for all perceivers. In the
purview of all the senses, it is stable externally. (IP 3/2/17)
The dreaming state is considered to be (one in which) the creation of
phenomena is (their) clearly evident manifestation that, although it is takes place solely

on the path of the mind, is mistakenly (thought to be) an object of the (outer) senses. (IP
3/2116)
When the abiding state is just a trace (of awareness), it is said to be deep sleep
which is like the dissolving away (of the worlds at the end of time).” (IP 3/2/15ab)
From the yogi’s point of view, (the first three states of consciousness) are
sustained (concentration) (dhāraṇā), meditation (dhyāna) and contemplative absorption
(samādhi), (respectively). The Āgamas characterize them as follows.
Fixing the mind on (some particular) place is sustained (concentration)
(dhāraṇā). Individual streams of perception (focused on one object) is meditation

(dhyāna). Contemplative absorption (samādhi) is the falling away of the relationship

between subject and object and the like.
Again, the Fourth (state) is linked to all (the other states), and even if it is not,
it abides as a single (undivided) nature. The difference (from the other states) is that

only a yogi is capable of that kind of reflective awareness. Again, (concerning) the
Fourth state, according to the teaching of the venerable Śivasūtra, ‘the Fourth should be

sprinkled like oil into the three.’ (2/20(21)) Itis the Great Effulgence (of the light of
consciousness) that is associated with (and pervades) the three states of waking and the
rest.

This is a synecdoche. For the second is in the first, the third is in the two, the
fourth is in the three, and the fifth in the fourth — the sense (of this sātra) must

CHAPTER TEN

necessarily be understood this way. Again, that has been said concisely in the sūtra as

what is being taught. The series of these sacred times is a unity, because their state is

such as they are mutually of each other’s nature. The yogi, whose nature has been
described, carries (a rosṣary) that, like the thread of a necklace, has many jewels, such as
pearls and rubies. Stringing (the states of consciousness) together with one thread called
reflective awareness that is capable of penetrating into all of them, he ‘carries it’ by
virtue of some excellence that crosses over the journey of worldly life and causes him to
attain (the goal), and by the reflective awareness of the essential nature of each (of these
states), establishes it within his own Self.
Having gone there beyond the three common states (of consciousness) worldly

people (experience) and perceiving the fourth state in its own essential nature as Beyond

the Fourth (p. 157), which is the supreme perceiver, (that Fourth state itself) is explained
to be reflective awareness, by which, like the thread of a garland, the lower three states
are held together.
There also (in that case), the part (aṁśa) that is pervaded (ākrāṇta) (by the
Fourth state), that moves along with (sāhacarya) those of waking and the rest etc., is
conjoined with the part that has entered into the essential nature of the perceiver. It is
that which is being held together, as well as the means of holding (the states) together.
Both (interpretations) make sense.
“SvTu ad 4/408cd-409ab: ācāraḥ proktasphārānupraveśaḥ sahacāritvaṁ

tadabheda-vimarśaparamārtham || ‘“Moving (in this context means) entry into the

expansion (of consciousness) taught (previously). (Thus,) the true nature of the
condition of ‘moving along with is the reflective awareness at one with that.
In this way, one perceives in the four states of waking and the rest, that they
penetrate one another in the form of, for example, waking in waking, dreaming in
waking, deep sleep in waking, and the Fourth in waking. There (these) four divisions of
waking are (called) Abuddha, Buddha, Prabuddha and Suprabuddha.
‘(They are called) ‘Gone and Come’ (gatāgata), “Well Dispersed’ (suviksipta),
“Well Conjoined’ (saṁgata) and ‘Well Concentrated’ (susamāhita).” (TĀ 10/253ab)
(These are the four kinds) of dream state. Udita, Vipula, Śānta and Suprasanna
are (those) of deep sleep. Whereas with regards to the Fourth state:

10/275cd

‘No second Fourth state (i.e. Fourth-fourth) is possible in this (state).” TĀ

(Some maintain) that there is one division in the state Beyond the Fourth,

namely, the ‘Ever Arisen’ (i.e. eternally manifest). TĀ 10/283cd

(Abhinava goes on to say: This is a foolish view. Thus it is established that it

has no divisions.) According to the view held by the Tantrāloka, there are three kinds
(of Fourth state): Manonmana, Ananta, and Sarvatobhadra. And in Turyātīta:
‘In Turyatīta there is one kind (only), and this is Satatodita.’ TĀ 10/283cd

According to this teaching, there is secondarily said to be (just) one kind,
which is Satatodita, that illumines the perpetual state of reflective awareness. (Each of
these is of three kinds,) because of the difference between (the manner in which they)
manifest, namely clearly (sphuṭa), clearly-cum-unclearly (sphuṭāsphuṭa), and unclearly
(aphuṭa), as well as (their basic) state as (the fourth,), which threads through (all of

TANTRĀLOKA

(The form perceived in a dream) ‘has been previously (perceived)’, in
the sense that it has been previously experienced (when awake). In deep sleep

(nothing) ‘manifests clearly°, because the universe (of objectivity) abides in a

potential state (within the perceiver in deep sleep), and so its nature is
them) everywhere (in all cases). As
(Maheśvarānanda quotes 10/294cd-296):

is

said

in

the

venerable

Tantrāloka

‘(Again, from yet another point of view) one should know waking to be the

state of one to whom a particular form appears clearly (sphuṭa). Dreaming is (his state)

when it is not stably manifest and has been previously (perceived in some form when
awake). (The state of the perceiver is) deep sleep, when nothing manifests clearly, as
previously (when awake, but does so subsequently when he wakes up and thinks ‘ slept
wellʼ). The Fourth state is that by which these three are united. Grasp how, like the

thread ofa garland, it extends through all the divisions!’ (TĀ 10/294cd-296)

Turyātīta is everywhere one (and the same) nature, and so is (at rest,)
undisturbed, experienced as Parabhairava, who is one’s own nature. As is said there

itself (in the Tantrāloka):

‘Finally, (the wise) say that the state in which all division has melted away due
to the outpouring of the fullness of nonduality is Beyond the Fourth. (The wise man)
should apply (this method) everywhere (to all the divisions) in this way.’ (TĀ 10/297)

Thus, it is rightly said that the Fourth state is capable of accomplishing both
purposes (artha) (?). It is with this same intention that (the rosary of states) is said
metaphorically to be ‘wonderfully varied’. Thus, the thread of a necklace that is strung
with rubies, pearls, sapphires, emeralds and the like is greater than the continuity of the
wonderful diversity of its colours, red, white, and blue etc. (p. 158) Thus, even if its

uniqueness (is only apparent) in some cases to some individuals, (people) experience,

that is, it is made directly apparent (to them), that the conjunction of all the colours is
distinct (from the single colours), and is invariably associated with them.
Such is also said to be the case with the series of waking and other (states),
namely, that the variety of ways they pierce one another is experienced (anusandhīyate)

in the manner described. This is what is being stated: that which is called the Great
Light, whose nature is the power of consciousness, is the supreme perceiver, the essence

of which is the pulse (parispanda) of (its) perpetually outpouring exertion (udyantṛtā).

He is the Lord, who is the state Beyond the Fourth.

The Fourth (is a state) which is not transcendentally aloof from (the lower)
limited subjectivity (as
is the state Beyond the Fourth). Called Pracaya, it is one’s own
(inherent) bliss. It is the instrumental cause that gives life to all the triads, such Piṇḍa,
Pada and Rūpa, will, knowledge and action etc. This (triad) is the three states
characterized as waking, dreaming and deep sleep. Once having penetrated (ākramya)

into the power of Yoga, characterized as the transcendental sovereignty which is

reflective awareness, one contemplates the supreme reality, which is the pure pulse
(parispandamātra) of the effulgent radiance of one’s own (innate) freedom. As is said in

the Śivasūtras: ‘The enjoyer of the three states is the Lord of the Heroes.” (I/1), and
‘that which is preceded by the three states vitalizes them.’ (3/39 (38) And as is said in
the venerable Spandakārikā:

‘Even when division prevails due to the waking and other states, it extends
through that which is undivided (tadabhinna), because the perceiving subjectivity
forever remains true to its own nature.”ʼ (3)

CHAPTER TEN

undifferentiated (and undivided). This is the meaning. Surely (one may object

that,) if this is so, then nothing at all would manifest here. With this doubt in

mind, he says (that it was manifest) ‘previously”. It also exists in the waking
state, which is prior to that of deep sleep. This is the meaning. Thus, (when he
wakes up,) there is a memory that “] slept well”, thus corroborating what was
said previously, namely that ‘when waking up, it is recollected’. (These) ‘three’
are (the states of) waking and the rest. (The Fourth state) ‘extends through all

the divisionsʼ, that is, within waking in waking and the rest of the secondary
modalities (of the three states) ‘like the thread of a garland’, because it is
present in all of them. Thus it is said (in the Śivasūtra): ‘the Fourth (state)

should be sprinkled like oil into the three (states).”

However, in the state Beyond the Fourth, there are no (relations), such

as that between the pervaded and the pervade, and so there is not even a trace of
(the experience of) duality within it. Thus, he has described the nature of the
waking and other (states), following both views in accord with their essential

purport. Having thus defined the five states of waking and the rest in the fifteen-

fold sequence, (he goes on to) teach the same in the thirteen-fold and the rest (of

the sequences because, as he says) ‘(the wise man) should apply (this method)
everywhere, (to all the divisions) in this way.”

He says just that:

-qtrṝdfā
ṣhē̃ ā| JdTTā a: || 22¢ I1
layākale tu svaṁ rūpaṁ jāgrat tatpūrvavṛtti tu |
svapnādīti kramaṁ sarvaṁ sarvatrānuṣared budhaḥ || 298 II
(Thus, in the division into thirteen in which the subjects) start from

the Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver - pralayākala), the waking state

corresponds to his Own Nature, dreaming (to the Consciousness
Deconditioned perceiver — vijñānākala) that precedes it, and so on
(progressively). The wise man should thus follow the entire sequence
everywhere (in all cases). (298)
(Thus, in the division into thirteen, in which the subjects) ‘start from’

that Own Nature which is the Dissolution Deconditioned (perceiver). This is the
meaning. ‘Everywhere (in all cases)” means right up to Śiva.

He says that:

mṁ-ākqdāttr=zša sthraf: gṬaTaāT || 2<8 11

ŚSū 3/20, also quoted above in TĀv ad 10/238cd-239ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

ekatrāpi prabhau pūrṇe cit turyātītam ucyate |
ānandas turyam icchaiva bījabhūmiḥ suṣuptatā || 299 ||
jñānaśaktiḥ svapna uktaḥ kriyāśaktis tu jāgṛtiḥ |

(These states are also found gathered together) in one place within

the Lord, Who is (perfectly) complete (pūrṇa). (Thus,) the state Beyond the
Fourth is said (to manifest within Him as the power of) consciousness. The
Fourth is bliss. Deep sleep, which is the seed-state (bījabhūmi), is (the
Lord’s) will. Dreaming is said to be the power of knowledge, while waking

is the power of action. (299-300ab)

That is not a metaphorical ascription, as when one says “the body is
fiery”. Thus, he says:
EI REEEFEEIĒ gṛcad ̄aā̄d ãẽīd:

|| 3oc

3 īa aīlq TGḺTd TīrTIST] īṭaiīq |

|1

lna caivam upacāraḥ syāt sarvaṁ tatraiva vastutaḥ || 300 ||
na cen na kvāpi mukhyatvaṁ nopacāro 'pi tat kvacit |
Nor is this just a metaphor (upacāra); all things are there in reality
(within the Lord). If this were not so, there could be no primary or
metaphorical sense in any case. (300cd-301ab)
This is so because ‘all things’, that is, phenomena, are ‘there in
realityʼ within the Lord, Who is (perfectly) complete (pūrṇa), and Whose sole

nature is consciousness.

the Īśvarapratyabhijñā):

Otherwise, nothing at all would manifest. As is said (in

MVV 1/1010ab jñānaṁ tu ṣvapnavr̥titvaṁ kriyā jāgrad iti sṇrtā | Cognition (jāāna)

is the dreaming state, (whereas) waking is considered to be action.’ TĀ 10/289-300ab
=
MVV 1/999-1010ab. Abhinava continues quoting from his MVV in Chapter Eleven.
Thus, TĀ 11/54cd-117ab (54-117)is the same or similar to MVV 1/1013cd-1061. The

following are extra lines in MVV between these two long citations.
atraiva yogabhūmyutthāḥ saṁjñāḥ piṇḍasthatādayaḥ ||
sarvatobhadratādyās tu prasaṁkhyājñāninirmitāḥ |
ekaikatra catūrūpasadbhāvād vitate tataḥ ||
catūrūpatvam ekatra tritvaṁ paścād athaikatā |

cekas tu bhairavo nāthaḥ prollasad
viśvarāpakaḥ ||
cekaḥ śivādisakalaparyantasthitisaṁgataḥ |

‘Here itself, the terms Piṇḍastha – Established in the Body etc., arise from the

planes of Yoga. Sarvatobhadra etc. are (terms) coined by those who have known

intuitive insight (prasaṅkhyā). Each one extends here from the essential nature of the

fourfold form. Then there is a state of four-fold form in one place, (then) three, and after
that of one. Thereis one Lord Bhairava who, pouring forth, is all things. Heis the union
of the state that begins with Śiva and ends with the Conditioned (perceiver). MVV

1/1010cd-1013ab

CHAPTER TEN
‘(The mass of) existing things rest in the Self of the Lord (and thus)

manifest. If they were not to do so, the act of reflective awareness, which is the

will (icchāmarśa), would not take place.
the

Thus, the primary (sense and corresponding reality) is not to be found in

Conditioned

and

other

(perceivers),

because

they

do

not

manifest

(independently), and that being so, because there is no primary (sense and
corresponding reality), the metaphorical one would also not exist. Thus, the
group of five states, beginning with waking, (must exist) in actual fact within
Siva also.

The Five States in Relation to the Fifteen Divisions
and the Seven Perceivers

TTFṬṬRHYIK
T TṬF HÇTJTT |I 302 11

a ēHrīa

ā a=d vṁhz ūāvafṁ aiī |

r̥ Smaaaã Sī ̄āGTT- |I|/302 1

qā: 1| 3c3 1
GRḹ ÑTYGTT TTdTaḍdd%

ai sīaTq
% ṬATT ṬĀaT II 30% ||

a ṁaāT -aīa. |

Ta agsṝīṭēīaa: || 3ou 1|

aaīr̄ ġ Taāīd a TT] ũẽ̄aT; |

īa--] Ṭ̄TTITTĪ TĪTF̄-TTRAT. |

Ū̄̄ T-3I TJTCT LI 30.6 1|

Ñ fiaṁ? āmfṁzaī a ũrā a vāt |

etac chrīpūrvaśāstre ca sphuṭam uktaṁ maheśinā l| 301 |I

tatra svarūpaṁ śaktiś ca sakalaś ceti tat trayam ḷ

iti jāgradavastheyaṁ bhede pañcadaśātmake || 302 ||
akalau svapnasauṣupte turyaṁ mantrādivargabhāk |
turyātītaṁ śaktiśaṁbhū trayodaśābhidhe punaḥ || 303 |I
svarūpaṁ jāgrad anyat tu prāgvat pralayakevale |

1P 1/5/10. Also quoted in TĀv ad 3/247cd-248ab, ad 8/362-364ab (361cd-363), ad

9/8ab, and ad 15/202cd-203ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

svaṁ jāgratsvapnasupte dve turyādy atra ca pūrvavat || 304 ||
tadīśāḥ śaktiśaṁbhv itthaṁ pañca syur jāgradādayaḥ | 305 II
saptabhede tu mantrākhye svaṁ mantreśā maheśvarāḥ |
Śśaktiḥ śaṁbhuś ca pañcoktā avasthā jāgradādayaḥ || 306 ||
svarūpaṁ mantramāheśī śaktir mantramaheśvaraḥ |
jñānam icchā ca śaṁbhur atra ca pañcamī|
maheśabhede trividhe jāgradādi nirūpitam || 308 ||
The Great Lord has clearly said this in the Śrīpūrvaśastra, (where
we read):™ “{(1) When the divisions are fifteen, this waking state
corresponds to three of them, namely, (one’s) Own Nature, the Conditioned

(sakala) (subject) and (his) power. Dreaming and deep sleep correspond to
the two Deconditioned (subjects), the Fourth state to the Mantra (subjects)
and the rest, and the state Beyond the Fourth to Śiva and His power.

(301cd-303abc)

(2) Again, when the divisions are thirteen, the waking state
corresponds to the Own Nature and the others are as before. (3) When the

Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers - pralayākala – become objects, the
divisions become eleven). The waking state corresponds to (one’s) Own
(Nature), the state of dreaming and deep sleep to the two (i.e. the
Consciousness Deconditioned perceiver and its powers), the Fourth (and

Beyond the Fourth) are as before. (303d-304)

(4) When the Consciousness Deconditioned (subjects become
objects, the divisions are nine). The five states, waking and the rest,
correspond respectively to (one’s) Own Nature, the Mantra (subjects), the

Lords of Mantra, the Great Lords of Mantra, and Śiva, along with His
power. (305)
(5) When the Mantra (subjects become objects of knowledge) and
the divisions are seven, the five states of waking etc. correspond to (one’s)
Own Nature, the Lords of Mantra, the Great Lords of Mantra, Power and

Śiva. (306)

(6) When the Lords of Mantra (become objects of knowledge), there
are five divisions. They are these five – (the waking and other states
correspond to one’s) Own Nature, power of the Great Lords of Mantra, the

Great Lords of Mantra, power and Śiva. (307)
(7) When the Great Lords of Mantra (become the object of

knowledge), the divisions are three, the states of waking etc. correspond to
(one’s) Own Nature, the (three) powers of action, knowledge and will,
together with Śiva, who is the fifth here. (308)

(1) (When the divisions are fifteen, one’s) Own Nature (extends) from

Earth up to Unmanifest (Nature), and the proximity of the word ‘Conditioned

Verse 302 is a direct quote of MV 2/27, and 303-308 are an explanatory paraphrase
of MV 2/28-33ab. MV 2/27-35ab is quoted in full in the commentary.

CHAPTER TEN

(subject)” (implicitly includes) it and its power. ‘The two Deconditioned
(subjects) are the Dissolution Deconditioned (pralayākala) and Consciousness
(2) (When the divisions are thirteen, one’s) ‘Own nature’ is the

Conditioned (perceiver), its power, and (the principles from Nature) up to the
Force (of limited agency) (kalā); ʻthe others are as beforeʼ. Thus, the two
Deconditioned (perceivers correspond to the states of) dreaming and deep sleep
(respectively). The Fourth (state includes) the Mantra and other (higher
perceivers), and Beyond the Fourth is Power and Śiva. One should continue
mutatis mutandis in this way.
(3) ‘When the Dissolution Deconditioned (perceivers – pralayākala)?
become objects, the divisions become eleven. What was ‘the waking state’
before corresponds to ‘(one’s) Own Nature’ as a Dissolution Conditioned
(perceiver) etc. ‘The two’ are the Consciousness Deconditioned perceiver and

its power. Thus, the power of the Consciousness Deconditioned perceiver is
(experienced) when dreaming, and the Consciousness Deconditioned perceiver
(itself alone) in deep sleep. (The remaining two higher states) ‘are as before’.
Thus, the (higher) Mantra and other (perceivers are experienced) in the Fourth
state, and Śiva and Śakti in the one Beyond the Fourth.
(4)

“When the Consciousness Deconditioned (subjects become

objects), that is, when the divisions are nine, ‘(one’s) Own Nature’ is the
Consciousness Deconditioned (subject) etc., that previously occupied the plane
of dreaming and deep sleep. He indicates the progression (by saying) ‘waking
and the restʼ. Thus, the Consciousness Deconditioned (subject) and its power
are the waking state (and s0 on), up to Śiva and Śakti, who are the state Beyond
the Fourth.
(5) (When the divisions are seven,) the Mantra etc. (subjects become
objects of knowledge), and (one’s) ‘Own Nature’ is the waking state, which
previously occupied the level of the dreaming state; thus, the Lords of the
Mantra (perceivers) are in the dreaming (state), the Great Lords of Mantras are
in deep sleep, Power in the Fourth state, and Śiva is Beyond the Fourth.
(6) When the Lords of Mantra become objects of knowledge, the
waking etc. state corresponds to (one’s) ‘Own Nature’, which is that of the
Lords of Mantra and the rest. The states of dreaming and the rest are, in due

order, (those of the higher perceivers), beginning with the power of the Great
Lords of Mantra.
(7) (When one’s) ‘Own Nature’ is that of the Great Lords of Mantra and
the rest, (that corresponds to) the waking and other states up to Śiva as the fift,
which is Beyond the Fourth, it is said, according to our philosophy, that in
actual fact it is Śiva’s power that has (thus) arisen in three forms, and that (it is)
will, knowledge and action.

The waking and other (states) are not only discernible (niripaṇīya) up
to here, but also within Śiva, in whose essential nature duality has fallen away.
Thus he says:
SĪTITCṬHTCĪTST ṬTGTĀT Ṁācddī:

ṢĪTJT: TTATTFJa TGĪSTT TAHT |I| 3°8 1

TANTRĀLOKA

vyāpārād ādhipatyāc ca taddhānyā prerakatvataḥ |
icchānivṛtteḥ ṣvasthatvāc chiva eko 'pi pañcadhā || 309 ||

Although, Śiva is one, the five states are present in Him by virtue of

His 1) activity (yyāpāra), 2) Lordship (adhipatya), 3) the absence of these
(two characteristics), 4) impulse (prerakatva), and when (His) desire is
satisfied, 5) rest within Himself. (309)

Having divided up (into sections) what was said previously, the author

and I have explained it. So the effort to do so is not repeated here. That is said

there (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘Another classification is now also taught in brief. Pay heed! The wise

should know that the sequence of all the penetrations (āveśakrama) is (also)

divided into another five types, each one distinct (from the other), in accord

with the variety (bheda) of waking, dreaming and the rest (of the five states of

consciousness).

(A) There (in that case), the triad consṣisting of (1) the Conditioned
(perceivers), (their) energy, and (their) own nature, constitutes the level of
wakefulness in the fifteen-fold division. (2 and 3) The two Deconditioned

(subjects) should be rightly known to be in the states of dreaming and deep
(dreamless) sleep (respectively). (4) The category of Mantra (perceivers) and
the rest, that is, their Lords and their Lords (i.e., the Lords of Mantras and the
Great Lords of Mantra) are considered to be in the Fourth State. O fair-faced
Lady. (5) Śakti and Śiva should be known to be in the state Beyond the Fourth.
(B) When the division is thirteen-fold, (1) (the waking state corresponds

to) the innate nature. (2-5) Both the two Deconditioned (subjects), Mantras,

Lords of Mantras, (their) Lords (the Great Lords Mantra), as well as Śakti and
Śiva, are as before. (29cd-31ab)
(C) In the (eleven-fold) division, when the Dissolution Deconditioned
(perceivers are the object, the five states correspond to) (1) (their) own (nature)

(svam), (that is the first two types of perceivers abiding as wakeful awareness),

(2) both the Consciousness Deconditioned (perceiver) and (3) its power (in
dreaming and deep sleep, respectively); (4) the Mantras, Lords of Mantras and
(their) Lords (the Great Lords of Mantra) (in the Fourth state), (5) Śakti and

Śiva, as before (in the state Beyond the Fourth).

(D) When (the Consciousness Deconditioned (perceivers) become
objects and the division is said to be nine-fold, the five states are said to be (1)

This verse is a light exegetical paraphrase of MV 2/34cd-35ab. MV 2/34cd-35ab is

quoted in TĀv ad 10/185-186ab. MV 2/34c is quoted by Abhinava in TĀ 10/185c.

The fourth topic that Abhinavagupta has in his detailed list of topics (see above

1/287-327ab) is called ‘the various types of sentient subjects'. According to Jayaratha,
this is not an independent section of this chapter, but is a topic which is treated in two or

three sections of it, including that which treats ‘perceptibility as a property of objects’

up to the ‘description of the waking state’ etc. It is possible, however, that
Abhinavagupta is referring to verses 10/302-309 as dealing with this topic.

See above, 10/178b. This verse prefaces those quoted by Jayaratha.

Read with MS Ġ svarāpam akalau for svarāpasakalau.

CHAPTER TEN

their own (nature) (svam), (2) the Mantra (perceivers), (3) the Lords of Mantras,
(4) their Lords (the Great Lords of Mantras), and (5) Śakti and Śiva.

(E) O fair-hued Lady, again, when (the Mantra perceivers are the object,

and s0) the division is into seven, the five (states) should be known to be
(divided) as before, as (1) (their) innate nature, (2) the Lords of Mantra, (3)
(their) Lords (the Great Lords of Mantra), (4) Śakti and (5) Śiva.
(F) When (the Lords of Mantra become the object, and so the division is
into) a group of five, (the five states of consciousness correspond to) (1) their

own (nature) (svam), (2) the power (of the Great Lords of Mantra), (3) the
(Great) Lords (of Mantra), and the two, (4) Śakti and (5) Śiva.

(G) When (the Great Lords of Mantra become the object, and so the

division is) triple, (the waking and other states) should be perceived to be (1)
(their own) nature (which is the waking state). The division of (the three powers
together as the second, namely) (2) the power (of action), (3) the power (of
knowledge), and (4) (that of the) will (as dreaming, deep sleep and the Fourth,
respectively), and (5) Śiva (who is the third division as Beyond the Fourth).
Although (Śiva is) undivided, even so (his nature is) fivefold, because

of (1) (His (purposeful) activity, and (2) sovereignty (savyāpārādhipatvena),

and because (3) he impels consciousness (independently of and) in the absence

of both these (two powers of knowledge and action in pure volition), and (also)

because of (4) the cessation of volition (in his power of bliss), and because (5)

(as consciousness itself,) he is established within himself. Thus is explained

what needs to be understood concerning the five-fold division.’

The division of the perceivers within the three (forms of) objectivity,

namely, entities (vastu), (their) attributes (dharma) and the rest, has (already)

been explained for each state, and so (this subject) is not taken up separately
(again) here.

He now concludes with the first half of the verse (of which the second
half introduces the following chapter).

ity eṣa darśito ʻsmābhis tattvādhvā viṣṭarād atha |

(310ab)

Thus, we have explained the Path of the Principles at length.

The sense is that the thirty-six-fold (division of the principles) was
explained briefly in the previous chapter; here (he explains it) ‘aṭ length’ in

another way, that is, each of the principles according to the fifteen-fold etc.

sequences. ‘Thus’ (atha) (is said) at the end, so that (the work may) be
auspicious.
The one called Jayaratha,

who knows the true nature of the

disagreement (here) with the views of (the Mīmāṁsaka) Kumārila and the

MV 2/34cd-35 is also quoted above in TĀv ad 10/185-186ab.

! MV 2/27-35ab. Cf. Somadeva’s translation (2004: p. 209-210).

TANTRĀLOKA

Naiyāyikas, presented this very clear and extensive commentary on chapter ten
(of the Tantrāloka).

Thus (ends) Chapter Ten, called the Division of the Principles of the

(commentary called) Discernment of the venerable Tantrāloka.

Appendix A

to Chapter Nine
The Emanation of the Tattvas According to the
Parātriṁśikāvivaraṉa (p. 130-141).
Goodall (2015: 44-46) provides an outline of the evolution of the

system of thirty-six tattvas in the Niśvāsatattvasaṁhitā and a table of them.
Maheśvarānanda describes and explains the thirty-six tattvas in a long passage
in his Mahārthamañja starting from verse 13. The first chapter of the third
section of the Zśvarapratyabhijūā, called ‘concerning the Tattvas’, is dedicated
to an exposition of the thirty-six Tattvas. The second chapter deals with related
matters. These include the nature of the three Impurities in IP 3/2/4-5, which is

translated in note 268 to TĀv ad 1/23, and the nature of the seven perceivers in
3/2/6-9, that is discussed in Chapter Ten that follows. Abhinava provides a very
helpful summary and explanation of his exposition of the reality levels (tattva)
in chapter eight of his Tantrasāra p. 70-91, to which the reader is referred. There
is a translation in Italian and one in English. Both are noted in the bibliography.
Another place Abhinava has an occasion to present the system of
Tattvas is in the Parātriṁśikāvivaraṇa (p. 130-141). A translation of this
interesting passage follows.
‘Above the Speech of Vision (pasyanti) is the plane of the goddess Parā,
where everything shines (bhāti) and is contemplated (vimyṛsśyate) as one
(abhedena). Although (the Light of consciousness) shines (bhāsanā) undivided
(abhedena) on the plane of (Pure) Knowledge and so too on the plane of Māyā,

it is otherwise with the reflective awareness (inherent in it that perceives
polarities within the one Light). Thus, on the plane of (Pure) Knowledge, the

‘this’ (aspect), that is, the totality of the perceiving subjects and objects, is
projected (saṁkrāmet) as a unity (ekataḥ) into the (subjectivity which is the) ‘T’
(aspect) (ahamātmani). It is then contemplated as covered over (ācchādita) by
that (‘T') as ‘l-thisʼ (i.e. ‘I am (all) thisʼ). (In other words,) both (these polarities)
are reflected (pratibimbita) within a common foundation (adhikaraṇa), which is
consciousness, as undivided (from it) and, manifesting in this way, it is said that

they possess (a common) basis (p. 131). Thus, as the venerable Utpaladeva has
said with regards to the Iśvara principle (that corresponds to this state of

consciousness): ‘in Īśvara’s state (avasthā), phenomena (bhāva) are on the plane
(of unity-in-difference,) which is supreme-cum-inferior (parāparā), just as on

the path of Māyā (they are on the plane of difference, which is the) inferior one
(aparā). Indeed, that (supreme power) is not the supreme-cum-inferior
(parāparāśakti) one or the inferior one (aparāśakti).’ Nor should one think that it
is right to doubt that (his view) is contrary to the scriptures that are being

expounded. (p. 132)

! Here it seems Abhinava is talking about the difference between the metaphysical
principle called ‘Īśvara’ and ‘śvara’ (literally meaning ‘lord’) as Śiva Himself. The
energy of the former is Parāparā and of the latter, Parā.

TANTRĀLOKA

Although the essential nature (rāpa) within the Great Lords of Mantra
and the rest (of the perceivers in the pure principles) is in ultimate reality solely

(awakened) consciousness alone, (bodha) but as they are different from one
another, consciousness (saṁtvid) assumes in them the form “I (am) I” (aham

aham), whereas ‘this
(is) just this’. Again, although the Consciousness
Deconditioned
ākala) (perceivers) in reality consist solely of
consciousness, of the two aspects of the absence of awakening (aprabodha) of
consciousness, namely, ‘not I’ and ‘not this’ʼ, they are awake (to the experience

of themselves as) ‘’. The Dissolution Deconditioned (pralayākalā) (perceivers)

are (totally) asleep with regards to both ‘’ and ‘this’. Although the reflective
awareness which constitutes the vital principle of things (prāṇabhūta), is also
present here on the plane of Māyā (implicit) as the manifestation of (the initial)
nonconceptual

(mirvikaḹpa)

(moment

of perception),

even

so,

the

daily

phenomenal activity (vyavahāra) of reflective awareness which follows after it
(paścāttaṉa), although it exists by virtue (of the preceding act of awareness free
of thought constructs) and is, in reality, not separate from it, operates in that
form (as conceptual). (p. 133) It consists of discursive representations (vikalpa),
as the reflective awareness of relative distinctions (bhedenaiva), that is (as
notions such as): “T am this body etc.”, “I am he who is this (embodied)

perceiver”, “this is a jar etc.”, “that which is ‘this’ is what is to be known”.
(Such is the state of consciousness of the (fully) Obscured (sakaḹa) perceiver.)
As there is no awareness (saṁvedana) of any other cause of (its

presenting itself) in this way (apart from its own nature), and even if one were
to imagine one, it would invariably ultimately result in being (just) this kind of
consciousness (tathāvidhabodha) (alone). Thus, (one must admit that) this

consciousness, which is free of discursive representations (avikaḷpasaṁvid),
possesses such a capacity (tathāsāmarthya) (to generate thought constructs).
This endless variety (of thought constructs) is because of its union with this

power and so it is well demonstrated that the (omnipotent) sovereignty
(aiśvaya) (of consciousness) abides unchanged. (This) sovereign freedom (of
pure nonconceptual consciousness to be all things) persists on this (plane of)
being (sattā) and so reflective awareness can be experienced (saṁbhāvya) in this

way also in phenomenal (mmāyīya) objectivity, which is that (of the plane) of

Corporeal Speech or in the abode of the Middle Speech, although (on these
planes it appears to be) separate from the shining (of the Light of consciousness)
(bhāsanātireky api). Here, within (this) supreme consciousness, as is the Light
(bhāsā) (of consciousness), s0 is reflective awareness which is the daily
commerce of life.
Thus, (at the supreme level of Speech,) phenomena manifest as one in
all respects, like water in water or a flame in a flame (jvālā), not even like a
reflection (in a mirror, as is the case at the level of the Speech of Vision, where

there is a trace of difference). It is only to the degree in which this supreme
goddess (paramesśvarī) also is described in words for the purpose of instruction
that she is fashioned (by Her own will) into lower states of being

(adharasattākḷptā). (p. 134) In this way, Bhairava’s nature, which is the Light

See TĀ 1/77-78 and 10/3-7ab.

APPENDIX A CHAPTER NINE

(of consciousness) (bhāsā), is self-evident (svataḥ siddha), without beginning,

the first and last in all respects (of all things) and (yet) eternally present.
What else can be said of him? Luminous with His own Light, He
illumines His own Light as the unfolding of the principles and phenomena
(tattvabhāva), which are made of His own nature (ātmamaya), as one with His
Himself (ātmaikyena). (And just as He illumines Himself,) so too does he

reflect in this very way (on His own nature as and all things manifest within it),
without (the inherent) wonder in this way (of His consciousness) diminishing (at
all). Moreover, the act of reflective awareness in this way, which is directed at

the shining (bhāsana) (of the Light), is a direct witness (sākṣātkārim) of the
infinite trillions of billions of millions of phenomenal (māyāya) destructions and
future creations and, (at one with it,) is of that very nature (tathārūpa). If, even
though it is such, one were to reflect in the course of emanation (sṛsṣṭ) on that

which is, with respect to the Light, the beginning or the middle, the doubt that
that which precedes and that which follows are not invariably linked together
which (thus) arises would not come to an end, and so (this) reflective awareness

would not be full (anymore); some things would appear within it and others not,
(and so its) nonduality (abheda) would be shattered.

So how could the trace (kalaṅka) of the indication of relative
distinctions (bheda) (already) contained (in a potential form) in the lower stages

of the Speech of Vision etc. abide (blissfully) within the great abode of supreme
Bhairava Who is the (sole) unchallenged (reality)? (Moreover,) the nature of the

venerable Parā Who, (no longer) nourishing this reality, would be reduced just

to a mere name. (p. 135) So how then could this (reflective awareness, being

such,) amount to anything? If it were not mounted onto this kind of flux (of
reflective awareness and consciousness), none of this which unfolds
(vijrmbhamāṇa) (before us), could appear. Then it would be right to say: ‘may
the absence of plenitude not be! May the aggregate of phenomena not be well
established! May all talk of nonduality cease! May (things) no longer rest
(blissfully) on Bhairava! It is only in words that the supreme state (paratva)
sustains the stain of duality!
Thus, (all) this exists and makes sense (sarṁgacchate) if the light (bhāsā)

(of consciousness), which is such, falling right from the very first (level) up to
the last of all, should establish its plane (of being) (padarṁ bandhayet) there

itself, along with (its) reflective awareness also. (So, just as) the last part thus
bears its own nature, it (also) contains within itself the other infinite number of

parts, that step by step precede it and are embraced by them in a manner which
is not separate from that, its own nature. Illumining and contemplating itself
(thus), it is full (and perfect). The parts which precede it are, (in their turn,) at
one with (the same) reflective awareness, which has as its essence (the same)

perfectly full (and all-embracing) Light (bhāsā) that has (already) unfolded with
respect to the parts which follow, and so, without abandoning the plenitude
which is its subsequent part, it embraces (all) the other parts that precede it,
which are by it forcibly made to partake of their own nature, which is not
separate from it. Thus, each one of them, illuminating and contemplating itself
in this way, is undivided (full and complete) (akhaṇḍita). Thus the Light (bhāṣā)
of each preceding part is not separate from the light of (all) the parts (two, three,
four and so on) that follow after it, and forcibly appropriates (balasvīkṛta) the

TANTRĀLOKA

(aesthetic) relish (camatkāra) of the parts which respectively precede it, in a

manner that cannot deviate from its own nature (svabhāvāvyabhicārānu-rodha),
and so, (abiding) in a state of oneness with Bhairava attained (thereby), the

light, even (when they are considered) individually (ekaikam api param), is full
(and perfectly all-embracing). (p. 136) This is so until they reach the most
intimate point of their own being (nija . . . nikatataravarti rīpam), which is
considered to be Bhairava, Who shines with His own Light. This is the abode of
rest ( viśrāntidhāmam), or (that) of one’s own will, or (one may say that it is) the

body (vapuṣ) called Bhairava. May you yourselves be skilful in that reflective
awareness and dedicated to (this contemplative) enumeration (prasaṁkhyāna)
(of the principles). Vision roams uninterrupted over a wild land, which is not

broken up by (its) lakes, mountains, trees and the like or else, extending
(unbroken) to a great distance in woodlands (seen from a height). Thus,
(attaining this state of unbroken wholeness), it leads to entry into Bhairava’s
(awakened) consciousness (bodha), and so may you all attain (the reality) taught

in the traditional teachings (saṁpradāyatā). As is said (in the Vijñānabhairava):

etc.

‘Cast (your) gaze onto a place without trees, mountains or walls . . .

Otherwise, if (the various parts) were to fall one by one, beginning with
the first part (without being connected to one another), or if this were to be
devoid of parts, then what difference would there be between (Bhairava
consciousness in its fullness) and the other forms of consciousness (saṁvedana)
that are not considered to be full? This difference between consciousness

(saṁvedana) considered to be full (and all-embracing) and the other forms of
consciousness which are not full consists, as it were, in the state of wonder, that

contains within itself the infinite variety of things. This the followers of
Parameśvara, who have the teachings, should experience for themselves. (p.

137) The lotus of the heart of fettered souls (pasujana), which has not been
made to bloom by the rays of the Supreme Lord’s descent of power, cannot be
penetrated and opened even with countless arguments sharp (as thorns). This
same vision, full (and perfect), can fall (drṣṭipāta) even with regards to a jar.
Indeed, even in that case, nondiscursive consciousness descends all at once
(jhagiti . . . nipatati) right up to the last part, whereas the forms of discursive
consciousness ( vikalpasaṁvid) that follow after it, proceeding along (āyāntyāḥ),
penetrate gradually (kramāt) ever more deeply, up to the part closest to the final
one. What use is there of (discussing) anything else? (Let this suffice).
Thus, reality, which

va (śīvatattva), is (never absent) even here (in

everyday life). Nondiscursive (avikalpa), it is the source of conceptual
representations ( vikalpa). Freedom itself, without beginning, it is the beginning
of all things. This has been proved and to this extent there is no disagreement.
That (reality) becomes thus completely full (and all-embracing), if it reaches the
plane of the Earth principle, the last of all. Indeed, he who contemplates the
Earth (principle as a whole, independently of the beings and things that
constitute it), can illumine and contemplate it as an object, and even so, as (one

VBh v. 60.

APPENDIX A CHAPTER NINE

and) undivided (abhedena), if one is actively engaged (in directing one's

attention) to the reflective awareness and manifestation of the (universal)
essence (sarvasva) of its own nature. The nature and essence of that (awareness

as a whole) is that of functioning as the foundation (ādharavṛtti) of the gross
elements, from Ether to Water. These have come forth from the subtle elements
which precede them, and have as their root cause the ego (ahaṁkāra), which is a
modification (pariṇāma) of the intellect (dhā), which is an allotropic form
(vikāra) of Nature (prakṛti, which consists of the totality of objectivity

(grāḥyacakra) in an undifferentiated state of the perceiver subject to Māyā, who
is freedom and consciousness in a contracted state. (p. 138) (This contracted
state) arises due to the manifestation of complete duality (ekarasabheda), which

is preceded by duality that has not (yet fully) developed (aprarūḍha), which is
fashioned (kḷpta), from complete (and perfect) freedom in the course of (its)
emanation. (The Earth is only completely Earth and as such fully formed in its)
own nature when it implicitly (encompasses within itself all other things). It
encompasses within itself five qualities, and so for this reason, the five subtle
eḷements which, contained implicitly within it, must, in order to form their own

full nature, in their turn, implicitly contain their cause which, in its turn, must
contain its prior root (causal principle), which establishes it (to be such), and so

on. The view that what is considered to be the material cause does not continue
(to exist in its) product is not (logically) sustainable. (At the most,) one may say
that sometimes the efficient and other (ancillary) causes are not present (in the
effect). We have discussed (this view) thoroughly elsewhere (in another) book

dedicated to that (subject); (discussing it here again) would lead us away from
the topic, and so (need not be discussed) at length here.

In this way, the Earth (principle) is in the beginning (of the ascending

series of principles). Water, which comes after it, should be filled (with the
same consciousness) illumined and contemplated in its wholeness (sākalyena),

(arousing a corresponding state) of relish (camatkāra) of the light and reflective
awareness of that (image of the Water principle), having encompassed within
itself the latent traces and essential nature of the Earth principle which is such
(as described). (The same should be repeated with the other principles) until, in
the end, (the yogi attains) the Goddess who is full (and all-embracing)
consciousness (pārṇasaṁvid), Who is Śiva’s very nature. (p. 139) What is said
in the scripture, namely, that although the Absolute (Brahman) is (equally in
each) place, (t is) omniform, (unsurpassed and inconceivable), and that in each

principle are present (all) thirty-six principles, is based on these arguments and
teaching. And such also is the teaching of the Stanzas on Vibration, which
should be taken to heart, where we read:

‘When (the yogi’s consciousness) pervades all things by (his) desire to
perceive, then why speak much? - He will experience it for himself.’
The last part (of these verses) alludes to this. What is (the use of saying)
anything else? (Let this suffice!) Within the unfolding (of the sphere) of Natural

See note 1,001.

Cf. TĀ 9/5lcd.

SpKā 3/13 (43).

TANTRĀLOKA

Law (niyati), unless it is removed by the Supreme Lord’s freedom, the nature of

something is that which it cannot do without, as for example, the nature of a

Śśīṁsīpā (tree) is a tree. Conversely, that which something can do without is not
its own nature, as for example, is the case with what is not a sṁśapā, that exists
in the absence of ‘tree-nessʼ. (p. 140) Now, the various principles (Earth and the
rest) cannot exist without those that, respectively, precede them, such as water
and the rest, which thus in this sense constitute their own (essential) nature. The

Earth (principle) cannot exist without the Water (principle), because one can
(clearly) perceive fluidity (inherently) within its solidity (as when one observes
heated metals melt). Thus, in accord with this principle, the gross elements
cannot exist without the subtle ones, and these without the unfolding of the

senses, and the senses also without the ascertainment (adhyavasāya) (which is

the function of the intellect). All these cannot exist separately apart from

(Nature,) the root cause, which in its original, subtle undivided form (pervades

them all). The root Nature (mālaprakṛti) is the object of enjoyment (bhogyā).
How can that exist without the enjoying subject (bhoktr) which, due to this

varied object of enjoyment, is contracted, and due to (this) contraction is subject

to various bonds, namely, time, the force (of limited agency) and the rest (of the
obscuring coverings) which have been posited within its own nature
(svātmāroḥita). How can the contraction of unbroken (undivided) consciousness
be possible without its freedom which, also called Māyā, is the cause of (this)
contraction? The freedom to contract (consciousness) implies a series of grades
of contractions, which have as their essence the uncontracted state (of
consciousness). That could not exist if there not (a unitary consciousness which

unfolds in stages from being) slightly uncontracted, uncontracted, slightly
expanded and (then finally) expanding (fully). (p. 141) (Thus ultimately) all this

that is (manifest and) perceived would be nothing without Bhairava who, free

and completely full, is the essence of perception (prathā). Thus, this sequential
development (krama) of the principles is proved to exist by own consciousness
(svasaṁvitsiddha). In this way the nature of the 7attvas has been properly

explained.”

Appendix B

to Chapter Nine
The Six Kañcukas
Māyā produces all the tatrvas below it in two streams. The first consists
of its direct creations and the other, indirect. Its direct emanations are the five
kaūñcukas, that go down to the level of the individual soul in one stream. The
other stream generates Prakṛti, from which the rest of the tattvas down to Earth
are emanated, much as they are according to the Sāṁkhya. Thusṣ, the first stream
is related most directly to the individual soul, and the other to the sphere of
objectivity, starting with the tattvas of the components of the psychophysical
organism down to the objective sphere of their activity, that is, the tattvas of
sensations and the physical objects. Both streams are essential for the individual
soul. The subjective one makes him fit to cognize and act, and the other
furnishes the tools and object of his perception and action. Thus, the individual
soul, enveloped and energized by Maāyā and the kañcukas, is partially sentient
consciousness in his most basic essential nature, and partially objective
insentience. If he were to be solely sentient, pure consciousness with no
objective element, he would be fully expanded Siva consciousness. Thus, all
that takes place for and by the individual soul is set in the framework of the law
of karma, which essentially dictates what the soul equipped in this way
experiences, and supplies the reason for why it experiences what it does,
without it ever losing its fundamental link with its own essential Śiva nature.
The word ‘kañcuka’ in a literal, non-technical sense means, according
to Monier Williams’s dictionary: ‘a dress fitting close to the upper part of the
body, armour, mail a cuirass, corselet, bodice, jacket, the skin of a snake husk,
shell, a cover, and disguise.” Although the literal meaning of the word does
describe the kañcukas to some extent, they are so intimately associated with the
indiviḍual soul that to think of them simply as adventitious enveloping
coverings would be very misleading. Indeed, we cannot understand the nature of
the individual soul fully without them. In their absence, when Māyā has not yet
generated them, the soul is totally helpless. It can do and known nothing. As if
in a state of deep sleep, devoid of any impulse or desire, it is as totally bound as
it could be, short of total insentience. Conversely, when they are active, the
individual soul is equipped to perceive, act, will, exist in time, and experience

its Karma. Accordingly, Abhinava defines the individual soul in terms of Māyā
and its primary products as follows:
“The individual soul is the Māya perceiver whose nature is the light (of
consciousness) that is enveloped by the six obscuring coverings (kaṅcuka),
namely, 1) Necessity (niyati), 2) Time, 3) Attachment, 4) Impure Knowledge, 5)

(limited) Agency and 6) Māyā, (corresponding to the experience that) 1) ‘it is
this alone, 2) just now, (that) 3) being attached, 4) IĪ know, 5) I act, and 6) (so
my) nature is contracted in this way’..!
IPVV vol 2 p. 240. The perceivers basic state is one of deep sleep. When the kaiñcukas
function, he enters the other states of consciousness. See MVV 1/836-843, quoted in a
note to 9/204. MVV 1/840 ff. discusses the nature of the triad of subject, object and

TANTRĀLOKA

The order here, that is, Kalā, Vidyā, Rāga, Kāla and Nīiyati, is also

found in the Tantrāloka (9/204). However, it is not always the same in all the

texts. Even in the 7antrāloka itself we find a variant. Thus, we read in Chapter
Six that: ‘At the lower level, the pure principles, Anāśritaśiva, Sadāśiva, Īśvara

and Śuddhavidyā become Maāyā,

Kalā-Vidyā,

Kāla-Niyati,

and

Raāga,

respectively. Kṣemarāja uniformly adheres to the former sequence in his
Parāpraveśikā (p.6, 7-8), Pratyabhijñāḥṛdaya (p. 16 and p. 22) and commentary
on the Svacchandatantra (SVTu ad 11/59. See TĀ note 9, 323 for a translation).

In the Parāpravesikā
(p. 7-8) we read:

‘If the Supreme Lord, laying hold of his own nature with the power of
Māyā, which is (His) supreme sovereign (power), assumes the (individual)
perceiver’s contracted state (of consciousness, he is) then called ‘puruṣa'. This
is the (individual soul) subject to transmigratory existence, bound by Karma and
deluded by Māyā. (But) although he is not separate from the Supreme Lord, the
Supreme Lord is not deluded (thereby). It is like magic. The magician, who has
brought about the illusion by his own will, has the mastery that comes from
knowing (how to perform the trick). Possessing the wealth of consciousness, he
is Supreme Śiva himself who is free (mmukta).
He possesses the agency (that does) all things, (as well as) omniscience,

plenitude, eternal permanence, and is (all-)pervasive. Although (his) powers are

(always) uncontracted, by (freely) assuming contraction, (they operate) as

limited agency (kalā) and capacity to know (vidyā), attachment (rāga), ime, and
nec
y (niyati.. Here (in this condition), limited agency is the cause of this
individual soul’s limited capacity to act. (His) capacity to know is the cause of
his limited capacity to know. Attachment is attachment to (particular) objects of
sense. Time is the sequence that divides up (and conditions) phenomena whose
nature is to manifest (at some particular time) and not manifest (at another,) as

gross elements etc. Necessity is the cause of the constraint that ‘I must do this’
(or) ‘I must not do this’. As this group offive obscures his own nature, it is (said
to be) an obscuring covering (kañcuka).”

In the Pratyabhūjñāhr̥dāya, the kañcukas are said to originate from the
five pure Tattvas mediated by Maāyā. The universal qualities of citsśakti
means of knowledge. Towards the end of that passage, the kañcukas are described in the
samē tērms.

TĀ 6/Alcd-42ab.

yadā tu parameśvaraḥ pārameśvaryā māyāśaktyā

saṁkucitagrãhakatām

aśnute

tadā

puruṣasaṁjñaḥ,

svarāpaṁ (p. 8) gṛhayivā
ayam

eva

māyāmohitaḥ

karmabandhanaḥ saṁsãṁĩ, parameśvarād abhinno ‘pi asya mohaḥ parameśvarasya na

bhavet —
indrajālam
iva
aindrajālikasya
svecchayā
saṁpāditabhrānteḥ,
vidyābhijñāpitaiśvaryas tu ciddhano muktaḥ paramaśiva eva | asya sarvakartṛtvaṁ
sarvajñatvaṁ pūũrṇatvaṁ nityatvaṁ vyãpakatvaṁ ca, śaktayo saṁkucitā api

saṁkocagrahaṇena kalāvidyārāgakālaniyatirāpatayā bhavanti | atra kalānāma (p. 9)

asya puruṣasya kiṁcitkartr̥tāhetuḥ, vidyā kiṁcijjñatvakāraṇam, rāgo viṣayeṣv
abhiṣvaṅgaḥ, kālo hi bhāvānāṁ bhāsanābhāsanātmakānāṁ kramo Śvacchedako
bhūtādeḥ, niyatīḥ mamedaṁ kartavyaṁ nedaṁ kartavyam iti niyamanahetuḥ, etat
pañcakam asya svarūpāvarakatvāt kañcukam iti

APPENDIX B CHAPTER NINE

(omnipresence), ānandasśakti (eternity), icchāśakti (omnipotence), jñānasakti

(omniscience) and krryāśakti (universal action), become the five obscuring
coverings (kañcuka). There we read:

‘Although (Śiva’s) powers are those of consciousness, bliss, will,

knowledge and action, (and continue to be so) due to (the individual soulʼs)

ignorance, (they assume) the form of the group of five (coverings), because he
is enveloped by the obscuring coverings of limited agency (ka/ā), limited
capacity to know (vidyā), attachment, time and necessity.

After Kṣemarāja has explained how consciousness and the powers of
the individual soul to perceive and act are restricted by the contraction brought
about by the threefold Impurity of Āṇava, Māyīya and Kārma, he goes on to say
that:
‘In the same way, the powers of universal agency, omniscience,
completeness, eternality and pervasiveness contract and (so) manifest as limited
agency (kalā, limited capacity to know (zaga), time (kāla) and necessity

(niyati), respectively.”

While the Saiddhāntika Mataṅgatantra does list the kañcukas in this
same sequence, the early Siddhāntas, apart from the Dīkṣottara,. generally do
not. The order in chapter five of the Parākhyatantra and the fourth of the

Svāyaṃbhuvasūtrasaṅgraha is practically the same as we find in Bhojarāja’s

Tattvaprakāśa (verse 22), where the sequence from Māyā is kāla, niyati, kalā,
vidyā, and rāga. Commenting on the 7attvaprakāśa (ad verse 41), Aghoraśiva
tries to explain this inconsistency by saying that the Mataṅga gives the sequence
in which they function (pravrttikrama), whereas Bhojarājā lists the sequence in
which they are emitted (syṣtikrama) out of Māyā. The same explanation,
although the orders differ, might be used to resolve the contradiction in the
accounts in the Kiraṇatantra, where we find the first in 1/16-18 (pravṛttikrama)
and the second in 4/22 and 8/125-130 (sṛsṣṭikrama).

The Correspondences Between the Semivowels and the Kacukas
Another context in which the sequential order of the kañcukas varies is
in their association with the semivowels. The letters of the alphabet correspond

to metaphysical principles (¢attva). Abhinava describes this in detail in his
commentaries on the Parātrīśikā and in Chapter Three of the 7antrāloka.

4. cidānandecchājñānakriyāśaktrāpatve

akhyātvaśāt

niyatikañcukavalitatvāt pañcakasvarūpaḥ Pr̥Hr p. 16

kalā-vidyā-rāga-kāla-

Jaidev Singh gives the same sequence in note 12 on the Sivasūtra 2/7 mātrkācakrasaṁbodhaḥ – ‘the awakening of the assembly of lettersʼ.

sarvakartrtvasarvajñatvapūrṇatvanityatvavyāpakatvaśaktayaḥ

saṁkocaṁ

grhnānā yathākramaṁ kalāvidyārāgakālaniyatirīpatayā bhānti | tathāvidhaś ca ayaṁ
Śaktidaridraḥ saṁsārī ucyate ṣvaśaktivikāṣse tu śiva eva | 9 || PrṛHṛ p. 22.

This matter is discussed in Dīkṣottara IFP T 17 pp. 994-995.

TANTRĀLOKA

Kṣemarāja presents a condensed, simplified version of the same in his
commentary on the Svasūtra. The correspondences are consistent and uniform
in these accounts except with respect to the semivowels Y R L and V. In the

Parātrīśikā, they are said to be dhāraṇas – ‘sustainers’ — because, as the

kañcukas and the gross elements with which they are also identified, they

sustain, that is, maintain the existence of the individual soul in its embodied

condition. In the Tantrāloka, these four correspond to the five Kañcukas + Māyā
that they replace.’ According to Abhinava they are Kalā, Vidyā, Māyā and
Rāga.
Commenting on ŚSū 2/7 mātṛkāsambodhaḥ – ‘the awakening of the
lettersʼ, Kṣemarāja describes the progressive unfolding of the letters from
consciousness in relation to the Tattvas, as outlined by Abhinava. When he
reaches the semivowels that correspond to the Kañcukas, he says:
‘By these (five) energies, in accord with the nomenclature of (standard
Sanskrit) phonetics (sīkṣā), (the semivowels are called) antaḥstha (in that

context, this means ‘located in between’, that is, between the vowels and the
consonants. When they are related to the kañcukas, antaḥstha means) ‘located
within’; that is, (they are located within) the plane of the individual soul as
Niyati and the other kañcukas. They are called ‘antahsthaā’ because (within the
individual subject) they sustain everything by sustaining the plane of the
(individual) subject and so the (various Agamic) traditions refer to them as

sustaining supports — dhāraṇas.

The vowels I (I,, U (Ū), r (R) and 1 (L) develop into the semivowels Y,

V. R and L, respectively, by coming in contact with A (Ā). Representing the
powers of will, knowledge and action, their phonemic development mirrors that
of the energies they symbolize within the consciousness of the individual soul.
These are, on the one hand, the four gross elements, and on the other, the
kañcukas. Kṣemarāja does not tell us exactly how the kañcukas correspond to

'TĀ 3/154cd-162 (154-162ab).

aābhya

eva

śaktibhyā’

antaḥ

puṁṅbhūmau

niyatyātikakañcukatveṇa avasthānāt antd sthākhyān pramātṛbhāmidhāravena viśvadhāraúāt dhārāáúāśabhena āmnāyeṣu uktān.

Abhinava writes:

‘Thus, the reason why this group of four (letters) are called semivowels
(antaḥstha) is because they are contained within (antaḥ) the will etc., and because they
come at the end (anta) as the abiding state in which (the powers have reached their)
final conclusion within themselves.' TĀ 3/158cd-159ab (158). In the sense of ‘located at

the endʼ, the semivowels represent the state at the final extremity of the influence of the

will. Jayaratha comments: ‘(the expression) ‘the will etc.’ refers to Expansion (U)
(which is the power of knowledge), because (the semivowels are contained) within

(antar) (the powers of) the will and Expansion, as they are in a state of oneness (within

them), and (so) in the same way, (the semivowels are at one) within themselves (that is,
with each other), because their one (common) nature is the perceiver. (This is the final)
and proper ‘conclusion’, that is, (their) manifeṣtation as one (ekātmyena). (That is their)
‘abiding state’ there because they abide at one with the perceiver. Thus, the four

APPENDIX B CHAPTER NINE

the semivowels. According SLJ's commentary, the six kañcukas are divided
into the four letters by combining Niyati with Rāga, and Kāla with Kalā. In his
notes to this passage, Jaidev Singh gives the following order: Y – Niyati, R Kāla, L – Rāga-Vidyā, V – Māyā - Kalā.

This is not the same as we find in the Parātrīśikālaghuvritti. Commenting on

‘Air, Fire, Water and Indra are the four sustainers (of the individual

The commentary explains:
‘1) Kalā is the (gross element) Air and it impels (the individual soul) as

(its) limited agency. 2) Impure knowledge in the form of Fire illumines (it) as

(its) limited capacity to know. 3) Māyā in the form of Water is craving (for
particular things), which is immersion (nimajjana) (into some object of desire)
and the blockage (of the individual soul). 4) Earth, (here) characterized as Indra,

is the power of attachment. These four powers sustain the individual soul
(giving him life and maintaining his state). They sustain it in the centre
(between the upper and lower levels, where it remains suspended) like king
Triśaṅku (who could neither ascend to heaven after death nor return to earth).

Otherwise, (if they were not to sustain it,) the consequence would be that it

would belong to the plane of insentient (entities), or else, like the Supreme

Lord, to the (plane of) the Sky of Consciousness.”"

King Triśaṅku was sent to heaven by Viśvamitra’s yogic power, but

Indra did not accept him and so he expelled him from heaven, but Viśvamitra

sustained him, so he remained suspended in the sky. The condition of the
individual soul is similar. He can neither become Lord Śiva nor the objective
world. He is in the middle between subjectivity and objectivity and is a
combination of both because of these four energies: kaā, vidyā, rāga, and

According to the PT, they sustain the individual soul in a condition

between the Pure and Impure reality levels. His condition is said to be like that

of the king Triśaṅku, who was sent to heaven by Viśvamitra when he died, but

was rejected by Indra who threw him back to earth, but, arrested in his descent
by Viśvamitra, remains suspended in the sky as the pole star. Indeed the

(semivowels) beginning with Y and ending with V (ie. Y, R, L and V) are called
‘antaḥsṭha’ (‘abiding within’) in this way in all the texts.’

' vāyvagnisalilendrāṇāṁ dhāraṇānāṁ catuṣṭayam | PT 7ab.
' 1) kalā vāyurūpā kiṅcit kartr̥tvena prerikā | 2) aśuddhavidyā tejorūpā kiṁcījjñatvena

prakāśikā ca | 3) māyā salilarūpā abhiṣyaṅgarūpanimajjanātmakastambhanasvabhāvā |
4) indropalakṣitā pṛthivīrāpā rāgaśaktiḥ | tā etāś catasraḥ śaktayaḥ puruṣaṁ

dhārayanti madhye triśaṅhkuvad viśramayanti, anyathā pāṣāṇādivat jaḍabhumim
evāpatet paraṃeśvaravad vā saṁvidgaganam evāpatet | PTLV p. 4

' Here only four kañcukas are mentioned, as this is in relation to the four letters Y, R ,
L and V. The two remaining kañcukas of kāla and niyati are included in kalā and rāga,

respectively.

See PTLv p. 7, which is p. 56 in Gnoli’s translation. The same analogy is also found
in the Paryantapañcaśikā v. 37 and MM p. 50.

TANTRĀLOKA

manner these four functions is ambivalent. On the one hand, they restrain the
unfolding of the soul’s consciousness, and yet at the same time they also
prevent it from degenerating further down to the level of insentience.
The serial order in the Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa is different. There, Abhinava
says that ‘the semivowels) beginning with Y and ending with V correspond to

the principles called Rāga, Vidyā, Kalā and Māyā. In one place in the PTv,

to H is Mahāmāyā, Śuddhavidyā, Īśvara, Sadāśiva and Śakti. In another place in

the PTv, where they are equated with the five Brahmās, they are listed as
Śuddhavidyā, Īśvara, Sadāśiva, Śakti and Anāśrita Śiva.

Relation of the Semivowels Y R L V to the Kañcukas
PTLV

PTy

y

Kalā-Kāla

Rāga-Niyati

R

Vidyā
Fire

Vidyā
Fire

L

Water

Kalā-Kāla
Water

v

Rāga-Niyati
Earth

Earth

Air

Air

' yādayo vakārāntā rāga-vidyā-kalā-māyākhyāṉi tattvāni PTV p. 98.

AppendixC

to Chapter Nine

[

(_’0 Kalā - Limiteá Ageacy
2 Vidyā - Limitá Kaowledē

I

(__2

Palṭi- Naōu-e )

(_ 2

Puusa
- so1

(_’ 10

Śabda
- Sound

)

21 Maas
- Mid

(_2ora-Ṟar

(._19Tvāk-Skan

) (..__ 15 Vāc - pcecdḥ

(_lAPau-HandS

,)

1) (_ _ 9 Spara- Touch

( pp-Ã-ṀN –
Ī5ñada reet ) (_ BRopa .Fam .)
(_1Rasana -Taṇgue ) (_ 12Pāyu -Awus ) (Ç.
7 Rasa
- Taste )
(_’16
Ghsāna -Nase ) (. 11 Upastā
- Geatals ) (_.6 Gandha
- Smel

Appendix
to Chapter Ten
The Seven Perceivers
From Earth to Nature (15 divisions)

Own nature, Sakala - wakefulness
Pralayākala - dream

Mantras, Lords of Mantra, Great Lords of Mantras – the Fourth
Siva – Beyond the Fourth
From the Soul to Limited Agency (13 divisions)
Own nature - wakefulness
Pralayākala - dream
Mantras, Lords of Mantra, Great Lords of Mantras – the Fourth

Siva – Beyond the Fourth
Māyā (11 divisions)

Own nature - wakefulness
Mantras, Lords of Mantra, Great Lords of Mantras – the Fourth
Siva – Beyond the Fourth
Pure Knowledge (9 divisions)
Own nature - wakefulness
Mantras – dream
Lords of Mantra - deep sleep
Great Lords of Mantras - the Fourth
Śiva – Beyond the Fourth
Iśvara (7 divisions)
Own nature - wakefulness
Lords of Mantra – dream
Great Lords of Mantras – deep sleep
Power - the Fourth
Śiva – Beyond the Fourth

APPENDIX CHAPTER TEN
Sadāśiva (5 division)

Own nature – wakefulness
Power of Great Lords of Mantras – dream
Great Lords of Mantras – deep sleep
Power – the Fourth
Śiva – Beyond the Fourth
Power (3 divisions)

Own nature – wakefulness
Power of action – dream

Power of knowledge – deep sleep
Power of will – the Fourth

Śiva – Beyond the Fourth

Śiva

Power of action – wakefulness
Power of knowledge – dream
Power of will – Deep sleep

Power of bliss – the Fourth

Power of intelligence - Beyond the Fourth