CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
What Needs be Done in the Procedure Concerning
the Apprentice (vidheyaprakriyā vidhau)

Fashioning the Three Knots of the Sacred Thread (sūtrakḷpti), verses lcd- 7ab,

pages 139-143

The Purification of the Principles (tattvaśuddhi), verses 7cd-30, pages 143-144
The Formation of the Mantras that Invoke the Principles, verses 11cd15, pages 145-148

Establishing Consciousness in the Principles and their Worship, verses
16-22ab, pages 148-151
The Power of the Semantics of Mantra, verses 22cd-26ab, pages 151-

The Function of Mantra, verses 26cd-28ab, pages 153-154

Declaration of Intent Should Herald Ritual Action, verses 28cd-30ab,
pages 154-155
Illumining the Body of the Disciple with the Movement of the Breath and

Mantra, verses 30cd-33, pages 155-158
Giving Birth to the Disciple on Increasingly Higher Levels and Worlds with
Trika Mantras and Oblations, verses 34-64, pages 158-168
The Burning of the Fetters (pāśadāhaḥ), verses 65-78ab, pages 168-172
The Conjunction with the Supreme Principle, verses 78cd-91, pages 172-178

The Yoga of the Offering of the Full Oblations

The First Full Oblation, verses 78cd-82, pages 173-174

The Second Full Oblation, verses 83-85ab, pages 174-175

The Third Full Oblation, verses 85cd-91, pages 175-178
Initiation for Worldly Benefits (bhogadikṣā) by means of a Full
Oblation, verses 92-97ab, pages 178-180
Initiation into the Disembodied form of Śiva Beyond the Principles,
verses 97cd-99ab, pages 180-184

Emission of the Pure Principles by Means of a Full Oblation, verses
99cd-102, pages 184-185

The Pure States of the Principles, verses 103-111, pages 185-188

The Senses Bound and Liberated, verses 112-115ab, pages 188-189
Purification of the Principles with Trika Mantras, verses 115cd-117,

pages 189-190

The Various Paths (adhvabheda): The Oblations Required for the Paths, verses

118-122, pages 190-192

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
The Brief Initiation (sūkṣmā dīkṣā)

A Brief Direct Initiation Without Outer Supports, verses 1-3ab, pages 193-194
The Required Mantras and Oblations, verses 3cd-7, pages 194-196
The Teacher Must Be Well Qualified, verses 8-9, pages 196-198
CHAPTER NINETEEN
The Initiation of the Immediate Exit from the Body (sadyahsamutkramaḥ)
The Initiation Whereby a Dying Man Attains Śiva at the Moment of Death,
verses 1-3, pages 199-200
The Ascertainment of Impending Death (kālāvekṣā), verses 4, page 200
Qualifications for the Initiation of the Immediate Exit from the Body, verses 5-

9, pages 200-203

The Deposition of the Razor (krpāṇyādinyāsaḥ) that Severs the Vital Points,
verses 10-14, pages 203-207
Severing the Vital Centres by the Circulation of the Breath in the Body (cāraḥ
Śśarīragaḥ), verses 15-23ab, pages 207-215
Blocking the Breath by Agitating the Wheels along the Trident of Knowledge,
verses (17-20), pages 215-216
Immediate Exit by Another Mantra, verses (21-23ab), page 217

The Procedure for the Brahmavidyā (hrahmavidyāvidhiḥ)
The Initiation that Brings About the Exit from the Body, verses 23cd31ab, pages 218-220
The Recitation of the Brahmavidyā
The Brahmavidyā Recited by a Fellow Initiate to Liberate Him.
Possible Objections and Response, verses 31cd-39

(39cd-40ab), (47) (47cd-48ab) - (50) (50Ocd-51ab),

pages 220-224
The Liberating Awakening of the Dying Man, verses 40-46 (40cd47ab), pages 224-228
The Dying Man Can Impart the Initiation to Himself, verses 51-55 (51cd-56),
pages 228-230

CHAPTER TWENTY
The Initiation Validated by the Scales (tulādīkṣā)
The Inner Purification (antaḥsaṁskāra) , verse 2, pages 231-232

The Burning Seed and the Burning Away of the Three Impurities,
verses 2-7, pages 233-235

The Examination of the Attainment of Competence (adhikāraparīkṣā)

The Initiation that Bears a Sign of Accomplishment, verses 8-1 1ab,
pages 235-236

X

The Procedure Concerning the Scales (tulāvidhi) , verses 11cd-12ab, pages 237-

The Initiation in Which the Purification of Impurity is Apparent by a
Loss of Weight, verses 11cd-16ab, pages 239-243

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
The Initiation of Those Absent (pārokṣīdīkṣā)

The Procedure Concerning (Those Who are Absent, Whether) Dead or Alive

(ṁṛtajīvadvidhi), verses 2-5, pages 244-246

Those to Whom the Initiation that Rescues the Dead Can be Imparted, verses 6-

15, pages 246-255

The Media Through Which the Absent Disciple Can be Made Present, verses
16-18ab, pages 255-256
Requirements for the Rite, verses 18cd-22ab, pages 256-257
Placing the Absent Disciple in a Simulacrum, verses 22cd-24, pages 257-259
The Teaching Concerning the Net (iālopadeśaḥ), verses 25-45, pages 259-270
The Examination of the Strength and Weakness of the Group of Purifications
(saṁskriyāgaṇe balābalavicāraḥ), verses 46-61, pages 270-276

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
The Extraction of Sectarian Signs (liṅgoddhāra)

Those at a Lower Reality Level who Follow Lower Traditions are Extracted
from There Along with their Sectarian Marks and Led Upwards
Inspired by Grace, verses 2-14ab, pages 277-281
The Proclamation (to the Lord) and (His) Consent (śrāvaṇam cābhyanujñānam),

verses 14cd-19, pages 282-283

Bestowing of One of the Seven Common Śaiva Mantras, verses 20-22, pages

283-284

Purification and Liberation from Sin (śodhanam pātakacyutiḥ), verses 23-28ab,

pages 285-286

Purifying Fire Offering, verses 23-27ab, pages 285-286
Converts Cannot be Full-fledged Teachers, verses 28cd-31ab, pages 286-287
Concerning the Elimination of Doubt (śaṅkhācchedaḥ), verse 31cd, page 287
The Procedure Applicable to Śaiva Teachers of a Lower Order and to those who
are Obscured, verses 31cd-37ab, pages 287-289
Ascertainment of a Disciple’s Competence, verses 37cd-40ab, pages

289-290
Those Initiated in the Siddhāntas and Bhairava Tantras Can be Initiated
into Trika, verses 40cd-42ab, page 291
Taking Initiation from Many Teachers Reinforces Knowledge, verses

42cd-46ab, pages 292-293

Veneration of the One Teacher who Bestows the Highest Knowledge,
verses 46cd-48ab, pages 293-294

xi
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
The Consecration of a Teacher
(abhiṣecanam)
Examination of the Competence of the Postulate (parīkṣā)
Qualities Required of a Teacher, verses 2-7, pages 295-297

Defects of a False Teacher, verses 8-10, pages 297-298

The True Teacher, verses 11-12ab, page, pages 298-301
Teachers that Should be Avoided, verses 13cd-16ab, pages 301-302

The Teacher to be Adopted is One with Perfect Knowledge, verses
16cd-17ab, page 302

The Creation of a Teacher (ācāryakaraṇam), verses 17cd-20ab, page

Knowledge is the Sole Sign of Initiation, verses 20cd-22ab, pages 304306
The Seven Sacrifices, verses 22cd-23ab, pages 306-307
Teacher Entrusts Ritual Implements and Authority to Disciple and Follows his
Command, verses 23cd-26ab, pages 307-308
A Knowledgeable Teacher Retains Authority and Must Transmit It, verses

26cd-28, pages 308-310

Teacher’s Duty to Liberate His Disciple, verses 29-30, page 310
The Teachers Mantra Observance (tadvratam) , verses 31-32, pages 311-313

The Yoga of the Vow of the Observance of the Vidyā, verses 33-44ab, pages
313-317

The Removal of Knowledge from a Deceitful Disciple (haraṇaṁ mateḥ) and the
Signs of His Obscuration, verses 44cd-64, pages 317-325

The Teacher Should Help an Obscured Disciple when He Can, verses 65-69,
pages 325-327

Better to Follow an Inferior Doctrine and Give it Up than Give up a Superior
One, verses 70-71, pages 327-328

Only the Teacher Who has Made the Disciple Fall Can Elevate Him Again,

verses 72-75, pages 328-330

A Trika Master is the Highest. If He Dies One Should Take Refuge in Another.
verses 76-77, page 330
Disqualifying Defects in a Teacher and Disciple, verses 78-89ab, pages 331-332

Abandon a Teacher with Pernicious Defects, verses 83-89ab, pages 332334
Those Who are Graced May Remove their Own Obscuration to Some Degree,
verses 89cd-96, pages 334-338
The Categories of those Deceitful Teachers (tadvibhāgaḥ), verses 97-101ab,

pages 338-340

The Consecration Into the State of an Adept (ŚāḌhakatvam), verses 101cd-

103ab, pages 340-341

xii

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
The Funerary Rites (antyeṣṭiḥ)

The Qualified Recipient (adhikārin), verses 2-4, 6-1 1ab, pages 342-344

The Rite of Passage (saṁskāraḥ), verses 5, 11cd-16, pages 345-348
The Procedure according to the Kulagahvara, verses 11cd-17ab, pages

348-350

The Procedure according to the Dīkṣottara, verses 17cd-20, pages 350-

Its Purpose (tatprayojanam), verses 21-24ab, pages 353-354

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
The Fashioning of the Offerings to the Ancestors (śrāddhaklṛpti)

The Purpose of the Rite (prayojanam) and Times when it Should be Performed,

verses 2cd-4ab, page 356

Identifying the Fettered Aspect with the Experient thereby Becoming Śiva,

verses 4cd-9, pages 357-359

No Procedure is Necessary for the Deceased who Knows Reality, verses 10,

page 359

The Days of the Teacher°s Enlightenment and Birth are Sacred Days (parvan),

verses 11-12cd, pages 360-361

The Procedure for the Channels of the Breath (nāḍīvidhiḥ), verses 13-14ab,
19ab-21ab, pages 361-362
The Worship of the Assembly When Performing srāddha for the Ancestors,

verses 14cd-18, pages 363-364

The Bestowal of Worldly Benefits (bhoga) and Liberation (hhogaṁokṣadānam),
verses 21cd-29, pages 365-368

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
The Remaining Observance (śeṣavṛttinirūpaṇam)
The Purpose of the Remaining Observance (prayojanaṁ śeṣavṛtteḥ), verse 2,

pages 369-370

Teacher Instructs as to the Daily Conduct, Including Ritual and Mantra, verses
3-20, pages 370-377
Mantras are Letters even so they are Powerless if Drawn from a Book, verses

21-25ab, pages 377-379

The Teacher Imparts Trika Mantras in Secret, verses 25cd-29ab, pages 379-380

The Daily Procedure (nityavidhi), verses 29cd-72, pages 380-398

Worship at the Junctures of the Day (sandhyopāsana), verses 29cd-

37ab, page 380-382

The Regular Worship on the Sacrificial Surface (nityārcā sthaṇḍile),

verses 37cd, page 382

Invocation (āvāhana), verses 37cd-51ab, pages 382-387

xiii
Libation (tarpaṇa), verses 51cd-54ab, pages 388-389

Worship with Whatever Expands Consciousness, verses 54cd55ab, pages 389-390

Rites are Fixed for Those Who Seek Worldly Benefits, Not for

Those Who Aspire to Liberation, verses 55cd-57, pages
389-390

Ritual Action Aimed at Oneness Brought About by Factors that Instil
Bliss, verses 58-61, pages 390-392

Hymn to Inner Worship, verses 62cd-65, pages 392-394

Manner of Worship with this Hymn and Conclusion, verses 66-76,
pages 394-398
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

The Worship of the Liṅga (liṅgārcā)
The Many Kinds of Liṅga (liṅgasvarūpaṁ bahudhā), verse 2, page 399
Higher Secret Mantras should not to be Used Externally, verses 2-8,
pages 400-404
Installation of a Deity by Oneself or by the Teacher, Into a Liṅga
Anywhere or Into an Iconic Representation, verses 9-20ab,
pages 404-407
Deity May be Installed and Worshipped in a Skull, verses 20cd-21ab,
page 407

Characteristics and Features of a Skull, verses 21cd-29, pages 408-413

A Description of the Varieties of Rosaries (akṣasūtranirūpaṇam), verses

30-39, pages 413-417

The Sacrificial Jar, verses 40-43, pages 417-419
Other Supports on which to Worship the Deity, verses 44-49, pages 418-420
The Various Types of Worship (pujābhedaḥ), verses 50-59, pages 421-424

Appendices to Volume Nine
Appendix to Chapter Sixteen: Animal Sacrifice according to Chapter Twenty of
the Netratantra, pages 425-436
Appendix to Chapters Seventeen and Eighteen: The Deposition of the Tattvas,
pages 437-442
Appendix A to Chapter Nineteen: The Sixteen Supports, the Six Wheels, the
Three Targets and the Five Voids, pages 443-451
Appendix B to Chapter Nineteen: Time and the Conquest of Death,
Kubjikāmata chapter 23, pages 452-456
Appendix to Chapter Twenty-two: The Seven Common Mantras, page 457

Abbreviations
APS
ASB

Ajaḍapramātṛṣiddhi
Asiatic Society of Bengal

BLO

Bodleian Library, Oxford

AV

Atharvaveda

BY
BhGī
BhoKā
BrṛUp
ChUp
CMSS

Brahmayāmala
Bhagavadgītā
Bhogakārikā
B,rhadāraṇyakopaṇiṣad
Chandogyopaṇiṣad
Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya

Devīdyvardhaśatikā

DhAK

DP
Dhál
GOML

Dharmālaṅkārakārikā

HDh

Devīpañcaśataka
Dhvanyālokālocana
Government Oriental Manuscript Library, University of
Chennai
History of Dharmaśāstra

Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī

IrP
ISMEO

Institut Français d'Indologie de Pondichéry
Istituto Studi Medio ed Estremo Oriente

ĪPVv

ĪŚGDP `

Indo-Īranian Journal

Iśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī
Iśānaśivagurudevapaddhati

JA
JASB
JRAS
IY
KED
KIN
KNP
KuKh
KuPa
KhCPS
KM
KṢSS

Journal Asiatique
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bombay
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
Jayadrathayāmala
Kashmiri Series Edition
Kaulajñānanirṇaya
Kramanayapradīpikā
Kumārikākhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairavatantra
Kulapañcaśikā
Khacakrapañcakastotra
Kubjikāmata
Kashmiri Shaiviṣm, the Secret Supreme

KNP
LYV

Kramanayapradīpikā
Laghuyogavāsiṣṭa

MBh

MP
MP (1 Śk)
MP (2 Tri)
MP (3 AS)
MS

Kashmiri Series of Texts and Studies

Mātaṅgaparameśvarāgama
Mahābhārata

Mahānayaprakāśa
Mahānayaprakāśa commented by Śitikaṇṭha
Mahānayaprakāśa by unknown author published in
Trivendrum.
Mahānayaprakāśa by Arṇasiṁha
Manuscript

XV
Mālinīvijayottaratantra

Mālinīvijayavārtika

Monier-Williams
Munṇḍaka Upaniṣad
Mṛgendratantra
Mṛgendratantravṛtti Kriyāpāda

Mṛgendratantra Kriyāpāda

Mṛgendratantra Vidyāpāda
Nepal German Manuscript Preservation Project

Nyāyabindu
Nyāyabindutīkā
Netratantra
Netratantroddyota
Number
Page
Paramokṣaniīrāsakārikā
Parātrīśikā (= Parātriṁśika)
Parātriṁśikavivaraṇa (Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa)

Pāṇini’s Sūtras, the Aṣṭādhyāyī.

Pūrvakāmikā

Paramārthasāra
Pramāṇavārtika

Pramāṇaviniścaya
Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya
Ricerche e Studi Orientali
Rājataraṅginī
Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha
Rgveda

Śatapathabrāhmaṇa

Sarvajñānottara

Sva/ŚSubodhodayamañjarī
Swami Laksmanjoo
Science of Light

Saṁvitprakāśa

Spandakārikā
Spandanirṇaya

Spandapradīpikā
Spandasaṁdoha

Śivasūtra
Śivasūtravimarśinī
Śivastotrāvali
Śrīmatottara

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad
Saṭsahasrasaṁhitā

Somaśambhupaddhati
Svacchandatantra
Svacchandatantroddyota
Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha

State University of New York Press
Siddhayogeśvarīmata
Tattvatrayaparīkṣā
Tantrāloka
Tattvārthacintāmaṇi
Trika Śāstra Rahasya Prakriyā
Tantrasāra
Tantrasadbhāva
Tantroccaya
Taittirīyopaniṣad
Tantravaṭadhānikā
Triśirobhairava

Ūrmikaulāraṇvatantra

Vijñānabhairava
Vāmakeśvarīmata
Vātulanāthasūtra
Yogavāsiṣṭa
Yonigahvaratantra
Upaniṣad
laghu

comm.

guru

Commentary

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
The Initiation of the Apprentice
(pautrikaḥ)
‘I bow (to the Rudra called) Balabhadra, whose power (bala) to sever

(bheda) the entire association with the flux of the fetters is auspicious (bhadra).

His power is full by virtue of his skill (in making) the horse of the vital breath

roam.”

Now, after the Initiation into the Rule, he announces (the following)
with the second half of the verse (of which the first half serves to conclude the

previous chapter. He does this) in order to describe the (next possible) future
(successive) initiation (to the status) of a spiritual son (putrakadīkṣā).

qa] ŪīTI ÇTāīd fISTI]_|

ĪTT: 11 g. 1|

TTḤRTRFATĪSJ
TATTT aTĪRTT || 3 1

yadā tu samayasthasya putrakatve niyojanam ḷ
gurukatve sādhakatve vā kartum icchati daiśikaḥ lI 1 II
tadādhivāsaṁ kr̥tvāhni dviṭīye maṇḍalaṁ likhet |
sāmudāyikayāge ‘tha tathānyatra yathoditam || 2 ||
Now, in order to attain the status of a spiritual son (putraka), (we

will proceed) to expound the ritual procedure (vidhi) here (for this, as)

explained by Śiva (Himself).

If the teacher wishes to promote a regular initiate (samayin) to the

status of a spiritual son, adept (sādhaka) or teacher (desśika), then once the
preliminary rite of purification (adhivāsa) has been performed, he should
draw the maṇḍala on the following day, in the manner previously described
for the composite sacrifice (sāmudāyikayāga) and elsewhere. (1-2)
He (now) describes the composite sacrifice.

TRTHTGĀTĪi
JṬIH JĪṬHTHTT 113 1

zāTcṁcēzzajṁś sriTrā ṁ |

' The interior sacrifice (conceming which, see above 15/295cd-365), is called ‘composite
(sāmudayika) in MV 8/80cd. The term ‘composite’ is explained by Bhatta Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha in
MṢT, Kriyāpāda, 891 (p. 151). There he says that the composite sacrifice ‘is to be performed in a
composite manner, that is, with an aggregate of many (component) parts (together in unison)’
(sanudāyenānekāṅga-samāhāreṇa nirvartyā (śuddhiḥ).

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

EÉEtxzrzzEe°Hi|t¢rJETJET.ĀHṬVAṬ
saḍaṣṭataddviguṇitacaturviṁśatisaṁkhyayā |

cakrapañcakam ākhyātaṁ śāstre śrīpūrvasaṁjñite || 3 |I

dvātriṁśat taddviguṇitaṁ śrīmattraiśirase mate |
asaṁkhyacakrasaṁbandhaḥ śrīṣiddhãdau nirũpitaḥ || 4 ||
A group of five wheels numbering six, eight, twelve, sixteen and
twenty-four (spokes, respectively,) is taught in the scripture called

Śrīpūrva. (Wheels) with thirty-two and sixty-four (spokes) are (described)

in the venerable Traiśirasamata. The relationship between innumerable
wheels is described in the venerable Siddhā and elsewhere. (2cd-4)
The (Trika) maṇḍala (consisting of) Trident and lotus is the appropriate
one here in both cases. Thus he says:

The Unifying Contemplation of the Constituents of the Maṇḍala

The Drawing and Worship of the Triple Trident maṇḍala

ṬāTTEṬ] TJT āTTĪ JTajhŪ] TTT |

tasmād yathā tathā yāgaṁ yāvac cakreṇa saṁmatam |
pūjayed yena tenātra triśūlatrayam ālikhet |I 5 II
Thus, whatever (kind of) sacrifice (it may be), and the maṇḍala
(cakra) that is considered to be (the most appropriate for it) (saṁmata), by
means of which one worships, here (in this case, the teacher) should draw
(the maṇḍala) with three tridents along with it (tena). (5)

Abhinava lists a number of configurations of deities drawn from the MV below in 33/3-19. He
repeatedly refers in the Tantrāloka to the Triśirobhairava as teaching a multiplicity of ‘wheels’,
i.e. configurations or assemblies of attendant deities. There are, for example, six of four, six, eight,
twelve, sixteen and twenty-four. See above, 1/113cd-1 14ab (114).
Above (in 3/254cd-255ab), Abhinava explained that according to the 7risirobhairava, (all) the
wheels of energies, stating with (the wheel) with one spoke to that of sixty-four and one thousand
spokes, emerge from twelve energies.
This is a vague reference to the many circles of Yoginīs described in the SYM. The subject of
most of the SYM is indeed Yoginicakras (Tôrzsók 1999: 225).
Conceming the term anusaṁdhāna as meaning both ‘fusion’ or ‘conjunction’ and
‘contemplation’, see above note 1,1072. The expression maṇḍalātmānusaṁṅdhānam reminds one
of Śivasātra 1/6 – ‘śakticakrānusaṁdhāne viśvasaṁhāraḥ – ‘when contemplatig (and fusing
together) the Wheel of Energies, the universe is withdrawn’ (see Dyczkowski 1992: 25 and above
note 1,1296). In this case it is the constituent parts of the maṇḍala that are conjoined together in

the course of the ritual procedure, to be finally contemplated as one with Śiva.
MS Th reads yathā yathā for yathā tathā.
Read with MSs C and T saṅmataṁ for saṁmitaṁ.

TANTRĀLOKA

frrṛafraã̃ ati vãraaṭa: 1

TSJTTAT-ÑÇT ṬŪĪ #ṬfĪT WSAT I 6 11

ErāuEtEG P:VEḍṭTGḤ

triśūlatritaye devītrayaṁ paryāyavṛttitaḥ |
madhyasavyānyabhedena pūrṇaṁ saṁpūjitaṁ bhavet | 6 II
vartanā maṇḍalasyāgre saṁkṣepād upadekṣyate |
The three Goddesses (placed successively) one after the other,
alternately (paryāyavṛttitaḥ) on (the prongs of) the three tridents, variously

(changing from place to place), in the middle, on the right and on the left,
are (thus) worshipped (properly and) fully. The way of drawing (vartanā)
the maṇḍala will be explained briefly further ahead." (Scd-7ab)

sīfcṝēz vs% Tazũtaraa
īt || 9 ||
a Tail 7JS: JōTTGGĪĪSĪ
arā |
āāTḷ: ÇḍṀÑīāg gGA gRGaaT: |I ¢ 1|I
VGVTI TJT] TCTIHRT: ÑTq |
TaT<;
TTTIGT] RTITKTJṬSAT I Ṝ 11

TTT JṬGĀTgGĪTĨ: || Ḷ0 ||

ṬÑŪHTĀRYHcTṬĪĪE JṀĀJTTĀAGT II/22 II

faī<d fkrāŪaī fizī 77 --ī, |

ālikhya maṇḍalaṁ gandhavastreṇaivāsya mārjanam || 7 |I
kṛtvā snāto guruḥ prāgyan maṇḍalāgre ‘tra devatāḥ |
bāhyagāḥ pūjayed dvāradeśe ca dvāradevatāḥ || 8 II
maṇḍalasya purobhāge tadaiśānadiśaḥ kramāt |
See below 16/12cd-15ab.
The word ‘vartanā’ means the drawing ofamaṇḍala or its parts. This word is not found in MW

or Apte. The neuter vartanam has amongst its meanings the cognate sense of ‘rolling around’ or
‘turning a circle or a curveʼ. The feminine vartanā appears in the Tantrāloka for the first time

here It then recurs numerous times in Chapter Thirty-one and commentary, where the drawing of

Trika

maṇḍalas

deṣcribed.

Just

to

mention

two

examples

of

usage

-~

‘-triṛriśūlavartanopayogi’ ‘useful for the fashioning (vartanā) the triple Trident’ (rriśālavartanām

eva kartum upakramate (ad 31/10cd-11ab), and ‘He begins the fashioning (vartanā) of the Tridḍent
itself’ (intro. To 31/1lcd ff.); also: vartanāṁ ca vijānāti sa gurus trikaśāsane | 31/51ab, ‘He who
knows (how to) draw (the maṇḍala) is a (true) teacher in the Trika teachings (trikaśāsana).’

See below, Chaptcr Thirty-one, which is entirely dedicated to presenting variant forms of the

Trika Trident maṇḍala. Here Abhinava is referring specifically to the tritrisśūlābiamaṇḍala
deṣcribed in the Trikasadbhāva (31/10-41ab). See Sanderson 1986: 195 for a drawing of this
maṇḍala. It is reproduced by Gnoli 1999: 613.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

āgneyyantaṁ gaṇeśādīn kṣetrapāntān prapūjayet || 9 I|
gaṇapatiguruparamākhyāḥ parameṣṭhī pūrvasiddhavākkṣetrapatiḥ |
iti ṣaptakam ākhyātaṁ gurupañṅktavidhau prapūjyam asmadgurubhiḥ || 10 II
rṁ gr̥hĩtvā tu puṣpadhũpãdipũjitam |

pūjyam ādhāraśaktyādi śūlamūlāt prabhṛty alam|I 1 1 II
śivāntaṁ sitapadmānte triśūlānāṁ traye kramāt |

Once the maṇḍala has been drawn, it is cleaned (simply by wiping

gently) with a scented cloth. Having done that, the teacher, who has bathed
(previously), should worship, as before, in front of the maṇḍala, the outer

deities" here, and in the doorway, the deities of the doorway. On the front

(eastern) part of the maṇḍala, he should then worship, beginning from the
northeast and ending in the southeast, in due order, (the deities) starting
with Gaṇeśa and ending with the guardian of the sacred site (kṣetrapati).
(7cd-9)

According to my teacher (Śambhunātha), the group of seven that

should be worshiped in the procedure (for worshipping) the lineage of
teachers consists of 1) Gaṇeśa, 2) (one’s own) teacher, 3) the teacher of the

teacher, 4) the teacher of the latter (parameṣṭhin), 5) the first realized

(pūrvasiddha) (teacher), 6) (the Goddess) of Speech, and 7) the guardian of
the place (kṣetrapati). (10)
Then, having received the authorization (ājñā) to do so, the object
of worship, that is, the power of the base (ādhāraśakti) and so forth, is

worshipped' appropriately (alam) with (offerings of) flowers, incense and

the rest, beginning from the root of the Trident and ending with Siva, at the

extremity of the white lotuses. (This is repeated) in due order for (all) three
tridents. (11-12ab)

! The procedure to draw this Trika maṇḍala – the Tririśūlābia – according to the Trikasadbhāva

is given below in 31/10cd-41ab. Here Abhinava presents the way in which it is worshipped. The

basic Trident maṇḍala with just a single Trident is described in chapter eight of Mālinīvijayottara.

That form of the maṇḍala is used, as we have seen here in the previous chapter, for the first level
of initiation to a regular initiate (samayin). Abhinava makes it clear that, of the many varieṭies of
Trika Trident maṇḍalas, the ones with a single Trident (as found in the MV 9/6-30 and presented
below in 31/62-85ab) and the one with three Tridents are the main ones. The first form of the

Trika maṇḍala Abhinava presents there is the one with three Tridents, taught in the liturgy of the

Trikaṣadbhāva (31/10cd-52), and a variety of it taght in the Trikahṛdaya (31/53) (presuming that

the Trikaṣadbhāva and Trikahr̥daya are different texts). This is the one that is meant here.

16/7cd-8ab is a paraphrase of MV 9/32: “Once (the maṇḍala) has been well fashioned in this

way, and cleaned with a scented cloth, (the teacher) should bathe and (worship) with the same rite
(karmaṇ) as was explained before.” Note that Abhinava is drawing from the MV here, even
though the maṇḍala taught there consists of just a single trident, whereas here he is talking about

the one with the triple trident.
See above 15/181-191.

Abhinava writes asmadgurubhiḥ, literally – (according to) ‘my teachers'. Abhinava had only

one teacher teaching him Trika ritual, and that was Śambhunātha. ] see no reason to doubt that he
is addressing him with an honorific plural. Apart from a reference to his Trika teacher, Abhinava

does not refer to his sources for the following liturgy. The initaaton of the apprentice
(putrakadīkṣā) is treted only cursorily in the MV, where it is presented as a modified form of the

basic samayadīkṣā. Obviously, the soure or sources could only be one or more Trika Tantras.

The variant reading in MSs C and T, puṣpadhūpādipūjitām, agrees with ājāāṁ. This would

mean that it is the authorization that is worshipped.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The goddesses should be shifted along the tips of the prongs of the
tridents) ‘one after the other’, that is, successively. (The manner the maṇḍala
should be drawn will be explained briefly) ‘further aheadʼ, in Chapter Thirtyone. ‘The outer deities’ comprise the outer entourage. ‘The first realized
(siddha) (teacher)’ is the founder (avatāraka) of this system (darśana). He is

the first, and (his) lineage is uninterrupted.' He who is the first in the lineage of
teachers (gurukrama) is a very special (teacher) who is totally dedicated
(niṣṭha) to the particular scripture at hand. Such a one should not be worshipped

in the course of the external rite of adoration. (His presence here) confirms this.
Or else he should also be worshipped as the very first in the special lineage of
teachers that should be worshipped. ‘Speech’ is the Goddess of Speech.
In order to explain the location (and condition) of the three goddesses
with (their) Bhairavas according to the predominance of (their) qualities, he

says:

TRTṬI® TAJT. TIITGI:
TAT TE |I 2Ṝ II

fir̥ afkī mzaāvḡa
ẼÃ̄a: 1| 23 1|
IṬRRTṬTT
TI JT ÁīSIIḶ |

ā 1|| 2 ||

RIṬa. TAṬ TI aJTI. TḶgJ šīza: |

madhyaśūle madhyagaḥ syāt sadbhāvaḥ parayā saha || 12 ||
vāme cāparayā sākaṁ navātmā dakṣagaṁ param |
triśūle dakṣiṇe madhyaśṛṅgastho ratiśekharaḥ || 13 II
syāt parāparayā sākaṁ dakṣe bhairavasatpare |

vāme triśūle madhyastho navātmāparayā saha || 14 ||

syāt pare parayā sākaṁ vāmāre saṁś ca bhairavaḥ |

Bhairavasadbhāva, together with Parā, is in middle of the middle
trident. Navātmā, together with Aparā, is on the left (prong), and the other

(couple) is on the right one. Ratiśekhara, along with Parāparā, is on the
middle prong of the right trident. Bhairavasadbhāva, along with Parā, is on

the right prong, (and Navātmā with Aparā on the left prong). Navātmā,
along with Aparā, is on the middle prong of the left trident, and
Sadbhairava with Parā is on the other left prong (and Ratiśekhara together

with Parāparā is on the right prong). (12cd-15ab)
Rcad ādyo 'vicchinnasaṁtānaḥ for ādyo vicchinnasaṁtānaḥ.

Read gurukrame for gurukramaḥ.
' The mantric form of these deities, which we have encountered before above, 15/239cd and
following, are given in Chapter 30/ 10 ff.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

‘On the left (prong)ʼ in relation to the (the deity) to be attained. ‘The

other (couple) is the remaining one, that is, Ratiśekhara (together with)
Parāparā. (The trident on) ‘the right’, in relation to the adept (sādhaka).
(Bhairavasadbhāva, along with Parā, resides) ‘on the right’ (prong). In other

words, on the remaining prong. ‘The left’ (trident), in relation to the adept. “On
the otherʼ, that is, the other remaining ‘left prong’. ‘Sad Bhairava” is
Sadbhāvabhairava. (He and Parā are on the left) with respect to the front (view).
Those (manuscripts) in which the following half (line is missing,) i.e. ‘and
Sadbhairava with Parā is on the other left prongʼ, should connect with the

previous (quarter, namely,) ‘“Bhairavasadbhāva, along with Parā, resides on
the right prongʼ. Thus, as the meaning (in one sense) has been established, one
should ignore (the variant reading) syāt parāparayā sākaṁ vāmāre
ratishekaraḥ| (Ratishekara, along with Parāparā, is on the left prong). In this
way Parā predominates on the middle prong, Parāparā on the right one and
Aparā on the left. The other two goddesses are in every case on the two sides as
auxiliaries (aṅgatayā). In this way also, although the goddess Parā is directly
collocated on (all) three tridents, the association of other two is not so (directly
apparent) in the same way. Thus, as Parā differs in character in this way from
the others, (she is) the main (goddess,) and so it is She who is omnipresent.
Thus he says:

Emend, as suggested by Sanderson (1986: 188 n 92), madhyāpekṣayā to sādhyāpekṣayā. C.
above 15/324. There the locations of the deities are from the point of view of Parā.
This is the arangement of the prongs of the trisūlābjamaṇḍala tavght in thc Trīkasadbhāva.
How it is to be drawn is described below in 31/10cd fṜ. Sanderson (1986: 196) presents the
following arangement:
i
Par
Bhairavasadbhāva
3, 8 Parparā
Ratiśckharabhairava
7 Aparā
Navātmabhairava
9 Parī
Bhairavasadbhāva

2, 6 Aparā
Navātmabhairava
4 Parāpaā
Ratiśekharabhairava
5 Par
Bhairavasadbhāva

In this way we get trce Triangles:
Top: Paraaparaa (red) (3), Paraa (white) (1) and Aparaa (black) (2)
Middle right: Aparaa (black) (7), Paraaparaa (red) (4) and Paraa (white) (5)
Middle left: Paraaparaa (red) (8), Aparaa (black) (7) and Paraa (white) (9)

Notice how prongs 1, 5 and 9 make a trangle with Paraa in each comer..

Sanderson explains: “All three are present therefore in each trident, in such a way that Parā is
dominant in the central, Parāparā in the right and Aparā in the left, while Parā as the only goddess

who occupies three thrones is seen as the omnipresent ground of this cycli triplication.
The initiatng guru now installs Matṛṣadbhāva in the central lotus within the triangle
marked out by the three Parās. While the influence of the Krama is perceptible even in the
installation of the three goddesses – since it is a characteristic of the Krama to express the

dynamic unity of the powers in such multiplications, with a move to the centre of the maṇḍala

TANTRĀLOKA

(kuleśvarīṣṭānam) the Trika’s Ābsolute expands to reveal the Krama within it undisguised. For
while it holds the old tradition through the name of its prcsiding power (Mātṛṣadbhāva), the
later’s mantras unfold it into the Krama’s tetradic cycle of cognition: projection (srṣti),
immersion (sthitih, avatāraḥ), resorption (saṅhāraḥ) and the Namcless Fourth (anākhyam,
turīyam, saṅhārasaṁhāraḥ), which reveals itself as the cycle’s ground and rcality in the limit of
resorption. The guru further instals thesc phases (kramāḥ) in their fully elaborated form as the
four sequences of deities, those of projection, immersion and resorption on the tridents of Parā,
Parāparā and Apar, respectively, and those of the Namcles in the centre, or else the Fourth
alone, containing the other three by implication’ (sce below 31/50cd-52).

Parā

3,

Aparā

Q

2,

)

JÉYS}

Parā

Representation of the 7rirriśūlāhjamaṇḍala (31/10-41 a)
Fṟom Sanderson, 1986, p. 195, with additions.

āpar

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Reptesentation of h 7iśālābiamaṇḍala (M /6-31, TĀ 31/62-85)
From Sandetsoa, 1986,p. 171, with adáitons.

TANTRĀLOKA

Guru
Gaṇapati

Paramaṣṭhin
Paavagu. | Parṟ

Pūrvasiḍdha

Parāparā

QeA

Aparā|

2,

(

|G/YYN

Parā

_
|[Parāpaṭā

Namdiṇ, Gaṅgā,

Kṣetrapāla

Parā

Gadesa || tdṣn
šrtyatt

Dchalī,Aṇaa

Ādhīmaśakt

ChāgalāṣyaMahodar

Representaton of the Jiṭrśũlāhjamáṇḍala (31/1041 a)
From Śanderṣon, 1986, p. 195, with additioṅs.

TANTRĀLOKA

fkr aĨĩ 11 2 .
aqTI]ṛ VJTRHÇPĪRGTTSTI: |
TJ-ṬJṢJTĪ JI fĒī-īārīcfītsaīq || 2ē 1|

Ṭāī ēa? āḷ Ṁaĩ a- s3̄; T aK; 1| 2.9 1|

JTIṀH"ĪGTHTT-THHTHTTTT
ṬJJTÇ I
TaT ādīāī GTTIĪ JṬTJT I| 2¢ /||
iiIGTAEḺFIGAEVLLEĀI

iEtdETGIEIHEIDIE SEIHEIEH
JīRṀ"TGĪTGJTT] TRTṬÑIHSTRT: 11 3o 11
TṀGATTTAṬ

TṬīā: āṃ̄dīaāhTTTVGGRIHTGĪHT ÁI 3g II

TJTITTTĀT] ḍĀĪRRTHTGTĪQ |

3 q amṁggaaīá
frafa fēraṁaarq 11 33 1

itthaṁ sarvagatatve śrīparādevyāḥ sthite sati || 15 ||

yāgo bhavet suṣaṁpūrṇas tadadhiṣṭhānamātrataḥ |
ekaśūle ʻpy ato yāge cintayet tadadhiṣṭhitam || 16 ||
avidhijño vidhānajña ity evaṁ trīśikoditam |
tato madhye tathā dakṣe vāme śṛṅge ca sarvataḥ || 1T I|
lokapālāstraparyantam ekātmatvena pūjayet |
paratvena ca sarvāsāṁ devatānāṁ prapūjayet || 18 II
śrīmantaṁ mātṛṣadbhāvabhaṭṭārakam anāmayam |
tato ‘pi bhogayāgena vidyāṅgaṁ bhairavāṣṭakam || 19 ||
yāmalaṁ cakradevīś svasthāne pūjayed bahiḥ |
lokapālān astrayutān gandhapuṣpāsavādibhiḥ || 20 ||
pūjayet parayā bhaktyā vittaśāṭhyavivarjitaḥ |
tataḥ kumbhāstrakalaśīmaṇḍalasthānalātmanām || 21 ||
pañcānām anusandhānaṁ kuryād advayabhāvanāt |
ye tu tām advayavyāptiṁ na vindanti śivātmikām || 22 1|
mantranāḍīprayogeṇa te viśanty advaye pathi |
With the venerable Goddess Parā present everywhere in this way,

the (performance of the) sacrifice is beautifully complete, just by her

(sustaining and) presiding over it (adhiṣṭhāna). Thus, even in the case of the
sacrifice in which there is only one trident, one needs only to think that it is
(sustained and) presided over by that (divine presence). Indeed, it is said in

TANTRĀLOKA

the Parātrīśikā that ‘. . . one who does not know the sacrificial rites becomes
one who does.” (15cd-17ab)

One should now worship on the middle prong, and so too on the
right and the left ones, up to the the Guardians of the Quarters, along with
their weapons, in every ,aĩ, (all together) as one, and the pure and
venerable Mātṛsadbhāva, as the supreme (Deity) of all the deities. Then, if
the sacrificeis (performed) to gain worldly benefits, one should worship the
eight Bhairavas, the limbs of the Vidyās (vidyāṅga), the couple (yāmala) and
the Goddesses of the Wheels, in their own (proper) place.
The Guardians of the Quarters should then be worshiped externally
(around them,) along with their weapons, with supreme devotion,
perfumes, flowers, libations of wine and the like, without being stingy.

(17cd-21ab)

The Worship of the Two Jars. Entering Nonduality by Mantras

and Connecting Together Through the Vital Channels

One should then (contemplate and) conjoin the five, namely, the
(main) and (secondary) jar, (both marked with the Mantra of the) Weapon
(PHAT), the maṇḍala (on which the main jar is placed), the fire (present
there) and one’s own Self, by meditating on their (essential) nonduality
(advayabhāvanā). Those who do not attain that nondual state of pervasion

whichis Śiva, can enter the path of nonduality by applying Mantras and
making use of the channels (of the vital breath) (mantranāḍīprayoga).

(21cd-23ab)

‘The (performance of the) sacrifice is complete’ because (the
goddess’s) predominant (quality) is to fill (and bring to perfection) (pāraṇa).
‘Thus’, because it is ‘just by her (sustaining and) presiding over it
(adhiṣṭhāna)’ that the sacrifice attains completion. This has been explained
many times in the book (called) 7rīśikā (i.e. the Parātrīśikā). ʻin their own
(proper) placeʼ, for example, in the southeast and northeast etc. ‘Then’, after
having worshipped the maṇḍala, (one should conjoin the five). ‘By meditating
on their (essential) nonduality, in the form of “I myself am present

PT 20c, see also above 13/151cd-154.
2 See below, 30/42-43ab.
See above 15/239b and following; also, below 30/45cd-46. Mātrsadbhāva is both the Trika Parā
is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Kāli. By this cursory mention of what is, in fact, the highest deity of the Trika
Abhinava sponsors, he hides its ultimate secret. But as always, he leaves behind him more clues.
Thus below, when he concludes his description of this Trika riśūlābjamaṇḍala as taught in the
Trikasadbhāva, he states clearly the three phases (krama) of Krama worship, namely, those of
emanation (srṣṭi), stabiliy (sthiti) and reabsorption (saihāra) (and so implicitly the deities that
populate these wheels cakras) should be worshipped on the main, central prong of each trident
where Parā is located. The ‘Fourth’, i.c. Kālasaṁkarṣīṅī – thc Īnexplicable – Anākhyā - is in the
very centre, which is the place of Kuleśyar, She who govems the Trikakula. By saying that, as an
altemative for those who seek worldly benefits (bubhūkṣu), the eight Bhairavas and the rest
should be worshipped, Abhinava cleay implies that worship clminates with Mātṛsadbhāva for
those who seck liberation (mumukṣu).

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

everywhere”. ‘Those who do not attain’ (that nondual state of pervasion, it is)
because this kind of nondual reflective awareness does not arise (in them).
He explains that application of Mantras and use of the channels (of the
vital breath).

TaGTTTT
fīTT TVSVĀKA aJTa: 1| 33 |I
yfērvarī-fga gvī ##īa |

TṀTṬHHTTGTĀĪTTTHTTĀT Ī |

ṢCTĪRITR̥TITĀĪ TTTĪTRTHTJT II 3U, II

̄īgaraīmq 1

svadakṣiṇena niḥsṛtya maṇḍalasthasya vāmataḥ || 23 ||
praviśyānyena niḥsṛtya kumbhasthe karkarīgate |
vahniṣṭhe ca krameṇetthaṁ yāvat svasmin svavāmataḥ || 24 |
mūlḷānusandhānabalātprāṇatantūmbhane sati |
itthamaikyasphurattātmā vyāptisaṁvitprakāśate || 25 ||
tato viśeṣapūjāṁ ca kuryād advayabhāvitām |
(The way this is done is as follows.) After exiting (exhaling with the
current of the breath) to one’s own right, and entering (inhaling) to the left

with respect to the (deity) resident in the maṇḍala, and (again) coming out

(exhaling) through the other (right way) (they are conjoined). (Proceeding)

in due order in this way (with respect to the deities) present in the primary

jar (kumbha), the secondary one (karkarī) and the fire, until (finally),
through one’s own left within oneself, they are connected together with the
thread of the vital breath by the strength of the (synthesizing)
contemplation (anusaṁdhāna) of the root (Mantra). This being so, the

consciousness of pervasion, the nature of which is the radiant pulse of
oneness, manifests in this way. One should then celebrate a special rite of
worship, which is (sanctified) with the sense of nonduality (advayabhāvita).

(23cd-26ab)

‘Through the other (way)ʼ, that is, the right one. ‘In this way’ means

in the stated manner, that is, by exiting and entering by the right and left (of the
exhaled and inhaled breath, respectively). One should enter ‘through one’s own
left. ‘They are connected together with the thread of the vital breath’. The
meaning is that one’s own self, the maṇḍala and the rest are mutually merged
into the vital breath. Otherwise, how can this (ritual) application (prayoga),
which is this radiant pulse of oneness, be successfully accomplished? This is the
meaning.
We have noted already that Abhinava tells us in Chapter Thirty-one that the manner of drawing
this Trika maṇḍala is described in the Trikasadbhāva (which may be the Trikasāra?). It is quite
possible, indeed, likely, that the concrete details concerning the positioning of the deities etc. are
drawn from there, interspersed as usual with Abhinava’s nondual exegesis.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), what is the purpose (of cultivating) a sense of
nonduality here (in this case also)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Purifying Libation from the Argha Vessel

ī̄ fē q 11 2 11
šTTTĪṬJITHTRTTRaTR
ṬJĪTJ |

āī JfṜ: TTÑ-f1: || 2v 1
yacchivādvayapīyūṣasaṁsiktaṁ paramaṁ hi tat I| 26 |
tenārghapuṣpagandhāderāsavasya paśoratha |
yā śivādvayatādṛṣṭiḥ sā śuddhiḥ paramīkṛtiḥ || 27 II

Whatever is sprinkled with the nectar of Śiva’s nonduality is indeed
supreme. The purification, that is, the act of rendering supreme the liquid

offering (argha), the flowers, the perfumes etc., as well as the wine and the
(sacrificial) animal, is the perception (dṛṣt) (and gaze) of SŚiva’s
nonduality. (26cd-27)
Surely (one may ask): Agreed that the act of rendering supreme in this
way the liquid offering and flowers etc. is in order to make them fit for the

worship (of the deity); however, what purpose does it serve with regards to the

(sacrificial) animal? After (having explained) the (unifying) contemplation of

the oneness of the maṇḍala and the Self, as enunciated, he says (the following),

taking this doubt into consideration, in order to define extensively (the types of
sacrificial) animals that can be offered (to the deity).

Concerning the Animals Fit to be Offered
(nivedyapaśuviṣṭaraḥ)

Animal Offering May be Cooked or Uncooked

frīāaāfḡīma starsīçxāgferaṁq 1

ftūāñtzzr̥aāṁhaīazī fēētrzēTRR 1| 3¢ /11
nivedayed vibhor agre jīvān dhātūṁs tadutthitān |

siddhān asiddhān vyāmiśrān yad vā kiṁcic carācaram || 28 II

The word ‘dṛṣṭī here may denote two things. One is the perception of Śiva's nonduality. The
sacrificial offerngs are purified by perceiving that they are one with Śiva, as are all things. The
word ‘dṛṣṭ’ may also mean the ‘gaze’. The officiant views the offering with a gaze that is
empowered by Śvv noával tonḍiosīēss and thereby purifies it. See above, note 3,487, cf.
note 15,681.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

”Living (sacrificial animals) and the constituent elements of the
body (dhātu) derived from them, whether prepared (siddha) (cooked),
unprepared (asiddha) (uncooked) or mixed (half cooked), or whatever is
moving or unmoving, should be offered before the Lord. (28)
The ‘living’ are the living individual souls (jiva) that are (sacrificial)
animals. ‘Prepared’ means ‘cooked’. Animals and the like that move are not
the only ones here (in this case) to be fit offerings; for (plants and the like) that
do not move (are so as well). Thus he says, ‘or whatever is moving or
unmovingʼ.

The plural number of (the word) ‘living (sacrificial animals) suggests

that there are many (kinds of) sacrificial animals, which (he now goes on) to

define:

Eight Types of Sacrificial Animal

ÇRĪTRTTÑRTIIGAĪTTTATST:|

3qJT ī aqāzqaīTaī

f ṁ aai vJḡṁēt | 30 1

dṛṣṭaprokṣitasaṁdraṣṭṟprālabdhopāttayojitaḥ (> -tāḥ) |
nirvāpito vīrapaśuḥ so ʻṣṭadhottaratottamaḥ (> -māḥ) l| 29 ||
yathottaraṁ na dātavyam ayogyebhyaḥ kadācana |
Śivopayuktaṁ hi havir na sarvo bhoktum arhati || 30 ||
(The sacrificial animal may be) of eight kinds which are,

respectively, of a progressively more elevated order, namely 1) ‘seen’

(dṛṣṭa), 2) ʻsprinkledʼ (prokṣita), 3) ‘a witness’ (saṁdraṣṭṛ), 4) ‘deceived’
(prālabdha), 5) ʻappropriatedʼ (upātta), 6) ‘conjoined’ (yojita), 7) ‘offered as
oblation’ (nirvāpita) and 8) ‘heroic’ (vīrapaśu). The more elevated kinds
should not be given to those (beings) who are not qualified (to receive
What is Abhinava’s source for this section, that extends from v. 28 to 50, that provides the

procedure for this peculiar manner in which the sacrificial animal is sacrificed? As the root mantra
taught here for the extraction of the animal’s life force is KHPHREMṀ (48cd-49ab), which is a
seed syllable of Kālī, it may have belonged to the Kālīkrama or a text influenced by it. Abhinava

concludes his exposition by referring to Kallaṭa’s Tattvārthacintāmaṇi. Kṣemarāja confirms that a

procedure like this one was taught there in NTu ad 20/28-29ab, as part ofa long passage in which
a similar procedure is described. Thus, it is possible that Abhinava’s source is the
Tatvārthacintāmaṇi, but it is not at all certain. We know that Jayaratha had access to the

Tattvārthacintāmaṇi, for he quotes it in several places. Thus, one would expect him to quote from
it here also, but he does not. Does then Abhinava’s reference to the Tattvārthacintāmaṇi (in
16/50cd-51ab) concern just the meditative practice and not the rest of the procedure? This is not

likely. It is clear from the way Kṣemarāja references the Tattvārthacintāmaṇi in his commentary
on the NT that it taught a complete procedure, either this one or a similar one. See Appendix to
this chapter, where the whole of chapter twenty of the Netratantra and the commentary has been
tranṣlated.

TANTRĀLOKA

them). Indeed, not everybody is fit to eat the oblation that is appropriate
for Siva. (29-30)

(The eight types of sacrificial animal are) ‘of a progressively more
elevated orderʼ, in the sense that (each is more) excellent, in accord with its
(successively) higher (order in the series listed).

Surely (one may ask), how is it that it is said that the importance
(māhātmya) of the oblation is such that not everybody is fit to eat it? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

TTAṬTĪS
T TṬṬĪ: #ḍTTĪ aāgā- |] 32 1|

yas tu dīkṣāvihīno ‘pi sśivecchāvidhicoditaḥ |
bhaktyāśnāti sa saṁpūrṇaḥ samayī syāt subhāvitaḥ l| 31 I|

He who, although not initiated, impelled by the regulations (vidhi)

(ordained by) SŚiva’s will, eats (the sacriṭicial animal) with devotion, is a
perfectly complete (saṅīpūrṇa) and regular (initiate) (samayin), whois well
purified (subhāvita). (31)

The cause (of his) eating (the sacrificial animal) with devotionis that he

is ‘impelled by the regulations (vidhi) (ordained by) Śiva’s will’. Asis said,
‘Peoplesʼ devotion arises by His grace alone.’” Thus the sense is that eating (the

sacrificial animal) out of greed and the like is an impediment (to spiritual
development).
animal.

(He now) defines, as he has indicated, the eight (kinds of sacrificial)

ā: ũ ũũrār̥çraa: || 32 1
ãgzaī āTITRTTHTTIÑĪTTH’SKV: |

-TĨṛq JGSTKTSĪ: JGĪĪ aI JṬTRT |

3T JTTĀITTA
JĪTḤ: ŪJṬGHTTRĀ: || 3% 1

frējftā: Gā’T̄aTTṬGJTTTTĀTSĪTI] 1| 3., 1|
fJPRITTT TTRhTHTṀTHJITT |

? This line is also quoted in TĀv ad 13/285cd, 17/73, and 25/27-29ab. The full verse, which
Abhinavagupta says is from a Purāṇa, is in 13/285. It is quoted in TĀv ad 21/9cd-1 lab. Abhinava

himself quotes it in MVV 1/697. TĀ 13/285ab is an abreviation of the first line. TĀ 13/285cd is
a literal quotation of the second line. It is partially quoted again in 13/289cd.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

dṛṣṭo ‘valokitaś caiva kiraṇeddhadṛgarpaṇāt |
prokṣitaḥ kevalaṁ hy arghapātravipruḍbhir ukṣitaḥ || 32 |
saṁdraṣṭā darśitāśeṣasamyakpūjitamaṇḍalaḥ |
prālabdha uktatritayasaṁskṛtaḥ so ‘pi dhūnayet || 33 I|
kampeta prasravet stabdhaḥ pralīno vā yathottaram |
upātto yāgasānnidhye śamitaḥ śastramārutaiḥ || 34 ||
yojitaḥ kāraṇatyāgakrameṇa śivayojanāt |
nirvāpitaḥ kr̥tābhyāsaguruprāṇamano ‘rpaṇāt || 35 I|
dakṣiṇenāgninā saumyakalājālavilāpanāt |
1) The (sacrificial) animal that is ‘seen’ (dṛṣṭa) is one that has been
viewed (by the officiating priest), casting (upon him) a gaze inflamed
(iddha) with the rays (of consciousness). 2) The ‘sprinkled’ (prokṣita) one
has only been sprinkled with drops (of the liquid) contained in the
sacrificial vessel (arghapātra). 3) (The sacrificial animal that is called) a
‘witness’ (saṁīdraṣṭṛ) is one that has been shown the entire maṇḍala after it

has been properly worshipped. 4) The ‘deceived’ (prālabdha) (sacrificial
animal) is one that has been purified by the three aforementioned

(methods). (Depending on the type, the animal) also quakes, trembles, and
gushes forth (prasravet) (urine), or else is paralysed and (falls) unconscious
(pralīna), respectively.
5) The (sacrificial animal that is) ‘appropriatedʼ (xpātta) is one that,
close to the sacrifice, has been tranquilized (śamita) (and life brough to an
end) by a weapon (as speedy as) the winds. 6) (The sacrificial animal that
has been) ‘conjoined’ (yojita) is such because it is conjoined with Śiva by
the process of (progressively) abandoning the causal forces (kāraṇatyāga).”
7) (The sacrificial animal that is) ‘offered as oblation’ (nirvāpita) (is such)
because it is one (within which) the teacher who, (well) practiced, has
placed (his) mind and vital breath. (He does this) by destroying (vilāpana)
the network of lunar energies (kalā) (of the exhaled breath of the sacrificial
animal) with the fire (his) right (exhaled breath). (32-36ab)
(The ‘sprinkledʼ (prokṣita) one has) ‘only’ (been sprinkled with drops
(of the liquid) contained in the sacrificial jar,) without (being subject) to the
gaze (avalokana) (of the officiant). (The ‘deceived’ (prālabdha) sacrificial

animal is one) ‘that has been purified by the three aforementioned

(methods)’. The meaning is that it has been purified by the three

aforementioned (methods), namely, the gaze (avalokana), sprinkling (with
consecrated liquid), and seeing (darśana) the maṇḍala. (Each of the three,) in
ascending order is, respectively, agitated when (subject to the officiant’s) gaze,
trembles when sprinkled, and gushes forth (blood) while it views the maṇḍala.
Or else, by a progressively heightened state of paralysis, the functions of all (its)

I have followed Jayaratha’s explanation of the expression ‘śastramārutaiḥ’, but one would also
understand this expression to mean ‘the winds (of the vital breaths) that are weapons’. In other
words, these kind of sacrificial victims are killed and offered by the manipulation of forms of the

vital breath.

See above, note 8,25.

The eighth kind – the vīrapaśu – is explained below in 16/52cd-53ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

senses cease. This is the meaning. (It is said that animal that is ‘appropriated’

(upāṭṭa) is sacrificed) ‘by a weapon (as speedy as) the winds’. (The weapon) is

described as that of the wind in order to convey its velocity (and force).
The sacrificial animal that has been offered by the teacher who is (well)
practiced in conquering etc. the breath and the mind ‘by placing (within it his)
mind and vital breath’, that is, which is in the condition brought about by
making the sacrificial animal’s inhalation etc. one (with his own), is said to be

(a sacrificial animal) that has been ‘offered as oblation’ (nirvāpita), by
rendering it devoid of the seed (of further life). (He does this) basing (himself

on the process whereby) the network of energies (kalā) of the moon of the
exhaled breath (apāna) of the sacrificial animal is destroyed by the fire of (his)
inhaled breath, which is to his right. This is the meaning.
He (now) elaborates (his explanation of) this (process).
Extracting the Vital Force and Vital Essences from the

Sacrificial Animal by Means of the Breath

&JTŠĪ || 35 ||
TTTTTTTÑ] SĪTPĪTIGTJTĪTJṬTĪq |
TĪTĀĪH̄ STTYSĪS TTI TIGTq II 39 |I

TJ J̄aT aaVēāā sī̄ StT TRĀTḤ 1| 3¢ 11
afragd™ī

GTRTTTTĀCĪHTaITTTTĪTRHITZTḤ|
3Tārī TTITṀHIGTÑ TĀTR II %o 11

T̃ 3TG-TTĪTTJIÑ
UṜJH |
EAERGEEEVULZEVIUEEEETHHIBAI

ṜāĪTSTĒTGGTĀGTSĪTĀT fiJTITTT II # 1

TṬa hṆkzdīrāī Tītāīrē 1| #3 11
fhza aff arcramamāīo]
farāīq |
TRTĪRITĪTTHTTTKTĒ
CTĪÑ ||/53 /11
tathā hy ādau paraṁ rūpam ekībhāvena saṁśrayet || 36 I|
tasmād āgneyacāreṇa jvālāmālām upāviśet |
paśor vāmena candrāṁśujālaṁ tāpena gālayet | 37 |

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

nābhicakre ‘tha viśrāmyet prāṇaraśmigaṇaiḥ saha |
paro bhūtvā ṣvaśaktyātra jīvaṁ jīvena veṣṭayet || 38 I|
svacitsūryeṇa saṁtāpya drāvayeta kalāṁ kalām |
tato drutaṁ kalājālaṁ prāpayyaikatvam ātmani || 39 |I

samastatattvasaṁpūrṇam āpyāyanavidhāyinam |
unmūlayeta saṁrambhāt karmabandhād amuṁ rasāt || 40 l|
tata unmūlanodveṣṭayogād vāmaṁ paribhraman |
kuṇḍalyamṛtasaṁpūrṇasvakaprāṇaprasevakaḥ || 41 II
vāmāvartakramopāttahṛtpadmāmṃṛtakeṣaraḥ |

hṛtkarṇikārūḍhilābhād ojodhātuṁ vilāpitam || 42 ||

Śśuddhasomātmakaṁ sāram īṣallohitapītalam |
ādāya karihastāgrasadṛśe prāṇavigrahe || 43 ||
niḥsrtya jhaṭiti svātmavāmamārgeṇa saṁviśet |
āpyāyayan apānākhyacandracakraṁ hṛdambuje || 44 II
sthitaṁ taddevatācakraṁ tena sāreṇa tarpayet |
In this way, (the teacher) must first of all rest in the supreme nature

(paraṁ rūpam), by (cultivating) a state of oneness (with it). Thus, (due to
that, after having come outside) by the fiery movement (of the officiant’s
exhalation) that emits a garland of flames, he must enter by means of the

(inhalation of the) animal, which is on its left, and dissolve away with (his)
heat the network of (its) lunar rays. Now, he should rest within the wheel of
(the animal’s) navel, together with the mass of rays of (their) vital breath

(prāṇa) and, having become other than himself (paro bhūtvā), he should by

virtue of his power envelop the soul (of the animal) (jīva) with (his) soul
(īvena). (Then,) having heated it intensely with the sun of his own
consciousness, he should dissolve away the energies (kalā) (of the animal’s
vital breath,) one by one. (36cd-38)
Then he should quickly transfer (this) network of (vital) energies
(kalā) (thus dissolved away), completely full of all the principles (tattva) and

the source of nourishment (of every living being) in a state of oneness (with

himself), into his own Self, and uproot forcefully (saṁrambhāt) and

This method is also explained in NT 20/27 ff. Sec ibid. 20/1-40, especially 27cd-37ab. Features
of this process are drawn from there. TĀ 16/38cd = NT 20/29ab and 16/39ab is close to NT
20/32d-33a.
In this context, the ‘supreme nature’ is the supreme vital principle, that is, the strength
of Śiva’s power (śāktaṁ balam). According to both_Abhiṅavagupta and Kṣemarāja, it was
expounded and discussed in a lost work by Kallatabhatṭṭa, called the Tattvārthacintamāṇi.

Bhāskara writes at the beginning of his commentary on the Śivasūtra that, after Vasugupta had

received them: “Subsequently, he transmitted them along with their secret to the venerable

Brahmin (ṣāri) Kallaṭa, who wrote the Aphorisms on Vibration (spandasūtra) as a commentary on
(the first) three of its four scctions, and The Wishgranting Gem of the Purport of Reality
(Tattvārthacintāmaṇi) on the last.’ Dyczkowski 1992: 11.
By way of the channel on the right, that is, piṅgalā.
The two pādas paro bhūtva ṣvaśaktya tu jīvam jīvena veṣṭayet are NT 20/29ab. The intended
sense is that the officiant should envelop the living animal, that is, its vital principle, with his own
vital principle. The officiant does this by catching hold (‘enveloping’) the animal’s exhaled breath
(jiva) with his own. In other words, they exhale together, then when the officiant inhales, he drags
the animal’s breath into himself. Then exhaling the Sun of the exhaled breath one with
consciousness consumes the energies of the animal’s breath, one after another.

TANTRĀLOKA

resolutely (rasāt) (the animal) from the bond of Karma (that fetters it to

transmigratory existence). Then, in association with (this process of)
divesting and uprooting, moving round to the left (of the animal) (vāmam),
the teacher, who by (this) anticlockwise sequence (vāmāvartakrama) has
reached the lotus of the (animal’s) heart, the filaments of which are made of
nectar, and has filled the bag of his own vital breath with the nectar of the
kuṇḍalinī, by establishing himself firmly in the calix of (the animal’s) heart,
begins to draw towards himself, by means of (the fire) of his inhaled breath

(prāṇa), which is like a bent finger in the form of an elephant’s trunk, the

essence (sāra) (of the animal), that is, its vital essence (ojodhātu) which,
dissolved away, is slightly yellowish-red, and consists of the (animal’s) pure
lunar (exhalation). Then, having rapidly exited (through the right vital

channel of the animal), he enters by way of his own left-hand path, feeding

the lunar wheel of the inhaled breath (apāna), and offers libation with that
(animal’s vital) essence to the wheel™ of the deities that reside in the lotus of

(his) heart. (39-45ab)

Here (the teacher must) first of all rest in the state of the supreme
nature; otherwise it would not be possible for (him) to have sufficient power

(sāmārthya) within himself to subdue (nigraha) (the sacrificial animal) and the
rest (that is required) here (for this procedure). Then, having exited (from his

body) by means of his own right (channel,) that emits a garland of flames of the
fire (of the exhaled breath), and entered by the sacrificial animal’s left hand

(channel) and melted away the network of energies associated with the Moon of
(the animal’s) inhaled breath (apāna) by the heat of the fire of his own exhaled

breath

(prāṇa).

Then

abiding

(there),

blocking

his

own

(breath)

by

encompassing all the vital breath in the wheel of (the animal’s) navel and,
having enveloped the soul (of the animal) (jīva) with (his) soul (jīvena) by the
greatness of his own (power), he destroys the network of the energies of (the
animal’s vital breath) with the heat of the fire of his own consciousness. Then,
with great force, making it one within himself completely, because it is the
source of nourishment (for every living being), and uprooting it from the bond
of Karma by gradually divesting (the animal’s soul of it), moving round to the
left (of the animal), reaching the location of the calix made of nectar of the lotus
(of the animal’s) heart, the teacher, who has filled the bag (bhastra) of his own

exhaled breath (prāṇa) with the nectar of Kuṇḍalinī (located in) the Bulb
(kanda), draws towards himself, by means of his vital breath (prāṇa), which

(during this process) is like an elephant’s trunk that is crooked and in the bent
form (of a hook), the essence (sāra) (of the animal), that is, its vital essence

(ojodhātu) which, dissolved away by the fire of his own exhaled breath (prāṇa),

is slightly yellowish-red and consists of the (animal’s) pure lunar (exhalation).
Then, having rapidly exited through the right channel (of the animal’s exhalated
breath), and entering through the left (channel of his inhaled breath), nourishing
himself with (the animal’s vital) essence drawn (from it) in this way, he should

Read, with Jayaratha, karmabandhād for karmabaddham.

Read āpyāyayan apānākhyacandracakraṁ for āpyāyayann apānākhyacandracakra.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

offer libation (with it) to the wheel of the deities that reside in the lotus of (his)
heart. The meaning is that he should make it one (samarasa).

He does not only extract just the vital essence (ojodhātu) (of the animal)
in this way, he also (extracts) other (vital constituents from the animal’s body).
Thus he says:

ÉEEĒEIĒ CIFETSa|ēcṇtzs:1ḤIRHNRRI

ha@ PJJTTFGTHTTRTTTTI
K€, |I

anena vidhinā sarvān rasaraktādikāṁs tathā || 45 ||
dhātūn samāharet saṅghakramād ekaikaśo ‘thavā |
kevalaṁ tv atha vāgnīnduravisaṅghaṭṭamadhyagam || 46 ||
jyotīrūpam atha prāṇaśaktyākhyaṁ jīvam āharet |

By virtue of this procedure, the teacher may extract from the

animal all its other (vital) essences also, such as (its) humours (rasa), blood
and the like, each by itself or all together. Or he may also extract just the
soul (jīva) (of the animal) alone, the form of which is light (jyotīs) and,
called the power of the vital breath (prāṇaśakti), is present in the centre (of
the heart), where Fire, Sun and Moon unite. (45cd-47ab)
(The power of the vital breath is) ‘present in the centre (of the heart),
where Fire, Sun and Moon unite’ means that, seated in the middle of the lotus
of the heart, which is the (dynamic) union of exhalation (prāṇa), inhalation

(apāna) and the Upward Moving breath (udāna).
Surely (one may ask), what should one do with these extracted (vital

essences)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Victim’s Soul is Made One (samarasa) With

the Wheel of the Goddesses

jīvaṁ samarasīkuryād devīcakreṇa bhāvanāt I/ 47 II
tad eva tarpaṇaṁ mukhyaṁ bhogyabhoktrātmataiva sā |
The (animal’s) soul should be made one (sarmmarasa) with the wheel

of the goddesses by imagining (it to be so) (bhāvanāt). That itself is the
principal (and supreme) libation (tarpaṇa), which is a state of (oneness) of
the enjoyer and the object of enjoyment. (47cd-48ab)

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), should this be done with mantra or not? With this
doubt in mind, he says:
Sacrificed by Means of Mantra

JTP}TṬCṭc@īUTTTITHT
TGT |I %¢ 1I

agnisaṁpuṭaphullārṇatryaśrakālātmako mahān || 48 ||
pinḍo raktādiṣāraughacālanākarṣaṇādiṣu |

The great syllabic Mantra (pinḍa) (that is used to) move and draw

out (ākarṣaṇa) etc. the flux of the (vital) essences, such as blood and the like

(in the animal’s body), consists of three letters — the Blooming Phoneme
(PH) encapsulated by Fire (R), the Triangle (E) and Time (Ṁ) (i.e

RPHREṀ). (48cd-49ab)

‘Fire’ is the letter R. ‘The Blooming Phonemeʼ is the letter PH. ‘The
Triangle’ is the letter E, and ‘Timeʼ the letter M. (The syllabic Mantra)
PHREM (> RPHREM) (is formed) in this way. That is said (in scripture):

‘Anger (PH) located within the capsule of Fire (R), it is conjoined to the
Triangle (E) and Time (M). This is considered to be the Razor, which serves to
draw out the flux of the (vital) essences, such as blood and the like (in the
animal˚’s body).
Surely (one may ask), how long does it take, and how many repetitions
of Mantra to achieve this? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ṣcg fāTzrāīṁ sēērsṁ#ā afa |1 xg 11

TTTTTGTT- ṬJĪTTĀĪTqT] JJTT |

itthaṁ viśrāntiyogena ghaṭikārdhakrame sati || 49 |
āvṛttiśatayogena paśor nirvāpaṇaṁ bhavet |

By resting (in this practice) in this way, and by repeating (the

Mantra) one hundred times, in the course of twelve minutes the animal is
offered as a libation (nirvāpanam). (49cd-50ab)
One should take up practice here in the initial phase (prākkoṭi).

Accordingly, he says:

See above 15/460-463ab.
Conceming the Mantra of the Razor, see 19/10 ff. and Appendix A to Chapter Nincen. A
different Kṣurikā – Razor called Kālarātr is taught in the MV; see below 30/56 ctc.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

The Teachings of the Tattvārthacintāmaṇi

fīrg: fafzar-īfa
īi ācīoīācaa] 1| ug 1|
kṛtvā katipayaṁ kālaṁ tatrābhyāsam ananyadhīḥ || 50 Il
yathā cintāmaṇau proktaṁ tena rūpeṇa yogavit |
niḥśaṅkaḥ sidáhim āpnoti gopyaṁ tat prāṇavat sphuṭam || 51 I|
Having practiced there for a while, his mind undistracted, as is
taught in the Cintāmaṇi, ‘he who knows Yoga and is free of doubt attains
success, by that (supreme) nature (in which he rests). Clearly, that should
be kept secret (and well guarded), as is the vital breath (itself). (SOcd-51)
The ‘Cintāmaṇi’ is the Tattvārthacintāmaṇi (by Kallaṭabhaṭṭa). ‘Thus
having completed (his) practice (he attains success). (He is) ‘free of doubt’. As
is said (in the scriptures):
‘One who is free of doubt achieves success. Thus, one should abandon
doubt here (concerning this procedure). One who is not (a brave) Kaula adept
(avīra), who harbours notions of false compassion, is destroyed.”

(This procedure) ‘should be kept secret’, because it is contrary to (the

practice and ethics of) common daily life (loka).

Kṣemarāja in his commentary on NT 20/28-29ab informs us that the Tavārthacintāmaṇi taught
a method of offering animal sacrifice by extracting the animal’s vital breath. Thus he writes:
tatvārthacintāmaṇipradarśitāgamikagolakābhyāsāsāditasamastatadrasopalambhaḥ ‘The attain-

ment of all that rasa, acquired by the practice of (producing and ingesting) the ball (of vital

juices), as explained in the Tattvārthacintāmaṇi.’ ls Abhinava drawing this practice from there?

Cf. above: ‘in this way, (the teacher) must first of all rest in the supreme nature (paraṁ rūpam),

by (cultvvating) a state of oneness (with it).’ 16/36cd

Altemative translation:

He who knows Yoga and has practiced there for some time, his mind undistracted, free

of doubt, thus attains success by means of (that) form (of the vital breath) (rāpa) (as taughú) in the
Cintāmaṇi. Clearly, (this procedure) should be kept secret (and well-guarded), as (one would
one’s own) life (itself). (16/50cd-51)

One could translate tena rūpena in two ways, one is: “by means of (that) form (of the
vital breath) (rūpa) or ‘by that (supreme) nature (in which he rests)’. The second translation

refers back to above: ‘in this way, (the teacher) must first of all rest in the supreme nature (pararī

rāpam), by (cultivating) a state of oneness (with it). 16/36cd.

The first translation is quite possible, if not more likely. Referring to the procedure as
taught and explained by Kṣemarāja in NT 20, it is clear that the TC taught a method by which the
officiant could manipulate the vital breath of the victim by means of his own. Practicing ‘there’
may well mean in and through the movement of the vital breath of the officiant, that has been
conmjoined to that of the sacrificial victim.

! Abhinava regularly refers to the Niśātanatantra as his prime source conceming the fallacy of
harbouring such doubts, which there is said to be of six kinds. See above, 13/197-199 and

Jayaratha’s commentary, where he quotes the passage in full. AIl such passages Jayaratha quotes,
like this one, may well be drawn from there. See, for example, ad 15/522 (518).

TANTRĀLOKA

He (now) also transposes the same (procedure) to the initiation that is

imparted to an (aspirant who is) absent.

rastī qaṁma fatṝ: aarāīsṝ sf̃ |

parokṣe ʻpi paśāv evaṁ vidhiḥ syād yojanaṁ prati |

The procedure that in this way serves to conjoin a fettered soul who

is not present (to a particular reality level or Śiva) is also the same.
(52ab)

The Heroic Sacrificial Animal

TṬAA
TIT T ÑTYGTĀT |
praveśito yāgabhuvi hatas tatraiva sādhitaḥ || 52 ||
cakrajuṣṭaś ca tatraiva ṣa vīrapaśur ucyate |

8) The sacrificial animal (vŪrapaśu) that has been introduced into
the sacrificial surface, killed, (its union with Śiva) accomplished (sādhita)
(with yoga and Mantras) there itself, and is pleasing to the circle (of
goddesses) (cakrajuṣṭa) (to whom it is offered as their sacrificial meal), is
said to be ‘heroicʼ. (52cd-53ab)
(The sacrificial animal that is killed) ‘there itself’, on the sacrificial

area, ‘is pleasing’, that is, consumed (by the circle of deities and initiates).
Surely (one may ask), even if the sacrificial animal has been killed in a
battlefield, (a butcher’s) shop or the like, it may be offered in the sacrifice etc.
So how is it that it is said to be of eight kinds? With this doubt in mind, he says:

agka-ā7fḷ
fiēā: aTā=-TTĪĪSTT aI 1 43 1

šara Ẽra a

aavgr1

yas tv anyatrāpi nihataḥ sāmastyenāṁśato ‘pi vā || 53 ||
devāya vinivedyeta sa vai bāhyapaśur mataḥ |

The (animal) that is killed elsewhere should also be offered to the
deity, whether completely or (just) in part. That one is considered an

See below, concerning the initiation of an absent disciple (parokṣadīkṣā) 21/25-27.

Instead of yojanaṁ prati we may read yojitaṁ prati – i.e. with respect to (a sacrificial animal

that) has been conjoined’. This is one that, having ‘abandoned the causes’ (karaṇatyāga), has been

conjoined to Śiva and offered (nirvāpita) (above 16/35). The procedure thereafter is the same,

with the difference that at the end, it is offered to the assembly (cakra) of Yoginīs, as described in
the following verse. The sacrificial animal offered in that form of the sacrifice is termed a

vīrapaśu.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

external sacrificial animal (which is outside the eight kinds) (bāhyapaśu).
(53cd-54ab)
He (now) states in serial order the fruits (of making this offering).
The Benefits of Animal Sacrife to Others and the Animal

I| &y 11|

TTāTgdá Ṭaī̃: ṂTRIḺTTaTGTĪRJHT:ÁI 44, 1I

rājyaṁ lābho ‘tha tatsthairyaṁ Śive bhaktis tadātmatā || 54 1I
Śivajñānaṁ mantralokaprāptis tatparivāratā |

tatsāyujyaṁ paśoḥ sāmyād bāhyāder vīradharmaṇaḥ || 55 ||

puṣpādayo ‘pi tallābhabhāginaḥ śivapūjayā |

(The sacrificer attains) a kingdom (rājya), the attainment (of his
desires), the consolidation of that (attainment), devotion to Śiva, oneness
with Him, the knowledge of Śiva, the attainment of the world of Mantras,

the condition (of Śiva’s) attendant, and conjunction (sāyujya) with Him.

As (the benefits of the offering) is the same as that of the sacrificial animal,
commencing with the external one and ending with the heroic, the flowers
and the rest (that are offered), also have (and give) these benefits (lābha) by
worshipping Siva (śivapūjā). (Sácd-56ab)
‘The condition (of Śiva’s) attendant’ is that of proximity (sāmīpya) to

(Śiva). In the same way, (the sacrificer attains by offering) the outer sacrificial
animal, the attainment (of his desire by the offering) of the iṣṭa sacrificial

animal and so on, up to (the offering of) the ‘heroic’ sacrificial animal (which
bestows on the sacrificer) conjunction with the Mantra (deity).
Surely (one may ask), how can the sacrificial animals, flowers and the
rest, and so too the mobile and immobile (universe), participate in that
attainment? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TGTUIGTĪ
ṜTTĪ fIṬIGTTT-: |I MWE 1I

g}aTTTRTTT
f f aā =nq 1
ekopāyena deveśo

viśvānugrahaṇātmakaḥ || 56 ||

yāganaivānugṛhṇāti kiṁ kiṁ yan na carācaram |
The last three attainments correspond to a standard set of three grades of union with Śiva taught

in the Siddhānta. Theṣe are residence in Śiva’s world (sālokya), proximity to Him (sāmīpya), and
conjunction with Him (sāyujya). Conceming sāyujya, see Goodall 2004 (edition etc. of
Parākhyatantra) note 889 on p. 397.

TANTRĀLOKA

What indeed does the Lord of the Gods, whose nature it is to grace
all, not grace, (both) mobile and immobile, by (this) one means – the
sacrifice? (Ś6cd-57ab)
Thus, it is not possible to consider the procuring etc. of the sacrificial
animal to be an act of violence. Accordingly, he says:

šīārāttfī vgītzd: āhreflaĩst̄ T 1| 4

sīgf=rq |

11]

tenāvīro ‘pi śaṅkādiyuktaḥ kāruṇiko ‘pi ca I| 57 ||
na hiṁsābuddhim ādadhyāt paśukarmaṇi jātucit |
Thus, even if (the teacher) is not a Kaula adept (vīra) and is beset by
doubts and the like, even if he is compassionate also, he should not adopt

the notion in any way (jātucit) that animal sacrifice (paśukarman) is (a
sinful act of) violence (hiṅṁsa). (57cd-58ab)

‘Thus’, if the teacher ‘is beset by doubts’ as to how to help (and save)

the sacrificial animal etc., and so is ‘not a Kaula adept (vīra), and has (many)

thoughts (savikalpa), or ‘even if he is compassionate alsoʼ (as well as being an
adept), he should never ‘adopt the notion that animal sacrifice
(paśukarman) (performed in the course of a) sacrifice and the like ‘is (a sinful
act of) violence (hiṁsa)’. The meaning is that he should not think of it in this
way. It is prescribed (by the scriptures), and so this (animal sacrifice) could not

be (a sinful act) violence. As they say: “The violence (done to the sacrificial

animal) in the course of the Agniṣṭoma is not actually violence.’ But, on the

This reference is drawn from a Vedic source. The performance of a Vedic sacrifice may also
require animal sacrifice. Much has been written about this. A special area within the sacrificial
enclosure is set aside for it, usually in the northwest, which is the direction of Vāyu, the god of the

Wind. The sacrificial stake – yāpa – is erected there, to which the sacrificial animal is tied to be
killed. The prescriptions for the manner in which this is to be done take care to emphasize that it
should not be an act of violence – hirsa, which is sinful. This happens if the blood of the animal
is spilt. In order to avoid that, the animal’s mouth is filled with various kinds of grain and tied. It

is then surrounded by priests, who pound it with wooden mortars, reciting hymns to Vāyu in a

loud voice, thus covering the noise the animal makes. Once it is dead, its throat is slit, and the
blood is carefully collected in a special vessel. This is then taken to the border of the sacrificial

area and poured onto the ground outside its confines as an offering to the beings who live there,
generically referred to as Rākṣas (‘Protectors’). This is done to satisfy them so they do not attack

and disrupt the sacrifice to steal the offerings meant for the gods. The victim is then carefully cut
into pieces in the prescribed manner. The hymn to Puruṣa (ṚRg 10/90) is intoned, amongst others,

suggesting the identity of the victim with the Man – Puruṣa – whose sacrifice and dissection

creates the world and the social order. Unlike the Greek sacrifice, the victim is cooked. The
cooked parts called havis are offered into the fire as oblations. Grains and other vegetarian

offerings are made separately. Practically everything is offered to the gods, the small remnant
(ucciṣṭa) that sticks to the sides of the pot is consumed by the priests. It is clear, even from this
very cursory account, that a great effort is made to confine the animal sacrifice within the

boundaries of ritual purity. Although, even in early times, the Vedic people tended towards

vegetarianism, this was only partially enforced, suggesting that at an earlier period it may not have
been a concern at all, as it came to be more and more in the ages to come. Thus, Tantric rites that

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

contrary, elsewhere, apart from the sacrifice, this is indeed violence, because
(scripture) forbids it. As scripture (declares):
‘O fair lady, he who knows the procedure should never kill an animal
violently (haṭhena) when it is in pain, or (even) indicate (that he will do so,)
prior to the sacrifice.’
Again:

‘O great goddess, one should not kill an animal during a wedding or for
one’s own purpose at any time in the course of a sacrifice, nor when loved
relatives come (to visit). O fair faced one, one should not kill an animal (just)
for sport without (the performance of a) sacrifice. (But) he who gives it in the

course of a sacrifice in order to offer libation to the Mothers, offering it once to

each one in accord with the previously taught procedure, once the sacrifice has
been performed (completely and correctly), he immediately gets the (same) fruit
from that as the repetition of a Mantra a thousand billion times and a hundred
million rites of worship (pāūjā).
(Similarly) smṛti also (says):
‘The one who uselessly kills an animal (himself) dies here (as many
times) as there are hairs (on that) animalʼ’s (body), going from one life to

another.

involved animal sacrifice, as in this case to the Trika goddesses worshipped on the triple Trident,
could find justification, implicitly at least, in Vedic sacrifice, and maintained similar provisions to
preserve its sacrality for similar reasons. However, one fundamental addition was made, which
could not be acceptable to Vedikas and that required a radical departure from them. This is the
denial of the ultimate existence and hence tenability of the distinction between pure and impure.

Cf. Manusmṛti chapter 5:

‘Beasts and birds recommended (for consumption) may be slain by Brāhmaṇas for
sacrifices, and in order to feed those whom they are bound to maintain; for Agastya did this of
old. For in ancient (times) the sacrificial cakes were (made of the flesh) of eatable beasts and birds
at the sacrifices offered by Brāhmaṇas and Kṣatriyas. (Ṣ/22-23)

One may eat meat when it has been sprinkled with water, while Mantras were recited,

when Brāhmaṇas desire (one’s doing it), when one is engaged (in the performance of a rite)

according to the law, and when one’s own life is in danger. (27)
‘The Lord of the creatures (prajāpati) created this (whole world) to be the sustenance of
the vital spirit; both the immovable and movable (creation is) the food of the vital spirit. (28)
The eater who even daily devours those destined to be his food, commits no sin; for the
creator himself created both the eaters and those who are eaten (for those special purposes). (30)
‘The consumption of meat (is befitting) for sacrificesʼ; that is declared to be the rule

made by the gods; but to persist (in using it) on other (occasions) is to be a proceeding worthy of
Rākṣasas. (31)
He who eats meat when he honours the gods and manes commits no sin,
whether he has bought it, or himself has killed (the animal), or has received it as a present from

others. (32)

A twice-bomm man who knows the law, must not eat meat except in conformity with law;
for if he has eaten it unlawfully, he will, unable to save himself, be eaten after death by his

(victims).’ (33)

Read with MS Th: kṛtveha for kṛtvoha.

“ Manusmṛti Ṣ/38.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask). Let it be so (as you say), but even so, initially this

death is greatly displeasing for the sacrificial animal. With this doubt in mind,

he says:

TāĪTĒṬGTĪT ṬGṬTSaTĪ YSTT II M
k|EEZUEEVEIGEIE-NEEḺ

paśor mahopakāro ʻyaṁ tadātve ‘py apriyaṁ bhavet || 58 II

vyādhicchedauṣadhatapoyojanātra nidarśanam |

Even though this (sacrifice) is of great benefit to the sacrificial
animal, nonetheless it is displeasing (for him). The example here is the

elimination of disease by the application of herbs and austerity (that are

unpleasant initially but result in great benefits). ’ (S8cd-59ab)

Although at the time, death is displeasing for the sacrificial animal, it is
‘of great benefit’ to it, that is, (a great) grace. The example there (in that case)
is ‘the elimination of disease . . .’. The herb is, for example, bitter. The
austerity is, for example, a painful (mortification of the body) (krcchra). As (is
said) in the scriptures (that is, the Netratantra):

‘O fair-faced lady, the sacrificial animals (are offered) in order to grace
them. (The Mothers and Yoginīs etc. to whom they are offered) release them
from sins and they sever their mass of fetters. The sacrificial animals used (in

this way) always have the upward way.”'

Śruti also (says the same, where we read): ‘The sacrificial animal that

was brought (into the sacrificial area) saw death and he desired the gods. The

gods spoke (to it) in this way: “Come! We will go to heaven with you!”
Surely (one may aṣk), if this were to be so, liberation (would be
aṭṭained) simply by dying, so there would be no need of initiation and the rest.
In order to quell this doubt, he corroborates (what he is saying) with scripture.

JTrcgzā

TT 7 afã |

sa-̄ ẼẼõ 11| 0 11
FGṬIR] 3; TTĪĪTTTĪ HRIĪ T€ q̄ 1| ā2 1

This means that after death there is rebirth in better worlds.

Amṛteśatantra MS reads tāḥ for tān.

' NT 20/8-9ab. NT edition rcads teyām for eyām and pāpaughāṁś- for pāśaughāṁś-. Kṣemarāja

comments:

‘the upward way is emanation into the planes of Pure Knowledge and the rest or

liberation.’ ūrdhvagatiḥ śuddhavidyādipadasrṛṣṭir muktir vā. The preceding verses supply the

context. They are part of the translation of all of chapter twenty of the Netratantra, found in the
Appendix to this chapter.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

śrīmanmṛtyuñjaye proktaṁ pāśacchede kṛte paśoḥ || 59 II
malatrayaviyogena śarīraṁ na prarohati |
dharmādharmaughavicchedāc charīraṁ cyavate kila || 60 ||
tenaitan māraṇaṁ noktaṁ dīkṣeyaṁ citrarūpiṇī |
rūḍhapāśasya yaḥ prāṇair viyogo māraṇaṁ hi tat | 61 II
iyaṁ tu yojanaiva syāt paśor devāya tarpaṇe |

It is said in the venerable Mṛtyuṁjaya that once that the fetters of
the sacrificial animal have been severed it is disconnected from the three
impurities (mala), and so a body no longer develops (prarohati) (into which
it is reborn again). (The meaning is that,) by the interruption of the current
of righteous and unrighteous (action) (dharmādharma), (its soul) falls away

from the body (and, dying, it is released from the cycle of transmigration).

Therefore, that is not said to be killing (the animal); rather, it is a
marvellous form (citrarūpinī) of initiation. ‘Killing’ refers to (a soul whose)
fetters are firm, and amounts to the disconnection of (its) vital breaths
(from the body). This (on the contrary) is only the conjunction of the
sacrificial animal (yojana) (with the supreme reality), in order to offer
libation to the deity. (59cd-62)

‘The

current

of

righteous

and

unrighteous

(action)

(dharmādharma)’ originates from (the activity of) the body. That is said there

(in the Netratantra):

‘By severing the root (of the fettered state) of the sacrificial animal,

(the goddesses) destroy (its) three impurities. The body of (the soul) that has
been disconnected from the three impurities does not develop (again in another
life). The conjunction of (the soul) of the sacrificial animal (with the supreme

reality) is like an initiation; it does not (amount to) killing it.

(The supreme yoginīs) destroy the fetters of the sacrificial animal by
(Śiva’s) essential pervasive nature and by the glorious outpouring (vibhava) of

His own power”. It is by that (destruction) that (its) body is destroyed. The
liberation that takes place when the body is destroyed (in this way) is not (the
same as) killing (an animal). The wise know that the killing (of a person) is the
disconnection from the body of a person who is bound with fetters that are firm

and well developed.”

He concludes this (point, saying):

TĀ 16/59cd-62 is a paraphrase of NT 20/18-21, which is quoted by Jayaratha in the
commentary.

NT reads teṣāṁ – ‘their for paśor – ‘of the sacrificial animal’. The latter is confirmed by the
same reading in the manuscript of the Amṛteśatantra (which is another name of the Netratantra.

See bibliography).

Here the reading is dīkṣāvad yojanaṁ, NT reads dīpavad. The MS of the Amṛteśatantra reads
dīkṣaiva yojana, which confirms the reading here.
S ] am following Kṣemarāja, who comments on this line: vyāpakena śivātmanā |
svaśaktivibhavena śāktena | yeneti trotanena.
“ AT reads mokṣaṇaṁ na jighāṁsanaṁ ‘liberation is not violent killing’.
NT 20/18-21.

TANTRĀLOKA

TTTRāĪTTTITY ṬJTGATRTGTĪT |I 3 II
tasmād devoktim āśritya paśūn dadyād bahūn iti l 62 ||
Thus, in accord with the Lord’s words, one should offer many

sacrificial animals. (62cd)

‘In accord with the Lord’s words’ʼ, such as, ‘one should sprinkle (with
water and thus consecrate) many animals (as offerings)’,’ many sacrificial

Ś NT 19/112b. The reading there (suported by the AT MS) is ajāṁs -- ‘goats’ for pasūṁīś –
‘animals’. One suspects that Jayaratha himself modified the text so that it may serve as an

appropriate authoritative reference to support Abhinava’s statement. The context in the NT is the
offering of many goats by a king to appease ghosts, Mothers, Yoginīs and the like, when there are

omens of calamities or indicating problems for the king, to protect himself from them.
yadā mṛtyuvaśāghrataḥ kālena kalito nrpaḥ |l
ariṣṭacihnitātmā vai deśo vā tatsutādayaḥ |

brahmaṇādiṣu sarveṣu nāśe janapadasya ca ||
śālyādiṣu ca saṣyeṣu phalamūlodakeṣu ca |
durbhikṣavyādhikāryeṣu utpāteṣu mahatsu ca ||
tadā nīrājanaṁ kāryaṁ rā(jñā)jīo rāṣṭravivrdhaye | 19/106cd-109ab
‘(This needs be done) if the kiṅg, (his) time measured out, is affected by the power
(vaśa) of death, and his soul is marked with nefarious signs, or else the country or his offspring
etc. are. When great calamities befall all (the people) including Brahmins and the rest, when the

country is being destroyed, (when they befall) the crops of rice etc., fruits, roots and water, and

when they bring about extteme poverty and disease, the king should then perform a nīrājana in

order to make the country prosper.’ (19/106cd-109ab)

sutādaya

ityādiśabdād rājña utpātānteṣu

satsu yadā brahmaṇādiṣu nāśas

tadā nīreṇa

abhiṣekavāriṇā, ajanaṁ sarvadoṣāṇāṁ nivāraṇārthaṁ kṣepaḥ niḥśeṣeṇa rājanaṁ dīptimattotpādanaṁ kāryam || tad vaktum upakramate

By the word ‘etc.’ (in the expression) ‘ofspring etc.’ (is meant) those who are involved

in the calamity (that befalls) the king, or i destruction (is befalling) Brahmins etc. Then it is

necessary to enthuse the king entirely with radiant energy (dīptimatta) (by nīrājana). (Thi

done) with water (nīreṇa), that is, the water used for consecration. The casting (of that water) is

the instigation (ajana) (of power) (required) so as to be protected from all (these harmful) defects.
In order to say (that) he begins:
pūrvavad yajanaṁ krtvā kalaśenābhīṣecayet I|I 19/109cd

katham ity āha
niḥśaṅko nirjane rātrau śubharkṣe ca tathāṁśake |

jayapuṇyāhaśabdaiś ca vedamaṅgalaniḥsvanaiḥ l 19/110
abhiṣiīñcet tu rājānaṁ.

nirjana iti guptasthāne | atha cācāryaḥ

‘Having performed the sacrifie, (the king) should be consccrated with (the water) of
the jar.’ (109cd)
How (is that donc)? He says:
‘(The officiant,) free of doubt, in a solitary place at night, when an auspicious
constellation and its aspect (ss ascending,) should conscrate the king with words that speak of
victory and merit (uṇya), resonant with Vedic hymns of praise (vedamaigala). (110-111a)
‘Solitary means in a hidden place. Now, (concemning) the officiant (ācārya):
siddhārthān juhuyād hahān

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

animals of (all) nine kinds should be offered in sacrifice (to the deity). Thus (the
purport of this statement) is established (as being correct).
Surely, according to (scriptural) statements such as, ‘(the sacrificial

animal can be one) that is born once, twice or seven times’ʼ, sacrificial animals
are superior or otherwise according to the various (number of) lives (they have

been sacrificed) and other such (considerations). So how is it that that has not
been stated here? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Best Sacrificial Animal Has Been Reborn as Such Six Times

niveditaḥ punaḥ prāptadeho bhūyo niveditaḥ |
saṭkṛtva itthaṁ yaḥ so ʻtra ṣaḍjanmā paśur uttamaḥ ll 63 1|
The most excellent sacrificial animal here (in this case) is one that

has been reborn six times; that is to say, that it was offered (in sacrifice),
reincarnated, and then offered again six times. (63)

(A sacrificiīal animal) ‘offered (in sacrifice) is one that has attained
oneness with the supreme principle by means of the purification (saṁskāra) by
each specific Mantra (used for that purpose). This is the meaning. (The
sacrificial animal has) ‘reincarnated’ because it has not in some way united
with (the supreme) good fortune (sarṁpatti) (of liberation).
He (now) makes (the teaching) firm (that a sacrificial animal in its

seventh rebirth as such) is the most excellent, by presenting an (appropriate)
example.

nīrājanavidhānena nāmāṅke saṁskṛte priye |

vahnau saṁruddhamanas ajāśca prokṣayed bahīn

úrpiyarthaṁ bhitasaṅghasya mantr̥ĩ rakṣārtham udyataḥ l 19/111bcd-112
nīrājanam asāmānyadīptyutpādanaṁ mūlamantraprayogapūrvakam

1|

"“amukasya

nīrājanam asiu svāhā" ity atra prayogaḥ | bhūtāni ca saṅghaś ceti samāsaḥ, saṅgho
mātṛyoginyādigaṇaḥ l 1 12 |

He should offer many things that have been successfully prepared (for the purpose)
(sidhārtha) into the fire that has bcen purified and is marked with the name (of the king). 0
beloved, (it should be done) along with the rite of waving lights (nīrājana). With the mind wll
fixed, many goats should be consccrated (to be offered in sacriice). (Thus) the reciter of Mantra
exerts (himself) to satisfy the ghosts and host in order to protct (the king, people and land).
(1ī1bcd-112)
Nīrājana (the waving of lamps), preceded by applying the root mantra, generates
unparalleled enrgy (dipti). “May so-and-so (be offered) nīrājana ṣvāhā’. This is the application
(prayoga) here. (Bhūtasaṅgha-) is a compound meaning ‘ghosts and the host’. The host is the host
of Mothers and Yoginīs ctc.’

TANTRĀLOKA

fkē a7 7 aa 1| sx 1
yathā pākakramāc chuddhaṁ hema tadvat sa kīrtitaḥ |
kāṁ siddhiṁ naiva vitaret svayaṁ kiṁ vā na mucyate || 64 ||
Just as gold becomes pure by a process of progressive refinement
(pākakrama), thiīs (sacrificial animal) is said to be such. What
accomplishment (siddhi) does (its sacrifice) not bestow? Or is not himself
liberated (thereby)? (64)
Thus, he says that (animal sacrifice) is the best aid, both for oneself and

for others, (with the words) ‘what accomplishment (siddhi) does it not
bestow?” etc.
He corroborates this (teaching) with the scriptures.

Sst GaāTṝadTa

HÁIEICCAḤ EĀṢETEITTIĒTII

ī̄ī TJTTIa
ṬTĀ RTTT I| Ṝ II

TṬSTRI TṬGaTrraṁāīś JSTAT ||/. 11

ṁzā aīā aṁgsa fra 1
uktaṁ tv ānandaśāstre yo mantrasaṁskāravāṁs tyajet |
samayān kuṭsayed devīr dadyān mantrān vinā nayāt | 65 ||
dīkṣāmantrādikaṁ prāpya tyajet putrādi mohitaḥ |

tato manuṣyatāṃm etya punar evaṁ karoty api || 66 ||

ittham ekādiṣaptāntajanmāṣau dvividho dvipāt |
catuṣpād vā paśur devīcarukārthaṁ prajāyate || 67 II
dātrarpito ʻsau taddvārā yāti sāyujyataḥ śivam |

IIt is said in the Ānandaśāstra: ‘Whoever has been purified by

Mantra, abandons the (observance of the) rules, abuses the goddesses, gives
mantras (to others) without (following) the rules or, having obtained
iṇiṭiation, mantra and the rest abandons (his practice,) deluded by (his
attachment to his) sons and other (worldly concerns), . . . (dies). Then
The entire passage from verse 65 to 72 deals with the same subject, that is, the animal offered in
sacrifice, and so may well be drawn from the same source, that is, the Ānandaśāstra. In line 70cd,

Abhinava states that Śiva (maheśin) is teaching, thus indicating that he is continuing to draw from

a Tantra.
“ Perhaps it would be better to read putrādi mohitaḥ for putrādimohitaḥ, in which the meaning
would be ‘deluded, he abandons (his) sons and the rest (of his family)’. The pronoun yaḥ (> yo) in
the first line requires a counter correlate ‘saḥ’ or the like, which is missing, indicating that a part

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

having (returned to the) human condition, even if he does the same again,

reborn from one to seven times in this way, he becomes a sacrificial animal.

Of two kinds, biped" or quadruped, (he is born) in order to serve as the
sacrificial pap (caruka) of the goddess.® Offered by the donor, this (animal)
in this way attains Śiva by being conjoined (to Him) (sāyujyataḥ).’ (6568ab)
of the text has been lost. Further evidence for this is that after listing a number of possible

transgressions, the text simply continues with no regard for syntax, saying: ‘hen, having (retumed
to the) human condition, he does the same again. This sentence suggests that the person’s
transgression is all the more because he continues to repeat it in subsequent lives. We would
expect such a sinner to go to hell, as do those who transgress the Kaula injunctions and speak
badly of the ‘the path of the left’.
A ‘biped’ is a human being. In other words, animal sacrifice is being divided into two kinds –
one in which human beings are sacrificed, and another in which animals are offered.

“2 Çf. another reference from the Ānandatanira above: ‘The goddesses are satisfied in (this)
sacrifice by bloody meat’15/606cd (602cd). Concerning caru, see above, note 2,7, and 15/605cd608ab (601cd-604ab).

Abhinava has quoted a long passage from the same Ānandatantra (in 8/32cd-41ab), warning
those who have been initiated into the higher traditions will go to hell if they transgress the Rules
and speak badly of ‘the practice of the left’. There we are told that they are saved by devotion to
Hāṭakeśvara, a form of Siva, who govems the hell worlds. Here, the same Tantra tackles the same

theme from a ditferent perspective. The fettered soul who transgresses for seven lives may be
liberated by being sacrificed to the goddess.

It is a common belief that animals offered in sacrifice are liberated after they have been
offered seven times in successive rebirths. At the most basic level, the same holds good for human
sacrifice. Any human offered in sacrifice is ex conceptio in one or other of his last seven lives.
Sublimated and interiorized, death itself becomes the sacrifice, and the path to liberation is traced

through seven lives, lived realising higher levels of attinment, marked by seven deaths. Men
draw closer to the goddess in this way, and so she likes, both literally and symbolically, to cat
their flesh in their last series of rebirths, especially of those who are in their last life.

This belief appears to have influenced or been influenced by an carly Buddhist
conception. According to this view, there is a stage of spirtual development when the aspirant
becomes a srotāpanna, lit. ‘one who has entered the stream’. Having entered this ‘stream’ʼ, he

needs only scven more lifetimes in order to achieve liberation. This notion was later adapted by
the Buddhist Tantras which, developing within the same cultural milieu as their Śaiva
counterparts, needed in a like manner to purify and interiorize more primitive beliefs. Thus, the
Hevajratantra affirms that the best sacrificial offering is a man who has traversed this course and

become one who has ‘retumed seven times’ (saptāvarta). (HT 1/7/21) Whilst the commentator
Vajragarbha accepts that this is literally the case, echoing the Tantra, he stresses that the human

victim sacrifices himself willngly, implying that his action is guided by the altruistic spirit that
inspires a Bodhisattva. However, he goes on to explain the ‘figurative sense’ in the Tantric
perspective, according to which liberation is to be achieved in this very life, and that the offering

is not an outer ritual but takes place spontaneously within the body. Vajragarbha begins by
outlining the godlike features of men in their seventh birth:

“They appear with seven shadows, their eyes are unflinching, there are three creases on
their forchcads, thcir bodies emit a pleasing odour, and s0 on. If you sce such a one, offer him
flowers in salutation, circumambulate him, and address him thus: “O Great Lord of Yogis, the
time has come to act for the good of such as us. If you address him thus, he will surrender his
life. . . . As for the figurative sense of saptāvara it is said: ‘Of all embodied beings, this body
represents seven births, for from the cating and drinking of food and drink with their six flavours,
these are digested, and nourishment incrcases. This is called the firṣt bitth. Thcn the blood is
formed, and this is the second birth. Then flesh, which is the third, skin, which is the fourth, the
formaton of vins, which is the fifth, then bones, which is the sixth, then flesh and marrow, and
this is the seventh.’ Hevajrapinḍārthaṭkā by Vajragatbha, commentary on HT 1/7/21. Translaton
by Snellgrove.

TANTRĀLOKA

(He does) ‘the same’ (again), that is, he abandons (the observance of)
the rules. ‘In this way’, by means of the channel which is the offering the donor
(makes of the sacrificial animal, he attains Śiva).
As the birth of that (sacrificial animal) is in order to serve as the

sacrificial pap (caruka) of the goddess, it should not be used elsewhere (for
something else). Accordingly, he says:

PEḺḤEAḵ ḶIʻGEitG:s:; ḤIHEAVĀṈI

raiftrāṁṝk

iti ṣaṁbhãvya citraṁ tat paśũnãṁ praviceṣṭitam || 68 |I
bhogyīcikīrṣitaṁ naiva kuryād anyatra taṁ paśum |
“Reflecting on that varied wandering (from birth to birth)
(pravicesṭitam) of sacrificial animals, the animal (selected for the sacrifice)
with the desire that it serve as food (for the Goddess) (should not be
assigned) elsewhere (to some other purpose). (68cd-69ab)
(The animal selected for the sacrifice) ‘with the desire that it serve as
foodʼ, that is, with the intention to feed the goddesses during the sacrifice and
other such (rites, should not be assigned) ‘elsewhere’ (for any other purpose)

apart from the sacrifice.
Surely (one may ask), let this be so with regards to the sacrificial animal
that is fit (to be offered) in the sacrifice; however, it follows that one that is not

fit, although brought nearby (to the sacrificial surface) should be removed

elsewhere, where it can be used as one desires. (In that case,) there is no (such)

rule that one should not assign the animal (selected for the sacrifice) with the
desire that it serve as food elsewhere (for some other purpose). With this doubt

in mind, he says:

1|

nāpi naiṣa bhaved yogya iti buddhvāpasārayet || 69 ||
taṁ paśuṁ kintu kāṅkṣā ced viśeṣe taṁ tu ḍhaukayet |
Nor should that animal be rejected once known that it is not fit (to
be sacrificed). However, if there is a need for a special (animal fit to be
sacrificed), one should draw it near (and offer) that one (but without
rejecting the other one). (69cd-70ab)

‘O Bhairavī, one should not offer an animal that is impotent, emaciated,

very old or very young, and certainly not a female animal.”

Possibly 68¢cd-70ab and 71-72 are also drawn from the Ānandasśāstra.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
The animal whose nature is as stated here is not fit (to be offered in a)

sacrifice. But even though one has known this, that animal should not be
rejected. Rather,
‘In order to (perform) the sacrifice successfully, (the sacrificial animal
may be of) three kinds; that is, a (male) buffalo, goat or sheep that has horns, is

young, complete in all its limbs, of one colour, and has an auspicious face.”

‘If there is a need for a special (animal fit to be sacrificed)ʼ, as
described (in this verse), one should also draw that special animal (that is fit to
be sacrificed) close (to the place where it is sacrificed) so that (that) need may
be fulfilled. Thus, what he is saying is that all the animals that have been
brought close to the sacrifice, however many they may be, should be offered,
not just those that are fit (to be sacrificed).
Thus he says:

TGTTT |I/60 11

tāvatas tān paśūn dadyāt tathā coktaṁ maheśinā I| 70 ||

Maheśin has said the same; namely, that one should offer as many
animals as there are (in the sacrificial area). (70cd)
‘As many (animals as there are,) right up to those that serve to fulfil
the need for special (animals that are fit to be sacrificed).
Once he has defined what is special (that qualifies) an animal (to fit to
be sacrificed) as a whole, he (now goes on) to define that with respects to its
parts also.

Parts of the Animal to be Offered

d ũaīq || z 11
eei.tEāeEEIEETVṢ!
htīhī=rssṝrgj}
gad
aāT || 93 1|
paśor vapāmedasī ca gālite vahnimadhyataḥ |
arpayec chakticakrāya paramaṁ tarpaṇaṁ matam || 71 II
hṛdantramuṇḍāṁsayakṛtpradhānaṁ vinivedayet |
karṇikākuṇḍalīmajjaparśuṁ mukhyetaraṁ ca vā || 72 ||
“’ By saying this, Abhinava is stating that these teachings are acceptable because Śiva has taught

them in a Tantra. If so, it is not unlikely that it is the Ānandatantra he began to quote from verse
65. It is unlikely that Mah

here is Śambhunātha, Abhinava’s Trika teacher. I take this to be

evidence that the entire passage concerning animal sacrifice, extending from 65 to 72, is drawn
from the Ānandatantra.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The officiant) should offer to the assembly of goddesses
(śakticakra) the omentum and the fat of the animal, that has melted into the
middle of the fire. This is considered to be the supreme libation. He should
offer the main (part of the animal,) namely, the heart, entrails, head,
shoulders, and liver, or else, the secondary one, that is, the ears (karṇikā),

earring (kuṇḍalī), marrow, and the lateral (channels). (71-72)

He should offer the liver, which is dark meat, as the main (offering).

‘The earsʼ (karṇikā) is the genitals (liṅgikā), and ‘the earring (kuṇḍal) is

the supreme little circle (maṇḍalikā). ‘The marrow’ is the fat (vasā) of the
bone. ‘The lateral (channels)’ are the vital channels (nāḍī) on the sides (of the

animal).

The Propitiation of the Fire (agnitṛpti)

āftāaḷ ī šaa ̄ fṬT̄̄d 1| 93 11
tato ʻgnau tarpaṇaṁ kuryān mantracakrasya daiśikaḥ |
tan nivedya ca devāya tato vijñāpayet prabhum || 73 |
After this, the teacher should perform a libation into the fire to the
assembly of mantras (mantracakra), and having offered (all) that to the
deity (deva), he should make (the following) declaration to the Lord. (73)
‘The libation’ is (performed) as is (the one) before.

What should he declare? (In response to this question,) he says:

TṬēēāī ŪAaTGTTT TTHH |
TṬTRĪTRATĪTGTTTTĪTTHTEṬGAT aT || 9% 1|

tj vrafcafṁ

gurutvena tvayaivāham ājñātaḥ parameśvara |
sākṣāt svapnopadeśādyair japair gurumukhena vā || 74 ||

anugrāhyās tvayā śiṣyāḥ śivaśaktipracoditāḥ |

“ Rcad mukhyetaraṁ for mukhyetaraṁ.
“ The text may be corrupt here; kuṇḍalī means a small earing. This does not seem to be
appropriate here.

The word liṅgikā is not found in the dictionaries I could consult. It litrally means ‘a small
(femalc) penis is this the clitoris? Probably not, because female animals are not offered.
“ Like liṅgikā, I could not find maṇḍalikā in the dictionaries.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

tad ete tadvidhāḥ prāptās tvam ebhyaḥ kury anugraham || 75 II
samāveśaya māṁ svātmaraśmibhir yad ahaṁ śivaḥ |
evaṁ bhavatv iti tataḥ śivoktim abhinandayet || 76 ||
“You yourself, O Supreme Lord, (have ordained) me a teacher by

(Your) command (ājñā). These are (my) disciples who, impelled by Śiva’s
power, deserve to be graced by You, (either) directly by means of teachings

imparted in dreams and the like, by the repetitions of mantras or

(indirectly) by the mouth of a teacher.™ Such are they who are present
(here), grace them! I who am Śiva, penetrate me with the rays of your own
Self!” Then he should joyfully praise Śiva’s declared (response) that, “may

it be thus (as you wish)!” (74-76)

The Inflaming (of the Teacher’s) Own Essential Nature
(svasvabhāvadīpanam)

aaTTḠ-̄: TĪ T-TĀT TTJĒTṬRTT |I/U

raīg fraāōēxd aāaqq |
TīaTTTR̥TRARTGĀĪTGTT-]
|I 98 1I

JṬIāT T-ṀTTATGT STTKṬ I

Śivābhinnam athātmānaṁ pañcakṛtyakaraṁ smaret |
svātmanaḥ karaṇaṁ mantrān mūrtiṁ cānujighṛkṣayā || 77 |I
tato baddhvā sitoṣṇīṣaṁ hastayor arcayet kramāt |
anyonyaṁ pāśadāhāya suddhatattvaviṣṛṣṭaye || 78 II
tejorūpeṇa mantrāṁś ca śivahaste samarcayet |
garbhāvaraṇagānaṅgaparivārāsanojjhitān || 79 ||
ātmānaṁ bhāvayet paścād ekakaṁ jalacandravat |
” In Kallaṭa’s version of the revelation of the Śivaṣūtra, a Siddha imparted them to Vasuguptain a
dream. In a later version, narrated by Kṣemarāja, Śiva appears to himin a dream to tell him where

to look for it.
”! Theṣe three options are inserted by Abhinava by way of a gloss on the passage f the MV which
he is quoting here. See following note.
TĀ 16/74ab, 75 = MV 9/37ab, 37cd-38ab. Verse 76 is an expanded explanation of MV 9/38cd39ab:
madīyāṁ tanum āviśya yenāhaṁ tvaisamo bhavan l
karomy evam ii prokto harṣād utphulalocanaḥ
‘Once the (teacher) had said that with his eyes blooming with joy, (the Lord replied) “T

am doing so!”.”

TANTRĀLOKA

kṛtyopādhivaśād bhinnaṁ ṣoḍhābhinnaṁ tu vastutaḥ | 80 ||
Now (atha) (the teacher) should recollect (his own) Śelf, at one with
Śiva, who performs the five tasks (of creation, persistence, withdrawal,

grace and obscuration) (pañcakṛtya), and that his own instrument of action

(svātmanaḥ karaṇam) (i.e. the senses) are the mantras,” and that, by virtue

of his desire to grace (others), (he is Śiva’s) iconic body (of Mantra) (mārti).

(77)

Then, having tied a white turban (sitoṣṇīṣa) (on his head), he should
worship (his) hands, one after the other reciprocally, in order to burn away

the fetters and emanate the pure principles. He should (then) worship the

Mantras on Śiva’s Hand, (blazing) in the form of (His) radiant energy

(tejas). They are present in the innermost circle (garbhāvaraṇa)” (just as

they are,) without limbs, entourage or thrones (āsana). After that, he
should contemplate (his own) Self as one (alone) and (as seemingly) many
(bhinna) because of (the five) tasks (it performs), that serve as limiting

adjuncts (that appear to divide up its unity). This is as happens with the
moon, (which appears to be various according to the stretches of) the water
(in which it is reflected).” (However,) in actual fact, it is divided (only) into
(the following) six modes. (78-80)

‘Now (atha)ʼ, after having obtained (Śiva’s empowering) command
(ajñā), (he is ordained as a teacher). (He indicates) by this (word) that after

Cf. MV 9/lcd: karaṇatvaṁ prayānty aṣya mantrā ye hṛdayādayaḥ ‘The mantras of the heart

etc. become his instruments of action.”
Cf MV 9/44ab: śivahastaṁ tataḥ kuryāt pāśaviśleṣakārakam | ‘He should then make Śiva’s
hand, that separates the fetters (from the disciple’s soul).’ ŚSee note below.
MV 9/43a. Śiva, in the rite of adoration, is provided with a court of minor divinities, positioned
in concentric circles. The first of these circles is called garbhāvarana, lit:: ‘the innermost circle’.
Cf. MV 9/39cd-44:

‘Then he should recall how the six-fold Path is sustained by (Śiva) (quoted in TĀ

9/90ab), and think of the five operations of creation (persistence, withdrawal, grace and

obscuration) that are effected (by Śiva) as his own. His supreme and inferior (parāparā) icoṅic
body (of mantra, which is) the individual soul (produced by Śiva’s) powers, is of two kinds,

according to whether it is with form or without, and that attends on me (i.e. Śiva) also. (Thus,) the
mantras of the heart etc. become his instruments of action. (39cd-41)

Having meditated on Śiva, who is such, he should contemplate by means of the inner

Self present within himself that he is of that nature, and encircle Śiva ten times. Having made all
the mantras present in the innermost circle (garbhāvaraṇa), tying a white turban (sitoṣṇīṣa) (on
his head) and having repeated Navātmā mantra seven times, he washes one hand with the other

with scented water. Having done so, he should then make Śiva’s Hand, that separates the fetters

(from the disciple’s soul). (42-44) 9/39cd-44
The image of the moon reflected in water is a common one. For example, in Parākhya 1/42:
‘(But perhaps) there exists only one knower, (situated) in various bodies, in accordance with his

past actons. He appears both as one and as many, like the moon (reflected) in (rppling) water.’

(Goodall’s translation)
But note that here the conclusion is not the same: ‘Inasmuch as (all are) forms of

consciousness, they are one; (but) they are divided, because of their various experiences. And
those arise from the soul’s own past actions. These are delusion (avidyā), which is bondage.
(1/43)
”' Śee Dyczkowski 2009: vol 2 chapter 2 (pp. 197-479), all of which is dedicated to the deitys
and the teacher’s empowering ‘command’ (ājāā).

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

(his exposition of the rite that) satisfies (and propitiates) the fire (agnitrpti), he
has begun (to describe the rite that serves to) energize his own (essential) nature,
as enunciated (at the end of the first chapter). He should recollect the mantras
that are (his) instrument of action (karaṇam) (i.e. the senses) as gross and subtle,
and so too (Śiva’s) iconic body (of Mantra) (mūrti), in (its) supreme

(transcendent) and lower (immanent) form. This is the prose order (saṁbandha).
‘The white turban (sitoṣṇīṣa) (is stamped) with Navātman, repeated seven

times.” (He should worship (his) hands, one after the other) ‘reciprocally’, the

left by means of the right, and the right by means of the left.” This is the

meaning. It is said that (Śiva’s Hand® is blazing) ‘in the form of (His) radiant
energy (tejas)’, in order to strengthen (its capacity) to burn away (the initiand’s)
fetters. (The Mantras) ‘present in the innermost circle (garbhāvaraṇa)’ are
the root Mantra and its faces. This is the meaning. As is said (in the scriptures):
‘That is said to be Śiva’s Hand that, conjoined with the five Brahmās, is
presided over by Śiva and, auspicious, severs (the initiand’s) bonds and bestows

peace (kṣemin).’

(He should contemplate his own Self as) ‘one (alone)’. The meaning is

that it is without companion, because it does not depend on anything else. (It
also appears to be many,) ‘as happens with the moon, (which appears to be
various according to the stretches of) the water (in which it is reflected)’.
Just as the moon, although in fact one, due to the diversity of limiting adjuncts,
that is, particular (stretches of water) such as water tanks, (appears) to be many.
Such is the case with this (Self) also. This is the meaning.
(Now,) in order to explain how (the experience of the Self) is divided
into six modes, he (paraphrases) the scripture that expounds that, in accord with
its essential meaning.

aṁaf̃ -ītaōhṁvr |

r̥zī fk ztzaṁ vmhīṁvgā fcqaī ṇaī 11 ¢2 11

ṜITITROĪC] aTGīāēatkērā: |
qGṬTTGT
TāT: Ḥ: TTTTJĪĪJHTHGṀT I <R II

maṇḍalastho ‘ʻham evāyaṁ sākṣī cākhilakarmaṇām |
Śśuddhā hi draṣṭratā śaṃbhor maṇḍale kalpitā mayā |l 81 II
homādhikaraṇatvena vahnāv aham avasthitaḥ |

” Jayaratha is following MV 9/43b.
” Read, as suggested by the editor, vāmena for vāme.
MV 9/44a.
Kṣemarāja quotes this and the following verse in SvTu ad 4/59:
anenālabdhamātras tu dehī nirmuktabandhanaḥ |

prayāti śivasāyujyaṁ nirmalo nirupaplavaḥ l

‘Having, due to this (.c. Śiva’s Hand), not attained the (minimum) measure (required to
activate karma), the embodied (soul) is frced from (its) fetters and, free of Impurity and afftction,
attains conjunction with Śiva.

TANTRĀLOKA

yadātmateddhā mantrāḥ syuḥ pāśaploṣavidhāv alam || 82 ||

1) “It is Ī myself who reside in the maṇḍala, and am this witness of
all (ritual) actions.”® (In other words,) within Śiva’s maṇḍala, I conceive
myself to be a pure witness, (not an agent). (81)
2) “It is I who reside in the fire, as the basis (adhikaraṇa) on which
the oblation takes place.” (The purpose of this meditation is that) the
mantras, inflamed by the state of the Śelf (ātmatā) (thus identified with the

fire), can burn up the fetters. (81-82)

The status of the witness is taught (with the word) ‘pure’ and the rest.
(The officiant considers himself to be a) ‘pure’ (witnessing consciousness
alone,) not mixed with (any sense of) agency. (The Mantras are) ‘inflamed by
the state of the Self (ātmatā), that is, their luminous energy (dīpti) is unfolding
by virtue of the penetration of the Supreme Lord, who has assumed the form of

the fire. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), what is (the nature of) their capacity to burn up
the fetters (of the fettered soul)? With his doubt in mind, he says:

GTHITRTSĪĪRTT-TRT
AJTT ; |

saiī 11 ¢33 1|

aITI-JEṬTT

ftra-z a Tarvllīāāvtza|
q f: mravrcaaraṁcaṅratrā
atd 11 ¢4 1
.ciaiīṣz ṇz

3HIĒRATTTT-ĪTTTĀTAIṀHĪTI
TTTṀ: || ¢F 1I
Verses 81-86 that describe the mental attitude (bhāvanā) of the teacher as he performs his
disciple’s initiatory rites as an apprentice (purraka) are drawn from MV 9/47cd-49. Abhinava

quotes all of those verses literally, but he does s0 a line at a time, inserting a line or more of his
comments in between. Thus 16/81ab = MV 9/47cd, TĀ 16/82ab = MV 9/48ab, 16/84ab = MV
9/48cd, 16/85ab = 49ab, TĀ 16/86ab = MV 9/49cd.

MV 9/47cd that reads vākhilakarmasu for cākhilakarmaṇām.

Literal quote with no variants of MV 9/48ab.
Note here how the line of Abhinava’s commentary that alternates with a line from the MV

serves to explain and stress that the ritual agent - in this case, the teacher engaged in initiating his

disciple – is conscious of himself as the witness consciousness. He empowers the Mantras by the
awareness of his state of consciousness in order to burn up the fetters of the Self. This happens by
shifting the attention from the object to the subject. In this way, the ritual action operates in the
field of subjectivity rather than that of objectivity. Abhinava does not refer to the lines that follow

in the MV, i.e. ‘up to the end of the sacrifice I am present in the jar in order to quell obstacles and

in the disciple’s body in order to accomplish his separation from (his) fetters.’ (MV 9/48cd-49ab)

Butiitis clear by referring to them that the subjectivity in question is that of the teacher present in
the disciple. Here as in many other cases, it is clear that he expects his reader to know the text to
which he is referring.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

sāmānyatejorūpāntarāhūtā bhuvaneśvarāḥ |
tarpitāḥ śrāvitāś cāṇor nādhikāraṁ pratanvate || 83 ||

ā yāgāntam ahaṁ kumbhe saṁsthito vighnaśāntaye |
sāmānyarūpatā yena viśeṣāpyāyakāriṇī || 84 ||

Śiṣyadehe ca tatpāśaśithilatvaprasiddhaye |

sa hi ṣvecchāvaśāt pāśān vidhunvann iva vartate || 85 ||
sākṣāt svadehasaṁstho ‘haṁ kartānugrahakarmaṇām |
jñānakriyāsvatantratvād dīkṣākarmaṇi peśalaḥ || 86 ||

The Lords of the Worlds, invoked (in this way) within the (one)
universal (sāmānya) radiant energy (tejas),® (when they have been offered)

libation and made to hear (the appropriate Mantras, no longer) exert (any)

authority over the individual soul. (83)
3 (and 4)) “In order to quell (all) obstacles, I (will continue to)
reside in the (sacrificial) jar up to the end of the sacrifice.” This is the
universal (attitude) (sāmānyarūpatā) (observed throughout the rite) that

nourishes (and sustains all) the particular (actions that take place in the
course of it). (84)
5) “And (I also) reside in the body of the disciple, in order to loosen
his fetters.” He abides (thus), as if shaking off (his disciple’s) fetters by the
power of his own will. (85)
6) “I who am the author of the (various) acts of grace reside (in

person), directly apparent (sākṣāt) within my own body. As (I am) free to
know and do (all things), I am capable (of performing) the rite of

initiation.” (86)

(The Lords of the Worlds are invoked) ‘within the (one) universal

(sāmānya) radiant energy (tgjas)’. The meaning is that they have attained a
state of oneness with the Mantra, the nature of which is the Supreme Lord’s

radiant energy, that has encompassed within itself the three abodes (of Parā,
Parāparā and Aparā). The invocation etc. is being explained. The authority (of

each Lord) is limited to that of his own world etc. (The reference to) ‘the

(sacrificial) jar’” (kumbha) implies also (the second small) jar (karkarī),
otherwise, (this meditation would only be) divided (into five kinds,) not six. He
is present here solely as one who quells obstacles (to the successful completion
of the sacrifice) so that he may protect all the particular (ritual) actions (done in
the course of the sacrifice). And so it is said that ‘ṭhis is the universal
(attitude) (sāmānyarūpatā) (observed throughout the rite) that nourishes
(and sustains all) the particular (ritual actions)°. (He shakes off his discipleʼs
fetters) ‘by the power of his own will’. It has been said many times before that

he does not depend (at all) on anything (else taking place,) such as the maturing

(of the soul’s) impurities.

$ Itis universal with respect to the three planes of consciousness, of Parā, Parāparā and Āparā.
MV 9/48cd.
MV 9/49ab.
MV 9/49d.MV reads karminah for -karmāṇām.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), how is this possible when he is in a limited
(confined) state due to his association with body and the rest (of the
psychophysical organism)? With this doubt in mind, he gives an example.

āST TĀaḤ II/S 1I

bhinnakāryākṛtivrātendriyacakrānusandhimān |
eko yathāhaṁ vahnyādiṣaḍrūpo ‘smi tathā sphuṭam || 87 II
evamālocya yenaiṣo ‘dhvanā dīkṣāṁ cikīrṣati |

anusaṁhitaye śiṣyavarjaṁ pañcasu taṁ yajet || 88 II

“‘Just as I am the one subject who unifies (all) the diverse products
(kārya) (of consciousness), forms and assembly of the senses (indriyacakra),
in the same way, I am clearly manifest (sphuṭa) in six ways (rāpa) as the fire
and the rest.”

Thus viewing (himself) in this way, (the teacher) should worship
(amongst the six Paths) the Path by which he intends to perform the
initiation, into (these) five (experiences of oneness), with the exception (of

the body of) the disciple, in order to bring about (their) unification. (8788)

“I am one amidst (my) many activities and each (of the countless)

particular (phenomenal) forms.” (Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavadgītā that):

‘An eternal part of Myself, having become an individual soul in the

world of individual souls, draws (towards itself and activates) the senses, with

mind as a sixth, that are present in (the objective sphere which is My material
and psychophysical) Nature (prakṛti).’

“I abide in the midst of the group of the six senses mentioned here as
the unifying subject. It is I who see and I who hear. I am the witness

(consciousness) of all people, and I am sixfold as the one who sees (and hears)

” Sce above, I685.
Verṣe 88 is a paraphrase and free interpretation of MV 9/50-51ab:
ity etat sarvam ālocya śodhyādhvānaṁ [g: śodhyātmānam] vicintayet
dīkṣāṁ yenādhvanā mantrī śiṣyāṇāṁ kartum icchati 5 l
tatraiyālocayet sarvaṁ yāyāt padam anāmayam |

‘Thus, having viewed all that (in this way), (the teacher) should think about the path

which is to be purified, by means of which the officiant (mantrin) wishes to impart initiation to

(his) disciples. He should view everything there itself, so that it may go to the plane free (of all)
disease (and death).’
“ BhGī 15/7.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

etc. In the same way (I am also present) in the maṇḍala and the fire etc.” This is
the meaning of the statement (made here in this verse). (The teacher should
worship the Path,) amongst (those of) the Principles and the Forces etc., ‘by
whichʼ (he intends to initiate his disciple).

Surely (one may ask), what happens here by (this process of) unification
(anuṣandhāna)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

anuṣandhibalānte ca samāsavyāsabhedataḥ |
kuryād atyantam abhyastam anyāntarbhāvapūritam )| 89 ||
tato ‘pi cintayā bhūyo ʻnuṣandadhyāc chivātmatām |

(The teacher) should practice intensely within the force (bala) (of
his) unifying contemplation (anusandhāna) to make the inner state (of all
these elements, both) singly and collectively, completely full one within the
other. Then, once again, he should (contemplate and) unite (them) with his
thought to (their essential) Śiva nature (in the following way).” (89-90ab)
(The teacher should practice) ‘intensely’. The intention is that in this

way he may accomplish the rite (karman) successfully without wavering. ‘He

should unite (and contemplate them)’, that is to say, within himself.
In the course of expounding a passage from scripture, he elaborates this
same (teaching).

āṝ̄ṁ ] T āgṁaaāq, āaq_ || Qo l|
TRITĪTTT-T

IEKSEā ĒTFĒIITEEZEiTṬITCYḤ

afāftka |

caīcā TTa st-qa ṣcaāvrṁstã|

aham eva paraṁ tattvaṁ na ca tad ghaṭavat kvacit || 90 l|

mahāprakāśas tat tena mayi sarvam idaṁ jagat |
na ca tat kenacid bāhyapratibimbavad arpitam || 91 ||

kartāham asya tan nānyādhīnaṁ ca madadhiṣṭhitam |
itthaṁbhũtamahãvyãptisaṁvedanapavitritaḥ || 92 ||

matsamatvaṁ gato jantur mukta ity abhidhīyate |
“ 89-90ab is an explanation of MV 9/50cd-51.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The insight) that “I am the supreme reality” is in no circumstances

like (the perception of) a jar. “This is the Great Light (of consciousness),
and so all this (universe) is within me, and that is not deposited (within
me) by some external (reality) as is a reflection (in mirror). I am the author
of this (creation), I preside over it and it is not dependent on (anything)

else. Purified thus by the awareness (saṁīvedana) of the great pervasion
(mmahāvyāpti) (of consciousness), which is such, a creature who has become

my equal is said to be liberated.” (90cd-93ab)

‘That’ (insight is not like the perception of a jar,) because (it has no)
fixed (conditioned nature) (niyata) like (that of) a jar. ‘And so’, because it is the
Great Light (of consciousness), the essential being (sadbhāva) of everything is
(present) within (its) full (and all-encompassing) nature. This is the sense.
“That’ (universe is reflected within me) because it is not deposited (there) by

any outer original object (bimba) (of which it is a reflection). Therefore ‘it is

not dependent on (anything) else, and so ‘I preside over it’. The meaning is

that it rests within me alone. As scripture (declares):

‘I preside over all things, and I am the author (of all).”””

The reason (everything) becomes one with me (matsamtva) is (the great
pervasion (mmahāvyāpti) (of consciousness)), ‘which is such’ etc. As was said
before with the same intended sense:
‘Liberation is nothing but the (full and complete) experience (prathana)

of one’s own nature. And the nature of the Self is (pure) consciousness, nothing

Surely (one may ask), what is the result of repeating this kind of
meditation again and again? With this doubt in mind, he says:

atēēarq 1| 33 1

tāpanirgharṣasekādipāramparyeṇa vahnitām || 93 II
yathāyogolako yāti gurur evaṁ śivātmatām |

90cd-91ab is an expansion of MV 9/52ab. aham eva paraṁ tattvaṁ mayi sarvam idaṁ jagat | I
myself am the supreme reality and all this universe is within me.”
“ 92ab is a close paraphrase of MV 9/52cd: adhiṣthātā ca kartā ca sarvasyāham avasthitaḥ | “
preside over all things, and I am the author of all”.

93ab is a literal quotation of MV 9/53ab. tatsamatvaṁ (read with 16/93a matsamatvaṅṁ) gato

jantur mukia ity abhidhīyate | Abhinava continues his presentaton and exegesis of this passage
from the MV, taking it up again from MV 9/55cd-56ab below in 17/1 ff.

MV 9/52cd.

“ Above, 1/156abc. Also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/31 and ad 1/331 (330).

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Just as a ball of iron (worked by a blacksmith gradually) assumes a
fiery (incandescent) state by a series (of successive actions) such as heating,
beating and sprinkling it (with water to then heat it again and so on), in the
same way the teacher (gradually) attains the state of Śiva’s nature. (93cd94ab)
The Depositions

The Procedure for the Deposition of a Path on the Disciple’s Body
(Śiṣyadehaga adhvanyāsavidhiḥ)

a āāīā: sfca 7a |

āq || 4, 1|
ftīē: |

tataḥ puraḥsthitaṁ yadvã purobhāvitavigraham || 94 |

parokṣadīkṣaṇe yadvā darbhādyaiḥ kalpite mṛte |
Śiṣye vīkṣyārcya puṣpādyair nyased adhvānam asya tam || 95 ||
yenādhvanā mukhyatayā dīkṣām icchati daiśikaḥ |
Then (thus prepared), after the teacher has seen and worshiped (the

disciple) with flowers etc., he should deposit (onto his body one of) the
Paths, as the main one (mukhyatayā) by means of which he intends to
iṇiṭiate him. (This may be done for a disciple) who is present before him, or
else (for one who is absent. In that case, the teacher) imagines that his form
is present in front of him within (an image of) the deceased (disciple),
fashioned from kuśa grass and the like,” in the course of the initiation (that
is imparted) to one who is absent. (94cd-96ab)
(A disciple) ‘who is present before him’, that is, one whom when he

looks (he sees) directly. ‘One who is absent’ because he is present in another
body. (A disciple) who is ‘deceased’ is one who is dead. This is the meaning.
He explains (what is meant by a particular Path) being the main one.

feaī: 1| <=, 1

taṁ dehe nyasya tatrāntarbhāvyam anyad iti sthitiḥ | 96 |

The condition (of the main Path) is such that, once it has been
deposited onto the body, (the teacher) should consider that (every) other
(Path) is included there (within it)'. (96cd)

“ Śee below, Chapter Twenty-one.

The description of the procedure of the rite of initiation continues in 17/1 ff.

TANTRĀLOKA

With this, he has described the procedure concerning the deposition of
the Path onto the discipleʼs body.
He now talks about the wonderful (nature of) that which is to be
purified and (its) purifier.

"[he Variety of Paths to be Purified and their Purifiers etc.
(Śodhyaśodhakādivaicitryam)

rd mzātTrATTATR: |1 Qv 1I

arkzāīa ṁā-TqHTT: |
a-ḷ yr̥ç̄Tk ũaTaã JĨẼ JIISĨĨ: |1| Q.¢ ||
Śodhyādhvani ca vinyaste tatraiva pariśodhakam |
nyased yathepsitaṁ mantraṁ śodhyaucityānusārataḥ | 97 ||

kvacic chodhyaṁ tv avinyasya śodhakanyāsamātrataḥ |

svayaṁ śudáhyati saṁśodhyaṁ śodhakasya prabhāvataḥ !| 98 II

" Verses 97-150ab are based on chapter six of the MV, which is only thirty verses long.

According to the MV, they are devoted to thc initiaton imparted by knowledge (āānadīkṣā).

Abhinava refers to that chapter in a nondescript way as a ‘the variety of Paths to be Purified and
their Purifiers etc. (‘odhyaśodhakādivaicitryam)’. He presents it as part of the initiation given to
apprentices (putrakadīkṣā), that continues up to the end of Chapter Seventeen. An echo of its

original name remains in Abhinava’s name for it, that is, vijñānadīkṣā – the initiation that imparts
immediate enlightening insight (vijñāna). Here then is another example of the initiaton that
bestow immediate liberation he sponsors throughout his Tantrāloka, that takes place in a moment,
by direct transmission from teacher to disciple, by his gaze or the single utterance (saijalpa) of a
mantra (16/249) or the like. In this way, by his undistracted unifying concentration (sandhi =
anusandhi), the teacher purifies his disciple’s Karma (16/305cd-306ab).

The gradual procedure requires the projection of the Six Paths along the subtle body,
that extends up from the base of the feet (marked by the left toe) upwards, for a total of 108
fingers. These distances are covered in three modalities, corresponding to the Goddesses Aparā,
Parāparā and Parā. The first serves as the basic model, of which the last two are explained as
modifications and additions (see verse 106-107 = MV 6/24cd-27ab). The Aparā deposition

extends for 84 fingers, the Parāparā, 96, and Parā, 108. The Aparā projcction is explained in

verses 101cd-105 (equivalent to MV 6/2-6ab) (the 36 reality levels). The additions for Parāparā
and Parā are in 106-7 = MV 6/24cd-27ab. The 118 world orders projected into 84 finger breadths

is described next in 114-127 (equivalent to MV 6/6cd-18ab). This is summarized first (128-129),
and then the modifications for Parāparā and Parā (130-131). Abhinava goes on to explain the
corresponding Path of Mantra (132-139ab) and Path of the Phonemes (139cd-142). This he does

in his own way, with reference to what he had stated previously in a different context. Thus, he

elucidates MV’s concise and obscure presentation (6/27cd-29ab). He concludes with a

presentation of the projection of the Path of the Forces (kalādhvan) (IĀ7-150ab), to which the MV

only alludes (6/28cd).

This is the Path which to be purified (Sodhya), that is, made one with Śiva. The seventy
purifying Mantras are now outlied as taught in the Sāraśāstra (Trikasāra) (1S0cd-158), and
quoted in brief (I59-161). An interesting fcature of these seventy Mantras is that they also include
Krama mantras integrated into the Trika triad (16/156-7) in the standard manner (three Goddesses
in four states of emanation, persistence, withdrawal and the Inexplicable). Abhinava mentions this

set at the beginning of the Tantrāloka, thus signalling thcir importance and settng the stage for

their recurrence in the rites and Yogas as culminating additions.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Once the Path that is to be purified (odhya) has been deposited

(on the disciple’s body) according to what is (most) appropriate for it, the

preferred Mantra that purifies it should be deposited there (in the same

place). (If) in some cases (the Path) to be purified has not been deposited,

then just by depositing the purifying (Mantra alone) it is purified by itself,
by virtue of the (Mantra’s) purifying power. (97-98)

(The Mantra that is) ‘preferred’ by either the teacher or the disciple
(should be deposited) ‘according to what is (most) appropriate for it’. It is
said (in the Mālinīvijayottara) that: ʻthe eight Mantras of Pibanī etc. should not

be applied beyond Īśvara.’' The meaning is that this has been said in accord

with the characteristics of the object of purification. (t is purified by itself) ‘by
virtue of the purifyimg (Mantra’s) power’ As is said (in the

Svacchandatantra): ʻThe power of mantra, born from the mouth of the Supreme

Lord, is indeed beyond conception.”

The following section up to verse 16/237 deals

with a series of depositions of Mantras the

teacher makes on the disciple’s body to purify and initiate him. Abhinava has already said that the

deposition of Mantras alone may be sufficient to initiate him. If that happens, the initiatory rites

that normally follow would be superfluous, smply because initation is a process of purfication.

The depositions described here are essentially based on those described in chapter six of the

Maālinīvijayottara, supported by those described there in chapter four. The MV introduces the
depositions of chapter six as those of the initiaton by means of knowledge (jāānadīkṣā) (MV 6/1

and 29cd-30ab). This is in contrast to the initiation by means of action (kriyādīkṣā), that involves

ritual. Clearly, ‘knowledge’ in this context means the knowledge of these depositions and their

Mantras. Abhinava is clearly aware of this distinction, but understands it at a higher level.
According to him, the ‘initiaton by means of knowledge’ (jñānadīkṣā) is better understood as

being one by means of consciousness or insight (vijāānadīkṣā). This is imparted directly by the
teacher’s gracious look to the disciple who is fit to receive it (cf. above TĀ 272 and note, also
16/248-29). In this way he finds another parallel to the intense direct transmission taught in the

Krama tradition and the immediacy of recognition taught in the Pratyabhijāā as it is in the

Parātrīśika, integrated into the Trika of the MV to become Anuttara Trika.

Tg ṣṭrip away, cancel and eliminate.

Cf. below, 16/223cd-224ab. The Six Paths are of two kinds. Three are the objects of
purīfication - śodhya – and three are the purifiers – śodhaka. The former are the Worlds, Reality

Levels and Forces. The latter are Mantra, Parts of Mantra and Phonemes. Formally, the two are

deposited together. First the objects of purification, followed by the purifiers or in parallel. An

example is equating parts of a Mantra to Tattvas. Projected onto the body, as it is uttered moving

along the body, the soul crosses the worlds embedded in the Tattvas, and as it does so is cleansed

of Kamma and fundamental Impurity (Mala). The Projectixg Mantras in this way on the body is

thus equivalent to initiatin. Combining permutations of the basic set of Mantras projected onto
the body variously, they become very many.
MV 9/73ab. ‘In all the rites in which the Mantras have not been (explicitly) stated and in all

kinds of initiatory rites, the Mantra that needs be applied for the purification of all the principles

up to and including Māyā, is that of Aparā. With regard to the principles that range from Pure

Knowledge to Śiva ‘with parts’ (sakala), it is Parāparā. Moreover, the eight Mantras of Pibanī etc.

should not be applied beyond Īśvara, and the six limbs beyond Śiva ‘with parts’. AIl the rites
concerning Śiva ‘without parts’ (wiṣkala) should performed with the Mantra of Parā.’ MV 9/71cd-

74ab Quoted in full above in TĀv ad 11/88.
ṢYT 4/151ab, also quoted below ad 28/361cd-362ab. The context is as follows:

phalaṁ tu vividhākāraṁ niṣpādyeia sudīkṣayā || 150 11
yasmā| ---acintyā mantraśaktirvai parameśamukhodbhavā |

TANTRĀLOKA

In order to explain there the wonderful variety of the object of

purification, he says:

TḤṁ mm N ṃ

faftktīsgaī1

fJāī aaāīq: Trē̃ī; || Q< ||
aparaṁ parāparaṁ ca paraṁ ca vidhim icchayā |
tadyojanānusāreṇa śritvā nyāsaḥ ṣaḍadhvanaḥ | 99 ||
The six Paths are deposited on the basis of the lower (apara),
middling (parāpara) and supreme (para) procedure (relating to the three
corresponding Vidyās), as (the teacher) wishes, in accord with their
(appropriate) application. (99)
The

word

(in

the expression)

accord

with

their

(appropriate) applicationʼ refers to the lower procedure and the rest.
How should it be deposited on the body? (In response to this question,)
he says:

The Projection of the Thirty-six Principles onto the Body

āga-<ī gīaaṁāṁa fērīr fa. || z o 11

parameśasya mukhaṁ parāśakúis tadudbhavavād evācintyā | śaktiśabdena vīryasāratāṁ
mantrāṇām āha || 151 ||

sā ca kriyākāle prayoktavyā guruṇā bhakiipārvikā || 151 II
kriyā dīkṣādikā, bhaktir mantraṣvarāpāmarśanakrameṇa tadvīryānmupraveśamayī saiva ||
acintyety ādinedam āha ---viṣāṇām iva pāśānāṁ mantraiḥ kavalanaṁ dhruvam |
karoti mantratattvajñaḥ śivāveśī guruḥ kṣaṇāt || 152 ||

‘In this way, according to the feelings (bhāva) of the disciples, the teacher should
always generate the many forms of the fruit (of their actions) by means of a good initiation.’ (150)
Why (is that):
‘The power of mantra, born from the mouth of the Supreme Lord, is indeed, beyond
conception.’ (I51ab)
As the Supreme Power is the Supreme Lord’s mouth, because it comes forth from there
alone, it is beyond conception. The word ‘power’ (śakti) denotes the essentiality of the vitality of
mantras. And that (power):
‘should be applied with devotion by the teacher when the rite (kriyā) (takeṣ place).
(I5led)

“The rite’ is initiation etc. ‘Devotion’ is entry into the vitality of Mantra by a process of

reflecting upon the Mantra’s essential (divine) nature. As for ‘inconceivable, he says this:

‘Mantras certainly swallow up (and consume) the fetters, that are like poison. The

teacher who knows the true nature of Mantra and has penetrated into Śiva does that in a moment.’
SVT 10/150-152

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

lalāṭāntaṁ vedavasau randhrantaṁ rasarandhrake |
vasukhendau dvādaśāntamityeṣa trividho vidhiḥ !| 100 ||
krameṇa kathyate dṛṣṭaḥ śāstre śrīpūrvasaṁjñite |
There are 1) eighty-four (finger breadths from the left toe) up to the
forehead; 2) there are ninety-six up to the Cavity (of Brahmā), and 3) one

hundred and eight up to the End of the Twelve (finger space above the
head) (dvādaśānta). This threefold procedure, which (I have) seen in the

scripture called Śrīpārva (ie. the Mālinīvijayottara), will be explained
(step by step,) in due order. (100-101ab)

He (now) begins (the exposition) of that (deposition in relation to the
thirty-six) principles.

jiBGŪ ÚGĒÚAHĀHI I1| z., 11

TṀTĪRTṬṬHGTTĪTPÉCTT: |I/ 20 ||

aTR] āīṬēācāī TaāTaāT=aF aIq || 20v 1|

cRet EIIḤI

GIGNTTṀTTTYaIĪTR̥ĒR
TIT: || g06 1|
SĪalq <i IS EEE qT -gzā

iGIEṄIRIĒEVIGTRNzHEATĀE:HHIEFCR
tatra tattveṣu vinyāso gulphānte caturaṁgule || 101 II
dharā jalādimūlāntaṁ pratyekaṁ dvyaṁgulaṁ kramāt |
rasaśrutyaṁgulaṁ nābher ūrdhvam itthaṁ ṣaḍaṁgule || 102 ||
puṅṁsaḥ kalāntaṁ ṣaṭṭatvīṁ pratyekaṁ tryaṁgule kṣipet |
aṣṭādaśāṁgulaṁ tv evaṁ kaṇṭhakūpāvasānakam || 103 1
sadāśivāntaṁ māyādicatuṣkaṁ caturaṁgule |
pratyekam ity abdhivasusaṁkhyam ālikadeśataḥ || 104 ||
Śivatattvaṁ tataḥ paścāt tejorūpam anākulam |
sarveṣāṁ vyāpakatvena sabāhyābhyantaraṁ smaret || 105 I|
jalāt dhyantaṁ sārdhayugmaṁ miūlaṁ tryaṁgulam ity ataḥ |
dvādaśāṁgulatādhikyād vidhir eṣa parāparaḥ || 106 ||

jalāt dhyantaṁ tryaṁgule ced avyaktaṁ tu catuṣṭaye |

These procedures are described in chapter six of the MV. See above, 7/68cd-70ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

tac caturviṁśatyādhikyāt paro ʻpy asṣṭaśate vidhiḥ || 107 I|
There, the deposition within the (thirty-six) principles (is as

follows). Earth extends for (a distance of) four fingers (from the soles of the
feet) up to the ankles. The (twenty-three) principles from Earth up to
Nature (prakṛti) occupy two fingers each, successively. In this way, (the

space covered extends for a total of) forty-six fingers, six (of which) are

above the navel. The six principles from the individual soul (puruṣa) up to
the Force (of limited agency) (kalā) should each be placed in (the space

covered by) three fingers. In this way (they span a total of) eighteen fingers
up to the pit of the throat. The four (principles) beginning with Māyā and
ending with Sadāśiva occupy four fingers each, thus (covering a distance of)
sixteen fingers up to the forehead."® Beyond that, one should recollect the

Śiva principle, which is tranquil (anākulam) and (whose) nature (is) radiant
energy (tejas), as pervading all (the principles,) along with (everything that

is) external and internal. (101cd-105)

This, the intermediate (parāpara) procedure (is such) because it
(extends for an) extra twelve fingers, as the principles from Water up to the

intellect occupy two fingers and a half and Nature (prakṛti) three. (106)

The supreme procedure is such as it occupies twenty-four more
fingers (space), and so comprises one hundred and eight digits, with the
The order of Aparā is explained in MV 6/2-5.
Aparā (84 finger breadths)
Earth –- 4 fingers (soles of the feet to the ankles)
Water to Nature – 2 x 23 fingers (from the ankles to six fingers above the navel) = 46 fingers

Puruṣa to Kalā - 3 x 6 fingers (from navel to the throat) = 18 fingers

a– 4 x 4 fingers (from throat to forehead) = 16 fingers
ve.

Verses 101cd-105 are a paraphrase of MV 6/2-6ab. Here is the passage on which Abhinava is

basing his account:

‘The five (gross) elements (should be deposited) from below the feet, (each one)

extending for two fingers. The Earth (principle) extends up to the end of the ankle (for four
fingers), and then (the twenty-three principles) beginning with Watcr, in due order. (They each

take up two fingersʼ space) and end six fingers above the navel. (Then) one should think of the

group of six principles (extending) from the principle of the individual soul up to to the pṅinciple

of the Force (of limited agency). (2-3)
Then one who is well attentive should meditate on the four principles, beginning with

Miāyā and ending with Sakala, as extending for four fingers (each). (4)
Bcyond that, (one should recollect) the Śiva principle, which is tranquil (anākulam) and
whose nature is radiant energy (tejas), as pervading all (the principles), along with (everything

that is) external and internal. This deposition (nyāsa), (made) with the division of the thirty-six
principles, has (thus) been described. (5-6ab)
! Veṛses 16/106-107 are a paraphrase of MV 6/24cd-27ab, which is quoted in the commentary.

As in the previous procedure, the Earth occupies four fingers, and so the intermediate procedure
takes up a space of4 + 55 + 3 + 18 + 16 = 96 fingers. Sce MV 6/25-26a.
Parāparā (96 finger breadths)
Earth - 4 fingers (from soles of the feet to ankles)
Water to Mind – 2 !% x 22 fingers (from the ankles to one finger above the throat) = 55

fingers

Nature –-3 fingers (to four fingers above the throat) = 3 fingers

Puruṣa to Kalā – 3 x 6 fingers (to six fingers above the forehead) = 18 fingers
Māyā to Sadāśiva – 4 x 4 fingers (to the Cavity of Brahmā) = 16 fingers.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

principles from Water to the intellect occupying three fingers (each) and

Nature four." (107)

1) The twenty-three principles from Water to Nature each extend for
two fingers and (cover a distance of) forty-six fingers. This is the meaning. The
meaning is that it extends up to six fingers above the navel. ‘In this way’,
because each one of the six extends for three fingers (they span a total of
eighteen fingers up to the throat). Each of the (four principles beginning with
Maāyā and ending with Sadāśiva occupy) four fingers each, thus, as the four are
four fingers each, they make sixteen fingers (up to the forehead).
2) and 3) (According to the intermediate procedure,) each of the twentytwo principles from Water up to the intellect occupy two and a half fingers, and
(Nature takes up) two. Thus, because (there are twelve more) in the intermediate
procedure and twenty-four extra in the supreme one, they extended for 96 and

108 (fingers). As is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

“This is said to be the lower (apara) procedure. Listen (now) to the

intermediate one (parāpara). One should know that, as before, the Earth

principle (occupies) four fingers. One should note that (the principles beginning

with Water and) ending with the intellect measure two and half fingers (each).
One should know that Fundamental (Nature) (occupies a space of) three fingers,
and the rest are said to be as before. In the case of the supreme (para) procedure
also, Earth is as before and the others, (i.e. the principles from Water to the
intellect, each measure) three fingers, and Fundamental (Nature) occupies four

units. One should deploy the rest as before.”

Surely (one may ask), what is the (scriptural) authority for (these) three

measures in this way? With this doubt in mind, he says:

HJT- TJTHI dūGTWGaTSJĀĪ ||/g0é /|1|
! See MV 6/26cd-27ab. This is quoted in the commentary. Earth, as before takes up four finger
breadths.
Thuṣ
A +66+4+ 18+16= 108.
Parā (108 finger breadths)
Earth -- 4 fingers (from soles of the feet to ankles).
Water to Mind - 3 x 22 fingers (to six fingers below the throat) = 66 fingers.

Nature – 4 fingers (to ten fingers below the throat). = 4 fingers.

Puruṣa to Kalā – 3 x 6 fingers (to four fingers below the Cavity of Brahmā) = 18 fingers.

Maāyā to Sadāśiva – 4 x 4 fingers (to the End of the Twelve) = 16 fingers.

In the supreme procedure, each of the principles from Water to the intellect occupies three
fingers, that is, half a finger more than in the intermediate procedure, and one more than in the

lower one. This makes a difference of eleven and twenty-two fingers extra with respect to them.
Again, Nature occupies two fingers in the lower procedure, three and four in the intermediate and
supreme, respectively. The latter two extend for twelve and twenty-four fingers more that the
lower one.

The lower one consists of eight four finger breadths and the intermediate, subtle one of ninety-

six. The earth takes up the first four fingers, thus the divisions are 4 + 55 + 3 + 18 + 16 = 96.
'! MV 6/24cd-27ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

trividhonmānakaṁ vyaktaṁ vasudigbhyo ravikṣayāt |
mayatantre tathā coktaṁ tattatsvaphalavāñchayā || 108 II
(This) threefold measure is clearly apparent due to the (successive)
subtraction of twelve (finger spaces) (ravikṣaya) from the (full measure of)
one hundred and eight. The same is stated in the Mayatantra: “(they are this
or that,) according to the fruits one desires.” (108)
(The subtraction of) twelve (finger spaces) should be (applied)
successively. Thus, (each successive one) decreases by a twelve-finger (space).
Having defined the deposition of the principles as a whole, he now goes
on to talk about (their deposition) individually.

JIṀ| Jrc̄TāTTāīīdāī-ī̄sīTafRTaTTTQ I| 208 11

GTTJWTCTVSG-ĀTRĪṢĀT
GTRT:

navapañcacatustryekatattvanyāse svayaṁ dhiyā |
nyāsaṁ prakalpayet tāvat tattvāntarbhāvacintanāt | 109 ||

kalāpañcakavedāṇḍanyāso ‘nenaiva lakṣiṭaḥ |

The (manner and content of the) deposition in the case of a

deposition of nine, five, or four principles or (just) one, can (easily) be

figured out by the (teacher’s) own intellect, bearing in mind that the rest of

the principles are included within it.'"® The deposition of the five Forces

(kalā) and the four Eggs (aṇda) is characterized by this (same procedure as

that of the five and of the four principles, respectively). (109-110ab)

'' The sense of the translation is uncertain. The pertinence of this citation is not clear. 101cd-105
is a paraphrase of MV 6/2-6ab, and 106-107 a condensed paraphrase of MV 6/24cd-27ab, and so
this passage definitely not drawn from the Mayatantra (also called Mayasaṁgraha). This way of
measuring the proportions of the body is a common, standard one. The Mayatantra, which is
concered with temple architecture, followed the same system. There the three measurements
must have been homologized in an analogous manner, with reality levels that, projected onto the

body, bestowed their respective form of accomplishments. In other words, what is meant here is
that one can choose one or other of these thrce procedures, according to the particular results one
desires.

"! These depositions are taught in MV 6/6cd-10.
1) In the deposition of nine principles, Nature takes up fifty fingers, the individual
soul three, Necessity (niyati) nine, time (kāla) six, Māyā, Śuddhavidyā, Īśvara and Sadāśiva four
fingers each (S0 + 3 + 9 + 6 + 16 (4 x 4) = 84). Note that for the calculations to be correct, we
muṣṭ take the entry ‘Vidyeśa’ to mean, as Jayaratha implies, Śuddha Vidyā and Īśvara, cach of
which occupies a space of four fingers.
2) In the deposition of five principles, Earth takes up four fingers, Water forty-six, Fire
twenty-two, Air twelve, and Space, like Śiva, is pervasive. Thus, 4 + 46 + 22 + 12

3) The deposition of the four principles, namely, Earth, Nature,
(Śakti), corresponding to the four eggs (anda) (see above, 11/8 ff.), are in the same proportions (4
+46 +22+12= 84).
4) In the deposition of the three principles, the Self (ātman) occupies seventy-two
fingers, Knowledge (vidya) twelve and Śiva, as before, is not counted (72 + 12= 84).

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
1) There, (in the case) of the deposition of nine principles. (Those up to)

Nature are (contained) in fifty finger(-breadths), the individual soul in three,

Necessityin nine, Timein six, Māyā, Vidyeśa' and Sadāśiva eachin four, and
Śiva as pervading (all of them). (In the case of) the deposition of five principles,
Earthis in four finger(-breadths), Waterin forty-six, Firein twenty-two, Airin
twelve, and Space as pervading (them all). This is the lower procedure. As is
said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘Now will be explained how the five principles are (distributed) in the
body. (The body) is pervaded by the Earth principle up to the ankles (for a space
of four fingers), the rest, in due order, by Water up to a space of six fingers

above the navel.“ Twenty-two units above that are covered by Fire. The

pervasion of Air is said to (extend for) twelve units from that. Recollect the end

of Space, which is the supreme, tranquil (reality) that pervades (them) all.’

One should think that in the other two procedures, there are twelve
fingers extra (each time). The same procedure applies also in the case of the
deposition of the four principles, namely, Earth, Nature, Māyā, and Śakti. In the
case of the deposition of three principles, the principle of the Self (ātmatattva)
(extends for) seventy-two fingers, the principle of Knowledge (vidyātattva) for
twelve (together making eighty-four), and the Śiva principle as pervasive. That
is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘In (the case of the deposition) in three parts, it is said that the principle
of the Self extends (for seventy-two fingers) up to the throat. The principle of
Knowledgeis above that (by twelve fingers, to the forehead,) and, as before, the

Śiva principleis (pervasive).

Surely (one may ask), agreed that the measure (of the body) is of three
kinds in this way, but why is the arrangement beginning from the forehead up to
the end of three kinds? With this doubt in mind, he says:

šṁ a ffērāāṁ amēaḷ aaṁta 1| 220 1

gJ̄Tdkṝrcī
š 7 Ṁcd fōaīsūa: 11 222 1

TIRTGRĪ
gJĪTT ṀTTTTGTTT |

uktaṁ ca triśirastantre svādhārasthaṁ yathā sthitam || 110 ||
dvādaśāṁgulam utthānaṁ dehātītaṁ samaṁ tathā |
dvāṣaptatir daśa dve ca dehasthaṁ śiraso ‘ntataḥ || 111 ||
pādād ārabhya suśroṇi anāhatapadāvadhi |
Ṣee previous note, entry 1.

!Thiṣis a space of 46 finger brcadths, cf. above 16/102.
Read with the MV tejasāvṛtam for tejasā vṛtam.
MV 6/6cd-9ab. See note 16,116 entry 4.
MV 6/10.

TANTRĀLOKA

'Moreover, it is said in the Triśirastantra: ‘Just as there is a

(vertical) space twelve fingers high (utthāna) at the base of one’s own (body),

in the same way also, there is one the same size beyond the body. ' O fair
lady, the body extends a span of eighty-four fingers from the feet up to the

end of the head. (Beyond that, it extends) up to (the End of the Twelve, which

is) the plane of Unstruck Sound (anāhata).’ (110cd-112ab)

1) Here, beginning with the feet and ending with the head, that is, up to the

forehead, which is the level (pada) of the End of Sound, there are eighty-four

finger (breadths). This is the lower measure present in the body. This is the
meaning.
2) In the same way, in terms of the condition of the lower measure, there is

an extension (utthāna) of twelve fingers within the base of one’s own (body), and
in the void of the head up to the Cavity of Brahmā. Śuch is the intermediate

measure.

3) In the same way also, ‘beyond the body, up to the End of the Twelve,

there is an extension the same (size), that is, twelve fingers, so that it makes the

supreme measure of one hundred and eight fingers. '

Surely (one may ask), he has set out to talk about the measure of the

body in this way, so now why should he talk about what is outside it? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

'In 101cd-110ab, Abhinava has presented the manner of relating the obiect of purification to its
corresponding purifier according to MV 62-10. In 101cd-110ab Abhinava has presented the
manner of relating the object of purification to its corresponding purifier according to MV 6/2-10.

After this, a reference is drawn from the 7riśirobhairava in 110cd-113, which is in general

agreement with the MV, at least with regards to the extent of the three primary measures of the

body, gross and subtle. Abhinava then continues with the presentation of the projection of three

Paths (adhvan) into the body, spanning 108 fingers according to MV 6. These are the Paths of th

worlds (114-119, 124-131), followed by that of Mantras (132-139ab), and then the Phonemes
(139cd-142). He ends in 143-150ab with an expansion of MV 6/27cd-29ab, with which chapter 6
of the MV ends. It appears that 151-163ab is drawn from the Trikasāra (Śāraśāstra). Abhinava

quotes it directly in 16/159-161. The exposition based on the Trikasāra of seventy purifying
mantras (17/162) continues from 187 to 204, ending with a quote from the Trikasāra (17/204, cf.

23/97-98) concemning the Supreme Deposition (para nyāsa).
' Read tathā for 1ataḥ, altough Jayaratha maintans the unemended reading and so interprets

differently. The location of the two Ends of the Twelve (dvādaśānta) is not clear. According to
7/68cd-70ab above, one of the two Ends of the Twelve is under the feet. The other is above,

beyond the Cavity of Brahmā. In this way the extended body measures 108 finger breadths. There
is no reference in verse 16/100 to this inferior End of the Twelve. Rather there are three measures.

One is up to the forehead, which extends from the feet for 84 finger-brcadths; 96 up to the Cavity
of Brahma, and 108, which includes twelve fingers of the void above the Cavity of Brahmā.
According to 16/110cd-112ab, which is drawn from the Triśirobhairavatantra, there are 84

fingers from the fceet to the forehead, which is the lower mcasure, 96 fingers up to the Cavity of

Brahmā, which is the intermediate, subtle measure, and 108 up to the End of the Twelve, which is
the supreme measure. Such is Jayaratha’s interpretation, who understands the ‘end of the head’ as
the forehead, and ‘one’s own foundation’ as the ‘void in the skull’. This interpretation does
maintain the same measures as before. However, these verses from the Triśirobhairavatantra
could also be interpretated on the basis of what Abhinava said in 7/68cd-70ab, in which case the

twelve fingers to which the expression ‘one's own foundation’ rcfers would correspond to the
twelve-finger space below the feet.

'1) 84 fingers: feet > ‘the end of the head’ i. forehead (which is the plane of the End of Sound).
2) 96 fingers: feet > Brahmarandhra. 3) 108 fingers: feet > End of the Twelve.

' These three lines appear to be Abhinava’s gloss on the previous lines drawn from the TBh.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

šccathḷ rTā-īcaaāīgaa āIGJĪTG |

dehātīte ‘pi viśrāntyā saṁvitteḥ kalpanāvaśāt |I 1 12 ||

dehatvam iti tasmāt syād utthānaṁ dvādaśāṁgulam |
iti nirṇetum atraitad uktam aṣṭottaraṁ śatam || 1 13 ||

As consciousness rests beyond the body also, it is imagined to be (part
of) the body. That is why there can be an extension of twelve fingers (above
it). In order to teach (nirnetum) this, it is said that (the measure) here is of one
hundred and eight (fingers). (112cd-113)

As supreme consciousness ‘rests beyond the body also’, an embodied

state exists (there) which is conceived by thought (rather than physical). ‘That
is whyʼ, although the extension of twelve fingers is above the Cavity of
Brahmā, (it is as part of) the body. ‘In order to teach this’, it is said here in the

venerable 7riśirobhairava that this is the supreme measure, that consists of one

hundred and eight (finger-breadths). This is the meaning.
Having defined in this way the deposition of the principles, he (now)
also talks about that of the worlds also.

The Projection of the Path of the Worlds onto
the Body (bhuvanādhvan)

TṬRTĪSJ

Tā, vaieītzā: || 22%€ 1

3 ft vaāahīaūṟā: || z2., |
ÉIĀEIPEĀVCCTIĒRGUA-Ḥ

JTERTAĪ ġ ÑīSY ||825 |1
TāāNḶ g TGTHh
T TTHĪ I| 22. |

PTIṬHTTTTrKAY
TTVSTAT
FĒ II 79¢ 11

STRTūJGĪTTTĪ TĒZTTT ||223 1I
TĀ 16/1104-113 is drawn from the Triśirobhairava.

TANTRĀLOKA

puranyāso ʻtha gulphāntaṁ bhūḥ purāṇyatra ṣoḍaśa |
tasmādekāṁgulavyāptyā pratyekaṁ lakulāditaḥ || 114 1|
dviraṇḍāntaṁ tryaṁgulaṁ tu cchagalāṇḍamathābdhiṣu |
devayogāṣṭake dve hi pratyekāṁgulapādataḥ | 1 15 II
iti pradhānaparyantaṁ ṣaṭcatvāriṁśadaṁgulam |
ṣaṭpañcāśatpurāṇītthaṁ prāgdharāyāṁ tu ṣoḍaśa || 116 ||
tato ‘pyardhāṁṁṅgulavyāptyā ṣaṭpurāṇyaṁgulatraye |
catvāri yugma ekasminnekaṁ ca puramaṁgule || 17 II
sarāge paṁspurāṇīśasaṁkhyānītthaṁ ṣaḍaṁgule |
krodheśapuramekasmindvaye cāṇḍamiyaṁ ca vit || 1 18 II
saṁvartajyotiṣorevaṁ kalātattvagayoḥ kramāt |
šūrapañcāntapurayorniyatau caikayugmatā |l 119 ||
Now (let us move on to) the deposition of the worlds (puranyāsa). 1)

The (element) Earth (extends up to) the ankle. There are sixteen worlds

here (within it, and it occupies four fingers). 2) After that, each of (the
thirty-nine worlds) from Lakulin up to Dviraṇḍa occupy one finger (space),

3) whereas Chagalāṇḍa occupies three fingers. 4) Now the two groups of
eight gods (deva) and the eight Yogas are (contained) within four (finger
spaces), as each one occupies a quarter finger (space). In this way, there are
forty-six fingers (from Water) up to Nature, and fifty-six worlds, and

before (them) sixteen, within the Earth (principle).” (114-116)

After this, there are six worlds, pervading half a finger (each), they
are contained in three finger (breadths). There are four (more worlds) in
two (fingers space), and one world in one finger(-space). In this (same) way
the eleven worlds of (the principle of) attachment and the individual soul
are (contained in a space of) six fingers. Then comes the world of Krodheśa,
that takes up one (finger space), and that of Caṇḍa that takes up two. These
are the two worlds of the (principle of impure) Knowledge. In the same
way, (there are two worlds,) Samvarta and Jyotis, in the principle of the
Force (of limited agency). (The worlds) Śūra and Pañcāntaka occupy one

and two fingers, respectively, the principle of Necessity (niyati). (117-119)

Tṇe fift-six worlds from Water to Nature comprise 1) the forty worlds from Lakulin to

Chagalāṇḍa, and 2) the sixteen worlds of the eight gods and cight Yogas. There is 1) a space of
forty-two fingers up to Lakulin to Chagalānḍa (39 + 3), and 2) four more for the two groups of
eight, thus making forty-six fingers in all. 3) Below that are the sixteen worlds of the Earth
principle that extend for four finger-spaces. Taking those into account, up to Nature, there are

seventy-two worlds contained in a space of fifty fingers.

114 to 119 is an extended explanation of MV 6/1 lcd-14 which is as follows:

‘Thus, the procedure concerning the principles has been taught. Now, (that conceming)
the path of the worlds is expounded in the same way. Having visualized (them), 1) the sixteen
worlds ranging from Kālāgni to Vīrabhadra should be projected up to the ankle (each one
occupying a quarter finger’s space) (4 fingers). 2) Beyond that, one should project the (thirty-

nine) worlds from Lakulin to Dviraṇḍa, each of which occupies one finger-space (39 fingers). 3)
Chagalāṇḍaka occupies (a space of) three fingers (3 fngers). 4) (The four worlds) of the cight
divine beings and the eight Yogas together occupy four fingers’ space (4 fingers). 5) After that,
one should think that there are another six worlds, each of which occupies a half finger-space (3
fingers), 6) (there are) another four in two fingers (space) (2 fingers) and 7) one in one (fingerspace).1 ( lcd-14)

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

1) ‘There are sixteen (worlds) within the four finger-spaces (occupied
by the Earth principle), because each (world) pervades a quarter finger space. 2)

There are thirty-nine (worlds) ‘up to Dviraṇḍa’, and 3) ‘Chagalāṇḍa’ is the
fortieth (world). 4) (The two groups of eight gods (deva) and the eight Yogas
are (contained)) ‘within four (finger spaces)ʼ. Their division here is that ‘each

one occupies a quarter finger (space)ʼ. (There are) ‘sixteen’ worlds (within
the Earth principle) and the finger-spaces are four. 5) ‘There are six worlds’

present in the principle of the individual soul. 6) ‘There are four (more
worlds) associated with Pracaṇḍa etc. in two (fingers space), and (then) 7)
‘one’ (world) associated with Ekaśiva. 8) ‘In the same way, (there are two

worlds)ʼ, that is, the world of Samvarta, (that occupies) one finger (space), and

the world of Jyotis, (that occupies) two finger(-spaces).

śrīpūrvaśāstre tac coktaṁ parameśena śaṁbhunā |
uttarādikramād dvy ekabhedo vidyādike traye || 120 ||

That has been taught by Śambhu, the Supreme Lord, in the

Maālinīvijayottara, (where he says that) ‘in the three, beginning with
(limited) knowledge, the worlds, starting from the upper one, take up
respectively, two and
altogether).” (120)

one fingers (space each, thus making nine

‘In the three’ principles ‘beginning with (limited) knowledge’, there

are two worlds each. There, ‘the upper one’, that is, the world that is above,

(takes up) two fingers (space), and the one below, one finger(-space). Thus,

there are three fingers’ (space) for each principle, so that in these three

(principles), there are nine.
Surely (one may ask), how is it that these (principles) are taught here in

the reverse order? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TJaT-ĀTŪTTTIJĪ TīTaadrqŪagaāī || 22% |I
TGTṜTGVSĀĪRTAT:
#T #TGHŠ |
vzā Ṭa frarāīṁ fīaakhĩ-ũ |1 g32 1
Conscious of his higher identity, Abhinava regularly refers to his teacher Śambhunātha as

Parameśa, Parameśvara or the like. Here it appears that Abhinava is referring to both him and

Śiva, who utters the scripture. The teacher who imparts the teaching of the scripture is Śiva

Himself. In other words, Śiva reveals the scriptures in his disembodied form, and in his embodied

form he explains them. This means, as Abhinava sees it, that it is not always necessary for Śiva's
embodied form to explain. He may do so just in his disembodied form through the inspired
intuition that understands them, or indeed through both together.
MV 6/15ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

sīzarzāīzaāītrēzzrcaīī fē zvad
asāratvāt kramasyādau niyatiparataḥ kalā |
athavānyonyasaṁjñābhyāṁ tattvayor vyapadeśyatā || 121 ||
ekavīraśikheśaśrīkaṇṭhāḥ kāle trayas traye |
kālasya pūrvaṁ vinyāso niyater abhidhīyate || 122 ||
athavānyonyasaṁjñāabhir vyapadeśo hi dṛśyate |

As it is not essential for the the serial order (to always be the
same), the Force (of limited agency) (kalā) (may come) after Necessity, or
these two principles may be called by each other’s name. The three worlds
in (the principle of) Time (kāla), namely, Ekavīra, Śikheśa and Śrīkaṇṭha,
are (contained) in three (fingers’ space). It is said (by some that) the

deposition of (the principle of) Necessity precedes (that of) Time. Or else it
is seen (in the scriptures that) they are called by one another’s name. (121-

123ab)

In order to strengthen this (argument for this view), he says again, (the

three worlds in (the principle of)) ‘Time (kāla)’ etc.
He summarizes this (as follows).

[

J-l-ē-Īgōd: TTRṬGTTTA II ṜXŚ II
gcai gaakō gqvaaĩçāā eamīīr|

JFTT_I 7N4 II

T TJṬā'g sā sīgThsīgoṁāīa || 35 l|

araṝsra Ḷarṁ aaīĩkc aāāṁz aḹ || 23 1
evaṁ pumādiṣaṭtatvī vinyastāṣṭādaśāṁgule || 123 ||
tato ‘py aṁguṣṭhamātrāntaṁ māyātattvastham aṣṭakam |
'" 121-127 is an expanded, filled out version of MV 6/15cd-18ab, which simply says:

‘The three worlds of Time occupy three fingers. The cight Lords of the Maṇḍala (up to
Aúguṣṭhamātra) occupy halfa finger each. Beyond them there ar three worlds, each one of which
occupies two thirds ofa finger, and two others that occupy a finger each. The same happens in the
case of the eight worlds (of the Īśvara principle) and the five (of Sadāśiva.
Thus, the former
occupy half a finger each, and the latter are thrce within two fingers' space, and two in the other
two fingers). Here, in this procedure concerning the Path of the Worlds, one should think of Śiva
(to be pervasive), as before.ʼ (I 5cd-18ab)
5 Read niyatiparataḥ for niyatiḥ paraiaḥ.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

pratyekam ardhāṅṁṅgulataḥ syād aṁgulacatuṣṭaye || 124 ||
itthaṁ dvyakṣṇi purāṇy aṣṭāviṁśatiḥ puruṣān niṣi |
puratrayaṁ dvayos tryaṁśanyūnāṅgulam iti kramāt | 125 ||
dvayor dvayaṁ pañcapurī vaidyīye caturaṁgule |
tata eśapurāṇy aṣṭau catuṣke ‘rdhāṁṅgulakramāt || 126 ||
tatas trīṇi dvaye dve ca dvayor itthaṁ catuṣṭaye |
sādāśivaṁ pañcakaṁ syād itthaṁ vasvekakaṁ ravau || 127 ||
In this way, (the worlds) contained in the six principles beginning

with the individual soul are deposited into (a space of) eighteen fingers.

Then the group of eight (worlds) ending with Aṅguṣṭhamātra, within the
principle of Māyā, occupy four fingers’ (space altogether), as each one
(extends for) half a finger(-space). In this way, the twenty-eight worlds,
(contained in the principles ranging) from the individual soul up to Maāyā,

(occupy a space of) twenty-two fingers. (123cd-125ab)

There are five worlds in the four finger (space) of Pure Knowledge.
Three worlds (each occupy) two-thirds of a finger(-space), in due order,

and (the other) two (occupy) two. Then, in the (following) four fingers’

(space), there are the eight worlds of the Īśvara principle, (one for every)
half finger(-space), in due order. After them comes the group of five

(worlds) of Sadāśiva, three in two (fingers’ space) and two in (the other)
two fingers, (and so are contained) in this way in four (fingers’ space).

Thus, there are eighteen (worlds in the space of) twelve (fingers). (125cd-

127)

‘In this way’, by taking the eighteen and four (fingers’ space) together,

(they make the twenty-two fingers’ space that contains the twenty-eight worlds,
in the principles from the individual soul up to Māyā). This is the meaning. If

two fingers' space is divided by six times,' each world measures two parts.

Thus it is said that (three worlds (each occupy)) ‘two-thirds of a finger(-

space), in due order°ʼ. (Out of the five (worlds) of Sadāśiva), ʻthree’ worlds ‘in

two’ fingers’ (space) requires that there be a measure two-third fingerʼs (space)
(for each world).
(Now) he correlates them in both ways also.

ṣoḍaśakaṁ rasaviśikhaṁ vasudvikaṁ vasuśaśīti puravargāḥ |
vedā rasābdhi yugmākṣi ca ravayas tatra cāṁgulāḥ kramaśaḥ || 128 ||

6 + 3 + 3 + 3 + 3 = 18.
' The worlds number 11, 2, 2, 2, 3, and 8 (= 28) aranged respectively in 6, 3, 3, 3, 3, 4 (= 22)
finger-spaces.
' The worlds are therefore altogether 118 (I6 + 56 + 28 +. 18), as we find in the MYV.

TANTRĀLOKA
the

The worlds are thus sixteen, fifty-six, twenty-eight, eighteen, and
finger(-spaces) are four, forty-six, twenty-two, and twelve,

respectively. (128)

In this way, this (deposition) is accomplished. Thus he says.

fṣrarzmt afēcai s q avai Ṝ rarç 1| 22< 1
zftṝ fāēRaa frā: maāīz mrṣgftzaī 1

TaJTIT]

aṣṭādaśādhikaśataṁ purāṇi dehe ‘tra caturaśīti mite |

vinyastāni tad itthaṁ Śśeṣe tu vyāpakaṁ śivaṁ tattvam || 129 ||

iti vidhir aparaḥ kathitaḥ parāparākhye rasaśrutiṣṭhāne |
aṣṭaśaraṁ saṁkhyānaṁ khamunikṛtaṁ tat pare vidhau jñeyam || 130 ||
There are thus one hundred and eighteen worlds deposited here in
the body, which measures eighty-four (finger-breadths). The rest is

pervaded by the Śiva principle. Such is said to be the lower (apara)
procedure. In one called intermediate," the number (of finger-breadths) is
fifty-eight instead of forty-six. One should know that there are seventy in
the supreme (procedure). (129-130)

(In intermediate procedure, the number of finger-breadths) ‘is fiftyeight instead of forty-six’, because there are twelve more. (In the supreme
procedure,) there are seventy, because there are twenty-four more.
Surely (one may ask), how is it that there are twelve and twenty-four
extra finger(-spaces) here (in these cases)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JBGJĪIRATĪRGTĀTTRIT
JTTÇTA |I

vmīavṛā rīṝ fdtrīḡā #ēhrvī; || 232 1
lakulāder yogāṣṭakaparyantasyātra bhuvanapūgasya |
adhikīkuryād gaṇanāvaśena bhāgaṁ vidhidvaye kramaśaḥ || 131 ||
Here, in these two procedures, one should increase (the size of each)
part progressively for the group of (fifty-six) worlds, beginning with Lakula

up to the eight Yogas, in accord with the calculations. (131)

16 worlds (4 fingers) + 56 worlds (46 fingers) + 28 worlds (22 fingers) + 18 worlds (I2
fingers) = 112 worlds in 84 finger-breadths.
Read parāparākhye for parāparākhyo.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

“The group of worlds’ (number) fifty-six. The ‘part’ in the case of the
intermediate procedure is an increment of a bit more than a fifth part. In the case

of the supreme (procedure), the increment is a little less than half a finger(space).

Having defined the deposition of the Path of the Worlds, he also (goes
on to) explain that of the Path of the Parts (of Mantra).
The Deposition of the Path of the Parts of Mantra (padādhvan)

T̄ aīē sãī a-J aãTṀ--̄d J || 233 |

q Ūīaśṝ || 233 1|

TJTIGTĀTĪ
] ṬaīTāī TGTSRTTT II/23% 1

aparādividhitraitād atha nyāsaḥ padādhvanaḥ |

pūrvaṁ daśapadī coktā svatantrā nyasyate yadā || 132 ||
tayaiva dīkṣā kāryā cet tadeyaṁ nyāsakalpanā |

tatvādimukhyatāyogād dīkṣāyāṁ tu padāvalr| 133 II

tattattvādyanusāreṇa tatrāntar bhāvyate tathā |
svapradhānatvayoge tu dīkṣāyāṁ padapaddhatim || 134 ||
nyasyet krameṇa tattvādivadanānavalokinīm |

Ia the case of the intermediate procedure, a fifth part of fity-six worlds is close to 1.1. Adding
a bit less than this space for each part would account for th twelve fingers' space extra from 46 to
58. A half of fiy-six is 28, s0 just a litle less than half an cxtca finger’s space for each world
would account for th extra twenty-four fingers' spac frm 46 to 70.
Spheres of the Body
Lower

Worlds

Finger Breadths

56 Lakula to the 8 Yogas

Intermediate

56 Lakuḷa to the 8 Yogas

SŚupreme

56 Lakula to the 8 Yogas

Total = 84

Total = 96

Total = 108

TANTRĀLOKA

Now after (the exposition) of the three procedures, that is, the lower
and the rest, (we go on to deal with) the deposition of the Path of the Parts
(of Mantra) (pada). If the ten Parts (of Mantra) mentioned previously are
deposited independently, and (if the teacher wishes that) the initiation be
performed by means of them alone, then this is the (manner in which) the

deposition is conceived. When the main factor in the initiation is the

principles (tattva) etc., the series of Parts is considered to be included there
in that way, in concord with (each of) the principles etc. When their own
predominance applies, in (the course of) initiation (the teacher) should
deposit the series of Parts successively (in due order) (krameṇa)

(independently), without referring them to the principles etc. (132-135ab)

(If the ten Parts (of Mantra)) ‘mentioned previously’ in Chapter Eleven
etc. (are deposited) ‘independently, that is, are the main ones. (When the main
factor in the initiation is the principles (tattva) etc., the series of Parts is

considered to be included) ‘there’ amongst the principles (tattva) etc. ‘in that
way’ʼ, as ten-fold. ‘When their own predominance applies’ʼ, (the power of the
deposition of the Parts) is strengthened, (and so is deposited) ‘without them

referring to the principles etc.’.
He says that:

g | 334 ||

tr

TGṬHJTG] HTṬĀTĪĪTṀTTTT]|I 23ē 11

ṁīġ 1| 2319 1
fāca

TTG ārStTā

caturṣvaṣṭāsu cāṣṭāsu daśasv atha daśasv atha || 135 ||
daśasv atho pañcadaśasv atha vedaśarenduṣu |
dharāpadān navapadīṁ mātṛkāmālinīgatām || 136 ||
yojayed vyāptṛ daśamaṁ padaṁ tu Śivasaṁjñitam ḷ
dharāpadaṁ varjayitvā pañca yāni padāni tu |I 137 I|
vidhidvayaṁ syān nikṣipya dvādaśa dvādaśāṁgulān |
(The teacher) should conjoin the nine Parts (of Mantra) associated
with (the phonemes of) Mātṛka and Mālinī, beginning with the Part
(corresponding to) Earth, into (nine spaces, consisting of) four, eight, eight,

ten, ten, ten, fifteen, four, and fifteen (finger-spaces, respectively)." The
Above in 11/51-53 (drawn from MV 2/51-57), the mantras, parts, phonemes, worlds and

principles that are accommodated into the spheres of the five Forces are enumerated. There the
parts (of mantra) are ten.
4 + 8 + 8 + 10 + 10 + 10 + 15 + 4 + 15 = 84. For example, the pada of Earth, which is KS,

according to the sequence of Mātrkā, and PH according to that of Mālinī, take up four finger-

spaces, and s0 on.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

tenth Part, which is called ‘Śiva’, pervades (all the preceding ones). The
two procedures, (intermediate and supreme, are derived from this one) by
adding to the five Parts, omitting that of Earth, (a space of) twelve fingers
(for the intermediate one), and twelve (more for the supreme one). (135cd-

138ab)

That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘The first (occupies) four finger(-spaces), two others eight finger(spaces) each, three ten each, one fifteen finger(-spaces), (one with) four
(fingers’ space), and another with the extra (fifteen), which is the ninth. (The

tenth,) which is immense, pervades (them all).”

Here, ‘another of four (fingers” space) is the eighth, which is a Part
consisting of two phonemes. ‘(Another with the extra (fifteen)’, that is, the
remaining fifteen fingers’ (space) for the ninth (Part), consisting of three
phonemes. The immense one consists of sixteen phonemes and is the tenth one,
which ‘pervades (them all)ʼ. It is said (here) in order to explain that that ‘the

tenth Part, which is called ‘Siva’, pervades (all the preceding ones)’. Again,
as (Abhinavagupta) has explained in the Pañcikā:

‘by pervading the eighth Part for (a space of) seven fingers with four
and three extra, and by pervading with twelve fingers the ninth, because that is
what remains.”
(This) is the view of some who are (whimsically) absorbed in making
(the deposition of the Parts) the same as that of the sequence of principles. It is
not possible to bring that about in all respects. What is the use of (stubbornly)
devoting oneself to an aim that cannot be achieved (aśakyārtha)? Similarly, in
the case of the deposition of the worlds, (which is most commonly done in) two

finger(-spaces at a time), how can one logically justify that it is said that the

world of Cchagalāṇḍa (extends) for three fingers? The worlds are pervaded by
the principles, not the other way around. Nor is it reasonable to say that they are

arranged within other principles, because their condition is such that they are

present (only) within (their own) fixed principles. So enough of much (needless
talk)! ‘The five (Parts)’ are present (in the space of) forty-two fingers.
‘Adding’ means placing within those five Parts.
He transposes the same (procedure) elsewhere (to another context).

r--meīsaīṁ taa frtṝīāzāī | 23¢ 1
aaīftcnT fē Frīdcgqṁ ṁTīa rraī 1

mantrādhvano ‘py eṣa eva vidhir vinyāsayojane || 138 II
vyāptimātraṁ hi bhidyetety uktaṁ prāg eva tat tathā |
“ MV 6/19cd-20. Read daśamaṁ for navamaṁ.

TANTRĀLOKA

The same procedure (applies) to the application (yojana) of the
deposition of the Path of Mantra. The only difference, as was said before, is
just (in the extent and contents of its) pervasion. (138cd-139ab)
(It was said before) in chapter eleven.
The Deposition of the Path of the Phonemes

Now, in order to define the Path of the Phonemes, he says (the

following).

zaṛṝq ggāṁhhvt=at 1| gxśo 1
Jc̄dk̄} āīcaā-kaqfaṝa fsōīa |
fc-ñtāīagsīvī. agēāīa ũá aza: || 242 1

varṇādhvano ‘tha vinyāsaḥ kathyate ‘tra vidhitraye || 139 ||
ekaṁ caturṣu pratyekaṁ dvayor aṁgulayoḥ kramāt |
trayoviṁśativarṇī syāt ṣaḍvarṇy ekaikaśastriṣu || 140 ||
pratyekam atha catvāraś cartuṣv iti vilomataḥ |
mālinīmātṛkārṇāḥ syur vyāptr śaivaṁ rasendutaḥ || 141 ||
varjayitvādyavarṇaṁ tu tattvavat syād ravīn ravīn |
tāṁ trayoviṁśatau varṇeṣv apy anyat syād vidhidvayam || 142. II

Now (we go on to expound) the deposition of the Path of the
Phonemes here in (all) three procedures.

The first (phoneme) is within four (fingers” space). (The

following) twenty-three phonemes (each take up a space of) two fingers.
Each (of the following) six phonemes (extend) within three (fingers’ space),
and each of (the last) four are within (a space of) four (fingers).

The phonemes, (deposited) in the reverse order, (are those) of
Maātṛkā and Maālinī. Śiva, who pervades (all of them), has sixteen

(phonemes). The other two procedures (are derived from this one), like

(the deposition of) the principles, adding a twelve(-finger space for the
intermediate one) and (another) twelve (for the supreme one), to the space

See above, 11/51-53.
Here the sixtcen vowels are omittcd, and the scquence of the remaining phonemes is the
reverse of the normal alphabetical ordr. In other words, they begin with KS and end with K.
Thus, here are | + 23 + 6 + 4 + 16 = 50 phonemes. These correspond to the following
respective fingers’ spaces: 4 + 46 + 18 + 16 + 0 = 84.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

alloted to the twenty-three phonemes that come after the first one.
(139cd-142)

‘The first (phoneme) in the reverse order (of the Mātṛkā syllabary) is,

as will be explained, KS, and (of the Mālinī syllabary) PH.” “Each (of the

following) six phonemes (extend) within three (fingers’ space)ʼ, so that by
counting six within three, there are eighteen (finger spaces). In the same way,
multiplying the four (fingers’ space for each of the following four phonemes) by
four, there are sixteen finger(-spaces), and so it is said that ‘each of (the last)
four are within (a space of) four (fingers). ‘Śiva has sixteen’ means that He
consists of sixteen phonemes (i.e. the vowels). ‘The other two procedures (are

derived from this one,) like (the deposition of) the principlesʼ, as was said
before:

‘This, the intermediate (parāpara) procedure, (is such) because it

(extends for an) extra twelve fingers, as the principles from Water up to the
intellect occupy two fingers and a half, and Nature (prakṛti) three.”

Thus, in the Mālinīvijayottara (śrīpūrvaśāstra) that is taught initially in
relation to the principles, and subsequently (the same teaching is) transposed
(and applied) to the Parts (of Mantra) etc. Accordingly, he says:

a 11 2x3 1
śrīpūrvaśāstre tenādau tattveṣūktaṁ vidhitrayam |

atidiṣṭaṁ tu tad bhinnābhinnavarṇadvaye samam || 143 ||
Thus, the

three

procedures are initially

expounded in

the

Maālinīvijayottara in relation to the principles and then transposed (with the

same criteria) to the two (series of) phonemes in which (the vowels and
consonants are) mixed (i.e. Mālinī) and not mixed (i.e. Mātṛkā). (143)
He (now) quotes the passage there concerning (this) transposition.

fṣfrāīsfṁ fḵ avīmṝ fkzaaī a ssaa 1
TTāīãra- āīa: ŪdaTãī-: || ṇz; |

“ó See above, 16/137cd-138ab. Thus, for the intemmediate one corresponding to 1 + 23 + 6 + 4 =
34 phonemes, there are 4 + 58 + 18 + 16 = 96 finger-brcadths. For the supreme one there are 4 +
70 + 18 + 16 = 108 fingerbrcadths.
Read pha for ha.
Above, 16/106. There are 22 principles from Water to the Intellect. According to this
statement, these should span a distance of
53 (22 x 2.5) fingers. Adding 3 for Nature, we arrive at
58 finger-qaqxbreadths.

TANTRĀLOKA

araāṁ ffē:c kta vrīT̄āgaũ 1| 2 1
dvividho ‘pi hi varṇānāṁ ṣaḍvidho bheda ucyate |
tattvamārgavidhānena jñātavyaḥ paramārthataḥ || 144 ||
upadeśātideśābhyāṁ yad uktaṁ tatpadādiṣu |
bhūyo nirdiṣṭaṁ tatraiva śāstre ‘ṣmad dhṛdayeśvare |l 145 ||
‘Although the phonemes are of two kinds, it is said that (there is
also) a division into six kinds. That should be known as it truly is by

(referring) to the procedure concerning the Path of the Principles.”’ (144)

(This is) as was taught with respect to the Parts (of Mantra) etc. by

(direct) instruction, and transposition (atideśa)'™ (from other procedures)
taught extensively'' there in (the Mālinīvijayottara), the scripture that is the
lord of my heart. (145)
‘Although the phonemes are of two kinds’, according to whether they

belong to the Mātṛkā or Mālinī alphabet. (Again,) each of these (two) kinds
pervades (the Paths of) the phonemes, the Parts (of Mantras), and Mantras, and
so (each phoneme) is said to be of six kinds. That ‘should be knownʼ as it

actually is by the process (krama) taught previously, that is, by (referring) to the
procedure concerning the Path of the Principles. This is the meaning of this
statement. By (referring to the Mālinīvijayottara as) ‘the lord of our heart’, it
is accepted (and affirmed that) the place of rest is here itself.
He says that:

TḠT-ĨṀṬGT] ṬGTTTHT: |
fīāā aḥ̄ĩ̄ r̥̄ddTõhcicTI || 2338, 1|
MV 6/27cd-28ab.

Ṭhe technical term aidesa, coined by Mīmāṁsṣakas, is discussed by Jaimini in seven sātras of

seven section of the Mīmāṁsasūtra. It denotes the transposition or transference of ritual
procedures or other details from one sacrifice to another. Gaṅganath Jha (1964: 289-290) explains,
“There are several Sacrifices, in connection with which the Veda does not not specifically
prescribe all the necessary details, but declares that ‘such and such a sacrifice shall be performed
in the manner of such and such other Sacrifice’; for instance, with regard to the Zṣu Sacrifice, after

having declared its peculiar features, the Vedic text goes on to declare that ‘the rest is like the

Shyena Śacrfice’. In such cases, the Shyena Sacrifice could be called the ‘prakṛt’, Archetype,
and the ṣu Sacrifice, the corresponding ‘vikṛtī’, Ectype. The Transference, then, of the details of
the Archetype to the Ectype is what is called ‘atidesśa’, which has been seen as ‘that process
whereby a detail becomes extended in its application from the Primary to the other acts cognate to

it, (Bhā trs p. 1239). The Prakaraṇapañcikā (p. 227) has defined it as ‘that through which the

Ectype becomes connected with the details of the Archetypal Sacrifice,’ or ‘the extension of the

details of one Sacrifice to another, when there is no incongruity with such extension’.” For more
details see ibid. p. 289-293.

'S Ṛead bhūyo nirdiṣṭaṁ for bhāyo ‘tidiṣṭaṁ.

! Ṭhe account of the procedure conceming the deposition of the Path of the Phonemes amounts

to only this statement. We must work out how it is to be done following the model (that is, by the

‘transposition’ – atidesa) of the three-fold deposition of the Principles. Abhinava is telling us that
this is what he has done, in accord with the instructions of the MV, his beloved scripture.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

padamantrakalādīnāṁ pūrvasūtrānusārataḥ |
tritayatvaṁ prakurvīta tattvavarṇoktavartmanã || 146 ||

“The three (procedures) with regards to the Parts, Mantras and
Forces etc. should be fashioned in the manner expounded with regards to
the principles and phonemes, in accord with the (teachings of the) previous

verses.” (146)

The Deposition of the Path of the Forces (kalā)

uktaṁ tatpadamantreṣu kalāsv atha nirūpyate |
Now that that was taught with regards to (the Path of) Mantras and
(their) Parts, (the three procedures) are now described with regards to the

(Path of) the Forces (kalā).' (147ab)

The Parts (of Mantra) and the rest should be fashioned into three kinds,
as supreme, intermediate and lower, along the Path of the Principles and the rest
taught (previously), in accord with the verses beginning with ‘the five (gross)

elements (should be deposited) from below the feet . . .’'. ‘That was

taught’ afterwards (with regards to (the Path of) Mantras and (their) Parts).
He teaches that:

q} Ū- gīTvraāī ṣīaāã̄ 11 g.x9 ||

fṣcttaāzai ārai q ṀaaT īa7ḶGT] || 2¢ 1|

ṣrāā fīd Tqacṁhq |
TGSRTKaTTRYTĀ-T TIT |II 233 1

caturṣu rasavede dvāviṁśatau dvādaśasv atha || 147 I|
nivrttyādyāś catasraḥ syur vyāptrī syāc chāntyatītikā |

dvitīyasyāṁ kalāyāṁ tu dvādaśa dvādaśāṁgulān || 148 ||
kramāt kṣiptvā vidhidvaitaṁ parāparaparātmakam |

' MV 6/28cd-29ab. The teachings of ‘the previous verses’ i.e. MV 6/3-28ab, are presented above
in 16/101-110, 132ff, and 234-236ab.

' The MV’s presentation of the projection of the Path of the Forces amounts to barely a mention

of it. Following the same principle of ‘transposition’ (atidesśa), Abhinava works out in detail the

equivalent form of this projection on the same triadic model in the following verses. As the
teacher, his job is to explain scripture. His exegesis operates at all levels, not only as a higher
metaphysical hermeneutics, explaining what is taking place in the course of ritual action in terms
of the dynamics and ontology of consciousness.
' MV 6/2a. Verses 6/2cd-6ab are paraphrased and commented above in 16/101-105. There

Abhinava does not refer to this quarter verse.

TANTRĀLOKA

caturaṇḍavidhis tv ādiśabdeneha pragṛhyate || 149 ||
kalācatuṣkavat tena tasmin vācyaṁ vidhitrayam |
The four (Forces (kalā)) beginning with Cessation (nivṛtti) each
occupy four, forty-six, twenty-two, and twelve (fingers’ space, respectively).
The Force Beyond Quiescence (śāntyatīta) pervades (the others). The other
two (procedures), intermediate and supreme, (are formed) by adding
twelve (fingers’ space), and (then) twelve (more, respectively,) within the

second Force.' The procedure concerning the four Eggs' is alluded to
here (in the Mālinīvijayottara) with the word ‘etc.”" Thus, (this implies
that) the three procedures within (that domain) should be said to be
(formed) like (those of the) four Forces. (147cd-150ab)

(The extra twelve finger-spaces are added) ‘within the second (Force)
present in the forty-six fingersʼ (space). ‘The word ‘etc.”’ is part of a statement
in the Mālinīvijayottara.
Concluding in this way (the teaching concerning) variety of (forms of)
the object of purification, he says (the following) in order to define the variety
(of forms) of the purifier.

The Deposition of the Current of Seventy Purifying Mantras (śodhaka)

Ḷeḻ ēeEEt Eṭ .ēez ITĒIḺUṈṬEYTHI
TTFŪTTTCGTTTRTĀĀĪSJTHĒTHTT |
evaṁ ṣaḍvidham adhvānaṁ śodhyaṁ śiṣyatanau purā || 150 1
nyasyaikatamamukhyatvān nyasyec chodhakasaṁmatam |

Having first deposited in this way the Path of six kinds that is to be
purified (śodhya)” onto the body of the disciple, (the teacher) should
[P3
Deposition of the Forces on the Body
Spheres _| Nivṛtti | Pratiṣṭhā | Vidyā | Śāntā

Lower

ĪĨ2_]__84 fingers

][_Total Height

Middle

96 fingers

Supreme |_ 4

ĪĨ2_|_108 fingers

Śāntātīt is pervasive and so has no measure.

See above, 11/8 ff.
MV 6/28¢cd-29ab quoted above in 16/146. 1t says: ‘The three (procedures) with regards to the

parts, mantras and forces etc. should be fashioned in the manner expounded with regards to the
principles and phonemes, in accord with the (teachings of the) previous verses.’ Here we can
observe very clearly how Abhinava favours his reader by filing in details omitted in the MV just
on the authority of an ‘etc.”.
' Read with MSs C and T, śodhyaṁ for śodhya-. See above, 16/94cd ff.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

deposit onto it (the Mantra) which, because it is the main one amongst (all
of them), is considered to be the purifier (150cd-151ab)

‘(The Mantra) considered to be the purifier’ is the particular Mantra
that is considered to be the purifier (of all the Paths). This is the meaning.
(Now) he talks about that.

TJTĀTTTT-ĪT
TT¥H āIh STIĪR: |1/gq12 |

āTṬ TCā ATHGAĪTT: |I/ 24R 11

TJTHĪTTTFTTRRGTAĀĪGT
ṬHTRAT |

TGāīRkTTGG-CTS
aI gJGĪTRTAT ||/qU43 11
EĒHĪĒṬTṀTE [ĀHŪPIRCEETVCTḤI

3š N qtd dṁoeaī] |
HḤIṬTRTTT-ī4 ĠhTō: JṜIāTT. || g4.4 1|

āīs% sīgcāīaaī fkrā: || guē 1
adhvany āsanamantraughaḥ śodhako hy eka āditaḥ | 151 1|
Śabdarāśir mālinī ca samastavyastato dvidhā |
ekavīratayā yad vā ṣaṭkaṁ yāmalayogataḥ || 152 ||

pañcavaktrīśaktis' tadvadbhedāt ṣoḍhā punar dvidhā |

ekākiyāmalatvenety evaṁ sā dvādaśātmikā || 153 |
saḍaṅgī sakalānyatvād dvividhā vaktravat puṇaḥ |
dvādaśatvena guṇitā caturviṁśatibhedikā || 154 ||
aghorādyaṣṭake dve ca tṛtīyaṁ yāmalodayāt |
mātṛṣadbhāvamantraś ca kevalaḥ śruticakragaḥ || 155 ||
ekadvitricaturbhedān trayodaśabhidātmakaḥ
ekavīratayā so ʻyaṁ caturdaśatayā sthitaḥ ll 156 ||

1) First of all comes the one purifier, consisting of (the flux of) the
multitude of Mantras (nantraugha), that serves as the seat (for the deity)
on the Path. (This flux of Mantras consists of)
2) (1) Śabdarāśi (the Assembly of Sounds) and Mālinī are thus of

two kinds, according to whether (they are a single) whole or in parts. (4)

ṀÓ See below 16/161.
l Read -śaktis for śakti.
“ Śabdarāśi and
Mālinī are both Mantra dcites whose bodies are made of the letters of the
alphabet. Śabdarāśi is a form of Bhairava, and Malinī is his consort. As such, they are considered
to be a single ‘whole’. Their Mantras are of the form OṀ ŚABDARĀŚYAI NAMAḤ and AIṀ
MĀLINYAI NAMAḤ. They may also be worshipped ‘in parts’, that is, as the single letters, each
one of which has a corresponding deity invoked by a corresponding Mantras. Thus, for example,

TANTRĀLOKA

3) Or else the group of six (deities)' (may also be worshipped in

two ways, that is,) as single deities (ekavīra) or as conjoined couples

(yāmalayoga). (2)

4) The energy (śakti) with five faces becomes sixfold by being
ed in the same way,' and then again twofold, according to whether
she is alone (ekāki) or coupled (yāmalatva), and so she is in this way twelve.

(12)

5) Possessing six limbs, she is differentiated (sakala) or otherwise,

and so is of two kinds."“ Again, like the (six) faces, she is multiplied by

twelve, and so she is divided into twenty-four (varieties). (24) (151cd-154)

6) (Then there are) the two groups of eight deities, that is, Aghora

and the rest.™ (There is) a third (group of eight), due to the arising (of the
same two groups paired together) as a couple. (24)

7) Mātṛasadbhāva mantra is (both) alone (kevala)' and present in

the four wheels, (the twelve energies of which arise) variously as one, two,

three, and four (together),' and so is divided into thirteen (modalities).

(13)

the first letter of Śabdarāśi – A – embodies Śīkaṇṭha Bhairava, that of Mālinī - N – the goddess
(also called ‘yoginṝ’) is Nadinī. Thuṣ, their mantras are OṀ ŚRĪKAṆṬHABHAIRAVĀYA

NAMAḤ and AIṀ NÃDINĪDÉVYAI NAMAḤ. For a complete list of these deities their

viṣualizations and pictorial representations, see Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 9: Appendix 3 pp. 239-269

for the Mālinī Yoginīs, and for the Bhairavas of the Assembly of Sound, ibid. Appendix 6 p. 282312. These visualizations have so far been located only in the Śrīmatottara, a Kubjikā Tantra.

Without these descriptions, we would not know what these deities looked like. They were

probably described in one or more lost Trika Tantra. Indeed, it is not unlikely that the

Śrīmatottara appropriated them from there. As most of the major Trika Tantras have been lost, we
are very fortunate that the Kubjikā Tantras, that are very closely related to them and drew

extensively from them, can help us considerably to reconstruct elements of Trika ritual, mantras

and iconography.

' Presumably the six are Parā, Parāparā and Aparā with their Bhairavas, Bhairavasadbhāva,
Ratiśekhara and Navātman, respectively. Each one can be alone or coupled with its partner. This
means, presumably, that Pa
coupled with her Bhairava – i.e. Bhairavasadbhāva, and each
Bhairava with his partner. In the first casc, the mantra of Parā comes first, followed by that of the
Bhairava. In the second, the Bhairava comes first, then Parā.

'" Thuṣ making twelve varieties.

The Śakti meant here is most probably Parā. Below in 30/36cd-37ab, Parā is said to have five

faces. See note there. Mantra deities are normally attended by their faces and limbs that are

deposited in associated with it (vaktranyāsa and aṅganyāsa). Parā’s six limbs are given below in
note 30,76 to 30/36cd-37ab. 1t is said here, if I have understood correctly, that each limb can have
a have a partner Buṭ, if this is so, Abhinava nowhere records the names of these partners.

Any of the six deities may be contemplated with or without limbs (and so there are twelve

varieties), which can be in their turn sakala or niṣkala. The varieties up to here are therefore fiftythree (I + 4 + 12
+ 12
+ 24 = 53).

The other group of eight is made up of the corresponding goddesses, Aghorī ctc. They can also
be coupled as Aghora and Aghor etc. In this way there are three sets.

In this case, all the phases are worshipped together as Mātṛsadbhāva. We have seen above that
the name Mātr̥ṣadbhāva denotes both Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī and Parā (3/68cd-70 (69-71ab)). The one
common to both is extracted in MV 8/39-40. There it is SHSRPHREM (see below, 30/45cd51ab). For the one pertaining solely to Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, i.e. KHPHREM, see below, 30/45cd-46.
ÓAbhinava is alluding here, yet again, to his fundamental syncretism of Trika and Krama

system. See above, 1/107, where he says that the three powers Parā, Parāparā and Aparā, in

association with the four moments of creation, persistence, reabsorption and the fourth (= the

Nameless), become twelve. These twelve states of consciousness ‘are born with respect to many

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

8) (By adding its aspect) as a single deity (ekavīra), it abides as
fourteen.” (1) (151cd-156)

There, the first is the ‘purifier, which is ‘(the flux of) the multitude
of Mantras (mantraugha) that serves as the seat (for the deity)ʼ. It is ‘one’
‘on the Path’ because (if it were not,) it would not be logically possible
otherwise to conjoin it thus (all together).
1) Again, Śabdarāśi (the Assembly of Sounds) is of two kinds,
according to whether it is in separate parts (vyasta) or a whole (samasta) (that

is, all the parts together). Such is the case with Mālinī also. Thus, there are four

varieties (bheda). (4)
2) (The six deities may be worshipped) ‘as single deities’ because every
single one consists of the repose within its own nature alone or ‘as conjoined
couples (yāmalayoga), because there is a hierarchy of (increasing) wonder

when (their state is one of) mutual intent (aunmukhya) on one another. Thus, the
six, according to whether they are (conjoined and) aroused or not, make twelve.

(12)

5) (Again,) according to whether these same six have faces (or not) as
single (deities) or as couples, make (another) twelve. As their (auxilliary) limbs

are twelve (six for each of the two kinds) as undifferentiated (transcendent) or
differentiated (immanent), (the varieties are) twenty-four. (24)

6) ‘(There is) a third’ group of eight. There are three groups of eight

here. (24)

7) (The mantra called Mātṛasadbhāva is) ‘alone’ (kevala), because it is
devoid of limitating adjuncts (upādhi). Therefore, (the Goddess of this Mantra)

is referred to as Anākhyā (the Inexplicable) everywhere (in the scriptures).
‘The

four wheels’

are

(the

cycles

of)

emanation

(persistence,

withdrawal and the inexplicable). Thus, there are four kinds, as the inexplicable
of emanation (the inexplicable of persistence, the inexplicable of withdrawal,
and the inexplicable of the inexplicable). (14)

rqfāã_ |

1| gu 11
anāmasaṁhṛtisthairyasṛṣṭicakraṁ caturvidham |
devatābhir nijābhis tan mātṛṣadbhāvabṛṁhitam || 157 ||
itthaṁ śodhakavargo “yaṁ mantrāṇāṁ saptatiḥ smṛtā |

The four-fold wheel of the Nameless, withdrawal, stability and

emanation, together with their own deities,'” is nourished (bṛrhita) by (the
sentient subjects altogether or even just one, simultaneously or successively, two at a time or three
and so on.’ TSā; see above note to 1/178cd-80ab for full reference from TSā p. 28-31.

" ]ṇ all the mantras are therefore 70 (53 + 3 + 14 = 70).
Cf. above, 4/176-181ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

Vidyā of the goddess) Mātṛsadbhāva. In this way, this class (varga) of

purifying (Mantras) is considered to consist of seventy Mantras.” (157-

158ab)

r̥ITJṢ ĪTGTTNTHī T #ZT II 24¢ |1|

STITTTAJTTTĀAJaT TTqĀTĒTT II 248 1I

āatīgũāēh: || 2 ||
ā7 āa fḵ ra-ṝ a’st-āāqazā: āa |

āīa ṭazāgcaṁ úīGrad 1| z ||

ferṛ āTTTĪRT aṬ STq |I 2Ā2 11

saḍardhaśāstreṣu śrīmatsāraśāstre ca kathyate || 158 |

aghorādyaṣṭakeneha śodhanīyaṁ vipaścitā |
athavaikākṣarāmantrair athavā mātṛkākramāt |I 159 ||
bhairavīyahr̥dā vāpi khecarīhṛdayena vā |
bhairaveṇa mahādevi tv atha vaktrāṅgapañcakaiḥ || 160 ||
yena yena hi mantreṇa tantre ‘sminn udbhavaḥ kṛtaḥ |
tenaiva dīkṣayen mantrī ity ājñā
pārameśvarī || 161 I|
evaṁ śodhakabhedena saptatiḥ kīrtitā bhidaḥ |
śodhyanyāsaṁ vinā mantrair etair dīkṣā yadā bhavet || 162 |I
tadā saptatidhā jñeyā jananādivivarjitā |
And, amongst the Trika scriptures (ṣaḍardhaśāstra), thīs is taught

in the venerable Sāraśāstra (where we read)'™: ‘the learned (teacher)

'” Cf. below, 16/162cd-163ab and 190. t seems that the seventy Mantras are as follows:
A) One for Śabdarāśi and Mālinī, taken together collectively, and two for each one and the

phonemes, taken one by one. This makes five varieties.

B) Six deities, either alone or as a couple, thus making twelve by adding their faces.
C) Twelve more by adding their limbs.

D) Three groups of eight, making twenty-four.

E) Fourteen aspects of Mātṛsadbhāva, to which should be added

F) The three goddesses Parā, Parāparā and Aparā.

Thus, we arrive
at A) 5 + B) 12+
C) 12 + Ḍ) 24 + E) 14 + F) 3. = 70

' The basic mantras prescribed here are indeed Trika mantras. The Śrīkularatnoddyota,

a Kubjikā Tantra, defines the core of the Trika’s system of Mantras as follows:

ca mālinyā vidyānāṁ tritayasya ca |

sāṅgopāṅgasamāyuktaṁ trikatantraṁ kariṣyati |l
‘The Trika Tantra will be fashioned

the three Vidyās along with Mālinī and Śabdarāś

joined with the limbs, primary and secondary, of
KRU 10/15

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

should (bring about this) purification here by means of the eight, Aghora
and the rest, or else with the Mantras (derived from) the monosyllabic

(Vidyā of Parā) (ekākṣarā) (namely, those of Parāparā and Aparā), or by

Along with the Trika mantras, the four-fold Wheel of Anākhyā, which are Krama
mantras, are prominent. Along with them, Mātṛsadbhāva, the seed syllable of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, is

given pride of place at the topmost layer of depositions. We have observed that the Devyāyāmala

was a Trika Tantra that was influenced by the Krama, as was the Trikasadbhāva. Thus, in the

Devyāyāmala, as we have seen, the Krama Goddess is placed above Trika’s Parā. In the
description of the triple Trident maṇḍala, drawn from the Trikasadbhāva (31/10cd-52) and the

Trikahrdaya (31/54 ft. (i they are different Tantras), presented below in Chapter Thirty-one, a
provision is made to project and worship this Krama grouping within it. So it is quite posible, i
not likely, that Abhinava is drawing from this source. If not, it was certainly a Trika Tantra that
had assimilated Krama teachings At any rate, the Trika Tantra from which Abhinava is drawing
was influenced by Krama, an influence we do not see in the Trika Tantras that have survived,

especially not the Malinīvijaya. Accordingly, it seems that Abhinava maintains the

Maālinīvijayottara’s position as the root Trika Tantra by drawing the samaya initiation from it,

drawing the higher putraka initiation (which is anyway not described in the MV) from a Trika
Tantra with Krama associations. As usual, he places the Krama teachings at the summit, this time

by sponsoring the deposition of Krama mantras at the uppermost layer, with those of the Trika
goddesses.
” It is clear that the following passage from 158cd to 161 is from the 7rikasāra, to which
Abhinava almost invariably refers in the Tantrāloka as the Sāraśāstra. The question is, from

where does Abhinava draw the previous passage, i.. 151cd to 156. One way to understand from

how Abhinava introduces 158cd is that the first of these two accounts is found in
‘ṣaḍardhaśāsatras’ and the second is from the Sāraśāstra (śrīmatsāraśāstre ca kathyate). One

could, perhaps emend ṣadardhaśāstreṣu śrīmatsāraśāstre – ‘amongst the Trika scriptures

(saḍarádhaśāstra)

(that)

taught

in

the

venerable

to

saḍardhaśāstre

tu

Śśrīmatsāraśāstre – (that) is taught in the venerable Sāraśāstra, which is a Trika scripture

(saḍardhaśāṣtra). Again, if we don't read the two disjunctively, the line ṣaḍardhaśāṣtreṣu
Śśrīmatsāraśāstre ca kathyate may also be translated ‘(that is) is also (ca) taght in the venerable

Sāraśastra, which is amongst the Trika scriptures (sadardhaśāstra).’ Īf this is what Abhinava

meant, we may understand that he is saying that both the passages are drawn from the Sāraśāstra.

This may explain why Abhinava glosses the conclusion of both passages, saying that the Mantras

that constitute the category of the “purifier’ are seventy (158ab and 163ab).

But this may not be so. The first passage enumerates these seventy mantras as those that

are to be projected onto the body. The second passage, that we know is from the Trikasāra, lists a

number of mantras that the teacher can try out on his freshly initiated disciple to see which one is
the most effective. It would be in keeping with Abhinava’s exegetical method to have first
‘extracted the essence’ of what the Trikasāra has to say about the current of seventy Mantras first,

and then conclude by quoting directly from his souree what concerns the one purifying mantra or

set of mantras the disciple can use as his basic, root mantra, to serve as the foundation of the rest

that he deposits on his body. The list of mantras taken from the Trikasāra includes the Heart of
the Khecarīs, that is, the root seed syllable of the Kālī Krama, that is, Piṇḍanātha (i.e.

KHPHREṀ), testifying to this Tantra’s association with Krama, and so allowing for the two

passages to be from the same source. Even s0, it does not seem to be, given the same prominence

as in the first passage, that may, therefore, be from a different source.

The problem here – whether the source is one or two – is strangely analogous to the

problem of identifying the source or sources of the depiction of the triple Trident maṇḍala

presented below in 31/10cd ff. There, Abhinava refers to first to the Trikasadbhāva as his source

for the drawing of the maṇḍala, and then some foty verses later on, to the Trikahrdaya, where hc
presents the projection into it of twelve energies, i.. the Twelve Kālīs of Wheel of the
Inexplicable (anākhyācakra). There too, one wonders whether these are two different sources or
the same one variously named. See below note 31,11
' athavaikākṣarāmantrair – ‘or else with the Mantras of the monosyllabic (Vidyā)’. The

monosyllabic Vidyā can only be Parā, i.c. SAUḤ. The mantras derived from Parā are the Vidyās
of Parāparā and Aparā.

TANTRĀLOKA

the sequence of (the letters of) the Mātṛkā (alphabet), or by Bhairava’s

heart, or by the Heart of the Khecarīs (KHPHREṀ), or by Bhairava, O
Great Goddess, (or) with the five faces and limbs.”® The Supreme Goddess
(Parameśvarī) commands that (the teacher who) recites Mantra should

initiate (his disciple) with whichever Mantra (taught) in this Tantra has

made (the disciple) leap (upwards) (udbhava) (pierced by its energy).’”

(158cd-161)
In this way, according to the variety (and kind) (bheda) of purifying
(mantras) (śodhaka), the varieties (bhid) are said to be seventy. If the
initiation (is performed) with these Mantras without depositing the object

of purification, then, devoid of birth and the rest,” it should be known to
be of seventy kinds.”” (162-163ab)
As (the word) ‘Mantras’ is plural, it means that they are (those)
associated with the three goddesses, Parā and the rest. ‘Bhairava’s heartʼ is the
Mantra Maātṛsadbhāva (HSHPHREṀ). “‘The heart of the Khecarīs’ is
Piṇḍanātha (KHPHREṀ). (The Mantra of) Bhairava is one of many such as

Navātman (RHRKṢMLVYYŪṀ). (The teacher should initiate the disciple with

the Mantra that) ‘has made (the disciple) leap (upwards), that is, whichever is

preferred (amongst them).

'” According to TĀ 30/32-33ab, there are two forms of Bhairava’s Heart. One is SHAṀ, and the

other is ‘the supreme heart of Parā’, which is SAUḤ. Another Heart, ‘which is called Bhairava’, is
extracted in 30/94cd-95. It is HKSIHUAUMṀ. We are told that the source of that mantra is the

Tantrasadbhāva. ṭ is used for the rite of initiation of the balance taught in TĀ Chapter Twenty.
Jayaratha tells us that the Heart of Bhairava meant here is the syllable of Mātṛṣadbhāva. As

HSHPHREM it may be either Parā or Kāḹ
counterpart of the Krama Heart of the Khecarīs
later.

It may also be SAUḤ, which is the Trika
. Piṇḍanātha i.c. KHPHREM, which is the

'" I we read the entry ‘five faces and limbs’ together as qualifying Bhairava, we may suppose

that the Bhairava meant is Svacchandabhairava, who has the five faces.

But this is not supported

by Jayaratha, I think quite rightly. I have taken the Śakti with five faces above in 153a to be Parā.
It makes sense that these should be her limbs and faces. Although, in the Tantrāloka, she

generally has five faces and six limbs, five limbs is also possible.
ĪT An upward leap (udbhava) is one of the ‘signs on the path’ (pathalakṣaṇa) that serves as a
means of ascertaining (pratyaya) that a penetration (āveśa) or descent of power (śaktipāta) of the

deity has taken place in the disciple in the course of initiation, indicating that it has been imparted
successfully. See above, 5/101 ff.
' Most forms of initiation include the object of purification (śodhya), that is, the world orders

(bhuvana), reality principles (tattva) and sphere of energy (kalā) that contain them. The neophant
is induced, through the ritual procedure, to be reborn progressively from lower to higher levels
within it, and so is progressively purified of his binding Karma. This is done by means of the
mantra, parts of mantra and phonemes, that are the purifiers (śodhaka). Īn this case, the neophant
is initated by the power of the deposition of the purifying mantras deposited on his body alone,
without previously projecting the paths that are to be purified. See below, 16/237cd-239ab (238-

239) and 16/244cd-247ab (245-247).
'” Cf. above, 16/157-158ab and below 16/190. Now that the deposition of the 70 purifying
Mantras has been defined, Abhinava goes on to talk about the deposition of the object of

purification and the enumeration of its forms. This subject and concluding remarks take up verses

163 to 206. The exposition of the deposition of Mantras continues below from verse 207 onwards.
' Navātman is the Bhairava of Aparā. Ratiśekhara (RYLVŪMṀ) is the Bhairava of Parāparā, and
Bhairavasadbhāva (JHKṢŪṀ) that of Par:

'! Jayaratha explains that the Śāraśāstra is simply saying that the teacher can select whatever

Mantra he likes. But clearly this is not what it is

actually saying. The mantra he chooses is

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Having defined in this way the variety (of forms of) the object of
puriication and (the Mantras) that serve to purify it, he says the following in

order to define the various types of initiation that depend on their power.
The Initiations and Liberation
The Various Types of Initiation (dīkṣābheda)

TTraTTīṣḷ āīṁza: ḍPTTTIṀ āSTĪ || ḶG3 |1
[GĒVEAIEEKEHCÉT|ĒH
TḤh’r̥-PaTīaTTRTṬFAT |I/gE% ||

TATTĪYGR

ĀṀTHĪTT II ṞGU II

aaṁ: |

hEEJEE HĒKIEEEIIT=VIĪŚTĀṬETHI
EEIĒEŪEIKITŪvEĪEŪIĀIIT

aRIITW
IT TĪR
R̥ATHTHĪR
C: |I 289 ||
[EÇIĀEINĪISH=|iĒēaē|[cca

JTTĪTAT

AITT

T_ | gē¢ 11

T̄TdIT ūYGTTI YGTAA JĪHTq I
fḵar sīār. gT ṂfṜ: īōraaī || 2e< 1
ḶGEGFCIEIEERKIIIRĒTGĒEEĒ PḤ

TṬTRTĪTJ
fr̥áiTST
fā’Ṁrēr̄ 1| Quo |1|
ÉIGEÉGVĪSSEĀCIGJṭ:iḺ=r.PḤ

ṁ 11 q.ç 1

TĨTŚTATG} ṬRTTTṬATAIT] |

frz ṁafe
ṛ-sftād r
q | qR 1

rfaf fkaāī ahātgaiī ā̄a

Jrcṁrz

%a-̃

fṣzaāṁēī 1| gux ||
JTTa JĪFTTBIAICTṬĪÇYI]
ṬGHJ|

determined by the appearance of a visible sign of its efficay prayaya). This is the upward leap
that takes place when, penetrating into the disciple, the mantra deity takes possession of him. See
above 5/101 ff. and Dyczkowski 2009: vol 1 p. 459 ff., also ibid. vol 11, note 25 p. 26-28.

TANTRĀLOKA

ũaza aTeēzaīīaāT aaā |] Ṟut, l|
śodhyabhedo ‘tha vaktavyaḥ saṁkṣepāt so ‘pi kathyate || 163 1I
ekatripañcaṣattriṁśadbhedāt tāttvaś caturvidhaḥ |
pañcaikabhedāc cādhvānas tathaivāṇḍacatuṣṭayam || 164 ||
evaṁ daśavidhaṁ śodhyaṁ triṁśaddhā tadvidhitrayāt |

Śodhyaśodhakabhedena śatāni tv ekaviṁśatiḥ || 165 1|
atrāpi nyāsayogena śodhye ‘dhvani tathākṛteḥ |

Śśataikaviṁśatibhidā jananādyujjhitā bhavet || 166 1

jananādimayī tāvaty evaṁ śatadṛśi śrutiḥ |
syāt saptatyadhikā sāpi dravyavijñānabhedataḥ || 167 II
dvidheti pañcāśītiḥ syāc chatāny adhikakhābdhikā |
bhogamokṣānusandhānād dvividhā sā prakīrtitā || 168 I|
aśubhaṣyaiva saṁśuddhyā śubhasyāpy atha śodhanāt |

dvidhā bhogaḥ śubhe śuddhiḥ kālatrayavibhedini l| 169 lI

ekadviṣāmastyavaśāt saptadhety aṣṭadhā bhujiḥ |
guruśiṣyakramāt so ‘pi dvidhety evaṁ vibhidyate || 170 ll
pratyakṣadīkṣaṇe yasmād dvayorekānusandhitaḥ |
tādṛgdīkṣāphalaṁ pūrṇaṁ visaṁvāde tu viplavaḥ || 171 I|
parokṣamṛtadīkṣādau gurur evānusandhimān |
kriyājñānamahimnā taṁ Śiṣyaṁ dhāmnīpsite nayet |/ 172 I|
avibhinne kriyājñāne karmaśuddhau tathaiva te |
anusandhiḥ punar bhinnaḥ karma yasmāt tadātmakam || 173 II
śrīmatṣyacchandaśāstre ca vāsanābhedataḥ phalam |
Śiṣyāṇāṁ ca guros coktam abhinne ‘pi kriyādike || 1741|
bhogasya śodhakāc chodhyād anusandheś ca tādṛśāt |
vaicitryaṃ asti bhedasya vaicitryaprāṇatā yataḥ || 175 II
Now, one should talk about the varieties of the object of purification

(Śodhya), (and so) that too will be described in brief. (163cd)

He (now) talks about the kinds of object of purification.
(The Path of the) principles is of four kinds, according to whether it

is divided into one, three, five, or thirty-six principles. The (other) Paths
(taken one at a time) are five, (or) alternatively (bhedāt) (taken all together,

just) one. In this way, the four Eggs that are to be purified are of ten
kinds." They are of thirty kinds because the procedures (described above)

are three. Due to the conjunction (bheda) of the purifying (Mantras) and
(their) object of purification, there are thus two thousand and one hundred

(kinds of initiation). Here also there are four thousand two hundred
kinds'™ (of initiation) along with (the preceding) seventy. This is because
(those forms of initiation) that do not include the process of taking birth (in
world orders in order to exhaust the effects of Karma) and the rest are two

4 + 5 + 1 = 10.
70 x 30 = 2100.
2100 + 2100 = 4200.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

thousand one hundred, and those that essentially consist of that

(jananādimayī) are as many. This is the number of the varieties (of

initiations) that can be performed on the Path of the object of purification

by means of (these) depositions.
These varieties are doubled again, according to whether (the

initiations are performed externally with the offering of Kaula) sacrificial
substances (dravya), or in consciousness (alone), and so there are eight
thousand five hundred and forty (types of initiation).' (These are) said to

be of two kinds, according to whether one’s intention (anusaṅṁdhāna) is

(to attain worldly) fruits or liberation. (163cd-168)

The worldly fruit (bkoga)” is of two kinds, according to whether

only inauspicious (bad karma) is purified, or else (just) auspicious (good
karma). There are seven kinds of purifications of auspicious (good) karma,
determined by the three times (past, present and future), considered one by
one, two by two, or all together. In total, there are therefore eight kinds of
worldly fruits. (169-170ab)

That (fruit)'™ also is of two kinds, according to whether (it refers to

the intention) of the teacher or the disciple, respectively. Thus, it is various

in this way (according to the following distinctions). In the case of an

initiation in which the disciple is present (pratyakṣadīkṣaṇa), the fruit of
such an initiation is full by virtue of the single intention (common to both).
If there is a disagreement (between them) (visaṁvāda), (the result is) a

disaster. In the case, for example, of the initiation of an absent or dead

(disciple), it is the teacher who has the (required) intention (anusaṁdhi). By
the power of (ritual) action and knowledge, (the teacher) should lead (his)

disciple to the abode to which he aspires. The rite (kriyā) and the knowledge

(which arises from it and sustains it) are not separate and (do not vary).
That is just as they are when Karma is being purified. Rather, it is the
intention (anusaṁdhi) that varies, as Karma is (essentially) of that nature.
(The same) is said in the venerable Svacchandatantra, (where we read) that
even though the rite (kriyā) and the like may be the same, the fruit
(nevertheless) varies according to the various mental dispositions (vāsanā)

of the disciples and teacher. (170cd-174)

The wonderful variety (vaicitrya) of worldly experience (bhoga) is

thus due to such intention (anusandhi), the purifying Mantra, and the

object of purification. The very life of duality (bheda) is (this) variety. (175)
4270 x 2 = 8540.

See above, TĀv ad 15/22ab.

' There are seven kinds of good karma that need to be purified, and hence seven types of

purification of good karma. These are past, present and future Karma. Then there are three more
kinds that are purified in pairs. These are past and present Karma together, past and future Karma
together, present and future Karma together. Finally, a seventh kind is one in which all three, past,

present and future Karma, are all purified together.
See below, 16/183.
' The mental dispositions of the disciple and the teacher must be in harmony for them to work

together towards a single goal.

' 16/174bc is an almost a literal quote of SVT 4/82cd: vāsanābhedato bhinnaḥ śiṣyāṇāṁ ca guros

tathā | This verse is also cited above, 15/22ab-23cd. Cf. 15/34cd-35ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The (other) Paths) apart from the Path of the Principles are ‘five’. ‘Due
to the conjunction (bheda) of the purifying (Mantras) and (their) object of
purification’, (there are thus two thousand and one hundred (kinds of

initiatoon)), as there are thirty objects of purification which, by being in
conjunction with seventy purifying (Mantras) (are multiplied together). It was
said before that there are seventy (varieties of initiation) associated with the

purifying (Mantras). In this way there are four thousand two hundred kinds'!

(of initiation which involve the deposition of both the object of purification and

the purifying Mantras), with an additional seventy (varieties in which the object

of purification is not deposited on the disciple’s body).” (The reference to)
‘sacrificial substances’ serves to characterize (outer ritual) action. The
‘inauspicious (bad karma) is that (of the adept – sādhaka – who is) devoted to
worldly Dharma (lokadharmin). The ‘auspicious (good karma)ʼ is that of one

who is devoted to Śiva Dharma (śivadharmin). When it is being purified,

there are ‘seven kinds’ of auspicious (Karma). There are three single varieties,

due to the distinction (bheda) between past, present and future (Karma). There

are also (another) three kinds, which are paired together as past and present
(Karma), past and future (Karma) and present and future (Karma). Moreover,

there is one (more kind) by (purifying them all) together. They are of ‘eight
kindsʼ, along with the purification of inauspicious (Karma).
(With regards to) ‘that tooʼ, namely, the worldly fruit (bhoga),'” is
‘various in this way’, that is, in the manner (krameṇa) that will be explained.
The ‘disagreement’ between the two is their different (conflicting) intention.
(In the case, for example, of the initiation of an absent or dead (disciple)), it is

the teacher alone (who has the (required) intention,) because the disciple is

somewhere else or is dead. ‘That is just as they are’ (when Karma is being
purified), that is, (action and knowledge are) undivided. (It is the intention
(anuṣaṁdhi) that varies, as Karma) ‘is (essentially) of that nature’ (that is to
say, Karma) is impelled by (and depends on) intention.
He (now) presents the variety of purifying (Mantras) (śodhaka).

1 2100 +2100 =4200.
The additional seventy kinds are based on the same number of mantras listed above in 16/157163ab; also cf. below 16/190. These seventy are not counted here amongst the forms of initiaton
in which both the object of purficaton and the mantras that purfy it are deposited on the
disciple’s body.
' We have seen that an adept (sādhaka) desires worldly benefits (bubhukṣu), whereas the
‘spititual son’ (putraka), that is, apprentice, aspires to liberation (mumukṣu) (TĀv ad 15/23cd24ab). Abhinava explained (above in TĀ 15/23cd-24ab) that:
‘There are two kinds of adept (sādhaka). One is devoted to Śiva Dharma
(Śśivadharmin), who is detached from (the daily affairs of) the world. The other is devoted to
worldly Dharma (lokadharmin) who, desiring (good) fruits, is dedicated to accumulating good
actions and refraining from bad ones.”

Read

bhāvitvena.

aúītavaramānātīabhāvivartamānabhāvitvena

See above, note 16,187.
' Cf. above, 15/27-30.

Read so ‘pīti bhogaḥ for so “pīti guruh.

for

atītavartamānātītavartamāna-

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

ṃTr̥fṝsṀ afrṁṁ a “Jrīṁī daīd || Q.95, |I
ṢĀHTĪ HTTI NIT T-RIT AĪrīīTkērāī |

cā- ṀfēB-ī || z.a /1]

aīfḷ] šia āatk q: || Quōḷ 1|

JT-TRĒRṬ
āĀTIg 3JIĪT 3=TÑ |

3, ālTza T aṁ JEINĪTTI
fgaT ú] q¢e 1

aqī īgaaqa : Ṃ|

3hfraā-hōīcāaāā; ŪRATĪTT. I| 2¢3 1

tathāhi vaktrair yasyādhvā śuddhas tair eva yojitaḥ |
bhoktum iṣṭe kvacit tattve sa bhoktā tadbalānvitaḥ | 176 II

śubhānāṁ karmaṇāṁ cātra sadbhāve bhogacitratā |
tādṛg eva bhavet karmaśuddhau tv anyaiva citratā || 177 |

bhogaś ca sadya utkrāntyā dehenaivātha saṅgataḥ |
tadaivābhyāsato vāpi dehānte vety asau catuḥ !| 178 II
prāktanāṣṭabhidā yogād dvātriṁśadbheda ucyate |
mokṣa eko ʻpi bījasya samayākhyasya tādṛśam || 179 ||
bālādikaṁ jñātaśīghramaraṇaṁ śaktivarjitam |
vrddhaṁ voddiśya bhaktaṁ vā śodhanāśodhanād dvidhā || 180 |
sadya utkrāntitas traidhaṁ sā cāsannamṛtau guroḥ |
kāryety ājñā maheśasya śrīmadgahvarabhāṣitā l| 181 I|
dṛṣṭvā Śśiṣyaṁ jarāgrastaṁ vyādhinā paripīḍitam |

utkramayya tatas tvenaṁ paratattve niyojayet || 182 ||

pañcatriṁśadamī bhedā guror vā guruśiṣyayoḥ |
uktadvaividhyakalanāt saptatiḥ parikīrtitāḥ || 183 II
etair bhedaiḥ puroktāṁs tān bhedān dīkṣāgatān guruḥ |

bhitvā siddhet prasaṁkhyānaṁ svabhyastajñānasiddhaye || 184 |

TANTRĀLOKA

It is just in this way that the one who experiences worldly

experience (bhoktṛ), whose Path has been purified by the (Mantra’s) faces

and is conjoined by them somewhere to the principle (tattva) of (his) choice

in order to have (worldly) experience, possesses its power (which is its

essence or nature). (176)

The varied state (citratā) of the (disciple’s) worldly experience
(bhoga) is such in accord with the continuing existence (sadbhāva) here (in
the course of initiation) of (his) auspicious Karma. However, when (his)
Karma has been (completely) purified, another varied state (citratā) (of
experience arises). (177)
And (s0, the consequent) experience (bhoga) is of four kinds,

according to whether (it comes about) by 1) the immediate exit (from the
body brought about by the initiation) (sadya utkrānti), or 2) in association
with the body just then (immediately after the initiation), or 3) by as a
result of practice, or else 4) when the body comes to an end. (178)

It is said that there are thirty-two varieties formed by combining

the previous eight kinds (of purified Karma with these four possibilities).

(179ab)

Although there is only one (form of complete) liberation, it is of two
kinds, according to whether (in the course of initiation) the seed (of further

Karma), namely, the Rule (samaya), has been purified (and hence
eliminated), or not. (It is purified and removed) in the case of one who is

such (tādṛśa),'” children, (the mentally retarded) and the like, when (the

teacher has) ascertained that (the disciple) will die soon, in the case of one

who has no power (to endure hard work and discipline), is aged. or is a

(simple) devotee. (179cd-180)

Itis of three kinds, by (taking into account the type of initiation that

brings about the disciple’s) immediate exit (from the body), which the

teacher should perform when (the disciple) is close to death.

This is Śiva’s command, (which he) uttered in the venerable
Gahvara (where we read): ‘“having observed that the disciple is consumed
by old age and is severely afflicted by illness, (the teacher) should therefore

cause him to leave (the body) and conjoin him to the Supreme Reality.”"
(181-182)

These thirty-five varieties concern the teacher (alone), or (if
they concern) both the teacher and the disciple, they are said to be seventy,

4 x 8 = 32. See above, 16/169-170ab.
" By ‘one who is such’ is most probably meant one who aspires to liberation (mumúkṣu).
Conceming him and others, se above, |5/24-26.
Read bhaktaṁ for śaktaṁ. Cf. above, 15/31-32. Jayaratha sticks to the reading ‘śaktan’ but his
explanation, namely, that this expression (which literally means ‘capable’) denotes ‘the nature ofa
leamed person and the lik’, makes n0 sensc in this context.
Abhinava quotes these lines again below in 19/8. Jayaratha quotes this verse in TĀ ad 9/130cd131ab and ad 13/236-238. Kṣemarāja quotes itin SVTu 4/14.
12 33 4 3 = 35.
In the case of the initiaton of one who is absent, etc, see above, 16/172.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

because there are two kinds of processes (kalana), (one for the teacher

the other for the disciple, as) taught (previously). (183)

and

The teacher, having multiplied (bhitvā) these varieties with
those
mentioned previously in relation to iṇitiation, should arrive (siddh
yet) (at
their resultant) enumeration (prasaṁkhyāna)” in order to accompl
ish a
well exercised knowledge (of their varieties). (184)

The variety of the object of purification of auspicious and other (Karma
)
has been explained. (The experience after initiation may come about)
‘as a
result of practice’, thaṭ is, by the process of worshipping the Mantra
(ḍeity). By
multiplying the four (varieties of experience after initiation) with
the eight
(kinds that result from the purification of Karma), ‘there
are thirty-two
varietiesʼ (of worldly experience). ‘Capable’ (śaktam) is the nature
of a learned
person and the like.” (There are two kinds of processes) ‘taught (previo
usly),

(where he said that) ‘that too (i.e. the fruit) is of two kinds, accordi

ng to whether

(it refers to the intention) of the teacher or the disciple, respectively.
Thus, it is
various in this way etc.
Analysing that (variety of forms of initiation), he presents it.

TJTĪ

TT

ah-Ṁarq

|| g¢y
i ||

catvāriṁśatsamuttārā kathitā | 18
tāṁ saptatyā bhittvā
dīkṣābhedānsvayaṁ kalayet || 185 I|
pañcakamiha lakṣāṇāṁ
ca saptanavatiḥ sahasrapariṣaṅkhyã |

bhedo ‘yaṁ mālinītantre || 186 ||

"(The teacher) may calculate for himself the yarieties of initiations,

having multiplied by seventy the aforementioned eight
thousand five

hundred and forty varieties. According to the Mālinītantra, the types
See above, 16/170cd. Note that the sixth syllable in this quarter

should be long (guru).

of

is short (laghu), whereas it

Read bhitvā for hatvā. CĪ. he following verse.

Read siddhyet for vadet. This and the previous emendation is tentative.
N 8540 x 70 = 597,800.
See above, note 16,200.
Above, 16/170cd.

1 Abhinava changes here to Ārya metre (I2 – 18 – 12- 15 mātras) from 16/18 t0206ab (206).

An enumeration of the types of initiation both possible and theoretica
l, which Abhinava treats
in 163cd-186, is not a subject discussed in the printed edition
of the MV. We know of several
instances of citations from the MV not found in the printed edition,
this may be one. It is not

TANTRĀLOKA

initiations here (in this case) number five hundred and ninety-seven

thousand eight hundred. (185-186)

Enumerating (in brief) the main kinds (of initiation) taught in this way,
(he notes that) there are also other kinds here (in this case). Accordingly, he

says:

TāfṬAT āTRTTTĪTRSIṬ

aITS: TgēāGTĀTĀĪTTārTTT
āTṬĪT |IIg¢ 1|

JI sTF-TIfafTS] TṬTĒī |

TJTĨYIRṬ ṬTT ĀTTTaTRHHĪ
II 2¢¢ 1I
aTTIG, RJITĪTTRT ĀTT. JTTJGTJÑRĀĒĪṀĒĪṬ|

saptatidhā śoddhṛgaṇas

triṁśaddhā śodhya ekatattvādiḥ |

tathetikartavyatā catur bhedā || 187 I|
dravyajñānamayī sā
jananādivivarjitātha tadyuktā |
pañcatriṁśaddhā punar

eṣā bhogāpavargasandhānāt || 1 88 II

yasmād dvātriṁśaddhā

bhogaḥ śubhaśuddhyaśuddhikālabhidā |

mokṣas tredhā dviguṇā

saptatir iti kāryatābhedāḥ || 189 ||

The purifying (mantras) are of seventy kinds. The object of
purification is of thirty kinds, (according to whether it is) one principle,

etc. (It should be purified along with the four-fold) Egg that consist of the
six Paths.™ (The rite) that needs to be performed in this way is of four

kinds. (Thus, it may consist of the outer ritual centred on the offering of
Kauḻla) substances, (or internalized as) insight (jñāna). Again, it may entail
or be devoid of the process of taking birth (in world orders in order to

exhaust the effects of Karma) and the like. Again, that is of thirty-five
kinds, according to the intention (to gain thereby various kinds of) worldly

benefits (bhoga) and liberation. This is so as there are thirty-two kinds of
likely that the Mālinītantra is not the MV. Elsewhere, we observe this name is given to the MV,
even if here Abhinava does not mention its name with the honorific with which he practically

invariably refers to it.

See above 16/164-165.

” The four Éggs span the Six Paths, and are pervaded by the three Vidyās of the Trika goddesses.
See MV 4/19-25, quoted in TĀv ad 16/216-222 (216cd-223ab).
See above 16/166-167.
1 See above 16/179 and183.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

worldly benefits, determined by the the time of purification or otherwise of
auspicious (Karma). There are three kinds of liberation.® Multiplied by
two, they are seventy. Such are the various kinds (of the initiatory rites) in

terms of their result. (187-189)

(They are) ‘multiplied by two’, because there is a distinction between
the intention (anusandhāna) of the teacher and that of the disciple."

g āriṁ 1| 28. 1

Śodhakaśodhyavibhedād
itikartavyatvabhedataś caiṣā |

dīkṣā bahudhā bhinnā

śodhyavihīnā tu ṣaptatidhā l|| 190 II

Due to the diverse (forms of) purifying (Mantras) and (their)

objects of purification, as well as the (consequent) diversity of (the rites)
that need to be performed (itikartavya), this initiation is of many kinds.
(However) there are (only) seventy kinds (of initiation that can be

performed) without (depositing) the object of purification. (190)

{IIECACHKIEIETIIECEAEFTEITĀ

Jīleazai

āī: VACATRṬĀŪCṬÑTTHT II 232 1I

ũ: ggīoī: gGG A]a: āgJīī ̄T || 22 1|

mantrāṇāṁ sakaletarasāṅganiraṅgādibhedasaṅkalanāt |
śodhyasya ca tattvādeḥ
pañcadaśād yuktabhedaparigaṇanāt I| 191 II
bhedānāṁ parigaṇanā
na śakyate kartum ity asaṅkīrṇāḥ |

anye bhūyaḥ saṅkīrṇā bahudhā l| 192 I|

1 Aç Abhinava has said himself, there is in actual fact only one form of liberation. It is said to be
of throe kinds because there are three ways taugh here to attain i. Scc above, 16/179cd ff
1 Read iti kāryatābhedāḥ for iikāryatābhedāḥ.
1 See above, 16/170 and 183.
2) Rcad śodhakaśodhya- for śodhanaśodhya-.
2b One wonders whether these calculatons are not drawn from the 7rikasāra Abhinava has
quoted above (16/162cd-163ab) as saying that the number of purifying Mantras is scventy, and
hence the kinds of initiatons.

TANTRĀLOKA

dvitrādivibhedasadbhāvāt |

By taking into account whether the (purifying) Mantras are of the
immanent deity (sakala) or otherwise (niṣkala), with or without (their

auxiliary) limbs etc., and by counting (also) the aforementioned fifteen

etc. varieties of the object of purification, beginning with the principles etc.,
the varieties (bheda) (are so many that) it is impossible to enumerate (them
all). These are the (primary) varieties (of initiations) that are not mixed
(asaṁkīṛṇa) (with other kinds).
Moreover, (apart from them) there are many other (secondary)
mixed (saṅkīṛna) varieties (bheda) (of initiation) that combine in many

ways, because of the division into two and three etc. of the purifying

(Mantras) and (their) objects of purification etc. (191-193ab)

(Mantras are of the immanent deity (sakala) or) ‘otherwise, that is, the

transcendental deity (niṣkala). ‘The aforementioned’ (fifteen etc, taught in)
chapter ten. ‘The (primary) varieties (of initiations) that are not mixed

(asaṁkīrṇna)ī are the ones that have been mentioned. (The division into) ‘two
and three etc.’, according to whether (they are associated with) two goddesses

or three, and so on.
Surely (one may ask), what is the use of talking about (these) varieties

(of initiation) in this way? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JTī TaāT āīg āTg hdúc̄ā acJ-HHTT]
||283 II

Tdā̄ 3 ġ VaTTIITTTJTGTGGTTSTI II28% 11

bhoge sādhye yad yad
bahu kartavyaṁ tadāśrayen matimān || 193 II
kāraṇabhūyas tvaṁ kila
phalabhiyas tv āya kiṁ citram |
apavarge na tu bhedas
tenāsmin vāsanādṛḍhatvajuṣā || 194 ||

kriyā ʻtha vijñānamātre vā |

If the goal is to attain worldly benefits (bhoga), the wise man should
undertake as many rites (kartavya) as possible. What wonder is it that an

abundance of causes should serve to give rise to an abundance of fruits?
Liberation (is one only), it is certainly not various, thus (the teacher whose)
mental dispositions (vāsanā) are firm (and stable) in (executing) this

l See above 16/151-157.

2 Read bhāyaḥ saṅkīrṇā for bhūyastv akāriṇo.

Cf. below, 259.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

(procedure) may also resort to a brief (simple) rite or just knowledge alone
(vijñānamātra) (that he imparts to his disciple directly). (193cd-195ab)

However, our teachers do not accept this (view). Thus, he says (the

following).

Conjunction to Progressively Higher Principles

r ft af̃ fsāchīīṝ 1| g<u 1|

aī; 1
abhinavaguptaguruḥ punar
āha hi sati vittadeśakālādau || 195 ||
apavarge ‘pi hi visti

rṇakarmavijñānasaṁgrahaḥ kāryaḥ |
Again, Abhinavagupta’s teacher has said that if the money (is

available) and the location and time etc. (are auspicious), (the teacher)
should gather together (and apply his) extensive knowledge of ritual
action also, when (the intention is to) liberate (the disciple). (195cd196ab)
He justifies this (view) with reasoned argument.

[Etktēei-z xNiḷtḷEēcē E.

cidvṛtter vaicitryāc
cāñcalye ‘pi krameṇa sandhānāt || 196 ||

Thiṣ ṭeacher could only be Śambhunātha, who thus clearly advocated the performance of ritual,
although he also supported the paths that internalized ritual or even transcended it altogether if the
descent of the power of grace is powerful enough to do so.

Lit. ‘an extensive (or detaild) assembly / collecton of actions and knowledge’
(viṣtīrṃakarmavijñāna-saṅgrahaḥ). Rather than reading ‘karmavijñāna’ as a collective compound
– ‘action and knowledge’, it is probably better read together as ‘knowledge (vijūāna) of how to
perform ritual’. The word vijñāna can mean ‘specific knowledge of how to do something in

particularʼ. The knowledge a doctor, builder, scientist, musician and the like possesses is

‘vijñūāna’. Itīs a knowing how’ not just knowing what’, although that is entailed. Knowing about

ritual begins by knowing how to perform it. Knowing what ritual and its components, such as

mantras, are, coincides with the knowledge of the deeper reality to which ritual action is

responding. To know what ritual is, is to know what reality is. And that knowledge develops and

manifests as ritual action proceeds. Repeated ritual action turns into insight, as does yogic action.
Insight may come all at once - like a lightning flash it illumines the sacrificer, the sacrificial area,
the offerings, instruments, utensils and deities, revealing their essential nature as manifestations
shining within the mirror of consciousness.
2 Abhinava’s ‘reasoned argument’ extends from 196cd to 199ab, to conclude with a standard
reference from the Niśāṭana, already quoted several times, to state that those who have not
managed to free themselves of vikalpa during their lifetime could attain the liberation that the

freedom from vikalpa bestows after death.

TANTRĀLOKA

tasmiṁs tasmin vastuni
rūḍhir avaśyaṁ Śśivātmikā bhavati |

Although the fluctuation of consciousness is wantonly playful

(cāñcala) because of its wonderful variety (vaicitrya), by progressively
focusing (and conjoining it) (sandhāna) within each particular entity

(purified and empowered in the course of initiation), the firm (conviction)
(rūḍhi) (that arises thereby concerning its true nature)is necessarily that it

is identical with Śiva. (196cd- 197ab)

ēiEkEṭcúvEazttēiteiEriḻ:1Hez HTECICṈII

zaĩf fahcūqāat
aṝ ata ard 11 282 1

ggaṁī 3ch |

tattvam idam etadātmakam
etasmāt proddhṛto mayā śiṣyaḥ l| 197 1I
itthaṁ kramasaṁvittau
mūḍho ‘pi śivātmako bhavati |

kramikatathāvidhaśivatā-

nugrahasubhagaṁ ca daiśikaṁ paśyan || 198 II
Śiśur api tadabhedadrṛśā
bhaktibalāc cābhyupaiti śivabhāvam |
yady api vikalpavṛtter
api mokṣaṁ dīkṣayaiva dehānte || 199 ||
śāstre provāca vibhus
tathāpi dṛḍhavāsanā yuktā |
When (the teacher’s) consciousness (operates) progressively
(kramasaṁviṭti) in such a way (that ascending through the Tattvas, he
reflects that): “this Tattva is of that nature and I have extracted (my)

disciple from it”, even a dullard (mūḍha) becomes Śiva. (197cd-198ab)
The disciple also, seeing that the teacher possesses (the capacity to
bestow) the grace of such progressively (developing) Śivahood, attains
Śiva’s state by (his) perception of oneness (with his teacher) and the

strength of (his) devotion. (198cd-199ab)
Even if (dualistic) thought (vikalpavṛtti) (persists after the disciple
has been initiated, he attains) liberation by that same initiation at the time
of death. Although the pervasive Lord (Himself) has said this in the
scriptures, (he should not be complacent); it behoves (yuktā) (him to
cultivate and maintain) a firm intention (dṛdhavāsanā) (to realize his
identity with Śiva). (199cd- 200ab)

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

(The pervasive Lord (Himself) has said this) ‘in the scriptures’, that is,

in the venerable Niāṭana and elsewhere. And that has been taught extensively
(bahūktam) (there) in chapter one.

He now states that the opinion of other (teachers) here (with regard to
this) is not the same.

No Differences in the Forms of Liberation

šfī ārṁṁczgē a fatk-ī ī a asa: aā̃q |
mokṣe ‘py asti viśeṣaḥ
kriyālpabhūyas tv ajah salokādiḥ || 200 ||

iti kecit tad ayuktaṁ

savicitro bhoga eva kathitaḥ syāt |

Some say that there are differences even in (the forms of)
liberation. According to them, (there are successive degrees of liberation,)
beginning with (the liberated state of one who inhabits Śiva’s) world

(sālokya). (This gradation) depends on whether the rites (that have been

performed are) a few (and simple) or many (and extensive). (According to
us), this is not correct. (Only) worldly experience (bhoga) can be said to be

diverse, (not liberation).® (200cd-201ab)

Surely (one may ask), if this is not a sound (and reasonable idea,) which

view should one adopt? With this doubt in mind, he says:
Transgression of the Rules

qTRITTTTĪTHTTAĀS ṬTAṀTṬTRT II 3v3,|1

Thus, we know that this was a major topic of chapter one of this lost Trika Tantra. Abhinava
has already cited the Niisaṁcāra as voicing ths view above at 1/51-52. The same passage recurs
in other places also (sce note there). Cleary, this was one of Abhinava’s major authorities

conceming this matter. However, it is not possible to say how much Abhinava is quoting here

from the Nisisaṁcāra. Certainly, 199cd is inspired by the passage paraphrased in 1/51-52. As for
the rest of 196cd-200ab, it is quite probable that Abhinava is writing freehand, as Jayaratha tells
us, with reference to the doctrines taught in chapter one of the Niśisaṅcāra. The passage is

possibly a condensed rwworking of parts of that chapter, supplemented with Abhinava’s exegesis.

Thus, Jayaratha introduces it saying that Abhinava is advancing his own reasons. Moreover, the

use here of a metre rarely found in the Tantras may also be taken to be an indication that this s s0.
Finally, elaborate reworking and additions probably prevented Jayaratha from citing the passages
from the Nisisaṁcāra Abhinava has in mind. Accordingly, he limits himself to this general

remark that the matter is dealt with at length in chapter one of that Tantra.

See above, 16/194cd.

2 Concerning the so-called types of liberation, see above note to 4/230.
The prima face view confuses particular types of consequences of action with forms of
liberation.

TANTRĀLOKA

āGHT],āHĪSTT TūAFTṬGTN TḤTTṀTT |I 3°Ṝ |I

sJ̄h ṃīIṁēīṁaT Ṁa, f-ratsīramargq

rā lr-r-T- 3̄̄ Ũ̄-t JJ-jq JIR I| 33 |
saṁskāraśeṣavartanajīvitamadhye ‘ṣya samayalopādyam || 201 ||
nāyāti vighnajālaṁ
kriyābahutve mumukṣos tat |

yasmāt sabījadīkṣā-

saṁskrtapuruṣasya samayalopād ye || 202 ||
bhukte bhogān mokṣo
naiva nirbījadīkṣāyām |
iti kecin manyante
yuktaṁ tac cāpi yat smṛtaṁ śāstre || 203 |I
According to some, the failure to observe the Rules and the like in

the course of a life that continues as a remnant of (what remains to be done

after empowering) purification (saṁskāraśeṣa) (of initiation) does not

become a net of impediments (to liberation). (This is so) when one who
desires liberation (performs) an abundance of rites (including those of

expiation).

This is because a person who has been purified by an initiation
‘with seed’ (sabīja) (which requires their observance), once he has suffered
the consequences of failing to observe the Rules and the like (during his
lifetime, attains) liberation (when he dies). This is not so in the case of
initiation ‘without seed’. (According to us this) is not correct, (rather the
fact of the matter) is as stated in scripture (as follows). (201cd-203)
The reason here is that ‘it is as stated in scripture’. He says that:

qTac-ō-Tefd $hēāīēcā ldi HI |
samayollaṅghanād devi kravyādatvaṁ śataṁ samāḥ |
‘O goddess, by transgressing the pledges one becomes a carnivorous

demon for one hundred years.” (204ab) (204cd)
(He now) concludes this (point saying):

ṞṚead kriyāhahutve for kriyābahutvaṁ.
Coṇerning expiatory rites, see below, 28/408-423ab.
The same line is quoted above as 14/19ab (see note ther for details). There Abhinava tells us it
is drawn from the Ánandagahvaratantra. It is paraphrased below as 23/98cd,. Jayaratha quotes
this same line literally in his commentary there. Read ‘yuktam for yuktam. Conceing a different
version of this line and wherc it is cited, see above note to 14/18cd-19ab.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Teacher should Liberate the Disciple by Any Means

īaāī ftraṁi fJaṁārktzr̥ora+
| 3ox 1

tasmād guruśiṣyamatau
Śivabhāvanirūḍhivitaraṇasamartham || 204 ||
kramikaṁ tattvoddharaṇādi karma mokṣe ‘pi yuktam ativitatam |
Therefore, even when (the goal is) liberation, it is (nonetheless)

appropriate (yukta) to perform a very extensive (version of the) rite, that
gradually extracts (the fettered soul) from the reality levels (tattva) etc. and

is capable of instilling in the mind of the teacher and the disciple firm

stabilityin (their) Śiva nature (Śivabhāva). (204cd-205ab) (205)

However, on the contrary, there is no restriction at all of this kind for a
teacher who is well practiced (in applying his) knowledge (jñāna). Thus he

says:

TTq] #aṬ WIGTAI T̄ḶīKTTaT-]G:
T fṜISI:: |I 3ou 11

Tdaṁīa ā= &d afagīmāfšq |

yas tu sadā bhāvanayā
svabhyastajñānavān guruḥ sa śiśoḥ || 205 ||

apavargāya yathecchaṁ

yaṁ kañcid upāyam anutiṣṭhet |

However, the teacher whose knowledge (jñāna) is well-practiced by

virtue of (his) constant meditation (bhāvanā) may apply whatever means he
wishes to liberate (his) disciple. (205cd-206ab) (206)
Having explained this thus by the way, he (goes back to) talk about the
main point.

More Depositions
The Supreme Deposition (paro nyāsaḥ)

JĪN FTTṬIR KŪRTITATT: |

evaṁ Śiṣyatanau śodhyaṁ nyasyādhvānaṁ yathepsitam || 206 ||
Śodhakaṁ mantram upari nyasyet tattvānusārataḥ |

TANTRĀLOKA

Having deposited onto the body of the disciple in this way the Path

which is, according to (the teacher’s) wish, the one to be purified, he should
then deposit onto (this the appropriate) purifying Mantra, in accord with
the reality levels (tattva) (he has projected onto the body of the disciple).

(206cd-207ab) (207)

(He says that this is done) ‘in accord with the reality levels (tattva)ʼ as
a synecdoche of the path to be purified. This (verse) refers concisely to the
supreme deposition, that consists of each of (its own specific) Mantras.
He says that.

rāTĩīgah-Prcāttaī arḷ: T I| Qo9 ||

iErAEEĪĒĒiEĪ EFF-CI

dvayor mātṛkayos tattvasthityā varṇakramaḥ purā || 207 ||
kathitas taṁ tathā nyasyet tattatattvaviśuddhaye |
The series of the phonemes of the two syllabaries, and in terms of

(their corresponding) metaphysical principles (tattva), has been explained

previously. That should be deposited in that way (by the teacher onto the

disciple’s body) in order to purify each corresponding reality level (tattva).

(207cd-208ab) (208)

‘The two syllabaries' are Śabdarāśi and Mālinī.
Surely (one may ask), it is said that ‘a Path is the cause of bondage.’

Thus, (in accord with this dictum) as the Path of the Phonemes is not different
from (the other Paths), it is binding. So how is it that here it is said to be

purifying, even though it is also an object of purification? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

a: || 3o¢ |I1

fraāā aṁgŪa: |
varṇādhvā yady api proktaḥ śodhyaḥ pāśātmakas tu saḥ || 208 I|
māyīyaḥ śodhakas tv anyaḥ śivātmā paravāṅmayaḥ |
Although it is said (in the scriptures) that the Path of the Phonemes
is an object of purification and that it is a fetter (pāśa) and (belongs to the
domain of) Māyā (māyīya), (there is) another (aspect that) is purifying,

which is Śiva by nature and Supreme Speech. (208cd-209ab) (209)

See above 16/141. Abhinavagupta presents an extensive and detailed exposition of the
correspondences between the letters of these two syllabaries and the tattvas in his commentary on
the Parātrīśika, yerses 5 to 9ab.

SVṬ 10/358d. Also quoted above ad 1/34.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Surely (one may ask), what is the authority (for the view) that one and
the same thing is (both) the object of purification and the purifier? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

q_ I| 30R 1||

iāītzEEEUEGĪETāĪSIEEAEAT IIETCĀHI
uvāca sadyojyotiś ca vṛttau svāyambhuvasya tat I| 209 ||
bāḍham eko hi pāśātmā śabdo ‘nyaś ca śivātmakaḥ |
tasmāt tasyaiva varṇasya yuktā śodhakaśodhyatā || 210 |

And (so too) Sadyojyotis has said in his commentary on the

Svāyambhuva: ‘Yes indeed! the Assemblage of Sounds (śabda) (has two
natures,) one is that it is the bondage (that binds the soul) (pāśa) and the

other that is Śiva. Therefore it is reasonable (to maintain) that (one and
the) same phoneme (can be both) purifying (Śodhaka) and puriṭied
(Śodhya). (209cd-210) (210-211ab)
The Distribution of the Reality Levels Within
the Parts of Parāparā Vidyā
(The view) of our scripture is the same:

TāSTTTRTTĀTĪTT ṜCṬIJĪK TT

|1 222 1II

ÉEAEZCIIĪ IēkEz|Ā-ḵ Eecēx- TA

TTTTĪ TPTRAITGTĪ IHTGTIT |I 33 1I

By referring to the source of this quote (see following note), it is clear that here ‘śahda-’ is
short for Śabdarāśi – the Assemblage of Sounds. This Bhairava is an embodiment of the fifty

letters of the alphabet, cach of which is embodied by a Bhairava. See Appendix C, Chapter 15.
The Svāyambhuva (i.. Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha) with the commentary by Sadyojyotis has
ben edited and translated by P-S Fillozat (I991). This passage is found in the commentary on
1/6 (p. 10), where the reading is: ki ca śahdarāśer viśeṣaś cābhāditaḥ śivātmakaḥ anyataraś ca
pāśāimākaḥ. It is also quoted by Utpaladeva in his commentary on Somānanda’s Śivadrṣṭi 3/14,
where the reading is as Abhinavagupta quotes it, thus suggesting that this is probably the original

reading. It is as follows:
kiṁ Śśabdarāśer viśeṣo'sti | bāḍham ekaḥ śivātmako’nyas ca pāśātmanaḥ | yah
śivātmakaḥ sa kāmikādibhedena bhidyate yas tu pāśātmakaḥ sa vedādibhedena bhidyate l

‘Does the assemblage of phonemes (śahdarāsi) (from which the scriptures are formed)
possess a peculiarity? Yes indced! One (natur it possesses) is Śiva, and the other that of (bhinding)
fettrs. The one which is Śiva is divided up into the varous Āgamas, beginning with
Kāmikagama. That which is made of bonds is divided up into the Veda and the likc.’

TANTRĀLOKA

Taã- TT ẼĨTṀṬTTI.i
7Ġ T |I 323

R̥GTĪTIRA
īā TGṬFTHG FĪT_ || Ṝ2%

fhē’ēTGITTTY ṬGTJAT |

TḠ-ĨTTHYĪT:
āT TTĪ TTTTTT II /324 1II

Ṝ/Jdhṅy’hrṇúḥ hṛdādyaṅgāni pañca ca | l 211 I|
sṣatṭ kr̥tvā nyasya ṣaṭtriṁśannyāsaṁ kuryād dharāditaḥ |
parāparāyā vailomyād dharāyāṁ syāt padatrayam || 212 ||
tato jalād ahaṅkāre pañcāṣṭakasamāśrayāt |
padāni pañca dhīmũlapuṁrāgākhye traye trayam || 213 ||
ekaṁ tvaśuddhavitkāladvaye caikaṁ niyāmake |
kalāmāyādvaye caikaṁ padamuktamiha kramāt || 214 ||
vidyeśvarasadāśaktiśiveṣu padapañcakam |
ekonaviṁśatiḥ seyaṁ padānāṁ syātparāparā || 215 ||
And it is also said in the Mālinīvijayottara: “(To) these (adepts who
are) embraced by them’ (and so on). After having deposited the (fives)
faces, namely, Sadyojāta and the rest, and the five limbs, that is, the heart

and s0 on, six times, one should perform the deposition of the thirty-six
(principles) from Earth onwards. (211-212ab) (211cd-212)

(In this procedure, the deposition of the Vidyā of) Parāparā is in

the reverse order (vailomya). 1) Thus, there are three Parts (pada) in the

Earth (principle). 2) Then the Parts (in the group of principles ranging)

Water to the ego are five, by taking into account the five groups of eight

worlds (within them)." 3) In the three (principles) called intellect, Root

(Nature) and the individual soul, (in which is comprised also that of)
Attachment, the Parts (pada) are three. 4) There is one Part in the two
(principles) of Impure Knowledge and Time, and 5) one in that of
Necessity. 6) It is said here that there is one Part, in the Force (of limited

agency) (kalā) andMāyā (together),in due order. 7) There are five Partsin

Pure Knowledge, Īśvara, Sadāśiva, Śiva and Śakti. This Parāparā (Vidyā)

(thus consists of) nineteen Parts. (212cd-215) (213-216ab)

Read ṣaṭ kṛtvā for ṣaṭkṛtvo. Thīs is done six times because the powers, that is, Parā etc., are
three, as are their Bhairavas.

This is done by depositing parts of the mantra (pada), which consist of one or more phonemes,
that pervade a certain number of principles. The mantras of which these are parts are those of the
goddesses Parāparā, Aparā and Parā. The way this is done is explained in MV 4/18cd-25. Here
Abhinavagupta summarizes and modifies 4/19-23ab, which concerns Parāparā. As Abhinava says,
in the MV the procedure is in the forward order, that is, starting with the highest reality levels,

going down. Here Abhinava presents the Parāparā Vidyā (for which see the following note), in the
reverṛse order.

Ṭhe Vidyā of Parāparā is OM AGHORE HRĪḤ PARAMAGHORE HUṀ GHORARŪPE HAḤ

GHORAMUKHI BHĪMA BHĪṢAṆE VAMA PIBA HE RURU RARA PHAṬ HUṀ HAḤ
PHAT. See MV 3/59-60, also below 30/20-26ab and note.
See MV 4/22ab.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
As is said there (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘By means of his will, which is such, and contains within itself the
meaning of all the scriptures, (at a certain point) the Supreme Lord awakened
Aghora). Awakened by that (will) and having aroused the matrix (yoni) with
(His) powers, the Lord emitted an equal number of phonemes, with the same
sound (as those). (O (Goddess) praised by (all) the Heroes,) embraced by them,
they bestow as (their) fruits (the fulfilment of every) desire (of the very best

aḍepts, not otherwise).

In this way, one (and the same) phoneme contemplated as being Śiva by

nature is purifying (śodhaka), otherwise it is an object of purification (śodhya).

This is the purport here. (The auxiliary limbs are deposited) ‘six times’, taken
together in relation to the (three) powers and their (three) possessors for each

principle. (The deposition of the Vidyā of Parāparā) ‘is in the reverse orderʼ,

because the sequence of withdrawal is the appropriate one in the case of
initiation. Thus, the sense is that, although (a mantra) is denoted in the scriptures
in the (forward order, which is) the sequence of emanation, the deposition (in

this case) should be done in this (other) way. (Thus, it is as follows).

1) The ‘three Parts (pada) (in the Earth principle) are PHAṬ, HAḤ,
HUM, which consists of one phoneme each along with a half (a phoneme).
2) (The Partsin the group of principles ranging from Water to the ego
are) ʻfive’, namely, PHAT, RARA, RURU, HE, PIBA, which consist of one and

a half, two, two, one and two phonemes (respectively).

3) “The individual soul, (in which is comprised also that of)
Atṭachment’, means the individual soul along with the principle (called)
Attachment. (The Parts for those principles) ‘are three’, namely, VAMA,
BHĪṢANE,

BHĪME,

which

consist

of

two,

three

and

two

phonemes

(respectively).
4) ‘There is one Part (in the two principles of Impure Knowledge and
Time), namely, GHORAMUKHI, which consists of four phonemes.
5) (There is) ‘one’ (in that of Necessity), namely, HAḤ, which is one

phoneme.
6) The ‘one Part’ (in the Force (of limited agency) (kalā) and Māyā) is

GHORARŪPE, which consists of four phonemes ‘in due order°. Thus, RŪPE
is in the Force (of limited agency) (kalā) and GHORA is in Māyā.

7) ‘There are five Parts’, that is, HUM, PARAMAGHORE, HṚĪḤ,

AGHORE, OM, which thus consists of one, five, one, three and one (phoneme).
The division there is one Part in Pure Knowledge, one in Īśvara, two in

Sadāśiva, and one in Śakti and Śiva (together).

2 MV 3/26.28. layaratha only quotes MV 3/27-28ab.
1) Eath - PHAṬ HAḤ HUMṀ (throe Parts)
2) Water to the Ego - PHAṬ RARA RURU HE PIBA (five Parts)
3) The individual soul to Attchment = VAMA BHĪṢAṄNE BHĪME (three Parts)
4) Impure Knowledge and Time ~ GHORAMUKHI (one Part)
5) Necessity — HAH (one Part)

TANTRĀLOKA

He (now states) how the phonemes are divided here (in this case).

as a , at z vd gra gnī 1
ñftr gīfvīzṝz:. gftr. vr̥ī Ūaa f-rgēaēzāī 11 3zē 11

KCEEEEIEEUEIĒETZIREĒĒḺIIHṬṈCĒICṈI
JḠkcdT-ãT--aTā farR: || 32¢ 1

āāR 3-d |

fī-ṁō̃ ftīackd ã w =āā: mēzā: || 22Ṛ 11

TāTTGṬHTI āTāūqz̄ā fēīīq || 33o 1|
sārdhaṁ caikaṁ caikaṁ
sārdhaṁ dve dve śaśī dṛgatha yugmam |
trīṇi drṛgabdhiś candraḥ

Śrutiḥ śaśī pañca vidhumahaścandrāḥ || 216 ||
ekānnaviṁśatau syād
akṣarasaṁkhyā padeṣv iyaṁ devyāḥ |
haldvayayutavasucitraguparisaṁkhyātasvavarṇāyāḥ || 217 I|
mūlāntaṁ sārdhavarṇaṁ syān māyāntaṁ varṇam ekakam ḷ
śaktyantam ekam aparānyāse vidhir udīritaḥ || 218 |I
māyāntaṁ hal tataḥ śaktiparyante ṣvara ucyate |
niṣkale śivatattve vai paro nyāsaḥ paroḍditaḥ || 219 ||
parāparāpadāny eva hy aghoryādyaṣṭakadvaye |
mantrās tadanusāreṇa tattveṣv etad dvayaṁ kṣipet || 220 ||

The number of phonemes contained in the nineteen Parts of the

Goddess (Parāparā) are, respectively, 1) one and a half, 2) one, 3) one, 4)
one and a half, 5) two, 6) two, 7) one, 8) two, 9) two, 10) three, 11) two, 12)
four, 13) one, 14) four, 15) one, 16) five, 17) one, 18) three (maha), and 19)

one, thus making thirty-eight, along with two half phonemes without a
vowel. (216-217) (216cd-218ab)

6) Māyā and the Force (of limited agency) (kalā) — GHORARUŪPE (one part)
B
7) Purc Knowledge - HUM (one Part), Īśvara
PARAMAGHORE (one Part), Sadāśiva – HṚĪḤ
AGHORE (two Parts), Śakti and Śiva (together) — OM (one Part)

The Parāpar Vidyā is rccited here in the reverse order (vailomyāi) (16/213a (2120)).
1) PHAT 2) HAḤ 3) HUṀ 4) PHAṬ 5) RARA 6) RURU 7) HE 8) PIBA 9) VAMA 10)
BHĪṢAṆE 11) BHĪMA 12) GHORAMUKHI 13) HAḤ 14) GHORARŪPĒ 15) HUṀ 16)
PARAMAGHORE 17) HṚĪḤ 18) AGHORE 19) OM
The two half phonemes without a vowel are the T at the end of th two PHAT;.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

The procedure for the deposition (of the goddess) Aparā (HRĪḤ

HŪM PHAṬ) is said to be one phoneme and a half (for the principles) up
to the Root (Nature) (PHAT), there is a single phoneme (HRĪḤ) (for the
principles from there) up to Māyā, and one (HŪṀ) (for the remaining

principles) ending with Śakti.” (218) (218cd-219ab)

The deposition of the (goddess) Parā (SAUḤ) is said to consist of
(a half-phoneme which is a consonant) without a vowel (hal), (for the
principles beginning with Earth and) ending at Māyā (S), after which it is
said that a vowel (AU) (covers the principles from there) up to Śakti, and
the supreme (vowel) (H) is within the (transcendent) undifferentiated

(niṣkala) Śiva principle. (219) (219cd-220ab)
The mantras of the two groups of eight beginning with Aghorī are

the same as the Parts of Parāparā, and so both these should be placed

within the principles, in accord with that. (220) (220cd-221ab)

T=rīrd aāḶ aā̄- JJS JIJ aISI I| 332 ||

ftrarṝ str̥̄razaṁāṁīġ ārīfēt 1| 3zz 1

avyaktāntaṁ svare nyasyaṁ śeṣaṁ śeṣeṣu yojayet || 221 |

bījāni sarvatattveṣu vyāptṛtvena prakalpayet |
pinḍānāṁ bījavannyāsamanye tu pratipedire || 222 ||

(AII the principles) up to Nature should be deposited into the
vowel of any of the phonemes of a Piṇḍa (mantra formed from groups of

phonemes). In accord with (their) differing numbers of phonemes, the

remaining (set of principles from the individual soul onwards) should be
conjoined within the remaining (phonemes). (221) (221cd-222ab)

Seed-syllable mantras should be conceived to be pervading all (their
corresponding) principles. Others maintain that Piṇḍa (mantras formed

from groups of phonemes) should be deposited in the same way as seedsyllable (mantras formed from a single syllable) (bya). (222) (222cd-223ab)

See MV 4/24 and below, 30/26cd.
218 (218cd-219ab) is bascd on MV 4/24.
HRĪḤ-– Earth to Nature (Prakṛti
HŪṀ -– Individual Soul to Māyā
PHATṬ – Pur prṇciple up to Śakt
Conceming the Vidyā of Par (SAUḤ), see MV 4/25, above 3/168cd-175ab (168-174),
4/181cd-189ab, 5/143-145 (142-144) and below 30/27-28ab.
Verse 16/219 (219cd-220ab) is based on MV 4/25.
3 Read nyasyaṁ for nyasya.
Nine in the casc of Navātmā, etc. Read varṇasaṁkhyāvībhedataḥ for varṇasaṁkhyā
vibhedataḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The number) ‘three (maha)’ is denoted by the three, Moon, Sun and

Fire. ‘Along with two half-phonemes without a vowel’. The meaning is, along

with two letters, T without a vowel (of PHAT, of which there are two,) in
addition to the thirty-eight. This is the meaning. As is said (in the
Mālinīvijayottara);
‘Within niṣkala (transcendental, undifferentiated) (Śiva), there is one

pada consisting of one phoneme (OM). One should know that there are two in

sakala (immanent, differentiated) (Śiva) – one (part) with three syllables
(AGHORE) and one with one (HRĪḤ). There are two (padas) in the two
(principles of Iśvara and Pure Knowledge, one) of five (syllables)
(PARAMAGHORE), and (one of) one (HUM). There are two (padas) of four
syllables (GHORARŪPE) and one (HAH) in the three (principles) considered to
be Māyā etc. (limited agency and knowledge). There is one (pada) of four
syllables (GHORAMUKHI) considered to be in the two (principles of) Time
(and Necessity). There is one (pada) with two syllables (BHIMA) in (the
principle of) Attachment. One (pada) of three syllables (BHĪṢAṆE) is
considered to be in Nature. There is one pada of two syllables (VAMA) in the
intellect, which is considered to be pervading the group of eight deities.Then
there are four (padas) of the Vidyā, two (PIBA), one (HE), two (RURU), two
(RARA), and a syllable and a half (PHAT) as the fifth (in the principles from
Nature to Water), which pervade the five groups of eight worlds (respectively).
There are three (padas) of one (HUṀ), one (HAḤ) and one and a half syllables

(PHAT) in the earth (principle).

(There is one phoneme and a half for the principles) ‘up to the Root’,
that is, up to Nature (PHAT). The meaning is that it pervades two Eggs. ‘There
is a single phonemeʼ (for the principles from there up to Māyā), which is the
seed syllable of Māyā (HRIḤ). There is ‘one’ (for the remaining principles

ending with Śakti,) and that has four energies (catuṣkala) (HŪM). (The half

phoneme which is) ‘(a consonant) without a vowel (haḹ) is (in this case) is the

Seed of Nectar (S). In this way, ‘the vowel’ is the letter AU. ‘Supremeʼ is
emission (visarga) (H). That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘Two Eggs (that extend up to Nature) are pervaded by a syllable and a

half (PHAT), and the two others by two syllables (HŪM and HRIH). Such, in
reverse, is (the extent of) the pervasion of Aparā.

The three Eggs (that extend up to the end of Māyā) are pervaded by the

letter S, and the fourth one by the Trident (AU), and that which is beyond all, by
emission (H). (This) is considered to be the pervasion of Parā.

3 ṂV 4/19abis quoted in TĀv ad 11/89.
This are probably the group of eight Bhairavas - aghorāṣṭaka or its feminine counterpart.
MV 4/19-23ab.
The syllable HUṀ consists of four energies or parts (catuṣkala), one for each of the pure
principles up to and including Śakti. Read ekakaṁ varṇam iti māyāhījam | ekam iti caiuṣkalam |
for ekakaṁ varṇam iĩi catuṣkalam | ekam iti māyābījam |
MV 4/24-25. The first quarter of the second verse (i.. MV 425) is quoted above in TĀy ad
3/166 (165cd-166ab), the second quarter is quoted in TĀv ad 3/104cd-105ab. Al of verse 25 is
quoted in TĀv ad 4/187cd-188ab and ad 1 1/89.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

(The mantras of the two groups of eight beginning with Aghorī should

be placed in the principles) ‘in accord with that’ means that (this should be

done) in accord with the (extent of the) pervasion of the aforementioned Parts of
Parāparā. That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara, where we read):

‘Eight very powerful Yoginīs are bom from the body of Parāparā.

They should be known to be seven, which consist, in due order, of five, six,

five, four, two, three and two syllables, and one of eleven syllables, along

with two consonants without vowels (ardhārṇa).’

‘The phonemes of a Pinḍa (mantra)ʼ, for example Navātman
(HRKṢMLVYŪṀ), the first (consonants of which) number nine and more.
The ‘vowel’ (in that example) is the letter Ū. ‘The remaining’ (set of

principles) from the individual soul onwards (should be conjoined) ‘within the
remaining (phonemes), that is, (in this case,) Y and the rest. ‘Seed-syllable

mantrasʼ (bīja) begin with (only) one phoneme and (so) differ from Piṇḍas and

Parts (of Mantras that consist of more than one). (Others maintain that Pinḍa
(mantras) should be deposited) ‘in the same way as seed-syllable (mantras)
(byja)’. The meaning is that (these people maintain) that piṇḍa (mantras) should
be deposited as pervading each principle (one by one, as do the seed-syllable
mantras).

The Projection of the Purifying Mantras

STi als% ¥īaā

I aqgīq fēad |

d JTT fṝgea |1 3322 1
akṛte vā ʻtha śodhyasya nyāse vastubalāt sthiteḥ |

Śodhakanyāsamātreṇa sarvaṁ śodhyaṁ viśudhyati | 223 1|

(In some cases,) even though the object of purification has not been
deposited (on the disciple’s body), all that needs to be purified is completely
" MV. 3/59-60ab. Although Jayaratha’s citation here of the MV is cogent, it is not Abhinava’s

source. The way he breaks up the Vidyāis not the same.

These are the seven parts of the Vidyā of Parāparā; divided up in this way they are: 1) OṀ

AGHORE HRĪḤ (5) 2) PARAMAGHORE HUṀ (6) 3) GHORARŪPE HAḤ (5) 4)
GHORAMUKHI (4) 5) BHĪMA (2) BHĪṢAṆE (3) 7) VAMA PIBA HE RURU RARA PHATṬ

HUṀ HAḤ PHAT (II + 2).

The word ‘ardhārṇa’ literally means ‘half a phoneme’. This is a consonant with a vowel. These
are the two letters T of the two PHATṬ;.
Navātman is the Mantra of Ratiśekhara, the Bhairava of Aparā. Navātman is also the Mantra of
Svacchandabhairava and the Bhairava of the goddess Kubjikā.
There are several variants of this

important syllabic mantra. The form taught in MV 8/21cd-24ab is RHIRKṢMLVYŪM. As far as

we know this is the basic, or at least most common, form in the Trika Tantras. The one we find in
the Svacchandatantra, the Kubjikā and Śrīvidyā Tantras is the most common form in general,

namely: HSKṢMLVRYŪṀ. It is the mantric body of Svacchandabhairava, an iconic form of
which is identified as Navātmā Bhairava. This Bhairava is the consort of the goddess Kubjikā. It

is the Bhairava upon which Aparā sits. Kubjikā’s root Vidyā is a variation of Parāparā Vidyā.

l Emend ukāre to ūkāre.

TANTRĀLOKA

purified just by depositing the purifying (mantras) alone, by virtue of the
power of what it is (vastubala) (that is, the power of Mantra). (223)

(223cd-224ab)

What is the (scriptural) authority (that supports the view) here that, even
if the object of purification has not been deposited, that which is to be purified is
purified by just depositing the purifying (mantra) alone? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

lUẽré EI-ṬEGEIĀTIErIḤ

TTŪĪ -JTGHHT
JTJf: TSTAT ||ṜN¥ |I
śrīmanmṛtyuñjayādau ca kathitaṁ parameṣṭhinā |
adhunā nyāsamātreṇa bhiūtaśuddhiḥ prajāyate || 224 ||
And (the same) is said by the Supreme Lord in the venerable
Mṛtyuṁjaya for example (where we read): ‘Now, the gross elements are

purified (bhūtaśuddhi) by just the deposition (of mantra) alone.” (224)
(224cd-225ab)
Surely, (one may object that that) is taught here in order to purify the
body. So how does that relate here (to what we are discussing)? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

The Deposition of Parāparā and the other Two Goddesses

šcggāTTqaṁm] axqa: |
STṚIṬRTĪT JBJT ṬÁĒTT- |I XRU II

3TThc-̄ī aīaīTgī ā̄ḥ -7T- TṬRIN |

Tīrk: ṇhTvũYIRTTĀTTÃ TÑ |

[–TI-TT-<TTTĪSRIṜRTGTGRTTTgNTRTTTTĪ

TṬJHT ā=T ṀTRIG ṜTS TGTA |I 3¢ II

JTT. TTfiē aIṛq hā̄āTHāGT-ĀTT |

ŠIGY BIGTH TaTIR ṬÑHSTJTa |

ITE CI

: See above 16/98, where Abhinava says that the Path is purified by the power of the purifying
mantra alone. Thus, it is clear that ‘vastubala’ here means the power of mantra. See also above,
16/162-163ab.

T have not been able to trace this reference in the edited text of the Netratantra.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

dehaśuddhyartham apy etat tulyam etena vastutaḥ |
anyaprakaraṇoktaṁ yad yuktaṁ prakaraṇāntare || 225 ||
jñāpakatvena sākṣād vā tat kiṁ nānyatra gṛhyate |
mālinīmātṛkāṅgasya nyāso yo ‘rcāvidhau purā || 226 ||
proktaḥ kevalasaṁśoddhrmantranyāse sa eva tu |
tripadī dvayor dvayoḥ syāt
pratyekam athāṣṭasu śrutipadāni || 227 |I
dikcandracandrarasaravi

aṁgulamāne devyā
aṣṭādaśa vaibhavena padam anyat || 228 ||
aparaṁ mānam idaṁ syāt
kevalaśodhakam anunyāse |
turyapadāt padaṣaṭke
mānadvitayaṁ parāparaparākhyam || 229 ||

dvādaśakaṁ dvādaśakaṁ

tattvopari pūrvavat tv anyat |

Although that (is taught there) in order to purify the body, (even so,
that deposition) is in actual fact (basically) the same as this (kind of
deposition that we are concerned with here). A thing said in a (particular)
context (may well be) sound in a different context as suggesting (something
else,) or even directly (normative). So why should that not be accepted
elsewhere (in a different context)? (225-226ab) (225cd-226)

When purifying Mantras alone are deposited, the deposition of the
limbs (i.e. phonemes) of Mātṛkā and the Mālinī is the same as in the
procedure explained previously for the worship (of the deity). (226cd-

227ab) (227)

There are three Parts on each of the first pairs of fingers, and four
Parts on each (of the following) eight. There are eleven Parts, ten, one, one,
six, twelve, five, five, two, two, one, and one finger measures, respectively.
Counting them (all together,) there are eighteen. The other (remaining
nineteenth) Part (is not counted separately,) because of its pervasive
(presence). This is the inferior measure of the goddess (Parāparā), when
only the purifying mantra is deposited. (227cd-229ab) (228-229)

See above, 16/141 and also 16/108.
:õ he nineteen Parts of the mantra are the same as those presented above in 16/213ab-215 (213216ab) as those of Parāparā. In this deposition, these Parts ar rclated to the cighty-four-finger
space which constitutes the inferior measure of the body (sce above 16/99-100). In the reverse
order, as before (see above, 16/212cd-213ab (213), 1-3), the first thrcc Parts take up a space of six
fingers, 4-7) the following four, thirty-two fingers, and the remaining eleven occupy a space of 8)
ten, 9) one, 10) one, 11) six, 12) twelve, 13) five, 4) fiv, 15) two, 16) two, 17) one, and 18) one
finger, respectively
(6 + 32 + 10+ 1 + 1 + 6 + 12 + 5 + 5 + 2 + 2 + 1 + 1 = 84). Cf. below,
16/233cd-225 (234-226ab).
1) PHAṬ 2) HAḤ + 3) HUMṀ = 6 fingers' space
4) PHAṬ (+ 2 (+2)) 5) RARA (+ 2 (+2)) 6) RURU (+2 (+ 2))
7) HE (+2 (+2)) = 2 (+ 8 + 8) fingers space
8) PIBA (+2 (+2)) = 10 (+ 2 + 2) fingers space
9) VAMA (+-2 (+ 2)) = 1 (+ 2 + 2) finger' space
10) BHĪṢAṆE BHĪMA = 1 finger’s spacc

TANTRĀLOKA

The other two measures (of the body), which are called
(respectively) middling (parāpara) and supreme (para), (are formed) by
adding to (the first group of) six parts, beginning with the fourth part,
twelve (finger spaces, and then again another) twelve, as was done
previously above for the principles. (229cd-230ab) (228-230)
(That deposition) is ‘in actual fact’ (basically the same as this kind of

deposition,) because it is the same as the deposition which consists of (both) the

object of purification and the purifier. (A thing said in a particular context may

well also be sound in a different one) ‘directly’, because it is normative

(vidhāyaka) (of what should be done). ‘So why should that not be accepted
elsewhere (in a different context)?’; rather it is indeed accepted. This is the
meaning. ‘The limbs’ (of Mātṛkā and Mālinī, i.e. the phonemes,) are their
essential nature. This is the meaning. “(When purifying Mantras) ‘alone’ (are
deposited), that is, by omitting (the deposition of) the object of purification.
(This) deposition with the sequence of phonemes etc. (takes place) in another
manner than (the one) one taught before with regards to its combination with the
object of purification. ‘It is the same’, that is, the deposition (is done in) that
(same) sequence.

‘There are three Partsʼ in the sequence of withdrawal (that is, in the
reverse order), (and they are) ‘on each of the first pairs of fingers’. Thus, there
are six fingers. (There are) ‘four Parts’ (on each of the following) ‘eight’
fingers. Thus, there are thirty-two (Parts). There are ‘eighteen’ Parts. (The
nineteenth Part is not counted separately) ‘because of its pervasive
(presence)ʼ; that is because it is (the Part that) pervades (all the others). As is

said (in the Mālinīvijayottara): ʻThe other part is pervasive . . .’. ‘Omly’ (the
purifying mantra is deposited) by omitting (the deposition of) the object of
purification. (There are) ‘six partsʼ, four of which (extend for) eight fingers,
(i.e. 4) PHAṬ 5) RARA 6) RURU 7) HE), one for ten fingers (i.e. 8) PIBA) and
one for one finger (i.e. 9) VAMA). (As was done previously) ‘above’. Thus,
here (in this case), there is an extra two fingers (space) for each Part. This is the
meaning.

11) GHORAMUKHI = 6 fingers’ space
space
fingers space
14) HUMṀ = 2 fingers' space

15) PARAMAGHORE = 2 fingersʼ space

16) HṚĪḤ = 2 fingers' space
17) AGHORE
= 1 fingersʼ space
18) OṀ = I fingersʼ space

The six Parts, to which are added two or four finger spaces each, are thus the fourth, the fifth,

the sixth and the seventh of eight fingers each, the eighth of ten digits, and the ninth of one finger.

Jayaratha kindly confirms this for us. The inferior (apara) deposition extends, as before (see
above, 16/100-100ab), for 84 fingers, from the feet to the forehead. The middle one (parāpara)
extends for 96 fingers, from the feet up to the Cavity of Brahmā, and the supreme one for 108

fingers, up to the End of the Twelve.

The calculations here in 227cd-230ab (228-230) may well be Abhinava’s own. He

simply applies the same procedures and proportions to the parts of Parāparā Vidyā as are aplied
to Mātṛkā and the Mālinī, concemning which, see above, 16/141 and also 16/108.
T MV 6/24a.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Surely (one may ask), the deposition of the Parts was previously taught
in accord with the sequence of principles. So how is it that here now it is
defined in another way? With this doubt in mind, he says:

hTGYIHGĒTT-ĀTRITTTTTĪ
WTGTR: |I/330 |1

kevalaśodhakamantra-

nyāsābhiprāyato mahādevaḥ || 230 ||
tattvakramoditam api

nyāsaṁ punar āha tadviruddham api ca |
Although the (deposition of) the principles (to be purified) has

(already) been taught in due order, the Great God taught the deposition (of
the nineteen Parts) again, although it is the reverse of it, with the intention
(of teaching) the deposition of the purifying Mantra alone. (230cd-231ab)
(231)
Although the deposition of the thirty-six principles that are the objects
of purification was taught in due order, that is, as the prior one, ‘the Great
Godʼ ‘taught the deposition’ of the nineteen Parts (of the Vidyā of Parāparā)

‘again, although it is contrary to it’, that is, as other than that also, ‘with the

intention (of teaching) the deposition of the purifying Mantra’. This is the
meaning.
He quotes that (scripture).

frēē vañhīṝ aīañtftr g īēṝa 11 332 1
ṢGTTfETT TTTĪTṢṀ-ĀṬ 3CĪṜT: |

fy; 1|
niṣkale padam ekārṇaṁ yāvat trīṇi tu pārthive || 231 II
ityādinā tattvagatakramanyāsa udīritaḥ |
punaś ca mālinītantre vargavidyāvibhedataḥ || 232 ||
dvidhā padānīty uktvākhyan nyāsam anyādṛśaṁ vibhuḥ |

The deposition of the sequence relating to (the purification of) the

metaphysical principles (tattva) has been taught (in the Maālinīvijayottara, in
the verses) that begins with ‘there is one Part of one phoneme within
transcendental (niṣkala) (Śiva)ʼ, and ending with ‘there are three (parts of

the mantra) in the Earth (principle)ʼ. The All-Pervasive Lord has taught

another kind of deposition, having said again in the Mālinītantra that ‘the
MV 4/19ab-23cd quoted above in TĀv ad 16/216-222 (216cd-223ab). See above, 16/213 ff.

TANTRĀLOKA

parts are of two kinds, according to (whether they are) divided into classes

(varga) and the Vidyās.’ (231cd-233ab) (232-233)

(One deposition) ‘has been taught’ in chapter four (of the
Mālinīvijayottara), and that has been explained (with reference to the scripture)

before. (The Lord has taught another kind of deposition,) ‘having said’ (how
it should be done,) in chapter six. As is said there:

‘The Parts (of Mantra) here (in this case) are of two kinds, according to

(whether they are) divided” into classes (varga) or Vidyās. Now listen to how
they pervade (the spaces they occupy,) like their (corresponding) Mantras.’
‘Another kind’ (of deposition), which is the reverse of the deposition

of the sequence of principles. This is the meaning.
He says that.

ṁ̄ Ç Ũr-̄̃_ || 333 1|

GaaāTTṀ £ ú ī TGTṬGHTT:
TT II 33 1I
RRJTGH-TT

ekaikaṁ dvyaṁgulaṁ jñeyaṁ tatra pūrvaṁ padatrayam || 233 I|
aṣṭāṁgulāni catvāri daśāṁgulam ataḥ param |

dvyaṁgulē” dve pade cānye ṣaḍaṁgulam ataḥ param || 234 ||

dvādaśāṁgulam anyac ca dve ‘nye pañcāṁgule pṛthak |
padadvayaṁ catuṣparva tathānye dve dviparvaṇī || 235 ||

One should know that the first three parts (of mantras) there
(extend) for two finger(-spaces) each, four for eight fingers” (each), (the
eighth which is) the next after that, ten fingers, the (next) two parts for two
fingers (one each), the next for six fingers, another for twelve, then two

MV 6/18cd.MV 6/18d reads vidyāvibhedatā for vidyāvibhedatah. The division into thc thrce
Vidyās (Parāparā, Aparā and Parā) has been explained above, in 16/21 cd-212ab (212) ff. Thus, it
seems that the division into ‘classes’ is what is taught here. In the following three verses,
Abhiṅavagupta’s paraphrases MV 6/19cd-23, esscntially rcpcatig what he has alrcady said in
16/226cd-227ab (227) ff.
10 See above, 16/213ab (213cd) f
1 ṂV 6/18d rads vidyāvibhedatā for vidyāvibhedataḥ,
2”2MV 6/18cd-19ab.
MV dyyaṁgulaṁ,
MV 621b rcads tatah ~ ‘thus’ for tatra-- Śtherc’.
’ MV 622a reads saptāṅgulāni 'seven fingers' for aytāṅgulāni ‘cight fingers.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

others for five each, two parts for four fingers (two each), and (finally) the

other two, for two fingers (one each).”” (233cd-235) (234-236ab)

(The first) ‘three parts (of mantra extend) for two finger(-spaces)
eachʼ, that is, six finger(-spaces all together). Each of one (of the four following
Parts) should be related here (in this case) also to ‘eight fingers’ (space. Thus,
making a space of thirty-two fingers altogether). ‘The (next) two parts
(extend) for two fingers’, which means that there is one finger(-space) for each

Part. (Another two of five) ‘eachī means that each one (extends for a space of)

five fingers. Otherwise, (if this statement is understood differently,) each one

would (extend for) two and a half fingers. (There are) ‘two Parts for four
fingersʼ, because each one (extends for) two. ((Finally, the last two extend) ‘for
two fingersʼ, which means each (extends) for one finger(-space).”
He concludes this (teaching saying):

TTTGAAT:
ḤĪITāT aIT ṜG=T |
evaṁ parāparādevyāḥ svatantro nyāsa ucyate |

Such is said to be the independent deposition of the Goddess

Parāparā.”” (236ab) (236cd)

(This deposition is) ‘independent’, because it is not dependent on the
deposition of the principles and the like. What is meant by its ‘dependence’ (in
this context) is that its deposition (is done) once the object of purification, that
is, the principles and the rest, has been deposited. Here (in this case), its

deposition is done independently by avoiding that. Thus, this is part (bhāga) of

its field (of application). As was said with this intended (sense in mind): ‘this is

the inferior measure of the goddess (Parāparā), when only the purifying mantra

is deposited.

Thus, the deposition taught (here) as being of two kinds, because (it can

either be) dependent on the object of purification or independent (of it) (is

deposited on the body of the disciple as follows).

Reading ‘one, one and two finger (spaces) (instead of ‘two finger(-

spaces) eachʼ), then the first three Parts (of Mantra) (extend for) four finger-

7 TĀ 16/233ab-235ab (233cd-235) = MV 6/21cd-23. MV 6/23d reads dve ‘pūrve dve pṛthak
tataḥ – ‘the last two are then two, (one each) separately’ for tathānye dve dvi parvaṇī–- ‘the other

two, for two fingers (one each).’
Basically, the configuration of the Parts (pada) related to the finger spaces of the body

is the same as presented above in 16/227cd-229ab (228-229) (see note there). The only difference

is that in the previous instance, the first three Parts of two fingers each are taken together as

covering six finger spaces, and the following four Parts that occupy of eight fingers each are taken
together as being thirty-two. Thus, the configuration of the previous one is 6 (2 x 3) + 32 (i.e. 4 x

8)+ 10 + 1 + 1 + 6 + 122 + 5 + 5 + 2 + 2 + 1 + 1 = 84 fingers
in 13 divisions.
This one is

2 + 2 + 2 + 8 + 8 + 8 + 8 + 10 + ḻ +

divisions.

+ 6 + 12 + 5 + 5 + 2 + 2 + 1 + 1 = 84 fingers in 15

77 Ṣee the previous note.
Cf. above, 16/227cd-229ab (228-229) and note.
1° Above, 16/229ab (229cd).

TANTRĀLOKA

spaces (each), (the next) four for eight fingers (each), (the eighth, which is) the
next after that, ten fingers. (Then each of (the following) two Parts, two fingers,
and another (after that), six fingers. (Then,) together with the previous (spaces,
there are another) twelve fingers. (The text continues, ‘then two others for five
each’). Alḻthough (the next) two Parts make ten finger(-spaces together),

(according to this view,) one is three fingers, the other is seven fingers. Again,
(while we understand that the following two Parts extend for four fingers, that

is, two for each Part, according to this other view,) the two Parts are of two

kinds, one is four fingers, and (the other) two.

Defining the (spaces corresponding to the Parts) in this and similar ways
by following (the sequential order of what) precedes and follows, by mixing
together both views and by reversing (or mixing up) the order of the finger-

spaces in the course of (this explanation,) results in the following defects. (To
begin with,) one abandons the reading of the wise, (moreover,) it is hard to

figure it out, (one falls in a) useless repetition (of what was said before), and one
is at odds with the venerable teacher’s explanation.
Surely (one may ask), why has the deposition of the (other) two
goddesses not been taught? With this doubt in mind, he says:

fkēīz ftrzī aaīqcāa
āīsīāq 1| 335 1|
šfī aĩttã āraa yyesaṁ akvaq |
vidyādvayaṁ śiṣyatanau vyāptṛtvenaiva yojayet || 236 I
iti darśayituṁ nāsya pr̥thaṁ nyāsaṁ nyarūpayat |

The other two vidyās” should by conjoined to the body of the

disciple, as (the consciousness that) pervades (it). In order to teach this, (the
Lord) has not explained (their) deposition separately. (236cd-237ab) (237)

Surely (one may ask), what is the use of (having) two kinds of
deposition of the purifying (Mantra)? Taking this doubt into consideration, he
says that there is no difference in the result, this (variety) is just the wonderful
diversity of (this) modality of practice alone (prakriyāmātra).

aT āGRTĀTT: |I 33 11

evaṁ śodhakamantrasya nyāse tadraśmiyogataḥ || 237 ||

According to this version, which Jayaratha notes and rcjects, the spatial divisions of the body
corresponding to the Parts of the Parāparā Vidyā are as follows: 4 + 4 + 4 + 2 + 2 [8 + 8 + 8 + 8 +
10] + 2 + 2 + 6 + 12 + 3 + 7 + 4 + 2 = 96 fingers in 18 divisons. The Vidyā of Parāparā consists
of nineteen Parts. However, the Parts deployed ar 18, as the nineteenth is pervasive.
. The orders of Aparā and Parā. See above, 218ab (218cd), 217cd (218ab). Scc also 232c-233ab
(233) and note.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

pāśajālaṁ vilīyeta taddhyānabalato guroḥ |
śodhyatattve samastānāṁ yonīnāṁ tulyakālataḥ || 238 ||
jananād bhogataḥ karmakṣaye syād apavṛktatā |
When the purifying mantra is deposited in this way, the net of (the

disciple’s) fetters dissolves away by union (yoga) with its (purifying) rays

(brought about) by the might of the teacher’s visualization of

it.™ (Thus

the disciple) is made to take birth simultaneously in all the wombs within
the reality to be purified. By thus experiencing (them all), when his Karma
is exhausted, (he attains) liberation. (237cd-239ab) (238-239)

‘The net of fettersʼ is the Six Paths, that is to say, that has not been

deposited. (The word) ‘tartva’ (‘reality principle’) is a synecdoche (that stands

for all the Path); thus, (the sense is that this) also (takes place) within (all) the

six Paths, and so the deposition accomplishes its purpose.

Surely (one may ask), as the individual soul is present in this way in
many bodies at once, and is moreover the experiencing subjectivity of the

consequences of Karma (bhoktṛ) (present in each body), as this is so, do (the

many individual embodied perceivers that are bom in this way) have a
perception of one another that connects them together (anusamdhāna), or not?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

Initiation Aided by Cognitive Yoga

ũ̄ĩĩ T 1 33 11

dehais tāvadbhir asyāṇoś citraṁ bhoktur api sphuṭam || 239 ||
mano ‘nusandhir no viśvasaṁyogapravibhāgavat|

The individual soul possesses many bodies, that are such, but

although it is the subject who experiences the consequences (of its Karma)

(bhoktṛ) by means of them, it does not have a clear mental perception that

connects it together (mano ‘nusandhi). (This is not surprising. Indeed, it is

just) as happens (with the common experience of) the conjunction and
separation with all things. (239cd-240ab) (240)
Here (according to us), the ‘individual soul’ is the contracted Self. Its

many ‘bodies are such’, that is, dependent (for their existence) on the power of

The six paths, in which case, they are not previously purified.
See MrT, Kriyāpāda, 3/104b, 105a; SVT, 4/108b.
Rcad tena ṣaḍadhvany api nyāsaś cetyārthasiddhaḥ for tena ṣaḍadhvany api nyāsaś
cetyārthasiddhaḥ. By purifying, i.. depositing the mantras of one of the Paths, all the Paths are
purified. So it doesn’t matter whether the depositions and related procedures taught here centre on

the purification of the Tattvas or not.
Even if the All is in reality dissolved and emitted each instant by the Lord, the particulars are

not cognizant of this process.

TANTRĀLOKA

Mantras (mantrabala). They all exist simultaneously, each fashioned by the
variety of its own particular Karma, and so although (the one individual soul)
experiences the consequences (of all its Karma thereby), it does not have a clear
mental perception of (this) ‘diversityʼ, that is, pluriform (experience,) that
connects it together. The meaning is that he has no knowledge (jñāna) that may
arise of the sort “I am (the same one) who is experiencing in another body as I
am in this one”. An example (of the same ignorance is found) here itself (in

common experience). It is ‘as happens with (with the common experience of)

the conjunction and separation with all thingsʼ. The Self is (all) pervasive,

and so there is no perception of a connection (with it) in the unions and
separations (that take place) ‘with all thingsʼ, that is, the mass of (objective)
phenomena (bhāvavrata), such that (it experiences that) “I am conjoined with
this and am separate from this (other thing) ”. Just as that is so (in everyday
experience), so it is in this case also.
Surely (one may object that) this example is not proved (to be correct),
for (the Self is all) pervasive and so there should be (some) perception there (in
that case) also that connects (the individual perceiver and objectivity together)
(anusandhi). With this doubt in mind, he says:

ŪT 11 Q%o 1|

niyatyā manaso dehamātre vṛttis tataḥ param || 240 |
nānuṣandhā yataḥ saikasvāntayuktākṣakalpitā |
The activity of the mind (manas) necessarily takes place only in the
body, not beyond it, for the perception that conjoins (sensations)
(anusandhā) is mentally conceived (kalpitā)™ by means of the one organ of

sense that is inwardly conjoined with its own (mind and outwardly with its
own object). (240cd-241ab) (241)

‘The activity of the mind (manas)’ is constrained by the power of

necessity (which determines the nature and function of everything), and so (the

mental activity) that connects together perceptions (anusandhāna) (necessarily)
takes place within the body alone. Certainly not elsewhere, for it is its activity.
As (multiple) perceptions (jñāna) do not arise simultaneously, (this activity) is
‘conceived’ by an organ of sense, that is, is dependent on it. (That sense organ)
is ‘one’ amongst (the senses of) sight and the rest, and ‘is inwardly conjoined
with its own (mind), and (outwardly with) its own (object)ʼ, in accord with
principle that ‘the Self is conjoined with the mind, the mind with organ of sense,

and the organ of sense with the object.

Perception (jñāna) is the fixed (predetermined) activity of the senses.
How is it possible for the mind to perceive (what is taking place) within other

See above, 9/236, 238. Mental conception (kalpanā) is the function and activity of the internal
senscs.
̄ Ṇyāyasūtrabhāṣya ad 1//4.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

bodies, even if it were to transgress that (necessary constraint on the function of
the senses)? Thus, he says:

rxīaf Ḥ āTTHIHT̄c̄T TT dq_ II Ṝx2

1II

pradeśavṛtti ca jñānam ātmanas tatra tatra tat || 241 |
bhogyajñānaṁ nānyadeheṣv anusandhānam arhati |

One’s own (sensory) perception (jñāna) is an activity that takes
place in a particular location, and is the perception of the object

(bhogyajñāna) here and there (in its own location). It cannot be the

perception that conjoins (and ascertains sensory activity) (anusandhāna)
within other bodies. (241cd-242ab) (242)

‘The perception of the object’ is the (sensorial) awareness (vedana)
which has ‘blue’ and ‘pleasure’ and the like as its field (of operation). This is
the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), if that is so, how can the perception that yogis
possess arise, which has as its field (of operation) entities beyond the senses?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

3qar q TTTT-āā GJTTT JT_ II Ṝ3%R II

arPP-aTaīē;

yadā tu manasas tasya dehavṛtter api dhruvam || 242 ||
yogamantrakriyādeḥ syād vaimalyaṁ tadvidā tadā |

Even though its activity is corporeal, if the mind possesses the

purity (and clarity) brought about by (the practice of) yoga, mantras, and
ritual etc., then it certainly has the knowledge of that (which is beyond the
senses). (242cd-243ab) (243)
Even though ‘its’ activity depends on the outer senses, ‘it certainly has
the knowledge’ʼ, that is, perception ‘of that’ entity, even though it is beyond the
senses. This is the meaning.
He applies this (theory of perception) to the main matter (being
discussed).

Ūvafā 1| 3<3 11

q aāā īaī fsrTHfd I| Q%x 11

TṬēīēTTgGTTĪĪS] TTTRTGTT]] |

TANTRĀLOKA

-ii. .1 2 1|

TGĪĪTĒ’JĪGĀTṜ T STī-TIGfrāst̃ I| 3%5 I|I

yathāmalaṁ mano dūrasthitam apy āśu paśyati || 243 ||
tathā pratyayadīkṣāyāṁ tattadbhuvanadarśanam |
jananādiviyuktāṁ tu yadā dīkṣāṁ cikīrṣati || 244 ||
tadāsmād uddharāmīti yuktam ūhaprakalpanam |
yadā śodhyaṁ vinā śoddhṛnyāsas tatrāpi mantrataḥ ll 245 ||
jananādikramaṁ kuryāt tattvasaṁśleṣavarjitam |
ekākiśoddhṛnyāse ca jananādivivarjane || 246 ||
tacchoddhṛsaṁpuṭaṁ nāma kevalaṁ parikalpayet |

Just as a (completely) pure (clear) mind quickly (and effortlessly)

sees a distant (object), in the same way (the initiand has) a vision of each
world in the course of the initiation of firm conviction (pratyayadīkṣā).

(243cd-244ab) (244)

If, however, (the teacher) wishes to perform an initiation that
does not involve (the disciple’s soul being made to) take birth (in the
various worlds in order to exhaust his Karma) and the like, it is fitting that
(he should cultivate the intention that) “I am extracting (my disciple) from

that principle”, and formulate (the mantras,) appropriately modifying
them (āhaprakalpana). (244cd-245ab) (245)
If the purifying (mantras) are deposited without the object of
purification, then there (in that case) also, (the teacher) should (anyway)

perform the rite (krama) (in which the disciple’s soul is made) to take birth
etc. (in the worlds) by means of (the appropriate) mantras, (but this should
be done) without conjoining (him) with the principles. (245cd-246ab) (246)
When only the purifying mantras are deposited (on the disciple’s
body), and (the procedure involving) the birth (of the disciple’s soul in the
worlds) etc. is omitted, (the teacher) need only mentally fashion
(prakalpayet) the name (of the disciple,) encapsulated by these purifying

mantras. (246cd-247ab) (247)

vīsion

of

each

world’

means

the

synthetic

perception

(anuṣandhāna) which has as its object the many bodies in each one of those
worlds that some (fortunate disciple) who is the recipient of an intense descent
of the power (of grace) possesses. ‘It is fitting’, because he does not wish (to
make his disciple’s soul) take birth etc. (in the worlds). (If only the purifying
mantras are deposited, the teacher) ‘should performʼ (the rite (krama) (in
which the disciple’s soul is made) to take birth etc. (in the worlds)) (in a generic

Thiṣ verse implicitly refers back to verse 238cd-239ab (239) above.
N See below note to 16/267cd-268ab (268) conceming ‘ūha.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

way), without taking into account the particulars. Thus, it is said that (this
should be done) ‘without conjoining (him) with the principles’.
Once the disciple’s name has been fashioned so as to be encapsulated
by purifying mantras (selected) as preferred (by the teacher), what should be
done (next)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

G=TTTTT āaTatṝ fT@īTsāTāTdrvgṣH_
I| 3% 11

ṬTTaTI SJGĀTSSTTĀTTRATTĀĪ: |

dravyayogena dīkṣāyāṁ tilājyākṣatataṇḍulam || 247 ||
tattanmantreṇa juhuyāj janmayogaviyogayoḥ |
In the case of an initiation that takes place in association with (the

Kaula) substances, offerings should be made to the fire of sesame seeds,
clarified butter, rice (akṣata) and grain (taṇḍula), (each with) its
(corresponding) mantra, whether it involves the conjunction (of the
disciple’s soul) with (the sequence of) births (in the worlds), or separation

(from them). (247cd-248ab) (248)

‘Its (corresponding) mantra’, characterized by the disciple’s name

encapsulated by the purifying (mantra). In actual fact that is the instrumental

cause of ‘the conjunction (of the disciple’s soul) with (the sequence of)

births (in the worlds) or separation (from them).” This is the meaning.
Again,

in

the

case

of

an

initiation

based

on

consciousness

(vijñānadīkṣā), nothing at all of this sort needs be done. Accordingly, he says:

] ā̄ākeēā TṬ JTTIT 1 3c 1|

TīTHāTÇGTTGIQ
TYĀaṬ PIĪTĒCTHTT |

tanmantrasañjalpabalāt paśyedā cāvikalpakāt |
If (the teacher) is to perform an initiation based on consciousness
(vijñānadīkṣā), (he) should gaze at the disciple intensely, until (the disciple
attains) a state free of thought (avikalpaka), by virtue of the might (bala) of
the (inner) discourse (sarījalpaḥ) of that (purifying) mantra. (248cd-249ab)

(249)

‘That mantra’ is preferred (by the teacher) as the mantra that purifies
(the disciple). “Until (the disciple attains) a state free of thought’, that is, up
to when he finally (attains) rest within the state free of thought, which is the
direct experience (of ultimate reality). This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), the nature of discourse (saṁjalpa) is speech
(śabda). So how is it possible (for the disciple) to rest within a state free of
(discursive) thought (by means of that)?

TANTRĀLOKA

The Essential Being and Purpose of Mantra (mantrasattāprayojanam)
Reflective Awareness as the Essential Nature of Mantra

fāāhcd: fkō ūatvmaāī
ārcq farvēr: 11| 3xR 1

fīīāaīātaftramdēktcãa 1| 2uy .1|

vikalpaḥ kila sañjalpamayo yat sa vimarśakaḥ || 249 ||
mantrātmāsau vimarśaś ca śuddho ‘pāśavatātmakaḥ |
nityaś cānādivaradaśivābhedopakalpitaḥ || 250 ||
tadyogād daiśikasyāpi vikalpaḥ śivatāṁ vrajet |
Indeed, thought (vikalpa) is made of (inner) discourse
(saṁjalpamaya) which reflects (on the nature of its object) (vimarśaka). And
that is the essential nature of Mantra and reflective awareness (vimarśa),
which is pure, and not the fettered state. Eternal, it is conceived
(upakalpita) to be one with Śiva, Who, without beginning,is the dispenser
of (every) boon; by union (yoga) with that, the teacher’s thought also
aṭṭains Śiva’s state. (249cd-251ab) (250- 251)
The eṣsential nature of thought is (inner) discourse, which is the (inner)
nature of the subject who reflects (on the nature of things), because it is the
freedom (to perceive) of the perceiver of the field (of objectivity) (kṣetrajña).
“That’ (inner) discourse is ‘the essential nature of Mantra’, which is inner”

reflective awareness, and because its sole form is (consciousness), free of

thought constructs, it is ‘pure’. Thus, in accord with the teaching that ‘that

which is this, the Lord’s being, is that of the fettered soul alsoʼ, it is ‘not the

fettered state’. Thus, it is ‘eternal’, for according to (the following) teaching,
its nature is (never) separated from it.
‘The

(wise)

know

that

the

(essential)

nature

of the

light

(of

manifestation) (avabhāsa) is reflective awareness; otherwise (if that were not
s0), the light (of consciousness), although coloured by the (entities manifest

within it), would be insentient, like a crystal.’

Surely (one may ask), how is it possible for gross thought, the nature of
which is (mental) discourse, to be linked to this kind of reflective awareness?
With this doubtin mind, he has said that ‘itis fashioned (upakalpita) as one
with Śiva, Who, without beginning,is the dispenser of (every) boonʼ. Even
the thought of (the teacher) who recites mantra ‘aṭtains Śiva’s state’ by

2 Conceming Mantras, see above $/135cd-142 and bclow 26/22.
Rcad yadāntrīyakaś ca for yannāntrīyakaś ca.
22 P 1/5/|1a. Only the firṣṭ quarter of this verse is quoted here It is quoted in full in TĀv ad
2/31cd-32ab (32) and ad 4/184, thc first linc ad 1 1/46-47.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

entering into the essential nature of consciousness. The meaning is that it comes

to rest within (consciousness that is) devoid of thought (and is transformed into

it).

Nor is that proved (to be s0) by reasoning (alone). Accordingly, he says:

Éjēukú ēṭE.cēḵvṝ-Eṭ':tTIETTAHI
ÉÉG ITVIKCI IŪIkēzxzkṭiiI

śrīsāraśāstre tad idaṁ parameśena bhāṣitam || 251 ||
arthasya pratipattir yā grāhyagrāhakarūpiṇī|

sā eva mantraśaktis tu vitatā mantrasantatau || 252 ||

The Supreme Lord has said that in the venerable Sāraśāstra: “(The
initīal immediate) perception of an entity, which is (undifferentiated

consciousness that is both) the object and the perceiver, is the power of
Mantra that extends throughout the series of Mantras (mantrasantati)’
(251cd-252) (252-253ab)

The initial (raw) ‘perceptionʼ is (the immediate) viewing of an entity. It

consists of (just) the awareness of it (which, as yet undefined and unidentified,)

is like pointing to (one’s own) head with a finger. It is (the one consciousness
which is both) ‘the object and the perceiver’, and is devoid of discursive

ideation by (its very) nature (avikalpaka-svabhāvā). Thīs same (initial

perception) is the power which is the very being (sattā) of all Mantras. It is
(constantly) being uttered as (the power) that is inwardly hidden within the one
nature of the perceiver. This is the meaning.
And this is taught in this way by Him (the Lord Himself). Accordingly,
he says:

TTṢTRHA TṬTTYTThZCTRT |

TḠāī̄ f̄JT JJTṬGCTTAĪGā: |1 3U3 1
parāmarśasvabhāvetthaṁ mantraśaktir udāhṛtā |
parāmarśo dvidhā śuddhāśuddhatvān mantrabhedakaḥ || 253 II

It is said in this way (in this Tantra) that the power of Mantra is

reflective awareness.” Reflective awareness is of two kinds, that is, pure

and impure, and so it divides up (and differentiates) Mantras (in those
terms). (253) (253cd-254ab)

” Here its very clear how Abhinava explains the nature of something by giving it a name drawn
from Pratyabhijñā terminology.

TANTRĀLOKA

That (reflective awareness) divides Mantras into two kinds, according to
whether they are pure or impure. He says this (with the words) ‘reflective
awarenessʼ etc.
He analyses that in accord with the teachings of the scriptures

Śaiva Mantras Differ from other Mantras

šh sīdr-kkīsa

TIĪTĀĪ: TTSHT TTTTTNTTTHTĀT:|I ṜUÉ II
cr̥gTrtrṁṝrztkēiī

ṁāī fē ē: fiīa: 1| 3u= 1

uktaṁ śrīpauṣkare ‘nye ca brahmaviṣṇvādayo ʻṇḍagāḥ |
prādhānikāḥ sāñjanās te sāttvarājasatāmasāḥ || 254 |
tair aśuddhaparāmarśāt tanmayībhāvito guruḥ |
vaiṣṇavādiḥ paśuḥ prokto na yogyaḥ patiśāsane || 255 ||
ye mantrāḥ śuddhamārgasthāḥ śivabhaṭṭārakādayaḥ |
śrīmanmataṅgādidṛśā tanmayo hi guruh śivaḥ || 256 ||
It is said in the venerable Pauṣkara that ‘(the mantras of) Brahmā
and Viṣṇu etc. are not the same (as ours). Located in the Egg (of Brahmā),
they belong to the domain of Nature (prādhānika) and, iīmpure (sāñjana),
they are sāttvika, rājasa or tāmasa.” A Vaiṣṇava teacher and the like is said
to be (just) a fettered soul. This is because, due to (his) impure judgement

(parāmarśa),” he has been consecrated by identification with them

(tanmayībhāvīta). He is not qualified (to receive and impart) the Śaiva
teachings (patiśāstra).” According to the view of the venerable Mataṅga

and others, ‘the mantras that are on the pure path are those of Lord Śiva

The original form of this verse (i.e. 16/254 (254cd-255ab) is:

anye prādhānikāḥ mantra brahmaviṣṇvādayo ‘pare |
sāñjanās te aṇḍmadhyasthāḥ sāttvarājasatāmasāḥ |

It is quoted by Rāmakaṇṭha ad MPĀ vidyāpāda 2120-21 without ascription. Bhatt
observes in a note to his editon that this verse is found in the Mrgendravṛúidpikā

upodghātaprakaraṇa verse 22. There it is said to be drawn from Rauravāgama, but cannot be

traced there. Abhinava tlls us clearly it is drawn from the Pauṣkarāgama. Thīs survives as the

Parameśvaratantra in manuscript. See bibliography.
> As a technical term, in the Pratyabhijñā sense, ‘parāmarśa’ is not encountered in the scriptural

sources. Thus, it is possible that this sentence is Abhinava’s gloss. But this may not be so. Thus, in
the translation I have given a common, non-technical meaning of the word.
256ab (256cd) is MPĀ vidyāpāda 2/20ab. According to Rāmakaṇṭha, the commentator, ‘the
pure pathʼ is Vidyātattva.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

and the other (Śaiva deities).” The teacher who is identified with them is
indeed Siva. (254-256) (254cd-257ab)

‘The teacher who is identified with them’ is endowed with a state of

oneness with the Mantras of Lord Śiva etc., whose nature is the pure (form of)
reflective awareness. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask): It is agreed that thought possesses a state of
reflective awareness by virtue of its association with the discourse outlined by
the freedom (to do so) of the (individual embodied perceiver) who knows the

field (of objectivity) (kṣetrajña). (The question is,) where does its association
(with this inner discourse come about,) first of all? He says this.

Reflective Awareness as the Basis of Language
and the Transmission

EEETEEFTYEIUtr;ç{ṭeeikiṛṇṂḷ
āā: a fāīv'r=zraāa:
aāstī īzvŪ u| 3u.s 1

Tr-aāēṁThca; āaaāṬgŪcza: |
.; GG-TĪSTHTSICT: TāTTRRATAT-TĪṬḺCṢ; ||/Ṝ3U¢ II
nanu ṣvatantrasañjalpayogād astu vimarśitā |

prāk kutaḥ sa vimarśāc cet kutaḥ ṣo ‘pi nirūpaṇe || 257 ||
ādyas tathā vikalpatvapradaḥ ṣyād upadeṣṭṛtaḥ |
yaḥ saṁkrānto ‘bhijalpaḥ syāt tasyāpy anyopadeṣṭrtaḥ || 258 II

Surely (one may ask), agreed that the state of reflective awareness

(thought possesses) is due to (its) association with (this) free (inner)

discourse. (But one may ask,) where did that (association originate) from
iniṭially? (If you say that) that (association originated) from reflective
awareness (vimarśa), (then) where did that also (originate from)? (In order
to answer this question, let us examine what happens) in the course of
instruction (nirūpaṇa). The initial (reflective awareness) that bestows this

kind of discursive thought (originates from) the teacher. Transmitted

(saṁkrānta), it becomes discourse (abhijalpa). His (teaching) also (comes)
from another teacher. (257-258) (257cd-259ab)

Now, it is said that that (association of thought with inner discourse
originates) from reflective awareness. (Well then,) where did that also (originate

from)? Thus he says, ‘(If you say that) that (association originated) from
reflective awareness (vimarśa), (then) where did that also (originate from)?”
(If one admits that) in this way, reflective awareness (originates) from (its)

aṣsociation with (this inner) discourse, and (conversely,) association with (this

inner) discourse from that, the consequence would be a vicious circle. This is

After having presented the intrcacies of these depositons, Abhinava continues from here to
verse 294 (294cd-295ab) with his liguistic analysis of mantra.

TANTRĀLOKA

the sense (of what he is saying). Here (in response to this objection,) one should

atṭend carefully to this. Accordingly, he says that (in order to answer this

question, let us examine what happens) ‘in the course of instruction
(nirūpaṇa) etc. In the course of instruction, there is some ‘initial’ reflective
awareness which is the root (of the teaching) and comes (directly) from a
teacher who is excellent and (most) senior (vrddha). It gives rise to the state of
discursive thought mentioned previously. It is transmitted to the one who is to
be instructed and assumes the nature of discourse (saṁjalpa). Due to (its)

association (with that), thought is reflectively aware (of its contents). Surely
(one may ask), how is it that the teacher has (the teachings) in this way? With
this doubt in mind, he says ‘his (teaching) also (comes) from another
teacherʼ.
(However, the problem is that) in this way, the consequence would be a
vicious circle that destroys the (very) root (of this view). With this doubt in
mind, he says:

TaTIFT̄I: T |

ṬaTa || 3u2 1
pūrvapūrvakramād itthaṁ ya evādiguroḥ purā |
sañjalpo hy abhisaṁkrāntaḥ so ʻdyāpy astīti gṛhyatām || 259 ||
The initial discourse (sañjalpa) (that constitutes the teaching

originated) from the first teacher. By being successively transmitted in this
way in all respects from each preceding (teacher to the next, it has come
down to us and) exists today also (as it did in the past). Thus, you should
accept (this view to be the correct one). (259) (259cd-260ab)

Taking the support of the succession of teachers in due order ‘in this
wayʼ, the first discourse (which constitutes the teaching) was transmitted in all

respects, all around, in due order of succession to those who are to be instructed,
from the first teacher who is the Supreme Lord, and (whose) nature (is) innate
reflective awareness (sahajavimarśa). That same (discourse) even today

complies with its condition (as the teaching) that has been transmitted and
(continues) to exist right up to the Māyā perceiver. ‘Thus, you should accept

(this view to be the correct one)ʼ; there is no vicious circle of any sort in this
way. This is the meaning.

Any (kind of) common daily (linguistic) usage that involves thought
(vaikalpiko vyavahāraḥ), which (thus) depends in this same way on the great
power (of the inner discourse of reflective awareness), is certainly of that same
nature, (as the activity of the mind and consciousness involved in the

transmission of the teachings). Accordingly, he says:

TTTĪTHTJGTTPIGIST
TKITJ |
fērṝ: caaād aīsṀīḷṂ dacda gfa: 1| 3ēc 1

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

yas tathāvidhasañjalpabalāt ko ‘pi svatantrakaḥ |
vimarśaḥ kalpyate so ‘pi tadātmaiva suniścitaḥ || 260 ||
It is well determined (and there can be no doubt,) that whatever
independent reflective awareness (of meaning) (vimarśa) one may conceive
by the power (bala) of that (same) kind of (inner) discourse, it is also of that
same nature (as is involved in the transmission of the teachings). (260)

(260cd-261ab)

In this way, it is proved that one (and the same reflective awareness of
meaning) that is operating from the first teacher up to this time complies with its
condition (as the teaching) that has been transmitted and (continues) to exist. It

manifests radiantly in the form of each particular (inner) discourse (abhijalpa)
(through which it is expressed).

Surely (one may ask), if this is so, where there is a difference in the

reflective awareness (of meaning) (parāmarśa) between one word and another
with respect to (their) etymology (although they are synonymous), what should
one understand (the meaning of the words to be there) in that case? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

a: z dīc aī af vī frēa 1
ṆSaTaGŪGTĀGTĪ ṜāHTIRT: JTTTT: I|/3ē2 1

zēz7 |

EāUUEEETiḤTEt-kIĀEPĀCTVĀIṬTCHII

ghaṭaḥ kuṃbha itītthaṁ vã yadi bhedo nirũpyate |
so ‘py anyakalpanādāyī hy anādṛtyaḥ prayatnataḥ l| 261 11
panṇāyate karotīti vikalpasyocitau sphuṭam |
karapāṇyabhijalpau tau saṅkīryetāṁ kathaṁ kila || 262 ||

Or else, if (one explains that) “a jar (ghaṭa) is a pot (kumbha)”

and indicates in this way that there is a difference (in the apprehension of
2 Read ghaṭaḥ kumbha for ghaṭakumbha. It may seem that it is possible to understand the
meaning of a word by means of another, and that this the way we learn a language. But that is not
s0. Understanding meaning and putting words together according to their meaning to form

sentences presupposes and requires a capacity to apprehend meaning. This Abhinava says is a one
of the functions of vimarśa – reflective awareness, that when it operates in this way is called

pratibhā. Thīs cognitive linguistic noetic awareness is the fundamental unified ground in which

the stream of signification of language rests and is known. If this reflective awareness were not to
exist, each synonym would be closed in and confined within itself. Thus, Abhinava said above

(11/68cd-69) that:

‘If it were not for this (grounding in an uncreated and infinite reflective awareness that

grasps meaning directly), none of the many (words) with conventionally (agreed meanings)
formed many times, (even if variously substituted by synonyms,) could come to rest (by
conveying a clear meaning). The result would be an infinite regress, which is hard to avoid,
because one would have to (continuously) make us of (various words belonging to an agreed)
convention in order to explain (even) those by which a child is instructed.”

TANTRĀLOKA

the meaning of these two synonyms, such that they can explain one another

without reference to the innate reflective awareness of consciousness that

grasps meaning, this supposed difference) also gives rise to other thought
constructs (as to what the word means. Thus, the view that the meaning of
words is understood in this way) should be vigorously rejected. (However,

the case of synonyms with differing etymologies is not the same. Thus, for

example) ‘kara’ and ‘pāṇi’ (which both mean ‘handʼ) are clearly
appropriate dictions (abhijalpa) of the notion (vikalpa) of (two separate
corresponding actions, namely that the hand) ‘does’ (karoti) (something)

and ‘plays dice’ (paṇāyate) (respectively). So (if they are used with an eye
on their etymological meaning,) how could they be mixed up (and used

promiscuously)?” (261-262) (261cd-263ab)

If one indicates that there is a difference in the reflective awareness
(that understands the meaning of two synonyms) of the sort that “by virtue of
the reflective awareness (of the meaning of the word) ‘pot’ (kumbha), there is
one of (the word) ‘jar’”, it creates another (different) notion (kalpanā) by

abandoning its own appropriate prior reflective awareness (of it meaning). Thus,
(this view of how the meaning of synonyms is understood) should be avoided,
even if it (requires vigorous) effort. (But thisis not so in the case of synonyms
with differing etymologi s, as they also convey their own distinct meaning).
The words ‘kara’ and‘pāṇi’, that are clearly appropriate in order to conceive
that the hand (kara) ‘does the act of appropriating (and grasping) (karoti) and
‘plays dice’ (paṇāyate) and the like (respectively), can never be ‘mixed up’,

that is, possess the same nature as the diction of one (and the same) reflective

awareness (of meaning) (ekaparāmarśābhijalpa). Thīs is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), if this is so, then how can one distinguish (the

direct understanding of a word) from the understanding (vyutpatti) (of the

meaning) of a word through another word, although that (too) arises (on the

basis of) that (same reflective awareness of meaning)? With this doubt in mind,

he says:

śabdāc chabdāntare tena vyutpattir vyavadhānataḥ |
vyavahārāt tu sā sākṣāc citropākhyāvimarśinī || 263 ||

Abhinava says we should not consider that synonymous words like ‘jar’ (ghata) and ‘pot’

(kumbha) denote two different things. However, not uncommonly, two or more words with the
same meaning have different etymological derivations. Such is the case with the words pāṇi and

kara, which both mean ‘hand’. Even if the etymology of the two words differs, as happens for
example with the word ‘pāṇi’, which derived from paṇnāyate, ‘playing at dice’ and ‘kara’, from
karoṭi, 'to do’. The difference is that we apprchend directly, through common usage, the mcaning
of the words for jar, whereas the understanding of the meaning of the words for hand, through
their etymology, is indirect. But even though, as synonyms their meaning is the same and does not

change, they can also be understood to each have their own specific meaning in accord with their
etymology. About synonyms and related matters, see K. Kunjunni Raja (1963: pp. 32ff.) and
Kumārila, TV 1/3/26.

1i6

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Thus, the understanding (vyutpatti) (of the meaning) of a word

through another word (develops) indirectly (vyavadhānataḥ), (whereas the

noetic awareness) that reflects on (the meaning of) the observed variety (of
words) through common usage (vyavahāra) does so directly. (263) (263cd-

264ab)

‘Thuṣ’, so that the (inner) diction (of the meaning of a word) may not

be mixed up (with another), ‘the understanding (of the meaning) of a word
through another word’ ‘(develops) indirectly, by juxtaposing the preceding
reflective awareness (of meaning) which is appropriate to itself (that is, of the

subsequent word that needs to be understood,) as happens, for example, in (the

understanding of) the diction (abhijalpa) ‘pot’ (kumbha) from the diction ‘jar.

Whereas, on the contrary, everybody’s understanding (vyutpatti) through old
(well established) common usage takes place directly, not indirectly, because it
reflects (on the meaning of) the weave (saṁudarbha) of words of many forms
(directly). This is the meaning.
In this way, the true nature of reality has ultimately landed up here.

tadvimarśodayaḥ prācyasvavimarśamayaḥ sphuret |
yāvad bālasya saṅvittir akṛtrimavimarśane || 264 ||
The arising from that (direct understanding) of this (or that)
reflective awareness (of the meaning of words) (vimarśa) flashes forth
radiantly as one’s own (innate) a priori (noetic) awareness. (This is so and
possible) insofar as the consciousness of (even) a small child is (grounded)
in (an original, fundamental) uncreated (akṛtrima) act of reflective
awareness (that grasps the meaning of words). (264) (264cd-265ab)
The arising of the reflective awareness of (the meaning) of, for example,
(the word) ‘jar’, consists of one’s own (innate) reflective awareness that has
come down from an ancient (linguistic) tradition (vrddhaparampara) and
‘flashes forth radiantly (as such) insofar as’ even (the consciousness of) ‘a

small child’, who has not come to understand the meaning of words because it

not possible for him to combine words together (śabdasaṁsaraga), ‘is
(grounded) in (an original, fundamental) uncreated act of reflective
awarenessʼ on his own consciousness (that grasps the meaning of words). (If
this is so for a small child,) then what to say of an adult who possesses a
proficient knowledge (vyutpatti) of that? This is the meaning.
Thus, that is the difference (between) Mantras (and common words),
due to which (people have) respect for the Supreme Lord there (as the one who
made them). Thus, he says:

TANTRĀLOKA

Common Language and Mantras Differ

3Jsz̄=dṃcJīszāī Tādḹ] T 3īīgdā: II Ṝā4 |Il

EEIHĪĒ|SĒVSETGGĪEIETEEAḤ

tena tanmantraśabdārthaviśeṣotthaṁ vikalpanam |
Śabdāntarotthād bhedena paśyatā mantra ādṛtaḥ || 265 ||
yac cāpi bījapiṇḍāder uktaṁ prāg bodharūpakam |
tat tasyaiva kuto ʻnyasya tat kasmād anyakalpanā || 266 ||
Thus, (the Lord) has adopted Mantra (as a means to realization),

observing that the notion (vikalpana) that arises from the special words

(sounds) (śabda) and meanings of mantras is different from the one that
arises from other (common) words (śabda). Moreover, the form of (noetic)
consciousness (bodha) mentioned earlier of seed-syllables (bīja) and syllabic
groups (piṇḍa) etc. (of Mantra) pertains to that alone, so how could it be
that of (any) other (common word)? How could that be a notion (that is
derived) from something else? (265-266) (265cd-267ab)

Mantras differ from common language because they possess a special sacred power to bring
about particular results and are themselves sacred. Even so, they exist and operate on the same

principle as common language, namely, convention (sarketa). Convention determines the
meaning of words and their usage in a language shared by those who know the convention on
which that language is based. Abhinava argues that, although the source of discursivity, the
formation and knowledge of a convention cannot belong to the domain of discursivity. Thought is
a kind of inner speech (saṁjalpa), it is discursive. The convention on which it is based is

grounded in pure, universal non-conceptual ‘’ consciousness that precedes it. In the following
passage, Abhinava refers to it as the ‘supreme mantra’, which is the supreme level of Speech.
‘This process of entry into consciousness is here (according to us) everywhere (in every

case) such (as is about to be described). An entity (padārtha), (whatever it may be, whether)

imagined or directly perceived, is in this way (iāvai) etablished in the great (effulgent) Mantric
power (mahaḥ) of Supreme Speech, which is the pure reflective awareness that is not subject to

Maāyā (amāyīya) and not conventional (asāṁketika). (This is) where the votaries of all schools

proclaim the (state or) plane (of consciousness) free of thought constructs (avikalpā dasā) (is
found). That (effulgent) power of the supreme mantra (ahaṁ) is (all the fundamental energies
which generate the variety of things represented by) the letters K onwards, whether individually or
combined together as seeds or syllabic groups (pinda) etc. which, ultimately real, are (present in
the principles) of Earth and the rest (to which they correspond). Otherwise, (if this were not s0,)
all (prior) non-conceptual perceptions (nirvikalpajñānāni), be they of mount Meru or a tree, of
water or of fire, of existence or non-existence, of a jar or of pleasure, would all be the same. (As a

result) the same would apply to conceptual knowledge, which arises from non-conceptual
knowledge, (and so its fundamental nature) cannot essentially differ from it.

(The

man) who knows everything (sarvajña) sces (clearly) in this way that the

body, which is not conventional, of that Mantra (asāṁketikaṁ mantravapuḥ) is itself the various
form (of things diversified inwardly by the) mutual difference (of one part with respect to another)

(anyonyavicitrarāpa), and the means by which convention (is formed, established and applied)

(saṁketopāya). (Thus, seeing it in this way,) they teach it as being an object of worship (and

practice) (upāsyatayā). PTy p. 193-194.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

‘Thuṣ’, because the manifestation (of the meaning) (sphuraṇa) of other
words (that are not Mantras) is as their own specific prior reflective awareness
(of their meaning), the Lord, ‘observing’ directly that ‘the notion’ that arises
from these ‘special words (sounds) (śabda) and meanings of mantras’, the
nature of which is innate and unconditioned (anavacchinna) reflective
awareness, is ‘different’ and has different characteristics from the notion ‘that

arises from other (common) wordsʼ, ‘has adopted Mantra’. The meaning is

that he has taught (the practice of Mantra) as the supreme (practice) to be
adopted. Although the nature of other (common) words is also (ultimately)
supreme reflective awareness, it is said that (they have) arisen in the form of
(common) gross language (sarjalpa) by the process of descent (through the
series of speakers), as it happens to be (in each case), as the (linguistic) tradition
(paramparā) derived from the common daily commerce of the ancients
(vrddhavyavahāra). Mantras, however, beginning with (those of) the first
teacher up to the present time, are all essentially the same innate and
unconditioned reflective awareness (paramārśatva) (that has not descended onto

the plane of ordinary language based on a common convention).

Thus, it was ‘mentioned earlier’ (that all Mantras, whether) seed-

syllables (bīja) and syllabic groups etc., are said to be essentially that (noetic)

consciousness (bodha), (in accord with) such (teachings):

‘AII (Mantras) consisting of seed syllables (bīja) and syllabic groups

(piṇḍa) are the (dynamic) pulsing nature (spandanātmatā) of consciousness.
Thus, (a Mantra) is said to serve as a means to (to attain) Supreme

Consciousness (because such is its nature).

(According to this verse,) that (consciousness) ‘pertains to them

aloneʼ, not to other (common) words, because it has been explained that they

assume a gross form (in their own) various ways. Therefore, as (Mantras
consisting 0f) seed-syllables and syllabic groups etc. are essentially
unconditioned consciousness, ‘how could they be a notion (that is derived)
from something else?” (That ‘something else’) is that other (form of) reflective

awareness (of meaning) that has been coming down through each lineage of

teachers (that manifests as common speech). The meaning is that there is no
other equivalent domain (kakṣya) here of (inner) discourse (saṁjalpa) (for
Mantras apart from that one).

It is with this same intention that it is said everywhere in the scripture

that the main (and most important) characteristic of a teacher is that he is an

expert in Mantras and their application (tantra). Accordingly, he says:

l Concerning linguistic conventions in general and how they are leamt, see 11/66-67ab, and how
they are established in the intuitive genius (pratibhā) of consciousness, which is free of them, see
above, 11/67cd-80ab.

2 Above, 7/2cd-3ab.

Gnoli translates the expression ‘mantratantra’ as the ‘science of mantras’. The word ‘tantra’ in

this context can also be understood to mean ‘ritual procedure’, in which case the teacher should be

an expert in the knowledge of mantras and their application to ritual.

TANTRĀLOKA

A True Teacher is a Master of Mantra

ēq] #hḷ̃ ṜT H-ĩ-atTJIIG: || 39 11
etadarthaṁ guror yatnāl lakṣaṇe tatra tatra tat |

lakṣaṇaṁ kathitaṁ hy eṣa mantratantraviśāradaḥ || 267 ||

It is for this reason that when (scriptures define) the characteristics
of a (true) teacher, (this one) characteristic is stated with (insistent) effort
(yatnāt) in various places, namely, that he is an expert in Mantras and their
application (mantratantraviśārada). (267) (267cd-268ab)
Thus, in this way, the teacher who is intent on the application

(pariśīlana) of the meaning (purpose, goal and ultimate nature of) Mantras
(mantrārtha) should pay attention to that in all respects. Thus he says:

tena mantrārthasaṁbodhe mantravārtikam ādarāt |
ūhāpohaprayogaṁ vā sarvathā gurur ācaret || 268 |I
Therefore, in order to awaken (the disciple) to the meaning
(purpose, goal and ultimate nature of) Mantras (mantrārtha), the teacher

should with (great) respect make use in every way of the explanation of the

mantras (mantravārttika) (found in the scriptures and transmitted by the
tradition), or (when they are used for ritual purposes,) apply the methods
of modification (ūha) and exclusion (apoha). (268) (268cd-269ab)
Surely (one may ask), if there is no such teacher, then what should be

done? With this doubt in mind, he says:

h Abhinavagupta uses here the language of the grammarians and of the Mīmaṁsā, the
philosophy adapted to the exegesis of the Veda and Vedic ritual. The word ūha in a non-technical
sense means ‘deliberation’ or ‘consideration’. It also means ‘transposition’ or ‘modification’. In

the context of Vedic mantras, it denotes the modification of a word in a Vedic mantra to adapt it
to the context in which that mantra will be used. This modification or adaptation of a mantra is

generally obtained by changing the suffixes of the cases (see, concerning this method,

Mahābhāṣya, Paśpa śāhnika, 1, 1, e; Concerning ūha – ‘modification’ according to the Mīmāṁsa,
see Ganganatha Jha 1942: 294-299. In this Tantric context, it is the generation of a series of
mantras on the basis of a common arrangement that is applied to a series of realities, entities or
deities modified accord to each particular instance. Abhinava gives an example below (17/11cd13ab) of how that takes place with respect to the mantras of the reality levels (tattva) invoked and

thereby purified by the utterance of their respective invocatory mantra. The term apoha is here

probably synonymous with bādha, which is the exclusion of aspects of the original mantra of the

rite which is being celebrated (concerning this see Ganganatha Jha, op. cit., pp. 300-306). In that

case, a mantra is modified by exclusion of its parts in order to apply it to a correspondingly

changed entity the mantra invokes.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

r-a-rátxrza’ q atāī’ rāa, |

mantrārthavidabhāve tu sarvathā mantratanmayam |
guruīṁ kuryãt ...........

When there is no teacher who knows the meaning (purpose, goal
and ultimate nature of) Mantras (mantrārtha) in all respects, take as a
teacher one who is identified with Mantra. (269abc) (269cd-270a)
(A teacher who is) ‘identified with Mantra’ is one who has (attained)
oneness of nature with Mantra. This is the meaning.
Thus, he says:

..aata11.1 tadabhyāsāt tatsaṅkalpamayo hy asau || 269 |

By virtue of (his assiduous) practice (abhyāsa) of that, (the teacher)
is identified with™ the intention (that initiates its use) (tatsaṁkalpa).
(268cd-270ab)
Surely (one may ask), the discourse of a teacher whose contemplation
(bhāvanā) of the meaning (purpose, goal and ultimate nature of) Mantras
(mantrārtha) is well-established and firm is other than (Mantra), (but even

s0,)

has the same power as Mantra. So how is it that it is said that there is no other
equivalent domain (kakṣya) here of (inner) discourse (saṁjalpa) (for Mantras,
apart from that)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

iGEEUEETAIŪIĒAĒ
GĒIII

ṀũṀ 3=z̄ 1| 2v ||

tatsamānābhisañjalpo yadā mantrārthabhāvanāt |
guror bhavet tadā sarvasāmye ko bheda ucyatām || 270 ||

If by (deep) contemplation (bhāvanā) of the meaning (purpose, goal

and ultimate nature of) Mantras (mantrārtha), the teacher’s discourse
becomes like that (of Mantra), then if it is the same in all respects, then
pray tell, what is the difference (between them)? (270) (270cd-271ab)
Surely (one may object) that it is not proved that they are the same in all
respects. The (formative) process of (a type of discourse) that is other than
Mantra is not the same (as that of Mantra). With this doubt in mind, he says:
Literally ‘made of’

TANTRĀLOKA

fē a 1
aṁśenāpy atha vaiṣamye na tato ‘ṛthakriyā hi sā |

(But) if there is even (just a small) partial difference, the purposeful

action (arthakriyā) (derived) from it is not (as is that of Mantra). (271ab)
(271cd)

The ‘difference’ ‘from it’ (that is, the teacher’s) discourse, from

Mantra due to (the difference) in the process (through which it is formed) and

the like (is such that it does not have the capacity to produce the same) result as
Mantra (mantrakāryā).

Even though there is a difference, it is like that between (an ordinary)
worm and one born from cow dung. He who sees the causal efficacy
(arthakriyā) derived from Mantra and the discourse (of the teacher) is one and
the same is Śiva Himself. He says this:

CI IITTĪĪ TI<Ṭ II Ṝ9ē

II

gomayāt kīṭataḥ kīṭa ity evaṁ nyāyato yadā || 271 ||
sañjalpāntarato ‘py arthakriyāṁ tām eva paśyati |
tadaiṣa satyasañjalpaḥ śiva eveti kathyate || 272 ||
(Some may say,) if one who, on the basis of the principle that a
worm (produced) from cow dung (is the same as one born) from a worm,
sees the same causal efficacy derived from the (teacher’s) discourse (as

from a Mantra even though it) differs (from it), then he is said to be (a
teacher whose) discourse is true, and is Śiva Himself. (271cd-272) (272-

273ab)

He explains (what is meant by a teacher whose) discourse is true.

sa yad vakti tad eva ṣyān mantro bhogāpavargadaḥ |
AIl that he utters is a mantra, which bestows (both) worldly benefits
and liberation. (273ab) (273cd)
The Lord has stated concisely with the same intended sense that ‘the

talk (of a yogi in the Fourth State) is repetition of Mantra.’
However, this is not our view. Thus he says:

kathā japaḥ ŚṢū 3/27.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

vaīī aāīṭaī- 1|| Qv3 1
naiṣo ‘bhinavaguptasya pakṣo mantrārpitātmanaḥ | 273 ||
yo ʻrthakriyām āha bhinnāṁ kīṭayor api tādṛśoḥ |

This is not the view of Abhinavagupta, who has (wholly) dedicated

himself to (the practice) of Mantras. He says the causal efficacy of two
such” worms (one common and the other born from cow dung) differs.

(273cd-274ab) (274)

This is not the view of the venerable Abhinavagupta, who is engaged in

contemplating (nibhālana) the experience of each Mantra and its essential
nature. And so he says that ‘the causal efficacy of such two worms’, namely, a

(common) worm and one born from cow dung, (is not the same). (In other

words,) he accepts that there is a difference there (in that case) in (what they)
produce. This is the meaning.
Surely, if that is so, how can one refute (the fact) that even without a
Mantra, a person who is endowed with (the full range of) progressively

heightening (tāratamya) contemplation (bhāvanā) of the meaning (purpose,
goal and ultimate nature of) Mantras, its accomplishment (is achieved) just by
(the teacherʼs) discourse? With this doubt in mind, he says:

mantrārpitamanāḥ kiñcid vadan yat tu viṣaṁ haret || 274 ||

tan mantra eva . . .

Whatever one who has offered his (whole) mind to Mantra says is
(so powerful that) it remedies (the most deadly) poison. (Indeed) that is

Mantra itself! (274cd-275a) (275abc)

‘“One who has offered his (whole) mind to Mantra’ is one who has

(contemplated and) made a connection with the vitality of Mantras. This is the
meaning. ‘Whatever’ (he says,) whatever verse or prose. As was said before:
‘Therefore, knowing whatever verse or prose (he utters) united with the

first and last (letter) in this way, he sees everything as Mantra.
% One wonders whether to emend tādṛśoḥ – ‘such to s

h –- similar’. It is common Indian

belief that worms can be born from cow dung. They are similar to normal worms born from other
worms but, Abhinava insists, they are not the same. One fundamental difference is that worms

bom from cow dung cannot reproduce.

Above, 3/225. Also quoted ad 4/194.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), if he manages to remedy poison and (do other)

such things just by having offered his mind to Mantra, would that not happen

by (his) utterance of any word at all, (even) without (some such) purpose? Yes

indeed, (it would not). Thus he says:

… . śabdaḥ sa paraṁ tatra ghaṭādivat |
A word other than that is in that case (just a common word) like

‘jar’. (275ab) (275cd)

He renders this (view) acceptable by way of an example also.

āīāīā̄ĀTJGTTTĀT TIIH: TṬT II/3Oy, II

g II QUē II

kāntāsaṁbhogasañjalpasundaraḥ kāmukaḥ sadā l 275 I
tatsaṁskṛto ‘py anyad eṣa kurvan svātmani tṛpyati |
tathā tanmantrasañjalpabhāvito ‘nyad api bruvan || 276 ||
anicchur api tadrūpas tathā kāryakaro dhruvam |
A lover, who is beautiful with (the delight of) discourse and (joyful)
union with (his) beloved, and so too etched (sarīskṛta) with (the memories

of) it, (whatever) else he (happens to be) doing, he is satisfied (and joyful)
within himself. Likewise, one who is sanctified (bhāvita) by this mantric
discourse, even when saying (anything) else, it is (spontaneously) identified

with it even if he does not wish it, and it most certainly produces the same
results. (275cd-277ab) (276-277)
(The lover) ‘is satisfied’ means that he rests within himself, by virtue of

the essence of the aesthetic delight (camatkāra) and wonder of that (joyful)
union. ‘“Even when saying (anything) else’ in this way within the state which is
the nature of the discourse of Mantra, ‘it is (spontaneously) identified with it,

even if he does not wish it’. The meaning is that, because of (his) constant

practice, the sole nature (of whatever he says) is Mantra. Thus it is said that ‘it

produces the same resultsʼ as is appropriate for a Mantra.

Surely (one may ask), even if there is no desire for the discourse of
Mantra, how is it that (his discourse) manifests as being of that nature? With

this doubt in mind, he says:
Read kiṁ na syāt for kiṁ syāt.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

vikalpayann apy ekārthaṁ yato ‘nyad api paśyati |I 277 |I
This is because, even though (a person may be engaged) in thinking

one thing, he also sees (something) else (at the same time). (277cd)

(278ab)

The sense is that a perceiver who is (engaged in) imagining a mountain
may be seeing a jar.
He supports this (view) with the words of scripture.

iṣāpahārimantrādīty uktaṁ śrīpūrvaśāsane |

It is said in the Mālinīvijayottara (śrīpūrvaśāsana): ʻ(Armed with)
the mantras and the rest that counter poison’" and what follows. (278ab)

(278cd)

And that is what is (said) there:

‘Even though he is engaged in enjoying the objects of the senses
(bhuñjāno viṣayān api), he whose mind does not waiver from reality is

untouched by (their) defects, just as a lotus petal is (unaffected) by water. He

who is armed with the Mantras etc. that counter poison, even though he ingests

it, it does not make him lose his senses. Such is a yogi of great wisdom.”

The meaning here is (as follows). He who knows the antidotes of
poisons (jāṅgulika), although he eats poison, he sees himself as being
established in his own nature (and so does not faint). In the same way, although
a yogi of great wisdom enjoys the objects of sense, his mind does not waver,

and so attains the supreme reality.

If he who is (dedicated to and) well established in the meaning
(purpose, goal and ultimate nature of) Mantras (mantrārthaniṣṭha), saying what
has been said (before by others), remedies poison, that (accomplishment) is the
unfolding of Mantra itself, not of (some) words other than that. He (now) states
another view there with regards to that.

0 Gṇolit ‘This verse is a quote from Dharmakirti’s PV 3/207. It is also quoted in the the PTV p.
199, ĪPVv vol. 2, p. 415 and vol. 3, p. 140 and 389. According to Abhinavagupta, and so too the
Buddhiṣṭs, several forms of knowledge can exist at the same time. For the arguments related to
this verse, see Tilmann Vetter 1964, pp. 64-71. ‘As the venerable Utpaladeva has established in

his commentary (fīka) on (his own) Īśvarapratyabhijīñā. The means (yukti) to enter here (into this
pure non-discursive consciousness is as follows): ‘one sees one thing, hears another, one does
something and says something else, one thinks one thing and enjoys something else.’ As the

venerable Śrīkaṇṭha has said (in the Svacchandatantra 7/57cd): “The mind cast in one place, the
eye falling in another – this is how the vital breath functions, effortlessly at all imes.”” PTv p. 196
SVT 7/5cd is also quoted above in TĀv ad 6/24ab.
ITṂV 18/81a.

Read tathā ca for tathāca.

MV 18/80-81, quoted above in 4/219cd-221ab.

Read tattvam eti for tattvam iti.

TANTRĀLOKA

yadi vã viṣanãśe ʻpi hetubhedād vicitratā || 278 ||
dhātvāpyāyādikānantakāryabhedā bhaviṣyati |

Or else it is (reasonable to maintain that) if when the poison is

destroyed there will also be a variety of (other) endless, differing effects,

including the nourishment of the vital essences and the like, it is due to a

diversity of causes. (278cd-279ab) (279)

The ‘diversity of causes’ are Mantras and the words (of one immersed

in the contemplation of Mantras) and so on. ‘When the poison is destroyedʼ,
like Mantra, the discourse (saṅjalpa) (of such a yogi) can also give rise to

another kind of effect, such as the nourishment of the vital essences, opulence
(puṣṭi), and so on.

Having explained the nature of Mantras, he (goes on to) talk about their

purpose.

The Clarity of the Object of Meditation Increases

in Accord with the Decrease of Mental Discourse

Tīā FāTG"ĪRhCTTTJTHTĀĪTT: |I/39R,1I

TṀTRTŪRCĪTa TīJGTGTATTT: |

tad evaṁ mantrasañjalpavikalpābhyāsayogataḥ || 279 1|
bhāvyavastusphuṭībhāvaḥ sañjalpahrāsayogataḥ |

In this way, by the yoga of the practice of the discourse (sarjalpa)
and thought (vikalpa) of Mantra, the clarity with which the reality that is

the object of meditation (bhāvyavastu) (manifests) is (such) in association
with the (degree in which) discourse decreases. (279cd-280ab) (280)

‘Clarity’ is the immediate direct (experience) of ‘the reality that is the
object of meditation’, that is, the Mantra deity contemplated as one with
oneself. (This is achieved) by subordinating (worldly) discourse (in consonance
with) the progressive development (tāratamya) of the practice of the words
(Śabda) and reflective awareness (of the meaning) of Mantra, by the process

(krama) that has been taught (takes place) in this way. This is the meaning.

! Read kāryabhedā for kāryabhedād.
! The principal effect, which is the destruction of the poison, is brought about by the power of

the Mantra, and not by the words that may accompany it. However, these may produce secondary

effects, about which see above, 1/1 14cd-122ab (115-122).

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Surely (one may ask), how can the reality which is the object of
meditation be experienced directly by the practice of the discourse of its
Mantra? With this doubt in mind, he says:

āTa-d TTaTa TJú¥
TT̄ II 3¢o I1
ṬR̥TTT WTH-ĪTTT TT T q Ġ fēī 1
vastv eva bhāvayaty eṣa na sañjalpam imaṁ punaḥ || 280 ||
grhṇāti bhāsanopāyaṁ bhāte tatra tu tena kim |

One contemplates (bhāvayati) a real entity (vastu eva), not (just)
discourse. This (discourse) is taken up (as) a means to make (that reality)
manifest (bhāsanopāya). Once it has manifested, then what use is it there (in
that case)? (280cd-281ab) (281)
Surely (one may ask), if this is so, what use is it for him to take up (the
teacherʼs) discourse? With this doubt in mind, he says ‘this (discourse) is taken
up (as) a meansʼ etc. ‘What use is it?” Once the goal has been attained, then of
what use is the means (to attain it) again? This is the intended sense.

evaṁ sañjalpanirhrāse supariṣphuṭatātmakam || 281 ||
akṛtrimavimarśātma sphured vastv avikalpakam |
(vastu)

As (the inner) discourse (of thought) decreases in this way, reality
manifests radiantly as fully evident, authentic (akṛtrima),

nonconceptual (avikalpaka) reflective awareness. (281cd-282ab) (282)

Surely (one may ask), it is said that, even in (states of intense emotion

in which) there is no thought, reality does not manifest, for it is said that ‘those
who are overwhelmed with passion (kāma), grief, fear, madness (or) thieves,

dreams and the like see even non-existent things as if they were present before
them.” So how is it that it is said that the real thing itelf (vastv eva) manifests (in
states of consciousness free of thought constructs)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

” Abhinava explains here that the purpose of mantras is to transport the practitoner from thought

(vikalpa) to the inner discourse (sarjalpa) of which it consists, to the manifestation of its object
as it truly is, that is, consciousness, and then finally to the authentic, uncreated (akṛtrima), nondiscursive (avikalpa) reality of the mantra-deity, which is essentially the pure reflective awareness

of the light of consciousness.

TANTRĀLOKA

nirvikalpā ca sā saṁvid yad yathā paśyati sphuṭam || 282 ||
tat tathaiva tathātmatvād vastuno ‘pi bahiḥsthiteḥ |
What consciousness free of thought constructs sees clearly as it is,
that is indeed such because such is the nature of even outer reality (vastu)

also. (282cd-283ab) (283)

(Such is the nature of) ‘outer reality also’ʼ, that is, its being (sattā), on

which it is dependent. This is the meaning.

The teacher who is one with Śiva (not only perceives universal Being
by his reflective awareness free of thought constructs, he also) conceives (the
nature of things) just as they are in particular (by means of his thought
constructs). Thus he says:

ftrrṁṁkcār-rararatvīt%Ṁ+: 1| 3¢3 1

TīRSTTT:
āJGT THIRT TaT: ēhcō |

viśeṣatas tv amāyīyaśivatābhedaśālinaḥ || 283 ||
mokṣe ‘bhyupāyaḥ sañjalpo bandhamokṣau tataḥ kila |
The means to liberation (used by a teacher) who is one with (his
own essential) Śiva nature (śivatā) that is free of Māyā is especially
(viśeṣataḥ) (his) discourse (saṁjalpa). Indeed, (both) liberation and bondage

are due to this. (283cd-284ab) (284)

(The teacher teaches) ‘the means to liberation’ of (his) disciple. Surely
(one may ask), according to the saying that ‘all (discursive) thought (vikalpa) is
transmigratory existence’,™ (intentional) thought (saṁkalpa) should be

binding. How is it that here, on the contrary, it is said to be a means to

liberation? With this doubt in mind, he says ‘indeed, (both) liberation and
bondage are due to this’. Here (according to us), liberation and bondage
depend on the (intentional) thought (saṁkalpa) of the teacher ‘who is one with
(his own essential) Śiva nature (śivatā) that is free of Maāyā’. However, there

is this much difference (between them), namely, bondage exists in the state of

duality (bhedamayatā), otherwise (if that state of duality does not prevail, the
soul attains) liberation.
Surely, (one may object that,) even so, according to us that is logically
correct, because (liberation) is ultimately a condition free of thought, certainly
not otherwise. So how is it possible that liberation is due to just (the teacher’s)
discourse alone? With this doubt in mind, he says:

"K This dictum is also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/24, 1/214, 4/11 ḻcd-1 13ab and 14/13.
I¢ appears that Jayaratha reads saṁkalpo (thught, intention) for sahjalpo (discoursc). The
context clearly indicates that that is not correct. One could perhaps cmend the text to saṁjalpād
from saṁkalpād, but the reading sarīkalpād is confimmed a litte further ahead. Even s0,
introducing the following verse, Jayaratha asks how liberation is possible ‘just by discourse
alone’, suggesting that he did have the reading in the pṅinted edition of the versc in thc Tantrāloka
before him, and that hc tacitly understood that discourse implies ideation.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

[EGTNEIMKE:ISTIEEHETITVHIIEPVNMAHI

ītgsad |

vikalpe ʻpi guroḥ samyagabhinnaśivatājuṣaḥ || 284 ||
avikalpakaparyantaparīkṣā nopayujyate |

Even if a teacher who is an authentic state of identity with Śiva is

engaged in thought, it is not necessary (nor proper) to examine whether
he is ultimately free of thought constructs. (284cd-285ab) (285)

The reason why this ‘is not necessary (or proper)’ here (in this case) is

because the teacher is in a state of identity with Śiva, (and so it makes no

difference whether he thinks or not – thought cannot bind him).
Nor is this proved (to be so
by just reasoning alone. Thus, he says:

Mantra Deity Close to Consciousness

TGTHRTHHTHHT JTTTJTG |
tadvimarśasvabhāvā hi sā vācyā mantradevatā || 285 ||
mahāsaṁvitsamāsannety uktaṁ śrīgamaśāsane |

The Mantra deity expressed (by the Mantra) (vāycā) is the reflective

awareness (vimarśa) of that (individual non-conceptual consciousness,)
which is very close to the (one) Great Consciousness. (Thus) it is said in the
venerable Gamaśāsana – (285cd-286ab) (286)
The sense is that Mantra is (spontaneously,) by itself alone, (inherently)

consciousness devoid of thought constructs." As Mantras and the like are in

this way very close to supreme consciousness, those who adhere to them are

capable of achieving success (siddhi).

(The following) is said in order to state that by way of an analogy.

MS T reads pārīkṣyā for -pratīkṣā. Emend to -parīkṣā.

l R̥ead evāvikalpa- for evāvilpaka-.
MS Th reads tadāyatāṁ (which agrees with siddhiṁ) for tadāyaṁtāḥ (which agrees with
mantrādayas). If we accept the reading in manuscript Th, the meaning would be ‘((Mantras) are
capable of achieving (for those who utter them) the accomplishment of) adhering to that
(consciousness).’
]t is very likely that the following verse is drawn from the Gamatantra. The term ‘vimarśa’
(‘reflectīve awareness) is almost entirely absent in the primary sources. Thus, its usage in the

previous verse can be taken as evidence that it is composed by Abhinava as a gloss on the one that

follows, which is drawn from the Gamatantra. Cf. above 1/150-151 where a verse drawn from the
Gamatantra īs introduced as being from there, at the end of the previous line.

TANTRĀLOKA

siddhiṁ rājopagāṁ śīghram evaṁ mantrādayaḥ parām |
‘Mantras and the like (accomplish for those who recite them) the

supreme (attainment), just as those close to kings can rapidly achieve for
others success (siddhi) in approaching the king.”’ (286cd-287ab) (287)
‘The supreme’ attainment is liberation. As is said:
‘The lowest accomplishment (siddhi) is one that gives control over
others (vaśya). The middle one bestows the state of a Skyfarer. The most
excellent accomplishment bestows the destruction of the fear of transmigratory
existence.
Moreover, that is also said in our scripture. Thus, he says:

gs sīṁ̄Tnd 1| 3¢s 1
uktābhiprāyagarbhaṁ tad uktaṁ śrīmālinīmate || 287 ||

mantrāṇāṁ lakṣaṇaṁ kasmād ity ukte munibhiḥ kila |

What is said in the venerable Mālinīmata has the (same) intended

sense as has (just) been stated (here), as when the sages asked (Kumāra),
“what is the purpose of (the defining) the characteristic feature of

Mantras?” (287cd-288ab) (288)

The sense of (the sages asking) “what is the purpose?” is, why is the

characteristic feature of Mantras stated (in the Tantra) when a question has been

asked concerning Yoga? As is said (there):
‘The Lord has been questioned by the goddess concerning the procedure
(to follow on) the path of Yoga. Why then, although he had consented to

(answer that question,) has he taught the characteristic feature of Mantras?’

Desiring to answer the sagesʼ question, Kārtikeya (said) that it is taught

(there) as an auxiliary (limb) of Yoga. Thus, in order to explain this, he says:

Abhinava is broadly referring to MV 4/2, which is quoted by Jayaratha in the commentary.
2 MV 4/2.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

The Dynamics of Initiation
Initiation may be into Ritual Action and also
Conducive to Liberating Knowledge

āTṣṣġ 3arñtczg pTTIIcTIT-Sd

gahtvīārãttrṣ’ r-zāzrvāṁg |

fiferī aṛ īaātaṁ ã̄ agaīa 11 282 1|

vŪddq |

fṁar fraātazāT 1| 3<2 11

yogam ekatvam icchanti vastuno ‘nyena vastunā || 288 I|
yad vastu jñeyam ity uktaṁ heyatvādiprasiddhaye |
tatprasiddhyai śivenoktaṁ jñānaṁ yad upavarṇitam || 289 ||
sabījayogasaṁsiddhyai mantralakṣaṇam apy alam |
na cādhikāritā dīkṣāṁ vinā yoge ‘sti śāṅkare || 290 ||

dvividhā sā prakartavyā tena caitad udāhṛtam || 291 ||

na ca yogādhikāritvam ekamevānayā bhavet |
api mantrādhikāritvaṁ muktiśca śivadīkṣayā || 292 ||

“The (wise) maintain that Yoga (which literally means ‘union’) is
the oneness of one entity (vastu) with another. That which is (this other)

entity, is said to be what needs to be known in order to achieve (the
prescribed) avoidance (of what obstructs the attainment of the goal, and

what should be adopted to achieve it). Śiva has uttered the knowledge
described (in this way) so that it may be achieved.”
(Thus,) in order to achieve Yoga with seed (sabījayoga),
(knowledge just of) the characteristics of Mantras is (not) sufficient. There
is no competence (adhikāritā) (to practice) Śaiva Yoga without initiation.”
Moreover, (initiation) is said to be of two kinds, in accord with the
Read with the edition of the MV, yadvastu for tadvastu.

Abhinava omits MV 4/5ab, perhaps because it was not found in his manuscript or was added

later as a gloss. It reads: dvirāpam api taj jñānaṁ vinā jñātuṁ na śakyate | “It cannot be known in
either of its two forms (as what should be accepted or refected) without knowledge (jāna).
Sabījayoga – ‘yoga with seed’ corresponds to sabījasamādhi – ‘concentration with seed’ – in
Patañjali’s Yoga (YSū 1/46 tā eva sabījaḥ samādhiḥ). According to the Yogasūtrabhāṣya, the

term denotes the four kinds of meditative attainments (samāpatti) related to gross and subtle

extemal objects (ibid. āś catasraḥ samāpattayo bahirvastubījā iti samādhir api sabījaḥ).
See above note 1,1172 to TĀv ad 1/231cd-232ab (232).

TANTRĀLOKA

distinction between (the practice based on the performance of ritual) action

and (that conducive to the development of the) knowledge (of ultimate
principles). Thus, this has been said because that (initiation) should be

performed in the two (corresponding) ways.™ Śiva’s initiation not only
confers entitlement (to the fruits of) Yoga (and its practice), it also (confers

the) authority (to practice) Mantras as well as liberation (itself).’ (288cd292) (289-293ab)

As this has been explained before, its meaning has been clarified and

so is not analysed and explained here again.

Initiation is Essential for Liberating Mantra Practice

FrāTāā-T fiāārcārcṁīaā: 1| 3<3 1|
F-ATTAITĀT

a r̥oṀta ẽtrērq, || < 1
anenaitadapi proktaṁ yogī tattvaikyasiddhaye |
mantram evāśrayen mūlaṁ nirvikalpāntam ādṛtaḥ || 293 I|
mantrābhyāsena bhogaṁ vā mokṣaṁ vāpi prasādhayan |

tatrādhikāritālabdhyai dīkṣāṁ grṛhṇīta daiśikāt || 294 1|

It is also stated with these (words) that, in order to achieve oneness
with (ultimate) reality (tattvaika), the yogi must dedicate himself (āśrayet) to

the root Mantra alone, and to be intent on this (until he attains) the final
culmination (of its practice, which is a state of reflective awareness) free of

(dichotomizing) thought constructs. He who, wishing to attain (any specific
result), be it worldly benefit (bhoga) or even liberation, by the practice of
Mantra, must first take initiation from a teacher in order to obtain the
authority there (to access and practice Mantra). (293-294) (293cd-295ab)
ese are the Initiation by Action (kriyādīkṣā) and Initiation by Knowledge (jñānadīkṣā).
s 288cd-292 (289-293ab) are a direct literal quotation of MVT 4/4, Scd-8 with no
variants, with respect to Somadeva’s edition.

See above, 15/5-7, commentary and notes. MV 4/4-5 is quoted and discussed above in note to
1/150 note 1,952.

Commenting on the passage he has just quoted, Abhinava tells us here that he has quoted it in

order to confirm the nondualist teaching that mantras are essentially non-dichotomizing

awareness. The point is that for the yogi to achieve oneness with reality (tattvaikya), he should
dedicate himself totally to the practice of the root Mantra until he achieves nondiscursive
awareness. He is entitled and fit to do this once he has received initiation from a Śaiva tcacher.
This is in accord with the MV, that declares:
‘(Another,) having obtained the initiation into Yoga, and having understood (it), should

practice yoga. (Thus, he first) attains the (magical) accomplishment (siddhi) (that comes from)
yoga, and at the end of that, the etermal plane (of existence).
After having attained initiation into yoga (yogadīkṣā) and learnt (the fundamentals of)

yoga, he should practice (it). (Thus,) he will attain perfection in yoga, and at the end of it, the

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

By saying that (the yogi should be) ‘intent on this’ʼ, he is stating that he
is fully concentrated (on this practice). (Authority) ‘there’ in accessing and
practicing etc. Mantra.
The Various Kinds of Conjunctions (yojanikābheda)

Reliance on One’s Own Inherent Inner Strength (svabala)

Thus, by the greatness of his Mantra etc., he can attain everything, be it
worldly benefits (bhukti) and so too liberation also. Accordingly, he says:

Tq ādTāTdTq |

TTATRGRATTRĀTTTJSTī
J TṬGŪT ṜṬI || 284 1
tena mantrajñānayogabalāt tad tat prasādhayet |
tat syād asyānyatattve ‘pi yuktasya guruṇā śiśoḥ || 295 ||

Thus, even though the disciple may have been applied (yukta) by the

teacher to (some) other principle (tattva), he can (nevertheless) accomplish
every single thing (tat tat) there may be (in any of the principles) by the
might (bala) of Mantra, knowledge and Yoga. (295) (295cd-296ab)

‘Applied (yukta)ī means conjoined. By (saying) this, (he) also indicates
the various kinds of conjunctions etc.
Surely (one may ask), if (the disciple) is conjoined by the teacher to

(some) other principle, then how is it that by his own strength (bala) alone he
can have the worldly benefits or (even) liberation of another (principle)? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

dīkṣā hy asyopayujyeta saṁskriyāyāṁ sa saṁskṛtaḥ |
svabalenaiva bhogaṁ vā mokṣaṁ vā labhate budhaḥ || 296 ||

(The disciple’s) initiation should rightly serve to purify (him). (Once
he is) purified (and empowered thereby), he, wise (as he is), obtains worldly
benefits or (attains) liberation (as the case may be) by his own (inherent)
strength (svabala) alone. (296) (296cd-297ab)
ctemal state. Once the supreme plane has been attained by means of this gradual union

(kramayoga), on never retums to the fettered state, (but always) abides within one’s own pure

Self.' MV 1/46-47.

Read tat tat prasādhayet for yat yat prasādhayet and yat ṣyād- for tat syād-.
Read anyasya for anyathā.

Abhinava is drawing the term ‘ṣvabala’

extending its application.

‘inherent strength’ – from the Spanda teachings,

TANTRĀLOKA

Thuṣ, although he has been purified™ in the course of initiation, there

should be no discipline (niyama) (for him to which) the regular and other (kinds
of initiates are bound by taking initiation). Accordingly, he says:

ṁīa arzt vrarq |

TI āJ

TṬJaT--ṬRfT
aTGJTTT : II ṜR II

tena vijñānayogādibalī prāk samayī bhavan ḷ

putrako vã na tāvān syād api tu svabalocitaḥ l| 297 ||
Thus, he who has the strength (in himself to sustain) insight

(vijñāna), Yoga and the like, whether he is initially a regular (initiate) or a
spiriṭual son, he should not (limit himself) to being this only, but rather to
what is consonant with (his) own (inherent spiritual) strength. (297) (297cd-

298ab)

“This onlyʼ, that is, a regular initiate or spiritual son.
Surely (one may ask), what is the condition of one who is weak in
insight and Yoga etc.?

‘Seizing that strcongth (bala), Mantras, cndowed with the power of omnscience, perform
their functions, as do the senses of the embodicd.’ Spkā 26
Bhagavadutpala explains: ‘Mantras can be in the form of seed-syllables (bīja),
aggregates of syllables (pinda), or words (pāda). They possess the attributes of reflection
(manana) and salvation (trāna), energized as they are by the awakening of the power of the
Natural Sound (of universal consciousness, sahajanāda). When one who recites mantra makes use

of them with reverence, they fulfil their functions of bestowing grace and the rest by virtue of

their ommiscience and other powers, by ‘seizing’ and assuming as their support the ‘strength’
which is the exuberant outpouring of unobscured consciousness known as (its) Supreme Power, as
do the hands, feet, and other senses of the embodied soul. What is meant by this is that, he who

recites mantras can apply them as he likes through a mere act of will, by being conscious of the
supreme principle that resides within them.” Dyczkowski 1992: 160

‘Just as an object which is not seen clearly at first, even when the mind attends to it
carefully, later becomes fully evident when observed through the cffort exkerted thrugh one’s own
(inherent) strength (svahala), when the yogi lays hold of that same power in that same way,
whatever (he perceives manifests to him) quickly, in accord with its tue nature (paramārthena),
whatever be its form, locus, time or stat.’ SpKā 36-37
Kal

ta coṃments: `Just as a man, though attentive, does not at first discern the

nature of some distant obiect, (although it does subsequently) become clcarly apparent (to him)

without his having to move at all, when he exerts a special effort to perceive it, just so, by this

same special effort, anything of whatever nature at whatever time, in whichever place and
whatever form it might be, becomes quickly manifest in that very way for (the yogi) who is

established in his inherent strength (svabala), that is his essential nature (svasvabhāva), because it
is free of obscuration. Thercfore, it is not at all surprising (if he) knows the past and the future of

(any) finite object. Op. cit. p. 1 14.
5 Read saṁskṛto ‘pi for kṛto ‘pi.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

One without Inner Knowledge or Yoga is Totally Dependent
on the Teacher and Initiation

fṆrēīaā ta aaāTaT ṬRhī aasaT || 3<¢ 1|
yas tu vijñānayogādivandhyaḥ so ‘ndho yathā pathi |
daiśikāyatta eva syād bhoge muktau ca sarvathā || 298 I|
However, he who (on the contrary) is devoid of insight, Yoga and
the like, is like a blind man (walking) on the road; he depends completely
on the teacher, for (both) worldly benefits and liberation. (298) (298cd-

299ab)

Surely (one may ask), what could even a teacher do for one who is
devoid of insight and Yoga etc.? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ãṭa a %haor aā far f-r̥sōī-āq |

ĩēthaiāī hẼTĩd 3gTaTI ĨIIĨĨ: ÇJ I| 388 11

dīkṣā ca kevalā jñānaṁ vināpi nījam āntaram |
mocikaiveti kathitaṁ yuktyā cāgamataḥ purā || 299 ||
It was said before on the basis of (both) reasoning and scripture,
that initiation is liberating by itself alone, even without one’s own inner
knowledge. (299) (299cd-300ab)
“(It was said) before’ in Chapter Fifteen etc.

arsttāhīi fSrā;: 1|

Tjtr̥cã
agfr ṁ aāma: | 3o0 1|
aīsfī aāšḷa 3gāh: aīatddi
Jēi |
yas tu dīkṣākṛtām evāpekṣya yojanikāṁ śiśuḥ |
sphuṭībhūtyai tad ucitaṁ jñānaṁ yogam athāśritaḥ l| 300 II

so ʻpi yatraiva yuktaḥ syāt tanmayatvaṁ prapadyate |

The disciple who is dependent on the conjunction (with a particular
principle) brought about by initiation, relies on (the corresponding) insight
and yoga appropriate to it in order to make it clearly evident.
(Nonetheless,) wherever he has been conjoined (at whatever reality-level),
he also attains a state of oneness (lanmayatva) (with it, and hence all levels).

(300-301ab) (300cd-301)

TANTRĀLOKA

“‘Wherever he has been conjoined’, that is to say, by the teacher.

he says:

Thus, this accomplishment depends solely on the teacher. Accordingly,

TGTaāīT̄-ā-TTTĀTĪTĀĪTRJfTRTT: 11 302 1
gurudīkṣāmantraśāstrādhīnasarvasthitis tataḥ || 301 ||
Thus, (the disciple’s) entire state is (entirely) dependent on the
teacher, initiation, the Mantras and the scriptures. (301cd) (302ab)
Having explained this with regards to the spiritual son etc., he (goes on)
to explain it with regards to the adept (sādhaka) also.
Purification of the Disciple’s Karma by Initiation

GTTÑa JdT] JTTr̄TĪTTaT]|

tīi Tīāṁ ōṬḡ? 3JJJaJĪ ṢJITHTTT 1| 30 ||

Ṝṛg: 1|

JÑĪSĪT |I 303 1
duṣṭānām eva sarveṣāṁ bhūtabhavyabhaviṣyatām |

karmaṇāṁ śodhanaṁ kāryaṁ bubhukṣor na śubhātmanām || 302 |
yaḥ punar laukikaṁ bhogaṁ rājyasvargādikaṁ śiśuḥ |
tyaktvā lokottaraṁ bhogam īpsus tasya śubheṣv api || 303 |I
(Only) the bad actions (karman), past, present and future of one

who desires worldly benefits should be purified, not the (good) auspicious
ones. (However,) the good actions (should also be purified) in the case of a
disciple who, on the contrary, having abandoned worldly benefits such as a
kingdom, (residence) in heaven and the like, desires (only) other-worldly
(lokottara) benefits. (302-303) (302cd-304ab)
‘One who desires worldly benefits is a lokadharmin adept.

'taã īīazāāf- sṛgaṁtRrēī-: || 30x5 1|

3ārāczāī q ṭaīṁa aṣqaēatx afra:

.: Ū-Tārzēāī TJTTSIĀĪ TSTT II 304 1
JaTRATṬTGÑĪIT]
JḺJĪT TTaā7 JJḤḤ |
TTṚTRTJTTIGĀTE
TAĒTTGT || 30Ṝ |1|

tatra dravyamayīṁ dīkṣāṁ kurvann ājyatilādikaiḥ |

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

karmāsya śodhayāmīti juhuyād daiśikottamaḥ || 304 ||

jñānamayyāṁ tu dīkṣāyāṁ tadviśuddhyati sandhitaḥ |
guroḥ ṣvasaṁvidrūḍhasya balāt tatprakṣayo bhavet || 305 ||
yadāsyāśubhakarmāṇi śuddhāni syus tadā śubham |
svatāratamyāśrayaṇād adhvamadhye prasūtidam || 306 |I
The best of teachers, who is engaged in the initiation that consists
(of offering) sacrificial substances, should make offerings to the fire with
cḷarified butter and sesame seeds etc., saying “I purify his karma”. In (the
course of) initiation consisting of knowledge, that (disciple’s karma) is
purified by the intent (sandhi) of the teacher who is deeply rooted (rūḍha)
in his own consciousness and by whose power (balāt) its destruction takes
place If (only the disciple’s) inauspicious actions are purified, the good
(actions) bear fruit in various degrees, depending on the degree of their
own excellence, (in this or that place) in the midst of the path. (304-306)
(304cd-307ab)
(In the course of initiation consisting of knowledge) ‘that’, i.e. (the

disciple’s) Karma, (is purified) by the (the teacher’s) ‘intent’ (sandhi), that is,
by his mental intent that conjoins the lokadharmin (disciple to higher realities)
(anusandhāna).
He attains the place in which (and by means of which) he is conjoined

(to higher realities) (yojanikāsthāna) once (the fruits of his) auspicious Karma
have been enjoyed. Thus he says:

JṬJTHṢĒHĪTTĪ GGĀĪTTHITĀT; |

śubhapākakramopātta phalabhogasamāptitaḥ |
yatraiṣa yojitas tatstho bhāvikarmakṣaye kṛte || 307 I|

Once the enjoyment of the fruits accrued by the gradual maturing

(and digestion) of auspicious (good Karma) is complete, and future Karma
has thereby been destroyed, (the disciple) is present on that (reality level
and world) to which he has been conjoined (by the teacher who initiates

him there). (307) (307cd-308ab)

‘(The disciple) is present on that (reality level and world)ʼ and is, in

other words, in that state. ‘The future Karma has been destroyed’ by enjoying
(the fruits of good Karma). The intended sense is that the purification of the

good Karma of the lokadharmin (adept) has not been taught (only that of the
other kind).
If the future auspicious (good) Karma has not been destroyed, then, on

the contrary, (its fruit) is enjoyed in various places (as befits it). Thus, he says:
One could also translate: ‘its destruction takes place with great force (balāt).

TANTRĀLOKA

fēṝā īRICGTJCGTṁTRITHĪCTT]_I

rgJāĪĪRī̄ṬĪ WRTRĪT-ĀaTT: || 30¢ 111
bhāvināṁ cādyadehasthadehāntaravibhedinām |
aśubhāṁśaviśuddhau syād bhogasyaivānupakṣayaḥ l| 308 II
Future (actions) are of two kinds, according to whether they

concern the present body or other (future) bodies. If (just) the inauspicious

part (of these Karmas) is purified, (their future) consequence (bhoga) is not
destroyed. (308) (308cd-309ab)
(The Karmas of) ‘the present body’ are the future (Karmas that arise)

during the time after the initiation (in the present body).
JSIT-ĀITA Tdd sTTr-āīaāīaāīīd:

ī gaTō… gaeīrxzāadstT fezT || 30Ḷ 1|
bhuñjānasyāsya satataṁ bhogān māyālayāntataḥ |
na duḥkhaphaladaṁ dehādyadhvamadhye ‘pi kiñcana || 309 ||
He always enjoys the experiences (that are the result of his good
Karma) (bhoga) until Māyā dissolves away, without ever having a body of

any kind that is a source of suffering (for him), even though it be

(somewhere) in the middle of the path (of transmigratory existence). (309)

(309cd-310ab)

What happens to him until Māyā has dissolved away? With this
question in mind, he says:

frs+as nēv át sa arstīāīṀīq || 320 1|
tato māyālaye bhuktasamastasukhabhogakaḥ |
niṣkale sakale vaiti layaṁ yojanikābalāt || 310 ||
Then, when Māyā has dissolved away, and he is (an individual)

experiencing subject who has experienced all the joy (of his good Karma),
he merges into transcendental (niṣkala) or immanent (sakala) (Śiva,) by
virtue of the power (bala) of the (initiation he has received, that) conjoins
(to higher reality levels). (310) (310cd-311ab)
Now he concludes, (summarizing) the subject of (this) chapter with the
first half of a verse (of which the second half introduces the following chapter).

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

iti prameyaṁ kathitaṁ dīkṣā kāle guror yathā |
Thus, that which needs to be known has been declared, namely the

manner of the initiation (the teacher imparts) at (the appropriate) time.
(311ab) (311cd)

In this way this which ‘needs to be known’ has been stated here

namely, ‘the manner’ in which the teacher should perform ‘the initiation at

(the appropriate) timeʼ, that is, when a descent of the power (of grace takes
place). (This is the) auspicious (end of an auspicious chapter).

The one called Jayaratha has here explained this, the sixteenth chapter
(of the Tantrāloka), concerning the mental conjunction (anusandhāna) of the the
object of purification and the purifier, that has arisen by the glorious power
(mahimā) of the venerable teacher (Abhinavagupta).

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
What Needs be Done in the Procedure Concerning

the Apprentice (vidheyaprakriyā vidhau)

I bow with reverence to (Śiva’s) glory (vibhava), that is skilful in

moving in the ongoing unfolding of Karma (karmaprapañca) generated by its
own power, and that bestows (inner) strength, as it draws near the (grace) to

bestow the strength to cross over phenomenal existence.

Now here itself, with the second half (of the verse of which the first half

concluded the previous chapter), he announces the following, in order to talk
about the rite which has a great purpose.

atha bhairavatādātmyadāyinīṁ prakriyāṁ bruve |
We will now teach (another) procedure (prakriyā) that bestows a
state of oneness with Bhairava.
He expounds that:
Fashioning the Three Knots of the Sacred Thread (sūtrakḷpti)

TG HVsēṇPITT̄YIRIRTH—q
TSĀ II 3 1I

fṛsāgq 1

arĩ TT= -rṝ 11 3 11
ftrarai fkṝīcgadteraāīãt

evaṁ maṇḍalakumbhāgniśiṣyasvātmasu pañcasu || 1 ||
grhītvā vyāptim aikyena nyasyādhvānaṁ ca śiṣyagam |
karmamāyāṇumalinatrayaṁ bāhau gale tathā || 2 ||
Śikhāyāṁ ca kṣipet sūtragranthiyogena daiśikaḥ |
After having grasped in this way the (mutual) pervasion as a unity
within the five, namely, the maṇḍala, the jar (kumbha), the fire, the disciple,
and his own Self, and deposited the Path onto the disciple, the teacher

Abhinava concludes this chapter saying that he has taught th initaton in which (the disciplc’s)
birt is induced (in the hicrarchy of worlds) (17/122cd). This form of initiation is contrasted to the
one taught in the previous chapter which, we ar told repeatedly, does not involve this. The form
of the initiaton taught here is larṣely that of the viśeṣadīkṣā 'special initāation’ of the Siddhānta in
which, as here, the joumey of the disciple’s soul through the worlds by successive rcbirths is
marked by the progressive buming of a thrcad onto which it has been projected. The procedure
(prakriyā), along with others, in the form found in the common Siddhānta and in the Trika as
presented in the Parātrīśika, is outlined in Dyczkowski 1992a: 235-240.
See above 1694cd ff.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

should cast the three impurities (mala) of Karma, Māyā and the Individual

one onto the (disciple’s) arms, throat and topknot (respectively), by linking
(yogena) (them to) knots (tied) in a (sacred) thread. (cd-3ab)
Here the ancillary jar (karkarī) is included along with ‘the jar
(kumbha), so it is mentioned (implicitly) amongst the five. (The three
impurities are cast onto the disciple’s body) ‘by linking (yogena) (them to)

knots (tied) in a (sacred) thread’. The meaning is that they are of that form.

As is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘(After that, the teacher should) first of all tie the mass of fetters, that is,

the adventitious (āgantu) (impurity of Karma), the innate (sahaja) (impurity of
the indiviḍual soul,) and the empowered one (of Māyā), onto the arms, throat
and tip of the topknot (respectively), by means of a thread made of three timeṣ

three (strands).”

What is the intention behind casting these (Impurities) in the form of

knots (onto the body)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TRaāTzJTTĪ TGĪ JRJ:

̄ūŪ |1 3 11

tasyātadrūpatābhānaṁ malo granthiḥ sa kiīrtyate || 3 |I
iti pratītidārḍhyārthaṁ bahirgranthyupakalpanam |

The Impurity (mala) (of Māyā), which is the manifestation of that
(reality) in a form that is other than it is, is called the Knot. In order to
strengthen the perception (of it) in this way, outer knots are fashioned
accordingly. (3cd-4ab)
Above in 16/74-93ab, Abhinava cites and cxplains MV 9/37-53ab. He continues on from there
here in 17/1cd ff. Thus, these verses (lcd-3ab) are an explanatory paraphrase of MV 9/54-57:

‘Reflect (bhāvayet) that the path to be purified of the disciple, maṇḍala and fire is
present there as a single unity, having deposited (it), as explaincd previously, on the body of thc

disciples. (54)

Take up (āśraye) the visualization of the pervasion of each one by means of its own
(coresponding) mantra. Having tid initally the mass of feters, that is, the incoming
(adventiious) (āgantu) (impurity of Karma) the innate (sahaja) (impurity of the individual soul)

and the empowered one (of Māyā), onto the arms, throat and tip of the topknot (respectively), by

means of a thread made of three times three (strands). (Do this) with its own (corresponding)
mantra. Then, having invoked (the corresponding) reality level (tatva), worshipped (it) and
offered libation (to it), the skilled (officiant) should then bring the pervasive matrix (yoni), that is,
the Vidyā of its matrices that are to be purified, (first) on the path that ends with Māyā, and (then)

that same (vidyā) on the pure (path beyond). (S6-57)

MV 9/55cd-56ab.

“Maāyā is of two kinds, as the Knot (of ignorance) (Granthi) and the pṅinciple (Tattva) (which

correspond to its disturbed and undisturbed aspects), above ad 8/259-260 (258cd-260ab). See
above, note 1,154 to TĀv ad 1/7, see note 4,126 ad 4/38 for a definition of Māyā as the ‘Knot’,
and also note 8,27 ad 8/9-10, cf. TĀv ad 9/154ab and note 9,292.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘That (reality)” is the supreme Brahman, which is the full light (of

consciousness). (Its) ‘manifestation in a form that is other than it is’ is its
perception as contracted (limited and not full). As it causes the obscuration of
(this true) essential nature (svarūpa), it is called Impurity (mala), and because it
limits (and blocks) it, it is called the Knot. In order to strengthen this (perception

of it), ‘knots are fashioned accordingly’ in the external thread of the fetters in

this way.
Even if this is so, why is it said that it is (to be placed) on the arms etc.?

With this doubt in mind, he says:

bāhū karmāspadaṁ viṣṇur māyātmā galasaṁśritaḥ || 4 ||
adhovahā śikhāṇutvaṁ tenetthaṁ kalpanā kṛtā |
The arms are the locus of action. Viṣṇu, whose nature is Māyā, is
located in the throat. The topknot that flows downwards (represents the
Impurity that engenders the state of limitation) of the individual soul. It is
for this reason that (the knots are) imagined in this way. (4cd-5ab)
(Viṣṇu’s) ‘nature is Māyā’, because his authority (holds sway) within
it. (The topknot) ‘flows downwards’, because the energy of the vital breath
(that the topknot symbolizes) extends from there (down) to the heart.
Surely (one may ask), even if this is so, why are the three (strands) of
the thread tripled? With this doubt in mind, he says:

-ṁkhfTrārāz raāaā āīgaa, || 4, 1|
naraśaktiśivākhyasya trayasya bahubhedatām || 5 ||

vaktuṁ tris triguṇaṁ sūtraṁ granthaye parikalpayet |

The thread for the knot should be fashioned with three triple

(tristriguṇam) strands, in order to signify that the triad called Man, Śakti,

and Śiva is of many kinds.’ (Scd-6ab)

Unfortunately, I could not locate the source of this verse.

It is common practice to make the thread of three triple strands, and to identify the three strands
with the channels 1dā, Piṅgalā and Śuṣumnā. Here they are related to the Trika triad of Man, Śakti

and Śiva, giving it a Trika identity. Ṅumerous other identifications are also possible. Commenting

on SVT 3/163-164, Kṣemarāja explains:
......4kanyākartitasūtrakam |

triguṇaṁ triguṇīkr̥tya.

kanyā av

SVT 3/163bc

tavikāraparaśaktyānukṛtarūpeti

tato mūlabhūmeḥ pravṛttānām

āṇavamāyīyakārmarūpāṇāṁ .ṣattvādigaṇatrayātmakaprapañcavyāptibhājāṁ pāśānāṁ bhāvibandhacchedādikaṁ samūlam unmīlanārtham, iti kanyākarúitatve triguṇatriguṇatve cāśayaḥ . .

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
The sense (of this verse) is that all this is of the nature of Man, Śakti,

and Śiva.
In order to show here itself (in this context) the pervasion (of these three
principles) in terms of the procedure (prakriyā) of other scriptures, he says:

3ṁ Jaúdhṁa--; .1 |

J

hHT: JTGGĀTÑT
TĪTR |

tejojalānnatritayaṁ tredhā pratyekam apy adaḥ | 6 |I
Śśrutyante ke ʻpy ataḥ śuklakṛṣṇaraktaṁ prapedire |
Thus, some have taught in the Vedas that each of the three, namely,
fire, water and food, is threefold, that is, white, black and red. (6cd-7ab)

(This is taught) ‘in the Vedas’, as is said in the teaching (imparted to)

Śvetaketu in the Chāndogyopaniṣad:

‘Fire arose out of the one supreme Brahman, and from that water, and
from water, food. Each one of these arose threefold. There, (three) forms of fire,

red, white and black arose. That which is red is fire. That which is white is water

and that which is black is food.”

‘Thus’, because such is the nature of the triad of fire, water and food.
Here (in this rite) when the fetters etc. are in the course of being severed within

tu

prakriyāmātrabhedaḥ

Śśaktitrayam

.eva

tritattvena

sthitam,

ity

āśayena

‘Having tripled the thread fashioned by a virgin girl with three threads, . . . SYT 3/163bc

A virgin symbolizes the supreme power in which no deformations have arisen. A tripled

triple thread is fashioned by a virgin, with the intention that it should serve to uproot, root (and

all) the future bonds and cracks etc. which are the fetters that pervade the three qualities of sattva

and the rest. They have been set into operation from the root ground in the form of (the three

Impurities) Āṇava, Māyīya and Kārma. According to the Mālinīviiaya and others, the three
energies (of will, knowledge and action) are present (here) as the three pṅinciples (tattva) (of Man,

Śakti and Śiva). It is with this intention that there are three threads (not one with three strands).

The difference (in details) is just one of procedure (praktiyā).’
The sixth prapāṭhaka of tṅe Chāndogyopaniṣad īs the instruction Śvetaketu Āruṇeya received
from his father Uddālaka Aruṇi. There we read:

yad agne rohitaṁ rūpaṁ tejasas tadrūpaṁ yac chuklaṁ tad apāṁ yat kṛṣṇaṁ tad

annasyāpāgād anger agnitvaṁ vācārambhaṇaṁ vikāro nāmadheyaṁ trīṇi rāpānīty eva satyam |
Chāndogyopaniṣad 6/41

‘Whatever red form fire has, is the form of heat; whatever white, the form of water;
whatever dark, the form of food. The fire-ness has gone from fire; the modification is merely a
verbal distinction, a name. The reality is just ‘these three forms’.”

As Abhinava reports, each of these three is said in the Upaniṣad to be of three kinds.
However, this is not the passage Jayaratha quots. Perhaps it is a commentary on it or the vērsion
of the Upaniṣad prevalent in Kashmir at that ime contained this passage.

TANTRĀLOKA

the body, which is the foundation of worldly experience, (the phases in which
this takes place, namely) the burning and drying (of the fetters) and the rest,
should arise (in a manner that they are) directly apparent. Thus, with the
intention of symbolizing that, (the thread is called a ‘sūtra’) because it indicates
(sūcana) the primary fetters (amongst) the endless numbers (of others) and the
like in the body, and because it saves (trāṇa) (from them) as the means by
which they are severed. It is within this, which is denoted by the word ‘sūtra’,
that the severing of the fetters etc. should be done. This is (the symbolic

etymological) meaning of (the name) ‘thread of the fetters’ (pāśasūtra). As
scripture (declares):

‘The second one is the body of the thread where these fetters are

located. They should be blocked, severed and burnt in the location of the thread,

not in the body (vigraha).”

The Purification of the Principles (tattvaśuddhi)
Having explained in this way the preparation of the thread, he (now)
talks about the purification of the principles.

aīsī ātrṁrṁrraā fkkzaāTmāē-; .1 .9 11
TIHT-JU TTTĪ JGhTJ ūHT=NÇ |

tato ‘gnau tarpitāśeṣamantre cidvyomamātrake || ] |I

sāmānyarūpe tattvānāṁ kramāc chuddhiṁ samācaret |
Then one should purify the principles one after the other (kramāt)

in the fire, within which libation has been offered to (all) the mantras, and

(consisting of) the Void of Consciousness alone, is (their) universal (generic)
nature. (7cd-8ab)

The intended sense is that, according to our view, purification is (the
process) of making (the principles) one with that within (their) ‘universal
(generic) natureʼ, which is ‘the Void of Consciousness alone’.
He says just that.

TraTĪTF TT-JTIaTRIT-T
JaTĪ |
tatra svamantrayogena dharām āvāhayet purā |l 8 II
iṣṭvā puṣpādibhiḥ sarpiṣṭilādyair atha tarpayet |
tattattvavyāpikāṁ paścān māyātattvādhidevatām || 9 l|
māyāśaktiṁ svamantreṇāvāhyābhyarcya pratarpayet |

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

There he should first of all invoke the Earth (principle) by applying
its Mantra, and having made offerings with flowers and the like, he should

offer libations with clarified butter and sesame seeds etc. After that, having

invoked and worshipped with her own mantra the power of Māyā, that

pervades that principle (of Earth), and the one who is the deity that

presides over the principle Māyā (adhidevatā), he should offer libations to

her. (8cd-10ab)

‘That principle’ is the principle called ‘Earth’. ‘The power of Māyā’

is (here) in the form of the goddess Vāgīśvar. ‘Her own mantra’ is OM

Surely (one may ask), it was said before that the aggregate of

phonemes, understood to be the Mātṛkā and Mālinī (orders of the alphabet),

(function as) the Mantra of the aggregate of principles beginning with Earth.
(So) which one (of these) is considered here to be (their) Mantra?

āvāhane mātṛkārṇaṁ mālinyarṇaṁ ca pūjane || 10 ||
kuryād iti guruh prāha svarūpāpyāyanadvayāt |

The teacher' has said that, in the course of invocation (of each

principle), one should (utter) a phoneme from the Mātṛkā (order of the
alphabet), and in the course of (its) worship (pūjā), from the Mālinī (order),

because the two, respectively, (differentiate) the nature (of each one) and

nourish (them). (10cd-11ab)

‘In the course of worship means when offering libation etc. Mātrṛī
the mother of the universe, and so it is befitting that (her letters) differentiate
the specific nature (ṣvarūpa) (of the principles from one another). Maālinī
sustains (and contains) the universe within her own nature, and so it is said that
she nourishes (it), ‘because the two, respectively, (differentiate) the nature
(of each one) and nourish (them)’.
He now illustrates the two here (in this particular case).

The exposition of this rite continues up to line 30cd.
See below 17/74-75. Cf. MV 9/69:

‘O Supreme Goddess, having after that dismissed the principle (tatva) Vāgīṣī, he
should imagine it to be melted away and pure in what is impure,’
'' Abhinava is referring here again to the authority of his teacher Śambhunātha to validate the

procedure he outlines here, whereby it is possible to arrive at the form of a Mantra that can be

derived by simple logic (ūha), and thereby modify (āha) it according to the context in which it is

applied. All the mantras of the series of Tattvas and the constituents of other Paths can be

eenerated in this way. Not only Abhinava arives at their form by this method, his students may

do so also. Thus, he has no need to waste space to write all the mantras in full, and his students

benefit by exercising their reflective awareness.

' For svarūpāpyāyanadvayāt MS T reads svarūpāpyāyanadvayam.

Read -pṛthakkāritvaṃ for -pṛthākāritvam.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Formation of the Mantras that Invoke the Principles

q= ām nqāīdṁ Taīsgfrācīē] 11 22 1I
GTJĀT ūīckH Jaāadq |

tāro varṇo ‘tha saṁbuddhipadaṁ tvām ity ataḥ param || 11 II
uttamaikayutaṁ karmapadaṁ dīpakam apy ataḥ |
tubhyaṁ nāma caturthyantaṁ tato ʻpy ucitadīpakam || 12 ||
ity ūhamantrayogena tattatkarma pravartayet |
(First comes) the Saviour (NAMAHḤ), now the (appropriate)

phoneme (KSA PHA), the name (of the principle) in the vocative (DHARE),

and after that (the second person pronoun) ‘yow’ (TVĀṀ), the verb (to
invoke) in the first person singular (ĀVĀHAYĀMI), then the Energizer
(dīpaka) (NAMAḤ), (the pronoun) ‘to you’ (TUBHYAM), the name (of the

principle) in the dative (e.g. DHARĀYAI) and then after that (finally), the
appropriate Energizer (NAMAH or SVĀHĀ). The various rites should be
performed in association with the Mantra, modified (according to the
principle being purified) (āhamantra). (11cd-13ab)

‘The Saviour’ is praṇava, i.e. OM. ‘The (appropriate) phoneme’ of

the Mātṛkā (order of the alphabet), as for example, in the case of Earth, (the

letter) KS. ‘The name (of the principle) in the vocative’ is for example (in this

case) ‘dhare’ (‘O Earth!”). ‘The verb (to invoke) in the first person singular’
is ‘avāhayāmi’ (‘I invoke’). ‘The Energizer’ is NAMAH. ‘The name’ ((of the
principle) in the dative) is (in this example) is ‘dharāyai’. ‘The appropriate
Energizer’ is ‘NAMAH’ in the case of worship (pūjā) and the like, and

‘SVĀHĀ’ in the case of a fire sacrifice.

Surely, the invocation (is the topic) commenced here. How is it that he

refers to worship (pūjā) etc.?

3Taāēa+x
fē ē̄+̃ ad fnTrT 11 g3 1

āvāhanānantaraṁ hi karma sarvaṁ nigadyate || 13 ||
Conceming the term ūāha – the ‘modification of a Mantra in accord with its changing context’,

see above, 16/268 (268cd-269ab) and note.

!` NAMAḤ KṢAṀ / PHAṀ DHARE TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ TUBHYAṀ

DHARĀYAI NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.

In the case of worship (pājā), the Mantra letter of the Earth principle would be

according to the Mālinī order of the alphabet, which is PHA. The final ‘namaḥ’ used for worship

is substituted with ‘ṣvāhā’ if a fire sacrifice (homa) is being offered. The mantras of the

remaining 35 principles have the same structure; all that needs to be done is substitute its name

first in the vocative (like dhare) and then in the dative (like dharāyai). Noṭe that the letters are in

the reverse with respect to the normal alphabetical order. A question arises here. As the letters of
the two alphabets are 50 and the principles are 36, what happens to the remaining 14 letters?

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

It is said that all the rites follow after the invocation. (13cd)
Surely (one may ask), what is an invocation, that worship and the rest
should follow after it. With this doubt in mind, he says:

IRRTGRTĀTTTHTTGTHATTYāTTT
|I/Ç¥ /1I
āvāhanaṁ ca saṁbodhaḥ ṣvasvabhāvavyavasthiteḥ |
bhāvasyāhaṁmayasvātmatādātmyāveśyamānatā || 14 1|

Moreover, the invocation is the vocative (saṅbodha)' (of the deity

invoked in the Mantra). It is (an awakening – saṁbodha – of the deity,
which is) the process of penetration into a state of oneness within one’s own
(true) nature, consisting of (the self-reflective awareness of the
unconditioned subjectivity of) ‘I’ (am) (ahaṁmaya), of the state of being

(bhāva) situated within one’s own (true) nature (svasvabhāvasthiti). (14)

‘Invocationʼ is the ‘vocative’ (sarṁbodha) (which in the highest sense is

the awakening of the true condition) ‘of the state of being situated within
one’s own (true) nature’ that is invoked. (It is said that,) “(The wise) know

that

the

vocative

is

just

(the

bare)

state

of

alert

attention

(abhimukhībhāvamātra) towards the one who is invoked (siddha).' In accord

' The literal meaning of the word is ‘to call’. The word sahībodha (also, more commonly,
saṁbodhana) is used as a grammatical term, which designates the vocative, usually traslated by

‘to callʼ, ‘to address oneself to’ or ‘to alert’. See VP, ĪI, Sādhanasamuddeśa, 163 and the

comment by Helārāja: ‘the vocative has a form which is more than the meaning of (just the bare)
stemʼ. It can also mean, as Abhinavagupta understands it here, ‘paying attention’ or ‘being

awakeʼ, which is a process of penetration of one’s own limited identity into its unconfined,
universal ground of subjectivity, in which he who is addressed is at one with the one who

addresses him. In the PTv (p. 57) Abhinava writes: ‘(nvocation, that is) paying attention (to

someone), consists of a state of identity between the one who is called and the one who calls. It

has a different sense than (just) the stem. Thus it is said that ‘the nominal stem differs from the
vocative. The word saṁbodha also means ‘awakening’. See also, PTy p. 73 ff. in note 17,19

below.

The word svasvabhāva literally means ‘one’s own own nature’. As the nature of one’s own

nature, it denotes one’s own true nature.
' Read -vyavasthiteḥ for -vyavasthityā.

The term ‘abhimukhībhāva’ literally means ‘a state of facing towardsʼ. In this context, it

denotes the state of alert attention of the person who, being called, faces towards the one who calls
him. It also an act of self-awareness to grasp oneself
as the one who is being called, as it is on the

part of one who is calling. Abhinava understands this to be a self-cognitive process of penetration
into the self-awareness of the common ground of subjectivity that the one who is called shares

with the one who calls him. The invocation invokes the presence of the deity. It is invoked by
calling it in the vocative. The deity is the true essential nature of the one who invokes it. Its

presence is its state of oneness with the worshipper. The invocation thus calls upon the one who

invokes, to penetrate into his own nature. He is calling out to the deity, who is other than himself

– one he addresses as ‘you’. For the deity to be made present, which is the function and purpose of
the invocation, that ‘you’ must become ‘T’. The invocation is the process by which this takes
place, that is, the penetration into a state of oneness with it in the pure self-awareness of ‘’. For

this to take place, the condition of the one who is invoking the deity must rise out of his state of

TANTRĀLOKA

with this view, (the state of pure alert attention is) the process of penetrating

into a state of oneness within one’s own (true) nature, which is the reflective

awareness of the full (and unconditioned subjectivity of) ‘I’ (am) (pārṇāhaṁparāmara). Thisis (alert attention,) not penetration itself. Ifit were to be so, it

would be Śiva’s state (daśā), not that of Śakti. Suchis the intended meaning.
Thus, he says:

Śśāktī bhūmiś ca saivoktā yasyāṁ mukhyāsti pūjyatā |
This is said to be the plane of Power (śakti), within which is the
primary (venerable and sacred) state of the object of worship (pūjyatā).
(15ab)
Surely (one may ask), how is it that the (venerable and sacred) state of
the object of worship is primarily on the plane of Power? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

Taī JTHTTTT: 1] 24 11
abhātatvād abhedāc ca na hy asau nṛśivātmanoḥ || 15 ||

This (condition is not that) of Man or Śiva, because (the former) is
not illumined (by the light of consciousness) (abhāta), and (the latter) is
(one and) undivided (abheda). (15cd)

bcing established within himself alone. In other words, it is a transition from individual to
universal, duality to oneness. The invocation initially evokes attention, which is understood in this
context as the propensity that initiates this process of identification.

? Abhinaya explains that ‘the invocation (āmantraṇa) of the Supreme Goddess (paramesvarī)
clearly expresses her nature as that of Śakti. AIl ṭhis is the trad – trika– consisting of Man, Power
and Śiva. There, (in this perspective,) whatever

lely confined within itself is insentient, and so

is, in the primary sense, Man, as when one says, for example, ‘the jar stands (there)’. (The

grammarians refer to it) as the remaining (person after referring to the first two), and is the

domain of the third person. Again, that manifests in the form of ‘this’, as the object of invocation,

in such a way that its ‘thisness’ is veiled by the ‘ that invokes, and its objectivity is separate

from it in the form of Power that can be expressed by the word ‘you’, (as when one says) ‘you are
standing’. There, (in that case,) this is the meaning of the word ‘you’ (the second person), and the
nature of the invocation (‘hey you’). When one invokes (someone thinking), ‘just as I stand (here)

so does he also (there), (and so is in the same state as I am, namely, that) he also possesses, (as I
do,) the independence which is the wonder of subjectivity associated with (the sense of one’s own
existence (asmadrūpa), (corresponding to the first person,) considering it to be the continuous
(unconditioned) wonder of ‘’ (he possesses), indicated by the second person in the sense of

‘you’. This (stage corresponds to) the goddess Parāparā. When one has the reflective awareness

of ‘T, which consists of the (perfect) freedom of independence in the uninterrupted wonder (of

consciousness), the goddess Parā arises, as when one says, ' exist’, which corresponds to the first
person. PTy p. 73-75.
Implicit in the act of calling, of saying, for example, “(hey) you”, the second person, is
the presumption, which is the basis of the relish of my own continuing ‘l-ness’ʼ, that that which I
am callig is in my same state, and possesses the freedom, the (experience of) wonder (which is
consciousness), the same ‘I-ness’, which is expressed in the first person.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

(The principle called Man, which includes all objectivity,) ‘is not
illumined (by the light of consciousness)ʼ, because of (its) insentience. This is
the meaning. (The principle called Śiva) ‘is (one and) undivided’, because the

distinction between the worshipper and the object of worship has fallen away.
As is said with the same intended sense:

suprṛeme

‘One should apply Mantras to Śakti, not to the individual soul or the

reality . . .””
Surely (one may ask), if this is so, why is it proper to worship etc. the
Earth and other insentient (principles)? With this doubt in mind, he says:
Establishing Consciousness in the Principles and their Worship

ācāī qaīarāthz: 11 2ē 1
TTGTTĪTTĀTITqĪ
TT TTrGTĀḤ |I

jadābhāseṣu tattveṣu saṁvitsthityai tato guruḥ |
āvāhanavibhaktiṁ prāk kṛtvā turyavibhaktitaḥ || 16 ||
namaṣkārāntatāyogāt pūrṇāṁ sattāṁ prakalpayet |
Then, in order to establish consciousness within the insentient
principles (like Earth) (jaḍābhāsa), the teacher (should form and utter their
Mantras). (In order to do this, he) should first apply the case ending of an
invocation, (that is, the vocative, to the name of the principle,) and then the
case ending of the dative, and then, by adding the salutation (namaskāra) at

” The verse from which Jayaratha is quoting the first line is found complete in PTv p. 151. There
it reads:

na puṅsi na pare tattve śaktau mantraṁ niveśayet

jaḍatvān niṣkriyatvāc ca na te bhogāpavargadāḥ |

‘One should place Mantra in (the sphere of conscious) energy (śakti) not in the
individual soul or the supreme realiy, because (they would then) be insentnt (in the firṣt cas),
and inactive (in the second), and so would give nither worldly benefits nor liberation.’
Note that instead of mantrān niyojaye,the version in the PTv p. 151 reads: mantraṁ
niveśayet. A verse from the lost Tatvarakṣāvidhāna quoted in SpPra ad 26 (p. 35) s very similar
aśaktatvān niṣkriyatvān na puṁsṣi na pare pade |
Śśaktau niyojayen mantraṁ japas tu saphalo bhave
‘Apply mantra in (the sphere of conscious) energy, not to the individual soul or to the

supreme state, for the former is powerless and the later inactive. (In this way its) repeated
recitation can bear fruit.”

TANTRĀLOKA

the end, he should imagine the full (unconditioned) being (sattā) (of

consciousness within it). (16-17ab)

He establishes this with reasoned argument.

AĨ’ṆĪ TTTÇ AIṬTGQTĀTHTTITTĀ;|

tataḥ pūrṇasvabhāvatvaṁ tadrūpodrekayogataḥ || 17 II
dhyeyodreko bhaved dhyātṛprahvībhāvavaśād yataḥ |
Thusṣ, (the realization of their) full (and perfect) nature is the result
of (their) association with the abounding excellence (udreka) of that nature
(which is their full, unconditioned being). This is because the exultation
(udreka) of (the deity who is) the object of meditation is due to (the humble

reverence) of the meditator who bows before it (prahvībhāva). (17cd-18ab)

The sense (of what he is saying is that) in the act of saluting (the deity

with reverence, the deity who is) the object of (that) salutation becomes primary

by virtue of the (corresponding) subordination of the one who offers salutation.
Moreover, according to our teachers, there is another scripture which
should also be explained in just the same way.

Jāaīṝ| #īcāras< Frēā̄ |z. 11

sṬ]; |

āvāhyeṣṭvā pratarpyeti śrīsvacchande nirūpitam || 18 I

The mantra of the Earth principle is thus dhare dharāyai namah.

Concerning obeisance, Abhinava writes: namaskaroti namasyatīti namaḥśahdam uccārayatīti

arthaparyavasāne parameśvaraṃ iti bāhyakarmasaṁbandhānupapattiḥ | vācika eva ca tadā
namaskāro mānaso 'pi vā syād iti kāyiko namaskāraḥ katham iti traividhyaprasidáhyayogaḥ |

asmalpakṣe tu manasā vācā kayena svātmānaṁ prahvīkuṟvan nyagbhāvayan bhagavantam

utkarṣayatīti namasyater arthaḥ iti sarvam upapannam | yad vakṣyati jayanamaskārādyabhidhānenāpīśvarasyotkarṣaḥ khyāpanīyaḥ svātmanaś ca tatpravaṇatā iti

‘(Some say that) ‘he salutes’ the Supreme Lord means that he bows before him, which

ultimately comes to mean that he utters the word ‘namaḥ’, because it is not logically possible for
there to be a relationship with outer action (and inner disposition). Then (they say) that salutation

is verbal, or may also be mental, how can it be bodily? Thus, the well-known triple kind (of

salutation) does not apply (ayoga). However, our view is that prostrating onesef with mind,
speech and body, that is, humbling (oneself), exalts the Lord. This is the meaning (and purpose of
the word he) ‘bows’. Thus, everything is sound and proper. As he will say: ‘by saying ‘victory (to
You)ʼ, so too ‘salutation (to You) should declare the Lord’s excellence, and one’s own bowing

(to Him in humble devotion). ĪPVv 1 p. 8
By bowing in reverence to acknowledge the Lord’s excellence over all things, limited,
confined consciousness, contracted by ego, merges into universal consciousness. As Kṣemarāja
says: śarīrādiprahvībhāvonmagnaparasvarūpānu-praveśarāpaṁ praṇāmam “Bowing (with
reverence) (praṇāma) is entry into the supreme nature that has emerged by prostrating the body
etc. SvTu ad 2/16.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

anenaiva pathā neyam ity asmadguravo jaguḥ |

My teacher has said that the statement in the venerable
Svacchandatantra that, ‘after having invoked (the deity), sacrificed and
offered libation (to it) . . . should be interpreted in the very same way.

(18cd-19ab)

Surely (one may ask), the plane of Śakti is the middling one (parāparā),
as it consists of (the experience of) unity-in-diversity (bhedābheda). Again, (the
plane) of Śivais the supreme one (parā), because it consists of (the experience
of) nonduality (abheda). So howis it that thereis no object of worship here?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

TGṀ T JTTSĀ TGaā-āTRrāITTTGH
128 1

paratvena tu yat pūjyaṁ tat svatantracidātmakam || 19 ||

anavacchitprakāśatvān na prakāśyaṁ tu kutracit |

That which is to be worshiped as supreme is (one’s own) free

consciousness.

(The

supreme

reality)

is

the

unlimited

light

(of

consciousness) which, as such, can (never) in any circamstance be illumined
(by another light). (19cd-20ab)
ŚSureḷy, if that is so, (one may ask,) how is it that it is said (in the

Upaniṣads) for example, that ‘the Self should be known, it should be pondered
and profoundly contemplated’
? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ḶĀKEEVSIGE’FTGIIGdU'tccz:r(IIEHT

tasya hy etat prapūjyatvadhyeyatvādi yad ullaset || 20 ||

tasyaiva tat ṣvatantratvaṁ yātidurghaṭakāritā |

(The forms) in which that (Light) manifests, as the object of
worship and meditation etc., are (expressions of its) freedom, that can do

the impossible. (20cd-21ab)

Abhinava is in actual fact quoting MV 9/56cd:
svamantreṇa tatas tattvam āvāhyeṣṭvā pratarpya ca ||

jjātavyomantavyo nididhyāsitavyaś ca cf. BṛUp.
The expression is ‘atidurghaṭakāritā’, which literally means ‘(the ability) to do what is most
difficult’. There could be nothing harder to do than what is logically impossible. In this case, it is
the freedom of the Light of consciousness, that never descends from the infinite expanse of its

pure subjectivity, to make itself into an object of worship. See above, 1/72 (73).

TANTRĀLOKA

Thus, as its state as the object of worship is secondary, invocation and

the like are of no use here (in this case). Thus, he says:

TGÑTYTTTĪ
ā T TṬTĀĒTYTA JGTYTṬ |
saṁbodharũūpe tat tasmin kathaṁ saṁbodhanā bhavet || 21 ||
prakāśanāyāṁ vai na syāt prakāśasya prakāśatā |
Thus, how can here be an invocation within that which is invocation
(itself)? (How can an awakening be brought about within that (reality)

which is awakened consciousness by nature?) It is not the luminosity of

the light that is present in the act of illumination (it is the object of
illumination that is ilumined, not the light). (21cd-22ab)
‘Thuṣ’, because (the condition of the Light) as an object of worship and

the like is just the unfolding of its freedom ‘within’ Śiva, who is the agency of
the act of invocation (/awakening) (saṁbodhana) how could invocation

(/awakening) be possible? It is not reasonable (to maintain) that He needs to be
awakened. When something is illumined by something else, it is not the
luminosity of the light that is present within it, rather (what is present there is
its) ongoing condition as an object of illumination. This is the meaning.
Surely, if this is so, what should be done (and understood to be

happening) in the case of an invocation or the like, which is of the sort “I am
invoking that deity” (that is, without invoking it with a vocative)? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

The Power of the Semantics of Mantra

gaāītmfarrārdā fā-ṁ aītzāṁkaīq 1| 33 11
JṬ--T ṬITG TĪT ĀTRTTTITI I

Tgēcāī {ĪTTaĪT TT-ĀaTīTRāṅ TTTq_ |
saṁbodhanavibhaktyaiva vinā karmādiśaktitām || 22 |)
svātantryāt taṁ darśayituṁ tatro(trā)ham” imam ācaret |

devam āvāhayāmīti tato devāya dīpakam || 23 ||
prāgyuktyā pūrṇatādāyi namaḥ svāhādikaṁ bhavet |

The Sanskrit can be translated in two ways. One translation is in the body ofthe translation, the
other is in brackets. One cannot but admire Abhinava’s skilful use of double meanings.
Another way of translating this line is: “(if that were possible, it would also be possible) that

light would not be luminous when engaged in the act of illumination.
To putit simply, if lght were to be illumined by something ese, it would an object ilumined by
it, not light itself.

Emend, as the editor of the printed edition suggests, tatroham to tatrāham.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

In order to show that, by virtue of (its inherent) freedom, (Mantra)
has the (semantic) power of the object (of a verb) and the rest (of the

grammatical cases that function together to execute the action expressed by

the verb), (the Mantra the teacher intones even) without (the name of the
deity) in the vocative case (operates equally well by simply declaring) “I
invoke the God”. Then, (after saying) ‘to the God’ (devāya) in the dative,
(comes) the Energizer (dīpaka) which, in accord with the previous practice
(yukti), is NAMAḤ, SVĀHĀ or the like, that bestows the plenitude (of

consciousness and completes the Mantra). (22cd-24ab)

Thus here (in this case) also, the Energizer should be conjoined (to the
Mantra) as is appropriate, in order to produce the (required) modification (ūha).
Thus, he says ‘then’, ((after saying) ‘to the God’ (devāya) in the dative (comes)
the Energizer (dīpaka)) etc.
Surely (one may ask), do all the Energizers such as ‘namaḥ’ bestow the
plenitude (of consciousness and complete the Mantra), or not? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

3f: gd’caārṁrrgrrzraraāī
Ū̄q II 3% 1|

īJreōīa; avaīz Jīdācq |

nutiḥ pūrṇatvam agnīndusaṅghaṭṭāpyāyatā param || 24 ||
āpyāyakaṁ ca procchālaṁ vauṣaḍādi pradīpayet |
The act of reverent salutation (i.e. NAMAH) is plenitude. The union
of Fire and Moon, which is the next one (i.e. SVĀHĀ), is nourishment. The
nourishing VAUṢAT and the like™ energizes (a further) outpouring (of
nourishment). (24cd-25ab)
“The union of fire and moonʼ is, as was said before: ‘(offer the rest of
the butter into the fire) with the syllable of nectar, that is, SVĀ, (and onto the

sacrificial pap) with (the syllable of) fire, that is, HĀ (repeatedly). The next

oneʼ is SVĀHĀ. (VAUṢAT energizes) ‘the outpouring’ (of nourishment)

See above, 17/17-18ab.

There is a type of Vedic Mantra which was taken over by the Tantric system of Mantras. It is
called a

‘jāt’ – i.e. generic or_universal - mantra, because it is commonly added to Vedic

Mantras. 1) NAMAḤ, 2) SVĀHĀ, 3) VAUṢAT, 4) HUM, 5) VAṢAT, and 6) PHAT are the (six)
classes (jāti) of invocations. The application of each one is briefly defined below in 30/43cd-44.
They are also uttered at the end of the invocation of the five or six limbs (aṅga) of a Mantra thus:

Heart –- NAMAḤ, head – SVĀHĀ, topknot - VAUṢAT, the Armour – HUM, the Eye – VAṢAT,
and the Weapon - PHAT.

Presumably the ‘and the like’ after VAUṢAT here refers to all the others except the first
two. VAUṢAT is the invocation made for a full oblation, see for example, below 17/52-53, 59 and
70-72. Also note that in this standard enumeration of the jatis, SVĀHĀ follows NAMAḤ, so

Abhinava refers to it as ‘the next one’. Concerning the jātis, see Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 2, pp.
260-262 and vol. 5, pp. 197-200, n 15.
15/443 (440cd-441ab). See above, 15/439-443 (436cd-441ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

means that it brings about a further greater increase of nourishment than does

(SVĀHĀ). As scripture (declares): ‘VAUṢAT is prescribed for nourishment.’

Surely (one may ask), should one apply (this kind of) modification

(ūha) in all cases (to all such Mantras and their parts) without exception in this

way? With this doubt in mind, he says:

īq, |

tatra bāhye ʻpi tādātmyaprasiddhaṁ karma codyate || 25 ||

yadi karmapadaṁ tan no gurur abhyūhayet kvacit |

There (in that case), if a rite is prescribed that is well-known to
have (a particular) nature in (the everyday) outer (world) also, the teacher
should not in any circumstance modify the part (of the Mantra that denotes
the deity who) is the object (of the rite) (karmapada). (25cd-26ab)
(A rite that is well known) ‘to have (a particular) nature’ is one that is

commonly) well-known in the world (of daily life). This is the meaning.
‘Prescribed’ means ‘enjoined’.
He establishes this with reasoned argument.

The Function of Mantra

fīsad 1| 2ē 11
--. fk

EEUIEEEAEEIĒGIĒĒṬ CE-ĀHṬICTCṬ

anābhāsitatadvastubhāsanāya niyujyate || 26 ||

mantraḥ kiṁ tena tatra syāt sphuṭaṁ yatrāvabhāsi tat |
tena prokṣaṇasaṁsekajapādividhiṣu dhruvam | 27 ||

tatkarmābhyūhanaṁ kuryāt pratyuta vyavadhātrṛtām |

A mantra is applied in order to make an entity manifest that is not

manifest (already). Of what use could that be there (in the case of) that
which is clearly manifest? Thus, modification of (the mantra in consonance
with the ritual action it accompanies) (karmābhyūhana) in procedures such

"In other words, a well-known mantra such as OM NAMAḤ ŚIVĀYA, uttered in the course ofa
common, wellknown rite dedicated to Śiva, must never be altered to make it, for example, a
Mantra dedicated to Viṣṇu by substituting his name for that of Śiva. In this example, that would
be OM NAMAḤ VIṢṆAVE.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

as sprinkling (prokṣaṇa), aspersion (saṅseka), the repetition of Mantra
and the like, would certainly (not be beneficial, rather), on the contrary, it
would create a state of (continuous) obstruction (vyavadhātṛtā). (26cd28ab)
‘A mantra’, of which the stated object (i.e. the deity) has been

modified. ‘That’ (which is clearly manifest) is the object (of the Mantra) which
needs to be modified. “Thus’, because the rite is (evidently) manifest externally
by itself. The sense is that ‘sprinkling (prokṣaṇa)ī and (these) other
(procedures) are clearly manifest as such externally, and so one needs not make
modifications (to the Mantra) by saying such things as “I am sprinkling”.

On the contrary, when (the nature a rite) does not appear externally as it

is, that should be done. Thus, he says:

Declaration of Intent Should Herald Ritual Action

TaāaāTgftziqaī-Tṝēzzzīē|

bahistathātmatābhāve kāryaṁ karmapadohanam || 28 I|
tṛptāv āhutihutabhukpāśaploṣacchidādiṣu |
The objective (karmapada) (of the rite) must be mentioned (uhana)
when (some element of a rite) does not appear externally, according to its
essential nature (athātmatā), as is the case, for example, with the
satisfaction (that results from offering libations,) or the burning away and

severance of (inner binding) fetters by the fire that receives oblations.
(28cd-29ab)

Thus, one must mention (the nature of the rite in such cases by saying)
for example, “I am offering a libation” or “I am worshipping”. The sense (of

this verse is that) the satisfaction (the deity experiences by offering it libation)

does not appear externally at all in that form, as happens, for example, with (the

act of) sprinkling (the sacrificial surface). ‘The burning away of (inner

binding) fetters by the fire’ means the burning away etc. of the fetters within
the fire.

mārjanaṁ prokṣaṇam eva – ‘cleaning is just sprinkling’ — commentary on SYT 2/231. These are
two of many saṁsṣkāras purficatory rites that may be applied to purify the sacrificial area,
sacrificial hearth, implements or offerings etc. See above, 15/369cd-371.
Jayaratha understands karman here in the expression karmābhyūhana to mean (ritual) ‘actionʼ.
However, in the light of what Abhinava has just said, it would be better to understand karman to

mean the object of that action, that is, the deity. If Jayaratha were right, we would not find many
mantras that incorporate a reference to the action they accompany, but this is not so. On the

contrary, it is very common for mantras to do that. Rather, it is the deity that is evident, in the

sense that it is clear to all that it is that deity which is the main object of worship. In these lines,

Abhinava is simply strengthening and justifying the point he made in the previous verse, namely,
that the deity is the fundamental constituent of a Mantra that cannot, and should not, be modified.

To do so takes all power from the mantra. Indeed, it' may become harmful.

TANTRĀLOKA

zāfex
fṣt ũaīāṣṝa; fōkatūēh: 11 3< 1|

yatroddiṣṭe vidhau paścāt tadanantaiḥ kriyātmakaiḥ || 29 l
aṁśaiḥ sādhyaṁ na tatroho dīkṣaṇādividhiṣv iva |
When a ritual procedure has been announced and that (rite) is then

to be accomplished by means of many associated secondary rites, as
happens, for example, in the case of the procedures (relating to) initiation,

there is no declaration (of what is being done or modification of the

Mantras) (ūha) there (in such cases). (29cd-30ab)

‘That’ is the procedure that has been announced. The ‘many associated
secondary rites’ are, for example, impregnation and the other (preparatory
purifications — saṁṣakāras) (performed to purify and empower the sacrificial
fire).” It is ‘as happens, for example, in the case of the procedures (relating
to) initiation’. (In such cases,) there is no need to make even one such

declaration (iēha) as, “I am performing an initiation” or “I am installing (the
deity)”. This is the meaning.
Having explained this by the way, (he now goes on) to speak about the
main point.
Ilumining the Body of the Disciple with the
Movement of the Breath and Mantra

Jaāī || 3o l||
ṇeĀHEkssxRcvf'TNEE

ṇzā Jaā fšra; 11 32 1
ftrzīcārīī āāāhc TacaU 1 7ēṬ |

kúīa ā TaRHRTT II 32 1I

fōīzīkzzza

tataḥ śiṣyasya tattattvasthāne ‘streṇa pratādanam |l 30 ||
kṛtvātha śivahastena hṛdayaṁ parimarśayet |
tataḥ svanāḍīmārgeṇa hrdayaṁ prāpya vai śiśoḥ || 31 ||
Śiṣyātmanā sahaikatvaṁ gatvādāya ca taṁ hrṛdã |
putitaṁ haṁsṣarūpãkhyaṁ tatra saṁhãramudrayã || 32 ||

kuryād ātmīyahr̥dayasthitam apy avabhāsakam |

Śiṣyadehasya tejobhī raśmimātrāviyogataḥ || 33 ||

See above, 15/502 (498) ff.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

“After this,” the teacher strikes the disciple with (the Mantra of)
the Weapon, in the place where a (particular) principle (tattva) (is projected
into the body). Having done that, he should touch (the disciple’s) heart with
Śiva’s Hand.® Then having reached the disciple’s heart by the path of his
own channel (of the vital breath), and having becoming one with the
disciple’s Self and seized it by means of the (mantra of) the Heart (SAUH)
and encapsulated by it, he should place it, that is, the one called ‘Harṁsa’,
there in his own heart" by means of the gesture (mudrā) of withdrawal.
Although (Harṁhsa is located there,) it lights up the body of the disciple with

its radiant flames in such a way that it is not separated from the light
(raśmimātrā). (30cd-33)

In 17/30cd-33 Abhinava is expanding and explaining MV 9/58-59:

‘Having offered libation to (the Vidyā), (the teacher) should strik the disciple with (the
Mantra of) the Weapon, and having attained (the Hear), the lcamed man should again (touch the
disciplein the heart with Śiva’s Hand. (S8)
(Then,) having gone there by the path of the channel (of his own vital breath), and
having encapsulated it with Mantra of the Heart and HAM, he should lay hold of (the disciple’s
Self) (in such a way) that it is not separated from the light (raśmimātrā). (59)
See above, 17/l0ab.
Ó Seç above, 15/459-476 (456cd-474ab).
‘Haṁsṣa’ is usually the letter H.
“2 The expression rasmimātrāviyogataḥ īs taken from the MV 9/5%ab, and cited by Kṣemarāja in
his commentary on SVT, 4/11 ḻab. The expression ‘raśmimātrā’ licrally means ‘(that which is)
only rays'. I take it to mean ‘lgh’, as Jayaratha does, and translate accordingly. Cf. these
passages from the SVT:
‘With (his) exhalation in conjunction with the utterance of ‘HUM’, (the teacher) should

enter the heart (of the disciple) through the cavity of the channel (of the vital breath). Having gone
(there), he should contemplate the consciousness of the disciple present in the heart, its form that

of a Kadamba bud and shining radiantly like a star, having severed it with the sword of the
Weapon, at the end of which is the jāti HUṀ PHAT. (SVT 3/169cd-171ab)

Kṣemarāja: The sword is the Weapon of the undifferentiated (form of Śiva) (niṣkala),
‘having severed the subtle body that it is not separated from the light (‘asśmimātrāviyogi) of
the disciple (from its location in the hcart).
‘It should be dragged along by the force (of the teacher’s breath) in the form of a hook
in due order (until it reaches) the extremity of Śakti.’ (3/171cd)

(The) ‘hook’ is what has been said. Its nature is the crooked energy (kuilākalā) (of

Kuṇḍalinī) at the end (of the mantric syllable). ‘The extremity of Śakti’ is the End of the Twelve
and that is the nasal here (at the end of the syllable Mantra. Next):

‘Having laid hold of (the disciple’s consciousness) in the End of the Twelve and
encapsulated it within the Heart, it should be conjoincd by the gesture of withdrawal
(saṁhāramudrā) to the thread which is imagined to be the channel of the vital brcath. Having
imagined it to be pervasive, envelop it with the Armour. (3/172-173ab)
The imagination of the pervasion (of the soul) that has been conjoined to the thread
which is the body is done by aplying (the mantra) “I am conjoining Devadatta’s consciousness to
the thread of the fetters – salutation!’ preceded by the utterance of praṇava (OM) and Niṣkala.
‘The common rite of initiation as described chapter four of the Svacchandatantra:

TANTRĀLOKA

‘After this’ means after offering libation to Vāgīśī (the Goddess of
Speech). (The teacher) ‘strikes’ (the disciple) ‘with (the Mantra of) the
Weapon, in the place where a (particular) principle (tattva) (is located in
the body)ʼ; that is, for example, the Earth (principle), to which a fire offering
has been made, and is (located) in the ankle. The teacher’s ‘own’ (channel) is
the right one, and that of the disciple, the left. ‘Having become (one)’, that is
to sṣay, within the heart itself. (The teacher seizes the disciple’s Self) ‘by means

of the heartʼ, that is, by the Mantra of the heart (SAUH). Concerning ‘the

gesture (mudrā) of withdrawal’, it is said:

astreṇa prokṣayec chisyaṁ puṣpayuktena tāḍaye
recakena tato gavā śiṣyadehe viśed dhṛdi
“The disciple should be sprinkled with the Weapon, and strike him with (that) conjoined
to a flower. Then having gone forth by exhalation, enter into the disciple’s heart. (4/69)

‘The flower’ is one that has been consecrated by the repetiti on of the Weapon. ‘By

exhalation' means ‘by (breath that is on) the upward path. Now there:

‘Having repeated the Śiva (mantra) beginning with OṀ, and having made the Mantra of
the Weapon that has PHAT at the end the instrument for the scparation (viślesa) of (individual)
consciousness, according to (the proper) procedure, and dragged it alng with the hook, place it in
the End of the Twelve. The individual soul located there should be properly laid hold of and
encapsulated with Dhruva Mantra, by means of gesture of withdrawal.’ SvT 4/70-72ab
Śiva is niṣkala. ‘Consciousnessʼ is in the form of the City of Eight. ‘According to (the

proper) procedure’, that is, by imaginative contemplating that it is not separated from the light

(raśmimātrā), as mentioned before. ‘The hook’ means the display of the gesture of the hook
(aṅkuśamudrā), in accord with the sequence of the crooked power (of Kuṇḍalinī) of the root
Mantra. (This should be done) ‘properly°, that is by the firmmess of (his) experience of it not being
different from himself (svābhedapratīti). As is said in the Spanda (treatise): ‘this itself is laying

hold of oneself. (2/7)
(Now with the upper) ‘inhaled breath, enter the heart (that is, one’s own) 72cd

(4/110ab)

‘Having sprinkled the disciple with the Weapon, strike him whilst uttering the Weapon.

Sprinkling (is done) with Śiva water on the thrcad of the fetters, in accord with the
location of the Heart. Strking (is donc) with ash, or else with thesc same (mantras). Thcn again:
‘Having gone forth with exhalation, he should sever his (disciple’s subtle body) from
the Heart with the sword (of mantra).’ (4/110cd)
According to the tcaching imparted in the venerable Lakṣmīkulārṇava, ‘Eṣablished in
the sun (of cxhalation), he should enter into the hcart of the disciples by the path of the Moon.’
Having gone out by (the path on his) own right and entered by (the path on) the lef of his disciple,
hc should sever the soul of th disciple which, imagined (bhāvanayā) to be located on the thrcad,
is in the form of the City of Eight, by the Weapon mantra. And (once it is) severed):
(4/111ab)

‘Having dragged that Self along with force (dhāmnā), place it in the End of the Twelvc.’
The manner in which it is dragged along was explained before, and that is ‘it should be

done without being separated from the light (raśmimātrā).
See above, 17/10ab.

Cf. MṛT. Kriyyāpāda, 81106.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

‘Having extended the right hand and slowly drawn (towards the palm)
the little finger (and then) the rest (of the fingers) in due order, one should

clench the fist and press on it with the thumb. This is said to be the mmudrā of
withdrawal (saṁhāramudrā).’
(The one called ‘Haṁsa’) ‘is placed there in his own heart’. This
(statement) should be applied in accord with maxim of the eye of a crow
(kākākṣinyāya) (to both the teacher and the disciple, one after another. In other

words, Haṁsa is in the heart of both). Thus, although it is placed in (the

teacher’s) own heart, one should think that it ‘lghts up the body of the disciple
with its radiant flames, in such a way that it is not separated from the light

(raśmimātrā); that is, in such a way that the light of consciousness would not

be separated from (the body).

Śurely (one may ask), what is the purpose of (the teacher’s) bringing the
disciple’s Self in this way into his own heart? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Giving Birth to the Disciple on Increasingly Higher Levels
and Worlds with Trika Mantras and Oblations

GTV“TTTGHTĪT ÑāTTTĀAT@IĀT; |
TTTTĪCT̄ āTĪĪTITTTZṬ̄ ||/ 3: 1

saēhaāī Jza i |
HrATJĪ TGGTTTRÁTVGH
TTST II 4 1|
svabandhaṣthānacalanāt svatantrasthānalābhataḥ |
svakarmāparatantratvāt sarvatrotpattim arhati || 34 ||
tenātmahṛdayānītaṁ prāk kṛtvā pudgalaṁ tataḥ |
māyāyāṁ taddharātatvaśarīrāṇy asya saṁsṛjet | 35 ||

(Now the disciple has reached the stage in which) he is fit to be born
everywhere (in all the wombs). (This is so for three reasons. One is) because
he has moved away from the place where his fetters (are located);

(secondly,) because he has attained an independent place (where he is free)

° How this gesture is made is not mentioned in MV 9/58-$9 that Abhinava is explaining here.

Indeed, although the gesture of withdrawal (saṁṅhāramudrā) is very common, it is not described

anywhere in the MV. Thus, Jayaratha has had to draw from another source. This mudrā performs
multiple functions. One is to grasp and withdraw the individual soul from its abode in the heart, so
that once extracted, it can be variously manipulated. Cf. SVT 4/72abc: tatrasthaḥ pudgalo grāhyaḥ
sampuṭyaiva dhruveṇa tu | saṁhāramudrayā samyak. . .
‘The individual soul located there (in the heart) should be properly grasped and

encapsulated with Dhruva Mantra by means of sarṅhāramudrā.’

Note that although commonly used in the rites of SvT, this gesture is also not described
in the SvT. Indeed, this is probably because it is s0 common. A description ofa saṅhāramudrā it
is found in the MPĀ (drawing fig 5 in appendix of MPĀ Kriyā- Caryā and Yogapāda), but is not
the same as the one described here.
“ See above, note 1,88.
’ In other words, the disciple continues to be conscious, without losing himself in Śiva’s light.
See SŚP vol. I, p. 112 and 261.

TANTRĀLOKA

(svatantrasthāna), and (thirdly,) because he is not subject (anymore) to his
own karma. Thus, (because these conditions obtain,) having initially
brought the (disciple’s) Self into his own heart, (the teacher) should (now)

generate within Māyā’ the bodies (of the disciple) that pertain to the Earth
principle. (34-35)

‘Māyā’ is Vāgīśī (the Goddess of Speech).

And how does that (body’s) creation (take place)? (In response to this

question,) he says:

ṟeḵEiE|E!EHIĀ EEEITĒHI

att ahaaī 11 3ē 1|

TGGTRITĪ TÇFĒṢTTTTT
I TITT |I 3¢ |1
F-AJTII] TJḺYIH TTĪ aTI ĀĪSTĀTĪT|
tatrāsya garbhādhānaṁ ca yuktaṁ puṁsavanādibhiḥ |
garbhaniṣkrãmaparyantair ekãṁ kurvĩta saṁskriyām l| 36 ||
jananaṁ bhogabhoktṛtvaṁ militvaikātha saṁskriyā |
tato ‘sya teṣu bhogeṣu kuryāt tanmayatālayam || 37 ||
tatas tattattvapāśānāṁ vicchedaṁ samupācaret |
saṁskārāṇāṁ catuṣke ‘sminn aparāṁ ca parāparām || 38 |I
mantrāṇāṁ pañcadaśakaṁ parāṁ vā yojayet kramāt |
1)

(The teacher)

should perform just one

rite of passage

(saṁskriyā),” namely that of impregnation (garbhādhāna), which is
connected to the others (concerning birth), beginning with the one for male

offspring (puṅīsavana), and ending with the coming forth from the womb
(garbhaniṣkrāma). 2) Now one (more purifying) rite of passage takes place

by combining the birth (of the body of the disciple into the appropriate
world) with the subjectivity that has worldly experiences (bhogabhoktṛtva).

3) Then (the teacher) should merge it into a state of oneness in the course
of those worldly experiences. 4) Then he should sever the bonds of that

principle. (36-38ab)

“ One could also transtatc ‘svatantraṣthāna’ as a place that depends on him. Fither way, the
that he is in a placein which he ‘depends

on himself’, that is, is free and independent.

, as we have seen, is presided over by Vāgīśvarī.

Realkathaṁ ca for kathaṁca.

See above 15/(502-509) (498-505) concerning the rites of passage (saṁṣkāra).
MV 9/60b.4: garbhādhānaṁ
sarvagarbhakriyānvitam (the sacrament of) conception
(garbhādhāna), (implicitly) contains all the rites conceming the embryo.

Rcad tanmayatālayam for tanmayatāṁ layam.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
(The teacher) should apply to these four (purifying) rites of passage,

(the mantras) of Aparā, Parāparā, the group of fifteen mantras, or that of

Parā, (respectively,) in due order. (38cd-39ab)

‘The others (concerning birth)’ are (the rites of) the parting of the hair
(of the pregnant woman) and the rest (sīmantonnayana). Thus (in this case),
impregnation is the main rite of passage, as it includes the secondary
(subsidiary) rites (associated with it). ‘These four’ (purifying rites of passage)
are impregnation, the subjectivity that has worldly experiences, its merger, and
the severing of the bonds. (The word) ‘or’ is in the sense of aggregation.
He (now) analyses the group of fifteen Mantras.

1 1|

pibanyādyaṣṭakaṁ śastrādikaṁ ṣaṭkaṁ parā tathā || 39 ||
iti pañcadaśaite syuḥ kramāllīnatvasaṁskṛtau |
The fifteen mantras (that are used) for the purification (that takes

place) by merger are, in due order, the group of eight beginning with

Pibanī, the group of six (limbs) beginning with the Weapon, and Parā.
(39cd-40ab)
He presents the Mantras used for making the offerings to the fire
(homa) here:

TṬIT-TṬGGaT JTIḤPTTT 3CḤ ||/0 ||

āIdāteTIHIHTHIEEEHI:THHĪṬAII

ṢTTT |
TIā] ĪrīīīrTāīṁ aā TTTT II 3 I|
s aāfī ṁīaār fakftrat ega:

3sard ft̄trrzīṁ̄aī-ā
3dJ || +3 11|
Jī aōā āfa gād aha |

The partners of eight Bhairavas, Aghora etc., have the same names in the feminine. The last of
the eight in the forward order is Pibana Bhairava (the Drinking Bhairava), whose partner is Pibanī.

For the names of eight parts of Parāparā Vidya, see below, note to 30/24cd-25ab.

The six auxiliaries (aṅga) are presumably the usual ones of Parā (SAUḤ). The Weapon
is normally listed last, so it appears that these too are also listed in reverse. Parā comes last, so 8 +
6 + 1. The ʻfifteen mantras’ are the eight parts of Parāparā, the six ancillaries of Parā, and Parā

Herself. These are effectively Parāparā and Parā. Ṅext follows Parā. Through these permutations

of the Trika Vidyā, the disciple is born into the condition of a putraka – a ‘spiritual son’. As such,

he also symbolically undergoes the four rtes of passage relating to birth.

TANTRĀLOKA

āTRTĀTTRĪĪRTI CāTGTĀĪTTĪRTT: 1|/ṟ3 1

ŪA |I/#4 I
TṬṬJṬRĀG hũHṛldī TTIH-: Ū{TTTdT:

āt-ī 7 1

aŪa ŪJt

I 40 1|

JTITT; JTairraikkāīkīzat: |

iṭ¥lēvīiivk’aādt-e HIIEI
aparāmantram uktvā prāgamukātmana ity atha || 40 l|

garbhãdhãnaṁ karomiĩti punar mantraṁ tam eva ca |

svāhāntam uccaran dadyād āhutitritayaṁ guruḥ || 41 II
paraṁ parãparãmantram amukãtmana ity atha |
jātasya bhogabhoktṛtvaṁ karomy atha parāparām || 42 |I
ante svāheti proccārya vitaret tisra āhutīḥ |
uccārya pibanīmantram amukātmana ity atha || 43 |I
bhoge layaṁ karomīti punar mantraṁ tam eva ca |
svāhāntam āhutīs tisro dadyād ājyatilādibhiḥ | 44 ||
esa eva vamanyādau vidhiḥ pañcadaśāntake |
pūrvaṁ parātmakaṁ mantram amukātmana ity atha || 45 ||
pāśacchedaṁ karomīti parāmantraḥ punas tataḥ |
huṁ svāhā phaṭ samuccārya dadyāt tisro ‘py athāhutīḥ l| 46 l|
saṁskārāṇāṁ catuṣke ‘smin ye mantrāḥ kathitā mayā |
teṣu karmapadāt pūrvaṁ dharātattvapadaṁ vadet || 47 I|
tato dharātattvapatim āmantryeṣṭvā pratarpya ca |
Śivābhimānasaṁrabdho gurur evaṁ samādiśet || 48 II
tattveśvara tvayā nāsya putrakasya śivājñayā |
pratibandhaḥ prakartavyo yātuḥ padam anāmayam || 49 ||
tato yadi samīheta dharātattvāntarālagam |
pṛthak śodhayituṁ mantrī bhuvanādyadhvapañcakam || 5O I

aparāmantrataḥ prāgvat tiṣras tisras tadāhutīḥ |

dadyāt puraṁ Śśodhayāmīty ūhayuktaṁ prasannadhīḥ | 51 II

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

“Having uttered the mantra of Aparā (HRĪḤ HŪṀ PHAT), the

teacher should first of all say that: “I perform for the soul of so-and-so
(who is within the Earth principle, the rite of) impregnation”. Then, while

he utters that same mantra (of Aparā) and ending with SVĀHĀ, he should
offer three oblations. After that, having uttered the mantra of Parāparā,
(the teacher should say): “I perform for the soul of so-and-s0, who has (just
been) born, (the rite by which he is given the capacity) to be the one who
experiences what is to be experienced (as the consequence of past Karma)
(bhogabhoktṛtva).” (Then,) having uttered (the mantra) of Parāparā and

SVĀHĀ at the end, he should offer three oblations.” (After that) once
uttered the mantra of Pibanī (PIBA HE RURU RARA PHAT HUM HAḤ
PHAT), (he should say): “I perform for the soul of so-and-so (the rite of)

merger into (his) worldly experience (bhoga)”, and (whilst uttering) again
the mantra (of Pibanī), ending with SVĀHĀ, he should offer three

oblations, with clarified butter and sesame seeds etc. The procedure is the

same for Vamanī and the rest, up to the end of the fifteen mantras

mentioned (above). (40cd-45ab)
(Then having uttered) first of all the mantra of Parā, (the teacher
should say): “I perform for the soul of so-and-so (the rite of) severing the
fetters.” (He should then repeat) the mantra of Parā again and then, having

uttered HUM SVĀHĀ and PHAT, he should also offer three oblations.°
(45cd-46)
In the mantras I have said (are used) in these four (purifying) rites

of passage, (the teacher) should say the words “Earth principle”
(dharātattva) before the word that denotes the object (of the rite)
(karmapada). (47)
Then having invoked,® worshipped and offered libation to the Lord

of the Earth principle," the teacher who has elicited a sense of identity

(abhimāna) with Śiva, should order him thus: (48)

“O Lord of (this) principle (tattveśvara) By Śiva’s command you

should not create (any) obstacle for this spiritual son (putraka), who is on

his way to the plane free of (all) disease.”” (49)

17/40cd-45ab is an expansion of MV 9/61-62.
See below, 17/47.
17/42 is a reworking of MV 9/61: ‘(Next, after impregnation,) O goddess with beautiful eyes,

the wise man who recites the mantras (should perform) the sacrament of birth by means (of the

Parāparā Vidyā,) who is on the right prong (of the Trident), and generates the capacity to be the
one who experiences what is to be experienced (as the consequence of past Karma).”
43 ṭo 45abc is an explanation of MV 9/62: “Then the skilled (teacher) should offer correctly

tions with the Weapon, preceded by (the Mantras of attendant goddesses) beginning

d (then) with Parā.”
n expansion of MV 9/63ab, which just says – ‘then the wise (teachers) should sever
(the disciple’s) fetters with the Parā (Vidyā).” Abhinava has explained how the mantra for a

partcular procedure is generated above. There he referred to his teacher, who taught him how to

do this. Thus, he also can claim that the mantras are approved as correct on the authority of his

teacher. Applying that method here and elsewhere, he provides the Trika mantras in his shorthand,
to which the MV refers, but does not present in full.

“ Ṭhis is done with Aparā Vidyā. See below, verse 1 16ab.
The purpose of this rite is, as Jayaratha tells us, impregnation (garbhādhāna).
2 MV 9/64cd-65ab. Quoted above ad 8/20cd-22ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

If after this, (the teacher) who possesses the Mantras (mantrin)

wishes to purify separately the five Paths beginning with that of the worlds

present in the intermediate spaces within the Earth principle, he should,
serene (and well disposed), offer as before, sets of three oblations with the
mantra of Aparā, appropriately modifying it (āhayukta) (and uttering): “I
purify (this) world”. (51)

‘That same (mantra)ʼ, namely, Aparā. ‘The word that denotes the

object (of the rite) (karmapada) is ‘garbhādhāna’ (that is ‘impregnation’).

Thus, the modified form of the Mantra (iēha) is the Aparā Mantra (HRIḤ HŪM

PHAṬ) “1 perform (the rite of) impregnation for the soul of so-and-s0 in the

Earth principle”, (then) Apara Mantra SVĀHĀ. ‘Then’, after the four
(purifying) rites of passage, ‘having invoked’ with Apara Mantra, because there
is no mention of some other Mantra. As he will say:

‘All the rites (kriyā) (that serve) to purify (the principles) up to the end
of Māyā should always be (done) with (the mantra of) Aparā.
The cause in this kind of command is that (the teacher has) ʻelicited a

sense of identity (abhimāna) with Śiva’. ‘After thisʼ, that is, after having
purified (that) principle, (he purifies the corresponding components of the other
five Paths) ‘with Aparā mantra’, that is, by taking recourse to Aparā mantra.
By (saying that he does this) ‘as before’ʼ, everything is included, as with the
other modifications (of the Mantra).

(Now) he transposes (atidiśati) this (procedure) elsewhere (to analogous
cases) also.

āT || u3 1|

evaṁ kalāmantrapadavarṇeṣv api vicakṣaṇaḥ |

tisras tisro hutīr dadyāt pṛthak sāmastyato ‘pi vā|| 52 |
tataḥ pūrṇãhutiṁ dattvã parayã vauṣaḍantayã |
aparāmantrataḥ śiṣyam uddhṛtyātmahṛdaṁ nayet | 53 |I

In the same way, the expert (teacher) should offer three oblations
each to the Forces (kalā), Mantras, parts of Mantra (pada) and phonemes,
either (to each one) separately, or else (all of them) together as a whole.
Then, after having offered a full oblation with Parā and VAUṢAT at the
Read aparātmakam for aparāsatkam.

is mentioned in MV 4/24; see below, 30/26cd.

}
PHAṬ_ ĀAMUKĀTMANO DHARĀTATTVE GARBHĀDHĀNAṀ KAROMI

“ Below, 17/116ab.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

end, and having extracted the disciple with (the same) Aparā Mantra (by

which the principle has been purified), he should lead him into his own
heart. (52-53)

(He can offer the oblations to) ‘(each one) separatelyʼ, that is, one at a

time, (or else to) ‘(all of them) together as a wholeʼ, (saying) “I am purifying
the other (remaining) five Paths.” (The disciple is) ‘extracted’, that is to say,
from the purified principle. ‘His own heart’ means that of the teacher.
He (now) presents another view (mata) here itself (about this).

ī gā JTTTTGTTTTĀYaTTTTTT
II 4£ 1|

yadā tv ekena śuddhena tadantarbhāvacintanāt |
na pṛthak śodhayet tattvanāthasaṁśravaṇāt param || 54 1|
tadā pūrṇāṁ vitīryāṇum utkṣipyātmani yojayet |
If when one (Path) has been purified and (the teacher) thinks that
the others are contained within it, he should not for that reason purify
(them) separately (one by one). After hearing (the name of) the Lord of
(that) principle (tattvanātha), (he should offer) a full (oblation), and having
extracted the soul (of the disciple from the reality level that has been
purified) and cast it upwards, (the teacher) should conjoin it within (his
own) Self. (5S4-55ab)

TTTcaTTṝāātadrīā TAaTTRATT̄TT: 1|.4, 11

zatēfṝ #krqg ārc |
aT q Ṭa: TgTārāṁzaīq
i1 uē 11

zaṁgī af ãī āī; aagūīa: a ̄JTaT 1| 4. 11
TJ JIĪTTGCZTTTĀTT

hEATÑGI-IEFc--ĀEĀUIÑAIḤĒCIĪEE
Verṣe 53 is a paraphrase of MV 9/67.
tataḥ pūrṇāhutṁ dadyãt parayã vauṣaḍantayã |
siśum utkṣipya cātmasthaṁ tadáehasthaṁ ca kārayet | 6 I
‘Then he should offer a full oblaton with Parā and VAUṢAT at the end, and having cast
the disciple upwards (TĀ reads uddhṛtya ‘extracted’ for utkṣipya ‘cast upwards’), he should place
him within himself and within the body (of the disciple).’

TANTRĀLOKA

qd ftōīrzāī fēēa. 11 u8 1

GIT ṬJ̄TTTI āJc-āī 3f fēīīq |

fīṣstāīq 1| o 1|]

tTd faā TTSsr̄ō̄T JJGRĪṬTI|

a yfzaāīá ī ras 11 ag 11

tātsthyātmasaṁsthyayogāya tayaivāparayāhutīḥ |l 55 ||
sakarmapadayā dadyād iti kecit tu manvate |
anye tu guravaḥh prāhur bhāvanāmayam īdṛśam || 56 ||
nātra bāhyāhutir deyā daiśikasya pṛthak punaḥ |
dadyād vā yadi no doṣaḥ sṣyād upāyaḥ sa bhāvane || 57 II
evaṁ prāktanatātsthyātmasaṁsthatve yojayed guruḥ |
tataḥ śiṣyahṛdaṁ neyaḥ sa ātmā tāvato ‘dhvanaḥ || 58 ||
śuddhas taddārḍhyasiddhyai ca pūrṇā syāt parayā punaḥ |

mahāpāśupataṁ pūrvaṁ vilomasya viśuddhaye || 59 |I

juhomi punar astreṇa vauṣaḍanta iti kṣipet |
punaḥ pūrṇāṁ tato māyām abhyarcyātha visarjayet || 60 |I
dharātattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ saj jalena śuddharūpiṇā |
bhāvayen miśritaṁ vāri śuddhiyogyaṁ tato bhavet | 61 ||

According to some (teachers), in order to unite (yogāya) (the Self of
the disciple) that is located within that (principle) (ātsthya) (with that of the
teacher, who is) established within himself (ātmasaṁsthya), (the teacher
should offer three) oblations with that same Aparā (mantra), along with the

words that express the purpose (of the rite) (sakarmapadā). (55cd-56ab)

(There are yet) other teachers who say that this kind (of ritual

action) is (just inwardly) imagined (bhāvanāmaya). The teacher need not
offer an outer oblation here (in this case). Or else, if he were to offer it
separately, that does not (entail) a defect; (indeed,) it is a means (upāya) to
aid meditation (bhāvana). (56cd-57)
The teacher should unite in this way (the disciple) with (his)
location within (his own) Self, (just as he was) previously placed within that
(reality level). Then, (the disciple’s) Self, purified from that much (of the

Path), should be led (back) into the disciple’s heart. In order make that
(awareness of purity) firm (and stable, he should offer) with (the Vidyā of)

Parā a full (oblation) again, preceded by the great Pāśupata (weapon), in

A more literal translation of the expression ‘tātsthyātmasaṁsthyayogāya’ could be: ‘in order to

unite (yogāya) (the Self of disciple,) whose condition is that of being located within that
(principle) (ātsthya), (with that of the teacher, whose condition is one of being) established within
himself (ātmasaṁsthya).”
“ 17/59 is a reworking of MV 9/68, that reads:

āhutīnāṁ trayaṁ dadyād dattvā pūrṇāhutiṁ budhaḥ |

mahāpāśupatāstreṇa vilomādiviśudáhaye |

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

order to purify (whatever) is adverse (viloma). Then saying again “I offer
etc.” with the Weapon (Mantra) and, (with the other exclamations) ending
with the mantra VAUṢAT, he should cast another full (oblation into the

fire). Then, having worshiped Māyā, he should dismiss her.” (58-60)

He should (now) meditate on how the purified Earth principle is
mixed with (and dissolves away into) the pure Water (principle). Thus,
Water becomes fit to be purified. (61)
‘Oneʼ out of the Paths of the principles and the rest. ‘“He should not
purify (them)’, that is to say, the other five paths. ‘With that same Aparā’, as
applied before (prakrāntā). The ‘oblationsʼ are three. (He should utter Aparā
Mantra) ‘along with the words that express the purpose (of the rite)’, that is,
“I place the Self of so-and-so within (my own) Self.” (The teacher need not

offer an outer oblation) ‘here (in this case)ʼ, in order to effect (the merger of

the Self of the disciple) that is located within that (principle) (tātsthya) (with
that of the teacher which is) established within himself (ātmasaṁsthya). ‘The
teacherʼ is the agent (who performs the rites). “It’, that is, that modality
(prakāra) characterized as the external offering to the fire, (may function as a
means (upāya) to aid the meditation). “(As he was) previously placed’, in the
way described (above, in the following lines):

‘Then having reached the disciple’s heart by the path of his own

channel (of the vital breath).””

‘Then’, after (the teacher) has led (the disciple’s soul) to his own heart,

it ʻshould be led (back) into the disciple’s heart’. The meaning is that it

should be placed (back) within it. ‘That much (of Path)’ is the Earth. By the
word ‘that’ (in the statement) ‘in order to make that firm (and stable)ʼ (is
meant) pure reflective awareness. As is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘(He should then offer a full oblation with Parā (Vidyā) ending with

VAUSAT and) having (thus) cast the disciple upwards (beyond the fetters) he
should make him reside within (his own) Self and that within his body. (Then,)

‘(Then) having (firt) offered a full oblation with the great Pāśupata Weapon, the wise
man should offer three oblations in order to purify (the Path) in revers etc.’
Concerning the Pāśupata Weapon, see below 30/41cd.
TĀ 17/59cd is MV 9/68cd. TĀ reads vilomasya for vilomādi.
”t Māyā here is the Vāgīśvaī, the Goddess of Speech. Sce above, 8/299 (298cd-299ab) note 8,753
and MV 9/69:
visarjayitvā vāgīśīṁ tattvaṁ tu tadanantaram |
vilīnaṁ bhãvayec chuddham aśuddhe (chuddhe aśuddhaṁ) parameśvari |

‘0 Supreme Goddess, having after that dismissed the principle (tatva) Vāgīṣī, he
should imagine then (that the) impure (lower) principle (Earth etc.) melts away, purified into the
pur (level above it).
: Above, 17/31cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

having (first) offered a full oblation with the great Pāśupata Weapon, the wise
man should offer three oblations in order to purify (the Path) in reverse etc.”™
‘With water’ means the principle of Water; ‘Thus’ʼ, by imagining
(bhāvanāt) the mixing of the Earth principle with the Water principle.
Transposing that same (method) in general (to all the series of
principles), he separates pure and impure.

EḷSEVTHIE|EFJITĒhUEṬ

I1

tathā tattatpurātattvamiśraṇād uttarottaram |

sarvā śivībhavet tattvāvalī śuddhānyathā pṛthak || 62 I|
By mixing (and fusing together) in this way the principle of each

world (progressively) with the one which is just above it, the entire series of
principles becomes Śiva and pure. Otherwise (whatever is not pure) is
separate (from Him). (62)

‘In this way’, that is in the manner described. ‘Otherwise’, what is not

pure is ‘separate’. The sense is that that which is other than Śiva is that which
is binding (pāśa). That was said before:

‘A fetter is said to be whatever is other than Supreme Śiva, Whose

nature we have just described’
Thus,
he says:

ḍ |

īṛ ṇtṣssdfāūlēaa, 1. =.3 1
prthaktvaṁ ca malo māyābhidhānas tasya saṁbhave |
karmakṣaye ‘pi no muktir bhaved vidyeśvarādivat |I 63 |I

(This) state of separation is the Impurity (nala) called Māyā. As

long as it continues to arise, even if karma is exhausted, there is no

liberation, as happens, for example, with the Vidyeśvaras. (63)

As is said concerning ‘Māyā’: “The perception of objects as divided off
(from one another and the perceiver) is the (Impurity) here called ‘Māyā’.’
AlIl that was said before he (now) transposes to the other principles.

7 MV 9/67cd-68, 67ab added for context.
7 Above, 8/293ab (292d).
” There are eight Vidyeśvaras. Their leader is Ananta, who governs the impure principles from
Māyā downwards (8/346-352 (345cd-352ab). Their residence is in the upper reaches of Māyā, and
so they are subject to itcven though they are frce of Karma.
7 ĪP3/2a. ĪP 3/2/5ab is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/23.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

tato 'pi jalatattvasya vahnau vyomni cidātmake |
āhvānādy akhilaṁ yāvat tejasy asya vimiśraṇam l| 64 ||

Thus, all (the preceding rites) beginning with the invocation of the

principle of Water into the Fire within the Void of consciousness, (should
be repeated) until it merges with”’ the principle of Fire. (64)
The Burning of the Fetters (pāśadāhaḥ)

ṂJSTTJT |

T T JĪSNĪ
gJITII]T|
-r̥TTGITG

ca
ṁ 11 a. 1

evaṁ kramāt kalātattve śuddhe pāśaṁ bhujāśritam |

chindyāt kalā hi sā kiñcit kartr̥tvōnmīlanātmikā ll 65 |I

karmākhyamalajrmbhātmā taṁ ca granthiṁ srugagragam |
pūrṇāhutyā samaṁ vahnimantratejasi nirdahet |/ 66 ||
(Continuing) in this way, (purifying one principle after the other)
successively until the principle of Force (kalā) has been purified, (the
teacher) should then sever the fetter (represented by the first knot in the
thread) that hangs on (the disciple’s) arm. Indeed, Force is the opening up
(of the soul’s) limited agency,”™ and is the unfolding (jrmbha) of the

Impurity called Karma. (Having placed) that knot on the tip of the

sacrificial ladle, (the teacher) should burn it at the same tīme as (he offers)
a full oblation into the radiant energy of the Mantra of Fire.” (65-66)
‘(Continuing) in this way’, that is, in the aforestated manner (krama).

What is the intended purpose of cutting (the thread representing) the fetter

” 1 have translated vimisraṇam as ‘merges with’. More lierally it means ‘mixing with’.
” See above, 9/155 fṜ. Kalā - here translated as ‘Force’ is the first kacuka. It iīmparts a capacity
for limited agency to the individual soul and so is essntially, as Abhinava says, the unfolding of
the Impurity of Karma (kārmamala) and so, as such, it is the pṅinciple attendant cause (nimitta) of
Karma.
” 17/65-66 is an explanatory expansion of MV 9/70:
kālāntavyāptiṣaṁśuddhau (> kalānta-) kṛtāyām evam ādarāṭ |
bāhupāśaṁ [g: bahupāśamit] tu taṁ chittvā homayed ājyasaṁyutam l|
‘When the pervasion up to the end of the (principle of) Kalā (read kalānta- for kālānta-)
has been purified with reverence in this way, once severed the fetter of the arm, he should offer
oblation with clarified butter.”

TANTRĀLOKA

(pāśa) that is (hanging on the disciple’s) arm? With this doubt in mind, he says,

‘the principle of Force (kalā)’ etc. ‘That’ is the thread of the fetters that is

(hanging) on (the disciple’s) arm.
Surely (one may

ask),

the

radiant energy

omnipresent, so how is it that it is located only in Fire?

(tejas) of Mantra is

TRTKTT]
ST̄Ṭ TTTGTĪJṬTa: | G9 1I
mantro hi viśvarūpaḥ sann upāśrayavaśāt tathā |
vyaktarūpas tato vahnau pāśaploṣavidhāyakaḥ || 67 |I
Mantra is (in reality) omniform, and being so, its manifest form is

such (as it is) due to its underlying ground (upāśraya) (in which it operates),
and so (present) within the fire (in that way), it burns away the fetters. (67)
‘Such (as it is)ʼ, that is, as fire, which, in accord with its character,
‘burns away the fettersʼ. This is the intended meaning.
Surely (one may ask), how can that which is without form (amirta) be

burnt? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ITTSĪ Ī JTHĀI |

TĀITḺṬIĪS STHTSTTT |I 5¢ I1

ārā-d rĪĀT ATJAT |

a

zazzā īmṝefa tī fatēīīaq 1

T ṜIHIIT || 90 11

ait #azā aṁĩ=f ĩṝ kũz 7-: 11 2 11
frttsr afē aēraāī q daṁṁīaṁŪ fēiq 1

1| 93 1|

plusṣṭo līnaṣvabhāvo ‘sau pāśas taṁ prati śambhuvat |

parameśamahātejaḥ śeṣamātratvam aśnute || 68 ||

karmapāśe ‘tra hotavye pūrṇayāsya śubhāśubham |

aśubhaṁ vā bhavadbhūtaṁ bhāvi vātha samastakam || 69 lI

dahāmi phaṭtrayaṁ vauṣaḍ iti pūrṇāṁ vinikṣipet |
evaṁ māyāntasaṁśuddhau kaṇṭhapāśaṁ ca homayet | 70 ||
pūrṇayā tasya māyākhyaṁ pāśaṁ bhedaprathātmakam |
dahāmi phaṭtrayaṁ vauṣaḍ iti pūrṇāṁ kṣiped guruḥ II 1 I|
nirbījā yadi kāryā tu tadātraivāparāṅṁ kṣipet |
pūrṇāṁ samayapāśākhyabījadāhapadānvitām || 72 ||

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

(The fetter) present before that (fire) is, as if (present before) Śiva,
burnt and dissolved away, (such that) all that remains of it is just the
Supreme Lordʼ’s great radiant energy (tejas). (68)
When the fetter of Karma is to be offered to the fire here by means
of a full (oblation, the teacher should say): “of this (person) I barn away the
good and bad (Karma)”, or (as the case may be), “(only) the bad Karma”,
or “the present, past, and the future (Karma)” or “all (of it) together.” (He

should then utter) PHAT three times (followed by) VAUSAT, and cast a
full (oblation into the fire). (69-70ab)

When (all the principles) up to Māyā have been purified in this
way, the teacher should offer the fetter (which is represented by the knot on
the thread, at the level) of the throat, into the fire with a full (oblation,
saying as he does so,) “of this person I burn the fetter called Māyā, which is

the perception of duality.”" (Then, after uttering) PHAT three times and

VAUṢAT, he should cast a full (oblation into the fire). If (an initiation)

without seed is to be performed, he should then cast another full (oblation
into the fire) here itself (in the same place), saying: “I burn the seed called
the fetter of the Rule (samayapāśa).” (70cd-72)

The teacher burns away ‘the bad Karma’, as the field (of application of

the initiation is with respect to) the lokadharmin. ‘Here itself’, in the course of
offering to the fire the fetter of the throat. ‘Another’ full (oblation), that is, a

second one. (Another oblation can be offered in the form of) ‘the Rule’ (with the

words,) “I burn the seed called the fetter of the Rule (samayapāśa).”

Surely (one may ask), how is it that it is said here that in the case of an
initiation without seed that the fetter of the Rule is burnt away (entirely) without
exception, (even though) devotion to the teacher and the deity etc. is taught
there as a rule (to be observed)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JIR || 63 11

gurau deve tathā śāstre bhaktiḥ kāryāsya na hy asau |

samayaḥ śaktipātasya svabhāvo hy eṣa no pṛthak || 73 ||
This (initiate) should cultivate devotion for the teacher, God and
the scriptures. That is not a rule; it is the (very) nature of a descent of the
power (of grace), it is not separate (from it). (73)

$ Read pāūrnayā for pūrṇasya. Cf. 0cd with MV 9/71cd: ‘Once the principle of Māyā has be
puñfied, the wise man (should do the same) to the fetter on the neck. (71ab)
Rcad pāśaṁ bheda- for pāśabheda-.
See above, 15/23cd-26.
If ṭhis devoton were to be just a rule, it would be bumt away like the other rules. But in actual
fact, it is a grace freely given by Śiva, and is an essential prcrcquisite even for those who,
incapable of the observing the Rule, ar given an initation without secd.

TANTRĀLOKA

Devotion for the teacher etc. exists for ‘this’ initiated (disciple), who

has received an initiation without seed, as what he must cultivate; it is not a rule.
For according to the teaching that ‘peoples’ devotion arises by his grace

aloneʼ, it is ‘the (very) nature of a descent of the power (of grace)ʼ itself. It

is not something ‘separate’ from it. This is the meaning.
In order to explain the special feature of the purification of the Pure
Path, he says:

tz ̄TI TIJ ūaTITTCṢJGT II 9Ū, 1|
māyānte śuddhim āyāte vāgīśī yā purābhavat |
māyā śaktimayī saiva vidyāśaktitvam aśnute || 74 |
tacchuddhavidyām āhūya vidyāśaktiṁ niyojayet |
evaṁ krameṇa saṁśuddhe sadāśivapade ‘py alam || 75 ||
Śikhāṁ granthiyutāṁ chittvā malam āṇavakaṁ dahet |

When (everything) up to the end of Māyā has been purified, (the
Goddess) Vāgīśī, who was previously the power of Māyā, is (now) the

power of Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā). Having invoked this Pure
Knowledge, (the teacher) should offer it a libation.® Once the plane of
Sadāśiva has been purified sufficiently in this way by (the same) process,
having severed the topknot along with the knot (on the thread), he should

burn the fundamental Impurity of the individual soul (āṇavamala). (7476ab)
That is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara, where we read):
‘The skilled (officiant) should then invoke (ānayer) the matrix (yoni)

that pervades all the matrices that need to be purified, (first) on the path that

ends with Māyā, and (then) that same (Vidyā) on the pure (path beyond).’

(The teacher should sever the topknot) ‘along with the knot (on the

thread), not as before, just the knot.

Surely here the Impurity of the individual soul (āṇavamala) should be
burnt away; so how is it that he has said that the Impurity of Māyā, which is the

Sce above, note 16,27.
Read māyāśaktimayī for māyā śakimayī. ee above, 17/9cd-10ab. Also, cf. MV 9/57.
The reading here - niyojayet — (‘apply) seems inappropriate. The sense warrants some such
emendation as ‘pratarpaye’. Sce, for example, SVT 4/139-140.
MV 9/57.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

perception of duality, should also be understood to be here? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

zī īgī q aatīāi || 9ē ||

ṁr̥ĩtg, rrat: |

īṇ 11 . 11

smmīaaā farcī zrñaṁkkraī1

yato ‘dhikārabhogākhyau dvau pāśau tu sadāśive || 76 ||
ity uktyāṇavapāśo ‘tra māyīyas tu niśāvadhiḥ |
śiṣyo yathocitaṁ snāyād ācāmed daiśikaḥ svayam || 77 II

āṇavākhye vinirdagdhe hy adhovāhiśikhāmale |

The fetter which is the Impurity of the individual soul is present (in
a subtle form) within Sadāśiva, for it is said that there are two fetters
within it, namely, (the residual trace of) worldly experience (bhoga) and the
aptitude (adhikāra) (for it). However, (the Impurity of) Māyā extends here
(up to) the Night (of Māyā) (niśā). When the Impurity called that of the
individual soul, which is in the topknot (śikhā) that flows downwards, has
been burnt (away), the disciple, as is proper, should bathe, and the teacher
should rinse his mouth himself. (76cd-78ab)
‘It is said’ in the Mataṅgatantra and elsewhere. ‘As is proper’,
‘householders (should bath) with water alone and renouncers (naiṣṭhika) with
ash.’ “The topknot that flows downwards’ has that (Impurity) as its basis.
Thus, it was said before that ‘the topknot that flows downwards (represents the

Impurity that engenders the state (of limitation) of the individual soul.’
The Conjunction with the Supreme Principle (yojanam)

Having explained (the manner of the) burning away of the fetters, he
(goes on to) talk about the (initiation that takes place by the) conjunction
(yojanikā) (of the disciple to the reality levels he desires).”
Above, 17/5a.

“ Abhinava takes care to present the basic, required rites of initiaton always bearing in mind that

this is an alternative for those who are not capable of grasping ultimate reality by their insight

directly. Thus, in the PTv p. 24-25 Abhinava formulates the thirteenth meaning of Anuttara,

which is that it is the reality attained without need of outer initiation that takes place by conjoining
the initiand to successively higher reality levels as taught here.

‘The root nud is used in the sense of ‘to impel’. Thus, nud means the impelling impulse

which consents to ascension (tara), that is, through the procedure of the rite of initiation, where
the consciousness is impelled in the consciousness of the disciple. In other words, the teacher

imparts the liberating initiation by means of the conjunction (based on a complete oblation) with

Śiva with parts (sakala) or without (niṣkala), and this happens by means of the sequence of the
various (inner) locations such as prāṇa-haṁsa etc., the viṣuvat, the Void, etc. However,
consciousness is self-illuminating, all pervading, beyond all differentiation of space, time and

form, and so with regard to it, none of these applications have any reason to exist. Thus, Anuttara

is that in which this ascension by means of this impelling impulse (nud) is completely absent,

TANTRĀLOKA

The Yoga of the Offering of the Full Oblations
The First Full Oblation

iiBVĪVṄ-ĀCEĪHEEEF IIHCAI
ftrzrzrtmrasratrmīṛēzisraq|

ÇāTGTTĪCfAHTTṬAĪT
||/93 1I

ialēzeeIEEftcc
Eecce
I
IPT} GTIRTGTAĪ
JIIĪ T IĪTṀTT] II ¢o 11

AITJ̄] Taārānī]

aaṁȭ- aī fkītcgv'ī raīTā--Nq 1I ¢3 I
tataḥ prāguktasakalaprameyaṁ paricintayan || 78 ||
Śśiṣyadehādim ātmīyadehaprāṇādiyojitam |
kṛtvātmadehaprāṇāder viśvam antaranusmaret |I 79 ||
uktaprakriyayā caivaṁ dr̥ḍhabuddhir ananyadhīḥ |
prāṇasthaṁ deśakālādhvayugaṁ prāṇaṁ ca śaktigam || 80 |I

Śśiṣyasaṁvidabhinnāṁ ca mantravahnyādyabhedinīm || 81 I|
dhyāyan prāgvat prayogeṇa śivaṁ sakalaniṣkalam |

dvyātmakaṁ vā kṣipet pūrṇāṁ praśāntakaraṇena tu || 82 ||

Then, (the teacher), thinking of all that needs to be kmown

(prameya) taught previously, having conjoined the disciple’s body etc. with

his own body and vital breath etc., should recollect that everything (viśva) is
present within his own body and vital breath etc. (Then, his) intellect firm
and mind undistracted, meditating by means of the method (prakriyā)
taught (previously) on the two paths of time and space (as) present within

the vital breath, the breath (as) present within (Śiva’s) power, and that that

(power rests) within consciousness, (he should then meditate on how) that

pure consciousness, which is Śiva, is not separate from the disciple’s
consciousness, and is undivided from the fire of Mantra and the rest.

Meditating (thus,) with (the same) application (prayoga) (of mantra etc.) as
before on SŚiva, with differentiated energies and without them
which (as the God) himself will say farther ahead: ‘he who knows thus, according to truth, has the
initiation that bestows nirvāṇa . . .’ (PT 24,25)

“ This kind of initation (.c. yoanikādīkṣā) is imparted to a disciple who desires to enjoy the
experiences of a particular reality level (tattva). In the Tantrasāra (p. 159), Abhinava writes:
‘Thus if the (disciple) happens to desire worldly enjoyment, (the teacher) should therefore conjoin
(him) there itself into the principle wherever (he has) desire for enioymen’. tato yadi bhogechuh
syāt tato yatraiva tattve bhogecchā asya bhavati tatraiva samastavyastatāyā yojayeti.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

(sakalaniṣkala) or as both together, he should cast a full (oblation into the
fire) with a completely tranquil mind (praśāntakaraṇa). (78cd-82)
‘(The breath) is present within (Śiva’s) powerʼ means that it is
present in the power of Time (kālaśakti). ‘Both together’ means (Śiva, whose)
nature is both with differentiated energies and without them (sakalaniṣkala).

(The statements,) ‘that has been taught before’ʼ, ‘the method (prakriyā)
taught (previously)ʼ, and ‘as before’ indicate that (the subject has been treated)
extensively in Chapter Sixteen and Fifteen. Thus, for fear of making the book
(too) long, we have not laid it out here (in detail).
Nor is this just our own idea (upajña). Thus, he says:
The Second Full Oblation

q frāīrçīTtātzaīq 1| ¢3 11

āGiḻRēavkāEVIRTZĀ]

flrrṁāṁtcftrktra:
egi sāīaā q aq || c¥ 1
āT TTTlT,
ṬJI-T ġ |
uktaṁ traiśirase tantre sarvasaṁpūraṇātmakam |

mūlād udayagatyā tu Śivenduparisaṁplutam || 83 ||

janmāntamadhyakuharamūlasrotaḥsamutthitam |

Śivārkaraśmibhiṣ tīvraiḥ kṣubdhaṁ jñānāmṛtaṁ tu yat || 84 ||
tena saṁtarpayet samyak praśāntakaraṇena tu |

It is said in the 7riśirasatantra that ‘the nectar of consciousness has

emerged from the root stream (mūlasrotaḥ) (of the vital breath) (that flows)
through the cavities of (the place of) birth (janma), the End (of the Twelve,
and the Heart,) in the centre (madhya) (between them). By its upward
movement from the Root, it is (first) aroused (kṣubdha) by the intense rays
of the Śun of Śiva, and is (then) flooded (paripluta) (by the energy of) the
Moon of Śiva, and as such, (fills and) is filled with all things. With this, (the
teacher) should offer libation properly with a completely tranquil mind
(praśāntakaraṇa) (83-85ab)
The foundation of birth, the End of the Twelve and the Heart are the
locations of the primary foundations (adhiṣṭhāna), and so, like (enclosed)
apertures (avavaraka), they are ‘cavities’. (The nectar of knowledge) ‘has

risen up from the root stream (mūlasrotaḥ)’, which is the pulse of the primary
energy (ādyaśakti) (of consciousness and the vital breath). Thus, by its

travelling upwards from the Root Foundation (mūlādhāra), it is ‘aroused’ by

the intense rays of the Śun of the vital breath which is Śiva, and so, extroverted
! This word is used above in 8/311c (311a) with this sense.

TANTRĀLOKA

(hahirmukhībhūta), it is flooded all around with the Moon of Śiva, which is

located in the End of the Twelve, that is, has become one’s own Self. Thusṣ, it

‘(flls and) is filled with all things’. In accord with the teaching that ‘the initial

transformation of consciousness is into the vital breath’, it is ‘the nectar of

consciousnessʼ, which is the first unfolding of supreme consciousness. It is with
this that (the teacher) ‘should offer libation properlyʼ to the aggregate of
Mantras (mantracakra), with a completely tranquil mind. The meaning is that
by casting a full oblation (into the fire), he should establish it well in his own
nature.

Surely (one may ask), what is said to be the tranquillity of the mind (to

which he refers)? With this doubt in mind, it says:

The Third Full Oblation

HĪTSTTPṬRṬṬĪĪĒTTHHaT 1I/C4 1I1
3THATJRĪT TTCATIJIRTĪĀJT: |

SEEEEVUEEĒAḺTEAVEḺEYHAIṬAAI

TGTTTTTÑĀ
GGJT āTHYTT-TTT |

gfraīĩtrt=d aTāōrāīxā āīaç=add || ¢.s 1

śūnyadhāmābjamadhyasthaprabhākiraṇabhāsvaraḥ || 85 ||
ādheyādhāraniḥspandabodhaśāstraparigrahaḥ |
janmādheyaprapañcaikasphoṭasaṅghattaghaṭṭanaḥ |l 86 ||
mūḷasthānāt samārabhya kr̥tvā someśam antagam |
kham ivātiṣṭhate yāvat praśāntaṁ tāvad ucyate || 87 ||
(The teacher,) shining radiantly with the rays of the light (that
shines) in the middle of the lotus of the Abode of the Void, (assumes,) in
accord with the scriptures, the form of consciousness without movement,
within the support and what it sustains.”” He devours the single union of the

Abhinava himself quotes this aphorism above in 6/12ab, and Jayaratha tclls us that it is from a
work by Kallaṭabhaṭṭa; possibly the lost Śakúisūtra or the Tattvārthacintāmaṇi. It s also quoted in

TĀv ad 5/6, ad 5/44-48ab, ad 15/297cd-302ab, ad 28/218cd-219ab, and ad 28/338cd-340ab, along
with two others. See above, note at TĀv ad 3/138-141 (137cd-141ab), where it is quoted for the

first ime. Cf. above 6/12: “when consciousness first enters the psychophysical organism, it is in
the form of the vital breath (prāṇa), which vitalizes the inner mental organ.’
Theṣe lines, it seems, are Abhinava’s explanation. The text reads ādheyādhāraniḥspandabodhaśāstraparigrahaḥ, which translate to mean ‘(the teacher assumes) in accord with the scriptures

the form of consciousness without movement within the support and what it sustains.’ This
translation is somewhat forced, but it follows, as it must, Jayaratha’s explanation. The sense is

much

improved

by

two

simple

emendatons,

namely

—nihspanda-

>

–niḥsyanda- and –bodhaśāstra- > -hodhaśaktúi-. The meaning would then be: ‘(the teacher

assumes) the form of the power of consciousness

that flows from the support and what it sustains’.

As Jayaratha does not make such emendations, hc is compelled to strain his explanation of the
following line. Thus he explains ‘ghaṭtana’ as ‘devouring’, whereas its literal meaning and usage
in theṣe texts is ‘striking together’ (TĀv ad 3/67cd-68ab), ‘pulsaton’ as in the expression
hṛádghaṭṭana- the throbbing of the heart’ (ibid. ad 3/67). He cannot accept that this is the meaning,

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

radiant resonance (sphoṭa) which is the unfolding development (prapañca)
of the (abode of) birth and of that which it sustains. Having (thus
conducted) the Moon from the location of the Root and placed it in the End
(of the Twelve), to the degree in which (the teacher) abides like the sky, he

is said to be ‘completely tranquil’ (praśānta). (85cd-87)

because he has just explained that the teacher is ‘without movement’, in accord with the

unemended reading.

I have had to translate it in accord with his explanation as ‘He devours (ghaṭṭana) the
single union of the radiant resonance (sphoṭa) which is the unfolding development (prapaica) of
the (abode of) birth and of that which it sustains.” A more accurate translation would be ‘(the form
of the teacher) is the pulse of the (dynamic) union of the single (common) resonant brilliance . . .’.

The resultant translation is:

‘(The teacher,) shining radiantly with the rays of the light (that shines) in the middle of

the lotus of the Abode of the Void, (assumes) in accord with the scriptures the form of the power

of consciousness that flows from the support and what it sustains. ‘(The form of the teacher)

is the pulse of the (dynamic) union of the single (common) resonant brilliance, which is the
unfolding development (prapañca) of the (abode of) birth and of that which it sustains. Having

(thus conducted) the Moon (of exhalation) from the location of the Root and placed it in the End
(of the Twelve), to the degree in which (the teacher) abides all around like the sky, he is said to be

‘completely tranquil’.”
iya tiṣṭhate for ivātiṣṭhate.

The verses in note 93 allude in a subtle way to the phases of the movement and resting of the
breath. In that context, the expression describing the teacher as ‘completely tranquil’ (praśānta)

conveys an extra technical sense. This emerges by examining sources that teach the practice of
breath control (prāṇāyāma). For example, cf. NTS nayasūtra 4/111-113:

‘By expelling (recanāi), by fillig (pāraṇāi) and by holding in (rodhanāṅ), the three-

fold breath-stretching (prāṇāyamaḥ) is held (to be accomplished). Generally, these are external;

but there are also internal ones. Internally he should expel; internally he should fill. He should
perform a motionless kumbhaka (internally); these are the three internal ones. There is a fourth

breath exercise which is called Suprasānta, (achieved) by moving (the vital energy) from the heart
into the navel and (by moving) the mind away from the sense objects.’ (translation by Goodall)

Goodall (2015: 491-2) ‘although it is quite commonly asserted in a very wide range of
works, including many early Śaiva ones, that prāṇāyama has three parts (e.g. Viāśikhatantra 6970; Sārdhatriśatikālottara 11/11-14), a fourth prāṇāyama is in fact spoken of already in
Yogasūtra 2/51 (bāhyābhyantaraviṣayākṣepī caturthaḥ). It seems there as though it may refer to a

profound subjacent super-kumbhaka that is not measured out but that is felt to come to exist, after

long practice, as a state that underlies all three other prāṇāyamas. This verse in the Niśvāsa may,
however, be the earliest passage in which i
signed the name Supraśānta / Śānta. The fourth
phase, referred to as Prasānta, is also mentioned in the Siddhayogesvarīmata 7/2 (see Tōrzsōk
1999: 132) where it is associated with the seed syllable of Parā.’” Goodall refers to Mallinson, who

observes that a fourth prāṇāyama may be called kevalakumbhaka in a number of early haṭha
texts, including Datātreyayogaśāstra, Gorakṣaśataka, Vasiṣṭhasaṁhitā and the Haṭhapradīpikā.

“The descriptioon of kevalakumbhaka, which is apparently something that can be performed only

after years of practice, is to be described in verses 2/71-4 of the last-named work. Hemacandra’s

Yogaśāstra teaches four breath-control practices in addition to piraka, recaka and kumbhaka,

namely, pratyāhāra, śānta, uttara and adhara (5!5). Among these, śānta is explained (5/8) to
consist of preventing the breath from flowing through the mouth, nose and palate. The relevant
part of the presentatin of prāṇāyama is as follows (Yogaśāstra 5/7c-9) tramslated by Gopani
(1989: 132-13).

(Goodall 2015: 493) ‘That very wind, when it is suspended and stopped at the navel, it

is called kumbhaka. Pratyāhāra īs that type of prāṇāyāma in which the breath is moved from one

part of the body to another. When the breath is prevented from escaping through the palate,

nostrils or mouth, it is called ‘śānta’. That prāṇāyāma in which the wind is drawn from outside
and stored in the region of the Heart is called ‘Utara’. When it

is shifted to the lower parts of the

TANTRĀLOKA

The teacher shines radiantly, energized by the contact with the rays of

the energy of the light present in the middle of the lotus which is in the Abode

of the Void, that is, in the Root Foundation (mūlādhāra), which is such
according to the teaching that will be imparted further ahead, (where we read
that it is) ‘within the lotus that covers the maṇḍala that is always propense (to

expansion,) and is present within the triangle (of the genitals).’ Thus, it has

assumed, according to the scriptures, that is, according to the manner taught by
them, the form of consciousness (bodha) that has arisen by the awakening of
power (śakti), and that abides ‘without movement’, in a single form within the

support, which is the abode of birth, and that which it sustains, that is, the vital
breath. Thus, he devours the unfolding development (prapañca) of the support
and what it sustains, that is, the foundation of birth and the vital breath, the

nature of both of which has just been explained. (He does this) by means of the
single union, which is the oneness of the radiant resonance, which is Unstruck

Sound. This is the meaning. Thus, the Moon of inhalation (apāna), devoured by
the Sun of exhalation (prāṇa), having risen up slowly and ‘placed in the End of

the Twelve, to the degree in which he abides like” the skyʼ, ‘he is said to be
‘completely tranquil”. The meaning is that he possesses the state of the

Transmental by the falling away of the division between subject and object.

That is also said in our scripture.” Thus he says:

3ṁ sr̄-vṁai
ggr̥ggã afar |

Ṝkra ṭ ũaṁṁã ftri attzamṁ71

1|

uktaṁ śrīpūrvaśāstre ca srucam āpūrya sarpiṣā |
krṛtvā śiṣyaṁ tathātmasthaṁ mūlamantram anusmaran || 88 ||
Śivaṁ śaktiṁ tathātmānaṁ Śśiṣyaṁ sarpis tathānalam |
ekīkurvañ chanair gacched dvādaśāntam ananyadhīḥ l| 89 ||
tatra kumbhakam āsthāya dhyāyan sakalaniṣkalam |
tiṣṭhet tāvad anudvigno yāvad ājyakṣayo bhavet || 90 ||

Moreover, it is said in Mālinīvijayottara: ‘Once (the teacher) has

filled the (sacrificial) ladle with clarified butter and placed the disciple in

body, such as the navel etc., it is named ‘Adhara’. The difference between kumbhaka and śānta
seems to lie only in the place within the body where the breath is retained.”
“ Below, 29/15lab.

“ Read iva tiṣṭhate for ivātiṣṭhate.

“ This

ment tells us two things. One is that Abhinava’s citation from the

Triśirobhairavatantra extends up to here. Another is that, even though that is a Trika Tantra, it is

not as much ‘our’ Tantra as is the Mālinīvijayottara, which for Abhinava’s tradition was the most

intimate and special Tantra, even amongst the highest Trika Tantras.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

that way within (his own) Self, he should recollect the root Mantra.
Unifying Śiva, (his) Power, (his own) Self, the disciple, the clarified butter,

and the fire, undistracted, he should slowly go to the End of the Twelve

(and enter it). There, having suspended the breath, meditating on (Śiva),
with and without (His) energies (sakalaniṣkala), he should abide there
unperturbed, until (all) the clarified butter is consumed”.” (88-90)
‘The root Mantra’ is the one (the teacher) wishes to impart. ‘Having

suspended the breath’ within the Self, which is the Great Sky (of
consciousness), he there makes that which is Nara, namely, all else (apart from
Śiva and Śakti), one with Śiva and Śakti. This is the meaning. (The teacher

meditates on Śiva) ‘with and without (His) energies’, because that is fitting for

(the process of) conjunction (yojanikā). (The teacher should abide there)
‘unperturbed’. The meaning is that (he should be) at rest within his own Self
alone, the nature of which is consciousness.

This being so, what happens? (In response to this question,) he says:

evaṁ yuktaḥ pare tattve guruṇā śivamiūrtinā |
na bhiyaḥ paśutām eti dagdhamāyānibandhanaḥ || 91 |I

“(The disciple,) united in this way with the supreme reality by the

teacher who is Śiva incarnate (śivamārti), the fetters of Māyā burnt away,

he does not return again to (his former) fettered state’. (91)

This then is the difference in the case of initiation that bestows worldly

benefits (bhogadīkṣā). Accordingly, he says:

Initiation for Worldly Benefits (bhogadīkṣā)

by Means of a Full Oblation

JI] āTGTṀTHTTĪ
T TT II 8z |I

fṣaī || Q% 11
’ TĀ 17/88b-90is a literal quotation of MV 9/75d-78ab. The only two varants ar srucam (‘large
ladle’) in TĀ 17/88b for sravam (‘small ladle’) in MV 9/75d, and TĀ 17/88d reads anusmaran
(as he recollects’) for anusmaret (‘he should recollect) of MV 9/76b.
Ī0% |7/91 is a literal quotation of MV 9/78cd-79ab with no variants.

TANTRĀLOKA

rār frāttrarī
aī ṁhāīaatōraā 1| <y, 1

āāḌEEIEGTISEcī|Et-iiāzE-IṬAĀI

zaūa ftṛ araṁā] ēiī ṀTī- Ṁfriqsz ar |

dehapāte punaḥ prepsed yadi tattveṣu kuṭracit |
bhogān samastavyastatvabhedair ante paraṁ padam || 92 ||
tadā tattattvabhūmau tu tatsaṁkhyāyām ananyadhīḥ |
punar yojanikāṁ kuryāt pūrṇāhutyantareṇa tu || 93 |I
muktipradā bhogamokṣapradā vā yā prakīrtitā |
dīkṣā sā syāt sabījatvanirbījātmatayā dvidhā || 94 |
bāle nirjñātamaraṇe tv aśakte vā jarādibhiḥ |
kāryā nirbījikā dīkṣā śaktipātabalodaye || 95 ||
nirbūjāyāṁ sāmayāṁs tu pāśān api viśodhayet |
kṛtanirbījadīkṣas tu devāgnigurubhaktibhāk || 96 ||
iyataiva śivaṁ yāyāt sadyo bhogān vibhujya vā |

"If, on the contrary, (the disciple) were to desire to obtain worldly

benefits after death somewhere within the reality levels (tattva), whether in

general or in particular,” and (then) finally the supreme place, (the

teacher), deliberating (saṅīkhyā) on the plane of that reality level, with his
mind intent on nothing else, should perform the rite that conjoins (the

disciple) with it by means of another full oblation. (92-93)

Initiation, whether it is said to be one that bestows liberation or
(both) worldly benefits and liberation, is of two kinds, according to whether

it is with the seed or without it. In the case of a child, a person who is

known to be dying, or powerless due to old age and the like, the initiation
that should be imparted is one without seed. (This is done) when the

strength that comes from a descent of the power (of grace) (śaktipāta) has

developed (in the postulant). (94-95)
In the course of an initiation without seed, (the teacher) should also
purify the fetters, which (in that case) are the rules (initiates with seed must
observe). He who has received an initiation without seed and has devotion
to the God, to the fire, and to the teacher, may by virtue of this alone go to

l Thiṣ passage (i.e. 17/92-97ab) appears to be Abhinava’s own words.

The firṣṭ case refers, according to Jayaratha, to the state of conjunction (sāyujya) with Śiva, and

the second to the being in the same world with Him (sālokya). See above, TĀv 13/245cd-246ab
below, 28/237cd ff.

Concerning

these two types of initiaton, see above 15/23cd-26 and notes. Just to remind the

reader, the initiation with seed is one that healthy adult males can take who can meet the
obligations of the observance of the Rule (samaya). Those without seed include children, women,

simpletons, and the disabled, who cannot or need not observe them.

The ‘purifying’ of the rules means their elimination. The teacher releases the disciple who is
incapable of observing the rules from their binding imposition. Concemning the initiaton ‘without
seedʼ, see above, 15/31-33ab.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

Śiva, either immediately or after fully enjoying the worldly benefits (he
desires). (94-97ab),
The worldly benefits (the disciple may enjoy) ‘in general’, (he
experiences) in a state of conjunction (with Śiva) (sāyujya), and ‘in particularʼ,
in a state in which he shares the same world (as Śiva) (sālokya) and the like.
‘Deliberating (saṁīkhyā) on that’ (reality level), in which he has rightly
(samyak) experienced and desired. ‘Immediately° (means just) after the
iṇitiation (or) ‘after enjoying the worldly benefits (he desires)’, after the body
falls away.
Surely, (one may ask that, by saying that) ‘he goes to Śiva’, is the
process of conjoining (the soul to progressively higher reality levels)
(yojanikākrama) taught here the instrtumental means (to just that), or something

else also? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Initiation into the Disembodied form of Śiva Beyond the Principles

GTRṬṀ || Qv I|

AāTIT ASĪGĒHTT |

IBŠIEEETCĀ
GCIĀK

earaīq dq 1
śrīmaddīkṣottare coktaṁ cāre ṣaṭṭriṁśadaṁgule |/ 97 I|

tattvāny āpādamūrdhāntaṁ bhuvanāni tyajet kramāt |

tuṭimātraṁ niṣkalaṁ tad adehaṁ tad ahaṁ param || 98 ||
Śśaktyā tatra kṣipāmy enam iti dhyāyaṁs tu dīkṣayet |

And it is said in the venerable Dikṣottara that ‘travelling (through

the body of the disciple) for (spans of) of thirty-six fingers, (the teacher)
should gradually (kramāt) abandon the reality levels (tattva) and the worlds

from the feet up to the end of the head, (one after another). (Then,)

thinking (dhyāyan) for just a moment (tuti) that – “ṭhe undifferentiated
(niṣkala) disembodied (form of Śiya) am I, (who am) supreme. I cast him
(my disciple) there by means of (Śiva’s) power’ – he should initiate him.

(97cd-99ab)

The distance from the soles of the feet to the top of the head of a person standing is 96

finger-breadths. This number is not evenly divisible by 36. Thus, the expression ‘end of the head’

must denote the upper End of the Twelve, which is locatcd at the end of the subtle body, twelve

finger-breadths beyond the top of the head. This measures 108 finger-breadths that, divided
by 36,
can be split into three units. The first unit spans the feet to the base of the spine. The second one

from there to the heart, and the third from the heart to the upper End of the Twelve.

Emend tad adehaṁ to yad adehaṁ.
17/97cd-99%ab is a concise paraphrase of Dīkṣoṭṭara 1/10cd-15, which reads, according to IFP
transcript T 17A (p. 797-798), as follows:

ttrṁśāṇgulaṁ pariṭyajya kramavac ca sumadhyame | 10 ||
tuṭimātraṁ sa vijñeyo dēhamuktas tu niṣkalaḥ

TANTRĀLOKA

svāmibhāvaṁ tu yat tasmin dvādaśāntam (> -nte) avasthitaḥ (> vyavasthitam) 1 |I
saṁṅyukta (> -yuktaṁ) śaktinā buddhaṁ tuṭimātras tu niṣkalaḥ |
Śśaktyādehasthito hy ātmā niṣkalaḥ parameṣśvaraḥ || 12. ||

tattvastho vyāpayed devi dehān muktas tu niṣkalaḥ |

susamiddhe yathā vahnau śikhā lihati cāṁbare || 13 11
dehasya tad varārohe lūāyati tapade dīkṣākāle bhimānan tu tadvat kuryāt tu deśikaḥ || 14 II

aham eva paraṁ tatvaṁ tatvalīnas tathaiva ca |

Śaktyā raṇiphītā yā (> tāraṇibhītayā) punas tatra kṣipāmy aham || 15 I1
(note tatva- has everywhere been silently corrected to tattva-)

°O lady with a beautiful waist, (travellig through the body of the disciple), having
abandoned (spans of thirty-six fingers one after another in due order (kramavat), in just a
moment he should be known to be undifferentiated (niṣkala) (Śiva), free of the body. (lOcd-1 1ab)
Lordship is established within that End of the Twelve and, conjoined with (Śiva’s)
power, is awakened (by it) for just a moment, (and he becomes) undifferentiated (Śiva). The Self,
disembodied by the power (of the Lord), is the undifferentiated Supreme Lord. O goddess,
established in (the highest) reality, he pervades (everywhere and), freed from the body, (he is)
undifferentiated (Śiva). (1 1cd-13ab)

Just as when a fire is well-fuelled, (its) flame licks (up) into the sky, (in the same way)
O fair lady, (that power) causes (the life force) of the body to play on that plane (of disembodied

Śiva). In the same way, at the time of initiation, the teacher should cultivate a notion of himself

(abhimāna) that “I myself am the supreme reality, and in the same way I am merged within it. I
am placing (my disciple) there by means of (Śiva’s) saving power.” (13cd-15).
The remaining part of the chapter fills out the details.
evaṁ yo vetti tatvena vahnivad dehamadhyataḥ |

atītaś śiva (> śivas) tadvahneḥ sa u yojayate pare | 16 |1
Śśaktyā tāvat sa yujyeta yāvat tatvan na vindati |
udite tu pare tatvve tatrastho 'pi na vāryate || 17 II

bandhamuktaḥ pare śānte pare līyanti (> līyati) śāśvate |

lūnas sarvagato devi dharmādharmavivarjitaḥ l 18 II

hṛtpadmād yāvat tatpadmaṁ pṛthak saṁhāralakṣitam |

p. 799) yāvad vaktram anuprāpiaṁ dvibhāgaṁ tyajate tu saḥ l 19 lI
tṛtīyaṁ tyajate svalpo tryaṁśair muktas tu niṣkalaḥ |
atītaṁ dyādaśānte tu śaktipadmaṁ prakīrtitam || 20 l|
tatrasthaṁ tutimātran tu kālaṁ tasya prakīrtitam |
niṣkalaś śaktipadme tu prabuddhas tatra tiṣṭhati | 21 I|
atītas suprabuddhas tu unmanatvaṁ yadā priye |

He who knows that as it truly is in this way, is like fire in the middle of the body. He

who has gone beyond that fire and is tranquil (śiva) is conjoined into the Supreme. (16) He should
be conjoined thus (tāvar) with (Śiva’s) power until he does not attain reality (tattva). When the
supreme reality has arisen, even though he is present there (in the body), he is not obstructed. (17)
He, free of bondage in the supreme and tranquil one, merges into the supreme and
etermal
(reality).
O goddess, the one who has merged (thus) is omnipresent and is devoid of (both) Dharma and

Adharma. (18)

From the lotus of the heart up to (yāvat) that lotus which, separate (from it), is
characterized by withdrawal. When the face is attained after that, he abandons the twofold
division (of body and soul?). One who is subtle (svalpa) abandons the third (level) and, free of the

three aspects, is Undifferentiated (Śiva) (niṣkala). (19-20ab)

The transcendent in the End of the Twelve is said to be the Lotus of Power. The

moment (tuṭimātra) present there is said to be the time of that (transcendent Śiva).

Undifferentiated (Śiva) abides awakened (prabuddha) there in the Lotus of Power. The
transcendent one is well awakened (suprabuddha) when, O beloved, the Transmental state
(arises). (20cd-22ab)

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

na kālaṁ na kalācāraṁ na tatvā (>tattvaṁ) na ca devatā || 22. ||

sunirvāṇaṁ paraṁ śuddhaṁ guruvaktre pratiṣṭhitam |
taṁ prāpya na nivartante bhayasaṁsārabandhane ||23 II

na tasya cāmarā (> cāparaṁ) khyātaṁ niṣkalāvasthitasya tu |
p. 800) etat te niṣkalaṁ tattvam uktam eva samāsataḥ || 24 ||
caturvidhaṁ mayā devi kathitaṁ tatvam uttamam |

trividhaṁ tu parityajya śaktyantaṁ (> -nte) yas tuṭi smṛtaḥ || 25 |I
tuṭau paṭau (> tuṭau) tu sthitvā vai ṣoḍaśāṁśe vyavasthitaḥ |

sa bhoktā sarvatatvā

Śśaktyante yas tuṭi smṛtaḥ ||26 ||

sa bhoktā sarvatatvā
śaktinā saha saṅyutaḥ |
Śśaktyatīto varārohe tatvena saha yujyate | 27 II

catuhpadmaṁ bhavet padmaṁ vyāpiṇī

(> vyāpinī) karṇikāṣṭhitā |

tatra śakticatuṣkan tu sūkṣmākhyaṁ parikīrtitam || 28 II

Śrutvā budhvā vimucyante nātra kāryā vicāraṇā |

Beautiful Nirvāṇa, supreme and pure, (where) there is no time or the activity of the
forces (kalācāra), no (separate) reality and no deity, is established in the teacher's mouth. (22cd23ab)

Having attained that, they do not retum into the bondage of the world of transmigratory
existence and fear. Nor is there said to be anything else (to be attained) for one who is established
in undifferentiated (Śiva). In this way I have told you concisely about the reality which is

undifferentiated (Śiva). (23d-24ab)

O goddess, I have told (you) the most excellent reality of four kinds. Having abandoned

the one of three kinds, and having stood firm each moment, the moment (tui) that is said to be

present within Power is established in the sixteenth part. (25cd-26ab)
That is the enjoyer of all the reality principles, and is conjoined with (Śiva’s) Power. 0
fair lady, the one who is beyond (Śiva’s) power is united with reality. (26cd-27)
The fourth lotus is a lotus in the calyx of which is located the Pervasive One. There are
four energies there, and it is said to be the one called the Subtle. Having heard (of it) and known
it, they are liberated - there is no need to reflect here (about this, it is certainly true). (28-29ab)
p. 801) sarvatantreṣu sāmānyaṁ tatrasthaṁ viṣuvaṁ smrtam || 29 ||
prāṇasya tal layaṁ devi tatrastho ’pi (> na) nivartate |

sakalaṁ niṣkala caiva mayanañ (> praṇavaṁ) ca tṛtīyakam ||30 l
praśāntaṁ prāpya deveśi niṣkalaṁ viṣuvaṁ smṛtam |
tribhāgabhājite cāre niṣkalaḥ praṇavaḥ smṛtaḥ lI 31 II

praśāntas tu smṛto binduḥ niṣkalaḥ praṇavasya tu |

sacetasya (> sacetasah) smṛto jīvo yadā śaktyā tu yujyate l| 32 |
anyathā niṣkalo hy ātmā suṣuptāv iva lakṣyate |

cinmātran tu smṛto (> smṛtaṁ) hutvā cetā śaktiḥ prakīrtitā || 33 II
Śrutvā budhvā vimucyante nātra kāryā vicāraṇā |
p. 802) sarvatantreṣu sāmānyaṁ tantrasthe (> tatrasthaṁ) viṣuvaṁ vadet (> bhavet) || 34 ||
prāṇasya tallayaṁ devi tātrasthe (> -stho) na nivartate |
Located there is said to be the Equinox common (to the teachings) of all the Tantras. O
goddess, that is the dissolving away of the vital breath. He who is established there does not

retum. Differentiated, undifferentiated and Praṇava, the third, having attained the Completely

Tranquil, O mistress of the gods, the Undifferentiated is said to be the Equinox. (29cd-31ab)

When the movement (of the breath) is divided into three parts, the Undifferentiated is

considered to be Praṇava. The Completely Tranquil is considered to be the Point (hindu), and is
the Undifferentiated (form) of Praṇava. (31cd-32ab)
The individual soul is said to be sentient if conjoined with (Śiva’s) power. Otherwise,

the Self is undifferentiated, and appears to be as if in deep sleep.

That is said to be pure consciousness alone, and having made an offering to the fire

(hutvā), consciousness is said to be (Śiva’s) power. Having heard (of it) and known it, they are

liberated – there is no need to reflect here (about this, it is certainly true). Located there is said to

be the Equinox common (to the teachings) of all the Tantras. O goddess, that is the dissolving
away of the vital breath. He who is established there does not retur. (33cd-35ab)

TANTRĀLOKA

tathā yuktam idaṁ sarvaṁ nānāceṣṭāni kārayet || 35 ||

tatsthāne līyate jñānī jñe ? paraṁ layam |

kalpanārahitaṁ jñāṁ (>jñānaṁ) sarvatatvavivarjitam || 36 |
vyāpakaṁ sarvatatvānāṁ pāraṁparyeṇa saṁsthitam |

etat te niṣkalañ cāraṁ kathitan tu mayākhilam || 37 ||

na deyañ ca tvayā devi anyāyapathavartine |
kapaṭenopapannāya śravasyapi na dāpayet | 38 I

vyāpinī vyyomarūpā ca anantānāyakā (> nāyikā) smṛtā |

p. 803) mārti (> mūrtir) devasya vikhyātā śaktyā devabhuvasya ta | 39
pañcavyoma smṛtā hy ete śūnyāvasthā tu devatā |

In this way, all this is sound (and proper). He should bring about many (kinds of)
behaviour. The man of knowledge dissolves away in that place the supreme dissolution. It is
knowledge free of thought constructs, and is devoid of al the reality principles. It pervades all the
reality principles and is established by the lineage (of teachers). I have told you all about this,
namely, undifferentiated motion. (35cd-37)
O goddess, you should not give it to someone who is on an evil path, nor even allow one
who has approached (a teacher) deceitfully to hear (it). The form of the Pervasive is the Void. It is
endless and (supreme, and) is said to have no mastcr. She is said to be form of the god, as the
Power of the fire of the god. She is said to be the Five Voids. They are the state of Voidness and
dcity. (38-40ab)
The Five Brahmās (see above, note 15,337)

brahmādīnāṁ varārohe śūnyadehaḥ paraḥ smṛtaḥ ||40 1
etat te devatāyogaṁ prathamatṁ parikīrtitam |

Śśaktyavasthāntarībhūtās sīūkṣmādyāḥ parikīrtitāḥ || 41 |I

tatsthacetātmakā devāś śabdarūpāḥ prakīrtitāḥ |

tṛtīyā tu varārohe jñātavyā deśikena tu | 42 |

‘O fair lady, the Void Body (śāūnyadeha) of (the five causal forces) beginning with
Brahmā is considered to be supreme. That is your Deity Yoga, which is said to be the first. The
Subtle One and the rest are said to be included in the state of (Śiva’s) power. Word is said to be

the nature of the deities present there that are consciousness. O fair lady, one should know by
means of the teacher that (Power) is the third one. (40cd-42)

dvividhasthāntare devi jyotīrāpaṁ vicintayet |

ta (> tad) evam anurūpan tu pañcamāṁ (> -maṁ) kathitaṁ tava || 43 ||

īśavaktre tathāghore vāmas sadyas tathaiva ca |
p. 804) trividhaṁ mantradehan tu veditavyaṁ prayatnataḥ l| 44 1

O goddess, one should think (that that which is its) form as light is within that which
abides as two kinds. I have told you the fifth one, which is its facsimile (anurāpa) in this way.
Within Īśa’s face and that of Aghora, is Vāma and s0 too Sadya – one should exert oneself to
know (Śiva's) mantra-body which is of three kinds. (43-44)
brahmā viṣṇus tathā rudro īśvaras tu sadāśivaḥ |

prthiyyāpas tathā tejo vāyur ākāśam eva ca l| 45 II

Śūnyasparśas tathā śabdo jyotīrūpaṁ tathaiva ca |

mantrarūpaṁ tathaiveha kathitaṁ tatvato mayā | 46 ||

sthūlāt sthālatarair bhāvaiḥ sūkṣmāt sūkṣmataraiḥ punaḥ |

pañca brahmāṇi deveśi veditavyāni yatnataḥ || 47 II

Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Īśvara and Sadāśiva (are) Earth, Water, Fire, Air and Space, (as
well as) the Void, touch, sound, light aand the form of mantra. I havē told (you this) here as it taly
is. O mistress of the gods, one should exert oneself to know the five Brahmas by means of states
(bhāva) tht are grosser than gross and more subtle than subtle. (45-47)

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

“That’ is the essential nature of the Supreme Brahman. This is the
meaning. Thus, it is transcendental (Śiva), and so is also said to be
‘disembodiedʼ. (He is) ‘supreme ‘I’ (consciousness)ʼ; that is, his nature is (the
subjectivity that is) the reflective awareness of (the supreme) ‘T’

(ahaṁparamārśa). This is the meaning.

Having said that by the way, he (now) states the main point.
Emission of the Pure Principles by
Means of a Full Oblation

ātā M + ḹ

iē vṝetcEs|zaḵ- Š uf fṀ I
€ÉṭēE|t=ZEEIESTPĒVUUETGI

UIEVCEICĀZIDFAIAEṬR:ṛṭ:ḶĪECHI

sabījāyāṁ tu dīkṣāyāṁ samayān na viśodhayet || 99 ||
viśeṣas tv ayam etasyāṁ yāvaj jīvaṁ Śśiśor guruḥ |
śeṣavṛttyai śuddhatattvaṣṛṣṭiṁ kurvīta pūrṇayā || 100 |I
abhinnāc chivasaṁbodhajaladher yugapatsphurat |
pūrṇāṁ kṣipaṁs tattvajālaṁ dhyāyed bhārūpakaṁ sṛtam || 1OI II
In the course of the initiation with seed, (the fetter of the observance
of) the rules need not be purified (and so removed). The special feature of
this (initiation) is that, in order that the disciple may fulfil (his) remaining
obligations (Śśeṣavṛtti) for as long as he lives, the teacher should emit the
pure principles with a full (oblation). (99cd-100)
How should he emit the pure principles here (in this case)? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

śūnyasparśas tathā śabdojyorūpaṁ (> jyotīrūpaṁ) tathaiva ca |
tattva
aṁ tathaiveha pañca brahmãḥ prakũrtitãḥ || 48 ||
tvā ca budhvā ca mucyate pāśabandhanāt |

p. 805) vrajate śivasāyujyaṁ śivena saha modate |49 |
sṣaṭpadārtham idaṁ devi mantrāṇāṁ kathitaṁ tava |

veditavyaṁ prayatnena siddhimokṣārthakāṇkṣibhiḥ | 50 |

evaṁ sarveṣu mantreṣu kathitaṁ tava śobhane |

The Void, touch, sound, light and the form of reality (iattvarāpa) are said to be the Fiye
Brahmas. Having known (them) this way and awakened, one is freed from the bonds of the fetters.
He goes (on to attain) union (sāyujya) with Śiva and he delights along with Śiva. (48-49)

O goddess, T have told you this group of six categories pertaining to mantras. Those who
crave for accomplishment and liberation should exert (themselvs) to know it. I have told you O
fair one, (what is) present in this way in all mantras.’ (Ṣ0-Ṣ1ab)

TANTRĀLOKA

As he casts the full oblation (into the fire), he should meditate on
how the net of principles, pulsing radiantly in the form of light, is
simultaneously emitted from the undivided ocean of Śiva consciousness.

(99cd-101)

The prose order is: he should meditate on the net of principles emitted
from the ocean of Śiva consciousness.
He presents other views here (in this regard):

GEEIEIEREIEISZZIÉEEEIH

a ŪJĪTĀ-TT : 1| 20 1
viśuddhatattvasṛṣṭiṁ vā kuryāt kumbhābhiṣecanāt |

tathā dhyānabalād eva yad vā pūrṇābhiṣecanaiḥ || 102 ||
The pure reality principles (Áuddhatattva) may be emitted by
sprinkling (consecrated water) from the sacrificial jar or by the power of
creative visualization (dhyāna), or else by (all three means, namely) a full
(oblation, visualization) and sprinklings. (102)

The power of creative visualization (dhyānabala) is included, because

(it is implied by the plural of) ‘sprinklings’. Thus, this is the perspective
(pakṣa) (that views the reality levels) as a whole (rather than individually).

He (now) explains what their pure state is.

The Pure States of the Principles

yfrt fkxqrzz

āīṁāa vrraīē̄Ḥ gJāNTT 1| 203 1

STHTITTĀTĪ
ṬSĪ ŪTRITTĪ -Tq |

TṀTCTRIĀTĪTTJTTJTĒṬ-AfĪ; || 20, 11

[ÁGIEIGEHĒĪEGHĒEGHEI ZṬÚKṢIḤII
āqarvtarcāatzamī
frgraāṁ 1
qgTPATTHTT:
JGTNĪI ĠTPHTRTTĪ IIṞOo.9 11]

fīāTI TṢ̄T kr̥ra: hōōTTaT &B I| 20. ||

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

frgaāT 1

āṁī āaḶGaT |I 220 11

a gaaāṁ gēaTT fr-āīsf̄] ā-a
rd-rrṁcgfrāi īṁf-ñfasrārk 1| 222 11

prthivī sthirarūpāsya śivarūpeṇa bhāvitā |
sthirīkaroti tām eva bhāvanām iti śuddhyati || 103 II

jalam āpyāyatyenāṁ tejo bhāsvaratāṁ nayet |

marudānandasaṁsparśaṁ vyoma vaitatyamāvahet || 104 II
evaṁ tanmātravargo ‘pi śivatāmaya iṣyate |
parānandamahāvyāptir aśeṣamalavicyutiḥ || 105 ||
Śśive gantṛtvam ādānam upādeyaśivastutiḥ |
śivāmodabharāsvādadarśanasparśanāny alam || 106 ||
tadākarṇanam ity evam indriyāṇāṁ viśuddhatā |
saṅkalpādhyavasāmānāḥ prakāśo raktisaṁsthitī|| 107 ||
Śivātmatvena yat seyaṁ śuddhatā mānasādike |
niyamo rañjanaṁ kartṛbhāvaḥ kalanayā saha || 108 II
vedanaṁ heyavastvaṁśaviṣaye suptakalpatā |

itthaṁ śivaikyarūḍhasya ṣaṭkañcukagaṇo ‘py ayam || 109 ||

śuddha eva pumān prāptaśivabhāvo viśuddhyati |
vidyeśādiṣu tattveṣu naiva kācid aśuddhatā || 110 ||
ity evaṁ śuddhatattvānāṁ sṛṣṭyā śiṣyo ‘pi tanmayaḥ |
bhaved dhy etat sūcitaṁ śrīmālinīvijayottare | I 1 11 II

The Earth, whose form is firm, contemplated (by the teacher) as

being Śiva, renders that same meditation (bhāvanā) firm within him, andis
thus purified. Water nourishes this (meditation), Fire makes it shine, the
Wind (induces its inner) blissful touch, and Space makes it extensive. (103-

104)

In the same way, the subtle elements are also felt to be (iṣyate)

Śiva’s state of being (śivatā). (The pure states of the five organs of action

are as follows). The Great Pervasion of supreme bliss (is the ejaculation of
the genitals), the falling away of all Impurity (mala) (is excretion), the
movement within Śiva (is the locomotion of the legs), the laying hold of him
(is the grasping of the hands), and the hymn to Śiva who is to be taken up
(is the activity of the voice). (The smelling of) the fragrance of Śiva, tasting,

seeing, touching and hearing Him - such is the pure state of the senses.
(105-107ab)
The pure state within the mind (manas) and the rest (up to Nature

is realized by contemplating) the intention (of the mind), the ascertainment

(of the intellect), and the self-arrogation (of the ego), as well as the light
ĠConcerning the functions of the senses, see above, 9/228 ff.

Concerning these three as the functions of the three internal organs, see above 9/238.

TANTRĀLOKA

(of sattva), the attachment (of rajas), and the abiding state (of tamas), as

being Śiva. (107cd-108ab)

The six coverings (kañcuka) (that envelop the individual soul) are 1)

the restriction (imposed by Karma and causality) (niyama), 2) attachment
(rañjana), 3) the sense of being an agent (kartṛbhāva), along with 4) the
passage of tīme (kalanā), 5) the awareness (of finite sensations) (vedana),
and 6) sleeping, as it were, in the presence of that aspect of (finite) reality
that should be abandoned. In this way, these too are pure for the one who

established in a state of oneness with Śiva. The individual soul who has

atṭṭained Śiva’s state (ivabhāva) is purified.

(Finally,) there is no impurity of any kind in the (pure) principles of

the Lords of Knowledge (vidyeśa) and the rest. Thus, by the emanation of
the pure principles in this way, the disciple is also of that nature (tanmaya).

This (teaching) is alluded to in the venerable Mālinīvijayottara. (108cd111)

(The Earth) ‘is purified’ means that it is (intrinsically) pure (meditation

does not make it s0). (Water nourishes) ‘this’ meditation as Śiva’s nature.

(Space makes) ‘it’ (extensive), that is to say, the meditation. ‘In the same way’,
that is, by rendering the meditation (that everything is) Śiva (śivabhāvanā) firm
etc. Although ‘tasting’ is the function of the sense of taste, because the word
‘fragrance’ is near to it, one should also understand that to (allude to) the
function of the sense of smell (also). Thus, one should explain the word ‘tasting’

as being both an appellation (abhidhā) and a characterizing sign (of something

else) (lakṣaṇa). ‘The senses’ are the genitals (ānandendriya) and the rest.

‘Self-arrogation’ is the function of the ego. ‘Light’ (and the other two) are the
form of the (three qualities of Nature, namely,) sattva, rajas and tamas,
respectively. (Their balanced) state of equality (sāmaya) is Nature (prakṛti).
Such is the explanation of (the six coverings, namely) ‘the restriction
(imposed by Karma and causality) (niyama)’ here (in this context), as
established in a state of oneness with Śiva. ʻSleeping, as it were’ means the

inability to think. The overall intended sense here is that their single state of rest

within Siva is their state of purity. Thus, by (stating this, he) affirms that, even
though (these) principles are impure, here is also (another) different Path of
(their) emanation as pure (principles). Nor is what we say not in accord with
scripture. Thus, he says that ‘this’ ((teaching) is alluded to in the

Mālinīvijayottara). 1t is (said to be just) ‘alluded to’, because (what is said

there) concerns only the senses.

He quotes that both (literally) word for word and its sense (in brief).

! Chapters 12 to 16 of the Malinīvijayottara are dedicated to a series of mediations (dhāraṇas)
on the thirty-six pṅinciples. While this could have been an opportunity to teach the experience of
Śiva consciousness in principle, as Abhinava has done, what we find instead mostly is how the
viṣsualizations of the principles, one by one, are rewarded by a host of attainments (siddhi). The
contrast with Abhinava’s approach adds to the impression that this passage is Abhinava's own
creation. He justifies what he is saying as bcing true and correct by saying that, although not
stated fully in the Malinīvijayottara, it s its own teaching, to which it just ‘allades’ in MV 15/44,
which he quotes without variants in the following versc, i.e. 1 12.
"! Here, as in other places, the genitals are called ānandendriya, that s, the sense organ of bliss.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

The Senses Bound and Liberated

STTṬgHT |

arara frṛāā̄ feṃ 11 222 1
bandhamokṣāv ubhāv etāv indriyāṇāṁ jagur budhāḥ |
nigṛhītāni bandhāya vimuktāni vimuktaye || 1 12. ||
The wise have said that both bondage and liberation are

(conditions) of the senses.'" Restrained, they serve to bind (the soul),
liberated (from restraint, they serve as a means to) liberation. (112)

The Lord Himself explains (what is meant by) the restrained and
liberated state (of the senses).

aā]] aJT-āīI ā |

ṣ-di fēī vīa.: ygaqṁa:|

etāni vyāpake bhāve yadā syur manasā saha |

muktāni kvāpi viṣaye rodhād bandhāya tāni ṭu |l 113 II

ity evaṁ dvividho bhāvaḥ śuddhāśuddhaprabhedataḥ |
indriyāṇāṁ samākhyātaḥ siddhayogīśvarīmate || 114 ||

“These (senses) are liberated if they are, along with the mind, in (the

one) all-pervading state. (But) by being restricted somewhere to (a
particular) object, they bind (the soul). Similarly, it is said in the

Siddhayogīśvarīmata that the state of the senses is of two kinds, according
to whether they are pure or impure.” (113-114)
As is said there (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘If these (senses) were to be, along with the mind, in (one) all-pervading
state, then, O beloved, the learned should know that they are liberated. If they

2 Ṛcad with MV 15/44b indriyāṇāṁ for indriyāṇi.
]7/112is a literal quote of MV 15/44.MV 15/44c reads vighīāni for 7/112c nighītāni.
Read with MV 15/47d, siddhayogīśvarimaie for siddhayogīśvare mate. The separated form is
Aiśa, and is not likely to have been employed by Abhinava. Indeed, he does not us it ayywhere
else. Tôrzṣôk (1999: 226) has not found any reference to this presentaton of the dual form of the
senses in the SYM, and Jayaratha does not cite any passage, which may indicate that he could not
find any rcference either.
' TĀ 17/I13ab = MV 15/45ab; 17/113cd is a condensation of MV 15/45cd-46, 17/114 = MV
15/47 17/114a reads ity evaṁ for ity ayaṁī of MV 15/47a.

TANTRĀLOKA

are present somewhere in an object that is located in (some particular) place,

then they are said to be bound.”

(Our venerable) teacher has said the very same thing. Thus, he says:

īr framīēēcarç vrīrṣgfrzzī 1
śrīmān vidyāgurus tv āha pramāṇastutidarśane |
The venerable teacher Vidyādhipati has said (the same in accord

with his) philosophy, (as taught) in the Pramāṇastuti."" (115ab)

In order to define the restriction to the application of Mantras here (in

this case), he says:

Purification of the Principles with Trika Mantras

grrīcā-ācjaīmaāī fraāvkaam ahzaīa || 22., 1|

GaaTī̄ōç gāōīaĪ q] fīs#d WĀT q II 2ē I|

samastamantrair dīkṣāyāṁ niyamas tv eṣa kathyate || 115 I|
māyāntaśuddhau sarvāḥ syuḥ kriyā hy aparayā sadā |
dvyātmayā sakalānte tu niṣkale parayaiva tu || 1 16 ||
īśānte ca pibanyādi sakalānte ʻṅgapañcakam |
ity evaṁvidhim ālocya karma kuryād gurūttamaḥ ||I 1 17 II
The rule (niyama) regarding all the Mantras in general (applied) in
the course of (this) initiation will (now be) stated. AIl the rites (kriyā) (that
serve) to purify (the principles) up to the end of Māyā should always be
(done) with (the mantra of) Aparā. (Those from Pure Knowledge) up to the
end of immanent Śiva (sakala) with Parāparā (dvyātmā), and those up to
transcendental Śiva (niṣkala) with Parā (Mantra). (The Mantras of) Pibanī

and the rest (of the group of eight goddesses are applied) up to the end of
Īśa, and the Five Limbs (aṅgapañcaka) at the end of immanent Śiva

(sakala). The best teacher, should perform the rite with an eye on the
prescription (vidhi) (executed) in this way."" (115cd-117)

I ḶV 15/45-46.
' Cf. Abhinava’s citaton of Vidyādhipat’s Mānastuti, i.. Pramāṇastotra above, in 9/173. See
also above 1/201. This citaton is from the Anubhavastotra, that presents a compatible view.
Ḷines 17/115cd-117 are a paraphrase of MV 9/71cd-’4ab, quoted by Jayaratha. Abhinava here
concludes this section on yojanikādīkṣā, which is not dealt with at length in the MV. Indeed, he
himself says that it is only alluded to. He has filled in the lacuna by refrtng to thc
Triirobhairava, which is a Trika Tantra, and the Dīkṣottara, which is an carly Siddhānta Tantra.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

‘All the ritual actionsʼ are those in which (particular) Mantras have not
been specified. As is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘In all the rites in which the Mantras have not been (explicitly) stated
and in all kinds of initiatory rites, (the Mantra) the wise man should apply in all
respects for the purification of all the principles up to and including Māyā, is
that of Aparā. Similarly, with regard to the principles that range from Pure
Knowledge to Śiva ʻwith parts’ (sakala i.e. Sadāśiva), (he should apply)
Parāparā. Moreover, a skilful, (learned adept) should not apply the group of
eight (Mantras) beginning with Pibanī etc. beyond Īśvara, and also not the six
limbs beyond Śiva ʻwith parts’. Whatever procedure is enjoined concerning
Śiva ʻwithout parts’ (niṣkala) (i.e. Śivatattva) should be performed with the

Mantra of Parā.

The number of oblations has been stated with respect to the Path of the

Worlds as the main one. He (now) transposes (the corresponding regulations) to

the other Paths, with further increments (adhikāvāpa).

The Various Paths (adhvabheda)

The Oblations Required for the Paths

sḷoq 11 22.
T-ĪTRGTĪT
fḺṬIT ffṬUT BHTq |

qraācrīcāīai aāṁTṭTTTTOI ā: 1| 32 1|

TGTd̄ ̄ JT̄RĪĪ’ q āTRTT || 220 |
purādhvani hutīnāṁ yā saṁkhyeyaṁ tattvavarṇayoḥ |
tāmeva dviguṇīkuryātpadādhvani caturguṇām || 118 II
kramānmantrakalāmārge dviguṇā dviguṇā kramāt |
yāvattritattvasaṁśuddhau syādviṁśatiguṇā tataḥ l| 119 ||

pratikarma bhavetṣaṣṭirāhutīnāṁ tritattvake |

ekatattve śataṁ prāhurāhutīnāṁ tu sāṣṭakam || 120 ||

The number of oblations required for the Path of the Worlds
should be doubled for the Path of the Principles and the Phonemes. It
should be four times the number for the Path of the Parts of Mantra (pada),

double that (i.e. eight) and then double that again (i.e. sixteen) for the Paths

To link the procedures taught there firmly to his main Trika authority, he refers here to the general
rule statedin the MV concerning the projection of the three Vidyās. For the Mantras of Pibanī and

the rest of th group of eight goddesssin Parāparā Vidyā sce above, 17/40cd-45ab.

! MV 9/7lcd-74ab. MV 9/71¢d-73 quoted abovein TAv ad 11/88. MV 9/73abis quotedin TĀv
ad 16/97-98.

TANTRĀLOKA

of Mantras and the Forces, respectively. For the purification of the three
principles, they should be multiplied by twenty. Thus for (all) three

principles, there are sixty oblations for each rite.'™" They say that for the
one principle, the oblations should be one hundred and eight. (118-120)

‘The numberʼ stated previously, that is, three etc. ‘It should be
doubled” for the Path of the Principles, because the worlds etc. are included
within them until, with respect to the Path of the Forces, the number is sixteen
times (more). Thīis is the overall meaning. There are ‘sixty’ oblations because

they are multiplied by twenty for (each of) the three. ‘They say’, that is, for
each rite.
Nor is this transposition (applicable) everywhere (in all cases). Thus he

says:

fqāōīrahzrr aāīa aaī. rīgaa: aḷqaī |

vilomakarmaṇā sākaṁ yāḥ pūrṇāhutayaḥ smṛtāḥ |
tāsāṁ sarvādhvasaṁśuddhau saṁkhyānyatvaṁ na kiñcana || 121 I|

The number of full oblations, along with the one for the rite that

removes obstacles, remains exactly the same, for the purification of all the
Paths (whichever one it may be). (121)

He (now) concludes this (topic) with the first half of a verse.

gGĀTI Ñṛaī aāī STāPTGHFaTāī I| 2.3 II
ity eṣā kaṭhitā dīkṣā jananādisamanvitā || 122. ||
This initiation, in which (the disciple’s) birth is induced (in the

hierarchy of worlds) etc., has thus been taught. (122)

(The initiation in which the disciple’s) ‘birth is induced (in the
hierarchy of worlds) etc.’ (has thus been explained) at length. May this be
auspicious.
The one called Jayaratha has added a commentary to this, the

seventeenth chapter, confirming (his) directly evident skill in (the performance
of) the rite of initiation (learnt from his) teacher.
This is the seventeenth chapter of the venerable Tantrāloka, called the

Exposition of the Special Initiation (visiṣṭadīkṣā).

Ṛvery time the rite of initiation is performed.
' Read viśiṣṭa- for vikṣipta-. To call the initiation taught in this chapter vikṣipta (‘scattered,

disṣṭracted’) makes no sense. Unless we understand that the initiation taught here is ‘scattered’,

because th teacher can conjoin the disciple to this or that reality level unsystematically. But that

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

is not the case. One wonders whether to emend vikṣipia- to saṁkṣipta-, meaning ‘brief’. This
possibility is precluded because this is the name given to the following chapter. The rite taught

there is indeed brief. Moreover, the title is confirmed by the concluding statement there which
declares that saṁkṣipto vidhir ukto ‘yaṁ ‘this, the brief procedure has been taught’ (18/11). One

could perhaps emend, as Gnoli’s translation suggests, to visiṣṭa- ‘special’ or ‘particular’. The

sense would be that this is a special initiation based on ‘particulars’, i.e. the reality levels etc.,

through which the postulant is made to pass.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
The Brief Initiation (saṁīkṣiptadīkṣā)
I praise the one who gives strength, who gives the endless, unmeasured
strength that bestows righteousness (rtadhā), he who graces all this undivided'
universe with His own greatness.
Now with the second half (of the verse begun at the end of the previous

chapter), in order to talk about the brief initiation, he says:

atha sṣaṁkṣiptadīkṣeyaṁ śivatāpattidocyate |
We will now talk about this, the brief initiation, that bestows the
aṭṭainment of Śiva’s state (immediately).

He says that:
A Brief Direct Initiation Without Outer Supports

aīā ṁā ašN q ṬIR<T TṬ fīāq 11 g 1

q ā-] ̄T=aTT T. || 3 11|

na rajo nādhivāso ‘tra na bhūkṣetraparigrahaḥ |
yatra tatra pradeśe tu pūjayitvā guruḥ śivam || 1 I|

adhvānaṁ manasā dhyātvā dīkṣayet tattvapāragaḥ |

jananādivihīnāṁ tu yena yenādhvanā guruḥ || 2 ||
kuryāt sa ekatattvāntāṁ śivabhāvaikabhāvitaḥ |

Coloured powder is not (required) here (to draw a maṇḍala), nor
the preliminary purification (adhivāsa) (prior to initiation) or the

appropriation of the ground (on which to perform it). A teacher who has

crossed over the reality levels (tattvapāraga) can initiate (his disciple)

anywhere once he has worshipped Siva, and meditated on the Path
mentally (within himself).

By whatever Path the teacher who is steeped (bhāvita) solely with a

sense of identity with Śiva (śivabhāva) performs (this initiation, whatever be
' Read idam akhaṇḍam for idam amandam. This emendation is only tentative.

This is thus done purely mentally, without recourse to the outer ‘threads of the fetters’
(pāśasūtra) and the like.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

the number of) reality levels (it involves, starting with many) up to (just)

one (ekatatvānta), it is devoid of such (purifying processes whereby the

disciple is induced) to take birth (successively in higher world orders). (13ab)

(The teacher has meditated on the Path) ‘mentally’, not by imagining it
in the thread of the fetters (pāśasūtra) or the like. (A teacher who is fit to
perform this initiation is one who has) ‘crossed over the reality levels (tattva),
certainly not one who has not. The sense is that he does not have the authority
(to perform) such a rite. As he will say:
‘The teacher may perform the brief rite (of initiation) to the degree in
which his knowledge (of ultimate principles) is well exercised and he is

identified (with Śiva); otherwise not.

Having in this way defined (this initiation as one that is) devoid of such
(purifying processes whereby the disciple is induced) to take birth (in
progressively more elevated worlds), he (now) talks about the various Mantras
(required to perform it).
The Required Mantras and Oblations

TTdi TTĪATT-ĀT ||/3 |I

Ḷeḻḵk‘ElE¥ritEaTEIeF IIRAHI
ktevieeE

Ṁ ē̄ aTẽ aTṬ -ī JTcád āTHāq II 4 1I
ĀÑUIŪĪĀENIZTHEEEEEĪhraḤ.

dā aī aīaī mRTT || 1|
parãmantras tato ʻsyeti tattvaṁ saṁśodhayāmy atha || 3 I|
svāheti pratitattvaṁ syāc chuddhe pūrṇāhutiṁ kṣipet |
evaṁ mantrāntaraiḥ kuryāt samastair athavoktavat || 4 |I

parāsaṁpuṭitaṁ nāma svāhāntaṁ prathamāntakam l

Śataṁ sahasraṁ sāṣṭaṁ vā tena śaktyaiva homayet |l 5 II
tataḥ pūrṇeti saṁśodhyahīnam uttamam īdṛśam |
dīkṣākarmoditaṁ tatra tatra śāstre maheśinā | 6 II
(The teacher should first utter) the Parā mantra for each principle
and then (say): “I purify (this) principle within him”, followed by SVĀHĀ.

Cf. above, 11/39cd-4lab and 16/187ab. The one principle is, of course, Śiva. This is an
immediate form of initiation.
“ Below, 18/8.
SAUḤ AMŪKASYA PṚTHVĪTATTVAṀ ŚODHAYĀMI SVĀH eṭc.

TANTRĀLOKA

(Then,) when it has been purified, he should cast a full oblation (into the
fire). He should do the same with all the other mantras; or else, (he can do
it) with them collectively, as taught previously.® He should pronounce the
name (of the disciple) in the nominative encapsulated by Parā with SVĀHĀ
at the end. He should offer with this (Mantra), according to (his) energy,

one hundred, one thousand or (another) eight oblations, to then (complete
the offerings with) a full (oblation). This kind of initiatory rite, the best (of
all), whichis free of (the Path that is) the object of purification,is taught by

Maheśvara in various scriptures. (3cd-6)

‘According to (his) energy° means ‘as is his capacity°. Thus, the sense
is that (the teacher) should perform a hundred fire offerings or a thousand, in
accord with the time and place etc. (in which he does it). (This initiatory rite is)
‘free of (the Path that is) the object of purification’. The meaning is that the

deposition of the Path etc. need not be done here (in this case) at all, even

mentally. “In various scripturesʼ, that is, in, for example, the Kiraṇatantra. As
is said there:

‘I will talk about another (form of)initiation. (This one) is connected
(only) with the Śiva principle. Having in the beginning laced within Śiva’s
mantra' the name of the individual soul (who is being initiated), conjoined'
with the sṣyllable OM (praṇava) and having then encapsulated (his name with)
Śambhu, he should offer oblation. Such is the fire offering of a thousand
(oblations) that disconnects the three fetters. O Bird! It is hard to obtain this

initiation which (is performed) by removing along with the others (ādi) (the
purifying processes whereby the disciple is induced) to take birth (in successive
worlds).”

17/46.
SAUḤ AMŪKANĀMĀ SAUḤ SVĀHĀ.

With another eight, they become one hundred and eight or one thousand and eight.
Note that here by ‘Maheśvara’, Śivais clearly meant, not Abhinava’s teacher, 8BpŌ phmmātha

The use of the Parā Vidyā (SĀUḤ) here and the Mālinī alphabet qualifies this briefinitiation as
a Trika rite. However, Abhinava is quick to tell us here and at the end of this chapter (18/11) that

this rite is taught in various Tantras, referring especially to the Kiraṇa and Dīkṣottara, both of
which are Siddhāntāgamas, although he does also refer to the Brahmayāmala (189). Jayaratha

quotes a parallel passage from what appears to be the Kiraṇatantra,in which, instead of Parā, we
find Śiva. Although these lines cannot be tracedin the 12 chapters of the published Viáyāpāda,

the referencein the vocative to Garuḍa, who only dialogues with Śiva in the Kiraṇatantra,
practically confirms that it is drawn from the remaining unpublished part. Thus, as Abhinava does

not cite any Trika source, as he would normally do, it is possible that Abhinava has drawn the
basic framework of this brief, simple procedure from the two Siddhāntas and made it into a Trika
rite. Certainly, Jayaratha could not find a Trika source.

' MS Thsivam ante– Śiva at the end for sivamantre.- within Śiva’s mantra’.
' Read with MS Th -sarīyuktaṁ for–saṁyuktāṁ.

Read ‘saṁbhuṁ for śambhuḥ (conj.). .

If we assume that ṄNAMAḤ ŚIVĀYA is Śiva’s mantra, if the postulant is called Devadatta, the

first step in the formation of this mantra is: OṀ DEVADATTĀYA NAMAḤ ŚĪVĀYA. If

Śaṃbhuḥīs, as usual, in the dative, we get śambhave. Encapsulating the name of the postulant

with that we arrive at:

OMṀ ŚAMBHAVE DEVADATTĀYA ŚAṂBHAVE ŚIVĀYA NAMAḤ

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
He (now) talks about the various Mantras (required) here also.

afē aī frvzgzṛ adī-+taz faf: || v
pratyekaṁ mātṛkāyugmavarṇais tattvāni śodhayet |
yadi vā piṇḍamantreṇa sarvamantreṣv ayaṁ vidhiḥ I| 7 II
In this (rite, the teacher) may purify the principles one by one with
by means of pairs of phonemes of the Mātṛkā and Mālinī (alphabets), or

also if he does so by means of a syllabic mantra (pinḍa), this procedure
applies to all the Mantras (in general). (7)

The ‘pairs’ consist of (phonemes drawn from the) Māṛkā and Mālinī
(alphabets). ‘This procedure’ is modified in the manner explained

(previously).

Nor is this to be done by the teacher alone (it must also be supported by
his practice). Thus he says:
The Teacher Must Be Well Qualified

ahkrasṁṁ

=ītcṝ garexq
fēk-qrmr
am’ afēzzā
aī 11 < 1
yathā yathā ca svabhyastajñānas tanmayatātmakaḥ |

gurus tathā tathā kuryāt saṁkṣiptaṁ karma nānyathā |l 8 II
śrībrahmayāmale coktaṁ saṁkṣipte ‘pi hi bhāvayet |

vyāptiṁ sarvādhvasāmānyāṁ kin tu yāge saviṣtaraḥ || 9 II
This kind of initiaton involves conjoining the soul of the disciple to just one reality

level (ekatattvadīkṣā), namely, Śivatattva. This is a kind of initiation that bestows immediate

sadyonirvāṇadīkṣā, and so there is no travelling through the worlds to which the soul is
ely conjoined. Here we have yet another example of how Abhinava promotes this
y of immediate release over and above liberation after death. Abhinava is here implicitly
implying that, although this is not generally the case in the Siddhānta, here is an example of this
kind of initiation that we do find amongst the procedures taught in the Siddhānta, thus supporting
the Trikakaula view that liberation while aliveis the most excellent.

See above, 17/lcd-12. We have seen that the Mantra there used to invoke the principlesis:

NAMAḤ KṢAṀ / PHAṀ DHARE TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ TUBHYAṀ DHARĀYAI
NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ. Following that model, the basic form of the Mantra here requires that

phonemes from both syllabaries and instead of ĀVĀHAYĀMI – ‘ḹ invoke’ have ŚODHAYĀMI’

– ‘I purify’ with the principle in the accusative rather than the vocative. Thus, we are at: NAMAḤ
KṢAṀ PHAṀ DHARAṀ ŚODHAYĀMI NAMAḤ TUBHYAṀ DHARĀYAI NAMAḤ.

In the ‘comprehensive mantra’, the single names ‘Earth’ etc. are substituted by the

generic expression sarvatattva – ‘all the principles’.

TANTRĀLOKA

The teacher may perform the brief rite (of initiation) to the degree

in which his knowledge (of ultimate principles) is well exercised and he is

identified (with Śiva); otherwise not. (8)

And (so) it is said in the venerable Brahmayāmala that “(the

teacher) should

imagine (and contemplate)

(bhāvayet), the universal

pervasion common to all the paths in the brief (rite of initiation)

(saṁkṣipta) also, however, in the (full) sacrificial rite (the projection of the

paths) is extensive (in all its details).” (9)

The ‘sacrificial rite’ (yāga) is the ritual action involved in offering an
obligatory sacrifice. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), if this is so, what is the use of the extensive rite,
that can only) be accomplished with much effort and expense? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

arai ar̥aqç 1| 2 1
atanmayībhūtam iti vikṣiptaṁ karma sandadhat |
kramāt tādātmyam etīti vikṣiptaṁ vidhim ācaret l| 10 ||
If (the disciple) is not identified (with Śiva), (the teacher) should

apply the brief rite (of initiation). (Thus,) he gradually attains a state of
identification. Accordingly, he should perform (this) brief procedure
(widhi). (10)
He (now) concludes the topic of (this) chapter.

saṁkṣipto vidhir ukto ‘yaṁ kṛpayā yaḥ śivoditaḥ |
dīkṣottare kairaṇe ca tatra tatrāpi śāsane || 1 1 I|

' Basically, this amounts to imagining and thereby experiencing that all the Paths pervade each

other equally.

Read saviṣtaraḥ for na viṣṭarah.

Even though it occurs twice, I have emended vikṣiptaṁ to saṁkṣiptaṁ as the sense demands,

and is also the way in which this rite is called above, in verse 9. Moreover, this is also how
Abhinava himself refers to this procedure in the following verse.
As the name of the rite, Gnoli understand vikṣipta to mean ‘special’ —

though in a general sense he too understands it to mean ‘brief’ — sarkṣipta. The application of
these two meanings to the same word is well exemplified by Gnoli’s translation of this verse
which, translated into English, is as follows:

‘I he is not identified (with Śiva) he may rejoin this state of identification by taking up
the special (vikṣipta) (rite of initūation), whereby he gradually attains a state of identification.

Thuṣ, he should (subsequently) perform (this) brief (vikṣipta) ritual procedure (vidhi).’ Cf. above,
note 17,121.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

This is the brief procedure that Śiva has taught out of compassion
in the Dikṣottara and Kiraṇa and in various places in the scripture

(śāsana). (11)

The end.
The one called Jayaratha who possesses the most excellent skill in the
brief liberating rite of initiation, has commented on this, the eighteenth chapter.

This is the eighteenth chapter of the venerable Tantrāloka, called the

Exposition of the Brief Initiation (saṁkṣiptadīkṣā).

I could not trace this brief procedure in the part of the Dīkṣottara that has survived. It is also not

found in the twelve chapters of the Vidyāpāda of the Kiraṇatantra published by Vivanti.

CHAPTER NINETEEN
The Initiation of the Immediate Exit from the Body (sadyahsamutkramaḥ)
I bow to the powerful one (balavat) who, not assuming (his) fierce
form, is the Pervasive Lord (vibhu), who has the strength (bala) to separate and
conjoin what arises from the glorious outpouring (vibhava) of the duality of
phenomenal existence.
Now, by means of half of a verse, he makes (the following) enunciation
in order (to go on) to describe the initiation that bestows Nirvāṇa immediately.

atha sadyaḥsamutkrāntipradā dīkṣā nirūpyate |

Let us now proceed to expound the initiation that administers an

immediate exit from the body.

Surely (one may ask), this (initiation) has not been taught with such
clear evident words (in the Malinīvijayottara so as to be known that it is taught
there). As this book has been undertaken on the basis of its authority, what is the
purpose of describing that (initiation here)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Initiation Whereby a Dying Man Attains
Siva at the Moment of Death

gfrāratṁ īP¥TT ú1 g ||
tatkṣaṇāc copabhogād vā dehapāte śivaṁ vrajet |
ity uktyā mālinīśāstre sūcitāsau maheṣśinā || 1 II
The

Lord

has

briefly

referred

(to

this

iṇitiation)

in

the

Mālinīvijayottara (mālinīśāstra) with the words, ‘(he) goes to (Śiva) when
the body drops, either at that very moment, or else after (he has) enjoyed
the worldly experience (predetermined for him in another world)

(upabhoga).” (1)

We have not stated this as (just our own idea. Thus, he says:

aTīgṀi ẽ̄̄aĨ Tī̄TATaIT II . II
' Line 1ab is MV 1/45cd. MV reads dehapātāc (‘after (his) death) for dehapāte (‘when (he)

diesʼ). The reading dehapātāc is also the one above in 13/203 where this line is quoted. See notes

there concerning the altemmation of these two variant readings according to the context.

CHAPTER NINETEEN

BṬṬGAĪĪ; ĪHTTGITH TṬETI TĀHfTT II3 1
dehapāte samīpasthe śaktipātasphuṭatvataḥ |

Śivaṁ vrajed ity artho ‘tra pūrvāparavivecanāt |
vyākhyātaḥ śrīmatāsmākaṁ guruṇā śambhumāūrtinā || 3 |I

When death (dehapāta) is immanent, having attained Śiva’s

initiation (Śāṇkarī dīkṣā), by the flashing forth of a descent of the power (of
grace), (immediately after) the moment (he receives) initiation, he attains
Siva. The matter (artha), discerned from beginning to end, and so (taught)
here, has been explained to us by (our) teacher, who is a veritable

incarnation of Śambhu. (2-3)

‘Death (dehapāta) is immanent’, that is, is going to happen in two or

three moments.
He now presents the variety of (the forms of) the descent of the power
(of grace) (that can take place) when this is so.

The Ascertainment of Impending Death (kālāvekṣā)
Qualifications for the Initiation of the Immediate Exit from the Body

qGṬ ITHTRI]
YIĪTRTTT; ṀSĪTTT |

arā āsra 1| < |
The play on words here clearly suggests that Abhinava is referring here to his Trika teacher,
Śambhunātha. Further ahead, Abhinava again tells us in the following introduction that his
exposition is inspired by Śambhunātha’s teaching (19/9). There are several mantras of the Razor
(kṣurikāvidyā). This one is found in the MV. We may assume that Abhinava went through this

passage with his teacher, as he did it seems all or most of the MV. Indeed, we catch glimpses of
Śambhunātha’s guiding hand throughout his presentation of the rites of the MV, right from when
he begins to do so above in chapter fifteen.
One of the reasons Abhinava and his teacher Śambhunātha took so much interest in

initiatory rites performed at the point of death was probably because they fitted the model of

immediate release, in contrast to its gradual attainment. Indeed, at the point of death, the two
coincide. The devout Saivite observant, all his life of his ritual duties and rules of conduct

bringing the accumulation of further Karma to an end, would welcome death as his entry into the

liberated state. Others could be purified through these rites of the remaining Karma directly.

Abhinava comments on MV 1/45d above in 13/234cd-235, presenting the initiation that is

imparted at the point of death as one that bestows immediate liberation (sadyonirvāṇa). He quotes

lines from MV 1/44-46 at the beginning of this chapter and Twenty-one (concerning the initiation
of those who are absent (pārokṣī)), both of which deal in different perspectives with the moment

of death and the opportunity it affords to liberate the dying man. The context in the MV is the two
kinds of possible liberation, immediate (in this life), and gradual (after death). Abhinava shifts the

application to this other context.
We find that the two main topics of this chapter, i.e. the ascertainment of immanent death
through signs and omens and yogic suicide, are commonly treated together in the sources.

TANTRĀLOKA

11 {, 1|

EjEtIaããiIẼEVITEĒIEr2ISŪHKUE{RṬEAṬ

yadā hy āsannamaraṇe śaktipātaḥ prajāyate |
tatra mande ʻtha gurvādisevayāyuḥ kṣayaṁ vrajet I| 4 II
athavā bandhumitrādidvārā sāsya vibhoḥ patet |
pūrvaṁ vā samayṝī naiva parāṁ dīkṣām avāptavān |I 5 II
āptadīkṣo ‘pi vā prāṇāñ jihāsuḥ kleśavarjitam |

antyān gurus tadā kuryāt sadyautkrāntidīkṣaṇam || 6 ||

If a descent of the power (of grace) takes place when (the disciple) is
close to dying, the teacher should impart the initiation that, free of
impediments (kleśa), (grants) an immediate exit (from the body) to those
who are at the end (of their life). (He should do it in the following
circumstances). 1) If (the descent of the power grace is intense-cum-)weak
and (the disciple’s) life is coming to an end, in the course of the service he
has offered to (his) teacher and others. Or (2) that (power of) the Lord
descends mediated by (the prayers) of (his) relatives or friends etc. Or (3)

if he was previously a (common) regular initiate, (but) has not received the
supreme initiation, or (4) if he has received it, he wants to abandon his vital
breath (and with it, worldly existence). (4-6)
‘(The disciple’s) life is coming to an endʼ, and as it wanes away, he is
considered to be a (common) regular initiate. ‘That’ is (the Lord’s) power (of
grace). The sense is that thus (the teacher) should impart the initiation that
(grants) immediate exit (from the body) to (the disciple) in whom it is apparent
that the Supreme Lord’s descent of the power (of grace) has taken place. (This
can be either) due to the service the one who is close to death has rendered to
(his) teacher, or if he is himself incapable (of doing so) by himself, by the

prayers of (his) relatives and friends etc. (The reference to) the ‘regular
initiate’ should be taken to mean that a medium descent of the power (of grace

takes place in his case,) and that to one who ‘has received it’, an intense one.
‘Those who are at the end’ are those who desire to go forth (from the body).
This is the meaning.

This task is not to be performed for them when it is not the time (to do

s0). Thus he says:

See above, 13/218 ff.

See below, 21/6-1 1ab.

Itis clear from what Abhinava says further ahead in verse 9 that his teacher Śambhunātha taught
him the circumstances that qualify a disciple close to death to receive this initiation. Cf. above,
14/20-22. See below, Chapter Twenty-one, which deals with initiation at the time of death or soon

after, especially 21/9c-1 1b and notes.

CHAPTER NINETEEN

#īrrçax frētā̄ || 9 1

3GPHHA TṬTTaTĪ TTd fāISīJI II ¢ 11
na tv apakvamale nāpi śeṣakārmikavigrahe |
kuryād utkramaṇaṁ śrīmadgahvare ca nirūpitam | 7 Il
dṛṣṭvā śiṣyaṁ jarāgrastaṁ vyādhinā paripīḍitam |
utkramayya tatastvenaṁ paratattve niyojayet || 8 II
(The teacher) should not (impart the initiation that) causes one to
exit (from the body) if (his) Impurity has not matured (and so is not ready
to be removed), or to one who (ṣtill) has a residue of Karma left. It is said
in the venerable Gahvara that ‘having observed that the disciple is
consumed by old age and is severely afflicted by illness, (the teacher) should

cause him to quit (the body) and then conjoin him to the Supreme Reality.”

(7-8)

(One whose) ‘Impurity has not matured’ is one who has not received

a descent of the power (of grace). This is the meaning. ‘One who (still) has a

residue of Karma left’ is one who is not close to dying. And nor is this
proved just by reasoning alone, thus he says that (it said) ‘in the venerable

Gahvara’.

Read na tv- for natv-.

These words are not to be understood literally (the theory of the maturing of Impurity was
refuted above, 13/54 ff.) but rather, as Jayaratha says, in the sense that of ‘one who has not

received a descent of the power (of grace)ʼ.

’ How this is done according to the Gahvaratantra is outlined below in 19/17-20. Abhinava quotes
this verse from the Gahvara above alsoin 16/182, where he says it is from there. Jayaratha also
quotes it in TĀv ad 9/130cd-131ab and 13/236-238, and Kṣemarāja in SvTu ad 4/148cd-149,
where he also says it is from there. Cf. Śvacchandatantra:
‘The initiation without seed that bestows immediate liberation (sadyonirvāṇadā) is the
second one. It disconnects (the soul of the initiate) from the three fetters, namely, those that have

passed, those not yet come, and those that have begun. At the end of the initiation, (he is) pure,

and when the body is abandoned, (he attains) the supreme plane.’ SYT 4/148cd-149

Kṣemarāja explains: ‘Immediate’ means just after the condition in which the energies of
the body (dehākalā) have bcen disconmected by inittation, energized by means of Mantra. Thus,

(theinitiationis one) that disconnects the three fetters, even when (their) effects have begun (to
operate). ‘When the bodyis abandoned’ is the time when the bodyis abandoned, whichis the end,
that is, the successful conclusion of the initiation. This is the meaning. The
point that it should be

performed in this way when that death is at hand, having ascertained (that is so) by the nephast
signs etc. (that indicate its advent). As is said in the venerable Gahvara:

‘having observed that a disciple is consumed by old age and is afflicted by (serious)
illness, (the teacher) should then make him leave (the body) and conjoin him to the supreme
reality.””
Emend naca to na ca.

TANTRĀLOKA

And nor is the scripture referring only to the condition of one who is

close to dying. Thus he says:

sẼTr-rīm fṣstz 11 < 1

viśeṣaṇaviśeṣyatve kāmacāravidhānataḥ |
pūrvoktam arthajātaṁ śrīśambhunātra nirūpitam || 9 II

The object of specification (i.e. the disciple) and the specified

aṭṭribute (i.e. old age) are freely interchangeable (in this expression),
Śambhu has described here the matters (arthajāta) mentioned previously,

accordingly. (9)

If the disciple is the object of specification, and the specified attribute is

that he is consumed by old age, then the initiation that (grants) immediate exit

(from the body) is for the disciple who has received, for example, (the common)

regular initiation, or else is previously a regular (initiate but has not received the
supreme initiation). Thus, it is said to be of two kinds. In the opposite case, that
is, (the object of specification) is the fact of being consumed by old age, and
(the specified attribute) is the condition of the disciple by virtue of (his) service
to the teacher and so on, and so it is said to be of two kinds.
In accord, in this way, with the proper time (to do so), he explains the
deposition of the Razor and the rest.

The Deposition of the Razor (krpāṇyādinyāsaḥ)
that Severs the Vital Points

ēṉ¢teRee‘t®EETTSIREEZSEI-HIECHI
vidhiṁ pūrvoditaṁ sarvaṁ kr̥tvā samayaśudáhitaḥ |
kṣurikām asya vinyasyej jvalantīṁ marmakartarīm | 10 |
Once having completed all the procedure explained above and
purified (the disciple) from the rules (thus exempting him from their
observance), (the teacher) should deposit onto him (the Vidyā called) the

Émend naca to na ca.

Above in verses 19/4-6.
' The one of the two expressions is ‘disciple’ and the other one ‘overcome by old age’ or
‘afflicted by ilness’. I by ‘the object of specification’ one means the disciple, the sense is that he
is a common, regular or other kind of initīate (see above, 19/5cd). If by the ‘object of
specificatin’ one means ‘consumed by old age’ etc., the translation would be: ‘having seen a man
overcome by old age etc. as a disciple’ etc. The reference is to the cases mentioned in above in
verses 4 and 5ab.

CHAPTER NINETEEN

Razor (kṣurikā) that, blazing (with energy), severs the vital points

(mmarman). (10)

That deposition is taught in our own scripture itself.
Thus he says:

ftrhīraā:
aṀ gfrsf=zq27 q 11 22 11

kEEkGtṇtaEt-ṭe+cz- ĀICEI
TaFS TĪSṬRRIÇĒT JETHTTTAṬ |

GT~THĪTṬ TRIRĪR GTGŪJT fiāSTTT I|/23 1
graraif

krtvā pārvoditaṁ nyāsaṁ kālānalasamaprabham |

saṁhr̥tikramataḥ sārdhaṁ sr̥kchindiyugalena tu I 1 1 |I viparītavidhānena
aāgneyīṁ dhāraṇāṁ kr̥tvā sarvamarmapratāpanīm |
pūrayed vāyunā deham aṁguṣṭhān mastakāntakam |l 12 ||

tam utkṛṣya tato ṅguṣṭhād ūrdhvāntaṁ vakṣyamāṇayā |

kṛnten marmāṇi randhrāntāt kālarātryā viṣarjayet || 13 ||
anena kramayogena yojito hutivarjitaḥ |
samayyapy eti tāṁ dīkṣām iti śrīmālinīmate || 14 ||

"(1t is said) in the venerable Mālinīmata (i.e. the Mālinīvijayottara)
that ‘the aforementioned deposition,' that shines like the Fire (at the end)

of Time (kālānala), is performed first in (reverse, that is) in the sequence

(of) withdrawal, along with the pair (of syllables) SRK and CHINDI.

Concerning the marman, see below, note 20,17.
' MV reads tadā.

MV tam utkṛṣya.

TĀ 19/11-13 īs almost a literal quote of MV 17/26-28. TĀ 19/11ab = MV 17/26ab. There tadā
reads kṛtvā – ‘(after) having performed’ 19/12-13a = MV 17/27-28a (literal quote). See above,

14/41-42ab for other parts of this passage.

The depositions of the alphabets — Mātṛkā and Mālinī – are taught in chapter three of the MV,

and Śabdarāśi is taught in MV 8/27-32ab. See above, 15/1 17cd-120 for Mātṛkā (which is the same
as Śabdarāśi), and 15/121-125ab for Mālinī. The text does not specify which of these should
be

used. One may assume, (as Vasudeva suggests (2004: 439 n 204), that any or all of them may be

used. Thus, with Śabdarāśi /Maātṛkā, deposited in reverse, the units would be SKRK KṢA
CHINDI, SKRṚK HA CHINDI etc. and with Mālinī SKRK PHA CHINDI, SKRṚK DA CHINDI

ete. They would be placed in th coresponding parts of the body, as prescribed for their original
deposition.

One wonders whether to emend sārdhaṁ (along with’) to sārṇaṁ (‘with a letter’).
The corresponding text of MV 17/26 as emended by Somadeva (2004: 138) reads

tadā pārvoditaṁ nyāṣaṁ kālānalasamaprabham |
vipartavidhānena kuryā dyiyugmatām (> kuryāt skṛkchindiyuggatam) |

TANTRĀLOKA

Then, having performed the meditation on the Fire (āgneyīm dhāraṇām)

that heats up all the vital points, the body should be filled with (the vital)

breath from the big toe to the top of the head. Then, having dragged (the

Thus, Mālintvijayottara says:
“(One should) then perform the aforementioned deposition, that shines like the Fire (at
the end) of Time (kālānala), in reverse, (with each phoneme encapsulated) within the pair (of
syllables) SRK and CHINDI. (The teacher) should perform the meditation on the fire

(āgneyīm dhāraṇām) that heats up all the vital points. After that, the body should be filled
with (the vital) air from the big toe to the top of the head. Then having dragged (the vital
brcath along) from the big toe, he should lead it to the end of the Cavity of Brahmā. (In this way,)
the knower of yoga should sever all the vital points with this mantra.. MV 17/26-28

The deposition to which the text is referring may be Śabdarāi. It is taght in MV 8/2732ab. This is simply the Sanskrit alphabet. Depositing it in the reverse order, the first letter would
be KṢA. Thus, the form of the first unit in this case would be SRK KṢA CHINDI, followed by
SRK HA CHINDI, SRK SA CHINDI, and so on.

The Mantra encrypted in the Mālinī code is given in the following verse 17/29 of the

MV, where it is called Kālarātri (the Dark Night of Death) that ‘severs the vital points' in the

body. These are the marman taught in Ayurveda and the martial arts as centres in the body where
conjunctions take place, and s0 are both vital (in the sense also of essential) and weak (see below,

note 20,17). The Tantra warns that one should take great care not to utter this mantra. After

repeating just $0 times, it causes a severe headache (MV 17/31ab), and one must take care with it,

‘if one wants to live a long life’. In 19/11-13, which needs to be read together with this, where

Abhinavagupta quotes these lines, he says not fifty, but a hundred. The Mantra taught for this in

MV is given below in 30/55cd-57. Again, below in 30/58-61, mantras of the same sort, for the

same purpose, are drawn from the passage of Tantrasadbhāva quoted above.
This meditation is described in MV13/20cd-33 as follows.

‘Now listen to (the meditation) pertaining to Fire. (I am teaching you this) so that yogis

(may) achieve accomplishment in Yoga (yogasiddhi). (20cd)
1) (The yogi) should think that there is a trangle, which has a halo of red flames, in the
body (read dehe for dehaṁ). O goddess, in seven days it becomes (fierce and) powerful, and 2) in
a month the adept is freed of all (his bodily) wind and phlegm. Sleepless and eating much, he
urinates and defecates litle.
3) At the end of season, he (can) bum at will (any) thing that is clearly visible, and
becoming the equal of fire in three years, he plays as he wishes like fire. Angry, he bums up
cverything, forests, groves and stones.
4) He should think of himself as mounted on a triangular maṇḍala. (Thus) he is skilful
in all things of many kinds, including business. In (another) seven days, he is freed of discase, and
5) with six (more) he is one with fire. 6) In three years, he beholds the essential nature of fire
completely. He becomes firm in each thing that he perceives, according to the type of its power.
(21-26)
7) Contemplating (his) Self, as before, in the middle of the palate, shining with flames,
he sees all the Lords of the principle of Fire in due order. 8) Meditating on that as being the same

as the solar orb and like fire covered with smoke, he become the equal of the lord of the principle
of Fire, who is in the middle of it. (27-28)

9 He should meditate on all things luminous like a smokeless fire from which the mass

of darkness has been removed by (its) light. 10) And there itself he attains to lordship over it. 11)

By day, he should think there of the radiant energy that is in the form of the light of fire. 12) When
it has become well stable there, (the yogi) becomes just as it is. (29-30)
13) The fire shines there like a lamp made of jewels, and the yogi, being one with it,

attains the lordship of the Lord of Mantras. 14) Meditating on fire internally and externally within
iteverywhere, undivided, he does not fall from that place up to the end of creation (saihāra). 15)
And when the end of creation comes, he reaches Śaṅkara’s supreme and tranquil plane. This is the
fifteen-fold visualization of fire (vahnidhāraṇā). (31-33)

CHAPTER NINETEEN

viṭal breath along) from the big toe up to the top of (the disciple’s head, the
teacher) should sever (his) vital centres (marman) with (the Vidyā of)
Kālarātri (the Dark Night of Death), which will be taught later, and expel
(the breath) from the extremity of the cavity (at the top of the head).”

Conjoined by applying this process (kramayoga), even a (common) initiate
(samayin) who has not offered oblations (is conjoined to the supreme
reality,) and attains (the fruit of) that initiation. (11-14)

See below, 30/55cd-57, which corresponds to MV 17/30cd-31. Instead of TĀ 197/13bcd:
ūrdhvāntaṁ vakṣyamāṇayā |
krmten marmāṇi randhrānāt kālarātryā viṣarjaye |
‘(Then, having dragged (the vital breath along) from the big toe) up to the top of (his

head), he should sever the vital points (marman) by means of (the Vidyā of) Kālarātri (The Dark

Night of Death), which will be taught latter.”

MV 17/28bcd reads:
brahmarandhrāntamānayet |

chedayetsarvamarmāṇi mantrenānena yogavit |l

‘(Then having dragged (the vital brcath along) from the big toe,) he should lead it to the
end of the Cavity of Brahmā. (In this way,) the knower of yoga should sever all the vital points
(marman) with this mantra.
Conceming marmans, see below note 20,17. This same mantra, in various forms, is also

found elsewhere including several Siddhāntāgamas. For example, according to Rauravāgama
(kriyāpāda) 1/15cd (p. 20), the Kṣurikāmantra is OṀ ŚIṀ CHIṀ. Bhat supplies the following
references, remarking that they are all corrupt. According to the Kāraṇāgama: mantraḥ proktaḥ

sivaṣyeha jagatsṛṣṭīlayātmakaḥ | ‘this Mantra, which is the emanation and dissolving away of the
universe, belongs here to Śiva’ (1/2/13cd). Further ahead we read:

ci ccha cī cchyakṣaraṁ gṛhya kṛdyarṇasaṁyutā |
kṣurikādy aṣṭavarṇaṁ tu sarvakāryeṣu pūjitam |

‘CI CCHA CĪ and, having grasped the syllable CCHI conjoined to the letters KRT, (the
mantra) consistng of eight syllables beginning with KṢURIKĀ, is worshipped in all (its) tasks.
Kāraṇāgama 125.
The Vidyā in this case is: KṢURIKĀ CI CCHA CĪ CCHIKṚṜT.

According to Suprabhedāgama 1/3l55ab ości vivīcidi kṣi ut kṣurikāmantram uttamam |

itis OŚCI VIVICIDI KSI UT. According to the Vātula quoted in Śivāgamaśekhara (yolume two,

p. 377) itis ŚI CHI KṢURIKĀSTRĀYA PHAT.
This expression appears in MV 1/47, where we read: ‘Once the supreme plane has been attained
by means of this gradual union (kramayoga), one never returs to the fettered state, (but always)
abides within one’s own pure Self. It is quoted below as 22/6cd-7ab.
anena kramayogena yojito hutivayjitaḥ | samayyapy eti tāṁ dīkṣām TĀ 19/14abc is clearly a
paraphrase of the following verse, cited by Jayaratha in TĀv ad 1955:
anena kramayogena yojitah parame pade |
samayy api mahādevi dīkṣoktam phalam aśute |
I have trnslated accordingly. Moreover, its lkcly that this verse came after M 17/32,
where the printed edition signals a lacuna.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The Vidyā Kaālarātri) ‘will be taught latter’ in chapter thirty. ‘He

has not offered oblations’ means that (everything is done) only with
meditation alone (anusandhāna).

He presents another way here (of doing this).

Severing the Vital Centres by the Circulation
of the Breath in the Body (cāraḥ śarīragaḥ)

āṣx ṝē7 fraīsiq 11 2ē 1
ṣoḍaśādhāraṣaṭcakralakṣyatrayakhapañcakāt |
kvacid anyataratrātha prāguktapaśukarmavat |I 15 |I

praviśya mūḷaṁ kandādeś chindann aikyavibhāvanāt |

pūrṇāhutiprayogeṇa sveṣṭe dhāmni niyojayet || 16 ||

Now here (according to others, this can be done) as is the animal

sacrifice (paśukarman) described previously. Once entered the root
somewhere, by means of one or other (of the groups of) the sixteen
supports, the six wheels, the three targets, (or) the five voids, or elsewhere,

See 30/55cd-57.

Cf. the Ūrmikaulārṇava:

saṭcakraṁ [-cakra] ṣoḍaśādhāraṁ trirlakṣaṁ vyomapañcakam || 2/184 |
sahasotsāhayogena yugapac chaktiyogataḥ |

Perhaps Abhinava’s source, indeed that of the Kubjikā Tantras also, is the beginning of

chapter seven of the Netratantra. The Gorakṣasaṁhitā (more accurately named Śrīmatottara)

follows the same overall layout as we find in the NT, and was certainly later. Once the GS has

talked about the Six Cakras, it goes on, as here, to talk about the nāḍīs and the circulation of the
vital breath (prāṇa). According to the Netratantra:

rtucakraṁ svarādhāraṁ trilakṣyaṁ vyomapañcakam | 1 II
granthidvādaśasaṁyuktaṁ śaktitrayasamanviam |
dhāmatrayapathākrāntaṁ nāḍitrayasamanvitam || 2 ||

dvāsaptatyā sahasraistu sāráhakoṭitrayeṇa ca || 3 II

nāḍivṛndaiḥ samākrāntaṁ malinaṁ vyādhibhirvṛtam |
sūkṣmadhyānāmṛtenaiva pareṇaivoditena tu || 4 II
āpyāyaṁ kurute yogī ātmano vā parasyā ca |
divyadehaḥ sa bhavati sarvavyādhivivarjitaḥ | 5 II

‘There are six Wheels, sixteen foundations, threc targets and five Voids. Endowed with
twelve knots and three energies, covered by the path of the three abodes and possessing thrce
channels – O lady with beautiful hips, once known the body, covered by the paths of the ten
channels, the 72,000 and with the billion and a half, and pervaded by the groups of channcls, and
dity, enveloped by diseases, the yogi nourishes himsclf and the other with the nectar of subtle

CHAPTER NINETEEN

meditaton and that arsen from the other. (Thus,) it becomes a divine body, free of diṣease.
(J11c4-5)
It is remarkabl that, although out of thes series of inner locations, the Six Wheels
(satcakra) ar much better known nowadays, even so, they scem to be of so litle importance to
Jayaratha that he does not mention them at all. Nothing has changed over the two hundred years
since Kṣemarāja, who is n0 less oblivious of them. They are smmply one of the scrics of ascending
centres into which the division into sixtcen is accommodated. Morcover, thcir locations are not
those of the Śix Wheels that are popular nowadays. Commenting on NT 7/1, Kṣemarāja says:
ṣat janma-nābhi-hr̥t-úāḷu-vindu-nādasthānāni nāḍimāyāyogabhedanadīptiśāṇtākhyāni
nāḍimāyādiprasarāśrayatvāt cakrāṇi yatra | ṣoḍaśa aṅguṣṭhagulpha-jānu-meḍhra-pāyu-kanda-

i-jaṭhara-hṛta-kūrmanāḍī-kaṇṭha-tāḷu-bhrūmadhya-lalāṭa-brahmarandhradvādaśāntākhyā
jīvasyādhārakatvādādhārā yatra.

‘(The word) ‘ravaḥ’ (means) six places, namely, that of bit, the navel, the Hcart,
palate, the Point, and Sound. Thy are called, respectivly, Nāḍi, Māyā, Yoga, Bhedana, Dīpti and
Śānta. They are ‘whcels’, becausc they are the basis (āśrāya) of the unfolding of Nāḍi and Māyā
etc. The ‘ṣvarāḥ’ are sixtecn. They are the foundations (ādhāra), becaus they are where the
foundation of the individual soul (is located). (They are) the toe, the ankles, the knees, the
genitals, the anus, the Root,the Channel (nādī), the stomach, the heart,the Channel of the Tortoiṣc
(kārmanādr., the throat, the palae, the centre between the eyebrows, the forehead, the Cavity of
Brahmā and the End of the Twelve.’
The Netratantra testifies to the existence of this set of six and sixteen etc. Abhinava

picked this up either from there or some other source. Even so, considering how it became such a
basic and extensively applied model, it is clear that its rare mention in Tantras prior to the Kubjikā
Tantras suggests that they developed there initially most extensively. Certainly, this is true of the
Six Cakra system in a special way. It is clearly very significant that in the Kubjikā Tantras the Six
Wheels are described extensively. Thus, in chapter 25 of the KukKh is an exposition of the nature
and content of the Six Wheels, Sixteen Foundations, the Three Targets and the Five Voids (listed

in KuKh 25/2ab: ṣaṟcakraṁ ṣoḍaśādhāraṁ trilakṣaṁ vyomapañcakam 1) (these are extensively
described in Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 8 pp. 130-139 and vol. 9 pp. 102-123). Of these, the first
group is by far the most important. It is described in verses 25/3cd-28 and several other places in
the Kukh itself, and in the Kubjikā Tantras. I have already established that the earliest extensive
source so far identified of the Six Cakra system is the Western Tradition (paścimāmnāya) of the
goddess Kubj
and that the earliest descriptions of the Cakras in this form developed in the

Kubjikā Tantras. Ṅoṭe that in this account, the Liṅga in Root Foundation (mālādhāra) is facing

west. This a characteristic feature of the Devī Liṅga worshipped in the Paścimāmnāya, and so is
strong evidence that this is the source of this passage, either directly or at least conceptually.

We note that Gorakhanāthis are first attested in Maharashtra, of which the area called
Śrīdeśa or Dakṣiṇapatha is repeatedly mentioned in the Kubjikā Tantras. I am grateful to Jason
Schwartz for pointing out to me that Kubjikā is still worshipped extensively in Maharashtra as a

regional goddess. Several Yoginī temples and Siddha temples belonging to the 11 century

onwards still survive in this area. They are a clear testimony of the practice of esoteric Kaula ritual

of the sort registered in the Kubjikā Tantras in this part of India at that time. There can be no
doubt that the Haṭha Yoga attributed to Gorakhanātha emerged from Kaula scriptural sources,

especially Kubjikā ones. The presence of both in this part of central India may well serve to

indicate that it is here that these developments initially took place.
It is of very great interest to the historian that these lines, exactly as we find in KuKh
25/2ab noted above, also appear in the Gorakṣaśataka atṭributed to Gorakhnātha, one of the
greatest founder figures of medieval Yoga. Whether the text is by him or not, we observe here a

very clear link with the yogas of early Śaivism. So compellingly important did these lines seem to

be, and the yogic body to which they refer, that they are a centrepiece of this seminal work on
medieval yoga, that belongs possibly to the 14 century. The description of the Six Cakras in the
GS is one of the earliest in the Yoga texts of the medieval period, and sets the basic format for the
countless repeats with increasing detail that followed in parallel with their descriptions of the

Tantras of this period.

TANTRĀLOKA

whilst severing (the root), beginning with the bulb, etc., he should conjoin

(the disciple to his) preferred abode by contemplating oneness and applying
a full oblation. (15-16)

‘Somewhere’ means (all the members of each group) together.

‘Elsewhere’ (means) the Twelve Knots and other (such series of stations within

We read in the Gorakṣasaṁhitā:

satcakraṁ ṣoḍaśādhāraṁ trilakṣaṁ vyomapañcakam |
svadehe ye na jānanti kathaṁ sidhyanti yoginaḥ l 13 II
ekastambhaṁ navadvāraṁ gr̥haṁ pañcãdhidaivatam |
svadehaṁ ye na jānanti kathaṁ siáhyanti yoginaḥ l| 14 11
caturdalaṁ ṣyād ādhāraḥ ṣvādhiṣṭhānaṁ ca ṣaṭdalam |

nābhau daśadalaṁ padmaṁ sūryasaṅkhyadalaṁ hrdi l| 15 ||

kaṇṭhe ṣyāt ṣoḍaśadalaṁ bhrūmadhye dvidalaṁ tathā |

sahasradalam ākhyātaṁ brahmarandhre mahāpathe || 16 ||
ādhāraḥ prathamaṁ cakraṁ ṣvādhiṣṭhānaṁ dvitīyakam |

yonisthānaṁ dvayor madhye kāmarūpaṁ nigadyate | 17 |I
ādhārākhyaṁ gudasthānaṁ paṅkajaṁ ca caturdalam |
tanmadhye procyate yoniḥ kāmākṣā siddhavandiā | 18 II
yonimadhye mahāliṅgaṁ paścimābhimukhaṁ sthitam |
'mastake maṇivad bimbaṁ yo jānāti sa yogavit 19 II
taptacāmīkarābhāsaṁ taḍillekheva visphurat |

Six Wheels, sixteen Foundations, three Targets and five Voids — how can yogis who do

not know this in their own bodies be successful? The house with five presiding deities has one
pillar and nine doors. How can yogis who do not know their own bodies be successful? (13-14)
The (Root) Foundation has four petals, Svādhiṣṭhāna, six petals. There is a lotus with ten
petals in the navel, and one with twelve petals in the heart. In the throat is (a lotus) with sixteen

petals, and one with two petals between the eyebrows. The one with a thousand petals is said to be

on the Great Path in the Cavity of Brahmā. (15-16)
The (Root) Foundation is the first Wheel, and Svādhiṣṭhāna is the second one. The
location of the Yoni is between the two. It is called Kāmarūpa. The one called the Foundation is

the location of the anus. It is a lotus with four petals. In between them is said to be the Yoni

(> Kāmākhyā), praised by the siddhas. In the middle of the Yoni is a grat Liṅga, which

faces west. He who knows the sphere (bimba), which is like a jewel on its head, knows Yoga. It
shines like heated gold, radiant like (the streak of a) lightning flash. GS 13-20ab

trikoṇaṁ tat puraṁ vahner adhomeḍhrāt pratiṣṭhitam || 20 |
yat samādhau paraṁ jyotir anantaṁ viśvatomukham |
tasmin dṛṣṭe mahāyoge yātāyātaṁ na vidyate ||2.1
svaśabdena bhavet prāṇaḥ svādhiṣṭhānaṁ tadāśrayaḥ |
svādhiṣṭhānāt padād asmān meḍhram evābhidhīyate || 22 ||
tantunā maṇivat proto yatra kandaḥ suṣumnayā |

tan nābhimaṇḍalaṁ cakraṁ procyate maṇipūrakam || 23 |
dvādaśāre mahācakre puṇyapāpavivarjite |
tāvaj jīvo bhramaty eva yāvat tattvaṁ na vindati || 24 1

‘The triangle is the abode of Fire. It is established below the penis. The supreme Light,

endless and omnipresent, is (perceived) in contemplative absorption (samādhi). When that is
perceived in Mahāyoga, there is no (more) coming and going. (20cd-21)
The words ‘ṣva’ (denotes) the vital brcath (prāṇa). Śvādhiṣṭhāna is its support. From
this plaṅe of svādhiṣṭhāna, it is called the penis (medhra). Where the Bulb (kāndha) is pierced by

Suṣumnā, like a jewel that is threaded through with a thread, that is said to be the circle (maṇḍala)
of the navel, called manipūraka. The soul wanders around in the great wheel of twelve spokes,
which is devoid of merit and sin, so long as he does not attain reality. GS 20cd-24

CHAPTER NINETEEN

the subtle body). That is said (in the following passage, in which the sixteen
supports are enumerated):
‘1) One should know that Kula is below the sexual organ (meḍhra), and

2) the one called Poison (viṣa) is in the middle (of it). 3) It is said that the

Empowered One (śākta) that impels the Sound of Awakened Consciousness
(bodhanāda) is in the Root (mila). 4) Then, the one called Fire is four fingers

above that, below the navel in the Support of Fire (pavanādhāra). 5) In the

navel itself is the one called the Jar. 6) The one called All Desire (sarvakāma) is
on the (central) path, halfway between the navel and the heart. 7) The one

called the Vivifier is in the middle of the calyx (udara) of the lotus of the

heart. 8) The Tortoise is in the chest, and the one called 9) Lola (the glottis) is

said to be in the throat. 10) The Support of Nectar (sudhā), the nature of which

is nectar (sudhā), is located above the glottis (lambaka). 11) The Lunar One

(saumya), surrounded by the energies of the Moon, is located in the root of that

same (glottis). 12) The one called the Lotus of Knowledge is between the
eyebrows, in the Circle of the Sky. 13) The Support on the surface of the
palate is (called) Raudra, and is sustained by Rudra’s power. 14) (The Support)

called Cintāmaṇi” is located on the Crossroad. 15) The Support of the Fourth
(state) is in the head, in the middle of the Cavity of Brahmā. 16) The Support
of the (Middle) Channel (of the vital breath) (nāḍyādhāra) is subtle and

supreme.

It

awakens

to

uninterrupted

(literally

‘dense’)

(ghanavyāpti). (These are said to be the Sixteen Supports).”

pervasion

Again:
‘(The Five Voids are as follows). The Endless (ananta) Void (kha) is in

the one called (the Place of) Birth. The second Void is in the navel. The third
Read as in the NTu pavanādhāre for pavanādhāro.
Read as in the NTu -madhyamārge for -padmamārge.
” Read as in the NTu -abhidhānākhyo for -abhidhāno ‘nyo.
Read as in the NTu sudhādhāraḥ for sudhāsāraḥ.

Read as in the NTu gaganābhoge for gaganābhogo.

Read as in the NTu cintāmaṇyabhidhānākhyaś for cintāmaṇyabhidhāno ‘nyaś.
Read as in the NTu turyādhāras tu for turyādhārasya.

Read as in the NTu madhye tu for vai hy ūrdhve.
Although their names and identity vary, the group of Sixteen Supports (ādhāra) is common to
many Tantric and Kaula systems, and is carried on to later Yoga traditions. In his commentary on
the NT (7/1cd, see Dvivedi 1985: 112-113), Kṣemarāja presents their projection into the body in
two procedures (prakriyā). For the first, which is presumably the Tantric one (tantraprakriyā), he
simply lists the locations of the Supports, which in that procedure serve to sustain the individual
soul in the body. The locations in the body are practically the same as those listed in the 7ūkā (Rai
1975: 33). They are: 1) Toe, 2) Ankle, 3) Knee, 4) Anus (meḍhra), 5) Genitals (pāyu), 6) Root
(kaṇda), 7) Channel of the vital breath (nāḍi), 8) Stomach, 9) Heart, 10) The Channel of the
Tortoise (kārmanāḍī), 11) Throat, 12) Palate, 13) Middle of the eyebrows, 14) Forehead, 15)
Cavity of Brahmā, 16) End of the Twelve.
Kṣemarāja goes on to quote this passage from an unknown source, introducing it saying
that it is a list of the Sixteen Supports according to the Kaula procedure (prakriyā), and that they
are said to sustain everything, not just the individual soul.
See Appendix B to this chapter.
NTT (7/27Ta) reads janmākhyaṁ for janmākhye.

TANTRĀLOKA

one is in the location of the heart. The fourth is in the middle of the Point
(between the eyebrows). It is taught that (the fifth one) is called Sound (nāda).
Commenting on the Dehasūtra, from which it also draws its account of the Six Wheels, Sixteen

Supports and the Three Signs, the 7īkā (fl. 172a-173a) explains the Five Voids as follows:

yat [k, kh: taṁ] pṛthivyādivyomāntam [kh: -vyomātaṁ] tad bhūtākāśaṁ | tathā [k, kh: yadā]

pūrvoktanivr̥tikalāvyāptiparyantaṁ .[k: pūrvoktavṛtti-; kh: pūrvyoktavṛtti-] yāvat tatra
pārthivabhūtaṁ [k: -ta; kh: thivabhūta] prathamam ([k, kh: -ma] | tathā [k, kh: tadā]

gulphādinābhyantaṁ pratiṣṭhākalāvyāpti-paryantaṁ [k: -vyāptir-] yāvat tatra āpabhūtatṁ [k, kh:
apābhūtaṁ] dvitīyam | tathā punar vidyākalāvyāptir yāvat [k: -kalāṁvyāpti] tāvat tejobhūtasya

vyāptīs tathā śāntikalā [k, kh: śakti -] yāvad vyāptiṣ tāvad vāyubhūtavyāptiḥ | tathā
Śśāntyatītakalāvyāptir yāvat |[kh:
śātyātīt-] tāvad ākāśabhūtasya
vyāptiḥ

evaṁ

bhūtapañcakamelāpakena bhūtākāśaṁ vyākhyātam | Ṭīkā MS K fl. 172a-172b

1) The Void of the Elements (bhūtākāśa). The Void of the Elements is (that reality which) begins
with Earth and ends with Space. The fist is the Earth element This is prcsent as far as the
aforementioned energy of Nivṛti extends. Then the Water Element, the second one, is present
from the ankls to the navel, that is for the extent of the pervasion of the energy of Pratiṣṭhā. In the
same way, the pervasion of the element Fire corresponds to that of the energy of Vidyā, and the
pervasion of the element Air to that of the energy of Śānti, whereas the pervasion of the element

Space corresponds to that of the energy of Śāntyatīta. Thus, the Void of the Elements has been

explained as the one that brings together the five (gross) lements.

.kathyate

yathā

pārthivabhūtavyāpti-sthāne

pārthivatattvam ekaṁ nivṛttikalāśrayeṇa vartate [kh: varttati] | tathā prathiṣṭhākalāśrayena [k,
kh: kalāyena] ambutattvasya [k: aṁvutasyā; kh: aṁvutasya] vyāptir yāvat tāvad āpatattvādi [k:

tāvadaptattvādi; kh: tāvat aptattvādi] prakṛtitattvāntaṁ [k, kh:
-tatvaṁ] guṇatattvena saha [kh:
saṁha] tatra caturviṁśativyāptiḥ [k, kh: -viṁśavyāptiḥ] gulphādinābhyantā [k: nābhyantas; kh: nābhyāṁtaḥ] | tathā vidyākalāśrayeṇa tejobhūtasya vyāptir yāvat tāvat nābher ārabhya [k:

nābhyād ārabhya; kh: nābhyād ārabhyo] lambikādho ’ yāvat | tathātraiva puruṣatattvādimāyātatvāntā

|[k,

kh:

-tatvamāyā-tatvantaṁ]

tattvasaptake

vyāptiḥ

tathā

Śśāntúikalāśrayeṇa vāyubhūtasya vyāptir yāvat tāval lambikādibindusthānāntaṁ |[k, kh:
tāvallaṁpikādi-] yāvat tathātraivaśuddhavidyādisadāśivāntatattvatrayāṇāṁ ([k, kh: -vidyā
sadāśivatatvāntaṁtatva-] vyāptiḥ

| tathā śāntyatītakalāśrayeṇa ākāśabhūtasya vyāptiḥ yāvat

tāvad bindvādiśivāntaṁ dvādaśāntaṁ yāvat
Śśivaśaktimekaṁ] | Ṭīkā MS K f1. 172b

tathātraiva

śivaśaktitattvam

ekam

[k:

2) The Void of the Principles: Now the Void of the Principles is explained. As stated previously,
(only) the Earth Principle, supported by the energy of Nivṛtti, is present in the big toe which, as
stated before, is the location of the pervasion of the element Earth. Similary, the Water element,

supported by the energy of Pratiṣṭhā, extends from the Principle of Water up to that of Nature,

along with the Principle of the Qualities (of Nature); (thus,) there (these) twenty-four (principles)
pervade from the ankles up to the navel. In the same way, the element Fire, supported by the
energy of Vidyākalā, extends from the navel to the bottom of the uvula. In this way, seven
priṇciples pervade from that of the Person up to that of Māyā. Again, the element Wind, supported
by the energy of Śānti, extends from the uvula up to the locus of the Point (between the

eyebrows). Such is the pervasion here of the three principles from Pure Knowledge to Sadāśiva.

Then the element Space, supported by the energy of Śāntyātīta, extends from the Point (between
the eyebrows) up to the End of the Twelve. In this way, there is one principle here, namely, Śiva

and Śakti (together
in one).

idānīṁ brahmākāśaṁ kathyate yathā yatra brahmopalabdhir bhavati [kh: + yatra
vrahmāpalavvir bhavati |] tat sthānaṁ kīdṛśaṁ 1 tat kathyate | dvādaśānte [k,

+. yataḥ]

saṁvartāmaṇḍalaṁ trikūtamayam [k, kh: -kūṭasamayaṁ] | trikāṭaṁ hrīṁ klīṁ śrīṁ trikoṇam [k,

kh: trikoṇa] | V (citram) | icchājñānakriyāśaktitrayayuktam tathā sattvarajastamoguṇatrayeṇa [k,
kh: / -rajastama -] bhūṣitaṁ |[k, kh: bhāsitam] tathā candrasūryāgnivarcasaṁ tathā

prātarmadhyāhnāparāhnāsandhyāveṣṭhitaṁ

tathā

([k,

kh:

brahmāviṣṇurudra-

CHAPTER NINETEEN

Now (the teaching concerning) the Six Wheels will be declared. 1) In
the (centre) called Birth is the Wheel of the Channels (of the vital breath)
(nāḍicakra). 2) The excellent (Wheel) called Māyā is in the navel. 3) The Wheel
of Yogis is in the heart. 4) The one located in the palate is said to be (the one
called) Splitting Apart (bhedana). 5) The Wheel of Illumination (dīpticakra) is
in the Point (bindu) (between the eyebrows) and the one located in 6) Sound is

called Tranquil (śānta).’ (NT 7/27-29)

prakāratrayasaṁyuktam |[k: -prākāratraya-] tathā

vātapittaśleṣmadvāratraya-yuktaṁ tathā

argaladvārabandhanakīlakatrayo-parodhābhidhānaiḥ [k, kh: -naḥ] kāmakrodhalobhair badhvā

[k, kh: -lobhe vadhvā] tathā iḍāpiṅgalāsuṣumnānāḍitrayayuktam [k, kh: iḍānāḍitrayamuktam] 1
evaṁvidhaṁ |[k, kh: saṁvidhaṁ] saṁvartāmaṇḍalaṁ ([kh: -maṇḍalamaṇḍala] dvādaśānte
saṁkṣepād uddeśamātrāt kathitam ) vistareṇa [kh: viṣṭhareṇa] ṣaṭsahasre vā br̥hadāgame
jñātavyam | iti brahmākāśaṁ kathitam | Ṭīkā f1. 172b
3) The Void of Brahman: Now the Void of Brahmā will be described. This is where the

perception of the Brahman takes place. How is that place? That will be explained. It is the
Samvartāmaṇḍala, consisting of the three Peak (seed-syllables) within the End of the Twelve. The

three Peaks (syllables) are HRĪṀ KLĪṀ ŚRĪṀ (that make the Triangle). The Triangle is

conjoined with the powers of will, knowledge and action. It is adorned with the three qualities of

sattva, rajas and tamas. It possesses the radiance of the Moon, Sun, and Fire. It is enveloped in the

three times of the day — moming, midday and afternoon. It possesses three ramparts, Brahmā,

Viṣṇu, and Rudra, and three doors (made of the humours) wind (vāta) bile (pīta), and phlegm
(śleṣma). īt is bound with lust, anger, and greed, which are called the three obstructions, namely,
the chain, the lock of the doors, and the nails, and it possesses the three channels, Iḍā, Piṅgalā and

Suṣumṇā. Such is the form of the Samvartāmaṇḍala in the Ēnd of the Twelve. It has been
explained here in brief. One should know the details extensively in the Saṭsahasra, or in the
Bṛhadāgama. Thus, the Void of Brahmā has been explained.
idānīṁ parākāśaṁ kathyate yathā

ṣoḍaśāntopariṣthitaṁ [kh:

-paristhane]

kaumārākhye [kh: komārākhye] parvatasthāne dhāūmavartiprānte | tathānyatroktaṁ kaumāraṁ
parvataṁ yacca anākhyaṁ [kh: asākhyaṁ] ṣoḍaśāntike [kh: ṣoḍaśāṁúikā] l| iti parākāśaṁ [kh:
parā śa] kathitam | Ṭīkā fl. 172b

4) The Supreme Void: Now the Supreme Void will be described. The Supreme Void is located
on top of the End of the Śixteen, in the place of the mountain called Kaumāra at the end of the trail
of smoke (dhūmavarti). It is said elsewhere that: “Mount Kaumāra is the Inexplicable within the
End of the Sixteen’. Thus, the Supreme Void has been described (see Dyczkowski 2009: vol 1 p.
413 ff.).
idānīṁ ([kh: idānī] māyākāśaṁ [kh: mākāśaṁ] kathyate yathā | māyākāśaṁ ṣoḍaśāntorádhve

saptadaśamānte [k, kh: saptā-] vartate [k, kh: missing] yatra [k: yathā] dhūmravartinī [k, kh: -ni]
līnā bhavati | anāmaye [k, kh: -mayo] nirākāre [kh: -kāra] sthāne tatra māyākāśam |
tathānyatroktam | parākāśaṁ pare [k, kh: -raṁ] sthāne [k, kh: -naṁ]

5) The Void of Māyā: Ṅow the Void of Māyā will be explained. The Void of Māyā is located
above the End of the Sixteen in the End of the Śeventeenth, where the trail of smoke dissolves
away. The Void of Māyā is in the place that is formless and free of (al) defects. That is said
elsewhere: ‘The one called Māyā is above that. It is the Śupreme Void in the Supreme Placc’.
Such is the Void of Ma
NT 7)/27-29. Observe that the account of the Śix Wheels hcrc in the NT has nothing to do with
the classic six Wheels of what is called nowadays Kuṇḍalinī Yoga.
Kṣemarāja comments: ‘The Endless (Void) (is so called) because itis as i without end,
and because it is the abode (āśraya) of th universe. (The Void) named Sound (is called ths)
because it is the abode of Sound. (The Wheel of the Channcls is so called) because it is the cause
of the extension of the channels (of the vital brcath). (The second Wheel is called Māyā) because
it is the cause of the knowledge of all the expansion (prapañca) of Māyā, in accord with the

TANTRĀLOKA

‘(The three Targets are as follows:) The Inner Target, the Outer Target
and the Middle Target, which is the third.”

dictum; “(the yogi achieves) knowledge of the agregate of the body in the Wheel of the navel’

(Yogasūtra 3]25). (The Assembly (cakra) of Yogis is called this) because it bestows concentration

(cittaikāgrya). (The next one is called Splitting Apart) because it should be split apart with effort.

(The next is called the Wheel of Illumination) because its nature is illumination (dipti), and (the
last one is called Tranquil) because it bestows tranquillity. . . . These Voids and Wheels should be
abandoned, because (the former) induce entry into the state of deep sleep, whilst (the latter) are the

cause of the unfolding of duality.’

Elsewhere, the Five Voids are equated with five of the Siīx Wheels within which the

goddess, as the energy of the universal Void of the Transmental, moves (see KuKh 55/1-4ab, also
ibid. 3/125). In this context, the missing Wheel is the navel (ibid. 55/2-4ab), whereas the Five
Elements (that are equated sometimes with the Voids) are accommodated into the Six Wheels by
omitting the Wheel of the throat (ibid. 21/35-36). The Netratantra (7/27-29) also fits the Five
Voids into its own version of the Six Wheels in its own way as follows.
“ This line is missing in the printed edition of the NT. However, it is possible that it was

originally there, as the NT does not refer to these three, although they are announced at the

beginning of chapter seven, along with the other groups. The three Signs, Marks or Targets can be
varously conceived within the body, and vary according to the practice (sādhanā). Accoráing to
the 7īka, the three Signs or Marks are as follows:

prathamaṁ .nãbhyadhaḥ [k,
kh: nābhyā-] kuṇḍalinīṣṭhāne brahmāgranthir
indragopaka-saṁkāśā [k, kh: -granthiḥ -saṁkāśād; kh: idra-] raktavarṇā |k, kh: -varṇāḥ] | tatra

citarāpam | tad eva manaḥ yasmāc caitanyarāpaṁ jñānam utpadyate | ulkārāpaṁ dīparāpaṁ
sthūlaṁ sūryadhāmarūpam ity antarlakṣā-bhidhānam [k, kh: anta-] | tena [k, kh: yena] kāraṇena
ataḥ [kh: aṁta] antaḥ-śabdena [k: anta -; kh: ata-] madhyam | tasmāc charīramadhye
kuṇḍalinīṣthāne lakṣaṁ kartavyam | ity antarlakṣābhidhānaṁ lakṣam ekaṁ kathitam 1

idānīṁ bahirlakṣaṁ [kh: -lakṣyaṁ] kathyate | yathā bahiḥśabdena antarlakṣasya

kuṇḍalinīṣṭhānasya yad bāhyaṁ tadūráhvataḥ hr̥dayasthānaṁ viṣṇugranthyabhidhānaṁ [k, kh: jñānāśī

kiñcit [k, kh: kaścit] | tad eva dravyarūpaṁ sūkṣmaṁ agnidhāmarūpam | iti bahirlakṣābhidhānam

| kena kāraṇena | yadā antarlakṣasya kuṇḍalinīṣṭhānasthitasya ūráhvagatyā [kh: -gatyāt] bāhyaṁ
hṛdayasthānaṁ [kh: hrṛdaye-] tadā bahirlakṣam | iti bahirlakṣaṁ dvitīyam l
idānīṁ ubhayalakṣaṁ kathyate yathā | ubhayalakṣaṁ kena kāraṇena | antarlakṣasya
tathā hahirlakṣasya evaṁ lakṣadvayasya yadā pararūpeṇa antarvartate tadā ubhayalakṣam |

anyac ca kiṁ
visiṣṭam | taṁ bindusthāne rudragranthau ṣvatantrarāpaṁ cidrīūpaṁ caitanyaṁ [kh:
caianyāṁ] jñānarāpam ālokaṁ paraṁ somadhāmānandarīpaṁ ([kh: saumadhāmānanda-]
vyomātītam | Ṭīkā fl. 171b -172a

“The first is below the navel, where Kuṇḍalinī is located (between the Wheel of the Selfsupported and the Wheel Full of Gems. See above 7/40cd-41ab). It is the Knot of Brahmā and,
(sparkling) like a firefly, it is red in colour. The essential nature of the mind stuff (citta) is located
there, that is, the mind (manas) from which knowledge, which is consciousness (caitanya), arises.
Its form is like a bumning coal and (the flame of a) lamp. Gross, it is the abode of the Sun. This is
the one called the inner sign. By ‘inner’ here is meant ‘in between’; thus, one should make (one’s)
sign in the middle of the body, where Kuṇḍalinī is located. In this way, one sign, called the ‘inner

sign’, has been explained.

Now the outer sign will be explained. By ‘outer is meant outside the inner sign, which
is the location of Kuṇḍalinī, that is, above it, which is the location of the heart. It is called the Knot
of Viṣṇu, and is red and white in colour. It is the consciousness that is the basis of knowledge, and
is the subtle (kaścit) nature of the Self. It is the nature of substance (dravya), and is subtle. It is the
abode of Fire. It is called the outer sign. Why is that? When in relation to the inner sign, which is
the location of Kuṇḍalinī, travelling upwards, (one reaches) the location of the Heart, then that is
the ‘outer sign’. This is the outer sign, which is the second one.

Now the sign that is both will be explained. Why is it the sign that is both? When it

resides within both the signs – the inner and the outer – in the supreme form (the other two being
gross and subtle), then it is the sign that is both. How else is it? That is independent consciousness,

CHAPTER NINETEEN

located in the Knot of Rudra, within the locus of the Point. It is the light which is knowledge and
is supreme. It is the abode of the Moon, and is bliss
‘beyond the Void’ (yyomātīta).”
'The main features of the Three Śigns can be tabulated as follows:
The Three Signs according to the 7īkā
Sign | Location | Knot
Colour
Naṭure
Abode
Inner
Navel
Brahmā
Red
Mind-stuff | Sun
Outer
Heart
Viṣṇu _] Red / White | Substance
Fire
Both
Point
Rudra

Self
Moon

Another version of the Three Signs is found in the context of the inner practice linked to

the worship of the goddess Tripurabhairavī, taught in the KuKauM. As usual, the Three Signs are
visualized along the vertical axis of the body, whilst uttering the corresponding seed-syllable in

the course of ascent. There this process is called ‘meditation on mantra’ (mantradhyāna), and it
heralds the repetition of the mantra of Tripurabhairavī. The passage reads:

ādhāram udayaṁ devi layo hṛdayam ucyate ||

viśrāmaṁ brahmarandre tu trilakṣaṁ parikīrtitam |

ādhāraṁ gudam ity uktaṁ raktakijalkasannibham ||

vāgbhavaṁ tasya madhye tu visphurantaṁ taḍitprabham |

hṛdaye kāmarājaṁ ca lākṣārasasamaprabham ||

brahmarandhraṁ tu śaktyākhyaṁ hutapāradasannibham |

°O goddess, the Foundation (ādhāra) is the arising (of mantra). The Heart is said to be
(its) merger. Repose takes place in the Cavity of Brahmā. This is said to be the triple sign. The
Foundation is said to be the anus. It s like the red filaments ofa flower. Vāgbhava (AIṀ), radiant
like a lightning flash, is in the middle of it. Kāmarāja (HRĪṀ) is in the Heart, and is brillant like
red lac. The Cavity of Brahmā is said to be the (seed-syllable of) Śakti (ŚRĪṀ), and is like heated

mercury. ʼ KuKauM 5/103cd-106ab

The Three Signs according to the Kulakaulinīmata

Sign
Foundation
Hcart

Location

Cheṣt

State_]__Seed-syllable
Form
ĀArīsing | Vagbhāva – AIṀ | Red flaments
Merger | Kāmarāja HṚIṀ
Red lac

Cavity of Brahmā | Top of the head | Repose |

_Śakti - ŚRĪṀ__|

Heated mercury

We may compare how Banerjee (1962: 189 ff. interprets the Thrce Signs mentioned in
the sources attibuted to Gorakhanātha. His presentation can be summarized as follows:
1) The inner sign (antarlakṣya). Under this heading come internal objects. These include

the Wheels, but most particularly Kuṇḍalinī in the channel of Suṣumṇā. Important also are the

centres within the head, for the practice of concentration. One is the golamaṇḍala. This is just
above the forehead, and in front of the Cavity of Brahmā. A brilliant light shines there.

Concentrating on this light, the yogi will be illuumined inwardly with Divine Light.
2) The outer sign (bahirlakṣya): This term covers outer objects that are used as objects
of concentratioon. Banerjee gives the example of colours visualized at various distances from the
tip of the nose. The sky is also a good support for this type of concentration. The yogi should not
be distracted by other objects he may see. ‘Thus,’ Banerjee cxplains, ‘even with open eyes, he
may make his mind free from all the diversities of the objective world, and by the power of his

abstraction and concentration, may see only the difference-less sky before him.’ In this way, the

yogi experiences the transcendental emptiness (śūnya). He may do the same with sound, or he

may fix his mind on a celestial body, an idol, or the figure of a saint. (ibḍ.
p. 191-192)
3) The middle sign (madhyalakṣya). Baṇerjee explains that this is: ‘any object of special

atṭention, which is not to be conceived as either within the body or outside the body, upon which

the mind is concentrated without any direct reference to location [. . .]. The chosen object for the

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Described previously’ in Chapter Sixteen. ‘By applying a full

oblationʼ like that (one before). This is the meaning.

He now talks about another way here (of doing this).

Blocking the Breath by Agitating the Wheels
Along the Trident of Knowledge

̄a ā̄āṀ aāa- ṂJ, 11 2.9 1|

T. ṬẼ. |

IRTK Ta: Gcaāḹ fāīr̥gqTīaá

practice of concentration for the time being may be rcal or imaginary, material or ideal, very small
or very big, dazzlingly bright or soothingly ©ool, of any colour or shape or size, of any form or
without form. (ibid. p. 192).
We may notice here how terminology drawn from the Tantras is applied by

Gorakhanāthīs to explain and classify forms of practice that are Yoga in the sense Pataāñjali
understands as concentration, through which the fluctuations of the mind are stilled. Generally, in

the Tantras, we find that although concentration is of course essential to the practices taught there,

such as the repetiton of mantras or inner projections, it is only incidental. The point of the

practice is the worship and ultimate union with the deity or gaining power from it. There are a
wide range of practices that lead the vital breath, and with it the consciousness of the adept,
upwards to the transcendent condition of the deity. However, the stations of this ascent are rarely,
if ever, understood to be stages of concentration. They can, of course, be interpretated in this way,
and this is what Gorakhnātha, as Banerjee has understood him, has done.

The set of Three Signs is the most common. However, we also find others. One we may
mention here is a set of Nine Signs. This is found in the KuKauM, which prescribes that that
should be contemplated as the finest essence (sāra) within the body. The Nine Signs are described

there as follows:

meḍhrādhāraṁ śikhākāraṁ sutaptakanakaprabham ḷ
nābhisthaṁ sūryabimbābhaṁ taruṇādityavarcasam ||

hṛdi yonisikhākāraṁ kaṇṭhe vai bhāskarākṛtim 1
ghaṇṭaṁ dĩpaśikhākāraṁ bilaṁ tadrpam ucyate ||

tadūrdhvaṁ yat samākhyātaṁ lambakaṁ candrasannibhaṃ |
ramābhaṁ cakṣuṣor madhye navamaṁ viśvatejasam |l
etatsthānasthito yogī navalakṣaṁ samabhyaset |
navasthānagataṁ lakṣaṁ navasthānaṁ tad ucyate ||

‘The foundation, which is in the genitals (medhra), is the form ofa flame, and its light is
like well-heated gold. The one in the navel shines like the solar orb, and has the brilliance of the
young (newly risen) sun. The one in the heart has the form of the flae in the Yoni, and the one in
the throat the form of the sun. The (one at the) base of the uvula (ghaṇṭa) has the form of the
flame ofa lamp, and (that one in) the cavity (of the mouth above) is said to have that (same) form.
The one above, which is called the uvula (proper) (ambaka), is like the moon. The ninth is in
between the eyes, and, possessing the radiant cnergy of the universe, it looks like a gem. The yogi
residing in these places should practice the Nine Signs. The Signs present in the nine places are
called the Nine Places. KuKauM 5/131-134.
See above, 16/36cd-45ab, The rites taught in Chapter Seventeen also culminates in the burning
away of the fetters of the Rule (samaāyapāśa). Śce 17/0cd-72.

CHAPTER NINETEEN

fī# aī? m sīft #zgh: Ū-II. 1| 2.3 II

a: fṁēēzaā ĩaa r̥tĩã ra: 1| 3 1

jñānatriśūlaṁ saṁdīptaṁ dīptacakratrayojjvalam |
cintayitvāmunā tasya vedhanaṁ bodhanaṁ bhramam || 17 ||
dīpanaṁ tāḍanaṁ todaṁ calanaṁ ca punaḥ punaḥ |
kandādicakragaṁ kuryād viśeṣeṇa hṛdambuje || 18 I
dvādaśānte tataḥ kṛtvā binduyugmagate kṣipet |
nirlakṣye vā pare dhāmni saṁyuktaḥ parameśvaraḥ || 19 ||
na tasya kuryāt saṁskāraṁ kañcid ity āha gahvare |
devahḥ kim asya pūrṇasya śrāddhādyair iti bhāvitaḥ || 20 ||
The Lord has said in the Gaḥvara: “‘After having meditated on the
Trident of Knowledge intensely energized (with Mantras) (saṁdīpta) and
blazing with three flaming wheels, (the teacher) should by means of this
repeatedly pierce (vedhana), awaken (bodhana), spin (bhrama), ignite
(dīpana), strike (tāḍana), īmpel (toda), and agitate (calana) the Bulb (kanda)
and the other wheels, especially the Heart. Then having placed it in the End
of the Twelve, in which the two Points (of exhalation and inhalation) have
ceased, he should cast (an offering into the fire). (Thus, he is) the Supreme
Lord and is conjoined into the Ineffable (nirlakṣya) or the Supreme Abode.

(The teacher) should not perform any purifying rite (saṅskāra) for him.’

Of what use are the offerings to the ancestors (śrādha) and the like for one
who is (already) sanctified (bhāvita) and is complete (and perfect)?ʼ (17-20)
‘Knowledge’ is supreme consciousness itself and that itself is the
‘Trident’, because it pierces through each of the supports etc. The ‘three
wheelsʼ are (the goddesses) Parā etc. in the form of three spokes. ‘By means of
thisʼ, that is, by means of the Trident of Knowledge. (The Trident makes the
wheels

in

the

subtle

body)

‘spin’,

that

is,

rotate

anticlockwise

etc.

(vāmādikrameṇa). (By) ‘impel’ (is meant that the Trident imparts an) impulse
(preraṇa) (to the wheels in the subtle body). (This is all done) ‘especially to the
heart’ʼ, which is the principal foundation (adhiṣṭhāna) of the individual soul.
‘The two Points (of exhalation and inhalation) have ceased’ means that (the

flow of) exhalation and inhalation is interrupted. (No rites need be performed)
“for him’, that is, one who has attained supreme lordship.

Nor is this said only in our scriptures. Thus he says:

Read vedhanaṁ for vedanaṁ.

Note that Jayaratha is telling us, that the Kulagahvara is a Trika Tantra.

TANTRĀLOKA

Immediate Exit by Another Mantra

a fatkritr̥a: 1

ē ṬTTKŪTT &afī̄zādṁṝ-ād: II 32 |

ftrzī frāīsdafç:
vīi sīq_ 1

3aā-āītā frttṛ fīraā e ũ ōōaq, 1| 32 1
śrīmaddīkṣottare tv eṣa vidhir vahnipuṭīkṛtaḥ |

haṁsaḥ pumān adhas tasya rudrabindusamanvitaḥ || 21 II
Śśiṣyadehe niyojyaitad anudvignaḥ śataṁ japet |
utkramyordhvaṁ nimeṣeṇa śiṣya itthaṁ paraṁ vrajet || 22 |I
The prescribed procedure (vidhi), according to the venerable
Diīkṣottara, is this: the Swan (H) encapsulated by (two) Fires (R), the Man
(M), below which is Rudra (Ū) along with the Point (M) (above). Once
applied this to the body of the disciple, (the teacher), unperturbed, should
repeat (this Mantra) one hundred times. (Then), causing the disciple to exit

(his body) upwards, in the twinkling of an eye, he goes in this way to the
supreme (abode). (21-22)

‘Fire’ is the letter R. “The Swan’ʼ is H. ‘Manʼ is M. ʻRudra’ is the letter
U. This —RHRMŪM - is the syllabic Mantra (piṇḍākṣara).
He transposes this (teaching) to another scripture also.

īy tg faf. #mfccgāīṁīzd-a
esa eva vidhiḥ śrīmatsiddhayogīśvarīmate |

This very same procedure (vidhi) (is taught) in the venerable

Siddhayogīśvarīmata. (23ab)

Read utkramyordhvaṁ for utkramyordhva.

Thiṣ passage is not found in transcript of the Dīkṣottara. However, all of chapter five of the
Dīkṣottara is dedicated to the subject of quitting the body ~ utkrānti – at the moment of death, in

such a way as to achieve liberation. The first part deals with utkrānti by experiencing Bindu. After
utkrānti with Nāda, a third section deals with utkrānti through the three major nāḍīs.

These kinds

of Yogas, of which the Kuṇḍalinī Yogas are a prime example, are modelled on disciplining the

upward ascent out through the Cavity of Brahmā (brahmarandhra) at the top of the head into the

End of the Twelve and beyond, as takes place in the perfect death that leads to liberation. This

procedure is essentially one of piercing (vedha) the inner vital centres in a manner typical of what
Abhinava would call the Kaula procedure (kulaprakriyā). Thus, although the Dīkṣottara is
traditionally classified as a Siddhānta Tantra, it exhibits certain features, such as this one, of the
Bhairava and Kaula Tantras.

The subject of initiation at death is not treated in the short recension of the SYM, and Jayaratha
does not supply any citation. Does Abhinava mean here that the same mantra is taught for this

procedure in the SYM as in the Dīkṣottara?

CHAPTER NINETEEN

The Procedure for the Brahmavidyā
(brahmavidyāvidhiḥ)
The Initiation that Brings About the Exit from the Body

gTGhrī

BTTSTaTITT:
GVTĪTī GĪÑSIfR |

1| 3 1|

a-a # gdīa qaaaāTh
7Ṭ: |I ṜU, 11

iyam utkrāmaṇī dīkṣā kartavyā yogino gurohḥ || 23 ||
anabhyastaprāṇacāraḥ katham enāṁ kariṣyati |
vakṣyamāṇāṁ brahmavidyāṁ sakalāṁ niṣkalombhitām || 24 ||
karṇe ʻsya vā paṭhed bhiyo bhūyo vāpy atha pāṭhayet |
svayaṁ ca karma kurvīta tattvaśuddhyādikaṁ guruḥ l| 25 I|
mantrakriyābalāt pūrṇāhutyetthaṁ yojayet pare |
This initiation, that brings about the exit (of the soul from the

body,) should be performed by a teacher who is (an advanced) yogi. How
could one who has not practiced (the control and contemplation of) the
movement of the vital breath do it? Or else (if he is not such a yogi), he
should recite or make (someone else) recite in the ear of his (dying disciple)
the Brahmavidyā. This will be taught further ahead in its two forms, that
is, with parts (sakalā), and woven together with the one without parts
(niṣkalombhitā). (The Brahmavidyā) may do (its) work of purifying the
elements and the rest by itself. (However) the teacher may (only) conjoin
(his disciple) to the supreme (reality) in the same way (ittham) by offering,
with the power (bala) of (ritual) action and mantras, a full oblation.

(23cd-26ab)

Having defined the circulation (cāra) (of the vital breath) in the body, in
order to explain the procedure concerning the Brahmavidyā, he says that it ‘will
be taught later’” etc. It will be taught in (Chapter) Thirty. ‘Woven together
with the one without parts’ means that each letter is encapsulated by the
Vidyā ʻwithout partsʼ, consisting of five syllables.

Bhūtirājā taught Abhinava the Brahmavidyā (30/63ab), but all the following discussion and

responses to possible obiections concerning its use, from 19/23cd onwards, are Abhinava’s own
words. The Brahmavidyā is presented in full below in 30/62cd-92.

“ 25cd – translation uncertain.
See below 30/62cd-91ab.

. I ṣuggest a tentative emendation of prativākyaṁ saṁpuṭitām, which makes no sense, to

prativarasaṁpuṭitām.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), it was said just before that this is not to be done

by a teacher who is not a yogi. So how is it that it he is saying this now? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

aāTTP-ATṬḤTĒcIT TI 3Ghīēī TJE || 3ē |1

yogābhyāsam akṛtvāpi sadya utkrāntidāṁ guruḥ || 26 I|
jñānamantrakriyādhyānabalāt kartuṁ bhavet prabhuḥ |

Although he has not practiced Yoga, the teacher is (the Lord,) who

is capable (prabhu) of performing (the initiation) that bestows immediate
exit (from the body), by the strength of (his) knowledge, Mantras, ritual
action, and visualization (dhyāna). (26cd-27ab)
Moreover, although knowledge and the rest are present (in the teacher),
the Brahmavidyā alone is primary here. Accordingly, he says:

fraāī āṀrad- ũīg 11 3.9 11

11 ¢ 111
GaTIGT]
JII: JJd fT#ēTlīzōaī |
anayotkramyate śiṣyo balād evaikakaṁ kṣaṇam || 27 ||
kālasyollaṅghya bhogo hi kṣaṇiko ‘syās tu kiṁ tataḥ |
sadya utkrāntidā cānyā yasyāṁ pūrṇāhutiṁ tadā || 28 ||
dadyād yadāsya prāṇāḥ syur dhruvaṁ niṣkramaṇecchavaḥ |
By this (initiation), the disciple quits (the body) forcefully (balāt) in

just a single moment of time. It may well be (that he must still) experience

(the consequences of residual Karma, but that) lasts for (just) an instant —
so what of that? There is another (initiation) that bestows immediate exit
(from the body), in which (the teacher) should offer a full oblation, (but)

that should be imparted (only) when the vital breaths (of the disciple) are
firmly intent on quitting (the body). (27cd-29ab)
The sense of (saying) ‘in just a single moment’ is that it is such that, in

the following moment, (the disciple’s) death occurs spontaneously. Surely, (one
may ask:) It is said that ‘. . that (Karma) by which this (body is sustained can
be destroyed only) by the experience (of its consequences).’ How is it
! Here Yoga means the practice of control and mastery of the circulation of the vital breath s0 as

to be able to make use of it for such rites. Cf. below, 19/51cd-53.
This quarter verse from the Kiraṇatantra (vidyāpāda 6/20d) is also quoted above in TĀv ad
9/130cd-131ab (see note there) and ad 15/27-29.

CHAPTER NINETEEN

possible for Karma to come to an end, even though it exists for (just) that
moment, without the experience (of its consequences) (bhoga)? With this doubt

in mind, he says that ‘(he must still) experience (the consequences of residual

Karma) etc. ‘So what of that?” Even if it exists, it has practically waned
away, and so is of no consequence. This is the meaning. (The initiation) ‘should
be imparted (only) when’, that is, at that very time when the vital breaths are
quitting (the body). This is the meaning. Thus, that (occasion) does not last for
more than the passing of just one instant of time. This is the sense.
Even if the ritual etc. is omitted, (the initiation can take place, for) it is

the Brahmavidyā alone that is the means here (to bring about the disciple’s
initiation). Thus, he says:

7ē: || 3< 1|
āTĪSTTṬĀTT] TTTRĀāSTTGT |

aā® fī=+® =ã || 30 1|

vināpi kriyayā bhāvibrahmavidyābalād guruḥ l| 29 ||
karṇajāpaprayogeṇa tattvakañcukajālataḥ |
niḥsārayany athābhīṣṭe sakale niṣkale dvaye || 30 ||
tattve vā yatra kutrāpi yojayet pudgalaṁ kramāt |

By the (sheer) power of the Brahmavidyā that will be (taught

further ahead), repeated in (his disciple’s) ear, (the teacher) induces (the

disciple) to quit the net of obscuring coverings (kañcuka) and principles,
even without (performing any) ritual (kriyā). (As he does that, the teacher)

should conjoin the soul (of the disciple) wherever to (whatever) reality

(tattva), be it the differentiated (form of Śiva) (sakala) or undifferentiated,
as (he) prefers, in due order. (29cd-31ab)
By (saying) ‘wherever’, he emphasizes that (the reality to which the
disciple is conjoined) is according to (his) preference.
It is not only (clear that the Brahmavidyā) is the (direct) means (to do
this, by indicating that it happens even if) the rites etc. are omitted, (even) the
teacher is also (not essential). Thus he says:

The Recitation of the Brahmavidyā

The Brahmavidyā Recited by a Fellow Initiate to Liberate Him.
PossibleOobjections and Response

EEIREEAEIṬĪEĀFGĪrīēIĪE]ḤIḤTAHI
samayī puṭrako vāpi paṭhed vidyām imāṁ tathā |l 31 II

TANTRĀLOKA

This Vidyā can be recited in this way (not only by the teacher, but)
also by a (common) regular (initiate) or a spiritual son. (31cd)
In that case what happens? With this doubt in mind, he says:

tatpāṭhāt tu samayyyuktāṁ rudrāṁśāpattim aśnute |
Indeed, (just) by reciting that, (the dying person) attains the
aṭtainment said to be that of a regular initiate (samayin), namely, the

condition of being Rudra’s limb (rudrāṁśa). (31cd-32ab)

(The word) ‘indeedʼ” is in the sense of (indicating) the cause. The
meaning is that (the dying man receives) the regular initiation (samayadīkṣā),
which is such.
Surely, (one may ask) how is it proper for these two (kinds of initiate) to
recite it as if (they were) the teacher? With this doubt in mind, he says:

EḷēEEIVĒAĪISṬUINZEE

3 1|

etau jape cādhyayane yasmād adhikṛtāv ubhau || 32 II
nādhyāpanopadeśe vā sa eṣo ‘dhyayanād ṛte |
Both of them have been empowered (adhikṛta) (just) to repeat
Mantra, recite (and study the scriptures for oneself), (but) not to teach the
scriptures (adhyāpana) or impart teachings (upadeśa). (Now) this (repeated
utterance of the Brahmavidyā is not an initiation in itself, it is in fact
essentially nothing) except the (personal) recitation (of scripture)
(adhyayana). (32cd-33ab)
The recitation of these two (types of initiates) is nothing other than (the
personal) recitation (of scripture). Thus he says that ‘“(it is in fact essentially
nothing) except the (personal) recitation (of scripture) (adhyayana)’. One
should connect the word ‘nothing’ before (‘except the (personal) recitation (of
scripture)).

Surely (one may ask), if the nature of this recitation is not the imparting
of a teaching or the like, how is it that the regular initiation is performed

(thereby for the dying person)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TGĪTRTTTĀĪRĀÇTTĀTTTT
āT 7Tī; 1|33 1

paṭhatos tv anayor vastusvabhāvāt tasya sā gatiḥ || 33 |I
Such is the condition of that (dying person that develops) as they
recite (the Brahmavidyā, namely, that of one who has just received
See above, 15/523-524ab (519-520ab).

CHAPTER NINETEEN

initiation. But this is not because they initiate him; rather it is) because it is

the nature of things (that it should happen). (33cd)

He instils this (teaching) in (others’) heart by presenting (two)

examples.

āarātṁ Ṁīú ākcḍcdtiī, || 3% 1|

yathā niṣiddhabhũtādikarmā mantraṁ smaran svayam |
aviṣṭe ‘pi kvacin naiti lopaṁ kartṛtvavarjanāt || 34 ||
yathā ca vãcayañ śāstraṁ samayī śūnyaveśmani |
na lupyate tadantaḥsthaprāṇivargopakārataḥ | 35 ||
(Reciting this Vidyā is as happens in the case of an exorcist) who is
prohibited from performing exorcisms and the like. Recollecting an
(exorcistic) Mantra, (he happens to utter it) to himself somewhere, where a

person who is possessed (happens to be) present, (and hearing it is thereby

liberated). (By doing this, the exorcist) does not transgress, because he does

not (consider himself) to be the agent (of the exorcism). Or else, (to cite
another example), it is like a regular initiate (samayin) who recites a

scripture (aloud) in a house (he believes to be) empty, does not transgress,

because (on the contrary) he benefits the living beings who (happen to be
there) in it. (34-35)

(An individual may be) ‘prohibited’ (from performing exorcisms by
means of Mantras). As is said: ‘one should not utter a Mantra (in front of
others,) because there is no (authority or) obligation (for him) to do so.” The
meaning is that there is no such presumption (abhimāna) here (in this case on

his part of the sort that) “I am doing (this) in this way.” By saying (that the

house is) ‘empty, his intention here is (to state) that there are no people. (He)
‘benefits’ (living beings who happen to be there,) because sin is destroyed just
by hearing the scriptures. This is the sense. That is said (in the following
passage):
‘One who kills cows, destroys what has been done (for him), kills a

Brahmin, sleeps with his teacher’s wife, betrays those who take refuge in him,

and (so too) one who betrays the trust of a friend, one who is wicked, one who

Itis by virtue of the Brahmavidyā’s nature itself that it bestows to the dying person the highest

state ofa regular initiate, that is, the condition of being a part of Rudra (rudrāṁśa). No additional

rites or mantras are required, or even the presence of the teacher. It may be done by any initiate

because the utterance of the Vidyā is not like imparting a mantra in the course of initiation, which

can only be done by a qualified teacher. The initiate is simply recitg it,as he would any passage
from the scriptures, and which he is qualified to do.

TANTRĀLOKA

sins regularly, one who murders (his) mother, and so too one who murders his

father – (all of them and those like them) are freed from (their) sins by listening
to (scripture) with deep feeling (bhāvena).”

He (now) connects this to the main point.

gam aaṁ fkraēũsã
a: |1 28 1
tathā svayaṁ paṭhann eṣa vidyāṁ vastuṣvabhāvataḥ |
tasmin mukte na lupyeta yan no kiñcit karo ‘tra saḥ || 36 ||
In the same way, he who recites this Vidyā to himself (in front of a
dying person who), as he does so, is liberated, would not be transgressing,
for such is the nature of things (vastusvabhāva) (that it should happen); he

does nothing at all. (36)

Surely (one may ask), agreed that there is thus no defect (in doing this).
However, there is a rule that ‘one should not recite the liturgy of the scriptures
before those who have not been initiated.’" So how is it that by reciting this
Vidyā in front of (a dying person, the one who does s0) does not transgress?

nanu cādīkṣitāgre sa noccarec chāstrapaddhatim |
Surely (one may object that it is said that) ‘one should not recite the
scriptures before one who is not initiated’. (37ab) (37cd)
Well then, in that case, there would never be an occasion to recite
(scripture), for walls and the like are also not initiated, and how would they not

be nearby? Thus he says:

|1

Trda- 3: #īgñaīṜ
am.: |
q Taīm

1Il

hanta kuḍyāgrato ʻpy asya niṣedhas tv atha kathyate || 37 ||
paryudāsena yaḥ śrotum avadhārayituṁ kṣamaḥ |
sa evātra niṣiddho no kuḍyakīṭapatatriṇaḥ || 38 II

Read yan no for yato.

AIso quoted above ad 4/70cd-72ab, but there the reading is: adīkṣiānāṁ purato noccarec
chivasaṁhitām 1 one should not recite Śiva’s scripture in front of those who have not been
initiated.”
However, MSs Kh, Ch, Ñ, and T: read chāstrapaddáhatim – for -chivasaṁhitām as here.

CHAPTER NINETEEN

Well then, (if that is so,) it is prohibited (to recite scripture) in front
of a wall! Now it is said that by excluding (the irrelevant) (paryudāsa), (it is
clear) that only one who is capable of hearing and understanding (but is not
initiated) is prohibited here (in this case from listening to the recitation of

scripture), not (indeed) walls, moths and birds! (37cd-38) (38-39ab)

Now this is (what is being) stated: the prohibition here (in this case) is
meant (to apply to those) who, like initiates, are capable of hearing etc., not
indeed to the dull (and foolish), who are like walls. Thus he says, ‘now it is

saidʼ etc.
If that is so, how can reciting (the Vidyā) in front of one who is in a

coma (mumārṣa) and (so is practically) insentient like a wall, be an occasion for

one (who does s0) to have transgressed the rules? He says this:

tarhi pāṣāṇatulyo ‘sau vilīnendriyavṛttikaḥ |
tasyāgre paṭhatas tasya niṣedhollaṅghanā katham || 39 ||
How then can one transgress (the rules) by reciting (the Vidyā) in

front of (a dying man,) whose senses have ceased to function and is

(unconscious) like a stone? (39) (39cd-40ab)

Surely (one may ask), what use is it to recite (the Brahmavidyā) to (one
who is dying) and is (as unconscious) as stone? (To this we reply that,) that is
not so. Thus he says:
The Liberating Awakening of the Dying Man

STaJāTTTAṬĀTTZJTAT
TIJHTJĪ |I|/%0 |1
īzzṝ fṁ fnraēgātx srtēaitzarq |

JRGEĀĪT ṬGG: II 2 1|1

sa tu vaṣṭusvabhāvena galitākṣo ‘pi budhyate |
akṣānapekṣayaivāntaś cicchaktyā svaprakāśayā || 40 ||
prāg dehaṁ kila tityakṣur nottare cādhitaṣṭhivān |
madhye prabodhakabalāt pratibudhyeta pudgalaḥ || 41 II
Now, because such is the nature of things (vastusvabhāva), even
though (the dying man’s) senses (no longer) function, he awakens by the
inner power of consciousness (cicchakti), which is self-luminous and
independent of the senses. The soul (of the dying person), wishing to
abandon the previous body (but) not (yet) sustained within a subsequent

TANTRĀLOKA

one, is awakened in between by the strength of the one who awakens him

(prabodhakabalāt). (40-41) (40cd-42ab)

Surely (one may ask), who is the one who awakens him here, by whose

strength (the dying man) attains this inner awakening? With this doubt in mind,
he says:

ṃCC IĀṢPAHĒLKIIRIRvI

GTTFTHTSTcĪRT-JTTJITGTTĀ: |I/ 53 1I
mantrāḥ śabdamayāḥ śuddhavimarśātmatayā svayam |
arthātmanā cāvabhāntas tadarthapratibodhakāḥ || 42 1I
tenāsya galitākṣasya prabodho jāyate svayam |

svacitsamānajātīyamantrāmarśanasaṅnidheḥ || 43 ||

Mantras consist of words (and sounds) (śabda), which, because their
nature is pure reflective awareness, are manifest by themselves
(spontaneously) as the reality they denote (artha), and awaken to that

reality.™ Thus, the awakening (of the dying man) whose senses have ceased

(to function) takes place by itself (spontaneously), due to the presence of the
reflective awareness of the Mantra (mantrāmarśana), which is of the same
kind as his own consciousness. (42-43) (42cd-44ab)
“The awakening takes place by itself (spontaneously)ʼ. As he will

say:

‘Hearing it, even if he is helplessly subject to great delusion, he
gradually awakens and becomes spontaneously, and with great force, attentive

to the one who is uttering (it).”

He establishes (that this is so) by means of an example.

yathā hy alpajavo vāyuḥ sajātīyavimiśritaḥ |
javī tathātmā saṁsuptāmarśo ‘py evaṁ prabudhyate || 44 ||

Read nottare for nottaraṅh.

Another translation could be: ‘(Mantras) manifesting themselves as meaning, awaken (the idea
of that) meaning’. See above, 16/250-295ab.
Below, 30/65cd-66ab.

CHAPTER NINETEEN
Just as a light breeze becomes (a strong) fast (wind) when combined

with (other wind) which is of the same kind as itself, so is it with the Self (of

the dying man). Even though its reflective awareness is in deep sleep
(saṅīsuptāmarśaḥ), it awakens in this way (when combined with the
reflective awareness of Mantra). (44) (44cd-45ab)

(Wind which is) ‘of the same kind as itself’, that is, one produced, for
example, by a fan. (The Self awakens) ‘in this way’, that is, by the reflective
awareness of Mantra and the like.
(Someone may object that,) well then, reciting Mantra in this way in
front of one who is not initiated clearly entails a transgression of the Rule. With
this doubt in mind, he says:

Jds:

prabuddhaḥ sa ca sañjāto na cādīkṣita ucyate |
dīkṣā hi nāma saṁskāro na tv anyat so ‘sti cāsya hi lI 45 ||
Once he has awakened, he is not said to be uninitiated. Initiation is

(essentially) nothing but (an empowering and purifying) sacrament
(saṁskāra), and he does indeed possess it. (45) (45cd-46ab)
Initiation is (the empowering and purifying) sacrament of Mantra, and
(the dying man) does (in this way come to) have that,® because (his) awakening
in any other way is not logically possible, and so (we must accept that it) is
accomplished spontaneously by the reflective awareness of Mantra and the like.
So, what purpose of his is (served by) transgressing the Rule?
In the same way, if someone else is helped by the recitation of the
scriptures and the like, no defect at all accrues to him that arises from
transgressing the Rule. Thus, he says:

ata eva nijaṁ śāstraṁ patṭhati kvāpi sāmaye |

tac chrutvā ko ʻpi dhanyaś cen mucyate nāsya sā kṣatiḥ l| 46 |I
Thus, if (some) fortunate man is liberated (on his death bed),

having heard his own (appropriate) (nija) scripture recited somewhere by
(even) a common initiate, he is not (guilty of) that defect (kṣati). (46) (46cd47ab)

Read sa ca for saca.

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely, (one may object that) in this way the words (of the scriptures)

would have no field (of application). With this doubt in mind, he says:

gTHTHTTRTTI

Śśāstranindāṁ maiṣa kārṣīd dvayoḥ pātityadāyinīm |
ity evaṁ param etan nādīkṣitāgre paṭhed iti || 47 I|
But (someone may say) that the aim of saying that one should not
recite (the scriptures) in front of the uninitiated is so that the scriptures
may not be criticized (and profaned), which causes both to fall. (47) (47cd48ab)
And in order to awaken (someone) else here (in this case) who is in
doubt (about whether this procedure has been successful) by entering into his
own coverings (kancuka), he says:

azṝḷ ā] āTTĪ IS3 @I aT T-̄IĀĪTT,|

yathā ca samayṝ kāṣṭhe loṣṭe vā mantrayojanām |
kurvaṁs tasmiṁś calaty eti na lopaṁ tadvad atra hi l| 48 II
Just as a regular initiate applying Mantras causes (a piece of) wood
or (clod of) earth to move, and does not thereby transgress (any rule), such
is the case here also. (48) (48cd-49ab)

‘(A piece of) wood’ such as one used for fuel and ‘(a clod of) earth’
that can be used, for example, (to make) an earthen Liṅga. ‘The case hereʼ is a
dying man.
He states the reason (for this) here itself:

YGTad TJTT TṬ̄H-ū̄ 7

aī: || 8 1|

yato ‘sya pratyayaprāptiprepsoḥ samayinas tathā |

pravṛttasya svabhāvena tasmin mukte na vai kṣatiḥ || 49 ||

(The dying man) is liberated (spontaneously) by his own nature

(svabhāvena). The initiate acts (in this way) because he wishes to get a sign
confirming (the power of Mantra) (pratyaya), there is no harm in that. (49)
(49cd-50ab)
L Cf. above 19/36 and 40.

CHAPTER NINETEEN

(The initiate desires) a sign confirming the unfolding (of the power) of
his Mantra.
Surely, (agreed that) the teacher has no blame, insofar as he is helping
another person. By extension, the same has also been said of the regular initiate
(samayin) and spiritual son (putraka). Then what about the adept (sādhaka) here
(in this case)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

arēkq ũai āīa %ō frāfīa-īoīrq|

sādhakas tu sadā sādhye phale niyatiyantraṇāt |
makṣikāśrutamantro ‘pi prāyaścittaucitīṁ caret || 5O lI
As the (worldly) fruit which is the goal the adept (sādhaka) (aspires
to attain) (sādhya) is always under the sway of the law of Karma (niyati),
even if (his own) mantra is heard by a fly, he must perform the appropriate
rites of atonement. (50) (Ś0cd-51ab)
‘The appropriate (rites of atonement)” may be (severe to varying
degrees,) intense or middling etc., (which depends on the degree in which
misconduct is inappropriate and in what way, as determined by the regulations

of the scriptures). Thus, (for example, scripture) declares that ‘one should not

show one’s own Mantra or rosary even to the teacher.’ (Although this injunction
may not seem to be reasonable, those who do not obey it are liable to observe
the penance scripture deems appropriate).
Having explained that in this way, by the way, he (now returns to) talk
about the main point.
The Dying Man Can Impart the Initiation to Himself

qTaaṁfczf’

q āīags: |
itthaṁ sadyaḥ samutkrãntir yoktā tām ājñayā guroḥ |

samayyādir api proktakāle proktārthasiddhaye || 51 |I
svayaṁ kuryāt samabhyastaprāṇacāragamāgamaḥ |
akṛtādhikṛtir vāpi guruḥ samayaśuddhaye || 52 ||
adhaṣtanapadāvastho na tu jñāneddhacetanaḥ |

In this way, a regular or other (initiate) may, with the consent of
(his) teacher, perform the aforementioned (initiation that brings about) the

TANTRĀLOKA

immediate exit (from the body) by himself, at the aforementioned time, in

order to accomplish the aforementioned purpose. The teacher who is well

practiced in the coming and going of the movement of the vital breath
(but), in order to purify (and eliminate the constraints imposed by) the
Rule, has not done what he is authorized to do (and is his duty), is on an

inferior level. Not so one whose consciousness is burning with knowledge.
(51-53ab) (S1cd-53)

The teacher (who) ‘has not done’ (what he is authorized to do (and
should do) is at fault). As is said:

‘If (the teacher) does not do what he is authorized to do (and should do)
(adhikāra), he will become a Vidyeśa when the body is destroyed.’
(The teacher whose consciousness is) ‘burning with knowledge’ is one
who is fully established in (the realization of) supreme nonduality. According to
the teaching (naya) ‘Abandon nothing! Take up nothing! (Established in
yourself just as you are, take rest!),® he is not in the field (of application of)
injunctions and prohibitions, and so what occasion could there be for (his)
transgressing the Rule? This is the intended sense.
Surely, (one may object:) There is no disagreement that it is the
teachers job to (perform) the initiation which (brings about the dying man’s)
immediate exit (from the body). But what is the authority (that allows that) this

be done by oneself (alone)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

itīyaṁ sadya utkrāntiḥ sūcitā mālinīmate || 53 |I
svayaṁ vā guruṇā vātha kāryatvena maheśinā |
The Great Lord has alluded (ṣūcitā) in the Mālinīmata that this
(initiation, which brings about) an immediate exit (from the body), can be
performed (equally well) by oneself (alone), or by a teacher. (53cd-54ab)

(Ṅ4)

He quotes that:

sarvaṁ bhogaṁ virūpaṁ tu matvã dehaṁ tyajed yadi l| 54 II
tadā tena krameṇāśu yojitaḥ samayī śivaḥ |

The behaviour of a teacher who is a jāānin is not subject to any prohibition or injunction. See
below, 23/26cd-28, 97-101ab.
“ Anuttarāṣṭakastotra 2c. The full verse is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/332 (331). 2 is also quoted
above ad 5/74cd-75ab (J4), and the first inc ad 4/92-94.
One would suppose that the person who can do this for himself
by himselfis an initiate.

CHAPTER NINETEEN
‘If (the common) regular initiate abandons the body, realising that

all worldly experience (bhoga) is ugly (and defective), he is rapidly
conjoined by this process (krama) (to the supreme reality, and so becomes)

Śiva.’ (Sdcd-55ab) (55)

(Such a one) ‘abandons’ (the body) by himself, and is

‘conjoined’ by

the teacher (to the supreme reality). As is said there (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘Or else, considering everything or worldly experience to be ugly (and
defective), abandoning his body, he attains the eternal plane (of being).
‘O Great Goddess, conjoined to the supreme plane by means of this
gradual union (kramayoga), even a (common) regular initiate (samayin) attains
the fruit which is said to be that of (this) initiation.’

He concludes the subject of (this) chapter with the first half (of a verse

in which he says):

ukteyaṁ sadya utkrāntir yā gopyā prāṇavad budhaiḥ || 55 ||
(Thus) this (initiation) has been taught (that bestows) immediate
exit (from the body), and the wise should protect (it) like (their very) life.

(55) (56)

This is the auspicious end.
‘Greedy to acquire the great vitality of the Mantra that bestows Nirvāṇa
immediately, Jayaratha has explained this, the nineteenth chapter.”
This is the nineteenth chapter of the venerable Tantrāloka, called the
Exposition of the Immediate Exit (from the Body) (sadya-utkrānti).

19/53cd-š4ab (54) is a paraphrase of two verses in the MV quoted by Jayaratha in the
commentary. The first line (i.e. 54cd) is based on MV 17/25. The second line is based on another

verse which Jayaratha tells us is, like the first, drawn from there, but is not found in the printed
edition of the MV. It is paraphrased above as 19/14, see note there.

MV 17/25ab quoted as TĀ 14/41cd.

“MV 17/25.
Ś This verse, which appears to be drawn from the MV, is paraphrased above as 19/14, see note
there.

CHAPTER TWENTY
The Initiation Validated by the Scales

The Pervasive Lord who bestows strength and inspires confidence in the
ignorant is victorious. By Him the body which is the Void in the centre is made
to pour forth perpetually externally as it does at the beginning and the end.
Now, in order to teach the initiation that bears an (outer) sign of (its)
accomplishment (pratyaya), he says, with the second half (of the verse begun at
the end of the previous chapter):

CĒ GE'.EIEEi: IEI
atha dīkṣāṁ bruve mūḍhajanāśvāsapradāyinīm || 1 I|
Now I will talk about the initiation that inspires faith in the

ignorant. (I)

' The Buddhist Dharmakīrti (c. 600-660) refers to two initiations that are said to exhibit outer

signs of having been successfully accomplished. It appears that they are commonly treated
together, as happens in this chapter of the Tantrāloka and in the passages cited below. In one of
theṣe initiations, a seed burns by spontaneous combustion through the application of mantras and
is thereby sterilized. Abhinava outlines a procedure for this kind of initiation below in 20/2-7.
Dharmakīrti refutes the possibility and efficacity of such an initiation in his Pramāṇavārtika

(1/258cd-259ab), where he says:

nālaṁ bījādisaṁsiddhau vidhiḥ puṁsām ajanmane |
tailābhyaṅgāgnidāhādāv api maktúprasaṅgataḥ l 258cd-259ab
‘the initiatory rite that is proved to be successul by the evidence of a (burt) sced and
the like is not enough to eliminate rebitth, because that would entail the absurd consequence that
even the application of oils or bums etc. could liberate from transmigration.’
The other initiation that exhibits signs of being successful is the ‘scales initiation’, to
which the rest of this chapter is dedicated. Sanderson (2001: p. 11 n 7) explains that Dharmakīrti
in his Pramāṇavārtika attacks the claim that the efficacity of initiation (and therefore the validity
of the scriptures that teach it) is proved by a variety of the ritual called tulādīkṣā ʻscales-initiation’

in which the initiand is weighed before and after the performance. Those present, we are asked to

believe, see that the person’s weight is greater before than after, and are thereby made to

understand that the initiation has succeeded in destroying the Impurity (malah) that impedes the

soul’s omniscience and omnipotence, that being of the nature of a material substance (dravyam)

albeit imperceptible. Now, this variety of initiation is Śaiva. It is cited by the Saiddhāntika
Sadyojyotis in Tattvasaṁṅgraha 36.

We turn to the Tattvasaṁgraha with commentary (‘īkā) by Aghoraśivācārya to see what
it has to say. There we read:

nanu dīkṣayā bandhanivr̥úr āīmano jātei katam avagamyate ? ata āhaŚuddhiṁ vrajati tuāyāṁ dīkṣāto brahmahatyato mukhyāt |

pratyayato jānīyād bandhanavigamaṁḥ viṣakṣayavat || 36 |
iha yad dīkṣāyāṁ mahāpātakayogino ‘py apetapātakatvaṁ dṛṣṭam | tathāhi śrīmatkālottarādyuktavan mantralabdhaghaṭāropaṇena tasya gauravaṁ parīkṣya paścād udghātamantroccāraṇādi-

CHAPTER TWENTY

pūrvaṁ tacchuddhiṁ kr̥tvā punar ghaṭāropaṇe tasya lāghavam utpadyamānaṁ drśyate | etac
copalakṣaṇaṁ nirbījakaraṇādī

pratyayāntarāṇām | tato ʻsmāddṛśyamānāt pratyayād ahi-

tunḍikakriyayā viṣaharaṇavad dīkṣākhyayā kriyayāḥ bandhanāpagamaḥ siddha iti jātavyam |

Surely (one may ask), how can one know that one’s own fetters have ceased by (taking)
initiaton? Thus (in response to this question) he says:
“By initiation on the scales, he is purified even of such great sins as brahminicide. One

may know that his bonds have been destroyed through the evidence (of one’s senses), just as (the

validity of the Gāruḍa-tantras is proved) by the cessation of poison (brought about by their
Mantras).’ (Tattvasaṅgraha 36) (Sanderson’s translation)

(Aghoraśiva’s commentary): One observes here (in this world) that the sin of one who
has accrued great sin is removed in the course of initiation. The weight (of a sealed) jar obtained
with mantras such as those taught in the venerable Kālottara etc. is examined by placing (it on the

scales). Then, after having purified it by firt utterng etc. the mantras used to open it, one
observes, by placing the jar again (on the scales), (the amount) that its weight has been reduced.
Moreover, this is a typical example (upalaksaṇa) of other validatory signs (that an initiaton has
been effective). Thus, (similarly), just as by the rite of the ‘snake in (Gāruḍa’s)

beak” (ahituṇḍikā)

that removes poison (and so is known to be effective), because there is a validatory sign (to that

effect) that we observe, one should know (by a decrease in his weight) that the removal (of the
disciple’s) fetters has been achieved by the rite called initiation.’ (my translation)

Dharmakiīrti for his pat simply denies that such a sign is authentic, saying:
“The fact that a person that was heavy (before initiation) and then becomes less so, does

not imply that he has shed his sins, just a little weight. Sin is not heavy because it is not
corporeal.”

(Pramāṇavārtika 1/259cd-260ab)

Kṣemarāja refutes Dharmakīrti’s objection in the course of a long presentation of the
nature of initāation in SVTu ad 5/88. (For an Italian translaton and study, see Sironi, A. (1987: 89113)). Quoting this verse, Kṣemarāja goes on to rcfute Dharmakīrti, as follows.
vad uktaṁ pāpasya gurutvābhāvāt pratyayavatī tulādīkṣā nopapadyate iti; tad aviditābhi-

prāyatayā na samyak, yatas tamomayapāpāvṛtihetukaṁ dehe gurutvaṁ tulādīkṣayā ghataŚuddhivat kāraṇanivṛttidvāreṇa nivartyate | tathā ca smṛtikāraḥ ---adharmāt tamaso dehe gurutvaṁ yat kṣayo ʻsya tu |

dharmato laghutoipādād ghaṭataḥ sampratīyate || iti |

(Dharmakīrti) has said that sin has no weight, and so the scale initation that (is said to)
possess validating signs is not logically possible. This is not correct, for he has not understood
what is intended. This is because the cause of the (obscuring) covering of sin, which is made of
tamas, does have weight within the body. The scale initiation brings it to an cnd by the cessation
of (its) cause, just as a jar is cleaned (by removing the dirt from it. The same is (written) by a
Smarta author:
‘The darkness in the body due to Adharma has weight. Its cessation by (the practice of)
Dharma makes it lighter, and so it is perceived in the case of a jar (into which the Adharma has
been projccted and becomes lighter by its purification).
The two signs of the efficacity of mantras are treatcd together in Kṣemarāja's
commentary on SVT 4/150-152:

phalaṁ tu vividhākāraṁ niṣpādyeta sudīkṣayā |
acintyā mantraśaktir vai parameśamukhodbhavā |

TANTRĀLOKA

(By) ‘faith’ is meant conviction (pratyaya).

He says that:

The Inner Purification (antahsaṁskāra)

The Burning Seed and the Burning Away of the Three Impurities

trikoṇe vahniṣadane vahnivarṇojjvale ‘bhitaḥ |

vāyavyapuranirdhūte kare savye sujājvale || 2 |I
kriyākāle prayoktavyā guruṇā bhaktipūrvikā |ḷ
viṣāṇām iva pāśānāṁ mantraiḥ kavalanaṁ dhruvam |

karoti mantratattvajñaḥ śivāveśī guruḥ kṣaṇāt |I

‘In this way, the teacher, in accord with (his) disciples’ basic states (bhāva), should
produce fruit of many forms by means of a good (well performed and apropriate) initation. (For)
the power of mantra bom from the Supreme Lord’s mouth is beyond concepton. The teacher
should apply (that power of mantra) which is heralded by the devotion (that is penetration into it)
when (he performs) the ṅite (kriyā) (of initation and the like). A teacher possessed by Śiva who
knows the true nature of mantra certainly gulps down (and remedies) by means of mantras (his
disciples’) fetters as if they were poisons.' (SVT 4/150-152)
In his commentary, Kṣemarāja quotes the following verses from an unnamed source:

tena tasyāṁ doṣavatyāmapi dīkṣā na niṣphalā | (also quoted above ad 1/24)

sutīvraśaktipātāś ca (> -tena) doṣabījavinākṛtāḥ |

api bhānti tulādīkṣāghaṭaśuddhivad īkṣyate |I
pāpasya gurutā no ced ghaṭaśuddhau bravīṣi kim |
tanmantraśaktyā dīkṣāṇāṁ citratvaṁ nāsamañjasam ||
lipyakṣare krte yadvat tāḍanādi nṛṇāṁ bhavet |

mantraśaktyā tathā sūtre pāśānāṁ chedanaṁ sphuṭam ||

‘In the course of initiaton, (only) the fetters of the soul should be purfied, not those
present in the intellect. Thus, even when it is defective, the initiaton is not fruitless. (The fetters
from which) the seeds of defects have been rmmoved by a good, intense descent of the power (of
grac), are apparent. It is visible, lie the puṅfication of the jar (into which the disciple’s sin had
been placed in the course of) the scalc’s initation.
If ṣin had no weight, what do you say (has happened when) a jar that has been purified
(of the sin deposited in it is perceived to weigh less)? t is not unreasonable that initiatons be
various by virtue of that (miraculous) power of mantra Just as when a leter has been fashioned
(on a sacrficial vessel or the like), people (who misbehave ar chastiscd) by being beaten etc. by
the power of mantra, in the same way, the fetters are severed (of thosc who are being initiated) by
cuttng the thread (onto which they have been projected).’

CHAPTER TWENTY

bījaṁ kiñcid grhītvaitat tathaiva hṛdayāntare |
kare ca dahyamānaṁ sac cintayet tajjapaikayuk || 3 ||
vahnidīpitaphaṭkāradhoraṇīdāhapīḍitam |
bījaṁ nirbījatām eti svasūtikaraṇākṣamam || 4 II

(The teacher who is) one-pointedly engaged in repeating Mantra,
(should imagine that on the palm of his) right hand is an intensely flaming

triangle, which is the abode of Fire (R), to be burning all around with the

phonemes of Fire (R), fanned by the abode of the Wind (Y). Taking hold of
some seed, he should imagine that it is burning (there in his) hand and

within (his) heart. The seed, burning with the fire of an uninterrupted
stream (dhoraṇī) of PHAṬs and energized by the Fire (of the letter R),
becomes sterile and incapable of germination. (2-4)

(It is called) ‘the abode of Fireʼ, that is to say, it is an upward facing
(triangle). ‘The phoneme of Fire’ is the letter R. ‘The abode of the Windʼ is a
hexagon’ which is marked by (six) Ys. (He may hold) ‘any seed’, such as (a
grain of) wheat. (The teacher is) ‘one-pointedly engaged in repeating
Mantra’. The meaning is that he is intent on repeating the syllable PHATṬ

energized with the letter R (i.e. PHRAT).

He explains the state (of a seed that is) incapable of germination.

t̄+d Jaā

TGHṬATGTHĪĪTI TT-TT-ĪTRTTJTT || 4, 1I

fēavīq |
sJHr-TTG=T
JTRJTTI] AJGTAT |I i |1

The syltable PHAT energized by R, the phoneme of fir.
In other words, the teacher should repeat th syllable PHRAT in an unbroken stram (dhoraṇī).
In his Hindi commentary on TĀ 6/287, Paramhaṁsa Mishra suggests another possible meaning of
the word ‘dhoraṇī’. According to him, it is a technique used to warm oneselfin winter by placing
the thumb warmed on a fire on the chest, wher the heart is located.
Paramhaṁsṣa Mishra underṣtands this Triaṇgle to represent the sacrficial hearth. Accordingly, he
quotes this verse in his Hindi translation of this passage without, however, identifying its source:
antarnirantaranirandhanaṃ edhamāne
kasyāṁścid adbhutamarīcivikāsavedyām |

māyāndhakāraparipanthini saṅvidagnau

viśvaṁ juhomi vasudhādiśivāvasānam ||

‘Ṭ offer as oblation the universe beginning with Earth and ending with Śiva into the fire
of consciousness that opposes the darkness of Māyā, fuelled inwardly, without interruption, break
or fuel in some (inscrutable) sacrificial heath (fashioned from) the expansion of th astonishing
rays (of the senscs).’
Read saḍāram for ṣaḍaśram. The Yantra appears to to be an upward facing trangle with R (or
RAṀ?) on each corner in the centre of a hexagon with Y (or YAṀ?)in cach comer of tht.

TANTRĀLOKA

taptaṁ naitat prarohāya tenaiva pratyayena tu |
malamāyākhyakarmāṇi mantradhyānakriyābalāt | 5 |I
dagdhāni na ṣvakāryāya nirbījapratyayaṁ tv imam |
sa śrīmān suprasanno me śambhunātho nyarūpayat l 6 ||
bījasyāpy atra kāryā ca yojanā kr̥payā guroḥ |
yato dīkṣā sudīptatvāt sthāvarāṇy api mocayet I|I 7 II
(The seed) has been heated (in this way) so that it may not

germinate. By this same validating sign (pratyaya), (the three Impurities,

namely) Innate, the one called Māyā, and Karma, are burnt away by the
power (bala) of mantra, visualization (dhyāna) and ritual action, so that
they may not (be capable of producing) their own effect. This sign
(pratyaya), namely, the sterilization of the seed, was described to me by the
venerable Śambhunātha, who was well pleased. The teacher may, out of
compassion, also conjoin the seed (to Śiva), for (this) initiation is so full of
fervour (sudīpta) that it can liberate even plants. (5-7)
“Their own effect’ is to bind those who are to be bound. (The initiation
is) “full of fervour (sudipta)’. If it were devoid of fervour, it would not be
capable of conjoining even animals, what to say of plants! This is the intended
sense. That is said (in the scriptures where we read):
“(This initiation liberates) bears (rkṣa), birds (pakṣin), hyenas, and the
like. It can even liberate plants.’
Thus, he says:

The Examination (of the Atṭainment) of Competence
(adhikāraparīkṣā)
The Initiation that Bears a Sign of Accomplishment

araṁ: fk-z̃ taīṟ a geazycaāāīfērāī 11 3 1|
fīT-toī
ḍṭaīaṁ cqaīzq ī T |
yo gurur japahomārcādhyānasiddhatvam ātmani |

jñātvā dīkṣāṁ caret tasya dīkṣā sapratyayā smṛtā || 8 I|
avadhūte nirācāre tattvajñe na tv ayaṁ vidhiḥ |
sācāraiḥ kriyate dīkṣā yā dṛṣṭapratyayānvitā || 9 |
nirācāreṇa dīkṣāyāṁ pratyayas tu na gadyate |

Śambhunātha is the source of the practice taught in 20/2-4. 20/5-7 is Abhinava’s explanation of
how and why burning up the disciple’s impurities liberates him.
” The second half of this line is TĀ 20/7d. Jayaratha has found the source to which Abhinava

refers. Unfortunately, he does not name it.

CHAPTER TWENTY
The initiation a teacher imparts who has known within himself that

(his) repetition of Mantra, oblation and worship have been accomplished

successfully is said to be one that bears an (outer) validating sign of (its)
accomplishment (pratyaya). This procedure is not for the renouncer
(avadhūta), who has transcended practice (nirācāra) and knows the true
nature (of things) (attvajñā). The initiation that bears a visible sign (of its

accomplishment) should be imparted by (teachers) who practice outer
ritual (sācāra). It is said that there is no (such outer) sign when an initiation
is performed by (a teacher) who has transcended practice (nirācāra). (8-

10ab)

‘This procedure’ is the initiation that bears an (outer) sign of (its)

accomplishment (pratyaya). ʻ(Teachers) who practice outer ritual (sācāra)

are those for whom ritual is fundamental. ‘A visible sign (of its
accomplishment)ʼ, such as the sterilization of a seed. “(A teacher) who has
transcended practice (nirācāra)’ is one who has knowledge (jnānin).

He establishes this by (both) reason and scripture.

3ī TaTATā āTTĪ TGT-TGTT II Q° 1II

jñānaṁ svapratyayaṁ yasmān na phalāntaram arhati ll 10 ||
dhyānādi tatphalāt sādhyam iti siddhāmatoditam |
Knowledge is self-validating and so does not require another
(ulterior) result (to establish its validity). It is said in the Siddhāmata (that,
on the contrary, the efficacity of) visualization (dhyāna) and the like can

(only) be established by its fruit. (10cd-11ab)

(Consciousness) ‘does not require another (ulterior) result’ (to prove
that it exists) because ‘it is (itself) its own sign (confirming its existence). The
‘resultʼ is, for example, the sterilization of a seed.

Having talked in this way about the examination of the one who is

qualified (to impart this initiation), he (goes on to) talk about the procedure of

the scales.

See above, 13/147-148. The avadhūta is a wandering ascetic with no fixed abode who engages in

Kaula practice. He is an important figure in the Brahmayāmala. One who knows the true nature of
s is solely on the path of knowledge; he has no interest in either ritual or Yoga. One could
s read the three separately. Then the meaning would be that this initiation is not meant for
1) a Kāpālika renouncer – avadhūta, 2) one who has transcended practice (nirācāra), and 3) one

who knows the true nature of things.

The first line is Abhinava’s reasoning, and the second is drawn from the SYM.

Read tatphalāt for tu phalāt.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Procedure Concerning the Scales (tulāvidhi)
The Initiation in Which the Purification of Impurity
is Apparent by a Loss of Weight

tulāśuddhiparīkṣāṁ vā kuryāt pratyayayoginīm || 1 1 II
yathā śrītantrasadbhāve kathitā parameśinā |
Or else (the teacher may impart the initiation) the Supreme Lord

has taught in the Tantrasadbhāva that examines (the disciple’s degree of)
" Abhinava tells us in Chapter Thirty that he leamt the mantras for this procedure taught in the

Tantrasadbhāva from his Trika teacher Śambhunātha.

“I have (thus) revealed in due order (the mantras required for the) sacrifice' of the
scales (to eliminate weight) and the union (with the Śākinīs given) in the Tantrasadbhāva that was

taught (to me) by Śambhunātha.’ 30/99

So again, it is quite possible that by parameṣin Abhinava means equally both Śiva and

Śambhunātha. The procedure for this rite is found in chapter nine of the Tantrasadbhāva, which

deals with various forms of initiaton. There we read:

sāṁprataṁ tu punar vakṣye tulāyā vidhim uttamam [g: ?] |

tulā paṭṭamayī
[k, kh: padṛ-] kāryā lakṣaṇaṁ taṣya kathyate || 355 1| [g: ?]
dīrghatvaṁ [k, kh: -tva] śākhayoḥ kāryaṁ [k, kh: kārya] caturhastapramāṇataḥ | [g: ?]
viṣtāre [k, kh, g: vistāra] trīi [k, kh, g: strīṇi] hastāni madhye hastadvayārddhataḥ l| 356 |
caturasrau [kh, g: -sro] samau [g: ?] kāryau [kh: kāryo; g: ?] tritoraṇasamanvitau |

madhye tu śrṛṁkhalā [g: srṁ-] kāryā [g: kārya] kaṭakatrayasaṁyutā |] 357 ||
karṇau tu sudṛḍhau kāryau sthālau sandhitasandhitau |

‘Now I will again speak of the excellent procedure of the scales. One should make a
scale made of slabs (of mctal) (parta). will tll you its characteristic fcatures. The two beams
should be made to measure four handspans. The (vrtical) extent is thrce handspans and two and a
half in the middle. (Th pans) should be made square and equal, and have three arches. One
should makc a chain in the middle with thrce connecting links (kaaka). The two hooks (karṇa)
(from which the pans hang) should be made well firm, big and their joints connected. (356-358ab)
Several meaning of the word pata are found in the dictionares. One is a ‘piece of cloth’, but this
hardly kcly. Another is ‘a slab’. The balance in this casc is fashioned from two pans or ‘slabs’
made of metal or other material.
evaṁ tataḥ prakalpyādau tulā vai [kh: caiva] maṇḍapāgrataḥ || 358 |I

adhivāsanaṁ tataḥ kr̥tvā gandhapuṣpapapavitrakaiḥ [kh: puṣpa pavi-] | [g: ?]
naivedyair bahubhir dhūpair mantranyāsaṁ [kh: -bhidhāū-] tu kārayet || 359 | [g: ?]

avitīye 'hani śiṣyaṁ ca taulyamānaṁ [kh: taulyar-] samārabhet |
samasūtraṁ tu taṁ taulyaṁ [k, kh, g: -lya] sikatāyāḥ sahaikataḥ [k, g: sahakaikataḥ] l1 360 |
samamānaṁ tato jñātvā dāpayed [k: drāva-; kh: dānayed; g: yatayed] agnipārśvataḥ |

Having in this way first fashioned the balancc in front of the awning (where the
initiation takes placc), one should then purfy it (adhivāsana) with scents, flowers and thrcads,
many (kinds of) food offerings, and inccnses. (Then) the deposition of the mantra should be
perormed. (358cd-359)

CHAPTER TWENTY

purification by (weighing him on) scales' (and so) possesses an (outer) sign
of (its) accomplishment, (11cd-12ab)

Surely, (one may ask). That has not been mentioned in our scripture.
What is the use of adding more weight (to this exposition) by (resorting to) the
procedure (prakriyā) of another scripture?' With this doubt in mind, he says:

On the second day (of the intiatory ṅites, the tcacher) should prepare the disciple who is
to be weighed. He should be weighed (sittng) erect (samasūtra) against an equal (measure of)
sand. Once known that the measure (of the weight of the two) is the same, (the disciplc) should be
placed next to the (sacrificial) fire. (360-361ab)
37a] grahaṇaṁ [kh, g: -na] śaktinā kāryaṁ [kh, g: kārya] sandhānaṁ śaktinā punaḥ l| 36 1)
94b kh] saṁśodhya kramaśaḥ [kh: -śa; g: saḥ] sarvaṁ [g: ?] adhvareṣu [g: ?] yaihākramam [ṣg:
?]I
yojayeta tato mantrī (k, kh, g: mantrīīi) sakale niṣkale ʻpi vā || 362|| [g: ?]
sarvaśudhinivrtyarthaṁ [k, kh: -śūāhi-; g: ?] bahurīāpena dāpayet |
pū̃rṇā tu pārṇatāṁ kuryād vidhir acchidraiā [k: -tāṁ; g: dratāṁ] bhave | 363 || [g: ?]
The (teacher’s) grasping (of the disciple’s vital breath) should be done with Śakti and

then again (its) conjunction by means of Śakti. Having purified everything gradually on the paths

in due order, the reciter of mantra should conjoin (the disciple) with (the deity, that may be) either
without form or with form. In order to complete the purification, (the mantra) should be placed in

many forms (hahurāūpa). The complete procedure should be completed, (so that) it may be without
defects. (361cd-363)

ārohayet tato mantrī sādhakaṁ śaktivigraham 1

uccārya śaktinā tūrnaṁ prāṇaṁ [k, kh, g: prāṇa] jīvasamāśritam || 364 1|
kaṇṭhayuktaṁ [kh: kaṇṭhe-] sabinduṁ [kh: -ndu] ca yakāreṇā pradīpitam [kh: ve-] |
bhūṣaṇair yāmakarṇasya bhūṣitaṁ tu yathepsayā l 365 || [g: ?]
laghutvaṁ bhavate devi gacchate corddhvataḥ [kh: -ta] ṣvayam | [g: ?
śuddhaḥ pāpavinirmukto [g: ? vini-] paraṁpāraṁ ca gacchati [g:
Śśuddhir evaṁ samākhyātā [k g: -ta] brahmaghnasyāpi śaṁbhunā [kh:
gāva [kh: gava; g: ?] prasyāpi ?ḷg: ?] kartavyā [g: ?] tuḻāśuddhir manī ā [k, kh, g: -śuddhimaJU 36711
evaṁ tulāviśuddhasya mokṣa [g: ?] ity abhiśabditaḥ [g: ?] |
The reciter of mantra should (then) mount the adept, whose form is made of energies

(śaktivigraha), (onto the scale). (He does this) having quickly recited the vital breath (H) along
with the individual soul (S) by means of Śakti conjoined to the throat (V) along with the Point and
energized with the letter Y (HSVYAṀ). Adorned with the ornaments of the ear of YĀMA,

according to one’s desire, O goddess, (the disciple becomes) light and rises upwards
(spontaneously) by himself. (364-366ab)

(Thus) the pure one, freed from sin, enters the lineage (of initiates). Śambhu has

explained in this way, (this method of) purification (that is effective) even for one who has

murdered a Brahmin. The wise man should perform the purification of the scales even for one
who has eaten beef. In this way it is said that one who has been purified by (the initiation of the)
scales is liberated.” (366cd-368ab)
Cf. below 20/16ab. The expression ‘tulāśuddhi’ literally means ‘purification of the scalesʼ,
which I understand to mean purification evidenced by the scales, i.e. ‘the purification of

(excessive) weight’. The disciple is too heavy because of the weight of the Impurity that the
initiation is meant to remove.

Abhinava is indicating the place in the MV where he perceives, or wishes to, an ‘allusion’ to
this procedure, which is not explicitly taught there. He has chosen one of the standard signs the
teacher observes in his disciple that initiation has taken effect. lakṣayec cihnasaṁghātam
ānandādikam ādarāt | MV 11/35ab

TANTRĀLOKA

gferāī ŪAÑTT 1|| 23 11

śrīpūrvaśāstre ‘py eṣā ca sūcitā parameśinā || 12 ||
ānanda udbhavaḥ kampo nidrā ghūrṇiś ca pañcamī |
ity evaṁ vadatā śaktitāratamyābhidhāyinā || 13 I
This same (kind of initiation) has been mentioned by the Supreme
Lord in the Śrīpūrvaśāstra (Maālinīvijayottara) also, where he speaks of the
gradation of the (descent of the) power (of grace), as indicated by (the signs
of its attainment). They are joy, an upward leap, trembling, sleep, and the

rolling of the eyes (ghūrṇi), as the fifth. (11cd-13)

Surely (one may ask) here, what serves to determine that this serves as a
reference to the initiation of the scales (tulādīkṣā)

udbhavo laghubhāvena dehagrahatirohiteḥ |

The upward leap is due to the loss of weight (of the body), because

the grip (of identification with the) body (dehagraha) has been obscured.

(14ab)

Surely (one may ask), what is meant here by the obscuration of the grip
(of identification with the) body (dehagraha)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

šaī fk mṝērī raakaa] raacagsa || g% 1|

fīīz̃ saīaī āgcaaq |

deho hi pārthivo mukhyas tadā mukhyatvam ujjhati lI 14 ||
bhāviḷāghavamantreṇa śiṣyaṁ dhyātvā samutplutam |
The body is primarily made of Earth. When (the teacher) has

visualized the disciple as having leapt up (into the air) by means of the

Mantra of lightness, which will be (taught further ahead), (the Earth)
abandons its primacy (and so the body is no longer terrestrial). (l4cd-15ab)

‘(The Earth) abandons its primacy” because all the fetters have been

destroyed. (The Mantra) ‘will be (taught further ahead)’ in chapter thirty.° As
he will say:

20/13ab is MV 11/35cd, there are no variants. 11/35cd is also quoted directly in TĀ 5/108ab
(107cd) and TĀ 20/13cd. Read with the printed edition of the MV, pañcamī
for pañcakam.
' See below, 30/93.

CHAPTER TWENTY
‘The Saviour (OM), the group (piṇḍa) (formed) with (the letters) ., M,

R, and Y, (along with vowel Ū) and salutation (NAMAH) (constitute) the four

syllabled (Mantra). By the lightness (of the one who receives it), the

purification by (the initiation of the) scales (tulāśuddhi) instils immediate
conviction (that it has been effective). This (Mantra) paralyzes the Śākinīs, it is

the vital centre (marman) (of the body), the heart, and life (itself).

(When the disciple has) ‘leapt up (into the air)’ by the subordination

of (his) false identification with (his) earthen body, he assumes the nature of the

Supreme Sky (of consciousness), due to which it attains the same (weight as a
heap of) flowers (weighed) on a scale. As is said in the venerable Tantrarāja

(i.e. the Jayadrathayāmala):

“When the disciple has been properly initiated, he is like the sky or like

Bhairava (Himself), with the fetters of transmigratory existence burnt away.

After that, he should be placed on a scale, and having removed the stone
(weights from the other pan), he should place a garland (in their place),
fashioned with twenty-seven flowers. If obscuring coverings (of his soul) have
been removed, the adept becomes equal to that (in weight).”

The mantra is therefore O ŚMRYŪṀ NAMAH.

” The marmans are vital points in the body. According to the ancient Indian surgeon Śuśruta, they

are seats of pockets of vitality (przāṇa) in the body (Thatte 1988: 12). The marmans have been
conceived as places in the body where pressure can be applied or even needles inserted for
therapeutic purposes. The Andakal therapists of South India are an example of Ayurvedic doctors
who practice this. According to Ros (1995: 12) more than 365 of these points have been found,

although some are more important than others. Generally, however, traditional Ayurveda

considers the marmans to be weak or ‘lethal’ points on the body. According to Vāgbhaṭa, there are
one hundred and seven such pressure points (sce Wujastyk 1998: 285-293). The earlier Caraka

describes a simpler scheme which only mentions the parts of the body (Wujastyk 1998: 245).
Wujastyk (1998: 244) explains: ‘The doctrine of marmans, vulnerable or lethal points on the body,
sits oddly with the rest of āyurvedic doctrine. It has no doubt been part of medical thinking for
millennia, and yet it somehow speaks of a different milieu. It seems at first arguable that the

theory of the marmans may have arisen first not in medicine, but in the context of India’s ancient
martial arts.” The reader is referred to Roçu 1981, who explores the links between the Indian
martial arts and medicine. See also Fedorova 1990 for fine, clear diagrams of the locations of the

marmans in the body.

' Below, 30/93-94ab.

Jayaratha quotes the following lines from chapter twenty of the third ṣatka of the JY

(ghoraghoratarācakre catuścatvāriṁśatidīkṣāvidhi paṭalaḥ). The readings in Jayaratha’s version

are in brackets. Note that the variants are the result of Jayaratha’s standardization of the deviant

(aiśa) Sanskrit of the original.

ākāśatulyaṁ bhavate (J: bhavati) śiṣyaṁ (J: śiṣyaḥ) sandīkṣitaṁ (J: -tas) -tadā |
bhairaveva (J: bhairavo vā) bhavet so vai dagdhasaṁsārahanáhanaḥ ||
paścāt tulām arpayeta aśmāny eva (J: evam) apāsya tu |
saptaviṁśatipuṣpaiś ca krtāṁ mālāṁ samarpayet l
tatsamaḥ sādhako jāyet (J: jayāt) prahīnāvaraṇo yadā |

JY 3/20/197-199ab (MS K fl. 157a MS Kh 126a MS G 198a Gh fl. 153a)

These verses are found in a section in the JY conceming ghaadiksā. t is one ofa serics
of such sectons dealing with various kinds of procedures used to impart initation (dīkṣāvidhi).
The two – ghaṭa and tulādīkṣā – are associated also in the following passage, quoted by
Kṣemarāja in SVTu ad 4/152. The first of these verses in the following citaton is quoted above in
TAv ad 1/24.

TANTRĀLOKA

tena tasyāṁ doṣavatyām api dīkṣā na niṣphalā |ḷ

sutīvraśaktipātāśca doṣabījavinākṛtāḥ |
api bhānti tulādīkṣā ghaṭaśuddhivad īkṣyate |
pāpasya gurutā no ced ghaṭaśuddhau bravīṣi kim |

‘In the course of initiaton, (only) the fetters of the soul should be purified, not thosc
present in the intellect. Thus, even when it is defective, the initiation is not fritless. And (then
there are) also those who shine who have (rcceived) a very intense descent of te power (of grace)
from whom the seed of defects has been excised. If, becaus of the weight of sin, the initiation of
the balance, which is like the cleaning of a jar, is not scen (to take place) then what will you say
conceming the cleaning of thc jar?
The following is an account of this form of initiaton found in chapter twenty of the third
saṭka of the Jayadrathāyāmala:
152b gh) ghaṭātmakām [kh: -ṭālakām] ato dīkṣāṁ śrṇu parvatanandini l 181 |
saṁpūjya parameśānīṁ vakṣyamāneṇa [kh gh: -na] krameṇa ú1
tatrāgnikarma kr̥tvā tu ghaṭaṁ samyak pratiṣṭhayet || 182 II

156b k) sārdhahastatrayaṁ daṇḍaṁ mātraṁ hastapramāṇakam |
caturhastaṁ [g: catuhastaṁ] bhavet stambhaṁ lamvayet [g: laṁbhayet] tantri hastakam || 183 11
evaṁ ghaṭaṁ pratiṣṭhãpya sudṛḍhaṁ [k; sa-] dr̥harajjubī
tatas tātra prapūjyā sā sahasrākṣaramālikā [k, kh, gh: -li

; g: -linā] || 184 I|

“Next comes the initiaton which is that of the jar. O deliht of the mountains! Listen.
Having worshipped the Supreme Goddess by means of the liturgy about to be explained, and
having performed ther the fire ṅitual, one should install a jar correctly. (I81cd-182)
(it should stand) thrce and a half handspans. The (horizontal) stick mēasures just one
handspan. The (vertical) beam (of the scale) is four handspans, and the rope should hang (from it)
for (one) handspan. Then, having thus installd thc jar fimmly with firm ropes, (the goddess)
consisting of the garland of one thousand letters should be worshipped there. (183-184)
helādolāvihāreṇa pātrayor [gh: pātrāyor] ubhayor [g: bhayo] nyaset |
madhye daṇḍakalā śārvī [g: sīrvā] śakiyāliṅganavan [k: – va; kh g: vi-; gh: vah-] nyaset | 185 11
197bg) evaṁ vinyasya saṁpājya paścāc [k: paṁścā-] chiṣyaṁ praveśayet [k -yē] |
asaṁprokṣitam evādau ghaṭapṛṣthe[k: prṣtha] samarpaye | 186 |
tāvantya |g: tāvanya] aśmāni cāryāṇi [g: -cārghāṇi] samīkṛtya tataḥ punaḥ |
avatārya prokṣayec [k, kh, g, gh: -ye] ca tāḍayen mantram uccaran [k, g, gh: -ram] | 187 I
By swinging (the horizontal stick of the scales) up and down (until they balance), (a jar)
should be deposited on both pans (pātra). The energy in the middle of the stick is (called) Śārvī. It
should be deposited (all around it) like the embrace of Śakti. (185)

After having made the depositions in this way, the disciple should be made to enter.

Unsprinkled, he should initially be placed at the back of the jar. Stones should be placed (on one

pan of the balance) in accord (with his weight) (until the two pans) have again been equalized.

Having taken (the disciple) down from the scales, he should be sprinkled (with consecrated water)
and struck whilst reciting the mantra. (186-187)

śaktimudrākalārāḍhaṁ ([k, kh, gh: -muṃḍākulā-] [k: -rūḍhaḥ; kh, g, gh: -rūḍho] ūīvranirghātayogataḥ |

dahed āmāūlataḥ ([g: vadedā-] śiṣyaṁ paṁcodghātaprayogataḥ [k: paṁcodyota-; kh g:

pañcādghāta; gh: paṁcodyāta-] || 188 II
āpyāyāropayet [k, gh: āpyāyyā-; kh: āpyāpyāro; g: āpyāpyāno] paścāt tulām [g: natvām] eva [k:

eve] narottamaḥ [g: va-] |
tatordhvaṁ [k, kh, gh: tatordha; g: tato dhatāni] hānir aśmānāṁ [g: raśmīnāṁ] jāyate nātra
saṁśayaḥ || 189 I|

Mounted on the energy of the seal of power (śaktimudrā), aplying violent blows, the
disciple should be burt from the (very) root (of his subtle body), and having nourished him by

CHAPTER TWENTY

applying five blows (of breath retention) (udghāta), the most excellent of men should after that
mount him on the scales. Subsequently, (after the disciple’s initiation, the number of) stones
undoubtedly decreases. (188-189)
avatārya punar devi tāḍanābhyukṣaṇādikam [g: tāḍayebhyukṣaṇā-] |
kr̥tvā punaḥ prakartavyaṁ tasya cidgrahaṇaṁ [g: vid-] sakrt |g: kr̥taṁ] || 190 |I

pāśāṅkuśaprayogena hṛtsaṁpuṭagataṁ kuru |

āyojya vidyāṁ [k, kh, g, gh: vidyā] kuhare punaḥ saṁropayet tulām || 191 II
tulāmānena cāsmānāṁ śataṁ śeṣaṁ bhavet tadā |

palānāṁ devadeveśi punas asmād apāharet [k: apāhaṁret; kh gh: amāheret] l 192|

pragrāhyaṁ pūrvavad devi taccaitanyaṁ ca saṁpuṭe |

tridhāmadhāmni [g: -mādhāstri] subhage saṁyojyā prerayecchanaiḥ [kh: prerayella?-] || 193 ||

125b kh) yāvacchāktaṁ [g: -cchāntaṁ] kulaṁ devi kāliyogena yojayet |
153a gh) mahāvyāptisamālambya sthitivandhena [k, kh: -naṁ; g: -va] bhairavi | 194 |

157a) kāraṇāvalir |g: kāraṇaṁvali] atyugrā [g: vatyugrā] saṁbhajyaiva gurūtamaḥ |

yojya [g: yojyaḥ] śiṣyaṁ dīkṣitaṁ ṣyād dagdhasaṁsāravandhanam || 195 ||

O goddess, having taken (the disciple) down (from the scales) and again performed (the
rites of) strking and ablution etc., (the teacher) should once again lay hold of his (disciple’s)
consciousness by applying the method of the hook of the feters and place it in the capsule of (his

own) the heart.

Having conjoined the Vidyā (to the disciple’s consciousness) in the cavity (his heart), he
should place (the disiple) again on the scales. Then, weighing (him) against the hundred stones, a
remnant remains, O mistress of the God of the gods, of (a certain number of) palas. (The disciple)
should then be removed again (from the scales) and, as before, (the teacher) should, O goddess,
lay hold of (the disciple’s) consciousness. Conjoined into the capsule (of his heart) which is, O fair
lady, the abode of the three abodes, he should then impel it slowly as much as possible and, 0
goddess, conjoin (his) soul (kula) by union with Kalī. (189cd-194ab)
O Bhairavī, taking the support of the Great Pervasion (that comes about) by securing a
stable condition, the best of teachers shatters the mass of very terrible causes (that bind the

disciple) and conjoins the disciple who has been initiated and whose worldly bonds have been
burnt away (to Śiva’s plaṅe). (194cd-195)

ākāśa tulyaṁ bhavate śiṣyaṁ sandīkṣitaṁ tadā |

198a g) bhairaveva bhavet bhavet so [k: mā; gh: sau] vai dagdhasaṁsārabandhanaḥ [k, kh, gh: -

naṁ || 196 1|

paścāt tulām arpayeta aśmānyeva apāsya tu |

saptaviṁśatipuṣpaiśca kr̥tāṁ |gh: krā] mālāṁ samarpayet [k: saṁmarpa-] |I 197 1|
tatsamaḥ sādhako jāyet prahīmāvaraṇo [kh: pratā-; g: -hīṇā-] yadā |

When the disciple has been initiated, he is lik th sky or like Bhairava (Himsēl, with
the fetters of tansmigratory existence bumt away. After that, he should be placed on a scale, and
having removed the stone (weights from the other pan), he should place a garland (in ther place),
fashioned with twenty-seven flowers. If the obscuring coverings (of his soul) have been removed.
the adept becomes equal to that (in wight). (196-197ab)
evaṁ Śśivapade [kh: padaṁ] yukto [g: yukte] mukto bhavati nānyathā || 198 II
ye saṁśayāviṣṭacittāḥ [k: -cintāḥ; kh gh: -citāḥ; g: -citā] saṁsārabhayabhīravāḥ [k: saṁsāre-,

k. kh, g, g

vaḥ] |

teṣāṁ dīkṣā ghaṭākhyā [kh: dhaṇākṣā] ca kartavyā mṛgalocane [gh: -na] | 19 |
tataḥ samāharet sarvaṁ [k: sarve] yan nyastaṁ guruṇātra tu [gh: ?] |

evaṁ rahasyam etad dhi [g: enaṁ tu] tavākhyātaṁ yathārthataḥ || 200 |I

Conjoined in this way to Śiva's plane, he is liberated, not otherwise. Those whose minds
are penetrated with doubt and are frightened because of the fear of transmigratory existence, 0
lady with gazelle’s eyes, the initiation called that of the jar should be performed for them. After
that, the teacher should withdraw all (the mantras etc.) that have been deposited. In this way, I
have told (you) the secret (of this procedure) as it truly is.’ (198cd-200)

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask), can this initiation that bears an (outer) sign of

(its) accomplishment be successfully (imparted) by just this method (prakriyā)
alone or not? With this doubt in mind, he says:

karmāṇi tatrāśeṣāṇi pūrvoktāny ācared guruhḥ || 15 ||
There

(in

that

case),

the

teacher

(purificatory) rites mentioned above. (15cd)

should

perform

all

the

The (purifying and empowering) sacrament (sarṁskāra) is mentioned

here in the enunciation, after the examination of the one who is qualified (to

impart this initiation). The procedure concerning the scales is mentioned after
that, with the intention of stating what remains (to complete) both (topics).
The (now he) concludes this (subject).

uktā seyaṁ tulāśuddhidīkṣā pratyayadāyinī|
This initiation of the purification of the scales (tulāśuddhi) (which

eliminates weight) and that instils conviction has been taught. (16ab)

This is the auspicious end.
The one called Jayaratha, whose intellect is threaded through with the
validating insight (pratyaya) consisting (of the teaching of my) venerable and
most excellent teacher, the scripture and my own Self, has commented on (its)
twentieth (chapter).
This is the twentieth chapter of the venerable Tantrāloka, called the
Exposition of the Initiation of the Scales.

Above, 1/287 ff.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
The Initiation of Those Absent (pārokṣīdīkṣā)
I praise that Lord of Strength (baleśvara) who is the lord of the strength

that destroys the perception of duality. May it deny the limited state of the Self
of the fully conditioned and (partially) unconditioned perceivers.

Now, with the second half (of the verse begun at the end of the previous

chapter), in order to talk about the rite concerning the initiation of those absent
(parokṣadīkṣā), he introduces (the next subject, saying):

Trṝftṁaaṁar
taīāṁ frtrd 1 2 1

parokṣasaṁsthitasyātha dīkṣākarma nigadyate |l 1 II

(1

Now (we will) talk about the rite of initiation of one who is absent.
‘One who is absent’ (may be so both) due (to his location in a

different) place and time.

The Procedure Concerning (Those Who are Absent,
Whether) Dead or Alive (ṅṛtajīvadvidhi)

Surely, (one may object that) this initiation is not taught in our scripture

(that is, the Mālinīvijayottara). On the contrary, the sole object (of initiation
there) is one who is present. What is said in the (following verse) and others like
it contradict (the possibility of initiating a person who is absent):
‘one who is penetrated by Rudra’s power desires to go to a true teacher

in ordḍer to atṭain worldly benefits and liberation, and is led (to him) by Śiva’s
will.”

So how is it that that (topic) has been introduced? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

a ag |

bhuktimuktiprasiddhyarthaṁ nīyate sadguruṁ prati |

ity asmin mālinīvākye pratiḥ sāṁṅmukhyavācakaḥ || 2 ||
sāṁmukhyaṁ cāsya śiṣyasya tatkṛpāspadatātmakam |
TSā p. 165: ‘Now the initiation of one who is absent (will be described). It is of two kinds, that

is, for one who is dead and one who is still alive (but not present). Thus, by ‘ime’ (kāla),
Jayaratha means ‘deat’ (kāla). A dead person is absent in the sense that he was present when
alive at a previous time.

MV 1/44 quoted above by Abhinava as TĀ 4/35 and 13/202 and by Jayaratha ad 13/248cd-249.

TANTRĀLOKA

(It is said) in the Mālinīvijayottara that (the aspirant who is

penetrated by Rudra’s power) ‘is led to a true teacher so that he can obtain
both worldly benefits and liberation’, The word ‘to’ (prati) in this sentence

denotes (the aspirant’s) ‘presence’ (and proclivity towards the teacher)
(sāṁmukhya). The ‘presence’ (and proclivity) of the disciple is essentially
that he has been made an object of (the teacher’s) compassion. (2-3ab)

The teacher is (meant) by the word ‘his’ (in the expression) ‘his
compassion’ʼ. The intended sense is that (that compassion) is the same, whether
(the disciple) is present close by (to the teacher), or not.

Surely (one may object), let it be so (as you say). (However, according

to the following line) and others, (this compassion) draws its life solely from
(the disciple’s) presence:

‘Once he has worshipped him, and because he has satisfied (him ,by
displaying the signs of his penetration,) he obtains from him Śaiva initiation’,
So how should one understand (what is said) here (in accord with this)?

With this doubt in mind, he says:

TT GTTRṬGATTIT I 3 1|
tam ārādhyeti vacanaṁ kṛpāhetūpalakṣaṇam || 3 ||

The expression ‘once he has worshipped him’ is an implied

characterization (upalakṣaṇa) of the cause of (his) compassion. (3cd)

The sense of (this expression) ‘the cause of (his) compassion’ is that,
thus, if it is absent, (this compassion) may take place by itself alone, even by
virtue of relatives (and friends) etc.

he says:

Thus, not only is that understood, but also something else. Accordingly,

TTGaT¥JIT: hĪRTTRITĪCTṬST |
r̥aTaraāṁt

tatsaṁbandhãt tataḥ kaścit tatkṣaṇād apavṛjyate |

ity asyāyam api hy artho mālinīvākyasanmaṇeḥ || 4 |I
(Now let us examine) the meaning of (this) sentence, a (veritable)
gem of truth found in the Mālinīvijaya: ‘Thus, some (fortunate one) is
liberated due to that relationship (saṁībandha) (with Śiva’s power) at that

very moment.” (4)

MV 1/44cd; see previous note. 21/2-5 is a partial quote with explanation of MV 1/43-44.
MV 1/45ab. The whole verse is quoted above in 13/203.
MV 1/43ab. Also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/43 and in 13/199cd-200. The previous verse (1/42)

says:

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
He explains the meaning of that sentence.

TṬGĀTT |I , ||

tatkṣaṇād iti nāsyāsti yiyāsādikṣaṇāntaram |
kiṁtv evam eva karuṇānighnas taṁ gurur uddharet || 5 II
(By saying) ‘at that very moment’ʼ, (he implies) that (for the
disciple,) there is no other moment (apart from the one in which he) desires
to go (to a true teacher) etc.; rather it is in this way itself (i.e. by his
spontaneous intention) that the teacher, impelled by compassion, lifts (him)
up (out of transmigratory existence) (uddharet). (5)

(The following) moments of going (to the teacher), reaching him, etc.
(are covered) by the word ‘etc.’. The sense is that it would not be possible for
one who is dead, or is in some other place, (for it to happen) in this way. ‘In
this way itself’, that is, by himself (spontaneously) (svayam), independently of
his being worshipped, etc. (The teacher is) ‘impelledʼ, that is, (he is) helpless
(paravaśa) (to do otherwise).

says:

Who are fit here (to receive this initiation)? With this doubt in mind, he
Those to Whom the Initiation that Rescues
the Dead Can be Imparted

ṬGTRĀTITĪTTATTTA TZTTq |
TāTaṬ] TJT TṬḺTRATĪṬTTJTKT I Ē. 1A
JTṬTHTTJĪĪCCTJTHTĀTTĀTTT: |

JTHĪJTHāqr̥̄] Ūīā ṭarmfd̃raā̃: I| 9 1

TT̄RI TṬGTII TTTT-TTRTTGTKI āṬ I ¢ 1

‘(t happens that) at some (undetermined) time, because an individual soul is fit (to

receive it), Śiva’s tranquil (transcendent) power (śaivī), that bestows the fruit of liberation, is
connected to it.’

The point is that it is sufficient for the disciple to wish to go to the teacher to attain liberation for

the teacher to liberate him, and he does so at the very moment that desire arises. Jayaratha points

out that that must be so, because for a person who is absent, either because he is dead or
elsewhere, there can be no further developments in subsequent moments after his intention arises

for him to do anything in time to go to the teacher and do all the rest that is required.

TANTRĀLOKA

gurusevākṣīṇatanor dīkṣām aprāpya pañcatām |
gatasyātha svayaṁ mrṛtyukṣaṇoditatathāruceḥ || 6 ||
athavādharatantrādidīkṣāsaṁskārabhāginaḥ|
prāptasāmayikasyātha parāṁ dīkṣām avindataḥ || 7 ||
dḍimbāhatasya yogeśībhakṣitasyābhicārataḥ |
mṛtasya guruṇā yantratantrādinihatasya vā || 8 II
bhraṣṭasvasamayasyātha dīkṣāṁ prāptavato ‘py alam |
(The teacher should impart the initiation, that rescues the dead

(from lower worlds) (mṛtoddhārī dīkṣā) and bestows Śiva, (to the

following)): 1) one whose body is consumed by serving the teacher (but) has
died without getting initiation; 2) one in whom has arisen such a desire (for
initiation) at the moment of death; 3) one who has (received) the purifying
(empowerment) (saṁskāra) of an i
etc; 4) one who has obtained (the initiation) of a (common) regular initiate
but no initiation beyond it; 5) one who has died in a riot; 6) one who has
been devoured by witches (yogesī); 7) one who has been killed by powerful
(guruṇā) magic or by means of magic diagrams and rites (yantratantra) or

the like, or (finally), 8) (an initiate) who although he has received a
complete (alam) initiation has fallen from (the observance of) his Rule. (69ab)

‘One whose body is consumed’ is one who has served the teacher for a
very long time. This is the meaning. That is said in the following (passage) that
begins as follows.
”“He has not received the supreme initiation, even though (he has made
a great) effort to be devoted to (his) teacher. He is impeded by death (kāla),’ so
how can he attain liberation? What is the use of his useless affliction,
undertaken for the sake of liberation? Is there some rite (karman) that (can
serve) him as a means to liberation?'' O Skanda, even if he is dead, there is a

most excellent' rite of initiation that is enjoined for one who was devoted to

(his) teacher, restrained (dānta), and intent on right conduct.

” These thrcee verses are Sarvajñānotāra 16/1-3. They are at the beginning of chapter 16 of the
Kriyāpāda called mṛtakadīkṣāprakaraṇam – the Chapter conceming the Initiation of the Dead,
where the rite is described with
T 760.

its mantras. The verses are on p. 86 of IFP T 334 and p. 64 of IFP

The reading na prāpto ‘pi parāṁ dīkṣāṁ gurubhakio ‘pi yainaiaḥ | is confirmed by both IFP
transcripts 334 and 769. The grammar is obviously faulty. Corrected, it would read na prāptāpi

parā dīkṣā gurubhaktena yatnataḥ. It appears, however, that the faulty Sanskrit is original.
T 334 and 760 read kālenāntasthito yasya – ‘he who is at the end of (his life) due to his
(immanent) deathī for kālenāntarito yasmāt – ‘He is impeded by death (kāla), so how ...
Instead of kiṁ vrṛthā T 334 and 760, read kiṁ pradā (> pradaḥ) – ‘what does (his affliction)

giveʼ.

' T 334 and 760 read dhar mokṣasādhanam for yad mokṣasādhanam.
' T 334 and 760 read varaṁ -- ‘beṣṭ for paraṁ – ‘moṣṭ excellentʼ.

' T 334 and 760 read gurubhaktāya śāntāya satyācārāya suvrata – ‘O observer of g00d vows .….

(enjoined) for one who is devoted to (his) teacher, tranquil and intent on right conduct’ for

gurubhaktaṣya dāntasya saṭyācāraratasya vai |- (enjoined) for one who is devoted to (his)
teacher, restrained (dānta) and intent on right conduct.”

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

It is said that the initiation (that bestows) immediate exit (from the
body) (sadyaḥsamutkrāntidīkṣā) takes place just then, that is, at the moment of
death, if (the disciple’s) teacher is pleased (with him). Otherwise (the teacher
(may impart) this (initiation). This is the distinction (vibhāga) (between these
two types of initiation). Thus, one should connect (the statement that ‘the
teacher can impart the initiation that liberates from death and bestows Śiva’)
here (in the case of) ‘one who has died without getting initiation’ also (as well

as in the other cases). ‘Inferior scripturesʼ are, for example, the Vedic ones.
(The initiation) ‘beyond it’ is that of the spiritual son etc. ‘[O]ne who has died
in a riot’ means one who has been killed by a cart and the like by those who are
as if complete fools (jaḍa) (in the heat of a riot). (One who has been killed by)
‘magic’, that is, by poison and the like. A ‘magic diagram’ (yantra) is an
arrangement of Mantras (drawn) on a sheet of birch bark, that accords with (and
is conducive to the magical act of) killing (an enemy). A ‘rite’ (tantra) (in this
context is a rite) such as worship and the fire offering, that accords with (and is
conducive to) that. That is said (in the following passage from scripture):
“Those who have been swept away from a mountain peak, fallen from a
tree, those who have died by hanging, those who have been crushed by a cart,
those who have been bumnt by fire, those who have died by the collapse of a
house, those sinners who have died in deep wells and rivers, those women
(whose babies are) still-bomn (mūḍhagarbhā) or have died giving birth, those
who have been killed by wicked creatures or even by a restrained buffalo, those
who have abandoned their life by poison, and those who have committed
suicide, those who have killed cows, Brahmins, their father and mother, or those
who have died from diseases, such as skin disease or the like, O beautiful

goddess, and other numberless (people who have been killed) by many other
kinds of cruel people.”
Again:
‘The initiation for the dead (mṛtavatī dīkṣā) is for those who have died

orphans, so too for those who have been killed in a riot and died in a bad way.’

The printed edition reads smmply anyathā tu iyam iii vibhāgaḥ. It appeas that some of the text
here is missing. take it to mean something like anyathā u iyaṁ dīkṣā kāryeti vibhāgaḥ.
Jayaratha quotes here, without atribution, the second and third lines of the Catuścatvāriśatidīkṣāpaṭala in the Ghoraghoratarācakra of the Y. This is JY 3/201258 (MS K: 159b, Kh: 127b
G: 201a Gh f1. 155b). The whole passage is interesting and worth quoting, as another manner
initiation can be imparted to someone who has died, by the use of the Grcat Ṅet (mahājāla). Y
satka 3 chapter 20):
155b gh) aṁhātaḥ saṅpravakṣyāmi kramāyātaṁ [g: -ah] sumadhyame |
Sśrnūddhārābhidhānā [k, kh: śrudvārā-] yā dīkṣā paramaśobhanā ||257 I
anāthaluptapinḍānāṁ |ġ: adhunā-] tathā ḍiīmvahaieṣv api [k: ḍisahatenyapi ?)]
kuvidhau ca [k: va] mṛtānāṁ [g: nāṣi] ca [g: nāṣii] dīkṣā mṛtavatī bhave |258 |

pravakṣyāmi rahasyena yan nākhyātaṁ mayā kvacit |

saṁpūjya [g: taṁ-] parameśānīṁ trailokyoddāmaḍāmarām [k: -ddama-; g: -kyoḍāma] [g: -lām]
I|259 i

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Now I will tell (you), O lady with a beautiful waist, what has come down through the
tradition. Listen to the supremely beautiful initiation called ‘Rescue’ (xddhārā). This initiation for

the dead (mṛtavat) is (meant) for those who have lost (their bodies) as orphans, so too those who

have been killed as new-born babies (ḍimba), and those who have died in bad circumstances (in

general). I will tell (you) with (its) secret what I have not said anywhere (in the scriptures).
Having worshipped the Supreme Goddess (parameśānī) who is the Unrestrained Ḍāmarā of the
Three Worlds (trailokyoddāma-ḍāmarā). (257-259)

yathāvibhavasaṁbhãrair agnikarma [k; rapikarma] samācaret [g: samārabhet] ḷ

tatraiṣṭakamayākāraṁ [k: tatrāṭu( ?)mayaṁkāraṁ ; kh, gh: tatrāṭṭakamayaṁ-; g: tatrāḍhamayā-]

dārbhyaṁ [kh: dārbhye; g: dārbha] vā parikalpate [g: -kalpyate] | 260 l1
adhivāsya yathā samyak tatas tu vidhim ācaret [kh: ārabhet] |
mahāyatanam ākramya viśvākhyaṁ padayogataḥ l| 261 II
160a) yatra [kh: tatra] saṅgrathitaṁ viśvaṁ yatra līnaṁ carãcaram |

yatra kṣayam [g: tasam?] idaṁ yāti prāṇādyaṁ sarvam eva hi l 262 |
128a kh) yato devi [k: +ti] punarbhāyaḥ [kh: -bhūyo] prakāśānandalakṣaṇam [g: -naḥ] |
ciddhāma [k g gh: cidvāma] yat [kh: yet] paraṁ sūkṣmaṁ kāraṇeṣv api kāraṇam || 263 ||
taṁ Sivaṁ paramaṁ [g: -ma] devaṁ [g: +ca] svaśaktiparimaṇḍitam |
tadullāsavikāsena mahājālābhidhena ca || 264 |

sarvādhvāvalokenaiva [k, g, gh -dvālokenanaiva; kh: -dvālokanenaiva] mṛtacaitanyam āharet
krodhād [k, kh, gh: krodhor] gale gṛhītvaivaṁ [g: -tvevaṁ] prakṛtau viniveśayet || 265 |1

One should perform a fire ritual with materials in accord with one’s means. An image
(of the deceased) is fashioned from brick (aiṣtakamayākāra) or darbha (grass). Having
(performed the preparatory) purificatory rites (adhivāsa), as is proper, he should then execute the
procedure. (260-261ab)
Having entered the Great Abode (of the sacrificc) called the Universe (viśva) by
conjoining with the plane (of deity) where the universe is knotted togther, and the moving and
immobile (world) is merged, where all this, beginning with th vital bcath, is destroyed, from
which, O goddess, arising again, the abode of consciousness which, supremely subtle, is the
(ulimate) cause amidst (all) causes, that is, supreme Śiva, adomed all around with his own
energies. (261cd-264ab)
By the unfolding of its outpouring called the Great Net, and by observing the entic Path
(of the cosmic order), fetch the consciousness o the dead person. Having gripped him with rage
by the throat in this way, place him within Prakṛti (264cd-265)
201b g) pāśāṅkuśaprayogena yatra tatra sthitaṁ paśum |
tadrūḍhiviniyogena calate prakṛtis tataḥ || 266 ||

tatra saṁgrathanaṁ [k: sagra-] kāryaṁ gāḍhavidyāpurahsaram |
yac cinmayaṁ tad unmeṣaṁ yad unmeṣaṁ kriyā hi sā || 267 ||
Yā (> yaḥ) kriyācāra evāsau caturdhā pariniṣṭhitaḥ [g: pariveṣṭhitah]
Śśaktirāpeṇa cākarṣaṁ grahaṇaṁ [kh: -ne; g: karṣaṇaṁ] jīvasañjñinā || 268 |1
pudgalena [k, kh: saudvalena; g, gh: pauṅgalena] samālokaṁ [k, kh, gh: mupā-] haṁsākhyena
viśodhanam |

khecarīvṛttim āḻaṁvya [k, kh, g, gh: khecarīṁ- k gh: ālaṁcya] mudrāṁ [k, kh, g, gh: mudrā]

khecarasevanāt [g: khecari-] |1 269 |1

prakuryān mṛtacaitanyaṁ [k, g, gh: -nye] gurur grahaṇam ādarāt [kh: -nādarāt] |
Wherever the fettered soul may be, by applying the elephant goad of the fetters, and

applying a state of stability (rūāḍhi) within that (Prakṛti), Prakṛti moves thereby. (The soul) should
be tied up there (by applying) first of all the profound (hidden) Vidyā. (266-267ab)
That which is consciousness is expansion (unmeṣa), and that which is expansion is
action. That practice of action is established four-fold. (The soul is) dragged (towards himself) by

Śakti, and grasped by (the individual soul) called ‘Jīva’. It is viewed equally by (the individual
soul called) Pudgala, and by the one called Hatsa, (it is) purified. Taking the support of Khecarī’s

state (vṛti), the teacher should make the Mudrā by attending on the Skyfarer, (and so) lay hold of

the consciousness of the dead person with respect. (267cd-270ab)

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

This is stated in general, with regards to both those who have been
initiated as well as those who have not. “Complete’ (initiation), in the sense of

even more so than that imparted to a spiritual son etc. This is the meaning.

Surely (one may object), those who are such all die, so should the

teacher impart the initiation that releases from death to (all) of them without
distinction, or not? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TJĀTĀĪḤGTṬTTGTTTTTATTT: I|Ṣ I

[E5IITEFEFIISRIÑRIIKE|tUHHIRI

bandhubhāryāsuhṛtputragāḍhābhyarthanayogataḥ || 9 ||
svayaṁ tadviṣayotpannakaruṇābalato ‘pi vā |
vijñātatanmukhāyātaśaktipātāṁśadharmiṇaḥ || 10 ||
gurur dīkṣāṁ mrṛtoddáhārīṁ kurvīta śivadāyinīm |

156a gh) jananādikriyākarma krtvā tatṣthaṣya [g: -kaṣya] sāṁṅpratam || 270 11
paścāt pragṛhya kālāgnicakraṁ [k: vākraṁ] nītaḥ [k, kh g ghī nītāḥ] śanaiḥ śanaiḥ |
yoiayeṉ nāḍimārgeṇa pare [g: pāra] dhāmny ānalodarāt [kh: śo?darāṭ] |271 I|I
nyāṣakrameṇa [k kh: bhyāsa-] subhage [k kh g gh: śu-] viśrāmyāyatane guru |
pūrṇāhutprayogena juhed vahnau [g: vahniṅ] úta tāṁ kr̥tim 1| 272 1
saṅyojya parame dhāmni [k: parāme-] ciṟpare mṛtajīvitam |
Having now performed the Karma (i.c. rites of passage) of th acts of birth and the rest
(of (the soul) who is present in that, and then laying hold of the Whcel of the Fire of Time
(Kālāgni, (the soul) is brought (into the simulacrum) stowly, slowly. (Then) from out of the fir,
he should be conjoined into the supreme abode by the path oṝ the channel (of the vital beath). O
fair lady, the teacher brings (the soul) to rest in the Abode (of the sacrifice) by the process of
deposition (of mantra). By applying a full oblation, he should offer that simulacrum into the fire,
having conjoined the deceased living being into the supreme abode within supreme consciousness
(270cd-273ab)
śuddhaṁ Śivaṣvarūpaṁ tad bhavaty [k kh gh: bhavety-] evaṁ na cādbhutam || 273 1
rahasyam etad ākhyātaṁ tantre ‘ṣmin pārameśvare [k kh gh: -ra] |
dīkṣāvidhānaṃ atulaṁ yāvat saṁbhavati priye || 274 ||

160b) na caitad devi dātavyam abhaktānāṁ kadācana |

siracchedam idaṁ muktvā nānyatra pravicāritam !|275 1
tvayā guptataraṁ kãryaṁ nākhyeyaṁ yasya kasyacit |

etad vidhānam atulaṁ bhogamokṣaphalapradam || 276 ||
catvāriṁśatidīkṣākhyaṁ caturbhir adhikaṁ mahat |

128b kh) ghoraghoratarācakre sarahasyam udāhr̥tam || 277 ||

It is not astonishing that in this way that (the soul) becomes pure Śiva nature. 0

beloved, that is said to be a secret in this Tantra of the Supreme Lord, for this is an unparalleled
maaner of initiaion. O goddess, it should never be given to those who are devoid of devotion.
Apart from this Śiraccheda, it is not taught elsewhere. (This), your most secret task, should not be

told to anybody. This unparalleled procedure bestows worldly enioyment (bhoga) and liberation.

It is the great one called the forty-fourth initiation. It is taught, along with (its) secret, in the

assembly (cakra) of Ghoraghorataās.’ (273cd-277)

TANTRĀLOKA

(A teacher should perform this initiation for any deceased person)

whom he knows possesses' a degree (arśa) of the power of grace that has

come to him by way of the fervent requests from his kin, wife, friends or
son, or because of the intensity of the compassion he himself feels for that
person. (9cd-11ab)
(The request is) ‘fervent’, certainly not shallow. (The compassion the
teacher) ‘himself feels’ independently of the requests of others. This is the
meaning. (He does this out of the ‘imtensity’ (of his compassion) which is not
just a little. (t is) ‘by way of’ (this that the teacher knows that his dead disciple

has received the power of grace) that is, through the requests of his relatives etc.

This is the meaning. The degree (of the descent of the power of grace) may be
intense, middling or mild etc. So for such as these a teacher should perform the
initiation that rescues the dead (mṛtoddhāradīkṣā), once he has determined that
a descent of the power (of grace) (śaktipāta) has come to them. (He does this)
reasoning that such (phenomena) as the fervent requests he has received from
their kin and others would not occur if it had not. Moreover, when the requests
and the like of their kin and others arise through intense desire to save (the
dead,) they must originate in the descent of the power of the Supreme Lord, not
in mere affection, for we do not see such (affection) in all instances. Nor does
the fact that they (i.e. the requests of the descent of power) have different loci

constitute a defect (of this view). For there are effects which are seen to come
about from their causes even though the effects are in a different location (than

their causes), as is the case with such phenomena as the motion of a ball of iron
and a magnet. (It is said that)

Read -dharmiṇaḥ for -dharmaṇaḥ.

' Cf above, 14/22.
' The translation of the verses and of the commentary from here to the verses is by Sanderson,

with minor modifications. It is quoted by Goodall 1998 (Kiraṇāgāma): 377 n. 621. Goodall: ‘as

evidence that this m.rtoddhārādīkṣā was common practice in Kashmir, Sanderson (2005: 267 n.
90.) adduces Kṣemendra’s satirical remarks on the motives of widows who have the ceremony
performed for their dead husbands in Deśopadeśa 8/50 and Narmamala 3/43.' Moreover, in

Sanderson’s opinion this kind of post-mortem initiaton may have been distinctive of the region of
Kashmir, because apart from the reference here and in the NT all the other sources he has found
that mention it are also Kashmiri (ibid.) Cf. Ramakaṇṭha’s commentary on Ki 6/11d-12.
(Goodalls trans): ‘And the descent of power has been taught to be the cause of devotion and such,

but not of becoming a suppliant (begging for initiatioon), especially not (when this becoming a

suppliant is) in a different locus, since this can be proved to be dependent on the influence of

affection alone. As they say: ‘One should urge someone one loves to the religion. It is not right to
infer from this (that) a descent of Śiva’s power (has taken place), because there is no necessary

concomitance.”

Sanderson (quoted by Goodall ibid.) observes with reference to this passage: ‘For

Bhaṭṭa Ramakāṇṭha the inevitable absence of clear indications of competence in such persons is

proof that the scriptures did not intend them to be initiated. But in pointing this out he discloses

how his opponents got round this problem, namely by claiming that the Descent of Power can be
inferred from the fervour of the requests of others that initiation can be performed. . . .

Abhinavagupta uses just this argument to justify the practice of initatng the dead, who are
obviously even less promising as sites of evidence than young children and simpletons . . .’
Elsewhere Sanderson adds (2006: 33-34): ‘Evidently this argument that the descent of grace may

be inferred is a learned device designed to reconcile what is indistinguishable from the function of
the mere priest, and of a priest for the dead at that, with the ideal image of the officiant as spiritual

guide.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
“This primordial power does not fall for a soul that is not in its final

rebirth. By its descent, his Impurity, which is the cause of transmigratory
existence, wanes away. When it has diminished after that a desire arises (within

the soul) to go to the supreme good.”
Again:
those

‘Peoplesʼ devotion arises by his grace alone. Due to that (devotion),
whose minds are immersed in his nature attain the supreme

accomplishment.

There is no contradiction here with such passages (that suggest that) the

sole field (of application of initiation) is to a person who is alive and present

close by.
Nor have we just voiced our own idea. Thus he says:

açṁ TAṀTTT I 22 1

śrīmṛtyuñjayasiddhādau yad uktam parameśinā I| 1 II
As the Supreme Lord has said in the venerable Mṛtyunjaya and

Siddhā etc. (I1cd)

He paraphrases that (passage in the Mṛtyunjayatantra):

JJaIGR TGGTĀT I 23 II

aṁī īraā aī a-- Ã g;3
TRTTTRĀTYT-ĀĪHTGGĀĒCT-|

' Cf. ṛudraśaktiṣamāviṣṭaḥ sa yiyāṣuḥ śivecchayā |

bhuktimuktiprasiddhyarthaṁ nīyate sadguruṁ prati |

‘One whois penetrated by Rudra’s power, desires to go to a true teacherin order to

atṭain worldly benefits and liberation, andis led (to him) by Śiva’s will.’ MV 1/44
Whatever be the source of this verse, it is clear informed by MV 1/44 or its source.

Abhinavagupta quotes an abbreviation of the first line of this verse in TĀ 13/285ab. TĀ
13/285cd is a literal quotation of the second line, and he attributes the verse to an unnamed

Purāṇa. He quotes the full verse in MVV 1/697. Read as in 13/285cd, 289cd and the MVV, yayā

for yathā. Jayaratha quotes the first lnein TĀv ad 13/285cd, 16/31, 17/73 and 2527-29ab.

Kṣemarāja cites a passage from the SYM (the Siddhā) concerning the initiation of an absent or

dead neophant in his commentary on NT 18/119ab. This same passage, with no variants, is quoted

here by Abhinava as 24/6cd-10ab. Cf. 21/11cd. His complete citation from the SYM corresponds
to TĀ 24/6cd-12. The mṛtoddhāravidhiḥ taught thereis then followed by others from other

sources. Moreover, Abhinava cites the SYM as saying that it is the teacher’s duty to impart an

initation that saves the dying or newly dead disciple from further transmigration if he is qualified

to receive it. See below, 23/29-30. Thus, it is clear from these references that this kind of funerary
rite is indeed described in the SYM Abhinava had before him, although there is no reference to it
in the short recension that has survived.

TANTRĀLOKA

| g

q nvzcq |

aTĪ TATHTRĀĪṬGIR
TTṬ I 2.4 1

adīkṣite nṛpatyādāv alase patite mṛte |
bālāturastrīvṛddhe ca mṛtoddhāraṁ prakalpayet |/ 12 ||
vidhiḥ sarvaḥ pūryam uktaḥ sa tu saṁkṣipta iṣyate |
gurvādipūjārahito bāhye bhogāya sā yataḥ | 13 II
adhivāsacarukṣetraśayyāmaṇḍalakalpane |
nopayogy atra tacchiṣyasaṁskriyāsvapnadṛṣṭaye || 14 ||
mantrasaṁnidhisaṁtrptiyogyāyātra tu maṇḍalam |
bhūyo dine ca devārcā sākṣān nāsyopakāri tat || 15 ||
(The initiation that) rescues the dead (mṛtoddhāra) can be
performed for one who has not been initiated, a king and the like, one who
is lazy (led astray by worldly enjoyment), one who has fallen and died, a
child, one who is sick, a woman, and one who is aged. (12-13)
The entire (ritual) procedure (vidhi) is (as) taught previously, but it
should be in an abbreviated form, in which the worship of the teacher and
so on is omitted. This is because it (is imparted by the teacher,) so that (the

disciple may enjoy) worldly fruits (bhoga) in the outer world. The

preliminary rite of purification (adhivāsa), the sacrificial pap (caru), the
sacred field (kṣetra), the preparation of the bed and the maṇḍala are of no

use here (in this procedure). (The purpose of the preliminary) purification
(adhivāsa) of the disciple, (in which he is made to sleep and dream,) serves

for the prognostication (of his) dreams (which is obviously not required for

this initiation). The maṇḍala serves to make the mantras gathered together
(in the maṇḍala) fit to be satisfied (and propitiated) (which is not
necessary here). The worship of the deity on the following day, is (also) of
no direct use (for this procedure). (14-15)
As is said (in the Netratantra),
“For the purpose of initiation, in order to rescue a dead person
(mṛtoddharaṇa) from amongst the dead, (the teacher) should worship the deity,

that is, the Supreme Lord, as before. (These dead include anybody) who has not
been initiated, the king, (his) sons and the like, those who are twice born, or

those, O goddess, who are lazy because (of their attachment to) worldly pleasure

NT 18/112-16a, quoted by Jayaratha in full, is condensed by Abhinava into verses 21/12-13.

Read -kṣetraśayyāmaṇḍalakalpanam for —kṣeṭṟaṁ śayyāmaṇḍalakalpane.

Read -yogyāyātra for ~yogāyātra.

This passage is condensed by Abhinava into verses 12 and 13. It marks the beginning of what
Kṣemarāja calls mṛtoddhāradīkṣā. It extends from NT 18/112cd to 121 and is translated below in

note 21,37. The NT begins by talking about its particular features and for whom it is meant
(viśeṣākhyāna).

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

(bhogālasa), and those who are obstructed by the defects of (their) Karma. (So
t00,) O goddess, the dead who are in hell for a long time, because of their fallen
condition (as having died due to some calamity), (those) devoid (as they were)
of right conduct, had not practiced austerities, did no meditation, and in whom

that which concerns the Supreme Lord was not established, and did not offer
sacrifices and the like. (Moreover,) there are (those who died as) children,

women, the aged, and those afflicted (by disease).

There (the expression), ‘one who have not been

initiated’ refers to

three amongst (these dead) who are fit (to receive this initiation); namely, the

first, the second, and the fourth. ‘Those who are twice born’ are the third.

(There are those who are fit to receive it) ‘because of their fallen condition (as
having died due to some calamity)’, such are those who have died in a riot and
the like. According to others, (this expression) refers to those who have fallen
from (the observance of) their own Rule. They must certainly be considered to
have fallen from (the observance of) the Rule, because (the king and his sons)

have not protected (their) subjects properly, (the twice born and the lazy) are
attached to worldly pleasures (bhoga), (others are) obstructed by the defect of
misfortune (daivadoṣa), (or) because (they have) not practiced austerities etc.
Here (all this) has been explained as due to the unfolding of impeded (tortured)
thought (kliṣṭakalpanā). One should ignore (that view) as based solely on an
obstinate (clinging) (āgraha) to it (on the part of others who are mistaken). ‘It
is the initiation taught previously, that concerns those who are alive and present
(nearby, which is imparted so that the disciple may enjoy worldly fruits (bhoga)
in the outer world). ‘The maṇḍala’ is traced with lines made of ash etc. (drawn)

all around outside the bed to protect the disciple. As is said:

Kṣemarāja comments: ‘although the king, (along with his) sons and the like, has been initiated,
(he needs this initiation) because it is possible that (he has committed) the sin of not protecting

(his) subjects properly. Although the twice born have received initiation, (they need this initiation)

because the firm grip (the pride of) caste (has on them) has not ceased. Although they have been

initiated with the initiation with seed, they have fallen from the Rule because they are attached to

the worldly pleasures of their caste (status). Or else, if (even if) he is intent on observing the Rule,
(he nonetheless needs this initiation) because it is considered to be possible that he has fallen from
the Rule, because he (may be) obstructed by the defect of misfortune (daivadosa). In order to

rescue those who amongst these dead have, by the intercession of their relatives etc., received a

descent of the power (of grace), (that they may attain) the goals of initiaton (that is, worldly
benefits and liberation), (the teacher) should worship the Supreme Lord.”

NT 18/112-116a Kṣemarāja: lūtādoṣaviṣāśanakṣudrayogeśabhakṣaṇabhr̥gupatanādi kāraṇair

bālādike mṛte narakapātādi saṁbhāvyate || `It

ssible (and one expects that) those children

etc. who have died because of skin disease (ūtādoṣa), poison, lightning, or were) eaten by savage
yogis (kṣudrayogeśa), fell from a prccipice and like, would fall into hell etc. This
passage is
condensed by Abhinava into verses 12 and 13.

Jayaratha is glossing the citation from the Netratantra. There the first four types of candidates
for this initiation are 1) the king, 2) (his) sons and the like, 3) those who are twice bor, and 4)

those who are lazy because (of their attachment to) worldly pleasure (bhogālasa). Note that
Kṣemarāja does not read the text in the same way as does Jayaratha. According to Kṣemarāja,
adīkṣita īs a noun and ‘one who is not initiated’ is a separate type. According to Jayaratha, the

same word is an adjective that qualifies the four types that follow. Thus, Ksemarāja expressly
states that the king may be initiated, but has not thereby been liberated.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘(The maṇḍala is drawn) with ash, yellow pigment and the like,

imagining it to be an enclosing wall of weapons.”

The sacrificial pap (caru) and the preparation of the couch etc. which

serve to purify the disciple or to see dreams (that serve to ascertain his

competence to receive initiation) ‘are of no use’. The (disciple) is not present
(nearby), so what is the use of that? This is the meaning. On the contrary, the
maṇḍala and the worship of the deity is of use here. This is the syntactic
connection with (what was said previously). As is said:

‘(The deities) on the sacrificial surface (sthaṇḍila) are all worshipped,
but there (in case of this kind of initiation,) there is no preliminary purification
(adhivāsa).”
(The maṇḍala is ‘not of use directly (for the absent disciple)’. The
meaning is (that it is of use) indirectly, by (invoking) the presence of the
mantras. The intended sense is that (the disciple) does not himself see the
maṇḍala etc. (maṇḍaladarśana) (which is normally part of the culminating rites

of initiation).

Here (in this case), this is not the instrumental cause that serves to
(invoke) the presence of the mantras. Thus, he says:

The Media Through Which the Absent Disciple

Caṉn be Made Present

RĀĪĪRTRTRTTTTTATTT:
II 2, I

igāēeeezze

ẼTT. ḍẼTHTTTA ṜaaT: 1 2. 9 1
3GāRTTTGFTRTGTAĪ āṬṬFATṬĪaTI] |
kriyopakaraṇasthānamaṇḍalākṛtimantrataḥ |
dhyānayogaikatadbhaktijñānatanmayabhāvataḥ || 16 ||
tatpraviṣṭasya kasyāpi śiṣyāṇāṁ ca guros tathā |
ekādaśaite kathitāḥ saṁnidhānāya hetavaḥ || 17 I|
uttarottaram utkṛṣṭās tathā vyāmiśraṇāvaśāt |
The (contributing) causes that serve to make (the absent soul)

present for the teacher, the disciples, or anyone who may have entered (and

is present by chance), are said to be eleven. They are: 1) the rite (kriyā), 2)

the offering (upakaraṇa), 3) the (sacred) place, 4) the maṇḍala, 5) an iīmage

(ākṛti) (of the deceased), 6) the mantra, 7) the visualization (dhyāna), 8)
conjunction (yoga) (of the breaths), 9) devotion to the (Lord) alone, 10)
A stranger who by chance or out of curiosity has entered the sacred space where the rite is

taking place should not be told to leave or asked questions. The rite should continue, presuming
that the intruder becomes inwardly spiritually involved.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

knowledge, and 11) and the sense of singleness of nature (tanmayabhāva).
The ones that follow after are progressively more excellent with respect to
the previous ones, because they are combined in this way. (16-18ab)
Taking as a support (the two groups, namely) the one beginning with
ritual action and the one beginning with visualization, these are the causes, said
to be eleven, that serve to make (the mantras) present. (Devotion to the Lord)

‘alone’ is the fundamental one. ‘Someone’, (who may have entered) by mistake
or the like. As is said: “One should not instigate reflection concerning one who
has entered (the sacrificial area) by mistake; (rather one should accept him).”
‘The ones that follow after are progressively more excellent with respect to
the previous onesʼ. Thus, the offering of (the sacrificial substances that serve

as) aids (to worship) (upakaraṇa) follow after the ritual action and so on.
Moreover, they are excellent collectively also. Thus he says, this is ‘because
they are combined in this wayʼ.
(Next) he explains whatever is unclear here.
Requirements for the Rite

fṣrāarīīā̄zadāī gTRITHGGRTTĪIĪRĒTT I| 2¢ 1

ā Tī gac- TīĪRf1 |
ṃvēōā fhfrcṛrasrāṁk aTāHTSS® 1| 2.3 lI

aṇgṁṁā āfc-ta-+ ftas gazvsaa| zo 1
37 ggammfa fgamdagaīq |
STBRCĪRTTI
JI Tī-r-āgGĪĪ 1] 32 1

kriyātibhūyasī puṣpādy uttamalakṣaṇānvitam || 18 II
ekaliṅgādi ca sthānaṁ yatrātmā saṁprasīdati |
maṇḍalaṁ tritriśūlābjacakraṁ yan mantramaṇḍale || 19 ll

anāhūte ʻpi dṛṣṭaṁ sat samayitvaprasādhanam |
yad uktam mālinītantre siddhaṁ samayamaṇḍalam || 20 l|

yena saṅdrṣṭamātreti siddhamātrapadadvayāt |
ākṛtir dīptarūpā yā mantras tadvat sudiptikaḥ || 21 ||
Śiṣṭaṁ spaṣṭam ato neha kathitaṁ vistarāt punaḥ |

In the following verses (I8cd to 22ab), Abhinava briefly glosses the first six entries, and

concludes that the rest are clear and so do not require furthr explanation. Thus, it appears that

Abhinava is not writing independently here (16-18ab), but rather is drawing from some unnamed
source. In 11cd, Abhinava has said that this procedure, aimed at liberating the deceased, is taught

in the Mṛtyunjaya and the Siddhā and elsewhere (21/11cd). Abhinava has just drawn from the

Netratantra. One would expect him to now be drawing from the SYM. But that is unlikely, as

Jayaratha would most probably have quoted it, as he normally does. Thus, it appears that
Jayaratha also did not know Abhinava’s source.

TANTRĀLOKA

1) The rite (should be) very abundant. 2) (The offering consists of)

flowers and the like, that possess the most excellent characteristics. 3) The

(sacred) place is (the location of) a solitary Liṅga and the like (listed in the
scriptures), where the Self is satisfied (and propitious). 4) The maṇḍala is

the lotus wheel of the triple Trident, (which is so powerful that) once seen,
the condition of a regular initiate is attained, even without having offered

oblations to the assembly of Mantras (mantramaṇḍala). That is stated in the
Maālinītantra in two words, namely, ‘accomplished’ and ‘only’, where we
read: “The maṇḍala of the Rule is accomplished by just seeing which . . .

5) The image (of the deceased should be) energized (dipta). 6) In the same
way, the Mantra is well energized. The rest is clear, therefore it is not
elaborated at length here. (18cd-22ab)

etc.
topic.

‘(By) just (seeing)ʼ, because it is separate from ritual worship (pājā)
Having explained that by the way, he (goes on to) talk about the main

Placing the Absent Disciple in a Simulacrum

TĪ AT GJRJ I| ṜR I

īīŪgrti #aīrrgraāraī frāq |

ga fatṁ anq 1
TGTĪTṀṬĀTT] ḤTTCETA; I| 3YI
kṛtvā maṇḍalam abhyarcya tatra devaṁ kuśair atha || 22 ||

gomayenākṛtiṁ kuryāc chiṣyavat tāṁ nidhāpayet |
tatas tasyāṁ śodhyam ekam adhvānaṁ vyāptibhāvanāt | 23 ||
prakṛtyantaṁ vinikṣipya punar enaṁ vidhiṁ caret |

mahājālaprayogeṇa sarvasmād adhvamadhyataḥ || 24 ||

Having made the maṇḍala and worshiped the deity there, (the

teacher) should fashion with (blades of) kuśa grass or cow dung an image

that resembles the (deceased) disciple (he wishes to initiate). He should then

place it (in front of himself). Then, having projected one Path, which is to

! Read uttamalakṣaṇānvitam for uttamaṁ lakṣaṇānvitam, in accord with TSā p. 166: uttamam

upakaraṇaṁ puṣpādi the most excellent offering consists of flowers and the like.’

In the TSā p. 166 Abhinava writes that ‘the place is a sacred seat and the like’ sthānaṁ pīthādi.

This verse is not found in the printed text of the MV.

TSā p. 166 and the mantra is (spontaneously) energetic by itsel mantraḥ svayaṁ dīptaś ca.
s Unlike the normal funerary rites (antyeṣṭi), which are performed as a matter of course (see

below, Chapter Twenty-four), these rites are meant to rescue those who have died impure deaths
or in a state of impurity in such circumstances as listed above, which would not allow them access

to them, or required extra reparation. Sanderson (2006: 32) observes that the Vedic smārta
counterpart of this is ‘the Nārāyaṇabali or Sūryabali, which is performed for exactly the same

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

be purified, up to (the level of) Nature by imagining how it pervades (all the
others), he should apply this procedure. Having drawn (to himself) the

mind (of his disciple) from the midst of all the Path by the Method of the

Great Net, he should place it there (in the image). (We will now) talk about
(this) procedure (vidhi). (22cd-24)
‘The image (of the deceased)ʼ is twelve fingers (long). As is said (in the
Netratantra):
‘(To accomplish the initiation to rescue the dead . . . he should worship
the Supreme Lord as above,) but with the difference that he should fashion a
silver image twelve finger (breadths, i.e. approx. 21 cm) in length, that must be
similar (in appearance to the deceased). Or else, O goddess, it may be made

from cow dung or (blades of) Kuśa grass. (It should be) purified with a bath.

classes of individuals a year after their death. Those rites are then performed over the next few

days. They begin with a ritual of cremation (antyeṣtih) in which a crude doll (arṇapuruṣa) takes

the place of the non-existent corpse, and end with the sapiṇḍīkaraṇa ritual in which the deceased
(pretaḥ) is incorporated as an ancestor (pitr). . . . While in the smārta rite, it was simply the ritual

processing (saṅskāraḥ) and disposal (pratipattiḥ) of the sacrificers body and implements
(āyudham), here it was part of the initiatory destruction of the bonds (pāśaḥ) which hold the

omṇiscient and omnipotent soul in ignorance and impotence of the cycles of births and deaths

Kṣemarāja glosses ‘silver as

incorrect (apapāṭha). rajasā

crushed rice, and states that reading ‘rājatā’ (meaning ‘silvery) is

śālicārṇena | rājatety apapāṭhaḥ | sadṛsīti mṛtadehena || Sanderson

(2005: 265 n 87) notes other materials from which the image may be made as recorded in
Bṛhatkālottara. Theṣe include white earth mixed with the five products of a cow, or Palāśa (Butea
frondosa) wood or Aśvattha (Ficus religiosa). The Vaisṇava Jayākhyasaṁhitā adds birch wood as

a third option.

NT 18/116bcd-117ab. The full passage (NT 18/117cd-121), edited and translated by Sanderson
(2005: 264-256) (the notes are mine), continues as follows with some modifications:
‘There (in that case) the purification (saṁskāra) (of the image) is just the initiation

itṣel: (This is done by meditating on himself as Śiva) pervading (the universe) (yyāptyā) (and

s0) should bring back the soul (of the deceased from) wherever it may be (read yatrastha- for

yavastha-) or (many) souls and place it (or them) within (the image). As he makes the Full
Oblation (after completing the oblations that eliminate the possibility of reincarnation on any level
of the universe) he should cast (the image) (into the fire of Supreme Śiva while raising the soul
through his own central energy-channel and then) uniting it with the level of Śiva. By this
means it will attain union (with Śiva). He should (also) worship the deity (i.e. Śiva, for the
deceased) in the rites for the ancestors (śrāddha). Optionally he may do this worship during

the cremation ceremony itself. (In the latter case), O goddess, the Guru should install an image of
the frightening (Bhairava) form taught above attended by two Śaktis in the cremation ground

where the body was bumt, employing the various offerings already mentioned and the aforesaid
rites. Alternatively, O goddess, there may be four or eight (attendant Śaktis) contemplated
with viṣualizations taught already.’

Kṣemarāja: ‘the preliminary purification of the postulate (adhivāsa) needs not be done’.
āja: “(he pervades) by entering abode of consciousness which pervades everything
vyāptyeti viśvavyāpiciddhāmāveśataḥ |

tKṣemarāja: ‘Only after having worshipped and offered oblation to the Lord, in accord with the
method (yukti) (transmitted) through the tradition taught by (my) teacher (in TĀ 21/25), by
reflecting on the seed of Māyā (HRIṀ), the aforementioned (postulant) should be initiated. (He
does this) by using the net of the phonemes (nātrkājāa) (that surround) the resonating (syllable
HRĪṀ), located in the centre with six circuits. (As explained in this verse):

TANTRĀLOKA

The intended sense is (that the pervasion extends) ‘up to (the level of)

Nature’. The individual soul that is to be attracted is above that. “This
(procedure)ʼ is the one about to be explained. In this way, by (saying) this, he

has indicated the teaching concerning the Great Net, that follows just after the
(two) types of procedure concerning the dead or living (disciple).
He now talks about that procedure (vidhi).
The Teaching Concerning the Net

(ālopadeśaḥ)

TGTHIHgRTT ÑJTJfĪTTTTTÑTIGTEĪRGTSE

ZITgTITīTTTRTGTTṜTaT-

ġ©ramfrcstarz-rafa mar.

SĪIGGTHI TĀĪTT; I Ṝ I

mūlādhārād udetya prasṛtasuvitatānantanāḍyadhvadaṇḍaṁ
vīryeṇākramya nāsāgaganaparigataṁ
vikṣipan vyāptum īṣṭe |

yāvad dhūmābhirāmapracitataraśikhā‘In the middle is Sound (i.c. HRĪṀ) (surrounded by) the four neuter vowels (r
(then the remaining) vowels, the gutturals and palatals, (along with) ṅ and N, then N an.
cerebrals and dentals, ṅ, N and N, then the eight units (pādya), beginning with Y (i.. Y, R, L,
V.8,. S, H) on the top.)
#-- He ṣhould conjoin him into the Śiva principle by the method of conjunction
(yojanikāprakāra) taught in the venerable Śvacchanda etc.

kšk-ikk Kṣemarāja: ‘There, the Saiddhāntika rites for the ancestors are well known to a large extent

(tāvat). Whereas according to the secret procedure —

‘once the teacher has meditated on the power which is food (annamayī), intensifies (all

things) and is vitality, (the teacher) of fine intellect should think that that postulant (sādhya) is

penetrated by her. Then he should offer that aspect of his fettered state which is worldly

experience (bhoga) into the enjoyer (of those experiences) with the sense of being of a single

nature (ekātmabhāva). In this way, the disciple becomes Śiva.

tatra saiddhāntikaśrāddhavidhistāvat prasiddhaḥ, rahasyavidhau tu

"gurur annamayīh śaktiṁ brṁhikāṁ vīryarāpiṇīm |

dhyātvā tayā samāviṣṭaṁ taṁ sādhyaṁ cintayet sudhīḥ |1
tato ʻṣya pāśavāṁśo yo bhogarūpas tam arpayet |
bhoktary ekātmabhāvena śiṣya itthaṁ śivībhavet |l

+ts The ṭwo śaktis are Cāmuṇḍā and Yogeśvaṁ. The four are Siddhā, Raktā, Suṣkā and
Utpalahastā, whereas the eight are these together with four companions (Dūts): Kāḥī, Karāī,
Mahākālī and Bhadrakālī. Thcir yisualations ar given in NT 10/17-37ab.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

jālakenādhvacakraṁ
saṁchādyābhīṣṭajīvānayanam iti mahā-

jālanāmā prayogaḥ || 25 |

(The teacher first) rises from the Root Support (mūlādhāra), and
with (his) vitality lays hold of the Staff (daṇḍa) of the Path (formed from)
the infinite number of channels that, very extensive, have come forth (from
the vital breath). (Then,) having gone beyond the Void of the nostrils, (the
teacher,) casting (the breath) forth, wills to pervade (everything). (This
continues) until, having covered over the wheel of the Path with a net made
of most (radiantly) manifest flames, beautiful with smoke, (he catches) the
soul he has chosen and leads (it towards himself). This is the procedure

(prayoga) called the Great Net. (25)

This is the procedure (prayoga) here called ‘the Great Net’. The teacher,
established in his own Self as Śiva’s subjectivity (ahaṁbhāva) by nature,
‘(first) rises from the Rootʼ, that is, from the Place of Birth (janmasthāna).
(Then,) having awakened the power of the vital breath (prāṇaśakti) as the root
cause (of the Great Net), by blocking exhalation, inhalation and breath retention
etc. repeatedly, again and again, (he ascends the Staff). The Staff is in the form
of a path, because it is the means which is the clearly evident flow (of the
breath), and the means (nimitta) due to which it ascends upwards and returns
downwards. (It is said to be made of) an ‘infinite number of channels’ʼ,
because there are thirty-five million (of them). ‘Come forth’ from (that power

of the vital breath), they pervade all the body, and so are ‘very extensive’.
Being present there as such, the vital breath is of that form. (The teacher) ‘lays
hold of it’, that is, having brought (the vital breath) under his own control, with
the vitality which is the strength of (his) power, by successively crossing over
(the inner centres) beginning with the heart, it reaches the extremity of the
cavity of the nose. Having done so, ‘casting forth’ (the breath), that is, causing
it to spread out all around externally until, by (not caring to) take up (any)
particular (thing), he manages to pervade the universe (as a whole). Thus,
‘having covered over’, that is, encompassed, the entire Path with the multitude
of his rays, which are like dense (hahalabahala) smoke, because they are
located in this way (tāvat) in the midst of the Impure Path, he very quickly
(catches) ‘the soul he has chosen and leads (it towards himself)’ like a fish

(caught in a net). The meaning is that by making the vital breaths and senses
(karaṇa) etc. (of the soul) one (with his own), (the teacher) drags it along
(towards himself).

Kṣemarāja quotes this verse it in his commentary on NT 18/117a, acknowledging that it is by
his teacher Abhinava: iti gurvādiṣṭasaṁpradāyayuktyā. This and the following verse are repeated

in chapter 16 of Abhinava’s Tantrasāra.
‘The Root (mālādhāra, janmasthāna) is the wheel in the genital area. The Staff is the

centnl current of the ascending breath. According to Jayaratha, thc vitality to which Abhinava
refers is that of consciousness, the energy of the supreme ‘’. There are 35 million channels of the
vital breath. The Void of the nostrils are the cavities of the nose. The smoke represents the

capacity to pervade of the power of the senses (the flames) that then pervades the entire universe.

TANTRĀLOKA

(Jayaratha now explains this same passage as a code for the Mantra
used in this procedure). Reflecting on the seed of Māyā (HṚĪṀ) and (uttering
the deceased person’s) name beginning, in the (reverse order of) withdrawal,

with the Staff which is the letter R, ‘having laid hold of’ it by means of the

vitality which is letter H, and nature of which is the pulsation of the power (of
the breath), and then, having ‘gone beyond the nose’, which is the letter ‘’, and
‘covered (it) over’ with the Point (M), which is the net of flames in the form of

light, ‘he leads the soul he has chosen (towards himself)ʼ. That is said (in the

Haṁsaparameśvara):

“((Both) undifferentiated" (niṣkala) and differentiated (sakala), tranquil,
I myself am supreme Śiva who is the supreme, omnipresent soul. I pervade the
entire universe.” Absorbed in this meditation, he should exhale and then inhale.

At the end of (the phase of) breath retention, he should slowly cast everything

(outside) by means of exhalation. Then, at the end of exhalation, (he should

place it) again within himself. He should observe (the vital breath) endowed
with (its) energy in the End of the Twelve in the form of a sprout moving
inwardly within all the universe (aṇḍa). Having uttered (HRĪṀ), the seed of
Maāyā, and having laid hold of the consciousness (of the disciple) which,
conjoined with the subtle body (liṅga) and pure, is in the form of a drop of
water, where the current (of Sound) is located within it. Once grasped, as is

proper, through that procedure by means of the Great Net, the seed, (thus)
grasped, together with the name (of the postulate), should be placed in the Heart

(of the simulacrum).

Surely (one may ask), does this (procedure) have a place in the initiation

of those absent (parokṣadīkṣā), or not? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Kṣemarāja quotes these verses NTu ad 18/117cd, where he says that they are from the Harhsa-

parameśvara. The first line, which Jayaratha does not quote, reads:
sarvārcanaṁ sthaṇḍile syān na ca tatrādhivāsanam | AĪ| worship takes place on the altar. The
(disciple’s) preliminary purificatin does not (take place) there.’
Read with the printed text of the commenary on the NT, niṣkalah for niṣkampaḥ.

! Commenting on NT 18/118, Kṣemarāja quotes this passage from Haṁsapārameśvara. ḹt
describes the procedure of the Great Net (mahājālaprayoga), by means of which the teacher can
lay hold of the soul of a deceased disciple and place it in a simulacrum that serves as a substitte
for its body. He does this by uttering the seed-syllable of Māyā (i.e. HRIṀ) and the soulʼs name.
The yogic procedure for catching the soul and rccitation of the seed-syllable HRIM is described
here in this and the following verse. The officiant begins by meditating on himself as all-pervasive
Siva. He should then exhale, inhale, hold his breath, and raise the vital power through the central
channel to the point twelve finger-breadths above his head. He should then visualize this power
moving out through the worlds to find the soul. He should utter the syllable HRIM and take hold
of that soul, visualizing it as resembling a drop of water.

Commenting on this passage of the NT, Kṣemarāja refers to a non-Yogic altemative
method for catching the soul of the deceased. Sanderson (2005: 267 n 90) describes it as follows:
‘a circular diagram is drawn with OM (nādaḥ) at the centre and the syllables of the syllabary

drawnin six circuits around it. The Śivanirvāṇavidhi, which gives the text of the Śaiva cremation

ritual followedin Kashmir, illustrates this diagram and gives the full ritnal procedure, mantras and
deities. The last is Māyādevī, who is to be worshipped in a dish full of offerings placed on a lamp
that rests at the centre of the diagram on the top of OṀ HAMṀ SAḤ followed by the name of the
soul to be drawn in, and the eight Kṣetrapālas, who are to be worshipped around the periphery.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

TJITTĒT ṀīTTTGJHJ āṬaiī

EaUie IEūE

ĪTGGTTI TāĪĒ; I| 3ē, I
etenācchādanīyaṁ vrajati paravaśaṁ
saṅmmukhīnatvam ādau
paścād ānīyate cet sakalam atha tato
‘py adhvamadhyād yatheṣṭam |
ākṛṣṭāv uddhṛtau vā mṛtajanaviṣaye
karṣaṇīye ʻtha jīve
yogaḥ śrīśaṁbhunāthāgamaparigamito

jālanāmā mayoktaḥ || 26 ||

By this (means), (the soul) that is to be covered (by the Net) at first
turns, helpless, towards (the teacher) and, if it is a wakeful fettered soul

(sakala), is then led (to him), as desired, from out of the midst of the Path.
Thus, I have taught the conjunction (yoga) I have learnt from the venerable

Śambhunātha and the scriptures, called ‘the Net’. (It is applied) when
aṭṭracting (a person who is absent into one’s presence) (ākṛṣṭi), and
rescuing (it) (xddhṛti), when dead. Or else, in the case of a living soul (that
is absent), that needs to (be captured by the Net and) dragged (into the
teacher’s presence to receive initiation). (26)

‘By this’ procedure (prayoga) called ‘the Net’, ‘that which is to be

covered (by the Net)ʼ, that is, the wheel of the Path, is ‘helpless’ and not free,
always ‘turns towards’ (the teacher,) who drags (the net towards himself).

Subsequently also, by that (same procedure,) if there is a ‘wakeful fettered soul
(sakala), that is, (that) kind of individual soul in the midst of that (Path), it is
‘ledʼ, that is, dragged along (in the Net), ‘as desired’, to a state of oneness (of
the vital breaths with the teacher and Śiva). Then, (the living) fettered soul is

dragged along (in the net), and the (deceased) disciple is extracted, that is,

The Net is cast within the domain of Māyā, in which the souls are Fully Conditioned (sakala)

subjects. Although dead, they are still awake, unlike those beyond the level of the individual soul

(puruṣatattva), that are sleeping. The same is true a fortiori when the Net is used to capture the
soul of an absent disciple and bring him to the teacher for initiation.

it is true, as Sanderson suggests, that this procedure is peculiarly Kashmiri, Śambhunātha’s

knowledge of it indicates his close connection to Kashmir, even if he is said to have come from
Jālandhara. Some have suggested that Abhinava travelled to Jālandhara to learn from

Śambhunātha. Here then is another reason why this is unlikely.

TANTRĀLOKA

rescued (from hell). Now, I have taught, for the sake of others, the procedure

(prayoga) ‘called ‘the Net”, I have learnt from the words of (my) venerable
teacher. It concems (both) the living and the dead, and is (a procedure used) in
the course of an initiation for those who are absent, when the individual soul (is
absent) and should be drawn towards (the teacher). This is the meaning.

Surely (one may ask), how can the vital breath etc. of fettered souls and
teachers be made one? He removes the occasion for doubt by presenting an
example.

ciravighaṭite senāyugme

yathāmilate punar-

hayagajanaraṁ svāṁ svāṁ,

rasād abhidhāvati |

karaṇapavanair nāḍīcakrais

tathaiva samāgatair

nijanijarasād ekḵībhāvyaṁ

svajālavaśīkṛtaiḥ II 27 I|
It is just as when two armies separated for a long time are again

joined together, the horses, elephants and men each naturally (tend) to go

to their same kind. The same happens with the organs of sense, vital
breaths, and the configurations of the vital channels (nāḍīcakra) (of the

teacher and the disciple) that have come together, brought under control by
their own net, that are unified by themselves spontaneously. (27)

Just as two armies, although separate for a long time, when they are
again joined together, the horses etc. join together with horses, in consonance
with their own (kind). In the same way, by the power of the procedure of the
net, the vital breaths of the teacher and those of the fettered soul (naturally join
together). This is the meaning in brief.
Surely, one who has died attains that particular condition, such as
heaven or hell, due to his own Karma. So how is he (caught and) drawn (back)?

With this doubt in mind, he says:

TGTāTGŪHIGTT
SĪĪRT fFTNTĪĒaT |

feta 1 2¢ 1

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

svahpretatiryaṅnirayāṁs tadaivaiṣa vimuñcati || 28 I|
The soul (caught and) drawn by the Great Net (cast) by (a teacher)
who has the knowledge (of how to do it) is immediately freed from (the
worlds of) heaven, ghosts, animals and hell (in which it resided). (28)
He renders this (teaching) firm by presenting an example.

TTrT-TĀTITT:
ṬRTĀT GTḤ |

tajjñānamantrayogāptaḥ puruṣaś caiṣa kṛtrimam ḷ
yogīva sādhyahṛdayāt tadā tādātmyam ujjhati l| 29 ||
This soul (puruṣa) who has been captured by the knowledge,

mantras, and yoga of that (teacher) immediately abandons (the place in

which he resides,) like a yogi who abandons the artificially crafted (kṛtrima)

unity (with another person’s body by departing) from the heart of (his)
victim (sādhya) with whom he was identified. (29)

Just as a yogi who, even though he possesses a state of unity with (his)
victim when (practicing the yoga of) entry into another person’s body
(parapurapraveśa) and the like, (when he separates himself) from the heart of
(his) victim, abandons at that very moment the artificially crafted (kṛtrima)
unity (with him). This is the meaning (of these) statements.

Nor is this (teaching) anything new. Thus, he says.

gJIIRĪRGTTĪRTGTTGTĒTHĀTTTT:|
zsṝaīṝ 7 frṁ q tā a: ātmī aā

3.

sthāvarādidaśāś citrās tatsalokasamīpatāḥ |

tyajec ceti na citraṁ sa evaṁ yaḥ karmaṇāpi vā || 30 ||
If (by this procedure, the soul) abandons the various states (in
which the soul is reborn,) starting with that of plants, (and so too) the
communality with their world and proximity (to them), there is nothing
extraordinary (about this), for this too is only due to Karma. (30)
If (the soul) abandons the particular conditions he has assumed (one
after another) under the sway of Karma, then how is it an occasion for wonder if
the soul, (caught and) drawn by the Great Net, does the same? This the meaning

of this statement.
Again, this is a special feature of human birth. Thus, he says:

TANTRĀLOKA

sÃṀkrs--wlrrōī
g 71 |

adhikāriśarīratvān mānuṣye tu śarīragaḥ |
na tadā mucyate dehād dehānte tu śivaṁ vrajet || 31 I|
He who has reincarnated amongst human beings, because (his)
body is that of one who is fit (to receive initiation), is not liberated from the

body just then. (Only) when the body comes to an end does he go to Śiva.

[€5}

Surely (one may ask), if this is so, does this purifying initiation
(saṁskāra) make some difference to him, or not? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

tasmin dehe tu kāpy asya jāyate śāṅkarī parā |
A certain (inscrutable) (power of) Śiva (śāṁkarī), which is his
supreme devotion (for Śiva), (arises) within that very body, although he has
not cultivated sound reasoning and the knowledge (of scripture,) or even
(served) a teacher. (32)
‘(He has) not cultivated (sound reasoning etc.)'. The intended sense
is that by virtue of its glorious power (māhātmya), there is no need to take up
anything else.
Surely (one may ask), in this way, by not abandoning that body, that
soul does not attain (this other one) here, so who is it that (receives this)
sacrament? (If there is none to receive it), then what is effected by the
initiation of one who is absent?

ācūtkaiīsai

3 1

taddehasaṁsthito ‘py eṣa jīvo jālabalād imam |
dārbhādidehaṁ vyāpnoti svādhiṣṭhityāpy acetayan || 33 |
Although this soul resides in (his own) body, by virtue of the power
of the Net, he (occupies and) pervades the effigy (deha) made of kuśa grass

Insert kiṁ between iti and parokṣa-.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

or the like (the teacher has prepared for him to occupy), although he is not
conscious of his own condition as presiding over (it and giving it life). (33)
As the (the soul) is pervasive by nature, it is not impossible that its
(corporeal) support is in both places (at once). This is stated (implicitly by
saying that) ‘he (occupies and) pervades’ (the body made of kuśa grass),
‘although he is not conscious’ (of his own condition), because of the power of
ignorance (to which he is subject).
Or else, he may abandon the human body also by virtue of the teacher’s
power. Thus he says:

āTT-HTĒHTTRTTṬĀTGSTITT-:

TTCGTT Ṭēaī] fāīgafā̃ I . I
manuṣyadeham apy eṣa tadaivāśu vimuñcati || 34 ||
Again, by virtue of the strength of (the teacher’s) repeated (practice

of) Yoga, mantras, rites and knowledge, that (soul) abandons even (this)
human body, just then, quickly (without delay). (34)

Surely, this has been said concerning a soul who has taken this or that
birth (repeatedly). Now, what happens in the case of one who has not assumed a
body? With this doubt in mind, he says:

gGacdrīsarzaīsīī

āṢ WGHG T aTI I| 34, 1)
suptakalpo ‘py adeho ‘pi yo jīvaḥ so ‘pi jālataḥ |
ākṛṣṭo dārbham āyāti dehaṁ phalamayaṁ ca vā || 35 ||
(Moreover,) even a soul without a body, who is as if asleep,
(caught and) dragged by the Net, also enters a body made of kuśa grass or

one made from a fruit. (35)

Sureḷy, here (with regards to this), it was said previously that the body
should be fashioned from (blades of) Kuśa (grass) or cow dung, so how is it that
it is said here to also be made from a fruit? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ac-htzīt aāī āēehcŪ |

jātīphalādi yat kiñcit tena vā dehakalpanā |
Ś Just as Abhinava referred to the Fully Conditioned (sakala) perceivers who are in the waking

state above in verse 26 here, it seems, he is referring those who, Unconditioned due to Dissolution

(pralayākala), are asleep.

TANTRĀLOKA

The body may also be fashioned by something (else), such as
nutmeg or the like. (36ab)
However, there is (something) special here (in this case). Thus, he says:

antarbahirdvayaucityāt tad atrotkṛṣṭam ucyate || 36 ||
That (body) is befitting (for the soul), both within and (as much) on
the outside, and so is said here to be the most excellent. (36cd)

Ṝā a gR-āṝratāīa 1| x 0 1

JāITĀĪT-ĀTĪTTATITTAT
TI I `#8 I
aT7EN TGAT GGPAITĪ T TGd |

tato jālakramānītaḥ sa jīvaḥ suptavat sthitaḥ |

manoviśiṣṭadehādisāmagrīprāptyabhāvataḥ | 37 I|

na spaṇḍate na jānāti na vakti na kilecchati |
tādr̥śasyaiva ṣaṁṣkārān sarvān prāgvat prakalpayet || 38 I|
nirbījadīkṣāyogena sarvaṁ kr̥tvā puroditam |
vidhiṁ yojanikāṁ pūrṇāhutyā sākaṁ kṣipec ca tam || 39 |I
dārbhādidehe mantrāgnāv arpite pūrṇayā saha |
muktapāśaḥ śivaṁ yāti punar āvṛttivarjitaḥ || 40 ||
sapratyayā tv iyaṁ yatra spandate darbhajā tanuḥ |
tatra prãṇamanomantrārpaṇayogāt tathā bhavet || 41 II
sābhyāsasya tad apy uktaṁ balāśvāsi na tatkṛte |
Thus, the soul brought (here to the image) by the method of the Net
(jālakrama) is like one who is in deep sleep, for (it has not) acquired (the
necessary) assembly (of instruments to act and perceive,) such as a body
endowed with a mind and the rest. (Thus,) it does not move, nor know, say

The meaning is not clear to me. Maybe all hc is saying is that this ‘body is the best because it is
both pleasing to see and agreeable to cat.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

or, indeed desire (anything). The teacher should (nonetheless) perform all

the rites of purification (sarīskāra) as before for one who is such.

After

having completed all (the rites) taught previously, along with the initiation
without seed and the procedure that conjoins (the soul to Śiva), he should

cast that (image into the fire,) along with a full oblation.

Once the body (made of) kuśa grass or the like has been offered into
the fire of Mantra, together with the full (oblation, the soul,) released from
(its) fetters, goes to Śiva, and does not return again (into an embodied
state).

This (initiation may also) have an (outer) sign (testifying to its
effectiveness) (pratyaya), in which case the body made of Kuśa grass pulses.
That happens because of the conjunction (yoga) of the vital breath, mind

and the offering of mantra. That (pulsation) is said to inspire great faith in
the person who is engaged in the practice (of this rite, but is of) no (benefit)

to the one for whom it is done. (37-42ab)

‘One who is such’ is one whose condition is like one who is sleeping.

(He should cast) ‘that’ body made of kuśa grass or the like (into the fire). That

is said (in the following passage,) beginning with:

‘After that, (the officiant) who is standing with his feet (straight and)
equal, should place that image, facing upwards, at the extremity of the
sacrificial ladle that holds clarified butter . . . He should then cast the full
(oblation into the fire), burn that image in the fire, and conjoin (the soul) with

the supreme abode. Truly, truly, there can be no doubt, (the soul) becomes

united with Śiva.

‘That’ pulsation (inspires faith in the person engaged in the rite but is

of) ‘no (benefit) to the one for whom it is done’. The intended sense is that it
is not a sacrament (saṁskāra) of any sort for the one who is to be initiated.

He (now) transposes this same (teaching to that concerning) the
initiation of a living aspirant who is absent.

rTaçtkzra aaṁqfā Ṝajr: I

sstācqrtātr

zāīī: || 3 1

ÉgEIēḻ|EQTCĪGṭGIEIEEĪTKH

[EEĀ IETEṀN IÇIPICJHCECLCIEEṬIṬHĀI
mṛtoddhāroditair eva yathāsaṁbhūtihetubhiḥ || 42 ||
jīvatparokṣadīkṣāpi kāryā nirbījikā tu sā |
tasyāṁ darbhākṛtiprāyakalpane jālayogataḥ || 43 1|
! ‘That is said (in) – tad uktam – may be a way of introducing a direct citation of the text from
which Abhinava is drawing.

Read tadākṛtiṁ for tatprakṛtiṁ.

1s this another reference drawn from the Haṁsaparameśvara?

TANTRĀLOKA

saṅkalpamātreṇākarṣo jīvasya mṛtibhītitaḥ |
Śiṣṭaṁ prāgvat kuśādyutthākāraviploṣavarjitam || 44 |
The initiation of a living (aspirant) who is absent should also be
performed, as much as possible, by the (same) means (hetu) said (to be
operating) to rescue the dead. It is (an initiation) without seed. In that
(version of the rite), the (capture and) dragging of the soul by means of the

Net into the fashioned image that is like the one made of kuśa grass (used

for the rite of the dead) is done by means of the imagination alone
(saṁkalpamātreṇa). The rest is as before, except that, for fear that (the

disciple) may die, the image made of kuśa grass or the like is not burnt.
(42cd-44)

Although it is established by virtue (of the principles of) transposition

that (this initiation) is one without seed (as is the one for the dead), even so, in

order that none may doubt that, because (the disciple) is alive, it is one with
seed, it is stated that ‘it is (an initiation) without seed’. (The rite is performed)
‘by means of the imagination alone’. The meaning is that one should not
create (an unnecessary and excessive) burden here (in this rite).
The procedure of the Net is successful in the field of operation that has
been taught. Not elsewhere. Accordingly, he says:

mfttṁṝarzhazīraāta frafkarzvīq

TITTT STTT I| 4 I
pārimityād anaiśvaryāt sādhye niyatiyantraṇāt |
jālākṛṣṭir vinābhyāsaṁ rāgadveṣān na jāyate || 45 ||
(The capture and) dragging (of the absent soul) by the Net does not

happen without practice, because (the teacher may feel a personal)

attachment or aversion (to the disciple, or because of the soul’s) state of

limitation, lack of sovereignty, and the constraint (of Karmic) necessity,
(which applies to everything) one seeks to achieve. (45)

Just as (the capture and) dragging (of the absent soul) by the Net is not
accomplished without practice, neither is it by attachment and hatred. How
could a person who is impelled in this way (by hatred and attachment) make a
goal to be achieved (sādhya) that is subject to the constraint (of Karmic)

necessity other than it is? For his nature is restricted, and so is he is not master

(of anything). As was said before, phenomena do not follow his will. Here
(according to us), that state (of mastery) can only be attained by the penetration
of the Supreme Lord’s state (into the soul). Only the Supreme Lord graces those
who are the objects of grace, which he does through the teacher’s body (over
which he presides); and His glorious power (mahimā) is beyond conception.
This has been said many times.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

Having in this way imparted the teaching of the Net, he says the
following in order to talk about the assessment of the (relative) strength and
weakness of the rites of purification.

The Examination of the Strength and Weakness of the

Group of Purifications (saṁskriyāgaṇe balābalavicāraḥ)

Ta taāgaaṁvīaīrzáīz
dēṝa:: 1

parokṣa evātulyābhir dīkṣābhir yadi dīkṣitaḥ |
tatrottaraṁ syād bālavat saṁskārāya tv adhastanam || 46 ||
Of the (many) incomparable (atulya) initiations with which an
absent person (may be) initiated, the strongest is the higher one. The lower
one serves to purify (the initiand to prepare him for that). (46)
(The initiations that are) ‘incomparable’ are those of the Kula and
Tantra methods (prakriyā) etc. He says this because (many) initiations may be
in progress for the benefit of the (soul) who is to be rescued, performed in this
way by many teachers, who have been requested to do so by many (of his) sons
etc. ‘The higher one’ is the Kaula rite of initiation etc., whereas the inferior one

is said to be the Tantric one.

Again, what happens if the initiations that are underway are comparable

(in elevation and power)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

bhuktiyojanikāyāṅṁ tu bhiyobhir gurubhis tathā |
kṛtāyāṁ bhogavaicitryaṁ hetuvaicitryayogataḥ || 47 II
The variety of fruits of an (initiation) that conjoins (the initiand) to
the fruits (he desires), performed by many teachers, is the result of the

association (of a corresponding) variety of means (hetu). (47)

Surely (one may object that), let this be so here (in this case), but in the
case of an (initiation) that conjoins (the initiand) to liberation, there is no variety
associated (with it,) so the variety of means would be useless. With this doubt in

mind, he says:

TṬT-ĪTT J̄AT f ḍaft ār TīīēTT | v¢ 1
Cf the use of the term heu here with its use above in 21/42d.

TANTRĀLOKA

parokṣadīkṣaṇe māyottīrṇe bhogāya yojayet |
bhogānīpsā durlabhā hi satī vā bhogahānaye || 48 ||
When (the teacher) is initiating (a disciple) in absentia, (he) may
conjoin (him to the appropriate reality levels that) are not beyond Māyā,
so (that he may enjoy) worldly experience (bhogāya). Or else, if (the
disciple) has no desire for worldly experience (bhoga), which is rare, (he
may conjoin the disciple to the higher reality levels beyond Māyā,) so as to
destroy (any further binding) worldly experience. (48)
‘So that he can enjoy worldly benefits (bhogāya)ʼ, not, indeed,
liberation. (A lack of worldly desire) ‘is rare’, because one does not expect the
severance of latent tendencies to (take pleasure in) worldly experience
(bhogavāsanā). A lack of desire for worldly enjoyment (bhoga) (is possible,
and) does happen in the case of some great souls, and that contributes to (their)
liberation. Thus he says: “or else if there is (no desire, he may conjoin the

disciple to reality levels) in order to destroy (further binding) worldly
experienceʼ.

Surely (one may ask), if during an initiation in absentia (the teacher)
performs (a rite) that conjoins (the disciple to other reality levels and worlds,) so
that in this way he may have the worldly experience (that is the consequence of
his Karma), how can that be (his) liberation, even if there is no desire for
worldly experience? With this doubt in mind, he gives the reply (that remedies
it), along with a supporting argument.

Ṭāṁc- āāīThīat aīrRadtaratrazārtaī
|] x3 1
uktaṁ hi svānyasaṁvittyoḥ svasaṁvidhalavattarā |

bādhakatve bādhikāsau sāmyaudāsīnyayos tathā || 49 ||
It is said that, of (the two, namely) one’s own consciousness and that

of someone else, one’s own consciousness is by far the strongest. When

there is an impediment (bādhaka), it annuls (bādhikā) it, and it is such also

with respect to the states of equality and indifference. (49)

(One’s own consciousness is) ‘by far the strongest’. The sense is that

even though the teacher has performed (the rite) which conjoins (the disciple) to
the enjoyment (of worldly experience), it is possible for him to be liberated.

Thus, it is said that ‘it’, that is, one’s own consciousness ‘annuls’ ‘the states of

equality and indifference’ present in the consciousness of both the teacher and

Read, as Gnoli suggests, (a)'māyottīrṇe for māyottīrṇe.

Ia this case, the former is the consciousness of the disciple and the latter that of the teacher.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

the disciple. (One’s own consciousness) ‘is such’, that is, it annuls (the other
states of consciousness). This is the meaning.

teacher.

He (now) presents a feature (viśesa) (of this rite) taught by another

kiEGEUĪETÉÉĀRFUIGĪCEI|TĪTI

aaṛṁ rrgafa

TRTRJSYI
āṬ] TāT Tú GJHTH Ṭ: I| 42 II

faī 11 u3 1

srīmān dharmaśivo ‘py āha pārokṣyāṁ karmapaddhatau |

parokṣadīkṣaṇe samyak pūrṇāhutividhau yadi l 50 |I
agniś ciṭicitāśabdaṁ sadhūmaṁ pratimuñcati |
dhatte nīlāmbudacchāyāṁ muhur jvalati śāmyati || 51 II

vistaro ghorarūpaś ca mahīṁ dhāvati cāpy adhaḥ |

dhvāṁkṣādyaśravyaśabdo vā tadā taṁ lakṣayed guruḥ |l 52 ||
brahmahatyādibhiḥ pāpais tatsaṅgaiś copapātakaiḥ |

tadā tasya na kartavyā dīkṣāsminn akṛte vidhau || 53 ||

The venerable Dharmaśiva has also said in the Karmapaddhati,

with regard to (this initiation) in absentia, that if during (this) initiation in

` Here, it seems that Jayaratha’s comment is not correct. The point here seems to be this. This
initaton serves to generate the circumstances in which the soul can have worldly experience, and

so contributes to the exhausting of its Karma, which is its cause. This is alright in most cases, as

this is the soul’s desire. However, i the soul has no desire for worldly pleasures and benefits,
aspiring instead to liberation, it is not compelled to descend to the level which is the domain of

Māyā to have this experience, which would be an impediment to the immediate attainment of
liberation. The reason for this is simply that its own state of consciousness prevails over this
possible impediment. The same holds good eyen for those states which other schools consider to
be liberation, namely, the equality with Śiva preached by dualist Śaivites, and detached

indifference (audāsinya) to the sphere of objectivity, which is the liberaton taught by the dualist
Sāṁkhya and Yoga schools. In brief, in the course of the initiation of an individual in absentia,
the teacher normally conjoins the disciple to a realm of worldly experience which is the

consequence of his Karma. Ēven so, if the mental taits of th disciple are the right ones, he can

attain liberation by means of it.
Kṣemarāja cites Dharmasiva in his commentary on SVT 1 1/7ab. Sanderson (2006b: 134-135 and
2007: 388-389) reports that Takṣavarta in his Niryādisaṁgrahapaddhati cites a number of

paddhatis ‘including extracts from Dharmasśiva’s Karmoddyota. It is probable that the

Karmapaddhati Abhinava is citing here is the same work, the original name of which was the
Karmoddyotapaddhati. Aīthough the Saiddhāntka initiaton name cnding with
‘-śiva’ suggests that Dharmaśiva was a Saiddhāntika, the references show that he made provisions
for Śaivite initiates of all the currents, allowing for the repetiton and visualization of their

mantras. Moreover, his system also allowed for the worship of Bhairava. As the mantra given to

TANTRĀLOKA

absentia, when correctly offering the (final) plenary oblation (pūrṇāhuti),
the fire crackles with (much) smoke, assumes the colour of dark (storm)
clouds, repeatedly flares up and subsides, and (assuming) a fierce
appearance, also runs down along the earth beneath (it) or (makes) an
unbearable (and inauspicious) noise, such as that of crows (cawing), then
the teacher should take note of that (as a sign that the disciple) is (afflicted)
by great sins, such as brahminicide and the minor sins associated with

those (the disciple has committed). Then, (in that case), he should not
impart the initiation if the (following reparatory ritual) procedure (vidhi)
has not been performed. (50-53)

He (now) teaches that procedure.

īā WGRṬTdS:
ṬT: TJZTSTaa: |

navātmā phaṭpuṭāntaḥsthaḥ punaḥ pañcaphaḍanvitaḥ |
amukasyeti pāpāni dahāmy anu phaḍaṣṭakam || 54 ||
iti sāhasriko homaḥ kartavyas tilataṇḍulaiḥ |
ante pūrṇā ca dātavyā tato 'smai dīkṣayā guruḥ || 55 ||
parayojanaparyantaṁ kuryāt tattvaviśodhanam |
The teacher should offer a thousand oblations (to the fire) of sesame

seeds and rice, (while reciting) the mantra Navātmā, encapsulated by (two)
PHATs followed by another five PHATs (and say) AMUKASYA PĀPĀNI
DAHĀMI (MI burn up this person’s sins”), followed by eight PHATs. He
should offer a plenary oblation at the end. After that, by means of (the rite

of) initiation, the teacher should purify the metaphysical principles (tattva)

for (the initiand, causing him to advance through them progressively) right

up to the supreme union (with Śiva). (54-56ab)
burn the dead initiand's sins is also used for this purpose

in Kashmir, Sanderson opines that

Dharmaśiva may well have been a Kashmiri. This possibilty may be supported by Abhinava

himself, who lists a certain Dharmasiva below as one of his teachers (37/62). It is possible that
Jayaratha supports this identification, if by his reference to him as ‘another teacher’ he means

another one of Abhinavagupta’s teachers. Finally, the ending of his name, like that of śānaśiva, to

whom Abhinava refers as the author of another paddhati (below 22/28cd-31ab), suggests that they

were both ascetics. Thus, they appear to be exceptions, as was Abhinavagupta himself, to ‘the

dominant character of the Śaivism of the Kashmirian exegetes, namely that it is that of married
householders.” (Sanderson 2007: 391).

This procedure, which serves to remove excess sinful impurities from the disciple, extends from
verse 54 to 60. Abhinava tells us that it is drawn from the Dīkṣottara (61ab). Unfortunately, it is

not found in the extant version of the Dīkṣortara. Was it taken from Dharmasśiva’s paddhati?

Verses 50-56ab are translated by Sanderson (2006b: 136 n. 481; see also Sanderson 2007: 390

n. 527). He says: ‘The mantra, substituting the name of the initiand Śivasvāmin, would be [OṀ]
PHAṬ H-S-KṢ-M-L-V-R-YŪṀ PHAT 6 ŚIVASVĀMINAḤ PĀPĀNI DAHĀṂI PHAṬ 8

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
‘After that’ means after the (reparatory) procedure (has been executed).

He now transposes this same procedure with respect to a living
(disciple) who is present (before the teacher).

pratyakṣe ʻpi sthitasyāṇoḥ pāpino bhagavanmayī l/ 56 |I
Śaktiṁ prāptavato jyeṣṭhām evam eva vidhiṁ caret |
This same procedure may be executed also for a sinful soul who is
present (before the teacher), (provided that) he has received the (gracious
and favourable) power (called) Jyeṣthā,” who is made of the Lord
(Himself). (S6cd-57ab)
Here (in this context, he now) presents another view.

ar ar šṝṝīs: āaīgç 7 ãazīa qa IM 4y91
YATRTTAṬ
aṬ] : JTITTĪA JĪTḤ |

yadi vã daiśikaḥ samyaṁ na dĩptas tasya tatpurã l| 57 II
prāyaścittais tathā dānaiḥ prāṇāyāmaiś ca śodhanam |
kṛtvā vidhim imāṁ cāpi dīkṣāṁ kuryād aśaṅkitaḥ l| 58 1I

Or else, if the teacher (feels that he is) not properly (and fully
inspired and) energized (dīpta), he may execute this procedure, and so too

[SVĀHĀ], the numerals indicating the number of times that the preceding syllable should be

repeated. This procedure is seen in the Kashmiri Śaiva manual for cremation. This is to be

performed, as in Dharmasiva’s paddhati, before the purification of the Tattyas,

that is to be done

at the time of cremation in the case of a person who has not received initiation while alive. See

Śivanirvāṇapadáhati (1984: 202, 274-275) (= Chandra, Lokesh, 1984 Sanskrit Texts from
Kashmir, Volume.7. Śata-piṭaka Series, Indo-Asian Literatures, No. 333, New Delhi: Sharada

Rani p. 2020), Ḹ. 1-3, p. 275 (= Chandra 1984, p. 202), 1, 3-5: (tad anu) navātmahomaḥ (phaṭ
hasarakṣamalavayūṁ phaṭ svāhā shasram 1000 vā 100 vā 10 hutrvā. pūrṇā. tejo 'ṣi PHAṬ PHAṬ
AMUKASYA PÁPÁNI DAHĀMI SVĀHĀ . …. adikṣitasya tattvaśodhanaṁ kuryāt āhutīnāṁ

1000 sahasram 100 śatam vā (conj.: 100 śataṁ śataṁ vā Ēd.) yathāśakti. ājyāhutiḥ śreṣṭhā

tadabhve tilayavataṇḍulaiḥ. yathāsau pṛthvītattam āyāhya saṁpūjya cāhunet.’
Note, by the way, that the form of Navātman here is as we find it commonly in Kubjikā

and Śrīvidyā rituals, that is, HSKṢMLVYŪM. The form of Navātman Abhinava teaches for the
ika

rites is RHRKṢMḶVYŪM.

Śiva’s power has two aspects, aroused and tranquil, embodied in two energies. One obscures the

soul and the other liberates it. The first is called Vāmā, the second Jyeṣṭhā. Concerning Vāmā and

Jyeṣṭhā, see TĀv ad 4/21¢d-22ab note 4,76. In TĀv ad 13/207cd-208ab) (207), Jayaratha quotes
the following lines: ‘Vāmā (is so called because she) emits (vamanāt) the world of transmigration.

She is the cover (that obscures) one’s own nature.' Again: ‘Jyeṣṭhā who is great and full, desiring

to gradually withdraw the reality consisting of the series of latent traces that accrue from all

worldly experience, is the sole path to liberation.’

TANTRĀLOKA

perform the initiation for (his disciple), free of (all) doubts once he has

purified (himself) with rites of reparation (prāyaścitta), the offering of gifts
(dāna) and practiced (various forms of) breath control (prāṇāyāma). (Ścd58)
(The teacher may perform these rite) ‘for (his disciple)’, that is, also for

the individual soul who is present (before him).

Again, one who knows reality (tattvajña) has no need to take up
(upādeya) any of this (ritual procedure to initiate his disciple).

cōāaṃ fārā: Jḍra’TīaTTdṁ ṬTJTĀTT I| < I

Tī Ḷā: ĪTHTRd TIT ARTĪTRIaT JIIÇ I 0 1|

aī ftr.
sarvathāvartamāno ‘pi tattvavin mocayet paśūn |
icchayaiva śivaḥ sākṣāt tasmāt taṁ pūjayet sadā || 59 ||
śāṭhyaṁ tatra na kāryaṁ ca tat krtvādho vrajec chiśuḥ |
na punaḥ kīrtayet tasya pāpaṁ kīrtayitā vrajet || 60 ||
nirayaṁ varjayet tasmād iti dīkṣottare vidhiḥ |

(A teacher) who knows reality (tattvavid) may also, even if he is not

present in every way, liberate fettered souls as (he) wishes. He is Śiva in

person (sākṣāt), and so he should always be venerated. The disciple must
not be stingy” there (about this). If he is, he goes down (falling to lower
realms). Again, (the teacher) should not divulge his (disciple’s) sin. One
who divulges (the sin of others) goes to hell. Thus, he should seek to avoid

(this). Such is the prescription (vidhi) (taught) in the Dīkṣottara.’(59-61ab)

Read sarvathāvartamāno for sarvathā vartamāmo.
The sense of śāṭhyam here is vittaśāthyam.

21/59 corresponds to Dīkṣottara 17/157cd-159, which reads:

sarvathāsarvamāno'pi (>vartamāno pi) tatvavin mocayet paśum |I15II
tatvavit sa śivaḥ

t tasmāt taṁ pratipūjayet |

mānuṣīṁ tanum āsādya śive jṅātaṁ (> śivajñānaṁ) prayacchati l 158 II
tasmāt tavvavidācāryaḥ śivavat pājayet sadā |
māyā tasya na kartavyā kṛtvā māyāṁ vrajaty ayam (> alam) || 159 |I

‘(A teacher) who knows realiy (iatvavid) may also, even if he is not present in every
way, liberate the fettered soul. He who knows reality is Śiva in person (sākṣār), and so he should
always be worshipped. (IS7cd-158ab)
Having attained a human body, he bestows knowledge of Śiva. Thereforc, the teacher
who knows reality should always be venerated like Śiva (Himsclf). One should not deceive him.
Having deceived him, this (fettred soul) goes (to lower realms).’ (158cd-159).

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

‘In every way’, that is, in some manner (prakāra). Deceit (here means)

doubt (and uncertainty). (The teacher) ‘should seek to avoid’ speaking about

(his disciplesʼ) sins.
He (now) concludes the topic of (this) chapter.

eṣā parokṣadīkṣā dvidhoditā jīvaditarabhedena || 61 ||

This is the initiation in absentia, which is of two kinds, according to

whether (it is performed) for a living (disciple) or one who is not. (61)

This is the auspicious end.
Jayaratha, whose mind is full of joy by virtue of (his) desire to elevate
(uddidhīrṣā) the entire universe, has written (this) commentary on the twenty-

first chapter (of the Tantrāloka).

This is the twenty-first chapter of the venerable Tantrāloka, called the

Exposition of The Initiation of those who are Absent.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
The Extraction of Sectarian Signs (iṅgoddhāra)
I praise the Lord who has opened His mouth wide to withdraw the false

purification of those who are badly fashioned (durvṛtta); the praise (I offer) is

not weak (amanda) and delights (all) the worlds.

Now, he says with the second half of the verse (begun at the end of the

previous chapter,) in order to discuss the initiation that extracts the (sectarian)
signs (of other schools and so converts to Saivism):

[k-īcuúēzikEṭĀEz INERIEEEAE TSa1I

liḷōogoddhārākhyām atha vacmaḥ śivaśāsanaikanirdiṣṭām || 1 ||
We will now talk of the extraction of the sectarian signs (of other
schools), which is explained only in Siva’s teachings (śivaśāsana). (1)
(It is explained) only (in Śiva’s teachings). As was said before:
‘Thus, purificatory rites are described only here in the Śaiva scriptures,

for those who have no faith in the teachings (artha) of other scriptures. And so

also (for this reason), Śaiva (doctrine) is the most excellent. One who has fallen
elsewhere (in another school) can be graced here with increasingly higher
(teachings). This is not so for one who has fallen anywhere (in any lower
school) other than this one. This is the reason why Brahmā, Viṣṇu and other
omniscient (sarvajña) (gods) have not prescribed in their scriptures any (rites
to) extract the sectarian marks (of other schools) or the like.”

Surely (one may ask), is this initiation taught in our scripture (i.e. the

Maālinīvijayottara), or not? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Those at a Lower Reality Level who Follow Lower Traditions
are Extracted from There Along with their Sectarian Marks
and Led Upwards Inspired by Grace

3acdI Eī 3IḹSīdī āā q Tāāīa EEE | X 1

GṚ- i gĩṁaī fra gisúgsād|
Chapter 18 of the Sarvajñānottara (IFP T 334) called liṅgoddhārādiprakaraṇam and the short

chapter 25 of the Sārdhatrimśatikālottara are dedicated to this subject, that is, conversion to

aiyiṣmm.

TĀ 13/357-359.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

STgTĪS
TTTa
TTY
JTTYT;:TZ

-.: fTTāṁṁīaī̄ zTrRaRar; |

3aī ṬATTI TĪTFTRGTTT
TThṀ
I Ṃ, I

I JS TZS qaT |

STIT B-TāTīT TIT: ŪṬ T_Ḥ I II

uktaṁ śrīmālinītantre kila pārthivadhāraṇām |
uktvā yo yojito yatra sa tasmān na nivartate || 2 ||
yogyatāvaśasañjātā yasya yatraiva vāṣanā |

sa tatraiva niyoktavyo dīkṣākāle tatas tv asau || 3 I|

phalaṁ sarvaṁ samāsādya śive yukto ‘pavṛjyate |
ayukto ‘py ūrdhvasaṁśuddhiṁ saṁprāpya bhuvaneśataḥ || 4 |
śuddhaḥ śivatvam āyāti dagdhasaṁsārahandhanaḥ |
uktvā puṅṁdhāraṇāṁ coktam etad vaidāntikaṁ mayā || 5 |
kapilāya purā proktaṁ prathame paṭale tathā |
anena kramayogena saṁprāptaṁ paramaṁ padam || 6 |
na bhūyaḥ paśutāmeti śuddhe svātmani tiṣṭhati |

After having taught (the manner of) concentration on the (gross

element) Earth, it is said in the venerable Mālinītantra that ‘wherever (the

disciple) is conjoined (by the teacher), he does not return back (from there).
(The disciple) should be conjoined there at the time of initiation (to the
reality level) where (his karmic) predisposition (vāsanā) (for it) has arisen
by virtue of (his) competence (yogyatā) (for it). Then, having (thus) attained
all the fruit (of his Karma), he is united with Śiva and departs (from
transmigratory existence). (But) even if he is not (thus) united (to Śiva),
having received a higher purification from the lord of the world (in which
he resides), he is (finally) pure. The fetters of transmigratory existence (that

bind him) burnt away, he attains Śiva’s state.’ Again, after having taught

(the manner of) concentration on the (reality level of the) individual soul, it
is said (there): ‘I first imparted (this teaching) that follows after the Vedas
(vaidāntika) to Kapila’. Similarly, (it is said) in the first chapter (of the

Read vāsanā for śāsanā. Cf. above, 5!2cd-4, especally 15/3d.
22/3-3ab is a quotation of MV 12/41ab, 40, 41cd-42 with minor variants.
22/5d-6a is a brief paraphrase of MV 16/24. A scries of meditatve suports (dhāraṇā) are
described in chapters 12 to 16 of the MV. These correspond to cach of th rcalty levels beginning
with Earth and ending with Māyā (I6/42). Then beyond that, the yogi attains ‘the plane of the
Lord of the Lords of mantra’ (647). Along this chain of ascent, he rises to the reality levl of the
individual soul (16/17d-23) and meditates on him within the lotus of the heatt. In the MV, Śiva
echoed by Abhinava, declares that: ‘that is the knowledge (vijūāna) of the Vedānta, deṣcribed in
brief. imparted this (teaching) previously to Kapila extensively.’ (16/24)
As the founder of Sāṁkhya, the sage Kapia is traitionally believed to have contributed
considerably to the concept of the individual soul. Uncreated and etemal, individual souls are
innumerable, some embodied, others not. The respect Kapila enjoys in Śaiva circles underscores
their indebtedness to the SŚāṁṅkhya for suplying twenty-four of the reality levels absorbed into the

TANTRĀLOKA

Maālinīvijayottara): ʻonce the supreme plane has been attained by means of
this gradual union (kramayoga), one never returns to the fettered state, (but
always) abides within one’s own pure Self.’ (2-7ab)
(Śiva

(vaidāntika).

taught)

the

knowledge

‘that

follows

after

the

Vedas

Surely (one may ask). When talking about the initiation in which the
sectarian marks (of other traditions) are extracted, why is (its) description said to

be like gold for one who desires to cross over the ocean of confusion
(saṁdihāna)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

srāī fē ēzaōṣaīszi fšraācaīaxaīḹ 1] . 1A

ō::&iEttzitxtdEtzzuiEr
dI
TTRTJIR-HYSTÇATRFJaTĀT : 1 ¢ 1

fṜlīaāt a f-rr sraāīsīī Ūggāīṣa 11 < 1
ato hi dhvanyate ‘ṛtho ‘yaṁ Śivatattvādhareṣv api || 7 |I
tattveṣu yojitasyāsti punar uddharaṇīyatā |
samastaśāstrakathitavastuvaiviktyadāyinaḥ || 8 II
Śśivāgamasya sarvebhyo ‘py āgamebhyo viśiṣṭatā |

Śivajñānena ca vinā bhūyo ‘pi paśutodbhavaḥ ) 9 ||

Thus, the sense that (these verses) suggest is also that 1) one who
has been conjoined to reality levels (tattva) below that of Śiva, should be
extracted from them again (and elevated further). 2) Śiva’s scripture
bestows separation from the realities taught in all (the other) doctrines
(śāstra). (Such) is its special (excellence) with respect to all (other)
scriptures (which makes it the most elevated of all). 3) Without knowledge
of Śiva, the fettered state (inevitably) arises again. (7cd-9)
‘Thus’ because of (these) three statements, (it is clear that the Śaiva
teachings are the most elevated). The ‘reality levels (attva) below that of Śiva’
(meant here) are those that are also on the plane of Māyā. This is the meaning.
He is declaring in this way that even a person who is located in a lower
philosophy (darśana) (but) has received a descent of the power (of grace) by
means of the ritual procedure (prakriyā) of the Śaivāgama should be extracted

Śaiva systm of thirty-six. Here we are alerted that he was especially venerated for his teachings
concerning the individual soul (puruṣa).
Read saṁprāptaṁ for saṁprāptaḥ.

2206cd-7ab, literal quote of MV 1/47. See above, 19/14 and TĀv ad 19/55. Before expounding
the rite of conversion, Abhinava wishes to establish that although this subject is not discussed
explicitly in his primary source, the Mālinīvijayottara, it is suggested in the passages to which he
refers here, and explains in this perspective up to verse 4ab.
Abhinava is explaining the passages he has just quoted from the MV.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

out (from the lower levels) by the teacher in the manner, for example, the Lords

of the world orders (proceed upwards to higher worlds by abandoning the lower
ones impelled by the Supreme Lord). It is said everywhere (in all the Śaiva
scriptures) that the means there (to do that)is the initiation by means of which
the sectarian signs (of other traditions) are extracted. ‘All (the other) doctrines
(śāstra)’ are (the Sāmkhya) of Kapila and the rest. The reality (vastu) taught

there is the discrimination between Nature and the individual soul. (However,)

even if that (has been achieved,) they are not liberated from Māyā. (Whereas)

the Śaivāgamais the main (and most excellent), because it bestows separation
from the reality those (others) teach. Thus, it is from that that one attains the

supreme level (pada) directly (sākṣāt), whereas, on the contrary, those who have
atṭained other philosophies, attain only lower levels. This has been said many
times before.
And there (in this regard), such is the sequence (of stages) that one
should follow, as he says:

xaezm|maviniE'iEṣṭ1ḷ

I| 2 |

eavīkhāmi f

hrḺaatī. I 2 1

kramaś ca śaktisaṁpāto malahānir yiyāsutā |
dīkṣā bodho heyahānir upādeyalayātmatā || 10 ll

bhogyatvapāśavatyāgaḥ patikartrtvasaṁkṣayaḥ |

svātmasthitiś cety evaṁ hi darśanāntarasaṁsthiteḥ || 1 1 ||
proktam udáharaṇīyatvaṁ śivaśaktīritasya hi |
The extraction (rescue and elevation from lower levels) of one who

is established in other (inferior) doctrines (darśana) (but is) impelled by

Śiva’s power (takes place in the following) sequence (of stages) (krama). (It
begins with a) descent of the power (of grace). (Due to that, the

corresponding) decrease (of the soul’s) Impurity (gives rise to) a desire to

go forth (to find a true teacher). (When he finds him, he receives) initiation,
(which is followed by) insight (bodha) (that leads to a further) decrease of

what should be abandoned and (a corresponding) state of merger in what

should be adopted. (Thus, he) abandons the fettered state he is compelled to
experience, and (the experience of) the agency of the Lord (in and through

his own actions) develops,' (which ultimately results in his being)
well-establishedin his own (true) Self (whichis Śiva). (10-12ab)

Here Abhinava is explaining MV 1/44, i.. ‘one who is penetrated by Rudra’s power, desires to

8g0 to a true teacher in order to attain worldly benefits and liberation, and is led (to him) by Śiva’s
will.’
Gnoli suggests that reading should ‘evidently’ be emended from –saṁkṣayaḥ (‘deṣṭruction’) to

–saṁcayaḥ (‘development’). The resultant meaning in that case would amount to ‘(the experience

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The desire to go forth’ (that develops by Lord’s Śiva grace leads him)
towards a (true) teacher. The ‘insight’ (that develops) after (receiving) initiation
is because he (thereby possesses) the authority to listen etc. to the scriptures.

‘What should be abandoned’ is Impurity and Karma etc. The ‘state of merger

in what should be adopted° consists of total (eka) repose in Śiva’s (divine)

power etc. This is the meaning. ‘The fettered state’ is the soul’s inherent
Impurity (āṇavamala). ‘The agency of the Lord’ is the impulse that impels
towards transmigratory existence.
What should one who has received a descent of the power (of grace) in
this way do (kārya)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

I| 23 1

za] fōrarkr̥a-mrṁī ēēamagsq |

atha vaiṣṇavabauddáhāditantrāntādharavartinām |I 12 ||
yadā śivārkaraśmyoghair vikāsi hrdayāmbujam |
liṅgoddhṛtis tadā pūrvaṁ dīkṣākarma tataḥ param || 13 II
prāg liṅgāntarasaṁstho ‘pi dīkṣātaḥ śivatāṁ vrajet |

If the lotus of the heart of those who follow inferior doctrines,
beginning with the Vaiṣṇava and Buddhist and ending with Tantra
(tantrānta), blossoms by the flood of rays of Śiva’s sun, then (the teacher

should) first of all extract the sectarian marks (of the lower traditions to

which they belong). After that (he should perform the Śaiva) rite of

initiation. (Thus,) even if (the disciple) previously belonged to (another
tradition, indicated by) a different sectarian mark (than ours), he attains
Śiva after (receiving) initiation. (12cd-14ab)
before:

The one ‘ending with Tantra (tantrānta) is the Siddhānta. It was said
‘However, if by (the power of) Śiva’s freedom, they too (become)

propense (to attaining) Śiva’s state, the purification (they have to undergo) is
double, (as it takes place) by the ‘extraction of (their) sectarian marks”

(liṅgoddhṛti), (which signals their conversion, and then) by initiation. A jar (that

smells bad) is perfumed with flowers in order to eliminate the bad smell. The

purification that it requires is double. Such is not the procedure when a jar is

of) the agency of the Lord (in and through his own actions) develops’. This makes good sense.
Jayaratha takeṣ the reading as it stands as good, and understands it as translated. Although this

also makes sense, the understanding of ‘agency’ as the impulse that impels towards
transmigratory existence does indeed appear to be somewhat strained.
' Cf. below, 23/74cd-76.
Above, 13/281cd-283ab.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
The Proclamation (to the Lord) and (His) Consent
(śrāvaṇam cābhyanujñānam)

ētte 'CAI

īka {q I 25 1|

ṬṬ TTTRTGTTTITĀTÑRTTTTT
I 2¢ 1
TJTSĪ G-TTIK GāTTGTHĀĪ TTTĪq |

JaATYA JTTIGTq I 28 1

tatropavāsya taṁ cānyadine sādhāramantrataḥ || 14 ||
sthaṇḍile pūjayitveśaṁ śrāvayet tasya vartanīm ḷ
eṣa prāgabhavalliṅgī coditas tv adhunā tvayā || 15 I|
prasannena tad etasmai kuru samyag anugraham |
svaliṅgatyāgaśaṅkotthaṁ prāyaścittaṁ ca māsya bhit | 16 ||
acirāt tvanmayībhīūya bhogaṁ mokṣaṁ prapadyatām |
apāsyāmbhasi nikṣipya snapayed anurūpataḥ |
snātaṁ saṁprokṣayed arghapātrāmbhobhir anantaram || 18 II
pañcagavyaṁ dantakāṣṭhaṁ tatas tasmai samarpayet |
tatas taṁ baddhanetraṁ ca praveśya praṇipātayet || 19 ||
Having made his (disciple) fast, the following day (the teacher)
worships (the Lord) on the sacrificial surface with the (basic) common
Mantras, and having done so, tells (the Lord his disciple’s) life story
(vartinī). (He then says:) “He was previously marked with sectarian signs,

(but) is now impelled by You, well disposed (towards him), grace him as is

befitting (samyak) (to him). May he not (need to) observe a penance as a
result of doubts (that may) arise by his abandoning his own sectarian signs.
Having become of Your nature, may he quickly attain (every) worldly

benefit and liberation!” (Then,) having received the Lord’s consent (ājāā),

(with the words) “may it be so!”, (the teacher) removes (his obligation to
observe his previous) vow and, having done so, places him in water, and
should then make him bathe accordingly. After that, once he has bathed,
(the teacher) should sprinkle him with water from the sacrificial vessel

Read śrāvaṇaṁ for śravaṇaṁ.
For a similar declaration, see MV 9/37-38 cited above in 16/74-76.

TANTRĀLOKA

(arghapātra). Then he should offer (him) the five products of a cow

(pañcagavya), a stick (to clean) the teeth, and having introduced him into
the sacrificial area with his eyes blindfolded, he should make him prostrate.
(14cd-19)

‘(The disciple’s) life story is what has taken place (in his life). (By
Śiva saying) “may it be so!”, (the disciple) is given permission, so that he may
hear (the Mantras and the teachings). (The teacher) ‘should make him bathe’

in order to remove the defects (that arise by the disciple’s observance of) that
(previous) vow. (The disciple should be made to do so) ‘accordinglyʼ, that is, as

befits the teaching of the school (darśana) (the teacher) wishes to impart. This is

the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), what are the (basic) common Mantras here (in

this case), (that) the Lord may be worshipped with, one amongst them? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

Bestowing of One of the Śeven Common Śaiva Mantras

JgēḶS TITGT: TqG TTHRTĪ STĪ ] Q 1

TĪSETTTSN TTCGTYJTAT]ā I 32 I

r-rat aataīa’ graīfatērāta1

aāaāīgfs aHN_ I| 3 1

praṇavo mātṛkā māyā vyomavyāpī ṣaḍakṣaraḥ |
bahurūpo ʻ‘tha netrākhyaḥ sapta sādhāraṇā amī || 20 ||
teṣāṁ madhyād ekatamaṁ mantram asmai samarpayet |
so ʻpy ahorātram evainaṁ japed alpabhug apy abhuk || 21 ||

mantram asmai samarpyātha sādhāravidhisaṁskṛte |
vahnau tarpitatanmantre vrataśuddhiṁ samācaret || 22 |

1) OMṀ, 2) Mātṛkā, 3) Māyā, 4) Vyomavyāpin (the Pervader of the

Sky), 5) the six-syllabled Mantra, 6) Bahurūpa (the Pluriform), and 7) the
one called Netra (the Eye) — these are the seven (universal) common

See above, 15/369.
' See above, 6219cd ff.
” The depositon of Mātṛkā is explaincd above in 15/!17cd-120. HRĪM is the mantra of Māyā.
Vyomavyāpin (the Pervader of the Śky) consists of cighty-one phrases praising Śiva (see abov,
6226cd-227ab and note). The six-syllabled mantra is OM NAMAḤ ŚIVĀYA, as is confirmed by
Jayaatha himself, in his Haracaritacintāmaṇi, 30/15-22. Bahurūpa (the Plariform) is the mantra
of Aghora, one of the five Brahmās (see above, 15/203cd-204ab and note): AGHOREBHYO
THA GHOREBHYO GHORAGHORATAREBHYAŚ CA SARVATAḤ ŚARVA SARVEBHYO
NAMAS TĒ RUDRARŪPEBHYAḤ. Translated, this means: ‘Praise in respects to you O Śarva,
to all who are the Rudras, you who are Not Fierce (aghora), fierce (ghora) and most fiece
(ghoratara) Conceming Aghora, who is identifed with Svacchandabhairava, see SvT 1/43.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

Mantras.' (The teacher) should offer one Mantra amongst them (to his

disciple), who should repeat it day and night, eating little or nothing (at all).
Now, once (the teacher) has presented the Mantra (to his disciple) and
offered (tarpita) that Mantra (with oblations etc.) into the fire that has been
purified by means of the common (basic) procedure, he should (proceed)

to purify (his disciple of the obligation to observe his previous) vow

(rataśuddhi). (20-22)

(The disciple) should repeat ‘it’ (day and night), that is, (he should

repeat) one amongst the (basic) common Mantras. (As he does this, the disciple
may be) ‘eating little or nothing (at all) according to his capacity.
Having purified him in this way, in order to explain (how he is)
liberated from sin, he says:

Netra (the Eye) is the mantra of Śiva Mṛtyuñjaya, that is, OM JUṀ SAHḤ (see below, 30/40cd-

41ab).

' NTS uttarasūtra p. 349-350 Goodall’s commentary on 2/1: ‘The use of mātrkā as mantra is in
later literature typically reserved for contexts where some general all-purpose mantra is required
(hence its prominence in the relatively cclectic Āśānaśivagurudevapaddhati), such as in
liṅgodáhāra . . . or in cases where an existing image is to be newly adapted for worship and the
mantra that was originally installed in it is no longer known. . . . The mātṛkā is therefore

commonly counted amongst types of exoteric or ‘universal’ (sādhāraṇa) mantras. Thus, in the

Jāānaramāvalī (I have taken the passage from the e-text Ī prepared for Muktabodha):
atha sādhāraṇaliṅgapakṣe sādhāraṇamantreṇaivārcanaṁ kāryam | tathā -

praṇavo mātṛkā māyā vyomavyāpī ṣaḍakṣaraḥ |

prāsādāghoramantraś ca sapta sādhāraṇā matāḥ ll

ebhiḥ sampūjayed vidvān sarvasādhāraṇaṁ śivam |l iti |

“Now with regards to common (publi) liṅgas worship should be done with a common
(universal) mantra. (t is said) accordingly:
‘The seven 1) OM, 2) Mātrkā, 3) Māyā̃, 4) Vyomavyāpin (the Pervader of the Sky), 5)
the six-syllabled mantra, 6) Prāsāda and 7) Aghora mantras – are considered to be (universaly)
common. The leamed man should worship Śiva, (the dcity) common to all by means of these
(mantra).”
We find practically the same verse in the Somaśambhupadáhativyākhya (IFP tṣanscrpt
T 0170 (p. 240) e-tcxt on Muktabodha’s site). Trilocanaśiva suplies a similar context:
sarvasāmānyatvena nṛpādibhi(h) sthāpiteṣu niyatajanapūjyeṣu sādhāraṇāṇubhir iti

praṇavo māyā mātṛkā vyomavyāpi ṣaḍakṣaram |

prāsādo bahurūpaśca sapta sādhāraṇā matā |) (iti) |

ebhiḥ pūjā kāryā |

‘With regards to (iṅgas) that have been installd by kings and the like, and that are to
be worshipped by a limited number of people, common souls should worship them as being
common to all and by means of these (mantras as stated in this verse).
1) OM, 2) Matṛkā, 3) Māyā, 4) Vyomavyāpin (the Pervader of the Sky), 5) the sixsyllabled mantra, 6) Prāsāda and 7) Aghora mantras – are considered to be the seven (universal)
common (mantras).
TSa (p. 171) adds ‘by means of the (basic) common mantra’.

TANTRĀLOKA

Purification and Liberation from Sin
(Śśodhanam pātakacyutiḥ)
Purifying Fire Offering

Taāfkĩ Ja7TṀPṀ ṁaTNTAEATT: I Ṝ II

TTTĀYS=<Ī

āaīgFa- dā a; |
eṝ-ftraāī fi=z: aaṁaāīsa

āazšai a šaṁa arradfā fēēāstr
pūjitenaiva mantreṇa kṛtvā nāmāsya saṁpuṭam |
prāyaścittaṁ śodhayāmi phaṭ svāhety ūhayogataḥ || 23 ||

Śataṁ sahasraṁ vā hutvā puṇaḥ pūrṇāhutiṁ tathā |

prayogād vauṣaḍ antāṁ ca kṣiptvāhiūya vrateśvaram || 24 ||
tāro vrateśvarāyeti namaś cety enam arcayet |

śrāvayec ca tvayā nāsya kāryaṁ kiñcic chivājñayā || 25 ||
tato vrateśvaras tarpyaḥ svāhāntena tataśca saḥ |
kṣamayitvā visṛjyaḥ syāt tato ‘gneś ca visarjanam || 26 ||
tacchravaṇaṁ ca devāya kṣamasveti visarjanam |
Having encapsulated the name (of his disciple) with the Mantra that
is being worshipped (in this way, he inserts it in the following mantra),
appropriately
modified
according
to
the
particular
case.

PRĀYAŚCITTAṀ ŚODHAYĀMI PHAṬ SVĀHĀ.” Having offered a

hundred or one thousand oblations (whilst uttering this Mantra), he casts a
plenary oblation (into the fire) with the same procedure, ending with (the
mantra) VAUṢAT. Then, having invoked the Lord of the Vow, saying OṀ
VRATEŚVARĀYA NAMAḤ, he should then worship him and declare:

“By Śiva’s command you should not do anything to him.” Then libation

should be offered to the Lord of the Vow (with an oblation) that ends with
the mantra SVĀHĀ. Having asked his pardon, he should be discharged,

and so too the fire after that. (The procedure is in two parts): first the

declaration to the deity, and then (the deity’s) discharge (with the words)
““please pardon (him).” (23-27ab)

“J purify [basic mantra] so-and-s0 [basic mantra] (of the obligation to perform) penance. PHAT

OM obeisance to the Lord of the Vow.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

Having explained (the rite of) the extraction of sectarian signs in this
way, he (now) describes the rite of initiation.

TTāīāḹttatcaā Jaai fē: : 1 2

sītraīaṁzh: anctaīhīaūā. |

tatas tṛtīyadivase prāgvat sarvo vidhiḥ smṛtaḥ || 27 ||
adhivāsādikaḥ sveṣṭadīkṣākarmāvasānakaḥ |
Then all the procedure (for initiation that takes place) on the third

day is said to be as before, beginning with the preliminary purification
(adhivāsa) and ending with the initiatory rite that accords with (the
disciple’s) own wish. (27cd-28ab)

(The neophant) fasts on the first day. It was said that the extraction of

the sectarian marks (takes place) on the second (day), and on the third (the
initiation).
Surely (one may ask), if the initiation should be performed according to
the (disciple’s) own wish, (does that mean that) he is fit (to receive) all the
initiations?

Converts Cannot be Full-fledged Teachers

ṭ|lJĒEIRIÑGIĀ ĒCATĒEITIĀYVĀI

aāīraiad aśa: |

JIT=T vŪafī̄ṁ īṬGTRTRT ḥ 28 1

raāīd ] JīīTa JTIaTTTTT;|
ṢTArGCTHĪTTTĪYHCTTĒ: I 3° 1|
ġYeTRIHīĪTRPTTTĀ=TĒTTA:|

prāgliṅgināṁ mokṣadīkṣā sādhikāravivarjitā || 28 I
sādhakācāryatāmārge na yogyās te punarbhuvaḥ |
punarbhuvo ‘pi jñāneddhā bhavanti gurutāspadam || 29 ||
mokṣāyaiva na bhogāya bhogāyāpy abhyupāyataḥ |
ity uktavān svapaddhatyām īśānaśivadaiśikaḥ || 30 l|

śrīdevyāyāmalīyoktitattvasamyakpravādakaḥ |

The initiation (that bestows) liberation to those who previously bore
the sectarian signs (of other traditions), does not carry with it the
competence (to become a teacher). Converts are not competent to be on
. For sśrīdevyā yāmalīyokúitattvasamyakpravedakaḥ,

read śrīdevyāyāmalīyoktitattvasamyak-

pravādakaḥ.
The word here for ‘convert’ is punarbhū, which literally means ‘one who has been reborn’.

TANTRĀLOKA

the path of an adept (sādhaka) or teacher (ācārya). The teacher Īśānaśiva,

who correctly explains the true meaning of the teaching of the venerable

Devyāyāmala, has declared in his Paddhati that ‘converts enflamed by

knowledge occupy the office of a teacher (only) to liberate (their disciples,

but) not to also confer worldly benefits (on them). (t is only by the use of)
the appropriate means that (he can act so that they may) also (enjoy)

worldly benefits.’ (28cd-31ab)

The reason here (in this case as to why they) are not fit (to be teachers

or adepts) is that they (must be) born again. As is said:

‘Those operators of Mantras are not subject to rebirth.”

Again, they will be characterized (further ahead):
‘He too (is not a true teacher) who (once bore) the sectarian sign of

another (tradition), and (although now) established in the Śaiva (tradition), must

be born again.

‘(If they) are enflamed by knowledge’ʼ, (they are fit to become

teachers). The sense is, how can those who are enflamed with the knowledge of

supreme nonduality not have authority? (They can liberate others) ‘by making
use of the appropriate means’ʼ, in accord with the methods etc. (prakriyā)
(explained in) the scriptures that serve as means to (the attainment of) worldly
benefits. This the meaning. Nor is that said without a basis. Thus, he says that (it
is taught in) ‘the venerable Devyāyāmala’ etc.
One who has been purified in this way should be taught. Thus, he says:

Concerning the Elimination of Doubt
(Śaṅkhācchedaḥ)

The Procedure Applicable to Śaiva Teachers of a
Lower Order and to those who are Obscured

TṬā-ī-arāriīgrftzāīf=ī afcṣēārfkaīaq u 32 u

īt; fškc |

See also above, 15/472c-474ab (470-471).

s Rcead srīdevyāyāmalīyoktúi- for śrīdevyā yāmalīyoki- and -pravādakaḥ for -pravedakaḥ. See
Sanderson 2007: 391 note 528 and Sanderson 2006b: 136 note 482.

As the Devyāyāmala was a Kashmiri work, Sanderson opines that this Īśānaśiva was from

Kashmir. Sanderson 2007: 391. Referring to the paddhati of Īśānaśiva, of which the sole traced

citation is here in the TĀ, he writes: ‘that passage gives a ruling that excludes converts to Śaivism

from holding the office as Ācāryas or Sādhakas, with the exception in the former case of converts
who achieve self-realization. In giving this ruling, Abhinavagupta tells us, "Īśānaśiva was
explaining a statement on this subject in the Trika's Devyāyāmala. The fact that it cites this source
makes it likely to have been a Kashmirian work, since it is probable that the Devyāyāmala too was

a product of this region.’ There is no reason to identify this śānaśiva with Iśvaraśiva who, along
with Śaṅkararāśi, firṣt propagated the tradition of Śrīvidyā in Kashmir (ibid. 384).
” This line, as we know the following is, may well be drawn from the Devyāyāmala.
MS Th reads matāḥ for sthitāḥ.

This line is quoted by Abhinava from the Devyāyāmala below, 23/10cd.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

gurvantasyāpy adhodrṛṣṭiśāyinaḥ saṁskriyām imām || 31 ||
kṛtvā rahasyaṁ kathayen nānyathā kāmike kila |
anyatantrābhiṣikte ʻpi rahasyaṁ na prakāśayet || 32 |
Even (if he is) up to the (level of a) teacher, the secret (teaching) is

only to be revealed to a follower of inferior doctrines once this rite of
purification (saṅīskriyā) has been performed — not otherwise. Indeed, (it is
said) in the Kāmika: ʻeven if one is consecrated (as a teacher) in another

Tantra, the secret (teaching) should not be revealed (to him)’. (31cd-32)

This should not only be done in the case of a follower of a lower school

(darśana), but also if he is a follower of our own school. Thus he says:

Tāī ũaqīTa-raākīkāTũ ftērā-q u 33 u
svatantrastho ‘pi gurvanto gurum ajñam upāśritaḥ |
tatra paścād anāśvastas tatrāpi vidhim ācaret || 33 ||
Ome should also apply this procedure to a follower of our own
Tantra (at whatever level he may be, even) up to (that of) a teacher, there
(in the case of his being) devoted to a teacher who is ignorant, and later
comes to lose his faith (in him). (33)

‘There’ʼ, in the case of an ignorant teacher.
Surely (one may ask), agreed that there is no advantage (guṇa) at all in
being devoted to an ignorant teacher. But where does the defect (arise) that
(requires) that the sign (of his belonging to that teacher’s lineage should be)
extracted? With this doubt in mind, he says:

šrāī-kã̄raraī frt -rũ q |
TTaāT TṬATĪ TITTĀĒTĀTRCTṬTTT I 3° II
aāīsā Jf̄ īāēhcaṁ aaḥ ai aqaq |
ajñācāryamukhāyātaṁ nirvīryaṁ mantram eṣa yat |
japtavān sa guruś cātra nādhikāry uktadūṣaṇāt || 34 ||
tato ʻṣya śuddhiṁ prāk kṛtvā tato dīkṣāṁ samācaret |
(The reason for this) is because he has repeated a Mantra devoid of
vitality, that has come from the mouth of an ignorant teacher. Moreover,
(that) teacher has no authority (to teach and impart Mantras), due to the

-T: anyatantre bhiṣikto ‘pi.
Cf. below, 23/4, where Abhinava cites the Kāmika again concerning this subject.

TANTRĀLOKA

aforementioned defect. Thus, (a true teacher) may initiate (him again only

after) having first purified him. (34-35ab)

‘The aforementioned defect’ is the (former teacher’s) ignorance.

īeoṁ ātṝa: ga n 3u u

ṣṁtkhratcdaīeaī

fhaō aīgktṁrzīai 1

35 1

adhodarśanasaṁsthena guruṇā dīkṣitaḥ purā || 35 ||

tīvraśaktivaśāt paścād yadā gacchet sa sadgurum |
tadāpy asya śiśor evaṁ Śśuddhiṁ kṛtvā sa sadguruḥ || 36 ||
dīkṣādikarma nikhilaṁ kuryād uktavidhānataḥ |
One who has been previously initiated by a teacher who belongs to

an inferior school of thought (darśana) may subsequently go to a good

teacher, thanks to an intense descent of the power (of grace). Then, if (that
happens), once that true teacher has thus purified his (new) disciple, he
should (without misgivings) perform all the rites of initiation and the rest,
in accord with the stated procedure. (35cd-37ab)
‘One who belongs to an inferior school of thought (darśana)’ is like
a Saiddhāntika in (relation to) the Bhairava current (of scriptures).
Surely (one may ask), it will be said that:
‘(Those who wish to receive the Śaiva teachings) should not be
examined (as to their competence) in the course of initiation; (rather) it should

be taken into consideration (only) when knowledge is imparted (to them).’

So, in accord with this ruling, let (the teacher) impart initiation (to the
convert) in this way. But how can the teaching be imparted without having
(first) considered (whether this initiate is fit to receive it)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

Ascertainment of a Disciple’s Competence

ī ār Ia | 3u1

dar Ūaga-N gaīī aīṁ fqŪãqīç | 3¢ u

fdlī sīq |

This line is drawn from Sarvajñānottara kriyāpāda 1927cd. It is found below as TĀ 23/21cd.
See note there.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

prāpto ‘pi sadgurur yogyabhāvam asya na vetti cet || 37 ||
vijñānadāne tac chiṣyo yogyatāṁ darśayen nijām |
sarvathā tv abruvann eṣa bruvāṇo vā viparyayam |l 38 II
ajño vastuta eveti tat tyaktvetthaṁ vidhiṁ caret |
Even once a true teacher has been found, if he does not know the
state (of the disciple’s) aptitude to receive the knowledge (of the scriptures)
(and wants to ascertain it), the disciple is obliged to show him his own
competence (to do s0). Nevertheless, even if (the disciple) says nothing or
says (something) that is contrary (to the teaching) (viparyaya), (the teacher,

reflecting that) he is in fact ignorant (by nature) (vastutaḥ), abandoning
that (inquiry), should apply the procedure in this way. (37cd-39ab)

‘Even if (the disciple) says nothing’ appropriate to demonstrate his
own competence, (or) ends up (saying something) ‘that is contrary (to the
teaching), in order to inform (the teacher) of (his own) incompetence. This is
the meaning. (The teacher thinks that he behaves in this way because he is) ‘in
fact’ (ignorant by nature,) and not because he is affected by the power of
obscuration (vilaya) or the like. (The teacher abandons) ‘that (inquiry)’ as to

(the disciple’s) competence (knowing him not to be so).
Surely (one may ask), (the disciple may be competent, but) his
competence may not be apparent; rather, on the contrary, it is his lack of
confidence which is so. (But even if that is true and he is not incompetent, rather

he only believes himself to be, because his consciousness is obscured,) well
then, (the opponent may ask,) how can the aforementioned procedure be
undertaken for one who is in a state of obscuration?

na tirobhāvaśaṅkātra kartavyā buddhiśālinā || 39 ||
adhaḥspṛktvaṁ tirobhūtir nordhvopāyavivecanam ḷ
The wise (teacher) should not doubt here (in this case) that (his
disciple is) in a state of obscuration (and so is not fit to receive initiation).
Obscuration consists of the desire for lower (doctrines) and not reflection
(in search of) a means to higher ones. (39cd-40ab)
The sense is that in a state of obscuration, (the disciple) would not

desire to discern a higher means.
He elaborates on this.

Cf. below 23/20cd-22ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

Those Initiated in the Siddhāntas and Bhairava Tantras

Can be Initiated into Trika

+6 1

táī%ā aostī T u 2 u

TGJĀĪRJTĒÑTTTT ḍĒJTṬTRGTTT |

siddhānte dīkṣitās tantre daśāṣṭādaśabhedini || 40 |
bhairavīye catuhṣaṣṭau tān paśūn dīkṣayet trike |
siddhavīrāvalīṣāre bhairavīye kuleʻpi ca || 41 I|
pañcadīkṣākramopāntā dīkṣānuttarasaṁjñitā |
(The teacher) should initiate into Trika those fettered souls who
have been initiated into the Siddhānta, that is, Tantra divided into ten and
eighteen (Tantras), and into the sixty-four Bhairava (Tantras). It is said in

the Siddhavīrāvalisāra as well as in Bhairava’s Kula that the initiation
that is called Anuttara is preceded by a series of five initiations.” (40cd-

42ab)

This (matter) has been discussed in chapter thirteen. Accordingly, one

should refer (back to) there.

(Now) he brings this (exposition back) to rest in the main point.

Abhinava refers to a Siddhāvīratantra in TĀ 33/2. But we know that the citation is from the

Siddhayogeśvarīmata. A manuṣcript of a fragment (chapter five) of a text called Siddhavīreśvarī-

tantra is deposited in the Asiatic Society of Calcutta (MS 3917D, no. 5947, see Śāstrī 1939-1940:
135-136). I have not seen it, so I cannot say whether it is the Siddhayogeśvarīmata. Perhaps the
Siddhavīrāvali-ṣāra citedin TĀ 22/40cd42ab may be the Vīrāvalitantra. But this seems unlikely.

Another possibilityis that it is the Virāvaliḥrrdaya, quoted above in 15/102cd-104ab. Perhaps
Abhinava is referring to three Trika Tantras in a single co-ordinate (dvandva) compound, namely,

the Siddhayogeśvarīmata (Siddha-), Vīāvali, and Trikasāra (-sāra). If so, Abhinava is saying in

TĀ 22/40cd-42ab that Anuttaradīkṣā, which bestows immediate realization, is taughtin all three

of these Trika Tantras. The initiation is also taughtin the Parātrīśikā, or at least possesses the
same characteristic (see ibid. verse 25).

Ś One could also understand bhairavīye kule to mean ‘belonging to the Bhairavakula’, rather than

the name of a text. But this is unlikely. Abhinava has quoted the Bhairavakula concerning the five
levels of initiation leading to Trika. See above, 13/302. Indeed, he quotes the Bhairavakula Tantra
in several other places. See TĀ 27/45-46, 28/50-52ab, 28/59cd and 28/388cd.

Tt is also possible to take ‘anuṭtara’ here to be an adjective meaning ‘unexcelled’ or ‘most

excellent’. However, it appears, at least in my opinion, that Abhinava is referring to initiation into
Trika as Anuttaradīkṣā (see above 13/302). Taking ‘anuttara’ to be a proper name, the expression

means initiation into Anuttara, which could be taken to be short for Anuttaratrika.

Read -kramopāntā for kramopātta.
See above, 13/302.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
Taking Initiation from Many Teachers
Reinforces Knowledge

gfRrzīḺī |
ITGaTĪī TTTRaTVHĪSTT
JTAIÇ āTḡ TGT I| 3 II

II

tena sarvo ‘dharastho ’pi liṅigoddhṛtyānugṛhyate || 42 ||
yo ‘pi hr̥ttthamaheśānacodanātaḥ suviṣṭṛtam |
śāstrajñānaṁ samanvicchet so ‘pi yāyād bahūn gurūn || 43 |I
taddīkṣāś cāpi gṛhṇīyād abhiṣecanapaścimāḥ |

jñānopodvalikās tā hi tattajjñānavatā kṛtāḥ || 44 |I

Thus, anyone who follows inferior (doctrines) is favoured by
extracting the signs (of his affiliation to them). (42cd)
One does not resort to another teacher only when a teacher is
incompetent, (that may also happen) when (a teacher) is competent also. Thus,
he says:
So too, one who, impelled by Maheśvara, who resides in his heart,
aspires to a very extensive knowledge of the scriptures, may go to many
teachers and also take their initiations that end in (his) consecration (as a
teacher). Indeed, performed by (various teachers) who (individually)
possess the knowledge this and that each one (of the scriptures), strengthen

(and reinforce his) knowledge.” (43-44)

Surely, according to such views (as the following), it is taught that it is
(an obstructing) sin (pratyavāya) to abandon a teacher:
‘By disrespecting the teacher, one dies. By disrespecting the Mantra,
one becomes poor. By abandoning the teacher and the Mantra, even a Siddha

goes to hell!!

Here it appears that Abhinava is talking about himself. He clearly declares that he has gone to

many teachers (see below, 37/58 ff.). Moreover, we have observed on many occasions that
Abhinava refers to his Trika teacher, Śambhunātha, as the Supreme Lord (parameśvara) as well
as, occasionally, Maheśvara (see, for example, 5/97 (96cd-97ab)). Who else could reside in hi
heart? In other words, however many teachers have initiated him, it is only this one teacher who is
in his heart. He never abandons him, nor relativises him in relation to other teachers, even if he

has received the full range of initiatons from them. Jayaratha goes on to tell us that, although
encouraged to leam from other teachers, the disciple may only do so if he receives the permission
of his teacher to do so, or is sent by him to another teacher. So it may well be that the Maheśvara
in Abhinava’s heart who is directing him to seek out teachers is indeed Śambhunātha.

The medial vowel between words in the compound mantrāvajāayā has been shortened to
mantravajīayā for the sake of the metre. Although such adjustments metri causa are not allowed
in standard Pāṇinian Sanṣkrit, they are common in the deviant (aiśa) Sanskrit of early Śaiva texts.

TANTRĀLOKA

So how is it that he has said this? Taking this doubt into consideration,
he corroborates (his view by referring to) scripture:

sīTāīarat aī r̄j. JPHTṬT JTĪq I `#, II

uktaṁ ca śrīmate śāstre tatra tatra ca bhūyasā |
āmodārthī yathā bhṛṅgaḥ puṣpāt puṣpāntaraṁ vrajet || 45 ||
vijñānārthī tathā śiṣyo guror gurvantaraṁ tv iti |
It is said in the venerable Mataśāstra and in many (other) places
that ‘just as a bee desiring fine scent goes from flower to flower, so too a

(good) student who desires knowledge should go from teacher to teacher.”
(45-46ab)

There is just this much (that needs to be) specified here, namely, (the
disciple) should go to another teacher with the permission of the previous one.

That is said (in the following verse):

‘However, he should go with the teacher’s permission, and not abandon

(the previous) teacher. By abandoning that teacher, no success (siddhi) (is

possible,) even by repeating Mantra millions of times.”

Surely (one may ask), amongst these many teachers, is there in this way
some special (quality) some one of them may possess, or not? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

Veneration of the One Teacher who Bestows
the Highest Knowledge

TṬTĪ vr̥̄TTĪ TTĀĪ āī fGTTITTITI #ē I

Indeed, most of the deviant forms we observe in the Sanskrit of these texts is for that reason.
Normally Jayaratha, like Abhinava, silently corrects the text to standard Sanskrit, and would have

done that in this case also, but was prevented from doing so by the evident infringement of the
metre that would result.

This verse is most probably from the same source as the one quoted in TĀv ad 22/45-46ab.

The same verse, with no variants, is quoted above in 13/335. See there for the verse that follows
and cf. 4/276cd-277ab (276). Gnoli has identified this reference as being from the SYM, but this
is unlikely. Tōrzsók (1999: 227) opines: ‘the reference seems more likely to belong to the Mata,

which saw itself as surpassing other systems, and perhaps was encouraging initiates of other
systems to ‘convert’. However, as Jayaratha points out, disciples were supposed to ask permission

to leave their guru and could not fly from one guru to another like bees from flower to flower, as
Abhinavagupta describes the situation. Abhinavagupta’s version reflects perhaps his own
experience.” Cf. above, 4/276cd-277ab (276)

“ This verse is most probably from the same source as the one quoted in TĀv ad 22/43-44.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

gurūṇāṁ bhūyasāṁ madhye yato vijñānam uttamam || 46 ||
prāptaṁ so ʻsya gurur dīkṣā cātra mukhyā hi saṁvidi |

Amongst the many teachers, one’s teacher (in the fullest sense is the

one) from whom one has obtained the highest knowledge, and his is the

chief initiation here within consciousness. (46cd-47ab)

them).

‘Here within consciousness’ʼ, which is the common basis (of all of

This should be contemplated by:

q 7Ṭ TTaī gfTIT. I

HaāRāzT’ītrvsrā-ī-:|

9 1]

sarvajñānanidhānaṁ tu guruṁ saṁprāpya susthitaḥ || 47 II
The wise and fortunate one (susthita) who, having attained a

teacher who is a treasure of all knowledge, should worship him (and render

him propitious), intent as he is with the desire of knowing each and
everything. (47cd-48ab)

(By saying just) this much, he has looked with approval on the removal
of the doubt (that may arise) when going to another teacher.
Now by encompassing (in a nutshell) the sense of the main point with
the first half (of a verse), he concludes the subject of (this) chapter.

ṣfār dramatr.

y¢ 1

iti dīkṣāvidhiḥ prokto liṅgoddharaṇapaścimaḥ || 48 II
Thus, the rite (vidhi) of initiation has been taught, ending with the
extraction of sectarian signs. (48cd)
This is the auspicious end (of this chapter).
‘The one called Jayaratha, who possesses the reflective awareness
(āmarśa) of that personal insight (svāvamarśa) that develops by the refutation,
one by one progressively, of the lower doctrines of others, has explained this,
the twenty-second chapter.’
This is the twenty-second chapter, called the Exposition of the

Extraction of Sectarian Signs, of the (commentary called) viveka of the

venerable Tantrāloka.

Read cātra mukhyā for nātra makhyā. Abhiṅava can only be referring here to his Trika teacher
Śambhunātha. Initiaton into Trikais initiaton into Anuttara consciousness.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
The Consecration of a Teacher
(abhiṣecanam)

May (the Rudra called) Sarvatobhadra (In Every Way Auspicious),
having assumed Bhairava’s body, bestow upon you (all) that is here, which is
auspicious in every way, by apportioning his own form.
Now, with the second half (of the verse begun at the end of the previous
chapter), he begins to expound the procedure for the consecration (of a teacher).

€Ébik;EzzRE|ē#erzzrt̄'tcttcH'EI
athābhiṣekasya vidhiḥ kathyate pārameśvaraḥ |
We will now expound the Supreme
procedure for the consecration (of a teacher). (1)

Lord’s

(pārameśvara)

Examination of the Competence of the Postulate (parīkṣā)
Qualities Required of a Teacher

ḷṛ ŪJTRCĪTPI TṬGTNĀATRT |

aāTGTGITT
T< JṬṬḺHJ TIRTT I

yaiṣā putrakadīkṣoktā gurusādhakayor api |
ivādhikāriṇī bhogyatattvayuktimatī kramāt || 2 ||
ninaṁ santaṁ bubhũṣum atha bhãvinam |
yogyaṁ jñātvā sṣvādhikāraṁ gurus tasmai samarpayet || 3 I
This initiation that is called that of (the teacher’s spiritual) son

possesses (the power) to conjoin (yukti) (fettered souls) with those principles

that are the objects of (their) enjoyment, and bestows authority to be both a

teacher and an adept (sādhaka). Once the teacher has ascertained in due
order that (his disciple) is a well-exercised man of knowledge, and is
competent (to be a teacher) at present, wishes to be so (bubhūṣu), and will
be so (in the future), should bestow (the consecration) upon him as an
offering, along with his own competence (adhikāra) (to be a teacher). (2-3)

' Here Abhinava is probably again referring to his teacher Śambhunātha as the Supreme Lord. I

so, it appears that he read the passages he quotes with him or indeed, the entire scripture from

which they are drawn.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

“This’ (initiation is) with seed. By virtue of (their) consecration, these
two (i.e. the teacher and the adept) possess the authority (to be so), and that

(authority) should be given to (the disciple) once he has been examined (for his
competence to receive it). Thus, one begins to examine the teacher ‘in due
orderʼ etc. ‘In due order’ means primarily what he has leart (śruta), (then his)
cognition (cinta) (on it), and so on. That should be related everywhere (to all
these cases). “Wishes to be so (bubhūṣu) and will be so (in the future) is in
reḷlation to (the disciple’s) well-practiced knowledge.
Surely, it is said everywhere (in the scriptures) that only consecration
can confer such authority. So here (in this case) also, simply perform the
consecration (and the disciple will have that authority). What use is there to

consider (whether the disciple is) a well-exercised man of knowledge (or not)?

With this doubt in mind, he says:

TTATÑḠHĪTĪR JĪTcITrēḥ 3ēā I| `¢ 1

a reṁṝrrztatar Ṝkrzgaīata 1 4,

EECAUHEINSĀEEIEAIĒT]

q-TTTTTYTITHTTTGT
TRĪTTTAT TṬē I] 9 |
Yo naivaṁ veda naivāsāv abhiṣikto ‘pi daiśikaḥ |
samayyādikrameṇeti śrṛīmatkāmika ucyate || 4 |I
yo na vedādhvasandhānaṁ ṣoḍhā bāhyāntarasthitam |
sa gurur mocayenn eti siddhayogīśvarīmate || 5 ||
sarvalakṣaṇahīno ʻpi jñānavān gurur iṣyate |
jñānaṁ prādhānyam evoktam iti śrīkacabhārgave || 6 |
padavākyapramāṇajñaḥ śivabhaktyekatatparaḥ |

samastaśivaśāstrārthaboddhā kāruṇiko guruh || 7 I|

It is said in the venerable Kāmika that ‘one who does not know (the
teachings) in this way is not a teacher, even if he has been consecrated by

(passing through all the levels of initiation) beginning with that of a
(common) Regular (initiate) in due order. (4)

I am inclined to relate the ‘in due order” to the capacity the teacher should have to conjoin the
aspirant with eality levels - attva – ‘in duc order.

1 disagree here. It seems to me that it makes more sense to relate them to the disciple’s
competence rather than his knowledge.

This citation reads as a continuation of the Kāmika made in 22/32. There it is said that secret

teachings should not be revealed to one who does not belong to the same Tantra, even if he has
been consecrated as a teacherin some other tradition. Ifit is from there, it is surprising to see such

a statement in a Siddhāntāgama, as the Kāmikais generally classifiedin the Āgamas. It appears
that this carly version was not a Siddhānta.

TANTRĀLOKA

In the Siddhayogīśvarīmata (it is said that) ‘the teacher who does
not know the sixfold interconnection of the Path (adhvasandhāna), present
(both) externally and internally, cannot liberate (others).’ (5)

According to the venerable Kacabhārgava, ‘it is said that knowledge

(of the scriptures) is the primary (and most fundamental prerequisite of a
true teacher). He who possesses (this) knowledge is considered to be a
teacher (and is preferred to others who do not), even if he is devoid of all
(the other) characteristics (of a teacher). A teacher is compassionate and

solely intent on devotion to Śiva. (He should) know the purport of all the

Śaiva scriptures, as well as (each) sentence (vākya), part (thereof) (pada),
and (their) extent (pramāṇa).” (6-7)
Although he is consecrated (by passing) successively (through the level
of initiation) beginning with that of a regular (initiate), he is not a teacher. This
is the prose order. He has in this way stated clearly by the corroboration of
several scriptures that it is agreed everywhere (in all the scriptures) that a (true)
teacher is a well-practiced man of knowledge.
Moreover, one should not make such (people) teachers (as are the

following). Thus he says:

Defects of a False Teacher

ī aVTN āīIT ōēTṝ TTITTTI |

ṇ=ī īā T gaT Sṁ _IGTĀHS |

T’ḷaṁaēzī a: Ūā: a mfasd: 1 2 1
na svayaṁbhãs tasya coktaṁ lakṣaṇaṁ parameṣśinā |
abhakto jīvitadhiyā kurvan nīśānadhiṣṭhitaḥ || 8 II
paśvātmanā svayaṁbhiūṣṇur nādhikārī sa kutracit |
This reference to the SYM is not found in the short recension.

One may understand ṣodhā to mean the sixfold deposition. It is basic common practice to project
six depositions of mantras onto the body, both on the outside of it and internally onto the subtle
body within it. However, an enclitic, such as ca (= ‘and’) or the like is required to indicate that

that is the meaning unambiguously. But that may be missing simply in order to maintain the
metre. The Path is indeed ‘sixfold’, but it is hard to understand how the connection of the Path and

the soul to itis such.

Read jñānaṁ prādhānyam for jñānaprādhānyam.
sarvalakṣaṇahīno ‘pi jīānavān gurur iṣyate | A varant of this line, which may be the original
form in which it appears in the text, is sarvalakṣanahīno ‘pi jñānavān gururutamaḥ | The most

excellent teacher is one who is endowed with knowledge, even though (he may be) devoid of all
(other) characteristics. It is quoted ad 1/45 and ad 4/60ab. Cf. NTS nayasūtra 4/154cd:

sarvalakṣaṇahīmo pi jñānavān gurur ucyate | Aīso Śarvajñānotara 19:4ab sarvalakṣaṇahīno ‘pi
śivaśāstrārthavid guha | Quoted by Goodall (2015: 502).
Gnoli understands these three to be grammar (pada), linguistics (vākya) and logic (pramāṇa).

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

bhasmāṁkuro vratiṣuto duḥśīlātanayas tathā || 9 l|
kuṇḍo golaś ca te duṣṭā uktaṁ devyākhyayāmale |
punarbhũś cānyaliṅgo yaḥ punaḥ śaive pratiṣṭhitaḥ || 10 II
“(The teacher one adopts should not be) ‘self-generated’ (that is,
without a teacher) (svayaṁbhūḥ). The Supreme Lord has stated the (true)

characteristic of this (most elevated sort of teacher).' (A false teacher) is
devoid of devotion (abhakta);' he acts ungoverned by the Lord,
(performing the rites solely) with the thought of (earning a) livelihood. By

nature a fettered soul, he wishes (only to affirm himself as) a self-generated
teacher (syaṁbhūṣṇuḥ) and has no authority anywhere (to do anything in
that capacity). (False is the teacher) who covers (himself) with ashes (just
for show), one who is (an illegitimate) son of an ascetic (or) of an immoral
woman, (one who is) an adulterine and a widow’s bastard.’ These are said
in the Devyāyāmala to be defective (false and wicked teachers). (Moreover,)

he too (is not a true teacher) who (once bore) the sectarian sign of another

(tradition), and (although now) established in the Śaiva (tradition), must be

born again. (8-10)

(The false teacher is) ‘by nature a fettered soulʼ, not one who is

penetrated (and possessed) by the Supreme Lord. This is the meaning. The
connection (with what was said) before (is that a convert who) ‘must be born

againʼ is defective (as a teacher in a Śaiva tradition).
In our system (darśana), there is no such restriction (on the
qualification to be a teacher) except that he should possess (a complete)
knowledge (of all the realities taught in the scriptures). Accordingly, he says:
The True Teacher

ī a fram: aisfī īē: 1

frk shīīē: I| g, 11
. Ṭ̄T: ŪTTJĪTT JTĪRATĪR T ōēfUīg |
śrīpūrvaśāstre na tv eṣa niyamaḥ ko ‘pi coditaḥ |
Abhinavagupta conṣiders that the best teacher to be svayaṁsaṁsiddáhika, that is, one who,

directly inspired by Śiva, has achieved everything without the mcdiatin of a teacher (for
example, see above, 4/40cd-41ab and 13/135). In this context the term is used in the negative

sense to denote a teacher who presumes that this is his condition, and so exempts himself from the

need to have a teacher, take initiation, study the scriptures etc. Even the true teachers who have

become so spontaneously by an intense descent of the power of grace are only of use to the few

who aspire solely to liberation, and not for the many who desire worldly benefits (see above,
13/147-148).
'" Below, 23/15cd-16ab Abhinava confirms that this statement is drawn from the Devyāyāmala.

Concerning the nature and characteristics of a teacher, see above 4/33 ff.

The standard objects of devotion are the deity, teacher, fire and the scriptures.
See above, chapter fourteen concerning the power of obscuration and false teachers.

“ See above, 22/28cd-31ab. Jayaratha quotes 23/10cd above ad 22/28cd-31ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

yathārthatattvasaṅghajñas tathā śiṣye prakāśakaḥ | 11 II
yaḥ punaḥ sarvatattvāni veṭṭītyādi ca lakṣaṇam |

No such restriction at all is enjoined in the Mālinīvijayottara. (A true

teacher is) one who knows the aggregate of reality levels (tattva) as it truly
is and reveals (the vitality of Mantras) in this way (tathā) to (his) disciple.
(In short) the characteristic (of a true teacher is as stated there where it

says) ‘whereas he who knows all the reality levels’ etc.° (11-12ab)
‘In this way’ (means) ‘as it truly is’. As is said there:

‘Whereas he who knows all these reality levels (attva) as they truly are
is a (true) teacher, who, said to be my equal, reveals the vitality of Mantras.
People who are touched by (such a) one, converse with him, and are seen (by
him) with a loving mind, are freed from (their) sins, even those committed
during seven lifetimes. Again, those living beings who, impelled by Śiva, have
been initiated by him, having attained the fruit they desire, go to the supreme

Surely (one may ask), how is it that, insofar as it is equally pertinent
(nyāya), an obligation (niyama) stated in another Tantra does not apply here as
well? With this doubt (in mind), he says:

3PTaR

THTSR I 23 I

ñãla ftza? ãaṁã kv aa 1

yogacāre ca yat tatra tantre coditam ācaret ||I 12 ||
tathaiva siddhaye seyam ājñeti kila varṇitam |

It is said in the Yogacāra that ‘ṭhis is (Śiva’s) command: one

should do what is enjoined (only) there (in one particular) Tantra, (not in
another,) so as to (achieve) success in the way (it prescribes).’ (12cd-13ab)
‘One should do’ (what is enjoined) there alone. As is said:

‘As (the difference between) a category of Tantras (and others) is

considered to be due to the difference between the various rites etc. (they teach),

' 23/12ab is an abbreviation of MV 2/10ab.

MV 2/10-12. Instead of reading the last quarter of the last line prayānti paramaṁ padam, the

printed text reads padaṁ gacchanty anāmayam (‘they go to the plane free of disease (and
imperfections)). MS Kh reads gacchanti for prayānti (which means the same). This is the reading
above in 13/219cd-222ab, where these verses are quoted. See notes there concerning variant

readings.
' This is the Yogasaṁcāra. Cf. above in 6/58cd where we find the same alternative name.
' Read yat tatra for yadyatra.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

therefore what should be done is that which is taught there (in just one of

them), and not in accord with another Tantra (of a different school).

This restriction (taught) in scriptures other (than our own) concerning
the teacher is not only with respect to (his) family, conduct (kulācāra) or the

like, it also concerns his body and (native) country, in accord with the view
(expressed in this passage from the Devyāyāmala):
‘A one-eyed (teacher) creates (mutual) hate (between people), and one
who is bald the destruction of wealth.’ . . . “(Those teachers who come from)
Kāñci, Kosala, Karṇāṭa, and Kaliṅga, and are born in Kāmarūpa, Koṅkaṇa,
Kaāverī, and the land of Kaccha should be avoided. So too one should avoid
those of other countries. 23

Read tasmāt tatra for tasmād yatra.

” Quoted above in TĀv ad 4/251cd and also ad 8/20cd-22ab. Lines 12cd-13ab could be a
reworking of this verse. If so, Jayaratha is quoting from the Yogasaṁcāra. However, Jayaratha
does not cite this important Trika Tantra anywhere, which he would have done had he had access

to it. So this citation is very unlikely to be from the Yogasaṁṅcāra.
| Read koikaṇo- for kuīkūo-.
Read with MS Th —kāverī- for kāvīrī-.
read tathānye ‘pi and rāṣṭriyān as being in concord, although they are in different cases. Such
‘mistakes’ are common in the deviant (āiśa) Sanskrit of the Tantras.

There is a standard group of eight places, the names of which begin with ‘K’

(kakārāṣṭaka), that are not auspicious. The following reference is from the uttarabhāga of the
Kāmikāgama 24|3cd-4, where the regions that are not included in Āryavarta are lisṭed:
kakāṣṭakaniṛrmuktaḥ prasaṅgāt so ʻpi kathyate ||

karṇātaś ca kaliṅgākhyaḥ kacchaḥ kāśmīrasaṁjñakaḥ |
koṅkaṇaḥ karahāṭaś ca kukkutṭaḥ kāṅka īriṭaḥ |I

‘By the way that will be taught that s free of the group of cight beginning with K. (This
is) Kamṇāta, Kalīṅga, Kaccha, the (place) called Kāśmīra, Koṅkaṇa, Karahāṭa, Kukkuta, and (the
one) called Kāīka.
This recension of the Kāmikāgama is a Siddhānta. The following passage is found in

Śrimatottara, which is a Kubjikā Tantra:

kakārāṣṭakasaṁbhūtaṁ [g: kakāṣṭakasaṁvarte; j: -kahmarute; jh: -te; t: -to; ḍh: -kaṁsaṁbhūto;
n: -te] na [Ē: taṁ] guruṁ kārayet priye || 20 ||

kacchakośalakāśmīraṁ [kh, ph: -karṇāṭaṁ; g, jh, n: -kaāuśalakāśmīra; j: kausalakāsmāra; t,dh: kauśalakāsmīra;
taṁ; p: -śalakarīaṁ] karṇāṭaṁ ([kh: kāśmīraṁ; j: kasmātaṁ; jh:
karṇāddhaṁ; d: kā ? ra; p, ph: kāśmīra] koṅkaṇodbhavam [g: kokaṇo-;
taṇakodbhavaṁ] |
kāmaruṭ] tathā [k: na vā] devi [k, ḍh, p: devī] kāñcīkaṁ [kh, p: kāñcī ; g, j, jh, ṇ:

kākīkaṁ; ḍ, ph: kīcī ] koladeśajam [kh: kollāsamudbhavaṁ; g: comṛdeśajaṁ; j: cesṇedeṇa; jh, t,

dh: kolladeśajaṁ; ḍ, p, ph: kollāsamudbhavaḥ; ṇ: colladeśajaṁ] l 2 II

eṣu deśeṣu [Ē jambudeśeṣu; g: jaṁvū-; j:j. paivvudośeṣa; jh, n: yahvudeśeṣu; d: eṣu deveṣu] ye

jãātā [Ē + te; jh: to] ācāryā [Ē:

āryā kh, ḍd,

cāryyāt; jh: ācārya;

cārccayet; j: varyayet; ḍ: varjayat; n: cārccāt; ph: svayet] priye |

āryāś] varjayet [Ē:

‘0 beloved, one should not take a teacher borm in the group of eight (places beginning
with) the letter K. (These are) Kaccha, Kośala, Kāśmīra, Kamātaka, one bom in Koūṅkaṇa,
Kāmarūpa and, O goddess, from Kāñci, Koladeśa. O beloved, one should avoid the teachers born
in these lands.’ Śrīmatoitara 20/20cd-22ab

TANTRĀLOKA

How is it that this restriction is not taught in our scripture (i.e. the
Maālinīvijayottra)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Teachers that Should be Avoided

aT: āīTNTTJHTGHTĪĪT
-TIṬd: āraifērq]| |

ṜšaATTITGVĀITH
T GP-ĀĪTRTRTSĪTT I 2: 1I
Tr̥RĀITGHIĪ. ŪJTTTTHĀT #a: |
yas tu karmitayãcāryas tatra kāṇādivarjanam || 13 ||
yataḥ kārakasāmagryāt karmiṇo nādhikaḥ kvacit |

devyāyāmalaśāstre ca kāñcyādiparivarjanam || 14 |

tad dr̥ṣṭadoṣāt krodhādeḥ samyakjñātary asau kutaḥ |
4(The rules) that one should avoid a one-eyed (teacher) and the like
concern a teacher who acts as a priest (not as one who is learned in the

scriptures). This is so because one does not observe anywhere that there is

(anything) more apart from the (ritual) agent and the aggregate of the
instruments of action (kāraka) (and so they must all be without defects).

(13cd-14ab)

(The injunction) in the Devyāyāmala” to avoid (teachers) from
Kaāñcī eṭc. is because those (who come from these regions) are seen to have
defects such as anger and the like. How (can that be in the case of teacher)
who possesses right knowledge? (14cd-15ab)
‘They are seen to have defects’ which are characterized (by their)

affliction (santāpa). As is said: ‘There is afflicton when one is angry, and

inconstant riches (śrī) when one is fickle (cañcala).' The sense is that a person
who is born in a region such as Kāñcī is by his very nature, lustful and angry
etc. (How can there be) anger and like in one who possesses right knowledge
and sees all living beings to be like himself? This is the intended sense.
Nor have we stated just our own idea. Thus, he says:
Note that the places all coincide in these two lists, except that Kāverī is listed in the

Devyāyāmala instead of Kāśmīra. The similarity of the names suggests that the difference is the
result of a simple modification of the name. In the period of their development, subsequent to the
Kubjikāmata, the Koṅkaṇa region along the Western Ghats became strongly associated with the

goddess Kubjikā. This reference indicates that it was not always s0. Following the same line of
reasoning, the absence of a reference to Kashmir in the analogous list in the passage of the

Devyāyāmala quoted by Jayaratha may be taken as evidence that the Devyāyāmala was redacted

in Kashmir. Cf. Sanderson 2007: 259 note 83.
23/13cd-17ab is Abhinava’s commentary on the Devyāyāmala, cited in 23/8-10 and in TĀv ad
23/12cd-13ab.

Ṛead karmiṇo for karmaṇo.
Gnoli, unsure of the meaning, suggests ‘the good success of the ritual action depends on the

integrity of the factors that bring it to completion.’ This seems to me [he writes] to be the sense,
even if the text is here perhaps corrupt.”

Read devyāyāmalaśāstre for devyā yāmalaśāstre.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

īāq aaī̄aīṝ̄ ā̃s JaTHGIĪTG] I| 2. 1|

g a arran 1

guravas tu svayaṁbhvãdi varjyaṁ yad yãmalādiṣu || 15 ||
karmyabhiprāyataḥ sarvaṁ tad iti vyācacakṣire |
The teachers have declared that (statements) in the Devyāyāmala
and elsewhere, (such as) ‘a ‘self-generated’ (teacher who has no teacher)
should be avoidedʼ, all refer to (a teacher) who specializes in the

performance of rituals (karmin) (not one who focuses on knowledge of the
scriptures). (15cd-16ab)

The meaning is that ‘the teachers have declaredʼ, that is, explained,

that whoever has been said in the Devyāyāmala etc. should be avoided (as a
teacher), such as one who is ‘self-generated’, all that is with reference to (a

teacher) who specializes in the performance of rituals (karmin).

Therefore, the possession of knowledge (of the realities taught in the

scriptures) is the primary defining characteristic (of a teacher) on which one
should focus (āśrayaṇīya). Accordingly, he says:

The Teacher to be Adopted is One with Perfect Knowledge

TāĪ TTRPTHRCGGĀTTIĪĒGTTTT
I 2E, I
ato deśakulācāradehalakṣaṇakalpanām || 16 ||
anādṛtyaiva saṁpūrṇajñānaṁ kuryād gurur gurumṃ |
The teacher should therefore (choose to) make a person with

complete and perfect knowledge into a teacher, without taking into
consideration any other characteristic, whether it be (his) place (of birth),
family, conduct or body. (16cd-17ab)
He now says what needs to be done here (to consecrate a new teacher).

See above, 23/8; 13/147-148. A teacher who specialīes in the performance of rituals must
bclong
to some traition.
We know that Śambhunātha read the Devyāyāmala witḥ Abhinava (sce above note 15.417 at
15/256). It is quite plausible to assume that the sense of the plural ‘teachers' – is an honorific
referring to Abhinava’s teacher. The same may we gleancd from Abhinava’s statng above (in
23/8ab) that ‘The Supreme Lord has stated the characteristic of one (who is a tre teacher of the
most elevated sort), taking ‘Śupreme Lord’ to be an cpithet of Śambhunātha.
Read devyāyāmalādau for devyā yāmalādau.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Creation of a Teacher (ācāryakaraṇam)

TTĀṬSJ zTI

gTīafaāī fkz-TāT u g 9

TTFaTĀTTI ṬGTPTHTRT TṬ I R¢ I

qd ādcazīū aāraTI
TH : I| 28 |I

prāgvat saṁpūjya hutvā ca śrāvayitvā cikīrṣitam || 17 |I
tato ‘bhiṣiñcet taṁ Śiṣyaṁ catuḥṣaṣṭyā tataḥ sakṛt |
tanmantrarasatoyena pūrvoktavidhinā guruḥ || 18 II
vibhavena suviṣṭīrṇaṁ tatas tasmai vadet svakam |
sarvaṁ kartavyasāraṁ yac chāstrāṇāṁ paramaṁ rahaḥ | 19 l|
After having worshipped and offered oblations as before and
declared what he intends to do, the teacher should then sprinkle the
disciple sixty-four (times) and then just once with water (infused with) the
aesthetic essence (rasa) of the Mantras (used to consecrate it), observing the
procedure (vidhi) taught above. (He should perform the rite) sumptuously
and at great length. Then (the teacher) should tell (the disciple) all the
essence of his duties and the supreme secret of the scriptures. (17cd-19)
(The disciple is sprinkled) ‘sixty-four (times), that is to say, with (as
many) jars (of consecrated water, and then) ‘just once’ʼ, that is, with one (jar of
water). By (saying) this, he is stating that because knowledge alone (eva) is
primary, ritual (alone) does not serve the purpose, and so even though he
himself has said that the ritual procedure by means of which (the disciple is)
consecrated (as a teacher) (abhiṣekavidhi) is (found) in the Mālinīvijayottara, he
has not taught it extensively here.
He (now) states the essence of what needs to be done.

anugrāhyās tvayā śiṣyāḥ śivaśaktipracoditāḥ |
(The teacher should address Śiva saying): “(these are) the disciples
who, impelled by Śiva’s power, are worthy of being graced by You.” (17cd-

20ab)

Surely (one may ask), having omitted to do so previously at the time (of

the disciple’s) initiation, how is it that (the disciple) is examined (to ascertain
his aptitude) on the occasion of his consecration (as a teacher)? In order to

remove (any) occasion for this doubt, he corroborates (what he has said) with
scripture.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

Knowledge is the Sole Sign of Initiation

aīaī’ āmaṁ fraīaiīq 1 22

uktaṁ jñānottare caitad brahmaṇāḥ kṣatriyā viśaḥ || 20 ||
napuṁsakāḥ striyaḥ śūdrā ye cānye ‘pi tadarthinaḥ |
te dīkṣāyāṁ na mīmāṁsyā jñānadāne vicārayet || 21 ||
jñānamiūlo guruḥ proktaḥ saptasatrīṁ pravartayet |
lAnd

that is said in the Jñānottara (where we read that):

‘Brahmins, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, eunuchs, women, śūdras, as well as others

The source of these four lines is problematic. Abhinava clcay tells us that hc is quoting from
the Jāānoútara, i. the Sarvajñūānoúara. ndeed, 23/20d-21ab is a light paraphrasc of
Sarvajñūānotara Kriyāpāda 19/27 (IFP T 334 p. 102), which is a versc in a chapter concerning the
conseeration of a tcacher (abhiṣekaprakaraṇa). Itrceads:

dīkṣākāle t amīmāṅsyā jñānadāne vicārayet |I
23/21lcd is a direct quotation of 19/27cd. It is also quoted, without variants, above in
TĀv ad 22/35cd-37ab. But there is a significant variant in the Sarvajānottara which may be the

original reading. This is jñānadāne for jñānakāle. The former means ‘when knowledge is
imparted’; the latter literally ‘at the time of knowledge’, implying ‘at the time when knowledge is
imparted’. The former thus appears to be a more satisfactory reading and has been chosen
accordingly. This reading is further supported by Kṣemarāja’s citatin of these lines in his
commentary on the Neīratantra ad 222c. They read:
brahmaṇāḥ kṣatriyāścaiva vaiśyā vā vīravandite |
napuṁsakāḥ striyāḥ śūdrā ye cānye 'pi tadarthinah l
dīkṣākāle na mīmāṁsyā jñānadāne vicārayet

jñānamūlo gurur yasmāt saptasatrīpravartakaḥ ||

However, although the text is clearly the same despite the variants, Kṣemarāja says that

he is drawing these lines from the Kāmika. This is confusing. There is some doubt as to whether
Kṣemarāja had access to the Kāmika, as in all instances in which he quotes it, his references

coincide with those of his teacher. However, in this instance it appears that he is quoting the
original. Thus, in place of uktaṁ jñānottare caitad brahmaṇāḥ kṣatriyā viśaḥ || 20 || ‘And that is

said in the Jīānottara (where we read that): ‘Brahmins, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas,’ he reads brahmaṇāḥ

kṣatriyāścaiva vaiśyā vā vīravandite | O (goddess) praised by Kaula adepts (vira), Brahmins

and

kṣatriyas or vaiśyas,We notice, by the way, that the speaker here is Śiva, who is addressing the

Goddess. In the Kāmika that is circulating nowadays, Śiva is addressing the sages (rṣi). The

Sarvajñānttara that has reached us is not set in the form of a dialogue.
There is no reason to suppose that there is a mistake in the printed edition of the

Netratantra. For the last line is quoted separately in the commentary on the Netratrantra ad

16/68ab. There also Kṣemarāja says he is quoting from the Kāmikā (feminine!). Gnoli suggests

in

a note to his translation, that only this line is from the Kāmikāgama; the rest is, as Abhinava says,

from the Sarvajñānottara. The recovery of the original Kāmika may well confirm Gnoli’s learned
conjecture. However, it may also be possible there was

some intertextuality between the Kāmika

and the Sarvajñānottara, as evidenced in the first three lines, and then the last line is a departure

TANTRĀLOKA

who wish (to receive) that (Śaiva teaching), should not be examined (as to
their competence) when (they are given) initiation; (rather that) should be
examined when knowledge is being given (to them).’ The teacher who is

said to be the rooted in knowledge (jñūānamūla) should encourage one who
performs

the

seven

sacrifices

considerations). (20cd-22ab)

(saptasatrin)

(regardless

of

other

in the Kāmika from the common text. Unfortunately, we do not have the text of the Kāmika
known to Abhinava, but it may well have been that the subject discussed here is not found in the

Sarvajñānoútara. Kṣemarāja had access to the Sarvajñānottara. Thus, it is quite possible that he

noticed that the last line here is not found there. There is no evidence that Kṣemarāja had access to

the Kāmika / Kāmikā except perhaps here. How could he have mistaken the full passage in NTu
ad 22/72c quoted above as being from the Kāmika? If he did not have access to it, perhaps the
mistake is in the early manuscripts of the Tantrāloka that instead of Sarvajñānottara say the entire
passage is from the Kāmika.

Now let’s examine the last line. The word ‘satrī’ could be derived from satrin meaning
‘one who performs a sacrifice’, that is, a sattram. A ‘sattra’ is an extensive Vedic sacrificial

session. MW defines it as ‘a great soma sacrifice lasting according to some, from 13 to 100 days
and performed by many officiating Brahmins; also applied to any oblation or meritorious work
equivalent to the performance of a Sattra.’ The form satrī is certainly very unusual, and it is

tempting to simply emend the text. However, the line is quoted in two other places with the same

word, and Jayaratha uses it in his introduction to the following verse, further supporting the

reading here. Kṣemarāja quotes the last line in two places in his commentary on the Netratantra.

One is in NTu ad 16/68ab, and the other we have noted already ibid. ad 22/72c. In the first

instance the reading is proktaḥ saptasatrīpravartakaḥ – that I take to mean: “(the teacher is the

root of knowledge,) who is said to be the one who instigates the seven sacrificial sessions
(saptasatrī)’. In the second instance we find the reading yasmāt saptasatrīpravartakaḥ ʻ(the

teacher is the root of knowledge,) for he is the one who instigates the seven sacrificial sessions
(saptasatrī).

2 The word viś means vaiśya –a man of the third caste.
Read jñānadāne for jñānakāle. Śce previous note. Also cf. TĀ 22/38a, where we find the
expression vijūānadāne. Śee above 22/37cd-39ab.
One could also translate ‘whose root is knowledge’.
Cf. NT 22/71cd-72ab.

deyam etat svaśiṣyāṇāṁ svaputrāṇāṁ na cānyathā lI ÑTT 22/71 1
svadīkṣitānāṁ bhaktānāṁ gurudevāgnipūjinām |
svayaṁ śāsitum arhāṇāṁ śiṣyāṇāṁ ca, na cādhyāpitamantrāṇām, api tu svayaṁ dīkṣitānāṁ

bhaktyādiyujāṁ svaputrāṇām api tādṛśām evaitad deyam ārādhanāya attvataḥ prakāśanīyam |l
Śśāsanārhāya, api cātyantamanunmiṣitavivekāya, asaṁbhavadvitāya vā

vinā samayadīkṣāṁ ca na dadyāt...

iti śrīkāmikokasthityonmiṣacchivabhakiaye suparīkṣitāmālyacittāya api vā kr̥tasamayadīkṣāya

tad vidhānaṁ deyam eva, na tu dīkṣāṁ

vinā jātucit | uktaṁ ca śrīmālinīvijaye

ṅa cādhikāritā dīkṣāṁ vinā yoge.asti śāṅkare | ity upakramyā

api mantrādhikāritvaṁ muktiś ca śivadīkṣayā | (MV 4/6-8) iti ||

..ṣvapriye pi ca || 2272 |

sarvāthā naiva dātavyamityājñā pārameśvarī

This (procedure vidhāna) should be given to one’s own disciples and sons, not
otherwise, (it should be given) to one’s own initiates, devotees and those who worship the teacher,
gods and the (sacred) fire.’ (NT 22/71cd-72ab)
(It should be given) to such as are his own worthy disciples he himself has taught, not to
those who have learnt Mantras (by themselves), rather to those who have been initiated and are

devout, so too to his own sons. It should be revealed so that they may worship correctly. ‘Without

the (regular, basic) Initiation into the Rule, it should not be given’ (even to) one who is worthy of

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

It ʻ‘was said’ previously.
Surely (one may ask), who is one who is engaged in the seven
sacrificial sessions (saptasatrī)? How should he impel him to perform them

(kathaṁ pravartayet)” With this doubt in mind, he says:
The Seven Sacrifices

É|EṭEaEFIEEE:Enult|ēealtczeIEEI

dīkṣā vyākhyā kr̥pā maitrī śāstracintā śivaikatā || 22 ||

annādidānam ity etat pālayet saptasatrakam |
abhiṣekavidhau cāsmai karaṇīkhaṭikādikam || 23 ||

sarvopakaraṇavrātam arpaṇīyaṁ vipaścite |
so ʻbhiṣikto guruṁ paścād dakṣiṇābhiḥ prapūjayet || 24 ||

One should take care to observe (pālayet) the seven sacrifices. These

are 1) iniṭiation, 2) the explanation (of the meaning of the scriptures), 3)
(the exercise of) compassion, 4) friendliness, 5) reflection on (the meaning
of the) scriptures, 6) oneness with Śiva, and 7) (charity), such as giving food

and the like (to the needy).” (22cd-23ab)

the teachings, or to one whose discemmment (viveka) is extrmmcly undeveloped, or on for whom it
is impossible (to have the) money (to cover the cost).’
Then Kṣemarāja quotes the equivalent of TĀ 23/20cd-22ab (sce above note 23,31). He
continues:
‘Thus, according to the stated view of the venerable Kāmika that this procedure should
be given to one whose devotion for Śiva has developed, s0 too to one whose mind is pure and well
cxamined, but never in any circumstance without initiaton. It is also said in the Mālinīvijaya,
beginning with: ‘There is no competence (adhikāritā) (to practice) Śaiva Yoga without initiation’
up to ‘(Moreover, (initiation) is said to be of two kinds, in accord with the distinction between (the
practice based on the performance of ritual) action and (that conducive to the development of the)
knowledge (of ultimate principles). Thus, this has been said, because that (initiation) should be
performed in the two (corresponding) ways. Śiva’s initiation not only confers entilement (to fruits

of) yoga (and its practice),) it also (confers the) authority (to practice) mantras as well as
liberation (itself). (MV 5/6-8)
‘(It should not be given without initiaton,) even to one’s own beloved. The Supreme
Goddess commands that t should not be given in every way (to anybody). (NT 22/72d-73ab)
Emend kā nāma saptasatrī tāṁī to ko nāma saptasatrī taṁ.

If 23/23ab is taken from the Kāmikāgama (see note 23,31 above), Abhinava is most probably
drawing his enumeration of the seven sacrifices from there. The passage Jayaratha quotes here is
probably not drawn from Abhinava’s source. The reason for this is simply that none of the items
given to the newly consecrated ācārya listed by Abhinava are found listed in this passage. If
Abhinava is drawing from the Kāmikāgama, Jayaratha could not have quoted it, as he did not
have access to it.

TANTRĀLOKA

In the course of the rite of consecration, (the teacher) should entrust

the learned (disciple) with the entire aggregate of ritual implements, such

as the (sacrificial) knife and the chalk (khatikā) (to draw the sacred
diagrams), and so forth. After that the (newly) consecrated (teacher) should
worship (his) teacher by (offering him) the sacrificial fee (dakṣiṇā). (23cd24)

with:

That is said (in the scriptures, where we read in a passage) beginning

‘Having thus rebuked (his disciple for his shortcomings) as prescribed,
(the teacher) should consecrate him.” . . . . “(The teacher then gives his disciple)

a turban and crown etc., umbrella, sandals and seat, an elephant, horse and a

palanquin etc. and, especially, the ancillaries of regal dominion, a knife,

scissors, and sword, the two sacrificial ladles (large and small), (sacred)

darbha (grass) and book, (along with) a rosary etc. Having given (him these
things, the teacher), established in the fourth stage of life (i.e. that of the
renouncer), (should say to his disciple) “from today onwards you should
always perform initiation by means of the path that graces the one who is to
receive it and explain (the meaning of the scriptures). Such is the authority

(invested in you) by Śiva’s command.” And so on, ending with: ‘the disciple

should worship the teacher with extensive offerings in accord with his means.”!

Surely (one may ask), once he consecrated (his disciple), how should

the teacher behave? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Teacher Entrusts Ritual Implements and Authority to
Disciple and Follows his Command

3TTIT ṬS: GēĪ āaāahḶ aaaī ī |

jñānahīno guruḥ karmī svādhikāraṁ samarpya no |
dīkṣādyadhikṛtiṁ kuryād vinā tasyājñayā punaḥ || 25 ||
ity evaṁ śrāvayet so ‘pi namaskṛtyābhinandayet |

The printed text reads khaṭvīṁ. The correct form would be khaṭvāṁ, which means ‘bedstead’.

As this entry is clearly anomalous, I have tentatively emended to khadgaṁ – ‘sword’.
Read caturthā- for caturā-. Perhaps ‘āshrama’ should not be understood to mean, as itnormally
does, ‘stage of life’, but ‘level of initiaton’. It is possible that this text sponsored teachers who
were renouncers, rather than householders. If so, that would be most unuṣual.
Śiyva’s command invests its recipient with authority.
If 23/23ab is drawn from the Kāmikāgama, one would not expect the seven sacrificial sessions
to be described in the Sarvajñānottara, and indeed, they are not. Jayaratha had access to it, and so
would have quoted from it. Clearly, however, Jayaratha could not find it there, and quotes from a
different source. This appears to be the same one as quoted in TĀv ad 23/101cd-103a.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
Once the teacher who is (dedicated to the performance of) rituals

(karmin), (but is) devoid of knowledge, has transmitted his authority (to his
disciple), he should not perform the functions for which he was (previously)
authorized again, such as initiate (others), without his (disciple’s) consent.
Thus, he should tell him (what he intends to do,) and (the disciple), having
bowed (to his teacher), should approve. (25-26ab)
(He should tell) ‘him’, that is, (the disciple) he has himself consecrated

(as a teacher in his place). (Note that) in some (manuscripts) this verse comes

just after (the one that begins with) ‘(the newly consecrated teacher) should
observe the seven sacrificial sessions This has been written because the
scribes made a mistake and so should be ignored.
Again, this is the difference (between this kind of teacher) and a

knowledgeable one (jñānin). Thus, he says:

A Knowledgeable Teacher Retains Authority

and Must Transmit It

ṢV ciḻē ḻ;zac Ḷa Ēpatc-THIETHI

āz̄ā+- āraã aaTṀĨṬITSTGJṬ I QUI

Tā;, īāat-ā-dd
fāgī-ā ̄ā I| 2. I

tataḥ prabhr̥ty asau pūrvo gurus tyaktādhikārakaḥ |1 26 ||
yathecchaṁ vicared vyākhyādīkṣādau yantraṇojjhitaḥ |
kurvaṉ na bādhyate yasmād dīpād dīpavad īdrśaḥ || 27 |
santāno nādhikārasya cyavo ‘kurvan na bādhyate |
prāk cākurvan vihanyeta siddhātantre tad ucyate || 28 ||
(However,) the former (type of) teacher (who knows the realities

taught in the scriptures and) has renounced his authority may from then on

behave as he wishes with regards to initiating (others) and explaining (the
scriptures) etc., without any restrictions. He is not impeded in doing so,
because a spiritual lineage (santāna) is like this, namely like (a series —
santāna – of lamps in which) one lamp (is lit) from (another) lamp. There
This is line TĀ 23/23ab.

TĀ 23/25 to 28c must be read as a single passage, and so was probably drawn from a single

source. Abhinava tells us that ‘that is said in the Siddhātantra’. Certainly, he is referring to the

passage that follows (29-30). Is the previous passage also from there?

Cf. the expression dipād dīpam ivoditam | (the disciple is illumined) like the flame (of a lamp)
that has arisen from (another) flame’. It is quoted above in TĀv ad 2/40, see note there. Also

quoted in TĀv ad 3/291ab (3/290) and 4/203. Possibly Jayaratha has quoted that phrase directly
from the passage in the SYM that Abhinava is paraphrasing here.

Sanderson points out that the Paśupatas of the Atimārga, who were the immediate

precursors of Āgamic Śaivites, prefigured the typology of their descendants into three basic types,

TANTRĀLOKA

is no loss of authority (when it is transmitted from teacher to disciple), and
(conversely, if one) does not exert it, he is not afflicted (thereby). If however
(the teacher retires or dies) without previously having done so (i.e.
transmitted his authority to others), (the transmission) would be destroyed

(vihanyeta). That is said in the Siddhātantra. (26cd-28)

according to the form of liberation and manner of its attainment to which they aspired. One
category considered that liberation is a state in which the aspirant is permanently possessed
(āveśa) by the deity. The Pāśupatas who believed this were ascetics, who were generally not
originally Brahmins. They observed the Great Vow (mahāvrata) to atone for their Karma, which
required carrying a skull bowl, from which they ate, and wearing garlands of human bones.
Accordingly, they came to be called Kāpālikas – Skull Bearers, as did the closely related
Somasiddhāntins. The other two kinds of Pāśupatas were the Pāñcārthikas and Lakulas. They
were for the most part originally Brahmins who, as worshippers of Rudra, had taken the Great
Vow of the Pāśupata, but did not carry skull bowls or wear garlands of human bone. The views
and practices of the former are documented in the Pāśupatasūtra and the commentary on it by the

fifth century Brahmin Kauṇḍinya. The understood liberation in the same terms as Abhinava does
here, that is, ‘as a transference of the state of equality with Śiva in the manner in which one lamp
is Iit from another (sāmyasaṁṅkrāntivāda). The Lākulas defined it as the arising of that state
(sāmyotpaṭivāda).’ Sanderson 2009: 133 n 311; see also Sanderson 2006 pp. 179-181.
The analogy of transference in this way is much tamer and more contained than the
sudden forceful transformative possession of the Kāpālika Pāśupata, that was adopted by the
Tantras of the Vidyāpīṭha. These Abhinava considers to be the most excellent, and that the

Siddhayogeśvarīmata, the root Trika Tantra, was the main one (see below, 37/18-25ab). Apart
from the Trika Tantras, other very important members of this group (pītha) include the markedly
Kāpālika Brahmayāmala and its even more markedly Śākta successor, the Jayadrathayāmala.
Practice, yogic and ritual, the pantheons, soteriologies, and theologies they taught, implicitly and
explicitly, could be understood as ranging from mild, that came to be called ‘Tantric’, and
extreme, that came to be called ‘Kaula’.

It was in these terms that Trika Śaiviṣm was transmitted to Abhinava by Śambhunātha,

whose method (prakriyā) conserves, and highly values the Śākta Kaula, but does not do so at the
expense of the more moderate Raudra Bhairava, that encompassed even the sedate Siddhānta. The
former stresses the wild, ceaselessly active Śakti, and the latter the unlimited expanse at rest
within itself of Anuttara Bhairava, also called Supreme Śiva, Her possessor. The balance (sāmya)
between them that allowed the full range from mild Tantric to energetic Kaula, rests on the
fulcrum of the genius of insight that characterizes the Brahminical grounding in salvific
knowledge. Here we observe a fine example of that balance in Abhinava’s choice of Vidyāvrata in
what follows. See below, note 23,49.
Read prāk cākurvan for prāk ca kurvan. Cf. TŚā, p. 173. The transmission from teacher to
disciple mirrors that between father and son. We are reminded of the Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad (1/5)
where this is described: “when one who has this knowledge departs from this world, he enters into
his son with these vital breaths [i.. faculties of Speech, Mind and Breath] . . . (17) From the earth
and from the fire the divine Speech enters. Verily, that is the divine Speech whereby whatever one
says comes to be. (18) Out of the sky and out of the sun the divine Mind enters him. Verily, that is
the divine Mind whereby one becomes blissful and sorrows not. (19) Out of the water and out of
the moon the divine Breath enters him. Verily, that is the divine Breath which, whether moving or
unmoving, is not perturbed nor injured. He who knows this becomes the Self of all beings. . .
.(20)
Again the ‘tṭansmission’ from the dying father to his son is described in the Kauītaki
Upaniṣad (215). They sit facing each other. ‘Father. ‘My speech in you I would place!’ Son:
‘Your speech in me I take.’ F: ‘My breath in you I place.’ S: ‘Your breath in me I take. F: ‘My
eye in you Ī place. S: “Your eye in me I take.” It continues in this way as the father transmits to

son his ear, tastes, deeds (karman), pleasure and pain, bliss, delight and procreation, his
goings, mind, and intelligence (prajīiā). Then the son ‘tuming to the right, he goes forth towards
the east. The father calls out after him: “May glory (yaśas), sacred lustre (hrahmavarcasa), and
fame delight in you!’ Then the other looks over his left shoulder. Having hid (his face) with his
hand, or having covered (it) with the edge of his garment, he says: “Heavenly (svarga) worlds and
desires do you obtain!’

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
‘The former’ (type of teacher) is a man of knowledge (jñānin). This is

the meaning. (The teacher who has retired) is not afflicted, whether he acts (as a

teacher) or does not. By (saying) this, he emphasizes that he is without
restrictions. ‘Like one lamp (is lit) from (another) lamp’. The intended sense
is that when another lamp is generated, there is no difference at all in the
luminosity of (that) lamp (with respect to the one from which it has been lit).
‘Previously’, when he has not renounced (his) authority.

He quotes that book (i.e. the Siddhayogeśvarīmata).

Teacher’s Duty to Liberate His Disciple

TĨḤ 1| 3 11
ī ãā rē: fũz aaarz q ṁin:

āṣād aI-# aT ç d =aāEīāī aiq | 3c 1
yathārtham upadeśaṁ tu kurvann ācārya ucyate |
na cãvajñã kriyākãle saṁsāroddharaṇaṁ prati l| 29 ||
na dīkṣeta guruḥ śiṣyaṁ tattvayogyaṁ tu garvataḥ |

yo ʻsya syān narake vāṣa iha ca vyādhito bhavet || 30 ||
‘A (true) teacher is said to be one who imparts the teaching
(correctly and) appropriately (yathārtham) (as he should). (The teacher

should) not disdain (his duty) to rescue (his disciple) from the world of

transmigratory existence when the time comes (to perform) the rite

(through which the disciple is initiated). If a teacher who, because of (his)
pride, were not to initiate a disciple who is fit to (attain the ultimate)

reality, his residence (would be) hell (in the next world), and here (in this

one) he would be (constantly afflicted by) disease.” (29-30)

(A bad teacher is) disdainful (of his disciple) and proud. ‘His’
(residence), that is, of one such as him, (is hell).
He now teaches the Mantra observance (vidyāvrata) of this (newly
consecrated) teacher.

' Thiṣ injunction may be understood in a general sense to mean that a teacher has the
responsibility to impart initiation to a disciple who is fit to receive it. However, the expression

‘saṁsāroddharaṇa’ ‘rescue from the world of transmigratory existence’, more specifically also

refers to an initiation imparted at the time of death, or just after, to free the soul from further

transmigration.

’ Read tattvayogyaṁ tu for tattvayuktas tu.

“ 23/29cdis quoted ad 3/292-293ab (291©d-292). It is the first lie of a verse quoted abovein

‘TĀv ad 15/35cd-36ab. See note there. Abhinava quotes the first line literally as TĀ 23/29cd and

paraphrases the second in 23/29cd. He says it is drawn from the Siddhātantra, that is, the

Siddhayogeśvarīmata, but cannot be traced in the short recension of the SYM.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Teacher’s Mantra Observance (tadvratam)

JTaTTĒī:
7ṬJS: ṬYTTI-T-TTĀGfTĪ] |

prāptābhiṣekaḥ sa guruḥ ṣaṇmāsān mantrapaddhatim |
sarvāṁ tantroditāṁ dhyāyej japec cātanmayatvataḥ | 31 |
yadaiva tanmayībhūtas tadā vīryam upāgataḥ |

chindyāt pāśāṁs tato yatnaṁ kuryāt tanmayatāsthitau || 32 |I

The (new) teacher who has (just) been consecrated should recite for
six months the entire liturgy of Mantras taught in the scriptures, and

meditate on (them) until he becomes one with them. If he has become one
with them, he then attains (their) vitality (vīrya), and (so) may sever the
fetters (of his disciples). Thus, he should exert himself (to attain and) abide
in (that) state of unity. (31-32)

The passage from 23/33 to 38 conceming Vidyāvrata is drawn from the Devyāyāmala. t begins

with general introductory remarks framing the yoga taught there as a manner of empowering the
mantras of the newly consecrated teacher, so as to enable him to initiate his disciples and thereby
liberate them. The Bhairava and subsequent Kaula Tantras teach a large range of Vidyāvratas. It is
a type rather than a particular practice, although the varieties have several common features.

‘There are also differences. The Vidyāvrata is an observance centred on the repeated recitation of

the formula of the goddess or goddesses who are the focus of the Tantra in which they are taught.
Generally, the practitioner is a sādhaka. Repetition of mantra – japa – is the central pillar of the
sādhaka’s practice. He is the one who accomplishes — sādhaka – the goal that is to be
accomplished, or brings under his control the being that is to be overcome – sādhya, by means of
his mantra practice – sādhana.
In the Kāpālika ethos of the Brahmayāmala, the sādhaka is an avadhūta, a name that is
still given to the one who has ‘shaken off’ (avadhūta) attachment as an antinomian ascetic. The

Vidyāvrata serves in all its varied forms, as it does here, to strengthen the power of the Goddess’s
Vidyā and gain mastery over it. Sanderson (2009: 134 n. 311) supplies an example from the
Yoginīṣaṁcāra which ‘requires anyone who has gone through its initiaton ceremony and then
received consecration (abhiṣeka) to adopt one of three forms of ascetic observance in order to gain

mastery

over the Vidyā (vidyāvrata):

the Bhairavavrata, the Cāmuṇḍāvrata or the

Triṣ.aṣṭikulavrata. In Chapter 21 of the Brahmayāmala, edited and translated by Csaba Kiss, nine

Vidyāvratas are taught, one for each syllable of the Navākṣaravidyā OṂ CAṆḌB KĀPĀLINI

SVĀHĀ. The names of the observances give us an idea of their nature that the interested reader
can find describedin detail there. They are: 1) the Naked Observance (nagnavrata), 2) the Badly
Clothed (kucailina), 3) the Garlanded One (mālina), 4) the Madman-like (xnmatta), 5) the Skull
(kapāla), 6) that of Muktabhairava, 7) the Childish (bālaka), 8) the Raw Flesh Eater (kravyāda)
and 9) the Platter (vardhamāna). Most, if not all, require the adoption of the lifestyle of a
wandering ascetic – the parivrājaka. But far from the contained ‘pure’ life of his namesake, the
Buddhist parivrājaka, it may sometimes involve considerable antinomian behaviour, as did the

Mahāvrata of the Pāśupatas that was its prototype.

While the BY does give much importance to pilgrimage to sacred places, which came to
develop into the sacred geography of the later Trika Tantras and then the Kubjikā Tantras some
centuries later, these Vidyāvratas do not focus on them. The Great Hero who observes the

Vidyāvrata may wear tattered clothes or be semi-naked. He eats impure food, mostly at night,
including raw flesh, and he behaves like a mad man, shouting his claims of identity with the deity.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
‘The entire liturgy of Mantras’ consists of the (Vidyās of) the three

Goddesses, (the Mantras of) the four Bhairavas,. and (those of) the group of

eight, beginning with Aghora. As is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘The teacher also, observing a vow of silence, should repeat for six
months the fifteen mantras I taught you previously. Girded with the initial
deposition (pūrvanyāsa), the fire sacrificer should meditate at (all) three times
on the Trident taught previously, observing a vow of chastity. Having
performed the sacrifice (yāga) taught previously, the teacher should sprinkle the
Trident Maṇḍala and then himself, at the beginning and at the end. Having in
this way observed (his) vow, the reciter of mantra is the most excellent knower
of mantra. Whether he performs rites to grace or control (others), he is not

destroyed (thereby).”

The Vidyāvrata taught in the Kubjikā Tantras has recognisable common roots, but has been
‘tamedʼ to some degree if performed literally, and internalized into the maṇḍala of sacred places
when fully domesticated. The Vidyā in this case is obviously Kubjikā’s. The observer of the vow

(vratadhārin) is told to wander at night to the sacred sites of the Mothers (pītha) in search of a

Yoginī belonging to his lineage. If he succeeds, he should unite with her, reciting all the while the
Vidyā. If he manages that, the Yoginī rewards him with sacrificial pap - caru. By eating that he
atṭains liberation.

We notice that, although many of these sacred sites listcd in the Kubjikā Tantras
coincide with those in the BY, in the latter they are portrayed primarily as cremation grounds.

While the Kubjikā Tantras do maintain the culture of the cremation ground to a degree, the sites to

which the ascetic engaged in this vow wanders are not cremation grounds. Again, it is likely that

the outer form of the Vow is to be literally executed according to the BY; if this is also the case in
the Kubjikā Tantras, this is not at all as clear, although in both cases the sacred sites are

worshipped and so ‘attended’ in the maṇḍala. However that may be, they all have in common the
figure of the sādhaka who, as we have noted, should always be engaged in the repetition of his

mantra (if a god) or the Vidyā (if a goddess). The version of the Vidyāvrata Abhinava has selected

from the Devyāyāmala is largely purged of antinomian elements. Here the practitoner is the

newly consecrated teacher, and he is observing the vow to energize the mantras he is going to use

for his disciples. Also, the Vow has been s0 thoroughly intemalized that the wandering takes place
only in a maṇḍala or sacred sites projected onto the body. Indeed, the interiorization is s0
thorough that the movement is that of the vital breath through the vital centres in the yogic body.

Thṛee of these four Bhairavas are, presumably, the partners of the three Goddesses. If so, the

identity of the fourth Bhairava is not clear. Is he Svacchandabhairava?
See below, 30/20-28ab and notes for the three Vidyās; 30/10cd-17 for their Bhairavas and note;
and 30/45cd-46 for Mātrṛsadbhāva.

The printed edition of the Mālinīvijayottara reads caret instead of japet. MS G reads japet.
The printed edition read triśaktparimaṇḍalam i.e. (the teacher should sprinkle) ‘the
surrounding enclosure of the three energiesʼ.
MV 10/31cd-35ab. Jayaratha underṣtands that Abhinava is commenting on these verses.
However, reading ahead, it is clear that Abhinava is drawing from the Devyāyāmala, commenting

as he does so. He also refers to the Brahmayāmala. Abhinava wishes to incorporate a Vidyāvrata
into his Trika. This he finds in the Devyāyāmala, which we know was a Trika Tantra. Although, it
is not explicitly mentioned in the MV, Abhinava sees its implicit presence there. Thus, towards

the end of the passage, Jayaratha quotes from the MV, which Abhinava has in mind, we find the

expression ‘cīrṇavrata’, that is, ‘one who has observed the vow.’ He repeats a modified version of
the expression below in 23/44a i.e. cīrṇavidyāvrataḥ, with reference to the BY. There the
Vidyāvrata is strongly antinomian. This Abhinava wishes to contain. Thus, he does not refer to the

preceding verses in the MV that set out the scenario in which the repetition of the Vidyā takeṣ
place. Even so, we can assume that he would expect his reader to be aware of the context. They
read:

TANTRĀLOKA

He now explains the meditative practice (yukti) to abide in (that) state of

unity whilst repeating the liturgy of Mantras.

The Yoga of the Vow of the Observance of the Vidyā

Ṣ̄TT TTTYTHFTQaGRTTAT |
JGTGT ṀTIṀTT JJITṬĪ STṀTRTTĪI 33 II

sTā sṀ̄īḤ || 3 ||

gōmttzcīācsrvīatrrīq|

hṛccakrād utthitā sūkṣmā śaśiṣphaṭikasaṁnibhā |

lekhākārā nādarūpā praśāntā cakrapaṅktigā || 33 ||

dvādaśānte nirūḍhā sā sauṣumne tripathāntare |
tatra hr̥ccakram āpūrya japen mantraṁ jvalatprabham || 34 I|

cakṣurlomādirandhraughavahajjvālaurvasaṁnibham |

“ś(The power of the breath) that originates from the wheel of the
(teacher’s) heart is subtle (and brilliant) like the moon or a crystal. It is in

‘Or else, his mind is that of a hero once he has served (his teacher and the deity) as
taught (in the scriptures). This procedure should be practiced at night on a day in the dark lunar
fortnight (krṣṇabhūtadina). Having performed the aforementioned sacrifice and offered the most
excellent (sacrificial) substance to the fire, the officiant (mantrin) should repeat mantra, his body
erect, immobile and facing north. (27-28)
(He should do so) unti the mistrsses of yoga gather together from all around. Having
made a loud sound that is very fierce and terrifying, fallng on the ground, (the yoginīs) stay
(there) penetrating the lord of adepts. Having paid homage to them and pierced the let imb of hi
own (body) and then having given them (the blood) that comes from it as a liquid offering
(argha), he becomes one with them (iasama). (29-31ab) MV 10/27-31ab
Cf. also Tantrasadbhāva chapter 21:
cīrṇavidyāvrato mantrī [g: ?] dīvyaiḥ [g: ?] saṁsevyate [g: ?sevyate] sadā |
kalpajīvī sutejasvī bālādityasamaprabhaḥ 124 1|
yatra yatrecchate mantrī puraṁ bhavati rākṣajam |
bhakṣyabhojyaiḥ [g: -jyais] susaṁpīūrṇaṁ sarvakāmasamanvitam || 125 ||
divyakanyaiḥ [g: -kanyais] samākīṇaiḥ [g: -nai] śayyāsanasamanvitam [g: śayyā 7]|
rātrau suratabhogaṁ tu ramitvā? tantramantravit|| 126 || [g: ?]

māyūrapiṁcchakenaiva punaś caivāpasaṁharei | [g: ?]
142a g] evaṁ krīḍayate mantrī sakhāyaiḥ parivāritam || 127 ||

‘The reciter of mantra who has observed the Vow of the (Observance of the) Vidyā is

always attended by divine (beings). He lives for aeons (kalpa) and is full of radiant energy, his
light like that of a young (moning) sun. (124)

Wherever the reciter of mantra desires the world, it is bor of (his) stern (steadiness)
(rūkṣā), it is well filled with delicious edibles and all one may desire, strewn with divine virgin

girls, it has a couch and seat. At night, the one who knows mantra and Tantra, (enjoys) the
pleasures of love, and by the (magic wand of) the peacocks tail he removes it again. The knower
of mantra plays in this way surrounded by his companions.’ (125-127)
The subject of this passage (i.. verses 33-39) is the mantra observance (vidyāvrata) which is
performed by a newly consecrated officiant (ācārya, guru) before he is to initiate others. See
Sanderson 1990: 356.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

the form of a line, and its nature is Sound (nāda) that, appeased, passes

through the series of wheels to (ultimately) rest in the End of the Twelve
(finger-space above the head), where suṣumnā (the central channel merges)
within (the crossing of) the three paths. There, (once the breath descends
again and) fills the wheel of the heart (to overflowing), (the teacher) should

then repeatedly recite the Mantra, its light burning radiantly, flowing forth
blazing from the currents of the cavities of the eyes and the pores of the
skin, etc., it is like the Submarine Fire (aurva). (33-35ab)

(The reference) to ‘suṣumnā (the central channel) characterizes (all
three channels, namely) Piṅgalā and the rest. ‘There’, that is, within the power

of the vital breath that rests within the End of the Twelve. One should know that
(the reference to) ‘the wheel of the heart’ (denotes a process which,) by the

going and coming (of the breath,) starts from the wheel of heart (and continues)
up to (when it returns) to the wheel of the heart (to start again). It pours out
blazing from the cavities of the eyes etc., and so, intensely enflamed, it is equal
to the (mighty) Submarine Fire. This is the meaning. Thus, it is said that ‘its
light burns radiantlyʼ.
He now describes the going and coming of the Mantra (in the cyclic
flow of the breath).

j TraT Ṁīīaaī. gṝaaāī aṁ: gher: I| 3ē 1
yāvac chāntaśikhākīrṇaṁ viśvājyapravilāpakam || 35 1|
tadājyadhārāsaṁtrptam ānābhikuharāntaram |

evaṁ mantrā mokṣadāḥ syur dīptā buddhāḥ sunirmalāḥ || 36 ||

‘(This process continues) until (the fire) fills the Topknot, located in
the tranquil (End of the Twelve). (There) it melts the clarified butter which
is the universe, then satisfied (and propitiated) by this flow of butter, (the
fire of the vital breath, blazing with Mantra, enters) the cavity of the navel.
In this way, the Mantras effulgent, awakened and stainless, bestow
liberation.’ (35cd-36)
The End of the Twelve, within which all activity (vṛtti) ceases, is

‘tranquil’, and so it is said that ‘it melts the clarified butter which is the

universe’. The word ‘navelʼ (metaphorically) denotes the heart, because of its

close proximity to it. ‘In this way’, that is, by uttering (the Mantras) as the
power of the vital breath.
When a oneness of a Mantra with the power of the vital breath has been
achieved in this way, within the wheels and foundations etc. (of the subtle

body), where does the Mantra he is repeating attain the glorious power, which is
“ Read piṅgalādi for piṅgalāpi.

TANTRĀLOKA

the seizure (akramaṇa) of its own vitality? (In response to this question) he

says:

EṭAUPEAEIEEEEAIEKĪŪI{IĀEICṈI

TĪTVTTÇṬGTGTTTTTTHTHTĪTT, |
aī] Ḹ ṀSTFFTh ŪṬṬTT-IRTTGTI I 3¢ II
dīā d̄ HẽiHmiūlakandanabhonābhihṛtkaṇṭhālikatālugam |
ardhendurodhīikānādatadantavyāpiśaktigam || 37 I|

samanonmanaśuddhātmaparacakrasamāśritam ḷ

yatra yatra japeccakre samastavyastabhedanāt || 38 |
tatra tatra mahāmantra
In whatever wheel he may repeat (the mantras), whether together
or separately, (that) there is the Great Mantra, be it in 1) the root, 2) the
bulb, 3) the ether, 4) the navel, 5) the heart, 6) the throat, 7) the forehead,
8) the palate, 9) the Half Moon, 10) the Obstructress, 11) Sound, 12) at the
end of that, 13) the Pervasive One, 14) Power, 15) the Equal One, 16) the

Transmental, (or) in 17) the supreme wheel of the Pure Self. (37-39a)

‘At the end of that’ means at the End of Sound. The supreme wheel is
described as follows: ‘Supreme Śiva is at the end of the Transmental.' He may
repeat the Mantra, the attainment of which within a particular wheel or
foundation is assumed to specify it. (The Mantras may be recited) ‘together or

separatelyʼ, that is, taking their support as a whole or individually. This is the
meaning.
He now concludes the main point.

See above, 6/161 and note. The standard ascent of Sound with the breath through suṣumnā is in

twelve stages beginning from the heart (se Appendix A to Chapter One). In this case, four extra
steps have been added below, and the goal is counted separately, thus making seventeen stations

of ascent. The reason for this number may well be that it coincides with the number of syllables of
the Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Vidyā. If that is so, the adept who recites the Vidyā should imagine first, and

then experience directly, that this riṣe takes place progressively through these stages in the course

of the utterance of the Vidyā. However, a problem arises here. The visualization starts and ends in
the wheel of the heart. How does the breath travel down below that to the Root and then back up
to the heart? The answer seems to be that this is a separate practice. Once the teacher has
generated potency of his mantras, he can recite them in any of these subtle centres in his own, or

his disciple’s body. Wherever he does so, the mantras are equally effective.
Devyāyāmala also quoted above ad 8/398-400ab (397cd-399).

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

TGTĀSTTGRIT

iti devyākhyayāmale 1
vidyāvratam idaṁ proktaṁ mantravīryaprasiddhaye || 39 ||

tac ca tādātmyam eveti yaduktaṁ spandaśāsane |

tadākramya balaṁ mantrāḥ sarvajñabalaśālinaḥ || 40 ||
pravartante ʻdhikārāya karaṇānīva dehinām |
This is the Vow of the Observance of the Vidyā (vidyāvrata), taught
in the Devyāyāmala, so that (the newly consecrated teacher) may activate
the vitality of (his) mantras (nantravīrya), which is a state of oneness (with

them). As is said in the Spandaśāsana: ‘seizing that strength (bala),

Mantras, endowed with the power of omniscience, perform their functions,

as do the senses of the embodied.”® (39b-41ab)

Once he has completed his Vow of the Observance of the Vidyā, he is
competent (to perform) the seven sacrifices (saptasatrī). Thus, he says:

#2 1|

ftrzī āaīra7 ācrm |
ca. avīfzii ũŪēa fērṁti 1 x2 u
STāīfr̄rTa--- īr-azjraṁā |

kṛtavidyāvrataḥ paścād dīkṣāvyākhyādi sarvataḥ || 41 II
kuryād yogyeṣu śiṣyeṣu nāyogyeṣu kadācana |
rahasye yojayed vipraṁ parīkṣya viparītataḥ || 42 |I
ācārāc chaktim apy evaṁ nānyathety ūrmiśāsane |
(A teacher who) has completed the Vow of the Observance of
Mantra should thereafter do (all that is required) in all respects, such as
(impart) initiation and explain (the scriptures) to qualified disciples, (but)

never to those who are not. (41cd-42ab)

$ This is the literal tanslaton expression ‘spandasāsana’. Śaiviṣm may be called Śivaśāsana, the
Spanda school may be called '‘Śpandaśāsana’. Modem Kashmiri Śhaivites maintain that there is
such an independent school of Kashmiri Shaivism, but that may not be so. Just a few verses
ahead, Abhinava rcfers to the Úrmikaulārṇavatantra as the Ūrmiśāsana. But there can be no
doubt at all that this is a Tantra, not an independent traditon. A misunderṣtanding may have
arisen, because the Spandakārikā is often called Spandaśāsana, as it is hcre. But that may not be
s0, as Abhinava never refers it as the Spandakārikā. t is hard to say. Cerainly, the kārikās and
the Śivasūtras together were always traditionally considered to be a ‘śāsana’ – Ś‘teaching - in their
own right.
“’SpKa 26.
These lines ar most probably Abhinava’s exegesis.

TANTRĀLOKA

According to the Ūrmiśāsana ‘a Brahmin should be introduced

(yojayet) to the secret (teaching), and so too® (his) partner (śakti), (only)

after having examined whether their conduct is contrary (to the norms) —
not otherwise!ʼ (42cd-43ab)
Conduct that is contrary (to the norms) is, for example, drinking wine,
which contravenes the (norms of the) Vedas (śruti) and the law books (smṛti).

‘So too’ conduct that is contrary (to the norms) (is also) that which contravenes
(what is accepted by) society (loka) such as (illicit) sex. Otherwise, one would

act impelled by greed and lust (laulya) etc. So he says: “not otherwise’.

Similarly, as he is occupied with gracing others (and so has little time),

he may perform his regular daily rites etc. in an abbreviated (form). Thus, he
says:

#adīēīgh 3TaTa II `3 1|

Jrvĩkzmṣā:
āa+ nṝar ā-kq fia. 1

nityādy atyālpakaṁ kuryād yad uktaṁ brahmayāmale || 43 |I
cīrṇavidyāvrataḥ sarvaṁ manasā vā smaret priye |
(The teacher) may perform (his own) regular daily rites etc very
briefsly. As is said in the Brahmayāmala: “O beloved! he who has observed
the Vow of the (Observance of the) Vidyā may, alternatively, recollect all
(the rite) mentally.’ (43cd-44ab)
Surely (one may ask), although this (teacher) may be intent on
examining (the postulant), if he initiates someone by mistake without knowing
that does not possess the competence (required to receive it), is he at fault or

not? (In response to this question,) he says:

The Removal of Knowledge from a Deceitful Disciple
(haraṇaṁ mateḥ) and the Signs of His Obscuration

šāārrdgārdraāāī PHSTTḤ,_I `%% I

7 gsaīēftra: aaifēṝq |

I| `x., |
gaaa1ṁ
2 See above, note to 2/48.

“ Read with Jayaratha evar for eva.

The meaning here is not clear to me, perhaps the text is corrupt.
“ Rites may be abbreviated.

This lin corresponds to: cṝrṇavidyāvrato maṁtrī manasā vā smaret sadā | BY 34/80cd (MS G
fl 313a), which reads marhtrī for sarvaṁ.
Read na vetyāśaṅkyāha for navetyāśaṅkyāha.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

dehasaṁbandhasaṁchannasārvajñyo dambhabhājanam || 44 II
avidan dīkṣamāṇo ‘pi na duṣyed daiśikaḥ kvacit |
jñātvā tv ayogyatāṁ nainaṁ dīkṣeta pratyavāyitām || 45 ||

buddhvā

The teacher’s (innate) omniscience is obscured by (his) association

with the body. (Thus, it is possible that he may) initiate a deceitful person
without knowing (it. But if he does so, he) is not at fault in any
circumstance. (However,) once known (a postulant’s) lack of competence

and sinfulness, he should not initiate him. (44cd-45)

The (teacher’s) lack of knowledge (of the postulant’s competence) is
because his omniscience is obscured by (his) association with the body. ‘He
should not initiate himʼ, (knowing that he is not qualified,) out of greed (for
the sacrificial fee) or the like.
Even so, (if he has initiated his disciple,) (the teacher) should repeatedly

examine the initiate when giving him knowledge etc. Thus, he says:

JA TJ TATT TTTAATTTTTIĪTGTTḤI `%ē I
īā ṁ fn=tīa 7 q sāīg fazāīq 1
jñāne śāstrasiddhigurutvādau ca taṁ punaḥ |
bhūya eva parīkṣeta tattadaucityaśālinam || 46 ||
tatra tatra niyuñjĩīta na tu jãtu viparyayãt |
When (dispensing) knowledge, be it that of the scriptures, (the

manner of acquisition of magical and yogic) accomplishments (siddhi), or
the status of a teacher etc., (the teacher) should examine (the initiate)

repeatedly. (The teacher) should apply him to whatever he is competent (to

practice), certainly not® the other way around (that is, to what he is not).

(46-47ab)

“Whatever” (he is competent to practice) may be philosophy or the like
(jñānaśāstra). ‘The other way around’ means (that teachers should not apply
the disciple) to what is other than (his) specific competence.
Surely, (the disciple’s) foundation is the Supreme Lord, otherwise the
desire for knowledge in this way would not be possible. Indeed, that itself is
said to be (his) competence. So what is the use of any other examination of (his)
competence (other than observing his sincere desire for knowledge)? He raises
this doubt:

Read na tu for natu.

TANTRĀLOKA

ī3] TzkaaTTā̄
īīzāī sNīād̃ a: I| %9 ||
ūrṁttzrza arairṁēz geē-āq |
nanu tadvastvayogyasya tatrecchā jāyate kutaḥ l| 47 II

tadīśādhiṣṭhitecchaiva yogyatām asya sūcayet |

Surely (one may ask), how can a desire arise there (in the case) of

one who is not qualified for these things? It is that desire itself, sustained by

the Lord, that indicates his competence. (47cd-48ab)

(A desire) ‘there (in that case), means one for knowledge etc.

Having accepted that (objection), he responds:

āÑ TSfd I| ¢ 1

satyaṁ kāpi prabuddhāsāv icchā rūḍhiṁ na gacchati || 48 II
vidyudvat pāpaśīlasya yathā pāpāpavarjane |
This is true. (However) there is some kind of desire that, (although)
awakened, does not become well-affirmed, (but manifests for a moment)

like a flash of lightning, as happens with (the desire of) a habitual sinner to
abandon sin. (48cd-49ab)

Surely (one may ask), even if it is awakened, because (it is) sustained by
the Supreme Lord, how is it that such a desire does not develop? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

ka-ēī ālērōrīaī īTT JĪTTHTGT: I| +

rūḍhy arūḍhī tadicchāyā api śaṁbhuprasādataḥ || 49 ||

‘The firm affirmation or otherwise of this desire also is due to

Śambhu’s grace. (49cd)

Thus, he is not a worthy recipient of knowledge etc. because, even
though a desire (for it) has awakened (in him), it does not develop.

TṬFĒGTJTRJIĒTT
TJ T TĪSTT_ |

3: ŪTTITTTGTā TṬRATHaTSTT: I Ḷ |

aprarūḍhatathecchākas tata eva na bhājanam |

’ Abhinava allides again here, as he regulaty docs, to his own tceacher Śambhunātha.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

yaḥh samyagjñānam ādāya guruviśvāsavarjitaḥ || 50 II
Ome in whom this kind of desire is not solidly affirmed is not, for
that reason, (a worthy) recipient (of the teachings). He who has received
proper (sound) knowledge (through initiation), but is devoid of faith in the

teacher, disrupts the world. When he is known (to be such), (the teacher)
should not instruct him. (50-51ab)

(Such a disciple) “disrupts’ (the world) by his transgressive behaviour.
‘When he is knownʼ to be unfit in this way (to receive the teachings), because

his desire (for them) is not solidly affirmed, (the teacher) should not instruct
him. Thus, he says ‘when he is knownʼ etc.
Again, one who is not known (to be fickle) in this way at the time when

he is being instructed, (but) is known (to be such) at a subsequent time, (the
teacher) should take away (his) knowledge. Thus he says:

3TTSfT
ṬTGĪTTī fTTGTTĪ TTT I u2 1
Tā.JTdaī

ṬaṬ āHJSI AṬATRT
TRTĀTH I 4R I

aīgafcā

JTHTINGṀÑVĪTT

frātzīaṁ aīṁ Jaa-vēḷ ũ faãTr̥q 1 u 1

ajñāte ʻpi punar jñāte vijñānaharaṇaṁ caret || 51 II
punaḥ punar yadā jñāto viśvāsaparivarjitaḥ |
tadā samagrato dhyāyet sphurantaṁ candrasūryavat || 52 ||
tato nijahrṛdambhojabodhāmbarataloditām |
svarbhānumalināṁ dhyāyed vāmāṁ śaktiṁ vimohanīm || 53 1|
vāmācārakrameṇaināṁ niḥsṛtāṁ sādhyagāminīm |
cintayitvā tayā grastaprakāśaṁ taṁ vicintayet || 54 ||

anena kramayogena múḍhabuddher durātmanaḥ |

vijñānamantravidyādyāḥ prakurvanty apakāritām ||I 55 II

”Although (the disciple) was not known (to be fickle and deceitful)

but comes to be known (to be such, the teacher) should take away (this)

knowledge (from him).” If the (teacher) comes to know repeatedly that (the

disciple) is devoid of faith (in him), he should then imagine (dhyayer) him be
7 Verṣes 23/51cd-55 are based on MV 18/57cd-66ab.
” Cf. above, 13/311-314ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

present before him, shining like the Sun or Moon. He should imagine that

Vāmā, (the Lord’s) deluding power (vāmā) who, (like the demon Rāhu),”

obscures the Sun and Moon, has risen in the Sky of the Consciousness
within the lotus (his own) heart. (Then,) having thought that she has come
forth (from within himself) and enters (the disciple) which is (her) victim
(sādhya), (operating within him) by a progressive movement in reverse
(vāmācārakrameṇa) (from the his toe to the End of the Twelve), he should

think that (the disciple’s) light has been devoured by her.” By the
application of this gradual union (kramayoga), the knowledge, Mantras

and Vidyās etc. of the foolish and wicked (disciple now) act to his
detriment. (S1cd-55)
The sense (of saying) ‘repeatedly” is that here (in this case) also, (the
situation) may not be otherwise (than it seems to be). The (expression)
‘movement in reverse’ means the sequence of withdrawal. That is said (in the

Maālinīvijayottara):

(If the disciple has) taken’ knowledge (jñāna) in a proper (honest)

way (nyāyena) but subsequently fails to understand it, the wise (teacher) should

” Conceming Rāhu and eclipses, see above, 6/100cd-102ab (100-101).

” The exprcssion vāmācārakrameṇa literally means both the sequence of the movement of Vāmā,
or that of the left or the reverse. Vāmā, is the reverse (vāmā) of the enlightening action of the

power Jyeṣṭhā, which is her positive aspect (see above, note 21,57). Jayaratha aptly glosses this
expression as ‘the sequence of withdrawal’ (ṣaṁhārakrama). The corresponding passage in the
MV quoted by Jayaratha clafies that this ‘rcverse movement’ of the power Vāmā, which
withdraws the disciple’s knowledge, is the flow of the breath that transports his soul from his toes
up to the End of the Twelve. As she does so, she consumes the light that had been installed within

him previously by initiaton.
” Or one could trnslate ‘by means of this gradual system of yoga’.
” TĀ 23/51cd-55 is an explanatory paraphrase of MV 18/57cd-66ab. Here Jayaratha is quoting

MV 18/57cd-58ab, S9cd-60ab, 64cd-65ab, 62cd-63ab, 65cd-66ab, in this order. A translation of
MV 18/57cd-66ab is as follows. The parts in italics are quoted here by Jayaratha:

‘(If the disciple has) taken knowledge (jūāna) in a proper (honest) way (nyāyena) (but)
subsequently fails to understand it, the wise (teacher) should then take (that) knowledge away
(from him). (57cd-58ab)
Having imagined him to be before him and having placed (him there) in accord with his

own nature, (the teacher who) knows yoga, should deposit the path of six kinds onto his body in
as taught before. (58cd-59ab)

Then, having observed that flane (dīpa) (which is the disciple’s soul) and laid hold of it,

he should, with his mind well concentrated, lead (that) radiant energy (tejas) gradually from the

tip of (his disciple's) toe to the End of the Twelve. (S9cd-60ab)
‘Then (the teacher), having thought that he has become one there with Śiva, should
imagine (dhyāyer) there the form of darkness (lamorūpa) that obscures (the disciple’s soul). (The
power Vāmā) fallig by that (same) path, reaches the tip of the big toes (of the disciple). He
should imagine (the darkness) inside and outside (to be black) like dense collyrium. (6Ocd-62ab)

By this procedure (vidhi) the knowledge, mantras and vidyās etc. of this foolish and
wicked (disciple are now no longer of any) help (to him). (62¢d-63ab)
Although (the erring disciple may be absent and) not seen (directly), he is perceived to

some extent due to the directed attention (abhisandhi) (of the teacher’s) mind, and (so) is always
(subject to) injury (and disdain). (63cd-64ab)

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

then take (that) knowledge away (from him). Then, having observed that flame
(dīpa) (which is the disciple’s soul) and laid hold of it, he should, with his mind
well-concentrated, lead (that) radiant energy (tejas) gradually from the tip of
(his disciple’s) toe to the End of the Twelve.
Or else, having imagined the light of the solar orb to be before him
(shining in his unfaithful disciple), (the teacher) should sever it. He should then

think that it is devoured by a power in the form of Rāhu (svarbhānu). By this
procedure (vidhi), the knowledge, Mantras and Vidyās etc. of this foolish and
wicked (disciple are now no longer of any) help (to him). (Only the teacher)
who is very angry because of the thousands of sins (his disciple has committed)
should make use of this procedure. Certainly not in order to play (a game).’

Surely, (one may object,) knowledge and action are the (very) nature of
the Self. By taking away knowledge from the Self, it would be destroyed. We
are not of the view, as is Kāṇāda and others, that the relationship between

knowledge and the Self is one of a quality and (the substance) that possesses it.
So how is it that this is said in your scriptures? He expresses this doubt (as
follows):

ēq aē vŪd-q 1

nanu vijñānam ātmasthaṁ kathaṁ hartuṁ kṣamaṁ bhavet |

ato vijñānaharaṇaṁ kathaṁ śrīpūrva ucyate || 56 ||

Surely (one may ask), how can one remove the knowledge that is
present in the Self? So how is it that the removal of knowledge (from a
deceitful disciple’s) soul is taught in the Śrīpūrva (Mālinīvijayottara)?” (56)
He counters this (objection saying):

šz āra frarzi fāī sṀ̄āa-q |

TA--ã Ṁḹ āāāTCṬPĪHTJTTTTITP:I 4S
Or else, having imagined the light of the solar orb to be before him (shining in his

unfaithful disciple), (the teacher) should sever it. He should then think that it is devoured by a

power in the form of Rāhu (svarbhānu). (6cd-65ab)

(Only the teacher) who is very angry because of the thousands of sins (his disciple has

committed) should make use of this procedure. Cerainly not in order to play (a game). (65cd66ab)
7 MV reads jñānam āṣādhya (‘having attaned knowledge’) for jñān amādāya (‘having taken
knowledge’).

” The manner in which the teacher removes a deceitful disciple’s knowledge and the reason for it

is explained in MV 18/54-73. 23/51cd-55 is a loose explanatory paraphrase of MV 18/57cd-66ab.
The passage comprising verses 55 to 89 is essentally a commentary on MV 18/57cd-66ab
(paraphrased in 23/51cd-55), 18/66cd-67ab (quoted in 23/67), 18/70cd-72ab (quoted in 23/84-85)
and 18/72cd-73ab (quoted in 23/86cd-87ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

ucyate nāsya śiṣyasya vijñānaṁ rūḍhim āgatam |

tathātve haraṇaṁ kasmāt .pūrṇayogyatvaśālinaḥ || 57 |
It is said (in response to this objection) that the knowledge this

disciple possesses has not become firmly established. If it were, how can it

be removed from one who is fully qualified (to possess it)? (57)

‘The knowledge this disciple possesses has not become firmly
established’. The meaning is that it has not become pure. When (the disciple)
has become firmly established in the supreme and full abode (of consciousness),

because (he is) capable of attaining a state of oneness (with it), how can that

venerable knowledge be removed? The intended sense of what he is saying is
that the Self would be destroyed in this way.

Surely (one may ask), his instruction has come to an end, why did (his)

knowledge not become firmly established? With this doubt in mind, he says:

kiṁtv eṣa vāmayā śaktyā mūḍho gāḍhaṁ vibhoḥ kṛtaḥ |
svabhāvād eva tenāsya vidyādyam apakārakam |l 58 II

However, he has been deeply deluded by the Pervasive Lord’s
power (called) Vāṃā,” and so his Vidyā and the rest is, by its very nature,
detrimental (to him). (58)

Surely (one may ask), if the Vidyā etc. is detrimental by its very nature,
because he has been affected by the power that destroys (his insight), then for
what reason should the teacher remove (his) knowledge? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

z'®|r̥ḤFUtkēcāīttcetzzTIṭAI

āīstīgJē r-áTghsttaī īJ I| Go |

guruḥ punaḥ śivābhinnaḥ san yaḥ pañcavidhāṁ kṛtim ḷ
kuryād yadi tataḥ pūrṇam adhikāritvam asya tat | 59 ||
ato yathā śuddhatattvasṛṣṭisthityor malātyaye |
yojanānugrahe kāryacatuṣke ‘dhikṛto guruḥ || 60 II

” Concemning Vāmā and its obscuring power sce above note 21,57.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

Śivābhedena tat kuryāt tadvat pañcamam apy ayam |
tirobhāvābhidhaṁ kṛtyaṁ tathāsau śivatātmakaḥ || 61 II
Again, if the teacher, being one with Śiva, can perform His five-fold
task (krti), his authority is then, for this reason, full (and complete). Thus,
just as the teacher is authorized to perform (the following) four tasks, that
is, the creation and maintenance of the pure principles, the destruction of
Impurity and the grace (of bestowing) union (yojanā) (with Śiva); in the
same way, because he is not separate from Śiva, he may perform the fifth
task, called obscuration. It is in this way that Śiva’s state is his (very)

nature.” (59-61)

‘Thuṣ’, as he has complete authority, because he performs (Śiva’) five

tasks (of creation, maintenance, destruction, grace and obscuration). What of

it, (even if) he does perform (Śiva’s) five tasks? With this doubt in mind, he
says that ‘it is in this way that Śiva’s state is his (very) nature’.
As (the teacher is a veritable embodiment) of the supreme good (śreyas)
in this way, he should not get angry in any circumstance. Accordingly, he says:

ata eva śive śāstre jñāne cāśvāsabhājanam |

guror mūḍhatayā kopadhāmāpi na tirohitaḥ || 62 I|
Thus, for this reason, (a disciple who once) had faith in Śiva, the

scriptures and knowledge, (but his consciousness) is (now) obscured by

(his) stupidity, (should take care) not to be also the object of (his) teacher’s

wrath. (62)

“Thus, for this reason’, that is, because the teacher is Śiva, the disciple

who, by virtue of his previous condition (when he was initiated) ‘had faith’ in
the Śaiva scriptures etc., (but now) is obscured because of ‘(his) stupidity,

(should) not, even so, be the object (the teacher’s) wrath. The meaning is that
the teacher should not get angry (with him).
Surely (one may ask), how can you say this? One with whom the
teacher is angry is subject to transmigration, and it is said that (his
consciousness) is obscured. Accordingly, he says:

rfi #fīṁ’ aa q fāftka s= 1

” Çf. above, 14/24-25 and 42cd-43ab.
For a discussion of Śiva’s five operations (paācakṛtya), see Dyczkowski 1992a: 178-183.
Verṣes 57 to 61 are Abhinava’s discussion of the tcāchings of MV 18/57cd-66ab, thc following
passage up to verse 66 is inspircd by his teacher’s view as attested in verse 65.

TANTRĀLOKA

gurur hi kupito yasya sa tirohita ucyate |

He with whom the teacher is angry is said to be obscured, and is

subject to transmigratory existence. (63ab)

Such is (indeed) the truth. (However,) he who is a (true) teacher is

dedicated in his intention to save the entire universe, and so is the Supreme Lord
Himself, who is supremely compassionate and is made of true wisdom
(satyajñāna). So what (true teacher) could be angry with anybody?

a q šaī fē rṃaṝ a ṇītāz: 1 1

sa tu devo hi gurur na ca mṛṣāvidaḥ | 63 I|

tata eva ca śāstrādidūṣako yady api krudhā |

na dahyate ʻṣau guruṇā tathāpy eṣa tirohitaḥ | 64 1|

The teacher is indeed God Himself; his knowledge is not false.
Thus, although one who transgresses the scriptures etc. is not (struck and)

burnt by the teacher’s anger, even so (his consciousness) is obscured. (63cd-

64)

‘Indeed’ has the sense of emphasis. ‘His knowledge is not false’. The

intended sense is that if it were to be, that would allow for the possibility of (his
being) angry. ‘Thus’, because his knowledge is not false. “Even so’, because it
is hard to get over the power of the nature of things (vastu), (his consciousness

is obscured anyway).

That is also our teachers view. Accordingly, he says:

The Teacher Should Help an Obscured Disciple when He Can

fēātrd ajz fraīt

ī ̄aT vUzTNT T RIJIR: JaT I ṜU, I
asmadgurvāgamas tv eṣa tirobhūte svayaṁ śiśau |

na kupyen na śaped dhīmān sa hy anugrāhakaḥ sadā || 65 ||
Our teacher’s tradition (gurvāgama) (maintains) that the disciple
is obscured by his own doing (svayam). A wise man should not be angry nor
curse; he is always gracious (and helpful to everybody). (65)

RṚcad sa tu for satu, sa ca for saca in the following line and sa u for sau in the following verse.
The expression ‘gurvāgama’ can also mcan ‘th scripture which is the teache°.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

Here (in the case) of one who himself desires to obscure (himself),
nothing else at all remains to be done that even (the teacher) needs to do.

Accordingly, he says:

mē afē #v fntzāq 1

īśecchācoditaḥ pāśaṁ yadi kaṇṭhe nipīḍayet |
kim ācāryeṇa tatrāsya kāryā syāt sahakāritā || 66 ||
If he ties a noose around his neck impelled by the Lord’s will (to do

s0), should the teacher’s task be to help him (hang himself)? (66)

What should (the teacher) do? (His) help in this case (to assist the
disciple’s suicide) serves no purpose at all. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), if this is so, would not the capacity to perform the
five operations (the teacher possesses) who is one with Śiva be compromised?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

atitī | ē.a1
Śśivābhinno ‘pi hi gurur anugrahamayīṁ vibhoḥ |
mukhyāṁ śaktim upāsīno ʻnugṛhṇīyāt sa sarvathā || 67 II
Although the teacher is one with Śiva (and so has the power to
obscure as well as grace), devoted (as he is) to the pervasive Lord’s

principal power, which is grace, may he (always) grace (everybody) in

every way! (67)

As is said there (in the Mālinīvijayottara):
‘He who, due to this procedure, has fallen from knowledge, cannot be
united again (with it) until he has been rescued (from his fallen state), only by

that same (teacher who has taken the knowledge from him).”

Surely then, (one may ask) what was the purpose of saying that (the
teacher) should remove the knowledge (of a miscreant disciple) etc.? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

ēITezE/EIYĪSEAEFĪII- AEĀḤ

MV 18/66cd-67ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

svātantryamātrajñaptyai tu kathitaṁ śāstra īdṛśam |
na kāryaṁ patatāṁ hastālambaḥ sahyo na pātanam || 68 I|

This kind of (practice) has been taught in the scripture only to

make known (the teacher’s complete) freedom. It should not be done. One
should lend a hand to those who have fallen, not cause them to fall

(further). (68)

(The teacher) should be intent on compassion. Accordingly, he says:

ŪTTēd, |

rā aṁ a. | 5

ata eva svatantratvād icchāyāḥ punar unmukham |
prāyaścittair viśodhyainaṁ dīkṣeta krpayā guruḥ l| 69 ||
Thus, the teacher should, moved by compassion, initiate this
(disciple, who has been obscured) by the freedom (of the Lord’s) will, after
having purified him with the rites of reparation and (rendered him again)

propense (to realization). (69)

The freedom of (the Lord’s will) consists (precisely in this, namely,)
gracing again also one who was (previously) obscured.

Surely (one may ask), it was said that one who has fallen from another

(teacher) is obscured. (Now) if he falls again in the same way, because he has no
faith in the other (teacher), he has fallen from both, so how could he be the
object of grace here (in this case) also? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Better to Follow an Inferior Doctrine and Give it Up

Than Give up a Superior One

-GUTEEĒKEE ĒEFGEḶĀCĀ

EaṜIEREVEAIUĪĒS--ĀŪĪCĀCAI
Here Abhinava is rferring especially to the Mālinīviayottara.
This verse is a paraphrasc of MV 18/67cd-68:
karuṇākṛṣṭacittas tu tasya krtvā viśodhanam |l
tatastasya prakurvīta dīkṣāṁ pūrvoktavartmanā ||

‘(The teacher’s mind,) drawn by compassion, having purified (his fallen disciple) by

means of the procedures in the scriptures of atonement such as breath control, should then initiate

him (again) in the manner taught previously.’

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

ūrdhvadr̥ṣṭau prapannaḥ sann anāśvastas tataḥ param |
adhaḥśāstraṁ prapadyāpi na śreyaḥ pātratām iyāt || 70 ||
adhodṛṣṭau prapannas tu tad anāśvastamānasaḥ |
ūrdhvaśāsanabhāk pāpaṁ tac cojjhec ca śivībhavet II 71 II
He who, propense to a superior doctrine (dṛṣti), loses (his) faith in it

and so subsequently follows an inferior scripture, (will never) become
worthy of the more excellent one (śreyas). However, he who (on the

contrary), is propense to an inferior doctrine, (but his) mind has no faith
(in it) and adheres (instead) to a more elevated teaching (śāsana), may
abandon the sin (and blame of his former belief) and identify with Śiva.

(70-71)

He makes (his point) by presenting an example.
Only the Teacher Who has Made the Disciple Fall

Can Elevate Him Again

T] gcdāīzç]d’St]
f fzi |
IE I

[kḶEESSEEEEEIĀ
rājñe druhyann amātyāṅgabhūto ‘pi hi vihanyate |
viparyayas tu nety evam ūrdhvāṁ dṛṣṭiṁ samāśrayet I| 72 |I
He who attacks a king, even if he is one of (his) ministers, is
executed, but that is not so the other way around (that is, if a king attacks
his minister). In the same way, (it is better to) follow a more elevated
doctrine (and so be like the king, than follow a lower one and be like the

minister). (72)

Thus, our scripture is also such. Accordingly, he says:

śrīpūrvaśāstre tenoktaṁ yāvat tenaiva noddhṛtaḥ |

Thus, it is said in the Mālinīvijayottara (Śrīpūrvaśāstra) (with regard

to this, that one who has been made to fall by his teacher cannot be elevated

again) until he has been rescued (from his fallen state) by that same

(teacher). (7J3ab)

He explains the overall sense.

23/73b is MV. 18/67b. The full verse is quoted above in TĀv ad 23/67.

TANTRĀLOKA

.93 1
TTJGTTHYĀT
TAT
TG

T|
atra hy artho ‘yam etāvat pūrvoktajñānabṛṁhitaḥ || 73 ||

gurus tāvat sa evātra tacchabdenāvamṛśyate |

The sense here is as follows. The word ‘that’ signifies that the
teacher is just the same ((āvat) one (as the first), who is nurtured by the

knowledge previously imparted. (73cd-74ab)

The words ‘just the same’ (tāvat) indicate that there is no disagreement

(about this).

He also explains the meaning of the word ‘jast’ (eva).

īgāRa-āTTĪTRTTATSTTĒHTGTTITPT
I| A9¥
STTRGT T #īd IJGTTTÑ:|

J JTTSTTTāhgFIĪSĪ
frTIT: I 4, 1
tādṛkṣvabhyastavijñānabhājordhvapadaśālinā I| 74 |
anuddhṛtasya na śreya etad anyagurūddhṛteḥ |
ata evāmbujanmārkadṛṣṭānto ‘tra nirūpitaḥ l| 75 I|

If he is not rescued by (his original teacher,) who has (access) to the
upper plane and is endowed with that kind of well-exercised knowledge,
but is rescued by some other teacher, it is of no use to him. Thus, the
example of the sun and the lotus is described here (in this regard).” (74cd75)
(This example) ‘is described’ in the commentary (vivaraṇa), that is, in

the Pūrvapañcikā.” As is said there:

‘A Iotus that has closed’ because the rays of the sun are weak or absent,
does not blossom even in the presence of the great energies of (many) other
PMṆKa transatin p. 346 note 482. According to Harunaga Īṣaacson, the sense of tāvat here is
‘clearly’. But that sense is not warranted by the context of Abhinava’s statement, unless we accept

that Jayaratha has chosen to understand Abhinavain this way. Rather Abhinava uses the word

tāyat in the common sense of ‘as such’ or ‘as much as’, whichin this context can be translated as
just the same.’ Jayaratha simply comments that this is commonly accepted. The teacheri
‘this much’, thatis, as capable of obscuring as gracing. We may perhaps construe that

two teachers of equal capacity, but that possibility is precluded by what Abhinava says in what
follows.
Cf. above, 22/13.

“ The Pūrvapañcikā īs referred to here as a commentary (vivaraṇa). This appears to have been a
lost commentary by Abhinavagupta on some part of the Mālinīvijayottara. He also refers to it as

the Mālinīpañcikā. t is quoted in the PT (p. 23 ff. and p. 57). There the lines are in prose. See
Hanneder 1998: 33 note 1.

! Read saṁkucit- for saṁkucat.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

planets. In the same way, the lotus of the disciple’s heart, without the teacher’s
feet, closes and blossoms again (only) (by the rays of grace) that fall from

A Trika Master is the Highest. If He Dies One Should

Take Refuge in Another.

THHĀTIṀTR-THHTTTTTḤ
I 1SĒ, I

trijagajjyotiṣo hy anyat tejo ‘nyac ca niśākṛtaḥ |
jñānam anyat trikaguror anyat tv adharavartinām || 76 ||
One thing is the radiant energy of the light (of the sun that

illumines) the three worlds, and another that of the moon. One thing is the

knowledge of a Trika teacher, and another that of those (teachers) who
belong to lower (schools). (76)

Surely (one may ask), if the previous teacher has died, then what should

he do? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JaṬ TaT |

Tīd daāīTITTTHPJATTGTa: I| 0%9I
ata eya purābhūtagurvabhāvo yadā tadā |
tadanyaṁ lakṣaṇopetam āśrayet puṇar unmukhaḥ l\ 77 II
Thus, if the preceding teacher is no longer alive, (his disciple) again
intent (on liberation) should take refuge with another one who is endowed
with (his same) mark (of excellence).” (77)
His mark (of excellence) (lakṣaṇa) is taught here (in the
Mālinīvijayottara): ʻ“Whereas he who knows all the reality levels (tattva) as they

truly are is a (true) teacher.”

(The teacher) should not be abandoned if he is alive. Thus, he says:

This was most probably one of the introductory laudatory verses of ths, Abhinava’s fit Trika
work. Śambhunātha is the only one of Abhinava’s numerous teachers, of whom he says that the
sun-lke rays of his feet has caused his heart to blossom. In other words, ‘the example of the sun
and the lotos' efers especially to himself
and his tcacher Śambhunātha, who was thus Abhinava’s
teacher right from the start of his journey through Trika Tantra.
For these charactcristics, see above, 23 11-12ab.
MV 2/10ab quoted above in TĀv ad 23/11-12ab. Here Jayaratha only quotes 2/10; the rest has
been added for the sake of clarity.

TANTRĀLOKA

Disqualifying Defects in a Teacher and Disciple

RIṬGTTĪ
IĪI āĪSTṜRĒTTHTĒ: 11 A9¢ 1

sati tasmiṁs tūnmukhaḥ san kasmāj jahyād yadi sphuṭam ḷ
syād anyatarago doṣo yo ‘dhikārāpaghātakaḥ !| 78 II
However, if he is alive and (the disciple) is well disposed (unmukha),
why should he abandon him? Clearly, (he would do that only) if there is a
defect within (himself or the teacher) that divests (them of their)
competence (to impart and receive initiation etc.). (78)
The sense is that in this way he should adopt a teacher who belongs to a
more elevated school (ūrdhvaśāsana). If there is (some) defect, they should
abandon one another. He says this with the words: ‘if there is a defectʼ etc.
Surely (one may ask), should the defect here (in his case) be understood
to be a worldly one, or one relating to the scriptures? With this doubt in mind,

says:

STĪTTGATTTTTHCGĀTTTĪ
TTĪ #TT: I| A93 I

[tziztkEIVG-EEṭ:zsṭcRrḤḤ

āI || ¢o 1
doṣaś ceha na lokastho doṣatvena nirūpyate |
ajñānakhyāpanāyuktakhyāpanātmā tv asau mataḥ || 79 II
Śiṣyasyāpi tathābhūtajñānānāśvastarūpatā |
mukhyo doṣas tadanye hi doṣās tatprabhavā yataḥ || 80 |I
The defect described here as a defect is not a worldly one; rather, it
is considered to be (the teacher’s) lack of knowledge, (his incapacity to)
communicate it, and the communication (of matters that are logically)
unsound. The disciple also (has other defects). His lack of faith (and
confidence) in such knowledge (of Śiva and the scriptures etc.) is the main
one, as (all) the other defects derive, indeed, from this one. (79-80)
He describes the nature of the defect relating to the scriptures, saying:
‘(the teacher’s) the lack of knowledge’ etc. From the word ‘alsoʼ, (one)
gathers (that the disciple may also have) the teacher’s (defects). Thus, the
relationship (between these statements is that): ‘this is considered to be the main

defect of the teacher and (also) of the disciple’. Thus there (in that case), (the
main defect is) the teachers ignorance. (Moreover,) even if he does (possess
some) knowledge, (he has) no capacity to communicate it. Such is the case with
reality (tattva) also, that is, the matter (artha) he communicates is (logically)

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

unsound. ‘Other” (defects) the teacher (may) have include undertaking religious

practices (anuṣṭhāna) that are not prescribed and the like. (Those) of the disciple
include his lack of acceptance of the teacher and the like. (The word) ‘indeed’
serves (only) to adorn the sentence.
The (basic) cause of (the disciple’s) lack of acceptance of (his) teacher
and the other (defects) are (his) lack of faith (in the teacher’s) knowledge. He

makes this (teaching) firm by means of a positive and negative example.

TqṬĪTTIaTTATTĪ
TTITĀT aTṀIT I ¢3 I

T sīṁa-aā:
fk fē 7 īāaā nq |

feaxāī za ftr=f̄ṝ u1 ¢ 3 1
na dhvastavyādhikaḥ ko hi bhiṣajaṁ bahu manyate |
asūyur nūnam adhvastavyādhiḥ svasthāyate balāt || 81 ||
evaṁ jñānasamāśvastaḥ kiṁ kiṁ na gurave caret |
no cen nūnam aviśvasto viśvasta iva tiṣṭhati || 82 ||
Who is it that, having been cured of a disease, does not have a great

deal of respect (for his) doctor? (However,) a detractor (who does not like

the doctor), will (nevertheless) certainly stubbornly (balāt) (insist) that he is
curing (himself,) (although) he continues to be sick. In the same way, what
will one who is satisfied (and has faith in the) knowledge (he has received)
not offer the teacher? But if not, although he is not satisfied (and has no

faith), he will certainly (act) as if he is satisfied. (81-82)

Just as anybody who has been cured of a disease would (normally)

show much respect to (his) doctor, (saying such things to him as) ‘my life has
been surrendered to your (gracious) favour’. One who is (the doctor’s) detractor

and is envious (of him) will, on the contrary, certainly stubbornly (balāt)
consider himself to be like one who is healthy, although he is not and has not
been cured (of his) disease. Similarly, will a disciple who is not satisfied (and

has no faith in the) knowledge (he has received) behave in harmony with (his)

teacher? (Rather,) he who is not satisfied with the knowledge (he has received)
and, so too with what has actually happened (vastuvṛtta), (thinks) ‘what should I

do with my teacher?”’ and pretends that he is satisfied. The meaning is that he

will cultivate false pride within himself.

Surely (one may ask), what is the (scriptural) authority for attending to

the teacher’s defect in relation to the scriptures, and not (his) worldly (ones)?

Abandon a Teacher with Pernicious Defects

ATTTCA ṬĀ TT T ōttkārī TJI: |

TANTRĀLOKA

JJ a āif aāīs%jāī |

gh aīgcrṁd aT I| C° 1

ftrrrēkáror̥̄gckrrṣraāa
āq |

arat fait 1 ¢ u

ajñānādaya evaite doṣā na laukikā guroḥ |
iti khyāpayituṁ proktaṁ mālinīvijayottare || 83 ||
na tasyānveṣayed vṛttaṁ śubhaṁ vā yadi vā ʻśubham |

sa eva tad vijānāti yuktaṁ cāyuktam eva vā || 84 ||

akāryeṣu yadā saktaḥ prāṇadravyāpahāriṣu |
tadā nivāraṇīyo ʻsau praṇatena vipaścitā || 85 II
viśeṣaṇam akāryāṇām uktābhiprāyam eva yat |
tenātivāryamāṇo ʻpi yady asau na nivartate || 86 ||
tadānyatra kvacid gatvā śivam evānucintayet |
In order to explain that ignorance and the like are the teacher’s
defects (to which one should attend), not (his) worldly ones, it is said in the

Mālinīvijayottara that: “The disciple should not inquire into what (the

teacher) has done, whether it is auspicious or not, (the teacher) himself

knows whether it is proper (yukta) or not. If he is attached (to doing things)
that should not be done, that steal away his life (prāṇa) and money, a
respectful and wise (disciple) should dissuade him (from it).’ The intention

behind specifying this about what should not be done is what has (just)

been mentioned. ‘If, although (the disciple) has (tried) hard to dissuade
(him), he does not desist, then having gone somewhere else (to another

teacher), he should (meditate on and) think only about Śiva.’ (83-87ab)
is said:

(The disciple should) ‘not inquire’ (into what the teacher has done). As

‘Once he who enquires into the right conduct (or otherwise) of a teacher
with the desire to find one (prapitsā) does find a true teacher, he quickly attains

Śiva above (in a higher teaching). By falling from that (other teacher’s) feet, he
(accrues) no impurity at all, (but if) he does assume (that impurity,) it would
sully the blazing intellect of the disciple alone (not that of the teacher).”
‘(The teacher) himself knows’ (whether it is proper (yukta) or not),
because he has a complete knowledge of the scriptures. ‘The intention behind
specifying this about what should not be done is what has (just) been
“ 23/84-85 = MV 18/70cd-72ab; 23/86cd-87ab = MV 18/72cd-73ab.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

mentionedʼ because the stealing away (thereby of the teacher’s) life (prāṇa)
and money is a worldly (concern).

Surely, (one may object that,) if this is so, (the teacher) would not know
how to discriminate between what should and what should not be done. In
accord with the following view, one should abandon him:

‘Even a teacher who is without stain, by not knowing what should and
should not be done, is prone to following a wrong path (utpatha), (and s0) it is
ordained that (he should be) abandoned.”
(If all teachers are like this,) what would be the use of going elsewhere

(to another teacher)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ī Ta q TṬc RITRIT āTTTR RĪTT I ¢9 1

na hy asya sa gurutve syād doṣo yenoṣare (> yathoṣare) kṛṣim || 87 ||
kuryād vrajen niśāyāṁ vā sa tv arthaprāṇahārakaḥ |
tadīyāpriyabhīrus tu paraṁ tādṛśam ācaret || 88 I|
yatas tad apriyaṁ naiṣa śṛṇuyād iti bhāṣitam |
(A defect) like farming (infertile) saline soil or wandering around at
night, does not entail a defect in the teacher’s status. (A significant defect)

steals away the vital breath and material wealth (of others). But although

fearful of its displeasing (nature), even so, (the disciple) should behave in
such a way that he may hear what is displeasing (nor should he tell others
about it). This is what is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara). (87cd-89ab)
Those Who are Graced May Remove their Own

Obscuration to Some Degree

śrīmātaṅge tad uktaṁ ca nādhītaṁ bhūmabhītitaḥ || 89 |I
The same is said in the venerable Mataṅga. It is not cited (here) for
fear of being too verbose. (89cd)
(It is not cited here) ‘for fear of being too verbose’ʼ, that is, out of fear

of making the book (excessively) long. Thus, one should follow this up for
oneself in the section concerning observance (caryāpāda) etc. (of that Tantra).

Surely, (one may ask, what) is the (point of saying) ‘until he has been
rescued (from his fallen state) only by that same (teacher who has taken the

TANTRĀLOKA

knowledge from him)’
? Is this restriction aimed at excluding other teachers, or
is it also aimed at prohibiting one’s own spontaneous discernment? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

T;Ṭ | Q 1|

3IGYTGTTĀ TTGTAYTĒTSI JTQ |

īĩṁḥ `dTōōfd ũr: ī ēīd sTsaaa II 82 l

yac caitad uktam etāvat kartavyam iti tad dhruvam |
tīvraśaktigṛhītānāṁ svayam eva hṛdi sphuret || 90 ||
upadeśastvayaṁ mandamadhyaśkater nijāṁ kramāt |
Śśaktiṁ jvalayituṁ proktaḥ sā hy evaṁ jājvalīty alam || 91 |I
““What has been said (by the Lord) should be done in that (very)
way”” – that (intention) shines firm and radiantly, spontaneously (by itself)

in the heart of those who are seized by an intense descent of the power (of
grace). (90)

he says:

If that is so, then there is no need of a teacher! With this doubt in mind,

This teaching has been imparted to one who has received a weak or

medium power (of grace), in order to gradually inflame his own (spiritual)
power, which (as a result) can (finally) burn intensely, fully (in all its
splendour). (91)
He (illustrates this teaching) with an example.

GGTTTTJFTTTṀTĀTTJĪTTT; |

drṛḍhānurāgaṣubhagasaṁrambhābhoabhāginaḥ |
svollāsi smarasarvasvaṁ dārdhyāyānyatra drśyate || 92 ||

The wealth of passion that emerges spontaneously from one who

enjoys the bliss of intercourse with a beautiful woman whose love is firm

(and intense) is seen to make (the passion of others) elsewhere firm (and

intense).” (92)

Above, 23/73b which is MV 18/67b.
Ṣee above, 23/73-76.
Here it seems that Abhinava is talking about himself and how he views his teacher,
Śambhunātha.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

‘Elsewhere’ means in one whose love is not firm.
Surely (one may ask), all these fettered souls manifest within
consciousness, and that is everywhere the same, so how is it that this has been
made the subject of an example of an unreasonable (view), namely, that this
manifests for someone spontaneously with this nature, (whereas for) someone
(else,) otherwise?” With this doubt in mind, he says:

TaTT GṬṛ, gTdT: fēēIIIN
]|

nanv eṣa kasmād dṛṣṭāntaḥ kim etenāśubhaṁ kṛtam |
citspandaḥ sarvago bhinnād upādheḥ sa tathā tathā || 93 II
Surely (one may ask), how is it that that example (has been given)?
(Our response to this question is,) what has been done in this way that is
inauspicious (and inappropriate)? The pulse of consciousness (citspanda) is
(indeed) present (equally) in all (things), but because the limiting adjuncts
(that contain it) are diverse (and divided, it manifests accordingly) in this
way and that. (93)

He replies (to that question) saying ‘what’ (has been done in this way
that is inauspicious (and inappropriate))? etc. Surely, (we reply,) why has
something inopportune been done by (presenting) this example? Although that

pulse of consciousness is everywhere the same, because of the negative nature

(daurātmya) of each of the (many) diverse limiting adjuncts, it assumes this or
that varied state. This is the meaning.
He now explains this varied state (of affairs).

JJ-ISY fīāT]T: ŪT-HṜGTĪST
a-

fi-īf̄ trītsīrartaāṀa
trḡd 1 Q 1
bhavet ko ʻpi tirobhūtaḥ punar unmukhito ‘pi san |
vināpi daiśikāt prāgvat svayam eva vimucyate || 94 ||
As (was said) before, it is possible that someone who was
(previously) obscured may, once (he is) propense again (to seek realisation),
liberate (himself) by himself alone, without a teacher. (94)

“’ The objection is simply that the example Abhinava presents is not a good one. The same reality

should appear to everybody in the same way. The experience of love and passion is not like that.

Not everybody experiences the same emotions, even when they share a common or similar
experience. This objection implies also that the means to achieving higher, more expanded, states

of consciousness should be the same for everybody.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The present participle) ‘being’ should also be linked to the previous

(possibility) als0.' ‘As (was said) before’, that is, by the process taught in

Chapter Thirteen etc. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask), how can one who has also been obscured, possess
the knowledge (of one who is spontaneously) enlightened (from birth)? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

-TĪTT; JTFTTHTGIÇ_ TdT: |
3TTYISJTAT
TIT GGGĪṬHTGTT I Ṝ4 II
prakāras tv eṣa nātroktaḥ śaktipātabalād gataḥ |
aṣaṁbhāvyatayā cātra dṛḍhakopaprasādavat || 95 ||
(The intention) here is not to say that this is a type (of obscuration,
such that one who was previously obscured) proceeds (on his own just) by

the power of a descent of the power (of grace, without the help of a

teacher). (This cannot be,) because it is impossible here (in this case), just as
it is (impossible) to quell intense anger (for somebody without the
intercession of an intermediary). (95)
This is not said to be a type of spontaneous enlightenment that occurs
here, (in the case of) one who is obscured. Rather, the word ‘type” is used
with the intention that (it is nothing more than) just a possibility that this (person

whose consciousness) is obscured proceeds (on his own) by the power of the

descent of grace. The meaning is the descent of the power (of grace) he has
generally is of the weakest sort (mandamanda). Moreover, that is impossible,
just as it is for a king to be gracious towards someone he has made an object of
his anger without the prior intercession of someone else, because (his anger is
very) intense. In the same way, how is it possible for knowledge to arise
(spontaneously) by itself even for him, without a teacher? The removal of
knowledge is classified (into different types) in this way, with respect to the
field of its application (viṣaya).
And that must necessarily be observed by the teacher. Accordingly, he

says:

flrā̃ araārīr=glmcā
a aflīār ṇ <8 1

ity eṣa yo guroḥ prokto vidhis taṁ pālayed guruḥ |

anyathā na śivaṁ yāyāc chrīmatsāre ca varṇitam || 96 ||

Ó9 The expression sann api may be applicd to both tirobhūtaḥ and punar unmúkhitaḥ. In other
words, someone who was previously obscured may subsequently become propense to achieve
liberaton. Conversely, one who was previously propense to achieve liberaton may be
subsequently obscured.
"|ṞRead prakāraśabdāt for prakaraṇāt.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

This is the (prescribed) procedure (vidhi) for the teacher, who
should (take care) to observe it. Otherwise (if he does not), it is said in the
venerable Sāra that he will not go to Śiva (when he dies). (96)
He (now) quotes what is said in the venerable Trikasāra.

The Categories of Those Deceitful Teachers (tadvibhāgaḥ)

aīá yaçdfīd rzm īfat 2
TṣTrṬTT ṬRa: aqTATT: I Q9 1
anyāyaṁ ye prakurvanti śāstrārthaṁ varjayanty alam |
te ‘rdhanārīśapuragā guravaḥ samayacyutāḥ || 97 II

‘Those teachers who have fallen from their pledges (samaya),
behave unlawfully, and do not observe the teaching of the scriptures
(śāstrārtha) properly, go to the world of Ardhanārīśa.’ (97)

‘The world of Ardhanārīśa (is) as said there (in the Trikasāra) (to be

as follows).

‘The reality level corresponding to the Point is above. The deity there is
Īśvara. You have been told the procedure that concerns regular initiates there

(clearly and) certainly. Ardhanārīśa is above that, along with (his) great world.

In the Skanda-yāmalatantra he is said to be Ananta. O Famous Goddess, may

he abide as a check on those teachers who have fallen from the observance of
the Rule (samayācāra). This is the command of the Supreme Goddess. Those
who behave unlawfully and do not value the teaching of the scriptures
(granthārtha), that is, those who are on an unlawful path, their abode is

there.”

That is not only said here; it is also (said) in other scriptures.
Accordingly, he says:

.2 Along with six other Yāmalas – Brahmayāmala, Svāyambhuvayāmala, Sarasvatīyāmala,
Gāndhārayāmala, Īśānayāmala, and Nandiyāmala the Skandayāmala (called there
Kumārayāmala) īs listed in the Ur-Skandapurāṇa 171/127-130. Quoted by Sanderson 2004 p. 10.

The Ur-Skandapurāṇa may be as early as the 6 century (ibid.).

According to SVT 10/1161cd-1162 cited by Abhinava in 8/341cd-344ab (341-343), there are

cight worlds in Īśvaratattva. They belong to cight Vidyeśvaras. Each progressively higher than the

previous one, the highest world is that of Ananta, who is the leader of the other seven. This

suggests that he is above. But according to the Śivatanu, Ananta sits on top of the Cave of Māyā at
the interface between the Pure and the Impure Paths. From therc he govers the lower impure Path

(8/346-349ab (345cd-348)). When his time is over, he is replaced by the next in line. So his world

is highest in this sense, not in terms of its spatial location. The passage Jayaratha quotes here is

from the Trikasāra. There Ananta is called Ardhanārīśvara. As the Lord of the world of Māyā, it

is fitting that he be the judge of those who transgress and maintain their pledges.

TANTRĀLOKA

>--ī-atTaš
#aīz fēraīaāī grq |

Taī ūHTTTTIQ

anyatrāpy adhikāraṁ na kuryād vidyeśatāṁ vrajet |
anyatra samayatyāgāt kravyādatvaṁ śataṁ samāḥ || 98 |I
(It is) also (said) elsewhere (in a Bhairava Tantra) that ‘a teacher

who does not (fulfil the responsibilities of his)' office (adhikāra) will
assume the condition of a Vidyeśvara (when he dies).” Elsewhere (that is, in

the Ānandagahvara, it is said) that by abandoning the pledges ‘one becomes
a carnivorous demon for one hundred yearsʼ. (98)
As is said (in the Trikasāra):

‘If (the teacher) does not (fulfil the responsibilities of his) office
(adhikāra), he will be a Vidyeśa when he dies.”
Similarly (in the Ānandagahvara),
‘O goddess, by transgressing the pledges one becomes a carnivorous
demon for one hundred years.”
He now explains the division of the subject (at hand, namely teachers

who transgress the rules,) as what is meant by these three statements.

r̄afcraāT

tg qrāī
āīāīk:: 1 3< 1

iyat tatratyatātparyaṁ siddhāntagurur unnayaḥ |
bhavet piśācavidyeśaḥ śuddha eva tu tāntrikaḥ || 99 ||
saḍardhadaiśikaś cārdhanārīśabhuvanasthitiḥ |
The sense here (of these statements) is (simply) that a teacher of the

Siddhānta who has transgressed the rule becomes a demon (piśāca)
Vidyeśa; a Tāntrika becomes a pure (Vidyeśa,) and one who teaches Trika,

a resident of Ardhanāreśvara’s world. (99-100ab)
Read na kuryād for ca neyād.

Abhinava quotes the line he paraphrases here in 14/19ab, saying it is from the
Ānandagahvaratantra, Jayaratha quotes the full linein the commentary here. He quotes a variant

of this line ad 15/33cd-34ab. For a detailed account of the locations of this citation, see note to
14/18cd-19ab.

° ṇ the following verse, Abhinava distinguishes between the fate of three types of transgressors,
according to whether they are teachers belonging to the Siddhānta, Tantra (which Jayaratha
identifies with the Bhairava tantras) and Trika. Accordingly, it appears that he is quoting from

scriptures belonging to each of these three types. We know that he quotes from the 7rikasāra, a

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

(A teacher) ‘who has transgressed the rule’ is one who has transgressed

his pledge. This (adjective) should be applied to the following (two cases) also.
A ‘pure’ (Vidyeśa) is one whose form is that of a Vidyeśa, (which is)
immediately apparent (as such). A ‘Tāntrika’ is one who is dedicated (niṣṭha) to
the (Tantric) systems, based on the Bhairava Tantras (bhairaīyadarśana).

hand).

He (now) says that here too there is a (further) division of the subject (at

ṀṬ HSTIHIĪ TṬGTI TĪTFT I 20 0 1|

eṣā karmapradhānānāṁ gurūṇāṁ gatir ucyate || 1QO Il
jñānināṁ caiṣa no bandha iti sarvatra varṇitam |
This is said to be the condition (gati) of the teachers who are

predominantly concerned with ritual. It is said everywhere (in all the
scriptures that) there is no (such) restriction for those (teachers) who are
men of knowledge (jñānin). (100cd-101ab)
Now in order to define the condition of an adept (sādhaka), he (first)

transposes the procedure taught previously to that of his consecration.

The Consecration into the State of an Adept (sādhakatvam)

agmrēkāaṁṁṁēhstī gatsā zri faṀkr: | g 0
sādhakasyābhiṣeke ‘pi sarvo ‘yaṁ kathyate vidhiḥ || 101 ||
AIl this procedure (vidhi) is said to be (also applicable to that of) the
consecration of an adept (sādhaka). (101cd)
Here too there are differences, which he (now) states.

Trika Tantra, in verses 96 and 97. We also know that the second of the two citations in 98 is from
the Ānandagahvara (see note there). Although this was certainly a Bhairava Tantra, according to

Abhinava’s exegesis, it appears to be referring to the fate of a Saiddhāntika teacher. The source of
the first citation is not known to me. The fault indicated here is by omission, rather than a positive
transgression. If it were from the 7rikasāra, one would expect a higher reincarnation than would

be the lot of one who has severely transgressed. Perhaps the ‘pure Vidyeśvara’ is one of the seven
who are below Ananta in status, in relation to whom one who is bom in the world of Ananta

enjoys a higher status.
The initiation of an adept – sādhaka – is done like that of a teacher, that is, by aspersion —

abhiṣeka. And so it is accordingly considered to be a consecration, rather than just an initiation.

Note that because Abhinava, on the authority of the Devyāyāmala, ordains that the Vow of
Knowledge be observed by the teacher, he states that the adept is not required to do so. We have

noted (above note 23,107) that the Vow of Knowledge is generally observed by the sādhaka, not
the ācārya. Aware of this, no doubt, Abhinava expressly states here that the sādhaka should not
observe it.

TANTRĀLOKA

fraaid fkc 1
TzāTTaāTddī
cād TĀTTaĪTTSBATSH ||203 1|

TTISATRT: TTṬHĪTGRṬṬT |

adhikārārpaṇaṁ nātra na ca vidyāvrataṁ kila |
sādhyamantrārpaṇaṁ tv atra svopayogikriyākrame || 102 ||
samaste ‘py upadeśaḥ syān nijopakaraṇārpaṇam |
There is no transmission of competence or Mantra observance
(vidyāvrata) here (in this case). (What does take place) here is (that) the
mantra of the goal (to be achieved) (sādhyamantra) is transmitted, the
teaching regarding the entire sequence of rites that are useful to him (is

imparted,) and he is given his own (ritual) implements." (102-103ab)

As is said (concerning the imparting of) ‘the teaching’:
‘He should impart properly and completely the three kinds of
knowledge to the two of them. The yogi should give his own permission (ajñā)
with regards to his own rites and (ritual) implements.”
As is said with regards to ‘his own (ritual) implements’:
‘(The teacher) should fashion the rosary etc. which serves the adept (to
fulfil the purpose of his) office, so too the thread which is like Mantra, the chalk
(to drawn sacred diagrams), the umbrella and sandals. Having given (him those
things, but) without the turban, and entered into the presence of Śiva (in the
shrine), he should then give him the mantra of the goal (to be achieved)

(sādhyamantra), along with flowers and water.”

He concludes this (topic) with the first half (of a verse).

aaṛ frsīta:

go5 1

abhiṣekavidhir nirūpitaḥ parameśena yathā nirūpitaḥ || 103 II
The rite of consecration has been described, as taught by the

Supreme Lord. (103cd)

This is the auspicious end.
Jayaratha, whose mind is pure and bad behaviour has ceased, by the
constant practice of the aesthetic savour (rasa) of serving (his) venerable and
true teacher,

Tantrāloka).

has commented on this,

the twenty-third chapter (of the

This is the twenty-third chapter of the venerable Tantrālokaviveka,

called the Exposition (prakāśana) of the Consecration of a Teacher.

Ó See above, 23/23cd-24.
. Theṣe verses appear to be drawn from the same source as the one quoted in 23/22cd-24.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
The Funerary Rites (antyeṣṭiḥ)
May (the teacher) Bhadramūrti, whose auspicious form (bhadramūrti) is

the universe, also conjoin one who has died to the supreme abode within the
(sacrificial) jar of supreme nectar, and ordain what is tranquil (and auspicious)
(Śiva) for you all.

Now, with the second half of the verse (begun at the end of the previous

chapter,) he sets out to explain the ritual procedure of a (Saiva) funeral.

Ta] JaTTITT-ĪTdī
āTGē-ī SJITTTĀTĪRĒATT || 8

atha śāmbhavaśāsanoditāṁ sarahasyāṁ śṛṇutāntyasaṁskriyām || 1 ||
Now listen (to a description of) the last sacrament, along with its
secret (procedure), taught in the Śaiva scriptures (śāmbhavaśāsana). (1)
Accordingly, he (begins by) describing the nature of those who are fit

there (to receive this).

The Qualified Recipient (adhikārin)

r-cāftzáa

sarveṣām adharasthānāṁ gurvantānām api sphuṭam |
śaktipātāt purāproktāt kuryād antyeṣṭidīkṣaṇam || 2 |I
ūrdhvaśāsanagānāṁ ca samayopahatātmanām |
antyeṣṭidīkṣā kartavyā guruṇā tattvavedinā || 3 |I

The teacher who knows (the true nature of) reality (and the correct
procedure) may perform the initiation (given in the course of a) funerary
rite to the followers of inferior (traditions, beginning with those who are
disciples,) right up to (their) teachers, (but only) because (they have) clearly
(received) a descent of the power (of grace) mentioned above.’ He must

impart it to those who adhere to superior doctrines (śāsana) but have

Abhinava may only be saying that he is going to explain the procedure ‘along with its secret’ in
the scnsc of its esscntial deeper meaning. But tis is not so. Kṣemaja cleary tells us that the
procedure of the Saiddhāntka śrādha is well known. This one is the ‘secret procedure
(rahasyavidhi). See below, note 25,7.
Through the actions of fiends, parents, etc. See above, 21/10.

TANTRĀLOKA

transgressed the rules (and failed to perform the required reparatory

rites). (2-3)

‘The followers of inferior (traditions) are the Vaiṣṇavas and the like.
‘They have received) a descent of the power (of grace)’ through the intense

prayers of their relatives etc. ‘Mentioned above’, in the course of the initiation

for the rescue of the dead. ‘Those who adhere to superior doctrines’ are
Śaivites etc.

What is the (scriptural) authority here (for this procedure)? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

TTJTTTRGÑTṢ JHTCTTĪVĀTK f 1
ar-aafttzcīaṛ

samayācāradoṣeṣu pramādāt skhalitasya hi |
antyeṣṭidīkṣā kāryeti śrīdīkṣottaraśāsane || 4 |I
(It is said in) the Dīkṣottaraśāsana that: “The initiation (in the form
of a) funerary rite must be performed for one who, due to (his) negligence,
has fallen, and there are defects in (his) observance of the Rule.” (4)

-TSaā p. 175.

See above, 21/10.

24/4 is drawn from Dīkṣottara 16/32cd-33ab. 24/4ab is a literal citaton of Dīkṣottara 16/32cd.

The rite is outlined in the Dīkṣotara in the context of describing a number of initiations. See

24/18-20ab, which is a summary of another initiatory rite taught in Dīkṣottara 16/20-28ab just
before this one. The full passage reads:

dīkṣā saṁśuddhadehan (> -dehe) tu pañcatve samupāgate |
p. 1060) samayabhede hetvarthe antyestin tu samārabhet | 30 l1
saḍvidhādhvānamārgasya yad raucyeta varānane |

evaṁ saṁṅhārayogena hunec caiva yathākramam |l 31 |
ekaikām āhutiṁ juhuyād ante pūrṇāhutiṁ dadet |

samayācāradoṣasya pramādāt skhalitasṣya ca || 32 1|
antyeṣṭis uu śivenaikā (>śivenaikyā) prāyaścittaṁ viśudáhaye |

‘The initiaton (that is performed) when the body is compltly pure and has (dissolved
into) the five elements (when it is cremated) is the funerary ritc that should be undertaken when
the Rule has been broken and for that reason. O fair faced lady, (the offician) should offer
oblation (to one) of the six Paths as he prefers, in due order in this way, in reverse. He should
offer a single oblation for each one and a full oblation at th end. The funerary rite (performed) for
one who, due to (hs) negligence, has fallen and there are defects in (his) observancc of the Rule,
(brings about) oneness with Śiva. It is a reparatory rite (prāyaścitta) that serves to purify (th
deceased).’ Dīkṣotara 16/30-3ab
Note that this rite does not require the use of a simulacrum of the deceased as is the case

in the rite Abhinava adopts. Sanderson has noted that this practice can be observed in Kashmiri

liturgical texts (paddhati) of a later period. Thus, this absence may be taken to be a possible

indication that the Dīkṣoṭtara was not redacted there.
Another funerary rite for those who have transgressed the Rule is described in the
Sarvajñānottara. Thīs is as follows:
ataḥ paraṁ pravakṣyāmi samayācāralaṁghane |

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

yathā viśudáhyate dehī vipanno ‘pa (>pi) ṣaḍānana |I
mṛdaṁbunā tu saṁśodhyāstrajaptena mantravit |

āpyāmilakai pūtaiḥ sthāpayitvā śivāṁbhasā |

bhasmasnānaṁ vilomena kr̥tvā tu pariyāpayet |

gandhapuṣpair alaṁkṛtyodakapāda (.-daṁ) niveśayet |

raktagandhais tathā puṣpair ajai (>ajair) vastropavītakaiḥ |
saṁcchādya vastrasaṁyukta (> -yuktam) astracāpibhir (-jāpi-) utkṣipet ||
nītvā tu śāṁkarīṁ dīkṣāṁ śucisthāne nidhāpayet |

‘Next I will tell (you), O Six-faced One (i.e. Kārttkkeya), how an embodied soul who

has died is purified when he has transgressed the conduct (prescribed by) the Rule (samayācāra).
Once the knower of mantra has cleaned the corpse with water (consecrated) by repeating the
Weapon (mantra), it is installed with Śiva water and pure guava (amla) waters. Then, having
bathed it with ashes in reverse (from the feet to the head), (the corpse) should be well laid out.
Once it has been adorned with scent and flowers, he should offer it water for the feet. Then having
covered it with red, fine smelling flowers, (grains of) rice, cloth and sacred threads, it should be

cast upwards along with cloth by repeating the Weapon (mantra) Having brought (the corpse) to
(receive) Śaṅkara’s initiation, it should be placed in a pure place.

The text here is unclear vastrasaṁyukta (> -yuktam) jastracāpibhir (>> astrajāpi-)
nivutiplavanaṁ (> vibhuti-) tatra śivakṣetraṁ prakalpayet |I
caturdāstāyataṁ (> caturhastā-) nimnadvihastasamaviṣṭaram |
atra japtaiṣ tu tatkīlai (>-kīlair) vidikṣu kīlito bahiḥ |l
vilomaṁ raktasūtreṇa kavacākhyena veṣṭayet |
pītena rajasā patraṁ tasya madhye samālikhet ||

tryaśramac ca samāyuktaḥ śrīṁgāṭakaṁ tathopari |
rekhena [k kh g gh: rakaina] rajasā taṁúu sarvadhānyamayena vā ||

pūrvoktena vidhānena tatra vahniṁ prakalpayet |

There, flooded with ashes, one should imagine it to be Śiva’s field. It is four hands

wide, two hands deep, and distrbuted equally. Here it is nailed down externally in the
intermediate quarters with (mantric) pegs that have been repeatedly recited. It should be covered

in reverse with a red thread called the Armour. A vessel should be drawn in the middle of it with

yellow and red (colour). It has a trangle and, on top of that, a pyramid (śrāhgātaka) and a thread
along with a red line, or one made of all the grains. Imagine the fire there by means of the
procedure taught previously.

astreṇa prastarān darbhān vyutkrameṇa tu devatāḥ |1
paryukṣaṇaṁ tathā kuryãd arcinābhyukṣaṇaṁ tathā |
sravaṁ sravaṁ ca homānte śavasyopari vinyaset ||

pūrvavac codāyed ājyaṁm abhivārya vilomataḥ !

tathaivodghāṭanaṁ kuryāt niṣṇatiṁ (> niṣṇātaṁ) ca ṣaḍānana |l

tarpayitvā tathā vahniṁ datvā pūrṇāhutiṁ tataḥ |

aiśvaryādivilomena mantrasidihāsinaṁ (>mantrasiddhāsanaṁ) nyaset |

Sprinkle (with sacred water) the mat of darbha (grass) and, in the reverse order, the
deities. Also purify it with the flame (of the fir), pouring (the oblation) continuously (into the
fir). At the end of the fi offering, place (th offering) on the corpse.
Impel, as before, the clarified butter, scattering itaround anticlockwise. O six-faced one,
in the same way open itup and bathe it. Then, having offered libations, make a full offering to the
fir. Deposit the seat of the Mantrasiddhas by (dpositing) Lordship and the rest in the reverse
order.
sandhyādimantravinyāsaṁ datvā dehe svake gṛhe |

Śive śivāsane caiva tathā homa (> homaṁ) samācaret ||
pūjayitvā tathānyāyaṁ (>yathā-) gandhapuṣpaiḥ pavitrakaiḥ |

arghyapādyādibhiś caiva yathāśaktyā vicakṣaṇaḥ ||

TANTRĀLOKA

He now says what is to be done here (in this case):
The Rite of Passage (saṅīskāraḥ)

CĀKTIEALUCEĀEEIĀ

yat kiñcit kathitaṁ pūrvaṁ mrtoddhārābhidhe vidhau |
pratimāyāṁ tad evātra sarvaṁ śavatanau caret | 5 ||

tataś citi

taḥ saṁcintaye (>-yen) nādī
(> nāḍīṁ) divyarūpā (-rūpāṁ) manoramāḥ (-mām) |
(>citiṁ) net tatra candanāgarudādhibhiḥ |I

yathā vā saṁbhavet tasya kucavastrottaraṁ guha |

punar abhyukṣya īu preta (>pretaṁ) mantrabījena ṣaṇmukha |
citimadhye niyuñjīta vastrachannaghr̥taplataḥ |

The expert, to the best of his ability, having placed the Sandhya and other Mantras on

his own body, house, Śiva and Śiva’s seat, should make offerings to the fire (homa). Having
worshipped, as is proper, with scent, flowers and sacred threads, as well as lustrations to the feet

etc.

Then having meditated on the channel (of the vital breath), which is divine and
beautiful, he should then bring it there to the funeral pyre with sandal wood, agallochum (agaru)
and curd, or else, as may be, O Guha, the upper garment covering the chest (khicavasṣṭra). 0
faced One, having washed the deceased again with the seed of mantra, (the corpse), covered with
a cloth and flooded with claṅfied butter, should be placed in the middle of the pyre.
intayen nāḍīṁ tasya dehe vicakṣaṇaḥ ||

hṛdi saṁsthāpya taṁ madhye pudgalaṁ nyaset |
tataḥ saṁdhãya tatvãni pãdãd ãrabhya mantravit ||
hitvā tu tāṁ tathābhūtaḥ (-taṁ) paśuṁ saṁyojayecchave (> -chive) |

tatra saṁdĩpayed vahniṁ tamastāda (>tadadhastād) pradakṣiṇaḥ |
astrabījena mantrajñaḥ āgneyīdhyāraṇāṁ (>-dhāraṇāṁ) smaret |
avicchinnāṁ tathā rāma ghorāstrābhimantritāḥ (>-tām) ||
bhrāmayitvāstrabījena jaladhārāṁ nidhāpayet |

tato jalaṁ vrajed vidvān snātvā datvodakaṁ śuciḥ ||
yāgaṁ yathoditaṁ kṛtvā nivedyeśaṁ kṣamāpayet |
eve (> evaṁ) vimucyate dehī samayādivilaṁghane |1
ajñād (>ajāato) jñānato vāpi krtūā (>kṛtvā) tv aṅṅteṣṭikarmaṇi (>antyeṣṭi-) |
| iti śrīsarvajñānottare antyeṣṭiprakaraṇam |1

Then the skilful (officiant) should meditate on the channel (of the vital breath) in body
of that (corpse). Having placed his own consciousness in (its) heart, in the middle of that, he
should place the soul (of the deccased). Then, once the knower of mantra has conjoined the reality
levels (iattva) beginning from the feet, with the exception of that (channel of the vital breath), he
should then conjoin the fettered soul in that state to Śiva.

There, below that (corpse), moving clockwise (around it), the knower of mantra should
light the fire with the seed of the Weapon, and recollect the meditation on fire. (Then) in this way,
he should pour, with the seed of the Weapon, an uninterrupted stream of water consecrated with

the Ghora Weapon, having walked around (the corpse). Then the leamed man should go to (a
place where there is) water and, having bathed and offered water, the pure one, having performed
the sacrifice, as instructed, offering water to the Lord, (should say) “please forgive (him)”. In this
way, an embodied soul is freed when a transgression of the Rule etc. has taken place, whether
knowingly or unknowingly, once the last rite has been performed.
This is the chapter concerning the last rite in the venerable Sarvajñānottara.’

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

Whatever was said previously (is done) in the presence of an image
(of the deceased) in course of the procedure called ‘the Rescue of the
Deadʼ, should all be done here in the presence of the corpse. (5)
Something else is specified here (in this regard) in another scripture.
Thus he says:

fahxa frēza 1

|| 1
Tēcdhṁhṁútzaī rctarāṁi mar
ṬṀTRATÑTTGTGTTJA
T Q TI I I

ṃē: a-t aṁ vrāfcērd 1

sr̄aata-a
fkḷā açcrzaf

śrīsiddhātantrakathito vidhir eṣa nirūpyate |
antimaṁ yad bhavet pūrvaṁ tat kṛtvāntimam ādimam |l 6 |
saṁhr̥tyaikaikam iṣṭir yā sāntyeṣṭir dvitayī matā |
pūjādhyānajapapluṣṭasamaye na tu sādhake || 7 ||
piṇḍapātād ayaṁ muktaḥ khecaro vā bhavet priye |
ācārye ṭtattvasaṁpanne yatra tatra mṛte ṣati || 8 Il
antyeṣṭir naiva vidyeta śuddhacetasy amūrdhani |

We will now describe the ritual procedure (vidhi) taught in the
venerable Siddhātantra. (There we read): “(In this rite, the teacher utters)
one by one, withdrawing (in the reverse order), the last (mantra), having
made it first, and the first, last. (Thus,) the sacrifice (iṣṭi) which is such is

the ‘the last sacrifice’ (antyeṣṭi), which is considered to be of the second
(kind). O beloved, (this rite) is not’ (to be performed) for an adept
(sādhaka) who has burnt away the (obligation to observe the) Rule by

(regular) worship (pūjā), meditation (dhyāna) and the repetition (of
Mantra) (japa). (For) by (his) death, this (one) (ayam) is liberated or

becomes a Skyfarer. Nor should the last rites (be performed) for a teacher
See above, Chapter Twenty-one.

Kṣemarāja, quoting the following passage from the SYM in NTu ad 18/1 19ab, introduces it by
saying that this is the funerary rite (meant to) rescue the dead, (which is performed) in the
presence of the corpse (mṛtoddhāro ‘ntyeṣṭiḥ śavaśarīre). Moreover, he tells us that this rite is not

like the well-known Saiddhāntika one, but i
secret procedure’ (rahasyavidhi) which is thus
meant for initiates of corresponding ‘secret traditionsʼ. See above, notes 21,37; 21,38; and 21,41

and, especially below, 25,7 as well as 27,11, where the section in chapter eighteen of the NT that
deals with this kind of rite is quoted.

The first kind is the standard mortuary rite as taught in the Śiddhānta, that serves as the Vedic
equivalent. See previous note.

Read na tu for natu.

Read, as in the NTu, -japapluṣasamaye for -japāpluṣṭasamaye.

'! The Siddha continues to live in the heavenly world of enlightened Siddhas.

TANTRĀLOKA

who possesses the truth, and who, wherever he may die, (attains a state of)

pure consciousness and (so) has no head.’ (6-9ab)

Here (in this procedure), the last Mantra or letter etc. is the first, and

that which is first is made last, and (so,) having done that, withdrawing each,

one at a time, that is, uttering (them in the reverse order, which is that of) the
sequence of withdrawal, this sacrifice (iṣṭi), beginning from the end and

(continuing) up to the beginning," is the ‘final sacrifice’. This is the meaning.

It should be done (if the deceased) is a regular initiate or a spiritual son, and so
‘it is considered to be of two kinds’. (The deceased) ‘has no headʼ. As the
word ‘head’ is is secondary characteristic, (denoting by extension) the body, the
meaning (of that expression) is that (the deceased teacher) is devoid of a sense
of false identification (abhimāna) with it. As there is no funerary rite for these
two (i.e. the teacher and the adept), the reason for this is presented by means of
(this) specification.

This should not only be done for those who are afflicted by having

transgressed the Rule, but also for others. Thus he says:

īṀtāī -h q d 1. 11
āVIIETEIEATIITFaAITIḤ

frt 1 go 1

Ĩkaṁī fāN} ai aTāī Ṭ̄dTNR I 23
TũR̥GVTĀĪĪ TTIIT-ṢĪTTRIT |

1| 23 1
mantrayogādibhir ye ca māritā narake tu te || 9 ||
kāryā teṣām ihāntyeṣṭir guruṇātikr̥pālunā |
na maṇḍalādikaṁ tv atra bhavet śmāśānike vidhau || 10 ||
kecit tad api kartavyam ūcire pretasadmani |

Verses 24/6cd-10ab are quoted by Kṣemarāja in the NTu ad 18/119ab, stating that they are from

the Siddhātantra. The variants there are noted in brackets. This passage is not found in the short
recension of the SYM edited by Tôrzsók. But there can be no doubt that it was part of the longer
recension known to Abhinavagupta. Above in 21/11cd, Abhinava expressly states that this
procedure is found in both the NT and the SYM.
Kṣemarāja comments: mantraprātilomyād vīrakrameṇa samaye putrakadvitaye kāryā,

na tv abhiyukte sādhake ‘mīráhani tyaktadehābhimāne cidānandaghane ācārye ceti tātparyam |

“(This) should be done by reversing the Mantra, that is, (cciting it) in the sequence of
the heroes (vīrakrama) for a regular (initiate) and an apprentice as the second. But not for an adept
(sādhaka) who is engaged (in practice) and a teacher who ‘has no headʼ, that is, one who has
abandoned (false) identificatin with the body and is dense (uninterupted) consciousness and
bliss.
' Read ādimaṁ yāvac ca for antaṁ yāvac ca.

In place of iṣṭir read antyeṣṭir, which literally means ‘the sacrifice of what has come to an end’
or ‘the sacrifice (to be performed) at the end'. The practice of reciting the Mantras of this esoteric
funerary rite in reverse order is justifid by this didactic etymology.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

pūjayitvā vibhuṁ ṣarvaṁ nyāsaṁ pūrvavad ācaret || 11 II
saṁhārakramayogena caraṇān miūrdhapaścimam |
‘A very compassionate teacher should also perform the last rites
here for those who have been killed by the application of mantras

(mmantrayoga) and the like and are in the hells. (9cd-10ab)

(It is generally taught that) maṇḍalas and the like are not required
here in this ritual procedure, (performed) in the cremation ground.
(However,) there are some (authorities) who say that that should also be
done (there in that) abode of ghosts. (10cd-11ab)

The Procedure according to the Kulāgahvara
‘After having worshipped the pervasive Lord (vibhu), (the teacher)
should perform the entire deposition (of Mantras) as before, (but in the
reverse order, that is,) in the sequence of withdrawal, (beginning) from the
feet and ending with the head. He should awaken that (corpse) in the same
way by (ritual) action, knowledge, and deep meditation (samādhi).’ (11cd12)
Having distinguished the (ritual) action etc. as taught in the venerable
Kulagahvara (from the procedure taught in the Siddhayogeśvarīimata), he

(continues to) present it:

fraāṁ īmāīṅi vṁkdtīsa anm- 1

fēratoṛ q̄1: -. 1

aārēāū #or; aa -TṬGṣāṭ EEHRT/SAHI

KKI

zaā̃ fē̃ īaāī ārrzzJr f-ē-: 1 2., u

ṢGT THN: #GTGTTTT II 2F I

bindunā rodhayet tattvaṁ śaktibījena vedhayet |
ghaṭṭayen nādadeśe tu triśūlena tu tāḍayet || 13 I|

! MS T reads mantrayantrādibhir – ‘by (the use of) mantras, yantras and the like’ for
mantrayogādibhir– ‘by the application of) mantras (mantrayoga) and the like. Although reading

in MS T makes good sense, the reading is secured by its citation in the NTu ad 18/119ab. I have
accepted the reading there, i.e. narakeṣu –- ‘in the hells for narake tu – ‘indeed in hell’. MS T
reads narake tu ye.
We know that 6cd-10ab are drawn from the SYM (see above, note 24,12). I take 10cd-1 1ab to

be Abhinava’s gloss. 1 1cd-12 is the beginning of a passage drawn the Kulagahvara. It continues
up to verse 16.

TANTRĀḶOKA

suṣumnāntargatenaiva visargeṇa punaḥ punaḥ |
tāḍayeta kalāḥ sarvāḥ kaṃmpate ‘sau tataḥ paśuḥ || 14 ||
utkṣiped vāmahastaṁ vā tatas taṁ yojayet pare |
pratyayena vinā mokṣo hy aśraddheyo vimohitaiḥ II 15 I|
tad artham etad uditaṁ na tu mokṣopayogadaḥ |
ity ūce parameśaḥ śrīkulagahvaraśāsane || 16 |I

(The teacher) should 1) (first) block (rodhayet) the essence (tattva)

(of the deceased person’s consciousness) by means of the Point (of the
exhaled breath), and 2) pierce it with the Seed of Power (S). 3) He should
(then) strike (ghaṭtayet) (and catch hold of it) in the locus of Sound (of the
inhaled breath), 4) beat it (and expand it out) with the Trident (AU). 5)
(After that) he should beat (tādayeta) all the energies (kalā) repeatedly (one
by one), with the emission (H) present within suṣumnā. Thus, that fettered

soul (present in the corpse) trembles (kampate) or else raises the left hand

(as a sign that the procedure has been effective). (The teacher) should then
conjoin (the soul) to the supreme (reality).
(The corpse trembles etc. because) those who are deluded would not
believe that (the soul of the deceased) has been liberated without an
assuring sign (pratyaya) (that it has taken place). It is (only) for that reason
that this (sign) is mentioned (here), it does not aid (the achievement of)

liberation.

The Supreme

Kulagahvaraśāsana. (13-16)

Lord

has

said

this

in

the venerable

Here indeed (first of all), the teacher ‘should block (rodhayet) the
essence (tattva)’, that is, the Self of (his disciple,) the fettered soul, that has
been dragged into the Heart ‘by means of the Point’, that is, the exhaled breath,
by the process of the application of the Great Net, and (block it,) at one with

' The method explained in the following verses is substantially that of the Great Net (see above,
21/25-45). The soul of the deceased is attracted (ākṛṣta) by the master, through his vital breath

(see TSā, pp. 175-176). The Point (bindu), according to Jayaratha, stands here for the prāṇa, that
is, the exhaled breath. ‘Fixation’ is the process whereby the master fixes the Self of the deceased

into his own heart, that

is, into his own Self. According to Jayaratha, the essence is transmitted

through the Self (atman) of the deceased. The perforation is executed by means of the phoneme S,

and consists in the piercing through the inner wheels (cakra) of the deceased, starting with the
heart. (see TSā, p. 176). The shaking/jolting is performed in the place where is the sound arises,

by tearing apart the knot of Rudra. After this, the soul is fixed with the Trident, that is, the

phoneme AU, at the extremity of the Cavity of Brahmā. Finally, emission, the phoneme H,

assimilates and becomes one with all the sixteen kalās, which are the energies of exhalation
(apāna) of the deceased. (Concerning the sixteenth kalā, see above, 4/92-95ab). In the TSā

(p.175), Abhinavagupta explains: ‘After having projected, in the (reverse order, which is that of)

involution, the mantras on the dead body, the teacher, making use of the method of the Net, must
attract (the soul of the) deceased, and immediately after, perform on the dead body the operations

of fixing, perforation, assailing, etc., making his own vital breath pass through the heart, throat
and forehead of the dead body.”

' Read mokṣopayogadaḥ for mokṣopayogyadah.
The use of Parā bīja ~ SAUḤ – here is clear proof that this procedure is drawn from a Trika

Tantra. Thuṣ the Kulagahvara, which Abhinava himself tells us is his source, was certainly a
Trika Tantra.

Read mahājālaprayoga- for mahājālayoga-.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

himself, in (his) heart. Then after that, having entered” into the Central Abode,

and by rising from that (heart) onwards progressively upwards, he should pierce

(through the inner centres) with the seed-syllable of Power, that is, he should

pierce through it with the phoneme of Nectar (S). After that ‘he should strike
(ghatṭayet) (and catch hold of it) it in the locus of Sound (of the inhaled

breath)ʼ, that is, by breaking apart Rudra’s Knot, he should lay hold of the

pulse (spanda) (of consciousness). Then again after that, he should open up the
inside of the Cavity of Brahmā with the seed of the Trident (AU). After that, by
the upward flowing emission (H) that rests on the all-transcending plane, in
accord with the teaching that the individual soul consists of sixteen energies, it
‘beatsʼ all the sixteen energies of the moon ‘repeatedly (one by one)ʼ, that is, it
seizes hold of them as undivided from itself. Due to that, the fettered soul that is

to be saved ‘trembles’ ‘or else raises the left hand’. Then after (this) sign (that
the procedure has been effective) has arisen, (the teacher) ‘should conjoin (the
soul) to the supreme (reality)’. The meaning is that he should conjoin (the
soul) to the Self, which is full (and perfect) consciousness.
If this sign is totally (ekāntataḥ) without application (for the attainment
of) liberation, then of what use is it? With this doubt in mind, he says:

sādhyo ‘numeyo mokṣādiḥ pratyayair yad atīndriyaḥ |
The liberation and the like (of the deceased), which is the goal

(sādhya), is beyond the senses, and (so) can (only) be inferred (as having
taken place) by means (of outer) validating signs. (17ab)
Here (in this case) also, there is a different (rite taught) in another

scripture. Thus he says:

The Procedure according to the Dīkṣottara

| 2 1

dīkṣottare ca puryaṣṭavargārpaṇam ihoditam || 17 ||
Here (in this regard), the Dīkṣottara teaches (another rite, that
involves) the offering (and elimination of the constitutive elements of the

subtle body, that is) the City of Eight (puryaṣṭaka). (17cd)
He teaches that:

RṚead praviśya for praveśena.
22 Jayaratha is quoting a part of the following line drawn from the Trisśirobhairava, quoted above
in TĀv ad 3/138-141 (137cd-141ab) and ad 5/64cd-66ab: ‘(The wise) say that there is an energy
(kalā) which is (immortal) Nectar within man, who consists of sixteen energies (kalā).”
This is Abhinava’s comment.

The City of Eight (puryaṣṭaka) is the subtle body that transmigrates after death, carrying with it
the individual soul, of which it is then the body. See above note, 8,465 to 8/163cd-165ab (163-

164).

TANTRĀLOKA

FEGETE EEAIEEA

eeexiE'kEUGeFZISKC

tadvidhiḥ śrutipatre ‘hbje madhye devaṁ sadāśivam |
īśarudraharibrahmacatuṣkaṁ prāgdigāditaḥ | 18 Il
pūjayitvā śrutisparśau rasaṁ gandáhaṁ vapurdvayam |
dhyahaṁkr̥tĩ manaś ceti brahmādiṣv arpayet kramāt |I 19 ||
eteṣāṁ tarpaṇaṁ krtvā śatahomena daiśikaḥ |
The procedure for that (is as follows). (The teacher should first)
worship in the centre of a lotus with four petals the god Sadāśiva, and (on
the petals, clockwise) beginning from the east, the group of four, namely,
Īśvara, Rudra, Viṣṇu and Brahmā. Having done so, he should offer
(them), in due order, beginning with Brahmā, the mind, ego, and intellect,
(the two subtle elements of) hearing and touch, and (then) the two bodies of
taste and smell, respectively. The teacher (does this) having offered libation
to them with a hundred fire offerings. (18-20ab)
” These five are the Causal Deities ~ karaṇadevatā. In other contexts, they appear as the Lords of
the five gross elements, along with a sixth, who governs the mind (manas). See above, 15/209ab211.
24/18-20ab is a summary of Dīkṣottara 16/20-28ab, which is as follows:

puryaṣṭakaṁ nyased devi parivāreṇa deśikaḥ |

pūrvam ādikrameṇaiva śabdādīnāṁ yathākramam || 20 ||

teṣān tu tarpaṇaṁ kr̥tvā śatam ekaiva homayet |

evaṁ hute śate devi pūrṇāhutyā (.~hutyāṁ) tu pātayet || 21 II

tataś śabdañ ca sparśañ ca śudáhe brahmaṇi vinyaset |
rasaṁ vai vinyased viṣṇoḥ rūpaṁ gandhaṁ (>gandhas) tathaiva ca l|22 11
rudratattve tu kartavyaṁ deśikena mahātmanā |

ahaṇkāras tathā buddhir īśvare tan tu vinyaset || 23 1|
manas tu (> manasaṁ) vinyased devi tattve caiva sadāśive |

nyaste puryaṣtake devi pūrṇāhutyā tu pātayet || 24 l

‘0 goddess, the teacher should fist of all deposit the City of Eight, (consisting of the
subtle element of) sound and the rest, with the retinue in the original scquence in due order.
Having offered libation to them, he should offer just one hundred oblations. O goddess, having
made a hundred offerings to the fire in this way, he should (conclude) with the offering of a fll
oblation. (20-21)
Then he should deposit 1) sound and touch in the pure Brahman. He should (then)
deposit 2) taste, which belongs to Viṣṇu. The great souled teacher should (then) makc (a similar
deposition of) 3) form and smell within the Rudra principlc (attva). He should deposit 4) the ego
and the intellct in Īśvara and, O goddess, he should deposit 5) the mind (manas) in the principle
of Sadāśiva. O goddess, once the City of Eight has (thus) been deposited, he should offer a full
oblation. (22-24) Dīkṣotara 16/20-24
brahmoṇkāreṇa deveśe brahmaviṣṇī tu homayet |
p. 1059) pārṇāhutyā tu devesi pātaye susamāhitaḥ l| 2 |1

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

eṣā sāṁnyāsikī dīkṣā puryaṣṭakaviśodhanī || 20 ||

This is the rite of initiation through deposition (sārmyāsikī), which

purifies (and so eliminates) the City of Eight. (20cd)

“The body’ (of these subtle elements is their) essential nature (ripa).
They should be offered in due order to Brahmā and the rest. That is said

(elsewhere):

‘At the end of the purification of the energies (kalā), (the teacher)
should project Brahmā, the Lord of (one of the five) causes, (onto the southern

petal of the lotus,) having first invoked him with his name (preceded by the
syllable) OṀ and offered him libation. He should then abandon sound and touch

within it . . . . He should always offer taste, which is a part of the City of Eight,
to Viṣṇu. . . . Then (having uttered) the syllable OM, invoked Rudra, and

established (him on his petal of the lotus), he should worship him. Then, O

goddess, he should deposit the (essential) nature of smell of that fire offering
made to Dhruva (i.e. Īśvara). . . . Having invoked Īśa with his own name

preceded by OM, he should worship him. Having worshipped, offered oblations
and lustration to two parts (of the City of Eight,) namely, the intellect and ego,
rudrañ ca īśvaraī caiva rudroṇkāreṇa homayet |

sadāśivasya tatvasya nidhanena tu homayet || 26 ||
pūrṇāhutyā tu dātavyaṁ deśikena mahātmanā |

sakalādikrameṇaiva grāhakāḥ parikīrtitāḥ !|I 27 I|

iyaṁ sanyāsinī (> saṁnyāsinī) dīkṣā kathitā tava śobhane |

O mistress of the gods, he should offer oblation to Brahmā and Viṣṇu with a Brahmā
Orṁkāra. O mistress of the gods, the wellattentive (officiant) should (then) offer a full oblation.
He should offer oblation to Rudra and Īśvara with a Rudra Oṁkāra. He should offer oblation to
the principle of Sadaśiva as the conclusion. (Thcn) the great souled teacher should offer a full
oblation. (These) are said to be the recipients (grāhaka) in accord with the (standard) sequence
beginning with Sakala. O fair lady, I have told you this, thc initiation by deposition (saimyāsi).
(25-28ab)
The Causal Deities in relation to the City of Eight
Direction
Above

Deity

Principle
Manas

South

Rudra

Form and Smell

East

West

North

Īśvara _| Ego and Intellect

Taste

Brahmā _| Sound and Touch

Ṭhe translation of this expression accords with the usage found in the equivalent passage in the
Diīkṣottara that Abhinava has presented in brief.

We have seen that 24/18-20 is a summary of Dīkṣottara 16/20-28ab. Abhinava himself states

his source in 24/17cd. However, the following reference presented by Jayaratha is not drawn from

there. Indeed, one would not expect it to be, as Jayaratha has not quoted the Dīkṣottara anywhere
because, no doubt, he did not have access to it. In this case, he managed to locate a reference in

another source that teaches a procedure that coincides closely with the one in the Dīkṣottara.

Read gandharūpaṁ for gandharūpe.

TANTRĀLOKA

and invoked Sadāśiva whilst uttering the root Mantra, he should deposit the

mind, which is (the remaining) part of the City of Eight, onto the Lord (of the

corresponding) cause.

Its Purpose (tatprayojanam)

Having explained its purification (saṅskāra) in this way, he (now)
states its purpose.

7 aṁrara: |

dszi ōlṭāhēi fēhzrT1 fē

22 u

puryaṣṭakasyābhāve ca na svarganarakādayaḥ |

tathā kr̥vā na kartavyaṁ laukikaṁ kiñcanāpi hi l| 21 II
uktaṁ śrīmādhavakule śāsanastho mṛteṣv api |

piṇḍapātodakāsravādi laukikaṁ parivarjayet || 22 ||

And when there is no City of Eight, there is no heaven, hell or the
like. Having acted (and performed the rite) in this way, no common worldly

(i.e. Vedic smārta) practices (laukika) of any kind should be observed at all.

It is said in the venerable Mādhavakula, that he who observes (its) teaching
(Śśāsana) should avoid common (smārta) practices (laukika) such as giving
alms, (offering) streams of water and the like, even though they relate to
the dead. (21-22)
(The word) ‘and’ indicates the cause. (Having performed the rites) ‘in
this way, that is, in the aforestated manner, one should do what is enjoined in
one’s own scripture. Thus, he says:

cāmṝt̄racaaīmt 23 1|

Śivaṁ saṁpūjya cakrārcāṁ yathāśakti samācaret |

kramāt tridaśamaviṁśatriṁśavatsaravāsare || 23 |I

Having worshipped Śiva fully, he should perform the worship of the

assembly (of initiates) (cakrārcā) to the best of his ability, every third, tenth,
twentieth" and thirtieth day (of the month) in due order, for a year. (23)

The Mādhavakula is the fourth ṣaṭka of the Jayadrathayāmala. Unfortunately, I could not trace
this reference there, nor in the other three sarkas.

Read -viṁśa- for triṁśa-.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
The ‘third’ (days) secondarily characterizes the first and fourth (day)

also, and the ‘tenthʼ the eleventh as well.

He concludes (this topic) with the first half (of a verse).

ity ukto ‘ntyeṣṭiyāgo ‘yaṁ parameśvarabhāṣitaḥ |
Thus (we have finished) the presentation of the sacrifice of the last
rites, taught by the Supreme Lord. (24ab)
This is the auspicious end.
The one called Jayaratha has written this clever commentary on the
twenty-fourth chapter. His triumph (jaya) (and excellence) is perceived (by all)
by virtue of his skill in the (performance of the rites of) initiation.
This is the twenty-fourth chapter of the venerable Tantrālokaviveka,

called the Explanation (prakāśana) of the Last Rites.

Sce below, 28/36-39ab and 2882cd- 1.
Once again, Abhinava is probably rferring in this way to ŚSambhunātha.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
The Fashioning of the Offerings to the Ancestors' (śrāddhaklṛpti)
May (the teacher) who bestows Śiva, presiding over the terrible body
which is phenomenal existence, and is as if bestowing existence all around,
prevailing in the hearts of (His) devotees, be auspicious (śiva) for the wise
(satām).

In order to teach the ritual procedure for the worship of the ancestors
(śrāddha), he says with the second half (of the verse begun at the end of the
previous chapter):

3̄7 gīg{farṝ; grṁargaītēī
f=rī- 1 2 1
atha śrāddhavidhiḥ śrīmatṣaḍardhokto nigadyate || 1 ||
We will now explain the ritual procedure for the worship of the
ancestors (śrāddha) taught in the venerable Trika (scriptures). (1)
Surely (one may ask), where is this ritual procedure for the worship of
the ancestors (śrāddha) taught in the Trika system (trikadarśana)? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

siddhātantre sūcito ‘sau mūrtiyāganirūpaṇe |

This is mentioned in the Siddhātantra, in the course of describing
the Worship of the Icons (mārtiyāga). (1-2ab)
This chapter corresponds to the second half of chapter nineteen of the Tantrasāra, that Abhinava

says concems śrāddhadīkṣā. It is performed after the antyasaṁskāradīkṣā taught in the previous
chapter.
The śrādáha – the ‘postmortem offering’ — is a funeral rite that involves the offering of food to
the ancestors. Monier-Williams explains in his dictionary that śrāddha is ‘a ceremony in honour
and for the benefit of dead relatives observed with great strictness at various fixed periods and on

occasion of rejoicing as well as mourning by the surviving relatives. These ceremonies are

performed by the daily offering of water, and on stated occasions by the offering of piṇḍas or

balls of rice and meal to three patemnal and three maternal forefathers, i.e. to the father,
grandfather and great grandfather. It should be borne in mind that śrāddha is not a funeral

ceremony (antyesti) but a supplement to such a ceremony. It is an act of reverential homage to a
deceased person performed by relatives, and is moreover supposed to supply thc dead with
strengthening nutriment after the performance of the previous funeral ceremonies has endowed
them with ethereal bodies. Indeed, until those antyeṣṭi or ‘funerary rites” have been performed,
and until the succeeding first śrāddha has been celebrated, the deceased relative is a preta or

restless wandering ghost and has no real body [only a subtle one liiigaśarīraḹ. It is not until the
first śrāddha has taken place that he attains a position amongst the pitrs or Divine Fathers in their
blissful abode called pitṛloka. The śrāddha is most desirable and efficacious when performed by a
son.

See also below, 28/8-9.

This rite is also called the Sacrifice of the Assembly (cakrārca). Trika Tantras and others
consider it to be the most important rite initiates may participate in. See below, 28/60cd ff. In

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

(The word) ‘mentioned’ (refers to something) that is not said directly
by oneself. As is said there (in the Siddhayogeśvarīmata):
‘Or else one should feed Tantric adepts (vīrabhojana) in the house of
the deceased.’ (Again): “It should be given during the season for the worship of

the ancestors . . .

The Purpose of the Rite (prayojanam) and
Times When it Should be Performed

ST̄ãTzāī jRGTTT-GTĪ
aIifēr 1 2 1

sag qdstā avṁ īā Hr=aTaṁāāk|

antyeṣṭyā suviśuddhānām aśuddhānāṁ ca tadvidhiḥ |I 2 ||
tryahe turye ‘hni daśame māsi māsy ādyavatsare |
varṣe varṣe sarvakālaṁ kāryas tatsvaiḥ sa pūrvavat || 3 II
tatra prāgvad yajed devaṁ homayed anale tathā |
That ritual procedure is for those who have been fully purified by
the funerary rite (antyeṣṭi), as well as those who have not been purified. It
should be performed by (the teacher) along with his own (close associates,)
as before, on the third, fourth and tenth day (from the time of death), every
month in the first year, and (subsequently) every year at any time

(sarvakāla). One should worship the deity as before, and offer oblations into
the fire. (2cd-4ab)

‘Those who have not been purified’ by the funerary rite (antyeṣṭi)
itself, not by initiation etc. ‘Along with his own (close associates)’ means
along with his own disciples and sons etc. ‘It’ is the ritual procedure for the
worship of the ancestors (śrāddha).
He says what is particular about the procedure here (in this case).

28/61, Abhinava confirms that this Worship of the Icons is taught in the SYM. These gatherings
in which the rite is performed collectively take place on various occasions, one of which is when
offerings are made to the ancestors (see below, 28/76cd-78ab). The Krama version of the

Miūrtiyāga is presented in chapter 15 of the Ājnākhaṇḍa of the MBT in 15/96cd ff. The Krama
relateḍ material there was probably lifted from the Kramasadbhāva.
Neither of these two references from the SYM can be traced in the short edited recension.

Anyway, Abhinava himself tells us that the rite for the ancestors is just ‘mentionedʼ in the SYM,

in the course of discussing something else. Clearly, śrāddha was not treated in detail in the long
recension either.

TANTRĀLOKA

Identifying the Fettered Aspect with the

Experient thereby Becoming Siva

fr ṣcāi ftrstrāq | ē 1
tato naivedyam eva prāg gṛhītvā hastagocare || 4 I
gurur annamayīṁ śaktiṁ vṛṁhikāṁ vīryarūpiṇīm |
dhyātvā tayā samāviṣṭaṁ taṁ sādhyaṁ cintayet sudhīh |I 5 l|
tato ʻṣya yaḥ pāśavo “śo bhogyarūpas tam arpayet |
bhoktary ekātmabhāvena śiṣya itthaṁ Śivībhavet || 6 |I

Then, having first taken the food offering (naivedya) in (his) hand,
meditated on the nourishing (brmhika) power (within it), which is made of
food and whose nature is vitality (vērya), the wise teacher thinks that (the

deceased) for whom (this rite is performed) (sādhya) is completely
penetrated by it. Then, having done that, he should offer that fettered

aspect (of the deceased’s soul), which is (the residual consequence of his
Karma that) is to be experienced (bhogya), into the experiencing subject
(bhoktṛ) in a state of identity with him. In this way, the (deceased) disciple

becomes Śiva. (cd-6)

The version quoted by Kṣemarāja (sce following note) reads pāśavāṁśo for pāśavo ‘īhśo. There
is no other variant.

Kṣemarāja quotes the text of TĀ 25/5-6 in his commentary on chapter 18 of the Netratantra,

where the procedure for the offering of food to the ancestors (śrāddha) is taught. He does not say,
as he normally would that he is quoting from his teacher’s Tantrāloka. Introducing this passage in
NTu ad 18/119ab, he says that ‘there (with regads to that), the procedure for the offering of food

to the ancestors according to the Siddhānta is generally well known (prasiddha). However, it is
stated (in the following passage) in accord with manner of offering the food taught in the secret

procedure (rahasyavidhi).’ tatra saiddhāntikaśrāddhavidhis tāvat prasiddhaḥ, rahasyavidhau tu
ity evaṁ naivedyanivedanayukyaivokaḥ. It is possible to take rahasyavidhi, '‘the secret

procedureʼ, to be the name of the source text. The possibility that Kṣemarāja is referring to the
procedure taught in the Siddhātantra in this way is doubtful, as he goes on to quote a passage

corresponding to TĀ 24/6cd-10ab, saying that it is from the Siddhā. But if he is rferring to the
SYM, then 2cd-4ab is most probably also drawn from there. Despite these uncertainties, I take
2d-6 to be drawn from the SYM. Verses 7 and 8 are Abhinava’s analysis, as Jayaratha maintains.

Anyway, it is clear that there are two Śaiva mortuary rites. One is Saiddhāntika, which

is publicly performed, and so is ‘generally well known’. The other is a private (‘secret’) rite for
Kaula (in this case Trika) initiates. It may be performed by itself or after the basic common,

purificatory, mortuary rites. Abhinava does not specify, but clearly this may be Śaiva or Smārta,
in line with the Śaiva scriptures that tend to either eliminate Vedic ritual or, as we have seen,
supplement it with a Śaiva counterpart. Newar Kaula initūates perform a separate, additional
mortuary rite apart from the smarta one for a deceased initiate, in the course of which the mantra
the deceased has received is retumed to the teacher from whom he received initiation.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

The meaning of (the statement that the deceased soul is) ʻcompletely
penetrated by it is that it possesses a state of oneness with it. ‘That’ fettered

aspect (of the soul of the deceased) which is (what remains of the conseque

nces

of his Karma that) is to be experienced (bhogya). ‘In this way’ means by
abandoning the state of a fettered soul and attaining oneness with the
experiencing subject.
Having analysed that, he explains it.

T: |

mī v9
bhogyatānyā tanur deha iti pāśātmakā matāḥ |
śrāddhe mṛtoddhṛtāv antayāge teṣāṁ śivīkṛtiḥ || 7 |I
The body, the other body, and that which is to be experienced
(bhogya) (as the consequence of Karma) are considered to be fetters
(pāśātmaka). They are made one with Śiva in the course of the worship of
the ancestors (śrāddha), in (the rite that serves to) rescue of the dead, and

in the (funerary rite, which is) the last sacrifice. (7)

(The subtle body is) ‘the otherʼ, that is, separate from the experiencing

subject (bhoktṛ), because it is an object. This is the meaning.

Surely (one may ask), the initiate after death spontaneously becomes
one with Śiva. So, of what use are the last (funerary) rites etc. for him? There (in
that case) also, there should be just one procedure, the purpose of which is to
eradicate (any) transgression (there may have been) of the Rule. What is the use
of these many (procedures)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

sēq 1 ¢ 1
ekenaiva vidhānena yady api syāt kṛtārthatā |
tathāpi taṉmayībhāvasiddhyai sarvaṁ vidhiṁ caret |l 8 II

Although the purpose is achieved by just one of (these) procedures,
even s0, in order to achieve a state of oneness, (the teacher) should apply all
the procedures. (8)
(The teacher) ‘should applyʼ (all the procedures) for (a disciple) who

aspires to liberation.

This is probably an allusion to the subtle body that transmigracs, that is, the City of Eight
(puryaṣṭaka). See above, note 8,46 to 8/163cd-165ab (163-164).
This is the subject of Chapter Twenty-one.
This the subject of Chapter Twenty-four.
! Śee TSā, p. 176 where his vicw is confirmed.

TANTRĀLOKA

T̄YTIN |

TTTIR I 8 1I
bubhukṣos tu kriyābhyāsabhūmānau phalabhūmani |

hetū tato mṛtoddhāraśrāddhādy asmai samācaret | 9 I|
In the case of (a disciple) who desires worldly benefits, (the teacher)
should perform (the rites) to rescue the dead, and make offerings to the
ancestors (śrāddha) etc. for (his benefit, on the basis of the principle that)
an abundance of ritual and practice are the causes of (a correspondingly

great) abundance of fruits. (9)

And it is said (in the scriptures also):

‘Although (the purpose is accomplished by just performing) the last
rites (antyesti), for those who have been purified by initiation and knowledge
and are free of Impurity, even so one should make offerings to (them as)
ancestors (śrāddha), in order to complete the (enjoined) procedure.”
A man of knowledge has no need of anything at all. Thus he says:

No Procedure is Necessary for the Deceased who Knows Reality

TTTTh[TETTĀTT-TA
T T GIS@aT |
sr-āftzgrgfraēzzrzaī̄
āhaṟ- 1| 2o 1|
tattvajñānārkavidhvastadhvāntasya tu na ko ʻpy ayam ḷ|
antyeṣṭiśrāddhavidhyādir upayogī kadācana || 10 ||
None of these procedures, be it the last rites or the offerings to the
ancestors etc., is ever of any use (and serves no function) for one whose
darkness (of ignorance) has been dispelled by the sun of the knowledge of
reality. (10)
Surely (one may ask), it is seen to be the (common) observance (ācāra)

that distinguished people (mahājana) worship the (sacred) Wheel etc. on the
anniversary of the death of men of knowledge also. So how is it that (he has)
said this? With this doubt in mind, he says:

: Cf. above 16/193cd-196ab. Kṣemarāja quotes the text of TĀ 25/5-6, saying it is from the
Siddhātantra (see following note). The preceding lines (2cd to 4) may well also be drawn from
there. Verses 7 and 8 are Abhinava’s analysis, as Jayaratha maintains. A quotation ad verse 9 is

not the source of that verse. Jayaratha does not identify it.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
The Days of the Teacher’s Enlightenment and Birth

are Sacred Days (parvan)

ũáiṝe vrērq1 22 1
teṣāṁ tu gurutadvargavargyasabrahmacāriṇām |
tatsantānajuṣām aikyadinaṁ parvadinaṁ bhavet || 1 1 I|

The day on which the teacher (guru), his family, those who belong
to it, and fellows (who have attained) oneness (with Śiva) (aikyadinam) is,
for those who belong to his (family and spiritual) lineage, a sacred day
(parvan). (11)

‘Teacher’ is an adjective of the sacred day. His family’ are (the

teacher’s) wife and son etc., and ‘those who belong to it’ are, for example, the
son of the sons. ‘The day (they attain) oneness (with Śiva) (aikyadinam) is

the day they die, because (it is then that they attain) union (sāyujya) with Śiva.
here.

He (now) explains why the word ‘parvan’, that is, ‘sacred time’ is used

yadā hi bodhasyodrekas tadā parvāha pūraṇāt |
(The Lord) has said that a sacred time (parvan) occurs if there is an
(overflowing) abundance (udreka) of awakened consciousness (bodha). It is
then called a ‘parvan, because it fills (with consciousness) (pūraṇāt).
(12ab)
The Supreme Lord ‘has said’. According to Him a sacred time (parvan)
is one that fills consciousness.
And so, moreover, like the day he attains oneness (when he dies), so too
his birthday is a sacred (feast) day for those who belong to his (family and

spiritual) lineage. Accordingly, he says:

janmaikyadivasau tena parvaṇī bodhasiddhitaḥ || 12 ||

In other words, it is a ‘guruparvan’, that is to say, a sacred day dedicated to the commemoration

of the teacher.

The parvan (it. node, juncture) are special days of the year when auspicious celestial
conjunctions occur. The etymology proposed by Abhinavagupta (from – pR, to fill) (see below
28/14cd-18ab), is purely a didactic one; even so, it indicates what these days are understood to be

by him, and so Gnoli has accordingly translated the word parvan as ‘tempo di adempimento’ – ‘a

time of fulfilment’. The awakened consciousness — bodha – is pouring out of the officiant, filling
the vital channels of those who have died with its wakefal and awakening vitality.

TANTRĀLOKA

Two days, namely, that of (the teacher’s) birth and that of (his
realization of) oneness (with Śiva when he died) are sacred (feast) days,
because (they both celebrate) the attainment of consciousness. (12cd)
The Procedure for the Channels of the Breath

ṬIT JaṬT GTĪR- TRIQIHG; |

fīātzāq 1|

putrako ʻpi yadā kasmaicana syād upakārakaḥ |

tadā mātuḥ pituḥ śakter vāmadakṣāntarālagāḥ || 13 ||

nāḍīḥ pravāhayed devāyārpayeta niveditam |

If a spiritual son is also to help someone (who has died), he should
make the channels (of the vital breath) on the left, right and middle, of (his)
mother, father and consort (śakti) (respectively), flow (by blowing into
them), and offer (the food) presented (niveditam) (to them), to the deity
(deva). (13-14ab)
By the word ‘also’ is meant that not only the teacher or the adept
(sādhaka) (but also a spiritual son may do this). By father and mother is also

intended here the teacher along with his wife."

Nor is he voicing just his own idea. Thus, he says:

a ftã fnēTaīq | 2: 1
śrīmadbharuṇatantre ca tac chivena nirūpitam || 14 ||

In this inner śrāddha, the father, mother and wife are rcepresented by the major three channels of

the breath. Presumably the vital breath or life force is made to flow through one or other of these

three channels in the corpse, according to whether it is that of one of these three — mother, father

or consort (śakti).

As the teacher and his wife are considered to be like parents, the teacher’s apprentice —

his ‘spiritual son’ — can perform this inner śrāddha for them. Although Jayaratha understands that
the word ‘also’ indicates that the ‘spiritual son’ can also do this, not just the teacher or an adept

(sādhaka), it may be more correct to understand that Abhinavagupta means that the spiritual son
can also do this. Adepts (sādhaka) do not normally officiate in rituals for others.
In śrāddha ceremonies, balls of rice mixed with black sesame seed (tīla), called piṇḍa,
are offered as food to the ancestors. These are placed in a row and offered one after another. The

primary recipients are the paternal ancestors, and so in most variants of the rite, there is only one

row of balls. Here the model is three such rows, for paternal, maternal ancestors, and those of the

wife (normally the man does this). They are interiorized by homologizing them with the three

channels of the vital breath of the deceased. Note that the central channel – suṣumnā - is that of
Śśakti, the consort, who is his spiritual power. Just as the life force flows through the three
generations of ancestors to which the rows of piṇdas are offered, so too does the vital breath in
these three channels. Just as the piṇḍas are offered to strengthen and sustain the life of the
ancestors in their world, so too the vital breath is made to flow through these channels in the

corpse.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
And that (procedure) is described by Śiva in the venerable

Bharuṇatantra. (14cd)
breath).

He explains the method (yukti) to make the channels flow (with the vital

tadvāhakālāpekṣā ca kāryā tadrūpasiddhaye |
svācchandyenātha tatsiddhiṁ vidhinā bhāvinā caret | 15 II
In order to attain (Śiva’s) nature, (the officiant) should perform

(the sacrifice) in accord with the time the (breath) flows. Now (he may
also) practice (caret) that accomplishment (siddhi) freely (as he wishes), by
means of the procedure that will be (explained shortly). (15)

(The officiant) should pay attention to the time of the spontaneous flow

(of the breath) of these left and other channels, as taught (in the following

verse):

‘In the morning of the day of the equinox (viṣuva),' the right channel

(of the vital breath) flows. In the evening, the other one, and the one in the

middle in between (them), by the yogi’s own (free) will.’

Or else, having ordained (vidhāya) (its) accomplishment by his own
power alone (independent of such considerations), he should make the channels
(of the vital breath) flow (with the breath) by means of the procedure that will

be explained. This is the overall intended sense.
The procedure taught here in one’s own scripture, which concerns all
(types of initiates), beginning with (the basic) regular one (samayin), is the
correct one (to follow), not the (Vedic) one which is commonly practiced
(laukika). Thus, he says:

The reading in the printed edition is —bharuṇatantre, which Gnoli silently emends to –

varuṇatantre. Bhāruṇḍa is listed as one of the eight Matatantras associated with the

Brahmayāmala (alias Picumata) in the Śaiva canon, according to the JY (MS Kh ṣaṭka 1 fl. 179b).
Bhāruṇḍī is listed as one of the eight Tantras of the Mata division of the sixty-four Bhairava
Tantras
listed there (Dyczkowski 1988: 115, 121). MS T reads -bhīruṇḍātantrī for -

bharuṇatantre, which supports a possible emendation to bharuṇḍatantre. Bheruṇḍā is the name of
a Yoginī. She appears as the fifth the of the sixteen Nityās worshipped in Śrīcakra. Her visualized
form (dhyāna) and Yantra are described in chapter ten of the Tantrarājatantra. Ādmittedly, no
text with this name has been traced, nor indeed have I come across references to it.

' The feminine kāryā – ‘should be performed’ indicates a feminine substantive, to which it refers.
This is presumable
meaning ‘sacrifice’. Thus, in the following verse (25/16), the rite is
called ‘cakreṣṭi’ – ‘sacrifice of the assemblyʼ.

Concerning the equinoctial day, see above, 6/ 167ff, especially 6/200cd-204ab.
Fs this verse drawn from the Bharuṇatantra?

TANTRĀLOKA

The Worship of the Assembly When Performing
śrāddha for the Ancestors

g sr̥tk; vvaxaī 7 ġ aaāṁamṝaṁ fafk

2ē, u

yasya kasyāpi vā śrāddhe gurudevāgnitarpaṇam |
sa cakreṣṭiḥ bhavec chrauto na tu syāt pāśavo vidhiḥ || 16 ||

The lustration of the teacher, deity and fire that is done in the

course of making offerings to the ancestors (śrāddha), for whomsoever (it
may be performed who is initiated), is a sacrifice of the assembly
(cakreṣṭi). The procedure should not be Vedic (śrauta), which is (meant

for) the uninitiated (paśu).” (16)

The cause of the absence of the Vedic procedure is that (the soul) is not

uninitiated (into Śaiviṣm).

In order to present in this way also the means (that accomplishes the
goal), that which obstructs (its attainment), and the (scriptural) authority here
(for this), he says:

radĩṁ ãĩt srrīrvzra
a fk=-N . 2. 1

tGdHcāāt Sṝr̥̄HĪĪTITcATHŪTṬṬT I 2¢ 1I

śrīmaukuṭe tathā coktaṁ śivaśāstre sthito ‘pi yaḥ |
pratyeti vaidike bhagnaghaṇṭāvan na sa kiñcana || 17 I|
tathoktadevapūjādicakrayāgāntakarmaṇā |

rudratvametyasau janturbhogāndivyānsamaśnute || 18 |I

And the same is said in the venerable Mukuṭa (where we read): ‘he
who has been a follower of Śiva’s scriptures and returns to those of the
Veda is, like a broken bell, that is, nothing at all. In the same way, thanks to
the worship of the deity (in the manner) described in the beginning, and the

sacrifice of the assembly (cakrayāga) at the end, the (deceased) person

assumes Rudra’s state, and attains divine benefits (divyabhoga) (thereby).”
(16-18)

Also called cakrayāga, this is a gathering of initiates who together perform the Kaula rite of
Ādḍiyāga – the Foremost Sacrifice. See below, 28/60cd ff. for an account of this rite.

] haye chosen not to follow Jayaratha’s explanation here.
2 Read apāśuvatvaṁ for pāśuvatvatṁ.

In other words, he experiences what the deity does.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
(A Śaivite who returns to the Vedas) is ‘like a broken bell’.

A broken

bell cannot perform its function, nor even that of a metal. Thus,
the condition it
assumes is that of having fallen from both. This the meaning. Thus, he
says he is
‘nothing at allʼ.

IEITF
AT
AE
ĒGIT

atha vacmaḥ sphuṭaṁ śrīmatsiddhāyāṁ nāḍicāraṇam |
We will now talk clearly about the movement through the channels
(of the breath) (nāḍicāraṇa), (as it is taught) in the venerable

(19ab)

He paraphrases the book called Siddhayogīśvarīmata:

ṁīratiq

2. u
TaTTāTTT
T} āft

T|

yā vāhayitum iṣyeta nāḍī tām eva bhāvayet || 19 I
bhāvanātanmayībhāve sā nāḍīṝ vahati sphuṭam |

yadvā vāhayituṁ yeṣṭā tadaṅgaṁ tena pāṇinā || 20 l|

āpīḍya kukṣiṁ namayet sā vahen nāḍikā kṣaṇāt |

(The officiant) should meditate (bhāvayeṭ) on the channel he wishes
to cause to flow (with the flux of the breath). When the channel
is in a state
of oneness (tanmayībhāva) with the meditation (bhāvanā), it clearly
(begins
to) breathe. Or else, in order to make (the breath) flow
(within) that

(channel) he chooses (to do so), having pressed that part (of the body)

with

the (corresponding) hand, he should incline the abdomen
(of the corpse).
(Then that) chanmel immediately (begins to) transport (the
flow of the

breath). (19cd-21ab)

‘That’ ((channel) he chooses) is one amongst them, that is,

(the one on

the) left etc., (which he chooses) in accord with the recipient etc.
for whom
(the procedure) is meant. “Or else’, as (this procedure) does not pertain to
yogis.
Having taught the procedure concerning the channels (of the
vital
breath) in this way, he explains that the reason for making offerin
gs to the

ancestors (śrāddha) is to bestow (on them) worldly experie

liberation.

nce (bhoga) and

Read -siddhāyām for -siddhaye.
° nāḍicāraṇa is not trated at all in the short recension of te SYM, and the two yerses Abhinava
quotes here are not found in it
Read pātrādy- for mātrādy-.

TANTRĀLOKA

The Bestowal of Worldly Benefits (bhoga) and Liberation
(bhogaṁokṣadānam)

Tē JTR̥TṬGTTTT TTĪRTrATTJTTT

2z 1

evaṁ śrāddhamukhenāpi bhogamokṣobhayasthitim || 21 ||

kuryād iti śivenoktaṁ tatra tatra kr̥pālunā |

In this way, (the teacher) may even, by means of the offerings to the
ancestors (śrāddha), generate the condition (for his deceased disciple) in

which he enjoys worldly experience, liberation or both, as compassionate
Śiva has declared in various places (in the scriptures). (21cd-22ab)

Surely (one may ask), it is said that initiation by itself is the means to
(both attaining) worldly benefits and liberation. So how is it that that is possible
by just observance (caryā), such as the offerings to the ancestors (śrāddha),
also? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Jrkkāīdāīa sṝcṁṝ̄d-Tdrām 2ṃšrē: 11 33 11
āTTJGSĪ TTfRITTITTH āTNS |

Śśaktipātodaye jantor yenopāyena daiśikaḥ !| 22 ||

karoty uddharaṇaṁ tattannirvāṇāyāsya kalpate |
Once a descent of the power (of grace) has arisen for someone,

whatever be the means the teacher applies to extract (him from his fettered
state) serves to extinguish it (kirvāṇāya) (and liberate him). (22cd-23ab)

He justifies (this teaching) with logical argument.

3agāīī šacaī fḵ a sīrcamāīaī:1| 33 1
STS ṬCĪRTTRTHTIT
ūTTT_ I
uddhartā devadevo hi sa cācintyaprabhāvakaḥ || 23 ||
upāyaṁ gurudīkṣādi dvāramātreṇa saṁśrayet |

Indeed, the one who rescues (all) is the God of gods (Himself), and
his power is beyond conception. He resorts to a means, be it the teacher,
iṇitiation or the like, solely as (His) instrument. (23cd-24ab)
And nor is this argument (yukti) our own idea alone. Rather such also is
the (teaching that) has come down (through the scriptures) (āgama). Thus, he

says:

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

uktaṁ śrīmanmataṅgākhye munipraśnād anantaram l|| 24 |
It is said in the venerable (Tantra) called Mataṅga, after the sages

question.” (24cd)

Thus, he states the sage’s question there.

rc-aaāT̄ fīi. ṃāṁīg vfkṁkd māfīg: |

fē úā zgaāī fhk- n 2F
muktir vivekāt tattvānāṁ dīkṣāto yogato yadi |

caryāmātrāt kathaṁ sā syād ity ataḥ samam uṭtaram || 25 ||
prahasyoce vibhuḥ kasmād bhrantiṣ te parameśituḥ |
sarvānugrāhakatvaṁ hi saṁsiddhaṁ dr̥śyatāṁ kila || 26 ||

“If liberation (is attained) by discriminating (viveka) between the
metaphysical principles (tattva), initiation or Yoga, how can it (be attained)
by (observance and right) conduct (caryā) alone?” Then, the all-pervasive

Lord, smiling, uttered the corresponding answer: “How has (this) your

delusion (arisen)? It is well established (and recognised) that the Supreme
Lord graces everybody. See (for yourself)!” (25-26)
That is said there (in the Mataṅgatantra):

‘Liberation (is attained) by discriminating (viveka) between the

metaphysical principles (tattva), that is, by reflecting (pravicārataḥ) on (the

nature) of Earth and the rest (of them). Another (liberation), which is well

ascertained, is by means of initiation, and that (teaching) has assumed a place in

the section concerning ritual (kriyāpāda). A third is accomplished by what is
stated in the section concerning Yoga,” and that too is taught (as sound).
(However) how could™ the fourth be well-accomplished by (right conduct and)
observance (caryā) alone, (and why) should (that) be taken up? When there is

knowledge of Śiva, sever the sprout of ignorance concerning Me.

The following passage is not found in the vidyāpāda of the Mataṅgatantra, which is the only
section (pāda) of this Śiddhāntāgama that has been edited. It appears that this question introduces
the section concerned with right conduct and observance (caryāpāda). See the following note.
See above, note 15,36.

The edition of the MPĀ reads yogapādoktitah - ‘stated in the section concerning Yoga (and so
is accomplished).
Instead of bhave, the printed edition of the MPĀ reads vibho- ‘O pervasive Lordʼ.

' The printed editon of the MPĀ reads pravaktavyā
‘should be taken upʼ.

MPĀ caryāpāda 4/4-6ab.

‘should be explained’ for prapattavyā

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Then’ means after the question. The ‘corresponding’ (answer) is the

appropriate one. ‘See (for yourself)’, no one disagrees with this. This is the

meaning.
He justifies that this (teaching is sound) by presenting an example.

ā aīoḷg_ |

rcġq aī āg āī gGṬFĀT JTRHĒVTÇI| Ṝ II

ūc ṣc ōaāḷ fkaī | 2. 11

prāptamṛtyor viṣavyādhiśastrādi kila kāraṇam |
alpaṁ vā bahu vā tadvad anudhyā muktikāraṇam || 27 ||
muktyartham upacaryante bāhyaliṅgāny amūni tu |
iti jñātvā na sandeha itthaṁ kāryo vipaścitā | 28 I|
iyataiva kathaṁ muktir iti bhaktiṁ parāṁ śrayet |

The (apparent external) cause (of death), whether it be much or
little, of a man whose time has come to die, is poison, illness, (wounds made
by a) weapon or the like (but this is not the ultimate cause). Similarly, these

(rites) with external (visible) signs are (only) secondarily said to serve (as a

means) to liberation. The (essential) cause of liberation is devout meditation
(anudhyā). Once a wise man has understood this, he should not cultivate
(any) doubt about how liberation (is possible) by just this (practice of right
conduct and observance alone). Accordingly, (leaving all else aside,) he
should dedicate himself to supreme devotion (alone). (27-29ab)

Poison and the like, ‘whether it be much or little’, is the (apparent)

cause of death of one whose death is immanent; but that is not its immediate

(direct) (sākṣāt) cause, which is (in actual fact) the coming to an end of the

worldly experience (allotted to him by his Karma). Similarly, the primary cause
of liberation is ‘devout meditation’, the sole characteristic of which is a
descent of the power (of grace), in accord with the view that ‘peoples’ devotion
arises by his grace alone.’ On the contrary, these (rites) with external (visible)
signs such as initiation, because they are such, are secondarily said to be just
(auxiliary) means (not ultimate causes). Thus, one should not doubt that
liberation is possible by just (right conduct and) observance (caryā), such as
making offerings to the ancestors (śrāddha) and the like. However, in this case,

one should resort with strong determination (dārḍhyena) to devotion alone, so
that this may be so. That is said there (in the Mataṅgatantra):
‘The Lord, the emperor of all, smiling, then (said): “What is the cause

of (your) delusion here (in this matter)? It is well-established (and recognised)
See above, note 21,20.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

by the special vision of devout meditation that the Supreme Lord graces
everybody. Signs, preceded by (the ingestion of) poison, disease, (wounds
caused by a) weapon (and the like), make it in various ways apparent that a
person’s time to die has come. However, they are not the cause here of death,

because (that does not take place as long as) the worldly experience (allotted to
him by his Karma) has not come to an end. It is ascertained in the same way
here also that observances (caryā) and the like are clarified (in the scriptures and
put into practice) due to the penetration (of grace) that comes about by the
power (bala) of devout meditation. These (rites) with external (visible) signs are

(only) secondarily said to serve (as a means) to liberation. The clear (internal)
sign (which is significant) is unwavering devotion, brought about by a descent

(of grace).

(O sage, a man who is penetrated by devotion should worship (his)
teacher until he is conjoined to the supreme plane by the Supreme Lord.
Devotion is said to be of five kinds, (according to whether) the cause is made
apparent by (the devoteesʼ) speech, mind, body, action, and the apprehension
(adhyavasāya) of (the intellect, which is) the heart). The Śivahood of the soul
(puṁs) who, (tranquil and) content, is penetrated by that (devotion), its
vitality always unrestrained, becomes (clearly) manifest.’
He concludes this (topic) with the first half (of verse):

3: īTrfarráfṁīcāēgfaī: 1 28 1
uktaḥ śrāddhavidhir bhrantigarātaṅkavimardanaḥ || 29 1|

(Thus) has been taught the procedure to make offerings to the
ancestors (śrāddha), which destroys the fear brought about by the poison of
error. (29cd)
This is the auspicious end.
Jayaratha, of fine intellect, whois totally dedicated to the many kinds of
procedures taughtin all the Śaiva scriptures (śāsana), has explained the twentyfifth (chapter of the Tantrāloka).
This is the twenty-fourth chapter of the venerable Tantrālokaviveka,
called the Explanation (prakāśana) of the Rite of the Offering to the Ancestors
(śrāddha).

The edition of the MPĀ reads praṇaṣṭarāgasya – ‘(whosē) attachment has been destroyed’ for
prasamabhāváśya – ‘who is (tranquil and) contentʼ.

Read with the edition of the MPĀ, tayāviṣṭasya for tayā śiṣyasya.
MPĀ caryāpāda 416cd-10, 13. 1 have added the translation of the two verses Jayaratha omits in
brackets.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

The Remaining Observance!
(Śeṣavṛttinirūpaṇam)

Śiva’s worship, that takes place by (the Lord’s) will, conquers the
universe marked with all things everywhere. That (teacher) with a fine mind
(who is engaged in it) has a good mind to liberate (those) people who are (his)
supplicants.
Now, in order to teach the way of life that remains concerning those
who have received initiation, he says with the second half (of the verse begun at
the end of the previous chapter):

11 2
athocyate śeṣavṛttīr jīvatām upayoginī | 1 Il
Now we will explain the way of life that remains (to be observed
after having received initiation) (Śeṣavṛtti), which is of benefit (for one’s life
and the good of all) living beings. (1)
Surely (one may ask), (everything that needs be done is) done by just
(receiving) initiation alone, in accord with the teaching that “(just) initiation
alone (by itself) releases (the soul,) and so too leads it upwards to Śiva’s

abode.” So of what use is the teaching concerning the way of life that remains

(to be observed after having taken initiation) (śeṣavṛtti)? Taking this doubt into

consideration, referring first of all to the different types of initiation, he explains
(their) purpose.

The Purpose of the Remaining Observance
(prayojanaṁ Śśeṣavṛtteḥ)

This is an important chapter. Here Abhinava teaches the daily rites a Trika Śaivite should

perform for the rest of his life, after he has received initiation. This is his ‘remaining observance’.
He also teaches the attitude of mind with which he should do that, charting the flow of divine

forms and their perceptions that emerge from the initial precognitive impulse that blossoms out

into ritual action. All ritual action takes place reflected within the inner mirror of consciousness
and its outer counterpart – the sacrificial surface (sthaṇḍila), as it does in every outer locus of

deity. This chapter is accordingly said in the colophon to deal with the Rite of the Worship of the

Sacrificial Surface. The name given here to this chapter is drawn from Abhinava’s list of contents
found at the end of Chapter One, above.

In the concluding line of this chapter (i.. 26/76cd), Abhinava says that it deals with ‘the
sacṅifice offered to the sacrificial surface (sthanḍilayāga) which is part of the regular (daily) rite.’
In other words, not all the regular rites and practices the initiate should engage in on a daily basis
are described here.

Kṣemarāja cites this lie in SvTu ad 11/199a. Unfortunately, all he says about its source is that
‘this has been established elsewhere’ (iii hi pratipāditam anyatra).

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

dīkṣā bahuprakāreyaṁ śrāddhāntā yā prakīrtitā |
sā saṁskriyāyai mokṣāya bhogāyāpi dvayāya vā || 2 ||
This initiation, which is said to be of many kinds, (ranging) up to
the one for the offering to the ancestors, serves (according to its type) to
purify, bestow liberation, give worldly benefits, or both (the latter). (2)
He elaborates on this (view).
Teacher Instructs as to the Daily Conduct,

Including Ritual and Mantra

srgdātkrarṁraīṁ

arāādāi TTRTTĪĪ TTTTTTĪTĀGT
I ` II
tatra saṅskārasiddhyai yã dĩīkṣā sākṣān na mocanī|
anuṣaṁáhivaśād yā ca sākṣān moktrī sabījikā || 3 II
tayobhayyā dīkṣitā ye teṣām ājīvavartanam |
vaktavyaṁ putrakādīnāṁ tanmayatvaprasiddhaye || 4 ||
There (in that regard), the initiation which serves to accomplish (a

preliminary) purification does not liberate directly. The one that is directly

liberating, (chosen) in accord with (the teacher’s) unifying intention
(anusandhi),˚ is one ‘with seed’. It is necessary to explain to those spiritual
sons and others who have been initiated with this one out of the two, how to

behave up to the end of their life, so that they may attain oneness (with the
Lord when they die). (3-4)

‘There’ʼ, in this way, there are four kinds of initiation. 1) One (type of
initiation) is said to be a means to purification (sarṁskāranimitta), and (differs)
according to the unifying intention (anusaṁdhāna) (of the teacher, as to whether
it should serve) for those who desire worldly benefits or aspire to liberation. 2)
(Another type of initiation) is imparted to the adept (sādhaka). It is not
immediately related (to the attainment of liberation,) as it is primarily (meant)
for (the attainment of) worldly benefits, and so does not liberate (the disciple)

Initiation is of various kinds. The initiation of an ‘extraordinary’ adept is imparted in order that

he may obtain worldly benefits, and that of a spiritual son ‘with seed’, to attain liberation. They
qualify to practice Yoga and acquire knowledge of the scriptures. Thus, they are preparatory
purifications rather than direct means. On the contrary, the initiation of an ‘ordinary’ adept, which
serves to attain worldly benefits, and that of a spiritual son ‘without seedʼ, to attain liberation, are

direct means (see above, 15/1). The two types of initiation that concem Abhinavagupta here are
the indirect ones to which he refers. The first, which concerns the adepts, can liberate directly,

independently of intermediated fruits. In the text of the TSā, I judge that the part yā ca tadaśaktān

prati mokṣadīkṣā is a gloss of some readers.
See above, 16/169-175.

TANTRĀLOKA

directly. The meaning is that it is not liberating. 3) Again, that (initiati
also be without seed. (However,) in order to preclude (that possibility,) it is said
that ‘it is one ‘with seed’ʼ. In the case of an (initiation) without seed, there is no

(particular) way of life that remains (to be observed after receiving it)
(Śeṣavṛtti). This is because the fetter of (having to observe) the Rule has been

purified (and removed). And he will say:

‘who could say (anything) about the way of life that remains (to be

observed after having received initiation) (śeṣavṛtti) to those (two) who are
‘spontaneously realized’ (sāṁsiddhika) and ‘without seed’?”

4) The spiritual sons, who have been initiated with the initiation which
is, as stated, of two kinds (with and without seed), should be told how they
should behave up to the end of their lives, so that they may attain oneness with
consciousness (after death), without (any) impediment.
Surely, the devout observance of the regular and occasional (rites) etc.
is said to be the manner in which an initiate should live the rest of his life, as a
means to both worldly benefits and liberation. Should the adept or the spiritual
son maintain that observance without distinction, or not? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

ITṬRṬ TṜaTĀ AIT fṜ IṬT &ṜaT J 4.

JTd kd ṀN aĩd || 1|
bubhukṣor vā mumukṣor vā svasaṁvidguruśāstrataḥ |
pramāṇād yā saṁskriyāyai dīkṣā hi guruṇā kṛtā lI 5 II
tataḥ sa saṁskr̥taṁ yogyaṁ jñātvātmānaṁ svaśāsane |
taduktavastvanuṣṭhānaṁ bhuktyai muktyai ca sevate | 6 |

Whether it be for one who desires worldly benefit or aspires to
liberation, the initiation that is authoritative by virtue of one’s own

(ilumined) consciousness, the teacher and the scriptures, is performed by
the teacher in order to purify (him). Thus, once (the initiate) has known

himself to have been purified and worthy (to follow) his own scriptures, he

adheres to the devout observance of what they teach, in order to (attain) the
worldly benefit (he desires) and liberation. (5-6)

The initiation is performed by the teacher for ‘one who desires worldly
benefit or aspires to liberation’, on the basis of the authority characterized as
one’s own consciousness, the teacher and the scripture, in accord with the

Below, 26/10ab.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

teaching that ‘this knowledge has three sources of conviction. . . .' (He does

this) ‘in order to purify (him)’. ‘Thus’ by virtue of the initiation, once the one

who desires worldly benefit or aspires to liberation ‘has known himself to be

worthy (to follow) his own scripturesʼ, because he has been purified, ‘he
adheres to the devout observance’ taught in his own scripture, such as daily
worship. The meaning is that he should do this (for all the teachings) without
distinction.
Surely (one may ask), should one tell the way of life that remains (to be
observed after having taken initiation) (śeṣavṛtti) to one who does not possess a

reflective awareness of his own in this way, or not? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

sīTār-ãārcaaza aīṣtī aaṁgfrkTa |

ācāryapratyayād eva yo ‘pi syād bhuktimuktibhāk |
tatpratyīūhodayadhvastyai brūyāt tasyāpi vartanam |I 7 ||

One should explain the way of life (vartana) (that remains to be

observed after having taken initiation) also to one who enjoys both worldly

benefits and liberation, by virtue of (his) experience (pratyaya) of the

(oneness of) the teacher (with the deity) (ācāryapratyaya), in order to
eliminate (any) impediment to that (realization). (7)
In this way, the situation is just the same in the case of one who
possesses (this) insight of himself (svapratyaya) also, as it is for one who finds
it in his teacher. Thus he says:

ĪTGRAT āTTRYATTTRHTTRṢITTA

svasaṁvidgurusaṁvittyos tulyapratyayabhāg api |
Śeṣavṛttyā samādeśyas tadvighnādipraśāntaye || 8 Il
(Similarly), the way of life that remains (to be observed after having
taken initiation) should also be taught to one who has the same insight (into
the Śiva nature of) his own consciousness and that of the teacher,in order
to quell obstacles etc. to that. (8)

This statement is drawn from the Niśātanatāntra, and is quoted above in 4/79a and ad 4/78cd-79.
The passage from which it is drawn is quoted in full in TĀv ad 13/197-198. The same statement
with a slightly different wording is also found in other Tantras. See above, 4/41cd-42ab and note.

Jayaratha does not tell us what this impediment may be and to what. However, we have seen

above in TĀv ad 26/4 that he says that the observance of an appropriate way of life, which

incluḍes the regular performance of the required rites, is maintained so that the initiate ‘may attain

oneness with consciousness without (any) impediment’.

TANTRĀLOKA

Again, if one is dependent on (something) else (other than oneself) in
some respect (ekāntataḥ) or not at all, what is the use of observing (a particular)

way of life that remains (after having taken initiation)? Thus he says:

kBEG
ḶI- EI

I

TRTATĀĪSTT TTIÁRTATR ā#hrTT I 3 I

yaḥ sarvathā parāpekṣām ujjhitvā tu sthito nijāt |

pratyayād yo ‘pi cācāryapratyayād eva kevalāt | 9 II
tau sāṁsiddhikanirbījau ko vadec cheṣavṛttaye |

(However,) he who, having abandoned dependence on anything else
in all respects, and abides (well established) by virtue of his own
(validating) experience (pratyaya) (of his Śiva nature), as well as one who (is

such) solely by virtue of the experience (pratyaya) of the (oneness of) the
teacher (with the deity) (is liberated in this life). Who could say (anything)

about the way of life that remains (to be observed after having received

initiation) (Śeṣavṛtti) to those (two), who are ‘spontaneously realized”

(sāṁsiddhika) and ‘without seed”™ (respectively)? (9-10ab)

Surely (one may ask), if this is so, is their condition (vartana) (just one

of dullness,) like that of a piece of wood or a wall or like that of an illiterate
peasant? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TTTATĪTTATTT-TT
ā āĪ 1| 2o 1|

a1

azzrEHTHEIĒEIĒFIḻav|CAHIEEḤ'

ā frcar fafr. ā-aaāīgēō ḷām̃ |

TST ṂJTRAĀT I22 I

[ENLÉENDHETĀ TFEAEIEEZFHIRE

srarī
aã aũt fafēa ,
areaāīftā ārcaāīē+ -tkka; gē̄q 1 2. 11

ieētUEEIQEAĀEHIĒEḶ T|RCI
See above, 4/42cd-43ab.

Sce above, 15/31. The reader may recall that initiates ‘without seedʼ, like the aged, sick,

women, children and kings, are exempted from the regular observances. By ‘seed’ here is meant

the observance of the rules and rites etc. to which the initiate is bound.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

kramāt tanmayatopāyagurvarcanaratau tu tau || 10 ||
tatraiṣāṁ śeṣavṛttyarthaṁ nityanaimittike bruve |

kāmyavarjaṁ yataḥ kāmāś citrāś citrābhyupāyakāḥ || 1 1 II

tatra nityo vidhiḥ sandhyānuṣṭhānaṁ devatāvrate |
gurvagniśāstrasahite pūjā bhūtadayety ayam || 12 ||
naimittikas tu sarveṣāṁ parvaṇāṁ pūjanaṁ japaḥ |
viśeṣavaśataḥ kiñca pavitrakavidhikramaḥ || 13 II
ācāryasya ca dīkṣeyaṁ bahubhedā vivecitā |

vyākhyādikaṁ ca tat tasyādhikaṁ naimittikaṁ dhruvam || 14 |I

tatrādau śiśave brūyād gurur nityavidhiṁ sphuṭam |
tadyogyatāṁ samālokya vitatāvitatātmanām || 15 ||
mukhyetarādimantrāṃ
vīryavyāptyādiyogyatām |
drṛṣṭvā śiṣye tam evāsmai mūlḻamantraṁ samarpayet l 16 ||

These two (the spontaneously enlightened and the initiate without

seed) are intent, respectively, (on practicing) the means to (attain) a state of
oneness (with Śiva by the goddess’s grace) and worshipping (his) teacher.

(10cd)

There (in that context), for the purpose of the remaining (post-

initiatory) observance (śeṣavṛtti), I will teach the regular (nitya) and

occasional (naimittika) (rites,, omitting the optional (magical) (kāmya)
(ones), for desires are (very) varied, and so too (equally) diverse are the

means (to their attainment). (11)

'' Read bruve for dhruve (Sanderson 2006: 25, n. 26 and Gnoli).

The division of the rites into nitya – permanent or regular, periodical - naimittika, occasional,
devoted to special events (births of a son, etc.), and kāmya – optional, volantary (for example all

the rites of magic exorcism, etc.) is a basic common formulation. For the value attributed to these
terms by Abhinavagupta, see below, 28/1-5. Note that Abhinavagupta here excludes from his
discussion rites that are performed to fulfil a specific desire (kāma) and so are voluntary (kāmya).

Such rituals are performed by adepts (sādhaka), that is, those initūates who, rather than desiring

liberation, wish to have worldly benefits and rewards (bubhukṣu) (see above, 15/21-34ab and

notes). These are obtained by performing magical rites. They arc a significant part of the rites
taught in the Tantras but, as one would expect, they are more prominent in some and less in
others. They cater for special needs and so are not part of what initiates are obliged to do.

Although, Abhinavagupta, in accord with the Tantras that are his sources, is not solely

concerned with initiates who seek liberation, his preference for them is clear. The ultimate goal is
liberation, although initiates may also reccive rewards (bhoga) in this life as well, and were seen

to do so. The sādhaka, in this scheme, is solely concerned with the attinment of yogic and
magical powers – ṣiddhi. Abhinava does refer to him and accepts his ambitions as valid, however
Abhinava excludes kāmya rites from his concerns, underscoring that they are not essential, and so

contain the sādhakas ambitions. Abhinava cannot and does not wish to deny that magical rites
are effective and serve a function; after all, they are taught in the scriptures. A striking example is
the Tantrasadbhāva, a Trika Tantra, that dedicates substantial space to magical rites, thus making
them a feature of scriptural Trika. Moreover, they may also have positive advantages and results,

for example in times of war.

Sanderson (2006: 25) notes that, although it is true that liberation is the goal for just a

few in non-Tantric Hinduism, ‘here it is the path of power and rewards followed by the sādhaka

which is by far the most exacting and disruptive of ordinary life. . . . To be safely on the path to

TANTRĀLOKA

There, the (daily) regular prescribed (rites comprise) the devout
observance of the (three) junctures (sandhyā) (of the day at dawn, midday

and sunset), the worship of the assembly of deities, along with the teacher,

the fire and the scriptures, and (the practice of) compassion for living

beings (bhūtadayā). The occasional rites (comprise) worship on all the

sacred days (parvan), the repetition (of mantras) required for special
(occasions), and the liturgy of the rite of the (offering to the deity of a)
sacred thread." (12-13)
This initiation, which is of many kinds and has been discussed
(here), is that of the teacher. In addition to that, the explanation (of the
scriptures) and the like are also certainly occasional. (14)
There (in that case), the teacher should first clearly explain to his

disciple the regular (daily) ordinance, after having examined his

competence (for it). Then, once he has seen that the disciple is qualified (to
realize) the vitality (vīrya), pervasion (i.e. the domain of their application),

and the rest of the main and other mantras, which are more or less
extensive, (the teacher) should impart the root mantra (SAUḤ) to (his)
disciple. (15-16)
‘These two are intent, respectively, (on practicing) the means to
(attain) a state of oneness (with Śiva by the goddess’s grace) and
worshipping (his) teacher’, because (the “spontaneously realized’
(sāṁsiddhika) one) is intent on reflecting on the goddess of his own
consciousness, and the one ‘without seed’ is such because of the devotion he has
for his teacher. As was said before:
‘He in whom this sound discriminative reasoning (sattarka) (arises
spontaneously) by itself is fit in all respects (to perform any ritual, practice any
form of spiritual discipline, and initiate others). He has been both initiated (as a

disciple), and consecrated (as a teacher, directly) by the goddesses of his own

consciousness.”'

liberation [the aspirant] needed only to have passed through the ceremony of initiation and then
maintain a comparatively moderate discipline of rituals and observances. The religious activities

of the ṣādhaka were much more complex, tme-consuming and intense; and they required him to
adopt observances (vratam, niyamaḥ) in such matters as dress, food, residence and behaviour
which segregated him, sometimes dramatically, from the normal social world. Liberation, then,
was the more accessible of the two goals of the Tantric Śaivas; and it was this accessibility, I
suggest, which lead the cults to take firm root in Indian society.”
Read devatāvrate for devatāvraje.
This entry appears to be anomalous, perhaps the text is corrupt.

' Concering all these rites see below, Chapter Twenty-eight. The scriptures do not all agree on

which rites are to be considered as ‘regular’ (nitya) or ‘occasional’ (naimitika). Although one

would logically expect the rites performed on sacred days (parvan) and that of the sacred thread,

which are fixed every year, to be regular rites, they are considered to be occasional by the
scriptural tradition accepted by Abhinavagupta. See below, 28/5, and also TVDh 3/29cd-30 and
Tantroccaya 9. Also Tantrasāra Gnoli 1990: 209-210.
Above, 4/42cd-43ab. Also quoted above ad 15/15cd-16.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
‘In the case (of the initiation) ‘without seed’ (the teacher) should, on the

contrary, remove all the restrictions imposed by the rules (the initiate ‘with
seedʼ) should observe. (The disciple) is liberated solely by the initiation itself,

due to (his) constant devotion for God and the teacher.”

As desires are various, (the magical rites) by which they are mediated

are various. Thus, because they are neither regular nor occasional (rites), these
(optional magical rites) are not mentioned here. ‘In addition (to that)’, because

the spiritual son etc. is not competent (there to explain the scripture and the rest,
which only the teacher can do). ‘After having examined his competence’, the
procedure should be explained to the disciple extensively, or else the main

Mantra should be given to him. It is otherwise with one who is not such (i.e.

competent).
Thuṣ he says:

ī ā aTa gd-aūaīa:
RIT AIaTT II 29 |

JTJP-ā ā¥AĪTR] GTHGIĀTTETĪST
aIT |

2¢ 1
frṁ īōnr̄ā ar frsī fē< gTe 1
āīaāīsā araṁṁra tkrṁ fatkrasa 1 2 1

šīetc1WEEIEĀHENEIĒIEEIVĀE™

tacchāstradīkṣito hy eṣa niryantrācāraśaṅkitaḥ |
na mukhye yogya ity anyasevātaḥ syāt tu yogyatā || 17 I|
sādhakasya bubhukṣos tu sādhakībhāvino ‘pi vā |
puṣpapātavaśāt siddho mantro ‘ṛpyaḥ sādhyasiddhaye || 18 II
vitate guṇabhūte vā vidhau diṣṭe punar guruh |
jñātvā ʻsmai yogyatāsāraṁ saṁkṣiptaṁ vidhim ācaret || 19 l
tatraiṣa niyamo yad yan māntraṁ rūpaṁ na tadguruḥ |

likhitvā prathayec chiṣye viśeṣād ūrdhvaśāsane || 20 ||

(The teacher may assess that the disciple who) has been initiated
into a (higher) scripture (śāstra), (but) has doubts (and is inhibited) about
(observing) the conduct without restrictions (niryantra), (it teaches) is unfit
(to receive and practice) the main (mantra). (If so, the disciple) may

(acquire that) competence by practicing other (mantras). (17)

(The teacher) should give the Mantra (indicated by the place in a

diagram drawn for that purpose) onto which a flower falls (cast there by

the disciple). So that (they may) accomplish the (chosen) goal, (it is given to

Above, 15/31.
Lit. by serving others’ – anyasevāah.

TANTRĀLOKA

three types of initiate, namely) an adept (sādhaka), one who desires worldly
benefits, or one who is about to become an adept. (18)
Once the procedure has been taught, either at length or in brief,

and the teacher has ascertained the essence of (the disciple’s) competence,

he should perform the brief form of the procedure (for his benefit). (19)
The (main) rule there (in that case) is that, whatever be the form of
the Mantra (nāntraṁ rūpam), (the teacher) should not reveal it to the
disciple in writing, especially (if it is one belonging to) a higher teaching.

(20)

(The manner of conduct of the higher Tantras is) ‘without restrictions’,
that is, free of thought constructs. ‘Another (mantra) is one that is not the

main one. ‘An adept (sādhaka)’ is one who has received that initiation (given
to an adept). “One who is about to become an adept’ is one who will be given
that initiation. ‘In brief” means not at length. ‘There (in that case)’, when the

brief essential procedure is performed. ‘A higher teachingʼ is that of the
Trikakula and the like.
He (now) logically justifies this (teaching).

Mantras are Letters, even so they are Powerless if Drawn from a Book

aā Ṁfõraṝ1 22 1
fōftfēzzq

GÇTTGTT
TRI ṬGTHĪTJVT TE; II QR I
mantrā varṇātmakās te ca parāmarśātmakāḥ sa ca |

gurusaṁvidabhinnaś cet saṁkrāmet sā tataḥ Śiśau || 21 I1I

lipisthitas tu yo mantro nirvīryaḥ so ‘tra kalpitaḥ |
saṅketabalato nāsya puṣṭakāt prathate mahaḥ || 22 ||

Mantras are letters by nature,” and these are essentially (forms of)
reflective awareness. And if that (reflective awareness) is not separate from
the teacher’s consciousness, that (consciousness) can be transmitted from

that (teacher) to the disciple.

‘A written Mantra is devoid of vitality. It is (something that has

been) conceived (kalpita) here. Due to the strength of the (linguistic)
Read yogyatāsāraṁ for yogyatāṁ sāraṁ.
This is, apparently, the rite of transmission of the mantra.

Cf. mantrā varṇātmakāḥ sarve varṇāḥ sarve śiyātmakāḥ |
‘AIl mantras are letters by nature and all letters Śiva. This is the second line of a passage quoted
by Jayaratha above ad 12/24cd. He identifies the source there as the Sarvavīra. In the PTv (p. 235236), it is identified as the Sarvācāra. C. also a quote from the Rauravāgama (Rurutantra) above
ad 1/46 where, with a very similar wording, mantras are identified with deities.
Powerful, effective mantras are taken from scripture, and so are coming from the deity. They
are not ‘conceived here in this world by some human agent.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

convention (that obscures it), its glorious power (mahaḥ) is not perceived

from a book.’ (21-22)

‘And that’ reflective awareness (is transmitted) ‘from that’ teacher (if)
‘that? teacher’s consciousness consists of reflective awareness. (A written

Mantra) ‘is devoid of vitality’, because it is devoid of reflective awareness. The
sense is that (the reflective awareness which is Mantra) it is ‘not separate from

consciousnessʼ.
Surely (one may ask), what is the authority (for the injunction that) the

vitality of Mantra should not be explained (akathana) from a book? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

fãī d |

pustakādhītavidyāś cety uktaṁ siddhāmate tataḥ |
Thus, this is said in the Siddhāmata, with regards to Vidyās learnt

from books. (23ab)

One should lay stress in this way on the vitality of Mantras (as the most
important consideration). This is the essential purport (of what is being said)
here.
Thus, he says:

ṃ āṃ JĪTTd 1| 33 11

ye tu puṣtakalabdhe ʻpi mantre vīryaṁ prajānate || 23 ||
te bhairavīyasaṁskārāḥ proktāḥ sāṁsiddhikā iti |
iti jñātvā guruḥ samyak paramānandaghūrṇitaḥ || 24 |I
tādṛśe tādṛśe dhāmni pūjayitvā vidhiṁ caret |

Whether a particular mantra or part of it has some literal meaning or not, the power of the

mantra lies in the power of the awareness of the one who recites it. By ‘awareness’ is meant a

direct apprehension unmediated by thoughts and notions. These are clothed in language

constituted of words that convey the meanings that convention assigns to them. A mantra is

‘meaningful’ in a different sense: it heightens and deepens awareness of the Deity which is its
object and of which the mantra is the body.
Cf. above, 4/66-69ab. Mantras are male mantra deities, and Vidyās are female mantra Deities.
According to Tōrzsôk (1999: 228), verses 22 to 23ab are probably a paraphrase of SYM 1/11 ff.,
that teaches that mantras should not be written in books, and that they are not effective if not taken

from a teacher. Verse 21 appears to be Abhinava’s gloss. In verse 24, however, Abhinavagupta
reverses this injunction by saying that those who can obtain the vitality of mantra even from

books are as good as initiated. Concerning the nature of mantras, see above, 16/250 ff. and 4/66 ff.

concerming leaming mantras from books.

TANTRĀLOKA

Those who know the vitality present in a mantra, even if it has been
obtained from a book, are said to have been purified by Bhairava
(Himself), and are spontaneously realised (sārṁsiddhika). (23cd-24ab)

Once the teacher has understood this clearly (samyak) and is

inebriated with supreme bliss, having worshipped (the Lord) in each abode
of that kind (that is, within each competent disciple), he should practice the

procedure. (24cd-25ab)

Having worshipped (the Lord) ‘in each abode of that kindʼ, that is, as

befits a competent disciple. This is the meaning.

The teacher should take care here (in this case to maintain) secrecy.
Thus, he says:

The Teacher Imparts Trika Mantras in Secret

u
Ez

ĪCTI

Tā¥TĪRTTTTTĀTTI TJ Ṭ |

yathānyaśiṣyānuṣṭhānaṁ nānyaśiṣyeṇa budhyate || 25 ||
tathā kuryād gurur guptihānir doṣavat yataḥ |
devīnāṁ tritayaṁ śuddhaṁ yad vā yāmalayogataḥ || 26 ||
devīm ekām atho śuddhāṁ vaded vā yāmalātmikām |
tatra mantraṁ sphuṭaṁ vaktrãd guruṇopāṁśu coditam || 27 |
avadhāryāpravyṛttes tam abhyasyen manasā svayam ḷ
tataḥ suśikṣitāṁ sthānadehāntaḥśodhanatrayīm || 28 II
nyāsaṁ dhyānaṁ japaṁ mudrāṁ pūjāṁ kuryāt prayatnataḥ |
Just as one disciple does not know the religious practice (anusṣṭhāna)
of another, so too the teacher should act (in secrecy), for a breach of secrecy
is a (culpable) defect. (The mantras) he should tell (his disciple) may be that
of the triad of Goddesses, who may be pure (i.e. solitary), or in union with
(their consorts). He may tell him (the Mantra of just) one goddess, pure (i.e.
alone), or else in union (with her Bhairava). (25cd-27ab)

See above, 4/42cd ff. and 13/222cd ff. concerning these and other types of teachers.
See above, 26/19.
See below, 30/9cd ff.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
Once (heard) attentively the Mantra from the teacher’s lips,

whether clearly uttered or whispered, he should practice it mentally by
himself until it is applied (pravṛtti) (to his observance). (27cd-28ab)

”After that, he should perform the triple purification of the (outer)

place, body and the inner (subtle body, as) taught previously in detail, and
with effort, the deposition, visualization, repetition of Mantra, ritual
gesture (mudrā) and worship. (28cd-29ab)
(A breach of secrecy is) ‘a (culpable) defectʼ. As is said elsewhere with
the same intended sense: “Accomplishment comes by (maintaining) secrecy.”
(The deity is) ‘pureʼ, (in the sense of) alone (without a partner). ‘Clearly’
means ‘aloudʼ. As is said (in the Svacchandatantra):

“(The Mantra) that is heard only by oneself is known as ‘whispered’

(upāṁśu). One that others hear, O goddess, is said to be ‘aloud’.”

‘Until it is applied’ means up to the time when (one’s) religious
practice (anuṣṭhāna) begins. (This should be done as) ‘taught previously in

detailʼ, that is, with the method (yukti) taught in Chapter Fifteen (above).
The Daily Procedure (nityavidhi)
He now teaches the (daily) obligatory procedure.

Worship at the Junctures of the Day (sandhyopāsana)

̄ JId Tqzā aNēīṝ JJcaiĀḹ aq 1| 2 1|

TT¥dTRRTTHī TIIGTTTTÑ I 3° 1|

TITGYĪĪ JTIĪ TRTĪTARTT: J 32 1|A
šāāsraimrg m-rāī āā am-- |

EṭEEḻkh-iākcḻṭ|ēctc: IETṈI

aqezīd | 23 1

Read avadhāryāpravṛttes for avadhāryā pravṛttes.

The following passage up to 37ab is concerned with the performance of the regular rites at the
junctures of the day (sandhya). Concerning such rites, see also SŚP 1/2-67 and SVT 2/1cd-20.
SVT 2/146cd-147ab.
See 15/232cd ff.

TANTRĀLOKA

tatra prabhãte saṁbudhya sveṣṭāṁ prāg devatāṁ smaret | 29 ||
krṛtāvaśyakakartavyaḥ śuddho bhūtvā tato gṛham |
āśrityottaradigvaktraḥ sthānadehāntaratraye || 30 l|
Śuddhiṁ vidhāya mantrāṇāṁ yathāsthānaṁ niveśanam |
mudrāpradarśanaṁ dhyānaṁ bhedābhedasvarūpataḥ || 31 ||
dehāsudhīvyomabhūṣu manasā tatra cārcanam |

japaṁ cãātra yathāśakti devāyaitan nivedanam || 32 ||
tanmayībhāvasiddhiyarthaṁ pratisandhyaṁ samācaret |

anye tu prāgudakpaścāddakṣadikṣu catuṣṭayīm || 33 ||
sandhyānām āhur etac ca tāntrikīyaṁ na no matam |

Having woken up at the crack of dawn, (the officiant) should first of

all recollect his chosen deity, and then, having attended to his necessary

(physical needs and so) purified (himself, he should return) home. Then,

facing north, after having purified the three, namely, the place, the body
and the inner (subtle body), he should place the Mantras (each in their
own) proper location, exhibit the ritual gesture (mudrā), perform the
meditation (dhyāna) within the body, vital breath, intellect, the sky and the
earth, in accord with (their) differentiated and undifferentiated nature

(bhedābhedasvarūpa), and worship there mentally. (He should) also repeat
(the Mantra) (japa) here (on this occasion), and offer (all) that, to the best

of his ability (yathāśakti), to the deity. This should be done at each

junction (of the day) (sandhya), in order to attain a state of oneness (with

the Lord). (29cd-33ab)

Others say that (the officiant) should face east, north, west and
south, (respectively,) in the four junctions. This is the view Tāntrikas

(hold); it is not ours. (29cd-34ab)

Again, he says (the following, in accord) with our own view.

eETGEEJTĀTSEEIṀIYĀEEz:1T'IENHI
Tīaāīd; gaTaīā ī=zā fkrgaṝkq|
gaarTāqezaīāhj-āṁhzaaī
fšṛā: 1| 3, 1
ṇr̥̄TTaāTTJTRTTTIṀrTTRTTT.|

yāsau kālādhikāre prāk sandhyā proktā catuṣṭayī || 34 ||
tām evāntaḥ samādhāya sāndhyaṁ vidhim upācaret |
sandhyācatuṣṭayīkṛtyam ekasyām athavā śiśuḥ l| 35 ||
kuryāt svādhyāyavijñānagurukṛtyāditatparaḥ |

Concerning the ritual ablution by which the officiant purifies himself, see above, 15/38cd-79.
See below, 26/68ab.

Ṛead -dakṣadikṣu for —daśadikṣu.
Abhinava is clearly stating here that this procedure is Kaula. Although the basic daily procedure
is Tantric, its Kaula roots are and muṣt be maintained.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
(The officiant) should attend to the prescribed (rite) for the

junctions (of the day), inwardly contemplating the fourfold junction taught
previously in the chapter concerning (the cycle of) time (projected into the

cycle of the breath). Or else, the disciple who is dedicated to study,
knowledge, the teacher and (his) duties etc. may, (if he so wishes to save
time, condense) the operations to be executed in (all) four junctions into
(just) one (of them). (34cd-36ab)
The sense is that (he condenses all of them) ‘into (just) one (of them)’

(so that he may have more time), otherwise his study etc. may suffer loss
(vipralopa).
Surely (one may ask), how can the (ritual) action which should be
observed in the four junctions (of the day when it) is done in just one junction
be completed (in all respects)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ṬATTAṬTÑĪTRTT-TT-TAĪYTaĪfTT: I 3ē 1
TTTA-RTTIT ĀT RIT-HAĪ ṜTĪ |

sandhyādhyānoditānantatanmayībhāvayuktitaḥ || 36 ||
tatsaṁsṣkāravaśāt sarvaṁ kālaṁ syāt tanmayo hy asau |
(The officiant) is one with (Śiva) at all times, by virtue of the

purification (sarṁskāra) brought about by the practice (yukti) of the state of
identification (with SŚiva) which, without end, has arisen from the
meditation (dhyāna) (performed at) the junctures (of the day)
(sandhyādhyāna). (36cd-37ab)

The Regular Worship on the Sacrificial Surface
(nityārcā sthaṇḍile)

Invocation (āvāhana)

ÇTI ṬHTaTRĒĒ: I 3 1
See above, 6/63 ff.

Here, it seems, Abhinava is alluding to the process of purification of thought (vikalpasaṁskāra)

that takes place not only by performing the daily rites at the junctions of the day, but especially by
the purifying meditation mentioned in the previous verses, as well as that of the junctions

projected into the cycle of the breath, as taught in Chapter Six. These are meditative practices

yukti. We have observed in many contexts that Abhinava considers ritual action to be liberating

because the power of the reflective awareness with which they should be performed purifies
dichotomizing thought processes. Here this is achieved by linking the outer observance with close
atṭention to the phases in cycles of the breath that correspond to the outer junctions of the day. See

above, Chapter Six. The practice there serves to annul the cycle of tmme by finding ‘gaps’ in the

cycle of the breath that measures it. If the eternal ‘endless’ state of identification is achieved in

one of these gaps, it not only annuls time, it covers all of it. Thus, attending to one juncture

encompasses all of them.

TANTRĀLOKA

TqÇGS: ū’aāt ũd rcatṣraTaā I 3¢ 1

TEEIḤETEIRAŪKEUATAZEṬ

38 1

ṬGRFJTTITIS: TRRGTĪĪṬCTTḤ I 0 1|

STSScCĀĒIPVEṭYJTEEIZAḤ

kṭētexez/tiēcṭzrcEHĀE |ĒṟsH

tato yatheṣṭakāle ʻsau pūjāṁ puṣpāsavādibhiḥ || 37 II
sthaṇḍilādau śiśuḥ kuryād vibhavādyanurūpataḥ |
suśuddhaḥ san vidhiṁ sarvaṁ kr̥tvāntarajapāntakam || 38 ||

arghapātraṁ purā yadvad vidhāya sveṣṭamantrataḥ |

tena sthaṇḍilapuṣpādi sarvaṁ saṁprokṣayed budhaḥ || 39 ||
tatas tatraiva saṅkalpya dvārāsanagurukramam |
pūjayec chivatāviṣṭaḥ svadehārcāpurahsaram || 40 ||
tatas tat sthaṇḍilaṁ vīdhravyomasphaṭikanirmalam |
bodhātmakaṁ samālokya tatra svaṁ devatāgaṇam || 41 II
pratibimbatayā paśyed bimbatvena ca bodhataḥ |
etad āvāhanaṁ mukhyaṁ vyajanān marutām iva || 42 |
Then, whenever he wishes, the disciple should worship on the
sacrificial surface (sthaṇḍila) etc. with flowers, wine and the like,
The daily rites are described here from 26/37cd to 27/59 – these are Kaula – and also above,
15/115 ff. and 15/386cd ff., that is drawn from the MV and SvT 2/21-279. I take the entire

passage from 26/37cd to 44ab to be taken from the Catuṣkapañcāsikā. Abhinava seems to be
quoting it more literally in 43-44ab. There are parts incorporated into the previous verse.
Abhinava continues by quoting the Nirmaryāda to remind the officiant that all this is in fact

taking place within the ideal world. Deity is omnipresent. The invocation of the deity that implies
that it moves from its abode to the place of worship cannot really take place. But this does not

mean that the rite is futile and there is no need to do it. Rather it means that all that takes place is a

purely mental projection sustained by the latent traces of past ritual action. Nor is stating this
superfluous. The statement of ultimate truths serves to jolt the officiant’s state of consciousness

into one of immediacy, in which he realises that the sacrificial surface is the mirror of

consciousness. It is from that and within that, that deity with its attendants and worlds arises and is

worshipped. After citing the Nirmaryāda to that effect (44cd-51ab), Abhinava continues the
exposition of the ritual procedure. Once the deity has been invoked (37cd-44ab), it must then be
worshipped (Ś1cd-53ab). Probably Abhinava continues to draw from the same source from which
he took the rite of invocation. If that is the Catuṣkapañcāśika, it covers 26/37cd to 44ab
(invocation), and then 51cd-53ab (libation and worship).
The sacrificial surface – sthaṇḍila – is a low platform of earth on which the deity is invisibly

installed and worshipped. The deity may also be worshipped in an abstract representation, termed
an ‘unmanifeṣt Liṅga’ (avyaktaliṅga), or an anthropomorphic representation (a ‘manifeṣt Liṅga’
vyaktaliṅga), which may be an idol (pratimā) cast in metal, a painting on a cloth (paa), or the

outline of the deities or their seed-syllable mantras carved on a skull (tāra) or a substitute for it
(below, 27/9, 19cd-28b).

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

according to (his) financial and other means. Being well-purified, and
having completed the entire procedure up to the inner (mental) repetition
of Mantra (japa), the wise (officiant) prepares the sacrificial vessel
(arghapātra) in the same way as before, with (the appropriate) Mantras of
his own choice (sveṣṭa). Having done so, he should sprinkle everything (with
the liquid containedin it, that is), the sacrificial surface, the flowers, and

the rest. Then, penetrated by Śiva’s state (śivatāviṣṭa), having imagined that
the doors, seat (of the deity), and lineage of teachers (gurukrama) are
present there, he should worship them, after having worshipped his own
body.
Then, having gazed upon (and contemplated) the sacrificial surface

(sthaṇḍila) (to be like a pure translucent) crystal, immaculate as a clear sky,
and (perceiving) its essential nature to be consciousness, he should view his

own host of deities present there as a reflection (pratibimba) (within it and
himself,) as the original image (bimba) (emanated) from consciousness, like

winds from a fan. This is the main (basic form of) invocation (āvāhana) (of
the deity, on which all others depend). (37cd-42)

‘Then’, after having performed the rites at the junctions (of the day).

(The words) ‘on the sacrificial surface etc.’ (indicate that the description of)

the regular daily worship (nityārcā) has begun. (Having completed the entire

procedure up to) ‘the inner (mental)’ (repetition of Mantra (japa)). (These

words) declare that without having performed the (inner) mental sacrifice, there
would be no competence (to perform) the outer sacrifice etc. (The manner in
which the sacrificial vessel (arghapātra) is consecrated with the appropriate

Śanderson (1990: 169-170) explains that after the neophant’s initiation, ‘daily recrcating the
maṇḍala in mental worship, he summons from within his consciousness the deities it enthrones,
projecting them onto a smooth mirror-like surface to contemplate them there as the reflection of
his internal, Āgamic identity. He aspires to know himself only as the nexus of deities, constituting
for himself an invisible identity concealed within his worldly perception and activity, a heterodox,
visionary Self of Power behind the public appearance of Purity sustained by conformity to
orthodox society.”

Sanderson (1990: p, 73 n 7) points out that Abhinavagupta could be taken to mean that
the worshipper is to look upon his own host of deities’ (svaṁ devatāgaṇam) as both the reflection
and as the original image. But that would amount to omittig the presence of the worshipper.
Better then to take svam to be a substantive – ‘himself’ – than an adjective ‘his own’. In his
Tantrasāra (p. 179), Abhinava himself explains that this is the correct interpretation, where he
writes: tatra hṛdye sthaṇḍile vimalamakuravad dhyāte ṣvam eva rāpaṁ yājyadevatācakrābhinnaṁ
mirtibimbitam iva drṣṭvā’ – having meditated on that pleasing sacrficial surface as a perfectly
clean mirror, and having seen his own form alone on (the surface of) that (mirror) as identical
with the configuration of deities to be worshipped, as though the (visualized) icons (of those

deities were) a reflection (of himself).’
Note also that Abhinava is saying that the fundamental invocation of deity takes place
within the domain of the Śāmbhava state of pure consciousness, free of thought constructs,
through the immediacy of its own self-reflective awareness. Such is the experience of
SŚāmbhavopāya, namely, that ‘everything is reflected within me, sustaned by me, and withdrawn
in the mirror of my own Śiva consciousness.'

For this to happen, the officiant must be, as

Abhinava says, ‘penetrated by Śiva’s state’, thatis, experience śāmbhavasamāveśa, which takes
pace in Śāmbhavopāya. Here Abhinava adds another appropriate example to illustrate the etheric
nature of deity, its manifestatioon, and the universe in which it arises, along with the worshipper,
like wind generated from a fan.

TANTRĀLOKA

Mantras is in the same way) ‘as before’ (in the procedure described in) Chapter
Fifteen etc. “Clear’ (vīdhra) (means) stainless (vimala). ʻThere’, within the
sacrificial surface, the nature of which is consciousness.

‘His own’

The various mantras.

(deity) is the one he wishes to worship (most intensely)

(ārirādhayiṣita). It is consciousness itself that is reflected externally, that has

poured forth in this way and that, and so it is said to be (present there in the
sacrificial surface) ‘as a reflection (pratibimba)’, and ‘as its original image
(bimba) (which is the consciousness from which it is emanated). “This’ (is the

main (form of) invocation), that is, the vision (of the deity) as the state of a
reflection (of consciousness within consciousness by consciousness).
Analysing the example, he explains:

TṬGRŪZIÑTĒĪAĪ ūCTTTNJSTT |

sarvago ‘pi marud yadvad vyajanenopavījitaḥ |
arthakṛt sarvagaṁ mantracakraṁ rũḍheṣ tathā bhavet || 43 ||
catuṣkapañcāśikāyāṁ tad etat tattvam ucyate |
Just like air which, although present everywhere, produces its
(own) effects (arthakṛt), (only when) fanned” by a fan, so too the

omnipresent assembly (cakra) of mantras (produces its effects) by

mounting in this way (onto the sacrificial surface). This, its true nature
(tattva), is explained in the Catuṣkapañcāśikā. (43-44ab)

‘By mounting’, that is, by developing in this way within the sacrificial
surface and the rest (of the places within which the deity is invoked). ‘So too’
(the assemblage of Mantras) produces its (own) effects. The Catuṣkapañcāśikā
(i.e. (Fifty (Verses) concerning the Group of Four) is a particular book (which is
so called because) it teaches (the nature of) the four things to be known, that is,

emanation and the rest, and is of this length. This is the meaning.

This is not only taught here. It is also (taught) elsewhere. Thus he says:

a katkzTĪRaT ç; 1

śrīnirmaryādaśāstre ca tad etad vibhunoditam || 44 ||

! See above, 15/146 f.

Read -vūjitaḥ for -jvitaḥ.

Read, as the metre demands, pañcāsikāyāṁ for —pañcāśikayā. The name of this unknown work
literally means The Fifty (Verses) concerning the Group of Four’. See above note, 26,38.
Jayaratha is implying that the Catuṣkapañcāśikā is a Krama work, and so focuses on the
fourfold process of creation, persistence, withdrawal, and the Fourth state. But there is no

evidence that he is right. Abhinava is not presenting Krama ritual here. Moreover, there is no

evidence that Jayaratha had the text. He does not quote it. So it is quite possible that Jayaratha

says this without cver having seen it, only on the basis of the name of the text,taking the ‘group
of four’ to be four phases of the Krama.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

Moreover, the pervasive Lord has said this in the venerable
Nirmaryādaśāstra also. (44cd)

Paraphrasing it (arthadvāreṇa), he says that:

STaTṚIT eTT TdNi ṬRISJTĪTRJ: I 4, 1

ktG EEṭECTEE IEIFE EEGEṈIṬPAI

devaḥ sarvagato deva nirmaryādaḥ kathaṁ Śśivaḥ |

āvāhyate kṣamyate vety evaṁ pṛṣṭo ‘bravīd vibhuḥ || 45 ||
vāsanāvāhyate devi vāsanā ca visṛjyate |
paramārthena devasya nāvāhanavisarjane || 46 ||
“.Oh God! How can Śiva, Who is God, present in all things, and
unrestricted (nirmaryāda) (by rules and regulations), be invoked or
dismissed?”” Questioned thus, the pervasive Lord said: “Oh Goddess! that
which is invoked (to be worshiped) is a latent trace (vāsanā) (of a notion

previously formed of deity), and it is (that same) trace that is dismissed. In
reality (paramārthena), God is neither invoked nor dismissed.” (45-46)
‘Unlimited (nirmaryāda)) means unrestricted, that is, free (and

independent) (svatantra).
(The Tantra) explains the nature of a latent trace here (in this context in

the Tantra itself).

ffkaa: 1

Jayaratha muṣṭ have had a copy of the Nirmaryādaśāstra to know that Abhinava is paraphrasing
the citation.

Read viṣṛjyate for kṣamyate vety.

Once Abhinava has described the procedure by which the deities are invoked onto the sacrificial
surface (26/45-51ab), he quotes the Nirmaryāda to remind the officiant that ritual is always, on

the ultimate level, accomplished by the dynamic being of consciousness. This inner activity in the
perfect stillness of the oneness of consciousness is ritual action in the fullest most complete sense.

In the paradoxical domain of oneness, nothing changes, and yet all things are accomplished
perfectly well.

The word ‘nirmaryāda’ literally means ‘without boundaries’. The sense is ‘without limitations
or restrictions.’ In a moral sense, which is not the one meant here, it denotes a person who does

not observe the common moral restrictions that right conduct requires.
yāṣanātmakatvam eva atra darśayati. I suppose the ‘atra’ means ‘here’, in the sense of ‘here in

this same Tantra’. The subject of ‘explains’ could be Abhinava. If it is, a better translation would
be ‘he explains the nature of a latent trace here (in this context).” However, it seems more likely

that Abhinava is continuing to draw from the Nirmaryāda. Rites are being prescribed here. These
are not explanations. Abhinava may combine ritual procedures from various sources, but he does
not, as he should not, construct them without basing himself on the authority of scripture.

TANTRĀLOKA

TTTHTHJṬGTĪ g-TĪTSĒTI

|ITCIEGAEḶIḤḤT|iHEATNECIḤ VĀI

TJFHTI Ṝaā āftt yTTITĪTPTT
I 8 1|
JTTTJJfTaRTTTTTTTTŪaT:|

a fḵ dī akara:

ḷM uço 1

āvāhito mayā devaḥ sthaṇḍile ca pratiṣṭhitaḥ |
pūjitaḥ stuta ity evaṁ dṛṣṭvā devaṁ viṣarjayet || 47 I|
prāṇinām aprabuddhānāṁ santoṣajananāya vai |
āvāhanādikaṁ teṣāṁ pravṛttiḥ katham anyathā | 48 II
kālena tu vijānanti pravṛttāḥ patiśāsane |
anukrameṇa devasya prāptiṁ bhuvanapūrvikām |l 49 ||
jñānadīpadyutidhvastasamastājñānasañcayāḥ |
kuto vānīyate devaḥ kuṭtra vā nīyate ʻpi saḥ || 5O II
sthūlasūkṣmādibhedena sa hi sarvatra saṁsthitaḥ |
“I have invoked the deity (deva) into the sacrificial surface,
installed, worshipped and praised (him there)” – having perceived (him
joyfully) in this way, the deity should (then) be dismissed. The invocation

and the other (ritual actions are performed) in order to satisfy
(santoṣajanana) unawakened living beings. Otherwise, how else could they

(be induced to) progress (along the path to liberation)? Engaged (in

following) Śaiva doctrine (patiśāsana), with time they come to know the
attainment of the deity which, preceded (and based on the attainment of
the) worlds (arranged in an ascending hierarchy), takes place
(progressively) in due order. Once (all) the heaps of (their) ignorance have
been destroyed by the radiant light of the lamp of knowledge, from whence
is the deity brought (here) and where is he led (away to)? (Indeed,) divided
into gross and subtle etc., (Deity) is present everywhere. (47-51ab)
‘Preceded (and based on the attainment and conjunction with the)
worldsʼ, which is the method (prakriyā) of attaining (progressively) the worlds
of each reality level (tattva) by the power of (the process of) conjoining (the
individual soul to them), in accord with the teaching:

‘(Having placed the (disciple who is) devoted to worldly Dharma
(lokadharmin)) into the (status of) the desired Lord of a world order, (he should
fulfil that Dharma (dharmāpādana). Or else, the one who desires liberation

(should be placed) within Śiva).

MT Kriyāpāda, 8/149b. Th fit lic is quoted above in TĀv ad 6/177 (176cd-177ab), and ad
8/194-195ab (193cd-194). The full verse is quoted ad 13/245cd-246ab and again ad 15/30.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

Libation (tarpana) – Worship with Whatever
Expands Consciousness
In order to teach what should be done after the invocation of the deity,

(the Tantra) says:

TaTITR̄
T-aīT] RIRāTNaē̄: 1] & 1

TṬG: I] 2 1

āvāhite mantragaṇe puṣpāsavanivedanaiḥ || 51 ||
dhūpaiś ca tarpaṇaṁ kāryaṁ śraddhābhaktibalocitaiḥ |
dīptānāṁ śaktinādādimantrāṇām āsavaiḥ palaiḥ | 52 ||
raktaiḥ prāk tarpaṇaṁ paścāt puṣpadhūpādiviṣṭaraiḥ |
Once the host of Mantras has been invoked, one must offer (them)
libation (tarpaṇa), along with offerings of flowers, wine, and incense (of
various kinds), as befits the strength of (the officiant’s) faith and devotion.
Libation° should first be offered to the energized Mantras of Śakti and
(Her) Lord etc. with wine, meat and blood, and then with flowers, incense
and the rest of the full extent (of the offerings). (5lcd-53ab)

Surely (one may ask), what is the authority that (prescribes that) libation

should be offered after the invocation (of the deity)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

ATIT- ġ H-īā T āTūúvḷ aJ | u3 1

aTHYTT
T ṢqT f=hō YHJĪT |

āgatasya tu mantrasya na kuryāt tarpaṇaṁ yadi l| 53 I|
haraty ardhaśarīraṁ sa ity uktaṁ kila śambhunā |

āvāhanānantarakartavyyam upadeṣtum āha. Here, as everywhere else, the subject of ‘saidʼ can
be ‘Abhinava said’ or the ‘Tantr:

d’. The ambiguity of the Sanskrit is convenient for Jayaratha,

who does not need to assert that it is either Abhinava or the deity of the Tantra who is speaking.

See note 49, above.
Jayaratha quotes 26/51cd-53ab ad 29/52-54, and says there that this is the way offerings are
made in Kula ritual (kulakrama). After citing the Nirmaryāda, Abhinava reṭurns to the account of

this rite, possibly continuing the citation from the Catuṣpañcāsśikā.

This verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 29/52-54. There we find the variant -baloditam for –
balocitaiḥ. If we adopt that variant, the meaning would be, ‘one must offer them the libation
(tarpaṇa) that has arisen from the strength of (the officiant’s) faith and devotion, along with
offerings of flowers, wine, and incense (of various kinds).”

Read tarpaṇaṁ or tarpaṇa.

In accord with the reading of the citation of this verse in TĀv ad 29/52-54, emend śaktinādādimantrāṇām to śaktināthādimantrāṇām.

TANTRĀLOKA

Śambhu has said that, if libation were not to be offered to a mantra
that has come (before the worshipper in the place of worship), it steals

away half of (his) body. (S3cd-54ab)

Surely (one may ask), (you have just) said here that the purpose of the
sacrificial substances etc. is (to serve as offerings for) the libation. (If s0,) then
which one of them should be used to worship etc. (the deity)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

gēṬcarTzā #īf fd-hīTtr̄ rasssfir | u

āīta aãrcgsī a sf aũát:1

yad yad evāsya manasi vikāsitvaṁ prayacchati l| 54 ||
tenaiva kuryāt pūjāṁ sa iti śambhor viniścayaḥ |
It is Śambhu’s seṭtled opinion (viniścaya) that one should worship
with whatever brings about (an) expansion (of consciousness) within his
mind. (S4cd-55ab)
Surely (one may ask), if this is so, how is it that it is said everywhere (in
the scriptures) that there are rules governing what sacrificial substances (should
be offered in) propitiatory rites (for averting evil or calamities) (śānti), and those
performed for welfare and prosperity (puṣṭi) and the like? With this doubt in
mind, he says:
Rites are Fixed for Those Who Seek Worldly Benefits,

Not for Those Who Aspire to Liberation

aṃrēīī āyzgdī fasTr̄̃afrafzrāT:1 uy u

sādhakānāṁ bubhukṣūṇāṁ vidhir niyatiyantritaḥ |l 55 ||
mumukṣūṇāṁ tattvavidāṁ sa eva tu nirargalaḥ |

In the case of adepts (sādhaka) and those who desire worldly
benefits, the (specific ritual) procedure (they should follow) (vidhi) is

(rigorously) fixed by the constraint (niyati) (which determines that a

' Quoted also above by Abhinava in 15/566 (562). There, the last quarter reads ity ūce bhagavān
yataḥ instead of ity uktaṁ kila śambhunā. The same is quoted again below in TĀv ad 29/22cd.
The last quarter is omitted there. In the first instance, it is clear that the source is the Gamatantra.

Jayaratha introduces this verse saying that Abhinava is going to guote an authority. It may be that

Abhinava is referring to his teacher Śambhunātha here as ‘Śambhu’, but this possibility is
precluded by the variant ‘hhagavān’ in 15/566 (562) above. However, there is no reason to doubt

that Śambhunātha is meant in the next verse. It does not seem likcly that one would say of Śiva

that a teaching is his ‘settled opinion’.
Quoted below in TĀv ad 29/174-175.
The following passage from S5cd-70 is Abhinava’s exegesis.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

particular action gives rise to a specific result).® (However) in the case of
those who know reality, and those who aspire for liberation, it is free of

(any) restriction. (55cd-56ab)

Surely (one may ask), what is the means (required) for a particular
(ritual) procedure? With this doubt in mind, he says:

qīq | u5 1.
afx rī frdrṁa fatēīr: ōāītaT u uç. 1]
kārye viśeṣam ādhitsur viśiṣṭaṁ kāraṇaṁ spṛṣśet I| 56 |I
raktakarpāsatūlecchus tulyatadbījapuñjavat |
santi bhoge viśeṣāśca vicitrāḥ kāraṇeritāḥ || 57 |
One who wants a particular result should lay hold of (spṛśet) the
particular (corresponding) cause, just as one who desires (to cultivate)
saffron (rakta) and varieties of cotton (karpāsa and tūla) (requires their
corresponding) seeds, which are as they are. (Thus,) the (many) particular
worldly experiences (bhoga) are determined by (as many) varied causes.
(56cd-57)
(The seeds are) ‘as they are’, that is, (the seed of a saffron plant) is
itself saffron.

(However,) on the contrary, there is no (such) specification at all in the

case of liberation. Accordingly, he says:

Ritual Action Aimed at Oneness Brought About

by Factors that Instil Bliss

“ Ṭhus, for them the rite vares according to the results to which they aspire.
l This verse is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/122¢d-123ab and ad 4/199. In other words, Abhinava is

telling us that what he has just stated as his teacher’s teaching applies only to those who are

liberated or aspire to liberation. Those who aspire to both would be subject to the rules of

common procedure. This de facto excludes the common Śaiva (i.e. the ‘tantrikas’), who would be
led in the course of initiation step by step along the ladder of the worlds where, repeatedly reborn,

he would experience and hence exhaust the consequence of his Karma (bhoga). This way differs

from the ascending path the soul travels in Kaula initiaton as taught, for example, below in
Chapter Twenty-nine. It is marked by the statons of the ascent of a flow of expanding energy,
variously experienced. While that purifies the soul and hence leads to its release, it does not
traverse levels of ‘worldly enjoyment’ (bhoga) of the worlds, although it does give rise to many
and varied accomplishments (siddhi) as it ascends towards liberation. In the attendant rites, Kaula

substances are offered and consumed, for it is these that ‘bring about an expansion of

consciousnessʼ.

TANTRĀLOKA

r̥JasīṀ fcrdtaṟ -?aafḷ
sḹ u u.. 1
deśakālānuṣandhānaguṇadravyakriyādibhiḥ |
svalpā kriyā bhūyasī vā hṛdayāhlādadāyibhiḥ |l 58 II
bāhyaiḥ saṅkalpajair vāpi kārakaiḥ parikalpitā |
mumukṣor na viśeṣāya naiḥśreyasavidhiṁ prati l/ 59 |l
The rite (kriyā), be it brief or extensive, is fashioned (parikalpitā) by
the (attendant) instrumental factors (kāraka) that (should) bring joy to the

heart. These may be external or imagined (saṅkalpaja), (and comprise), for
example, the mental conjunction (anusandhāna) of locations (in the cosmic
order) and time, qualities, the (sacrificial) substances, and (ritual) actions.
(None of them serve) to specify the field (viṣaya) (in which, whatever it may
be,) one who aspires to liberation (practices and accomplishes) the most

excellent procedure (naiḥśreyasa-vidhi). (58-59)

Surely (one may ask), how is it that here (in this case), it makes no

difference whether the rite is brief or extensive? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

ḷŪJE RIUIIIEJEIGSIE ErkI

na hi brahmaṇi śaṁsanti bāhulyālpatvadurdaśāḥ |
(The relative concepts) of ‘much’ and ‘little’, that are the
misfortunes (of dualistic thought,) are not admitted in the Brahman.
(60ab)

Surely (one may ask), if a rite is constructed by various causes, and

these here (in this case) make no difference (to it), then why is it said that it is

fundamental that they (should) bring joy to the heart? With this doubt in mind,

he says:

fkīā: HaTā-zGāRaīq, āTāTTĀTGT: II| ||

citaḥ ṣvātantryasāratvāt tasyānandaghanatvataḥ || 60 |I
Gnolī’s Italian translation: ‘In the case of the one who desires liberation, the ritual actions —

whether they are numerous or few, depending on the various elements employed in them, such as

substances, qualities, connections with time and place, brought about by external or imaginary

means, but always causing joy in the heart – these distinctioons make no difference at all with

respect to the final aim, which is the attainment of the highest realization.’
(The wise) do not teach that the misfortunes (which are relative distinctions, such as) ‘much’
and ‘litṭḷē’, exist in the Brahman. Cf. the dictum ‘although the Absolute (Brahman) is (equally in

each) place, (lt is) omniform, unsurpassed and inconceivable’. Quoted above TĀv ad 1/165; see
note there. It is also in the PTv; see Gnoli 1985, p. 80 note 232.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

kriyā syāt tanmayībhūtyai hṛdayāhlādadāyibhiḥ |
The essence of consciousness is freedom, and that is its dense
(uninterrupted) bliss. Thus, (it is for this reason that ritual) action (kriyā)
aimed at (attaining) a state of oneness (with consciousness) (must be

performed with the aid of factors that) bring joy to the heart. (60cd-61ab)
‘Its’ (dense
consciousness)

(uninterrupted)

bliss)

is

that of the freedom

(of

Thus, it is their nature, which is the dense (uninterrupted) bliss of

consciousness, that (makes them) fit (to use to) worship. Thus he says:

flrarcāaēīaar;

āa: |
śivābhedabharād bhāvavargaḥ ścyotati yaṁ rasam || 61 II
tam eva parame dhāmni pūjanāyārpayed budhaḥ |
In order to worship (in the highest sense), the wise (awakened) man
should offer (as an act of worship) into the Supreme Abode the juice (of
aesthetic delight) (rasa) that exudes from (the multitude of) phenomena,
(pressed down) because of the weight of (their) oneness with Śiva. (61cd-

62ab)

He (now) states that he explained this himself elsewhere at length.
Hymn to Inner Worship

TJTI āTGH ṀĪTTAT ĪĪTḤ FrTIĒṀ . 62 1

stotreṣu bahudhā caitan mayā proktaṁ nijāhnike || 62 ||
I have said this many times in (my) hymns, in the course of my own
daily worship (āhnika). (62cd)
Gathering that together, he presents it.

€|EVEziīḻEEṇCkEṭFGARETcitĪ

aI ŪTIṬTGā
aī ṭāTdaādṁ TGĀĪT | G.3 1|

EageIEIEEEĀEEIEDTEE:EITIERUIRIITTSIS
TTṀṀōTHrdā’TATTTJĪ: TTTHIRGTITRTĪ : |
JT-TTaTT¥FGHRGTTTHTTTGHHT]

EḶEe|at

TANTRĀLOKA

hē|ēzIE|ECEAITECĒHUĒEḺĪRĀEĒEAIETTṢI

adhiśayya pāramārthika-

bhāvaprasaraprakāśam ullasati |
yā paramāmrtadṛk tvāṁ

tayārcayante rahasyavidaḥ || 63 ||

krṛtvādhāradharāṁ camatkṛtirasaprokṣākṣaṇakṣālitā-

māttair mānasataḥsvabhāvakuṣumaiḥ

svāmodasandohibhiḥ |
ānandāmṛtanirbharasvahṛdayānarghārghapātrakramāt
tvāṁ devyā saha dehadevasadane
devārcaye ‘harniśam || 64 |
nānāsvādarasāmimāṁ trijagatīṁ
hṛccakrayantrārpitām
ūrdhvādhyastavivekagauravabharān
niṣpīḍya niḥṣyanditam ḷ
yat saṁvitparamāmṛtaṁ mṛtijarājanmāpahaṁ jṛmbhate
tena tvāṁ haviṣā pareṇa parame

saṁtarpaye ʻharniśam || 65 ||

Resting in the Light which emanates from ultimate reality, those
who know the secret (mystery) worship You with the vision of the Supreme
Nectar that pours forth from it (exuberantly). (63)
I worship You, O God, along with the Goddess, in the temple of
(my) body, day and night having washed the altar of (its) foundation (the
mūlādhāra) with the spray of the essence (rasa) of (my) aesthetic rapture. (I
worship You) with the flowers of (my) own nature, abundant with their

innate fragrance, drawn with the imagination from the liturgy of the
priceless chalice (arghapātra) of my Heart, brimming over with the nectar

of bliss.® (64)

I place this triple world (of subject, object and means of
knowledge), which is the juice (of aesthetic delight of) many flavours, on the

machine of the Wheel of the Heart. Pressing (down upon it) with the great
weight of discrimination between what is above and what is below, the
supreme nectar of consciousness that ends birth, old age and death

Sanderson (in Parāpūjā) translates as follows: ‘Those initiated into the hidden teaching worship

you with the experience of the ultimate
joy that flashes into view when they immerse themselves

in the radiance that is the true surge of creation.’
“ Verse 64 is repeated below as 29/176; it is also found in MVV 2/126 with no variants.
MVV 2/127-130ab is translated above note 4,781 ad 4/194. Verses 63 and 64 are quoted in TSā

p. 180-181.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

(forever), flows (gushing from it). With that ultimate oblation, (offered
into) the supreme (fire), I gratify You day and night. (65)
‘“The foundation’ here (in this case is the centre at the base of the

genitals, called) the Foundation of Birth (‘anmādhāra) (i.e. the mūlādhāra). By

(the words) ‘machine (yantra) etc., he refers here to both the common daily
activity (of machines that squeeze juice from fruit) and that of the (inner)
Wheels (within the body).

Manner of Worship with this Hymn and Conclusion

JTT TT̄āJTT
āTṬT TĪTYIT: | 9 |

iti slokatrayopāttamarthamantarvibhāvayan |

yena kenāpi bhāvena tarpayeddevatāgaṇam || 66 ||
mudrāṁ pradarśayetpaścānmanasā vāpi yogataḥ |
vacasā mantrayogena vapuṣā saṁniveśataḥ || 67 II

kṛtvā japaṁ tataḥ sarvaṁ devatāyai samarpayet |

Meditating inwardly on the meaning gathered from these three
verses, (the officiant) should offer libation to the host of deities with
whatever sentiment (bhāva) (he may feel). (66)
After that, he should display the ritual gesture (mnudrā) (with his
hands), or with the mind by means of Yoga, with speech by applying
Mantras (mantrayoga), and with the body by its posture (saṁmiveśa).® Then
having repeatedly recited (the root) Mantra (japa), he should offer
everything to the deity. (67-68ab)
The meaning has been explained in a previous (part of the)
commentary, and so is not explained here word for word. “The meaning
gathered from these three verses’ is the characteristic of repose within

supreme consciousness.

Çq .¢ 11
tac coktaṁ kartrtātattvanirūpaṇavidhau purā || 68 II

See above, 15/259ab. We are told below (32/9cd-10ab) that mudrās are each of four kinds,

according to whether they are of body, hands, speech, or the mind.

TANTRĀLOKA

This has been said before in the course of the procedure of

describing (and perceiving) the true (and essential) nature (tattva) of the
agency (of consciousness). (68cd)
(This has been said) ‘before’, in Chapter Nine and Thirteen etc.

caĩ Ṭ] āĨīgāT| Tī-iqfīd TīĪTJTIT: 1| 8 I
tato visarjanaṁ kāryaṁ bodhaikātmyaprayogataḥ |

kṛtvā vā vahnigāṁ mantratṛptiṁ proktavidhānataḥ || 69 ||
After this, (the deity) should be dismissed, (either) by (applying) the
procedure (prayoga) by means of which it is made one with consciousness,

or (it may optionally be done) after having satisfied the Mantras present in
the fire, in accord with the procedure taught (above). (69)

TaITSTTTTTTTTRTHSTTTAJ
fR I 90 1
dvārapīthaguruvrātasamarpitanivedanāt |
rte ʻnyat svayam aśnīyād agādhe ‘mbhasy atha kṣipet |I| 70 ||
Apart from the food offered to teachers, sacred seats (pītha) and
doors, one may eat the rest oneself, or else throw it into deep water. (70)
“The restʼ (of the offering) is the main one.
He (now) states the reason why (the remnant of the food offering) is
thrown into deep water.

prāṇino jalajāḥ pūrvadīkṣitāḥ śambhunā svayam ḷ
vidhinā bhāvinā śrīmanmīnanāthāvatāriṇā || 71 II

Aquatic creatures have (in fact already) been initiated previously
by Śiva Himself, by means of the procedure that will be (taught later,) that
has been brought down (into the world) by the venerable Mīnanātha. (71)

“ The deities are made one with consciousness by progressively dissolving their mantra body into

the Sky of the Heart by means of the gesture of withdrawal (saṁhāramudrā). The mantra deities
are satisfied by a full oblation (pārṇāhuti).

Abhinava is alluding here to a myth concerning the origin of the Kula scriptures. The story goes
that after teaching his consort, Śiva tossed the Kula scripture into the sca. It was eaten by a fish.

Here Abhiṅava is implying that he was thereby initiated. The fish was caught by the Siddha

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
(The procedure) ‘that will be (taught later)ʼ, that is, that will be

explained in Chapter Twenty-nine etc.
He (now) says that if it is eaten by (some) other (creatures), that would
(entail) a defect (in the ritual procedure).

rēkaī |

mārjāramūṣikādyair yad adīkṣaiś cāpi bhakṣitam |
tacchaṅkātaṅkadānena vyādhaye narakāya ca || 72 ||
(The remnant of the offering) eaten by cats, mice etc., and so to by

(others that) are not initiated, gives rise (on the contrary) to the torment of
doubt, which as a result, serves (only as a cause of) disease and (damnation

in) hell. (72)

That is said (in the scriptures):
‘The remainder of sacrificial food (ucchiṣṭa) (offered) to the teacher and

the deity is (like) food (anna) that, (partly) eaten, is left aside. It should be kept
safe, as one would something pledged on trust (nikṣepa), it should never be
given to anybody. The diligent (officiant) should throw it into a ravine, fire,
water, (or) a well. If it is eaten by those who are not initiated, the
accomplishment (attained through) Mantras (mantrasiddhi) is destroyed. (If it is

eaten) by those who have no devotion, there is the fear of thieves. If a worldly
man eats it, he suffers and becomes despondent (and weak). (If it is eaten) by
other birds (or) crocodiles, (one’s) sons die, and if by rams, (oneʼs) relatives. O

goddess, if (it is eaten) or (even) licked by monkeys, (he goes to) jail
(bandhana), by a donkey or camel, he becomes poor, by parrots (śuka), (his)

grief (śoka) increases. If it is licked by red apes (markaṭa) and horses, (his)

happiness and good fortune is destroyed. If it is licked by a cat, he is soon
(afflicted by) disease. If (it is licked) by myna birds (śārikā), (or) especially by
sparrows (kalaviṅka), (he will) quarrel. (If it is licked) by crows, he will go
abroad, and by a hawk (cillā), (he will) die. If a rat (undura) eats it, his lifespan

will diminish (hāni). If a dog eats it, disease arises, if by cows, hate, and there

will certainly be suffering from bears (if they eat it). If a boar eats it, the wife

will misbehave (with other men). If a mongoose touches it, fear from thieves
will arise. If it is utilized by wicked men and women, devoid of religion

(nāstika), adepts get all (forms of) suffering.”
Surely (one may ask), here (in this case,) the distinction between those
who have received initiation and those who have not is (just) conceptual

Minanātha (also called Matsyendrantha), who retreved it from the belly of the fish. See above,
note to 1/7 note 1,143; and for a detailed exposition of this myth, see also Dyczkowski 2009: vol 2
p. 318-324. Maybe Mīnanātha here is the author of the Ūrmikaulāmava.
Jayartha underṣṭands that these beings have reccivd Kaula initiation, which is described
below in Chapter Twenty-nne.
™ Śarṅikā is a kind of bird, commonly called Myna, itis ither the Gracula Religiosa or the Turdus
Salika.

TANTRĀLOKA

(vikalpa). 1t is not proper for men of knowledge who are free of thought
constructs (to perceive one,) and so, as there is no (real) difference between
them, how is it that he has said such a thing?

Jkã īq%] ṇ̄dTch]GTTJaĪ
I| 93 I
atas tattvavidā dhvastaśaṅkātaṅko ʻpi paṇḍitaḥ |
prakaṭaṁ nedrśaṁ kuryāl lokānugrahavāñchayā || 73 ||
Thus, even a wise man, who by virtue (of his) knowledge of reality
has destroyed the torment of doubt, should not openly do something like
this, if he desires to grace the (common folk of this) world. (73)
“Thus’, because (if) cats etc. eat (the remnants of the food offering,) it
is the cause of (many) troubles. (Even a wise man) ‘should not openly’ (do
this), so that nobody may see (him acting) in this way. This is the meaning. For
if that were to happen, the common man who, even though he makes conceptual
distinctions (savikalpa), would take up (that practice), and so the procedure
enjoined by the scriptures would be violated. Or else there would be doubts with
regard to a man of knowledge that he practices what is prohibited by the
scriptures.
Nor is that said without a basis (in scripture). Thus, he says:

J-TTTTETATR āTgē fā]T TGTAT |
JJTTJIT āAT-ITĪ JṬgJ īṬ TTIĒT TBḺIq |

I| 9x

Śśrīmanmatamahāśāstre tad uktaṁ vibhunā svayam ḷ
śaṅkasaṅkocaniṣkāsanaparāyaṇaḥ || 74 1|

bhavet tathā yathānyeṣāṁ śaṅkā no manasi sphuret |

mārjayitvā tataḥ snāte puṣpeṇātha prapūjayet || 75 II
puṣpādi sarvaṁ yatsthaṁ tadagādhāmbhasi nikṣipet |

The pervasive Lord Himself has said in the venerable and great

Mata scripture:” ‘One should oneself be intent on opening up the

”' The SYM is not amongst Tantras Abhinava lists as preaching freedom from doubt and
inhibition (see for example, 12/23¢cd-24ab). It is not a source Abhinava quotes for this teaching.
This reference is most likely to come from a scriptural source of the Mata rather than from the

SYM. Is this great Mata Tantra the Jayadrathayāmala?’ Tōrzṣók (1999: 229) explains that the

Mata prescribes that remnants of the offerings should be disposed of in such a way that it does not

give rise to doubt / suspicion in other people, possibly without others seeing it. The expression
describing the performer as ‘one who is intent on opening up the contraction (of consciousness)

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

contraction (of consciousness) brought about by doubt (within oneself) in
such a way that doubt does not arise in the mind of others (also).’ (74-75ab)

Then having cleaned (himself in this way), when he has bathed, he

should worship (the Lord) with a flower. (Then,) whatever is there (on the

sacrificial surface), that is, the flowers and the rest, should be thrown into
deep water. (75cd-76ab)

‘Then’ means after he has eaten the sacrificial food etc.
He now concludes the topic of (this) chapter (saying):

ṁ: fīzṣ̄aīāīṣz frcdkītTr aT=T I 9ē 1]
uktaḥ sthaṇḍilayāgo ‘yaṁ nityakarmaṇi śambhunā || 76 II

(Thus) Śambhu has taught this sacrifice offered to the sacrificial

surface (sthaṇḍilayāga), which is part of the regular (daily) rite. (76cd)

The one called Jayaratha, whose mind is beneficial (to all), by virtue of

the rite of worship and (an understanding of) its true nature he has obtained by
the grace of (his) venerable teacher, has commented on this the twenty-sixth
chapter.
This is the twenty-sixth chapter of the venerable Tantrālokaviveka,
called the Explanation (prakāśana) of the Rite of the Worship of the Sacrificial
Surface.

brought about by doubtʼ seems to be too Kaula to attribute it to the SYM. Compare, for example,

the Kaula initiation according to the Ānandesśvaratantra, in the course of which impure sacrificial
pap (caru) is given to the initiand, who is purified if he accepts it and eats it without doubt or

heṣitation (śaṅkā). See TĀ 29/198cd ff.

” Read snāte for snānaṁḥ.

Read yatsthaṁ for tatsthaṁ.

” Here Abhinavagupta is most probably refering here to his Trika teacher Śambhunātha.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

The Worship of the Liṅga (liṅgārcā)

srāīzzāī fṀr̥s aftra mī5̄ñ 1 g

athocyate liṅgapūjā sūcitā mālinīmate || 1 ||
We will now talk about the worship of the (outer) Liṅga, (a subject
that is) mentioned in the Mālinīmata (but not taught there). (1)

The worship of Śiva (originally Rudra) in a Liṅga is nowadays a well-known characteristic of
public Śaiviṣm. The earliest known Liṅgas belong to the early centuries of the current era. The
Bhairava and Kaula Tantras know the existence of Liṅgas but do generally not promote their
worship, at least in the common external form. The unpublished Piṅigalāmata is one of the earliest

Tantras in which Liṅgas, their types, construction and worship are taught at length. It belongs to a

category of Tantras called pratiṣṭhātantras that deal, as their name suggests, with the rites of

installaton of deities in icons, buildings etc. and Liṅgas. It is not specifically Siddhānta-oriented,

as it refers to a variety of deities belonging to several pantheons. Thus, for example, it teaches,
amongst many other things, the measurements and rites of installation of icons in cremation

grounds. The situation changes dramatically after the 12 century or so when, along with temple
architecture, Liṅgas become a major topic in the Siddhāntāgamas. They teach the chaacteristics

of various kinds of Liṅgas, measurements, locations, rites of installation, as well as varieties of

ritual procedures, both daily and occasional. The Śaiva Purāṇas also frequently refer to the
worship of Liṅgas, drawing at times from the Siddhāntāgamas, and even supply well-known
myths of origin, that draw from the Siddhāntāgamas, the scriptures of common, public Śaivism.
Pāśupatas, who focused their spiritual discipline on the worship of Liṅgas and pilgrimage to them,
starting from around the beginning of the current era or a little before, contributed considerably to

the spread of Śaivism by ‘diṣcovering’ and installing Liṅgas all over India. They were and still are
worshipped with Vedic mantras, worshiping the five faces of Śiva projected onto the Liṅga,
namely, - Śadyojāta, Vāmadeva, Aghora, Tatpuruṣa and Īśāna, beginning with west, north, south,
cast, and above, respectively. Their mantras are supplemented by recitation of the Śrīrudram and
Camakam, both drawn from the Vedic corpus.

Mirroring the Pāśupata Śaiviṣm known collectively as Atimārga – the Higher Path –

Siddhānta, like other forms of Āgamic Śaivism, began as an esoteric form of Śaivism open only to

initiates, who were enjoined to keep their rites secret, that is, outside the public domain, although

i is considered by the schools of the Bhairava Tantras (including Trika) to be the basic, common

aiviṣm (sāmānya), thus eroding its esoteric character. By the 12 century it came to foṣter public

Śaivism, as it does today in South India, through elaborate temple rituals centred on Liṅgas. The
Śākta cults of the Bhairava and Kaula Tantras also became public, but in a different way,
managing in some places and circumstances to maintain their esoteric character.
The number of Liṅgas in India is larger than any other representation of deity. A treatise
on Śaiva ritual that omits the worship of the Liṅga and related matters would be incomplete.
However, the Trika Śaivism Abhinava sponsors as the highest form of Śaivism is virtṇally

unconcemned with it, at least in its common outer form. His primary authority — the
Maālinīvijayottara – discusses it (in chapter 18) but only to exalt the status of its internalized

worship, to finally deny the ultimate value of its outer worship. This is Abhinava’s point of
departure. He begins by supplying a a broad definition of the word ‘liṅga’ as simply a ‘sign’ –
liṅga – of the presence of deity or deities

invoked into an aniconic object, in which they are

worshipped. Thus, Abhinava is led to enumerate at length the places that can be formed or
selected (st’hānakalpana) where this can take place. He begins with types of outer Liṅgas. Then he

moves on to his first alternative choice – a skull. The members of the list that follows are in this

sense kinds of Liṅgas, even though the deities worshipped in them may be goddesses. These are
‘secret’ Liṅgas, the closest outer representatves of the ‘inner’ Liṅga that enshrines deity within

the body.

Conceming the Trika worship of the Liṅga, see MV 18/19 and its visionary fruits in MV 18/20
tf. Énumerated amongst them are the standard signs of possession (āveśa) by a deity. It would be

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

‘(The yogi) should worship the inner (spiritual) (ādhyātmika) Liṅga. . .’
The Many Kinds of Liṅga (liṅgasvarūpaṁ bahudhā)
Higher Secret Mantras Should Not be Used Externally

Surely (one may ask), how is it that the worship of the (outer) Liṅga has
not been discussed directly here (in the Mālinīvijayottara)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

TJIĪRTHITGTTTIĪ
Tī JĪTRTḤ |

EṭxikuRkztCEĪEīr--r̥ṬĪE
eteṣām ūrdhvaśāstroktamantrāṇāṁ na pratiṣṭhitam ḷ
bahiṣkuryāt tato hy ete rahasyatvena siddhidāḥ l| 2 I|

These Mantras taught in the higher scriptures must not be installed

externally. It is because they are (kept) secret (and internal) that they
bestow success (and accomplishments) (siddhi). (2)
Surely (one may ask,) what would be the consequence of installing

them externally? With this doubt in mind, he says:

EIEIEEIHSAVENṄ GAEIĪGZIĀ

3 fifz aad ṁ aṁīaṛc ulzfa: 1 3 1
svavīryānandamāhātmyapraveśāveśaśālinīm |

ye siddhiṁ dadate teṣāṁ bāhyatvaṁ rūpavicyutiḥ || 3 II
(Such Mantras) bestow the accomplishment (siddhi) endowed with
the penetration (āveśa) which is entry into the glorious power (māhātmya)
of the bliss of their own (innate) vitality. Their external state (i.e. uttered
aloud as public Mantras that are not kept secret) amounts to a fall from
(their essential) nature. (3)
There is also another reason. Thus he says:

surprising for a Saiddhāntika to know that this happens in the course of worshiping a Liṅga, even
an internal one.

MV 18/3a. The complete passage says: ‘The Yogi should not worship a Liṅga made of earth,
stone, metal, gems and the like, rather he should sacrifice to the inner (ādhyāmika) Liṅga, where
(the whole universe, with all) moving and immobile things, rests. Indeed, the essential nature of
the outer Liṅga is empowered by this (inner Liṅga).’ MV 18/2cd-3 (quoted above ad 5/121cd
(120cd). Concerning the tradic inner Liṅga, see above $/1 12cd-127. The experience of the inner
Liṅga is the subject of MV 18/1-56ab. Conceming the installation of a Liṅga, especially the

extemal fixed one, see Brunner-Lachaux 1998 Somaśambhupaddhati vol. IV, written by

Somaśambhu in the first half of the eleventh century.
Read -pravesāveśaśālinīm for -praveśavaśaśālinīm.

TANTRĀLOKA

fka

JTraṝrzrar̥irīcṝr fāēērcṁ: 1| 1|

kiñca coktaṁ samāveśāpūrṇe bhoktrātmakaḥ śivaḥ |
bhogalāmpaṭtyabhāg bhogavicchede nigrahātmakaḥ || 4 ||
Moreover, it is said that when penetration (into His own nature)
(samāveśa) is incomplete, Śiva is a worldly experiencer (bhoktṛ) who is

greedy for worldly enjoyment (bhoga). If that enjoymentis interrupted, itis
His nature to punish (those who deprive Him of it). (4)

Surely (one may ask), what is the consequence of His nature being to
punish (his erring worshippers)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

īa fṁṝtz aa aītṣzaraīī fērzañ 1 u u
śāntatvanyakkriyodbhūtajighatsābṛṁhitaṁ vapuḥ |
svayaṁ pratiṣṭhitaṁ yena ṣo ‘syābhoge vinaśyati | 5 II
(The power of) an (iconic) form (vapuṣ) (of an esoteric deity that has
been installed externally) is intensified by (its) voracity, that arises by
repressing its tranquil (aspect). He who has installed it by himself (with no
right to do so) is destroyed when (he leaves it) without the food (bhoga) (it

craves for). (5)

Read samāveśāpūrṇe for samāveśapūrṇo.

The sense, it seems, is that the deity should not be installed in a Liṅga by means of the secret
mantras (i.e. those of the three Trika Goddesses, the four Bhairavas, etc.), but rather by means of

the common generic mantras, that is, for example, the above mentioned ‘Eye’, which is
Mṛtyuñjaya’s mantra. This is the seventh of seven common mantras Abhinava enumerates above

in 22/20. ‘The use of mantras from the ‘higher’ scriptures in the installation of outer idols is

prohibited, because these mantras can only grant perfection (siddhi) if they are used secretly and
internally; because they might even be dangerous. This is explained by Śiya’s lust for enjoyment,

and by alluding to the negative consequences for the worshipper who fails to comply with it, the
quotation from the Jāānottara (in TĀ 27/6-8)is adduced as a scriptural support. Here the desire

for enjoyment, whichis more readily connected with ferocious deities is projected onto Śiva. In

the Mālinīvijayavārttikā the quotation has been adduced for similar reasons; the concept of
enjoyment as a source of liberation; which has been mentioned in MVV 1/45, is explained in an

admittedly oblique way through the quotation: if the desire of the dcities is gratified through
enjoyment, they grant perfection or liberation.’ Hanneder 1998: 155. Also ibid note 29: “we can
distinguish many aspects of this structure, a ritual one (‘outside’ deities are gratified by forbidden
substances), a Gnostic one (their nature is recognised) and one of internal ritual.”
Sanderson 2006 (with reference to 27/1-13): ‘The mantras of the Siddhānta [may be] . . .

installed permanently in fixed idols where they will remain so

long as the appropriate

Saiddhāntika worship and purity are maintained. The left maintains that its own mantra-deities are

simply too powerful, indeed too dangerous, to be placed in this way beyond the immediate control
of the worshipper. Fixed images of certain of the esoteric deities are not unknown; but where such

installations are prescribed it is the exoteric mantras of the Siddhānta which animate them. So the
boundary between the exoteric right and the esoteric left was breached in appearance rather than

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
‘He’ who has installed (the deity) by himself (is destroyed).
Nor is (this view) based on just (our own way of) reasoning alone.
Accordingly, he says:

3h, JHĪRŪTĪ TÇTTTHĪYTĪT |
ftraār arṁraī aam’g?ī-āīq+ea 5ē 1
TRṬGṢGRTĪTGI ā T-TRTTĀHT āIē: |

sṛā tqā rāza} ũtcsr̥a aĩṭzar |

uktaṁ jñānottarāyāṁ ca tad etat parameśinā |

Śśivo yāgapriyo yasmād viśeṣān mātṛmadhyagaḥ || 6 I

tasmād rahasyaśāstreṣu ye mantrās tān budho bahiḥ |
na pratiṣṭhāpayej jātu viśeṣād vyaktarūpiṇaḥ || 7 ||
ata eva mṛtasyārthe pratiṣṭhānyatra yoditā |
sātra śāstreṣu no kāryā kāryā sādhāraṇī punaḥ || II
Moreover, the Supreme Lord has said this in the Jāñānottara.
(There we read): ‘Siva loves sacrifices (yāga), especially (when He is) in the
midst of the (Circle of the) Mothers.’ Thus, a wise man should most
fact; for it is the mantras rather than the iconic forms which may be associated with them that are

the essential embodiments of the deities in Tantric worship. There are cults of aniconic mantras
but not icons which are not mantras.”

Cf. MVV 1/46cd devasya yāgapriyatā viśeṣān māṭṟmadhyataḥ |
If the text is the Sarvajñānottara, the name is always, except here, in the masculine, as one

would expect. We have noted that we observe a shift of gender in the case of the Kāmika /
Kāmikā, Kiraṇa / Kiraṇā, and Mṛgendra / Mṛgendrā (see notes 4,83 and 15,78). Thus, a similar

shift in this case is not impossible, although one could consider emending to the normal gender
jñānottare yac as a possible correct rading.
This passage cannot be traced to the manuscripts of the Śarvajñānottara. Moreover, the
reference to rahasyaśāstra here is suspect. Although the Sarvajñānottara is an unusual

Siddhāntāgama in many respects, promoting in several places nondualism and direct identification

with Śiva, nonetheless it does not think of itself as a ‘secret scripture’. t is thus quite possible that

Abhinava is not referring here to the Sarvajñānottara.
Conceming the eight Mothers, see above, 8/241cd-242, where their names are listed, and the
commentary. Abhinava comments on line 27/6cd in the MVV 1/46-47:

yatrocyate ṣvaśakyādikṣobhasaṁraṁbhanirbharā |
devasya yāgapriyatā viśeṣān mātrmadhyataḥ l| 46cd is cquivalent to TĀ 27/6cd
aisvaryaśaktyudrekena labdheśvarapadābhīdaḥ 1
devo vijīñānamahimāprodbhūto ‘yam prapañcitaḥ
‘Where it is said that the love the god has for the sacrifice is full (to overflowing) with
the enthusiasm that comes from the arousal of his own power etc., especially (when he is) in the
midst of the (Circle of the) Mothers, the god, by virtue of the superabundance of the power of
(His) lordship, is called ‘He who has attained the plane of the Lord (iśvara), and by the glorious

TANTRĀLOKA

certainly (jātu) not install the Mantras of the secret scriptures externally,

especially not those that are (externally) manifest (and spoken out aloud).
That is why the installation procedure taught elsewhere (in other

scriptures) for the benefit of the deceased, (according to our) scriptures,
should not be performed here (in this case). Rather, on the contrary, a
common (sādhāraṇī) (rite of installation) should be performed (with
common mantras). (6-8)

‘That is whyʼ, that is, because an outer (public) installation (of the

deity) has been prohibited (in the secret scriptures). (It is enjoined) ‘elsewhere
(in other scriptures) for example, in the venerable Mṛtyuñjayatantra. As is
said there:

‘Or else one should also install (the deity) in the cremation ground when

the body (of the deceased) has been burnt.”

power (of His) consciousness (vijāāna), (al) this that is extensively conceived (prapañcita) has
ariṣen.
Śiva’s relish for enjoyment is more commonly associated with ferocious deities,
specifically his form as Bhairava. This is s0 in MVV 1/42-45, that precedes this passage in MVV
1/46-47, where Abhinava presents the experience Dcity has of the world as a source of lberation:
‘As soon as Bhairava, who is knowledge, becomes entirely identified with the flood of
the waves of objects (tat), but (mmains) (when he) as the possessor of his power is satisfied with
no less than the plenitude of things, when this state of having a power is subordinated by means of
his full, own power alone, then such a stream of knowledge consisting of reflective awareness
(vimarśa), in which an extraordinary bliss (hlāda) appears through instruction in enjoyment
(bhoga), pervades (everything). For the fortunate ones, even the multitude of enjoyments, i
cultivated by confidence in this (yadīya) performance of the ‘practice of consciousness’ are
transformed into the abode of salvation.’ (MVV 1/42-45) Translatin by Hanneder.
On the distinctions into manifest, unmanifest, etc., with regads to Liṅgas see above, 5/!13. See
also MV 18/1-56ab with regards to the adept who is ‘avyakialiṅgin’ and 15/595cd-596. Cf.
Kulapañcaśikā: avyaktaliṅginaṁ [k: -taṁ] dṛṣtvā saṁbhāsanti marīcayaḥ |
liṅginaṁ nopasarpanti atiguptāya tat [k: ta] priye [k: priyet] l|

Quoted by Kṣemarāja in commentary on the Śivasūtra 3/26.

19 II

' NT 18/119cd. The printed edition of the NT reads: praiṣṭhāpyaṁ tathā devi O goddess, (the
god) should be installed in ths way’ for pratiṣṭhā vāpi kartavyā – “Or else one should also install
(the deity) . . .’. Kṣemarāja explains that the meaning of ‘when the body (of the deceased) has
been burt’ (dagdhapiṇḍe) is ‘when the location of the body has been bumt’ (pluṣtadehasthāne).
śrāddhe saṁpājayed devam antyeṣṭāv athavā yajet |
pratiṣṭhāpyaṁ tathā devi dagdhapiḍe śmaśānake l
pārvokair dravyasaṁbhārair gurunā prāgvidhānaiaḥ
pūrvokaṁ bhīṣaṇaṁ rãpaṁ śaktidvayasamanvitam |
dagáhapiṇḍe pluṣtadehasthāne | pārvoktam ii bhairavīyaṁ śaktidvayaṁ kr̥śaṣthīlam
‘The god should be worshipped in the course of the rite of feeding the ancestors
(śrāddha). Or else one should sacrifice (to him) during the fuanerary rite. 0 goddes, (t god)
should be instaled in this way when the body (of the deceased) has been burnt.
(The god Bhaiava,) who was mentioned before, (his) form frightening and possessing
two energies (one subtle and the other gross), (should be worshipped) by the tcacher with the
rcquisite (sacrificial) substances in accord with the previous procedure. NT 18/119-120

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

‘A common (sādhāraṇī) (rite of installation) should be performed
(with Mantras know to all)’, for example, with the Mantra of the Eye.

In this way, as an external, permanent installation (of the deity) is

prohibited in our system (darśana), a mobile icon (calā) should be (installed

instead). Accordingly, he says:

Installation of a Deity by Oneself or by the Teacher,

Into a Liṅga Anywhere or Into an Iconic Representation

ī ī̄T-TTTG TTĪRTĒATGATḤ I

ā tanmayatvasaṁsiddher ā cābhīṣṭaphalodayāt |
putrakaḥ sādhako vyaktam avyaktaṁ vā samāśrayet || 9 II
As long as (he has not) attained a state of identification (with the
deity, or) until the desired fruit has not arisen, a spiritual son (putraka)
and adept (sādhaka) may resort (samāśrayet) to a manifest (outwardly
visible iconic form) (vyakta) or (to a mental representation or an aniconic

form in which the deity) is not (externally visibly) manifest (avyakta). (9)

Should the spiritual sons (putraka) etc. prepare the idol (pratimā) (for

worship) by themselves, or not? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ṬaTRJq;

af:, āckaīTāī ī-TaAĀ ṬGTI | 20

fīxttaīaṁtsī a 1 2 1

kkEEEHE

CHI
ī q vmvrṣi fēg Ṝrczqc vāṁzāq |

I 23 1

This passage refers to a funerary rite taught above in Chapter Twenty-one. See TĀ

21/12-13 is a condensed paraphrase of NT 18/112-16a, which is quoted in full by Jayaratha, and
TĀv ad 21/22cd-24, where NT 18/116bcd-117ab is quoted.

‘The Jñānottara is referting to ‘secret scriptures’. So when it says ‘elsewhere’ that is, in
other scriptures apart from itself and those like it, we would presume that it is referring to these
‘secret scriptures’. So it is surprising that Jayaratha cites the Netratantra (alias Amṛteśvara),

which is not generally considered to be a ‘secret scripture’, as an example, especially because its
main mantra, dedicated to Mṛtyuñjaya, is a common, public one (see above, note 27,6).

This verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 27/52. We shall see in 27/56cd-57 that the Trika Trident

is projected into the Liúṅga these Trika initiates worship.
See above, note 26,39.

TANTRĀLOKA

Jmī fgaīītē āaṝkrazgdgsdī 1

ṁh…z fē - ú1 ṇx 1

aṝT-kq |

sr-ī aṝ rRfārārafkr,

ṣaataī fētēr. | ṇ= u

ṁ aieāhītdd,|

TI T dTST TS TGTATJTTIṬṜĪÑ|

TIRIĪ TIT RTTĪ I R¢ I

cīa 7ē. |

T¥aT āJāTTĪTTTḤTTTTṀTT_I Ro II

putrakair gurur abhyarthyaḥ sādhakas tu svayaṁ vidan |
yadi tat sthāpayen no cet tenāpy arthyo gurur bhavet || 10 |

guruś cātra nirodhākhye kāla itthaṁ vibhau vadet |
jīvaty asmin phalāntaṁ tvaṁ tiṣṭher jīvāvadhīti vā || 1 1 I|

liṅgaṁ ca bāṇaliṅgaṁ vā ratnajaṁ vātha mauktikam |
pauṣpam ānnam atho vāstraṁ ganáhadravyakṛtaṁ ca vā || 12 ||
na tu pāṣāṇajaṁ liṅgaṁ śilpyutthaṁ parikalpayet |
dhātūtthaṁ ca suvarṇotthavarjam anyad vivarjayet |l 13 II
na cātra liṅigam ānādi kvacid apy upayujyate |
udāravīryair mantrair yad bhāsitaṁ phaladaṁ hi tat | 14 |

tasyāpi sthaṇḍilādy uktavidhinā

śuddhim ācaret |

mantrārpaṇaṁ tathaiva ṣyān nirodhastīūktayuktitaḥ || 15 lI
agnau ca tarpaṇaṁ bhãũriviśeṣād dakṣiṇā guroḥ |

dīnāditr̥ptir vibhavād yāga ity adhiko vidhiḥ l| 16 ||

sarveṣv avyaktaliṅgeṣu pradhānaṁ syād akalpitam |
tathã ca tatra tatroktaṁ lakṣaṇe pãrameśvare || 17 |
sūtre pātre dhvaje vastre svayambhūbāṇapūjite |
nadīprasravaṇotthe ca nāhvānaṁ nāpi kalpanā l| 1 8 I|
pīthaprāsādamantrāṁśavelādiniyamo na ca |
vyaktaṁ vā citrapustādau devadārusuvarṇajam || 19 ||

atha dīkṣitasacchilpikr̥taṁ sthāpayate guruḥ |

athavā lakṣaṇopetamūrdhatatkarparāśritam || 20 ||

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

paṅkticakrakaśīūlābjavidhinā tūram āśrayet |
tallakṣaṇaṁ bruve śrīmatpicuśāstre nirūpitam || 21 I|
tūre yāgaḥ sadā śastaḥ siddhido doṣavarjite |

While the spiritual sons must request the teacher (to perform the

rites of installation, as they are not authorized to do so), if an adept knows
(the procedure), he may install (the icon) by himself. But if he does not, he

too has to request the teacher (to do it for him). (10)

Here (in that case), at the time when the (deity) is detained (in the

icon) (nirodha), the teacher should say before the pervasive Lord: “As

long as he lives, may you abide (here), until (he obtains) the fruit (he
desires), or until the end of (his) life. (11)
The liṅga may be a made of quartz (bāṇaliṅga), gems, pearls,

flowers, food, cloth, or fragrant substances. He should not take into

consideration (parikalpayet) a Liṅga made of stone fashioned by an artisan
(Śilpin). So too any other made of metal should be avoided, with the

exception of gold. (12-13)
The measurements etc. (listed in scriptures for) liṅgas are of no
application here at all. (Only a liṅga) that shines with Mantras of illustrious
vitality (udāravīrya) bestows (the desired) fruit (and none other).

(However,) that too should be purified with the (same) procedure taught

with regard to the sacrificial surface etc.' (Then,) the Mantras should be
offered to it, (and the deity) should be detained (within it) in the same way,
that is, in the manner explained (previously), and so too the lustration
(tarpaṇa) of the fire (that comes next). (Finally,) the remuneration (dakṣiṇā)
(offered to) the teacher should be very special. An additional procedure
(vidhi) is the sacrifice (offered) by virtue of (one’s spiritual) wealth, which is
(to bring joy to the complete) satisfaction (trpti) of the downtrodden (dīna)
and others (that are afflicted). (14-16)

Of all the aniconic (avyakta) signs (of the presence of deity) (liṅga),

the main one is (natural), not fashioned (by man) (akalpita). t is said in

various places in the Supreme Lord’s (scripture),' in which the defining

characteristic (of Liṅgas is stated,) that there is neither invocation nor

Literally, ‘at the time called ‘detention’ (nirodha)’. Four essential events take place at their own

appropriate time in the course of the worship of a liṅga or any iconic, or indeed aniconic,

representation of the deity. These are 1) the invocation of the divinity (āvāhana), 2) its installation

(sthāpana) in the Liṅga or other representation, 3) it is ‘brought close’ (sarmidhāna) to the
worshipper and so easily accessible for worship, and 4) is detained or ‘fixed’ (saṁnirodhana) in

the place where it is to stay up to the end of the rite. “This aforementioned detention of the God,
who nevertheless penetrates all things, is his continuous (uninterrupted) presence up to the end of
the ritual (SŚP vol. 1, 3/68cd-69ab). According to the Jāāratnāvali (SŚP vol. 1: 192 n. 3), the

detention of the deity is accompanied by the prayer: “May the Blessed One remain fayourable
towards me constantly.”

' The bāṇaliṅga is usually made of pebbles of quartz and is shaped like an egg. See Rao 1916:
vol.I, p. 12.
See above, 26/37 ff.

Liṭerally – ‘unmanifest’.
! Abhinava may be refering specifically to the Parameśvarāgama, of which there is a Nepalese
manuṣcript preserved in Cambridge. See bibliography.

TANTRĀLOKA

artifact (kaḷpanā) with regard to a thread (that is used for a rosary), a
(sacrificial) jar, a flag, a cloth, a spontaneously born precious stone (bāṇa)
venerated (as a liṅga), and one that has arisen in the current of a river. Nor
is there any restriction (in this case) as to the (location) of a sacred seat

(pītha) or building (where they are enshrined),' (the suitable) Iimbs of

mantras (by which they are worshipped), time (when it should be done), or
the like. (17-19ab)
Or else the teacher may (if he so wishes), cause the installation of an
iconic (yyakta) (representation of the deity),) such as a picture, (a mask, or
image made of) papier machē etc., or it may be made of deodar wood or
gold fashioned by a true (member of the) artisan (caste) (Śilpin) who has
received (the appropriate) initiation (to do the job). (19cd-20ab)

Deity May be Installed and Worshipped in a Skull
Or else, (the deity) may reside (in a skull) that possesses the
(required) characteristics, (be it the entire) head (or) a bowl made from it
(tatkarpara). (The deity) should be placed on the skull (tūra) (and
worshipped there) according to the procedure relating to the lines, wheels,
tridents and lotuses (natural to it or engraved on it). (20cd-21ab)

Read -prāsāda- for prasāda” Concerning all this, see Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati, vol. 4 p. 374. The projection of Mantras
etc. concem only the liigas fashioned by human hands (mānuṣeṣv eva liṅgesu mantramārtyādi-

saṁkaraḥ, ibid. p. 374).

Cedrus Deodara.
As is the case with other references to the BY in the Tantrāloka, this one also could not be

traced in the BY that survives in the early eleventh century Nepalese manuscript we have, from

which the great majority, if not all other manuscripts we have are derived. Even so, tārayāga -

‘the sacrifice performed on a skull’, that is, the invocation, installation and worship of deities on a
skull, is well known to it; it is also found in the related Piṅgalāmata. The Picumata (alias

Brahmayāmala) repeatedly describes rites involving the worship of deities invoked into a human

skull or the deposition (nyāsa) of them onto it. The Picumata, which one could characterize, as
Sanderson docs, as a ‘Kāpālika Tantra’, dedicates a long section on the iconometry of idols to be
erected in cremation grounds and their worship. Like the Sacrifice of the Skull, this is not a

subject commonly discussed in the Śaiva Tantras. Kiss (2015: 318) reports that chapter four of the

Brahmayāmala from verse 338 to the end deals with a ‘description of ritual objects such as

damarus, kapālas, khatvāṅgas and a section on image installaton (pratiṣṭhā). Verses 740 to 779
deal with the characteristics of a skull (kapālalakṣaṇa).”

Embellishing skulls with silver, gold, and precious stones to use for ritual purposes is

common practice in the Buddhist Yoga and Anuttarayoga Tantras, but not those of the
(chronologically earlier) Kriyā and Caryā Tantras. The transition from the first two to the second

two types is marked by the strongly developed influence of the forms of Śaivism that subscribe to

theṣe kinds of ritual procedures. One of the central features is the worship of the deity in a skull

(kapāla) or its use as a sacrificial vessel (pātra). As this is a feature of the cult of the
Brahmayāmala, it can be said to be ‘kāpālika’. We may say the same about the Buddhist Tantric

cults. Naturally, a skul is considered normally to be a very impure object, but not so when part of
aliving body. Accordingly, the Vijñānabhairava teaches:
kapālāntar mano nyasya tiṣṭhan mīlitalocanaḥ |

krameṇa manaso dārḍhyāt lakṣayel lakṣyam uttamam || 34 1|

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
Characteristics and Features of a Skull

We will now state its defining characteristic (lakṣaṇa), as described
in the venerable Picuśastra, (where we read that): ‘the sacrifice (yāga)
(performed) on a skull devoid of defects is always commended (śasta) as

bestowing accomplishment (siddhi).’ (21cd-22ab)

(The adept) ‘may install (the icon)’ by himself alone. ‘But if he does
notʼ know (how to do) it himself, (the teacher must do it for him). (As long as)

‘he’ (lives), that is, the adept or spiritual son. (May the Lord be present) ‘until
(he obtains) the fruit’ or ‘or until the end of (his) life’. As was said (before):

‘As long as (he has not) attained a state of identification (with the deity,

or) so long as the desired fruit has not arisen.

‘Made of cloth’ – the dwelling (of the deity) is made from cloth alone.
He implies (by saying that the liṅga) ‘should not be made of stone’ that that is
(only) fit for a permanent installation (of the deity). By saying that ‘any other

should be avoidedʼ, the meaning is that it should be made of gold. “The

measurements etc. (listed in scriptures for) liṅgas are of no application
hereʼ. It is said with the same intended sense, that:

‘one should not consider (what would be the correct) size etc. of

(liṅgas) that have been installed by Siddhas.”

‘That tooʼ, namely the liṅga, (should be purified as is the sacrificial
surface and the deity within it, and should be addressed with the words): ““As

long as he lives, may you abide (here), until (he obtains) the fruit (he

desires) or until the end of (his) life.” (The remuneration (dakṣiṇā) offered to
the teacher) ‘should be very special’, not just special. (The procedure is)
‘additionalʼ, because it is optional. The ‘thread’ is the thread of a rosary. The
‘jar’ (meant here out of the two jars) is the large one. The ‘flagʼ (stands for

attributes of the deity,) such as the ascetic’s staff (khaṭvāṅga). The ‘cloth’ is one
intended for the sacrifice. ‘The head’ is (the whole) unbroken (skull). The

‘wheels’ (of deities on the skull are worshipped) in sequence, going around
(them). He quotes that (Picumata as saying): (the sacrifice performed) ‘on a
skullʼ eṭc.
He (now) defines the (possible) defects (of a skull).

‘Having placed the mind within (the space of the) skull, abiding (motionless), with the
eyes closed, by the progressively (increasing) stability of the mind, one perceives the supreme
goal. (34)
Read yāgaḥ for yogah.
” Lines 21cd to 24 are mostly drawn from the Picumata, i.e. Brahmayāmala.
Above, 27/9ab. The full passage is quoted below in TĀv ad 27/50-52.

Read ity anityavāt for iti nityavāt.

TANTRĀLOKA

SīTdōhtst dHP-TĪĪTTĀ &ST I 33 II

jālakair jarjarai randhrair dantair ūnādhikai rujā || 22 II

yukte ca tūre hāniḥ ṣyāt taddhīne yāga uttamaḥ |

If the skull has networks (of channels), old cavities, too many or too
few teeth, and is diseased, (the worshipper) will suffer loss (hāni). If (the
skull is) devoid of these (defects), the sacrifice (performed on it) is the most
excellent (of all). (22cd-23ab)
(By) ‘networks (of holes) (are meant) ones that opened up recently
and are generally small (sūkṣma).”” ‘OId cavities’ are ones that were formed a
long time back. ‘Too many or too few teeth’, that is, (more or less) than thirty-

two. ‘Diseased’ in the form of (rotting) discharge. ‘Devoid of these (defects),
that is, without networks (of holes) and the rest.

EṇRHEREUGITHETETEUITTWTIEE

kāmya eva bhavet tūram iti kecit prapedire || 23 |I

Some maintain that the skull is used only for (magical) intentional

rites (kāmya). (23cd)

‘Someʼ earlier (teachers maintain that skulls are only used in magic

rites). He (now) states our own view.

Tṃa ṬVĪHTSS II 2U, 1I

JĪ 1| 35 1

ī āK-B-ThōēṬHTTTTTĪTTGG|

YGBRJṬTĪ āTSṬRTT TR ĀĪTIIĪ-TTI 3UI
We find the same usage of the term ‘jālaka’ here the feminine jālikā - meaning the fine
nctwork of channels in a skull in the following passage from the Brahmayāmala:
jálikābhedane caiva mahādoṣa prajāyate | 229 |
tasmāt sarvaprayamena niráoṣaṁ kārayed budhaḥ |
jālikābhedane tāre karmahāniḥ prajāyate | 230 |
vyādhiś caiva prajāyeta [kh: prajñeyeia] arthahāniṁ tathaiva ca |

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

guravas tu vidhau kāmye yammād doṣāṁs tyajed iti |
vyācakṣate picuproktaṁ na nitye karmaṇīty adaḥ || 24 ||
śrīṣiddhātantra uktaṁ ca tūralakṣaṇam uttamam |
ekādikacatuṣkhaṇḍe gomukhe pūrṇacandrake || 25 ||

padmagorocanāmuktānīrasphaṭikasaṁnibhe |
ekādipañcasadrandhravidyārekhānvite śubhe || 26 ||
na rūkṣavakraśakaladīrghanimnaṣabinduke |
ślakṣṇayā vajrasūcyātra sphuṭaṁ devīgaṇānvitam || 27 ||
sarvaṁ samālikhet pūjyaṁ sarvāvayavasundaram |

(But our) teachers” explain that, when it is said in the Picumata

(that) ‘in a magical rite (kāmyavidhi) one should take care to avoid (a skull

‘A great defect arises when the channels (of the skull) are broken. Therefore, the wise
man should make every effort to render it free of defects. When the channels in a skull (tāra) are
broken, (one’s) work is destroyed. Disease arises, and s0 too loss of wealth.’ BY 4/229cd-231ab

The following is a passage from the Brahmayāmala, where we find an example of the use of a
skull for a magical rite to subdue – ‘attract’ – a victim:

yāgakāle prakartavyā gandhadhāpādikā kriyā | 1621
daśārṇarecitā vidyā siddhasandohalakṣaṇā |
asya sādhanakarmaṁ ca kathayāmi yathā bhavei 163 II
‘At the time of a sacrifice, one should make ritual (offering of) perfume, incensc and the
like. The Vidyā is made of five phonemes and is the extract of (the teachings of the) Siddhas.
Now I will tell you how the rite of its sādhana is. (162cd-163)
mahāvīrakapāle tu kṛtvā caivaṁ caturbhujam |

kapālamālābharaṇaṁ nāgayajñopavītinam [g: -nīm] | 164 1
kapālakhaṭvāṅgadharāṁ preiārāḍhāṁ subhairavīm |

143a g] digambarāṁ [g: ?] caturvaktrāṁ pāśāṅkuśadharāṁ śubhām || 165 II
pūjayīta kr̥tanyāso mudrāpañcakabhūṣitaḥ |

The worshipper who has performed the deposition (of the mantras on his body) and is
adomed with the five insignia (mudrā) (of a Kāpālika) (should worship) having fashioned in this
way (a Bhairava) on the skull of a Great Hero with four arms (holding) a skull, a garand, as an
ormament, and (wearing) a snake as a sacred thread. (On the skull thrc is also) a beautiul
Bhairavī who holds an ascetic’ staff, mounted on a ghost, naked with four faces and holds an
auspicious noose and clephant gaud, (164-166ab)
digvāso muktakeśaś ca madhocchiṣṭavidhau sthitaḥ || 166 ||

mṛtanirmālyapuṣpais tu anyair vācāntadhātakaiḥ | [g: ?]

pūjayed bhairavīdevīṁ puṣpair nānāvidhais tathā |/ 167 | [g: ?]
dantakarṇākṣināsāyā mūlaṁ baliṣamudbhavam | [g: ?]
sugandhamiśritaṁ [g: ?] dadyād gandhametad dvijottamaḥ || 168 II

He is naked, his hair dishevelled, observing the procedure that rcquires wine and the
remnants of food. He should worship the goddess Bhairavī with dead leftover flowers, used
previously as an offering and other (such things) and (also) with flowers of many kinds. The most
excellent of the twice born, should offer this as scent — the root of the teeth, ears and eyes of the
animal offered in sacrifice (bali) mixed with fine perfume. (168)
laśunaṁ guggulaṁ caiva mahāmāṁsaṁ tathaiva ca |

TANTRĀLOKA

with these) defectsʼ, (the sense is that that) is not so (when it is used) in the

regular (daily) rite, (in which such defects make no difference. Not that it
should be used only for magical rites). (24)

According to the venerable Siddhātantra, the most excellent

characteristic of a skull (is found) in one that has one (two, three or) four
(clearly defined) parts (khaṇḍa), one that is (shaped like) the head of a cow
(gomukha) (or) the full moon, (one that has the colour of a red or blue)
lotus, (yellow) orpiment (gorocanā), and is (shiny and radiant) like pearls,
(clear) water, or crystal. It has one (two, three, four or) five beautiful (sar)
holes and, auspicious, has fourteen lines. (A skull that does) not (possesses
good characteristics is one that is) rough, crooked, (broken) in pieces,
elongated, with depressions and points (bindu). (On the surface of the

skull), one should engrave clearly with a hard, thin scalpel everything that
is to be worshipped, including the host of goddesses, beautiful in all their
limbs. (25-28ab)

kr̥ṣṇamārjāraviṣṭiṁ ca ekatra viniyojitam || 169 |

bodhitaṁ strīrajenāyaṁ daded dhūpaṁ tu mantravit |
svavāmāṅgodbhavenaiva rudhireṇa kapālake |/ 170 ||

arghaṁ tasya pradātavyaṁ ṣurayã ca pratarpayet |

Garlic, bdellium, human flesh (or beef), a black cat and (the meat of a) slave together in
one place - the knower of Mantra should offer (this), awakened (and energized) by a woman’s
menstrual blood as incense. Purifying liquid (argha) should be offered with the blood from the

left part of one’s own body onto the skull and offer libation with wine (surā). (171ab)

maitsyamāṁsaṁ caruṁ deva upahāraṁ tathaiva ca | 171 I
vaṭakaiḥ pūrakair dhīpair āmamāṁsamanvitaiḥ l
naivedyaṁ dāpayet prājñaḥ palāṇḍuṁh laśunaṁ tathā | 172.1
tato homaṁ prakartayyaṁ mahāmāṁsena mantriṇī |

gomāṁsarudhireṇaiva tarpayed hastajena tu I 173 |
arthālābhena [g: ?] cānyena [g: ?] tataḥ kr̥tvā pradakṣiṇām |
japaṁ śaṁkhākṣasūtraṁ (g: saṁ-] ca mahāśaṁkho [g: -saṁkho] hy atandritaḥ | 174 1
sadocchīṣto japed devīṁ yadīcche siddhim ātmanaḥ [ṣg: …tiddhimā ?]
japet akṣarāṭyakṣeṇa māhocchuṣma prapaśyati ? | 175 11
bhinnājanapraīkāśaṁ ghoraṁ dvādaśalocanam
svapnānte paśyate devī dṛṣṭvā siddhyati mantravit | 176 |
O god, the wise man should offer a food offering of sacriicial pap made of fish and
meat, along with cakes of pulsc, balls of meat, incense, along with raw meat, onion, and garlic. 0

reciter of Mantra, (he should make) a fire offering of human flesh (or beef) (mahāmāṁsa) and
offer libations with the blood of cow flesh and that of an elephant or with something else if he
cannot procure the money (to do that). Then, having circumambulated (the skull), he should

tireḷessly repcat (the Vidyā o0f) the goddess if he wishes accomplishments for himsclf.
(171cd-175ab)
He should repeat Mantra without omitting (any lettcrs) (until) he sees Mahocchuṣmā.

(He is black) like sliced collyrium, fearsome and with twelve eyes. O goddess, he sees him in a
dream and having seen him, the knower of Mantra is successful. (175cd-176)

The text goes on to list a vaiety of kinds of meat to offer in the fire concluding that the

person with whose name he makes these offering is attracted in a moment. (177-182ab)

? This is probably an honorific plural for ‘my teacher’, who could only be Śambhunātha.
According to Monier-Willams, gorocanā is a bright yellow orpiment prepared from the bile of
cattle, employed in painting, dyeing, and marking a ilaka on the forehead. In medicine it is used

as a sedative, tonic, and anthelmintic remedy.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

It is stated that (the skull may be shaped like) ‘the head of a cow’ etc.
in order to draw a comparison with its form, and that it is like a ‘lotus’ etc., in
order to draw a comparison with its colour. It has ‘beautiful (saf) holes’. There

are holes here (in the skull), to serve as a means for wine etc. (placed in it) to

come out of it. As is said there (in the Śiddhātantra):

‘Well then (tāvat), first of all, one should examine the skull (to see if) it
possesses the (required) characteristics. (Those are found in one that has just)
one part, two, three or four parts and is very beautiful. Or else (its shape may be
that of a) cowʼs head, or be radiant as the full moon. Or else it may be the colour
of a lotus, (yellow) orpiment, water, a pearl, coral, sapphire, or like pure crystal.
(If auspicious,) it has fourteen lines, one, two, three, four or five holes. An

auspicious mark should be fashioned (on such a skull).

(However,) O slim-waisted lady, you should never inscribe one that is

rough, decaying, cruel, crooked, elongated, marked with points and (with a
disfiguring) depression (nimna). Once ascertained that the skull is pure by virtue
of its characteristics and that it fulfils all expectations, one should fashion on the
upper hollow (of the skull) an image (of the deity) (pratimā) as one imagines it

to be. Having fashioned an area (kṣetra) on one quarter of it, one should draw a
circle within it, and then again within (that) circle another circle in the middle

(of it), divided into three parts, in the middle of which is a lotus. Once known
that the goddess or the god is in the middle of it, surrounded by yoginīs, as
within a wheel, the parts should be fashioned (in this way) by a hard, thin

scalpel.!
ways.

(The text continues to discuss the skull and related matters) in many

He (now) transposes the same (procedure) elsewhere also (to another
sacrificial implement).

iiEEIEGTGAEEINĒṬCĒ-U ḶṬYĀ
tad evānusartavyam arghapātre 'pi lakṣaṇam || 28 ||
The defining characteristic of a sacrificial vessel (arghapātra)
should also follow along analogously to that (of the skull). (28cd)
And the scripture also (characterizes the sacrificial jar) in the same way.
Accordingly, he says:

ÉÉEEGURGṀKIALERUEUTCLṬ

TSRHT® GPITTTYĪTHhSTTT I| 38 1
! This passage does seem to be Abhinava’s source here, which he tells us is the Siddhātantra.
According to Tōrzsôk (1999: 229), this long quotation from the Siddhātantra is not found in the
available recension of the SYM, and the detailed manner of the description is uncharacteristic of

it, as is the topic itself.

TANTRĀLOKA

śrībrahmayāmale ‘py uktaṁ pātraṁ gomukham uttamam |
gajakūrmatalaṁ kumbhavrttaśaktikajākrti || 29 ||

It is also said in the venerable Brahmayāmala that the best vessel
(i.e. a skull) is (one that is shaped like) the head of a cow, its base (round

like) a tortoise or elephant, and form like the female organ (śaktikaja),”it
(should be) round like an elephant’s forehead (kumbha).(29)
A Description of the Varieties of Rosaries
(akṣasūtranirūpaṇam)
Having described the many kinds of the liṅga, he (now) describes
(various forms of) the rosary.

ÉṭFeiEIEAITEEŪPETYZEI

JĪTHTṬSĪPTĒTTTTRGTTTTĪST
I 30

3?

akṣasūtram atho kuryāt tatraivābhyarcayet kramam |

vīradhātujalodbhūtamuktāratnasuvarṇajam || 30 |

akṣasūtraṁ kramotkṛṣṭaṁ raudrākṣaṁ vā viśeṣataḥ |

Śataṁ tithyuttaraṁ yad vā sāṣṭaṁ yad vā tadardhakam || 31 II

tadardhaṁ vātha pañcāśadyuktaṁ tat parikalpayet |

Now, one should fashion (or acquire) a rosary, and worship there

itself the (entire) sequence (of principles, worlds and deities etc,) (krama).
(The beads should be) made of the Heroes’ Substance (vīradhātu), seeds of
padmākṣa, pearls, gems, (or) gold. The rosary (made of these materials) is,
respectively, more excellent, or especially so, one (made of) rudrākṣa. It
should be fashioned with one hundred and fifteen (beads), one hundred and
eight, half of this, or half of that (again), or else (just) fifty. (30-32ab)
śaktikaja literally means the Lotus of Śakti.

Concerning this section of the Tantrāloka, see Sanderson 2007: 98.
Cf BY 4/740:
gomukhaṁ [k: raga- kh: ro-] rājapuṣṭambā [kh: gajaṣuṣumnā] gajakuṁbhas tathaiva ca |
kurmapṛṣṭākṛú caiva śaktipātraṁ [kh: -pātaṁ] tathaiva ca |
Nelumbium Speciosuam.
Elaeocarpus Ganitus.
The rosary is a common subject in Tantras of all sorts. Conceming the rosary, see SŚP, vol. 1,
p.216 and note 2. See Dyczkowski 2009: vol 7 note 11, 44 conceming the types of rosaries
acording to the Kubjikā Tantras. The passage concemning the rosary is in the MV (19/75 f.. It
begins as follows:

‘Then the wise man should fashion a rosary, according to that (same) procedure, made
of gems, pearls, (or) mother-of-pearl etc., (or) of padmākṣa ctc. Or else it may be made of metal,

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

‘The Heroes’ Substance’ is a human temporal bone (mahāśaṅkha).
‘Half of this’ is fifty-four, and ‘half of that (again)’ is twenty-seven.
He presents the correspondences (vyāpti) (between the Mantras and
various realties) here in this case (in relation to the rosary).

gāftḷ Ṁōā ftrītcr̥-ērhtaāga;1| 32 1

TRJTĪEṬTĪ TaTTTTTcATTĪ] fāfē; |

3.,u

3qfẽ āī āTaāJGTTG@THATCṬĪS:I| 3¥ II

EātGEfEIS/IIEEEĀS/USTZEGTṂṞCR

ta sī ajdīēā̃za:|

TḶēhdsHdṇrēīzīth & Sṛi] diq_ |

aqaT JGTGTTTHTĪT
TṬTTYTTT I 38 1
vaktrāṇi pañca citspandajñānecchākṛtisaṅgateḥ || 32 ||
pañcadhādyantagaṁ caikyam ity upāntyākṣago vidhiḥ |
Śśaktitadvatprabhedena tatra dvairūpyam ucyate || 33 ||
tato dviguṇamāne tu dvirūpaṁ nyāsam ācaret |
tato ʻpi dvig
iṣaṁhr̥tidvitayena tam || 34 ||
mātṛkāṁ mālinīṁ vā ʻtha nyasyet khaśarasaṁmite |
uttame tu dvayīṁ nyasyenyasya pūrvaṁ pracoditān || 35 ||

dīkṣāyāṁ mukhyato mantrāṁs tān pañcadaśa daiśikaḥ |

yadi vã tattvabhuvanakalãmantrapadãrṇajaiḥ || 36 ||
saṅṁkhyābhedaiḥ kṛte sūtre taṁ taṁ nyāsaṁ guruś caret |

krtvākṣasūtraṁ tasyāpi sarvaṁ sthaṇḍilavad bhavet || 37 |

pūjitena ca tenaiva japaṁ kuryād atandritaḥ |

vidhir uktas tv ayaṁ śrīmanmālinīvijayottare || 38 ||

cakravad bhramayann etad yad vakti sa japo bhavet |
yad īkṣate juhoty etad bodhāgnau saṁpraveśanāt || 39 ||

such as gold, and measure fifty beads. It should be just the length of one’s own arm and formed
into the shape of bracclet. Laying hold of that, hanging down (rom one’s hand), made fragrant
with perfume and incense etc., having worshipped the Lord of Kula, place Śakti there. MV
19/75-77 Read samālambhya for samālabhya.

TANTRĀLOKA

The penultimate procedure (concerning the rosary with twentyseven) beads relates to (Sadāśiva’s) five faces. (Each of these) is associated
(with the five powers of) consciousness, vibration (spanda), knowledge, will,
and action, and so is five-fold (thus making twenty-five. Moreover, there

are two other phases corresponding to) the oneness that precedes (the
unfolding differentiation of these phases) and the subsequent oneness

(when it ends. Thus, making twenty-seven in all). (32cd-33ab)
By the association (of each one) with Power and its possessor, (the
number of phases and beads) is there said to be double (the previous one,
thatis,
fifty-four). Thus, when itis double the measure, one should perform
the depositionin two forms, (one for Śiva and the other for Śakti). (33cd34ab)
Then again, when that is double, by (depositing) that (in the
forward and reverse order, that is,) in the two sequences of emanation and
withdrawal, (they become one hundred and eight). Either (the fifty letters
of) Mātṛkā or (those of) Mālinī may be deposited (onto the rosary that)
measures fifty (beads). (34cd-35ab)
The teacher should deposit both the two (that is, Mātṛkā as well as
Mālinī) on the most excellent (rosary which is made of one hundred and

fifteen beads,) after having deposited the fifteen Mantras taught previously

as the main ones for the rite of initiation.” (35cd-36ab)
Or if the rosary is made (of beads) numbering the principles,

worlds, Forces, Mantras, parts of Mantras (pada) or phonemes, the teacher

should perform the corresponding deposition (onto it). (36cd-37ab)

Once the rosary has been made, everything (that needs be done to
purify it etc.) is as with the sacrificial surface. Once it has been worshipped,
one should repeat Mantra tirelessly with that same (rosary). This is the
procedure taught in the venerable Mālinīvijayottara: ‘rotating (the rosary)
like a wheel, (repeating the Mantra with each bead), whatever he says, that
is Mantra, and whatever he sees he offers as an oblation, by introducing it

into the fire of consciousness.” (37cd-39)

The group of five faces ‘is five-fold’, because it is multiplied by the
group of five energies commencing with consciousness, thus making twentyfive. This is the meaning. “Oneness’ is the single nature (rūpa) that transcends
(the domain of) limiting adjuncts (upādhi). Thīs is the meaning. It is of two
See above, 17/39cd, 40ab.

27/39 is a paraphrase of MV 19/82-83ab, which is quoted by Jayaratha in the commentary. Note

that the MV continues by teaching that rotating the rosary in reverse, the mantras repeated with it
serve for various kinds of black magic. To this, as one would expect, Abhinava makes no

reference at all. Note also that although Chapter Nineteen of the MV is dedicated to the repetition
of mantra (japa) and associated matters, such as the types of rosary one can use as an aid to this,
none of these details are mentioned in the MV, although Abhinava claims that this procedure is

taught there. Itis possible that a part of this chapter of the MV has been lost. But thisis unlikely,

as the procedure taught there does not coincide with this one. Thus, we maust surmise that
Abhinava learnt it independently either from his teacher Śambhunātha or some other Trika Tantra,

which is more likely. Anyway, the use of the Mālinī alphabet testifies to this being a Trika

procedure.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

kinds. (There is the oneness) that ‘precedes’, because the limiting adjuncts have
not arisen, and (the oneness) at the end, because the limiting adjuncts have been
stilled. In this way, there are twenty-seven (phases). (This is) ‘the penultimate’
(procedure,) because the last (kind of) rosary is one with fifty beads, and this
one is next to it. “There’, that is, (in the case when there are) two (sets of)

twenty-seven. ‘When it is double the measure’, that is, consists of fifty-four
(beads). ‘In two forms’, consisting of Śakti and (Śiva,) its possessor. ‘Then
again when that is double’, that is, one hundred and eight. “The most

excellent’ (rosary is the one) made of one hundred and fifteen beads. (The
teacher should deposit both) ‘the two’, Mātṛkā and Mālinī. (The Mantras
taught) ‘previouslyʼ (as the main ones) in chapter fifteen and seventeen. As is
said there (above in Chapter Seventeen):

‘The fifteen mantras (that are used) for the purification (that takes place)

by merger are, in due order, the group of eight beginning with Pibanī, the group

of six (limbs) beginning with the Weapon, and Parā.

‘Or if’, according to another view, (the beads of the rosary correspond
to the constituents of the six-fold Path). (This is the procedure) ‘taught’ in the
nineteenth chapter (of the Mālinīvijayottara). As is said there:

‘Then, with this (same) procedure, the wise man should fashion a rosary
made of gems, pearls, (or) mother-of-pear1 etc. (or) lotus seeds (padmākṣa) etc.
Or else it may be made of metal such as gold and measure fifty beads. It

should be just the length of one’s own arm and formed into the shape of

bracelet. Laying hold of that, hanging down (from one’s hand), made fragrant
with perfume and incense etc., having worshipped the Lord of Kula, place Śakti
there. One should utter the seed-syllable with each (bead) encapsulated

(puṭāntaga) by the seed syllable of Parā. One should connect the radiant KS at

the end to the one letter which is at the beginning.

One should recollect the first letter as the most powerful (bhūyaḥ),
pervading and presiding over all (the others). The letters are also of two kinds,
the procedure regarding (their) division is considered to be this one (as follows).

The pervasive letter (which is the first one) is in the second one. The second one
should be deposited as was the previous one (into the one that follows), and so
on with the third and the rest of the letters, ending with PH. This is also an

accepted way.

Above, 17/39cd-40ab.
“’ MV 19/76b reads śatārdhapratimāṁ for śatārdhākṣamitām, as is found here and in MS K of the
Mv.

! Ṟead samālambhya for samālabhya.
SAUḤ AṀ SAUḤ, SAUḤ ĀṀ SAUḤ etc. A phoneme becomes a seed syllable — bīja – when
anusvāra (ṀM) is added to it. It appears from the context that this is meant here.

MV 17/75-78. This makes AKS. Thus, the word for ‘rosary’ is akṣamālā the ‘garland of Akṣa’,

which also means the garland of all the letters from A to KS. Note that in this way there are fifty

letters (with KS as extra on the end of the series of 49) and an extra (SAUḤ) AKṢA (SAUḤ) for

the central bead, making 51 beads all together.

4 This procedure is for the Mālinī alphabet that ends with PH. Assuming the presence of Parā’s
seed syllable as before, the units are SAUḤ Nṛ SAUḤ, SAUḤ 1R SAUḤ etc.

TANTRĀLOKA

Having then accordingly recollected Śakti one-pointedly as the radiant
light of the thread (sāūtrābhā), one should place Her in the middle of the AKṢA
(on the central bead) in order to complete the rosary (akṣasūtra). Rotating (the
rosary) like a wheel (repeating the Mantra with each bead), (whatever) he says
here is all considered to be (prakalpate) the repetition of mantra that serves (to

atṭain) the accomplishment of mantra (mantrasiddhi). Whatever he sees is, in

the same way, an oblation here into the blazing reality (of consciousness).”

Even though the defining characteristics of the sacrificial jar have been

stated, now, in order to further present its varieties, he explains (the same from)

another point of view.

The Sacrificial Jar

aaTaāī fatk:. ga kṝr atā: 1

iekezetar̄kuḵv|tcccEtczE: !
athavārghamahāpātraṁ kuryāt tac cottaraṁ param ḷ
nārikelam atho bailvaṁ sauvarṇaṁ rājataṁ ca vā || 40 ||
tasyāpy eṣa vidhiḥ sarvaḥ pratiṣṭhādau prakīrtitaḥ |
tan niṣkamparasaiḥ pūrṇaṁ kr̥tvāsmin pūjayet kramam || 41 I|

Or else, the great sacrificial jar may be made of coconut, bilva,

gold or silver, (bearing in mind that the type) which follows (in this series of
options) is superior (to that which precedes). The procedure (to follow) for
its consecration etc. also is all as has been explained (before, in the
preceding cases). Having filled it with (the sacrificial) fluids meant for those
without fear (niṣkamparasa), (the deities of) the liturgy (krama) should be
worshipped within it. (40-41)
The

c“(sacrificīal)

fluids

meant

for

those

without

fear

(niṣkamparasa) are the (bodily) secretions (offered and consumed by) Kaula

adepts and the like, such as, for example, the Five Nectars (pañcāmṛta). This
is the meaning.

“ MV 9/82a reads bhramayed enāṁ – he should make it rotate’ for TĀv 27/3| bhramayann etad
– ‘rotating it.
“ MV 19/75-83. Note that the procedure in the MV, even though Jayaratha quotes it here, does
not fully coincide with the one Abhinava presents, which we must, therefore, presume is from
some other sourcc.
Aegle Marmelos.
“ Rcad vīrarasādibhiḥ for vīrasandhibhiḥ. Pehaps vīraṣyandibhiḥ (‘that ooze from (the bodies of
Kaula adepts’).
The Five Ṅectars (pyaicāmṛta) are common offerngs in all kinds of Sanskritic ṅituals. They are
normally milk, coagulated or sour milk, buttr, honey and sugar. Or else, they may be th five
products of a cow (pañcagavya), namely, cow urine and dung, curd, milk and clarfied butter (see

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

=ṁāīāā ũa] #īa {q TGT T: |

THIHHĀA
TT fīk r̥̄TĨ dTīḠUTT I #R II

TSIIĪ√ TrJTṬJĪHTaTTĪ
JRATJ ãq] I

>āīḤa 7 qṬSA TRITJT fFTRTT: I

3 1

adhomukhaṁ sadā sthāpyaṁ pūjitaṁ pūjane punaḥ |
tat pātramunmukhaṁ tac ca riktaṁ kuryān na tādṛśam || 42 |I
pūjānte tadrasāpūrṇam ātmānaṁ pravidhāya tat |
adhomukhaṁ ca saṁpūjya sthāpayeta vicakṣaṇaḥ || 43 ||
(The sacrificial vessel) should always be installed facing down and
worshipped (like that when it is consecrated). However, in the course of
worship, that vessel (should be placed in its normal position,) facing

towards (the worshipper, taking care) that it should not be (completely)
emptied. It should be just the same at the end of worship, (as the officiant

drinks from it, and so) completely fills (and satiates) himself with (the

aesthetic delight – rasa – of) its (sacrificial) flnids (rasa). (Then,) the

(sagacious and) skilled (officiant,) having worshipped (again), should
(again) place it upside down. (42-43)

(The sacrificial vessel is) ‘worshipped’ with the Vidyā of the sacrificial

vessel etc. ‘In the course of worship” of the Mantras etc. of one’s own choice,

(it should be facing the officiant) and ‘it should be just the same’ (at the end of
worship), that is, facing (him).

In order to present other supports (on which to) worship (may) also take
place (pūjādhāra) taught in (certain other) particular scriptures, he says:
Other Supports on which to Worship the Deity

EĀāUUGAHHIETHŪKETAAĀCĪIḤ
fer īaī ādT=ġlrcātōrr̥aṭtīq I `% 1
SŚP vol. 2, p. 30). In Kaula ritual these five may be replaced or supplemented by Kaula sacrificial
substances (kuladravya), normally considered to be very impure, called the Five Jewels. See

below, note 29,55.
Saṇḍerson (2007: 375 n. 463): ‘No text of this name has been mentioned elsewhere in the

literature known to me, but it is no doubt either the Kālīkula or a text closely related to it. For we
have a close parallel in the Kālīkulapañcaśataka (4171cd-72ab) referring to the worship of the
phase of withdrawal.” Sanderson has the following lines in my edition of that text in mind:

athavā cchurikāṁ sthāpyā kartarīṁ vā sudāruṇām ||
mahāmakuṭapṛsthe [k, kh: mahāmukupṛṣṭhe] tu pūjyā saṁhārabhairavī|
‘Or else, Saṁhārabhairavī should be installed on a blade or a very fearsome sword or on
the surface of a larṣe mirror and should be worshipped (there).’
Clcaty Sanderson changedhis mind from 2001, where he lits the Kālīmakha as a
separate text (2001: p. 4 1)..

TANTRĀLOKA

-rt=sīt

rdt SaTTIN
Z ḍJs] Çrāq] |
āR TĪITIŪ

khaḍgaṁ kr̥pāṇikāṁ yad vā kartarīṁ makuraṁ ca vā |
vimalaṁ tat tathã kuryãc chrĩmatkãālīnukhoditam || 44 ||
śrībhairavakule ʻpy uktaṁ kulaparvaprapūjane |
sthaṇḍile ‘gnau pate liṅge pātre padme ‘tha maṇḍale | 45 ||
mūrtau ghaṭe `strasaṅghāte paṭe sūtre ‘tha pūjayet |
svena svenopacāreṇa saṅkaraṁ varjayed iti |l 46 ||
It is said in the venerable Kālmukha that a sword, a blade, a
dagger, or a mirror without blemish may also (serve as the supports on

which to worship the deity) in the same way. It is also said in the venerable
Bhairavakula, that during the celebration that takes place on Kula feast

days (kulaparvan), one should worship (the deity) with its own

appropriate offerings (upacāra) on the sacrificial surface, in the fire, on a
cloth, in a liṅga, a (sacrificial) vessel, a lotus, a maṇḍala, an icon (mūrti), a
jar, on an assemblage of weapons, a jar, or on a thread. One should avoid

mixing them up. (44-46)

‘Its own appropriate offerings’ are those that are appropriate to, for
example, the condition of a householder. As is said:
‘One should worship, in accord with the enjoined procedure, in the
house with (sacrificial) substances, and in the cremation ground with

(substances) that come from that (place). One should not mix them up.”

Surely (one may ask), what is the use of having many supports on
which to worship, such as the sacrificial surface and the rest? Taking this doubt
into consideration, he presents a classification of their area (of application).

gaā |
hEḻazdcczirē Eāṭe: Ḷx aṇgāfszṝā I| ` 9 ||
Instead of ‘during the celebration that take place on Kula feast daysʼ, it is possible that

kulaparvaprapījane refers to a scction of the Bhairavakula dedicated to thīs subject.

Jayaratha underṣtands svena svenopacāreṇa to mean offerings appropriate to onoself, This is a

possible interpretation, however the repetition of the possessive svena suggests the offerings

should be appropriate to each particular object and the deity present in it. This is effectvely what
Abhinava himself says in the following verse.
This verse may be from the Bhairavakula, as Jayaratha quotes itas part of his commentary on a

passage Abhinava quotes from therc. However, that is unlikely, as it does not contain any wording

of Abhinava’s citation. Indeed, the verse Jayaratha quotes is not really dealing with the same
issue.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

yathāpsu śāntaye mantrās tadvad astrādiṣu dhruvam |
Śatrucchedādikartāraḥ kāmyo ‘taḥ saṅkarojjhitaḥ || 47 II
Just as Mantras (projected) into water serve to bring peace, in the
same way (conversely, those projected) onto weapons and the like certainly
destroy (one’s) enemies etc. Thus (it is for this reason) that a magical rite

(performed with a desire for a specific goal) (kāmya) is free of admixture.

(47)

‘Thus’,

because

what these

(magical

rites)

do

is

fixed

(and

predetermined, there is no admixture). Thus, one who desires peace (and to

tranquilize restless ghosts) should offer worship in water, not on weapons and
the like.

Surely (one may ask), what is the use of (all) these many (varieties) in
this way for one who has no desire? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TṀĪT T Ñ TTTGGĀTTTTTTTTTR, JTT |
ŪṬTRṬrī +Ti ATTTAIĀĪRHTRTT I 5¢ 1I

īeṛaāī Ṭ̄Td dTgJG TTTHĀTĒTTTḤ |
gJā. dfīṁhd
ad̃ fakr. aḷã ṇ x. 1
akāmasya tu te tattatsthānopādhivaśād dhruvam |
pāśakartanasaṁśuddhatattvāpyāyādikāriṇaḥ l) 48 II
athavā puṣṭakaṁ tādṛg rahahśāstrakramombhitam ḷ
suśuddhaṁ dīkṣitakr̥taṁ tatrāpy eṣa vidhiḥ smṛtaḥ || 49 ||
Whereas for one who has no desire, (his mantras) sever the fetters
(of the soul) and nourish the reality levels that have been purified etc.,

(operating variously) according to the limiting adjuncts associated with
each particular place (on the Path onto which they are projected).
Or else, the same kind of procedure is said (to apply) to (a sacred)
book that, very pure and composed by an initiate in which the liturgies of
the secret scriptures are woven together (umbhita) (can serve as a support
on which to worship). (48-49)

‘Or else’ from another point of view, as the liturgies of the secret

scriptures are woven together (umbhita) (in such a book,) and also because it is
tolerant towards all (kinds of) ritual action, it is (implicitly) declared that it is
conducive (and in accord with them, as are the other supports on which to

worship). It is ‘composed’, that is, written.

Having defined in this way the nature of a Liṅga (and the representation
of deity in which it is present and worshipped in general), in order to define the
various types of worship, he says:

TANTRĀLOKA

The Various Types of Worship (pujābhedaḥ)

zṇ fxx fex gaītr vāēaīīḹ arg 1 u2 1

sfr̥arai

i 7Ṭē-: ũaĩa 7

ṜIEUEUEIEĀKIEĒĀSTEITGIRĀI
itthaṁ syayaṁpratiṣṭheṣu yāvad yāvat sthitir bhavet |

vibhavais tarpaṇaṁ śudáhis tāvad vicchedavarjanam | 5O Il

ata eva yadā bhūridinaṁ maṇḍalakalpanam |
tadā dine dine kuryād vibhavais tarpaṇaṁ bahu l| 51 II
pratiṣṭhāyāṁ ca sarvatra guruḥ pūrvoditaṁ param |
satattvam anuṣandhāya saṁnidhiṁ sphuṭam ācaret || 52 ||

(It is essential) to purify and lustrate (tarpaṇa) (the Liṅgas and
icons etc.) installed in this way by oneself lavishly, (regularly, and)
without a break, for as long as they are functional. Thus if, (for example), a
maṇḍala that has been fashioned to last for many days, it should be

lustrated daily abundantly. When installing (a deity) the teacher should, in

all respects, conjoin (himself in) meditation with the supreme reality and its

essential nature mentioned previously, and having done so, bring (the deity)
into his presence (sarīnidhi) in a clearly evident manner (in the outer icon).

(50-52)

(The lustration should be) ‘without a break’. The meaning is that,
(taking care to) avoid an interruption, (it should be) continuous (and regularly

done without fail). ‘Thus’ – because it is necessary to perform lustrations etc.
without a break.
Surely, (you said previously):

‘As long as (he has not) attained a state of identification (with the deity,
or) until the desired fruit has not arisen, a spiritual son (putraka) and adept

(sādhaka) may resort (samāśrayet) to a manifest (outwardly visible iconic form)
or (to a mental representation or an aniconic form in which the deity) is not

(externally visibly) manifest.’

According to this teaching, it is said that spiritual sons etc. resort to (the
worship of) Liṅgas etc. until the particular intended result is not attained. What

should be done after that? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The word is vibhavaiḥ. The literal sense is ‘with (all) the monetary means (at one’s disposal).
Above, 27/9. The first line is quoted above in TĀv ad 27/10-21ab.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

fiā g Tr-āhvīā

3Tīmās̄ daraái rafkraiṁ fāga a 1 yx 1

rjfkrtṣṣ?

qTTT-TTĀ
I -TSN ḍṬSJGĀŪT |

siddhe tu tanmayībhāve phale putrakasādhakaiḥ |

anyasmai taddvayād anyatarasmai tat samarpyate || 53 II
tasyāpy eṣa vidhiḥ sarvas tadalābhe tu sarvathā |
agādhe ‘ʻmbhasi tat kṣepyaṁ kṣamayitvā visṛjya ca || 54 II
ity eṣa svapratiṣṭhānavidhiḥ Śśivanirūpitaḥ |
parapratiṣṭhite liṅge bāṇīye ‘tha svayaṁbhuvi l| 55 ||
sarvam āsanapakṣe prāṅ nyasya saṁpūjayet kramam |
When the spiritual sons and the adepts have attained a state of
identification (with the deity which is their desired) fruit, that (object of
worship) is offered to another (initiate) that differs from those two (kinds).
AII the procedure (to be observed) in his regard is the same. If one cannot
find (anybody who is fit to do this) in all respects, (the outer icon) should be
thrown into deep water, after having asked (the deity’s) forgiveness (for
any omissions or errors committed in the course of its worship), and

(formally) dismissed (it). Thisis the procedure described by Śiva Himself
for one’s own (personal) installation (of the deity). (52-55ab)
When a Liṅga has (already been) installed by others, whether it be
made of precious stones (bāṇa) or (a natural) self-generated (svayaṁbhū)

one, one should first of all deposit all (the mantras of the principles, as is
done)in the rite of (Śiva’s) Throne, and then worship the liturgy (krama)

(within it). (S5cd-56ab)

One could also understand the expression svapratṣthānavidhiḥ.as svapratiṣṭhāne vidhiḥ
meaning that ‘(this is the procedure (described by Śiva Himself) for his own installation.
These natural stones that are discovered to be liṅgas.

Here Abhinava is saying that the characteristic Trika Trident should be projected onto the Liṅga
in the manner taught above in 15/297cd ff. Thus, this is quite literally a Trika Liṅga, within which

the deities of the Trka are worshipped. See following note.

The term ‘krama’ denotes the configurations of mantras, and hence mantra deities, that are

invoked in the course of the systematic (kramika) worship deity of which they are the entourage.
Consider the simple basic example of a maṇḍala. ts form, built up from geometric figures and

also sometimes icons (such as the Trident), is determined by the configuration of deities and the
like around the main deity (alone or with a consort) installed in the centre. In the course of

worship, the surrounding deities are invoked and worshipped through their mantras in the location

of the maṇḍala allotṭed to them in the course of the sequence — krama – of the liturgy. The whole

procedure is thus called kramapūjā or karmārcana, which means, in both cases, the worship of the
Krama’, or through, in, and by means of the Krama. In the same way, the teachers of the tradition

are worshipped in the Gurumaṇḍala, sacred sites in the Pīṭhamaṇḍala and so on in ‘due order –

TANTRĀLOKA

If one cannot find someone who is fit to offer that in that way, then

what should they do? With this doubt in mind, he says ‘if one cannot find
(anybody who is fit to do this) etc. ‘(A natural) self-generated (svayaṁbhū)

(liṅga) is, in other words, one (found in nature,) which is as described in the

procedure (taught in the scriptures). ‘One should first of all deposit all’ (the
mantras of the principles onto it, as taught for the rite of Śiva’s Throne).
Surely, the self-generated and other (kinds of Liṅga) have come down
(into this world) from the midst of the pure or impure Path. So how can this be

worshipped here which is beyond all the Path? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Td T-aT; adĪ; fṜīaīaṁē:

.F. I

q ā STTTHIRX I 49II

śuddhāśuddhādhvajāḥ sarve mantrāḥ sarvaḥ śivāntakaḥ || 56 |I
adhvā cehāsane proktas tat sarvatrārcayed idam |
āvāhanaviṣṛṣṭī tu tatra prāgvat samācaret || 57 ||
AII| Mantras are born from the pure and impure Paths.
(Moreover,) it is said that the entire Path ending with Śiva is (present) here
in (His) Throne. (Thus,) it should be worshiped (anyway,) everywhere (in
all cases). The invocation and dismissal (of the deity) should be done (in the

same way) as before. (56cd-57)

Nor is this established (to be correct) by just reasoning alone.
Accordingly, he says:

yathākramam. Thīs manner of understanding the liturgy and the process of worship (krama) is
distinctive of Kaula and proto-Kaula ritual, as is the terminology. Not found in the Kāpālika
Brahmayāmala, one of the earliest Bhairava Tantras, the term emerges in the Kālīmata of the

Jayadrathayāmala. In the context of the worship of forms of Kālī – the Goddess of Time and

redemptive Death - the Krama is the uniquely distinctive manner in which she and her entourage
are worshipped. There, the Krama is not set in space, it is set in time. The sequences of creation,
preservation, and destruction, and the embracing Fourth, are the ‘locations’ of the divine forms

that suround the goddess. In this case, krama is a most appropriate and understandable term. This
is n0 less so when transposed to the worship of other goddesses not specifically associated with
Time and Eternity.
In this case, the Krama is the Trikakrama, that is, the sequence of mantras and

depositions taught above in 15/297cd ff. for the projection and worship of the Trika Trident and
its deities. See previous note.
“ In thc light of Jayaratha’s introductory question, one would expect liṅgāḥ, but that would not be
correct Sanskrit. We should therefore understand here that Jayaratha equates the mantras with

Liṅgas and iconic forms in general. This makes sense, as the Deities are present in their
iconic/aniconic representations as mantras.
“As before’ means
according to the procedure taught in Chapter Fifteen to fashion and worship
the Trident and its dities, which is the Trika initiate’s basic daily worship (nityā pājā). t appears

that in all the places and things Abhinava has listed where the deity may be worshipped, the Trika

initiate can project and worship the Trdent into any of them in this same way. The Trika Śaivite

worships the Trika Trident with the Trika Goddesses enthroned on it within the Liṅga in this

and s0 too in the other places. Outwardly,

reality he is worshiping the Trika goddesses

way,

it appears he is worshipping the Liṅga, whereas in

on the Trident.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

TJSG-< fāI āaṃī |

Taīāī JGAÑ ĪITTFITĀĪHĪRATTT: I| Ḷ¢ 1
uktaṁ tantre ‘py aghoreśe svacchande vibhunā tathā |

athavā pratyahaṁ proktamānārdhārdhanṇiyogataḥ || 58 II
kṛtveṣṭaṁ maṇḍalaṁ tatra samastaṁ kramam arcayet |

The pervasive Lord has said also in the Tantra Aghoreśa

Svacchanda (where we read): “Or else, after having fashioned (one’s own)

preferred maṇḍala by making it a quarter of the stated measure (given for
initiation), the entire liturgy (krama) should be celebrated there every
day.” (58-59ab)
‘The stated measure’ is said to be three handspans, as (is stated in the

passage) beginning with, ‘In the same way, in relation to the one (measuring)

three handspans . . .’

He concludes this (topic, saying):

bahuprakārabhinnasya liṅgasyārcā nirūpitā || 59 |
The worship of the liṅga, which is of many kinds, has (thus been)
described. (59cd)
This is the auspicious end.
The one called Jayaratha, who is skilful in describing the consciousness

that is the essential nature of the Liṅga of many kinds and modalities, has

commented on this, the twenty-seventh chapter (of the Tantrāloka).

This is the twenty-seventh chapter of the venerable Tantrālokaviveka,
called the Explanation (prakāśana) of the Worship of the Liṅga.

“ One could emend aghorese to aghoreṇa and translate ‘(thc pervasive Lord) Aghora (has said)°.
But this citation cannot be traced in the SvT. If the citation here refers to the Trika maṇḍala, as

Abhinava may be suggesting, we would not expect it to be, for that would make the Svacchanda a
Trika Tantra, which it is not. We know of the existence of an Aghoreśvaraṣvacchanda that
belonged to a group of Tantras related to the Svacchanda. We have noted above that ‘the worship
of the Krama is a distinctive feature of Kaula and proto-Kaula Tantras. Although not all Tantras
of the Vidyāpītha are Kaula in this sense, those Tantras that are belong to the Vidyāpītha. The

Brahmayāmala allocates the ‘eight times eight’ Bhairavatantras along°with the Yāmalas to the

Vidyāpītha, along with some other Tantras, amongst which is the Aghoreśvara (Dyczkowski

1988: p. 159 note 283). The SVT belongs to the Mantrapītha, of which it is the main Tantra. So it
is not surprising that we find no mention there of kramapūjā in general, and certainly not of the
Trikakramapūjā, to which Abhinava refers here.

Appendix to Chapter Sixteen
Animal Sacrifice according to Chapter Twenty of the Netratantra
Chapter twenty of the Netratantra deals with animal sacrifice, which is

the topic of TĀ 16/28 ff. It has been translated here to serve as a general

orientation to the moral norms in this regard and an overview of the procedure.
We notice the elaboration here of the matters concerning the animal’s vital
breath, as in Abhinava’s account. We are reminded of the Vedic equivalent

where the animal is offered to Vāyu, the god of the Wind, the cosmic breath.

uktaṁ devena tatsarvaṁ paripṛṣṭaṁ hi yanmayā |
adhunā śrotumicchāmi saṁśayo.ayaṁ hṛdi sthitaḥ || 1 II
yoginyo mātaraścaiva śākinyo balavattarāḥ |
kathaṁ parapurāt prāṇān kṣaṇādākarṣayanti tāḥ || 2 ||
kasmācca nirghṛṇā raudrāḥ kiṁ vā tāsāṁ prayojanam |
etat sarvam aśeṣeṇa bhagavan vaktum arhasi || 3 I|

Śrotum icchāmi iti devī praśnavākyārthanirṇayam adhigantum icchati | katham
iti, kasmād .iti, kiṁ vety uktibhiḥ prakārahetuprayojanaviṣayāṁ jijñāsāṁ
sphuṭayati || 3 I|
tannirṇayāya śrībhagavān uvāca
“The Lord has taught all that I have asked. Now I wish to hear (more).

There is this doubt in my heart. How do the Yoginīs, Mothers and the very

powerful Śākinīs, drag out the vital breaths from the body of others in (just) a

moment? Why are the Rudras merciless? What is their purpose? O Lord, you
should tell me all that without exception.’ (1-3)

‘I want to hear’ – (the goddess) wants to understand the teaching

concerning the subject of the question. The words ‘how’, ‘why’ and ‘what’
serve to clarify what she wishes to know concerning the manner, cause and
purpose (of this procedure). In order to teach that, the venerable Lord said:
śrṛṇu devi pravakṣyāmi rahasyaṁ paramādbhutam !|
yathā prāṇāñjighāṁsanti paśūnāṁ patiśāsanāt |/ 4 ||
rāgadveṣavimuktās tā lobhamohavivarjitāḥ |

yāgārthaṁ devadevasya paśūn vai prokṣayanti tāḥ |I 5 II
na lobhena na hiṁsārthaṁ na caiva hi jighāṁsayā |

mahābhairavadevasya śāsanaṁ pālayanti tāḥ l 6 ||
tadarthaṁ paśavaḥ srṣṭāḥ svayam eva svayaṁbhuvā |
paśavaḥ patiyāgārtham upayuktā na cānyathā || ] II

‘Listen, O goddess, I will tell you a supremely astonishing secret, that
is, how (the priests) do violence to the vital breaths of the sacrificial animals
according to the Lord’s teaching (patiśāsana). Free of attachment and aversion,

they are devoid of greed and delusion. They consecrate (prokṣayanti) (and so
prepare the offering of) the sacrificial animals of the God of the gods for the

APPENDIX CHAPTER SIXTEEN

sacrifice. They do not protect the teachings of the god Mahābhairava out of
greed, in order to do violence or murder. The sacrificial animals were created
for that purpose and (the priests) themselves are naturally born (for that). The
sacrificial animals are used for the sacrifice of the Lord and in no other way.’

(4-7)

patiśāsanād iti tadāśritya | evaṁ kasmād iti hetuḥ, yāgārtham ity anena ca
prayojanaṁ nirṇītam | lobhamoha ityādinā nirghṛṇatvaṁ pratyuktam |
prokṣayanti upahārāya yojayanti | hiṁsārtham upadravāya | tad artham iti
yāgāya | svayam evety anena patiśāsanād ity uktiḥ pramāṇīkṛtā | na ceti ca

evārthe || 7 I|

(This is done) ‘according to the Lord’s teachingʼ, that is, having adopted
it. In this way (the question) ‘why’ is (in relation to) the cause. By (saying) ‘for
the sacrifice’, the purpose is taught. (By saying) ‘devoid of greed and delusion’,
he is replying (to the accusation of) being cruel. ‘They consecrate’ means (the
priests) appoint them to be an offering. The purpose of violence is to attack
(another violently). The purpose of (the slaughter of the sacrificial animal) is for
the sacrifice. Saying ‘by themselves alone’, the statement ‘by the Lord’s
teachingʼ is given authority. (The word) and (in the expression) ‘and not’ is in
the sense of ‘indeedʼ.
eṣām anugrahārthāya paśūnāṁ tu varānane |

mocayanti ca pāpebhyaḥ pāpaughāṅṁś chedayanti tān |l 8 II

paśūnām upayuktānāṁ nityamūrdhvagatir bhavet |
ūrdhvagatiḥ śuddhavidyādipadasṛṣṭir muktir vā |

‘O fair-faced lady, the sacrificial animals (are offered) in order to grace

them (with liberation). (The Mothers and Yoginīs etc. to whom they are offered)

release them' from sins, and they sever their mass of fetters. The sacrificial
animals used (in this way) always have the upward way.’
‘The upward way’ is the emanation of the plane of Śuddha Vidyā etc. or
liberation.
trividhena tu yogena yojayanti śivājñayā | 9 l|
pareṇaiva hi sūkṣmeṇa sthūlena tritayena tu |
Yyojayanti na caivātra ghātayanti balena tāḥ || 10 ||
paraḥ sarvãtmako ʻnanto niṣkriyo nirmalas tu yaḥ !
vyāpakaḥ parameśānaḥ sarvakāraṇakāraṇam |I 1 1 |I
sarvabhūtāntarāvasthaḥ sarvānugrahakārakaḥ |
tasminn eva niyuktās tā nirmalā vigataklamāḥ || 12 ||

ekībhāvam anuprāpya na viyuktāḥ kathaṅṁcana |

tacchaktau tu vilīnās tā icchārūpeṇa saṁsthitāḥ || 13 |I
jñānotkarṣāḥ kriyāvasthā yāgayogāvadhūtikāḥ |
! Amṛteśatantra MS reads tāḥ for tān.

NT 20/8-9ab is cited in TĀv ad 16/58cd-59ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

tadbhāvaṁ tu samāsthāya tadrūpaṁ yojayanti yān || 14 II
te muktāḥ śivabhūtās tu śivaśaktyā śiveritāḥ |
nirmalāḥ Sivarūpās tu tatprabhāvād bhavanti call 15 ||
‘(The yoginīs) conjoin (thatis, offer the sacrificial animals) by means
of three kinds of the Yogain accord with Śiva’s command, thatis, by the three
supreme, subtle and gross. (The yoginīs) conjoin (and so offer the animals); they
do not strike them down violently (balena). (9cd-10)
The Supreme Lord, the cause of all causes is supreme, the nature of all
things, endless, actionless, stainless, and pervasive. Completely penetrated into

Him (and attained supreme bliss), they are free of impurity and (bodily) fatigue,

having attained a state of oneness (with Him, the yoginīs) are never separated
(from the Lord). (11-13ab)
Merged into His power, they abide there in the form of the will (as the
expansion of consciousness free of thought constructs. Their) knowledge is
extraordinary. They are immersed in the state of (unfolding) action (fuelled by
knowledge). They shake not in the (animal) sacrifice and in the Yoga (of the
atṭainment of oneness with the Lord). (I3cd-14ab)
Having assumed that state and impelled by Śiva and (His) power, the
(sacrificial animals) they conjoin to that nature become Śiva and are liberated.

By the (yoginīs) power, free ofimpurity, their natureis Śiva. (4cd-15)
yathā yogena dīkṣāyāṁ śivatvam upalabhyate |

tathā vai yogiyogena śivatvamupayānti te || 16 ||
atyantamalinasyāsya pūrvoktasyādhikāriṇaḥ |

malapradhvastarūpasya nairmalyaṁ vyañjayanti tāḥ || 17 |I
Just as one attains Śiva’s state in the course of initiation by Yoga, in the

same way by the Yoga of the yoginīs, (the sacrificial animals) attain Śiva’s
state. (The yoginīs) make manifest the purity of the embodied being mentioned
before, who is extremely tainted and fallen due to (that) impurity. (16-17)
mūlacchedena teṣāṁ hi jighāṁsanti malatrayam |
malatrayaviyuktasya śarīraṁ na prarohati || 18 II
dīpavad yojanaṁ tasya paśor naiva hi ghātanam ḷ
vyāpakena svarūpeṇa svaśaktivibhavena ca || 19 ||
trotayanti paśoḥ pāśān śarīraṁ yena naśyati |
Śśarīreṇa pranaṣṭena mokṣaṇaṁ nahi māraṇam || 20 l
dr̥ḍhapraruḍhapāśasya baddhasya puruṣasya yaḥ |
viyogas tu śarīreṇa maraṇaṁ tadvidurbudhāḥ || 21 ||
‘By severing the root (of the fettered state) of the sacrificial animal,

(the yoginīs) destroy (its) three impurities. The body of (the soul) that has been
disconnected from the three Impurities does not develop (again in another life).

NT rcads teṣāṁ – ‘their’ for paśor – ‘of the sacrificial animal’. The latter is confirmed by the
same reading in the manuscript of the Amṛteśatantra (Nepal Archive MS no 1/285, NGMPP reel
no. B25/4).

APPENDIX CHAPTER SIXTEEN

The conjunction of (the soul) of the sacrificial animal (with the supreme reality)
is like an initiation; it does not (amount to) killing it.

(The supreme yoginīs) destroy the fetters of the sacrificial animal by
(Śiva’s) essential pervasive nature and by the glorious outpouring (vibhava) of
His own power’. It is by that (destruction) that (its) body is destroyed. The
liberation that takes place when the body is destroyed (in this way) is not (the
same as) killing (an animal). The wise know that the killing (of a person) is the
disconnection from the body of a person who is bound with fetters that are firm

and well developed.” (18-21)

evaṁ paraḥ prakāśas tu sūkṣmaś caivādhunocyate |
sūkṣmaṁ śaktimayaṁ jñānaṁ jñānaśaktyā tu gamyate || 22.|
arāvarāvarāviṇyā dhvanibhāvānuṣārakam |

Śaktimayaṁ

citsphurattāpradhānam,

na

tu

prāgvat

śāmbhavaprakāśa-

viśrāntyātma, jñānaśaktyā dehādipramātṛtāpraśamanonmagnasaṁvidā gamyate
prāpyate | kīdṛśyā na vidyate rāvo mantraviśeṣoccāradhvanir yasya tādṛg yo
rāvaḥ sahajo nādāmarśas tena rāvīṇyā pronmiṣat-parāhaṁvimarśarūpayā |
kīdṛśaṁ jñānam ity āha dhvaner nādāmarśasya bhāvaḥ sattā, tadanusaraṇaṁ
tanmayībhāvaṁ prāptam |ḷ
“Such is the supreme Light. Now the subtle (form of Yoga) will be
taught. The knowledge that is in consonance with the resonant state (of
consciousness) that is subtle and made of Śakti is understood by the power of

knowledge that is the resounding (energy) (rāviṇī) of the sound of silence.” (2223ab)

It is ‘made of Śakti’; that is, it is predominantly the vibrant effulgence
of consciousness. It is not, as before (in the previous form of yoga), repose
within the Śāmbhava Light. Itis ‘understood’, thatis, attained ‘by the power of
knowledgeʼ, thatis, the consciousness that has emerged by the quelling of the
subjectivity of the body etc. What is that like, of which there is no ‘sound’? It is
that which possesses the resonance of a special (extraordinary) utterance of
Mantra. The ʻsoundʼ that is like that is innate reflective awareness of Sound.
Thus, (it is) the resounding (energy) (rāviṇī) which is the unfolding of the
reflective awareness of supreme subjectivity (parāham). How is (this)
‘knowledge’? He says that it is the being (sattā) of the resonance (dhvani) of the
reflective awareness of Sound. Following in consonance with that, (knowledge)

has attained a state of oneness with it.

siddhānāṁ siddhidaṁ jñānaṁ khecaryaḥ paryupāsate || 23 ||

Here the rcading is dīkṣāvad yojanaṁ, NT reads dpavad. The MS of the Amṛteśatantra reads
dīkṣaiva yojane, which confirms the rcadng here.
1 am following Kṣemarāja, who comments on this linc: vyāpakena sivātmanā |
svaśaktivibhavena śāktena | yeneti troanena.
AT reads mokṣaṇaṁ na jighāṁsanaṁ lberation is not violent killng’.
NT 20718-2 ciṭed in TĀv ad 16/59cd-62.

TANTRĀLOKA

siddhāḥ śrīkhagendrādyāḥ, khecaryaḥ saṁvidgaganacāriṇyo devyaḥ | paritaḥ
samantād upāsate tanmayatvena sphuranti || 23 ||
yady api śāktaṁ jñānaṁ sarveṣāṁ bhittiḥ, tathāpi
ajñānenāvṛtaṁ jñānaṁ paśūnāṁ samalaṁ sthitam |
ajñānaṁ māyāśaktikṛtam ātmany anātmatāpratipattipurahsaram anātmani
dehādāv ātmābhimānātma || yata evam ato yogābhyāsaprabuddhena nijena

nirmalena tu tā devyā jñānenābhibhavanti tat | 24 |

yathā prabuddáhaḥ suptena krīḍate ca yatas tataḥ |
madirāsavapānena yathaivonmāditaḥ kvacit | 25 ||
krīḍate hy asvatantratvād bālo vā bhramyati kvacit |
unmatto vāpramattena preryate paśavas tathā || 26 ||
mātṛbhir guhyakaiḥ śaktyā svena yogabalena tu |
jīa ākṛṣyate kṣipraṁ paśūnāṁ yogavīryataḥ || 27 ||

‘That knowledge bestows attainment (siddhi) to Siddhas, and is
attended by the skyfaring goddesses.’ (23cd)
The Siddhas (are the Kaula teachers) beginning with the venerable
Khagendra. The ‘skyfaring goddesses’ are the goddesses who move in the Sky
of Consciousness. (That knowledge) is ‘attended’ all around and shines
radiantly as one with that nature. Although the knowledge of Śakti is the
foundation (bhitti) of all, even so
‘the knowledge of the fettered is enveloped by ignorance and sullied

with Impurity.” (24ab)

Ignorance is created by Māyā; it brings about the false notion that the
Self is in that which is not the Self, that is, the body etc., heralded by the
(mistaken) sense that what is not the Self is in the Śelf. For, in this way:

‘those goddesses overcome it by (their own) pure knowledge (awakened
by the practice of Yoga). (In this way,) just as an awakened person when asleep
plays in this way and that, or like one who is inebriated by drinking wine plays
because he is not free, or a child wanders around somewhere, or one whois mad
impels fettered beasts, so do the Mothers, Guhyakas (and other such beings) and
Śakti (impel him) by their power of Yoga. The soul of the sacrificial animalsis
quickly drawn out (of their bodies) by the (power of the) vitality of Yoga.’

(24cd-27)

yat tat paramam avyaktaṁ śāśvataṁ hy acalaṁ dhruvam|
tat prāpya yogamārgeṇa praviśya paradehataḥ || 28 ||
paro bhūtvā svaśaktyā tu jīvaṁ jīvena veṣṭayet |

vyat tad ityādi prāgvat | tat prāpya paraṁ cinmayaṁ balaṁ samāviśya yogamārgeṇeti
tattvārthacintāmaṇipradarśitāgamikagolakābhyāsāsāditasamastatadrasopalambhaḥ
.svadeha
.evāvikāsasthityā prāṇākarṣāpakarṣābhyām

APPENDIX CHAPTER SIXTEEN

asvatantrīkr̥taprāṇabalo yogī pādaśākhābrahma-randhrata ekatareṇa pathā
golakaṣṭhityaiva parahr̥dayaṁ praviśya paro bhūtveti
sañcāro vāyutattvastho vāyutattvaṁ ca buddhigam |
ahaṅkāragatā buddhiḥ sa cittattvaṁ samāśritaḥ ||
‘That which is supreme unmanifest (reality) is eternal, immobile, and
firm. Having attained that by the path of Yoga and entered in from another
body, being another, he should envelop the soul (of the animal) with (his own)
soul by his own power.” (28-29ab)
‘That which is’ (is to be understood) as before. ‘Having attained that’

supreme strength which is consciousness (cinmaya) and entered (into it) ‘by the
path of Yoga’. The attainment of all that juice (rasa), acquired by the practice of
(producing and ingesting) the ball (of vital juices) as explained in the
Tattvārthacintāmaṇi, by abiding in a state of abeyance (avikāsa) within one’s
own body. Having rendered the strength of the vital force dependent (on
himself) by dragging in and ejecting the vital breath, the yogi enters the heart of
the other (creature) by the single Path (that exits) from the Cavity of Brahma of

the tree of the body (pādaśākhā (?)), (his vital breath) assuming the state of a
ball. Then ‘being anotherʼ,

“The circulation is in the principle of Air and the principle of Air is in the
intellect. The intellect is in the ego, and that is grounded in the principle of

consciousness.”

ity āmnāyadṛṣṭyā paratrāhaṁpratītidārḍhye mātrāśataṁ sthitvā prāṇakṣobheṇa
taṁ kṣobhayitvā svendriyaśaktibhis tadindriyākramaṇapūrvam ātmaśaktiṣvīkrtasya parasya śarīraṁ sva-pariṣpandapravṛttinivṛttikrameṇātmaśarīrīkṛtya
jīvaṁ parapuryaṣṭakaṁ, jīvena svapuryaṣṭakena, svaśaktyeti pronmiṣitaśāktabalena svaprāṇena veṣṭayed ākramet || tad ittham

Abiding, in accord with this traditional doctrine, for a hundred measures

(of time), in order to make the sense of self which is elsewhere (in the other
body) firm (and stable). (First of all,) that (sacrificial animal) is aroused by
arousing the vital breath with the energies of his own senses. (Then, having)
entered into that (animal’s) senses and made the body of the other (that is, the

sacrificial animal,) whose vital energy (ātmaśakti) has been made one’s own,
into one’s own body, by the process of setting into operation and halting the
pulse of one’s (vital breath) (svaparispanda), ‘he should envelopʼ ‘the soul (of
the animal)ʼ, that is, the subtle body of the other (creature) ‘with (his own)
soulʼ, that is, with his own subtle body, ‘by his own power’, that is, with his
own vital breath, of which the strength of its power has unfolded. That is such
(as described here):

The Tattvārthacimāmaṇi is by Kallaṭabhaṭṭa, who wrote or commented on the Spandakārikā.
Abhinava refers to it as his authority conceming the manner of sacrficing an animal by
manipulating its vital breath. See TĀ 16/32-51, the rcference is in TĀ 16/50cd-51.

TANTRĀLOKA

ākramya taṁ hr̥diṣṭhaṁ vai adha ūrdhvapraveśataḥ || 29 l|
ekībhāvaṁ samāsādya samatvaṁ tatra cābhyaset |
paraṁ kãāraṇam ãśritya ṣvatantratvaṁ tadãbhyasetl| 30 ll
paraṁ kāraṇaṁ śāktaṁ balam āśritya tadgraheṇāvaṣṭabhya | tatra ceti paraṁ

prerayati yadevāhaṁ karomi, tadevāyaṁ karotv itīdṛśaṁ samabhyasyan tena

saha ekyam āṣādya svatantratvam abhyased iti jigamiṣuṁ nirodhayet tiṣṭhan
taṁ gamayed iti krameṇa taṁ ṣvaceṣṭāvaśagaṁ kuryāt | tad etad uktaṁ
gurubhiḥ tatstha asśnīyāt pibed gacchet tiṣṭhet supyāt tāvad yāvat
samāsāditasakalaceṣṭāphalaḥ ṣa yogī saṁpadyate tatas tam ānayed visṛjen
mohayed unmīlayed āpūrayed visiṣṭaṁ vā sthānaṁ prāpayet | ityādi l| 30 ||
‘Having crossed over into that (soul) which is located in (the animal’s)
heart by entering in below and above, and achieved a state of oneness (with the

sacrificial victim), he should practice (that) (balanced) oneness (samatava).
Having entered into the causal body of the other, he should then practice (his)
independence.’ (29cd-30)

‘Having entered into the causal body of the other’ (means), once having
entered into the strength of the power (of the vital breath), that is, blocked it by
laying hold of it. And there he impels the other, practicing (the exercise of his
will thinking): ‘may this (animal) do whatever I do’. Practicing in this way,

having achieved oneness with it, ‘he should practice (his) independenceʼ. (In

this way,) he should restrain (the victim) who wishes to go away, and when

standing he should cause it to move. In this way, he should bring his own

behaviour (svaceṣṭā) under control. That has been said by (our) venerable
teacher (in the Tattvārthacintāmaṇi (?)):

‘Present (there, the animal) should be made to eat, drink, move about,

stand still, and sleep until the yogi, who has attained the fruit of all (the
animal’s) activities, attains (complete control). Then he should cause it to come
(to him), dismiss it, delude it, open up its eyes, fill it, or else bring it to the
special place (where it is to be sacrificed).”
atha
vyāpakena svarūpeṇa śaktyā śaktiṁ tu dārayet |
samāveśabalād vīryabhūtāṁ vyāpakatām āsthāya ṣvaśaktyā
tatprāṇaśaktiṁ dārayet chedārtham ākṣipet |
tad etat saṁpuṭīkṛtya śakticchedaṁ tu kārayet || 31 |
tayā svaśaktyā sarvato valitvā paraprāṇaśaktiṁ cchurikāprayogeṇa cchindyād
ity arthaḥ || 31 II
Now: ‘By virtue of (his) pervasive nature, he should rend asunder the
energy (of the victim) with (his) energy. Assuming with his energy the
pervasive state which is vitality (vīrya) by the strength of (his) penetration
(samāveśa) (into consciousness) —

APPENDIX CHAPTER SIXTEEN

‘he should rend asunder the power of its vital breath and cast it forth in
order to cut it off; having encapsulated it, he should cause (its) power to be cut

off. (31)

The meaning is that, having encompassed the supreme power of the
vital breath completely (in all respects) by that, one’s own power, one should
sever it by making use of the (mantra of) the Razor.”
Śaktirūpaṁ tato devi sattvam āsthāya yogavit |
svasattvasattārūpeṇa citsūryatvena tāpayet || 32 I|

drāvayet tu parastho hi raśmīn raśmibhir arkavat |
Śšaktirāpaṁ prāṇaśaktipradhānaṁ sattvaṁ parajīvam āsthāya svīkṛtya yogī svasattvasya saṁbandhinā śāktasphurattātmasattārūpeṇa kāraṇena, citsāryatveneti
caitanyārkarūpitayā, santāpitaṁ kuryāt | tatas tadīyān cakṣurādiraśmīn pare
tatraiva paradehe, sthitaḥ san dīptaiḥ svaiś cakṣurādibhi raśmibhiḥ sūrya iva

somaraśmīn drāvayed vilāpayet |I

‘Then, O goddess, having laid hold of the (living) essence (sattva) (of

the victim) in the form of (its vital) energy (śakti), the knower of Yoga should
heat it with the Sun of consciousness, which is the essential being of his own
(living) essence. Esṣtablished in the other (i.e. the victim) he should, like the sun,

cause the rays (of the senses of the victim) to melt away by the rays (of his own
senses).” (20/333ab)

‘Having laid hold of”, that is, made his own, the other soul which is ‘the

(living) essence in the form of the energy’ that is predominantly the energy of

the vital breath. The yogi should heat it ‘with the Sun of consciousness’, that is,

with the (primal) cause, in the form of the Being which is the vibrant effulgence
of power associated with his own (living) essence. He should then cause ‘the
rays’ of sight and the rest (of the senses) ‘in the other’, whilst abiding just there
in the other body, to ‘melt away’ and be destroyed by means of the rays of his
own sight and the rest (of his senses), like the Sun, the rays of the Moon.
tatrāpi yogabalāt
yojayed hṛdaye sarvān śabdādīn indriyāṇi ca || 33 ||
bhūtāni rasabhūtāni guṇān eva hi sarvataḥ |
antaḥkaraṇasaṅghãtaṁ..
parasaṁbandhĩni viṣayabhũtabahirantahkaraṇãni proktavilãpanato
bhūtāni drutatvam āptāni sarvāṇi yojayed ātmany ekīkuryāt ||

rasa-

There also by the strength of Yoga:
‘he should conjoin all (the objects of sense) beginning with sound and
the senses, the gross elements in liquid form (rasabhūta) and qualities in every
way (as well as) the aggregate of the inner mental organs . . .’ (33cd-35a)

Conceming the Mantra of the Razor, see TĀ 19/10 ff. and the Appendix A to Chapter Nineteen.

TANTRĀLOKA

The objects of sense, gross elements, outer and inner organs of sense
a
iated with the other (creature i.e. the sacrificial victim) have become
liquid. By the aforementioned (process of) destruction, all of them have
assumed a fluid form. They should be conjoined together and made one within
oneself.
atha

grhītvā tat svacetasā || 34 ||
prav et tu tadā yogī puram ākramya sarvataḥ |
drutaṁ gṛhītaṁ tat sarvaṁ kṣipram ātmastham ānayet || 35 ||
tad iti pūrvoktaṁ sarvaṁ gṛhītvā, āgamoktadṛṣṭyā sādhyasya mūrdhadvāreṇa
niṣkramya cetasā puraṁ Śśarīraṁ praviśet | tatas tad ākramya śaktyā ʻsya yat
pūrvaṁ drutaṁ vilāpitaṁ saṁgrhītam, tat sarvaṁ kṣipram ātmaniṣṭhaṁ kuryāt

I|35 1|

Now ‘. . . having laid hold of that with his own mind, the yogi should
then enter, once invaded (ākramya), the body (of the victim) in every way.
Having quickly laid hold of all that, he should quickly place it within himself.’

(34d-35)

‘Having laid hold of° all ‘that’ was mentioned, and having made an exit

through the head of the victim (sādhya), in accord with the manner taught in the

scriptures, he should enter the body ‘with his mind’. Then ‘having invaded’ that
with the energy (of his consciousness), what was previously liquified, destroyed

and gathered together should all be quickly placed within oneself.
tad itthaṁ yogī
tatkṣaṇād ānayej jīvaṁ mudrāmantraprayogataḥ |

mudrā ‘tra prathamaṁ svaśarīraniḥsaraṇasamaye karaṅkiṇī, taccharīrākramaṇe krodhanā, tadraśmyādivilāpane lelihānā, tatpurād niḥsaraṇe khecarī,
svahṛtprāptau bhairavī | tad bandhasatattvaṁ śrīvijñānabhairavoddyote
‘smābhir darśitam | mantras tu pañcapiṇḍakṣurikākālarātryabhidhānaḥ
śrīguptatantrāt śrīpāūrvādidṛṣṭaḥ | tatprayogād yoginyaḥ kṣaṇāt parajīvam
ānayanti

That being such, the yogi ‘should that very moment bring forth the soul
(of the victim) by the application of mudrā and mantra.” (36ab)
The first muudrā here (in this case) when leaving one’s own body is

Karaṅkiṇī, and Krodhanā when invading that body. Lelihānā (is the mudrā

used) when destroying the rays (of its senses), Khecarī when going out of that

body, and Bhairavī when one has reached (back into) one’s own heart. I have

explained how they are formed and (their) nature in the commentary (uddyota)
of the venerable Vijñānabhairava. The mantra is (variously) called Pañcapiṇḍa,
Kṣurikā and Kaālarātri. It is seen in the Mālinīvijayottara and other (Tantras,)
beginning with the venerable Guptatantra. By making use of that, the yoginīs
brings forth the other soul (which is that of the sacrificial victim) in a moment.

APPENDIX CHAPTER SIXTEEN

anena vidhinā sīūkṣmaṁ yogī yogaṁ samabhyaset || 36 ||
tat sarvaṁ prāpnuyāt kṣipraṁ sūkṣmayogena yogavit |
prathamaṃ uktadr̥śā yogam abhyasyet tato yogavidanena sūkṣmeṇa yogena
tatsarvam iti jīvākarṣaṇam āgamoktaṁ ca tatsiddhiphalaṁ kṣipram āpnoti |
upasaṁharati
‘The yogi should practice subtle yoga by means of this procedure. The
knower of yoga quickly obtains all that by (this) subtle yoga.’ (36cd-37ab)
First of all, he should practice (this) yoga in accord with the stated
teaching. Then, by means of the subtle yoga, in accord with the yogic procedure,
‘he quickly obtains all that’ namely, the dragging forth of the soul (of the
sacrificial victim) as taught in the scripture, and the fruit of its accomplishment.

(The Tantra) concludes:

(37cd)

‘Subtle yoga has been explained; the gross one will now be taught.’

sūkṣmayogaḥ samākhyātaḥ..……... atha

thūlaścaivādhunocyate || 37 ||
tam āha
pinḍasthaṁ tatprayogeṇa piṇḍam ākarṣayed dhruvam |
pinḍasthaṁ sthūlaśarīragatam, piṇḍaṁ puryaṣṭakadeham tatprayogeṇeti
tattatpratikr̥ikarmavicitragaradānādiyuktyā kṣudrayā, ākarṣayet || tathā
He says that:
‘He should certainly drag the body within the body by means of that

procedure. (38ab)

‘He should drag ‘the body, that is, the subtle body, ‘within the bodyʼ,
that is, within the gross body, ‘by means of that procedure’, that is, by means of
that inferior (kṣudra) method which consists in a variety (of ways of) consuming
and depositing etc. each particular corresponding Karma. Then:
mantramudrāvidhānena vidhinā pāṁsavena ca |l 38 |I
dhyānayogabalenaiva chummakādyaṅgalakṣaṇaiḥ |
pātayanti na sandehaḥ paśūnāṁ pāśavaṁ puram || 39 ||
Without a doubt, (the yoginīs) cause the bestial body of the sacrificial
animals to fall, by means of the procedure concerning the dust (scattered on
them), and the procedure prescribed for the Mantras and Mudrās, by the strength
of the (officiant’s) yoga and meditation, and by the marks on (their) limbs made
with code words (chummaka) and the like (38cd-39)
tatra mantravidhānena māraṇaṁ śrīsvacchande darśitam

TANTRĀLOKA

There the killing (of the animal) takes place by means of ‘the procedure

prescribed for the Mantras’ taught in the venerable Svacchanda.
krodharājaniruddhaṁ tu śmaśānapaṭamadhyagam |
śmaśānadhūlinā lekhyaṁ viṣaraktānvitena ca ||
yasya nāma varārohe huṁphatkāravidarbhitam |
mārayeti samāyogāt krūṟrajātividarbhitam ||
mriyate saptarātreṇa yo rakṣābhiḥ surakṣitaḥ | iti |

‘Paralysed by the King of Anger (HUM) in the middle of a shroud taken
from a cremation ground, one should draw, O fair-hipped one, his name with
(ink made by mixing) the dust taken from a cremation ground along with the
blood (of a dead man) and poison. (The letters of the name are) woven together

with HUM and PHAT, and so, by conjoining it with MĀRAYA (die!),

embroidered with the syllable of Cruelty (PHAT), he dies in seven nights, (even

if he is) protected by protective amulets.” (SVT 9/64-66)

mudrāvidhānaṁ tu vyomakuṇḍalinītyādimāntrasaṁpradāyopakrameṇa
baddhvā saptaśikhāṁ mudrām āśikhāntaṁ halākṛtim ityādinā,
tadā grasanti yoginyo rāvaṁ kṛtvā śikhāntare | ity antena
śrīguptatantre pradarśitam | pāṁsavavidhir api

The procedure prescribed for the Mudrās, in accord with the tradition

concerning Mantras, such as that which concerns the Kuṇḍalinī of the Sky
(vyoman), (is taught in the passage) in the venerable Guptatantra beginning

with ‘having formed the gesture (mudrā) (called) Saptaśikhā (‘Seven Tufts’)

which, up to the end of the topknot, is in the (semi-circular) form of a plough’,
and ending with: ‘then, having roared within the tuft of hair (on top of the
animal’s head), the yoginīs devour it.’ So too, the procedure concerning the dust
(scattered on the victims taught there is as follows):

saptamyāṁ kr̥ṣṇapakṣasya prabhāte lakṣayet sadā |
kṛtanyāsabalā dhīrādhīrā vā yoginī priye ||
prathamaṁ nirgatã yã tu nãrĩ vã puruṣo ʻpi vã |
vāmadakṣiṇahastābhyāṁ vāmadakṣiṇapādayoḥ ||
grāhayet pāṁsum uddhṛtya dakṣiṇe puruṣasya ca |
apasavyena vāmāyā malloke mārayet sadā ||

‘One should always observe at dawn on the seventh (day) of the dark
fortnight, O beloved, whether the yoginī is resolute, strong by having deposited
(mantra on her body) or fickle. One should lay hold of the dust on the left and
right foot with the left and right hand, whether to come forth is a woman or a
man, having picked it up on the right side of a man and with the left of a
woman, he should always kill it in my world.”

ityādinā tatraiva darśitaḥ | jñānayogabalaṁ yogīśvaryātmanijamūrtyāveśād
nābhyudayakrameṇa sādhyadehasthapañcāmṛtākarṣaṇasāmarthyam | chumma-

APPENDIX CHAPTER SIXTEEN

kāni āgamikapāribhāṣikanāmāni, tad yathā śastraṁ vibhāgajananam māṁsaṁ
balavivardhanam, kāleyakaṁ kuṣumam, vasā maṇḍam, śiro vicāraḥ, śastrahato

labdhaḥ

This and more is explained there itself. The strength of the yoga of
knowledge is the capacity to extract the Five Nectars within the victim’s body,
by the process of ascent (of the vital force) from the navel, brought about by
penetration (āveśa) into its own iconic form, which is Yogīśvarī. The
‘chummakas’ are appellations that serve as code words in the Āgamas.' For
example, (the word) ‘weapon’ means ‘creating division’; ‘meat’ (means) ‘the
growth of strength’; ‘curcuma’ (means) ‘flower’; ‘marrow’ (means) ‘brandy’;

‘head’ (means) ‘cogitation’; and ‘struck by a weapon’ (means) ‘obtained’. They
are cut up in accord with the method (enjoined for a) slaughtered animal, as are
the signs (made on) of the limbs (of the sacrificial animal) that serve as

offerings (to the deity) of other practices (ācāra) (such as this one) taught in
each particular Ḍākinītantra.

iti, ādinānyeṣāṁ .tattaḍḍākinītantroktānām ācārāṇām tair yāny aṅgānām
upahārīkriyamāṇānāṁ lakṣaṇāny aṅkanāni haṭhapaśuyuktyā cchedās taiḥ || tad
ittham
In this way: “If the yoginīs, who are most powerful by virtue of (this)

threefold Yoga, slay (the sacrificial victim, then O goddess, the best of things is

practiced.ʼ

trividhena tu yogena yoginyo balavattarāḥ |
jighāṁsanti yadā devi tadā śreyaḥ samācaret || 40 Il
trividhād yogād ādyaḥ prakāraḥ paśor muktiṁ dadāṅti śrutyaivoktaḥ, dvitīyatṛtīyau bhogamokṣau vitarata ity arthalabdhau | āmnāyāntareṣu caitad astītyāśayena yogeśyā bhakṣitasyāgameṣu mṛtoddhārādidīkṣyatvam ucyate || 40 ||
The first variety of the threefold Yoga bestows liberation on the

sacrificial victim. This is declared by the Vedas. The second and third (varieties)

bestow worldly benefits and liberation, and so they have attained (their)

purpose. This is also present in other traditions. It is with this intention (that) the

rescue of the dead and the like is said there to have the status of an initiation by

Yogesī in the Āgamas of (her) devotee (?)'

The Five Nectars are feces, urine, spit, menstrual blood and semen. As the animal should be a
female, I am not sure whether these standard five are meant here or a modified set in which

menstrual blood is substituted with something else.
" Chapter fifteen of the Svacchandatantra is dedicated to chummakas, that is, secret code words

chummakā tatsamayānupraviṣṭasañciiyā pāribhāṣikī saṁjñā | ŚVT ad 15/1.
2 The printed text reads bhakṣitasyāgameṣu, which literally means ‘in the Āgamas of one who has
been eaten’, which makes no sense. Clearly there is a problem with the edition. I have very

tentatively suggested emending to bhaktasyāgame.

Appendix to Chapters Seventeen and Eighteen
The Deposition of the Tattvas
The serial order of the five elements, and so too that of the subtle

elements associated with them, is practically everywhere the same in the
Śaivāgama and, for that matter, in other schools. However, this is not the case

with the serial order of the organs of sense. This is surprising, as one would
naturally assume that it conforms to that of the elements and associated
sensations. Unfortunately, Abhinava does not state their order directly
anywhere. This lacuna is filled by Jayaratha, who quotes the Nyāyasūtra.
Although belonging to a different school of thought, it states the common-sense
point of view to which Jayaratha ascribed. It declares that ‘The senses of smell,
taste, sight, touch and hearing are (derived) from the gross elements.’
(Nyāyasūtra 1/1/12. So, Earth > smell, Water > taste, Fire > sight. Air > touch

and Space > hearing). According to the Bhogakārikā, the order is the same but
is presented in reverse: hearing, touch, sight, taste and smell (karaṇāni śrutis

tvak ca cakṣur jihvā ca nāsikā | BhoKā 25ab). This is also the order also in the

Mṛgendrāgama (śrotraṁ tvakcakṣuṣī jihvā nāsā ca manasā saha | MṛG
vidyāpāda 1243). According to the Tātparyadīpikā by Śrīkumāra on

Tattvaprakāśa 58, the five sensations of sound, touch, sight, taste, and smell are

registered by the corresponding organ of sense and so, as one would expect, are
in the same serial order (śrotrasadbhāvasiddhiḥ | evaṁ sparśa rūpa rasa
gandha grahaṇakaraṇatayā tvagādīndriyasiddhir avagantavyā |) This is what

we

also

find

in

the

Mahārthamañjarī

(MMṀ

p.

tatra

Śśabdasparśarūparasaganáhā iti kramāt). Thus, the order in the Saiddhāntika
sources is fairly uniform, and is followed in this Trika work, as one would
expect it to be. However, the serial order in the SvT (10/923cd-924 quoted in

TAv ad 8/ 221cd-223ab (221-222)) is: the ears, skin, eyes, tongue and nose.
According to the Sāṁkhyakārikā, the order is different again: sight, hearing,
smell, taste and touch (buddhīndriyāṇi cakṣuḥśrotra- ghrāṇarasanatvagākhyāni

| SāṁkKā 26ab)
The serial order of the organs of action is even less uniform. According

to the Sāṁkhyakārikā it is: speech, hands, feet, anus, and genitals (vākpāṇipāda-pāyūpasthāḥ karmenriyāṇy āhu || SaṁKā 26). According to the Bhogakārikā
(21cd) it is genitals, feet, anus, speech and hand (upasthapādapāyvāsyapāṇināmāni vai pṛthak). According to the Tattvaprakāśa the order is:
speech, hands, feet, anus, genitals (vacanādānaviharaṇotsargānandāśca
karmaiṣām | TPṛ 59ab karmendriyāṇi vākpāṇipādapāyūpasthānīti pañca

bhavanti | Tātparyadīpikā). According to the Mahārthamañjarī, the order is the

same (vacanādānadhāvanaiḥ || visargānandanābhyāṁ ca pañcabhiḥ
svasvabhāvavān | MM p. 59). According to TĀ 9/253, supported by the
Mṛgendra, the order is speech, the hands, genitals, anus and feet (vāṇī pāṇī
bhagaḥ pāyuḥ pādau ceti rajodbhavāḥ | (MrG vi 12/4ab). According to SvT
10/922cd-923ab (quoted in TĀv ad 8/221cd-223ab (221-222)), speech, the
hands, feet, the anus and the genitals. Finally, the serial order of the senses is
according to MV 2/32 is as follows.

TANTRĀLOKA
“The (senses of) hearing, touch, sight, taste and smell are the organs of

cognition. The organs of action are speech, the hands, the anus, the genitals and

the feet, in due order.”

Clearly, there are substantial differences in the serial order. The most
vexing is the difference between the serial order in the MV and the TĀ, even if
it is only a change in the sequence between the anus and the genitals. As the
MV is the prime authority, for clarity and simplicity, I take the serial order there
to be the standard, even if it is in disagreement with Abhinava, who seems for
some reason to have preferred the Mṛgendra. The order followed here is the one

in which Kṣemarāja lists the Tattvas in the Parāpraveśikā.

As a model for all the rest, Abhinava presents the Mantra of Earth, the

first Tattva, in a simple code in TĀ 17/11cd-12. This is: NAMAḤ KṢAM /
PHAṀ DHARE TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ TUBHYAṀ DHARĀYAI

NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ. In the ‘comprehensive mantra’, the single names ‘Earth’
etc. are substituted by the generic expression sarvatattva – ‘all the principles’.
The Deposition of the Tattvas
Earth

1. NAMAḤ KṢAṀ / PHAṀ DHARE TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ

TUBHYAṀ DHARĀYAI NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Water

2. NAMAḤ HAṀ / DAṀ JALA TVÃṀ ĀVÃHAYÃMI NAMAḤ TUBHYAṀ

JALĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Fire

3. NAMAḤ SAṀ / AUṀ TEJAS TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ TEJASE NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.

Air

4. NAMAḤ SAṀ / OṀ VÃYÕ TVÃṀ ĀVÃHAYÃMI NAMAḤ TUBHYAṀ

GURAVE NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.

Space

5. NAMAḤ_ŚAṀ / AIṀ ĀKĀŚA TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ ĀKĀŚĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
' The Tattvas are listed in Parāpraveśikā p. 6. This is the serial order according to Swami

Lakshmanjoo, namely, genitas, anus, fcet, hand, speech. Bāumer (2011: 187-188) and Singh

(1998: 129-130) also follow the same order of the Tattvas, except for the five Kañcukas, that they

present in the reverse with respect to that of the Tantrāloka and Mālinīvijayottara.

APPENDIX CHAPTERS SEVENTEEN AND EIGHTEEN

Smell

6. NAMAḤ VAṀ / EṀ GANDHA TVÃṀ ĀVÃHAYÃṀI NAṀMAḤ

TUBHYAṀ GHANDHĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Taste

7. NAMAḤ LAṀ / TAṀ RASA TVÃĀṀ ĀVÃĀHAYÃMI NAMAḤ TUBHYAṀ
RASĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Form

8. NAMAḤ RAṀ / AṀ RŪPA TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ TUBHYAṀ
RŪPĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Touch

9. NAMAḤ YAṀ ’/ ŚAṀ SPARŚA TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ SPARŚĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Sound

10. NAMAḤ MAṀ / MAṀ ŚABDA TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ ŚABDĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Genitals

11. NAMAḤ BHAṀ / KṢAṀ NAṀ / _SAṀ UPASTHA TVĀṀ
ĀVĀHAYĀṀI NAMAḤ TUBHYAṀ UPASTHĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHÃ.
Anus

TUBHYAṀ PĀYAVE NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Feet

13. NAMAḤ PHAṀ / HAṀ PĀDA _TVĀM ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ

TUBHYAṀ PĀDĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Hands

14. NAMAḤ PAṀ / AḤ PĀṆE TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ TUBHYAṀ

UPASTHĀYAI NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.

TANTRĀLOKA

Śpeech

15. NAMAḤ NAṀ / SAṀ VÃC TVÃṀ ĀVÃHAYÃMI NAMAḤ TUBHYAṀ
VĀCE NṄAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Nose

16. NAMAḤ DHAṀ / ĀṀ GHRĀṆA TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYÃMṀI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ GHRĀṆĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Tongue

17. NAMAḤ DAṀ / LAṀ JIHVE TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ JIVHĀYAI NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Eyes

18. NAMAḤ THAṀ / CHAṀ LOCANA TVĀṂṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ LOCANĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Skin

19. NAMAḤ TAṀ / PAṀ TVAC TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ TVACE ṄAMAḤ / SVĀHÁĀ.
Ears

20. NAMAḤ ḌHAṀ / ṬAṀ ŚROTRA TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ ŚROTRĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Mind

21. NAMAḤ ḌAṀ / RAṀ MANÓ TVÃṀ ÃVÃHAYÃMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ MANASE ṄAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.

22. NAMAḤ THAMṀ / JAṀ AHAṀKÃRA TVÃṀ ĀVÃHAYÃMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ AHAṀKĀRÃYA NAMAḤ / SVÃHÃ.
Intellect

23. NAMAḤ ṆAṀ / ṄAṀ BUDDHE TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMṀI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ BUDDHYAI NAMAḤ/ SVĀHÁĀ.
Prakṛti

24. NAMAḤ TAṀ / JHAṀ PRAKR̥TÉ TVĀṀ ĀVÃHAYÃMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ PRAKṚTYAI NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.

APPENDIX CHAPTERS SEVENTEEN AND EIGHTEEN

Puruṣa

25. NAMAḤ CAṀ / ṬHAṀ PURUṢA TVÃṀ ÃVÃHAYÃMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ PURUṢĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Necessity

26. NAMAḤ ṅAMṀ / ḌHAṀ NIYATE TVĀM ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ

TUBHYAṀ NIYATYAI NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Time

27. NAMAḤ JAṀ / ḌAṀ KĀLA KĀLA TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀṀI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ KĀLĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Attachment

28. NAMAḤ ṄAṀ / YAṀ RÃGA TVÃṀ ÃVÃHAYÃṀI NAMAḤ

TUBHYAṀ RĀGĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Limited Capacity to Know

29. NAMAḤ CAṀ / BHAṀ VIDYE TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ VIDYĀYAI NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Līmited Agency
30. NAMAḤ JHAṀ / VAṀ KALE TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ KALĀYAI NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.

31. NAMAḤ CHAṀ / AṀ MĀYE TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAṀAḤ

TUBHYAṀ MĀYĀYAI NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.
Śuddhavidyā

32. NAMAḤ GHAṀ / IṀ ŚUDDHAVIDYE TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ ŚUDDHAVIDYĀYAI NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.

33. NAMAḤ GAṀ / ṄAṀ ĪŚVARA TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAṀAḤ
TUBHYAṀ ĪŚVARĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.

TANTRĀLOKA

Sadāśiva
34. NAMAḤ KHAṀ / GHAṀ SADĀŚIVA TVĀṀ ĀVÃHAYÃMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ SADĀŚIVĀYA NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.

Śakti
35. NAMAḤ KAṀ / GAṀ ŚAKTE TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ
TUBHYAṀ ŚAKTYAI NAMAḤ / SVĀHĀ.

Śiva

ṚṀ rM NAṀ ŚIVA TVĀṀ ĀVĀHAYĀMI NAMAḤ TUBHYAṀ ŚIVĀYA
NAMAḤ
/ SVĀHĀ.
Abhinava returns to the purification of the Tattvas in Chapter Eighteen
in the context of the purification of the sacred thread and an abbreviated form of
initiation, offered to the deity on special occasions as atonement for errors or
omissions. He provides the basic rules for the formation of the Mantra in 18/7
ff. as a modification the previous model. In this case, the basic form of the
Mantra here requires phonemes from both syllabaries and instead of
ĀVĀHAYĀMI – ‘I invoke have ŚODHAYĀMIʼ– ‘I purify’ with the principle
in the accusative rather than the vocative. Thus, the mantra for the first one,
which is Earth Tattva is:
NAMAḤ KṢAṀ PHAṀ
TUBHYAṀ DHARĀYAI NAMAḤ

DHARAṀ

ŚODHAYĀMI

NAMAḤ

Appendix A
to Chapter Nineteen
The Sixteen Supports, the Six Wheels,
the Three Targets and the Five Voids
Abhinavagupta’s source for these common Kaula groupings of the
constituents of the subtle body was most probably chapter seven of the
Netratantra. The Six Wheels are described there in verses 5 to 28: the Sixteen
Supports in verses 29 to 30ab, the Three Signs in verses 36cd to 37, and the Five
Voids in verses 38 to 49ab. After this come a few verses concerning the Nine
Kulas, collectively referred to as ‘the Ocean of the Kula division’ (49cd-56ab).

But these verses may be an interpolation. The name of this chapter suggests that
it is only fifty verses long. And indeed, the previous topics are covered in this
number of verses.
Although the first four groupings are not found together in the
Kubjikāmata, they appear as a standard set in the later Kubjikā Tantras. A hymn
in the Siddhakhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairavatantra eulogizes them together as
an integral part both of the goddess’s maṇḍala and the body:
vande bindugatātmānaṁ triṣkoṇaṁ ṣaṭkalāṅkitam [g: -kalānvitaṁ] |
soḍaśādhāramārgeṇa lakṣatritayaśaktinā ||
pañcavyyomāmṃbukamale nāḍyante hṛtpure [g: rṛhyahṛt] pure [g: missing] |
daśavāyunirodhena [g: dasa-] bhramate śaktivigrahe [g: sakti-] ||
vande ājñādhikāraṁ [k, kh, g: -re] tu ādhārādheyamaṇḍale [k: ādhārāceya-] |
svādhiṣṭhāne sthitaṁ nityaṁ maṇipūrṇapure tathā [k, kh: tridhā] ||
anāhate dvidhāvasthaṁ viśuddhe daṇḍamūrdhani |
ājñābodhabalenāpi pare vyomni layaṁ vrajet ||

vande [g: caṁdre] nādātmakaṁ tejo [k, kh, g: tejaṁ] bhairaveṇānupūritam [k,

kh: bhairavenānu-; g: bhairavenānatupūritaṁ] |
kulatrayasamāyuktaṁ [k, kh: -samāṁ-] śrīguruṁ nagnavāsasam [g: -vāsasa] ||
saṁvartāmaṇḍalānte tu ājñāpañcakabhūṣitam |
siddhāmnāyasvarūpeṇa sṛṣṭinyāyena tattvataḥ l| SKh 23/23-28

‘I praise the Self present in the Point and the Triangle and (Hexagon)
marked with the six energies by means of the path of the Sixteen Supports and
the energy of the Three Signs within the lotus of the water of the Five Voids
within the channels (of the vital breath) (nāḍī) in the abode of the Heart within
the abode (of the body and the maṇḍala) that wanders within the form of Energy
by checking the ten vital breaths.
I praise the authority of the Command in the maṇḍala of the support,
and the sustained that abides constantly in (the Wheel of the) Self-supported in
the abode Full of Gems. (I praise its) twofold state in (the Wheel of) Unstruck
Sound and in the Pure (Wheel) in (the throat, which is) the stick of the head, that

dissolves away in the Supreme Void by the power of the (Wheel of the)
Command.
I praise the radiant energy of the nature of Sound that is (constantly)
replenished by Bhairava. Endowed with the three Kulas (of the Triangle, he is)
the venerable teacher, clothed in nakedness who (abides) within the

APPENDIX A CHAPTER NINETEEN

Saṁvartāmaṇḍala adorned with the fivefold Command (of the Five Siddhas) in
the form of the tradition of the Siddhas as it is in reality, in accord with the

modality of emanation.’

The Siddhakhaṇḍa presents the mantras of these four groups together in
serial order as ‘the worship of the great Krama of thirty (parts)
(triṁśātmakamahākramapūjā) at the beginning of chapter fifteen that is
dedicated to ‘the regular and occasional worship of the great Krama
(nityanaimittkamahākramapūjā). In response to SŚrīnātha’s question
concerning the Krama ‘consisting of thirty’ (triṁśātmaka), the goddess
responds:
saṭcakraṁ ṣoḍaśādhāraṁ [g: ṣoḍasā-] trilakṣaṁ vyomapañcakam |
hy etat [k, kh: ataḥ] pūjākramaṁ vakṣye svadehe jñānapaddhatim l
‘The Six Wheels, the Sixteen Supports, the Three Signs and the Five
Voids – this is the sequence of worship (pājākrama) – 1 will explain the liturgy
of knowledge within one’s own body.’ SKh 15/2
The first line of this verse recurs repeatedly in the Kubjikā sources as
well as Tantras of other schools. Although eclipsed by the focus in the later
traditions on the Siīx Wheels, the Sixteen Supports, the Three Signs and the Five
Voids weere considered to be, no less than the Six Wheels, basic features of the
subtle body. Thus, after presenting the mantras of the Six Wheels and the

Sixteen Supports, the same line comes again, to which the Siddhakhaṇḍa adds:

‘how can one who does not know (these four) in the body be a Kaulika? (śarīre
Yo na jãnãti sa kathaṁ kaulikocyate [g: kaulikathyate] ll. Indeed, these are the
Kaula adept’s body. Thus, the 7īkā explains these categories extensively in the
course of commenting on the Sūtra of the Body which introduces the subject
(uddeśa) with a similar verse that begins with the same standard line to

conclude that:

Śśarīraṁ yo hi [kh: bhi] jānāti sa bhavet [kh: -k] kulanandanaḥ | Ṭīkā f. 147a
(kula).”

‘He who knows the body is the beloved of the family (of initiates)

No less than Wheels, Supports, Signs and Voids, along with Knots (not
mentioned here), are markers of the stages in the ascent of Kuṇḍalinī. This
model was already well established when our text was written, although the
KMT does not mention it. An important source, which may precede the KMT, is
chapter seven of the Netratantra, which begins with a variant of the standard
line (rtucakraṁ svarādhāraṁ trilakṣyaṁ vyomapañcakam | NT 7/1cd). Dvivedi
(NSĀ intro. pp. 115) points out that the early Śrīvidyā tradition also accepted
this model. However, a major modification was introduced. This was the
increase in number of the Wheels from six to nine, to make them coincide with

the nine triangles that constitute Śrīcakra, the famous maṇḍala of this school.

Even so, the system of Six Wheels, Five Voids and Twelve Knots was known to

TANTRĀLOKA

the 12th century commentator Amṛtānanda (see dīpikā on the YHṛ p. 287-290),
who must have felt that this was an established authoritative tradition, and so

tried to make it square with the innovation. Later, Vidyānanda (c. 13th cent.?)

refers to this system in his commentary on the NSĀ (p. 67), testifying to its
continued importance. Indeed, it was important enough to be incorporated into
the teachings of the Gorakṣaśataka. Attributed to Gorakhnātha (c. 14th cent.?),
this is one of the earliest and most authoritative works on Haṭhayoga. Echoing
the early Tantras with which the author must have been acquainted, he writes:
saṭcakraṁ ṣoḍaśādhāraṁ trilakṣyaṁ vyomapañcakam ḷ
svadehe ye na jānanti kathaṁ siddhyanti yoginaḥ |l
‘How can those yogis who do not know the Six Wheels, Sixteen
Supports, Three Signs and Five Voids in their own body be successful?” GS 13

We find an interesting description of the Sixteen Supports in chapter

four of the Ciñciṇīmatasārasamuccaya. Although the passage is long, it is worth
quoting in full. The CMSS is describing practices related to three ‘branches of
Kula” (kulaśākhā). These are three states discussed extensively by
Abhinavagupta and Kashmiri Śaiva masters after him, namely, those of Śiva –
Śāmbhava, Śakti – Śākta and the Individual Soul – Āṇava. According to the
CMSS, the practice, powers and experiences associated with the Supports relate
to the condition of the individual soul (āṉava). There we read:

aṇur ātmasvarūpaḥ [all MSs: anunāsvarūpaṁ] ca cicchakti-parabhāvitaḥ [kh: prabhāvitaḥ] l|
ādhārabhedayogena kulaśākhāsamāśritaḥ [g: kulasākhyā-; gh: kulasā-] |
sthānaṁ sthānāntaraṁ devi viśramanti [k, kh, g: visramanti; gh: viṣramānti]
parasparam ll
prthag bhedaṁ |[k: bhadaṁ] prthak siddhir anubhāvena [all MSs: madhubhāvena] bhāvitam |

etad [gh: eta] devi mayā khyātaṁ [k gh: kṣātaṁ] āṇavaṁ [all MSs: ānavaṁ] tat
prakīrtitam ||
‘The essential nature of the individual soul (aṇu) is the Self, supremely
sanctified by the power of consciousness. t resides in a branch of the Kula by
means of the Yoga of the penetration of the Supports. O goddess, the place
(where a support is located) and the next one give rest to one another. The
varety (bheda) and accomplishment (of each) is individually sanctified by (the

personal) experience (of each one). O goddess, I have explained this. It is said to
be the state of the individual soul (āṇava).” CMSS 4/27cd-29

Bhairava goes on to describe each of the Sixteen Supports, their

location and the experience of the accomplishment (siddhi) attained there. This
is the knowledge of this branch of the Kula (śakhājñāna).

udgaṭṭayed [all MSs: udgataye] viṣādhāraṁ [k g gh: viṣadharā; kh:
viṣadharaṁ] cãlayec ca [k, kh, gh: svālayec ca] mahīdharam [all MSs:

mahīdharām] |

APPENDIX A CHAPTER NINETEEN

kampayed akhilāṁ [k gh: akhitnā; kh: -lā?] corvīṁ [k, kh, gh: corvī; g: coḍvī]
sarvādhārasṣthitaḥ [g: -sthita; gh: sarvadhāla-] priye ||
ākṛṣya sarvalokānāṁ pātālavivaraṁ [k g gh: -vicaraṁ] viśet |
stambhayet sarvasainyāni saṁkocastho [k: sa-; all MSs: -sthe] na saṁśayaḥ ||
dhvaṁsayed [g: -saye; gh: dhvasayed] duṣṭacetāṁsi [k gh: -cetāsi] unmūlaṁ [
g: unmūla; k gh: utmūla] pratipādayan [k, kh, gh: pratipādapān; g:
patṭipādapān] |
darpaṁ [k: darpa; g: dharpaṁ] harati nāgānāṁ mārutasthas tu sādhakaḥ ||
drāvayed yoṣitaḥ sarvāḥ [all MSs: sarvān] vaśīkuryāc carācaram |

paraṁ saubhãgyam āpnoti janmacakre suṣaṁsthitaḥ ||

cālayet [gh: -yat] pratimādīni ākarṣet surayoṣitaḥ [k g gh: surapoṣitāḥ; kh: positaḥ] |
plavate [k gh: -tet] khatalaṁ [g: khetalaṁ] yogī kandacakrāvalambakaḥ ||
kuṇḍalyādhāram ārūḍhaḥ [all MSs: -dha] āhvayet [g: āhṛyet] yoginīgaṇam [g
gh: yogiṇīgaṉṇaṁ] |
vedhayet [kh: vadhayet] parvatādīni [all MSs: paravādīnī] sādhayed yad yad
īpsitam [g: yad īṣpipsitaṁ] ||
pūrayed [k, kh, gh: purayed; g: pūrūyed] viśvam [all MSs: visava-] akhilaṁ
svānandaughena [k gh: -dotghanṇa; g: -pyena; kh: -doghana] sādhakaḥ
sarvasaṁkrāmaṇaṁ kuryāt kumbhastho [kh, gh g: -sthā] nānyagāminaḥ ||
cittakṣobhavaśākṛṣṭir apamṛtyunibarhanam [k, kh: yaṣākṛṣṭi apamṛtyu-; g: bhavasṣākṛṣṭi-apa-] |

vedhadīkṣātmasambodhaṁ [k, kh: -kṣātsasaṁbodhaṁ] kuryāt saṁjīvanīgataḥ
[k g gh: -gati; kh: -gatiṁ] |l

kūrmādhārasamādhiṣṭho [k gh: kurmodhāra-] yogī parapuraṁ vrajet |

sarujāṁ [g: sarujyāṁ] nirujāṁ [g: nirujyaṁ] caiva nirujaṁ [k, kh, gh: ~jāṁ,; g.
nirujyaṁ] sarujaṁ priye ||
sthito jīvaputādhāre sādhako [gh: -kā] yogacintakaḥ [k, kh: -cittakaḥ] |

nidhanaṁ yasyate [all MSs: pasyate] sarvaṁ sarvasiddhīśvaro bhavet |l

lolākhyaṁ sthānam āsādya bhogāni vividhāni ca |
prāpnoti sādhakaḥ kṣipraṁ nātra kāryaṁ [k g gh: kārya; kh: kāryā] vicāraṇam
[k g gh: vicāraṇāt; kh: -raṇā] ||

lambikāntasthito [g: lambi ntasthito] yogī kṣutpipāsam alaṁ [k: -sa laṁ]
haret [k, kh, gh: daret] |
rasaṁ rasãyanaṁ [k: rayāyanaṁ] siddhaṁ labhate mṛtyujid bhavet ||
guruvaktraguhāntasthaḥ [all MSs: -tastha] sādhako vigataspṛhaḥ |
avināśatanur bhūtvā [all MSs: avināsa-] prāpnoti paramaṁ padam ||
viṣuvastho
|[k
gh:
visuvasthā;
kh,
g:
visuvastho]
mahādevo
jagaduddharaṇakṣamaḥ [all MSs: jagaduddharana-] |

bhavate nātra saṁdehaḥ [k g gh: -haṁ; kh: -haṁh] pūjyate [k, kh: pūjaye g gh:

pūjate ] yoginīgaṇaiḥ [all MSs: yogiṇī-; k: -gaṇai] ll
samārūḍhaḥ |[k: -ḍham; kh, gh: -dhas; g: -samoruḍhaṁs]
guṇān [k, kh, gh: -guṇāl; g: -dhiguṇān] labhet [g: -nabhet] |
hartā kartā bhaved yogī yathā [g: pravo] devaḥ [g: dheva] sadāśivaḥ |I
paracittagatajñānam atītānāgataṁ [gh: paracintagata-] ca yat |
ruditaṁ sarvabhũtānāṁ tattavato [g: tat tato] vetti sādhakaḥ [gh: -ka] l|

visargānte [k g gh: -nta; kh: -ntaṁ] yathāvatstho [k, kh, gh: yathāvastho; g

paṣāvastho] niṣkampo [k gh: nikampā; g: niṣkemyo] dehavarjitaḥ |

kalākalaṅkarahito [k gh: -kalaṅkāra-; g: kalākalaṁkālahito] bhrājate [gh:

TANTRĀLOKA

trājate] divi sūryavat [gh: māūryavat] ||
sarvakāmeśvaro vīro yoginībhiḥ [all MSs: yogiṇībhiḥ] parāvṛtaḥ |
svānandarasasaṁpiūrṇaḥ [k g gh: -saṁpārṇaṁ] krīḍate ‘nantavarcasaḥ [k, kh:
krīḍayenanta-; g: kṛdatenanta-; gh: kriḍatenandavarvasaḥ-] ||
1) The Universal Foundation (sarvādhāra): O beloved, one who resides

in the Universal Foundation bursts open the foundation of poison (and counters
it). He can move a mountain and shakes all the earth.
2) Contraction (sarṁkoca): One who resides (in the Support of)
Contraction, having attracted all the worlds, enters the cavity of the lower
worlds. Without a doubt, he paralyses any army.
3) Wind (vāyu): The adept who resides in (the Support of) the Wind
destroys (all) evil-minded (beings) and, having uprooted (them), steals away the
pride of snakes.
4) The Wheel of Birth (ianmacakra): He who is well established in the

Wheel of Birth causes all women to melt (with desire) and brings the (whole)

universe under his control. He gets supreme good fortune.
5) The Wheel of the Root (kanda): The Yogi who takes his support
from the Wheel of the Root makes statues and the like move and attracts the
women of the gods. He leaps into the sky.

6) The Support of Kuṇḍalinī: Mounted on the Support of Kuṇḍalinī, he

invokes the troupe of Yoginīs. He pierces through mountains and the like. He
gets whatever he wants.
7) The Jar (kumbha): The adept who is established (in the Support of)

the Jar and does not go to others fills the whole universe with the flood of his

bliss. He pervades all things.

8) The Herb of Immortality (saṁjīvanī): One who has entered (the

Support of) the Herb of Immortality attracts (all to himself) by the control (he
has on others) by disturbing (their) minds. (He has the power to) prevent
premature death and brings about the awakening that takes place by the
initiation by piercing (of the inner centres).

9) The Support of the Tortoise (kārmādhāra): This Support is said to be

‘present in touch’ (sparśaga) (CMSS 4/34c). The yogi who is established in the
contemplation of the Support of the Tortoise enters another’s body (at will). O

beloved, (he transforms a woman) who has wrinkles to one without them, and a

man without wrinkles to one who has them.
10) The Capsule of the Soul (jīvaputa): This Support is the ninth in the
summarial list of Supports that introduces their more detailed description. There
it is said to be ‘the capsule that contains the soul of living beings’ (bhūtānāṁ
jvasaṁpuṭam) (CMSS 4/34b). The adept who contemplates Yoga and abides in
the Support of the Capsule of the Soul is the lord of all accomplishments and
brings all things to an end.
11) The Lola: The adept who attains the place called Lola (in the throat)
certainly quickly acquires many kinds of worldly benefits.
12) The Uvula (lambika): The yogi who abides within the Uvula

conquers hunger and thirst completely. He attains the juice and elixir of
immortality and, accomplished, he conquers death.
13) The Mouth of the Teacher (guruvaktra): This is also called

Khañjavaktra (CMSS 4/35b). The yogi who resides in the cave of the teacher’s

APPENDIX A CHAPTER NINETEEN

mouth and who is free of craving, becoming one whose body is imperishable,
atṭṭains the supreme plane.
14) The Equinox (viṣuva): The great god who resides in the Equinox is
worshipped by the troupes of Yoginīs and is, without a doubt, capable of

elevating the (entire) universe.
15) The Place of Emission: The Yogi who has mounted on (the

Support) of Emission attains omniscience and other divine attributes. Like the
god Sadāśiva, he is the creator and destroyer (all things).
16) The End of Emission: The adept who, free of the body and
unshaking, is properly established in the End of Emission has knowledge of
other peoples minds and of the past and the future. He knows correctly the
speech of animals. Free of the stains of (limiting) energies (kalā), he shines in

the (transcendental) Sky like the sun. He is a Hero, the lord of all passion

(kāma) and is surrounded by the Yoginīs. Full of the juice of his own inherent
bliss, his radiant energy is endless and he plays. CMSS 4/37-54

The KMT does not refer to the Śixteen Supports. Instead in chapter 17

we find a system of Sixteen Knots (granthi), said to be Supports (ādhāra). The

KMT relates the four syllables of the names of each of the four primary seats to
them (see intro. vol. 1, p 599 ff.), thereby probably taking over an earlier model
that did not include them. Thus, we find the same set listed in the KRU in a

passage common with the KMT (KRU 5/143ab-150ab = KMT 17/71-78ab) but
no mention is made there of the sacred seats. The Sixteen Knots (granthi) or

Supports (ādhāra) are part of the body of the goddess Mahāmāyā. Moving in

the vital breath, she fills it and the body with her sixteen energies. In the KRU

we read:

paścimānanasaṁbhūtā [k, kh, g: -tāṁ] vṛddhamāyā [k: -māyāṁ] mahattarā |
granthiṣoḍaśakopetā [all MSs: -tāṁ] haṁsasthā [k: -sthāḥ; g: hasasthā]
haṁsagāminī [k: -minīṁ] ||

haṁsaḥ [g: -sa] prāṇaḥ samākhyātas tejastattvaṁ |[k: -tejatatvaṁ; kh:
-tejatatva] tathaiva ca |
tābhyāṁ madhyasthitā [g: madhosṭhitā] hy eṣā [k: pā; kh: epā; g: eṣāṁ]
soḍaśādhāravigrahā ||
tena haṁsāsanā proktā tathā vai haṁsagāminī|
[k. kh: + tathā vai] ādhārāḥ śrīkuleśānyāḥ [g: śrīkujeśāntāḥ] pādādau
mastakāvadhiḥ ||
granthayo ʻsyās tu vijñeyāḥ [g: -yā] haṁsabījasamanvitāḥ |
kalāṣoḍaśabhir bhinno haṁsākhyaḥ parameṣvari ||
eṣā mahattarā devī mahāmāyā prakīrtitā |
‘Vṛddhamāyā, born from the southern face (of the goddess), is most

powerful. She possesses sixteen Knots, resides in Haṁsa and moves with
Haṁsa. Haṁsa is said to be the vital breath and is the principle of radiant energy
(tejas). She, in the form of the Sixteen Supports (ādhāra), resides between them.
Thuṣ, she is said to have Haṁsa as her seat, and so it is that she moves with
Haṁsa (haṁsagāminī). The Supports of the venerable Kuleśānī are present (in
sixteen parts of the body) beginning with the feet and ending with the head. The
Kmots should be known to be endowed with the seed of Haṁsa. (Thus) O

TANTRĀLOKA

Supreme Goddess, the one called Haṁsa possesses sixteen energies. This, the
most powerful (mahattarā) goddess, is known as Mahāmāyā. KRU 5/137141ab
After listing the Knots and Supports, the KMT and KRU declare in a

common passage:

‘The goddess has (these) sixteen limbs. She is Khecarī, the mistress of

the Skyfarers. She resides in the lotus, in the middle of the lotus. Residing in

Haṁsa, she moves with Haṁsa (KMT ‘transports Haṁsa’). The goddess is both
with (manifest) energies (sakalā) and without (niṣkalā). Her body is made of
thunder (vajradehā) and she is the Transmental (manonmanī). KMT

17/77-78ab (= KRU 5/14150ab)

The Sixteen Knots are then listed along with their locations, as follows:

1) Ananta – middle finger. 2) Kāla – ankles. 3) Raudrī –- sole (of the feet?) 4)
Jyeṣṭhā and Vāmā -- (right and) left hips. 5) Kāma – foundation of the genitals.
6) Liṅga – just above (the location of the previous one). 7) Brahmā -- above and
below where the hairs of the body (roma) are located. 8) Soma – just above the

previous one. 9) Sūrya – just above that again. 10) Prāṇa – just above. 11) Jīva –
just above. Living beings live and die because of this. 12) Viṣṇu – throat. 13)
Rudra – palate. 14) Īśa – above that. 15) Sādākhya -–- above trikūṭi. 16) Māyā –above that flooded with the bliss of desire (icchānanda).

The 7īkā, in accord with the source upon which it is commenting,

presents an extensive projection of the Six Paths (ṣadadhvan), that is, the
cosmic order and its mantric equivalents distributed systematically in the sixteen
places in the body where the Supports are located. In this context, the Supports

are understood to be extensive world orders (bhuvana) that contain lesser

worlds and their corresponding Principles, energies, mantra, parts of mantra and

letters, that constitute the Six Paths. The Supports are listed in the Sūtra of the
Sixteen Supports, quoted in full by the 7īkā as part of the Śūtra of the Body

(Dehaṣūtra).

Although their names and identity vary, the group of Sixteen Supports
(ādhāra) is common to many Tantric and Kaula systems and is carried on to
later Yoga traditions. In his commentary on the NT (7/1cd, see Dvivedi 1985:
111-113), Kṣemarāja presents their projection into the body in two modalities
(prakriyā). For the first, which is presumably the Tantric, he simply lists the

locations of the Supports, which in that modality serve to sustain the individual

soul in the body. The locations in the body are practically the same as those
listed in the 7īkā (Rai 1975: 33). They are: 1) Toe 2) Ankle 3) Knee 4) Anus
(meḍhra) 5) Genitals (pāyu) 6) Root (kanda) 7) Channel of the vital breath

(nāḍi) 8) Stomach 9) Heart 10) The Channel of the Tortoise (kūrmanāḍī) 11)
Throat 12) Palate 13) Middle of the eyebrows 14) Forehead 15) Cavity of

Brahmā 16) End of the Twelve.
Kṣemarāja goes on to quote from an unknown source a list of the

Sixteen Supports according to the Kaula modality (prakriyā) in which they are
said to sustain everything, not just the individual soul. There we read:

APPENDIX A CHAPTER NINETEEN
‘One should know that Kula is below the anus (meḍhra) and the one

called Poison (viṣa) is in the middle (of it). It is said that the Empowered One

(śākta) that impels the Sound of Awakened Consciousness (hodhanāda) is in

the Root (māla). Then, the one called Fire is four fingers above that, below the

naveḷ in the Support of Fire (pavanādhāra). In the navel itself is the one called
the Jar. The one called AIl Desire (sarvakāma) is halfway between the navel and

the heart. The one called the Vivifier is in the middle of the calyx (udara) of the
lotus of the heart. The Tortoise is in the chest and the one called Lola (the

glottis) is said to be in the throat. The Support of Nectar (sudhā), that nature of
which is nectar (sudhā), is located above the glottis (lambaka). The Lunar One

(saumya), enveloped by the energies of the Moon, is located in the root of that
same (glottis). The one called the Lotus of Knowledge is between the eyebrows

in the Circle of the Sky (gaganābhoga). The Support on the surface of the palate

is (called) Raudra and is sustained by Rudra’s power. (The Support called)
Cintāmanṇi is located on the Crossroad. The Support of the Fourth (state) is in
the head, in the middle of the Cavity of Brahmā. The Support of the Channel (of
the vital breath) (nāḍyādhāra) is subtle and supreme. It awakens to intense
pervasion (ghanavyāpti). These are said to be the Sixteen Supports.’
The Sixteen Supports are mentioned in the Gorakṣaśataka (verse 13)
but they are not described there. The commentator refers the reader to the
Siddhasiddhāntapaddhati. (Briggs 1973: 287 fn. 2). Referring to this source,

Banerjea (1962: 182) lists and explains the details of the practice at each
support. They are: 1) Big toe 2) The Root Foundation (mūlādhāra) 3) Rectum
(gudādhāra) 4) Base of the genitals (meḍhrādhāra) 5) Udyāna 6) Navel 7)
Heart 8) Throat 9) Uvula (ghaṇṭikā) 10) Palate 11) Tongue 12) Middle of the

eyebrows 13) Nose 14) Root of the nose (kapāta) 15) Forehead 16) Cavity of

Brahmā.

Elsewhere the Five Voids are equated with five of the Six Wheels
within which the goddess, as the energy of the universal Void of the

Transmental, moves (see 55/1-4ab below, also above 3/125). In this context, the
missing Wheel is the navel (55/4ab), whereas the Five Elements (which are

equated in places with the Voids) are accommodated into the Six Wheels by
omitting the Wheel of the throat (21/336). The Netratantra (7/27-29) also fits
the Five Voids into its own version of the Sīx Wheels in its own way as follows:
“The Endless (ananta) Void (kha) is called Birth. The second Void is in
the navel. The third one is in the location of the heart. The fourth is in the
middle of the Point (between the eyebrows). It is taught that (the fifth one) is

called Sound (nāda).
Now the Six Wheels will be declared. In the (Void) called Birth is the
Wheel of the Channels (of the vital breath) (nāḍicakra). The excellent (Wheel)
called Māyā is in the navel. The Wheel of Yogis is in the heart. The one located
in the palate is said to be (the one called) Splitting Apart (bhedana). The Wheel
of Illumination (dipticakra) is in the Point and the one located in Sound is called
Tranquil (śānta).”
Kṣemarāja comments: The Endless (Void) (is so called) because it is as

if without end and because it is the abode (āśraya) of the universe. (The Void)

TANTRĀLOKA

named Sound (is called this) because it is the abode of Sound. (The Wheel of
the Channels is so called) because it is the cause of the extension of the channels
(of the vital breath). (The second Wheel is called Māyā) because it is the cause

of the knowledge of all the expansion (prapañca) of Māyā in accord with the
dictum: ‘(the yogi achieves) knowledge of the aggregate of the body in the

Wheel of the navel’ (Yogasūtra 3/25). (The Wheel of Yogis is called this)
because it bestows concentration (cittaikāgrya). (The next one is called Splitting
Apart) because it should be split apart with effort. (The next is called the Wheel
of Ilumination) because its nature is illumination (dīpti) and (the last one is

called Tranquil) because it bestows tranquillity. . . These Voids and Wheels
should be abandoned because (the former) induce entry into the state of deep

sleep whilst (the latter) are the cause of the unfolding of duality.

mālyākhyaṁ [k, kh: māyākhyāmaṁ] tadūrdhvataḥ | iti māyākāśam | Ṭīkā fl.
172b

Appendix B

to Chapter Nineteen
Time and the Conquest of Death
Kubjikāmata chapter 23
This chapter deals with time and the conquest of time. Bhairava begins
by declaring that once one has known the Wheel of Time, one’s own and that of
the other (i.e. external world?), one can eradicate time and death (utkrānti).

Time is of three kinds: 1) Inferior (apara) – this is the based on the (activity of)
the forces (kalā also ‘units of time’). It is under the control of time. 2) Supreme
(para) – beyond (even) a fraction of an instant 3) Middling (parāpara) – this is

the tīme that is formed by the unfolding of time (out of the timeless —

kālonmeṣa). The tīme of the cosmic cycles is the time that differentiates (kalate)
the body. Established in a cosmic period (kalpa) in the middling form of time,
time is conquered. Eṣtablished in the persistence within the supreme form of
time is the maker of time. (1-5)
The supreme form is beyond the 96. The middling is the 96, while the
inferior form measures 84. Associated with the group of five it becomes quickly
five-fold (?) There are Jayā, Riktā etc. of Paurṇimā in association with Nandā
and Bhadrā eṭc. There are 5, 5 and 5. Months, seasons ending with yana. The
saṁvatsara, yuga, manvantara and kalpa. In this way, they differentiate (kalanti)

time up to the end of the five times five (???). The Islands are supported by time

and the sacred seats by the Islands. The Principles are within the sacred seats
and amongst them are the five gross elements. Each one is encompassed by a
group of five up to the 25th. They move in the ocean of forces conjoined with
the group of five vowels. They are fixed onto the Lotus Channel and are on the
machine of time. He quickly removes the water of the living being (jīvatoya).
They cause the drying up every moment with the rays of the sun and moon.
Once this is done Death (kṛtānta) is able to transport (vāhane kṣamaḥ).
Repeatedly dragging towards itself all this ocean of living beings, he waters the
trees of decay for those who want the fruits of old age and death. (6-14)
Signs and Omens
Now follows a long passage describing a series of omens and signs with
their prognosis for the sake of those who do not manage to ‘cheat time’. They
relate to the length of time a person has left to live. Many are visions concerning
the alteration of colour or brightness of the sun and moon. Others are concerned
with how one sees the shape of the shade of one's own body. For example, one
who does not see the head of his shadow has only a moment left to live! The
colours of the limbs of the body are also important. (15 - 43)

This chapter corresponds to chapters 35 to 37 of the $SS.

TANTRĀLOKA

Prognosis through Vision
The next passage also deals with prognosis through vision, in particular
of the Sun and Moon. The movement of the Sun and Moon is by means of the
12 and 16 rays (ara), respectively. One should mark the light within it in the
burning Fire. There is a four-petalled (lotus) within the 16 rays (of the Moon).
The one who knows time should know that in the middle of this is the
characteristic of time (kālalakṣṇa i.e., the sign of death). If the petal below the
moon is destroyed, then one will die within six months. If above, three months

etc. Similarly, one can prognosticate on the basis of how much one sees of the
four petalled lotus in the centre of the 12 rays of the sun. The worst is if one

does not see the light of the sun at all. Death will then come within a day. (44-

50)

Everything in the body, impelled by time, dies. Dividing it up with
middling time, one should practice in conjunction with the movement to the left
in the beginning and ending with the right, in due order. Applying the bright and
the dark half, one practice the Wheel of Time which is in between the full and
the new moon. Beginning with the first day of the new moon in three groups of
five. The vowels are conjoined first to the bright half and last to the dark half.
The individual soul (pudgalātmā) entering into this (should) practice this each
day. This is the fast practice of the body (piṇḍasādhana) for the destruction of
old age and death. One practices in this way does not always achieve success
(siddhi). This is because he is dragged into the Wheel of the Yoginīs due to
which he becomes forgetful. Forgetfulness (vismṛti) becomes a lunar day (tithi).

This is the lunar day, the turn of the day (vārā NB change to feminine gender).
(51-59)

This is your supreme time, said to be ultimate reality (paramārtha).
Once abandoned (the time?) in the middle of the body, you should stand
contemplated (bhāvitā) elsewhere. The nectar of the body is the supreme Yoga
and it should not be given to one who has not been examined. Until the body is
filled with knowledge and dispassion, there is knowledge of the middling form
of time. On the fifth night of the dark half of the moon of the month of
Maārgaśīrṣa, one should keep vigil equipped with the paraphernalia for the rite.
One should take an unbroken piece of birch bark. Then facing east one should
write on it the twelve auspicious vowels, with the Drop and measure (mātrā)
with blood, musk and saffron. Once the Vidyā has been repeated a number of
times it should be tied with a white thread. Then one should worship the
Kramāmnāya, endowed with lamps and Mantras, with white sandalwood, liquid

offerings and beautiful Jātī flowers. Encapsulating it within two clay saucers, it
is then placed in the midst of the flower and the Mantra is repeated until the end
of the night. Then at dawn the Krama is worshipped once again and the virgins
are lustrated. (60-69)
The Vidyā is then given in verse 70.
Those who have repeated the Vidyā sing hymns of praise and (fore) tell
the auspicious and inauspicious. If the gods do not sing hymns of praise, they
reveal great calamities and he suffers a fall in the Yoginīkula. By virtue of the
empowerment (sāmarthyataḥ) there is no death and he does suffer a fallen state

APPENDIX B CHAPTER NINETEEN

of accomplishment. Once he has done this, the letters of the Vidyā on the birch
bark are examined. Prognosis can be made on the basis of the state of the
writing. The jar worshipped at the time if taken to a village or town and carried

round it 16 times is protected from fire by the water inside it. (70-78)

Next Bhairava deals with the recitation of the Mṛtyuñjaya Mantra. This
can be recited while making offerings to the fire at a certain time of the year to
avert the future misfortune indicated by a bad omen (ariṣṭa). One should recite
the Mantra while thinking of the soul (pudgalātmā) in the nectar of the rising of
the moon. (79-82)
Next Bhairava talks about the ‘divine rosary’. It is not cut by a wheel, it
is not burnt by fire and is not threaded together with another thread. Meru is in
the middle of it and it has no knots. It has 50 beads from which comes the
universe. Even if the Mantras repeated with its aid are incomplete or divided up,

one attains what has not been achieved before. (83-90ab)

Now the goddess wants the Mantra of Ḍākinī, Rākṣasī, Lāmā, Kākinī,
Śakinī, Yakṣinī and Bhrāmaṇī. Bhairava responds by telling the goddess the
heptad (DRLKŚH ??) of Bhramaṇī using the code of the Meruprastāra. It can be
used for all purposes both to grace and obscure (nigrahānugraha). (90cd - 95ab)

The Heart of the Śākinī
Next comes the heart of the Śākinīs given in the same code

(DYRŚĀṀ). By practicing the consequences of bad omens are averted but if the
uvula dries up while repeating it, then one should abandon meditation. If by
further repetition, meditation and worship, the state is not pacified, then the
signs of death appear after five days. Then he should take refuge in his teacher
and tell his sons, wife, relatives and friends that the rites of ritual suicide
(utkrāntikāraṇa) should performed. He who does otherwise is a sinner. This

should be done without anger and one should not feel pained to do it. It is done
if one is not able to protect the body. It should be given by the teacher once he
has ascertained that the disciple has the characteristics (of one who is in this
state). (95cd-104ab)

Sacred Place
The Self is five-fold and it is known through one's own body. It consists
of all the sacred bathing places (tīrtha). A place becomes sacred as it is a place
accomplished yogis, who can give knowledge to others, have visited or lived in.
Thuṣ, ultimately, the place becomes sacred by the power of the Self. All the
sacred places are to be found where the teacher is present. The one who knows
the Self does not consider those sacred places full of water where there are gods
made of earth, (truly sacred).

TANTRĀLOKA

Ritual Suicide
(This discussion is related to ritual suicide as it is in such sacred places
that this is done). There is not fault for wise man if he commits (ritual) suicide if

he has respect for his teacher. The teacher is in fact the ford-maker
(tīrthāṇkara). The disciple quickly goes to a ‘slanted womb’ (tiryagyoni ??) and
atṭṭains the fruit which is the cessation of suffering (duhkhānta). The rite of ritual
suicide should not be done at any other time (or any other circumstance). It
should be done to achieve (spiritual) renown (kīrti). (104cd-112ab)
The mark of ritual suicide is as follows: the doors should be locked with
a chain. (Then some of them) in certain places should be open. The knot, which

is the foundation of the living being, should be cut. A chain should be put on the

anus, Liṅga, naval, mouth, nose, ears and eyes. A kuñcikā (a type of red berry or

a bamboo shoot?) should be placed above. Next Bhairava goes on to describe
the instrument (karaṇa) (to cut through) the chains. The adept squats in the
‘posture of the cockʼ. It is described as follows. He is bent over, the elbows
above the knees. The shoulders should be struck (by the teacher ??) with the

fists. One should utter the Mantra at the ‘root of the razor’ (??) and the knots are
thus cut in an instant once the doors have been opened (up to) the uvula. One
should practice this way constantly for six months when the signs of
accomplishment (pratyaya) appear. One should squeeze the vital breath that is
in the foundation of the Jar. The sign of death (utkrānti) becomes apparent by
practicing thus for a month. (When Kuṇḍalinī reaches) the Cavity of Brahmā, it
is as if pulsing with light (sphurantī). (The rest of the body) up to the throat is
lifeless. This takes place where the body is in a set posture (bandhatanu). One
should place something soft at the base of the anus. (One can make use of) a
back rest, the knees one each side, one should place two ‘bolts’ there. Then
(seated comfortably in a firm and even posture) one should control (the breath)
with gentle restraint. Once the body has been purified in this way, one attains
the aforementioned siddhis. Then one makes fame (for oneself). By practicing
this constantly one is able to leave the body (utkramaṇa) easily immediately.
One who is angry quickly destroys (his impediments) by that which is within
the body (ghaṭikā). His accomplishment becomes apparent by the flowers that
fall from the heavenly tree and creepers. (112cd-130ab)
The type of ritual suicide described above is for one who knows the six
paths and the five-fold Self. There is another kind which is done by an adept
who is suffering (dulkhita). It should be done in a frightening forest, attending

to one's own or another's angry mind. There, one should fashion a red manṇḍala

within which is a heptangle. The goddesses there are very fierce. They should be
worshipped starting with Yakṣinī as the root up to Ḍāmarī. One should deposit
the Self along with Kusuminī in the middle. One should worship them with
pieces of meat and offer blood as the liquid offering (argha). Then having
broken through the eight parts one should place the sacrificial vessel
(arghapatra) which contains faeces and urine along with some liquor. One
should worship with a man who is a protector of the earth and wears black with
liquid offering (naivedya). One should offer a vessel full of blood (raktapātra)
to each deity and make liquid offering separately for each one with skull bowls.
In order to bring the deities close by, one should offer incense. The incense

APPENDIX B CHAPTER NINETEEN

contains human bones with some liquor. One should then repeat the Vidyā
along with (the offering) of one’s own bodily elements (dhātu) a hundred times.
Then seven Mantras are given one for each goddess to which one of the dhātus
is offered and is invoked to bring this dhāru of the enemy under control (140A).
The adept then invokes the deities to accept the offerings made from his body,
exclaiming that he suffering, depressed, fallen and has abandoned the Rule. He
invokes the RAYS (marici) to accept the offerings. If he does this daily, the

yoginīs, shining brightly, will come at the end of the seventh night. They
quickly destroy (everything, also one’s impurity). Or else one can induce them

to perform this control (nigraha) of bad actions. One should not take any
substance that has come from one’s own body, (but) smearing one’s Self with

the Brahman one should meditate: ‘l am the Supreme Soul. I am Bhairava, the
Great Lord.” Thinking this, one should apply the six-fold deposition to one's
body. When this has been done 16 times one gets a Vajra body. (130cd-148)

Appendix to Chapter Twenty-two

The Seven Common Mantras

praṇavo mātṛkā māyā vyomavyāpī ṣaḍakṣaraḥ |
bahurūpo ʻtha netrākhyaḥ sapta sādhāraṇā amī || 20 ll
1) OM, 2) Mātṛkā, 3) Māyā, 4) Vyomavyāpin (the Pervader of the Sky),
5) the six-syllabled Mantra, 6) Bahurūpa (the Pluriform), and 7) the one called
Netra (the Eye) – these are the seven (universal) common Mantras. (20)
See above, 6/219cd f.

The deposition of Mātṛkā is explained above in 15/117cd-120. HRĪMṀ is the mantra of Māyā.
Vyomavyāpin (the Pervader of the Sky) consists of eighty-one phrases praising to Śiva (see

above, 6/226cd-227ab, note 6,443 where this important mantra is given in full). The six-syllabled

mantra is OṀ NAMAḤ ŚIVĀYA, as is confimmed by Jayaratha himself, in his

Haracaritacintāmaṇi, 30/122. Bahurūpa (the Pluriform) is the mantra of Aghora, one of the five
Brahman (see above, 15/203cd-204ab and note), which is translated and summarized thus: “Praise

in respects to you O Śarva, to all who are the Rudras, you who are Not Fierce (aghora), fierce

(ghora)
and
most
(fierce
(ghoratara)
(AGHOREBHYO’
THA
GHOREBHYO
GHORAGHORATAREBHYAŚ CA SARVATAḤ ŚARVA SARVEBHYO NAṂAS TE
RUDRARŪPEBHYAḤ). Concerning Aghora, who is identified with Svacchandabhairava, see

SVT 1/43. Netra (the Eye) is the mantra of Śiva Mṛtyuñjaya, that is, OM JUṀ SAH (see below,

30/40cd-41ab).
'NT p. 349-350 uttarasūtra Goodall’s commentary on 2/1: The use of mātṛkā as mantra is in later

literature typically reserved for contexts where some general all-purpose mantra is required (hence
its prominence in the relatively eclectic Zśānasivagurudevapaddhati), such as in liṅgoddhāra . . .

or in cases where an existing image is to be newly adapted for worship and the mantra that was
originally installed in it is no longer known. The mātṛkā is therefore commonly counted amongst
types of exoteric or ‘universal’ (sādhāraṇa) mantras. Thus, in the Jūānaratnāvalī (I have taken it

from the version typed for Muktabodha):

atha sādhāraṇaliṅgapakṣe sādhāraṇamantreṇaivārcanaṁ kāryam | tathā praṇavo māṭrkā māyā vyomavyāpī ṣaḍakṣaraḥ
prāsādāghoramantraś ca sapúa sādhāraṇā matāḥ lI
ebhiḥ sampājayed vidvān sarvasādhāraṇaṁ ivam | iṭi ḷ
Now, with regards to common (public) liṅgas – worship should be done with a common
(universal) mantra. (It is said) accordingly:
‘The seven - 1) OM, 2) Mātṛkā, 3) Māyā, 4) Vyomavyāpin (the Pervader of the Sky), 5)
the six-syllabled mantra, 6) Prāsāda and 7) Aghora mantras – are considered to be (universally)
common. The learned man should worship Śiva, (the deity) common to all by means of theṣe
(mantras)

We find practically the same verse in the Somaśambhupaddhativyākhya (IFP transcript
T 0170 (p. 240) e-text on Muktabodha’s site). Trilocanasiva suplies a similar context:
sarvasāmānyatvena nrpādibhi(h) sthāpiteṣu niyatajanapūjyeṣu sādhāraṇāṇubhir iti

praṇavo māyā mātṛkā vyomavyāpi ṣaḍakṣaram |

prāsādo bahurāpaśca sapta sādhāraṇā matā || (ii) |
ebhiḥ pūjā kāryā |
With regards to (liṅgas) that have been installed by kings and the like and that are to be

worshipped by a limited number of people, common souls should worship them as being common
to all, and by means of these (mantras, as stated in this verse).