(determined form) is uncertain. On the analogy of whether a fire sacrifice can be

declared (to have been completed) or not," would that not be (just a case of a
possible) alternative (vikalpa) (and not doubt)? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

3THSĪÑZRGTṬHTGTTITTT: || Ū2 1I

Read with MSs Ch, J, Ih, N sati for sāta.

'" When we see an object and we are in doubt as to whether it is a pillar or a man, the

doubt is confined to two possibilitiss because we are sure that all others that may be

possible are excluded. We perceive that there are many features of the object which
exclude the possibility that it is not a pillar and, similarly, that it is not a man.

' Theṛe are differences of opinion amongst Vedic schools as to which rites should be

performed in the course of a fire sacrifice (yajña). Consequently, disputes may arise
between followers of differing traditions as to whether it has been completed properly.

Such problems may be resolved by admitting that certain rites are optional or may be
performed in more than one way. In that case these differences would be understood as

possible options or alternatives (vikalpa).

TANTRĀLOKA

āmarśanīyadvairūāpyānudghāṭanavaśāt puṇaḥ |l 252|
saṁśayaḥ sa kimityaṁśe vikalpas tv anyathā sphuṭaḥ |
Again, doubt arises because the two (possible) natures of the objects
of reflection (between which it vacillates) have not been disclosed. It resides

in the aspect ‘what?”” Otherwise, (this uncertainty would) clearly be

(ust) an alternative (vikalpa) (between two possibilities). (252cd-253ab)
(251)

‘The two (possible) natures of the objects of reflection’, that is, (in

this case) a trunk (of a tree) and a man, have not been disclosed, in the sense
that they have not been revealed in their particular form, such as the face (of a
man), the cavity (of a tree) and the like. Thus, because this perception is

associated with the ‘what?” aspect, it is just doubt. (However,) here (in the case)

of (the alternative,) a trunk (of a tree) or a man, there is a real object of doubt,
namely, ‘is this a trunk (of a tree) or is this a man?’ But if (it were to be just)

‘what is this?’ it would be the primary (form of doubt), because in the ‘what’

aspect none of the particular attributes are disclosed, whereas here (in this case),
it is not primary, because (some) determined particulars are known. This is

the difference (between the two forms of doubt). However, in the case of an

alternative (vikalpa), such as between (whether one should offer) barley or
wheat (in a fire sacrifice), both are clearly ascertained (to be what they are), and

so their nature is not undisclosed.'" He says this (by saying): ‘otherwise, (this

uncertainty would) clearly be (just) an alternative (vikalpa) (between two

possibilities). ‘Otherwise’, this kind of doubt serves as a reason to apply the
' Alternatively, one could translate that ‘it exists when the aspect ‘what?’ is present.’

In other words, doubt in this sense only arises when one does not know the nature of
something and is enquiring into what it may be. Otherwise, if two or more things are

known, but there is a doubt as to which one to select for a particular purpose, this is not

doubt in this sense. It is simply reflection on possible alternatives, that is, thought.

'i See above, note to intro. of 1/247ab-247cd (1/247cd-248ab). Perception takes place

in two moments. The first moment is the immediate experience of the perceived entity

justas itis in its essential nature, which is grounded in the oneness of consciousness and
so is not specifically definable. In the second moment it is identified and defined as a
particular entity, the external colour ‘blue’ or the inner feeling ‘pleasure’, for example.
Each entity is defined by comparing it with similar entities and differentiating it from

others that are dissimilar. These are the ‘alternatives’. Both are known and neither is an
object of doubt, and so the formation of a thought construct or notion which labels or

defines a specific entity is not a form of doubt. Note also that entities belong to a
particular time and place. Thus, the two moments of perception are only definable as
successive from the perspective of the second ‘moment’.

' Read niyataviśeṣadharmāvagamāt for niyataviśeṣadharmānavagamāt.
'" Jayaratha explains that this verse describes the secondary form of doubt in which

some distinctive qualities of the object have been perceived. No qualities are clearly
perceived in the primary form of doubt. There is a difference between the doubt as to
whether an object is this or that and the doubt as to whether one should sacrifice with
barley or wheat. In the former case, the details are not clearly perceived, and the doubt

relates to the nature of the object. In the latter case, the possible options are known. The

decision as to which of the two should be used rests on the authority of scripture.

CHAPTER ONE

scriptures because the two objects of reflection (which in this example are),

barley or wheat, have been ascertained according to the nature of their particular
attributes.' This is the sense of what is said (here).

Scripture is essentially the (authority which) decides (and settles matters
of dispute) (nirṇayātma), and a ruling (nirṇaya) generally operates in relation to
a matter of doubt (concerning scriptural ordinances). Something which is (well)

known does not become an object of doubt in this way,'" nor does one which is

(totally) unknown, because doubt is a quality (dharma) of the perceiver (not the

Although one understands that there is something which is uncertain
(just) by (the operation of) some kind of doubt, even so its perception is possible

then. The very acceptance that that (is an object of doubt) is the question
(which ultimately leads to the resolution of that uncertainty). And that too (in its

turn), like its cause, goes on to serve as a reason to apply the scriptures (when
applicable). In order to reach a decision concerning that (matter), the application
of the scripture that is being applied (as the authority to settle the doubt)
proceeds in three ways, namely, ‘enunciation’ (uddesśa), ‘definition’ (lakṣaṇa)
and ‘examination’ (parīkṣā). ʻEnunciation’ is just a declaration of the subject
matter (padārtha) by (its) name. The first thing that must be done is to take this

up, because it is not possible to define or examine (a subject) that has not been

enunciated. Thus, without (the initial) enunciation (of a subject) it is not

possible to apply scripture, the nature of which is to define and examine (a
subject that has been enunciated as an object of enquiry). Thus, there (in that
context, the application of scripture) is also an auxiliary (of the resolution of a
doubt).
Surely (one may ask,) if the application of scripture is accomplished by
just (that) one (initial phase), what purpose is served by (having) the three? If
(one were to ask this, our reply would be that) that is not so, because they are
said here to serve as a reason (for the application of scripture) insofar as they are
mutually connected to one another. (The right understanding of) a matter (artha)
which is said by someone to be (an object of) doubt is determined by scripture
through (the process of) enunciation and the rest. Thus, he says (the following)
in order to establish that, although there is a difference in the nature (of these
three), in this way (collectively), in (their generic) common (samāna) form as

the perception (prathā) (of something) the nature of which has not been

revealed (anudghāṭita), (it serves as) a cause for the application (pravṛtti) of

scripture.

TĪTJGTTTRTTTTĀTaTYTHT ĠṬ II 43 11
2 See previous note.

'" RṞead upalabdhārtha evaṁ saṁśayaviṣayatāṁ for upalabdha eva saṁśayaviṣayatā.
'"” If doubt were to be the result of simply not knowing an object, then all the countless

unknown objects would be the objects of doubt. But no doubt arises concerning
something that is totally unknown. Moreover, knowing or not knowing relates to the
perceiver. It is the perceiver who is in doubt, and it is his concern to come to know what

he is uncertain about. Uncertainty is not a quality of the object.

Read tadāpi for tadā.

TANTRĀLOKA

ṢGIR. JY: iJT TJ

tenānudghāṭitātmatvabhāvaprathanam eva yat || 253 ||
prathamaṁ ṣa ihoddeśaḥ praśnaḥ saṁśaya eva ca |
Thus, the initial (moment of) perception (in the cognitive process) of
the (mere) existence of something (the specific nature of which) has not

(yet) been disclosed is here (termed) ‘enunciation’ (uddeśa), ‘question’
(praśna) and ‘doubt’ (saṁśaya). (253cd-254ab) (252)

‘Thus’, by applying the principle (nyāya) taught previously, ‘the initial

(moment of) perception (prathana) (in the cognitive process) of somethingʼ,

which is that of its bare existence (vastumātra), ‘(the specific nature of which)

has not (yet) been disclosed, is here (termed) ‘enunciation’ (uddeśa),

‘question’ (praśna) and ‘doubt’ (saṁśaya)’. The nature of doubt there is such
as has just been explained. In the (course of) enunciation, the perception of the
nature of an entity is (that of one that) is undisclosed, because the things
(padārtha) (that are the object of enquiry are) denoted by just their bare name
alone (nāmadheyamātra). The same can be said (vācya) also (with regard to the
formulation of a) ‘question’ (namely, that it is an indeterminate perception of
something), otherwise (if it were not), it would be the determination (of its
nature) (nirṇaya) and so there would be no difference between it and the answer

(to the question concerning its nature).

There (in that case) a question arises with regards to something which is
the object of doubt. Thus (it is only) after that has been ascertained that the
question can be formulated (nirṇetavya). (But how is it possible to account for
this circularity?). In order to explain that and its true nature, now that the
occasion has arisen (to do s0), he says:

hIERIĒSEAIYICEETGTEEIĪĪÚĀETAAHI
tathānudghāṭitākārabhāvaprasaravartmanā || 254 |
prasarantī svasaṁvittiḥ praṣṭrī śiṣyātmatāṁ gatā |
One’s own consciousness, extending by means of the path, which is

the unfolding of the state of being (bhāvaprasara) (that presents itself
initially) in an undisclosed form, assumes the nature of a disciple (and is
called the) ‘enquiring’ (consciousness). (254cd-255ab) (253)
' Jayaratha explains here how all three, that is, the initial enunciation ofa topic to be

discussed, the formulation of a question and doubt, are indeterminate perceptions, the
content of which is just the bare existence of what is being enunciated, the object of
enquiry or doubt. As such they arise in the first phase of perception to mature in the
second phase into determinate perceptions, which are clear conceptual representations

of the content of the first phase through which its specific nature is known and hence
made manifest.

CHAPTER ONE
Here (according to this) nondualist doctrine (advayanaya), (the view is

that) ‘consciousness alone, being as it is ultimate reality, is everything’. Thus, it
is unreasonable (to maintain) that there is (any) difference (bheda) between the

disciple and the teacher etc., who is the one who questions and the one who
answers (respectively). ‘In this way’, in the aforementioned manner, the

‘undisclosed form’ is one with consciousness because it is full to overflowing

with all existing things. ‘The state of being’ (of consciousness that presents

itself initially in this form is the supreme level of Speech which) is (the one)
ultimate reality (pāramārthikaṁ vastu), the nature of which is full (complete
and all-embracing) (pūrṇa). Its ‘unfolding’ (prasara) is (its) descent, (which

takes place) by (progressive) entry into the (lower) levels (of Speech), beginning

with the Speech of Vision (Pasyantī). That is itself the ‘path’. One’s own

consciousness itself, contracted, ‘extending’, that is, assuming the states of the
Corporeal and the other (levels of Speech) by means of this (path), manifesting
(thereby) the plane of the disciple who is the perceiver, is said to be the
‘enquiring (consciousness). This is the meaning.
Where and how is its state as the enquiring (consciousness)? He says:

TāTāTTTYĪRAṬTTSTtTTRTT: II/ 3uU 1
EUEEHPEEIHCCĒIIĪĪ
qṬaaīai YTGTTaTST JÑŪRaTHĪ ||QUĒ II

tathāntaraparāmarśaniścayātmatirohiteḥ || 255 ||

prasarānantarodbhūtasaṁhārodayabhāg api |
yāvaty eva bhaved bāhyaprasare prasphuṭātmani || 256 ||
anunmīlitarūpā sā praṣṭrī tāvati bhaṇyate |
In this way, when the certainty (niścaya) which is the inner
reflective awareness (consciousness has of its own nature as the knower) is
obscured, (the cognitive process assumes two forms) that emerge from the
flow (of extroverted awareness) that follows after (this obscuration has

taken place). (One is) withdrawal (into the higher levels of awareness where
there is certainty, and the other form) is emergence (down into the lower
levels where there is not). The form (of consciousness) that has not opened
up (and become active) when the external, clearly evident expansion (of

perception that moves out towards its object) takes place is said to be the
enquiring (aspect of consciousness). (255cd-257ab) (254-255)

‘In this way’, because (consciousness) is the (one) supremely nondual

(reality, it encompasses this entire process). “When the certainty’, that is,

stability (dārḍhya), of ‘the inner reflective awareness’ which is oneness with

' See çommentary to the following verses in terms of the levels of Speech below ad

272cd-273ab (271).

TANTRĀLOKA

the perceiver, ‘is obscured’ because its successively higher (more evident)
nature is not present in the one that progressively (obscured) follows,
(consciousness assumes) two (forms) that arise subsequently ‘from the flow’

(of awareness) that is directed (away from the perceiver) to the outer (sphere of
objectivity). (One is) ‘withdrawal’, which is the (progressively developing)
state of rest within one’s own nature of the form (of awareness which) is the
Supreme, and the other (levels of Speech that merge into it). And (the other is)

‘emergence’, which is the external outpouring (of consciousness) in the form of
(awareness that progressively descends) from the Speech of Vision onwards

(down to Corporeal Speech).
That is the form of consciousness ‘when the clearly evident’

manifestation of the pair, subject and object etc., which is the ‘external

expansion (of perception that moves out towards its object) takes place’;
‘(the aspect of consciousness) that has not opened up (and become active)”
does not manifest as consciousness. It is said to be ‘the enquiring (aspect of

consciousness) insofar as it is perceived to be undisclosed' in this way. This
is the meaning.
Consciousness is not only the enquiring subjectiv
question and the rest. Thus, he says:

it is also the

[GEECREEICÉEI FEIItECCTĀHṬIINCH

TṀTRTTSAT

svayam eyaṁ vibodhaś ca tathā praśnottarātmakaḥ || 257 ||
guruśiṣyapade ‘py eṣa dehabhedo hy atāttvikaḥ |

When one is in doubt, the mind oscillates between being sure and then again being
uncertain. When the state of certainty prevails, awareness, previously directed outwards
to the object, flows back into the perceiver from the object and so, as he no longer needs
to know the outer object, he abides tranquil within his own essential nature. The absence
of certainty about the nature of the object diverts the flow of awareness back to it and,

attempting to regain that fundamental certainty of inner rest, emerges out of its pure
subjectivity. As it does so, awareness articulates its formulations and hypotheses,
ranging from intuitions at the level of the Speech of Vision through to that of the
cogitation and notions of Middle Speech and out into Corporeal Speech. Then reaching
the furthest extreme of doubt and its expression, finding some certainty again, the flow
reverses back again into the subject. In this way, it oscillates back and forth as we feel,
‘O Ñam not sureʼ, and then ‘Ah, yes, now I understand’, and then, as that certainty is not
full and stable, it again redevelops as before and so on. Ultimately, perfect certainty is a

state of rest in which consciousness shines unobscured by doubt. Such is the original
liberated state attained by the recognition in an instant of its own pristine, unobscured

nature. This is how the Empowered Means (Śāktopāya) leads to No Means. We shall see

in Chapter Four that the purpose of contemplating the Twelve Kaālīs as phases of the
perennial rhythm of consciousness is to remove the doubt that obstructs its recognition.
' The ‘undisclosed’ consciousness does not manifest as consciousness; instead it
manifests as the object of doubt. Perceiving that, the residual consciousness which arises
and falls away in the manner described, sometimes understanding then again not, is the

enquiring perceiving subjectivity.

CHAPTER ONE

(Awakening) consciousness (vibodha) on the plane of the teacher
and the taught is itself in this way (both) question and answer. Indeed, this

difference between the bodies (of the teacher and disciple) is not ultimately
real. (257cd-258ab) (256)
Abhinava expounds this teaching more extensively in the Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa.

There he says:

“The matter (vastu) (taught in the course of the questions and answers) is the
supreme reality (paramārtha) of the Supreme Lord, whose nature is consciousness, and
so pulses radiantly inwardly without division in this way (at the supreme level of
Speech). It is contemplated (parāmrṛṣta) on the plane of the Speech of Vision (pasśyanīī)
as the intention (free of conceptualization) to differentiate letter, word and sentence. It is
present in a differentīated manner (bhedena) on the plane of the Middle (level of
Speech) until (yāvaṁ) within (the level of) Corporeal (Speech — vaikharī) it finally
assumes (the form of) separately divided compositions of phenomenal (māyīya) letter,
word and sentence based on the matter (taught in the form of question and answer)
(vastupūrvaka).” (PTv p. 13)
‘Initially (at the level of Supreme Speech), the matter (vastu) (taught in the
scripture) in the form of questions and their answers is undivided (into these polarities)

and is perpetually actively (existent) (satatodita). Thus, the point here is essentially this:

one’s own Self which is all things shines (spontaneously and independently) by itself. It
contemplates itself inducing a state of wonder (within itself) (as it does so) by means of

question and answer, which is undivided from itself as the subjectivity (ahantā) which is
its own nature consisting of (both) the one who questions and the one who replies.

(Thus, the reflecting awareness that) “I myself, who desire (to experience) such

extraordinary wonder (vicitracamatkāra), knowing it in this way, am just that” . . .
(unfolds from the beginning through to the middle and end of the Parātrīśika,) or else

(one could say, throughout) all the scriptures derived from the five currents, such that
this worldly business (of their existence is accomplished). This is said to be the supreme
relationship (saṁbandha) (between teacher and disciple). I, Abhinavagupta, have
explained the essence of (the doctrine concerning) question (and answer)
(praśnasarvaṣva) which always invokes (āvaha) Bhairava’s plane of being immediately,

and is the eṣsence of the teaching which is to be kept secret. (ibid. p. 14-15)

‘Abhinava has offered this explanation of (the doctrine with regard to the)
question (and answer) (praśnavyākhyā) concerning the reality of the Trika (teachings)
(trikatattva) in order to tear asunder with great force (haṭhāt) the knot (of Māyā that

blocks access to) the Sky of the Heart for those whose mind thirsts to drink the juice of

(the aesthetic savour of) Śiva and, penetrated by Śiva, is constantly engaged (read

saktam for sattāṁ) in destroying (all that is) inauspicious (asiva). (ibid. p. 63)
‘Consciousness, the Goddess (bhagavatī) Parā, is by Her very nature spreading
forth (as questioning awareness). Undivided from Bhairava, She is said to be the
supreme power of the will. The body she bears is the Speech of Vision and the rest (of

the levels of Speech), which are forms of Parāparā and Aparā, (its) nature the extending

powers of knowledge (and action). That is the act of reflective awareness
(parāmarśana) which in this way is in the form of (that) spreading forth (of the powers
of consciousness). It is said to be the question, and the Goddess is the one who asks the
question which is of that nature. The act of reflective awareness (parāmarśana) of its

extending form is said to be the supreme one, and its nature is that question and answer.

Again, that (as the individual answer) of the other (apara) (aspect of)

consciousness (that responds) is at the beginning and end. It is the instrument of
withdrawal into the bliss of supreme dense (uninterrupted) consciousness (that occurs)
repeatedly. Bhairava’s body is the entire flow that has been contemplated inwardly. It
unfolds constantly as the essential nature of the one who replies. These two, the flow

TANTRĀLOKA

That is said (in the Svacchandatantra):

‘The deity Sadāśiva, having established Himself on the plane of the

teacher and disciple, brought the Tantra (down into the world), in accord with
the particular supporting level (of descent), by means of statements made of

words that precede (as questions) and follow on (as answers).

and the withdrawal, are not measured by time, and so that reality has just one nature

which is (both) question and answer. That is the supreme relationship (between teacher

and disciple), which is endowed with the state of Anuttara the teachers described in this
way in the past as the wealth of the essence of Trika.’ (ibid. p. 64-65). Concerning the
types of relationships between the teacher and the taught, see below 1/274ab-277cd
(1/274cd-278ab).
According to Sanderson (2005b: 94), this means that: ‘the lineage is to be

understood as a single state of being within which individual identities are incidental
and irrelevant. This is the basis of the doctrine that the guru lineage and the deity are

one and the same, and the justification of the injunction that the initiate must look upon
the guru as deity incarnate.’ Perhaps Sanderson is forgetting that according to the view

of nonduality taught here although individual identity is grounded in universal one, the

latter does not cancel out the former. Indeed, it reinforces it at the deepest and most
universal level as its true essential nature. Cf. above, 1/232cd-234 (233-235ab) and MM

p. 95-96.

SVT 8/31cd-82ab which also quoted in SvTu ad 1/1-4ab. The printed text of the SyT

reads tantram ādhārabhedataḥ for tantraṁ samavatārayat – ‘tantra was brought down

(to earth) – in both instances. As this is the reading of all the manuscripts also, I take

this to be the correct one. This verse is also quoted in in the commentary by

Sivopādhyāya on VBh 7ab and in PTv p. 12. Jayaratha’s reading of this verse agrees

with the reading there. Following the verse Jayaratha quotes here, the Śvacchandatantra
goes on to describe how the Tantra ‘descended’ in stages from level to level,˚as higher

beings progressively taught lower beings at each stage of descent. So the questions and

answers are, as the Tantra says, ‘in accord with the distinct planesʼ (ādhārabhedataḥ) on

which they reside. So, for example, it was given by Śiva’s will to Īśvara, who then told
it to Vidyā, who transmitted it to the Lords of Vidyās and so on.
tajjñānam īśvare ʻdāt tad īśvareṇa śivecchayā ||

vidyāyāḥ kathitaṁ pūrvaṁ vidyeśebhyas tathādarāt | (ṢVṬT 8/32cd-33ab)

‘He gave its knowledge to Īśvara and by Śiva’s will, Īśvara taught it first to
Vidyā and then, in the same way, (it was transmitted) to the Vidyeśas with reverence.
(8/32cd-33ab)

devaḥ paravākśaktimayaḥ śivabhaṭṭāraka eva | sadāśiva iti gṛhītatattadbhāūmikaḥ |
svayaṁ .guruśiṣyapade sthitveti pratibhābhuvi praṣṭṛprativaktṛbhāvāsūtraṇena
paramamahā̃
ntīvākśaktyāsūtritapūrvottarapadātmakair vākyair upalakṣitaṁ
tantram aśeṣaśāstra-sandarbhamayaṁ taj jñānaṁ ceśvare ‘dād iti saṁkramitavān |
ādhārabhedata iti īśvarāmmakam ādhārabhedam āśritya svayaṁ tadātmanā sthitvā ity
arthaḥ | tajjñānam īśvare dattam iti tu pāṭhaḥ pūrvaślokānta āsūtryeti yojayitvā tena

cety anuṣaṅgeṇa vyākhyeyaḥ | iyatā mahaisambandho darśitaḥ ’| śivecchayā

sadāśivecchayā, ity anenānāyātaśaktipāto nopadeśya iti dhvanati |

‘The deity’ is Lord Śiva Himself who is made of the power of Supreme
Speech. (He is) Sadāśiva, in the sense that he has assumed that role, ‘having eṣtablished

Himself on the plane of the teacher and disciple’. ‘The tantra’ is the entire collection of

CHAPTER ONE

scripture. ‘He gave its knowledge to Īśvara’, that is, it was transmitted (to him) by the

statements that characterize (the scriptures) ‘made of words that precede (as questions)
and follow on (as answers). It is outlined (initially) by the power of Speech, which is

the supreme Great Speech of Vision that marks (in a potential form) on the plane of
creative insight (pratibhā), the relationship between the one who questions and one who
replies. (This happens) ‘in accord with the particular supporting levels (of descent)’. The
particular supporting level is Īśvara. (He did s0) ‘having established himself (there).’

The meaning is that he established himself as being of that nature.

The reading ‘its knowledge was given to Īśvara’ indicates that having linked
what was said at the end of the previous verse to that, (this line) should be explained by
associating them together. The great relationship (between the teacher and the taught) is

presented by (stating) this. (This takes place) by Śiva’s will, that is, by Sadāśiva’s will.

By (saying) this it is implicitly suggested that one for whom a descent of the power (of
grace) has not come about, is not to be taught.

vidyāyā iti ---- aṣṭavargavibhinnā ca vidyā sā (mātṛkaiva tu) | (1O/11A4) iti

devyās

tathā

vedanapradhānatvād

vidyāśabda-

vācyasyāśeṣasya
mantragrāmasya,
anantabhaṇārakādibhyaś
ca
vidyeśebhyo
mantracakravartibhya īśvareṇa tantraṁ tajjñānaṁ ca kathitaṁ saṁkramaṇayuktyā
vimarśapadaṁ nītam | ādarād iti bhaktyullāsaprakarṣāt |
yady pi bhagavato mātṛkā tadutthāś ca mantrāḥ parameśavad bhedenāvabhāsitā
vidyātattva-dhāmni tāvad aśeṣaviśvābhedavyāptir atra nimagneva sthiteti tām
unmajjayitum īśvareṇa viśvānujighṛkṣayā jñānasaṁkrāntir atra kṛtā upapannaiva |

‘Vidyā’ (is defined as follows): “That Vidyā (is Mātṛkā,) who is divided into
the eight classes of letters.” (10/1144) The goddess, as will be explained, is called
Maātrikā, and because (she is) predominantly sentient awareness (vedana), is denoted by
the word ‘Vidyā’ (‘ Knowledge’). She is the entire multitude of Mantras. Īśvara imparted

the Tantra and its knowledge to the Lords of the Vidyās who, beginning with the Lord

Ananta, are the emperors of Mantras. (Thus) by the process of transmission it was

brought onto the plane of reflective awareness. (This was done) with reverence, that is,

by virtue of the excellence of the outpouring of (their) devotion.
Although the Mātṛkā of the Lord and the Mantras that arise from Her are made
manifest, like the Supreme Lord, as separate (from each other and their source), (even
s0) within the abode of the Vidyā principle the entire universe is thus (tāvar) pervaded
by oneness and abides as if immersed here. It is right that, in order to make that
(Mātṛkā) emerge (out from there), Īśvara, desiring to grace the universe, has transferred
(that) knowledge here.

itaḥ prabhṛty antarālasambandhaḥ āsūtritaḥ
mayāpi tava deveśi sādhikāraṁ samarpitam (8/36cd)

ity etāvat paryanto bhaviṣyati ||

evar
paśyantīprasaraṇaparyantāṁ
madhyamāprasaraṇenāha --

śāstrasthitim

uktvā,

māyāniyatiparyantais tasmād rudrair avāpi tat | 8-33 |
From here onwards (the Tantra) will refer to the Intermediate Relationship in
this way, ending with (the following line): “O mistress of the gods, I also offered this to
you along with authority (over it).” (8/36cd)

Having taught the condition of the scriptures up to the flowing forth of the
Speech of Vision, he (now) says (how this takes place) as the flowing forth of the
Middle (Speech).

TANTRĀLOKA

‘From him, it was acquired by the Rudras present up to (the principle) of
Māyā’s Niyati. (8/33cd)
tasmād iti vidyātattvacakravartino ‘nantabhaṭārakād ity arthāt | māyāniyatiparyantair
iti maṇḍaliprabhr̥tibhiḥ kañcukavāsibhiśca rudrair avāpīti saṅkramaṇayuktyaiva || 33 ||
tato ʻnantaraṁ tad eva jñānaṁ tathaiva ----

śrīkaṇṭheneśvarāt prāptaṁ jñānaṁ paramadurlabham | (8/4ab)

From the sense (we understand that) ‘from him’ (means) from the Lord

Ananta, who is the emperor of the Vidyā principle. It was acquired by the Rudras

‘present up to (the principle) of Māyā’s Niyati’, beginning from Maṇḍalin and those

who reside in the Kañcukas by the process of transmission. Then, after that, that same
knowledge was (passed on) in the same way. (Thus he says that)
_ 'the knowledge that is extremely hard to acquire was obtained by Śrīkaṇṭha
from Īśvara. (8/34ab)

ahaṁ hi bhagavãn īśvarãtmanaḥ śivasya śiṣyaḥ maṇḍalyādyās tv anantaśiś

madhye puṅstattvādhiṣṭhātāro
rudrā
bandhahetutayā
etājjñānaśaktiṣaṁkrāṇtir na kṛtā || tato ‘pi tathaivaā ----

sthāpitā

iti

I myself, the Lord (bhagavat), am the disciple of Śiva who is Īśvara. (He has)
endless numbers of disciples, beginning with Maṇḍalin. Here in the middle are the
Rudras, who preside over the principle of the individual soul, placed (there) as the cause

of bondage. Thus, the power of that knowledge was not transmitted to them. After that
also, in the same way:
tenāpi tadadhaḥ proktaṁ rudrāṇām īśyarecchayā |I
pradhānāc chatarudrāntaṁ dīkṣayitvā vidhānataḥ |
mamāpi ca purā dīkṣā tathā caivābhiṣecanam ||
śrīkaṇṭhena purā dattaṁ tantraṁ sarvārthasādhakam | (8/34cd-36ab)

By Īśvara’s will, he too taught what was below that to the Rudras. He first

initiated (those who reside) in Fundamental (pradhāna) (Nature) (and from there) up to
the one hundred Rudras, in the (proper) prescribed manner. My initiation also (was
given) before, and so too (my) consecration was given to me in the past by Śrīkaṇṭha,

and (so also) the Tantra which is the means to attain every goal. (8/34cd-36ab)

vady api guṇatattve śrīkaṇṭhanāthaḥ sthitaḥ, tathāpy asau śivaśiṣyatvena
prabhāvātiśayavān
iti
svordhvasthaprakṛtivartinaḥ
krodhādyas
svādhāratattvagatānāṁ ca śatarudrāntānāṁ rudrāṇām anugrahītā |
kailāsavāsinas tantrapravaktur_ bhagavata umāpater uktiḥ | tad ittham anantādyāḥ

maṇḍalinas tv anantaśiṣyāḥ,
krodhādayaḥ śatarudrāntā umāpatiś ca śrīkaṇṭha:
ity adiṣṭaṁ bhagavatā | tena yat
kheṭakanandanena ---Although the Lord Śrīkaṇṭha resides in the principle of the guṇas, even so, as
Śiva’s disciple he possesses an extraordinary power (prabhāva), and so he graces all the

Rudras, who are above Prakṛti, that is, the eight beginning with Krodha, and the hundred

Rudras who are located in the principle which is his foundation. ‘My teaching, that is,
that of the speaker of the Tantras, who resides on (Mount) Kailāsa, the Lord (bhagavat)

Umāpati. He is in this way Ananta and the rest, Śrīkaṇṭha and the disciples of Śiva, who

CHAPTER ONE
Similarly (it is said elsewhere):

‘The goddess is herself established as the one who questions and the

one who replies.” '

Surely (one may ask,) the mutual difference between teacher and
disciple is perceived directly, so what (is this you are saying that is) their nature

is the Lord God (īśvarabhaṭṭāraka), (as well as) those who are part of the assembly
(maṇḍala) and are Ananta’s disciples, namely Krodha and the rest, those ending with
the hundred Rudras, Umāpati, and Śrīkaṇṭha’s disciples. This is what the Lord has
taught. Thuṣ, (this is what) Kheṭakananda has said:

ete kalādiyogāt prakaṭīkṛtadṛkkriyāḥ pareśena |I" (tasaṁ. 30)
ity uktam
‘The members of the assembly (mnaṇḍalin), Śrīkaṇṭha and (the eight Bhairavas)
Kroḍha etc., the hundred Bhavas along with the Lords of the Heroes. The Supreme Lord
has made (their powers of) perception and action clearly evident by (their) union with
limited agency (kalā) and the rest of (the Kañcukas).
tad yathoktānusāraṁ kvacit sākṣāt kvacit pāramparyeṇeti vyākhyeyam, na tv aviśeṣeṇa |
dīkṣayitveti, abhiṣecanaṁ kṛtveti ca śāktasamāveśasaṁkṛramaṇayuktyā pūrvaṁ

śabhavasamāveśayuktyaiva

| / evaṁ

ca

nādīkṣitasya jñānagrahaṇe,

nāpy

anabhiṣiktasya taddãne ʻdhikāra ity ādiṣṭaṁ bhavati | athaitat tantraṁ ca tajjñānaṁ ca
saṁkramaṇayuktyaiva ---- mayāpi tava deveśi sādhikāraṁ samarpitam || (8/36cd) itaḥ

prabhr̥i vaikharyāḥ prasaraḥ l 36

In accord with what has been said, that (transmission) should be explained (to
take place) directly in some cases or indirectly in others, not without distinction, once
initiated and having (been) consecrated, by means of the transmission (brought about)
by the empowered penetration (śāktasamāveśa) first (and then) by means of Śambhu'’s
penetration (sāṁbhavasamāveśa). In this way it is taught that one who is not initiated

has no authority to receive knowledge, nor is one who is not consecrated (authorized) to

give it. Now that Tantra and its knowledge is (its) by means of (its) transmisṣṣion:
‘O mistress of the gods, I also offered this to you along with authority (over
it). (8/36cd)

From here onwards it is the flow of Corporeal Speech (through which the

Tantra is transmitted from human teachers to human disciples).”

This is the way the ‘descent of a Tantra’ (tantrāvatāra) is generally described.
Itis standard practice for a major Tantra to do this. Thus Abhinava, following the same
model, presents the account of the transmission of the Siddhayogīśvarīmata, the root

Tantra of the Trika, in Chapter Thirty-Six below. He then goes on to present the
transmission of the currents of the Śaiva teachings through the lineages of teachers, to
conclude that the Tantrāloka is the essence of all of these transmissions, which are
ultimately rooted in that of the SYM. Thus, just as a major Tantra attests to its own
authority by tracing its origin from Deity, Abhinava implicitly claims the same authority

for the same reason and in the same way for the teachings of the Tantrāloka.

'” Ifin place of the reading svayarṁ devī, we adopt the reading in MSs K, Ch, J, h, and

T: dvayaṁ devī, the meaning would be ‘the goddess is established as the two, namely,

one who questions and the one who replies.”

TANTRĀLOKA

as consciousness? (In response to this question,) he says: ‘this (difference
between the bodies) etc. ‘is not ultimately realʼ, that is, it has no reality
(avāṣṭava). The point is that consciousness itself, by the glorious power of its
freedom, makes each (particular) embodied state and the like manifest.
He says that:

fkrā: | 2u¢ 11
aTNTTATA gTHHTTT-ĪHTITḤ’ |

bodho hi bodharūpatvād antarnānākṛtīḥ sthitāḥ || 258 II
bahirābhāsayaty eva drāk sāmānyaviśeṣataḥ |

Consciousness (bodha) itself, (precisely) because it is consciousness,
causes the many forms present within (it) to manifest externally in an

instant as (both) universal and particular. (258cd-259ab) (257)

The Supreme Lord, Whose nature is consciousness, ‘causes the many
forms’, that is, each particular kind of phenomenon (bhāvajāta), ‘present

within (it) to manifest’ as (both) universal and particular, ‘externally’ as
(individual forms) separate (from one another) (vicchedena) ‘in an instantʼ,

without delay, because it does not depend on anything else (to do s0). This is

the meaning of (this) statement.
There (in that case), what is the external manifestation of the universal?

Thus (with this question in mind,) he says:

RPTTTITṬJTITRITRTATĀTTT
ATĒT |I 24X 11
rīīṝz7 gftz: aīāṛzārgftz:

srakṣyamāṇaviśeṣāṁśākāṁkṣāyogyasya kasyacit l| 259 ||

The emission (of a universal is that) of a certain attribute (of an

object, such as the ‘cow-ness’ of a cow,) which is fit to receive, and requires,
the aspects (of its fully determined form,) which are the particulars to be
emitted (in order for it to be known). (Thus,) the emission of the universal
(with no particulars) is essentially (the content of) doubt. (259cd-260ab)

(258)

The ‘universal’ (sāmānya) is the generic object of doubt and enquiry. It is the

question, and the consciousness, fundamentally free of thought constructs, that
questions. The ‘particular (viśeṣa) comprises all the details and specific features of the
object discerned by their corresponding thought constructs.

' Cf. Utpaladeva (IP 1/5/7) who says: ‘Indeed the conscious nature, the Lord, like a
yogi, independently of material causes, by virtue of His will alone, makes the multitude

of entities present within Himself, externally manifest.’

CHAPTER ONE

‘The aspects (of its fully determined form) which are the particulars
to be emitted’ are those that will pour forth (from consciousness) as pertaining
to the specifying characteristics (of that entity) (svālakṣaṇya). There (in this
regard, it is said): “a universal devoid of particulars (is as non-existent) as are a
hare’s horns.” Thus, in accord with this reasoning (yukti), because (a universal)
is invariably associated (with particulars, it) ‘requires’ (them), that is, (is

naturally in) a state of propensity (towards associating with them). There (in that
case), ‘a certain attribute’ which is of a fixed (determined nature) (niyata),

such as ‘cow-nessʼ, that is ‘fit’ (to receive the particulars) even when it is not
propense to do so, because it is present (equally) in all (the entity), and its
essential nature does not cease, and so possesses the corresponding
(appropriate) qualities (anuguṇa) (to receive them). The external manifestation
(of this attribute) is ‘the emission of the universal (with no particulars)’, and

that, because it is a form of perception (prathā) in which its nature is
undisclosed, is ‘doubt’. Thus, the meaning is that the perception of doubt
(saṁśayapratīti) is the perception of the universal (undefined nature of an
object), which requires the appropriate particulars (of its fully determined form

to manifest and be known clearly as that particular object).

Analogously (evaṁ), the nature of the emission of the particular
(qualities of an entity) is the perception of the ascertainment (of its nature)
(niścaya). Thus, he says:

srakṣyamāṇo viśeṣāṁśo yadā tūparamet tadā || 260 ||
nirṇayo mātṛrucito nānyathā kalpakoṭibhiḥ |
(its)

(Only) when (the emission of) the aspect (of the object) consisting of

particular (qualities) which is to be emitted ceases does an

ascertainment (nirṇaya) (of the nature of an object) take place in accord

2 Ṭhe person who enquires is in doubt. He only has a vague, general notion of what he

wants to know. In order to understand, he needs to know specific details. Thus, he asks

questions. The answers supply the details until finally the object of doubt becomes

clearly known. The nature of the object is essentially the same consciousness which is
the nature of the perceiver. Thus, as both question and answer reside together as aspects

of the same consciousness, the one who questions already knows the answer somewhere

in the depths of his consciousness. Accordingly, this process of progressively
developing questions and answers is understood to be a progressive disclosure of the
object which is ‘covered over” within consciousness. This process comes to an end only
when the one who enquires is satisfied that he has known what he wants to know, and
that happens when the knowledge he already possesses innately in his consciousness is
sufficiently revealed. In other words, the teacher does not really teach anything that the
disciple does not already know. He simply helps his disciple to recognise the truth

within himself. This takes place, as Abhinava puts it further ahead, ‘by an intense

appropriation of the vitality (vīrya) (that is, reflective awareness) of his own nature’.

TANTRĀLOKA

with (the satisfaction of) the desire (to know it on the part) of the

perceiver, not otherwise, even in ten million aeons. (260cd-261ab) (259)

‘When’ however, ‘(the emission of) the aspect (of the object)
consisting of (its) particular (qualities) which are to be emitted ceasesʼ, that
is, when the emission that has as its field of operation particulars (viśeṣasṛsti) is
brought to an end because all the particulars that serve to (reach a correct)

ascertainment (of its nature)' have been emitted, then that itself should be (the
correct and) certain determinate perception (niścaya), that is, conviction
(pratyaya) (that, for example,) “this is indeed the trunk (of a tree)”, because it is
the perception (of that object) whose nature is (thus) disclosed (udghāṭita). The

arising of this (ascertainment) is related to the desire of the perceiver (to know

it), and so it is said that (it takes place) ‘in accord with (the satisfaction of) the
desire (to know it on the part) of the perceiver’. The point is that (the nature
of an entity is) ascertained (niścita) to the degree that the perceiver is satisfied

that “(now) I have known (it)”. ‘Otherwise’, on the contrary, it could never be

(s0), because the perceiver’s desire does not (find) rest. He says that (with the
words): ‘ʻnot otherwise, even in ten million aeons.”
This is not only just the ascertainment (niścaya) of that (object’s
nature); it is also (its) ‘definition’ etc. Thus, he says:

|| 2ē2 1|

tasyātha vastunaḥ svātmavīryākramaṇapāṭavāt || 261 ||
unmudraṇaṁ tayākṛtyā lakṣaṇottaranirṇayāḥ |
Now, the disclosure (unmudraṇa) of that entity (with all its
particulars) according to (its own specific) form that takes place by an

intense (pātava) appropriation of the vitality (vīrya) of one’s own nature,
(is termed the) ‘definition’ (lakṣaṇa), ‘reply’ (uttara) and ‘ascertainment’
(nirṇaya) (of its nature). (261cd-262ab) (260)

‘The disclosure’ in that very form (as it truly is) is the discovery of the
specific, well determined (pratiniyata) nature ‘of that’ particular (specific)
‘entity°. (It takes place by) the ‘appropriation’, that is, making the vitality of
one’s own nature, (which is the intensity of a state of awareness,) averted from

(everything) other than that,' the object (of awareness), as being one’s own.
'"Cf. below 1/270ab (1/270cd).

' Read niścayopayogināṁ for niścayopayoginā.

' Read with MSs Ch, Jh and I pramātricchāyā evāviśrānteḥ for pramātricchāyām-

Cf. the use of this expression above in 1/200b.

' The subject applies the vitality of the cognitive energy of the power of his reflective

awareness, which would otherwise be directed elsewhere, to his object, that thereby

becomes defined in his field of awareness.

CHAPTER ONE

(It is) ‘intense’ there (in that case) because it is free of all (other) needs (and
expectations and so is focused on that alone). That (revelation of the nature of
the object in this way is its) ‘definition’, and is (also) said to be the ‘reply (to

the enquiry as to its nature, as well as its) ‘ascertainment’, because there is no
difference (between them) with regards to the perception (prathā) (of the entity)
whose nature has been disclosed. There (in that context), the definition is the
attribute (of the entity) which informs (the perceiver) of its true (specific)

nature, which (is unique to it and) not common (with anything else). The ‘reply’

is the removal of defects (in one’s understanding), which assists the knowledge

of (the entity’s) true nature, and ‘ascertainment’ is the understanding of its true
nature (tattvāvabodha).

Surely (one may ask,) as the essence of the understanding of the true
nature (of an entity) is not different (in these cases), then why is ‘examination’
not included along with ‘definition’, as is ascertainment? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

q: || ēx 11
SJJĪ AJ: āṬRJTGETĪTTTĀYATI] |
nirṇītatāvaddharmāṁśaprṣṭhapātitayā punaḥ || 262 1|
bhūyo bhūyaḥ samuddeśalakṣaṇātmaparīkṣaṇam |

Again, the ‘examination’ (parīkṣaṇa) (of an object) consists of the

repeated ‘enunciation’ (samuddeśa) and ‘definition’ (lakṣaṇa) that follows
after (some) aspect of (its) nature (dharmāṁśa) has been ascertained
(nirṇīta) to some degree (tāvat). (262cd-263ab) (261)

‘The aspect of (the object’s) nature (dharmāṁśa) that has been
ascertained (nṇirṇīta) to some degree’ is the one that has been made the object
of ascertainment and is the object of a limited degree of definition. The repeated
‘enunciation’ which has that as its object, and (its) ‘definition’, which is the
description of (its) unique attributes (and those it has in) common (with other
entities), constitute (its) ‘examination’ (parīkṣā), which is the observation
(īkṣaṇa) (of the object) again from all sides (paritaḥ), that is, in all respects, in
order to eliminate all (other possible) contrary views (as to its nature). This is
the meaning of (this) statement.

This triad consisting of ‘enunciation’ and the rest is found everywhere
(in all systematic expositions of a subject and enquiry into the nature of an
object). Thus, he says:

ÇRTĀHĪT-TGT-IĪTR]
ādd: ||/3ēē 1I
dṛṣṭānumānaupamyāptavacanādiṣu sarvataḥ || 263 ||
uddeśalakṣaṇāvekṣātritayaṁ prāṇināṁ sphuret |

TANTRĀLOKA
The

three

(moments)

of

‘enunciation’,

‘definition’

and

‘examination’ manifest in all respects (with regards to any valid means of

knowledge, whether) direct perception, inference, analogy or valid
testimony etc. of (all) sentient beings. (263cd-264ab) (262)
He (now) explains this (series of four means of knowledge one by one)

in due order.

[iEkaEetiUHEEzeIzt.IEE ÚETIELHṬ

ma |
nirvikalpitam uddeśo vikalpo lakṣaṇaṁ punaḥ || 264 1|
parīkṣaṇaṁ tathādhyakṣe vikalpānāṁ paramparā |

(In relation to direct perception,) enunciation (corresponds to the
first moment of perception, which is) not conceptualized. Definition
(corresponds to the initial) conceptualization (of the object perceived)
(vikaḷpa). Examination (corresponds to) the series of conceptions
(concerning what) has been perceived directly in this way (initially).

(264cd-265ab) (263)

‘Enunciation’ (uddeśa) (is such) because it is the cognition (prathā)

that has not (yet) been disclosed (and developed) of the mere (initial generic)
perception

(of the existence of an

object)

(ālocanamātra).

‘Definition’

(lakṣaṇa) (is such) because it is the cognition of its disclosed nature (namely,
the perception of particulars such as) “(this is) blue” formed by the thought
construct (vikalpa) relating to (the preceding phase of perception,) which is
devoid of thought constructs (and that mentally defines it). Their ‘examination’
(parīkṣā) is the production of a correct ascertainment of the nature of the object
on the basis of the (differentiated) ‘conceptions’ concerning the nature of the

antecedent and subsequent knowledge of its (particular) functional efficacy.'

! Abhinava now examines, one by one, how these three phases of enunciation,

definition and examination operate in all four valid means of knowledge. He begins with
direct perception.

' The functional efficacy of an entity is the fundamental criterion by which its specific

nature is known and confirmed to be as it is conceived to be (see above notes 1,604,
1,617, and 1,1042). We know water is water because it quenches thirst – thi

functional efficacy. The water of a mirage or seen in a dream cannot do that.

i

existence of a sub-atomic particle is confirmed by the trace it leaves behind on the

screen of a cyclotron. We will never be able to see it, but we know it exists because of
the effects it produces. We observe the functional efficacies of the things around us and
make use of them in our daily life all the time. When we pick up a packet containing tea
in the moming to make tea, we may check after we have made it that it is tea, not coffee
or fruit juice. We can do this because tea has a different effect on our taste buds. The
Buddhists were the first to formulate the notion that an entity is what it is and not

something else because it possesses a particular functional efficacy (arthakriyākāritva)
of its own. They needed to define the nature of things in this way because if everything

CHAPTER ONE

cd Tīī] |

raq 1

̄.NM] ÑŠÇṬIEYĪ TSĪTAH GATT II R II

Ék-biekUrúúḻEEIEEIĪ

nago 'yam iti coddeśo dhūmitvād agnimān iti || 265 ||
lakṣyaṁ vyāptyādivijñānajālaṁ tv atra parīkṣaṇam |
uddeśo ‘yam iti prācyo gotulyo gavayābhidhaḥ || 266 ||
iti vā lakṣaṇaṁ Śśeṣaḥ parīkṣopamitau bhavet |

svaḥkāma īdr̥g uddeśo yajetety asya lakṣaṇam || 267 ||
agniṣṭomādinety eṣā parīkṣā śeṣavartinī|
(If, for example, we take the inference: ‘on this mountain there is
fire because there is smoke’,) the enunciation is (simply) ‘this mountain’.

The object to be defined is ‘there is fire because there is smoke’.
Examination (in this case) is the conscious analysis (vijñānajāla) of the
(invariable) concomitance (vyāpti) (between the terms of the inference) and

the rest.

is equally transitory and composite and hence insubstantial, we cannot distinguish one
thing from another on the basis of their presumed ‘essential nature’ being different from

that of other things, as there is no such ‘own nature’. Clearly, nonetheless, one thing
differs from another, and that is because each ‘thing gives rise to its own specific
effects. Saivites have no problem with the existence of the ‘own nature’ of entities. But

as nondualists, it is ultimately just one ‘own nature’ that all things possess. They are all

equally consciousness manifesting in some particular form. So they too adopt the same
criterion to specify and differentiate one entity from another ~ the examination of the
functional (or one could also call it causal) efficacy of something before it gives rise to
its effects, and afterwards confirms or otherwise what it is believed to be, that is, the
notion formed in the previous phase of ‘definition’.

Now Abhinava goes on to explain how these three phases relate to those of

inference.
! By ‘invariable concomitance’ (vyāpti) is meant the invariable presence of the
probans (that is, the means by which one can infer the nature of something which is not

directly perceived) in concomitance with the probandum, which is to be inferred. In this

case, the probans is smoke, which is invariably concomitant with fire. These then are

the five basic elements of the Indian syllogism: 1) the locus of the inference,
exemplified in this case by the mountain. 2) The means by which the nature of the
inferred object is ascertained, in this case, the smoke. 3) The object of the inference, in
this case, the fire. 4) The invariable concomitance of these two which is established by

5) referring to other instances. In this case, we observe that although it is possible for
there to be fire without smoke, there is never smoke without fire as, for example, when
cooking on a log fire. Thus, according to the Nyāya, a syllogism has five members.

These are: 1) Statement of that which is to be proved (pratijñā) – ‘there is fire on the hill

TANTRĀLOKA

Oṟ eelse (analogously), with respect to postulation (as, for

example, ‘this animal, which is similar to a cow, is called a wild cow?), the
enunciation is the initial (notion) ‘this (animal) and the definition is ‘that
which is similar to a cow is called a wild cow (gavaya)’. The examination
(concerns) the rest (of the features of the animal). Similarly, (the same may
be said of, for example, the statement: “he who desires heaven should

sacrifice with Agniṣṭoma.” '") TṬhe enunciation (in this case is) such: ‘he
who desires heaven’, its definition ‘should sacrifice’, and the examination
the rest, that is, ‘with Agniṣṭoma etc’. (265cd-268ab) (264-266)

(If, for example, we take the inference: ‘on this mountain there is fire

because there is smokeʼ,) the ‘enunciation’ is ‘this mountain’, because (all that

is) perceived is just the possessor of the attribute (i.e. smoke) as being the
attribute of that which has to be established (sādhya) (i.e. the fire) that has not
(yet) been disclosed.

‘The object of examination’ is such because the

perception (of the mountain) has been disclosed as that which is qualified by the
attribute (i.e. smoke) of that which has to be established (i.e. fire).
‘Concomitance’ (vyāpti) (is the invariable concomitance of fire and smoke such

that when one) is present or absent (the other is also). It is due to that that (a
correct) ascertainment (niścaya) of the invariable concomitance of that which is

to be inferred and the means by which it is established, arises. This is the nature
of ‘the examination’ of this (concomitance).
(In the case of an analogy serving as a means of knowledge,) ‘this
(animal)ʼ (is the enunciation,) as it is the perception of just the body which is
present in front as being that which has not (yet) been disclosed. ‘The initial
(notion)ʼ is the first (phase of perception), which is not predicated (avacchinna)
by the particulars of the possessor of the attributes (of the animal which is being
identified). ‘This (animal) is similar to a cow’ (is the notion) on the plane of
the means of knowledge; ‘should be called a wild cow’ is on the plane of the
(successful) result (of the postulation) because the particulars by which it is
specifically determined (avaccheda) are (perceived to be) present. The word
‘or’ is in the sense of ‘in addition to’ (with reference to) the definition (that
follows), pertaining to the plane of the means of knowledge and in relation to
the plane of (the successful) result (of the process of postulation which is its
because there is smoke. 2) Statement of reason (hetu) – ‘wherever there is smoke there
is fire.’ This corresponds to invariable concomitance (vyāpti). 3) Statement of a general
rule supported by an example (udāharaṇa) – ‘as is the case with fire in the kitchen.”
4) Application of the rule (upanaya) – ‘there is smoke on the hill as in a kitchen. )
Conclusion (nigamana) – ‘there is fire on the hill.” Abhinava reduces these five to the

three phases of enunciation, definition and examination.

'ÚAccording to some logicians it is necessary to distinguish between inference

(anumāna) and ‘postulation’ (arthapatti), whereas others maintain that the latter is a
form of the former. Anyway, Abhinava now goes on to show how the same three phases
also operate in relation to coming to know the nature of an unknown object by
‘postulation’, that is, analogy, and its similarity with something else that is known.

'" The Agniṣṭoma is an important Vedic sacrifice offered in the spring. It took a
number of days, during which Soma was extracted from a plant and offered in the
sacrificial fire to the gods.

CHAPTER ONE

‘definition’), because it is a perception of the disclosed nature (of the object, i.e.

that it is a wild cow). “The rest (of the features of the animal) include the
awareness (that the animal) possesses a dewlap (sāsnā) etc. and that it can serve

as a vehicle and be milked etc.
‘(Also) suchī’ (may be said with regards to the statement: “he who
desires heaven should sacrifice with Agniṣṭoma etc.”). The definition of ‘he
who desires heaven’ (i.e. ‘should sacrifice’) is such because there is no

ascertainment (nirṇaya) of a distinction between the connection with the field
(viṣaya) (of operation of the injunction) and the competence (adhikāra) (to
execute it, and so needs to be defined).' According to the saying: (it is called)
the rest because it is the ultimate goal (that remains to be attained)’, ‘the rest’
(is the definition of how this should be done, that is, ‘with Agniṣṭoma’). It is the

activity (vyāpāra) which is the eulogy (arthavādavyāpara) (of the importance
of what needs to be done) and so is what should be done. This is the meaning.
‘Examination’ here (in this context) is such, because it is the means by which
(every detail concerning) the competence (to sacrifice etc.) on the part of one
who desires heaven that has been enunciated and defined is freed from the chaff

(of uncertainty) (nistuṣīkaraṇa).

Surely (one may ask,) it has been said that ‘enunciation’ is the emission
of the universal in accord with the expectation of (the required) particulars that

are to be emitted. (But) is it not improper (that) the particular be an object of

expectation, because at that time there is not even just (a hint of its) presence as
something that will be in the future? He counters this doubt by first repeating by

way of explanation the characteristic described before to further aid (our

understanding).

ÑīhrcaāqPṬAKĪTITTYTHGTIT: || 2ē¢ I1

aaṁ: aazīvīā || qēR II
vikalpasrakṣyamāṇāny arucitāṁśasahiṣṇunaḥ || 268 ||
vastuno yā tathātvena sṛṣṭiḥ soddeśasaṁjñitā |
tadaiya saṁvic cinute yāvataḥ srakṣyamāṇatā || 269 ||
The emission (sṛṣti) in that way of a (generic) entity (vastu) that can
sustain the other aspects that are desired (to satisfy the need to know it),

which are to be emitted by the notion (vikalpa) (by means of which it is
12a2 The point is that the person who desires heaven is one who is fit to offer sacrifice by

virtue of his desire to do so. His relationship to the area of his effort, i.e. the offering of
the sacrifice, has not been clearly ascertained, and so needs to be defined.

' The question is, how can the present perception of the universal, undefined form

‘this is (something) have a sense of requiring or needing particulars for it to be a clear
perception of a specific object that is thus known to be what it is? Each perception is

self-confined and momentary. How can a present perception (of the universal undefined

form) require another (that is, its particulars) to complete it? How can a present
perception be known to be what it is by some future addition to it?

TANTRĀLOKA

identified), is termed ‘enunciation’ (uddeśa). At that very moment (of
enunciation, which is concomitant with the) impending emission
(srakṣamāṇatā) of that which is such (namely, the required aspects),

consciousness discerns it. (268cd-269) (267-268ab)

‘The notion’ (of the bare existence of an entity) is (such) because it is

the primary basis on which the perceiver has emitted the generic (form of that
which is to be conceptualized and defined). (The other aspects) ‘which are to
be emittedʼ in relation to that (and depending on it) are the future desired
outpourings (of the required aspects) by the definition (lakṣaṇa) (of the as yet

undefined object). Thus, the ‘other aspects’ are the particulars that are other

than the universal, and are ‘desired’ because they satisfy the perceiver (who
needs to know the object). In other words (arthāt), they are those (particulars)
that can be pervaded (by) that kind of generic entity (vastu) (as does a universal,
particulars). ‘The emission in that way’ as (the entity) which can sustain the
particulars characterized by the specific distinguishing (properties of the entity)

which are to be emitted etc. is its ‘enunciation’, that is, the naming (of it as that

which is to be elucidated). ‘At that very moment’ when the enunciation takes
place, insofar as (it is concomitant with the) impending emission

! The ‘enunciation’ of what is to be subsequently defined and examined takes place in

view of those two subsequent phases. We have already noted that the ‘enunciation’ of
an object of enquiry is like the chapter heading of a book, its definition is like the
headings of the sections of a chapter, and examination the chapter itself. ‘Enunciation’

is thus a generic statement of the content of the chapter, which is then conceptually
divided up into sub-headings. The writer then proceeds step by step, filling out the

contents of the chapter until it is complete. This is possible because everything he is
going to write is already present in his mind, held together in timeless consciousness, in

which ‘before’ and ‘after are not separated in time. The same happens whenever we
perceive an object through any means of knowledge, whether by direct perception,

inference or any other way. Initially the object is emitted in its most generic form as a
unitary apperception of the whole. It is already known but not yet clearly defined in all
its aspects and details. These are then filled in by the thought constructs that cluster

around the original generic nucleus, which serve to identify and know it in all its
specific details. These are formed through a series of choices between possible
alternatives – accepting those that are correct and rejecting those that are not.
The enquiring state of consciousness that articulates itself as ‘what is this?’

coincides with the first moment of creation in which the generic object is emitted from
consciousness, which is destroyed at the time of the answer, when the particular

defining features of the object are emitted from consciousness and the generic object is

withdrawn. What is to be emitted (srakṣamāṇa) to fill in some of the evident details

necessary to identify the object appears in the second moment, in which more features
of the object are emitted. These should be sufficient to define the object, although the

object is not yet fully manifest. However, if that does not happen, doubt arises; for

example, when one sees a tree on a foggy night and a doubt may arise that is articulated

in the question ‘is this a man or a tree? Further presentation of particulars that allow the

discernment that ‘this is a tree, not a man’ result in the form of consciousness termed

‘definition’ (lakṣaṇa). Abhinava maintains that this can only be possible because

everything is already known implicitly by non-temporal and omnipresent consciousness.
Thus, even though one aspect of consciousness questions, it already knows the answer,
and so when it hears the right answer proffered by the other aspect of consciousness that
responds, it accepts it to be true.

CHAPTER ONE

(srakṣamāṇatā) `of that which is such’, that is, of the required (desired)
particular, ‘consciousness discernsʼ, that is, investigates it (anusaṁdhatte).
This is the meaning. The reason there (that accounts for how that is possible) is:

iuākēaczāīci|EbEĀeEzItczzed

yato hy akālakalitā saṁdhatte sārvakālikam |
Indeed, (this is possible) because the condition (of consciousness)

which is that of being unmeasured by time (akālakalitā) discerns all that is

temporal (of all times, past, present and future) (sārvakālika). (270ab)
(268cd)
The word ‘indeed’ serves to embellish (this) statement.

Surely (one may ask,) as ‘definition’ (lakṣaṇa) is the perception of both
the universal and the particulars when the perception of the disclosed nature (of
the object of enquiry) takes place, what (then) is the object of (this phase of
perception termed) ‘definition’? And what is (the state of consciousness termed)
‘definition’? As there is no discerned difference (viveka) here (of this), there

would be no constraint (niyama) (on it being this or that).® With this doubt in
mind, he says:

' Gnoli translates verses 267-268 as follows: ‘Enunciation is the emission of an entity

that is susceptible to being defined by a future emission of other differentiated

representations, desired (by the cogitating subject). All these elements, which are about
to be emitted, are discemed by consciousness then in all their extension which,
unmeasured as it is by time, discerns everything that is born in time (past, present and
future).”

' A note in Sanskrit at the bottom of the printed Sanskit text says: ‘f the prior

generic state (sṭhiti) is one in which the particulars have not been made manifest and the
particulars arise subsequently, because the universal and the particulars are perceived
separately, then the condition in which there is (a relationship between) the object of

definition and the definition obtains. However, if the particulars were to be present in

the prior generic state, then here (in this
case) there would be no mutual constraint
(niyama) (such that the object of definition can invariably be coupled with its
definition). The point is that (as the saying goes) ‘the conjunction of two things (which

are unrelated) in one place would be faulted by the defect called ‘intermixture’

(saṁkara) (which is confusing)ʼ.
The generic aspect of the object that is perceived initially is identified as, for
example, a man. Its ‘enunciation’ is ‘this is a man’. After this, the particular qualities of
the object are made manifest. In this case they are, for example, the man’s height, the
limbs of his body, the clothes he wears, and so on. These serve to define the generic
figure of the man as some particular person. If the two aspects, generic and particular,

are perceived together in the second moment of definition, they would not be two
separate things. For a relationship between two or more things to be possible, they must

be separate, distinct entities. This would not be the case as the generic and the particular
aspects are seen together as one thing. Then the second phase, that is, definition, would

be redundant. The problem is partially solved by admitting that the two moments in
which first the generic and then the particular are perceived are separate. But then the
problem would arise that there would be no necessary connection between the two.

There would be no ‘constraint’ that imposes that the generic should be defined in a

TANTRĀLOKA

-t
a]I z
gfīē: J-TRTT
UT]

TūATT: I|Q.0 ||

SJTITTT J JI āftcwōāīŪīg=xā|

srakṣyamāṇasya yā sṛṣṭiḥ prāksṛṣṭāṁśasya saṁhr̥tiḥ lI 270 ||
anūdyamāne dharme sā saṁvillakṣaṇam ucyate |
Definition (lakṣaṇa) is said to be (a form of) consciousness wherein
the emission of what is to be emitted (namely, the particulars, coincides)

with a reabsorption of the aspect previously emitted (namely, the

universal,) when the nature (dharma) (of the object) is not (yet) clearly
manifest (anūdyamāna). (270cd-271ab) (269)
Here (in this context), ‘definition’ is (a form of) ‘consciousness’ which
consists of the emission and withdrawal of the spheres of the particulars and the

universal; it is the seed (cause) of the activity of daily life. There (in that

context, that state of consciousness) should be called ‘definition’ as that which
is to be affirmed (vidheya) of the particular aspect which is being emitted. The
universal aspect which is to be withdrawn as that which is not (yet) clearly

manifest is the object of definition. Such is the discerned difference (viveka)
(between them).
Surely (one may ask,) it was said that the ‘examination’ (parīkṣaṇa) (of

an object) consists of repeated ‘enunciation’ (samuddeśa) and ‘definition’

(lakṣaṇa).’ (Now) there (in that case, does this not entail that) the (process

of) examination would not come to rest, because there is no reason (nimitta)
for
it to come to an end (in a satisfactory conclusion)? He counters this doubt,

(advancing a reply) that includes an explanatory illustration (anuvāda)' (of
what he has said).

I|ʼ 3192

1I

tatpr̥ṣṭhapātibhīūyoṁśasṛṣṭisaṁhāravibhramāḥ || 271 ||
parīkṣā kathyate mātrrucitā kalpitāvadhiḥ |

‘Examination’ is said to consist of the repeated movements to and

fro (vibhrama) of the emission and absorption of (the successive) aspects (of
cognition, namely ‘enunciation’ and ‘definition’,) that follow on from that
specific way by the particulars. In other words, anything perceived initially generical
ly
could be anything else when the particulars are perceived. The man we saw initially and
said ‘this is a man’ could turn out to have the attributes of a dog or a cat or,
indeed,
anything else. Thus, the defect of a confusing ‘intermixture’ would be the result.

Above 1/263ab (261cd). Read samuddesa- for samuddveśa-.

' The new aspects that specify and enrich with details the notion being discussed are

called by Mīmāṁsakas, vidhi (‘affirmations’ or ‘rulesʼ), and those that
are specified,
that are preexistent and generic, are called anuvāda, that is, a passage which
explains
and illustrates these ‘affirmations’ or ‘rules'. See Gnoli 1985: pp. 296-297.

CHAPTER ONE

(moment of ‘definition’). Its end is determined (arbitrarily) in accord with
(the satisfaction of) the desire of the perceiver." (271cd-272ab) (270)
Surely (one may ask,) it is said that the power of reflective awareness

consists of the wonder of (being aware of the consciousness which is) oneʼs

own nature (svātmacamatkāra). (As Supreme Speech,) it unfolds progressively
wherever direct perception (inference) and the rest (take place) as the (three
forms of Speech, namely, that of) Vision, the Middle One and the Corporeal. So
why is this referred to here as a different process, namely, ‘enunciation’ and the
rest, which is (part of the discourse of the philosophy of the Nyāya, but is) not
well known in one’s own philosophy? With this doubt in mind, he says:

IṬYGrJ
TĀTĪṬ ṜāaTĪ aI āT IT. I| Q92 1

prāk paśyanty atha madh
vaikharī ceti tā imāḥ || 272 ||
parā parāparā devī caramā tv aparātmikā |
Now,

these

(three

moments

of

enunciation,

definition

and

examination are equivalent to three levels of Speech, namely,) first the
(Speech of) Vision (paśyantī), then the Middle (Speech) (madhyamā) (which

is that of thought) and Corporeal (Speech) (vaikharī). They are the

Goddess Parā (Supreme), Parāparā (Middling) and the last one, which is

Aparā (the Lower One), (respectively). (272cd-273ab) (271)

' Cf. above, 1/259. If, for example, we see a standing figure on a foggy night and try

to identify it, we may first emit the idea that ‘this is a man’, but are not fully satisfied
that we have identified the object correctly. Thus, we withdraw that notion and emit
another, such as ‘this is a pillar’. But if we are not satisfied, we withdraw that notion

also and emit another such as ‘this is a tree’. Then, if that also does not seem right, we
may revert to the first one, emitting it again, this time, perhaps, adding more details so
that the notion forms ‘this is a man with arms and a headʼ. This process of examination

continues until we are satisfied that ‘yes, indeed, this is a man not a pole or a tree or
anything else.”

' Concerning these three levels of Speech, see above, note 1,225.
'! Maheśvarānanda quotes this and the following verse in the course of his explanation

of verse 50 of his Mahārthamañjari:
‘Corporeal (Speech) is (the power of) action. The Middle (form of) Speech is
made of (the power of) knowledge. Again, the (Speech of) Vision is (the power of) the

will. The Subtle One is the state of the oneness of them all.’
The reality which is Speech is thus divided into four kinds, namely, in due
order, the Subtle One, the Speech of Vision, the Middle One and the Corporeal. As is
said in the Sāmbapañcā

‘She utters the sixty-three letters from Mitrāvaruṇa’s abode and gives birth

here by means of the evident organs (of speech) by virtue of (her) association with the
vital breath. I offer reverence to that (Speech of) Vision, who has arisen first, to the
Middle One located in the intellect, and the Corporeal Speech (located) in the mouth,
which is clear (and well-articulated) by the organs (of speech).”

TANTRĀLOKA

(In the PTv the three, Parā, Parāparā and Aparā, are, respectively, the first,
second and third person, singular, dual and plural.)
Surely (one may object that) the three, ‘enunciation’ and the rest, (are
said to be) the Speech of Vision etc. simply because they are equal in number.
Whatis this (triad)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

frtra 11 3.93 1
icchādi śaktitritayam idam eva nigadyate || 273 ||
There (in that regard), the Speech that is well known as Corporeal, as the pulse
that develops by the functioning of the palate and the other organs (of speech), is
ascertained to be the power of action. Again, the Middle One is impelled solely by the

activity of the intellect and so is the power of knowledge. Again, (the Speech of) Vision
is the will, because her nature is the consent to extend outwards, for (in accord with) the
etymology (of her name, she) is the Supreme Speech that sees. The nature of the Subtle

One is the blended state of the three aforementioned (forms of) Speech (that are one
within it), on the analogy of the juice of a peacock's egg. (ts) condition (vṛtti) is the
exertion of the Supreme Lord who is the inner perceiver. Again, the Supreme Speech of
that same ŚSupreme Lord (constantly) enters His essential nature and (there) pulses
radiantly. As our teacher has said in the venerable Ṛjuvimarinī:
‘Mātṛkā (the goddess who is the alphabet) is Supreme Speech and is the
essential nature of Supreme Śiva, Who is the Lord (bhaṭṭāraka) Unstruck Sound. (She

is) consciousness that is the cause of the flowing forth of the thirty-six principles.’
The status of (the word) ‘speech’ is philologically derived as active (direct

speech), i.e. ‘it speaks to himʼ not ‘it is said’, as accords with a passive construction. As

my grand-teacher has said in the venerable Saṅvitstotra:
‘The most excellent and venerated teachers say that You are Supreme Speech
that is not separate from the universe. Your nature the reflective awareness of your own

Light, they support the etymology (of the word) ‘speech’ as that which speaks (vakti).’
Therefore, it is said that all the play of Speech consists of the unfolding
development (vistāra) of the three powers of will (knowledge and action). As (is said) in

the Yoginīḥr̥daya:

‘Then this is the power of the will, who abides as the body of (the Speech of)

Vision. In the same way the power of knowledge is Jyeṣṭhā, who is said to be the
Middle Speech. The power of action is this (goddess) Raudrī, who is Corporeal Speech,
and her form is all things.”

[Maheśvarānanda then quotes this and the following verse and goes on to

comment:]
Will and the rest (of the powers of knowledge and action) is the radiant pulse

(sphuratta) of one’s own Self, and of that nature is some (higher indefinable) perception

(anubhūti) which is the reality of Mantra (mantra). Thus, everything is consistent. Will
and the Speech of Vision, by mutually exchanging places as that which is being
indicated (uddesya) and as that which is to be adopted (upādeya), another reality (artha)
is (thereby) illumined. ‘There is no noetic experience (pratyaya) in the world that is not

associated with word.' In accord with this teaching, everything right up to the subject’s
own nature is made of Speech and does not go beyond it. And so it is that the power of
reflective awareness alone is the very life of the Self, the nature of which is the Light (of
consciousness). And that (reflective awareness which is Speech) is what is indicated by
many words such as ‘Mantra’ and ‘worshipʼ (pāūjā). The only difference (between them)

is that each one is only just a particular channel (dvāra) (through which Speech
operates). MM p. 123-125.

CHAPTER ONE

'This (triad) is said to be the three powers, namely, will

(knowledge and action). (273cd) (272ab)
that:

The relationship between (this teaching and what was said) before is

TGTfT TATĀ -aē: JTTĀT |
etatprāṇita evāyaṁ vyavahāraḥ pratāyate |
This commerce of daily life (vyavahāra) takes its course impelled by
this (triad). (274ab) (272cd)

A note at the bottom of the Sanskrit text says: ‘The meaning is just this, namely, that

the daily commerce of life (vyavahāra) which is indicated as being in the form of the
three, Rudreśa and the rest, by fettered perceivers, because (it is the domain of) thought
constructs, is here, when pure, described as the (triad) of will, (knowledge and action,

and) as that which is to be adopted.”

' Maheśvarānanda (MM p. 124) first quotes the YHṛ 1/38, 40cd and then TĀ 1/272cd-

274ab (271-272). According to the YHṛ:

icchāśaktis tadā seyaṁ paśyantīvapuṣā sthitā |
jñānaśaktiṣṭathā jyeṣṭhā madhyamā vāgudīritā || 38 |I
kriyāśaktiṣṭu raudrīyaṁ vaikharī viśvavigrahā l| 40cd II
‘Then this is the power of the will, that abides as the body of (the Speech of)
Vision. In the same way the power of knowledge is Jyeṣṭhā, who is said to be the
Middle Speech. The power of action is this (goddess) Raudrī, who is Corporeal Speech,
and her form is all things.” YHṛ 1/38, 1/40cd

says:

Just after citing TĀ 1/272cd-274ab (271-272) Maheśvarānanda (MM p. 125)

icchādiṣyabhāvaiva ca svātmasphurattā | tanmayī ca kācid anubhūtir mantraśabdārtha
iti
sarvaṁ
.saṁgacchate
1|
vyatyāsenārthāntaram api dyotyate |

.icchā

punaḥ

paśyantītyuddeśyopādeyayor

na so ʻsti pratyayo loke yaḥ śabdānugamādṛte | iti nītyā sarvo ‘pi pramātr̥svabhāvaḥ

paryantato vāṅmayatāṁ nollaṅghayati | tataś ca prakāśarūpasyātmano vimarśaśaktir
evānuprāṇanam | sā ca mantrajapapūjādyanekaśabdavyapadeśyā bhavati | kevalaṁ tat

tad dvāramātram eva bheda iti l| 5O II

‘The radiant pulse of one’s own Self is the (powers of) will, (knowledge and
action). And there is a certain (inscrutable) perception (anubhiūti) which is the reality
(expressed) by the words of Mantras. Thus, everything is coherent (and makes sense).
Again, the will is (the Speech of) Vision. Substituting these two, one with the other, as
what is being discussed and what needs be taken up, another meaning (becomes)
apparent. (This is expressed in the statement): ‘there is no perception in the world that is
not associated with words. In accord with this principle, there is nothing (whatsoever),

right up to the essential nature of the perceiver, that transcends its (essential condition)
as Speech (vāṅmaya). Thus, the power of reflective awareness the Self, which is the

Light of consciousness, possesses is that which impels (and gives it life). And that

TANTRĀLOKA

The sense (of this verse) is that all this ‘commerce of daily life’, pure

and impure,' manifests on the screen of consciousness. That is said (in the
following verse):

‘In this way, the commerce of daily life, impure as well as pure, is
experienced within the All-pervasive Lord Who scintillates with the

manifestations of (the many) extremely different things.”

Not only is their nature such, such is also that of the (various forms of)

relationship (between the teacher and the taught) mentioned in the following

(reflective awareness) is denoted by many words such as ‘Mantra’, ‘the repetition of
Mantra’ (apa) and ‘worship’ (pūjā) etc. The only difference (between these things) is

only that particular door (through which this reflective awareness operates).’
' The ‘pure’ aspect of daily experience and activity is the perceiver and agent, who is
always one and the same. The ‘impure’ aspect is the object of knowledge and action,

which is invariably multiple and diverse. Another way of understanding this distinction

is that the ‘impureʼ level is the sphere of Māyā, that encompasses the first thirty-one
principles from Earth to Māyā. The ‘pure’ level includes the five higher principles
beyond up to Śiva. A note at the bottom of the page of the printed text suggests a third
interpretation. There we read: ‘the point here is that the commerce of daily life is taught
(by others) to be a state of thought (conceived by) the fettered perceivers in the form of
the three, Rudreśa and the rest, (and so is to be rejected). The same is said here to be

pure, as that which is to be adopted in the form of (the powers of) the will and the rest.”
The three perceivers presumably correspond to those called Conditioned (Sakala),
Dissolution
Deconditioned
(Pralyākala)
and
Consciousness
Deconditioned
(Vijñānākala). See above note 1,658 to 1/77-80 (78-81) and below, note 4,91 to 4/29-30.

' Read with MS Kh atyantabhinnārthā- for atyarthabhinnārthā-.
! Jayaratha introduces with this reference the next topic, namely, the six types of

relationship between the teacher and the taught. This reference may be drawn from the

Kularamamālā, which Abhinava paraphrases below in verse 1/275cd-276ab (274). But
this may well not be so. Jayaratha quotes a verse that is from there in the commentary
on the following verse that is much closer to this one, and so more likely to be

Abhinava’s source. It is more likely that Jayaratha is citing a source that states the
standard number of six types of relationships between the teacher and the taught. This is

what we find, for example, in the first ṣarka of the JY (MS Kh fl. 166b-167a), where
this subject is discussed at length (see Dyczkowski 1988: 102-104). The JY explains
that the Lord’s body is pure consciousness. Thus, when he wishes to generate this
relationship through the production of scripture, a movement (pravṛtti) arises within him
that issues out of the transcendental, unmanifest state. Kuṇḍalinī, the power of
consciousness and speech latent within him, is aroused by the fullness of the growing
intensity of this movement, and so straightens to become a manifest resonance (svara)
within consciousness. Śiva is in this way filled with the energy of speech and so

assumes the form of the aggregate of all phonemic sounds (śabdarāṣi), here identified

with Sadāśiva who, eternal (sadā) and possessing Śiva’s nature, is ever at the upper

level (ārdhvasthāna). Sadāśiva reflects upon the manifest universe as consisting

essentially of two categories, namely, the ‘listener’ and the ‘speaker’. This is the one
relationship (saribandha) through which the meaning of scripture is communicated.

Therefore, although these two aspects of a single reality and the relationship between
them is undivided, it is of various types according to the level of its manifestation,
namely:

CHAPTER ONE

mahac cānantarākhyaṁ ca tathāvāntaram eva ca |
divyaṁ miśram adivyañ ca ṣoḍhā saṁbandhalakṣaṇam || JY 1/35/96 (MS K fl. 304a,

MS Kh fl. 167a)

‘Great (mahat): that between consciousness and its power. 2) Subsequent
(ānantara): that between Sadāśiva and the Vīras. 3) Intermediate (avāntara): that
between he who awakens and he who is awakened. 4) Divine (divya): the relationship

between Sadāśiva as he who awakens and the divine beings below him up to the level of
Maāyā. 5) Mixed (vniśra): that between divine beings and sages. 6) Other than Divine
(adivya): that between sages and ordinary men.’

Generally, as here, the relationships are six, whereas Abhinava states that there

are five. This is unusual, although we do find this number elsewhere also as, for
example, in the Spandapradīpikā (p. 84), where they are called ‘Supreme’ (para),
‘Great” (mahat), ‘Divine’ (divya), ‘Oṭher than Divine’ (divyetara) and ‘Mutual’

(itaretara). Abhinava appears to be aware of this difference, and so explains that there
are only five relationships but that they are all aspects of the one supreme relationship,
which is therefore not counted separately. See Dyczkowski 1992a: 140 and 360 n 8 for
more concerning the five types of relationship (saṅbandha) between the teachers of the

scriptures and their disciples.
If this reference is the basis of TĀ 1/275cd-276ab (274), it is drawn from the
Kularamamālā, which Abhinava tells us is his source. Jayaratha takes the trouble to say
that ‘(Abhinavaguptais paraphrasing) the sense (of what) is saidin the ‘Ratnamālā’

thatis, the venerable Kularatṇamālā; (heis not quoting) word for word.” (ad 1/275cd
276ab (274)). This may be so even though Abhinava says that there are not six, but only
five forms of relationship between the teacher and the taught, in accord with their
respective nature. The wording is close enough for this be possible. Compare the
Sanskrit of this verse (A) with Abhinava’s version (B):

(A) paro mahānantarālo divyo miśras tv adivyakaḥ |

saṁbandhaḥ ṣaḍvidhas tantre

(B) . . . . . . . ;sarvaḥ parakalātmakaḥ || 275 ||

mahān avāntaro divyo miśro ‘nyo ‘nyas tu pañcamaḥ |
We observe that in the place of antarālo we find avāntaro, both of which
equally mean ‘intermediate’. The difference can be explained quite plausibly as the

result of changes in the transmission of the text, but also as an indication that the source
is not the same (see below). According to Abhinava’s exegesis, the five relationships are
all aṣpects of the one supreme relationship (which is that between the God and the

Goddess), and so is not counted as a separate relationship. Rather it is all of them

viewed in the different perspectives of a hierarchy of revelation transmitted down from
higher beings to those ofa successively lower order.

Note however that Jayaratha also quotes the following in his commentary ad

1/275cd-276ab (274), in which there are indeed five, and is closer to Abhinava’s
wording than (A), which thus may not be from the Kularatnamālā.
(C) mahān avāntaro divyo divyādivyaś caturthakaḥ |
itaretaramārgeṇa pañcadhā bhinnalakṣaṇaḥ ||

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The relationship (between teacher and taught is said to be) of six kinds
in the Tantra (namely,) ‘Supremeʼ, ‘Great’, ‘Intermediate’, ‘Divine’, ‘Mixed’

and ‘Human’ (adivyaka)

Accordingly, he says:

The Supreme and other Relationships

TGJTYĪĪTTITTTḤ ṬTTHHŪJTTĪHT |I Q9Z |I
THÑTRKTTTĪJTHTJṀ|

etatpraśnottarātmatve pārameśvaraśāsane || 274 ||
parasaṁbandharãpatvam abhisaṁbandhapañcake |

In the Supreme Lord’s teaching, consisting of such questions and
answers, the essential nature of the supreme relationship (between teacher
and disciple) is present there within the five (types of their) relationships

(as their basis). (274cd-275ab) (273)

The ‘questions and answersʼ, the nature of which has been explained

previously, consist, that is, have as their nature (this) reality which, being so, is
the relationship between the one who questions and the one who replies. This is
the sense. (It is present) ‘in the five relationships’, beginning with the ‘Great’
one. The sixth is the supreme relationship, which is present in all of them as the
one that vitalizes them. Thus, it is not mentioned here separately.

‘(Relationship) is of five kinds, (each with its own) separate characteristic.
(These are) ‘Great’, ‘Intermediate’, ‘Divine’, and ‘Divine-cum-Non-divine’ as the
fourth, along with the ‘Mutual’ path.’

The sixth relationship, not mentioned in this verse, is presented in the

preceding citation (ad 275cd-276ab), which is certainly from the Kularamamālā, as the
mutual penetration (āveśa) of Śiva and Śakti. Thus, it appears to be more likely that the

verse cited here (ad 274ab) is not from the Kularatnamāḷā.

' MVV Chapter 2:

The consciousness itself that is (applied) here (to this) teaching is said to be the
teacher. For it utters (girati) the universe in conjunction with (its) emanation and
withdrawal. The primary establishment here (in this, the teacher’s consciousness,) is
said to be the supreme relationship (saṁībandha) (between the teacher and the taught).

The

knowledge

taught

(sāṁsiddhika). (262-263)

by

that

(consciousness)

accomplishes

(everything)

(That is) where our teachers are always established. It is from that that the

division (of the Śaiva teachings) comes forth. Also, (this) is where it was said before
that oneness with ignorance is destroyed. Thus, it illumines and lays hold of the
wonderful variety of one’s own consciousness (which includes the other relationships
between teacher and taught, namely) ‘Intermediate’, ‘great’, ‘divine and ‘human’, and
the coming together of the scripture (that illumines) the limbs of one’s own speech
endowed with truth, which are the creations of the teacher. (264-266)

says:

CHAPTER ONE
We are not (just) voicing a view we have imagined ourselves. Thus, he

3q¥JīF ŪaTTIJIĀĪ Td: TTZĒTHĀ̄: II Q94,1I1

yathoktaṁ ratnamālāyāṁ sarvaḥ parakalātmakaḥ || 275 I|
mahān avāntaro divyo miśro ʻnyo ʻnyas tu pañcamaḥ |
As is said in the Ratnamālā, (the relationships termed) ‘Great’
(mahat), ‘Intermediate’ (avāntara), ‘Divine’ (divya), ‘Mixedʼ, which is
another, and the ‘Other’ (than divine), which is the fifth, are all the

Supreme Power. (275cd-276ab) (274)

(Abhinavagupta is paraphrasing) the sense (of what) is said in the
‘Ratnamālā’, that is, the venerable Kularatnamālā; (he is not quoting) word for

word. There (we read):

“That which is not seen and is devoid of what is to be adopted and
rejected and (phenomenal) qualities, is said to be the fundamental reality of all
the principles of existence. And (that reality) with an invisible form is said to be
tranquil (and transcendent). Its will is the energy that has come forth endowed
with the (divine) quality of what possesses that nature.’

' Chapter Thirty-Six exemplifies in detail the relationships between the beings that

gave and received the teachings of the Siddhayogeśvarīmata in the course of its descent
to earth. They came down to earth progressively, transmitted from the teacher, whose

state is at a higher level in relation to his disciple, the recipient. Just as the disciple is
such in relation to the teacher at the level above him, so too, in his turn, he is a teacher
in relation to his disciple at a level below him. In this way, step by step, the teaching
travels down from Śiva, the supreme teacher, who is in the supreme state at the highest

level, down to man, who is in the lowest state at the lowest level. Scriptures commonly
describe their origin and progressive descent into the world in these terms. For example,
see the beginning of Chapter Thirty-Six below, where Abhinava summarizes the

account the SYM gives of its progressive transmission in such terms. In this case, there

are five levels with their corresponding types of relationships, said to be collectively
aspects of the supreme relationship, which is that of consciousness with its own power
of reflective awareness. This is the supreme level of the Goddess of Speech, who
streams down through all the levels of Speech and relationships. Thus, at the lower
levels, the relationship between the one who teaches and the taught implies both oneness

and difference. The level on which even the most subtle shade of difference has

disappeared and the two are in a state of absolute identity is the supreme relationship

(cf. PTv p. 13-15). Although all major schools of Śaivism agree that a series of
relationships is formed between the teacher and the taught in the course of a Tantra’s
‘descent to earth’, Abhinava stresses that from the Trika point of view they are all forms
of the supreme relationship, which is essentially an expression of the supreme power of
Speech (see below, note to 1/226cd (1/277ab)). What this means is that even at the

lowest level of transmission, that is, between a human teacher and disciple, the true
relationship between them is ultimately the supreme one between Śiva and Śakti.

TANTRĀLOKA

According to this (teaching), the Supreme Power of the Supreme
Goddess has come forth (into the world) as each one of these (types of)
relationships. Thus, it is said that all (forms of) relationship beginning with (the
one called) ‘Great’ are the Supreme Power. Thus, this very (passage from the
Kularatṇamālā) concludes with this (verse):
‘O goddess, it is said that the sixth (relationship) has come down onto

the surface of the earth following the path of emanation in accord with the
nature (and degree) of penetration (of Śiva’s power of grace).”

The ‘mixed’ (relationship is the one called) ‘Divine-cum-non-divine’

(between a deity and sage). It is ‘another and the ‘Other”’, with respect to the

Divine (relationship between two deities). The Mixed is another. The one which

is other than that also is the Non-divine (relationship between human beings).
Thought (vikalpa) arises three-fold as Divine, Divine-cum-Non-divine and Nondivine. Thuṣ, here that is called Mutual. That is said (in the Kularatnamālā):
‘(Relationship) is of five kinds (each with its own) separate
characteristic. (These are) ‘Great’, ‘Intermediate’, ‘Divine’, and ‘Divine-cumNon-divineʼ as the fourth, along with the ‘Mutual’ path.’
One should understand this group of five relationships to be, in due

order, the one between Śiva and Sadāśiva (which is ‘Great’), then from him
to Anantanātha (which is ‘Intermediate’), and from him to Śrīkaṇṭha and

Nandikumāra etc. (which is ‘Divine’), and from them to the Rṣis, that is,

Sanatkumāra and the rest (which is ‘Divine-cum-Non-divine), and from them

also to (common) human beings (which is ‘Mutual’ or ‘Non-divine’). As is said

there itself (in the following passage in the Kularamamālā):

‘Śiva, Who is completely full, (perfect, all-embracing,) supreme and
unlimited radiant energy (tejas), possesses (one supreme) power (called)
Sādākhyā (The Existent One), Who operates in the field of the agency of Her

own (free) will (svecchākartṛtva). 1) (The wise) know the relationship that has
atṭained (its) being by that (relationship between them) to be the first (i.e.,
Great). 2) Again, in due order, the Intermediate One (takes place) in association

(with Śakti) (yogena),' and was received by the god Anantesa' from

' When a disciple has this relationship with his teacher, he experiences himself as

Sadāśiva and his teacher as Śiva. Similarly, depending on the level of his subjectivity,

he experiences himself as the corresponding being at that level and his teacher as the

perceiver on the level of development above him. At the lowest level, he experiences
himself as a fully bound individual soul in relation to his enlightened human teacher.

' The following passage is also quoted in the notes to the PTV (p. 12).
' One could translate the word ‘yogena’ as ‘by means of Yoga’, i.c. Ananta received it

from Sādākhya by means of Yoga. However, that way it is not possible to explain how
Sādākhyā is feminine in the first instance and denotes Śakti, whereas Sadākhya in the
second instance is masculine and denotes Sadāśiva. Jayaratha ignoring this problem
simply identifies the two, saying that the Great relationship is that between Siva and

CHAPTER ONE

Sādākhya (i.e., Sadāśiva), and so is called the second one. 3) Again, the third
one, O goddess,is Śrīkaṇṭha, (who received it) along with Nandin. As both have
understood it in this way from a god, it is called Divine. 4) That was given to
the Ṛṣis by Nandin in a concise form and (so) (this), the fourth one, is called by
the Lord Divine-cum-non-divine. 5) The fifth is the Mutual One, which is in the
form of the (human) disciple and teacher (that is formed) in association with the

systematic explanation (vyākhyānakrama) (of the scriptures) in the course of

worshipping the Seat of Knowledge (vidyāpītha). This is said to be the
relationship (between the teacher and the taught,) which is of five kinds.”
(Now) he describes the nature of the Supreme Power.

bhinnayoḥ praṣṭṟtadvaktroś caikātmyaṁ yat sa ucyate || 276 ||
(A relationship in this sense) is said to be the unity that (is
established) between the two different (polarities, of which) one is he who
inquires and (the other) he who replies to that. (276cd) (275ab)
‘He who enquiresʼ is, for example, Sadāśiva, and the one who replies
in that case is Śiva. The word ‘that’ refers to the reflective awareness, whichis
the act of questioning (praśnakriyā). Although the two differ, there is a
relationship between them by virtue of the oneness which is the stability of
consciousness (engaged) in such a matter. (This is) because the nature of this
(relationship, as others,) is unity-in-difference (bhedābheda). (However,) if
a, although the text clearly says that it is between Śiva and Śakti (who is called
Sadākhyā). In order to solve thisinconsistency, I have translatedin this way.

' Anantais a form of Śiva whois generally saidin the Āgamas to be the creator and

governor of the cosmic order, ranging from Māyā down to the earth principle (see
8/305ab-307ab (8/304-306) and commentary). As such, he is said to be the Lord of
Maāyā, which he stimulates to generate the cosmic order below it (8/324ab, (8/323),
331ab-332cd (330cd-332ab)). He is also the Lord of the souls who reside in the sphere
of Māyā (8/336ab-349ab (8/345cd-348)). A different Anantais said to be the Lord of
one of the eight worlds associated with the Īśvara principle (8/342ab-344ab (8/341343)), which is just below that of Sadāśiva. Perhaps this is the one meant here. If so

Śrīkaṇṭha here can be identified with the Ananta who generates and governs the lower
priṅciples. Indeed, Śrīkaṇṭha is said to reside in Unmanifest Nature, andis responsible
for the destruction of all things within the domain of Māyā (6/150ab-151cd (6/149-

150ab)). However, it is quite possible that no such associations are meant in this
context.
' There are several possible meanings of the term ‘vidyāpīṭha’, the Seat of
Knowledge. It may refer to a sacred site (pītha), which in this case is unlikely. It may
also refer to the class or group (pītha) of scriptures. The term may also mean the sacred
plinth (pīṭha) on which manuscripts of the Tantras are placed to worship them. In that
sense, the worship of the Seat of Knowledge amounts to the worship of the scriptures

(see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 3, 33 ff.). This seems to me to be the most likely meaning
here.

AII relationships involve something which is common to both the relata, otherwise

they could not be related. At the same time there must also be a difference between

TANTRĀLOKA

there is a state of (perfect) oneness because even the most subtle trace (gandha
lit. ‘scent’) of duality (bheda) has fallen away, then that would be a state of

plenitude, which is that of being all things, and the supreme relationship

(obtains). He says that.

saṁbandáhaḥ paratā cãsya pũrṇaikātmyaprathãmayṝ|

Its supreme state is the realisation (prathā) of complete oneness

(pūrṇaikātmya). (277ab) (275cd)

The ‘supreme state’ is ‘the realisation (prathā) of complete oneness
(pūrṇaikātmya). Everything is present (in that one reality, which is) complete
(pūrṇa). Iṭ is complete everywhere and so it is also present in (all) the five
relationships. Thus, it is rightly said that ‘they are all the Supreme Power’. That

is said (in the Trikahr̥daya):

them, otherwise they would not be two members of a relationship. Thus, all
relationships are a unity-in-difference.

' The level of relationship between its polarities – in this case the teacher who

embodies the consciousness that replies and the disciple who embodies the one that

questions – corresponds to the degree in which the difference between them is more or

less subtle. Thus, from this perspective, the Great relationship, which is the highest, is

that between Śiva, who is absolutely one and Sadāśiva, who embodies the state of

consciousness corresponding to the reflective awareness ‘I am He’. In that case there is
merely a trace of difference – just enough to experience the totality of all that exists as
Siva, Who is experienced objectively as ‘He’ Who I am. The supreme relationship is

said to be one in which every trace of objectivity is removed, and as such is the

plenitude (pārṇatā – a feminine word) of perfect oneness. In a sense, therefore, one
could say that this is not a relationship at all, and so only five are enumerated. But in

another sense, it is the oneness which is the essential basis of all the levels of
relationship between the teacher and the taught, which are thus aspects of it. In other

words, the plenitude of the perfect realisation of the oneness of consciousness arises

when consciousness itself experiences itself as all that there is and more beyond.
Everything is equally sacred consciousness. The human is divine. The limited fettered
soul is unlimited, free consciousness. Disciple and master are one.

' We know that Jayaratha is quoting the Trikahṛdaya because Kṣemarāja quotes the

same verse in his commentary on the Svacchandatantra and tells us its source (SvTu ad
8/38). A passage īin the Svacchandatantra (8/36-38) outlines the descent of its
transmission from Śrīkaṇṭha down to men through a downward progression of beings.
Kṣemarāja comments on it by framing the phases of the transmission in terms of this
sequence of five types of relationships (saṁbandha). He concludes by saying that: ‘it is
the Goddess herself who is the power Parā who sustains (and governs) the universe and
whose heart is a lake of the sentiment (rasa) which is the desire to grace (all) who,
having entered the body of each (of these) teacher (ācārya), bestows her grace. It is said
in this way that it is the supreme (form of) relationship that falls everywhere right down
to the human (non-divine) one. That is said in the Trikahr̥daya.’ He then goes on to

quote this verse.

CHAPTER ONE
‘O Supreme Goddess, all (forms of) relationship (between the master

and disciple) are the Supreme Power, (whether) ‘Great’, ‘Intermediate’,
‘Divine’, ‘Mixed’ and the Non-divine (i.e. Human), that comes after that.”

Abhinava quotes the following reference from the Svacchandatantra in his
commentary on the Parātrīśikā. The same verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 35/26-27
note 35,24, where the commentary on this and following verses is translated.
guruśiṣyapade sthitvā svayaṁ devaḥ sadāśivaḥ |l
pūrvottarapadair vākyais tantram ādhārabhedataḥ |

‘Having established himself on the plane of teacher and disciple, the god

Sadāśiva (created) the Tantra by means of statements made of questions and answers,
based on the distinction between (their) ground (as the Lord and recipient of the
teaching).” (SVT 8/31cd-32ab)
‘In this way, the power of grace is perpetually present, and never sets within

every perceiver. Itis this supreme relationship which is the sole life of the essence of the
Trika scriptures. This is because here within the Absolute (Anuttara), according to the
aforementioned teaching, all the other relationships ~ Great, Intermediate, Divine,
Non-divine and the rest, are one with the Supreme One. That is said in the 7rikahr̥daya
(where we read): “the Supreme Lord, Who is always intent on emitting into His own
power, is grace by nature and, free of constraint, the creator and destroyer (of all

things).

Such is the ever emergent (immanent and active) state (in terms of) this
process. As the Supreme Lord, Who is consciousness, is the ultimate reality which is
such (at the supreme level of Speech), the inner reality which shines resplendent (within

him) as undivided is contemplated on the plane of the Speech of Vision as the (initial)

intention to differentiate the phrases, words and phonemes (that manifest on the
following levels of Speech). (Then,) on the plane of the Middle Speech, it is (in the
process of being) divided up, until it finally (comes) to possess (the form of) Corporeal
Speech, as the composition (racanā) of sentences made of up of separate (bhinna)
phenomenal (māyīya) phonemes and words . . . [of the statements of the scriptures] that
concern (and are based on) reality (vastupāūrvaka).

That is itself the invisible face of Bhairava, which is the reflective awareness of

emission (visarga). It is the arousal (kṣobha) which is the attainment of the union of

Śiva and His Power in the form of the letters A (which stands for anuttara, the

Absolute) and Ā (which stands for ānanda, bliss) (respectively), the essence of which is

the Absolute (corresponding to Śiva) and (pure) ‘T consciousness (corresponding to His
power). This is the seed of the unfolding flow (prasara) of the Trika scriptures, the
Stable Plane (dhruvapada), the Root (reality), and the vital principle of all living beings.

. . . The nature of reality (itself) (vastu) is question and its answer, ever emergent (and
active) (satatodita), which is initially (one and) undivided.

Thuṣ, such is here the (essential intended) sense (tātparya). One’s own Self,
which is by nature all things and is perceived by itself, contemplates itself by means of
question and answer, which are not separate from its own nature, as the subjectivity
(ahantā) consisting of the one who questions and the one who answers, thereby
(inspīring itself with) wonder. (The words of each particular scripture thus arise
progressively in consonance with the emergence of the desire that) ‘I wish (to
experience) this kind of diverse (and beautiful) wonder (vicitracamatkāra)’ and then,
knowing in that way, I am such (as exemplified by three sections of the Parātrīśikā)

beginning with ‘the goddess (asking), “how is the Absolute?” Then in the middle:

‘Bhairava said: “listen O goddess” up to (the words) “this is the Rudra couple (in

TANTRĀLOKA

He (now) transposes this same (notion) to the other (kinds of)

relationships (mentioned in the scriptures):

STTa T TTR-TĀTTTTTTT || QUŪ 1|1

anenaiva nayena syāt saṁbandáhāntaram apy alam || 277 1|
Śśāstravācyaṁ phalādīnāṁ paripūrṇatvayogataḥ |
The other relationships are also (to be understood in terms) of this
same principle so that the purport of the scriptures (may manifest) with the
fullness of its fruits and the rest. (277cd-278ab) (276)
He sums up this (teaching).

atar || 3.c

itthaṁ saṁvid iyaṁ devī svabhāvād eva sarvadā || 278 |I
uddeśāditrayaprāṇā sarvaśāstrasvarūpiṇī |
In this way, consciousness, that is, this Goddess Who by Her very
nature and at all times is the life-breath of the three, namely, ‘enunciation’
and the rest, is all the scriptures. (278cd-279ab) (277)

union)” (at the end). Or else (the same process can be understood to take place with

respect to) all the scriptures that originate from the five currents until they arrive
progressively to the (level of the) business of daily life. This is said to be the supreme

relationship (between the one who utters the teachings and the one who receives them).’
PTv pp. 12-16. Abhinava adds in the same PTv (p. 64-65):

‘Consciousness, the Goddess Parā, flows forth (spontaneously) by its very
nature. Parā is said to be the power of the will and (undivided from) Bhairava does not
divide Him. Her form is the power of knowledge etc. which are the attributes (of Her)
flow, and it sustains the body of the (Speech of) Vision and the rest (of the levels of
Speech), the nature of which are Parāparā and Aparā. Such is that act of reflection
(parāmarśana) on the nature of the form of (Her) flow which is the question the

Goddess, who poses questions of that nature, asks. The act of reflection on the nature of
that flow is said to be supreme, its nature indicative (rūpaka) of (both) that question and
the answer. Moreover, commencing from the inner state of the other consciousness (that
replies), the body of Bhairava which has internalized the entire flow. again serves as the

means of withdrawing the bliss of the dense (uninterrupted) supreme consciousness, and

unfolds perpetually in the form of the one who replies. These two, the flow and

withdrawal, are undifferentiated by time, and so this reality, which is their one nature, is

(both) question and answer. That is itself the supreme relationship (parasaṁbandha)
endowed with the state of the Absolute (anuttaratā). In the past the teachers have
described this as the wealth of the essence of Trika (ṣaḍardha).’

CHAPTER ONE

‘In this wayʼ, in the aforementioned manner, consciousness itself is

always this Goddess Who, by Her own freedom, as the life-breath of the three,

enunciation and the rest, is the scripture in its entirety. The meaning is that
consciousness itself manifests as the scriptures.
Well then, he (now) proffers there (in that regard) the enunciation (of
the topics of the Tantrāloka).
The Enunciation of the Topics of the Tantrāloka

TārzāT̄ Ṭ̄RJT. ṬĪÑTTSTĪ=TĪT || 2.3 1
[ERIEIĒFŪEIEĀHUIEE ḶĪGEATI

ITPĪṬTĪĪ TTUT: TAĪṬAĪṢ TTÑ; || 2¢o 11

GTIFATATTATI: JTF̄Tāikāītga || 3¢2 1

TTTTTTT ̄T ĀṬAI TI GṬJH: || 2¢R II

ÉrVISĀṀE-CTJLĒĀEFIiītakt’[sĪHTIEVEḤI

ḹ Jk
TÇ̄TTdI] H-HIĪ TSG HI-PĪITĪḤ:

1I| Ṝ¢3

1I

tatrocyate puroddeśah pūrvajānujabhedavān || 279 ||
ijñãnabhid gatopāyaḥ paropāyas tṛtīyakaḥ |
śāktopāyo naropāyaḥ kālopāyo ‘tha saptamaḥ || 280 ||
cakrodayo ‘tha deśādhvā tattvādhvā tattvabhedanam |
kalādyadhvādhvopayogaḥ śaktipātatirohir || 281 ||
dīkṣopakramaṇaṁ dīkṣā sāmay pautrike vidhau |
prameyaprakriyā sūkṣmā dīkṣā sadyaḥsamutkramaḥ |) 282 ||
goddhāro ʻbhiṣecanam |
śrāddhakīr̥ptiś ca śeṣavṛttinirūpaṇam || 283 ||
liṅgārcā bahubhitparvapavitrādi nimittajam |
rahasyacaryā mantraugho maṇḍalaṁ mudrikāvidhiḥ || 284 1|

ekīkāraḥ svasvarūpe praveśaḥ śāstramelanam |
āyātikathanaṁ śāstropādeyatvanirūpaṇam || 285 ||

There (in that context, now) will be stated the initial enunciation (of

the content of the Tantrāloka and then) in a subsequent (more detailed one)

than the one that follows, with (the corresponding) subsections.

TANTRĀLOKA

1)

The Types of Liberating Knowledge (vijñāna).

6)
7)
8)

The Temporal Means® (kālopāya)
The Arising of the Wheels (cakrodaya).™
The Path of Space.”” (deśādhvan).

2)
3)
4)
5)

9)

(Penetration into Ultimate Reality) Devoid of Means (Anupāya).
The Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya).
The Empowered Means (śāktopāya).
The Individual Means (āṇṉavopāya).

The Path of the Principles (tattvādhvan).

10)

The Division of the Principles' (tattvabhedanam).

12)
13)

The Application of the Path (ādhvopayoga).
The Descents of the Power (śaktipāta) and Obscuration
(šaktipātatirohitī).
The Preamble to the Rite of Initiation (dīkṣopakramaṇa).
The Common Initiation into the Rule (samayadīkṣā).

11)

14)
15)

16)
17)

18)

19)

The Path of the Forces and the Rest"”” (kalādyadhvan).

The Initiation of the Apprentice (pautrika).™
What needs be Done"" in the Procedure concerning the Apprentice
(vidheyaprakriyā vidhau).

The Brief Initiation (sīkṣmā dīkṣā).

The

lInitiation

of

the

Immediate

(sadyahsamutkrama).
20)
The Initiation of the Scales' (tulādīkṣā).
21)

22)

Exit

(from

the

Body)

The Initiation of those Absent (pārokṣī).

The Extraction of Śectarian Signs (iiṅgoddhara).”

' In this context the forms of consciousness are those corresponding to the means of

realisation.

' This chapter teaches how the cycles of time correspond to the cycle of the breath. By

attending to the breathing cycle with this awareness, the yogi practicing in āṇavopāya

absorbs the thought constructs which are the basis of the sense of time passing.

Ultimately, when the process is complete, he realises his own eternal conscious nature,

which is free of time.
'™ This chapter teaches how cycles — ‘wheels’ of repetitions of Mantras of various
lengths ‘arise’ in consonance with the cycle of the breath.

'U n this chapter, Abhinava presents a detailed description of the worlds (bhuvana)

that make up the cosmic order.
'” In the previous chapter, Abhinava described the nature of the thirty-six principles
(tattva); in this one, he teaches how a series of seven perceivers correspond to them.
These range from the most fully conditioned (sakala) right up to Śiva, the supreme
perceiver.

” The Forces (kalā) are five spheres of energy in which the thirty-six principles are

contained.
' The ‘apprentice’ is the teacher's spiritual son, who is destined to become a teacher in
his turn.

” 1 tentativeḷly emend prameyaprakriyā, which makes no sense to me, to

vidheyaprakriyā.

' The belief is that Karma weighs down the body. So in order to check that the teacher

has successfully removed the disciple’s Karma by means of initiation, he weighs him.

CHAPTER ONE

23)

The Consecration (of a Teacher) (abhiṣecana).

25)

The Offering to the Dead (śrāddhakḷrṛpti).

24)
26)
27)

28)

The Funerary Rites (antyeṣṭi).

A Description of the Remaining Observance (śeṣavṛttinirūpaṇa).
The Worship of the Liṅga (liṅgārcā).

The Many Kinds of Propitious Times (parvan),”” (the Offering of)
the
Sacred
Thread
and
other
Occasional
Rites

29)

(bahubhitparvapavitrādi nimittaja).
The Secret Observance (rahasyacaryā).

31)

The (Trika) Maṇḍala (maṇḍala).

30)
32)
33)
34)
35)
36)
37)

The Current of Mantras.'” (mantraugha).
The Procedure concerning Mudrās (mudrikāvidhi)."
The Gathering Together (of the Deities) (ekīkāra).

Entry into One’s Own Nature (svasvarūpapraveśa).
The Encounter of the Scriptures (śāstramelana).
An Account of the Transmission of the Scriptures (āyātikathana).
A
Description
of
the
Scripturess
to
be
Adopted
(Śśāstropādeyatvanirūpaṇ. (279cd-285) (278-284ab)

The preliminary enunciation is (simply) a presentation (of contents) by
naming (them briefly) in a general way (as chapter headings). The subsequent

'” The word ‘liigodhara’ literally means ‘the extraction of sectarian marks'. When a

person belonging to another tradition takes Saiva initiation, the teacher must first

remove his connection with it. This procedure may involve the removal of the sectarian
marks on the disciple’s body that indicate his past affiliation.

' In common astrological terms, a parvan (lit. node’ or ‘juncture’) is a special fixed
period of time when a special celestial conjunction occurs. These include the days of the

four changes of the moon, that is, the full moon and change to the new moon, the eighth

and fourteenth of each half-month, the day of the moon’s passing the node at its
opposition or conjunction, the moment of the sun’s entering a new sign, and any

particular time of the year such as an equinox a solstice. Such periods of time are
occasions for the performance of rites that are considered to be especially efficacious. In

this chapter, Abhinava presents special Tantric parvans that are special days for the

worship, for example, of the eight Mothers. Others include the birthdays and death
anniversaries of teachers or when they come to visit. The etymology proposed by
Abhinavagupta for the word parvan is to derive it from the root pr, to fill (see below

above, 25/11cd-12ab and below, 28/14cd-18ab). Although it is purely a didactic one, it
indicates how he understood these special occasions periods to be. Accordingly,
following Gnoli’s lead, I translate parvan, as ‘a time of fulfilment’.

'™ In this chapter, Abhinava presents the Mantras required to perform the Trika rituals

taught in the Tantrāloka.
' Khecarī Mudrā (the Gesture of the Skyfarer) is the main Mudrā that gives energy to

the others described in this chapter. It is essentially the upward flight of Kuṇḍalinī
through the subtle body and out along its axis, which may be outlined by Śiva’s Trident

projected into it.
' The word ekīkāra literally means ‘making one’ and so, by extension, ‘gathering

togetherʼ, or ‘assemblingʼ. This chapter is dedicated to listing the names of the deities
that are the members of the enclosing assemblies (cakra) that, according to the
scriptures, surround the central Trika deities of the Trika Trident.

TANTRĀLOKA

enunciation is a presentation (of contents) by naming the particular (subsections
of each chapter). This same division (into two types of enunciation) has been
described elsewhere. There (in that context), he declares the preliminary
enunciation beginning with ‘the Various Forms of Consciousness’ and ending
with

exposition . . .ʼ. The ‘forms of consciousnessʼ are divided up into those
pertaining to Śiva (śāmbhava) and the rest. ‘Devoid of Means’ means No

Means (anupāya). ‘The Initiation of Apprentices (putraka) is in relation to
3,

the procedure prescribed for (the initiation of) apprentices (who are going to
become teachers). (The word) ‘i
onʼ is related to what was stated
previously (and has been brought forward to refer to the procedure for
apprentices). ‘Rituals’ should be associated with the procedure prescribed for
apprentices. As he will say:
‘(This is) explained in the subsequent enunciation of that chapter

concerning the procedure prescribed for apprentices.’'

What is the purpose of writing such (an extensive) book? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

fṝṀ a: qēḷ q |

qicg ā-rfāraāī aāāāaT aiq |

II

gaī īaaī-g: 1M 2¢. 1
iti saptādhikām enāṁ triṁśataṁ yaḥ ṣadā budhaḥ |

āhnikānāṁ samabhyasyet sa sākṣād bhairavo bhavet || 286 ||

saptatriṁśatsu sampūrṇabodho yad bhairavo bhavet |
kiṁ citram aṇavo ʻpy asya dṛśā bhairavatām iyuḥ || 287 I|

Thus, the wise man who constantly (and assiduously) practices
these thirty-seven chapters becomes Bhairava Himself in person (directly
visible) (sākṣā).™ He whose awakened understanding of the thirty-seven
(chapters) is perfectly complete (and His perfectly full consciousness

(pervades) within the thirty-seven (principles)) is Bhairava, what wonder

is it if by his (mere) glance, individual souls (also) attain Bhairava’s state?
(286-287) (284cd-286ab)
'} have not been able to trace this statement in the Tantrāloka or its commentary.

' This and the following verse are quoted below in TĀv ad 13/160 and 37/32-33ab.

Cf. below, 13/160, where Abhinava promises that a person who studies and practices the

teachings in the Tantrāloka becomes a true teacher. Thus, he is Bhairava in person —

sākṣāt – which means he is Bhairava who can be seen directly.

' The first line of this verse has two meanings. The immediate sense is the one that

follows from the previous verse. The suggested sense is that of the translation of the
same line in brackets.

CHAPTER ONE
Detailed Enunciation of the Topics of the Tantrāloka

ṢNT ṬSITR:

[eeEte i|ēṭTCĀSHEKIECFZḺHHĪĪEPÁĀI

āṝīā 7Ṭ̄gaTa-q || 380 ||

rāāīd sT̄aīç aāīcāaq 1| 282 11

3qfzeaqīṁ JTITdddTaTTĀJaTĀT |II 282 1I

3--NR: TGTTT-.TTTTTTGAII|

TIINITTGṜTTSĒT-TĀṬṬRTHTCTT |

TTTQ |

ÑJGGTTTĪSTT I| 284 1I

TGJRÑNTTTCY

ity eṣa pūrvajoddeśaḥ kathyate tv anujo ‘dhunā |
1) vijñānabhitprakaraṇe sarvasyoddeśanaṁ kramāt || 288 ||
2) dviṭīyasmin prakaraṇe gatopāyatvabheditā |

3) viśvacitpratibimbatvaṁ parāmarśodayakramaḥ |) 289 ||

mantrādyabhinnarūpatvaṁ paropāye vivicyate |
4) vikalpasaṅskriyā tarkatattvaṁ guruṣatattvakam || 290 ||
yogāṅgānupayogitvaṁ kalpitārcādyanādaraḥ |
saṁviccakrodayo mantravīryajapyādi vāstavam || 291 ||
niṣedhavidhitulyatvaṁ śāktopāye ‘tra carcyate |

5) buddhidhyānaṁ prāṇatattvasamuccāraś cidātmanā || 292 ||

uccāraḥ paratattvāntaḥpraveśapathalakṣaṇam |
karaṇaṁ varṇatattvaṁ cety āṇave tu nirūpyate || 293 ||
6) cāramānamahorātrasaṁkrāntyādivikalpanam |
saṁhāracitratã varṇodayaḥ kālādhvakalpane || 294 ||
7) cakrabhinmantravidyābhidetaccakrodaye bhavet |
8) parimāṇaṁ purāṇāṁ ca saṁgrahastattvayojanam || 295 |I
etaddeśādhvanirdeśe 9) dvayaṁ tattvādhvanirṇaye |
kāryakāraṇabhāvaśca tattvakramanirūpaṇam || 296 ||

TANTRĀLOKA

This is the preliminary enunciation (of the topics discussed in the

Tantrāloka). Now we turn to the subsequent (detailed one). (289ab)
1)
2)
3)

AII (the topics discussed in the Tantrāloka) are (implicitly) indicated
in due order in the (first) chapter, which deals with the various
forms of consciousness (corresponding to the means to realisation).
The kind of (penetration into ultimate reality which is) devoid of

means is (discussed) in the second chapter.

(The topics) discussed in (the third chapter, that) deals with the

Supreme Means, are a) the reflection of all things within

consciousness, b) the sequence of the arising of (the fifty forms) of

reflective awareness,™° and c) the oneness (of these forms of

reflective

4)

awareness)

with

Mantra

and

the

other

(ritual

procedures).
Here (in chapter four, that) deals with the Empowered Means, (the

following topics) are discussed: a) the purification of thought, b)

the true nature of discriminative reasoning (larka), c) nature and
characteristics of teachers, d) the inapplicability of the auxiliaries of
yoga (apart from sound discriminative reasoning), e) the
irrelevance of conceived forms of worship etc., f) the arising of the

cycles of Consciousness,™ g) the vitality of Mantra,' h) the true

repetition of Mantra (japya) and the rest (of the constituents of

ritual), i) the equivalence of prohibitions and injunctions.
12ss This is the flow

as pure ‘]’ consciousness, represented by the letters of the alphabet.

' The ‘purification’, that is, progressive elimination, of thought constructs leading to

the direct recognition of one’s own Śiva nature free of thought constructs, is the practice

of the Empowered Means. Accordingly, Abhinava begins his exposition of this means
by describing the stages in which it takes place and how it does s0.
' The most excellent Wheel or Cycle of Consciousness is that of the Twelve Kālīs,

which is described here. The Twelve Kālīs correspond to twelve phases in the
cycle of
perception. These are the four phases of the arising, persistence, withdrawal, and
the

fourth encompassing state of unity, in the domain of the object, means of knowledge
and the perceiver. Although the recognition of this cycle is the culminating experience
of all three means to realisation, Abhinava describes it in this

apter concerning the

Empowered Means, as it primarily marks the phases of elimination of thought
constructs in the three domains of subject, object and means of knowledge. When this
process is complete, the liberated soul recognizes that he is the oneness which is Śiva,

and that the whole universe (of duality) is an emanation of the Light of his own

consciousness. Thus, he realises unity-in-diversity (bhedābheda) and enters the pure
oneness of the Absolute ~ Anuttara – beyond means (anupāya).

' The vitality (vārya) of Mantra is the universal pulsation (sāmānyaspanda) of the pure

‘T of Śiva consciousness, realised as the plenitude of the phases of consciousness

worshipped as the Twelve Kālīs, and so is discussed here.

' The prohibitions and injunctions taught in the scriptures are meant for the benefit of

people who practice in the lower means to realisation. However, in reality they

are just

notions, as is evidenced by the fact that they are relative to one another and vary
different contexts and according to differing traditions. Thus, they are equivalen

in

t and so

5)

CHAPTER ONE
(The following) are described (in Chapter Five, that deals with) the
Individual Means: a) meditation by means of the intellect, b) the

utterance through the principle of the vital breath, and c) the
utterance through the conscious nature,” d) entry into the
6)

Supreme Principle, e) the characteristic signs on the path, f) the
instruments (of yoga), and g) the true nature of the phonemes.
(Chapter Six deals with) the conception (kalpana) of the Path of
Time. (The topics discussed here are:) a) the measure of the
movement (of the vital breath), b) the conception of night and day
and the transits (of the sun through the zodiac) and so on, c) the
various kinds of reabsorptions (of the breath into consciousness),
and d) the (progressive) arising of the (energies of the) phonemes

(in the cycle of the breath).
7)

8)

9)

(This chapter deals with the progressive) arising of the cycles

(cakrodaya) (of the syllables of Mantras in the movement of the
breath) and the various types of cycles, Mantras and Vidyās.

In (the chapter that) teaches the Path of Space, (we discuss) the

dimensions of the worlds, a summary of the worlds, and their
association with the metaphysical principles.
The two (topics discussed in the chapter) dealing with the Path of
the Principles, are a) the relationship between cause and effect, and

b) a description of the sequence of the principles. (288-296) (286cd295ab)

iG{EEIŠIFIĒĒĒEĪPTISĒTEUVIĀ
JHTĀG 3—Tq ṁā.rz fē-TĀ 11 3<% 1
TJTATRTTGTĪTTZTEITTIĒTT] |
qtũīazī. gdT¥aũthṝrēTTḤ II 2X¢ 11

SṬRATĪGTTĪ-RTRṬHĪ TTĀĪTĀTḤ II|/3<8 1I

JITrāTāTārāTaāTTaTaT-TRTHTa: |

m- ofgdaāī 1| 23¢ 1

not relevant for those who are practicing the purification and elimination of thought
constructs in the Empowered Means.

' Read cidātmanā for cidātmatā.

'! The word cakra literally means ‘wheelʼ. In this context, as in many others, it means

‘cycle’. In this chapter, Abhinava examines the number of times Mantras of varying
lengths can be repeated in consonance with the cyclic movement of the breath in the

course of twenty-four hours. The various ‘Wheels’ are these cycles of varying length
and number according to the length of the particular Mantra recited in this way.

TANTRĀḶOKA

10) vastudharmas tattvavidhir jāgradādinirāpaṇam |
pramātr̥bheda ity etat tattvabhede vicāryate || 297 ||

11) kalāsvarūpam ekatripañcādyais tattvakalpanam |
varṇabhedakramaḥ sarvādhāraśaktinirūpaṇam || 298 I
kalādyadhvavicārāntare tāvat pravivicyate |
12) abhedabhāvanākampahrāsau tv adhvopayojane || 299 ||
13) saṅkhyādhikyaṁ malādīnāṁ tattvaṁ śaktivicitratā |

anapekṣitvasiddhiś ca tirobhāvaviciṭratā || 300 ||
šaktipātaparīkṣāyām etāvān vācyasaṁgrahaḥ |

14) tirobhāvavyapagamo jñānena paripūrṇatā || 301 ||

utkrāntyanupayogitvaṁ dīkṣopakramaṇe sthitam |
10)

In the (chapter concerning) the various ways the principles are

divided (into groups, the following topics are discussed): a)
(perceptibility as) a property of entities (vastudharma),” b) the

procedure pertaining to the principles (with regards to the seven

levels of perceivers), c) a description of the waking and other states

11)

(of consciousness in relation to them), d) the various types of
experiencing subjects.

In (this chapter dealing with) the Path of the Forces etc., (the

following) are discussed: a) the nature of the forces, b) the
conception (of the division of all things) into one, three and five etc.

principles,'” c) the process of the differentiation of the phonemes

12)

(in relation to these divisions), and d) a description of the power
that sustains everything.

(The topics discussed in this chapter that deals) with the application

of the Path (described in the previous chapters) are: a) the

contemplation of nonduality (abhedabhāvanā) and b) the reduction

13)

of doubt (kampahrāṣa).
a) The superiority (of Śaivism with respect to) Sāṁkhya etc., b) the
nature of impurity (mala) etc., c) the variety of (the descents of)
power, d) proof of their independence (from personal effort), and e)
the variety of forms of obscuration. Such, in brief, are the matters
discussed (in Chapter Thirteen, which is) concerned with the

' In this secton Abhinava discusses the nature of phenomena and the perceiver. He

discusses whether the objects the perceiver perceives exist independently of the
perceiver and perception, or not. In this way he introduces his exposition of the seven
levels of perceivers arranged along the hierarchy of the thirty-six principles and
corresponding objects.

' At the lowest level, seven levels of perceivers span the thirty-six principles. They

each have their objective sphere, thus making fourteen. Their own essential nature

(svarūpa) is the fifteenth. Proceeding upwards to the next higher perceiver, the units
decrease by two. Finally, at the top, only their essential nature remains, which is Śiva
who is perceived directly as the consciousness beyond subject and object. Thus, in

descent the units increase from one to three, then five and so on up to fifteen.

CHAPTER ONE
examination of the (forms of) the descent of the power (of grace)

14)

(Śaktipāta).

(This chapter deals with) the preamble to the rite of initiation. (The

topics there) are: a) the removal of obscuration, b) fulfilment by

knowledge and c) the futility of (ritual) suicide. (297-302ab) (295cd-

300)

TTHIRTIṬTĀGIJĪT ĪTGTĀTSTT] |
R̥ATTTTTT=I
] āṬTT+ BHTIT 1|| 303 1|

ÉEkīḻBtēzztavltar|Exr-ḤḤ

frīṁzaṟaāferz afrrṃṛṀtī=ṝīa 1| 30v 1|

šTST yīgfafraTā-TTST |
STRTNTGTTĪTFT
: ṬT TAĀ TāĪ;: ||/304 1|
raT-ī āgāhīã aTaraTG-RTīTTḤ || 30ē 1|
ftraezāfatkrzaīmī vraṁāftaferzmoq_ 1| 30.5 1

# |

rfēā 1| 30c 1

15) siṣyaucityaparīkṣādau snānabhit™ sthāṇakalpanam || 302 ||

sāmānyanyāsabhedo ‘rghapātraṁ caitat prayojanam |

dravyayogyatvam arcā ca bahirdvārārcanaṁ kramāt || 303 ||

praveśo dikṣyarūpaṁ ca dehaprāṇādiśodhanam |
viśeṣanyāsavaicitryaṁ saviśeṣārghabhājanam || 304 ||
dehapūjā prāṇabuddhicitkhādhvaṅyāsapūjane |
anyaśāstragaṇotkarṣaḥ pūjā cakrasya sarvataḥ || 305 II
kṣetragrahaḥ pañcagavyaṁ pūjanaṁ bhūgaṇeśayoḥ |
astrārcā vahnikāryaṁ cāpy adhivāsanam agnigam || 306 ||
tarpaṇaṁ carusaṁsiddhir dantakāṣṭhāntasaṁskriyā |

Śivahasṭavidhiś cāpi śayyāklṛpti vicāraṇam || 307 ||
svapnasya sāmayaṁ karma samayāś ceti saṁgrahaḥ |
samayitvavidhāv asmin syāt pañcadaśa āhnike || 308 |I
15)

Chapter Fifteen deals with the (basic) common initiation. The
topics discussed here are, in brief: a) the examination of the
disciple’s competence (to receive initiation), b) the various types of
(riṭual) bath, c) the selection of the place (suitable for the sacrifice)

'√Read snānabhit for sthānabhit.

TANTRĀLOKA

(sthānakalpana), d) the kinds of common depositions (on the body),
e) the sacrificial jar and its purpose, f) the appropriateness of the
sacrificial substances, g) the outer sacrifice and the worship of the
door, h) entry (into the abode of the sacrifice), i) the nature of the
directions, j) the purification of the body and the vital breath etc.,
k) the variety of special depositions (on the body), 1) the worship of

the body, m) the special rite for the sacrificial vessel, n) worship
and deposition of the path in the vital breath, intellect, mind and

the Void,° 0) the superiority (of our school) over those of other

scriptures, p) the worship of the Wheel in all respects, q) taking
possession of the field, r) the five products of the cow, s) the worship
of the earth and Gaṇeśa, t) the worship of the Weapon, u) the fire
sacrifice, v) the purification of the fire, w) the libation, x) the
preparation of the sacrificial pap (caru), y) the stick for the teeth, z)
the final purification, a2) the rite of Śiva’s hand, b2) the making of
the bed, c2) the examination of dreams, d2) the rite (during which
the initiate is taught) the Rules, and e2) the Rules (themselves).
(302cd-308) (301-307ab)

Ejṭe
EIEIPHĀNIEENIEGaTEIEEIf

16) maṇḍalātmānusandhānaṁ nivedyapaśuviṣtaraḥ |
agnitṛptiḥ svasvabhāvadīpanaṁ Śiṣyadehagaḥ || 309 ||
adhvanyāṣavidhiḥ śodhyaśodhakādivicitratā |
dīkṣābhedaḥ paro nyāso mantrasattāprayojanam || 310 ||
bhedo yojanikādeś ca ṣoḍaśe syād ihāhnike |

16)

Here in Chapter Sixteen will come (the following topics): a) the

unifying contemplation of the constituents of the maṇḍala, b)
(matters)

concerning

the

animals

fit

to

be

offered,

c)

the

propitiation of the fire, d) the inflaming of (the teacher’s) own

essential nature, e) the procedure for the deposition of a Path on the

disciple’s body, f) the variety of Paths to be purified and their

' Read citkhādhva- for citsvadhva-. See 15/295cd ff.

' Concerning the term anusaṁdhāna as meaning both ‘conjunction’ or ‘fusion’ and

‘contemplation’, see above note 1,1072. The expression maṇḍalātmānusaṁdhānam
reminds one of Śivasūtra 1/6 – ‘śakticakrānusaṁdhāne viśvasaṁhāraḥ – ‘when
contemplating (and fusing together) the Wheel of Energies, the universe is withdrawn’
(see Dyczkowski 1992: 25). In this case, it is the constituent parts of the maṇḍala that
are conjoined together in the course of the ritual procedure, to be finally contemplated

as one with Śiva.

CHAPTER ONE
purifiers etc., g) the various types of initiation, h) the supreme
deposition, i) the essential being and purpose of Mantra, h) the
various types of conjunction and so forth. (309-311ab) (307cd-309)

gāaāritīraāfs: TTNIaTGIS āISTTT |I/322 |I

ṁrard ũras faṣī 1
17) sūtrakḷṛptis tatvaśuddhiḥ pāśadāho ‘tha yojanam || 311 II
adhvabhedas tathety evaṁ kathitaṁ pautrike vidhau |
17)

The procedure pertaining to the apprentice (putraka) is explained in

this way: a) the fashioning of the sacred threads, b) the purification

of the principles, d) the burning of the fetters, e) the conjunction
(with the supreme principle) and f) the various paths. (311cd-

312ab) (310)

StT-ITfTāTTc T-ITaTSJ JTRZ: || 322 1|

GṬGīdēīī] ITJĪTTATTRAṬ. JĀĪTT; || 323 1|

18) janaṇādivihīnatvaṁ mantrabhedo ‘tha susphuṭaḥ || 312 ||
iti saṁkṣiptadīkṣākhye syād aṣṭādaśa āhnike |
19) kālāvekṣā kṛpāṇyādinyāsaś cāraḥ śarīragaḥ || 313 ||
brahmavidyāvidhiś caivam uktaṁ sadyaḥsamutkrame |
18)

Now a) the absence of (further) births etc. and b) the various types

19)

In (this chapter, which teaches the initiation) of immediate exit
(from the body), is taught a) the ascertainment of impending

of Mantra will be (discussed) very clearly in eighteenth chapter,
which is called the ‘brief initiation’.

death,” b) the deposition of the razor and the rest (in the dying
man’s body), c) the circulation of (the breath in his) body and d) the
procedure for the Brahmavidyā (that liberates him). (312cd-314ab)
(311-312)

TTR-RTTRTTTqTPHYSJ ṬPIĪĀĪḤ: ||/32:

HRtTHIEETCZIIĒAIṭIAṈI

rā̃sīatzfktēsrrdcāṁ: afgēarr̥ṝ ] 32. 1|

TANTRĀLOKA

EEKĒEIPĒTVĒAĒṄIT-AIĒT

JIāī] āīāgaāT dīīīak=zfa: || 32ē 1|
20) adhikāraparīkṣāṇtaḥsaṁskāro ʻtha tulāvidhiḥ || 314 ||
ity etad vācyasarvasvaṁ syād viṁśatitamāhnike |
21) mṛtajīvadvidhir jālopadeśaḥ saṁṣkriyāgaṇe || 315 1|
balābalavicāraś cety ekaviṁśāhnike vidhiḥ |
22) śrāvaṇaṁ cābhyanujñānaṁ śodhanaṁ pātakacyutiḥ ||
Śaṅkāccheda iti spaṣṭaṁ vācyaṁ liṅgoddhr̥tikrame |
20)
21)

316 1|

Now this is the essence of what is to be stated in Chapter Twenty: a)
the inner purification, b) the examination (of the attainment) of

authority and c) the procedure of the scales.

The procedure (taught) in Chapter Twenty-One deals (includes) a)

the procedure concerning (those who are absent, whether) dead or
alive, b) the teaching of the net, c) the examination of the strength

22)

and weakness of the group of purifications.'”

In (this chapter, which is concerned with) the rite of extracting

sectarian signs (from one who is converting to Śaivism), is found a

clear exposition (vācya) of a) the proclamation' (to the Lord) and

(His) consent (to impart conversion), b) purification and liberation
from sin, and c) the elimination of doubt. (314cd-317ab) (313-315)

TḡT =TT Td: II 32%9 ||

TTTHIS-KATIR
ārheā TRTTTT |
23) parīkṣācāryakaraṇaṁ tadvrataṁ haraṇaṁ mateḥ || 317 I|
tadvibhāgaḥ sādhakatvam abhiṣekavidhau tv iyat|
24) adhikāry atha saṁskāras tatprayojanam ity adaḥ || 318 II
taturviṁśe ‘ntyayāgākhye vaktavyaṁ paricarcyate |
23)

In (Chapter Twenty-Three, which) deals with the consecration (of
the teacher), is found a) the examination and creation of a teacher,
b) his Mantra observance, c) the removal of knowledge (from a

deceitful disciple), d) the categories of those (deceitful teachers) and
e) the (consecration into) the state of an adept.

' Iṇitiation imparts ‘authority° or ‘aptitude’ to practice and achieve the goal of that

practice. Thus, the examination of the outer signs of having attained it is essentially the

ascertainment that the initiation has been imparted and received.

'” Read saṁskriyāgaṇe for saṁskriyāgaṇaḥ, as Gnoli suggests.

' Read śrāvaṇaṁ for śravaṇaṁ.

24)

CHAPTER ONE

Now, in Chapter Twenty-Four, called ‘the last sacrificial rite’
(antyayāga), is discussed what should be taught there, namely: a)
the recipient (adhikārin), b) the rite of passage (saṁṣkāraḥ) and c)

its purpose. (317cd-319ab) (316-317)

āīṝṁ ũrṁaardá -ṁfat: #ēa: 1| 32x1|

25) prayojanaṁ bhogamokṣadānaṁ nāḍīvidhiḥ" sphuṟaḥ 1| 319 1

pañcaviṁśāhnike śrāddhaprakāśe vastusaṁgrahaḥ |
26) prayojanaṁ śeṣavṛtter nityārcā sthaṇḍile parā || 320 ||
27) liṅgasvarūpaṁ bahudhā cākṣasūtranirūpaṇam |
pūjābheda iti vācyaṁ liṅgārcāsamprakāśane || 321 ||
25)

In Chapter Twenty-Five, which is (called) ‘the exposition of the

26)

c) the bestowal of worldly benefits (bhoga) and liberation.
(The topics of Chapter Twenty-Six) are: a) the purpose of the rites
performed after initiation, b) the regular worship (nityārcā) on the

27)

offering to the dead (śrāddha)’, the subjects in brief are: a) (its)
purpose, b) a clear procedure for the channels (of the breath), and

sacrificial surface.

In Chapter (Twenty-Seven,) which is (called) ‘the exposition of the
worship of the Liṅga’, (the topics) to be discussed are: a) the many

kinds of Liṅga, b) a description of (the varieties of) rosaries, and c)

the various forms of worship. (319cd-321) (318-320ab)

iīaāōexctcIEEiihzxxTH
TJÑÑRṬTHTTR̥TIJĒTTĪT
TGTT |I 3221
JāTāT-āTaTāṝTJĪTSTrTTT] |

Ja: ṀŪtaāī ārtrcīṁahiterattzēaṁ ú| 3231
eiE=ieEPHRIGĒVAVSIĒĒĒIĪĒCCGI

fē--] 11 32x 1|
28) naimittikavibhāgas tatprayojanavidhis tataḥ |
parvabhedās tadviśeṣaś cakracarcā tadarcanam || 322 |
gurvādyantadinādyarcāprayojananirūpaṇam |
mṛteḥ parīkṣā yogīśīmelakādividhis tathā || 323 I|

' Read -dānaṁ nāḍīvidhiḥ for -dāne nātra vidhiḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

vyākhyāvidhiḥ cyutavidhir gurupūjāvidhis tv iyat |
naimittikaprakāśākhye ‘py aṣṭāviṁśāhnike sthitam || 324 ||

28)

In Chapter Twenty-Eight, which is called ‘the exposition of the
occasional rites’ (naimittikaprakāśa), (the matters discussed include)

a) the kinds of occasional events (naimittika), b) the injunction

concerning their application, c) the various propitious times

(parvan) and d) their special features, e) an examination (of the
Sacrifice) of the assembly (cakra) and f) its worship. (Other topics

include): g) a description of the purpose of the worship of the

teacher’s birthday, the day he died and the like, h) an examination
of death, h) the procedure concerning the gathering (melaka) of
Yoginīs (yogīsī) etc., i) the procedure for the explanation (of the
scriptures), j) procedure for (the expiation of) transgressions (of the

Rule), and k) the procedure for the worship of the teacher. (322-

324) (320cd-323ab)

tīa; fṇzūcīzgea-: |
rdīatrratasī azāīdṝrcṣa 1| 324 1
GJÑŪEGAEEPTCEAEēHḤ]

adhikāryātmaṇo bhedaḥ siddhapatnīkulakramaḥ !
arcāvidhir dautavidhī rahasyopaniṣatkramaḥ || 325 |
dīkṣābhiṣekau vedhaś cety ekonatriṁśa āhnike |

29)

(The matters discussed) in the twenty-ninth chapter are: a) those

who are fit (to perform Kaula rites), b) the Kula rite (kulakrama)
dedicated to the Siddhas and (their) consorts, c) the procedure for
the rite of worship (according to Mādhvakula), d) the procedure
concerning the Tantric consort, e) the liturgy of the secret doctrine,
f) initiation, g) consecration (of the adept and teacher), and h) the
(initiation by) piercing (the inner centres). (325-326ab) (323cd-

324)

ṃ-rāx% zrrṁṝr frst rsttrq 1 32= 1

JJGTSSTÑ] -āTTaṬāāīēf̄TēTTTR |
[EEEUIEEISE ĒIFEAFRĪ]r--JṬṚEICṈ

TTṀ TĨĪTHJ |
hōīīṀ f] ũīTṁ JRGTTIi GSSTNIT || 32¢ ||
30) mantrasvarūpaṁ tadvīryam iti triṁśe nirāpitam || 326 ||
1i02 Read cyuta- for śruta-.

'" Read vedhas for bodhaś.

CHAPTER ONE

31) śūlābjabhedo vyomeśasvastikādinirūpaṇam |
vistareṇābhidhātavyam ity ekatriṁśa āhnike || 327 ||
32) guṇapradhānatābhedāḥ svarūpaṁ vīryacarcanam |
kalābheda iti proktaṁ mudrāṇāṁ samprakāśane || 328 II
30)

The nature of the Mantras and their vitality (vīrya) are described in

31)

Chapter Thirty-One (was written) to fulfil the need for a detailed

32)

Chapter Thīrty.

exposition of the various types (of Trika maṇḍala) with lotuses and
tridents, and a description (of the parts of the other maṇḍalas

called) the ‘Lord of the Sky’, the Svastika and the rest.
(Chapter Thirty-Two) deals with the Mudrās. The topics discussed
(there) are a) (their) secondary and primary types, b) their nature,
c) deliberation on (the nature of their) vitality (vīrya), and d) the

various occasions (when they are applied). (326cd-328) (325327ab)
(The word) ‘thus’ (iti) (with which verse 284 begins and so marks the

beginning of this entire section) does not just (imply) in this way that the
greatness of this (book consists) only (in the contents that are briefly enunciated
as the headings of each chapter), but in something else also, which is stated (in
the passage) beginning with ‘these thirty-seven chapters’ and ending with
‘(chapter thirty-two) deals with’ (i.e. the subsections of each chapter). Here
(in this book), the author has, in accord with (the nature of) reality (which

consists of thirty-seven principles), written thirty-seven chapters as a (single)
whole (when read together as a book) and individually (when read as individual

chapters). Just as everything that is present within the Earth principle is in a

gross form because it is predominantly based on duality, similarly, here also
(all) that will be discussed is declared (in this, the first chapter, with the words)
‘all (the topics discussed in the Tantrāloka) are announced in due order (in

the (first) chapter)ʼ.' ‘The Supreme Means’ is the Means pertaining to Śiva
(śāmbhavopāya). 1) 1t is generally said that (the nature) of this (means) is

'M Read kālabheda for kalābheda.

'M We shall see further ahead in Chapter Nine that reality is understood to be the

undivided oneness of the thirty-seven metaphysical principles (tattva) as the one
universal and transcendental consciousness. The principles are links in a causal chain,
formed in such a way that the higher principles contain within themselves the lower
ones in a potential form and contain the ones above as the actualization of their
potential. Thus, a complete knowledge of any one of them is the knowledge of all of
them. In other words, consciousness, the one reality, unfolds in such a way that the
nature of each phase ofits expansion contains all the others,in accord with the holistic
motto of Trika Śaivism formulated by Śambhunātha, Abhinavagupta’s Trika master,

namely, sarvaṁ sarvātmakam – ‘the nature of every (single thing) is everything’ (see

PTy p. 165 ff.). Jayaratha is telling us here that Abhinava has written his Tantrāloka in

the same way. A complete understanding of any one chapter (or, indeed of any part of
it) is the same as a complete understanding of all of it. Jayaratha goes on to cite the first
chapter, which corresponds to Earth, the lowest principle, as an example.
' Above, 1/286cd (1/287ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

(nondiscursive) thought-free (consciousness), and that is possible when there is
no (perception of) duality, which (takes place) when the universe of words and
their meanings is (realized to be) the one (pure) consciousness. There (in that
context), the universe of (things) denoted by words is a reflection within
consciousness and, as such, is of two kinds, namely, universal (as
consciousness) and particular (as the reflections within it). 2, 3) Moreover, the
universe of words is (also) said to be one (as is that of their meanings), because

the Mantras etc. (from which the universe is generated) and the progressive
emergence of the forms of reflective awareness (that correspond to the letters
from which they are constructed) are (both an) undivided (unity), because they

are not separate from consciousness."” These are the three things to be known

(by this, the Supreme Means,) included here (in Chapter Three, which is

dedicated to it).

Again, the nature of the Empowered (Means) is the transformation (of
thought constructs) (vikalpaka). Thus, 1) the purification of thought is the first
thing that is discussed (in the beginning of Chapter Four, which is dedicated to
this Means. There) it is explained (how this takes place) through (sound
discriminative) reasoning by reflecting on, for example, (the true nature of)
what should be avoided (and what should be adopted in order to realise the
reality of consciousness, which is free of such conceived distinctions). 2) Thus

(an exposition of the) nature of that (sound discriminative reasoning) follows

after that. 3) Moreover, one acquires a true teacher by virtue of the radiant

brilliance (visphūrjita) of (sound discriminative) reasoning, which is essentially

Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā). 4) Thus he explains that, along with its true

nature. 5) (Sound discriminative) reasoning (in this sense) is a direct and clearly
apparent auxiliary (aṅga)' of Yoga, and so the other auxiliaries of Yoga are of

no use. 6) Moreover, as (sound discriminative) reasoning (tarka)' is

'"7 ‘Bothī’ may also be the universe of words and the things they denote. These two are
both one with nondiscursive pure consciousness, and so as they are two aspects of it;
they are essentially one with one another.
'N We have seen that these three topics discussed in Chapter Three, that deals with the

Supreme Means, are a) the reflection of all things within consciousness, b) the sequence
of the arīsing of (the fifty forms) of reflective awareness (that flow as pure ‘Tʼconsciousness represented by the letters of the alphabet), and c) the oneness (of these

forms of reflective awareness) with Mantra and the rest.

" Ṣee below, 4/11 Icd ff.

'1 Ṣee above, note 1,184.
! The term ‘tarka’ literally means ‘reasoning’, ‘speculation’, ‘inquiry, ‘logic’ʼ, or

‘confutation’. It is a common word for ‘logic’, and as such denotes both the discipline of
logic and the Nyāya school of Indian philosophy, which supports what one could call
the everyday ‘common sense’ understanding of the nature of reality. To do this, it
developed an elaborate system of logic and formalized the principles of philosophical

debate, and so is also sometimes called ‘tarkaśāstra’. The sense of ‘tarka’ in the

Mālinīvijayottara, from which Abhinavagupta draws the term, is the discriminating
discernment between what is to be adopted (upādeya) and what should be rejected
(heyādyālocanā) (MV 17/18). Thus, as Abhinava explains it, it is a kind of reasoning
insofar as it involves the operation and use of notions (vikalpa) that are exclusive of one
another to form assessments. However, it differs also if understood as Pure Knowledge,
which does not involve ratiocination, but is, on the contrary, an intuitive direct insight

CHAPTER ONE

essentially Pure Knowledge, and so because it counters Māyā’s dualiṣṭic
thought constructs, ritual worship and the like, which is conceptual, is not taken
into consideration (when practicing the Empowered Means). 7) Thus, the Cycle
of Consciousness (saṁviccakra) (of the Twelve Kālīs) dawns by virtue of the

stability of the purification of thought." 8) That dawning (of the cycle of the
Twelve Kālīs) is the supreme vitality of Mantras, and the reflective awareness

(that operates) in this way is the true repetition of Mantra and (all) other (ritual
procedures). 9) Thus, because there is no duality in consciousness, prohibitions

and injunctions are equal (and both useless). In this way, (the fourth chapter,

which deals with the Empowered Means,) contains nine things to be known (by

means of the Empowered Means).
In the same way, the (practice of) meditation by means of the intellect

(buddhidhyāna)' and the rest, which belong to the Individual Means, also

serve directly as a means to that (Empowered Means). We have not explained
every word, because (much) is clear (as it is) and for fear of making the book

too long, and also because (much) will be explained further ahead. Thus, one
should understand it for oneself.
ŚSurely (one may ask,) why has the subsequent (detailed) enunciation of
the chapters from (thirty-three), which deals with the assembly (of deities), not
been made? With this question in mind, he says:

flEASIEIGĀIT=Ie’ĒIĀTTAĪ. Ā

ā I| 33281|
dvātriṁśatattvād īśākhyāt prabhṛti prasphuṭo yataḥ |
into the nature of reality, that is free of thought constructs. But we should not

understand what is meant by ‘tarka’ as just insight, intuitive knowledge, as opposed to

the dry logic of ‘tarka’, the former free of thought constructs and the latter quite the
opposite. ‘Right or sound reasoning’ – sattarka mediates between the two – thought and
the consciousness beyond it, which knows itself both as the transcendental perceiver
who is all things and immanently as all things of which it is the true nature. One could
say, in a way, that it is a ‘thoughtless thought’. It is ‘thoughtless” because it is the

insight consciousness has of itself as reality, which knows itself not just abstractly

beyond all conceptual representation, but also concretely in every tiny detail of all that

exists. Itis ‘thought’ because insight issues into thought as the teachings and from them,

by profound insight into their meaning, which ultimately transcends it. In other words, it
is both the destination and the way to it. Accordingly, it is not wrong to retain, in part at

least, the literal meaning of the word sattarka by translating as it as ‘sound

discriminative intuitive reasoning°.

'. Read eva vikalpasaṅṣkārasya for evāvikalpasaṁskārasya. If we do not make this

emendation, the meaning is ‘the stability of the latent trace (of consciousness) free of

thought’. But this makes little sense, as it is thought that leaves behind latent traces. The
other sense of ‘purification’ would also not apply to the thought-free condition, which is
that of ‘pure’ consciousness. The Dawning of the Cycle of Consciousness within the

expanse of individual consciousness completes the process begun by Sound Reasoning,

by removing the last traces of doubts from which dualistic thought constructs germinate.
See below, 4/122cd ff. more specifically 4/148 ff.

'1 See below, 5/19cd-42.

TANTRĀLOKA

na bhedo ‘ṣṭi tato noktam uddeśāntaram atra tat || 329 ||
The reason why there is no other enunciation here of (the contents
of the Tantrāloka) is stated (beyond chapter thirty-two) is because, from the

thirty-second principle, that is, the one called Īśa,onwards, there is no

clearly apparent division (bheda). (329) (327cd-328ab)

The chapter concerning Gesture (mudrā) is the one that has as its

essential nature the thirty-second principle. After that, namely the thirty-second,
which is called Īśa, comes the thirty-third, which is the chapter (concerning the)
assembly (of deities). Starting from that (level) division (bheda) does not
predominate, and (so as there are no subdivisions into topics in the
corresponding chapters, and) no subsequent (detailed) enunciation is made. This
is the meaning.
Now if there is no differentiation (bheda) from there onwards, what was

the purpose of (even) enumerating the other (following) chapters? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

TGATĀĪ ] SJāTTTTTCTJITTHTH: |

mukhyatvena ca vedyatvād adhikārāntarakramaḥ |

The remaining series of chapters (adhikāra) (corresponding to the
inner sequence of competence within consciousness) (adhikārāntarakrama)
is due to the (subtle presence of) objectivity (at the higher reality levels) in

its primary (most generic, internal) form."° (330ab) (328cd)
Concluding this (topic), he introduces another one.

ity uddeśavidhiḥ proktaḥ sukhasaṁgrahahetave |
athāṣya lakṣaṇāvekṣe nirāpyete yathākramam || 330 |

See below, 9/50cd-53ab. This is Śuddha Vidyā, the first of the series of five pure

principles in which nonduality prevails.

There is enough differentiation (bheda) for there to be five metaphysical principles
and corresponding reality levels beyond the thirty-second, although oneness between
subjective consciousness and its objective contents prevails at these levels. Abhinava

explains that the objectivity present even at these levels is in its ‘primary form’ʼ, in the

sense that it is the experience that the subject has of itself as objectivity, which at its

highest level is the immanent aspect of transcendental subjectivity. It is primary because
it precedes and is the basis of outer objectivity, that is experienced as external and
independent of the subject.

CHAPTER ONE
Such is the enunciation (uddeśa) (of the contents of the Tantrāloka),

expounded in order (to present) an easy summary (of it). Now (in what

follows), its definition and examination are presented in due order.
(330cdef) (329)

‘Its’, that is, the topics that have (just been) enunciated.

Now he summarizes the teaching (artha) of (this) chapter.

The Concluding Verses

TāG&T: |

3TTTSĪTd TITTYRZTTHTRTI

ātmā saṁvitprakāśasthitiranavayavā saṁvidityāttaśaktivrātaṁ
tasya ṣvarūpaṁ sa ca nijamahasaśchādanād baddharūpaḥ |
ātmajyotiḥ svabhāvaprakaṭanavidhinā tasya mokṣaḥ sa cāyaṁ
citrākāraṣya citraḥ prakaṭita iha yat saṁgraheṇārtha eṣaḥ || 331 ||
The Self is the abiding state (sthiti) of the Light of consciousness. It

is (pure) consciousness without parts (or divisions) and so it encompasses

(the entire) multitude of powers. By concealing its own glory, (it assumes)
the bound form (of the fettered soul). Its liberation (comes about) by the
procedure (vidhi) that reveals the Light of the Self, which is its own
essential nature. The purport here (of the teachings) is this wonderfully
various (liberated state of the fettered soul, whose) form is (also) various
and is revealed herein succinctly (saṁgraheṇa) (by this collection of
teachings). (331) (330)

Here (according to us), the essential nature of the Self is Light which,
different from the (common) external light of the three abodes (of Sun, Moon

and Fire), is consciousness alone. And consciousness is ‘without partsʼ. It is
just one, and its form is undivided (continuous) Light. And so, in accord with
the reason (yukti) stated previously, namely that ‘the power (śakti) (which is the
functional efficacy) of an entity is its own (specific) nature as conceived by the
subjects (who perceive it) (mātṛkalpita) (on the basis of its various effects),"
the essential nature (svarūpa) of that Self (atman) has encompassed (within

itself) endless powers. Although its nature is nondual in this way, it manifests
'! The first verse that follows defines the purport of the Tantrāloka and its contents.

The following further examines it.

'"T The variety of forms of liberation correspond, as we have seen (1/33), to the variety

of traditions that teach forms of liberation corresponding to the form or level of the

fettered soul.
'I Above, 1/68 (69).

TANTRĀLOKA

the duality which is subject and object by concealing ‘its own glory, that is,
(its own unique) cognitive subjectivity and agency that it does not share in
common with anything else, by (the power of) its own freedom, which does
what is extremely difficult to do. (Thus,) in accord with the aforestated reason,

namely, that ‘Śiva Himself has assumed the state of the fettered soulʼ,’ he is

said to be ‘boundʼ. Even so, by reversing (this condition) (pratyāvṛtti),
liberation is (achieved, which is) the unfolding experience (prathana) of one’s
own ‘glory, that is, (supreme) cognitive subjectivity and agency, in accord with
the aforestated view, namely:
‘Liberation is nothing but the (full and complete) experience (prathana)

of one’s own nature. And the nature of the Self is (pure) consciousness.

Moreover, as is the reality (they teach), such is the extent of the
multitude of each of the endless (collections of) scriptures (śāstra). He says this

(by stating) ‘and this’ etc. And this ‘liberation’, which is the penetration

pertaining to Śiva and the rest (of them), is ‘wonderfully various’ and is
‘revealed herein’, that is, in this chapter. (t is the liberated state of the fettered
soul, whose) nature is various according to the plane of the particular
philosophy taken up as the basis (of practice and insight,) in accord with the
aforestated view:
‘“I am unsullied by attachment and the like”, “I am inwardly empty”
and “ḹ am inactive” (only this manner of knowledge, whether, collectively or

individually, can liberate from that much (bondage).)

Or else its ‘form is various’ in accord with the following teaching:
‘Thus, the wonderful diversity of that sentient aspect, (variously) called,
for example, the individual soul (pudgala) or atom (of consciousness) (aṇu),

rests in many ways in the aspect (of consciousness) that is unobscured.

And such statements as:

‘Thus, while the Pervasive Lord (vibhu) reveals His own complete form
(in all His fullness) to one perceiver (pramātṛ), (He does so) to some (other)
part by part, progressively.’'

‘This is the purport’ (concerning the nature) of the two, bondage and
liberation, revealed (here in this chapter) ‘succinctly’, that is, in brief. This is

the way (one arrives at the) connected (prose order and sense of the words).

' PS 5d. This quarter verse is also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/222-223 and below ad

9/144cd-145ab. Cf TĀv ad 6/41cd-42ab.

Above, 1/156abc. Also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/31 and the full verse is quoted

below ad 16/90cd-93ab.
' Above, 1/33ab.

' Above, 1/137.

' Above, 1/140.

CHAPTER ONE
Surely (one may ask,) it was said that the unfolding experience

(prathana) of the (true) nature of the Self is liberation and the Self is one and
undivided, so where does the variety of (forms of) liberation, which is the

realisation of that, come from? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ftreqāīā ftrrārmīq gftzērarac

#zavṝāq
ā## a mōavgī || 3321
mithyājñānaṁ timiram asamān dṛṣṭidoṣān prasūte
tatsadbhāvād vimalamapi tad bhāti mālinyadhāma |
yat tu prekṣyaṁ drśi parigataṁ taimirīṁ doṣamudrāṁ
dūraṁ runádhet prabhavatu kathaṁ tatra mālinyaśaṅkā || 332 ||

False knowledge is a darkness that gives birth to (countless) unique

defects of vision. It is due to its existence (sadbhāva) that (consciousness),
although (perfectly) pure, appears to be the abode of impurity. What one
should perceive, (once placed) around the eye (like collyrium), should block

(and remove)™ to a great distance the disease of (that) darkness which

seals (the eyes) (doṣamudrā). How (then) could doubt (that there is any)
impurity there prevail (again)? (332) (331)
‘Darknessʼ is the Individual Impurity (āṇavamala) which is ‘false

knowledgeʼ, that is, the perception of duality (bhedaprathā), which is
incomplete (apūrṇa) knowledge (vedana). ‘Vision’ is full (and complete)
(pūrṇa) consciousness. It generates ‘(countless) unique defects’, such as the
mistaken identification (of the Self with the body,) which is not the Self. Thus,
because false knowledge exists, although that consciousness (jñāna) is ‘pure’
and also full, it ‘appears to be the abode of impurityʼ, that is, it manifests
itself as incomplete (apūrṇa) by its own freedom. Thus, (it operates in this way)
in the commerce of daily existence, as such is the extent of reality (manifest in
the state of bondage). But on the contrary, what one should perceive as the goal,
that is, (what) one must certainly know, is (that) full (and all-embracing)

consciousness" which is one with the supreme subject. (It is said):

‘I am not the vital breath, nor the body. I am not the mind, nor am I the
intellect, ego or intelligence (ḍhī). I am that aspect which is the knower
(jñāṁśa) who is here (amongst them).”

This translation follows Jayaratha’s explanation. Another, I would say better one,

could be ‘the object of perception transcended (parigata) in the act of perception (dṛsi),

sets aside . . .ʼ

TANTRĀLOKA

Mounted on the plane of (pure) reflective awareness by progressively
divesting (oneself of false identification) in accord with this teaching (nīti), ‘the
darkness which seals (the eyes) (doṣamudrā)’, that arises from the false
knowledge which is the (false) arrogation of Self onto (the body etc.,) that is not
the Self, should be blocked (and removed) to a great distance, that is, it should

be obscured by identifying the Self with what is (truly) the Self. Then what
‘doubt (that there is any) impurity there’ can there be? There is not even the
possibility (then of its prevailing) there (again). Thus, in reality there is neither
bondage, nor liberation (for that matter), of any sort, and so what variety could
there possibly be there? (It is said,) with the same intended sense:
‘In reality there is no world of transmigration, (s0) how can there be any
question of embodied beings being bound? Acting (to achieve) liberation

(muktikriyā) on the part of one who is liberated and who is not bound is not in

accord with reality (vitathā). This (cosmic) illusion (which is like) the rope
(mistaken for a) snake and shade (mistaken for a) demon is a creation of false

illusion. Abandon nothing! Take up nothing! Establishedin yourself just as you

are, take rest! '

' Read tadā for tatra and add iti after mālinyaśakā.

' This is the second verse of Anuttarāṣṭakastotra – A Hymn in Eight Verses to

Anuttara (the Absolute). The first line is quoted again below in TĀv ad 4/92-94
and19/51-53ab (51cd-53), and the last in TĀv ad 5/74cd-75ab (74); cf. below 2/12.
Instead of virama – ‘take restʼ, the published text edited by K.C. Pandey (1963: 943944) reads vilasa and his MS A vihara. Both mean ‘play’.
This hymn is commonly attributed to Abhinavagupta, but this may well not be

so. Jayaratha does not introduce his quotations from it as being by Abhinava, either
directly or by showing some special deference to the author, as he normally (but not
invariably) does when he quotes the master. More significantly, this verse, like othersin
this hymn, appears to present the view of Advaita Vedānta, rather than nondual Śaivism.
The view here is that the worldis illusory. It is a product of the ignorance of the

Brahman, which is the one true reality. This verse refers to the common example, of this
ignorance as the sight of a rope viewed in a dark room appearing to be a snake, for the
semblance of the world superimposed on the real Brahman in the darkness of ignorance.

While this is a good example one from the perspective of Advaita Vedānta, it is not an
apt one to represent the Śaiva nondualist view, which maintains that the world is made

of the energies of absolute consciousness. It is not the product of ignorance. The snake
is not freely produced by the rope as its authentic manifestation, albeit one that obscures
its fundamental basis and true nature, as nondualist Śaiva metaphysics would maintain.
Jayaratha introduces this verse saying that it conveys what Abhinava means to say. But
that is not correct. Abhinava is not saying that the ‘defect of vision’ gives rise to an

illusion of an existent world. He is only saying that it is due to that that one fails to see

that consciousness is pure. It is not, and cannot be, contaminated by any extraneous
reality – as the dualist maintains, or indeed, by any mistaken notions –— as the nondualist

Vedāntin must inevitably accept. The purity of consciousness is its all-inclusive nature,
which excludes nothing, because all that appears in any way is its manifestation. The

view expressed in the Paramārthacarcā appears likewise to be that of Advaita Vedānta,
Both these texts, as Sanderson (2007: 381) points out, ‘survive in Kashmirian

manuscripts with colophons that assert that Abhinavagupta is their author. But I know of
no evidence that confirms this assertion. Nor am I aware of any that refutes it. However,

the fact that Jayaratha cites a line from the former without attribution does not inspire

CHAPTER ONE
This has been said elsewhere. Now, the ‘darknessʼ is (that) particuḻlar

disease of the eyes due to which the defect of knowing (things) otherwise (than
they truly are) is generated in the (course of the) act of perception. It is blocked
(and removed) by (the reality) that should be seen (as the true object of
perception), which takes the place of collyrium and such things (that cleanse
vision). There (in that case), there is not even a doubt (that there is any)

impurity. Thus, this is the object of the analogy suggested (in this verse).
Now, for those others who, even though they do not know the supreme
profundity of this treatise and its meaning, along with the reality (it teaches),
who, by thinking in some other (contrary) manner, explain it in another
(contrary) way, like something that is turned upside down (uttāna), the

venerable author says the following, to mock them by way of false praise:

ṬTTJT GJTSSTTĀ āCTTJIHĀ ṬTTĀT
r̥̄-IST STSṬTHTĪ ḤqfTTC THTHIIHĒĀTHTĪ || 333
I1
bhāvavrāta haṭhājjanasya hṛdayānyākramya yannartayan
bhaṅgībhirvividhābhirātmahr̥dayaṁ pracchādya saṁkrīḍase |
yastvāmāha jaḍaṁ jaḍaḥ sahr̥dayaṁmanyatvaduḥśi
manye ‘ʻmuṣya jaḍātmatā stutiadaṁ tvatsāmyasambhāvanāt || 333 I|

confidence, since this goes against his usual practice when quoting Abhinavagupta’.
Sanderson is referring to the citation of the first line of this verse in TĀv ad 4/92-94.

That such contamination is possible is exemplified by the Mahopadeśaviṁśatika, which
is another hymn attributed to Abhinavagupta with clear Advaita Vedānta leanings. In
actual fact it is, as Sanderson (ibid. n 485) says: for the most part a reworking and
reframing of the first part (vv. 2-8) of the Nirguṇamānasapūjā, whichis one of the more

than 300 hymns ascribed to Śaṅkarain the South Indian Smārta tradition under the
spiritual authority of the Śaṅkarācāryas of Śṛṅgerī and Kāñcī.’

' Here it appears that Jayaratha is departing from Abhinavagupta, who says, as I have

translated, that the object of perception is transcended. If that is so, it is hard to

understand how it can serve to cleanse perception, as Jayaratha maintains. Perhaps the

point is that as the act of transcending the object in the moment of perception propels
awareness into a state of pure consciousness, the object serves as a springboard and

hence cleanses the vision of the fettered soul, which is focused on the object, not on the
pure consciousness which transcends it. More directly, Jayaratha seems to mean that the
true object of perception as ‘that whichis to be seen’ (prekṣya)is Śiva Himself. The

‘emptiness’ of the first moment in the act of perception is the plenitude of Śiva
consciousness, which cleanses the vision of obscuring thought constructs that arise in
the second moment. Anyway, the practice is to perceive without elaboration. We just

look at things without going into what they are specifically. In this way, it is possible to
experience the underlying fundamental consciousness, which is not objective, and so is
not subject to the limitations of objectivity. In the Buddhist Yoga of Naropa, this

practice is likened to how a child looks with wonder at the paintings on the wall of a
monastery with no idea of what they represent.

TANTRĀLOKA

O You who are all things (bhāvavrāta)! Having forcefully laid hold
of the hearts of men, You dance (like an actor) with (Your) many ways of

acting, and having concealed Your Heart as You do so, play! He who is dull

(and devoid of higher states of consciousness) (iaḍa), thinking he possesses
an aesthetic sensitivity (though he does not), badly taught, says that You
are dull matter (jaḍa). I think that his dull (insensitive) nature (iaḍātmatā)
is entitled to praise by virtue of (his) belief that (he) is the same as You (at

least in this respect)” (333) (332)

‘0 You who are all things!’ (O You who are all) phenomena such as

(the colour) ‘blue’, having hidden Your Heart, and hence Your true nature,

‘having forcefully laid hold of the hearts’ʼ, that is, hopes, of all ‘men’ (who

hold many) views (concerning Your nature) ‘You dance (like an actor) with

(Your) many ways of acting°’, and as you do so, play like an actor, that is, You

manifest with an unreal (artāttvika) form, in accord with the manner
(described in the following verse):

‘“Today He will fashion us from Nonbeing or from Being, or is this,

(the source of our existence), two-fold? (Will He make us) permanent or

impermanent? Mutually separate or undivided?” In this way, 1 think, the

phenomena in the universe, intent on viewing the face of (true) existence

(sadvadana), their hearts blocked by silence, abide with difficulty.’

Thus, one who maintains that everything is insentient (matter),'

although devoid of aesthetic sensitivity, thinks of himself as possessing it, and
so is ‘badly taught’, that is, knows nothing because of (his) false pride (due to
which he identifies himself with the body and his personal existence alone),
says that You, who are all things (bhāvavrata), are ‘dull matter’, that is,
insentient. Thus, we make the following simile. The one who holds this view in

actual fact believes himself to be like You, Who are consciousness, and so if he

says that

You are Yourself like (phenomenal) existence, dull matter

(jaḍātmaṇ), that is praise in the place of deprecation. In reality, the nature of

(all) phenomena is consciousness; if they were not consciously known

' Abhinava himself comments on this verse in DhĀ p. 127.
' In line with this nondualism, ‘unreal’ here does not mean illusory or even not
ultimately real. Śiva manifests as everything both ‘real’ and ‘unrealʼ, ‘relative’ and

‘ultimate, etc. These are ‘forms’ (rūpa) of Śiva. In other words, the view here is not
that the world of phenomena is a product of ignorance, as is the snake which a rope is
mistaken to be. The ‘unreal’ʼ, ‘non-ultimate’ universe of phenomena is a product of

Śiva’s freedom to be that also without this limiting Him and without the universe being
‘unreal’ or ‘non-ultimate’. These forms are Śiva, Who manifests this way to Himself as

the many limited perceivers. These too are similarly ‘unrealʼ and ‘non-ultimateʼ, and yet

not, for the same reason. This is Lord Śiva’s ‘dance’ and ‘play acting’, namely, His

assumption of countless roles. The actor chooses to assume his role. The rope does not

choose to be mistaken for a snake.

'! The expression ‘sadvadana’ means both ‘face of (true) existence’ and ‘philosophy

of Beingʼ.

' Read sarvajaḍavādī for sarvo vād.

CHAPTER ONE

(acetyamāna) they would have no formal existence (rūpa) (as contents of
consciousness). Thus, those who do not know this are more dull (and insentient)
(jaḍa) than even insentient (jaḍa) phenomena.
So how can their being the

same (sāmya) as phenomena that (are in reality) of the nature consciousness

(which is Deity and so praiseworthy) end up being (an object of) deprecation?

This is the sense (of this verse). Similarly, in relation to the main point also, the
sense (of this verse is) that: may he who does not know the true nature of this
book (and does not understand it correctly), not know it (– that doesn’t matter),

however, if he says anything which differs (from what is taught here and insists

that he is correct), it is he who is dull (and stupid) (jaḍa); it is not a defect at all

of this book.

Surely (one may ask,) if this is the case, then (why not) request some
other learned people to (make an effort to study and) understand this treatise
(śāstra), so that having understood (the matter) here correctly (they) should not
cultivate an aversion (to its teachings)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ṬG:: JGaITNS] JTT-T

ft-kēī šōggaīrāīT-T || 3351

iha galitamalāḥ parāvarajñāḥ
Śivasadbhāvamayā adhikriyante |
guravaḥ pravicāraṇe yatastad
viphalā dveṣakalaṅkahāniyāñcā || 334 ||

As (only) teachers free of impurity, whose nature is the very being
of Śiva and (who) know the supreme (transcendental) and the lower
(immanent order), are fit to ponder (on these teachings), the yearning
(yāñcā) to destroy the defect of aversion (for this work in others) is

fruitless. (334) (333)

There are two (kinds of) people here in (this world) — those who have

not received a descent of the power (of grace) and those who have. The former

may be requested hundreds of times to (make an effort to) understand this
(Tantrāloka), but not even their mind moves (towards doing that). Here (in this

case), one should pay attention (to this), namely, that (simply) requesting (such

people)™ not to cultivate an aversion (to it) has n0 power (to change their
' There is a play of words here that cannot be translated into English. The word ‘jaḍa’

here translated as ‘dull (matter)” and ‘insentient’ also means ‘stupid’ in Sanskrit. So

someone who is ‘jaḍa is ‘stupid’, ‘dull’, ‘ignorant’ ‘unconscious’ and ‘insensitive’, like

insentient matter.

Theṣe are people who have not received grace and are not inspired to study the

Tanīrāloka. It may seem that Abhinava is saying that only fully realised teachers are fit
to study the Tantrāloka. Jayaratha tacitly corrects this impression by referring to such
teachers as ‘supremely fit (paramādhikārin). All those who are recipients of Śiva’s

TANTRĀLOKA

attitude). Whereas the others (who have received grace), even if not requested

(to do 50), they themselves set about (doing what is necessary) in order to

understand this (teaching). There (in that case) also, requesting is useless.

(Accordingly,) he says: ‘the yearning (yāñcā) to destroy the defect of
aversion (for this work in others) is fruitless'. How are (the people) who have
received a descent of the power (of grace)? He says they are ‘free of impurity°,
that is, they are such that the impurity of their ignorance has fallen away. Thus,
those who know the ‘supreme’, that is, the first (and foremost reality beyond
which) there is nothing higher (anuttara) (A), and the ‘lower’, that is the last

(final) emission (visarga) (H), are those who know the vitality of Mantra,
which is the reflective awareness of supreme ‘I'-consciousness. Thus ‘their

nature is the very being of Śiva’, that is, they possess the knowledge (jñāna)
which is (the state of consciousness that is) one with the supreme subject. And
so they are ‘teachers’ who teach the true nature of things. Thus, they are said to
be supremely fit to understand this (Tantrāloka), as they ‘can make (a person)

fit to ponder (on these teachings)’. As will be said (further ahead): ‘The

characteristic.of a teacher is just this, namely, that he should know the first and

last (letters of the alphabet ~ A and H). He who knows this is

as worthy of

devotion as I am (soham iva). He is Bhairava Himself, the deity.

1In

order to show that this chapter and the one that follows are mutually connected,
that is, gathered together as is wealth, he both concludes the end (of this
chapter) and introduces the beginning (of the following one) with just one verse,
for such is the authorʼs style. Accordingly, in (this,) the first half of the verse, he

summarizes the sense (and purpose) of (this) chapter.

E|KIENĒEEEGENPṬGk Eṭ:īṣ]d

tantrāloke ‘bhinavaracite ‘mutra vijñānasattābhedodgāraprakaṭanapaṭāvāhnike ‘smin samāptiḥ |

grace are inspired to exert themselves to grasp its meaning. These, too, he clearly

implies, are fit to study the Tantrāloka, just by virtue of their divinely inspired desire to

do s0.

' The supreme is Anuttara, represented by the lettr A. The ‘lower’ is the last, grossest

form of emission (visarga) (see below, 3/143ab-143cd (3/142cd-143ab) and
commentary), represented by the letter H. Together they constitute the beginning and
end of AHAṀ (‘T), that is, the reflective awareness of the pure ‘I’ of absolute
consciousness.
Below, 3/224.

' The line that follows is the first half of the verse. The following chapter begins with

the second half of the verse. This is how Abhinava links one chapter to the next
throughout the Tantrāloka. It is a feature of the way he writes. Jayaratha points out that
we are told in the first half of the verse, with which this chapter ends, that its sense and

purpose is the exposition of the ‘perfect knowledge’. Abhinava introduces the following
chapter by saying that he is going on to expound ‘the uninterrupted consciousness of the

Absolute’, which is essentially the same subject that he presents in that chapter from
another perspective.

CHAPTER ONE
This is the end of this (the first) chapter of the Tantrāloka,

composed by Abhinavagupta, which skilfully elucidates the (essential)
being of discerning insight (vijñāna) and its types. (335ab)
This is the auspicious (end) (iti śivam).
Having received a faultless family lineage (janmakrama) from (his

father), the learned and venerable Śrṅgāraratha,' and from the venerable
Śaṅkhadhara a most excellent knowledge of all (the forms of) learning (vidyā)

also, and an understanding of all the Āgamas from Śiva, whose body is the

venerable Kalyāṇa,' Jayaratha has explained the first chapter. May it be an

object of reflection here for the wise! Thus ends the first chapter, called the
‘Elucidation of the Types of Discerning Insight (vijūāna)ī of the Tantrāloka,
composed by the venerable Abhinavagupta, the most excellent and great Śaiva

teacher (mahāmāheśvarācārya). 1t has a commentary called ‘Light’ (prakāśa)

written by the venerable Rājānaka Jayaratha. May this be an offering to Lord
Siva.

Śṛṅgāraratha, Jayaratha’'s father, was a minister of Ṛājarāja (Rājadeva, r. 1213-1236).
He was initiated by Subhaṭadatta, as was Jayaratha. He was a descendent of
Vibhūtiḍatta and author of a lost commentary on the Tantrāloka. See below, concluding

verse 35 of the TĀv.
' Jayaratha has referred to Kalyāṇa above in the introductory verse 2 as the teacher
through whom he attained liberation.

' Sanderson (2007: 240-241) explains that ‘rājānaka’ was a tile give in Kashmir by

the ruler to brahmin ministers and inherited by their descendants. The title has been

given to a number of nondualist Śaiva teachers, including Abhinavagupta himself,
Kṣemarāja, Rāma (who wrote the commentary (vivṛti) on the Spandakārikā), and
Yogarāja. The social standing of these teachers is exemplified by Abhinavagupta
himself, whose inner circle of devotees were members of families of ministers (see

below, 37/66ab-84ab (37/65-83) and PTyv concluding verses 5-10, where Abhinava tells
us about them). Jayaratha reports that his ancestors included ministers under kings
Yaśaskara (r. 939-948 CE), Ananta (r. 1028-1063), Uccala (r. 1101-1111) and Rājadeva
(r. 1213-1236) (see below, concluding verse of the commentary, 8-41).

Appendix A
to Chapter One

The Levels of Sound according to the Netratantra
The levels of Sound of the utterance of OM is a common topic in all the
Śaivāgama, beginning with the earliest ones and continued into the Kaula
schools, and through them up to the present day. It is so fundamental that it is

well known to the Vaiṣṇava Tantras also. The core teaching is a sequence of

twelve stages ranging from A to the Transmental. These mark the stations of
ascent from the Heart up to the End of the Twelve, at the summit of the subtle
body (see notes to 3/112ab-113ab (3/112cd-113)). The epitome of the
development of all seed-syllable Mantras from their audible sound up to their
original divine source, they retract and reverse the downward flow of the
cosmogonic energy of Speech from its supreme form (parā vāc) at one with
Śiva as His reflective awareness and freedom down to audible corporeal Speech
(vaikharī vāc).
Amongst the most lucid and detailed accounts are those in the
Svacchandatantra and the Netratantra that was most probably inspired by it.
Kṣemarāja comments on both of them, thus leaving us as a standard basic
account. There are two presentations in the Netratantra. The first one is
Netratantra chapter 21 verses 59-70ab. It describes the stages from the highest
to the lowest, in descending order. The progression through the levels of Sound
is taught again in brief in chapter 22 verses 21-23 in the sequence of ascent,
from A upwards. It is more convenient to present that first, as it is very similar
to what we find it in the Śvacchanda; indeed, the very wording in places is the
same. The version in the NT appears to be a modification of the one in the
Svacchanda, made to identify stage 9 – Śakti – with Kuṇḍalinī. This is not
stated directly in the Svacchanda, nor commonly in other sources that simple

accept the sequence as it is in the Svacchanda. SvT 4/255 is identical to NT
22/21 (see below). These lines along with the preceding and following two lines

are quoted by Jayaratha in TĀv ad 1/83cd-85ab (84cd-86ab). Clearly, he took
that to be the standard basic reference. They declare that:

‘That (Vidyā with) eleven parts moves continuously within the vital
breath. (They are) the letters A, U and M, along with the Point, the Half Moon,

the Obstructress, Sound, End of Sound, Power, the Pervasive One and the Equal

One, which is considered to be the eleventh.'" The Transmental is beyond that,

and beyond that is the Untainted (Absolute – nirāmaya).” SVT 4/254cd-256
We notice, by the way, that Kṣemarāja comments in much greater detail
on this sequence in the NT than he does in the SvT. This may be taken to
suggest that he wrote the commentary on the NT before that on the SvT and did
not wish to repeat himself. As we shall see in Chapter Eight, the stages beyond
the audible articulation of this ascent are incorporated into the Śaiva cosmology

'"! For SVT 4/255cd śaktiś ca vyāpinī caiva samanaikādaśī smṛtī | NT 22/22ab reads:

kauṇḍalī vyāpinī śaktiḥ saṃanāsś ceti sāmayāḥ|

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE

of the Svacchanda and the Siddhāntas. They are distributed in the worlds of the
higher pure principles (śuddhatattva), represented there as both deities and
worlds on the levels of their encompassing spheres (āvaraṇa).
Netratantra chapter 22 verses 21-23
akāraś ca ukāraś ca makāro bindur eva ca |
ardhacandro nirodhī ca nādo nādānta eva ca || 21 ||
kauṇḍalī vyāpinī śaktiḥ samanāś ceti sāmayāḥ |
‘The letters, A, U and M, the Point, Half Moon, the Obstructress,
Sound, the End of Sound, Kauṇḍalī, the Pervasive One, Śakti and the Equal One
(With Mind) are connected with suffering (the sāmaya).” (22/21-22ab)

kauṇḍalīti śaktiviśeṣaṇam | ity ekādaśa mantrāvayavāḥ prāṅnirṇītatattvāḥ
sāmayā heyā ity arthaḥ | tad uktaṁ śrīṣvacchande samanāntaṁ varārohe
pāśajālamanantakam | iti ||
‘Kauṇḍalī’ is an adjective of Śakti. The meaning is that these are the
eleven parts of Mantra, the nature of which was determined previously. They
are connected with suffering and should be abandoned. That is (also) taught in

the venerable Svacchanda:

‘O fair-hipped lady, the net of fetters is endless up to the end of the

Equal One.” (SVT 4/432cd)

tadūrdhvam
niṣkalaṁ cātmatattvaṁ ca śaktiś caiva tathonmanā l| 22 ||

sābhāsaṁ ta1........

samanāntāt kalanāmayād niṣkrāntam, taduccāraṇānte nirāvaraṇam apy
anunmiṣitaśivaśaktivyāptikaṁ . śuddham
.ātmatattvam,
tad
eva
tu
pronmiṣadabhedena
sārvajñyādirīpam
unmanāśaktyātma

tad etat
prameyadvayaṁ paramaśivaviśrānty-anāsādanāt sābhāsam atyaṇīyaḥsaṅkocam
| yad viyatparyantāśeṣaviśvottīrṇaviśva-mayatābhāsakaṁ tat
ṇirābhāsaṁ paratattvam anuttamam |
niṟābhāsam iti prāgvat || 223 ||
Above that is:
‘The undifferentiated (niṣkala) principle of the Self and Śakti, who is

the Transmental. That is manifest (sābhāsa).’” (22/22cd)

It has come out from the culmination of the Equal One, which consists
of the process of differentiation. At the summit of its utterance (and upward

TANTRĀLOKA

movement), it is free of obscuring coverings; even so, the pure principle of the
Self, pervades the Śakti of Śiva, who has not unfolded (into emanation). That
same (principle) that unfolds at one (with all things) is the energy of the

Transmental, which is omniscience etc. That is these two objects of knowledge,
namely that which is ‘manifest’ (sābhāṣsa) and an extremely tiny contraction
(brought about by) not attaining repose within Supreme Śiva. The unmanifest
(nirābhāsa), most excellent, supreme principle illumines all that is transcendent,
right up to the Sky (of consciousness, as well as) the state of immanence. (The
meaning of) ‘unmanifestʼ is as before.

Netratantra chapter 21 verses 59-70ab
1) Únmanā the Transmental

Śśivo hy anādimān dhāma śāśvataḥ prathamo ‘calaḥ |
etat prāg eva vyākṛtaprāyam | sa ca
icchayā ca yadā devi prasaratyavilambitaḥ l| 59 ||
tadā cāsyecchākhyā

mana utkramya gatānavacchinnasvaprakāśasphurattā | eṣaiva ca

(59ab)

Śiva is the beginningless Abode, eternal, the first (of all) and immobile.

That has practically (all been) explained before. And (concerning) that, (Śiva
says):
O goddess, if he streams forth, (unobstructed) without delayʼ (59cd)
Then His (power) that is called the will is —

‘She (who) is the supreme power, the subtle Transmental (unmanā) and

her nature Śiva.”

Having gone beyond mind, she is the radiant pulse of (Śiva’s) own
unconditioned Light. And she is (as described).
2) Samanā - the Equal One, With Mind

astitvamātram ātmānaṁ kṣobhyaṁ kṣobhayate yadā || 60 ||
samanāsau vinirdiṣṭā śaktiḥ sarvādhvavartiṇī|

kroḍīkaroti yā viśvaṁ saṁhrtya sṛjate punaḥ || 61 1

If She disturbs the (limited) Self, which is just Being alone and is the

object of disturbance, she is called Samanā (the Equal One or With Mind), the

power that is present on all the Path. She embraces the universe and, having
withdrawn it, emits it again. (21/60cd-61)

3) Śakti

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE

astitvamātraṁ
prakāśātmamahāsattārūpam,
ataḥ
kṣobhyaṁ
samastasūtraṇāsahiṣṇum

yadā

kṣobhayate
śānyātiśūnyādidharāntasamagrajagadāsūtraṇ-ātmanā
sphurati,
tadā
parapramātr̥padāvarūḍhā
āsūtritāśeṣamantavyamananamātrarūpatvāt
samanety uktā |
‘Just Being alone’ is the great universal Being (mahāsattā) whichis the
Light (of consciousness). Thus if Śakti ‘diṣṭurbs’ ‘the Self’, whichis ‘the object
of disturbance’ that cannot bear the stringing together of the Whole (within
itself), (Śakti) shines radiantly as the stringing together of all the universe,
beginning with the Void beyond the Void (i.e. transcendental Śiva) down to
Earth. Then, having descended from the plane of the supreme subject, she is
called Samanā (With Mind), because her nature is just the cogitation on all that
is, namely, the object of cogitation that has been threaded together.
4) Vyāpinī Kuṇḍalā -- the Pervasive One
ata eva sarvādhvani vartate prathamollekhakalpatayā sphurati, ataś ca viśvaṁ
kroḍīkaroti | ayaṁ cāsya kroḍīkāro yad etat saṁhṛtya svābhedātmanā
nīimajjanena

ābhāsya
sṛjati,
idantayā
prathayati,
garbhīkr̥tāśeṣaviśvasṛṣṭisaṁhāra-prapañcamahāsṛṣṭiśaktirīpatayā sphuratīty
arthaḥ | etad eva punaḥśabdena dyotitaṁ punaḥ punaḥ saṁhrtya sṛjatīti yāvat |
saṁhrtyety anena ca śūnyātiśūnyātmavyāpinī bhūr uktā, sṛjatīty anena tu

Śaktibhūmiḥ || 61 || yad āha

Thus, she is present on all the Path and shines radiantly like the initial

outline (of a picture). In this way she embraces (the entire) universe. Her

embrace (of all things) is this: having withdrawn it by submerging, that is, by
the state of oneness with herself (svābheda), and having shone forth as the light
of the Void (śūnyābhāsā), She emits, that is, is perceived as objectivity and, in
the form of the power of the Great Emanation (mahāsṛṣti), which is the ongoing
chain (prapañca) of emanation and withdrawal, shines vibrantly (sphurati). This
is the meaning. That same (process) is indicated by the word ‘again’, in the
sense that ‘having withdrawn it, it emits it’ again and again. The plane of the
Pervasive One (vyāpinī), which is the Void beyond the Void, is (implicitly)
mentioned by (saying) ‘having withdrawn’ and ‘it emits’ the plane of śakti. As
is said:

kuṇḍalākhyā mahāśaktis tṛtīyāpy upacaryate | (62ab)
kuṇḍalākhyety anenāntaḥśūnyabahiṣkṛtapāravaśyātmatākhyāpanena vyāpiny
atra kroḍīkṛteti darśitam | upacaryate saivetthaṁ vyavahriyate || yā
caiṣonmanākhyā

samasta-hāvābhāvāsūtraṇād
bhāvābhāvasāmānyāvabhāsātmasamanāvyāpinīśakti rāpatayā sphuritā, saiva
vācyavācakātmaśāktarūpaṁ viśvam avabibhāsayiṣuḥ kroḍīkṛtavācyaspandavācakāmānyanād rūpatayā prathamaṁ spandata ity āha

TANTRĀLOKA

The great power called Kuṇḍalā is also said, in a secondary sense, to be

the third one. (21/62ab)

By referring to the one ‘called Kuṇḍalā’, that is, by referring to the state
of dependence on another which is the externalized inner Void, (the Tantra)
explains that the Pervasive One is included here. She is denoted figuratively in
this way and is (called Kuṇḍaliṇī) in common practice. Again, this power called
the Transmental shines vibrantly as the power of With Mind and the Pervasive
One which is the manifestation of the universal oneness (sāmānya) of Being and

Nonbeing because it threads through the manifestation of all existing things.
This same (power,) desiring to manifest the universe which is Śakti consisting

of (all) the objects of denotation and (their) denotators, pulses first of all in the

form of the universal Sound (nāda) that denotes the pulsation of the objects of
denotation (vācyaspanda) it has embraced. Thus it is said:

5) Nāda – Sound

dhvanirūpo yadā sphoṭas tv adṛṣṭāc chivavigrahāt | 62 |
prasaraty ativegena dhvanināpūrayan jagat |
sa nādo devadeveśaḥ proktaś caiva sadāśivaḥ | 63 |
sphutaty abhivyajyate ʻsmād viśvaḥ śabdagrāma iti sphoṭaḥ śabdabrahma, ata
eva dhvanirīūpaḥ śabdanasvabhāvaḥ, adṛṣṭād ity anākṛter draṣṭer karūpāt (>
arūpāt)
paranādāmarśātmanaḥ
prakāśānandaghanāt
śivasvarūpād
ativegenāvyucchinnadrutañadīghoṣavat prasarati |
‘If that which, in the form of Resonance, is Sphota, flows forth from
Śiva’s unseen form with great force, filling the universe with (its) resonance,

(then) that is called Sound. He is the God of the gods, said to be Sadāśiva.’

(21/62cd-63)

‘Sphoṭa’ is Śabdabrahman (the Absolute Word). (It is called this

because) it illumines (sphoṭati), that is, makes manifest the universe, which is
the totality of words (śabdagrāma), from itself and so is the Resonance, which

is śabdana – utterance. It ʻflows forthī ‘with great force’, like the roar of a
fast, continuously (flowing) river, from Śiva’s nature, which is the dense

(uninterrupted) bliss of the Light (of consciousness), and nature the reflective

awareness of Supreme Sound. (It issues forth from) the ‘unseen’ formless
perceiver.
kīdṛk? dhvanīnā ghaṇtānuraṇanarūpeṇa nādāntena jagad viśvam āpūrayan
āmarśanena
ātmasātkurvanṉ

sa
eva
nādabhaṭtārako
'krtakāhantedantāsāmānādhikaraṇyavimarśātmaka-paraciprakāśarāūpa
iti

sadāśiva

iti sāmānādhikaraṇyokter āśayaḥ

| prasaratīty uktyā

paravākśaktir eva pārameśvarī iyaṁ sphuratīty ādiīśati | atra ca nādānto ‘py
anupraviṣṭaḥ l| 63 ||

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE

6) Nādānta – the End of Sound

How is it? (t does so) ‘filling the universe with (its) resonance’, that is,
as the End of Sound, the form of which is (like) the resonance of a bell (just
after it has been struck). It makes (the universe) one with itself by the reflective

awareness (amarśana) (of its sonic nature). That same (Resonance) is the Lord
Sound, who is the light of supreme consciousness, which is the reflective

awareness that is the common foundation (sāmānādhikaraṇa) of objectivity and
uncreated subjectivity. This Sound (nāda) is Sadāśiva. This is (the point that is)
intended by referring (to them together) on the same level. By saying that ‘it

flows forth’ is indicated that the power of Supreme Speech, which is that of the
Supreme Goddess, shines vibrantly. Here, it has also entered into the End of
Sound.

7) Nirodhinī – the Obstructress
atha
dhvanir adhvagato yatra viśrāmyaty anirodhitaḥ |
nirodhinīti vikhyātā sarvadevanirodhikā || 64 |

adhvagato `śeṣavyāpako ‘nirodhito ‘nāhato nādabhaṭṭārako yatra viśrāmyati
svavyāpti-nimajjanenādharavyāptim unmajjayati, sā nirodhikākhyā mantrakalā
vikhyātā | kīdṛśī’ sarveṣāṁ brahmādidevānāṁ nirodhikā ūrdhvavyāptyā
dhārikā yathoktaṁ śrīṣyacchande
nirodhayati yā devān brahmādīṁś ca surādhipe |

nirodhiketi sākhyātā | (SVT 10/1223abc) iti || 64 |I

Where Resonance is present on the Path and rests unobstructed, it is

called Nirodhinī (the Obstructress), who obstructs all the gods. (21/64)

The Lord Sound ‘present on the Path’ is Unstruck Sound that,
unobstructed. pervades everything without exception. It is where he ‘rests’, that
is, by immersing into his own pervasion, he causes the lower pervasion to
emerge. That is an energy of Mantra called Nirodhikā - the Obstructress. How is
it? Suṣṭaining by the pervasion of the upper (higher realities), she obstructs all
the gods, that is, Brahmā and the rest (from rising higher beyond their status).
As is said in the venerable Svacchanda:
‘O queen of the gods, She who obstructs (nirodhayati) the gods,
Brahmā and the rest, is called Nirodhikā. (SvT 10/1223abc)
paraṃaśivābhedākhyātir eva brahmāder nirodha ity āha niruddhasya
maheśatvamahimā na pravartate | ataścābhedākhyātyaiva tatrasthānāṁ
nānātvam ity āha
asaṁkhyātās tu koṭyo vai mantrāṇāṁ tatra saṁsthitāḥ || 65cd II
kiṁ ca
labhante tat praviṣṭā vai...…. (21/66a)

TANTRĀLOKA

ye tad nirodhikāpadaṁ praviṣṭā yoginaḥ, te tad eva labhante, na ūrdhvam

abhedavyāptim | tad ity āvṛttyā yojyam l

What obstructs Brahmā etc. is ignorance of Supreme Śiva’s oneness.
Thus it is said: The glorious power of Maheśa’s state does not operate in the
case of one who has been obstructed. Thus, it is only because of ignorance of
oneness that those who are present there are many. Thus, it is said:
“There are countless billions of Mantras present there. (21/65cd)

Moreover: ‘Those who have entered attain that . . .’
Those Yogis who have entered into that plane of the Obstructress

(Nirodhikā) aṭtain only that, not the pervasion of oneness which is above. One
should add ‘that’ for a second time (i.e. those who have entered that attain
(only) that).

yā ceyaṁ dhvanimātrātmanādāntavyāptinirodhikākhyā māntī kalā
...-ša binduś ceśvaraḥ smṛtaḥ | (21/66b)

paraiva śaktir icchāśaktivyāptyā samanātaḥ śaktyantaṁ padam unmīlya
jñānaśaktivyāptyā
śaktiprādhānyam
unmīḷayantī
samastavācakābhedinādāmarśamayatāṁ
dhvanimātrātma-nādāntavyāptyābhāsitāṁ
.nirudhya
samagravācyābheda-prakāśarūpāṁ
sphuṭed
antāhantaikya-vimarśātmeśvararūpabindvātmmatāṁ

na
ca
nirodhikāpadābhāsanasamanantaram eva bindvātmatāṁ gṛhṇāti, api tu madhye
8) Bindu – the Point

This energy of the one who recites Mantra that obstructs the pervasion

at the End of Sound which is (pure) Resonance alone is:
‘the Point which is said to be Īśvara’. (21/66b)

OŌnce the Supreme Power has, by the pervasion of the power of the will,
opened up the plane from the Equal One to the end of Śakti, and is engaged in
opening up the predominance of Śakti by the pervasion of the power of
knowledge, and having blocked what has been illumined by the pervasion of the

End of Sound, which is just (pure) Resonance alone, and is made of the

reflective awareness of the Sound which is the oneness of all denotators
(vācaka), (then) Light, which is the oneness of all the objects of denotation,

shines forth (sphuter), and it assumes the nature of the Point – Bindu – which is
Īśvara, who is the reflective awareness of the oneness of inner subjectivity
(ahantā).

9) Ardhacandra –- the Half Moon

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE

Moreover, it does not assume the nature of the Point after the
manifestation of the plane of the Obstructress; rather, (that happens) in the
middle:
yadā śivāmṛtaṁ miūrdhni patati sṛṣṭikāraṇam

āpyāyas tu bhavet tena so ‘rdhacandra iti smṛtaḥ |

vimarśapravaṇanādakalāvācyasaṁhārapradhānā
svasattā
nirodhena
nirodhinīpadaṁ .śritvā samastavācyābhedavedanātmabindudaśāṁ siṣṛkṣuḥ
prathamaṁ .kũṁcidunmajjadvãcya-pradhãnãm ardhacandradaśãṁ Sśrayatĩti
tātparyamḷ
‘If Śiva’s nectar, which is the cause of emanation, falls on (one’s) head,

(one is) nourished, and so that is called the Half Moon.’ (21/66cd-67ab)

One’s own Being (svasattā), predominantly (in the state of) withdrawal

of the object of denotation, is the energy (and phase) (kalā) of Sound inclined to
reflective awareness. Having entered onto the plane of the Obstructress by
blocking (it) and desiring to emit the plane of the Point (Bindu), which is the
experience (vedanā) of the oneness of all objects of denotation, it comes to rest
first of all on the plane of the Half Moon, which is predominantly (that of) the
object of denotation that is emerging to some degree (out of subjectivity). This
is the general sense.
padārthas tu śivasya nādātmanaḥ sadāśivanāthasya saṁbandhi amr̥taṁ sphuṭed
antābhāsātma sṛṣṭivīryaṁ sraṣṭavyasya viśvasattātmanor vindo mūrdhni patati,
bindūdayāt prathamam unmiṣati yadā, tadā sa mantrāvayavo ʻrdhacandra ity
ucyate, yatas tena āpyāyo bhavet tadbhūmikārūḍhasya pūrṇacandrākārā sraṣṭrī
bindvātmā kriyāśaktidaśā udayate ||
The nectar, which is an entity (padārtha) associated with the Lord

Sadāśiva, who is Śiva’s nature as Sound, shines forth (sphutet). The vitality of

emanation of that which is to be emananted, namely, the Being of all things, is

the inner shining (of the Light) of Bindu. (This) “falls on one’s head’. If, by the
emergence of Bindu, it is the first to unfold, then that is that part of Mantra
which is called ‘the Half Moon’. Thus, one who has mounted onto that plane is
‘nourished’; that is, the state of the power of action which is Bindu, the creator
whose form is the Full Moon, dawns.
eṣa(sāṁ) cārdhendur bindupadād ūrdhvam ārohatām
saṁhāraḥ sarvabhũtānãṁ...

nādād adho ‘varohatāṁ tu

srṣṭikāraṇam eva ca || 21/67 |
tad
itthaṁ
bindvātmakriyāśaktau
prṛthagbhūtavācyavācakamantra-daśādarśanāyāha

makāro hy atra vai rudro varṇasaṅghaṭṭa uttamaḥ |

binduḥ
prṛthagbhāvam
avabhāsayan
māyāśrayapumāmarśimakārarūpeṇa bhavati |

prathamaṁ

TANTRĀLOKA

This Half Moon, rising above the plane of Bindu, ‘the withdrawal of all

living beings (takes place).’ (21/67c) And descending below Sound ‘it is the

cause of emanation.” (21/67d) This is said in order to reveal the plane of Mantra,

in which the object of denotion and the denotator are separate when the power
of action which is Bindu is in this way clearly (functioning):
10) The Letter M

‘Here, the letter M is indeed Rudra, the most excellent conjunction of
phonemes (saṅghata).’ (21/68ab) In the course of this, the diversity that Bindu
generates manifests. It is initially (in the form of) the letter M that contemplates
the individual soul that rests in Māyā.
atra ca rudro ʻdhiṣṭhāteti śeṣaḥ | eṣa ca makāraḥ prastutapraṇavāpekṣayākārokārābhyām, mantrāntarāpekṣayā tu varṇāntarebhyo ‘py uttama utkṛṣṭo
‘tiśayena udgata ūrdhvavartī ca varṇānāṁ saṅghaṭṭo viśrāntiṣṭhānam,
piṇḍākṣarasaṁbandhino hi varṇās tattattattvavācakatāṁ bhajamānā yāvan na
māyāgranthyudbhediplutoccāra-makāradhvanirīpatām āviṣṭāḥ,
tāvan na
viśvavedyāvibhedivedanātma-binduvyāptīm
āviśanti

/plutāntaṁ
ca
dīrghahrasvatad-varṇanīyavācyasattāstīty api ca varṇasaṅghaṭṭaḥ
Here Rudra is the presiding (Lord). This is what remains (that is
implicitly stated). And this letter M is ‘the most excellent’ with respect to the
letters A and U of the praṇava (OM) we are talking about, and so too with
respect to other Mantras and other phonemes (structured in this way). It is
better, that is, excellent, (in the sense) that it has opened up exceedingly and is
the ‘conjunction’ of the phonemes that is above (them as) the place (where they)
rest. The phonemes associated with syllabic Mantras (piṇḍākṣara) are the
denotators of specific realities (tattattattva). As long as they have not assumed
the form of the resonance of the letter M which, by its prolated utterance
(plutoccāra), rends assunder the Knot of Māyā, they do not enter into the
pervasion of Bindu, which is the state of consciousness (vedanā) that is (one

and) undivided from all the objects of denotation. And the (universal) Being of
the objects of denotation that are described by the long and short (utterances of

long and short vowels) is (found) at the end of the prolated (utterance), and this

is also the ‘conjunction of phonemes (sarghaṭta)’.
itthaṁ ca pūrvoktā śaktir māyāgranthyāśrayamakārātmamantrāvayavarāūpatām
āpannā viśva-jagadātmatayā
yadā sthitiṁ ca labhate svonmukhaṁ sṛṣṭikāraṇam || 68 II
pratiṣṭhākhya ukāras tu viṣṇuḥ sākṣād bhavaty asau |

svonmukham iti svatra saṅvidrūpe unmukhaṁ kṛtvā pramāṇapradhānatvāt
sthitidaśāyāḥ pramāṇasya ca jñeyācchuritasaṁvidrāūpatvād evam uktam, ata
eva sṛṣṭer meyapradhānāyā daśāyāḥ kāraṇam |

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE
In this way, Śakti, who was mentioned before, assumes the form of a

part of the Mantra, as the letter M, that has as its locus (āśraya) the Knot of
Maāyā, and as the nature of all the universe. (Then)
11) The Letter U
‘if the letter U, which is called ‘steadfastness’ (pratiṣṭhā), attains (the
state of stable) persistence (sthiti), which is the cause of emanation directed

towards itself, it is Viṣṇu (himself) directly (present and) apparent.’ (21/68cd-

69ab)

It is said to be ‘directed towards itself’ because, having directed itself
(inwardly) into consciousness in all respects, as it is predominantly the means of
knowledge; the phase of persistence and the means of knowledge are
(essentially) consciousness covered over with objectivity. Thus, it is ‘the cause
of emanation’ʼ, which is the phase (daśā) in which the object predominates.
pramāṇarūpasaṁvidantarvartina eva hy ābhāsāḥ prṛthagvimṛśyamānāḥ
prameyatayā sṛjyante | atra ca matsyavalanasaṁyogād galake mīnam āśritā | iti

pūrvāparakoṭyor
dolanena
galakoṭare
kṛtapadā
saṁvidunmiṣanmeyātmakokār-āmarśarūpā ukārākhyo mantrāvayava ucyate |
The manifestations (ābhāsa) that are within consciousness in the form

of the means of knowledge, that are to be perceived individually, are emanated
as the object of perception. Again here (concerning this state), the teaching
imparted in the Kula of the venerable Mīna(nātha) (declares that) ‘(this state)
rests on (āśritā) the fish which is in the throat because it is associated with the
moving to and fro of the fish (matsyavalana)’.

(The meaning is) that it has taken up (its) place in the cavity of the
throat by the swinging (to and fro) between the prior and subsequent extremity
(of the movement of the breath), and its form is the reflective awareness of the
letter U, which is the object of knowledge (that emerges) as consciousness

unfolds. (This is) said to be the part of the Mantra called the letter U.

sa
ca
pratiṣṭhāyāṁ .. garbhīkṛtābādiprakṛtyantatrayoviṁśatitattvāyāṁ

saṁkhyãnaṁ
prathā
yasya,
ata
eva
tatpadādhiṣṭhātr̥ṣṭhitisaṁvin-mayaviṣṇubhaṭtārakāmarśitvāt sākṣād viṣṇuḥ |
The experience (prathā) (of that letter) is the meditation (saṁkhyāna)

that takes place within (the sphere of energy) called Pratiṣṭhākalā, which is
Pratiṣṭhā, that consists of the twenty-three principles from Water to Prakṛti

encompassed (within it). Thus, because it contemplates (āmarśin) Lord Viṣṇu,
who is the consciousness of persistence and is the (Lord) who (sustains and)
presides over that plane (of existence), it is Viṣṇu himself (sākṣār) who is

directly (and clearly) apparent.

TANTRĀLOKA

evarṁ

vadan

garbhĩkr̥tapumãdĩmãyãntatattva-saptakaṁ
vidyākalāvyāptir
ity

anumantavyam iti śikṣayati ||
One should consider that, amongst other things, it is taught that as one
goes on uttering that (pratiṣṭhā) in this (same way), the pervasion of Vidyākalā
(develops. It consists of) the group of seven principles beginning with the
individual soul and ending with Māyā encompassed (within it), and is
predominantly the phase of withdrawal of the energy of the letter M.
atha kaṇṭhād avaruhya hṛtpadmaprāptāyāṁ saṁvidi

nivrttis tu yadā sarvaṁ niṣpannaṁ praṇavaṁ vibhuḥ l| 69 |
akārākhyaṁ paraṁ dhāma brahmā sa kamalāsanaḥ |

prthvyantatattvasarganivṛtter nivṛttiḥ | ataścāvarohakrameṇaitadantatvāt
praṇavasya akāra ā samantāt khyānaṁ tasya tad akārākhyaṁ paraṁ dhāma |
12) The Leṭter A

Now, having descended from the throat and reached the lotus of the
Heart within consciousness:
‘If all the praṇava, the pervasive Lord, has been produced, then that is
Nivrṭti. It is called the letter A and is the Supreme Abode. That is Brahmā
whose seat is a lotus.” (21/69cd-70ab)
(The sphere of energy called Nivṛtti) is the completion (nivṛtti) of the

last principle, which is Earth. The letter A of praṇava is the knowledge
(khyāna) of that in all respects; that is ‘called the letter A and is the Supreme
Abode.”
prakarṣeṇa nūyate stūyate ‘bhedena vimṛśyate ‘nena paraṁ dhāmeti kṛtvā
praṇavaikadeśo ‘py akāraḥ pradeśo ‘pi brahmaṇaḥ sārvarūpyam anatikrāntaḥ |

iti sthityā praṇavaparadhāma sāmānādhikara

a nirdiṣṭam | yac caitad

akārātmarūpam,
.tadbrahmarūpavācitvāt
sṛṣṭipradhānasaṁvidāmarśitvād
hṛtkamalakarṇikārūḍhatvāc ca brahmā kamalāsana iti cocyate | dvādaśāntavad
hṛdo‘pi pūrṇasaṁvittvāt paradhāmety ucitaivoktiḥ |l

‘It is praised as the most excellent’; that is, it is contemplated as one.
(Thus,) having considered it to be (krtvā) the Supreme Abode by virtue of this
(oneness), although it is only in just one place within the praṇava, in accord

with the teaching (sthiti) ‘although the Absolute (Brahman) is (equally in each)

place, (t is) omniform and unsurpassed,’ it is declared to be praṇava’s Supreme

Abode as the common basis (of all its parts) (sāmānādhikaraṇyena). Moreover,

the form which is this letter A is said to be ‘Brahmā, whose seat is a lotus’,
because he denotes the nature of that Brahman. It is contemplated as the
consciousness which is predominantly emanation, and is seated on the calix of
the lotus of the heart. (Thus,) it is rightly said that, like the End of the Twelve,

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE

the Heart is also the Supreme Abode because it is full (and complete)
consciousness.
ÁRRNNR ÃR RR N N-ṀĒTĒTEEETTTTPTEHḤ

In order to make this account easy to comprehend, I have reproduced
here an exposition of this the ‘Ladder of Sound’ (nādasopāna) found in an

earlier work (see Dyczkowski 1992a: 252-255). The presentation is reversed. It

starts from the bottom, lower phases, and works up as follows:

1-3) The first three stages are the three audible letters of OM, that is,
A, U and M. As they are uttered, one passes through the three states of waking,
dreaming and deep sleep, to which they respectively correspond. The ‘Silence’
beyond contains the resonance which represents the higher Fourth state, in
which the identity of the Self and the Absolute is progressively realised. They
culminate in the energy of the Transmental (unmanā), which fuses with
Supreme Śiva. After the three audible stages come the following nine, which are
as follows. Note thatin the previous citation the sequential orderis Point, the

Half Moon, the Obstructress, and Sound etc. In the VBh (4, 12), the order seems

to be Sound, the Point, the Half Moon and the Obstructress. The sequence given
below is attested in NT 22/21-22ab.
4-5) The Half Moon and the Point. The upward progression
corresponds to the process of withdrawal (saṅhāra). In Pratyabhijñā terms,
objectivity is initially merged into the subjective aspect of consciousness, which
is then absorbed into the pure consciousness that transcends subject and object.
Above the audible sound of the syllable OM comes the sphere of the ideal
objects denoted by speech (vācya), represented by the Point and the Half Moon.
The Point symbolizes the union of transcendental Śiva and His energy, which
corresponds to the sphere ofimmanence. It is energy gathered togetherin a
highly concentrated state that contains in potential the entire sphere of
manifestation. The Half Moon represents the point at which this potential is just
about to actualize itself, and emerges to manifest externally. As such, it is said

to be the ‘vitality of emission’ (sṛṣṭivīrya) that manifests objectivity and, nectar-

like, falls onto the Point, that contains what is to be made manifest. It is the first
sign of the awakening of the Point and its rupture. The Half Moon goes on to
develop into the Full Moon of the Point once filled with the ‘nectar’ of the bliss,

which accompanies emanation. In this way, the energy of the Half Moon emits
in the descending phase and withdraws in the ascending one.
6-7) Sound and the End of Śound. ‘Sound’ (nāda) is the name given
to the pulse (spanda) of the supreme level of Speech (parā vāc) which animates
the highest reality. The Netratantra refers to it as a form of sound that pervades
the universe. Kṣemarāja explains that the energy of the higher levels initially
manifests in two aspects. One is subjective, as the aggregate of the energies of
Speech that function as the denotators (vācaka) of the second aspect, which

consists of the aggregate of the energies of Speech which they denote (vācya).
When the initial impulse towards manifestation arises, the energy of
consciousness retains the pulse of the second aspect within itself and expresses
the pulse of the first aspect in the form of undifferentiated Sound. As this Sound

TANTRĀLOKA

is the denotator of the world of objects, which are its denoted meaning, it

manifests (sphuṭati) the universe, and so is called the ‘manifestor’ (sphota). As

such, it is the aggregate of phonemic energies (śabdagrāma) that generates the

universe identified with the Sound Absolute (Śabdabrahmanṇ) – the absolute

reality in the form of sound (dhvanirūpa, śabdanasvabhāva). Viewed froṃ the
reverse perspective, Sound is the resonance that follows the Point, that
condenses the energy of mantra which, through Sound, merges into Śiva’s
energy. Accordingly, it is defined as that which remains of the synthetic
awareness of the conscious subject in itself when the duality of thought comes
to an end.
Sound is the reflective awareness of the energy of transcendental

consciousness which, becoming conscious of itself, assumes the form of
‘Unstruck Sound’

(anāhatadhvani). It

is not manifest as the individual

phonemic energies of Speech, but is the phonemic energy (varṇa) of all these as
the instrumental cause of their manifestation, and underlies them when they are
manifest individually. As such, it can be identified with the emissive power of
consciousness (visarga), as yet unmanifest, that resides in the junction between
transcendent Śiva and his immanent energy. The Netratantra identifies it with
the Sadāśiva principle, which corresponds to the state in which manifestation
rests in Śiva’s energy. The philosophy of Kashmiri Śaivism – the Pratyabhijñā –
explains it in phenomenological terms as the state of consciousness which,

conscious of itself in its essential subjectivity (ahantā), contains within itself all
the objectivity (idantā) that is to be made manifest.

The ‘End of Sound’ (nādānta) is the stage in which Sound dissolves
into Energy, which is the following stage, and the point of entry into the
principle of Power (śaktitattva). It is said to be like the final resonance
(anuraṇana) of a bell, that can be faintly distinguished just before the sound of
it ceases completely. It is also said to be like the sound of running water
because, even though there is no physical sound, the ‘resonance’ of the energy
of consciousness is rapid and indistinct. At this stage, Śiva has a global
consciousness of the universe that resides within Him, and is pervaded by the
evanescent vibration of the End of Sound. Here the unity of the aggregate of
phonemic energies, made manifest as the End of Sound, is full of the power of
the supreme form of Speech, from which it issues forth.
8) The Obstructress (nirodhikā). The ‘Obstructress’ is the sound
energy above the End of Sound which separates the lower, outer sphere from the
higher inner one. Sometimes identified with Raudrī (Cf. NT 22/39 and below
comm. to 3/66ab-66cd (3/66cd-67ab) and 6/57ab (6/57)), this energy blocks or
obstructs (nirodhikā) the divine beings that govern the lower spheres,
preventing them from rising beyond it and being capable of perceiving the
higher undifferentiated unity. This state represents a serious obstacle to the
yogi's ascent, but if he manages to rise above it, it can also help to prevent him
falling below it. Due to the dual function of the energy operating at this level,
the Netratantra refers to it not only as the Obstructress, but also as the power of
mantra (mantrakalā). As such it is the energy of the higher order of beings that
operates through mantra. It is the level on which the energy of mantra is
particularly powerful and helpful in maintaining the higher states.

APPENDIX A CHAPTER ONE

9-11) Energy, the Pervasive and the Equal One. The final phase of

the End of Sound merges into that of Energy, which is its source in which it
abides, as the pulsation (spanda) of its potency. It marks the beginning of the
union of Śiva with His power that takes placein three stages, manifested by the
three energies called the ‘Pervasive’ (vyāpinī), the ‘Equal One’ (samanā) and
the ‘Transmental” (unmanā), respectively. Actually, ‘samanā’ literally means
(the energy) ‘with mind’ʼ, in contrast to the one that follows, which is ‘unmanā’”
– ‘without mind’. However, the texts often explain the term ‘samanā’ as if it

were ‘samāna’, meaning ‘of the same (sa) size (māna)’, that is, ‘equal’. This is

the experience at this level – i.e., one of the ‘equality’ of all things realised to be
all the one, universal divine consciousness. The first of these energies ~ the
Pervasive – is immanent in manifestation and, pervading it, gives it life. The
second - the Equal One With Mind- is transcendent evolving into immanence.

It marks the stage where the first pulse (spanda) of consciousness takes place

that gives rise to the universe of manifestation. It absorbs it into itself when it is
reabsorbed and projects it out of itself when it is emitted.
12) The Transmental – the Goddess Beyond Mind. The last stage of
this ascent is the Transmental (Unmanā). Iṭ is the supreme transcendental

energy thatis united with Śiva andis virtually one with Him. It is the highest
and most subtle limit of immanence. As such, it is the final point of transition
into Śiva, which it pervades and in which it is stilled. Thus, it is described as the
transcendental Void of the energy of consciousness, and as uncreated, immobile
Speech. Beyond Mind, this is where the basic mental state (manasatva) of the

mind (manas) ceases. The door to liberation, according to Woodroffe, it is the

‘secret teaching of all the Tantras’, and is indeed common doctrine to virtually
all developed Saiva and Śākta Tantric traditions. It is not only the highest of the
series of states leading progressively to the liberated state; it is also a positive
power that brings it about by severing the bonds of attachment to the world
(Woodroffe 1981: 425). On the threshold of transcendence, the Transmental is

the supreme transcendental energy thatis united with Śiva andis virtually one
with Him. Kashmiri Śaiva teachers identify the Transmental with Spanda – the
subtle activity of divine consciousness. Although a stage lower than Śiva,
Spanda is elevated in the school by that same name to the level of the supreme
principle. The reason for thisis essentially the same. Spanda /the Transmental
/the Goddess are the experience of the supreme reality called the Śāmbhava
state. As the higher stage contains the ones below it, the highest stage – the
Transmental – contains in itself all the phases of manifestation merged in the
process of ascent, and so conversely, contains in a potential form all that is to be
emitted. The Transmental thus lies at the interface between the sphere of
phenomenal manifestation and Śiva’s sphere and links the two. Through and by
the Transmental, the energies in the upper sphere pour down into manifestation
as the world of phenomena, on the one hand, and as the liberating teachings of
the tradition, on the other. Thus, it is not only the port of entry into the upper
sphere of the liberated condition; it leads upwards to it.
See also TĀ 5/56cd-57ab 6/161-162 and notes etc., 8/383cd-385ab (383-384),

8/425ab (424cd) 23/37-38, TĀv ad 29/156cd-157ab, and 29/160cd-161ab. See
also Torella 1979b: 69, note 11, Dupuche 2003: 664, and Padoux Vāc p. 408 ff.

Appendix B
to Chapter One
The End of the Twelve: A Comparative Table
It is convenient to refer to the Śaiva Siddhānta sources analysed by
Brunner in her work on the Somaśambhupaddhati. They are: 1)
Somaśambhupaddhati (nirvāṇadīkṣāvidhi) verses 231-236; 2) SVT 4/263-267ab,
342cd-348 and 350-355; 3) Prāsādacandrikā quoted in the Kriyādīpikā (p. 96).
The same passage is quoted by Anantaśambhu in his commentary on the
Siddhāntasārāvali (p. 39) where it is attributed to the Vātulāgama. The

Siddhāntaśekhara (p. 368-370) agrees with this source. Brunner supplies three
diagrams drawn on the basis of these sources depicting their location in and
above the body. These have been integrated into the table on the opposite page.
The reader’ʼs attention is drawn to two points.
Firstly, īin these texts the root mantra (mūlamantra) is not OṀ
(= AUM) but HAUM. However, Brunner explains, referring to various sources,

that this does not make much difference. The letter H is uttered in the navel,
according to Somaśambhu. The remaining part starts from the heart, as does the
utterance of OM. The second point to note is that the SvT and the
Prāṣādacandrikā also mention the measure (mātrā) or duration of the utterance

of each part. In both cases the whole extends for three-and-a-half measures. The
first three measures are for the audible

A U M, and the remaining half is

variously divided into the components of the higher, silent resonance. The End

of the Twelve is thus the ‘location’ of the highest state in the recitation (uccāra)

of the syllable OM, which in the Svacchandatantra īs represented as the Path of
Mantra.

APPENDIX B CHAPTER ONE

1e0JUL

jeoḺ

pe2y 0}

] snoiqōāz
anua
ṇu5 Jo
1510.

JP˚H

ŠPEd

P2TḶ210.
peeṇz10]
PEeēH

T

eaxṣepe|

H

|,@Pix

V

n

Y

[
[
npuag
upu ,
pi1g | pig

IET_ḸT

vuvuas]"bubūābg

2.d

euyuvūt 2ṃ
jo śāi>ug

GOOJ JIEḤ fUOOJ JIEH

J4poḻy ṚDpagy
DPOṆ

z

|zi|

IB

T

JId ] 1AS ] dṢṢ

[=dā1

S

+ō l

7ō ī|. - | n

9I/] | 91V1 | ©

]nīṃ, ] 7

nGāa,

+

ipu
pi1g

Z

EA1ISEPES

tipng | ēōpṅg | ōōpī | 1
eieasr
a] | eeaṣr
ASḶ | eas]
Asṉ || zū1
eisēpe
STPIS

|eas-aeṇy

Z,

T

AÁāuuz oṃ] jo pior

2id

+i
8/

(az1

8 1

+y

=

jomjdo

2sd

A

9++ | 9 + 1

I

JUḌŪEIEUEJg EḌEJFUAÇEIg| EḺḌEEUṬÉḤ]__]
1ouyjdoṉḻ

d5S

FA

(suōāugy uī) uoṣṣū2ixg

2id̃

ápog 2ṇ
jo uteġ