between

those

configurations

(cakra)

also

is

described in various places (in the scriptures), (each) as an (encompassing)
unity, the nature of which accords with the category to which it belongs
(according to its function). (112cd-113ab) (113)
‘” Abhinava retums repeatedly to refer to the multiplicity of configurations of divine

forms, which is an evident and a major feature of all Tantric pantheons. Most times he
refers back implicitly or explicitly to his statements here, and so to the authority of the
Triśirobhairavatantra. Jayaratha tells us here that the very first chapter of the TBh deals

with the Wheel of a Thousand spokes. He refers the reader to the same chapter for
details of numerous wheels again ad 3/254cd-257ab. Abhinava implies (1/11 1cd-112ab

(112)) the wheel of a thousand spokes was presented as the culmination of a progression
of successive more extensively populated configurations. Ultimately, they are all

contained in the most excellent of them, which is that of the Twelve Kālīs, to which the
TBh itself apparently did not refer. Certainly, if it did do, so Abhinava would have

quoted it as saying so. That way he would have enlisted another major Trika Tantra as

supporting the synthesis of Trika and Krama promoted by his teacher Śambhunātha, that
he also took to heart as central to the teachings of Anuttara (the ‘most excellent’) Trika.

This verse epitomizes a central point of doctrine. Accordingly, Jayaratha quotes it or
parts of it in as many as twelve other places, namely in TĀv ad 3/66ab-67cd (3/66cd67ab), 78ab-79cd (78cd-79ab), 99cd-100ab, 142cd-143ab (142), 191 (190cd-191ab),

205cd-206ab, 228, 5/40, 69ab (5/68cd), 8/174cd-175ab (174), 9/154ab, 13/264-265, and
29/81. Abhinavagupta himself quotes it (in 5/40) and tells us that Śrīkaṇṭha uttered it the

Maṅñgalaśāstra. Kṣemarāja quotes the full verse (ŚSūvi ad 3/8), third quarter (ŚSūvi ad
3/30) and half (NTu ad 21/20-32ab), saying it is from the Sarvamaṅgalā. Most of
Jayaratha’s references are in Chapter Three, which deals with the Divine Means
(Śāmbhavopāya). This is because this means is based on Śiva’s power of the will, which

is His freedom and the one power that manifests as all the others. Abhinava quotes the

second line in the PTV (p. 41). There, as here and other places in the Tantrāloka, this

reference is cited to indicate that all of the countless powers are forms of the one power

of the freedom (svātantrya) of Śiva consciousness.

CHAPTER ONE
(Each Wheel) is an ‘(encompassing) unityʼ, because (its constituents)

belong to a common type that performs specific, fixed functions such as

creation (srṣṭi) and the like." ‘The nature’ (of this encompassing unity) is said
to ‘accord with the category to which it belongs’, because it performs (its

own specific) fixed function." Thus there is a ‘difference between Wheelsʼ,

and so the (number of) Wheels (described) in the scriptures are endless.
He illustrates that (with an example):

TṬN=TĒTĒTTrTTTĀTVTĀ
T 12231
TZTTVĀTĪ]
TTRĀĪTH fēB Rrījf; |

catuṣṣaḍdvirdvigaṇanāyogāt traiśirase mate || 1 13 ||
saṭcakreśvaratā nāthasyoktā ciṭrā nijākṛtiḥ |

The mastery of the six wheels of the Lord’s own form is said in the

Traiśirasamata to be wonderfully various by virtue of His union with

four, six and twice times twice those (powers). (113cd-114ab) (114)

Twice four makes eight and again (doubling) in the same way, sixteen.

Twice six makes twelve, again (doubling) in the same way, twenty-four. This
is (the Lord’s) ‘masteryʼ of the six Wheels which is ‘various’, that is, of many

forms, because of the wonderful variety of limiting adjuncts associated with the

particular (contents) that pour forth (as each) Wheel. (t is) ‘(the Lord’s) own

formʼ because nothing else separate from that is (ever) perceived. Thuṣ, in the
Traiśirasamata, that is, the Triśirobhairava, (this mastery) ‘is said’ to be of the

! The word ‘cakra’ means most literally ‘wheel’, but by extension can also mean

‘configuration’, ‘assembly°, or ‘cycle’. In this context the word denotes a configuration
or cycle of energies (śaktisamūha). Thus, as his example, Jayaratha appears to be

referring here to the Wheels (i.e. cycle of energies) of creation, persistence, withdrawal
and the Inexplicable. The worship of the goddesses in these Wheels or cycles is a
standard feature of Krama (kālīkula, kālīkrama) ritual.

The Wheels (cakra) are all essentially the same, as they all configurations of the

energies of consciousness. However, they vary according to their functions.
" Read, as Jayaratha does, citrā nijākṛtiḥ for citranijākṛteḥ..
l Cf. below 5/90-92ab (89cd-91) and the commentary, where Jayaratha quotes this
verse, as well as TĀv ad 29/9, where half the verse is quoted. These configurations of
four, six, eight, twelve, sixteen and twenty-four energies develop out of Śiva’s single

transcendent unperturbed nature in the phase of descent. Then the ascent takes place
through ten phases of Emptiness (5/90-92ab). Cf below, 16/2¢d-4. In Chapter ThirtyThree (33/2-14ab), Abhinava, drawing from the Siddhavīra (SYM?) and (mostly) from
the MV, takes the trouble just once to list the names of the deities populating similar
configurations (cakra) enclosing the Trika goddess integrated with the phases of
emanation and withdrawal, as outlined above and taught by his Trika teacher
Śambhunātha (33/32). The sets do not coincide with the group of six wheels mentioned
here. He preferred, quite rightly, to draw from his most authoritative source. Thus,
unless the 7Triśirobhairava or a parallel source is recovered, it is not possible to fill out

the details of their content or even their application.

Thus, the six wheels are of 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, and 24 spokes.

TANTRĀLOKA

Lord, who is endowed with (absolute) freedom and presides over each Wheel.
That is said there:

‘O goddess, (each of) the groups of four, six and eight,• and (the

Wheels with) twelve, sixteen and twenty-four spokes, are (each) individually
well established.”
The many types of Wheels and reason (nimitta) for the difference
(between them) is also explained in the 7riśirobhairava itself. Thus, he says (in
the following verse):

īTīṁ sīēcēitīī ṁ- catatkza: || q2I

nāmāni cakradevīnāṁ tatra kr̥tyavibhedataḥ || 114 ||
saumyaraudrākṛtidhyānayogīnyanvarthakalpanāt |

"The names of the goddesses of the Wheels there (vary) according

to their various functions. (They do so also) because they are conceived in
accord with their purpose, (nature and the meaning of their name)
(anvarthakalpana), in association with the visualization (dhyāna) of (this or

that) peaceful (saumya) or fierce (raudra) form. (114cd-115ab) (115)

t The fifth syllable of the first quarter of this verse is long (guru) instead of being short
(laghu), as it should be. Even so, the expression ‘ṣatkoṣṭakaṁ’ is not correct Sanskrit,

although the intended sense is clear. Moreover, the division of the two halves of the first
line is clumsy. dvādaśāraṁ ṣoḍaśārakam is hypermetrical by one syllable. This extra

initial syllable is accommodated into the previous quarter, which is short of one final
syllable.

I Verṣes 114cd-121ab (115-122) are a paraphrase of a passage from the first chapter of

the Triśirobhairavatantra.
t Cf. below, 3/255-256, 266ab (265). The assemblies (cakra) are constituted of real,
individually distinct deities, although they are all expressions of the one integral, pure

consciousness. Each Wheel has its own functions. These belong to two categories,
namely, šānta (tranquil), that is, saumya (benevolent), or ‘raudra’, ‘wrathfulʼ or

‘fierce’. They correspond to two types of optional rites (kāntya), performed to gain some
particular result. One is called sāntikā, which literally means ‘pacificatoryʼ, as are for
example exorcisms, or more generally the removal of evil, troubled beings from a

particular place. The other variety is called ‘āpyāyana’, which literally means

‘nourishment’. These include rites performed for prosperity and fulfilment (puṣṭi) and

the like. The other type of rites are called ‘raudra’, ‘fierce’ or ‘ghora’, ‘terrīfic’. These

include various forms of black magic (abhicāra), of which there are six standard
varieties (ṣaṭkarma). According to the most common listing, they are rites to 1) murder
one’s enemy (maraṇa), 2) delude (mohana), 3) paralyse (stambhana), 4) create enmity
between allies of the enemy (vidveṣaṇa), 5) expel (uccātana), and 6) bring others under
one’s control (vasīkaraṇa). These rites are termed ‘intentional’ (kāmtya). Abhinava does

not deal with them because, as he says, peoplesʼ desires are very many, as are these rites
(below, 26/11, cf. 28/1-5, concerning the different types of rites). These magical rites

are explained in detail in Goudriaan 1978: 251 ff.

CHAPTER ONE
(The words) ‘is

said’ (uktā) should be added from the previous verse,

changing the gender etc. (in accord with the syntax here). (Although) the
Supreme Lord (parameśvara) is just one, He manifests in a (particular) fixed
form, the nature of which is peaceful or wrathful etc., according to the particular
desire of the adept (sādhaka) so that, having done so, he may bestow (upon
him) each particular accomplishment (siddhi) (pertaining to the visualization of

that form). That is

said (in the Triśirobhairava-tantra):

‘The Lord, like a wish fulfilling gem, always assumes the nature of the

particular form in which the adept recollects him.”

One should understand this point for oneself from the first chapter of
the venerable 7risirobhairava. For fear of making (this) book (to0) long, we

have not corroborated (this view) with every word (there). (Abhinavagupta)
says just that.

The Nourishing Power of the Creative Imagination (pratibhā)

In his commentary on the PT, Abhinava explains how the fluctuations of the

mind and feelings of hate, benevolence, and love involved in the magical rites to help
(which are ‘tranquilʼ) or damage others (which are fierce’) are aspects of

consciousness. He says that they are the instruments of the diverse play of its universal
manifestation which, as such, are hypostatised as deities. Thus, they are essentially
consciousness itself, which assumes in various circumstances, peaceful and fierce
forms. Accordingly, he writes:

‘As the fluctuations of the mind, such as anger and the like, are one with the
(aesthetic relish of) the wonder of consciousness, and also because they could not

otherwise assume their own specific nature, they are the divine instruments

(karaṇadevatā) of the Supreme Lord which, as the rays of the Śun of Śiva, each (in their
own way) unfold his (divine) play. Each combining (variously) with each other, they
assume innumerable forms, conceived to be peaceful or fierce in accord with the

particular (operation), terrific or peaceful, of (magical) rites such as expulsion

(uccāṭana), murder (maraṇa), pacification and so on. As such, in accord with these
various black and other magical operations (kṛtya), they are said in scriptures such as

the Mata and the like to be deities worthy of worship, and the attendants of the
venerable Lord Bhairava.’ PTv p. 42.
The word ‘uktā’ – ‘is said is a participle which in the previous verse agrees with the
feminine abstract noun ‘īśvaratā, i.e. ‘mastery’, to which it refers. Here it refers to ‘the

namesʼ – nāmāni – which is a neuter plural noun, and so should be made to agree

accordingly, i.e. uktāni nāmāni – ‘the names said to be (of the goddesses).

]preṣume that Jayaratha is quoting from the Triśirobhairavatantra in view of what
he goes on to say.

Cf. ‘Like the wish fulfiling gem, the omniform God approaches (His devotee)

assuming the nature in which He is worshipped.' Ādhārakārikā 66, quoted in the

Spandapradīpikā (Dyczkowski 1992: 141).

Jayaratha thuṣ confirms it is Abhinava himself who is speaking here. Viewing the

large number of configurations of divine forms (cakra) described in the first chapter of
the Triśirobhairavatantra, Abhinava gives his explanation as to why they are so many

and diverse. Jayaratha quotes just a line from his source, which is sufficient to sanction

his view. Deity appears in accord with our needs and understanding. Deity in its

countless divine forms is such because of us, no less than we are as we are because
Deity has assumed our form.

TANTRĀLOKA

rī ḍferārr āīrā JJaī ā] || 22uI
ekasya saṁviṉṇnāthasya hy āntarī pratibhā tanuḥ || 1 15 I|

saumyaṁ vānyan mitaṁ saṁvidūrmicakram upāsyate |

The body of the one Lord of Consciousness is (His) inner creative

imagination (pratibhā). (It is) worshipped (externally) as the cycle of the
waves of the (outpowering of the powers of) consciousness

(saṁvidūrmicakra) (in a conditioned) limited (form as the deity made
manifest thereby), whether peaceful or otherwise. (115cd-116ab) (116)

‘The inner creative imagination’ (āntarī pratibhā) is the power of
freedom (svātantryaśakti). By ‘otherwise’ is meant wrathful (raudra). Thus,
because it is distinguished by each particular, peaceful or wrathful form (of the
deities in it), it is ‘limited’.
Having analysed that (point), he illustrates (it with examples):

aā aaṁrcqftēfīzṝ afērzat aīĩzaīq 1| 22ē11

STTHTĪcTTHAT, PTTTRTIĪJ aTaT: |

TETTI
TTTT IT̄d TR TTGTĒJŠGT |I 22.9|I

STṬIN TĪI JTH TCHIĪ JTT-TT |IṞ82¢CII

GĀĪĪTRTGTJTTTTA ĪTJGT: #T: TE II/[2R/II

After this concluding explanatory verse of his own, Abhinava goes on with an
insertion that continues up to 135ab and then returns to this reference from to the TBh
again in 135cd-136ab.
Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains that ‘the Wheel of the Tide of Energies — irmicakra is

pratibhā, which means conscious creative energy.’ The term ‘Wave’ to denote the

activity and nature of consciousness is drawn from Krama sources. It seems that this is a

name for the primary cycle of consciousness. Its phases constitute the activity of
consciousness as aspects of the one Goddess of Consciousness (saṁviddevṝ). This Wave
of creative imagination that arises inwardly within consciousness generates

configurations – ‘wheels’ – of divine forms along with their associated Mantras and the
consonant outer ritual action.

Cf. below, 3/65ab-65cd (3/65cd-66ab).

Presumably, the Wheel of the Waves of Consciousness is worshipped in a limited

way as the Wheels produced by its waves. They are of two types, according to whether

they are configurations – ‘wheels' – of peaceful or wrathful deities. Jayaratha’s view is

that it is the same configuration of divine forms that varies. Either way, these Wheels
are ‘limited’, whereas the Wheel of the Waves of Consciousness itself is not. Perhaps

we may identify it with Viśvacakra, mentioned above in 1/112.

CHAPTER ONE

sṝṁīē attdōīaq 11 22zI

asya syāt puṣṭir ity eṣā saṁviddevī tathoditāt || 116 ||
dhyānāt sañjalpasaṁmiśrād vyāpārāc cāpi bāhyataḥ |
sphuṭībhūtā satī bhāti tasya tādṛkphalapradā || 117 ||
puṣṭiḥ śuṣkasya sarasībhāvo jalam ataḥ sitam |

anugamya tato dhyānaṁ tat pradhānaṁ pratanyate || 1 18 II

ye ca svabhāvato varṇā rasaniḥṣyandino yathā |
dantyauṣṭhyadantyaprāyās te kaiścid varṇaiḥ kṛtāḥ saha || 119 ||
taṁ bĩjabhãvam ãgatya saṁvidaṁ sphuṭayanti tãm |
puṣṭiṁ kuru rasenainam āpyāyayatarām iti || 120 ||
sañjalpo ʻpi vikalpātmā kiṁ tām eva na pūrayet |
amṛteyam idaṁ kṣīram idaṁ sarpir balāvaham || 121 ||
tenāsya bījaṁ puṣṇīyām ity enāṁ pūrayet kriyām ḷ

(When) the Goddess of Consciousness is clearly evident (in the

form of the intention): ‘may he be fulfilled (puṣṭi)”’ she manifests by virtue
Abhinava goes on to say that Deity may be worshipped in a limited or unlimited form,

according to whether one wishes to attain some worldly benefit (bhoga) or liberation
(mokṣa), respectively (1/123ab (1/123)). The ‘limited form’ of Deity is the visualized
one. The Tantras of all schools contain thousands of descriptions of visualized forms of

deities. The usual common forms of worship (pūjā) require the imagining of the form of
the deity, even if it is represented externally in an icon, although it is more commonly
invoked into a Yantra or a jar. In this respect, Abhinava’s Anuttara Trika is very
unusual. Of all the many deities mentioned in the Tantrāloka, Abhinava describes the
forms of only three. As one would expect, these are those of the triad of goddesses,
Parā, Parāparā and Aparā. But even then, he presents a general overview of the variant
forms mentioned in the scriptures without precisely indicating the ones he prefers (see
below, 15/323cd-28ab and 31/39-41ab, where their colours are mentioned). He takes

care to say immediately after (in 15/328cd-330ab) that they are essentially omniform,

pure consciousness, and as such help to achieve liberation. We may note, by the way,

that this attitude is attenuated with respect to the Mantras of these and related deities.
Abhinava clearly presents the sonic body of the deity with its ‘limbs’ and ‘facesʼ in the
context of riṭual. See Chapter 30.
Worldly benefits (bhhoga) are a common aim, and are well accepted to be such

generally in all traditions engaged in ritual and Mantra practice. Abhinava freely accepts
that this is a parallel concern to the attainment of liberation; even so, his focus is quite
clearly on the latter, seeing the former as a steppingstone to its attainment. Thus, it is not

surprising that Abhinava chooses to comment at length on the Parātrīśikā, which denies

the utility of outer ritual, and is concerned with what Abhinava calls the Anuttara
modality (prakriyā) of practice, which is entirely within consciousness and so its sole
purpose is liberation, and that too, in this life (jīvanmukti). The deity in that case is

‘without form’ as the Light of Anuttara, full of the energies of Speech that, reflecting

into one another, generate in and through the flux of its perpetual emission (visarga) all

the levels and spheres of existence and the infinite cycles of time. Here Abhinava

TANTRĀLOKA

of this meditation (dhyāna), that arises in this way in association with the
utterances (of Mantras) and outer (ritual) action (yyāpāra) and bestows on

that (man who invokes her) such kinds of fruits (as are in accord with her
peaceful or wrathful form).
1) (The visualization:) ‘fulfilment’ (puṣṭi) is a process of infusing the
‘juice’ (rasa) (of vitality) into one who has ‘dried upʼ (śuṣka). Thus, the
appropriate form of visualization is like (pure) clean (sita) water, and
unfolds with that as its principal (element).
2) (The Mantra:) Those letters from which, by their (very) nature,
(this) juice (rasa) flows as, for example, the labio-dental (V) and dental

(S), once combined with some (other) letters, assume the state of seed-

intends to illustrate how even rites performed solely for worldly benefits are necessarily
based on the same essentially free and liberating activity of consciousness, which is
operant and can be recognized to be manifest and actualized in ritual action. On the

manifest plane of relative distinctions, the opposites in this case are the two basic
categories to which divine forms belong - peaceful and wrathful.
In the passage that follows, Abhinava exemplifies how this takes place in a rite
for prosperity, wellbeing, nourishment and fulfilment (pusṭi), which is clearly meant for

the attainment of these worldly benefits. The point is that even in such cases, ritual is
effective because of the activity, power and divinity of consciousness, namely, the
Goddess of Consciousness. She is the creative imagination (pratibhā) of Lord Śiva Who
thus assumes various forms, peaceful or wrathful, according to the rite. This

consciousness becomes evident and actual when combined with the relevant meditation,
interior discourse and outer rites, which are three aspects in which this creative
īmagination manifests and operates in the domain of spiritual practice. It asserts itself
and fulfils its purpose in and through the intention (sartkalpa) which initiates the rite,

and threads through it in its phases as its primary mover and forms itself into it. Thus,
the Goddess of Consciousness manifests in the three ways indicated by the paragraph

numbering in the text of the Tantrāloka and its commentary as 1) the visualization, 2)
utterance of Mantra and 3) the rite.

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: ‘It is internal consciousness — Samvid Devī – that

protects the sādhaka, [not just good wishes]. [The reading] ‘tathā’ is wrong[;] put tayā
instead [so that it means] ‘by that Samvid Devī’ [Goddess of Consciousness]. The
Dhyāna [visualization] here arises by Samvid Devī. [Goddess of Consciousness]. The
dhyāna [visualized form] is internal.”

Adopting the reading tayoditāt for tathoditāt, as suggested by Swami

Lakshmanjoo, the text would mean ‘she manifests by virtue of this meditation (dhyāna)

to which she gives rise (tayoditāt)’. Maintaining the form in the printed edition, the

Goddess of Consciousness ‘arises in this way’ would mean as either wrathful or
peaceful. In this example, she is, clearly, ‘peaceful’ and nourishing. The emendation
stresses the point, implied anyway, that it is the Goddess who generates the meditation

and visualized form.

The letters S and V form the first syllable of the Mantra SVĀHĀ, which is uttered

when offering an oblation to the fire. See below, 15/4, 15/439-443 (15/436cd-441ab)
and 17/24cd-25ab. The letter S, which is the first letter of the Vidyā of Parā (SAUḤ),

the Seed of the Heart (see below, 30/24cd-25ab), is also called the Seed of Nectar
(amṛtabīja), see below, 3/166ab-168ab (3/165cd-167). Clearly, the rites in this case are

internal.

There are countless examples in Tantras of all traditions of how Mantras
function in various ways to bring about specific results. For example, nine such

operations are listed in the Netratantra (18/6cd-8). These are: 1) ‘energizing’ (dīpana),

CHAPTER ONE

syllable (Mantras), and (s0) make that (form of) consciousness manifest.
Why then cannot an utterance (saṁjalpa) also, (although) essentially a

thought construct, impart (a sense of) fulfillment to that same
(consciousness) when (we say): “Bring about fulfiIment! Nourish him with
juice (rasa)”
3) (The rite:) (Thus,) this rite (which nourishes) should be
completed (by saying while offering oblations): “this nectar (amṛta), this
milk, this clarified butter is a source of strength. May I nourish his seed

with this!” (116cd-122ab) (117-122)

He describes the visualization and the rest (dhyāṇādi) in due order (in
this passage beginning with) ‘fulfilment (puṣṭi).
1) ‘Thus’, for the aforementioned reason, (it is water) because the

characteristic of ‘fulfilment (puṣṭi) ‘is a process of infusing the ‘juice’

(rasa) (of vitality) into one who has ‘dried up”ʼ. Water nourishes and it is

‘with that principal element’ that it brings about ‘fulfilment’, which is full

(and complete) etc.

2) Now he explains that ‘utterance (saṁyjalpa) is also of two kinds,

according to whether it is worldly (common every day utterance) (laukika) or

other-worldly (alaukika) (utterance of Mantras made in the course of ritual

with the praṇava OMṀ. 2) ‘Awakening (bodhana), with the mantra NAMAḤ. 3)
‘Striking (tāḍana), with the mantra PHAT. 4) “Aspersion’ (abhiṣecana), with the

mantra VAUṢAT. 5) “Purification’ (vimalīkaraṇa), with the mantra SVĀHĀ. 6)

‘Placement of the fuel’ (indhananiveśana), which serves to burn fetters and remedy
poison and the like. This is done by placing the mantra HUM at the beginning or end of
a mantra. 7) Libation (tarpaṇa), which gives strength (balavattādhāna), by placing the
syllable LAM at the beginning or end of each syllable of a mantra. 8) ‘Protection’
(guptibhāva), reciting the mantra or the name 100,000 times preceded and followed by
the mantra of the Eye (see below, 30/40cd-41ab). 9) ‘Nourishment’ (āpyāyana), which
strengthens further one who is already getting stronger by placing at the beginning and

end of each syllable of the Mantra or the name of the deity, the syllable VĀṀ.
Read -bhāvāpādana- for -bhāvāpādāna-

“! The primary meaning of the adjective ‘śuṣka’ is ‘dried upʼ. One could say that of a

dead, dried-up tree or piece of wood, and by extension, ofa person who is very weak, ill
or depressed. This ‘dryness’ is understood to be an absence of rasa. ‘Rasa’ means, most
literally, ‘juice’, as for example that of a fruit, the sugarcane, or the sap of a tree.
Accordingly, it also means both ‘taste’ or “flavour’ and ‘vital essence’. As such, this is

the name given to a constituent fluid or juice of the body, especially chyle, which
according to Ayurveda is formed from food and changed by the bile in the digestive

tract into blood. When food is digested it produces rasa, which nourishes the vital

constituents of the body (dhātu). In the same perspective, the same word also denotes

semen or living seed in general. The Upaniṣads mean to say that the Brahman is the
vital essence of all things, when they declare that He is rasa (raso vai ṣaḥ – Tait īya

Upanisad 2/7/1). Vitalizing and transformative, the alchemical elixir that serves as a
medicine for all diseases and transforms metals to gold is also called rasa. The
viṣualization, Mantra and rite invokes rasa to purify, nourish, cure from illness and
extend life. AIl this is implied in the term pusri, here translated as ‘fulfilment’, which is
the wellbeing and strength which, like pure water, nourishes and gives life to what is

‘dried out'.

TANTRĀLOKA

performance or the practice of Yoga). (He says that in this passage) beginning
with ‘those’ letters ‘for example, the labio-dental (V) and dental (S)”

‘(make) that (form of) consciousness (manifest)ʼ, that is, (the form of

consciousness which is a sense of) fulfilment (pusṣṭi.. ‘The state of seed

syllable (Mantras) is the state of Mantras. Thus the utterance of this (seed-

syllable) is other-worldly (not just common everyday speech). By ‘labio-

dental’ the letters V and the rest are (meant). By ‘dental’ (is meant) the Seed of

Nectar (S) etc. ‘Some (other) lettersʼ are those that are, for example, not labiodental. So it is said:

‘(The syllable) vaṣaṭ is enjoined for nourishment . . .” Also: “By means
of the classes of letters used for fulfilment and nourishment . . .’
In this way, cerebral and other (classes of letters) are also included. (The
statement that the utterance of Mantra is) ‘essentially a thought construct’
refers to its worldly (aspect). ‘That’ (form of) consciousness is fulfilment.

3) He now analyses external (ritual) action such as the offering of
oblation and the like (saying) ‘nectar° etc.
means thick sour milk
(dadhi). (Thus, with reference to that,) it is said:

attained) by offering oblations of thick sour milk . . .

‘supreme fulfilment (is

The words ‘source of strength’ are associated with each one (of the

sacrificial substances). “(May I nourish his) seed’, that is, all the vital
constituents of the body (dhātu), the semen, menstrual blood and the rest that

are the cause of the body, ‘with this’ sacrificial substance, such as molasses.®

“This’ – rite of fulfilment.
Referring to another reality which is to be known, he concludes this
(point).
Pāṇini in his grammar distinguishes between two types of Sanskrit: ‘worldly”

(laukika) and ‘other-worldly (alaukika). The former is classical Sanskrit, which may

well have been a language commonly spoken in his day where he lived by at least a
learned elite, and the latter Vedic Sanskrit, which was certainly no longer a common
spoken language anywhere in Pāṇini’s day. However, in this context, the distinction
intended is between common everyday language and that of Mantras. Swami
Lakshmanjoo intends the sense here quite differently. According to him: “saṁjalpa
[utterance] is external action [that is, uttering] pleasing, not harsh words.”

The letters that are combined as prescribed by the scriptures to form Mantras are no
longer just letters. Their state has changed to that of Mantras. The combination of letters
to form single syllables like kirī or śrīṁ are called ‘bījas’, that is, ‘seeds’, because they

are considered to be the seeds from which full Mantras develop. But although the two
are distinguished, the state or nature of both ‘seed’ and Mantra is essentially the same.

Read with MSs K, J, h, Ṅ, T and Ḍ vibhajayati for vibhajati.

Swami Lakshmanjoo: “Aṃṛta [nectar] refers to [the herb called] sakhaghu. You can
also use a samāgri [mixture] of rice, fruit and sakhaguti (?).”

AII the substances, including nectar and curd, are a source of strength, not just the
clarified butter.

The meaning of the word gaḍūcya is uncertain. The text is probably corrupt. The

printed text reads gadiūcyādinā, MS ]h reads gudacyādinā and the remaining MSs
guḍūcyādinā. 1 propose a tentative, rather unsatisfactory, emendation to guḍādinā.
Swami Lakshmanjoo suggests sakhaghu (above note 835).

CHAPTER ONE

Limited and Unlimited Deities are Forms of the Lord of Consciousness

Tīaāṝr̥̄Ã lrũai: ag7aid || q2I|

tasmād viśveśvaro bodhabhairavaḥ samupāsyate || 122 ||

avacchedānavacchidbhyāṁ bhogamokṣārthibhir janaiḥ |

Therefore, the Lord of the universe (viśveśvara), the Bhairava Who
is Consciousness (bodhabhairava), is worshipped by those who desire
worldly benefits (bhoga) or liberation, with a (specific) limited (form) or
without limitation, (respectively). (122cd-123ab) (123)
‘(Bhairava is worshipped) with a (specific) limited (form) or

without limitation’. According to the teaching (nīti) stated previously. a

‘limited (form) is the condition (of a rite) in which it is governed by a fixed

procedure such as a visualization (dhyāna) and the like. What is otherwise is

‘without limitation’. As he will say:

‘In the case of adepts (sādhaka) and those who desire worldly benefits,

the (specific ritual) procedure (they should follow) (vidhi) is (rigorously) fixed
by the constraint (niyati) (which determines that a particular action gives rise to

a specific result).™N (Whereas) in the case of those who know reality and those
who aspire for liberation, it is free of (any) restriction."N
Again, although the Lord has a limited form (in this sense), it is
vitalized by the unlimited, supreme form. One cannot achieve anything without

entering into that (unlimited) nature.

He supports this (view) by referring to the sense (of a passage in the)
Bhagavadgītā (without quoting it literally).

3ṢTRCTTIHT
ṢTTĪ TṬTĪRTḤ |I 233I
ye ‘py anyadevatābhaktā ity ato gurur ādiśat || 123 ||

!ṬThe teacher (Kṛṣṇa) has taught this (in a verse of the

Bhagavadgītā) that begins with (the words): ‘those also who are devotees of
other deitiesʼ. (123cd) (124ab)
(The verse) ‘that begins with’ – the set of statements beginning in this

way from here onwards. ‘The teacherʼ is the Lord Vāsudeva, who is the teacher
of what is true (tāttvikārtha). There (in the Bhagavadgītā, He says):
See above, 1/115ab-115cd (1/1 15cd-1 16ab).

“ Thus, for them the rite varies according to the results they aspire to attain.

“ Below, 26/55cd-56ab. The same verse is quoted again in the TĀv ad 4/199.

Verses 124-132 are a commentary on Bhagavadgītā 9/24-26.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The votaries of the three Vedas who drink soma and have been purified

of sin, having worshipped Me with sacrifices, pray for the way (to go) to

heaven. Having attained the holy world of the lord of the gods, they enjoy
(there) in heaven the divine pleasures (bhoga) of the gods.”
(again).

‘When (their) merit is exhausted, they enter the world of mortals

This is (what happens to) those who desire (worldly) enjoyments.

‘To those people who worship Me (alone), thinking of none other,
constantly engaged (in that), I bestow Yoga and forbearance.”
This is what happens to those who desire liberation. Having described
(the Lord’s) nature with limitation and without, one after the other, in order to
explain that the unlimited form is (present) in the limited (form) also, he
teaches:
-O Kaunteya, those also who are devotees of other deities and, having
faith (in them), worship (them), are (really) worshipping Me alone, (but)
without prior injunction (avidhipūrvaka).
“ BhGī 9/21.

# BhGī 9/22b.

Ibid. 9/23. Abhinava comments on verses 9/21-23 of the Gīā as follows:

‘Although they sacrifice to Me, desiring only small results, such as heaven,

etc., they themselves put limitations on what they could achieve because of the
weakness of their mind. That is why the merit (dharma) gained by performing sacrifices

with limited desires is instrumental in bringing those people back to earth again and
again. They continuously come and go from this world. However, it should not be
wrongly assumed that the nature of sacrifice (yāga) is the cause the cycles of birth and
death. This would be wrong. Therefore (Kṛṣṇa goes on to say that: ‘ give Yoga and

forbearance etc.).

How do others (who do not have limited results in their minds) think about the
Lord? They, only desiring the highest reality, attain the results in the form of the highest
reality. In this context, the word ‘yoga’ means attainment of the nature of the Brahman,
which did not exist before. While the word kṣema [forbearance’] means the protection
of that attainment. This protection is a guarantee that one is established in the Brahman

and there is no possibility of falling down from that state.’ Translation by Boris
Marjanovic (2002: 217-218).

“ BhGī 9/24. The following two verses (i.e. 24 and 25), quoted by Jayaratha further

ahead, complete the sense and so are best read together with this one:
‘I am the enjoyer and Lord of all the sacrifices, but they do not know Me in
reality (as I truly am), and so they fall. Those who are devoted to the gods go to the

gods. Those who are devoted to the ancestors go to the ancestors. Those who worship
ghosts go to the ghosts, and those who worship Me go to Me.’

The immediate sense of avidhipūrvaka is ‘not according to the proper procedureʼ.
Although this is the obvious meaning, Abhinava prefers to understand this expression as
translated. Indeed, he severely criticizes those who understand it the other way, because
if Kṛṣṇa is ‘the enjoyer of all the sacrifices’, He would accept impurity by accepting
impure sacrifices offered without following the proper procedure. But he ’agrees that

CHAPTER ONE
He explains that:

ye bodhād vyatiriktaṁ hi kīñcid yājyatayā viduḥ |
te ‘pi vedyaṁ viviñcānā bodhābhedena manvate || 124 ||

Kṛṣṇa teaches that ultimately the Supreme Being is the object of everybody's worship.
Thus, he goes on to say:

“‘My teacher explains this particular point in the following way: Even those

kinds of people – who under the influence of a dualistic philosophy worship other gods

and treat them as different from their own Self and as different from the nature of the

Brahman – worship only the highest Brahman, who is identical with their own Self.

However, these kinds of people observe faulty injunctions (dusṭavidhi), because their

worship includes within itself the notion of duality. Therefore, the Lord said, “they do

not know Me who is their own Self, who is the real enjoyer of sacrifices and has taken
the form of that particular god (that they worship). Therefore, such people deviate from

my path.” In this context, the word ‘deviate’ means that they go to other gods because
they are devoted to them. Those who, on the other hand, know the Lord as (the one)
undivided reality worship only him even when they sacrifice to other gods or to their

ancestors. Thus, we can conclude that all those who worship the highest Brahman, attain
that Brahman.’ Translation by Boris Marjanovic (2002: 220-221).
Abhinava points out that the Self is the ultimate object of sacrifice, even

though it is not named directly as a recipient, as are other deities to whom sacrifice is
offered, in accord with the definition of the sacrifice as ‘an offering of things to a deity

whose (name)is mentioned’ (Śabarabhāṣya 9/42/32). In actual fact, he says, the Selfis

implicitly always mentioned. The only difference between this ‘naming’ of the Self and
that of other deities is that it is not accompanied by injunctions. The discussion
continues:
‘But – someone may say – in order for the sacrificial substance to be offered,
the (name of) the deity should be mentioned. So in what way do you mean that the Self
is the object of sacrifice, when there is no mention (of the Self)? The injunction: ‘the
sacrificial rice Prāyaṇīya should be offered to Aditi’ (Taittarīyasaṁhitā 6/1/5/1) is
characterized by the mention of the deity. This reference is included in the injunction.

However, the Self is not the object of any injunction. This is why the Blessed One says

(that it is) ‘not preceded by injunction.’ The various deities, different and separate from
the Self, are, on the contrary, necessarily the object of injunction, because (the

injunction) serves to grasp what has not already been grasped. Our own Self, the

Supreme Lord, cannot be an object of a previous injunction, because he cannot be made
graspable by an injunction. [Moreover, what you say is not entirely correct, namely, that
the Self is never mentioned in the course of a sacrifice]. Without mentioning the Self,

nothing can take place. The truth then is this, that present in all the deities that are

mentioned, Indra and the rest, who are made present and effective by an injunction,
implicit within them and constantly mentioned is our own Self, which by its very nature
manifests all things and shines permanently as the continuous and recurrent idea and
sentiment of the ‘T’, which sustains the light of all of them, like a thread that keeps a
garland together. Thus, what is said in the verse, that is, (they are) ‘worshipping Me
alone (but) without prior injunction (avidhipūrvaka).’ Translation based on Gnoli’s

emendations and translation.

TANTRĀLOKA

Even amongst those who consider that there is something worthy of
worship that is separate from consciousness, (the ones) who carefully
examine the object (of their devotion), also agree that it does not (in fact)
differ from consciousness. (124) (124cd-125ab)

‘Those worshippers (yājaka) ‘who consider”, that is, know another
deity such as Indra, who has a specific (particular) fixed form ‘that is separate

from consciousnessʼ, that is, from their own Self, whose sole nature is the

perceiving subject (veditṛ), and (who) reflect very deeply on (that) deity, in the
form of Indra or the like, with most excellent faith, even though it is an object,
because it has a limited, fixed form, realize it to be at one with consciousness as
it is their own Self, which is one with the supreme perceiver. This is in accord
with the view (expressed in this verse from the Saṁṅvitprākaśa):
‘(In the course of perception) the object (becomes subjective and s0)

assumes the state of the subject, and the subject (becomes) consciousness. If it is
true that consciousness is Your essential nature (ārman), then (for that reason)

this universe is made of You.”

SP 1/31. The verse reads in the commentary:

vedyo vedakatām āpto vedakaḥ saṅṁvidātmatām |

saṁvit tvadātmā cet satyaṁ tad idaṁ tvanmayaṁ jagat ||
The same verse is also quoted below ad 10/267. There the verse reads
vedyaṁ vedakatāmāptaṁ vedakaḥ saṁvidātmatām |
saṁvit tvadātmã cet satyaṁ tenedaṁ tvanmayaṁ jagat |l
This and the preceding verse of the Samvitprakāśa is quoted in SpPra ad SpKā

28-29. In the recovered MSs of the SP, the two lines of this verse are reversed.
Moreover, there as well as in the citation here, we find the regular masculine reading

vedyo vedakatāmāpto, whereas in the citation of the verse ad 10/267 we find the neuter
vedyaṁ vedakatām āptaṁ, which is clearly erroneous. Also, there for tad idaṁ the
reading is tenedaṁ for that (reason) this .. which makes good sense but is not attested
elsewhere. However, in the case of the reading (satyarṁ) tad, the first half of the second
line spills over clumsily into the second. Moreover, adding practically nothing to the

meaning, it is redundant. Thus, although the reading tena is attested in only one case. I

have chosen to retain it.
The preceding verse, not quoted here, aids in understanding the meaning of this

one:

yadaiva viditaṁ viśvaṁ tadānīm eva cinmayam |
Yyan nāsti bhāgo vedyo ‘sau nātha yo vedakād bahiḥ |
‘O Lord, the moment (we realize the true nature of) the universe, (we realise)

pure consciousness, because there is no part of it that can be known objectively outside
the perceiver.’ SP 1/30.

CHAPTER ONE

Surely, (the Mīmāṁsaka may ask,) it is said that ‘the sacrifice is the

offering (of the sacrificial) substances (dravyatyāga) for the deity°. And (so)

in order that (that) poṣsession may be abandoned, (a specific) deity is

mentioned. But in the case of one’s own Self, the sole nature of which is

consciousness, there is no such designation in this way, so how can that be an

object of worship (and be a recipient of that offering)? With this doubt in mind,

he says:

Injunctions do not Apply to the Supreme Deity Who is the Ultimate Goal

zayarza ] faf: gearaṁzaz
a qaT: 11 23vII

tenāvicchinnatāmarśarūpāhantāprathātmanaḥ |
svayaṁprathasya na vidhiḥ sr̥ṣṭyātmāsya ca pūrvagaḥ || 125 l|
vedyā hi devatāsṛṣṭiḥ śakter hetoḥ samutthitā |
ahaṁrūpā tu saṁvittir nityā svaprathanātmikā || 126 ||
Thus, injunction (vidhi),, which is essentially a creation

(of

consciousness), does not precede (pūrvaga) (and condition the one

supreme Deity), the nature of which is the unfolding experience (prathā) of

subjectivity (ahantā), that is uninterrupted reflective awareness and is

(thus) self-revealing (svayaṁpratha)." The emanation of (limited) deities,

arisen from the power (of consciousness), which is (its) cause, is objective

Also cited below ad 15/158cd-159. The same definition of ‘sacrifice –
devatoddeśena dravyatyāgo yāgaḥ – is found in the commentary (vilocana) by

Nigamajñāna on the Varuṇapaddhati. He explains that:

‘iti vacanāt analakarmā (> -karma) kuṇḍasaṁskārāgnisaṁskārādikam |
ādiśabdena maṇḍapamaṇḍalārccanādī (> -di) |’
‘By saying this is meant the act of (offering to) the fire (and what it entails),
namely, the purification of the sacrificial hearth and the fire etc. By the word ‘etc.’ (is
meant) the worship etc. of the pavilion and the maṇḍala.” Varuṇpaddhativyākhyā IFP T
1034 no p. 835
The technical sense of the word dravya- is ‘sacrificial substance’. In common

usage the word means, amongst other things, ‘wealth’. Thus, the expression
‘dravyatyāga’ can also mean ‘the abandonment / renunciation of wealth’. Vedic
sacrifices could be quite expensive. It was thus indeed necessary that the patron who
offered one should ‘renounce’ a good amount of his money.
The expression ‘pūrvaga’ literally means ‘(something that) precedes’. Sometimes, as

here, the expression refers to a cause which, as such, necessarily precedes its effect; or

knowledge that is preceded by a means of knowledge. Injunction does not precede selfrealization in this sense. Self-realization is not necessarily attained by following
scriptural injunctions in the way an effect necessarily follows from its cause.
ṣvayaṁpratha- literally means ‘experiences’ or ‘knows’ itself.

TANTRĀLOKA

(vedyā), whereas consciousness is subjective (ahaṁrūpā), eṭernal and self-

revealing (to one’s own experience). (125-126) (125cd-127ab)
‘Thus’, for that reason, namely that its nature is consciousness, ‘that’

(which is one’s own Self) is, in accord with the dictum that ‘this Self has shone

forth (just) onceʼ, in its unceasingly (active) form as unconditioned

(consciousness), consists of the reflective awareness of the light of supreme ‘I’
consciousness. Thus, it is ‘self-revealingʼ, that is, it is proved to exist by itself
(svataḥsiddha), independently of (any) means of knowledge etc. ‘Therefore’ no

preceding injunction, the nature of which is to impel one who is not engaged in

action (apravṛtta) and is ‘a creation (of consciousness), which is (just) a

means to attain this or that accomplishment (siddhi), (can apply to Him).

Bhairava is pure consciousness which, although it generates everything within the

field of objectivity, is never an object. Bhairava knows Himself directly, spontaneously,
just as He truly is. He is the pure universal subjectivity in relation to His emanation,

which is objective (vedya), in the sense that it is an object of consciousness that ‘can be

knownʼ (vedya). Objectivity is the characteristic feature of emanation. As such, a deity

which is the object of worship and devotion is also an emanation of consciousness. It is
also objective in relation to Bhairava. There are thus, in a sense, two deities. One is the
deity who is the object of worship. This is the embodiment of universal objectivity,
which is multiple and hence at the lower (apara) level. The other one is the universal
subjectivity, which is at the supreme level (para). This is Bhairava. Ultimately,

Bhairava alone exists and so there is no object with reference to which He is a subject.
As such He is the Absolute — Anuttara – that transcends even this universal, sacred
subjectivity in the undefinable eloquence of the One that expresses itself and all that
exists through its self-awareness as the supreme subjectivity, the experience of which is

all that exists.

As deities manifest as objects of awareness, they are necessarily related to
consciousness. They are not independent of it. On the contrary, their ‘luminous’, that is,
perceivable, nature depends on the experiencing subject to make them apparent as an
object of experience. The table does exist when I am not seeing it, because it is possible

to experience it. But in order for it to become a part of my experience, it must
necessarily be experienced by me. In this sense, its experienced existence depends on
me. Moreover, there is nothing beyond experience. Experience is all that there is, in the
sense that it is all that can possibly be known to exist, even if it is not known at present

by every perceiver, or anyone apart from Bhairava, the supreme perceiver. Starting with
this presupposition, the enquiry into the nature of reality is directed at an analysis of the

structure of experience. To say that the object exists by virtue of the experiencing

subject is essentially a statement descriptive of the relationship between the two within

the structured economy of experience. This does not mean that individual objects are

created by the individual subjects who perceive them. The relationship between the

subject and object is mutual. The object is an ‘experience’ not a ‘thing’. But although

there cannot be an object without the subject, the subject can be an object to itself.

Indeed, all objectivity is in various ways such. Seeing the deity as an object of
knowledge, it is not known to be one with the knower.

Read with MSs K, Kh, Ch, J, Jh, T: bodhātmahetunā for tena bodhātmatvena hetunā.
Only MS G has this extra reading, to which is added svātmatattvasya in what appears to

be a gloss on the original reading recorded in the other manuscripts.

See note above in TĀv ad 1/57.
‘ Read ūattatsiddhiṣādhana- for tatatiṣāddhasādhana- and omit the na that follows.

1 translate the word ‘pravṛtta’ as ‘engaged in action’. As an adjective it denotes

‘someone who is engaged in doing something’. Bhairava is engaged in His cosmic

CHAPTER ONE

This is the meaning. The nature of one’s own Self, which is consciousness,

(never) becomes the field of operation (viṣaya) of injunction, because it cannot

be attained (by following) injunctions. As long as (something) is not attained, it
is a field of operation of injunction, and one’s own Self is never unattained,

because it is (always and) everywhere (in all circumstances) manifest as

accomplished (and proved to exist) from the very beginning (ādisiddha).
Surely (one may ask,) as an injunction consists of a command (that
impels to action) (niyoga) and its execution (bhāvanā) etc., it is said to be of
many kinds. Now of what injunction is one’s own Self not the field of
operation? With this doubt in mind, he says:

vidhir niyogas tryaṁśā ca bhāvanā codanātmikā |

An injunction (vidhi) is (essentially), a command (niyoga) that
impels (to action) (codanā) (as laid down according to the Mīmāṁsā in its

standard) execution (bhāvanā) in three aspects. (127ab) (127cd)

An injunction impels to action someone who is not engaged (in that

action), it does not impart knowledge to one who is ignorant™ As

(Mīmāṁsakas) say:

functions of creation, maintenance and destruction, as well as gracing and obscuring the
soul. In these five functions are included all His countless activities. At the human level,
in this context, the activity in which one is engaged is the performance of ritual, the

maintenance of moral norms, and the rest that scriptures enjoin. A scriptural injunction
impels one who is not thus engaged to act as enjoined. Bhairava is perpetually engaged
in His divine activity in His self-īmpelled, i.e. immanent form. He has no need to be

impelled to engage in His sacred activity. Thus, no injunction or indeed anything else

can ‘precede’ His activity as a cause that impels it.
Read with MSs Ch, Jh, N, Ṭ and D sarvatraiva for sarvadaiva.

See above, note 1,548.
‘ Abhinava explains here what he means in terms of the philosophy of the Mīmāṁsā.

The Mīmāṁsā justifies and expounds the metaphysics and epistemology that is implied
and underlies Vedic ritual, that is, the fire sacrifice (yajīa). According to the Mīmāṁsṣā,
although the Vedas are a collection of hymns to the Vedic gods, they are not really
eulogies, rather they are essentially injunctions to perform Vedic ritual. In order to

expound, establish and defend this view, the Mīmāṁsā developed many terms of its

own, or understood common ones from its own perspective. Abhinava is making use of

one such term which is common to his tradition, but with a different meaning in the
Miīmāṁsā’s nomenclature, to refute the Mīmāṁsā view. This is the term ‘bhāvanā’. The
word bhāvanā is derived from the root bhū, ‘to be’. It means ‘bringing into beingʼ, that

is, in this context, ‘execution’ of an action which ‘brings into beingʼ its result. By

extension, it also means intention, reflection, as well as meditation. It is used with the

last of these meanings extensively in our sources (see, for example, VBh 62 quoted
above in TĀv ad 1/83ab-84cd (1/83cd-85ab)). According to the Mīmāṁsā’s usage,
‘bhāvanā’” means ‘intention’. It is the effort or activity of the agent directed at the

attainment of a desired result, and is expressed in the verbal affix of the imperative. For

example, in the injunction svargakāmo yajet (‘one who desires heaven should
sacrifice’), the injunctive verbal affix (-er of yajer) indicates that one who offers the

sacrifiee MUST realize the final aim, which is heaven.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The characteristic of an injunction is just this, namely, that it impels to
action someone who is not engaged (in that action). An injunction does not
impart knowledge about something that is unknown, for (if it were to do so it)

would be subject to the defect that (it is operating) beyond the extent (of its
defined field of operation, and so would not be an injunction).’

(According to the Mīmāṁsakas,) as an injunction informs (one only
that) the relationship between heaven and the sacrificial rite is that between the
goal and the means to accomplish it, (an injunction) impels only to that extent,
namely, that it gives rise to the knowledge in an individual who has a notion (of
what he is doing) (sapratyaya) that ‘I am engaged in (ritual) action’. According

to the Mīmāṁsakas who belong to Prabhākara’s school, (an injunction is a)

‘command’ (niyoga), whereas according to those who belong to Kumarila
Bhaṭṭa’s school, it is the ‘execution’ (bhāvanā) (of the injunction). There (in
that context), a command is the nature (dharma) (of an injunction) as that which
should be followed, which is essentially what is to be done. Impelling (to
action), it can be articulated (in a statement set in the proper grammatical form
with words having their proper) conjugational and other endings as ‘I am being
impelled (to action). And that (command is expressed in sayings) such as: ‘one
who desires heaven should offer sacrifice with the Dārśa and Paurṇamāsa

(rites).' One can see that (this command) is determined by two associated

factors (anubandha). (One) factor is said to be the one related to the field of
operation (of the command) (viṣayānubanáha), namely, as that to which the

sacrifice should be offered (yājya) and the like. (The other) factor relates to the
competence to do this (adhikārānubandha), as for example, ‘one who desires
heaven’ (is competent to offer sacrifice). Thus a ‘command’ (niyoga) is declared
to be that which is associated with these two factors. The nature of a command
is that it ‘orders (that) something (be done) in some placeʼ. (Now,) the
‘execution’ (of an injunction) (bhāvanā) is the activity, which is application to a

goal

(bhāvyaniṣṭha),

of

the

one

who

executes

(the

injunction)

(bhāvakavyāpāra). The goal (bhāvya) is the fruit, namely, heaven and the
An injunction does not tell us anything that was previously unknown; rather it directs

us to the performance of something to be done. Thus, bhāvanā is the ‘injunction’ (vidhi)
to generate or emit a reality previously non-existent, in this case ‘heaven’. This,

Abhinava says, cannot happen in relation to consciousness, as it is the very
presupposition itself of existence and not something to be attained.
“ MS Kh reads: na jñātajñāpanaṁ – ‘it does not impart knowledge about something
that is knownʼ. MS Ch read: na jñānajñāpanaṁ – ‘it does not impart knowledge about
knowledgeʼ.

Theṣe are Vedic rites performed during a New and Full Moon.

‘“ The followers of the Mīmāsaka Kumarila Bhaṭṭa believe that an injunction is
essentially an intention - bhāvanā – which is executed in accord with the injunction.

Unlike the Mīmāsaka Prabhākara’s view that an injunction is simply an objective
‘commandʼ, Kumarila underṣtands injunctions to be subjective, as they involve
reflection and intention to execute them. The factors involved are termed accordingly.

Thus, the goal is bhāvya, namely, that which one intends to do or considers should be

done, which is the object of bhāvanā –-’intention’. Thus, it literally means ‘that which

CHAPTER ONE

like. The execution (bhāvanā) is the activity of a person that is applied (niṣṭha)
to that and gives rise to it. The person is the one who (reflects on and) generates

(bhāvayati) by his own activity the intended aim (which he) reflects on

(bhavan), for example, heaven. Thus, it is said to be ‘execution’ (bhāvanā)
(because it is the reflection which gives rise to that). That is of two kinds,

namely, the execution of the word (śabdabhāvanā) and the execution of
meaning (which is the intended aim) (arthabhāvanā). It has three aspects,
because it depends on the three aspects on which one must reflect (bhāvayer),

namely, ‘what’ (is to be attained or done), ‘by what’ (it should it be done) and
‘howʼ (it should be done). That is said (in the following verse):

‘Once the execution has been understood (from the words of the

injunction formed) from the root and affixes, it depends (primarily) on three
aspects, namely, ‘what’, ‘by what’ and ‘how’.”
There are ‘three aspects’ there (concerning) the execution of the
intended aim (arthabhāvanā). ‘What’ (is to be attained) in this connection is
‘heaven’. “By what’ (it should be done) in this connection is the sacrifice, and
‘how’ (it should be done) in this connection is barley and similar (offerings). In
the same way, in the case of the execution of the word (śabdabhāvanā), ‘what
(is to be done) in this connection is the (statement of the) activity (pravṛtti) of a
person (directed at his intended) goal (bhāvyā). ʻBy what’ in this connection is a

word (which enjoins its attainment), and ‘how’ in this connection is the
explanation of the meaning of the precept (arthavādavākya), which is the

operation (vyāpāra) that relates (the two). (A command that) ‘impels (to

action) (codanā) is a Vedic statement concerning what should be done. As they
say:
‘(A command that) impels is a statement that impels to action.’

This (statement) can be related (and linked) to both kinds (of
execution). And (if), understood by means of (some) other authority (pramāṇa),
that declares the (same intended) meaning, it assumes the status of an authority,
and eṣtablishes that that intended meaning (is correct). For example, (in
statements such as) ‘one should offer eleven measures (pāla) as libation to
Indra’, just as libation and other (ritual action) is mentioned, the deities Indra

one considers/intends (should be attained)°. The bhāvaka who executes the injunction is
‘the one who considers/intends (that it should be done)ʼ.

Read svargādikam arthaṁ for svargādikam artha.

Bhāvanā has two aspects. One is arthabhāvanā (i.e. ‘intention with regard to the

goal’) and the other śabdabhavanā (i.e. ‘īntention with regard to what is stated’). Both
consist of three factors. In the first case they are: 1) That which is attained (in this case
heaven). 2) That through which it is attained (in this case the sacrifice). 3) How it is to

be attained (in this case the sacrificial offerings etc.). Analogously, śabdabhavanā

consists of 1) the statement of the goal of an individual’s endeavour by means of 2) a

word or scripture which enjoins its attainment by 3) relating the two in a meaningful

sentence.

See Jhā (1942 second edition 1964) p. 154.

TANTRĀLOKA

etc. are also enjoined (as the objects of worship), because the relationship
between the sacrificial substance and the deity should be declared (clearly and)

directly (sākṣāt pratipādya).
He says just that:

gza

fk šaāī. || g31|

S=ḶINa TYGTTĪ fāēzāīsīī ī fāz: |1 z2¢

tadekasiddhā indrādyā vidhipūrvā hi devatāḥ || 127 ||
ahaṁbodhas tu na tathã te tu saṁvedyarūpatām |
unmagnām eva paśyantas taṁ vidanto ‘pi no viduḥ || 128 I|
tad uktaṁ na vidur mãṁ tu tattvenãtaś calanti te |
(However), only (minor) deities such as Indra, (whose worship) is
indeed ordained by injunctions (vidhipūrva), are attained that way. This
is

not the case with ‘I’ consciousness. Those (who sacrifice to consciou

sness

but) witness only (its) emergent (unmagna) objective aspect, although they

know that (consciousness in this aspect as deity, in truth) know it not.

That

is said (in the Bhagavadgītā, where we read that): ‘they do not know Me in

reality and so they fall (calanti).” (127cd-129ab) (128-129)

(The worship of deities) ‘ordained by injunctions (vidhipūrva)
is

preceded (by an injunction), that is, those deities (who are) ‘preceded’ by an

injunction are those (whose worship) is based on a preceding authority
(pramāṇa) which illumines a matter (artha) not previously understood.

“ Itṭ is normal practice in Vedic ritual, and indeed Tantric pūjā, for particular offerings
to be made to specific deities. Injunctions concerning the worship of a deity therefore
should clearly state what offerings should be made to it.

‘l This line is drawn from BhGī 9/25cd. The word ‘calantī literally means ‘(they)

moveʼ or ‘waver’, implying that they move away or waver from that realityʼ, that
is, fall
from it. This is the reading in the printed edition of the BhGT. However, in Jayaratha

complete citation of this line, the reading is cyavanti – ‘fall’ for calanti – ‘move’
or
‘waver’ which confirms this interpretation. See following line.

‘“ The expression vidhipūrva literally means, as we have seen, ‘preceded by an
injunction’. The full articulation of an ‘injunction’ to worship, for example, in a certain

way, in effect describes as it prescribes what should be done and how to
do it. Thuṣ, a
‘vidhī’ comeṣ to mean not just an injunction, but also the ritual procedure itself
that is
enjoined. Worship is also possible without a preceding injunction as to how it should
be

done, or procedure established by the scriptures, but that kind of worship is not

accord with the authority of the Vedic scriptures. The same applies to Tantric

’ The word for ‘authority’ here is ‘pramāṇa’, which also means ‘means of

ritual.

in

knowledgeʼ.

Scriptures are such in both senses. They are a means of knowledge because
they explain
something not known, and they are authorities because they enjoin action
in relation to
the reality they illumine. But this is only possible because the deities to which
they refer
are made known as objective realities and how they should be worshipped.

CHAPTER ONE

Deities (of a lower order that) are separate from one’s own nature are like

(common) objects of knowledge, (with the difference that) their nature is
established by the scriptures, they are not known (pratipanna) by other means
of knowledge (like direct perception or inference). Thus, this view (which is
maintained by the Mīmaṁsakas) is sound. Whereas, on the contrary, one’s own

Self, the sole nature of which is ‘’ consciousness (ahaṁbodha), is for the

aforestated reason, always manifest (prakāśamāna), and so does not require any
means of knowledge to prove its own existence. So it is rightly said that (the
Self) is not the object of preceding injunctions (avidhipīūrvaka). He says just

that (with the words) ‘this is not the case with ‘I’ consciousness’." The
meaning is that it is not the object of injunctions.
Surely, if one’s own Self shines by itself independently of (any) other

means of knowledge,” why is this not always so for everybody? With this

doubt in mind, he says: ‘those’ etc. (For) ‘those’ who worship deities such as

Indra that are separate from their own Self, their own Self is always manifest,
otherwise consciousness of objectivity (vedyavedana) would be logically
impossible, nor could anything else separate from that possibly be the state of

Deity (devatātva). (Thus,) ‘although they know that (consciousness in this

aspect as deity), in actual fact ‘they know it not’, because as they
predominantly perceive objectivity, they would not know it as one with the
perceiver. This is the meaning. Thus, they fall (from the higher state of
consciousness) by accepting this or that particular limited (niyata) deity and the

like (as their own and rejecting their own consciousness). That is said there (in

the Bhagavadgītā):

‘They do not know Me in reality (as 1 truly am) and so they fall.’

He explains that.

aT || 2281I
calanaṁ tu vyavacchinnarūpatāpattir eva yā || 129 l|

(What is meant by) ‘falling’ is nothing but the assumption of a
limited form (by consciousness as one who worships and the gods, instead

of attending to his own consciousness). (129cd)

He corroborates this (view) also with a verse there (in that same book).

devān devayajo yāntītyādi tena nyarūpyata |

Read ahambodhas tu na tathā iti avidhipūrva ity arthaḥ for ahambodha iti tathā iti

vidhipāūrva ity arthah.

! Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ñ and T yadi for yāda.
‘ Read with MSs K, Ch, J, Jh, ṄÑ, and T: pramāṇāntaranairapekṣyeṇaiva for

pramāṇādi-nairapekṣyeṇaiva.
BhGI 9/25cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

This is why (Kṛṣṇa) has said: “they go to the gods who worship the

gods.™™ (130ab) (130)

‘This is why°, because the reason (for that is) ‘the assumption of a

limited formʼ. This is the meaning. As is said (in the Bhagavadgītā):

‘Those who are devoted to the gods go to the gods. Those who are
devoted to the ancestors go to the ancestors. Those who worship ghosts go to

the ghosts, and those who worship Me go to Me.""

Surely, if this is so, how is it said that those who are devoted to other

gods also offer sacrifice? With this doubt in mind, he says:

frācṣa āāā ā 3 ṁ̄ afaradāṝ ftaṝrq 1| 23011

aaç |

nimajjya vedyatāṁ ye tu tatra saṁvinmayīṁ sthitim || 130 ||
vidus te hy anavacchinnaṁ tadbhaktā api yānti mām |

However, those who, having submerged (these gods’) objectively

perceivable nature (into consciousness), know there the abiding state (sthiti)

(of reality) which is (pure) consciousness."® (Thus says Kṛṣṇa,) “even

though they are devoted to that (particular divine form), they go to Me who
am unconditioned.” (130cd-131ab) (131)
‘There’ (means) within the deity, that is separate from one’s own Self.

‘They are devoted to that’ – the meaning is that they offer sacrifice to a deity

who is separate from their own Self. (They attain) ‘Me’, that is, the Self the

nature of which is one with supreme consciousness. (The true) sacrifice (yāga)
is (a state of constant) abiding (avasthāna) within this supreme nondual

(reality), as consciousness, and the attainment of that is itself the fruit.

Surely, the Lord Vāsudeva uses the word ‘Me’. This, the first person, is

singular (and so refers only to Himself), thus how is it said that pure

consciousness (which is impersonal and not Kṛrṣṇa) is denoted (by it)?™ With

this doubt in mind he says:

TṀTT| RITS āTIHĒTHF: |I 232 II

130a is an abbreviation of BhGT 9/26ab.
BhGī 9/26.

‘ The most authentic sacrificial action is the state of being established as pure

consciousness in the supreme nondual nature. This eternal, abiding state is both the fruit

of worship and the means to it.

“’ The question here is that if Deity is essentially pure consciousness, it should be

impersonal, however Kṛṣṇa never refers to Himself impersonally in the Bhagavadgītā.

He always refers to Himself as ‘Me’ or ‘] .

CHAPTER ONE

sarvatrātra hy ahaṁśabdo bodhamātraikavācakaḥ |) 131 ||
sa bhoktrprabhuśabdābhyāṁ yājyayaṣṭratayoditaḥ |

Everywhere here (in all these verses, the personal pronoun) ‘I’

denotes only pure, (awakened) consciousness (bodha) which, by the words

‘enjoyer’ (bhoktṛ)” and ‘Lord’ (prabhu) refer to it as the one who offers
sacrifice and (the deity that is) the object of (his) sacrifice, (respectively).”’

(131cd-132ab) (132)
‘Here?

in

the

Bhagavadgītā,

the

intention

is

to

expoundN

unconditioned pure consciousness, thus it is said that it talks about (vācaka)

consciousness alone, upon which it reflects. It is not even possible that there can
be a second reality apart from the Light of consciousness that can serve as its

counter-correlate which is to be negated (as ‘not the Light’), because then (the

one light of consciousness) would be affected by the (conceived dualistic)
option (vikalpa) (that distinguishes between) a shining state (of the light of

consciousness) and one that is not. In the case of the body, (when one says), for

example, “I am thin”, this reflective awareness of ‘’ is just a thought construct
(vikalpa), because it is possible for there to be a counter-correlate which is to be

negated in relation to the body (i.e. “I am not fat”)." But surely (one may ask),

if consciousness is just one and has no counter-correlate (i.e. the absence of

consciousness), how can the relative distinction (bheda) as the ‘one who offers
sacrifice and the object of (his) sacrifice’ be ultimately real, (for Kṛṣṇa to say

that) ‘they offer sacrifice to Me’ and the like? With this doubt in mind, he says
(in the second sentence): ‘the enjoyer’ etc. The point is that consciousness

alone manifests as the nature of both (the sacrificer and the deity). That is said

there (in the Bhagavadgītā):

‘I am the enjoyer and Lord of all the sacrifices.
Surely (one may ask,) how can one logically justify that the one
(consciousness) is the nature of both? With this doubt in mind, he says:

‘ According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, the bhoktṛ [enjoyer] is the sādhaka [practitioner].
” Abhinava is commenting on BhGT 9/25ab.

Read pratipādayīṣitatvāt for pratipipādayiṣitatvāt.
‘ The ‘I amʼ in such experiences one has of oneself as ‘T am thin’ is a notion, not

consciousness, because it entails the opposite proposition, its counter-correlate ‘I aṃ not

fat’. The pure subjectivity of ‘I amʼ, which is not related to the body, cannot have any
counter-correlate, i.e. ‘T am notʼ. This cannot be a proposition, although it is a statement,
because although we have a subject, nothing can be predicated of it, and thus it does not
really amount to a proposition at all. The system frames in the most proximate words
possible what is essentially beyond the framework of a logical structure. It is dealing
with trans-empirical experience, that is, experience wherein the relationship between
subject and object no longer obtains. This is possible because consciousness
encompasses both without being either, although it is initially discovered in the subject.

BhGī 9/25ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

fe ara

Yyājamānī saṁvid eva yājyā nānyeti coditam || 132 ||
nānyākṛtiḥ kuto ‘py anyā devatā na hi socitā |

It is said that consciousness itself is the sacrificer and that the

object to which sacrifice is offered is none other than that. (Deity has) no
other form (than this) at all (kuto ‘pi). (For) another deity (than this) is
not appropriate (as an object of worship). (132cd-133ab) (133)
‘It is said’ʼ, that is, asserted ‘that consciousness itself is the object to

which sacrifice is offered’. For there is no reason ‘at all’ that that (supreme

deity may have any) ‘other formʼ, such as Indra etc. Moreover, that
consciousness itself is ‘the sacrificer’. There is ‘none other’ (i.e.) different
(consciousness). The meaning is that the sacrificer is made of nondual
consciousness. Or else (one could say that) it is not proper for the deity of

consciousness to have a form like this,° because duality (bheda) within

consciousness is logically unsustainable, as (anything that is) separate from
consciousness is insentient. Nor is it logically possible for the insentient to be

deity, which is one with the luminosity etc. (of consciousness). Thus

consciousness itself, which is self-luminous and one, manifests as the nature of
each single (thing). So it is rightly said that ‘He (the Lord) is said to be (both)

the one who offers sacrifice and is the object of his sacrifice.’

Thuṣ it is said that nothing, including injunctions and the like, can serve

as a means (nimitta) to prove (the existence of) consciousness, because it is

proved from the start. Accordingly, he says:

fatkra āīTē: āhīsa m-āĩte gftrīa aI || 2331|
vidhiś ca noktaḥ ko ʻpy atra mantrādi vr̥ttidhāma vā |/ 133 ||

Emend na tvākṛtiḥ to nānyākṛtiḥ as Jayaratha reads the text when he writes na punaḥ

kuto 'pi hetoḥ anyākṛtiḥ indrādirāpā.

The very form of the deity is pure consciousness, although consciousness cannot

have a form, for that would entail an untenable duality within consciousness. Nothing

supposedly different from consciousness could ever appear within consciousness. It is
self-illuminating consciousness that manifests in this way. Deity is not an inert object as
is an idol. Only consciousness is deity and so the only appropriate object of worship.

Read with MSs Ch, J, Ṅ and T sā hy evaṅvidhākṛtimatī for ṣā hi evarṅvidhākṛtīḥ

ākṛtimatī.

‘ The ‘form’, that is, nature of the deity, is pure consciousness, although in reality

consciousness has no form. There can be no duality within consciousness. If there were
any other reality apart from consciousness, it would be unconscious, and so could not

appear anywhere within consciousness. It is self-illuminating consciousness that
manifests in this way. The nature of Deity is not like the manifestation of an inert object.

devatātvaṁ yujyate – literally ‘possess the state of deity°.

‘õ Read with MSs K, Ch, Jh, Ñ, and T: dyotamānatvaikasvabhāvam for
dyotamānatvādy-aikasvabhāvam.
N TĀ 1/132a(132b).

CHAPTER ONE

And (so) neither injunction is stated here (in our view to have
anything to do with consciousness) or the (Vedic) Mantras etc., that are the
domain of its functioning (vrtti). (133cd) (134ab)
Vedic statements (vedavākya) are of two kinds, namely, Mantra (i
the Vedic hymns) and Brāhmaṇa (which are later texts containing the exegesis
of the hymns, ritual and the exploits of the gods).® Again, the statements
(vākya) of the Brāhmaṇas are of three kinds, namely, a) injunction (vidhi)

(concerning ritual action), b) eulogy (arthavāda) (of deities and accounts of

their exploits), c) exegesis (naming and explaining) (nāmadheya). Statements
concerning injunctions have no function (vyāpāra) there within consciousness.
This is the sense of what (Abhinavagupta) is saying. In the same way, Mantras
and the like do not operate there. This is because Mantras and the like are the

‘domain’ and basis ‘of its functioning°’, that is, of the activity which is the

function of injunction (vidhivyāpāra), and without that (basis that) activity is

not successful. Nor can any duality (bheda) possibly arise within consciousness,
such as the relationship (between) the denotator (word) and the object of
denotation (meaning), or the sacrificer and the object of sacrifice. Thus, it is
proved that there is only one consciousness, which is proved to exist (a priori)
right from the start.
Sureḷy, if this is so, how is (it that) this unfolding flow of all things
(viśvaprasara), which are sentient and insentient, (possible)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

Obscured and Unobscured Consciousness

GISJTTHTTTTa
fkzrāī sTgŪē 7ā: |
JIĪĪTJTTGTI Ñ ŪqāTTRTAATĀTTĀTT; ||g
3% II

TITCHTTTZJ R̥ATĪTĒ̄ fĒTT |

so ʻyam ātmānam āvṛtya sthito jaḍapadaṁ gataḥ |
āvṛtānāvṛtātmā tu devādisthāvarāntagaḥ || 134 ||
jaḍājaḍasyāpy etasya dvairūpyasyāṣṭi citratā |
This (consciousness) veils itself, and having done so, is present on
the plane of the insentient. Half-veiled and half-revealed, it is present (in

living beings) starting from the gods right down to plants. Each of these

According to Monier-Williams: ‘The Brāhmaṇa is a portion of the Veda revelation

(as distinct from its Mantra and Upanisṣad portion) and consisting of a class of works

called Brāhmaṇas. They contain rules for the employment of the Mantras or hymns at

various sacrifices, with detailed explanations of their origin and meaning and numerous

old legends. Each of the three Vedas [not Atharvaveda] has its own Brāhmaṇa.’

TANTRĀLOKA

two forms (of consciousness), sentient and insentient, is wonderfully
diverse." (134-135ab) (134cd-135)

‘Having veiled (itself)ʼ, that is, having manifested the contracted state

(of consciousness) by the power of Māyā, the (very) nature of which is the
concealment of one’s own (innate conscious) nature. This is the meaning. ‘The
plane of the insentient’ is the multitude of phenomena (bhāvarāśi) that are
made manifest by (some) other (reality). This is the meaning. Initially, the

Supreme Lord (Who is pure consciousness), wishing to create the universe,
illuminesṣ it (within Himself in such a way) that it is not separate (and diṣṭinct)

from Himself. This is said in various places in the scriptures to be the first
creation (ādisarga). Subsequently, if He wishes to create (the universe) by
means of Māyā, He then causes to pour forth by His own innate freedom, in
the mirror of His own Self, the endless series of manifestations (ābhāsa) of the

two, subject and object, and from the midst of the multitude of phenomena
(bhāvarāśi) which are His own body (svāṅga) He causes the (physical) body,
vital breath (prāṇa), intellect and Void to become the perceiver by projecting
(onto them) the agency, which is essentially the subjectivity present within

Himself (svagatāhantā). After that, by setting aside (His own) conscious nature,
He induces sound (and the other sensations), as the field of objectivity (idantā),

to assume the state of the objects of perception (of the subject). Therefore, the
body and the rest assumes into itself (the subjectivity) of the knower (jñātṛtā)

and the agent (kartṛtā) and what is (separate and) other than that, (the

objectivity) of the object of knowledge and action.™ Thus, they are called

‘sentient and insentient’, and he says that by saying (that the Lord’s

consciousness is) ‘half-veiled and half-revealedʼ.
Moreover, in this way he also says that He is endless by virtue of the

wonderful variety of His (two) modalities (prakāra), (with the words) ‘each of

theseʼ, etc. The ‘wonderful variety° there of the insentient is due to the (many)

“’! Possibly Abhinava begins his paraphrase of a passage from the TBh beginning here

(134-135ab (134cd-135); certainly up to 136ab (136) and possibly also up to 137ab

(137).

Read with MSs Kh, Ch, J, Jh, Ñ, T and D ullāsayati (‘causes to pour forth’) for

ābhāsayati (‘shines forth’).

Thus, the psychophysical organism functions as agent and knower, that is, as the
subject.

‘’ Jayaratha explains that initūally, the Lord who is pure consciousness, wishing to

create the universe, illumines it within Himself in such a way that it is not separate and
distinct from Him. This is the first creation (ādisarga). It is followed by Maāyā’s
creation. When He wishes to create by means of Māyā (the universe of duality), the

Lord illumines by His own innate freedom, on the mirror of His own Self, the endless

series of manifestations of subjects and objects along with the body, vital breath
(prāṇa), intellect and so on. The perceivers are those manifestations and aspects of the

Lord that partake in varying degrees in His self-awareness, that is, ‘I-ness’. Conversely,
external sensorial objects, such as sound, are characterized by ‘this-ness’. They

apparently manifest separately from consciousness, which is subjective, and so assume

the status of objects of perception. In other words, the psychophysical organism assumes

the aspects of agency and cognitive subjectivity in relation to the goals of its activity

and objects of knowledge. The former is sentient and the latter, insentient.

CHAPTER ONE

different words (and entities they denote) etc. And that also, due to the varying
(intensity of insentience, according to whether it is) more or less weak, is of
many kinds. Although the (variety of the) sentient (aspect) is also endless,

because of the diversity of (the many) families (of living beings), it is of many
kinds, because of the diversity of hierarchy and the rest of the three fetters.
(Thus the countless) contracted perceivers wander (around) in this

and that state in accord with (their) hopes (for the result of) each of (their)
actions (karman), and as (they) are devoid of the understanding (buddhibhāva)

of ‘right’ (dharma) and ‘wrong’ (adharma), and expelled (into the outer

world) by this and that desire, they know their own Self (svātmānam),

although (just) one, as being various and as having many forms. Moreover, they
perceive the insentient object (of the senses) as a multiplicity, insofar as it gives
rise to pleasure and pain etc.
What is the cause (nimitta). of this variety in this way? With this
question in mind, he says:

āīa aāaaīaṁ fē fē f ā fatrāātq 11 3u11
ā fn-rai
daa sfr ahk a 1
tasya ṣvatantrabhāvo hi kiṁ kiṁ yan na vicintayet || 135 |
tad uktaṁ triśiraḥśāstre saṁbuddha iti veīti yaḥ |
He (the Lord of Consciousness) is free. What may He not
conceive?® That is said in the Triśiraḥśāstra, (which declares that) one who
knows (this wonderful diversity) is well awake (saṁbuddha). (135cd-136ab)
(136)
He supports (his view by referring) to that (Tantra) (not by quoting it
literally but by paraphrasing) on the basis of the meaning, (and so says) ‘that is
saidʼ etc. ‘One who knows’ (this) wonderful diversity ‘is well awake
(saṁbuddha)’. The meaning is that he is properly (and perfectly) (samyak)
awake. That is said ‘īn the Triśiraḥśāstra’ that is, in the venerable
Triśirobhairavatantra. There much is said (in a passage) beginning with:

The three bonds are, as we have seen, the three Impurities (nala), namely individual

(fundamental) impurity (āṇavamala), Māyā and Karma. See above 1/22 ff comm. and

notes.

% Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, N, T and D saṅkucitāḥ for saṁkucitā.

Read with MSs Kh and Jh-bahiṣkṛtatvena for -pariṣkṛtatveva. This reading is

supported by the one in a verse quoted by Jayaratha from the Triśirobhairavatantra in
the commentary on the following verse.

Read jānanti for jānate.

Swami Lakshmanjoo suggests the reading vicinayet – ‘discern’ for vicintayet

‘conceive’. But that reading does not fit the metre. The first line of this verse is quoted

in the MM (p. 45). The second half there reads ‘kiṁ kiṁ yatra vicitrayet’ (‘where and
what may he make various?”) for ki kiṁ yan na vicintayet (What may He not
conceive?).

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Otherwise, one who possesses little wisdom (bodha) (and does not
know this), plays within the cage of the body hanging on the thread of the
impurity (that sullies his soul) (mala), like a small insect (that plays) with the

threads (of a garland on which it sits).”

It goes on: ‘one should know him’ (who knows this) to be properly

(and perfectly) awake .. .” and ends with: “(the fettered soul) wanders about

like an actor with many forms of external signs (of his sentiments), devoid of
sound understanding," expelled (into the outer world) by (his) desire and lack
of forbearance (akṣema).”
Surely (one may ask,) even if the body etc. is considered to be the
perceiver, it is (nonetheless) insentient and so is an object of knowledge; thus,
how can it have this sort of cognitive consciousness (jñāna)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

šravaī fē frzīztcorareōīaāṁ
aT || q3ē|

jñeyabhāvo hi ciddharmas tacchāyācchādayen na tām || 136 ||

Objectivity is a quality of consciousness (cit); its shadow cannot

cover it!” (136cd)

Objectivity is a quality of cognitive consciousness (jñāna). (The

cognition) ‘l know (this) entity does not (imply) any excellence on the part of

the entity (by virtue of which it can give rise to cognition), rather the cognitive
nature of that (cognition) belongs to cognitive consciousness alone. And that is

said here” (in the Triśirobhairavatantra) also:

‘the objectivity of the object of knowledge is noetic consciousness

(jñāna) itself (eva).”

Thuṣ, insofar as they are objects of knowledge, ‘the shadow’ of the
body etc. ‘cannot cover” consciousness, because something cannot be its own
obscuring covering. (It cannot obscure consciousness) in such a way that it
would not be cognitive consciousness of this sort. Thus, even though it assumes

Read with MSs Kh and J: -buddhaḥ sa for —buddhas tu.
T1 tentatively have emended svabuddhibhāva- (‘own

underṣtanding’)

to

subuddibhāva- (‘sound understanding’). MSs K, Kh read: icchājñeyabahiṣkṛtaṃ –
‘expelled (into the outer world) by (his) desire and objectivity° for
icchākṣemabahiṣkṛtam – ‘expelled (into the outer world) by (his) desire and absence of
forbearance (akṣema)’.

This is a paraphrase of a line in Trisirobhairavatantra quoted literally in the
commentary.
“ One may suppose that by ‘here’ Jayaratha means the Tantrāloka, but as this reference
is missing in the TĀ, I take him to mean the Triśirobhairavatantra.

CHAPTER ONE

the body etc. as itself, the (essential) conscious nature of the Self is not

compromised at all That is said there (in the Triśirobhairavatantra) itsel:

“The (essential) nature of the object of knowledge is consciousness, and
its shadow cannot cover (it).’

Thus, he says:

STTTIHTTTTĪ
ā!Tr rT fkrāz 1| q3.1
tenājaḍasya bhāgasya pudgalāṇvādisa
U
anāvaraṇabhāgāṁśe vaicitryaṁ bahudhā sthitam || 137 ||
Thus, the wonderful variety of that sentient aspect (variously)
called, for example, the individual soul (pudgala) or atom (of consciousness)
(aṇu), rests in many ways in the aspect (of consciousness) that is
unobscured. (137)
‘Thus’, because (objectivity) does not obscure consciousness, the
‘unobscured’ (aspect) is the Self, the nature of which is pure consciousness.
This is the meaning. Even though the body etc. are consciousness by nature,
initially (āmukha) they manifest as objective (jñeyatvena), and so may also be
impure (even though they rest in the pure, unobscured consciousness of the
Self).
Surely (one may ask,) if division is logically impossible within

consciousness, how can one explain the wonderful variety (of levels of

consciousness)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

%eāt || g3¢ ||

saṁvidrūpe na bhedo ‘sti vāstavo yady api dhruve |
tathāpy āvṛtiniṛhrāsatāratamyāt sa lakṣyate || 138 ||

Although there is no real division (bheda) (of levels) within
consciousness, which is always stable (dhruva) (and invariable), even so it is
perceived (to exist) due to the gradation (of the progressive) decrease of the
veil (that covers it). (138)

‘The decrease of the veil’ is the dwindling away of individual
(fundamental) impurity (āṇavamala). ts ‘gradation’ is the degree (in which it
takes place,) which is slight, middling, or much. It is for this reason that (a
division of levels of consciousness) ‘is perceived’. The point is that it is
certainly not possible (to perceive divisions within consciousness) directly. This
The point is that even though the reflective awareness of consciousness is associated
with the body, the nature of the Self is not affected in any way.

TANTRĀLOKA

is why he qualifies (the word ‘division’ by saying) before that that it is (not)
‘realʼ.

says:

Now what is that gradation (tāratamya)? With this question in mind, he

āaezam: vīhqraṁaroṝā |

T-ĪRTTTT |I 2381
tad vistareṇa vakṣyāmaḥ śaktipātavinirṇaye |
samāpya paratāṁ sthaulyaprasaṅge carcayiṣyate || 139 ||

We will talk about that extensively in the course of explaining (the

nature of) the descent of the power (of grace) (śaktipāta), and having
concluded (the matter) present in the first (part), it will be discussed in the
context of matters pertaining to ritual (sthaulyaprasaṅga) (in the second

part). (139)

As he will say:

‘The manifestation of the gradation (tāratamyaprakāśa) of the descent
of the power (of grace) (śaktipāta) is these (three degrees), namely, intense,

middling and weak. Each of these is of (these same) three kinds.’

” See below, 13/129cd ff. where the nature and gradations of the descent of the power
of grace is discussed in detail.

The second line of this verse is not easy to understand. Jayaratha’s explanation does

not make good sense and does not seem to be relevant. Indeed, it may well be that

Jayaratha’s reluctance to comment on every word is really due his own uncertainty
about the meaning of this difficult line. For this reason, it seems, he invites the reader to
work it out for himself. In verse 145, Abhinava clearly defines the gross activity
(sthaulyavibhrama) of knowledge as being the power of action. In verse 163 he

confirms this usage by saying that action, which has as its essential nature knowledge, is
the ‘grossness’ (ṣthūlatva) within itself that transports the multiplicity within it.

Jayaratha explains that ‘grossness’ is the outpouring of duality. This is the level of ritual
action which is in the domain of the Individual Means – the ‘gross means’ʼ (sthūlopāya).
The other two – the Empowered and the Divine – are subtle and supreme, respectively.
Accordingly, I understand sthaulyaprasaṅga to mean, basically, matters pertinent to
ritual. Ritual procedure is taught and its nature discussed from Chapter Fifteen onwards.
While this seems fairly clear, the reading samāpya paratāṁ as it stands is not. The

variety of variants, different in each manuscript, is possibly indicative that the scribes
were also perplexed. It seems that Abhinava may be referring to the first half of the
Tantrāloka. Once Chapter Fourteen is concluded, he will talk about the rituals. These
begin with the rites of initiation that are graded according to the competence of the
aspirant. Moreover, the Impurity that obscures the soul is progressively removed by

means of them. Accordingly, 1 have tentatively emended the reading to
samāpyāparagaṁ, i.e. ‘having concluded (the matter) present in the first (part)ʼ, taking
it to be an ascriptive of an unstated ‘arthamʼ i.e. ‘matterʼ, ‘subject’ or ‘teaching’.

“ Below 13/129 (129cd-130ab).

CHAPTER ONE

Beginning with this (verse, this matter) ‘will be discussed’, defined and

examined in many ways.” This is the meaning. The point is that here (in this
chapter) is enunciated all that is to be understood, that will be discussed (in the
Tantrāloka). As he will say:

‘All (the topics discussed in the Tantrāloka) are announced in due order
in the (first) chapter, which deals with the various forms of consciousness

(corresponding to the means to realisation).”

For fear of making the book excessively long, we have not explained
this (verse) word for word. Thus, one should understand it for oneself. In this
way, in accord with the progressive decrease of impurity, one also perceives the

Lord's nature of one’s own Self." He says this (next).

Concerning the Means to Realization’

Preliminary Analysis of the Means based on Will, Knowledge and Action

īfTṁ̃ Ṁard faṛ: 1

Concerning these three moments of enunciation, definition and investigation, see
below 1/246ab-277ab (1/246-277).

“’ Below, 1/288cd (287ab).
l Read ātmano for ātmanāṁ.

°!! Abhinava now turns to an exposition of the means to realization, which continues up
to 245. Verses 140-170 are a general preliminary analysis. In the first three verses,

Abhinava outlines the fundamental principles on which practice is based. The one
reality is pure consciousness which, from different points of view is equally the
Absolute, Deity and the Self. Ignorance of this one reality is binding, because it is the
condition in which the many individual souls perceive themselves, the world they live in
and the one ultimate reality as distinct and separate from one another: This sense of
separation is accompanied by conceptualization (vikalpa), which identifies and labels

the countless unique particulars and sets them into relationship with one another in time
and space. This is inferior – apara – knowledge with respect to that of one’s own

essential nature and of all things as pure, divine consciousness, which is supreme – para
– knowledge. Inferior knowledge is not just an absence of knowledge. It is partial

knowledge. Supreme knowledge is complete knowledge, which includes inferior
knowledge and fulfils it. Even so, inferior knowledge obscures superior knowledge so

long as the latter is not fully grasped. Thus, there is nothing to attain that is mis ng. The
path to liberation is the progressive removal of ignorance. The means to do this, which
Abhinava outlines in the following verses and then discusses in detail in the following
four chapters, belong to four categories. These are 1) Anupāya – No Means;
2) Śāmbhavopāya – literally Śiva’s Means, which 1 call the Divine Means (214-220); 3)
Śāktopāya –- the Empowered Means (221-241); 4) Āṇavopāya – the Individual Means
(242-245). The last three correspond to three aspects of the one triadic (Trika) reality,

namely, Śiva, Śakti and Nara, the individual soul. The first corresponds to Anuttara as
the fourth Inexplicable that is all three and yet transcends them. From this perspective,

Anupāya does not just mean ‘No Means’, it also means anuttaropāya, that is the Means
which is Anuttara itself or the direct means to it, which is the most excellent (anuttara)

of all.

TANTRĀLOKA

ataḥ kaṁcit pramãtãraṁ prati prathayate vibhuḥ |

pūrṇam eva nījaṁ rūpaṁ kaṁcid aṁśāṁśikākramāt | 140 ||
Thus, while the Pervasive Lord (vibhu) reveals His own complete

form (in all His fullness) to a certain perceiver (pramātṛ), (He does so) to

some (other) part by part, successively. (140)

(The Lord reveals His own complete form to) ‘a certain’ (perceiver) by
the (rapidly heightening) gradation of the intense modality (vṛ1ti) of the decrease

(of obscuration),”" and to another (perceiver) ‘part by part, successivelyʼ, in

accord with the gradation (tāratamya), ranging from slow (manda) onwards, in
which the (obscuring) covering decreases.
Surely (one may ask,) what is the full (pūrṇa) and incomplete (apiūrṇa)
state of the Supreme Lord’s nature? With this doubt in mind, he says:

[ek eea|ḶersEĀĀHSḤ

JIṬĪ TT T TGdCT
ag 1| 2.42I|
viśvabhāvaikabhāvātmasvarūpaprathanaṁ hi yat |
aṇūnāṁ tat paraṁ jñãnaṁ tadanyad aparaṁ bahu || 141 I|

The (full and complete) experience (prathana)” of one’s own

nature as the one Being (bhāva) of all beings is the supreme (para)

knowledge (of Deity) individual souls possess. Inferior (apara) and multiple
is that (knowledge) which is other than that. (141)
‘The one Beingʼ is the fundamental Being (sartā) which is the supreme
light (of consciousness of all beings, that is,) of all phenomena (bhāva), such as
(the experience of the colour) ‘blue’, ‘pleasure’ and the like, because otherwise

their manifestation (lit. ‘shining’) would be logically impossible. That is the
essential nature of the ‘(full and complete) experience of one’s own nature’,
that is, the direct experience (of that) by means of the dynamic modality (of
consciousness) which is free of thought constructs (avikalpavṛtti). That alone is

Read with MSs Ñ, T and Ḍ -nirhrāsatāvṛti- for —nirhrāsatāvṛti-.
! Read kacit iti tīvranir̥hrāsatāvṛtútāratamyāt | kaṁcid iti aṁśāṁśikākramāt for

kaṁcit iti ũyranirhrāsatāvṛtitāratamyam aṁśāṁśikākramāt.

! Cf. below, 1/156-157. This is a full knowledge (pūrṇaprathā) of onē's own true
nature and that of every single thing individually and of all things collectively. This is

not just information or the knowledge of something that once acquired can be stored
away with other data. It is a continuing ongoing ‘perception’, which is another meaning

of the word prathana. The word also resonates with the sense of ‘unfolding’ or

‘extending’ insight. This does not mean that more is known thereby that was not known
before. It is full and perfect knowledge, nothing more needs to be known. The moment,
as it were, that ignorance develops, it instantly blocks it. In this way, perfect knowledge

never arises in this timeless processless process of perpetual enlightenment. Knowledge
in this sense is liberation itself. It is not just the cause of it.

CHAPTER ONE

the full and ‘supreme knowledge individual souls possess’ of the Supreme
Lord. The knowledge of the empowered (and individual means to realization,)
which consists of thought constructs, ‘is other than that’ kind of full (and
complete) (pāūrṇa) knowledge. 1t is ‘inferior, that is, incomplete (apūrṇa),
because it is devoid of the unfolding insight into the (true) essential nature of

consciousness (citsvarūpaprathā). It is ‘multiple’, that is, it is of many kinds,

in accord with the manner that will be explained. This is the meaning.
He (now) expounds the multiple types (of this knowledge).

rr̥īT̄+ fāftrnfrṝtfzṝ
ftzrt qx3 1
prathamānaṁ vicitrābhir bhaṁgībhir iha bhidyate || 142 |

And that (knowledge), revealed (prathamāna) through the means

that is direct as well as (those that are) means to that (direct means) etc., is

divided here into (wonderfully) diverse (vicitra) modalities.”” (142)

‘That (knowledge) is supreme or inferior knowledge. ‘The means
that is direct’ is the Divine Means (Śāmbhavopāya). That alone is the
unimpeded instrumental means (nimitta)’™ to the attainment of supreme
knowledge. When that has reached (its) supreme summit (parākāṣṭhā), it is
called No Means (Anupāya). Thus, it will be explained that No Means is not just

! One could also translate: ‘the unfolding insight into one’s own conscious natureʼ

Consciousness is not directly recognized to be the one all-encompassing reality and so
appears to be a separate reality that differs from insentient objectivity.

!One could also translate ‘prathamāna’ as ‘experienced’. The full and perfect

knowledge of the true nature of Śiva consciousness, which is our true nature, is both a
perpetual ongoing ‘experience’ and a ‘revelation’.

' Śupreme knowledge is the direct experience of one’s own true nature, and hence all

things, unmediated by any means. Inferior knowledge develops through and as the

various means to realisation (upāya), which have ‘wonderfully diverse

aspects'. These

belong to three categories that are aspects of the unfolding liberating insight or
knowledge (vijñāna), which is the main subject of this chapter as a whole. What has

been said up to now prepares the way for the summarial exposition of these three

categories of practice here. Beginning with No Means, which is ‘supreme knowledge’,
they will be described in detail in the following four chapters. It is possible to attain
liberating insight into one’s own Śiva nature through any one of these types of means, or
they may combine, leading one to the other in a virtually unlimited number of

combinations. Thus, each one may be of a superior or inferior type, according to
whether it leads directly or indirectly to realisation; some may be obstructed more,
others less, thus adding further to their possible variety. See following verse.

! Jayaratha refers to the means to realisation – even the most direct one – as an

‘instrumental cause’ (nimitta), not a direct cause (kāraṇa), which can only be Śiva’s
grace (śaktipāta, anugraha).

TANTRĀLOKA

the negation of (all) the ordinances of the means (to realisation as ineffective).’

The means to that Divine Means is the Empowered (śākta) one, and, by the
word ‘etc.’, (he indicates that) the means to that is the Individual (āṉava) one.
(Thus, the one means to realisations) ‘is divided’, (but this) division is (just)

figurative (not ultimate). This is the meaning.
Such is not the only reason (nimitta) for this wonderful variety, there is
also another. Thus, he says:

TTITTATTĪTĒT ṬITúG; TāTd |I gX31|
tatrāpi svaparadvāradvāritvāt sarvaśo ʻṁśaśaḥ |
vyavadhānāvyavadhinā bhūyān bhedaḥ pravartate || 143 ||

There (in that case) also, these (means are of) many kinds,

according to whether they are (direct or) mediated with regard to
themselves or another, in all respects or part by part, with or without
interposed (obstacles). (143)

“With regard to themselves’ as, for example, the Śāmbhava (sṭate

attained directly) by the Divine Means (Śāmbhavopāya). Thus (when he says

'Read with MSs K, Ch, J, Jh, K, T and DḌ nopāyavidhiniṣedhamātram (‘not just the

negation of (all) the ordinances of the means (to realisation as ineffective)) for
nopāyaniṣedhamātram (‘not just the negation of (all) the means (to realisation as
ineffective)?). Śāṁbhavopāya is the direct means to attain that unobscured, supreme
knowledge that reaches the supreme summit (parā kāṣṭhā) of attainment, namely,
Anupāya. Anupāya, which literally means ‘No Means’ʼ, is not understood by
Abhinavagupta to be just that there is no means to attain the one reality. It is not just a
matter of ‘letting go’ of attachments or abiding in Silence, realizing that all is already
full and perfect and so there is nothing to attain. It is the Divine Being of the Absolute

Deity, Who spontaneously reveals Himself in all His fullness as His supreme act of
grace, understood as an infusion of the Deity°s divine transformative power. It is not just

a mere negation of all means. It is Śiva’s supreme act of grace, that liberates the
individual soul without any effort on its part once and for all. So it is the goal of all the

means to realisation through which Śiva graces the soul.

The word ‘śāmbhava’ is derived from the name ‘Śambhu’ for Śiva. Śaāmbhavopāya

(herein translated as ‘the Divine Means’) thus literally means ‘the means pertaining to
Śambhu (i.e. Śiva)ʼ. The corresponding state to which this means corresponds is
Śāmbhava, that is, Śiva’s own state. Similarly, ‘Śāktopāya’ (which I translate as ‘the
Empowered Means’) literally means the ‘means pertaining to Śakti’, and ‘Ānavopāya’
(which I translate as ‘Individual Means’) is the ‘means pertaining to the aṇu, that is, the
individual soul. Thus, the three means correspond to the triadic ~ Trika – state of the one
reality, namely, that of Śiva, Śakti and Nara (the individual soul). Thus, the three means
are based on, and lead to, their corresponding states. Each of these is the full and
complete triadic reality experienced from one or other of these perspectives, and so each

means is based on, and leads to, the same ultimate reality — Anuttara. Also understood to

be Bhairava, Abhinava equates it with No Means (Anupāya), which is the fundamental
state of the one reality, which is the Light of Śiva consciousness. In this case each
means is direct, although they may require more or less time and operate in different

CHAPTER ONE

that the means may be) ‘mediated with regard to themselves or anotherʼ, (he
intends to say that what is) ‘mediated’ has a means (in other words, one means

serves as a means to another). ‘In all respects’ means (that a particular means
to realisation operates) completely and ‘part by part’, partially. (The means
may be) ‘with interposed (obstacles)’ because the direct means (to realisation)

is absent In this way, initially the means to realisation is of three kinds

because it is divided into the Divine (Empowered and Individual means). As
each one of them can be mediated with respect to one another, (the three are) of

two kinds and so are six.” These are again of two kinds, according to whether
each one is complete (pūrṇa) or partial (apiūrṇa), making twelve (varieties).
Theṣse are again of two kinds, according to whether each one of them has

interposed (obstacles) or not, and so there are twenty-four (varieties). Moreover,
as the interposed (obstacles) are of many different kinds, so the varieties (of

means) are many.
Surely (one may ask,) in this way (tāvat) knowledge has been

introduced as that which is to be attained (upeya). Thus there (in that case),

there should be some means (to attain it), and that is not knowledge itself,

because that is what is to be attained. Nor is it ignorance, because that cannot

serve as a means to that. So what then is the nature of the means (to attain it)?

With this doubt in mind, he says:

dH, || .x |

jñānasya cābhyupāyo yo na tad ajñānam ucyate |
jñānam eva tu tatsūkṣmaṁ paraṁ tv icchātmakaṁ matam || 144 ||

The means pertaining to knowledge is not said to be an absence of
knowledge (ajūāna), (rather) it is knowledge itself; (however,) that which
domains. Although this is a possibility, one means may lead to another and so are
arranged in a hierarchy.

The ‘direct means to realisation’ in the fullest sense is the immediate recognition that

one’s own nature is pure Śiva consciousness. This takes place in the most perfect
practice of the Divine, that is, Śiva means to realisation, that develops spontaneously
into No Means by the most intense form of the descent of Śiva’s power of grace
(Śaktipāta). Then there is no mediation of any means – it is direct attainment of the
supreme, liberated state. If this does not take place, then the practitioner must resort to

other, more or less, indirect means.
Any one of the three categories of practice can by itself lead directly to realisation.

Thus, there are three kinds of practice. Or else, one category of practice may lead to
another, which then leads directly to realisation. Thus, each category is of two types,

making six in all.

If the means leads to realisation without further practice and grace, it is ‘complete’
or, if not, ‘partial’.

Read tadanaupāyikatvāt for tadanaupayikatvāt.

The Empowered Means is jñānopāya – ‘the means based on knowledgeʼ i.e.

conceptual knowledge (vaikalpikajñāna). See below, 4/2-6. Fundamental to
understanding the nature of practice and how it operates is the distinction between

TANTRĀLOKA

is more subtle than that is considered to be the supreme (means). It is (the
power of) the will (icchā) (to realisation that achieves its goal
instantaneously).” (144)
However, ‘that which is more subtle than that’ ‘is considered to be’
different from the gross, conceptual knowledge of the Empowered and other
(means). This is the prose order (and connected sense of this sentence).” Thus
it is the ‘Supreme (Means)’, which is the Divine (Śāmbhava) one. This is the
meaning. Thus it is said to be ‘an (intense) intent (icchā)’, (whereas) the

essential nature of the Empowered and Individual (Means) are (the powers of)
knowledge and action. This is the overall sense.
Surely, even so, (one may ask) how is it logically possible that the
relationship between a means and a goal (upāyopeyabhāva) pertains to (reality)
which is just one? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3JRTIJHITT]
JTTS TĪGATHJH: |

|I Çx4, 1I
consciousness free of thought constructs (nirvikalpa) and with them (savikalpa).
Formulated for the first time by the Buddhists, the distinction between these two forms
or aspects of consciousness has a long history and is generally accepted by all schools of
philosophy and teachings, although variously understood. Generally, the former is a
liberated state compared to the latter, which is bound by thought constructs. The Divine

Means operates in and as consciousness free of thought constructs (nirvikalpa). The
other two are within its domain.
See above, verses 26 and 27, where Abhinavagupta maintains that ignorance is
limited knowledge, not an absence of it or essentially different from it.
The translation is in accord with Jayaratha’s interpretation. However, one could also
(probably better) understand this verse as referring to two means of realisation. In this

perspective, the first sentence concerns the Empowered Means, which is based on the
exercise of the power of consciousness to know (in the sense of perceive and conceive

correctly). The second may then be taken to refer to the Supreme Means (paropāya i.e.
SŚāmbhavopāya), which is based on the initial intention to perceive and conceive that
impels it (cchopāya). t is the first moment of perception (prathamikā-locana) which is
the perceiverʼs state of self-awareness free of thought constructs (nirvikalpa). In that

case the translation would be as follows:
‘The means based on knowledge (which pertains to Śakti) is not said to be (a

form of) ignorance (which evolves into insight), but is (in fact ultimately) knowledge
alone. The Supreme (Means) is considered to be subtle (compared to the other two in
which thought still operates), and is a (direct) intent (icchā) (to realisation that achieves
its goal instantaneously).”

Htis clear from his commentary that Jayaratha understood the meaning of this part of
the verse to be ‘(rather) that is knowledge itself which is considered to be subtle and is
the supreme (means) which is the (intense) intent (icchā) (to realisation).” Here, it seems

to me, Jayaratha may not be correct. The three main categories of means to realization
are 1) Supreme, whichis based on intent ~

sśāmbhavopāya. 2) Subtle, whichis based on

knowledge – Śaāktopāya. 3) Gross, whichis based on action - Āṇavopāya. 1 understand
‘subtle’ to refer to Śāktopāya andsupreme’ to Śāmbhavopāya. 1 understand this verse

to be referring to the first two means. The following verse, as one would expect if this
interpretation is correct, refers to the third ~ gross — means.

CHAPTER ONE

upāyopeyabhāvas tu jñānasya sthaulyavibhramaḥ |

eṣaiva ca kriyāśaktir bandhamokṣaikakāraṇam || 145 ||

(The sense that there is) a condition which is the means and one
that is a goal is (essentially) an error (inherent in) the gross state of

knowledge,” and that is itself the power of action, which is the sole cause

of (both) bondage and liberation.’” (145)

The ‘gross state’ (of knowledge of reality amounts to) the outpouring

(of manifestation) as the duality (bheda) of endless subjects and objects

(brought about) by the submergence of the supreme, subtle innate nature of the

one compact (uninterrupted union) of consciousness and bliss. This gives rise to
the error (bhrama) that ‘that is the goal and this is the meansʼ. In reality, Śiva

alone, Who is the supreme light of consciousness, is the goal, and He shines
everywhere because He does not cease (to exist) anywhere. Thus, in this case,
no purpose whatsoever is served by (any) means (to realization), because (by
definition) they make known (something that was previously) unknown. That is
said (in the Saṁvitprakāśa) (where we read):
‘When Your true nature is directly visible and (You) abide clearly
apparent in all respects, those who make use of means (to realization) certainly

do not know You.”

No Means will be explained (in Chapter Two) in the same perspective.
(Now) surely (one may ask,) if this is the case, then how can this common

practice (vyavahāra) (of the means to realisation) bring about the development

(of liberated consciousness)?”™ With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘this same

” Another possible translation is ‘The gross dynamism of knowledge is the relationship

between the means and the goal.’ The word ‘vibhrama’ is translated as dynamiṣm. It can
also mean ‘error’, which is how Jayaratha understands it, although he does refer to the

error of duality as an ‘outpouring’. The sense of sthaulyavibhramaḥ can also be the
mistake of the grossness of knowledge. Knowledge is both the means and the goal. Itṣ
arising is instantaneous insight. Either way, the distinction between a goal and the
means to attain it is absent. Abhinava himself clarifies in the next line that when he
refers to the gross state of knowledge, he is talking about action. See following note.

Action is described as ‘gross knowledge’ above in 1/139 and below in 1/145. This is
because, as Jayaratha explains, the action meant here is the process of manifestation.

The arising and falling away moment to moment of what appears within consciousness

takes place as cognitive action. The production of relative distinctions between subjects

and objects and amongst them is the gross form of cognitive consciousness, i.e.
‘knowledge'. The relationship between a means and its goal is analogous to that of the
cause and its effect (kāraṇakāryabhāva). This too, as we have noted already, is
understood in terms of action. The cause being agent, and the effect the product of its
activity. In soteriological terms, activity that generates Karma is binding, whereas acts

of discernment and insight are liberating.

”! SP 1/13, also quoted below in TĀv ad 2/14 and by Śivopādhyāya ad VBh 124 (122).

A common distinction is made by nondualists of all schools between ‘the business of
daily life’ (yyavahāra), also called the ‘relative’, or ‘conventional’ truth/reality, and the
supremely real (paramārthika) or ‘ultimate truth/reality. The other major nondualisms,

TANTRĀLOKA

(power of action)ʼ etc. (It is) ‘the power of action’ because it gives rise to the
state of diversity brought about by the difference between each single thing. The
sense is that for that reason this (universe of subjects and objects) is just the
unfolding expansion (sphāra) of the Supreme Lord. Thus, if (the power of
action) is not known (to be such) in this way, it is binding, whereas if it is
known, it is liberating. He says this (by declaring that it is) ‘the sole cause of
(both) bondage and liberation’. As is said (in the Stanzas on Vibration):
‘This, Śiva’s power of action, residing in the fettered soul, binds it, (but)
when (its true nature) is understood and it is set on its own path, (this power)
bestows the fruits of Yoga (siddhi).’
whether the Buddhist Madhyamika and idealist Yogācāra or Advaita Vedānta,
understand the relative truth as a kind of ignorance of the supreme truth, which gives
rise to the mistake which is the dualistic experience of daily life that is thus not
ultimately real. This is not the case here. Daily life, with its relative distinctions, in this

case, that between the goal of liberation and the means to attain it, is real. However, it is
the domain of ignorance of the one nondual reality which is consciousness, it is the

product of the activity of that same consciousness. Although it is true that there is no
need of any means to attain the consciousness, which is all things and so is already full

and perfect, this does not mean that the means to realisation are not true means. Insight
is the knowledge that they too are the activity of consciousness, as are both the fettered

and liberated state. Thus, because that activity is liberating, one should engage in

practice in earnest, not simply give up making any effort. When we do not practice
awareness, the activities we are inevitably engaged in (even that of not doing anything)
are binding.

SpKā 48. The commentators on this verse variously explain what is meant here by

the power of action from different points of view. In the most elevated sense, it is the
supreme energy of consciousness. Itis called ‘spanda’ (‘vibration’, ‘pulsation’) because

it is by virtue of His inner dynamism that Śiva, the one universal consciousness and

innate nature of every perceiving and acting subject, creates all things and acts through
them. At the same time, it is through this, His universal energy, that Māyā -- the world

of dualityis generated. Thus, it has two aspects. Oneis internal and the otheris external.

The internal aspect is one, and free of all change and succession. In this aspect, Śiva's

power of action is ‘set on its own path’. The external aspect leads to duality and the
succession of manifestations which make up action, and so is successive. In this aspect,

Śiva’s power of action residesin the fettered soul. These two aspects operate in opposite

ways. The outer aspect makes action possible for the limited individual soul and hence

subjects him to Karma, that is, the consequences of his actions. The inner activity of

Śiva’s energy is universal and s0 is devoid of Karma.

It is because we perceive reality in the perspective of our limited conceptions
that we make distinctions between the goals we seek to achieve and the means to
achieve them, and so we act, and our actions bind us by their consequences. Ultimately,
the one reality is always present and complete in every respect
~ there is nothing to
attain thatis not ours already, nor is there anything to avoid. Everything forms a part of

the same reality. When we realize this, we experience Śiva’ s power acting within us,
and the things we do are understood to be the actions of Śiva Himself, Who acts freely

within Himself as He does through us and the outer world. The diversity of
manifestation, based on the relative distinction between things and the countless living

beings that perceive them, is possible because Śiva has the power to act and generate it.
Ignorant of this fact, the individual soulis bound, but when he understands that it is Śiva
alone Who acts, and that thisis his true identity with which all things are one, the same

power is liberating. Clearly, the teaching is not to desist from action or not to have any

CHAPTER ONE

Surely (one may ask,) even if this is so, what is considered here (in this
teaching) to be a means (to realization)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

jEḻEEeitv:ĪEIĒEZcE7ATE

JTRITNd āTRTHĪRTIGĀ THĪTTTTḤ I 22ē. II
tatrādye svaparāmarśe nirvikalpaikadhāmani |
yat sphuret prakaṭaṁ sākṣāt tad icchākhyaṁ prakīrtitam || 146 ||

%1) There (as that is so), that which manifests clearly in the first
(moment of perception) within one’s own self-awareness, the sole abode (of
pure) thought-free (consciousness), is said to be the direct (sākṣāt) (means

to realisation) called the will (icchā). (146)

‘Thereʼ, as that is so, that which ‘manifests clearly’ ‘in the first’

moment of perception (prāthamikālocanajñāna), which has therefore arisen
goals. Rather, it is a matter of acting and having goals in consonance with Śiva’s

activity and His goals, mindful that it is He who is acting as our true identity. See
Dyczkowski 1992a: 128-132, 172-173, 259-263.

Verses 146-156 are quoted in the IPKau fl. 76a-76b. This and the following verse

define the highest means to realisation. Then the following two verses define in
descending order, the remaining two.

” A literal translation of the expression ‘prāthamikālocanajñāna’īs ‘the knowledge of
the first viewing’. According to an analysis of the process of perception adopted from

the Buddhist idealist Yogācāra (which is the theoretical basis of the Mahāmudrā

tradition), there are two major phases of perception. The first is free of thought
constructs. This is the phase in which reality ‘as it is’ (yathābhūta) īs perceived directly.

In the second phase, the content of the first phase is analysed and thus rendered

ameṇable to the daily commerce of life (vyavahāra), in which individual objects and
perceivers are identified and known through the process of conceptualization which
characterizes this phase. In other words, by failing to grasp the initial timeless
immediacy of the first moment, perception precipitates into the sphere of thought

constructs in which notions of time, space and form dominate, thus contracting and

splitting up the initial undifferentiated unitary consciousness in which subject and object
are one. The Buddhist idealists, of course, consider it to be pure consciousness devoid of

subjectivity. The view here, on the contrary, is that it is a pure unconditioned

subjectivity of which the flux of subjects and objects is its free conceptual expression.

The first moment of self-reflective awareness is the subtlest state of
knowledge. It is the will, that is, the pure intention to perceive which is the initial

moment of perception (prathamikālocana) (see above, notes 1,1, 1,101, 1,102 and

1,438). Jayaratha explains that it is the direct experience of the nature of manifeṣtation

as the radiant pulse or ‘flashing forth’ of the power of consciousness (sphuraṇa), which

is one with the perceiver. The first phase is the domain of the Divine Means of Śiva
consciousness itself, free of thought constructs. The other means of realisation operate

in the second moment, in which conceptual representation, and with it duality, arise.
Thus, they are not direct means, and attain their goal only gradually. In the initial
moment of perception, it is possible to experience a state of self-awareness, free of
thought constructs. For most people this happens so fast that they are not aware of it.

But if the yogi practices attention to himself as the perceiver, that experience of self-

TANTRĀLOKA

as free of thought constructs and so, because no separate object of awareness
has emerged is within ‘one’s own self-awareness’ʼ, that is, within the pure
effulgent pulse (sphurattāmātra) (of the Light of consciousness), is the radiant
manifestation (of consciousness) (sphuraṇa) as the direct experience (of reality).
As it does not depend on any other means it ‘is said to be the direct (sākṣāt)

(means to realisation) called the will’. The meaning is that it is said to be the
means (to realisation) called ‘Divine’ (Śāmbhava), which is the unobstructed

expansion of the power of the will.
In order to clarify (this point) by teaching an example, he says:

EUEĒJAIIIAAUECIĒĀḤGEAeTczḤI
ṬIT WTa: āTÇRTJFTTHT
fṜTāTHT |I Ṟ4 1
JIĪ S]JĪ fīkrc̄Ṭ̄TTITTZṬSRTSTĪĪTT|
qāazātdafTī
āīā 3 āīzz: || 2:¢ 11
yathā visphāritadṛśām anusandhiṁ vināpy alam |
bhāti bhāvaḥ sphuṭas tadvat keṣām api śivātmatā l| 147 ||
bhūyo bhūyo vikalpāṁśaniścayakramacarcanāt |
yat parāmarśam abhyeti jñānopāyaṁ tu tad viduḥ || 148 II

Just as an entity (bhāva) manifests clearly (and directly) for those

whose eyes (dṛk) are wide open,” without having to (apply their mind to)

awareness develops, and as it does so, he experiences in the very core of subjectivity an
intense desire. This is not a desire for anything objective. It is the immensely powerful

intention to exist and be conscious, to experience Śiva consciousness directly. Free of
thoughts and notions, it is a direct and perfectly lucid awareness of consciousness
which, shining directly as it is in itself, is Lord Śiva Himself. This then is the most
direct (sākṣāt) and clear (sphuṭa) means to realise Śiva, Who manifests thus effortlessly
in a moment. Accordingly, the means is named after Him. It is Śambhu’s (i.e. Śiva’s)

means because it is based on His innate freedom – the freedom of His self-reflective
awareness, through which He knows Himself and does all things.

Thus, those who can practice this means must possess a clear vision, one that is
expanded and unrestricted. Unrestricted by notions and uncertainties, it perceives

directly and spontaneously. The elevated adept who has received the intense grace to
practice at this level must maintain this awareness. This too happens naturally for one
who is ready to perceive Śiva in an instant without need of any other means.

The word ‘bhāva’, which I translate here as ‘entity’, means more literally ‘being’ or
‘state of beingʼ. Thus, it includes all states of consciousness and all else to which the
practitioner may attend, for example the movement of the breath or the junction between
inhalation and exhalation. Most people who try to do so fail to maintain a steady

awareness of that and are distracted by thoughts which obscure, as it were, a lucid and

steady consciousness of it. This is because their consciousness is contracted. An

expanded state of consciousness, free of thought constructs, maintains awareness easily

without having to repeatedly determine the nature of its object as being none other than
itself in that form. Thus, most practitioners resort to other means, such as the repetition
of mantras or breath control, to steady their reflective awareness.

CHAPTER ONE

determine its nature (anusaṁṅdhi), in the same way Śiva’s nature (manifests

in an instant) to some (elevated souls) also.

2) (Whereas, if the clear and certain) reflective awareness (of one’s
own identity as all things) comes by repeated deliberation (carcana) on the
(developing) process of (increasing) conviction (niścayakrama) that is part
of the notion (vikalpa) (that ‘I am

Śiva and all this’), (the wise) know that to

be indeed the means based on knowledge.” (147-148)

‘VIṇ the same way (as the Divine Means operates based on the insight

that) ‘the Self alone is all this’, so too (in the practice of the Empowered

Means), the notion of Self which, although (it initially) includes both aspects,

namely, (the true notion of) Self and (the false one that) is not the Self,” ‘the

conviction that is part’ (of that notion) which is preceded by the negation of

(its) counter-correlate (i.e. that the Self is not all this), by repeated ‘deliberation

(carcana) is progressively purified (step by step) in accord with whether it is to

about to become clear (sphuṭatābhāvin) and so on. Thus, ‘the reflective

awarenessʼ of one’s own nature which is being conceived (in this way)
‘comesʼ (to attain) (the stage of) a direct experience (pratīti) which is
undivided, the nature of which is direct (insight unmediated by thought) of the

sort ‘this is indeed such’.

Read with MSs C, Ñ, T visphārita- ʻwide open’ for visphurita- ‘dynamically

functional’. One may take ‘dṛk’ – ‘the sense of sight’ to stand, by way of example, for

all the senses. Cf. VBh 80: ‘Having cast (his) gaze fixed (without blinking) on a gross
object (directing his attention inward) and making his mind free of the support (of
thought), (the yogi) soon reaches Śiva.’ Also ibid. 84: “One who, immobile, looking at a

pure (cloudless) sky, fixing (his) eyes (on it) without a break, at that very moment, O
goddess, acquires Bhairava’s nature (vapuṣ). And VBh 113 ‘Listen properly, O
goddess, I will tell (you) the teaching. Liberation arises immediately when the two eyes

are just fixed (without movement).”

These two verses compare and contrast the first two means of realisation. The Divine

Means is direct, spontaneous insight, free of thought constructs, into Śiva’s nature as
one’s own true identity and all things. If one cannot practice in this very elevated way,
then it is necessary to make use of the flux of thought to make it progressively more

clearly manifest by the increasing conviction that that is the true nature of oneself and

all things. This then is the next category of means based on Śiva’s power of knowledge.

” The following commentary is entirely concerned with the second of these two verses.

This is probably not because the commentary on the first has been lost. Rather, the first
verse relates to the preceding one concerning the Divine Means that Jayaratha has

commented on already. More to the point is that the second verse deals with the

Empowered Means, which is presented here as an alternative to the Divine Means for

those who cannot apply it to realise their identity with Śiva directly.

Ṭhiṣ Upaniṣadic dictum is also quoted below ad 4/60cd-62ab.

! Read with all MSs ~kṣepitatve ‘pi for ~kṣepitve ‘pi.

See below, 4/4-6.

Read with MSs Ch, Jh, Ḍ and T vikaḷpamānṉam for vikalpyamānam, i.e. ʻwhich is
being made into an object of thoughtʼ.

At the beginning of Chapter Four, in which Abhinava expounds this means, he lists

six stages in the progressive purification of thought up the perfect clarity of the

realisation of one’s own identity as Bhairava. See below, 4/2-7.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘(The wise) know that to be the means based on knowledge’. The

meaning is that they know it is he Empowered Means (Śāktopāya), which is the

unfolding expansion (sphāra) of the power of knowledge. The word ‘indeed’

serves to indicate that (this means) differs from the previous one. Here (by this

means), it is said that thought itself (in this way) gradually becomes thought-

free (pure consciousness). Again, there (one attains that conscious) nature
(experienced in the domain of the Divine Means to realization) which brings

about the direct experience (of reality) as free of thought constructs. Thus, the

two (the Empowered and Divine Means) lead from one to the other.

yat tu tatkalpanākḷrptabahirbhiūtārthasādhanam |
kriyopāyaṁ tad āmnātaṁ bhedo nātrāpavargagaḥ || 149 ||

3) Whereas the means based on action is taught to be (that which
utilizes as a) means (sādhana) an external entity (artha) fashioned (to serve

as such) by that (same) conceptualization (kalpanā). The difference here
(between the means) is not (in their goal, which is) liberation. (149)

In the same way ‘it is taught’ that ‘the means based on action’

(kriyopāya) is of that nature. It is said in all the scriptures that one should

understand the Individual Means (āṇavopāya) to be the unfolding expansion of

the power of action. For that is ‘fashioned’, that is, conceived by one’s own

creativity (svaśilpa) by means of these

(countless) thoughts

which

are

(essentially) perceptions of duality (bhedaprathā). The ‘means (sādhana) to
that is an ‘external’ particularized (limited) ‘entity (artha) such as the

Thought, imagination, conceptualization, reflection, discernment, and all the other
functions and aspects of thought (vikalpa) operate in the practices that can be classified

as belonging to the Individual Means, just as they do in the Empowered Means. The

essential difference is that practice in the domain of the Individual Means takes its
support from outer entities. Thus ritual, the recitation of Mantra, and even yogic practice
based on outer supports such as the vital breath or visualization of deities, cosmic orders

etc. belong to this category of means. The form of conceptualization is basically the
same as in the Empowered Means, in the sense that whatever the outer support may be,
it is to be conceived and understood as being essentially consciousness, its radiance,

awareness, powers and the like, until everything that is done and its support are realized

to be one with the agent, and hence Śiva.
Both sustained by the power of the will Śiva Himself has to realise Śiva, the

power of action is not essentially different from the power of knowledge. Indeed, the
latter develops from the former and so can resume its former nature. Knowledge turns to
action and action reverts to knowledge. The activity the practice of yoga and the
performance of ritual involves ultimately evolves into liberating knowledge by

cultivating the will, that is, maintaining awareness of the essential subjectivity from
which it issues forth. See following verse.
Instead of bhedo nātrāpavargagaḥ, ĪPKau reads bhedo nātrāpavargataḥ, i.e. the
difference here (between them) is not due to (differences in the form of) liberation.’

“ Read tadātmasvarūpaṁ for tat ātmasvarāpaṅ.

CHAPTER ONE

recitation of Mantras. The word ‘whereas’ (serves to indicate that this means is)

a separate one (from the Divine and Empowered Means). Thought is the entity
(artha) (that serves as the basis) in the Empowered (Means). Here (in this case,
an) external (entity does s0) also. Thus, the recitation of Mantra and the like is
not (a part) there (of the Empowered Means).

(But) surely, (one may ask,) should there not be a difference in the goal
due to the difference in the means? With this doubt in mind, it is said that: ‘the
difference here (between them) is not present (in their goal, which is)
liberation’.” Liberation is the (ongoing) experience (prathana) of one’s own

(true) nature, and that is (attained) by all (the means) insofar as they lead to

one another.” This is the point.

Surely, it is commonly declared that knowledge alone is the means (to

realisation), so how is it that in (the sphere of the) the individual soul it is said
that action is the means? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Knowledge Extends into Action and Develops into Yoga

TTTĪTHTTĪ JĪTTSIIST |Ṟ40
yato nānyā kriyā nāma jñānam eva hi tat tathā |
rūḍher yogāntatāṁ prāptam iti śrīgamaśāsane || 150 ||
For

action

does

not

differ

(from

knowledge),

rather

that

knowledge" itself is such (tathā), for by developing (and becoming firm,)

MS T reads bhedo ‘trānāpavargagaḥ, i.e. ‘the difference here is present in what is
not liberationʼ.

.Cf. below, 1/156.

Here perhaps Jayaratha is not quite correct. This may be so, but Abhinavagupta has
said that each means may by itself lead to liberation. See above, 1/143.

“ What is meant by ‘knowledge’ here is clearly knowledge of Śiva (śivajñāna), that

arises by the removal of the Impurity whichis theignorance that obscures the soul (see
above, the quote from the Svāyambhuvāgama TĀv ad 1/46). Itis also foundin the Śiva

scriptures. Thus, we read in the Svāyambhuvāgama (1/4cd-6) concerning the ten
Śivāgamas and eighteen Rudrāgamas of the Siddhānta:
jñānaṁ śaivaṁ para

ṭ uhyaī yat tat tārakam uttamam |

cintāmaṇir ivātrāso sthitis sarvasya kārakaḥ I

ekam eva śivajñānaṁ vibhinnaṁ daśadhā punaḥ |1
athāṣṭadaśabhūto ‘pi deśāntaravisarpitaḥ ||

‘Knowledge of Śiva is the supreme secret, which is the most excellent saviour
among the various kinds of knowledge, including that of the Veda and the like, in
accord with the various kinds (bheda) of Śiva knowledge. (Śiva)is like a wish granting

gem that is present here and is the creator of them all. Again, thereis just one Śiva
knowledge thatis divided ten-fold andis also the (group of) eighteen that has come
forth in another place.”

TANTRĀLOKA

the (highest) limit of Yoga is attained. (It is said) in the venerable Gama
teachings (śāsana)- (150)

The Gamatantra has not been recovered. However, it is clear from the references

Abhinava supplies in various places further ahead that it was a Bhairava Tantra that

taught Kaula doctrines. Thus, it is an appropriate scriptural authority to sustain a Trika
Kaula view. Yoga is a feature of most, if not all, Indian religious traditions. As a means
to the attainment of the higher realities taught in each one, the forms of Yoga and the

manner in which it is understood and defined varies in accord with what these realities

are understood to be. As discussed by Somadeva (2004: 235-243), broadly speaking
some of the most common are: 1) Bringing the activity of the mind to a halt through
detachment (vi-yoga) of the perceiver from the objective world (Yogasūtra), leading to
the liberated isolation (kaivalya) from Nature and its qualities (guṇa) (e.g. YSū 4/34). 2)
The Jain view that it is disjunction (a-yoga) of the impurity of Karma from the soul
(Chapple 2003: 26). 3) Yoga is absorption in contemplation (samādhi) (Bhoja
Rājamārtaṇḍa p. 2). 4) Yoga is a means to worship God (Kṣemarāja NTu ad 1/8). 5)
According to the Saiddhāntika Nārāyaṇakaṇtha, Yoga is what the literal meaning of the
word is, namely, ‘union’ in the sense of the state of conjunction with Śiva
(sivasāyujyatā). Similarly, Vaiṣṇavas teach that liberation is a state of conjunction with
Viṣṇu who is the supreme form of Nature (paraprakṛti) (below, 4/29). 6)
The
Vaiśesikas define Yoga as contact (saityoga) of the mind with the soul brought about by
the withdrawal from the senses (Vaiśeṣikasūtra 5/2/16). 7) Yoga, according to the
Yogabīja (88-90ab) attributed to Gorakhanātha, is the union of opposites like the two
breaths and, above all, the individual and the supreme soul (cf. ŚT 25/1-3ab). 8)
Oneness of the two (ibid). 9) Nondualist Śaiva Yoga, in which Śiva and the soul are
realised to not be different by the rejection of dualist knowledge (Somānanda 7/81-84b

and MVV 1/110c-112b). 10) Yoga is knowledge, which is Śiva’s power.
We may take the following definition of Yoga found in the MV as the most

authoritative one for Trika Śaivites and the one to which Jayaratha accordingly refers. It

says:

‘The (wise) maintain that Yoga (which literally means ‘union’) is the oneness
of one entity (vastu) with another. That which is (this other) entity, is said to be what
needs to be known in order to achieve (the prescribed) avoidance (of what obstructs the
attainment of the goal and what should be adopted to achieve it). It cannot be known in

either of its two forms (as what should be accepted or rejected) without knowledge
(ñāna). Śiva has uttered the knowledge (thus) described so that it may be achieved.”

MV 4/4-5 (quoted below as 16/289ab-289cd (16/289-290ab), omitting MV 4/5ab).

We observe, as Somadeva (2004: 237) points out, that this definition plays on

the dual sense of the word jñāna – knowledge’ – as both spiritual knowledge itself and

the revelation of scripture. In this way it connects two common themes, namely, the

relationship between Yoga and knowledge and the purpose of Śiva’s revelation.

According to this definition, Yoga and knowledge are mutually supportive. The yogi
must achieve oneness only with what has been previously defined as the reality to be
accepted (upādeya), that is, the pure realities of the universe. Accordingly, he should
reject all that is not that and impedes its realisation. Clearly, from this perspective,

knowledge of what these are is a basic requirement for the practice of Yoga. As

Somadeva writes (ibid.), the contrast between knowledge and Yoga in this context is
thus: ‘one between a conceptual understanding of scriptural injunction and
its
appropriation to direct experience.” Accordingly, the MV supports the superiority of
Yoga over knowledge. Abhinavagupta does not. Although he insists that action (kriyā),

which includes both ritual action and yogic practice, is not something (vastu) else

CHAPTER ONE
(Action) ‘does not differ’ from knowledge ‘because’ ‘that knowledge

itself’, by its development (rāḍhi), that is, growth, having attained the reality
which is the supreme summit and (highest) limit of Yoga, '‘is such’ (tathā), that
is, action. This is what is said everywhere (in the scriptures). This is the
meaning.
Surely (one may ask,) what is the authority (pramāṇa) here (that

supports this view)? With this doubt in mind, ‘it is said’ (needs to be added to)
‘in the venerable Gamatantra’ as the remaining (part of the complete

sentence).

He quotes that very book there (where we read):

aaftrraraṁāraāī
aāī fkkrzṆṝāīzāT 1| zug 1
yogo nāṅyaḥ kriyā nāṅyā tattvārūḍhā hi yā matiḥ |
svacittavāsanāśāntau sā kriyety abhidhīyate || 15I |I|

‘Yoga does not differ (from action) and action does not differ (from
Yoga).” The insight (mati) that, mounted up through the metaphysical
separate from knowledge (vijāāna) (e.g. below 1/232ab (1/232)), he does so in order to

underscore that it is knowledge which is the ultimate source of action and that through
action it operates everywhere.
" This is so because both Yoga and action are impelled by consciousness (see below
1/153). Abhinava is making a point about a matter which is very controversial, namely,

the relationship between action and the cultivation of knowledge of the ultimate nature
of reality on the one hand, and the practice of Yoga on the other. Śaṁkara, the foremost
exponent of Advaita Vedānta, argues on the basis of the teachings of the Upaniṣads, that

the ultimately real Brahman can only be attained by knowledge of Its essential identity

with the Self. The Brahman is unconditioned and eternal, and so the knowledge of this
identity, which is a major theme of the Upaniṣads, liberates from the illusory bondage of

mortality and the suffering that it inevitably entails. The Brahman is pure inactive
consciousness and so cannot be attained by performing Vedic rituals. Śaṁkara

maintains that their performance is enjoined and taught only for those who have not
realised this essential identity. Thus, the knowledge of how they should be performed,

and of all other spiritual disciplines that involve action, is lower knowledge

(aparavidyā) with respect to the supreme knowledge (paravidyā) taught in the
Upaniṣads concerning this identity and its corollary, which is that all that seems to differ
from it is illusory. The classical Yoga system taught by Patañjali in the Yogasūtra
teaches that Yoga is the quelling of the activity of the mind. It is stilled by detaching

consciousness, which is the essential nature of the individual Self, from its fascination

with the activity of Nature. So, although this view is essentially dualist, it agrees that the

ultimate realisation of the highest state of Yoga is the perfect stillness of pure

consciousness.
Here the practice of Yoga is understood differently. It is, as the very word
‘yoga means, ‘union’. It is the process of making all the lower levels fuse with the

higher to ultimately merge them all into consciousness. Yoga is also the withdrawal of

the mind from external objects, to direct it progressively to more and more internal
objects until it reaches the perceiver which is its source and into which it dissolves

away. This is the activity which culminates in Yoga - union - with dynamic

TANTRĀLOKA

principles (tattva), serves to quell the latent impressions (vāsanā) in one’s

own mind,is termed action. (151)

consciousness, that is, merger into it. Free of objectivity, it is quite different from
external action. Participating in the universal activity of consciousness, it is not set in
time and space.

ĪPKau (fl. 79b) and all MSs read -śāntyai (‘in order to still’) for śāntau (‘(engaged)
in stilling%). This seems to be a better reading. However, it is clear from what Jayaratha

says that he had the same reading as that of the printed text before him.
Karma leaves behind ‘latent impressions’ or tendencies deposited like seeds in
the fabric of the subtle body that go on to develop into future experiences in accord with
the past Karma. The impurity of Karma presupposes the Impurity inherent in the
individual soul (āṇavamala) and that of Māyā (māyīyamala), and so these latent
impressions entail the existence of all three.

Arguing for the inherent unity of knowledge and action, which is a major theme of
the philosophy of the Pratyabhijñā, Abhinava quotes TĀ 1/151-155ab in the ĪPVV (vol.

3 p. 258-259). He prefaces this citation with the following remark

‘The learned man who is engaged in activities such as initiation, worship, and
visualization (of the deity) possesses the competence (to perform) ritual action, and (this

competence) is the (contemplative) attainment which is the knowledge of reality. Now

although this traditional teaching (āgama) has been explained in this sense (artha), even
so, this same point (artha) is valid provided there is a root to this matter (artha).

Otherwise, if knowledge is an aid to action, let that be so. (But if someone asks) what is
the manner (prakāra) in
ī which action causes knowledge to increase? (I reply that) that
thisis so because it is seen to be successfully accomplished even by just theimagination

(bhāvanā) alone. If the action (in question) is worship (such that) ‘(My) reflective
awareness that has been (consolidated and) made firm with a sense (bhāva) that extends
right up to the end of the body. (As such) IĪ contemplate, whilst offering all this (offering
of) pleasing flowers and unguents etc. to the Supreme Lord, as being one (with Him and
my Self).” Then it is rightly said that knowledge devoid of (ritual) action such as

worship, does not become firm.”

Cf. NT Chapter Sixteen:
karmī yogī tathā jñānī ācāryas trividhaḥ smṛtaḥ || 66 II
tatra tatra śāstre || 66 || ṭathāpi
karmayogau tu deveśi jñānamūlau phalapradau |
prṛthagbhedo na dṛśyeta jñānād vai yogakarmaṇoḥ || 67 ||
kriyāyās tadviśeṣaphalātmanaś ca yogasya jñānaśaktiṣphāra-rāpatvān na jñānāt pṛthak
bhedo ‘sti, api tu jñānadarpaṇāntaḥ pratibimbitatvena bhinnābhāsatvam iva || 67 || yata

evam

tasmād ācāryamukhyas tu jñānavān sarvado bhavet |

jñānavān paracitsamāveśātmāakapraśastajñānaniṭy vukto yaḥ, sa eva
karmayogādipradhānācāryāṇāṁ madhye mukhya ā̃

vaḥ | sa eva sarvado bhavati |

‘A teacher is considered to be of three kinds: (an expert) in ritual (karmin), a
yogi, and a man of knowledge (jñānin).’ 16/66cd

CHAPTER ONE
And he explains that himself.

svacitte vāsanāḥ karmamalamāyāprasūtayaḥ |
tāsāṁ śāntinimittaṁ yā matiḥ saṁvitsvabhāvikā || 152 I|

sā dehārambhibāhyasthatattvavrātādhiśāyinī |
kriyā saiva ca yogaḥ syāt tattvānāṁ cillayīkṛtau || 153 1

°"'The latent impressions in one’s own mind are the products of the

(three impurities, namely,) Āṇava, Māyīya and Karma. The insight (mati)

(He is variously described in this way) here and there in the (corpus of)
scripture. Even so:
‘O mistress of the gods, (ritual) action and Yoga (both) bestow (their) fruit and

are rooted in knowledge. Ritual action and Yoga are not perceived to belong to a
separate category apart from knowledge.” (16/67)
(Ritual) action which is its particular fruit and Yoga because it is the unfolding

of the power of knowledge is not a separate category apart from knowledge. Rather,

because they are reflected within the mirror of knowledge, they are as if a separate
manifestation. As this is so:
‘Therefore, the foremost amongst teachers should always be a man of

knowledge.” (16/68ab)

“The man of knowledge’ is one who is always intent upon the knowledge that
is praised as immersion into supreme consciousness. Amongst teachers who are

predominantly (engaged in) ritual action, Yoga and the like, he is the foremost teacher.
(That is how) he should ‘always be’.”

‘ For yogaḥ syāt IPVV vol. 3p. 259 reads yogo ‘pi and for kṛtau kṛteḥ.
Quoting verses 1/152-155ab in the ĪPVV (vol. 3 p. 259), Abhinava introduces them

saying these verses are an explanation of the previous one i.e. 1/151 that he has

presented in his own ‘vārtika’ (mayā ca vārtike etat vyākhyātaṁ). This is the
Tantrāloka, to which he refers in this way elsewhere also. It is not his MVV. Clearly,
the citation from the Gamatantra is verse 151. In the ĪPVv (3, 259) Abhinava refers to it
as ‘Sadāgama’ (tathā ca śrīsadāgamaḥ). The liberating power of intuitive insight,
which is consciousness itself, is a dynamic principle. Other schools such as Sāṁkhya
and Advaita Vedānta maintain that consciousness is inactive. This is because they do
not believe that it possesses an actively applied power (śakti). According to the
Sāṁkhya, although devoid of the power to act, consciousness is an impelling force,

which when present impels the activity of the psychophysical organism, which is
created by the differentiated manifestation of Unmanifest Nature stimulated to do so by

the presence of consciousness. According to the Advaita Vedānta, which denies the

existence of a separate reality apart from consciousness, the ‘substance’ from which it

TANTRĀLOKA

which is the means to quell (them) (śāntinimittam) īs (essentially)
consciousness, that rests on (and deploys) (adhiśāyinī) the group of reality

principles that, located externally, generate the body. This same (insight
and the world is formed is the ignorance of Māyā. Like the snake for which a rope is
mistaken in a dark place, it is the illusory result of a mistake. Thus, in neither view is the
world a product of consciousness, although its presence and existence is essential for it

to exist, whether concretely or as an illusion. Kashmiri Śaivism, on the contrary,

maintains that the world is a creation of consciousness. Moreover, it is not, as Buddhist

idealism – Yogācāra – maintains, an illusory creation, as are dreams. If that were so,

then in that case also, there would be no need to admit that consciousness possesses

Śśakti, that is, the power to create a real world and the means to perceive it.
In the present soteriological perspective, this same power is the dynamic

intuitive insight – mmati – which is present in Śiva, the highest metaphysical principle,

and those that constitute the psychophysical body. Essentially consciousness itself, it is

the true fundamental spiritual nature of ritual action which, as such, serves as a means to
liberation. This is especially evident in the rite of initiation. This is because, as

Abhinavagupta will explain in detail in Chapter Fifteen and the ones that follow which

deal with forms of initiation, it is a transformative ascent of the soul through the
principles. In this ascent it leaves behind the lower impure principles (and with them its

own impurities) to enter into the higher pure ones and through them into union with
iva, the supreme principle.

This process develops in the course of the rite by the systematic utterance of
the Mantras which correspond to these planes of reality, progressing through them as

they are uttered. Śiva’s power of intuitive insight – maati – which is knowledge (jāāna)
of the true nature of the metaphysical principles, also develops in the individual soul in

parallel with this unfolding activity which it itself has inspired. It becomes fuller, more
complete, in consonance with increasingly expanding comprehensiveness of the higher
principles which encompass those below them, until the full and complete (pūrṇa)

knowledge, which is liberation itself, is achieved by reaching Śiva, the highest most

comprehensive level of reality. Thus, knowing its true nature as the one consciousness
which is all things and hence one’s own true identity, because every single thing is

everything, the latent traces and habitual tendencies of the mind born from the
impurities that sully and bind the soul, along with the impurities themselves, come to an
end. Again, as this process progresses, the lower principles merge into the higher ones
above until all of them dissolve away into pure Śiva consciousness. Thus, understood as

a developing upwards series of unions — yoga – the same process is also called Yoga.

“ Concerning this triple impurity and the latent impressions that contract individual

consciousness, see above, 1/23 etc.
This translation accords (as it must) with Jayaratha’s interpretation. However, the
immediate sense is that this intuitive insight ‘rests on the outer group of metaphysical

principles which generate the body.” Or according to the reading in the ĪPKau viśāyinī

for adhiśāyinī, the meaning is that intuitive insight is in the midst of the outer group of
metaphysical principles that generate the body. The following verse, which refers only
to the body and the senses (including inner mental senses), apparently supports that this

was in fact what Abhinava meant. Moreover, he is concerned with the binding latent
traces born of the impurities within the mind that affect the maṁi, which is also
understood to be, at the lower level, ‘the activity of the mind’ (manovyāpāraḥ).

The body is said to encompass two levels, corresponding to two bodies. One is
‘impure’ and the other is ‘pure’. The ‘impure’ body extends through the thirty-one

principles from Earth up to Māyā. These are the principles that constitute objective
phenomena and relate specifically to each individual soul. As such they are not
‘common to all’. Accordingly, a Sivasūtra (1/14) declares that ‘the perceptible is the

CHAPTER ONE

is both) action and Yoga, engaged in merging the reality principles into
consciousness. (152-153)
(The word) ‘means’ (nimitta) (in the expression sāntinimittam i.e.

‘which is the means to quell (them)’) serves to explain (the sense of the)

locative." By saying that the insight (nari) (that removes impurity) is
‘(essentially) consciousness is meant that its essential purpose is (the

attainment of liberating) knowledge (jñāna). This ‘insight’ ‘rests on' (the

two kinds of metaphysical principles, namely) those that are not common to all

and, ‘located externally’, generate the impure body, in accord with, for

example, (the following) dictum:
‘O Mistress of the gods, deposit (on the body), in due order, all that is
the cause of the creation of the body with the syllable OM (praṇava) (repeated)

thirty-one times.”

bodyʼ (dṛśyaṁ śarīram). The principles beyond or, as Jayaratha understand them,
‘outside’ the impure body of the sphere of Māyā, are those of which pertain to the pure

universal consciousness common to all individual souls. The passage Jayaratha quotes
refers only to those up to Samanā – With Mind (aka the Equal One). Just beyond it, at

the summit of the series of principles within the sphere of immanence, stands Unmanā the Transmental Beyond Mind. This is the intuitive insight (mati) which ‘rests’ on all
the principles and within which they rest, deploying them within consciousness. The
Transmental is the point of contact with Śiva and hence the direct means to liberation.

See above, note 1,625.
“ Verses 1/152-155ab are quoted in the ĪPVY vol. 3 p. 259. There instead of the reading

cillayīkr̥tau, which is a locative, we find cillayīkṛteḥ, which is a dative of purpose – i.e.
‘so that the (metaphysical) principles may merge into consciousness’ for cillayīkṛtau
‘engaged in merging the (metaphysical) principles into consciousness’. Jayaratha points
out that in the course of initiation, ritual action serves to progressively elevate the
individual soul through the lower reality levels, which merge into those above as it

moves through them. Thus, the lower, impure reality levels below Māyā dissolve away
as they are abandoned, and the higher ones emerge as degrees of their merger into
consciousness. Yoga is understood, in accord with the word’s literally meaning (i.e.
‘union’), as the act of conjoining the reality levels (tattva) in the process of, and for the
purpose of, dissolving away (laya) the mind. Thus, in this case it is clear that ritual
action and Yoga are essentially the same process.

“ Verses 152-155ab are Abhinava’s explanation of the verse in the Gamatantra quoted

s 151. Jayaratha is referring to the use of the locative in the expression

‘svacittavāsanāśāntau’ (in 151c above), that is, ‘in order to quell the latent impressions

(vāsanā) of one’s own mindʼ. He is saying that it is a locative of purpose.

“2 Read adhiśāyinī for adhiśayānā.

Read ityādyuktyāśuddhadehārmbhiṇī for ityādyuktyā śuddhadehārmbhīṇī.
“ SVṬ 2/42cd-43ab. Kṣemarāja

comments:

Śśarīrotpatteḥ

.māyādikṣityantaṁ
.tattvāni ekatriṁśataṁ praṇavena
śrīmanniṣkalabhaṭāraka-tulyavyāptikena
śuddhadehotpattyarthaṁ
nyaset

praṇavanyāsāc caitāni prāgdaśāto ‘nyādṛṁśyeva (bhavaṇti) | tathāhī ---- akhyātirāpā
āyā bhedaprāgalbhyāvimohinī asya, kalā pūjādhyānādikiṁcitkartr̥vonmīlikā, vidyā
tāttvikavivekapradā,

rāgo

bhaktyabhiṣvaṅgapradaḥ,

upadeśādiviṣayakalanāpradaḥ, niyatiḥ bhagavadārādhanādau niyāmikā, puṁbhāvaḥ
"ahaṁ śiva eva" iti prathāprarohakaḥ | evamanyat || 42 ||

“The (thirty-one) principles ranging from Māyā to Earth that are the cause of
the production of the body should be deposited thirty-one times with the syllable OM

TANTRĀLOKA

(The other kind are) the metaphysical principles (above Māyā) that are
common to all. (Both kinds are deployed by the power of insight) by the
initiation through the metaphysical principles (tattvadīkṣā) and other such
(means,) as is taught (in the following passage):

O fair faced lady, placing the Path that should be abandoned below,

(and) impel that (breath upwards) until that energy of the Equal One (samanā)

(praṇava), which is as pervasive as the venerable undifferentiated (niṣkala) Lord. By the
deposition of the Praṇava these change with respect to their previous condition. Thus:
Maāyā, which is the absence of understanding (akhyāti), is the (overwhelming) power of
duality and is deluding. Knowledge (vidyā) (on the contrary) bestows true
discrimination concerning the nature of reality. Attachment (raga) bestows (the desire
to) embrace devotion. Time gives the progressive manifestation (kalanā) of the object of
the teachings and the like. Constraint (niyati) constrains (the individual) to worship etc.
the Lord. The state of the individual soul is ‘I am Śiva Himself’. Thus (praṇava) brings
about the development of insight (prathā) and (so) is in this way different (from its
previous condition).”
Clearly, the thirty-one repetitions of OṀ correspond to the thirty-one ‘impure’
principles that extend from Earth to Māyā. Beyond them are the five pure principles

ranging from Śuddhavidyā (Pure Knowledge) to Śiva. They are projected or deposited

in thirty-one places on the body, from the feet up to the head. This is done by touching
that part whilst saying, in the case of Earth (pṛthvī), the lowest principle: OM
PṚTHVYAI NAMAḤ and so on for the rest of them. Cf. below note 15,142.

“ SVT 10/1275cd-1276a. Kṣemarāja comments:

samanāntasya pāśatvād heyādhvatvam | recayed ity ūrdhvena, ity arthāt ||
athopādeyādhvapraveśapramukhāṁ paratattvaviśrāntirāpāṁ yojanikām āha ---...... tadūrdhve conmanā smṛtā |
mano mananamātrarūpam api tatra na kramate na sambhavati, api
mantrarūpaiveyaṁ daśety arthaḥ | ata evātra prāk ---vyāpāraṁ mānasaṁ tyaktvā bodharūpeṇa yojayet |
tadā śivatattvam āyāti paśur mukto bhavārṇavāt || (SVT 4437) ity uktam |
yataś cātra mananaṁ na kramate, ata eva
nātra kālaḥ kalāś cāro na tattvaṁ na ca devatāḥ || (SVT 10/1276).

htu

As (the Path) up to the end of the Equal One is the fetter (that binds the soul),
(that is) the Path that should be abandoned. In other words, one should exhale upwards.
Now he states to what one should be conjoined which, preceded by entry into the Path
that is be taken up, is repose in the supreme principle:
‘above that is said to be the Transmental.’ (10/1276a)
The mind (manas) (consists) only of thought (mmanana). It does not traverse

there (into the Transmental), that is, does not exist there. Rather this (higher) plane is

solely of the nature of Mantra. This is the meaning. Thus (it was said) here before:
‘Having abandoned the activity of the mind, (the soul) should be conjoined with the
conscious nature. Then the fettered soul reaches the Śiva principle and is freed from the

ocean of phenomenal existence.” (SvT 4/437) It is for this reason that thought does not
traverse here. Thus: “There is no time here, (limiting) energies, movement, reality level
(tattva) or deities.” (10/1276cd).

CHAPTER ONE
Thus, because it quells the latent traces of one’s own mind, (this

intuitive, creative insight which deploys the principles in this way within
consciousness) is ‘action’. Again, that same (action) is Yoga (literally ‘union’),

because it conjoins the principles within consciousness in accord with the

teaching: ‘they maintain that Yogais the oneness of one entity (vastu) with
another.” Those two are not separate from knowledge, and so it is rightly said
that ‘Yoga does not differ (from action) and action does not differ (from
Yogay

“% Concerning the series of twelve phases of the recitation of OṀ, see Appendix to this

chapter. The Equal One (samanā = ‘With Mind’) is the eleventh phase, just below the

energy of the Transmental (unmanā) that flowsinto supreme Śiva consciousness.
““ MV 4/4ab.
“ Above 1/I51ab. The point Abhinava is making here is that Yoga is a form of action

(kriyā). Specifically, it is the act of conjoining all things with consciousness by

recognising their essential oneness with it. This activity is marked by withdrawing the
senses from outer objects and diverting the awareness channelled through them back
into the perceiver. The insight (mati) of the essence of reality that develops in order to

remove the latent impressions of past actions and duality in the mind is a form of action

(kriyā). Those that appear are removed by Yoga and that is action. Note that although
the word ‘kriyā’ does, in common usage, mean simply ‘action’, in a technical sense it
means more specifically ‘ritual action’. According to this view, ritual action (that is,

initiation) removes the three-fold Impurity (mala) that binds the soul, and hence the
latent impressions (vāsanā) in the mind that it generates. Moreover, Yoga, according to

Abhinavagupta, is the process of merging the metaphysical principles into Śiva
consciousness, which is exactly what ritual action is meant to do. Again, we are told that
the process traces the generation of a ‘pure body°. This too is a feature of ritual action.
The prime example of this is initiation. Most specifically it is the regular (samaya)
initiation that Abhinava draws from the Mālinīvijayottara that allows access to his
Anuttara Trika and is repeated by the initiate daily as his regular worship (nityā pūjā).
This is described below in Chapter Fifteen. As an example of how the ritual action is

essentially Yoga or develops into it, Jayaratha summarily outlines an Initiation by

means of the Principles (tattvadīkṣā). Thīs brief, powerful initiation takes place by the
utterance of OM. The sonic energy of OMṀ traverses the body in stages through the

metaphysical principles that are projected onto it as OMis uttered. As we shall see in

detail in Chapter Nine, which deals at length with the metaphysical principles (tattva),

they are divided into two main groups. The first thirty-one principles ranging from Earth

to Māyā are called the ‘impure principles’ because they are within the domain of the
dualistic vision of Māyā. These, as we have seen (note 1,959) constitute the impure

body. The first stage of this initiation is to transform that into the ‘pure body” of the
remaining higher five ‘pure princpples' beyond the domain of Māyā, ranging from Pure
Knowledge (śuddhavidyā) up to Śiva, which is experienced as one with consciousness
and an extension of it. This is done by the mediating experience of their essential
identity with the perceiver, which is the principle of Pure Knowledge that ‘I am all this
sphere of objectivity and all this is me.’ Individual purified consciousness, abandoning

the lower priṇciples, rises through the remaining pure ones, which are experienced as

the higher sonic energies of OM (see Appendix to this chapter) that range from the Point
(bindu) and the Half Moon (ardhacandra) up to the Equal One (samanā). The latter

corresponds to the Īśvara principle, which is the experience ‘ am this’, in which the
subtle objectivity that remains is experienced as one with the perceiver. Iiis just below

pure subjective consciousness, which is not objectivised at all. This is how, by means of

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) how can knowledge itself be action? He explains
this by giving an example:

vasstṁ fṁ zrstaidṁ-agīa
a |

ENEVIK iiEza IHCTNHI
loke ‘pi kila gacchāmīty evam antaḥsphuraiva yā |
sā deham akṣaṁ deśaṁ cāpy āviśantī gatikriyā || 154 ||
Even in the world (of everyday life) (loka) the inner impulse
(sphurā) (of consciousness) in the form (of the intention): ‘I am goingʼ,
penetrating the body, the organ (of action) and the location (to which it is

directed),” (results in and) is the movement (of the body). (154)

The ‘inner impulse’ (sphurā) within oneself (in the form of the
intention) ‘I am going’ is the radiant pulse (sphuraṇa) which is consciousness,
the nature of which is the exertive state (udyantrṛtā) (that impels the activity of
the body, senses and mind). It ‘penetrates' the body etc., making it dependent
on itself by revealing its helpless (dependence on the power of consciousness)
(vaivaśyāviṣkaraṇena), and the act of ‘going’ takes place. Thus it was rightly

said that ‘knowledge’ itself is such (namely, action)'”" When the radiant pulse

(sphuraṇa) (of consciousness of the sort) ‘I am goingʼ on the part of one who is

moving is taking place, it penetrates the aggregate of the (organs of action),

namely, the feet etc. of the body, which consists of the agent, instruments (of
inner ritual action, all the principles, lower and higher, fuse together into consciousness

and then into the transcendent beyond, a process which is, therefore, essentially Yoga.

Read with ĪPVY (vol. 3 p. 258-259) deham aḵṣaṁ deśaṁ cāpy for dehaṁ deśam
akṣāṁś cāpy. Presumably, what is meant by ‘location’ is that the impulse to go

somewhere not only impels the body and the organs of locomotion, it also directs them

to some particular place, and so that place also is, as it were, penetrated by it.

‘’ What is meant by ‘knowledge’ here is clearly knowledge of Śiva (śivajñāna) that

arises by the removal of the Impurity which is the ignorance that obscures the soul (see
above, the quote from the Svāyambhuvāgama TĀv ad 1/46). It is also found in the Śiva
scriptures. Thus, we read in the Svāyambhuvāgama (1/4cd-6) concerning the ten

Śivāgamas and eighteen Rudrāgamas of the Siddhānta:

jñānaṁ śaivaṁ paraṁ guhyaṁ yat tat tārakam uttamam |
jñānavibhedataḥ ||
cintāmaṇir ivātrāso sthitis sarvasya kārakaḥ ||

ckam eva śivajñānaṁ vibhinnaṁ daśadhā punaḥ ||

athāṣṭadaśabhūto 'pi deśāntaravisarpitaḥ |l

‘Knowledge of Śiva is the supreme secret which is the most excellent saviour

among the various kinds of knowledge, including that of the Veda and the like, in
accord with the various kinds (bheda) of Śiva knowledge. (Śiva) is like a wish granting

gem that is present here and is the creator of them all. Again, there is just one Śiva

knowledge that is divided ten-fold and is also the (group of) eighteen that has come
forth in another place.”

‘’ Above, 1/150b.

CHAPTER ONE

action) and (their) function (karman), and so the act of ‘going’ is brought

He concludes this (point by saying):

tasmāt kriyāpi yā nāma jñānam eva hi sā tataḥ |
jñānam eva vimokṣāya yuktaṁ caitad udāhṛtam || 155 ||
Therefore, what is (commonly) called (ritual) action is also

(essentially) just (a kind of) knowledge.”” Thus, (although yogic and ritual

action is the basis of this means to realization), what was said (before),””

namely, that knowledge alone is liberating, is (ogically) sound.”” (155)
‘Thus’,

because

the

(essential)

nature

of action

is

knowledge.

Accordingly, it is said (by such declarations as): “initiation alone liberates and
s0 too leads upwards to Śiva’s abode’ that action can serve as an instrumental
” Ultimately, knowledge, that is, consciousness, does everything.

’ PKau (fl. 79b) reads mānataḥ for sā tataḥ.
‘’ See above, 1/22.

”” According to Abhinavagupta, knowledge and action are co-extensive. They are not
opposites as they are, for example, according to the Advaita Vedānta. They work
together to attain the goal of liberation. Even so, knowledge is superior to action, as it is
the remedy for Karma. According to the dualist Siddhānta, the soul is bound by the

Impurity (mala) that obscures its essential Śiva nature. Understood to be a separate
reality, it is a sort of substance (dravya) that is removed by the ritual action of initiation,

and that state of purity is maintained by the ritual and other activity that ensues after up
to the end of the initiate’s life. Thus, as Sanderson (1992: 290) explains with regards to

this modified Śaiviṣm: ‘naturally, because Īmpurity is no longer a substance but merely
the unawareness of a self-contracted consciousness, then the nondualists must see the
function of ritual quite differently: if initiation liberates then it must do so not as action,

but as a kind of knowledge coded in action and experienced by the initiator.

Moreover, if ritual is believed to work only because it is a mode of knowledge,

then, as it is not the only mode of knowledge, it need not be the only means of
liberation. Knowledge alone, immediately intuitive or initially discursive, may liberate

without relying on the symbolic activity of riṭual. Ritual has been validated; but it has

been demoted to admit the authenticity of purely gnostic gurus (jñāninaḥ) who have
achieved liberation and deserved authority without being processed by ritual and who
are capable of perpetuating their spiritual lineages by liberating others through oral

instruction or inspiration alone. As we shall see, a heretical pre-empting of ritual is
avoided by understanding this process of direct transmission to be the highest form of
initiation.

’ṢyāSūSaṁ 2 (33)/24cd Svāyambhuvaṣūtrasaṁgraha 2 (33)/24cd (IFP T. No. 39).

māyīyam āṇavan kāmamṃ (> kārmaṁ) etāvad aṇubandhanam |

etac coktaṁ mayā sarvaṁ saṁkṣepāt kanakāṇḍaja | 2 (33) / 23 |I
asṣmāt pravitatād bandhāt parasaṁṅṣthānirodhakāt |

dīkṣaiva mocayaty ūrdhvaṁ śaivaṁ dhāma nayaty api || 2 (33) / 24 |

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The bondage of the individual soul consists (of the three Impurities), Āṇava,
Maāyīya and Kārmaka. I have stated all this in brief, 0 (Brahmā) Born from the Golden
Egg! It is from this extensive bondage that blocks (access to) the supreme state (from

which) ‘initiation alone liberates and so too leads upwards to Śiva’s abode.”

Kṣemarāja quotes this line in SvTu ad 11/199a without naming its source:

yuktaṁ caitat, yataḥ ---- nāsti dĩkṣāsamo mokṣa........... SVT 11/199a

dīkṣaiva mocayaty ūrdhvaṁ śaivaṁ dhāma nayaty api iti hi pratipāditam anyatra ||
dīkṣā ca yair mantraiḥ kriyate, tadvīryarūpā ---..na vidyā mātṛkā parā | SvT 11/199b

sā hi bhagavatī aśeṣavācyavācakātmakajagadabhedacamatkārātmakaśabdarāśvimarśaparamārthā sarvamantrāraṇiṣ tatra tatrāgameṣu nirdiśyate | sā caiṣā
viśvāvamarśanena paraṁ jñānaṁ prayacchati || tac ca pratipāditādhvaprakriyāmayam
evety āha ---- na prakriyāparaṁ jñānaṁ .
.... SVT 11/199c

‘That is a sound (view), for ‘there is no liberation equal to initiation.” (SVT
11/199a) 1t has been established elsewhere that ‘initiation alone liberates and so too

leads upwards to Śiva’s abode. Initiation is the vitality of those mantras by means of

which it is performed. “. . . there is no Vidyā higher than Mātṛkā. (SYT 11/199b) Īt is
she who is the goddess (bhagavatī). She is the reflective awareness of the Aggregate of
Sounds (śabdarāśi) which is the wonder at one with the universe consisting of all the
objects of denotation and (their) denotators. It is taught (repeatedly) in various places in
the scripture that it is the firestick (that lights the fire) of all mantras. It is she who
bestows supreme knowledge by reflecting upon all things. And that (knowledge)
consists of (the knowledge) of the configuration of the path (of the worlds)
(adhvaprakriyā) that has just been expounded. (The Tantra) says this: ‘there is no higher
knowledge than that of the configuration (of the worlds).’

prakriyātaḥ paraṃ anyaj jñānaṁ parituccham eva ||
jñānaṁ .jñeyasya jñāpakam iti pūrvanirūpitanītyā jñātena lakṣaṇīyo yo
lakṣyabhūtaparatattvaikātmā (> -tmyā) yogas tato ‘nyo mitayogo heya evety āha ---..
.nāsti yogas tv alakṣyakaḥ || SVT 11-199d II| avidyamānaṁ paraṁ lakṣyaṁ
āṉtidhāma yasya tādṛśo yogo nāsti | vidyamāno ‘pi mitayoga ihānuttaracarcāyām
ayoga eveti yojanikoktaḥ parayoga eveha yogaḥ || 199 ||
(It is said that any) other knowledge apart from the configuration (of the
cosmic order) is insignificant (parituccha). Knowledge is that which makes the object of
knowledge known. According to this dictum, described previously, Yoga is oneness

with the supreme reality which is the goal (lakṣya) and is that which should be discerned

(lakṣaṇīya) by what is known. Any other than that is false Yoga that should be rejected.
(Thus, the Tantra) says: ‘there is no Yoga that is without a (perceived) goal. (SVT
11/199d) There is no such Yoga of which there is no supreme (discerned) goal which is
(its) abode of rest. Even if there is a limited (degree of) Yoga (mitayoga), here
according to this most excellent reflection (anuttaracarcā) (on the nature of Yoga), it is
not Yoga. The supreme Yoga is said to be that which conjoins (with progressively
higher world orders) (yojanika). Only that is here (considered to be) Yoga.”
The same line is quoted, along with the preceding line, by Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha in
the vṛtti that introduces MrT yogapāda 1/1. Here he briefly outlines the purpose and

function of the traditional division of the Siddhānta Āgamas into sections (pāda), of
which he names the first three of the four (the fourth is the caryāpāda concerned with

CHAPTER ONE

means (nimitta) to liberation. Thus, it has been rightly said that ‘knowledge is

the sole cause of liberation’.” He says this (by declaring that) ‘what we said
before is (logically) sound

Surely (one may ask,) it was said before (in statements) such as
‘(liberation) is not (some separate reality) that differs from the Self who is

free’”" that liberation is nothing apart from knowledge of the Self. Thus, as

knowledge liberates, (it implies) that what is being said is that they are related to

one another as cause and effect (not that they are the same). How is that

logically possible? With this doubt in mind, he says:
Śiva is all His powers

aq aI: TT. I QUE II
observances). In doing that, he notes how the Vidyā – Knowledge, Kriyā -- ritual action
and Yoga to which the sections are dedicated work together and sustain each other,
grounded in their common basis and goal, which is the liberating knowledge through

which they operate and to which they all lead.

asmāt pravitatād bandhāt parasaṁkhyānirodhakāt (read with K parasaṁsthā- for
parasaṁkhyā-)| dīkṣaiva mocayaty ūrdhvaṁ dhāma nayaty api | iti śruter ikṣāyā

eva
niratiśayakaivalyāvāptihetutvāt
tas;
ca
sarvasya
eva
paśupāśeśvarasvarūpanirūāpaṇopāya-bhūtena samastādhvavyātipradarśakena (> vyāpti-) mantramantreśvarādimāhātmyaniścāyakena jñānena vinā niṣpādayitum

aśakyatvāt

p.

2)

tadavabodhako

paśupāśeśvarasvarūpanirūpaṇāya

pratham

uktah

anekavidhasāṅgadīkṣā-vidhipradarśanāyopadiṣṭaḥ

vidyāpādaḥ

tataḥ

saparicchadaḥ

kriyāpādo

iu

jñānakriyākramajñenāpi sādhakaputrādinā samādhyādyanabhyāsād anātmavidā satā
yathopadiṣṭasvasvavyāpārānuṣṭhānaṁ
saṁpādayituṁ
na
śakyam
iti
prāṇāyāmādyaṅgasahito yogajñaptaye yogapādopakramaḥ |

‘According to this śruti, initiation alone is the cause of the attainment of the

most excellent liberation. As that is so (it is an essential requirement. However,) that
cannot be accomplished without knowledge, which is the means to discern the nature of
the fettered soul, the fetters and the Lord of that (initiation) and all (things).

(Knowledge) displays the pervasion (and extent) of all the Path and instils conviction as

to the greatness of the Mantras, Mantreśvaras and other (beings on the Pure Path). Thus,
the Vidyāpāda (the Section concerning Knowledge) with its chapters, which makes that

known, was taught first of all, in order to describe the nature of the fettered soul, the
fetters and the Lord.

Then the Kriyāpāda (the Section concerning Action) was taught, in order to

explain the procedure by which initiation and its auxiliaries of many kinds (are

performed). Now, it is not possible to accomplish one’s own particular ritual observance
(anuṣṭhāna), as taught by one who knows (only that which is) not the Self, because he
has not practiced concentration (samācdhi) and the rest, be he a sādhaka or a putraka etc.
(This is so) even if he knows the manner of development (krama) of knowledge and
action. Thus, the Yogapāda (the Section on Yoga) is introduced, along with breath

control and the rest of the ancillaries, in order to make Yoga known.

71 Above 1/22d.

“ See above, 1/31a.

TANTRĀḶLOKA

Tfrz̄TarTIGTĪTATTTIT] 1IṞ4.9 1I

mokṣo hi nāma naivānyaḥ svarūpaprathanaṁ hi saḥ |
svarūpaṁ cātmanaḥ saṁvin nānyat tatra tu yāḥ punaḥ || 156 ||
kriyādikāḥ śaktayas tāḥ saṁvidrūpādhikā nahi |
asaṁvidrũpatāyogād dharmiṇaś cānirāpaṇāt |/ 157 ||

Liberation is nothing but the (full and complete) experience
(prathana) of one’s own nature. ”” And the nature of the Self is (pure)

consciousness. Indeed, there is nothing else there.””" Moreover, nor are

those (various) powers of action and the rest other than the conscious
nature, because, indeed, it is unreasonable (to maintain that anything else

can exist) there that is not consciousness, and (also) because (the scriptures)

do not describe (any underlying ground of these powers) that possesses

(them as its) attributes.

(In other words, Śiva, Who is universal

consciousness, is Himself all His powers). (156-157)

Surely, (one may ask,) what is one’s own nature, the experience of

which is liberation? (In response to this question) he says: ‘one’s own nature’
etc., that is, the nature of one’s own Self, which is ‘consciousness’. The
experience of that as it truly is (yathātattvam) is knowledge and that itself is
liberation. So what has been said is sound. Whereas this talk of a relation
(between them) as cause and effect is merely conceptual, not real. As he will

say:

‘As the relationship said to exist between knowledge and liberation is
not primariḷy causal (it is certain that no (such) undesirable consequence

(prasaṅga) (is possible)).

‘Other than’ means separate from consciousness. Surely (one may
ask,) if there is no other nature (rūpa) of the Self apart from consciousness, then
how could it be associated with other powers? With this doubt in mind, he says:
‘thereʼ etc. ‘Indeed’ is in the sense of ‘and’.
Surely (one may ask,) according to such statements as ‘the attributes of

the Lord are (his) powers . . .’ (that declare) that the powers are attributes of the

Lord, they are described as being attributes directly (not secondarily).

(However,) as the possessor of the attributes has not been described, is not the

(reason advanced) unproved? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TT̄HTJTT

’ Cf. above, 1/141 and note.
Cf. above, 1/31. 1/156abc is quoted above in TĀv ad 1/31 and below in TĀv ad
1/331 (330) and in 16/90cd-93ab.

“ Below, 1/162abc.

CHAPTER ONE

YIHTī JĪRTTIITTJ: JVISTT āeTT |I qu¢ 11
pārameśvaraśāstre hi na ca kāṇādadṛṣṭivat |

Śaktīnāṁ dharmarūpāṇām āśrayaḥ ko ‘pi kathyate || 158 II

Unlike Kaṇāda’s view, in the Supreme Lord’s scripture, there

is not said to be any substratum of the powers (to which they are related) as

its attributes (that are separate from it in themselves). (158)

According to the followers of Kaṇāda: ‘The Self (is such) because it is

(inherently) related with ‘self-ness'." By means of such (statements) they

describe the Self as being the possessor of attributes, and having done so accept
that it possesses (various) diverse (transitory) attributes that come (to it) and

recede by declaring, for example, that:

‘Its qualities (guṇa) are sentience (buddhi), pleasure and pain, desire
and aversion, exertion, dharma and adharma, latent traces (of past action),
number, measure, individuality, conjunction and disjunction (vibhāga).
Kaṇāda is considered to be the founder of the Vaiśeṣika school of philosophy. The
first and most basic text of this school is the Vaiśesikasūtra, which is attributed to him.
It is considered to be much older than Gautama’s Nyāyasūtra, but later than 300 BCE.

The Vaiśeṣika ʻtakes its name from the word ‘viśeṣa’, which means ‘a particularʼ. It
emphasizes the significance of particulars or individuals and is decidedly pluralistic.
The Vaiśeṣiīka is mainly a system of physics and metaphysics. It adopts a sixfold
classification of the objects of experience (padārthas): substance, quality, activity,

generality, and inherence, to which later Vaiśeṣikas added a seventh, non-existence. We
find that three of these (substance, quality and activity) possess real objective existence
and we can intuit them; others (generality, particularity, and inherence) are the products
of intellectual discrimination. They are logically inferred, not directly perceived.

Radhakrishnan and Moore (1957) p. 386. These categories are described in detail in the
Vaiśeṣikasūtra.

“ Instead of parameśvaraśāstre, read with MS K and TĀv ad 9/74-75ab where this
verse is quoted, pārameśvaraśāstre.
‘Cf. below, 9/74cd-75ab.
! The Vaiśeṣikas maintain that the Self is the permanent substratum (āśraya) of
sensations and volitions, which unites and coordinates them. Pleasure, pain, desire,

aversion, the will, etc. are considered to be independently existing qualities (guna,

dharma) of the Self, that belong to it as their possessor (dharmin). The Self cannot be
perceived directly, only inferred. Thus, Kaṇāda states that ‘the universal experience of

objects and the senses is a sign that a subject exists which differs from the senses and

their objects.” Vaiśeṣikasūtra 3/1/2. According to the Vaiśeṣika, every individual thing
exists and has a specific nature, because it possesses as its fundamental inherent
attribute the universal or ‘generality’ (sāmānya) which defines it as what it is. A table is
a table because it possesses ‘table-ness’. This reference declares that the same applies to
the Self which is such because it possesses ‘self-nessʼ.

This reference is drawn from a Vaiśeṣika text. Cf Vaiśeṣikasūtra 1/1/6:
rūparasagandhasparśāḥ saṁkhyāḥ parimāṇāni prṛthaktvaṁ saṁyogavibhāgau

paratvāparatve buddhayaḥ ṣukhaduḥkhe icchādyeṣau prayatnāś ca guṇāḥ ʻThe qualities

(guṇa) are colour, taste, smell and touch, numbers, measures, separateness, conjunction
and disjunction, priority and posteriority, notions, pleasure and pain, desire and aversion
and exertions. Kṣemarāja says in SvTu ad 10/678cd: dravyaguṇakarma-

TANTRĀLOKA

(However), here (in our philosophy) it is not said at all that power and
its possessor are related to one another as an attribute is to its possessor in this

way. (According to us,) consciousness is supreme, (that is, transcendent) and
free. (However,) due to the influence of each particular limiting adjunct, it is

said to be this or that (corresponding) power. In reality there is no difference

(bheda) at all between power and its possessor.”” As was said before:

‘Just as there is (no difference between) the fire’s (capacity) to burn and

cook (and the fire itself that always remains one and the same), similarly, what

difference is there in actual fact between the forms (vapusṣ) of God conceived in

various circumstances by the (many) perceivers?’

Surely (one may ask,) what would be wrong if we were to describe the
relationship (between Śiva and His powers) as that between attributes and their
possessor here (in our teaching) also, as in the philosophy of Kaṇāda and

others? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Taā̃ |1| 2u48 1|
tataś ca dṛkkryecchādyā bhinnāś cec chaktayas tathā |
ekaḥ śiva itīyaṁ vāg vastuśūnyaiva jāyate || 159 ||

Moreover, if the powers of will, knowledge, action and the rest were

to be (independent and) separate from (their underlying ground), the

statement (vāc) ‘Śiva is one’ would become devoid of (any) reality. (159)

If there were to be a real difference (bheda) between power and its

possessor, on the analogy of attributes and their possessor, then (statements) in
which it is said that ‘Siva is one only’, such as (the following, would be
meaningless):
‘Śiva is one only. He is the Lord Who comes forth perpetually in this
way in many kinds of forms, moving and unmoving, as (His) play.”

sāmānyaviśeṣasamavāyākhyapadārtha-ṣaṭkam eva tattvam ity abhidadhadbhiḥ kaṇādaŚśiṣyaiḥ.
‘(The Vaiśeṣikas who are) the disciples of Kaṇāda say that reality (tattva)
consists of the group of six realities (padārtha). These are called ‘substance’ (dravya),
‘quality’ (guṇa), ‘action’ (karman), ‘universal’ (sāmānya), ‘particular (viśeṣa) and
‘inherenceʼ (samavāya).

The powers or energies of the Self, the fundamental conscious nature, are not simply

its attributes. Rather, each power is the one absolutely free consciousness which,

differentiated by particular limiting adjuncts, is called that. So, in reality there is no
division between power and the possessor of power.
“ Above, 1/69 (70).

CHAPTER ONE

As countless entities arise, that are powers and their possessors, this
statement (vāc), which is essentially a declaration of the Lord’s nonduality
(īśvarādvaya), would be ‘devoid of (any) reality’, that is, there is nothing it
would denote (abhidheyarahitā). And so, in this way (iti yāvat) the doctrine of
nonduality would stand refuted.
Surely (one may ask,) if Śiva, Who is consciousness, is in fact only one,
then how is it that the business of daily life (yyavahāra), that consists of many
powers, that is, (the power of) consciousness and the rest, is otherwise? In
order to quell this doubt, he says, as (he) concludes:

[kEzEIEIEEil &EErzIī$īs; ḤHÚECTI
tasmāt saṁvittvaṃ evaitat svātantryaṁ tat tad apy alam |
vivicyamānaṁ bahvīṣu paryavasyati śaktiṣu || 160 ||

Therefore, consciousness itself is this (power of creative) freedom,

which (according to the measure in which) it is conceived (vivicyamāna) as
this or that (power) results in many powers. (160)

This has been explained previously, so there is no need to make an

effort (to go into this matter) again here. As was said (before):

‘Moreover, (the fact that) He possesses many powers amounts to (His

inseparable) union with that (one) power alone.”

(One may ask,) here (according to you,) ‘knowledge of the Self is itself
liberation’, and so in actual fact knowledge and liberation are not related to one

another as cause and effect. Thus, (effectively what you are saying is that)
‘causes do not necessarily (produce their) effects (immediately and in every

case).””" Thus, according to this principle, it is possible that even when the

cause, called the knowledge of those who know (jñānin) (the true nature of
reality), exists, liberation, which is the effect, may not. Should one not doubt

(the possibility of) the contingency (prasaṅga) of this undesirable consequence?

Thus, he says:

Liberation is One, the Means are Many
āTTAICHT

n JHTHG IgĀTTHĪÇTTT |1

TaT ú| 2ē2 |

yataś cātmaprathā mokṣas tan nehāśaṅkyam īdṛśam |

“ The Sanṣkrit here is anyathā kriyate, which can mean literally ‘operates in another
way or ‘is made to be otherwise, in the sense of ‘is considered to be otherwise’

“ Above, 1/67cd (68cd).

’! The same dictum is quoted below ad 4/59 and in the introduction to 9/122.

TANTRĀLOKA

nāvaśyaṁ kāraṇāt kāryaṁ tajjñāny api na mucyate || 161 1|

There is so no such doubt (possible) here (with regards to our
teachings, namely,) that even one who has (complete) knowledge (jñānin) of

that (one ultimate reality) may not be liberated, (because, although

knowledge is the cause of liberation, it may not bring about its result every

time), as a cause does not necessarily give rise to its effect (immediately and

in every case). (This objection is groundless,) because liberation is (in fact
nothing but) the experience of one’s own authentic identity (ātmaprathā)
(and not merely its effect). (161)
The point is that one who has (this) knowledge is certainly liberated.
And so it is sung (in the Bhagavadgītā):
‘Amongst them, the man of knowledge who is always engaged (in

Yoga) (nityayukta) and whose devotion is one-pointed is the most excellent. I

am most beloved by the man of knowledge and he is my beloved.

Again:

Self.”

‘(Kṛṣṇa says): the man of knowledge is considered to be My very

Surely, (in such statements as) ‘knowledge alone is liberating it is

said (implicitly) that knowledge and liberation are related to one another as are
cause and effect, so how is that not an undesirable consequence (prasaiga) (that
effectively refutes this view)? Thus, he says:

ī ī ̄̄ TT īṬS JTr̄] ēT frāq 1| 2.2 1
yato jñānena mokṣasya yā hetuphalatoditā |
na sā mukhyā tato nāyaṁ prasaṅga iti niścitam || 162 |

As the relationship said to exist between knowledge and liberation

is not primarily causal, it is certain that no (such) undesirable consequence

(prasaṅga) (is possible).”” (162)

This has been explained at length, so there is no need to make more

effort here (to explain this matter further).

Concluding this (subject), he introduces another.

fBha? ̄JāTã |

“ BhGĪ 7/17.
“ ]bid. 7/18b.

Above, 1/155c; cf. above, 1/35.

’ Quoted above in TĀv ad 1/156-157.

CHAPTER ONE

evaṁ jñānasvabhāvaiva kriyā sthūlatvam ātmani |
yato vahati tenāsyāṁ citratā dṛśyatāṁ kila || 163 II
Thus, as action, which is just knowledge by nature, bears (vahati)
within itself a gross state in this way, behold indeed the wonderful state of
diversity (citratā) within it. (163)
(Action) ‘is knowledge by nature’ because action is invariably
associated with knowledge (that is, cognitive consciousness). As is said:
‘(there is) no action devoid of knowledge . . .
(Cognitive consciousness becomes) ‘gross’ by pouring (out of itself) as
the duality (bheda) which is the inner (division between) subject and object. The
‘wonderful state of diversity’ (of action) is due to the variety of differences
between each particular object of perception etc. (which) ‘thus’ (takes place)
because (cognitive consciousness) assumes a gross (form).

Thus, he says:

kriyopāye ʻbhyupāyānāṁ grāhyabāhyavibhedinām |
bhedopabhedavaividhyān niḥsaṁkhyatvam avāntarāt || 164 ||

The means based on action are divided into those that are perceived

objectively (but are not manifest externally, as is the case with inner yogic
practice) and external (ones, such as ritual). These are innumerable
because they have many kinds of subsidiary divisions and subdivisions.

(164)

(The means) ‘perceived objectively’ (internally) are the upward
movement (of Mantra and the vital breath) (uccāra) and the like.”” The external

ones are the fire pit, maṇḍala and the rest (employed in outer ritual). The

upward flow (of Mantra) (uccāra) and the like are on the plane of objectivity,
but even though they are manifest externally (that is, outside the perceiver), they

are not (said to be) ‘external’ because they are not in the field of the sense of

sight and the other external senses, and also because they are not common
(objects) to other perceivers. On the contrary, the fire pit, maṇḍala and the rest
are in the field of the outer senses, and so are common (objects to all

“ The whole line states: ‘there is no knowledge devoid of action and no action devoid
of knowledge.’ It is quoted below ad 14/27ab, see note there.

” See below, note 1007.

TANTRĀLOKA

perceivers). Thus, they are external, and as such are objects of perception.”

Accordingly it is said that (the means based on action are) ‘divided into those
that are perceived objectively (but are not manifest externally) and

external (ones). In this way, although the various kinds (bheda) (of means

based on action) are confined (and limited) (niyata), even so they are
‘innumerable’ and of many kinds because of their subsidiary divisions, that is,
due to their many divisions and subdivisions. This is the meaning. Thus, in the
initial (instance,) there are five kinds of flows (of the vital breath) (uccāra)

because of the (five kinds of vital breath), namely, exhalation (prāṇa) and the

rest. There (in that case) too, there are many secondary divisions, such as, for
example, the Point (bindu), Sound (nāda) and the rest (that are the stations of

development of sonic energy within the flow of the breath). In this way also, the

(number of) Mantras that are uttered (by it) are endless. Thus, the varieties
(bheda) are without number.
And so, in the same way, (he) began (by declaring that): “. . . because
action does not differ (from knowledge) . . ..”” (He then went on) to establish

by means of sound reasoning (yukti) and the scriptures that action is essentially
knowledge. Thus, knowledge is the sole means to attain liberation.
Consequently, the means is not multiple and so its fruit, liberation, is not diverse
aṭall. Accordingly, he says:

ST hāTTTa Ṭekī JTTRTH |

ga- 1| 2 11
anena caitat pradhvastaṁ yat kecana śaśaṅkire |
upāyabhedān mokṣe ‘pi bhedaḥ syād iti sūrayaḥ || 165 11
Thus, the doubts some learned people had are removed, namely

that because there is a diversity of means there should also be a difference
in the (forms of) liberation (to which they lead). (165)

The prose order is ‘some learned people had doubtsʼ. The ‘learned

peopleʼ (to whom Abhinava refers) are the dualists. There (according to their
view,) there is a real difference between the cause and (its) result,' and so

because the causes are diverse, there should also be a diversity of results. Here

(in our view), on the contrary, in accord with the dictum ‘although the Absolute

(Brahman) is (equally in each) place, (It is) omniform, unsurpassed and
inconceivable'"' (we say that) consciousness alone is everything. So what is

” Several practices based on the flow (uccāra) of the vital breath are taught in Chapter

Five below. See especially, verses 5/45 ff. The whole of Chapter Six is dedicated to
practice based on the cyclic flow of the vital breath. Chapters Fifteen onwards are

devoted to means based on outer ritual.

“ Above, 1/150a.

Oṇe could also translate ‘there is a real multiplicity of (both) causes and (their)

resultʼ.

' This line is quoted by Jayaratha four more times below in his commentary on

3/43cd-45ab (45-46), 4/98, 12/5, and 28/375cd-376ab. Read, as in the other places this

CHAPTER ONE

this difference (bheda) between cause and effect? Even if (you admit) that the

difference between cause and effect (does exist as a) notion, (you have
effectively) accepted that there is only one means (to realisation), which is
line is quoted, pradeśo ‘pi brahmaṇaḥ for pradeśo brahmaṇaḥ. Bhartṛhari quotes this
line in his commentary on the Vākyapadīya (Lahore edition, p. 20). The full line is

quoted in the commentary on the PS (p. 15), where a second line is added: ekaikatra ca
tattve ‘pi ṣaṭṭriṁśattattvarūpatā | `And in every single place in (each) metaphysical
principle, there (abides) the nature of (all) the thirty-six principles.’

Abhinava comments on the first line in the ĪPVV I, p. 43-44 as follows:

‘AIl that is an object of perception (vedya) is like the body of the Self, which is
consciousness, the Light (that illumines the object), and one’s own essential nature.
Thus, just as the body, even though it is an object of perception, is pervaded by the
conscious nature because it is taken to be (the perceiver as the sense that) ‘this is me’
(aham iti) (directly) not secondarily, so is it with all things (viśva) (in relation to
universal consciousness). Even for those who consider the Self to be separate (from the

body), the secondary character of the sense of ‘' does not manifest in this world (of
daily life) within the body (as if it were separate from it), as does a blanket or the like
(which is known to be such) because (it serves) as an accessory (upakaraṇa) (to it).

Moreover, just as, in the manner which will be explained, consciousness is all things

because (everything) is pervaded by the conscious nature, so too we do not accept that

the mass of phenomena such ‘blue’ and ‘yellow’ is a (separate) category (vibhāga)

(apart from consciousness). (Utpaladeva) corroborates this (view) with a statement
drawn from a text of those who hold the view of (Advaita) Vedānta, (where it says,)
‘although (the Absolute (Brahman)) is (equally in each) place’. The space (contained in)

a jar and the space (occupied by a) cloth are (merely) conceived locations of space

(formed) by association with the jar etc. The nature of space, that is, (its) pervasiveness
etc. (ṛemains) such, and so (these conceived locations) are neither more nor less (than
space).

The Brahman, whose nature is the Light (of consciousness), is extensive

(bṛhat) and so is pervasive, and because it fills (bṛṁhaka) (everything), it nourishes the
emanation of all things. (Thus,) in the same way, these locations (in space), which are
the manifestations of blue and yellow created by secondary adjuncts such as (the colour)
blue made manifest by its own power, are (present) in the Brahman. (Now, the
Brahman) is ‘omniform’, and its condition is the undivided (unity) of all (its) energies.
As its nature is just the shining (of the Light of consciousness, which is universal
manifestation) alone, and thus because there it has no counter-correlate (which is other
than that,) there is no (second reality) which is to be negated (as not being the

Brahman). As this is so, (the Brahman is ‘inconceivable’, that is, it) is not associated
with the (dualistic) condition of thought constructs, and so is (pure consciousness)
which is devoid of them, the nature of which is the absence of (any) experience
(saṁvedana) of (anything) different (from itself) (pratiyogin). That which is every

single thing is ‘unsurpassed’, and is not even slightly something more than that (and

separate from it). (Thus, this statement) clarifies that the two (i.e. the Brahman and
individual manifeṣt phenomena) are mutually related to one another as the cause and
that which has that as its cause. IPVV 1, p. 43-44
Instead of tat pratyekam anatikrāntāḥ, tato manāg api anadhikāś ca read tat
pratyekam anatikrāntaṁ, tato manāg api anadhikañ ca. Cf. PTv p. 139, where
Abhinava seems to quote what could well be the continuation of the same dictum. ʻIt is
said in the scriptures (śāstra) that ‘although just (a specific) location, (such is) the

omniformity of Brahman, and although (present) in each particular reality level, (tattva)
it consists of (all) thirty-six reality levels.’ pradeśamātram api brāhmaṇaḥ sarvarāūpam
ekaikatrāpi ca tattve ṣaṭtrīṁśattattvamayatvaṁ śāstreṣu nirūpitam |

TANTRĀLOKA

knowledge. Thus, because there is no multiplicity of means, what diversity can
there be in the liberation which is its fruit?
Surely (one may ask, that by statements) such as: ‘And that
((knowledge), revealed (prathamāna)) through the means that is direct (as well

as (those that are) means to that (direct means) etc.))" it is explicitly said that

there are many means (to realisation); so why does that difference not entail a
difference in the goal? With this doubt in mind, he says:

malatacchaktividhvaṁsas tirobhūcyutimadhyataḥ |
hetubhede ‘pi no bhinno ghaṭadhvaṁsādivṛttivat I| 166 ||
Although the causes may be various, (the results, namely,) the

destruction, disappearance and removal of impurity (mala) and its power
are nonetheless one, just as (any inert object), such as a jar, can be

destroyed (in many ways)." (166)

Even there, (in those cases) in which the relationship between cause and
effect is real, and even though the causes, for example, initiation and the like,

are various, there is no diversity at all in the result, namely, the destruction of
impurity and its power. This is because there is no (essential) difference in the
(resulting) initiation etc., even though (the means by which it takes place,) that
is, through the Forces (kalā), the Principles (tattva), the World-orders (bhuvana)
etc., are diverse.'" Similarly, ‘the destruction and disappearance’ of a jar is
the same even when the means to that, such as a mallet, a hand, a wall, (another)

jar and the like, are diverse. Thus, it is not invariably the case that there is a
difference in the result due to a difference in the cause. Again, (in the case)

where (one maintains that) the difference between the means and the goal is
only conceptual, this does not apply. This is the sense (of this verse). In this way
it is proved that, even though the means (to realisation) is of three kinds because
it is (the powers of) the will, knowledge and action, there is no difference at all

in (the form of) liberation which is its goal.
This is not only proved by discriminative reasoning (tarka), it is also

(proved) by the (testimony of) the scripture. Accordingly, he says:

2 Ṣee above, 1/142.
Read -vidhvaṁsas- for ~vidhvaṁsa- and bhinno for bhinnā, as suggested by Gnoli.

!0. These are the three Paths denoted (vācya) by Mantras along which the soul travels to

union with Śiva in the course of initiation. They run in parallel and include each other in
such a way that by going down any one of them, one travels down all of them. In an
earlier period, they probably served individually as Paths in this sense, and then came to
be integrated into a single six-fold Path (see above, note to TĀv ad 1/34 and below
6/30ab,34ab-35ab (6/30, 34-35) and notes). We do indeed find them separately.
Moreover, this may well be why there are different kinds of initiation (dīkṣā) according
to whether one travels the Path of the World-orders (bhuvanadī.kṣā), Principles
(tattvadīkṣā) or Forces (kalādīkṣā).

CHAPTER ONE
Definition of the Three Penetrations and Means to Realisation

=ṃmaT Tāikrāī gāāaṁzrṝā 1 z= 1
tad etat trividhatvaṁ hi śāstre śrīpūrvanāmani |
ādeśi parameśitrā samāveśavinirṇaye || 167 ||

This three-fold manner (of means to realisation) was taught by the
Supreme Lord in the scripture called Śrīpūrva (i.e. the Māliṇnīvijayottara) in
the course of explaining (the forms) of penetration (samāveśa) (into and by

the supreme state). (167)

He quotes from that book:

SGIT
3 STIaY: JIISISATTĀTT: || ṞĒ¢ II

aṁq ũa fũrāa 1

3 TJTITTSĪIfd
JIT: āISTĪĒTTTT || ḶG I
S=-IRGTTATTGTĪRJTTJGĒGTÑ;:|
āJṬ vr̄̄Ta gHAI: #TTĪTT 3A | A90 ||
'! The word āveśa, which literally means ‘penetration’ or ‘entry, commonly denotes

the act of being possessed by supernatural beings who ‘penetrate’ and enter the body of
the person who is possessed. Possession generally has strongly negative connotations in

India, as elsewhere, but not always. From the earliest times, Vedic sources speak of
supernatural beings entering people’s bodies as powerful, energizing and enlightening
forces. The transformative experience of ‘penetration’ by Śiva’s energy is a

distinguishing feature of the teachings of all the Kaula traditions. Thus, we find other
similar classifications of forms of ‘penetration’ in the Tantras that teach Kaula practice.

Similarly, grace is experienced as a ‘descent of power’ (śaktipāta) that enlightens and

expands individual consciousness. The Siddhānta Āgamas normally do not associate the

two as Abhinava does, wishing thereby to integrate the praxis of the Siddhānta into his

Trika Kaulism. The point of contact is their common link with initiation. Initiation is
primariḷy understood to be a process of purification which, once it reaches completion,

allows the purified consciousness of the individual soul to conjoin, or even become one

with, Śiva consciousness. Purifying ‘penetrationsʼ are a cardinal feature of Kaula

initiation. Accordingly, the teacher checks that his disciple has been initiated by

observing a series of outer signs, beginning with the trembling of the body, to make sure

that it has taken place (see below, 5/102ab (5/101) ff.). Accordingly, the same terms are
used sometimes to name types and levels of initiation. As Abhinava tells us, his Trika

teacher Śambhunātha explained them to him as characterizing the categories of practice
(upāya) he now goes on to outline and then discuss in detail in the following four

chapters. For a discussion of the nature of ‘penetration’ and other divisions of its

varieties, and the scriptural precursors of the three main forms, see Dyczkowski 2009:
intro. vol. pp. 445 ff. For an extensive overview of possession in Asia, the reader is

referred to Smith 2009.

TANTRĀḶOKA

akiñciccintakasyaiva guruṇā pratibodhataḥ |
utpadyate ya āveśaḥ śāmbhavo ‘sāvudīritaḥ || 168 I|
uccārarahitaṁ vastu cetasaiva vicintayan |
yaṁ samāveśam āpnoti śāktaḥ so ‘ṭrābhidhīyate || 169 ||
uccārakaraṇadhyānavarṇasthānaprakalpanaiḥ |
yo bhavet sa samāveśaḥ samyag āṇava ucyate || 170 ||
The penetration (āveśa) that arises for one who does not think of

anything, by an intense (guruṇā) awakening (prabodhataḥ), is said to be

the one pertaining to Śiva (śāmbhava).
The penetration one attains whilst thinking of (the nature of) reality
(vastu) with the mind alone, without (having to practice) the utterance of

Mantra (uccāra) (or the like),” is here called Empowered (śākta).

The penetration that takes place by (the practice) of the utterance
(of Mantra and concentration on the movement of the breath) (uccāra), the

instruments (of Yoga) (karaṇa), visualization (dhyāna), (the cycling of )

'° This line also means ‘the penetration that arises for one due to an intense insight

brought about by the teacher (guruṇā)’. Thiīs is certainly the original intended sense,
which Abhinavagupta does not deny, but chooses to consider secondary with respect to

this one, and so I have translated accordingly. See below 1/172 ff.

'” This is the common meaning of the term ‘uccāra’. The literal meaning of the word

is ‘upward movement’, denoting, originally in a purely phonetic context, the upward
movement of the breath through the loci of articulation, striking which phonemes are

produced. In the context of the recitation of Mantra it denotes the upward flow of the
sonic energy of the Mantra. It is a fundamental practice of Śaiva Yoga and indeed that

of the early Tantras in general, including Vaiṣṇava and Buddhist. Another essential
dimension along with the sonic is prāṇic. The Mantra’s sonic energy rises through the
subtle body, sustained and energized by the flow of the vital breath that transports it. A
well-known representation of this process is the upward movement of Kuṇḍalinī, who is
at once the power of the vital breath (prāṇaśakti), speech (vācchakti), and consciousness

(cicchakti), reflecting an early Upaniṣadic triad of breath, speech and mind. Indeed,

‘uccāra’ may be understood entirely in terms of the vital breath. A passage in Chapter
Five below (verse v 43 ff.) describes how the upward movement of the vital breath
(without Mantra) ascends through progressively evolving levels of bliss, corresponding

to forms of the vital breath. In that context, one could, accordingly, translate ‘uccāra’ as

the ‘utterance or the upward movement of the vital breath’ (prāṇatattvasamuccāra).
Abhinava goes further by outlining an ‘uccāra’ of the ‘conscious nature’ (cidātman)

(ibid. v 62cd-74ab). Clearly this kind of upward movement is the most ‘internal’ of all.

Indeed, its exposition in Chapter Five that deals with the Individual Means can only be
understood if we take it to begin at that level, evolving rapidly into the highest level of
practice.

' Abhinava draws his definition of the instruments of Yoga from the Trisirobhairava,

which he quotes as follows below in Chapter Five. The reader is referred there for a
detailed explanation:

‘The instrument of Yoga (karaṇa) is practice based on awakened (individual)
consciousness (bodha). (The wise) say that it is of seven types, namely, 1) that of the
object of perception, 2) the perceiver, 3) consciousness (cir), 4) pervasion, 5)
abandonment, 6) inclusion, and 7) bringing together. (The practice of) ‘postureʼ is to be

CHAPTER ONE

phonemes (in the breath) (varṇa) (as the subtle practice of Mantra), and the

formation

of

supports

(sthānakalpanā)

(for

ritual

action

concentration)," is rightly said to be Individual (āṇava). (168-170)

and

The point of quoting (these verses) in the reverse order (with respect to
that in the Tantra) is that the means (to realisation) and the goal etc. lead to one

another, and so (they come) to rest predominantly in the Divine Means alone.!
He (now) explains that (triad of means, one after another,) in due order.

Śāmbhavopāya: The Penetration and Means Pertaining to Śiva
established in one’s own nature when (all things are) gathered together preceded by the
pervasion of that (consciousness).’ 5/128cd-130ab (129cd-131ab).

” Ṣee below 6/1-4ab.
. Liṭerally ‘pertain to the individual soul’ MV 2/23, 22 and 21. Abhinava takes care to

follow this scheme in the following chapters, which deal with these means to

realization. In his presentation of the means pertaining to Śiva (śāmbhavopāya), he

focuses on the state of the aspirant ‘who does not think of anything, which he
understands to be the dynamic condition of pure indeterminate (nirvikalpa) -T

consciousness. His exposition of the Empowered Means focuses on ‘conceiving reality
by the mind alone’. Accordingly, he deals with the dynamism of the mental world of

thought, that is, determinate (savikalpa) perceptions and their transformation into the
pure Śiva consciousness of the liberated state. Describing the practice of the Individual

Means, he deals, one after another, with what he understands to be the primary forms of
the practices listed here. These are based, initially at least, on the activity of the
psychophysical complex with which the individual soul is identified. Thus, they include

the most extensive part of most Tantric practice, namely ritual, and those derived from it

such as the repeated recitation of Mantra (iapa). Descriptions of rituals make up half the

Tantrāloka, that is, from Chapter Fifteen to almost the end. So all of that section may be
taken to be primariḷly concerned with the Individual Means, although, as we shall see,
Abhinava perceives that many of these rituals extend much beyond the domain of action

into the parallel ones of the higher means, as indeed they must if they are to be effective.

'!" Abhinava reverses the order of the verses in which the three means to realisation and

their corresponding states of penetration into Śiva consciousness are defined in the MV,

because he would like those who practice the teachings to attain the goal as soon as
possible. The higher means are more immediate than the lower ones and therefore more
effective and efficient. However, which one of them or combination of them operates at

a given time for a particular person depends on the intensity of Śiva’s grace. It is not a

matter of personal choice. Even so, as the ground of all the means to realisation, and the

reason why they can be effective, is the recognition of fundamental truths, teaching
them may open up one who learns them to receive the required help from the higher
levels not yet attained. Moreover, all means to realisation ultimately culminate in the

flash of insight that consciousness cannot be conditioned in any way, because there is
nothing outside it. Again practice, indeed perception itself, is only possible because it is
grounded in the reflective awareness of consciousness and sustained by it. This

reflective awareness necessarily operates in all the means to realisation, the purpose of
which is to strengthen and sustain it. The highest level of practice is centred solely on

this reflective awareness. The lower means simply remove the obstacles to it. Thus, in a

sense, all the means to realisation rest in the Divine Means, which culminates in No

Means.

' The exposition of the Divine Means extends from verse 171 to 213.

TANTRĀLOKA

Explanation of the Definition of the Śāimbhava Penetration

akiñciccintakasyeti vikaḷpānupayogitā |

tayā ca jhaṭiti jñeyasamāpattir nirūpyate || 171 ||

The expression ‘one who does not think of anything” (implies

that in this means) thought constructs are of no use. Thus, (as they are of
no use and do not arise,) the attainment of the object of realization

(jñeyasamāpatti) is said to be instantaneous. (171)

‘Thus’ – because thought constructs are of no use. (What happens)

when one does make use of thought constructs is that at that very moment,

according to this view that: ‘he for whom the objective state of being is firm and
complete (pārṇa) in all respectsʼ (is taken up with thought and as a result is
fully identified with objectivity. Thus,) the object, (in the highest sense as) that

which must necessarily be known, that is, the ultimately real conscious

nature," cannot be attained (samāpatti).' (However, if) by the power of

practice, a thought construct (such as ‘I am Śiva, Who is all this’) gives rise to
another thought construct like itself, from which its lack of clarity etc. is
(progressively) falling away, then, in accord with the excellence of the thought

construct that is progressively produced, it approaches a state of identity with

Ṣee above, 1/168.
! Here there is a play on words that is difficult to translate. The word ‘jāeya’, which

literally means ‘that which should be known’, denotes the object of knowledge. Thus,

the word can refer to any object or objectivity in general as the object of knowledge. It

may also denote ‘that which must necessarily be known’, that is, Śiva, the ultimate

reality. See below, 1/176cd-178ab.

The term ‘samāpattī’, which I have for convenience translated in its non-technical

sense as ‘attainment’, denotes in the common nomenclature of Yoga the acquisition of a

level or state of contemplative absorption. Relevant dictionary definitions of samāpatti
include: ʻcoming together, meeting, encountering, falling into a state or condition,
getting (ie. attaining), assuming an original form, completion, and conclusion. In

Buddhist terminology, it is a subdivision of the fourth stage of abstract contemplation.’

Bhoja, in his commentary on the YSū, the Rājamārtaṇḍa, presents bhāvanā
(contemplation), samādhi (contemplative absorption) and samāpatti (attainment) as
three progressively higher stages of concentration and absorption in the object, the last

of which is a condition of identity with it (see Somadeva 2004: 221-2 for details).

Somadeva (2004: 221) writes: ‘bhāvanā, ‘contemplative insight’ is the most general

term uṣed in the context of meditation. It is the repeated mental engagement with an
object of contemplation to the exclusion of others. Samādhi, Bhoja explains, is a high
degree of bhāvanā. It takes place when awareness is narrowly focused, or ‘one pointed’.

Samāpatti, according to Bhoja, denotes the transformation of coalescence that takes
place in the mental continuum; consciousness assumes the form (tadrūpapariṇāma) of

whatever it is immersed in.”
!""! Read -jananakrameṇa for jananākrameṇa.

CHAPTER ONE

consciousness which is essentially free of thought constructs.' (This is) as he

will say (in the passage) beginning with ‘He who wishes to enter (into this, the
Supreme Lord’s nature) must purify (his) thought (properly and) without delay
(añjasā), and ending with ‘thus (as a result of this process), consciousness

attains its own pure state of being which is free of thought constructs’.' Thus,

(the Divine Means) differs from the Empowered Means."

Surely (one may ask,) how can that be (the Divine Means) simply

because thought constructs are of no use (in that sphere of practice)? In order to
clarify this doubt, he says:

3TTTTṬGGTT JṬHTĒGTVIĪTGIT |I/92 |I
sā kathaṁ bhavatīty āha guruṇātigarīyasā |
jñeyābhimukhabodhena drākprarūḍhatvaśālinā || 172 ||

How does this (realization) take place? (This takes place,) says (the
Lord,) by means of that extremely intense (guruṇā) and awakened insight
(bodha) dīrected at the object of realisation (jñeya) that develops in an

instant. (172)

!” Thought constructs are ‘unclear’ in this sense to the degree in which they are not

notions of the oneness of reality and its essential Śiva nature etc. As notions of this
oneness develop through repeatedly directing one’s reflective awareness and thoughts to

the teachings and applying them, they progressively become more in accord with the

true nature of reality. Thus, they become ‘clearer and their previous lack of clarity ‘falls
awayʼ. Progress is marked by the degree of excellence in these terms of thoughts and
notions. Ultimately, they dissipate, that is, dissolve away into pure Śiva consciousness

beyond thought and conception. Dissolving away thoughts into supreme consciousness
is, essentially, the practice of the Empowered Means.

ŚBeḻow, 4/2cd and 4/6cd.
” The cardinal difference between the Divine and the other two categories of means,

not just the Empowered, is that it operates in the state of consciousness which is free of
thought constructs. It pertains to the experiencing subject ‘who does not think of
anything’. Pure subjectivity is one that is free of the contamination of objectivity that
arises by the mistaken identification of the subject with the psychophysical organism.
The latter form of subjectivity is, in actual fact, a thought construct. The gradual
purification of that notion, as outlined here by Jayaratha and described in detail in

Chapter Four (verses 2 to 6), is the domain of the Empowered Means, which functions
in the sphere of the means of knowledge, that is, the inner mental senses and the outer
ones through which cognitive consciousness operates. The Individual Means functions

in the sphere of objectivity that also includes the psychophysical organism as well as the
outer world. The difference between the Empowered and Individual Means is that the

former operates through the cognitive power of consciousness and so is internal. The

latter operates through the power of action exterally as well as internally.

'” The most evident meaning of MV 2/23 quoted above in 1/168 that Abhinava

comments on here is that the Śāmbhava penetration takes place in the disciple who is
free of thought when he is awakened by the teacher directly. Abhinava has chosen to see
a different meaning here, advancing a somewhat strained interpretation of this verse.
The reason for this is that he needs to find scriptural sanction for a feature of what he

TANTRĀLOKA

As ‘directed at’ (implies) towards (something), (the state of) ‘being
directed at depends (for it to be possible) on another entity (towards which it is
directed), and that is pure consciousness (cinmātra), because that is the most
appropriate (reality towards which awakened insight is directed). This is said
(implicitly when he says that it is) ‘directed at the object of realisation
(jñeya). In order to explain (how it is) ‘extremely intense’, he says that it
‘develops in an instant’. (By saying) ‘in an instant’, (he) indicates that the

kind of progressive development of thought constructs described (previously

that takes place in the Empowered Means) does not take place (in this one).

takes to be the most elevated practice of the Krama tradition, which he presents as the
inner culminating secret of Trika, despite its evident absence in the MV, his basic

authority (see above, 1/17). Krama strongly emphasises the importance of intense,
sudden, and ‘audacious' (sahasa) empowerment. Liberation is achieved by an intense,

instantaneous break with duality. Abhinava repeatedly asserts in various contexts that

this may take place in one who in some inscrutable way is fit to receive it, even without

a teacher. Thus, he stresses that personal insight that arises spontaneously (svataḥ) is
superior to one attained through a teacher or scripture, taking care to state they may lead

from one to the other and so sustain each other without contradiction. Again, it is
possible to be born a liberated soul or on the verge of becoming one. He is himself an
example (above 1/1). One may achieve the status of an enlightened teacher by oneself
(svayaṁsaṁsiddhika). This kind of teacher, Abhinava affirms, is the best of all (4/74cd-

76ab). Thus, initiation directly from the goddesses of consciousness is possible (see
below, 4/42cd-43ab), as it is by the progressive development of one’s own insight

(4/60cd-62ab and note), and along with that, the intensity (gurutaḥ) of one’s own efforts
(13/142cd-143ab). Again, the teacher may indeed occasion liberation, but for those who

are ṛeady, all that is required is his glance or touch. As we shall see, No Means is not
literally no means at all, it is an extremely subtle means that attains its goal effortlessly
in an instant. Jayaratha elaborates, telling us that it takes place in a number of ways, by

direct transfer of spiritual energy of the teacher into the disciple, especially by just a
look (below 2/2 and commentary). Abhinava himself confirms, from the disciples point

of view, that just by seeing a fully enlightened teacher, he is himself enlightened (2/40),
when he is ready and fit to be so.

' Śāmbhavopāya īs contrasted here with Śāktopāya, which is the means by which the

adept attains to the level of pure consciousness that is free of thought constructs through
a sequence (krama) of conceptual representations that make the object of realization

progressively clearer through repeated practice, as described above in 1/147-148 and

notes. `ḹ am all thisʼ is the clearest possible thought construct, which, in an instant turns
into its other aspect, namely, pure consciousness. This is total and complete knowledge,

that is, knowledge of all that exists. At this level of practice, the power of awareness
directed at Śiva, the object of realisation and all that needs be known, is so intense that it
reaches the fullness of complete insight and expansion of consciousness in an instant.
the

This is the highest practice, in which there is practically nothing to do. Thus,
PTLaghuvṛtti (p. 24) declares: tathāyaṁ parāmarśaḥ svīkartavyaḥ yathā

vicchedaśūnyaḥ sakr̥dvibhātasvabhāvo ‘kālakalitaḥ saṁpadyate

‘One should appropriate this reflective awareness in such a way that (that
eternal reality) that is unmeasured by time and its nature shines forth once (in an instant

and forever persists) without interruption.”

'This is Śaāmbhavopāya. According to Kṣemarāja, the first of the three sections
of the Sivasūtra is concemed with that. Thus, it deals with immediate and sudden

CHAPTER ONE

Surely (one may ask,) how can these two (words i.e. guruṇā -- ‘intense’
and prabodhataḥ –‘awakened insight’), which have different case endings, be in

concord (sāmānādhikaraṇya)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

tṛtīyārthe tasi vyākhyā vā vaiyadhikaraṇyataḥ |
(The suffix) ‘tasi’ (at the end of the word ‘prabodhataḥ’), according
to this explanation (of the verse in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra), optionally
imparts (to the word to which it is suffixed) the sense of the instrumental
case. Otherwise, (the two words can also be understood) as not being in

concord. (173ab)

“(The suffix) ‘tasi’ (at the end of the word ‘prabodhataḥ’) imparts
(to the word to which it is suffixed) the sense of the instrumental case’. It is

applied after the indicatory (‘i’) is dropped. It is considered to ‘impart the

sense of the instrumental case’ by (adding it to) the end of the stem (of a word,

that is to that part of a word), which (may) end with any of the case endings.
(This grammatical usage may be considered to apply here). ‘Otherwise’, that is,
from a different point of view, ‘(the two words can also be understood) as not
being in concordʼ, in which case the meaning is ‘because of (tataḥ) an intense

insight (prabodha) brought about by the teacher (guruṇā)’.

realisation or awakening that takes place by an intense descent of the power of grace.

The rest of the Śivasūtra teaches a gradual path through the other two categories of

means to realisation. Commenting on ŚSū 1/5 udyamo bhairavaḥ `Bhairava is upsurge’
Kṣemarāja quotes MV 2/23, in which Śāmbhava penetration of consciousness
(samāveśa), which is Śāmbhavopāya, īs defined. He writes: ‘the upsurge (of
consciousness) is the sudden emergence of the highest level of intuition (pratibhā), the

outpouring (ucchalanā) of consciousness consisting of the (ever) extending awareness
(vimarśa) (it has of its own nature). It is Bhairava because he is full of the entire
universe, insofar as He is the unity (sāmarasya) of all His powers, and assimilates into

Himself every differentiated perception (kalpana). (He appears in this form) to those

(yogis) who, devoted to Him, are solely intent on the inner reality (of all things), in
order to make their own Bhairava nature manifest.’
The question is this ~ the word guruṇā (meaning ‘intense’) is in the instrumental

case. The word prahodhataḥ (meaning ‘awakened insight’) is an ablative, so how can

the former be considered to be an adjective of the latter?

Classes of adverbs and adjectives are formed by the addition of indeclinable

suffixes, especially to pronominal roots or stems. Functionally, there is no essential

difference between such suffixes and case-endings, and so adverbs and adjectives of this
sort may sometimes replace inflected nouns or adjectives. This one is formed by adding

the suffix taṣi. It is

standard usage in Pāṇini’s grammar to add indicatory letters to

suffixes and other constitutive elements of words, including roots themselves. These

serve to indicate certain grammatical functions of the verbal elements to which they are
atṭached, and so are elided when they are applied. Thus, tasi becomes as. The final ‘s

changes to viṣarga, i.e. ḥ, to make -tah. This suffix has an ablative sense, and is most
commonly part of an ablative construction. In this case, Abhinava says that it imparts

the sense of the instrumental case. Thus, when the suffix tasi is added to the nominal

TANTRĀLOKA

THJTGTTT āJTÇITTTSTTT |I 2
TRTTI TÑRITRJĀĪĀTIĪT;:|
āveśaś cāsvatantrasya ṣvatadrīūpanimajjanāt || 173 |I
paratadrūpatā śambhor ādyāc chaktyavibhāginaḥ |
And (the term) ‘penetration’ (āveśa) is that state (of identity) with
supreme (awakened consciousness) (paratadrūpatā) (that emerges) from
Śambhu, Whois undivided from (His own) power and precedes (all other
means to realization). (It takes place) by virtue of the submergence of that
(contracted) nature of the one who is not free (asvatantra), which is one’s

own (ṣvatadrūpatā). (173cd-174ab)

stem ‘prabodha-’ ʻawakened insight’, it means ‘by awakened insight’, and agrees with
‘intense (guruṇā), which is in the instrumental case and expresses a cause.

This translation conforms to Jayaratha’s interpretation, as it must for the translation

of his commentary to make sense, and moreover, seems to me to be basically correct.

Here we find the essential features of āveśa as understood by these Kashmiri teachers,
which clearly distinguishes its common, non-technical sense, i.e.

‘possession’.

According to Jayaratha, Abhinava contrasts two aspects of ‘that nature’ (tadrūpatā) of
‘one who is not free, namely, ‘own’s own’ (sva-tadrūpatā), which is in a contracted
state of consciousness, and that of the ‘the other? (para), whichis the:supremeʼ (paratadrūpatā), uncontracted consciousness of Śiva. In other words, the same consciousness
of ‘one who is not free’ has two aspects. One is contracted and is unique to each

individual soul. The other is that of the universal consciousness of Śiva who, in relation
to the contracted aspect, is ‘other’ and ‘supreme’. One is reminded here of Utpaladeva’s

standard definition of ignorance, that is, of the soul’s fundamental Impurity
(āṇavamala):

‘As it conceals one’s own nature, this is the soul’s (essential) Impurity

(āṇavamala). It is two-fold (as) the loss of the freedom of (its innate) consciousness and
s0 too (along with it), the lack of consciousness of (its innate) freedom.’ IP 3/2/4

(quoted above in TĀv ad 1/23)

When the individual soul is penetrated by Śiva’s power, which is His will
(icchāśakti) and freedom itself (svātantrya) that proceeds from Him, the former aspect

is ‘submerged', i.e. subordinated to the other aspect that, as a consequence, emerges and

becomes primary. Thus, the fundamental Impurity of ignorance is removed. The

resultant state is the original one which ‘precedes it’, namely, that of knowledge, which
characterizes the liberated condition whilst still alive, in which individual consciousness

persists but is subordinated to supreme Śiva consciousness, with respect to which it is
secondary. Accordingly, Jayaratha quotes Utpaladeva as saying that complete
penetration both ways (sam-āveśa) by Śivas power amount to that.
Wallis (2014 p. 299-300) prefers to disregard Jayaratha’s interpretation, and
sees a genitive rather than an ablative of the word śambhoh. So according to him, the
‘penetrationʼ is (the state) ‘of the Lord’. In order to do this, he somehow continues to
think of ‘śambhoḥ’ as an ablative in order to make ādyāt agree with it, translating it as
an adjective, i.e. as ‘primordial’ (Lord). At the same time, he makes it agree with
‘submersion’ (which he translates as ‘suppressing’). He is aware of this problem and so
offers two translations. This first, which he prefers, is:

CHAPTER ONE

‘The one who is not free (asvatantra) is the limited perceiver of the
insentient intellect and the rest (of the constituents of the psychophysical

organism with which it identifies). The ‘submergence’ of ‘that’ contracted
(conscious) nature ‘which is one’s ownʼ, that is, not common (to anybody
else’s), is (its) subordination (to the one supreme consciousness). ‘Penetration’
(āveśa) is ‘that state’ which is oneness with ‘supreme’ free awakened
consciousness (that takes place) having taken the support of that (submergence

of contracted subjectivity). This is the connected (prose order of the words of
this verse). As (Utpaladeva) has said (in the Īśvarapratyabhijñā):

‘The (cardinal) characteristic of (ibberating) knowledge is penetration by
its (power). (It is the assumption of) the primacy (mukhyatva) of the agency and
awakened consciousness of (the soul’s essential) conscious nature when the

void (of deep sleep) and the rest (of the constituents of the psychophysical
organism with which the contracted, fettered agency of the true subject is

identified, assume) a subordinate (state with respect to) that (agency of

awakened consciousness).

‘Āveśa [penetration] is that state which conforms itself (only) to the Supreme
((which initially appears) as ‘other’), due to a prior act of suppressing conformity to the
individual self (sva-), which lacks autonomy. It is (the state) of the primordial Lord,

united with his Power.”

The second interpretation, which he says ‘is not impossible’, is rendered thus:
‘Due to submergence that which has the quality of the self — (yet) lacks

autonomy – there comes about a state which has the quality of the Supreme: this is

āveśa (penetration) (which comes) from the primordial Lord, united with his power.

{P 3/2/12. Utpaladeva explains in his own brief commentary (vrrti) on this verse:

‘On the contrary, when this same void and the rest (of the constituents of the

psychophysical organism) are in a subordination state with respect to the awakened

consciousness which is the agency (of the Lord), then the characteristic of the
knowledge of the subject who, because of that, possesses the nature of that awakened
consciousness, is said to be the penetration of its power.” Clearly the basic, and certainly
original sense of ‘āveśa’ (literally ‘entry’) as ‘possession’, in the sense of ‘entry (which
is the literal meaning of the word) by some supernatural being, has been sublated by a

higher, ‘tamer’, more sophisticated understanding of it as liberating knowledge. Even

s0, the emphasis is clearly on the shift from the agency of the individual soul who is
‘penetrated’ to that of the agency of Śiva, who penetrates it along with His power. In
other words, as happens at the ‘primitive level, the supernatural being who possesses

takes control of the one who is possessed. When that being is Śiva, this means
identification with Him which ultimately came to be understood at an even more refined
level as ‘recognition’ on the part of Śiva Himself of His own nature as the individual

soul. Thus, in the very first verse of the Śivadṛṣṭi, Somānanda invokes Śiva to take
possession of him and thus reveal Himself to Himself in and through the teachings:
asmadrūpasamāviṣṭaḥ svātmanātmanivāraṇe |
Śivaḥ karoṭu nijayā namaḥ śaktyā tatātmane ||

‘May Śiva, who has penetrated (‘entered’ into and ‘taken possession of’) my

own nature, offer salutations by His own power to (His own) expanded Self in order to
reveal Himself by Himself (to Himself).”

TANTRĀLOKA

.Again, where has this (penetration of energy) come from? He says:

‘from Śambhu’, not from power (śakti) or the individual soul (aṇu).“ (He)
‘precedes (all other means to realization)ʼ, in the sense that power and the

indiviḍual ṣoul arise from that. Thus, here (in this case), power is that of the

will, not knowledge or action, because, as will be explained, these two are
contained within (this Śāmbhava) penetration.
Here the meaning of a sentence is understood by first understanding the
meaning of the words (padārtha) (that constitute it). Thus, after (explaining) the

application of the meaning of the words (padārtha), in order to (explain) the
application of the sense of the sentence, he says:

hIkEe.cē

fe-f+ fxez- zra, mīccrārataṁq|

aī frifṁṁ saa] 1| zu1

tenāyam atra vākyārtho vijñeyaṁ pronmiṣat svayam || 174||

vināpi niścayena drāk mātṛdarpaṇabimbiṭam |

mātāram adharīkurvat ṣvāṁ vibhūtiṁ pradarśayat |I 175 II
āste hṛdayanairmalyātiśaye tāratamyataḥ |
Thus, the meaning of this statement here is this: the object of

realization (vijñeya), unfolding by itself spontaneously, even without (any
intervening) intellection (niścaya), suddenly subordinating the (limited)

subject reflected in the mirror of the (supreme) subject (mātṛ), continuously
revealing its own glory (vibhūti), abides at increasingly higher levels

In other words, ‘possession’ is understood now at this higher level as a ‘descent
of powerʼ, thatis, grace. When the individual soulis penetrated by Lord Śiva’s power of
grace, everything changes. Before, the body, senses, mind and vital force seemed to be
its identity, and their corresponding states of consciousness, (waking of the body and

senses, dreaming of the mind and deep sleep of the vital breath), the only ones. When

Śiva’s divine energy of grace penetrates the individual soul, it realizes that the true
agent and perceiver is consciousness, whichis its own true essential nature, as it is that
of Śiva Himself. Then a dramatic reversal takes place, so that this becomes primary and
the body etc. secondary.
Thus, when consciousness is ‘submerged’ and ‘contracted’ (Sanderson would
say ‘inhibited’), the lower orders of subjectivity that identify with aspects of the
psychophysical organism emerge. In that condition, the uncontracted Śiva
consciousness is as if subordinate and secondary to contracted individual consciousness.
When the power of Śiva’s grace penetrates the individual soul, its contracted state
expands. As it does so, the lower orders of subjectivity ‘submerge’ and the higher orders
emerge correspondingly, until the supreme subjectivity emerges, which is the fully
expanded state of Śiva consciousness into which everything has been assimilated.

Ṭhe penetration that comes from Śiva is the basis of the two penetrations at the

following two levels, Empowered and Individual. The following two lead to the first,
which ‘precedes’ them.

' This line is missing in the citation of these two verses in VBh p. 19-20.

CHAPTER ONE

(tāratamyataḥ) within the excellence of the purity (nairmalya) of the Heart
(of reflective awareness). (174cd-176ab)
‘The object of realization’ is the ultimately real nature, which is called
‘pure consciousness’ (cinmātra). The ‘(limited) subject’ is the intellect,
because it is the instrumental cause of the creation (prasava) of the entire

aggregate of the senses. That itself is ‘the mirror’, because it can bear the
projection of a shade consciousness (within itself). The limited subject that is
reflected there, that is, that has laid hold of itself (there), is subordinated, and the
projection of the Self into the intellect and the rest (of the psychophysical
organism with which it identifies) is rendered secondary (with respect to the
primacy of pure consciousness). In this way, (this) ‘gloryʼ, which is not
common to anything else, because its state is the most excellent of all

(taratamabhāva) as the conscious nature, is (thereby) being made primary.

(This process) is different (from the one which entails) the (progressive)

development of thought constructs in the manner described previously,'”
because it is not dependent on anything else, and so (takes place) instantly

(jhaṭiti). The Heart is reflective awareness (vimarśa), because it is taught

that: aṣ tthis (radiant effulgence of consciousness) is the essence (of all

manifestation), it is said to be the Heart of the Supreme Lord’. Its ‘purity

(nairmalya) is its (abiding) undecaying (nature), because it is not directed at

anything else (except the pure, eternal Light of consciousness)." 1ts
‘excellence’ is the supreme summit (of consciousness). ‘Unfolding’' there
‘spontaneously’, it shines as the self-illumining Light (of consciousness). This

is the meaning.

Surely (one may ask,) the object of knowledge (jñeya) may, in this

respect (tāvat), be of two kinds – sentient and insentient. There (in that case),

the insentient as (the experience of the colour) blue and the like penetrates into
Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, T and Ḍ racayan for racayat.
2” Ṣee above, commentary to verse 171.
√ Consciousness spontaneously expands progressively because there are no
intervening thought constructs. This is both because their presence impedes i
development and also because removing and dissolving them back into consciousnes
a gradual process.

AII the MSs read visargaḥ – ‘emission’ — for vimarśaḥ.

TP 1/5/1ácd. IP 1/5/14 is quoted ad 3/209cd-210, ad 5/139-140 (138-139) and ad
29/126cd-127ab; ĪP 1/5/13-14 is quoted ad 4/181cd-182ab.

This ‘purity (nairmalya) is the property mirrors possess whereby they are capable

of reflecting images within themselves. The intellect (buddhi) possesses it to a limited

