
but he evidently intends us to refer to them, and so, for the sake of clarity, they

have

been included in brackets. It is quoted several times by Kashmiri Śaiva teachers. For

example, in the SpPra commentary on SpKā 1 and SpKāvi p. 148. See Dyczkows
ki
1992a: 145.

1 One could also translate sataḥ padārthasya (lit. ‘existing thing which is the meaning

ofa word’) as ‘Being and category (of existing things).

! If everything is a manifestaion of consciousness and hence is essentially

consciousness, which is Śiva, how can we distinguish between one thing and another

and why do we do so? The answer given here is that the specific nature of an

entity is

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Power (in the sense of functional efficacy) is the nature of (every type
of) thing. The difference (between one thing and another) is a projection due to
(the perception of) the diversity of the result (of the functional efficacy of each

Surely (one may object,) fine, let that be – there is no difference (bheda)
between power and the possessor of power, (even so,) the energies do differ
from one another. This is again the same defect and that same situation. With
this doubt in mind, he says:

I

mātṛkḷṛpte hi devasya tatra tatra vapuṣy alam |
ko bhedo vastuto vahner dagdhṛpaktrṛtvayor iva || 69 ||
Just as there is (no difference between) the fire’s (capacity) to burn
and cook (and the fire itself always remains one and the same), similarly,
what difference is there in actual fact between the forms (vapuṣ) of God

conceived in various circumstances (tatra tatra) by the (many) perceivers?

(69) (70)

Just as the fire’s power to burn and cook, for example, is conceived to

be (two) different (powers) because of (its) diverse results, namely, burning and

cooking, even so, because the possessor of power has a single nature, (its
powers) cannot in actual fact divide up the essential nature of one another
(which is the possessor of those powers). (Only) an entity which is proved to
characterized by its functional efficacy. The difference between one thing and another is
not in what they are essentially but what they do. A table differs from a cup because its

function is to serve as a support for the objects placed on it, whereas that of a cup is to
hold liquids. These are some of their functional capacities, that is, their powers. From

this perspective, the universe of entities, whether immense or tiny, is a countless number
of powers. These powers are their functional capacities – fire heats, water quenches
thirst, and so on. They differ from one another in that respect, as seen by the perceiver
who has need of one or the other for the corresponding purpose it can serve, although

they are all equally manifestations and forms of consciousness. All these powers
collectively are the one power of Śiva consciousness, who is their possessor and one
with them as is fire with its heat, capacity to burn, cook, and illumine etc. See
Dyczkowski 1987: 111-112.

! Kṣemarāja also quotes this line in a long commentary on SvT 5/88d. Cf. below TĀv
9/68cd-69ab where this line is quoted again.

! Quoted belowin TĀv ad 1/158. Swami Lakshmanjoo points out that Lord Śiva that

appears through forms of His Śakti. Thereis no real difference between them. However,
it is not possible to perceive Śiva directly, that can only take place through His eṉergies.
Thuṣ, they become means (upāya) to realisation. The power of the willis the Śāmbhava

Means, that of knowledge, the Empowered Means, and the Individual Means is the
power of action. See below 1/140 ff. concerning the means to realisation.

CHAPTER ONE

have a separate (individual existence) is divided off from another entity. Power
is not proved to be separate from the possessor of power. So what can be
divided up by what? The nature of (one and) the same fire is conceived to be its

capacity to burn etc. In the same way, even when the Supreme Lord is

conceived to have an endless number of powers, there is no (mutual) difference
(between them and their possessor). Thus, the view that maintains God’s

nonduality is never compromised.
Surely (one may ask,) although conceived in this way, the difference
between powers does manifest, so how can that be denied? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

EIEERrIVĒĒE ṜTĒTAIE-EAITĀĪ

aāãTtkxqā afzrr-sftkṝgxērstṁ
aīaāa 1| 1011
na cãsau paramãrthena na kiñcid bhāsanād ṛte |
na hy asti kiñcit tacchaktitadvadbhedo ‘pi vāstavaḥ || 70 ||
However, this (difference between powers and their possessor) is

not absolutely non-existent (rather it does exist). Nothing exists apart from

(its) manifestation; thus, the difference between power and its possessor is

also real (vāstava) (in this sense). (70) (71)

There is nothing else apart from the light (of the manifestation of

consciousness) (bhāna). Thus, as difference (bheda) also manifests, it is not

nothing at all, rather it is (fully and ultimately) real, and as such the (mutual)
difference also between the powers and their possessor is absolutely real. This is

! One of the fundamental features of Abhinavagupta’s Anuttara Trika is Anuttara, the
nature of which Abhinavagupta has already expounded in great detail in his commentary

on the Parātrīśikā. An important aspect of Anuttara, whichis relevantin this context, is
that, as the Inexplicable, it cannot be characterizedin any way, even as Śiva or Śakti.

This is because it is the prior source of both as aspects of its own nature, whichis
equally the Light of consciousness (i.e. Śiva) and its power of reflective awareness (i..

Śakti). The former is universal and transcendent, whereas the latter is particular and

immanent. Abhinavagupta explains there that:
‘AIl this, which consists of the thirty-six principles, is emanated from Śiva by
His own (inherent) power. He is the possessor of power, whose predominant nature (in

this aspect) is the supreme power, which is the universal vibration (sāmānyaspanda) of

consciousness (as its Light). But, even so, it is made to rest within its own essential
nature, which is Bhairava’s particular vibration (of reflective awareness) (viśeṣaspanda)
(in the aspect which is) predominately (His many) energies. This is how (phenomenally)
existing things are grounded in their own specific nature. (It is,) as is said, ‘wherein
everything is (established)'. Although that (reality), consisting of the oneness of Śiva
and Śakti, the universal and the particular, is indeed one, even so the Supreme Lord

(parameśvara) Himself has differentiated them and described them accordingly, in
order to make instruction and the means to realisation possible. However, it is in reality
nonetheless one alone, and consists of free consciousness, which, as the ‘’, is Anuttara,
the essence of which is the power (of Bhairava’s) sovereignty (aiśvaryaśakti) (that lords
over all things). PTv p. 86.

TANTRĀLOKA

the meaning of (this) statement. Thus, as the relative distinction (between them)
(bheda) is by nature in this way one with the light (of the manifestation of
consciousness), it is not separate (from it). Therefore, the view that maintains

nonduality is not compromised. Nor is the established common designation

(vyavahāra) of (mutual) difference between the powers and their possessor

denied. Thuṣ, all is well.

Surely (one may ask, as) it has been said that the Supreme Lord has just

one power called ‘freedomʼ (ṣvātantrya), are (His powers of) will and the rest

just the sudden manifestation (visphūrjita) of that (one power), or are they other
independent powers? With this doubt in mind, he says:

YNTŪATTTTIĀ TTTTTĀTRTṬĪ fē āq |

svaśaktyudrekajanakaṁ tādātmyād vastuno hi yat |
Śśaktis tad api devy evaṁ bhānty apy anyasvarūpiṇī|I 71 II

What an entity possesses that, by virtue of its oneness with it,

generates an abundance of its own powers, is also a power. (Similarly, the
Lord has only one power, namely) the Goddess, Who even though She

manifests in this way, transcends (Her manifestations).’ (71) (72)

The wonderful variety of the secondary (avāntra) powers of (some)
‘entity, like fire, is that of its own power. Thus the ‘abundance’ of power, that

is, the functional efficacy (sāmarthya) (of that entity), which is established in its

(common) non-specific activity and is the reason for its being (variously)
denotated, ‘generatesʼ, that is, makes manifest, its outpouring as other
particular powers such as (the capacity to) burn and cook (that fire possesses).
Moreover, (it does s0) ‘in identity with that’, its own power, which is such as

described, because its own power, which is of this kind, is (only) one. This is
the prose order (of the words of this verse) (saṁbandha). The intended sense is
that the fire, which has the capacity (to do various things), brings about the
entire range of effects, such as burning and the rest. In the same way, the
Supreme Lord possesses (just one) ‘power, namely, the Goddess’, although
She manifests as (other) secondary (associated) (avāntra) powers, such as the

will and the rest. So although each particular kind (bheda) (of power) arises,

because

its

own

nature

is

not

separate

from

the

supreme

Light

(of

l More literally one could translate anyasvarūpiṇī: (her) essential nature (transcends)

and is other than (Her manifestations). Fire has various powers to burn, cook, and so
on. The fire from which these powers are generated can be understood to be a type of
power that transcends them, encompassing and including all of them. Similarly, Śiva

consciousness, the one universal reality, possess only one power, which is one with it,
through which it generates the countless energies that constitute its manifest forms.
Swami Lakshmanjoo is more interested in soteriological issues than
ontological ones. Thus, he comments on this verse explaining how the energies of will,

knowledge and action that operate as the basis of their three corresponding categories of
means to realisation are ultimately one energy in three forms.

CHAPTER ONE

consciousness, the Goddess Who is) the shining manifestation (of the Light of
consciousness) is called (Śiva’s) freedom (svātantrya). So it has rightly been

said that: “He has only one attribute that includes all the othersʼ." Thus it has

been proved that in this way (Śiva) has just one power called ‘freedom’, which
manifests in this way and as (each) emitted different (kind) (bheda) (of power).

It is not just (Siva’s) power that manifests as the diversity that is
conceived in this way, He Himself (does s0) also. Accordingly, he says:

ftragīj̄dratraāīdīr gīsaTād |

aTfdīTTṬTAḶ TaITTTRGTĪTRJ II/3I
śivaś cāluptavibhavas tathā sṛṣṭo ‘vabhāsate |
svasaṁvinmātṛmakure svātantryād bhāvanādiṣu || 72 ||
It is by virtue of (His) freedom that Śiva (also), without being

deprived of His glorious power (vibhava), manifests in this way in the

course of creative meditation (bhāvanā) and the like, created (ṣṛṣṭa) within
the mirror of (the consciousness of the individual) perceiver, whose

consciousness is (in fact) His own." (72) (73)

Śiva is the (indiviḍual) perceiver who possesses His own contracted

consciousness," and has (as such) assumed an identity (grhītātmagraha) within
the intellect and the rest (of the psychophysical complex) and is well established
(there). (The consciousness of the individual perceiver) is translucent

(svaccha)," and so, because it is capable of bearing a reflected image

' Above, 1/65ab (1/65cd).

” Śiva does not lose His power when He appears as the deity which is an object of
contemplation and veneration. This is because He retains His status as the experiencing
subject even though He makes objects manifest as reflections within Himself, as the
indiviḍual perceiver,
by His own spontaneous activity. Through this same power of

freedom, by which Siva does the impossible, He makes Himself known objectively

without compromising His essential subjectivity. At the level of duality, the individual

perceiver feels that “this is Lord Śiva”. At the intermediate level of unity-in-difference,
he experiences Lord Śiva who is his own nature manifest as all things. Thus, there is

both the oneness of subjective consciousness, and the multiplicity of objectivity with
which itis identified ~ “I am Siva and all this is my glory”. At the highest level of unity,
his experience is that of the perfect oneness of identity with Śiva – “ am Śiva”.

! The text here appears to be corrupt. It reads sivas ca svā saṅkucitā saṁviṭ lakṣaṇaṁ

yasyāsau . . . pramãtã.

" The term ‘ṣvaccha’, which literally means, ‘clean’ or ‘pure’, and its synonyms
‘vimala’ and ‘nirmala’, meaning literally ‘free of impurity°, denote the quality entities

may possess by virtue of which they can reflect other objects within themselves. 1

translate these terms for want of a better word as ‘translucence’ and cognates, which

Jayaratha defines as follows: “If (an entity) possesses the particular quality called
‘translucence’ (svacchatā) with respect to that which posits a reflected image (within it),
then it accepts a reflection of that (within itself).’ (TĀv ad 3/7) Consciousness which

reflects everything within itself is thus supremely translucent. We will come across this

term repeatedly used in this sense, especially in the first part of Chapter Three, where

Abhinava expounds the Doctrine of Reflection (pratibimbavāda). This teaches that

TANTRĀLOKA

(pratibimba) (within itself), it is the mirror within which, ‘in the course of
creative meditation’ (bhāvanā), (listening to) the teaching and the like is, ‘by

virtue of His freedomʼ, ‘created (sṛṣṭa)’ as (some) conceived (particular) kind

(bheda) of object of meditation and the like, and so, as if? assuming the state of
objectivity, ‘manifests'. However, (Śiva) does not also become such (just the
notion of Him does), because He is one with the subject. Thuṣ it is said that

(Śiva manifests in this way) ‘without being deprived of His glorious powerʼ.
The meaning is that He is not deprived of (His) subjectivity (pramātṛbhāva).
That is said (in the Īśvarapratyabhijñā):

‘(The Lord, by virtue of His freedom, which is the absence of duality,
having fashioned (his own)) Self (ātman) that (abides) unforsaken (by that)
freedom, (with notions that He is the Lord (Iśa) and the like, behaves (as such in

daily life).

He concludes this (point, saying):

TīāTTR-T ṬGHT TIĪĪISTT

tasmād yena mukhenaiṣa bhāty anaṁśo ‘pi tat tathā |
śaktir ity eṣa vastv eva śaktitadvatkramaḥ sphuṭaḥ || 73 |I

Therefore, by whatever channel (mukha) (Śiva) Who, although

devoid of parts, manifests thus (as possessing them), is a power. Thus, this
anything that manifests in any form, subjective or objective, does so within
consciousness in the way a reflection appears in a mirror. But unlike the reflection in a
mirror, that depends on the existence of an original image outside the mirror of which it

is the reflection, the reflections within consciousness are produced within it by its
inherent power.
“” ṂSs J, Jh, N, Ṭ and Ḍ replace iva (‘as if’) with eva (‘indeed).

"P 1/5/16. The first line of this verse has a number of variant readings with respect to
the printed editions of the ĪP, which is the form in which it is quoted below in TĀv ad

3/227cd-278ab (277), 9/159 (partially), 11/10cd-12ab, 28 and 15/315-317. The first
quarter is quoted ad 29/126cd-127ab. We read there: svātantryām uktam ātmānaṁ
svātantryād advayātmanaḥ, whereas here the reading is: svātantryād advayātmānaṁ
svātantryād bhāvanādiṣu. The other version means:
‘The Lord, thanks to his freedom, which is the absence of duality, having
fashioned an identity (ātman) which is not devoid of freedom, (variously representing
Himself) by notions that He is Iśa etc., acts (here in the world).”

Utpaladeva explains: “Therefore the Lord, out of His freedom, which is

(perfect, all-encompassing) plenitude, the characteristic of which is a state of oneness
with (all) objectivity, manifests Himself as the knower at that (particular) time by means
of the notions (that He is) God, Śiva, the Knower and the like, for the purpose of the
practice of meditation and the like.”

“ Cf. below, 1/205cd-206 and commentary.

CHAPTER ONE

succession from power to its possessor is an evident (sphuṭa) reality (vastu).
(73) (74)
‘Therefore’, for (this) reason also, namely that manifestation is (only)

logically possible due to (the existence of) the difference between both Śiva and

(His) power that is created (sṛṣtena bhedena) in this way. Śiva is ‘devoid of

partsʼ, as His one nature is solely the Light (of consciousness). But even s0,

‘whatever channel’, that is, (whichever) one amongst the partial (aspects of

Śiva’s manifestation) as the world-orders and the rest (mentioned previously)

He manifests in creative meditation (bhāvanā) etc., is a channel (mukha) which,

as a means to attain Śiva, is ‘a powerʼ. (This view is) in accord with (the
teaching of the Vijñānabhairava,) that states: ‘it is said here that Śiva’s power

(śaivī) is the means (mmukha) (to attain Him)'. There is no other means (upāya)

to understanding (the true nature of things) etc., nor is it reasonable (that there

could be one). Thus, the ‘succession’, which is the relationship between the

means and the goal, that is, between power and its possessor, is well ‘evident’

(sphuṭa). There is no doubt at all here (about this). This is the meaning.

“ VBh 20d; also quoted in TĀv ad 1/1, 3/172 (171cd-172ab), 3/194 (3/193cd-194ab),

6/252ab (251cd) and 29/273cd-274ab. The word ‘nukha’ that I translate here as
‘channelʼ, literrally means ‘face’ or ‘mouth’. Śiva’s face or mouth is the channel through
which He becomes manifest. It is also the channel through which He bestows His grace
and utters the scriptures. See above, note 1,29.

Śiva manifeṣts the countless entities of the universe by means of his energies, or to be
more precise, the energies make Him manifest as each thing of which they are the
functional efficacy. Śiva’s energies, as aspects of His one power of freedom, also serve
as the means by which He is made manifest just as He is, in the fullness of His one

essential natur.. We do not know or perceive the essential nature of things in
themselves. We perceive their qualities and effects. We know fire from its capacity to

heat, give out light, cook, and so on. Similarly, it is not possible to perceive ši
directly. He can only be known through His energies. Thus Śiva’s primary external

energies of will, knowledge and action, operating on the individual˚ level of
consciousness, serve, as we shall see further ahead, as the basis of the three categories of
means to realisation (upāya). See following note.

Although essentially one, in terms of experience and practice, Śakti, which is the

means, comes first, and Śiva, the goal, follows after. The categories of means to
realisation operate through the activity of their corresponding energies. The energy
which functions predominantly at the level of the Individual Means (āṇavopāya) is

action. This is the basic level of practice for most people who are caught up in duality

(bheda). For example, rituals, the recitation of Mantras, the practice of yoga, which
includes working with the breath and body, all function by virtue of the power of
consciousness to act. Clearly, one first experiences this energy and then the goal of its
activity, which is Śiva, Who is the goal to be attained (upeya). Similarly, at the
intermediate, mental level of the Empowered Means (śāktopāya), the power of
knowledge operates, by means of which insight develops through the progressive
refinement of conception and thought. When this process is complete, Śiva is recognised
to be the ultimate source of all mental activity by the power of the pure Transmental
energy of the power of knowledge consciousness possesses to know everything as well
as itself. At the highest level of nondual practice, the power of the will operates as the

energy of consciousness experienced within the pure subjectivity of consciousness,

which impels the operation of all the other energies. It is the undistracted reflective

TANTRĀLOKA

Thus, their relationship (with one another) as the means and the goal, is

proclaimed in various places in the scriptures. Accordingly, he says:

k

-aī --. fkra 1 x1

śrīmatkiraṇaśāstre ca tat praśnottarapūrvakam |
anubhāvo vikalpo ‘pi māṇaso na manaḥ śive || 74 ||
avijñāya śivaṁ dīkṣā katham ity atra cottaram |
That (view) also (expressed in its own way) in the venerable

Kiraṇaśāstra in the (course of a series) of questions and answers (that

begins with the following objection): ‘The experience (anubhāva) (of
hunger and thirst etc.) is mental, and (as such) is also a thought construct

(vikaḷpa). (Thus,) the mind (cannot apply itself) to Śiva. (But) without
having first known Śiva, how is initiation (that serves to conjoin the soul to
Him possible)?” The answer here (to this question) is as follows. (74-

75ab) (75-76ab)

awareness Śiva consciousness has of its own nature, which pours out by the exuberance

of its inherent bliss, impelling the creative functions of its own energies. Here too the

experience of this energy leads to the recognition that one’s own consciousness is

essentially the same Śiva consciousness which possesses it. In this case, the succession
from one to the other is practically instantaneous, whereas at the other two levels it is
progressive and clearly observable. The experience and operation of the power that
leads to Śiva, Who is realised to be its possessor, must be as real as He is for it to be
effective.

“ Liteṟally: ‘there is no mind within Śiva’. The objection here is that if mind could

make Śiva known, that entails that He would be reduced to the level of a thought
construct. However, as we shall see further ahead, the respondent argu es that hunger
and thirst are not thought constructs, but even so, everybody experiences them.
Similarly, Śiva can also be experienced even though the mind cannot conceive him.

“ This is a concise paraphrase of KiT vidyāpāda 9/7-8, which is the fourth passage
quoted in Jayaratha’s commentary. The whole vidyāpāda has been edited and translated
into Italian by Vivanti. Goodall has edited and translated a part of it along with

Rāmakaṇṭha’s commentary. See bibliography. For detailed notices of the many

identified manuscripts of the Kiraṇatantra in Nepal and South India and also previous

editions, see Goodall 1998: Ixxxiv-cīi.

“ Abhinava expounds a teaching of the Kiraṇatantra, namely that although Śiva is not

objective and transcends the mind and its conceptions, He is known by virtue of His

divine attributes. These are experienced by the mind directly, not as concepts. That this

is possible is exemplified by the experience of hunger and thirst. They are not objects of
the outer senses; rather they are known to the mind directly, without the need of
mediating thought constructs. The opponent’s view is that this is not true. Mental
cognition free of thought constructs is not possible – that too develops into a thought
construct. Finite thought cannot grasp Śiva and nor can the mind. Those who maintain

that although not perceptible to the senses, Śiva can be grasped by the mind free of
thought constructs, are mistaken. There is no such mind. But if this is so, how can Śiva

CHAPTER ONE

‘That’ has been said in Śiva’s scripture, namely, that the power (of Śiva

consciousness) is the means (to realization). This is the remaining part of the
sentence (that is required to complete the meaning). Thus, in accord with the
two-fold manner of proceeding of the scripture, namely, as word and meaning,
(Abhinava) explains this in accord with the (intended) meaning (of the text,

rather than quoting it literally word by word,) and (so says): ‘the experience . .
.” etc. There (in the Kiraṇāgama) Garuḍa (asks):

‘How can the Śiva principle be a void? That which is void is not in

the purview of the senses. Direct perception is sensory cognition. What is

beyond that (cannot be an object of the senses and s0) is nothing at all.

(The question suggests that) because the Śiva principle is not in the
purview of direct perception, it is nothing at all. Questioned thus, the Lord
(replied with the words) beginning with: .
‘Māyā should be abandoned and Śiva should be adopted (and perceived)
(grāhya). The one who grasps (Him and perceives Him) (grāhaka) is said to be
the individual soul. Śiva (is void in the relative sense that He is) devoid of the

(impure) attributes of Māyā. . .!

And ending with:

‘(Moreover) why should an entity that is beyond the senses not be

experienced?“ It is well known (to everybody) that (a form of) ascertainment
(anubhāva) exists that is perceived (only) by mind, as is, (for example,) hunger

(In this way Śiva asserts that) although the Śiva principle is not directly
perceptible to the external senses, it is an object of the direct perception of the
be known? And without knowing him, how can the teacher initiate his disciple? The
discussion that follows answers these objections.

“” Read, as does Vivanti’s the edition of the Kiraṇatantra, yac chūnyaṁ for tac

“ Kiṟaṇatantra vidyāpāda 9/1. This and the following quotations from the
Kiraṇatantra are found in the vidyāpāda 9/1-13.

KIT vidyāpāda 9/2abc. This ine ends with pasumalaviyogataḥ – because He is not
conjoined to the impurities of the fettered soul’. The text continues (ibid. 9/3): ʻ(Śiva) is

not said to be void because He does not exist, but (is so in a relative sense) with respect
(to the individual soul,) who is other than He. Just as a house can be partially empty

(without being totally s0), such is the case with (Śiva, Who is void because He is
devoid) of the qualities (of Nature), that is, sattva (and the rest).” In other words, Śiva is

void in relation to the individual soul, in the sense that He is devoid of the limitation and

impurities that bind and sully it. This does not mean Śiva does not exist. Indeed, His
pure consciousness nature, although inscrutable, is supremely existent. Verses 9/4-5 are

quoted below in TĀv ad 1/76 (77).
Literally: ‘why should there be no experience also where there is an entity that is
beyond the senses?- MS Kh reads anubhavena kim – ‘what is the use of experience
where there is an entity that is beyond the senses?

““ Ibid. 9/6.

TANTRĀLOKA

mind, and so is (reasonably) established (pratisamāhita) to be something. And

(s0), again repeating this (objection), Garuḍa asked:

‘The ascertainment (of the nature of something) is with regards to an

entity which is (an object of) discursive representation (vikalpārtha), and that
is a thought construct of the mind. Thus, (by accepting this view, the
impossible consequence would follow that Śiva, Who) is beyond the mind
(amanaska lit. “without mind’) and without form, should be known as

(something which is) mental (samanaska lit. ‘with mindʼ). (However) how
can (a teacher) initiate (others) without having known (that) reality? One should

know an entity in all respects (to know it properly), (whereas Śiva) cannot be

known in every way (by means of the mind and its constructs).”

The author, wishing to be concise, formulates the sense of the question

in his own words. The point here is (as follows). It has been stated that Śiva is

directly perceptible to the mind, on the analogy of hunger and the like (that are,

like Śiva, not perceptible to the outer senses). There (in that case), it is a mental
experience (free of thought constructs). (It is said) that ‘here (in this context) the
mind (mnanas) (is said to be the mental faculty that imagines and formulates)

intentions (saṁkalpaka). As, according to this view, mind is (essentially
imagination or) intention (saṅkalpa) by nature, (all that pertains to it is just) a

thought construct, and its nature (is such that it) does not make contact with
(any outer) object (artha), and so (as the mind is limited) to that extent, it is

“ Read with Vivanti’s edition vikalpārthe – ‘with regards to an entity which is (an
object of) discursive representation’ for vikalpottho – ‘arises from a discursive
representation’

“ The edition of the text reads ato (‘so’) for ca tac (‘and that’).

“ A Sanṣkrit note at the bottom of the page explains that: ‘By ‘mental’ is meant the
thinking of the mind. The Śiva principle is not mental and has no form.”

“’ KĪT vidyāpāda 9/7-8.
“ This statement may be SāṁKā 27b. The reading in the editions is atra manaḥ

saṅkalpakam instead of saṁkalapakam atra manaḥ. ṭ is the standard definition of

manas and its function which is also accepted by the Āgamas. For example, in MṛT
vidyāpāda 12/Tabc:
devapravartakaṁ śīghracāri saṁkalpadharmi ca | manaḥ . . .…. . . . . II

Manas impels the deities (of the senses). It moves very quickly, and its nature
is intention.
Cf. also SVT 4/394b: manaḥ saṁkalpa ucyate saṁkalpaḥ kramato jñānam ‘the mind is said to be intention. Intention gradually (becomes) knowledge’. Ksemarāja

glosses saṁkalpa as meaning the will (icchā), and ‘because it indicates the sequence of
all that is the object of desire, it is said that it ‘gradually (becomes) knowledge’.” Thus,
as saṅkalpa evolves into vikalpa, and in a sense they guide one another, they are so

closely related that at times they are indi

uishable.

According to the commonly accepted Sātṁkhya view, the inner mental organ of sense

consists of three faculties. One is the intellect, which assesses the nature of what is

perceived through the senses, inferred thereby or recollected. Its function is
ascertainment (adhyavasāya). Another is the ego, which relates perceptions and notions

CHAPTER ONE

not a valid means to know Śiva. That is not (and cannot be) known where (no)

means of knowledge operates. So if the Śiva principle is unknown, how is
initiation possible? (Only) once the teacher has known the supreme (Śiva)

principle should he conjoin the initiand there (to it) by means of initiation. So it
is said, for example, that ‘knowledge is (present) within the teacher’. The word

‘īt’ (that in Sanskrit serves to indicate the conclusion of a statement) comes at
the end of the question. When the question Garuḍa utters (has been asked)

‘here’, the reply, which is the response uttered by the Lord, (follows).
He states that:

ÇJTI]¥GTI

kṣudhādyanubhavo naiva vikalpo na hi mānasaḥ | 75 |I

‘Indeed, no! The experience of hunger and the like is mental, but
certainly not a thought construct (and so Śiva, like hunger, can indeed be

experienced inwardly).”" (75cd) (76cd)

The word ‘no!’ is out of sequence and so should be applied as having as

its object the denial of the question, (in the sense that) ‘(no) this is not a
question (that needs to be asked). The word ‘indeed’ (indicates that what he is
about to say) is the reason (for that), namely (that this is not s0,) because the

mental experience of hunger and the like is not a thought construct. This is the
meaning. Initially, they are also the objects of a direct mental perception
(mānasapratyakṣa) that is free of thought constructs. Otherwise, the thought
‘this is hunger” which follows after that (initial direct experience), would not
arise. There is also nothing wrong in them also being the object of conceptual
(savikalpaka) mental perception," because it is accepted that a means of
knowledge (can also operate with regards to that) as it is based on (real

empirical) entities, (such as, in this case, the lack of food and water etc.). In the

same way, Śiva is also in the purview of mental perception; however, the
difference is that (it takes place) by means of (His) energies. As is said there in
the verses that follow (in the Kiraṇatantra):

‘(It is not the case that) where there is (a direct) experience of hunger

and the like, there may be no thought construct (vikalpa). A thought construct

also has as its basis (a real) entity; (however,) that entity is not (an outer,

etc. to oneself as being one's own. Its function is self-arrogation (abhimāna). The third

is ‘mind’ – manas. This is not ‘mind’ in the Western senses of the word, it is the

intention to perceive, recollect etc., and so co-ordinate the sensations that stream in
through the senses with the products and functions of the other two so as to generate the
notions and thought constructs that are, essentially, products of its imagination. Thus, its
function is imagination (saṅkalpa) or intention.

This line is an explicative paraphrase of KiT vidyāpāda 9/9ab, which is the first line

of the passage from there, quoted by Jayaratha, i.e. KiT vidyāpāda 9/9-11.

" Vivanti reports, op. cit. p. 77 note 41, that Rāmakaṇṭha, commenting on 9/9, also

maintains that the experience of hunger and the like is not only conceptual – na punar

vikalpātmaka eva.

TANTRĀLOKA

physical one) like a jar. A thought construct is mental. 1t is subtle, and
dissolves away in the power (of knowledge) the Void, (which is Śiva,
possesses). Present there (the individual soul) is differentiated from (all) other
(things, including Māyā,) and so, (in that state), is said to be devoid of mind.
Perception (jñāna) is (the result) of the conjunction of the Self with the

senses. The Selfis the agent and mind, the action. Here (in this case), Śivais
the goal to be attained (sādhya) (and known). (For that to be possible,) one must
accept that, although all-pervasive, (He is perceived) by means of one (of His)

figurative
Whatis said to be (Śiva’ s) voidness is so (in a secondary)

sense (upacāreṇa)in relation to Māyā. Śivais said to be the Void because He
is devoid of the attributes (of Māyā) such as mutability and the like (which
condition empirical entities). This amounts to saying that in relation to
something else that (Śiva)is not void (and hence can be known as something).
And so (as thisis s0), once Śiva has been known by means of (His) power, the

“ A passage, perhaps drawn from a commentary, found in a note of the Sanskrit text

explains: ‘What is said (here serves to) refute (the view that the) nature (of the mind) is
such that it does not make contact with (any) object (artha). He states the (right) manner
(to understand the matter) there (in that case), saying that ‘(a thought construct also has
as its) basis (a real) entity° and so on. (With regards to the statement that) ‘there is no
thought construct (vikalpa) (where there is (a direct) experience of hunger and the like)ʼ,
it is said as a reason for this that ‘(a thought construct also has as its) basis (a real)

entity. (But) if it is based on (a real empirical) entity, then why does it not manifest
(externally) like a jar? Thus it is said that it is not like a jar. The reason there is ‘that a
thought construct is mentalʼ and so on.

Read with the edition of the KiT: tenoktas for tenāsau.

Read with the edition of the KiT: cātmendriyasleṣāt for cātmendriyāśleṣāt.

KiT, Vidyāpāda, 9/9-11. Altṭhough hunger and the like are mental perceptions, they

are not thought constructs. Nonetheless they are known by the power they exert on the

mind. Śiva is perceived by the mind in a similar manner through His power (śakti). A

thought construct (vikalpa) cannot grasp ultimate reality as it is in itself, because a

thought construct is the relative perception of an idea as distinct from others. It is partial
and can serve as a means only to perceiving aspects of experience; through it one can

never come to know reality as a whole. However, although a thought construct is a

mental phenomenon, not all mental phenomena are thought constructs. This is the case

with our feelings, such as the perception of hunger, which, although mental and to some
extent conceptual, are not entirely so. Indeed, all thought constructs (vikalpa) are
preceded and sustained by an underlying mental state which is free of them (nirvikalpa).

The mind does experience Śiva’s power. It is like the experience of hunger, whichis
empirical because obviously it relates to the physical condition of the body, the absence
of food, etc. The experience of Śivais not empirical, it is not based on some empirical
entity. Itis based on theinner mental perception of Śiva’s power of freedomin its

various forms as His will, knowledge and action, etc. Śiva replies that the perception of
hunger is not a thought construct. Even if hunger and the like were to be objects of
mental, discursive perception (savikalpa), this would not be unreasonable, as discursive
mental representations (i.e. thought constructs) are based on something real. Thus Śiva,

like hunger etc., can be perceived by mental perception, by means of one of his powers.
Thus, the teacher knows Siva through one of His powers and so, knowing Him in this
way, can conjoin the aspirant to Him by means ofinitiation.

“ Read with MSs K, ĠG, Ch, J. Jh, N, T and Ḍ -māyāpekṣayo- for -māyākṣayo-.

CHAPTER ONE

teacher conjoins the initiand there (to Him) by means of initiation. Thus there is
no defect (in our view).
Surely (one may ask,) an entity that is known in all respects is (truly)
known, not (one that is only known) in part. A thought construct (vikalpa)
cannot know an entity in all respects because it is applied (to only some
specific, determined) fixed (niyata) aspects (of it). Thus, even if Śiva has been

made the field (of experience) by means of (His) power, (His state) as the field
of that (experience) is not such in all respects, and so is not (truly, fully) known.
He says (in response to) the doubt (raised by) this, the rest of the question:

TTIT-ARHSTT
WṬTRJ āAT āṢ |

Ũraīq 1| oē
rasādyanadhyakṣatve ‘pi rūpād eva yathā tarum |
vikalpo vetti tadvat tu nādabindávādinā śivam || 76 ||

(Anyway Śiva can also be realized by thought). Just as a notion

knows a tree by its form alone even when its taste etc. is not perceived,

similarly, Śiva (is known) by means (of His powers that are aspects of His

nature, such as Divine) Sound (nāda), Light (bindu) and the like. (76) (77)

Here (in this regard), one must concede that a thought construct follows
on from (an original experience) which is devoid of thought constructs. Thus a
(thought construct) perceives a tree by means of, for example, its form alone,

even though (the tree) consists (of numerous qualities) such as form (as well as)

taste etc. That (form) cannot be perceived as its taste etc. also (by the sense of

taste), because (form) is limited (to being perceived by the sense ofsight); (even

s0,) it is not right to say that (the tree) is not perceived because it is not
perceived in all respects, as that is contrary to experience. In the same way, the
established view (here is that) Śiva is also known by means of (His) powers,

such as (Divine) Sound (nāda) and Light (bindu). That is said there itself (in

the Kiraṇa):

Juṣṭ as a tree is known by direct perception by means ofjust (its) form
alone (although its) taste and other (qualities) are not perceived, so too the Lord
is perceived according to (His) true nature independently of objectivity
(vastubhāva) by the power of knowledge (He and the fettered, as essentially

consciousness, possess).

‘ Lit. ‘just as a thought knows a treeʼ.

This verse is a condensed paraphrase of KiT vidyāpāda 9/12-13ab and 9/4-5 quoted
by Jayaratha in the commentary.
A tree can be perceived by means ofjust its colour or form, without one having
tasted its fruit etc. Eyen if all its parts are not perceived, it is nonetheless perceived.
Similarly, although Śiva is perceived by means of just one of His powers (such as

consciousness of Divine Sound or Light etc.), He is nonetheless entirely perceived.
“ KĪT vidyāpāda 9/12-13ab. Rāmakaṇṭha comments on the expression ‘vastvbhāva’ as

meaning knowledge of various empirical particulars, and so I have translated

TANTRĀLOKA

Again:
‘Light (bindu), (Divine) Sound and Power are conceived to be (present)

in the emptiness (of Śiva’s transcendental consciousness)in order to steady the
mind. Again, (when their experience becomes) permanent,®' (the mind becomes
completely) stable. (Śiva, Who)is beyond the senses because (He)is extremely
subtle,is present in (His) subtle power. That (power)is considered to be the
power of knowledge. By the knowledge of that, He Himself is known.
It is established (siddha) in this way that (Śiva’s) power alone is the

supreme means (upāya) to realise the supreme principle. The (implicit) sense

expressed (here) is that (Śiva's power) in the form of the world-orders etc. is of

endless kinds.
In this way, whatever be the wonderful diversity of this universe
consisting of sentient and insentient beings and the field of operation of
emanation and the rest or the states of waking etc., all that is the unfolding
expansion (sphāra) of the Supreme Lord’s power alone. Accordingly, he says:

j|ETÉĪṭIRÉIEETIGPVKIEĀḤ

ūttra zaz āglthcōrraT_ 1| 9¢
II

iḶBEEELEEIPI-IEE IEAETiE’THHIIṈLI

accordingly. Another possible translation could be: ‘Just as a tree is known by direct

perception (even if its) taste etc. is not perceived by (just perceiving) its form alone, in

the same way, by virtue of the fact that (the Lord and we possess) the power to perceive,
the Lord is perceived abstractly (tattvabhāvena) by setting aside (the perception of
empirically) existing things (vastubhāva).”
We come to know Śiva by setting aside our individual, objectivized

perceptions and attending instead to the fact that we are capable of perception,

recognising that this is a power Siva possesses as universal consciousness that He
imparts to us and in which we share. The point here is expressed beautifully by Rumi,

who teaches:

‘Do you want the sweetness of food

or the sweetness of the one who put sweetness in food?’
‘think not of what you see, rather give thanks to the One who gave you sight.’
Barks 2011: 290

“’Read with the edition of the KiT nitye for nityarṁ.

“” Instead of sūkṣmā śaktiḥ sa tadgataḥ, the edition of the KiT reads: sūkṣmaśaktilayaṁ
gataḥ – `(he has) merged into (his) subtle power°ʼ.

“ KIT vidyāpāda 9/4-5.
“ Read paramopāyaḥ for paramupāyaḥ.

CHAPTER ONE

bahuśaktitvam asyoktaṁ śivasya yad ato mahān |
kalātattvapurārṇāṇupadādibhedaviṣṭaraḥ || 77 |I
sṛṣṭisthititrodhānasaṁhārānugrahādi ca |
turyam ity api devasya bahuśaktitvajrṛmbhitam || 78 II
jāgratsvapnasuṣuptāny atadatītāni yāny api |
tāny apy amuṣya nāthasya svātantryalaharībharaḥ || 79 |I
mahāmantreśamantreśamantrāḥ śivapurogamāḥ |
akalau sakalaś ceti śivasyaiva vibhūtayaḥ || 80 |I

““The many powers Śiva is said to possess are the great extension of

differentiation (bheda) (of the Paths of manifestation consisting of) the
cosmic forces (kalā), metaphysical principles (tattva), and world-orders
(pura), (along with their respective denotators, namely the Paths of the)

letters, Mantras, parts of Mantras (pada) and the rest. The unfolding of the

Lord’s manifold power (also consists of the processes of) creation,
persistence, obscuration, withdrawal and grace etc. as well as the Fourth

(state).

Moreover, (the states of) waking, dreaming and deep sleep and
others beyond them® are all the multitude of the waves of the Lord’s
(creative) freedom (svātantrya). So too (the perceivers) headed by Śiva

(called) the Great Lords of Mantra, the Lords of Mantra and Mantras,
(along with) the two that are Deconditioned (ākala) and the Conditioned
(sakala), are (all) the glorious powers (vibhūti) of Śiva Hiṃself. (77-80)

(78-81)

“ In these four verses, Abhinava gives a summary of the nature of Śakti as all the major
categories of existing things and their dynamism, ranging from the most gross and

immanent to transcendental Śiva. Thus, he lists the various categories (bheda) of
realities that comprise the universe which the teachings expound. They are: 1) the Sixfold Path 2) the five functions (pañcakṛtya), 3) the four states of consciousness, and 4)

the hierarchy of seven perceivers.

Read with MSs J, Jh, Ñ and T -padādibheda- for -padādir bheda-.

’ Concerning the waking and other states, see below, 10/227cd ff.

“ This subject is discussed extensively below in Chapter Nine (9/53cd-55ab, 90cd ff.
and 103) and all of Chapter Ten, an outline of which follows. According to a common
teaching found in various degrees of development in the early Siddhānta Āgamas and

fully formed in the Mālinīvijayottara, there are seven types of perceivers (pramātṛ)
arranged in a hierarchy along the series of thirty-six principles. In terms of the
phenomenology of the Pratyabhijñā, they are understood to view their corresponding

section of the series of principles as their objects. The first three are conditioned by the

‘Force (of limited agency) (kalā). This is the energy of Māyā, which obscures

consciousness in such a way that it reduces it to the form of perceiving subjects related

to objectivity experienced as separate from themselves. The first and lowest of these
categories of perceivers is subject to all the aspects of the Force (of limited agency) —

kalā – and so is called Sakala – ‘With Kalā’ – which I translate for convenience as
Conditioned. These perceivers experience the principles from Earth up to the Individual
soul, and are subject to all the three forms of Impurity (mala), namely, Innate (āṇava),

TANTRĀLOKA

Maāyā and Karma. The following two perceivers above that are still within the realms of
Maāyā. The first, the Pralayākala – Dissolution Deconditioned, resides in the priṇciples
from the Individual Soul to Māyā, that is, the obscuring coverings (kañcukas) of the
Individual Soul (see above, note to comm. 1/39-40). The one above it is called
Vijñānākala – Consciousness Deconditioned. This type of perceiver resides in the
intermediate state between Māyā and the Pure Principles, in which the remaining four

levels and types of perceivers reside.

The Dissolution Deconditioned (Pralayākala) perceivers are divested of the
active energies of Karma, but continue to possess the latent ones. They sleep for a

period of cosmic destruction (pralaya) and so are called accordingly. Their state of deep

sleep (suṣupti) is of two kinds, namely, with and without some sense of perception of
dream objects and the self-awareness that accompanies it. The first is called
‘savedyasuṣuptī’ – literally ‘deep sleep associated with objectivity°. The second is called
‘apavedyasuṣuptī – literally ‘deep sleep free of objectivity (see below, 9/138 ff. and
10/132cd ff.).. Although still within the phenomenal domain characterized by the

distinction between subject and object, no distinct phenomena appear (apavedya),

although the latent traces of the experience of objectivity of the previous Conditioned
(sakala) state of subjectivity persist. The Dissolution Deconditioned perceiver
‘associated with objectivity’ experiences just the bare cognitive awareness characterized
by the recollection, when emerging out of deep sleep, that “ḹ slept comfortably”. The
other type, which experiences deep sleep free of objectivity, recollects that “I knew
nothing at all” (see below, comm. 10/127cd-133ab). In the Consciousn

Deconditioned (Vijñānākala) perceiver, both impurities (mala) of Karma and Māyā
have come to an end as well as their latent impressions. The impurity pertaining to the
individual soul (āṇavamala) is still functional but is tending to cease (vidvaṁsabhāva).
Even so the presence of this impurity is evident in the state of the Consciousness

Deconditioned perceiver, who under its influence may be conscious but has no freedom,

or may be free but is unconscious of being so (see above, note to comm. on 1/23). The
yogi at this level of subjectivity enters a state of deep contemplative absorption
(samādhi) but, as if paralysed, he does not have the power to maintain it. When he
emerges out of it, he is again free, but he cannot sustain higher states of consciousness.

When the principle of Māyā is destroyed, the Dissolution Deconditioned
perceiver associated with objectivity (savedyapralayākala) enters into the
Consciousness Deconditioned state from which it does not, anyway, differ much.
Indeed, it appears that originally these categories of perceivers were considered to be
aspects of the Consciousness Deconditioned subjects. Both perceivers are destined to
awaken at the end of the period of cosmic destruction or its yogic equivalent. The
Dissolution Deconditioned, who were in objectless deep sleep, may return into the

world of transmigration of Maāyā, descending into it, according to the latent traces of

their past Karma, or rise to a higher level. Thus, for example, if they were devout
Vaiṣṇavas, they come to reside in their corresponding principle, that is, Unmanifest

Nature. Conversely, if they were previously engaged in the practice of Śaiva meditation
and other Śaiva spiritual disciplines, they may rise to the higher level of Mantra
perceivers beyond Māyā. Thuṣ, according to whether they descend or ascend, they are

of two kinds (see below, 9/138-141 and 10/133cd-137). The Consciousness
Deconditioned subject may similarly rise or fall when he awakens, but he rises further

and does not fall as far down as the Dissolution Deconditioned perceiver. Thus, he may

awaken at the higher level beyond Māyā to become a Mantra, Mantreśa (Lord of
Mantra) or Mahāmantreśa (Great Lord of Mantra). He may also return to the world of
transmigratory existence, but he does so as either as a yogi or as a man of knowledge
(vijñānin) (see below, 10/138-140ab).

CHAPTER ONE
The words ‘and the rest’ (in the expression) ‘parts of Mantras (pada)

and the restʼ refer to living beings (bhūta) and (all) phenomena (bhāva).

(Śiva’s) various (cosmic) functions (kṛtya) are mentioned by (saying) ‘creation,
persistenceʼ (and so on). ‘The Fourth’ is another way of referring to the full
(and perfect Śiva) nature present within (the phases of) emanation and the rest.
The Four-fold Reality (catuṣṭayārtha) (taught in the Krama system) is also
(implicitly) indicated by this (expression). Thus, obscuration and grace should
be included within persistence and withdrawal (respectively) to make that

possible. The Fourth (state) is other (than these phases).

Equivalent states may be achieved by yogic practice. Thus, the Dissolution
Deconditioned state is achieved by the yogi when the activity of mind, along with that
of the senses and even the breathing, stop in deep contemplative absorption (samādhi)
‘with the eyes closed’ (nimeṣa). If the adept (sādhaka) is sufficiently pure (that is, free
of latent traces of past Karma), he is able to quietly set aside that state, which is an
impediment to further development, and enter that of the Consciousness Deconditioned

perceiver. Rising beyond that level of subjectivity, the next, which is that of the Mantra
perceiver, is above Māyā, within the Pure Knowledge, the first of the Pure Principles, in

which objectivity is experienced as one in various modalities with the perceiver. There
fundamental impurity (āṇavamala) survives as a latent trace, and that too progressively
comes to an end in the higher perceivers, the Mantreśas and Mahāmantreśas, who reside
in the higher principles of ĪIśvara and Sadāśiva, respectively. It finally disappears totally
in Siva.
See Somadeva (2004: 145 ff.) for a detailed exposition of the doctrine as it
appears in the Mālinīvijayottara and the closely related Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha.
There he also discusses the differences with respect to the original form formulated in
the Siddhānta Āgamas and examines their presentation by early Siddhānta
commentators like Rāmakaṇṭha. Thuṣ, he traces its evolution to its most fully formed
formulation, which is found only in the Mālinīvijayottara.
There (in MV 1/22cd-23ab), we read that:
‘One should know that the Self is of four kinds. There (amongst them) is the

Vijñānakevala, who is conjoined to (just) one (form of) impurity. The Pralayakevala is
conjoined with that and Karma.

The four types of Self are: 1) those in the pure universe, free of the three forms

of impurity, 2) Vijñānakevala (‘remaining only in awarenessʼ), who are only affected by
the impurity of individuation (āṇavamala), 3) Pralayakevala (‘merged into nature’), who
are subject to that and Karma, and 4) the fully limited Self (sakala).
Somadeva notes that only the Parākhyatantra, which although amongst the
early Siddhāntāgamas is relatively late, mentions the Pralayākalas. They appear in the
(p. 166 note 62). Goodall notes (1998:184 footnote 77): ‘The first Saiddhāntika source
in which we find the terms Pralayākala and Vijñānākala is Sadyojyotiḥ’s
Svāyambhuvavṛtti ad 1/2 and 2/26 (in the second passage we find vijñānakevala in place
of the latter). The Kiraṇa speaks of the kevala type of soul (1/23), but does not subdivide it into these two categories.’

Sanderson observes (1996a: 23): ‘The source of the new terminology is
unclear. Jayaratha in his Tantrālokaviveka ad 10/7 considers it a Saiddhāntika

classification, and it was generally adopted in the Saiddhāntika circles; but I find no

Saiddhāntika scripture which uses it . . . In the absence of any early Saiddhāntika

evidence of the classification, I propose the hypothesis that the source lay in the
Mālinīvijayottara, . . . for there the terminology is central and pervasive’.

TANTRĀLOKA

The various states (of consciousness) are mentioned by (saying)
‘waking, dreaming’ (and so on). The two (perceivers who are) deconditioned

(akala)

(are

called)

‘Consciousness

Deconditioned’

(Vijñānākala)

and

‘Dissolution Deconditioned’ (Pralayākala). By that (is meant) the various types
of perceivers (pramātṛbheda).
In this way, Śiva, Who is ultimate reality and is one dense mass of
(uninterrupted) consciousness and bliss, abides thus as the one who impels and

gives life to the wonderfully diverse universe consisting of the thirty-six
principles. Accordingly, he says:

The Innate Nature of the Group (grāmadharma)”

ḍa #īī RJṬTITTaT] |

srīāāa fē zaṁaīēhcqa RṜTtTS 1| ¢z I
Somadeva, searching for the origins of the sets of perceivers, refers to the

Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha, which is ‘the source for much of the material that the MV
has adopted from the Śaivasiddhānta.’ There in the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha there is
a division into three: 1) Amala (subdivided into Vidyeśvareśāna, Vidyeśvara and
Vidyā), 2) Kevala (mala but no kalā), 3) Sakala (mala and kalā). The subdivisions of 1
correspond to Mahāmantreśa, Mantreśa and Mantra. Somadeva wonders whether this
classification may have served as the basis of the one in the MV, which has simply

divided ʻkevala’ into two types. Sadyojyotis, commenting on this passage (i.e. Svā. 1/2)
practically presents the view in the MV. It is quite likely that this was Sadyojyotis'’s

source (see Somadeva (2004) p. 167-169 for more details). Somadeva (2004) (p. 177-8)
notes: “The Mālinīvijayottara’s innovation to the pramātṛbheda is therefore the

subdivision of Svāmbhuvasutrasaṁgraha’s isolated soul into the Vijñānākala and the

Pralayākala. The exact source from which the Mālinīvijayottara has adopted these
experients is unclear. For Abhinavagupta the Pralayākala are the ‘liberated’ souls of the
Vaiṣṇavas, Brahmavādins (Vedāntins) and Buddhists, and the Vijñānākalas are the souls
‘liberated’ by isolation according to the Sāṁkhya, Yoga and Pāñcarātra Systems. But it
is not impossible that experients approximating to both the Vijñānākala and the
Pralayākala existed under different names in various schools of the early Sāṁkhya and
Yoga.' He is referring here more specifically the Videhas (> Vijñānākala) and
Prakṛtilaya (> Pralayākala) mentioned in some works on Pātañjali Yoga and Sāṁkhya

(Yogasūtra 1/19 and Vyāsa’s bhāṣya).” Somadeva (2004) (p. 173-176) searches for
earlier non-Saiddhāntika sources for this view and finds the notion of Videha and
Prakṛtilaya Yogins in higher states of samādhi mentioned in Vyāsa’s bhāṣya on YSū
1/19 and Bhoja’s commentary Rājamārtaṇḍa ad YSū 1/19 and 1/17.

Concemning

the

Four-fold

Reality,

also

called

the

Four-fold

Sequence

(kramacatuṣṭaya), taught in the the Krama system, see note to TĀv ad 3/256ab (3/256).
Here Jayaratha presents the Four-fold Reality as essentially consisting of the three
phases of emanation, persistence, withdrawal and a fourth condition that encompasses
them and is present within them, even as it transcends them. This is the eternal, nontemporal consciousness manifest as and through time in these three phases, in each
timeless instant. Undefinable as any one of them, it is appropriately called the
Inexplicable (Anākhya) or No Name (Anāma). In this setup, taught in the Krama
system, obscuration is an aspect of the phase of persistence, and grace that of

withdrawal.

“) This passage extends from TĀ 1/81 (82) to 85ab (86ab).

CHAPTER ONE

tattvagrāmasya sarvasya dharmaḥ syād anapāyavān |
ātmaiva hi svabhāvātmety uktaṁ śrītriśiromate || 81 ||

It is ṣaid in the venerable Triśiromata that the (essential) nature
(dharma) of the (entire) group (grāma) of metaphysical principles (tattva) is

imperishable. Indeed, it is the Self alone who is the identity of their own

nature (svabhāvātman). (81) (82)

An attribute (dharma) is of two kinds, namely, (one that) bestows life

(i.e. gives existence) (prāṇada) to an entity (padārtha), and (the other that) is

the cause of (its) assuming (particular features or) qualities (viśeṣa). The first is
like a universal. A cow is not a cow without ‘cow-nessʼ. The second is like a
(particular) quality (guṇa). (The colour) ‘white’, for example, qualifies an entity
that has attained being. In this way, here (in this context) ‘the Self alone of the

(entire) group (grāma) of metaphysical principles (tattva) gives it life (i.e.

existence) (prāṇada), and so is the ‘aṭṭribute’ which is the essential nature (of

the group). Thus, it is said to be ‘imperishable’, that is, it is never disassociated

(from it). The word ‘indeed’ (indicates) the reason (for this). Surely, (a question
arises as to) what the authority (pramāṇa) is here (for this view). With this

doubt in mind, he says that ‘it is said in the venerable Triśiromata’.
A scripture functions in two ways –— as word and meaning (that is, as
what is written, word for word, and its sense, which may be variously
expressed). Referring to that same book, he says in both ways (that is, by
literally quoting from it and summarizing the meaning):

hṛdiṣthaṁ sarvadehasthaṁ ṣvabhāvasthaṁ suṣūkṣmakam ḷ

sāmūhyaṁ caiva tattvānāṁ grāmaśabdena kīrtitam || 82 |

The extremely subtle totality (sāmiūthya) of the principles located in

the Heart, in all the body, and in the specific nature (svabhāva) (of all

things), is termed the ‘group’ (grāma). (82) (83)

“! Now that Abhinava has established on the authority of Siddhānta sources the

existence and nature of Śakti in its manifold forms, he turns to a major Trika Tantra, the
Triśirobhairava, to say the same in the ambit of the Trika Kula. The point of contact
between them is the term ‘dharma’. According to the standard esoteric nomenclature of
the Kaula Tantras and their Buddhist counterparts, in the Anuttarayoga the term
grāmadharma is used to refer to the antinomian conduct of elevated Kaula Tantric

adepts. In common Sanskrit, the word grāmadharma or grāmyadharma literally means
‘rustic or vulgar behaviour’, that is, the way an uneducated, low-caste villager behaves

who takes no heed of basic Brahminical norms that regulate the right conduct of the

higher castes. In Buddhist Tantras it denotes the spiritual practice of adhering externally

to common ‘vulgar behaviour whilst inwardly repeating Mantras and focusing the

TANTRĀLOKA

The ‘totality (of the principles) is the group (of principles). The word
‘grāma’ (that can also mean ‘village’) functions (in this context) in the sense of
‘a groupʼ. (This is an acceptable interpretation) because one can observe this
usage in such statements as: ‘its nature is the entire group (grāma) of principles
that has been swallowed up ”.” And that is present everywhere in two ways,
that is, externally and within the body, as universal (common to all)
(sādhāraṇa) (externally), and as particular (not common to all) (asādhāraṇa)
(within the body). This is the meaning. Thus, it is located in the fixed, specific
nature of mobile (living) and immobile (insentient things) etc. So too, in the

same way, it is located within the ‘Heart’, that is, within consciousness
(bodha), shining radiantly at one with it. Thuṣ, it is ‘extremely subtle’, that is,
it cannot be discerned (aparicchedya).
(The essential inherent) attribute (dharma) of this group of principles

(tattvagrāma) is not the contracted (individual) Self, rather, it is the supreme

one. Accordingly, he says:

sṃīāa srī scqṣ: fTaīgaúaz:
ātmaiva dharma ity uktaḥ śivāmṛtapariplutaḥ |
Itis said that (the inherent) nature (dharma) (of the ‘group’)

(unconditioned) Self itself, flooded with Śiva’s nectar. (83ab) (84ab)

is the

The meaning (of the expression) ‘flooded with Śiva’s nectar’ is that
(the group of principles) is made of the aesthetic rapture (camatkāra) of
supreme bliss. He also indicates in this way that it is the supreme goal°
(upeya), and so one should pay close attention (to it) just there.

What is the means here (in this case) by which it can be experienced
directly? He says (in response to this question):

JG-TvṬJṀkrṁ

attention on higher spiritual principles. See HT 2/3/41 also Advayasiddhi 14, and
Cittaśuddhiprakaraṇa 58.
The Triśirobhairavatantra similarly explains the term in an elevated way as the
dharma of the grāma – ‘the groupʼ. This is not the group of houses or families that

make up a village, but rather the metaphysical principles that constitute the gamut of
reality. Dharma is the essential attribute (dharma) of these principles, that is, the Self.

Thus, the practice, simply stated, is to stay immersed and satisfied in the Self (see

below, 29/65). Thus, Abhinava links the common basic Śaivism of the Siddhānta to the

eṣoteric Kaulism of Trika, mediated by the concept of Śakti.
“ This line is probably drawn from the TBh. The expression ‘kavalīkṛta’, here
translated as ‘consumed, literally means ‘made into a morsel’ ready to be gulped down.
The literal meaning thus suggests the process whereby the dispersed particulars and

their common underlying universal metaphysical principles are gathered together into
consciousness to be consumed as a unity into the oneness of consciousness.

““ Read paramopeyaḥ for paramupeyaḥ.

CHAPTER ONE

[EIENEESCAPHNEAEEIGIEETCTHIIṈ®AI

aa Jāatd |

prakāśāvasthitaṁ jñānaṁ bhāvābhāvādimadhyataḥ || 83 ||
svasthāne vartanaṁ jñeyaṁ draṣṭrtvaṁ vigatāvṛti |
viviktavastukathitaśuddhavijñānanirmalaḥ || 84 ||
grāmadharmavṛrttir uktas tasya sarvaṁ prasiddhyati |
One should know that the abiding (of consciousness) within its own
abode is the knowledge (of reality) (jūāna) present in the Light (of
consciousness that shines) in the centre between (any two things,) such as
the existence and non-existence (of any one thing). (One should know that)
it is (the pure) subjectivity (draṣṭṛtva) from which (every obscuring)
covering has fallen away.
Stainless by virtue of (that) pure consciousness, which is said to be a
separate (transcendental) reality (viviktavastu), it is called (the state of)
‘abiding within the state of the nature of the (knowledge of the) group
(grāmadharmavṛtti. He who possesses (that state) achieves everything.
(83cd-85ab) (84cd-86ab)
By the words ‘and the like’ (one should understand any particular)

‘existent’ (bhāva) also. Thus, (the meaning is that the light of consciousness

shines) in the centre between the existence and non-existence (of any one thing),

or between (the perception of) two things (bhāva). “One should know’ that the

‘abiding’ (of consciousness) within its own abode, that is, in its persistent state

(sthiti), is the ‘knowledge (of reality) (jñāna) that, taking its support from (the

centre), ‘is present in the light (of consciousness)’, that is, within is its own
(subjective) nature, not within (objectivity, which comprises both) existence,
non-existence and the like. The meaning is that one should know the manner of
abiding (vṛrt) within the domain (viṣaya) of ‘the nature of the groupʼ
(grāmadharma).

The overall sense here is this. When (one is) perceiving two existent
things or the existence (of one thing, conscious of the concomitant) nonexistence (of other things), perceiving the centre, which is the void that divides
“ The expression viviktavastu literally means ‘a separate reality.

Grāma is the knowledge of reality within the light of consciousness. It is the pure
subjectivity free of the obscuration of objectivity that shines as ‘a separate reality, the

centre between two perceptions. The first, that exists and is taking place, and the second,

which is yet to come into existence. As attention moves from one object to another, the
second displaces the first, thus shifting it into the non-existence, which is its cessation.
The yogi who abides in the centre between their existence and non-existence abides in
pure transcendental consciousness. As the sky does the earth, although separate from
them, it encompasses all things. This is the Centre between inhalation and exhalation,

subject and object, the light of consciousness and its reflective awareness. The yogi
abides in all levels of practice in the centre, participating in the dynamic state (vr7ti),
perfect in all respects, of the ‘attribute of the groupʼ, that is, the knowledge of the

Totality.

TANTRĀLOKA

the two (from one another), and having simultaneously abandoned that
existence and non-existence etc., he whois attentive comes to abide there itself
within the supreme goal, whichis the supreme Self flooded with Śiva’s nectar.
Thatis said (in the Vijñānabhairava):

‘Having known (jñātvā) (and concentrated on (dhyātvā)) two things

(or states), one should rest in the centre between both of them within (pure

thought-free) consciousness (jñāna).°’ Having abandoned both simultaneously,

Reality shines in the centre.’

“ VBh 61. The printed edition of the VBh reads dhyātvā – ‘having concentrated (on)
for jñātvā – having known’. Biumer translates as follows: ‘Meditating on the

knowledge of two things or states one should rest in the middle. By abandoning both

simultaneously, the Reality shines forth in the centre. Swami Lakshmanjoo explains:
‘Just take any two pots or two things; meditate on any two objects, for instance this case
of spectacles and this paper. Concentrate on these two objects and reside and rest in

between these two objects. When you perceive this object and after perceiving this

object, you perceive this paper. When you perceive this object and this act is over and
perceiving of this paper has not begun; that is madhyama [the centre]; that is the ‘in

between’. Fix your consciousness there, on madhya [the centre]. . . While concentrating

on that centre, be established in that centre. When you are established in
i that centre
simultaneously leave the impression of these two objects; you have to take support
every now and then of these two objects . . . The centre will disappear and you have to
take the support of these objects again and again. See this and see that and see what is in
between and when that centre is established well then you have to discard impressions
of both objects and be established in the centre and then the universal centre will be
revealed. This is śāktopāya.
At the same time when you breathe in and breathe out take the support of

breathing in and breathing out to establish your centre. When the centre [between] these
two breaths is well established, then leave the breath aside and enter in that centre and
the universal centre will be revealed.”
““’ VBh 61. I transḷate the word ‘jāna’ here as ‘consciousnessʼ, although it literally

means knowledge. The ‘knowledge’ meant here and in the verses from the
Triśirobhairava quoted here is free of thought constructs (nirvikalpakajñāna). Thīs type

of ‘knowledge’ is contrasted with the one that is accompanied by thought constructs
(savikalpājñāna). Perception moves from one to the other. The identification of an

object as a table or a chair is a thought construct that is formed by differentiating a
particular object from all others that are not tables or chairs and comparing that
particular object with other tables and chairs previously identified (one could say
labelled) as such. This does not mean that the world we experience is solely constituted

of these thought constructs and so, like a dream, although it appears, is not real. This is
not the Trika view, based on the Pratyabhijñā, although it may well be that of the
Vijñānabhairava. Consciousness, as we have seen, manifests freely as all things, and so

too as the thought constructs that accompany their perception as individual, particular

things. Nothing that appears is unreal, including thought constructs. All things manifest

according to their nature. Even so, the world perceived through thought constructs is
one of countless particulars, each with their own fixed, determined nature. Variously
reḷated in time and space to one another, they are also cut off from one another. This is
the perspective of duality and relative distinctions. This is the knowledge we have of
things accompanied by thought constructs (savikalpakajñāna). It is centred on them as
individual entititss. This would not be possible if there were no underlying
consciousness, which is one and universal. This is the pure undivided Light of

CHAPTER ONE

‘When one thing has been abandoned (tyakte), and consciousness has
been (firmly) checked, it should not move on to something else. Then
transcendental contemplation (atibhāvanā) blossoms forth, by virtue of the

state

(free

of

thought

(tanmadhyabhāvena).”

constructs)

in

the

centre

(between

them)

consciousness which illumines and makes all things, including the thought constructs,
manifest. This consciousness free of thought constructs (nirvikalpakajñāna) shines in

the centre between one thought and the next, revealing itself to be the one ultimately
real nature of all things.

““ Read vikasaty atibhāvanā for vikasatyati bhāvanā.
““’ VBh 62. Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: ‘Keep two objects [in front of you], do not
look at these two objects simultaneously. Go on looking at one single object with live

consciousness, with full awareness. Go on looking at this object and when you are

aware of that, when you perceive it well, leave it. Try to find another object, do not
look
at it; leave this object, to perceive another object, but do not go to the other object
yet.
When you leave this object and you do not reach another object yet, you travel only up

to that, up to another object, do not enter the kingdom of another object. Leave the
kingdom of the previous object, but do not enter in the kingdom of another object, roam
in the centre. . . . [There] the supreme state of God-consciousness blossoms forth.”

(2007: 82-84)

The manuscripts of the VBh contain more meaningful variant readings than
manuscripts of most other texts. So much so that the Sansṣkrit commentat
or

Śivopādhyāya refers to variant readings on several occasions in his commentary and

even comments on them separately. Occasionally Swami Lakṣhmanjoo does the same.
In this case, he explains that by adopting the reading atyakte for tyakte and
tanmayabhāvena for tanmadhyabhāvena, a different meditation (dhāraṇā) is taught
in

this verse, which would then be translated thus:

‘When, without abandoning one thing (atyakte), consciousness has been
(firmly) checked, one should not move on to something else. Then transcenden
tal
contemplation (atibhāvanā) blossoms forth, by being one with it (tanmayabhāvena).”

Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: ‘“One dhāraṇā [meditation] is just to look at a
pot. . . Do not think of any other thing. . . Go on concentrating on that pot
only. . .

Your thought must be established in that one object, in objective consciousness. Do not
8go to another object. Keep your consciousness alive. It must not be dead. When you are

tired of seeing it again and again, your consciousness is dead and your consciousness
wants to see another object because you want to see something new. But do not
do that;
it must not be dead. . . You must keep it alive for the time being. You must not,
at any
cost, go to another object. . . Then you will become one with that object, objective

consciousness melts in your subjective consciousness. The mixture of that particular

objective consciousness and your particular subjective consciousness of the object

only

enters in universal consciousness.”
Śivopādhyāya, the author of one of the two surviving Sanskrit commentaries,

comments on three variant readings. Thus, in the place of tyakte (‘abandonedʼ),
the text
he adopts reads nyakte (‘when removed°). He also refers to the variants vyakte (‘when
manifest’) and avyakte (‘when unmanifest?). Thus, he writes:
‘‘when removed’ (nyakte) means ‘when concealed’. When an entity or thing
which is an object of visualization (such as a deity), whose form has, for example,
four
arms and three eyes, is not seen, when it is ‘concealed’ and ‘consciousnessʼ,
i.e.,
sentient awareness, is ‘checkedʼ, that is, by the skill that comes from practice has
been
completely blocked; having done so (the visualized object) is well installed
(in

TANTRĀLOKA

(The words) ‘one should know’ should be applied (twice,) in accord

with the maxim of the eye of a crow. Thus ‘one should know (this) abiding
(of consciousness) as well as one should know the ‘subjectivity° which is the
direct experience of supreme reality and, moreover ‘from which (every

obscuring) covering has fallen away°”' 1) The external covering consisting of
existence, non-existence and the rest ‘has fallen awayʼ, that is, ceased. Thus (the
subjectivity, the covering) of which (has ended,) is devoid of the limitations

(avaccheda) of an external location and the like. 2) Again, the ‘obscuring
coveringʼ, which is the differentiation (kalanā) engendered by time, (both)

supreme and inferior, ‘has fallen away’ and ceased (and so the subjectivity the

covering) of which (has ended,) is undifferentiated by time (akālakalita). Thīs is

the meaning. That is said (in the Triśirobhairava):
‘Inferior (apara) time is up to the sixteenth. The supreme one (para) is
the seventeenth. The time which is beyond the supreme, O beloved, is the
Lord, Who is the eighteenth. Once the one time has been fashioned three-fold

within the vital breath, one should abandon it again.”

consciousness). ‘It should not move on to something else’, that is, to another thing such

as a jar, the body of which has been perceived. . . In the case of the reading bhāve vyakte
‘when a thing is manifest’, or if the letter ‘a is added (to make) avyakte ((when a thing
is) ‘unmanifest°). The meaning is just the same as stated before. In this way, in the case
of (the practice of) Yoga (i.e. meditation) with support (it is said):

‘Having abandoned progressively the mind, whose sole field (of operation is)
the object of meditation, meditation and the one who meditates, the contemplative

absorption (that arises) is said to be like (the flame of) a lamp (in a place) without wind.”
Once having abandoned meditation and the one who meditates, in accord with
the teaching of the treatises on yoga (yogaśāstra), because the goal is repose in the
Central Abode which is devoid of the support of the object of meditation, (the yogi's)
contemplation (bhāvanā), which is the purification (saṁskāra) (that takes place by)
repose in the state in the centre, ‘blossoms forth’ to a most excellent degree (atiśayena),

that is, is intensely. (This happens) ‘by virtue of the state in the centre between the two

conditions (bhāva), namely, manifest and unmanifest, by resting in the Central Abode,
the nature of which is something (indefinable). Thus, the meaning is that there would be
a state of repose in the centre, the nature of which is the pure consciousness of the one
perceiver who contemplates and conjoins (anusaṁdhātṛ) those two, as the one who
pervades the condition (daśā) at the beginning, middle and end of the two states,

manifest and unmanifest.

“’ In other words, ‘one should know the abiding (of consciousness) in its own abode’

and ‘one should know the subjectivity (drastrtva) (present there)’. Concering the
maxim of the eye of a crow, see above, note 1,88.

“ Jayaratha now explains the nature of these coverings in terms of the three parameters

that specify objectively perceived particulars, namely that there are three kinds of
coverings – those related to location, time and form.

“ For parāparas tu read with MSs Ch, N, T, D: parāt paras tu.

“’ These lines appear to be drawn from the 7riśirobhairavatantra. Quoted by Jayaratha
without further explanation, they are mysterious. It seems that Jayaratha assumed that
his readers would have access to the text or that they would be given an explanation by
a teacher. It is possible that the text is referring to three forms, aspects or developments
of the emissive power (visargaśakti) of consciousness, symbolized by the sixteenth,

seventeenth and eighteenth digit of the Moon. Abhinava refers to three types of
utterances of viṣarga – normal, short and very short – and correlates them with the

CHAPTER ONE
3) Similarly, (the subjectivity) from which ‘the (obscuring) covering

consisting of the eleven parts (pada) ‘has fallen away’ is devoid of the

particular forms, Brahmā and the rest, that are fixed (and ordained) by it.™ As
is said:

‘That (Vidyā with) eleven parts moves continuously within the vital
breath. (They are) the letters A, U and M along with the Point, the Half Moon,
the Obstructress, Sound, End of Sound, Power, the Pervasive One and the Equal

One which is considered to be the eleventh."

Thus (this supreme subjectivity) is the subject who is undivided from

the Transmental (which is the twelfth stage beyond these eleven), and its

defining characteristic is the direct experience of supreme reality. This is the
meaning in a nutshell. That is said (in the following line):
‘The Transmental is beyond that, and beyond that is the Untainted

(Absolute – nirāmaya).”"

Thus the ‘reality° which is separate from every specific location, time

and form and (so) is devoid of conditioning limitations (avaccheda) is the

Supreme Principle which is the great (universal) Being (mahāsattā) (of all

highest level of aesthetic enjoyment (PTv pp. 46-48). Below, Abhinava quotes a pasṣsage

from the TBh (see below 3/139ab (3/138) ff.) that refers to the seventeenth digit as the
quiescent, potential

form of Kuṇḍalinī – Śaktikuṇḍalinī – which,

resting

in

consciousness as pure ‘nectar’, does not emit. The sixteenth digit is the active form of
emission as the Kuṇḍalinī of the cosmic breath (prāṇakuṇḍalinī). According to the
passage we are examining, the eighteenth is the emission that encompasses both aspects,

quiescent and emergent. The three are related in some way to the breathing. Possibly,

the sixteenth lower form is in the inhaled breath (apāna), the supreme in the exhaled
(prāṇa) and the middling one in the centre between them, where the movement of the

breath rests. As we shall see in detail in Chapter Six, the movement of the breath is
coordinated with the flux of time. Thus, it seems that according to this passage the

emissions of the breath correspond to three aspects or forms of time. Thus pure, eternal
consciousness shines free of the obscuration of time when the breath, charged with the
energies that impel it and generate time, has been ‘abandoned’ and the yogi realises his

essential, unobscured conscious nature.

’ Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara gover the three audible phonemes of the syllable
OM. Thus, Brahmā marks the first in the series of eleven levels of OM mentioned in the

passage that follows.

Here they are presented as degrees of obscuration of

consciousness. As the vital breath ascends, conveying the contracted consciousness of
the individual soul with it, they decrease until on the twelfth level — the Transmental —

consciousness shines ‘free of obscuration’.
“’ SYT 4/254cd-256ab.
“’ SVṬ 4/256cd. We have already encountered this series of stages of the ascent of the
sound of the syllable OM. See above, TĀv ad 1/61¢d-62 (62cd-63), also below, TĀv ad

1/187cd-188ab and 5/56cd-57ab etc. See Appendix to this chapter for a detailed account
of the stages of Sound. See also Ś/56cd-57ab 6/161-162 and notes etc, 8/383cd-385ab

(383-384), 8/425ab (424cd) 23/37-38, TĀv ad 29/156cd-157ab, and 29/160cd-161ab.

See also Torella 1979b p. 69, note 11, Dyczkowski 1992a: 252-255, Dupuche 2003: 62-

64, Padoux1990: 408.

TANTRĀLOKA

things).” ‘It is said’ there (about that) in all the scriptures without exception

that it is ‘stainless by virtue of (that) pure consciousness’ which is the
reflective awareness of supreme ‘I’ (consciousness). ‘(The state of) abiding

within ‘the attribute of the group’ (grāmadharmavṛtti)’ is one in which all

bondage has been rendered insignificant by the attainment of oneness with that.

(This accords with) what is said (in scriptures, where we read that) ‘Bhairavī

obtained it from Bhairava . . . etc.” This and the remaining statement has also
been said by our teachers. This is Śrīkaṇṭha’s teaching (uki).’’ That is said
there (in the Triśirobhairava in a passage) beginning with:

““I will explain the fourth one in association with the attribute of the
group. . . . ‘The extremely subtle totality (sāmūḥya) of the principles

residing in the Heart, in all the body, and in the specific nature (svabhāva)
(of all things), is termed the ‘group’ (grāma). It is said that (the inherent)

“T The fifth or sixth century philosopher of language, Bhartṛhari, who was an important
source for Utpaladeva’s Pratyabhijñā, makes a fundamental distinction between a

‘superimposed’ or ‘metaphorical’ Being (upacārasattā), which is a correlate and

function of language, and an absolute reality and identity he calls mahāsattā (Great
Being), ātman (Self) and svabhāva (essential nature), which is the condition and ground

of language itself. Thus Bhartṛhari writes:

‘Itis Being (sattā) which, being differentiated according to the object in which
it is present, is called the universal. All words are based on that. This is the meaning of

the stem (ofa word) and of the root; it is eternal, it is the great soul . . . (VP 3/1733-34;

trans. Iyer 1971: 25-26. See Halbfass 1992: 91-92).

Utpaladeva uses the same term to describe the supreme level of Speech:
‘(The power of) consciousness (citi) is reflective awareness. It is Supreme
Speech that arises spontaneously. That is the (supreme) primary (mukhya) freedom and
sovereignty of the Supreme Self. It is the radiant pulse (sphurattā) (of the Light of

consciousness), the great (universal) Being (of all things), unspecified by place or time.

As the essence (of consciousness) it is said to be the Heart of the Supreme Lord.” ĪP
1/5/13-14.
Kaw (1967: 99, 100) writes concerning sattā that it ‘is the highest reality
(paramārtha) which is the characteristic of the Supreme Spirit, Śiva. The sattā of
insentient objects, like the earth or stones, liesin their manifestation (sphuradrāpatā hi
sattā sphuradrūpatā ca prakāśamānatā – [the effulgent form (of consciousness) is
Being and the effulgent form (of consciousness) is the manifest state (of things). D. The
essence of Being understood this way is the power (śakti) of consciousness.” See
Utpaladeva’s commentary on ŚDṛ 4/6.

Read

bhairavyā

for

bhairavīṁ.

This

quarter

verse,

drawn

from

the

Siddhayogīśvarīmata referring to its own transmission, is quoted as part of a long
passage belowin TĀv ad 36/1-7ab. See note there. One would expect the scripture here

to be the Triśirobhairava.

’ Śrīkaṇṭha is the form of Śiva who teaches the 7risirobhairava, that Jayaratha now
goes on to quote. Jayaratha, it seems, takes him to be a historical person.

CHAPTER ONE

attribute (dharma) (of the ‘group’) is indeed the (unconditioned) Self. This
is said to be the ‘attribute of the groupʼ (grāmadharma).
One should know that the abiding (of consciousness) within its own
abode is the knowledge (of reality) (jñāna) that is present in the Light (of
consciousness). ‘Abiding’ is said to be the state (vṛtti) (of the group). Once
having known that (this) state is one’s own abode (svapada), one discovers
subjectivity (draṣṭrtva).
One should know that it is well awake (prabuddha) and devoid of
external coverings. Free of supreme and inferior (time) and free of the eleven
(lower) levels, the knowledge (of reality) (jñāna) in the Self within one’s own
Self is flooded with Śiva’s nectar. Stainless by virtue of (that) pure

consciousness which is said to be a separate (transcendental) reality
(iviktavastu), it is called (the state of) abiding within ‘the attribute of the
groupʼ (grāmadharmavṛtti) iṇ ṭhis Tantra and is elevated (udita) in all
respects.”

And that same (Tantra continues with the words beginning with):

`Or else, the adept who knows the supreme reality and then desires (to
atṭain) Śiva . . .’ and ending with: ‘one should cultivate the stable state (sthiti)
which is established in (the supreme) reality (tattvasthā), endowed with the
Light of the power of the centre.”

The author, by stating in a nutshell the sense of the end of that passage,
wishing to present the subsequent passage (grantha), adds his own words,

namely: “He who possesses (that state) achieves everything.' The meaning is

that one who abides within ‘the nature of the group’ and has attained oneness
with the supreme power (of consciousness) by entering the Central Abode (that
is, suṣumnā) by deṣtroying the movement of the exhaled and inhaled breath
(prāṇa and apāna) ʻ‘achieves everything’, that is, perceives (everything)
whether external or internal as consisting of the most excellent oneness with

Śiva. That is said (in the following verse):

‘Once the mind of daily fettered life (sarisṛti)° has been bound by the

medicinal herb of meditation on Śiva, when it is directed (to anything, be it
even) a piece of wood or a wall, like the alchemical potion (rasa), (it transforms
it into) the golden state of Śiva.”
Thus, he says:

“ MS K reads: ātmaiva dharma ity ukto grāmo dharma prakīrtitaḥ | It is said that it is
the Self itself which is (the essential) nature (dharma) (of this group). The group is said
to be the attribute.”

! The expression viviktavasṭu lierally means ‘a separate reality°.
+ = 82-83a (83-84°) = 83cd-84a (84cd-85a) = 83b (84b) = 84cd-85a
(85ab-86a).

Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ñ, and D sarsṛteh for saṁṣṛte.

TANTRĀLOKA

Established in Rāma (rāmastha)

ūrdhvaṁ tyaktvādho viśet sa rāmastho madhyadeśagaḥ | 85 ||

Having abandoned the ‘upper’ (exhaled breath), the ‘lower”

(inhaled breath) should enter (the Middle Channel). He who is established

in Rāma (rāmastha) resides in the middle place. (85cd) (86cd)

The ‘upperʼ is the exhaled breath (prāṇa), (so called) because it
transports upwards. The ‘lower’ is the inhaled breath (apāna), (so called)
because it transports downwards. ‘Having abandoned’, that is, interrupted that

movement (tadgati), ‘he’ (the yogi) who abides within ‘the nature of the
groupʼ, ‘should enter’” the Middle Channel. How is he? He ‘resides in the

middle placeʼ. The energy located there in the middle of the Middle Channel

has the (extremely subtle) form of a Iotus fibre and the place of that (energy) is
just one (ekadeśa), that is, the inner Void (antarvyoman). That (is the place in

which the yogi resides,) to which he goes, that is, knows, and he is established

there with one pointed determination. That is said (in the Vijñānabhairava):
‘The Middle Channel is situated in the middle (between the two
breaths) in (an extremely subtle) form like a lotus fibre. Having meditated on

that as the Goddess Who is the inner Void, the God is made manifest
(prakāśate) by Her.'

This passage extends from TĀ 1/85cd (86cd)- 89cd (90cd).
“ The word ‘rāma’ is derived from the root ram which means to delight or enjoy. It

denotes the Supreme Self (paramātmā) characterized as Rāma, ‘the enjoyer, who sports

with the cosmic varety, sentient and insentient, delighting within himself. Thus, one

who is ‘rāmastha’ is established in ‘rāma’, the Supreme Self who, delighted, plays.
Rāma, the well-known incarnation of Viṣṇu, is not meant here.

One could also translate tadgatiḥ as ‘that condition’, i.e. the state of the breath in
which it flows up and down.

“ Ṛead iti for itī.

“ Read as in the edition of the VBh madhyasaṁsthā for madhyasaṁstha-.

] take the word devyā to be the common aiśa form of the word devī. Cf. the name of
the Tantra Devyāyāmala for Devīyāmala.

“ Liṭerally: ‘illuminedʼ.

’! VBh 35. The Middle Channel is suṣumnā (also, occasionally spelt correctly —
suṣumṇā). Extremely subtle, it is commonly said to be as fine as a lotus fibre. A line
without thickness, like the Point (bindu) without size, it marks the boundary between the

finite body and the infinite expanse of transcendental consciousness, and so represents

the Deity or the state of the supreme perceiver (parapramātṛbhāva). Not an object, it
can only be known by its own inherent power of self-awareness. Thus, Swami
Lakshmanjoo (2002: p. 36-37) explains: ‘There is no agency other than the madhyanāḍī
(the Middle Channel), that central path. Your individual consciousness will not reach
there. It is a state of consciousness that is realized by the consciousness of that state. It is
not realized by another agency. There is no other agency working there.' Known only to

Himself by Himself, Siva, the transcendental Void of consciousness, is realized by the

grace of the Goddess, the power of the Void.” Śivopādhyāya comments: ‘The Middle
Channelʼ is called ‘suṣumnā’. It is ‘situated in the middle’, that is, in the middle of the

CHAPTER ONE

Thus, he is said to be ‘established in Rāma (rāmastha)ʼ. ‘Rāma’ is

the Supreme Self Who resides there (in the Centre) and shines radiantly with
that form. According to the teaching that begins with: “ do not play (and

experience delight) (ramāmi) aloneʼ; as the wonderful variety of all things,

he plays (and is delighted) as the nature of every single sentient and insentient

thing. This is the meaning. That is said in the 7riśirobhairavatantra:

‘Attending to the upper and lower (flows of the breath), one whose

mind is fixed on (the state) that arises from the exhaled and inhaled breath,
having abandoned the upper (exhalation), should enter (the Centre,) and so he is

established here in Rāma.

heart. This is the syntax. ‘Having meditated on’ that as being like a lotus fibre because it

iṣ extremely subtle, that is, having thought of the inner Sky which is the Sky of

consciousness within it, God is illumined by the goddess who is such. Within the
Middle Channel there is a Void which is the inner Sky of consciousness. The energy of

the vital breath flows forth from that. By (cultivating this) awareness, the Light is

produced (prādurbhāva). Or else (another explanation is that) the first line can read

either as ‘the Middle Channel is situated in the middle and its form is like a lotus fibre’
or else ‘the Middle Channel is in the form of lotus fibre that is in the middle. This is a

compound in which both parts can be the adjective (qualifying the other part). God is

illumined by that power of the vital breath which is of this kind as the Sky which is

contemplated (cintita) in the middle of it.’

“ Read evokto for evoktaṁ.
“ This statement is probably a citation from the TBh.

Entry into the centre takes place with the flow of inhalation. The inhaled breath

absorbed into the consciousness of the Centre brings the condition of the breath in

which it moves outwardly to a halt. Translating Abhinava’s concise paraphrase of this

verse literally, it appears that he explains how the yogi enters the Centre, namely:

‘having abandoned the ‘upper’, he should enter below. The yogi who successfully

practices the self-awareness here termed ‘abiding in the groupʼ, his attention firmly

fixed on his subjectivity, enters into the Centre between the breaths by abandoning the
upward flowing breath (prāṇa). The yogi experiences his essential identity with Śiva

when all that is external and internal is in a state of oneness (sāmarasya) with His
supreme power. This is achieved by entering the Central Abode (mmadhyadhāman) when
the flux of the breathing (prāṇa – exhalation and apāna – inhalation) halts. The ‘centre
in this case is suṣumnā, the channel (nāḍī) in the centre between the channels that

convey the upward and downward moving flux of the two breaths. Here yogis
experience the pure energy (sakti) of consciousness in the form of a fine filament of
light. Here, in the centre between Being and Nonbeing, yogis experience a progressive
expansion of consciousness upward and inward which passes through the eleven phases
(padaikādaśika) of the inner utterance of Orṁ within suṣumnā. These range from the
letter A to the Equal One (samanā). Beyond that is the Transmental (unmanā) which,

transcending time, space and form, is the reflective awareness of the supreme subject.
Beyond spatial relations, itis said to be the inner Void. Experiencing this Emptiness, the
yogi is ‘established in delight (rāmastha) of cosmic consciousness, playing, as it were,

by being every single thing. The following verses teach how to cultivate the
self-awareness in a state of extroversion that develops into and sustains the introverted
contemplation of inner elevation. See Appendix to this chapter concerning the levels of

Sound.

Consciousness is neither being nor nonbeing in the sense of phenomenal
existence, nor is it non-existent. It is in the ‘middle state’ (madhyabhāva) that unfolds in

TANTRÃLOKA

There (in the same Tantra), the Goddess (asks,) alluding (to the
Supreme Self):
‘O God, what is Rāma said to be? Who, O Lord is the one who resides

here? O Great God, tell (me) everything about how that can be practiced.”
Having been asked (this), the Lord (said):

‘O Supreme Goddess, I will explain correctly the Yoga I have called

‘Established in Rāma’ and its practice, as is befitting.’

Thus (having said this), in order to introduce (the subject), the answer is

given in many verses (grantha) (that follow).
Here

(now)

the

author

gquotes

that

(passage

from

the

Triśirobhairavatantra) (not literally) but by way of the meaning of the words:

ḺGĀIERZEEIVGEUUIĒUḤḤI

gatiḥ sthānaṁ ṣvapnajāgradunmeṣaṇanimeṣaṇe |
dhāvanaṁ plavanaṁ caiva āyāsaḥ śaktivedanam || 86 ||
buddhibhedās tathā bhāvāḥ saṁjñāḥ karmāṇyanekaśaḥ |
eṣa rāmo vyāpako ʻtra śivaḥ paramakāraṇam |)| 87 ||
“Ṭhis delight (rāma) is movement, standing (still), dreaming (the
dream of thought constructs) and waking (to the insight of knowledge). (It
is) the opening and closing of the eyes, running, jumping, exerting an effort

(in knowledge and ignorance) (āyāsa), the experience of the energies (of the

senses), the (various) forms of the intellect (buddhi), entities, names and

countless actions. It is Śiva, the supreme (omnipresent) cause, who
pervades (everything) here. (86-87) (87-88)

the subtle metaphysical junction between the polarities of Being and Nonbeing. This
‘expansion in and of the centre (madhyavikāsa) takes place on the fourteen occasions
listed here. All this can also be applied to the practice of maintaining awareness of the
expansion of consciousness that takes place during sexual intercourse. At the moment of
orgasm, discursive thought, which is based on the relativity of opposites, ceases, and the
experiencing subject is in a state of pure wonder (camatkāra) in which the Kuṇḍalinī of

Consciousness rises instantaneously, resplendent with the realization of pure I-ness.

“’’ 86-89 (87-90) is a paraphrase of a passage from the TBh quoted by Jayaratha ad
1/89cd (90cd).
“’ Rāma is the blissful playful Lord who delights in creating the universe. As Jayaratha
explains, Rāma is the name given to ‘the Supreme Lord Who is the Supreme Self, intent

on the play of making the entire universe manifestʼ. AIl these varieties of actions and the

CHAPTER ONE

‘Dreamingʼ (means) thought constructs (vikalpa).” ‘Waking’ is

knowledge (born of sensory and mental perception). ‘The opening of the
eyesʼ is the state of Īśvara (in which Śiva consciousness experiences ‘l am all
this (universe)). ‘The closing of the eyesʼ is the state of Sadāśiva (in which

Śiva consciousness experiences that ‘all this (universe) am I’). (The word for

effort) – āyāsa is derived from the root aya in the sense of ‘motion’ (gati). The
meaning of motion (in this case) is in the sense of ‘knowledge’. Thus aya
means ‘going or proceeding’ (ayana), that is, knowledge (by which one comes
to know and proceed). Its āsa means to throw (away) in the sense of its negation

or end (nivrtti), that is, ignorance.' Dharma and the rest are the eight qualities

of the intellect.”" ‘Names’ are (just names that people happen to have) by
chance such as Dittha and the like. ‘Actions’ are (the many kinds of) work
(people are engaged in) (yyāpāra). Thuṣ, the entire universe (of experience) has
been subsumed into these fourteen (activities and states) beginning with
‘movingʼ. (All this) ‘moving’ etc. is Rāma – the Supreme Lord Who is the
Supreme Self, intent on the play of making the entire universe manifest. Thus it
is said that ‘Śiva, the supreme (omnipresent) cause, pervades (all this) here’ʼ.
‘(AII this) hereʼ is the unfolding expansion of Śiva Himself which is this entire
universe within all this which is characterized as ‘moving’ etc. This is the sense.

That is said (in the following verse):

‘Present in all the fields (of consciousness) (viṣaya) and objects of the

senses, wherever one pays attention, there is no place where Śiva is absent.

How can that (perpetually) abiding state (sthiti), which is the attainment

of oneness with that (supreme reality) occur here (in this case)? He says:

rest listed here are collectively, emblematic of all that takes place because Rāma
pervades them all. Thus, Rāma is Śiva, the real cause of the universe.

Cf. ŚSū 1/9 on which Bhāskara comments: ‘The thoughts of the pervasive perceiver

that, constantly renewed, emerge inwardly in the absence of external objects are said (to
constitute) the dream state. The liberated condition (patibhāva) (makes theṣe) thought

constructs firm (and full of divine consciousness), while due to the fettered state, they
are, on the contrary, unstable and said to be the covering (which obscures) the Lord

Who is the power (of consciousness).” See Dyczkowski 1992b: 29 ff.

“ Cf. ŚSū 1/8. Bhāskara explains: ‘Sensory perception is a product of the intellect, eg0,

and mind (coupled with the sensations) of sound, touch, form, taste and smell. The
power of knowledge which belongs to the conscious nature (cidātman) actively flashes

forth (sphurati) in this way in the form of the cognizing subject, means of knowledge

and the object of cognition. Here it is (said to be) the waking state which (marks) the
loss of the fettered soul’s true nature (svarūpahāni).’ Dyczkowski 1992b: 28.

’ The word gati means, most literally. motion. By extension it also means modality or

state of being. In this sense the meaning coincides with that of knowledge, which is also

astate of being, that is, the state of the act of knowing.

”" Thus ‘effort – āyāṣa – means exerting oneself in both states of knowledge of higher

realities and ignorance of them.

”! Concerning the eight qualities of the intellect, see below, 8/265ab-272ab (8/264-271).

SYṬ 4/314.

Read with all the MSs tadaikātmyalakṣaṇā (‘oneness with that (supreme reality)) for

tadaikātmyāpattilakṣaṇā ʻthe attainment of oneness with that (supreme reality)ʼ. The

TANTRĀLOKA

āāTefTTTTT TāJfHTHTTTTTT |
BTRT TH S THTTIJG
fkFIT I|¢¢ 1

kalmaṣakṣīṇamanasā smṛtimātranirodhanāt |
dhyāyate paramaṁ dhyeyaṁ gamāgamapade sthitam || 88 ||
paraṁ Śśivaṁ tu vrajatĩ bhairavãkhyaṁ japãd api |
He who, with a mind free of impurity, meditates on (this) the

supreme object of meditation, located on the plane of ‘going and comingʼ

(gamāgamapada),' by suppressing just (his) memory alone (which is the

source of thought), attains Supreme Śiva, Who is called Bhairava, by the

repeated recitation of Mantra (japa) also.”" (88-89ab) (89-90ab)

word ‘sthiti’ means persistence as well as ‘condition’ or ‘state’ Generally, along with
creation (sṛṣṭi) and withdrawal (saṁhāra), the word denotes one of the phases of the
cycle of creation and destruction. Sometimes, as here, it denotes the state of permanent

persistence of reality. But this is not a static persistence. It is the condition of perpetual
renewal, as it were, of oneness between Śiva and all things, especially the Self of every
living being.
The metre of this quarter is defective. The sixth syllable is guru and the seventh

laghu rather than the other way around. The reading is the same in the text from which it

is drawn that is quoted in the commentary further ahead.

” The expression ‘going and coming’ (gamāgama) commonly denotes the movement

of the breath which ‘goes’ as exhalation (prāṇa) and ‘comes’ as inhalation (apāna) (see
for example KuKh 11/60-61). It may also denote the emergence and withdrawal of the

energies of consciousness. In relation to the repetition of Mantra, which is the context

here, ‘going and coming’ may be applied to the forward and reverse order of reciting a
mantra. If the count of the number of times a mantra is recited is kept with the aid of a

rosary, the ‘going’ is the forward, clockwise direction. This continues up to the main

bead, which is called the Meru. Then starting again from there, the same is repeated in
reverse order. This is the ‘coming’ phase. This pair with respect to the energy that
impels the breathing is the upward and downward motion, respectively (KuKh 40/23cd24), that correspond to the purifying ascent and descent of Kuṇḍalinī through Susumṇā
(ibid. note to 13/140ab, also 18/63cd-65; 30/69cd-72ab). Conversely, the supreme state
of Nirvāṇa is devoid of all ‘going and comingʼ and so is free and tranquil (ibid. 31/51cd54). See Dyczkowski 2009 note vol. 1, p. 162-163 and p. 380-381.
In this case, according to Jayaratha, the expression ‘going and comingʼ is a

metaphorical designation of the fourteen aspects of the ‘nature of the groupʼ

(grāmadharma), as each one involves movement and rest (‘agama’ ‘lack of goingʼ). At
the individual (āṇava) level of duality, the practice involves attending to the movement
of the breath as it comes and goes during these activities. Practicing at the intermediate,

empowered (śākta) level, the polarities to which the yogi attends are the subject and
object. At the supreme (śāmbhava) level, the polarities are the Light of consciousness
(prakāśa) and reflective awareness it has of its own infinite nature. At this level,
realisation is spontaneous and instantaneous, although it may not be permanent.

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains: ‘“He contemplates that supreme object which is

established in joy and puts to rest all thought (ṣvaṛti). This must not be done with one's
ordinary mind, but with a mind that is absolutely pure. This [is the] mind in the

CHAPTER ONE

He whose mind is like that, namely, ‘free of impurity’ – that is, free of
the impurity which is each and every manifestation of duality (bheda). The

mind (manas) thinks (manute), and so is consciousness, which is essentially

reflective awareness. According to the dictum ‘all thought is recollection’, the

‘memory alone’, that is, just memory (in itself, not a particular memory), is the
act of imagining (vikalpana) a body, face, hands etc. ‘Suppressing’, that is,
destroying it by emptying it out of the manifestations of form etc. and taking the
support of that (mind free of duality and the recollection of bodily form), he
‘meditates on the supreme object of meditation’, because it is not contracted

by any fixed form and is Śiva, the supreme cause (of all things), contemplating
(Him) as one with his own Self. As is said (in the Vijñānabhairava):
‘Meditation

(dhyāna) is the immobile,

formless and unsustained

intellect. Meditation does not consist of imagining the face and hands etc. of the

body (of a deity).”

ānākala ([state is at the

highest extreme of Māyā and so] is just at the entry in one’s own plane of being [in the
pure principles beyond Māyā].
It is not only through dhyāna [meditation, which is] full of awareness, that he

enters into that supreme state of Śiva which is Bhairava, but also through [repeated]

recitation [of Mantra] (iapa). The dhyāna [meditation practiced] here is not on a mārti

liconic form]. It is only awareness. Just be attentive, don’t lose your subjective

consciousness. You must observe and hold what you really are – nothing must be
practiced, everything is there. Śaivism does not mean to practice dhyāna [meditation] on
some miūrti [iconic form]. Lower dhyāna [meditation] with a mārti [icon] purifies at

first. You create the image then draw it into yourself.

In Āṇavopāya [the Individual Means] you must be aware [of the centre]
between two breaths. Move in and out with awareness. (True repeated) recitation (of
Mantra) is [the practice of] observing one object then another object [mindfully]. These
are the beads of the rosary of this japa [repeated recitation of Mantra]. Śakti is the sūtra

[thread] that threads through the beads. The thread is the reality of the beads. It is away

from bhāva [Being] and abhāva [Nonbeing] (one bead and another bead). Observe this
universe through every sensation of sound and taste etc. This is Śāktopāya [Empowered
Means]. This is real japa. The (repetition of Mantra) (called) pañcalakṣa [(japa) literally
of 500,000 repetitions] [actually consists of mindfulness of the] five points of awareness
ranging from sṛṣṭi [emanation through to persistence, withdrawal, obscuration up] to
anugraha [grace]. Lakṣa means centre of awareness. It does not mean (the number)

100,000.”

” Alṣo quoted below ad 1/182cd-183ab.

VBh 146 (144). The word ‘dhyāna’ means both meditation in the sense described and

also 'visualization’. The ‘dhyāna’ of a deity is normally understood to be the
visualization of its anthropomorphic form with hands and faces etc. Recollection of
Śiva’s form described in this way the scriptures is a thought construct. Moreover, to
viṣualize Him in this way implies that the mind is engrossed in duality, whereas true

meditation on Śiva is a state of awareness in which He is experienced as one with one’s
own essential nature. True meditation is the reflective awareness aware of the object of

meditation as one’s own Self. Śivopādhyāya:
niścalā

nānolleēkhaśūnyā,

kandahṛd-

TANTRĀLOKA

Of such kind is (this) meditation. ‘Going’ (gama) is in the sense of

‘movement’, that is, the dynamic state (gati), and ‘coming’ (agama) is the

absence of movement, which is being stationary (ṣthāna). (The object of

meditation) is ‘located’ in the aforementioned fourteen-fold support,™ which is

the ‘plane’ secondarily characterized by these two. Thus, it is ‘supreme’, that
is, (completely) full (and unconditioned), and so (the Yogi with a pure mind
who meditates on it) ‘attains Supreme Śiva, Who is called Bhairava’. The
meaning is that he attains (unifying) penetration (samāveśa) into Him.
(Moreover,) he attains Śiva not only by meditation but ‘also by the repeated
recitation of Mantra (japa).

says:

What is this repeated recitation of Mantra? With this doubt in mind, he

tatsvarūpaṁ japaḥ prokto bhāvābhāvapadacyutaḥ || 89 ||
The repeated recitation of Mantra that is free of the polarities of
Being and Nonbeing, is said to be His own nature. (89cd) (90cd)

‘Hisʼ, that is, Śiva’s ‘own nature’ is essentially the supreme form of

Speech (parāvāc) which is the nature of the Self. In other words, contemplated
repeatedly, it is ‘the repeated recitation of Mantra’. Thus it ‘is free of the

polarities of Being and Nonbeing’. In accord with the aforementioned
teaching, it is the essence of the pure reflective awareness of the consciousness
that shines radiantly in the middle (between) them. This is the meaning. That is

said (in the following verse):

‘The contemplation (bhāvanā) that is experienced (and takes place)

repeatedly again and again in the supreme state is here (according to this
scripture) the repeated recitation of Mantra (japa). It is the spontaneous Sound
(of consciousness). Such is the nature of Mantra that should be repeatedly

recited.”'

“‘Immobile’ means fully developed. ‘Formless’ means devoid of many manifestations.
‘Unsustained’ means devoid of supports such as the Root, the Heart, and the End of the

Twelve.”
Emend evaṁvidho dhyātā to evaṁvidhaṁ dhyānaṁ.

Liṣṭed in verses 87-88.
'! VBh 145 (143). This verse is also quoted in SvTu ad 2/137cd-139ab. Śivopadhyāya

explains:
pare bhāve viśvapūraṇe svasvabhāve yā bhāvanā vimarśanā aham eva paro haṁsaḥ

akṛtakāhaṁvimarśātmā japanīyo devaḥ | yā bhāvanā niṣpādyate sa japaḥ iti anvayaḥ |
japyam āha svayaṁ nādo mantrātmā iti pṛthaṅ mantraḥ pṛthaṅ mantrī na siddhyati
kadācana | iti nyāyāt | atra sūkṣmavastūpadeśamaye śāstre ||

CHAPTER ONE

In this way it is said that the act of abiding in the ‘aṭtribute of the groupʼ
is (the same as) being established in Rāma (rāmastha). The same is stated in the

venerable 7Triśirobhairava (where we read):

‘Moving, standing, dreaming, waking," opening and closing the

eyes, running, jumping, exerting an effort, experiencing the energies (of the
senses), the (various) forms of the intellect (buddhi), entities, names and
countless actions - this is said to be the fourteen-fold delight (rāma).
It is pervaded by Śiva, the God of the gods, Who is the Supreme Self,
present within all existing things, whose auspicious characteristic is (His) many

forms.” He who, with a mind free of impurity, meditates on (this,) the
‘‘Contemplationʼ is the reflecting awareness ‘within the supreme state’, that is,

within one’s own essential nature that fills everything. It is experienced, that is, comes
about in the form of ‘I myself am the supreme Harhsa, Śiva, the supreme causeʼ (SVT
4/399cd). That is ‘(unstruck) Sound’, the deity who should be repeatedly recited, the
nature of which is the reflective awareness of the uncreated ego. The connected sense is
that the contemplation that is generated (thereby) is the repeated recitation of Mantra.
The ‘Mantra that should be recited’ is said to be the spontaneous Sound (of
consciousness), the nature of which is Mantra. This is because the teaching is that
‘separate from the Mantra (he recites), one who recites Mantra is never successfulʼ,

‘hereʼ according to the scripture that consists of the teachings concerning the subtle

reality.”

Abhinava also quotes this verse in ĪPVv 2, p. 262 where he writes: nanu yadi

šabdāvartanaṁ .japas tadavicchinne kālabhedam
aspṛśati paravāgrūpe kathaṁ
japavyavahāraḥ | āvartanasya hi vicchidya vicchidya yad udīraṇaṁ, tad eva rāpam |
parāvasthāyām .iti sakṛdvibhātatvavat sakr̥d āvartanam eva tatra japa iti yāvat,
āvartanavyavahāraśca tatra udayamātre | sakṛcchabdena tu ekavāravācinā

sadārthaparyāyeṇa vā vicchedaśaiṅkā nivāritā,

yathoktaṁ prāk svarasoditā iti | yas tu

bhiūyo bhīyaḥ pare bhāve bhāvanā bhāvyate hi yā |

japaḥ so ʻtra ṣyayaṁ nādo mantrātmā japya īdṛśaḥ || (vi0 bhaió 145)

iti parādaśāyām
api
_āvartanavyavahāraḥ,
paśyantīmadhyamādarśapatitāyāṁ daśāyām |

sa

‘Surely, if the repetition of Mantra is a continuous round of words, how can the
activity of repetition of Mantra take place within the nature of Supreme Speech which,
being undivided, is not affected by temporal division? The utterance of a round (of

sounds) takes place by separating (one sound from another) repeatedly, and that itself is

its nature (rūpa). In the supreme state, the repetition takes place once (atemporally) like
a single flash (sakṛdvibhātatva), and repetition of Mantra is like a continuously repeated
action there when it has just arisen. The word ‘once’, that denotes (something that takes)

place a single time or one that is synonymous with ‘always’, removes the doubt that
there is a break. As was said before, ‘(Speech) arises spontaneously°. (Abhinava then

quotes VBh 145 (143).) Thus (according to this teaching,) continuously repeated action
takes place on the supreme plane also as (takes place) on this plane, that has fallen to the

level of the mirror of the Speech of Vision and the Middle One.”

Read with MSs Ch, N, D: jagrann for jāgrad.
The compound anekākāralakṣmaṇā – whose auspicious characteristic is (His) many

forms’ – is not correct Sanskrit. As an adjective agreeing with ‘śivena’, it should be in
the same instrumental case, i.e. -akṣmaṇena, but this would entail that the seventh
syllable would be guru, whereas it should be laghu. MSs Ch, Ñ, T, and DḌ record a lectio
facilior

TANTRĀḶLOKA

supreme object of meditation located on the plane of ‘going and coming’

(gamāgamapada), by suppressing just (his) memory alone (which is the
source of thought), attains Supreme Śiva, who is called Bhairava, by the
repeated recitation of Mantra (japa) also. The repeated recitation of
Mantra that is free of the polarities of Being and Nonbeing is said to be His

own nature.

fcvgSurely (one may ask,) it is generally said everywhere that the

sphere (viṣaya) of meditation is an object of meditation which has form and is

separate (from the meditator). Moreover, it is said that the repeated recitation

of Mantra is centred on (the Mantra) that is to be recited, which is the object of
denotation of the denotator, the nature of which is thought (vikalpa). Here, on

the contrary, both are (said to be) pure reflective awareness (parāmarśamātra)

which is at one with one’s own nature. How is that? With this doubt in mind,
he says:

Degrees of Freedom and Obscuration

TTTĪRāTĪ īTTYHaTT-TĪIJAĪ |I/oII
tad atrāpi tadīyena svātantryeṇopakalpitaḥ |
dūrāsannādiko bhedaś citsvātantryavyapekṣayā || 90 lI
Here (in this case) also, (it is clear that) the difference (between the

means to realisation) conceived by (the Lord’s) freedom as being, for

example, (more or less) close or distant (from their goal) is with regards
to (the degrees of) freedom of consciousness (citsvātantrya). (90) (91)

Here (according to us), ultimate reality is the Supreme Lord alone, who

is the free Light (of consciousness), because His essence is just the (pure)

reflective awareness of supreme ‘I’-(consciousness) alone. The plurality of the

–lakṣaṇā, which means the same, nor does it solve the problem. We must accept that the
Sanskrit of the text in this place is deviant metri causa.
”! MSs K, Ch, Jh, and D read: tatsvarāpo for tatsvarūpaṁ. In Abhinava’s citation, MSs
Kh, Ch, D and read tatsvarūpo for tatsvarūpaṁ. These variant readings in the MSs

would suggest emending to them. But that is not supported by Jayaratha, who certainly
comments on the reading tatsvarūpam.

! MSs K, Ch, Jh, Ṅ, T, and D read vyatirikākāradhyeyaviṣayatvaṁ for

vyatiriktasākāradhyeya-viṣayatvaṁ – ‘the sphere (viṣaya) of meditation is an object of
meditation which has form separate (from the meditator).”

Note that here Jayaratha is pointing out that it appears that Abhinava’s exegetical

model does not conform to scriptural revelation. Indeed, it cannot, strictly speaking,
simply because the sophisticated Pratyabhijñā notion of ‘reflective awareness’

(parāmarśa, vimarśa eṭc.) īs unknown to it, or as these exegetes would prefer to say –
explicitly known to it. Accordingly, Abhinava now presents (from verse 90 (91) to 93

(94)) a brief exposition of Pratyabhijñā doctrine applicable to this context as a
conclusion to the teachings he has drawn from the Triśirobhairava.

Cf. below, 1/209.

CHAPTER ONE

means to attain it is conceived by Him according to the difference between

those who are to be instructed. Thus, the means that has arisen as predominantly

based on the freedom of consciousness is said to be ‘close’ (to the goal).

Otherwise, (any) other (one) he says is ‘distant’. Similarly also, the means for

any given person (is determined) in relation to the proximity of the goal. Thisṣ

should not be a reason to be confused because, as will be explained (further

ahead), the relationship between the means and the goal is such that they lead to
one another (so those who are at a lower level and need to practice inferior
means pass through them to higher ones).
He concludes this (point by saying):

ā̄T TI ] UU] TTTĪ TTĪA. |I <¢ II
evaṁ svātantryapūrṇatvād atidurghaṭakāry ayam |
kena nāma na rūpeṇa bhāsate parameśvaraḥ || 9 1 ||

In what form does the Supreme Lord not appear by virtue of the
fullness (of His) freedom in this way? (Verily,) He accomplishes miracles!

(91) (92)

The ‘formʼ (in which Śiva appears) is as each one of His (countless)
energies. This is the meaning. Thus, he says:

TRTTITTTI

graīīc’mfiraaṁrṭefi:
rēkcrēkcṉ 1| 33 1
nirāyaraṇam ābhāti bhāty āvṛtanijātmakaḥ |
āvṛtānāvṛto bhāti bahudhā bhedasaṅgamāt | 92 |
iti śaktitrayaṁ nāthe svātantryāparanāmakam |
icchādibhir abhikhyābhir gurubhiḥ prakaṭīkṛtam || 93 |

'Ś This is the means pertaining to Śiva. Abhinava begins his exposition of this means to
realisation, to which Chapter Three is dedicated, by stating that whereas No Means is
the direct experience of the Light of consciousness, this, the highest means, is based on
the disceemment and hence application to the freedom of that Light.
The goal of one means serves as the means to a higher goal. Thus, in one manner of

development, the means lead to one another, to finally reach the ultimate goal. It is also
possible for a means to reach the goal directly. See below, 1/143.

" The text says that Śiva is atidurghaṭakārin, which literally means ‘one who does

what is most difficult to accomplish’. ‘Doing what is most difficult to accomplishī
(durghaṭakaritvā) is commonly said to be a defining characteristic of Śiva’s freedom,
that is, His creative autonomy (svātantrya).

TANTRĀLOKA

(Śiva) manifests free of obscuration. He manifests having obscured

His own nature. He manifests as both (partially) obscured and unobscured.
By

associating

with

duality

(and

diversity

He

manifests)

(bhedasaṁgamāt) īn many ways. Thus, there are three powers within the

Lord (corresponding to these three conditions). (My venerable) teacher
has clearly elucidated (their nature) as being those named will, (knowledge
and action), otherwise (collectively) called (His) (creative) freedom

(svātantrya). (92-93) (93-94)

He is ‘free of obscuration’ because He is the pure light (of

consciousness), and ‘covered’ because of the emergence of the impurity of
duality (bheda). (He is) ‘both (partially) obscured and unobscured’ because

of the subtle indication (āsūtraṇa) of the impurity of duality (that takes place)

even though He is pure noetic consciousness (jñāna). Thus, (He possesses) a
supreme, inferior and middling state and (shines) ‘in many ways’, that is,

because of the multiplicity of the objects of desire etc., (He is) of many kinds.
This is the meaning.

Even though (Śiva) is free of obscuration, duality is present (there, but)

just as a latent tendency (vāsanāmātra), because it is (constantly) in the process

of being denied (niṣedhyamāna). The word ‘thus’ refers to (Śiva’s) own

”" No obscuring covering veils consciousness in the highest level of practice of the

Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya). Veils separate Śiva from the individual soul at the other

two lower levels of practice. They are fully in place at the lowest, individual level of
practice (āṉavopāya) in which duality prevails, but only partially so at the intermediate
level of the Empowered Means, which is that of unity-in-diversity.
Abhinava explains in his Tantroccaya: ‘The manifestation of (Śiva’s) own

nature is His freedom. And that (can) take place instantaneously when he whose body is

destroyed (at death), there at that very moment (possesses) Śiva's nature (śivatā) (see
below, 13/130cd and TSā p. 120). Or else (this may be brought about) gradually and in
three ways, that is by the empowered and other (means). This is what we are (about to
explain). And it is said:

‘This Self, who is free and whose form is Light, obscures its own nature. Then

again it reveals this, Siva’s aesthetic delight (rasa), either all of a sudden or gradually

(part by part – kramaśaḥ). (TSā p. 7)

Jayaratha takes gurubhiḥ to mean ‘teachers’. 1 take this be an honorific plural

referring to Śambhunātha, who taught Abhinava Trika. It not at all likely that there were

many Trika teachers of this novel teaching concerning the three categories of means to
realization to which Abhinava is alluding. If this is correct, here we have evidence that
Abhinava learnt the basis, at least, of the categorization of practice (upāyabheda), which

is not found in the scriptures in the form he presents it, from his Trika teacher.

See above, 1/2-4; cf. ŚDr̥1/3-4. The three powers of will, knowledge and action
operate predominantly in the practice of the Divine, Empowered and Individual Means,

respectively. They are embodied in the Trika Goddesses Parā, Parāparā and Aparā.

Together, they are Śiva’s freedom (svātantrya).

The trace of duality present in Śiva is only as that which is denied by the oneness of
His infinite, unlimited Being.

CHAPTER ONE

(unobscured) nature. Thus, the teachers who have brought these scriptures

down (to earth) have revealed that (Śiva nature) is the three manifest powers,
Parā (Parāparā and Aparā,) (who correspond to Śiva’s) unobscured (veiled and
unveiled, and obscured form, respectively,) that are called (individually) will,
(knowledge and action) as the field of operation (viṣaya) of the Supreme Lord,

and are (collectively) called the power of (His creative) freedom. Thus,

(the

view that) ‘He possesses many powers amounts to (His) inseparable union with

that one powerʼ has been established.

(Śiva's) possessing many powers is the reason that impels those who
name (Him as they do). Thus, he says:
The Etymology of the Names of Bhairava, Deva and Pati

mēītazaīsā r: ra-. fīā. || <1
devo hy anvarthaśāstroktaiḥ śabdaiḥ samupadiśyate |

mahābhairavadevo ‘yaṁ patir yaḥ paramaḥ śivaḥ || 94 |

(The nature of) God (deva) is taught by means of words stated in
the scriptures (that serve as etymologies), the meanings of which are in
accord with His nature. He is this great Bhairava, the Lord (Pati) and

Supreme Śiva. (94) (95)

Jayaratha is saying that the word ‘thus’ (iti) is with reference to Śiva’s essential,

unobscured nature and its power. This is described in the remaining part which is

introduced by the word ‘thus’.
Above, 1/66ab (1/66cd).

” Justified by the common belief that the name given to a deity or supernatural being

reflects its nature, its etymology, even if not philologically fully correct, is a standard
didactic device. Moreover, it may serve as a means to upgrade the being named, and so

too integrate him or her into diverse traditions and their teaching. Thus Sanderson

(2006: 62) observes: ‘For the unlearned, we may suppose, the name was adequately
explained by its literal meaning (‘The Terrible’), since its bearer is associated with the

cremation grounds and requires alcoholic and non-vegetarian offerings, even human

sacrifices. These associations, however, make him an unlikely candidate for the role of
the Absolute. The nondualist tradition therefore overlaid the basic meaning of the name
with more appropriate interpretations.’ Several didactic etymologies are presented
in the
TĀ and the commentary, beginning with that of Gaṇapati above (1/22), and below
Deva

(1/103ab-106ab (1/103-106)), Pati (i.. Śiva) 1/104ab (1/104), Parā (TĀv ad 3/236), the
twelve Kālīs 4/148-172 and commentary, Kālī (4/173cd-176), Malinī (5/132d-133cd
(5/131d-133ab)), Kālasaṁṅkarṣiṇī (15/346-347cd), Maātṛsadbhāva (15/347cd-349ab
(15/347cd-348)), Mahāpreta (15/310) and also Triśirobhairava (MVV 1/395-397).

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The etymologies in the scriptures’ are those arrived at through

grammatical analysis (vyutpatti), semantic etymologies (nirukta), and those

coherent with the statements in the scriptures (sāmavāyika).
He (now) states (what they are):

faã frafā dīmŪoṛTTJTĪR
ṜTT fJād 1

za-

#ṇar--+sftṝsīraī-

#ī: sīã: 1

fīrd'ṁ atTkīaaā -7 1| Q

Tj T T2: 1| QuI

hEILEṭIEEI

ī-dātzzgfāīeeEitteautzi ḷḤḷIAĀT
" Read vyutpattaiḥ for vyutpannaiḥ.

Read with J and N, sāmavāyikaiḥ for sāmayikaiḥ. Cf. Sanderson in Sāmarasya note
123, quoted by Báumer (2011) p. 67 note 1: ‘By the disciplines of text-analysis Ī mean

grammatical analysis (vyutpatti) and semantic analysis (nirvacanam). Both provide the

exegete with considerable room for manoeuvre. He needs to show only that the meaning

he attributes to a sentence does not infringe the rules of grammar. It is not necessary to
consider how far the expression of that meaning through the words conforms to normal
usage, word-order or the like. It is enough that the meaning is not grammatically
impossible. Semantic analysis is even more flexible. It enables an exegete to insert the
meaning he seeks by deriving a word artificially from the meaning of verbal roots that
resemble the sounds or syllables that compose it (akṣaravarṇasāmānyāt); see Kahrs
1998, p. 37 quoting Yāska: akṣaravarṇasāmānyān nibrūyāt ‘one may analyse on the
basis of similarities of syllables or sounds.’ Abhinavagupta echoes these words in PTv
p. 268, 11 23-24 (KED p. 241): tathā ca vedavyākaraṇe parameśvareṣu ca śāstreṣu
(conj. śāstreṣu Gnoli, KED) mantradīkṣādiśabdeṣv akṣaravarṇasāmānyān nirvacanam
upapannam ʻIn the explanation of the Veda and in [explaining] such words as mantraḥ
and dīkṣā in the Śaiva scriptures it is proper to analyse meaning on the basis of

similarity of sounds or syllables.”

CHAPTER ONE

viśvaṁ bibharti poṣaṇadhāraṇayogena tena ca bhriyate |
svavimarśatayā ravarūpataś ca saṁsārabhīruhitakṛc ca || 95 ||
saṁsārabhītijanitād

ravāt parāmarśato 'pi hṛdi jātaḥ |

prakaṭībhūtaṁ bhavabhaya-

vimarśanaṁ śaktipātato yena || 96 ||

nakṣatraprerakakālatattvasaṁśoṣakāriṇo ye ca |
kālagrāsasamādhānarasikamanahsu teṣu ca prakaṭaḥ || 97 ||
saṅkocipaśujanabhiye
yāsāṁ ravaṇaṁ svakaraṇadevīnām |
antarbahiścaturvidha-

khecaryādīkagaṇasyāpi || 98 II

tasya syāmī ṣaṁsāra-

vṛttivighatanamahābhīmaḥ |

(God is called Bhairava for the following reasons). A) He sustains
(bibharti) the universe by nourishing™ and supporting it and is sustained
by that. Again (He is called Bhairava) by virtue of His nature as the

(cosmogonic) resonance (rava)™ (of consciousness) as His own reflective

awareness. B) He helps those who are frightened of transmigratory
existence (sarīsārabhīru). C) He is born within the Heart (of one’s own
consciousness) by the cry (rava) born of the fear (bhiīti) of transmigratory

existence or by the contemplation (of Deity stimulated by that fear). D)

Read poṣaṇa- for pūraṇa-, as Jayaratha apparently does and Sanderṣon (1990: 75)
suggests.
”" Read ravarūpataś for rava rūpataś.
” According to the first etymology, Bhairava’s name is derived from the roots ‘bhrṛ,
meaning to sustain and nourish, and ‘ru’, to shout. These two roots, along with ‘vamm’,
which literally means to vomit, understood metaphorically as ‘to emit’, are the ones that

most commonly appear in the less elaborate etymologies we find in the Tantras and

commentaries. Examples are those in the Vijñānabhairavatantra (130) and in the

Kubjikā Tantras (see below, note 1,749). The series of etymologies Abhinava presents

here are largely taken over by later teachers, including Kṣemarāja in his commentary on
Svacchandatantra SVT 1/1-4ab and Śivopādhyāya on VBh 130 (128). See Sanderson
2006: 62-63.

” Read with MSs K, Ch, Jh, N, T and Ḍ: svavimarśatayā for savimarśatayā.
” From the roots, ‘bhī’, ‘fear’ and ‘av’, protectʼ.

” From ‘bhīrava’ ‘a cry (for help bor) of the fear of transmigration in the hearts of

those who invoke Him’. The form ‘bhairava’ thus means ‘He who is born from this
cryʼ.

TANTRĀLOKA

(He is called Bhairava because the liberating) reflection on the fear (due to
this) fettered existence (bhavabhaya) is rendered lucid by the descent of His
power (of grace) (śaktipāta). E) He is clearly manifest in the minds of those

who delight in the contemplation that devours time that (thus) completely

exhausts the principle of time that impels the constellations.” F) He is the
master of the goddesses of the senses whose cry (ravaṇa) frightens

contracted souls”” and (also) of the internal and external hoard of the four

kinds (of Yoginīs,) starting with those who wander in the Sky (of
Consciousness) (khecarī). G) He annihilates the ongoing course of

The word ‘bhairava’ is here derived from ‘bhā’ meaning ‘star’ and the root ‘ī’’, to
push, impel or move. Together they form the word ‘hhera’ which is understood to mean
time. The last syllable – ‘va – is interpreted as a derivative of the root ‘vai’, to exhaust.

Thus the ‘bheravas’ are those who exhaust (vayanti) time, while Bhairava (derived from
‘bherava’) is their inner nature.

Although such etymologies are common to many schools, they often add
features that adapt them to their perspectives. Here it is clear that this and the following
one are adapted to the Krama system’s perspective. Moreover, whilst the other

etymologies listed here are commonly found in some form in the textual sources, these
two are unusual. One wonders whether Abhinava formulated them himself. The lack of
reference to a textual or traditional authority here may be a sign that he did indeed do so.
Either way, it is clear that he means to integrate into his exposition, as he does in many

other cases throughout his Tantrāloka, a Krama view which centres on the relationship
between time and non-temporal consciousness.

” According to this didactic etymology, the word ‘bhairava’ is a compound referring to

those powers ‘whose shouting instils fear’, of which Bhairava is the Lord.

Abhinava describes these groups of Yoginīs in the PTv (p. 41), where he identifies
their source as the Skyfarer (Khecarī), the Goddess of Consciousness, who figures in the
Krama teachings as the fundamental nature of four spheres of these Yoginīs, identified
as energies of perception operating within the four domains of progressively unfolding
cognitive consciousness. He writes:

‘(The energy of consciousness is called the ‘skyfarer’) because, abiding in the
‘skyʼ, that is, (the Absolute) Brahman which is undivided (oneness) (abhedarūpa),
‘fares’ (through it in the sense that) she brings about the knowledge of the object of the
senses (viṣaya). In this way, She is responsible for the behaviour (of the perceiver, who)
avoids (what is undesirable) and takes up (what is) and the like, (even as She) abides in
(the perceiver's) own nature. Thus, the Skyfarer is both the inner and outer senses and

their respective objects, such as (the inner sensation of) pleasure and the (outer
perception of the colour) blue and the like. The powers that move in the Sky (of
consciousness), namely, 1) Vyomacarī (Skyfaring, i.e. Khecarī), 2) Gocarī (Faring in the
Field of the Senses), 3) Dikcarī (Faring in the Directions), and 4) Bhūcarī (Faring on the

Earth) are, in due order progressively, 1) the plane of the Void, in which the relationship

between subject and object has not (yet) arisen; 2) the outpouring of perception, which
is pure consciousness alone; 3) the outpouring of the (initial) indication (diśyamāna) of
duality, consisting of the inner oneness associated with the aspect which is objectivity;
and 4) the clearly evident prominence of duality. (Thus,) these powers, on the basis of
the (holistic) principle expounded previously, are in reality not separate from the

Skyfaring power, who by her very nature wanders freely (in the unlimited expanse of)
her own (conscious) nature. Thus, the power of the Supreme Lord is just one. As is said:
‘His powers are the entire universe, while the Great Lord is the possessor of power.”

CHAPTER ONE

transmigration and so is the Great Terrible One. (95-99ab) (96-100ab)

A) ‘He sustains (bibharti)’, supports and nourishes (the universe),
because it pours out (into manifestation) as adhering (saṁlagna) to the screen of

His own nature. And He is sustained and nourished ‘by that’ universe, because
(in His immanent aspect) He shines radiantly everywhere as the universe. He is

‘the (cosmogonic) resonance (rava) (of consciousness)ʼ, because it is (his)
very nature to resound (śabdana), and so according to this etymology, (He is)
Bhairava because (He) ‘sustainsʼ (bharaṇa) and ‘resounds’ (ravaṇa).

Note that Kṣemarāja’s conception of these energies is not quite the same. He

sees them as derivations of a fifth higher sphere populated by the energies of

Vāmeśvarṁī. Kṣemarāja explains that they are the ‘Vāmā energies (so called because

they) run counter (vāmācāra) to saṅṣāra (for the awakened yogi) and (because) they

emit (vāmanti) the universe of unity and diversity along with the essence of duality
(bheda). They loudly proclaim and emit the essence of diversity (for the ignorant) and

bestow the essence of oneness (abheda) which is unity and multiplicity (bhedābheda)

(to the awakened). As their foundation (and source), their mistress is (this) one goddess
alone.’ (SpSaṁ p. 20) Kṣemarāja goes on to present the four spheres of energies as
operating within 1) the plane of the subject – Khecarī, 2) the plane of the inner mental
organ (antaḥkaraṇa) – Gocarī, 3) the ten external senses, five of sense perception
(buddhīndriya) and five of action (karmendriya) – Dīkcarī, 4) the five sensations which
are the objects of the senses. Projections of Vāmeśvarī, the one fundamental energy of
consciousness, they operate the same way, binding the unenlightened, whereas, on the
contrary, they sustain the insight of the liberated by manifesting nonduality in all these

spheres, For details, see Dyczkowski 1992a: 69-70 (= SpSam p. 20-21 cf. SpNir p. 37-

38), Dyczkowski 1987: 129ff., and Sanderson 2006: 69-70.

” Evidently basing himself on these verses, Kṣemarāja says in SvTu ad 1/1 4ab:

‘Bhairava’s nature is to fill (bharaṇa), cause to resound (ravaṇa) and emit
(vamana) the universe. According to the etymology (of his name), he is the freedom
from fear of those who are timorous, that is to say, he bestows freedom from fear to
those who are in the world of transmigration. Fear is the fear (bhī) which is the fright of

transmigratory existence. ‘Sound’ (rava), is the cry created by that (fear). The ‘sound of

fear” (bhīrava) that arises from that is the unconscious response (sphurita) of those who
cry out. (Bhairava) is he who by means of the descent of the power (of His grace)

elevates the one who, engaged in reflecting on the fear of transmigratory existence, cries

out in fear. Time that impels (irayati) the stars (bha), that is, the constellations, is

‘bhera’. Those who make it pass (vāyanti) are ‘bheravas'. They are the yogins who are

the gourmets (that enjoy the aesthetic delight of) the contemplative absorption that
devours time. This (Bhairava) is their inner nature. The sound (rava) that frightens
fettered beings is the reflective awareness of the differentiated energies (kalā) that arise
etc. from the Aggregate of Sounds (of the phonemes). The sounds of fear are the

goddesses of consciousness, that is, the wheels of Khecarīs, Gocarīs, Dikcarīs and
Bhūcarīs. Their lord is this Bhairava. ‘In this way Bhairava is frightening and intent on

destroying transmigratory existence, because the etymology (of his name) has been
given in this way in the Āgamas and because his nature has been explained in accord
with the meaning (of his name) by the venerable Bṛhaspati in the Śivatanu.’

Drawing no doubt from Kṣemarāja and Abhinava, Maheśvarānanda presents
the same etymologies of the names Bhairava and Deva in his Mahārthamañjarī (p. 172-

173).

TANTRĀLOKA

B) Bhairava is He who ‘helps those who are frightened’. Fear is the
instrumental cause of transmigratory existence; thus, He bestows freedom from

fear to those who are subject to transmigration. This is the meaning.

C) Fear (in this context) is the fright of transmigratory existence. The
‘cry’ born of that is the cry (for help) which has as its object the Lord, or else it

is the reflection (on the Deity) that is born from that. Thus (He is called)

Bhairava who shines in the Heart, which is the plane of ultimate reality, of those

who cry out (to Him) and reflect (on Him).

D) (He is called) Bhairava because the cry (rava) of fear (bhī) (one
experiences due to this) fettered existence (bhava) is the ‘reflection’, that is,
discernment, of which this (cry) is the cause, by means of the descent of (His)

power (of grace) (śaktipāta) (it invokes). The point is that this (cry) itself is the
instrumental cause also of dispassion from transmigratory existence.
E) ʻThe principle of tīme’ consisting of moments etc. is (called)
‘bhera’ because it impels (īrayati) the constellations, that is, the shining stars
(bhāni). The ‘bheravas’ are yogis who ‘completely exhaust’ without residue,
time, that is, they overcome it and (so) make it to pass (vāyanti), (their) attention

well fixed on the contemplative absorption (samādhi) that devours time. He

who is (their) Lord (swamin) ‘is clearly manifest’ and shines radiantly within
them as (ultimate) reality, (and so is accordingly called) Bhairava.

We could also understand Abhinava here to mean that one who is afraid of
transmigratory existence and desires liberation from it is protected by Bhairava.

Bhairava’s expanded state of consciousness can be experienced in moments of
powerful psychic intensity, as when one is very frightened. By attending closely to the

consciousness which is the source of these intense emotions, Bhairava manifests to His
devotees. As the VBh (verse 118) teaches: ‘At the beginning and end of sneezing, in a
state of fear or sorrow, (standing) on top of an abyss or while fleeing from a battlefield,
at the moment of intense curiosity, at the beginning and end of hunger; such a state
comes close to the experience of Bhairava. (translation by Báumer). Cf. verse 22 of the

Spandakārika: ʻSpanda is stable in the state one enters when extremely angry, intensely
excited, running or wondering what to do.” Śee Dyczkowski, 1992, p. 100-102, 158-

159, 223-224 and corresponding notes.
Notice, by the way, that the Spandakārikā is most probably following the

Vijñānabhairava, which in all probability preceded it. What has happened is that the

experience of the dynamism of consciousness — spanda – has replaced the experience of

Bhairava as the ultimate experience.

In the scriptural

sources, notably the

Jayadrathayāmala, the term ‘spanda’ frequently occurs as the dynamism of the Kālī
Krama. Kṣemarāja was quite right in identifying the Spanda teachings as those of ‘secret

tradition’, that is, Krama. His frequent citations from the VBh in the course of his

commentary on the Śivasūtra similarly imply that he understood them to be closely

related.

” The well-known word samādhi literally means ‘gathering well together’. It thus

appropriately denotes the highest levels of concentration, for example, in Buddhist
sources (as the last and highest stage of the Noble Eight-fold Path), and in the Yogasūtra

and related sources. Some have suggested the translation ‘trance’, because this state of
intense concentration is so completely absorbing that it may be accompanied by loss of
consciousness of the outer world. In this case, one could argue that it is a ‘trance’ that

consumes time. But as the word ‘trance’ has a series of other connotations (such as
possession), I prefer the more usual translation, even though forms of samādhi taught in
certain Tantras are indeed much like ‘trance’.

CHAPTER ONE

F) The powers of the senses are the goddesses of the senses ‘of the
fettered souls (whose consciousness is) contracted’, and consist of the
perception of duality. Their ‘roar’ is the reflective awareness of the (obscuring)
energies of the letters ‘K’ etc. that arise out of (Bhairava in His aspect as) the

Assembly of Sounds (of the phonemes) that ‘serves to frighten’ (the fettered
soul) by generating each (experience of) pleasure and pain. In the same way,
‘the internal and external group of four kinds (of Yoginīs,) starting with
those who wander in the Sky (of Consciousness) (khecarī) that are the
subject, object (means of knowledge and the noetic consciousness that

encompasses them called) Khecarī, Gocarī, Dikcarī and Bhūcarī, are the ‘sounds
of fear (bhīrava)’. This Bhairava is master of them (all).

G) He is ‘the Great Terrible One’, that is, the fierce one (who
annihilates the ongoing course of transmigration). Thus, he has been denoted by
convention here (in our scriptures) by the word Bhairava. This is the overall

sense.

He concludes this (saying):

iīa zf r̥efftṁra; #aga: ũa 1| R<II
bhairava iti gurubhir imair

anvarthaiḥ saṁstutaḥ śāstre || 99 |I

The teachers praise Bhairava with these etymologies in the

scriptures. (99cd) (100cd)

Juṣṭ as Maātṛkā is the aspect of the Goddess when Her body is contemplated as

consisting of the fifty letters of the alphabet, similarly Bhairava is Śabdarāśi – the
Assembly of Sounds when His body is contemplated in the same way. The deities who
govern the letters, which are their embodiments, are female Mātṛkās in the first case and

male Bhairavas in the second (for the Trika explanation of the relationship between
them, see below 3/198). When their true divine nature is recognized, the energies and
powerholders of the letters are liberating; otherwise, they generate the thought
constructs that bind the fettered soul. Cf. SpKā 45: “He who is deprived of his power by

the forces of obscuration (kalā), and a victim of the powers arising from the Assembly
of Sounds, is called the fettered soul.”

Whereas Abhinava draws from a text – the Śivatanuśāstra by Bṛhaspati – for the
etymology

of

the

word

– god- in the following passage, he attributes the didactic etymology of the name

Bhairava to ‘teachers in the scriptures’. As Bṛhaspati was a Siddhāntin, it is hardly
likely that he was the source of that etymology also. According to Jayaratha, ‘the
teachersʼ are those who have brought down this or that scripture (to earth). Concluding
his didactic etymology of the words Bhairava and Deva in his commentary on the
Svacchandatantra (SyTu 1/1-4ab), Kṣemarāja states that: tathā bhairavo bhīṣaṇaḥ
saṁsāravighaṭanaparaḥ, evam āgameṣu nūruktatvāt, śrībrṛhaspatipādaiḥ śivatanāv
anvarthavyākhyāta-svarūpatvāc ca | ‘In this way Bhairava is frightening and intent on

destroying transmigratory existence because the etymology (of his name) has been

given in this way in the Āgamas and because his nature has been explained in accord
with the meaning (of his name) by the venerable Bṛhaspati in the Śivatanu. Kṣemarāja

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The teachers’ are those who have brought down this or that scripture
(to earth). They ‘praise’ (Bhairava) with these aforementioned ‘etymologiesʼ,

that is, with appellations that accord with (His) nature (artha). He is well known

in ‘the scriptures (in general), as they do not assume (any) particular
(difference with respect to one another in this regard), that is to say, He is
mentioned everywhere (in them). Again, He is (also) properly ‘praised’ with
‘etymologies that accord with His nature by presenting (His) capacity

(sāmarthya) to fill (bharaṇa) etc. all the universe.™ This is the meaning. As is
said (in the Vijūānabhairava):

would thus understand the plural ‘teachers' to be an honorific plural referring to
Śiva/Bhairava, the teacher of the scriptures. Even s0, one wonders whether Abhinava is
also referring here to his teachers or just the one Śambhunātha reverentially in the
plural, as we find just a little further ahead (1/(103ab) (103ef)) with reference to
Bṛhaspati. Jayaratha notes that, according to him, ‘the reading ‘gurugaditair’ is the best

reading.’ This can mean both ‘spoken by the teacher’ or ‘by the teachers’. In that case
one could also translate this line as ‘Bhairava is praised by these teachers (or this

teacher) of the scriptures with these etymologies.”
Certainly, some of these derivations are generally recognisable amongst the
many we find in the scriptural sources, but even so there are some that are quite unusual,
perhaps even unique. One is especially so, namely, the one that teaches that Bhairava

impels the stars. His association in this way with the passage of time suggests a Krama

influence, which is made clearly evident by the associated reference to Khecarīs and
other yoginīs commonly found in Krama sources. We know that Śambhunātha
sponsored a form of Trika that culminates at its highest level with the Krama Goddess.
It makes sense that he should teach a corresponding form of Bhairava.
Evidently basing himself on these verses, Kṣemarāja presents etymologies of
the words ‘Bhairava’ and ‘deva’ in his commentary on the Svacchanda (SvTu ad 1/1-

4ab). Reversing the order of Abhinava’s presentation, he begins with the etymology of
the word ‘deva’, and then goes on to this one of ‘Bhairava’. Here Kṣemarāja concludes
this passage by attributing the etymologies to Bṛhaspati. However, in the TĀ, only that

of the word ‘deva’ is clearly attributed to him. It is unlikely that the other one is also his.
It is clear from the numerous references drawn from his Śivatanu and other references
that Bṛhaspati was a Siddhāntin. It is very unlikely that he would focus on Bhairava
specifically as ‘deva’ in this special way. Moreover, portrayed here with Yoginīs well

known in the Krama tradition, it is clear that he is the Bhairava of that tradition. We
know of no such connection with the Krama in the surviving fragments of Bṛhaspati’s

work, nor would we expect there to be. Thus, it appears that Kṣemarāja understood

Abhinava’s attribution of the etymology of the word ‘deva’ to Bṛhaspati to apply to that

of Bhairava also. Indeed, this seeming attribution has been cause to pause for me to
reflect also, but for the reasons given, this appears to be very unlikely. It is more likely
that Abhinava compiled it himself from a number of traditional etymologies, and took
the opportunity to present a Bhairava who is consonant with the form of Trika he

champions, that is linked to Krama.

Bhairava is the common form of Śiva in all the Bhairava Tantras, regardless of the
particular school to which they may belong. In other words, Bhairava, in one form or
other, is the consort of all the goddesses, great and small, of the dominantly Śākta
schools of the Bhairava Tantras.
Cf. for example NT 21/74ab: bharaṇāt prakriyāṇḍānāṁ sa bhairava iti smrtaḥ | He

is called Bhairava because he fills the (cosmic) eggs (visualized in their corresponding)

manner (of worship).” Kṣemarāja takes this to be the standard etymology, evidently

CHAPTER ONE
‘(Bhairava is so called) because (He) fills (bhriyāt) everything and

causes it to resound (ravayati).'' He gives all things” and He pervades within

everything. Thus, by uttering the word ‘Bhairava’ at length, (one becomes)

drawing from one in SvTu 1/1-4ab here. However, the etymology he presents at the
beginning of his commentary on the VBh is not the same:
bhīrāṇām abhayaprado bhavabhayākrandasya hetus tato

hr̥ddhāmni prathitaś ca bhīravarucām īśo 'ntakasyāntakaḥ |
bhīraṁ vāyati yaḥ svayoginivahas

viśvasmin bharaṇādikrd vijayate

tasy prabhur bhairavo

vijṅānarāpaḥ paraḥ l 1 |I

‘He bestows freedom from fear to those who are fearful. He is the cause of the
cry of the fear of transmigratory existence. Experienced in the abode of the heart, He is
the Lord, the destroyer of death, of those who are in agony with the cry of fear. The
Lord of He who transports time (causing it to pass) and is transported by his own
Yoginīs is Bhairava. He who, supreme, in all this (universe) fills etc. (all things) and
whose nature is consciousness (vijñāna), is victorious.”

The point Jayaratha is making is that Bhairava is praised everywhere in His
scriptures in a general way, His nature being such as the meanings of His name suggest.

He may be praised without necessarily referring to any of His specific attributes to

which these etymologies refer. Their purpose is not so much to supply etymologies of

the names of a deity (however accurate or fanciful), but to serve as a means of praising

it. Moreover, Jayaratha says that didactic etymologies (nirvacana) of Bhairava’s name
such as those Abhinava presents are common in the scriptures, which is true. To

illuṣṭrate his point, he quotes from the VBh as an example.
This verse is quoted in TĀv ad 5/136cd-137ab (135cd-136ab). It reads racayati –
‘deploys’ for ravayati – ‘causes to resound’. The reading here is as we find it in TĀv ad

1/99cd (100cd). It is the most generally accepted and so has been retained. However,
when Jayaratha quotes this verse a second time, it appears that he accepts the former
reading (i.e. ‘deploys’). Given the large variety of meaningful variant readings of the

VBh in the MSs that may already have existed in Jayaratha’s time, it is not impossible
that he accepted both readings.

The printed edition of the version of this verse commented by Śivopādhyāya reads

sarvago – ʻpresent everywhere’ for sarvado – ‘gives all things’. Clearly the former

reading is redundant and is supported only by MS N, whereas the latter reading is found
both here and the second time Jayaratha quotes this verse.

7 VBh 130 (128). Instead of bhriyāt – ‘because (He) fills’, the printed text of the VBh

reads bhayā (Śivopādhyāya’s reading) and bhiyā (Ānandabhaṭṭa’s reading, in which
case the text says that ‘(Bhairava is so called because) He makes all cry out (ravayati)
with fear (bhī).’” Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that variant: “When you scream in fear,

God is there. It is with the intensity of fear that you cry out to the Lord to protect you.
You want His support. If God is there you are protected. You have to focus your mind
on the meaning of Bhairava. You have to scream before the Lord, not before anybody
else. The fear has to be extreme, the torture has to be intense. . . . ‘“Bhairava’ means

when you are afraid and scream, He is there. [He pervades] means He is all-pervading.

He is there. When you want to explain [i.e. experience] this state of Bhairava, recite this
word Bhairava in continuity and you will become Bhairava. When you yourself become
Bhairava, what fear is there? (2002: 154-155)
This is clearly a popular reading and appears to yield the most sense, so much
so that one is tempted simply to emend the text here. But there can be no doubt that the

TANTRĀLOKA

one Jayaratha quotes is also an early one. Indeed, even though it is not strictly
etymologically correct, the perception of Bhairava as the sustainer of everything is
widely prevalent. Thus, Abhinava begins his series of etymologies with that one and
refers to it in the PTv (p. 63) where he writes: “Bhairava’s nature is to fill (and nourish)
and He is the sound (rava) of the great Mantra’. In his Prabodhapañcadaśikā (verse 4)
he says that
‘he is the god Bhairava whose characteristic is to fill (and nourish) (bharaṇa)
the universe and by whose power the totality (of all things) is reflected in the mirror of

his own nature.

Accordingly, Abhinava accepts the reading ‘bhriyāt’ (‘may he fill’) in his
quotation of this verse in the ĪPVV (vol. 2 p. 214). Moreover, when Jayaratha quotes this
same verse again below in TĀv ad 5/136cd-137ab (135cd-136ab) we find the same

reading. Jayaratha’s introduction to this verse here removes any doubt that this is the

reading Jayaratha had before him. The unanimity of the manuscripts of his commentary

further confirms it. Again, it is a notable feature of the transmission of the text of the
VBh that it is has preserved a surprisingly large number of viable variants. They are so
many that both the 16" century commentator Ānandabhatṭa and Śivopādhyaya a century

1ater feel compelled to note several of them in their commentaries. Clearly, a complete
study of the VBh requires an edition of the text on the basis of the largest number of
MSs possible, whilst taking note of the major significant variants.
Śivopādhyāya prefers the reading bhayā (‘by means of the light’). According to
him, the diphthong AI of the name ‘Bhairava’ denotes ‘the clearly evident (i.e. active)

power of action’ of which Bhairava is the possessor and by virtue of which He is Śiva.

‘Thus’, he writes ‘the meaning of the word Bhairava is this: Maheśvara (represented by)
the letter AI, the possessor of the power of action, causes everything to resound, that is,
reflects on it by means of the light which is the light of consciousness.” Ānandabhaṭṭa

who reads bhiyā (‘due to fear’) explains that Bhairava ‘causes all this universe to
resound, that is, ponder, due to fear. Or else he protects it (avati = rakṣati) by the
reflective awareness that “I am all (this) mass of perceivables, that is, blue and (all else

that is) not blue, pleasure and (all else that is experienced mentally that is) not pleasure.”
Thuṣ, one attains Śiva by attaining stability of the experience that “I am everywhere
internally and externally”.

Even so, Śivopādhyāya writes: ‘there are some who read ‘(Bhairava is socalled) because He fills (bhriyāt) everything and causes (it) to resound (ravayati).’ That
is not a sound (sādhu) (view). It would make sense if one were to establish (the
etymology) of the word ‘bhṛrava’ or the like. Although this is the reading in the
majority of the manuscripts, even so, (pray tell me) in relation to which of the letters (of
the word Bhairava) would (the word) ‘bharati’, the meaning of which is ‘sustaining and

nourishingʼ, be applicable? Amongst the (phonemes) of the word ‘Bhairava’, (the word)
‘bharati’ is not related thus to the phoneme BHAI nor to the phoneme RA or VA.

(Even) assuming the view that (the phonemes are read) together, it is not sound (to
derive the sense of) ‘filling etc. (bharaṇa) from the pair of phonemes ‘BHARA’ and
the meaning ‘resound’ (ravaṇa) from just the letter VA. It is not reasonable to apply the
maxim of the ‘eye of a crow’ (i.e. that one thing can be applied to perform two
functions, see above, note 1,88) by first linking the first two phonemes together and then
by again conjoining the phoneme RA, which was applied before, to the phoneme VA,

because then much thought would have to applied (to this question) as it is hard to

conceive (how that could be). (Again, it is said that the word) Bhairava means ‘filling’
(bharaṇa), ʻresounding’ (ravaṇa) and ‘emitting’ (vamana). (But) although this is an old
(traditional) meaning, it is does not bear logical scrutiny, because (the etymology of) the

CHAPTER ONE

Again:
‘(The exhaled breath (prāṇā) above and the inhaled (jīva) below, (the

goddess) Parā who is emission (visarga), is uttering forth (and manifesting in

this way) within the two places where they originate.) By filling (them thus, the

yogi attains) the state of plenitude (bharitasthiti).”™

word ‘Bhairava’ is not (thereby) successfully established (read bhairavapadasyaivam
asiddhatvāt for bhairavapadasyaiva siddhatvāt). The phoneme AI (disappears like a)
breeze blowing through a reed, like the phoneme VA, and (so) the word Bhairava is not
successfully (derived).”
Moreover, it is clearly stated in the second quarter (of this verse) that the
Supreme Lord gives all things and pervades within everything. (Thus,) the second

quarter (essentially) declares that the meaning is that of the two verbs ‘to give’ and ‘to

pervade’. Kṣemarāja and others were not aware of this (interpretation), for at the
beginning of the laudatory verse of (Kṣemarāja’s commentary) the Vijñānoddyota, the
(same) meaning ‘filling’ etc. has been elucidated. (This says: “Bhairava is the Lord
(prabhu) who 1) bestows freedom from fear to those who are timorous (and 2) is the

cause of the cry of fear (bhī) of phenomenal existence, and so is experienced in the Sky
of the Heart. He is the Lord of those who are radiant with the sound of fear and is the

end of death. He is the one who exhausts (vāyati) fear and is transported by His own
Yoginīs. He who is supṛeme, fills (and suṣtains) etc. (everything) within all this
(universe), and whose nature is consciousness (vijnāna), is victorious.” Śivopadhyāya
concludes that ‘the root meaning of this verse is that Bhairava sustains, nourishes,
bestows and pervades all things.’ He then goes on to declare that one should follow the

view taught in the Tantrāloka, and presents the etymologies stated here.

Finally, we note that the etymologies of the word Bhairava are varied.
Śivopādhyāya states that the most popular is that of ‘filling (bharaṇa), ‘resounding’
(ravaṇa) and ‘emittingʼ (vamana), and Kṣemarāja says that these three activities

characterize his nature most specifically. But even so, Abhinavagupta does not present

the third meaning. The Kubjikā Tantras supply yet another variant that is a didactic
(nirvacana) rather than strictly philological etymology. Despite Śivopādhyāya’ s
objections, thisis common practice we find applied to many words and names foundin

the Tantras, just as we find in the much earlier Vedic sources. According to the Kubjikā
Tantras, Bhairava’s name is derived from three roots namely, bhṛ, ram and vam, in the

sense of sustaining, sporting and emitting, respectively. Thus we read in the Śrīānatoṭtara

(1/115-116):

‘What is Bhairava? Bhairava is the one whose nature is to sustain (bharaṇa),
sport (ramaṇa) and emit (vamana). He fills (bharati) with nectar, sports (ramate) with
(his own) energy, and emits (vamate) the essence of knowledge. Thus he is called

Bhairava.

He is called Bhairava because the entire universe is pervaded (vyāpita by him)
and he is the one who sports (ramate) in the Supreme Sky and emits (vamate) the
pervasion of (the energy) who moves in the Void (of consciousness) (Khecarī).”
Similarly, ‘Bhairavī is Śakti. She is called Bhairavī because (she is Bhairava’s
power) to wander (bhramaṇa), sport (ramaṇa) and emit (vamana).’ (commentary on
line 17 of the Mālinīṣtava in Chapter Four of the Kumārikākhaṇḍa. Dyczkowski 2009:
vol 5 p. 234).

VBh 24d. Jayaratha quotes just the last quarter of this verse, which says that ‘by
filling (them thus, the yogi attains) the state of plenitude.’ He is thus suggesting that
Bhairava (‘the One Who fills and is full’) is alluded to here. No doubt, Jayaratha also

TANTRĀLOKA

suggests, presuming that his readers would know, that the entire verse teaches an

important practice to attain or realize the essential plenitude of one’s own Bhairava

consciousness. Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that by this practice the yogi becomes one
with Bhairava, because Bhairava Himself is the state of perfect satisfaction and

plenitude in which nothing is missing, which one comes to experience as one’s own
essential nature by becoming ‘full’. This means realizing by this practice that Bhairava’s
plenitude is that of one’s own nature. This involves first of all establishing clearly by

close attention that the breath ascends and descends along a vertical axis of which the
two extremes are the Heart and the End of the Twelve. According to the depth and

intensity of awareness, the Heart is experienced variously. At the most superficial level,
it is a vital centre in the centre of the chest from which the exhaled breath (prāṇa)
ascends and into which the inhaled breath (apāna) descends. At a deeper level of
awareness, it is the experience of the core of the soul’s pure conscious Being. There are

two major forms of the End of the Twelve. One is the ‘external End of the Twelve’

(bāhyadvādaśānta). Thīs is set at a distance of twelve fingers’ breadth from the point of
exit of the breath from the body. The breath is understood to begin its exit from the
bridge of the nose. The first four finger-breadths therefore cover the length of the nose.
The remaining eight are outside. By placing one’s hand at this distance from the nose

one can feel the subtle sensation of the exhaled breath making contact with it.

The other End of the Twelve is the upper one. This is the so-called Cavity of

Brahmā (brahmarandhra). It īs located at the highest part of the head, that is, at the apex

of the body. In the physical body it marks the suture of the skull that closes soon after
birth. According to the common ancient Indian physiology taught in the Upanisads, it

marks the point of entry of the vital force into the body which carries with it the living

being (jīva) who is to inhabit it. At death it is generally believed that the vital force, and

with it the individual soul, can exit from the body through one or other of its nine
cavities, namely, the two nostrils, two ears, two eyes, genitals and anus. The ninth is the

Cavity of Brahmā. By exiting through that, there is no further rebirth.

We may note here in passing that sometimes the upper End of the Twelve is

said to be located at a distance of twelve finger breadths above this Cavity. The two
possible locations lead to some confusion, but that may sometimes be avoided by

observing the context. But whichever of the two is meant, both are said to be the place
from which the emission (visarga) of the breath, consciousness and vitality into the

body takes place, and so too the emission of contracted, individual consciousness into

the unconfined Expanse of Śiva consciousness. Thus, like the Heart, the End of the

Twelve is not just a power centre in the body. The Heart is the location of the core of

consciousness. It is the centre of our Being which, unconfined in any way, is the infinite

expanse of God consciousness within which all things rest and manifest. Thus, the two

polarities at the two extremes fuse in the movement between them, which is at first
external and then ultimately recognised to be within. The practice, as Swami
Lakshmaṇjoo explains it, is essentially attending to the resonant energy of the breath as

it utṭers the inner Mantra of the breath that resonates within it as the Supreme Goddess

and energy of Śiva consciousness. This is the ‘unuttered’ Mantra HAṀSAḤ, that can be
heard by listening carefully to the sound of the breath. HAMṀ is the sound of inhalation
and SAḤ that of exhalation. Recited the other way around it makes the sound SO

‘HAM, which means ‘I am He’. Although known to many people, it is nonetheless one

of the most important and powerful practices. As all Mantras should be uttered in
consonance with the breath, that is, paying attention to it, this practice can be said to be

one of the most fundamental.
Swami Lakṣshmanjoo explains how it is done. “You have to take the breath
from the Heart to the End of the Twelve and take it from the End of the Twelve to the

Heart again and recite prāṇa [the exhaled breath] and jīva [the inhaled breath]. To recite

CHAPTER ONE
The reading ‘with these’ (i.e. (gurubhir) imaiḥ – ‘(the teachers have)

with these etymologies’) is doubtful. The reading ‘gurugaditair’ (i.e. ‘spoken by
the teacher (or ‘teachers’ rather than gurubhir imair) is the best reading.”'
(He now) explains (the etymology of) the word ‘deva’ (God).

aī āaā-- || Ḷ o ||
EFHUEIEEME
a-T--ṀĨ
ē-ī gar; |

āīṁ--=-ãN TJfT̄áT: TTĀ 1| Q.2.I|

TTTATIHĪTTJTĀTR

fkārrāī zfrrhrīTīvīa 7r: || go3I

heyopādeyakathā-

virahe ṣvānandaghanatayocchalanam |
krīḍā sarvotkarṣeṇa
vartanecchā tathā svatantratvam || 100 ||
vyavaharaṇam abhinne ʻpi
svātmani bhedena sañjalpaḥ |
nikhilāvabhāsanāc ca
dyotanam asya stutir yataḥ sakalam || 101 ||
tatpravaṇam ātmalābhāt
prāṇa means to recite ‘SA’ in the outward End of the Twelve and the sound ‘AṀ’ of

HAMSAḤ will be recited in the heart. When you take your breath inside it will end with

‘AṀ’, when you take it out it will end in visarga [emission] ‘SAH’ and if you
concentrate at these two starting points, you will become one with Bhairava because of

His fullness.”

” Read imair iti pāṭhaḥ cintyaḥ for imaiḥ iti cintyam. Clearly Jayaratha consulted more

than one manuscript of the Tantrāloka. He must have seen this other reading (i.e.
gurugaditair in place of gurubhir imaiḥ) in a manuscript which was not the main one to
which he referred. Indeed, this is the reading in MS C. It is interesting to observe that

Jayaratha did bother to look at different manuscripts. This must have been common
practice by the learned. Kṣemarāja also refers to other readings in his commentaries on
the Netra and Svacchānda Tantras, as does Abhinava. The practice continued, as we can
clearly observe in the commentaries of the Vijñānabhairava, the manuscripts of which

have a surprisingly large number of significant variant readings. It appears that scholars
stuck to their main manuscript as much as possible, even though readings from others
may sometimes have been, as in this case, considered to be better.

TANTRĀLOKA

prabhṛti samaste `pi kartavye |
bodhātmakaḥ samastakriyāmayo dṛkkriyāguṇaś ca gatiḥ || 102 ||

(God is called ‘deva’™ for the following reasons.) A) Devoid of (any)

considerations (kathā) of a goal to attain or (consequence) to be avoided,
(He plays) the game (krīḍā) of pouring (Himself) out (into cosmic
manifestation) because of His dense (uninterrupted) (ghana) bliss. B) (His)

abiding (and unfailing) intention (vartanecchā) is to be superior to all and

such is (His) freedom (to be so). C) (His varied) behaviour (vyavaharaṇa)
within His own nature which, although undivided, (manifests) as divided
(within it as) the discourse (saṁjalpa) (of conceptual representation). D)
(He is said to be) shining (dyotana) because He makes all things manifest.
E) He is praised (stuti) because everything is inclined towards Him in all
(the various) things it has to do (kartavya) from the (very) moment it attains
a nature of its own. F) (His) proceeding (gati) is awakened consciousness,
which consists of all (His universal) action, and is endowed with the

attributes (of universal) knowledge and action. (100-102) (101-103)

” The word ‘deva’ is derived from the root div which, according to Pāṇini’s list of
roots, means A) ‘play’ (krīḍā), B) ‘desire to excelʼ (vijigīṣā), C) ‘behave variously’
(vwyavahāra), D) ʻshine (dyuti), E) ‘praise (stuti) and F) ‘proceeding’ (gati). In his
commentary on the SvT (ad 1/1-4b) Kṣemarāja sums up these derivations as follows:
tatra devaḥ śivādikṣityantāśeṣasṛṣṭyādikrīdāparaḥ, tāvad aśeṣotkarṣatayā
vijigīṣuḥ,
tadabhinnatvāt
viśvasya
jagadvyavahārarūpatayāpi
dyotamānaḥ,
śivamantramaheśvarādibhiḥ stīūyamānaḥ,
sarveṣām agatīnāṁ gatiḥ prāpyo
‘bhinnabodhasāraś ca, yathoktaṁ "'divu krīdādau" iti |

‘There (the word) ‘deva’ (is derived from the root) divu, which is said (to have
a number of meanings,) namely, play etc. (Thus a ‘deva’ is he who is) 1) intent on the

play of the emanation of everything from Śiva down to a louse. 2) Thus, he desires to

excel by being more excellent than anything (else). 3) As he is (himself) the various
behaviour (vyavahāra) of the universe, 4) he is not divided from it and illumines all
things. 5) He is praised by Śiva, Maṇtramaheśvaras and the rest (of the perceivers). 6)
Heis the way to proceed (gati) of all who have no way (of their own), andis the object

of attainment and essence of undivided consciousness
In his commentary (vivaraṇa) on the Parātrīśikā (p. 7-8), Abhinava supplies a
similar didactic etymology of the word devī (‘goddess’). He writes:

paraiva ca saṅvit devī ity ucyate | iyatā paśyantyādisṛṣṭīkrameṇa

bāhyanīḷādi-paryantena
svavimarśānandātmanā
krīḍanena
saryottīrṇatvena
sarvotkarṣāvasthiteḥ bhagavato bhairavasya tathā sthātum icchayā vijigīṣāmmanā iyad
anantajñānasmr̥tisaṁśayaniścayādi-vyavahārakaraṇena sarvatra ca bhāsamāne
nīlādau tannīlādyātmabhāsanarūpeṇa dyotanena sarvair eva tadīyaprakāśāveśaiḥ
tatpravaṇaiḥ stũyamānatayā yathecchaṁ ca deśa-kālāvacchedena sarvātmatāgamanena
ata eva mukhyato bhairavanāthaṣyaiva devatvam iṣyate tacchakter eva bhagavatyā
devīrūpatā | yad uktam – divukrīḍāvijigīṣā-vyavahāradyutiṣṭutigatiṣu | tathā ca evaṁ
vidhamukhyapāram-aiśvaryamayadevatvāṁśāṁśikānugrahāt

devatāvyavahāraḥ |

CHAPTER ONE

A) By the greatness of (His) freedom, He pours (Himself) out as the
entire universe beginning with Śiva and ending with Earth. Thisis His ‘game’.

thatis, ‘(His) abiding (and unfailing) intention (vartanecchā) to be superior

to allʼ, and ‘such is (His) freedomʼ to ‘behave (yyavaharaṇa) (variously)
within His own nature which, although undivided (manifests) as the diverse

discourse (sarījalpa) (of conceptual representation)ʼ. He plays™ (this game)
and so He is (called) ‘God’ (deva).™ Nor is there any reason (nimitta) (for Him
to behave this way) apart from (the desire to) play, so he says that (He is):

‘devoid of (any) considerations (kathā) of a goal to attain or (consequence)

to be avoided’. The Lord is not engaged in the creation etc. of the universe in

order to take up or give up anything, thus the accepted reason (for this) here is
(His) ‘dense (uninterrupted) (ghana) bliss’.
B) Thus, His freedom itself is ‘(His) abiding (and unfailing) intention

(vartanecchā) is to be superior to all’, that is, (His) desire to excel (and
transcend). The desire of one who wishes to excel (and transcend) is: ‘how can I
exist (eternally) once having overcome all (others)? The word ‘such’ (tathā) is

a figure of speech conjoining two independent actions (samuccaya) (in this case

the Deitys intention to excel all others and His freedom to be s0). Thus, as He

plays and desires to excel (and transcend) (vijigīṣate), He is (called) ‘deva’.
C) Although He is ‘undivided’ from all this, His ‘discourse (saṁjalpa)

(of conceptual representation) of the sort ‘I know this’ (takes place) ʻwithin

His own natureʼ, ‘as dividedʼ. That is (His) ‘behaviour (vyavaharaṇa)’,

which is (His) manifestation in an (empirical) form, which is not (His) ultimate
‘This supreme (parā) Goddess of Consciousness is called ‘devṝ’ for six
reasons. (These are) a) because (she plays) the game (krīdana) which is that of the bliss
of her reflective awareness (of herself) in the process of emanation (through the various
forms of Speech,) beginning with that of Vision (pasyantī) up to the external
(manifestation of phenomena,) such as (the colour) blue and the rest. b) (She is called

‘devī’) because She wishes to be as is Lord Bhairava who, tran

excels them all, (and so that wish is) the desire to be victorious (vi
called ‘devī’) because she gives rise to the activity of daily life (vyavahāra), which
(consi
in this measure of the endless (forms of cognition) such as knowledge (born
of direct perception), memory, doubt, certainty, and the like. d) (Sheis called ‘devī’)
because when (phenomena) such as (the colour) blue and the like manifest, (she) shines
(dyotana) in the form of that manifestation which is (the colour) blue and the like. e)
(She is called ‘devī’) because (all phenomena) into which her light has penetrated are
propense towards her as (she who is) praised (and celebrated by them). f) (She is called
‘devī’) because she assumes the nature of all things by limiting (herself) in space and
time (freely) as she wishes. Thus, (for all these reasons,) the status of deity is considered

to belong primarily to the Lord Bhairava and ‘devī’ only to His blessed power. Thus, the

root div has all the aforementioned meanings, that is, play (krīḍā), desire to win
(vijiigīṣā), activity (vyavahāra), praise (stuti) and proceeding (gati). Viṣṇu, Brahmā and
others function as gods by the grace of their being (secondary, partial) aspects of the

divinity which consists of the primary supreme lordship whichis such.

” Read dīvyati for devyati.

” In his commentary on the Bhagavadgītā (p. 34), Abhinava preṣents the same

etymology with respect to the deities (devāḥ) of the senses (karaṇeśvarī), which are the
functions of the senses (indriyavṛtti) as taught in the secret scriptures (rahasyaśāstra),

that is, in the Krama teachings.

TANTRĀLOKA

nature (apāramārthikarāpa). This is the meaning. Thus, as He plays and

behaves (variously) (vyavaharati) (in this way in the world), He is (called)
‘deva’.

D) The manifestation of ‘all things’, that is, subjects and objects, and
His (manifestation) within all things, is His ‘shining’. Thus, as He plays and
shines (dyorate) or illumines (dyotayati), He is (called) ‘deva’.

E) ‘He is praised (stuti) because everythingʼ, that is, this universe,

‘from the (very) moment it attains a nature of its ownʼ its activity depends
upon Him ‘in all (the various things) it has to do’. The sense is that the

activity (pravṛtti) of all (the perceivers), namely, Śiva, Mantramaheśvaras, and

the rest (of the series of seven types of perceivers),’” depends on Him, and so,

because they are propense (towards Him), bow (to Him). Thus, He is (called)

‘deva’ because he plays (dīvyate) and is praised (stāyate).

F) The nature of His action is ‘universal’, that is, full (and all

embracing) reflective awareness, and His attribute, that is, (His) energy, is
knowledge and action. Thus, as He is such, His ‘proceeding (gati), which, as it
does not assume (any particular form), is (His) noetic consciousness (jñāna)

which is everywhere, and (so too is His) unfolding. Thus, it is established that

He is omniscient and all-pervasive. Or else, therefore, as He plays, knows
(jānāti) and unfolds (prasarati) (everywhere), He is (called) ‘deva’.

He concludes this (topic) saying:

II TṬĒĨ. TTI ēaI; |
iti nirvacanaiḥ śivatanuśāstre gurubhiḥ smṛto devaḥ |

These are the etymologies by which the teacher refers to God (deva)

in the Śivatanuśāstra.” (103ab) (103ef)

There is a contrast necessarily posited by nondualist schools of Indian philosophy,

understood variously, between what one could call the daily commerce of life

(vyavahāra) and a supreme, ultimate reality (paramārtha). A’ distinction is made

between ‘truth’ or ‘reality’ in what is common daily life and that which is ‘supreme’
(para) and ‘other (para) than that. For some schools, this contrast is understood on the
model of what we experience when dreaming with respect to when we are awake. From

this perspective, the world of daily life has no more reality than a dream. This is not the
view here, although the distinction is maintained. Deity acts on both levels – that of

daily life and the supreme, ultimate one. Both are real and always the one reality. The

former is Deity that appears as all things; the latter Deity as it is in itself as supreme
subject. From the perspective of the individual subject, the former is the world of daily

life. The domain of duality and transitoriness, it is not ultimate, although not unreal. It is

other than (apara) Deity in its oneness which, with respect to it is, other (para) and
supreme (para). Cf. below, note 1,1056.

” See above, note to 1/77ab-80ab (1/77-80).

” Bṛhaspati, who wrote the Śivatanuśāstra, was an early Siddhāntin who wrote

independent works, like Sadyojotis, who was the first to do so. Rāmakaṇṭha refers to
them together in the introductory verses to his commentary on the Mokṣakārikā.

CHAPTER ONE

The meaning is that ‘the teacher°, that is, the venerable Bṛhaspati,
describes (the Deity in the Śivatanuśāstra) with the verses beginning with: “He

who is this God (deva) plays (dīvyati). He sports and so is the Lord’,™ and
ending with: “As God’s state is (never) disturbed, he is therefore praised as

Sadāśiva (Always Auspicious).”’

Now, beginning with (the words,) ‘by teaching’, he gives the etymology

of the words Pati (‘Lord’) and Śiva.

JIĪHTTĪ¥-TTTGTTTĪTaṇrīṛcā ṃdīŪēg+ || 203 1

śāsanarodhanapālana-

pācanayogāt sa saryam upakurute || 103 |I

tena patiḥ śreyomaya
eva śivo nāśivaṁ kim api tatra |

He is (called) the ‘Lord’ (pati) because by teaching (śāsana),

obstructing

(rodhana),

protecting

(pālana)

and

maturing

(pācana)

(Karma), He helps all beings. He is Śiva (the Auspicious One) (because)

He is the supreme good (śreyomaya) and there is nothing inauspicious
(aśiva) there (within Him). (103cd-104ab) (104)
‘Teaching’ is the awakening (bodhana) of those who are to be

awakened by means of the teaching of the scripture and the like. ‘Blocking’

Bṛhaspati most probably preceded Somānanda, the author of the Śivadrṣṭi (Torella 1994;

intro. p. 13 n). Although he was a Siddhāntin, Abhinava was clearly fond of his work
the Śivatanuśāṣtra, which he quotes six more times in the Tantrāloka (below, 8/231ab,
264ab, 300ab, 302ab, 346ab (8/230, 263, 299, 301, 345) and 9/206ab (9/206)), although
admittedly not much in his other, later works. Indeed, only once in the ĪPv (vol. 1 p.

317).
” Omit ‘evaṁ’, as do MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ñ. T and Ḍ, and read yo ‘sau with MS T instead of
Vvamo.

The short phrases Jayaratha cites indicate that Abhinava has considerably adapted his

original source.

This and the following verse are also most probably drawn from the Śivatanuśāstra.

This would make sense. Bṛhaspati is supplying the etymology of important names of

Śiva, the Deity of the Śaiva Siddhānta, i.e ‘Mahādeva, Sadāśiva, Pati and Śiva.

Jayaratha quotes a verse from the Mṛgendratantra which may well have inspired the
first part of this verse.
There is a play of words here. ‘Śiva’ means ‘auspicious, propitious, gracious,

favourable, benign, kind, benevolent, friendly, and dear. It is also, of course, a proper
name. The meanings, as an adjective of Pati or proper name, are implicitly connected by
saying that he is ‘the supreme good (śreyomaya)’. Similarly, Śiva is called ‘Śaṅkara’
because He does (kara) what is ‘śam’, that is, the supreme good (śreyas). See

Dyczkowski 1992: 339 note 4.

TANTRĀLOKA

those who are subject to the round of transmigration because they are affected
by the (binding) power of destruction (means) placing them there (in that

fettered state). ‘Protecting’ is the act of protection, which is the establishment

in that same way (within consciousness) of the wonderful variety of the
universe by (the application of) the constraint of the fixed (principles of Karma
and natural law). The ‘maturing’ of Karmas is the production of a propensity
with regards to those engaged in Karma to give (rise to) their fruits (and so

exhaust them). Indeed, it is said (in the Mṛgendratantra):

“(He is engaged in) awakening (bodhayan) those who are fit to be

awakened, even in (the period of cosmic) sleep, and obstructing (rundhan) those

who should be obstructed, maturing (pācayan) (the consequences of the) Karma

of those engaged in action, making (prakurvan) the powers of Māyā fit (and
ready) to be made manifest,' (even as He continues) seeing (paśyan) all things

just as they are.””

‘Thus’ the reason (why He is called the Lord) is because (He) teaches
etc., even though the word ‘pati’ (itself) ultimately means ‘protection’. This is
the meaning. Thus ‘paṁ’ (the Lord) is He who protects (paāti, rakṣati). He is ‘the

According to the common Śaiva Siddhānta theory of Karma, when Karma is fully
mature, Śiva graces the soul and so releases it from Karma. This view is criticized
below 13/54 ff.

Mṛgendravidyāpāda 4/15. Commonly quoted in Siddhānta sources, for example in

the Tattvaniṛṇayavṛút by Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha ibid ad 28, Nareśvaraparkṣā ad 231, p.
153 and Kiraṇavṛtti ad 4/17.

Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha comments on this verse from the dualist Siddhānta point of

view:

jāgradavasthāyām
iva
.svāpāvasthāyām
api
malaparipākatāratamyāpekṣayā
bodhanārhān bodhayan, rodhanārhān rodhanaśaktyā rundhan, karmiṇāṁ karmāṇi
pariṇāmayan,

ca
prasavābhimukhīḥ
kurvan,
sarvaṁ
cidacittattvabhāvabhūtabhuvanātmakaṁ yathāvad avalokayann āṣṭe | yad yatheti na tv
asmadādivat ayathā vastvavabhāso ‘apy asya bhavatīti vakṣyāmaḥ |

‘(He is engaged) in awakening those who deserve to be awakened in the dream
state also, as in the waking state, in accord with the degree in which (their) Impurity has

matured. He is obstructing those who deserve to be obstructed by (his) power of
obstruction, as he changes the Karmas of those engaged in action (into their
consequences). (He does this) as he makes the powers of Māyā propense to give birth

(to their effects,) and abides observing everything properly, be it conscious or
unconscious principles, phenomena (bhāva), gross elements (bhūta) and worlds. We say

that the manifestation of an entity is just as it is, certainly not as it is not, such as, for
example, oneself (asmadādivat).”

Read with edition of the Mṛgendra and MSs Ch, J, h, Ñ, and T: paśyan sarvaṁ for
sarvaṁ paśyan. MS N adds 1/104ab tena patiḥ sreyomaya eva sivo nāśivaṁ kim api
tatra. `Thus, He is (called) ‘Pati’ (the Lord), the auspicious one (śiva) who is the

supreme good (śreyomaya) itself and there is nothing at all inauspicious (asiva) there
(within Him).

CHAPTER ONE

supreme

good’

because

He

is

the

supreme

nondual

(reality).

(By)

‘inauspiciousʼ (is meant) duality (which is completely absent in the Lord).’

Surely (one may ask,) even if this is so, what is the use of adding

adjectives (to the Lord’s name)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

GaāEeaivEenGEHṈICNAHII
TTṬTGTRTTJIṬU eISEIĀ
īdṛgrūpaṁ kiyad api
rudropendrādiṣu sphured yena || 104 ||
tenāvacchedanude
paramamahatpadaviśeṣaṇam upāttam |

This same kind of nature is also manifest to a certain degree (in the

minor gods) such as Rudra and Upendra. Thus, the adjectives ‘supreme’
and ‘great’ are added (to His name) to preclude (the mistaken idea that) He
is limited. (104cd-105ab) (105)

‘This same kind (of nature), as explained in terms conforming to the
meaning of the words Bhairava etc., is ‘to a certain degree’, that is, not in all
(respects, manifest in other deities). The sense is that (the Lord’s nature) can be
(present) everywhere (in all other deities also, but only) in (some) aspects. Thus,
the adjectives ‘supreme’” and ‘great’ are used (to describe the Lord) to
distinguish (Him) from other (deities,) in order to teach that He is the most

excellent of all.
Surely (one may ask,)

ignorance is the instrumental

cause of

transmigration (sarṣṛti), and knowledge that of liberation (from it). Again,

ignorance is the lack of knowledge of one’s own essential nature, whereas
knowledge is the knowledge of that. One’s own essential nature is the supreme
Light (of consciousness). Covering its own nature by its own free will, it

manifests (its own nature as) the universe. Although this is so, its (own) power

itself is the means (upāya) to realize that (Light) by which knowledge of one’s
own (true) nature is possible (bhavet). (So) one should know just this much,

namely, that which is the object of explanation of all the scriptures, and that has
largely been explained here. Thus, one should stop (here and not continue
further with the Tantrāloka). With this doubt in mind, he says:
The Exposition of the Tantrāloka
The word ‘aśiva’ means both ‘inauspicious’ and ‘not Śiva. Translatingin accord

with the other meaning, we get ‘thereis nothing thatis not Śiva (aśiva) thereʼ. So the
‘inauspiciousʼ is absence of Śiva, whichis duality.

7 These lines are also most probably drawn from the Śivatanu. If so, we should

understand that the word generic word ‘deva’ – ‘god’ – for Śiva, of which Brṛhaspati has
supplied the etymology,is an abbreviation of Mahādeva, whichis a well-known proper

name of Śiva.

TANTRĀLOKA

a√ād ahōaākaāT || 2, 1

iti yaj jñeyasatattvaṁ darśyate tac chivājñayā || 105 I|
mayā svasaṁvitsattarkapatiśāstratrikakramāt |
Thus, I will expound, at Śiva’s command, according to my own
consciousness, sound discriminative reasoning (sattarka), Śaiva doctrine

(patiśāstra), Trika and Krama, the true nature of what needs be known.
(105cd-106ab) (106)
This is the introduction (which ends here).”™ ‘Thus’ʼ, 1 will now

expound at length ‘at Śiva’s command’ on the basis of ‘my own
consciousnessʼ etc. what has been outlined briefly here in the aforementioned

” This is not a text. Rather it is a generic term for the common basic form of Āgamic

Śaivism, i.. the Śaivasiddhānta. Jayaratha says as much in ad TĀ 1/105cd-106ab (106).

It may also mean its scriptures and related works. Cf. TĀv ad 4/253 and TĀ 16/254-256

(254cd-257ab).

”" have translated following Jayaratha, as I must. Another possible translation could be

“. . . Śaiva doctrine and Trika, in due order°. Although this is not the meaning accepted
by Jayaratha, it is more likely – why would Abhinava place Krama above Trika?
Moreover, Abhinava’s Anuttara Trika includes the Krama teachings as it does the

Pratyabhijñā and Spanda. However, it seems to me that the best translation is as follows:

‘Thus, I will expound, at Śiva’s command, according to the three (trika),
namely, the sound discriminative reasoning (sattarka) (inherent in) my own
consciousness, the Lord (who is my teacher) and scripture, in due order (—kramāt), the

true nature of what needs be known.”

The due order would be the reverse one. First comes scriptural revelation, then

‘the Lordʼ, who I take to be the teacher, and the last is the sound reasoning based on the

personal experience of one’s own consciousness. This triad mirrors a standard set of
three validating sources, namely, scripture, the teacher and one’s own insight (see
below, 4/78cd-79). The characterizing quality of a true teacher is his discerning

reasoning which, distinguishing between what should be rejected and what is to be
adopted, is the result and basis of the purification of his notions concerning their identity

as Siva first and then those of his disciple. The same discernment allows the teacher to
distinguish what is most relevant and important in the scriptural revelation which he

teaches to his disciple. Indeed, this is the basis on which Abhinava wrote his Tantrāloka
based on carefully selected passages from the scripture and his teachers’ instruction.

”! The introduction began above at verse 22. In the introduction, Abhinava has dealt

with the basics of his metaphysics, theology and practice under the five headings we
have noted, namely, 1) knowledge and ignorance, 2) innate and intellectual knowledge
and ignorance, 3) nature and character of consciousness, 4) Śiva the possessor of power
and His power, 5) the Divine Names. Now he begins with the exposition itself. The

point of entry into Anuttara Trika is, of course, practice. Accordingly, Abhinava begins

with that. In this chapter, he first presents an overview of practice, that is, the means to
realisation (upāya). This is followed by what is essentially an index of the contents of
the Tantrāloka, first just chapter headings, and then headings of the sections into which
the chapters are divided, which is followed by Jayaratha and in the translation.

CHAPTER ONE

way about ‘the true nature of what needs to be known’, namely, the true

ultimate nature of bondage and liberation etc., (which is possible) because other

scriptures (śāstra) (of various schools) have been (well) examined. This is the

meaning. Here ‘Śiva’ is (Abhinava’s) teacher (i.e., Śambhunātha).”

‘He who is the teacher is said to be Śiva. He Who is Śiva is considered
to be the teacher. Śiva and the teacher – there is no difference between either of

The point is that without permission (ādesśa) (of the teacher who is Śiva)

there is no competence here (to expound the teachings). (One’s) ‘own

consciousness’
(means)
one’s
own
(personal)
experience.

discriminative reasoning’ (means) (the application of) reason (yukti) (based on

the understanding and practice of the teachings as a means to gain insight into
ultimate reality).”™ (Siddhānta) ‘Śaiva doctrine’ (patiśāstra) (which represents
the basic, common public form of) Śaivism that is predominantly dualist.
‘Trika is the school (śāstra) that expounds (the nature of) the three powers,

Parā (Parāparā and Aparā). Krama is (the teaching concerning) the Four-fold

Reality (catuṣṭayārtha). Taken together, this is a copulative compound (in

77 Jayaratha says that Śiva’ is the teacher. This is most probably not what he literally

meant, as Abhinava did not. Rather the teacher is Śiva. And this could only be

Abhinava’s Trika teacher, Sambhunātha. This is the concluding verse of the

introḍuction (upodghāta) to the TĀ. TṬhus, Abhinava is declaring that he wrote the
Tantrāloka at Sambhunātha’s command. In other words, he was authorized to do so by
his teacher. He attained the capacity and authority (adhikāra) which rendered him fit to
undertake this great task from his Trika teacher Sambhunātha. His purpose (prayojana)

was to give his students and peers a liturgical manual of Trika ritual and to write a
commentary on the MV, and so expound Trika Śaivism, also taught in other Trika
scriptures. The purpose of that (prayojanaprayojana) was that others may benefit from
it (bhoga), and to lead to liberation (mokṣa) those so desired to attain it. The name
(abhidhāna) of the work is ‘Tantrāloka’.

” The verse refers, of course, to a Śaiva teacher. Cf. below 16/256cd (257ab).
T” According to Monier-Williams’ dictionary, the relevant meanings of the word yukti

are: `a trick, contrivance, means, expedient, artifice, cunning device, magic, to find out

or employ an expedient; by device or stratagem, artfully, skilfully, under pretext or
pretence; reasoning, argument, proof, inference, induction, and deduction from
circumstances by means of an argument.” As we shall see in detail in Chapter Four,
‘Sound Reasoning’ – sattarka – which is developing discriminating insight applied to
understanding the ultimate purport of the scripture, is the basis of the Empowered
Means (śāktopāya). Reflection on the meaning of scripture in general, and the

Tantrāloka in particular, coupled with a developing experience of the dynamism of

consciousness, is a kind of contemplative practice (bhāvanā) that serves to purify
thought of false notions progressively until one reaches the clarity of the direct and
profound insight that one’s own true nature and that of all things is nothing but pure

consciousness, which is Śiva Himself.

The term ‘yukti’ also denotes a meditative technique or practice. The 112

practices taught in the Vijāānabhairava, for example, are called ‘dhāraṇas’ –

‘meditationsʼ. They are also called ‘yuktiś’ – which Swami Lakshmaṇjoo translates as
‘tricks’. They are ‘tricks because they ‘trick’ the dull, ignorant, worldly mind into

atṭaining higher states of consciousness.

7 See above, note 1,659.

TANTRĀLOKA

which the members form a list). Here everything that is taught is proved by

one’s own experience and sound discriminative reasoning, in accord with (both)

the common (Śaiva) scriptures (accepted by all Śaiva schools) and the particular
ones (of our specific traditions)."® This is the tradition (āgama). (The word)

” The ‘āgama’ (iterally ‘that which has come’ down to us) are the scriptures and their
teachings, which may also be just orally transmitted. They fall into two broad
categories. They may be ‘common’ (sāmānya), that is, generally accepted by all
Śaivites. From the Trika point of view, these are the Siddhānta Āgamas. They may also
be ‘particular’, or specific to one's own particular school. These are also arranged along

the same gradation, from common to increasingly particular or specific. Again, from the
Trika point of view, essentially they are the Bhairava Tantras and the Kaula Tantras that

are derived from them. The most ‘general’ and ‘common’ from this perspective are

essentially two. One is the Nerratantra, which teaches the cult of Mṛtyuñjaya Śiva,
otherwise called Amṛteśa. It does not affiliate itself to any one of the four pīṭhas, i.e.
‘groups’ or categories of Bhairava Tantras. The other is the Svacchandatantra, that
belongs to the Mantrapītha. The other relevant Bhairavatantras belong to the
Vidyāpīṭha. A primary feature of the Bhairava Tantras is the prominent presence of
goddesses (see below, 37/24cd-25ab). Along with the Mantra-, Mudrā- and Maṇḍala-pīthas (i.e. ‘collections’), the Vidyāpīṭha is one of four divisions of the Bhairava
Tantras (Dyczkowski 1986: 104 ff.). This system of classification is taken as basic by
Abhinava himself, who presents the Vidyāpītha as the most excellent of the four (see
below 36/17-24ab). Tantras continued to ascribe themselves to the Vidyāpīṭha up to the
development of the Kubjikā Tantras, some of which also do so. However, the Tantras of

the Śrīvidyā school, which is the last great Tantric system in the chain of development

of the early Śaiva and Kaula Tantric systems, do not do so. Indeed, they do not refer to

this system of classification at all. Sanderson (1986) has described in depth the

importance and characteristic features of the Tantras of the Vidyāpīṭha. The word

‘Vidyā’ in this context denotes the Mantras of female deities, which dominate the praxis
of these Tantras.

The Brahmayāmala is amongst the first Tantras of the Vidyāpīṭha. Also called
Picumata (the Teaching of the Yoginī called Picu), 12,000 verses long, it is the prime

representative of the so-called Mata Tantras. The Bhairava of this Mata is called

Kaāpālīśa, the Lord of the Skull. His consort is Caṇḍākāpālinī. (See below note to TĀv

ad 4/63cd-64). Teaching practices (including sexual ones) performed in the cremation
ground, Sanderson has described this as a Kāpālika Tantra. Sections have been edited,

translated and studied (see bibliography). Probably belonging to the same period (7"

cent CE?) is the Siddhayogeśvarīmata (also called Siddhayogīśvarīmata), the first Trika

Tantra. Abhinava often quotes it here in the Tantrāloka. He considers it so important

that he takes it as an exemplary model of the stages through which scripture is

transmitted (below, 36/1-10). A recension of that has been recovered has been partially
edited and studied. The Tantrasadbhāva is the next Trika Tantra in chronological order.

The present writer has partially edited it and made it available for others to continue the

work. It is likely that the Mālinīvijayottara was redacted after that. These and the
Triśirobhairava and Devyāyāmala, that have not survived, are the major representatives
of the ground layer of Trika scripture, characterized by the absence of its self-

characterization as Trika. The next layer consists of Tantras of which we know only
from references. These do know themselves as Trika. An example is the Trikasāra –
‘the Essence of Trika’, also called Trikahṛdaya – ‘the Heart of Trika’. Abhinava’s

Anuttara Trika is the third and ‘most excellent’ – anuttara – Trika.

Another line of development in the Vidyāpītha begins with the massive
Jayadrathayāmala, which consists of four ṣaṭkas of approximately 6,000 verses each.
This is largely a compendium of ritual practices — kalpa – centred on numerous forms of

CHAPTER ONE

‘upodghāta’ (meaning ‘introduction’, is formed from the prefix) ‘upa’ (which

means) Ś‘quickʼ’, that is, ‘conciselyʼ, (and udghāta which means) ‘strikeṣ’

(hanyate), that is, ‘impresses’, above and below (i.e. from the beginning to the

end) within it the meaning of the scripture, like the name of a king (punched
onto the upper and lower side of) a coin.

The Deployment of Bhairava’s Energies and the Supremacy
of the Assembly of Twelve Goddesses

Having in this way declared the (next) subject, in order to present it by
encompassing the (essential) purport of the scriptures, he now says:

Taā JTTd TATTTRTĀĪ
TĪTT TĀTTHT. II 20, |1|

tasya śaktaya evaitās tīsro bhānti parādikāḥ || 106 ||
sr̥ṣṭau sthitau laye turye tenaitā dvādaśoditāḥ |
(Śiva) has just these three powers, namely, (the Goddess) Parā
(Supreme) and the rest (that is, Parāparā (Middling) and Aparā (Lower)).

They manifest in (the phases of) creation, persistence, withdrawal and the
Fourth (that both includes and transcends them).” Thus (they) have arisen
twelve-fold.” (106cd-107ab) (107)
Kālīs and related goddesses. The main form of Kālī here, who is identified with
Caṇḍayogeśvarī, is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī. The most secret kalpas are considered to be Kaula.
Here are the roots of the worship of the 13 Kālīs (reduced by Abhinavagupta to twelve)

(see below 4/148ff.) and the beginnings of the Krama system. A few short independent
Kaālīkrama Tantras that have been recovered developed from these seeds, for example,
the Kramasadbhāva and the Kālīkulapañcaśatika (which Jayaratha calls the

Devipañcaśatika). In this line, about the middle of the 9" century, Śivānanda, also called
Jñānanetra, received a new revelation from Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī in Uddiyāna, the Northern
Seat (uttarapīṭha), located in the Swat Valley close to Kashmir. He established a new

lineage of transmission of the teachings that climaxed in the fully fledged Krama
system. These then are the main examples of the ‘particular’ scriptures of this tradition

that Abhinava incorporates, along with the ‘common’ ones, into his Anuttara Trika as
revelations amplifying and sustaining his primary scripture, the Mālinīvijayottara. For
an example of how the scriptures at various levels work together, see below TĀv ad

4/251 and notes.
” The word ‘ghāta’ (of upodghāta – ‘introduction’) is derived from the root ‘han’, in

the sense of ‘striking (a blow)ʼ. According to Jayaratha, the introduction ends here, and

I must follow suit, although Abhinava himself considers that the exposition of the
Tantrāloka begins with verse 52. This is where he says the introduction ends in his

Tantrasāra. See note 1,533, where the passage from the Tantrasāra is translated.
” Cf. below, 33/30.
Cf. below, 5/25-27ab. Significantly, Abhinava begins his exposition of practice and,

indeed, the whole of the Tantrāloka following the introduction to it by referring to the
Twelve Kālīs, which he thus implicitly presents as the foundation of all Anuttara Trika
practice. Repeatedly Abhinava and his commentator declare that Śiva’s power – śakti –

TANTRĀLOKA

is the means to realizing Him. In the verses that follow, we are told why, namely, that
the one Śakti as the Twelve Kāḹīs is Śiva’s all-embracing plenitude, the perfection in all
respects that is Who He is.
Abhinava sets out by expounding first of all what ‘needs to be known’ most

essentially. Indeed, like the Upaniṣadic Brahman, the Imperishable, it is that ‘knowing

which all things are known’ (The opening statement of the Mānḍukyopaṇiṣad).
There are two reasons for this. One is that the three goddesses Parā, Parāparā

and Aparā, which are the core of Trika worship, are understood to encompass all three

domains in which reality manifests. These are the subject (mātrṛ), cognitive
consciousness (vijñāna), which is the means of knowledge (pramāṇa) operating through
the senses and mental apparatus, and the object of knowledge (meya) (see below 4/125).
In each sphere, consciousness flows through the process of emanation from
consciousness, persistence within it, and withdrawal back into it of all that is in its

domain. The Fourth condition is consciousness itself in relation to each one and which
encompasses all three, collectively and individually. It is identified with
Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, also called Mātṛṣadbhāva (see above, 3/178ab-178cd (3/177-178ab),

4/177 and below, 15/348ab-349ab (15/347cd-48)), the Goddess of the Krama (see

below, 3/68ab-70ab (3/68cd-70) and 33/30-31ab). Twelve-fold, as the twelve Kālīs,

embraces
everything
in
the
domain
of
objectivity
(= Apara), the means of knowledge (i.e. mind and senses) (= Parāparā), and the
perceiver (= Parā) in this way within the dynamism of consciousness. The latter is called
the ‘Inexplicable’ (anākhya), because it cannot be defined either sequentially, as this
process, nor is it other than that, even as it transcends both alternatives (below, 4/178c-

180ab). By identifying the Krama goddess and her hypostases with the Trika goddess

Parā (4/176) and her forms, Abhinava masterfully integrates Krama doctrine into Trika

(see Sanderson 2007: 71-75). Abhinava is so concerned to establish these equivalences

that he virtually repeats what he says here in Chapter Four with reference to the
Empowered Means (śāktopāya) (4/25-26ab), and again in Five with reference to the
Individual Means (āṇavopāya) (5/24cd-27ab). Moreover, he manages in this way,
despite the total absence of reference to the Krama in the Mālinīvijayottara, to present it
as the ultimate essence, and hence, the highest form of the Trika teachings. As
Sanderson (2006: 74) explains: ‘it is this set of twelve, rather than the three or four

goddesses of the Trika proper, which Abhinavagupta declares to be 'the principal circuit

of the divine Powers' (mukhyaṁ śakticakram) in which Bhairaya's nature is most fully
manifest. AIl the other sets of emanations worshipped in the various Śaiva systems of
ritual (kalpaḥ) are, he claims, the condensation or expansion of these.”
In the following verses, Abhinava explains that this (Parā/Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī) is

the one power which thus twelve-fold encompasses all the others and so is Śiva's

plenitude (pūrṇatā), which the Pratyabhijñā teaches is His freedom (svātantrya) and

reflective awareness (vimarśa). Abhinava implicitly declares in a passage in Tantrasāra

(p. 27) that this one power is the ultimate of all the major traditions, named in various

ways. More specifically, Abhinava continues:

‘Consciousness shines in its plenitude by the realisation that it is this (allencompassing) totality of (all) its powers. And the powers (of the Lord) are numberless.
Indeed, how much can be said (about them)? These powers are the universe. How can
they (all) be taught (in the scriptures)? (However), everything is summated in (just)
three (of them). (One is) the venerable Supreme (parā) power, by means of which the
Supreme Lord sustains, perceives and makes manifest this (entire reality, comprised in
the thirty-six principles (tattva) beginning with) Śiva up to Earth (in a state of oneness)
as just (pure) inconceivable consciousness. (The second one is) His venerable Middling
(parāparā) power, by means of which (He makes the same reality manifest) as a unity

CHAPTER ONE

‘He’ is the Supreme Lord who is the object of denotation of the words
Bhairava etc. ‘These three powers, namely, (the Goddess) Parā (Supreme)

and the rest (that is, Parāparā (Middling) and Aparā (Lower)), have been

declared (by the Trika scriptures) to be the main ones, as they encompass within
themselves all the other powers. They manifest radiantly in a form which is the

nature of all the others ‘in creation, persistence, withdrawal, and the Fourth
(that both includes and transcends them)’, that is, the Inexplicable
(Anākhya). Thus, as each one has four forms, (they) arise twelve-fold as the

(Twelve Kālīs,) beginning with the venerable Sṛṣṭi Kālī. This is the meaning
of (this) statement. That is said (in the following passage):

"By being associated with the sequence of creation (persistence,

withdrawal and the Fourth state), the condition of (each of) these three abodes is
also four-fold. In this way, the supreme Sun which is one’s own consciousness,

imperishable and its body Light,™ has dawned twelve-fold.”

along with diversity (bhedābheda), as are (images reflected in a) mirror (devoid of mass
and measure, as happens when, for example, with the reflected image of) an elephant.
(The third is) His venerable Lower (aparā) power, through which (He makes all things

manifest, whether subjects or objects in the modality in which they are) mutually

distinct from one another, that is, as separate (and divided) (bhedena).
(AII three are the one) Goddess, namely, the venerable Parā Who, embracing
this three-fold contemplation (dhāraṇa) within Herself, consumes it within (Her)
synthetic contemplation (anusandhāna) of it. (Thus, She is also) called by such names
as the venerable Mātṛṣadbhāva (the Essence of (all) Subjects) and Kālakarṣiṇī (the

Destroyer of Time). Each one of these four energies (Parā, Parāparā, Aparā and the

Goddess Parā identified with Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī) are each, by virtue of the freedom (of
consciousness,) of three kindsin emanation, persistence and withdrawal, and so they are
twelve.”

” Abhinava expounds the twelve Kālīs of Krama doctrine below in 4/148-172.
” This passage is clearly drawn from a Krama source. It refers in the manner that is
usual in these sources to the dawning of the solar Wheel of twelve Kālīs. As we shall

see in Chapter Four, and as was pointed out in the Introduction, this fundamental Krama
teaching is the centrepiece of what Abhinava understands to be the most esoteric
teaching of Anuttara Trika. Although similar formulations are common in the Kālīkrama
(also called Kālīkula) sources that have survived, I have not been able to trace this verse
there.

This passage is not from Śivānanda’s Kramastotra. He followed the thirteen

Kaālī system. This one (with a thirteenth Kālī in the centre) was the basic and most
common. Abhinava’s presentation of just twelve Kālīs thus stands out with respect to

the others. This passage is thus either by him, which is unlikely as Jayaratha would

signal it as such, or by a person who followed that system. He may be after Abhinava, as
is the anonymous author of one of the three texts called Mahānayaprakāśa. If before, it
indicates that there were precedents for Abhinava’s view. But there is no evidence of
that, nor is it likely.

”Ṁ Instead of ‘prakāśavapur ayyayaḥ’ “which is imperishable and its body Light’, MS

D: prakāśapuram avyaya() – ‘whichis imperishable and the abode of Light’.

7 Itis commonly believedin India that there are twelve forms of the sun, one for each

of the twelve zodiacal solar months. To these correspond the twelve Kālīs, who are as
many phases or energies of the cycle of the means of knowledge (pramāṇacakra),
identified with the Sun. In its immanent form it is dynamic cognitive consciousness, of

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) it has been logically established that there is just

one Supreme Lord Who is the Supreme Light (of consciousness, variously)

called Bhairava etc., and that He possesses just one power called ‘freedomʼ,
which is not separate (from Him). So how is it that here He is said to arise

twelve-fold? With this doubt in mind, he says:

Ṁa: Ṁdīa Ṁ-īd || q0 11]

aīraāTcāāa ̄tftzaī |
tāvān pūrṇasvabhāvo ʻsau paramaḥ Śiva ucyate || 107 ||
tenātropāsakāḥ sākṣāt tatraiva pariniṣṭhitāḥ |
He who is this much (tāvān) is full (and complete), and (so) is said to
be Supreme Siva. Thus, those who worship (these twelve aspects) here are
evidently well-established there (in Siva’s nature). (107cd-108ab) (108)
‘This much’ is His extent namely, (these) twelve energies, and so it is

said that (being such,) ‘His nature is full (and complete)ʼ. Everything is

present within (Śiva’s nature, which is) full (and all-encompassing), and it is

full (and unlimited) everywhere, otherwise He would not possess (that)
plenitude (of consciousness and Being).™ Thus ‘those who worship here’

within the Wheel of Twelve (Kaālīs) ‘are well established there’ within

Supreme Śiva, and are one with Him.” This is the meaning. This is a very
extensive doctrine that requires (detailed) exposition, and so will be discussed at
length in (Chapter Four which deals with) the Empowered Means (to
realisation).” So (we will not engage in this) laborious task here.

Surely (one may ask,) how can that be right insofar as here in various
places (in the scriptures) the number (of energies in any given configuration)

may be more or less?”™™ With this doubt in mind, he says:

which subject and object are the polarities between which it oscillates. Analogously, as

we shall see, the cycle of sixteen energies is the Moon of the object of perception. The
Fire with eight energies is the subject (see below, 4/122cd ff.).

Ṃ Every single thing, however vast, however small, is contained within Śiva’s all-

embracing nature. And that same all-embracing nature is in every single thing, however
vast, however small, individually just as it is in everything, altogether. If that were not

so, Śiva’s plenitude would be nought.

The Twelve Kālīs cover the full expanse of Śiva’s consciousness — supreme,

middling and lower, in all the phases of manifestation, included within which is His
transcendent, inexplicable unity. The Twelve Kaālīs are the most completely explicit

representation of Siva’s all-embracing nature which, becoming all things, is everything
even as it transcends everything as the one consciousness without a second. Here then is
the reason for the paramount place Abhinava gives to the Twelve Kālīs in his Anuttara

Trika. This also explains why ultimately all practice leads to the supreme experience of

this dynamism, through which liberation is achieved.

See 4/122cd ff.

” The question here is very pertinent. Why should the configuration (cakra) of twelve
Śaktis be considered to be superior to all the others?

CHAPTER ONE

|I zo0¢
STḤ11

tāsām api ca bhedāṁśanyūnādhikyādiyojanam || 108 II

tatsvātantryabalād eva śāstreṣu paribhāṣitam |

The scriptures explain that the conjunction of these (powers) with a
greater or lesser (number of) differentiated aspects (bhedāṁśa) etc. takes

place by the power of His (creative) freedom. (108cd-109ab) (109)

He says just that:”™

TGÑĪĪ JTTJĪṢJ fīTRRATISHdF: 11 Q01I
TGJf: TGTTT TdāēāīszkJfTā |
EṭGIAĪĒEFI-FÇ[HETJIKETHṆEYĪ

gRJTTGTTĒṀTTTṀĪ
T: fēērā. |

ekavīro yāmalo ʻtha triśaktiś caturātmakaḥ || 109 ||
pañcamūrtiḥ sadātmāyaṁ saptako 'ṣṭakabhūṣitaḥ |

navātmā daśadikchaktir ekādaśakalātmakaḥ || 110 ||
dvādaśāramahācakraṇāyako bhairavaḥ sthitaḥ |

Bhairava, the Lord of the Great Wheel of twelve spokes,” abides

(also as) the ‘Solitary Hero’ (ekavīra), the ‘Couple’ (yāmala), as possessing

”" The following passage extends from 109cd to 123ab (110 to 123). Perhaps all of it is

drawn from or inspired by the 7riśirobhairava. Moṣṭt likely 109cd to 115ab (110 to 115)

are so. Jayaratha’s citations establish that the passage drawn from the Triśirobhairava

certainly extends from 1/11 lcd to 1/114cd-115ab (115).

” Here Abhinava implies that the Wheel with twelve spokes is the primary one over
which Bhairava presides. As the male powerholder, he presides over each Wheel,

extending his domains in consonance with the configurations of His energies, embodied
in the female deities that constitute the increasingly proliferating assemblies.

Analogously, further ahead (in 3/253cd-255), Abhinava declares that all wheels of
energies emerge from that wheel. But there the deity in the centre is Parā. Thus, the

assemblies are entirely female. Abhinava cleverly justifies the switch by explaining that

Parā is Bhairava’s Self. His source is the Trikasāra (sāraśāstra), which he quotes

directly before the Trisirobhairava, that refers to its proliferaton in other
configurations. It is obvious to the more knowledgeable that Abhinava is alluding here
to the Twelve Kālīs, the core of his Krama system. There is evidence that the Trikasāra

integrated its Trika with Krama, to some degree at least (see Trikasāra entry in the
Appendix concerning the sources). However, no Krama influence can be observed in the

many citations from the 7riśirobhairava, what to say of the Twelve Kālīs. Without
needing to resort to the fusion of these two Trika sources, Abhinava would certainly
have cited instances directly from the 7riśirobhairava. For in that way, he would have

enlisted another major Trika Tantra as supporting the synthesis of Trika and Krama

promoted by his teacher Śambhunātha, that he also took to be central to the teachings of

his Anuttara (the ‘most excellent’) Trika.

TANTRĀLOKA

three powers, as four-fold,” with five iconic forms, as six-fold, as this
group of seven and adorned with the group of eight, as the Nine-fold One
(navātman), as possessing the powers of the ten directions, and as the eleven

energies.” (109cd-111ab) (110-111)

“The ‘Solitary Hero’ʼ is Mṛtyujit (Śiva, the Conqueror of Death,

Who is worshipped alone) in the initial visualization (dhyāna). The ‘couple’

These two verses and the following one are quoted in the MM p. 82. Read as there
bhairavaḥ

sthitaḥ for bhairavas tv iti.

” This line is quoted below in TĀv ad 33/1.

The MM reads saptāṣṭakavibhūṣitaḥ (this (Bhairava) is adorned with the seven and

the group of eight’) for saptako ʻṣṭakabhūṣitaḥ. The variant seems to me to be a better
reading, but as Jayaratha has accepted it, it has been left as it is.

MM p. 82 etad uktaṁ bhavati – pūrvaṁ tāvat pīthatayā deham abhyarcya tanmadhye

hṛdayavyomarūpe ṣvātmarūpamahāprakāśalakṣaṇaṁ parameśvaram anusandhāya, tam
abhitaḥ prasarantīrindriyaśaktīś ca vicintya, tadanu sarvāntaḥkaraṇasamaṣṭilakṣaṇe
svacitte
viśvavedyavilāsalakṣaṇam
arghyadravyam
āpūrya,
tac
ca
pārameśvaraparāmarśamayyā
mantraśaktyā
saṁskṛtya,
tenaiva
kulāmṛtena

nijāvaraṇadevatāparimaṇḍalito

‘yaṁ parameśvaraḥ pūjanīya iti | ayaṁ ca

saṁkocavikāsayogād ekāram ārabhyā-saṅkhyāraparyantam āgameṣv arcanīyatayā
āmnāyate | yad uktaṁ śrītantrāloke – (TĀ 1/109cd-112ab (110-112)) . . . erat
tātparyeṇaiva
srotaścatuṣṭayopapāditānāṁ
paddhatīnãṁ
pravṛttir
ity
etāvanmātraparyavasāyi pījārahasyam |
‘This is what has been taught: first of all, worship the body as the seat (pīrha)
(of the deities). Once that is done, contemplate the Supreme Lord, who is the Great

Light which is one’s own nature there, in the centre, which is the Sky of the Heart.

Then, having reflected on the energies of the senses that flow forth all around from that,
and filled one’s own mind, which is the aggregate of all the inner organs (of sense), with
the liquid offering (arghyadravya), which is the play of all objectivity, and purified it

with the power of Mantra, made of the reflective awareness of the Supreme Lord, one

should worship this Supreme Lord, who is surround by His own attendant deities, with

that same Kula nectar. It is this that is taught in the Āgamas as that which is to be

worshipped that, contracting and expanding, thus (develops,) beginning with the (circle
with) one spoke up to that with innumerable (spokes). As is said in the Tantrāloka:
(quotes 1/109cd-112ab (110-112)). What is meant here essentially is that this is the

manner (in which) the liturgies taught in the four currents (of scriptures) operate. Just
this alone is what the secret of worship amounts to.”

" Abhinava refers repeatedly to the multiplicity of configurations of divine forms, an
evident and major feature of all Tantric pantheons. He understands them to be the
proliferation of the energies of the one energy of consciousness. His scriptural authority

in this regard is the Triśirobhairava. Jayaratha tells us that the first chapter of the TBh
deals with the Wheel of a Thousand Spokes, formed through the progressive
development of the preceding smaller configurations that it thus integrates into itself.
Abhinava says that the subject is dealt with so extensively there that he cannot go into it
further for fear of making his book too long (3/254cd-257ab).

Similarly, Jayaratha states that the details are too many to reproduce (ad

1/111cd-112ab) (112)), and so refers the reader to the 7riśirobhairava directly. Even so,
Jayaratha (ad 1/109cd-110ab) (110-111)) does make an effort to list the names of the

deities in each assembly. As Jayaratha quotes the 7riśirobhairava extensively in several

places, there can be no doubt that he had access to it. Thus, one wonders why Jayaratha

CHAPTER ONE

(Śiva and Śakti are also worshipped) there. The three powers, Parā (Parāparā

and

Aparā)

(are

worshipped)

in

the

Kula

modality

(of

practice)

(kulaprakriyā).” The ‘four-fold’ consists of (he goddesses) Jayā (Vijayā, Ajitā

and Aparājitā).” (Bhairava possesses) ‘five iconic forms’ (when worshipped)
as Sadyojāta (Tatpuruṣa, Vāmadeva, Aghora and Īśāna) (that are the five forms

of Sadāśiva represented by His faces according to the Siddhānta). That is said

(in the following lines of scripture):

does not quote it here, preferring other sources instead, especially as he himself states

that, although the names of the deities of the assemblies are taught in various scriptures,

they are taught in particular in the first chapter of the Triśirobhairava (ad 1/11 cd112ab (112)). There is no reason to doubt, however, that the explanation he gives here is

drawn from the TBh, and so is reliable.

Read mṛtyujid iti for mṛtyujiti. Mṛtyujit, the Conqueror of Death, is still a very
popular form of Śiva all over India. The repetition of his Mantra and fire offerings are
considered to be very beneficial for those who are sick or mentally disturbed. The
Netratantra, the Tantra of the Eye, is His main Tantra, so-called because it teaches a
visualization of the Maṇḍala of Śiva’s Third Eye. Jayaratha is saying that as Mṛtyujit,

Śiva is worshipped alone, without His consort.

” The three Trika goddesses that are worshipped on the prongs of the Trident of the

Trika maṇḍala may also be worshipped in the corners of a triangle (that is, a three-

spoked cakra) representing the Goddess as the womb (yoni) of the creation which, when
recognised to be such, is Pure Knowledge, not Māyā. Thus, the Trika triad identified, as

Abhinava regularly does, with the subject, means and object of knowledge, is both the
Trident and triangle of the three energies. Accordingly, Abhinava writes (in PTy p. 5354):
‘The goddess (bhagavatī) Pure Knowledge (sśuddhavidyā) endowed with the
undivided (unity) of the subject, means and object of knowledge, is triangular (trikoṇā).
It is filled (on the plane of) Māyā with the excellent reflected image of duality (bheda)

(of the many diverse things). Thus, Māyā also, which is the source of the universe, is in

reality, just (Pure) Knowledge. (Māyā) is said to be the Great Secret Place (mahāguhyā)

because she is not known to be such in the aforestated manner, and because it consists
of three angles (of the triangle), which are the subject (object and means of knowledge,)

as the glorious power of (their) oneness (abheda) has been concealed. She herself (as
this Triangle) is in actual fact the Trident, which is the abode of worship according to
the Trika teachings. That is said (in the following verse): ‘She is the (female) Triangle,
the Great Knowledge, the triple one (trikā), the abode of all aesthetic sentiments (raṣa),
the plane of emission, and so She should be worshipped (as) Trika. Again: ‘A single
universal vision dawns present (equally) in the subject, object and means of knowledge.”
An example ofa Trika triangle is the centre of the Maṇḍala worshipped in the
preliminary stages of the Kaula ritual as taught below in Chapter Twenty-Nine, which is
dedicated to the Kula modality of practice. See 29/45cd-46ab and commentary.

” These are the goddesses who attend on Tumburu, the main form of Bhairava of the

Vāma Tantras (the Tantras of the Left – vāma). See Dyczkowski 1988: 36-38, 149-150.
According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, the four are the states of waking etc., and Jayaratha
is wrong. But this is probably not s0, as Jayaratha had access to the TBh and so could
furnish the explanation it itself most probably supplied.

See above, 1/18, comm. and notes.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘The group of five is the essence in (the teaching of) the Siddhānta, the

group of four in the (Tantras of) the Left and Right, and the triad (trika) in the

Bhairava Tantra.”ʼ

‘Six-fold’ (means the six goddesses). As he will say:

‘Viśvā (‘She Who is Everythingʼ), the Īśā (the Governess) of that
(universe), Hāraudrī, Vīranetrī (the Leader of the Heroes), Ambikā (the Young

Mother), and Gaurvī (the Female Teacher) are the goddesses in the six-spoked

(Wheel).

It is said concerning ‘the group of seven’ that:

A

very

similar

verse

appears

in

the

Kumārikākhaṇḍa

(51/1)

of the

Manthānabhairavatantra of the Kubjikā school. There the second half of the first line
reads catuṣkaṁ vāmagocare (‘the group of four in the field of the (Tantras of the) Left’)
instead of catuṣkaṁ vāmadakṣiṇe (‘the group of four in the (Tantras of) the Left and
Right’). This variant reading, which I have accepted, makes more sense, as the Bhairava

Tantra belongs to the right current of scripture to which the Trika Tantras belong.

Accordingly, in the KuKh, the reading of the next line is dakṣiṇe trikam ity āhuḥ (‘the
three (trika), they say, (is the essence of the Tantras) of the Right’) instead of trikaṁ tu

bhairave tantre (‘and the triad (trika) in the Bhairava Tantra). The version of these

lines found in the KuKh are also found at the beginning of the Gurukramādhikārasūtra
in Chapter 22 of the Yogakhaṇḍa (1) (22/25cd-45ab) of the Manthānabhairava. The rest
of that sātra explains them quite differently as follows.

‘Brahminicide, the drinking of wine, theft, sex with the teacher°s consort, and
incitement or association with these sins (saiyogin) are said to be the five great sins

according to the Siddhānta. Brahminicide, the drinking of wine, theft, and sex with the
teacherʼs consort - these, excluding incitement or association with them, are the four

sins according to (the teachings of the Tantras of the) Left. The drinking of wine, theft,
and sex with the teacher’s consort – is said to be the triad (of sins in the Tantras of the)

Right.’” See Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 5 notes on text and translation, note 1 (p. 47).

If the conjectured reconstruction of the text is correct, it appears that the
redactor of the text of this Kubjikā Tantra drew this verse from another Tantra without
understanding its meaning, whereas Jayaratha presumably did, because it was explained

in the source from which he drew it. It is also possible, but less likely, that Jayaratha
ascribed this meaning to this verse. Either way, it is clear from the preceding context

that he understood it this way.

‘ Below, at TĀ 33/2abc, this passage is ascribed to the Siddhāvīratantra. There the

first line reads viśvā tadīśā hāraudrī vīranetry ambikā tathā | The six are also listed in
MV 2/59cd-60ab: vi”"'vā viśveśvarī caiva hāraudrī vīranayikā | ambā gurveti yoginyo
bījais tair eva ṣaṭ smṛtāḥ || On the basis of the readings in these two passages, read
tadīśā hāraudrī for tadīśakā raudrī. Were it not for the reading in the MV and its
confirmation in 33/2abc below, the reading in the printed text would appear to be the
better one. Read vīranetry ambikā for vīrakā tryambikā. These goddesses are
worshipped on the corners of a hexagon.
According to Swami Lakṣhmanjoo, these six goddesses protect the adept
(sādhaka) and are six ways he experiences spiritual energy in the course of his practice
(sādhana). He says that: 1) Viśvā is ‘universal energy. 2) Īśikā is transcendental energy.

3) Raudrī obstructs the the sādhaka. 4) Vīrakā gives the sādhaka courage. 5) Tryambikā
bestows supreme (para) and inferior (apara) reflective awareness (parāmarśa) on the
sādhaka. 6) Gurvī is the energy that commands him.

CHAPTER ONE

‘The (seven) Mothers are Brāhmī, Māheśvarī, Kaumārī, Vaiṣṇavī,

By ‘the group of eight’ (is meant) Aghora and the rest. He Himself is
Navātman” (the Nine-fold One who,) present in the centre of that group of
eight, (governs them). ‘(He possesses) the powers of the ten directions’. As is

said, (they are):
‘“Umā, Durgā, Bhadrakālī, Svasti, Svāhā, Śubhaṅkarī, Śrī, Gaurī,

Lokadhātrī, and Vāgīśī, who is said to be the tenth.”

The ‘eleyen’ (energies) are said to be those of Khaṇḍacakṛra. Up to
here, Bhairava has assumed a lesser number (of powers,) and so (with respect to

! The Sanskrit reads:

bṛāhmī māheśvarī caiva kaumārī vaiṣṇavī tathā |
vārāhī ca tathendrāṇī cāmuṇḍā ceti mātaraḥ ||

Cf. TS which is practically the same:

brāhmī [kh: brahmāṁ;
g: ?] māheśvarī caiva kaumārī vaiṣṇavī tathā |I
vārāhī caindrikā [kh: cendrikā] devī cāmuṇḍā saptamī matā | TS 9/432cd-433ab
This is exactly the same group of seven Mothers found in the Svacchanda
Tanṇtra. They are described there in 10/1018cd-1025 as arranged in the eight directions,
with Umā added as an eighth. See below, in 33/2 following MV 3/14, eight Mothers are
listed, namely: Brāhmaṇī, Māheśī, Skāndī, Vaiṣṇavī, Aindrī, Yamātmikā, Cāmuṇḍā and

An early reference to the Mothers, predating the Tantras, is found in the
Durgāmāhātmya (11/13-21). There the Mothers are Brahmāṇī, Māheśvaṁī, Kaumārī,
Vaiṣṇavī, Varāhī, Nṛsiṁha, Aindrī, Śivadūtī and Cāmuṇḍā. There they are all identified
with Durgā (Nārāyaṇī) in a series of invocations of a series of forms of the goddess that
continues with Mahārātri, Sarasvatī, Durgā, Kātyāyanī, Bhadrakālī, Gaṇṭhā, and
Caṇḍikā (11/22-28).
According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, the seven Mothers ‘govern the sādhaka in
states of organic actionʼ.

‘ According to MV 1/19cd-21ab, the group of eight Aghoras (aghorāṣṭaka) are
Aghora, Paramaghora, Ghorarūpa, Ghoramukha, Bhīma, Bhīṣaṇa, Vamana, and Pibana.

They are the Bhairavas of the goddesses mentioned in the Vidyā of Parāparā, who have
the same names in the feminine. See below, 30/20-26ab. Concemning the Eight
Bhairavas, see note 8,1029; 11,184; 15, 385, 390; 29,127; and 30,50.
Navātman is the Bhairava of Aparā. According to MV 8/21cd-23ab, the mantra is
RHRKṢMLVYŪM. Each letter has a corresponding Bhairava with Navātmābhairava
(represented by M) in the centre. Concerning this important seed-syllable Mantra and its

variants and the iconic form of Navātmābhairava, see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. vo. 2,
pp. 423 ff.
Read ‘khaṇḍacakroktāḥ’ for ‘khaṇḍacakroktā’. Abhinavagupta refers to

Khaṇḍacakra, which literally means ‘the Broken or Incomplete Circleʼ, in the PTv, with
regards to which he quotes the Kubjikāmata. As this reference is not found in the printed
edition of the Kubjikāmata, it may have been drawn from an earlier version of the KM.
It is also possible that the word ‘mata’ here means just ‘teaching’ or ‘school’. If so, it

may have been drawn from another Kubjikā Tantra, although admittedly, there is no
other reference in Abhinava’s works that indicates he knew the Kubjikā Tantras. Even
so, they certainly did exist at that time outside Kashmir, if not in the Valley. The

TANTRĀLOKA

the following configuration of twelve, He) is the thirteenth.™ In this (way), (he)

refers to (and introduces) the (form of Bhairava which is associated with) a

greater number (of energies).
And so he says that the greater number (of energies) is endless:

reference declares that: ‘above Māyā is Mahāmāyā, which is the bliss of the Triangle’

(PTy p. 184). We may infer from the context that Abhinava implies that the Triangle is
Khaṇḍacakra. The identification of the Triangle with Mahāmāyā
is not common in the
Kubjikā sources, but it does occur, for example, in the following reference from the
Ambāṣaṁhitā (25/65c), where the Half Wheel (ardhacakra) is similarly identified with
Mahāmāyā, the higher ‘divine’ aspect of Māyā. There we read: ‘she is the goddess
Koṅkaṇā, the energy of nectar (madhu lit. ‘honey’) who oozes into the divine Half
Wheel of Māyā’ (devī sā koīṅkaṇā yā (vā) kṣarati madhukalā divyamāyārdhacakre). But

this may well not be meant here. It is hard to see how eleven units can be related to a

triangle, although one could describe it as ‘a fragment of a wheel’ or as half of one if we
take the complete wheel to be a hexagon (see below, note 3,319 to TĀv ad 3/94cd95ab). Another more likely possibility is a reference in the Chummāsaṁkeṭtaprakāśa
reported by Sanderson (2007: 348 n. 382). This is the teaching (kathā) of the Incomplete
Circle, stated as follows: ‘the Mahaugha (Great Flux) of the rays of Khaṇḍa [cakra]

comes about when after uniting within the cycle of consciousness in each flow [of

cognition] and relishing their respective fields of experience they revert and so eliminate
one . . . [of their number].” What the Kaulasūtra cryptically says with reference to this

teaching explains how the Incomplete Circle, originally in twelve parts (possibly
representing the twelve inner and outer senses) loses one and so becomes ‘broken':

‘When the twelve rays unite without force the confidence of their leader dissolves.
[This] one [among the twelve therefore] disappears. So there is a breaking of the circle
caused by a deficiency in [their] discipline.’ (Sanderson's translation, ibid. p. 348)

Jayaratha understands the form of Bhairava with less than twelve forms to be related
to the ‘lesser’ number of powers, that is, less than twelve. Bhairava, who sustains within
Himself and is Lord of the twelve, is the thirteenth, and so begins the series with the
greater number. It seems that Abhinava is quoting the lost Triśirobhairava as an

authority to establish that the ‘wheel of twelve spokesʼ, which for him is that of the
twelve Kālīṣ, integrated with the Trika goddesses is the main one (mukhyacakra).

However, although the TBh was an important Trika Tantra, none of the references

drawn from it indicate that it integrated Krama teachings into its Trika, unlike others,
notably the Devyāyāmala. Moreover, the primary sources do not refer to this circle of

twelve Kālīs as surrounding a Bhairava in the centre. This Wheel is an entirely female
one. The deity in the centre is a thirteenth Kalī (see below, note to introductory remarks

to verse 4/125).
Anyway, Abhinava's purpose is to emphasize the privileged status of the
twelve-spoked wheel. Thus, the Twelve Kālīs appear regularly as the unfolding
experience of the highest state, realised in all three categories of means to realisation.
They appear, as they do here, as the reason for Bhairava’s plenitude (3/251cd-252ab),
and as the source of all other configurations of energies (śakticakra), in Chapter Three,
which deals with the Supreme (Śāmbhava) Means (see 3/253cd ff.). Abhinava presents

them in detail in Chapter Four (4/122cd ff.), which deals with the Empowered Means as

that category of practice that is essentially concerned with the transformation of
differentiating thought back into its original pure conscious nature, which is the specific

function of the Twelve Kālīs. Accordingly, they appear in a practice that begins in the

Individual (Āṇava) Means linked to the intellect in Chapter Five (see 5/27cd-36). There

Abhinava calls them the Wheel of the Absolute (anuttaracakra) (5/27cd-28ab), which

thus represents in a unique way the plenitude (pūrṇatā) and perfection of Śiva

consciousness as the Goddess of Consciousness, who consumes all duality into herself.

CHAPTER ONE

Tj aāTāāēī f̄ī-̄aTSṀ āṬ 7J: 11] 222II

fṝīrarh mṁmī fāqīTchfārri|

evaṁ yāvat sahasrāre niḥsaṁkhyāre ‘pi vā prabhuḥ || 1 11 II
viśvacakre maheśāno viśvaśaktir vijrmbhate |

In this way, the Great Lord, (all) powerful.® who is (Himself) all
the powers, unfolds within (the one Wheel which is) all the Wheels
(viśvacakra), until (He expands) into the Wheel of a Thousand Spokes,” or
even within that of countless spokes.™ (111cd-112ab) (112)
‘The Wheel of a Thousand Spokes’ is described in the first chapter of
the Triśirobhairavatantra. For fear of making the book excessively long, each
This verse is quoted in MM p. 82. There instead of the reading prabhuḥ (‘powerful’),

we find vibhuḥ (‘pervasive’), which seems better in this context.
Cf. below, 4/132ab and also 5/31cd-32ab and 5/37-38.

According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, all-transcendent Bhairava as the thirteenth

onwards is beginning to enter into the innumerable state of His being: ‘He is the Lord of

the twelve-fold Cakra, but He cannot be ‘numbered’ (kalanā) so He is not really the
thirteenth – He is not a number. He is Asaṁkhya (countless).”

This verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 33/1. The name ‘viśvacakra’ can also be

translated as ‘the wheel which is all the wheelsʼ, that is, all the infinite possible

configurations of energies. In the economy of Anuttara Trika, all the Wheels, that is,
configurations of energies of consciousness, derive from the Main Wheel
(mukhyacakra), which is the Wheel of the Twelve Kālīs described in Chapter Four

(4/122cd ff.). They unfold within the Void of the Sky of Consciousness. At one with
consciousness, the energies and their configurations are themselves as many Voids
within the one Great Void. As Abhinava explains:

‘It is never possible to enumerate the various kinds of Wheels, because (their)
common foundation are the spokes of the endless rays present in that Wheel (with
twelve spokes), just as the (variegated colours) white, yellow, red and so on of a
peacock’s feather manifest by its unfolding and folding back (appearing to be many
feathers), although it is not so. The Lord of the Wheel, Who is (full to) overflowing with
subtle consciousness (in which all things are) dissolved away into its unexpanded state,
manifests in the same wonderfully variegated way in the dynamic state (vṛti) of (its
constant) unfolding (as all things) and folding back (in on itself). By the folding back of
one or other (spoke of) that (Wheel) and the unfolding of some (other), it appears to be
transformed into (all the Wheels,) beginning with a Wheel with one spoke (up to one)
with a thousand spokes or even countless (spokes, each) inserted into and contained
within one another or not (at all) (cf. below 3/267ab-267cd (3/266-267ab)). (One may
ask:) what of that? (The point is that) That one wheel unfolds as the Void (vyoman)

itself.

Or else (one can say that just) that (Void), containing within itself endless
(numbers of) Wheels of Being, manifests. Or else (from another perspective), that the

one Great Void contains endless numbers of Voids. Just as the one sky shines white,
blue and red, and just as these clouds shine in many ways, similarly, the free principle of

consciousness shines with its own inconceivable number of forms, nor are they,
therefore, anything at all.. MVV 1/943-949

TANTRĀLOKA

word has not been corroborated (by quoting the whole passage). (The Wheel

of) ‘countless spokesʼ is (such) because the world-orders etc. are endless. Even

so, itis not separate from (Bhairava), and so he says that (the Lord is) ‘endowed
with all the powersʼ. That is said (in the Maṅñgalaśāstra):

‘Power and the possessor of power are said to be two categories. His
powers are the entire universe, while the Great Lord is the possessor of

Surely, if the Lord alone is the ultimate reality (paramārtha) of all these
Wheels, since the purpose is served by just that one, why are many described in
each scripture (sśāstra)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

īTHtr̥ ī TBPTIĪ AṬTĪRTHTGTHT ||[22I

teṣām api ca cakrāṇāṁ svavargānugamātmanā || 112 ||
aikyena cakrago bhedas tatra tatra nirāpitaḥ |
The

difference

