
limited (saṁīkucita), it does perform the function which is appropriate to its own
(nature).

So

the

(idealist)

Buddhists

(say)

that:

‘this,

the

nature

of

consciousness, is only one, of which we see the many forms of its (continuous)
transformation as joy, sorrow and the rest.’ According to this line of reasoning
(it is clear that) they have arrived at (pratipanna) the metaphysical principle that
corresponds to the knowledge which is the activity of the intellect. Thus their
liberation (amounts) to the attainment of the principle of the intellect
(buddhitattva). That has been said (in the Svacchandatantra):

‘Brahmā resides there in the principle of the intellect as (its) lord. That,

they say, is the supreme, omniscient plane of the Buddhiṣṭs.’

Thus for them, transmigratory existence below the principle of the

intellect is quelled. And so in this way, it is rightly said that ‘liberates from

(only) that much (bondage).’ The followers of the Sāṁkhya have arrived at the
metaphysical principle that corresponds to the condition (avasthāna) in which
the individual soul abides as its own essential nature in a state of separation
from Nature which consists of pleasure and pain etc. Thus their liberation
(amounts) to the attainment of the principle of the individual soul (purṁstattva).
That is said (in the Svacchandatantra);

‘(The principle) of the followers of Sāmkhya is that of the individual

soul which is free of pleasure and pain etc."

appears to be an agent because of the agency of the qualities (guṇa) (of Nature). (The
Soul and Nature work together) like a blind man (who carries) a lame man (on his back
to direct him), so that Nature may be visible to the Self and the Self may act. Creation
proceeds from (their) union. (19-21)

In my opinion nobody is more modest than Nature. Knowing that “I have been

seen”, she no more comes within the sight of the Self. Thus verily the Self is never

bound, nor is he released, nor does he transmigrate. It is Nature, being the support of
this manifold creation, that migrates, is bound and is released. (61-62)

The one Self thinks “T have seen her” and therefore loses all interest. The other
(i.e. Nature) thinks “ḹ have been seen” and ceases to act further. Therefore, even if there
is still a connection, there is no reason for any further transformations.’ (66)

Delete ceyar.

! Read with MSs Ch, J, N, T, Ḍ: kṛtam akṛtaṁ

" The text appears to be lacunose here. The subject changes abruptly from a criticism
of the Sāṁkhya conception of liberation to that of the (idealist) Yogācāra Buddhists.
! SVṬ 11/68-69ab. Read tatrādhipatyena for tatrādhipatvena.

CHAPTER ONE

The view that maintains the existence of the Self (ātmadrṣṭi) is superior
to the view that denies the existence of the Self (nairātmyadṛṣṭi). Thus, the

knowledge of the followers of the Sāṁkhya with respect to the Buddhiṣṭs is a

(more) complete unfolding of insight, and so they attain the principle of the
individual self, which is above the principle of the intellect. And so in this way,
the point suggested in the previous verse has been established, namely that the

knowledge which (in its own perspective) is a complete unfolding of insight is

increasingly higher (as one progresses to higher systems)." Although the

knowledge of the individual soul as separate from Nature is in this way on an

equal footing (sāmya) for both the followers of the Sāṁkhya and those of

Paṭañjali (the author of the Yogasūtra), (the knowledge) of the followers of

Patañjali is superior to (that of) of the Sāṁkhya, because they meditate with

reverence on the Lord (Iśvara as the supreme soul). Thus it is said that they

aṭtain the level of the Principle of Necessity (niyatitattva), which is above that
of the individual soul. (t is said in the Svacchandatantra):

‘O mistress of the gods, the twenty-sixth (principle) is the supreme
plane in the Yogaśāstra.
In the same way, the supreme plane of the (Śaiva) Mausala and
Pāśupatas onwards is the attainment of correspondingly higher principles in

accord with the (degree of) excellence of (their) knowledge. That is said (there
in the Śvacchandatantra):

‘It is said that the principle of Māyā is that of the Mausula and Kāruka
(Paśupatas).” Again: ‘it is said that (the principle of) Īśvara is the supreme plane

of the Pāśupata vow.”

ṢVṬT 11/70ab. Kṣemarāja comments that: ‘their liberation amounts to only the
attainment of the power of consciousness, which is separate from Nature (that consists
of the experience of) pleasure and pain and the like.”

We have seen that ignorance is not considered here to be a total absence of

knowledge. Rather it is partial knowledge. The liberating knowledge a given system
teaches is full and complete from its own perspective. It is the ‘complete unfolding of
insight (pūrṇaprathā) it teaches.

“ This line corresponds to SYT 11/70cd. The following two correspond to SYT 11/71cd
and 71ab, respectively.
Kṣemarāja, commenting on 11/71ab, writes: ‘Itis said that (the Pāśupata) Tantra is of
two kinds: Lākula and Mausula.” Thus, the Pāśupata (Tantra) is of two kinds. As
Mausula will be explained, the Pāśupata vow that was established by Lākuleśa is

mentioned here. There the supreme plane is the attainment of the Īśvara principle. As
was stated before: ‘those who observe the divine Pāśupata vow and have conquered the

senses, are immersed in ashes, repeat Mantra and meditate (on the deity), go to Īśvara’s
plane.” (10/1169cd-1170ab)
In the case of Pāśupata (doctrine,) in which (ritual) action predominates, (it is
said that) ‘in the case of Mauṣula and Kāruka (Pāśupata), (the plane attained) is said to
be the principle of Māyā. (11/71cd)
The disciple of the venerable Lakuleśa, Musulenda, who came down (to earth)
again (as Lakuleśa did) in the place (called) Kārohaṇa, has taught particular Vows (to
observe) in their own particular scripture, that (entail) much ritual (kriyā) (performed) in

TANTRĀLOKA

In the same way there (in that context), the knowledge of the Buddhists

and the like liberates bit by bit from the impurity of Māyā (māyīyamala)

(according to the view of the particular Buddhist school), that of the Mausulas
from that of Karma as well, and that of the Pāśupatas also from the individual
one (āṇavamala), which is the mistaken notion that the Self is what is not the

Self. Thus it is said that (this kind of knowledge), ‘whether collectively or
individually (samāsavyāsābhyāṁ)ʼ, (liberates from (only) that much

(bondage)).

order to attain Kṣemeśa, Brahmā and Swāmin, who reside in the principle of Māyā.

(Thus) there (in that case) the supreme plane is the principle of Māyā itself.

And one who has entered the principle of Māyā
is ‘Kṣemeśa, Brahmā, and
Swamin, that supreme plane is (their level)’ (11/72ab) in the enumerated order

(respectively). Those also who are the kinds of Pāśupatas called Vaimala, intent on

practicing the aforementioned group of eight Pañcārthapramāṇas, are in another
(category). Their supreme plane is Tejeśa and Dhruveśa, who are present in the Īśvara

principle. Thus (the Tantra) says:

Tejeśa of the Vaimalas is the plane of Dhruva (taught in the) Pramāṇa
(Pāśupata scripture). (11/72cd)
(Itis said of) one who is devoutly dedicated (niṣṭha) to the Pramāṇa scriptures

of the Vaimala that:

‘To the degree that by his (ascetic) conduct (caryā) he observes the Vow of the
Skull up to when he dies, his Self pure with the knowledge (that comes) from initiation,

he goes to his own (corresponding) plane.” (11/73)

With the words ‘his Self pure with the knowledge (that comes) from initiation’,

a peculiarity is indicated with respect to the Mausula and Kāruka, who are dedicated

solely to the aforementioned Vow predominantly based on ritual. Their nature is,

respectively that of Tejeśa and Dhruva. As was said before: “‘Tejeśa and Dhruva is the
supreme plane of the Pramāṇas.” (10/1174)

Those who observe the Vow of the bones, namely, the skull etc., according to
the aforementioned teachings of Lākula, ‘sleep in (a bed of) ashes.” (Pāśpatasūtra 1/3)

Impelled thus by (such injunctions of the) Pāśupata scripture:
‘Dedicated to the recitation of Mantra, (smearing their body with) ashes and
ritual, they go to Īśvara’s plane.” (11/74ab)
Here amongst them, having gone beyond the condition of the principle of
Maāyā, which is the sphere of the Mausula etc., ‘Iśvara’s supreme plane is said to be
(realised) in (the observance of the Pāśupata vow. (I1/71ab) This is stated out of order

in order to present the types of Pāśupatas of the Mauṣula etc.’

Sanderson (2005b: 104 n 45) explains: ‘It is accepted that they [the Pāśupata]
have the power to lead their followers to liberation at the reality-level of Īśvara. This is a
lower liberation (aparā muktiḥ) than that attainable by those who have received full
initiation (nirvāṇadīkṣā or sādhakadīkṣā) in any Śaiva Tantra; but it is a true liberation.
The Pañcārthika Pāśupatas, the Lākulas (also called Mahāyratas and Kālamukhas) and
the Vaimalas are said to realize their scriptures’ salvific potential, but the Mausulas and
Kārukas are held to reach no further than the world-source (māyā), that is to say, the

reality-level that is the upper limit of the impure universe. Or though they follow valid
scriptures they have placed excessive emphasis on rites at the expense of gnosis. For
this view of the Pāśupata systems or elements of it, see below 37/13cd-15;

CHAPTER ONE

Niśvāsaguhya 7/251¢c-252b (f. 67 v 2-3), 71263c-264b (f. 67 v6), 7/269 (f. 68r1-2);
Dīkṣoṭtara 18/123-125, SvT 10/1134-1135b and commentary, SVT 11/70-74 and
commentary. A less generous view is found in the Saiddhāntika Paddhati of

Somaśambhu and in the Siddhāntika scripture Sarvajñānottara. According to the first
the Pāśupatas reach no higher than the world-source and according to the second they
reach not even this level, being ‘liberated’ in Time (kālaḥ), while the other non-Tantric
followers of Śaiva scripture, called Mahāvratas by the first and Somasiddhāntins by the

second, are conceded true liberation by being assigned to the level of Vidyā, just

beneath Īśvara, in the pure universe, see Somaśambhupadáhati vol. 3 p. 553 verse 8ab

and Sarvajñānottara f. 37r2. kevalārthavidaḥ kālaṁ prāpnuvanti jitendriyāḥ.’

See Dyczkowski, 1992a: 57-58. Kṣemarāja offers the following gradation of systems

commenting on PrHṛ 8: ‘The roles that (one reality assumes) are the (ultimate) states
(taught in) all the philosophies' (tadbhūmikāḥ sarvadarśanasthitayaḥ). 1) The
materialist Cārvākas consider the Self to be identical with the sentient body. 2) The
empirical Nyāya identify the Self with the intellect until it is liberated and is then

identified with the void of deep sleep. 3) The Mīmārṁsakas identify the Self with the

ego. 4) The Buddhists consider the activity of the intellect to be the Self. 5). Some
Vedāntins consider the vital breath (prāṇa) to be the Self. 6) Some Vedāntins and the

Mādhyamika Buddhists maintain that ‘nonbeing’ is ultimate reality. 7) The Vaiṣṇava

Pāñcarātra asserts that Viṣṇu is the supreme cause of all things. 8) The Sāṅkhya view

amounts to accepting the state of deep sleep, to which Vijñānākala perceivers are
subject, as ultimate. 9) Some Vedāntins consider Īśvara to be the highest principle

(taītva). 10) The Grammarians believe that the Speech of Vision on the level of the

Sadāśiva principle is supreme. 11) Tāntrikas (presumably the Śaivasiddhāntins)
maintain that the all-transcending Self
is supreme. 12) The Kaulas identify the Self with
the universe. 13) Trika Śaivites maintain that the Self is equally both immanent and

transcendent.

Abhinava dedicates all of chapter thirty below to expound and justify the view
that all philosophical and religious traditions of India, at least, belong to one stream of

insight that originates from Śiva, and so, one may observe, they are all implicitly

ultimately Saiva. Accordingly, they all possess some degree of truth and so do lead to
levels of attainment, but, Abhinava maintains, only Trika leads to the highest level.

Thus it is, in actual fact, the ultimate goal of the lower ones also (30/31-32, see also
37/1-17 and MVV 1/15 ff). AIl other schools stop short at the level they consider to be

the supreme one and so are misguided by the mistaken belief that they have attained the

highest form of liberation. Thus, although their followers do make progress by their
teachings, the same teachings ultimately obstruct their further progress. Indeed, they can

be said to be deceiving themselves because, although they are just fragments of the one

tradition (30/38ab (30/37cd)), they each mistakenly believe themselves to be all of it.

This approach to understanding one’s own school in relation to others is not at all

peculiar to Trika. Indeed, as Torella (2011: 31) notes, the outright rejection of all rival

views is not common in any school of Indian philosophy. ‘Much more widespread,’ he
writes, ‘is a sort of limited acceptance, provided that the rival school – to which a

certain validity is ascribed - is willing to take its place on a rigidly hierarchical scale, at
the top of which one’s own system is enthroned.’ Thus the Siddhāntin Rāmakaṇṭha, who

was an older contemporary of Abhinavagupta, offers a different gradation in his

Paramokṣanirāsakārikā (Stanzas concerning the Refutation of the (views of) Others

regarding Liberation). Most of the twenty odd schools to which he refers are obscure;

nonetheless, the principle of ordering systems in an ascending sequence culminating, of

course, in his own Siddhānta Śaivism, is the same. This is also the standard way in

which Tantric traditions posit themselves in relation to others at the level of revelation.
For example, the Kubjikā Tantras locate other traditions in a hierarchy arranged along

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely, (one may ask,) why is it that even when bondage has fallen
away in this way, as befits one’s own philosophy, one is not liberated? With this
doubt in mind, he says:

īāāTRṬĪTISTTSVIGTTJTTTTR’T

3Tjṝ TJ Trīq āārāzšaāsīā: || 3%I
tasmān mukto ’py avacchedād avacchedāntarasthiteḥ |
amukta eva muktas tu sarvāvacchedavarjitaḥ || 34 ||
Therefore, even though (someone may be) free from (one) limitation

(avaccheda), he is not liberated because other limitations continue to exist.

He who is truly liberated is free of all limitations. (34)

the goddess's body, who is thus all of them, with the highest, her own, at the summit

(see Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 3, 155). The rise from one to the other is marked by an

ascent through a graded series of initiations. This approach is so basic and common that

as new systems develop, they accommodate the others that preceded them on their own
ladders of attainment, just as they may add higher layers of worlds or principles

culminating in their own. Thus, this way of presenting other systems and realities may
serve, in certain cases and to some degree, as an aid for historians to gain an
understanding of their relative age.

The sense of ‘limitation’ here is extroverted awareness centred on objectivity, that

entails a contraction or limitation of subjective consciousness. It is the opposite of the

reflective awareness of supreme subjective consciousness that, free of limitation, is

integral (pūrṇa) and free (svatantra). While the latter is one and without gradations,
there are degrees of limitation corresponding to the degree of objectivity that separation

from subjectivity entails. Abhinava sums up the teaching of verses 23-26 and 32-34 in

his Tantroccaya as follows:
‘It is said in the scriptures that ignorance is the cause of bondage (MVT
1/23cd). (What this means is that) the instrumental cause of the world of transmigration
is an upside-down understanding (of one’s true nature) (viparītaniścaya) (such that what

is not the Self is identified with what is the Self, and what is the Self is identified with
what is not the Self, i.e. the body). And so that is said to be the Impurity (which binds
the soul), and (this) impurity is indeed nothing but ignorance. Thus (it is said that):
‘When the power of complete knowledge arises, all that is uprooted..

When knowledge is not complete, (the degree of) liberation is consonant with

the degree in which there is correct knowledge, and that is entirely due to the

manifestation of the corresponding state of subjectivity that transcends it. When
knowledge is complete, the subject who transcends all things and is all things manifests
as being of the nature of Śiva Himself. For this reason, there is no ignorance anywhere

in any aspect of that (supreme subject). And (so it is said that) liberation (is achieved)

when knowledge (i.e. one's own consciousness), in which all Impurity has been
deṣṭroyed, manifests. Liberation is nothing else but this. Rather, liberation is the light of

the principle of consciousness, which is pure, free, complete, all things and beyond all

things, (and that manifests) when the Impurity of ignorance has ceased. For this reason,
Taṃm clarifying all that should be known by means of this treatise (śāstra).

CHAPTER ONE

‘A Path is the cause of bondage.'
According to this teaching (of the
Svacchandatantra), a Path is binding to varying degrees (tāvat).” There the
Buddhists and the like are liberated from it (to some extent) by the falling away

of bondage up to the end of the principle of the intellect, but even so, ‘because
other limitations continue to exist of the Path above it, they are not (truly)
liberated. Thus, they are emitted again at the beginning of a (new cycle of)

creation, and so transmigratory existence (again) comes into being (for them), as

the cause of bondage has not been totally destroyed. As (Abhinavagupta) will

say:

‘At the beginning of a (new) day (of creation), Śrīkaṇṭha again emits
those who have mastered the Sāṁkhya or the Veda and the rest. Therefore, this

kind of liberation is not proper (and complete) (samyak).

Similarly, (we read) in the venerable Svacchandatantra:

‘Worldly souls are subject to repeated creation and destruction.
Mounted on the wheel of transmigratory existence, they are like (the jars of) a

water wheel (ghaṭayantra).

Having explained this in general, the following is said in particular with
the intention of characterizing one who has been liberated by Buddhist and other
subordinate philosophies:
‘Freed from bondage, the Lord binds him again. The bondage due to the
world of transmigration (binds) repeatedly as long as he does not attain God.’
° SYṬ 10/358d. Also quoted below ad 16/207cd-208ab (208).

See below, 1/77ab-80ab (1/77-80). The Path (adhvan) consists of two sets of three
parallel series of realities. They mark stages of emanation in the descending sequence

and withdrawal in ascent. One set of three is the objective order denoted by Speech

(vācya), and the parallel set of three are the corresponding forms of Speech that are their
denotators (vācaka). The denotated are, from gross to subtle, the world-orders
(bhuvana) (described in chapter 8 below), the metaphysical principles (tattva)
(described in chapter 9 below), and the spheres of the Forces (kalā) (described in
chapter 11). They are contained in one another, as are their corresponding denotators,
Mantras, parts of Mantras (pada), and phonemes (varṇa), respectively. The individual

soul traverses this Path, step by step, to reach Śiva in the course of initiation by means

of the denotators. Although the Path is ultimately liberating if one ascends through it,
the stages along it when descending represent the factors which progressively bind the
soul as they constitute the means and factors that make binding worldly experience

possible. Piled one above the other, the further down the soul is on the Path, the greater

the degree of bondage. Conversely, as he rises, step by step, he is freed of the form and

degrees of bondage at the lower levels he has abandoned. See note to 6/34-35 and
Dyczkowski 1992a: 102 ff. and for a detailed exposition, Padoux 1990: 330 ff.
" Below 6/152cd-153ab (152); also quoted below ad 9/187.

SYT 11/185cd-186ab.

ṢVṬ 12/51cd. MS Kh and Ch read: yāvad dehaṁ na vindati as long as he does not
attain the bodyʼ and MS J reads: yāvat mokṣaṁ na vindati as long as he does not attain

liberation’. The SvT and commentary supply the context:

TANTRĀLOKA

Whereas, only one for whom all the bondage of the Path has ceased

entirely (without residue) is visibly (sākṣā) a liberated soul. As he says: ‘he

who is (truly) liberated is free of all limitations’. As is said (in the
Svacchandatantra):

‘the Śaivites supreme plane has gone forth (beyond) the entire Path.!
So too: ‘the accomplished Śaivite shines on the head of (all) others.

(Truly) liberated, he does not come again (here) below when (there is a new)

creation.’

The instrumental means (nimitta) here (to achieve total liberation) is

this kind of (completely) full (and perfect) knowledge. So he says:

‘The body is made of the twenty-four (principles) and possesses senses.’

(12/48cd) One should know that to be made of Prakṛti (and that) it impels (both)

Dharma and Adharma. ʻBy the activities of the mind, speech and body it accrues

Dharma etc., (whereas) I (who am the Self) am devoid of the qualities (of Prakṛti) and
am not an agent. (12/49abc) Thus one who is separate from Prakṛti (experiences that):
‘“T am not subject to the bondage of Prakṛti.”” (12/49d) ‘“ consider,” all this is only to
be ‘the product of the activity of Prakṛti.' (12/50a) Ī ascertain that it is impelled by
means of the intellect and the rest (of the senses). By the arising of this kind of
discrimination ‘one is released from the (binding) latent impression (of past action).

(12/50b) A latent impression is a residual trace (of past action) (saṅtskāra). The one

who ‘is released is the Sāṅkhya monk. That is this ‘ḹ have taught this knowledge of the
Sāṅkhya by virtue of which one is liberated from Prakṛti.’ In a short time one is separate
(from that).

‘Freed from bondage, the Lord binds him again. The bondage due to the world

of transmigration (binds) repeatedly as long as he does not attain God. The Lord is the

agent of emanation, who binds all living beings.’ (12/51-52ab)

As insentient Prakṛti cannot assume the agency of (the sentient) individual
soul, and that (soul) does not accept (its association with Prakṛti), (then) even when they
are in contact, the universe would not arise. (However,) as long as the Lord does not
assume (His role as) the agent of their release from bondage, although liberated by the

Sāṅkhya (teaching), (the soul) returns back again because a (full) knowledge of reality
has not arisen. SvT 11/316-12/157 is drawn from the Niśvāsanaya (Sanderson 2001:

28).

V ṢVṬ 1I/7Acd.

Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, N, T, and D: mārdhnītareṣāṁ for mārdhnātareṣāṁ.

Jayaratha ofien uses the word ‘nimitta’ in his commentary. It literally means an

‘instrumental cause’, ‘means’, ‘reason’ or ‘purpose’. t is the means by which something
is done or achieved and the reason for it. It is the ‘attendant’ or ‘instrumental cause’ of

the primary or ultimate cause (kāraṇa) of something. In this case, the ultimate cause
(kāraṇa) of liberation is Śiva’s grace. Everything else that may serve as a means to it is
an instrumental, attendant cause – even full and perfect knowledge. The meaning of the
word ‘nimitta’ does include the sense of ‘means’ to something, but it is so insofar as it is
an instrtumental cause to attain it. The term ‘upāya’ literally means a ‘means’. In this

context, it is a means to realisation. Any means to realisation ~ upāya - is such by the

power of Siva’s grace, and so one could say that it is an ‘instrumental cause’ – nimiṭta –
of realisation. However, the term ‘upāya’ carries with it an added essential connotation
thatit is a consciously applied means to attaining or gaining something. A ‘nimitta’ is an

CHAPTER ONE

ṃq 3rHTTST

JGTTĒT || 3 , 1A
yat tu jñeyasatattvasya jñānaṁ sarvātmanojjhitam |

avacchedair na tat kutrāpy ajñānaṁ satyamuktidam || 35 |

Knowledge of the object of knowledge (jñeya), along with the
metaphysical principles that constitute it (satattva), free in all respects from
limitations, (does not admit the persistence of) ignorance anywhere. (As
such,) it bestows true liberation. (35)
The meaning is that the essence of the reflective awareness of supreme
subjectivity (ahantā) is ‘free in all respects’ and in every way of even just a

latent trace of ‘limitations’, that is, (the many forms of) reflective awareness of

objectivity (idantā) that contract (consciousness). Thus, because it is the full
(and perfect) unfolding of insight (pārṇaprathā), it ‘(does not admit the

persistence of) ignorance anywhere’, and so bestows ‘true liberation’ʼ, which

is different from what (just) appears to be liberation. The meaning is

that

(liberated consciousness) shines as the oneness of the subject whose essence
is
the self-reflective awareness of (pure) ‘T’ (consciousness).

Now he analyses the nature of the knowledge and ignorance he has
introduced.

Concerning the Knower, Knowledge and Ignorance

īTST-TCaRT JGT JGĀĀT |

far ũīṁtzaṁrēī kravā7 1| 3ē 1
Jjñānājñānasvarūpaṁ yad uktaṁ pratyekam apy adaḥ |
dvidhā pauruṣabauddhatvabhidoktaṁ śivaśāsane || 36 ||

According to Śaiva doctrine (śivaśāsana), the knowledge and

ignorance mentioned (here) are each of two kinds, namely, spiritual

attendant cause, reason or even just an incidental cause for the execution of the

primary

cause of an effect.
“ 1 have followed Jayaratha’s explanation, reading together ‘sarvātmanojjhitam
avacchedair’. However, it seems better to read, as Gnoli does, sarvatmanā as referring

to jñānam, in which case the translation would be ‘(knowledge of the

object) in all

respects and free from limitations’. This is indeed the point Abhinava has been making
the past few verses, namely, that knowledge of that which needs be known is only fully

liberating when it is complete in all respects. The object – jñieya – literally

‘that which

needs be known’ is ultimately Śiva Himself. Complete knowledge in all respects of Śiva
is liberation itself.

TANTRĀLOKA

(pauruṣa) (which is constitutive of individual consciousness) and intellectual

(bauddha) (which is on the level of the conscious mind). (36)

‘Śaiva doctrine (Śśivaśāsana)ī is the Supreme Lord’s teaching
(pārameśvara-darśana) in the form of the five currents (of scripture). This is

Eṣsentially, spiritual knowledge (paurusajñāna) is knowledge of the Self (puruṣa).
Conversely, spiritual ignorance is ignorance of the Self. Intellectual knowledge
(bauddhajñāna) and ignorance are the conceptual insight and lack of it that correspond

to them. Sanderson (1992: 290 n 38) refers to them as being ‘constitutive of individual
consciousness' and knowledge or ignorance ‘at the level of the conscious mind,
respectively. As we shall see, the two types of knowledge and ignorance work together.
Abhinava adopts this concept of two-fold ignorance from the Siddhānta,
developing it further. Thus, for example, the Siddhāntin Rāmakaṇṭha writes in his
commentary (vṛtti) on MPA vidyāpāda 2/2cd-3:
dvividham ajñānaṁ pauruṣaṁ bauddhaṁ ca | atra yāt pauruṣam
apratipattirūpaṁ dravyajanyaṁ tannivr̥tiḥ kāraṇanivṛttpārvikā śā rasya mukhyaṁ
prayojaṇam ucyate | adhyavasāyaphalatvād anadhigataviṣaye vijñānam upajanac
chāstraṁ buddher eva saṁskārakaṁ yuktam |

‘Ignorance is of two kinds, namely, spiritual (which is the ignorance that is
constitutive of individual consciousness) (pauraṣa), and intellectual (which is on the
level of the conscious mind) (bauddha). There (in that case), the spiritual one (which is
constitutive of individual consciousness) that is generated by the substance (which is

obscuring Impurity – mnala) is essentially the lack of the attainment (of liberated

consciousness). The main purpose of scripture is (its) cessation heralded by the
cessation of (its) cause. (Knowledge of) scripture has as its fruit (correct) apprehension,
and so, generating knowledge when an object is unknown, it is reasonable (to say that it)

refines the intellect itself (not just thought). . . .

. arabdhakāryakarmabhogoparodhato buddhyādīnāṁ dīkṣānivartyatvābhāvān na

dīkṣayā nivartayituṁ śakyaṁ bauddham anadhyavasāyātmakaṁ, tad eva śāstreṇa
nivartyata iti buddhiṣaṁskārakaṁ śāstram uktam | ṣā ca saṁskr̥tā na punaḥ
avidyāsmitārāga-dveṣābhiniveśātamabhiḥ
saṁsārahetubhūtaiḥ
kleśaiḥ puruṣam
anubadhnātīti śreyohetuḥ saṁpadyata iti |

Intellectual (ignorance), which is the lack of apprehension of the intellect and
the rest (of the components of the mind), cannot be brought to an end by initiation,
because they are obstructed by the experience (generated) by Karma that has begun to

take effect, and (that is) not what can be destroyed by initiation. That particular
(ignorance) is brought to an end by (the knowledge of) scripture. Thus, scripture is said

to be what purifies the intellect. And when that (intellect) has been purified, the
individual soul is not bound again by the impediments that are the cause of
transmigratory existence, namely, ignorance (avidyā), egoism (asmitā), attachment
(raga), aversion (dveṣa) and tenacious (clinging to mundane existence — abhiniveṣa).

Thus (the soul) attains the cause of the supreme good.”

According to the Yogasūtra, as noted in Monier-Williams’s Sanskrit

dictionary, there are five kleśas, that is, impediments to progress in Yoga. They are: 1)
ignorance (avidyā), 2) egoism (asmitā), 3) desire (rāga), 4) aversion (dveṣa), and 5)
tenacious clinging to mundane existence (abhiniveṣa).

‘“ Note that Jayaratha understands Śaivism here to be only that of these Tantras.

However, Abhinava uses the term ‘śāsana’ in a general sense. Thus, in MVV 1/192ab,

CHAPTER ONE

the meaning. That is said everywhere without distinction (in all the scriptures).
He defines that (ignorance):

T Jāī dāāī TGTGĀ TīTsvrdi] |

GuikitēaiatUEe|ētuītstz- HIEIĪ

Eilēr‘ēeezEsREtK REE7Ugūt:Ḥ.

tatra puṅṁso yad ajñānaṁ malākhyaṁ tajjam apy atha |
svapūrṇacitkriyārūpaśivatāvaraṇātmakam || 37 ||
sañṅkocidrkkriyārūpaṁ tat paśor avikalpitam |
Now, there (the innate spiritual) ignorance of the individual soul
that is called ‘Impurity’ (mala) is born from that (supreme perceiver who is

Śiva Himself), but even so it is the veil that obscures (the individual

soul’s) own Śiva-nature, which is complete (and all-embracing)
consciousness and (unobstructed) action. It is the (essentially) contracted
(state) of the knowledge and action of the fettered soul. (Inherent in the
fettered state,) it is not a product of (binding) thought constructs

(avikalpita) (as is the case with intellectual ignorance). (37-38ab)

he refers to Vaiṣṇavism and Buddhism as
‘sśāsanas’. Moreover, those who are initiated
Śaivites (śaivasaṁskṛtāḥ) are ‘people who have been properly initiated into

Parameśvaraśāsanaśāstra. Theṣe also include those who belong to the Pāśupata
Atimārga, Krama, Kula and Trika and the like. AIl of them, he says, attain the same
liberation (apavarga). The only difference is that in systems like the Krama and Trika

this is achieved quickly, whereas in the Pāśupata and Siddhānta the goal is reached
slowly ‘through a course of graded meditations in which one ascends from one reality-

level to the next, and by means of various complex rituals.' MVV 1/195-196 translation
by Sanderson (2005b: 105). Note that other forms of Śaivism, such as we find in the

Purāṇas, that do not require initiation, are not included here.
My translation follows Jayaratha’s interpretation, as it must, however this is not the
only possible meaning. The problem is the understanding of the expression ‘tajjam’
‘born from that’. Jayaratha understands ‘that’ to refer to Śiva. However, the pronoun

‘that’ (understood to be the correlate of yat) most probably refers to the ignorance which
is the Impurity of the individual soul. Moreover, what is born from that is the veil that
obscures the soul's Śiva nature. Thus another translation, that does not take into account
Jayaratha’s interpretation, would be as follows:
‘Now, there that (the innate spiritual) ignorance of the individual soul which is
called ‘Impurity (mala) is that from which is also born the veil that obscures (the
individual soul’s) own Śiva-nature, which is complete (and all-embracing)
consciousness and (unobstructed) action. (Its) form is the contracted (state) of

knowledge and action. That (ignorance is) not something conceived by the fettered

soul.”

Spiūtual ignorance (pauruṣājñāna) is not ignorance of something. It is the
fundamental impurity of the individual soul (āṇavamala) which is its state or condition

as ignorant of its own true essential Śiva nature. Although it relates to the individual

soul (puruṣa), it obscures Śiva’s real state, which is the complete and perfect knowledge
(jñāna) and total freedom of action (kriyā) that constitute his Śiva nature (Śivatā). This
happens because Siva freely chooses to replace them with the limited, imperfect

TANTRĀLOKA

knowledge (jñāna) and action (kriyā) of the individual soul when Śiva chooses to

contract down His unlimited consciousness to the limited consciousness of the
individual soul.
Although the fundamental impurity of the individual soul (āṇavamala), which

is ignorance, gives rise to the limited consciousness that generates and is grounded in

thought constructs, it is itself free of thought constructs. This ignorance does not consist
of the fettered soul’s self-conceived mistaken notions (avikalpita). Preceding the
activity of the intellect, it is the inhibited, limited self-awareness which binds the soul
which he, unthinkingly, considers to be natural to him. For him, it is as if it were the
state of consciousness free of thought constructs (nirvikapa). It is not a notion or
judgement (adhyavasāya). Spiritual ignorance, which confines the individual
consciousness to the limited perception of objects viewed in relationship to itself as the
individual perceiver, comes into play in the first moment of perception
(prathamālocana). Perception, according to the Kashmiri Śaiva teachings, takes placein

a number of stages, variously analysed. Most basically, there are two. Oneis the initial

moment of perception which is free of thought constructs. t is just the pure sensing, as
it were, of the object. It is known directly, without any intervening conception of what it

is. In the next phase, the object or objects are identified and defined as what they are
commonly known to be, for example, a table or a chair, externally, or the feeling of
pleasure or pain, inwardly. The second phase involves the development of thought
constructs that label or ‘name’ the entity perceived. In this second phase, objects are

defined by mutual exclusion from one another (‘this is a table, not anything else’) and
the perceiver. In the first phase, there is just a pure awareness of something within

consciousness, not separately defined from it or anything else. This means that it is

known according to its true nature. It is here that the fundamental Impurity, which is
ignorance of the true nature of reality, namely, omniform and transcendental
consciousness, operates. It is due to that that in the second phase we lose awareness of

the essential conscious nature of all that we perceive, and the thought constructs through
which it is identified obscure it. Thus, careful attention to perception is a major practice
of the Trika Śaiviṣm Abhinava teaches. If we can manage to attend to the first moment
of perception when we first look at something, we will feel Śiva consciousness and so
experience our true Void (i.e. empirically indefinable, unconditioned) nature, free of
duality. The Vijñānabhairava, for example, teaches several meditations that strengthen

awareness of the first moment. One is simply to gaze out at an open expanse, resting in

the pure awareness of just ‘seeing’. As is taught there: “One should cast one’s gaze on

(an open stretch of) land devoid of trees, mountains, walls and the like. When the mind
is (thus) absorbed (and dissolves away), one becomes free of the fluctuations (of
thought).” (VBh 60). Another common practice is centring. In this case one needs to
find the emptiness, free of thought constructs, of the centre between two perceptions.
The VBh teaches: “when perceiving two entities (or states), having (perceived and)
meditated (on them), rest in the centre between them. Having abandoned both

simultaneously, Reality ‘shines in the centre.’” (ibid. 61) Similarly: ‘When one thing has

been abandoned (ryakte), and consciousness has been (firmly) checked, it should not
move on to something else. Then what is beyond contemplation (atibhāvanā) blossoms
forth, by virtue of the state (free of thought) in the centre (between them)

(tanmadhyabhāvena). (ibid.

62)

Commenting on this verse from the VBh, Swami Lakshmanjoo explains that

‘the fundamental Impurity of spiritual ignorance operates here in the Void of the Centre,
contracting it down so much that it practically disappears so that all that apparently

remains is the second phase of thought construct formation which takes place in the

intellect. Thīs is the ignorance through which the Lord obscures Himself out of His own

CHAPTER ONE

The word ‘now’ is in the sense of the next (matter following on from

what has just been discussed). Thiṣ intended (sense) is that after the (initial)
enunciation (of the subject, that is, knowledge and ignorance), the occasion (has

come to state their) defining characteristics and examine (them). ‘There’, out

of the two kinds of knowledge and ignorance, (it is said that) ‘that (fundamental

Impurity) of the individual soul originated as the supreme (form of ignorance).”
The meaning (of this statement) is that (spiritual ignorance), the nature of which

has (just) been stated, (and is otherwise) called ‘Impurity (mala), is born, that

is, arisen from Śiva Himṣelf, the supreme subject who is endowed with
unlimited knowledge and action that are (unique to him, and) not in common
with any other (lower perceiver). The Supreme Lord Himself, abandoning, by

virtue of His own freedom (to do anything He chooses), (His own) full (and

complete) capacity to know and act etc., may thereby cover Himself with the
emergence of (the fundamental) impurity of the soul (āṇavamala), which is
ignorance (akhyāti). That is said (in the Paramārthasāra):

‘The Great Lord’s supreme freedom, which is (His) bringing about what
is most difficult to do, is the goddess Māyāśakti and the enveloping cover of
Siva’s own nature. Due to the grip of Māyā, the consciousness (bodha), which
is the individual soul, of one who is sullied (with the fundamental Impurity of

ignorance), is the fettered soul.”!
And as he will say:

‘Therefore, (the varied) expansion (vijrmbhita) of Impurity is only (an

expression of) the freedom (inherent in the Lord’s) own nature.

free will.’ Concerning the search for the centre, see below, comm. and notes to 1/83ab84cd (1/83cd-85ab), cf. also 1/181cd-182ab.

“’ In the course of formal argument, after the initial enunciation of a subject, its
definition and examination follow. See below 1/248ab (1/247ca) ft.

Read -yogiparapramātṛ- for -yogi parapramātṛ-.
PS 15-16ab. Of the many words for consciousness, bodha, serves to denote

consciousness as the state of ‘awakened’ (buddha) consciousness that is free of thought
constructs. According to the PTLvṛ (p.2), it is its condition ‘devoid of thought
constructs’ (avikalpatva) and ‘plenitude’ (pūṟrnatva). This is the true, essential
‘individual soul’ (puṁs). The one who is ‘sullied by Impurity’ (malin) is the individual
soul obscured by fundamental Impurity who, as such, is liable to be gripped by Māyā.

As the following line of the PS declares, when that happens, he is subject to conditioned
agency and knowledge, attachment, time, and the necessity of suffering the
consequences of his Karma. As such, he is the fettered soul (pasu). But even so, the
nucleus or essential core, as it were, is consciousness free of thought constructs, as it is

of these limitations that produce them and all else associated with their existence.

Stripped of Māyā and its consequences, the naked soul sleeps. Although always one

with Śiva, it continues to be sullied by its very condition of minuteness (aṇutva), even

without Māyā. So this consciousness, which is the individual soul, is sullied by this, the
most fundamental Impurity, which is the lack of knowledge (akhyāti) of its true
unconditioned nature, and is the prerequisite for Māyā to operate and, along with it,

Karma.
Below, 9/83cd.

TANTRĀLOKA

The fettered soul is conjoined to the three impurities, that is, the

fundamental one pertaining to the soul (āṇavamala) and the rest. The

knowledge that that perceiver possesses is the perception (ālocana) of the
manifestations (ābhāsa) (that take place) within (specific instances of) cognition

(dṛk) and action that are determined (and fixed) (niyata), because (they are)
conditioned (avacchinna) by time and space etc. It is the Supreme Lord
Himself who again conjoins to His own condition as an individual soul, which
He assumes by abandoning (His) omniscience and the rest, the capacity for
limited action (kalā) etc., by virtue of which he (as the individual soul)
possesses a limited power to know and act.™' That is said (in the following
passage in the Mālinīvijayottara);
That (power of Māyā) generated the principle which is the Force (of

limited agency) (kalātattva), due to union with which the individual soul has

come to possess the capacity (to be an) agent. Then (that Force) emitted (the
principles of the capacity for) Knowledge (vidyā) and Attachment (rāga). (This)

knowledge discerns the action (karman) of that (individual soul), its effect and
instrument (of its activity).” Attachment (rāga) also makes him take pleasure
(and be attached) to his own worldly pleasures, even if they are impure. (Next)

Necessity (niyati) conjoins the individual soul to (the fruits of) his own action
(karman). (Finally) Time, which is determined (by units) beginning with a

moment (tuti), also measures out (and conditions) (kalayati) him.

(As here,) so too in the initial enunciation (of the subject at hand),

which is the nature of knowledge, the nature of ignorance was described first in

order to establish what must be eliminated.

Literally ‘avacchinna’ means ‘divided upʼ or ‘cut off.

Read with MS T: niyatajñatva- for niyataṁ jñatva-. The one eternal, omniscient and

omnipotent consciousness, which is completely independent and requires nothing,

initially, out of its own free will, empties itself of all its attributes to become the

contracted individual consciousness which, the very opposite of the original fully
expanded consciousness, is the individual soul devoid of all the former's powers and

attributes. Then, again out of its own freedom, it infuses into the soul a limited power to
act and know, and so it becomes a limited agent and perceiver. To this are added
attachment, time and the constraints of the law of Karma. See below, note 1,454.
MVT 1/27-29. The sequence in which these five obscuring coverings (kañcuka) are

generated from Maāyā is not uniform in all the sources. For a detailed discussion, see
below, 9/167cd-213.

“ MSs K, Ch, J, h, N, T and D read punah for pumān.
“ MV 1/28ab is also quoted in TĀv ad 9/192cd-193. The translation of this line follows
Abhinava’s implicit explanation of it in TĀ 9/192cd-193. Another possible translation

could be: ‘(This limited) knowledge discerns the action (karman) of that (individual
soul), so that (it may act) as the cause (that accomplishes) the effect (which is the aim
of) that (individual soul) (kārya).”
“É A “tuṭi’ is an eighth of a second. As in this case, the word may also denote

generically a very small span of time.

MV 1/29cd is paraphrased as TĀ 9/201cd and quoted in TĀy ad 9/201cd-202ab. MV
1/27abc is quoted in TĀv ad 9/174 and ad 9/189cd-190ab. MV 1/27-29 is quoted ad

1/37-38ab and MV 1/27a ad 9/40cd-41ab.

Read with all the MSs: ucchedyatva- for avaśyocchedyatva-

CHAPTER ONE

Surely (one may ask,) it is said that the knowledge of the individual soul
(in the sense of its capacity to know), which is essentially an activity of the

intellect, is devoid of thought constructs. (Well then,) how is it that it is not
(considered to) occur (within) a part (aṁśa) of the intellect? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

tad ajñānaṁ na buddhyaṁśo ‘dhyavasāyādyabhāvataḥ || 38 II

That (spiritual) ignorance is not a part of the intellect because (it

does not entail a specific determinate) ascertainment (adhyavasāya) (of
something) and the rest (of the cogitation associated with that
ascertainment). (38cd)

In this way also, according to, for example, the dictum: ‘the intellect is
(conceptual) ascertainment (adhyavasāya)’, the primary nature of the intellect
is ascertainment. If that is absent, how can (spiritual ignorance) possess the
(same) nature (dharma) as that (intellect)? Thus he says (what follows).

Definitions of the Forms of Knowledge and Ignorance

TāṀŪhsraīvaāṁtdtēriāāī a] || 38 1|

| o||

aham ittham idaṁ vedmīty evam adhyavasāyinī |

satkañcukābilāṇūtthapratibimbanato yadā |l| 39 ||

dhīr jāyate tadā tādṛgjñānam ajñānaśabditam |

‘°l The limited capacity of the soul to know is essentially its ignorance because, as we

have seen, ignorance is here considered to be a limited form of knowledge. Moreover, it

is not in itself a thought construct, although, operating through the intellect, it generates
them. The question here then is why should this limited capacity to know not be an
attribute of the intellect and so be an aspect of it? If it is, then this aspect of the intellect
would be free of thought constructs.

saṁKā 23a. The yuktidīpikā provides a definition of the term adhyavasāya:

8aurevāyaṁ .puruṣa evāyam iti yaḥ pratyayo niścayo ‘arthagrahaṇaṁ s0
‘adhyavasāyaḥ. ‘The perception (pratyaya), that is, assessment (niścaya), which is the
act of knowing an object, (of the sort) ‘this is indeed a cow’ and ‘this is indeed a man’
(and not anything else), is ascertainment.” The ‘ascertainment’ (adhyavasāya) of the

empirical nature of things is conceptual, and is the specific function of the intellect
which marks the culmination of sensorial cognition, whether it be of an outer or an inner
imagined object. The latter can be recollected from the past or newly formed. Again, the

knowledge that 2 + 2 = 4 is also an intellectual, conceptual ascertainment. It is a result

of the intelligence (pratibhā) the intellect possesses by virtue of the reflection of

consciousness within it.

TANTRĀLOKA

bauddhaṁ tasya ca tat pauṁsnaṁ poṣaṇīyaṁ ca postr ca || 40 |I
If the notion (dhī) that ascertains (adhyavāsayanī) (the nature of an

entity as) “I know this (to be) thus” arises, (generated) from the reflection

(of the light of the Self) in the (mirror of the intellect) of the individual soul
(anu) who is sullied by the six obscuring coverings (kañcuka), (but does
not develop further,) then that kind of (intellectual) knowledge is said to be

ignorance. Its (underlying corresponding spiritual ignorance,) which is that

of the individual soul (itself), is nourished by it, and (the spiritual ignorance
nourished by it in its turn) nourishes it (intellectual ignorance). (Thus,

spiritual and intellectual ignorance feed on one another). (39-40)

(The existence of the group of) ‘six obscuring coverings’ is the reason
why (the intellect) is capable of ascertaining in this way (the nature of an entity
perceived through the senses). The six obscuring coverings are described (in the
following way in the Paramārthasāra):

‘ See below, 1/215 and 9/238.

The six obscuring coverings (kañcuka) that envelop the individual fettered soul are,
in the order accepted by Abhinavagupta, beginning with the one closest to the individual

soul: 1) Māyā, 2) the limited power of action (kalā) (also called the Force (of limited
agency)), from which are generated 3) the limited power of knowledge (vidyā),
4) Attachment (rāga), 5) Necessity (niyati) (which is essentially the law of Karma and
causality), and 6) Time (kāla) (see below, 9/204). 1) Māyā is the first covering which

obscures consciousness, of which the others are aspects derived from it. Māyā limits

consciousness universally, infusing into it a sense of duality, difference, ignorance,

illusion and conflict. Initially, it removes all the power and awareness of consciousness,

plunging it, as it were, into a state of deep sleep. Subsequently, it revives it into the

limited condition of the individual soul by generating the following five coverings.
2) The first of these is called ‘kalā’ which is the limited power of action or agency the
individual soul possesses. The word ‘kalā’ means energy or power, but not complete

power, just a part (kalā). Thīs limited power is infused into the fettered soul, allowing it

to act to a limited extent. However, its limited actions, although possible because it
possesses some degree of freedom, are binding. Accordingly, I sometimes call it the

Force (of limited agency) (kalā). The remaining four coverings are derived from it (see
below, 9/203). 3) Just as the infusion of the power of limited action makes the soul a

limited agent, the power of limited knowledge makes it a limited knower. Although the
soul is essentially consciousness, as is Śiva Himself, its knowledge is limited. The soul
which is initially so contracted that it has no capacity to know anything, is given some
power to do so by this obscuring covering, which thus illumines it in a limited way even

as it obscures the inherent omniscience of the soul’s innate conscious nature. 4) The
next covering is called ‘rāga’, which means ‘attachment’. It is the craving and
atṭachment the fettered soul feels for particular things, accompanied by the fear of losing
them. 5) Necessity (niyati) is the principle of constraint (which is the literal meaning of
the word) that ensures that specific karmic causes give rise to their consequences. It is

due to this that the individual soul (or indeed any entity) is ‘fixed’ and ‘constrained’ to
its own specific, limited nature so that only specific causes give rise to their respective

effects. One may equate it with Natural Law. 6) Finally, time is the sense of the passage

of time to which the individual soul feels itself to be subject and formats its experience

in temporal terms. See below 9/167cd-213 for a detailed exposition of these six
principles.

CHAPTER ONE
‘(The individual soul) is bound because it is under the sway of the

power of time, (its) limited capacity to act (kalā), and the necessity (of having to
bear the consequence of Karma) (niyati), (as well as) attachment and the limited

capacity to know (vidyā). (The result is perceptions of the sort,) “‘just now 1

know something and I know just this very thing only incompletely." The
inner aspect (antaraṅga) of the individual soul is said to be this, namely, the six

obscuring coverings, along with Māyā.

The ‘individual soulʼ, which is the limited Self, is ‘sullied’ by (the
obscuring coverings,) the nature of which have just been described, and is as if
withered away (mlāna) by the emergence (within its contracted consciousness)
of (its) fixed (pratiniyata), (limited) capacity to know and act etc. (An
intellectual notion is generated) ‘from the reflection (of the light of the Self),
that is, from the projection of the shade of consciousness that is born from that

(individual soul). This is the meaning. Such is the nature of (the intellect,)

because in this way, it is the plane of the manifestation of the consciousness of

the individual soul. This is the overall sense. ‘That kind (of intellectual

knowledge) is the ascertainment (adhyavasāya) (of the nature of things) in this
way. In order to explain that they are mutually (both) the cause and the effect
(of one another), he says, ‘its (underlying corresponding spiritual

ignorance)ʼ etc. ‘Its’ (means) that (ignorance which is) of the intellect, and

‘that of the individual soul’ is the (ignorance) which is (intrinsic) to the

indiviḍual soul as its condition, that is, pertaining to the individual soul. This is

the meaning. ‘It is nourished by it’. The meaning is that (this is) the effect.

(Take for example,) one who is penetrated by lust, grief and the like, the
conceptual knowledge (vikalpakaṁ jñānam) that arises (in his mind) consists of

the direct experience" of this and that entity induced by reflection

(anusaṁdhāna) etc. on (his sense of) identification with that (emotion). As

they say:

‘Those who are overwhelmed by lust, grief, fear, madness, (the fear of)
a thief, (bad) dreams and the like, see things as if present before them even

though they do not exist.”

Read with MSs J, Jh, TṬ and the printed edition of the PS -niyativaśād instead of
niyatibalād and emend rāgāvidyāvaśena to rāgavidyāvaśena.

Read asarvātmanaiva for sarvātmanaiva.
“ PS 16cd-17. PS 17ab is quoted below ad 11/14cd-18. PS 17cd is quoted ad 9/204, see
note there for a translation of Yogarāja’s commentary on the entire verse.

Read -sākṣātkārātmakavikalḷpakaṇṁ for –sākṣāṭkārāṭmakam avikalpakaṁ.

“’ This example ilustrates well how the two kinds of ignorance reinforce each other. A

person in love forms images of the beloved in his mind, which then further intensify his
emotions. The images are thought constructs produced by the activity of the intellect.

The emotion is a state of consciousness experienced within consciousness as such, with

no intervening thought constructs. But although fundamentally different in this respect,

they reinforce one another.

TANTRĀLOKA

(The one that) ‘nourishesʼ is the cause (kāraṇa). The instrumental

cause (nimitta) of dreams and the like is the preceding experience. One who

lives (blissfully) on Banana Island does not have even the (slightest) desire to

imagine fire (or anything else he has not seen that may be harmful).
Having described ignorance in this way, he says (the following) to
describe the two kinds of knowledge also.

aṃīī ŪJṬHT JT: IHTZĀTTḤ|

1 1
[kezzEEezzick ēitzrEEiEE ḤI

ũŪīz = || 2 I|

kṣīṇe tu paśusaṁskāre puṁsaḥ prāptaparasthiteḥ |

vikasvaraṁ tad vijñānaṁ pauruṣaṁ nirvikalpakam || 41

vikasvarāvikalpātmajñānaucityena yāvasā |
tad bauddáhaṁ yasya tat pauṁsnaṁ prāgvat poṣyaṁ ca poṣṭṛ ca || 42 |

Spiritual knowledge is the expanding consciousness (vijñāna) devoid

of thought constructs of the individual soul who has attained (its original)
supreme state, as the latent trace (saṁskāra) of his (lower) fettered state
wanes away. The (liberating) insight (avasā) (that develops) in accord with

(the plenitude of) this expanding knowledge of the Self, free of thought

constructs, is intellectual knowledge (on the level of the conscious mind), of

which spiritual (knowledge) is, as before, (both) nourished (by it) and

nourishes (it). (Thus, spiritual and intellectual knowledge nourish one
another). (41-42)

‘Spiritual knowledge’ is ‘devoid of thought constructsʼ, that is, it is

different in character from thought constructs such as that of the artificial

(constructed) (kṛtrima) ego (which is just a notion of self) and the like. (On

the contrary,) it is ‘expanding (consciousness)ʼ, that is, the reflective awareness
of supreme ‘I’ consciousness of ‘the individual soul’ of which all bondage has
ceased, and so has attained oneness with supreme consciousness by the
destruction of (the impurities of) Karma and Māyā, in accord with the rule that
The ego is the sense of oneself as being the agent of one’s own action and the
perceiver of one’s own perceptions. t is of two kinds, according to whether the sense of
self is that of the one universal and transcendental Śiva consciousness or of the
individual fettered soul. The former is the result of the innate reflective awareness of

consciousness, which is its inherent power. Thus, it is ‘uncreated’ (akṛtrima). The latter
is the ego which arrogates to itself the operation of the senses and mind, which

processes their input and responds to it through the organs of action of the body. It is

generated from Nature (which is generated from Māyā) along with the other priṇciples

that operate and manifest in the sphere of objectivity. It is a notion of the Self that is

thus ‘created’ and ‘artificial’ (both meanings of the word ‘kṛtrima’
). Ultimately, it is a
‘conceived’ (kalpita), contracted, limited and indiyidual notion of Self which is created
(krt) by the ‘uncreated' ‘U – ‘aham’ – which is free of thought constructs, as a mistaken

conception of it.

CHAPTER ONE

‘when the instrumental cause (nimitta) is absent, so too is that which is the

occasion for its application (naimittika)’. (This is implied) by saying that just
the latent trace of (his lower) ‘fettered state’, that is, the (Impurity) pertaining
to the individual soul (āṇava), has waned away. This is the meaning.

‘(The (liiberating) insight (develops)) in accord’ with the completely

full (and perfect) nature (of Śiva Himself) who possesses it. Thus the nature of
this (liberating insight) is: ‘all this glorious outpouring (vibhava) is mine’. ‘Of
lIn other words, in the absence of the cause, its effect cannot arise. The destruction of
the Impurities marks that of bondage, which is their effect and the reason of their
existence.
“ The basic or fundamental Impurity is āṅava mala, which is intrinsic to the individual
soul – aṇu. It is the ignorance which makes him that, and so is called ‘āṇava’, that is,

‘pertaining to the soul’. Once the latent trace of that is removed from consciousness, the

other two forms of Impurity which develop from it, and are aspects of it, namely, Karma

and Māyā, also cease. When this happens, individual consciousness is free of constraints

and so spontaneously expands back to its original unconditioned, universal expanse. The
knowledge of reality, in all its aspects, namely, Śiva, consciousness, the Self and the

Being of all things, unfolds in consonance with this expansion.
One could also think of this ‘latent trace’ of limitation as a kind of habit.
Without making any effort to develop and maintain awareness of one’s own essentially
conscious, spiritual nature, it naturally, that is, effortlessly and spontaneously, tends to
contract. This contraction amounts to the mistaken identification of oneself with the
body, senses and mind. By personal effort and, ultimately, grace, this mistaken
identification weakens as one’s attention is progressively more centred on the

fundamental subjective, divine consciousness. But however much progress one may

have made on this path of spiritual knowledge, until the last latent trace of ignorance,
that is, habit of identifying oneself with the body, has ceased, it is liable to form again.
Thus it is only when it ceases completely that the expanded, liberated state can be

permanent and individual consciousness is established in its true universal nature, which
is free of these limited, binding thought constructs from which the individual, limited
subject is formed. In other words, it is a mental creation (kalpita). The true, unlimited
subject, which emerges when it ceases, is free of thought constructs and is thus
‘uncreated’ (akalpita) and authentic. This is the intellectual knowledge (bauddhajñāna)
of the individual soul who is thus filled with the spiritual knowledge (pauruṣajñāna)
that expanded consciousness has of its own nature. In this way they sustain and nourish
one another.
ĪP 4/12a. Also quoted below in TĀv ad 4/169-170, 5/129cd-131ab (128cd-130ab)
(the whole verse), 7/64cd-75ab and 14/46. The entire verse says: ‘“He whose nature is all

things, knowing that ‘all this glorious outpouring (vibhava) is mine’ possesses Maheśa’s

state even when (his) thought constructs are flowing.’ It is quoted below ad 5/129cd131ab (128cd-130ab). Utpaladeva comments in his vrtri on this line:
‘Although the embodied perceiver (kṣetrajña) continues to produce thought
constructs by the Lord’s power itself, even in that state (daśā), having known fully that
(his own) nature is that of the Lord, penetrating the universe as one with it (by reflecting
that) ‘this glorious outpouring consisting of transmigratory existence is mine’,

transforming all (his) thought constructs without exception into nothing but reflective
awareness alone, possesses Maheśvara’s state.

Abhinava comments in his vimarsinī:

‘That inner Self (pratyagātmā) (within the body), who is the fettered soul, is

not something other than this ‘I’. Rather He Himself, who is the supreme being, the one
compact mass of the Light (of consciousness) that has totally encompassed (the

TANTRĀLOKA

whichʼ intellectual knowledge is ‘as beforeʼ, that is, just as the two forms of
ignorance are mutually nourished and nourishing, so too (are the two forms of
knowledge). This is the meaning. Similarly, one should understand (by

implication) that the difference (viśeya) (between them is that knowledge is)
complete (knowledge) and (ignorance is) incomplete (knowledge). Otherwise,

the nature of knowledge and ignorance could not be stated (at all).

Surely, (one may ask,) this kind of absence of knowledge has no
beginning. There is no disagreement about this. But when could this knowledge
which is the non-existence of that (ignorance) arise? And what is the attendant

cause (nimitta) of its absence? With this doubt in mind, he says:

āaĩlP̄]Ṃ T-TT TT #SST TRḺT |I 3 I
tatra dĩkṣādinã pauṁsnam ajñānaṁ dhvaṁsi yady api |

tathāpi taccharīrānte taj jīñānaṁ vyajyate sphuṭam || 43 |

“““°There (in that context) although spiritual ignorance (constitutive

of individual consciousness) is destroyed by initiation and the rest (that
follows), even so (without spiritual knowledge), that knowledge (of the Self)
manifests explicitly (only) when the body comes to an end. (43)
Spiritual ignorance, the nature of which has (just) been described, is

destroyed by initiation, which is said to be (as follows).

individual) subject and object, is (who) I am. He is me not something else at all. Thus
the creation of thought constructs is also the ‘glorious outpouring’ (vibhava), the
characteristic of which is the freedom (svātantrya), that is ‘mine’. When this kind of
reflective awareness has become firm in this way, even one whose thought constructs

have not ceased is liberated even whilst alive. As is said: “Even doubt would not make

one doubt (one’s own true nature); this (reality) is clearly a state free of doubts.”
In the previous verse Utpaladeva explained how the fettered soul comes to
recognise his true Śiva nature by the gradual attenuation of thought constructs; this one
explains how this recognition is achieved even when they continue to form, if they are

like this.
“It would be impossible to talk about knowledge or ignorance at all if ignorance were
to be a total absence of knowledge. No understanding of being ignorant could ever arise.

Moreover, if spiritual and intellectual knowledge and ignorance were to be totally
different, they could not affect one another. They could not contribute to each other's

development. The difference between the two types of ignorance and knowledge, like
that between ignorance and knowledge itself, is not in their essential nature, rather it lies
in their locus and the degree and form of their development.

“ Abhinava now refers to a fundamental example of how these two forms of
knowledge work together, that is, initiation. Initiation alone can only liberate the soul
after death. This is so because although the initiate has attained spiritual knowledge

thereby, he is still without intellectual knowledge. If, after receiving initiation, which

allows him access to the scriptures and the teachings, he cultivates this other type of

knowledge, he may achieve liberation in his own lifetime. In this way, the two work

together.
Read with all the MSs except Kh and G tu śarīrānte for tac charīrānte.

CHAPTER ONE

‘It bestows (dīyate) the essence of knowledge, and the latent traces of
the fettered state are destroyed (kṣīyante); thus endowed with (the capacity of)
‘bestowing’ (dāna) (knowledge) and the ‘destruction’ (kṣapaṇa) (of the fettered

state), it is called ‘initiation’ (dīkṣā).”

‘Even so’, that is, if ‘that’ knowledge of the Self, which is (essentially)
just the absence of ignorance, is propense to manifest (by taking initiation),
however, as the saying goes: ‘only (the Karma) that has begun (to take effect)

(prārabdha) should not be purified’ (in the course of initiation). Thus the

Kṣemarāja quotes the same verse in his commentary on SYT 5/88cd. There, instead

of the plural kṣīyante [t: kṣīyate] paśuvāsanāḥ -- ‘the latent traces of the fettered state
are destroyedʼ, we find the singular – kṣīyate paśuvāsanā – ‘the latent trace of the
fettered state is destroyedʼ.

Cf. Ūrmikaulārṇavatantra:

dīyate jñānasadbhāvaṁ [-va] kṣīyate pāśapaījaram |
dīnakṣapaṇaśīlavāt [-kṣīlatvāṭ] dīkṣeyaṁ pārameśvarī | 2/290 ||
‘It gives (dīyate) the essence of knowledge and the cage of the fetters is

destroyed; ‘giving’ (dāna) and ‘destroying’ (kṣapaṇa); it is, therefore, this, the initiation
(dīkṣā) of the Supreme Goddess.”

Virtually the same verse is found in the MBT:
dīyate jñānasadbhāvaṁ kṣīyate pāśapañjaram |
dīnakṣapaṇadharmitvāt dīkṣā teneha kīrtitā || KuKh 31/4
Similar definitions of initiation are found in virtually all the manuals and

Āgamas of the Śiddhānta, and indeed in Tantras of all schools. Most of these definitions

are in the form of didactic etymologies of the roots dā ‘to give’ and kṣa ʻto destroyʼ.

Abhinavagupta also ṣays that these are the defining characteristics of initiation

(dānakṣapaṇalakṣaṇā dīkṣā PTy p. 14). Similarly, Kṣemarāja defines initiation as ‘the
destruction of the fetters and the bestowal of Śiva’s plane (comm. SVT I p. 13). Brunner
has collected examples of such definitions from the Siddhānta Āgamas (see SŚP ĪI p. 34). Four out of five of them agree with our text that what is given (diyate) by initiation is

the essence of knowledge. Similarly, what is destroyed is bondage. This is variously

described as the ‘cage of sin’ (Suprabheda, caryāpāda, 4/1cd), the three impurities
(Cintya, T. 14, p. 338, AVS, T. 7, p. 77), the latent trace of karma (Mṛgendra,
kriyāpāda, 8, comm. on the first verse) and that of the fetters (comm. SVT 5/88a). It thus
purifies the Self (Mṛgendra ibid.) and bestows knowledge (AVS ibid.). Abhinavagupta

quotes a similar verse from the Siddhāntāgamas which says: ‘Initiation is said to possess

the attributes of giving and destroying. It gives the essence of knowledge and destroys
all impurity by piercing (the soul) with awakened consciousness (hodhānuvedha)ī (PTv

p. 14).

Sanderson (1992: 287) comments: ‘According to the semantic analysis

(nirvacanam) traditional to the Saiva literature the word dīkṣā (‘initiation’) is
appropriate to the rite (anvartha-) because it means ‘that which bestows (dā)

knowledge and destroys (kṣi) the fetters. But the bestowing of knowledge

(jñānadānam), which is said to account for the first syllable of the word is not the
imparting of conscious knowledge or enlightenment (bauddhaṁ jñānam), because such

TANTRĀLOKA

impurity of Karma, which brings about the existence (and continuing life of)
this body, persists. It is for this reason (that liberating knowledge) ‘manifests
explicitly (only) when’ the present ‘body comes to an end’, in accord with the
teaching that: ‘one attains Śiva when the body dies (dehapāta). The meaning

is that it manifests because it is experienced directly (only after death). By the
expression (initiation) ‘and the rest (that follows)’, one should understand the

remaining mode of conduct (that should be observed after initiation until death)
(Śeṣavrtti), not the middling-intense (tīvratara) descent of the power (of grace)

or the like. (The latter) is the attendant cause (nimitta) of initiation, and so

reference to it is established by the word (initiation) itself. Nor is there any
other attendant cause of liberation apart from initiation in this (case). That is
said (in the following verse):

knowledge would surely transform the individual beyond recognition. The knowledge

claimed is one that is said to have been received on a deeper, subconscious level within

the individual (pauruṣaṁ jñānam), where it can lie latent until the moment of death
when the remnant of the fetters that has obscured it disappears and the Śiva state (śivatā,
Śivāvasthā) becomes manifest.”

“Read prārabdhekaṁṅ for prārabdhrekaṁ SNT 4/141d. The Karma that has begun to
take effect is responsible for the continuing experience of day-to-day life. Thus, if that is
also ‘purifiedʼ, i.e.

removed in the course of initiation, it would entail the death of the

initiate. Cf. above, note 1,363 and below, 9/130cd-131ab, and 15/27.

’ MV. 1/454, below 13/203 and note.

! Here it seems that Jayaratha is refuting the view of some other commentator on the

Tantrāloka. We are told a little further ahead that the most intense descent of the power

of grace is immediately liberating. This may be because it is so intense that the recipient
dies from it (see below, 13/130cd-131ab), but if he survives, he is liberated in the body.

Other less intense forms liberate after death which comes about from natural causes.

This is the reason for the reference here to the middling-intense form of grace ‘or the

likeʼ, i.e. other lower levels of grace. The Kaula traditions, as one of the corollaries of
their claim to being nondualist (advaya), is the claim that their higher traditions can
bestow liberation in this life. In other words, they claim that their teachers can serve as
vehicles for the most intense forms of Śiva's grace that can bestow immediate liberation.

’ The expression dīkṣādi – Śinitiation and the rest refers to at least two different,

although related things. It seems that a previous commentator understood the ‘rest’ to be
a reference to the grace required to make the initiation effective. But Jayaratha

disagrees. Grace is essential for initiation to be successful. Without it, there would be no

initiation and so, Jayaratha maintains, reference to it is implicit in the word ‘initiation’

itself. Initiation is itself the liberating grace. Moreover, he adds, there is no other
attendant cause of liberation apart from initiation. So by ‘the rest’, he says, is meant all

else that needs to be done apart from the actual initiation itself, which marks and

essentially is the descent of Siva’s power of grace. This is the ‘remaining mode of
conduct’ (śeṣavrtti. Initiation has fully purified the initiand. By means of the rite,
through Śiva’s grace, the initiate has actually been conjoined to Śiva. According to the

Siddhānta view, he is as free as is possible while one is still in this world living in the

body. What remains to be done is for him to maintain his state of purity and hence
union, until death, after which he is fully liberated.

‘’ Grace and initiation are attendant or instrumental causes of liberation, the former
leading to the latter. Knowledge alone is the direct cause.

CHAPTER ONE

‘Initiation alone frees from that extensive bondage which obstructs
(entry into) the supreme plane (sthāna) and so too leads upwards to Śiva’s

Again, initiation may take place by the first (and most excellent) process
(of realisation), namely No Means (anupāyādikrama), which is heralded by the
most intense (tvratama) descent of the power (of grace) by virtue of which one

(attains) liberation at that very moment. That is said (in the following line):

‘Thus some (fortunate one) is liberated due to that conjunction (saṁbandha)
(with Śiva’s power) at that very moment.”" (Some may say that) this attendant
cause (nimitta) of liberation does not depend on initiation. (But) that is (an

impossible view that) should not be entertained, because in that way there
would be a conflict (of views) with the scriptures (śruti).’ (However, it is said

that):

‘It is well established in all the scriptures that right (liberating)

knowledge (arises) for one (who is fit for it) as a result of one’s own purification

(by the deity directly) (ārmasaṁskāra), without (having to take) initiation.’

(However,) what is intended by the prohibition (of initiation in
statements) such as this is with reference to initiation (imparted
means of
outer (ritual) action. Otherwise, how could one make this (prohibition) square

with the sense of the expression here ‘purification of the Self’'?" Now enough

of much (talk).

‘’ Quoted by Kṣemarāja in his comm. on SYT 11/199. Ultimately of course, it is not the

initiation itself that does this. Only Śiva can liberate the soul (see below, 13/122-125ab).
Thus, liberation is accessible to everybody because it is accomplished for them rather
than by them (Sanderson 2006: 25).

’ Initiation (dīkṣā) is of various kinds and levels according to the degree of the descent

of the power (of grace) that the initiand receives. At the highest, No Means (anupāya)
level, he receives the most intense descent of the power of grace (tīvratīvraśaktipāta).
When this happens, the bodily functions are suspended and pure consciousness realizes
its own Self as a dense mass of uninterrupted Light and Bliss which is the essence of
pure [-ness, that is, the supreme subjectivity of Śiva Himself. See below, 13/129-310 for
an extensive discussion of all the forms of the descent of the power of grace. No Means
(anupāya) is the subject of chapter two.
1 MVT 1/43ab. The whole passage (ibid. 1/42-43ab) is quoted below in 13/199cd-200;
see also below, 21/4, which says: ‘at a certain time, the peaceful power of Śiva that

beṣtows liberation is conjoined with an individual soul because it is fit (to receive it).

Thus some (fortunate one) is liberated due to that conjunction (saṁbandha) at that very

moment.

Note that Jayaratha is referring to the Tantras as śruti, a term normally reserved for

the Vedic revelation. See above note 1,307.
“’ One could also translate: ‘by the purification of the Selṝ’. MS Kh reads:

saṁskāraparipākata(h) – ‘as a result of the maturing of the purification of the Self’

‘’ The point Jayaratha is making is that initiation is necessary. It is true that in some

rare cases discussed below in chapter two, which deals with No Means (anupāya) (e.g
TĀ 2/2) and elsewhere, the disciple is liberated directly by Śiva’s grace mediated by a

liberating look or touch of the teacher. However, this possibility should not be
understood to be an exception. Rather it is itself a form of initiation, although it does not

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely, (one may ask.) if liberation (is attained) only after death in this
way by initiation, then how is it that it is said that ‘one is liberated even whilst

alive’?
" With this doubt in mind, he says:

feraī ṁa sta-Ṁtk:
ēka fērT ú| xzI
bauddhajñānena tu yadā bauddham ajñānajṛmbhitam |
vilīyate tadā jīvanmuktiḥ karatale ṣṭhitā || 44 ||

(However), liberation whilst still alive (in the body) is (as if) in the

palm of one’s hand, if (all that has) developed out of intellectual ignorance
(on the level of the conscious mind) dissolves away by (sound) intellectual

knowledge (which is the self-realisation that results through insight into the

ultimate purport of the scriptures). (44)

(Liberation whilst still alive is possible) ‘by (sound) intellectual
knowledgeʼ, that is, (by the knowledge) that arises by listening etc. to the

involve any outer rites. The verse Jayaratha quotes here represents a view which

apparently denies the need for initiaton. But, as Jayaratha points out, there is no

disagreement that liberation requires that the soul be purified, and it is this, above all,

which is the hallmark of initiation. The word ‘initiation’ in this case denotes the rite of

initiation. What is meant is not that there is no need of initiation as such, only that it
need not be in the form of an outer rite. Initiation is essentially a process whereby the
impurities of the individual Self are purified, and he is thereby empowered. Jayaratha
agrees that in some cases this may take place without any external rite, but this does not

mean that liberation is possible without initiation. If the Self has been purified, which is
essential in order to attain the liberating knowledge of the Self, then initiation must have

taken place, although not necessarily externally. This possibility is what Abhinavagupta

discusses indirectly in the following verses. See below, notes to 4/49-50 and 60cd-62ab.
See below, 3/272ab (3/271) and 13/184cd, cf. also 1 1/103
Even if initiaton has been received and the initiate is thereby freed of spiritual
ignorance, the spiitual knowledge that results is not conceptual and so is unclear. It sṭill
needs to be understood. Moreover, it cannot function completely because of the

continuing identification with the body which makes it possible, indeed, very likely that

it begins to accumulate again. Insight into the true nature of reality and one’s own Self

is essential. And this can only be achieved by Lord Śiva’s grace through a deepening
understanding of the scriptures, the teacher’s words and personal insight. This
ultimately leads to realisation of the one supreme nondual reality of Śiva consciousness,
even when the body, senses and mind are operating.
Initiation purifies the initiand and conjoins him with Śiva to which it gives rise.
By maintaining the ritual program to which the initiate has access, he maintains that
purity, and so once the Karma that is in the course of completion is exhausted and the
body drops, he achieves liberation. To get it in this life he needs the liberating insight

which is the realisation of his identity with Śiva. In other words, the state of unity

atṭained by initiation has to become a direct experience for it to be immediately

liberating.

CHAPTER ONE

Supreme Lord's nondual scriptures. That is said (in the following verse
from
the Kularatṇamāḻā);
‘If the teacher expounds the tradition (at the right) time, (the disciple) is
liberated (in an instant); from that moment on all that remains is just
the

machine (of his body).

And one should know that that (takes place) by virtue of the

competence (adhikāra) (to receive the teaching in this way conferred upon him)

by initiation. One who has not taken initiation does not have the competence

to even listen to the scriptures. So even if its instrumental cause (nimitta

) is the

understanding (avabodha) (of the scriptures), how could that (liberating)

knowledge arise? 1t is said that: ‘one should not utter (the teachings of) Śiva’s

path (paddhati) in front of those who have not been initiated. The point

(uktaprāya) is that by (doing) this nothing happens at all (ua kiñcid bhavati) for
one whose spiritual ignorance has not been destroyed. Those who see things
otherwise (and think that initiation is unnecessary would anyway) not be
propense to taking initiation because there would not be anybody (amongs
t
them able to) perceive (draṣṭr) the goal to be attained. Thuṣ, as (initiation) is

the root cause of the attainment of liberation, one should not say that (the rule
regarding the necessity of) initiation is lax. Although spiritual knowledge

is

Jayaratha is referring here to the classic formulation by Advaita Vedānta and others

of how the study of scripture can lead to liberation by insight into its true meaning.
The
first step is to ‘hear’ (or read it) carefully. This is called ‘liṣṭeṉingʼ (śravaṇa). The
next
step is to carefully reflect on its meaning. This is called ‘cogitation’ (manana)
. This
cogitation leads to a profound contemplation (nidhidhyāsa) of the reality
the scriptures
teach, resulting in a direct experience of it. This practice was originally applied
to the
study of the Upaniṣads, particularly its Great Sayings (mahāvākya). Theṣe include
‘all
this indeed is the Brahman’ (sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma), ‘this
Brahman is
consciousness’ (prājño ‘yaṁ brahma), and the most famous of all: ‘thou
are thatʼ (tat

tvam asi). Studying and reflecting on the scriptures in this way, one develops

true

insight, which is an increasingly direct experience of the Reality they
teach. This is what
is meant by ‘intellectual knowledge’ here. It is ‘intellectual’ not because it
is ‘cleverʼ or

academic. It is called ‘intellectual’ because it is the knowledge which is the light
of
consciousness that shines reflected in the intellect, and is known in and through the

profound reflection on its true nature which articulates itself as such statement
s and the
entire teachings.

“ Below in 13/230-231ab, Abhinava quotes a similar verse, stating that this is the view

of both the Ratṇamālātantra and the Gāmatantra. Thus, a doubt may arise as to
which
one of these two Jayaratha is quoting from. It cannot be the Gamatant
ra, because

Jayaratha never quotes from the Gamatantra and so most probably did not have access

to it, whereas, on the contrary he does cite the Kularatnamālā in several places.
Thus,
we may conclude that the Abhinava is quoting from the Gamatantra there
and Jayaratha

from the Ratnamālā here. For further details see note to 13/230-231ab.
“ Read with MSs K, J, JH, N, T. and D: dīkṣādhikāreṇaiva for dīkṣitādhikāreṇaiva.
SVṬ 5/51ab.
‘ Read draṣṭur for sraṣṭur. The goal the scriptures teach cannot be known and hence

attained without being free of spiritual impurity. If none believed that this
is true and
saw the matter differently, thinking that intellectual knowledge is enough, nobody
could
correctly perceive the goal and hence wish to take initiation, which is the means
to attain
the necessary state of purity.

TANTRĀLOKA

propense to becoming manifest by means of initiation and the like, it does not
beṣtow liberation just then, because as is said (in the scriptures) it manifests
after the death of the body. (However,) this (liberating intellectual knowledge

manifests) at that very moment (in which it is received). Thus, it is accepted
(kaṭākṣita) (in this way) that (out of the two kinds of knowledge,) it is the main
(and predominant) one.
It is not only because of this that it is the main attendant cause (nimitta)
of that (form of liberation). There is another (reason) also. Thus, he says:

cá ītraē |

āTT |I II
dīkṣāpi bauddhavijñānapūrvā satyaṁ vimocikā |
tena tatrāpi bauddhasya jñānasyāsti pradhānatā || 45 ||

Jayaratha is referring indirectly to a cardinal point of doctrine regarding liberation
that echoes throughout the Tantrāloka and Abhinava’s exegesis. All initiated Śaivites

are fit to attain liberation. There is no difference between them when they do, and

initation is the sole means to attain it. There is however a fundamental difference

between the lower common dualist Śaiva Siddhānta and that of the higher esoteric
systems like Krama and Trika. The votaries of the former make gradual progress in

maintaining the pure state they acquire through initiation, and can only attain liberation

after death. Those who are ready amongst the latter attain it immediately in this life by a
flash of intense insight. The same applies to those who attain the goal of the path of the
nondualist Śaiva philosophy of Somānanda and the Pratyabhijnā of Utpaladeva. They
are all initiated directly by the Deity through the intellectual knowledge of their identity

with it. Thus, Abhinava writes in the Mālinīvijayavārtika:

parameśānaśāstre tu ye samyagdīkṣitā narāḷḥ |
teṣāṁ naivāpavargasya lābhe bhedo ‘sti kaścana ||
na caitadatirikto ʻpi mokṣopāyo ‘sti kaścana |
kevalaṁ kvāpy anāyāsā jīvanmuktikrameṇa ca |l
śīghram eva parā siddhir yathāsmaddarśaneṣv iti |

kvāpi tattvāvalīyogaparipāṭīkramāc cirāt |lḷ

tais taiḥ kriyākalāpaiś ca labhyate paramaṁ phalam |

‘There is no difference whatsoever between those people who have been

properly initiated into the Supreme Lord’s scripture (parameśānaśāstre) when they
attain liberation. Nor is there any means to liberation (for them) apart from that. The
only (difference is that), in some cases, the supreme accomplishment (siddhi) (is

attained) quickly, without effort and through the process (that leads to) liberation in life,
as (taught) in our (higher esoteric) systems. In some cases, the highest fruit is attained

after a long time through a gradual course of unification with (and of the) series of
reality levels (tattva) and by means of the many various rituals.- MVV 1/193-196ab
Clearly, hauddhajñāna – ‘intellectual knowledge – is no bookish knowledge.
Rather, at its most developed level it is the insight of the Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā)
that “T am Śiva and all ṭhis (objectivity) is my glory”. As we shall see in chapter four,
Abhinava refers to it as sattarka – ‘Sound Discriminative Reasoning’.

CHAPTER ONE

Even initiation is truly (satyam) liberating (only if it is) preceded
by (clear) intellectual insight (bauddhavijñāna). Thus, there (in that case)
also, it is intellectual knowledge that is fundamental. (45)
Here (in this context), according to such dictums as:

‘The most

excellent teacher is one who possesses (this) knowledge even if he is devoid of
all (the other) characteristics (of a good teacher).'" Only the teacher who has
understood the meaning of the scriptures has the competence (to impart)
initiation. Thus it is said that (the teacher’s) main characteristic is (that he
should) ‘know the procedures (vidhāna) of the Śaiva scriptures and be expert in

knowledge and that which should be known.’ Otherwise, on the contrary: “O
(goddess) who is praised by the heroes, initiation is not successful when there is

no (knowledge of the) scriptures." According to this and similar dictums,

initiation would not be liberating (without intellectual knowledge) and so,

because the (direct) cause (kāraṇa) of initiation is intellectual knowledge (of the
procedures prescribed in the scriptures), without it (initiation) could not be

completed successfully.
ss If we read with MSs G,

C, J, Jh, N, and T sadyo for satyaṅ, the meaning would be

that when initiation is based on clear intellectual insight it is ‘immediately (sadyas)
liberatingʼ. This reading is indeed an interesting and convincing one. However, it
appears from Jayaratha’s commentary that despite his presentation in this sense of the

previous verse, he does not have this other reading before him, or at least chooses to
ignore its implications.
This line is also quoted below ad 4/60ab. A variant of this line is found below as

23/6ab. There it appears as a line of a verse Abhinava quotes from the
Kacabhārgavatantra, which may be another name for the Bhargaśikhā. This line is also
quoted by Kṣemarāja twice in his commentary on the Svacchandatantra ad 1/12 and ad
1/27. See below, 4/33-85 for an exposition of the characteristics of a teacher and his
intimate relationship with Sound Discriminative Reasoning (sattarka), that is, Pure
Knowledge (śuddhavidyā) that develops as insight into the purport of the scriptures.

ṢYṬ 1/13cd.

! ṢVṬ 1/24cd. Jayaratha emphasizes that the intellectual knowledge which ‘precedes’

initiation is that of how to perform it on the part of the teacher. However, it also means
the intellectual knowledge the disciple possesses, which precedes not only initiation but
also all other means by which consciousness expands (when spiritual knowledge

develops) in the disciple. Initiatioon removes the fundamental Impurity of the soul
(āṇavamala). Thus, it expands consciousness. This expanded consciousness is spiritual

knowledge. Even so, without the intellectual knowledge of the ultimate purport of the
scriptures, it cannot be understood.

Jayaratha says that the person who requires intellectual knowledge to make the

initiation successful is the teacher, who must know the scriptures that teach the

procedure, and knows how to initiate his disciple in the best way for him. Swami
Lakshmaṇjoo shifts the focus onto the disciple. Initiation can only be successful if the
disciple has the necessary understanding of the teaching of the scriptures — namely his
identity with Śiva. As Swami Lakshmanjoo says: ‘Initiation creates Pauruṣajñāna; but

it is effective only if the disciple has intellectual knowledge but not complete

intellectual knowledge as in Śāktopāya.

The objects of this ‘Intellectual Knowledge’ are, on the one hand, metaphysical,

namely, the true nature of reality, Śiya, the Self, the world and so on. On the other it
includes all aspects of practice. This ranges from the subtle contemplative practices,
which are Abhinava’s most favoured, to a wide range of Yogas of the breath, Kuṇḍalinī

TANTRĀḶLOKA

This is not just our own idea. Thus, he says:

TJTTI Jā ĪR-@_TTGIRCTĪTṀ: |I Y,I
mataṅgādau kr̥taṁ śrīmatkheṭapālādidaiśikaiḥ l 46 ||

These two (aspects of) knowledge and ignorance have been

distinguished (from one another) by (Saiddhāntika) teachers, beginning

with the venerable Khetapāla, in (their commentaries) on the Ruru,”
Svāyambhuva, and Mataṅga amongst others. (46)
and the like, to concrete ritual performance. Thus, the liberation attained through such
knowledge may be achieved in a few exceptional cases, immediately or gradually over

time.

Intellectual Knowledge is knowledge of the scriptures, the ambit of which

Abhinava extends to include all that has been transmitted through the lineage of his
teachers. In this perspective, one could say that there are, broadly speaking, two aspects
of the one Trika tradition as Abhinava sees it. One includes the Śaiva scriptures, of

which the Trika Tantras are the culmination, and understood in the manner discussed, as
encompassing all the others. This is integrated with the lineage transmission of the

Krama, which possesses original root Tantras of its own. The other aspect is represented

by the teachings of the Masters. These may be directly explanatory of the Tantras or else

have developed as independent teachings that draw from them only secondarily,
acknowledging, of course, the authority of these scriptures. This means both Krama
teachings that may be written down – even in the form of scriptures which transmit the

originally oral tradition based on direct realisation, and the Pratyabhijñā. This is

presented by Somānanda, the author of the Śivadṛṣi, which is the first work of this
school, as the essential teaching of nondualist Śaivism transmitted through the lineage
of Trṛyambaka (see above, comm. 1/7-8 and below, 36/11-14). Significantly only

teachers, not Tantras, are mentioned in this context. Under this heading is also included

the Spanda lineage beginning with Vasugupta and Kallaṭabhaṭṭa. Knowledge of all this
multiple transmission (āgama) and how it applies to practice and direct experience, is

Intellectual Knowledge. Clearly, this cannot function as an aid to realisation without the

Spiritual Knowledge that shines by the removal of the fundamental Impurity of Spiritual
Ignorance that obscures the soul. But it is essential for a teacher to have the former.

Without it he would not know how to initiate others, which may involve elaborate ritual
procedures. Nor could he be a medium of transmission of the teachings.

“ The Ruru is the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha, concering which and its names see entry in

Appendix volume concerning sources.
Abhinava is telling us here that his presentation of these two forms of knowledge —

pauruṣa and bauddha is inspired by the Siddhāntāgamas and their commentators.
Kheṭapāla, better known as Sadyojyotis, was the first known exegete of the Siddhānta.
He wrote commentaries on the Svāyambhuvatanīra and the Rauravāgama on which a
commentary was also written by. Bṛhaspati. Aniruddha and Rāmakaṇṭha, a few
generations later, wrote commentaries on the Mataṅgatantra.
It is significant that Abhinava should choose the Siddhāntas to frame his most
basic concern, that is, the attainment of knowledge that saves, and the eradication of the
ignorance that binds. But although the Siddhānta teaches this, it is not the complete
teaching. If it were, there would be no point in rising to the higher Bhairava and

CHAPTER ONE
That is said in the venerable Svāyambhuva:

‘Now, knowledge of Śiva operates in order to free (the soul) from the

bondage of the Impurity of the Śelf, (along with) the one called Māyā and

Karma, and in order to make Śiva’s state (śivatva) manifeṣt.%

‘Now, it is said that the (fundamental) beginningless Impurity (nala) of

the (countless) individual souls is their (basic) fettered state (pasutva). 1t is

said that the flux of the fetters (pāśa), namely, ignorance and the rest, that
depend (for their existence) on the existence of that (Impurity), is located within

that of the individual soul (pauruṣa). Therefore, in accord with (one’s) desire,

one should know that imperishable (akṣaya) liberation as it truly is.’

ultimately Trika Tantras. The Siddhānta has understood the nature of liberating
knowledge but cannot dispense it fully. The rites it teaches can remove spiritual
ignorance but not intellectual ignorance, at least not fully. This means that the
Siddhāntin may attain liberation but only after death. For it is only by insight that
liberation in this life is possible. To impart that, Abhinava abandons the Siddhānta
sources and turns to the Trika Niśāṭaṇatantra (1/50-51). The Siddhānta teaches the

gradual path based on the purification of the impurity of the ignorance inherent in the
soul. Trika and Krama teach the immediate path by the purification of the knowledge
based on reflection and insight. Just as the former is necessary for the latter, so the

Siddhānta continues to play a fundamental role in Abhinava’s Trika Śaivism.

The IFP transcript T. no. 39 is called Svāyambhuvāgamaḥ by the scribe, although all

the colophons refer to is as Svāyaṁbhuvasūtrasaṁgraha. From page 117 the text begins

again. Itis this which, in actual fact, is the Svāyaṁbhuvasūtrasaṁgraha. When referring

to a verse, I put the correct numbering of the chapter first (assuming the saṅgraha
begins where I stated) and following it in brackets the number of the chapter in this

transcript. The scribe of the transcript supplies variant readings from another manuscript

of which, unfortunately, he gives

and labelled A. A reads:

no notice. These variants are noted in square brackets

śivāj jñānaṁ pravartate – “knowledge comes forth from Śiva’

for śivajñānaṁ pravartate – knowledge of Śiva operatesʼ.

“ SvāSūSaṁ 1 (32)/2.
’ ŚvaSūSaṁ 2 (33)/lab. This line quoted below ad 9/66cd-67ab. In SyTu ad 5/884,
Kṣemarāja, saying that his source is the Svāyaṁbhuvasūtra, quotes this line along with

the following one that Jayaratha omits. There the second line reads:

tuṣakambukavaj jeyaṁ māyājam aikurasya tu I

‘One should know that (the Impurity) born from Maāyā is like the chaff and
integument of the sprout (of the fettered state) (see below note 9,419).
In the transcript the second half reads: māyāpāśāṁkuraṣya tat |

‘(One should know that that is like the chaff and integument) of the sprout of

the fetter of Māyā.

“! Read with the transcript pauruṣe sthitaḥ for pauruṣaḥ [, ḍ: puruṣaḥ] smṛtaḥ ʻs

considered to be that of the individual soul’. The reference here is to āṇavamala which
is inherent in the individual fettered soul as his fettered state. The two other Impurities —
that of Māyā and Karma – are aspects and development of this one.

ŚvāSūSaṁ 2 (33)/lab, 2 Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh:, ṄN, T, Ḍ and transcript 39: –

nādimalaṁ for -nādir malaḥ. Read with the transcript ~icchataḥ for ~icchatā. The lines

that follow are instructive:

patijñāṉaikagamyaṁ [Ā : gamyaikantaditareṣā] taditareṣām agocaram |
tena tatjñānanirmuktaḥ śuddhātmā bodhyate budhaiḥ [Ā : tajñānibhir mukto śuddhātmā

socyate budhaiḥ] || 3 |I

TANTRĀLOKA

So too in the venerable Ruru:
‘Those who are well versed in Mantra and the Tantras, worship with
many kinds of sacrificial rites, authorized (abhyanujñāta) (to do so) by the

teacher and the Tantras,' their bonds° severed by the initiation.

‘Men should not inquire with little intellect into (the nature of)
Mantras or reason about them (to determine whether they are effective or not).
Taking scripture (āgama) to be (their) authority (pramāṇa), the wise should

have faith in them.”
NT °All the deities are Mantras by nature and all Mantras, Śiva. Once having
known this Śiva nature, think only about Śiva accordingly.
So too in the venerable Mataṅgatantra:

"Thuṣ that Lord Īśa, shining with the jewels in the crest (of his matted

hair), the Emperor of Mantra burnt away like a heap of grass all the sage’s

‘It can only be attained by the knowledge of the Lord (patijñāna). Īt is not in

the purview of other things. Thus, the wise know that a pure soul is freed by that
knowledge.”
The

colophon

of

this

chapter

reads:

iti

svāyaṁbhuvaṣūtrasaṁgrahe

pāśavicāraś catustriṁśatpaṭalaḥ [Ā: vicārapaṭalo dvitīyaḥ] l

` This verse is Rauravasūtrasaṁṅgraha 2/21cd-22ab. Read with its edition and all the
MS except Kh and G: —nantratantra- for mantratattva-.

! Read with the published Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha: gurutantrābhyanujñātā for

gurutantrādy-anujñāta MSs Ch, T, Ḍ: jūātā].

Read with the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha: –-bandhanāḥ – ‘bonds’ for –saṁśayāḥ –
‘doubts'.
“ The MSs of the TĀ read dīkṣāvicchinna- for dīkṣāsicchimna-, which is clearly a
typographical error.
ṉa mīmāṅṁsṣyā vicāryā vā mantrāḥ svalpadhiyā (K, Ch, Jh, T: na mīmāṁsā vicāryā vā

maniraṣvalpadhiyā; Ñ: na mimāṁsṣā vā vicāryā vā mantraṣvaḹpadhiyā; Ḍ: na mīmāṅṁsā
vicaryā vā maṁtrasvalpadhiyāṅṁ).
Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha reads hitaiṣibhiḥ [K: hiteṣṭibhiḥ] for vicakṣaṇaiḥ.

Rauravasūtrasaṁṅgraha 3/27. The Raurava reads śraddhātavyaṁ for Śśraddhātavyā.

The former reading means that the wise should have faith in the Āgamas. According to
the reading here there should be faith in the Mantras.
T Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 3|28.
MS Kh reads: sarve varṇātmakā mantraḥ sarve varṇāḥ vātmakā – all Mantras are
phonemes by nature and all phonemes, Śiva’. This line i also found in the Sarvavīra

quoted ad 12/24cd.

The MSs read krtvā for jūātvā i.e ‘once fashioned (this Śiva nature).
" Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha 3/27 and 3/28.

! MPĀ vidyāpāda 2/6cd-7. The printed edition reads devah (‘god’) for īśaḥ;

jvālāvyūhena (with the mass of flamesʼ) for jvālāvīryeṇa (‘with the vitality of the
flames); samyag ajñānaṁ ((burt away) properly (the sage’s) ignorance) for sarvam
ajñānaṁ ((burnt away) all (the sage’s) ignorance).

CHAPTER ONE

ignorance with the vitality of the flames that arose from the fire of (His)

words.”

(That is) true knowledge which is the destruction of ignorance.

Devoid of impurity (amala), it has come forth from Śiva’s lotus mouth, and

facing in all directions (sarvatomukha), it is the disclosure of Śivahood. By

means of this, those who have achieved the goal (siddha) see (Śiva,) who is that

plane (of existence) which is free of (suffering and) disease.”
‘The restʼ includes, for example, the Cillācakreśvarīmata. 1t is said
there:
In his commentary on this verse, Rāmakaṇṭha identifies the ignorance mentioned

here with the fetters that once bound the sage’s soul. Similarly, Jayaratha understands
this to be a reference to his spiritual ignorance, that is, the fundamental Impurity of the
soul
(āṇavamala).
Thus,
although
the
Mataṅgatantra
(that
is,
the

Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama) does not directly refer to the distinction between spiritual
and intellectual knowledge and ignorance that Abhinavagupta elaborates here, one could
make a case that it is implicitly accepted. The same is true of the following verses

Jayaratha quotes, and indeed of all of these important Siddhānta sources. It may well be,
therefore, that the distinction is only clearly formulated in these terms by
Abhinavagupta himself, and (that he does) so as he cannot find exact, specific
references to this formulation. Although he acknowledges that it is formulated there

(above 1/46), he simply refers us to the sources (all of which are Siddhantāgamas) in a

general way (but see above note 1,494). The best reference Jayaratha could find is from
the Cillācakreśvarīmata, which was most probably written after Abhinava and so may

have been influenced by him. Even so, it distinguishes between intellectual (hauddha)

and spiritual (pauruṣa) Impurity (mala), not ignorance.

The following lines correspond to MPĀ vidyāpāda 17/68-69ab. The printed edition

reads -otpannam- for -odbhūtam-. The previous two lines say: ‘However, if the Lord’s
power of knowledge shines within the intellect, then, by the flux of the rays of its
inherent vitality (the knowledge which, Rāmakaṇṭha glosses, is its own inherent power
and illumines what is the good) prevails (pravartate).

" The cillā is a female Bengal eagle. Thus, the name of this Tantra literally means ‘the

Teaching of the Mistress of the Circle of Eagles’. Yoginīs commonly assume animal
forms. Thus, these female eagles are probably Yoginīs worshipped in this form. This
text has not been recovered. Vāmadeva quotes it twice in the Janmamaraṇavicāra (p. 4
and p. 9). Quote on p. 4:
māyā kalāśuddhavidyā rāgakālau niyantraṇā |
saḍ etāṉy āvṛtivaśāt kañcukāni mitātmanaḥ ||
evaṁ ca pudgalasyāntarmalaḥ kañcukavat sthitaḥ |

tuṣavat kañcukāni syusṣ tasmāj jīñānakriyojhitaḥ l

‘Māyā, the force (of limited capacity to act) (kalā) impure (limited capacity to

know) (aśuddhavidyā), attachment and time (as well as) the constraint (of Karma) –
these are the obscuring coverings (kañcuka) of the limited soul because they encompass

him. The inner Impurity of the individual soul is, in this way, like an obscuring

covering. The obscuring coverings are like chaff (that envelops grain), thus (that
Impurity) is bereft of knowledge and action.

ibid p. 9:
uktaṁṅ śrīcillācakreśvaramate –

TANTRĀLOKA

somasūryarasollāsaparasparanigharṣaṇāt |

jātavedasi saṁjāte madhyadhāmavikāsini ||
virāruṇaparīṇāmavaśād aṇkurasaṁbhavaḥ |
‘The mutual rubbing together of the (blissful) outpouring of the juice (rasa) of

the Moon and the Sun gives rise to the Fire which expands the abode in the centre
(madhyadhāman). By the transformation of the semen and the menstrual blood (that

takes place when this occurs), the sprout (of the first state of the embryo) arises.”
ekarātroṣitaṁ retaḥ siktaṁ kalilatāṁ vrajet Iḷ
budbudaṁ saptarātreṇa peśī māsena jāyate |
dvitīye māsi ca ghanastrtīyegnīparigrahaḥ ||

caturthe vyaṇgatāṇgānāṁ cetanā pañcame bhavet |
“The semen that was sown and sprinkled for one night becomes the fecundated
seed. In seven days it becomes (like) foam and in one month a fleshy foetus (pesī). In
the second month it becomes dense, in the third it is wrapped around the fire (of life)
and in the fifth the limbs that had become evident in the fourth (month) possess

consciousness.’

saṣṭhe sarvāṇgasaṁbhedaḥ saptame calanodgamaḥ ||
tejo'stame saṁcarati navame vedanaṁ bhavet |
saṁpūrṇadeho daśame māsi jantuḥ prajāyate ||
jāto'sau vāyunā spṛṣṭo yoniyantraprapīḍitaḥ |
‘In the sixth (month) all the limbs are distinct and in the seventh it begins to
move. In the eight, radiant (vital) energy (tejas) circulates (through it) and in the ninth
there is sensory awareness (vedana). In the tenth month the body is fully complete and
becomes a person. Touched by the breath (vāyu) (of life), he is pained by the machine of
the womb.”
na smaraty ugrasaṁtāpam anekabhavasaṁbhavam ||
krameṇa vṛddhimāyānti tasyaite dehahetavaḥ |
rasaḥ sthitiṁ prakurute raktaṁ saṁjīvayatyalam ||
māṁsaṁ vṛṁhayati prãāyo medaḥ snehayati sphuṭam |
‘He does not recall the terrible suffering that has arisen through many lives
(bhava) and progressively these, the causes of his body grow (and develop). The juice

(of digested food) gives stability and (forms) blood that is sufficient to give life (to the

body) (whilst) the flesh generally increases it and fat clearly becomes sinew.’

dhārayanti tathāsthīni majjāntaḥsārasaṁśrayā |l

harṣotkarṣakaraṁ śukraṁ mūtraṁ kledavivekakṛt |

vāyvagniṣaṁrodhakaraṁ purīṣaṁ parikrtitam ||

p. 10) svedakledopakaraṉaṁ garbhaheturathārtavam ḷ

evaṁ śarīram āsādya ṣāṭkośaṁ tatparigrahāt |
anapekṣya nijaṁ bhāvaṁ pumān bhāvān apekṣate |

‘The bones in the same way sustain it and the marrow rests in their inner
essence. Sperm gives rise to joy and elevation. Urine creates moisture and discernment.
Faeces are said to block (excessive) wind and fire (in the body) and are the secondary
cause of sweat and moisture (of the body). The fertile season is the cause of the

CHAPTER ONE

‘That Impurity (mmala) is considered to be of two kinds – intellectual and
spiritual. There, (out of these two,) spiritual Impurity is destroyed by initiation

and the like, (whereas) intellectual (Impurity) is not. It continues to be active

to varying degrees as long as the intellectual knowledge has not arisen that
destroys (the ignorance) which is of its same kind and correctly distinguishes
the essence (of reality) and what it is not.”

Initiation cannot make spiritual knowledge manifest as long as it is not

preceded by intellectual knowledge and so, for that reason also, (the latter) is

said to be the main (pradhāna) (form of knowledge).

How can such intellectual knowledge also arise in this way apart from

the Supreme Lord’s scripture? Thus, that itself is here (in our view) the main
(means,) because it is the root cause (of liberation). Thus, he says:

hÉIEVIEEIIEIFAGHIECA

tathāvidhāvasāyātmabauddhavijñānasampade |
śāstram eva pradhānaṁ yaj jñeyatattvapradarśakam || 47 II

Scripture (śāstra), which reveals the (true) nature of (all) that
needs be known (jñeyatattva), is īndeed the principal (factor) that serves
to bring about the intellectual understanding which is that kind of
(liberating) insight (avasāyā). (47)
(Scripture is the principal factor that serves) ‘to bring about’, that is, to

generate that (liberating insight). This is the meaning. This is because ‘the
nature of (all) that needs be known’, that is, of ‘blue’, ‘pleasureʼ and the like,

is Śiva’s nature, which is the Light (of consciousness that makes all things
manifest), because (its) manifestation (lit. its ‘shining’) could not otherwise be

(impregnation of) the womb. Having obtained a body in this way, consisting of six
(vital) sheaths by taking (all) this up, disregarding his own condition (bhāva), the person
(thus constituted) is dependent (on the many outer) things (bhāva).’

' One could perhaps emend samudritam to sumudritam – ‘well impressed’. MS Ñ
reads:

–samuddhatam

and

D:

–samudditaṁ. Theṣe readings suggest the preferred emendation -samuditam – ‘active’.

' AII ṭthe MSs read -prakāśakam ‘illumineṣ’ for -pradarśakam ʻreveals'. Although

Jayaratha’s explanation is consonant with the variant, he comments on the reading –
pradarśakam (with which all the MSs agree) and so that has been retained.

' The meaning of the word jñeyatattva is also ‘the true nature of the object of
knowledge.’ This is the way it is also understood below in verses 52 ff.

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains: Advaitaśāstra is a must for Bauddhajñāna, but Dīkṣā

[initiation] is a prerequisite for that. Pauruṣajīāna must be there first, then
Bauddhajñāna is glorious. It will purify itself and others also. If there is only
Bauddhajñāna, it is no use. But it is in fact impossible to have Bauddhajñāna; unless
Aṇavamala is destroyed. So Pauruṣajīāna and Bauddhajñāna grow together.

TANTRĀLOKA

logically possible.”" (Scripture) ‘reveals’ it because, by teaching supreme
nonduality (parādvaya), (scripture) defines (abhidāyaka) (the ultimate nature of
all things). This is the meaning. Thus, the difference between this (our Śaiva
scripture) from other scriptures that do not reveal that is also implicitly

acknowledged (kaṭākṣita).

Surely, (one may ask,) let it be so (as you say), but why is liberation

(attained) here (in this case only) when the body comes to an end if spiritual

ignorance has ceased, whereas when intellectual knowledge ceases, it (is
attained) just then (at that very moment)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

iāe tc®ezits EṭItāeiEiIEḤ

fē aaq 1| ¢ Il

dīkṣayā galite ‘py antarajñāne pauruṣātmani |
dhīgatasyānivṛttatvād vikalpo ‘pi hi sambhavet || 48 ||
Even when inner spiritual ignorance has (inwardly) ceased by
virtue of initiation, (binding) thought would (nevertheless still) arise

because (the ignorance) present in the intellect has not ceased. (48)

(What is being discussed is) the ignorance ‘present in the intellect’.
‘Thought’ is the perception of relative distinctions (bhedaprathā), and that is
The reality underlying objectivity (i.. ‘all that needs to be known’) is Śiva’s
essential nature (sśivatā) which is the Light of consciousness (prakāśa). Without it no
object could manifest (lit. ‘shine’) within consciousness and thus exist in any way that

could be known. Note that this view does not entail that what is unknown is non-

existent. Whatever exists can be known, it is ‘knowable’ and, indeed, ‘should be known’
and is ‘what is to be knownʼ (all translations of the term ‘jñeya’). Anything which is, or

can be, an object of knowledge, must necessarily appear within consciousness to be
known.
Intellectual knowledge is the insight that everything is the one Śiva consciousness in

the form of the Pure Knowledge (śuddhavidyā) that ‘I am all this and all this is me’.
This deep understanding of the true purport of the scriptures, cannot arise unless the

spiritual ignorance which contracts consciousness is removed by initiation. Conversely,
initiation is not possible or effective without intellectual knowledge because without
insight, doubt is not removed and doubt gives rise to more binding thought constructs,

even if consciousness has expanded and spiritual knowledge has developed through

initiation and practice. If intellectual ignorance persists, mistaken notions are always

liable to lead the practitioner astray. So, the two support each other and must develop
together.

" T translate the word ‘prathā’ here as ‘perception’, some translate the word as

‘experience’. lts sense in common parlance is, more literally, that of ‘spreading out’,
‘extending, ‘unfolding and so, by extension, ‘displaying’. One could translate

bhedaprathā as just ‘expansion’ or ‘unfolding’ of bheda ~ ‘division’, ‘relative

distinctionsʼ, in short, duality. However, by doing so the intrinsic connection with

perception, that is, the act of knowing which coincides with the appearing of what is

known, would be ignored. Compare the expression ‘citsvarūpaprathā’, which I translate
as the ‘unfolding insight (prathā) into the (true) essential nature (svarūpa) of
consciousness (cir). Also, ‘pūrṇaprathā’, which I translate as ‘the full (and perfect)

CHAPTER ONE

an absence of knowledge (of the one reality) (akhyāti) and so is ignorance. This
has been said many times.
Surely, (one may ask,) if the ignorance present in the intellect has not

ceased, then what difference does it make to the Self (when the body comes to
an end and with it the intellect)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

aaiṁ fi-r |

dehasadbhāvaparyantam ātmabhāvo yato dhiyi |
dehānte ʻpi na mokṣaḥ syāt pauruṣājñānahānitaḥ l| 49 ||
As the sense of one’s own (corporeal) identity is present in the

intellect right up to the end of the body’s existence, but not so also when the

body has come to an end, (an initiate’s) liberation (takes place then)
because (only his) spiritual ignorance has been destroyed (by initiation).
(49)
Even an initiate will for the time determined (niyata) (by his residual

Karma) grasp (and perceive) his own (embodied) identity (ārtmagraha) within

(his) intellect. Thus, because the two (that is, the intellect and one’s own
(pūrṇa) unfolding of insight (pārṇaprathā)’. One could also translate simply as the
‘unfolding (or expansion) of consciousness’ or (the reality) which is ‘full (and perfect).

This would convey the sense of the unfolding revelation or manifestation of it, but

would not take into account the knowing of it. Ignorance is apūrṇaprathā, which means

both unfolding (perception) of (the aspect of reality which is) incomplete or

‘incomplete unfolding (of complete and perfect consciousness). In short, the term
‘prathā’, despite its common primary sense of ‘spreading out’ etc., is here to be
understood more in the sense of ‘perception’ or ‘knowledge’, and by extension,

‘manifestation’ʼ. The term indicates that consciousness and the cognitive activity that
accompanies it is an extending, unfolding dynamic process. This is true whether the

‘unfolding perception’ is that of full and perfect consciousness, as it is of duality, which
is the same ‘unfolding’ but in its incomplete (apūrṇa) form, or of what is incomplete,

that is, duality and relative distinctoons (bheda), rather than the pure essential nature of

consciousness alone. By translating the word prathā as ‘experience’ʼ, one would

conclude that this view teaches that everything is ‘experience’. Ultimate reality is the

experience of oneness, whereas the daily reality of the ignorant fettered soul is the
experience of duality (bhedaprathā). However, that translation fails to note the noetic

nature of ‘experience’.

dehānte lit. ‘when the body comes to an end’.
Intellectual ignorance is described here as ‘laying hold of oneself within the

intellectʼ. Laying hold or grasping oneself that way means to perceive one’s own
subjectivity as being there rather than within pure consciousness. The perception of

oneself in the intellect is a notion of oneself. It is a thought construct based on

objectivity and relative distinctions. It is to perceive oneself objectively as ‘I am so and
s0’, to which may be associated any number of notions based on an understanding of

oneself as variously identified with a range of objectively perceived entities, starting
with the grossest, which is the body, as when we think, ‘ am fat’ or ‘Ī am thin’. The

TANTRĀLOKA

limited perception of oneself within it) are not (essentially) different.
possible for intellectual ignorance to thrive within oneself (even when spī
ignorance has been eliminated by taking initiation). This is the sense (of this
verse).
Thus because (this) perception of one’s own (embodied) identity that
takes place within the intellect ceases when the body comes to an end, and
because spiritual ignorance has been previously destroyed by initiation and the
rest, (one attains) liberation. So it has been rightly said that ‘that knowledge (of
the Self) manifests clearly (only) when that body comes to an end.”
(Binding) thought arising here in this way is an intervening obscuration
to liberation (after initiation). Thus, liberation (is not attained) at that very
moment. But if it does not arise again, (he attains) liberation even when the

body still exists (and he is alive). Thus, he says:

ā̄ mī] ṣcgh rI TatrāTa 1| o 1|

ītsfsEe'tāútctzzie

bauddhājñānanivrttau tu vikalponmūlanād dhruvam |
tadaiva mokṣa ity uktaṁ dhātrā śrīmanniśāṭane || 50 ||
vikalpayuktacittas tu piṇḍapātāc chivaṁ vrajet |
itaras tu tadaiveti śāstrasyātra pradhānataḥ | 51 |
body, which is objective, can be fat or thin, the ‘I’ can never be an object such that it can
have such objective attributes. The same applies to notions such as ‘I see’ or ‘ḹ am
blindʼ, which is at the level of sensory subjectivity, identified with the senses. ‘I am

happy or sad relates to the mind and so on. All these ways of ‘grasping oneself within
the intellect’, that is, conceiving oneself intellectually, are thought constructs (vikalpa).

Until the correct intellectual knowledge of oneself as pure consciousness that can never

be an object arises, which is not a thought construct, the fettered soul is subject to the
intellectual ignorance of such limited notions of its own nature. In this sense, one can
say that intellectual ignorance persists as long as identification with the psychophysical

organism persists.

Above, 1/43cd. Abhinava says here, and is echoed by Jayaratha, that those who have

maintained the spiritual knowledge acquired by initiation intact will be liberated when
the body dies, because the binding activity of the intellect with its mistaken notions of
personal identity and the world ceases. However, this is not always guaranteed.
Accordingly, Abhinava repeatedly discusses the condition of the dying man. He
presents and supports by reasoned argument the famous passage in the Bhagavadgītā
where Kṛṣṇa declares that the soul transits to another body impelled by the desires and

notions the dying person has at the moment of death (28/324cd ff). This implies that

even at the moment of death intellectual knowledge is essential. This is a very important

matter for Abhinava, who devotes a great deal of attention to teaching post-mortem

initiatory rites and Mantras imparted to the dying or recently departed (see chapters 19,
21 and 24; also 28/308 ff). A cardinal example of the later is the Brahma Vidyā (see
19/33 ff., and 30/62cd-90ab). These serve to clean up any remaining spiritual ignorance
and sustained liberating insight.

CHAPTER ONE

(However,) liberation is most certainly (achieved) just then,

intellectual ignorance ceases, because (binding) though

when

t has been uprooted.

Thus the Benefactor has said in the venerable Niśātanatantra: “He whose

mind is yoked (yukta) to thought attains Śiva (only) after
the body dies,
whereas the other (aspirant who is free of thought attains Him)
that very

moment.” This is because here (intuitive insight into the meaning of the)

scriptures is primary. (50-51)

This (teaching) is not without scriptural authority. Thus he says

(the

Benefactor Himself) ‘has said’ etc. ‘The other (aspirant) is
one who is free of
thought. (He attains liberation) ‘just then’, (even) when the (living)
body still

exists.” This is the meaning. As is said there itself (in the Niśāṭanatantra):

1/50-51 is a paraphrase of three lines Jayaratha quotes directly from the Niśātana

(1/50d). The first line is paraphrased below as 13/242ab and
quoted literally by
Jayaratha. These lines and three preceding them are paraphrased
as 14/42cd-45.

Jayaratha quotes all six ad 14/42cd-45. The same idea is reworked in 16/199cd

-220ab

and elaborated from line 196cd to 220ab. Jayaratha informs us (ad 16/196cd
-220ab) that
this subject is discussed at length in the first chapter of the Niśāṭanatantra.
Liberation is
immediate for those free of thought constructs when intellectual ignoranc
e ceases and
after death for those who are freed from spiritual ignorance by initiation

When intellectual ignorance has been eradicated by a sound knowledg
e, free of
thought constructs, of the nondual reality taught in the scriptures, and spiritual
ignorance

has been remedied by initiation, the soul is liberated whilst living
in the body
(jīvanmukta). The expanded consciousness of spiritual knowledge
is always liable to
contraction without intellectual insight of the soul’s essential
identity as pure

consciousness. There is no self-knowledge without intellectual knowledge.

the soul who possesses that insight is liberated there and then, it follows

Indeed, if

that knowledge

of the scriptures, in this sense, is even more important than taking initiation.
! Jayaratha prefers not to interpret ‘just then’ (tadaiva) in the way which appears

to be

the most evident, namely, that the aspirant whose fundamental spiritual
impurity has
been removed attains liberation in this life in the very instant his intellectu
al ignorance

ceases. In other words, liberation in the body is achieved in an instant. It is
not in the
domain of practice. Liberation after death, which is much more common,
requires
practice even though the initiate is already essentially pure. The fact that we
are already

perfect is not a reason not to practice or to have no goals of any sort
in life. Indeed, it is
just the other way around. It is because of this inherent purity that
practice and the

attāinment of its goal is possible. Thus, the more we are pure, the more we practice.

Practice is the concrete expression of that purity. It sustains and reveals
it. The need to
practice is a natural reaction to the realisation that we are already essential
ly free in our

oneness with our own unlimited and divine consciousness. The more the freedom,
the
greater the practice, the more intense the zeal, the greater our openness to face
anything

and courage to give everything we have to the Light, knowing that we have
nothing and
are simply freely returing what has been freely given. The liberated
life is the fullest
most unrestricted expression of the same attitude. But now suddenly
we enter that
oneness and live, even in our daily life, the experience of the perfect
plenitude which,

requiring nothing, pours out of its plenitude into perfectly selfless action that

illumineṣ

and benefits the world. The inner stillness is the ground of the limitless
activity of ‘Nonactionʼ that creates, sustains and withdraws all things. The liberated
life is the cosmic
life lived in transcendental oneness with Deity for the benefit of others.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘He whose mind is yoked to thought attains Śiva (only) after the body

falls away. He whose mind is free of thought sees” himself as

imperishable Śiva by the purity of (his) state (bhāva) and is, without a doubt,

liberated whilst alive (jīvanmukta).

(Thus) he now concludes (this discussion concerning) the primacy of
scripture he had introduced (as a topic) previously. The word ‘thus’ (iti) (which
marks the end of the quotation) should be applied (with reference to the two
things, that is, the one which precedes (that is the quotation) and the other one
which follows (that is the following sentence) in accord with the maxim of the

eye of a crow.” Thus (the ‘itī’) should be explained (to be indicating both) the

end (of the quote) from the venerable Niśāṭana and the reason (why the
scripture is primary for the attainment of liberation in this life). And that, as was
said previously also, ‘reveals the (true) nature of (all) that needs be known

(ñeyatattva)

The first line is quoted below ad 13/242ab and as TĀ 14/44cd. All three lines are

quoted again as part of a longer passage below ad 14/42cd-45. Read as we find there

and in MSs Ch, Jh, N, D: vikalpakṣīṇacittas for vikalpahīnacittas.

Ch: paśyato; T: paśyante; Ḍ: paśyata.
Insṭead of hy ātmānaṁ the same citation below ad 14/42cd-45 and MSs Ch, Jh, Ñ, T
and D read: ātmānaṁ, which is thus the accepted reading.

Observe Abhinava’s interpretation of this verse and his subtle reworking of a few

words to align it better to his agenda of promoting instant realisation as the door to
liberation in the present life (jīvanmuktúi). Liberating realisation is an ‘all or nothingʼ
affair. It requires the total cessation of thought or, to put it another way, total entry into
perfectly pure nirvikalpa consciousness, that is, one totally devoid of even the slightest
trace of objectivity, free of all dichotomy between ‘inner’ nirvikalpa and ‘outer’

savikalpa.

See above, note 1,88. The word ‘ii’ is used to mark the end of quotations or

statements, as are inverted comma. It can also serve to indicate a reason and so could be
translated as ‘thuṣ’.

Above, 1/47d. Abhinava summarizes what he has said up to now in the following

passage of the Tantrasāra (p. 2-S). What he says here about why he wrote the
Tantrasāra, applies equally to the Tantrāloka: Here (according to us), knowledge is the
cause of liberation because it counters ignorance, which is the instrumental cause of
bondage. And ignorance is of two kinds. One is present in the intellect and (the other is)
spiritual (pauruṣa). The one present in the intellect is the lack of conviction (concerning
the true nature of the Self) and a reversed conviction (that the Self is what it is not).
Spiritual Ignorance consists essentially of (the veil of) thought constructs, which is the
contracted experience (of the nature of reality). As we shal
explain when discussing the

nature of Impurity, that itself is the root cause of transmigratory existence. Although

spiritual ignorance is remedied by initiation and the like, even so, that cannot take place
if the ignorance present in the intellect, which is an absence of (sound) judgement
(adhyavasāya), exists. This is because initiation, which consists of the purification of
the (initiand’s) reality levels (tattvaśuddhi) and (his) conjunction with Śiva, is
(mecessarily) preceded by a convinced ascertainment (on his part) of what should be
reject and what should be adopted. (Now) there (in that case), the knowledge that is

well-established in the intellect, that consists of (sound) judgement, is fundamental.

Only that, in the course of its exercise, destroys ignorance, including the spiritual one.

This is because the exercise of consciousness with (sound) conceptions (of reality)
ultimately culminates in (the liberated state) free of conceptual representations.

CHAPTER ONE

Now what is the nature of the object (of perception) (jūeya) such that,

in the course of its being revealed, it should bring about the understanding that
(a knowledge of the) scriptures is primary (for the attainment of liberation in
this life)? With this question in mind, he says (the following).
The a priori Nature of Śiva Consciousness

Ṝa: |

TGTITTTĀ
TĪRTY TKTTĪ aTI /II 4RII

jñeyasya hi paraṁ tattvaṁ yaḥ prakāśātmakaḥ śivaḥ |

na hy aprakāśarūpasya prākāśyaṁ vastutāpi vā || 52 |

(Now) the knowledge that should be adopted consists of a proper convinced

ascertainment that is well grounded in all that is true (samastavastu) in every respect,
namely, that the nature of the Self, which is the light of consciousness uncontracted by

thought constructs, is Śiva. And that (conviction) is preceded (by the study of) scripture.

Only scripture that is spoken by the Supreme Lord is authoritative (pramāṇa). This is

because (it is generally) accepted that, in that regard (tatra), the subject (artha) taught in
other scriptures is quite different (from the one taught by the Supreme Lord), and also
because (their authoritativeness) is said to be proved by arguments that are related to a
different reality (artha) (than is the concern of Śaiva scriptures). Thus, the knowledge
taught in other scriptures liberates from just a certain commensurate amount of
ignorance, not from all of it. It is (only) the Supreme Lord’s scripture that liberates from

all of it, and that consists of five currents divided into ten, eighteen and eight times eight

divisions (i.e. scriptures). The essence (drawn) from all (of them) consists of the Trika
scriptures. And (the essence drawn) from them also is the Mālinīvijaya. (However), it is
impossible to elucidate the subject matter (artha) contained therein without having
(first) made it coherent. Nor can the true nature of reality that has not been elucidated
serve to liberate (oneself) or liberate (others), simply because it is pure (complete and
certain) knowledge alone that is such (i.e. liberating). Thus, because the root (of the
aṭtainment of) the supreme goal of life (puruṣārtha) is well practiced knowledge, this
(work) is undertaken in order that that may be achieved.
Indeed, it is said in the scripture that ignorance is the cause of bondage, and
that is considered to be Impurity (mala). All that becomes devoid of (any) basis, and
liberation (is achieved) when the power of full (and perfect) knowledge dawns as does
one's own consciousness, the Impurity of which has been entirely destroyed. Thus, by
means of this treatise I will render clear and lucid the entire reality that needs be known.

(Thus ends) the introduction.”
1 have translated the expression jñeyatattva as ‘the nature of (all) that needs be

known’. Now in this different context jñeya, which literally means, ‘what needs to be
known’ or ‘should be known’, is better translated as ‘object of perception’. In this sense,
the word belongs to a triad of terms that together denote three aspects of perception,
namely, ‘jñātr̥’ – the ‘knower” or ‘perceiver’, jñāna – knowledge or perception, and
jñeya – the object of knowledge or object of perception. Moreover, when we are not
talking about some specific perceiver or type, the word ‘jñātr denotes the subject, and
by extension, his subjectivity in general. Similarly, the word ‘jñeya’ may denote

objectivity in general. So sometimes, according to the context, I also translate in that
way.

TANTRĀLOKA

The supreme reality (paraṁ tattvam) of the object (of perception)

is Śiva Whois the Light (of consciousness), for that whichis not Light can

neither be illumined (i.e. be made manifest) nor even have (any) existence

(vastutā). (52)

This verse connects to verse 47 above. The first line is quoted above in the comm. on

1/26 and below in that on 1/54. Note that in both cases the reading is jñeyasya ca instead
of jñeyasya hi as it is here.

The second line of th
following passage:

verse is quoted in MM (p. 36) as the conclusion of the

kulālādīnāṁ kumbhādyapekṣayā kiñcid ajāḍye ‘pi parameśvarāpekṣayā jāḍyam eveti

suṣṭhūktaṁ kāryakāraṇabhāva eva sarve sambandhāḥ, kāraṇaṁ ca kartaiveti | evaṁ ca
sati
tatra paramaśivād upari na kartrantarasphuraṇam, prṛthivyā upari na
kāryāntarotpattīś ca | tayor yaḥ pratipadārthamānupūrvyeṇa vyavahriyamāṇo

madhyavartī
tattvasaṁghāta-rūpo
‘rthaḥ,
tasya
pratyakṣādipramāṇopagṛhyamāṇasya
paryantataḥ
prakāśa
evānuprāṇanatayā
svabhāva ity anvayavyatirekābhyām avadhāryate, anyathā cakṣurādisāmagryām api
teṣām aprakāśamānatvāpatteḥ |

‘Potters, for example, are sentient to some degree in relation to the pot etc. (they

make). Even so, it is rightly said that in relation to the Supreme Lord they are as if

insentience itself. AIl relationships (between things) are (ultimately) just that between
cause and effect, and the cause is an agent. Moreover, this being s0, no other agent
manifests above Supreme Śiva, and nor does any other effect arise (below) beyond

Earth. A phenomenal entity consists of a coalescence of metaphysical principles and,

located in between these two (extremes), drawn towards itself
by the intellect, functions

(in daily life) in accord with each (relevant) category of existing things. Perceived by
the means of knowledge such as direct perception and the rest, its nature is ultimately

the light (of consciousness) as that which gives it life (and existence). This is understood
(to be s0) by both positive and negative concomitance. (Thus, if it were) otherwise, even

if the aggregate (of factors that make for perception,) such as the sense of sight and the
rest, are present, the (undesirable) consequence would be that they would not manifest.”
MM p. 36: yad uktaṁ nareśvaraviveke na prathetāprathārūpaṁ nāśvetaṁ śvetate yathā iti |

yathã ca śrītantrāloke -

na hy aprakāśarūpasya prākāśyaṁ vastutāpi ca iti | TĀ 1/52cd

tataś_cāntaḥsthaḥ ṣvātmaprakāśa eva bahiḥ prakāśyaprapañcatayā sphuratīty etat
tāvad
.abhyupagantavyam

ca
sattriṁśato

prakāśasvabhāvatvāviśeṣāt pṛthivyāpa ityādir anyonyaviśeṣato vyavahāro na
saṁbhavati | . vyavahriyate ca viśeṣaḥ pratyakṣam eva lokena | anyathā
jalasthalavibhāgāder arthakriyāṁ praty aniyamāpatteḥ | sa ca viśeṣaḥ svahṛdayagatayā
vimarśasattayaivotpadyate | utpattiś ca tādātmye paryavasyati | yad yaj jātaṁ tat tad
eva hīty uktatvāt | uṉmeṣapadenaitad āha –
svātmavimarśadrumasya pallavapuṣpādiprāyam etad viśvavaicitryasphuraṇam iti
‘As is said in the Nareśvaraviveka: ‘One does not perceive (anything) that is
not perceived (aprathā), just as what is not white does not become white (śvetate).”
As (is said) in the Tantrāloka: ʻthat which is not Light can neither be illumined
(i.e. be made manifest) nor even have (any) existence (vastutā).
Thus the Light of one’s own Self, which is located within, shines as the

external unfolding development of the object of illumination. One must accept it to be
such. Thus, because (all) thirty-six principles are (equally) without distinction the Light

CHAPTER ONE

The ‘blueness” of ‘blue’ and the like which is ‘the object (of
perception) is its ongoing manifestation (prakāśamānatā), which is not, as

such (tāvat), its essential nature, for if it were to be, then it would be (manifest)

to everybody all the time, not just to somebody sometimes. Thus, everybody
would be omniscient. And so (the manifest state of an object) is possible only
(if) conjoined with a perceiver whose nature is the Light (of consciousness) (in
such a way that it is experienced as) ‘it manifests (lit. ‘shines’) to him” (or) ʻit

manifests to meʼ. (Phenomena) like ‘blue’ are not concluded (paryavasita)

independently in their own nature (without reference to a perceiver). Śiva
Himself is the perceiver whose nature is the light (of consciousness), because
anything else apart from that is afflicted with conceived notions (vikalpa) of

unity and difference (bhedābheda).” Thus, because the object of knowledge,

that is, ‘blue’ etc. manifests (lit. ‘shines’), (Śiva, who is the perceiver that
illumines it, and so is the source of its manifest nature,) is Himself (its) ultimate

reality (paramārtha), (and s0) ‘the supreme reality (paraṅ tattvam) is Śiva
Who is the Light (of consciousness).”

Surely (one may object), even if it is not such by itself (i.e. luminously

manifest), (the object) will become such by (its) association (saṁbandha) with

the Light (of consciousness). With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘that which is

(of consciousness), the business (of daily life) that is due to the mutual distinction
between Earth and Water and the rest, (should) not be possible. It is directly perceived
by people (lokena) that the difference (viśeṣa) (between things is actually) operating (in

everyday life). Otherwise (if that were not s0), the undesirable consequence would be

that the division between water and dry land (sthala) and the like, in terms of their
function would not be fixed (and invariable). Moreover, that difference (viśeṣa) arises as
being essentially (perceived through an act of) reflective awareness which is
instinctively accepted (to be correct). And its arising ultimately culminates in a state of
oneness (tādātmya). For it is said that (an entity) is as it has arisen (to be). That (arising)
is referred to by the term ‘opening upʼ (unmeṣa). It is said:
‘The radiant flashing forth of the wonderful variety of all things is like the

sprouts and flowers of the tree of the reflective awareness of one’s own Self.”

etena . parāparapramātroḥ
prakāśavimarśānuprāṇanatvaṁ
paryantatas
tayor
aikātmyaṁ (p. 37) ca vyākhyātam | paramaśiva iti | uktarāūpaṁ cāsṣya svātantryaṁ
viśvottirṇatvamātre
viśrāmyati,
na
punar
viśvamayaviśvottirṇatvalakṣaṇe
paramasvātantryasaṁpatsāmrājye, tādṛkṣyabhāvasya ca pratyāhārānaucityāt, pratyuta
tasya pratyāhartr̥tvam eva svabhāva iti || 12 ||
It is explained in this way that the oneness of the two, that is, the supreme and
inferior perceiver, is ultimately the vitalizing power of the reflective awareness of the
light (of consciousness) (p. 37). The freedom, previously described, (that Paramaśiva)

possesses brings (all things) to rest in transcendence alone. For it is not proper that one’s

own (innate nature), which is such and is within the empire of the wealth of supreme
freedom that is (both) transcendent and immanent, be withdrawn. Rather, on the
contrary, (one’s own) innate nature (svabhāva) is the state of withdrawal itself.”

This may be the unity of the perceiver and diversity of the object. It may also be the

unity and difference of the relationship between things. For there to be relationship,
there must be something in common between the relata. Obviously, there must also be
difference between them.
" The objection is that it is not necessarily the case that whatever manifests is the Light
of consciousness that shines in that way. One could also maintain that the object is not

TANTRĀLOKA

not (Light) etc. Even though ‘blue’, for example, manifests in association
(saṁbandha) with the Light (of consciousness), it manifests insofar as it is itself
(svayam) the light (that shines in that way) (prakāśarūpa). And it could not be
that what is unmanifest (lit. ‘not light’) by nature manifests (lit. ‘shines’). A

building that is not white does not become white (śverate).

Nor would it have real existence in that way (i.e. as a white building).
(Something) having abandoned its manifest state (prakāśarūpatā) (as that
particular object) could not become something else. This is the overall sense.
In this way, not only is the true nature (tattva) of what exists (bhāva) as

an object (of perception), such as

‘blue’, Śiva, who is the light (of

consciousness), because it manifests (lit. ‘shines’), but (such also is the nature)

of what does not exist. Thus, he says:

3JTTSTTĪU ṂWTTTĪ TCPṀTTTTHT |I

avastutāpi bhāvānāṁ camatkāraikagocarā |
yat kuḍyasadṛṣī neyaṁ dhīr avastv etad ity api || 53 |I
The non-existence (avastutā) of entities is also in one (and the same)

field of the wonder (of consciousness as is their existence). The notion

(dhī) “ṭhīs is non-existent (avastu)” is not similar to (an inert object such as)

a wall." (53)

Even a notion (buddhi) of the form ‘there is no jar here’ is of the nature
of consciousness (bodha), and so differs from an inert entity such as a wall.
Thus, because the non-existence (abhāva), for example, of a jar (on an empty

piece of ground or where some other object is located, is) known (to the
intellect) (buddhyamāna), it is, (as is anything that manifests in any way,
whether externally or in the mind,) Śiva, Who is one dense (unbroken)

consciousness and supreme bliss. This is the meaning. They say that:

the Light but becomes manifest when illumined and made manifest by the light of
consciousness. This is essentially the dualist Sāṁkhya’s view. The answer to this

objection is that if that were so, the manifestation of anything would be impossible,
because if unmanifest means independent of the Light of consciousness, it could not
exist, because ‘existence’ and manifestation are one and the same.

The same analogy is found in the Nareśvaraviveka, quoted in MM p. 36.
‘Wonder’ (camatkāra) īs the primary characteristic of consciousness; it is indicative

of its sentience, which distinguishes it from the insentient (iaḍa). See note 1,11.

! Everything that appears in any way within the field of perception - even the notion
that something does not exist – is illumined by the light of consciousness. Nothing

exists outside it. Moreover, whatever appears in any form, is illumined by the light of
consciousness and so participates in its luminous, conscious nature, otherwise, it would

be outside consciousness and non-existent. How ‘non-existence’ is perceived, as
exemplified by the perception of the absence ofa jar in a certain place, is a surprisingly
complex epistemological problem. See Torella 1987: 57 ff.

CHAPTER ONE

‘even that which is insentient, in the course of being known (to the

intellect), is the Lord Himself, Whose nature is consciousness.’

Surely, (one may ask, agreed that) once the existence of the Light (of

consciousness) has been proved, one can prove that the ultimate reality of the
object of perception, both existent and non-existent, is one with that. But by
what (sure and certain) means of knowledge is that (Light) proved to exist?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

TRTĪ] TT āATĀ Jdd JTYTT |

prakāśo nāma yaś cāyaṁ sarvadaiva prakāśate |

anapahnavanīyatvāt kiṁ tasmin mānakalpanaiḥ || 54 I|

Indeed, this Light (of consciousness) shines at all times; so, as it

cannot be denied, what is the use (of applying) contrived means of
knowledge to it? (All that needs be done is to recognise that the One Light
exists and that it ilumines the manifestation of all things.) (54)

Indeed, a means of knowledge has as its object something new (that has
not been known before). As they say: “A means of knowledge (is defined as
having) as its object (an entity) not (as yet) known, or (to put it another way), it

is the (cognitive) light (that illumines) something that is unknown.’ There is

no novel manifestation (lit. ‘light’) of the light (of consciousness), because it

continues to shine ‘aṭ all timesʼ, and so, ‘because it cannot be deniedʼ, it is

useless to contrive means of knowledge there (in that case to know it or prove

its existence). If that (were possible), then its manifestation (lit. ‘light’) would

be novel, and if so, because it was previously unknown, it would not manifest

(lit. ‘shine’) (at that previous time). And that sort of absence would also occur in
the case of the recollection of a previous time that is devoid of that. (However,)

memory also is not logically possible without this kind of (prior) experience,
because (memory) is essentially the absence of forgetfulness of something
The word here is ‘abodha’, which literally means ‘not-consciousness’.
Read with Jayaratha sarvadaiva for sarvatraiva.

The ‘denial’ (apoha) to which this verse refers is a cognitive process whereby a
particular object perceived by the senses, or even imagined, is identified by ‘denyingʼ

that it is anything else. Buddhist logicians originally formulated this concept in order to
account for the specificity of entities which they maintain have no nature of their own
and so cannot be distinguished simply on the basis that they are different things. From

the perspective of the philosophy of Recognition (Pratyabhijña), it is not applicable to

the light of consciousness that shines everywhere as everything at all times. All that

needs to be done is to recognise that the One Light exists and that it illumines the
manifestation of all things.
anadhigatavīṣayaṁ Npramāṇamajñātārthaprakāśo vā. This statement, which is
probably drawn from a Buddhist text, is discussed in ĪPVV vol. 1, p. 63. It is quoted
again below ad 1/180cd-181ab and in the ad 4/81cd-83.

The light of consciousness irrefutably precedes all knowledge.

TANTRĀLOKA

previously experienced,√ and there is no experience of a previous time that is

devoid of the light (of manifestation) (simply) because the experience of that is

essentially the light (of manifestation which is consciousness), and so it is itself
(that) Light (of consciousness). So how can it not exist previously also? Thus,
the proof (of the existence of the Light of consciousness) does not depend on
(any) means of knowledge, because it is proved to exist right from the start

(ādisiddha), as it shines at all times. Again, in accord with the principle (nīti)

that ‘the light (of consciousness) is the subject (pramātṛ) that illumines (all
things), it is Siva, the Supreme Lord, Who is the supreme subject. So it was
rightly said that: ‘the supreme reality (paraṁ tattvam) of the object (of

perception) is Śiva, Who is Light.

This definition of memory is found in YSū 1/11. anubhūtaviṣayāsaṁpramoṣaḥ
smṛtiḥ. Abhinava explains from the Pratyabhijñā point of view:

pūrvaprakāśitavīmṛṣṭatvenaiva prakāśo yo vimarśane vārtamānike antarvartī
samarthitaḥ, sa eva anubhūtasya viṣayasya asaṁpramoṣo ‘napahāraḥ ucyate |
anubhavo Śtīto hi atra prakāśabhāvena viṣayasya uktaḥ, asaṁpramoṣaśca

vārtamānikaṁ (p. 23) tathāparāmarśanam |

‘it is established that the light (that shines) in the present act of reflective
awareness is present within it as the reflection on what has been previously illumined. It
is this alone, namely, the lack of forgetfulness of an object experienced (in the past) that
is said to be (its) retention (anapahāra) (in experience). It is said that the manifest state
here of an object is a past experience and the lack of forgetfulness is the reflective

awareness of its being such at the present time. ĪPVV 2 p. 22-23
Memory also requires previous experience as its basis. There is nothing prior to

experience (that is, the Light of consciousness) that can come to be known by any
means whatsoever, for they are all based on experience. Cf. ĪP 1/1/2: “When the
cognizer and the agent, who is one's own Self and Maheśvara, is proved to exist right
from the beginning (of any perception for it to be possible), what intelligent person can
(ever) deny or establish (its existence)?”
After quoting this verse, Maheśvarānanda (in MM p. 16) writes: gāṅgo hi
pravāhaḥ śaityaprasādādyanekaguṇotkarṣād antarbahiṣṭāpāpahārapravīṇo bhavati |
(p. 17) tatraiva sarvāṅgīṇāplavapūrvakam aghamarṣaṇādyavasthāsu ko nāma naras
tṛṣitah syāt | na kaścid api tathā syād iti yāvat | pipāsety anena
gaṅgāsrotonimagnasyāpi yadi kaṣyacit salilapānecchā, kas tatra pātuṁ pratyīūha iti

pratyāyayatā dārṣṭāntike "pi sthale viśvavyavahāranibanáhanaṁ parameśvaraṁ prati
pramāṇajijñāsāyāṁ pratyakṣādīni sarvāṇy api pramāṇāni sambhavanti, na punar eṣām
atra kācid apekṣety udbhāvyate |

‘The flow of (the river) Ganges removes both outer and inner heat by virtue of
the excellence of its many qualities such as coolness and purity. First plunging with all
one’s body there when in states such as those that efface sin, what man could be thirsty?
None at all could be so! If one who is immersed in the current of the Ganges is thirsty
and desires to drink, what obstacle could there be (to prevent him) from drinking? Now

taking this validatory experience as an example, desiring to inquire into (the nature of)

valid means of knowledge, (we observe) that all the means of knowledge, including
direct perception and the rest, (arise and) are possible (saṁṅbhavanti) with respect to the
Supreme Lord who holds together all the activities of daily life. Nor indeed does one

observe that here (in this case) they are dependent at all (on anything in any way. Rather
they are validated by the Supreme Lord Himself).”

Above, 1/52ab, also quoted above in TĀv ad 1/26 and below ad 10/55cd-56ab.

CHAPTER ONE

Nor is it just that when that is proved (to be so) (siddha), the (various)

means of knowledge are of no use; rather, on the contrary, the proof (siddhi) (of

their validity also) depends on that. Thus, he says:

Tīrātṁ ā sttā: a ũ aāat . uyy1]
pramāṇāny api vastānāṁ jīvitaṁ yāni tanvate |
teṣām api paro jīvaḥ sa eva parameśvaraḥ || 55 ||

The (many) means of knowledge give life to all things (vastu)

(because it is by means of them that they appear to the sentient subject),

while the supreme living essence (jīva) of those (means) also is that same

Supreme Lord (Himself Who is the true identity of the perceiver). (55)

(One may object that) here (according to your view,) entities (vastu)
such as ‘blue’ or ‘yellow” are, independently of their manifest form (prakāśa –

ḷ Verses 1/54-55 are quoted below in TĀv ad 10/116cd-117ab. Abhinava explains in

his Tantrocc
‘(Objection:) surely if this God is of the nature of Light, how is it that
his ignorance is not of the nature of Light? Or (if it is), how can it cease? It is said (in

response to this question): ‘The Self is Śiva, who is free and whose body is Light’. This
Supreme Lord is free, because once he has obscured his own nature, he makes it

manifest (again). And his nature is Light. `~~Thus, if he were not to shine in any one
aspect, that (aspect) would be unmanifest (and so would He), whereas He shines with all

his being (as the nature of all things) (sarvātmanā), and so is manifestation itself
(prakāśatā lit. ‘luminosity°). (And this) manifestation of (Śiva’s) own nature is His
freedom.”
Maheśvarānanda quotes this verse in the MM (p. 16, see previous note). He
links it to the following references:
‘What is the use of (any) means of knowledge which is (an ever) new
manifestation (navābhāsa) with regards to (this) ancient perceiver whose nature is
always manifest (sarvadābhāta) and is inherent in every cognition?’ (IP 2/3/15)
‘O dear one, who can know the knower? (Bṛhadāranyakopaṇiṣad 415/15)

‘Just as he who tries to cross over the shade of his own head with his feet, his
head could (never) be in the place where (his) feet are, so is it with this energy of the
Point (i.e. the power of subjectivity). According to Kṣemarāja, who quotes this verse in
his commentary on the first Śivasūtra, it is drawn from the Trikaḥr̥daya. Abhinava

quotes it in the PTy (p. 171), saying it is from the Tantrasāra. He returns repeatedly to

this image of subjectivity. For example, in MVV 1/912 he says: palāyate hi cit sā ced
vyavacicchedayiṣyate | nijottamāṅgacchāyeva svapadāakramaṇakrame || ‘If one wishes
to delimit consciousness, it flees (from all attempts to reach it), like the shade of one’s
own head when one’s own feet (seek) to cross into it.’ Also, IPVv, 1, p. 66: vicāritā
pūrvasiddha evānyathā vicārāyogād ity evam ātmā vicāryamāno’ pi svaśiraśchāyeva
pramāṇapadākramaṇād dūram apakrāmati | ‘The one who reflects (on the nature of
something) is established (to exist) prior (to his examination of the object), otherwise
(that) examination would not be possible. Thus, even if the Self is the object of
examination, (it is not exhausted in this objectivity, but) like the shade of one’s own

head recedes far away due to the assault (on it) by the plane of the means of knowledge

(that seeks to grasp it).’

TANTRĀLOKA

‘ligh’), in themselves or with respect to one another, not different (from one
another from the point of view of) their own essential nature (because they are
all just the light of consciousness). (Thus it follows that) ‘blue’ is not ‘blue’ in
its own essential nature nor is ‘yellow’, ‘yellow’. (So) if ‘blue’ were to be

‘yellowʼ in its own essential nature, or ‘yellow’ ‘blue’, that would not entail any

contradiction at all. Now if (you were to say that) just as something manifests,
s0 should it be established in itself, and so (for that reason) blue is not yellow

and yellow is not blue, (our reply would be that) in this way then nothing would

be said about their difference (viśeṣa) within themselves. (To these objections,

our reply is that) however, (this difference) does manifest (lit. ‘shine’), and so it

is the Light itself that is their (specific) nature (rāpa)' (and the difference

between them). (Thus,) because (the Light of consciousness) is associated with

the establishment of each fixed, specific nature (of every single thing), it may
impart ‘life’ (to all manifest forms equally, without distinction) in such a way
that (the perception that) ‘this is blue’ and ‘this is yellow’ can be accomplished
(siddhyet).
Again, that (light of consciousness), coloured (adventitiously) by (the

manifest form of) ‘blue’ etc., assuming a (particular) fixed form as its support,
should be referred to as the means of knowledge. Moreover, nothing else is
required in order to prove its own existence (svātmasiddhi), both because its
natṭure is the light (of consciousness and manifestation) and because the light
illumines both itself (as subjective consciousness) and the other (objective

consciousness which it makes manifest). (But) even though this light (of
consciousness) is such, it would not be the locus of the stable foundation of an
entity or of itself (as the subject) within (the luminous) nature of the light (of

consciousness). In this way even ‘blue’ would not be ‘blue’ – such would be the
consequence. Therefore, in order to establish the existence (siddhi) of its own
manifest nature (lit. ‘luminosity’) (as the subject) and that of (everything) else

(as the object), one must accept (the existence) of a light (that illumines) that
(means of knowledge) also, the nature of which is the reflective awareness of ‘I

consciousness, which is its life, so that everything may be established (to be
what it is). As is said (in the Ajaḍapramātṛ-siddhi);:
l Read with the MSs iti prakāśa for ii iti prakāśa.

One could also translate if we accept the reading of the printed text: ‘thus
manifestation (lit. ‘light’) alone (shining) as this and that (iti iti prakāśa) is their nature
(rūpa) which, because it is not constrained to assume any particular fixed form, . . . may

impart ‘life . . .

The experiences of blue and yellow differ because the light of knowledge shines
variously in accord with its object. If this were not so, blue would appear as yellow or

vice versa. However, they are fundamentally the same in that they are equally

manifestations within experience which occur harmoniously and are regulated and
conditioned by empirical laws. They shine by virtue of that Light, whereas the Light
itself is self-reflective, and so does not require any other Light to illumine it. Otherwise,

if it did, this would entail an inevitable infinite regress insofar as that Light would
require another to illumine it and that another and so on. The perceiver is the final place

of rest (viśrantiṣṭhāna) of the act of perception, where the manifestation (‘ligh’) of the
object becomes reflective awareness (vimarśa). The perceiver becomes conscious of

himself, of his being the ‘light’ of the perception (‘illumination’ of the object). The

illumination of the object – its perception – presupposes a light into which it enters, a

CHAPTER ONE
‘the repose of the light (of consciousness) within its own nature is said

to be the state of (pure) ‘I’ (consciousness) (ahaṁbhāva).

And that itself is Śiva, the Supreme Lord Who is the Supreme Light,

and so it is said that ‘while the supreme living essence (jīva) of those (means)

also is that same Supreme Lord (Himself, Who is the true identity of the

perceiver)ʼ.

As that (Light) is proved to exist (a priori) right from the start

(ādisiddha) not only can (any) means of knowledge not do anything (to prove
its existence) (sādhaka), nor can (they) disprove (its existence) (bādhaka)
either. Thus, he says:
light which is not its own but belongs to the subject. The stable, established state of the

subject ‘precedes’ as an a priori condition of knowledge, and so can never be grasped as

an object. To try and do so would be like trying to jump over the shade of one’s own
head. Thus, it is proved ‘right from the start’. The pure subjectivity of consciousness

which escapes, because it ‘precedesʼ, objectification in this way, is therefore

unconditioned, and so is the consciousness of Deity itself. See Torella 2002: 85-86.

APS 22cd. Also quoted below in TĀv ad 3/203cd-204ab, 3/221cd-223ab, and
6/238cd-239ab (238). Abhinava himself refers to this line in TĀ 5/61cd-62ab.

The term ‘siddhi’, which literally means ‘accomplishment’, has more than one
application in this context. For one thing, it is used to mean the proof of a proposition.

The right application of a valid means of knowledge to ascertain the nature of something
leads to its siddhi – that is, ‘accomplishment’, ‘proof, or ‘correct ascertainment’. For

example, when we see smoke on a hill, we can infer that there is fire. This is because
there is an invariable concomitance between smoke and fire, i.e. where there is smoke
there must be fire. Thus, the existence of the fire on the hill is established (siddha), and

its valid proof is the siddhi – proof – of the existence of smoke on the hill. When an

object is perceived by the senses and its nature correctly apprehended through the

processes of perception, which is also considered to be a valid means of knowledge, this
is its siddhi. The object is siddha – established to be what it is. The term used in this
sense operates equally well in relation to the accomplishment of a goal. The production

of a jar from a lump of clay, for example, is its siddhi ~ accomplishment. The
accomplishment of anything – whether it be an action or right knowledge – presupposes,
according to this view, the existence of the agent of the act and the knower. Now, the

subject - who is thus both agent and perceiver – is the same Light of consciousness that

illumines and shines as the object, but it knows itself as itself, that is, as a subject, rather
than as something else, that is, an object. The reflective awareness which is inherent in

the Light of consciousness as its most essential attribute and power can thus be directed
outwards, as it were, as the reflective awareness of ‘this’ (idaṁvimarśa), or inwards as

the reflective awareness of ‘I’ (ahaṁvimarśa). The final resting place (viśāntiṣṭhāna) of
the former is the latter, just as it is its beginning. The same can be said mutatis mutandis

of action. Activity proceeds from the agent, and when completed comes to rest in him
again. Just as the two – knowledge (that is perception etc.) and action - go together as
aspects of the activity of consciousness, so does the object as that of knowledge and
action, as well as the subject as the perceiver and the agent. The subject is the basis,

resting place and source of the other aspects. Ultimately, it is consciousness itself. Thus
it is siddha (i.e. established, proved, and accomplished) right from the start and is the
basis and ultimate cause of the siddhi (i.e. establishment, proof and accomplishment) of

the cognition and action that follow after. Perception and action of the individual

perceiver and agent of consciousness ‘contracted down’ to the individual level is the

microcosmic equivalent of the universal perception and activity of macrocosmic

TANTRĀLOKA

qdīṁgaācaīrrraī fē t |
hiECIVĪĒ GĒISĀEIĪ

sarvāpahnavaheyākadharmāpy evaṁ hi vartate |
jñānam ātmārtham ity etan neti māṁ prati bhāsate || 56 ||

It happens in this way even to one whose capricious nature is to

deny everything, namely that (he experiences that): “this negation of
knowledge, oneself and the object manifests to me.” (56)
He whose ‘nature’ is ‘capriciousʼ, and denies, that is, refutes (the
existence of) ‘everything’, that is, the knower, knowledge and the object of
knowledge, is the Buddhist. The Mādhyamika (Buddhiṣṭts) maintain that (all)
three do not exist. The Yogācāra (Buddhists) maintain that the knower and the

object of knowledge do not exist. The Vaibhāṣika (Buddhiṣṭs) maintain that
(only) the knower does not exist. He also (experiences) ‘the negation of
knowledge, oneself and the object’ (as:) ‘it manifests to me’, that is, to the
one who is reasoning (as to whether they exist or not). This is because (his
negation of their existence) is essentially a state of awareness (saṅvedana)
(within consciousness). The denial (of their existence) is and abides as a
consciousness that expands out, through and as, its ‘contracted’ equivalent. This

happens holistically; that is to say, every single part, however tiny, is the whole.
Consciousness is thus not just an aggregate of (its countless ‘contracted’) parts, it is

their essential nature. As all this is established, proved and accomplished — siddha –
right from the start, as consciousness which is Śiva Himself. Utpaladeva appropriately

commences his exposition of the Doctrine of Recognition (IP 1/1/2) by saying:

‘What intelligent (sentient) being could ever refute or prove (the existence) of
the agent, the perceiver, his own Self, which is the Great Lord, proved to exist right
from the start (ādisiddha)
Utpaladeva himself explains: “Every being’s own nature is the basis of the

(proof, accomplishment and) establishment (siddhi) of all existing things. It has
encompassed (within itself) the establishment (proof and accomplishment) (siddhi) (of
everything), for otherwise the accomplishment of each and every single thing would be

(logically) impossible. It is its own Light and its nature, one with the subject, proved

(and established right from the start) prior (to any cognition or action) (pārvasiddha), is
(most) ancient, and (possesses all) knowledge and action. Proved (to be such) by one’s
own self-awareness itself (svasaṁvedanasiddha), it is the lordship (that is, sovereign
mastery) (aiśvarya) (of both individual consciousness to know and act in its limited way
and of universal consciousness in its unlimited way by virtue of which it is Deity). Thus,
(the effort) to prove (the existence) of the Lord and (so too to) refute it, is the exertion of

fools.

Kṣemarāja begins his exposition of the Heart of Recognition
(pratyabhijñāhṛdaya) in the same way, declaring that ‘consciousness, which is
(perfectly) free, is the cause of the accomplishment (siddhi) of everything’. The reader

is referred to his commentary, which covers succinctly and in depth the points
mentioned here.

CHAPTER ONE

(personal) conviction (pratīti). This is the meaning. Thus, the (very) refutation

of (the existence of) oneself (that is, the subject) etc., or means to establish it

(sādhana) (then entails) that the one who is contending (this view), (whose
existence) is necessarily implied (ākṣipta) in (the presentation of his) prior
contention (pūrvakoṭi), is proved to exist (siddha). It would not be possible to
prove the existence of anything (or the correctness of any view) without the
existence of the one who is (attempting) to prove it. And that one is Śiva
Himself, who is the Supreme Lord, ultimate reality (paramārtha), and the Light
(of consciousness), which is proved to exist by itself (svataḥ siddha) (without
need of ulterior independent proof).
Thuṣ there (in that case) also, the Buddhiṣṭ’s (effort) to conceive (any

valid) means of knowledge (pramāṇa) (to establish his view) is useless. Thus,
he says:

āTTā JHIPITIJTATĀāĪTT |I 491|
apahnutau sādhane vā vastūnām ādyam īdrśam |
yat tatra ke pramāṇānām upapattyupayogite || 57 ||

(Insofar as) the negation or affirmation of (the existence of) things

is preceded (a priori) by such a one (who does it), how can the reasons

(based on any of the) means of knowledge be applicable there (to him)?°°

(57)

(The

negation

or affirmation of)

‘thingsʼ,

that

is,

the knower,

knowledge or object of knowledge, is ‘preceded’, because it is proved a priori,
by ‘such a one’ʼ, that is, the supreme perceiver (parapramātṛ), (no means of
knowledge is applicable) ‘there’ to the perceiver whose existence is proved (a

priori) right from the start (ādisiddha). It is said that the means of knowledge

Formal philosophical disputation in India begins with the presentation of the

opponent’s view. Thus, it is called the ‘prior contention’ or ‘view’ (pārvakoṭi /
pūrvapakṣa). The response to the opponent’s view is the ‘subsequent contention’ or
‘view’ (uttarakoṭi uttarapakṣa). Jayaratha is saying that his Buddhist opponent, who
denies the existence of the Self etc., is proved to be wrong by the very fact that he puts

forwards this view, as he could not do so if consciousness in its tripartite manifestation
as subject, object and means of knowledge, did not exist.

Another, freer, translation could be: ‘(Insofar as) the negation or affirmation of (the

existence of) anything (including that of the sentient subject) is such that, a priori, (the

negator must participate in it), how can any means of knowledge be justifiably

applicable there (to him)?’ Cf. ĪP 1/1/2 quoted above ad 1/55; cf. also ĪP 2/3/15-16
(Torella 2002: 172-173).

There are three aspects (koṭi) that constitute any noetic event, the subject (pramātṛ),

means (pramāṇa) and object of knowledge (prameya). In this context, the ‘means of

knowledge’ is the means that proves (pramāṇa) the proposition which is to be proved
(prameya), and is applied by the one who is engaged in proving it (pramātr). The play

on words here is clear. In this perspective, perception is the means applied by the
perceiver by which he proves the existence of the object of perception and its nature to

TANTRĀLOKA

is indeed that which possesses the (correct) knowledge (pramāvat) of the object
of knowledge. Again, the object of knowledge is that which is to be reflected
upon as objective (idantāvimṛśyam), and the establishment (of its existence and

true nature) (siddhi) depends on the light (of the consciousness of the perceiver)
that is separate (from it). And the nature of the perceiver is not such (as that of

the object) that it can be determined specifically (paricchedya)™ by a means of
knowledge. (The perceiver) is engaged in determining etc. (the specific nature
of) an entity (arthapariccheda), and because it is its own light, it is not separate
from the Light (of consciousness), nor can (the perceiver) be perceived

objectively (idantāvimṛśya), because it consists (essentially) of the reflective
awareness of ‘I’ (consciousness). If that were to be the object of a means of
knowledge, then it would be perceivable (bhāvya) by another perceiver
(engaged) in the act of perception (pramitikriyā), and there (in that case) by
another also (and so on). Thus, there would be an infinite regress (anavasthāna)

(which would make perception impossible). Thus here (in this case), there is no
good reason at all for the functioning (pravṛtti) of (any) means of knowledge (to
prove the existence of the perceiver). What is said in the teaching concerning
meditation (bhāvanopadeśa) and the like, for example, ‘this Self has shone forth
(just) once, is (just a manner of speaking that accords with common) usage

be as itis perceived. The ‘supreme perceiver’ (parapramātṛ) is thus the ultimate identity
of all perceivers engaged in proving or disproving the existence and nature of anything
to be as it is or otherwise, just as he is the essential consciousness, which is the
subjectivity of all perceiving subjects.

1 have tentatively emended prameyaṁ khalu pramiṇvat pramāṇam to prameyasya

pramāvat pramāṇam.

Read -paricchedyaṁ for —paricchedyaḥ.
sakrṛd vibhāto’ yam ātmā A longer version is

Spandasaṅdoha. He introduces it saying that it is a

quoted by Kṣemarāja in his

‘śivasūtra’. Not found in the

Sivasūtra, he probably means to say that it is a brief statement uttered by Śiva. It reads:

‘this Self shines forth but once, it is full (of all things), and so can nowhere be
unmanifest.” (sakṛd vibhāto ‘ayam ātmā pūrṇasyāsya na kvāpy aprakāśanasaṁbhavaḥ).

Quoting the full form,_Abhinava informs us that it is from the unrecovered
Sāraṣvatasaṅgrahasūtra (IPVv 3, p. 23). He explains (ibid. p. 20): “One who knows the

Brahman describes with this dictum the ultimately real perceiver whose sole nature is
the illuminating (Light which shines) constantly, without a break. Its manifestation

(ābhāsa) is not occasional, (as is that of) being and nonbeing. Therefore, there is no
association there with time, nor is there (any) within phenomena in relation to that. This
is the meaning of (this) aphorism.”
A little further ahead (ibid. p. 23), just before he quotes this aphorism to

explain that the Light of consciousness is not absent anywhere, Abhinava quotes a verse
he wrote praising the Light of consciousness:
‘I (Śiva), who bear the beauty of the radiant half-moon, praise the form which

is the illuminator of phenomenal existence, of the ocean of the consciousness, of the

fickle (playful) state of the illumination of the manifestation (of the Light of
consciousness) and its absence, pertaining to the variegated (individual) Self and the
body of its own luminous body (vapuṣ), free of the sequence (of phenomenal
manifestation) (which is such) by virtue of (its inherent) freedom.”

CHAPTER ONE

(vyavahāra) in terms of objectivity. This is not literally so (na vāstava), because
there (in that case), there is no direct experience (of it as an object). (The Self) is

experienced (as if it were an object) because there (in that case, its) subjectivity
is obscured. Let this suffice. This same (point) will be elaborated at each step.

It was also explained previously that (n0) means of knowledge is of any use, as
(the subject) is proved (a priori) right from the start (ādisiddha), and so (the
point) has not been elaborated again (here).
Not only (does) sound reasoning (yukti) (support this view) here,
scripture (does s0) also. Accordingly, he says:

aIṁ ṭqaraaisīā|

aūaī feēra || ucII

fI: |

kāmike tata evoktaṁ heṭuvādavivarjitam |

tasya devātidevasya parāpekṣā na vidyate || 58 ||
parasya tadapekṣatvāt svatantro ‘yam ataḥ sthitaḥ |

Thus, it is said in the Kāmikāgama that (Deity) is free of logical

discussion (hetuvāda). That God Who surpasses the gods does not depend
The sense of saying that ‘the Self has shone forth (just) onceʼ is that the

manifestation of the Self’s true infinite, unconditioned nature is not a temporal event.
Events set in time happen one after another. We measure time in relation to what takes
place previously and subsequently. Consciousness is one, and so when it manifests it

does so ‘just once’. This ‘once’ is not a particular moment, as there is no previous

moment prior to its manifestation and subsequent one after it ceases to do so. This also
implies that a full and perfect manifestation of the pure conscious Self happens ‘just

onceʼ and forever, continuously. The same expression is found in Gauḍapādakārikā
(3/36), with reference to the Brahman. Jayaratha quotes this saying as many as nine
more times in his commentary on 1/66ab (67ab), 1/125-126 (125cd-127ab, 3/129

(128cd-129ab), 4/178cd-180ab, 5/88cd-89 (88-89ab), 8/171cd-175ab (171-174), 9/159,
10/116cd-117ab and 29/80. See also, IPVV vol. 1 p. 55 and vol. 2 p. 262. Abhinava uses
the same expression with reference to the uniqueness of any clearly and certainly
perceived object: “(an entity) known according to its particular nature, that is, fixed by a

firm (and sure) apprehension (of its nature), is one that has manifested (vibhāta)
(clearly). It does not need to be meditated upon again, because it has shone forth once
(and for all) (sakṛd vibhāta).’ PTv p. 38-39
Jayaratha is saying here that this expression is a just a manner of speaking. The

perceiver is not an object. When it is said that ‘it manifests’, that should not be

understood to be in the way in which an object manifests, even if that is an inner object

of meditation. Moreover, the process of manifestation taking place within the expanse of
consciousness of the perceiver, free of thought constructs – including those of space and
the passage of time – takes place in a timeless moment. It is ‘(just) once also in the

sense of ‘all at once’. Cf. below, 10/220cd-222, also Dyczkowski 1987: 82.

This is the common experience of oneself as the body and mind (that is, one could

say, ‘personality). This comes about by the mistaken identification with such things

that, objective by nature, obscure in this way the pure subjectivity of consciousness,
which is totally devoid of any objectivity.

TANTRĀLOKA

on (anything) else (to establish His existence,) because (everything) else
depends on Him, and so He is (always) independent (and free). (58-59ab)

(59-60ab)

‘Thus’, because there (in the case of the perceiver) none of the means

of knowledge are (logically) appropriate and have no application, it is ‘free of
logical discussion’, that is, it is devoid of (any) talk (vāda) of (any) inference
(concerning its nature). Thus, he says: ‘that’ (Supreme God of the gods does
not depend) ‘on (anything) else’ such as a means of knowledge or the like (to

establish His existence), and ‘s0’ because (He) does not depend on anything else

(He is always independent and free).

Just as the means of knowledge do not condition (Him) because, in this

way, He does not depend on (any) other (thing), similarly the objects of
knowledge also (do not do s0). Thus, he says:
Śiva Ubiquitous, Eternal and Omniform

STTJAT]
āTTĪ TTṀTPTJTTJHT: |] .R II
fraaī ṝ a fnvyfṁcī fēaīgfā:. fra.
Rastogi (1987: 281) does not take this to be a direct quotation. But Kṣemarāja took it

to be so. It is not certain that Kṣemarāja had access to the Kāmika, as he invariably only
quotes passages cited by Abhinava; even so, we know that he did take this passage to be

a direct, literal citation from the Kāmika, as he quotes as such in his commentary on NT
7/16, that reads as follows.

yad _ iti

Ṃprathamādhikāranirdiṣṭaparadhāmāīmavīryam,

svarāpam

iti

sarvasya,
svasaṁvedyaṁ
svaprakāśam
na
tu
svasaṁvedanānyapramāṇaprameyam,
tasya devātidevasya parāpekṣā na vidyate |
parasya tadapekṣatvāt svatantro ‘yam ataḥ sthitaḥ |I”
iti kāmikoktanītyā. aṣya bhagavataḥ pramāṇāgocaravāt ata eva svatantrātmaṇy
avatiṣṭhate na tv anyatra tadviviktasyānyasyābhāvāt pratyutānyadviśvaṁ tadvyāptatvāt
tanmayam eva saṁbhavati

‘What was taught in the first chapter (of the Netratantra) to be the supreme

(luminous) abode’s own vitality, (that) is the ‘own nature ‘(svarūpa) of everything,
because no specification has been made (as to whose ‘own nature’ it is). (Moreover,) it

is its own object of awareness and is self-luminous; it is not an object of a means of
knowledge that is other than its own self-awareness.
‘That God Who surpasses the gods does not depend on (any) other (thing),
because (every) other (thing) depends on Him, and so He is (always) independent (and

free).

In accord with this principle (nīti), as stated in the Kāmika, the Lord is not in
the field of (any) means of knowledge, and so abides within his own independent nature,
certainly not elsewhere, because there is (nothing) else separate from that; on the

contrary, all else (that may come into existence) can (only) possibly do so (sarbhavati)
because it is pervaded by it, and so is of that very same nature.’
See above, note 1, 249 and Kāmikāgama entry in Appendix concerning cited
texts.

CHAPTER ONE

anapekṣasya vaśino deśakālākṛtikramāḥ |) 59 ||
niyatā neti sa vibhur nityo viśvākṛtiḥ śivaḥ |
For one who, independent and the master (of all things, transcends

them,) spatial, temporal and formal processes are not restricted (niyata) (by

Karma and natural law), and so He is Śiva Who is ubiquitous, eternal and
omniform. (59cd-60ab) (60cd-61ab)

(Śiva is) ‘master (of all things), that is, free. By means of the
specifications (concerning Him), a reason (is supplied as to why that is s0). Here
(in this case) also, space, time and form cannot divide up Śiva, Who is the Light

(of consciousness) and independent of (all) else, because (space and the rest) are

conditioned (upahata) by thought constructs based on unity and diversity
(bhedābheda). So (he says that they are) ‘not restricted’. Thus (Abhinava)

says̃ that (Śiva) is such (by statīng that He is): ‘ubiquitous, eternal and

omniformʼ. (He is) ‘ubiquitous’ because (He is) not divided up by space. (He
is) ‘eternal’ʼ because time that divides (events) up into past (present and future)
has fallen away. (He is) ‘omniformʼ because (He) pours out the wonderful
variety of forms, sentient and insentient etc.
This is expanded on further (prapañcayati)

vibhutvāt sarvago nityabhāvād ādyantavarjitaḥ | 60 ||
viśvākṛtitvāc cidacittadvaicitryāvabhāsakaḥ |

By virtue of His ubiquity, He is all-pervading. As he is eternal, He is

free of beginning and end. As He is omniform, He manifests the wonderful
variety of things, both sentient and insentient. (60cd-61ab) (61cd-62ab)

Śiva is consciousness, which is eternal, ubiquitous and omniform, that is, unaffected
by time (because it is always the same), undivided by space (because it is everywhere),
and without a fixed form (because everything is a form of the Light of consciousness).

Perceptions of time, space and form are not a direct experience of reality, that is,

consciousness just as it is (i.e. as described). They are thought constructs formed from a

perception of the continuity of manifestations of consciousness on the one hand, and on

the other, that of their difference from one another. The same is the case with space —

there is a unity of space and difference of location. So too forms, insofar as they are all
equally manifestations and yet also different from one another. See above, comm. and
note to 1/52.

Jayaratha, it seems, understands that this and the following verse are a gloss on the
previous one drawn from the Kāmikāgama. However, as he did not have a copy of it, it
is quite possible that he was mistaken. If so, these two verses are also drawn from there.

TANTRĀḶLOKA

says:

Thus it is said in the Āgamas that he has many forms. Accordingly, he

ūīNeEEtkkEcīitiīatt| cṇṬRAḤI
at faīrēr aaāiīṝ.
ḷē-7 - tftār-raṁcafīra: ṝzan.
ftīa -ad 1 =zu
tato ʻsya bahurūpatvam uktaṁ dīkṣottarādike || 61 ||

bhuvanaṁ vigraho jyotiḥ khaṁ śabdo mantra eva ca |
bindunādādisaṁbhinnaḥ ṣaḍvidhaḥ śiva ucyate || 62 |

Thus, His pluriform nature is taught, for example, in the
Diīkṣottara. Śiva, conjoined with the Point (bindu) and Sound (nāda) etc.,
is said to be of six kinds, (as World (bhuvana), (Iconic) Form (vigraha),

Light (jyotiṣ), Space (kha), (Unstruck) Sound (śabda) and Mantra. (61cd-

62) (62cd-63)

TĀ 1/61cd-62 (62cd-63) is based on Dīkṣottara 2/2cd-3ab. See Somadeva 2004: 257.
There are manuscripts of this text in the Institut Français d'Indologie in Pondicherry

(transcripts no. 17B, 127 and 150). It is the second half of the Niḥśvāsakārikā (see
Sanderson, 1990: 75). The Dīkṣottara is transmitted in South Indian manuscripts as the
last part of the Niśvāsakārikā. Thīs, in its turn, appears to be the fifth and last part
(sūtra) of the Niśvāsatattvakārikā. As Sanderson points out (1996c: 24), in the last verse

of the Guhyasūtra (with which the Nepalese manuscript of the Niśvāsatattvakārikā
ends): Śiva invites Devī to ask him to g80 on and teach the fifth sūrra, the

kārikā. Although it is probable that this is a much latter addition to the sātras of

the Niśvāsatattvakārikā, which were also probably composed at various times, the
Dīkṣottara recovered in the South and found amongst the transcripts of the IFP is the
one known to Abhinavagupta. He quotes it as many as thirteen times.’ See also below,
2/9, 51149ab (5/148), 8/9, 15/461-462ab (458cd-459), 17/97, 18/11, 1921, 21/61, 24/4
and 17, 28/65, and 29/243. Concerning the Dīkṣottara, see the Appendix dealing with

the sources under this heading.
The verse (edited by Somadeva 2004: 257) reads in the Dīkṣottara 2/2cd-3ab:

śabdavyoṃmnī tathā jyotir vigraho bhuvanaṁ tathā ||

mantramārtiṣ tu paramaḥ ṣaḍvidhas tu śivo ʻvyayaḥ |
‘Imperishable Śiva is six-fold as Word, Space, Light, Form, World-order, and

Mantra-form.

Kṣemarāja quotes this verse in the SvTu ad 4/270cd to establish that the

bhuvanas, as are the other five, are essentially Śiva by nature. It is clear from

Jayaratha’s explanation of the lines quoted by Abhinava from the Dīkṣottara that he did
not have the text before him, as Sanderson has pointed out (Somadeva 2004: 262 n. 40).
He did, however, have the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha, the SvT and MV, all of which
he quotes. Jayaratha bases his explanation for the most part on the SYT which, with

respect to the other two sources, is in actual fact the furthest from the explanation the
Dīkṣotara itself supplies. It would have been better had Jayaratha chosen the
explanation given by the MV, but it is not clear and very brief. The sequence of the six
forms of Śiva differs in each of these presentations and none coincide with that noted in
the TĀ. These are: 1) Dīkṣottara: Word, Space, Light, Form, World-order, and Mantra-

CHAPTER ONE

form. 2) SvāBhu: the Point (bindu), Sound (nāda) and Space (vyoman), Mantra, Worldorder (bhuvana), and Form (vigraha). 3) MV: Space, Form, the Point, Letter, World-

orders and Path (adhvan). 4) TĀ: World (bhuvana), Form (vigraha), Light (jyotiṣ),

Space (kha), Word (śabda) (of Unstruck Sound) and Mantra. It is hard to say whether
Abhinava eṣtablished this sequence with a specific purpose in mind. Anyway, for the
sake of clarity, the following explanation of the six is drawn primariḷy from the

Dīkṣottara, which is the source he refers to specifically, and is compared with the brief
account in the MV. The order of presentation is the one suggested by Abhinava.

The following is my edition and translation of Chapter Two of the Dikṣottara,

where this is explained. It is based on IFP Transcript TOO17B from folio 795 to the end,

inputted under my supervision for Muktabodha’s digital library. The Dīkṣottara of the
Niśvāsakārikā is the fifth section of the Niśvāsatattvasaṁhitā:
deva uvāca-

Śṛṇu devi pravakṣyāmi sādhakānāṁ hitāvaham |
yena vijñātamātreṇa vidhimuktaṁ labhed dhṛvam |I I |]
saḍvidhas tu śivo jñeyo yoginā sumahātmanā | p. 806)

śabdavyomatayā jyotiḥ vigraho bhuvanas tathā |I 2 ||

mantramūrtis tu paramaḥ ṣaḍvidhas tu śivo 'vyayaḥ |
mantramūrtiṁ viditvã tu mantrasiddhim avãpnuyãt || 3 I|
bhuvaneśatvam āpnoti bhuvanāsaktamānasaḥ |

‘The god s
Listen, O goddess, I will tell (you) what is of benefit for adepts (sādhaka), by
just knowing which one certainly becomes free of (having to perform) the prescribed

procedures. The yogi who is a beautiful and great soul should know Śiva, who is of six

kinds. (1-2ab)
Imperishable Śiva is of six kinds as Sound, Space, Light, Form, World, and
Mantra-form. Once the Mantra-form is known, one attains accomplishment in Mantra.
He whose mind is intent on a world attains lordship over (that) world. (2cd-4ab)
brahmādīnāṁ surendrāṇāṁ sādhane vigrahaṁ smaret | 4 ||
yoginām adhipatyarthaṁ jyotistho yogam abhyaset |
Śśabdatatve pare līnaḥ śabdāntargatamānasaḥ || 5 II
parameśākhyam āpnoti śabdāt sarvārthasiddhaye |

He should recollect the (iconic) Form of the Brahmā and the other lords of the

gods in the course of (his yogic) practice in order to become the lord of (all) yogis.
Established in the Light, he should practice Yoga.

He whose mind is present within Sound and is merged within the supreme

principle of Sound attains, by virtue of the Sound, the one called the Supreme Lord in
order to accomplish all goals. (4cd-6ab)
tasyātītaṁ paraṁ devi śaktivyoma prakīrtitam || 6 ||
tasya dhyānād bhavet siddhiḥ muktiś caiva na saṁśayaḥ p. 807)

vigraho bhuvano jyotiḥ śabdo vyoma tathaiva ca l|7 l

ete paraprakāśaś tu śivadhyānaparaś śivaḥ |
Śivam evaṁ vidhaṁ
jñātvā sādhakas tu samāhitaḥ || 8 II
prāpnoti vividhāṁ siddhiṁ muktiñ caiva na saṁśayaḥ |

Beyond it, O goddess, is the supreme, said to be the Space of Power. By

meditating on it, there is, without a doubt, both accomplishment and liberation. (6cd7ab)

TANTRĀLOKA

Form, World, Light, Sound and Space – these are the supreme light, Śiva, who

is intent on contemplating Śiva. Once the attentive adept has known Śiva, who is like

this, he attains, without a doubt, many kinds of accomplishment and liberation. (Jcd9ab)
Mantra-form
mantramāūrtiparaṁ jñātvā siddáhiṁ muktim āpnuyāt || 9 ||
japahomārcanādhyānāt (jape-) siddhayaś ca yathārthataḥ |
OŌnce knowing what is beyond the Mantra-form, he attains accomplishment and
liberation. By repeating Mantra, offering oblation, worshipping and contemplation (he
atṭains) accomplishments as desired. (9cd-10ab)

Śiva's World
bhuyanan tu bhuvanākāraṁṅ brahmāṇḍādi yathākramam || 10 |l
nānāratmamayaṁ divyam anaupamyaguṇānvitam |
indranīlamahānīḷaiḥ rājataiś ca vibhūṣitam || 1 1 |I
padmarāgamayastaṁbhaiḥ nānāratnopaśobhitam | p. 808)
divyasṛggandhavastrāḍhyaṁ divyaiśvaryasamanvitam || 12 ||
bhuvanaṁ devadevasya jñātvā tallayam āpnuyāt |
The world-order has the form of a world-order such as the Egg of Brahmā and

the like in due order (within the hierarchy of world-orders). Made of many gems, it is
divine and possesses incomparable qualities. 1t is adorned with great blue sapphires,
pillars made of rubies, and further adorned with many (kinds of) gems, it is rich with

divine garlands, scents and clothes, and endowed with divine sovereignty — once
knowing the world-order of the God of the gods, one attains merger into that. (10cd-

13ab)

Śiva’s Iconic Form
vigrahaṁ vigrahākāraṁ śivavarṇādilakṣaṇam || 13 ||
Śaśāṇkārdhadhanaṁ tryakṣaṁ nāgayajñopavītinam |

Śūnyahastaṁ vr̥ṣārūḍham umādehārdhasaṅyutam || 14 ||
Śśaṇkhakuṇḍendudhavalaṁ sahasrādityavarcasam |
vigrahaṁ devadevasya sarvakāmārthasādhanam || 15 |I

Form (vigraha) has the form of (Śiva’s) icon (vigraha) which is characterized
by Śiva’s colour etc. (He bears) the crescent moon (to the side of the head). (He has)
three eyes, a snake for a sacred thread, there is nothing in (his) hands, he is mounted on
a bull, and Uma is half his body. He is white like a conch, Kunda flower and the moon,
has the radiance of a thousand suns. (Such is) the (iconic) form of the God of the gods,
which is the means to (the attainment) of the objects of all (one’s) desires. (13cd-15)
sādhanaṁ sarvamantrāṇāṁ bhūmyarthe ca smaret sadā |
ḹyotidhyānāt sadā yogī yogasidáhim avāpnuyāt 16 |
aṇimādiguṇaiśvaryaṁ yogīkrīdādilakṣaṇam | p.809)
vyālākāram anākāraṁ vyomavyāpī paraś śivaḥ l| 17 |I

CHAPTER ONE

Itis the means (sādhana) to accomplishing all Mantras. One should recollect it
always in order to attain (Śiva’s) world. By contemplating (Śiva’s) Light constantly, the
yogi attains the accomplishments of yoga. (These include) the powers to make oneself

small at will and the other (forms of) mastery that characterize the yogi’s sport etc. The

form of a tiger (vyāla) and no form (at all), (such is) Supreme Śiva who pervades Space
(vyomavyāpin). (16-17)

Śiva as Pervasive Space
sarvavyāpinam īśānaṁ cintayā śivam āpnuyāt |
nirguṇaṁ sāñjanātītaṁ grahanakṣatravarjitam || 18 ||
śuddhasphaṭikasaṇkāśaṁ paraṁ vyoma vicintayet |

By reflecting on the Lord (iśāna) who is all-pervasive, one attains Śiva. One
should think of the supreme Space as devoid of (phenomenal) qualities, beyond stain,
free of planets and constellations and (transparent) like pure crystal. (18-19ab)

Sound
vyomalīnamanāḥ samyak vyomastho vyomatanmayaḥ |l 19 ||
paraṁ mokṣaṃ avāpnoti yatra śabde layaṁ gataḥ |
Śśabdadhyānāt paro mokṣaḥ siddhayaś ca na saṁśayaḥ || 20 ||
tasmāt sarvaprayatnena śabdadhyānaṁ samāśrayet |

vāmapārśve iḍā tasya ciciṇīśabdam uttamam || 21 ||

prākr̥taṁ nāma caitad dhi sthūlaś ca parikīrtitaḥ | p. 810)
dakṣiṇeṉa suṣumnā hi ciravākkariṇī smṛtā || 22 |
n nāma cety uktaṁ sūkṣmasya parikīrtitam ḷ
ghaṇṭānādavirāmāntāntāntyamadhye paraṁ smṛtam || 23 ||
nirālaṁbo nirādhāraḥ tad eva paramaṁ padam |
ciravakyante nirālaṁbo nirāśrayaḥ l| 24 ||
ghaṇṭānādavirāmānte śivo 'haṁ yo nirāśrayaḥ |

He whose mind is merged in Space and is properly established in Space, attains

liberation where he dissolves away into Sound. By contemplating Sound, without a

doubt (one attains) liberation and accomplishments. Therefore, one should engage with
all effort in the contemplation of Sound. (I9cd-21ab)
(The channel of the breath called) Iḍā is on its left side. Its most excellent
sound is ‘Cīñcinī’. This is (sound) pertaining to Nature (prākṛta), which is said to be
gross. By (the influence of) the right (channel), suṣumnā is said to make the sound of a
cricket (ciravāk). That is said to pertain to the individual soul (puruṣa) and is said to be
(the sound) of the subtle. (21cd-23ab)
The supreme (form of Sound) is in the centre, at the extremity at the end of the
cessation of the Sound of a bell. Devoid of support and without foundation, that itself is
the supreme plane. (The Sound) devoid of support and without location is at the end of
(the Sound) Ciñciṇī and the cricket, at the end of the cessation of the Sound of the Bell
is the (insight that) “I am Śiva”, which is without location. (23cd-25ab)
hr̥diīṣṭhaṁ mantrasaṁghãtaṁ kr̥tvã mãrtiṁ (mãrti) nyased budhaḥ || 25 |
brahmādibhiḥ kalais tattvaiḥ sarvasiddhikaraḥ (-ra) smṛtaḥ |
sa tu cintayate nityaṁ tatrasthaṁ bindum īśvaram || 26 ||
citrastha īśvaro nādaḥ sa tu sākṣāc chivaḥ (chiva) smṛtaḥ |

TANTRĀLOKA

A ‘world-order” is the particular world-order (in which a fettered soul)
must reside (due to his past Karma), and is the basis (of his experiences of its)

consequences (bhogādhāra). The word form’ denotes by figurative
application, (divine beings) that possess a (particular) form (vigrahin).

Once the wise man has placed the aggregate of Mantras in the Heart, he should
deposit the icon (mirti). (Attended) by the energies and principles consisting of Brahmā
and the rest, it is considered to generate all the accomplishments. He should constantly

reflect on the Point, which is Īśvara, located there. Iśvara is Sound located in the

variegated, and that indeed is considered to be Śiva, directly apparent. (25cd-27ab)
p. 811) haṅsākhyaś caiva binduś ca nādo nādānta eva ca || 27 ||

evaṁ jñātvā bhaven mantrī Śivaḥ sākṣād alepakaḥ |

etat tat paramaṁ guhyam etat tat paramaṁ śivam || 28 |I
(+ etat tat paramaṁ guhyam etat tat paramaṁ padam |)
etat tat paramaṁ jñānam etat tat paramākṣaram || 29 ||

The one called Haṁsa, the Point, Sound and the End of Sound — having known
(this) in this way, the one who recites Mantra is stainless Śiva, directly apparent. That is
the supreme secret, that is supreme Śiva, that is supreme knowledge, and that is the
supreme imperishable (reality). (27cd-29)
nātaḥ parataro dhyeyo nātaḥ parataraṁ śivam |
vidite saṅiyag evaṁ hi mucyate nātra saṁśayaḥ l| 30 ||

sādhakasya vidhir hy eṣā sarvakāmārthasidáhidā |

eteṣāṁ parato devaḥ śabdarūpavivarjitaḥ || 31 ||
vyāpakas sarvatattvānāṁ mayā pūrvam udāhṛtam | p. 812)
taṁ viditvã vimucyante sidhyante nātra saṁśayaḥ || 32 |
iti niśvāsakārikāyāṁ dīkṣottare dvitīyaḥ paṭalaḥ |

There is no higher object of meditation than this. There is no higher Śiva than
this. Once He has been known in this way, (the aspirant) is liberated – there is no doubt
here (about it). This procedure bestows upon the adept the accomplishment of all the
things (he) desires. Beyond them is the God I have taught before, who is devoid of form
and sound and pervades all the reality levels (tattva). Once having known Him, (fettered
souls) are freed, and without a doubt, are successful. (30-32)

Swami Lakṣhmanjoo, it seems, reads bhoktādhārarūpam for bhogādhārarāpam, i.e.,

instead of ‘the basis of empirical experience’, ‘the basis of the enjoyer’. According to

Swami Lakṣhmaṇjoo, this ‘enjoyer’ is the Lord of a particular world. The world-orders

are places where individual souls go according to their Karmas, to experience their
consequences. Each world-order has a deity that governs and presides over it. These
deities are also beings subject to transmigration who work out their Karma in their
office as Lords of world-orders. When that Karma is exhausted, they move on to other
worlds. If their Karma is good, they will move up to govern higher world-orders or fall

to govern or be subject to lower ones.
The worlds are called lakṣya in the MV (12/13a). The 118 principal worlds are

described there briefly in Chapter 5. The Dīkṣottara describes the worlds as the palace
of Śiva, the God of gods, as follows:
‘Śiva’s] bhuvana [– manifestations, beginning] in order with the Egg of
Brahmā etc., appear in the form of a palace. The world (or palace) of the God of gods is

made up of various jewels, divine, provided with incomparable virtues, adorned with

indranīla sapphīre, mahānīla sapphire and silver, with pillars made of ruby, ornamented

CHAPTER ONE

Although they have many forms, such as Rudra, the Knower of the Field

(kṣetrajña) etc., (what is meant) here (in particular) are (the deities who are

known as the six) causes beginning with Brahmā. ‘Light” is the Point

with various gems, beautiful with celestial garlands, scents and furnishings, possessed of

divine sovereignty. Knowing the world of the God of the gods one attains to it (it. ‘one
is merged in it’). Ḍīkṣottara 2/10cd-13ab edition and translation by Somadeva (2004:
281-282)

” According to the MV (12/12¢d), ‘Form’ is two-fold as Śiva’s own body made of

mantras and the bodies of other individual mantra beings. The Diīkṣottara (2/4cd)

advocates the practice of these bodies for the Yogi who wishes to win over other deities

such as Brahmā, Viṣṇu or Rudra. However, there the ‘body is specifically the physical
form of Śiva as Ardhanārīśvara. ‘In order to raise to Śiva’s level (bhūmyarthe) and
master all mantras, one should constantly visualize [his] body (vigraha) in the shape of

an [anthropomorphic] figure, white in colour etc., bearing the sickle of the moon [in his

hair], three-eyed, with a serpent for a sacrificial thread, a trident in his hand, mounted on
the bull [Nandin]. His body is joined to half of Umā’s body, which is white like conchshell, like jasmine, or like the moon, dazzling like a thousand suns; [one should
contemplate] the body of the God of gods, capable [of bestowing] all that is desired.”
Dīkṣottara (2/13cd-16ab) edition and translation by Somadeva (2004: 280-28)

” There is a well-known group of six deities found commonly in most if not all early

Śaiva Tantric schools that preside over phases of emanation and other realities, called

the six ‘causes' (kāraṇa). The first of these is Brahmā, generally followed by Viṣṇu,
Rudra, Īśvara, Sadāś
and Śiva. That these are meant here is confirmed by the
quotation below in TĀv ad 1/63. The reading rudrādi (‘beginning with Rudra) has
accordingly been emended to brahmādi (‘beginning with Brahmā’). Concerning them,

see below, note to 6/187ab-187cd (6/186cd-187ab) and 8/9cd-10. In the Kubjikā

Tantras, the first five correspond to the Five Elements, that is, Earth Water, Fire, Air and
Space. Anāśrita Śiva, the last one, is transcendental. They each have a seed-syllable
Mantra termed Praṇava, and are distributed along the axis of the microcosmic body,
world orders and reality levels. See Dyczkowski 2009: intro vol. 1, p.636-652. Torella
(2002: 197, n 3) explains how the first three are understood to function in the
Pratyabhijñā: ʻBrahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra along with Īśvara, Sadāśiva and Anāśrita
[Śiva] are the so-called Kāraṇas or Kāraṇeśvaras situated on the various planes of reality
in order of increasing ontological dignity. Each of these deities presides over (adhiṣṭhā-)

a plane of reality, brings his devotees to this plane and vice versa, becomes directly
present to those who are absorbed in contemplation of that level of reality (IPVv 3, p.

305). Abhinava . . . connects them with forms of knowledge, levels of the word and

locations in the human body. Brahmā is associated with the first moment of cognition

and manifestation (prāthamakālpakī sṛṭiḥ), with the effusion of paśyantī [the Speech of
Vision] in the form of pratibhā [intuitive imagination], and his locus is in the heart;
Viṣṇu is associated with the continuing of cognition, as in memory and dream, with
madhyamā [Middle Speech] and vaikharī [Corporeal Speech], his locus is the throat;

Rudra with the reabsorption of all discourses, the first step into the supreme word and
his locus is the palate.”
”' According to Swami Lakshmaṇjoo, the ‘light’ mentioned here is the centre of light
found at each junction of the breath, that is, between the ascending and descending,

exhaled and inhaled breath.

The Dīkṣottara (2/5ab) prefers the term ‘light’ (jyotiṣ) to ‘point’ (bindu). There
we read: yogināṁ adhipatyarthaṁ jyoti(h)stho yogam abhyaset | ‘In order to become the

sovereign of Yogins, [the practitioner,] resorting to light, should practice yoga.’ Edition

and translation by Somadeva (2004: 273 note 71). Jayaratha rightly quotes the MV

TANTRĀLOKA

(bindu) because it is (commonly) referred to as ‘light’ in such statements (in the
scriptures) as: ‘the form (of the Point) is that of a Kadamba bud and is like a

radiant star’ ‘Śpace is the Void, characterized as (three higher phases of
12/11ab concerning the nature of the Point (see above note 1,550). The complete verse

says:

‘The form (of the Point) is that of a Kadamba bud and is like a radiant star,

Although one, it is considered to be ten-fold because of the difference of (its various

colours) white etc. MV 12/11

The MV does not explain the practice of the ten-fold Point, Somadeva (2004:

272) suggests a parallel practice from the Svacchandatantra 12/152-153cd called

sṣaṇmukhīkaraṇa (the yogic practice of the Six Openings) (see below note to TĀ
5/129ab-132cd (5/128ab-131cd)). This he summarizes as follows: ‘This requires the

Yogin to seal the openings of his ears with his thumbs, his eyes with his index fingers
and middle-fingers, and his nose with the ring- and little-fingers, and then fix his mind

on the six openings. The ten colours are enumerated as white, red, yellow, black, green,

orange, blue, variegated, translucent and delightful” (= moon-coloured). The Yogin
instructed about [their corresponding] reality levels [1artva], is advised to reject all but

the ‘delightful” drop [i.e. point]. It resembles the disc of the moon, is bright as lightning
and flickers like a star.”
MV 12/11ab. The bud of the sacred Kadamba tree is about the size ofa golf ball. Īt is
covered with golden brown bristles that give the impression that it is shining. The
dimensionless Point that here represents the light of consciousness, is commonly
described as having this form. For a discussion of this symbolism and examples, see

Dyczkowski 2009 vol. 2, 125-129. The Point is compared to a shining star below in
3/113ab (3/113cd).

The MV (14/14cd-16ab) refers to three Voids in the head (kakhatraya) and three
beyond (khatraya). Another Void is in the heart, but as this is not relevant to this
practice, it is not mentioned. The details are described below in the notes to verses
32/10cd-12ab, where this passage from the MV is quoted. The Dīkṣottara teaches the

meditation on the Void as follows:

‘(The yogi) should contemplate the supreme firmament, devoid of quality,

beyond contact, without lunar mansions and constellations, as resembling clear crystal.

(The yogi) fully merging into the Void, located in the Void, identified with the Void,

attains final liberation.’ (2/18c-19a, translation and edition, Somadeva 2004: 268)

Somadeva notes that more is explained in Chapter Three of the Dīkṣortara,

where it is said that the yogi must pass through a series of five Voids, each of which is
five-fold. These five Voids appear to be an extension of an underlying triple Void, to

which most of Chapter Three is dedicated. These are the lower, middle and upper Voids,

that are located in the heart, throat and palate, respectively. These are said to be subject
to afflictions (sāmaya), whereas the fourth Void above them is free of them (nirāmaya).
The text is unclear as to its location. But it is most probably on the top of the head. The

fifth Void, which is not clearly named, must correspond to the supreme plane of
existence. The overall scheme of an ascending series of Voids starting from the heart up
to the limit of the subtle body at a distance of twelve fingers above the head is not

uncommon in the early Śaiva Āgamas. They may be coupled, as happens in the

Svacchandatantra, with the ‘utterance (or ‘upward motion’) of Mantra’ that ascends

first through levels of audible sounds experienced in these centres, and then from the
eyebrows to the top of the head and beyond through a series of sonic energies. Called

CHAPTER ONE

the upward flow of the Divine Sound of OMṀ and other seed-syllable Mantras,

namely) Power (śakti), the Pervasive One (vyāpinī) and the Equal One

(samanā).™ ‘Wordʼ is (Divine) Sound (nāda).” ‘Mantra (is, for example,

the Garland or Ladder of Sound (see below, 5/56cd-57ab), the SvT (4/288d-296c)
distributes them through a series of six Voids that must be transcended to enter the

seventh one beyond. See below, note to 6/187ab-187cd (6/186cd-187ab) for a table of

theṣe correspondences; also, Somadeva 2004: 263-271 and tables ibid. on pp. 260-261.
Jayaratha, ignoring the distinction between the Voids and the levels of sonic
energies, identifies the three Voids with the three – Power (Śakti), the Pervasive One

(Vyāpinī) and the Equal One With Mind (Samanā), that lead to the Transmental
(Unmanā), which is the last of the series. See Dyczkowski 1992a: 252-255 for a detailed
account and the Appendix to this chapter.

See MV 12/9 ff. See Dyczkowski 1992a: 211-212 and below, note 580.

Somadeva (2004: 277-279) explains what is meant here by Sound (nāda). ‘It is the
Resonance within the three main channels of the subtle body. The left channel, called

iḍā, resonates with the ciñcinī sound, the right channel, called piṅgalā, with the sound of
cricket (cīra), and the central susumnā channel reverberates like a bell. When the belllike resonance in the central channel dies down the Yogin attains the silent, liberated

state of Śiva.

‘[The Yogin] who merges into this Resonance attains ultimate liberation. From
meditation upon Resonance, there is no doubt, accrue ultimate liberation and
Perfections. Therefore, one should undertake the meditation with diligent effort. On the
left side is the [channel] Iḍā, its supreme sound is ciācinī. It (the sound) is said to be
insentient (prākṛta) and coarse (sthūla). To the right of [the channel called] Suṣumnā is
the Piṅgalā [-channel resonating with] the sound of the cricket. It is said to be conscious
(pauruṣa), and so is called subtle. The Resonance at the end of the reverberation of a
bell [manifests] in its (the central channel’s) middle; it is supreme. At the end of [the
resonances of] the voices of Ciñcinī and the cricket [respectively, the Yogin] is
unsupported and unlocated. Diīkṣottara 2/20ab-24ab (2/20-24). These sounds
commonly appear in lists of ten inner sounds yogis hear. For details, see below,
5/100ab-100cd (5/99cd-100ab) commentary and notes.

The equivalent in the corresponding series in the MV is the phoneme (arṇa). But the

Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha uṣes the synonym ‘Mantra’, as does the Dīkṣottara. 1t

refers to a common practice found in multiple forms and variants in the early Tantras of
all kinds, as in the Tantrāloka, namely, the utterance of Mantra (mantroccāra). This

takes place in consonance with the movement of the breath through locations in the

subtle body and then outside and beyond, marked by energies which are phases of its
sound and resonance. The basic pattern is the utterance of (H) A U Ṁ. The Tantras
supply the stages of the upward movement of ‘utterances’ of numerous seed-syllables
on the same model, with the usual variants. See Dyczkowski 2009: intro. 1, 376 ff. The
Dīkṣottara teaches the utterance (uccāra) of the syllable HAṀSA as the ‘Mantra-form’.

Somadeva (2004: 284 ff) explains: ‘it instructs the practitioner to begin by effecting a

union or fusion (sarṁghāṭa) of theē HAṀSA mantra located in his heart-region.
‘[After] producing a mantra-fusion located in his heart, the wise [practitioner]
should [then] perform the imposition of the [mantra-] body together with the [five
causal deities] Brahmā etc. (i.e. Viṣṇu, Rudra, Īśvara and Sadāśiva), the Kalās [Forces]
and the Tattvas [metaphysical principles], which are traditionally known to effect all
Perfections. In this way, one should ceaselessly contemplate the bindu located in the

sloping portion [of the forehead] as Īśvara. Iśvara located in the aperture [of the

cranium] is Resonance, but [clearly] manifest, he is [traditionally] taught to be Śiva.
[The four/five stages are] the 1) HAṀSA, 2) the drop (bindu), 3) Resonance (nāda), and

TANTRĀLOKA

the audible part of the syllable OṀ which) consists of the letters A, U and M.

(The words) ‘associated with (the Divine) Point (bindu) and Sound (nāda)

etc.’ qualify (Mantra).”’ As is said (in the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha):

‘Adepts should meditate on Śiva as being six things, according to the

various fruits (they desire); (they are) the Point (bindu), Sound (nāda) and

Space (vyoman), Mantra, World-order (bhuvana), and Form (vigraha).

Again (according to the Svacchandatantra):
‘(With respect to the supreme state) the Transmental (unmanā) is

another (lower) state of being (bhāva); the gross (state) is considered to be

another (apara) (lower) than that. Again, the Void, which is Space, followed by

Touch, Word (= Sound) (nāda) and the End of Sound (nādānta)), Light (= the
Point (bindu) pervaded by the Obstructress (nirodhikā) and the Half Moon
(ardhacandra), Mantras (denotators of the nature of the reflective awareness of
the letters A, U, and M), the Causes (= Rudra, Upendra and Brahmā denoted by

4) the Fading of Resonance (nādānta). The mantra practitioner who knows this
irreversibly becomes (5) manifest Śiva. Dīkṣottara 2125ab-27cd (2/25cd-28ab)

Once the breath has been gathered into the Heart it rises from there through the
location of the five causal deities. These are typically, as we find in the SVT (4/262266), Sāráhatrīṁśatikālottara (25/8cd-12ab), the Parākhyatantra (14/73-75ab): Brahmā
– heart, Viṣṇu – throat, Rudra – palate, and Īśvara – the forehead. In some cases (as in
SVT), these are followed by Sadāśiva beyond, which there is Śiva or just Sadāśiva (also
called Śiva), counted as the fifth, with Śiva as transcendent beyond. The five Forces
(kalā) delineate as many spheres, into which the thirty-six principles ranging from Earth

to Śiva are divided. The former are described in detail below in Chapter Eleven and the
latter in Chapter Nine.

According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, Jayaratha is mistaken here. Mantra according to

him may be any Mantra. The syllable OM is just an example. Moreover, Swami
Lakṣhmanjoo says that these are two aspects of Śiva, not Mantra. Jayaratha understands

the expression ‘bindunādādisaṁbhinnaḥ’ to be an adjective qualifying the word
‘mantraḥ’ in the previous line, whereas Swami Lakshmanjoo understands it to relate to
‘saḍvidhaḥ siva . . .’ “Śiva Who is six-fold’ of the next line. In view of the following
verse, which Jayaratha himself quotes, which sustains Swami Lakshmanjoo’s view, one
wonders why Jayaratha explained it otherwise.

Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgaraha 20/38b. Somadeva analysing this verse, explains that

according to the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha, these six correspond to the culminating

experience which is the goal (lakṣya) of each of the corresponding six Paths that
constitute the Śaiva cosmic order (ṣaḍadhvan) and are considered to be six aspects of
Śiva. Theṣe are: world-order (bhuvana) = Path of the Worlds (bhuvana), Form (vigraha)
= Path of the Principles, Space (vyoman) = Path of the Forces (kalā), Sound (nāda
/dhvani) = Path of Mantra, Mantra /Aṛna = Path of the Letters (varṇa) and the Point
(bindu /jyotis) = Path of the Parts of Mantra (pada).

According to the SvT, the six correspond to six stages in the utterance of the Mantra

OM, as outlined in the following footnote.

CHAPTER ONE

them) and the World-orders (= the principles which are grounde
d in the

Causes).

Again (according to the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘The division of the target (lakṣyabheda) is considered to be six-fold

divided into Space, Form, the Point, Letter, World-orders and Path.
Moreover, wherever a person is firmly resolved here (within
this sixfold order), he attains (what he is seeking) there in accord with the
dictum: “(the

disciple) is conjoined (by his teacher) there (to the level of reality)
where (he
can experience) the worldly enjoyments he desires (and attains
the

corresponding) accomplishments (siddhi) (by the power of Mantras).’ Thus,

he says:

These lines are SYT 4/269-270ab. The printed edition of the SYT reads tasyāpar

punaḥ śūnyaṁ saṁsparśaṁ ca tato ʻparaṁ for punaḥ śūnyaṁ
ca vyomātmā
saṁsparśaṁ ca tataḥ paraṁ. Read with the edition of the SYT unmanā
tv aparo bhāvaḥ
(‘the Transmental is a lower state of being) for unmanā tu paro
bhāvaḥ (‘the

Transmental is the supreme state of being’). The reading in the SvT is sustained

by

Kṣemarāja’s explanation: ‘the Transmental is the reflective awarenes
s of one’s own
nature and s0, as such, because it is a subtle state of propensity (to the
attainment of the
supreme 5tate), it is, with respect to the supreme (transcendental
state of) being
(parabhāva), a lower (immanent) one (apara). 1t is the great (universa
l) being (of all
things) (mahāsattā). 1t is the subtle state of being and (includes
also) non-existence
(abhāva). This is the connected (prose order). (The next level down)
is the Equal One
(samanā). It is not ‘another’” (apara), because it is (entirely) separate
(from) it but is

closely associated with that nature called the Transmental, to which it is related

what is pervaded by that which pervades it. It is in that respect that

as is

it is gross, whereas

that too is subtle with respect to the letter A etc. (of OMṀ, of which these are

the sonic

energies). Another (level with respect to) the state of the Equal One
is the Void, the
nature of which is the Pervasive One (vyāpinī) that pervades (āsūtraṇa
) all phenomena
(bhāva) and is (called) the Great Void. This is the meaning.
Kṣemarāja goes on to explain that ‘the Pervasive One is the first of
two Voids
which, because it is pervasive, serves as the foundation (bhitti) for the
manifestation of

all things, whether existent or non-existent. Touch is Śakti. Word is Sound

and the End

of Sound. Light is the Point, pervaded by the Obstructress and the Half
Moon. Mantras
are the reflective awareness of the letters A, U, and M, which are the
denotators (vācya)
of the Causes, that is, Rudra, Upendra and Brahmā denoted by them. The
world-orders
are the principles that are grounded in the Cauṣal Deities.”

MV 12/9. The MVʼs explanation of the six is brief but has been reconstru

cted with

the help of other sources by Somadeva (2004: 263-271).

This passage is quoted ad 1/61cd-62 (62cd-63), ad 8/210-212 (209cd-212ab) and

ad

it twice below in 15/2cd-3ab and as 28/263cd-264a (264abc). In the first instance

he

8/435-436ab (434cd-435). The first quarter is quoted ad 15/30. Abhinav

a himself quotes

says that it is from the Svāyambhuva and in the second from the Svayambh
ūtantra. He
paraphraseṣ as he explains it in 8/435ab (434cd). Rāmakaṇṭha
quotes it in the
Mataṅgavṛti ad vidyāpāda 3/23c-25b and 26/63. There the reading
is mantrasāmarthyāt for mantraśaktyā of TĀ 15/3b. It occurs in the South Indian
Svāyambhuva
as 40/2c-3b (IFP T. 39, p.148). There the second line ends with syād
atroktam aviṣṭarāt.
The source is in actual fact the Sūkṣmasvāyambhuva. Goodall (2004:
XXXVI n 50)
notes that ‘Vaktraśambhu quotes two and a half verses that he
attributes to the
Sūkṣmasvāyambhuva in the Mṛgendrapaddhatiṭīkā (IFP T 1021 p. 127)
and plainly

TANTRĀLOKA

ā JTTēṬ] |

Tī āīaī aīa- || 331
yo yadātmakatāniṣṭhas tadbhāvaṁ sa prapadyate |
vyomādiśabdavijñānāt paro mokṣo na saṁśayaḥ |l 63 1

(The adept) attains the state of being which is the essential nature of
that (one out of these six aspects of Śiva) in which he is resolutely
established (niṣṭha),® (whereas) supreme liberation is (attained) without a
doubt by a complete knowledge (vijñāna) of the (pervasive) resonance

(Śabda) of (all these aspects) starting with Space. (63) (64)

The adept (attains) ‘the state of being of that’ world-order etc. in the

essential nature of which he is ‘resolutely established (niṣṭha)’.The meaning

is that (he attains) a specific accomplishment (siddhi) according to the nature of

each (corresponding) world-order etc.® That is said (in the Śvacchandatantra
in the following passage) beginning with:

‘He who meditates on a world-order, the one (specific) form of which

will be explained (further ahead), attains the lordship of (that) world. . . .
1) He who always recollects the form (vigraha) of the causes beginning
with Brahmā, whose characteristic is as described previously, attains that
distinguishes the work from the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha, for he twice mentions

both works together in lists.’
It is also quoted by Kṣemarāja in his commentary on the Svacchandatantra ad

4/415abc and 8/3b-10. In the first instance, he comments on the following:

‘Having experienced (the consequences of his karma, the disciple) travels
upwards, where he is conjoined by his teacher into the differentiated (aspect of deity

with form) (sakala) or into the undifferentiated (without form) (niṣkala).” SVT 4/415abc
Kṣemarāja explains that (he is conjoined) ‘where he desires worldly
enjoyments (bhoga). In accord with this teaching, he is conjoined there into the
differentiated (aspect of deity with form) (sakala) (into one or other) lord of a world, so

that he may be united with it. Or else, when the experience of the consequence of
auspicious Karma comes to an end, one who desires liberation is conjoined to
undifferentiated Śiva and goes to that same plane.”

In SvTu ad 8/3b-10 he writes: he who is conjoined there itself (by the teacher

in the course of initiation) to where he desires worldly enjoyments is successful (by the

power of Mantra). Those particular deities who have been worshipped by the worship
of these, the adept’s mantras, they are then all of Bhairava’s nature itself, and (so) are
means to achieve all the accomplishments.”

Instead of ‘resolutely established’ (i.. ‘upon which he is firmly resolved') Somadeva

translates ‘whichever of (the six) nature(s) he depends on’. The ĪPKau (fl. 3a) reads
Yadātmakatāviṣṭhas (‘the essential nature of that in which he has penetratedʼ) for
yadātmakatāniṣṭhas (‘the essential nature of that in which he is resolutely established’
).

Abhinava sums up in just one verse the point of the whole process expounded in
Chapter Two of the Dīkṣottara.

Read tadrāpatāyāṁ for tadrūpatāyā.
The world-orders, their contents, forms, presiding deities, associated experiences and
attainments are presented in detail below in Chapter Eight.

CHAPTER ONE

(deity’s) nature. 2) By means of Mantras (he attains) the accomplishment

(siddhi) of Mantra by the repetition of Mantras, fire offerings and worship. 3)

By meditating on (their) form described previously, (he) is successful. There is

no doubt here (about it). 4) By meditating on the Light, the lord of yogis attains
the accomplishment (siddhi) of yoga. He then attains its nature and becomes the
king of yogis. 5) By meditating on the Void, his nature is the Void. The one
who is pervasive (by meditating on the Pervasive One) is present everywhere. 6)
By the yoga of meditation on the Equal One (samanā), the yogi attains

omniṣcience.

As these, although six, are (all) Śiva by nature, it is said that: ‘having
meditated on Śiva (he becomes) of (His) nature. According to this teaching,
one attains one’s own essential nature which is Śiva even when one enters
into each one individually, because (they are all) one with Śiva. So he says: ‘by
a perfect knowledge (vijñāna) of the (pervasive) resonance (śabda) of (all
these aspects) starting with Space’. ‘Resonance’ (śabda) is the production of

the resonance (śabdana) of the resonances of these six, that is, Space and the

rest. It is supreme reflective awareness. As it is of that nature, that ‘perfect
knowledgeʼ is the experience (of them all). Thus, without a doubt one

(attains) ʻsupreme liberation’, which is the attainment of oneness with Śiva,

Whose sole essence is reflective awareness. This is the meaning of (this)

statement. If (we accept) the (variant) reading ‘the group of six starting with

Space,” one should explain (it to mean that one attains supreme liberation) by

the particularly excellent (visiṣṭa), unconditioned knowledge of the group of six,

that is, Space and the rest.” The sequence beginning with world-orders (to

which the previous verse refers) is not meant here. Thus, accordingly, the one
beginning with Space is applied here.

SVṬ 4/271-276. The following verses describe what happens at the Transmental level

as the experience of ‘Nonbeing’ (abhāva), which is the Void of transcendental Śiva (see

Dyczkowski :2004: 51 ff., which is dedicated to this subject). These levels of
consciousness are described below in the note to TĀv ad 1/83ab-84cd (1/83cd-85ab).

SVT 4/271d (omitted in the long quotation above).
Read with all the MSs except K, Kh and G: ṣvasvarūpalābho for —svarāpalābho.

Somadeva (2004: 257 n. 31) explains that here Jayaratha interprets Abhinavagupta

as teaching that liberation is achieved by the direct experience of śahdana [Resonance],
which he explains is the highest reflective awareness of the words denoting the six
goals. In fact, the Dīkṣottara and the Svāyambhuvasūtra-saṁgraha teach that the
highest liberation is achieved by only these two goals: vyoman [Void] and śabda

[Resonance].”

! It seems that some manuscripts Jayaratha consulted read vyomādiṣaṭka- ‘the group of
six starting with Space’ instead of vyomādiśabda- ‘resonance (śahda) of (all these

aspects) starting with Space’. According to Swami Lakshmanjoo, Abhinava lists Space

(vyoman) first here, although it was the fourth in the previous verse, because the Lords
of the Worlds (bhuvanesśvara) etc. are one only, that is, Lord Śiva. In order to indicate

that they are all equal, he does not observe the same sequential order.
The word ‘vijīūāna’ is here understood to mean particularly excellent (visiṣa)
knowledge (jñāna).

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely, (one may ask,) if (Śiva) is omniform, how is it that He is said to
be just six-fold? With this doubt in mind, he says:

f-ṣftr
āaza ācr--Tvrīq 1|

] || Ṝ II
viśvākṛtitve devasya tad etac copalakṣaṇam |
anavacchinnatārūḍhāv avacchedalaye ‘ṣya ca || 64 ||
Moreover, as God is omniform, that (series is only) a secondary

(metaphorical)

designation

(of His

nature

in

the context of)

His

(progressive) ascent into (His) unconditioned state and of the dissolving
away of His limitations (into His transcendental state). (64) (65)
(The Lord's six-fold aspect) is only ‘a secondary characteristic’
(attributed to Siva) in order to establish by means of that that (He is) the sum

total (saṁgraha) of the entire universe. It is not only a secondary characteristic
with respect to His cosmic form, rather it is so in another case also, so he says
(that it is so also of His) ‘(progressive) ascent into (His) unconditioned state’

etc. ‘The dissolving away of limitations’ means that the limitations, beginning
with the world-orders, that contract (Śiva’ s consciousness) are dissolved away
into (His) transcendental state. The intended meaning (is that thisis a secondary

characterization of Śiva in the sense that) He does not fall from His essential
nature even when (in His immanent state). He is all things.

But surely (someone may object that) by accepting that He has a fixed
nature (niyatātmika) in this way, what is being said (effectively) is that He is
conditioned in both respects also (as immanent and transcendent). It is with this
doubt in mind that he has said that (the Lord’s omniformity is apparent even in
the course of) ‘His (progressive) ascent into (His) unconditioned stateʼ’. Even
when He is (immanent and is) all things, because He transcends all things, (He

is perpetually) developing into (His) unconditioned state, and (so) the one free
(awakened) consciousness (hodha) manifests (lit. ‘shines radiantly°) in this way
and that.
Surely (one may ask,) how is it possible for the one (Śiva) to transcend

all things when He is (simultaneously) everything at one and the same time? In

order to quell this doubt, he corroborates (what he says) with scripture (that

supports this view):

3sk s ājītṁi ta k

In this and the following verse, Abhinava explains how Śiva can be both everything,

thatis, immanent, and yet at the same time, without contradiction, transcendent. He

explains this in two ways. One is dynamic, according to which Śivais engaged in

transforming Himself from one to the otherin the timeless rhythm of the present. The

other is spatial. The two aspects subsist together, with the transcendent one serving as
the ground of the immanent one.

CHAPTER ONE

uktaṁ ca kāmike devaḥ sarvākṛtir nirākṛtiḥ |
jaladarpaṇavat tena sarvaṁ vyāptaṁ carācaram || 65 ||

“And it is said in the Kāmika: ‘“God is (both) formless and
omniform, just like water or a mirror (when images are reflected in them).
He pervades all things, both (animate and) moving, and (as well as

inanimate and) immobile, (and assumes their form)’. (65) (66)

(The form of) a jar, for example, reflected within a mirror or the like, is

not separate from the mitrror even though it manifests as separate from it,

otherwise (if it were to be), the manifestations of the mirror and the jar would be

mutually separate from one another (and so we would see the jar resting on the
mirror). In the same way, although Śiva Himself, Who is the Light (of

consciousness), is making this universe of mobile (sentient) and immobil
e

(insentient) things manifest by His own (free) will by separating it off from His

own essential nature, (He) pervades it. (This must be s0,) because (its) manifest

state could not logically be explained otherwise. And (so) He has encompassed

it as not separate from His own essential nature. Thus, even when (Śiva) is
(immanent) as all things, (He is transcendent) beyond them, and even when
He

transcends them, He is of their nature. So in both respects also, there is no
defect. Thus it is said that (He is both) ‘formless and omniform’. (He is both)

omniform,

(that

is,

immanent

as)

the

universe,

and

formless

(that

is,

transcendent) beyond it.® And (it also means that), even having returned

After a short detour to the teachings of the Dīkṣottara, (TĀ 1/61cd-63 (62cd-64)) and

a brief gloss in verse 64 (65), Abhinava returns to the citation of the Kāmika begun

1/58-59ab (59-60ab).

in

This line is quoted by Jayaratha below in TĀv ad 3/21-22. I is striking how few

sources Abhinava cites in order to support Utpaladeva’s Doctrine of Reflection

(concerning which see below 3/1-60). One is the Kāmikāgama cited here. This

may be

the same source to which Abhinava refers in 3/21-22 and TĀv as a teaching taught
by
the ‘God of the gods’. Jayaratha quotes a few more sources. Amongst them, notably are
Buddhist Yogācāra texts. Indeed, that the world is like a reflection in a mirror is a

common analogy in the Mahāyāna sūtras, especially the Gaṇḍavyūha. However, there it
is presented as a vision of the illusory nature of the world that appears but is without
substance or independent nature of its own. According to the Pratyabhijñā,
the
reflections within the mirror of consciousness are produced by the power of the
mirror

itself and so are as real as it is.

”° The pervasive nature of Sadāśiva is one of his major characteriṣtics eulogized in the

string of his names and epithets forming the Vyomavyāpin Mantra (the Mantra
of Śiva
who pervades the sky). Commonly applied as the Mantra of the Path,
it is one of the
most important Mantras of the Siddhānta corpus. So it is very significant that there
he is
portrayed as both Space and the one who pervades Space. Here we have a
deeper

explanation of how and in what sense He is pervasive.
Śiva, the Light of consciousness, manifests the entire universe out of His own

free will in the same way, as separate from Himself, although in reality it is not.
Thus,
He pervades everything. If He were not to be all-pervasive, He would be limited
and not

be the unlimited, universal Light that makes all things manifest, and so nothing would

manifest. Moreover, as nothing in reality differs from Him, everything unfolds

within

TANTRĀLOKA

back” into (any) reality level (tattva), He (continues to) transcend it. In this
way this Supreme Lord, Who is Light and one only, unfolds everywhere. This is

God's nonduality (varādvaya) as it is in reality (paramārthataḥ).

Surely, (an opponent may object): one may agree to this much, namely
that phenomena (bhāva lit. ‘existing things') have no separate being (sattā) of
their own in relation to (the light of consciousness,) because it is not logically
possible for them to manifest separately (independently of it), and so in relation
to phenomena, God, Who is the light (of consciousness), is one only. However,

it is said that He possesses (various) attributes such as ubiquity and the like.

In relation to that, it is undeniable that there is a mutual difference (bheda)
between the attributes and their possessor as well as the attributes (themselves).

So how can one prevent the manifestation of this duality (bheda) (affecting the

oneness of) the Lord so that He (remains) one only and the doctrine of

nonduality can be established? With this doubt in mind, he says:

na cãsya vibhutādyo ‘yaṁ dharmo ‘nyonyaṁ vibhidyate |
Nor are His (divine) attributes of ubiquity and the rest (essentially)

different from one another.®" (66ab) (67ab)

(Śiva’s) ‘(divine) attributes of ubiquity and the rest’ are not separate
from His own (essential) nature. No attribute excels (and hence differs) from

Him. Rather, it is (His) own nature. Ubiquity is said to be (Śiva’ s) state of

(universal) pervasion, and thatis possible if whatis pervadedis separate from
Himself. (However, it must also be one with Him.) It is not possible for there to

Him. Thuṣ, although He is immanent, He is also transcendent and vice versa. He is both
omniform, as the universe (viśvamaya) and, beyond it (viśvottīrṇa), He is formless.

Read āvṛttya for āvṛttyā.
N The point is that Śiva repeatedly manifests as and through the thirty-six principles

(tattva), collectively and one by one. In the latter case, he assumes a particular form as
one of the principles without this affecting His essentially transcendental nature, just as

when He manifests as all of them, He continues to transcend them. Swami Lakshmanjoo

explains that: ‘(Śiva) is not all-pervading, because non-pervadingness would be

excluded; so there would not be real pervasion. There is nothing for Him to pervade. If
He is All-pervading, the negation of non-pervasion is excluded but there is no negation
at all for Him: He is all-pervading and He is not all-pervading, He is eternal and He is

not eternal, He is both universal and not universal. These attributes of Lord Śiva are not
really separate from one another. His being is not divided that He can be seen in these
three ways. He has only one aspect which includes every other – Svātantrya (freedom) –
thisis the real way of explaining Śiva.

Kashmiri Śaivism is called īśvarādvayavāda – the view that maintains God’s

nonduality. This name defines the essential difference between the nondualism of all the

Kashmiri Śaiva schools and that of others such as the Advaita Vedānta, and the
Buddhists who do not accept the ultimate reality of God.

“ See above, 1/59.

Cf. below 1/198-200.

CHAPTER ONE

be any directions in space (dik) and the like in relation to the supreme Light (of

consciousness).” So what could it pervade?

(Similarly), eternal existence is not (Śiva’s) attribute, because He is

present in (all) three times (past, present and future), and also because He is not

measured out in time. It is with this intended sense that it is said, for example,

that ‘this Self has shone forth (just) once.’ The same (applies to His)

omniformity. In relation to that there is no (separate, independently existing)

universe that (Śiva) also may have (some) form (in relation to). Similarly, there

can be no difference between these (divine attributes) in any way in relation to
the supreme Light (of consciousness, as each of them is one with the Light,) nor
are they mutually different (bheda) from one another. So he says: “nor are they
(essentially) different from one anotherʼ.

Surely, if this is the case, how is it that (Śiva) is said to be ubiquitous,
eternal, omniform and so on, (implying) that there is a difference (bheda)
between (His) attributes? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Powers of Śiva’s Freedom

gs scaīzīī ft |

eka evāsya dharmo ‘sau sarvākṣepeṇa vartate || 66 ||
tena svātantryaśaktyaiva yukta ity āñjaso vidhiḥ |

He has only one attribute that includes all the others. Thus the
precept (vidhi) is sound (which states) that He is united with the power of
(creative) freedom (svātantrya) alone. (66cd-67ab) (67cd-68ab)
(Śiva) ‘has only one attribute’, which is (His) own nature, called the
reflective
awareness
of
(pure,
universal)

(consciousness)

(ahaṁpratyavamarśa) that includes all the attributes of ubiquity and the rest.
The meaning here is that that is said to be this reflective awareness of the (pure)

“ The directions ~ in front, behind, to the left or right etc. – can only be so in relation to
some fixed point in space, not in relation to the supreme (para) Light of consciousness,
which shines everywhere as all things. Spatial directions exist only in relation to the

lower (apara) light of consciousness which shines as individual things.

‘Juṣṭ once’ in this sense is not an event set in time. See note above in TĀv ad 1/57.

“ The reference from the Kāmikāgama appears to extend up to 66cd (67cd). What
follows is Abhinava’s gloss. The reason for this I believe is the shift of terminology.
The Kāmika talks about Śiva’s attributes — dharma – and how they are all ultimately His

one attribute –— which is essentially His own nature – that includes all of them. Abhinava
continues by explaining in Pratyabhijñā terms that this one dharma is Śiva’s power of
creative autonomy – svātantrya. This equation opens the door for Abhinava’s exposition
of the Nature of Śakti and its functions, operating through its innumerable forms, to
conclude that Śiva and Śakti are one (1/66cd-73 (68ab-74)). Thus, he explains in these
terms how Śiva is both transcendent (as Śiva) and omniform (as Śakti). Then he begins
a lengthy citation from the Kiraṇa.

“ This verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 10/12cd-17. See above, note 1,375 concerning
the translation of the term svātantrya as ‘freedomʼ and ‘creative autonomy’.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘T’ of the Light (of consciousness), which does not depend on (anything) else to
illumine itself or (anything) else. Thus (this, His sole attribute,) is His freedom
(svātantrya). It is the capacity to generate (countless) thousands of
manifestations in each (and every) place and time etc. It is due to that that even
though the limited perceiving subjects are the outpouring of His own (conscious
nature), in relation to themselves He behaves as (all-)pervasive and eternal etc.

(However,) in actual fact, (all these attributes) are only His power of (creative)
freedom and autonomy (svātantryaśakti), called the reflective awareness of
(pure) ‘T (consciousness). Thus it is said (in the Iśvarapratyabhijñā) that:

‘((The power of) consciousness (citi) is reflective awareness. It is
Supreme Speech that arises spontaneously.) That is the (supreme) primary
(mukhya) freedom and sovereignty of the Supreme Self.

Accordingly, he says: ‘thus’ etc.
Sureḷy, (one may ask,) it is said everywhere that He possesses®” 607 endless
powers beginning with the will and the rest, so how is it that it is said here that
He is united with just one power called ‘freedom’? With this doubt in mind, he

says:

bahuśaktitvam apy asya tacchaktyaivāviyuktatā || 67 ||
Moreover, (the fact that) He possesses many powers amounts to

(His inseparable) union with that (one) power alone. (67cd) (68cd)

The power of (Śiva’s) freedom behaves (in this world) as (if it) were

many, due to the limiting adjuncts (upādhi) (secondarily associated with iīt),
such as each of (the countless) objects of desire and the rest (to which aspects of
this one power, as the power of the will and so on correspond). Thus (the fact
that Śiva poṣsess) many powers amounts to His union with that (one) power. As
is said (in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra);:
“The power of the Sustainer of the Universe, said to be inherent within
Him (samavāyinī), (is the Goddess). It is She Who assumes the form of His will
when He wishes to emit (the universe). Hear now how She, though one,

becomes many.

““TP 1/5/13cd. The sentence in brackets is the first line, which Jayaratha choses to omit.

Utpaladeva explains: “This is the first (and highest) level of Speech, (in and from) which
what it says is undivided. It is without beginning or end and does not depend on
(anything) else, because its nature is eternal consciousness. This is pure freedom that
does not depend on anything else (to exist, act, be and know all things), and is called

(God’s sovereign) lordship.” Clearly, the Supreme level of Speech is the reflective

awareness which is pure, universal ‘I’ consciousness. Concerning the levels of Speech,

see above, note 1,225.
The Sanṣkrit lierally says that Śiva is ‘united or conjoined (yoga) to His powers’, that
is, His one power that possesses countless forms.

“ This line is quoted below in TĀv ad 1/160, ad 2/31cd-32ab) (32) (quotes 1/67 (68)),
3/64ab (64), and 3/193 (192cd-193ab).

CHAPTER ONE

(When that power instils in (consciousness) here in this world the
certainty that: “this is such and should not be known to be otherwise,” then
(She)

is called the power of knowledge.
When assuming a state of intent towards Her task of the form — ‘may all
this be such’ and at that very instant makes it so, She is called activity here (in

this world).)

Thus, although she, the Mistress (of the universe), has only two forms,
She, like the Wish fulfiling Gem, becomes infinitely diverse through the

limitations imposed upon Her by (Her) objects (arthopādhivaśāt).

Surely, (someone may object that) in this way also the view that
maintains God’s nonduality (īśvarādvayavāda) is not established, because
(you
also) refer to the power of (Śiva’s) freedom, which is separate from Him. With
this doubt in mind, he says:

Śśaktiś ca nāma bhāvasya svaṁ rāpaṁ mātṛkalpitam ḷ
tenādvayaḥ sa evāpi śaktimatparikalpane || 68 |I

The power (śakti) (which is the functional efficacy) of an entity is its

own (specific) nature, as conceived by the subjects (who perceive
it)

(mātṛkalpita) (on the basis of its various effects). Thus (it follows) that (Śiva)
also is (one reality) without a second, (even) when He is conceived
to be

(power and) the possessor of power. (68) (69)

The ‘power (which is the functional efficacy) of an ‘entityʼ, that is,

any existing thing which is the meaning of a word (padārtha), is its ‘own

(specific) natureʼ, as conceived by the subjects (who make use of it)
by

projecting a relative distinction (bheda) (onto it with respect to everything else),

due to the diversity (bheda) of the (perceived) results (of its functional efficacy

with respect to other entities). In fact, it is not some other category of reality
(padārtha). Thus, even when He is conceived to be power and the possessor of
power, He is the same all-pervasive Lord (vibhu), Who is nondual by nature.
Thus, in this way (iti yāvat) there has been no compromise at all of (Śiva’s)
nonduality." That is said (in the following reference):
“”MV 3/5ab-6ab, 8cd-9ab. Jayaratha omits the two verses in the middle of this passage,
