1/13). The sense of the term Yoga viewed in this perspective is thus not the practice of
Yoga as a means, but ‘yoga’ as the condition which is the goal that is attained, or at
least, the process that leads to it as such. In that perspective, the aṅgas are not ‘limbs’ or

‘parts’ of Yoga, but its auxiliaries. Even s0, in some contexts the translation in common

practice may be more appropriate. In the many kinds ofyoga, the ‘ancillaries’ or ‘limbs”

are commonly understood to follow on from one another as phases or stages of the one
praxis of which the goal is yoga, and is itself the process of attaining perfection in that
yoga and so is also yoga. See below, 4/86 and note.

CHAPTER ONE

Yoga’. (Thus,) in accord with this teaching, those who practice and explain

sound discriminating reasoning (tarka), which is intent on bringing about

the

recognition' that the Lord (śvara) is one’s own Self that is self-luminous and
the supreme goal, should be saluted above all. Thus, in order to contemplate
again (his) teacher, grand-teacher and great-grand-teacher as those who have
prepared him for this particular (purpose in a special way)
(viṣeśaprayojakīkāreṇa), he says:

JHī--zārrrTgrdftgaT: 1|

TGPTITṬGS TGGĪĪTR̄Ī : || Ḷ2 1|
śrīsomānandabodhaśrīmadutpalaviniḥsṛtāḥ |
jayanīi saṁvidāmodasandarbhā dikprasarpiṇaḥ || 10 |
tadāsvādabharāveśabṛṁhitāṁ matiṣaṭpadīm |
guror lakṣmaṇaguptasya nādasaṅmohinīṁ numaḥ || 11 I]
(The collections of fragrances (delighting) consciousness that come

forth from a beautiful blue lotus (utpala)'™ by (its) blossoming with the joy

of the (shining) moon which is beauty (itself), and spread in (all) directions,
excel (all). In the same way,) the compositions (inspired by) the bliss of

consciousness, that have come forth from the venerable (śrīmar)
Utpala(deva) by virtue of (his) awakening by the illustrious Somānanda,
and have spread in (all) directions, excel (all). (10)
' MV 17/18b. This line is also quoted below ad 4/18cd-19ab. The context, MV 17/1819, quoted by Abhinava in 4/15-16. There and in the following verses, he deals

extensively with the nature and application of discriminating intuitive reasoning

(tarka)

as the primary foundation of the practice of the Empowered Means. It both discerns the
highest goals taught in the scriptures when operating for oneself and is the primary

qualifying attribute of a true teacher when operating for others. See below, 4/13 ff.

' Instead of -pratyabhijñāpanaparasya (‘intent on bringing about recognition’), MSs
Ch, J, N T and Ḍ read -pratyabhijñānaparasya (and MS K –pratyabhijñāparasya,

which means the same, that is, ‘intent on recognitionʼ).

'" Hanneder translates the word utpala as ‘water-lly°, which is indeed one of the

meanings of the word. However, another is ‘blue lotus’, which seems to be more
appropriate, as blue lotuses blossom at night by the light of the moon.
'“ Hanneder suggests that the reading here is ‘suspiciousʼ, as ‘the ceasure is inelegant as
it splits ‘śrīmar and ‘the wording of the TĀ is not secured by the commentary.” (1998:
133 note 28).

' This verse is MVV 1/7. Read as we find there and the metre demands —sañbodha-

for -hodha-.

' There is a play on words here. The compound sarvidāmodasandarbhā means a)

‘compositions (inspired by) the bliss of consciousnessʼ, and b) ‘collections of fragrance
s
(that
delight)
consciousnessʼ.
The
compound
śrīsomānandasaṁbodhaśrīmadutpalaniḥsr̥uāḥ means a) (compositions) that have
come
forth from the venerable Utpala(deva) by virtue of (his) awakening by the illuṣtriou
s

TANTRĀLOKA

We salute the bee-like mind of the teacher Lakṣmaṇagupta, whose

sound is the attractive (resonance of consciousness) intensified by (his)
penetration (āveśa) into the copious relish of that (Lotus, his teacher
Utpaladeva).” (11)
Now, (it is said that:) ‘a spiritual teacher (ācārya) is ten times (greater)

than a (common) teacher (upādhyāya), and a father is (equal to) a hundred

spiritual teachers.” Thus, in accord with this dictum, because the recollection

(of a father) is of greater importance than even that of his teacher,
(Abhinavagupta) reflects on his own father, by way of (seeking his) blessing.

Ẽ UIEtIĒEḺ ĀE-EÁIEIṬIIHṈ
a fragoaī fczaṁcz ī īṛēēūā: |I 23I
yaḥ pūrṇānandaviśrāntaḥ” sarvaśāstrārthapāragaḥ |

sa śrīcukhulako diśyād iṣṭaṁ me gurur uttamaḥ || 12 ||
May the venerable Cukhulaka, the best of teachers who has crossed

over (and mastered) the purport of all the disciplines (śāstra) and rests in

perfect bliss, instruct me in what (I) desire (to learn). (12)

Somānanda, and b) ‘(fragrances) that come forth from a blue lotus (utpala) by (its)
blossoming with the joy of the (shining) moon which is beauty (itself).

'! We have seen that Somānanda was the first to write on the nondualist Śaiva

philosophy that developed, in the hands of his disciple Utpaladeva, into the

Pratyabhijñā. The fragrance of these teachings emanating from Utpaladeva ~ the God of
the Lotus – attracted the bee-like mind of his disciple Lakṣmaṇagupta, who taught

Abhinavagupta Pratyabhijñā. Abhinava also praises him at the beginning of his MVV
(v. 8), and of course, at the beginning of the ĪPV.
' Manuṣmṛti 2/145ab.

Read -viśrānta for -viśrānta.
' Abhinava seeks the blessings of his father, who he expressly tells us was called both

Cukhulaka (or, variously, Cukhula, Cukhala, and Cukhalaka – which is the reading here
in MSs J, N, and Ḍ) as well as Narasiṁhagupta, revering him as ‘shining brightly by
virtue of his immersion in the essence of the scriptures’ʼ, and as being graced with great

devotion for Śiva (below 37/54, cf. above, TĀv ad 1/1). Abhinava’s father gave him his

basic knowledge of Sanskrit and taught him grammar, literature and logic (nyāya).

Abhinava’s mother, whom he recalls with great love, died when he was young (below
37/56). It seems that his father died when Abhinava was in his youth, and, liberated,
‘rests in perfect bliss’. He says of him: ‘I adore (my father), a scholar whose name is
Cukhala and who is more venerable than even the teachers. It is through his education
(saṁsṣkāra), that I have become free from attachment.’ (MVV 1/5) The translation is by

Hanneder who reflects on what may be meant by the word ‘saṁṅskāra’ here, settling for
the meaning ‘education’ (Hanneder 1998: 131-132). While this a possible translation,
the term commonly refers to the Vedic rites of passage which are forms of initiation,
and so may be applied to Śaiva initiaton. The latter is not likely, as Abhinava is
normally careful to acknowledge his teachers and what they have given him, and does

not say anywhere that his father initiated him into any form of Śaivism. However, there
is no reason to reject out of hand the first, most literal meaning. The rites of passage are
common to followers of all paths. They are normally sponsored by the father, and if he

CHAPTER ONE

‘Cukhulaka’ is another name (of Abhinavagupta’s) father, which is

well-known in the world. He is ‘the best of teachers’. The reason for (his)

excellence is that the recollection (of a father) is of greater importance than
(even) that of a spiritual teacher. Thus, it is said elsewhere also: “The father (of

Abhinavagupta,) who is called Cukhula, is more venerable than even (his)

teachers.”

After having directed (our) attention in this way to the teachers who are

(more) proximate to the Tantra modality (tantraprakriyā), he exults (his)
teacher of the Kula modality as the place where (he found ultimate) rest.
is a capable and authorized Brahmin, may even be administered directly by him. Unlike

the Śaiva and other such initiations, these are not a matter of personal choice. As the son

of a Brahmin, and to be one, Abhinavagupta would have had to receive them. Their
Vedic character is irrelevant to Abhinava’s or indeed his father’s personal convictions.
Although the word may well also be taken to mean ‘education’ in a general sense, this
meaning does not necessarily preclude the other one.

! MVV 1/5ab. In the place of janakaṁ chukulābhidham – Ś‘the father (of
Abhinavagupta) who is called Cukhula’, the edition of the MVV reads yuktaṁ
Śśrīcukhalābhidham, which Hanneder translates as ‘a scholar whose name is the
venerable Cukhala’. The word ‘yuktaṁ’, which Hanneder takes to mean ‘abhiyuktaṁ’ ,
i.e., diligent or well versed, implies, according to him, that Cukhala/Cukhula was a

scholar. We know that this is true; even so the expression can equally well mean that he

was diligently attentive to the Deity, which we may presume was Śiva. Indeed, this is
how Abhinava describes him, when at the end of the PTv (concluding verses 12cd) he
praises ‘the one called Cukhala, whose mind, solely (intent on) Śiva (śivaikacitta), was
averse to the story (vrttānta) of the world of transmigratory existence.’

““ Note here that Jayaratha distinguishes Pratyabhijñā from Trika on the basis that the

former belongs to the Tantra modality and the latter the Kula one. Trika, as we have
noted already, contains both modalities. The teachings of the Pratyabhijñā belong
entirely to the Tantrīc modality. Any school, or even just a single Tantra, can be
classified from this perspective. Thus, the teachings of Siddhānta systems would
normally be entirely in the Tantric modality. The Krama teachings are entirely in the
Kula modality. One may well ask in that case what remains then of Kula as a separate

‘systemʼ in the Kashmiri Śaiva context? One wonders, therefore, whether it is right to
think, as many scholars do, that Kula is a separate system (along with Krama,
Pratyabhijñā, Spanda and Trika) which forms a part of the syncretic whole we nowadays
call Kashmiri Saivism or even Trika. The answer to this question, I believe, is implicitly
supplied by Abhinava himself by the sequence in which he presents the teachers whom

he acknowledges as contributing to the existence of the Anuttara Trika he expounds and
his knowledge of it. These are 1) Matsyendranātha, who brought the Kula teachings into

the world. 2) Tryambakāditya, who revealed nondualist

Saivism, and the teachers

associated with him, who revealed the other two forms of Śaiva teachings, dualist and
dualist-um-nondualist. They constituted a triad (trika) who presumably taught the

Tantric modality. To these another is added which said to be a ‘half’ because it was
started by a woman, namely, 3) Tryambika’s daughter, which is Trika proper. This
contains the Kula modality also. Abhinava declares that his Tantrāloka oozes the nectar
of these schools. He then continues to praise the teachers of the Tryambika lineage, that

is, those of the Pratyabhijñā, in chronological order: Somānanda, followed by
Utpaladeva and then Lakṣmaṇagupta. We may pause here to observe that Abhinavya is
referring to these teachers in order of precedence as the founders of the more general,

pervasive forms of the teaching, and then specifically as the particular teachers who
founded specific lineages that came down to him. Thus, Matsyendranātha’s Kaulism is

TANTRĀLOKA

√TTTNT
T JITTI T: |
T-ālṣ% T̄ĨTST̄ JTTRHTĪ: 1| 23 11
jayatāj jagaduddhṛtikṣamo ʻsau
bhagavatyā saha śambhunātha ekaḥ |
yad udīritaśāsanāṁśubhir me
prakaṭo ʻyaṁ gahano ‘pi śāstramārgaḥ || 13 |I
May Śambhunātha who, together with Bhagavatī (his consort), is
the (only) one capable of extricating the (entire) universe (from ignorance),
be victorious! Although profound (and hard to grasp), it is he who has
made this path of the scriptures (śāstra) clear to me by the (enlightening)

rays of the teachings he has spoken (to me). (13)

conceived to be an original pervasive presence, which is indeed how it is described (see

above, verse 7 and notes). Thus, just as the philosophy of the Pratyabhijñā is clearly
apparent throughout the Tantrāloka, by direct reference as much as ‘pervasive
presence’, so too is Kaulism. In this respect it could be thought to be a component
‘system’, but it is one which is entirely different in character from the Pratyabhijñā

which can be very clearly defined by reference to its specific texts. This is not so with

the Kaulism of the Tantrāloka. Only a few works, all of which are Tantras, are

attributed to Matsyendranātha. Nonetheless, Abhinava places Matsyendranātha at the
head of the list of his most venerated teachers, suggesting that his Kaula teachings
inform, in various ways and degrees, the teachings of Anuttara Trika taught in the
Tantrāloka. Numerous passages containing Kula teachings may indeed be identified in
the Tantrāloka and related works, but these are always related in some way to a
particular school that conveys them. One of them is Anuttara Trika itself.

Abhinava refers to Śambhunātha in several places in his Tantrāloka, both generally

as his Trika teacher and also as imparting particular teachings. In this, the culmination
of the first phase of his career, in which his primary concern is Trika Śaivism,
Abhinavagupta perceives himself to be an enlightened being, both because he was born

from enlightened parents first of all, and then especially by virtue of the Trika teachings
and grace of Śambhunātha, his Trika master. He venerates his other teachers, but it is
only Śambhunātha who made the path of the Trika teaching clear to him so that he could
travel down it swiftly by attending to the spiritual and intellectual knowledge
transmitted to him by Śambhunātha and his consort (1/16). Flowing from their lotus

feet, radiant with the rays of the light of illuminating grace, they made the lotus of his
heart bloom with the full and unrestricted expansion of liberated consciousness (1/21).

Thus Śambhunātha, who was Abhinava’s sole (eka) Trika teacher, was most unique
(eka) amongst all his teachers. By learning Trika from him, he reached the highest level

of realisation possible. He received thereby the secret which is the essence and

culmination of all the Śaivāgama; indeed every teaching understood to be just stages on
the way to that supreme attainment.
In this way also Śambhunātha was his sole teacher,

because pi teaching him Trika and initiating him into it, he had taught everything.
ambhunātha was Abhinava’s Trika teacher, to whom Abhinava repeatedly
refers throughout the Tantrāloka as the source of this or that teaching. He has a very
special respect for him and is especially grateful to him. Thus, the serial order in which

CHAPTER ONE

(Śambhunātha’s) Tantric consort (dūtī) is called Bhagavatī. One has no
authority anywhere (to perform any) ritual in the Kula modality without a
consort. Therefore (it is normal) to take an oath of companionship (with a

consort).

‘The attainment (siddhi) of fearful men that is said (to be achieved) here

after a year, is achieved with women who are established in reality in (just)

twelve days. Therefore, taking a beautiful woman with fine features (subhagā),

with a nature that is steeped in virtue (bhāvitāśaya), one should worship,

(make a) sacrifice and offerings to the fire.’
By (saying that) ‘the path of the scriptures’ has become (clear, that is)

free of (the impeding) impurity (of ignorance) (vimala), (Abhinava) has thereby
also declared that (Śambhunātha) explained the (śaiva) tradition (āgama)
headed by Trika (to him). As (Abhinavagupta) himself has said:
‘Having correctly (samyak) understood the traditional teaching (āgama)

from the mouth of the venerable Śambhunātha, the great repository of all the

he praises his teachers here appears to be guided by a principle of gradation of the
systems that contribute to the Trika he expounds here, from generic to more specific.
Accordingly, he praises Śambhunātha last, not as the least of his teachers, but as the
greatest one who taught him, specifically, Trika Śaivism, and therefore must have
initiated him into it. Indeed, he dedicates two more verses of praise to him here (1/16
and 1/21). He is the only teacher he praises at the beginning of his summary of the
Tantrāloka, the Tantrasāra. There he repeats the concluding verse in this series (i.e. 21).
In his MVV (1/2-4) Abhinava praises him first of all in the following verses, where he
again refers to the knowledge he imparted to him as rays of light:
‘May (my) teacher surpass all who, with the rays of his (awakened)

consciousness pouring forth all around, makes the lotus of my heart blossom, (and) who
entrusted me with the currents of doctrine (arthaugha) that are dedicated to destroying

the distress (of sañsāra). (These doctrines) are radiating like (jewels) in the five streams

(of Śaiva revelation), which have as their aim the Half of Six (i.e. Trika) (that are
formed by the five streams) together with its reflective awareness. May (this teacher),
Śambhunātha, who was purified by (his teacher), the glorious Sumati, and is favourable
towards true devotees, be pleased with me and satisfied with this (offering of the)

flowers of (my) words.”
'”! Venerated here along with his consort, Śambhunātha is portrayed as the acme of a
Kula teacher. Although Matsyendranātha, the first Kula teacher of this Age, is not

referred to here by Abhinava along with his consort, when the Kula teachers of the four
Ages are worshipped in the Gurumaṇḍala at the outset of Trika Kula practice, special
care is taken to mention and worship their consorts also (see below 29/29cd-33ab). The
same is the case with the Krama teachers, not mentioned here by Abhinava (see below
intro. to comm. on 29/43). AIl these are Kula teachers who teach Kaula practice which
involves, symbolically at least, the offering and consumption of meat, wine, and sexual

fluids. The point Abhinava is implicitly making is that Kula practice reaches its peak of
excellence with Trika. This is because it most effectively gives rise to the fully

expanded state of liberated consciousness, whether such rites are literally done

externally or just symbolically and inwardly.
! MSs N T and Ḍ svarūpāṁ for sarūpāṁ, which can also mean ‘of a common nature

with oneself’

TANTRĀLOKA

scriptures, this is the extensive commentary (vivṛtti) I have written on this

treatise which says profound (things) and is beautiful with the (unbroken) flow
(saṁtati) of the savour (rasa) (of aesthetic delight) of the secret (teachings).”

Now, in the course of declaring what he is doing, the purpose
(prayojana) (of it) and the rest, the author declares the reason (for writing) the
book.
The Purpose of the Book and its Inspiration

3TTāNTgīiṁ
dPīT? ēērd 11 2: 1
santi paddhatayaś citrāḥ srotobhedeṣu bhiyasā |
anuttaraṣaḍardhārthakrame tv ekāpi nekṣyate || 14 ||
Many and various are the liturgical manuals (paddhati) (in use) in
the diverse currents (of scripture) (srotas).™ But there is not even one to be

seen for the procedures (krama) of the Anuttara Trika. (14)

One could also translate ‘. . . beautiful with (the traditional teachings) of the lineage
(saṁtati) (that transmits) the savour (rasa) (of the aesthetic delight) of the secret
(teachings).”

The source of this reference has not been traced. It looks like a standard verse

that comes at the beginning or end of a treatise praising the teacher. Without the source,
we can only conjecture what this commentary was. He refers to his commentary as a

vivrtti. Itis possible that he was commenting on a previous commentary. This is the case

with his well-known vivṛtivimarśinī on the ĪP, that comments on Utpaladeva’s vṛtti as
well as ṭikkā on his own Jśvarapratyabhijñākārikā. This verse is not found there. Nor

would we expect it to be. Here Abhinava is acknowledging Śambhunātha as his teacher,
and says that it contained ‘secret teachings’ and so was certainly a commentary on a
Trika work. Was this his lost commentary on the MV or some lectio thereof called
(Śrīpūrva-) Pañjikā? (See Appendix volume concerning sources under that entry).

This remark directs our attention to the existence in Abhinava’s time (i.e.

the

eleventh century) of liturgical manuals (paddhati). The language of the Tantras is often

terse, and the many and diverse rituals they teach are generally described in an
abbreviated form. They often just state what is to be done, not how, and the mantras

required are often given in code. Without a teacher who knows the ritual procedure, it

requires time, reflection and knowledge to work it out, even if there is sufficient data to
do so. It is not surprising therefore that liturgical manuals came to be compiled that
prescribe in detail how the rituals are to be performed, so that all that is required is to

follow their instructions without needing to refer to the original Tantras from which they
draw. Rāmakaṇṭha (who was an older contemporary of Abhinava) defines the nature of
a paddhati accordingly in his commentary (vṛtti) on the Sārdhatriśatikālottara (ad

4/1cd-2ab) as follows:

‘For any scripture a Paddhati is a text which enables the performance of the

rituals [of that scripture] along with the Mantras [that accompany them] by succinctly
arranging in the order [of performance] (a) the [instructions] explicitly stated [in the
scripture but] dispersed in various places [throughout its length], and (b) whatever else

those explicit statements imply. An example is the Yajñasūtra in the case of the

CHAPTER ONE

Yajurveda.’ Translation and edition by Sanderson (Heidelberg handout 2003 p. 2 also
2005b: 106 n 491).
This came to be such common and extensive practice that nowadays

such

works constitute by far the greatest bulk of Tantric manuscripts. While the great

majority were and are of importance to just a small group of practitioners at any given
time and place, some are major influential works. However, very few early paddhatis

composed prior to the 13th century have survived. Sanderson (ibid. p. 1) informs us that
the Naimittikakarmānusandhāna of Brahmaśambhu of Mālava composed in AD 938

(Asiatic Society of Bengal MS G 4767) is the oldest surviving paddhati. The
Siddhāntasārapaddáhati by king Bhojadeva (reign 1018-1060) (NAK 1/1363 = NGMPP
B 28/29), the Kriyāsaṅgrahapaddhati by Vāladhārin (Kathmandu Kaiser Library,
MS
63 = NGMPP C 5/3 manuscript completed in AD 1091/2), and the Jñānaratnāvalī
by

Jñānaśiva, (probably a South Indian) Siddhāntin living in Beṇares in the second half of
the 12th century (IFI MS T 231), are three other unpublished padáhatiṣ. Theṣe are not
very big works. The Kriyākramadyotika ‘Illumining Light of Ritual Procedureʼ, by
the
12 century South Indian Siddhāntin Aghoraśivācārya is, on the contrary, such
an
extensive and thorough manual that it still guides the rituals in the majority of the
large

Śaiva temples of South India. It draws from Karmakāṇḍakramāvalī (also called

Somaśambhupaddhati), composed around 1095 AD by Somaśambhu, who was probably
from Kashmir. These are the only early paddhatis so far discovered.
From what Abhinava says here, it would seem there were already many and
various liturgical manuals in 11" century Kashmir. Buṭ either they were not as popular

as they came to be later on, or with the continuous changes that there must have been, as
there still are, in ritual procedure and their limited spread outside the circles of initiates
of individual teachers, they were not copied. The earliest commentators on the
Siddhānta Āgamas, who preceded Abhinavagupta, mention the names of a
few

padáhatis and even quote from them. Abhinava himself refers to them in one or
two
places. For example, he cites the Karmapaddhati by Dharmaśiva (below 21/50-56
ab)
and that of a certain Īśānaśiva (below 22/28c-31b) (who should not be confused with
a
later homonymous South Indian author of an extensive paddhati that bears
his name).
The ending ‘-śiva’, of these names, indicates that they were Siddhāntins. In
this case, as

in many others, we observe that Abhinava is not averse to drawing from sources that
belong to dualist, more public, Śaivism. In this respect he follows the normal practice of

drawing ritual procedures from a variety of sources, where deemed appropria
te, whilst
maintaining his focus on the ritual practice of his favoured traditions. Amongst
paddhatiṣ we know that predate Abhinava but are not mentioned by him is one based
on
the Saiddhāntika Kāloṭtara composed by Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, father of Rāmakaṇṭha
who
refers to it in his commentary on the Sārdhatriśatikālottara (see Sanderson
2007: 244-5
for this and other later Siddhānta paddhatis also ibid. 387 ff.).
Thus, by referring to the Tantrāloka as a paddhati, Abhinava is telling us that

from this point of view at least, it is not only a liturgical work; he is also implying that it
is sufficient unto itself. There is no need to refer to the original Tantras, although he
certainly does not discourage us from doing so; indeed, he much admires those who do.
Clearly, the Tantrāloka is more than just a compendium (saṅgrahagrantha), although

Jayaratha does also refer to it ‘as a compendium of the essence of the entire Trika
teaching (comm 1/1) and, indeed, of ‘all the other (Śaiva) traditions (śāṣtra)) (comm.
1/9). Nor is it just a study of the Tantras (in which case Tantrāloka would mean
the
Light OF the Tantras) or just an explanation of them (in which case Tantrāloka would
mean Light ON the Tantras) (cf. TĀv ad 1/246ab-246cd (1/246cd-247ab))
. In
Abhinava’s view, ritual action (kriyā) does not essentially differ from knowled
ge

(jhñāna) or indeed, from yoga. There is a continuity from one to the other. When

TANTRĀLOKA

knowledge develops and the summit of yoga is attained, it turns to action (see below,
1/150). Thus, the Trika liturgy, which includes all three, is the most complete form of
practice. This is because, as we are reminded repeatedly, liturgical action, like every
other activity, including yoga, is modelled on the dynamics of perception, which is

grounded in the one all-embracing, full and complete consciousness and issues from it.

Thuṣ, he ultimately champions the complete knowledge of reality as the ultimate means,

and indeed, the goal itself: liberation (see below 1/22 and 32). We will see as we
proceed how Abhinava supports and justifies ritual as a means to liberation from various

perspectives within the context of Śaiva nondualism, even though it is action (see, for

example below, note to 1/23, note 1,465 and 4/256 ff.).
In short, as Sanderson (2007: 372) puts

The Tantrāloka is not a Paddhati in

the narrow sense, that is to say, a detailed practical guide to the performance of the

system's rituals. Rather it builds on the basis of the Maālinīvijayottara a theory-rich

account of the vision of the Trika's teaching of the nature of ultimate reality and the
means to realization (see below

1/17). These means include ritual, but since

Abhinavagupta held to the view, in opposition to the Saiddhāntikas, that it is knowledge
rather than ritual that lierates, he also teaches the methods that do not descend to the

level of ritual performance and rationalizes ritual itself as a process of cultivating the

insight that in his higher methods comes about through direct, nonconceptual intuition
or the gradual refinement of a conceptual awareness of ultimate reality

(vikalpasaṅṣkāra), to the point at which it transcends its conceptual character to
become immediate experience (sākṣātkāraḥ)’.

Thus, taken as a whole, the Tantrāloka contains a full program of Anuttara
Trika doctrine and practice. Certainly, it was Abhinavagupta’s intention for it to serve as
the basis for the future development of Trika Śaivism. However, although he tells us

that one of his disciples knew the rituals well, we have no evidence that the rites taught

in the Tantrāloka were extensively performed. No manuals for these rites have survived,
if they ever existed. Even Jayaratha, the commentator, who lived two centuries later,

was it seems initiated into Śrīvidyā rather than Trika. The tradition has survived in some

form to modern times, but can by no means be said to be connected through an

unbroken transmission directly to Abhinavagupta. Fortunately, in Abhinava's view,

there is ample room for those whose insight is elevated and sound to take up the
teachings, understand them correctly, and transmit them to others (cf. below 4/100 ff).

Concerning this verse, see Dyczkowski, 1988: 180. Gnoli translates ‘Trika, cioe’ la

scuola senza superioreʼ, i.e., ‘Trika, the most excellent schoolʼ, taking ‘anuttara’ to be
simply an adjective of Trika rather than a proper name. Similarly, Sanderson (2007:
391, note 530) translates ‘the procedures of the supreme doctrine of Trika’. He

acknowledges that Anuttaratrika, otherwise called Parākrama or Ekavīra, is considered
to be the system taught in the Parātrīśikā, which Abhinava expounds in his commentary

(vivaraṇa). But it seems that he wishes to distinguish it from the Trika taught in the
Tantrāloka. This is because the Trika teachings of the PT and allied texts such as the

Vijñānabhairaya do not admit the performance of outer ritual, whereas Abhinava
dedicates most of the second half of the Tantrāloka to matters of ritual. However, this
need not be so. Jayaratha considers the teaching of the Tantrāloka to be ‘the modality

(of practice) (prakriyā) of the teaching (artha) of Anuttara Trika’ (see below, comm. on

the following verse). Abhinava himself refers to the mantras of his own school as that of
the Anuttara Trika (below, 11/88), which Jayaratha glosses as being those ‘of the
teaching (artha) of Anuttara Trika’ contained in the primary Trika Tantras, that is, the
Siddhayogīśvarīmata, Anāmakatantra and Mālinīvijaya. Finally, we may note that
Swami Lakshmanjoo (1995: 7) also agrees that Abhinava meant to say that the system
he teaches in his Tantrāloka is Anuttara Trika. Thus, the PT teaches anuttaraprakriyā,

which is a name Abhinava gives to it in that there is no outer ritual. The Tantrāloka also

CHAPTER ONE

Nor could it be otherwise here (in this case). Thus, in the course of

declaring his own competence, he makes known the justification for the reason
of his commitment (to do this):

ity ahaṁ bahuśaḥ sadbhiḥ śiṣyasabrahmãcãribhiḥ |
arthito racaye spaṣṭāṁ pūrṇārthāṁ prakriyām imām || 15 II
Thus, repeatedly requested by (those) virtuous people who are (my)
disciples and fellow students, I compose this treatise (prakriyā), which is

clear and complete (pāūrṇārthā). (15)

teaches the remaining two modalities of practice, namely, Tantra and Kula prakriyā,
which do. Note that this is so, even though the teachers of the Pratyabhijñā philosophy

are considered, at least by Jayaratha, to be exponents of the former. Nonetheless,
Tantraprakriyā likē Kulaprakriyā is also a modality of ritual practice.

There is a problem here with how it would be best to translate the word ‘prakriyā’.
OŌne meaning of the word is simply ‘book° or ‘treatise’ (cf. Sanderson 2007a: 391, note

530). Indeed, this is one way that Jayaratha understands the word. Two examples
will
suffice. Commenting on 1/19, he says: ‘“we will elucidate’ (it) by means of (this) treatise
(prakriyā). (prakatkurma iti prakriyākaraṇena). Again (TĀv on 1/21): ʻHe says
that
‘requested (by (my) sincere disciples and fellows) I compose (this work), that is, the
work (prakriyā) he has promised (pratjūātā) (to write), the name (abhidhāna) of which
is Tantrāloka, in accord with what is stated further ahead (where we read): ‘Here in this
teaching called the Tantrāloka, I expound this . . . (below, 17246ca). (arthito racaye
iti
pratjñātāyāḥ prakriyāyāś ca tan mayā tantryate tantrālokanāmny atra śāsane

ityādivakṣyamāṇopajīvanena tantrāloka ity abhidhānam I) Thus ‘treatise’ is indeed one
of the meanings of the word prakriyā, and it does fit in the context of this verse.

However, Abhinava also uses the word in a different, more technical sense, as

indeed does Jayaratha. We observe this usāge in the Vijñānabhairava (14á4cd), where we
read: “O gazelle-eyed one, this external (ritual) procedure (prakriyā) is (practiced)
here
only amongst the gross (minded) (eṣātrra prakriyā bāhyā sthūleṣv eva mṛgekṣaṇe)

There can be no doubt that the sense as translated here is correct, because the VBh goes

on to describe corresponding inner forms of outer ritual as the ‘true’ and effective ones.

Clearly ‘prakriyā’ in this case means ‘procedure’, especially, but not always, just ritual
procedure. Moreover, there are a number of prakriyās, and not all or everything they
include need be ritual; and so I translate the term as 'modality (of practice)’. There can

be no doubt that this is the meaning in the following reference: ‘(Abhinavagupta

expounds) ‘this’, the modality (of practice) (prakriyā) of the teaching (artha) of
Anuttara Trika, that (he has) understood from (his) teacher’s instruction, because it is
free of doubt, error and the like. (TĀv 1/16, see also introductory statement to 1/17).

We have seen that there are two methods, procedures, or modalities of practice,

namely, Tantric and Kaula. The term for ‘method’ is prakriyā. Here, one could
understand that there is a reference here to another ‘prakriyā’, in this sense, namely that
of Anuttara Trika. Accordingly, one could translate the word as ‘liturgyʼ or ’ritual
format’. Indeed, Abhinava has just said that the Tantrāloka he is writing is a liturgy
(paddhati). But not every prakriyā is liturgical. We have noted that the use of the term
in the expression ‘anuttaraprakriyā’. This ‘prakriyā’, taught in the teachings of the

Parātrīśikā, transcends riṭual. But as the PT is a Trika Tantric text, one could hazard to

say that it forms a part of Anuttaratrikaprakriyā. No Means or Anupāya taught in

TANTRĀLOKA

JJTRṬṬTJITFTṬTGUTG-ĪTTT-

Ṁ ā-td || 2. 11|

śrībhaṭṭanāthacaraṇābjayugāt tathā śrībhaṭṭārikāṁghriyugalād guruṣantatir yā |

bodhānyapāśaviṣanuttadupāsanottha-

bodhojjvalo ‘bhinavagupta idaṁ karoti || 16 |

Abhinavagupta does this, flaming with the (awakened)
consciousness that has arisen by (devout) attendance (upāsana) to that
remedy for the poison of the fetters, namely (all) that is other than
(awakened) consciousness, which is (the teaching transmitted through
the) lineage of teachers (that has come) from the two lotus feet of the

venerable Bhaṭṭanātha and the two feet of the venerable Bhaṭṭārikā (his
consort). (16)

‘Attendance’ to the knowledge that has come through the lineage of the
teachers is the act of repeatedly placing it in one’s mind (cetas). From that has
chapter two, is also called anuttaropāya. This can mean the ‘unexcelled means’ʼ, but it

seems more likely that the sense is ‘the means proper to Anuttara’. No Means, which

like Anuttaraprakriyā denies the necessity of outer ritual (see 2/24ab-26ab (2/24-26)),

can be taken to represent the presence of this prakriyā in the context of the one taught in

the Tantrāloka. But here it is a small token presence. Moreover, it is understood as a

‘meansʼ – an approach that Abhinava had not yet explored in his earlier work, the PT.
Finally, I should refer to Rastogi's discussion (1987: 5-7) concerning the

ambiguity of this term. Rastogi quotes from the Sanskrit lexicons, the Śahdakalpadruma
and Vācaspatyam. The former defines a ‘prakriyā’ as a section in a book which lays out
the order or sequence (krama) of its topics (i.e., an index). The latter defines it as ‘fixed

procedure (niyatavidhi). But although these definitions tend to support the technical

sense of ‘procedure’, Rastogi prefers to think that the reference to ‘prakriyā’ in this

verse is to the Tantrāloka as a type of book dealing with procedures. In deference to the
opinion of this scholar, I translate prakriyā here as ‘treatise’ (see below, note 1,323).

Nonetheless, it seems that Abhinava also meant to say that he was expounding, indeed,
constructing this, the Anuttaratrika modality of practice. The verb ‘racaye means ‘I

composeʼ, which can refer to the book he is writing. But one may equally well translate
‘racaye’ as ʻḹ construct or ‘put together’, which would support the translation of

prakriyā as ‘procedure’ (ritual and otherwise) or ‘modality° (of practice), but it may also
refer to the practice which he ‘constructs’ʼ.

As in his previous Trika works, the PTyv and MVV, Abhinava declares that he is
impelled by his disciples and others to write. At the same time, in accord with the
standard form of writing a leamed treatise (śāstra), he also states his commitment
(pratijñā) to do it and complete it. The following verse announces the source of his
authority (adhikāra) and ability (sāmarthya) to do it.

See below, 8/293ab (8/292).

Bhaṭṭanātha is Śambhunātha, who taught Abhinavagupta Trika.

CHAPTER ONE

‘arisen the (awakened) consciousness’, which is the subject (viṣaya)
that

should be taught, namely, the direct experience (of the supreme reality); and so

is ʻflamingʼ, that is, one whose nature it is to have rightly understood (the

teachings). Being such, (Abhinavagupta expounds) ‘this’, characterized

as the

(he has) understood from (his) teacher’s instruction, because it is free of

doubt,

modality (of practice) (prakriyā) of the teaching (artha) of Anuttara Trika, that

error and the like.

Now wishing to tell it to others, he ‘doesʼ, that is, teaches (this). This is

the meaning. By mentioning the name ‘Abhinavagupta’ which is well known to

all, he has reinforced (his) authoritativeness (and that of this work). Indeed, it is

said that:
‘A teacher is (considered to be) authoritative (āpta) who has directly

experienced the nature (of the reality he is expounding) and is engaged (in

teaching) by (the sincere) desire to tell (others) of the reality (artha) (he has
seen) as he has seen it.”
He expounds what is indicated by the word ‘that’, (namely, that)
‘which is the (teaching of the) lineage of the teachers’, that is, the knowledge
taught by that (lineage) which is that of the succession of teachers and persists

without a break. This is the meaning. How is that (iineage)? He says (it is)

‘the remedy for the poison of the fetters, that is, (all) that is other than
(awakened) consciousnessʼ. He will explain (further ahead where he says):
‘A fetter is said to be whatever is other than Supreme Śiva, Whose

nature we have just described and Who is beautiful with the freedom of the

consciousness which is supreme nonduality.’

According to this teaching (nīti), a ‘fetter’ (pāśa) is whatever is ‘other
than’ supreme Śiva who is ‘(awakened) consciousnessʼ; namely, ignorance

(akhyāti), which is the perception of duality (bhedaprathā). Ī is ‘poison’

because it deludes, and that (devout attendance to the lineage) remedies

it. ‘The

venerable Bhaṭṭanātha’ is the venerable Śambhunātha (Abhinavagupta’s Trika
teacher). ‘The venerable Bhaṭṭārikā’, who is called ‘Bhagavatī’, is his consort
(dūtī). As (Abhinavagupta) himself has said:

Read sākṣātkṛtadharmo for sākṣātkṛtadharmā.

! The translation follows Jayaratha’s explanation of the word ‘upāsanā’ (which means

‘practice’ ‘atṭeṉdance to’ and ‘worship’) as the teaching of the lineage of teachers.
Lakshmanṇjoo takes it to mean the lineage of teachers itself, rather than the knowledge
passed down through it.

” Below, 8/292cd-293ab (292).

Swami Lakshmanjoo (1995: 8): ‘In reality, everything other than knowledge of Śiva

(Śivajīāna) is binding. It is a fetter. . . Thus, what the yogi must do above all, once all
things are abandoned, is to make knowledge of Śiva his goal. By means of this, he may
fully attain the state of experiencing Śiva directly.’

TANTRĀLOKA

""I praise Śambhu, the great teacher who has many (names and) titles

at the beginning and end (of his earthly names, such as

1) Bhatṭa,

Bhaṭṭārikānātha, 2) Śrīkaṇṭha, who is the visible (drṣṭa) Bhairava, 3)
Nrṣiṁha (a lion amongst men), who is united with (his consort who is) the

foundation of the (divine) energy of glory (bhūti), and (who is a spiritually)

proud (and brave) Kaula adept (vīra).

In accord with such sayings as: ‘ṭhe wise man should place (the

teaching) in a woman’s mouth and then take it again from there, it is taught

that in the Kula modality (of practice) (prakriyā) the disciple obtains knowledge

by (means of) the mouth of (his teacher’s) consort (dūt7). Therefore, here (in

"" It appears likely, judging from the form and content of this verse, that it was drawn

from the same lost work by Abhinavagupta quoted by Jayaratha at the end of his
commentary on verse 1/13 above. Is it the Śrīpūrvapañcikā?

In a general sense, the title Bhaṭṭa is given to learned Brahmins, and is a way of
addressing princes reverentially. It comes at the end of the names of a number of
Kashmiri teachers, for example, Kallaṭabhaṭṭa, who is the author of the Stanzas on
Vibration (spandakārikā). Bhaṭṭārikā is the feminine form of the title. It is a respectful
form of address to queens and princesses, and so, as in the male equivalent, to female
teachers. The Goddess is also sometimes addressed in this way. Women were teachers
both in the Trika, as in this case, and in the Krama (see below, TĀv ad 4/173ab).

Above (1/9) Śrīkaṇṭha is clearly said to have been a human teacher ‘manifest in the
worldʼ, and so was Bhairava/Śiva, who was visible to all.

We have seen that Narasiṁha was the name of Abhinava’s father. Here the word

serves as an epithet or title. It appears that Abhinava intends both. Just as ‘Śambhu’ is a

name both for Śiva and his teacher Śambhunātha, the other names can refer both to Śiva

and earthly teachers. Moreover, they may also be names of other teachers. Thus,

Śrīkaṇṭha is a name of Śiva as both deity and teacher (above, 1/9). We may see an

allusion to Bhūtirāja, another of Abhinava’s teachers, in the word ‘glory — bhūti.
Similarly, the word ‘vīra’ (‘Kaula adept) may refer to Vīranātha (see note 214 below).

Thus, Abhinava is cleverly expressing that his Trika teacher Śambhunātha is Śiva
(Śambhu) Himṣelf, as are these other teachers, even as they are all epithets of the same
Sāmbhunātha/Śiva.
Read -kalāśrayā- with MS K for kalāśriyā. Abhinava refers to his mother in this
way above in the very first line of the first verse. Here ‘glory° – bhāūti – may also refer
covertly to Abhinava’s Krama teacher Bhūtirāja.
We may read, as I have translated, the word ‘vīra’ (literally meaning ‘hero) as an
epithet applied to Narasiṁha, indicating that he was a Kaula adept. We may also read
these words independently, in which case ‘vīra’ should be taken to be a title given to a

teacher. An example of this usage is with reference to an early Krama teacher called
Hrasvanātha or Vāmana, who was also called Vīranātha or Vīravāmanaka (see below,

TĀy ad 4/173ab).

" Ūrmikaulārṇava 3/108 ab. This line is also quoted again below in TĀv ad 29/122cd-

123ab. There the reading is priye (‘O beloved’) for punaḥ (‘again’). which is the reading

in the surviving manuṣcript.
The dāūrī is the partner of the Kaula adept who practices ritual union with her in the

Kula modality of practice (kulaprakriyā) taught below in chapter twenty-nine. The rite,
or a possible part of it, as it is described there, entails that the female partner take the
Kula substance produced by the male partner in her mouth. She then passes it into her
partner’s mouth, he returns it, and so on back and forth until it is consumed (29/126129). Full of the vitality of consciousness, the substance bestows yogic

CHAPTER ONE

this school) one takes (the teachings equally) from both the teacher and his
consort, as being on an equal footing.
Surely, (one may ask,) having (introduced and) acknowledged in

general terms (the teacher who is) the means (that effects) the modality of

practice (prakriyā) (taught in the) Trika system (darśana), as there is (a

accomplishments (siddhi) and induces higher states of consciousness. The transmission

of insight ‘knowledge’ takes place analogously from the dāt’s mouth.
The word darśana literally means ‘the act of seeing or viewingʼ. It also means ‘a
philosophical systemʼ, which in India, according to the nature of the system, may be
more or less theological, logical, systematic, theistic, atheist, related to a religious
tradition, or independent. The word appears in the titles of compendiums of such
systems. Well known examples are the Saḍdarśanasamuccaya (A Compendium of the
Six Philosophical Systems) by Haribhadra Sūri, the Saḍdarśanasaṁgraha of Rajaśekhara,
and the Sarvadarśanasaṁgraha by Mādhava. (See Halbfass 1988: 263 ff., who discusses

the history of the usage of this term in this sense.) The word ‘darśana’ can have a broad

generic sense. The term Śaivadarśana (See KuKh 30/166ab) refers to all the schools of

Āgamic Śaivism collectively, which Kashmiri Śaivites refer to as ‘Pārameśvaradarśāna’

(below, comm. 1/36). It is also regularly used to mean ‘Tantric or Kaula teachingʼ. Each
one of the Kaula traditions (āmnāya) is a ‘darśana. It denotes both the entire Tantric

system, and, as the rites and Yogic practices taught in any Tantric system imply a view
of reality, it also implicitly denotes its theoretical, metaphysical basis.
Again, the word ‘darśana’ denotes what could, broadly speaking, be called a
religion or religious tradition, and so entails the same problems of definition that we

encounter when trying to define what religion in India is in general. In this sense, darśana

denotes both a larger generic identity — what we call ‘religion’ – as well as a specific one –
what might be called a ‘cult’ with relation to a specific deity, or a ‘sect’. Thus, the religions,
Buddhism and Jainism, are referred to as darśanas (see KuKh 68/50), just as schools of
Śaiviṣm are (ibid. 30/166ab). The same term may also be used to denote a particular phase
ofa religion, as in the expression ‘vaidikadarśana’ (see KuKh 68/131). Accordingly, the
Buddhists, Jains, Vedikas (bhaṭṭa), Sauras, Vaiṣṇavas and Śaivas constitute a group of six
‘darśanas’ (ṣaḍidarśana), recalling the standard set of six philosophical systems
(saḍdarśana) (YKh (1) 4/175 and JY 4/20/244 quoted below in comm. 29/73cd-75ab).

In this context we note that Kaulism as a whole is said to be a darśana even

when it appears, as it did in the first phase of its development, embedded in the Śaiva
Tantras as an option or a modality (kulaprakriyā or kulācāra) contrasted with the
Tantric (tantraprakriyā or tantrācāra). In the Netratantra, for example, we find a

chapter dedicated to ‘an explanation of the Kula tradition’ (kulāmnāyanidarśana) (NT

12/īab). Kṣemarāja explains that this is the kulāmnāyadarśana, the essential feature of

which, as presented in this brief chapter of the NT, is the worship of the eight Mothers.
Independent Kula Tantric systems are also termed darśanas. Jayaratha, in his

commentary on the Vāmakeśvarimata (also called Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava) of the Śrīvidyā
tradition refers to its teachings in this way at least twice (VM pp. 48 and 125; Padoux
1994: 28). Clearly, in this case, darśana does not denote a philosophical system,
although it may appear to have this sense when used by Kashmiri Śaiva authors to

denote the schools of Kashmiri Śaivism, which with respect to the Tantras that are their
more or less proximate sources, are more sophisticated and ‘philosophical’. This is

clearly the case for example with the Spanda school, that does not have an equivalent in

the Tantras. Thus, Rājānaka Rāma, who comments on the Spandakārikā, uses the term

‘darśana’ to ddistinguish the teachings of the Spanda school from those of other

darśanas (SpKāvi, p. 39). Bhagavatotpala also refers to the Spanda teachings as an
independent (svatantra) ‘darśana’ (SpPra, p. 6). However, in the case of the other
schools of Kashmiri Śaivism, apart from the Pratyabhijñā, which is constructed in a

TANTRĀLOKA

whole) group of scriptures that expound that reality (artha),® how will (that
task) be accomplished by taking the venerable Mālinīvijayottara alone as (the
main) authority? With this doubt in mind, he says:

šarzzm ffēt rvrzīī fēēā: 1| z I
na tad astīha yan na śrīmālinīvijayottare |
devadevena nirdiṣṭaṁ svaśabdenātha liṅgataḥ || 17 ||
manner typical of Indian philosophical systems, the application of the same term implies
added resonances. Thus, Maheśvarānanda claims that the Kashmiri Krama school (also
called Kālīkrama, Mahārthakrama and Mahānaya) is more excellent than all the currents
(srotas) of the teachings of the Śaiva scriptures because it is the essence of all the

darśanas (MM p. 171-172). Similaty, Śitikaṇṭha in his Mahānāyaprakāśa (Light on the

Great Teaching) refers to the Krama system as one of several kuladarśanas (MP (1 Śk)
p. 111. See also Dyczkowski 1989: 75-77.) The term ‘Kramadarśana’ is not uncommon
(for example, see below the introductory remarks of the commentary on 3/256-257 and

also TĀv ad 4/173ab, where this expression appears twice). Trika is referred to as a
darśana several times in other Kashmiri Śaiva sources. In his commentary on the eighth

aphorism of the Pratyabhijñāhrṛdaya, for example, Ksemarāja says that Trikadarśana is
the highest form of nondualism (paramādvaya). Similarly, although Maheśvarānanda

distinguishes between the Trika and Krama as two darśanas, he maintains that because
of their common monistic idealism, there is not much difference between them (MM p.

92.) In this case, Maheśvarānanda is thinking of Trika as a philosophical system.

Jayaratha goes so far as to identify the teachers of the Trikadarśana as those of the
Pratyabhijñā, which is in form and content a typical Indian philosophical system (see
below comm. on 4/172).

" The word ‘artha’ conveys a number of meanings, both general and technical.

Áccording to common usage, ‘artha’ basically means ‘aim’, ‘purpose’ or ‘meaning’, as
in the expression ‘śabdārtha’ – ‘the meaning of a word’. By extension ‘artha’ also
means ‘a thingʼ, insofar as ‘things’ are the ‘meanings’ of words. Thus, the word
‘paramārtha’ means ‘supreme (parama) thing’, i.e. ultimate reality. Less common is the
similar expression ‘tattvārtha’ for the ‘(ultimate) reality (artha) of reality (tattva), i.e.

‘the true reality’. The word ‘artha’ is also used in a technical sense to mean a ‘doctrine’
or ‘system’ʼ. Thus, we come across the expression ‘trikārtha’ which means both the
‘teachings of the Trika’ or ‘ultimate reality as expounded in the Trika teachings’.

Abhinava uses this expression when he writes: ‘in fact according to the Trika teachings
(trikārtha) the Trident is the abode of worshipʼ (vastutaḥ pūjādhāma triśūlaṁ trikārthe
PTv p. 54). Analogously, we come across the expression ‘spandārtha’. So, for example,
Rājānaka Rāma calls his commentary on the Stanzas of Vibration ‘Spandārthasūtrāvali’
– ‘the Row of the Thread of the Spanda teachings’. The ‘Śpandārthasūtra’ is the
Spandakārikā. Similarly, we find the expression ‘kramārtha’ for the teachings and
reality taught in the Krama system, as well as ‘mahārtha’. According to
Maheśvarānanda, the latter expression encompasses a range of semantic connotations
including ‘Great Meaning’ʼ, ‘Great Teaching’, ‘Great Goal’ and ‘Great Reality°. Thus,

he writes:

‘(Mahārtha) is ‘great’ (mahat) insofar as it is the ground of every one of the

diverse principles of meaning (arthatattva). It is the reality/meaning (artha) which is the

principle to be realised and can encompass every meaning /thing (artha) in all its major
and minor divisions.' (MM p. 176)

CHAPTER ONE

There is nothing here (in the Tantrāloka) not taught by the God of
gods in the venerable Mālinīvijayottara (Tantra), whether (directly) in His

own words or (indirectly) by allusion (iṅgataḥ). (17)

dtis called) ‘the venerable Mālinīvijayottara’ because by the ‘victory
(vijaya), that is, excellence overall, of (the alphabet goddess) Mālinī, who

begins with N and ends with PH, it descends (frtom) (urtarati), that is, flows
forth from all the currents (of the scriptures) because it is the essence (of the
teachings) of all the scriptures. He (goes on) to say just this:

GSI aṬravāzazfrā
gsgṛā̃ faaī: |
āīaṚ fr+raīāi fṝ ṁar cīra 1 2. 11
daśāṣṭādaśavasv aṣṭabhinnaṁ yac chāsanaṁ vibhoḥ |

tatsāraṁ trikaśāstraṁ hi tatsāraṁ mālinīmatam |)| 18 ||

The teaching (śāsana) of the pervasive Lord is divided into (groups

of) ten, eighteen and eight times eight (Tantras), the essence of which is the

Trika scriptures (śāstra), and the essence of that is the Mālinīmata. (18)

! The expression liigataḥ here translated as ‘by allusion’ means more literally ‘by
being indicated’. The matters the MV treats only cursorily or not at all are, according to
Abhinava, implicitly indicated by it as, for example, when some procedure is required to

complete a rite. This is all the more so, for all doctrinal and philosophical matters which
Abhinava understands to be implicit, it is to teach, as it must, a nondualist view.

Also called Parā (the Supreme), Mālinī (the Lady with a [Garland of Leṭters]) is the

Goddess of the Trika. She is an embodiment of the power of Speech, and so Her body is
made of the energies of the fifty letters of the alphabet. Mātṛkā (the Little Mother) is

another Goddess of the alphabet, but while the energies of the letters that constitute Her
body are arranged in the normal order of the Sanskrit alphabet, those of Mālinī are in a

different order, beginning with the letter N and ending with PH. This is the order in

which these letters are found on the body of the Goddess and hence projected onto the
body of the worshipper to generate the same body of phonemic energies as the deity.
Somadeva Vasudeva has demonstrated that the shape of the letters of old Kashmirian

Śāradā script correspond to those of the parts of the body of the standing figure of the
goddess. See below, 15/117cd-120 (concerning Mātṛkā) and 15/121-125ab (concerning
Mālinī).

Read cyavate for plavate.
Concerning the hierarchy of scriptures with reference to TĀ 1/18 see below 13/300 f1

and notes. See also, 37/13cd-26 and MVV 1/391-399. Swami Lakshmanjoo (1995: 9)
explains: ‘Lord Śiva is full to overflowing with five powers, namely, those of
consciousness, bliss, will, knowledge and action. Śiva who is full of (these) energies
always primarily consists of the power of grace (anugrahaśakti). Our venerable teacher
(Abhinavagupta) says at the beginning of his Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa that ‘in reality, the

Supreme Lord's nature is grace.’ Lord Śiva’s grace has come down to earth in the form
of the Tantras. In reality, all the Tantras are Śiva’s own nature, within which the power

of Speech always resides. Then, by the power of grace, a Tantra descends onto the level
of the Speech of Vision (pasśyantī). One should remember that Supreme Speech and the

Speech of Vision abide as the nondual nature of this Tantra, and both forms of Speech

TANTRĀLOKA

(I) Here (according to our system), Supreme Speech is (awakened)

consciousness (bodha), of which the essence is supreme reflective awareness. It

are merged in their own nature in the form of questions and answers. Subsequently,
when this Tantra descends onto the level of the Middle Speech, then its nature as
denoted and denotator, or question and answer, begins to be delineated. After that, this
Tantra descendsin a clearly apparent form onto the level of Corporeal Speech. Then,
assuming the form of Svacchandanātha, Lord Śiva, manifests His five powers as five
faces, the names of which are Īśāna, Tatpuruṣa, Sadyojāta, Vāmadeva and Aghora. The
first three of these faces, thatis, Īśāna, Tatpuruṣa, and Sadyojāta, manifest ten Tantras

which are predominantly dualist and are called Śiva Tantras. Then when the remaining
two faces, that is, Vāṃadeva and Aghora, penetrate together into the three previous
ones, the Rudra Tantras, which are predominantly dualist-cum-nondualist, come into
being. These Rudra Tantras are eighteen in number. Again, when Īśāna’s face, which is
predominantly the power of consciousness, Tatpuruṣa's face, which is predominantly
the power of bliss, Sadyojāta’s face, which is predominantly the power of the will, and

Vāmadeva’s face which is predominantly the power of knowledge, penetrate

simultaneously and fully into the completely full (and perfect) face on the right, that is,
the face of Aghora; then the sixty-four Bhairava Tantras, which are predominantly
nondualist, come into being. Thus, in this way, by means of His independent power of

grace, the Lord Svacchandanātha reveals the ninety-two Tantras on the level of

Corporeal Speech through His five faces for the benefit of the world. The essence of
these ninety-two Tantras is the Mālinīvijayottara Tantra, on the basis of which our

teacher (Abhinavagupta) has composed the Tantrāloka.

The most complete account of the levels of Speech is found in Abhinava’s
commentary on the PT, over half of which is on the first four of its thirty-six verses. He
structures it around the contents and nature of the four levels of Speech, that is, Supreme

Speech (parāvāc), the Speech of Vision (paśyantī), the Middle (madhyamā) and
Corporeal (vaikharī) Speech. These are as follows. 1) Supreme Speech is the reflective
awareness Śiva, who is absolute consciousness, has that ‘I am’ʼ (aham), which embraces

within itself all the energies of this self-awareness. Devoid of objectivity in any form, it

is the perpetual affirmation of Being, which communicates and affirms its own perfect
infinite existence to itself. As such it is understood to be an inner discourse (saṅjalpa)
which, nonconceptual and not formed into words, is not based on convention (saṁketa).

Iṭis the inherent freedom, which is the reflective awareness of absolute consciousness,
by virtue of which it is the one absolute reality. AIl the scriptures abide at this level,

merged at one with the supreme power of Speech. At this level, the object they denote

(vācya), is the true ultimate nature of Deity and the words of the scriptures that expound
and explain it (vācaka) (See Swami Lakshmanjoo 2006: 2-3).
At the next level, that is, the Speech of Vision (paśyantī), consciousness
develops into that of a perceiving subjectivity. As such, it is related to its object as yet
undivided from it. Held within the perceiving subjectivity, it is the reflective awareness

of itself as the perceiver in relation to all things shining within it, as one with it in a

potential form of all that will be emitted on the following levels. This level of Speech
‘seesʼ all things that are to be emitted, within itself, at one with itself, ‘like a flame in a
fire’. Thus, at this level, word and the objective reality (artha) it denotes, along with its
meaning (artha), are still one. Here too language is not articulated as a stream of words
and their objects of denotation. It is the reflective awareness of the perceiver or

‘knower who thereby has the capacity to perceive and know everything, ready and

propense to know whatever is presented to it. At the supreme level, Speech is the

reflective awareness that is the essential, inherent foundation of consciousness itself. It
is what makes absolute consciousness absolute and conscious. Devoid of reflective
awareness, it would be insentient, and as such, inert, conditioned and limited. Unrelated

CHAPTER ONE

is full (to overflowing) with all things, and so all the scripture (śāstra) unfolds
as supreme consciousness here within it. (2) This being s0, the reflective
awareness of ‘’ (consciousness) arises inwardly on the plane of the Speech
of
Vision (paśyantī) as unique (asādhāraṇa) because its nature is undivided into
word and meaning (and such is the condition of scripture at this stage).

Therefore, contemplated there by the subject who reflects,. the object of

denotation, that is, (the reality which is the) meaning (of a word), pulses
radiantly (sphurati) (enveloped and) covered over with (the pure subjectivity of)
‘I-ness’. (3) After that, that same (scripture) pours out only inwardly (within the
to any ‘other’, this level is indefinable even as ‘supreme’, as that would entail the
existence of a second lesser reality in relation to which it is supreme. At the next level,

the Speech of reflective awareness is ‘supreme’ in relation to the potential objectivit

y

towards which, although undefined, it is oriented. It is what makes of consciousness a

subject which perceives its object. The words of scriptures and their object of denotatio
n
that have descended to this level are one, as they are on the level of Supreme Speech
from which they have descended, but here are propense to manifest externally
(Swami
Lakshmaṇjoo 2006: 2).
The next level, Middle Speech (mnadhyamā), manifests on the plane of ideation
and is the Speech of thought. At this stage, words and their meanings are experienc
ed as

distinct realitis, although still only mental ones. At this level, the words of the

scriptures and what they denote are distinct from one another, as are scriptures
themselves. They are made manifest within the Supreme Lord’s inner state (antardaś

and they are experienced there (Swami Lakshmanjoo 2006: 2).
K. Kuṇjunni Raja (1963: 148) explains from a purely linguistic point of view:
‘The next stage in the manifestation of the speech principle is called madhyamā
or the intermediate, since it lies between paśyanṁī and vaikharī. This is the
utterance in
its phonological structure, the sound pattern of the norm. It is psychological in its
nature
and can be comprehended by intellect. All the elements linguistically relevant
to the

sentence are present in a latent form at this stage. The same meaning will be conveyed

and the same sphoṭa will be revealed by different forms of madhyamā, depending
on the
language adopted. This corresponds to prākṛta-dhvani. At this stage all
the individual
peculiarities of the speaker are present in the utterance along with the linguistic
ally
relevant parts.”
Finally, Speech issues out externally as Corporeal Speech (vaikharī). At this
level language denotes external, objectively existing things and the relationsh
ips
between them, their qualities and activity etc. In this way, the universe of words
and
meanings is made manifest progressively on the model of the articulation of speech
that

arises out of pure consciousness. The scriptures extend at this level within the power of
Corporeal Speech, and there each is clearly experienced individually, just as their words
and the objects they denote are perceived to be distinct (ibid.). Thus, on the same model,

Śiva’s Speech generates both the manifest universe and the scriptures.
For a detailed
exposition of the levels of Speech (or Word), see PTyv pp. 8-11 and 102-159,
Ruegg
1959: 79-81, Gnoli 1959: 55-63, Iyer 1969: 142-145, Aklujkar 1970: 67, and
for the

most complete account, Padoux 1990: 166-222. Jayaratha presents another account
of
the levels of Speech below in his commentary on 3/235cd-236ab. Middle Speech is
discussed in detail below in the notes to 15/128¢d-138ab.
Read san for sat. Throughout the printed edition the present participle of the root
as —
‘to be appears as sat rather than the correct form san. The same error is found in

manuscripts.

Read pratyavamarśakeṇa for pratyavamarśakena.

all the

TANTRĀLOKA

mind) onto the plane of the Middle Speech (madhyamā) as separate words and
their denoted meanings, because the unfolding expansion (prapañca) of subject
and object has arisen (within it). There the Supreme Lord (parameśvara) abides
on the plane of Sadāśiva and Īśvara by subtly manifesting (āṣūtraṇa) (his) five
faces of consciousness, bliss, will, knowledge and action. Thus, by (variously)
combining the group of his five faces, He brings down (into the world) the
entire (corpus of) scripture (śāstra) made of the five currents (srotas) and its

wonderful diversity with its divisions and subdivisions. (He does this) by

making (them clearly) manifest (uftaṅkana)° on the planes of unity (abheda),

unity-in-diversity (bhedābheda) and diversity (bheda), that it may become
fully evident on (4) the external plane of Corporeal Speech (vaikharī)." The
Ten Sivāgamas (This happens) in this way. First of all, three divisions
The five faces of Śiva are His forms as the powerholders of His five main energies
(Śakti) on the Sadāśiva level, which corresponds to Śiva's experience that ‘I am (all)

this’ (aham idam). They abidein a differentiated but still potential state at the Middle
level of Speech (madhyamā), on which mind and intellect operate, and are fully
manifest at the Corporeal (vaikhari) audible articulate level of Speech as the scriptures.

The word ‘uṭṭaṅkaṇa’ literally means ‘stamping’, ‘etching’ or ‘inscribing’, and so by
extension, ‘characterizing’ or ‘manifesting’. We shall see a little further ahead that there

are three categories of Śaiva scripture called Bhairava, Śiva, and Rudra, which are said
to teach that reality is 1) nondual (abheda), 2) unity-in-diversity (bhedābheda) and

3) diversity (bheda), respectively. Jayaratha implies here that the reason for this is
because they are ‘stamped with these three planes of existence and are themselves
‘stamped’ onto them. In other words, the Supreme Lord, Who is pure consciousness, is
the one reality that shines in these three states (avasthā) or on these planes (daśā). He
reveals the nature of these three planes in the corresponding categories of scripture and

so manifests them within them. At the same time, the three categories of scripture
manifest within the three states as the reflective awareness that, at this level of Speech,
which is that of thought and intellection, is articulated into words.

The Āgamas of these three groups are not in fact distinguishable in this way.
Siddhāntāgamas display varying degrees of dualism, and Tantras considered to be
nondualistic are not so in all respects. Moreover, many of these Āgamas only had an
ideal nominal existence when these notions were formulated. Indeed, there is no

evidence that any of the ten Śiva Āgamas existedin the early period. The point is that,
according to this view, the revelation of the scriptures, like the development of Speech,

takes place in consonance with creation, that passes through these stages.

Hanneder (1998: n. 108) comments: ‘the interesting point here is that the five
or six streams (srotas) are still above normal language and that the categories to which

actual texts can be attributed are the three divisions.”
! Abhinava describes the levels of Speech concisely as follows: “Within the principle

of Supreme Speech the universe abides without divisions. Within the Speech of Vision
there is (a subtle) indication (of forthcoming) relative distinction (bheda). Relative
distinction has unfolded within the Middle (level of Speech), and within Corporeal
(Speech) the manifestation of relative distinction is (fully) evident in the form of
separate (distinct) objects of ongoing reflective awareness’ ĪPVV 1, p. 16.

A basic notion we find generally in the Śaivāgamas of all kinds is that they are

uttered by Sadāśiva’s five faces. The notion developed that he has spoken the Veda also,
as well as the major treatises on the mundane (laukika) sciences such as medicine and

astrology. So too revelations on Yoga (ādhyātmika) and the scriptures of the Pāśupata.
These are uttered by his five faces as in the following chart. Each face in its turn has

five faces, with the same names, making for further subdivisions. The upper face – that

CHAPTER ONE

(bheda, i.e. scriptures) manifest when each of the (faces of) Īśāna (I),

Tatpuruṣa (T) and Sadyojāta (S) is in a state of intent to be born (udbubhūṣaṇa)
(when they are about to appear) and (so too three more) when they are born
of Īśāna – uttered the Mantramārga consists of the five currents (śrotas) of the

Śaivāgama.

The following table has been drawn up on the basis of PūKā 1/17cd-20 quoted

in the Śataratnasaṁgraha (p. 8):

laukikaṁ vaidikaṁ caiva tathādhyãtmikam eva ca |

atimārgaṁ ca mantrākhyaṁ tantrabhedam anekadhā ||

sadyovāmamahāghorapuruṣeśānamūrtayaḥ |
pratyekaṁ pañcavaktrāḥ syus tair uktaṁ laukikādikam ||

pañcaviṁśatibhedena srotobhedaḥ prakīrtitaḥ |

eṣy evāntargataṁ vastu vāṅmayaṁ vastuvācakam ||

Direction | Face
West
North

South

East
Upper

Causal Lord | Śāstra

(Karaṇeśvara)
Sadyojāta | Brahmā
Vāmadeva | Viṣṇu

Laukika
Vaidika

Tatpuruṣa_|

Atimārga
Mantratantra

Aghora__|

Rudra

Sadāśiva

Ādhyātmika

See Dyczkowski 1988: 31 ff.

The Tantras refer to individual scriptures as ‘divisions’ (bheda) of the category to

which they belong. This usage allows for universal application to all forms of scripture
as well as technical treatises and the schools they represent, that are made manifest and
emerge out of the inner pleroma of consciousness which is present at the higher levels

of Speech, where they exist as potentials. Thus, each Tantra is a specific ‘bheda’, that is,
‘unit’ that belongs to a general ‘hheda’, that is, ‘categoryʼ. It is normally possible to
distinguish between the two usages of the word by observing the context in which it

appears.

The long passage that follows deals with how the ‘divisions' (to which Āgamas

correspond) are formed by the combination of Sadāśiva’s faces. It is somewhat terse and

complex. In order to understand it clearly we refer the reader to the following concise
explanation supplied by Gnoli in a note to his Italian translation of the Tantrāloka: ‘The
various scriptures, divided into groups of ten, eighteen and sixty-four, related to the state

of diversity, unity-in-diversity and nonduality [respectively], presided over by Śiva,
Rudra and Bhairava, are the result of the varied combination of Śiva’s five faces,

namely, Īśāna (), Tatpuruṣa (T), Sadyojāta (S), Vāmadeva (V) and Aghora (A)
(concerning which see below 15/203cd-204ab). Abhinavagupta has expounded the

nature of Śiva’s five faces and their various combinations in his two commentaries on

the MVT namely, the lost (Śrīpārva-) Pañcikā and the Vārttika. Abhinava himself refers
us to the Mālinīvijayaślokavārttika (MVV) (in TĀ 37/30). Six of the first group of ten

scriptures are derived from the three faces of Ī, T and S in their dual form as ‘born’

(udbhūta) and ‘intent to be born’ (udbhubhūṣu), one from them all together, and three
from the couples IT, ĪS and ST (see MVV 1/374-375). Two of the scriptures of the
group of eighteen come from the two faces V and A individually, three from the pairs,

IV. IA and AV; four from the triads ITV, ĪTA, ĪSV and ĪSA; three from the triads TSV.
TSA, and TVA; one from the triad SVA; four from the tetrads ĪTSVA, ĪTSA, ĪTVA and
ĪSVA; and one from the pentad ĪTSVA (MVV 1/375 ff.). The sixty-four scriptures of

TANTRĀLOKA

(udbhūta). Thus, there are six divisions (formed) by single (faces) (nos. 1-6).

The three manifesting together make another division (no. 7). Īśa and Tatpuruṣa,
Īśa and Sadyojāta, Sadyojāta and Tatpuruṣa, taken together as pairs — these
three, give rise to three (more) divisions (nos. 8-10). These are the ten Śiva
divisions that are predominantly dualist (bhedapradhāna). That is said (in the
Mālinīvijayavārtika):
‘Īśa, Tatpuruṣa and Sadyojāta – when each one has come into being and
is in a state of intent to come into being, they together make six. A triad is (also)
formed by the three in pairs, which along with one (of them, alḻtogether) made

up in this way the ten Śiva divisions (i.e., Āgamas).

The Eighteen Rudrāgamas

By combining them with Vāmadeva and Aghora (which are the

remaining faces), there are eighteen Rudra divisions. There (in that case), in the

same way, each single division, that is, Vāmadeva (no. 1) and Aghora (no. 2),
(together make) two divisions. In (this) five-fold grouping also, the three faces,

Īśa, (Tatpuruṣa and Sadyojāta are those) mentioned in the Śiva divisions and so

(this grouping is not mentioned again here) (śivabhedeṣu uktatvāt) [aṣ it is not

right to say something again that has already been said. This is because
mentioned in the Śiva divisions there are in this way three divisions of two
natures (making six), along with one (of three together) and three divisions

made of three (pairings) (of three) of the five (faces) (śivabhedeṣu uktatvāt).]

And because Tatpuruṣa and Sadyojāta do not have this same kind of

nature, no union takes place with these two. (Thus) as four (combinations) do

the third group are formed from the four stages of ‘intent to be born’, ‘born’, ‘intent to

concealment’ (tirodhatsu) and ‘concealed’ (tirohita). The first four faces pass through
theṣe stages and conclude in the fift, that is, A, and its various combination with other
faces (MVV 1/383 ff.).’
MVV 1/374-375ab. Instead of tad itthaṁ śivabhedānāṁ daśānām abhavat sthitiḥ

(‘made up in this way the ten Śiva divisions’), the edition of the MVV reads: jayate
śivabhedānāṁ daśānāṁ vividhā sthitiḥ (‘the manifold state of the ten Śiva (Āgamas)

arises).
Read ekena for tena.

! The passage between asterisks is missing in1 MSs Ch, J, Jh, and N. It reads:

punarvacanānupapatteḥ tathā dvyātmakatvena bhedatrayasya tena pañcānāṁ
tryātmakatvena
bhedatrayasya
Śivabhedeṣu
uktatvāt.
MS
K
reads:
punarvacanānupapatteḥ tena pañcānāṁ tryātmakatvena bhedatrayasya śivabhedeṣu

uktatvāt – i

itis not right to say something again, thus it is because it is mentioned

in the Śiva divisions that there are three types (of 6, 1 and 3 Āgamas) as having three
natures (out) of the five (faces). The repetition of sśivabhedeṣu uktatvāt that precedes
this passage and with which it ends is suspicious. Hardly anything is added by this
passage to what has been stated. It may well have been a gloss in the margin of a

manuscript that was written by mistake into the body of the text. Moreover, the word

‘tena’ makes no sense in the longer version, and so I have had to emended to ‘ekena’
(see previous note). This is not the case in the shorter version found in MS K, which

leads one to suppose that it is closer to the original presumed gloss.

Read with MSs Ch, J, Ih, Ñ T and Ḍ -jātayosścaivaṁ for -jātayostu evaṁ.

CHAPTER ONE

not exist. (only) three divisions consisting of two (faces)’ remain,

namely,

IĪśa and Vāma (no. 3), Īśa and Aghora (no. 4), Aghora and
Vāma (no. 5). These
are the three divisions made of two (faces). In the same way,
the five, Iśa,
Tatpuruṣa, Ajāta, Vāma and Aghora, combining in triads (produ
ce) by uniting
(first)

with

and

(then)

in

due

order with

the

other faces,

six

(combinations). (Adding) three pertaining to Tatpuruṣa, and one
for Sadyojāta
uniting with the remaining faces. But even though there are ten
kinds, the first
triad consisting of Īśa, Tatpuruṣa and Sadyojāta has been mentio
ned amongst
the Śiva divisions, and the remaining triad of Īśa, Vāma and
Aghora will be

applied to a different task" In this way, just eight of the triadic divisio

remain. Thus, there are just eight divisions (formed from the)

IĪTV (no. 6), ĪTA (no. 7), ĪSV (no. 8), ĪSA (n0. 9), TSV (no.

ns

triads (namely,

10), TSA (no. 1 1),

TVA (no. 12) and SVA (no. 13)). Therefore, talk of each one

individually

should only be thought about, not spoken. In this way, what he intend
s to say is
that the union of Tatpuruṣa, Ajāta (i.e., Sadyojāta), Vāma and Aghor
a in pairs or
groups of four is not allowed (to take place) in the process of
producing the
knowledge (revealed in the scriptures). As this is the case also
with the triads,
that would entail the prohibition of many varieties. In this way,
reference to a

group of seven would also be unreasonable. So, enough of so many (details

).

In the same way, when these five are combined in groups
of four,
because for the aforementioned reason, although of five kinds,
Nara (i.e.,
Tatpuruṣa), Ajāta, Vāma and Aghora do not combine, so
there are (just) four
divisions (formed by the combination of) four (remaining faces);
(ITSV (no.

14), ĪTSA (no. 15), ĪTVA (no. 16), and ĪṢVA (no. 17)). When all

of these are

combined, it makes one division made of five (faces) (no. 18). In
this way there
are eighteen Rudra divisions which are (scriptures that) predom
inantly (teach)

unity-in-diversity. That is said (in the following passage):

‘If three faces (mentioned above) combine with the
right and left

(ones), then (that results in) seven divisions of two and eight divisi

three (faces). There are also four (combinations) of four

consists of (all) five. Thus, out of these twenty, (four

ons of

(faces), and one that

are omitted), as Tatpuruṣa

(Nara) and Ajāta do not combine with the two, Vāma and Aghora

, because

These are: Sadyojāta with Vāmadeva, Sadyojāta with Aghora
, Tatpuruṣa with
Vāmadeva and Tatpuruṣa with Aghora.
Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ṅ, T, and D dvyātmakabheda- for dvyātmakaṁ
bheda-.
" See below, note 1,296 concerning the ‘remaining triad’.

Read with MSs Jh, Ṭ and D read ata evaikaikakathanaṁ for ata eva

thus confirming this translation.

ekakathanaṁ,

Apparently here Jayaratha is criticising a different view of how the faces combin
produce scriptures.
Read with Ch, J, Jh, and Ṭ saṁmīlanāyāṁ for saṁmīlanāyā.

which means the same. These four faces do not combine alone.

e to

reads melanāyāṁ,

But they may do so in

association with Īśāna, the remaining fifth face. So we get ĪTSV (14), ĪTSA

(16) and ĪSVA (17). The eighteenth is formed by combining all

the faces.

(15), ĪTVA

The first line of this quote corresponds to MVV 1/376cd.
Gnoli suggests that

Jayaratha may be quoting here from the lost (Śr)pūrvapañcikā.

Read with MSs k, ch, ū, t, and d: dvikā bhedā for āvikabhedā.
Read yataḥ for yātaḥ.

TANTRĀLOKA

(the faces in the) east and west do not possess knowledge independently. Thus

the (remaining) divisions are sixteen. But even there (in that case) also, there is

one (division) belonging to Vāmadeva, and above that (one which is)
Bhairava’s nature, which is (thus) the eighteen-fold state of the Rudra division

described by Śiva Himself in the scriptures.

Read with MSs Ch, J, Ih, Ñ T and D sivenaiva for sivenaivaṁ.

Lists of Āgamas (also called Tantras, Saṁhitās etc.) are commonly found in major
Siddhāntāgamas as well as Bhairavatantras. These are generally found in chapters
dedicated to the ‘descent of the Tantras’ (tantrāvatāra). I haye examined various canons
found in different types of Tantras in The Canon of the Śaivāgama and the Kubjikā
Tantras of the Western Tradition (SUNY 1988), to which the reader is referred. A full
survey has not yet been done. Here we may note two sources, both available as e-texts

that I had transcribed for the Muktabodha online library. One is in a manuscript called

Kālottaratantra NA MS n0. – 5-4632, NGMPP reel no. B 118/7 (308 folios in Nāgarī

script). This appears to be an apograph of NAK 1-1114, NGMPP B 25/7, an undated
Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript in the Nāgarī script, except that it has added the
Sārdhśatika recension from some other source (Goodall 2007, p. 129). It consists of

eight texts that identify themselves as Kaālottaras. They are: 1) Kālottare
√Jñānapañcāśikā (ff. 1v1-4v7). This is not a recension of the Kālottara. See Goodall
2007, pp. 127-128). 2) Kālajñāne Satikam (4v7-916). 3) Kālottare Sārádhaśatikam (1v16¥9). 4) Kālotare Dviśatikam ff. 1v1-W3. 5) Kālottare ‘dhyuṣṭaśatam
(Sārdhatriśatikam) .ff. 1v1-17yY3. 6) Kūālottare Saptaśatikam. 7) Kālottare
Trayodaśśatikam ff. 1v1-46y7. 8) Unidentified Kālottara.
Folios 1-2a of the Jīñānapañcāśikā contains lists of Āgamas: 10 Śivabheda, 18
Rudrabheda, 28 Gāruḍatantras, 32 Bhūtatantras, and 24 Vāmatantras (spoken by
Vāmadeva) making 112. A probably older list is in the Rauravasūtrasaṁgraha chapter
3 tantrāvatāra, published in Rauravāgama vol. 1, p. 7-9. Another source is chapter one
of the Pārvakāmikā kriyāpāda tantrāvatārapaṭalaḥ, which is the first chapter. The main

Āgamas of the five faces are listed along with the upāgamas associated with each one.
Ajitāgama kriyāpāda chapter 1 tantrāvatāra. There the twenty-eight Siddhāntas are

distributed amongst the five faces of Sadāśiva. The 10 Śivabheda are uttered by Īśāna,

the upper face. The 18 Śivabheda are distributed in the other four. A different

distribution is found in the Pauṣkarabhāṣya. Both are reported by Bhaṭ in his

introḍuction to the Rauravāgama p. xi. Although, as he himself remarks, this canon is
not amongst the oldest, it is interesting as it also presents the 28 Siddhāntas as coming
from all the faces. More commonly we find that they are said to come only from the
upper face, as we find in the Kāmikāgama:

īśānavaktrād ūrdhvasthāj jñānaṁ yat kāmikādikam |
daśāṣṭādaśabhedena śivarudrāvatārakaiḥ ||
‘The knowledge beginning with Kāmika issues forth from Īśāna’s mouth,
which is above in ten and eighteen divisions that have been brought down by Śivas and

Rudras.” PūKā 1/22

The names of the 28 Siddhāntas as presented in the Pauṣkarabhāṣya begins

as uṣual with Kāmika. They are as follows according to the Ajita:

Sadyojāta: Vijaya, Pārameśvara, Niśvāṣa, Prodgīta, Mukhabimba

Vāmadeva: Siddha, Śantāna, Śarvokta, Candrajñāna, Vimala
Aghora: Svāyambhuva, Vīra, Raurava, Makuṭa, Kiraṇa
Tatpuruṣa: Lalita, Anala, Vātula

CHAPTER ONE

And that is stated at length along with the names (of the scriptures) in

the venerable Śrīkaṇṭhī. That is thus (as follows):

“The knowledge in the upper current (of scriptures) is of two kinds

and is called Śiva and Rudra. The Śiva divisions are said to be:Kāmaka,
Yogaja, (A) Cintya, Maukuṭa, and Aṁśumat, Dīpa (Sūkṣma, Sāhasra,

Ajita, and Anataka).

O beloved, (now) listen to the Rudra divisions: Vijaya, Niḥśvāsa,
Udgīta. Pārameśvara, Mukhabimba, Siddha, Santāna, Nārasiṁhaka,
Candrāṁśu, Vīrabhadra, Āgneya, Svayambhuva, Visara, and the one called

Īśāna: Kāmika, Yogaja, Cintya, Kāraṇa, Ajita, Dīpta, Sūkṣma, Sahasra, Aṁśumat,
Suprabheda
According to the Pauṣkarabhāṣya:
Sadyojāta: Kāmika, Yogaja, Cintya, Kāraṇa, Ajita
Dipta, Sūkṣma, Sahasra, Aṁśumat, Suprabheda
aya, Viśvāsa, Svāyambhuva, Anala, Vīra
Tatpuruṣa: Raurava, Makuṭa, Vimala, Canrajñāna, Bimba

Īśāṅa: Prodgīta, Lalita Śiddha, Śantāna, Śarvokta, Pārameśvara, Kiraṇa, Vātula.

3 The Śrīkaṇṭhī, which Ksemarāja also calls the Śrīkaṇṭhīyasaṅhitā (vimarśinī on ŚSū

2/1 and uddyota on SVT 8/29) and Śrīkaṇṭhasaṁhitā (in vivṛti on StCi 84 and uddyota
on SvT 10/3-5) is an important Tantra for Trika Śaivites, who considered its
presentation of the Śaiva canon to be the most authoritative (see Pandey 1963: 139-143

and Dyczkowski 1988: p. 43 ff.. It has been recovered by Sanderson from a manuscript
of the Nityādisaṁgrahābhidhānapaddhati. This section has been published, unedited,
by Hanneder (1998: 240-268), from which the variants have been drawn.

v. 108-1 12.

The texts marked with an asterisk have been recovered wholly or in part, although

they have not all been published.

The Kiraṇatantra liṣts a Candrāṁśubheda. This may be the Aṁśumadbhedāgama, of
which there are several manuscripts or, more probably, the Candrāṁśu mentioned
further ahead.
Read, in accord with the published Śrākaṇṭhī (only significant variants will be noted):
kāmakaṁ, for kāmajaṁ. The Śrīkaṇṭhī (v. 122d) also calls it by its common name,

Kāmika. Śrīkaṇṭhī reads mākuṭaṁ for maukuṟaṁ (same reading in 123c). AIl but the

first word of this line is missing in the printed edition in its place read with the
SŚrīkaṇṭhī: dīpaṁ sūkṣmaṁ tu sāhasram ajitānatakaṁ tathā |

Read with K, Kh, Ch, J, Jh, Ṅ, T and D rudrabhedāñ chṛau priye for rudrabhedāṁs
tv imāñ chṛṇu.

Read niḥśvāsam udgītaṁ for niḥśvāsaṁ madgītaṁ. The Śrīkaṇṭhī reads this line:

vijayaṁ pārameśaṁ ca niśvāśodgītam eva ca. A Prodgītāgama exists (IPF T 1021). The

name appears in the canonical lists of the Siddhāntāgamas (see Dyczkowski 1988: 34

ff.). Moreover, in a section which follows these verses in the Śrīkaṇṭhī, which describes
how Śiva's body is made of the the twenty-eight Āgamas, Prodgīta is listed in the place
of Udgīta.

A Vīratantra has been recovered in South India, which is amongst the IFP transcripts

(29, 30, 31, and nine others). Whether it existed when the Śrīkaṇṭhī was written or was
(as is most likely) just a name in a largely ideal list which supplied names for Āgamas
that came to be redacted later, it makes no difference in this or many other similar cases.

What matters for the textual editor is that the name is the same.

TANTRĀLOKA

Raurava, Vimala, Kiraṇa, Lalita, and Saurabheya. 0 Maheśvaī, (these,)

they say, are the twenty-eight Tantras that have come from the upper current (of

scripture).

The TĀv reads: rauravāḥ pañca (the five Rauravas). The Sṛīkaṇṭhī reads:
rauravāhūṁ ca. I have emended to rauravākhyaṁ ca.

The SŚrīkaṇṁī reads aṣṭaviṁśatibhedaṁ tu ūrdhvasrotovinirgatam. (The same

irregular shortening of the second vowel of asṭāviṁśati- to aṣṭaviṁśati- is also found in
the MSs of the TĀ.) `(O Maheśvarī, (these) Tantras, they say are) the division of

twenty-eight that has come from the upper current’ These twenty-eight are the
Siddhāntāgamas. The Brahmayāmala, which is certainly one of the earliest, major Śaiva

Tantras, although it is not a Siddhāntāgama, mentions these two divisions of ten and
eighteen, associated with Śiva and Rudra respectively. Even s0, it appears that for some

centuries they existed only as names. As Goodall (1995, p. xiv-xv) explains: ‘of the
twenty-eight Tantras that are listed as scriptures of the Śaivasiddhānta very few are
demonstrably early works. Most are South Indian redactions or entirely fresh
compositions that were unknown to Rāmakaṇṭha [who was a Kashmiri Siddhāntin
belonging to the 11 century]. The first exegetes of the Siddhānta were all Kashmiris.
The earliest of them was Sadyojyotis, who is well known to Somānanda as his

predecessor, and so lived earlier than the middle of the ninth century. In the works that
have survived authored by him and his successors, such as Rāmakaṇṭha, in the

following few generations, a very limited number of Siddhāntāgamas are quoted or
mentioned. The manuscripts preserved in Nepal are the only ones surviving from the

early period prior to Abhinavagupta, either as originals or transcribed copies. There too

we find only very few Siddhāntāgamas. Conversely, although a good number of

Āgamas with these names have been recovered in South India, their predominant

concern is with temple ritual. Although the Āgamas and related Siddhānta sources of the
early period do deal with ritual, it is only rarely explicitly related to temple worship.

Moreover, there is very little mention of temple construction and architecture, which is a
major concern of the ones found in South India. Thus, it appears to be more than likely
that texts redacted in the later period in South India, not in the North, where the
Siddhānta most probably originated, were given names drawn from the ideal lists of

names found in earlier Āgamas. An attested example of this phenomenon are the
Āgamas of the Lingayats. They bear the same names as the twenty-eight
Siddhāntāgamas, but are quite different texts. To explain this, the Lingayats maintain
that their Āgamas are a continuation (urtarakhaṇḍa) of the Siddhāntāgamas. See

Goodall 1998: 402-417 and Sanderson 2007a: 233-234 for discussion.

The Āgamas that have been recovered have been marked with an asterisk.

Some of_them certainly do belong to the early period, notably the Nihśvāsa. This

lengthy Āgama is being edited by a team of scholars. Mukuṭa, Kiraṇa, Raurava (=
Ruru) and Kāmika (= Kāmaja) are quoted by Abhinava. Exemplars of most of the
existent Siddhāntāgamas that have not been edited, apart from the ones in Nepal

mentioned above, are in transcripts deposited in the French Institute of Indology in
Pondicherry. These can be viewed and downloaded from muktabodha.com.
The same appears to be the case with the sixty-four Bhairava Tantras. Even the
very form of the names of some entries, as for example, the eight Cakra Tantras, suggest

that they are just that ~ names (see Dyczkowski 1988: 42 ff.). A great deal has been lost
from the early period, so it not possible to say with any certainty how many of these

titles are real. An extensive and sure window we have that looks out onto the corpus of
available Śaiva Tantras and related literature prior to the eleventh century are references
and quotations by Kashmiri teachers, especially Abhinavagupta as well as Jayaratha,
who took care, it seems, to trace as many of Abhinava’s references as he could. An

annotated list of these texts is found at the end of the book along with the bibliography

CHAPTER ONE
And here (in this context) the same (Abhinavagupta says):

‘The group (of Āgamas) spoken by the Śivas is called Śiva. The group

(uttered) by the Rudras is said to be called Rudra.’
The Sixty-four Bhairavatantras

The ‘eight tīmes eight’ are the sixty-four Bhairava divisions. In a
similar way, within the southern face, which is by nature nondual and (consists
of) the innate nature (svarūpa), Śiva, Śakti and the mouth of the Yoginī, which
is called their union, there are four (stages) as ‘the intent to be born’, ‘born’,

‘intent on concealment’ (tirodhatsu) and ‘concealed’ (tirohita) of each one (of
the other four faces). Thus, if this group of sixteen divisions merges inwardly
simultaneously with the other four faces, then by combining with one another,

(they make) the sixty-four Bhairava divisions,® which are predominantly

nondualist. That is said (in the Mālinīvijayavārtika):

‘That which is inside, in the southern (stream of scriptures), is the Liṅga
of the Heart, which is considered to be the supreme Heart. That is also replete

with all the things that have been emitted and internalized. It assimilates

(grasana) the aspect which is the radiant energy (tejoṁśa) of Māyā that
and index. We notice that most of the titles listed in the Śrīkaṇṭhīyasaṁhitā are missing,

and conversely, that most of the Tantras mentioned by the Kashmiris are not mentioned
there.
We can also refer to the works written in South India by early Śrīvidyā authors,

the Siddhāntins there who wrote prior to the fourteenth century, and those who, like
Maheśvarānanda, for example, contributed to the Kashmiri Trika and related schools in

South India, where they were well-known. A good number of the early sources survived
there up to that time. Traces of the Kashmiri tradition remain in some form it seems in
Kerala, where deities like Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, rightly considered there to be of Kashmiri

origin, are still worshipped. These are subjects of ongoing and future research.
“ MVV 1/408d-409ab. Ten forms of Śiva, each a Śiva in his own right, uttered one of

the ten Śiyāgamas. Similarly, eighteen Rudras the eighteen Rudrāgamas.

° Instead of svarūpe śivaśakti- read with MS Kh: svarūpaśivaśakti-. Normally, the

Mouth of the Yoginī is reckoned to be a sixth face below the five faces of Sadāśiva,
from which issue the Kaula teachings. This may be a way of expressing the intimate

relationship of the Śākta Kaula teachings with those Bhairavatantras, that issue from the

southern face (see Dyczkowski 1988: 65 and 169, also below, note on comm. 6/194ab194cd (6/193-194ab)). Hanneder suggests another more subtle reason, which need not
be incompatible with this one. He writes (1998: 30 n. 114): It is rather odd to find the
yoginīvaktra here, as it is usually a name for the lower face. But here Jayaratha faces a

dilemma. On the one hand he wants to provide the reader with the names of the Tantras

by quoting the Śrīkaṇṭhī but he also wishes to interpret the passage in line with the
Vārtika [i.e. MVV]. Now these two sources differ in one important point: the Śrīkaṇṭhī

attaches much weight to the lower face, the Vārtika does not mention it, and — more

importantly – has no place in its system for it, since the sixth stream is already reserved

for the ārdhodhva [the current above the upper current. I think that Jayaratha’s way out

is to subsume the yoginīvaktra under the Aghora-face.’

4 x 16 = 64.
Read as suggested by the editor of the printed text, —sṛṣta- for –spaṣṭa-

TANTRĀLOKA

engenders

duality

and

s0,™

because

it

withdraws

all

(things

into

consciousness), it is black and bears the form of darkness.
To the degree the (other) four faces (apart from Aghora, the southern

one) merge inwardly there (into Bhairava), (they are) then% (each)
simultaneously (yugapat) divided (into four stages, namely) ‘intent to be born’,
‘born’, ‘intent on concealment’ and ‘concealed’ (tirohita), and (thus become)

sixteen. Entering into Śiva, who is free and the Heart of Emission, in the right

(face), then that scriptural corpus (śāstra) consisting of eight times eight

(scriptures)

(yugapat).

called

Bhairava

(comes

into

being

together)

all

at

once

And that is explained at length along with the names (of the scriptures)

in the venerable Śrīkaṇṭhī as follows:’

‘(Now) T will tell (you) briefly something else that was sung by the

Supreme Lord. I will tell that (group of) sixty-four with its divisions, part by
part. O (fair Goddess) praised by the Heroes, (in eight groups of eight) called
Bhairava, Yāmala and the one called Mata, Maṅgala, Cakrāṣṭaka, Sikhāṣṭaka,
Bahurūpa, the seventh, and Vāgīśa, which is said to be the eighth, (altogether

they make) eight.” That is the wheel (cakra) of Sadāśiva, which I will now tell
(you) in brief.

Read with the MVV —grasanāc ca tat for —grasanātmakam. Hanṇeder (1998)

translates ‘because it devours the particles of light (tejoiśa) that belong to Māyā and
foster duality. In the MVV, between this sentence and the previous one, Abhinava

inserts a reference to two verses of the Vijñānabhairava. Theṣse say: “(the yogi) should

imagine that the entire (expanse of the) sky is merged within (his) head as Bhairava’s
state. (Then he and) all that (exists) penetrates (and is absorbed) into the reality (which
is) the radiant energy (tejas) of Bhairava’s form.’ (85) Again: ʻIn the same way, (the
yogi) engaged in contemplating for a long time the (awesome) darkness on a stormy
night in the dark lunar fortnight (when there is no moon) attains Bhairava’s nature. (87)
The point is that the Southern or Right Face of Sadāśiva is dark because it is the body of
Bhairava, within which the sixty-four Bhairava Tantras are revealed.

““ MVV reads: antarlīnatayā bhāti (to the degree the (other) four faces) manifest as

merged inwardly) instead of tatrāntarlīnatāṁ yāti (i.e. (to the degree the (other) four
faces) merge inwardly (there)).

õ Read with the MVV tato for itthaṁ.

“l MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ṅ, T and Ḍ read naisargike (‘pertaining to creation’) for vaisargike

(‘pertaining to emission’). I have retained the reading in the printed text, as it agrees
with the one found in the MVV. Hanneder understands that these are not just four
adjectives of Śiva. They are four aspects of Śiva (i.e. ʻfreeʼ, ‘Heart’, ‘emission’ and
‘right face’) which, combining with each of the sixteen, makes the sixty-four Bhairava
Tantras.

°“ MVV 1/383-384 and 388cd-390. 1/383cd-384 is quoted by Śivopādhyāya ad VBh 85

(84). This is preceded by the following verse which is said there to be also drawn from
the MVV but is not found there: Read with the MVV yugapad evaitad bhidā for
yugapad evaitad bheda- and aṣṭāṣṭakātmakaṁ śāstraṁ for aṣṭāṣṭakātma tacchāstraṁ.

Read ity asṭa for ity aṣṭo.

CHAPTER ONE

(1) Svacchanda, Bhairava," Caṇḍa, Krodha, Unmattabhairava,

Asitāṅga, Mahocchuṣma, and Kapālīśa. These are the forms of Svacchanda

spoken by Bahurūpa.”

(2) Brahmayāmala, Viṣṇuyāmala, Skanda, Umā” and Ruru; the sixth
is said_to be Atharvanaṁ. Rudra is said to be the seventh, and Verāla the

(3) Next, O Great Goddess, hear (the names of) the Mata divisions of

my (Tantras).” There is the one called Rakta, and the Mata called Lampaṭa and

"" In order to make the full set of eight required here, one must read Svacchanda and

Bhairava as two separate entries, although it is clear that there is only one text, i.e. the

Svacchandabhairava. See following note.

In his commentary on SVT 1/4cd-7, Ksemarāja quotes the Sarvavīratantra as saying:

“The collection of scriptures (saṁhitā) is (divided into) four groups (pītha),
namely, Mudrā, Maṇḍalapītha, Mantrapīṭha and Vidyāpīṭha. Theṣe four books, namely,
the Svacchandabhairava, Caṇḍa, Krodha and Unmattabhairava, belong to the
Mantrapīṭha.’
See Sanderson (2007: 234), who reports that this same verse is also found in
the JY (ṣaṭka 1). Abhinava accepts this division of scripture into four piṭhas, a division
possibly first described in the Brahmayāmala and elaborated by subsequent Tantras
such as the Jayadrathāyāmala. Perhaps this is the reason why he dedicates chapters 30
to Mantras (which include Vidyās), 31 to Maṇḍalas, and 32 to Mudrās. (See

Dyczkowski 1988: 49 ff. and 104 ff. for an analysis of the canon of the JY and its

allocation of Tantras to the four pīṭhas).
Although these eight are presented as Tantras, the forms of (Śvacchanda)
Bhairava from which they draw their names each utter eight Tantras. Thus, there are

‘eight times eight’ Tantras. Note that ‘Bahurūpa’, who spoke this group of eight Tantras,
is Svacchandabhairava, the first of the eight. This makes sense as Aghora, Sadāśiva’s
southern face that utters the Bhairavatantras, is Svacchandabhairava.
” Read with the Śrīkaṇṭhī: skandam umā for svacchandaś ca.

The group of eight Yāmalas continued to be considered such a standard set that a text

called ‘Yāmalāṣṭakatantra’ – the Tantra of the eight Yāmalas, which calls itself a

Tantra, although more of the nature of a compendium, was ‘revealed’ some centuries
later. It is being edited by Prof. Galewicz at the University of Krakow in Poland. The

Brahmayāmala (also called Picumata), Viṣṇuyāmala, Skandayāmala, Umāyāmala and
Rudrayāmala are listed as a set of five Yāmalatantras belonging to the Vidyāpīṭha
(Sanderson 2007a: 235). For an extended discussion based on the JY (ṣaṭka 1), see

Dyczkowski 1988: 114-119.
” This repetition is, it seems, the classification of the Matatantras found elsewhere.

Thus, a number of Matatantras listed in the JY (ṣaṟka 1) are common with this list but

are presented as derivative Tantras of the Brahmayāmala / Picumata, which it considers

to be the main Matatantra. According to the JY (1) there are eight Matatantras
associated with the Brahmayāmala | Picumata, several of which correspond. They are:
Raktāmata, Pecikāmata, Mṛgālinīmata, Śambarāmata, Utphullakāmata, Nīlakeśīmata,
Bhāruṇḍāmata and Piṅgalāmata (quoted in Dyczkowski 1988: 155, also Sanderson
2006: 249 n 54). The Piṅgalāmata itself lists: Durvāsomata, Pecikāmata,
Sarasvatīmata, Jayadratha Phetkāramata, Raktāmata and Lampaṭāmata as the ‘sevenfold BY°. The reference is drawn from Sanderson (ibid.). See Dyczkowski 1988: 115.

TANTRĀLOKA

that of Lakṣmī, the fifth is Kālikā.”' The one called Piṅgalā”” is the sixth.

Another is the Uīphullakamata, and the one called Viśva is said to be the
eighth. O (Goddess) praised by the gods; these are said to be the Caṇḍa division
of the Bhairava (Tantras).

(4) Bhairavī is said to be the first and has arisen from the Picutantra.

(Bhairavī) is said to be of two kinds. Then the third is said to be Brahmī, and

Kalāā” is the fourth. The one called Vijayā is the fifth, and the one called
Candrā is the sixth. (The last two are) Maṅgalā and Sarvamaṅgalā This is

the Maṅgala diviṣsion spoken by Krodheśa.
(5) The first is Mantracakra. The second is Varṇacakra. The third is

Śakticakra, and Kalācakra is the fourth. The fith is Binducakra. The sixth is
called Nāda. The seventh is Guhyacakra, and the eighth is said to be Khacakra.

This is the Cakra division spoken by Asitāṅga.
(6) Andhaka, Rurubheda, the one called Aja, the one called Mūla,

Varṇamaṇṭha, Viḍaṅga, Jvālina and Mātṛrodana were praised, 0

Supreme Goddess (Parameśvarī), by the Supreme Lord, Ruru.
(7) Bhairavī, Citrikā, the one called Haṁsā, and Kadambikā, Hṛllekhā,

Candralekhā, Vidyullekhā, and Vidyutmat. These are Vāgīśa’s divisions,
spoken by Kapālīśa.

(8) Bhairavī, said to be Śikhā, (is the first), and Vīṇā is the second.

The third is Vīṇāmaṇi, and Sammoha is the fourth. The fifth is Ḍamara, and

the sixth also is Atharvaka. The seventh is said to be Kabandha. SŚiraścheda
The printed text reads Cālikā, which makes no sense, so I have adopted the reading
in NSA 1/29.

Emend piṅgalādyaṁ to piṅgalākhyaṁ, and in the next line read with MSs Kh, Ch, ÑṄ

and D utphullakamataṁ for utphullakaṁ mataṁ. Abhinava mentions a Tantra called
Utphulla (below 29/166ab), that Jayaratha glosses as utphullakamatam. Emend
viśvādya to viśvākhyaṁ. Manuscripts of the Piṅgalāmata exist (see bibliography).

” The Brahmayāmala is also called Picumata. The word ‘picu’ commonly means
‘cotton.. The BY is thus the Mata teaching of the Yoginī of the cotton plant. See
Dyczkowski 1988: 115 for the JY (1) derivation of the name, in quite a different sense.

This Picutantra, if it existed, would be different from it.
” Read brāhmī kalā for brāhmīkalā.
This may be the Maṅgalaśāṣtra quoted by Abhinava in 5/40. The same verse appears
several times in Jayaratha’s commentary and elsewhere.
! The edition reads varṇabhaṇṭhaṁ. The simple emendation ‘varṇamaṇṭha’ means

‘Sweetmeat of Letters. This is the reading of MS Jh. The Śrīkaṇṭhī reads kalāmoṭaṁ
‘Bundle of Energies’.

" Instead of mātrṛrodanam – the Crying of the Mothers — MSs Ch, J, Jh, Ñ T and D
read mātṛrodhanam – the Obstruction of (or by) the Mothers.

Read vidyunmān for vidyumān.
The Viṇāśikhātantra is a Vāmatantra. It has been edited and translated by Gaudriaan.
See bibliography.

The printed edition reads dvityikā (‘second’), MSs J, h, T and DḌ read dvitīyakā.
The Saṅmohana, Śiraścheda, Vīāśikhā and Nayoitara are a standard group of four
Vāmatantras. According to Sanderson, the Śiraśccheda (or Śiraccheda) is the name of
the first of the four ṣarkas of the Jayadrathayāmala. The following three, each about
6,000 verses long, appear to have been redacted independently in Kashmir and then
amalgamated (see Sanderson 2007: 235, 252 and 2005b: 278-283). The Nayottara is one

CHAPTER ONE

is said to be the eighth. These, O Goddess, are the Śikhā divisions spoken by

Unmatta. This is Sadāśiva’s wheel (cakra) divided into eight groups of eight.

The meaning is that (the corpus of scripture – sāstra), divided into these
(Tantras) with many diverse divisions, primary and secondary, is of many
kinds. As (is said) in the Śrīkaṇṭhī with regards to the face of Tatpuruṣa:
‘Initially, the heart of the Garuḍa (Tantras is formed) with twenty-eight
diviṣions.” Again: ‘the Bhūta Tantras are in the west . . .’. And ‘in the south is
the southern path, divided into twenty-four (Tantras).” Again: “What has

arisen from Vāmadeva is different (from those). Now listen to that.

of the sections of the Niḥśvāsatttvasaṁhitā, which is being edited. The association of

Tumburu, the Bhairava of the Vāma current, is made in the account in JY (1) of its
transmission (Dyczkowski 1988: 113). He is also the Bhairava of the Vīṇāśikhātantra.
The visualized form of Tumburu is described in the JY (1), which appears to have been
influenced by the Tantras of this current (see ibid. 149 n 181). See below, notes 1,292,
1,797 and 4,678.

See Dyczkowski 1988, 42-49 for an analysis of this list and a brief discussion of the

Tantras of the southern, that is ‘right hand’, mouth. In the later period, the Tantras came
to be thought of as forming a standard group of sixty-four, just as the Siddhāntāgamas
form a standard group of twenty-eight. The latter, which are more strictly Śaiva, are
associated with ‘subsidiary° Āgamas (upāgama), which are many more (see ibid.). The
former also are said to have ‘subsidiary Tantras’ (upatantra), although this designation
is much less common.

Read wth MSs K, J, Jh, Ñ T and Ḍ bhedopabhedanānāvaicitryātmanā for

bhedopabheda-vaicitryātmanā.

! Ibid. 220ab. The previous and the following references cannot be traced in the

version of the Śrīkaṇṭhī available.
Read as suggested by the editor of the printed text, sāmprataṁ for sāmṛtaṁ. The

western and eastern faces of Sadāśiva utter the Gāruḍa and Bhūta Tantras, respectively.

They are concerned with exorcism of ghosts and spirits (bhūta), countering snakebite

and other poisons. Recent research has uncovered a number of Gāruḍa Tantras amongst
Nepalese manuscripts. A representative text compiled from these types of Tantras is the
Krīyākālaguṇottara. 1 supervised the input of manuscripts of the Trottala and
Tortalotara for the Muktabodha Digital Library. These are available online. The
Tantrasaṁgraha by Nārāyaṇa is an extensive compendium of remedies for poison and
snakebite that draws from the Gāruḍatantras. Concerning the Gāruḍa and Bhūtatantras,
see Dyczkowski 1988: pp. 39-42, and Sanderson 2001: 14 n 13. An edition and study of
a part of the Kriyākālaguṇottara to which 1 brought attention for the first time in the

aforementioned publication, has been published recently by Slauber. The Bhairava
Tantras are spoken by the southem, right face. The left face, which is that of Vāmadeva,
speaks the Vāma Tantras (see above, note 6). Although influential at one time, only one

Vāma Tantra, namely, the Vīṇāśikhā, has been recovered. It seems that the first saṭka of
the Jayadrathaāyāmala has drawn substantially from Vāma Tantras. There we find a

deṭailed visualization of Tumburu Bhairava, the main deity of this class of Tantras. See
Dyczkowski 1988: pp. 36-38 and 149-150.
The Jñānapañcāśikā (op. cit. fl. la-1b) lists the the following Gāruḍatantras.
1) Hara 2) Huṁṅkāraka 3) Bindusāra 4) Kalāmṛta 5) Devatrāsa 6) Sūyāsa (?) 7) Śāvara

8) Kālasāvara 9) Pakṣirāja 10) Śikhāyoga 11) Śikhāsāra 12) Sikhāmṛta 13)

Pañcabhūta 14) Vibhāga 15) Śūnyabheda 16) Nīlakaṇṭha 17) Kālāga (> Kālāṅga) 18)

Kālakūṭa 19) Paṭaduma (> Paṭadhūma) 20) Kamboja 21) Kamvala 22) Kaṅka (?) 23)

TANTRĀLOKA

(The Tantra) refers (in this way to) another variety (of scriptures) with its

divisions, primary and secondary. (Moreover,) as each face has five faces, from
that division secondary divisions arise. In this way that is also included, and so
not discussed here separately. That has been said (in the Mālinīvijayavārtika):
‘Each face has five faces, from which it is said that there are countless
divisions of the ten and eighteen divisions.’
Thus, the teaching is that this corpus of scripture (śāstra) is of three
kinds, called Śiva, Rudra and Bhairava, which teach duality, unity-in-difference
and nonduality, respectively. That has been said (in the following lines):
‘He knew (this) Tantra called Rudra, Śiva and Bhairava to be of three

kinds. In reality this essence of knowledge (jñānasattā) unfolds as (teaching)

duality, unity-in-difference and, in the same way, as possessing (the teachings

concerning) nonduality (respectively).”

Although this corpus of scripture is in this way dualistic etc., having

encompassed (and assumed as His own) the remaining triad (trika) consisting
of the Supreme Lord’s (faces) Īśa, Vāma and Aghora which, as the abode of
Kālatuṇḍa 24) Kaṭāhaka 25) Suvarṇarekha 26) Sugrīva 27) Trotala and 28)

Troṇalottara.
Each of the other four faces has five faces, see Dyczkowski 1988 p. 31. The five

faces discussed here are those of Īśāna, that is, the upper face that speaks the

Mantratantra. See ibid. 32 ff.

MVV 1/378. Instead of daśāṣtadaśabhedasya tato bhedeṣv asaṅṁkhyatā the MVV
reads: daśāṣṭadaśabhīnnasya tato bhedair asaṁkhyatā, which means practically the
same. The countless ‘divisions’ of the twenty-eight Siddhāntāgamas are, presumably,
the so-called ‘secondary’ or ‘subsidiary, the Upāgamas.
MVV 1/391-392ab. MVV reads itthaṁ tantraṁ . . sthitaṁ tridhã (‘in this way the
Tantra is of three kinds’) for tantraṁ jajñe . . . idaṁ tridhā (‘he knew (this) Tantra to be

of three kinds’). The verses of the MVV (1/392cd-395ab), which are followed by those

aoled next, are worth noting: ‘In the same way there are three primary energies of
iva, namely, those beginning with the will (i.e., will, knowledge and action). There
itself, by (their) ongoing development, the five energies and the rest are conjoined (to
them). In this way, that Trika, which is in the midst (of them), is a separate (distinct)
teaching (śāṣtra) which, supreme in this way, originates from the tradition (karma) of
the lineage belonging to our teacher's house. Thus, because it is closely (related) to the
teachings (śāstra) (of the Tantras) of the Left and Right, a Kaula stream (of the
teachings) unfolds at the extremity of the culminating stream (of the scriptures).”

" Read with MSs J, Jh, Ñ and T iṣṭaṁ (‘the remaining ((Trika) triad)) for ṣaṣṭhaṁ
(‘the sixth’).” Cf. above, where Jayaratha says: ‘the remaining triad (śiṣṭasya trikasya)

of Īśa, Vāma and Aghora will be applied to a different task’.
! As a ‘remaining’ category of scriptures and their teachings, the Trika is here said to
be derived from the faces of Īśāna (= Īśa), Vāmadeva and Aghora that are above, to the

left and the right, and utter the Siddhānta, Vāma and Bhairava Tantras, respectively.
Elsewhere, Trika is said to be ‘the half in front’ (pūrvārdha) of the faces, which can
well be understood as being these three. Again, it is also said to be ‘above the upper”
(ārdhvordhva), which also makes sense in this perspective not only spatially, but as
being ‘above’ the others, because it contains their essence. For a more detailed
discussion see above, note 1,6, and Dyczkowski 1988: 174.

CHAPTER ONE

rest of the three goddesses Parā (Parāparā and Aparā), encompasses

(it all), (the

Lord) floods it with the nectar of supreme nonduality, in accord with

statements as:

such

‘Juṣṭ as is the scent in a flower, oil in sesame seed, the soul (jīva) in the

body, and nectar in water, in the same way Kula is inwardly establis

the (Śaiva) scriptures (śāstra).”

hed in (all)

Read with MSs J, h, Ñ T and D ityādyuktyā for ityādyuttayā.

TĀ 35/34. 1t is quoted in the Mahārthamañjarī (p. 170), where Maheśvarānanda says

that it is ‘the view of the Tantrāloka’, without identifying its source. Instead of jale

rasaḥ, the reading there and below in 35/34 is jale ʻmṛtam, which agrees with that
of
MsSs K, J, Ih and T, and so has been adopted. Abhinaya says (below 35/33)
that he is
quoting this verse from the Kālīkula. According to Sanderson (2007: 375),
the Kālīkula
is “very probably° the Kaālīkulapañcaśataka (which Jayaratha calls
the
Devīpañcaśataka), of which the following passage I have edited from the manuscri
pts
of this unpublished work appears to be paraphrased here by Abhinavagupta.

etad rahasyaṁ paramaṁ kulaṁ jñãtaṁ na kenaci |

Śśaivād bāhyam idaṁ deva pañcasrotovivarjitam [k, kh, g: -śrotra-] || 35 ||
daśāṣṭādaśabhedasya śaivasya parameśvara |
antarlīnam [k, kh, g: antalī-] idaṁ jñānaṁ na jñātaṁ tridaśeśvaraiḥ ||
36 ||

sarvatra saṁsthitaṁ deva sugūḍhaṁ [k, kh: sugūḍhe, g: sugāḍhai] kulam uttamamm ḷ
puṣpe [g: puṣpai] gandha ivāsaktas [kh g: -śaktaṣ] tailaṁ [k: melaṁ; g: tairaṁ] yadvat

tilādiṣu || 37 ||
10kh-a, 9g-a) tathaiva sarvaśāstrāṇāṁ [k, kh: -naṁ,; g: -ṣāstrānāṁ]
kulam ante
pratiṣṭhitam |

‘This supreme secret which is Kula is not known by anybody. O god, this
is
outside the Śaiva (teachings) of the ten and eighteen divisions (of the Siddhānt
as) and is
devoid of (division into) five currents (of scripture). Ó Supreme Lord, this
knowledge,
which is unknown (even to) the gods, is that and is merged inwardly.
O god, the most
excellent and well-hidden Kula (teaching,) it is present everywhere like scent
present in
a flower or oil in sesame seeds and the like, in the same way Kula
is inwardly
established within all the (Śaiva) scriptures (śāstra).’ 2/35-38ab
context:

For the reader's convenience, the verse Jayaratha quotes is presented here

in

‘AIl (the various learned and spiritual traditions, be they) worldly science

(laukika), Vedic, the Sāṁkhya, Yoga and the like, (the Vaiṣṇava) Pañcarātr
a, Buddhiṣṭ,
Jain, logic (nyāyaśāstra), grammar, (the dualist Śaiva) Siddhāntatantras
and Śākta
(Tantras) etc., are all born from the (five) Brahmās, distinguished from one
another as

Sadyojāta and the rest (of Sadāśiva’s five faces), as is taught in the venerabl

e

Svacchandatantra and other (scriptures). (26-27) . . . Therefore,
there is only one
tradition in which every (tradition) is grounded, starting from the mundane
(Vedic)
scriptures, to that of the Vaiṣṇavas and the Buddhists, (up to) that of the
Śaivas. (30)
The ultimate goal and abode of that (Śaiva tradition) is called Trika. (31ab)
That same
(tradition) is said to be Kula, because it is not divided by anything and (never)
ceases (to
exist, and s0 cannot be sublated by a higher teaching). Just as in all the limbs
of the
body, whether superior or inferior, each distinct from one another, there
is (only) one to

which life is imparted, just so, as scripture (declares), (the Kaula) Trika is present in
all
(the scriptures and all things). (31cd-32)

TANTRĀLOKA

Otherwise (if Śiva’s essential and supreme nondual nature were not
present in all the scriptures), they would not (serve as a) mean (nimitta) to
attaining the supreme plane (of existence). That has been said (in the
Mālinīvijayavārtika):
‘Thus, moreover, Bhairava, within whom (all) the limitations of

phenomena have been withdrawn and so is completely full to overflowing, His
power reinforced by the Sound (rava) arising from ultimate reality,® embraces
the three energies. (These are) the Trika (triad) beginning with Aparā and

ending with Parā, present respectively within those (faces), namely, Iśāna,

Vāma, and (Aghora) on the right. (And having done so,) He abides (as such,

that is, as the consort of these three Goddesses and as the possessor of their

powers).

The Tantras of the Upper, Left and the other (Right current) as well as

the Kulas, which are established in the culmination of that flow (of scriptures

and teachings), bestow the plane of nonduality.’

And (this is) declared in the venerable Kālīkula that, ‘devoid of the five
currents (of scriptures), it is said to be the essence of the (two) groups (bheda) of ten and
eighteen (Siddhāntāgamas). Juṣt as is the scent in a flower, oil in sesame seed, the soul
(jīva) in the body, and nectar in water, in the same way Kula is inwardly established in
(all) the (Saiva) scriptures (śāstra).’ (33-34) (TĀ 35/26-27, 30-34) See Dyczkowski

1992a: 313 and SvTT 8/28-31ab, 11/43cd-45ab, 11/179cd-182.

Read with the MVV, paramārthodyadrava- for paramārthodyaddava-. Instead of —

Śśaktikaḥ (power) the MVV reads —vṛttikaḥ (state or activity).
! The MVV reads ‘avatiṣṭhate’ instead of trikaṁ sthitaḥ, which does not change the

meaning, but eliminates ‘rikaṁ’, which qualifies the three Goddesses Aparā etc. as the
‘Trika (triad)’. I have retained this reading because this surely is the point, namely, that

the Trika triad is present in the three faces. Aparā is the hidden energy of Iśāna, the

upper face, which the Siddhānta Āgamas declare to be their source, considering

themselves to be the ‘upper’, most elevated scriptures. These, considered to be dualist,
along with those of the faces of Vāmadeva to the left, and Aghora to the right, which are

considered to be dual-cum-nondualist and nondualist, respectively, are believed to be

permeated by Kaula Tṛika teachings. These are not just nondualistic, as are the
scriptures spoken by Aghora (i.e. the 64 Bhairava Tantras), they are supremely nondual,
a ṭypical characterization of the Trika teachings, and indeed of Kaula ones in general.
Trika teachings, here identified with the most elevated Kula teachings, need not have a
separate current of scripture, as their teachings are present in the other Tantras. There
they present themselves as particularly special, powerful, and secret teachings in a

Tantra which is itself secret. Here an additional dimension is added, which is discussed
in the following paragraph. The teachings are ‘āgama,’ in the more literal sense of the
term, as a tradition that has ‘come down’ through the lineage of teachers. The written

Āgamas are also such, but in this case what has ‘come downʼ is an oral tradition. This is
the reason why they are not seen in the written Āgamas. But this view leads to the
question which follows.

MVV.

1/395cd-396ef

and

398.

MVV

reads

rādhāny

bhedasaṁkocahānaye (‘(the Kulas) are established in this flow in order to destroy the
contraction of duality°) for taddhāraprāntarūḍhāni prāpayyābhedabhūmikām (‘those
that are established in the culmination of that flow (of scriptures and teachings and)

bestow the plane of nonduality°).

CHAPTER ONE

Surely, (someone may object,) no such scriptural teaching (śruti) is

perceived (to exist), so what is the authority (for this view)? Surely, he
(Abhinavagupta) himself has stated that the authority here (in this case) is (the

teaching) of the lineage of teachers. As he says (in the Mālinīvijayavārtika);:

‘In this way, in the midst (of the energies and scriptures,) that Trika

(triad) (that is divided up as the three classes of Tantras etc. and) separate
(from them) (vibhinna) is supreme. The teaching (śāstra) is present in our

teacher’s house by virtue of the transmission of the lineage (of teachers)

(sampradāyakrama).’

Surely, (an opponent may raise) the objection that this (doctrine), which
has sprung from human intellect (and so has no scriptural source), has been
made into the answer. This is (indeed) a novel kind of erudition. Thus,
traditional doctrine (āgama), whatever it may be, should be confirmed (by
scripture) so that this (question may be satisfactorily) answered. (To which we
reply that that is) not so. Traditional doctrine (āgama) (both written and oral
does not require validation, as it) is said to be that which is commonly accepted
(prasiddhī) (knowledge) and is free of contradictions (avigīrā). As is said:
‘Traditional doctrine (āgama) is that which is commonly accepted
belief (prasiddhi) in the world, whether it is accompanied by sound argument
(yuktimat) or otherwise. As it is devoid of contradiction, it is the authority

(pramāṇa) concerning knowledge as well as ignorance. What is commonly
accepted (prasiddhi) and free of contradictions (avigīrā) (in this sense) is

considered to be the Goddess of Speech, Who is the truth (itself). That which is

proved (siddha) in this way should be accepted by those who are free of

doubts.”

The term ‘śrutī commonly refers to the Vedic scriptures. In this case as elsewhere,

Jayaratha uses the term to refer to the original revelation of the Tantras. See below,
notes 1,293 and 1,477.

For the context, see the previous verse, quoted above.
“ MVV 1/393¢d-394ab. Read with MVV paraṁ tathā for tathā tathā. Īn addition to
whatis stated, we may also understand that there is an allusion here to the diverse forms
of Trika represented in its various scriptural sources. The variant forms of the Trident

maṇḍala Abhinava describes in chapter 31 are indicative in this respect. We know from
Abhinava’s many references that, for example, the Devyāyāmala taught a variety of
Trika that maintained the supremacy of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, the goddess of the Krama
(below, 29/57cd), although it taught the worship of the same maṇḍala, and was

therefore undoubtedly a Trika Tantra (see below, ad 15/462cd-466 (15/460-463)).

However, the question which follows here suggests, as we have noted, that Abhinava, at
least as Jayaratha understands him, is particularly concerned with the oral Trika
tradition. Accordingly, although the word śāstra may be understood to mean a text or a
corpus, itis translated here with the general term ‘teachingʼ.

ḷ Scripture is the teaching that is commonly accepted, and the accompanying reflective

awareness. This is the subject of chapter thirty-five below. Parts of these verses are

quoted below in TĀv ad 35/1cd-2ab, IPv vol.

p. 39 and ĪPv vol. 2, p. 89, where the

reading of the last line is tayā yatra yadā siddhaṁ etad grāhyam asaṁśayam (that

which is proved by that (Goddess of Speech) wherever and whenever should be

TANTRĀLOKA

And that (commonly accepted knowledge) is present here (in this
teaching) and devoid of contradiction. It belongs to great souls, that is, the great
teachers. So what is the purpose of searching for other authorities (pramāṇa)
here (in this case)? One cannot simply say that because this kind of scriptural
teaching (śruti) has not reached the ears of those who maintain materialist views

(cārvāgdṛk) and are devoid of insight into (the true nature of) fettered existence

(bhava); that is unreasonable. Just because there is no authoritative means of
knowledge (pramāṇa), (that does not mean that the reality which is its) object

should also not exist. Nor are these (teachers liars, who) deceive (others) that

they should teach in this way what is otherwise (than the truth), because (we)

see that the application (prayoga) of all the sense of the traditional doctrine
(āgamārtha) of the Śaiva corpus of scripture (śāstra) has this teaching

(upadeśa) as its root. Thus, just as the Vedic revelation (sśruti), which is the root

(authority for the performance) of the Aṣṭaka and other (Vedic) sacrifices, is
considered to be present in Manu and the other smṛtis, because therein is the

root of a closely related tradition (śākhā), one should know that such is the case

(tathā) here also (with the Tantras). Without having seen (dṛṣrvā) an original
revelation (sruti) like this, (these teachers), who have experienced directly the

accepted without doubt’) instead of tathā yatra siddhaṁ tad grāhyam aviśaṅkitaiḥ
(‘That which is proved (siddha) in this way should be accepted by those who are free of
doubts.”)
In general terms, the expression ‘what is commonly accepted (prasidhi) and
free of contradictions (avigītā) refers to the basis of all scripture. Thus, Kṣemarāja
(comm. on SvT 5/88) explains:

‘Moreover, such is whatever is said in the scripture of the Supreme Lord,

which is a dialogue (between the Deity and one who questions it,) from which-mamy
fruits are obtained, such as ‘nourishment’ etc. and ‘tranquillity etc., and each and eyery
thing that has been clarified by the observance of that (practice) which should be

observed, (as taught) by the series of teachers who have perceived (that reality). (That
dialogue) has as its authority the insight (pratīti) that (the teaching) is impelled by the

omniscient (Śiva, the) Great Lord, Who is proved to exist (siddha) by what is commonly

accepted (prasiddhī) and free of contradictions (avigītā), which is the understanding of

all who are enlivened by the entire business of daily life.’

More specifically, Jayaratha is referring here to the oral tradition, which has the
same validity as the written scriptures, for the same reason. This is how Abhinava

explains this verse in his commentary (vimarśinī) on the Recognition of the Lord
(tsvarapratyabhijñā): ʻThe relationship (between the teacher and the taught) is the
lineage of the series of teachers. This (verse) indicates that (the teaching) commonly
accepted by the great teachers is the root (one). Nor should one doubt that, being such, it
should not be accepted. (Indeed,) it is (the teaching) that should be supremely accepted
as the great secret. The teachings of great secrets have come down (orally transmitted)

‘from ear to ear’. However, they have been set down to writing in the scriptures that
deal with great secrets by certain very compassionate (teachers). But even so, they

continue to be secrets. (This is s0) because one sees that these teachings also are not

ignored. That is said (with the following words): “What is commonly accepted

(prasiddhi) and free of contradictions (avigītā) (in this sense) is considered to be the
Goddess of Speech (Herself), who is true.” (IPv vol. 1 p. 39) See below, note 35,9 for
the commentary that follows.

CHAPTER ONE

entire Śaiva traditional doctrine (āgama) along with its (essential) reality, would

not teach in this way (if it were not true).” Now enough of this ill-mann

ered

testing of the teachings of great masters!
Sureḷy, (one may ask,) it is said of the scriptures that: ‘as they have all

come from Śiva, they (all) beṣtow the fruit of Śiva’s abode. So, i according

to this, the fruit (namely, Śiva’s Abode) and its determining cause, that

is, the

unity (of the Śaiva scriptures), are one (that is, are both always one and the

same, whatever be the school to which the Śaiva scripture belongs), then

what is

said to be the basis of their being many (scriptures leading to various levels of

realisation) in this way? (Our reply to this question is that) this is true. (The

scriptures do really have only one purport and fruit), however, due to the

difference of disposition (āśaya) of those who are the objects of (Śiva’s) grace,

they are conceived (kalpita) to be many (and different). As is said (in the
Mālinīvijayavārtika);
‘The purpose of all of this (revelation) is to impel (to action) in accord

with the differences of those who hear (the teachings). This difference, which

is

due to the difference of the goal (artha) (various aspirants have), is (only)
metaphorically conceived. One should not conceive that there is a difference

here in the fruit; if (this supposed difference) were conceivable, (the differenc

would be just a notion, and s0) not in accord with reality.

e

. In the Vedic ambience, the Vedas are considered to be the original revelation which,
as such, is termed ‘“śruṁī’, which literally means ‘that which has been heardʼ. Later

literature such as the Law Books (dharmaśāstra), for example the one aṭtributed
to
Manu, although not original revelation is considered to be directly related
to it as
‘smṛtī’, which literally means ‘that which has been recollected’. The Purāṇas
are also
considered to be smṛti, thus affiliating them to the Vedic revelation. This claim
was
made for the Tantras also centuries after Jayaratha who, on the contrary, is careful
not to
do so. However, he does invoke the principle that justifies the authoritativeness
of the
smṛtis, because they are considered to be closely related to the Veda, although they
are,

in fact, a quite separate corpus of literature. The teachers of the Śaivāgama knew them
well. Although not Veda, these traditions are considered to be rooted in the same
truth
and are authoritative for that reason. The great teachers of the Śaiva revelation in

witnessing their truth witnessed all the truth, including that of the Vedas.
In order for
that to be possible, they themselves must have been truthful.
MVV 2/290cd.

MVV 2/275-276ab.

sarvam etat pravṛttyarthaṁ śrotRṇāṁ tu vibhedataḥ |

arthabhedāt tu bhedo 'yam upacārāt prakalpyate |1275||

phalabhedo na kalpyo ‘tra kalpyaśced ayathāyatham |

In the previous line of the Mālinīvijayavārtika, Abhinava tells us that these
words are spoken by Śrīkaṇṭha in the Kiraṇaśāsana i.e. the Kiraṇatantra. Indeed,
it is

found in KiT 10/30cd-31ab, where we read:

puṅpravṛtter ayaṁ bhedaḥ A: tatra bhedas tathā mataḥ / B: śroṭṟbhedas tathā mataḥ

phalabhedo na (B: phalabhedena) kalpyo ‘tra jñānabhedaḥ prakalpyate |
‘This variety (bheda) (of the scripture) is to impel man (to action). A) The
variety there is considered to be such, B) The variety in the current (of scriptures
) is

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely, (one may ask that) if this is so, does this mean that, in actual
fact, it would be unreasonable (to maintain that the types of scriptures and their
corresponding schools) are really (relatively) superior (or inferior to one
another), as the case may be, as sayings such (as the following) declare?
‘(The scripture of the) Śaiva (Siddhānta) is superior to the Vedas and
the like; the Left and Right (currents of Tantras are superior to the) Śaiva; Kaula
is superior to the (Tantras of the) Right. There is no (scripture) greater than

(Our reply to this question is that this is) not so, because what is said

(here) is that, insofar as (they are related to each other) as leading from one to

the other, (lower scriptures) are related (to higher ones) as is the means to the

goal. Thus, the culmination (of this progression) is the corpus of scripture
(śāṣtra) which establishes the teaching of supreme nonduality alone (eva), and
its one fruit is the attainment of the essence of Śiva’s being. That very

(corpus. i.e. Tṛrika,) is the most excellent because it is the direct means

(sākṣādupāya) to attain the supreme plane. And that has been explained

extensively

by

this

same

(writer,

Abhinavagupta,)

in

the

venerable

considered to be such. One should not conceive that there is a difference here in the
fruit. What is conceived is the diversity of the knowledge (they impart).

The lines that follow in the MVV are also worth quoting: “This, (the scripture)
of the pervasive Lord (vibhu), is divided into divisions of ten, eighteen and eight times
eight. The one fruit (of it all) is the attainment of Śiva’s essential nature within the
individual soul who is zealous to attain that and is competent for it, with no
consideration of caste, family or colour etc.” Ibid. 2/276cd-277

! The first quarter of this verse is quoted below in TĀv ad 8/32cd-35ab. The full verse

is quoted by Kṣemarāja in the SvTu ad 11/74c. 11/74cd states that sarvādhvano
viniṣkrāntaṁ śaivānāṁ tu paraṁ padam || – ‘the supreme plane which has come forth

out of all the path is that of the Śaivas’. Kṣemarāja explains that this is said in this verse
‘with the intention of establishing a wonderful subsidiary variety of scriptures spoken by
Śiva. . . . Here the word ‘Śaiva’ refers to the scriptures of the Siddhānta beginning with

the Kiraṇatantra, which bestows Śiva’s transcendental (anuttīrna) plane.’

Sen Sharma says in the intro. (p. 4) to his edition of the Matsyendrasaṁhitā
that this verse is drawn from the Kulārṇavatantra. The closest to this verse there is:
sarvebhyaś cottamā vedā vedebhyo vaiṣṇavaṁ param |
vaiṣṇavād uttamaṁ śaivaṁ śaivād dakṣiṇam uttamam ||
dakṣiṇād uttamaṁ vāmaṁ vāmāt siddhāntam uttamam |
siddhāntād uttamaṁ kaulaṁ kaulāt parataraṁ na hi l| 2/7-8
(The statement ṣaḍdarśanāni me ʻṅgāni (2/84a) indicates the Kulārṇava was written

after the ‘six philosophies’ became a standard set.
" The point Jayaratha is making is that one is led progressively from the dualist
position to a nondualist one through the scriptures in such a way that the systems they
teach, ranging from dualist to nondualist, serve as the means and the end to one another,
until one reaches the supreme means, which is the end in itself, i.e. Trika, when one
finally attains to the very Being of Śiva.

CHAPTER ONE

Maālinīślokavārttika and elsewhere (ādi). Thus one should understand that for

oneself from that same (book). Every syllable is not proved to be in agreement

(with the teaching) for fear of the book (becoming too) big. Thus, they say: ‘the
essence of (the scriptures) is the Trika śāstra.’ That is said (in the following
verse);
‘After the Veda comes Śaiva (i.e., Śaivasiddhānta), then Vāma (the

Tantras of the Left Current), then Dakṣa (the Tantras of the Right Current), then

Kula, then Mata, and then after that also comes Trika which, the best of all, is

supreme.”

With the same intended (meaning, we read in the Niśācāra):

‘A teacher who knows the (nature of the) supreme reality (which is his
goal), although he has been consecrated in the Path of the Left, needs
(nonetheless) to be initiated into the Bhairava (Tantras), and he too (needs to

take further initiations) into Kula, Kaula, and (then finally) also into Trika.

‘-Elsewhere’ most probably refers to the Śrāpāūrvapañcikā. See Appendix volume
concerning sources and references under this entry.
' This and the following verse are quoted by Abhinava in the PTv p. 92. A variant of

the first of these verses is quoted again by Jayaratha below in TĀv ad 13/300cd-301.
There Mata comes after Dakṣa, then after that comes Kula and Kaula, followed by

Trika. Thus there it reads:

vedāc chaivaṁ tato vāmaṁ tato dakṣaṁ tato matam |
tataḥ kulaṁ tataḥ kaulaṁ trikaṁ sarvottamaai param ||

‘After the Veda comes Śaiva (i.e. Śaivasiddhānta), then Vāma (the Tantras of

the Left Current), then Dakṣa (the Tantras of the Right Current), then Mata and then
Kula, then Kaula and Trika which, the best of all, is supreme.
The verse here and in PTv p. 92 reads:
vedāc chaivaṁ tato vāmaṁ tato dakṣaṁ tataḥ kulam |

tato mataṁ tataś cāpi trikaṁ sarvottamaṁ param ||

' This verse is quoted without variants in TĀv ad 447cd-48 and ad 13/300cd-301. This

and the following verse are quoted by Abhinava in the PTv p. 92, where he refers to
another source, perhaps Somānanda’s lost commentary on the PT, as saying: ʻṭhe
sequence is this one. As has been said: “what is present in all these stages (bhūmī), that
is, profane treatises, the Veda, Siddhānta, the Left, Right, Kula and Mata, is the
ultimately real perceiver.” Cf. previous note.

This verse is also quoted below in TĀv ad 13/302 (see note there). Abhinava quotes
itin the PTv p. 92, where he says that it is from the Niśācāra, as does Jayaratha here.

In some cases, Mata precedes Kula, which is followed by Kaula, which is not
mentioned in this verse but appears below in this order. The scriptures of the Siddhānta
are generically termed ‘Śaiva’, as they are considered to be the common universal

(sāmānya) Śaiva practice. Those of the Left are the Vāma Tantras mentioned above.
Those of the Right, as we have seen, are the Bhairava Tantras. Kula means, presumably,
first of all the Kaula elements present in these Tantras, understood as inner, more secret
teachings of the Bhairava Tantras, that is, the Kula practice (kulācāra) or ‘modality”
(prakriyā) embedded in the Bhairava Tantras, which ultimately developed into

scriptures (kulāgama) in their own right. It is possible that Mata refers to the teachings

TANTRĀLOKA

This and more are said in the venerable Niśācāra (Tantra) and in other
(Tantras). Moreover, that (i.e., Trika) is also of three kinds, because it consists

of three parts, called the Śiddhā, Nāmaka (or Anāmaka) and Mālinī (Tantras).
There, the Siddhātantra is predominantly (concerned with ritual) action, the
Nāmaka Tantra with knowledge, and the (teaching of the) Mālinīmata consists

of both (ritual action and knowledge), and so that is the main (scripture). As he
said: ‘the essence of that (Trika śāstra) is the Mālinīmata.’ Similarly, it is

rightly said: ‘there is nothing here (in the Tantrāloka) not (taught by the

God of gods in the venerable Mālinīvijayottara)’

Thus, as (the Mālinīvijayottara is a Trika Tantra, īit possesses the

necessary) qualification (adhikāra) (to teach) that, because it tolerates all
(sarvaṁsaha) (the teachings of the lower Śaiva scriptures also, and so also) it is

reasonable (to assert that) the consequence (nirvāha) of the original proposition

of the Matatantras, of which the main one was considered to be the Brahmayāmala (see
above, note 1,275). Certainly, one of the features of the BY is that, despite its

predominantly Śākta orientation, the esoteric Śākta Kula as a separate category of
teachingsis practically absent. Thisis simply because the strongly Kāpālika Mata of the

BY precedes it. Even so, one can perceive in the light of subsequent developments many
features of them already emerging in this, one of the earliest Bhairava Tantras. One of
the most striking is the use of the term ‘Kula’ as denoting the eight ‘families’ – kula – of
deities associated with the eight Mothers (mātṛkā). Although this asso

on is not

stressed in later developments, it serves to explain, in part at least, the origin of the term.

Possibly ‘Kula’ here refers to early Kula teachings, when they were still perceived as
deeper esoteric teachings, such as those of Kālīkula (also called Kālīkrama), in its early

stage when still embedded within the procedures and rites (kalpa, vidhi) of the extensive

Jayadrathayāmala. We may take Kaula (literally ‘belonging to Kula’, i.e. produced by

Kula,) as the product of these earlier esoteric Kula teachings, that is, the independent
Kaula scriptures and traditions. Another possible way of understanding the distinction
between Kula and Kaula is that the latter stressed interiorization and transcendence of
opposites through intense empowerment. We find Kālīkula sources and the Kaula
Kubjikā Tantras referring to their traditions as ‘kulakaula’ perhaps to indicate that they
span both approaches – the outer literal enactment of ritual and pilgrimage and their
interiorization into the maṇḍala and the body. For a detailed analysis, see Dyczkowski

2009: intro. 2, p. 324 ff.
In this reference it is possible that in the expression kule kaule trike pi, Kula
and Kaula are adjectives of Trika, or perhaps just Kaula is. In the MVV (1/398),
Abhinava declares that Trika rises above the many Kula Tantras (kulāni). However,
there is no reference there to Kaula as a separate category. Certainly Trika is Kaula.
Abhinava is proud to be a Kaula. It is thus quite possible that we should read kaule trike

as ‘into Kaula Tṛika’.
! Concerning the SYM, see Appendix volume concerning sources and references under
this entry. The Nāmakatantra, which some have suggested may have actually been

called Anāmaka, has not been recovered, if it existed. Nor has the Mālinī or Mālinīmata.
It probably never existed, but whether it did or not, if it is identified with the
Maālinīvijaya it is the mythic precursor of the Mālinīvijayottara mentioned there. See

MV 1/8cd-13, quoted below in TĀv ad 9/7.

' Above, 1/17 and 1/18.

CHAPTER ONE

(pratijñā), (namely, that the Mālinīvijayotara explicitly or implicitly contains

all the forms of Śaiya teachings,) is sound. He says (this, as follows):

ato ʻtrāntargataṁ sarvaṁ saṁpradé
hitair budhaiḥ |
adṛṣṭaṁ prakaṭīkurmo gurunāthājñayā vayam || 19 ||

Thus, at the command of (our) master and protector (gurunātha),

we will elucidate all that is contained herein that has not been seen

(adṛṣṭa)” by the learned
(saṁpradāyojjhita). (19)

who

are

devoid

of

the

tradition

‘Thus’, because, for the aforementioned reason, this very scripture

(śāstra) is the (main) fundamental one, ‘we will elucidate’ (it) by means of

(this) treatise (prakriyā). Thus the point is that, (as they say): ‘the effort

exerted in what is (most) fundamental (pradhāna) is fruitful.’ (He says) ‘aṭt

the

command of (our) master and protector (gurunātha)’, because without that
command (ājñā) there would be no authority (adhikāra) here (to expound the

teaching). This is the point.

See above note 1,224 above.

Abhinava cannot be referring to more than one teacher (pace Gnoli) nor would it
make sense for the teacher to whom he refers be other than the one who belongs to the

tradition he is presenting. There is little room to doubt, therefore, that ‘gurunātha’ is

Śambhunātha, his Trika teacher.

Abhinava must be referring here, as Jayaratha says, to the Mālinīvijayottara rather

than all the Śaiva scriptures which, as their essence, it contains. Thus, by elucidating ‘all

that is contained’ in the MV, he is also elucidating all the scriptures. Those who do not
belong to the tradition, i.e. those who have not received initiation into Trika, would not
have been allowed even to see it. Another better way of understanding this statement is
that it refers to those others who have been initiated into other Trika lineages, not the
one transmitted by Śambhunātha. Directed by him, Abhinava discers all the Śaiva
teachings in the MV, although not all are evidently stated. Others did not. Thus, much
was omitted by them. Abhinava makes up for this in this commentary on the MV, the

Tantrāloka.
" Emend adṛstaṁ to adṛṣṭaḥ.
‘Abandonedʼ, ‘left, ‘discontinued’ or ‘rejected’ is the literal meaning of ujjhita.
Again, this attributive compound could equally be translated as meaning that those to
whom it refers have ‘been abandoned by the tradition’ or have left the tradition’. Either
way, they are devoid of it.

In this case, the term ‘prakriyā’ is used in a non-technical sense to mean simply ‘a

workʼ or ‘tṛeatiseʼ, not in the technical sense of a modality of practice, concerning

which see above, note 1,203.
The ‘command’ of a deity or teacher is not just an order to do something. It is also an

empowerment to do it. To receive such a command is like receiving a descent of
the
power of grace (śaktipāta) or to be penetrated by the deity’s power. When one receives
it, one is empowered, and so is given the authority (adhikāra) to do what has
been

commanded. Concerning the many implications of the term ‘qjñā’ – ‘command’, see

TANTRĀLOKA

The Lord’s grace (bhagavatprasāda) alone is the instrumental means

(nimitta) by which what has been seen by others can be elucidated and within

oneself (to do it). In order to make this known, he says:

f:

[ĒEEEPTUE:TItz

fsrrFcrrrsfttf̄=sT: 11 301

abhinavaguptasya kr̥tiḥ
seyaṁ yasyoditā gurubhir ākhyā |
trinayanacaraṇasaroruhacintanalabdhaprasidádhir iti || 20 ||
This is the work of Abhinavagupta who, as declared by (his)

teachers, is a man who has attained the most excellent accomplishment
(and fame) (prasiddhi) by reflecting (and meditating) on (cintana) the

lotus feet of (his teacher, the) Three-Eyed One. (20)

The point is – what is not attainable by one who has attained the most
excellent accomplishment by the grace of the Three-Eyed One?
Dyczkowski 2009 intro. vol. 1, pp. 197 ff., where the meaning of the term is explored in
detail.

The word ‘prasiddhi’ may mean, amongst other things, both ‘fame’ and ‘excellent
accomplishment’. As Abhinava was probably not well-known when he wrote his

Tantrāloka but ‘destined for future greatness’ (TĀ 37/79), the latter meaning is to be
stressed. In a technical sense, prasiddhi denotes the kind of intuitive sense that is the

basis of common belief and the capacity to understand anything. In this case,
particularly scripture. I have translated the word as Jayaratha glosses it, i.e., ‘most

excellent accomplishment’. However, the technical sense may well have been
uppermost in Abhinava’s mind. This is further supported by the sense of cintana, which

can also mean thinking about the meaning of scripture, or indeed, the words of the

teacher. In that case he is saying that he has ‘aṭtained the capacity of insight into the
meaning of the teachings and beliefin them by reflecting / thinking / cogitating on them

at the feet of the teacher whois Śiva Himself.’
MSs K, Ch, J read -sadodita- (‘constantly°) for —saroruha- (‘lotus’). The meaning

would then be that Abhinava attained this by ‘by reflecting (and meditating) constantly

on the feet of (his teacher, the) Three-Eyed One’.
Lord Śiva is frequently called the Three-Eyed One, so it seems at first sight that

Abhinavais referring to Him here. However, the feet to which Abhinava refersin the
other verses (16 and 21) are those of his Trika master Śambhunātha and his consort. Itis
from them that the knowledge of the Trika lineage flows (16), andis the light that
enlightened him (21). Śambhu is a common name of Śiva the Three--Eyed One, although
Jayaratha, it seems, has not grasped the pun (sleṣa); it is clear that Abhinavais again
praising his teacher here, not just Śiva. Abhinava praised his deitiesin the beginning, it

makes no sense for him to suddenly do so again in the course of praising his teacher. It
is normal to see one’s teacher as deity. Cf. above, note 1,203.

CHAPTER ONE

Moreover, in order to establish that this work (and what it teaches) can
be taken up (and understood) in this same way (evam) by everybody, he says:

JīTJTNTTĀTĀTITTITTĪTTITĀgTT]

śrīśambhunāthabhāskara-

caraṇanipātaprabhāpagatasaṅkocam |
abhinavaguptahr̥dambujam
etad vicinuta maheśapūjanahetoḥ || 21 ||

In order to worship Maheśa (the Great Lord), discern (vicinuta)
this, the lotus of Abhinavagupta’s heart, that has blossomed by the light
falling from the feet™ of the sun-like Śambhunātha. (21)
Viciṇuta literally means ‘separate out’, that s, ‘analyse.

The expression I have translated as ‘blossomed’ is apagatasaṅkoca ,which literally
means ‘from which contraction has been removed’. The contraction meant here is not

just that of consciousness. Here it may also mean shyness or reticence. Those who are
truly great in spiritual and in other ways are not overconfident in their own abilities.
What confidence they have comes by grace. It is with this kind of confidence that
Abhinava undertakes this great work. The analogy also clearly refers to spiritual

inspiration. Abhinava expressly refers to ‘the example of the sun and the lotus’ as

referring to the light that comes from a true Trika teacher that causes the lotus of the

heart to blossom, unlike the light of other lower teachers, which is a much dimmer light,
like that of the moon (below, 23/45cd-76).

Instead of translatixg ‘caraṇanipāta-’ as ‘falling from the feet’, one could equally

correctly translate it as ‘falling at the feet’ (as Sanderson has done 2005b: 122).
Assuming the latter, the lotus of Abhinavagupta’s heart bloomed by the light that
touched it when he fell at the feet of his Trika teacher Śambhunātha. Both senses may
be intended simultaneously. A variant found in manuscript J supports the alternative
translation. There instead of the reading prabhāpagatasaṁṅkocam (‘has blossomed by
the light (falling from the feet)), we find prabhāvagatasaṁkocam as ‘has blossomed by

the power (of falling at the feet)ʼ.

This verse is also found (without variants) at the beginning of the Tantrasāra
(v. 3). A note there contains the following explanation of this verse, which supports this

transḻaton: ‘The venerable Śambhunātha is the teacher of the author, who taught him

Trika (trikaśāstra). It is he alone who is the ‘sun’ which is the Supreme Soul and the sun
(itself). His two feet, that are knowledge and action, are the rays and feet. By the falling
of those (rays), the contraction of the lotus of Abhinavagupta’s heart has been removed
by the effulgence of (their) light, and it shines by virtue of the continuous expansion

(‘blooming’) of its own essential nature. Just as a lotus blossoms by the falling of the
sun’s rays (on it at dawn), in the same way (Abhinavagupta’s) heart has blossomed by
the light of the venerable Śambhunātha’s feet, and the teaching (śāstra) in its essential
characteristic has come forth from that. Thus, the essential nature of the Light is the
reflective awareness of its own nature. It is described in this way. One should ‘discern
that’. The worship of Maheśa is the recognition as his being one’s own nature. It is

TANTRĀLOKA

The ‘heart’ is the (very) Self (ātman) of scripture and the reality (it
teaches). (The most elevated and authentic) worship of Maheśvara (Śiva, the

Great Lord) is the recognition (of all things and Deity) as being one’s own
nature by the progressive process (karma) (of exercising) each of the forms of

insight (jñapti) that will be explained (here in the Tantrāloka), īn accord with
the teaching (imparted by the Vijñānabhairava) that:

‘(Real) worship (pūjā) is not (performed just by offering) flowers and
the like. It is that which makes the intuitive mind (mati) firm (and stable) in the
Supreme Sky (of transcendental consciousness), free of thought constructs. By
the devout (performance of) that (kind of) worship (the mind) dissolves

away.

because of that that this discernment has as its fruit the recognition (of one’s own nature

as) Maheśvara. This is the meaning. The general intended sense is — once one has
atṭained the state of Maheśvara, what is the use of (any) other fruit?”
Towards the end of his career, Abhinava expresses his gratitude to his manty

teachers
in
a
similar
way
when
he
writ
nānāgurupravarapādanipātajātasaṁvitsaroruhavikāsaniveśitaśrīḥ:
‘beautified by the blooming of the lotus of (his) consciousness by (his) falling
at the feet of various excellent teachers.” (IPVV vol. 3 p. 405)
Kṣemarāja uses the same metaphor to praise Abhinavagupta, who was his only
acknowledged teacher, at the beginning of his commentary (verse 6) on the
Svacchandatantra, where he says:
abhinavabodhādityadyutivikasitahr̥tsarojān me |
rasayata sarasāḥ parimalamasārasaṁsāravāsanāśāntyai l|
‘May the fragrance of the lotus of my heart that has blossomed by the light of
the sun of the (ever-) new consciousness (of Abhinavagupta) delight with aesthetic
sentiment those who possess it, in order to quell the latent tendencies of transmigratory

existence, which has no essence.”
" The forms of liberating insight (jāapti) are No Means and the three categories of
means to realization (upāya) which Abhinava expounds, one at a time, in chapters two
to five. These are then taught through and as the many practices and ritual procedures of
the remaining part of the Tantrāloka. See below, 1/247ab-247cd (1/246cd-247ab).

VBh 147 (145), also quoted below in TĀv ad 4/121cd-122ab. Śivopādhyāya

comments: “mahāvyomni paracitprakāśe, ādarāt śraddhāprakarṣāt, yo layo viśrāntiḥ,
sā yasmāt pūjā tasmāt puṣpādyaiḥ nāma na pūjā ||

‘The dissolving away, which is repose in the Great Sky. the light of supreme

consciousness by devout, most excellent faith, is (real) worship. Thus (just the offering
of) flowers and the like is not worship.' Swami Lakshmanjoo explains: “The real

worship is where your intellect is firmly established in the supreme void of

thoughtlessness . . . where one merges with great respect, with great honour. You
dissolve. You lose everything. Not with dishonour, not with hatred, but with honour you
merge in that supreme thought-free state of cidākāśasʼ. (Báumer 2002: 173-174) Note
that worship (pūjā) is said here to be a way of quelling the activity of the mind. Thuṣ
essentially, it is a form of Yoga, which according to the Yogasūtra (1/1) is the ‘stilling
of the activity of the mind’ (citavṛttinirodha). Although the result is the same, the Yoga
taught here differs from that of the YS. According to the latter, the mind is constantly
distracted, shifting from one object to another. This condition, which is painful and

CHAPTER ONE
(Here ends) the prologue (ādivākya)

Thus (Abhinavagupta expressly) says that (this initial section praising

the Trika Deities and teachers is) the prologue (ādivākya), in order to

make

known that it is just a single (coherent and univocal) statement, which is the
prologue, that has as its purpose (and meaning that of) a Great Statement
(concerning the nondual nature of reality that inspires its recognition)

It is not accepted here (in our view) that anything else apart from the
Supreme Lord’s descent of the power (of grace) serves as an instrumental cause
(nimitta) (to induce one) to apply oneself to hearing etc. that scripture. Even so,
it is the (normal) style of those who write (such) treatises to compose this
‘prologue’ in order to establish (initially) the subject (they will discuss)

(abhidheya), (its) purpose (prayojana) and so on, to serve as a cause (to

induce others) to apply (themselves to the study and practice of the teachings).

binding, is remedied by concentration. As the mind is nothing apart from its activity,

when it is stilled it ceases to exist. The VBh teaches that it is stilled by worship, which
induces it to dissolve away into pure consciousness.

! There is a play on words here which is hard to translate. The traditional belief is that

although the scriptures are very extensive and say many things, there is an underlying
unanimity – ekavākyatā – literally, ‘single statement’. This ‘single’ unanimous

‘statement’ or teaching concerns the reality — ar1ha – which is the meaning – artha of
the Great Statement of all the scriptures, namely, that there is only one reality, which is
Śiva, and that this reality is taught most fully and completely in the Trika scriptures and
by the teachers of the Trika school. The term ‘mahāvākya’ Great Statement – is well
known to the followers of the schools that take as their authority the Vedas, especially

the Upaṇiṣads. According to Śaṅkara, the great exponent of Advaita Vedānta, these

Great Statements found in the Upaṇiṣads sum up and declare their essential teachings,
namely, that the Brahman (the Absolute) is the one reality, and that it is the Self which
is our true, eṣsential nature. The most famous of them is tat tvam asi, ‘you are That’.

See below, note 1,482.

In other words, Jayaratha is saying that the introductory verses, in which

Abhinava worships his deity in its various aspects and then his teachers, serves to
inspire the recognition of their identity with one’s own Self, and that this is the highest
form of worship, in which individuality dissolves away into the infinite expanse of the

pure consciousness of Deity. As such, these verses serve the same enlightening function
of the Great Sayings of the Upaniṣads.
Tt is standard practice for a writer to state explicitly at the beginning of a technical or
philosophical work the basic elements which qualify it as a systematic treatise (śāstra).
These necessary constituent elements of a śāstra are technically called ‘anubandha’.
They are generally said to be four (anubandhacatuṣṭaya): 1) Saṁbandha – this is the

relationship between the author and his teachers, and hence that of the work and those
who contributed to it. This matter is discussed in order to establish the authenticity of
the doctrines expounded in the work. 2) Abhidheya – this is the subject of the treatise.
Under this heading we can add abhidhāna, which is the name of the work, and defines
what it expounds. 3) Prayojana – this is the aim of the treatise and its purpose.
4)

Adhīkārin – this concerns the qualities of one who is fit to study the work and receive
instructions as to its deeper meaning. Jayaratha explains that the ‘initial statement’
(ādivākya) (i.e. verses 1 to 21) serves the function of the anubandha.

TANTRĀLOKA

(1) The subject (abhidheya) of the Tantrāloka is the Trika teaching

(rrikārtha), which is of many kinds, such as being the (the goddesses) Parā,
Parāparā and Aparā. It is implied by the first five verses and is expressly stated
in the expression ‘the procedures (krama) of the Anuttara Trika
(2) The Definition (abhidhāna) of the Tantrāloka. The five verses (i.e.,

16 to 20) beginning with ‘the venerable Bhaṭṭanātha’ have been dedicated to

establishing the excellence of the root tradition (over all others) by defining it

(abhidhāna) as the main one of all the scriptures, and by his own skilfullness

in presenting those who made it.

(3) The Purpose (prayojana) of the Tantrāloka. (The teaching that) has
come (down) through the line of teachers executes (and declares) its own

purpose (prayojana), in accord with stated teachings such as:

‘Therefore, teaching what has come down through the series of

teachers, one attains Supreme Śiva.

(Thus) seven verses (i.e., 7-13) are composed to praise the teachers in

order to present (the teachers of) the lineage as an ancillary (aṅga) of that
(purpose). Thus, the purpose (prayojana) (of these verses is to indicate) that
(Abhinava) himself has been given liberation in this life (jīvanmaukti) by the
recognition of that (reality) as his own nature by the progressive sequence
(krama) of means (to realisation) which will be explained (further ahead).

One could add that the very first verse implicitly contains all of them also. In
that case, the first of these, that is the relationship (sarṁbandha) between the author and

his teachers, begins with Abhinavagupta’s father, identified with the ‘secret’ five-faced

Sadāśiva, mentioned in the first verse. The second matter (anubandha) is the subject
(abhidheya) of the treatise, which defines it most comprehensively. In this case, it is
anuttarāmṛtakula, which not only means ‘the Family of the nectar of the Absolute
(anuttara), as translated, but is also a way of referring to the teachings of the Trika
school Abhinava expounds. This too is the attainment, which is its purpose (prayojana),
the third matter (anubandha). In other words, right from the start Abhinava declares that
the purpose of his work is the exposition of the form of Trika he teaches so as to lead
others to the realisation of Anuttara. This means both the unsurpassable (an-uttara)

school of Trika and the particular ‘family’ (kula) or lineage of Trika which teaches the

attainment of Anuttara, the Absolute. Moreover, what is also denoted (abhidheya) there
is, according to Jayaratha (comm. 1/1), that even though countless energies, beginning

with consciousness, arise out of Śiva consciousness, His freedom, denoted in the first
verse as ‘the pure digit of the Moon’, is the main one. Again, the penetration of Śiva and
Śakti is also denoted (abhidhāna) there, as is the physical union of Abhinava’s parents.

Finally, the fourth matter concerns the qualities of the person who writes the treatise that
make him fit to do so (adhikārin). In this case Abhinavagupta implies that he is so
because he was born of a yoginī and a siddha.

See above, note 1,220, for the meaning of ‘artha’ as ‘school’.
Above, 1/14.
Read -kauśalyena for —kauśalena.
“ Inṣṭead of diśan – ‘teaching, MS K reads mṛśan – ‘contemplatingʼ.
See below, 1/274ab (273cd) ff. and chapter 36.

In the Mālinīvijayavārtika (1/194cd-196ab) Abhinava declares:

CHAPTER ONE

‘Only in some cases (kvāpi) does the highest perfection (come about) quickly,
without effort and through liberation in life, as taught (iti) in our systems. Sometimes
the highest fruit is reached after a long time through a gradual course of unification with
a series of reality levels (ta1tva) and through many various rituals.
There are thus said to be two possible kinds of liberation: gradual and
immediate. The former is fully attained only after death. It is ‘liberation without a body”
(videhamukti). The other takes place while a person is still alive (jīvanmukti). Siddhānta

Śaivism generally accepts only the former. Trika accepts both, but considers the latter to
be superior. It is the realisation of oneness with Bhairava which takes place by the most
intense form of the descent of the power of grace (śaktipāta) (see below, 13/129cd ff.
for a discussion of the varieties of the descent of the power of grace). Abhinava writes:
prayojaṇaiṁ

ca

sarvyapramāt.rṇāṁ

vaśotpannaitāvadanuttara-jñānabhājanabhāvānām

vibhoḥ

paraśaktipātānugraha-

itthaṁ

nija-

svarūpahr̥dayaṇgamībhāvena
nijāmodabharakrīḍābhāsita-bhedasya
nikhilabandhābhimatatattvavrātasya svātmacamatkārapūrṇāhantātādātmyabhairavasvarūpābhedsamāveśātmikā jīvata eva muktiḥ | prāṇadehādibhīmāv eva hi
antarbahiṣkaraṇa-viṣayāyāṁ preraṇākhyāyām udyogabala-j vanādirūpāyāṁ rūḍhasya
bandhābhimatebhyo muktiḥ .iti
te | truṭite'pi hi māyīye saṁskāramātre keyaṁ
muktivācoyuktiḥ kim apekṣayā vā? iti tad uktaṁ śrīṣpande -

iti vā yasya saṅvittiḥ krīdātvenākhilaṁ jagat |

sa paśyan satataṁ yukto jīvanmukto na saṁśayaḥ ||

‘The aim (prayojana) of all sentient beings who are the vessels of the

aforementioned knowledge of the Absolute (Anuttara), that has developed within them
by the grace of the descent of the Lord’s supreme power, is solely liberation in this life
(jīvanmukti). īt is penetrating absorption (samāveśa) in the unity which is the inherent
nature of Bhairava. (This unity is) the oneness of the integral egoity and wonder of
one’s own nature with all those principles, generally considered to be binding, (that
consist of) the duality made manifest by the play occasioned by the fullness of one’s
own inherent bliss. It is experienced by profoundly understanding and laying hold of

one’s own nature. It is said that liberation from that which is considered binding belongs

only to one who resides on the plane of the vital breath and the body etc., which is the

object of the internal and external senses, that is to say, to one who is established in the

exertion (of consciousness) (udyoga), the power (of one’s own nature) (bala), the life
principle etc., which is called the impulse (preraṇa) (that gives life to all living beings).

Once every trace of Māyā has been removed, then what sense does the word ‘liberation’

have and in relation to what?” As has been declared in the Spandakārikā (30):
‘Or, constantly attentive, and perceiving the entire universe as play, he who has
this awareness (samvitti) is undoubtedly liberated in this life.’ PTv p. 18, cf. ibid. p. 96.
In other words, if manifest reality (‘the entire universe) is perceived

dualistically, that is, if it is not recognized to be the natural dynamism of the one light of

consciousness, it is binding. But, if, on the contrary it is recognized to be such, then as

Sanderson (2006: 48-49) puts it: ‘the cognition and action which previously obscured

the real identity of the individual now illustrate its all-pervading and unobscurable
power. Liberation in life (jvvanmuktiḥ) is just this perception of the dynamic unity of

consciousness in each of its self-obscurations.” The reason for this is because Śaiva
nondualism is not based on the rejection of duality as is the case, for example, in

Advaita Vedānta. Reality is one and nondual because it embraces both duality and
nonduality. As Abhinava says:

TANTRĀLOKA

This is indicated also by the last verse (of these seven verses,
i.e. the

thirteenth,) and is stated directed in the (very last) verse (i.e. the twenty-first,)
that begins with ‘the venerable Śambhunātha’.
What mindful person who has been sanctified by the Supreme Lord’s
descent of the power (of grace) would not engage (in practice) for the sake of
that? This is the reason (nimitta) for his engagement (pravṛtti) (in the practice of

the teachings). But obstacles (are possible and do) arise also for one who is

applying (himself) to realise that in accord with such teachings as: ‘ṭhe
Vināyakas conjoin him to transitory worldly pleasuresʼ. Thus, in order to
remove these (obstacles) (he has composed the sixth verse,) praising Gaṇeśa

(the head of the Vināyakas) and Vaṭuka.

(4) The relationship (sarṁbandha) between these concerns. He says that

‘requested (by (my) sincere disciples and fellows,) I compose (this work)ʼ,

that is, the work (prakriyā) he has promised (pratijñātā) (to write), the
name
(abhidhāna) of which is Tantrāloka, in accord with what is stated further
ahead

(where we read):
‘Here in this teaching called the Light of (and on) the Tantras
(Tantrāloka), 1 expound this (four-fold knowledge, which is the great dawning

of accomplishment (siddhi) and liberation).

Moreover, in this way this sense is also (implicitly) included, namely,

the relationship (saṁbandha) between the name (of the work) (abhidhāna)

and

its subject (abhidheya), and that of the subject and its purpose (prayojana),
which is that between the object of denotation and the denotator and that
between the goal (sādhya) and the means to achieve it (sādhana), (respectively).
Thus, there is only one prologue, which consists of the combination of many

statements, that has been uttered in order to (impel one to) act (pravṛtti)

(accordingly). This in brief is the overall meaning.

‘We do not base our contention that (reality) is one because of the
contradiction inherent in saying that it is dual. Iṭ is your approach (pakṣa) that accepts
this (method). (While) if (duality and oneness) were in fact (to contradict each other,)

they would clearly be two (distinct realities). ‘This is duality and that is not’, ‘that is this

(reality) which is (both) dual and nondual’ – where (these perceptions) manifest
equally,
that is said to be nondual. Surely, (even if you were to object) that in this way there
would be duality (bheda), let it be! We do not desire (to make use of many) words. We
do not (admit that there is duality between the oneness) that needs be accepted and (the

duality) that should be rejected, as there is here (in this case) according to you. If you

wish to take the support of the view (pakṣa) that graces all, then accept (this) philosophy
(dṛṣṭi) of supreme nonduality, which is the great refuge (of all).” MVV 1/628-631,

cf. MP (2) 9/68 and Dyczkowski 1987: 36-38.

! Read slokāmāsātritam for Ślokāntarāṣūtritam.

The name ‘gaṇeśa’ literally means ‘Lord of Hosts'. The ‘hosts’ in this case are the

Vināyakas, of whom Gaṇeśa is the greatest one. The Vināyakas belong to the extensive

class of supernatural beings, like ghosts, that are troublesome or even malicious. When

their Lord is propitiated, instead of causing trouble, they help and protect from the same
troubles they cause, which in this case is attachment to worldly pleasures.
Below, 1/246cd-247ab (245).

CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION

There is no dispute here that the votaries of all views (agree that)
liberation (mokṣa) is (the goal) to be attained and that transmigratory existence,
which is its opposite, should be abandoned. (Moreover, everybody agrees) that
the reason (for it) (nimitta) īs false knowledge (mithyājñāna), and that
knowledge of reality counters it. Thus, just by experiencing it directly,
ignorance is removed, and so one attains liberation. Even so, those (who follow
other paths) have not known the one, fixed (niyata) nature of knowledge and
ignorance, (and so maintain differing conflicting views). (Thus, as is said,) ‘by
(their) desire for liberation, Māyā makes (them) wander about (confused) in
what is not liberation.’ According to this and other such teachings, what is
considered to be liberation (by such people) is not (real) liberation. In order to

show this and assert that, although the examination of that is fundamental (for
all schools), (the approach here) will be explained in a manner that differs from
other śāstras. Thus, the author (first) writes about the examination (of the nature

of) bondage and liberation in the very introduction itself (of his work).

Concerning Freedom and Bondage, Knowledge and Ignorance

Tāī̄Ḥ ūJTGTĪ HTARĀRTŪTT |I 23I
iha tāvat samasteṣu śāstreṣu parigīyate |
ajñānaṁ saṁsṛter hetur jñānaṁ mokṣaikakāraṇam || 22 ||

Well then, it is proclaimed here (unanimously) in all the scriptures

that ignorance is the cause of transmigration, and knowledge is the sole

cause of liberation (from it). (22)

(Next) he says that we have not just stated our own idea:

TGōTTĪTTSTĪx TḍTTIGGGTTVT |

=f I

malam ajñānam icchanti saṁsārāṅkurakāraṇam |

" According to Jayaratha, this general introduction continues up to verse 105 (106).

However, in his Tantrasāra, Abhinavagupta brings the introduction to a close at the

equivalent of verse 51, where he ends his exposition of the nature of knowledge and
ignorance.

SVT 10/1141ab, where this is said with reference to Vaiṣṇavas. See below, comm.

4/17-18ab and note. Kṣemarāja explains that ‘what is not liberation is everything other
than the pervasion of the oneness of the Supreme Lord, who is the dense (uninterrupted)
consciousness
and
bliss
of
supreme
nonduality.”

paramādvaitacidānandaghana-parameśvaraikyavyāpter anyat sarvam eva. The same

line is quoted by Abhinava himself in 4/38, 8/337ab (8/336cd), 13/316cd-31 7ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

“The same is said in the venerable Mālinīvijayottara (thus): “(The

wise) prefer (the view that) Impurity (mala) is ignorance (not a material
Abhinava is presenting here the basic argument against dualist Siddhānta Śaiviṣm,

which maintains that the soul is bound by Impurity, which is a material substance in
some sense, not simply immaterial ignorance. Sanderson (1992: 285-6, quoted in

Goodall et al. 2015: 40-41) explains clearly and succinctly the essentials of the concept

of bondage according to fully developed Siddhānta doctrine, against which Abhinava is

arguing:

‘Liberation cannot be achieved through mere knowledge of reality without

recourse to ritual. This is because the state of bondage, in which the soul fails to realize
its innate omniscience and omnipotence, is not caused by mere ignorance. The
ignorance that characterizes the unliberated is the effect of an imperceptible Impurity
(malam) that acts on the soul from outside; and this Inpurity, though it is imperceptible,

is a material substance (drayam). Because it is a substance, only action (vyāpāraḥ) can
remove it; and the only action capable of removing it is that of the rituals of initiation

and their sequel taught by Śiva in his Tantric scriptures.

Under the influence of Impurity, the soul continues to be subject to the
products of māyā. It is bound by incarnation in a particular world, with a particular
body, and mental and physical faculties. It has limited power of knowledge (vidyā) and
action (kalā). It is bound to experience the effects of its past action (niyatiḥ). It is subject

to time (kālaḥ); and it is driven by a nonspecific craving for worldly experience (rāgaḥ).

While it is caught by these products of māyā it acts and experiences the fruits of its
actions in birth after birth. The unliberated soul (paśuḥ, aṇuḥ) is therefore said to be
constrained by four fetters (pāśaḥ): 1) Impurity (malam), 2) māyā, 3) its past actions
(karma), and 4) the power of Śiva’s will that holds it subject to these three (rodhaśakti).
In later texts the term Impurity is extended from the first fetter to the second and third.
The first is then termed Impurity associated with (all) the Unliberated (āṇṉavam
[< aṇuḥ] malam), whereas the second and the third become the Impurities of Māyā
(māyīyaṁ malam) and Karma (kārmaṁ malam).
Goodall (2015: 41) points out that Sadyojyotiḥ (c. 675-750 AD) expounded the

doctrine of mala in the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṁgraha. However, it is not found in earlier
Saiddhāntika literature. That means not just the earliest sutras of the Niśvāsa but also in

the non-eclectic recensions of the Kālottara, the surviving Rauravsūtrasaṁgraha,
Niśvāsakārikā and Sarvajñānottara. Ṭhuṣ, although the doctrine come to be a hallmark

of firṣṭ Saiddhāntika Śaiviṣm and then Śaiva doctrine in general, surprisingly it is not

found in earliest period and is not uniformly taught. Also note that there are instances in

the Siddhāntas where mala is also understood as ignorance. In the Parākhya (4/25) the
consciousness of individual souls is ‘enveloped by ignorance’ (ajñūānāvṛtacetasām), thus

implicitly identifying fundamental Impurity mala with ignorance. See also ibid. 4/162cd

and Kiraṇa 2/19cd-20.

‘Impurity (paśutva) is not the state of being of a bound soul (paśor bhāvaḥ) (it
is mala); the nature (of the soul) is (rather) its own power of knowledge (svarūpaṁ

svacidātmakam). Therefore impurity (paśutvam) is nescience (ajīānam), or the state of

being characterized by ignorance (bhāvo vājñānalakṣaṇaḥ). Since it obstructs the
sentient (soul), it is called in scripture ‘nescience’ (ajñānam). The consciousness of the

soul is that which is to be revealed; her effects are what reveal it.. Parākhya 4/162-163

(translation by Goodall)

CHAPTER ONE

substance as the dualists maintain).√ It is the cause of (Karma, which is)
the sprout of transmigratory existence (saṁsāra).’ (23)
malo ʻjñānaṁ paśutvaṁ ca tiraskārakaras tamaḥ ||
avidyā hy āvṛtir mūrcchā paryāyās tasya coditāḥ |

sa cavidyādiparyāyabhedaiḥ siddho mate mate | Kiraṇa 2/19cd-20
‘Impurity is ignorance and the fettered state. It is variously called ‘obscuring
darknessʼ, ‘ignorance’, ‘covering’, and ‘coma’. (Its existence) is established in each
school (mata) as ignorance and various such synonymous terms.”

Cf. below ad 9/206, quote from Sivatanu, where the same expression occurs. There

the cause of transmigratory existence is also said to be āṇavamala, but it is identified
with the impurity that sullies individual consciousness, not ignorance.
MV 1/23¢cd quoted again below in 9/120cd, in TĀv ad 9/65cd-66a (1/23a), ad
9/98cd-99ab, and paraphrased in 13/49cd. The MV may be elaborating on Svāṁbhu.
1/17e: malaṁ saṁsārakāraṇam. In the MV, this line comes just after a description of

the thVijñāna- and Pralayakevala perceivers. See below, note 1,658 to 1/78-80.

The discussion concerning knowledge, ignorance and Impurity continues up to
verse 51. See also TSā p. 2-5 and below 9/62-87, and 13/1-128. Abhinava discusses the

nature of the Impurity - mala – that obscures and binds the soul below in 9/60-88ab and
13/41cd-52, where he establishes with reasoned argument that it can only be ignorance

and not a substance, as the dualist Siddhānta believes. Thus, at the very outset of his
Tantrāloka he presents the nondualist Śaiva view that liberation is achieved by attaining
the knowledge of reality that comes by Śiva's grace, not by ritual action alone as the

Siddhānta maintains. As Sanderson points out (2006: 39-40);: ‘[Siddhānta] rejected
the
notion that liberation could be brought about by enlightenment, by mere knowledge.
Knowledge could liberate only if a man's state of bondage in saṅsāra were simply an
error or illusion. It argued that while unliberated existence is indeed characterized
by
erroneous views, the ultimate cause of this ignorance is Impurity (malam). Now this

Impurity was not some transcendental Illusion in the style of the nondualistic Vedānta . .

. but rather a pervasive, unperceived material substance (dravyam). So long as an
individual is not ripe for liberation Śiva will cause this Impurity to contaminate him,

preventing him from realizing that in his real nature he is an omniscient and omnipotent

being equal to Śiva himself. But when Śiva sees that a soul is ready for release he

will

Power (śaktipāta). This will reveal the individual to an officiant as fit to receive

the

restrain the power of this Impurity and show his favour in the form of a Descent of
initiation through which Śiva will grant him release. Knowledge alone could not liberate

him, whether it arose by the power of the individual himself or by the favour of Śiva,
precisely because this Impurity is a material substance (dravyam). Śiva-iṉspired

knowledge might reveal the existence of Impurity, as a man may realize that his sight is

impaired by a cataract, but just as the cataract can only be removed by surgical
intervention, so Impurity will remain until it is physically destroyed by the appropriate

action (yyāpāraḥ). This action is the result of Tantric Śaiva initiation revealed by Śiva in

his scriptures.’ See also ibid. p.43-44 and Dyczkowski 1992a: 235-6.

This verse is
Maheśvarānanda writes:

quoted

in

the

Mahārthamañjari

(p.

30-31),

where

‘The condition (daśā) of the reflective awareness of (the Lord of
consciousness) is the state which is the dynamic manifestation of the pulse (of the light
of consciousness) (sphuraṇa). By the application of its primary state of orientation
(aunmukhyayogena), which is the Light (of consciousness) as (the universal) agency (of

consciousness), it bums up the series of Impurities pertaining to the individual soul

(āṇava), Karma and Māyā. (In other words,) as that which has been made to enter into

TANTRĀLOKA

‘Ignorance’ is darkness. (t is not a total absence of knowledge; rather)

itis incomplete knowledge, which consists of (mistakenly) considering what is

not the Self (i.e. the body etc.) and what is the Self to be otherwise (than what
they really are). It is the concealment of one’s own nature along with the

reality (it consists of) that has arisen by the Supreme Lord’s free will alone.

That is the individual soul’s (essential) (āṇava) ‘Impurity’ (mala), not the
substance (dualist Śaivites believe it to be, the existence of which) will be

refuted in the Ninth Chapter and others (further ahead). And it is said (in the

Iśvarapratyabhijñā):

its own nature, it appropriates it (and makes it one with itself). . . . The nature of the
Supreme Lord is the Light of consciousness and (its) reflective awareness as knowledge
and action (respectively). Moreover, even though on the one hand his noetic and
reflective subjectivity persists, (at the same time on the other) he gives rise to the
Impurity pertaining to the individual soul). . . . Everything is the outpouring of Impurity
(malollāsa). Its nature is just the lack of propensity to (the exercise of) one’s own
reflective awareness (of one’s own nature), in accord with the doctrine of the
Maālinīvijayottara (which declares that:) ‘(The wise) prefer (the view that) Impurity
(mala) is ignorance (not a material substance as the dualists maintain). It is the cause of
(Karma, which is) the sprout of transmigratory existence (saṁsāra).”

In other words, ignorance is the mistaken notion that the components of the

psychophysical organism, which are not the Self, are the Self, and that Śiva

consciousness, which is the Self, is not the Self.
Read -samullāṣitaṁ for -samullāsita-

Concerning mala, see below, 9/49 ff. and 13/41cd ff. For clear, general explanations

of the three forms of mala, see PrH comm. sū 9, ŚSūvi on sātrra 1/1-3. Dualist
Śaivasiddhānta maintains that there are thre eternal realities. These are Pati - the Lord,
Paśu – the fettered souls, and Pāśa – the fetter that binds them. The individual bound
souls are essentially the same nature as Śiva, that is, pure consciousness. However,

whereas Siva, the Lord, is infinitely great, the souls are infinitely small and so are also
called ‘aṇus’ – literally ‘atoms’. Again, whereas Śiva has never been bound, nor will He
ever be, the fettered souls are confined by the fetters of what the Siddhānta consider to
be a material-like substance that sullies the soul, and so is appropriately called mala

‘dirt’ or ‘Impurity’. Although essentially one, it has three aspects or, one could say,

functions or energies. The basic form is the fundamental Impurity that obscures the
essential, pure conscious nature of the soul and separates it from the Lord. It is
accordingly called Āṇavamala – the Impurity of the individual soul (aṇu). Although
substantial in some sense, it consists of the fettered soul’s generic craving (abhilāṣa) for
existence and the fulfilment of the fundamental feeling it has that it is incomplete
(apūrṇamanyatā). The liberating union with Pati – the Lord – can only take place when

the soul is purified so that the barrier that separates them is removed. The world in

which the fettered soul resides is made from the same impurity, operating now as the
‘substance, as it were, of the worlds and metaphysical principles, body, senses, and

mind, the soul inhabits and forces that constrain it. AIl these constitute the domain of

Maāyā in which the fettered soul is stricken by the delusion of duality. This means that
he perceives every single thing as distinct and different from everything else to such a
degree that no two things are the same. Coupled with that sense of difference and a
consequence of it is the sense that some things belong to him whereas others do not. His
body, family, possessions, and the world he inhabits are his own, others are not. Finally,
he distinguishes between what he wishes to have (upadeya) and what he feels he needs
to avoid and give up (heya). Such are the consequences of Māyīyamala, the Impurity of

Maāyā. The third binding Impurity is Karma. It is both the result and instrumental cause

CHAPTER ONE

‘This, the Impurity which pertains directly to the individual soul

(āṇayaṁ malam), brought about by the obliteration (of the knowledge) of one’s

own true nature, is of two kinds. It is the loss of the freedom of (its innate)

consciousness, and so too (along with it) the lack of consciousness of (its

innate) freedom.”

of the other two impurities, which it sustains and by which it is sustained. Just as the
Impurity of the individual soul is the fundamental cause, Māyā the material cause and
Karma is the immediate, instrumental cause of worldly experience (bhoga), which is
essentially its consequence. Just as actions (karman) constantly vary, so do the

experiences the fettered soul has. The Siddhānta understands these three collectively to
be like the husks and integument of a grain of rice, or a cataract that can only be
removed by material means, namely, the rite of initiation, which detaches the

fundamental impurity from the soul and conjoins it to Śiva.
Nondualist Śaivas agree that mala exists and that it does function in these

ways. Indeed, they draw freely from Siddhānta sources to describe it. However, they
maintain thatṭ it is not an independent reality nor are the individual souls. Rather, mala is
essentially nothing but ignorance, and that it can be removed only by knowledge.
Initiatoon does remove mala and conjoin the soul to Śiva, but this is because initiation is

a process whereby the innate knowledge of the pure consciousness is revealed by the
removal of ignorance. It is not a mechanical process like cleaning rice or removing a
cataract from the eye. See below, 1/241ab-242ab (1/240-241) and 9/68 ff. for a detailed

criticism of the view that mala is an independent reality. See also 13/41cd f.

IP 3/24. AIṣo quoted below, TĀv ad 5/106 (5/105cd-106ab) and ad 962. 32/4d is

quoted in ad 9/93cd-95ab. Below 9/65ab: apūrṇamanyatā ceyaṁ; see there and
commentary. Also PrHṛ p. 21: apūrṇamanyatārūāpam āṇavaṁ malam.
This definition of āṇavamala is the result of Utpaladeva’s higher nondualist

exegesis of the Siddhānta doctrine of mmala. He explains in his own brief commentary

(vṛtti) how it is a derivative of consciousness, which is always essentially one with it,
not an independent insentient reality: ‘The (one) absolute reality is free consciousness;

only insofar as this, its essence, is in a state of perfect fullness. Since it thus wills, by
virtue of its very freedom (the Āṇava impurity exists which is two-fold. It is) ‘Impurity

because it involves error with regards to the Self’s real nature, and ‘two-fold atomicity

insofar as consciousness becomes limited by the loss of its fullness (that is, all-

embracing oneness) thereby creating (a form of) subjectivity in which only the light of

consciousness subsists which is devoid of freedom or only freedom devoid of

consciousness.' Translation by Torella with minor variants. Abhinava explains:

‘According to this system, the essential characteristics of the principle of consciousness
(cittattva) are omniscience and omnipotence. The impurity called ‘Āṇava’ consists in
the loss of these, so that the Self becomes limited. Here (in this case its) limited state is
the obscuration of (its) real nature. Thus, even when there is omniscience, but it is

simply the obscuration of omnipotence, which consists of perfect freedom and forms

another characteristic feature (of the real Self) or vice versa, there is the same Impurity
called Āṇavamala, which consists of the obscuration of the real essential nature.”

Translation by K.C. Pandey.

The verse that follows defines the other two forms of impurity (mala):
‘The perception of objects as divided off (from one another, and the perceiver)
is the (impurity) called ‘Māyā’. It (subjects the soul to repeated) birth, and
to
experiencing the consequences (of its actions) (bhoga). (The Impurity) of Karma
(operates) in the agent who is not conscious (of his true nature). (All) three are due to

the power of Māyā.”

TANTRĀLOKA

And how is it? He says (that that ignorance is the cause of)
‘transmigratory existence’, which is the Impurity of Māyā (māyīyamala),
whose nature has been defined (in the śvarapratyabhijñā thus): ‘The perception
of objects as divided off (from one another and the perceiver) is the (Impurity)

here called ‘Māyā’.’ According to the teaching, which will be imparted
further ahead (where we read): ‘Karma, the cause of transmigratory existence, is

said to be the sprout of transmigratory existence, ‘the sprout’, which is the

cause of the impurity of Karma (karmamala), is ‘the cause’ of that
(transmigratory existence). The same is said in the Mālinīvijayottara: (the
soulʼs essential) Impurity and Karma are the instrumental cause (nimitta), the
effect (of which) follows after.' (What Abhinavagupta is) stressing in this way
is that it is with reference to that (namely, bondage and its remedy,) that this
book is concerned.

Sanderson 1992: 289: n 35: bhinnavedyarathātraiva māyākhyam Ś(the
Impurity) termed Māyā is the manifestation of the object as other which presupposes
that (two-fold contraction of the self’s nature which is āṇavaṁ malam).” Ibid note 36:
janmabhogadaṁ kartary abodhe kārmaṁ tu As for the karmaṁ malam, it is that in the
unenlightened agent which gives rise to rebirth and the experience of reward and

retribution.
In this way, the same impurity develops in these three forms. Abhinava

explains: ‘(Transmigratory existence (sarṁsāra) is due to the progressive emergence of
the three-fold impurity. The first is the (mistaken) notion within our own Self of (its
being) incomplete (apūrṇa), that brings about the condition of the individual soul (aṇu),
and so is the soul’s (essential) impurity (āṇavamala). (Then) in the craving to make full
(and complete) that which is not, the impurity called Māyā (arises) due to the perception
of duality (bhedadarśana). (Then the fettered state is fully formed) by the emergence of
the impurity of Karma, that takes place by the assumption of latent impressions, good

and bad. PTv p. 41.

}P 3/2/5ab. ĪP 3/2/5a is quoted below in TĀv ad 17/63.
Below 9/88cd.
Although Jayaratha clearly tells us that this line is from the MV. it is not found in the

printed edition. In actual fact it is a citation of SvT 3/176ab (also quoted below in TĀv
ad 5/106 (105cd-106ab), where it is labelled as SvT 3/176), ad 9/88cd-89ab and ad
13/49). Note however, that when Kṣemarāja quotes this line in one place in his
commentary he writes that it is found ‘in another Tantra’ (tantrāntare) (SvTu
10/378cd). We may perhaps understand him to mean that the same line is also found in

‘another Tantra’. If so, he may be referring to the MV.
Kṣemarāja explains, commenting on SYT 3/176ab: ‘these two, namely, (the

fundamental) impurity (of the soul) and Karma, are (both) an instrumental cause,

because (the fundamental) impurity is the cause of Karma and Karma is the cause of
(the impurity) of Māyā. Beyond that, (the impurity of) Māyā is (their) result. The
meaning is that (Māyā) is the effect of (fundamental) impurity and Karma. Although
(the impurity of) Karma exists when the (impurity of) Māyā, which is the perception of

objectivity divided up (in itself and from the perceiver) exists, even so, it is not a cause

(of bondage) for those who know (reality) and (whose consciousness) is fully expanded,

even though (objectivity) exists, (duality) is not perceived. Thus, it is the acquisition of
those who (because of their fundamental impurity) consider (themselves) to be

incomplete. Thus, what has been said is the most (correct).”

CHAPTER ONE

(Now he goes on to) say that although there are two kinds of ignorance

– Spiritual (pauruṣa) and Intellectual (bauddha) – the one meant here is

Spiritual (Ignorance), not the other.

viśeṣaṇena buddhisthe saṁsārottarakālike |
saṃbhāvanāṁ nirasyaitad abhāve mokṣam abravīt || 24 ||

Once having precluded the possibility (that knowledge) present in

the intellect, which is subsequent to (the fettered state of) transmigration,

(is liberating,) by specifying (that ignorance is ‘the cause of the sprout of

transmigration’ʼ,) (the Lord) said that liberation (is achieved even) when
that (intellectual knowledge) is absent. (24)

‘By specifying’” (that ignorance) is ‘the cause of the sprout of

transmigration’ (implies that) intellectual ignorance, which is erroneous
apprehension (durvyavasāya), is not the cause of the impurity of Karma

(karmamala). Rather, (on the contrary,) that (Karma is the cause) of that

(ignorance). So how can this specification (of the nature of ignorance as ‘the

cause of the sprout of transmigration’) be made coherent (with this view)? That

(i.e. intellectual ignorance) is possible (only when) there is a body which is the

cause of (all) action (karman), because it is the instrument (to accomplish) its
objective (kārya). Moreover, the intellect is one of the senses, and so it is said

that ‘i is subsequent to (the fettered state of) transmigration’. It is said (in

the Svacchantatantra) that: ‘(whatever) has form, a body and a world (in which

it exists), is said to belong to Māyā (nāyīya)’. Thus according to such

teachings, (the intellect) is subsequent to transmigratory existence and the body.
This is the meaning.
(One may ask whether) it is said that ‘(the Lord) has said that
liberation (is achieved even) when that (intellectual knowledge) is absent’ in
order to preclude the possibility (that the intellect is the site of this liberating
knowledge)? (Our reply is that) liberation (is not achieved) when just

intellectual ignorance ceases, for™ when that ceases, only intellectual

knowledge arises. Even if the nature (of this intellectual knowledge) were to be

a pure thought (śuddhavikalpa) (free of all intellectual ignorance), according to
MS J contains an interesting gloss here which reads: ‘as this (ignorance) is predicated

of what pertains to the soul (pauruṣa), when there is no spiritual (pauruṣa) ignorance
there is liberation; this is certainly not so when intellectual ignorance is absent.’
pauruṣaviśeṣaṇena pauruṣasya ajñānābhāve mokṣaḥ na tu bauddhājñānābhāve.

Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, T and D viśeṣaṇeneti for viśeṣaṇena.

SVT 4/105ab. Instead of śarīrabhuvanākāro māyīyaḥ parikīritaḥ, the printed edition

of the SvT reads: Śarīrabhuvanākārā māyīyāḥ parikīrtitāḥ | “(Those things that) have a
form, body and a world (in which they exist) are said to belong to Māyā (māyīya).”
Kṣemarāja comments: ‘the worlds’ indicates phenomena (bhāva) and the gross elements
etc. Thus, whatever manifests as objectivity is the impurity of Māyā (nāyīyamala).

Read yatas tasmin for yat tasmin.

TANTRĀLOKA

the teaching that: ‘all thought is transmigratory existence it would

(nonetheless) give rise to transmigratory existence. So how can (liberation) be

possible in this way (simply) when that (intellectual ignorance) is absent? Even
outsiders (who do not belong to our school) say with (the same) intention:

‘A wise man should not immerse (himself in any notions) –~ even

thought that concerns ultimate reality. What difference is there between an

auspicious and an inauspicious thought? (They are both equally just notions).

Now, if once Spiritual Ignorance had ceased by means of initiation and
the like, intellectual knowledge were to arise, (only) then, in accord with the

teaching imparted (further ahead), would it also serve as a cause of liberation

in this life (jīvanmukti).
The point is that nothing would be achieved just by that (Intellectual
Knowledge) alone, whereas on the contrary, when Spiritual Knowledge has

ariṣen, it is a cause of liberation that does not depend on (anything) else. As is
said:

‘In the course of initiation (only) the fetters of the soul should be
purified, not those present in the intellect. Thus, even when it is defective, the

initiation is not fruitless.

And the essential nature of that (Spiritual Knowledge) is (just pure)

knowledge alone (jñānamātra) (devoid of thought constructs). The absence of

ignorance (akhyāti) is itself full (and perfect) knowledge (khyāti) (of reality),

and that is the true nature of the Self, which is dense (uninterrupted) Light and

Bliss. The (unfolding) experience (prathana) of that is itself liberation. So it is

rightly said that: ‘(the Lord) said that liberation is (achieved even) when

that (intellectual knowledge) is absentʼ.

““ Quoted again below in TĀv ad 1/214, 4/111cd-113ab, 14/13, and 16/283cd-284ab
(284).

l The same verse is also quoted below in TĀv ad 4/6. See note there.

° How thought is purified and transcended is explained in the first verses of chapter

four, which deals with the Empowered Means that is based on this process. If his
Spiritual Ignorance has been removed by initiation, and the devout Śaivite dedicates
himself all his life to attentively observing the precepts and his ritual obligations, he

attains liberation when he dies (videhamukti).. But if he remedies his Intellectual
Ignorance also, he attains liberation while alive (jvamukti) also. See above, note 1,356.

This verse, and a few more from the same source, are quoted by Kṣemarāja in his
commentary on SvT 4/150-152. See below, note 20,1 ad 20/1, where they are cited.
Not all impurity should be removed in the course of initiation. The part of it
which manifests and sustains the initiate’s current mental and physical existence should
be left intact. Otherwise he would die. This residue is more commonly identified with
the form of Karma which has been set into operation (prārabdha) and suṣtains the body
until it is exhausted. See below, 1/43 and commentary.

“ MSs K, Ch, J, Jh, Ṅ T and Ḍ read just yuktam –- t is righ’ – not yuktam uktam –. ‘it
is rightly said’.

CHAPTER ONE

Surely, (one may ask,) what is the basis (and necessity of asserting) that
the meaning of the term ‘ignorance’ is incomplete knowledge (apūrṇajñāna)?
Let that just be simply an absence of knowledge. With this doubt in mind, he

says:

JTTTHĪfT

a f: @raīṝzāsarā
7 ēaatā aṝī || zuII
ajñānam iti na jñānābhāvaś cātiprasaṅgataḥ |
sa hi loṣṭhādike ʻpy asti na ca tasyāsti saṁsṛtiḥ !| 25 ||
(According to us,) ignorance is not a (total) lack of knowledge, for
(if that were so, the use of the term) would be too extensive. That
(ignorance) is also (present) in a stone and the like, and that is not subject

to transmigration. (25)

(If one were to ask) what is that over-extensive (use of the term

‘ignorance’)? (We reply,) its application (to stones and the like). So it is rightly
said that the meaning of the term ‘ignorance’ (in this case) is incomplete

(apūrṇa) knowledge. He says that:

ato jñeyasya tattvasya sāmastyenāprathātmakam |
jñānam eva tad ajñānaṁ śivasūtreṣu bhāsitam || 26 ||
“Therefore, it is said in the Śivasūtras ṭhat (binding) ignorance is

(partial) knowledge (jñāna), which is the lack of perception (prathā) of the
° Virtually all schools of thought in India agree that knowledge of reality is liberation.

Accordingly, the nature of ignorance is a common basic problem discussed by
practically all schools of Indian philosophy. There are a variety of views. One for
example is that ignorance is a total absence of knowledge. Another is that its nature is
inexplicable. The view here is that as knowledge is essentially consciousness and a total
absence of consciousness is impossible, ignorance is also a form of knowledge, albeit
incomplete. The tables and chairs we perceive do exist. So what we see is not incorrect

or false. However, we see only the tables and chairs that are the objects of the senses.
We do not also perceive the one universal reality common to all things which tables and
chairs most essentially are. The ignorance of this aspect amounts to the perception of
duality – the difference between a table and chair – and the specific form of each entity
as distinct and different from every other. In other words, ignorance is understood here
to be partial, dualistic knowledge, which can only illumine certain specific and diṣṭinct
aspects of reality such as when we experience ‘this is a table’ or ‘this is a chair, but do

not experience the one, ultimate, universal nature of all things. We do not perceive the
totality of reality and view the individual entities we perceive as a part and epitome of
the plenitude (pūrṇatā) of that all-embracing oneness.

1/26-30 refer to ŚSū 1/1 and 122, of which these four verses are a commentary.

TANTRĀLOKA

true nature of the object of knowledge (jñeya) in its totality (sāmastyena).N
(26)
‘The true nature of the object of knowledgeʼ, that is, of (an external
physical object such as) ‘blue’ (or inner mental object) such as ‘pleasureʼ will
be explained (below, where it is said that): ‘the supreme reality (paraṁ tattvam)
of the object (of perception) is Śiva, Who is Light.’“ ‘Therefore’, for the

aforestated reason, ‘the lack of perception of the true nature (of the object of

knowledge) in its totality (sāmastyena) as a single, compact form, because
(reality is) everywhere (the same) without distinction; (being rather of the sort,)

‘this is blue’ and ‘this is pleasure’, which is a perception of duality and so is
incomplete ‘knowledge’ – that itself is ‘ignorance’. It is not simply an absence
of knowledge, and so (it) is ‘said in the Śivasūtras (that ignorance is (partial)
knowledge). This is the meaning.
Where is that explained there (in the Śivasūtras)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

ĒT T āFST SATI JĪ |

caitaṅyam ātmā jñānaṁ ca bandha ity atra sūtrayoḥ |
saṁśleṣetarayogābhyām ayam arthaḥ pradarśitaḥ || 27 |

This is the point made by reading the aphorisms ‘the Self is

consciousness” and ‘knowledge is bondage’ alternatively, together and

separately. (27)

‘(By reading the aphorisms) alternatively, together and separatelyʼ,
we get ‘knowledge (jñāna) is bondage’ and 'ignorance (ajñāna) is bondageʼ,
according to whether the (privative) letter ‘a’ is conjoined to or separated from

° Swami Lakṣhmanjoo explains: ‘The Śivasūtra says that ignorance is knowledge [i.e.

cognitive consciousness] in a differentiated form. What is to be known (jñeya) is Lord
Śiva [He is the object of knowledge as is, for example, the colour] blue. When you donʼt
feel Lord Śiva’s function in the objective world that is ignorance.”

“ 1/52ab below, also quoted in TĀv ad 1/54 and 10/55cd-56ab.
’Abhinavagupta is referring here to the first and second aphorisms of the Śivasūra.

These can be read separately as well as together. In the first case we have: caitanyam

ātmā + jñānaṁ bandhaḥ i.e. ʻthe Self is consciousness’ and ‘knowledge is bondageʼ. In
the second case we read ‘caitanyam ātmājñānam bandhaḥ’, which can be broken up
into ‘caitaīyam ātmā + ‘ajñānam bandhaḥ’, i.e. `the Self is consciousness’ and
‘ignorance is bondage’. Read together the privative suffix ‘a’ is added to the word
‘jñānamʼ (‘ʻknowledge’) to make ‘ajīānam’, which means ‘absence of knowledgeʼ. By
reading the two aphorisms ‘together and separately the sense is that common day-today empirical knowledge is the ignorance that fetters consciousness, which is the

individual soul’s most authentic nature.

CHAPTER ONE

(the initial word of the second aphorism). This is the meaning. The word
‘ignorance’ denotes incomplete knowledge.

He says this:

aa āā Ṭ̄] |I 2¢ /11
fītT-āī āī fikaṁ ar sēzoi J aā |
aā ̄a fr-T-GTA
̄TṬ-T || 3<II
T̃ Tā ūPAĀTTTTṬTITTHTTTT
II 30 1|
caitanyam iti bhāvāntaḥ śabdaḥ svātantryamātrakam |
anākṣiptaviśeṣaṁ sad āha sūtre purātane | 28 ||
dvitīyena tu sūtreṇa kriyāṁ vā karaṇaṁ ca vā |
bruvatā tasya cinmātrarūpasya dvaitam ucyate || 29 ||
dvaitaprathā tad ajñānaṁ tucchatvād bandha ucyate |
tata eva samucchedyam ity āvṛttyā nirūpitam || 30 ||

The word (for) ‘consciousness’ (caitanya) is an abstract noun,”

which indicates that (consciousness is not some ‘thing’). It is just (a state of
unconditioned) freedom (svātantrya) (from inhibition) which is Being-assuch (sat) devoid of (any) specification (anākṣiptaviśeṣa). (This is what Śiva)
says in the first aphorism (of the Śivasūātras). By uttering the second

aphorism (‘knowledge is bondage’, Śiva) declares that the (binding) duality
of that pure conscious nature (is empirical knowledge,) whether it (is

considered to be) the act (of knowing in itself) or the instrument (by means

of which something is known).
The ignorance of that (nondual consciousness) is the perception
(prathā) of duality which, because it is petty (tuccha) (and worthless in

relation to the nondual awareness of being conscious),” is said to be

‘ This verse is quoted in MM p. 30. Instead of pradarśitaḥ the reading there is

prakāśitaḥ which means practically the same. Maheśvarānanda explains that ‘what is

meant here essentially is as follows. The Supreme Lord, as knowledge and action, is the
Light (of consciousness and its) reflective awareness. The Impurity called ‘Individual’
arises when there is a lack of awareness, even partially, of His state as the knower, that
is, the one who is reflectively aware (of His own nature).”

“! Abstract nouns denote an entity independently of its attributes, that is, its essential

nature alone, devoid of any concrete individuation as a specific entity. See PV 1/61-62

and ĪP 1/5/12-13 and commentary. Also Torella 1987: 156-160; 2002: 119, notes 24 and
25.

The integral nature of the absolute allows for the existence of the binding world of

objectively perceivable phenomena along with the pure subjectivity of consciousness.
The two represent opposite polarities of a single reality. Of these two, objectivity is
insignificant (uuccha) with respect to the ultimacy (paramārthatva) of the subject. It is

TANTRĀLOKA

bondage and so should be eliminated. This is what is said (by reading the
second aphorism) in conjunction (with the first) (āvṛttyā) (so that it means
‘ignorance is bondage’). (28-30)
Here (in this world of our experience and according to our view,) there

is nothing at all that is not consciously perceived (cetita), and so the (cognitive)

activity of consciousness (citikriyā) is universal (and common to) all (that is
perceived to exist) (sarvasāmānya). (The alertness of being) conscious

(cetana), which possesses full (and perfect) knowledge and action,” is
(engaged in the act of being conscious and) imparting consciousness (cetayati).
the sphere of negation, in which objectivity presents itself as a void (śūnya) in relation
to the fullness of the subject. See Dyczkowski 1987: 38.

‘Cow-nessʼ is the universal of all cows and so is common to all of them. A higher,

more inclusive universal is ‘animal-ness°, which is common to all animals, not just
cows. In this way there is a hierarchy of universals, such that the lower ones are

pervaded by the higher. The universal that is common to all things, and so is the most
inclusive of all, is consciousness. Everything that exists, according to this view, is
within consciousness as a manifestation of it. According to the attendant conditions, it
may be known to varying degrees by an individual perceiver to be such. Thus, a simple

act of reflective awareness is sufficient for the human perceiver to realise that
consciousness is present in any moment of perception of anything. But even if this

awareness is not operative, some degree of reflective awareness must persist for an
object to be known as it is, that is, for example, as the colour ‘blue’ or ‘pleasure’ In the

absence of awareness entities would simply appear without being known. Sub-atomic
particles appear in this way. But even then, there is some degree of reflective awareness,
which defines the specific nature of an entity sufficiently for one subatomic particle to

differ from another. A higher degree of reflective awareness grasps not only the

individual nature of things, which the human perceiver does by forming thought

constructs which identify it, such as the notion ‘this is a chair’. It also grasps its own

ground and that of all perceptions and their contents, namely consciousness. In other
words, one can say, in a way, that consciousness (not matter) is the universal substance
of all things. Depending on the nature of the entity into which it is formed, differing
degrees of its inherent self-awareness are manifestly known as the perceiving

subjectivity of consciousness, on the one hand, and its capacity to conceive and know

the specific nature of its object and itself, on the other. Thus, the degree of the
development of reflective awareness, in this sense, is marked by levels of subjectivity
set in relation to its corresponding objectivity. The higher the level, the more powerful

the power of reflective awareness. At the highest level, that is the supreme subject,
Supreme Śiva Himself, it is in its fullest most developed form; it is the very nature of
consciousness as the reflective awareness of its perfectly free and all-embracing nature,

devoid of any objectivity and the divisions or specifications it entails, common to all

things as their essential nature into which it freely forms itself. Thus, this full and
perfect knowledge is also its unconditioned freedom to be everything as pure

consciousness, untouched by diversity or change.
We can also translate it as ‘full (and perfect) cognitive activity’ (pārṇajñānakriyā).
Cf. ĪP 1/5/12, where Utpaladeva is clearly referring to the first aphorism of the Śivasūtra

– ‘the Self is consciousnessʼ understood as ‘sentience’:

‘Thuṣ, the Self has been defined as ‘consciousness’ (caitanya), meaning by this

the activity of consciousness in the sense of being the agency of this activity. It is thanks
to consciousness that the Self differs from insentient reality.’ Torella’s translation with

adaptations.

CHAPTER ONE

Its state of being is ‘consciousness’ (caitanya), which is endowed with full (and

perfect) knowledge and action. That itself is said to be the freedom (of

consciousness) which is (Śiva’s) supreme sovereignty (aiśvarya).” He says that

(by declaring that consciousness is) ‘just (a state of unconditioned) freedom

(svātantrya) (from inhibition)’. (What is meant by saying that consciousness

is) ʻjust (a state of unconditioned) freedom (svātantrya) (from inhibition)”
(is that it is nothing but) just freedom alone, and so he says that it is ‘devoid of
(any) specification (anākṣiptaviśeṣa). (The meaning is,) no specifications are
attributed to it, including those that (invariably) accompany it (and are intrinsic

to it), such as permanence, pervasiveness and the like, due to which there (may

be) types (of consciousness or relative distinctions within it). (The word
caitanyam meaning ‘consciousness’ is an abstract noun, and) an ‘abstract
nounʼ (bhāvapratyayāntaḥ śabdaḥ) only denotes (an entity) devoid of its other
atṭendant attributes. Thus a specification (viśeṣa) (i.e. an adjective) pertains
(only) to a word that denotes a substance. As they say:
‘A word belonging to a particular (linguistic) convention

(saṁketabheda) (may) refer to other attributes (of the entity denoted by it) or
not, as one who knows (the convention) wishes. This is the difference (without
exception) in every case between (words) that denote (the abstract) state of
being (of an entity i.e. abstract nouns) (bhāva) and a substance (i.. proper

Consciousness is Śiva, who is the sovereign Lord and master of all things, which He

creates, sustains, and destroys. He is absolute, supreme and one because of his
‘lordshipʼ. He is not just the Lord of a world order as are some gods who possesses

inferior, limited lordship. His lordship governs all that exists and so is ‘supremeʼ. It is

His perfect unconditioned freedom, by virtue of which He is not only free of all
limitations, that is, perfectly autonomous, He is free to do and know everything, and so
is perfectly and supremely creative. Śiva’s freedom — svātantrya – is thus His ‘creative
autonomyʼ. The following verse of the ĪP (1/5/13) identifies this freedom with the
reflective awareness of consciousness, which is Supreme Speech (concerning which see
above note 371): ʻ(The power of) consciousness (citi) is reflective awareness. It is
Supreme Speech that arises spontaneously. That is the (supreme) primary (mukhya)

freedom and sovereignty of the Supreme Self.’
‘ The point is that consciousness is not qualified in any way as being ‘this or that’
consciousness. Nor are there varieties of consciousness derived from its inherent

qualities as being, for example, pervasive and eternal, such that there are ‘eternal’ or
‘pervasive’ types of consciousness.

”’ The abstract noun ‘cow-ness’ denotes this one fundamental qualiy of a cow, that is,

the specific nature only cows possess. The cow is the ‘substance’ that possesses
qualities, such as colour, the fact that it has four legs, and gives milk etc. In this context,
‘cow-nessʼ is a primary, inherent quality that cannot be separated from a cow, whereas
its colour, for example, is a secondary, non-inherent quality. A cow may be brown or
white, but it cannot be devoid of ‘cow-nessʼ, nor can that ‘cow-ness’ vary in different

cows and so have any particular qualities of its own. Thus, in a sense, the ‘substance’ of
a cow is its ‘cow-ness’.

” Abstract nouns denote an entity (or ‘substance’) independently of its attributes. But if

the speaker so desires, they may also be qualified by adjectives denoting specific
attributes of that entity. See note 371, above.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘By the second (aphorism) – that is, by the word ‘knowledge’ in the
second aphorism (which declares that ‘knowledge is bondage’). ‘Knowledge’ is
the act of knowing (jñapti), and the means by which (something) is known
(yena jñāyate). So, in accord with this etymology, (knowledge) primarily
denotes ‘the act (of knowing in itself) or the instrument (by means of which
something is known)” of that (consciousness) the nature of which has been
declared (in the first aphorism, which states that) ‘the Self is consciousness’.

Thus consciousness (cit) is that which imparts sentience (cetayate), that is, it is
the agent (engaged) in the activity of consciousness (citikriyā). ‘It is said that
that is the (binding) duality° of that, ‘the nature’ of which is ‘pure

consciousnessʼ alone. (In other words, he) refers to the perception of duality by

alluding (in this way) to the agent (of knowledge) and the (resultant) act (which
is knowledge,) as well as between the agent (of the act of knowing), (the
resultant) act (which is knowledge), and the act (of knowing itself,) which are
different (bhinna) and condition (one another). The meaning is that (the fettered
soul) does not know (nākhyāti) (the inherently) complete (and all-embracing)
(pūrṇa) nature of that (pure consciousness). Thus, by not knowing the complete
(and all-embracing) (pūrṇa) nature of consciousness (sarṅvid), which is
nondual, that ‘experience of duality° is itself ‘ignorance’, that is, incomplete
knowledge. And because it is incomplete, that (knowledge) is called ‘bondage’,
which is the triple Impurity, as knowledge that has been contracted in many

ways by the sense of incompleteness (apūrṇamanyatā) (due to the innate
Impurity of the soul), the auspicious and inauspicious latent traces (produced by
the Impurity of Karma), and the body, worlds and forms (produced by the
Impurity of Māyā).
That ignorance ‘should be eliminatedʼ, because it is bondage. The
meaning is that it should be abandoned, in accord with the teaching:
‘Itis said that every impurity, (whether it be) Karma, Māyīya or Āṇava,

should all be abandoned . . .

Surely (one may ask the following.) Here (in this view), because
incomplete knowledge is the experience of duality, then that itself is ignorance,

(bu how has this come to be understood (to be s0)? With this doubtin mind, he
, ‘(If the second aphorism is read) in conjunction (with the first)

iniṣa (so that the form is ‘ignorance is bondage’), it is said that the

perception (prathā) of duality is the ignorance of that (nondual
consciousness). (Reading the second aphorism) ‘in conjunction’ (with the
first, instead of reading jñānaṁ bandhaḥ – ‘knowledge is bondage’,) it (reads)

Read kriyāṁ vā karaṇaṁ ca vā for kṛiyāṁ karaṇaṁ ca.
Read apūrṇamanyatā- for apūrṇaṁ manyatā-.

MV 1/16abc. Instead of mmalaṁ karma ca māyīyam āṇavam akhilaṁ ca yat, the MV
reads malaḥ karma ca māyā ca māyīyam akhilaṁ jagat.

Read by itself, the second sātra says that ‘knowledge is bondage’. Read together with
the previous one, it says ‘ignorance is bondage’. So in the first case we have caitanyam

ātmā, jñānaṁ bandhaḥ andin the second we have caitanyam ātmājñānaṁ bandhaḥ. The
‘a’ of ajñānaṁ (‘ignorance’) fusesin euphonic combination with the final

The point is that incomplete knowledge, which is binding, is ignorance.

CHAPTER ONE

‘ignorance’ ((ajñānaṁ) is bondage (handhaḥ), by repeating it again due to (the
two aphorisms) coming together (the one aphorism becomes two)).

Surely then, (one may object that) one should define liberation

accordingly. With this doubt in mind, he says:

TTTTĪĪTTHĪTTĪTTHQ ṬFJĪSṬFSTSTT āaT |

TaI |321

svatantrātmātiriktaṣ tu tuccho ‘tuccho ‘pi kaścana |
na mokṣo nāma ta nāsya pṛthaṅnāmāpi gṛhyate || 31 |
Liberation is not some (separate reality), whether insignificant
(tuccha) or significant (atuccha), that differs from the Self that is free;

(indeed,) one does not even use a different name (for it). (31)

(The implied) remaining part of the sentence is that (liberation) is not
something other (than the liberated Self). If (iiberation is) ‘insignificant’, then
iṉ accord with the teaching stated previously (in the preceding verse), it would
just be bondage (that does affect the true nature of the Self); and (if it is)
‘significant’, then it is ultimately real, and so it does not differ from the Self,

that is free. As he will say:

‘Liberation is nothing but the (full and complete) experience (prathana)

of one’s own nature. And the nature of the Śelf
is (pure) consciousness.

Literally: ‘even its name is not taken separately°. In other words, knowledge of the

Self, which is inherently free, is itself liberation. Swami Lakshmanjoo, commenting on

this verse, says: “Mokṣa [liberation] occurs when your being becomes absolutely
independent from all sides. Without that svātantrya [freedom] whatever exists in this

world would be tuccha (i.e. worthless) and is not mokṣa [liberation]. He writes
(1995 p.
13): ʻliberation is nothing at all apart from the Self that is free, whether it be

insignificant (i.e. consisting of duality) or significant (i.e. consisting of nonduality).”

(translated from Hindi). See following note.

Abhinava is borrowing here from the terminology of Advaita Vedānta. The world

according to that view is an illusion. It is like a dream, which does have some existence,

because it undeniably appears, but has no persisting, ultimate existence, as we know

when we wake up from it. The dream, the Advaita Vedāntin says, is ‘insignificant’, a
‘trifle’ – tuccha. The world of daily life which seems s0 vast and important, is very
small and unimportant compared to the Brahman, which is not so (atuccha). Abhinava
is saying that liberation and the Self are literally the same reality – not like two things

that are ṣo similar that one can say they are ‘the same’. The former is not an
‘insignificant illusion. Nor can it be said to be a substantial, independent
reality,

because the only one that can be such must be truly, ultimately existent. Thus, if it is so

then it is the Self. These arguments are directed against two basic views. One is the
Advaita view that, as the world is an illusion, then so is bondage and hence
also
liberation. The other is the dualist view that the world and bondage do exist, and
so do

liberation from the world of tansmigratory existence and the fettered state that binds the
soul to it.

Below 1/156abc. Also quoted below in TĀv ad 1/331 (330) and ad 16/90cd-93ab.

TANTRĀLOKA

What is the point? (The point is that) here at least, there is no
disagreement that knowledge of the Self is liberation. Thus, the characterizing
feature of the Self (i.e. freedom) is also that of liberation. So, because there is no

difference between them, no separate characterizing feature has been stated for

that which is already proved to possess it. Thus, when he says that ‘one does
not even use a different name (for it)ʼ, the word ‘even’ indicates that (if this is
s0,) what question could there be with regards to (its) characterizing feature and
the like?

Although this is (true), he begins to define the nature of liberation
taught in other philosophies in order to clarify how (our view) differs from that.

[IUEEIGEAḤ

|| 33 11
yat tu jñeyasatattvasya pūrṇāpūrṇaprathātmakam ḷ

taduttarottaraṁ jñānaṁ tattatsaṁsāraśāntidam || 32 ||
The perception of the object of knowledge, along with the

metaphysical principles that constitute it, which is full or less complete, is

the knowledge that, increasingly higher, quells each corresponding (form

of) transmigratory existence. (32)

‘The object of knowledge’ is the Path consisting of the Forces,

Principles and Worlds etc., ‘along with the metaphysical principles that

constitute itʼ, that is, (their) mutually separate (distinct) and progressively

higher condition (avasthāna). The ‘knowledge’ (of the object) is ‘imcreasingly
higherʼ by its ever more elevated state, progressively traversing each world
order etc. (one after another), because each (corresponding) limitation ceases

and so (becomes) accordingly (more and more) excellent. Thus, because (it

develops in stages in this way and) because it is essentially the experience of
duality, even when in a contracted state, ‘knowledge is a full or less complete
perception (of the object). It arises by crossing over the network of principles
that have been placed on a lower level with respect to that, and so ‘quells’, that
is, liberates, from the corresponding ‘(form of) transmigratory existence’, that
is, the fourteen kinds of rebirth, because, as is said: ‘the sphere of

transmigratory existence is said to be of fourteen kinds’. This is the meaning.
Read pūrṇāpūrṇaprathātmakam for pūrṇapūrṇaprathātmakam.

Cf. below, 4/29-32ab. Swami Lakshmanjoo: ‘The essence of that which is worth

perceiving is Śiva, and as that perception becomes full in succession, the fuller it

becomes, the closer you are to mokṣa [liberation]. What some Masters consider to be
full, for others is incomplete. Complete fullness is only attained in Śaivism, even though
[devotees of other lower schools] are liberated to a degree by their own [conception of]

‘Ś Read pūrṇāpūrṇaprathātmakaṁ jñānam fo pūrṇapāūrṇaprathātmakaṁ
jñānam.

SVT 10/59ab. A note to the Sanskrit texts explains that: ‘Iis said that transmigratory

existence is of fourteen kinds, as (follows): ‘The divine beings are conceived to be of

CHAPTER ONE

The (primary) nature (dharma) of knowledge (in this sense) is that it liberates.

It is the (fully) uncontracted state of the contracted (knowledge and
consciousness of the fettered soul)."' He explains that:

TṬTRTFJT

TTTĪ
āTāaTSTT

ā Tafd
radī
dīa: 1| 331|
rāgādyakaluṣo ‘smy antaḥśīūnyo ‘haṁ kartṛtojjhitaḥ |

itthaṁ samāsavyāsābhyāṁ jñānaṁ muñcati tāvataḥ || 33 ||
“I am unsullied by attachment and the like”, “I am inwardly

empty” and “I am not an agent”” – this kind of knowledge, whether
collectively or individually (samāsavyāsābhyāṅṁī), liberates from (only) that

much (bondage).” (33)

‘This kind of knowledge’, which is described in the first half (of this

verse), ‘liberates (only) from that much’ limited bondage, that is, intellectual
and other (forms of ignorance). This is the prose order (saṅbandha). There (in

that context), the knowledge that “I am unsullied by attachment and the like
is that of the (followers of the Buddhist school of idealism called) Yogācāra. As
they say:
“The Buddhas (jina), free of obscuring coverings, have said in brief that

transmigratory existence is the mind (citta) sullied by attachment and the like.

Freedom” from that is liberation.
Again:

eight (kinds), the (types of) animal births are of five kinds, and that of man, one kind.
(This), in brief, is the (gross) elemental (bhautika) creation.’

Omit kiritu, as do all the MSs.

! Knowledge that liberates is the state of pure, unconditioned consciousness. It is itselṝ
the liberated state of the contracted consciousness of the fettered soul. In other words,

consciousness has two aspects. One is perpetually ‘uncontractedʼ, that is, unconditioned
and perfect, and so is never bound. It is the liberated state of the other aspect of
consciousness, which is ‘contracted’ to varying degrees by the power of the freedom of

the former to impose upon itself the limitations of the impurities that contract it. Other
forms of knowledge may correspond to degrees of expansion, but they are limited to the
same degree and so not ultimately liberating.

Literally – ‘I aṃ devoid of agencyʼ.
See K.C. Pandey 1963a: 318. Swami Lakṣhmanjoo: ‘[Collectively or individually]

means that [some] are freed individually or collectively, that is, someone may be free
from one or more mala, whereas others are freed completely of all the malas
[collectively] (samāsyena). 1t is [collectively] from their point of view, not from the
ŚSaiva point of view. [Individually] one can only be free from māyīyamala [the impurity

of Māyā].
MSs Ch, Ñ, T and Ḍ read viviktatā (‘separation’ (from)) instead of vimuktatā
(‘freedomʼ (from)).

TANTRĀLOKA

‘This mind is (self-) luminous; impurities are, by (their very) nature,

(just) adventitious, (not innate to it). When they cease, that light which is the
goal of all (sarvārtha) (shines) imperishable.

This is the meaning here (of these lines). (According to the Yogācāra,)
the mind (citta) is luminous by nature, (but) due to beginningless ignorance it is
covered by adventitious impurities such as attachment and the like.
Transmigratory existence arises due to this. But even so, by destroying each of

these adventitious impurities by the power of assiduously pursuing (anuṣṭhāna)

the path of the practice of meditation (bhāvanā) and the like, it brings about a
reversal (from the ignorant to the enlightened perspective) in the (deepest) seat
(of consciousness) (āsrayaprāvṛiti). It is due to that that liberation, which is
the manifestation of (the mind’s) innate, indestructible luminous nature (is
attained).
(We say that) that (view) is unsound. You (Yogācāra Buddhists)
maintain that meditation (bhāvanā) is the cause here (of liberation). (However,
meditation) cannot impart a (different) quality to the (transitory) moments of the
mind that cease at each instant, because (meditation) can (only) impart (a
particular) quality (to it) by being present in a single stable underlying

foundation, (which you do not admit exists).” Stable entities (that persist for
some time), such as sesame seeds, are perfumed by stable (persistent) pleasant
(smells). This (mind) should also be such. (However, the stream of the mind)

arises as new (and unique) (apūrva) every moment, like the repeated passing
of (something that is) discontinuous and transitory. (Thus,) the meditation of a

moment of the mind that has not reached excellence cannot give rise to (that)
moment (which corresponds to) the luminous (enlightened) mind. So what is the
purpose of that (meditation)? Sullied (samala) moments of the mind (born) from
their own spontaneous power to give rise to similar (ones) are (only) capable of
generating moments of the mind that are similar (to themselves), not dissimilar,

luminous ones. Meditation would be incapable in this way of destroying

impurity, because (each) moment of the mind is transitory." So what is (all

this) talk of a reversal (from the ignorant to the enlightened perspective) in the
(deepest) seat (of consciousness) (āśrayaprāvṛtti)? Thus, this is all the liberation
MSs Kh, Ch, J, h and T read prakṛtyā tanavo malāḥ – ‘impurities are, by (their very)
nature, (just) corporeal (i.e. not innate to the mind)’.

One could also translate ~ ‘which is all that there is'.

PV 2/208. Also quoted below in TĀv ad 4/29-30, in the ĪPVv ad 1/5/4. The previous

line reads: vyāvṛttau pratyayāpekṣam adṛḍhaṁ sarpabuddhivat | ‘The discernment of
difference depends on (one's) perception (of it) (pratyaya), which is as unstable as is the
notion (that a rope seen in the dark is) a snake.”

The term ‘āśrayaparāvṛtti’ literally means ‘reversal of the foundation’. I borrow

Suzuki’s translation which, although less literal, is closer to the spirit of the intended
seēnse.

The mind is momentary and so cannot be permanently affected by meditation or the
like, because there is no stable underlying foundation of the mind.

“/Instead of pratikṣaṇam apūrvatvena upajāyamānasya (arising as new (and unique)
(apūrva) every momentʼ), MSs Ch and Ñ read: pratikṣṇasamūlatvenopajāyamānasya
(‘ariṣing as rooted every moment’); T: -asamatvena- (-as being imbalanced-); D: samalatvena- (-as sullied’-).

ciṭṭakṣaṇabhaṅgura- literally means: ‘the mind is destroyed at each moment’.

CHAPTER ONE

of those who maintain the doctrine of momentariness amounts to. Liberation
and bondage are only possible in the case of something that is a stable (lasting)
and single (entity) and the like. One who is bound acts (to achieve) liberation,

and once (liberation) is attained, he is indifferent (to all that is binding) (nivṛtta).
A series (santāna) is not a single (entity,) because it is conditioned by notions of

unity and diversity (bhedābheda).

The (partially liberating) knowledge that ‘“I am inwardly,” that is,

within consciousness also, ‘“empty”” is that of the followers of the (Buddhiṣṭ)

Maādhyamika. (These people) maintain that all things are devoid of an essential
nature of their own and, because consciousness is also devoid of an essential

nature of its own, declaring that it is false, say that liberation is (attained) in

that emptiness itself. As they say:

‘The purpose of the sage’s teaching that ‘this universe is only mind

(cittamātra) is to remove children’s fear of it, but in reality that is not so. Those

who (are most eminent and) greatly fortunate have destroyed even that state

which is ‘only mind."”

“ A series is both a unity, in the sense that it is a single series, but is also made of
separate units that differ from one another. If we try to understand what it is, the notions

we can form of it are necessarily both of a unity and a diversity.

“ Read with MSs Ch, J, Ñ, T and Ḍ -abhidadhantas- for -abhidadhatas-.
. These lines are drawn from the Bodhicittavivaraṇa, attributed to Nāgārjuna. The

lacunose text, edited by Lindtner, is available at:

Lindtner ascribes the authorship of the Bodhicittavivaraṇa to Nāgārjuna, the wellknown author of the Mīūlamadhyamakakārikās (MMK) who flourished around
150 CE.
However, Buescher (2008: 36-40) argues convincingly against this view. I am
grateful

to Dr. Buescher for this reference.
The first sentence corresponds to verse 27. The version of the edited text reads

uttrāsaparihārārthaṁ (‘to remove intense fear’) for tattrāsaparihārārthaṁ (‘to

remove

the fear of it’). The following line corresponds to verse 25cd. The edited text reads

citamātravyavasthayā (‘by the state of Mind Onlyʼ) for cittamātravyavasthitiḥ (‘the
state of Mind Only). This variant is intelligible, and indeed may be seen to be the
better

reading, by reference to the context. The sequence of these lines is reversed with respect

to that of the edition of the Bodhicittavivaraṇa. Read together with the preceding
line
translating the edited text, we get:
‘[The purpose of the teaching concerning the aggregates is to bring about the
end of clinging (to the false notion of) Self.] Those who (are most eminent and)
greatly
fortunate destroy even that (instruction concerning the existence of the aggregate
s) by
the state of Mind Only.’ (25) (followed by a lacuna in the edited text) . . . The
purpose

of the teaching of the sage that ‘this universe is Mind Only (cittamātra) is to remove
children’s great fear, but in reality that is not so.’
Read in reverse, as Jayaratha does, the variant found here makes more sense
and so has been accepted.

The term cittamātra here translated in capitals as ‘Mind Onlyʼ has been
understood to refer to consciousness as the fundamental reality which is Emptiness.
What has been called the One Mind. However, the sense of ‘mind only can also be,
according to the context, that nothing exists in an objective physical or material sense.

TANTRĀLOKA

(According to us,) that also is not a sound view. If the autonomous
nature of consciousness is also denied because it is false, (then) there would be

no Being (sartā) in falsity (i.e. even that would not exist). This is because,

(unlike objects) such as (the perceived colour) blue and the like, (Being) is not

relative. Moreover, if the autonomous nature of (sensorial phenomena) such
as (the colour) blue and the like is also denied because they are false, their
condition (avasthāna) is that of the nature of consciousness. Being itself would

not be within consciousness, which is just the essence of manifestation
(sphurattāmātrasāra), because it is false, and so nothing would manifest. Thus
(all) there would be is just a state of unconsciousness (mitrchā). It is impossible
to deny that consciousness, which is the essence of manifestation, is
something.
Now, it is said (by Nāgārjuna) that:
‘It is void of all supporting attributes (ālambanadharma), all beings, all

impediments and residues (of past actions) (āśaya).” It is not void in the
ultimate sense (paramārthataḥ).”
If (one affirms), in accord with this stated principle, that (reality is)

devoid of (any) conceived (kalpita) form, such as the relationship between
subject and object but not of consciousness also, that would amount to an
acceptance of the aforementioned Buddhist idealist view (vijñānavāda). (Thus,)

as that too is devoid of (any) conceived or relative nature and the like (these
Buddhists say that):

The dreams we have are made by, and are, ‘just the mind. The world we see in a dream,

the beings that populate it, and even ourselves who participate in it, are just figments of
the activity of the mind, which is itself, like the dream, unreal. To say that ‘the universe

is only mind amounts to saying that it is a mental construct, an illusion. Dreams are

also ‘only mind’. The complete form of this expression is ‘cittadṛṣyamātra’, i.e. the

universe is ‘only an object perceived by the mind’. Thus an equivalent expression is that
the universe is ‘bhrāntimātra’ ‘just an illusion’ʼ.

“ An illusion exists even if its contents do not. An illusion has being, but it is not the
specific being of a particular entity, which is defined as what it is by not being anything

else. The ‘being’ of an illusion is just existence, which is not relative, as is that of some
particular existent.

Read

with

MSs

sphurattāmātrasārarūpāyā.

G,

1,

Jh,

N,

and

D

sphuratāsārarāpāyā

for

’’ Monier-Williams reports two pertinent meanings of the term ‘āśaya’ – 1) disposition
of mind, mode of thinking (in Yoga philosophy); 2) stock or the balance of the fruits of
previous works, which lie stored up in the mind in the form of mental deposits of merit

or demerit until they ripen in the individual soul's own experience into rank, years, and
enjoyment. (Cowell's translation of Sarvadarśanasaṁgraha. 168, 16 ff.)

“In other words, ultimate reality is said to be Void because it is devoid of all
contingencies, not because it does not really exist. This verse is also quoted by
Kṣemarāja in his commentary (nirṇaya) on SpKā 12-13. There sarvasattvair reads

sarvatattvair in the second half of the first line. The meaning then is ‘all metaphysical

principlesʼ instead of ‘all beingsʼ. Kṣemarāja tells us that the verse is by Nāgārjuna, the
great expounder of Buddhist school of the Middle Way, the Mādhyamika. It is quoted
again below ad 6/10ab.

CHAPTER ONE
‘This universe is the radiant manifestation of the mind (antaḥkaraṇa)

alone, which is the unperceived'” reality (tattva) that makes what is

wonderfully varied, manifest.”

According to this and other similar statements (you idealist Buddhists

make) accepting consciousness (vijūapti) to be ultimately real, you

(respected) aged people have not noticed (utprekṣita) anything new. The defect
there (of your conception of consciousness) has (already) been discussed.'

“I am not an agent” is the (partial, binding) knowledge of those who

(accept the) Sāṁkhya (view), maintaining as they do that the Self is inactive.

Otherwise (they say, if it were active) it would not possess consciousness,

because only insentient entities are perceived to be active (kriyāvat), as is, for

example, milk (when it changes into curd). (According to us) this (view) is

unsound, because an inactive Self would not be liberated. If the individual soul
(puruṣa).does not do anything, even if the discriminating insight has arisen
(whereby he discerns the difference between himself as eternal consciousness,
free of all the consequences of the activity of Nature, which is the perpetually
active sphere of objectivity that apparently binds him), he would not abide as
(his) own essential (conscious) nature. This is because it is not possible that

Nature, the very nature of which is activity (pravṛtti), to be aloof (and inactive),
because it is possible for (that) activity to arise again for that (individual soul
and affect it). Nor does Nature have (the capacity) to determine that “I have
been seen by him” or “I will not act again for that purpose (which the soul

proposes)”, because, as it is insentient," it is incapable of perception.
" Eyen if

‘ MSs K, Ch, Jh, N, T, and Ḍ read avabhāsita- ʻmanifested for avibhāvita-

‘unperceivedʼ.
! Note that the word for consciousness used here is vijñapti, which is originally a
Buddhisṭ term.
! Read tatra cokto doṣaḥ for tatra cokto doṣah.
! The view here, accepted by a number of schools in various forms, is that causality is
a single continuous process, as is action. The cause is the agent of the effect, which is

the result of its activity. The Pratyabhijñā

view is that the agent is always ultimately

consciousness, which is thus the universal cause of everything operating through

particular causes that give rise to their specific effects. However, Sāṁkhya does not

accept the agency of consciousness, which it maintains is inactive. Áctivity, including
the production of effects from their causes, is only perceived to take place in the sphere

of objectivity, that is, Nature (prakṛt). Consciousness, which is the individual Self, is

just a passive perceiver of Nature’s permutations.

‘ Read with MSs Ch, J, Jh, N, T. and D: pravrttisambhāvanāyāḥ for
sambhāvanāyāḥ.

! Read -anusandhānam asty acaitanyād for -anusandhānam astyācaitanyād.
! Nature (prakṛti) is the totality of objectivity. The individual soul is bound by it by
because he wrongly identifies with it, until the realisation dawns that that is a mistake,

and he understands that Nature is purely objective and has nothing to do with himself.
Then Nature feels, as it were, that “the soul has seen me and knows what I am’ and so
retires from the purview of the soul to leave it to be free and independent in its essential,

pure conscious nature. We read in the Sāṁkhyakārikā (19-21, 59, 61, 62, 66):
‘Itis established that the Self (puruṣa) is a pure witness by contrasting it (with
Nature). He is a solitary, neutral spectator, who does nothing. Thuṣ, it is through their

union that insentient (Nature) appears to be intelligent, and conversely, the neutral Self

TANTRĀLOKA

this has taken place in this way, just as when one perceives sound (or any

other object of sense), that objective (artha) (to hear sound) arises again; in the

same way, even when a discriminating assessment (that discerns the difference
between consciousness and insentient Nature) has been made (once), that
(same) objective (artha) (which is to experience daily life) will (certainly) arise
again, because (Nature’s) nature has not ceased to be (such as it is). (In brief,)

although (this liberating act of discernment) has been done in this way, it (is as

if) has not been done.
# . ! (Agaiṇ), even though the knowledge Buddhists (attain) is
