degree, and so it is like a mirror that inwardly reflects the inner light of the Self and
externally, the outer world that is presented to it through the channel of the senses. Here
it is said of consciousness itself, which is perfectly pure, because it reflects everything

within itself. Moreover, what is reflected is not different from it nor is the reflection
derived from anything outside it. Thus, the purity of consciousness is the state of pure
reflective awareness of its own nature. It is ‘not directed at anything else’

! The reflective awareness of pure divine consciousness is in a state of perpetual

expansion. It is always in the process of unfolding through all its energies, from the will

to knowledge through to action, and so encompasses all the means to realisation and is

their basis and essentially what they are.

TANTRĀLOKA

consciousness, so how is it that it is said that that ‘penetration is awakened
consciousness itself’? Thus, he says:

šraā fkṁ a7 f---Ġ ōīē, T kfāīq 1| 2.9
1|
ṢTq Taī Jcd ārḡNszāṁrzāT: |

TT : JTTI: Tā JTRJRTĪT; || Q9 |1|

aī fāh 1
jñeyaṁ dvidhā ca cinmātraṁ jaḍaṁ cādyaṁ ca kalpitam || 176 ||
itarat tu tathā satyaṁ tadvibhãgo ʻyam īdr̥śaḥ |
jadena yaḥ samāveśaḥ sa praticchandakākṛtiḥ || 177 II
caitanyena samāveśas tādātmyaṁ nāparaṁ kila |

Moreover, that which is to be known (jñeya) is of two kinds,

namely, (pure) consciousness alone (cinmātra) and the insentient (jaḍa).

And the first (kind) is conceived (kalpita) (to be Śiva for the purpose of

instruction and as an object of meditation and the like), while the other
(kind) is thus real (and true as it stands). Such is the distinction between
them.

(An outer) penetration (samāveśa) by an insentient (object pictured

in consciousness) is in the form of (unity-in-difference like an) image

reflected (in a mirror)." The (inner contemplative) penetration by (pure)

consciousness is (experienced as one’s own) identity with it. Indeed, it is

nothing else!" (176cd-178ab)

See above, note 1,1014.
Ṣee above, 1/72ab-73ab (1/72-73). I am following Jayaratha’s interpretation, as 1

must. However, it is clearly forced. A simple emendation of cādyaṁ (‘and the first’
(kind)) to cāntyaṁ (‘and the latter’) would make matters straight. Thus ‘the latter” is
‘the insentient’, that is, objectivity, which is indeed ‘conceivedʼ, that is, the object of

conceptualization. Thus, ‘the other” would be pure consciousness that is free of all
conceptualization and so is ‘real’ʼ and true – satyam – as it stands.

Read sa praticchandakākṛtiḥ for sapraticchandakākṛtiḥ.

Abhinava distinguishes between two kinds of ‘penetration’ (samāveśa) into
consciousness, according to whether what penetrates into consciousness is insentient or
consciousness itself, in order to clarify what he means by ‘penetration’. This is
essentially the attainment of oneness between the polarities that are penetrating each
other. This can only take place within the essential subjectivity of the individual soul,

which is consciousness with Śiva, Who is also consciousness.

Implicitly understanding, it seems, ‘jaḍa’ to mean not just ‘insentient’, but

some kind of supernatural being, Wallis sees in these two verses Abhinava’s refutation

of the commonly accepted meaning of samāveśa or āveśa as simply ‘possession’. Thus
he (Wallis 2014 p. 301) comments: ‘In a rather clever hermeneutical move, Abhinava
argues that there are only two ‘things’ that exist, objects and subject(s) — and possession

by an insentient object cannot mean anything but a reflection of the image of that object
in consciousness, (e.g. the mind obsessing over something), while possession by
awareness, which is one’s own innate being, can only mean oneness with it. In this
Advaita view, there is only one undifferentiated awareness that all sentient beings

CHAPTER ONE
Surely (one may ask,) how can consciousness, which is self-

luminous,' be an object of knowledge which is illumined by something else?

With this doubtin mind, he says that: ‘the first (kind)is conceived (kalpita)

(to be Śiva for the purpose of instruction and as an object of meditation

and the like)ʼ. (The word) ‘and’ indicates that thereis a doubt (as to how thisis

possible). The Supreme Lord Himself, out of His innate freedom, without

compromising
status as the knower, concealing (His) experience of Himself
(ahaṁpratīti), makes Himself known (pratipādayati) as an object of knowledge

for the purpose of instruction and meditation etc. as forms of reflective

awareness such as ‘one should know (vijāeya) that Śiva Himself is the agent of
all actionsʼ. This is indeed (the Lord’s) supreme freedom, namely, that even

though His own nature' continues to be the perceiver, He makes it manifest as

an object. Thus it is said to be ‘conceived’, that is, it is devoid of (an

independent) reality (vastuśūnya).'“ ‘The other (kind) is insentient like (the

experience of the colour) blue, and ‘is thus (real (and true as it stands))’ as an
object of knowledge. There (in that respect), the perception of (the colour) blue,
for example, is nothing but the act of reflection (within consciousness)

(pratibimbanamātra) as, for example, (the colour) blue, on the analogy of a
mirror and a face (reflected within it). (This act of reflection) is the purpose

of (this kind of) penetration (samāveśa) (of consciousness), certainly not

identity (with it). If that were to be so, ‘blue’ and the like, having become of the
nature of cognitive consciousness (jñāna), (all that) would remain is (that
cognitive) consciousness (jñāna)' alone, and so no distinct condition of a
participate in, thus possession is generally conceived as meaningless; there is no
separate being that can enter you.”

) Ṣee below, 2/9 and notes.
' R̥ead, as the MSs suggest, svaṁ rāpaṁ for svaṁ svarūpaṁ.

Thiṣ does not mean, of course, that Śiva does not exist, or that the way He is

conceived to be, for example, as a householder ascetic living on Mount Kailāsa, is false.

What is meant is that when we think of Deity, It becomes an object of our thought.

Consciousness is experienced as Deity, not through ignorance - it is not a

misconception – but because consciousness freely assumes that condition so that it can
be known and its true nature realised. In this sense, Deity is not a ‘vastu’, an
independent ‘existing thing’, which is one of the meanings of the word ‘vast’, or
‘reality°, which is another. Outer objects of knowledge are real as they are in the sense

that they really are objects of perception just as we see them to be. Deity is not really an
object. It freely manifests as such through the notions it generates in those who worship
and seek to attain it.

'“ AII pheṉomena that appear in any form, whether externally or internally in the mind,

do so within consciousness, like reflections in a mirror. But unlike a physical mirror,
which requires an outer object for its reflection to be produced within it, the mirror of

consciousness generates its own reflections. In this perspective, manifestation and

perception is understood to be the process whereby consciousness generates reflections.

It is the ‘act of reflection' of the mirror of consciousness. Abhinava expounds the
Doctrine of Reflection (pratibimbavāda) at length with supporting arguments in the first
part of Chapter Three.
There are several words for consciousness in the sources. Although they are
frequently interchangeable, the differing names may imply various aspects of
consciousness and the way it functions. These differences may at times be relevant to

TANTRĀLOKA

(corresponding) image (of the object within consciousness) (praticchanda)

would be (possible).“ (However,) it is in actual fact the case that the oneness

of contracted

(objectivised consciousness)

and

uncontracted

(cognitive)

consciousness is that of (consciousness itself). Thus, the purpose of (that kind

of) penetration (into consciousness)is oneness with it. So it was rightly said that
the penetration (of uncontracted Śiva consciousness into contracted individual
consciousness) is the (attainment) of that supreme nature (on the part of the

latter,) who is not free.
He concludes that (subject by saying):

[ÁáEEEIGZEIFĒ IEIEṄINĒḤIEET

tenāvikalpā saṁvittir bhāvanādyanapekṣiṇī |/ 178 II

Śivatādātmyamāpannā samāveśo ‘tra śāmbhavaḥ |

Thus, Śiva’s (śāmbhava) peṇetration is (a state of) consciousness

(saṁviṭti) free of thought constructs (avikalpā saṁvitti) that, independent of

meditation (bhāvanā) or the like, has attained a state of oneness with Śiva.

(178cd-179ab)

‘Consciousnessʼ, that is, (consciousness in its) uncontracted form.

Surely (one may ask,) agreed that here (in this case) the emergence (of

this uncontracted state of consciousness) does not depend on (the exercise of)

thought, for if that were to be the case, there would be no difference between

this (the Divine Means) and the Empowered Means, but (even so one may

the choice of one word as opposed to the others. For example, the word cit is a general

term for consciousness we find in all schools. The abstract noun derived from it –
caitanya – is understood to mean, more specifically, the ‘agency of the act of being

consciousʼ (citikartṛtā). Thisis how Kṣemarāja defines it in his commentary on the first

Śivasūtra. The term ‘ṣaṁvid’, which is also part of the nomenclature of idealist

Buddhism (yogācāra), denotes consciousness as dynamically engaged in the act of

perception. Accordingly, we come across the plural ‘many sarvids’ to denote the many

acts of perception (1ās tā vibhinnāḥ saṁvido niścayarūpāḥ ĪPV vol. 1 p. 356). The term
‘hodha’, although often used indiscriminately to mean just ‘consciousness’, like the

word ‘cit’, implies and sometimes explicitly means ‘awakened’, that is, ‘realised’
consciousness. In this case the term ‘jñāna’, which in a non-technical sense means
‘knowledge’, here denotes perception. Accordingly, I have translated the expression
‘nīlajñāna’, which literally means ‘the knowledge of blue’, as ‘the perception of blue’.

In this context, ‘jīāna’ means consciousness as the resultant cognition of an act of

perception. I translate the word accordingly as cognitive consciousness, not meaning the
actual act of perception itself (which it may also mean), but its result.

'" AII the MSs read pratikarmavyavasthaiva – distinct condition of a corresponding

response (within consciousness) for praticchandavyavastaiva – distinct condition of a
(corresponding)image (of the object within consciousness).

Read asarkucitarūpā for saṁkucitarpã.

“ The Divine Means is the exercise of the direct reflective awareness of pure,

unconditioned consciousness. This is called ‘saṁvitti’, the power of consciousness

(saṁvit). Practicing the Divine Means, individual consciousness penetrates into it and is

CHAPTER ONE

ask,) are thought constructs that (arise) at a subsequent time required here (to
maintain the expanded state of consciousness) or not? With this doubt in mind,

he says:

Conception and Nonconceptual Consciousness
TdTCṬṬT: TATTSṬT-TIS TāĪRHATI:

II Q198

tatprasādāt punaḥ paścādbhāvino ‘tra viniścayāḥ || 179 ||
santu tādātmyamāpannā na tu teṣām upāyatā |
The conceptions (viniścaya) that (arise) subsequently by the grace of
that (nondiscursive awareness) attain a state of identity (with Śiva,) and

(so) they serve no (further) purpose. (179cd-180ab)
'“By the word ‘that’ is (meant) reflective awareness free of thought

constructs. Siva’s nature is realised by consciousness that does not fashion

penetrated by it. In a timeless moment, individual contracted consciousness expands out
into the universal, uncontracted Śiva consciousness which is its ultimate ground and

essential nature. Unlike the Divine Means, whichis immediate and free of thought, the
Empowered Means is gradual, and involves working with thought constructs to ‘purify
them, that is, align thought with ultimate reality, as will be explained further ahead here

and in detail in Chapter Four.
Liṭeṟally: ‘they certainly do not possess the status of means’ na tu teṣām upāyatā.

Notice the distinction between the ‘means’ (upāya) to realisation, the corresponding
penetration, whichis what takes place, and the corresponding state to which it leads and
on which it is based. Thuṣ, for example, the Śāmbhava penetration takes place when
practicing Śāmbhavopāya, which resultsin the realisation of Śaāmbhavāvastha, thatis,

Śiva’s own state. Similarly, the Śākta penetration in Śāktopāya - the Empowered Means

– leads to Sāktāvasthā, which is the Empowered State, i.e. that of Śakti, whichis the
freedom and reflective awareness of Śiva consciousness. Āṇava penetration in
Āṇavopāya, that is, the Individual Means, leads to Āṇavāvasthā, that is, the Individual
State, i.e. the state of the individual soul, in which it realises its essential identity with
Śiva. All these are states of the one consciousness, and s0 basically the same

enlightened state viewed from these three aspects. This one universal and transcendental
consciousness is No Means (Anupāya). All the means to realization are, as it were,
rivers that flow into the ocean of No Means.
The Divine Means is the sudden penetration into Śiva consciousness, that is,
the complete and perfect expansion (pūrṇavikāsa) of consciousness by the recognition
of its essential fully expanded Śiva nature. It happens just by the force of Lord Śiva’s

intention alone, without outer supports. Thus, it is the experience of the same ineffable
reality recognized in No Means. The only difference is that No Means is once and
forever, whereas sooner or later, the yogi inevitably falls from the Divine Means if No

Means is not attained.

J, Jh, Ñ: + grhītamiti svaspaṣṭā nīścayasya yataḥ (N, T: yathā) prathā grṛhnāmīty

avikalpaikyabalāt tu (Jh, N, T: tuṁ) pratipadyate ‘The very clear experience (prathā) of
the ascertainment ‘(it) has been known’ takes place by virtue of the strength of oneness

with the nonconceptual (awareness that) ‘I know:.”

TANTRĀLOKA

thought constructs,' and so, as (further) means are unnecessary (karaṇāyogāt)

with regards to something that has been done (and completed) (kṛta), the
thought constructs that follow after have nothing (more) to do there (in that
case). Thuṣ, he says: ‘they serve no (further) purpose’.

'“Ṭhus, those who maintain that the validity of (knowledge) devoid of

thought constructs depends on thought constructs (to establish it) have been
refuted. Accordingly, he says:

vikalpāpekṣayā mānam avikalpam iti bruvan || 180 ||
pratyukta eva siddhaṁ hi vikalpenānugamyate |
He who says that (although) valid knowledge (māna) is not a
thought construct, (but) depends (nonetheless) on thought constructs (to

validate it)™ stands refuted indeed. (Only) that which has been

' MSs Ch, Jh, N, T and Ḍ read avikalpatayaiva (by consciousness) ‘free as it is of

thought constructs for avikalpakayaiva (by consciousness) ‘that does not fashion

thought constructsʼ.

In the following section, Abhinava establishes that consciousness must have two

aspects for even the most common perception - and with it, knowledge and experience

– to be possible. We have seen that in temporal terms they are said to follow on one
after another in each act of perception (see above, note 1,101). The first moment of
perception, its initial phase, is free of thought constructs. In this phase, consciousness is

a pure noetic continuum within which the object is perceived just as it is in reality, that
is, as a manifestation of consciousness appearing within it. To those that maintain that
no such initial phase of perception or form of consciousness devoid of thought

constructs which is known intrinsically to itself as it is exists, Abhinava replies that if it
were not to exist, perception, through which knowledge is acquired and formulated as

notions such as ‘this is a chair’, would be impossible. Moreover, by exercising reflective
awareness, it is possible to experience it directly and consciously. This is essentially
liberated consciousness, which expands perpetually, unrestricted by notions of time and
space, particulars, and relative distinctions etc. So if this ‘pure’ form of consciousness

were not to exist, not only could perception not take place, liberation would also be
impossible.

Buddhist logicians maintain that daily life (vyavahāra) is based on thought

constructs, as do some Śaivites such as Lolaṭa (see below, 1/228ab (1/228)). Concerning

his view, we read in the MVV:

‘Some say that the (sole) means of knowledge in this universe is inference
(read anumānaṁ pramānatvaṁ for anumānapramānatvaṁ), and that the Deity Whose

nature (is consciousness), free of thought constructs, is omniscient. Even although He is

the witness (of all things), He never becomes (a part of) the state of the daily commerce
of life (vyavahāra). (An opponent may object): how can the daily commerce of life,
which consists of thought (vikalpa), (take place in a reality which is) devoid of thought

constructs? (We reply that) all this commerce of daily life extends due to thought, and

that is (essentially) inference (not direct perception). (Indeed,) that itself is inference and
all the notions (associated with inference), the postulate (pakṣa) (for example, ‘there is

(previously)

CHAPTER ONE
correctly

determined

(siddha)

can

understood by means of thought.“ (180cd-181ab)

be

(subsequently)

fire on the hill’), (the ascertainment that the object possesses the distinguishing)

characteristic (of what is to be proved, for example, smoke,) and that there is an
invariable concomitance (between them, ‘wherever there is smoke there is fireʼ,) and the
perception of that, etc. In fact, there is only one validating perception (pratyaya). Surely
(one may ask in response to this view, which maintains that we never perceive anything
directly), how could inference be possible independently of direct perception
(adhyakṣa), as that is (invariably) associated with the uninterrupted connection
conditioned by the direct perception of that (which is the basis for inference)? (We reply
that,) that is true (it is not possible to perceive anything directly). However, the one
Deity Who is the seat of omniscience exists. Penetrated by Him, one can conceive
the
invariable concomitance (vyāpti) (between probans and probandum) within
consciousness. Otherwise, (if the Deity which is consciousness were not to exist,) the
perception (vedana) of fire and smoke etc., as well as the absence (of smoke when there
is no fire) etc., that is, concomitance in presence and absence, would not be possible
even in hundreds of aeons. Thus inference, which is the result of the similarity of
the

main perception (i.e. of smoke, for example, with its inferred cause), is said to be that

which impels the business of daily life (vyavahāra).
Everywhere (in all circumstances) these perceivers come to the Lord’s
consciousness to draw life from it, and subjectivity is none other (than that). People
are
ignorant. How can one attain the state of a knowing (perceiver)? Without
that
(consciousness, how could there be) subjectivity? Therefore, (each perceiver) is
conjoined within consciousness (to it), and so that (subjectivity) is not hard to attain. In
reality, (subjectivity, that is, the capacity to perceive and know,) is nothing (at all
in

itṣeḻf). It is the Lord of Consciousness who is such (i.e. the essential nature of
subjectivity). That view, which is based on the Lord’s direct perception, is (one of)

dependence (upon Him), and as (the consciousness of the individual soul) is dependent,
it is said to be the perception (māna) of a fettered soul. The ignorant soul is one who
is
without the Lord. Thus, the sage has proclaimed that, impelled by the Lord, he is subject
to pleasure and pain. Thus, the teacher Lolaṭa, who is respected by everybody,
has
taught that the one valid means of knowledge is inference, which depends in this way on

the Lord.' MVV 1/764cd-778ab.
Gnoli notes: ‘the reference here is both to the Buddhist logicians who maintain that
various activitess and manner of behaving [in daily life] (vyavahāra) are based on

discursive thought (vikalpa), and so too to those Śaiva teachers, like Lolaṭa, who were
influenced by them’ (cf. MVV 1/764cd-778ab). See below, 1/228ab (1/228).
Dualist (Vaibhāṣika) Buddhiṣts and dualist Śaivites maintain that the state of
consciousness devoid of thought constructs (nirvikalpa), in which the nature of an
object is ascertained, arises at the end of a series of thought constructs (vikalpa)
concerning its nature. For example, the thought “what is this?” is followed by a series of

notions that conclude with the knowledge that ‘“this is a jar, which arises in a state of

consciousness free of thought constructs (nirvikalpa). Abhinava refutes this view. As

the idealist Yogācāra Buddhiṣts also maintain, he affirms that a state of consciousness
free of thought constructs (nirvikalpa) occurs at the beginning of the process of
cogitation. The true nature of the object shines in the pure consciousness free of thought
constructs at the initial moment of perception as the radiant manifestation of
consciousness. Thought constructs, which define it conceptually as a specific entity,
rather than as a generic manifestation of consciousness at one with it as all things
are,

can only function after the nature of the object has been correctly established to be such

(siddha). This first moment is experienced at the supreme level of practice
(śāmbhavopāya), which is the means to realisation that attains its goal directly in a flash

TANTRĀLOKA

Indeed, a means of knowledge (is defined as having) as its object an
entity not (as yet) known. As they say:
‘A means of knowledge (is defined as having) as its object (an entity)
not (as yet) known, or (to put it another way,) it is the (cognitive) light (that

illumines) something that is unknown.

(If one maintains that) an entity that has been perceived (directly by

consciousness) devoid of thought constructs is (subsequently) determined

(according to its specific nature) by thought which follows after, then, as

(thought would in that case function as) the perceiver of what has (already) been

perceived, then it has no validity in itself. So how can it come to serve as an
instrumental means (nimitta) to impart the status of a means of knowledge to
something else also (i.e. the preceding nonconceptual perception)? Thus, he
says: ‘only that which has been (previously) correctly determined (siddha)

can be (subsequently) understood by means of thought’. ‘Correctly
determined’ means ‘come to be known’ (adhigata). ‘Understood’
(anugamyate) means that it is ‘known’ (gamyate, i.e. adhigamyate) ‘after

(anu). This is the meaning.

Śurely, (an opponent may object: alright,) let determinate representation
(vikalpa) operate with respect to an entity that has been perceived; nevertheless,
there (in that case) it would not be logical (to maintain that) its condition is that

of a perceiver (grāhakatva) because it is (already) a determinate apprehension
(adhyavasāya) by (its very) nature. So how could the ascertainment (pratipatti)
(in the form) ‘ perceive what has been perceived’ be that of (thought)? With

this doubt in mind, he says:

gēraī fkzzāīzā aā aāT7 || 2¢2 11

gr̥hītam iti suṣpaṣṭā niścayasya yataḥ prathā l| 181 I|
gr̥hnāmīty avikalpaikyabalāt tu pratipadyate |

of intuitive insight free of thought constructs. The other means which operate in the
domain of the thought constructs of the second moment are slow and indirect, and are
anyway only effective because they are rooted in this pure consciousness.

This line is also quoted above ad 1/54 (see note there) and below in TĀy ad 4/81cd-

83. A means of knowledge, to be such, must be a source of knowledge. Knowledge to

be knowledge must be new. If one does not come to know something that was not

known already, it would be recollection, not knowledge. Thus, for a means of
knowledge to truly be a means of knowledge, it must have as its object something new,
not previously known which, like light, it illumines. See below, TĀ 4/81cd-85 and

commentary.

Jayaratha explains that Abhinava is refuting those who argue that the existence of

nondiscursive (i.e. thought free) awareness is proved on the basis of the existence of
ideational, discursive awareness, since an idea is a thought construct restricted to an
‘understanding of what has already been determined. Thus, pure consciousness can

never be an object of proof by extraneous means as it is self-iluminating and never an

object of knowledge.

CHAPTER ONE
Insofar as the experience (prathā) of the ascertainment (niścaya)

‘(this) has been perceivedʼ is clearly evident, one knows (pratipadyate) that

“I perceive”° by the power of oneness with thought-free consciousness

(avikalpa). (181cd-182ab)

This verse appears at first sight to be saying that determinate perception takes place

first and that it is subsequently appropriated by the perceiving subjectivity which is

indeterminate. It thus follows the order we find in the Sāṁkhya’s theory of perception,
which SN. Dasgupta (1979: 261-62) outlines as follows: ‘the first is the buddhi stage,

which has only the mere objective determination (niscaya); the second is the stage of

asmitā or abhimāna, the ego, which feels all things as belonging to the self as “ am so
and s0”, “mine is this or that”.” However, the Śaiva view here is that this
self-appropriation of a perception is not just a function of the ego (ahaṅkāra), which is
a mental organ and so does not intrinsically involve consciousness, which merely
paṣsively illumines its functioning. The view here, on the contrary, is that perceptions

are in this way appropriated by consciousness itself, mediated by its intrinsic
subjectivity operating in the restricted ambit of the personal ego sense.

The first systematic extensive inquiry into the nature of ‘thought’ – vikalpa – framed

in this term – developed in the ambit of Buddhist idealism, the Yogācāra, who presented

the teachings of the Buddha recorded in his sayings (nidhāna) in this perspective.

Yogācāra distinguishes between two phases of perception. The first is direct perception
(pratyakṣa), that is, experience (anubhava), and the second its conceptualization. The

firstis free of thought - avikalpa, and the second is thought itself– vikalpa. Thus, in the

following passage from the PTv, Abhinava refers to, as similar to his own, the Yogācāra

concept of the ‘store-house consciousnessʼ (ālayavijñāna) as the depository of thoughts
and associated Karma of the past and seeds of those that will mature in the future. Thus,
according to the Yogācāra, the world we perceive is a mere mental construct, as unreal

as is a dream. Here the nondualist Śaiva view differs radically, insofar as it understands
it to be a manifestation of consciousness that appears within consciousness. Knowing it

to be such is to know what it is. Thus, the world of thought constructs is not just
phenomenally real, it is absolutely so, as a manifestation of consciousness conceptually

conceived and known by the light of nonconceptual consciousness, which is its source
and foundation. Abhinava describes this process as follows:
‘Although this reality (artha) is solely the self-luminous light (of consciousness
and so is self-evident), it will now be explained by means of reasoned argument (yukti).
Differentiated conceptual representations (vikalpa) of the (colour) ‘blue’ and the like are

conceived

in

succession

and

are

considered

to

exclude

one

another

(virodhāvabhāsasiṣaṁmata). They are veridical (as manifestations of consciousness)
and (so) are not in the process of being destroyed (niḥṅśeṣyamāna) (as are errors in the
course of correction). (t is clear that they are real and correct,) because they are fit at
(some) subsequent time (to actualize their) functional efficacy and the like born from
their own intrinsic power (svasāmarthya). The (undifferentiated) nonconceptual
conscious (nirvikalpasaṁvid) nature precedes the conceptual representations (vikalpa)
established (in phenomenal manifestations such as the colour) blue and the like, that are
progressively (in the process of) being conceived. (Even s0,) it is not separate from the
manifestations (of phenomena) such as (the colours) blue and yellow, which are
considered to exclude one another, and are to be conceived in this and that (form,) as is
the case, for example, with the perception (hodha) of a cognition which has as its object
a picture, the perception (of a landscape viewed) by one standing on the peak of a
in, or the eyes of a peacockʼs feathers. Whereas (that form of perception,) which
ded up into the manifestations (of individual phenomena) such as (the colours)

TANTRĀLOKA

blue and yellow, the nature of which are contrary to it, is not preceded by the

(differentiated) conceptual representations (vikalpa) of the manifestations of, for
example, (the colours) blue and yellow, which have arisen as each of (the specific forms
of its) own endless power (samārthya) (to do countless things), as happens with the

direct perception of the colour blue alone.

And thīs (consciousness) that is free of thought constructs (nirvikalpaka)
exists. It is variously called in the scriptures, ‘creative intuition’ (pratibhā), ‘opening
upʼ (unmeṣa) and so on, and is present in the interval between both (of the two

differentiated) conceptual representations (vikalpa), namely, one which has ceased and
the other in the process of arising. It precedes, (in so far as it is such,) the

(differentiated) conceptual representations of (the colour) blue and the like, that are not
erroneous and considered to be mutually exclusive. Therefore, (that consciousness, free
from thought constructs,) consists of the undivided (unity) of (its) endless
manifestations (and is not separate from them). (The existence of this) interval between

both cognitions cannot be denied, because the two forms of cognition are divided (off
from one another). Moreover, the nature (of that interval must be) consciousness itself,
otherwise, (if it were to be), as they are, (discontinuous) when the latent impression (of a
past) perception (saṁvtsaṁsṣkāra) ceases, recollection, etc. (of the past) and the
association (of one thing with another) (anusaṁdhāna) and the like (in the present)

would not be possible. Thus, there is a general consensus of opinion amongst all

philosophers (with regard to the object of our discussion,) namely, creative intuition
(pratibhā) that possesses (these) attributes. Thus, it is not (something that is) not well
established (nāsiddhiḥ). Moreover, the condition of this (reflective awareness) is not
conceptual, because it does not depend on convention (saritketa) (as does language,

which is necessary for the formation of thought constructs, prior to the) proficiency (to

form it) (vyutpatti) and (specific) time (and circumstance for it to arise). (Indeed,) it
does not differ from the nature of consciousness, which is the opposite of the insentient,

and is (inseparably) linked with this type of reflective awareness, which is (spontaneous

and) innate (sahaja) and not conventional (as is the language of thought). It is not
comparable to conceptual representations (vikalpa), because no relative distinctions
arise (within it or with respect to consciousness). However, it is the support of the
essence (of all forms of) relative distinctions (bheda) it may generate (objectivity
characterized as) ‘meaning and things’ (arthabhāva) (cf. VP 1/1).

Conceptual representations (vikalpa) do not arise without (the support of the

reflective awareness of consciousness that is) free of them (avikalpa) because they are
not independent (and free). (Their) lack of independence is because they are (necessarily
mediated by) the recollection of the linguistic convention etc. (required for the mental
verbalization that the formation of thought constructs involves). How is it (possible) to
recollect a linguistic convention and the rest without (some prior) direct experience?
Again, in accord with the aforestated principle, consciousness is devoid of any temporal

and other such limitations. Thus, this Supreme Goddess, creative intuition (pratibhā), is
just one (alone) who, conceived through the glorious power of our (forms of) language,

possesses a limited nature of this sort but, even so, is made of all things. In the centre
also, (she is) the plane of birth of (all) the other thought constructs, present, past and
future. In the same way, for the same (reasons, Buddhists,) skilful in (the practice of)
discernment, accept (the existence of) a store-house consciousness. . . . This creative
intuition (pratibhā) which is the consciousness of all objects (of perception) present
within the interval between (the two cognitions) which precede and follow after, is of

the nature of all things. What can the lassitude (glāni) fashioned by the bondage of non-

existence do to one whose nature has dissolved away within it and (thus) shines with the
supreme power?’” PTv 104-109

CHAPTER ONE

‘The experience (prathā) ‘(this) has been perceived” arises because
of the existence of the (corresponding) thought construct as it operates when an

entity has been perceived (and its nature conceptually ascertained). Whereas
‘one knows (pratipadyate) that ‘] perceive’ by virtue of taking one’s support
from

the

oneness

with

thought-free

(consciousness)

(nirvikalpaka),

by

identification of the entity (artha) which is the object of perception (dṛsya) with

(its) mental representation (vikalpya) (when the perception is subjectivized).N

So it is said with good reason (yukta) that: ‘thought grasps what has (already)
been perceived.”
Surely (one may ask,) cognitive consciousness (jñāna) gives rise to
knowledge, not action. Thus (the bare existence of) an entity is known by that.
(Its specific nature) is not correctly determined (siddha) (by cognitive
consciousness alone). So how is it that it was said that ‘that which has been
(previously) correctly determined (siddha) can be (subsequently) understood by

means of thought’?' With this doubt in mind, he says:

avikalpātmasaṁvittau yā sphurattaiva vastunaḥ || 182 1|
sā siddhir na vikalpāt tu vastvapekṣāvivarjitāt |
The correct determination (siddhi) of (the nature of) an entity is
(essentially) its radiant appearing (sphurattā) within consciousness that is
free of thought constructs. It is not the result of a thought construct,
because (thought) is independent of (that) entity. (182cd-183ab)
According to (our) doctrine of (the universal) manifestation

(of

consciousness) (āhhāsavāda), it īs said" that the (fact and) act of
manifestation (ābhāsamānatā) itself is the correct determination (siddhi) (of an

entity’s nature,) and so it is ‘(essentially) the radiant appearing (sphurattā) of
an entity (within consciousness)’. (But) surely (one may ask,) as thought
constructs are also within themselves (essentially) thought-free (consciousness),

they

too

have

a

radiantly

apparent

form

(sphuradrūpatā)

(within

consciousness), and so why should not (the nature) of an entity be correctly
determined from that also? With this doubt in mind, he says: ‘it is not the

result of a thought construct’. In accord with the dictum: ‘all thought is

recollection," the nature of thought constructs is to that degree (tāvar)
memory, and that operates with respect to an entity previously experienced that

The recognition of this fundamental condition of consciousness free of thought

constructs is the essence of the practice of the Divine Means.

!5 See above, note to 1/37-38ab. Gnoli notes that ‘the distinction between the object of

perception and that of its mental representation is at the theoretical, not practical level.
Concerning this notion, see the PV of Dharmakīrti Svavrtti, 70 (Gnoli 1960, p. 39).

" Above, 1/180cd (1/181ab).
!5 ṞṚead ity ukte for ity uktaṁ.
“ AIṣo quoted above, ad 1/88-89ab (89-90ab).

TANTRĀLOKA

is not present. Thus, thought constructs are independent of (any external) entity

(vastu). Although independent thought constructs and the like are linked to

things fashioned by the embodied perceiver (kṣetrajña), even so, those things
(artha) are born of the latent traces of previous experience, and thus it is said
that: “(thought) is independent of (that) entity’. The point is, how can that
which is not dependent (and so is unrelated to any external entity) become a

means to its correct determination (siddhi)?"

If in this way, thought operates with respect to an entity that has been

determined by thought-free (consciousness), it does nothing more at all (that

needs to be done), so how is it required anywhere (in any circumstance to
determine) ‘what is that’? Thus (in response to this question) he says:

g¢2 1

Jayaratha explains that all ideas are essentially memory (sarvo vikalpaḥ smṛtiḥ). The

discursive awareness of thought has nothing directly to do with the object in itself that
exists at the present moment. Although an object does appear within consciousness, the

mental representation ‘this is a jar’ is not the jar. The determinate perception that this
object is called a jar is based on the previous experience of having seen such objects
and, recognizing its similarity with them, the conventional name ‘jar is then mentally
assigned to it. The nondiscursive, reflective awareness that ‘I perceive something’
invariably precedes this mental representation and is thus the immediate experience
around which subsequent thought constructs cluster. Thought constructs do not and
cannot establish (i.e. prove and determine) the existence of the object.
Moreover, as Abhinava argues in the following passage, conceptualization

alone is not sufficient to explain, as Buddhist idealists maintain, how we experience and
know anything. If thought is just recollection with no subject who thinks, many
problems would arise. For example, it would not be possible to establish a distinction

between present and past experience.

‘And that ascertainment (of the nature of an entity) which is the negation
(apohana) (of all else that it is not,) although it is all subsequent to the time of (its
direct) experience, even so manifests as one with its (immediate direct) experience by
ignoring (apahastana) that subtle difference in time, so that the experience is also
associated with (its) object (artha) such that (it accounts for the) notion (abhimāna) that
“I am experiencing this now”. Otherwise, (if that were not so, then we would have to
accept that) ‘all thought (vikalpa) is recollection’. If one were to consider that that is in

fact so, then when an experience is taking place and the experience which is that to be

ascertained (sādhya) is not firmly in place, how could the reflective awareness of that as
having been established be possible such that “I experienced (this in the past)?” Nor (is
it the case that) the difference in the time is a mistake (that occurs) when no reflection
on temporal distinction takes place, because temporal distinction is not (objectively) real
(avāṣṭava). We say that the real nature of a thing is as is the reflective awareness (of it).
Thus, the venerable (bhaṭṟa) (Buddhist idealist) Śaṅkarānanda says ‘thought constructs
induce experienceʼ, in order to criticize Dharmottara (who says) ‘therefore an entity

(vastu) (the true nature of which) has been established cannot be described thus (just as

it is).” (The word) ‘thus’ (in this statement) indicates that the notion is a product of the
mind (manas), which is outside one’s own (immediate) experience. The (Buddhist) who
maintains (the view that reality) is a stream of self-illuminating awareness is incapable

of establishing that there is a separate independent condition that is continuously giving
rise to ongoing experience. Hanging onto a blade of grass by (maintaining) this (view),
he needs help. So let this suffice.’ IPVv vol. 2 p. 16.

CHAPTER ONE

ftcaṝ- |
kevalaṁ saṁvidaḥ so ʻyaṁ nairmalyetaravibhramaḥ || 183 |I
yad vikalpānapekṣatvasāpekṣatve nijātmani |
The fact that consciousness is independent within itself of thought
constructs (and perceives the nature of things directly reflected within itself
or else) depends upon them (in order to discern its objects as specific
particulars differentiated from others and itself) is only this movement to

and fro (vibhrama) (between its) state of purity (nairmalya) and its
opposite. (183cd-184ab)

In this way, exponents of all views have established that in the course of
the business of daily life (vyavahāra) etc., consciousness is dependent on
discursive ideation (vikalpa). In order to clarify (that) once (that dependence) is
abandoned, (consciousness) is (realised to be essentially) independent of

discursive ideation,'" he gives an example:

niśīthe ‘pi maṇijñānī vidyutkālapradarśitān || 184 ||
tāṁs tān viśeṣāṁś cinute ratnānāṁ bhīūyasām api |
(In fact consciousness always discerns its object directly,
independently of thought constructs, just as a skilled jeweller) who knows
jewels," even in the dead of night, discerns the particular qualities of even

“ n the next two verses, Abhinava explains what he means by the ‘purity’ or mirror-

like ‘translucency” of the aspect of consciousness that is free of thought constructs.

“] variously translate ‘vikaḹpa’, according to the context, as ‘thought’, ‘notion’, ‘idea’,
‘ideationʼ, ‘discursive ideation’, and ‘determinate representation.
“ Ṣee below, 1/229ab (1/229cd), where what is meant by ‘a skilled jeweller’

(conversely, cf. the expression ratnatattvam avidvān in 1/228a). The jewel, we are told

below, is the pure Self (4/111cd-113ab). Abhinava is referring here to the intuitive
foundation of perception which, free of thought constructs, perceives the nature of its

object directly. Not only is this pure cognitive consciousness the epistemic foundation

of all empirical knowledge; it is also the manner in which the Divine Means
(sśāmbhavopāya) operates. The expert jeweller recognizes the value of a gem in an
instant (cf. 4/239). Similarly, the practitioner in the Śāmbhava state perceives the true

nature of things as manifestations of consciousness, that is, as the effulgence (sphurattā)

of his essential Śiva nature, in the flash of the initial moment of perception. If the
jeweller is less skilled, he cannot manage to know the value ofa gem just at a glance; he

needs time to look at each gem carefully, and must think for some time in order to

aṣsess its value. Thus, he is cast into the sphere of thought, like one who practices in
Śāktopāya. There thought is gradually purified until it merges in the state of certainty

TANTRĀLOKA

a large number of gems that are illuminated (for just the very short) span

of time of a lightning flash." (Similarly, the man of knowledge grasps the

nature of the object in the flash of pure awareness that precedes the
formation of thought constructs, as one with his own conscious nature).
(184cd-185ab)
A (skilled) jeweller comes to know, by virtue (of his) superior (and

abundant) experience, the very subtle, mutually distinguishing features ‘of even
a large number of gems’, even in a limited (amount of) light that lasts a short

time, without (having to) determine (them) (avasāya). 1t is because of this that
he possesses (the capacity to) discern (viveka) that “his (gem) has little (value),

this one a lot, and this (other) gem (compared to) that one also is very valuable
(mahadratna).”

free of thought, when it reaches the highest degree of clarity (see 1/229ab-229cd
(1/229cd-230ab)).

'“ The same example is given by Bhartṛhari, the philosopher of language, in his
Vākyapādīya (1/35). There it serves to illustrate how the pratibhā which is the capacity

to understand language, operates by grasping meaning in an instant, without intervening

ratiocination. Thus, those who know a language well can grasp the meaning of a word
or statement in an instant, whereas others require practice to do so. If we are right to

identify Bhūtirājatanaya (the ‘son of Bhūtirāja), to whom Abhinava refers as one of his
teachers (37/61ab (37/60)), as Helārāja who wrote an important commentary on it,

Abhinava may have studied it with him. Whether this is correct or not, it is remains

possible that his lost ‘Prakīraṇakavivaraṇa’ may have been a commentary (vivaraṇa)
on parts of the third chapter of Bhartṛhari’s Vākyapadīya that goes by that name (Gnoli
1999: intro. p. 78). A variant of this verse is found in the MVV (1/179). There instead of
niśīte pi maṇijñānī “(a skilled jeweller,) who knows jewels even in the dead of night’ ,
the reading is ramatattvasphuṭaprajño ‘one who has a clear (and well-developed)

knowledge of the true nature of gems’.

As is the case in Abhinava’s works on Trika prior to the Tantrāloka, there is no
reference in the MVV to SŚāmbhavopāya. Even so, the state was well known to him.
There this verse, along with two that follow, serve to illustrate with examples how Śiva
can be realised in an instant by those who, well-practiced, can know ultimate reality

spontaneously in an instant. He writes:

‘A person who (is) at one (with the music) (tanmaya) experiences the beauty
(vaicitrya) in a large number of notes applied by a dexterous touch (arranged) in a single
extension (of musical sound) on the vīṇa. One whose sense of hearing has reached the
highest limit through (rigorous) training, tranquil (without effort), knows the notes of

that (melody) and (can) even (judge) whether the microtones are lower of higher. May

this suffice! In this doctrine of nonduality this (etad) is established without effort: even

when duality appears, reality is nondual.” 180-182.
Even in a system that rests entirely on duality (like Patañjali’s Yoga), this is

clearly established. Patañjali, for instance, states in the chapter with the name ‘magic

power that ‘everything is also known by intuitive knowledge’. And it is also stated by

me in this work (atra) that in the first opening of intuition (which is consciousness
itself) and undivided, there is (sthita) an appearance (udaya) of the fruits of all
perfection in the form of a vibrant emergence (sphurattā) of everything. MVV 1/183-

185ab Partly Hannederʼs translation.

CHAPTER ONE

What is the reason (nimitta) here for the superiority of his experience,
by virtue of which he can determine the nature of an entity, even independently
of thought? (In response to this question,) he says:

īĩcā tṁrē árzaraazīmezī 1| q¢., ||

nairmalyaṁ saṁvidaś cedaṁ pūrvābhyāsavaśād atho || 185 ||
aniyantreśvarecchāta ity etac carcayiṣyate |
Now, as we shall explain later, (the ability to discern) this purity

of consciousness (nairmalya) (which precedes and is the basis of all
thought that apparently sullies this purity) is achieved by previous practice,
or likewise, by the Lord’s unrestricted will. (I85cd-186ab)
(By) ‘previous practice’ (is meant practice) in another (past) life. Thus

‘we shall explain later,’ for example in Chapter Thirteen (in the context of the
teaching concerning the descent of the power of Śiva’s grace – śaktipāta).
This penetration is not only of three kinds, insofar as there are also
other, secondary kinds. Thus, he says:

Varieties of Gradations and the Trika Triad

TGJTJfR̥̄ṬTT

eE.

S

pañcāśadvidhatā cāsya samāveśasya varṇitā || 186 ||
tattvaṣaṭtriṁśakaitatsthasphuṭabhedābhiṣandhitaḥ |
Fifty

varieties

of

this

penetration

are

described

(in

the

Maālinīvijayottara-tantra) īn accord with (how) these (three) clearly apparent
categories (bheda), located amongst the thirty-six metaphysical principles

(tattva), are discerned (and conjoined together) (abhisandhitaḥ). (186cd187ab)
!“ R̥ead atha for atho at the end of the line.

'“ The point is that the one Śāmbhava penetration includes the Empowered and

Individual. Thus, the Divine Means includes the other two categories of means and so

‘precedesʼ them as their basis.
'“ Verses 1/186cd-196 are essentially a commentary on MV 2/17-19, quoted by
Jayaratha here. The series of penetrations are meant for yogis who penetrate the fifty

realities listed below in a progressive upwards ascent, by contemplating, conjoining and
absorbing them one by one into their subjective consciousness to finally penetrate into
and be penetrated by pure Śiva consciousness. The more advanced yogi may also reach

TANTRĀLOKA

(The fifty varieties of penetration are) ‘described’ in the Śrīpūrvaśāstra
(i.e. the Māliṇīvijayottaratantra). As is said there:
‘O fair faced lady, penetration by Rudra’s power is described
(paripathyate)" as being of five kinds. (These are the penetrations) of 1) the
gross elements, 2) the metaphysical principles, 3) the Self, 4) Mantra, and 5) the

power of the Lord.'" The one called elemental is here of five kinds and the
next one thirty. The one called the Self is said to be of three kinds, and the one
called Mantra, ten kinds. Again, one should know that in reality the one called

Power is also of two kinds. (Thus,) this penetration is said to be divided into

fifty kinds.”

The cause here (of these forms of penetration) is the synthetic

contemplation (anusandhāna)' of the ‘clearly apparent categoriesʼ, that is,

types (prakāra) that will be described (further ahead, consisting) of the Person
and the rest, that are amongst the thirty-six principles, and the principles
the same goal by traversing groupings of them of them, especially the Trika triad, to
which the next verse refers. See commentary to the following verse for an enumeration

of the fifty divisions. In Chapter Three, verses 274cd-281ab (274-280), Abhinaya

presents these 50 samāveśas as equivalent to the fifty forms of reflective awareness
(parāmarśa) that constitute the recognition of the plenitude of AHAṀ of Bhairava, who
is the true nature of the liberated soul, realised through the perfection of Śāmbhavopāya.

!) ṞRead with the printed edition of the MV, paripathyate for nanu caryate. Just before

this passage in the MV we find a brief description of the five corresponding signs of the
descent of Rudra’s power MV (2/14 ff.). See below, 3/293ab (3/292), 13/117cd-120ab,
214-216.

™ Iṭ is probably better to understand -mantreśaśakti- to means ‘the Lords of Mantra

and powerʼ. This is how it is translated in my translation of the MV. I follow Jayaratha
here because it is clear that he understands -nantreśaśakti- to be ‘Mantra and the power
of the Lordʼ, although the expression 7
ti is not at all common. Thuṣ, in Jayaratha’s

commentary to the next verse, he explains the ten aspects of Mantra (which he calls
Vidyā) as ten phases of the utterance of Mantra.

MV 2/17-19. The MV continues saying that these fifty are of three basic types, and

then goes on to present the definition of the types of penetrations in the verses quoted

above in 1/168-170, of which what follows is essentially an explanation. Thus,

Abhinava has reversed the order of presentation again in this case as well, not just that

of the three major penetrations.

” ] ṭranslate the term ‘abhiṣandhi’ and its cognate ‘anusandhāna’ as ‘synthetic

contemplationʼ. 1t is derived from the root sandh in the sense of ‘conjunction’ or

‘coming together’. So ‘abhisandhī and ‘anusandhāna’ also denote the process of
unification or conjoining together. In this case, principles and powers are conjoined in

the contemplative absorption brought about by the penetration that corresponds to them.
The double meaning of these terms is exploited extensively in the Śivasūtra, where the
term ‘(anu- / abhi-) sandhāna’ appears several times. For example, in sūtra 1/6 –—
‘śakticakrānusaṁdhāne viśvasaṁṅhāraḥ. Two translations are required to cover the

original sense thus: “when contemplating (and fusing together) the Wheel of Energies,

the universe is withdrawn’. Cf. also ŚSū 1/20 – śaktisaṁdhāne śarīrotpattiḥ, in this case
the emphasis is reversed ‘when the energies are fused together (and contemplated,) the
body comes into being.”

CHAPTER ONE

(themselves), that will be explained individually (further ahead in Chapter

Nine).

He (now) describes this division (of the metaphysical principles):

TGTTTJT- JAT{THTTTÑCTHa TTT IIṞ¢S II

etat tattvāntare yat puṁvidyāśaktyātmakaṁ trayam || 187 II
ambhodhikāṣṭhājvalanasaṁkhyair bhedair yataḥ kramāt |
This is so because the three, namely, the Person (Nara), Knowledge
(Vidyā) and Power (Śakti), that are amongst these (thirty-six) metaphysical
principles (and span them), are of four, ten and three different kinds

(bheda), respectively. (187cd-188ab)

(To complete the sense,) an addition (adhyāhāra) (is required, namely,)

‘and they are separate from that (series of thirty-six principles).

1) Thus, there (in that context, it is said concerning the principle of the)

Person (purhs): ‘this Self is of four kinds”." In accord with this dictum, it is
divided into four kinds, characterized as (the four kinds of perceivers called)
Conditioned (Sakala), Dissolution Deconditioned (Pralayākala), Consciousness

Deconditioned (Vijñānākala), and Pure (Śuddha).
2) Similarly, mantra (vidyā) is divided into ten divisions (bheda),"
namely, the letter (varṇa), the Point (Bindu), Half Moon (Ardhacandra), the
Obstructress (Nirodhinī), Sound (Nāda), the End of Sound (Nādanta), Power
(Śakti), the Pervasive One (Vyapinī), the Equal One (Samana),

Transmental (Unmanā).

and the

3) Similarly, Power (śakti) is divided into three divisions, which are (the
powers of) will, (icchā), knowledge (jñāna) and action (kriyā).

The three principles of the Person, Knowledge and Power constitute one of the triads
(trika) that are characteristic of the Trika (‘trūadic’) teachings. Jayaratha is saying that,

just as additions generally need to be made to the aphorisms (siūtra) of Pāṇini’s grammar
for them to make sense (a practice technically called adhyāhāra), similarly here we need

to add the statement that these three principles ‘are separate from that (series of thirtysix principles), in the sense that they are principles in themselves.

The printed edition of MV 1/22c reads jeyas for hy eṣah.
. There are three kinds of pure perceivers above Māyā, namely, Mantras,

Mantreśvaras and Mahāmantreśvaras. These are the perceivers of the thirty-three
priṉciples ending with Sadāśiva (see above, 1/77ab-80ab (1/77-80) and notes). Thus,

they include the penetration of the five gross elements and that of the remaining
principles which, along with four pertaining to the Self, mentioned in the citation from
the MV in the commentary to the previous verse, together make thirty-seven. These,

along with the ten pertaining to Vidyā (called Mantra in the citation) and the three
pertaining to Śakti, together make fifty.

1 Theṣe are the phases of OM and seed-syllable Mantras on the same model, both their

audible phonemic sound (varṇa), which is the first division, and the following nine
above the level of their audible sound.
See Appendix to this chapter.

TANTRĀLOKA

Why has this group of three principles been taught separately? With this

doubt in mind, he says:

TaTTI-āJKTG WCT TITT fkōō
puṅvidyāśaktisaṁjñaṁ yat tat sarvavyāpakaṁ yataḥ || 188 II
avyāpakebhyastenedaṁ bhedena gaṇitaṁ kila |
The three called the Person, Knowledge and Power pervade the

entire (series of thirty-six metaphysical principles). Thus, they have been

reckoned apart from the other (principles), which are not pervasive.”
(188cd-189ab)

(These three principles differ from) the other (principles), ‘which are

not pervasive’, (namely, those) that are pervaded (by these three). The
pervasion of the Principle of the Self (aka the Person) (extends the principle of
Earth) up to Māyā, that of the Principle of Knowledge (from Maāyā) up to
Sadāśiva, and that of the Principle of Power (from that reality level) up to Śiva.
As is said: “(Their) pervasion (extends) progressively (from Earth up to) Māyā,

(from that reality level up to) Sadāśiva, and (finally) right up to Śiva.

Theṣe three pervade the metaphysical principles, whereas the latter do not pervade

each other, and so, differing from them in this way, they are reckoned separateḷy from
them, even though they are constituted by them.

'" Ṛead -prāntavyāptir ity anukramāt for —prāntavyāptrī nanu kramāt.

Cf. tattvatrayaṁ paraṁ khyātam aparaṁ cādhvamadhyagam | SVT 4/403ab
commentary: paraṁ śuddhātmonmanāparaśivarūpaṁ yat tattvatrayaṁ prakāśitam, yac

cāparaṁ

sthūlam

adhvamadhyagam

pañcamapaṭalabhāvitattvabhuvanādhvadīkṣāmadhye
ātmavidyāśivākhyaṁ tattvatrayaṁ

iti

‘(A group of) three principles is said to be supreme. The inferior one is in the
midst of the Path.’ (SVT 4/403ab) The supreme has been revealed to be the triad of

principles consisting of the Pure Self, the Transmental and Paraśiva (Knowledge),
whereas the inferior one is gross and is in the midst of the Path. This is the triad of

principles called the Self (ātman), Knowledge (vidyā) and Śiva that pervade (the
principles up to) Māyā, Sadāśiva and Śiva respectively in the midst of the initiation by
means of the Path of the Worlds (bhuvanādhvadīkṣā) that will be (taught in) Chapter

Five. . .… ḷ

tritattvaṁ yat paraṁ proktaṁ tena cāpūritā tanuḥ || 4-406 II
parādiśaktitrayamayena āmmakalpenetyarthaḥ || 406 ||

‘The body is filled with that which is called the supreme triple principle.”
(4/406cd) The meaning is that (the body is filled) with that which is conceived to be the

Self, consisting of the three powers, Parā and the rest.

etac ca tritattvaṁ yasmād adhvātītaṁ samanāntam atikramya sthitaṁ tasmāt paraṁ
tattvam, yat tu māyāsadāśivaśivavyāptyā tad aparaṁ yasmād adhvamadhyagam, ata

CHAPTER ONE
This (triad) is not only separate from the other (thirty-six) principles,

rather (they are) also (separate) from one another. He says this:

aśuddhiśuddhyamānatvaśuddhitastu mitho ‘pi tat || 189 II
They are also mutually (related and yet distinguished) as (the
Person, which is the principle that spans) the impure (principles),
(Knowledge, those) in the process of being purified (and so are pure-cumimpure), and (Power, the one that) is pure. (189cd)
The Person is ‘impure’ because (the principles up to Māyā he pervades

and with which he is identified) consist of duality (bheda). Knowledge is ‘in the

process of being purified’ because (the principles above Māyā, from Pure

Knowledge (śuddhavidyā) up to Sadāśiva, which it encompasses and with
which it is identified,) consist of unity-in-diversity (bhedābheda). Power is

‘pure’ because it consists of oneness (abheda).

evāpareṇātmāditattvatrayeṇa dharādeḥ śivāntasyāntaḥkṛtatvāt tad ārabdhā ---aparā sā tanuḥ sthūlā ṣaṭriṁśattattvakalpitā | iyaṁ punaḥ ----

And that triple principle (extends) beyond the Path, it abides (in its place,)

having traversed beyond the end of the Equal One, and so is the supreme principle.
Whereas that which, pervading (the principles up to) Māyā, Sadāśiva and Śiva is the

inferior one, and s0 is ‘in the midst of the Path’. Thus, the inferior one, consisting of the

three principles of the Self and the rest, internalizes (within itself) (the principles)

beginning with Earth up to Śiva. Having done that, that gross inferior body is fashioned
from the thirty-six principles. Again, (concerning) this (it is said):
tattvatrayaṁ paraṁ yac ca sarvatattvādhvavarjitam || 4-407 ||
tena cāpūritāśeṣaṁ sā tattvādhvaparā tanuḥ |

samastādhvātikrāntaṁ yat śuddhātmāditattvatrayaṁ tenoktasatattvenāśeṣaṁ kṛtvā
āpūritā sarvātmatābhāsanena vyāptā yā prakrāntā nādaśaktyātmā tanuḥ sā

tattvādhvanaḥ sakāśāt parā prakṛṣṭā |/ 407 1

‘Everything is filled with the supreme triad of principles, which is devoid of all
the Path of the principles, and that is the supreme body of the Path of the principle.’

(SVT 4/407cd-408ab)
The triad of principles (consisting of) the Pure Self etc. is beyond the entire
Path, and so is said that, having fashioned everything along with (its fundamental)

reality (tattva), the body is ‘filled’ (with everything), that is, pervaded by manifesting as
everything, is the power of Sound (nādaśakti), which (issuing forth) from the Path of the

Principles is ‘supreme’, that is, most excellent.”
The division of the thirty-six principles into three in this way is to make practice
easier for those who are more developed. This takes place at least on two levels. One is
ritual. The realities or aspects of the one reality, like forms of the Deity, attendant

deities, their consorts, varieties of supernatural beings, accomplished yogis, teachers and

more, all have their corresponding mantras. Ritual, whether performed externally or
imagined in various ways to take place within the body, is essentially, from this
perspective, the actualization of these realities — worlds, principles, cosmic forces —

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) agreed that this is so, but what is the reason for

mentioning the gross elements separately? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Five Elements

JT-JTAÑTGTT TTĀRGTTTJT |

[iBāīPRVGEEIGIĒEEGṈṈIḺTI
bhūtāny adhyakṣasiddhāni kāryahetvanumeyataḥ |
tattvavargāt pṛthag bhūtasamākhyāny ata eva hi l| 190 ||

(The existence) of the gross elements (bhiūta) is proved by direct
perception, and so they are classified separately from the (other) group of
principles (tattva), (whose existence) can only be inferred by (their) effects,
(of which they are) the cause (kāryahetu). (190)

The gross elements are proved to exist to this extent by direct
perception. This is why they are taken up (and treated) separately from the other
metaphysical principles, which invariably can only be inferred (to exist, and are
not perceived directly). He says that (by declaring that for this reason they are
classified separately, apart) ‘from the (other) group of principles (tattva)
(whose existence) can only be inferred by (their) effects, (of which they are)

the cause (kāryahetu)ʼ. In this way, here (in this context,) the gross elements

are the preceding causes (of their effects) because, as they are insentient, they

are associated with innumerable (material entities) such as jars etc. This is the

inference. In accord with the dictum that ‘the gross elements (come) from the

subtle ones . . ., ṭheir cause is (the group of five sensations, which are) the

through their corresponding Mantras, so that they can be worshipped as parts of a
cosmos, and the divine beings who reside in it are all sacred and sanctified as
emanations and thereby extensions of Deity. The Mantras are all these things even as
they are the means by which they are worshipped. Arranged in layers, spreading in all

directions along the vertical axis mundi, the parts and divisions of this sacred cosmos

are naturally and systematically ordered. Each layer pervades its own worlds, beings,
principles etc. The layers themselves are also included within the pervasive spheres of

more extensive and encompassing principles and forces. Accordingly, their Mantras are
more inclusive, and their utterance pervades more extensively. In this way, just three,

that is, the Mantras of the SeIf, Vidyā and Śiva, pervade all of them.

Viewing the gamut of reality from the perspective of consciousness

is,

insight, as the Kashmiri masters do, the principles are aspects of the scintillating
manifestation of the cognitive activity of consciousness. These unfold as phases of this
activity ranging from the oneness (abheda) of pure Siva consciousness, through to the

unity-in-diversity (bhedābheda) of the sphere of Śakti, and the duality of the sphere of
the individual Self (ātman).

' Svāyambhuvasūtrasamgraha 33/10a. The whole line reads: tanmātrebhyaś ca
bhūtāni sarvaṁ ca kramaśo ‘sr̥jat | `the gross elements (come) from the subtle elements.

(He) emanated everything gradually (in due order).
The subtle elements are the five sensations perceived by the senses, namely,
sound, form, taste, smell and touch. These sensations combine in various ways to form

CHAPTER ONE

subtle elements (tanmātra) (whose existence) can be inferred from their effects,

namely, the gross elements. Similarly, by this same (kind of) inference, one can

infer (the existence) of the entire group of principles up to Māyā. This will

(all) be (discussed in Chapter Nine, that deals with) the Path of the Principles,
and so there is (no need) to exert (oneself) here (further). Thus (in short, the

existence of the gross elements (bhūta) is established (directly)) by perception,

‘and so’ (they are classified separately).

the gross elements. Space, for example, which is the subtlest element, is generated from
touch alone. Earth, which is the grossest, is generated from all five, amongst which
smell is predominant. The reason is simple. It is generally believed that pervasive tactile
sensation we have is of Space. Earth has a sound, form, taste, and touch, but above all

has its own characteristic smell. The peculiar ‘materialistic idealism’ of the Sāṁkhya is
aḍopted with adaptations by most theistic schools of Sanskritic Hinduism, including

both Vaiṣṇavism and Śaivism as a whole. It understands that the previous higher, more
subtle principles, are the cause of the lower ones. Within the sphere of Nature, the series

begins with the intellect, ranging down to Earth. Thus, reversing the order, one would
expect the mind, including the intellect, to generate the senses and these, sensations,
from which come the gross elements. As we shall see in Chapter Nine, the principles
below mind are emanated by the ego (aharṁkāra), the third of the three internal senses.

The ‘ṣubtle elements’ (tanmātra) are the five types of sensation perceived by the

five senses, such as the form of an object by sight. They are inferred to exist as

metaphysical principles in their own right, as it is through the sensations we have of
physical objects that, in this idealist view, they exist as objects within consciousness.
The sensations in their turn, from this idealist perspective, exist because of the senses

and so on, up the series of principles, as described in the following note. The principles
up to Māyā exist, according to their nature, within the sphere of objectivity, and so can

be known objectively through inference and direct perception. In the sphere of the
principles beyond Māyā, objectivity is merged in various ways in the subjectivity of

universal consciousness. Thus, these principles are known to exist through the exercise
of the reflective awareness consciousness has of itself. This consciousness is not that of
the individual soul, which is contracted and individual. The subjectivity of this
consciousness, above the sphere of Māyā, is not contracted by it and so is universal, not

individual.
As we shall see in detail in Chapter Nine, the metaphysical principles (tattva) are the

categories into which all the countless individual components of reality and the
experience of it can be classified. For example, all solid physical objects, like jars,
belong to the Earth principle, just as fluid ones to Water. Gross physical entities can be

perceived, others cannot. These are the remaining components or factors that constitute

experience. Travelling upwards, they are the five sensations or subtle elements
(tanmātra), corresponding in the manner described in Chapter Nine to the five gross

elements. These are the sensations perceived by the group of five senses, which is above

them in the series of principles. They are sound (śabda) – hearing, form (rūpa) – sight,
taste (rasa) – tongue, touch (sparśa) – skin, and smell (gandha) – nose. Above them are
the five organs of action: hands (pāṇi), feet (pāda), anus (pāyu), genitals (upasthā) and
speech (vāc). Then come the three inner mental senses: ego (ahaṁkāra), mind (manas),
and intellect (buddhi). Above them is Nature (prakṛti) and the individual soul (puruṣa).
These twenty-five principles are those of the Sāṁkhya. Āgamic Śaivism adds eleven

above them. The six above the individual soul are related to its limitations. These are its
capacity for limited action (kalā) and knowledge (vidyā), attachment (rāga), time (kāla)
and the law of causal and karmic necessity (niyati). They are considered to be aspects or

energies of Māyā, which is the principle above them. The thirty-one principles up to

TANTRĀLOKA

Surely (one may ask,) agreed that there is (good) reason (to consider)
the gross elements, which can be proved to exist (directly) by perception,
separately from the group of principles that can (only) be inferred to exist.
However, (the question remains,) why should it not also be the case with the

gross elements (surely, are they not also inferred to exist)? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

r̥a f 1

sarvapratītisadbhāvagocaraṁ bhūtam eva hi |
viduś catuṣṭaye cātra sāvakāśe tadāṣthitim || 191 |I
(The gross Elements are called ‘bhūta’, meaning literally ‘existent’,

because) an ‘existent"" js that whose true nature is perceived by

everybody, and they know that to be the case here with four (of the five

gross elements), along with space (āvakāśa) (as the fifth). (191)

(The gross Elements are called ‘bhūta’, meaning literally ‘existent’

because) an ‘existent’, which is the very domain of (true) existence (sattāyā
Māyā are called ‘impure’ (aśuddhatattva), because they are all within the domain of
duality (bheda) in which individual perceivers and agents are related to their objects as
separate multiple entities. This, we have seen, is the sphere of the principle of the Self

(ātmatattva). The following principles are Pure Knowledge (sśuddhavidyā), Īśvara,
Sadāśiva. Śakti and Śiva. The universe emitted by Śiva through His Śakti is experienced
in various ways to be one with the perceiver in the first three of these principles. The

universe exists at these levels in a subtle form, just enough to be experienced as one
with Siva’s universal and transcendental consciousness. Thus, this
is the sphere of unity-

in-difference (bhedabheda), which is that of the Principle of Śakti. The thirty-sixth

principle beyond that is Śiva, Who is pure transcendental oneness. This is the sphere of
nonduality (abheda) which, after the Principle of the Self and Śakti, is the third, the
Principle of Śiva. Beyond these thirty-six, that are common dualist Siddhānta but
understood here in a nondualist perspective, there are said to be two more. The thirty-

seventh is Bhairava, also called Paramasiva, Who is both immanent and transcendent.
Above that is the thirty-eighth principle, which is the Inexplicable. This is necessarily

the last one, because any attempt to define it leads down to a lower one (see below,
11/21-23ab).
AII the thirty-six principles, arranged in this sequence and groupings, form a

causal chain such that the immediately preceding group is the cause of the succeeding

one. This is the reverse of what one would normally think is the case. The five gross
elements are products of sensations, these of the outer senses, these of the inner senses,

these of Nature, and that of Individual Soul whose contracted state of consciousness is a
result of Māyā and its five attendant principles. Māyā is a product of the higher ‘pure
principles. Thus, as the higher principles generate the lower, the upper end of the chain

is the ultimate uncaused cause of everything. The gross elements, which is the last group

in the descending series, are directly perceptible, whereas the others, that is the
principles above them, as our text says, can only be inferred by their effects.

Abhinava plays on the double meaning of the word ‘bhāta’, which means both
‘gross element’ and ‘existent’.

CHAPTER ONE

gocaram eva), is said to be that which is perceived as it truly is by everybody,

(both by) the learned and those who are not, alike. An ‘existent’ (bhūta) is true

(not false), and that is true concerning which there is no difference of opinion by
anybody at any time. Those who are not learned do not perceive (the nature of
anything) when it is an object of inference to that extent (tāvat), whereas those

who are learned, even though they do perceive it, disagree in many ways with
one another (as to what it is), and so there (in that case), it is even possible that

(it can be considered to be) unreal. This is the point (Abhinavagupta is making).
(The word) ‘and’ (means ‘and s0’) for that reason ‘everybody’ ‘knows’ that

the ʻfour’ ending with Air, along with ‘space’, which is (so called) because it

gives space,' that make up the group of five (gross) elements beginning with

Earth, (possess) the ‘condition’ of a gross element (i.e. is truly existent) because
(its) ‘true nature is perceived by everybody’. Thus, it was rightly said that ʻso
the gross elements (bhūta) (are classified separately).
In this way, elemental penetration (bhautāveśa) is of five kinds and the

penetration of the Self is of three kinds. One should include just one of the
divisions of the (penetration of) the Self, that is, the principle of the individual

soul, amongst the (series of) metaphysical principles; otherwise, there would not

be (the required) thirty (forms of) penetration of the principles.' Vidyā, as was
said before, is in its universal (common — sāmanya) aspect, Mantra, and as such,

ten kinds of penetration pertain to it. In (its) specific aspect, it is reckoned

amongst the (pure) principles in the form of the Mantra, Mantreśa and

Mantramaheśa subjects (who are the perceivers in the principles of Pure
Knowledge, Īśvara and Sadāṣiva, respectively). In the same way, having placed
one division of (the principle of) Power amongst the (thirty-six) principles (as
the principle of Śakti), (this) penetration is of two kinds. In the case of Śiva, He
is Himself what is to be penetrated, and so no penetration (takes place) there (in
that case), because His nature is the supreme nondual (reality) (paramādvaya),
with respect to which the distinction (bheda) between the ‘penetrated’ and the

‘penetrator’ is untenable, and so it is rightly said that ‘the penetration of

(Rudra’s power) is of fifty kinds.

Surely (one may ask,) was not the nature of (the penetration of) the

Elements and the rest described in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra after an initial
declaration that the five kinds of penetration of Rudra’s power would be
discussed? (How can that be?) Thus, (in response to this question,) he says:

TRYITRĀTTITTTT.
ṬJHĪ T] T-ĀÑ |
'" The fifth element akāśa – variously translated as ‘space’ or ‘ether° – gives space –
avākāśa – to the entities made of the other elements.
Above, 1/190d.

'"“ Above we were told that the Person is of four kinds, corresponding to four types of

perceivers (see 1/187cd-188ab). Now Jayaratha points out that the penetration

corresponding to it is of three kinds, as the Person is also one of the metaphysical
principles (tattva) and so is not counted separately. Similarly, above we were told that

Śakti is of three kinds, but there are only two corresponding penetrations; the third kind
of Śakti is the metaphysical principle, that is, reality level.

See above, 1/186cd-187ab.

TANTRĀḶOKA

sarīdī vyarāā raārāṁzaī || z82 11|
EFEGIHĒETEIEHḤEĀEEEĀ

ṛāT TTTJTaSĪĪ GJTAHĪ fJērēfrā̄T: 11/283 1

rudraśaktisamāveśaḥ pañcadhā nanu carcyate |

ko ʻvakāśo bhavet tatra bhautāveśādivarṇane || 192 ||

prasaṅgādetaditi cet samādhiḥ sambhavannayam |

nāsmākaṁ mānasāvarjī loko bhinnaruciryataḥ || 193 |
Surely, (one may ask: the Mālinīvijayottara) is expounding the five-

fold penetration of Rudra’s power, so what occasion is there to describe

the penetration of the Elements and the rest there (in that context)? If you
were to justify this by saying that this (topic is discussed there only)
incidentally (in the course of the main discussion, our response is that)
people without (sensible) views and with tastes other than (ours) are not

our own (people). (192-193)

“What occasion is there?” (There is none,) because the penetration of

the Elements and the rest is not a subject taken up for discussion. Talking about

a subject that has not been taken up for discussion (aprastutābhidhāna) occurṣ

when, having begun (by discussing) something, one then talks about something
else. Thus it is said: ‘what occasion is there to describe there the penetration

of the Elements and the rest? Now, although a description of the penetration

of Rudra’s power had been announced, this was discussed ‘incidentallyʼ. This
too is improper and so he says: ‘this (topic is discussed there only)
incidentallyʼ. If something is discussed in addition to that which does not
(directly) concern (the main topic), when (the discussion of that) topic is (so
well) under way that it has been virtually concluded, it is justified (by saying
that) ‘this (topic) is discussed (there only) incidentally (in the course of the

main discussion)”. But here (in this case), although the topic has been

announced, but without having (gone on to) state the definition (of the subject)

and investigated etc.,'" all of a sudden the penetration of the Elements and the

rest is discussed; how is this (discussion) incidental? In that case, as subjects for
discussion (prameya) which are out of context are endless, does that mean that

an incidental’ (topic) would (involve) discussion of innumerable related

subjects? So he says: “(people) without (sensible) views are not our own

(people)ʼ.
Well, if that is the case, then what should one accept (to be the correct
view)?

'” See MV 2/17-19 (quoted above in TĀv ad 1/186cd-187ab), according to which there

are five types of penetration of Rudra’s power (rudraśakti) into the elements (bhūta),
the principles (tattva), the Self, the Lords of Mantra, and Power (Śakti).

' Enunciation (uddeśa), definition (lakṣaṇa) and investigation (parīkṣā) of a topic are
the phases in a formal presentation and discussion of a subject. See below 1/247ab
(1/24ca) ff.

CHAPTER ONE

JTTĀĪ āJI TT

TJIT zaTTSTT |I 28%
1I

ucyate dvaitaśāstreṣu parameśād vibheditā |
bhūtādīnāṁ yathā sātra na tathā dvayavarjite || 194 ||
(We reply) that it is not said here (in this view), which is free of
dualism, that the Elements are different from the Supreme Lord, as it is in
the dualist scriptures. (194)
‘Here’ (means) in (this) nondualist scripture, that is, the venerable

Mālinīvijayottara. ‘That’ duality (is not our view). (Rather,) it is denied, in
order to be free of dualism.
And so, what is that? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Goddess as the Thirty-six Principles and their Dī

IāTTĪTa:
IST āē-rēf̃ fhzrī |

TTaīdr
ṃarīzēīī rṣTTTRĀTTTĪĪ || 234, 1 |
yāvān ṣaṭṭriṁśakaḥ so ‘yaṁ yad anyad api kiñcana |
etāvatī mahādevī rudraśaktir anargalā || 195 ||
As is this entire group of thirty-six (principles) and so too whatever
else (may exist), such is the extent of the Great Goddess, Who is Rudra’s
power free of (all) restrictions. (195)
(Whatever) ‘else’ (may exist), that is, the (various) types (of orders of

existing things associated with) that (group of thirty-six principles), such as the

world-orders and the like. (The Goddess) is ‘free of (all) restrictions’. The

meaning is that because She pervades (all things, She is) not obstructed

(pratihatā) (by anything)."' As is said:

“This universe is Your Wheel of Energies as the perceived, perceiver
and perception. Some (inscrutable higher reality) shines perpetually in the end,
beginning and middle (between each of them) that is not completely separate

from You (as are these three).”

As everything is the Great Goddess, the objection is groundless, as the elements are

not different from Rudra’s power. Note that Abhinava is also referring in this way to the

extent of the pervasion of the Śāmbhava penetration.

' This verse is from a Krama text. However, the sophisticated idealist presentation of

the twelve phases of the Wheel of Energies, that is, the Twelve Kālīs, is evidence that it

does not belong to original scriptural corpus. Its setting in the form of a hymn reinforces
it. As the phases are twelve, the text postdates Abhinava. Indeed, it is not impossible

that these are his words.

TANTRĀLOKA

He corroborates (his view) with the purport (of the teaching) that is
there (in the Mālinīvijaya):

=āērzr |

IĪṜJēTr TaāzvaTTRŪRT: || q¢ē |1|
tata eva dvitīye ‘sminn adhikāre nyarūpyata |
dharāder viśvarūpatvaṁ pāñcadaśyādibhedataḥ || 196 |
Thus (this is the reason the Lord) described in the second chapter
in this (Maālinīvijayottara) the omniformity of the Earth and the rest (of the)

principles as having fifteen etc. subdivisions. (196)

‘Thus (this is the reason)ʼ, because such (tāvat) is the unfolding

expansion

(sphāra) of Rudra’s power.'

(It is said)

‘in this’

Mālinīvijayottara. As is said there (in the passage) beginning with:

the

‘The Earth principle is differentiated by the division of (seven) energies
(Śakti) and (seven) powerholders (śaktimar), and (so), along with its own nature
(svarūpa), it should be known to be fifteen-fold.’ And ending with: “. . . Śiva,

directly apparent, is not divided.”

” Śee MV 2/1-7ab. This division into fifteen is described in detail below in Chapter

Ten. See especially 10/1-28, 97cd-186ab and notes. We have seen that there are seven

types of perceivers, arranged in a hierarchy along the gamut of the thirty-six principles
(see above, note 598). Each of these, according to its place in the series, has its own

corresponding object, thus making fourteen divisions. The fifteenth is the ‘own nature’

of the two. Thus, as subjectivity develops and reaches the next higher stage of

subjectivity, the divisions decrease two by two until only the ‘own nature’ remains. As
the higher levels are contained in the lower ones, which are their causes as potentials,
and the lower in the higher, as their actualization, all of them contain all the others. This
is their ‘omniformity°.
MS Jh reads -sāratvāt (‘because (such is) the essence (of Rudra’s power)). MS Ñ

reads –sphuraṇavāt and MSs T and DḌ -sphuratvāt, which means the same, namely:

‘because (such is) the pulsating radiance (of Rudra’s power).
' MV 2/2, 7cd. The latter is also quoted below in TĀv ad 10/188cd-192ab. The whole
passage (i.e. MV 2/2-7), which is quoted below in TĀv ad 10/3-5, reads:
‘The Earth principle is differentiated by the division of (seven) energies (śakti)
and (seven) powerholders (sśaktimat), and (so) along with its own nature (svarūpa), it
should be known to be fifteen-fold . . . The subjects who are the possessors of power
(are seven,) from Śiva to the Conditioned (Sakala), and the wise say that the powers are
(also) seven. Those who aspire to (their) respective fruits should know that, like the
Earth, analogously, the aggregate of the various principles from Water to Nature, is
divided into these (fifteen) divisions. In the same way, one should know that the
principles from the Individual Soul up to the Force (of Obscuration) (kalā) can be
divided into thirteen aspects, the (savedya) Dissolution Deconditioned (subjects)
(Pralayākala) into eleven, the same number in Māyā (that is, apavedya Dissolution
Deconditioned subjects), the Consciousness Deconditioned (subjects) (Vijñānākala) into
nine, Mantra (subjects) into seven, Lords of Mantra (subjects) (Mantreśa) into five, the

CHAPTER ONE
This will (all be described) in (Chapter Ten, which is concerned with)

the division of the principles, so for fear of making the book too long, he has not
gone into (this matter in detail) here.

Surely (one may ask,) if this is (just) talk about the penetration of

Rudra’s energy,'" what is (the use of discussing the) penetration of the
Elements and the rest? Is this not the same defect? Taking into account (this)

doubt, he justifies (this view), presenting an example by way of conclusion.
The Empowered Means

The Divine Attributes and the Purification of Thought

fr’̄rT’TTTTTRTŚTTITT
JEITT] ||/2R4 11]
tasmād yathā purasthe 'rthe guṇādyaṁśāṁśikāmukhāt |
niraṁśabhāvasaṁbodhas tathaivātrāpi budhyatām | 197 I|

Therefore, just as any object which is in front of one is perceived as
ed whole, by means of the partial (perceptions) of its qualities
and the like, know that in the same way here also (the totality of reality can

be grasped part by part).” (197)

Great Lords of Mantras (subjects) (Mahāmantreśa) into three, and that finally, Śiva,

directly apparent, is not divided.”

' Read with MSs Ch, Jh, Ṅ. T, and D: rudraśaktisamāveśo ‘bhidhīyatāṁ for

rudraśaktāv evaṁ samāveśo “bhidhīyatāṁ (.

Rudra’s energy in this way”).

. (juṣṭ) talk about the penetration into

”” Abhinava is explaining how the Śāmbhava penetration and its corresponding state

can be one and undivided, even though a series of penetrations of Rudra’s (that is,
Śiva’s) energy take place along the levels of the subjective and cosmic order. The

model, as usual, is perception. The penetration of Śiva’s energy throughout the cosmic

order is the manner in which He perceives and thereby generates it. Macro- and

microcosm reflect one another within the mirror of consciousness, which generates their
reflection through the perception of its own nature. Thus, if we examine the act of
perception of even the most trivial object, we can understand how Śiva’s energy, the
power of creative perception, operates in relation to the entire cosmic order. There are

fifty penetrations in the first example and fifteen divisions in the second example. One
could add many more ways of dividing up the cosmic order, for example, the thirty-six

principles, 118 worlds, the five cosmic forces and, indeed, any of the countless

configurations of energies and divine forms which constitute the many cosmic maṇḍalas

described in the Tantras. They are the parts of the Whole or, in this perspective, the

qualities of the one conscious substance. Both are held together as the phases of the
dynamism of a single unitary perception without compromising the multiplicity of the
former or the unity of the latter.

We have seen that the first moment of perception is the pure consciousness

within which flashes the immediate direct perception of things in themselves as

manifestations of consciousness. The second moment is one of analysis of this unitary

TANTRĀLOKA

Just as a nearby object, such as a jar, by means of the manifestations
(ābhāsa) of its aspects as, for example, that it is made of copper, is correctly
perceived (as it truly is) in accord with its own specific nature (svālakṣaṇyeṇa),
as (one) undivided and partless (whole,) consisting of the coming together of the

manifestation of many universals (sāmānyābhāsa), ‘īn the same way here

also’ one should understand that the manifestation of all of Rudra’s power (in

its entirety) takes place by means of (its) parts, that is, (the penetration of) the
Elements and the rest.
Even if that is so, what of it? With this doubt in mind, he says:

perception through the conceptualization of the relative distinctions between its parts
and qualities. When we look at an object, the example given here is a jar, we do not

perceive it as a mass of sensations. We see a jar. This is because the analysis of the
second moment is completed in the third moment of synthesis which, like the first
moment, perceives the object as a whole in a state of consciousness which is free of
thought constructs. In the first moment something is seen and a desire or intention arises
to see it in detail, just as a man may like to see the limbs ofa woman or a woman those
of a man. From the universal leveḹ of intention, one descends to the individual level of

analysis and then synthesis to finally rest again in the satisṭied subjectivity which has

perceived its object both part by part and as a whole, that is, with thought constructs at

the individual (āṇava) and empowered (śākta) level and without at the level of pure Śiva
(Śāmbhava) consciousness.

Instead of ‘the manifeṣtation of many universals’, one could also translate

anekasāmānyābhāsa- as ‘many manifestations of universals’. Thus, there are two kinds
of ‘manifestations’ (ābhāsa): manifestations of particulars (viśaṣābhāsa) and
manifestations of universals (sāmānyābhāṣa). Thīs means that according to this view,

when we see a jar, for example, both that particulajar
r manifests in consciousness and

its ‘j̄ar-nessʼ. The latter is necessary because it is that which is represented in the

corresponding thought construct, i.e. ‘this is a jar’. If there were no universal jar to

which the word ‘jar’ corresponds, each individual jar would have to be identified
separately. There would be as many words for a jar as there are jars. Again, every object

is made of parts, and these may be very many, indeed, an infinite number. The same
consideration applies to the parts as to the whole. These too manifest both in their
individual specific form (for example, the handle of the jar,) and the corresponding

universal (in this example, ‘handle-nessʼ). Thus, in a sense, every thing that manifests

consists of an aggregate of manifestations that are (as the totality of them) at once

particular (to that manifeṣṭation) and universal. The same principle applies to the totality
of existence. Indeed, the perception of every single thing when the practitioner is in the
Śambhava ṣtate of consciousness is experienced as everything in this way.

CHAPTER ONE

ata evāvikalpatvadhrauvyaprābhavavaibhavaiḥ |
anyair vā śaktirūpatvād dharmaiḥ svasamavāyibhiḥ || 198 II
sarvaśo 'py atha vāṁśena taṁ vibhaṁ parameśvaram |
upāsate vikalpaughasaṁskārādye śrutotthitāt || 199 ||
te tattatṣyavikalpāntaḥsphurattaddharmapāṭavāt |
dharmiṇaṁ pūrṇadharmaugham abhedenādhiśerate || 200 ||
Therefore, (there are) those who, by the purification of the flux of
(their) thought constructs that takes place by having heard (and studied the

teachings) (śruta), attend with reverence (upāsate) on the Supreme Allpervasive Lord, either in (His) entirety or part by part, by means of His
(divine) attributes such as His (transcendence) beyond thought,
permanence, majesty, glory or others. (AII of these attributes) are equally
(the Lord’s) power (in its entirety) and as such inhere (in one another).
Thus, by the intensity (pātava)' of any one attribute (such as ‘Lord Śiva is
eternal’) manifesting in its corresponding thought construct (repeatedly

formed by reflecting on the teachings concerning His nature), (one) comes
to rest at one with the possessor of (all of) them, Who is the totality of the

flux (of all His divine) attributes. (198-200)

‘Therefore’ — because one knows (the Lord Who is). the possessor of

(all the divine) attributes by knowing just (one of His) attributes."' (One of

them is) ‘permanence’. It is the state of stability (dhrauvya), which is eternal
existence (nityatva). ‘Or others’ – these (other attributes not mentioned here)
include, for example, (the Lord’s) (all-encompassing) plenitude. They ‘inhere
(in one another) because (they are all equally His) power, and so are one. This
is the meaning. Some who, basing themselves on the process of purification of
the flux of thought constructs that arise by having heard (śruta) and pondered on
(cintā) (the meaning of the scriptures)''"" and have as their object this or that

specific (niyata) attribute (of the Lord), enter the Supreme Lord by means of all
the powers mentioned previously or by just one (of His) powers. Once they
have entered (into Him and been penetrated by His powers), with each of their

individual thought constructs manifesting in accord with their own inner form,

they have an ‘intense’ awakened consciousness of those powers, that is,
atṭtributes, whether specific (niyata) or otherwise (aniyata). Having entered into
that, they ‘come to rest at one’ with the Supreme Lord Who is the possessor of
(all) the attributes, that is, energies and ‘totality of the flux (of all His divine)
attributesʼ. (This is) because He scintillates with an endless number of powers

!"”Cf. the usage of this expression below in 1/260a (1/260b) and Jayaratha’s gloss.
! Çf. above 1/65cd (1/66ab).
'!" On the triad – study (śruti), reflection (cintā) and contemplation (bhāvanā), see MV

4/28 ff. and below 13/327. The purification of thought constructs by reflection on the

meaning of the scriptures is one of the cardinal practices of the Empowered Means, as
described below in Chapter Four. In this case, this takes place by cultivating thoughts
such as ‘Lord Śiva is eternal or ‘Śiva is the supreme lord of the universe’, knowing that
this is so because one has learnt it from one’s teacher and the scriptures.

TANTRĀLOKA

and so (His) nature is full (and all-encompassing). The meaning is that they

pulse radiantly as being of that form (and nature).

Surely (one may ask,) why has it been said that an entity, though single
(but) associated with many kinds of attributes, can only come to be perceived
(pratītigocarībhāva) as (a single) undivided (whole,) and not the other way
around? In order to quell this doubt, he corroborates this (teaching by referring
to an authority):

ūcivān ata eva śrīvidyādhipatir ādarāt |

Thus the venerable Vidyādhipati" has said with reverence. (200ef)
He quotes him:

[EEEISEEIEEAGEEEEII

rq 1

3īṁkcfxaāt-rrter
āīṛ VāTTṬYT: TĒaT: || 3, II
tvatsyarūpam avikalpam akṣajā
kalpane na viṣayīkaroti cet |

antarullikhitacitrasaṁvido

no bhaveyur anubhūtayaḥ sphuṭāḥ || 201 ||
“(O Lord,) if (perception,) born of the senses, were not to render
Your inconceivable (avikalpa) nature into an object in (the domain of)

'! Éternity and the other divine attributes of Śiva are aspects of His divine power ~

Sakti, at one with Him. They are not just attributes of Śiva; they are Śiva Himself. The
experience of eternal existence, majesty or glory of Śiva is the experience of Śiva
Himself. By meditating on Śiva as one of them, for example, His glory, which is the
Light that illumines and shines as all things, all His divine attributes are realized

because He is. Awakening to the nature of one or more of these powers, the individual

soul attains the Supreme Lord Who possesses them all and as such is the plenitude of all
His powers that shine inwardly within Him as His inner powers – all aspects of His pure
self-awareness. The experience of the totality of Śiva as the single, undivided oneness of

all His energies and hence all things, is fundamental to the practice of the Divine Means.
Thus, the empowered state of contemplation of one of Śiva’s attributes, recognizing it to

be that of one’s own essential consciousness, leads to the recognition that all His

attributes are those of consciousness, which is one’s own essential nature in the
Śāmbhava state.

'! Viḍyadhipati wrote the Pramāṇastotra, also called Pramāṇastuti or just Mānastuti.

He also wrote the Anubhavastotra that Abhinava cites here. His works are quoted below
in 9/173, 13/127ef-128 (128), 14/9cd-12 and in 17/115ab (where his name is mentioned

as the author of Pramāṇastotra). Gnoli notes that it is also quoted by Rāmakaṇṭha in his
commentary to the Kiraṇatantra, vidyāpāda 19.

CHAPTER ONE

conceptualization (kalpana)," the diverse perceptions that are sketched
out within (consciousness) would not be clear experiences.” (201)

If (direct) sensory perception (pratīti), which is free of thought

constructs, ‘were not to render Your inconceivable (avikalpa)’ī and also
undivided ‘nature into an object in the domain of conceptualization’, having
taken as its support the duality (bhedana) which has as its domain each (of the
many) specific attributes (of the Lord), then such ‘experiences’ ‘would not be’

(possible). The meaning is that they would not arise. (How are they?) They are
‘clear’ and consist of manifestations of the nature of the bearer of the attributes
(that arise) by means of (mukhena) the manifestation of (any) one of (His many)
specific attributes. They are ‘sketched out within (consciousness)” in an

unclear form as ‘diverse perceptions' (saṁvid) that have as their objects (the

Lord’s) many secondary attributes. If (indeed) all experiences (anubhava) are

present in (the one consciousness which is) the possessor of attributes because it

is strewn (ākrānta) with all the attributes, then notions such as ‘that is a
renouncerʼ, (which) every single (perceiver) has, should be of three kinds. Thus,

according to whether they are 1) due to his own (spontaneous) desire, or
2) conditioned by a (particular) aim, or 3) due to (a person’s) skill, (a notion)

would manifest within the possessor of the attributes by means (rnukhena) of a

specific attribute for each (individual) perceiver, not the other way around.'

"!" If one reads, as Gnoli does, kalpanena instead of kalpane na, as Jayaratha does, we
get the meaning ‘if sensory awareness were to perceive Your inconceivable nature with
(just one) act of the imagination . . . Gnoli rightly considers this to be the better
reading. Indeed, Jayaratha struggles to make the one he prefers yield good sense.

"! This quote from Vidyādhipati is set in Rathoddhatā which has eleven syllables each
quarter divided as follows: — u — | u u u | – u – | u -The metre and the content indicates
that it is drawn from his Anubhava-stotra. Concerning Vidyādhipati and his works, see
Appendix concerning citations and sources.

! These arguments apply equally to the perception of Deity as they do to any object,
as they are all manifestations of the Deity’s energies. Any entity possesses a number of
qualities (dharma) or attributes. These may be primary or secondary. The ‘being or
‘table-nessʼ ofa table are primary attributes, without which it would not exist as a table.

Its colour, size and the like are secondary attributes. An object possesses finite qualities,

whereas ultimate reality understood as deity, consciousness or the absolute, possesses
non-finite qualities such as those listed in the previous verses. The nature of an entity
both in its general (sāmānya) nature (for example, ‘table’) and in its specific nature

(‘this green table’) is known through its attributes. The entity in itselfis a manifestation
of consciousness, that is, consciousness itself. It is known in the initial moment of
perception, which is free of thought constructs. One could say that consciousness/deity
knows itself to be such. This indeterminate perception is fundamentally neither
objective nor subjective. Consciousness does not view itself as an object, in relation to
which it is a subject. It simply ‘shines’ as pure and hence as all that manifests. Each

manifestation is distinct, as a configuration of the energies which are aspects and forms

of the one energy of consciousness, which is its essential nature. An entity is what it is
and is known to be such by means of what it does or can do. A table can serve as a

support. A cup can hold water. These capacities or powers it possesses are essentially

aspects of its causal efficacy, that is, the effects that it can bring about. These include

the changes in the eye when they are seen, or the hearing if they make sound. Thus,
attributes and the possessor of the attributes are understood to be related as are powers

TANTRĀLOKA

So, although He possesses an endless number of powers, it is quite reasonable
that manifeṣtation takes place within the Supreme Lord by (just) one power
amongst them.
This (view) is not only proved (siddha) by discriminative reasoning, but
also by scripture. So he says:

The Goddess, the Lord’s Powers and Attributes as Means to Realization

f=t: | 2.2 11

ītāī #ī Tā ÇrT ādTRZṬaTTT || 33 ||

AITX ĒTTHTĪTTGTGĀĪṬ |

tad uktaṁ śrīmataṅgãdau svaśaktikiraṇātmakam |
atha patyur adhiṣṭhānam ityādy uktaṁ viśeṣaṇaiḥ || 202 ||
tasyāṁ divi sudīptātmā niṣkampo ‘calamūrtimān |
kāṣṭhā saiva parā sūkṣmā sarvadikkāmṛtātmikā || 203 ||
pradhvastāvaraṇā śāntā vastumātrātilālasā |
ādyantoparatā sādhvī mūrtitvenopacaryate || 204 ||

The same is said at the beginning (of a chapter) in the venerable

Mataṅgatantra" by (indicating various) distinguishing qualities of what is

stated (concerning the Lord’s sustaining ground) at the beginning (of this
passage, namely,) ‘now, the Lord’s sustaining ground (within which He is
made manifest) consists of the rays of His own energies.’ (Thus it
to the powerholder. Just as every manifestation and all of them together are the one light
of consciousness, so too the countless configurations of energies are aspects and forms
of the one power of consciousness, its freedom (svātantryaśakti) to do any and

everything. Thus, by knowing one power, all of them are known and so too the
powerholder. This happens spontaneously in the state of pure nondiscursive

consciousness. At the level (or one could say in the phase) of perception in which there
are many perceivers engaged in knowing their object, they are differentiated and related

to one another by their thought constructs as are the countless entities that populate daily
life. These may arise in three ways. One is as spontaneously formed conceptual

representations, with no specific aim or purpose. Another is to select manifestations and
render them accessible to serve some purpose the perceiver may have. Or they may be

simply imagined according to the subject’s ability to do so. The two, that is,
manifeṣṭation and its energies on the one hand, and the conceptual representation of

them on the other, work together. This is possible only because the senses and mind, in
the modality of thought, perceive the Light that manifests as it truly is, free of

representations.

'! The expression srīmataiṅgādau could be translated as ‘in the venerable Mataṅga
etc.ʼ, but here Abhinava is quoting directly from it in a specific rather than a general
way. Moreover, this passage does indeed come at the beginning of a chapter of the
MPAĀ.

CHAPTER ONE

continues): ‘(residing in this way) within that light (of His power, He) is
well illumined by nature (sudīpta), He wavers not and (s0) possesses an
immobile form. That same (power) is the supreme level (kāṣṭhā) (of
existence), which, subtle and present in every direction (in space,) is nectar.

(Every) obscuring covering completely destroyed, She is peaceful and is the
intense delight within (that, which is nothing but) reality alone
(vastumātra). Wise (sādhvī), without beginning (or) end, (She) is said

metaphorically to be the iconic form (mūrti) (of the Lord).” (202-204)

The reality which is (the Lord’s) ‘own rays of energiesʼ is ‘the Lord’s

sustaining ground’." This and (other such statements) refer ‘by (indicating
various) distinguishing qualities to the (sustaining ground) that is
distinguished (by them). This is the connected (sense of these verses). The
reading: ‘now, the Lord’s sustaining ground consists of the rays of His own
energiesʼ is that of the Lord’s (own words)."" The author has altered the
reading in order to present the experience (of the Lord’s energy,) which is

such." In order to present these same distinguishing qualities, he has quoted
(literally) from the Tantra, beginning with ‘within that’, and ending with ‘is

said in a secondary senseʼ.

'! MPĀ vidyāpāda 3/1-3ab. These verses serve to lend scriptural authority to the view
that the supreme reality is illumined by one or more of its powers, which are its
sustaining ground, and that the two are aspects of the one reality, metaphorically related
to one another as substance is to its inherent nature or form.

"! Śjva’s energies are not only His sustaining ground; He is all of them and manifests

within them and is manifested by them. The distinction between Śiva as the possessor of
power and His power arises when individual aspects of the one energy are distinguished
on the various levels of manifestation down to the physical, as the countless energies

through which Śiva manifests as all things. At one, they rest within His pure selfreflective awareness, whichis the sustaining ground of His being as the knowledge He

has of Himself. As the Light of consciousness, He is the collective totality of all that
manifests, even as He transcends all the single things that are the energies of the rays of
His Light. As the totality, He is the subject, sustained by all His energies. As individual
things, He is each particular object, sustained in its being by its energies, which are the
ground of its eṣsential nature.

' If I have understood correctly, the alteration Jayaratha is referring to here is a

reversal of the order of the words of this line which, as quoted by him, is also the
reading of the printed edition, namely: atha patyur adhiṣṭhānam svaśaktikiraṇātmakam.
Abhinava quotes this line as svaśaktikiraṇātmakam atha patyur adhiṣṭhānam, i.e. ʻnow,

that which consists of the rays of His own energies is the Lord’s sustaining ground.’

Jayaratha says that by this alteration of the word order Abhinava indicates that this is

what the distinguishing features described in what follows refer to. The rest of the

passage is quoted literally. Indeed, there are no variants with respect to the printed

edition. Jayaratha, it seems, implies that Abhinava does not paraphrase the rest of the

reference, as he tends to do when quoting, in order to underscore the agreement of the

teaching here with that of the MPĀ, even though it is a dualist Siddhāntāgama.

'"" Read with MSs G, Ṅ, T and D, read evaṅvidhānubhavadarśanārtham ‘in order to

present

the

experience

(of the

Lord’s energy)

which

is

such’

for

evaṁ

vidhyanuvādabhāvadarśanārtham in order to show in this way that the procedure

(taught in this Tantra) agrees in its general sense (with the teaching here)ʼ.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘His own energiesʼ, which (He alone possesses and are) not in common

with anything else, are the ‘rays’ as (His attributes,) such as (His) oneness,

luminosity, and endlessness. (They are) the ‘Lord’sʼ, that is, the powerholderʼs,

‘sustaining ground’, which is the place where (He and all things) manifest.
This is the meaning. Power alone is the means to know that. As is said (in the
Vijñānabhairava):

‘Just as the directions and (their) divisions etc. are known by the light of
a lamp and the rays of the sun, in the same way, O beloved, Śiva (is known) by

(means of His) power (Śakti).

Thuṣ, within ‘that’ power which is ‘luminous’, that is, shining, He too
is properly ‘illumined by nature’; that is, His body is the Great Light (of

consciousness). Thus, (He) ‘wavers not’. He is established in His own nature
alone. If He were to fall from His own nature, which is the Light (of

consciousness), all this (universe) would be blind. Thus, He possesses (yukta)
an ‘immobile form’ which, made of the Great Light, is worthy of praise. Thus,

as ʻwithin that’ (power) which is such, this is such (also), so ‘that same
(power) is the supreme level (kāṣṭhā) (of existence)’, which is the

transcendental state of rest. Thus, (that power is) ‘subtle’. It is not possible to
discern it (as some particular, specific entity,) because it is one with the supreme
perceiver. Thus, the most excellent delight ‘within (that which is nothing but)

reality alone (vastumātra)’, that is, the supremely real nature, is its radiant
effulgence. And in this way, by (its) excellence, (all) outer obscuring coverings

have been completely destroyed by it without leaving any residual trace, and
(all) duality (within it) has been completely stilled. This is the meaning. Thus,

(that power) is ‘peaceful’, that is, (Her) nature is (pure) consciousness alone.

This is the meaning. In the same way also (She is) present in all the directions

(in space), that is, Her nature is wonderfully diverse, because (She is) the
universe which consists of (all) mobile and immobile beings. That too is

‘nectar’, (that is to say, She is) eternal and so is ‘without beginning (or) end’.
‘Beginning and ‘endʼ exist in what is impermanent. Thus, (She is) ‘wise’, that
is, devoid of the impurities of defects such as impermanence and the like. This
is the meaning. She who is such ‘is said metaphorically to be the (iconic)
formʼ of the Supreme Lord, Who is the possessor of (that) power, that is, She is
secondarily described as being of that nature. This is the meaning.
Surely (one may ask,) when a metaphorical ascription takes place, it
must be possible to perceive that it is furnished with (all) three (factors),
beginning with the exclusion (bādha) (of the primary meaning, along with
reason for it and its purpose). Is that the case here or not? With this doubt in
mind, he says:

tathopacārasyātraitan nimittaṁ saprayojanam |

''” VBh 21 also quoted below in TĀv ad 3/105cd-106ab. Swami Lakshmanjoo: ‘Energy

is the means by which you can understand and enter in the state of Lord Śiva.’ (2002:
19).

CHAPTER ONE
Such (as explained in the following verses) is the reason here, along

with purpose of the metaphor. (205ab)

The ‘reason’ (nimitta) is the cause due to which there is a metaphor.
Thisis the sense. By referring there (in that context) to the possessor of power,
(Śiva’s) power, whichis the primary meaning, is excluded, (to give way to the
secondary one which concerns Him). And the relationship between themis that
between the means (whichis Śakti) and the goal (whichis Śiva).

He says that:

E|erĀREEISEIEEIEIEIĪ=re/IIIEAEHI

tanmukhā sphuṭatā dharmiṇy āśu tanmayatāsthitiḥ || 205 ||
ta eva dharmāḥ śaktyākhyās tais tair ucitarūpakaiḥ |
ākāraiḥ paryupāsyante tanmayībhāvasiddhaye || 206 ||
(This metaphor serves to indicate that) the clearly apparent state
(of Śakti) within the bearer of (these) attributes, which is the rapid
(realisation of) the state of oneness with (Him), has that as its entrance

(tanmukhā).

These same (divine) attributes, which are called (Śiva’s) powers, are

venerated as each (of their many) forms, which are appropriate for the

achievement of a state of oneness (tanmayībhāva) (with Siva, who possesses

them)." (205cd-206)

That power is the ‘entrance’ (mmukhā) which is the means (upāya) (to

realise Śiva, the possessor of that power)."" What is said to be (Her) ‘clearly
"" In the following verses up to 209, Abhinava will explain the reason and purpose for

this metaphor, i.e. that Śiva’s energies are His iconic form. The point is that Śiva’s

energies serve as a means to knowing Him just as knowing the parts of an objects are
the means to knowing all ofit.

"" Siṃply stated: when Śiva’s power is clearly manifest, the devotee experiences His

divine attributes, thatis, Śiva’s omnipotence, omniscience, permanence and the like.
When this happens, the devotee instantly becomes one with Siva, who possesses them,

and he realises that in reality they are the attributes of his own fundamental
consciousness, whichis his true nature. In this way, Śiva’s power - Śakti– is the means
to realise Him.
" Oneness (tammayībhāva) with Śiva is achieved through His powers. All forms of
awareness should be realized to be manifest as differentiated aspects of pure
consciousness. That is its radiant pulse (sphurattā). This is the recognition of

Śakti

through which one instantaneously recognizes one's Self to be the powerholder, Whois
none other than the Śaktis themselves. When Śakti is realized, Śiva is realized.

'" Ṭ have translated the expression ‘tanmukhā’ as ‘the means to that’, which is its sense.

But it literally means ‘the face of that (Śakti)’, and is an adjective which qualifies

TANTRĀLOKA

apparent state’? (It is the clearly apparent state of the power of consciousness,
which) ‘is the rapid (realisation) of the state of oneness.’ The intended sense
is that when Śakti has been atṭained, Śiva has been attained. This itself is the

main purpose (of this metaphor).
Thus, he says:

1|
tatra kãcit puṇaḥ śaktir anantā vā mitāś ca vā |
ākṣiped dhavatāsattvanyāyād dūrāntikatvataḥ || 207 ||
Again, due to (its greater) proximity or distance (from universal

consciousness,) a given power (may) encompass an infinite or limited

number (of powers,) in accord with the principle that ‘Being’ (sattva)

includes (every particular entity, while) the dhava-ness (of a Dhava tree
includes only the limited number of existing Dhava trees). (207)
The powers may be ‘infinite or limitedʼ, in line with the principle
that ‘being’ (sattva) (encompasses every particular entity, while) the dhavaness (of a Dhava tree extends to only the limited number of Dhava trees in

existence)ʼ.

The

only

things

that

‘dhava-ness’

includes

are

its

own

manifestations alone (that is, Dhava trees, that) are different from (those things)

that are not Dhava trees. This is the condition (of dhava-ness, whereby) it

includes (only) a limited number of things. However, ‘Being’, on the contrary,
is present everywhere in (both) Dhava trees and (all things that are) not Dhava

trees, and so it includes an infinite (number of) entities. Thus, (energies) that

include a limited (number of) entities are ‘distant (from universal
consciousness) because they are not present everywhere, as they are not
pervasive, whereas those that encompass an endless number of entities are
proximate to it because, pervasive, they are present everywhere.
He (now) connects (what he has been saying back) to the main point.

‘sphuṭatā’ – ʻthe clearly apparent state’. That ‘face, which is Śakti, is the means to

realise Śiva. The shining of divine Light of Śiva’s consciousness with perfect clarity and
lucidity is the experience of the instantaneous realisation of oneness with Him within
Him. This shining of the Light is Śiva’s divine form (mārti), which is His power to
shine in this way for those who are graced by the vision of Him. This is Śiva’s face, the
iconic form in which He is worshipped at the highest level.
"! See above, 1/66ab (1/66) ff., 1/90ab (1/90) and below 9/1-6. Cf. PTy p. 139: ʻThat

which by its absence (entails) the non-existence of something is thus (tāvaṁ) its own
nature, just as (conversely) the (essential) nature of the ‘śiṁśupā-nessʼ (of a Śiṁśupā
tree) is the ‘tree-ness’ (of that tree). That which has no nature of its own within the
expansion of the fixed nature (of things), obscured by the Supreme Lord'’s freedom,
does not exist without it, just as without ‘tree-ness’ (the existence of) Śiṁśupā-ness is
negated.”

CHAPTER ONE

|| Ṝ 0¢

AINCIGEISVEGĒIITÉISAṂTI

IT. āTTTĀTRTGTTHĪTTHÇT: |I 2°R. 1I
tena pūrṇasvabhāvatvaṁ prakāśatvaṁ cidātmatā |
bhairavatvaṁ viśvaśaktīr ākṣiped vyāpakatvataḥ || 208 II
sadāśivādayas tūrdhvavyāptyabhāvād adhojuṣaḥ |
śaktīḥ samākṣipeyus tadupāsāntikadūrataḥ || 209 ||
Therefore, the (perfect) plenitude of one’s own nature, the
luminosity (prakāśatva) (of the Light of consciousness), the conscious nature
and Bhairava’s state, (are each a divine attribute) that includes all the
powers, because it pervades (them all).

However, (the principles) beginning with Sadāśiva can (only)
include those energies that are below them, because there is no pervasion
upwards. (Thus, the states of realization vary) according to the proximity
or distance (from consciousness of the form) of worship (upāsā). (208-209)
‘The energiesʼ’ of the Īśvara (principle) and the rest are ‘below’ because
their nature is to pervade (the principles below them) and not pervade (what is
above them,) starting from Sadāśiva’s state, (which follows on from that of
perfect) plenitude (and is pervaded by it). (Those powers) which are close to the
nature which is full (and all-encompassing) attain the full (and complete) fruit,

which (includes both) worldly benefits and liberation. Again, when (their)
nature is not full (and complete), (they) on the contrary (only attain a limited)

incomplete state. This is (meant by) saying: “(the states of realization vary)
according to the proximity or distance (from consciousness of the form) of

worship.” Moreover, it is for this reason that there is a difference between
philosophies (darśana) (that is, some lead to a more complete state of

realisation and others to a less complete one).'

Surely (one may object that the deity’s one divine) attribute (dharma),
which is essentially universal (sāmānya) (and hence unlimited), manifests
within thought in a limited way by the power of that (very) thought, and so there
(in that case) it manifests within (the Lord Who is) the bearer of (that one

universal) attribute (in a limited way) by way of that (thought). Thus, this
process should take place in (the sphere of) the Empowered Means, not in (that
of) the Divine (Śāmbhava Means), which is free of thought constructs and is the
undivided manifeṣtation of the (true) nature of an entity (vastu). So how is that
said here (in the context of the teaching concerning the Divine Means)? With
this doubt in mind, he says:

gīTd

'"!É Cf. above, 1/33-35.

TANTRĀLOKA

|| 220 1|

itthaṁbhãve ca śāktākhyo vaikalpikapathakramaḥ |
iha tūkto yatas tasmāt pratiyogyavikalpakam || 210 1|

When this condition (prevails), (this) process'" (which consists

essentially of following) a path (to realisation) formed by (the gradual
intensification (krama)) of thought constructs (such as “I am Siva Who is
endowed with every divine attribute”’) is called the Empowered (Means).
The point of referring to this (process) here (in the course of this exposition

of the means pertaining to Śiva) is that, insofar as it is (a means) that does
not require (the formation of) thought constructs (but rather consists of

their instantaneous eradication, it) is just the opposite of this. (210)

‘Here’ – in the course (of this exposition of the means) pertaining to

Śiva, which is described as the (very) opposite (pratipakṣa) of that (means
which makes use of) thought (namely, the Empowered Means). (Thus,) it is

right that (this other) aspect (which pertains to the Empowered Means) has been
described (here as its opposite counterpart). Thus, nothing has been said that is

irrelevant. Thiṣ is the point. The undivided manifestation of the (true) nature of

an entity (vastu) takes places progressively (in stages) (krameṇa) within (the

domain of) thought, whereas within (the domain) free of thought, (it takes place

instantaneously) without stages (akrameṇa). Thus, wherever one who has
aṭṭained the state free of thought pays attention, he attains Siva there at that very
moment.
He says that:

The Śāmbhava Path Free of Thought Constructs

IRGIĪĪĪTTĪT TT] T] frsīrq 11 222 11
avikalpapathārūḍho yena yena pathā viśet |
' Explained above in 1/198-209.
"! Śaktopāya is the means whereby the universal quality of all differentiated thought

forms manifests within them by the practice of repeated differentiated thought

constructs directed at what is beyond thought. Through this practice, the possessor of
the qualities of consciousness manifests progressively more and more distinctly. There
is a progression (krama) in the development of thought forms until the undivided reality

manifests, while in what is beyond thought there is no such progression. In this context,

the meditation on single energies of Siva belongs to the empowered category, as it

involves focusing on one of them conceptually. At the Śāmbhava level of practice, all
the energies are experienced collectively as the power of freedom and reflective
awareness, which is Siva’s Being (sartā) itself and so one with Him. Abhinava tells us

that the reference to individual energies in the preceding verses is to clearly distinguish

the Empowered from the Supreme category of means, and thus clearly define the latter

in contrast to the former.

CHAPTER ONE

dharāsadāśivāntena tena tena śivībhavet || 211 ||

He who is established on the path free of thought constructs, by

whatever path he enters, from Sadāśiva to Earth, he becomes identified

through it with Śiva. (211)

He gives an example of that:

ṀTÃ. ĨTTG-d TTTTT̄’YaTTTTĪ |I 32 II
nirmale hṛdaye prāgrṛyasphuradbhūmyaṁśabhāsini |
prakāśe tanmukhenaiva saṁvitparaśivātmatā || 212 ||

When the Heart is pure and has within it a light that illumines the
aspect which is the foremost (ever) radiant plane, (then, within that and)

by means of that itself, (one attains) the state of Supreme Śiva Who is
consciousness." (212)
'' The ‘path free of thought constructs’ is the Divine Means, which pertains to Śiva

directly as the exercise of the pure reflective awareness, undistracted by thought
constructs, of the Light of consciousness. Concretely, it involves maintaining an

unwavering awareness of the ‘I-ness’ which is the essence of the pure subjectivity of
consciousness unsullied by even a trace of objectivity. Very few people can practice in
this way, because they are led away from focusing on consciousness by the distracting

desire for something or fear of it, that precipitates into thought. It presupposes a perfect

detachment from outer objectivity, which can only be achieved by cultivating sound
reasoning and discernment. This is achieved by practicing the Empowered Means. But
that too is very difficult for the great majority of people, who must therefore resort to

taking external supports such as the practice of yogic postures (āsana), recitation of
mantras, devotional songs, rituals, and the like, along with more internal practices like

meditation and visualization (for example, of the yogic centres in the body or deities).
But however much these practices may involve the formation of thought constructs,

they are grounded in the pure Śiva consciousness free of thought constructs, and
function effectively to the degree in which it unfolds and develops. Thus, its grace is
both the basis of any means by which the individual soul is freed and the ultimate goal.

More concretely in relation to the subject at hand, all fifty forms of penetration
(samāveśa) into consciousness lead directly to the realisation of Śivas state.

! The citation of this verse in VBh p. 20 reads prāgrasphurat- for prāgṛyasphurat-.

The word for ‘foremost’ or ‘most excellent’ — prāgrya – can also mean ‘what precedes’.
Here it denotes the transcendental level of pure consciousness that precedes
manifestation prior to the formation of differentiated perceptions. t is the Śiva principle

at the beginning of the series of reality levels. Śiva is foremost because He is the first
and precedes all others. Thus, another possible translation of this verse could be: ‘When

the Heart (of reflective awareness) is pure and shines with the Light that illumines the
aspect of the plane of the effulgent pulse of consciousness which precedes (all others,)

then, by means of that, one becomes Supreme Śiva, Who is consciousness.’
"! Iṇ the previous verse, Abhinava explained that in the pure consciousness of
Śāmbhava practice, the yogi can identify with Śiva by means of any one of the thirtyfive principles from Earth to Sadāśiva. Here he explains how the adept enters into
Supreme

Śiva from the thirty-sixth principle, that is, Śiva, when it is illumined by the

TANTRĀLOKA

Here indeed, ‘when the Heart is pure’, its nature is the full (allencompassing) reflective awareness of ‘I’ consciousness. Thus, that which, in
reḷation to other principles is an ‘aspect’ characterized as (the ever) radiant
plane, namely, the thirty-sixth aspect (i.e. the Śiva principle) is made ‘foremost’
(prāgrya), that is, most excellent, by virtue of its indivisible (oneness). Then
(making use of) that aspect of the plane (of consciousness) as a means, one
penetrates into ‘the Light’ (in the Heart) which is the shining (ābhāsa) of that

(aspect) (and so) becomes ‘Śupreme Śiva, Who is consciousnessʼ. This is the

meaning.

Śiva):

He (now) concludes this (section concerning the means pertaining to

JIaTGT TTTIY gHTĪTTTTR̄T; ||/223 |I
evaṅ parecchāśaktyaṁśasadupāyam imaṁ viduḥ |
śāmbhavākhyaṁ samāveśaṁ sumatyantenivāsinaḥ || 213 II

In this way, Sumati’s disciples''™ know this means which is the true

one (sadupāya),'" which is an aspect of the power of the supreme (parā)

will, and is the penetration called ‘pertaining to Śiva’. (213)

This power of the will is the venerable Goddess (bhaṭṭārikā) Parā. This

‘aspectʼ is of that nature. It is said that ‘(that) is considered to be the supreme
(means). It is (the power of) the will (icchā) (to realisation, that achieves its goal

instantaneously)." In accord with this (view), in relation to the Empowered

and other (means), it is the direct means, and so, being such, it is (the supreme)

means (to realisation taught by) ‘Sumati’s disciples’, namely, the venerable

light of the Heart, which is supreme subjectivity. Thus, another possible translation of
this verse could be: “When the Heart (of reflective awareness) is pure and shines with
the Light that illumines the aspect of the plane of the effulgent pulse of consciousness
which precedes (all others,) then by means of that, one becomes Supreme Śiva, Who is

consciousness.”
'' In the citation of this verse in VBh p. 20 summatyantenivāsinaḥ reads amanyanta

nirāsinaḥ. 1 have translated antevasinaḥ to means ‘disciplesʼ, as Jayaratha explains.

However, I take the use of the plural here as an honorific referring to Sumati’s most
excellent disciple, Śambhunātha, Abhinava’s Trika teacher. See following note 1,1127.
'! AIl practice is based on developing and sustaining an expanded state of

consciousness free of thought constructs. In this perspective, the Śāmbhava Means is
ultimately the only true (sar) one grounded in Being (sar), which only pure
consciousness can experience directly. Free of restrictions, it operates directly within
consciousness, that is, reality itself. Accordingly, it is also called the Direct Means or
the Means of Direct Experience (sākṣādupāya). Conversely, the other means operate in

the domain of the thought, notions and duality. The Śāmbhava Means is the means that

operates within the supremely existent and unconditioned One. As we shall see in the
next verse, the other two categories of practice operate in the domain of Māyā
(māyopāya).
'! Above, 1/144d.

CHAPTER ONE

Somadeva and the rest. The venerable Somadeva was the disciple of the

venerable Sumati, and his (disciple) was the venerable Śambhunātha. Thiṣ is
(according to) those who know the sequence (of the teachers) that have come

down (through the lineage) (āyātikrama). As he will say: ‘from the venerable

Soma came Sambhunātha, who knew everything.”"' Again:

‘A certain venerable and powerful (vibhu) Bhairava, living in a sacred

seat (pīṭha) in the South,'' gave (out the teachings) in the scriptures of the five
currents,' along with (those) in the wealth of the Atimārga (of Pāśupata
'!” Below, 37/61d. Jayaratha is mistaken here. Abhinava himself tells us that
Śambhunātha was a disciple of Sumati (MVV 1/2-4). Jayaratha’s sole authority for his

view that Soma was the teacher of Śambhunātha is the line he quotes here. Sanderson
has suggested that this mistake is due to a corruption of the text (see Hanneder 1998:
131, note 20). In the printed edition below, and in the manuscript Jayaratha had, the

reading is ‘srīsomataḥ’ – ‘from the venerable Soma’. By emending to śrīsaumataḥ, as
Sanderson suggests, the meaning is ‘from the venerable good one’, which is a
contraction of Sumati – One of Good Mind. Thus here, as in all other instances,
Śambhunātha, who was Abhinavagupta’s Trika teacher, is said to be the direct disciple
of Sumati. Jayaratha is clearly very conscious of the fact that in other references
Śambhunātha figures as Sumati’s disciple. Even s0, he does his best to explain away the

references he himself feels obliged to quote. He also knows very well that the

expression sumatyantenivāsinaḥ can be understood to be an honorific plural (see
previous note) referring to Sumati’s disciple, Śambhunātha. Indeed, it can be read as a

genitive singular. Note also that the
understood to mean the penetration that

penetration ‘called Śāmbhava’ can also be

Śāmbhunātha experienced. The translation is in

accord with Jayaratha’s explanation, as it must be. However, for these reasons, the
following one is better:

‘The (wise) know in this way that this, the true means (sadupāya), which is an

aspect of the power of the supreme (parā) will, is the penetration called ‘pertaining to

Śambhu’ and is that of Sumati’s disciple (Sambhunātha).

'! Somadeva, a Jain monk who lived in South India in the 10 century, refers in his

Yaśastilaka to the existence there of ‘Trika Kaulas (Dyczkowski 1987: 16). So it is not
surprising if the founder of the Trika lineage to which Abhinavagupta belonged lived in

South India.

'! We have seen that Śiva as Saḍāśiva has five faces, each of which has five faces. The

upper face (called Īśāna) utters the five currents of the Śaivāgama. The lower eastern

face, which is that of Tatpuruṣa, utters the scriptures of the Atimārga (lit. the Path
Beyond) (see Dyczkowski 1988: 31 ff.). This was a name for Pāśupata Śaivism, which
is the earliest known form of sectarian Śaivism (rather than Śaiviṣm in general, i.e. the

worship of Śiva as supreme deity). From inscriptional evidence, we know it existed
already in the first centuries of the common era, and so preceded the development of the

Tantras by several centuries. Unfortunately, the original Pāśupata ścriptures (called the
Pramāṇāṣṭaka – the Group of Eight Authorities), have been lost. Even so, we learm a
great deal about the early teachings of the Pāśupata from the Pāśupatasūtra and its
(possibly fifth century) commentary by Kaunṇḍinya, even though it has a markedly
Brahminical bias. We learn something of how it was by the seventh century from a large

Āgama called the Niḥśvāsasaṅhitā, which is being edited by a team of scholars.
Pāśupatas were ascetics who covered their body in ashes and kept matted hair. The
focus of their practice, according to the Pāśupatasūtra, was Liṅga worship, which they
did with five Vedic Mantras dedicated to the five forms of Rudra-Śiva, that were to
become Sadāśiva’s five faces (see Dyczkowski 1988: 19ff.) Their lifestyle, like modern

TANTRĀLOKA

Śaiviṣm).' Sumati was in the world and then, as is well known,' aṟose his
foremost disciple, the venerable Śambhu, who came from the sacred seat

k
(pītha) of Jālandhara.

This is said elsewhere and should be understood with reference (yojya)

to his grand-teacher (paramaguru). Or else (the reason why Śambhunātha is

often said to be Sumati’s direct disciple) may also be explained on the basis of
(the following) view which will be stated further ahead:

“A teacher is said to be as great as is his (spiritual) family (saṅtāna) . . .

for such is the extent of (just) one (true) sage.”

as:

One should understand (the matter) in the same way in such statements

sādhus, was peripatetic. Wandering around the country, they discovered and established

numerous Liṅgas. In this way, they represented one of the major ways in which Śaivism
spread in India, and with it, Liṅga worship with Vedic Mantras, an important practice
still common today throughout India.
'' According to Sanderson (2009 p. 28-29), Atimārga is ‘‘the Path Outside [the Order
of Castes and Disciplines]. Pāñcārthikas and Lākulas were its two major divisions. The
Somasiddhāntin Kāpālikas were ‘closely related in the theology to the Lākulas’.
'" Read prasiddham for prasiddhim.

' Abhinava repeatedly identifies his teacher Śambhunātha with Śambhu, i.e. Śiva, by

this kind of play of words. For example, he praises him at the beginning of the PTv
(intro verse 4) saying:

“(My) first (and foremost) teacher, the venerable Śambhu, who is Śrīkaṇṭha and
the Supreme Lord and has freed a host of fettered souls from (their) fetters by his
priceless glory, is victorious.”
Clearly, ‘Bhairava’ here is the name of a person, not the deity.

"' I is possible that the sacred seat (pīha) of Jālandhara was located in the Kangra
Valley, not far from the modern town of Jālandhara. For a discussion concerning its

possible location, see Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 2, p. 554 ff.

" Jayaratha is apparently telling us that it is Abhinava himself who has said this
‘elsewhere’. Only he could be saying this in relation to his own grand-teacher.
According to Jayaratha, this is Śāmbhunātha. Jayaratha is aware that something is

wrong, because it is clearly stated here that Śāmbhunātha was Sumati’s direct disciple.

So he goes on to somehow justify this evident contradiction.

If this is indeed a verse by Abhinava, we would expect it to be part of opening

benedictory verses at the beginning of a Trika work. If so, this could only be the

Śrīpārvapañcikā. It may well have come after the verse quoted probably from the same
source in TĀv ad 1/6 (see also TĀv ad 1/13 and note 1,211). Indeed, they read well

together as a progression. In the same way, another benedictory verse also probably

from there, below in TĀv ad 23/74cd-75 (note 23, 90) which is dedicated entirely to

Śambhunátha, could well follow on from this one.

'' Jayaratha is referring to verses 1/234cd-236ab (235-236) below. He is quoting the

first and last quarter (i.e. 234d (235a) and 236b (236d). There the reading is yāvān asya
hi saṅtāno . . . tāvān eko yato muniḥ (‘(A teacher is said to be) as great as is his
(spiritual) family (saṁtāna) . . . for such is the extent of (just) one (true) sage.ʼ). The
reading here is ‘yāvān asya hi saṁtānas .……. tāvān eko gurur mataḥ.

CHAPTER ONE
‘Śambhunātha described the essence of the waking and other states (to

me). The darkness (of his ignorance was) dissipated by the moonlight of the

venerable Sumati’s wisdom.

Now, having explained the means pertaining to Śiva, he talks about the
one pertaining to (His) power.
The Empowered Means

IFIS √T-q̄ II ĪT-ĪRJĪ āaḤ |

1I
Śśākto ‘tha bhaṇyate ceto dhīmano ‘haṁkṛti sphuṭam |
savikalpatayā māyāmayam icchādi vastutaḥ || 214 ||
Now we are going to talk about the Empowered (means to

realisation). Mental consciousness (cetas), (consisting) of the intellect, mind

and eg0,"” is clearly evident (to everyone). As it is a state given to

conceptualization (savikalpatā), it is Māyā, (although) in actual fact it
(consists of) the powers of the will and the rest (of consciousness). (214)

That (mental consciousness) is not just mind (manas) here, and so he

says (that it is): ‘the intellect, mind and egoʼ. Thuṣ, it is ‘clearly evident’. The
meaning is that its nature is manifest in a directly apparent manner. And so, in

accord with the teaching that ‘all thought is transmigratory existence . . .,""
(the inner mental organ) is the perception of duality (bhedaprathā), and so he

'' Below, 10/287. According to Jayaratha’s forced interpretation, Abhinava refers to
what Jayaratha considers to be his teacher’s teacher in order to further strengthen the

authoritativeness of the teachings he has received. The essential oneness between the
teacher and disciple is more intensely realised to the degree in which the lineage to

which they belong is well established and based on the direct realisation of each of its
members of their essential oneness. Abhinavagupta was one with his Trika teacher
Śambhunātha, as was Śambhunātha with his teacher Somadeva and Somadeva with
Sumati. This is why Abhinava can refer to Sumati as Śambhunātha’s teacher. In short,
Jayaratha implicitly wants us to understand that Abhinava preferred to refer to Sumati,
rather than Somadeva, as Śambhunātha’s teacher, because as the founder of this Trika
lineage, he is the teacher of all the teachers in the lineage, with whom he is one.

'” Concerning the three internal senses, see below, 9/227 ff. and SāṁKā 23-27.
'! Thiṣ dictum is quoted again below in TĀv ad 4/111cd-113ab, 14/13 and ad

16/283cd-284ab (284). Bhagavadotpala quotes the complete line in his commentary on
SpkKā 1, saying that it is from the Naradasaṅgraha. The second half says: ‘there is no

bondage apart from thought’. Vāmanadatta also quotes the first half in his

Saṅvitprakāśa (3/2) and explains: ‘The sense of the saying ‘all thought is
transmigratory existence is this: the lack of (inherent) existence (asattva) of creation (in
itself) abides as the (inherent) existence of pure consciousness.' Maheśvarānanda quotes

this verse in his MM (p. 25). Just before it he quotes another from the same source
which further aids our understanding of it: ‘Therefore thought by being purified is not
separate from consciousness. Thus, (for that very reason,) this (state) devoid of thought
(nirvikalpa) is thought established within its own (essential conscious) nature.”

TANTRĀLOKA

says: “as it is a state given to conceptualization (savikalpatā), it is Māyā. But
even though this is so, in reality (the inner mental organ) is, according to its
application (yathāyogam), that (same) will, knowledge and action (of
consciousness), and so he says: ‘in actual fact it (consists of) the powers of
the will and the rest’. Indeed, just as the Lord makes the universe by means of
(His) powers, beginning with the will (that is, will knowledge and action), in the
very same way, the fettered soul (generates) thought constructs etc. by means of
the three inner mental organs, beginning with the intellect (that is, the intellect,
mind and ego, to which they respectively correspond). This is the sense (of thīs
verse). It is said in this way that the individual perceiver (kṣetrajña) possesses
the freedom (to create) thought and the like, and their creation depends on these
three. This is what has been taught in this way.
Thus, he says:

JTr̄ṛT=ī āgTTRTTTTTĒT] Z: |

īārd iārzūēh: 11 224 1|
abhimānena saṅkalpādhyavasāyakrameṇa yaḥ |
Śśāktaḥ sa māyopāyo ‘pi tadante nirvikalpakaḥ l| 215 |I
The Empowered (means to realisation functions) by the successive
(operation of these three mental faculties, beginning with the ego, which)

arrogates (a personal identity) (abhimāna). (Identification is followed by
the activity of the mind, which forms) the intention (saṅkalpa) (to
comprehend, and then the intellect, which makes the final conceptual)

ascertainment (adhyavasāya)."” Although this means is based on Māyā

(mmāyopāya) (insofar as it functions in this way), at the end of that (process

one ultimately attains a state of consciousness which is) free of thought
constructs. (215)

Having (first of all) arrogated agency here within one’s self by laying
hold of ego, then forming an intention with regards to (some) external object as,
for example, desirable, as ‘this (is the goal), not that’, and by discarding

(vyapoha) (all) else and come to the conclusion (niścaya) that ‘I alone am

present everywhere’ or ‘everything is present within me’, the conceptual
perception (vaikalpikapratyaya), which is such, pertaining to the empowered
(means) arises. (But) even though (this) means is Māyā by nature, because
thought constructs are grounded on relative distinctions (bheda), (even s0,) by
the power of repeatedly exercising those thought constructs, correspondingly
more excellent thought constructs are produced, and so, in the end, the
penetration pertaining to Śiva takes place, which is (a condition) free of thought
constructs, and is the most (perfectly) clear, direct perception of reality (artha).
This is the meaning. As he will say in the passage beginning with:

'' Conceptual ‘ascertainment’ (adhyavasāya) of the empirical nature of things, which
marks the culmination of sensorial cognition, is the specific function of the intellect. See
above 1/38cd-39 and below, 9/238.

CHAPTER ONE
‘He who wishes to enter into this, the Supreme Lord’s nature, described

in the previous chapter, must purify (his) thought (properly and) without delay
(añjasā).”
And ending with:

‘Thus (as a result of this process), consciousness, strengthened by that
noble and supremely clear nature (of the most lucid notion), attains (its own)

pure state of being, which is free of thought constructs.’'

This is why it is said that the Empowered Means is a means to (the

higher) means.

Surely (one may ask,) the spontaneous (svārasika) and nonconceptual
validating experience (pratyaya) of all these (functions) of the ego and the rest
(asmadādi) comes about effortlessly. So there (in that case), why is (the means)
said to be the Śāmbhava penetration, which is also taught as being the goal (to
be attained)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

ēa- || 32. 1|
pašśor vai yāvikalpā bhūr daśā sā śāmbhavī paramṃ ḷ

apūrṇā mātṛdaurātmyāt tadapāye vikasvarā || 216 ||
The plane (daśā) of (consciousness that even) the fettered soul
(experiences in the first moment of perception) free of thought constructs,

is Śiva’s (state) (Śāmbhavī).™" However (param), (falling as it does to the
level of discursive, conceptual consciousness,) it is incomplete (apūrṇā) as a
result of (his) miserable state (daurātmya) (as an individual, conditioned)
subject. But once that (miserable state) ceases, it unfolds. (216)
said:

That is the plane of (consciousness) free of thought constructs. As is
‘on that plane (of Being) (in the prediscursive moment of knowledge,)

even the fettered soul (experiences) Īśvara’s state (of consciousness).”'
! Below, 4/2 and 4/6.

'! The feminine of the adjective ‘śāmbhava’ – ‘pertaining to Śambhu (i.e. Śivay, is
‘sāmbhavī. It agrees with the feminine noun ‘daśā’, meaning ‘state’ or ‘level’.

'! Jayaratha is quoting here from Utpaladeva’s lost commentary (Jīkā) on his own

Pratyabhijñākārikā. Īśvara’s state of consciousness is the experience that ‘(all) this am

Ṅ (idam aham). The Sadāśiva level above, into which it spontaneously develops, is ‘I

am (all) this’ (aham idam). The former corresponds to the subtle contraction of
subjectivity brought about by the subtle emergence within universal consciousness of
objectivity. The latter corresponds to the subtle expansion of the subjectivity associated

with the withdrawal of objectivity. This play of expansion and contraction is

TANTRĀLOKA

If that is so, then what is the point of making (all this) effort here to

teach it etc.? (In response to this question,) he says that ‘however, it is
incomplete (apūrṇā). The knowledge and action of the (fettered, conditioned,)

contracted subject are contracted. So there (in that case), how can that miserable

soul (experience and possess) Śiva’s state (śāmbhava) (clearly and) directly

(sākṣāt)? This is the point. Thus, when ‘(his) miserable state (as an individual,
conditioned) subject” ‘ceasesʼ, and the plenitude (of Śiva’s consciousness)

pours forth, that plane (of consciousness free of thought constructs) that pertains
to Śiva (śāmbhavī) ‘unfolds’, endowed with a full (and complete) (piūrṇa)
knowing and acting subjectivity etc. This is the meaning. Thus, an effort etc. to
teach (this) should most certainly be assumed in order to bring about the
recognition of one’s own (true Śiva) nature, which is heralded by the removal of
the contracted knowing and acting subjectivity etc. (of the fettered state). Thus,
(the teaching is) proved (to be correct).
(Now) he connects that (point) to the main point.

1|

7 |
aT aJTRI-RTTHHITTĪ JĪRRZSsarī || 32¢ 1I
evaṁ vaikalpikī bhūmiḥ śākte kartṛtvavedane |
yasyāṅṁ sphuṭe parantv asyāṁ saṅkocaḥ pūrvanītitaḥ l| 217 ||
tathā saṅkocasambhāravilāyanaparasya tu |
sā yatheṣṭāntarābhāsakāriṇī śaktir ujjvalā || 218 II
Such is the plane of thought constructs (operant) in the Empowered
(means), in which (the individual subject’s) agency (kartṛtva) and cognitive

awareness (vedana) are clearly evident (to him). However, for the
aforestated reasons, on this (plane, consciousness) is contracted.

One who is intent in this way on dissolving away the burden of

(this) contraction possesses that blazing power (of consciousness) that
brings about the inner manifestation as desired. (217-218)

Even though here in the Empowered Means, which is essentially
conceptual cognitive consciousness (savikalpajñāna), knowledge and action
are, by (their) dependence on the thought-free (consciousness of the Śāmbhava

experienced in the prediscursive moment of perception. In the case of the sense of sight,

for example, this is practiced by just ‘seeing’, whilst focusing on the seer without
aṭṭending to what is being specifically seen.

'! Read parantv asyāṁ for paraṁ tv asyāṁ.

"! Practically all schools of Indian philosophy agree that thought is accompanied by

speech. It is a kind of inner talking (antaḥsaṁjalpa). From this point of view, a
perception clothed in thought is ‘discursive’, just as the pure cognitive consciousness
which precedes it, devoid of thought constructs, is ‘nondiscursive’.

CHAPTER ONE

state), ‘clearly evident’. But even so, due to the miserable state of the subject,

they are contracted. Thus, here also an effort to teach it etc. must necessarily be
made, by virtue of which that empowered (state) (may) blaze forth and unfold,
as intent on dissolving away (this) contracted (state of consciousness). This

(power of consciousness) brings about the ‘inner manifestation’, which is the
oneness with the (supreme) subject (the seeker) desires, as the goal (to be
achieved) (upeya). The meaning is that (the power of consciousness) shines

radiantly as oneness with the supreme subject."'

Surely (one may ask,) the difference between the Empowered and

Divine (Means) has been established, because (the former is associated with)
thought constructs and (the latter is) free of them, but as the Individual (Means)

is also (essentially) only (operating through) thought constructs, how can the
difference between it and that (Empowered Means be established)? Having
(first) presented the question, he (goes on to) explain the difference between
them.
The Individual Means

] ṁhfcāi fēē ssīāōḷr tcā a a |

STSHTĀ IIṜZŚI
!! Read with MSs Kh, Ch, J, Jh, N and T parapramātraikātmyarūpatyā for

parapramãtreka-rūpatyā.

Practicing

at

the

level

of

the

Empowered

Means,

consciousness is contracted because the practitioner identifies himself as the particular
individual he is in relation to his body and, more specifically, his mind. He is strongly

conscious of himself as the subject who knows and acts but is wrapped up in his thought
constructs about himself. He thinks that ‘I am so and so’, not Śiva. His subjectivity – as
agent and perceiver – appear to him to be that of an individual centre of consciousness,
which is separate from Śiva. Thought constructs are a bridge, as it were, between
subject and object. The self-awareness ‘I am so and so’ is a though construct. The

person with which ‘T, the subject, is equated is an object of thought, identified with the

body, related to and, indeed, formed from the complex workings of the mind, in which it

is apperceived. This apperception is the ‘miserable state’ of the pure, unconditioned
subject reduced to this condition. However, practicing the Empowered Means, he
reflects on the meaning of the teachings he has received from his teacher and reads in
the scriptures and the treatises which teach nondualist Śaivism. Thus, he cultivates and

reinforces day after day the thought ‘I am Śiva’. In this way the conceived subjectivity
is purified of its mistaken conception of itself that contracts consciousness and so also
its knowledge and action. As the notion ‘ am Śiva’ becomes more lucid and radiantly
clear, he approaches closer to the self-reflective awareness of fundamental ‘I’

consciousness which is not a thought construct (vikalpa). The pure awareness, now free
of thought constructs other than ‘I am Śiva’, has no outer objective referent. It is the

awareness Śiva has of Himself as pure, all-embracing consciousness from which
nothing is excluded. Thus, when this process attains its goal, consciousness, free of
thought constructs, at the Śāmbhava level unfolds ‘generating the inner manifestation
one desires of the goal, which is the realisation of oneself as the supreme subject,

which is oneness with Śiva. This is what happens directly for those who practice on the
nondiscursive level of the Śāmbhava means to realisation.

TANTRĀLOKA

nanu vaikalpikī kiṁ dhīr āṇave nāsti tatra sā |

anyopāyātra tūccārarahitatvaṁ nyarūpayat || 219 ||
Surely, (one may ask, does this mean that) there in (the domain of
the exercise of) the Individual Means, the intellect is not engaged in
thought? (No, thought persists in this means also. The difference between

them is that the intellect in the course of practicing Individual Means is

mediated by) other means (anyopāya), (whereas) here (the Lord) has said

(in the Mālinīvijayottara that the Empowered Means) is devoid (of other

practices such as the) utterance (of Mantras). (219)

(One does practice) concentration (samādhi) ‘there’ (in the Individual

Means), (but there are) ‘other” (means also,) such as the utterances (of the vital

breath and Mantras) and the like. Having taken the support in (the course of the

practice of) the Individual (Means) of outer (practices) such as the utterance (of

the vital breath and Mantra), the intellect is given to thought. What is special
(and different) ‘here’ in (the practice of) the Empowered (Means) is that it is
devoid of those (external practices). Thus it is said here that (what is meant by

stating that the Empowered Means operates) ‘y the mind alone’ is that it

consists of just pondering with determination (and conviction) (sāvadhāraṇa)
(on one's own identity with Śiva).
Surely, (one may ask,) is (the Empowered Means) here (according to

the teaching), devoid only of (the practice of) the utterance (of the vital breath

and Mantras) or (is it) also devoid of (the practice of) the instruments (of yoga)
(karaṇa) and other such (practices)? Thus, he says:

3=NRWIGĀT
TGGT] HTĒ
TTTaT: |

uccāraśabdenātroktā bahvantena tadādayaḥ |

Śśaktyupāye na santy ete bhedābhedau hi śaktitā || 220 ||

"S MV 2/22, see above, 1/169.
''” Cf. below 5/2-5. Ritual, which entails the utterance of Mantras and outer ritual

action, generally takes place in the sphere of the Individual Means (āṇavopāya). Buṭ it is

possible to engage in some Kaula rites, such as those described in Chapter Twenty-

Nine, in the empowered state of consciousness, in which case they also belong to the
Empowered Means, and are based on the expansion of consciousness (vikāsa) that takes
place by union of Śiva and Śakti, internally, and possibly also externally. This
‘expansion in the centre’ takes place in the core of consciousness by the union of the

energies that radiate from it out through the mind and the senses and those of their

objects. The outer rite strengthens and at the same time, develops through the inner, as
perceptions clothed in thought constructs give way progressively to the immediacy of
direct pure perception free of thought constructs. Thus, practiced this way, these rites do
not require the recitation of Mantras, which is what distinguishes them from the

common, outer rituals that belong to the Individual Means.

CHAPTER ONE

The word ‘utterance’ here by (its) plural (case) ending (also
implicitly) states ‘and the rest’ (ādayaḥ) (with reference to the other
practices of the Individual Means, indicating) that they are absent in the

Empowered Means." The empowered state (śaktitā) is one of unity and
difference (not duality as is the individual state). (220)

The sense is that one gets the meaning ‘and the rest’ by (the use of) the
‘plural (case) ending’. Thus (the practice of the Empowered Means is said to

be) devoid of the utterances (of the vital breaths and Mantras). This

is how one

should explain (the way this compound) is analysed. These utterances (of the
vital breaths and Mantras) and (the practice of the yogic) instruments, postures

(karaṇa) etc. are absentʼ (in the practice of the Empowered Means,) because
they are entirely based on duality (bheda). (However,) here (in the practice of

the Empowered Means) there is nonduality, as there is no external utterance of
Mantra and the like, and there is duality also, because it consists of (the
purification of) thought constructs. Thus, it consists of both. Accordingly, he

says that: ‘ṭhe empowered state (śaktitā) is one of unity and difference’,'
whereas duality predominates in (the practice of the) Individual (Means).
He says that:

GeTIa: |

rd̃- fāṁkcŪē: 1| 2 2 II
! The reference here is to verse 1/170 (= MV 2/21) above which reads:

uccārakaraṇadhyānavarṇasthānaprakalpanaiḥ |

yo bhavet sa samāveśaḥ samyag āṇava ucyate ||

‘The penetration that takes place by the utterance (of the vital breath and
Mantra) (uccāra), bodily postures (karaṇa), visualization (dhyāna), the letters (varṇa)

and the formation of places (sthānakalpanā) is appropriately said to pertain to the
individual soul (āṇava).”

The kinds of practices belonging to the category of the Individual Means are
listed in a single compound word that constitutes the first line of this verse. Abhinava is
referring to the plural ending of this word (-aiḥ). In other the words, ‘the utterance (of
the vital breath and Mantra) (uccāra) stands for all of them and so implies ‘etc.” also.

'' Another way one can explain how the empowered state (śaktitā) is one of unity-in-

diversity is as follows. The Sāmbhava state is oneness with Śiva, and

so is clearly based

on nonduality. The individual (āṇava) state of individualized consciousness is clearly

based on duality, that is, the distinction between subject and object as well as between
individual objects and perceivers. In the former the power of the will as the intention to
perceive or act latent in pure nondiscursive consciousness at the initial moment of
perception dominates. In the latter, the power of action. The empowered state is between

the two. The practice to which it leads commences with dualistic thought constructs and

ends in the nondual consciousness of Śiva, free of thought constructs. It operates in the

flux of the power of knowledge which flows from the oneness of the perceiver and

agent to the multiplicity of the perceived object and phenomena which are the product
of its activity (kārya).

TANTRĀLOKA

aṇur nāma sphuṭo bhedas tadupāya ihāṇavaḥ |
vikalpaniścayātmaiva paryante nirvikalpakaḥ || 221 ||

The duality (bheda) between individual souls (aṇu)' is evident.

Here the means relating to it (that resolves it) is the individual one (āṉava).
Its essential nature is the certainty (which is the correct determination of)
conceptual representation (vikalpaniścaya). Ulṭimately (it culminates in a

state of consciousness that is) free of thought constructs." (221)

By saying that ‘ultimately (it culminates in a state of consciousness
that is) free of thought constructs’ he indicates that (the practice of the

Individual Means) also comes to rest in the same (means) pertaining to Siva.

Surely (one may ask,) according to the principle declared (above where
we read): ‘however, (the principles) beginning with Sadāśiva can (only) include
those energies that are below them because there is no pervasion upwards,
the intellect and the rest (of the mental faculties) do not function within Śiva. So
how can it be said that they serve as a means to attain Him? Thus, he says:

Taftṝṁaṁ ũ̃ ēfl haṁhzrq ú 2==1
3-aīĪ āī̄TS-NTh fīā ā aef=. |

TaTRṬĪTTTĪ Gāī TJJRĪJ: ṬTTĀTĪ || 323I

nanu dhīmānasāhaṁkṛtpumāṁso vyāpnuyuḥ śivam |
nādhovartitayā tena kathitaṁ katham īdṛśam || 222 ||
ucyate yastuto ‘smākaṁ śiva eva tathāvidhaḥ |
svarūpagopanaṁ kr̥tvā svaprakāśaḥ punas tathā || 223 ||

Surely (someone may object that neither) the intellect, mind, ego,

(mor) the individual soul can pervade Śiva, because they (belong to orders

'' I have tentatively emended the reading in the printed edition ~ aṇur nāma sphuṭo

bhedas (‘t is evident that the individual soul is dualityʼ), which makes no sense to
aṇūnāṅṁ tu sphuṭo bhedas.

'' Cf. below 5/2-5. In this perspective, outer practices such as ritual performance or

internal yoga are based on thought constructs that are effective insofar as they sustain

the development of insight. For this to take place, they must be done with mindful

awareness of the presence of consciousness and its power to act through the objective

medium of the psychophysical organism and operate in the domain of outer objectivity.
Practicing in this way, thought constructs become progressively more subtle and

focused on a true representation of one’s own nature and all that exists as divine

consciousness. As that happens, insight into its true all-embracing nature develops with
the growing sense of certainty. This ultimately reaches the state of rest within the
supreme transcendental and universal subjectivity of Śiva Himself, Who comes to be
recognised as one’s own most fundamental identity and that of all things. Thusṣ, to the
degree this higher subjectivity becomes more stable, practice shifts from the domain of
the Individual Means through the Empowered to the Divine.
'' Above, 1/209abc.

CHAPTER ONE

of reality that) are below (Him), so how is it that (you) said such a thing

(which implies the contrary)?

(In reply to such objections,) it is said that according to us, in actual
fact Śiva Himself is such (i.e. the intellect etc). After He has concealed (His)
own nature, He again in the same way, (by virtue of His freedom, through

that same intellect and mind, becomes His) own light. (222-223)

Here ‘according to us’ʼ, that is, in the view of those who profess
nonduality, ‘in actual fact Śiva Himself’, having concealed Himself by the
glorious power of His own freedom, in accord with the principle that ‘Śiva

Himself has assumed the state of the fettered soulʼ," ‘is suchī, that is, the

limited subject in the form of the intellect and the rest (of the mental faculties).

Then again, He Himself, by diveṣting (Himself of limitation) by progressively
setting aside (identification with) the intellect and the rest, in the same way
becomes Śiva Himself Who is His ‘own Light’. Thus, whether the intellect and

the rest are operating or not even within Śiva, there is no defect at all (in our

doctrine).
That is also said in the dualist scriptures, not only in the nondualist

ones. So he says:

sṛāṛaaīq; fdrrṁāī a ārrī zatk: || 33%1I

Eikctēe
c EEḤ

dvaitaśāstre mataṅgādau cāpy etat sunirūpitam |
adhovyāptuḥ śivasyaiva sa prakāśo vyavasthitaḥ || 224 ||
yena buddhimanobhūmāv api bhāti paraṁ padam |

The same (view) is also well expressed in dualist scriptures such as
the Mataṅgatantra, (which declares) that the light of Śiva, Who pervades
(the levels) below (Him), persists, due to which the supreme level (continues

to) shine even on the (lower) plane of the intellect and the mind. (224-

225ab) (224-225cd)

"! That is, that the mind and the rest can serve as a means to realizing Śiva. See above,
verse 1/215.
! One could also translate svaprakāśa ‘illumines himself’
! PS 5d. The complete verse reads: tatrāntar viśvam idaṁ vicitratanu – karaṇa –-

bhuvanasaṁtāṇam | bhoktā ca tatra dehī śiva eva gṛhītapaśubhāvaḥ || ‘There within
(the four Eggs) is this universe, that is, the series of worlds (inhabited by beings with)
various (astonishing) bodies and (their) sense organs of sense. The experiencing subject

there is an embodied being who is Siva Himself who has assumed the state of the
fettered soul. This quarter is quoted again below in TĀv ad 1/331 (330) and ad

9/144cd-145ab.
Cf

ad
6/4lcd-42ab
šivasyaiva . svasvātantryād
grhītapaśubhāvasyetyarthaḥ Śiva Himself has assumed the state of the fettered soul by
virtue of His freedom (to do 50).”

!' These lines are effectively a commentary on MPĀ vidyāpāda 3/21cd-22ab, which is

quoted by Jayaratha.

TANTRĀLOKA

As is said there:

‘In this way, the great (metaphysical) principle (tattva) free (from any
defect for which it could be) criticized and rich with thousands of radiant rays,
pervades below from that principle of (Śiva) that possesses (every divine)

quality.”

He concludes saying: ‘He Who pervades (the levels) below (Him)’

etc. ‘That’ (light of consciousness) is in the form of the intellect and the rest

‘due to which’, that is, because the intellect etc. are at one with Śiva’s light,

(the supreme level continues to shine even on that lower plane).

Having thus explained that by the way, (he goes on) to discuss the
(main) subject (at hand).

All the Means Attain the Same Goal

Jr 1| 224|
''” MPĀ vidyāpāda 3/21cd-22ab. Also quoted below in the TĀv ad 8/379cd-380ab

(379). This is a reference to Bindu – the Point which, in this context, represents the

supreme reality in a manifest state, that is, the supreme principle as Śiva’s Light set in
relation to the sphere of worldly experience (bhoga). See below, 8/378ab (8/377) ff.
commentary and notes for an analysis, especially 8/379cd-381ab (8/379-380) and notes.

"' n the previous verses, Abhinava explained that the Light of Śiva consciousness can

shine at the levels of the intellect and mind because Śiva freely chooses to limit His
infinite consciousness to assume that finite form. He goes on here to say that even the
dualist Siddhānta agrees that Śiva’s Light shines there even though they belong to a
separate distinct reality. This is not because they are one with Śiva’s Light but because it
pervades the lower levels also. Although dualist Śaivites maintain that Śiva differs from
the individual souls and the lower principles, starting with Māyā down through the
psychophysical body to the outside world, even so, they teach that He penetrates the
consciousness of individual souls, and they experience Śiva’s bliss when they
experience that He pervades everything. At first sight, it appears that Jayaratha has

missed the point. But what he means to say is that what the dualists maintain can only
be possible if the lower levels are essentially one with Śiva. In other words, Śiva’s

divine attribute of omnipresence or His ‘pervasion’ (vyāpti), to which dualist Śaivites
repeatedly refer to account for the necessary inter-relationship between Him, individual
souls and the world in which they reside, can only be possible if they are essentially one.
From the nondualist perspective, the condition of ‘pervasion’ is a state of oneness
between that which pervades (vyāpaka) and what it pervades (vyāpya). At the lower

levels one experiences a difference between them. In states of contemplative absorption

(samādhi) Śiva consciousness does shine within the intellect and mind but, according to

this nondualist view, that is not the full realisation of Śiva consciousness. It is the

experience of that at the individual (āṇava) and empowered (śākta) levels on which Śiva

freely manifests at the most subtle level of objectivity as Deity. At the supreme, nondual

level of Śāmbhava practice, there is no objectivity at all. Śiva consciousness expands
within itself, through itself into itself in the perennial eternity of His consciousness. At
the lower individualized level of contracted consciousness this is experienced as
the
spontaneous arising and falling away of ever-new manifestation in the procession of

time.

CHAPTER ONE

dvāv apy etau samāveśau nirvikalpārṇavaṁ prati || 225 ||
prayāta eva tadrūḍhiṁ vinā naiva hi kiñcana |
Both these two penetrations (Individual and Empowered) are

directed towards the ocean of (consciousness) free of thought constructs.
Indeed, nothing could exist that is not established in it. (225cd-226ab) (226)

Both of these are ‘directed towards’, that is, are propense towards
(expanding consciousness) in the sense that they both (attain) rest in the
penetration pertaining to Śiva, who is the Supreme Light. What does not rest
there does not manifest and so would be nothing at all. He says this: ‘indeed,

nothing could exist that is not established in it’. Moreover, what is being said

is that, in this way, the Supreme Light, which is (consciousness) free of thought,
is the means of all these (means). '
This is not just our own idea. Thus, he says:

Jāhrcāaādṁsṣrātaq || 33ē 1I

-aTTTAIJ r̥ATTId fṝō gfrīāq |

saṁvittiphalabhic cātra na prakalpyety ato ‘bravīt || 226 ||
kalpanāyāś ca mukhyatvam atraiva kila sūcitam |
This is why (the Lord) has said that ‘“one should not imagine that
there is (any) difference here in the fruit which is consciousness (attained
by applying oneself to the various means of realisation).” Imagination

(kalpanā)

(that conceives

these

supposed differences) is indicated

(implicitly) here (in this same verse) as being the predominant factor (that
leads people to suppose that they exist). (226cd-227ab) (227)
‘This is why’, because (all the means lead to) entry into one (and the
same) consciousness, which is free of thought constructs. That is said (in the

Mālinīvījayottara):

‘The wise should not imagine that there is any difference here in the

fruit which is consciousness.”"®

'' In other words, the basis of all the means to realisation, by virtue of which they are

effective, is the Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya). This is because it is essentially pure,
perpetually expanding consciousness, apart from which nothing could exist.
'!“’ MV 2/25ab. Also quoted below TĀv ad 5/155 (5/154), introductory remarks below

to 13/1 20/34 and 34/3. This line comes just after the definition of the three kinds of
penetrations that are, according to Abhinava, the basis of the three categories of means
that draw their names from them (quoted above, 1/168-170). Maheśvarānanda

comments that the placement of this line there affirms at a stroke that the fruit of all the
means are at an equal level (MM p. 141). Abhinava frequently stresses this view,

TANTRĀLOKA

Here (in this case), the notion that there is a difference between the

fruits has come about in this way (tāva1) because the means are many.
Otherwise, that would not be possible here, because (the notion that the fruits
are many) is based on the prior appropriation of (thought, which is) what has

been prohibited. This is what is implied by saying that (the wise) ‘should not

imagineʼ, and so he says that ‘imagination (kalpanā) (that conceives these

supposed differences) is the ‘predominant factor’ which is being discussed.

Itis ‘indicated’, not stated directly. This is the point.

Not only here (in this view), but also according to other schools which
are outside (and not part of our own), (the ultimate) rest (of all enquiry and
seeking) takes place in (the state of consciousness) free of thought constructs.
Accordingly, he says:

feakcā

-N 1 20
11|
iEea¢PaA'EIIEīEeegbṭa|Ḷṟṣ
vikalpāpekṣayā yo ʻpi prāmāṇyaṁ prāha tanmate || 227 ||
tadvikalpakramopāttanirvikalpapramāṇatā |

Even he who says that the (assessment of) the validity of knowledge
(free of thought constructs) depends on thought, in that view (also), the

validity of knowledge that is free of thought constructs is attained by means

of a series of thoughts.""' (227cd-228ab) (228)

Even in the view of the Vaibhāṣika Buddhiṣṭs and others who maintain
that (the assessment of) the validity of knowledge free of thought constructs
depends on thought, the validity of (knowledge) free of thought constructs is
‘attained’, that is, brought about, by a series of particular (te ca te) thought

constructs. The meaning is that (ultimate) rest in (the state of consciousness)

free of thought constructs (comes about) by the (progressive) development of
thought.
He gives an example of that:

Concluding Summary of the Three Means

TGTTTaHĪRÇTĪRTTTITTTTHTTT |I/ 22¢ 11

c-ā]
'̃ vvar
ai|

ratnatattvam avidvān prāṅniścayopāyacarcanāt || 228 ||
anupāyāvikalpāptau ratnajña iti bhaṇyate |
namely, that all means to realisation lead to the attainment of Anuttara, which in his

exegetical perspective is the consciousness to which the MV is referring to here, even
though there is no mention of Anuttara anywhere in the MV.

'! See above, 1/180 and 191. C. below, 4/2-12.

CHAPTER ONE

(Take for example the case) of a person who at first does not know

the true nature (and value) of a gem. By deliberating (carcana) (on its

worth) by (a series of conceptual) means to assess it (niścayopāya), he is
(finally) said to be one who knows (the nature and value of) the gem when
(a state of consciousness) that is free of thought and requires no (further)

means (anupāya) is attained. (228cd-229ab) (229)

12 Above (1/184cd-185ab) Abhinava has given the example of an expert jeweller who

assesses the value of a gem in an instant to illustrate how the Divine Means

(śāṃmbhavopāya) operates. Here he gives the example of one who is not so
accomplished. This jeweller takes time. He needs to think, compare one gem with

another to assess their relative value. He is not sure of their nature and value. A glance
is not enough. This is the way practice proceeds in the Empowered Means, which is

here called ‘the means through certain assessment’ (niścayopāya), as it requires thought

and repeated assessment of the teachings. The jeweller in this case comes to his
conclusion mentally. One who is less skilled needs to test the gem. He needs the support
of outer methods of assessment, just as the practitioner at the Individual (āṇava) level of
practice needs the support of outer ritual or yoga, for example. On the contrary, at the

highest level of practice, not only are outer supports unnecessary, even thought is not
required. The practitioner is on the plane of expanded consciousness, free of thought
constructs, like the skilled jeweller who knows the value of a gem intuitively, directly in

a flash. Similarly, this knowledge flashes pristine and clear, free of all doubts, in the
state of consciousness free of thought constructs which is the Śāmbhava state of the
supreme perceiver. But even though thought intervenes at the other two levels of
practice, the practitioner ultimately reaches the same state of consciousness in which

thought ceases, dissipated by the certainty of correct assessment (niścaya), and so rests
in the same expanding consciousness of the Sāmbhava state. Such is the abiding

condition of a disciple who has attained his teacher’s

state of divine (śāmbhava)

consciousness by the grace of his teacher’s empowering instruction and the scriptures he

has diligently put into practice. To put it another way, the state free of thought
constructs, which is the essential, universal ground of all knowledge and so precedes the
thought constructs through which the specific, individual nature of things comes to be
known, is also present at the end of that process. He who cannot merge into that
expanding state of consciousness at the beginning in an instant has a chance to catch it
at the end, even though it may take much time and effort. But there he need not do
anything. Ultimately, when he is ready, he is spontaneously carried away to the highest
state of consciousness of No Means by simply letting go and allowing insight into the
true nature of reality to spontaneously unfold. He recognises that expanding
consciousness is always there right from the start. It cannot be attained by thought
because it precedes it and is its basis. To put it another way, the basis of all spiritual
discipline is an intuitive certainty, however limited and obscured by thought constructs,
that is, doubts and uncertainties. Without that nobody would even begin to practice. It
arises originally by Śiva’s grace, Who thereby freely chooses to reveal Himself, to
varying degrees, according to the purity of His devotees consciousness, that Śiva has

inspired him to strive for. The development of practice and the ultimate attainment to
which it leads is, from that perspective, the degree in which Śiva’s pure, thought free

consciousness, at rest within itself, expands, permeating and ultimately absorbing all
thought constructs to leave behind in the moment of the supreme act of grace, when the

devotee’s consciousness is completely pure, the complete revelation of Śiva’s own
nature as the aspirant’s true essential nature.

TANTRĀLOKA

A certain jeweller, for example, who does not know the nature (and
value) of a gem initially by (direct assessment) free of thought, deliberates by
means of thoughts such as ‘is such its nature or not?” and so on that basis,
when

(a state of consciousness) that is spontaneous (ṣvārasika), free of
thought and
requires no (further) means (anupāya) (arises), he is said to be one
who knows

(that) gem, knowing (as he does) the true nature of that object, which is free
of
thought constructs. This is the meaning of (this) statement. The same can be

said about one who does not know the individual and other
(means to
realisation).
Here (according to us), cognitive consciousness (jñāna) is of three

kinds, according to whether it is (knowledge of objectivity, which is) duality

(bheda), (that of the means of knowledge, which is) unity-in-differenc
e
(bhedābheda), and (that of the perceiver, which is) nonduality (abheda)
. As is

said:

"!n reality, this essential being of noetic consciousness (jñānasattā)
unfolds in three ways as dual, dual-cum-nondual and, in the same way, endowed

with nonduality.
There

(in

that

context),

the

Individual

(Means)

is

said

to

be

'! Pratyabhijñā terminology is absent, and so does not preclude the possibility that

this

predominantly based on duality, and the EÉmpowered on unity-in-diversity

What then is the (means) pertaining to Śiva based on? With this doubt in mind,
he says:

TTTTITHTT
ĪTTT |I 32¢, |I
abhedopāyam atroktaṁ śāmbhavaṁ śāktam ucyate || 229 |
bhedābhedātmakopāyaṁ bhedopāyaṁ tadāṇavam |

verse may be drawn from a scriptural source. Judging by the content, it appears
that it
was a Triīka Tantra – perhaps the 7riśirobhairava?

'! Even though the three categories of means to realisation operate separately through

the three energies of the will (for the Divine Means), knowledge (for the Empower
ed
Means), and action (for the Indiviḍual Means), they are all equally expansio
ns of the
essential knowledge of the true nature of consciousness. This consciousness is not
just a
passive background on which outer illusory forms are projected, like a cinema
screen or
the canvas on which the artist paints his picture. It is a dynamic consciou
sness that
unfolds in the three domains of the oneness of the perceiver, the plurality of the object,

and the unity-in-difference of the perception which, partaking in the nature of both
at its
extremes, connects the two. This verse tells us how the reflective awareness, which
is

the essential being (sattā) of that Śiva consciousness, unfolds first in the

realm of the

duality of objectivity practicing the Individual Means, that is, the recitation of Mantra,

ritual, āsana, meditation and the like. It then goes on to unfold in the domain
of thought
alone, through the inner practice of the Empowered Means, free of
outer ritual and the

rest. It then finally unfolds spontaneously and without effort, in the domain of
the
perceiver and agent, who is one and the same, whatever be his perception or action.

CHAPTER ONE

Here the means pertaining to Śiva (śāmbhava) is said to be that of
unity (abheda). The Empowered means is said to be unity-in-diversity, and

the means (based) on difference is the Individual one." (229cd-230ab)
(230)

Surely (one may ask,) according to the teaching that ‘liberation is
conferred by Śiva’s initiation’," (ritual) action, such as initiation, is said to
serve as a means (to liberation). Nowis that some other, separate means, or does
that come to be included somewhere here (in the means based on knowledge)?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

3TdT āls āīṁ aīāāī:; ātaza || Q30||

ante jñāne ‘tra sopāye samastaḥ karmavistaraḥ || 230 ||
prasphuṭenaiva rūpeṇa bhāvī so ‘ntar bhaviṣyati |
The entire extent of (ritual) action, which will be (described

later)," will be included in a clearly evident form in the last form of

! This verse is quoted in MM p. 141. The verse that follows immediately after is said

to be from the otherwise unknown Upāyadviśati (Twenty Verses concerning the

Means). In the following passage in the Mahārthamañjarī, Maheśvarāṇanda presents the

view that all the means to realization are forms of the salvific energy of Śiva and that
belong to one or other of these three categories according to the degree its intensity.
iti Śrītantrālokopāyadviśatyādinītyā prāṇaspandoccāraṇādyaśuddhavikalpa
āṇavaḥ | cittamātra-nirvartyaśuddhavikalpātmā śāktaḥ | vikalpasarvavilayasvabhāvaḥ
šśāmbhava iti trividhe 'pyupāyatattve sthūlas
nāditāratamyayogena śaktyullekhasya
sarvatrāpyanusyūtiḥ | śākte tu tasyā aulbaṇyamātrād utkarṣa ity anusandheyam | yad

uktam -

sā śaktir āṇavaiḥ śāktaiḥ śāmbhavaiś ca tridhoditaiḥ |
upāyaiḥ śīvam ābhāsya svasṛṣṭair mocayaty amiūn ||
‘According to the teachings of the venerable Tantrāloka and the Upāyadviśati
(there are three categories of means to realisation. One is) the Individual Means, which
consists of impure thought constructs centred on the cyclic pulse of the breath and (its)
upward motion etc. The Empowered One consists of pure thought constructs effected by
the mind alone. The Divine Oneis the complete dissolving away of thought constructs.
Thus, although the means to realisation is of three kinds, the manifestation of Śakti

threads through it everywhere in association with the hierarchy of gross, subtle (and

supreme) etc. Thus, one should contemplate the excellence within the empowered state
as being due solely to the developing strength of that (power of grace). As is said:

‘That power illuminates Śiva by the (many) individual, empowered and divine

means that have arisen threefold as its own emanations, and having done so, liberates
these (fettered souls).’ MM p. 141
! MV 4/8d. Also quoted below in TĀv ad 2/40.

'! From Chapter Fifteen onwards.

TANTRĀLOKA

knowledge (listed) here," along with its means (that is, the Individual

Means). (230cd-231ab) (231)

‘Along with its means’, that is, along with means (to realisation), such

as the utterance (of Mantra) and the like associated with (the Individual Means).
This is the meaning. Thus it was said before that (present) there ‘along with its

meansʼ is the ‘entire extent of (ritual) action’, that is, the wonderful variety of
(rites of) initiation and the like that make up the assembly of (ritual) action

which will be explained (from Chapter Fifteen onwards) and ‘will be included’
(in this means). It is indicated by (saying) this that (ritual) is not a different and
separate (independent) means.
Surely (one may ask,) it is reasonable (to maintain) that what is

included in something of a particular type is of the same type, not otherwise. So
how can (ritual) action, such as (the rite of) initiation, be included in knowledge

of the individual (means)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

-āTcāT 1| 3 32 1A

kriyā hi nāma vijñānān nānṅyad vastu kramātmatām || 231 1|
upāyavaśataḥ prāptaṁ tat kriyeti puroditam |
Action is not something different from knowledge; (rather it is
knowledge itself) which, in order to serve as a means to realisation, has
assumed the nature of a succession (krama) (of processes and ritual

actions). It was said before that that is action." (231cd-232ab) (232)

‘That’ knowledge (is action,) as was said before with the words

beginning with: ‘because action does not differ (from knowledge).” ”

'' One of Abhinava's primary concerns in writing the Tantrāloka is the exposition of

the rites of his Anuttara Trika. Accordingly, he refers to it as a liturgical manual
(paddhati) (above 1/14). The function of the rites performed by those who seek
liberation (mmumukṣu) is the final removal of the Impurity which prevents its realisation.
We have noted that this Impurity is understood by the Siddhānta to be a material
substance (dravya), whereas here it is understood to be essentially ignorance. Thus, as
Sanderson observes (2006: 46): ‘if ritual is to be a means to liberation at all its purpose
can no longer be discovered in the fact that it is concrete action as opposed to mere
knowledge [as the Siddhānta maintains]. Since Impurity has been dematerialized, ritual

must work on ignorance itself; and to do this it must be a kind of knowing.’ The same
logic also holds good for the practice of Yoga. Whether this involves the outer physical

activity of the body or the subtler inner movement of the manifold forms of the breath or
even the practice of concentration, it is a form of action. So this too, in order to be
liberating must be understood as leading to liberating knowledge (see above 1/150).

! Saṇḍderson (2006: 47) explains: ‘A substratum of action in the concrete sphere of

indiviḍualized consciousness supports the process of awareness and enables it to
develop in intensity.”

''" Above, 1/150a. Abhinava is quoting there from the Gamatantra. The three means to

realisation can also be understood in terms of the form and degree of succession (krama)

CHAPTER ONE
Surely (one may ask,) by such (statements) as ‘knowledge is the sole

cause of liberation’,"™ it has been declared that liberation (comes) from

knowledge. Thus (the question arises as to whether knowledge is) liberating by
virtue of its own (inherent) competence (svādhikaraṇa) (to be s0), or is (this)
competence derived from something else (parādhikaraṇa)? ĪIf it is its own
(inherent) competence, then is it liberating whether initiation has taken place or
not? If not, then according to the dictum: “there is no competence to practice

Saiva Yoga without initiation,"" there is no competence (adhikāra) to acquire

or, as I translate here, ‘progressive advance’, which takes place within that domain of
practice. Thus, the Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya), which is centred on the immediacy
of self-awareness, progresses, as we have seen, spontaneously in a moment and so is
non-successive (akrama). The other two categories of Means progress successively. The

progressive development in the domains of the Empowered Means is in the way we
think about things – what we believe they and we ourselves are. All levels and forms of
practice for spiritual development are about expanding consciousness and growing in

wisdom and insight. The Empowered Means is centred on perception and so unfolds
without outer supports. As it is inward in this way, the succession, that is, step by step
development (krama), takes place hand in hand with insight into the pure consciousness
which is always full and perfect. Ultimately, this is recognised to be the process (krama)

of the dynamism of consciousness itself, which cannot be said to be either a process,
which would make it temporal, or not because, inactive, it would not be consciousness.
Such is the activity within the domain of the Empowered Means, namely, the activity of
perception (jñāna). A step down from the domain of the subtle, indeed, ultimately

indefinable process of perception and the formation of thought constructs that
accompanies it, the reflective awareness of consciousness flows into the domain of the
Individual Means, in which the power of the will in the domain of the Divine Means and
that of knowledge in that of the Empowered Means issue out into the power of action.
Here the inscrutable dynamism of consciousness ~ the supreme form of action — which,

by the freedom of its own will, has formed itself first into perception ~ ‘knowledge’ —
assumes the form of gross outer action that, operating through the psychophysical
organism, extends through time. Sentient and consciously directed, it functions as Yoga
which finds its ultimate completion in the union (yoga) of all things within

consciousness.

'"" Above, 1/22d.
'! MV 4/6cd. This important line is paraphrased by Abhinava in 8/193ab (192cd). He

quotes it directly twice in 15/5ab and in 16/291ab (16/291) as does Jayaratha in TĀv ad
1/231cd-232ab (232), 4/42cd-43ab, 8/191-193 (190cd-193ab), and the introduction to
8/210-212 (209cd-212ab). Note that Abhinava himself seems to distinguish between
meditative practice and ritual. At the very beginning of his exposition of Trika ritual in

his Tantrāsāra, he declares that it is only if one wishes to perform these rituals that
initiation is necessary. The sense of the term ‘yoga’ is not clearly defined in the Tantras.
There ‘yoga’ may also be used as a term to denote ritual, although one would expect
them to be opposites. The sense of this identification is that certain rituals unite one with

the deity, and ‘union’ is the meaning of the word ‘yoga’. White (2009: 73 ff) argues that

the earliest use of the term ‘yogayukta’, which we would nowadays translate as
‘engaged in Yoga’, was to be hitched up to one’s chariot. We have already noted the

symbolic importance of the chariot for early Vedic ritualists (see above, note 1,46).

Ritual action from that perspective was a ‘yoking upʼ, that is, ‘Yoga’.

Again, from another perspective, the process of purification, which is a basic

requirement for ritual action, can be understood as Yoga. The worshiper should be as

pure as is the deity he is worshipping. Indeed, all that is offered, the ritual implements,

TANTRĀLOKA

knowledge, and so what would be liberating and who (would be liberated)? If
(initiation) does take place, then (knowledge) would be (inherently) dependent
on something else within its own nature, and so initiation could not logically
serve as an instrumental cause (of knowledge), for if the competence (of

knowledge to liberate) were to depend on something else, (the contingency

would arise that realization is brought about by some external cause). (Thus,)

the cause (which is ritual action) is in one place (i.e. outside the ritual agent),

and its effect (which is knowledge) would be in another (i.e. within him). Is this

not a great defect (in this view)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Teacher and His Spiritual Family

qTTJĪĪ ] TTTJRGAIU] TGTṬĒĒTTT || 332/II

samyagjñānaṁ ca muktyekakāraṇaṁ svaparasthitam || 232 ||

yato hi kalpanāmātraṁ svaparādivibhūtayaḥ |

Right knowledge (samyagjñāna) is the sole cause of liberation, and

it is present (both) in oneself (that is, in the teacher) and in the other (that

is, in the disciple), because the manifestation (vibhūti) of ‘sel’, ‘other’ and
the like is only imagination (kalpanāmātra). (232cd-233ab) (233)

(The manifestation of ‘self’ and ‘other’) ‘is only imagination’. The
intended sense is that in reality there is only one consciousness that shines

radiantly as each manifestation of ‘self’ and ‘otherʼ.

the representations of the deity and all else that is involved in its worship should be

pure. Although the process by which the worshipper is purified involves the repetition

of mantra and ritual gestures that are ‘external’, it is an ‘inner’ process. It is ‘imner’ in

the sense that it takes place within the yogic body through the internal movement of the

breath and its vital energy. It is, in other words, a yogic process. t is, moreover, what

takes place in the course of initiation. Initially induced by the teacher during initiation, it
is subsequently practiced by the initiate alone. This is a cardinal example of how outer

ritual action is related to Kaula Yoga. The rise of Kuṇḍalinī, the piercing of the centres
and the purification this brings about leading to liberation prepare the way for the most
excellent and perfect worship of deity. As this ideally takes place when the worshipper
is fully purified and hence liberated by the practice of Yoga, it is not surprising that
many traditions came to reject the need for outer ritual. The logic behind this rejection
in this case is not that liberation can only be attained by knowledge, as, for example, the
Advaita Vedānta maintains, or that rituals are in themselves powerless because what is
required is devotion, as the later Bhakti schools maintain. Both these positions also
reject the practice of Yoga, the first because it is a form of action and the second
because devotion is by itself enough to draw the deitys liberating grace.

'!” Liberation is not attained by the disciple’s own efforts or, indeed, by those of the
teacher. Liberation can only be attained by knowing the true nature of the one reality,
which is the same pervasive consciousness manifest as and within all things, which is
thus the essential nature of both the teacher and the disciple. The difference between
them is quite real as manifestations of consciousness, but it is just the notion of one’s

CHAPTER ONE
Accordingly, he says:

: || 3331I
N
TETTT
Tā’ WTRNTṀ

tulye kālpanikatve ca yadaikyasphuraṇātmakaḥ || 233 ||
guruḥ sa tāvad ekātmā siddho muktaś ca bhaṇyate |
As (the notions of ‘self’ and ‘other’) are equally imaginary
(kālpanika), the teacher, who is the radiant manifestation of oneness
(aikyasphuraṇa) (with the disciples who are one with him), is thus (tāvat)

one in nature (with them) and (as such,) is said to be ‘accomplished’

(siddha) and ‘liberated’. (233cd-234ab) (234)

The notion of ‘self’ and ‘other” in relation to who is the teacher and who
is not etc. are the same (because both are equally just notions), thus the oneness

with the disciple (of the teacher) or with the teacher (of the disciple) makes
them one. (But even so, the resultant) reflective awareness which, because it is
devoid of the division of the manifestation of ‘self’ and ‘other’ etc. and (its)

effulgent manifestation, is as one compact consciousness, is the teacher whose

nature is that.'" (That) is (the teacher’s) nature and he is, to that extent (as the
unity of the teacher and disciple is realized), the (ultimate) limit of the
manifestation of oneness (as both become one as the teacher), his one (all-

encompassing) Self, which being such, is ‘accomplished and liberated’; (and
these) are said to be (the accomplishment and freedom) of the supreme lordship

(of Śiva consciousness) alone. This is the meaning.'

This is what is being said: to the degree in which (one’s own) reflective
awareness is in a state of oneness with one’s own consciousness, this oneness of
the Supreme Light which has (thus) been attained and is just one, manifests.

That is said (in the following verse):

own identity as the disciple distinct from that of the ‘other’, that is, the teacher. If the
disciple recognises that that one, universal Śiva consciousness shines within the teacher,

he will recognise that it shines within himself also. In the same way, if he experiences it
within himself, he will experience it within the teacher. Indeed, he may experience it

directly within Śiva even independently of the teacher and so recognise it to be the same

in all things, living and inanimate. But, as the next verse stresses, the one consciousness
is first experienced as that of the teacher who assumes both aspects of teacher and the

taught – Siva and the individual soul.

!"- AIthough both the teacher and the disciple are equally that one undivided

consciousness, even so, that unitary consciousness is manifest as the teacher, not as the
disciple.

'"” He indeed is a true teacher who sees himself as one with his disciples, just as the

true disciple is one who sees himself as one with his teacher. The two are the Light of
consciousness which is aware of itself as the unity of both. This is the teacher’s

Supreme Lordship, that is, status and state as Śiva Himself.

TANTRĀLOKA

‘He who knows the pervasion (of consciousness) in this way, as divided

into ʻthe other” and (himself as) ‘not the other’ (parāpara), īs Śiva, the

supreme cause (of all things) directly visible (sākṣār), and is (the teacher) who
liberates (from bondage).”
Thus, he says:

a]Ta

aitd-: |1 33% 1|

TTTTTTAJĪT
ITT TFTTÑ TT; |

yāvān asya hi saṁtāno gurus tāvat sa kīrtitaḥ || 234 ||
samyagjñānamayaś ceti svātmanā mucyate tataḥ |
tata eva svasaṁtānaṁ jñãnĩ tãrayatītyadaḥ || 235 ||
yuktyāgamābhyāṁ saṁsiddhaṁ tāvān eko yato muniḥ |

A teacher is said to be as great as is his (spiritual) family (saṅtāna),
and if (that) is made of right knowledge (samyagjñāna), he therefore

liberates

himself (when

a

member

of this

spiritual

family

attains

liberation). " Thus (the saying) that starts (with the words): ‘the man of

knowledge liberates his own spiritual family’ is fully proved both by reason
(yukti) and scripture (āgama), for such is the extent of (just) one (true) sage.

(234cd-236ab) (235-236)

A ‘spiritual family’, which consists of disciples and their disciples etc.,
is such because, to the degree in which it manifests as being of that nature
(tāvadātmatvena),' it is the manifestation of that one (consciousness which is
both teacher and disciple). “Thus’, because such is the (extent and nature of a)
spiritual family. Taking one’s support from a spiritual family, which is such,
because of the oneness of consciousness, (all that there is just) this one

teacher.'""N Thus, just as the members of the family are liberated, (the teacher)
‘liberates himself’. As the division between ‘self’ and ‘other’ is (just)

conceptual (kālpanika), there is nothing wrong (with this view). Accordingly, he

'' One could also translate: ‘as divided into supreme (transcendent) and other
(immanent) or the ‘supreme’ pure principles above Māyā and the inferior impure
principles below it.

'"” Concerning the spiritual family, see below, 28/194-212.
'' One could also translate: ‘to the degree in which it manifests as the Self’.

'!” It seems that there is a teacher and his disciples, but as their consciousness is one, all

that there is just the teacher alone. The lineage of teachers and their disciples is in reality

just a stream of the one consciousness which manifests this way from one generation to
the other of teachers. Thus, in reality there is only one teacher, and that is Śiva

consciousness, which realises itself and illumines others from one generation to the

next. Accordingly, as long as his disciples are not liberated, the teacher is also not fully
liberated, and by liberating them he liberates himself.

CHAPTER ONE

says: ‘and so (the man of knowledge) liberates (his own spiritual family)’.
That is said (in the following verse):
‘By fully knowing the teaching (jñāna) and what is to be known, the
teacher will save everybody of his own people as well as thousands of millions
of (other spiritual) families.”

The reason here for this is ‘for such is the extent of (just) one (true)

sageʼ. The ‘sage’ is the teacher. As this is so, the removal of the defect
mentioned by others is effortlessly accomplished. Accordingly, he says:

JTIT āT TSTT āTSNÑ

fJ̄īsrq 11 339 1|

aīī] vaftc Tāq |
zT roa: fī araār āafāaṉ 11 23 c 1

tenātra ye codayanti nanu jñānād vimuktatā || 236 ||
dīkṣādikā kriyā ceyaṁ sā kathaṁ muktaye bhavet|
jñānātmā seti cejjñānaṁ yatrasthaṁ taṁ vimocayet || 237 ||
anyasya mocane vāpi bhavet kiṁ nāsamañjasam |
iti te mūlataḥ kṣiptā yattvatrānyaiḥ samarthitam || 238 ||
Thus, (by accepting that the teacher and his disciples are essentially
the same pure conscious reality), those others (who) maintain and promote
(the following view) have been refuted from the very root (of their
contention): Surely, (they object), the liberated state is due to knowledge, so
how can (ritual) action such as initiation be liberating? If you say (that
action is essentially) knowledge, then it would (only) liberate the one in
whom it is present. Would it not (therefore) be unsound (to maintain that)
it (serves to) liberate someone else also?” (236cd-238) (237-238)
‘Those? who maintain various kinds of dualist views and make these
objections have been ‘refutedʼ, that is, completely refuted ‘from the very
rootʼ, as we accept that knowledge and action are one and that the division

between ‘self’ and ‘other’ is (only) imaginary. That itself is the (correct)

response here (to this objection), no other." He says this (with the words)
'! If ṭhe teacher and disciple were to be really fundamentally different, how could the
teacher whose consciousness is perfectly full and free communicate his enlightened
condition to the disciple whose consciousness is, on the contrary, contracted and bound?
Initiation or any other procedure, whether outer ritual or inner meditation, could not
serve as a means to transfer the knowledge the teacher has to his disciple. For this to be
possible, their most fundamental conscious nature must be essentially identical. The
same holds good in relation to Śiva Himself, with whom the teacher is one. Just as the
disciple should assume the teacher’s own divine, free nature, so too, conversely, the
teacher assumes the limitations of his disciple, but without losing awareness of his true,

TANTRĀLOKA

‘those who’ ((make the following) objection have been refuted). The ‘others’,
(who) are described as those who are the votaries of dualist theism

(bhedaiśvaravādin)," we will refute further ahead. This is the connected

(sense of these verses).

Surely (one may ask,) if one does not accept what the dualists say,
namely, that the impurity (that sullies and binds the soul) is a substance, then
what is it? With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Removal of Impurity and the Four Forms of Knowledge

vs ī fa zaā #īāaōītēaq1

TīTTGTTTTĪTTĪ] JTTATTHṬTITRTT |

ā zxīfaxaāīṁ fēatrg 1| 2x0 1
malo nāma kila dravyaṁ cakṣuḥsthapaṭalādivat |
tadvihantrī kriyā dīkṣā tv añjanādikakarmavat || 239 ||
tat purastān niṣetsyāmo yuktyāgamavigarhitam ḷ
malamāyākarmaṇāṁ ca darśayiṣyāmahe sthitim || 240 ||
(The dualist Śaivasiddhāntin maintains that spiritual) Impurity
(mala) is a material substance (dravya) (that covers the soul) as does, for
example, a cataract the eye, and that initiation is the action that removes it,

just as the act of applying collyrium and the like (removes cataracts).
Further on we shall refute that (view), which is contrary to both reason and
scripture, and explain the (true) condition of (āṇava) Mala, Karma and

Māyā. (239.240)

He concludes as he sows the seed for more (teachings).

zag |

T® Tzk TaTTÑTTTĪRTT |I 3¢ 1I
evaṁ śaktitrayopāyaṁ yaj jñānaṁ tatra paścimam |
mūlaṁ taduttaraṁ madhyam uttarottaram ādimam || 241 ||

divine free consciousness. The sense of difference between the disciple and the teacher
as oneself and someone else is a false notion.

'!! Theṣe are, for example, the dualist Śaivasiddhāntins, who maintain that Śiva, the

Lord (pati), the individual fettered souls (pasu) and the three-fold Impurity (mala) that
binds them (pāśa) are three separate realities. The first two are consciousness. The last
is understood by them to be a material substance (dravya).

'! See above, note to 1/23.
'! See below, 9/62 ff.

CHAPTER ONE

Such is the means to realisation, which consists of the three powers
(of will, knowledge and action). The root of these is the last form of
knowledge (that is, the Individual Means). The middle (Empowered Means)

is higher than that, the first (the Supreme Means) is higher still." (241)

‘The lastʼ is the Individual (Means), which is ‘the root’, and its (place
of) rest is in the (Means) pertaining to Śiva (attained) by the progressive
development (krama) of the Empowered (Means). He says that ‘higher than
that’ Individual (Means) is the Empowered Means, which is higher and more
because it is the place of rest (of the Individual Means). Higher than the
Empowered one also is the (Means) pertaining to Śiva. As is said:

‘The penetration that takes place because of the relationship

(saṁbandha) of the pervasive Lord’s power with the individual soul is said to

be three-fold because it is linked with (the powers of) will, knowledge and
action, and so accumuḷates at (correspondingly) progressively higher (levels).”

As the abode of rest of the Individual and other (means), the

knowledge pertaining to Śiva’s means is not the only most excellent one, for
there is another one apart from that called No Means (which is beyond it). Thus,

he says:

TTĀTĪTFHATTTṬTTTTGTATĪ |I 3%+2 II
tato ʻpi paramaṁ jñānam upāyādivivarjitam |
ānandaśaktiviśrāntam anuttaram ihocyate || 242 ||

Superior to that is the knowledge free of means and all else." It

rests in the power of bliss and is called here Anuttara (the Absolute). (242)

(The means called Anuttara – the Absolute) is ‘superior’ because it is

one with the goal. Thus, it is said to be ‘free of means and all else’ and so it is
said that ‘it rests in the power of bliss’. The (powers of) the will (knowledge
and action) are directed externally because they are conditioned by their object
of desire (knowledge and action), and so it is also possible for duality (to arise),

whereas in the case of the power of bliss, according to the dictum: °bliss is the

'! See below, Chapter Thirty-Four.

'! We have seen that the pure consciousness, free of thought constructs, which is ‘the

knowledge pertaining to Śiva’s meansʼ, is the basis of all practice in any domain at all
levels, but there is a level still higher than that where there is nothing the disciple needs
to do. Purified by the practice of the means to realisation, he attains liberation by Śiva’s
supreme grace, transmitted through the teacher. This, the supreme state of
consciousness, is the goal which cannot be attained by any means, and so is called No
Means (anupāya).

" This is taught in Chapter Two below.

TANTRĀLOKA

nature of the Brahman’," that is the very nature of consciousness, and so there
is not (even) the scent of a means (to realisation) here. This is the meaning.'

And this is not (just) our own idea, rather it is declared everywhere in

the scriptures. Thus, he says:

% |

II

tat ṣvaprakāśaṁ vijñānaṁ vidyāvidyeśvarādibhiḥ |
api durlabhasadbhāvaṁ śrīsiddhātantra ucyate || 243 ||
mālinyāṁ sūcitaṁ caitat paṭale ʻṣṭādaśe sphuṭam |
na caitad aprasannena śaṅkareṇeti vākyataḥ || 244 ||
ity anenaiva pāṭhena mālinīvijayottare |

'" This citation is quoted again below in TĀv ad 1/242, ad 3/71 (71cd-72ab), 3/92cd93ab, 4/139, ad 28/332ab, ad 29/97cd-98ab, and ad 29/127cd-128ab. Cf. 29/97cd.
Although this is not a direct reference from the Upaniṣads, it states a view that is clearly

meant to echo them, as the term Brahman indicates. Thus, we find the statement in

Taittirīyopaniṣad 3/6/1: ānando brahmeti vyajānāt – ‘He knew bliss to be the

Brahman.” The text continues: ‘for from bliss, indeed, all these beings originate; once

born they are sustained by bliss; they move towards and merge in bliss’. Also according
to BrŪp 9/7/I: nityaṁ vijñānam ānandaṁ brahma
- ‘the Brahman is eternal

consciousness and blissʼ.
The word ‘ānanda’ is liṣted in standard lexicons as a masculine noun and that

is how it appears consistently in all these citations. However, in other sources where this

statement is found, it is treated as neuter. Thus, we find the form ānandaṁ brahmaṇo

rūpam in the commentary on the PMNKā ad Kārikā 49. A note (49.78) to the edition by
Watson et al further locates this reference in Parākhyatantra 14/89b (see also Goodall
2004: 378, fn. 827). Cf. Bhāsarvajña in the Nyāyasāra p. 565: ānandaṁ brahmaṇo
rūpam tac ca mokṣe ‘bhivyajyate (‘bliss is the nature of the Brahman and that is made
manifest at the time of liberation’). It is also quoted as scripture by Sucaritamiśra ad
Ślokavārttīka, śūnyavāda 70 (p. 130). Cf. also Tantrasadbhāva 1/295cd: ānandaṁ
brahmaṇo rūpam na vibheti kadācana (bliss is the nature of the Brahman, (he who
knows this) is never frightened’). Wilson er al note that ‘This is in turn very close to
Tattirīyopaniṣat in 2/4 and 2/9: ānandaṁ brahmaṇo vidvān na vibheti kadācana (‘bliss
is the Brahman, a wise man is never frightenedʼ).

! No Means – Anupāya – is essentially the power of the bliss of consciousness

(ānandaśakti). Bliss is both the wonder (camatkāra) consciousness experiences by

reṣting in its own nature and the union of Śiva and Śakti from which pour forth the

energies of emanation. All the other powers of will, knowledge and action are, to a
greater or lesser degree, directed outwards from subjective consciousness towards
objectivity, whereas Bliss (ānanda) is the inner nature of the Absolute, which is the one
reality without a second called Brahman, because it pervades and nourishes its
emanation by its oneness with it.

CHAPTER ONE

That consciousness which is self-illuminating and whose true nature

is hard to attain even by Vidyās and Vidyeśvaras etc." is taught in the
venerable Siddhātantra (i.e. the Siddhayogīśvarīmata) and clearly
indicated in the eighteenth chapter of the Mālinī, that is, with this very

reading in the Mālinīvijayottara" stating: ‘Śaṅkara does not (teach) this
(if) He is not pleased!” (243-245ab)

There (we read):'”
‘O Lord of Yoga, the most excellent of those who know Yoga, I want to
hear (about) the Yoga which, without means (anupāya) and devoid of effort and
exertion, (bears) great fruit.
'" Theṣe are the Mantra and Mantreśvara subjects who, beyond Māyā, experience the
principles of Pure Knowledge and Īśvara, respectively. See below, 9/53cd-55ab and
15/309-312.
"! Concerning the Siddhayogīśvarīmata, which is the earliest Tantra that teaches rites
and Mantras to worship the Trika trīad of goddesses, Parā, Parāparā and Aparā in the
Trika Trident Maṇḍala, see Appendix concerning the sources of the Tantrāloka.
Itis very doubtful that the SYM taught immediate realisation, and certainly not

Anuttara directly. Abhinava uses this reference to consciousness as ‘self-illuminating’ to

support his concept of Anuttara, which he had already elaborated in great detail in the
PTy as complete and perfect subjectivity (pūrnāhantā), Supreme Speech and Trika
itself. Quoting the SYM and then the MV as stating this, he is backed by the highest

Trika authorities.

!! Abhinava quotes and comments at length on MV 18/74-81 below in 4/213cd-278 to

establish that relative distinctions such as ‘pure’ and ‘impure’ are merely conceptual.
Here indeed, in Chapter Eighteen, the teaching of the MV is clearly nondualist, whereas
elsewhere in the MV, it may be argued that it is not necessarily so. But even so, this
‘nondualismʼ between pure and impure may not necessarily have ontological

implications. When Tantras teach rites which involve the offering of meat and other
substances considered ‘impure, and declare that they are votaries of ‘supreme
nondualismʼ (paramādvaya), it is generally in this sense.

! The following passages are not found in the printed edition of the MV but are

certainly drawn from there.

! This verse is also quoted in the ĪPVV 3, p. 401. Abhinava does not tell us its source,

but he introduces it saying: “As liberation (is attained) by recognition (pratyabhijīñā)
alone, Yoga consisting of the impediments (kleśa) of yama and niyama (and its other

limbs) is of no use here. Abhinava discusses how only the direct insight into the nature
of reality, namely, that ‘I am all this and all this am I˚, which is termed Sound
Reasoning (sartarka), serves as a means to realisation (see below, 4/13 ff., especially
verses 87 to 97). He finds scriptural support for this teaching from the MV (see below,

4/15, with reference to MV 17/18-19). Thus, it is quite possible that although these

verses are not found in the printed edition of the MV, they come from there, as is the
case with another lost verse from the MV recorded in the PTv (p. 183). This is the
opinion of Tōrzsók (1999: 217). It is unlikely that these verses are drawn from the
SYM, if the recension we have of the SYM is representative of the recension known to

Abhinava and Jayaratha. This SYM is practically entirely concerned with ritual,
whereas the MV is focused much more on Yoga. Again, references in the Tantras in

general to No Means are very rare. Indeed, this is the only one presented by the

Kashmiri teachers as being found in a Trika Tantra. However, the reading of the first
line is not sure. The same verse quoted in the ĪPVv omits the reference to anupāya. Here

TANTRĀLOKA

Asked by the goddess, (Lord Śiva replies,) beginning with (the words):
‘0 goddess, listen, I will tell (you about) the most excellent nectar of

Yoga, having obtained which mortals, free of effort, attain Śiva’s

state. Śaṅkara

does not teach this (if) He is not pleased. Even if it is obtained" in some way,

no trace of it arises (in the aspirant’s mind).”
‘Therefore, one should practice that constantly with a mind that is
not
indifferent (to attaining the goal). O goddess, that is emission (visarga), where

one should find rest." That is said to be the teacher’s mouth. It is said to be the

Wheel of Energies. That is the most excellent place from which all Mantras
arise.”
work:

He (now) says that this is the purpose (and sense – artha – of this)

THa TīdT| T-JIṀĪĒ-TT
TITTĀT|
iti jīīāānacatuṣkaṁ yat siddhimuktimahodayam || 246 ||
tanmayā tantryate tantrālokanāmny atra śāsane |

the reading is: anāyāsam anārambhaṃ anupāyaṁ mahāphalam – (the
Yoga which,)
without means (anupāya) and, devoid of effort and exertion, (bears)
great fruit.’ The

reading in the IPVv is: sphuṭopāyam anāyāsam anārambhaṁ mahāphalam. (the Yoga
which is) a clear means, and, devoid of effort and exertion, (bears) great fruit.”

"" In ĪPVV 3, p. 401 the reading is upalabdhe (‘if it is obtainedʼ), as it is

Kṣemarāja (commenting on ŚSu 2/10) reads upadiṣṭe (‘if it is taught’).

here, but

'" After quoting this verse in ĪPVv 3, p. 401 Abhinava goes on to quote the

following verse:

‘The Yogas with limbs, including breath control (prāṇāyāma) and the rest,
are
(human) creations and so are not worth even a sixteenth part of (the
true) uncreated

(Yoga).”

He continues saying: “although described in this way in the secret
scriptures, it
is not stated clearly in this way, rather it is described concisely (in a
veiled manner). He

then goes on to quote the following verse which says:

‘Even if when he attains just (this) trace (of attainment) and does
not become
(foolishly) elated (pramatta), the Vināyakas (who create obstacle
s) conjoin him to
transitory worldly benefits (bhoga) (and so (he) cannot attain liberatio
n).”

! The verse which contains this and the following sentence is quoted

by Abhinava in

the PTv p. 182. There instead of viṣrāntim arhai, i.e. “(where) one
should find restʼ, the
textreads viśrāntim ṛcchati, i.e. ‘(where) it gives restʼ.

CHAPTER ONE
Here in this teaching called the Light of (and on) the Tantras

(Tantrāloka), I expound this four-fold knowledge, which is the great

dawning of accomplishment (siddhi) and liberation.”” (246cd-247ab) (245)

(Itis) as if there is within the Tantrāloka the light (āloka) of the Tantras
of the Supreme Lord, or else (one can says that) it is the light (āloka) which

illumines them." What is the four-fold knowledge, the nature of which has

been described? It is the dawning (of realisation,) which is the great arising ‘of
accomplishment (siddhi) and liberation’ within this (Tantrāloka). (I) expound
and extensively illumine here in the teaching (called) Tantrāloka, this Great

Dawning (of Realisation). This is the meaning."

” Here Abhinava is referring to his own Tantrāloka as an authority to support the

validity of his presentation of the four penetrations (samāveśa), which are descents of

power of grace which is Rudraśakti as four forms of knowledge that are essentially the

atṭainment of Anuttara, that is, Trika and the means to it. He is also telling us that these
four constitute his basic exegetical model that accommodates all the practices, whether
they be in the form of ritual, Yoga, or direct insight and combinations of them.

! According to the first way of breaking down the compound ‘tantrāloka’, it means

‘Light of the Tantrasʼ, and according to the other way it means ‘Light on the Tantras’.
Jayaratha says that these are alternative, equally valid way of understanding the
meaning of the name ‘Tantrāloka.

"!” In the second half of his summary of this chapter presented in the first chapter of his

Tantrasāra (see above note 1,533 for the first half), Abhinava again focuses our

atṭention on the ‘four-fold knowledge’, which consists of the levels and categories of

means (upāya) and corresponding meditative penetrations (samāvesśa), as the essence of
his teachings:
‘There (in that regard,) here (according to us, the essential) ‘own nature’ (of

every single thing) is that which, above all, should be adopted (as one’s own)

(paramopādeya), and that is the nature of all existing things as the Light (of
consciousness), because it is illogical that that which is not light (i.e. does not manifest
anywhere at any time or in any form can) possess a nature of its own. And that (light) is
not multiple, for there is no difference (bheda) between the ‘own nature’ (of things),
insofar as it is not logically possible (for the Light) to enter into (and assume) a nature

which is other than (itself). Again, space and time also do not divide it up, because they

too are that light (of consciousness) by nature. Thus, the Light (which makes all things
manifest) is indeed only one, and that is itself consciousness. (Indeed,) nobody disagrees
here that consciousness is the Light (that illumines all) things (arthaprakāśa). And that

Light does not depend on anything else (for its existence and illumination). The state of

dependence on another (pertains only to and is) just the condition of the object of

illumination. And the condition of the object of illumination is itself nothing but a state
of dependence on another Light (to illumine it). Moreover, there is no other Light at all,
thus the one Light is independent, and because of (its) independence, it is devoid of the

conditioning divisions (avaccheda) of space, time and form. Thus, it is pervasive,
eternal and the formless nature of all forms. Again, its independence is the power of
bliss; its aesthetic wonder is the power of the will; (its) condition as the Light (of
consciousness) is the power of consciousness; (its) condition as reflective awareness is

the power of knowledge, and its association with all forms, the power of action.
Although it is endowed in this way with the primary energies (of consciousness), in
actual fact the Light, undivided and endowed with the powers of will, knowledge and
action, is the form of Śiva who is at rest within His own bliss. It is He Himself who, by
virtue of (His) freedom manifests Himself in (a limited) contracted (form), is said to be

TANTRĀLOKA

Now (it is said that):

‘Logical argument (nyāya) does not operate there with respect to an
entity (artha) that has not been perceived or one whose nature has been

ascertained. Rather (it operates) with respect to one (whose nature is the object

of) doubt. Thus, doubt is one of its ancillaries.

According to such dictums, the application (praṇayana) of a treatise

(śāstra), which is essentially a (conclusive) ascertainment (nirṇaya) (of the

nature of its subject), is generally with respect to a matter (artha) which is the
object of doubt. Thus, because doubt is (one of) its ancillaries, he begins by

describing its nature.'

the individual soul (aṇu). And He then again makes Himself manifest as free, by virtue
of which He shines as the unconditioned Light (of consciousness) which is Śiva’s nature
(rūpa). There, (in that case) also, He makes Himself manifest either without or with
(some) means. Again, if (this takes place) with means, the means are either will or
knowledge or action. Thus, (the means is of) three kinds, which is that of the meditative
penetration (samāveśa) (that takes place thereby) distinguished as pertaining to Śiva
(śāmbhava), (His) power (śākta) and the individual soul (āṇava). There (in that
context), this fourfold nature (which includes the absence of means) is also taught here
successively (in due order).”

' Absolutely ignorant people have no doubts, nor do those who know all they want to
know. Doubts may arise only when there is a desire to know. The Tantrāloka is meant
for those people who have this desire, that is, those who do understand something, even
if it is just the importance of knowing more.

' The Tantrāloka is written in accord with the classic model of a Sanskrit didactic

treatise – āstra. The word is derived from the root śas, which has the sense of ‘to
instruct or ’govern’. The ‘tra’ has an agential sense. Thus, the word śāstra denotes a
text or a discipline that teaches something, and so governs a body of knowledge and its

application. The exposition of the teachings of a sāstra should be logical and coherent
so that the teachings may not be open to doubt either with regard to their content or
truth. Doubt is the essential cause of the development of thought constructs which
obscure and contract consciousness. The close association of the two — thought and

uncertainty – is reflected in the word vikalpa, which may denote both ‘a thought’ and
‘an alternative’. In this perspective, a thought construct is a conceptual assessment of

the nature of its object as one of a number of alternative possibilities. The mass of

sensations coming through the eyes, processed by the inner mental faculties, come to be
labelled and hence identified through an inner mental statement such as ‘this is a table’.

This statement is a determinative judgement, that is, ascertainment (niścaya), which is

formed on the basis of examining other alternatives which are discarded as incorrect.

This process is technically called apoha, which one could translate as ‘denial’ or

‘negation’. This kind of analysis of the cognitive process and how we reach conclusions

is accepted by various schools of Indian philosophy beginning with its initial major
formulation by the Buddhist idealist Diṅnāga in his Pramāṇasamuccaya (see Torella
2002: 128-130). This is accepted here as a method which is applicable to an

examination of the teachings which establishes their validity, even as it elucidates them.

The Buddhists formulated and carefully analysed this epistemic mechanism

because it is thereby possible to conceptually determine the nature of particular entities
without assuming that they possess a nature of their own. They need not postulate the
existence of supposed realities as their opponents do who maintain that a table is known
to be a table because its innate nature or ‘table-ness” has been grasped and correctly

represented. Even without an innate ‘own nature’ a table can be known by exclusion of

CHAPTER ONE

Enunciation, Definition and Investigation '
everything else that it is not. Thus, doubts that may arise concerning what it is are
resolved. The Pratyabhijñā also accepts the existence of this cognitive process, which it
understands in the ambit of its own system. Here, as we shall see, the nature of an object
is determined by a process of progressive manifestation of its qualities as they come to
be known, until they are sufficient in number and clarity for the nature of the object that

is the bearer of those qualities to be known, or to put it another way, for it to be
manifest.
' Nyāya, which literally means ‘sound reasoning’, is an empiricist, dualist philosophy,
primariḷy concerned with logic and epistemology. It is also concerned with identifying
and elucidating the basic principles on which sound philosophical debate is based and
the proper manner to expound a philosophy in a systematic and logically coherent

manner. This is achieved by a progressive, systematic exposition of a subject in three
phases, namely, enunciation (uddeśa) of the matter to be discussed, definition (lakṣana)
of its primary characteristic and, finally, the investigation (parīkṣā) of its nature.
Vātsyāyana, an early exponent of Nyāya, writes in his commentary (bhāṣya) on the

Nyāyasūtra (1/1/3): ʻThe science of reasoning (nirṇaya) goes through three stages or
proce:s
namely, enunciation (uddeśa), definition (lakṣaṇa) and investigation
(parīkṣa). Uddeśa is the mere mention of the category by name. Lakṣaṇa consists in that
character or property that serves to differentiate that which is enunciated from

everything else. Parīkṣa is the detailed examination of what has been enunciated and

defined.’ In this case, most concretely, the ‘enunciation’ is the subject of each chapter of

the Tantrāloka. The list of these ‘enunciations’ given below serves effectively as a list
of chapter headings. Analogously, the following list of ‘definitions’ serves as an index

of the topics of the sections of each chapter. The third step, that is, ‘investigation’, is the
content of each chapter, in other words, the Tantrāloka itself.
Abhinava ensures in this way that his Tantrāloka is an authoritative treatise,
laid out respecting the rules of a systematic, logical exposition. But this is not enough.

He is also concerned to establish that the Tantrāloka also possesses the necessary
characteristics to qualify it as an authoritative transmission of the teachings which
ultimately originate from Deity. This places the authority of the Tantrāloka on the same
level as scripture. However, unlike scripture, the Tantrāloka has a human author.
Indeed, Abhinava refers to himself very clearly at the end of this chapter as the author,

as he does in several places throughout his work. The seeming contradiction is

reconciled by examining the nature of reality which, as cognitive consciousness,

involves, as usual, an analysis of perception and epistemology from this perspective. To
this end, Abhinava begins by examining the nature of doubt (lines 1/247cd to 1/253ab).
As doubt concerning metaphysical realities is removed by the teacher, he goes on to
expound the relationship between the teacher and his disciple as that between two
aspects of consciousness, namely, one that questions and the other that replies (lines

1/253cd to 1/258ab). This leads to the general application of this principle to

understanding how the perceiving subject reaches a right conclusion and achieves
certainty (niścaya) as to the nature of his object (lines 258cd to 261ab). He goes on to

examine how enunciation, definition and examination are fundamentally phases of the

act of perception, and how they are evidenced in the operation of all valid means of
knowledge (lines 261cd to 269ab). Once having established how this works, he is free to

examine this three-fold process entirely in terms of consciousness as actively engaged in

forming the objects of knowledge in the process of coming to know them, and then the

process purely in terms of the activity of consciousness as Speech and its energies (lines

269cd to 275ab). The conclusion is a brief exposition of the five types of relationship

between the teacher and the taught as aspects of the supreme one in which
consciousness is both. Thus, as the teachings of the Tantrāloka are grounded in the pure

TANTRĀLOKA

tatreha yad yad antar vā bahir vā parimr̥śyate || 247 |I

anudghāṭitarūpaṁ tat pūrvam eva prakāśate |

There (in that regard) whatever one reflects on here, whether

internal or external, manifests initially in an undisclosed (anudghātita)
(generic, unspecified) form. (247cd-248ab) (246)
‘Internal’ means within mental consciousness (mānasavijñāna) and the

like. (Whatever one perceives is initially) in an ‘undisclosed form’, that is, its

specific qualities have not (yet) been made manifest. The meaning is that its
nature (devoid of its specific qualities consists then of just its) generic attributes

(sāmānyadharma).

This is generally what is said to be ‘doubt’. Thus, he says:

TāTTgaāTRaTēēī fēTRaiTaraT arī || 2%%¢ 11

āvra: ṣafxrzī fitṁ atṁ īaar 1

saṁśayaḥ kutracid rūpe niścite sati nānyathā |

A perception (prathā) whose form™ is (at this stage) undisclosed in

this way cannot be defined (anirvācya), and (so) is (essentially) doubt. (It
arises only) when the nature (rūpa) (of the object of this uncertainty) has
been to some degree determined (as the bearer of these generic, unspecified
attributes), not otherwise. (248cd-249ab) (247)
‘In this way’, initially, the form of (for example, a person in the dark)
is ‘undisclosed’ʼ, that is, not revealed,' because one has not known its
specific, particular attributes such as hands and feet etc., (just its) form, which is
(its) generic qualities such as (the bare perception of its) height and the like.
reflective awareness of universal ‘’ consciousness, they flow out from the supreme
relationship, as all scriptures ultimately do.

' The primary form of doubt is a perception in which only the generic attributes of an
entity and not its particular features are perceived. For example, the perceiver knows

that ‘this is a tall standing figure’, but as only some of the object’s generic features are
apparent to him, he does not know specifically what it is. AIl perception begins this

way, but it normally moves on imperceptibly quickly to the following phases in which

the specific nature of the object is ascertained. If this does not happen, the perceiver,

stuck in this initial generic perception, experiences this initial doubt as to the nature of
what he is perceiving.

'2 The ‘form’ʼ (ākāra) of a perception is its object.

' The word I translate here as ‘undisclosed’ is ‘anunmudrita’, which literally means
‘unsealed’ʼ, ‘opened upʼ.

CHAPTER ONE

Thus it ‘cannot be defined’ because there is no ascertainment (niścaya) of
other kinds of specific (features) of the bearer of (these) attributes. Doubt is a
‘perception’ʼ, that is, cognition (pratīti), the nature of which is characterized by
the fact that it is not possible to say (what the object of doubt is in a certain)
determinate manner, based on both (its) aspects (generic and particular). (Doubt
is such because) it arises when one knows a generic attribute (of the entity),
such as (in the case of a figure ofa man or tree its) height or the like, but not its
particular attributes, such as (the man’s) face (if it is a man or a) cavity (if it is a

tree).™ He says this (in the sentence which in Sanskrit) begins with ‘to some

degreeʼ, that is, in some (entity) which possesses the (perceived) attributes (but)

which is defined (solely by its) generic attributes. This is the meaning. ‘Not

otherwiseʼ, that is, (no doubt exists) when the nature of the entity has been
ascertained (niścita) in its entirety or not at all (because in that case there would

be no object of doubt).

Analysing this (view), he explains:

GEāEiṂEēṭczNīz[EHE:|TIĒTHHIEPCHII

etat kim iti mukhye ‘smin etad aṁśaḥ suniścitaḥ || 249 ||
saṁśayo ‘stitvanāstyādidharmānudghāṭitātmakaḥ |
(When we ask:) ‘what is this?” (we are expressing) the primary

form (mukhya) (of doubt). (Doubt is not a total absence of knowledge, for
even when in doubt about something,) the ‘this’ aspect is well determined,

(that is, there is no doubt that something is there). Doubt (is most

essentially concerned with the ‘what’ aspect. It is that phase of perception
during which the fundamental) attributes (of an entity), including its
existence or non-existence and the like, have (as yet) not been disclosed

(udaghāṭita) (to the subject who wishes to perceive them). (249cd-250ab)

(248)

‘(When we ask:) What is this?’ there is doubt, which is essentially (a
form of) reflective awareness. In relation to other (similar forms of) reflective

awareness such as: ‘(is this) a pillar or a man?” (this is) the primary (form of

doubt,) because none of the particular qualities (of the entity) have been
disclosed. In that case, the ‘this aspect in relation to the ‘what’ aspect has been

! We see a tall erect object on a dark night which may be, for example, a man or the

stump of a tree. We can make out its generic features, perceiving, for example, ‘this is a
tall figure which seems to have a face’, but we cannot make out its particular features. In
order to be sure what it is, we need to be able to make out more specific distinguishing
features. Thus, if we see that the figure has a face, we feel certain that it is a man. Or, if

we see that it is a cavity of a tree, not a face, we know that it is a tree. Thus, for a
perception of an object to be certain and the object clearly ascertained, both aspects,
generic and particular, of that object need to be clearly perceived.

TANTRĀLOKA

correctly ascertained (niścita) by the (bare) perception of the (entity) alone

which possesses the attributes.

Surely (one may object that) the definition of doubt is that: “doubt is the
reflective awareness which is (the uncertainty) with regards to both the fixed

(ascertained) (niyata) (alternative) aspects.'" (In reply to this objection, we
say this definition is not accurate). There (in that case), one aspect has been

determined, (namely) the ‘something’ (aspect), and by that (the requirement
which defines doubt) has been met. He says this (in the second half of this

verse,) which begins with (the word) ‘doubt’.'™” The nature of (doubt) is like

that of (an entity) which has not been disclosed, that is, revealed by its particular

aṭṭributes, amongst which first of all is their ‘existence’ or ‘non-existence’.
Where the disclosure (of an entity) has not taken place because even ‘existence’
and ‘non-existence’ amongst (its fundamental) attributes have not been
ascertained, what question can there be of (its) other attributes (being
ascertained)? Thus, because the form of all of (its) attributes is undefined
(anullikhita), and so (perception) does not have the support of (any) fixed
(indubitably determined) attribute, this is the primary (form of) doubt. The point
is that the ‘what’ aspect denotes the form of the undefined entity (which is the
object of doubt). He says that:
[hī]HcāṬāq] ṜṬscza] EuEEa+: TāN IT

II Ṝ4o

Il

kim ity etasya śabdasya nādhiko ʻṛthaḥ prakāśate || 250 ||
(Indeed), the word ‘what’ does not convey more meaning (than

that). (250cd) (249ab)

(The word ‘what’ does not convey) ‘more’ than the meaning of that
word (‘whatʼ itself). Then (one may ask,) to what does it refer? With this doubt
in mind, he says:

f. --T-JaTē-R āīcaāī̄aṛ-ā 1|
'"” There are two types of doubt ~ primary and secondary. Primary doubt is simply the

uncertainty one may feel when one sees something and asks oneself ‘what is this?’ One
knows that there is something out there. This is the perception of the ‘this’ aspect of that
object of perception. However, one does not know the ‘what’ aspect because the
specifying qualities of the object, by means of which one can know what it is have not

been perceived. In the case of secondary doubt, the perception of the object is more

clearly defined. For example, one may see an elongated erect object on a dark foggy
night and ask oneself ‘is this a pillar or is this a man?’ In this type of doubt there are two

alternative possibilities. Either the object is a man or a pillar. All other possibilities are
excluded. Thus, this is not complete doubt, as is the primary form, in which the object
could be anything.

' The point of this objection is as follows. According to this definition, doubt depends
on the existence of at least two ascertained alternatives between which doubt vacillates,
and so serve as the constituent aspects of doubt. When one asks oneself ‘what is this?’ it

cannot be said to be doubt, let alone its primary form, as there are no two such
alternatives. It is just ignorance.

' Elide astitvaṁ ca nāstitvaṁ ca tat.

CHAPTER ONE

kirṁ tv anunmudritākāraṁ vastv evābhidadhāty ayam |
Rather, (all) this denotes is an entity whose form has not been

disclosed. (251ab) (249cd)

“This’ is the word ‘what’.
It is (only) right that there be a primary (form of) doubt in some

circumstances when there is' a secondary (form of it). So in order to illustrate
the secondary (form of doubt) as well, he says:

# TI: || 342, |

sthāṇur vā puruṣo veti na mukhyo ‘sty eṣa saṁśayaḥ || 251 ||
bhūyaḥsthadharmajāteṣu niścayotpāda eva hi
The doubt ‘“is this a man or the trunk (of a tree)?” is not primary
(because it entails) the arising of an ascertainment (niścaya) of many of the

qualities (of the object). (251cd-252ab) (250)

(This is) not ‘the primary form’ (of doubt) because it is not, as before
(in the previous example), one in which none of the (specifying) attributes (of
the object of doubt) are disclosed. This is because (in this case) many particulars
related to what is ‘not the trunk (of a tree)ʼ, for example, are perceived as

certain, because no other (alternative) determined fixed perception apart from
‘(this is) a trunk (ofa tree) (or a man) is possible.

Surely (one may ask,) if this is so, then it is possible that here (in this

case, the nature of the) entity may be mixed up (with another), because its fixed
