CHAPTER ELEVEN

na hy atra vargīkaraṇaṁ ṣamayaḥ kalanāpi vā || 9 l|
yujyate sarvatodikkaṁ svātantryollāsadhāmani |
(Supreme Śiva) is the omnipresent abode of the exuberance of the

creative freedom (of consciousness), and so no classification, whether a

convention or a conception (kalanā), is applicable here (to Him). (9cd-10ab)

‘Classification’ has two aspects. The first conventional (samaya), and

the other conceptual (kalanā), which is the various ways in which (Supreme
Śiva) is imagined to be. The reason here for this is that it is in all respects ‘the
exuberance of the creative freedom (of consciousness)’.

Surely (one may ask), if that is so, how can such teachings as ‘one

should know that Śiva is the agent of all actions’ (ever) come to be conceived?
With this doubt in mind, he says:

aaāa-zaṛ fīi #7 āīāṁīcfr=gaīd 1| 2e 1|

3TRVTTTHVITĀTÁTHTTGA |

svātantryāt tu nijaṁ rūpaṁ boddhṛdharmād avicyutam || 10 l|
upadeśatadāveśaparamārthatvasiddhaye |
bodhyatām ānayan devaḥ sphuṭam eva vibhāvyate || 1 1 II
yato ‘taḥ śivatattve ‘pi kalāsaṁgatir ucyate |

We can clearly observe that even though (Śiva’s) own (essential)
nature (rūpa) does not fall from (His) inherent nature as the (supreme and

universal) subject (boddhṛdharma), He freely (chooses) to become an object
of our understanding. (He does this) so that instruction may be possible, in
order to achieve (true and) ultimate absorption (in Him). It is because of
this that it is said that the Śiva Principle (śivatattva) also is associated with a
Force. (10cd-12ab)

‘It is because of this’, namely that, although (Śiva) is the (supreme and
universal) subject, because, by virtue of His freedom, He is experienced
(vibhāvana) objectively, he is (said to be) ‘associated with a Force’. The
meaning being that He is related to this and that notion (concerning His nature).

That is said (in the Īśvarapratyabhijñā):

‘The Lord, by virtue of His freedom, which is the absence of duality,

having fashioned (his own) Self (ātman), that (abides) unforsaken (by that)

! Read kalpanīyatāṁ for kalanīyatār.

TANTRĀLOKA

freedom, with notions that He is the Lord (Īśa) and the like, behaves (as such in

daily life).

This (view) has been previously logically established in many ways and
so there is no need to make an effort (to do so here) again. The nature of (this)
Force is said to amount to just this.
Surely (one may object): alright, let that be (as you say), we do not
disagree here (about this); however, how is it that the Egg is said to extend up to

the end of Power, and not (up to the end of) the Pervasive One and the rest?

With this doubt in mind, he says:

The Four Eggs

3JTG
H JGTfYTTTRATTĒTTĨT]
II 23 11

aṇḍaṁ ca nāma bhuvanavibhāgasthitikāraṇam || 12 ||
prāhur āvaraṇaṁ tac ca śaktyantaṁ yāvad asti hi |
(The wise) say that the (Cosmic) Egg is an enveloping covering

(āvaraṇa) that (extends) up to (the Principle of) Power, and is responsible

for the division of the world orders into groups (up to that Principle).

(12cd-13ab)

(The word) ‘that’ refers to the obscuring covering.
ŚSurely (one may object) that thereis a division of world orders here (in
the Śiva principle, but) thereis no obscuring covering in the form of an Egg that
serves as a cause of that. Thuṣ, thisis (indeed) a novel manner of talking (about

this). Accordingly, he says (in response to this objection):

ū̄ṁ r̥̄TTafā: 1| 23 1
EiGĪSPIEFIṢÁḤEIĒE-EISISĒEĒE

yady api prāk śivākhye ‘pi tattve bhuvanapaddhatiḥ || 13 II
uktā tathāpy apratighe nāsminn āvṛtisaṁbhavaḥ |

(The Egg of Power does not extend further) because even though a
series of world-orders was previously said to be present in the principle

' ĪP 1/5/16, quoted above with variants in TĀv ad 1/72 (73) (see note there), ad

3/227cd-278ab
(1/5/16a).

(277),

9/159

(1/5/16a),

11/28,

15/315-317

and

29/126cd-127ab

See places listedin previous note.
"√ Here again Jayarathais addressing the mistake of identifying the principle – tatva–

of Śakti, and the station of development of Sound thatis also called Śakti.