CHAPTER FIFTEEN

to the main (Mantra) with sesamum seeds and one hundred (oblations of) cḷarified butter made with the small ladle. In the same way, (he should

offer) one sixth (the number of libations of the times he has repeated) the

limbs and faces, and a tenth of (the repetitions of) the remaining Mantras

also. (One can offer) even a thousand or more oblations also to satisfy (the

Mantra deities), according to the money one has (to do this). (421-422)

(418cd-420ab) (Then

(mṛgīmuḍrā). As is said:

‘O Great Goddess, when the tip of the thumb is conjoined to the middle and ring fingers and the index and little fingers are extended at a distance from one another, that is the great gesture called that of the deer.” There is no rule that there should be (just) a hundred oblations. Thus, he

says that ‘(one can offer) even a thousand or more’. Thus, it is said

(repeatedly) in various places (in the scriptures), ‘one should not be miserly”.

Surely (one may ask), if the libation can be accomplished with just a

hundred oblations, then what is the use (of offering) a thousand or more oblations, that (serve only to) consume (more) money? With this doubt in mind,

The Sacrificer Should Not be Stingy, Vāmā’s Power will Bind Him

One who, although he has money, is consumed by greed and the

like, perceiving that external (matters) are the most important, consciousness takes second place, and so he does not receive a descent of the power (of grace). (423) (420cd-421ab) ‘Perceiving that external (matters) are the most importantʼ, because

of (his) obstinate inclination for outer things like money. As is said:

‘He who, although there is money, does not carry out the full extent of the prescribed procedure out of greed, does not get any fruit at all.’ Also quoted above in TĀv ad 15/36cd-37ab. See note there.

Surely (one may ask), what is the (scriptural) authority here (to support

the view) that, just due to this alone, he receives no descent of the power (of grace)? With this doubt (in mind, he says):

uktaṁ svacchandatantre tad dīkṣito 'pi na mokṣabhāk | It is said in the Svacchandatantra that ‘even though he is initiated,

he is not liberated.”" (424ab) (421cd)

Now, there is no disagreement here that what has been done, (at least) to

some extent, is not not done. So, what would be the fruit of the rites performed in the course of the initiation of one who is (afflicted with) greed and the like?

He voices this doubt:

nanu yat tasya dīkṣāyāṁ kr̥taṁ karmāsya kiṁ phalam || 424 || Surely (one may ask), what fruit (does a miser) get from the rites

performed in the course of (his) initiation?®’ (424cd) (421ef) He answers this (question as follows):

TTTTRĪTTTTGTTI āTHTRTFTATTTṬ |

F-JT T-Tā ā TāRTITAHTTTaTT II|`#42Ū I tatrāhur gamaśāstrajñā vāmāśaktimayās tadā | mantrā badhnanti taṁ ṣamyag bhavakārāmahāgṛhe || 425 || ṢVṬ 1/21d SVT read muktibhāk for moksabhāk.

māyānvitaḥ śathah krūṟo nihsatyaḥ kalahapriyah | 20 l|

kāmī ca lobhasampannaḥ śivabhaktivivarjttaḥ |

| na mukúibhāg iry anena ṣvāmmany eva asya bhāyapradatvam uktam sarveṣāṁ śiṣyatvāt | 2 Iḷ

‘He who is deluded (māyānvta), deceitful, cruel, a liar, delights in quarrelling, lustful,

stingy, devoid of devotion for Śiva, critical of the teacher and the scriptures, even though he 1s initiated, he is not liberated. SvT 1/20cd-21

(A person who is) dece1tful 1s one whose heart is not pure. One who is cruel has a fierce

(vtolent) nature. One who delghts 1n quarrelling engages in useless illogical dispute. One who 1s stngy is one who though he has means, when it comes to rites of worship or the like, he is decetful about hss wealth. (One who 1s devoid of) devotion to Śiva and the like is said to be

affected by the (Śiva's) destructive power (vlayaśakti).’ ’ Cf. above, 15/36cd-37ab.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Those who know the Gamaśāstra say (in response to such questions) that, the Mantras are then (in that case) made of Vāṃā’s power, (and s0)

they bind him as is fitting (samyak) in the great edifice of the prison of transmigratory existence. (425) (422cd-423ab)

‘Then (in that case)ʼ, when external (matters) are the most important and consciousness takes second place. This is the meaning.

JĪTTT TNITTRTTHTĪTGĒHTĪTRBAT II#RĒ II yā tv anugrāhikā śaktis teṣāṁ sā gurudīpitā | śodhayeta svaśāstrasthaniṣkāmollaṅghanakriyām || 426 || (However), the gracious power (of Lord Śiva) they do possess, energized (dīpitā) by the teacher, serves to purify the involuntary transgressions of the rules of their own scriptures. (426) (423cd-424ab) ‘Theyʼ’ are those who have received initiation who possess ‘the gracious power (of Lord Śiva). Energized through ritual, yoga and knowledge by the teacher, it ‘serves to purify’ the involuntary, that is, without prior desire,

transgression of the rule which, consisting of prohibitions and injunctions, is found in the scripture given (by the teacher) as one’s own. Moreover, as that is so, ultimately his own (true) nature manifests, in accord with the view that (is

expressed in the following verse):

“Thus, because he has not caused obstacles (to others), and being for

aṭtains equality with the Supreme Lord.”

(However,) when (the Mantras are) presided over by the power (called) Vāmā, because external (matters) are (deemed to be) the most important and consciousness takes second place, one’s own nature is obscured from (its very) root, and so (the power of grace) can do nothing at all. Thus, it was rightly said that: ʻone who is consumed by greed and the like does not receive a descent of

the power (of grace).’ Moreover, it was said before:

‘Such (a teacher) is firmly governed by Vāmā, and is the most fettered of souls (paśūttama). Even though he has heard sufficiently about the knowledge of Siva, his sole attitude (vṛttitva) is dualistic, and he does not give it up. How can one who, once obscured by Siva, is by the power of (karmic) ’ The same metaphor is found also above in 12/21ab.

4 This verse is set in Arya metre. ’ Above, 15/423ab (420cd).

necessity (niyati) rendered dependent (on others) (paratantrita), attain the

Lord's plane of being (patipada)?”

One should offer a full oblation in this way at the end of the fire sacrifice (homa), in_order to complete it. Accordingly, he explains that

procedure (prayoga).”

The Full Oblation

T̃ 3aāTīTIHTC-ĀĪAĪ-TCATTĀTT |

gqr-jdi Sīa’ṝcaīcH’araTTSTHTṬÑĀT II/#2' 1I

IEḵUUEGFEṬEGIEIĒEIUETHĪṈ

gqTIrTH ṜITR TTCTTTTHT I|/#30 1|

vāmaṁ srugdaṇḍagaṁ hastaṁ dakṣiṇaṁ sopayāmakam || 428 |I

(The teacher) then takes up the large and small ladles® filled with

the nectar of clarified butter, their nature SŚiva and Śakti. By placing one below and the other above, they are beautiful with their mutual intent on

one another. (Then his) mind, breath and body equal (in balance and well controlled) by being engaged in the procedure of oneness; the left hand is

on the handle of the large ladle, the right (hand), which has a braided ring of darbha grass (upayāmaka) (on one finger), is placed below the neck (of ’ Above, 13/314cd-316ab. “’ Now Abhinava returns to talking about the fire offering. “’ The sruk is a wooden ladle that 1s used to pour clarified butter into the fire. The sruva is a smaller wooden ladle which is used to take the clarified butter or mulk from their container (sthālī) and pour it nnto the large ladle. Jayaratha notes that the clarified butter 1s only in the sruk.

“ Ṭhis is not the meaning of the word ‘upayāmaka found in the dictonary. MW says that itis ‘a partcular veṣsel for ladling out; a ladle (used at a sacnfice)ʼ. Thīs is clearly not what is meant

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

the small ladle), and (the two are then) firmly squeezed (together with both

hands). Having done this, exerting himself (and attentive), he should lower

the large ladle, (tipping it towards the fire), as he conjoins the vital breath (prāṇa) to increasingly higher (levels), until (this) supremely blissful, most excellent nectar falls from the tip of the ladle, that is, from the Wheel of the

Moon (located there), into the fire of consciousness (that burns) at the

extremity of the End of the Twelve. (The teacher) should thus cast the (final) oblation that ends with VAUSAT into the fire, which is the mouth of

(all) Mantras. (427-431ab) (424cd-428)

‘By placing one below and the other above’ʼ, as is usual (in accord

with) ‘their nature as Śiva and Śakti’. Thus, the small ladle is above the large one. As is said (in the scriptures):

‘The base of the large ladle (should be at the height of) the location of the navel. the cavity at its extremity (agramukha) (should be) level and facing upwards. Ó goddess, the small ladle is placed facing down on top of the large

Thus, because they are Śiva and Śakti, it is right that they should be

mutually (facing and) intent on one another, so that (one may) attain the

desired fruit. Thus, because they penetrate into each other and so are mutually

intent on one another, even though (the clarified butter) is only in the large ladle, it is said without distinction that (the ladles are) ‘filled with the nectar of

cḷarified butter’. In this way, (the teacher) ‘takes up the large and small ladlesʼ that are such. The teacher’s body, vital breath and intellect etc. are in a state of (harmonious) oneness, brought about by (his unifying) contemplation

(anusandhāna) of the (one) supreme nondual (reality). (His) left hand is at the base of the handle of the big ladle that is turned upwards. The right (hand), ‘which has a braided ring of darbha grass (upayāmaka) (on one finger)’, faces downwards, as does the small ladle. Held at its (upper) extremity, below its neck, (the hand is) placed on the front part (agrapītha) (of the handle) that has the shape of the fire altar (vedika). Having pressed together these extremities, (the ladles are) ‘firmly squeezed (together)’, with the two hands placed in this way (the lower at the bottom of the handle of the big ladle and the upper at the top). (The teacher,) ‘exerting (himself) (and attentive), conjoins the vital breath (prāṇa) properly ‘to increasingly higher (levels)’, beginning from the heart, by progressively crossing over each level. (As he does this,)

here. My translation is based on Jayaratha’s explanation. It is standard practce for those parúcipating in a rite to wear a ring like thus.

ṭ seems that the mouth of the big ladle 1s technically called candracakra, which literally means ‘the Wheel of the Moon. We have observed many examples of the common metaphor of lunar fluid dripping from above into the fire of consciousness. The Wheel of the Moon at the orifice of the ladle is thus the outer counterpart of the one located in the End of the Twelve at extremity of the subtle body.

” This verse is also quoted above in TĀv ad 15/282-283ab, as part of a loṇger citaton drawn from either the Nandiśikhā or the Ánandaśāsana.

7 Read prepsita- for prekita-.

contemplating the fall of the stream of clarified butter, he ‘should lowerʼ it

slowly until ‘(this) supremely blissful’ and hence ‘most excellent nectar falls

from the large ladle, which is characterized as consciousness and is established

on the supreme peak (of consciousness), ‘into the fire of consciousnessʼ, that

burns up the universe and is located ‘at the extremity of the End of the Twelveʼ. (In other words,) it should flow forth as that which further awakens the fire of consciousness. ‘(The teacher) should thus cast the (final) oblation that ends with VAUSAT’, that is, offer the (final) full oblation, as that which

makes (the deity fully) satisfied, into the outer ‘fire which’, as a means to ingest each of the sacrificial substances, ‘is the mouth’ of all Mantras. The ‘ʻupayāma’ is the upper knot, which is perceived to be the sword of knowledge. It is an arrangement of (blades of) darbha (grass) in the form of a braid. As they say:

‘The braid, which is the most excellent sword of consciousness, is made

from thirty-six blades of Darbha (grass), the size of the palm (of a hand)

Surely (one may ask), what is the purpose of contemplating (this rite) in this way? With this doubt in mind, he says:

z 3šī fṝa ũaī: gr= y vṁataā: 11 xae 1

iitilETḤ ṇTGH&HRGIHTSHHTMHN™H II/#32 II

itthaṁ jñātvāditaḥ kuṇḍasrukṣruvājyamanūn bhṛśam || 432 | dvādaśāntavībodhāgnau ruddhvā pūrṇāhutiṁ kṣipet | The consciousness that is above, reflected in the (sacrificial) pit, is

the fire. The large and small ladles are the vital breath. The clarified butter is the juice of (the aesthetic delight of) consciousness of (the sacrificer’s sacred) intent (saṅīkalpa-cidrasa). Having known (this) in this way from the

start, and having firmly placed in the fire of consciousness (that burns) in the End of the Twelve, the fire pit, the large and small ladles, the butter and the Mantras, (the teacher) should cast the (final) full oblation (into the outer fire). (431cd-433ab) (429-430) The consciousness that is located above, reflected below in the (sacrificial) pit, is the fire. The vital breath, which is like that (also), is

Spreading the fingers of the hand, the area covered from the thumb to the index finger is called a ʻtāla’, up to the middle finger, ‘gokarṇa’, and up to the little finger ‘vitasta’. Read evam anusandhāne for evam abhiṣandhāne.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

(embodied in) the large and small ladles. The juice of (the aesthetic delight of) consciousness is the reflective awareness of oneness in this way." Having first

of all contemplated (these things in this way) and firmly placed the (sacrificial) pit and the rest in the fire of consciousness (located) in the End of the Twelve,

and having made (them) one (in that fire), which is like the original form

(bimba) (of which all things are a reflection), by the process of ascent there in each place (along it), ‘(the teacher) should cast the (final) full oblation (into the outer fire)ʼ. Just as the condition of these external things, that are like

reflections, are progressively lower, (so too conversely, the condition of these internal things, that are like original reflected objects, are at progressively higher levels). Surely (one may ask), if the condition of the original reflected object is progressively higher, then the condition of the reflection should be (correspondingly) progressively lower. What is this way of reasoning (naya)? Taking this doubt into consideration, (he responds) by presenting an example.

yathā yathā hi gaganam utpatet kalahaṁsakaḥ l| 433 || jale bimbaṁ vrajaty asya tathety atrāpy ayaṁ vidhiḥ | According to how a goose (kalaharitsa) flies up into the sky, so does

its image (bimba) move™ (reflected) in water. The same happens here.” (433cd-434ab) (431)

The ‘image’ is in the form of a reflection. Now he talks about another variety of this same kind of synthetic

contemplation (anusandhāna).

Inner Ascent Through the Tattvas by a Series Inner Conjunctions

aṇṛṀṭḷḷ fex a za dī a T.I: 1M 3

cḷ aaTaāãīdhdī f’’amṁ=āaāRTT |I/`#34 1I

Ṭē.AṬĪ j¥IRḤJTT TAT TĀT I

Ei|ĒEIUIĒEIHEJEAIIEAĒGÉHḤÚĪRAIAṬ

ḺiēēimEāEzĀkṭIEĒEEETĀATPHCI Read evam abhedaparāmarśātmā for evaṁ bhedaparāmarśātmā. 7Read vrajaty asya for bruḍaty asya. ” Literally: ‘such is the case here with thss procedure’.

Jrṝ tTā ā̄ dārsavīH 1| #3¢ 11| svābhāvikaṁ sthiraṁ caiva dravaṁ dīptaṁ calaṁ nabhaḥ || 434 || māyā bindus tathaivātmā nādaḥ śaktiḥ śivas tathā | itthaṁ vyāãpyavyãpakato vibhedyābhyantarāntaram || 435 || tadadhahsthāni prthvyādimūlāntāni tathā pumān | avidyārāganiyatikālamāyākalās tathā || 436 || aṇur vidyā tadīśeśau sādākhyaṁ śaktikuṇḍalī | vyāpinī samanaunmanyaṁ tato ‘nāmani yojayet || 437 | recakastho madhyanāḍīsandhivid gurur ity adaḥ | proktaṁ traiśirase tantre ‘parayojanavarṇane || 438 || It is said in the Traiśiras Tantra, in (the section in which) conjunction with the another (aparayojana) is described: ‘A. 1) Māyā and the Drop (bindu), 2) the Self, 3) Sound, 4) Power and 5) Śiva (pervade) B. 1) one’s own nature (svābhāvika) and what is solid (sthira), 2) liquid (drava), 3) burns (dīpta), 4) moves (cala), and 5) space (nabhas), respectively." In this way, that is, on the basis of the relationship between the pervaded and the pervader, progressively breaking through further inwards, the individual soul (of the disciple should be conjoined first to all the principles) below (it), beginning with Earth and ending with (Māyā, which is called) the Root. C. 1) (Then beyond that to) the Ignorance (of the limited capacity to know), Attachment (raga), Necessity (niyati), Time, Māyā, the power (of limited agency) (kalā), the individual soul, 2) (Pure) Knowledge (vidyā)

(together with) its Lord, Iśa (i.e., Īśvaratattva), Sadāśiva (sādākhya), 3)

Śaktikuṇḍalī, the Pervasive One, the Equal One and 4) the Transmental. The teacher who is established in exhalation and knows the conjunctions within the Central Channel (madhyanāḍīsandhivit) should then 5) conjoin (the disciple with Śiva, who is called) Without Name. (434cd-438) (432436ab) 1) Here, (according to us), the Supreme Goddess’s power is called

Maāyā. Its nature is to conceal the (true) essential nature (of things). (Māyā) is

pervasive and so pervades ‘one’s own nature’ʼ, and having pervaded and shrouded it, abides (in this form). Thus, contracted by that, it is the Self (at all

levels of subjectivity,) starting with the Fully Conditioned (perceiver). It (too) is

pervasive and so pervades ‘what is solid’, that is, Earth’s nature, in this way in accord with the sequence (of the levels of pervasion,) which are going to be described. 2) The Drop is nourishing and so (pervades what is) ‘liquid’, that is, watery. 3) And (similarly,) Sound (pervades what) ‘burnsʼ, that is, is fiery. 4) Power is predominantly touch, (that pervades what) ‘movesʼ, that is, is windy. ) Māyā and the Drop (bindu) pervade one’s own nature (svābhāvika) and what is solid (sthira). 2) The Self pervades what is liquid (drava). 3) Sound pervades what burns (dīpta). 4) Power pervades what moves (cala). 5) Siva pervades space (nabhas).

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

5) Śiva is devoid of obscuring coverings and so (pervades) ‘space’. This (is said in the Kālottara, where we read): ‘Earth, Water, Fire, Air and Space – these are the five principles by

which the entire universe is pervaded.”

By encompassing the thirty-five principles from Earth up to “Śakti in accord with this view, (the teacher) ‘knows the conjunctions within the Central Channelʼ, that is, he knows that thoroughly (tanmarmajña). The teacher ‘established in’ the upward ‘exhalation’ progressively breaks through further and further inwards, that is, further and further upwards, in the manner (taught in the Svacchandatantra, where it says) ‘by abandoning the six (causes),

in the seventh (the yogi achieves) merger (into the Supreme Principle).’”'" Then

finally, by means of the practice (yukti) described previously, he conjoins (his disciple) with (the one called) Without Name, that is, the Inexplicable (anākhya), Supreme Śiva, who is established in the End of the Twelve. This is

taught in this way

in the chapter’""

Triśirobhairavatantra concerning (initiation by a process of ascending) conjunctions (to progressively higher realities) (yojanikāprakaraṇa). Having explained that by the way, he says (the following) in order to

talk about the preparation of the sacrificial pap (caru).

The Preparation and Consumption of the Sacrificial Pap (carusaṁsiddhiī)

T-°̄t ārāaāīgg fō-̄āī ēT-TĀITI: 1|| /#3o ||

šĩ #Id a ̄caā JTF̄TTCATJTRT; || #2 || šaTTTTSJ JTIT T-aTSIĪ T 3 7aT |

qdT HIṬŪGTT J̄HĪCGhTYI: TZT I| #x32 1| Sārdhatriśatikālottara 8/1cd-2ab. The first line of this verse is quoted above in TĀv ad 11/19.

The second line is reproduced literally as TĀ 1 1/19cd. 1 ṢyT 4/246b. Also quoted above ad 6/192 (191cd-192ab) (see note there) and below ad 15/498500 (494cd-496). The ‘six” are the six causal deities (karaṇadevatā) Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Iśvara, Sadāśiva and Siva, arranged along the stages of the utterance of OM. The seventh beyond is Supreme Siva. See Dyczkowski 2004: 54-55.

Abhinavagupta refers to the chapters of the Tantrāloka as ‘prakaraṇas’. See for example,

above 1/287 and 2/1. There are many words for ‘chapter’ in Sanskrit. Abhinava uṣes this one to refer to chapters in Tantras. For example, in the Kāmikāgama (TĀA 4/25). Or it can refer to just a section dealing with a certain topic.

! Verses 15/431cd-438 (429-436ab) are a short parenthesis, 439 (436cd) ff. follows on from 434ab (431cad).

T̄ ̄caĩtŪḷ JgaTk̄: ṬT: || `

tataḥ prāksthāpitanyastamantrasaṁskṛtavahninā |

carusiddhau samastāś ca kriyā hṛmmantrayogataḥ || 440 ||

7Then the sacrificial Pap pap (caru) should be prep. prepared, with the fire that was installed previously (for this purpose) and purified, and on which

the Mantras have been deposited.™ (It can be prepared) by either (the

offering to the fire. One can use either Kaula substances (vīradravya) or ordinary (Vedic) ones (laukikadravya) in the sacrificial pap, as desired.”

1 This passage begins with ‘then’ (iataḥ), that is, presumably, after the disciple has been conyoined with Śiva. However, Jayaratha says that the initiaton Abhinava has drawn from the Trisirobhaiṟava is taught here ‘by the way°. So, it is not certain that thss passage is also drawn

from there. Even if it is, it may well not have followed directly after in the oruginal. Nonetheless, it is not unreasonable to suppose that it 1s drawn from the Triśirobhairava. The mantras for the

preparaton of the sacrificial pap are Trika mantras, which indicates that the passage 1s drawn from a Trika Tantra, as is the Triśrrobhaiṟava.

Read -sthāpitanyasta- for -sthāpitānyasta-. See above, 15/414 (411cd-412ab). There the preparation of the fire s described bricfly based on MV 8/115-116. ! The preparation of the sacrificial pap is taught briēfly m the MV 8/119cd-122ab, that Jayaratha

quotes further ahead ad 15/447-449ab (444cd-446). This is not Abhinava’s source, but it does contain details that agree with the MV. Other details concerntng the ingredients of the sacrificial pap are drawn from a dfferent Trika source, which is more Kaula than the MV., as is the Trśirobhairava. There are many varieties of caru, in its most basic, simplest form, it is rice boiled in water with mulk or just cooked in steam. The caru used for Kaula rites is made from

meat, spices, garlic and the like, that conventional Vedic norms constder to be impure (see below). In standard Siddhānta rites, caru is given to postulants to eat at the end ofa preliminary

purification (adhivāsa) that prepares them for the rte of initiation. Kaula and similar sources

‘Afterwards, he should cook the caru using unhusked grains of (either) śāli or the rice

that ripens in sixty days, together with handfuls . . . He should make the caru (using the above ingredients) together with ghee and milk, while uttenng the brahmamantras; haying made 1t, he

(they have sipped) the five products of the cow.’ 3/10-12ab

CHAPTER FIFTEEN Goodall explains: “The caru in non-tantric contexts is for gods and manes, but in tantric

contexts, of which this may be the first known example, the caru is often offered to Śiva in the

e.g. Mṛgendrakriyāpāda 7/47-50, Kiraṇa 18/34 and Vīāśikhatantra 19-20, all m the context of preparation for adhivāsa the preliminary purifying rite to prepare for imtiation. Here in the

Nisśvāṣa the third part of the caru is given simply to the ‘sādhakas’ in general.’

Cf. Dīkṣottara 14/68-71ab edited and translated by Goodall (2015: p. 262-263): ‘One who knows the mantras should cook the caru according to the enjomed rite.

Having transformed the vessel into the sakala deity using the (mantra of the) god of the gods

together with the aṅgamantras and the five brahmamantras, he should install Śiva in it. He should

after the tattva(s). Havung smeared it with ghee, he should fill it with milk. Concentrated, he should make the caru with barley, wheat and wild rice, with sixty-day rice (?) or with millet (kaṅhunā). Dīkṣottara 14168-71ab

The Tantrasadbhāva, an important Trika Tantra, describes its preparation as follows. caruṁ k, g: caru vai śrapayet mantrī kṣīreṇāmrṛtavatsayā |

tāmrasauvarṇarājatyā athavā mṛnmayena vā || 54 |I

sudṛḍhā nivranā snigdhā kṣālayen mālavidyayā k: kṣālanānmī̃-; kh: -yetmīlavidyāṁyā | 80a kh śivāgnau colmukaṁ gṛhya k, g: gūhya bahirante ca dīpayet || |I g ? śrapayet tena cāgnau tu kr̥tarakṣā prasannavān |

cālanaṁ mālamantreṇa ghaṭāntarena k kh: ghaḍharantena g: ” kārayet | 5 II “The mantrin should cook the caru with milk from a cow of whom no calf has died

(amṛtavatsayā = amṛtavaisāyāḥ) usig litle millet-grains, O goddess, or wald rice or fox-tai millet, ṣaṣṭi or śāli, o goddess, or with barley, wheat and rice, using (a vessel of) copper, gold,

silver or clay. Translation by Goodall (2OI5: p. 262)

“(The vessel should be) very strong, without cracks, and smooth. It should be washed with the root Mantra. Taking a burning coal from Śiva’s fire, it should be heated inside and

outside. Having protected (it with Mantras), the contented (officiant) should cook (the caru) with

that on Śivas fire. Then the pot, smeared with clanfied butter, filled with milk should be placed in

the middle of the fire in such a way that it does not move at all. (When cooking the contents,) it

should be stirred with the root Mantra within the jar.' TS 9/55-57

The following is an example of the Kaula procedure for the use and preparation of the

caru. It is a summary of ‘the sūtra concerning the Sacrifice of the Victim which is a part of the

Prescription concerning the Sacrificial Pap (carukavidhāne paśuyāgavidhisūtram) found in chapter three of the Yogakhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairavatantra.

‘The god asks about the practice (sādhana) that is not harmful to living beings. The

goddess goes on to talk again about the ritual offerng of meat, wine and caru. She begins by

saying that ‘one should take what should not be taken – there is no defect ....' One should take it

up in accord with the sequence (of the ritual procedure) in order to (prepare and consume the) caruka and (make) the bali offering. (141cd-144) One should fashion a Circle 1n a solitary place with cow dung mixed with liquor (ali).

One should make the encompassing circle (vrttaka) the measure of a handspan (hastamātra). It

should be fashioned with a burning coal (artgara). The sequence of the Five Seeds 1s present there

along with the Seven Peaks. The Six of Restraint (nigrahasaṭka) is also present there and is

worshipped with the six substances. One should bring a sacrificial animal (pasu) there and (its vital) constituents (dhātu) should be offered to the goddess. Once having placed the bone and

meat, and the blood is also present 1n the fire, one should offer the earthen fat (meda). (The

TANTRĀḶŌOKA

AII the rites for the preparation of the sacrificial pap should be performed in association with the Mantra of the Heart (SAUḤ). Then, the teacher lays hold of the sacrificial pap, and he fills the large or little ladle with (melted) clarified butter, according to whether (the aim is the attainment of) worldly benefits or liberation. As he does so he

recites, one by one, the Mantras of the two triads of the gods and the energies and, as a seventh, the Mātṛsadbhāva. He should (then) offer the rest of the butter into the fire with the syllable of nectar, that is, SVĀ, and

following couple of lines are very corrupt) ... one should make the deposition (sannyāsa) there with the Sun and Moon ... That livng being should be transferred into the livng being within one's own body and of the adept (sādhaka). Then one should brng lghted incense and punfy it with Caṇḍikā's Weapon. All of that is the same as (sāmānya) as caru and should be looked after with effort. (145-150) One should offer the guardian of the Dāmara field bali in the southwest. One should establish the aforementioned caru with that pure substance. There is no defect there. One acquires the fuit of 10 million sacrifices. The caruka, fire offering, and Kaulika placing of the bali should be done in accord with the view of the scripture, otherwise one goes to hell. One should offer an auspicious ram (aja) in the Wheel, a gathering of the Rule, or on the road. One should offer the skun and bones and whatever (else?). One should take the first drop that falls with the right hand. One should place sesame seed with musk (rōocana) with three (?) Bengali madders (munda). The powerful and brave one should punfy all the gods. (Thus) he is never subject to evil magic (nigraha), and cruel and foul (influences) flee (from him). He who slays a yictim anywhere

without observing this sacrifice does not get the accomplishment of ether this or the other world.

He who kills a boy by mistake as a bali offering gets no fiuit thereby and what (good) work he may have done before 1s destroyed. (I51-159ab) The merit accrued by the disciple who drinks Soma in the Age of Stfe is acquired by merely cating (the caru) īn front of the Krama. Just by eating it, one acquires both enjoyment and liberation. One acquires endless mert and is praised by one's relatives. The various kinds of caruka should not be given to Taāntrikas and should always be kept hudden, like riches from thieves. Otherwise, there is no success and no tradition (sampradāya).’ (159cd-165ab) (Here it seems that Tāntrikas are those who belong to the Tantric sects that do not perform animal sacrifices and accept the consequent consumption of the sacrificial meat.)

Abhinava lists a number of ways the teacher imparts initiaton which is immediately liberating above in 13/227cd-229ab. Amongst them is the consumption of caru. 71 Cf. MV 8/121ab hṛdayena caroḥ sidáhir yājñikaiḥ kṣīrataṇḍulaiḥ ḷ ‘The sacrificial pap is (prepared) successfully with sacnfictal rice boiled in milk and (the utterance of the) mantra of the Heart (whule it cooks).”

”1 Read mantrāṇāṁ for yantrānāṁ.

! As elsewhere, I take Mātṛsadbhāva to be HSHRPHREMṀ, which is extracted 1n MV 8/39-40ab; see below, 30/47-51. See above 15/331cd-332, note 533. The Mantra of the Heart (irdayabīja) is the name of the syllable SAUH. The MV enjoins that the single oblations of caru are made with the Mantra of the Heart (SAUH). For the final full oblatton, Abhinava adds a ‘seventh’ to the sx mantras of the Trīka goddesses and their Bhairavas. This is Mātṛsadbhāva, which is Kālī's seed syllable. Here, agamn, in this way, as in other places, 1t marks the culmination of worshup as that of the goddess Kālī. Thus, Abhinava implicitly connects to the teaching of the M that enyoms that seven Mantras should be used for the offering. But having done that, he fills out the detals integrating the Trika tnad of goddess and their three Bhairavas with Mātrsadbhāva, i e ,

Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī as the seventh deity above. Abhinava is supported by the MV, which says the caru should be divided into seven portions, although admittedly it does not direct their offering to this group of seven. There is no evidence in the quotations drawn from the Triśirobhairava that it 1ntegrated Kālī into its teachings as the culmination ofthe Trika triad. One wonders whether ths 1s Abhinava’s manipulation or whether he is drawing from another scriptural source.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

onto the sacrificial pap with (the syllable of) fire, that is, HĀ repeatedly. (439-443) (436cd-441ab)

‘Then’ʼ, that is, after the libation. ‘On which the Mantras have not

(yet) been depositedʼ. As is said:

‘The liquid (offerings) along with the sacrificial pap and rice cakes (puroḍāśa) are the auspicious (śiva) oblation (offered) into the fire that, purified with the five sacraments (saṁskāra), is transcendental Śiva,”" who has been invoked (and is present).

Thus, it is said there that it is a pure fire. (The sacrificial pap) ‘should be prepared’ by the teacher himself. (The pap can be prepared by the disciples) ‘at the same tīme as (the teacher makes) the offering to the fireʼ, because the disciples are not occupied with the offering to the fire etc. ‘“Kaula substances (vīradravya) are such things as wine.' The ‘ordinary ones’ are such things as

milk and rice. (The substances may be) ‘as desired’, that is, either Kaula or

otherwise. ‘AI the ritesʼ include the taking up of the cooking pot (sthālī) etc., their_consecration with Mantras, and stirring (the preparation) with a ladle.

(SVĀ) is ‘the syllable of nectar’ʼ, because (the phonemes) S and V are nourishing. (HĀ) is ‘(the syllable of) fire’, because (the phoneme) H

(represents) the perceiver, as it denotes Śiva. The sense (of saying) ‘repeatedly° is that the procedure (prayoga) should be done in this way with each offering to the fire. In this way, SVĀ is (deposited) onto the fire. This is the lunar aspect.

Here Abhinava 1s referring to saipātahoma ‘a sacṅfice of the remnant’, also just called

saṁpātaḥ below in 15/444a (442c). Concerning this rite 1n which a part of the clarified butter is

made to fall on the sacnfical pap, see MT kriyāpāda 7/44-45 and ŚSP vol. 2, p. 86. Sanderson

(2007b: 274 note 137) explains: ‘In Tantrc practice the officiant pours the first part of each oblation of melted butter from the ladle (sruvaḥ) into the fire as he utters the SVĀ of SVĀHĀ that closes the Mantra in the case of oblations, and then he utters the HĀ while he pours the rest (ājyaśeṣaḥ) onto whatever is to be empowered (saṁskārya-). This 1s done first with the rootMantra and then with its ancillanes. He refers to SVT 3/153. māūlamantram samuccārya svā ity

agnau prapātayet | het śiṣyasya śiraṣi sampātaḥ śivacoditaḥ l| Having uttered the root-Mantra (saying) SVĀ cast (the oblation) 1nto the fire and with HĀ the remnant (is made to fall) (saṁṅpāta)

on the disciple's head impelled by Śiva.’ Sanderson cites a passage from the Kalādīksāpaddhat (Ī. 60v-61r4): niṣkaleṉa tadaigavaktrai ca ekaikayāhutyā sampātaṁ kuryāt, yathā: OM HŪṀ SAṀPĀTAṀ KAROMI SVĀ ity agnau HĀ úúi carau. evam anyat | punaḥ niṣkalenāṣṭottaraśataṁ

japtvã parāmr̥tam anusmaran carav ājyāhutṁṁ kṣiped ity agnīṣomasomasomatāvyāptaś carur bhavet | iti caruṣādhanam | ‘(The offering of) the remnant (sarpāta) should be made with the uskala Mantra (of the deity) along with its 1mbs and faces with each single oblation thus: OṂ HŪM SAMPĀTAM

KAROMI SVĀ into the fire and HĀ into the sacrificial pap (caru) and in the same way (anything) else. Then again, having repeated Mantra with niṣkala 108 tmes, recollecting the supreme nectar, cast the oblation of clarfied butter into the sacrificial pap. In this way the sacrificial pap will be pervaded by the Fire and Moon and the lunar essence of the moon (somasomatā). Ths 1s the

manner of preparing the sacriicial pap.’

According Monier-Williams, a puroḍāśa is ‘a mass of ground rice rounded into a kind of cake

usually divided into pieces, placed on receptacles and offered as an oblation in fire.

HĀ is deposited into the sacrificial pap, which is the Moon, and so is the fiery aspect, in such a way that both together assume the nature of Fire and Moon (agnīṣoma). As (is said) in the Veda (śruti): ‘Indeed, he who offers that oblation with the Fire and Moon, that becomes nectar for him.” Thus, he says:

TrSĀĪĪSTFHTAT-ĀṬRTATTGTṬĀTH¥TT: |

TTṚTATTTĀĪRṬTT-ĀTCA TĪT |I 62% 11 bhojyabhojakacarvagnyor ittham ekānusandhitaḥ | svāhāpratyavamarśāt syāt samantrād advaāyaṁ param || 444 || (The fruit of) the single congruous connection (ekānusandhi) in this way of the sacrificial pap and the fire, that are the food (of objectivity) and the eater of food (who is theperceiver), brought about by the reflective awareness (focused) on SVAHA along with the Mantra, is supreme

nonduality. (444) (441cd-442ab)

‘Supreme nonduality’ (is realized) by the attainment of the oneness of the Fire (of the subject) and the Moon (of the object). Surely (one may ask), what has been stated in this way is just the equality (of nature) (sāmya) of the object of enjoyment and the enjoyer, (but) what is that? With this doubt in mind, he says:

JTa TH ṃR. īr Ĩ

ār-T: 1| vx-4 1|

eṣa saṁpātasaṁskāraś caror bhoktā hy adhiṣṭhitaḥ |

bhogyasya paramaṁ sāraṁ bhogyaṁ narnarti yatnataḥ || 445 II This is the (empowering) purification that comes about by the

oblation (which is the ‘falling together’ of the clarified butter into the fire and onto the sacrificial pap) (saṁpātasaṁskāra). He who eats the sacrificial pap (i.e., the subject) is the (fundamental) sustaining state (of the

any effort (at all). (445) (442cd-443ab)

(He who eats the sacrificial pap is) ‘the supreme essence’ (of what is eaten), because (the object of enjoyment) which is eaten rests within (the perceiver, who is) the one who eats (it). Thus, it is said that (conversely, the eaten vibrates, as if) ‘dancing intensely (narnarti)’, that is, it pulses radiantly

This 1s more correctly called saṁpātahoma, concerning which, see above note 15,719. " follow Gnoli in emending adhiṣṭhitaḥ to adhiṣṭhtiḥ, and yatnataḥ for ayatnatah.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

as the very nature of the arousal (of manifestation out of the subjectivity of consciousnesS).

He (now) illustrates the (etymological) meaning of the term ‘equal fall’

ṬHHGITTHTĪCTTTTI ĪTGĀHTJAT |

ūTITITTGTTSITJṬ-ĀTĪ || `5, || samam ekānuṣandhānāt pātato bhoktṛbhogyayoḥ | anyonyasya ca saṁpātāt saṅgamāc cettham ucyate || 446 || (This sacrament is called an ‘equal fall’,) because the eater (i.e., the perceiver) and the eaten (i.e., the perceived) fall (pāta) (i.e., are experienced simultaneously) together, due to the single (synthetic) contemplation

(ekānusandhāna) (of both of them) equally (samam) (together). Again, it is called this because by mutually falling (that is, combining) together they

come together.” (446) (443cd-444ab)

Here in this case, the sense of their existing together at the same time

means that (subject and object) are parts (of single whole). The sense of (their)

coming together means that (subject and object) are an assemblage (samudāya). He divides the sacrificial pap that has been purified in this way into six (as follows). Offering of the Sacrificial Pap and More to the Implements and the Disciples

TIHI-T| TT-̄Tftz̄A fJIṚIHTRJ ||/<.9 1|

vīṝPcṁTārṁītzztaīT-kq ṅāxz ātfē: 1|/#%¢ 11 There are two streams of clarified butter. One falls into the fire, which represents the perceiver.

The other falls onto the sacrificial pap, that represents the object. The former is the one who eats, and the latter is the food he eats. Their fall together represents the congruity that links subject and object in a common perception with two aspects. One is directed at the subject and the other at the object, assessing their nature, it connects them together. The term anusandhāna has a double meaning. One is ‘assessment’ or ‘investigation’. As a phase in the cognitive process, it is the stage in which the specific empirical nature of the object is determined. As a form of meditation, it is the contemplation of reality principles or their representations with the intention of ascertaining

their true nature directly. Both cases involve differentiating the entity which is the object of attention as well as connecting or relating to others. The latter is anusandhāna, ‘investigating / contemplating and connecting together.” A well-known example of the use of the term in this sense is Śivasūtra 1/6: śakticakrānusandhāne viśvasaṁhāraḥ, ʻby contemplating / fusing together the configurations of energies the universe is withdrawn.’” In this case the two streams of clarified butter representing the perceiver and the perceived flow together, unified by a single anusandhāna of both, so that they are experienced as one.

7 Read anyonyasya for anyo ‘nyatra.

āīṝ dāT= a =- aVHTSĪTT | sthaṇḍile kumbhakarkaryor bhāgaṁ bhāgaṁ nivedayet | bhāgenāgnau mantratṛptir dvayaṁ Śiṣyātmanor atha || 447 |I itthaṁ vihitakartavyo vijñāpyeśaṁ tadīritaḥ | śaktipātakramāc chiṣyān saṁskartuṁ niḥsared bahiḥ || 448 || tatraiṣāṁ pañcagavyaṁ ca caruṁ daśanamãrjanam | (Now the teacher) should offer a part (of the pap) to the sacrificial surface, to the large jar and to the small jar (kakarī). The Mantras (present in the fire) are satisfied by one part (offered) to the fire. Two (are offered, one each) to the disciple and himself. In this way, he should do what is

enjoined and, once having made the (appropriate) declaration to the

Lord, (the teacher,) impelled by (Śiva), should go outside to purify (his)

disciples, according to the (intensity) of the descent of the power (of grace they have received). There, (in the open,) he should give them the five

products of the cow, the sacrificial pap, and (a stick) to clean the teeth. (447-449ab) (444cd-446) And it is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘The sacrificial pap is (prepared) successfully with sacrificial rice boiled

in milk, and (the utterance of the) mantra of the Heart (while it cooks). (Then)

(the sacrificial pap) is then divided into six (equal) portions. (These are offered) equally to Śiva, the fire, the teacher and disciples, and to the small (vārdhānī)

and large jars (kumbha).””

‘Once having made the (appropriate) declaration’ (concerning this, it is said in the Mālinīvijayottara);: “You yourself, O Supreme Lord, (have ordained) me a teacher by (Your) command (ājñā). (These are my) disciples who, impelled by SŚiva’s power, deserve to be graced by You, such are they who are present (here), grace

them, having entered my body, so that being Your equal (I may act thus!)””

(Then) ‘(the teacher) is impelled by (Śiva)ʼ, who says (in the

scriptures), `“do this”. ‘There’ outside (in the open), he should give (them the sacrificial pap). ” The declaration is taken from MV 9/37-38 and is transcribed by Abhinavagupta below in 16/74-76.

” According to TĀ 15/439 (436cd) ff., these Mantras are those of the three goddesses, the three Saktis and Mātṛsadbhāva. ” MV 8/121-122ab.

MV 9/37-38. Lines 37-38ab are quoted literally below as TĀ 16/74ab and 75. The following line is expanded as TA 16/76.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

The Śtick for the Teeth (dantakaṣṭha)

Tīaāi Tīaā: Ṃj?: ṀTHHHHIVTATATTTTT: II/#38, 11

TJTS TTHRIHĪSATYT Tq |

tasya pātaḥ śubhaḥ prācīsaumyaiśāpyordhvadiggataḥ || 449 ||

aśubho ʻnyatra tatrāstrahomo ‘py aṣṭaśataṁ bhavet |

It is auspicious for that (stick) to fall to the east, north, northeast, west or vertically (ārdhvadik). It is inauspicious (if it falls) elsewhere. There (in that case) also, one hundred and eight oblations should be (offered) with

the Weapon.” (449cd-450ab) (447)

‘That’ is (the stick) to clean the teeth. ‘There’, when it is inauspicious. That is said (in the scriptures, where we read):

‘If (the stick) stands (straight) facing upwards, he will get a kingdom and liberation, (but if) it faces down, deathwards, death; (and so in order to avoid that,) he should make a hundred oblations with (the Mantra of) the heart. (If it falls) in the east, (he will achieve) complete success in Yoga. (If it falls) in

the southeast, that indicates disease, in the south there will be death, in the southwest (much) quarrelling, in the west, much wealth, in the northwest (he

will be) ousted (by the enemy), in the north, he will obtain (yogic and magical) accomplishment (siddhi), and in the area of the northeast, liberation.”

The purification (saṁskāra) of the teeth has been taught in this way.

The Final Purification (antasaṅṁskriyā) The Vision of the Deities in the Maṇḍala

hF'rEkEeccE-FccF. T-TJT I| “4o II

srṝ-aāēēzārqāraatēai f=r̃ 1 TTÑ-TTRGHHJTĪRTPaTT TṬE: || #42 11

rava JīT=aīṛī 3vavā sṝj; |

”" This is a small stik made of soft wood about the size of the little finger used to clean the teeth.

See ŚSP 1/11-17 (vol. 1, pp. 8-13). The same rite of the stick 1s also performed by Tantric

Buddhiṣṭs (see for example, Gnoli-Orofino 1994: 160). 15/449cd-450ab (447) is MV 8/123. MV reads: tatrāpi homo ‘ṣṭaśatiko bhavet – ‘there (in that case) also, the oblations should be one hundred and eight’, for tatrāṣtrahomo 'py aṣṭaśatam bhavet – There (in that case) also one hundred and eight oblations should be (offered) with the Weaponʼ.

” According to Jayaratha, the purpose of this rite 1s to make the Mantras penetrate the disciples.

praveśya sthaṇḍilopāgra upaveśyaiva jānubhiḥ | prakṣepayed añjaliṁ taṁ taiḥ śiṣyair bhāvitātmabhiḥ || 452 || añjali punar āpūrya teṣāṁ lāghavataḥ paṭam | dṛśor nivārayet so ‘pi śiṣyo jhaṭiti paśyati || 453 || (The disciples) are blindfold (by the teacher) with a good cloth consecrated (rnantrita) with (the Mantra of) the Eye. (Their power of sight) arrested in this way by force, (they do) not fidget, and (their) attention is not directed to anything else.™ (Their) cupped hands filled with flowers, pearls, gems and the like, the teacher introduces them into the front of the sacrificial surface, and then, making them kneel, (the teacher) should throw (his) handful of flowers (onto the sacrificial surface) along with those

purified disciples.” After having filled their hands again (with flowers), he

should remove the blindfold quickly from the (disciple’s) eyes (so that) he

sees (the Maṇḍala) all of a sudden. (450cd-453) (448-451ab)

‘Those are (the disciples) who have been introduced into (the

sacrificial area) in this way, and are those who are to do what needs to be done.

The blindfold is amongst the standard set of ritual implements (29/75-77). The consecrated

blindfold is in itself so powerful that even touching it may induce possession by the deity (āveśa) (29/196-197ab). There are several occasions for a disc1ple to be blindfolded apart from this one. These 1nclude the initiatory rite of placing Śiva’s Hand on his head. Another one is that 1n which he is given his name as an initiate. This is selected according to where a flower he casts falls randomly on a specially prepared diagram (see 29/187-191cd) Generally, the bhndfold is

empowered, as in this case, with the Mantra of the Eye. This is also so 1n the naming ceremony taught in the SvT:

‘It is proper that the viewing of the maṇḍala should be by (the disciple) who is (imtially) blindfolded, so (that he may) assume a state of concentration on the Lord by quelling

the outer flow of the senses. Thus, it 1s said:

Once the cloth (for the blindfold) has been sprmmkled with water, it should be enveloped with (the mantra of) the Armor. Worship it with scent and flowers etc. and consecrate it with Bhairava’s Mantra. Once having bound the eye with (the Mantra of) the Eye. . . . SvT 4/60cd-61a

(Kṣemarāja) ‘once having bound the eye’, that 1s, (the sense of sight) that heralds the flow of all the senses, (once) consecrated with (the Mantra of the Eye). (The blindfoldng of the eyes) is preceded by the utterance of the Mantra of the Eye. (Having done that, the teacher) ‘should place a flower in the disciple’s handʼ. (4/61d)

” This is the rite of maṇḍaladarśana, that marks the liberating chmax of the rte of intiaton

Although this rite is generally an essential part of the conclusion of the procedure for the common initiation, it is not found in the MV. Accordingly, Abhinava draws it from some other source. The disciple is similarly blindfolded for the rite in which he is allotted a Kuḷa. This is

decided by where flowers he releases from his hand happens to drop. See below, 29/187cd-191, which is largely drawn from MV 11/17cd-22 See there and notes for details.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

(The blindfold is removed) ‘quickly, in such a way that he sees the sacrificial surface all ofa sudden. This is the (overall) sense.

So, what happens to him in this way? With this doubt in mind, he says: S

iGEKERIĪE=42ĪEEICIEETĀETRATAHI jhatity ālokite māntraprabhāvollāsite sthale | tadāveśavaśāṁc chiṣyas tanmayatvaṁ prapadyate || 454 || At the sudden sight of the sacrificial ground (i.e., the Maṇḍala) springing forth radiantly (ullāsita) with the power of the Mantras (projected onto it), by virtue of the penetration (āveśa) of their (power), the disciple attains a state of oneness (tanmaya) (with it). (454) (451cd-452ab) He induces one to take this (teaching) to heart by presenting an example.

Just as one who is in love (raktahṛdaya)“ sees by himself

(spontaneously each of the many) virtues of the beloved, so does one purified by a descent of the power (of grace) see in this way the presence of Mantras (in the Maṇḍala). (455) (452cd-453ab)

(He sees this) ‘by himself’, with no need at all of another means, for if that were s0, he would not have that vision (of reality) (darśana). Surely (one may ask), the qualities of the beloved, such as (her) beauty,

are perceptible. One who is in love can see them. Mantras, however, are not perceptible, even if they are close by, so how can they become the objects of the senses of sight and the rest, that perceive inferior things? With this doubt in

mind, he says:

TTTA-TGÇĀ WTITT STRT AITĀTT |I `54E, 1I cakṣurādīndriyāṇāṁ hi sahakāriṇi tādṛśe | saty atyantamadṛṣṭe prāg api jāyeta yogyatā || 456 || ” A raktahr̥daya is one ‘whose heart is attached (rakta) (to his beloved) or ‘whose heart 1s dye

(wath love).

When such an aid to sight and the other senses is present, they

become fit (to perceive) even what was previously totally invisible. (456) (453cd-454ab)

‘When such an aid to sight and the other senses is presentʼ, that is, a descent of the power (of grace), ‘they become fit’, and it becomes possible for them ‘(to perceive) even what was previously totally invisible’. The meaning is that (they become fit to operate) as instruments of the act of perception in the case of Mantras and the like, although they are not the objects of conceptual knowledge, because there is no latent trace of (their being previously) experienced.

What is the authority here (for this view)? With this doubt in mind, he

ax fē fāzzzī- Ġā īd, mō | sfcrāfē ā vazāṁ fāg;: ahreaātsī 1| -ṣu 1 kṛtaprajñā hi vinyastamantraṁ dehaṁ jalaṁ sthalam | pratimādi ca paśyanto viduḥ sāṁnidhyasaṁnidhī || 457 |I Those whose insight is developed (kṛtaprajñā), observing a body, water, a place, an icon and the like onto which Mantras have been deposited, know (immediately) whether (the Mantra deity is) present or

not. (457) (454cd-455ab)

He says (the following) to those who deny even their own insight (that

they have) in this way.

ITT-TQTĪÉĪRRTGAfRaT: |

TRṬTĪTĪT TTĪRTRATTTRGĀTTĨ: || 5

nyastamantrāṁśusubhagāt kiñcidbhūtādimudritāḥ | trasyantīveti tat tac cidakṣais tatsahakāribhiḥ || 458 II (But) those who are afflicted (mudrita) by some ghosts or the like are gripped, as it were, by fear, because (the teacher) is beautiful, (shining radiantly) with the rays of the Mantras deposited (on his body). Thus, one can perceive their presence or absence very well by means of the senses assisted (by a descent of the power of grace). (458) (455cd-456ab) People who are ‘afflicted by some ghosts or the like’ are seen in (this) world to be ‘gripped, as it were, by fear’ of the teacher etc., because of the good fortune (and grace) of the radiant energy that has been revealed (in him) by the deposition of Mantras (onto his body). In this way, the senses that have been assisted by that descent of the power (of grace) and the like, the presence or absence of each one is thus (known immediately,) as is the consciousness by

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

(its own) awareness. With this much, the final purification (sarskāra), which is that of the penetration (of the power) of Mantra (nantrāveśa) (into the

disciple), has been taught.

Now he expounds the rite of Śiva’s Hand. ”The Initiation by Means of Śiva’s Hand (Śśivahastavidhi)

TT JNgHTTTTI TTTTĀ II #uR 11

dTĪTI TĪR} TṬ-Taāīaā TāTTq I|ē0 1| tataḥ sa dakṣiṇe haste dīptaṁ sarvādhvapiūritam |

mantracakraṁ yajed vāmapāṇinā pāśadāhakam || 459 II

taṁ śiṣyasya karaṁ mūrádhni dehanyastādhvasaṁtateḥ | nyasyet krameṇa sarvāṅgaṁ tenaivāsya ca saṅṁspṛśet || 460 || ” Read ctcetanavad evam for cit cetanavad evarh. The teacher transforms his hand into Śiva’s hand (śivahasta) by projecting upon it the main, most powerful mantras of the tradition. The impositton onto the disciple’s head of Śiva’s hand to

sever his bonds and thus initiate him is a procedure that goes back to pre-Āgamic Pāśupata Śaivism and appears in the earliest known Śaiva Āgama, the Niśvāsatantvasaṁhitā. Goodall

is required.’ The imposition of Śiva’'s Hand is commonly followed by the cutting of a thread, which

induces the severing of the initiand's fetters. This is taught in the earliest Siddhāntāgama, the NTS, in Mūlasūtra 4/14: (Then follow) the supenmpoiton (of mantras onto the hand), the

laying hold of the discple, the (laying of the guru’s) Śiva-hand (upon the head of the initiand),

In some, cases, the topknot of the disciple is severed, as is prescribed in the

Note that the Śivahasta taught in the Kularatnamālā bṅngs about mmmediate realīzation

(see 29/192cd-194) Goodall 2015 289: ‘Sanderson has shown (2006:188-193), the initiauon structure in the Niśvāsa must derive from the Lākulas described mn Niśvāsamukha 4 . . . Clearly 1t

involved the laying of the Śtvahasta upon the disciple and then meditation upon the Lākula cosmography, coupled with some action’ Sanderson 2006: 188: ‘The officiant we are told here, must meditate on the cosmic hierarchy, make that hierarchy the object of an action unfortunately

lost in a lacuna caused by damage of the manuscript, and then nitiate the candidate through what

the text calls the descent of the word atha (athaśabdanipātaḥ)˚” See Goodall 2015: 294-295. lbid. 295. ‘the scant Lākula material leaves us in doubt about whether niuatton is essenually the bestowal of the Śivahasta, the meditation upon the prakriyā cosmic order or the ‘descent of the word atha’.

Then (the teacher) should worship on his right hand, by means of the left, the wheel of Mantras, energized (dīpta) and full of all the Paths,

that burn up all the fetters. (He should) place that hand on the head of (his) disciple, onto whose body the series of paths have been deposited, and he should deposit in due order (the Mantra) on each limb (of his body), and

touch it with that same (hand). (459-460) (456cd-458ab)

Surely (one may ask), nothing is said in this regard in the Mālinīvijayottara. So where has this (ritual procedure) been taken from? With this doubt in mind, he says:

īd ftraēxā gaā fsftaā 1 2 1 uktaṁ dīkṣottare caitaj jvālāsaṁpātaśobhinā | dattena śivahastena samayī sa vidhīyate || 461 1| sāyujyam īśvare tattve jīvato ‘dhītiyogyatā | And (so) this is said in the Dīkṣottara, (where we read that) the disciple becomes a regular initiate (samayin) when (the teacher) has given (and laid upon him) Śiva’s hand, beautiful with the descent (saṁpāta) of the flames (of the fire of Mantra). He is united, while he is still alive, with the Iśvara principle, and is (rendered) fit to study (the scriptures). (461-

462ab) (458cd-459)

15/462cd-463 (458cd-459) is a condensed paraphrase of Dīkṣottara 7/108-11 lab. This passage is found in IFP T 17B p. 907 and IFP T 127 p. 4. Quoted and edited from the latter by Goodall 1998: xIī n. 96. However, IFP T 17B is more complete and correct. The variants there 1n this passage are labelled B. An electronic transcript of it can be downloaded from the Muktabodha site. The passage reads: jvālāmālākalākāraṁ dhyātvā devaṁṅ maheśvari | dhyātvā devaṁ maheśānaṁ bhīūmimadhye (B: dhya to madhye missiṅg) tu tatvavit || 108 II puṇyapāpaṁ dahet tasya dhyātvā deham na saṁśayaḥ | evaṁkṛte tato devi śivahasteti sa smṛtaḥ (B: -hastena saṁsmṛtaḥ) l| 109 |ḷ śivahastapradānena samayī sa vidhīyate (B: sarvadhīyate) | anena vidhinā dev kuryāt tasyāpy anugraham | 1 10 |lī sāyujyaṃ īśvare tatve bhavate (B: bhavante) nātra ṣaṁśayaḥ | ‘O Maheśvarī, having meditated on the god whose form is a blazing garland of energies, once (the teacher who) knows reality has meditated on the god Maheśāna in the middle of the Earth, hss merit and sin is burt away without a doubt by having (thus) meditated (on his) body (108-109ab) Then, O goddess, once this has been done, (the teacher’s hand) 1s considered to be Śiva’s Hand. By giving Śiva's Hand (and laying 1t upon him, the disciple) should be made a regular initiate (samayin). O goddess, by means of thss procedure, grace him also. Without a doubt (he is) conjoined (in this way) to the Īśvara principle.' Dīkṣottara 7/108-11 ab Note that in the Dīkṣottara, the imposition of Śiva’s Hand on the disciple’s head makes him a regular mitiate (samayin). Abhinava has chosen the procedure taught in the Devyāyāmala

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

(Śiva’s Hand is beautiful with) ‘the descent of the flames (of the fire of Mantra), because of the (close) presence of the radiant energy of Mantra. That is said (in the Śvacchandatantra, where we read): “Having meditated on the All-pervasive Lord in Siva’s Hand and the aggregate of Mantra well and

intensely aflame.’ The ‘Īśvara’ (principle) is located above the principle of (Pure) Knowledge. It is certainly not (as some maintain) Kālāgnirudra, which is

located below the Earth principle, because it is not seen to be such in the

scriptures. (Kṣemarāja,) the author of the uddyota (commentary on the Svacchandatantra,) has laboured here (in his commentary on this passage to counter this mistaken conception). Thus one should consider (for oneself)

what is the use of that discussion here (in this regard). The ‘study’ (of the scriptures) is (their systematic) study. That is said (in the Svacchandatantra,

where we read):

“The regular initiate (samayin) who has been purified (saṁskṛta) in this way is fit to utter the word (of the scriptures), so too to hear (it), study (it), offer

oblations and also worship etc. He whose soul is completely pure, by virtue of right conduct (caryā) and meditation, attains the Lord’s plane.”

descrubed next as the regular, basic initiation. The reason for this 1s clear enough. According to the latter, Trika Mantras and deities are projected onto the teacher’s hand. As the Dīkṣottara 1s not a

Trika Tantra, Abhmava could have simply ignored it, but he chooses 1nstead to present the procedure of Śiva’s Hand there to serve first as a preliminary to the imposition that takes the

initiand up to the level of Iśvara. The Trika procedure taught in the Devyāyāmala cauṣes him to

rise all the way to a state of conjunction (sāyujya) with Śiva, and so completes the regular initaatton (samayadīkṣā). Abhīnava then continues on to the other initiations, surprisingly, reserving the highest type of initiaton –— the one which bestows immediate extinction of the

fettered state (sadyonirvāṇadīkṣā) – to the procedure taught in the Dīkṣotara. Does this mean that

this common, basic initiation, meant for those who aspired to liberation, was not found, or at least, not described in detail, in Trika Tantras? The PT (v 25-26) does refer to it, but there it is in

relaton to the utterance of SAUḤ. The Spandakārikā (v 32), probably following suit, after PT 19 presents it as a flash of direct realisation that does not require outer ritual.

SṬ 3/142ab.

Read tathā śruter for tathāśruter.

7 See note just below, where the passage from the commentary on SvT 4/78-79ab 1s translated.

Read tathava ca for tathaivaca.

ṢVT 4/78-79ab. samayī saṁskrto hy evarī...……....

pārameśaśāstra-

....-..vvācaṉe 'syārhatā bhavet |

śravaṇe ʻdhyayane home pūyanādau tathaiva ca l| 4-78 I vācanam buddhyādyārohāyāvartanam, śravanam arthāvabodhaḥ, adhyayanam vedavatsatatapātha āgamagranthasya, ādiśabdena japadhyānādayaḥ 1| 78 | ittham ayaṁ samayī ----

caryādhyānaviśuddhātmā labhate padam aiśvaram |

Śśodhanam na yuktam iti Tśvarapadam ----

sśuddhabhāvasthútasyāsya kālarudraṁ nidhāpayet |

That is not only taught here (in the Dīkṣottara), but also elsewhere.

Thus, he says:

Ṣaṁaām Çṝṁ=-T-dTATIṀ |I ē2 11 T ʻÑTGTTYTTĪTRTRT | āIaāTṀ ṀŪdTḤf TSTB TT | #ē3 11

SNTTGṀSTIĪ JIĪTṬJTTATĪTI | fafrī q afkzḍṁ ūç aaī sraq || ē; 1| T ÑZIḺIJTṢ; šB 3ftzrrfrīcz ̃ |

pramukhaṁ nurvāhitety alam | īśvarapadalābho ‘parā muktiḥ | ‘The regular intiate (samayin) who has been purified (saṁsṣk, rta) in ths way°. (78a)

‘In this way° (means) by causing (him) to enter (sveral times) into the conditton of (the devotee who is) a ḻimb of Rudra, which is that of a twice bom (Brahmin), by extracting (the disciple’s previous caste status). The regular mitaate’ (samayin) is one who has the Rule and observes confinement within the boundary (of the rules imposed) by the Supreme Lord’s scriptures. As he says:

‘(He) 1s fit to utter the word (of the scriptures), so t0o to hear (it), study (it), offer oblations and also worship etc. (SVT 4/78) ‘Uttering (the word of the scriptures) is repetition in order to make (the meaning) ascend into the mtellect etc. ‘Heartng’ is the understanding of the meaning (of the scripture). Study is, like the Veda, constant reading of the book of scriptures (āgamagrantha). The word ‘etc.’ (rfers to) the repetition of Mantra and meditation etc. In this way, this regular initiate (is as follows):

‘He whose soul is completely pure by virtue of right conduct (caryā) and meditation

attains the Lord's plane.’ (SVT 4/79ab)

His soul is pure ‘by virtue of rght conduct (caryā) and meditation’, that is, by observing

the Rule and (by the practice of) Yoga Without initiation, that is, without his being applied to the

puriication of the Path, he is not fit to (practice) the Lord’s Yoga, and it is by that Yoga that his fetters are purified, and when that happens, he attains the Lord’s plane (pada). Thus, if anyone is

conjoined to Īśvara’s reality level (tattva), 1 is not proper that the lower levels (adharapada) to be purified in the course of the Putraka’s initiation. The Lord’s plane: ‘Place Kālarudra of the one who is established n purity (śuddhabhāva).’ In accord with (this) statement from the Kiraṇāgama, (one can say that) he has spoken

about the abode of Kālāgnīi. That is wrong (asat), because the regular initiate is not enjoined to (take the 1nitation based on) conjunction (of the soul with worlds and reality levels), because the subject of the statement of the Kiranatantra is the initiation of the worlds (bhuvanadīkṣā), which

is the basis of that of the Apprentice (putraka) It is (said) in the Kiraṇā that at the end of the initiaton of the regular initiate, beginning with ‘he should then perform the initation’, this

statement is mainly concerned with the initiation of the worlds, which is for the Apprentice. (So

let ths) suffice. The attanment of the plane of the Lord is a lower form of liberation.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

śrīdevyāyāmale tūktam aṣṭārāntas triśūlake || 462 | cakre bhairavasan nābhāv aghorādyaṣṭakārake | bāhyāpare parā nemau madhyaśūle parāpare | 463 || jvālākule ‘ruṇe bhrāmyanmātṛpraṇavabhīṣaṇe | cintite tu bahirhaste saṁárṣṭe samayī bhavet || 464 || pāśastobhādyas tu sadya uccikramiṣur asya tam | prāṇair viyojakaṁ mūrdhṇi kṣipet saṁpūjya tad bahiḥ || 465 |I anena śivahastena samayī bhavati sphuṭam | It is said in the venerable Devyāyāmalatantra that ‘(the disciple) becomes a regular initiate (samayin) when he has seen (the wheel the

teacher) imagines (is on the palm of his own) outer hand. It has eight

spokes, and within it is the Wheel of (Śiva’s) Trident. The essence (of the three) Bhairavas (bhairavasat) is in (its) nave, and (the retinue of eight Bhairavas) beginning with Aghora, on the eight spokes. (The goddess) Aparā is on the outer (circumference). Parā is on the felly, while Parāparā

is on the middle prong (of the Trident). Red and full of flames, it is fierce (and powerful) with the rotating syllable of Mātṛpraṇava (PHREMṀ) (that

makes it turn). Having (first) contemplated externally that (hand) and having had a vision (of this wheel), he becomes a regular initiate

(In order to impart the initiation that bestows immediate release,

the teacher,) having (first) worshipped externally that (hand) which severs

the vital breaths (from the body), should place it on the head (of the

disciple) who wishes to ascend upwards immediately, (his) fetters paralysed and more. By this, (the rite of) Śiva’s Hand, the disciple clearly becomes a regular initiate.’ (462cd-466ab) (460-463)

‘(The wheel the teacher) imagines’ on the outer and inner part of the

hand, which is such, is the trident, on the central prong of which is located (the

goddess) Parāparā. It is within a wheel with eight spokes, which is red like vermillion (sindiūra), and so is ‘full of flames’. Within it are reflected the

goddesses Parā and Aparā in two places, namely, the felly and outside the spokes (on the circumference, respectively). Its nave is adorned with the three

Bhairavas, and is fierce (and frightening) with the syllable PHREMṀ, that

rotates all around each spoke of (this wheel), the spokes of which are presided over by the group of eight (Bhairavas) beginning with Aghora. As it is fundamentally (Śiva,) the supreme good, a right vision (of this wheel) paralyses (the disciple’s) fetters, and so just by this alone, (regular) initiation into (the

observance of) the rule (samayadīkṣā) is accomplished. This is the meaning.

7 Contact (saṁṣparśa) with 1t, as we shall see, brings death.

” The following is an outlne of how thss procedure can serve to impart an initiation that dispenses immediate liberation (sadyonirvānadīkṣā) by removing the vital breath from the

disciple’'s body, thus conjoining him with Śiva by hus death. Concerning this type of initiation, see below, Chapter Nineteen. ” Printed edition reads pheṅkāra-; Th: phreṁkāra-.

Not only is the (regular) initiation into (the observance of) the rule

(imparted) in this (way), but also the initiation that immediately dispenses

Nirvāṇa (sadyonirvāṇadīkṣā). Again, (the disciple) who desires to exit (the body

in a manner consonant with the vital breath, ‘thisʼ, Śiva’s hand, ‘which severs

the vital breaths (from the body), should be placed on the head (of the disciple)ʼ. Just by its touch alone, his initiation that immediately dispenses Nirvāṇa (sadyonirvāṇadīkṣā) takes place. This is the meaning. As is said there

(in the Devyāyāmala), beginning with:

‘having drawn an eight-spoked wheel with a felly and a nave along with

intermediate spokes, marked above with a trident.’ (Then continuing with,) ‘one

should deposit Bhairava, who is located in the nave.’ ... ‘One should worship the

group of eight (Bhairavas) beginning with Aghora’... ‘They are located on™ the group of eight spokes.” . . . ‘Parāparā, who is red like vermillion (sindūra), is on

the Trident.

The goddess Aparā and

Parā are located

on the outer

(circumference) and felly (respectively).” . . . ‘The wheel,™ in the centre of

which is Bhairava, rotates, and its light is red.’ . . . ‘Having visualized the great wheel surrounded by a garland of flames on the hand, he should place the left

foot (PH) there on the staff of the trident (R), and all around on the spokes

conjoined everywhere with the right knee (E). . . . ‘By seeing (it the fetters are) paralysed; by touching (it) he certainly dies.” Surely (one may ask), what happens to him (now) that he has (acquired) the status ofa regular initiate in this way?

T Ta -āsSTtr̄ī SīeHITaTSTTT II `8.9 11

3JũftṀṁ: āīīh: dTRITI<—N W #a: 1| Ḷē.¢ || tasyaiva bhāvividhivat tattvapāśaviyojane || 466 || putrakatvaṁ sa ca pare tattve yojyas tu daiśikaiḥ | sa eva mantrajātijño japahomāditattvavit || 467 || nirvāṇakalaśenādau tata īśvarasaṁjñinā | abhiṣiktaḥ sādhakaḥ syād bhogānte ‘sya pare layaḥ ll 468 II (Then,) when he has been separated from the fetters of the

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

(jāti), the true nature of the repetition (of Mantra) (japa), (the offering of)

oblation and the rest. The adept (sādhaka) who has been consecrated

Abhinava preṣents a procedure for this initiaton in detal in the following chapter, he does so without reference to the Dīkṣottara. The passage, including 1ús introductory lines, reads: adhvānaṁ kurute so hi na u na vyāpayet param | 12 I samayī sarvatantreṣu bhavate nātra saṁśayaḥ |

putrako yena devesi kathyate ivayogibhiḥ l 1 13 I

tad aham saṅpravakṣyāmi kathyamānaṁ nibodha me |

gaṇayāgādtah kr̥vā drṣṭvā kher (> khe) maṇḍalāni u | 114 1 hutvā u vidhivad devi tatvapāśair viyojitaḥ | yajitas tu pare tatve putrakas sa vidhīyate | 115 I sa eva mantrakalpajño mantratantravidhānavit |

mantrakalpasuvetā ca deśakālavidhānavitḷ| 1 16 | japayogavadhānajaḥ tatvajaś ca vidhānavit| Dīkṣoitara IFP T 17B p. 908-909 ‘The one who generates the Path (of the Worlds) certainly pervades the supreme He 1s a regular initiate in all the Tantras, there can be no doubt here (about this). O mistress of the gods, I will tell (you now) that (procedure) by whuch (the 1nitiate) is said to be a spiritual son (putraka), according to Śiva yogis. Pay attention to me as I explain. After having performed the sacriḹice to the host (of beings). having seen the assembhes (maṇḍala) in the Sky and offered oblation as prescribed, 0 goddess, separated from the fetters of the principles and conjoined to the supreme reality, he becomes a spiritual son. He alone knows the (special) procedures (kalpa) (implemented) by Mantras and the procedures (vidhāna) of the Mantratantra (in general) He knows well the (specal) procedures (kalpa) (implemented) by Mantras, the (appropriate) procedures for (partcular) places and times, he knows the procedures concering the repetition of Mantra (japa) and the Yogas and, knowing the true nature (of these things) (iatva), he knows the procedures.’ Dīksottara 7/112cd-116 Abhinava says that the spirṭual son (putraka, that 1 sometimes translate as Apprentce) (‘knows the types of Mantra (jāti)’ mantrajājño, whereas the manuscript of the Dīkṣotara says ‘he knows the (optional) procedures (kalpa) (implemented) by Mantras' mantrakalpajīo The change is most lkely because Abh1mava was not interested in ‘kalpas’, that is, the kind of rituals

largely performed to fulfil particular desires. Again, the text continues eulogising the initiate’s skil in the use of Mantra by declaring that he is also expert in magical and exorcstic rites, neither

of which interest Abhinava, and s0 he smmply omits to mention them. The Dīkṣottara continues:

tāpaṉe dīpane caiva chedane ca tathaiva caI II7 | mohanastaṁbhane caiva saṁputajñas tathaiva ca | paramaṉtravibhedajīīo mantrāpyāyanatatparah | 1 18 I deśajātivibhedajñaḥ yojanāya ca tatparaḥ pātane daityabhūtebhyaḥ siṅṁhavidyādhareṣv api l I19 I sarvajñas ca kr̥tayaś ca śaucācārasamanvitaḥ ḷ samarthaś ca pantyāgī japāsaktas sadā maiaḥ l 120 l

(abhiṣikta) is initially (conjoined with Śiva) by means of the jar of Nirvāṇa, and then subsequently, by the one called Īśyara (to Sadāśiva). At the end of (his Karmic) experience (bhoga), he dissolves into the supreme

(reality). (466cd-468) (464-466ab)

(The procedure) ‘that will be (explained further ahead)’ in Chapter

Sixteen etc. ‘He’ means the spiritual son (putraka). ‘He himself’ means the

regular initiate ‘when he has been separated from the fetters of the principles’. ‘As (he will be) by means of the procedure that will be

(explained further ahead)’ – these (two statements) should be related to one another here, and in the same way further ahead also. ‘Types (of Mantra) are (the kinds of ejaculations that come at the conclusion of Mantras,) such as

namaḥ and svāhā. (The jar of) ‘Nirvāṇa’ (is identified with Śiva because) he who bestows Nirvāṇa is here said to be Śiva. Although the adept (sādhaka) has been conjoined to Śiva, his abiding dwelling (avasthāna) is on the plane of Sadāśiva, so that (he may have) (karmic) experience (bhoga). Thuṣ, he says: ‘When (his Karmic) experience (bhoga) has come to an end, he dissolves

into the supreme (reality)’.

SEIE ĒTIĒFIṀ|SIGNEIRTĀṈṬAÉHI

--T-D–...,.......aQ ..AA,,..,,.. ‘(This initiat knows the procedures) when heating, inflaming, and severing (are requrred), and s0 t00 (the magical rites that) delude and paralyse (an enemy). He knows the encapsulatton (of mantras with other mantras) and, intent on nourishing (his own) mantras, he

knows how to render asunder the mantras of others. He knows the varieties of locations and classes (of mantras) and is 1ntent on conjointng (them) in order to cause the fall (of others) from

demons and ghosts, even 1n those who have as their base the Lion Vidyā. He knows everything (that needs to be done) and what has been done, and possesses the (right) conduct of purification.

He is competent and a renunciate, who is considered t0 be always dedicated to the repetiton of

mantra.' Dīkṣottara 7/117-120 7 See ŚSP vol 3, pp. 500-553. The sādhaka 1s first initiated as a disciple who aspires to liberaton (mummukṣu). He is thus united with Śiva. He 1s then placed on the plane of Sadāśiva, where he can have the worldly benefits, he desires and 1s entitled to have due to his past Karma,

until they are exhausted.

Abhinava is drawing from Dīkṣottara 7/133-134, which is as follows

abhiṣiñcec ca matmān pṛthivyādisamāyutam |

‘The wise man should (contnue) to sprmkle (abhisiñcet) the jar of Nirvāna, which is

conyotned to (the realiy levels) begmnnng with Eart, for as long as this procedure is considered

(to require it). Then, (when) the disciple has been consecrated, he should be led into Śiva’s presence, and having worshipped him with the sacrificial liquid (arghya) etc., (the teacher) should bestow upon him the authority (of an initiate).” Dīkṣottara 7/133-134.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

daśatantrātimārgajña ācāryaḥ sa vidhīyate |

prthivīm āditaḥ kṛtvā nirvāṇānte ‘sya yojanām ||/ 470 | abhiṣekavidhau kuryād ācāryasya gurūttamaḥ | He who possesses (all) these qualities and has been initiated into

Siva’s teachings, knows well the four sections (pāda) of the scripture,° is intent (on studying) the eighteen (Siddhānta) Tantras (of the Rudra division), and knows the ten (Siddhānta) Tantras (of the Śiva division, as

well as those of the Pāśupata) Atimārga,” is considered to be a teacher. A

Earth up to the extremity of Nirvāṇa.” (469-471ab) (466cd-468)

The Siddhāntāgamas and the Vaiṣṇava Saṁhitās that were modelled on them, are generally

said to be constituted of four pādas or sections, called Vdyā – doctrine, Kriyā -- ritual, Caryā –

right observance, and Yoga. However, examination of early Siddhāntigamas reveals that this division is relatively late and artificial (see above note 15.45 on TĀv ad 15/14-17). Accordingly, Sanderson suggests that in this case the term ‘pāda’ denotes these four topics a Tantra is supposed

to teach, rather than sections of it. This is possible because Jayaratha quotes two other passages

from the Devyāyāmala in which pādas are mentooned below in his commentary on 28/386cd387ab and 28/400-404 (referenced by Goodall 1998. 183 n 69). Even s, by Abhinava’s time, the Āgamas were already thought to have been divided into these four sections, even 1f they were not 1n fact so. Thus, Abhinava would naturally follow standard duvistons like this, even though not realsstc. The Siddhānta Āgamas were thought to number 28, but this was an ideal figure 1n Abhinavagupta’s time. Had he noticed this and still stuck to the standard number, nonetheless? This seems hardly likely. We must assume therefore that he is quoung here from an unknown source, which was most probably a Siddhānta, for there is no menton of the Bhairava Tantras. Clearly, Abhinava has combined, as he is wont to do, a reference from a Trika scripture (i.., the Deyyāyāmala) with a Siddhānta source, to demonstrate that the procedures across the board from ‘left’ to ‘right’ are compatible. ? Śee above, 1/18 for the two groups of Siddhāntāgamas, namely, eighteen belonging to the Rudra division (rudrabheda) and ten to the Śiva one (śivabheda). Atmārga – the Excellent Path, is a common designation for Pāśupata Śaivism, whuch historically preceded that of the Āgamas. Their scriptures were the Eight Pramāṇas, none of which has survived. See above, not 8,869. The ‘supreme way° consists of the sixty-four so-called nondualiṣṭ Tantras 15/469-471ab (466cd-468) is based on Dīkṣottara 7/121-126ab, that reads, accordng to IFP T 17B: catuṣpātsaṁjñitābhijñaḥ kalābhijãas tathaiva ca | utsāhavān sadā dakṣaḥ sādhakas sa vidhīyate | 121 1I p. 910) kalašāsṭadaśenaiva nava pañcadaśena vā | abhiṣekapradātavyaṁ deśikena mahātmanā || 122 | saṁpuṭīrtya vidyakhyam kalaśaṁ surasundari | abhiṣiñcet tataḥ śiṣyaṁ vidhidṛṣṭena karmaṇā || 123 |ḷ

prṛthiyyādi samārabhya māyātatvam apaścimam |

saṁpuṭīkrtya paścāt tu vidyākhyenābhiṣecayet l| 124 | evañcaivābhiṣiktas tu sādhakas sa vidhīyate | pṛthivīmāditaḥ kr̥tvā nirvāṇāntena śobhane || 125 II abhiṣiktas tu deveśe ācāryas sa vidhīyate | ‘One who knows well the four sections (pāda) of the scripture and the forces (kalā), who is always laborious and skilful, is to be made an adept (sādhaka). The great souled teacher should consecrate him with eighteen, nine or fifteen jars (of sacred water). Having encapsulated

‘These’ (qualities) are, for example, knowledge of the Mantras and Tantras. ʻThe extremity of Nirvāṇa’ is the plane of Paramaśiva. Again, so that (he can have) authority (to perform the rites), his abiding dwelling (avasthāna) is in the lower (apara) Śiva, (whereas his) is in Siva. As is said (in the scriptures): ‘The teacher™ abides on the (intermediate) plane, which is both supreme and inferior (parāpara), in order that (he can have the) authority (to

perform the rites). In Siva’s state, he may impart initiation to adepts (sadhaka)

into (the state of) Sadāśiva, in the case of the spiritual son into the supreme

plane, and the regular initiate into (that of) Īśvara.”

The Four Types of Initiates, from Regular to Teacher Surely (one may ask), in saying this, what is being said with regards to the regular initiate? With this doubt in mind, he says:

T{TĪTHĀṜ̄ ĪTF garāī ṬSTÇTT II `#.9, 11 etair vākyair idaṁ coktaṁ samayī rājaputravat || 471 || sarvatraivādhikārī syāt puṭrakādipadatraye |

What is being said by these statements is that the ‘regular’ initiate is like a prince; he has the authority in all respects (to progress to all) three grades, comprising that of spiritual son and the rest. (471cd-

472ab) (469)

Just as a prince has been given the authority to, for example, (govern a) kingdom, similarly this regular initiate also (is competent to progress to the level of a) spiritual son and the others. All the initiations are said to be preceded by the initiation of a regular initiate.

the jar called Vidyā (with mantra), O beautiful lady of the gods, he should then sprinkle the disciple with the rite of which he has seen the procedure. (121-123) Having encapsulated (the principles) beginning with Earth up to the principle of Māyā in the end, he should then sprinkle (him) with (the water of the jar) called ‘Vidyā’. (124) He who has been sprinkled in this way is considered to be an adept. Taking Earth as the first, with Nirvāna at the extremity, O beautiful one, (thus) sprinkled, O mistress of the gods, he is considered to be a teacher.” Dīksottara 7/125-126ab

This reference is not found mn the Dīkṣoitara or the MV. Perhaps it is taken from the

Devyāyāmala, from which Abhinava also draws in this section.

7 Sanderson (reported by Goodall 1998. 184 n 69) suggests on the basis of this remark that verses 402 to 471ab (400-468) are all drawn (or paraphrased) from the Devyāyāmala. Indeed, references are sparse 1n thus section; however, a good number have been 1dentified as derived

from chapter eight of the Mālinīvijayottara in the same sequential order as the rest of this chapter.

The prevtous passage is derived from one in the Dīkṣotara. So even, if Sanderson’s contention is

true, 1t needs be qualified, for ‘by these statements' Abhinava 1s in fact implying that they are

drawn from various sources, although even so, they agree in the manner he describes

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Although there is no distinction between the spiritual son and the teacher with regards to (their being both equally) conjoined to the supreme

principle, (even s0,) he explains that there is some difference (between them).

II oz II JTrēīā a 7 qā: aāTad ftr--āīm 1

putrako daiśikatve tu tulyayojaniko bhavet || 472 || adhikārī sa na punaḥ sādhane bhinnayojane | The spiritual son is equally conjoined (to the supreme principle,) as

is the teacher. However, he is not competent to (apply) the means (to

perform and participate in the rites which entail bringing about) various kinds of conjunctions (at various reality levels for a disciple). (472c473ab) (470) ‘He’ is the spiritual son. ‘The means’ is initiation, the rites of

to abide on the (intermediate) plane, which is both supreme and inferior (parāpara). Thusṣ, he says (it entails) ‘various kinds of conjunctions’. Surely (one may ask), it is possible for a regular initiate (to have received) a prior initiation that serves to extract sectarian signs (of his previous religious affiliations); so how is it that it has been said here that he is like a prince (in the sense that he is authorized to progress to higher levels of initiation)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TāT̄ī āTGTTCJHĪTRTTĪTRĪG; /|| RA“EṈĪI

etattantre samayyādikramād āptottarakriyaḥ || 473 I| ācāryo na puṇar bauddhavaiṣṇavādiḥ kadācana | A teacher who has attained (the authority and knowledge to perform) more advanced rites has become so gradually, (passing through

the levels of initiation,) beginning with that of regular initiate in this

(particular Saiva) Tantra. He could (most certainly) never be a Buddhist or

a Vaiṣṇava. (473cd-474ab) (471)

: See below 16/295ab ff. Abhinava is referring to forms of initiaton whereby a teacher conjoins hus disciple to ascending reality levels and their corresponding worlds in the course of initiation

(yojankadīkṣā). In other words, Abhinava is saying that the apprentice has attained the level of his teacher, but is not competent to initiate others or perform rites in which these conjunctions are

Preparing the Bed (śayyākḷpti)

sāṁ g frē--̄ l| ’y.9 1|

ftrs frrṛra faṇāzidṁ earrāīīaā: 1 x u, 1

I GTTĀITJTR̥̄TTṬITS EIR I 49¥ 1

evaṁ prasaṅgān nirṇītaṁ prakṛtaṁ tu nirūpyate || 474 || Śivahastavidhiṁ kr̥tvā tena saṁpluṣṭapāśakam | Śiṣyaṁ vidhāya viśrāntiparyantaṁ dhyānayogataḥ || 475 1| tataḥ kumbhe ʻstrakalaśe vahnau svātmani taṁ śiśum | praṇāmaṁ kārayet paścād bhūtamātṛbalīṁ kṣipet |I 476 ||

Ṁ(This) has thus been explained by the way. (Now we go back to)

discussing the main point. After having performed the prescribed rite of Siva’s Hand, and thereby burnt away the (disciple’s) fetters, (the teacher) should make that disciple bow (with reverence) to the large jar, the jar onto which the Weapon (PHAT) has been deposited, the fire, and his own Self, until, by means of meditation, he ultimately (attains) rest (within Śiva).

After that, one should throw an offering (outside the sacrificial surface) to the ghosts and the Mothers.” (474cd-476) (472-474ab) (The reference here to the initiate as a) ‘teacher’ is (only) indicative, thus (he may be) an adept also. As he will say (further ahead):

‘The initiation (that bestows) liberation to those who previously bore the signs (of other traditions) does not carry with it the competence (to become a teacher etc.) Those (initiates who must be) born again are not fit to be on the

path (that leads to becoming) a teacher or an adept.

471¢d-474 1s Abhinava’s observation. The source of 475-476 has not been determined. As Abhava is not drawing from the Dīkṣottara, it may be that from 474cd to 495ab (472 to 491ab),

he 1s drawiṅg again from the Devyāyāmala. " Bali literally means an anmal sacrifice. Although also literally done, often a symbolic

subsutute is offered to replace the ammal. Offerng hali may be an independent rite in itself. More

often it is an ancillary rite performed along with the main one. It serves as an occasion to make

offermgs to attendant deities or supernatural beings of place such as sacred sutes, geographical locattons and the like, including the location where the rite is taking place and the foundations of a

house. Its offered to beings such as ghosts (bhāta), guardians of place (kṣetrapāla), the Mothers (mātrkā) and yoginīs, to pacify them and make them propitious. In the MV. it 1s prescribed for all

the ghosts 1n all the darections, where it is said that ‘the teacher should then perform the rite of offering bali in all the quarters wath this mantra: ‘“OM KṢAḤ KṢAḤ SARVABHŪTEBHYO SVĀHĀ’. MV 8/124. Below, 22/28cd-29ab.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN Thus, it was said previously that ‘(he who possesses (all) these qualities

and) has been initiated into Śiva’s teachings.'" ‘Thereby’, that is, by Siva’s Hand.

Now in order to fashion the bed, he says: Yoga of the Disciple with the Teacher When Sleeping

āīā: JTgTaā-d JāGĀTHaIfVHĪ-īTḤ | aṝñ ftā a 1| x ōs || ̄aaTa-̄ fr--Tīaā fyrwrgcarṣfasāfs caī āgrīēaī-īī |

YTGĀĪTTGTSĪIṀ: TTTGTGJTHIATḤ |I #9¢ 11

grtaāīṁaāṝṭṝzrzī faaṁāaa ftraṁ 11 xix 1

=EI Jcaīādas gIJII<Ī Gaī īq

Tācfā̃drzaā ēcaāṁṁrcad frzfatēī#ēṁ: 11 x¢e. 11 tataḥ śaṅkaram abhyarcya śayyām astrābhimantritām | kṛtvāsyāṁ śiṣyam āropya nyastamantraṁ vidhāya ca || 477 II śiṣyahṛccakraviśrāntiṁ kṛtvā taddvādaśāntagaḥ | bhavet kṣīṇakalājālaḥ svaradvādaśakodayāt || 473 I tataḥ praveśapracitakalāṣoḍaśakojjvalaḥ | saṁpūrṇasvātmaciccandro viśrāmyed dhṛdaye śiśoḥ I| 479 || svayaṁ vyutthānaparyantaṁ dvādaśāntaṁ tato vrajet | punar viśec ca hṛccakram itthaṁ nidrāvidhikramaḥ l| 480 I

7"Then, after having worshipped SŚiva and prepared the bed

consecrated with the Weapon (PHAT), (the teacher) places his disciple on it and deposits the (appropriate) Mantras (onto him). Then, having (brought b Above, 15/469b (466d).

7 In order to induce the soul to rise through the stages and levels, to which it must ascend in

order to reach Śiva and thereby be initiated, the teacher extracts it from the disciple’s heart when he is asleep. This is because it is the common belief, exemplified in the following passages from the Upaniṣads, that sleep is a state in which the individual soul rests passively within the heart. Thus, we read in the Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad: ‘Then Ajātaśatru said: “When this man was asleep, where was his conscious spirit,

whence did it return?” And Gārgya did not know. 16

Then Ajātaśatru said: “When this man was asleep, his conscious spirit, having assumed into himself by his consciousness the consciousness of all the vital breaths (prāṇāḥ), was dwelling in the inner space within the heart. When he holds these (vital breaths), then a person is said to be

asleep. When his breath is withheld, his speech is withheld, his eye is withheld, his ear is

withheld, his mind is withheld. 17 Now when he is in deep sleep, when he does not know anything, then the seventy-two thousand arteries called hitāḥ move from the heart to the pericardium. Entering into them, he rests in the pericardium. Just as a young man or a king or a great Brahmin might rest, when experiencing extreme joy, so does he rest.” 19 BṛUp 2/1/16-17, 19

his inhaled breath) to rest in the wheel of (his) disciple’s heart, (by the flow

of the disciple’s exhaled breath) he goes to (his) End of the Twelve. (This process takes place as follows. Initially,) as the (solar energies of) the twelve

Then, burning radiantly with the sixteen (energies of the Moon of

inhalation), accumulated (as the breath) enters,® the Moon of (the

teacher’s) own consciousness, completely full, he brings it to rest in the disciple’s heart. He then travels to (the disciple’s) End of the Twelve, to then return into the wheel of his heart and so on, (back and forth in consonance with his breathing,) until (the disciple) wakes up by himself. Such is the process that (constitutes) the procedure while (the disciple)

sleeps (nidrāvidhikrama). (477-480) (474cd-478ab)

‘The twelve vowelsʼ are the energies (kalā) of the sun. ‘Such’ (is the

procedure, namely) the entry and exit of the breath in this way of the disciple and oneself, in the stated manner.

Ṝ-T SJTTGI TJTTTĪRTTHāHT |1| 5.¢3 |1 āyātanidraḥ Śśiṣyo ʻsau nirmalau śaśibhāskarau |

hṛccakre pratisaṁdhatte balāt pūrṇakṛśātmakau || 481 |

When the disciple has (just) fallen asleep, he gathers together (and

contemplates) forcefully in the wheel of (his) heart the pure Moon and Sun (of inhalation and exhalation) that are full and depleted. (481) (478cd-

Surely (one may ask), even if this is so, what of that? With this doubt in mind, he says:

” The twelve vowels make up the stream of the Śun of prāṇa, the exhaled breath. The disciple’s

entry into his heart coincides with the teacher’s 1nhalation, and hus rest in the End of the Twelve

with his exhalation. Thus, the teacher enters the disciple’s heart by exhalng while the disc1ple imhales, and the End of the Twelve by inhaling when his disciple exhales. Thus flow of the vital

breath, back and forth between teacher and disciple, continues until the disciple wakes up. ” See above, 5/63cd-65.

70 Jṭis possible that here Abhinava is presenting here the essential practce of a number of simar

procedures, rather than drawing from any one source. We are alerted to this posstbility because

the authority that he supplies for it is a nondescript meditaton on the breath taught in the

Vijñānabhairava. In this way, he has no need to refer to any one partcular variant of this

procedure. However, we have no proof that he is doing ths here. It is more likely that he is basng

himself on just one source. Up to now he has followed the Devyāyāmala, along with the

Dikṣottara. As it is not found in the latter, he may well be contnung to follow the procedure taught in the Devyāyāmala. The same may be the case with the following section concerning the examimatton of dreams (vicārana).

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

The Disciple’s Yogic Dreaming

aJTṀ ṂIRYĪT-THTRḺCĪHITTITTC II #¢2 11 haṭhanirmalacandrārkaprakāśaḥ satyam īkṣate |

svapnaṁ bhāviśubhānyatvasphuṭībhāvanakovidam || 482 |

(Possessing as his) light that of the Moon and Sun, pure (by the

capable of clearly reflecting on future (events), both auspicious and

otherwise. (482) (479cd-480ab) he says:

What is the authority here (for this teaching)? With this doubt in mind,

sīaī gJḺTTN |

It is said that, ‘having meditated on (the energy of the vital breath,

first) full and (then) thin, in the region of the twelve (finger space), once having entered into the heart (in the centre), meditating, the one who sleeps

aṭṭains freedom.’””' (483) (480cd-481ab) 7! This verse is a light paraphrase of VBh 55.

pīnāṁ ca durbalāṁ śaktiṁ dhyātvā dvādaśagocare |

praviśya hrdaye dhyāyan muktaḥ svapnasvātantryam āpnuyāt || 55 |I ‘Having meditated on the energy (of the breath,) fat (with its natural sound) as well as

weak (and lengthy) in the regton of the twelve (finger space, then) once having entered the heart

(when fallng asleep) engaged (in this) meditation, one attains mastery over one’s dreams.

The printed edition reads muktaḥ instead of suptah. This verse is also quoted in the SpNir (p. 56); there the reading 1s svapna-. Adopúng that reading, the verse as it appears in the printed editon can be translated as follows: “‘Meditating on the energy (of the breath) gross and weak in the region of the twelve-finger space and having entered the heart meditating, one attains

the freedom to dream (svapnasvātantrya). Kṣemarāja quotes this verse 1n hus commentary on SpKā 33-34, whch reads: ‘Requested by the will, the benefactor makes the Sun and Moon rise, and bestows on the

embodied while they wake, the objects that are created in (their) heart. So also, in the dream state

(Śiva), residing in the centre, manifests without exception, always and most vividly, the things (his devotee) desires, because he never desists from (his) prayerful request.”

It is likely that the author of the Stanzas knew the Vijñānabhairava. It appears that

Rāmabhatṭa, commenting on the Stanzas, knew this verse with this vanant, seeing, as does Kṣemarāja, its relevance to these verses in the Stanzas. Thus, in his commentary he writes: “(The

true yogi 1s one who), because he 1s intent every moment (on exercisng his) reflective awareness

‘It is said’ in the venerable Vijñānabhairavatantra. The reading there

(with reference to the energy of the vital breath) is ‘fat and weakʼ (pīnāṁ ca durbalāṁ) instead of ‘full and thin’ (pūrṇāṁ ca kṛśāṁ). The Examination of Dreams (vicāraṇa)

fōraī īat-aša ḷgaq |

EṞAREIE! TaHT āīsēīTē̄TTaTT | <¢3 1| aTTTS TTVHĪGFTTĪTTTTT: |

TĪ: GŪāTTTTCAĪSTTTTTGT |I 5¢4 11

eEṟE-ĀEIEEIṀIEEIEI-CTIUSHṈIYAI

āī? JT. ṀadT-ṀTTT TIG ṬĪTKAĪ |

When the disciple has (just) fallen asleep and the teacher has

worshipped Siva, he should eat the sacrificial pap together with his assistants (sasakhā). Then he should brush his teeth and go to sleep,

(pratyavamarśa), never at any time, in the course of any experence, neglects the prayer he has achieved through hus own mnate power. (This prayer is his) merger with hus own nature, the Benefactor and Lord of all. The Benefactor manifests for one such as he (who is not negligent in

his prayer) the things he desires, even while he dreams, just as when he is avake. The things (he experiences) while dreaming that (seem to come about) freely, (independent of his will) do not restrict (his) own (inherent) power, which is that of universal agency. This is because he is (no

longer) a worldly soul subject to rebirth, but he is free and creates them by (his) own power as he wishes. Just as Bhartṛhari says: ‘The lord of all, endowed with every power, dividing Himself by Himself and creating phenomena of various sorts, becomes, while dreaming, the enjoyer.’

Therefore, ths 1s called ‘freedom to dream’ (svapnasvātantrya), and as there is no difference for

Lucid dreaming and its application to yogic practice in the context of the Spanda teachings is diṣcussed in detail in Dyczkowski 1992a 241-245. It is a standard part of the preliminary ntes of initiation for the teacher to examine the

postulant's dreams to determine whether they are auspicious or otherwise. Abhinava adds a new dimension to thrs procedure by teaching how the neophant can remain lucid in the dream state. In

this context, Abhmava 1s not concerned with the freedom the luctd dreamer may have to create or alter the contents of his dreams, he focuses instead on the insight that he can develop as a lucid dreamer, to see for himself directly whether the signs of future events (in this case the initiation) are auspicious or not

7”. See previous note

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

concentrating on the wheel of the heart flaming with the rays of Mantras.

Early morning, after having performed all the regular daily rites and worshipped Siva, the teacher examines what was seen (in his own and his disciple’s) dreams, (in order to assess) their relative strength. What he himself has seen is the stronger (dream), not that of the other, because it is associated with (the greater) intensity of his own consciousness. If the (level

of awakened) consciousness of the teacher and that of the disciple are equal, their dreams should be the same. (484-487ab) (481cd-484)

‘The sacrificial pap” was (prepared and) placed (there) for oneself.

(The teacher) ‘examines’ (his dreams and that of his disciple), that is, he

assesses (and compares their relative significance, and whether they are auspicious or not). With this (statement) he begins (to discuss the manner and form of) the assessment of the dream.

ĠaTTTTGTTTṬSTRTTTTTaHĪTRTḤ ÁI 5¢.9 11

qasĩ aaād Taāāīrr̥TḤeTēTT 1| #¢8 11

Tāīsē| T̄ī āīāSVITAISĀH; ||`#80 ||

sai fē wgṝ ferq a- ūvad #ēT 11 #82 1

devāgnigurutatpūjākāraṇopaskarādikam || 487 |I

hṛdyā strī madyapānaṁ cāpy āmamāṁsasya bhakṣaṇam | raktapānaṁ śiraśchedo raktaviṇmūtralepanam || 488 II

”(The disciple may have the following dream. He may dream of) 1) the preparation and performance etc. of the rites to worship the gods, fire,

and the teacher, 2) a beautiful woman, 3) the drinking of wine, 4) the eating of raw meat, 5) the drinking of blood, 6) the severing of (one’s own) head, 7) smearing oneself with blood, dung or urine, 8) mounting onto pleasing animals and riding them, such as horses or elephants, and 9) climbing a

Each one of these is said to be an auspicious dream, and they are

generally pleasing. (The teacher) should explain that (to his disciple) so as to develop his sense of satisfaction (and be pleased). Indeed, joy (hlāda) is the supreme fruit.

Thus, (a dream) that is other than (such) is inauspicious. There (in

that case, in order to neutralise it, the teacher) should perform one hundred and eight oblations (whilst reciting) the Weapon Mantra. (Moreover, if) the dream is inauspicious, the teacher should not tell that to his disciple. When

a doubt is well-rooted, it requires a great deal of effort to remove it. But for those whose doubts have ended, auspicious or inauspicious (dreams) are of no consequence at all. (487-492abc) (485-490a)

‘Another (dream)ī witnessed by the disciple. (If the degree of awakened, lucid consciousness of the teacher and that of the disciple is the same,) ʻ‘ṭheir dreams should be the sameʼ, not more or less strong (in

determining whether they are auspicious or not). (An auspicious dream) ‘is generally pleasing’. The sense is that (some auspicious dreams,) like the severing (of one’s own head,) are not pleasing. (The teacher) should explain ‘that’ auspicious dream (to his disciple). ‘Another (dream) that is other than

that’ aforementioned dream. ‘Another’ means the opposite of that. (Thus, instead of dreaming of raw meat, which is auspicious, one may dream of) cooked meat (which is inauspicious). As is said:

‘That which is the opposite of that is said to be a bad dream, as is, for

example, (dreaming about) eating cooked meat, (being) massaged, falling into a

deep precipice and the like.’

The reason why (the teacher should not tell his disciple that his dream)

is inauspicious is (explained) in the second half (of this verse). But for those

whose doubts have ended, (auspicious or inauspicious dreams are of no consequence at all,) because (consciousness) free of thought constructs is not divided into into auspicious and inauspicious. This is the sense. These (disciples) vary even when asleep, because their nature consists of the three qualities (of Nature). Thus, he says:

T1 Concerning the prognosis of auspicious and inauspicious dreams, see Dyczkowski 2009 and SSP.

T This reference seems to have been drawn from the source Abhinava is drawing his account of the prognostication of dreams from, whch could be the Devyāyāmala.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

agšci fārāravīq 1| x82 1

f-ēfzrīatzīzī qarçTT=̄ATJIHT II #R83 II

(The dream experiences of a disciple vary) in this way, according to

the variety (of the qualities (guna) to which he is subject). The sattvic

The auspicious and inauspicious character of the latter’s (dreams) is

determined solely by the pleasure or suffering (he experiences when

asleep). (492cd-493) (490b-491ab)

Surely (one may ask), the tāmasic (disciple) would not see anything. So how could one determine whether his (dream) is auspicious or inauspicious?

With this doubt in mind, he says that ‘the auspicious and inauspicious character of the latter’s (dreams) is determined solely by the pleasure or

suffering (he experiences when asleep)’.

Surely (one may ask), how could the tāmasic (disciple) be qualified for the rite of initiation? Presenting this doubt, he removes it:

7JII I x7 1| nanvy atra tāmaso nāma kathaṁ yogyo vidhau bhavet |

maiva mā vigrahaṁ kaścit kvacit kasyāpi vai guṇaḥ || 494 II Surely, (one may ask) here, how can the tāmasic (disciple) be fit for the rite (of initiation)? (I reply that) there is no need to argue. Any (particular) quality (may be possessed) by anybody anywhere (according to what the case may be or the person). (494) (491cd-492ab)

(The word) ‘indeed’ serves to indicate emphasis, and that should be

related everywhere (to each alternative). The ‘quality’ (meant is), in other words, the one that predominates. He illustrates this (teaching):

gatṃītakrraīst7 ṣrī afe ar: 1

sarvasāttvikaceṣṭo ‘pi bhojane yadi tāmasaḥ |

kiṁ tataḥ so ʻdhamaḥ kiṁ vãpy utkr̥ṣṭas tadviparyayaḥ || 495 I| If, for example, a person is tāmasic only with respect to his food and sattvic with respect to all (the rest of his) behaviour, is he therefore a low (person who is not fit to receive initiation)? Or, if one is the opposite of that, is he so excellent (that he is fit to receive it)? (495) (492cd-493ab)

‘Therefore’, because he is tāmasic only with respect to what he eats? ‘One who is the opposite of that’, that is, tāmasic in every circumstance, but

sāttvika only with respect to what he eats.

(He now) relates (what he is saying to the main) point.

vicitrātmā bhaved eva mukhye tv arthe samāhitaḥ || 496 ||

Even a person who has received a descent of the power (of grace) and has been initiated, because (he is affected by the diverse) conditions of the qualities, (he himself is) varied (in his behaviour and intentions), but (even so, remains equally) attentive to (his) main purpose. (496) (493cd-

‘(The diverse) condition of the qualities is due to the fact that the material (prākṛta) body continues to be (in a certain) state for (only) some (limited period of) time. “(His) main purpose’ is initiation. Now in order to expound the rite of the Rule, he says:

The Purifying Rites to Make a Brahmin (sāmayaṁ karma)

AIERÉÉESAICEIEĀEHKGIAH

KEEHIḤŪEIAPIEEḺĀEICĀĒēe IRTVĀI

tato guruḥ śiśor mantrapūrvakaṁ devatārcanam | deśayet sa ca tat kuryāt saṁskuryāt taṁ tato guruḥ l| 497 I| hṛdādicakraṣaṭkasthān brahmādīn ṣaṭ samāhitaḥ | spṛśec chīśoḥ prāṇavṛttyā pratyekaṁ cāṣṭa saṁskriyāḥ l| 498 II hṛdayādidviṣaṭkāntaṁ bodhasparśapavitritaḥ |

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

The teacher should then teach (his) disciple how to perform the rite of worship of the deity along with (the required) Mantras and he should do it. Then the teacher should purify him. (In order to do this,) well

(his) vital breath with the six causal forces,” Brahmā and the rest, that are

located in the six wheels of (the subtle body of the) disciple, from the heart

onwards, and (perform) the eight rites of purification for each one, from

the heart to the End of the Twelve. (The disciple) has been purified (as we

shall see) by coming in contact with (pure) consciousness.” (497-499ab)

(494cd-496)

‘Then’ (the teacher should purify him) after he has taught (his disciple how) to worship the deity etc. He explains (how that is to be done, with reference to the) ‘the wheels of (the subtle body of the) disciple, from the heart onwards’ʼ. These six wheels are the heart, throat, palate, (the place)

between the eyebrows, forehead and the Cavity of Brahmā. The eight (rites of purification) ‘for each one’ multiplied by six make the forty-eight purifications (saṁskāra). This is the meaning. ‘(The disciple) who has been purified by

coming in contact with (pure) consciousness’. In accord with the view that ‘by abandoning the six (causes), in the seventh (the yogi achieves) merger (into

the Supreme Principle),” he has been purified by coming in contact with the

consciousness that is the body of the supreme subject located in the End of the Twelve, not by (complete and) direct merger. The meaning is that he is pierced through by it. As he will say: ‘(The disciple who has) attained the state of a ‘twice-born’ should just make contact with the End of the Twelve by virtue of his own oneness (within himself, but) not rest within it. Descending from it immediately, he attains (the

condition of a devotee of) Rudra, who is a part (of him) (aṁśa), by virtue of which the ‘regular” initiate (samayin) is purified (to be an initiate)

He (goes on) to say that his accomplishment of the other purifying (and empowering) rites (sariskāra) (is achieved) by this much alone. Forty-eight and Seven Purifying Rites Whereby

the Disciple becomes a Brahmin

TRĪTTTĪCCTTTĪTĒATRGS: || `68, 1 {eeút=zTEETFUĪKÉFEHEEITḤ 71 See above, note 8,25.

7 The epithet hodhasparśapavitritaḥ, which is here made to refer to the discple, may also refer to the teacher.

71 SVT 4/246b. Also quoted above ad 6/192 (191cd-192ab) (see note there) and ad 15/434cd-438 (432-436ab). 71 Below, 15/523-524ab (19-520ab).

āhārabījabhāvādidoṣadhvaṁsād bhaved dvijaḥ || 499 || vasuvedākhyasaṁskārapūrṇa itthaṁ dvijaḥ sthitaḥ | Thus, he becomes thereby, due to the destruction of the defects in (his) food, seed, and character etc., ‘twice born’ (dvija).”” (Purified by) all forty-eight purificatory rites, he is in this way ‘twice born’ (in all respects). (499cd-500ab) (497)

The ‘etc.’ refers to (his) location. As is said (in the Svacchandatantra):

‘He is twice-born when (his) seed, food, location and character are pure.”™

There (in that context) defects in the food are due to the failure to carry out (the rules and regulations) according to the modality (of right conduct) (prakriyā) taught in the Vedas and the smṛtis. (It is necessary to purify the) defects in the seed, (because) according to (the following) view (stated in the Mukutasaṁhitā),

true purity of the seed is impossible:

‘The status of a Brahmin is due to the purity of the seed (from which he

was conceived), and that (purity of seed) is present in women. (However,) their

fickle mind (cetas) runs after even (the lowest) outcastes.”!

Defects (in a person’s character arise) because of (his) association with

falsity, lack of sincerity, and the like. Defects in (oneʼs) location is due to contact with (unclean) foreigners (mleccha) and the like (in that place). (One

who is twice born) is purified by the forty-eight purifying (and empowering

He (now) names them: See Pandey, 1993: 20.

SVT 4/68ab, cf. MIT, Kriyāpāda 8/64.

" Kṣemarāja quotes this verse in SvTu ad 4/68ab, saying it is from the Mukuṭasaṁhitā, and comments: iti mukuṭasaṁhitoktanyāyāṉn na kvacid bījaśuddhir vāstavī saṁbhãvyate, iti sā mantrair eva saṁpādyā | āhārasya śrutismṛtyuktaprakriyayā anirvāhād aśuddhir asúi, deśasyāpi mlecchādisaṁparkāt, bhāvasyāṣsatyānārjavadiyogād iti śuddhir ādheyaiva || ‘According to the teaching stated in the venerable Mukuṭasaṁhitā, true purity of seed is not possible anywhere (in any circumstance). Thus, (if it exists,) it is brought about by Mantras alone. Food is impure, because the procedure taught in the Vedas and smṛtis has not been observed. A countryʼs (impurity) is due to contact (there) with outcaste foreigners (mleccha) and the like, and that of (one’s own) basic state (bhāva) is due to lack of truthfulness and rectitude etc. Thus, purity (is not an innate quality, it) needs to be brought about.” Abhinava tells us that Mukuṭasaṁhitā deals extensively with the nature of caste distinctions, to conclude that they are just notions. He writes: jātīnāṁ ca brāhmaṇādīnāṁ nāsti sthitiḥ - kalpitatvāt upadeśavyaṇgateti tu durbuddhīn paśūn pratyāyayet – iti ca bhagavatā mukuṭasahitāyāṁ vistarato nirṇītam iha tu ayatnasiddham eva | ‘Castes such as Brahmin and the rest have no (objective) existence (sthiti), because they are (merely) conceptual. It is a clarification of doctrine (of social law) that serves to inṣtil understanding in fettered souls of poor intellect. The Lord has taught this extensively in the Mukutasaṁhitā, whereas here (this) is proved (to be true) effortlessly.” PTv p. 237

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

JṬ f-TGĒHUĪ TTTIJE TATTēēī |

ārsftz% ṁsttāḥ ālīaḥ šB̄. 1| uc?, 11

JGIE: TJYI: TS TITHGTGTĪ: || 40 ||

TṬĪĪA ṬIGī: āTTTAT TE TAHĪ |I Ḷ0% |1

ñ-ārāīsfīqaīsa arza:: dr̥fkraīsīdī |

raTrrTGāaīāī TēRATTTTTĪ STT |I| 4 1|

aāḷ TTJaATI T Jf̄ā: TTTIGṀ || 40.9 1 |

garbhãdhãnaṁ puṁsavanaṁ sīmanto jātakarma ca || 500 l|

15/502 is based on SvT 10/386cd-387ab, 503a is drawn from SvT 10/388cd-394 (which deals with the types of vratabandha), and 503bcd from 10/395-396 (the remaining five listed here). 503c – SVT 10/396cd; 502ab – SVT 10/395ab, 504a – SVT 10/397 504bcd-505ab drawn from SvT 10/398bcd-399 505cd-506ab is based on SvT 10/400cd-402ab. 506cd-507ab based on SYT 10/403-404°,507cd – SVT 10/404cd-406 508ab – SVT 10/407cd-408ab 509 – SVT 10/410-411ab. follows:

15/502 1s based on SYT 10/386cd-387ab which 1s, along with the commentary, as

brāhmaṇasyãdhkárãṣṭau catvãrṁśatam eva ca |

‘There are eight (that bestow) competence to be a Brahmin, and forty (additional

purifications). He states them in due order:

”vratabandhaiṣṭike maujjīhhautike saumikaṁ kramāt I 501 1

..–1.Q._. 1) Impregnation (garbhādhāna), 2) the procreation of a male child (puhsavana), 3) the parting of the hair (swīmantonnāyana), 4) the rite at birth (jātakarman), 5) the naming

(nāmakaraṇa) (of the baby), 6) the going out (uṣkrāmaṇa), 7) the first solid food (annapraśana). and 8) tonsure (cāḍākarman). O fair lady, these eight are said to purfied with this same (method).

(SVT 10/386cd-387)

The parting of the hair (marks) the completion of (the differentiation and) division of the primary and secondary limbs. The ‘going out’ (niṣkrāmaṇa) is seeing the sun (for the firṣṭ

time). Tonsure 1s the fashioning of the topknot. “With this same (method), that is, with the

method that has come down through the aforementioned succession by applying ten oblations with (the Mantra of) the Lord Īśāna, who is the cause. Thus ‘O goddess, with these completed he then becomes a Brahmin’ (SYT 10/388ab). Birth as a twice born (Brahmin) 1s achieved by two

untroubled Brahmins – one by Vedika mantras, and the second one by (these) purificatory rites

(samskāra). (It makes no difference). This is done for both of them (equally) with Vedic (laukika)

Mantras.’ see also SyT 2/203 ff The first four saṅṣkāras, performed for the fire, are described, in some detail in the

SVT. 1) Impregnation (garbhādhāna) 2/203-204ab, 2) the procreation of a male child (puṅsavanam) 2/204cd-206ab, 3) the parting of the hair (stmāntonnayana) 22206cd-214, and 4) the rte of birth (jātakarman) 2/215-216.

”““15/503a is drawn from SvT 10/388cd-394 (which deals with the types of vratabandha), and

15/503bcd from 10/395-396 (the remaining five listed here). See below 15/506-510ab. 502a – SVT 10/396cd. kir ca ----

tato bhavati godānaṁ taccaturdaśakam priye |ḷ vedādhyayanānte upādhyāya gomithunadānenopalakṣitam ātmanaḥ keśādivapanaṁ godānam || Moreover: “O beloved, then comes the offering of cows, which is the fourteenth. The

offering of cows and the offerng of one’s own hair etc represented by the offering of two cows to the teacher at the completion of the study of the Veda. (396cd)

7 502ab -SvT 10/395ab. See above note, where the passage 1s translated in full.

7 504a -SVT 10/397 atha gurubhir gārhasthyāyānujñātaḥ ----

snāta udyāhayed bhāryāṁ jñānasiddhaḥ kumārikām | (397ab)

pravrajet iti coditatvāt śīghram eva prāvṛāryam icchan ----

‘Now once he has been given the permisston by the teacher to assume the householder°s

state: ‘The one who has bathed and (in whom) knowledge is accomplished (by study), should

marry a young virgin (and have her as his) wife.’ (397ab) He is satd to be ‘one who has bathed’,

that is, one who has attained purity by the study of the Veda. Bathing at the completion of study is taught in the tradition with this intentuon. Thus, he is completely successful (siddha) by virtue of

the knowledge which is the understanding of the meaning of the Vedas. Or else (t is said), ‘he

should go forth (as a renouncer) from the celibate (state). As this is enjoined with the desire (to enter) quickly (the state of the renouncer who has) gone forth – ‘Having made (a simulacrum of) a wife made of darbha grass, he should celebrate the sacrifices with her. (397)

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

caitrī cāśvayujī paścāt saptaiva tu havir makhāḥ || 503 |”

This Karma 1s 1n the form of the regular (nitya) and occasional (naimittika) rites enjoined for the phase of life (aśrama) of the householder. In ths way it is the accomplishment of the sacrament (saṁskāra) of marriage. “One should know that to be the fifteenth.’ (397c) By that: pitṛdevamanuṣyāṇām bhūtānāṁ tarpaṇaṁ tathā |

pañca sūnã gr̥hasthasya cullĩ pesaṇy upaskaraḥ |

khaṇḍanī codakumbhaśca badhyate yas tu vāhayan ||

tāsāṁ krameṇa sarvāsāṁ niṣkṛtyartham mahātmabhiḥ |

ity evam udvāhenavvante niṭyayajāḥ saṁgrahītā ity āśayah | 397 1| ‘In this way libation (is offered) to the ancestors, deities and men, as well as ghosts.

(These four, along with) study, for a Brahmin are the five great sacrifices.’

Theṣe are the regular sacrifices stated together (in brief) in the Yajñasūtra. That is said

(in the following passage):

‘Five (things symbolze) the offspring of a householder – the stove, grind-stone, an

article of household use, sugar-boiler (khanḍanī > khaṇḍika) and the coda jar (?). He who,

engaged in carrying (out his domestc duties) is troubled, five great sacrifices have been fashioned by great souls in order to atone for all (defects). They are performed danly by householders who

perform the domestic rites. (These are:) study, which 1s the sacrfice of Brahmā The sacrifice to the ancestors is the offering of libation. The offering of oblation is for the gods. Animal sacnfice is for the ghosts, and the sacrfice to man is reverence for guests. The 1ntended sense is that, in

this way, by (the reference to) marriage, these regular sacrifices are included.

504bcd-505ab drawn from SvT 10/398bcd-399. The Vedic domestic rites (pākamakha) are occasional rites performed by householders

in the course ofa year Kṣemarāja supplies a brief randown:

| pārvaṇī sitāsitapakṣādyadine,

tatratyo yāgas

‘The aṣṭakas are (called) Śāka etc , (and take place on the eighth day) of the dark lunar fortúight, beginning with the month of Pauṣa. (Those performed during) the auspicious conjunctons (of the planets) (pārvanī) are called the sacrifices that take place (on those

occasions,) during a lunar day of the bright or dark lunar fortnight. The offering to the ancestors

(śrāddha) is the prescribed rite taught for the days (sacred to) the ancestors. A sacrifice

(performed in the month of) Śrāvanṇī (is called) Śrāvaṇī. The Āgrāyanī is a sacrifice (performed to

celebrate the harvesting of) new food. One should know that the same (applies to those the sacrifices named after the months of the year, that is) CaiT and Āśvayujī. Others who read that

there are two Āgrāyaṇīs say that there are two sacrifice (to celebrate the harvesting of) new food, in the autumn and the spring. They explain that the sacred day and the rite for the ancestors is to

be read together (thus there is one less sacrifice listed to allow for two Āgrāyaṇīs). Theṣe are the

domestc sacrifices in the Veda that it is sad are to be performed with sacrificial cakes (puroḍāśa)

and the like. The fire sacrifices that will be taught (further ahead) are (performed by offering)

ādheyam agnihotraṁ ca paurṇamāsaḥ sadarśakaḥ |

āptoryāmātirātrau ca saptaitāḥ somasaṁsthitāḥ l| 505 |

dayā kṣamānasīūyā ca śuddhiḥ satkṛtimaṅgale || 507 |

-9d-D...........ā....Q.Q,

barley-meal (ṣaktu) and the like. Here, as no patculars ar mentoned, one should know that they ar to be (performed) with sesame seeds as stated (previously).’ SYTu ad 10/338cd-339 7 505cd-506ab based on SYT 10/400cd-402ab Kṣemarāja explains these seven kinds of

sacrifices (yajīa); that is, 1) Aāgneya, 2) Agnihotra, 3) Darśa, 4) Paurṇamāsī, S5) Cāturmāsya,

6) Pasśubandha and 7) Sautrāman.

‘1) The installaton of the fite (āgneya) is the bringing of fie by the process (of rubbing) firesticks (together). 2) The oblation to the fire (agnihotra) is the offering to the fi in

the morning and the evening. 3) The new moon (darśaka) (sacrifice) 1s the reverse (of the full moon one). It 1s the sacrifice that 1s performed when the moon is not visible for new moon. 4) The

Phālguna or Caitra up to the fourth month after on the full moon. 5) The words ‘the sacrifice of

The ammal sacnfice (paśubandha) is a partcular sacrifice in which the flesh etc. of a sacrficial victim and the like 1s offered to the fire. 7) The rite dedicated to (Indra) the ‘good protector”

(sautrāmaṇī) is a sacnfice in which lquor (surā) 1s offered (surāyāga). SvT 10/400cd-402ab 506cd-507ab based on SVT 10/403-404a.

agniṣṭtomātyagniṣṭomau ukthyaḥ soḍaśīúkā tathā |

vājapeyo ‘tirātrastu āptoryāmas tu saptamah || 403 |1

ta ete yāgaviśeṣāḥ ---- somasaṅsthā samākhyātāḥ.............

grahakaraṇakasomapānayuktā yayñarūpāḥ krīyāḥ somasaṁsṭhāḥ lI Theṣe particular sacrifices are ‘said to be a part of the Soma (sacrifice)’ (404a) Those that are a part of the Soma (sacnfice) are rates in the form of sacrifices that include the drinkīng

of Soma, which brings about possession (graha). 7 507cd - SYT 10/404cd-406 – quoted in commentary. 7! 508ab – SVT 10/407cd-408ab.

aśvamedhaṁ tataḥ paścā yuhuyāt tu yathākramam | 407 I|

‘After that, m due order, he should offer a horse sacntfice as oblation ’ (407cd) Even a Brahmm who due to Karma attains the condition of a universal monarch should have this horse

sacrifice performed. In this way, begnnmg from (the sacrament of) marriage, ending with these,

‘having done them all in this way, he is thus a householder.’ (408ab). This is one who is in the

second phase of life (asśrama).

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

”1) (The first purifying rite is) impregnation (garbhādhāna),

(followed by) 2) the procreation of a male child (puṅṁīsavana), 3) the parting of the hair (swīmantonnayana), 4) the birth rite (ātakarman), 5) the naming (nāmakaraṇa) (of the baby), 6) going out (for the first time) (niṣkramaṇa), 7) the first solid food (annapraśana), and 8) tonsure (cāḍākarman), which is the eighth. The taking of vows (vratabandha), (the four practices to observe while learning the Veda, namely) 9) aiṣṭika, 10) pūrvika, 11) bhautika and 12) saumika, 13) (the shaving of the beard, along with) 14) the gift of cows. (These are) the fourteen sacraments (administered) up to (the completion

of) student life. The fifteenth sacrament is marriage (udvāha). After that come the seven domestic sacrifices (pākayajña), that is to say, 16) (the sacrifices that should be performed on) the eighth lunar day (aṣṭaka), 17) (those to be performed during) auspicious conjunctions (of the planets) (pārvaṇī), 18) the offerings to the ancestors (śrāddha), the two, 19)

(performed in the month of) Srāvaṇa (śrāvaṇī) and 20) the two

agrahāyaṇī, 21) the one performed in the month of Caitra (caitrī), and 22)

the one performed in the month of Aśvayuj (the āśvayujī).

After this come the seven (solemn) oblations (havirmakha), that is,

animal sacrifice (paśubandha), 29) along with the rite dedicated to (Indra) the ‘good protector’ (sautrāmaṇī).

The seven Soma sacrifices” are the 30) Agniṣṟoma, 31) the one beginning with ati, 32) the Ukthya, 33) the Soḍaśin, 34) the Vājapeya, 35) 509 is based on SVT 10/410-411ab, where the eight good qualities of the soul are lssted. The

words used to denote the eight good qualties of the soul may be different in some cases, but the meanings are the same. Kṣemarāja explains: dayā parānukampā, kṣāntir apakāriṣu śaktatve ‘py apratikriyā, paraguṇasahatvam anasūyatā,

‘1) Compassion is sympathy for others. 2) Forbearance (kṣānti / kṣamā) is to refrain from retaliation towards those who cause injury, although capable of doing so. 3) Freedom from spite (anasĩyā) s tolerance of others' (bad) qualities. 4) Purity (śuddhī/śauca) is purity of mind, speech and body. 5) Freedom from (tiring) exertion (anāyāsa) is doing work that does not entail (painful) impediments. 6) (Doing what is) auspicious (mangala) is seeing, touching and thinking about auspicious sacrificial substances. 7) Generosity (akārpaṇya) is to give (to others) as much as one can. 8) Absence of craving (asprha) 1s contentment. These are the (good) qualities of the

Self, that is, of the mmner mental organ and speech etc. which are closest to the Self. (They are) not

(directly qualitis of) the Śelf, because its sole nature is consciousness.’

7 This list of forty-eight items in verses 502-509 (498-505) is taken from SvT 10/383-412cd They are the forty saṁskāras and eight qualities of the soul listed in the Gautamadharmasūtra.

They are noted in Pandey, Rajbali 1969: 20. Read niṣkramaṇaṁ for niṣkrāmaṇam.

” See Appendix to Chapter Six for the Indian lunar calendar. 7 SVṬ 400c reads āgneyar for ādheyah.

” Ṭheṣe are the seven standard modifications of the Jyoriṣoma sacrifice.

the Āptoryāma, and the 36) Atirātra.’ Then comes 37) the Hiraṇyapāda

etc. sacrifice, which is repeated a thousand (times), and finally the horse

sacrifice (Aśvamedha), which is the thirty-eighth, with which one comes to the end of the stage of the householder (gṛhastha). Then come the two

stages of 39) the forest dweller (vanaprastha) and 40) the renouncer

(saṁnyāsin).

After this come the eight qualities of the Self, that is, (41) 1)

508ab) (498-505)

‘Going out’ (niṣkrāmaṇa) is (a period of time just after giving birth

that the mother and her baby are kept) out of sight (adarśana). ‘The taking of vows’ (vratabandha) is the investiture of the sacred thread (upanayana).

‘Aiṣṭika’ are the four vows that must be observed while learning the Veda. ‘The gift of cows’ is the gift to the teacher of a pair of cows at the end of the course of the study of the Vedas, and the offering of one’s hair etc., which it (also)

secondarily

fourteenth.

Svacchandatantra): ʻthen O beloved, comes the gift of cows, which is the

fourteenth.' ‘After that’ means after marriage. ‘The offerings after death (śrāddha)’ have as their object (one’s) dead father etc. ‘The two agrahāyaṇī are the two sacrifices a year, in autumn and spring, for the new food (of the harvest seasons). ‘The one beginning with ati’ is the Aryagniṣṭoma. The word ‘etc.’ (of Hiraṇyapāda etc.) indicates a form (of it). Thus, the Hiraṇyapāda (‘Golden Foot’) is (a spring) sacrifice (performed in the month of) Caitra and is often kinds. This is the meaning. It is ‘repeated a thousand (times) because

each one (of the ten kinds) is repeated a hundred times. That is said (in the

Svacchandatantra):

‘The Golden Foot is the first. Then (comes) the one who bears the

Golden Anus, (then come) the Golden Penis, the Golden Navel, the Golden

Womb, the Golden Ear, the Golden Skin, the Golden Eye, the Golden

Tongue, and its (Golden) Horn - these are said to be the ten sacrifices. Each one

Read sokthyaḥ for soklayaḥ. The ukthya is a libation offered in the morming and midday sacrifice, as well as the name ofa liturgical ceremony which forms part of the Jyotiṣṭoma. ” Concerning these sacrifices, see Renou, 1954, 5 v 507c Cf. SVT 10/404cd-406ab, which is quoted 1n the commentary. See note there. “ Inṣtead of satkṛú- ‘doing good (to others), SYT 10/410c reads anāyāsa ʻwithout effortʼ.

Normally ‘going out’ 1s the occasion when the baby is taken out to see the sun and the moon and the stars for the first time. SyṬ 10/396cd.

Ḵ ṣemarāja explains: garbho hṛdayam. ‘The womb 1s the heart.

SVT 10/404cd-406. Here the last hne reads: śatena tu vṛtaṁ cātra ekaikaṁ tu vijãnate | `ẽach

one is known here to be complete (vr1a) by (performing it) a hundred times. The edition of the SVT reads śatena tu ghṛtaṁ cātra ekaikaṃ tu vijāyate | 10/406cd ‘Clarified butter (offered) here a hundred times to each one triumphs.’

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

‘Compassion’

‘Forbearance’ (kṣānti) refraining from revenge, although capable of it, on those who do wrong to you. ‘Doing good (to others) (satkṛti)’ is doing what is good by undertaking readily (to do so). ‘(Pursuing what is) auspicious (maṅgala) is taking care to observe what is (well) commended. (These are the

qualities of) ‘the self’. (In this case, this means) the inner mental organ, which

is proximate to the Self. It is not the Self (itself) directly, because that is one

with consciousness. Here in this same (context), he presents other purifying rites included amongst them.

īaāī āvgāĨsi arg ārzqTā- I| 40¢ 11

ĨTTTT 3 TTTTT TPITGTTS |I 408. 1

STĪTRIRTGATTTĪIĪTT TCT |

I:. āJṬāT; I| 4Q0

īkatczkaa ã̃ aar-aaftēlā̃ za |

TTHĨIĪĪĪĪI TāTPĒTTĪSTT TṬG: |

rāīgfār ftōrttīarīr̥dsī: 1 ugç3 1. mekhalā daṇḍam ajinaṁ tryāyuṣaṁ vahnyupāsanam || 508 II

-–,.. Ṁ–- ......

..Ḷ. gB garbho hr̥dayam | ete pakṣyādyākārā agniciṭyāvśesā

sa eva sahasrahomasamprādyo hiraṇyapādādś cityayajāaḥ |

The womb is the heart. These are particular arrangements of the fire altar (agniciti) in the form of a bid etc., to which gold is given where their feet etc. are located. As the the form of each bird is different, ‘Clarified butter (offered) here a hundred times to each one triumphs.” (406cd)

He explains the particular nature of the oblation (homa) (offered) in order to accomplish ‘They are all purified with a thousand (oblatons).’ (407a)

This is the tradition concerning the thousand oblations, that is, the sacrifice to the foundation of bricks (from which the fire altar is fashioned), beginning with the Golden Foot.

Jayaratha reads kṣāntir, which means the same.

saṁdhyā bhikṣeti saṁskārāḥ sapta sapta vratāni ca

"510 is a paraphrase of SVT 10/389cd-390ab. Inroduciṅg tas yerse with the previous lne and

contṉnuing with the ones that follow, the Śvacchantatantra states with Kṣemarājas

commentary:

‘In this way, for this Brahmun, ‘the ninth is the taking of vows.” (SVT 10/388c). This 1s a samskāra. `And that is said to have ancillaries.’ (388d) As that 1s so, ‘I will tell (you) its ancillaries, correctly and in due order. (389) He lists them: `1) The girdle (mekhalā), 2) the stick for the teeth, 3) a deer skin, 4) the ʻtriple life (tryāyuṣa), 5)

sandhyā, 6) the attendance to the fire and 7) begging, which the (wise) know is the seventh.” (389cd-390ab) The ‘tiple life’ is the three lines of ashes (made on the forehead)

vows of the girdle that the celibate student should observe.

These are the seven

‘0 fair-faced lady, these are seen to be obligatory regulators (of the new initiate's

behaviour) at the time of intiation.’ (390cd)

‘The time of initatton is the time marked by (seeing) the maṇḍala and the offering oṝ the cows that wil take place (subsequenty). These ‘regulators' have not (yet executed. (Their purposc 1s that (the celibate sudent) who is in the firs stage (aśrama) (oṀ been) life) may not be lost, and so must certainly be observed. Moreover: ‘These seven vows are seen to be those of celibate students: 1) (The vow of) Bhauteśa, 2) (that of) the Pāśupata, 3) (that of) the Gaṇa and 4) Gaṇeśvara, 5) Unmattak a, 6) Asidhara and 7) Ghṛteśa. (391-392ab) (JY 1/18/144-145 is a direct, lteral citation of SyT 10/389cd-390ab

fourteen vows are listed.)

and 391-392ab, in which the

(They) ‘are seen’ in the Supreme Lord's scripture and they are found in the Veda in the

vew (pakṣa) of (some) lost Vedic school (śākhā). In the first case, (they are 1n the Śaiva scriptures) because they must be observed. ‘They should be known to be the vows.” (392c)

They are to be observed for the time when the yows are taken. And they are ‘pratsed

ancillary. (392d) These are other vows that are ancillary to the samskāra called ‘the taking of a vow’ as the frut (of the vow) which 1s fruitful. Thus:

‘Along with these there is one, which 1s the nnth time a vow is taken. It is said that

group of seven vows is ncluded within that.’ (393)

In thiṣ way that is seven, beginning wih (the vow of wearg a) girdle, and those beginning with (the vow of) Bhūteśa are (also) seven. Thus making: (394ab)

‘0 fair-faced lady, one should offer to the fire (these) fourteen vows

in this way.’

The intended sense is that (they are observed) each separately, not Just by consideri

that other vows that have been taken are included (1n one of them).

‘Without a doubt, one should offer to the fire the four Vedic vows.

should be completed with an offering to the fire. He lists them:

‘(They are) aiṣtika, pūrvika, bhautika and saumika. (395ab)

(394cd) They

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

bhauteśapāśupatye dve gāṇeśaṁ gāṇapatyakam || 509 ||

unmattakāsidhārākhyaghṛteśāni caturdaśa

ete tu vratabandhasya saṁskārā aṅginaḥ smṛtāḥ || 510 ||

pārivrājyasya garbhe syād antyeṣṭir iti saṁskṛtaḥ |

dvijo bhavet tato yogyo rudrāṁśāpādanāya saḥ || 511 |I etāṉ prāṇakrameṇaiva saṁskārān yojayed guruḥ |

athavāhutiyogena tilādyair mantrapūrvakaiḥ || 512 I|

(Another) seven purifying rites (that are required for the patron of a Vedic sacrifice – yajamāna – is that of) the girdle (mekhalā), staff (danḍa), the skin of a black antelope (ajina), and the three red lines

(ryāruṣa), the worship of the fire, the rites at the three junctures of the day (saṁdhyā), and giving alms. The seven vows are Bhauteśa, Pāśupatya, Gāṇeśa, Gāṇapatya, Unmattaka, Asidhārā and Ghṛteśa. (Together the make)

fourteen. These purifying rites are considered to be auxiliaries to that of the

assumption of the vows (vratabandha), which is the main one. The last

sacrament (antyeṣṭi) (i.e., the funerary rite) is (administered) in the womb of his condition as a renunciant. (508cd-511ab) (506-508) Once (the disciple) has been purified (by these sacraments), he becomes a ‘twice born’, who is thus fit to assume (the condition of) a limb The vows that are to be observed at (certain times) are called by names such as ‘aiṣṭika’

in the Supreme Lord's scriptures, in accord with the reading of Vedic texts that expound the Soma sacrifice that takes place at the sacred ume (parvan) of an 15ṭi (i.e. the offering of oblations of butter and fruit etc.).

They are called in the (following) way mn the Yayāasūtra:

‘There are four Vedic vows, namely, 1) Belonging to the triple knowledge, the four-fold fire offering, the offering of cows, and s0 too the bath - are four.’ The offering of cows wall be (explained) here separately. Out of the need for other vows to bestow the authority to study the Vedas, these are (taught) as the main ones (for that purpose): (395cd)

‘The Lords of the Vows who regulate (the conduct) of celibate students are four.”

The (vows) regulate (the conduct) of celibate students and bestow upon them the right

condtion (tathātva). Wth that in this way at the end (of the series), such are the saṅṣkāras: ‘One

should know that they are thurteen.’ (396a) One who has attended on this practice with these, is given authority (to access) the Vedas. Accordingly, he says: ‘thus, indeed, he (comes to) possesses

the Vedas.’'(396b)

Moreover: ‘“O beloved, then comes the offering of cows, which 1s the fourteenth ’ (396cd) The offering of cows is the offering of one’s own hair etc. (as symbolic of seed that has been) sown represented by the offering of two cows to the teacher made at the completion of the study

of the Veda. 511 is drawn from SVT 10/391. See previous note for text. ṢYṬ 10/389cd-390ab reads dantakāṣṭam – the stick to brush the teeth instead of danḍam. Read with the SVT ajinaṁ for ajina and tryāyuṣaṁ for tryāyuṣe, which literally means ‘marked red in three places. The same emendation is required in Jayaratha’s commentary.

See below, Chapter Twenty-four. Although the funerary rite is considered to be a purification, it is only adminiṣtered to a person whilst still alive as a part of the rites performed when he assumes the condition of a renunciant. Thus, it is said to be admṛnistered when he is in the womb, about to be born into that state.

of Rudra (rudrāṁśa). These purifying rites should be conferred upon him by the teacher either by means of the procession of the vital breath

(prāṇakrama) or by means of oblations with sesame seeds etc.," along with the (appropriate) Mantras. (511cd-512) (509-510ab)

‘The three red linesʼ are the sectarian mark made of ashes made on the

forehead (pundraka). As is said (in the Svacchandatantra concerning the assumption of the vows): “The ninth is the observance of vows (vratabandha), which is said to

possess (various) ancillaries (argin).

‘These’, forty-eight (purifying rites). He (now) clarifies the statement that (the purifying rites are conferred) along with the (appropriate) Mantras.

The Mantra Used for the Sacraments

Tj N ṬĪḤTÇTTTT: ṬT: II u23 1| praṇavo hṛdayaṁ nāma śodhayāmy agnivallabhā |

evaṁ krameṇa mūrdhādyair aṅgair etat" punaḥ puṇaḥ || 513 ||

(The Mantra used for the sacraments consists), in due order, of OM, the Heart, the name (of the disciple) followed by ‘I purify’ (Sodhayāmi) along with (SVAHA), the beloved of the fire (agnivallabhā), repeated again

and again with the limbs beginning with the Heart." (513) (510cd-511ab)

‘The Heart’ is the (limb) associated with the (five) limbed Vidyā (vidyāṅga). Thus, one can infer that for each purification five offerings should be made to the fire with the group of five Vidyāṅgas in this way. Accordingly, it is said that (it should be repeated) ‘again and again’ʼ. Surely (one may ask), why is it said that by attaining the status of a ‘ṭwice-born’, he is fit to assume (the condition of) a limb of Rudra (rudrāṁśa)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

See above, 13/295cd-300 and concerning Rudra’s devotee as a rudrāmśa. t Oblattons are made with sesame seeds smeared with butter and clarified butter. See SVT 10/413.

Monier-Williams translates pundraka as a mark or line made on the forehead with ashes or colouring substances to distinguish Vaiṣnavas from Śaivas etc, a sectarian mark’. ṢVṬ 10/388cd. see note 15,807.

Read eat for atat.

" Emend mārdhādyair to hṛdyādyair. Jayaratha is clearly commenting on the emended reading.

Gnoli translates: “(The sacraments are conferred) by the successive and repeated utterance of the

Mantra OMṀ, the five limbs of Mantra, beginning with the Heart, the name (of the discplē) followed by ‘I purify’ (śodhayāmi) and with the Mantra SVĀHĀ (agnivallabha) ”

CHAPTER FIFTEEN What Makes a Brahmin a Brahmin

yataś ciddharma evāsau śāntyādyātmā dvijanmatā | tena rudratayā saṅvit tatkrameṇaiva jāyate || 514 |I As the condition of being ‘twice-born’ is a quality of consciousness, and consists of (the virtues of) tranquillity and the rest, (it comes first); (the disciple’s state of) consciousness as that of Rudra arises successively (after

that). (514) (511cd-512ab)

‘The condition of being ‘twice-born’ is a quality of consciousness,

consisting of an accumulation (of virtues,) because it arises as (the virtues) of

tranquillity and the rest, in accord with the view that (a Brahmin is) ‘tranquil, restrained (ḍdānta), and has conquered anger . . .’ Thus, because the perception of having attained the condition of being ‘twice born’ accords with the extent (they have been) accumulated, ‘(the state of) consciousness as that of Rudra arisesʼ. The sense is that he is fit to attain (the condition of being Rudra’s) limb. He induces (us) to take the teaching to heart by means of an example.

qaṛḷ ṜTTRTTṬTī TIṀ TaTI-RTT |

yathā hemādidhātūnāṁ pāke kramavaśād bhavet |

rajatādi tathā saṁvitsaṁskāre dvijatāntare || 515 || Just as in the course of processing (pāka) the substances (that

produce) gold and the like, silver and other (precious metals appear first),

similarly in the course of purifying consciousness, the condition of a ‘twicebornʼ (appears) as an intermediate stage. (515) (512cd-513ab)

Just as when the particular substances from which gold, for example, is produced are being processed, that condition (finally) arises by the successive aṭṭtainment of (the intermediate stages,) such as silver, (that lead to it), in the

same way, when consciousness is being purified, ‘the condition of a ‘twicebornʼ’ (appears) as an intermediate stage’. The sense is that by (undertaking to) achieve that first, one (ultimately) attains (the condition of) being (one of)

Rudra’s limbs.

Surely (one may ask), it is said that one who is ‘twice born’ is born into

the condition of a Brahmin that is not a fallen one (avipluta), because a Brahmin

is one who is not fallen. How is it that this is said (to be s0)? With this doubt in mind, he says:

yonir na kāraṇaṁ tatra śāntātmā dvija ucyate | (Birth in a particular) womb is not the cause there (in that case, whereby one is a Brahmin). It is said that (a true) Brahmin is one who is peaceful by nature (irrespective of his caste). (516ab) (513cd)

Surely (one may ask), who has said this? With this doubt in mind, he

ft- ṃraīarēīṝeā sr ṟ: HIHTSAI muninā mokṣadharmādāv etac ca pravivecitam || 516

This has been discussed by the sage (Vyāsa) in the Mokṣadharma"

and elsewhere. (516cd) (51l4ab) As he has said (there):

‘He who has understood all this, both Nature and (its) modifications,

and knows the condition (gati) of all living beings, the gods consider him to be a Brahmin. Without fear of any living being, because he is not frightening for anybody, (knowing himself to be) the (very) Self of all living beings, the gods consider him to be a Brahmin. Even a man of low caste (śūdra) who is virtuous and possesses (good) qualities is a Brahmin. Even a Brahmin who is devoid of good actions

(kriyāhīna) is even lower than a man of low caste. O Yudhiṣṭhira, one should

terrible ocean of the five senses, even though he is low caste. O king, (a man's) caste is not apparent (nor need one look to it). (It is his good) qualities that give riṣe to beneficial (and auspicious results, not his caste status).

Nor is this said just by him (alone). Thus, he says:

aI īart fn= TṬāq |

mukuṭādiṣu śāstreṣu devenāpi nirūpitam |

It is also taught by God in scriptures such as the Mukuṭa. (517ab)

This is the name of a section of the twelfth book of the Mahābhārata, from chapter 174 to the end (see, for example, 256, 31-32). Several passages from the scrptures that present the true

nature of a Brahmun in this sense are collected 1n the Vajrasūcī.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

That is said there (in the Mukuṭāgama) īn many ways: ‘The adept (sādhaka) who follows Śiva’s law (śivadharma), possesses

faith, and is Śiva by nature, a devotee of Śiva, (spiritual) knowledge and the

teacher, is loved . his fellow students, is free from spite, has perceived reality and is purified in Siva’s sacrifice, though he be of the lowest caste and deformed (hīnāṅga), is liberated. One who does not possess these qualities, even though he is a Brahmin, is not liberated. One who is deceitful, even if he is a Brahmin, should be avoided, whereas an outcaste foreigner (mleccha) who is not should be accepted. He is loved by the Great God, not (one who knows) the four Vedas (but) is deceitful, hates Siva, acts sinfully, and criticizes Siva’s law and the like.

(If) what a Brahmin does is sinful and what a man of low caste does is good, is

it taught that there (in such cases, of actions that are in accord) Dharma and those that are not, the cause is caste?” Surely (one may ask), this (view) is contrary to other scriptures such as the smṛtis, so how (can this view) be established? With this doubt in mind, he

fēēī ā’aTāçTAGTTRAT II 42. 11

saṅvido dehasaṁbhedāt sadrṛśāt sadṛśodayāt || 517 || bhūmābhiprāyataḥ smārte dvijanmā dvijayoḥ sutaḥ | There is a general consensus in the smārta (lawbooks) that a

Brahmin is a person born from two Brahmins. This is because consciousness is associated with the body, and that which is born from something is generally similar to it. (5S17cd-518ab) (515)

In terms of the association of consciousness with the body, the cause of

the arising of something is similar, that is, does not fall away (from its own

nature) to that from which it arises, which (also) does not fall away (from its own nature). It is for this reason that the most generally accepted view of the

smṛtis is that the offspring of two Brahmins is said to be a Brahmin.

Surely (one may ask), how is it said here that (this is so) for the most part? With this doubt in mind, he says:

3esr ā- fē īāī īSr-T 1|

antyajātīyadhīvādijananījanmalābhataḥ || 518 II

utkṛṣṭacittā ṛṣayaḥ kũṁ brãhmaṇyena bhãjanam | ‘The Lord has explained extensively in the Mukutasaṁhúā that castes such as

‘brahmin’ and the rest do not exist because they are (just) conceived notions’ (and) ‘deformed

instruction may convince (only) fettered fools’.

(However, this is not an invariable rule, for) how is it that (those)

and other such low castes possess the nature (and status of) Brahmins (brāhmaṇya)? (518cd-519ab) (516) (Such) ‘seersʼ are, for example, Vyāsa.

It is with this intention that caste and the like is not accepted in our system (darśana). Accordingly, he says:

TḠATYI ST-TRTTTITY f mIB |

ata evārthasattattvadeśiny asmin na diśyate || 519 |l rahasyaśāstre jātyādisamācāro hi śāmbhave | Thus, the common observance (samācāra) of caste and the like is not taught in these secret scriptures, that come from Śiva (śāmbhava) and

teach the true nature of things. (519cd-520ab) (517)

Surely (one may ask), if that is so, why is that not said in the smṛtis etc. also? With this doubt in mind, he says:

kÑCIEHḤfMIEēḷṉ TIHRITCĀĪHĪTGĪH II| 420

pāśavāni tu śāstrāṇi vāmaśaktyātmakāny alam || 520 | sṛṣṭyādisiddhaye śaṁbhoḥ śaṅkā tatphalakīrptaye | The scriptures of the fettered (where these matters are taught) are

essentially the (evil) energy, Vāmā. Doubt (exists) so that Śiva may bring about the creation (sṛṣti) etc. (of daily life,) and to fashion the consequence

of that. (520cd-521ab) (518)

‘Creation (sṛṣṭi) etc.’ is the business of daily life (lokavyavahāra). (The

forms of) doubt are stated in such (passages) as, ‘the doubt (concerning) caste

Caste, which is denied by the Trika and other Kulas, is āccepted in southern Śaivism. See

Brunner-Lachaux, 1964. See below, 15/595cd-601ab. Also, MVV 1/196cd-197ab. Also, the

Mukutāgama quoted ad 15/51ácd (old numberiṇg). Sanderson has made a survey of

pronouncements in the full range of early Śaiva sources. A summary of their locations and

contents is in ‘Tantric Śaiviṣm and Caste’ (handout for a lecture delivered at the Unversity of Vienna 7" June 2009).

A less lteral translation conveys the sense better: ‘Ambiguous notions (concerning caste, for

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

and the doubt (concerning the sacrificial) substance . . .' ‘The consequences of that’ are heaven and hell etc.

Having thus said that by the way, he (goes on to again) talk about the main point:

TZITVITIGT aĠ-T TTAĀĪ TTṆaT JaT 1|I 422 1II

āpādītadvijatvasya dvādaśānte nijaikyataḥ || 521 || sparśamātrān na viśrāntyā jhaṭity evāvarohataḥ | rudrāṁśāpādanaṁ yena samayī saṁskṛto bhavet || 522 || (The disciple who has) achieved the status of a Brahmin by virtue of his own oneness, (attained) within the End of the Twelve by just (a fleeting) contact with it, not by resting within it, descends from it immediately, thereby attaining (the condition of a devotee who has become) Rudra’s

He should ‘not rest within it’, for in that case he would be conjoined to Supreme Śiva. This is the sense. Surely (one may ask), what happens to one who has been purified in this way? With this doubt in mind, he says:

TÑJĀTTGTIS-Ī TṬēŪīī fāyīr=tziq I| 433 1II adhītau śravaṇe nityaṁ pūjāyāṁ guruṣevane | samayy adhikṛto ‘nyatra guruṇā vibhum arcayet || 523 |I This quarter verse seems to be drawn from the Niśātanatantra. A passage from that Tantra concerning the types of doubt is quoted above ad 13/197-198, where a passage from the Niśātanatantra īis quoted. There six kinds of doubt are listed. Although ‘the doubt (concerning) caste’ is not amongst them, Jayaratha takes the trouble to note, most probably basing himself on

the same text, that it is a subvariety of the doubt concerning the offering of Kaula sacrificial substances. As these include wine and bodily substances, Brahmins may feel inhibiting doubts

about offering them. Concerning the devotee of Rudra as a rudrāṁśa, see above, 13/295cd-300 and note 13,327. Sanderson (2006a, p. 191) ‘A memory of the connection of the samayadīkṣā with the Pāśupata

tradition from which the Saiva evolved by extension via the Lākula is preserved, I believe, in the

Agamic doctrine of the destiny of those who receive only the samayadīkṣā in their lifetimes. They are said to achieve at death the lesser liberation (aparā mukti), which is to enter the level of Iśvara

between Śuddhavidyā and Sadāśiva in the Pure Universe. This is the point of liberation assigned by the Niśvāsa and the Svacchanda to the Pāśupatas. Elsewhere they are said to become Rudreśas

or to attain the rudrapadam. And the rites which supplement the samayadīkṣā in certain Agamas

have as their goal the transformation of the initiate into a Rudrāṁśa’. See introduction to SŚP 3, p. Xxxiil.

A regular initiate who has been rendered fit to regularly study, hear the scriptures, (to perform regular daily) rite (pūjā) and serve the teacher, should, on other occasions, worship the All-pervasive Lord with (his)

teacher.” (523) (520cd-521ab)

‘Elsewhere (on other occasions)’ are the occasional rites (naimittika)

etc. As is said:

‘The teacher should perform (all) three (types of rites), that is, the regular (daily ones) and the rest (i.e., occasional and intentional), whereas the adept (may perform) just the regular one.® For as long as he lives, the other two

(may be performed only) at Śiva’s command.

Surely (one may ask), should he listen (to the scriptures) or study (them)? Taking this doubt into consideration, he begins to declare the (rules

and) pledges (samaya) (the initiate should observe).

The Pledges (samaya) The Eight Groups of Eight Pledges According to the Devyāyāmala

3TRĪRAHGI-<TTTĪHGVṬC EEAĒIE

̄Tṁ ṃrē̄ lā ūāTTATRaRTTaAT || u2U ||

tam āpāditarudrāṁśaṁ samayān śrāvayed guruḥ | aṣṭāṣṭakātmakān devyāyāmalādau nirāūpitān || 524 || avādo ‘karaṇaṁ gūḍhiḥ pūjā tarpaṇabhāvane | hananaṁ mohanaṁ ceti samayāṣṭakam aṣṭadhā || 525 || "(Now) the teacher should tell (the disciple, who has thus by his

devotion) become Rudra’s limb (rudrāṁśa), the sixty-four pledges The meaning of this line is not clear to me. The word ‘guruṇā’ means ‘with the teacher° or ‘by

the teacherʼ, assuming an unstated ‘by the teacher's permission’. It seems from Jayaratha’s citation from the MV that this is how he understood the meaning. A third possibility is ‘as the teacherʼ, but that makes little sense. So, the most probable sense is that the regular initiate who can only perform the daily regular rites of worship may participate in other types of rites with his teacher.

below and the MV nityam eva for nityam evarṁ. ̄T MV 1/49.

Just after the neophant has received initiation, he is normally told the rules he must follow,

which he accepts as pledges – samaya – that he must keep. Accordingly, as part of the conclusion of the rites of initiation, this long section from 525cd to 613ab (521cd-609ab) deals with the observance of the pledges (samayācāra). Here Abhinavya presents the precepts taught in as many

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

(samaya) described in the Devyāyāmala and other (scriptures). There are eight groups of pledges (samayāṣṭaka) (each of which consists of) eight (rules). (They are:) 1) what is not to said (avāda), 2) what is not to be done (akaraṇa), 3) (what is to be) kept hidden (giḍdhi), 4) (what should be) worshipped (pūjā), 5) (to whom is offered) libation (tarpana), 6) (whom one as eleven Trika and Krama Tantras. The former are marked with a single asterisk, the latter with a double one. They are: Devyāyāmala: 15/525cd-535ab (521cd-531ab); Gamatantra 15/535cd-

536 (531cd-532); Mādhavakula 15/537 (533), 15/575-577ab (571-573ab); Unknown: 15/538544ab (534-540ab); Triśirobhairavatantra 15/544cd-549 (540cd-545); Sṛīṣāra ī.e. Trikasāra 15/550-557ab (546-553ab); Gamatantra 15/557cd-566 (551cd-562); Ūrmikaulārṇava 15/567-

15/605cd-608ab (601cd-604ab); Kuḻaratnamāḷā 151598 (594); Kulagahvaratantra 15/599-600ab (595-596ab); Niśisaṁcāratantra 15/600cd-601 (596cd-597) and Nakuleśa’s teachings 15/608cd-

613ab (604cd-609ab).

The teacher normally tells the samayin the rules / pledges (samaya) he must observe just

after he has received initiation. Accordingly, Abhinava deals with this here. The MV does not

present the rules at all, and so Abhinava has had to draw from other authoritative Trika or Krama related Tantras. In this context, the foremost of these is the Devyāyāmala, which contains the most systematic presentation of the Rules. Abhinava also refers to the Gamatantra (which is a Trika source) and the Mādhavakula of the Jayadrathayāmala (which is related to the Krama), and draws from the Triśirobhairava (which is Trika). He also draws from the Ūrmikaulārṇava, and to a lesser extent the Kularatnamālā, the Rātrikula and Ānandatantra. Clearly, Kaula traditions are not ‘transgressive’ and ‘antinomian’ in the sense that there are no rules. These are all Trika Kaula and Kālīkula sources. They are ‘supremely nondualist’ because they don’t accept that caste distinctions and degrees of purity are an inherent part of the nature of people and things. Although this subject is missing in the MV, it is a common one in major Tantras,

whether Siddhānta (from which Abhinava does not draw, except the Mukuṭasaṁhitā quoted above in note 15,822). Thus, chapter 37 of the Kumārikākhaṇḍa of the Manthānabhairava, a Kubjikā

Tantra, is dedicated to the same subject, i.e. the Rule to be observed by Kula Yogis, much of which is in common with SSS 41 (see Dyczkowski 2009: vol 10, p. 168-180 and vol 11, p. 125-

128). It comes there, as Abhinava has placed it here, after a presentation of the basic rite of

initiation (samayadīkṣā) which, as its name itself suggests, is an initiation into the observance of the Rule. See MBT vol. II note 9 p. 125-128 ff for an analysis of the pledges in the Kubjikā Tantras. These are often presented, as in the Devyāyāmala etc., in eight groups of eight. This is what we find, for example, in SSS 17/160-183ab. The entire passage is translated op. cit. Concerning the Rules taught in the Svacchandatantra see S√T vol. 2 pp. 36-38 and 328-32 (for

parallel Saiddhāntika samaya) and vol. 3 pp. 38-43 (for more Kaula samaya).

The model of eight pledges (samaya) is found in Siddhānta parallels also. The following is presented by Wallis (2014) p. 249 n 633 as a summary of Śiddhāantasārapaddhati (A 30r6-v4, B 39r6-v5). Wallis explains that the rules belong to two categories, the samaya and samayācāra. ‘The first follows: “1. do not speak ill of Śiva, 2. or of his teachings, 3. or those who teach

(Śaivism), 4. or of his worshippers; 5. do not step on the shadow of liṅga, 6. or on any substance that has been offered to God, 7. do to eat any such substance, 8. or eat food touched by an unclean

woman.” And the second is given only to nirvāṇadīkṣita: “1. Do not teach the mantras or rituals to

uninitiated persons, 2. do not allow them to be copied down, 3. do not initiate someone without

śaktipāta (apatitaśāktikaṁ na dīkṣayet). 4 and 5. Do not eat without offering the food to Śiva, the fire and one’s guru. 6. Feed guests, the poor, and the unfortunate, and scavenging animals too. 7.

Offer extra worship on festive days; and 8. be loyal to one’s fellow initiates at all times, regardless

of rank; protect lay devotees and anyone in danger, sick or mentally ill.” Additionally, on aṣṭamī, caturdaśī, and the full and new moons, he should abstain from fish, meat, sex, anointing the body

with oil and shaving.” We note in passing that one of the striking differences is that the Kaula

pledges emphasize the honouring of women and rejection of the conventional norms enjoining purity, and strongly guard the dignity of lower castes and others considered to be unclean. Although both sets of pledges contain several not to disparage and criticize the sacred. Notice also that secrecy is no less a concern for the Siddhānta than it is for the Kaula and related Tantras.

See above, 13/295cd-300 and note 13,327.

8) (who is to be) driven mad (mohana). (524-525) (521cd-523ab)

He presents the eight group of eight (rules) (stated) there (in the

Devyāyāmala with the words) ‘what is not said (avāda)ʼ etc.

GTWT H-T-TTI TTĀTTNHGĀĒÑ | TJqTGTT TĪHĒTṬHTT TRHI TT II 4RṜ /II

T aITNq II 42.9 |1|

qHTH-TTT-TĪT-ŪĪĀTṀZIT TGTT II 42¢ 11

YHTITTG JaTTIĪ Ṁē¢aīg ātāq I1 u30 11

āTRJTFṬTĪJ TṬRATJTI WITaTT I| 432 ||

TṬḹ ṞTŪgaī a ggrarzīrrṛfzaṁ |

qITTTṬṬJTÑTTG-TIIT ĀITIT II 432 1|

TāTJTTSTTTITĪT-ī-TTTA TTRĀTT | II 433 1 svabhāvaṁ mantratantrāṇāṁ samayācāramelakam | asatpralāpaṁ pauruṣyam anṛtaṁ nāṣṭadhā vadet || 526 || aphalaṁ ceṣṭitaṁ hiṁsāṁ paradārābhimarśanam | garvaṁ dambhaṁ bhũtaviṣavyādhitantraṁ na cãcaret || 527 |I| svaṁ mantram akṣasūtraṁ ca vidyāṁ jñānasvarūpakam | samācārānguṇān kleśān siddhilīṅgāni gūhayet || 528 |I guruṁ śāstraṁ devavahnī jñānavṛddhāṁ striyo vratam | guruvargaṁ yathāśaktyā pūjayed aṣṭakaṁ tv idam ||/ 529 || dīnān kliṣṭān pitṜn kṣetrapālān prāṇigaṇān khagān | śmāśānikaṁ bhūtagaṇaṁ dehadevīś ca tarpayet || 530 || Śivaṁ Śśaktiṁ tathātmānaṁ mudrāṁ mantrasvarūpakam | saṁsārabhuktimuktīś ca guruvaktrāt tu bhāvayet || 531 || rāgaṁ dveṣam asūyāṁ ca saṅkocerṣyābhimānitāḥ | samayapratibheṭtṜṁs tadanācārāṁś ca ghātayet || 532 || paśumārgasthitān krūrān dveṣiṇaḥ piśunāñ jaḍān | rājñaś cānucarān pāpān vighnakartRṁś ca mohayet || 533 ||

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

(1) (The initiate should not talk about) the nature of (his) mantras and Tantras, the rules, (his) conduct (ācāra), the gatherings (of Siddhas and

Yoginīs, nor should he indulge in) false (idle) talk, (utter) harsh (words)

and untruth. (These) eight things he should not say. (2) (The eight things) he should abstain from are: conduct that is fruitless and harmful, thinking about the wives of others, pride, fraud, (harming others,) and practicing the Tantra concerned with evil spirits,

poison and disease. (3) (The eight things the initiate) should keep hidden are: himself, (his) mantra, rosary, (his) Vidyā, the nature of (his) knowledge, the (good)

(4) He should worship to the best of his ability these eight: the teacher, the scripture, the deity and fire, those who have grown old in (Śaiva) knowledge (jñānavṛddha), women, (his) vow, and the teacher’s family (guruvarga). (5) He should offer libation to the wretched (dīna), the afflicted, the

of ghosts who reside in cemeteries, and the goddesses in the body.

(6) He should respect (and contemplate) (bhāvayet) (as learnt) from the teacher’s mouth Śiva, (His) Power, the Self, (ritual) Gesture (nudrā),

the nature of Mantra, transmigratory existence, (worldly) enjoyment and liberation.

(7) He should strike down (ghātayet) attachment, hate, grumbling, cowardice, envy, pride, those who infringe the rules, and those who do not

practice them.

(8) He should drive mad (and thereby chastise) (mohayet) those who

are on the path of the fettered, cruel people, the resentful, traitors, the foolish, the followers of kings, sinners, and those who cause obstacles. (526-533) (523cd-531ab) ‘The rules are each a secret sacrificial rite (rahasyayāga), and (the initiate’s) ʻconduct” (ācāra) is (his) action which is appropriate to that. ‘He should abstain fromʼ, that is, He should not do. (He should keep) ‘(his)

knowledge’ (hidden); that is, his erudition and the like, as a way of exalting

himself. (So too) ‘the nature (of his) insight (into reality)ʼ, that is, knowledge of (ultimate) reality. (He should worship) ‘the vow’, that is, his own gesture (mudrā) etc. (He should offer libation to) ‘living beings’, that is, cows etc. The manner in which he contemplates ‘(the true nature of) transmigratory existence is that ‘this is nothing at all’. ‘Hate’ is (an inner) burning.

‘Grumblingʼ (asūya) is ascribing defects to (other peoples’ good) qualities. ‘Envyʼ is intolerance of othersʼ excellence.

Read with Th, pauruṣyam for paruṣam. The text reads pāpān, which means ‘sins’. I take this to be an irregular contraction of pāpinḥ – ‘sinnersʼ made for the sake of the metre.

:sēitii Erī |

paśubhiḥ saha vartavyam iti śrīmādhave kule |

(The witches called) Śākinīs should be venerated,“ and as the

illustrious Gamatantra has said of them: ‘as they are™” twice as audacious,

their passion four times more and greed eight times more, one should be wary of them. (Just saying) “Śākinīs!” (disrespectfully) is enough (to evoke their wrath).”

According to the venerable Mādhavakula, (the initiate) should not keep the company of those fettered souls who do not belong to the Kula traditions (kulāmnāya), excluded (from them by their aversion) to the hero’s sacrificial substances. (534-536ab) (531cd-533) (Śākinīs are) ‘twice asʼ (audacious) with respect to other women. Rules Relating to the Manner a Disciple Should Behave with his Teacher

ṜGTTTISṬĀTTTVITS TTHITGRTĀAT II 43ē 11

fkēārft vrarāq 1

Ṛead kulāmnāyāsthitā for kulāmnāyasthitā. Ṛead with the JY vartavyam for vastavyam.

‘ Śākiṇīs are kinds of witches. Accordng to the AgP (S0/38) they have an ‘oblique look’ (vakradrṣṭi, i.e., the evil eye. See Mallmann (1963: 204-206). Reformed, they are yoginīs who

are embodiments of Śiva’s energies, as happens 1n the Pañcavāha of the Krama system, which is

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

īrmfērī qT d̃ gā1 Ṭ̄JŪ-T: II 438 II

devatācakragurvagniśāstraṁ sāmyāt sadārcayet || 536 || aniveditam etebhyo na kiñcid api bhakṣayet | etad dravyaṁ nāpahared guruvargaṁ prapūjayet || 537 || sa ca tadbhrãtrbhãryãtukprãyo vidyākṛto bhavet | na yonisaṁbandhakr̥to laukikaḥ sa paśur yataḥ || 538 || tasyābhiṣyaṅgabhūmis tu gurvārādhanasiddhaye | arcyo na svamahimnā tu tadvargo guruvat punaḥ || 539 || %(The regular initiate) should always worship the assembly (cakra) of deities, the fire, and the scriptures, as the common (sāmya) (practice)."

He should not eat anything that has not been offered to them." He should

not steal (apaharet) the sacrificial substance" (offered) to them. He should worship the teacher’s (spiritual) family (guruvarga). (He should be aware that) that is (his spiritual family,) consisting of his brothers, wife and sons

not formed by common ancestry (yonisaṁbandha), for (one who is related

in this way) is a worldly fettered soul. The person for whom the teacher has a special affection should be worshipped to please him, not for his own

greatness, and his family should be worshipped, as is the teacher. (536cd539) (534-537ab) ‘Thatʼ is the teacher’s family. (The word) ‘tuk’ means ‘son’. ÁAccording

to the lexicon ‘tuk, tokaṁ and tanayaḥ (all mean) ‘son’. That (kind of family is) ʻformed by common ancestry (yonisaṁbandha)’. The reason to worship (a person that belongs to the teacher’s spiritual family is that the teacher) ‘has a special affection’ (for him).

This passage, i.e., 15/538-544ab (534-540ab), focuses on the rules relating to the manner a

disciple should behave with his teacher. Nobody has the authority to make such rules himself. Clearly, Abhinava is drawing from some scriptural source (Trika or Krama), or possibly putting material together from several sources. These he has listed at the beginning of his exposition. Perhaps he is quoting from the 7Triśirobhairava. See below, note 15,846. U The MV itself furnishes an example of the usage of the word ‘sāmya’ as meaning common (basic practice). The last statement of chapter eight says: ity etat sāmayaṁ karma samāsāt parikīrtitam This is the (basic) common (sāmaya) rite that has been well enounced in brief.’ Paraphrase of MV 8/132: “The wise man always (eats) having worshipped the gods, fire,

teachers and goddesses, and does not eat anything that has not been offered to them’.

The ‘substances’ of the god (devadravya) in this case are his clothes, ornaments, jewels etc., with which his icons are adorned. See ŚSP vol. 2, p. 272.

See below, 28/194. Nighaṇṭu 2/2. Read -bhūmitvam arcane for —bhūmitvam arcana.

T īḷ JJT-Ī āITĀTTIJTS || Ḷyo|| ferītāaī yā̄ata fkfērīta-mcd |

ca īifkī hṝ āTt ṀT3 r || u? ||

IŪGTEITEĀFPEETCPICEIEEI|zzafḤ

aqvīq fēē- aā=a-qḶ II ux2 1|

guror nindāṁ na kurvīta tasyai hetuṁ na cācaret | na ca tāṁ śr̥ṇuyān nainaṁ kopayen nāgrato ʻsya ca || 540 || vināãjñayā prakurvīta kiñcit tatsevanād ṛte | laukikālaukikaṁ kr̥tyaṁ krodhaṁ krīdāṁ tapo japam || 541 || gurūpabhuktaṁ yat kiñcic chayyāvastrāsanādikam | nopabhuñjīta tatpadbhyāṁ na spṛśet kintu vandayet || 542 || (The disciple) should not criticise the teacher nor find reason (to do s0), nor should he listen to that (criticism), neither should he make him

angry. In front of him, apart from serving him, there is nothing he should do without his permission, be it a worldly or otherworldly deed, (express)

anger, play, (practice) austerity or repeat Mantras. Finally, he should not make use of anything already used by the teacher, such as his bed, clothes, seat and the like, nor should he touch them with his feet. Rather he should worship them. (540-542) (537cd-540ab) (The disciple should not) ‘find a reason’ to criticise (his) teacher. Nor

should he listen ‘to that’ criticism of (his) teacher. (He should not make) ʻhimʼ, that is, the teacher (angry). The sense is that (the disciple can) serve him then without (having to have) ‘his (express) permission’ (to do S0). Surely (one may ask), how is it that so much emphasis is placed on worshipping the teacher in this way? With this doubt in mind, he says: The Pledges according to the Triśirobhairava

TTTSIĨTĀāSTT Jrzgrzraōīfzfiī: |

TṬĀTTTI-TGTĒ HTTTI āTTI fīT || Ḷx% 1|

fk-rarāṝdāṃṁ r̥rartēzī ar aa-. 1 ūx.. 1| HṀ̄ŪĪTKTTTTCYTATTTT TCṬ |

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

TTGaTTTFTTĪcJUĪ JṬTSGGTTJTATĪ |

fr-ṁ a= aa āaī || yś. l| Tē TG īdz’̄d TāāTPRTAÇ TH | śrīmattraiśīrase ‘py uktaṁ kṛcchracāndrāyaṇādibhiḥ | araṇye kāṣṭhavat tiṣṭhed asidhārāvrato ‘pi san || 543 II nīiyamastho yamastho ‘pi tatpadaṁ nāśnute param ḷ| gurvārādhanasaktas tu manasā karmaṇā girā || 544 | prāpnoti gurutas tuṣṭāt pūrṇaṁ śreyo mahādbhutam ! himapātair yathā bhūmiś chāditā sā samantataḥ || 545 || mārutaśleṣasaṁyogād aśmavat tiṣṭhate sadā | yamādau niścale tadvad bhāva ekas tu gṛhyate || 546 || guros tv ārādhitāt pūrṇaṁ prasarajjñānam āpyate | sarvato ʻ‘vasthitaṁ cittvaṁ jñeyasthaṁ yasya tatkathā |l 547 |I sadya eva nayed ūrdhvaṁ tasmād ārādhayed gurum ḷ

“t is also said in the venerable Traiśirasa: “Even if by observing

forest (and is so absorbed in meditation so as to appear to be as inert) as a 4 5/544cd-549 (540cd-545) is certainly drawn from Triśirobhairavatantra. Abhinava says that ‘it is also said’ in the Triśirobhairava (15/544cd (540cd)). This may mean that what has been stated before (i.e. in 15/538-544cd (534-540ab) is drawn from there and what follows is ‘also saidʼ there. These are types of penances that essentially involve long fasts. See Brunner-Lachaux 1985: 410-411. As they are similar in this respect, these two penances — kṛcchra and cādrāyaṇa – are commonly mentioned together. The earliest Saiddhāntika works concerning the rites of reparation were compendiums (nibandha) made up of extracts from the Siddhāntāgamas. Two have been published together and both are called Prāyaścittasamuccaya. The earliest which belongs to the eleventh century or a little earlier is by Hṛdayaśiva, and the other belonging to the twelfth century by Triḷocanaśiva (see bibliography). The former presents the prescriptions that concern them from chapter forty-five of the Kiraṇatantra (chapter 15); the chapter on penance in the Sarvasvacchanda consisting of twelve thousand (15 (34)). (Note that this is not the

Svacchandatantra) and the common, general procedure (sāmānyaprāyaścittavidhāna) called

Agneya in the Vātulatantra (44). They are defined by the twelfth century by Trilocanaśiva in his

Prāyaścittasamuccaya (see bibliography) as follows:

‘For half a month, in the bright (fortnight), one should increase (one's food each day) by a mouthful (grāsavṛddhī); and in the darkening (fortnight) one should decrease (it by the same amount). (Thus,) the manner of performing cāndrāyaṇa has been taught. (There is also a) water-

‘He should eat one meal a day for three days, (then) for three days (only) what is

(offered to him) un-begged, (then) he should eat at night for three days, (and finally) he should consume (only) air for three days. Thus is the krcchra taught, which is (also) called prajāpatya.” (778-779ab)

Varieties of these penances (also called ‘vows’ — vrata ibid. 85cd) are described in the

verses that follow up to 82ab. They are prescribed for one who shouts at or strikes his teacher (134cd-136). The kṛcchra fast is prescribed, for example, for eating from the plate of a menstruating woman (286cd), as it is for touching someone who has committed grave sins

(mahāpātaka) (273ab 399cd-404), a Brahmin who eats the food of a śūdra (31cd-320), smelling

the scent of liquor (385cd-386ab), stealing black beans (391), and for larger thefts, both (415-

piece of wood, even if one is engaged in observing the Vow of the Blade of the Sword (asidhārā) and is steadfast in the observance of injunctions 4 Chapter 45 of the first ṣaṟka of the JY provides extensive idealized lists of Tantras and lineages transmitted in monasteries – mathikas, from which they derive their name. A series of vratas are associated with each one of them. In this way, the names of many vratas are listed, amongst which we find asidhāra in several instances. The Vow of the Sword Blade suggests that it is a severe austerity involving cutting oneself with a sword, standing or walking on the blade of a sword. Judging from the context here, we would expect it to be a penance of this sort. It is listed

amongst a series of fourteen penances in the Svacchandatantra. 10/389cd-390ab and 391-392ab

of JY 1/18/144-145 is a direct, literal citation; see above note 15,807 for a translation. The Brahmayāmala also lists the names of many vratas and describes the practice of some of them. There in this ‘Kāpālika Tantra’, rather than penances, they figure more as practices to gain siddhis, inyolving transgression of Vedic norms of conduct. In this case, it involves the worship of deity in the body of a beautiful woman as and through substances produced by sexual intercourse. The sense then of the name asidhāra is in this case probably because the practice is very dangerous, like walking on the blade of a sword. It is described in chapter forty of the Brahmayāmala. The text, edited as far as it was possible from the manuscripts, follows: ataḥ paraṁ pravakṣyāmi asidhāravratam mahān | sarvasiddhipradaṁ proktaṁ sarvayoginipūjanam || |I pūrvalakṣaṇasaṁyuktāṁ yoṣitāṁ k: yoṣito suratocchukām k: chukām | 238a k) aṅvarūpasaṁpannāṁ k: -nnā nayayauvanadarpitām k: sava- ||2 || hāsyalāsyavilāśinyā vibhramādividhānakam | vastrālaṅkārasaṁpannāṁ k: -lakāra- sarvābharaṇabhūṣitām | 3 || hārakeyūramāṇikyamuktāvalisusaṁsthitām ḷ . . . pīnonnatastanyepetāṁ sobhāsaparimaṇḍalāḥ || 5 || 189b kh) cucukāśraddāmasobhā maghanā tu payodharā | ‘Next, I will tell (you) the great Vow of the Blade of a Sword, that is said to beṣtow all accomplishments (siddhi) and is the worship of all Yoginīs. (One should bring a young) woman who possesses all (good) characteristics, who is keen (to enjoy) the pleasures of love (rati). She (should) has an extremely beautiful body and be proud of her new youth, she enjoys the play of dance and merrymaking that disturbs (and arouses men) etc. She has (fine) clothes and ornaments and is adorned with all the adormments. (She wears beautiful) necklaces and anklets with emeralds and pearls . . . (I-4ab) she has fat and upraised breasts and is surrounded by an aura of beauty. Her breasts flourish and their nipples are large. (Ścd-6ab) prakṛtyā śīlasaṁpanāṁ vidagdáhā ca vilāsinī k: -ni | rājānaṁ yoṣitām vāpi anyavarṇagatām api |l 7 || tādṛgvidhopabhogañ ca k: -śca ātmānam k: ātmanaṁ samalaṅkaret k: sasalaṅkaret | vāmapārśve sthitā yāntu (> sā tu) vahinyāsantu (> bahir-) kārayet || 8 || śarīre hastayor vakṣyaṁ k: -kṣya svāyāgasthaṁ kh: -gotthaṁ vidhānavit | strīyāgapūrvakaṁ k: śṛhayāgapūrvaka, kh: gṛha- nyāsaṁ tathātmani vikalpayet || 9 || cumvanāliṅganā krṛtvā bahirṇyāsantu kārayet | She is well-mannered by nature, skilful and playful. She may be a royal woman or also belong to another caste. He should adorn himself with similar adornments. (Seated) on (his) left, he should deposit (mantras) externally on (his and her) body and hands. The one who knows the

procedure, (seated) in his own place of sacrifice, before performing the sacrifice to the woman, should fashion a deposition in the same way on himself. Having kissed and embraced (her), he should deposit (mantras) externally (onto her body). (7-10ab)

śaktipīthe nyāsaṁ kṛtvā āsane sthāpaye tu tām k: mā || 10 || cumvanāliṅganaṁ kr̥tvā līṁgaṁ tatra vinikṣipet | nityanaimittikaṁ kāmyaṁ japaṁ k: jayaṁ kuryād avagrahe || 1 1 | nirācārapadāvastho k: -vasthā vyomārṇavanisevakaḥ | pramādād yadi kṣobhaḥ k, kh: kṣābho syāt svayamevatsukānitaḥ k: tu |I 12 | japed daśasahasrāṇi tattvayuktiṣṭu sādhakaḥ |

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

---ṀM.–QQQQQ

Having made the deposition on the Śaktipītha, he should place her on a seat. Having embraced and kissed (her), he should place his Liṅgam there. He should repeat Mantra (as for the) regular, occasional or optional rite. Established on the plane of nirācāra, he attends on the Ocean of

the Sky. If (the practitioner is) sexually aroused by mistake. . . the adept who is conjoined with reality should repeat (mantra) ten thousand times. (10-13ab)

cumvanāliṅganaiś caiva (+ nairñcaiva) śītkāraiḥ savilāsakaiḥ || 1 3 | paratattvāvalokī ca kṣobho naiva samācaret | āhnikāṇnāntarālantu k: agnikā- kriyā yā prerayed vudhaḥ l 14 | pūrvoktena vidhānena āhnikāni k: āgnikāni tu kārayet | madhyāhne cāhnikaṁ tatra karttavyaṁ sādhakena k: koṇa tu |/ 15 | tṛtīye sevanaṁ krtvā bhojanaṁ ca samārabheṭ | He who views supreme reality should not be aroused by the kisses and embraces, the sounds of lovemaking and amorous play. The wise man engages in the rite without break throughout the day. He should practice the daily observances in the manner taught before. The adept should practice the daily observance at midday. Having worshipped (sevanaṁ kṛtvā) in the third (part of the

day), he should take food. (13cd-16ab)

niveditan tu devīnāṁ āmiṣaṁ caiva bhakṣayet | 16 || 238b) aṇyoṉyamukhadānena bhakṣayet avidhānatā k: bha yeta- | bhakṣaṁ bhakṣayato prājña mukho mukhe na saṁśayaḥ || 17 II tṛṣitas tu k: -ntu pived vāri saucaṁ naiya samācaret | abhiṣekas k: abhiṣekaṁ tathā śaktiṁ bahir niṣkramya dhārayet || 1 8 II He should eat meat having offered it to the goddesses. He should eat giving (and taking) mutually (from one) mouth (to the other). The wise man eats food from mouth to mouth without a doubt. He who is thirsty should drink water. He should not cleanse (the body) The consecration (takes

place) in that way. Going outside, he should maintain a hold of the (spiritual power he has thus received). (16cd-18) nityavrataṁ tu niṣkramya tayā sārddáhaṁ k: sāddhaṁ samācaret | sakhāyai dūrasaṁsthais tu veṣṭitaḥ svāyudhodyataiḥ || 19 || dhyānarūpan tathā kr̥tvā devāgāraṁ tato vrajet | maunī dhyāṇaparo k: parau mantrī saktivarjaṁ k: -varjja samācaret || 20 || tayā saha svapet k: -yat mantrī ekatraivāsite bhuvi k: vibhu | anyonyāliṅganair nityaṁ vilāsādibhir veṣṭitaiḥ || 21 |

Having gone forth, he should observe a perpetual vow together with her. He is surrounded

by (his) companions who are at a distance, their weapons raised. Then having fashioned the form of the visualized (deity) (dhyānarūpa), he should 20 to the deity’s shrine. The reciter of Mantra, silent

and intent on visualization, should practice with Śakti. The reciter of Mantra should sleep with her,

sanmukhau tu ṣyapen nityaṁ na kadācit parāṅmukhau || 22 |

190a kh) kāmato kṣobham āyāti prāyaścitaṁ samācaret |

ekāhnena maithunena māsena varavarṇini || 24 ||

He should regularly eat betel and practice giving it to one another. They should always sleep facing one another, never facing away from each other. He should protect (his state of) arousal, established on the play of nirācāra. The wise man should practice the spontaneous repetition of

Mantra for ten thousand times. If he is aroused by lust, he should practice penance, O most excellent lady, by daily sexual intercourse for a month. (22-24)

(niyama) and prohibitions (yama), one does not attain that supreme plane. However, he who is dedicated to worshipping (his) teacher with (his) mind, actions and speech receives from the teacher who is satisfied (and well propitiated) the great wonder, which is the supreme good, in full. Just as the earth, covered all around by (abundant) snowfall, remains constantly (hard) like a slab of stone by contact with the wind, in the same way, when (the observance) of pr ohibitions (and injunctions) etc. does not waver, (the

(But) it is only from the teacher who has been (well) worshipped

that one attains the full, unfolding (prasarat) knowledge (of Deity), which is the consciousness present in all respects (within the sphere of) objectivity. (Just) his talk (kathā) of that elevates (his disciples) immediately. Thus, one should (above all) worship the teacher.” (543-548ab) (540cd-545)

The Pledges according to the Trikasāra

JTṢTR ā"IHITTT TYAĪTḤ ATITT II AXAZ ÁI

JITHTTTTĪ āITā T̄T Tg ã-̄ḹ āš I| y8 |

Īeīssīq āaaṁ araīaā āra fē : |

qafa aI: ṀõŪ̄d td N || uyo l|

3 N. 1| uuz 11

J3īd a Tad sāī—IĪfRJHTTGT TṬē: II 442 1II 3īṝ ãfāīzq īzīat aaāā fafkrarāzq |

Tīaq āṝāTk gi TrãT T ōHHT II uṂ3 ||

He should perform (the practice of) the Sword’s Blade, according to the procedure of the

Vow of the Sword’s Blade. The reciter of Mantra should practice it for a month intent on visualization. In a month the Skyfarers will show themselves (to him). In this way in a month he moves the same (as they do). (But) he who in a month again practices (sexual) arousal wilfully, the capacity (that comes from) pride, he should observe the Vow again for a week. In this way, the adept destroys what is contrary to the Vow (avrata). . . Or else, the reciter of mantra should practice at night, having placed (his) Liṅgam in (her) Yoni.” (25-27, 32cd) BY 40/1-4ab, 5cd-6-27, 32cd TĀ 5/550-557ab (546-553ab).

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

ãzzīTāāīttd aēramz zaz faasīāīq | JTĩcēāīaīsīṁ Jaē ī āaīTdcdāj-q || uuz 1| iCEĀSZIEERIES ĀCFAĀĀṀIGtIVTIIEAEḤ 3ṛ-̄zaāḹ fqarṝkaīgag ãvaī; as=grzaiftza: || uuu || śrīsāre ʻ‘py asya saṁbhāṣāt pātakaṁ naśyati kṣaṇāt || 548 || tasmāt parīkṣya yatnena śāstroktyā jñānalakṣaṇaiḥ | śāstrācāreṇa varteta tena saṅgaṁ tathā kuru || 549 || snehāj jātu vadej jñānaṁ lobhān na hīyate hi saḥ | tena tuṣṭena trpyanti devāḥ pitara eva ca || 550 || uttīrya narakād yānti sadyaḥ śivapuraṁ mahat | bhuṅkte tiṣṭhed yatra gṛhe vrajec chivapuraṁ tu saḥ l| 551 || iti jñātvā sadā pitrye śrāddhe svaṁ gurum arcayet | bhuñjīta sa svayaṁ cānyānādiśet tatkṛte guruḥ || 552 || yo dīkṣitas tu Śśrāddhādau svatantraṁ vidhim ācaret | tasya tan niṣphalaṁ sarvaṁ samayena ca laṅghyate || 553 || saiddhāntikārpitaṁ caṇḍīyogyaṁ dravyaṁ vivarjayet | śākinīyācakaṁ śabdaṁ na kadācit samuccaret || 554 || striyaḥ pūjyā virūpās tu vṛddhāḥ śilpopajīvikāḥ | antyā vikāritāṅgyaś ca veśyāḥ svacchandaceṣṭitāḥ || 555 || (It is) also (said) in the venerable Śāra (i.e., the Trikasāra) that (just)

by conversing (with him), sin is destroyed in a moment. Therefore, examine (the teacher) as is taught in the scripture with regards to the signs of (his)

knowledge, and (whether) his behaviour conforms to scripture. (Then,

having found him to be true,) keep his company (saṅga) accordingly! (Such

a one) imparts knowledge out of love; he does not fall due to greed.N

When he is satisfied, the gods are satisfied, and the ancestors,

having come forth from hell, go immediately to Śiva’s great abode. (So too, the ghost,) in whatever house he may reside and suffer the consequence of Karma (bhuṅkte), goes to Śiva’s abode. Having known this, he should always worship his own teacher when making an offering to the deceased (śrāddha). The teacher should eat it himself, and having done so, should tell others (to do the same). However, the initiate who performs the rite of offering (food) to the deceased by himself independently, all (he does) is fruitless, and (moreover) he transgresses the rule. He should abstain from (wrong notions concerning) the sacrificial

substance fit (for the goddess) Candī, offered in accord with the prescriptions of the scripture (saiddhāntikārpita). He should never utter a

word that calls (a woman) a witch (śākinī). Women are (always) worthy of

worship, whether they be ugly, old, live from (their) handicraft, belong to a low caste, their limbs are deformed, or are prostitutes and loose women (svacchandacesṣṭitā). (548cd-555) (546-553ab) Read hīyate for hriyate. See below, 15/586cd-588ab.

TANTRĀLḶOKA

The Pledges according to the Gamatantra

āaṃ Tē Tī ṬGHIAT; JTcd: | fzārTamī. #ēṝraar̥ rremsfāassīaī. ú1 uuē 1

̄ā ŪṀaāTāçē d JATIST āSSHT |I 449 1|

Tāī TTIRTT: ṬJJHSITT JāRĀNTĪT : || Ḷu/ 1I 3araī: āftzrāraī āī ā qṬāad 3fēarī | āṝā ṁī ūīai Tōa JJIJĨ || 48 11 tathā ca śrīgame proktaṁ pūjanīyāḥ prayatnataḥ | nirācārāḥ sarvabhakṣyā dharmādharmavivarjitāḥ || 556 || svacchandagāḥ palāśinyo laṁpatā devatā iva | veśyāḥ pūjyās tadgṛhaṁ ca prayāgo ‘tra yajet kramam || 557 || strīṣu tan nācaret kiñcid yena tābhyo jugupsate | ato na nagnās tāḥ paśyen na cāpi prakaṭastanīḥ || 558 |I vrddhāyāḥ saṁsthitāyā vā na jugupseta mudrikām | vaikṛtyaṁ tatra saurūpyaṁ melakaṁ na prakāśayet || 5S9 || The same (is said) in the venerable Gamatantra: “(Women) should be venerated (pūjanīya) with (great) effort. Women who have abandoned conventional behaviour (for a higher one) (nirācārā), eat everything, who are devoid of (both) Dharma and Adharma, who live freely, who eat meat and are dissolute (laṁpaṭā), are like deities. Prostitutes should be venerated, and their home is (like) Prayāga. Here (the initiate) should offer sacrifice to (the deities of) the tradition (krama). He should abstain from any action that can lead him to feel disgust for women. Thus, he should not look at them (when they are) naked or with their breasts exposed. He

should not feel disgust by the deformed appearance (mudrikā) of one who has the form (saṁsthitā) of an old (woman). There (in that case, physical) deformity is beautiful. One should not reveal the (location of) the meeting

(place where initiates worship together) (melaka). (556-559) (553cd-

gaṝraig gīār-dervīrg fsrṁ: | ykc 1||

ṬST TṬTTHĀITĪĪ TJ JĪRaSĪTT |

devamūrtiṁ śūnyatanuṁ pūjayet tripathādiṣu | TĀ 15/557cd-566 (551cd-562). Gnoli translates: ‘one should not show the (secret) conventions (to the uninitiated) (melaka)’.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

sarvaparvasu sāmānyaviśeṣeṣu viśeṣataḥ || 560 |l pūjā guror anadhyāyo melake lokavarjanam | One should worship the idol of a deity that is unadorned

roads, or some (similar place). The worship of the teacher is a break from study, (and should be performed) especially on all propitious times

(parvan), both common and special. (When attending) (Kaula) gatherings (melaka), the world (of daily life) (loka) is (to be) abandoned. (560-561ab) (557cd-558)

ī frxza azq fncā rsṝtvṛaāaṝ | 3dāTa zr ēēā I fafq || uR2 1 fāsrsrafāēcaātraarṁā vaāāaā = |

na jugupseta madyādivīradravyaṁ kadācana || 561 || na ninded atha vandeta nityaṁ tajjoṣiṇas tathā | upadeśāya na doṣā hṛdaye cen na vidviṣet || 562 || vijātīyavikalpāṁśatyāgāya prayateta ca | One should never be revolted by the hero’s sacrificial substances, such as wine. Nor should one criticise those who delight in them; (rather,) one should always praise them.®” There are no defects in teaching (others

about them) if one is not (secretly) averse to them in (his) heart. One

T: TJIRT ṜTĪIĪ TIḤ H-ITI aḠ-Ã̄Ã. || u3 ||

īīāa #-ārīqā T ġrú afē || uēz /|| qHVT āfzcgdr rTaī-ā-ā; |

For a definition of parvan, see below 28/372. This injunction may refer to the worship of the idol, but that is unlikely.

5 Śivopādhyāya quotes a line in his commentary on the VB (p. 61) that is quite probably the

original Abhinava had before him in the Gamatantra. The first half is the same. It reads: na ninded atha vandeta vīradravyaparāṉ narān | “Oṉe should not criticize, (rather) one should always praise, the men who are intent (on making use) of the hero’s sacrificial substances.’

guroḥ śāstrasya devīnāṁ nāma mantro yatas tataḥ || 563 || arcāto ‘nyatra noccāryam āhūtaṁ tarpayet tataḥ | āgatasya ca mantrasya na kuryāt tarpaṇaṁ yadi || 564 |I haraty ardhaśarīraṁ tad ity ūce bhagavān yataḥ | The name of the teacher, the scripture, and the goddesses is a Mantra, and so should not be uttered (at any time) elsewhere apart from when worshipping, and once invoked, libation should be offered to it. For the Lord has said' that if libation were not to be offered to a Mantra that has come (before the worshipper in the place of worship), it steals away half of (his) body. (563cd-565ab) (561-562)

The Pledges According to the Ūrmikaulārṇava

śrīmadūrmau ca devīnāṁ vīrāṇāṁ ceṣṭitaṁ na vai || 565 || prathayen na jugupseta vaden nādravyapāṇikaḥ ! Moreover, (it is said) in the venerable Ūrmi that (an initiate)

should not divulge the behaviour of the goddesses and heroes (engaged in Kaula ritual), nor feel aversion to it, nor address them without the sacrificial substances in (his) hands. (Ś65cd-566ab) (563)

d īm aāṁṁz TÑTÑGATṀĒTIT I| UG II

gāTq || 4G9 I| śrīpūrvaṁ nāma vaktavyaṁ guror dravyakareṇa ca l| 566 || gurvādīnāṁ na laṅghyā ca chāyā na dvaitibhiḥ saha | jalpaṁ kurvan svaśāstrārthaṁ vaden nāpi ca sūcayet || 567 I Read mantro for mantre.

TĀ 15/566 (562) is quoted in a note to TSā (on p. 180) immediately following a citation of TĀ

26/51cd-53ab. There is only one variant, but it is very interesting one. Instead of ity ūce bhagavān yataḥ – ‘for the Lord has said . . ` in the note we read ity uktaṁ kila śambhunā – Śambhu has said . . . .’. Should we understand Śambhu here to be Śambhunātha? If so by reading 26/51cd53ab along with 566 (562), it is clear that he advocated that the libation be made with Kaula substances.

” TĀ 15/566 (662) is quoted again below in 26/53cd-54ab and in TĀv ad 29/22cd. No reference is made in those places to the source. Here it appears to be the end of a citation from the Gamatantra. TĀ 15/567-574 (563-570).

This is the Ūrmikaulārṇavatantra. See above, note to 2/48.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

The teacher’s name should (always) be uttered with a preceding

(honorific) ‘śrī’, whilst holding (the sacred Kaula) substances (as an offering to him). (The disciple) should not cross over the shadow of (his)

teachers and others (like them). While conversing with dualists,®° he should not talk about the teachings (artha) of his own scriptures or even refer to them. (566cd-567) (564-565ab)

nītyād viśeṣapūjāṁ ca kuryān naimittike vidhau | tathāpi madhye varṣasya tathāpi hi pavitrake || 568 I| He should perform the regular (daily rite) and the special rite of adoration (pūjā) for (each) prescribed (special) occasion, so too also in the middle of the year, and indeed also" (in the course of the rite of the

offering of) the sacred thread. (568) (565cd-566ab)

ṝṃēz fē fa=īṁ ā-TmaTaTīq || u£< 11 anyastamantro nāsīta sevyaṁ śāstrāntaraṁ ca no |

aprarūḍhaṁ hi vijñānaṁ kamped etarabhāvanāt || 569 || He on whom Mantra has not been deposited should not sit (to take part in the rites). Nor should he resort to other scriptures. Knowledge which is not fully developed may vacillate® by reflecting (bhāvana) on

(scriptures) other (than one’s own). (569) (566cd 567ab)

TGTTG-TVĪṬGIT ṜṬHTATATT; | srṝaāTtfṁd 7 va+aī ā gvīāt̄d fssāq || usc 1| grhopaskaraṇāstrāṇi devatāyāgayogataḥ | arcyānīti na padbhyāṁ vai spṛśen nāpi vilaṅghayet || 570 || Household utensils and weapons are used for the sacrifice to the deities and so should be worshipped. They should not be touched with the

feet, nor should one step over them. (570) (567cd-568ab)

also be tarkikaiḥ – ‘with logicians’. Emend nityād to nityāṁ. “ Emend tato ‘pi madhye to tathāpi madhye and tato ‘pi hi to tathāpi hi. Correct kampet etara- to kamped etara-.

TĀ 15/570cd-571ab (566cd-567ab) is quoted above in TĀv ad 4/261cd-263ab. T Çf. KM 25/113-114ab.

ēīfaṛarī f--=rt: āaīz fāṣrṝdēū 11| y.g 11 3U-VTT -T āī: T ̄Tūgīīgē | ī adTvṛatēāṁrīa-rgft=fṝ. ḍaāaa1 1| 4oṜ 1| TṬGṬĪSTYTṀĀTINII JāĀfcēifsī |

guruvarge gṛhāyāte viśeṣaṁ kañcid ācaret | dīkṣitānāṁ na nindādi kuryād vidveṣapūrvakam || 571 II upadeśāya no doṣaḥ sa hy avidveṣapūrvakaḥ | na vaiṣṇavādikādhaḥsthadṛṣṭibhiḥ saṁvased alam || 572 || sahabhojanaśayyādyair naiṣāṁ prakaṭayet sthitim | He should perform some special (ceremony) when the members of the teacher’s family visit one’s home. One should not criticise or the like initiates with (feelings of) aversion. There is no defect in teaching (others). That is not attended by (feelings of) aversion.”™" One should not live

together with followers of inferior doctrines, such as Vaiṣṇavas,” nor

should one tell others that one eats or sleeps with them.® (571-573ab) (568cd-570)

The Pledges according to the Mādhavakula

3ṝ H-īdēāqŪ JIHT-RTRJTT II 4.93 1|

”ft is said in the venerable MādhavakulaT that those who are

established in other doctrines, what is taught in the Veda and by Vaiṣṇavas and what they say, should always be avoided. (573cd-574ab) (571) vardhamānī-m-upālambhī dehalyā muṣalaṁ tathā | khaṭvā śūrpagharaṭṭaṁ ca vardhamānyāditaḥ kramāt || pādenaitān na saṁspṛśya yad icchec chriyam ātmanaḥ | ‘One should not touch the following things with one’s feet if one wishes good fortune for oneself: a platter, upālambhī (?), the threshold, a pestle, a bedpost, a winnowing fan, and a grindstone.’ Cf. JY ṣatka 1 chapter 48, where such household objects are projected into the body, marking stations of ascent. KM 25/124 ff. supplies inner equivalents of weapons.

Above in 15/564a (560a), instead of the reading upadeśāya na doṣaḥ we find upadeśāya na

doṣāṭ(h) – ‘there are no defects in teaching (others).” Read vaiṣṇavādikādhaḥ- for vaṣṇavādikādhaḥ-. Ś Évidence that Abhinava is quoting literally is the terse, bordering on, defective Sanskrit of these passages.

15/575cd-577ab (571cd-573ab) is drawn from the Mādhavakula.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

(When one practices (the observance) of the prohibitions (and iṇjunctions) etc. without wavering,) ‘one assumes a single (one-pointed) state (of mind)ʼ, because one is careful (and attentive to that,) and so is unwavering. This is the meaning. As (the teacher’s) knowledge expands by nature, it is ‘the principle of consciousness in all respects present (throughout the sphere of) objectivityʼ. Such is the case not only by (the teacher’s) teaching, but also ‘(just) by conversing (with him)ʼ, and so he says that ‘his talk (kathā)’ (elevates his disciples immediately). ‘There’, in the case of the (physical) appearance (mudrikā) (of an old woman, deformity is beautiful). ‘Those who

delight in them’, that is, those who are devoted to the sacrificial substances of a (Kaula) hero. (There is no harm) ʻ‘in teaching (others)’, for example, ‘what is

wine and what is devotion to Śiva.’ Here (in this case), the fruit (of instruction) is just to satisfy the mental disposition of the one who is being taught. The sense of (saying), ‘in the middle of the yearʼ, is whenever there may happen to be requisites for the rite (samāgrī). (One should not resort) ‘to other scriptures’

that are in conflict with one’s own scriptures. ‘Household utensils’, such as the

stove. (One should not follow what) ‘they’ (say), that is, those who adhere to the Vedas etc. The reason here (for this is explained next).

ATJELḤ TTAĀĪTĀJĪCTTĪ-KTÑ ||ḹ ÁMS̄ 1I|

UTāṬĪī ṭJTHI āJTTIĪ-TTTSĪAT | JHTCṬT=T d TGR TIRATĪ TS Ṭ ṬÑJT II VSṂ (I

the best for oneself or accomplishment, O lady praised by (Kaula) heroes, (if one wishes) a long

life or meetings with Yoginīs, Yoga that has passed or not yet come, and the contemplation

However, if by mistake one has made friends" (with a member of another

FitciEḷṬETEIUGITGEAI

EiRGKGĀcrczik'CAIRCAĒ

It is also said in the venerable Ūrmi that (an initiate) should not

associate with one who follows other scriptures, one who is devoted to a

different teacher (of another tradition), a fool, one who earns a living with the substances (that are offered to the) deity, one who is violent to a Tantric consort (śaktihiṁsā), and one who is wicked. (576-577ab) (573cd-574)

(bhāvanā) that destroys phenomenal existence. One must strenuously avoid drinking together with

them. Conversation with them must be avoided, what to say, O beloved, of touching! The touch of

one who is not intiated requires that one must bath 1n fire.

The term ekapātra- literally means ‘the same plate’. In common usage the term denotes the

condition of the members of a group who dine only amongst themselves 1n order to avoid being polluted by dining with others. Either way the general sense 1s ‘exclusive’. Kulas are exclusive. Only members of the same Kula can, for example, study scripture or perform rituals together. Indeed, they cannot cven eat together. Cf. Kulārmavatantra: ekapātraṁ na kurvĩta yadi sākṣāt kuleśvaraḥ |

mantrāḥ parāṅmukhā yānn vtghnaścaiva pade pade | ‘One should not eat together (indiscriminately with others) (ekapātra), if one is Kuleśvara (Himself) directly visible. Mantras become averse and an obstacle (arises) at each step.” Kulārnava 8/15. The same verse is found in KuKh 37/67. See Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 11 p. 348-351 note

157 concerning commensality.

ekapātre kulāmnāye kāryaṁ nānyat kadācana |

Read with the JY akulīnaś ca for akulīneṣu and bhavet for bhayam.

ṂḶS Th reads saṅge - ‘contact for sakhye – ‘thendsh1p.

l See below, 28/23cd-25ab, 383cd-385ab. The word cakra here may mean the manḍala

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

ā f-R aī̄ JāSTTTTTTTRĀT 1I 49 I sckraaṁēṭāā aāhr r--ī- 1 ITRTHIIJTṬSĪTTTṬ TYVTTRĪTĀĪq I| yo¢ 11

na vikalpena dīkṣādau vrajed āyatanādikam || 577 || uktāsthāśithilatve yan nimittaṁ naiva tac caret | Śśāsanasthān purājātyā na paśyen nāpy udīrayet || 578 II na ca vyavaharet sarvāñ chivābhedena kevalam | One should not (take) initiation and the like and go to sacred sites (āyatana) with (fickle) thoughts (vikalpa); nor should one seek to find a

reason for (one’s own) laxity in practicing the stated (teaching). One

should not see, refer to,° or treat those who are established followers of the

teachings according to their prior caste status. (Rather, one should treat

them) all only as one with Siva. (577cd-579ab) (575-576)

(One must avoid) ‘those’ who belong (to other traditions,) such as the Veda. (One should not take initiation) with ‘(vacillating) thoughts (vikalpa)ʼ, that is, doubts. One should ‘go’ (to sacred sites) with a mind free of doubts, in the manner that will be explained. This is the intended sense. (One should not refer to an initiate’s) ‘prior caste status’ as a Brahmin etc. (Rather) one should

see him ‘as one with SŚiva’. As is said (in the Śvacchandatantra):

‘O goddess, a person who mentions (an initiate’s) prior caste (status is a sinner who is) subject to penance. He burns for three days in Rudra’s hell, five

in Keśava’s, and a lunar fortnight in that of Brahmā.’

(kṣatriya),

are all considered to be Śivas.

sīáīz āt 11 u92 1

ārīTrTTHĪ STTdT TT TT fk 1| u¢o 1

pointis also that, even if one is not fully dedicated to the practice of the teachings, it is better to do

what little one manages to do or has enough faith to do, than waste even more time and effort in searching for reasons for one’s own laxity.

sadvidyaiḥ sākam āsīta jñānadīptyai yateta ca || 579 || nāsaṁskṛtāṁ vrajet tajjaṁ viphalatvaṁ na cānayet | melakārdhaniśācaryā janavarjaṁ ca tatra hi l| 580 II māṁsādidāhagandhaṁ ca jighred devīpriyo hy asau | One should keep the company (āsīta) of those who have true knowledge, and exert oneself with those who are enthused by knowledge. One should not approach (a woman) who has not been purified (asaṅskṛtā). Moreover, (if one does,) one should not render fruitless what is born from

that (encounter).®”" There,™ where the practice at midnight (ardhaniśācaryā) of the assembly (of male and female initiates) (melaka)” takes place, should be (a secluded place where) there are no people

(janavarja). One should smell the aroma of burning meat etc. (One who does s0) is pleasing to the goddess. (79cd-581ab) (77-578)

‘One should not approach’ and keep the company (of a woman) ‘who has not been purifiedʼ, that is, who has not received initiation. ‘What is born from that (encounter) is the mixture of sexual fluids (kuṇḍagola) and the like (that serve as Kaula sacrificial substances).

EEUIRER-CĀCEEEF-E IEETĀIṬHZI

ITHṬGTSTTPT-ĪRTTĒTGTTaT; | rāz̄dfrr-īa īaz fšfaī fōaīa 1| u¢3 1

gurvājñāṁ pālayan sarvaṁ tyajen mantramayo bhavet || 581 I| śāstrapūjājapadhyānavivekatadupakriyāḥ | akurvan niṣphalāṁ naiva ceṣṭeta trividhāṁ kriyām || 582 || mantratantrair na vādaṁ ca kuryān no bhakṣayed viṣam | Observing the teacher’s command, he should abandon everything, and be one with Mantra (mantramaya) (by being fully concentrated on it). He should not dedicate himself fruitlessly to the three types of rites (obligatory, occasional and optional) without (worshipping) the scriptures, worshipping (the deities), repeating Mantra, meditation, discrimination, and (whatever) aids them. One should not kill (others) with Mantras and magical rites (mantratantra), and not feed (others) poison. (Ś81cd-583ab)

2 Cakramelaka is described below in 28/371 ff.

Ṁ Perhaps read hādhaṁ for vādaṁ?

CHAPTER FIFTEEN (Observing

everythingʼ; in this way, for example, his command is obeyed. This is the

gdTāṝ? fdlī

TE ṬRJGATIĪ || 4¢3 |1

kPẼRIIAẼFFEIPKEEEIEaASEIE-HḤI

ftra ā ṃīaā arṁaī fitr-aTTT 11 uc. 11

samayānāṁ vilope ca guruṁ pṛcched asannidhau || 583 |I tadvargaṁ nijasantānam anyaṁ tasyāpy asaṁnidhau | tenoktam anutiṣṭhec ca nirvikalpaṁ prayatnataḥ || 584 || yataḥ śāstrādisaṁbodhatanmayīkṛtamānasaḥ | šiva eva gurur nāsya vāgasatyā viniḥsaret || 585 || śivasya svātmasaṁskṛtyai prahvībhāvo guroḥ punaḥ | hlādāyety ubhayārthāya tattuṣṭiḥ phaladā śiśoḥ || 586 1| If (someone) transgresses the rules, he should ask the teacher (what

should be done). Or, if (the teacher) is absent, (he should ask) one of his (same) kind (varga) who is a member of his own spiritual family, or if he

too is not present, another (teacher). He should take care to follow what he says without thinking (about it) (nirvikalpa). This is because by virtue of

(his) insight (saṁbodha) (into the meaning of) scripture etc., the mind of the

teacher has been made one with it and he is Śiva himself, nor can a false

word come from him. The purpose of bowing (prahvībhāva) before Siva is to purify oneself. In the case of the teacher, it is to please (him), and so it serves both purposes. (It is the teacher’s) satisfaction that gives (good) fruits to the disciple. (583cd-586) (581-584ab) (If someone transgresses the rules,) ‘he should ask’ (the teacher what) the penance (should be). (If his own teacher is absent, he should ask) ‘another’

teacher (or a member of) ‘his’ (that is, the teacher’s) ‘own spiritual family’. (He should follow what) ‘he’, that is, the other one, (says). If one offers salutation to Siva, it makes no difference at all to Siva. Rather, (it makes a difference) to the one who offers it. The same is the case with the teacher with regards to one’s own purification. (But apart from that,) he is also pleased then, and so it is said that ‘it serves both purposesʼ.

aā TṬĀT_II uc. 11

Taē- JS< T̄ . 1 .. 1| gurvāyattaikasiddáhir hi samayy api vibodhabhāk | tadbodhabahumānena vidyād gurutamaṁ gurum || 587 I| ataḥ saṁprāpya vijñānaṁ yo gurau bahumānavān | nāsau vijñānaviśvasto nāsaktaṁ bhraṣṭa eva saḥ || 588 II

When the ‘regular” initiate, whose success depends solely on the

teacher, also possesses a fully awakened consciousness (vibodha), he should consider (his) teacher to be (even) more than a teacher (gurutama),

by virtue of the respect (he has) for that awakened consciousness. Thus, one who, after he has attained knowledge (vijñāna), (yet) does not have great

veneration for his teacher, has no faith in the knowledge (he has

received). He is not zealous.™ (Indeed) he is just a fallen soul. (587-588)

(584cd-586ab)

JTITTHTTrīT Ġ arāTHTITI JITTTT |

EiJḤEK EPE I5{I REIETAAEZ- ĀIIHVĀI

TGTṬGĪ ī TāTYĀÑITITĒTT-HĀĀ |I ḶRe 1I jñānānāśvastacittaṁ taṁ vacomātreṇa śāstrajñam | uktaṁ ca nārcayej jātu hṛdā vijñānadūṣakam || 589 || tādṛk ca na guruḥ kāryas taṁ kṛtvāpi parityajet | mukhyabuddhyā na saṁpaśyed vaiṣṇavādigatān gurūn || 590 || (A teacher who) does not have faith in the knowledge (of the

scriptures), and is said” to know the scriptures only by (their) words

(without knowing the reality they teach), and with (his) heart criticises

(this) knowledge,” should certainly not be venerated. One should not make such a teacher (one’s own, or) if one has done so, abandon him. One should

not consider Vaiṣṇava and other such teachers to be the main ones (as one does true Śaiva teachers). (559-590) (586cd-588ab)

(One should not take a Vaiṣṇava as a teacher;) ‘if one has done so’ by mistake, (abandon him).

ṂSs C, Ṭ and Th read vúbhodavān.

Read sāstrajīam for śāstritam, which makes no sense.

Instead of hrdā vijñāna- C Th read: hrdādijñāna- “(crīticizes) the knowledge of the Heart and other (Mantras).

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

ī fāēhczāī 11| u<2 11

iIIE’-IEĀECEIEĀEAIKGEṬ āaTī TTTI āṬ- TIIJTITI; 11 UR2 1

tathā ca śrīmadūrmyākhye guror uktaṁ viśeṣaṇam | gurvājñā prāṇasaṁdehe nopekṣyā no vikalpyate || 591 II kauladīkṣā kaulaśāstraṁ tattvajñānaṁ prakāśitam |

yenāsau gurur ity ukto hy anye vai nāmadhāriṇaḥ || 592|| Moreover, the (distinguishing) characteristic of a teacher is stated in the venerable (Tantra) called Ūrmi” in the same way. (There it is said that) out of fear for (one’s) life (if one does so0), the teacher’s command should not be disregarded (nor) doubted.”” He is said to be a (a real and true) teacher who reveals Kaula initiation, the Kaula scriptures and knowledge of reality. Others (just) bear that name. (591-592) (588cd-590ab)

The Pledges According to the Ānandaśāstra

TāTTIIĪ TTJIÑ T TṬG. | Ḷ || iezzeeiāīceezlEṈE-ĀRIŪTĀG ĒT

fsṣrfī: at ltrcādrērāīz- 1| u< 1

śrīmadānandaśāstre ca tathaivoktaṁ viśeṣaṇam | yasmād dīkṣā mantraśāstraṁ tattvajñānaṁ sa vai guruḥ || 593 II tiṣṭhed avyaktaliṅgaś ca na liṅgaṁ dhārayet kvacit | na liṅgibhiḥ samaṁ kaiścit kuryãd ãcãramelanam || 594 || kevalaṁ liṅginaḥ pālyā na bībhatsyā virūpakāḥ | The distinguishing characteristic (of a teacher) is also explained in

teacher is one from whom (one obtains true) initiation, the Mantra

scriptures, and knowledge of reality.”

“ Thiṣ is the Ūrmikaulārṇavatantra. See above, note to 2/48.

“2 Abhinava has just quoted the Ūrmikaulārṇava as sayng that the teacher of that Tantra gives

Kaula initiation, Kaula scriptures and knowledge of realiy. One wonders i the replacement of the first two with simply ‘imtiaton; and ‘scriptures’ 1s sgntficant. We know from the fragments that have been recovered of the Ūrmḍkaulārṇava that it was a Krama Tantra brought into the world by

Matsyendranāṭha. He 1s a well-known founder figure of Kaulism in general, and so there is no question of the Ūrmikaulārṇava not being Kaula. Perhaps we may nnfer that although the

Ánandatantra was a Tantra of the left (vāmatantra), 1t was not Kaula.

%\Oṉe should (always) be (tiṣṭhet) without (outer) manifest sectarian signs. Nowhere (in any circumstance) should one bear (outer) signs (of

one’s spiritual affiliation). Nor should one congregate together to practice

(ācāramelana) with those who do (bear such outer) signs. One should only

defend (and respect) those who bear (these) signs (nothing more). One should not fear (bībhatsyā) people who are deformed (and ugly). (593-596) (590cd-592)

(The teacher’s word) ‘should not be doubted’, (as when one thinks) should (what he says) be done or not?”

Rules and Norms Taught in Various Trika and Bhairava Tantras

gīrzīTṁaz a ūīaī: JTgITRITT: II uRQ4 1 śrīmadrātrikule coktaṁ mokṣaḥ śaṅkāpahānitaḥ || 595 | aśuddhavāsanasyaiṣā mokṣavārtāpi durlabhā | It is said in the venerable Rātrikula: “(The chance of achieving) liberation is destroyed”® by doubts; for one whose latent tendencies are

% The following three lines seem to be out of place. Reading the text in continuity, the series of injunctions would apply to the teacher. But that is not likely. The last two are certainly not meant just for the teacher, the others also do not appear to be. In short, the subject has changed abruptly to Abhinava citing general rules initiates must observe. So either these lines are spurious, or some part of the text has been lost. Given this hiatus, it is unsure whether Abhinava continues to draw from the same source. The word for ‘sign’ here is ‘liṅga’. It is possible that the reference here is to Śaivites who wear small liṅgas on their bodies. But it here it is probably not so. Cf.: avyaktaliṅginaṁ k: -taṁ dṛṣṭvā saṁbhāsanti marīcayaḥ | liṅginaṁ nopasarpanti atiguptāya tat k: ta priye k: priyet |l ‘(The yoginīs who are) the rays (of the energies of the deity), seeing (an ascetic) without (outer) manifest insignia, converse (with him). O beloved, they do not approach one who bears insignia, for they are very secret.' Kulapañcaśika 3/19 Quoted by Kṣemarāja in commentary on the Śivasūtra 3/26 (also quoted in footnote here). Cf. below 27/17a, also MV 18/1-56ab with regards to the adept who is ‘avyaktaliṅgin’.

“ Abhinava is probably referring here to cakramelana, in which assemblies of Siddhas and

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Kularatnamālā

Tīcīçgīṁi 7 d fhēais 1|

na likhen mantrahṛdayaṁ śr̥īmanmāloditaṁ kala || 596 ||

tadaṅgād uddharen mantraṁ na tu lekhe vilēkhayet |

One should not write the (seed syllable) taught in the venerable

Mālā (i.e., Kularatnamālā), which is the Heart of (all) Mantras.™ (It is said there that) ‘the Mantra should be extracted from its body.” It should not be written in a manuscript (lekha).’ (596cd-597ab) (594) Kulagahvaratantra

aāīT-ũrṁa ú| uQ. ||

ḷ ÃẼẼIĒAJGIISKCKUI ṀSĪTT |

TIFITaTR} īFATÑ TGTGRTĪTT IIḶA¢ 11 atattve ‘bhiniveśaṁ ca na kuryāt pakṣapātataḥ || 597 || jātividyākulācāradehadeśaguṇārthajāṇ | grahān grahān ivāṣṭau drāk tyajed gahvaradarśitān || 598 I One should not be attached to what is not true (atattva) (moved) by (some foolish) prejudice (pakṣapāta). The eight tenacious errors (graha)

"" The Kularamamālā īs a Tnka Tantr. Thus, moṣt probably the Mantrahrdaya is SĀUḤ. Abhinava refers to it that way 1n PTv p. 252. The body (aiga) of Mantras 1s a diagram or grid called a prastāra, withīn which the leters of the alphabet (mātrkā) are deposited. When it been propery consecrated, 1 becomes an ‘assembly of letters” (mātṛkācakra). Thuṣ empowered, the letters are extracted from 1t to form Mantras. It can also serve as a code. Instead of mentoning a letter directly, the text may identfy it by referring to its positton 1n relation to other letters in the grid. See Schoterman 1982: 181-209 for

an extenstve discussion and presentation, including drawings of several prastāras (also called gahvaras), and Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 7 pp. 9-11, 13-16 notes 1, 4 and 5. ?” The word graha 1s a noun dernved from the root grh, which has the sense of ‘lay hold of, catchʼ. Here the same word is used in two senses One ! translate as ‘tenacious error°. These are the things we ‘hold on t0’ and -lay hold of as seemingly important due to ignorance and attachment. The word 1s repeated in a second sense, which is defined in Monier-Willams’ dictonary as partcular evil demons or sprits who seize or exerise a bad influence on the body and mind of a man (causing insanity etc., it fals within the domamn of medical science to expel theṣe demons, those who especially seize children and cause convulsions etc. are divided into nine classes according to the number of planets). Indeed, the word ‘graha’ may also means ‘planet’ because planets ‘lay hold’ of people, thus influencing their destiny. Again, a ‘graha’ is also, according to Moner Willams, ‘any state which proceeds from magical 1nfluences and takes possession of the whole man’. An interesting example mentioned in the medical books is rudragṛaha. A person afflited by this graha is possessed by the notion that he is as mighty and important as Rudra. He is gripped by a fury that makes him very strong and unmindful of the normal social reṣraints. Thus, he may run through the streets naked yelling at the top of his voice ‘I amṃ Rudra”. This is a state of possession - graha - which is quite different from the grace <

explained in the Gahvara should be quickly abandoned as if they were

demons (graha) (that take possession of people). (These are the attachments) induced by (pride of ones) caste, education (vidyā), (one’s) family, (one’s) behaviour, the body, country (of origin), (one’s) qualities

and wealth.”" (597cd-598) (595-596ab)

Niśisaṁcāratantra

JTaTTĪSG TAṬ TGṬIRĪTRT #RTT I| 483 ||

tathā śrīniśicārādau heyatvenopadarśitān | brāhmaṇo ‘haṁ mayā vedaśāstroktād aparaṁ katham || 599 || anuṣṭheyam ayaṁ jātigrahaḥ paranīrodhakaḥ | evam anye ‘py udāhāryāḥ kulagahvaravartmanā || 600 || Similarly, in the venerable Niśicāra and elsewhere, they are presented as what should be rejected. The supreme obstacle (to liberation)

the notion that): “I am a Brahmin, so how can I dedicate myself to

something other than that taught in the Vedic scriptures?” (599-600ab)

(596cd-597) In the same way, other (errors) can be exemplified in relation to the path (taught in the) Kulḹagahvara. (600cd) (Ś98ab)

Surely (one may ask), how is it that caste (status) is described as being an eṛṟor?

-rkTrašlāā:

anugraha of the Deity that also manifests as a ‘descent of power’ that penetrates and ‘possesses’

the person who is its object. The difference, of course, is that it enlightens and liberates, whereas the former obscures and binds. Finally, more simply and directly, one could translate ‘graha’ as ‘attachment’, as in the expression ‘jātigraha – ‘attachment to casteʼ.

! AII these errors apply equally as possible causes of pride to people in the West and elsewhere

in the world. In India these all take second place. Pride of one’s own high caste status is the first and most powerful and tenacious error.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

A tenacious error (graha) is that which, causing one to perceive, even if involuntarily, something that is of a certain nature as not being of that nature, obscures its own (true) nature. (Thus) it is said to be like a demon (graha) (that takes possession of people). (601) (598cd-599ab) He (goes on to) amplifies this (statement).

āfṭcaarṛa īī sīfcvryfaā: ēft sēcaī 1 T T TāTaēú āg 3IRJTHGH I| 0R 1|

saṁvitsvabhãve no jātiprabhṛtiḥ kāpī kalpanā | rūpaṁ sā tv asvarūpeṇa tad rūpaṁ chādayaty alam || 602 |I yā kācit kalpanā saṁvittattvasyākhaṇḍitātmanaḥ | saṅkocakāriṇī sarvaḥ sa grahas tāṁ parityajet || 603 | No notion (kalpanā) of caste and the like apply to the essential

nature of consciousness. As it is not the true nature of (its) nature,” it is

capable of obscuring that nature. Any (discursive, dualistic) notion of the (true) nature of consciousness, which (is one and) undivided, contracts it.

All that is erroneous (graha), (and so any such notion) should be abandoned. (602-603) (599cd-601ab)

aaī ā #'ī, || koz ||

fgāīcast. aa īaī d-dīstī sāzaā 1| o 11

gqdzṁa: āīā: ūaīatṁ TḤ || o5 || śrīmadānandaśāstre ca kathitaṁ parameṣṭhinā | nirapekṣaḥ prabhur vāmo na śuddhyā tatra kāraṇam || 604 | devītrptir makhe raktamāṁsair no śaucayojanāt | dvijāntyajaiḥ samaṁ kāryā carvante ‘pi marīcayaḥ || 605 |I avikārakṛtas tena vikalpān nirayo bhavet | sarvadevamayaḥ kāyaḥ sarvaprāṇiṣv iti sphuṭam |l 606 II ! Emend rūpaṁ sā to rūpasya.

The Lord has also said in the venerable Ānandaśāstra: ‘The Lord is without bias (nirapekṣa) and acts in a manner contrary (to the common worldly norms)” (vāma). The cause there (of his bestowal of grace) is not

the purity (of the recipient).”"“ (Similarly,) the goddesses are satisfied in (this) sacrifice by bloody meat,”” not by applying (the rules concerning) purity. Brahmins and those belonging to the lowest castes should be made

equal.”" (Thus) the rays (marīci) (of consciousness radiating through the senses), although savouring (their objects),” are freed of agitation

(avikārakṛta). Hell is the result of (dualistic) thought. It is clear that the

body of all living beings (irrespective of caste or other conceived differences) is made of all the gods.” (604-606) (601cd-604ab) Nakuleśa |FeEAKIḤIRVṭIṢIĒEEAĒI .2

JĨTTATJTĪ TTRĀGṬTGT JSIT. I| Ś. ||

This has also been well described by the venerable Nakuleśa and

others, (who say that) the body alone is the sanctuary (āyatana); one should ! Gnoli translates vāmaḥ ‘agisce come uno meno se l˚aspetta’ – ‘(one who) acts in a way one least expectsʼ. The sense of Siva being without bias is that he is free to grace anybody at any time

irrespective of their caste status. The Law Books are considered to derive their authority from the

Vedas. The transgression of the Law — Dharma – is viewed as an essentially spiritual offence rather than a criminal one. Thusṣ, transgression requires reparation, not punishment. The reparation

is meant to reinstate the original condition of the soul prior to the offence. This condition is

understood in terms of degrees of purity. The higher the caste, the higher the level of basic purity, and the lower, the less. By virtue of their Brahminical status, Brahmins are the purest, and so are authorized to deal with the sacred. According to this view, sweepers and the like are, due to the Karma of previous lives, born inherently very impure. Thus, they are distanced from the sacred in accord with their caste status and level of impurity. The Ānandatantra declares here that Śiva’s interaction with individual souls is independent of such, and indeed, any other consideration. Whom SŚiva favours by his grace, which is channelled primarily through initiation, is not determined by considerations of purity. Thus, he acts in a manner contrary to the customs and regulations of daily life. He may grace an outcaste or a Brahmin equally, their purity, in the aforestated sense, is never the cause as to why he may favour one and not the other. Indeed, the goddesses worshipped in accord with the dictates of the Ānanda and other such Tantras requires the offering of what are normally considered impure substances, such as meat and wine.

! Emend śuddhyā to śudáhis. ! Cf. another reference from the Ánandatantra below 16/65-68ab. ! This translation assumes that dvijāntyajaiḥ should be emended to dvijāntyajāḥ and kāryā to

kāryāḥ. Another possible translation, which sticks closer to the printed text, is ‘(worship) should be performed equally by Brahmins and members of the lowest caste’, which presumes that the unstated substantive of kāryā is pūjā.

”! 1 take 15/608cd-612ab (604cd-608ab) to be Nakuleśa’s teachings. Perhaps Nakuleśa is

Lakuleśa / Lākulīśa, who is traditionally renowned as the founder of an important branch of

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

not go to another. Recollect Mantra, the sole sacred bathing place (fīrtha). Avoid other ones. (607-608ab) (604cd-605)

Conclusion”'

faftrrṁ ga āīcāṁ fāfēīsī úcāsīq 11| h oc 11

Ḥ-TT ēad HT¥cī T TīTcŪTH āaiī-āīq |

zfṁ #aar frr

a-Tra úzviq || ēg l|

vidhim enaṁ sṣukhaṁ jñātvā vidhijālaṁ parityajet || 608 II samādhir niścayaṁ muktvā na cānyenopalabhyate | iti matvā vidhānajñaḥ saṁmohaṁ parivarjayet || 609 || mantrasya hṛdayaṁ muktvā na cānyat paramaṁ kvacit | iti matvā vidhānajño mantrajālaṁ parityajet || 610 ||

Having understood this injunction with ease (sukham),” one should abandon the net of injunctions (that merely bind and confuse). (Perfect)

(of realization).

understood this, one who (truly) knows (the nature of) what is prescribed

Apart from the heart of Mantra (SAUH), there is nothing else superior (to this) anywhere. Once understood this, one who (truly) knows (the nature of) what is prescribed should abandon the net of Mantra. (608cd-610) (606-

ri Jvīāa-a-i s fẽq |

Pāśupata Śaivism (see below, 37/13cd-15), the immediate precursor of the Āgamic Śaivism. If he

is Nakuleśa, the passage Abhinava is presenting here from an unknown source is šurprṣiṉ. Nakuleśa believed in the interiorization of sacred geographies. The Pāñcārthika Pāśpata Saivism taught in the Pāśupatasūtra (c. 5" century CE) presents a picture of these Śaivites as wondering ascetics. There is no mention there of interiorizing their itineraries. That would only be necessary

for householders or sedentary renouncers who resided in monasteries. On the other hand, the

terms here for sacred sites — ‘āyantana ‘and ‘tīrtha’, predate the Saivāgama. Had it been some other term like ‘pīṭha’, it would have cast further doubt on this identification. If we accept the citation at face value as drawn from teachings attributed to Lakuleśa / Nakuleśa, it appears that he introduced an interiorized practice of the Pāśupata’s traditional itinerant lifestyle.

! Now that Abhinava has quoted a string of mostly Trika sources, he concludes by summing up what is to be learnt from them most essentially. Another possible translation is: “having understand that this injunction is (to experience) joy’.

The food offering (naivedya) should be eaten, and the remnants

(Śeṣa) thrown into the water of a river.” There is no defect if it is eaten by the fish, (for they must have been) previously initiated (in another life). (611) (608cd-609ab) Surely, (one may ask, if this is so,) what is the reason for the (common)

usage of the word ‘rule’ (samaya)”

STPJTRṬTṬGTTRTĀTKT TāĪRT:|I 23 1 avaśyapālanīyatvāt paratattvena saṅgamāt | jñānaprāptyabhyupāyatvāt samayās te prakīrtitāḥ || 612 ||

They are called pledges (samaya) because they must be observed,

(The Rule) must be observed because of its (general well-established)

prevalence (rūḍhi). The term ‘samaya’ (to denote the Rule the initiate must observe) is in (common) usage, because (those who observe it) reach (samayanti), that is, understand (saṁgacchante) the supreme reality by means of

it. (Another) didactic etymology (supports its usage namely, the Rule – samaya

– is s0 called because) it is the right way (samyag ayanam) by which (one attains) knowledge.

! Malamoud (1998: 10) explains: ‘A piece of food is called ucchista when 1Īs in fact considered to be the remains of a bulk of food that someone has begun to eat. It is for thss reason that even

one’s own leftovers are impure for oneself. The same rules hold for the gods, concerning what is

to be done with the leftovers of sacrificial food. The Brāhmaṇas treat the mateer clearly: they

cannot be thrown into the fire, snnce that would be tantamount to offering table scraps to the gods! The best procedure 1s that the sacrificer eat them himself, or throw them into a body of water. These leftovers that are not to be given to the gods, it must be noted, are scraps from a meal they

themselves have eaten; and while no foreign element has come to alter this food, its status has

nevertheless changed, for the simple fact that it has continued to exist after the conclusion of the sacrifice. “ See below, 26/71. The preceding verse – 1e , 612cd-613ab (608cd-609ab) – appears to be a misplaced

interpolation, that may be the result of a copyist’s error. There is n0 apparent connection between

what precedes and follows after 1t. Jayaratha refers back to what is stated in the previous verses, completely ignoring this one. Thus, ttmay well not have been found in the manuscripts he had of the Tantrāloka. “This is the literal meaning of the word. The other two are derived from the root i- meaning both

‘to go’ and ‘to know.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

evaṁ saṁśrāvya samayān devaṁ saṁpūjya daiśikaḥ | visarjayet svacidvyomni śānte mūrtiviḷāpanāt || 613 |I Once the teacher has told (the neophant) the rules in this way and has worshipped the Lord, he should dismiss Him into the tranquil space of His own consciousness, by dissolving away (therein the mantra of His)

‘sacred body’ (mūrti). (613) (610cd-611ab)

aṟṝaftṣrcarāī fōṛaēērr feraṛg 11 =22x 1 JIaT āṬĪ āTTTNSTPTĪTTCAT: r--̄zgfrrāōramiī ārzá fhrr=szr 1| ēzu, 1

yadi putrakadīkṣāsya na kāryā samanantaram | tadābhiṣiñcet sāstreṇa śivakumbhena taṁ śiśum || 614 | ātmānaṁ ca tato yasmāj jalamūrtir maheśvaraḥ | mantrayuṅn akhilāpyāyṝī kāryaṁ tad abhiṣecanam || 615 |I After that, if the disciple is not to be subsequently initiated (further into the status) of a Spiritual Son (putraka), (the teacher) should then sprinkle (him with water) taken from Siva’s jar (consecrated) with the

Weapon, and then (sprinkle) himself (with it). The reason why this

aspersion (abhiṣecana) should be done is that the Lord in His sacred body of water (jalamūrti) and united with the Mantra, nourishes all things. (614-

615) (611cd-613)

(He says that if the disciple is) ‘not to be’ (initiated further, he should

be sprinkled with water). The sense is that if he is to be (initiated into the status

of a Spiritual Son), the sprinkling does not take place. He concludes the teaching (artha) of (this) chapter with the first half (of a verse).

rfī azavṁīś vaivr frārā aiṁṁq | iti samayadīkṣaṇam idaṁ prakāśitaṁ vistarāc ca saṁkṣepāt | Such is the Initiation of the Rule (samayadīkṣā), that has been explained both at length and in brief. (616ab) (614ab) (It has been expounded) ‘at length’ (from the point of view of) the subject, and ‘in brief” from (the point of view of its) written form (that is, the number of verses).

The one called Jayaratha, who has (as if, like Śiva,) five faces (from

that of the regular and occasional rites, has explained this the fifteenth chapter (of the Tantrāloka).

Here ends the fifteenth chapter, called ‘an exposition of the common initiation into the Rule (samayadīkṣā), which is in the venerable Tantrāloka, composed by the venerable Abhinavagupta, the most excellent and great Śaiva teacher (mahāmāheśvarācārya). It has a commentary called ‘Discernment’

(viveka), written by the venerable (rājānaka) Jayaratha.

Appendix A The Deposition of the Mātṛkās - Mātṛkānyāsa - according to the

Maālinīvijayottara

The Basic Common Procedure Abhinava stresses repeatedly throughout his exposition of Trika ritual that the basic Trika rites are heralded by the purifying deposition onto the body of the officiants and participants of three basic depositions (nyāsa). These are three forms of the Sanskrit alphabet formed by the deities and the spiritual energies of the letters. The first two are feminine. One is Maātrkā that is set in the normal common alphabetical order. The other is Mālinī in which the seeds (bīja), that is, the vowels, are mixed with the matrixes (yoni), that is, the consonants. The third, called the Assembly of Sounds — śabdarāśi – is male. It is made up of fifty Bhairavas who are the deities of the letters. Concerning these depositions see TA 15/115cd-145. We begin with Mātṛkānyāsa with which the depositions onto the body of the alphabets or parts of Mantra normally begin.

This is recorded in TĀ 15/117-120 which is drawn from MV 8/27-32. It is

normal basic procedure to begin by purifying the hands that will be used to deposit the letters and parts of Mantra on the body. Abhinava does not record the procedure, no doubt, taking it, for granted that it is well known. This is followed by a deposition onto the six (sometimes five) of the body. I include them here for the sake of completeness. The Deposition onto the Hands - karanyāsa Touch the thumb with the index finger, saying:

Touch the index finger with the thumb, saying:

Touch the middle finger with thumb, saying:

Touch the ring finger with the thumb, saying: eṁ taṁ thaṁ daṁ dhaṁ naṁ aiṁ anãmikābhyāṁ hũṁ

Touch the little finger with the thumb, saying:

oṁ paṁ phaṁ baṁ bham maṁ auṁ kaniṣṭhãbhyãṁ vauṣaṭ Rub the backs of the hands along the palms:

astrāya phaṭ

2 See TĀ 15/117cd-120

Touch successively the palm and the back of the left hand with the right

forefinger and the middle finger joined together; then claps the palm with these two fingers. By performing the deposition of the hands (karanyāsa), that is, identifying the fingers, palms and the back of the hand with the different sounds of the alphabet, they are consecrated. Thus, the hands become full of the energy of mātrṛkā.

madhyamābhyāṃ vaṣaṭ

i ap dhau au Jh a117 i

taṃ thaṃ daṃ dhaṇ naṇ

aṃ kaiy khaṃ gaṇt ghaṇ ṅap ā̃ṃ

""haūvikābhyā hūr ..1

karatalapr̥ṣṭhābhyām astrāya phaṭ

The Deposition on the Limbs - aṅganyāsa Touch the chest with the index finger, the middle finger and the ring

finger of the right hand joined together, saying:

aṅ kaṁ khaṁ ghaṁ ṅaṁ āṁ hr̥dayãya namaḥ.

Touch the head with the index finger and the middle finger of the right hand joined together, saying: iṁ caṁ chaṁ jaṁ jhaṁ Ẽaṁ īṁ śirase svāhã. Touch the tuft of hair on the head with thumb of the right hand, saying:

Touch the shoulder joints with all the fingers joined together, saying: eṁ taṁ thaṁ daṁ dhaṁ naṁ aim kavacãya hiũṁ. Touch the three eyes with the forefinger, the middle finger and the ring finger joined together, saying: orṁ paṁ phaṁ baṁ bhaṁ maṁ auṁ netratrayãya vauṣat. Touch successively the palm and the back of the left hand with the right forefinger and the middle finger joined together; then clap the palm with these

two fingers.

Here, by placing the consecrated hands on the different parts of the body with the appropriate sounds, the whole body is consecrated and transformed into mātṛkā.

Touch the parts of the body with Tattvamudrā saying:

OM AṀ ŚRĪKAṆṬHĀYAI NAMAḤ Continue rnutatis mutandis.

__ R̥M_1Bhāmbhūtyai_ _Right nostūīl (piĩgalā) _| |__ Sũõĩ . /{ḷ ..Ti-āai .__|_Lcftnostilúódā)_

hand (Bones)

hand (Marrow) foot (Semen) foot (Breath)

1. oṁ aṁ śrīkaṇṭhāyai namaḥ 2. oṁ āṁ anantāyai namaḥ 3. oṁ iṁ sūkṣmāyai namaḥ 4. oṁ īṁ trimūrtyai namaḥ 5. oṁ uṁ amarĩīśāyai namaḥ 6. oṁ ūṁ arghĩśāyai namaḥ 7. oṁ ṛmṁ bhārabhūtyai namaḥ 8. oṁ R tithīśāyai namaḥ 9. oṁ ḷṁ sthāṇṉavyai namaḥ. 10. oṁī Ḷṁ harāyai namaḥ 11. oṁ eṁ jhaṇṭhīśāyai namaḥ

1. Topknot 2. Mouth 3. Right eye 4. Left eye 5. Right ear 6. Left ear 7. Right nostril (piṅglā) 8. Left nostril (iḍā) Ó. Right cheek 10. Left cheek 11. Lower teeth

14. Upper lip 15. Topknot 16. Tongue 17. Right shoulder 18. Right arm 19. Right elbow 20. Right wrist 21. Fingers of the right hand 22. Left shoulder 23. Left arm 24. Left elbow

26. oṁ ñaṁ śyenāyai namaḥ 27. oṁ ṭaṁ someśvarāyai namaḥ

26. Fingers of the left hand 27. Right buttock

12. oṁ aiṁ bhauktikāyai namaḥ 13. oṁ oṁ sadyojātāyai namaḥ

25. oṁ jhaṁ ajitāyai namaḥ

12. Upper teeth 13. Lower lip

25. Left wrist

28. oṁ ṭhaṁ lāṅguliṅyai namaḥ

28. Right thigh

31. Toes of right foot 32. Left buttock 33. Left thigh 34. Left foot 35. Left toes 36. Left toenails 37. Right diaphragm 38. Left diaphragm 39. Spine 40. Stomach 41. Heart 42. Skin (Chest) 43. Blood (right shoulder)

45. oṁ vaṁ khaḍginyai namaḥ 46. oṁ śaṁ bakīśāyai namaḥ

49. oṁ haṁ lakulĩśãāyai namaḥ

45. Sinews (left Shoulder) 46. Bones (From the chest to the right hand) 47. Fat (From the chest to the left hand) 48. Semen (From the chest to the left foot) 49. Breath (From the chest

50. oṁh kṣaṁ saṁvartakāyai namaḥ

50. Cavity of Brahmā

44. oṁ laṁ pinākinyai namaḥ

47. oṁ ṣaṁ śvetāyai namaḥ 48. oṁ saṁ bhṛgavyai namaḥ

29. Right knee 30. Right shank

44. Flesh (neck)

to the right foot)

the first four out of its thirty-six verses. He structures it around the contents and nature of the four levels of Speech; that is, Supreme Speech (parāvāc), the Speech of Vision (paśyanṁī), the Middle (madhyamā) and Corporeal (vaikharī)

In other words, Middle Speech is the plane of common language, characterized by its various words. This is the language of discursive ideation, not external speech. It consists of the many words, made up of the phonemes,

vowels and consonants (symbolized as seed and matrix, respectively) mixed

together. According to Abhinava, Mālinī is the alphabet, in which the order of the letters, seeds and matrices, are mixed up, that primarily symbolizes it. He writes in his commentary on the Parātrīśikā (pp. 148-156): ‘(PTv p. 148) In the same way, we will (now) examine how (the

principles and letters) abide (and are arranged) on the plane of the Middle Speech, which is present within supreme consciousness, as the expansion (vijrṛmbha) of the venerable (goddess) Parāparā. Middle Speech is located on the plane of the Īśvara (principle), which consists of the power of action. This is the plane over which (Iśvara) has authority. It is a state of awareness (vedana) that covers the object (present there) in a clearly evident form. (Just as) a denotation (vācaka) is projected (adhyaśate) onto the object of denotation (vācya), (so too,)

the object of denotation (is projected) there also (onto that which denotes it). This projection, which consists of the mutual mixing and covering over of one

! This Appendix is with reference to TĀ 15/121-133ab.

another, can only take place if the denotator, (which is projected onto any) object of denotation in its totality, is also itself a totality, not otherwise. A cloth cannot cover another cloth even if it is just three or four fingers too short. And this universality is the result of the mutual mixing together of their own natures. The vowels, which are seeds (bīja), are in the state of the denotator (vācakatva),

whereas the consonants are matrices (yoni) and (their state is that of) the object

of denotation. This is because they are, respectively, (aspects of) Śiva and Śakti, as (they are) described (in this way) in the Mālinīvijaya (where we read):

‘Here (according to this tradition) the seed is Śiva, and Śakti is termed

the matrix (yoni) And again:

‘(The goddess of the alphabet is) of two kinds, because (her) nature is (both) seed and matrix. The vowels are considered to be the seed, and the matrix is considered (to be formed) with the consonants beginning with K.” (PTv p. 149) Śiva Himself Who, (never) forsaking His (inherent)

(whereas) Śakti Herself, Who is immersed in the objective aspect, is the object

of denotation (vācyā). (Thus,) even on (the plane of) relative distinctions (bheda), the denotator is (always) perceived (prathate) (and manifests) as not

object of denotation (pratipādya). The state of the matrices, that is, of the

consonants, which are Śakti, is a condensate of the seeds, that is, the vowels, which are Śiva. This is because, as we shall explain further ahead, a matrix extends out (and so is derived) from a seed. (Thus, the objection that could be

raised has no ground, namely that) if the matrices are already mixed with the

seeds, that is, the vowels, and so all their fruits, both liberation and worldly

benefits, would arise (spontaneously) without effort (niryamna) and without having to first cultivate them. Moreover, the seed phonemes would be matrices within themselves, and analogously, matrices (would be seeds), so there would

be nothing to distinguish them from one another. None of these (objections) can disturb us, we who proclaim that Speech, which is essentially consciousness, contains within itself the infinite variety of things. In daily life, although it is subject to Māyā, Speech is the Light (of consciousness,) which is reflectively

successive and in a clearly apparent state. While (all) this is explained by others with great difficulty, here, for those who base themselves on the foundation of (this) teaching in this way, it is (obvious and) established effortlessly. For this reason, we have not been too concerned to visit the homes of the masters of grammar in vain, to get (nothing) from that except the foul-smelling body (of

MV 3/10cd-11a. MV 3/10d is quoted in TĀv ad 3/80cd-81ab (81).

the dead letter). (What we have said also serves to refute similar possible objections) with regards to Mantras, such as the one consisting of nine letters (navātman), (long) garland-like ones (mālāmantra), and so on. That is how we

justify the procedure that there should a ‘prior” and a ‘subsequent’, succession and non-succession etc. (at the same time). (The point is that, according to this view, Speech is both one and multiple, that is, non-successive and successive).

In this way, the main and ultimately real abode of the Middle Speech is the goddess Mālinī, who is Śakti and Her essential nature. Thus, it is said in the Maālinīvijayottara: ‘In order that those who are followers of the Tantras and Mantras may achieve the desired fruits, the knower of Mantra should project into the acts of deposition (of Mantras onto the body) that have not been performed in accord with their specific procedures (viśeṣavidhi), Mālinī, whose (seeds are) mixed with the matrices, in order to obtain a body of power.” This mixture (of seeds) with the matrices has already been explained.

Thus, elsewhere also (we read):

‘One should apply Mantra to Śakti, not to the individual soul or the supreme reality, because (they would then) be insentient (in the first case) and inactive (in the second), and so would not give (either) worldly benefits or

liberation.”

As this is so and all things are in every (single) thing, (we will now

examine) in due order, (the nature of the first sixteen phonemes of the Mālinī

alphabet, namely) N r Ṛ | Ḷ TH C DH Ī Ṉ U Ū B K KH G, which constitute the

Śiva principle, with respect to that already expounded concerning supreme consciousness as it is presented here (in this work). (PTv p. 152)

(1) (The sense of) hearing (N), which is a matrix and consists of the state of (resonant) Sound (nāda), falls into the nourishing ground of the four seeds (2-5) (r Ṛ 1 Ḷ) that nourish nectar and having (thereby) attained an

intensified (and energized) state (bṛṁhitatva). (6) It iīmmediately assumes the state of the organ of taste (TH) (rasanā), which is the essence of the flavours and an organ of sense. (7) Then (after that), once it has differentiated (viśeṣībhūya) into (the principle of) smell (C), which is Earth, it assumes, there itself,

(8) the state of the sense of touch (DH) and,

(10) is reflected in the energy of the organ of speech (Ṇ)). (11-16) Then again, as the seeds of Expansion (unmeṣa) (U) and ascent (ārdhvāśraya) (Ū) of the energy of (that) organ of action (karaṇa), taking as its support the matrix of power, which is the intellect (B), penetrates completely into the matrices of Earth (K), water (KH) and Fire (G). The Speech of Vision is (primarily) within the (essential) nature of the

organ of speech (Ṇ) which, in accord with that (nature) extends there itself into MV 3/34-36. The first lne is quoted in the commentary on TA17/15

the seeds (r Ṛ I L), and having done so, it abides on the plane of vision (TH > D), impure knowledge (C > V), which is the generic (principle of perception that underlies the organs of perception), and in the last of all of them, namely, the sense of smell (DH > T). Then, having progressed by means of the seed of Īśvara (Ī) and taken the support of the power of hearing (N), by union with the two seeds of Expansion (U) and Ascent (U), it is present in the matrix of (the genitals, which is) the sense organ of pleasure (ānandendriya) (B > Ḍ), and (becomes) Sadāśiva

(K), Īśvara (KH) and Pure Knowledge (G). Thus, as it is present in the beginning, middle and end of all things, the Śiva principle, which is unlimited and possesses an infinite number of powers, is declared to be here. (17) GH, which in relation to supreme consciousness (taught) here (in this work) and the Speech of Vision, is Wind and Māyā, respectively (p. 153), is (here) within Mālinī, Sadāśiva. (The following letters correspond to three principles in the same way).

(18) N, which is Ether and the Force (of limited agency) (kalā), is

(19) (The letter) I, which is the will, consisting of power, is Pure Knowledge. (20) A (anuttara), which is free ‘I’ (consciousness) and the (principle)

called Śiva, is Māyā.

(21) V, which is impure knowledge and smell, is the Force (of limited

agency) (kalā).

(22) BH, which is Nature (prakṛti) and the organ of locomotion (pāda),

is ĪImpure Knowledge.

(23) Y, which is time and touch, is Aṭtachment (rāga). (24) D, which is the organ of excretion and ego, is Necessity (niyati). (25) ḌH, which is the hands and mind (manas), is Time. (26) TH, which is (the genitals) the organ of pleasure (ānandendriya)

and the intellect (buddhi), is the Individual Soul (puruṣa).

(27) IH, which is touch and time, is Nature (prakṛti). (28) N, which is sound and the individual soul, is the intellect (dhī). (29) J, which is form and Necessity, is the ego. (30) R, which is smell and Necessity, is mind (mnanas).

(31) T, which the organ of locomotion and Nature, is hearing. (32) P, which is the mind and hand, is skin (the sense of touch). (33) CH, which is flavour (rasa) and attachment, is the two eyes (of the sense of sight).

(34) L, which is attachment and flavour, is the sense of taste. (35) Ā, which is the power of bliss and Śiva’s power (śaivī), is the sense of smell. (36) S, which is (Pure) Knowledge and fire, is (the organ of) speech. (37) H, which is power of emission, is the organ of grasping. (38) H, which is Īśvara and water, is the organ of excretion.

(39) S, which is Māyā, and wind, is the organ of pleasure. (40) KṢ, which is Sadāśiva and earth, is the feet. (41) M, which is the individual soul and sound, is sound.

APPENDIX B (42) which is the Force (of limited agency) (kalā) and ether (nabhas),

is touch. (43) M, which is the power of Śiva Who is called the Point (haindavī), is form. (44) T, which is the sense of smell and touch, is flavour. (45) E, which the pure power of Śiva (sārttvī), is smell. (46) AI, the same (vowel) in its long form, is ether. (47-48) In the same way, O and AU are wind and fire. (p. 154) (49) D, which is the sense of sight and flavour, is water.

(50) PH, which is the ego and organ of excretion, is earth.

The deployment (niveśa) (in this way) in the body (takes place) here as

stated (in the scriptures). Thus, (the holistic) state (and the teaching that) every

(single) thing is everything is (easily established) without opposition. Thus, the moment the goddess Parā deposits, in the described manner, Her own reflected image into the Speech of Vision, she assumes at the same time the condition of

the matrices mixed (with the seeds) in the abode of Middle (Speech) which are established in a state of oneness with Her own nature. (Thus, She becomes)

Mālinī Who, as the variety of combinations seeds and matrices can form with

one another is infinite, has innumerable varieties, such as, for example,

Kulapuruṣa, and so She is of countless types. As is said:

‘one must sacrifice to the goddess Mālinī, who is surrounded by innumerable Kula deities and powers.” The yogi who is engaged in (his) practice based on this process externally in relation to the world orders and principles and (internally the corresponding internal) wheels, (comes to) possess particular accomplishments (siddhi) (according to) where he is within the body or the vital breath (PTv p. 155). Just as (particular) medicinal herbs taken together give rise to a specific result, in the same way, (practiced) together, a specific meditation or deposition

(of letters and Mantras onto the body), oblation and the like bestow a

(corresponding) specific accomplishment, because here (in this case) also, the activity (of the power of) constraint (niyati) is not transcended. Each (set of) scriptures (śāstra) describe a grid (prastāra) formed on the basis of a particular deployment of the phonemes (vārṇaniveśapuraḥsara) (within it). It consists of the aggregate (samiha) of phonemes, grouped together in a (fixed) determined series (niyataparipāṭīpiṇḍa), as determined by the particular primary phoneme which accords with the predominance of this or that divine phoneme in proportion to the knowledge (vijñāana) of their followers. (Once the manner in which the grid is to be drawn has been described, a Tantra) describes the manner in which Mantras are extracted (mantroddhāra) from it.

(This is done) to reveal the nature of that phoneme which imparts radiant energy

(sphuraṁtā) to the Mantras that are augmented (upabṛṁhita) by imparting this kind of vitality (vīrya) (to them). This is just (as is the case) with the venerable Nityā Tantras, (where this method) is the reason for the predominance

Abhinava is referring here the deposition of letters and Mantras onto the body. See TĀ 15/121 f.

(prādhānya) of the seed of delusion (mohana), that is, the letter AI. (Thus,) the

deployment (of letters) accords with the sequence of (letters of) the venerable (Maālinī alphabet,) that begins with N and ends with PH, that are arranged (in this way) due to the predominant (initial position of) the deployment (niveśa) of the Supreme Sound (N). This is the intention (abhiprāya) which is behind the

deployment (of the letters) of the Kulapuruṣa and Kulaśakti (in another alphabet). (The desired) result is not just to keep the Mantras and phonemes etc. secret, (but to empower them). . . . ʼ (PTv p. 156)

The deployment of the phonemes, governed by the power of constraint, vary in different schools in accord with the capacity of their votaries. Each of these deployments is sustained and governed by a principal phoneme within which, according to a particular school, the vitality of (its) Mantras is expressed. The various deployments differ from one another, not with the intention of keeping them secret. Rather it is because the vitality of Mantras is revealed in various ways due to the power of constraint to which they are subject, as are all phenomena.

Mālinīnyāsa the Deposition of Mālinī according to the Mālinīvijayottara

The order of the letters of the Mālinī alphabet is given in MV 3/37-41ab

reproduced (with a few variants) in TĀ 15/121-125ab.

Concerning Mātṛkā and Mālinī see TĀ 15/115cd-145.

Note that the names of the Yoginīs are not listed there. I have drawn them from the Triśirobhairava that Jayaratha quotes there in his commentary. Again, the corresponding 7Tartvas are not noted in the Tantrāloka. They are given in MV 4/114cd-118ab also in the PTv Singh p. 104 ff. where Abhinava comments on MV 4/125.

Cf. ṬĀ 15/128cd-130ab.

Concerning Mātṛkā and Mālinī see TĀ 15/115cd-145. The passage in the Mālinīvijayottara says:

“O goddess, I will tell you how all this is present in the body of Mālinī I have (just) described in which the vowels and consonants are mixed together. It is taught that the Earth principle is (located) within the phoneme PH. One should observe the twentythree principles beginning with water and ending with Nature to be within the corresponding phonemes beginning with D and ending with JH, respectively. Within the group of seven phonemes beginning with TH (up to A) are, as before, the seven (principles) beginning with the individual soul. (114cd-116ab) The three (principles) from Pure Knowledge ending with immanent Śiva (sakala) are in the (phonemes) I, N and GH. One should discern (how) the remaining sixteen phonemes from G to N are within the Śiva principle. The forces, the parts (of

mantra) (pada), the mantras and the world-orders, O fair lady, should be known to be as before distributed in that (same) numerical order as they are (in relation to) the

phonemes (of Mātṛkā).' MV 4/116cd-118ab

APPENDIX B Touch the parts of the body with Tattvamudrā saying: OM SAUḤ NAṀ NANDINYAI NAMAḤ Continue mutatis mutandis. Names ending in i/ī> yai ending in ā > āyai.

,_.Eyes _.|

of teeth teeth of teeth teeth

.23»)Y.__!|.ṬVināyaā _J| Rāga _| _Left shoulder | .Õ2)b | .Pūṇimā .|.Niyati __ .RīghtAm_|

kañcukas in reverse with respect to the sequential order Abhinava accepts in chapter nine and is found in the MV. Thus, according to them, after Māyā in the descending

order, they are Niyati, Kāla, Rāga, Vidyā and Kalā.

Bottom of the Trident Trident

ÕMT. Q.Ṛ.Vāyuvegā | ._REars _ | __Skull__QQ_Ḥ|

Genitals__ __Belly __|

Mālinīnyāsa 1. oṁ sṣauḥ naṁ nãdinyai namaḥ 2. oṁ sauḥ ṛṁ nivṛttyai namaḥ 3. oṁ sauḥ Ṛṁ pratiṣṭhāyai namaḥ 4. oṁ sauḥ lṁ vidyāyai namaḥ 5. oṁ sauḥ Ḷṁ śāntāyai namaḥ 6. oṁ sauḥ thaṁ satyai namaḥ 7. oṁ sauḥ caṁ priyadarśanyai namaḥ 8. oṁ ṣauḥ dhaṁ guhyaśaktyai namaḥ 9. oṁ sauḥ īṁ cāmuṇḍāyai namaḥ 10. oṁī sauh ṇaṁ vajriṇyai namaḥ 11. oṁ sauḥ uṁ ka”nkaṭāyai namaḥ 12. oṁ sauḥ ūṁ kālikāyai namaḥ 13. oṁ sauḥ baṁ śivāyai namaḥ 14. oṁ sauḥ kaṁ ghoraghoṣāyai namaḥ

1. Topknot 2. Head-band 3. Head-band 4. Head-band 5. Head-band 6. Top of the Head 7. Thīrd Eye 8. Eyes 9. Nose 10. Ears 11. Right Earring 12. Left Earring 13. Mouth 14. Teeth: lower right

breath. sa jīvo visargayuk tatparaḥ kathitaḥ prāṇaḥ | MVT 3/39d-40a

15. Teeth: Lower left 16. Teeth: Upper right 17. Teeth: Upper left 18. Front teeth 19. Tongue 20. Speech 21. Throat 22. Right shoulder 23. Left shoulder 24. Right Arm 25. Left Arm 26. Two hands 27. Nails right hand 28. Nails left hand 29. Trident: Bottom 30. Trident: Upper 31. Skul 32. Heart 33. Right breast 34. Left breast 35. Milk 36. Jīva 37. Jīva 38. Breath 39. Belly 40. Navel 41. Buttocks 42. Genitals 43. Sexual fluid 44. Thighs 45. Right knee 46. Left knee 47. Right shank 48. Left shank 49. Right foot 50. Left foot

The Deposition of Mālinī according to the Triśirobhairava Order

|__ 2_ |, R_ṬnNivú _ Head-band _| |_ 3 R / /Prayhā _ Head-band _| |_ 4 .ul Ṭ. Vidgya___, Headband_|

(Priyadarśanī)

T _ Guhyaśaki _Nose__|

..Vajiō _ _Mout _| row of) Teeth row of)

row of) Teeth of)

1 Mayādevī _ _Tongue_|

|_ 18 /{Ḹ SN ḤĪĒ_Naṁyaī _| TwoEars __| the (right) ear the (left) ear

|_ 22_ p 1 MlLam _ (Righpam

+ṬṀTṬ T=a=“. ṀT—TA-THI Trident

|_32 _/ P..Ú.ĀPavam__ –Heat _Ḥ

|_ 33 .. s ṄTambkā___Bely__

|_36_/Ḷ._L / CPutīnā ___ (Lefī) brcast | |_37 J.m.ḤḶ ._Moūī _|HMiīk _|

|_6_ / AI Kryāśaki _ (Lefl knee |_ 47 Ñ.ú0 Ḻ Gāyaṁī __(Righ shank | |_49 p {._Dahan __ _Rightfoot__ A Comparative Chart of the Mālinī Alphabet Kubjikā is repeated represented in the Kubjikā Tantras as an embodiment of Mālinī. As Mālinī does not figure in any other Kaula school, her central importance in the Kubjikā Tantra’s clearly illustrates their close relationship to Trika. Indeed, this deposition is very common in the Kubjikā Tantras, in the ṢSS and KM alone, it occurs eight times.

The following comparative chart of the Mālinī alphabet table has been

prepared on the basis of the following sources. 1) KuKh 18/25 ff. 2) SSS

chapter 7. The data from this source has been tabulated by Schoterman (1982:

216-217). 3) the Ṭikā (fl.

142b) 4) MVT (3/37-41a). The latter is

Abhinavagupta’s source for his presentation in the Tantrāloka (15/121-125a). The Mālinī letters and their corresponding Yoginīs and parts of the body are

listed in KRU 5/898. The sequential order of this series differs substantially

from the others, although the content is largely the same. The last two columns

on the right of the following table record the names of the goddesses of the Maālinī letters according to the ŚM. The ŚM supplies a description of the visualized form of each one. This is the only place I have found them. The drawings made on the basis of these visualizations of these Yoginīs is found in Dyczkowski 2007. The names listed in the penultimate column are drawn from chapter seven of the ŚM where the goddesses are described as recorded in the previous appendix. The last column contains the names of the goddesses linked to the Bhairavas of the letters of the Assembly of Sounds described in chapter twenty-four recorded in appendix VI below.

Comparative Chart of the Mālinī Alphabet KuK | Goddess Place | MV | Goddess | Place h KuKhṢSS | KuKh T

ṀT | - šē. ḵ , ōm ṭġg ḷ m m

Priyadarśanī

| všr ḵrē. | bn aṇē

Guhyaśakti | Nose

Kaṅkaṭā | Earring | Mohanī | Prajñāśa

Earring | U

and T: Right

I” | Gandhaśakt | Nose

Lower right

and | ṢSS and T:

Earring | Na SSS: ears

U Mohanyā SSS | SSS and T: and

Guhyaśa | Nārāyaṇī

Kālikā | Earring | Prajñā | Guhyaśa kti

Ka | Ghoragho | Teeth

APPENDIX B SSS and T: SSS: Kapālinyā | Lower

Ga | Māyādevī | Teeth

SSS: Upper right teeth Gha | Ghoraghoṣā | Teeth | Gha | Vāgīśvarī | Teeth Ghorā Ghoragh SSS:

Upper left teeth Na Vicitrā Teeth Na | Nārāyaṇī | Teeth | Cchirvar | Cirvarāśa

Khirvarā T: Vīrā

Front teeth

Shoulde | Bha

Right shoulde

Ya | Vāyuvegikā | Shoulde | Ya | Vināyakī

SSS and T: left shoulde

Left shoulde

Dha | Jhaṅkārī

Arm | Vināyakī | Vināyakī

Vāyuveg | Vāyuveg

Palms | Tha | Kundanā T: Two hands

|_Ḥ / lcchāśakti Back of Jha | Kāpalinī Nails_ Jhañkāṅ Jhañkārī |

TANTRĀLOKA SSS and T:

SSS | Jhañkārī and T:

of the right hand

SSS and T: Kurdanī

of the right hand Tips of | Na

SSS: Fingers of the left hand T: Nails of the left hand

SSS and Ṭ: | the nails SSS: | Saṁjīvanī of the H hand

Kurdanī | Kurdanī

Jayantī | Trident

the na1ls of the hand

SSS and T: Back

of the hand Ta | Kāpalinī T: | Skull T: ?

Bhīṣaṇī | Trident | Jayantī | Kapālīśa śakti

T. ? Bottom | Ta | Vāyuvegā |

SSS and T: | of Shaft Dīpanyā

of the Trident

right hand Jayantī ṢSS | Upper

Trident SSS: Points of the Trident

-_T Pava.wa Ṁ —T ṝ-TT Sa

SSS and T: Ambikā

La | Saṁhār | Breast

Breath | Na | Chagalī | Milk

(Chagalī) | Chagalī

Cha | Chagalā

T: Cchagalaṇḍ

T: Intellect

M | Guhyaśakti | Sexual | M SSS: Krūrā

ukrā | Thighs

Thighs | Ta

AI | Krīyāśaku | Knee | AI | Kṁyā | Knee | Kṛīyāśakt | Kṛyāśakū SSS

Ṃsn ṇg p on fsnak Ṭaānā Jāāā I shank

The letter CH 1s also commonly associated with Chikkarī or Chivarā.

TANTRĀLOKA and

Pha | Phetkārikā | Foot

Phetkārik | Foot T:

Phetkārī | Phetkārik

Appendix C The Assembly of ŚSounds (śabdarāśi) according to the Mālinīvijayottara

Sūkṣmāya . |

,___ SũPM _(ḷ Tihśāa ._| ._._ Leftnostil (ḍa) __._ ,_ $M..QQ.| .Q.Stāṇve _ _ Rightcheek__ .–

hand (Bones) (Marrow) (Semen)

Touch the parts of the body with Tattvamudrā saying Trika

OMṀ RAHARAKṢAMALAVAYŪM ŚRĪKAṆṬHĀYA NAMAḤ Kubjikā

AIṀ HRĪṀ ŚRĪṀ HSKHPHREṀ HSAUḤ AṀ ŚRĪKAṆṬTHĀYA NAMAḤ Or

OM HASAKṢAMALAVARAYŪM ŚRĪKANTHĀYA NAMAḤ Śabdarāśinyāsa

2. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ āṁ anantāya namaḥ 3. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūrṁ iṁ sūkṣmāya namaḥ 4. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ īṁ trimũrtyai namaḥ 5. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyyũṁ uṁ amarīśāya namaḥ 6. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyũṁ ūṁ arghĩśāya namaḥ 7. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ ṛṁ bhārabhũtyai namaḥ 8. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūrṁ Rṁ tithīśāya namaḥ 9. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ ḷṁ sthāṇave namaḥ. 10. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ Ḷṁ harāya namaḥ 11. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyyūṁ eṁ jhaṇṭhīśāya namaḥ

1. Forehead 2. Mouth 3. Right eye 4. Left eye 5. Right ear 6. Left ear 7. Right nostril (piṅgalā) 8. Left nostril (idā) 9. Right cheek 10. Left cheek 11. Lower teeth

13. Lower lip 14. Upper lip 15. Topknot

12. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ aiṁ bhauktikāya namaḥ

12. Upper teeth

16. Tongue 17. Right shoulder 18. Right arm 19. Right elbow

20. orī rhrkṣamlvyūṁ ghaṁ śivāya namaḥ

20. Right wrist

38. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ phaṁ śikhivāhine namaḥ

38. Left diaphragm

21. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ “naṁ ekarudrāya namaḥ

21. Fingers of the right hand 22. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ caṁ kũrmāya namaḥ 22. Left shoulder 23. oṁ ṛhrkṣamlyyūṁ chaṁ ekanetrāya namaḥ 23. Left arm 24. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ jaṁ caturānanāya namaḥ 24. Left elbow 25. oṁ ṛhrkṣamlyyūṁ jhaṁ ajitāya namaḥ 25. Left wrist 26. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūrṁ ñaṁ śyenāya namaḥ 26. Fingers of the left hand 27. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūrṁ ṭaṁ someśvarāya namaḥ 27. Right buttock 28. oṁ ṛhrkṣamlyyūṁ thaṁ lāṅguliṅe namaḥ 28. Right thigh 29. oṁ ṛhrkṣamlvyūṁ daṁ ḍãrukāya namaḥ 29. Right knee 30. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ ḍhaṁ ardhanārīśvarāya namaḥ 30. Right shank 31. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūrṁ naṁ umākāntāya namaḥ 31. Toes of right foot 32. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūrṁ taṁ niṣāḍhine namaḥ 32. Left buttock 33. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ thaṁ ḍiṇḍiṇāya namaḥ 33. Left thigh 34. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ daṁ dhātriṅe namaḥ 34. Left foot 35. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ dhaṁ mīnāya namaḥ 35. Left toes 36. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ naṁ meṣāya namaḥ 36. Left toenails 37. oṁ rhrkṣamlyyūṁ paṁ lohitāya namaḥ 37. Right diaphragm 39. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ baṁ chagalaṇḍāya namaḥ 40. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyyūṁ bhaṁ dviraṇḍāya namaḥ 41. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ maṁ mahākvlāya namaḥ 42. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ yaṁ vālīśāya namaḥ 43. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ raṁ bhujaṅgamāya namaḥ

39. Spine 40. Stomach 41. Heart 42. Skin (Chest) 43. Blood (right shoulder)

44. Flesh (neck) 45. Sinews (left

46. oṁ rhrkṣamlvyūṁ śaṁ bakīśāya namaḥ

46. Bones (From the chest to the right hand) 47. Fat (From the chest

to the left hand)

48. Semen (From the chest to the left foot) 49. Breath (From the

chest to the right foot)

50. Cavity of Brahmā

able to trace that presents a description of the visualized forms of the Bhairavas.

Based on them drawings have been published in Dyczkowski 2007: >>>. The series is well known generally in the Tantras of other schools of the early period and the later ones. We also find it, for example, in the Svacchandatantra (2/29-

35), Aggnipurāṇa (145/28-30; 293/41-47), and the Śāradātilaka (2/29-35).

The fifty letters and their location in the body are noted in chapter 19 of the KuKh, however the Bhairavas are not named there. Presuming that their names are those listed in chapter six (KuKh 6/14-20), they have been entered first in column two. The variants of these names in the KM (24/20) and SSS (38/4-20) are noted next to those of the KuKh. The first variant is from the KM

and the second from the SSS. Significantly variant names found in the

Tīkā. The locations of the letters and Bhairavas in the body noted in the fourth column are taken from chapter nineteen of the KuKh. Variants in the KM and SSS are noted in brackets in italics. Those of the KnT have been noted in the last column on the right. A compartment is left empty if the entry agrees with the corresponding one to the left of it.

A Table of the Letters, Bhairavas and Locations of the Assembly of Śounds Letter

KuKh / KM, SSS

Location in

Location in

,_ A. |. Anaūua._ | ...-LIT Mouh __ _Ī ,_Ṃ /|Ṃ Sūkbṣma., _.._IRighteye_____ _ Caturmūrtika (?)

,_ U_|Amarṁśa/Amaṁn_| Vaṅśa_| .Rightear ___.__| ,_úŪ | Arghīa/Arghin Arghīśa | lLeftear _| _ d| (piṅgalā)

Bhairava KuKh /KM, SSS

Location in the Body

Location in the Body (KNT˚)

,_1! /|.._shau / “’_ Rightcheek __.__ __ ḺḶ. J|, ._Haa __/.-.-|LTReficheek._|

H —N TṀgag7 |, - T-v Z

IkR HH gpraa-7

_ EÉ .QJhanhśa_.__ ._TTLowerteet .__ Bhautin

,_Ka | .Krodha _ _Kruddha _Rightshoulder | _._._._, Kha

Right arm (middle of the

Right elbow

Right hand (also in

ú Ia Śivottama

(upper part of hand)

Fingers of the

HHB rērsāzgr - Ū--- Ṭāx (front of hand)

,.a |_Kūma___ _" CT| " L-eftshoulder | _.._., (armpit

Kūrma (?) / | Fingers of the

See above, note to 6/31-33ab.

(middle of knee

TANTRÃLOKA Letter

Bhairava KuKh/KM, SSS

Location in the Body KuKh

Location in the Body (KnT)

r-ra-N --T,Ṁzãṛ -- >

foot (right foot) (buttock)

ī-Cr=--ṬN r̥r ō--(Daṇḍi)

Dhātṛṟudraka /

ŚT: Syadriī

S–ṀTI.dN|TxaRaā

foot (left foot

IHHHĒṈ ÑṄEHĒEHĒENĒEN hNĒEḤ INNH DPHM ĪHHHEṈ ĪEEHEĒEENĒE BĀÉNENHN INNHN IĀHN

iI-JJIBṚBRAĀĪĒ o-prāṀg_-Ṁ

ikhivāhin /

| ..|| -ṇ -n | .1 Right

Left diaphragm

Ba |Chagalaná_J|...._I Spine Q._.__| Bha | Dviraṇḍa _._Q_Ṛ___Ī| —Navel _ .._.

Heat _. ...._ Ya ˚|..vāīaa __| .._B..NISkn_._|...._` Bhujaṅgama /

,_Va _| Khaḍga/Khadgin |Khaḍgīaa |._Sinews _| .._.._| Sa

Bakānanada /

|Sa | Svetaka/Śveta |_.,__ |HMarow__|...._ ,Sa /| lakuliv√Bhṛgu | ._ʼʼ_Ī| Semen __|Q._..._

7 =- Ṁ (SSS Kh: Lakulin

,_ KṢa | Saṁvartakā Saṁvara .Anger _| ._.._.|

The Formation of the Trident Throne! The Deposition of the Throne (āsananyāsa) According to the Śvacchandatantra 2/55ab-84, with Kṣemarāja’s Commentary The account of the Throne described in the Svacchandatantra only extends up to Mahāpreta, on which Svacchandabhairava sits. Kṣemarāja significantly identifies him in his pervasive state as the oneness of the Throne with the Bhairava of Consciousness - Cidbhairava – to whom he refers in his commentary on the Vijñānabhairavatantra as a synonym of Vijñānabhairava. This identification here not only implies that Svacchandabhairava’s deepest, pervasive identity is consciousness, it also implies that he is the Bhairava of the Trika teachings tramsnitted in the Vijñānabhairavatantra. Thīs is the Bhairava who sits on this Throne. We observe as we read its description in the Svacchandatantra and Kṣemarājā’s elaboration in his commentary, that practically all the constituent layers of this seat are incorporated into the Trident Throne up to this level. Here the Throne is a lotus. The equivalent of the Staff of the Trident is the stem of the

lotus. On the lotus lies the Great Ghost — mahāpreta who is identified with Sadāśiva, laughing and red-eyed. On him sits Svacchandabhairava. There we reach the summit. Three prongs that emerge from the navel of the Greast Ghost ṛeplace Svacchandabhairava and so the lotus becomes the Trika Trident.

Thus as we ascend along it, we journey through the history of the

development of the Saiva schools. This is said to be mirrored by their developing excellence. Accordingly, Abhinava notes at what level along the Trident other schools locate the summit of their throne but does not relate that to

their historical development. This is as one would expect - Śiva’s word is eternal. Even so, we may surmise that the Svacchandatantra precedes the

Trika Tantras. A comparision of this account with the one in chapter eight of the Mālinīvijayottara (verses 54 to 83ab) upon which Abhinava’s account is based (in TĀ 15/297-318) shows that the details are similar (see below where all of chapter eight of the Maālinīvijayottara has been translated). The essential difference is that the Trika Trident continues beyond Svacchandabhairava’s Throne (āsana) described in following passage drawn from the Svacchandabhairavatantra. This is done by having the three prongs of the Tṛident emerge from the navel of the Greast Ghost. We turn now to the text. First. The Tantra, then Kṣemarāja’s commentary. ātmānaṁ bhairavaṁ dhyātvā tato hṛdyāgama ācaret | puryaṣṭakaśarīram api bhairavīkartum ayaṁ prakrama ārabdhaḥ l||

See TĀ 15/297-318.

VBh p. 1: iha śrīmān cidbhairavaḥ pūrṇāhaṁvimarśātma-.

tatra yājyasya bhairavarūpasyātmana āsananyāsaṁ tāvad vitatya nirūpayati -Having meditated on oneself as Bhairava, one should take (that identification) to heart. (55ab)

This procedure now commences in order to also make the subtle body (puryaṣṭakaśarīra) one with Bhairava. There (in that regard, the Tantra goes on) to describe extensively the deposition of the seat of the object of worship, which is oneself in the form of Bhairava. nābhau kandaṁ samāropya nālaṁ tu dvādaśāṅgulam || 55 || hṛdantaṁ kalpayed yāvat tatra padmaṁ vicintayet | aṣṭapatraṁ mahādīptaṁ keṣarālaṁ sakarṇikam || 56 || kandaṁ padmotpattimūlam, samāropya parikalpya, mattagandhapīdanayuktyā ca kandaṁ nãbhau nãbhiviṣaye samāropya ullāsya, nālaṁ prāṇaśaktirūpam, nābhiḥṛdayāntarālasya dvādaśāṅgulatvāt dvādaśāṅgulam ity uktam || Havīng projected the bulb (kanda) (at the base of the Throne) into the navel, imagine that the stalk, which extends for twelve finger-breadths, ends into the heart. Imagine a lotus there. It has eight petals and is very brilliant. It has stamens and a calyx. (55cd-56)

The bulb is the root from which the lotus emerges. ‘Having projected’ means ‘having imagined’. The bulb is projected, that is, pushed up, ‘into the naveḷʼ, that is, within the area of the navel, by the practice of clenching the anus (mattagandha). ʻThe stalkʼ is the energy of the vital breath (prāṇaśakti). As the distance between the navel and the heart is twelve fingerbreadths, it is said to ‘extend for twelve finger-breadths’. atra vyāptīm āha ---kandaṁ śaktimayaṁ tatra nāle vai kaṇṭakās tu ye | bhuvanāni ca tāny eva rudrāṇāṁ varavarṇini |l 57 || māyātmako bhaved granthir aśuddhādhvavyavasthitaḥ | vidyāpadmaṁ mahādīptaṁ karṇikābījarājitam || 58 II puṣkarāṇi ca deveśī tatra vidyeśvarāḥ smṛtāḥ | evaṁ dhyātvā mahāpadmaṁ sarvadevamayaṁ śubham |l 59 || He states the extent (of each one) here (as follows).

‘(One should imagine) that the bulb is made of energy. O most excellent lady, the thorns there on the stalk are the worlds that belong to the Rudras. The knot is Māyā, and it is located on the impure path. The lotus of knowledge is very brilliant and is adorned with a calix and seeds. O mistress of the gods, the blue lotuses there are said to be Vidyeśvaras. Having meditated on (that), the

auspicious great lotus made of all the gods.” (57-59)

kalpayed ity anuvartate | Śśaktir icchātmā pārameśvarī ādhārabhūtā yasyāṁ viśvam idam ādhirayate sā "'vyomākārām” iti vakṣyamāṇatvāt garbhīkṛtadharāditattvacatuṣṭayā | yathoktaṁ śrīpūrvaśāstre ---ādāv ādhāraśaktiṁ tu nābhyadhaś caturaṅgulām | dharāṁ surodaṁ potaṁ ca kandaś ceti catuṣṭayam || (8-55) iti | tatra aptattvavyāptyā surārṇavam, tejovyāptyā khyātaṁ (potam), prāṇaprasūtihetuṁ vyūhātmakaṁ vāyuvyāptyā kandam ity evaṁvyaktikā śaktiḥ prakrtaṁ rũpaṁ yasya tat sāram ity arthaḥ | ata eva aṅkuranālarūpāśeṣādhvavyakteḥ tatra gandhatanmātrādikalātattvāntanālavyāptiḥ ) rudrãṇãm .iti rtattattattvādhiṣṭhātRṇām | mahādīptam iti śuddhādhvavartyaśeṣamantratejomayatvāt | puṣkarāṇi bījāni | vidyeśvarāh anantabhaṭṅṭārakādyāḥ Śśikhaṇḍyantāḥ | evaṁ kandanālagranthidalakarṇikābījarūpaṁ sṣaḍuttham āsanaṁ prasiddham || 59 1| (The diction) ‘one should imagine’ follows (each item listed). ‘“Energy’

is the will of the Supreme Goddess who is the foundation (ādhāra) within which

this universe is sustained and, as will be explained, her ‘form is the Sky’ and so encompasses within herself the four principles (that is. the Great Elements), Earth and the rest. As is said in the Mālinīvijayottara: ‘First of all, the Energy of the Foundation (should be projected into the

base of the Trident) four fingers below the naval. (Then) the four, that is, Earth

(dharā), the Ocean of Wine (suroda), the Boat (pota) and the Bulb (kanda).”

There, the Ocean of Wine is due to the pervasion of the principle of Water, and the Boat by the pervasion of Fire. The Bulb is the cause of the birth of the vital breath (prāṇa) and consists of the aggregate (of all the vital energies). By virtue of the pervasive presence of Wind, energy is the Bulb that makes it manifest in this way. That is its material nature, which is its essence. This is the meaning. Thus, ‘thereʼ the stalk pervades from the subtle element of smell up to the principle of the Force (of limited agency) because all the Path manifests in the form of the sprout and the stalk. The ‘Rudras’ are the governors of (their)

respective principles. (The lotus is) ‘very brilliant’ because it is made of the radiant energy (tejas) of all the Mantras present on the Pure Path. ‘The blue lotusesʼ are the seeds. The ‘Vidyeśvaras’ are those (wWho belong to the group) beginning with the venerable Ananta and ending with Sikhaṇḍin. In this way, it is well known that the seat originates thus from the six, namely, the bulb, stalk,

knot, petals, calix and seeds.

āsananyāse kramam āha ---Śaktinyāso bhavet pūrvaṁ kandaṁ tu tadanantaram | aṅkuraṁ nālavinyāsam anantaṁ parikalpayet || 60 || tejomayaṁ mahāśubhraṁ sphuratkiraṇabhāsvaram | MV 8/55.

The sequence in which the seat is deposited is stated (next). Energy is deposited first, then after that, the bulb. The deposition of the sprout and the placement of the stalk (follows. Then) one should imagine Ananta, who is made of radiant energy, very bright and shining with brilliant

rays. (60-61ab)

kalpayed ity arthaḥ l| 60 ||

nālḷaṁ vinyasya yad uktaṁ anantaṁ parikalpayet iti, tanmadhye granthisthāne siṁhāsanaṁ tadupari ca padmaṁ krameṇa kalpayitum āha ---Having penetrated into ‘the energy° of the will, which is the surface

(bhitti) onto which the universe is inscribed, and crossed over into ‘the bulbʼ, which is the pillar (that rises from) it, and then, having outlined the entire Path

up to the end of Māyā, which is ‘the stalk and the sprout’ in the form of the extending flow of its unfolding, ‘one should imagine’, just by means of the memory alone, the Vidyeśa Ananta, who is ‘made of radiant energy’. After having taught ‘the placement of the stalk’ and imagined Ananta,

the (following) is said so as to imagine, in due order, in the middle of that, where the Knot is located, the throne (siṁhāsana) and, above it, the lotus.

ete ca ---sitaraktapītakr̥ṣṇā āgneyyādīśadiggatāḥ | pādakāḥ siṁharūpās te trinetrā bhīmavikramāḥ || 62 || One should deposit Dharma, Knowledge, Dispassion and Lordship in due order. (61cd) And these: White, red, yellow and dark blue (respectively), they are (located) in the (intermediate) directions, beginning with the southeast and ending with the

northwest. These souls (pādaka), in the form of lions, have three eyes and their

valour is ferocious. (62)

pādakā iti etadvāsanānuviddhā hi saṁsaranti saṁsāre ity aśeṣasaṁsāriṇaḥ ajñātāḥ pādāḥ pādakāḥ, ete sūṁharūpā iti parākramamahimnā, aśeṣaviśvākramaṇāt | īśvaraśaktyadhiṣṭhāne evaitad eṣāṁ ghaṭate na tu sāṁkhyanaye jaḍābuddhidharmarūpatāyām itīśvaraśaktyadhiṣṭhānād ete trinetrāḥ, ghorasaṁsāraghātahetutvāc ca bhīmavikramāḥ || 62 || The ‘souls’, pierced through by these latent traces, wander around in the world of transmigration. (Thus,) they are all the transmigrating beings who are

ignorant of (their) state (pāda). They have ‘the form of lions’ because of the greatness of their valour, and because they extend over the entire universe. This

happens for them under the presidency of Iśvara’s power, not, as Sāṁkhya teaches, due to the existence of the nature (dharma) of the insentient intellect.

Thus, because (they are) sustained by the power of Īśvara, they ‘have three eyesʼ. “Their valour is ferocious’ because they are the cause of the fierce blows of transmigratory existence.

parameśvaraśaktmayā

One who desires liberation should ‘deposit these Mantras made of Śiva’s power.’ (63ab) In reality, (Mantras are living beings) made of the Supreme Lord’s power. Not known to be such, they wander on lower planes. If they are recognized to be such, then they are transmigrating beings who are on the Pure

Path and their nature as Mantra is revealed by the will of Śiva, who is the one

who recognises (them to be such, namely,) as possessing the attributes of contemplation (manana) and salvation (trāṇa). (Thus,) in reality they possess (great) devotion. Their nature as Mantra is not any other (than this) because they are on the Impure Path (it is always as it is when they are on the Pure Path). siṁhāsane ‘vayavāntarāṇy āha ---adharmājñānāvairāgyam anaiśvaryaṁ ca prāgdiśaḥ || 63 1 uttarāntaṁ niveśyaṁ tu............... ete hi ---...........Qātrakāḥ sitavarṇakāḥ | siṁhāsanapaṭṭikārūāpāḥ | prāyaśca sarve "khyātimayamāyācchāditatvād adharmādimayāḥ, ata eva dharmādīn prati sprhayālava ity adharmādaya eṣāṁ māyāpade ajñātāni gātrakāṇi || 63 || atraiva ---He names the other parts of the throne.

‘Adharma, Ignorance, lack of dispassion and lack of lordship should be placed in the (primary) directions (beginning with) the east and ending with the north. Their bodies are white.” (63cd-64ab)

(They are) the pieces of cloth (that cover) the throne. Generally, all things consist of Adharma etc. because they are covered over by Māyā, which is ignorance. They long for Dharma and the rest (that are their positive counterparts). Thus, on the plane of Māyā, the bodies of Adharma and the rest are unknown. Here itself (in the same place it is said): saṁáhãnakĩlakãś caiva atasīpuṣpasaṁnibhãḥ || 64 || vedā yugāś ca te caiva jñātavyāḥ kramaśaḥ priye | āgneyyādikrameṇa pratikoṇaṁ pādakena saha gātrakadvayasya bandhanārthaṁ kīlakadvayam iti | r̥gādayo vedāḥ, kṛtādayaś ca yugās tattadbhogavāsanāḥ puṣṇantaḥ saṁsārabandhanahetavo vicitraśaṅkāśaṅkurūpāḥ saṁdhānakīlakā ity uktāḥ | bandhakatvād eva ca kṛṣṇavarṇā jñātavyāḥ |

‘“(They are) the nails that hold (the throne together). They are (dark

blue) like atasī flowers. O beloved, one should know them in due order to be the Vedas and (four cosmic) Ages.” (64cd-65ab)

In each corner, in due order beginning with the southeast, there are two nails that serve to hold together the two bodies with the feet (of the throne) (pādaka). The nails that hold (the throne together) are said to be the (four) “Vedas’ beginning with the Ṛk (Veda), and the (four cosmic) ‘Ages’ beginning with Kṛta, that nurture the latent traces of each worldly experience. The cause of the bondage of transmigratory existence. Their form consists the (many and) various doubts and fears. They should be known to be black because they are binding. They are binding when not known to be the Supreme Lord’s power mentioned previously. Surely, (one may ask), how can these qualities of the intellect have attained such (an extensive) plane (of existence)? (In response to this question) it is said that qualities (of Nature), such as the intellect and the

rest (mentioned here), are products of Māyā. The intellect and the rest is the

location of the development (of the Qualities). They should be cut away from the plane in which they are rooted. (Once) severed (from it), they no longer

grow again. Such is this process (krama) which, like this, (serves) to sever them from the plane of (their) origin. ata eva sattvarajastamāṁsi mūlata evocchettuṁ siṁhāsanopari guṇamayam eva māyām aṣūrakaṁ nyasitum āha ---adhaśchādanam ūrdhvaṁ ca raktaṁ śuklaṁ vicintayet || 65 || madhye tamo vijānīyād guṇās tv ete vyavasthitāḥ |

Thus, in order to sever sattva, rajas and tamas from (their very) root,

(the following) is said s0 as to place the piḷlow (asūraka), that is, Maāyā, that is

made of all (three) qualities, onto (this level of) the throne:

‘One should think that the lower and upper covers are red and white

(respectively). One should know that darkness (tamas) is in the middle. These

are the qualities arranged (in this way).’ (65cd-66ab)

ūrdhvaṁ śuddhavidyānikaṭavartitvāt sitaṁ sattvarāpam | adhas tu saṁsaraṇānuguṇatvād raktaṁ rajomayam | madhye tu khyātyācchādanaprakarṣāt tamomayaṁ kṛṣṇam | prādhānikaḥ prapañco māyāyām asann ityādi tv asat, aśeṣamāyākāryasya māyāyāṁ sūkṣmarūpatayā bhuvanādhvavarṇayiṣyamāṇasthityāvasthityāvasthitatvāt | śaktipātapavitrais tu sarvaṃ etac chivaśaktirūpaṁ mantratayaiva bhavanīyam | yad vakṣyati ---yatra yatra ity upakramya, sarvam śivamayaṁ yataḥ |l iti |) (The cover) above is close to Pure Knowledge and so is white and its nature is sartva. The quality (of the one) below is consonant with that of

transmigratory existence and so is red and made of rajas. In the middle, (the

space between them), is black and made of tamas, because of its great capacity (prakarṣa) to veil knowledge. ‘The creation (that proceeds) from fundamental nature (pradhāna) does not exist within Māyā’. According to this view, it does not exist because the entire product of Māyā is located within Māyā in a subtle form arranged as the Path of the Worlds (in the manner that) will be explained.

Those who have been sanctified by a descent of the power (of grace) should

contemplate all that, the nature of which is Śiva’s power, as Mantra. As will be

said (further ahead in the passage beginning with) ‘wherever’ and (ending with)

‘as everything is made of Śiva.’

karṇikā hemasaṅkāśā bījāni haritāni tu | 67 1

īdṛgvarṇam eva sitapadmaṁ bhavati | sitatvaṁ cāsya śuddhavidyāmayatvāt | asya daleṣu devatānyāsam āha ---Now, in order to place the Lotus of Knowledge on the throne, on top of the pillow (asūraka) (he says):

The word ‘asūīraka’ means both ‘demon’ and ‘pillow. SVT 4/3134.

yatra yatra mano yāti jñeyaṁ tatraiva cintayet |

calitvā yāsyate kutra sarvaṁ sśtvamayam yataḥ || 4-313 ||

‘(For such a great yog1,) wherever (his) mind goes, he should think that (the supreme

reality) which 1s to be known 1s there. As everything is Śiva (sśivamaya), having moved (from one

place), where will it go (that is not Śiva)?’ SVT 4/313

TĀANTRĀLOKA

‘“Know that there is a white lotus (there). Think that the stamens are

white, red and yellow, at the root, in the middle and in front (respectively). The

calyx is (white) as snow and the seeds are green.’ (66cd-67)

The white lotus has these colours. It is white because it is (the principle

of) Pure Knowledge. Now he teaches the projection of the deities onto its petals: vāmāṁ pūrvadale nyasya jyeṣṭhāṁ vahnidalāśritām | raudrīṁ dakṣiṇapatre tu kālīṁ nairṛtagocare || 68 II kalavikaraṇīṁ devīṁ vinyasyed vāruṇe dale | balavikaraṇīṁ devīṁ vāyavyadalamāśritām || 69 || balapramathanī devīmuttare viniyojayet |

sarvabhūtadamanīṁ ca eśānyāṁ viniyojayet || 0 |

madhye manonmanīṁ devīṁ karṇikāyāṁ niveśayet | ‘Place Vāmā on the eastern petal. Then Jyesthā is placed on the southeastern petal. Raudrī is on the southern petal and Kaālī is in the area of the

southwest (nairṛta). The one (called) Kalavikaraṇī should be deposited on the

western petal. The one (called) Balavikaraṇī is located on the petal in the northwest. The goddess Balapramathanī should be allocated to the north and Sarvabhūtadamanī to the northeast. The one called Manonmanī should be placed in the middle of the calyx.” (68-71ab)

spaṣṭam etat || 70 || erac ca ---śakracāpanibhaṁ devi dhyātavyaṁ śaktimaṇḍalam || 71 I| tato ʻpi ---madhye sūryasahasrābhāṁ cintayet tu manonmanīm | etā devyo bhuvanādhvanītyā pareṇa rūpeṇa śaktitattve sthitāḥ, madhye tu pade parāpareṇa, iha tu vidyāyām apareṇa rūpeṇeti vibhāgaḥ | tatraiva cāsāṁ nāmānusāri svarūpaṁ darśayiṣyāmaḥ, sarvaṁ prāguktaśaktitrayamayam iti ||

This is clear. Moreover,

‘O goddess, one should meditate on the circle of energies to be like

Indra’s bow.” (71cd)

Then also: ‘One should think of Mind Beyond Mind, shining like a thousand suns, in the centre.” (72ab)

In terms of the teaching concerning the Path of the Worlds, these goddesses are present in the principle of power (śaktitattva) in their supreme (para) form. On the plane in the centre, they are intermediate (parāparā) and

here, within Vidyā, (they are) in the lower (apara) form. This is the division (between them). There itself (where the Path of the Worlds is taught), we will

explain their nature in accord with their names (and how) everything is made of the three powers mentioned previously. (Now the following) is said, in order to deposit within the principle of Knowledge the three circles (maṇḍala) that are the means (of knowledge),

object and subject, and the pervasion of knowledge, action and the will (respectively). sūryādhvamaṇḍalaṁ patre somaṁ saṁṇyojya kesare || 72 || vahnimaṇḍalakaṁ devi karṇikāyāṁ niveśayet | atra hi meyarūpasya somasya vahnisūryātmakamātrmānamadhyavartitvam, na hi mātṛprakāśabhittīṁ vinā mānaprakāśācchuraṇaṁ vinā vā meyaprakāśaḥ kaścit | pramātraiva hi cidrasāśyānībhāvātma meyam ābhāsyate, ābhāsyamānaṁ ca pramāṇaprakāśācchuritam eva bhavatīty alam adhikena; (vistṛtaṁ ca) bhaviṣyaty etat sṛṣṭisaṁhãrapaṭale || 72 || etad dhāmatrayādhiṣṭhātṛdevatātrayaṁ nirūpayati tadadhiṣṭhātṛviśvāntar-bhāvam atra prakaṭayitum ---‘Place the Circle of the Path of the Sun on the leaves and conjoin the Moon to the stamens. O goddess, place the Circle of Fire in the calyx. (72cd-

Here the Moon, which is the object of knowledge, is in between the subject and means of knowledge that are Fire and the Sun (respectively). There is no light of objectivity of any kind without the screen of the light of the subject (onto which it is projected) and the pervasive presence of the light of the means of knowledge. It is the perceiver alone, who is the condensed state of the aesthetic savour of consciousness, that illumines the object of knowledge. That which is made manifest (‘illuminedʼ) is pervaded by the light of the means of knowledge. Now enough of excessive (talk). (This) will be (taught) extensively

(later) in the chapter devoted to emanation and withdrawal. The three presiding deities of these three abodes is (now going to be) described. (The following) is said in order to elucidate the universal inner state of the presiding (deities) of that (triple abode):

brahmā viṣṇur haraś caiva maṇḍaleṣy adhipāḥh smṛtāḥ || 73 Il parāparayā vyāptyā eṣāṁ dhyānam āha ---brahmā caturmukho raktaś caturbāhuvibhūṣitaḥ | kṛṣṇājinottarīyaś ca rājīvāsanasaṁsthitaḥ || 74 || kamaṇḍaludharo devi daṇḍahastas tathaiva ca | akṣamālādharo devaḥ padmahastaḥ sulocanaḥ |l 75 |l dhyātvā patreṣu taṁ nyasyet sarvakilviṣanāśanam | ‘Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Hara are considered to be the lords within the circle.” (73cd)

(Now he teaches) their visualization, in terms of (both) the supreme and

inferior pervasion:

‘Brahmā has four faces. He is red and is adorned with four arms. He wears a cloak of black antelope and is seated on a lotus seat. O goddess, his eyes are beautiful and he holds a waterpot and staff, rosary and lotus. Having visualized (him thus,) place him, the destroyer of all sin, amongst the petals (of the lotus).” (74-76ab)

atasīpuṣpasaṅkāśaṁ śaṅkhacakragadādharam || 76 ||

pītāmbaradharaṁ devaṁ vanamālāvibhūṣitam | sphuranmukuṭamāṇikyaṁ kiṅkiṇījālamaṇḍitam || 77 |I divyakuṇḍaladhartāraṁ garuḍāsanasaṁsthitam | dhyātvā viṣṇuṁ mahātmānaṁ keśareṣu niveśayet || 78 I| ‘(Dark blue) like an atasī flower, holding a conch, wheel and mace, the

god wears yellow clothes and is adorned with a garland of (flowers). The jewels of his crown shine and he is adorned with a net of small bells. He wears forest (flowers as his) divine earrings and sits on Garuḍa as his seat. Having visualized Viṣṇu (in this way) place (that) great soul amongst the stamens (of the lotus).”

Śśaṅkhena padmamupalakṣyate | mānameyayor lolībhāvān meyātmani somamanṇḍale sṛṣṭipradhāne ‘pi sthitikārī viṣṇuḥ, sthityātmani ca pramāṇarūpe sūryamaṇḍale sṛṣṭikartā brahmādhiṣṭhātā, iti yujyate evaitat I| 78 || The lotus (Viṣṇu holds, but is not mentioned here,) is indicated implicitly by (the mention of) the conch. Viṣṇu, the agent of stability, is present in the Circle of the Moon, which is the object of knowledge, although it is predominately (the sphere of) emanation, because the means and object of

knowledge are intimately connected (lolībhāvāt). Again, (similarly) Brahmā, the agent of emanation, is the presiding authority (adhiṣṭhātṛ) within the Circle of

the Sun, which is (the sphere of) stability and its nature the means of knowledge. This makes sense. śaṅkhakundendudhavalaṁ śūlahastaṁ trilocanam | daśabāhuṁ viśālākṣaṁ nāgayajñopavītinam || 9 |l sīṁhacarmaparĩdhãnaṁ śaśāṅkakrtabhũṣaṇam | nīlakaṇṭhaṁ vrṣārūdhaṁ rudraṁ dhyātvā varānane || 80 |l niveśayet karṇikāyāṁ mahāpātakanāśanam | taduparĩ ---mahāpretaṁ nyaset paścāt prahasantaṁ sacetanam || 81 || raktavarṇaṁ sutejaskaṁ netratrayavibhūṣitam | ‘White like a conch, Kunda flower and the moon, he holds a trident and has three eyes; His eyes are large, and he has ten arms and wears a serpent as a sacred thread. He wears a lion-skin cloak and has made the moon his ornament. His throat is blue, and he sits on a bull. Having visualized Rudra (in this way),

O fair-faced one, place him, the destroyer of great sins, in the calix (of the lotus). (79-81ab) Above it: ‘After that, place the Great Ghost, sentient and laughing (on the lotus). He is red, beautifully powerful (surejaska) and adorned with three eyes.” (81cd82ab) prakarṣeṇa .itaḥ sphutṭed antānīmajjanena ahantāpradhānāṁ sthitim anupraviṣṭaḥ; prakarṣeṇa ca itaṁ gataṁ saṁbaddhaṁ viśvaṁ yasya iti vyutpattyā preta iha sadāśivaḥ, sa ca mahad iti padena anāśritaśivarūpaḥ | paramaśiva eva ca bhagavān ekaś cidrūpas tadadhararūpavarīī, ity anāśritādis tadekajīvitaḥ, svayaṁ tu preta iva pretaḥ, adharādhvano ‘tra stimitatvenāvasthānāc ca pretaḥ, (Kṣemarāja now presents a didactic etymology of the name ‘mahāpretaā’ – the Great Ghost). The one who has gone forth (itah) becomes manifest (sphuṭet) as more excellent (prakarṣeṇa) (than others) (= pretah). (In other words,) he has entered into the abiding state (sthiti) that is predominantly subjectivity (ahantā) by merging inwardly (into consciousness). Now, according to the following didactic etymology, the Ghost (preta) is Sadāśiva. (He is also called preta because) his universe has become (ita) excellently (prakarṣena)

well-bound (within consciousness). According to this etymology, the Ghost — preta – here is Sadāśiva. Moreover, he is ‘great’. (This) word (implies that he is transcendent and so) never enters (creation) (anāśrita). He is the Supreme Śiva Himself, the one God (bhagavat) who is consciousness, who is present in the foundation of that (universe). Thus, His own life is as transcendent Śiva (anāśrita) etc. and having by Himself (spontaneously) seemingly gone forth — preta – He is preta, the ‘Ghost’. He is (also) the Ghost whose lower path (back into the world) has been blocked, and (that is His) abiding state.

sa ca aparayā vyāptyā sthūlaḥ sadāśivaḥ, madhyamayā sa eva nādarūpaḥ, parayã tu anãśritaḥ, iti tadanusãreṇa sũṁhãsanaṁ padmaṁ ca yojyam | ṣa ca pretaḥ paramaśivo ‘hantānupraveśād eva prahasan nādāmarśarūpo mahāvikāsamayaś ca, tenaiva paramaśivena nādātmanā sacetanaḥ | evam api tāvanmātredantonmeṣātmako-pādhirūpatvāt viśvānurañjakatvāc ca raktavarṇaḥ, bodhaprādhānyāt sutejaskaḥ | vakṣyati ca ---- sūryakoṭiṣamaprabham | iti bhauvane paṭale | And He is, by a lower form of pervasion, the gross Sadāśiva. By the middling one he is Sound, and by the supreme one Anāśrita. One should add the lotus throne accordingly. Again, that ghost is, by entering into subjectivity (ahantā), Supreme Śiva, who is ‘laughingʼ. (His laughter) is (his) contemplation of Sound and is also the Great Expansion (mahāvikāsa). By virtue of that same Paramaśiva, Who is Sound, (this ghost is) sentient (sacetana). His colour is red because the limiting adjuncts (that condition his consciousness) in this way are the unfolding of objectivity that takes place to this degree. (He is red) also because (he) colours the universe (red) with desire.

nayatā netratritayena ūrdhvadṛśā viśeṣeṇa bhūṣitaṁ rājamānam | yathoktam ---tisro devyo yadā cainaṁ nityam evābhyupāsate | tryambakas tu tadā jñeyā.…........... || iti || 81 || evam iyat paryantam He impels the universe, which is the object of will, knowledge and action, with (his) three eyes, that are the energies of will, knowledge and action. He is especially adorned and shines beautifully with his (upper eye that) looks upwards. As is said: “if one worships him constantly as (the god with) three goddesses, he should then be known to Tryambaka. I| 81 II It is thus this much at the end. praṇavena nyaset sarvam āsanaṁ bhairavasya tu || 82 || oṁ āsanāya namaḥ iti mantreṇa | etat sarvam āsanaṁ cidbhairavābhedena

vyāptaṁ .sarvaṁ .Śivamayam .iti vakṣyamāṇatvāt Sśaktirūpam, vyatiriktāpararūpaṁ praṇavāntargarbhīkāreṇa nyaset | atra ca ----

āsanaṁ vibhajenmantrī kramaśaḥ padmamudrayā | iti Śrṛīraurava uktatvāt karadvayaṁ mukulīkṛtya padmamudrāsphālanīyā sthāpanīyā || 82 || ‘Praṇava should be deposited on all of Bhairava’s throne.” (82cd) (This is done with) the mantra ‘oṁ āsanāya namaḥ’. All this throne is pervaded with its oneness with the Bhairava of Consciousness (cidbhairava). As

will be said, ‘everything is made of Śiva’; thus, (its) nature is (also) Śakti. One should not deposit something else of another separate nature (by depositing) the Praṇava that contains (everything within itself). Here (with regards to this), it is said in the venerable Rauravāgama: ʻthe reciter of mantra should divide up the throne gradually with the lotus seal (padmamudrā).” Thus, having gathered together the fingers of the two hands, the lotus seal should be spread open and installed. gandhaiḥ puṣpaiḥ samabhyarcya..…-..…_ praṇavenaiva | ...…-..tato mūrtiṁ prakalpayet | kadambakuṣumākārāṁ tuṣārakiraṇatviṣam || 83 || prakāśāhlādamayīmityarthaḥ || 83 || atha ---miūrtyūrdhve bhairavaṁ devaṁ sakalaṁ parikalpayet | dvātriṁśadvarṇakhacitaṁ sphurattaḍidivojjvalam || 84 ||

‘Having worshipped with scents and flowers . . .” (2/83a) with Praṇava

alone, ‘one should then conceive the iconic form (of the deity) to be in the form of a kadamba flower, shining with rays (white as) snow.” (2/83bcd)

(That is) made of the joy of the light (of consciousness). ‘Above the iconic form (of the Great Ghost) one should conceive the

differentiated (sakala) (iconic form of) the god Bhairava, shining with the

thirty-two syllables (of his mantra), burning (brightly) like a lightning flashing. (84)

Appendix E The Mantras of the Trident according to the Maaliniivijayottara Having observed the structure of the Lotus Throne on which Sadāśiva,

the Great Ghost serves as the seat of Svacchandabhairava. We turn to the formation of the Trident Throne taught in the Mālinīvijayottara (8/55-84ab) as the Inner Sacrifice and presented by Abhinava in TĀ 15/15/297cd-365

FṀ---p̄Š---ḸZ7

The Mantras of the Shaft of the Trident 1) OṀ HRĪṀ ĀDHĀRAŚAKTAYE NAMAḤ (the Foundation) 2) OM KṢḶĀM DHĀRĀYAI NAMAḤ (Earth) OMṀ KṢVĪṀ SURODĀYA NAMAḤ (Water – the Ocean of Wine) OM VAṀ POTĀYA NAMAḤ (Fire – the Boat) OM KṢAṀ KANDĀYA NAMAḤ (Air – the Bulb)

3) OM HAṀ ANANTĀYA NAMAḤ. 4) The Knot of Māyā The eight qualities of the mind at the level of Māyātattva:

OṀ YAṀ DHARMĀYA NAMAḤ (SE) (Dharma)

OM RAṀ JÑĀNĀYA NAMAḤ (SW) (Jñāna (knowledge))

OM LAṀ VAIRĀGYĀYA NAMAḤ (NW) (Vairāgya (dispassion))

OM VAM AISVĀRYĀYA NAMAḤ (NE) (Aiśvārya (mastery)) OM ṛM ADHARMĀYA NAMAḤ (E) (Adharma)

OM ṚṂ AJÑĀNĀYA NAMAḤ (Ś) (Ajñāna (ignorance)) OM IM AVAIRĀGYĀYA NAMAḤ (W) (Avairāgya (lack of dispassion))

OM ḶM ANAIŚVARYĀYA NAMAḤ (N) (Anaiśvārya (lack of mastery)) 5) The Plinth, the Lotus and the Corpse

OṀ OM VIDYATATTVĀYA NAMAḤ (Plinth. Vidyā (power of limited

knowledge) OM AUM ADHASCHADANĀYA NAMAḤ (Lower covering. Māyā) OM HAḤ ŪRDHVACHADANĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper covering (power of limited agency))

6) The Lotus of Knowledge: KAṂ, KHAṀ, GAM (Ē) GHAṀ, ṄAMṀ, CAM (SE) CHAM, JAM, IHAM (S) ṄAM, TAṀ, THAM (SW) ḌAṂṀ, ḌHAṂ, ṆAM (W) TAM, THAM, DAM (NW) DHAṀ, NAṀ, PAṀ (N) PHAṂṀ, BAṀ, BHAM (NĒ) OṀ HAṀ VĀMÃYAI NAMAḤ (Ē)

OMṀ HĀṀ JYEṢṬHĀYAI NAMAḤ (SE) OM HIM RAUDRYAI NAMAḤ (S)

OM HIMṀ KĀLYAI NAMAḤ (SW)

OM HUM KALAVIKARAṆYAI NAMAḤ (W) OM HŪṂM BALAVIKARAṆYAI NAMAḤ (NW) OM HEM BALAPRAMATHANYAI NAMAḤ (N) OM HAIṀ DAMANYAI NAMAḤ (NE) OM HOM MANONMANYAI NAMAḤ (centre)

The mantras of the parts of the lotus:

Petals - Śun: OM ŚAṀ SŪRYAMAṆḌALĀYA NAMAḤ

OM SAṀ SŪRYAMAṆḌALĀDHIPATAYE BRAHMAṆE NAMAḤ

Stamens — Moon: OMṀ SAṀ SOMAMAṆḌALĀYA NAMAḤ

OM SAṀ SOMAMAṆḌALĀDHIPATAYE VIṢṆAVE NAMAḤ Calyx – Fire: OM SAṀ AGNIMAṆḌALĀYA NAMAḤ OṀ SAṀ AGNIMAṆḌALĀDHIPATAYE RUDRĀYA NAMAḤ

OṀ AṀ VIDYĒŚVAREBHYO NAMAḤ OM AḤ ĪSVARATATTVĀYA NAMAḤ

The Cavity of Brahmā (brahmarandhra) at the top of the head.

At the base of the trifurcation Mahāpreta:

OṀ KṢMAṀ MAHĀPRETĀSANĀYA NAMAḤ 8) Tips of the prongs of the Trident: OM JRAṀ SŪLAŚṚṆGEBHYO NAMAḤ The Abbreviated Rite

From the energy at the base, up to the prongs of the Trident:

OM HRĪṂ JRAM ĀSANAPAKṢÁĀYA NAMAḤ.

9) Trividyā. At the level of the Upper End of the Twelve.

The Three Bhairavas 1) Bhairavasadbhāva (the Bhairava of Parā): JHKṢHŪM The Limbs of Bhairavasadbhāva OM JHKṢHĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ OM JHKṢHIṂ ŚIRASE SVÁĀHĀ

OMṀ JHKṢHŪṀ ŚIKHĀYAI VAUṢATṬ OM JHKṢHAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUM

OMṀ JHKṢHAUṀ NETRĀYA VAṢATṬ OM JHKṢHAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ The Faces of Bhairavasadbhāva

OMṀ JHKṢHAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper)

OM JHKṢHIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (East) OM JHKṢHUṂ DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (South) OM JHKṢHEṀ UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (North) OMṀ JHKṢHOṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (West)

Unlike Ratīśekhara and Navātman, Abhinava does not supply instructions for the formation of the limbs and faces of Bhairavasadbhāva. However, he does supply two models. As the mantra of Ratiśekhara is short, and so cannot be split up, his limbs and faces are formed from the vowels added directly to the consonant base. Navātman is longer and so it is possible to split up the base into single consonants and inflect them systematically by the

addition of the vowels. This is not possible with Bhairavasadbhava, as it is not

with Ratiśekhara. As the formation of the latter is given by Abhinava and he is silent as to the former, one may presume that he meant us to understand that the model for both is the same.

2) Ratiśekhara (the Bhairava of Parāparā): RYLVŪṀ The Limbs of Ratiśekhara

OṀ RYLVĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ OṀ RYLVŪṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ OM RYLVIṀ ŚIKHĀYAI VAUṢAT

OṀ RYLVAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUM

OṀ RYLVAUMṀ NETRĀYA VAṢAT OM RYLVAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ The Faces of Ratiśekhara

OM RYLVAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper)

OṀ RYLVIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (East)

OM RYLVUM DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (South) OM RYLVEM UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (North) OṀ RYLVOṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (West) 3) Navātman (the Bhairava of Aparā): RHRKṢMLVYŪM The Limbs of Navātman %k%6W6 % %eWo % %eW% % %% %6 W% % Ã%ē

These are derived from the first six consonants of Navātman that is, R H R KṢ M L. Inflecting with the long vowels for the limbs and the short for the faces, as normal, we get:

OṀ RĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ OMṀ HIṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ OṀ RŪM SIKHĀYAI VAUṢAT OṀ KṢAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUM OM MAUM NETRĀYA VAṢAT OMṀ LAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ

See TĀ 30/116ab.

TANTRĀḶLOKA

The Faces of Navātman

OM KṢAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper) OM YIM PUŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (East) OM RUM DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (South) OM VEM UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (North) OM LOM PASCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (West) The Three Vidyās

Parā Vidyā SAUḤ SAUḤ is the supreme Heart of Parā. Abhinava reports that there are several variants or this monosyllabic Vidyā. He cites SHAUḤ and HSAUḤ as examples. Another variant is SHSUAUHḤ which is in six parts corresponding to six configurations of energies (cakra) in the subtle body. Another, very

different, Vidyā of Parā is HRĪḤ. Theṣe and other monosyllabic mantras (bīja)

are used in secret Kaula rituals of various schools, not just Trika. It is the fifth of the Five Brahmās according to the system of Mantras in the Kubjikā Tantras. There we find HSAUḤ, HSVAUḤ, HSVŪAUḤ and oṭhers. One gets the impression that the large number of variants may be derived, in part at least,

from the uncertainty of the pronounciation of SAUḤ. The variant forms in the

Kubjikā Tantras are also probably a way of distancing its system from that of

Trika to which it is very closely related. The Limbs of Parā

The Faces and Limbs of Parā Vidyā are formed on the same model as the others recorded here. In this case the base is S to which long vowels are added for the Limbs and short ones for the goddess’s five Faces.

OMṀ SĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ

OM SĪMṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

OM SŪMṀ ŚIKHĀYAI VAUṢAT.

OM SAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUM

OM SAUṀ NETRĀYA VAṢATṬ OM SAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ The Faces of Parā

OM SAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper)

OMṀ SIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (East) OM SUM DAKṢIṆAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (South) 3Se MV 4/25, TĀ 16/172ab, 4/181cd-193 and 5/14145

OMṀ SEMṀ UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (North) OM SOṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ) (West) The Vidyāṅgas The Vidyāṅgas are Mantra deities that are a part of Śiva's entourage.

They are the Heart, called Vidyādhipa, the Head, called Brahmaśiras, the

Topknot called Rudrāṇī, the Armour called Puruṣṭuta and the Weapon called Pāśupatāstra. The Vidyā of which these are the limbs is Parā.

Vidyāṅgahrdaya (Vidyādhipa) (the Heart): OM OM OM OM OM Brahmaśiras (the Head): OM AMṚTE TEIJOMĀLINI SVĀHĀ Śikhā (Rudrāṇī) (the Topknot): OM VEDA VEDINI HŪM PHAT Varman (Puruṣṭuta) (the Armour): OM VAJRIṆE VAJRADHARĀYA SVĀHĀ Aṣṭra (Pāśupatāstra) (the Weapon): OM ŚLIṀ PĀŚU HUṀ PHAṬ

Parāparā Vidyā OMṀ AGHORE HRĪḤ PARAMAGHORE HUṀ GHORARŪPE HAḤ GHORAMUKHI BHĪMA BHĪṢAṆE VAMA PIBA HE RURU RARA PHAṬ

HUṀ HAḤ PHAṬ Aghora,

Paramaghora,

Ghoramukha,

Vamana and Pibana are an important Group of Eight Bhairavas.’ The names of

these Bhairavas were originally those of Rudras. These eight Bhairavas and

their female equivalents are regularly worshipped in the course of Trika ritual. They are closely associated with Parāparā who is built up from the Vidyās of their eight partners who bear their names in the feminine. They appear in the Vidyā of Parāparā arranged in the same serial order as the Bhairava’s are listed. They are:

Aghorī: OM AGHORE HRĪḤ

Paraṃghorī: PARAMGHORE HUM Ghorarūpā: GHORARŪPE HAḤ Ghoramukhīī GHORAMUKHI

The limbs may be six or five. When they are five normally the Eye (Netra) is omitted. Siva’s Eye is the well-known Mantra of Mṛtyuñjaya, namely ŌṂ JUM SAḤ as its mantra is a common Śaiva one 1 argue that that is the case above in note 15, 112.

See MV 3/560 and TĀ 16/213-216ab See MV 1/19cd-21ab “Bhīma’ is anomolous. The required vocative is bhīme. The form bhīmā is the nominative and is not attested. If we read bhīmabhīṣane as one word the Sanskrit would

be correct. However, in that case the ancillary goddess Bhīmā would not be accounted

for. It appears that a mistake occured whereby bhīme was read as bhīma. This is quite an

understandable error. The vocative bhīmabhīṣaṇe – O terrible frightening one! May well

Vamanī: VAMA Pibanī: PIBA HE RURU RARA PHATṬ HUṀ HAḤ PHATṬ Aparā Vidyā

HṚRĪḤ HŪM PHAT The Guardians of the Quarters OM LĀṀ INDRĀYA NAMAḤ (East) OM RIM AGNAYE NAMAḤ (South-East) OM TUM YAMĀYA NAMAḤ (South) OM KṢAIṀ NAIRTYAI NAMAḤ (South-West) OM VAUM VARUṆAYA NAMAḤ (West) OM YAḤ VĀYAVE NAMAḤ (North-West) OM SUM KUBERĀYĀ NAMAḤ (North) OṂ MAM IŚĀNĀYA NAMĀḤ (North-East) OM AMṀ PRAJAPATAYAI NAMAḤ (above) OM IM VIṢṆAVE NAMAḤ (below) The Weapons of the Guardians of the Quarters

OM LAṀ VAJRĀYA NAMAḤ OM RIM ŚAKTYAI NAMAḤ

OM TUṀ DAṆḌÁYA NAMAḤ OM KṢEM KHAḌGĀYA NAMAḤ

OM VOṂ PĀŚĀYA NAMAḤ

OM YAṀ DHVAJĀYA NAMAḤ OM SUM GADĀYAI NAMAḤ

OM MAṀṂ TRISULAYA NAMAḤ

OM AṀ PADMĀYA NAMAḤ OM IM CAKRAYA NAMAḤ Krama Vidyās Mātṛsadbhāva HSHRPHEṀ

The six limbs of Mātṛsadbhāva:

OMṀ HĀṀ HRṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ OM SĪṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

sound better than bhīme bhīṣaṇe and makes sense to someone who may not know that eight parts of Vidyā correspond to the ancillary goddesses. See TAv ad 30/25cd-26ab where Jayaratha quotes the SYM for the corresponding deities of each letter of Parāparā

! See MV 8/39-43

OṀ HŪM ŚIKHĀYAI VAṢAT

OM RAIṀ KAVACÁYA HUM

OM PHAUM NETRAYAYA VAUṢAT OM RAḤ ASTRAĀYA PHAT The five faces of Mātṛsadbhāva

OM HOM ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ

OM SEM PURVAVAKTRAYA NAMAḤ OM HUM DAKṢIṆAVAKTRAĀYA NAMAḤ

OM RIṀ UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ

OM PHREṀ PAŚCIMAVAKTRAĀYA NAMAḤ The Seed-syllable of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī KHPHREṀ The limbs KHPHRĀM HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ KHPHRĪM ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ KHPHR̥ŪṂṀ ŚIKHAYAI VAUṢAT KHPHRAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUM KHPHRAUMṀ NETRAYĀYA VASAT KHPHRAḤ ASTRAĀYA PHAT The faces KHPHRAM ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ KHPHRIṀ PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ KHPHRUṂ DAKṢIṆAVAKTRAYA NAMAḤ KHPHREM UTTARAVAKTRAYA NAMAḤ KHPHROMṂ PASCIMAVAKTRAYA NAMAḤ The Nine-syllabled Kālakarṣiṇī Vidyā

KHPHR̥ÉḤṀ MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI The seventeen-syllabled Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Vidyā HṚĪM (or KHPHR̥EM) MAHĀCAṈḌAYOGEŚVARI THṚ (M) DHRṚ (MṀ) THR (M) PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ PHATṬ The Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī Samayavidyā of 100 syllables

KHPHR̥EṀ PHAṬ I MAHĀCAṆḌE CAṆḌAMUKHI CAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI

CAṆḌADUḤKHAVIMOCANI SARVASAMAYALOPAVIGHĀTANI TEJOVATI AMṚTAMŪRTE ASIDDHASĀDHANI SIDDHI-

SARVADOṢĀN ABHIMATAṀ ME PRAYACCHA SARVĒ SARVAGE ARŪPĒ SARVARŪPE HṚĪṀ PHAT | KHPHREṀ PHAT | HŪM KROṀ KṢĀṀ SARVAVIDYEŚVARI PHAṬ SVĀHĀ | The Vidyās of Kālasaṅkarśiṇī Abhinava rigorously avoids reference to the iconic forms of deities with hardly one or two exceptions and that only in the case of the three Trika Goddesses.' At a basic level he must have understood that if he presents the iconic form of one deity, he would be obliged to present many others. Avoiding, as he normally does, reference to the iconic form of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī who, de

facto is the supreme deity of Abhinava’s Anuttara Trika, he presents her, as does the Devyāyāmala, as the Supreme Goddess - Parā who consumes the vital breath, and with it time, absorbing it into the Eternity of her essential nature as absolute consciousness. He writes:

And so, it is said in the venerable Devyāyāmala in (the part of it) called

the Dāmarayāga (the Sacrifice of the Warlocks): ‘Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī (Attractress

of Time), who resides in the mouth and constantly generates (kalanī) inhalation and exhalation draws (karṣati) the triple time at the tip of the nose into the Heart

by means of inhalations. By the retentions of the breath, she sustains (and checks) it (dhatte) and by exhalation she consumes it. Ascending by exhalation (within suṣumnā) she devours time completely in an instant. The power of the

will (icchāśakti) that goes by the name of Parā awakens the three energies (of will, knowledge and action). Worthy of worship, she draws all the vital breath,

which is the foundation of time, (into herself).

In the above citation Abhinava is paraphrasing three passages from the Devyyāyāmala quoted by Jayaratha in the commentary as follows. As is said there (in the Devyāyāmala): “This, the gross time that moves along the two paths (of exhalation and

inhalation), is for yogis adorned with the three energies (of knowledge, action

and the will) on the right, left and middle (currents of the breath, respectively). She who is Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī consumes the three kinds of time in this way. (The goddess) who goes by the name Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī, generating

inhalation and exhalation, is time which is located in the cavity of the mouth. It is drawn into the Heart by inhalation and is sustained on both sides (samantāt)

by retention. Arisen by exhalation the goddess consumes time in an instant.

already quoted from it (see above, 3/67cd-70) and tells us further ahead that his teacher Śambhunātha has initiated him in the rite of the Mahāyāga it teaches (15/351cd-352ab). He provides the nine syllabled Vidyā of Kālasaṁkarṣinī taught there below in 30/54-

TĀ 15/335cd-338

The power of the will that goes by the name of Parā awakens the three energies. Worthy of worship she draws (into herself) all the wind (of the vital

breath) which is the foundation of time.”

Abhinava does not avoid the presentation of mantras, as he does iconic forms. He even goes so far as to argue that it is in certain circumstances permissible to acquire them from books, which is contrary to the basic norm that mantras should be learnt from a teacher, or at least, the most basic ones. Abhinava is happy to do that up to a point. He presents Trika mantras, conscious that they are not in the pblic domain. But he draws the line with Krama mantras, apart from the fundamental seed-syllable of the Goddess, that is, KHPHREM. The rest he keeps secret. Jayaratha helps us by quoting the Devyāyāmala’s

presentation of Kālasaṁkarṣiṇī’s seventeen syllable Vidyā in the Mālinī code."

The ones given here below are drawn from a a liturgical work called the Kālikākulapañcakramakramārcana compilled by a certain Vimalaprabodha

probably around the 11 century." It is the only liturgical manual that has been

recovered that teaches the ritual worship of the Pañcayāha which is the core of the teachings of the most developed form of the Krama system. It is recorded in the three texts called Mahānayaprakāśa as processes of the configurations of energies of cognitive consciousness. There we find the following Vidyās of

Piṇḍanātha Saṁhārabīja

KHPHR̥EṀ / MA-E-KHA-PHA-RAMṀ The Nine syllable Vidyā KHPHREṀ MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI The Seventeen syllable Vidyā (1)

HRĪṀ / KHPHREṀ' MAHĀCAṆṈḌAYOGEŚVARI ṬHṚ DHṚ ṬHṚ PHAT PHAT PHAT PHAT PHATṬ ayaṁ pathadvaye kālaḥ sthūlaś carati yoginām |

savyāpasavye madhye ca śaktitrayavibhūṣitaḥ ||

See TĀv 29/69-70ab.

The final last colophon reads: iti śrīparamahaṁsaparivrājakācārya śrivimalaprabodhapādaviracita kālikākulapañcakramakramārcanaṁ samāptam || ' Śee bibliography for the details of the two surviving manuscripts.

According to Sanderson: ‘the norms for the formation of Ancillaries require us to

The Seventeen syllable Vidyā (2)

KHPHREṀ PHĀṀ PHĪṀ MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI KĀLAKĀLI HŪṀ PHAṬ

The Seventeen syllable Vidyā (3)

MA-E-KHA-PHA-RA-MA-HĀ-CA-ṈA-ḌA-YA-O-GA-E-ŚA-VA-RI

The Hundred syllable Samayavidyā KHPHREṀ PHAṬ |I MAHĀCAṆḌE CAṆḌAMUKHI CAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI PHAṬ.

CAṆḌADUḤKHAVIMOCANI SARVASAṀMAYALOPAVIGHĀTANI TEJOVATI (TEJOMAYI) AMṂṚTAMŪRTE ASIDDHASADHANI SIDDHIRDDHIPRADE NĀŚAYA SARVADOṢĀN . ABHIMATAṀ ME PRAYACCHA SARVE SARVAGE ARUPE SÁRVARUPE HRĪṂ PHAT | KHPHREM PHAT | HŪM KṚROṀ KṢĀṀ SARVAVIDYESVARI PHAṬ SVĀHĀ |

armrmrmrmrmrmrmrmrmaaṛa aHH---––mHii--AHAunderstand. (1) that the anusṣvāraḥ should be added not only after the Ā of the Heart but

after all except the Weapon, which ending in H. does not receive this closure, and (2) that the prescription of the opening consonant cluster KHPHR should be applied throughout. Thus, we have the following: KHPHRĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ

KHPHRĪṂṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

KHPHR̥ŪṀ ŚIKHAYAI VAUṢAT

KHPHRAIṀ KAVACĀYA HUṀ

KHPHRAUṀ NETRAYĀYA VAṢAT KHPHRAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAT This creates an implausible anomaly, since it is normal practice to form the

ancillaries from the seed-syllable of the main mantra by substtuting the six sounds ĀṀ,

ĪṀ, ŪṀ, AIṀ, AUṀ, and AḤ for the vowel of that syllable. Since the main mantra has been given as OM HRĪṀ MAHĀCAṆḌAYOGEŚVARI PHAT, that is to say, with HRĪM as its seed syllable, those of the ancillaries should have been HRĀṀ, HRĪṀ, HRŪM, HRAIṀ, HRAUM, and HRAH. From the fact that the section on the ancillaries

has them begin with KHPHR rather than HṚ we may infer that it is highly probable that

the author who composed this section had as his main Mantra not OṀ HRĪṀ

MAHĀCAṈḌAYOGEŚVARI PHAT, but OṀ KHPHREM MAHĀCANṆḌAYOGESVARI PHAṬ which conforms to the practice of the Kālīkula, and therefore that

the substitution of HRIM may be the result either of a conscious modification that was not carried through to the form of the ancillaries, or, perhaps, of a scribal error.

Concerning Mantras The Initiatory Mantra It seems that right from the earliest developments of the Śaivāgamas, particularly the Bhairava Tantras, the circles of initiates were so small that their traditions were constantly in danger of being lost. It was not easy to find qualified teachers. The Brahmayāmala and other scriptures sought to remedy this problem by allowed for the possibility of self-initiation. Not at all normally accepted, in this special case the initiation does take place simply by the utterance of the root mantra. Abhinava explains that ‘this is because the goddess Raktā (Herself) gradually initiates him (as he) repeatedly recitates (Her) Mantra. If (the aspirant) cannot find a master such

as has been described he should practice this means (vidhi) (and initiate himself

directly). (The Lord) has said in the (Śiddhayogeśvaī) Mata that the study of Mantras from a book is (generally) attended by the same defect (that is, they lack the effulgence of consciousness). Thus, in the absence of this defect, (learning Mantras from books) is not prohibited.

According to Jayaratha, the goddess Raktā is Durgā, but this is clearly wrong as Durgā is not worshipped significantly in the rituals of the Brahmayāmala. The main deity worshipped there is Kapālīśa Bhairava along

with eight goddesses, also called Yoginīs, that issue from his body. His Mantra is actually a Vidyā, as it invokes his consort, Caṇḍākāpālinī, not him. It is:

The nine syllables of the Vidyā are presided over by the nine deities who are the main object of daily worship. These are Kapālīśa Bhairava ((OM) HŪM), his four goddesses who are arranged around him in the four directions: Raktā (east) (CAMṀ), Karālā (south) (DE), Caṇḍākṣī (west) (KĀ) and

Mahocchuṣmā (north) (PĀ) and their four attendant powers (dūtī) - Karālī

(south-east) (LI), Danturā (south-west) (NI), Bhīmavaktrā (north-west) (SVĀ) and Mahābalā (north-east) (HĀ). These four are hardly more than embodiments of epithets that describe the four main goddesses. It is common practice that the first in a series stands for all the rest. Thus, Raktā, stands for all the others.

anenaiva vibhāgena dakṣiṇāre karālinī k: -de karālin | paścime k: -maṁ caiva candākṣī mahocchuṣmā kh: -chuṣmā; k: -chuṣmāṅ tathottare || āgneye tu karalyākhyā k: -lākhyā natrṛte k, kh: narrite danturā k: dantunāṁ tathā | vāyavye k: -vya bhīmavakīrā k, kh: -vaktrān tu īśāne k: i- tu mahābalā || pūrvakrameṇa vai devi yoginyo k: -nyā vinyased budhaḥ | BY 30/21ab, 23-25ab These yoginīs appears throughtout the BY, but re.fer especially to chapters 29 and 30, where their maṇḍala is described.

Accordingly, by the ‘worship of Raktā’” is meant the worship of all of them which is done by reciting the Vidyā. The Seven Common Mantras Abhinava lists the basic mantras common to all schools of Śaivism as

follows in TA 22/20. The reader is referred to the notes there for an analysis.

1) OṂ, 2) Mātṛkā, 3) Māyā, 4) Vyomavyāpin (the Pervader of the Sky), 5) the six-syllabled Mantra, 6) Bahurūpa (the Pluriform), and 7) the one called Netra (the Eye) — these are the seven (universal) common Mantras.

praṇavo mātṛkā māyā vyomavyāpī ṣaḍakṣaraḥ | ._ bahurũpo ʻtha netrākhyaḥ sapta sādhāraṇā amī || TĀ 22/20

Appendix G Chapter Eight of the Mālinīvijayottara, The Initiation into the Rule (samaya) Chapter eight of the Mālinīvijayottara is dedicated to teaching the basic regular Trika initiation (samayadīkṣā) upon which a good deal of Chapter Fifteen of the Tantrāloka is based. It is very helpful to read this in order to better understand what Abhinava is teaching and how he has adapted and extended this procedure taught here. The procedure taught in this initiation constitutes the substance of the regular ritual the Trika Saivite performs daily, and so is at the very heart of the Trika practice of one who has chosen the path of riṭual. The translation of the passages that are quoted by directly by Abhinava are in bold characters. Passages quoted by Jayaratha in relation to Abhinava’s exposition are in italics. Their location in the Tantrāloka and the commentary are in the notes. Referring back to those places, the interested reader can see how Abhinava has understood these passages.

The Sacrifice

athātaḥ saṁpravakṣyāmi yajanaṁ sarvakāmadam ! yasya darśanamātreṇa yoginīsaṁmato bhavet |l 1 || I will now talk about the sacrifice that bestows all that is desired, just by seeing which one is honoured by the Yoginīs. (1) Selection of Place (sthānakalpana)

āī-dāīrāv=ā āqa- aafaan I| 3 |I EEENIkeḻĀśEṭi-EhkEīḤ

tatrādau yāgasadanaṁ śubhakṣetre manoramam | kārayedagnikuṇḍena vartulena samanvitam || 2 || pañcavīṁśatiparveṇa samantādardhanābhinā | turyāṁśamekhalenāpi parvauṣṭhena suśobhinā || 3 || There (in that case), one must first of all select an abode for the sacrifice

which is pleasing and situated in an auspicious place. It should have a round

beautiful lip (2-3)

The Six Purifying Baths

tacca ṣaḍvidhamuddiṣṭaṁ bhasmasnānādyanukramāt || 4 || ”Then, the knower of mantra who has conquered the opposites, should bathe with the bath of mental states (bhāvasnāna), and that is taught as being of six kinds, beginning with the bath in ashes, in due order. (4)

bhasmaṣnāne mahāstreṇa bhasma saptābhimantritam | In the bathing with ashes the ash is consecrated (abhimantrita) with the great (mantra) of the Weapon seven times. (Śab)

rqārīa āārckṁīīzgārra II u ||

q īīṁ ṃoaa rēfzaī I| ē II malasnānāya saṁhārakrameṇoddhūlayettanum | 5 || vidyāṅgaiḥ pañcabhiḥ paścācchiraḥ prabhṛti guṇṭhayet |

abhiṣekaṁ tu kurvīta mūlenaiva ṣaḍaṅginā || 6 |

1) In order to wash away dirt (malasnāna), he should cover the body with (the ash) in the sequence of withdrawal (i.e., from the feet to the head) with the five limbs of the Vidyā. Then he should envelop (the body with them) from the head onwards (down to the feet) and sprinkle (himself with water) with the

root (mantra) and (its) six limbs. (Ścd-6)

See TĀ 15/388 f. and also ŚSP vol. 1 pp. 230 ff.

TĀ 15/49cd corresponds loosely to MV 8/5cd-6 (bath in ashes) and 15/48-51ab corresponds loosely to MV 8/8-9ab (worshup of the sun). 15/56 corresponds to 8/1 lcd-12 (ablution with air).

Read -snāne for -snānaṁḥ.

k: yalenaiveti.

The various forms of bathing are described 1n TĀ 15/38cd-79, which partly draws from here. MV 8/5cd-6 1s quoted in TĀv ad 15/49-51ab. According Jayaratha, the root Mantra is Parā.

āmaarā ftaī |

gq || ¢ || tato ‘vāsāḥ suvāsā vā hastau pādau ca dhāvayet | ācamya mārjanaṁ kuryādvidyayā bhūrivarṇayā || 7 |I nyāsaṁ kr̥tvā tu sāmānyamaghamarṣaṁ dvitīyayā | upasthānaṁ ca mālinyā japeccaikākṣarāṁ parām || 8 II Without clothes or (dressed) in fine clothes, (the officiant) should then

wash his hands and feet and, after having sipped water (ācamya), he should wipe (the body clean) (mārjana) with a Vidyā of many letters. Having performed the common deposition, prayed for purification (aghamarṣana) with the second (Vidyā) and attended reverently (upasthāna) with Mālinī, he should repeat (japet) the monosyllabic (Vidyā of) Parā. (7-8)

STFTSTT TITI J GTĪĪTHTHTT |

fatraTrTīttzā a- aaq fēēq aorī | jalasnāne ‘pi cāstreṇa mṛdaṁ saptābhimantritām | pūrvavattanumālabhya malasnānaṁ samācaret | 9 || vidhiṣṇānādikaṁ cātra pūrvavat kiṁtu vāriṇā | 2) Also, when bathing with water, the earth (used) is consecrated seven

times with the Weapon (astra). Then, having touched the body with it as before, he should then perform the ablution (that removes) impurity (malasnāna). The procedure, bathing and the rest is as before, but (done) with water. (9-10ab)

sādhāraṇavidhisnāto vidyātritayamantritam || 10 ||

toyaṁ vinikṣipenmūrdhni mantrasnānāya mantravit | 3) In order to (perform) the ablution with mantra, the knower of mantra should (first) have bathed in accord with the common procedure, and should (then) throw on (his head) water that has been consecrated with the three Vidyās (of Parā, Parāparā and Aparā). (10cd-11ab)

MV 8/7cd-8 is quoted 1n the TĀv ad 15/53cd-55. MV 8/9ab is quoted in TĀv ad 15/49-51ab.

Taī āīṃṂga- aāraāe āāaṇa I| zg II

THGTĀTT-TTĀ T-BṀGTTGT TḠTÑ |

rajasā godhutenaiva vāyavyaṁ snānamācaret || 11 II mahāstramuccaraṉ gaccheddhyānayuk padasaptakam | tadeva punarāgacchedanusmṛtya parāparām || 12 |

4) He should perform the ablution with Air by means of the dust shaken

off (from the body of a) cow. Immersed in meditation and uttering the Great Weapon, he should walk seven paces and then again return back for that same

(amount), recollecting (The Vidyā of) Parāparā. (11cd-12)

EḶIEEEEPIIECVÑEIĒEIḤEĒḤ

varṣātapasamāyogāddivyo ‘pyevaṁvidho mataḥ |

kiṁtu tatra parāṁ mantrĩ sravantĩmamr̥taṁ smaret | 13 || 5) The divine ablution, which is performed in conjunction with the rain and the sun, is considered to be like this, only that there (in that case), the reciter of mantra should (mentally) recollect (the Vidyā of) Parā as flowing forth nectar. (13)

3Tav gsH©ord & ̄Ū G |

aṇṀ3 ōācāgcdzáaṁē 3 I| zx |l astreṇāṅguṣṭhamūlāttu vahnimutthāpya nirdahet | svatanuṁ plāvayetpaścātparayaivāmrṛtena tu || 14 | 6) Having aroused the fire from the root of the big toe with the Weapon, he should thoroughly burn his own body (with it), and after that flood it with nectar with that same Parā (Vidyā). (Such is the ablution with fire). (14) The Entry into the Abode of Worship

r̥ĀTī TTāTITN TR̥JTRTTṬATT |

sūryādau mantramādāya gacchedastramanusmaran |

taṁ; lo: kṛteti. ' MV 8/11cd-12 quoted TĀv ad 15/56.

Havīing taken up the mantra (previously projected onto) the Sun etc. he

should go (to the abode of worship), recollecting the (mantra of the) Weapon. (15ab)

3qrīz-vdraāāvīz faVr=zṝrrTīās: || zu |I

qyy fāTātzarraī sōfczrwvīaz || z= |l yāgaveśmāstrasaṁśuddhaṁ viśecchuciranākulaḥ || 15 || tatra dvãrapatīn pũūjya mahãstreṇābhimantritam | puṣpaṁ vinikṣipeddhyātvā jvaladvighnapraśāntaye |l 16 || (After bathing) Unperturbed and pure, he should enter into the abode of the sacrifice that has been purified with (the mantra of) the Weapon. Having worshipped the Lords of the Door there, he should throw a burning flower consecrated with (the mantra of) the Great Weapon, having meditated (on it) in

order to pacify the obstacles. (15cd-16)

āṛaiffq āāīsaī fēz āēkcdā TaTTI | yfaṁrrāc- afgaṣfaaiga I| z.s |

tatrādāvastramantreṇa kālānalasamatviṣā || 1 8 ||

aṅguṣṭhāgrāttanuṁ dagdhāṁ sabāhyābhyantarāṁ smaret | Then, after having mentally created a protective barrier (rakṣaṇa) in the

ten directions (around the site) with the Weapon, he should enter the abode of

the sacrifice that is burning like a fire facing east or facing north, and begin

the special deposition (of mantra). There, first of all, he should recollect that the

body is bumt inwardly and externally from the big toe (upwards) by the

Weapon mantra, its radiant lustre like the Fire of Time. (17-19ab)

for dvārapatīn iṣṭvā.

k: samanvitā.

See TĀ 15/183cd-193.

feērīarmṛvṝ azā7 aaaṁ has;I-g-7 || 2.< || ṛaī EES…EI hṬHṬCHTTTH HEE. |

Once having visualized that the ash of that (body) is scattered by the

wind of the Armour, he should then think that the form of the Self is that of Śiva’s Point (śivabindu), and should then conjoin (Śiva’s) unconquered' power,

which is SO ‘HAṂ, to it.' (19cd-20)

Navātman, Limbs and Faces

GTGṬĒĪ TGIII zVSrēē ārīvēq_ || 2? ||

āvz aīṝgīaṜ arīggātaṅrṁarq II 22 II

ftārzzī=rxa -meṁkfarṣfaryfīr 1 ī firēazī Ṝfr āīcāē fī gga || 2= II dtthzārzaīā Jīzzaaṁ: |

He should then add the Vidyāmūrti by means of the (following)

Mantra. The great vital breath (H) preceded and followed (ākrānta) by the staff (R), the navel (KS), the hip (M), the left breast (L), the neck (V), the left part of the back (Y) adorned with ornament of the left (ear) (Ū) and (then) the Void of

the Point and the Half Moon adorned with Sound (nāda) and Śakti’s Point

” Śee 15/232cd-239ab. Read aparājitām for aparājitaḥ. Gnol (1999: 669 n 2) suggests the

reading om ham ity aparāyitām for so ham ity aparājitaḥ that is OM HĀMṀ for SO ‘HAṀ. See TĀ 15/232cd-230ab. Read aparajitām for aparājitaḥ. Gnoli suggests possibly emending

śaktim so ‘ham to śaktim oṁ hamṃ. Literally ‘the 1con of the Vidyā’. This is formed from Navātman – RHRKṢMLVYŪṀ. Concerning this seed syllable Mantra, see TĀ 30/11cd-16ab

(šaktibindu). O goddess, this most excellent piṇḍa (mantra) is taught (in the

scriptures) (śruta) as the Ninefold One (i.e., Navātman). This, the producer of all accomplishments, has been mentioned (here) secretly (sarahasyam). (21-

aādāōattīa raiārgfaigfāa: I| 3+, II JTḤṬĨ āñcq̄TŪaāTTATGJITC: ṢFHT | esa tryarṇojjhito ‘dhastāddīrghaiḥ ṣaḍbhiḥ svarairyutaḥ || 24 || saḍaṅgāni hṛdādīni jātibhedena kalpayet | kṣayaravalabījaiśca dīptairbinduvibhūṣitaiḥ || 25 || vaktrāṇi kalpayetpūrvamūrdhvavaktrāditaḥ kramāt | Omitting the last three (letters of Navātmā), one should fashion (its)

six limbs, that is, the Heart and the rest, with the six (letters) that follow, conjoined with the six long vowels, along with the syllabic invocation (jāti) (corresponding to each limb). ” The faces should be fashioned (kalpayet)

beginning with the upper face (i.e., Iśāna) in due order with the energized seeds KS, Y, R, V, and L, decorated with the Point. (24cd-26ab)

rcāgfafatāzā# voraṁcxaāī aā Il 2= |

pratyaṅgavidhisiddhyarthaṁ lalāṭādiṣvatho nyaset |l 26 || In order to accomplish the procedure (successfully) for each limb, he

should now perform the deposition on the forehead etc. (26cd)

See TĀ 30/43cd-45ab. The jātis and corresponding limbs are as follows: heart

NAMAH, head

– SVĀHĀ, topknot - VAUṢAT, armour – HUM, eye –- VAṢAT and weapon - PHAT. MV 9/24cd-25 is reworked in TĀ 30/15-16ab. The TĀ reads vaktrāṇy asya ca – ‘and its faces’

for jātibhedena – ‘along with the syllabic invocation (jāti) (corresponding to each limb)’. Abhīnavagupta tells us that these five ‘energized seeds' are the five faces of Navātman. If we follow the directions of this edition of the MV and place the jātis at the end of each limb, as they are normally, we get:

Heart:: OM KṢĀṀ HṚDAYE NAMAḤ

Head: OM YIM ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

Topknot: OM RŪM ŚIKHĀYAIḤ VAUṢAT

Armour: OM VAIM KAVACAYA HUM Weapon: OM LAUM ASTRĀYA PHAT

But this is only five.

See abvgove note 15,524 for the faces and limbs of Navātman.

ṣ—š ā azaī 3-s sviī̃ aÃ |l 2 l . īāīg2 āīq d ōUg TSgA ṛ |

EÉṞBEeekETURETAR:ītezgEr

ēftrrār-cṭēveāúgfc-rar 7 || 3< II

ar fīT<rāg aīī Tgr̥TIĀTJHTT |

IFFTKATRTRITTTĀT ṬJHT |

a lalāṭe dvitīyaṁ ca vaktre saṁparikalpayet |

e ai adhorádhvadanteṣu o-aukārau tatho ‘ṣṭhayoḥ || 28 |I

A should be imagined to be on the forehead and the second one (Ā) on

the mouth. Having placed I and I on the two eyes, one should deposit U and Ū on the two ears. ṛ and Ṛ are on the nostrils. In the same way one should deposit ḷ aṇd L on the two cheeks. E and AI are on the lower and upper teeth (respectively). The letters O and AU are in the same way on the two lips. M is on the topknot. The tongue should be fashioned with H. One should deposit the gutturals on the right shoulder, arm, hand, fingers and nails. In the same way, the palatals (should be deposited) in (the same) order on the left (arm). The cerebrals and dentals should be deposited as before (respectively on the right and left) hips, thighs (feet, toes and nails). The labials are on the two sides (of the body), the back, stomach and heart, in due

order (respectively). One should imagine the semivowels (Y R, L and V) to be on the skin, blood, meat and sinews (respectively). The (remaining) five

(phonemes) beginning with S (i.e., S, S, H and Kš) are on the bones, fat, sperm,

vital breath and the testicles (respectively). (27-32ab)

T--r̄ṁ āaī ēraī fdraāṁaīeāza: I| 32 |I mūrtyaṅgāni tato dattvā śivamāvāhayedbudhaḥ || 32 || Having formed the limbs of the Icon (mmūrti) (mantra), the wise man

should then invoke Siva (to enter into it). (32cd)

Bhairavasadbhāva

aāīṁaũrr̥+zā̃ã: ãārafa;: fṀra: || 33 || T-=T: THĪ ṜI ĪTT TRIĀ; |

prāṇopari nyasennābhiṁ tadūrdhve dakṣiṇāṅgulim ḷ vāmakarṇaprameyotaḥ sarvasiddhipradaḥ śivaḥ || 33 I| sadbhāvaḥ paramo hyeṣa bhairavasya mahātmanaḥ | aṅgānyanena kāryāṇi pūrvavatṣvarabhedataḥ || 34 || The navel (KS) should be deposited above (i.e., before) the vital breath

(H), and above that the right finger (JH). (This is) Siva, the bestower of all

accomplishments, threaded through with the objectivity (prameyota) of the left

ear (U). This is the supreme essence (sadbhāva) of Bhairava, the great soul. The limbs should be formed as before, in conjunction with the vowels. (33-34)

Śāmbhavanyāsa

=rsī gaagazgāī |

ftra: ṃrgg ṁea -ī: gatāīfaa: I| 3u, |l mūrtiḥ sṛṣṭistritattvaṁ ca aṣṭau mūrtyaṅgasaṁyutāḥ | śivaḥ sāṅgaśca ṣoḍhaiva nyāsaḥ saṁparikīrtitaḥ || 35 || The Icon (mūrti), emanation, the three principles, the eight, conjoined to the limbs of the Icon, and Siva with his limbs – this is said to

be the sixfold deposition. (35)

MV 8/27-32ab is quoted in TĀv ad 15/117-120, which is an abbreviated paraphrasis of it. Read

with —koṣesṣu for —kūpeṣu.

See TĀ 30/16cd-17ab, which is a reworking of MV 8/33-34ab. This is the mantra of

Bhairavasadbhāva, the consort of Parā. It is JHKṢHŪM. 3 MV 8/35b is quoted in TĀv ad 15/239cd-244ab.

īfcīr || 2ē || īrtīṁ vaīTēāracdra7 aa-Ṁq | āaaāāāvzēatrṭarar ṣī || ss ||

āīkaaaeārōfṁ aitāīTmga || 3c || asyopari tataḥ śāktaṁ kuryānnyāsaṁ yathā śrṛṇu | mūrtau parāparāṁ nyasya tadvaktrāṇi ca mālinīm || 36 || parāditritayaṁ paścācchikhāhṛtpādagaṁ nyaset | kavaktrakaṇṭhahṛnnābhiguḥhyorūpādagaṁ kramāt || 37 I| aghoryādyaṣṭakaṁ nyasya vidyāṅgāni tu pūrvavat | tatastvāvāhayecchaktiṁ sarvayoginamaskṛtām |l 38 II

One should then perform the deposition of energy (śākta) above it; listen to how (that is done).” Having first of all deposited Parāparā with (Her) faces (and limbs) onto

the Icon and (on emanation) Mālinī, he should then deposit the triad Parā and the rest (of the three principles) onto the topknot, heart and feet, respectively.

Then having deposited (above the eight, Aghora and the rest, the eight goddesses) beginning with Aghorī onto the head, face, throat, heart, navel, genitals, thighs and feet, respectively (he should deposit) the five limbs of the Vidyā (vidyāṅga) (above the corresponding limbs of the Icon) as before. Then

by all yogis. (36-38)

Concernng all this, see TĀ 15/247-250ab. According to Śambhunātha’s interprtation (see TĀ

15/245cd-246), the translation of MV 8/35 would be as follows: ‘The deposition according to the

tradition is sixfold, consisting of mārti (= Navātman), emission (= Mātṛkā), the three principles, the eight conjomed to the ‘icon’, Śiva (= Bhairavasadbhāva) and (by a sxth being) with his hmbs. MV 8/35-36ab is quoted n TĀ 15/247-248ab wath variants but without change of meaning. In

place of MV 8/3ścd śivaḥ sāigaś ca ṣodhaiva nyāsaḥ saṁprakīrttaḥ – and Śiva with his hmbs –

this is said to be the sixfold deposition’, TA 15/247cd reads: sivah sāṅgaś ca vijñeyo nyāsaḥ soḍhā prakīrtitaḥ – one should (also) know Śiva with his limbs – ‘this 1s said to be the suxfold

deposition’. In place of M 8/36ab asyopari tataḥ śākaṁ kuryān nyāsaṁ yathā śrṇu – Śʻthen one

should then perform the deposition of energy above it; listen to how (that is done), TĀ 15/248ab

reads: asyopari tataḥ śāktaṁ nyāsaṁ kuryācca ṣaḍvidham –- one should then perform the sxfold deposition of energy above it’ TĀ 15/239cd-246 explams these and related verses in the MV.

According to this view, the three principles are the three Bhairavas: Ṅavātman, Rauśekhara and Bharravasadbhāva.

See TĀ 15/247-250ab

TĀ 5/248¢d-250 1s a close paraphrase of MV 8/36-38. MV 8/38cd reads tatas tv āvāhayec

chaktiṅ ṣarvayoginamaskr̥ām – ‘Then (finally, the officiant) should mmvoke (āvāhayer) (Śivas)

Maātṛsadbhāva

āfcrcra aṁīgfyftzī f= farzr I| 3< Il āATÑTTJTATā āaHTGTTUIĪ-ārāī: | -+-ā ftīaī. āaī ̄aa atad %ōṇ I| o ||

TAEĀHECIAIT GVIĀIĒEEZḤ

āī̄aīēT sī̄+c-st a g-nfcafzgaaīq || +e II

zzarhzaTarī frcāāīā sāītzā |

qTTGTI TTNITFTṬḺTTĪ-T iifdāī || 2 || jīvaḥ prāṇaputāntasthaḥ kālānalasamadyutiḥ | atidīptas tu vāmāṅghribhūṣito mirdhni bindunā || 39 || dakṣajānuyutaś cāyaṁ sarvamātrṛgaṇānvitaḥ |

tasmādenāṁ’ japenmantrī ya icchetsiddhimuttamām || 41 |I rudraśaktisamāveśo nityamatra pratiṣṭhitaḥ | yasmādeṣā parāśaktirbhedenānena kīrtitā || 42 || “The Living Being (S) within the capsule of (the two) Vital Breaths

(H), shining like the Fire of Time (R), the Left Foot (of the goddess) (PH), intensely energized, its head adorned with the Point (M) and linked with

the Right Knee (E).” Accompanied by all the host of Mothers, this (mantra)

gives life to them all” and they bestow the fruit (one’s) desires. Iṝ is taught

that this is the supreme essence (sadbhāva) of the Mothers.® Therefore, the officiant (mantrin) who aspires to the most excellent accomplishment must repeatedly recite it. The penetration of Rudra’s power (rudraśaktisamāveśa) aaaaakkṀÃvr-tttaśttcsaÃṀ-SĀ-ĀṈṈhhmmmmhēkvvacēeeea…a-s-sT-TṆṬṆTṈmṬHhÃvhnmān power which is saluted by all yogis.' TĀ 15/250d reads instead ‘Then (finally, the officiant) should invoke (āvāhayer) (Śiva’s) power) in the form of Mātrsadbhāva’.

! Variant reading: l00: arcita. TĀ sarve. TĀ bhairavaṣya ca.

Read with TĀ -naṃ for —nāṁ.

Variant reading: l00 anyeneri. MV 8/39-43 is quoted as TĀ 30/47-51 with variants. Thus, the Mantra is HSHRPHEM. TĀ 30/48b reads sarvamātṛgaṇārcitaḥ `venerated by all the host of Mothers’ for MV 8/40b

sarvamātr̥gaṇānvitaḥ ʻaccompanied by all the host of Mothers’. TA 30/48c reads ‘sarve’ for sarvā. The feminine in this reading refers to the Mothers. TĀ 30/49b reads bhairavasya ca – and of Bhairava’ for MV 8/41b paripathyate – ‘it is taught’. MV 8/41ab is quoted in TAv ad 3/68cd-70 (69-71ab) and 4/177-178ab.

is always established here, for it is said to be the Supreme Power, in this

aspect. (39-42)

yāvatyaḥ siddhayastantre sarvāḥ syuranayā kṛtāḥ |

aṅgāni kalpayed asyāḥ pūrvavatsvarabhedataḥ || 43 |

As many as are the accomplishments (siddhi) (promised) in the

Tantra, all of them are generated by this (Vidyā). Her limbs should be formed as before in conjunction with the vowels (as appropriate). (43)

mūrtiḥ savaktrā śaktiśca vidyātritaya eva ca |

yāmalo ʻyamato nyāsaḥ sarvasiddhiprasiddhaye || 45 || Now, the deposition is said to be sixfold. (It consists of) the Icon (of Mālinī) with its faces, power, the three Vidyās, the group of eight beginning with Aghorī, the five limbs (of the Vidyā) and the supreme power with (her) limbs. Thus, this double (yāmala) deposition (first male then female) serves to

atṭṭain all accomplishments (siddhi). (44-45)

! TĀ 30/50d reads bhedenānyena- ‘in another aspect for MV 8/42d bhedānena – ‘in this aspect’. The reference here is to the sonic form of Parā, that is, SAUḤ. See above, TĀv on 29/21: ‘Here with the word ‘Parā’ itself the author has referred (vyākṛta) to Mātr̥ṣadbhāva which is the highest form of Parā Herself.’

“ k. anyathāpyamneti

See TĀ 15/254-255.

arṝī ara fafr. āīaiī gThāīrīīafsafĩ. |

Those who take their support from the path to liberation should (first)

perform this procedure of the left (concerning Śakti).’ Or else those who do not

desire that fruit (should perform them) separately with (the correspondingly) different mantras and phonemes. (46)

EEP- iUIV-TṬ VTETEVEIEAH

=aaṛ: ũafṁāī ī || x ||

kEETE= |TĀ-CĒĒ

CĒ āṃ=aa || x¢ ||

This deposition is considered in the same way to be of five kinds and

concerns (all the mantras) with their varieties, however many they be (in all

the Tantras), that denote Śiva, (His) Power and the individual soul.

However, (one should take care) that wherever the (mantra) which is

invoked (happens to be), that it is present there with its limbs and should be the sixth (deposition). This sixfold (deposition) is mentioned everywhere

(in the scriptures). (47-48)

The Sacrificial Substances and the Sacrificial Vessel

TTṬṬRTĪĪTRTT JTaTJTTĪHATGTT;: |

MV 8/44-46ab is concisely paraphrased as TĀ 15/254-255ab. MV 8/46ab 1s quoted in TĀv ad 15/255cd. “Ś Read vātaphalārthibhiḥ for vā tatphalārthībhīḥ. TĀ 15/257, where MV 8/47 1s quoted, reads bhedāḥ for bhedaih and soḍhaiva krtitaḥ for pañcavidho mataḥ. Thus, the translation of the text there in the TĀ is: ‘The sixfold deposition (in this case) 1s said to be one 1n which (the Mantras deposited) are the knds amongst these Mantras (taught in any of the Tantras), however many they be, that denote Śiva, (His) Power and the 1mdividual soul. “ Read with TĀ 15/258a, kiṁtv āvāhyas tu for kimtu bāhyastu.

svānuṣṭhānāvirodhena bhāvābhāvavikalpanaiḥ | yāgadravyāṇi sarvāṇi kāryāṇi vidhivadbudhaiḥ || 49 || The wise (unafflicted) by notions of existence and non-existence

TTSHĒTJHICTA TaTATaTTJTĪTTTḤ |

tato ʻrghapātramādāya bhāvābhāvāvikalpitam ḷ tataścāstrāgnisaṁdagdhaṁ śaktyambuplāvitaṁ śuvi l/ 5O II Then taking up the sacrificial vessel (arghapātra) which, devoid of notions of existence or non-existence, burnt by the fire of the Weapon and flooded by the water of Śakti, is pure. (50)

kartavyā yasya saṁśuddhiranyasyāpyatra vastunaḥ | tasyāṇenaiva mārgeṇa prakartavyā vijānatā || 51 I| (Whatever) is to be purified, be it this entity or something else, that

should be done in this very same way by one who knows (how to do it). (51)

=zf7 II u= II nā cāsaṁśodhitaṁ vastu kiṁcidapyatra kalpayet |

tena śuddhaṁ tu sarvaṁ yadaśuddhamapi tacchuci | 52 |

Read bhāvābhāvāvikalpanaiḥ for bhāvābhāvavikalḹpanaiḥ; the meaning it seems is that the

officiant should not worry whether a sacrificial substance that is normally required for a rte is

amongst the offerings or not. Whatever inspires him 1s pleasing to the deity. As Abhinavagupta writes:

‘It is not specified which substances are (best suited) for the sacrifice nor the liquid

offering (argha). (This is because) the cause of (attaning) the partcular accomplishment of one

who desires accomplishments (ss the type of) practtce (sādhanā) (and the offering of a particular sacrificial substances that that entals). (However,) for one who aspires to liberation, nothing is

prohibited or enjoined; whatever 1s pleasing (to him) is fit to bring about oneness with Śiva’s consciousness.' TĀ 15/290cd-291. See TĀ 30/41cd.

MV 8/51 is quoted in TĀv ad 15/420cd-421ab (417cd-418ab).

Variant reading: kiṅcid apyupakalpayed. k; ṣahśodhitaṁ ca yat sarvam

One should not think (kalpayet) that any substance, whatever it be (that is offered) here (in this rite), has not been purified (by it). Purified by

that, everything, even what is impure, (becomes) pure. (52)

Tīargāī gaTḡd ūgcṀ: aata = |

tadambunā samāpūrya ṣaḍbhiraṅgaiḥ samarpya ca |

amrtīkr̥tya sarvāṇi tena dravyāṇi śodhayet || 53 ||

After having filled (the sacrificial vessel) with water, offered it with the six limbs (of the mantra, and thus) transformed it into nectar, all the (sacrificial) substances should be purified with it. (53)

The Inner Sacrifice The Trika Trident

āgaīa- fi aṃ |

ātmānaṁ pūjayitvā tu kuryādantaḥ kṛtiṁ yathā | tathā te kathayiṣyāmi sarvayogigaṇārcite || 54 || O goddess who is honoured by all the host of yogis, I will tell you no' how, after having worshipped the Self, the inner sacrifice is performed. (54)

JTaṛq āHRAIĪT; 3 Tā¥YĪqTPḶTT | { 3ãāẽ ũĨĨã ṀTN -cl rgga || uv II

EEYEGEEEIETZZIEIZEIETIT 1

ekaikāṅgulametatsyācchūlasyāmalasārakam

The Base of the Trident “nitially, the Energy of the Foundation (should be projected into the base of the Trident) four fingers below the naval. (Then) the four, that is, Earth MV 8/52 is quoted in TĀ 15/162cd-163ab. The reading in the KSTS edition of the MV 8/52b is

atra kalpayei, whereas in TĀ 15/162d it is upakalpayet. S k: ṣadbhirarghair.

k: caturaṅgulametad.

(dharā), Water (suroda), the Boat (pota) and the Bulb (kanda), each (taking up)

Trident. (55-56ab)

ftzāraitraaīī vrōītd rfrftā |

tato nālamanantākhyaṁ daṇḍamasya prakalpayet |I 56 || lambikāvadhitaścātra śūlordhvaṁ granthiriṣyate | abhittvainaṁ mahādevi pāśajālamahārṇavam || 57 II na sa yogamavāpnoti śivena saha mānavaḥ |

The Shaft of the Trident Then (beyond that) one should imagine the channel which is the staff of that (Trident) called Ananta that extends up to the uvula. There is said to be a knot above the staff.” O great Goddess, without piercing through (that) great ocean of nets and fetters, a man does not attain union (yoga) with Siva. (56cd-

Maāyā at the Uvula

rqṣga || u || TaṀ ṣq,

fēa ā=J ēīq II u Il

dharmaṁ jñānaṁ ca vairāgyamaiśvaryaṁ ca catuṣṭayam || 58 II koṇeṣu cintayenmantrī āgneyādiṣvanukramāt | gātrakāṇāṁ catuṣkaṁ ca dikṣu pūrvādiṣu smaret || 59 ||

The reciter of mantra should meditate on the four qualities (of the

intellect), namely righteousness (dharma), knowledge (jñāna), dispassion (vairāgya) and lordship (aiśvarya), in the four (intermediate) directions, beginning with the southeast up to the northeast. Again, he should meditate on

“ TĀ 15/297cd-365 is a commentary on MV 8/55-84ab, most of which is quoted or paraphrased as it goes along. These verses deal with the projection of the Trident of the Trika mandala into the

vútal breath. Abhimavagupta describes the Trika Trident Throne 1n 15/297cd-312, following quite closely the account in MV 8/55-68. l MV 8/55 quoted 1n TĀv ad 15/297cd-303ab. “ Read nālordhvaṁ for śūlordhvaṅ.

The Square at Śuddhavidyā between the Uvula and Cavity of Brahmā

faīāā ēarçvszīaāqgan I| 6o

grantherūrdhvaṁ trīśūlādho bhavitavyā catuṣkikā | vidyātattvaṁ tadevāhuśchaṁdanatrayasaṁṅyutam |I 60 ll kakhalaṃbikayormadhye tattattvamanucintayet | One should meditate (in this way) on the square base (catuṣkikā) which is above the knot and below the three prongs. They say that it is the principle of (Pure) Knowledge and that it has two coverings. One should meditate

(anucintayet) on that principle in the middle (between) the Cavity of Brahmā

(kakha) and the uvula. (60-61ab)

The Lotus of the Īśvara Principle in the Cavity of Brahmā

ra7ṣṝftṁ aaācāāṇ% fāāga: || a |I padmākr̥ti kakhatattvamaiśvaraṁ cintayedbudhah || 61 ||

karṇikākesaropetaṁ sabījaṁ” vikasatsitam ḷ

The wise man should meditate (cintayet) on the Īśvara principle within

the Cavity of Brahma (kakha).”" Its form a lotus flower, blooming and white, it

has a calix, stamens and seeds. (61cd-62ab)

“ The gātrakas are elevated cornices that adorn the corners of the throne. Cf. Kṣemarāja ad SVT 2/63, who defines them as siṁhāsanapaṭṭikārūpāḥ, and ad NT 18/41: gātrakāṇi koṇāntarāḷagā

avayavaviśeṣāḥ. On these cornices, which according to the SvT are white, and according to the NT, yellow, are projected from the eastern to northern corner impiety (adharma), ignorance

Read, as Sanderson suggests (1986: 179, n 47) kakhe for kakha-.

r̥ãṁzā: ũarmgraīṝcīaḥ a-q || ē2 ||l

āsfārzv ta āfaaōḷ ī || ē. |l

pūrvapatrāditaḥ paścādvāmādinavakaṁ nyaset || 62 |

balapramathanī cānyā sarvabhūtadamanyapi | manonmanī ca madhye ‘pi bhānumārgeṇa vinyaset || 64 || One should then deposit the group of nine (goddesses) Vāmā and the rest (on the petals) beginning with the eastern one. (They are) Vāmā, Jyeṣṭhā,

and then Kālī,

Kalavikaraṇī,

Balavikaraṇī,

and Balapramathinī.

Sarvabhūtadamanī is also another one and Manonmanī is in the centre. One should deposit them following the path of the sun (i.e., clockwiṣe). (62cd-64)

fēṝTst fōk-ṁ sṬēṣar aāf aṇfṀ̄ ṣar || s., lIl

vibhvādinavakaṁ cānyadvilomātparikalpayet | vibhurjñānĩ kriyā cecchvā vāgīśī jvālinī tathā lI 6 |

vāmā jyeṣṭhā ca raudrī ca sarvāḥ kālānalaprabhāḥ |

One should then imagine (vikalpayet) another group of nine (goddesses) beginning with Vibhvī (arranged) anticlockwise. (They are) Vibhvī, Jñānī, Kriyā, lcchā, Vāgīṣī, Jvālinī, Vāmā, Jyeṣṭhā, and Raudrī. All of them (shine)

with the light of the Fire of Time.” (65-66ab)

ã Ũṃṣ̄. samṁar: || s. ||

” Verses 60-66ab are paraphrased and explained 1n TĀ 15/302-306. Verses 61-66ab are quoted in TĀv ad 15/303cd-307.

dhvani cārkenduvahnīnāṁ saṁjñayā paribhāvayet || 67 I In the centre, the stamens and the petals, one should meditate (respectively) on Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Hara, taught previously, empowered (with these energies). (They are) the lords of the circles of the Fire, Moon and Sun.

ārvīrTāīēqdīṁcāai arī || . lII īśvaraṁ ca mahāpretaṁ prahasantaṁ sacetanam |

kālāgnikoṭivapuṣamityevaṁ sarvamāsanam” || 68 |I Sadāśiva The Great Ghost (Mahāpreta) And (above Pure Knowledge one should contemplate) Iśvara (and above him Sadāśiva), the Great Ghost, who is (full of) consciousness and

laughing, His body (blazing like) millions of Fires of Time.™ (68) rkrg

dīfṭrsara ācōfTīṝcrārcqzaāa7q I| '9o | tasya nābhyutthitaṁ śaktiśūlaśṛṅgatrayaṁ smaret | kakhatrayeṇa niryātaṁ dvādaśāntāvasānakam || 69 || cintayet tasya śṛṅgeṣu śāktaṁ padmatrayaṁ tataḥ | sarvādhiṣṭhāyakaṁ śuklamityetatparamāsanam || 70 ||

The Three Prongs One should (now) recollect the three prongs of the Trident of Energy (śaktiśūla) that have arisen from (Sadāśiva’s) navel. They exit as three (rays from) within the Cavity of Brahmā (on the crown of the head) and end in the

End of the Twelve. Then one should think that on its prongs there are three

lotuses empowered (by the three powers), white and presiding over all. This is

the supreme throne.” (69-70)

The text here is partially corrupt. The sense however is clear on the basis of TĀ 15/307 and also SVT 2/72cd-73.

” parātri tyetatsarvam.

7“ MV 8/68 is quoted in the TĀv ad 15/312. See TĀ 15/309-310.

” Read kakhe trayeṇa for kakhaiayeṇa.

7 MV 8/69-70 are quoted in TĀv ad 15/313-314, which is an explanatory paraphrase of them.

tatropari tato mūrtiṁ vidyākhyāmanucintayet | ātmākhyāṁ ca tatastasyāṁ pūryanyāsaṁ śivātmakam || 71 II Then there, above (that), one should think of the Icon (mirti) called

Vidyā and then the one called the Self. Within that is the preceding deposition,

which is Śiva by nature.” (71)

Visualized Forms of the Three Goddesses

iaEkREḵt Ṁ;

I ḶetkṝevEĀEIEḶIEḤI ā aīr̥ 3 tīoṁ gvīra II 's I| tato madhye parāṁ śaktiṁ dakṣiṇottarayordvayam |

parāparāṁ svarūpeṇa raktavarṇāṁ mahābalām || 72. || icchārūpadharāṁ dhyātvā kiṁcidugrāṁ na bhīṣaṇām | aparāṁ vāmaśrṅge tu bhīṣaṇāṁ kṛṣṇapiṅgalām || 73 II Then, (one should contemplate) the supreme power (Parā) in the middle

and the (other) two on the right and the left. Parāparā (on the right) is red by

nature and very powerful. She bears the form of the will (> sic. knowledge) and is somewhat fierce (but) not frightening (bhīṣaṇa). Having visualized (her, meditate on) Aparā on the left prong, who is frightening and tawny-black. (72-

ṢBTETIT ZafĪ JJāītcfeṣāsrāīq |

sfḷavsfī a vīk r̥caã fr |

icchārūpadharāṁ devīṁ praṇatārtivināśinīm | parāṁ cãpyãyanĩṁ devīĩṁ candrakoṭyayutaprabhām || 74 | ṣaḍvidhe ʻpi kṛte śākte mūrtyādāvapi cintayet | Once performed the six-fold (deposition) of power, as is done with the

Icon and the rest, one should think of Parā, the goddess who bears the form of 7 See TĀ 15/321-323ab.

The meaning here is unclear. See TĀ 15/326ab. Read mārtāv iva for mārtāv api

the will and destroys the suffering of (her) devotees (praṇata). She is the goddess who nourishes (all) and shines with the light of billions of moons.

faītāzē vgrar-razq fēzzā I| ou, || TTTRPĪTTTTTĪ ēfiī arṣh-rq | vidyāṅgapañcakaṁ paścādāgneyyādiṣu vinyaset || 75 II agnīśarakṣovāyūnāṁ dakṣiṇe ca yathākramam |

After that one should deposit the five limbs of the Vidyā in the south-

east etc., that is, in the southeast, northeast, soutwest, north-west and south, in due order. (75cd-76ab).

ā-q || sē ||

śaktyaṅgāni śivāṅgāni tathaiva vidhinā smaret || 76 || kiṁ tu śakrādidikṣv astramantraṁ madhye ca locanam | aghorādyaṣṭakaṁ dhyāyed aghoryādyasṣṭakānvitam || 77 || One should recollect with the same procedure the limbs of Śakti and

those of Śiva. However, (one should also) meditate on the Weapon mantra in

(all) the directions, beginning with (east governed by) Indra, the Eye in the middle and (on the petals of the lotus), the group of eight beginning with Aghora along with the eight (corresponding goddesses) beginning with Aghorī. (76cd-77)

sarvāsām āvṛtatvena lokapālāṁś ca bāhyataḥ | Then having reflected on the guardians of the quarters along with (their) weapons as encompassing all of them externally by means of their own mantras.

graīṁzṁ4: aftrca sṝ ũarcaā || sc l|

TĀ 15/323cd-325 is a paraphrase of MV 8/72-75ab. TĀ 15/353cd-365 is a paraphrase of MV 8/75cd-84ab interspersed with direct quotations. MV 8/75cd-76ab 1s quoted 1n TĀv ad 15/357cd-358 (357-358ab).

gāz#āūilī īṝ-s ērra++vtrzz |

sāstrān svamantraiḥ saṁcintya japaṁ paścāt samārabhet |I| 78 II svarūpe tallayo bhūtvā ekaikāṁ daśadhā smaret |

jvalatpāvakasaṁkāśāṁ dhyātvā svāhāntam uccaret || 79 |l sakr̥d ekaikaśo mantrī homakarmaprasiddhaye | ity eva mānaso yāgaḥ kathitaḥ sāmudāyikaḥ || 80 |I

After that one should begin to repeat the mantra and, merged into one’s own nature, one should recollect each one (of the Vidyās (?)) ten times. Having meditated on (each one) to be like a blazing fire, the one who recites mantra should utter SVĀHĀ at the end, once for each one, in order to render the

oblation (homakarman) successful.

Such is the mental sacrifice (mānasayāga) which is said to be made of the assemblage (of mantras) (sāmudayika). (78cd-80)

gradzft=āaā úṁṁg a-- I| ¢ l|

etattriśūlamuddiṣṭamekadaṇḍaṁ triśaktikam | itthametadavijñāya śaktiśūlaṁ varānane || 81 II

baddhvāpi khecarīṁ mudrāṁ notpatatyavanītalāt | This is the Trident, which is it said has one staff and three powers. 0

fair faced (goddess), without knowing the Trident of (the three) powers (to be such) in this way, although he forms the gesture of the Skyfaring Goddess, he does not fly up from the surface of the earth.™ (81-82ab)

qddī-raīṛ faṁt=frr ṛōrzā āām |

ityetacchāmbhavaṁ proktamaṣṭāntaṁ śāktamiṣyate || 82|| turyāntamāṇavaṁ vidyāditi śūlatrayaṁ matam | Thus,

this is said to be the Divine (śāmbhava) (Trident).

Empowered one (śākta) is considered (to reach up only to) the end of eight (fingers” space above the Cavity of Brahmā). One should know that the MV 8/784-80ab is quoted in TĀv ad 15/359cd-361ab (359-360) See there for details.

MV 8/81cd-82ab is quoted in TĀv ad 15/361cd-363ab (361-362). TĀ 15/(361cd-365ab) (361364) expands and explains MV 8/81-83ab, 84ab.

Individual (Trident) ends four (fingers’ space above it). This is considered to be the triple Trident. (82cd-83ab)

(One can also) meditate on the assembly of powers (śakticakra) by the procedure (in which the deities) are worshipped individually (prthagyāgavidhānena). By that (means also), once having formed (the gesture of) the Skyfaring (Goddess), he quits in the same way the surface of the earth. (83cd84ab)

tato ʻbhimantrya dhānyāni mahāstreṇa trisaptadhā || 84 || niksipeddikṣu sarvāsu jvalatpāvakavatsmaret | nirvighnaṁ tadgrṛhaṁ dhyãtvã saṁhr̥tyeśadiśaṁ nayet || 85 | Then, after having consecrated grains of wheat with the great Weapon twenty-one times, he should scatter them in all the directions, meditating on them as being like a burning fire. Having meditated on that abode (of the sacrifice) as being free of obstacles and having gathered (the grains) together, he should place (them) in the northeastern quarter. (84cd-85)

r-rāçaārá-: ũdz- aīc- |

MV 8/82cd-83ab quoted 1n TĀv ad 15/363cd-364ab (363) of which 1t is a paraphrase. See TĀ 15/361cd-363ab (361-362).

Kh;: śaktipadmam.

Ṣee TĀ 15/365.

TĀ 15/365cd-366ab) (365) is an explanation of MV 8/83cd-84ab (not quoted by Jayaratha).

This 1s where Gaṇeśa 1s worshipped. MV 8/85d is quoted in TĀv ad 15/377cd-378ab (376cd377). See TĀ 15/369cd-370ab (369).

pañcagavyaṁ tataḥ kuryādvadanaiḥ pañcabhirbudhaḥ | gomiūtraṁ gomayaṁ caiva kṣīṝraṁ dadhi ghrṛtaṁ tathã || 86 || mantrayedūrdhvaparyantaiḥ ṣaḍaṅgena kuśodakam | mudre dravyāmṛte baddhvā tattvaṁ tasya vicintayet || 87 |I tena saṅprokṣayedbhūmiṁ svalpenānyannidhāpayet 1 The wise man should then (consecrate) the five products of a cow, that

is, cow urine, dung, milk, curd and clarified butter, (with the mantras of the) five faces (of Sadāśiva) and with the six limbs. He should consecrate the water (in which sacred) kuśa (grass is immersed) with the six limbs, ending with the

upper ones (?) . . .' One should sprinkle the ground with a little of this (water) and set aside the rest.” (86-88ab)

ṭGUIEHE-IRUIāVEEEIGFĪḤ|ṈĀĀṈIḷ ṬṀÑJTGTTI TĒTT JṬPTT I

vāstuyāgaṁ tataḥ kuryānmālinyuccārayogataḥ || 88 |I

puṣpairañjalimāpūrya phakārādi samuccaran |

dhyātvā śaktyantamadhvānaṁ nakārānte vinikṣipet || 89 |I One should then offer sacrifice to the site (vāstuyāga), in association

with the utterance of Mālinī. Having filled one’s cupped hands with flowers whilst uttering (the Mālinī alphabet in reverse) beginning with PH and having

meditated on (all) the path ending with Śakti, he should throw (them as an offering) after (uttering) the letter N (with which the Mālinī alphabet begins).

Worship of Gaṇeśa

TgGYTTH-Ī =JS JŪTIĪ Ṭārĩ || <o ||

EṭRIĀIERECAEUĀAĒĒTEGIUETĪIKTAI

“’kt nānyadvdārayed

l I cannot understand the following line (8/87cd): mudre dravāmṛtaṁ baddhvā tattvaṁ taṣya

vicintayet | Abhinavagupta does not refer to it.

“ See TĀ 15/371-372.

MV 8/88cd-89 is quoted in TĀv ad 15/375cd-376 (375-376ab) which elaborates on these

feārs fafxzārr=q ēcārqgsrāq I| <3 |l gandhadhũūpādikaṁ datvā gaṇeśānaṁ prapūjayet | saḍutthamāsanaṁ nyasya praṇavena tatopari ||/ 90 ||

gāmityanena vighneśaṁ gandhadhūpādibhiryajet |

asyāṅgāni gakāreṇa ṣaḍḍīrghasvarayogataḥ || 91 |I trinetramuditaṁ dhyātvā gajāsyaṁ vāmanākṛtim | viṣarjya siddhikāmastu mahāstramanupūjayet || 92 || After having offered perfume and incense etc., one should worship Gaṇeśa. After having placed a seat (for him) generated from six (components, as will be explained), one should worship the Lord of Obstacles with (the syllable)

GŪAUM and with perfumes and flowers etc.”” His limbs (are formed) with the

letter G in conjunction with the six long (vowels). Having meditated on him as

having three eyes and joyful, with the face of an elephant and form of a dwarf, then he who desires accomplishments should, after he has been dismissed, worship the great Weapon (Mantra).” (90-92)

ītaz ḹtrāraṁ vgcaīūraā7 I| <3 || dattvānantaṁ tathā dharmaṁ jñānaṁ vairāgyameva ca | aiśvaryaṁ karṇikāyāṁ ca' ṣaḍutthamidamāsanam || 93 || (This is done) once Ananta, Dharma, Knowledge, Dispassion, Mastery

and the calix (of a lotus) have been put in place. This is the throne made of six (components). (93)

The Deity of the Weapon

fā- nrzr nēṁ yādqa I| <x II

k: gandhapuspādibhir.

“ Variant reading: tasyāṅgānīn.

Read with K, gandhapuṣpādībhir, which 1s the standard formula for the anomalous gandhadhūpādibhir.

MV 8/91-92ab is quoted in TĀv ad 15/377cd-378ab (376cd-377) The KSTS edition of the MV reads gām ity anena for gūauṁ ity anena. ” In TĀ 15/(378cd-381ab) (377 + 2, 3 and 4), Abhinavagupta summarizes MV 8/92cd-100. MV 8/92cd is quoted 1n the TĀv ad 15/378cd-381ab (377 + 2, 3 and 4).

9. kh, g: ceti.

! MV 8/93 quoted in TĀv ad 15/377cd-378ab (376cd-377) which elaborate on it. Cf. SŚP 1/128129.

asyopari nyaseddhyātvā khaḍgakheṭakadhāriṇam |

vikarālaṁ mahādaṁṣṭtraṁ mahograṁ bhrukuṭĩīmukham || 94 ||

svāṅgaṣaṭkasamopetaṁ diṅmātṛparivāritam |

svārṇairevāṅgaṣaṭkam tu phaṭkāraparidīpitam l| 95 Place (the deity of the Weapon) on it, having meditated (on him) as bearing a sword and shield. He has big teeth and his mouth gapes terribly; very fierce, the eyebrows on his face are knit. He is possesses his own six limbs and is surrounded by the Mothers of the directions. The group of six limbs (are fashioned) with their own (respective) vowels and are well energized by the

syllable PHAT. (94-95)

The Eight Mothers and their Worship

ṣ̄ Ūdṁī q asĩ g m?ēxq II <e ll

sr-īā tīkēzāī 7 arṝ ōeakt m: |

ī-kt aṣoṃḷ s; ararsĩ

fēṛ. || <v ||

GgTTTTJ EzEGII EEE šIše

tadrūpameva saṁcintya tato mātraṣṭakaṁ yajet | indrāṇīṁ pūryapatre tu savajrāṁ yugapatsmaret || 96 || āgneyūṁ śaktihastāṁ ca yāmyāṁ daṇḍakarāṁ tataḥ | nair-rtīṁ varuṇānĩṁ ca vãyavĩṁ ca vicakṣaṇaḥ || 97 || khaḍgapāśadhvajairyuktāṁ cintayedyugapatpriye | kauverūī mudgarakarāmīśānīṁ śūlasaṅyutām || 98 II Having meditated intensely on that form, the group of eight Mothers

should be worshipped. Indrāṇī is on the eastern petal. Recollect her at the same time along with (her weapon), the thunderbolt. The (Mother) in the southeast,

AĀgneyī, holds a javelin (śakti) in her hand. Then (meditate on) Yāmyā (who is on the southern petal and) holds a staff. 0 beloved, the skilled (practitioner) should think simultaneously of Nairṛtī (in the southwest), Varuṇānī (in the west)

and Vāyavī (in the northwest) as bearing a sword, noose and flag (respectively). Kauverī (in the north) holds a mallet and Iśānī (in the northeast) bears a

trident. (96-98)

hoōōi āāī-deaīraṅā || << ||

2 . kh. sāṅgatḥ (sārṇaiḥ) ityevaṅvidhaḥ.

MV 8/94-98 is quoted in TĀv ad 15/378cd-381ab (377 + 2, 3 and 4).

kiEkTĀUḤEIEĒÉEAICTĀKETI gandhapuṣpādibhiḥ pūjya ṣvatantre homamācaret | ādau ca kalaśaṁ kuryātsahasrādhikamantritam || 99 || sahasraṁ homayettatra tato japtvā visarjayet | śatamaṣṭottaraṁ pūrṇaṁ paścādyajanamārabheṭ || 100 || Having worshipped them with perfume and flowers etc., one should, O free one, offer an oblation (homa). First of all, one must consecrate the small jar (kalaśa) with over a thousand repetitions of mantra. One should (then) make a thousand offerings there to the fire, and then after having repeated the mantra

(japa) for a full hundred and eight times, (the diety) should be sent away."' After that one should commence the sacrifice. (99-100)

The Sacrifice The Large and the Little Jar, Placement and Worship

ā̄? ṭḍPTTITTA ēHITTTTJTĪT | gdṁjaāīrsrrṁṀ raragaTgfā I| g 2 || īrāfcrhrāīdṁ fāṁaagāma I| .2 || JITPTTTGSTdT TGG-āJTTJfTĪT |

tatrādau kumbhamādāya hemādimayamavraṇam |

sarvamaṁntrauṣadhīgarbha'ṁ gandhāmbuparipūritam | 101 II cūtapallavavaktraṁ ca srakṣūtrasitaṁkaṇṭhakam | rakṣoghratilakākrāntaṁ sitavastrayugāvṛtam || 102 ||

śatāṣṭottarasaṁjapta mūlamantraprapūjitam 1

vārdhānyapi tathābhūtā kūṁtu sastreṇa pūjitā || 103 |I There in the beginning (of the rite), one should take a jar without cracks

made of gold or the like, that contains all (kinds of) jewels and herbs' and is

completely filled with fragrant water, its mouth (adorned) with young mango MV 8/99cd-100c is quoted in TĀv ad 15/378cd-381ab (377 + 2, 3 and 4). Variant reading: sarvaratnausadhīgarbham.

Ó Variant readnng: krtakanṭhakam. ' k. śūlamantraprapūritam.

. Read as in the citaton of tms passage in TĀv and 381cd-388ab (378-385ab),

sarvaratnauṣadhī- for sarvamantrauṣadhī-. We find the same expression below in 1 1/44ab.

leaves and a garland and thread fashioned as its necklace. It is covered with

a mark (tilaka) that serves to destroy demons' and is wrapped in a white cloth. It is worshipped with the root Mantra repeated one hundred and eight times."" The small jar (vārdhānī) is also (adorned) like that, however, (unlike the large

jar) it is worshipped with the Weapon (mantra). (101-103)

vikirairāsanaṁ dattvā pūrvoktaṁ tu vicakṣaṇaḥ | indrādīnpūjayetpaścātsvadikṣu proktasvasvaraiḥ l| 104 1I Once the skilful (officiant) has offered the seat mentioned previously (for the jar) along with the scattered grains (on which it is placed), he should worship Indra and the rest (of the guardians of the quarters each) in their own

quarter with their own vowels, as stated (previously)." (104)

(The disciple) should then cause an unbroken stream (of liquid) to fall from the small jar (vārdhanī), and after that (the teacher) should rotate it around

the large jar (kalaśa), saying this to the lords of the regions: “O! O! Sakra, by Siva’s command you should attend with care on your quarter (of space) up to the end of the rite, so that (demonic) obstacles (there) may be quelled.” (105-106)

Read, as 1n the citation in TĀv, -kṛtakanthakam for -sitakaṇṭhakam. ! The expresston rakṣoghnatilakākrāntam may also be understood to mean ‘covered with white

12 TA 15/381cd-391ab (378-388ab) are a paraphrase of MV 8/101-109. MV 8/101-103 is quoted in TĀv ad 15/381cd-388ab (378-385ab). Abhinavagupta condenses these verses 1nto TĀ 15/381382a.

See above, MV 3/66-67 and TĀ 30/42-43ab. Concerning verses 105 to 108 see TĀ 15/378cd-

k: yhnopaśāntaye.

āīa āfkrtermī arāīṁīṝ fāfrārtq II| go |l nītvā tatrāsane pūrvaṁ mūrtibhūtaṁ' ghaṭaṁ nyaset | tasya dakṣiṇadigbhāge vārdhānīṁ viniveśayet' || 107 || Having brought the jar which serves as the icon (of the deity), one

should place it there on (its) seat in the east.'" One should place the (small) jar (vārdhānī) in the quarter to its right (dakṣiṇa).' (107)

TTATTĪRfṝ: TSA āīāī-ī Ūr̄Tvzq I| g. || ātmamūrtyādipūjyāntaṁ kumbhe vinyasya mantravit |

gandhapuṣpādibhiḥ pūjya vārdhānyāṁ pūjayedimam" |/ 108 II Once the knower of mantra has deposited onto the (big) jar (kumbha) (the mantras) beginning with that of the icon of the Self (ātmamiūrti) up to that of the object of worship and worshipped with scent and flowers etc., he should

worship the Weapon within the (small) jar. (108) The Fire Sacrifice

fa; arāēāa ar || z

The Purification of the Fire (agnisaṅṣkāra)

gandhairmaṇḍalakaṁ' kr̥tvā brahmasthāne vicakṣaṇaḥ | tatra saṁpūjayetṣaṭkaṁ ' trikaṁ' vāpyekameva vā | 109 || Once the skilled (practitioner) has fashioned the maṇḍala with scents

"! Variant reading: vivedayed ' Ṟead pūrve for pūrvam.

385ab) is an explanatory paraphrase of MV 8/107. " kh: pūjayedāsim.

Variant reading: gandhamaṇḍalakamiti; kh’ manumaṇḍalakam. kh: saṁpūjayecchaṁkham.

TĀ 15/387cd (384cd) reads gandhamandale for gandhair manḍalakaṁ.

location of Brahmā, he should worship either the group of six or the triad (of

goddesses) or just one.(109)

āqvraTaāīē āsrāxṛṛ+ aar || 230 || R̥TRTITTTĒTTJṬTI a redrrT | kuṇḍasyollēkhanaṁ lekhaḥ kuṭṭanaṁ copalepanam | catuṣpathākṣavāṭaṁ ca vajrasaṁsthāpanaṁ tathā l| 110 l| kuśāstaraṇaparidhiviṣṭarāṇāṁ ca kalpanam (AII the preparatory purificatory rites) of the sacrificial hearth (kuṇḍa), including the digging, sprinkling, beating (of the ground to flatten it), the smearing, the cross, the enclosure (akṣavāṭa), the fashioning of the carpet of kuśa grass, the enclosing trench (paridhi), and the seat of kuśa grass (viṣṭara), (as well as) the installation of the thunderbolt, should be done with the

Weapon. (110-111cd)

gatṁzāvī agfī famaātat aā || z22 II ftraāīTaftr frz+īza ūŪqṣa fṝcaiá : |

sarvamastreṇa kurvīta vidyārmohīmiti nyaset |I śivamomiti vinyasya saṁpūjya dvitayaṁ punaḥ | tāmrapātre śarāve vā ānayejjātavedasam || 112 || śivaśukramiti dhyātvā vidyāyonau vinikṣipet |

One should deposit the (Mālinī) Vidyā OṀ HṚĪṀ. Having deposited the

Siva (Mātṛkā with an initial) OM and worshipped both again, he should bring the fire on a copper or earthenware plate. Having meditated (on it thinking that

it is) Siva's seed, it should be cast into the womb (yoni) of the Vidyā. (11 1cd113ab)

ārṝkaīgā; v faāãā rāq I| 2 Il

kkh: vidyāmamdrīm.

MV 8/111d-113ab is quoted in the TĀv ad 15/405cd-406ab (402cd-403ab). ‘Having moved three times around outside the pit with the syllable OṀ (dhruva).’ Ths line (quoted by Jayaratha just after this verse) is not found in the edition of the MV

tatastvāhutayaḥ pañca vidyāṅgaireva homayet || 1 13 ||

jananādi tataḥ karma sarvamevaṁ kṛte kṛtam |

Then, one should offer five oblations with the (five) limbs of the Vidyā. Thus, done in this way, all the (purificatory) rites beginning with (those

performed at) birth are done. (113cd-114ab)

TITWTJTTJ āI TĪR̥fĪ ṬĪ: | z2x Il Tqsā nṁīṁ ā: ftṁ a farstāq |

parāparāmanusmṛtya dadyāt pūrṇāhutiṁ punaḥ || 114 || saṁpūjya mātaraṁ vahneḥ pitaraṁ ca visarjayet | carvādisādhanāyāgniṁ samuddhṛtya tataḥ punaḥ || 115 |I Having recollected Parāparā, he should offer a full oblation again, and (after) having worshipped the mother and the father of the fire, dismiss them.

Then having taken fire (from the hearth, install it) again (separately) in order to

prepare the sacrificial pap etc. (114cd-115)

Another Fire Sacrifice

sTṝ̄ ā< dāā̄ zṜ#PH TT: fkq 1| 22ē. 1 rpĩṝ a qdtāq aanzaār-aā faf: |

jvalitasyāthavā vahneś citiṁ vāmena vāyunā | ākṛṣya hṛdi saṁkumbhya dakṣiṇena punaḥ kṣipet || 116 || pūrṇāṁ ca pūrvavad dadyācchivāgner aparo vidhiḥ | Or else, the other procedure (concerning) Śiva’s fire (is as follows).

Having drawn in a flame (citi)'™" of the burning fire into the heart with (the inhaled) breath on the left and retained it, he should expel it again with (the

exhaled breath on) the right and, as before, he should offer a full (oblation). ' (116-117ab) ' MV 8/113cd-114ab is quoted 1n TĀv ad 15/407cd-408ab (404cd-405ab). Read evarkṛte for

ṬĀ 15/415c (412c) reads sikhāṃ for citiṃ. trzaslate ‘cir’ as Abhinavagupta understands it to mean, namely, ‘śikhā’ ‘{flame’. Indeed, perhaps this was the rcading in Abhinavagupta’s manuscript of the MV. It is also possible to translate citi as ‘consciousnessʼ i. having drawn in the consciousness (c1ti) of the burning fire . . . MV 8/116-117ab is paraphrased and explained 1n 15/(415cd-416ab) (412cd-413ab).

f?ra=d mmīrīaz zaīcāī-; āf̃; ēāāq || 22

Śivarūpaṁ tamālokya tasyātmāntaḥ kṛtih kramāt || 117 II kuryādantaḥ kṛtiṁ mantrī tato homaṁ samārabheṭ | (Another way to worship Śiva’s fire is) to gaze upon it (seeing that it is) Śiva (śivarūpa); (in this way) the rite is progressively internalized into the Self.

(Thus,) the reciter of mantra should perform the inner rite and then commence

the (outer) oblation. (11 7cd-118ab)

Tō va ḍũai ṁagīṝṁ vṣga: I| z2¢ |Il mūlaṁ śatena saṁtarpya tadaṅgāni ṣaḍaṅgataḥ || 118 I|

After having offered libation to the root mantra a hundred times, (he should offer) libation with a sixth part (of the clarified butter) to the limbs (and faces of the mantra), and with a tenth part, the remaining kinds of mantras. (118cd-119ab)

āīā: ṁa-artzīar-rtxārārgaṁōaṁ I| z2 ITā Ġgcaḹ gJaTTd ēīq |ḷ

The Introduction of the Neophant He should then introduce (his) disciples, who are pure, have bathed, and are fasting, (into the abode of the sacrifice). Then, after having bowed to the Lord of the gods who is present in the four (things)' in due order, he should give (his disciples) the five products of a cow, the sacrificial pap, and (the stick)

to clean the teeth. The sacrificial pap is (prepared) successfully with sacrificial ! TĀ 15/416cd-417ab (413cd-414ab) is an explanation of MV 8/117cd-118ab (not quoted by

Jayaratha).

! k.: daśāṁśaiścaiva tarpaṇam.

Iṭ appears from TĀ 15/477 (473) that these four are the big and little jars, the fire and the Self.

rice boiled in milk and (the utterance of the) mantra of the Heart (while

cooks). (119cd-121ab)

ftraārTrr̥ftreamī amī-arraāī. aam | saṁpātaṁ saptabhirmantraistataḥ ṣaḍbhāgabhājitam || 121 ||

Śivāgniguruśiṣyāṇāṁ' vārdhānīkumbhayoḥ samam |

(Then) the oblation (saṁpāta) is offered with (the utterance of) seven

mantras'" and (the sacrificial pap) is then divided into six (equal) portions.

(These are offered) equally to Śiva, the fire, the teacher and disciples, and to the small (vārdhānī) and large jars (kumbha). (121cd-122ab)

dantakāṣṭhaṁ tato dadyātkṣīravṛkṣasamudbhavam || 122 |

tasya pātaḥ śubhaḥ prācīsaumyaiśāpyordhvadiggataḥ | aśubho ‘nyatra tatrāpi homo ‘ṣṭaśatiko bhavet || 123 I|

(The teacher) should then give (them) a stick for the teeth made of

milkwood (kṣīravṛkṣa). It is auspicious for that (stick) to fall to the east, north, northeast, west or vertically (ārdhvadik). It is inauspicious (if it falls)

elsewhere. (To remedy that, another fire sacrifice should be performed). There (in that case) also the oblations should be one hundred and eight. (122cd-123)

aīz fēz āīg ra: |

bahiḥkarmatataḥ kuryād dikṣu sarvāsu daiśikaḥ |

oṁ kṣaḥ kṣaḥ sarvabhūtebhyaḥ svāheti manunāmunā || 124 || See TĀ 15/437-438.

1t seems that according to TĀ 15/439 ff. theṣe Mantras are those of the three goddesses, the

three Śaktis and Mātrsadbhāva.

MYV 8/121-122ab is quoted in TĀv ad 15/447cd-449 (444cd-446). See TĀ 15/444cd-445. There Siva is replaced by the sthaṇḍila, that 1s, the sacrificial surface. '“ MV 8/123 is quoted in 15/450 (447). 15/450d (447d) reads tatrāstrahomo ‘py aṣṭaśataṁ bhavet – ‘there (1n that case) also one hundred and eight oblations should be (offered) wath the Weapon’ for MV 8/123d: tatrāp1 homo 'ṣṭaśatiko bhavet – ‘there (in that case) also the oblattons should be one hundred and eightʼ.

“" bahihkarma emended to balkarma.

The teacher should then perform the rite of offering bali in all the quarters with this mantra: “OM KṢAḤ KṢAḤ SARVABHŪTEBHYO

The Examination of the Disciple’s Dreams

r̥dd f-īahiīfē #caṁī art fa-rziq Il 22Eē |l

q JṀTTĪTTTHJṬĀ ṜITTHT-Ñ samācamya kr̥tanyāsaḥ samabhyarcya ca śaṅkaram | k k k Ãk. 3 k . S. . S gr̥he Šuciḥ || 125

prabhāte nityakarmādi kṛtvā svapnaṁ vicārayet || 126 l|| śubhaṁ prakāśayetteṣāmaśubhe homamācaret | Having rinsed (his mouth), performed the deposition, and worshipped

Śaṅkara. . . in the abode, pure. Having performed deposition on the disciples

and, especially, himself, and performed the regular (daily) rites and the rest at dawn, (the teacher) should examine (each disciple’s) dream. If it is auspicious, he reveals (the meaning) to them, whereas if it is inauspicious, he should perform a fire sacrifice (homa). (125-127ab)

nīvṝṝ3ṁ fōmcēanmmīāqāx- ērvm I| 22¢ ||

vā faṝ yr̥s ggaṁ ftfs sīāīcaaitr̄taaṁ I| z2< II tataḥ puṣpaphalādīnāṁ suveśābharaṇāḥ striyaḥ || 127 |I āpaduttaraṇaṁ caiva śubhadeśāvarohaṇam | madyapānaṁ śīiraśchedamāmamāṁsasya bhakṣaṇam || 128 |I devatādarśanaṁ sākṣāttathā viṣṭhānulepanam | evaṁ vidhaṁ śubhaṁ dr̥ṣṭvā siddhiṁ prāpnotyabhīpsitām ||/ 129 || “2 MV 8/124 is with reference to TĀ 15/476-478ab (472-474ab) (not quoted by Jayaratha).

Most of line 8/125cd is missing.

Auspicious dreams such those of flowers, fruits and the like, women with beautiful clothes and ornaments, escape from a calamity, ascent into auspicious lands, the drinking of liquor, decapitation, the eating of raw meat, the direct vision of deities, the smearing with faces -— having seen such an auspicious (dream), he obtains the accomplishment (siddhi) he desires. (127cd-

kjGUEEIGFEUGEEIEEEIEETI

etadevānyathābhūtaṁ duḥsvapna iti kīrtyate |

pakvamāṁsāśanābhyaṅgagartādipatanādikam || 130 || tantroktāṁ niṣkṛtiṁ krṛtvā dvijatvāpādanaṁ tataḥ | One that is contrary to this is said to be a bad dream (duhsvapna). (Examples are dreaming of) eating cooked meat, being smeared with unguents, falling into a precipice and the like. After having performed the rites of expiation taught in the Tantras' (the disciple) attains the condition of a ‘twice

bornʼ (brahmin). (130-131ab)

The Teaching of the Rules and Concluding Ablution

Ṭ̄T cāī āaT āa: || 232 ||

fēkī-rf arāqç |

devāgnigurudevīnāṁ pūjāṁ kṛtvā sadā budhaḥ || 131 1| eteṣāmanivedyaiva na kiṅcidapi bhakṣayet | The wise man always (eats) after having (first) worshipped the gods, fire, teachers and goddesses, and should not eat anything without having offered

them food (first).√ (131cd-132ab)

īar=ā īzā īēšrza ass.q || z32 || fṝrrrē a ōū rgdnṁ raf̃q |

devadravyaṁ gurudravyaṁ caṇḍīdravyaṁ ca varjayet || 132 ||

i Read with TĀ 15/48cd adhirohaṇam for avarohaṇam. ! k: duḥkhasvapnamitīti.

See TĀ 15/481cd-489. “ See TĀ 15/509. 15/538 (534) is a paraphrase of MV 8/132 (not quoted by Jayaratha).

niṣphalaṁ naiva ceṣṭeta muhūrtamapi mantravit | yogābhyāsarato bhīūyānmantrābhyāsarato ‘pi vā ll 133 || (Moreover,) he should avoid (touching) the sacrificial substances

(offered) to the god, teacher and the goddess (candī). The knower of mantra should not act fruitlessly even for a moment. He should be devoted to the practice of yoga and also, or else, to the practice of mantra. (132cd-133)

aāī I| g 3x Il ūāUIĒ-EAVTEĀ:EAEAja|ttḻ!

Having taught (his disciples) such rules (samaya) and others like them,

(the teacher) should dismiss the God of the gods, and (then) by means of (the water in) Siva’s jar that destroys all sin (dusṣkṛta), he should make (his)

disciplesʼ bath and, or else, (he should bathe) himself also. (134-135ab)

ityetatsāmayaṁ karma samāsāt parikīrtitam || 135 || Thus this, in brief, is said to be the ritual procedure (that concerns a

common) regular (initiate). (135cd)

iti śrīmālinīvijayottare tantre samayādhikāro ‘ṣṭamaḥ || II See TĀ 15/534-535ab. ' See TĀ 15/610cd-612.

Appendix H A comparative chart between the tattvas and the Trident Throne

ḹPhacavae _ _ ..s

S-Ṛī--+-y Jes The lows of Knowledge wi the +-IHHHPĀḤṈ iuḍurdṭ'tydúvhúṇ

Taamicáṭe pai) is yl o ūe Mieoai samṇas) al e yleo'Tre Thvaknleige wik bk Ḷe

Śuddhavidys| UÚalaited power of acṅoo | shels° e lower shell Ṃ he Warld. ad'hṭ pa sl 'be Sēī sṇttv Te ? gpalie o be aānd eod beĩ,

opposites. Dhama (Piety). Wisdoan

Úháua) Deciees (Vaxrśṭya

(Adlaúa. Çhúay,Aaivaa) Niniay The is haats

Ajlin, Atarg, Eeēḍ IRrTna kNEgyyrrrrrrxrrḺaaI

ḸīTNlion __|

/ŪTagaa Ḷaune) TT jaṇa- r-i

ĪÚ yçpgç g_Phal–7| Tmerass |--ki2aḥ --

Š| ci.. | -- j | ṭiz ™… d—Cpaga—{} (aaṇavaiy.) QC-a

; .7| ḸQG.hoaa

Tdsṣaa7} ,Āaakle J ... 7|

.|CTaua—{ "hM T ṣṣ.. – | =- Ldaaa—| (,n-Irā/ṈṚWx ) J” ’saaī__7 ā.d.

ṂṂ|ddJaa —– 6vahhhaa) |__weç___Ṁdāīṇoamaovē ___ ianu _ 1 ūṇa aboe

A chart of the tattvas and the Trividyā according with MV 4/19-27 Bhairava teachs how the reality principles are distributed in the Three

Vidyās, Parāparā (MV 4/19-23cd), Aparā (4/24) and finally Parā (4/25-27), as follows.

i| | ṣ | . JṀ, .. .:= .

Ãḹ- | . | ..–> ....| i;: i

:Ĩ | 248 | . ē | .

ṭ:.i | | £: | 1}d

rr- | .4. ._ . . 4