
CHAPTER ELEVEN
----------------------------------------


tattvānāṁ sā kalety uktā dharaṇyāṁ dhārikā yathā || 4 I|

Again, (from another point of view,) some say that this Force is that extremely subtle power that is present within the Principles, as is, for example, the sustaining power within the Earth Principle.

(A Force is) ‘extremely subtle’ because it cannot be perceived by itself. (However,) it must be conceived to exist, because (its) effects could not otherwise be logically possible. In this way, ‘as is, for example, the sustaining power present ‘within the Earth Principle’,’ so too (an energy) operates (kalayitrī) (there) called Nivṛtti (‘Cessation’) because, (fully) extroverted, it stops (operating) once the ultimate limit (parākāṣṭhā) (of extroverted objectivity) has been reached. Similarly, (the next) energy (śakti) is called hā (‘Foundation’) because it operates (kalayitrī) (the principles) from Water to Nature, by establishing (pratiṣṭhāna) (these) twenty-four principles within the daily commerce of duality (bhedavyavahāra). One should know the names of the others in the same way, according to their function (kalana). (Thus, the following Force is called Vidyā – ((limited) Knowledge), because it is the cognitive awareness (vedana) of the (contracted) limited (individual) soul. (The next one is called Śānta – Quiescent) because it quells (the condition of) the plane of Māyā; and (the highest one is called Beyond the Quiescent —


TANTRĀLOKA
----------------------------------------


the Naiyāyikas.

Śivena kalpito vargaḥ kaleti samayāśrayaḥ || 6 ||

Others say that ‘Force’ is (just) a conventional term (samaya) that refers to a group (of principles) imagined (kalpita) by Śiva, so that the rites of initiation and the like may be performed easily in an abbreviated form.

(Abhinava is voicing an opponent’s view here, who objects that,) surely a conventional term is just (an arbitrary) convention, which is dependent only (on some individual’s) desire (that it be s0), and so, as it is not ultimately real (in itself), it is false (asatya). Thus, one can freely (establish any) other conventional term, and so in this way, there is no binding rule (niyama) (that the Forces exist and are related to these groups of principles, rather than others). With this doubt in mind, he says: arbitrary, as) no other convention arises (that can replace it).

The reason why (this convention) is established by the Lord of the gods is that it does not become ultimately unreal, it is not false, and no other convention arises (to replace it). Otherwise, (if the convention were to be just an Read devadevakṛtatve for devadevakṛtatvaṁ.