CHAPTER SEVEN The Emergence of the Cycles of Mantras (cakrodaya) ‘May the Rudra (who bestows) victory and is the penetration (āveśa) of the fierce (caṇḍa) Bhairava that has rendered excellent the emergence of (every)

single Mantra and eliminated the impression of fettered existence (bhavamudrā) make (all that is) auspicious (and beneficial) firm (and stable).”

Now, with the second half (of the verse begun at the end of the previous chapter,) he sets out to expound the Emergence of the Cycles (of Mantric breathing) in relation to the principle of Time. Surely (one may ask), the emergence of the goddess (of the alphabet) Mātṛkā, who is common to all Mantras, was explained previously (in the preceding chapter), so what reason is there to also explain the emergence of the ' The word ‘udaya’ literally means ‘arising’ or ‘emergence’. It is commonly used to

denote the rising of the Sun – sūrya, or Moon – candra, in the expressions sūryodaya — ‘dawn’ and candrodaya – ‘moonrise’. Here the word has a technical sense when

combined with the word ‘cakra’. The word ‘cakra’ literally means ‘wheel’. By extension, it also means ‘assembly°. So the words ‘devatācakra’, ‘gurucakra’ or ‘sādhakacakra’, for example, denote an assembly of deities, teachers and adepts,

respectively. Thus ‘cakrayāga denotes the sacrificial rite performed by and for an assembly of initiates. According to the context, the word ‘cakra’ can also mean, as it does here,

‘cycle’. Mantras recited in consonance with the breathing cycle (prāṇacakra),

depending on their length, form daily cycles of varying sizes. This chapter examines the

measure of these cycles of Mantras that arise, that is, rotate, within the breathing cycle. As the cycle of the breath does its round, the Mantra recited in consonance with it arises

with each turn from the heart. The dawn of the Sun of exhalation (prāṇodaya) is that of

Mantra also (mantrodaya). The dawning of the cycle of the repetition of Mantra

‘mantracakrodaya’ coincides with the dawning of the cycle of the vital breath — ‘prāṇacakrodaya’. To use Abhinava’s example, with each turn of a waterwheel, the jars that are attached to it fill and empty out, rising full each time out of the water. Thus,

cakrodaya, that literally means ‘emergence, arising or dawning of the wheels’, denotes

‘the rotation of the cycles of Mantra within the movement of the breath’. Swami Lakshmanjoo explains in his Trikarahasya: Cakrodaya involves: a) The Cakrabhid – the various cycles of Mantra, and b) Mantrabheda and Vidyābheda various Mantras and Vidyās. For example, one cakra cycle is the ordinary cakra cycle of 21,600 breaths of the ordinary course of breathing during one twenty-four hour day. You have to control that cycle (cakra) by lengthening the breath, for

example, by doubling it in length, so that in twenty-four hours you breathe only 10,800

times. Going on gradually extending the time of a single breathing cycle, you will finally breathe only twenty-four times in twenty-four hours. Then you are the master of the various cycles (cakrabheda) and so have become the master of time. By and by, you

must enlarge the span of time. This involves effort. In the sixth stage of enlargement,

there is yammajopāsana practice born of effort. In seventh, it is ayatnajopāsana practice born without effort. There is no breath retention in this effortless practice.” The emergence of the letters, Mantras and their parts in the breathing cycle was discussed in the previous chapter, from verse 216 to the end.