CHAPTER TWO The Penetration into Ultimate Reality Devoid of Means (Anupāya)

May Rudra, Who is attended by victory (iaya) and makes the humble

victorious, be, without any means, victorious. As the Lord of Desire, what desire

does He not fulfil completely?

explained), after having understood the teacher’s word (just) once. He then has (the form

of) penetration (samāveśa) (into Supreme Śiva) which is permanent and devoid of (any) means (to realisation). (If one were to ask) that here (in this case) only intuitive discriminative reasoning (tarka), which is (the most excellent) ancillary of Yoga, (can in due course attain the goal,) so how is it that he discerns (that supreme reality immediately without it)? (In response,) it is said that, of what use can (any) means (of realization) be with regard to this Supreme Lord Who is self (luminous) Light and (our) own Self? īt (cannot bring about) the attainment of (His) own nature, because it is eternal, nor knowledge (of it), because it illumines itself, nor (can any means to realisation) remove a

covering (that obscures Him), because it is impossible for there to be any obscuration, nor (can there be any means to bring about) entry into that (supreme consciousness) because there is no one who is separate from (the Light) that enters (into it). And so, because it is illogical that (any means to realisation) can be separate (from the one reality of consciousness), what (could be) the means here? Therefore, all this one reality which is

(pure) consciousness alone is not measured by time, it is undivided by space, unconditioned by limiting adjuncts, it is not limited by (any) form, not taught by words, and not known by (any) means of knowledge. Moreover, (if any of these factors,)

beginning with time and ending with (some) means of knowledge, serve as an

instrumental means to attaining (Śiva’s) own nature, it is only by virtue of His own free will. “(Ultimate) reality is free and dense (uninterrupted) bliss and I am that, and there

itself within me all things are reflected” – he who firmly (without any doubts) discerns (reality) in this way perpetually possesses that penetration of the Supreme Lord which is free of (all) means (to realisation). He is not subject to any constraint (to practice), be it, for example, Mantra, worship, or meditation, nor (does he have to observe any prescribed

manner of) conduct.

‘The network of means (to realisation) does not illumine Śiva. Is (the sun with its) thousands of rays illumined by a pot?’ Discerning in this way, one of noble vision

should penetrate instantly into Śiva, Who is self-luminous Light.

‘Wherever the radiant pulse (of the Light of consciousness) shines, the Supreme Lord, Who is all things, shines pure within me.’ Once having known in truth that He

Himself is (my own) Self, there is nothing else that needs be done.”

Abhinava explains the teaching concerning Anupāya as he summarizes it briefly

in the Tantroccaya:

‘There (in that case, i.e., when God is realised in an instant), the Light of the

Supreme Lord shines for some (elevated soul) continuously without having to (resort to