CHAPTER THIRTY

‘saḷutation’. It is a ‘transformation’ (that takes place) because of the oneness

he who (bows) in salutation (attains) by abandoning (his) embodied subjectivity and thereby assuming the subjectivity of consciousness, which is like a transformation. Even though this is so, it is not impossible for him to fall from (that) reality level (tattva), and so (in order to stress that that state has been

consolidated,) he says (that it is a state of) ‘mergerʼ.

The Faces and Limbs of Navātman

r̥JITTī eTāTT āa-āīVGT T --T I 2, I

eJmaT®īvīzq āraṁrzfāōz+:

eṣa tryarṇojjhito ‘dhastād dīrghaiḥ ṣadbhiḥ svarair yutaḥ |

saḍ aṅgāni hṛdādīni vaktrāṇy asya ca kalpayet || 15 II kṣayaravalabījais tu dīptair binduvibhūṣitaiḥ |

Omitting the last three (letters of Navātmā), one should fashion (his) six limbs, that is, the Heart and the rest, with the six (letters that follow), conjoined with the six long vowels. (His) faces should be fashioned

with the energized seeds KS, Y, R, V, and L and decorated with the Point. (15-16ab)

They aree NAMAḤ, SVĀHĀ, VAṢAT, HUṀ, VAUṢAT and PHAT. Although Vedic, they are fundamental features of the majority of Tantric Mantras, as they are usually added, as we have

just noted, to the limbs ofa Mantra (see above, note 30,27; for an extensive discussion of the jātis in relation to the limbs, see Dyczkowski 2009: vol. 5 note 15 p. 197-200). The Kubjikā tradition, aware no doubt of their Vedic character, prides itself in being without them, and so more

thoroughly Tantric. But although there are statements to that effect (see KuKh 68120-122),

nonetheless, they do regularly appear as concluding markers of the ‘limbs` of the mantras of that tradition, as normally happens in general, thus underscoring their importance and power. See Dyczkowski 2009: 2, 260-262, KuKh 10/32 note 23.

°MV reads jātibhedena for vaktrāṇy asya ca. The six limbs of Navātmabhairava are HĀṀ RĪṀ HŪṀ KṢAIṀ MAUṀ and LAḤ. The five faces are KṢAṀ YIṀ RUṀ VEṀ and LOṀ.

The Limbs of Navātman

OMṀ RĀṀ HṚDAYĀYA NAMAḤ OMṀ HIṀ ŚIRASE SVĀHĀ

OMṀ RŪṀ ŚIKHAYAI VAṢAṬ OMṀ KṢAIṀ KAVACĀYA HÚM OM MAUṀ NETRĀYA VAUṢAT OM LAḤ ASTRĀYA PHAṬ The Faces of Navātman:

OṀ KṢAṀ ŪRDHVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (Upper) OMṀ YIM PŪRVAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (E) OṀ RUṀ DAKṢINAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (S) OṀ VEM UTTARAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (N) OMṀ LOM PAŚCIMAVAKTRĀYA NAMAḤ (W)

‘Omitting the last three (letters of Navātmā), it is devoid of these

three, namely, V, Y and Ū (so H, R, H, KS, M and L remain). The seed-

syllables conjoined with the five short (vowels) are Space (KS), Air (Y), Fire

(R), Water (V) and Earth (L). According the earlier (teachers,) they are

‘energized’ because the short (diphthong) letters beginning with E (i.e. E and

0) and the short vowels beginning with A (i.e. A I U) are fiery by nature, and so are made of radiant energy (tejas). (But) according to the venerable

Lakṣmaṇagupta, (it is because they) have the letter R (added to them). As

scripture (āgama) says:

‘1) The supreme seed-syllable is the twenty-sixth. It is conjoined with the letter R and has a Point. O Pārvatī, this is the eastern face of Maheśa and the goddesses (KSRAM. 2) The right face of the host of the goddesses and gods has

the form of Bhairava. It ends with (the letter) at the end of the end of M. It has a

Point and the letter R (YRAM). 3) Again, the great seed syllable of Indra is the

auspicious twenty-eighth. It has the letter R and is conjoined with the Point (LRAṀ). 4) The auspicious western face (is that of) the supreme seed syllable

of Varuṇa that is conjoined with (R) the seed of Fire (VRAMṀ). 5) the Point is conjoined on the head (of the seed syllable) of the auspicious northern face

Lakṣmaṇagupta, who may or may not be the Lakṣmaṇagupta who taught Abhīnava Pratyabhjñā (see above, 1/1) was mentioned above in TĀv ad 15/2545cd-246ab. There t00, he is presented by Jayaratha as holding a diferent view concerning the structure of a mantra. There, the proponent of the accepted view, we are told, is Śambhunātha.

These are the syllables of the five faces of Navātman, set in the five cardinal directions. Indra’s direction is normally the east, but in this case, it is very clearly stated that the eastern face is that

of Maheśa. Normally, north follows south. However, the text tells us that the fifth face is Utara, meaning either ‘north’ or ‘above’. The former meaning is the common one, but makes no sense here. The Upper face is normally listed at the end (cf. Dyczkowski 1986: 31). Thus, following the normal sequential order, as there is no reason not to, arrive at the following table: The Five Faces of Navātmabhairava

Direction of the Face |_Deity _Scd syllable | Ēlement East Maheśa |_KṢRAṀ Space South Bhairava | _YRAṀ

North Indra LRAM Earth West Varuṇa

Water Ūpper

Note that the sequence of the letters in Navātman corresponding to the five elements is, as Jayaratha noṭes, the normal one: Space (KS), Air (Y), Fire (R), Water (V) and Earth (L.). According to the text Lakṣmaṇagupta followed, all of the seed-syllables, each

corresponding to one of the five gross elements, incorporates the letter ‘R’, which represents fire. This, he maintains, is the reason for their power and brilliance.