CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

niyataṁ bhāvi yan nityaṁ tad ity asmin vidhau sthite | mukhyatvaṁ tanmayībhūtaṁ sarvaṁ naimittikaṁ tataḥ || 2 || (If what is meant by) a regular (nitya) (rite) is that it (must invariably) take place (constantly (nitya)), then in this (kind of) ritual procedure, its primary (characteristic) is of that nature. Thus, (as no ritual can be performed all the time,) all (rituals) are occasional. (2) Surely, if whatever (rite) is fixed (niyata) that is a regular (obligatory one,) then as it is logically impossible for this fixity to be otherwise, all (rites) that are of that nature would have to be performed day and night (constantly).

(Thus,) for example, one who is engaged in (ritual) ablution would then never cease from (doing that,) because of its fixed nature (niyatabhāvi). And that is

not so; (thus, no rite) of any sort would be regular (nitya); (in this sense rather, all rites) are occasional. Accordingly, he says: ‘thus all (ritual procedures) are occasional.”

Now it is said that the regular (obligatory) nature (of these) rites is due

to the regulation (niyama) based on the conceived (division) of a day and the

like. Thus, for example, according to what is taught (yathāśaṁsam), the worship performed at the junctures of the day (sandhyāvandana) is done in the evening or the morning etc. Thus he says:

3 +zcā ātrcāaī |

dinādikalpanotthe tu naiyatye sarvanityatā |

dinamāsarkṣavarṣādinaiyatyād ucyate tadā || 3 || As the fixity (of rites) is determined on the basis of the conceived (division of) day and the like (according to the nature of the rite), because the month, asterism, and year etc. (during which to perform occasional rites) are necessarily fixed (and applicable in all cases), then it (can be) said that (the status of) all (rites) is that of regular ones (which is clearly absurd). (3)

Read tanmayibhūtaṁ or tanmayibhātiḥ.

In this and the following verse, Abhinava discusses the difference between a regular and an occasional rite. The first is called ‘nitya’, which literally means ‘constant’ or ‘regular’. The second kind is called ‘naimittika’, which literally means that it is occasioned by some cause that

arises at a particular time, and that it serves a particular purpose. However, a regular rite also

bears these characteristics. It occurs daily and so its time is fixed, and it serves the purpose of meeting the initiate’s ritual obligations. Moreover, if nitya is understood in its literal sense as ‘constant’, no rite would qualify, as none are performed (or could be) all the time. So this too is

occasional. Conyersely, most of the so-called ‘occasional’ rites are also regularly rcurrent.

Thusṣ, in this way, because the fixity (of rites) is based on the conceived

(division of) day and the like (according to the nature of the rite), all (rites can be) said to be regular ones. Having in this way refuted the definition of an occasional rite as formulated by others, he (now) states his own view.

aśaṅkitavyāvaśyantāsattākaṁ jātucid bhavam | pramātraniyataṁ prāhur naimittikam idaṁ budhāḥ || 4 || (A rite,) the nature of which is not subject to doubt and is necessary, occurs occasionally, and is not obligatory for all – this, the wise say, is an occasional (rite). (4) ‘This, the wise say, is an occasional (rite)’. They (define) its characteristics (as follows). It is one ‘that is not subject to doubt’, that is, (its

form and nature is) certain, and so its nature is such that it is necessary that it

must take place, because by intending to remove (incumbent) impediments (to that certainty), one is necessarily bound to do so. Surely (one may object), a regular (rite) is such also, and so here (this definition is) also over-extensive. Thus, he says that it ‘occurs occasionally’. The meaning is that it is (only performed) sometimes. Surely (one may object that) the nature of the regular (rite) is such (also), because it is (performed) at a fixed time. Thus, in that

situation, there is the same defect. Thus he says that it ‘is not obligatory for

all’. The regular (rite) is fixed for (all) four (types of initiate, namely) the

regular one and the rest. This one, however, (is compulsory for just) some. As is said (in the Mālinīvijayottara):

‘The teacher should perform (all) three (types of rites); that is, the

regular (daily ones) and the rest (i.e. occasional and intentional), whereas the

adept (may perform) just the regular one. For as long as he lives, the other two (may be performed only) at Śiva’s command.ʼ Having defined the occasional (rite), he (goes on) by association to define the regular one also.

fīai frāTaīcritzq JāT'Ṃa I y4, 11 That is to say that those rites are performed only on certain occasions. The first two

specifications are also applicable to the regular rites. The second two apply only to the occasional ones. MV 1/49, also quoted above in TĀv ad 15/524cd-525ab (520cd-521ab).