CHAPTER ELEVEN

(A Force extends) in the midst of these ‘principles’, which is ‘its own (given) group’, consisting of one principle and so on, in the manner which will be explained. It is ‘distinct’ (from other groups) as (the universal) ‘cow-ness’ is (distinct) from horses and other (animals that are not cows).

Here itself he presents another view.

kecid āhuḥ punar yā ʻsau śaktir antaḥ susūkṣmikā | tattvānāṁ sā kalety uktā dharaṇyāṁ dhārikā yathā || 4 I| Again, (from another point of view,) some say that this Force is that extremely subtle power that is present within the Principles, as is, for example, the sustaining power within the Earth Principle. (4) (A Force is) ‘extremely subtle’ because it cannot be perceived by itself. (However,) it must be conceived to exist, because (its) effects could not

otherwise be logically possible. In this way, ‘as is, for example, the sustaining power present ‘within the Earth Principle’,’ so too (an energy) operates (kalayitrī) (there) called Nivṛtti (‘Cessation’) because, (fully) extroverted, it

(operating)

limit (parākāṣṭhā)

(of extroverted

objectivity) has been reached. Similarly, (the next) energy (śakti) is called

hā (‘Foundation’) because it operates (kalayitrī) (the principles) from Water to Nature, by establishing (pratiṣṭhāna) (these) twenty-four principles within the daily commerce of duality (bhedavyavahāra). One should know the names of the others in the same way, according to their function (kalana). (Thus, the following Force is called Vidyā – ((limited) Knowledge), because it

is the cognitive awareness (vedana) of the (contracted) limited (individual) soul. (The next one is called Śānta – Quiescent) because it quells (the condition of)

the plane of Māyā; and (the highest one is called Beyond the Quiescent — Śāntātīta) because it is (the transcendent) beyond that.

Although there are two views, in actual fact, there is no difference at all between them. Thus, he says:

raṁq ṭarz4, 11 atra pakṣadvaye vastu na bhinnaṁ bhāsate yataḥ | anugāmi na sāmānyam iṣṭaṁ naiyāyikādivat II 5 II Here, (according to us,) the essential point (vastu) does not appear

to differ from these two perspectives, because we do not maintain that this

Read dharaṇyāṁ for dharaṇyā.

common nature (anugāmin) is a universal (sāmānya), as do, for example, the Naiyāyikas. (5) The first view, like that of the Naiyāyikas, omitting (to consider) the nature (of the Forces) as energies, (reckon each to be just) a universal (sāmānya), the characteristic of which is only that it (pervades and) is associated (with its corresponding particulars). But, as this is not what is intended, there (in their case), neither (of the views) is better than the other, because there is no difference (in either case in the pervasive presence) of (the common universal, which is) energy. Others have another view here (about this) also. Thus, he says:

sr̄. aēfa ātaīī gaāevḍ1|

Others say that ‘Force’ is (just) a conventional term (samaya) that

refers to a group (of principles) imagined (kalpita) by Śiva, so that the rites of initiation and the like may be performed easily in an abbreviated form.

(Abhinava is voicing an opponent’s view here, who objects that,) surely a conventional term is just (an arbitrary) convention, which is dependent only

(on some individual’s) desire (that it be s0), and so, as it is not ultimately real (in itself), it is false (asatya). Thus, one can freely (establish any) other

conventional term, and so in this way, there is no binding rule (niyama) (that the Forces exist and are related to these groups of principles, rather than others). With this doubt in mind, he says:

kṛtaś ca devadevena samayo ‘paramārthatām | na gacchatīti nāsatyo na cānyasamayodayaḥ || 7 II

(We reply that this is not so.) A convention established by the Lord

of the gods does not become ultimately unreal. Thus, it is not false, (nor is it arbitrary, as) no other convention arises (that can replace it). (7) The reason why (this convention) is established by the Lord of the gods

is that it does not become ultimately unreal, it is not false, and no other

convention arises (to replace it). Otherwise, (if the convention were to be just an

Read devadevakṛtatve for devadevakṛtatvaṁ.