CHAPTER ONE The Types of Liberating Knowledge' (vijñūānabhid) May that (divine) abode – the Trika reality which is nonduality (itself) and the full (and perfect) realisation of freedom ~ from which (proceed the powers of) will, knowledge and action that are the immanent (udita) planes of (transcendental) consciousness and bliss, and of which all this (universe), which is such, is the (unfolding) glory of its unrestrained power, be (ever) present within my mind, and (thereby) destroy (all that within it) obscures the secret of the transmission (āgamarahasya) of Śiva’s teachings.

Liberated (as I am even whilst living) in the body, by the drops of compassion from the ocean of the venerable Kalyāna (who is auspicious good fortune), I take refuge in him, a true master, within (my) heart.

CHAPTER ONE Although (my) heart is hard with the burden of phenomenal existence, I quickly place (there) His teaching that is borne on the head of all the kings of the earth like a crown jewel.

(constantly) occupied with this teaching (artha).

Some ignorant people are constantly coming and going (from this world, life to life), others are envious, some in doubt – what should we say of those who (can) hear that (teaching but) have not come (to listen)?

Not having heard that profound and pleasant teaching (artha), whatever is said by others with an intense (desire to) incite (people) to act (as they wish them to do, but) which derives its skill (only from their) own way of thinking (and intentions) (svāśaya), (simply) makes the mind unstable.

Although my speech is powerless here (in this task), whatever restriction may arise (on one’s understanding of the teachings is not my fault, rather) that is (all) the venerable expansion of the Supreme Lord’s great bliss (which both hides and reveals the truth).

radiantly!

“T bow to the goddess Parā (the Supreme One), who is the creative intuition of consciousness (citpratibhā).° Bhairava’s Yoginī (united with Him) (bhairavayoginī), She has made (her) place on (top of) the lotuses (of the Trika Trident, the) prongs” of which are the aspects (of perception, namely) subject, object and means of knowledge.”

CHAPTER ONE Ibow to the goddess (Aparā), who resides in the body of Bhairava’s dancing form and plays within it ike) a lightning flash in a sky (covered) with dense storm clouds.

May (Parāparā), the pulsingly radiant (sphurat) prong of knowledge," that has burnt up the triple fetter with its blazing rays of the light (of Śiva consciousness), have the power to uproot all that runs contrary (vipakṣa) to the truth (satpakṣa).

May that same triad of Goddesses – who are the glorious power of the All-pervading Lord (vibhu) as 1) the power which is (His) freedom, 2) the intent to emit the succession (krama) (of manifestation), and 3) the succession (krama) itself – inwardly reveal my own (unsurpassable) Anuttara nature (svabhāva).

not duly propitiated. But if he is, he removes them. Accordingly, he is commonly CHAPTER ONE Moon. His own abiding state (nijasthiti) is to govern the Great Wheel of the Rays (of the energies of Parā, Parāparā and Aparā) that exists by virtue of the (unfolding and) glorious power (vibhava) of those deities. May he stir (and lift) up the ocean of my consciousness thoroughly (to pervade the universe and inspire me).

and strewn with knots and holes, spreads and extends (in all directions).

by a Jain monk called Somadeva in South India in the ninth century, that Trika existed there as a Kaula school that taught (n0 doubt amongst other things) basic Kaula practice, i.e., sexual rites and the offerings of wine and meat to the Trika deities (see Dyczkowski 1988: 6). Maheśvarananada, who lived and wrote in South India around the 13th century, quotes from a large number of Kashmir Śaiva texts as well as original Trika and Krama sources known to Abhinavagupta, although not many Tantras. The Śrīvidyā teachers like Amṛtānanda and Śivānanda (who was Maheśvarananada’s teacher) wrote extensive commentaries on the Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava (the Ocean of the Sixteen Nityā (Yoginīs)) and the Yoginīhṛdaya (the Heart of the Yoginīs), both root Tantras of the Śrīvidyā (i.e., Tripurā) tradition, as well as independent works on the same subject. They did this from the perspective of the Kashmiri masters, whom they knew very well and quoted from extensively. The Krama system flourished there at least into the 14th century. Important texts were written there. Amongst them are two called Mahānayaprakāśa. One was written by Arṇasiṁha, and the other by an unknown author. Another great work was the Cidgaganacandrikā, by Śrīvatsa, who belonged to Arṇasiṁha’s lineage. These were followed by Maheśvarānanda’s Mahārthamañjarī, the root verses of which are in early Maharastrian, revealed to Maheśvarānanda by a Yoginī in the land of the Colas (modern Tamil Nadu) in the mystic state between waking and dreaming (MM verse 71). The substantial number of works Maheśvarānanda quotes unknown to the Kashmiris is testimony in itself to vigorous development there of these traditions. However, in Kashmir itself, Muslim rule that was imposed from the middle of the 14" century had largely brought a halt to further major developments. It seems that some forms continued in the South practically up to the present day, mostly in CHAPTER ONE (spiritual) lineage named Traiyambaka, they are the stainless helmsmen (of the boat that crosses) the ocean of the teachers’ scripture, that heaves with the play of (mighty) waves.

The venerable Śrīkaṇṭha, the one (unique) teacher who is well known (prathita) in the world, triumphs, (as does) the lord (bhagavat) Maheśvara, who is another of his forms, and Bhūtirāja (who is so also).

Utpala(deva) by virtue of (his) awakening by the illustrious Somānanda, and have spread in (all) directions, excel (all).

come forth from the venerable Utpala(deva) by virtue of (his) awakening by the illuṣtriou s TANTRĀLOKA We salute the bee-like mind of the teacher Lakṣmaṇagupta, whose sound is the attractive (resonance of consciousness) intensified by (his) penetration (āveśa) into the copious relish of that (Lotus, his teacher Utpaladeva).”

perfect bliss, instruct me in what (I) desire (to learn).

rays of the teachings he has spoken (to me).

Many and various are the liturgical manuals (paddhati) (in use) in the diverse currents (of scripture) (srotas).™ But there is not even one to be seen for the procedures (krama) of the Anuttara Trika.

clear and complete (pāūrṇārthā).

remedy for the poison of the fetters, namely (all) that is other than (awakened) consciousness, which is (the teaching transmitted through the) lineage of teachers (that has come) from the two lotus feet of the venerable Bhaṭṭanātha and the two feet of the venerable Bhaṭṭārikā (his consort).

‘the true reality’. The word ‘artha’ is also used in a technical sense to mean a ‘doctrine’ or ‘system’ʼ. Thus, we come across the expression ‘trikārtha’ which means both the ‘teachings of the Trika’ or ‘ultimate reality as expounded in the Trika teachings’. Abhinava uses this expression when he writes: ‘in fact according to the Trika teachings (trikārtha) the Trident is the abode of worshipʼ (vastutaḥ pūjādhāma triśūlaṁ trikārthe PTv p. 54). Analogously, we come across the expression ‘spandārtha’. So, for example, Rājānaka Rāma calls his commentary on the Stanzas of Vibration ‘Spandārthasūtrāvali’ – ‘the Row of the Thread of the Spanda teachings’. The ‘Śpandārthasūtra’ is the Spandakārikā. Similarly, we find the expression ‘kramārtha’ for the teachings and reality taught in the Krama system, as well as ‘mahārtha’. According to Maheśvarānanda, the latter expression encompasses a range of semantic connotations including ‘Great Meaning’ʼ, ‘Great Teaching’, ‘Great Goal’ and ‘Great Reality°. Thus, he writes: ‘(Mahārtha) is ‘great’ (mahat) insofar as it is the ground of every one of the diverse principles of meaning (arthatattva). It is the reality/meaning (artha) which is the principle to be realised and can encompass every meaning /thing (artha) in all its major and minor divisions.' (MM p. 176) CHAPTER ONE There is nothing here (in the Tantrāloka) not taught by the God of gods in the venerable Mālinīvijayottara (Tantra), whether (directly) in His own words or (indirectly) by allusion (iṅgataḥ).

The teaching (śāsana) of the pervasive Lord is divided into (groups of) ten, eighteen and eight times eight (Tantras), the essence of which is the Trika scriptures (śāstra), and the essence of that is the Mālinīmata.

‘(Now) T will tell (you) briefly something else that was sung by the Supreme Lord. I will tell that (group of) sixty-four with its divisions, part by part. O (fair Goddess) praised by the Heroes, (in eight groups of eight) called Bhairava, Yāmala and the one called Mata, Maṅgala, Cakrāṣṭaka, Sikhāṣṭaka, Bahurūpa, the seventh, and Vāgīśa, which is said to be the eighth, (altogether they make) eight.” That is the wheel (cakra) of Sadāśiva, which I will now tell (you) in brief. Read with the MVV —grasanāc ca tat for —grasanātmakam. Hanṇeder

foster duality. In the MVV, between this sentence and the previous one, Abhinava inserts a reference to two verses of the Vijñānabhairava. Theṣse say: “(the yogi) should imagine that the entire (expanse of the) sky is merged within (his) head as Bhairava’s state. (Then he and) all that (exists) penetrates (and is absorbed) into the reality (which is) the radiant energy (tejas) of Bhairava’s form.’ (85) Again: ʻIn the same way, (the yogi) engaged in contemplating for a long time the (awesome) darkness on a stormy night in the dark lunar fortnight (when there is no moon) attains Bhairava’s nature.

context: For the reader's convenience, the verse Jayaratha quotes is presented here in ‘AIl (the various learned and spiritual traditions, be they) worldly science (laukika), Vedic, the Sāṁkhya, Yoga and the like, (the Vaiṣṇava) Pañcarātr a, Buddhiṣṭ, Jain, logic (nyāyaśāstra), grammar, (the dualist Śaiva) Siddhāntatantras and Śākta (Tantras) etc., are all born from the (five) Brahmās, distinguished from one another as Sadyojāta and the rest (of Sadāśiva’s five faces), as is taught in the venerabl e Svacchandatantra and other (scriptures). (26-27) . . . Therefore, there is only one tradition in which every (tradition) is grounded, starting from the mundane (Vedic) scriptures, to that of the Vaiṣṇavas and the Buddhists, (up to) that of the Śaivas.

Thus, at the command of (our) master and protector (gurunātha), we will elucidate all that is contained herein that has not been seen (adṛṣṭa)” by the learned (saṁpradāyojjhita).

This is the work of Abhinavagupta who, as declared by (his) teachers, is a man who has attained the most excellent accomplishment (and fame) (prasiddhi) by reflecting (and meditating) on (cintana) the lotus feet of (his teacher, the) Three-Eyed One.

In order to worship Maheśa (the Great Lord), discern (vicinuta) this, the lotus of Abhinavagupta’s heart, that has blossomed by the light falling from the feet™ of the sun-like Śambhunātha.

Well then, it is proclaimed here (unanimously) in all the scriptures that ignorance is the cause of transmigration, and knowledge is the sole cause of liberation (from it).

svacidātmakam). Therefore impurity (paśutvam) is nescience (ajīānam), or the state of being characterized by ignorance (bhāvo vājñānalakṣaṇaḥ). Since it obstructs the sentient (soul), it is called in scripture ‘nescience’ (ajñānam). The consciousness of the soul is that which is to be revealed; her effects are what reveal it.. Parākhya 4/162-163 (translation by Goodall) CHAPTER ONE substance as the dualists maintain).√ It is the cause of (Karma, which is) the sprout of transmigratory existence (saṁsāra).’

Once having precluded the possibility (that knowledge) present in the intellect, which is subsequent to (the fettered state of) transmigration, (is liberating,) by specifying (that ignorance is ‘the cause of the sprout of transmigration’ʼ,) (the Lord) said that liberation (is achieved even) when that (intellectual knowledge) is absent.

(According to us,) ignorance is not a (total) lack of knowledge, for (if that were so, the use of the term) would be too extensive. That (ignorance) is also (present) in a stone and the like, and that is not subject to transmigration.



This is the point made by reading the aphorisms ‘the Self is consciousness” and ‘knowledge is bondage’ alternatively, together and separately.

Liberation is not some (separate reality), whether insignificant (tuccha) or significant (atuccha), that differs from the Self that is free; (indeed,) one does not even use a different name (for it).

The perception of the object of knowledge, along with the metaphysical principles that constitute it, which is full or less complete, is the knowledge that, increasingly higher, quells each corresponding (form of) transmigratory existence.

much (bondage).”

the individual soul abides as its own essential nature in a state of separation from Nature which consists of pleasure and pain etc. Thus their liberation (amounts) to the attainment of the principle of the individual soul (purṁstattva). That is said (in the Svacchandatantra); ‘(The principle) of the followers of Sāmkhya is that of the individual soul which is free of pleasure and pain etc." appears to be an agent because of the agency of the qualities (guṇa) (of Nature). (The Soul and Nature work together) like a blind man (who carries) a lame man (on his back to direct him), so that Nature may be visible to the Self and the Self may act. Creation proceeds from (their) union. (19-21) In my opinion nobody is more modest than Nature. Knowing that “I have been seen”, she no more comes within the sight of the Self. Thus verily the Self is never bound, nor is he released, nor does he transmigrate. It is Nature, being the support of this manifold creation, that migrates, is bound and is released. (61-62) The one Self thinks “T have seen her” and therefore loses all interest. The other (i.e. Nature) thinks “ḹ have been seen” and ceases to act further. Therefore, even if there is still a connection, there is no reason for any further transformations.’

Therefore, even though (someone may be) free from (one) limitation (avaccheda), he is not liberated because other limitations continue to exist. He who is truly liberated is free of all limitations.

Knowledge of the object of knowledge (jñeya), along with the metaphysical principles that constitute it (satattva), free in all respects from limitations, (does not admit the persistence of) ignorance anywhere. (As such,) it bestows true liberation.

(bauddha) (which is on the level of the conscious mind).

“““°There (in that context) although spiritual ignorance (constitutive of individual consciousness) is destroyed by initiation and the rest (that follows), even so (without spiritual knowledge), that knowledge (of the Self) manifests explicitly (only) when the body comes to an end.

(However), liberation whilst still alive (in the body) is (as if) in the palm of one’s hand, if (all that has) developed out of intellectual ignorance (on the level of the conscious mind) dissolves away by (sound) intellectual knowledge (which is the self-realisation that results through insight into the ultimate purport of the scriptures).

Abhinava refers to it as sattarka – ‘Sound Discriminative Reasoning’. CHAPTER ONE Even initiation is truly (satyam) liberating (only if it is) preceded by (clear) intellectual insight (bauddhavijñāna). Thus, there (in that case) also, it is intellectual knowledge that is fundamental.

These two (aspects of) knowledge and ignorance have been distinguished (from one another) by (Saiddhāntika) teachers, beginning with the venerable Khetapāla, in (their commentaries) on the Ruru,” Svāyambhuva, and Mataṅga amongst others.

to bring about the intellectual understanding which is that kind of (liberating) insight (avasāyā).

Even when inner spiritual ignorance has (inwardly) ceased by virtue of initiation, (binding) thought would (nevertheless still) arise because (the ignorance) present in the intellect has not ceased.

As the sense of one’s own (corporeal) identity is present in the intellect right up to the end of the body’s existence, but not so also when the body has come to an end, (an initiate’s) liberation (takes place then) because (only his) spiritual ignorance has been destroyed (by initiation).

by extension, his subjectivity in general. Similarly, the word ‘jñeya’ may denote objectivity in general. So sometimes, according to the context, I also translate in that way. TANTRĀLOKA The supreme reality (paraṁ tattvam) of the object (of perception) is Śiva Whois the Light (of consciousness), for that whichis not Light can neither be illumined (i.e. be made manifest) nor even have (any) existence (vastutā).

a wall."

Indeed, this Light (of consciousness) shines at all times; so, as it cannot be denied, what is the use (of applying) contrived means of knowledge to it? (All that needs be done is to recognise that the One Light exists and that it ilumines the manifestation of all things.)

Supreme Lord (Himself Who is the true identity of the perceiver).

It happens in this way even to one whose capricious nature is to deny everything, namely that (he experiences that): “this negation of knowledge, oneself and the object manifests to me.”

(Insofar as) the negation or affirmation of (the existence of) things is preceded (a priori) by such a one (who does it), how can the reasons (based on any of the) means of knowledge be applicable there (to him)?°°

(Śabda) of (all these aspects) starting with Space. (63)

Moreover, as God is omniform, that (series is only) a secondary (metaphorical) designation (of His nature in the context of) His (progressive) ascent into (His) unconditioned state and of the dissolving away of His limitations (into His transcendental state). (64)

“And it is said in the Kāmika: ‘“God is (both) formless and omniform, just like water or a mirror (when images are reflected in them). He pervades all things, both (animate and) moving, and (as well as inanimate and) immobile, (and assumes their form)’. (65)

The power (śakti) (which is the functional efficacy) of an entity is its own (specific) nature, as conceived by the subjects (who perceive it) (mātṛkalpita) (on the basis of its various effects). Thus (it follows) that (Śiva) also is (one reality) without a second, (even) when He is conceived to be (power and) the possessor of power. (68)

Just as there is (no difference between) the fire’s (capacity) to burn and cook (and the fire itself always remains one and the same), similarly, what difference is there in actual fact between the forms (vapuṣ) of God conceived in various circumstances (tatra tatra) by the (many) perceivers? (69)

However, this (difference between powers and their possessor) is not absolutely non-existent (rather it does exist). Nothing exists apart from (its) manifestation; thus, the difference between power and its possessor is also real (vāstava) (in this sense). (70)

What an entity possesses that, by virtue of its oneness with it, generates an abundance of its own powers, is also a power. (Similarly, the Lord has only one power, namely) the Goddess, Who even though She manifests in this way, transcends (Her manifestations).’ (71)

the mirror of (the consciousness of the individual) perceiver, whose consciousness is (in fact) His own." (72)

(73)

(Anyway Śiva can also be realized by thought). Just as a notion knows a tree by its form alone even when its taste etc. is not perceived, similarly, Śiva (is known) by means (of His powers that are aspects of His nature, such as Divine) Sound (nāda), Light (bindu) and the like. (76)

imperishable. Indeed, it is the Self alone who is the identity of their own nature (svabhāvātman). (81)

The extremely subtle totality (sāmiūthya) of the principles located in the Heart, in all the body, and in the specific nature (svabhāva) (of all things), is termed the ‘group’ (grāma). (82)

Here (in this case) also, (it is clear that) the difference (between the means to realisation) conceived by (the Lord’s) freedom as being, for example, (more or less) close or distant (from their goal) is with regards to (the degrees of) freedom of consciousness (citsvātantrya). (90)

In what form does the Supreme Lord not appear by virtue of the fullness (of His) freedom in this way? (Verily,) He accomplishes miracles! (91)

(The nature of) God (deva) is taught by means of words stated in the scriptures (that serve as etymologies), the meanings of which are in accord with His nature. He is this great Bhairava, the Lord (Pati) and Supreme Śiva. (94)

(aśiva) there (within Him). (103cd-104ab)

This same kind of nature is also manifest to a certain degree (in the minor gods) such as Rudra and Upendra. Thus, the adjectives ‘supreme’ and ‘great’ are added (to His name) to preclude (the mistaken idea that) He is limited. (104cd-105ab)

Thus, I will expound, at Śiva’s command, according to my own consciousness, sound discriminative reasoning (sattarka), Śaiva doctrine (patiśāstra), Trika and Krama, the true nature of what needs be known. (105cd-106ab)

(Śiva) has just these three powers, namely, (the Goddess) Parā (Supreme) and the rest (that is, Parāparā (Middling) and Aparā (Lower)). They manifest in (the phases of) creation, persistence, withdrawal and the Fourth (that both includes and transcends them).” Thus (they) have arisen twelve-fold.” (106cd-107ab)

be Supreme Siva. Thus, those who worship (these twelve aspects) here are evidently well-established there (in Siva’s nature). (107cd-108ab)

place by the power of His (creative) freedom. (108cd-109ab)

In this way, the Great Lord, (all) powerful.® who is (Himself) all the powers, unfolds within (the one Wheel which is) all the Wheels (viśvacakra), until (He expands) into the Wheel of a Thousand Spokes,” or even within that of countless spokes.™ (111cd-112ab)

The difference between those configurations (cakra) also is described in various places (in the scriptures), (each) as an (encompassing) unity, the nature of which accords with the category to which it belongs (according to its function). (112cd-113ab)

The mastery of the six wheels of the Lord’s own form is said in the Traiśirasamata to be wonderfully various by virtue of His union with four, six and twice times twice those (powers). (113cd-114ab)

that) peaceful (saumya) or fierce (raudra) form. (114cd-115ab)

manifest thereby), whether peaceful or otherwise. (115cd-116ab)

Therefore, the Lord of the universe (viśveśvara), the Bhairava Who is Consciousness (bodhabhairava), is worshipped by those who desire worldly benefits (bhoga) or liberation, with a (specific) limited (form) or without limitation, (respectively). (122cd-123ab)

pramāṇādi-nairapekṣyeṇaiva. BhGI 9/25cd. TANTRĀLOKA This is why (Kṛṣṇa) has said: “they go to the gods who worship the gods.™™ (130ab)

However, those who, having submerged (these gods’) objectively perceivable nature (into consciousness), know there the abiding state (sthiti) (of reality) which is (pure) consciousness."® (Thus says Kṛṣṇa,) “even though they are devoted to that (particular divine form), they go to Me who am unconditioned.” (130cd-131ab)

Everywhere here (in all these verses, the personal pronoun) ‘I’ denotes only pure, (awakened) consciousness (bodha) which, by the words ‘enjoyer’ (bhoktṛ)” and ‘Lord’ (prabhu) refer to it as the one who offers sacrifice and (the deity that is) the object of (his) sacrifice, (respectively).”’ (131cd-132ab)

It is said that consciousness itself is the sacrificer and that the object to which sacrifice is offered is none other than that. (Deity has) no other form (than this) at all (kuto ‘pi). (For) another deity (than this) is not appropriate (as an object of worship). (132cd-133ab)

He (the Lord of Consciousness) is free. What may He not conceive?® That is said in the Triśiraḥśāstra, (which declares that) one who knows (this wonderful diversity) is well awake (saṁbuddha). (135cd-136ab)

unobscured.

Although there is no real division (bheda) (of levels) within consciousness, which is always stable (dhruva) (and invariable), even so it is perceived (to exist) due to the gradation (of the progressive) decrease of the veil (that covers it).

part).

Thus, while the Pervasive Lord (vibhu) reveals His own complete form (in all His fullness) to a certain perceiver (pramātṛ), (He does so) to some (other) part by part, successively.

The (full and complete) experience (prathana)” of one’s own nature as the one Being (bhāva) of all beings is the supreme (para) knowledge (of Deity) individual souls possess. Inferior (apara) and multiple is that (knowledge) which is other than that.

And that (knowledge), revealed (prathamāna) through the means that is direct as well as (those that are) means to that (direct means) etc., is divided here into (wonderfully) diverse (vicitra) modalities.””

There (in that case) also, these (means are of) many kinds, according to whether they are (direct or) mediated with regard to themselves or another, in all respects or part by part, with or without interposed (obstacles).

instantaneously).”

(The sense that there is) a condition which is the means and one that is a goal is (essentially) an error (inherent in) the gross state of knowledge,” and that is itself the power of action, which is the sole cause of (both) bondage and liberation.’”

to realisation) called the will (icchā).

as such) by that (same) conceptualization (kalpanā). The difference here (between the means) is not (in their goal, which is) liberation.

‘Knowledge of Śiva is the supreme secret, which is the most excellent saviour among the various kinds of knowledge, including that of the Veda and the like, in accord with the various kinds (bheda) of Śiva knowledge. (Śiva)is like a wish granting gem that is present here and is the creator of them all. Again, thereis just one Śiva knowledge thatis divided ten-fold andis also the (group of) eighteen that has come forth in another place.” TANTRĀLOKA the (highest) limit of Yoga is attained. (It is said) in the venerable Gama teachings (śāsana)-

own mind,is termed action.

penetrating the body, the organ (of action) and the location (to which it is directed),” (results in and) is the movement (of the body).

Therefore, what is (commonly) called (ritual) action is also (essentially) just (a kind of) knowledge.”” Thus, (although yogic and ritual action is the basis of this means to realization), what was said (before),”” namely, that knowledge alone is liberating, is (ogically) sound.””

Unlike Kaṇāda’s view, in the Supreme Lord’s scripture, there is not said to be any substratum of the powers (to which they are related) as its attributes (that are separate from it in themselves).

Moreover, if the powers of will, knowledge, action and the rest were to be (independent and) separate from (their underlying ground), the statement (vāc) ‘Śiva is one’ would become devoid of (any) reality.

this or that (power) results in many powers.

(and not merely its effect).

As the relationship said to exist between knowledge and liberation is not primarily causal, it is certain that no (such) undesirable consequence (prasaṅga) (is possible).””

Thus, as action, which is just knowledge by nature, bears (vahati) within itself a gross state in this way, behold indeed the wonderful state of diversity (citratā) within it.

The means based on action are divided into those that are perceived objectively (but are not manifest externally, as is the case with inner yogic practice) and external (ones, such as ritual). These are innumerable because they have many kinds of subsidiary divisions and subdivisions.

Thus, the doubts some learned people had are removed, namely that because there is a diversity of means there should also be a difference in the (forms of) liberation (to which they lead).

Although the causes may be various, (the results, namely,) the destruction, disappearance and removal of impurity (mala) and its power are nonetheless one, just as (any inert object), such as a jar, can be destroyed (in many ways)."

the supreme state).

The expression ‘one who does not think of anything” (implies that in this means) thought constructs are of no use. Thus, (as they are of no use and do not arise,) the attainment of the object of realization (jñeyasamāpatti) is said to be instantaneous.

instant.

(The existence) of the gross elements (bhiūta) is proved by direct perception, and so they are classified separately from the (other) group of principles (tattva), (whose existence) can only be inferred by (their) effects, (of which they are) the cause (kāryahetu).

(The gross Elements are called ‘bhūta’, meaning literally ‘existent’, because) an ‘existent"" js that whose true nature is perceived by everybody, and they know that to be the case here with four (of the five gross elements), along with space (āvakāśa) (as the fifth).

(We reply) that it is not said here (in this view), which is free of dualism, that the Elements are different from the Supreme Lord, as it is in the dualist scriptures.

As is this entire group of thirty-six (principles) and so too whatever else (may exist), such is the extent of the Great Goddess, Who is Rudra’s power free of (all) restrictions.

Thus (this is the reason the Lord) described in the second chapter in this (Maālinīvijayottara) the omniformity of the Earth and the rest (of the) principles as having fifteen etc. subdivisions.

Therefore, just as any object which is in front of one is perceived as ed whole, by means of the partial (perceptions) of its qualities and the like, know that in the same way here also (the totality of reality can be grasped part by part).”

He also wrote the Anubhavastotra that Abhinava cites here. His works are quoted below in 9/173, 13/127ef-128 (128), 14/9cd-12 and in 17/115ab (where his name is mentioned as the author of Pramāṇastotra). Gnoli notes that it is also quoted by Rāmakaṇṭha in his commentary to the Kiraṇatantra, vidyāpāda 19. CHAPTER ONE conceptualization (kalpana)," the diverse perceptions that are sketched out within (consciousness) would not be clear experiences.”

Again, due to (its greater) proximity or distance (from universal consciousness,) a given power (may) encompass an infinite or limited number (of powers,) in accord with the principle that ‘Being’ (sattva) includes (every particular entity, while) the dhava-ness (of a Dhava tree includes only the limited number of existing Dhava trees).

When this condition (prevails), (this) process'" (which consists essentially of following) a path (to realisation) formed by (the gradual intensification (krama)) of thought constructs (such as “I am Siva Who is endowed with every divine attribute”’) is called the Empowered (Means). The point of referring to this (process) here (in the course of this exposition of the means pertaining to Śiva) is that, insofar as it is (a means) that does not require (the formation of) thought constructs (but rather consists of their instantaneous eradication, it) is just the opposite of this.

He who is established on the path free of thought constructs, by whatever path he enters, from Sadāśiva to Earth, he becomes identified through it with Śiva.

When the Heart is pure and has within it a light that illumines the aspect which is the foremost (ever) radiant plane, (then, within that and) by means of that itself, (one attains) the state of Supreme Śiva Who is consciousness."

will, and is the penetration called ‘pertaining to Śiva’.

(consists of) the powers of the will and the rest (of consciousness).

one ultimately attains a state of consciousness which is) free of thought constructs.

subject. But once that (miserable state) ceases, it unfolds.

Surely, (one may ask, does this mean that) there in (the domain of the exercise of) the Individual Means, the intellect is not engaged in thought? (No, thought persists in this means also. The difference between them is that the intellect in the course of practicing Individual Means is mediated by) other means (anyopāya), (whereas) here (the Lord) has said (in the Mālinīvijayottara that the Empowered Means) is devoid (of other practices such as the) utterance (of Mantras).

practices of the Individual Means, indicating) that they are absent in the Empowered Means." The empowered state (śaktitā) is one of unity and difference (not duality as is the individual state).

state of consciousness that is) free of thought constructs."

Both these two penetrations (Individual and Empowered) are directed towards the ocean of (consciousness) free of thought constructs. Indeed, nothing could exist that is not established in it. (225cd-226ab)

This is why (the Lord) has said that ‘“one should not imagine that there is (any) difference here in the fruit which is consciousness (attained by applying oneself to the various means of realisation).” Imagination (kalpanā) (that conceives these supposed differences) is indicated (implicitly) here (in this same verse) as being the predominant factor (that leads people to suppose that they exist). (226cd-227ab)

Even he who says that the (assessment of) the validity of knowledge (free of thought constructs) depends on thought, in that view (also), the validity of knowledge that is free of thought constructs is attained by means of a series of thoughts.""' (227cd-228ab)

(finally) said to be one who knows (the nature and value of) the gem when (a state of consciousness) that is free of thought and requires no (further) means (anupāya) is attained. (228cd-229ab)

of thought alone, through the inner practice of the Empowered Means, free of outer ritual and the rest. It then finally unfolds spontaneously and without effort, in the domain of the perceiver and agent, who is one and the same, whatever be his perception or action. CHAPTER ONE Here the means pertaining to Śiva (śāmbhava) is said to be that of unity (abheda). The Empowered means is said to be unity-in-diversity, and the means (based) on difference is the Individual one." (229cd-230ab)

TANTRĀLOKA knowledge (listed) here," along with its means (that is, the Individual Means). (230cd-231ab)

Action is not something different from knowledge; (rather it is knowledge itself) which, in order to serve as a means to realisation, has assumed the nature of a succession (krama) (of processes and ritual actions). It was said before that that is action." (231cd-232ab)

the like is only imagination (kalpanāmātra). (232cd-233ab)

one in nature (with them) and (as such,) is said to be ‘accomplished’ (siddha) and ‘liberated’. (233cd-234ab)

CHAPTER ONE Such is the means to realisation, which consists of the three powers (of will, knowledge and action). The root of these is the last form of knowledge (that is, the Individual Means). The middle (Empowered Means) is higher than that, the first (the Supreme Means) is higher still."

Superior to that is the knowledge free of means and all else." It rests in the power of bliss and is called here Anuttara (the Absolute).

CHAPTER ONE Here in this teaching called the Light of (and on) the Tantras (Tantrāloka), I expound this four-fold knowledge, which is the great dawning of accomplishment (siddhi) and liberation.”” (246cd-247ab)

(generic, unspecified) form. (247cd-248ab)

been to some degree determined (as the bearer of these generic, unspecified attributes), not otherwise. (248cd-249ab)



qualities (of the object). (251cd-252ab)

Again, doubt arises because the two (possible) natures of the objects of reflection (between which it vacillates) have not been disclosed. It resides in the aspect ‘what?”” Otherwise, (this uncertainty would) clearly be (ust) an alternative (vikalpa) (between two possibilities). (252cd-253ab)

(praśna) and ‘doubt’ (saṁśaya). (253cd-254ab)

initially) in an undisclosed form, assumes the nature of a disciple (and is called the) ‘enquiring’ (consciousness). (254cd-255ab)

manifests as the object of doubt. Perceiving that, the residual consciousness which arises and falls away in the manner described, sometimes understanding then again not, is the enquiring perceiving subjectivity. CHAPTER ONE (Awakening) consciousness (vibodha) on the plane of the teacher and the taught is itself in this way (both) question and answer. Indeed, this difference between the bodies (of the teacher and disciple) is not ultimately real. (257cd-258ab)

Consciousness (bodha) itself, (precisely) because it is consciousness, causes the many forms present within (it) to manifest externally in an instant as (both) universal and particular. (258cd-259ab)

The emission (of a universal is that) of a certain attribute (of an object, such as the ‘cow-ness’ of a cow,) which is fit to receive, and requires, the aspects (of its fully determined form,) which are the particulars to be emitted (in order for it to be known). (Thus,) the emission of the universal (with no particulars) is essentially (the content of) doubt. (259cd-260ab)

TANTRĀLOKA with (the satisfaction of) the desire (to know it on the part) of the perceiver, not otherwise, even in ten million aeons. (260cd-261ab)

(nirṇaya) (of its nature). (261cd-262ab)

(nirṇīta) to some degree (tāvat). (262cd-263ab)

TANTRĀLOKA The three (moments) of ‘enunciation’, ‘definition’ and ‘examination’ manifest in all respects (with regards to any valid means of knowledge, whether) direct perception, inference, analogy or valid testimony etc. of (all) sentient beings. (263cd-264ab)

(In relation to direct perception,) enunciation (corresponds to the first moment of perception, which is) not conceptualized. Definition (corresponds to the initial) conceptualization (of the object perceived) (vikaḷpa). Examination (corresponds to) the series of conceptions (concerning what) has been perceived directly in this way (initially). (264cd-265ab)

Definition (lakṣaṇa) is said to be (a form of) consciousness wherein the emission of what is to be emitted (namely, the particulars, coincides) with a reabsorption of the aspect previously emitted (namely, the universal,) when the nature (dharma) (of the object) is not (yet) clearly manifest (anūdyamāna). (270cd-271ab)

explains and illustrates these ‘affirmations’ or ‘rules'. See Gnoli 1985: pp. 296-297. CHAPTER ONE (moment of ‘definition’). Its end is determined (arbitrarily) in accord with (the satisfaction of) the desire of the perceiver." (271cd-272ab)

Now, these (three moments of enunciation, definition and examination are equivalent to three levels of Speech, namely,) first the (Speech of) Vision (paśyantī), then the Middle (Speech) (madhyamā) (which is that of thought) and Corporeal (Speech) (vaikharī). They are the Goddess Parā (Supreme), Parāparā (Middling) and the last one, which is Aparā (the Lower One), (respectively). (272cd-273ab)

In the Supreme Lord’s teaching, consisting of such questions and answers, the essential nature of the supreme relationship (between teacher and disciple) is present there within the five (types of their) relationships (as their basis). (274cd-275ab)

As is said in the Ratnamālā, (the relationships termed) ‘Great’ (mahat), ‘Intermediate’ (avāntara), ‘Divine’ (divya), ‘Mixedʼ, which is another, and the ‘Other’ (than divine), which is the fifth, are all the Supreme Power. (275cd-276ab)

The other relationships are also (to be understood in terms) of this same principle so that the purport of the scriptures (may manifest) with the fullness of its fruits and the rest. (277cd-278ab)

In this way, consciousness, that is, this Goddess Who by Her very nature and at all times is the life-breath of the three, namely, ‘enunciation’ and the rest, is all the scriptures. (278cd-279ab)

adhvabhedas tathety evaṁ kathitaṁ pautrike vidhau | 17) The procedure pertaining to the apprentice (putraka) is explained in this way: a) the fashioning of the sacred threads, b) the purification of the principles, d) the burning of the fetters, e) the conjunction (with the supreme principle) and f) the various paths. (311cd- 312ab)

See below, 9/50cd-53ab. This is Śuddha Vidyā, the first of the series of five pure principles in which nonduality prevails. There is enough differentiation (bheda) for there to be five metaphysical principles and corresponding reality levels beyond the thirty-second, although oneness between subjective consciousness and its objective contents prevails at these levels. Abhinava explains that the objectivity present even at these levels is in its ‘primary form’ʼ, in the sense that it is the experience that the subject has of itself as objectivity, which at its highest level is the immanent aspect of transcendental subjectivity. It is primary because it precedes and is the basis of outer objectivity, that is experienced as external and independent of the subject. CHAPTER ONE Such is the enunciation (uddeśa) (of the contents of the Tantrāloka), expounded in order (to present) an easy summary (of it). Now (in what follows), its definition and examination are presented in due order. (330cdef)

teachings). (331)

although (perfectly) pure, appears to be the abode of impurity. What one should perceive, (once placed) around the eye (like collyrium), should block (and remove)™ to a great distance the disease of (that) darkness which seals (the eyes) (doṣamudrā). How (then) could doubt (that there is any) impurity there prevail (again)? (332)

is entitled to praise by virtue of (his) belief that (he) is the same as You (at least in this respect)” (333)

fruitless. (334)