CHAPTER ONE — THE TYPES OF LIBERATING KNOWLEDGE

THE MAṄGALA VERSE

My mother, Vimalā, is joyous with the glory of the festival of my birth, the ever new creation, her foundation the pure energy of the Moon. My father, Narasiṁhagupta, is the hidden light with five faces and his body is full. May the body of the nectar of the Absolute, my Heart, the emission which is the vibrant emissive state of the united form of both of them, my father and mother, Śiva and Śakti, pulsate radiantly!

THE INTRODUCTORY VERSES

May that divine abode, the Trika reality which is nonduality itself, and the full and perfect realisation of freedom, from which proceed the powers of will, knowledge and action that are the immanent planes of transcendental consciousness and bliss, and of which all this universe, which is such, is the unfolding glory of its unrestrained power, be ever present within my mind, and thereby destroy all that within it obscures the secret of the transmission of Śiva's teachings.

Liberated as I am even whilst living in the body, by the drops of compassion from the ocean of the venerable Kalyāna who is auspicious good fortune, I take refuge in him, a true master, within my heart.

Although my heart is hard with the burden of phenomenal existence, I quickly place there His teaching that is borne on the head of all the kings of the earth like a crown jewel.

I am not engaged in this work to attain some unique status as a writer, nor am I doing this to show off my skill with language; rather my desire is that my thought be purified by being constantly occupied with this teaching.

Some ignorant people are constantly coming and going from this world, life to life; others are envious, some in doubt. What should we say of those who can hear that teaching but have not come to listen?

Not having heard that profound and pleasant teaching, whatever is said by others with an intense desire to incite people to act as they wish them to do, but which derives its skill only from their own way of thinking, simply makes the mind unstable.

Although my speech is powerless here in this task, whatever restriction may arise on one's understanding of the teachings is not my fault; rather that is all the venerable expansion of the Supreme Lord's great bliss which both hides and reveals the truth.

(remaining verses continue below — this file will be completed by reading through the rest of the text)
