
## THE INITIAL INVOCATION — VERSE 1


(My) mother, Vimalā, is (joyous with) the glory (of the festival of my birth), the ever new (abhinava) creation, her foundation the pure (vimala) energy (of the Moon). (My) father (Narasiṁhagupta) is the hidden (protected) (gupta) light (ruci) with five faces and his body is full. May the body (kula) of the nectar (amṛta) of the Absolute (anuttara), my Heart, the emission (visarga), which is the vibrant (emissive) state of the united form (yāmala) of both of them (my father and mother, Śiva and Śakti), pulsate radiantly!


## IN PRAISE OF THE DEITIES — Verses 2-6


I bow to the goddess Parā (the Supreme One), who is the creative intuition of consciousness (citpratibhā), Bhairava's Yoginī (united with Him), She has made (her) place on (top of) the lotuses of the Trika Trident, the prongs of which are the aspects of perception, namely subject, object and means of knowledge.


I bow to the goddess (Aparā), who resides in the body of Bhairava's dancing form and plays within it (like) a lightning flash in a sky (covered) with dense storm clouds.


May (Parāparā), the pulsingly radiant prong of knowledge, that has burnt up the triple fetter with its blazing rays of the light (of Śiva consciousness), have the power to uproot all that runs contrary to the truth.


Śiva, Śakti and Nara (the individual soul) manifest as the external (objective) expansion of Śiva (śambhu), just as the deities (when they appear on earth) assume a human form.


In this way, (there are) many groups of deities, principal ones and those like them. And, (my) teaching (śāstra) (is composed in this same variety of ways). This is my intention (bhāva) that leads to the supreme reality (bhāvāya) (in accord with the ways people are), not (the gratification of my) own (self).


## IN PRAISE OF THE TEACHERS — Verses 7-13


May the pervasive lord Macchanda (the Fisherman) be pleased with me, he who cast along the outer path the net (of Māyā) that, red with (colour and) attachment, fashioned (artistically) with (many) parts (kalā) and strewn with knots and holes, spreads and extends (in all directions).


The ancient teachers triumph. Possessing the special beauty of the multitude of authentic pearls from the Tāmraparṇī (river) of the lineage (santati) taught by Traiyambaka, they are the helmsmen in the sport of the waves of the ocean of the scriptures.


He by the intensity of whose embrace the noble Somānanda attained the perfect immortality of Śiva himself, (gained from) the ocean of consciousness (kṣīroda) — may that teacher (Lakṣmaṇagupta) protect us.


(The doctrines) that, profound and full of great meaning, attained the Utpala's (Utpaladeva's) (divine) beauty, (and so) gained currency as the Divine Word pervading the path of the Veda.


May that teacher Lakṣmaṇagupta, a veritable treasure of bliss, who brings delight to the three worlds, protect you — though he seems (to act) in human ways.


This teaching is extremely difficult to understand. Out of devotion to his teacher and for the sake of helping the world, Śambhunātha explained it.


Thus these great souls are (none other than) Śaṅkara (Śiva) Himself in the form of the teacher. They have come to bestow the lineage (of the teachings) and to liberate (beings) from the bondage of transmigratory existence.


## THE PURPOSE OF THE BOOK AND ITS INSPIRATION — Verses 14-21


Many and various are the liturgical manuals (paddhati) (in use) in the diverse currents (of scripture). But there is not even one to be seen for the procedures (krama) of the Anuttara Trika.


Therefore, by the grace of my teacher, the venerable Kalyāṇa, who is an ocean (of compassion), (this work is written by me) whose mind is satisfied by the (undivided) taste (ekarasa) of the savour of the entire tradition (āmnāya).


And so the great compilation (samāmnāya) consisting of (the essence of) the Śaiva tradition (śivāmnāya), called the Tantrāloka, is here taught by me as a liturgical manual (paddhati).


Here (in this work), by reasons (hetu) stated elsewhere and by those that will be stated, (my) established conclusion (siddhānta) is set forth both in extenso and in brief.


The compilation of the currents (of scripture) (srotas) has been made five-fold. The upper current, the oblique (current) and the lower (current) are described in full.


## CONCERNING FREEDOM AND BONDAGE — Verses 22-35


Well then, it is proclaimed here (unanimously) in all the scriptures that ignorance is the cause of transmigration, and knowledge is the sole cause of liberation (from it).


(The wise) prefer (the view that) Impurity (mala) is ignorance (not a material substance as the dualists maintain). It is the cause of (Karma, which is) the sprout of transmigratory existence.


But the knowledge that removes all the coverings (āvaraṇa) completely is the supreme liberation; it should be known as the supreme state of Śiva, than which there is none higher.


## DEFINITIONS OF THE FORMS OF KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE — Verses 39-51


If the notion (dhī) that ascertains (the nature of an entity as) 'I know this (to be) thus' arises, (generated) from the reflection of the light of the Self in the mirror of the intellect of the individual soul who is sullied by the six obscuring coverings, (but does not develop further,) then that kind of knowledge is said to be ignorance. Its (underlying spiritual ignorance), which is that of the individual soul itself, is nourished by it, and it nourishes it.


Without a mental construct (vikalpa), this world does not appear in the least. And if there were no mental construct, nothing (specific) would be clearly perceived.


To the extent there is reflective awareness (vimarśa) (in a cognition), to that extent the entity is formed (within it). And nothing (objective) is left unreflected (in some degree). The reflective awareness (of the Light of consciousness) (exists) in all things.


The full manifestation (pūrṇā prathā) (of consciousness), which removes all the coverings, is the attainment of Śiva.


## THE A PRIORI NATURE OF ŚIVA CONSCIOUSNESS — Verses 52–59ab


The supreme reality (paraṁ tattvam) of the object (of perception) is Śiva Who is the Light (of consciousness), for that which is not Light can neither be illumined (i.e. be made manifest) nor even have (any) existence (vastutā).


The non-existence (avastutā) of entities is also in one (and the same) field of the wonder (of consciousness as is their existence). The notion (dhī) 'this is non-existent (avastu)' is not similar to (an inert object such as) a wall.


Indeed, this Light (of consciousness) shines at all times; so, as it cannot be denied, what is the use (of applying) contrived means of knowledge to it?


The (many) means of knowledge give life to all things (vastu) (because it is by means of them that they appear to the sentient subject), while the supreme living essence (jīva) of those (means) also is that same Supreme Lord (Himself Who is the true identity of the perceiver).


It happens in this way even to one whose capricious nature is to deny everything, namely that (he experiences that): 'this negation of knowledge, oneself and the object manifests to me.


(Insofar as) the negation or affirmation of (the existence of) things is preceded (a priori) by such a one (who does it), how can the reasons (based on any of the) means of knowledge be applicable there (to him)?


Thus, it is said in the Kāmikāgama that (Deity) is free of logical discussion (hetuvāda). That God Who surpasses the gods does not depend on (anything) else (to establish His existence), because (everything) else depends on Him, and so He is (always) independent (and free).


## ŚIVA UBIQUITOUS, ETERNAL AND OMNIFORM — Verses 59cd-66ab


For one who, independent and the master (of all things, transcends them,) spatial, temporal and formal processes are not restricted (niyata) (by Karma and natural law), and so He is Śiva Who is ubiquitous, eternal and omniform.


By virtue of His ubiquity, He is all-pervading. As He is eternal, He is free of beginning and end. As He is omniform, He manifests the wonderful variety of things, both sentient and insentient.


Thus, His pluriform nature is taught, for example, in the Dīkṣottara. Śiva, conjoined with the Point (bindu) and Sound (nāda) etc., is said to be of six kinds, as World (bhuvana), (Iconic) Form (vigraha), Light (jyotiṣ), Space (kha), (Unstruck) Sound (śabda) and Mantra.


## THE POWERS OF ŚIVA'S FREEDOM — Verses 66cd-80


He has only one attribute that includes all the others. Thus the precept is sound which states that He is united with the power of (creative) freedom (svātantrya) alone.


Moreover, (the fact that) He possesses many powers amounts to (His inseparable) union with that (one) power alone.


The power (śakti) of an entity is its own (specific) nature, as conceived by the subjects (who perceive it). Thus (it follows) that (Śiva) also is one reality without a second, even when He is conceived to be the possessor of powers.


## THE INNATE NATURE OF THE GROUP (GRĀMADHARMA) — Verses 81-85ab


It is said in the venerable Triśiromata that the (essential) nature (dharma) of the (entire) group (grāma) of metaphysical principles (tattva) is imperishable. Indeed, it is the Self alone who is the identity of their own nature (svabhāvātman).


The extremely subtle totality (sāmūhya) of the principles located in the Heart, in all the body, and in the specific nature (svabhāva) (of all things), is termed the 'group' (grāma).


It is said that (the inherent) nature (dharma) (of the 'group') is the (unconditioned) Self itself, flooded with Śiva's nectar.


## ESTABLISHED IN RĀMA (RĀMASTHA) — Verses 85cd-89cd


Having abandoned the 'upper' (exhaled breath), the 'lower' (inhaled breath) should enter (the Middle Channel). He who is established in Rāma (rāmastha) resides in the middle place.


## DEGREES OF FREEDOM AND OBSCURATION — Verses 90-93


Here (in this case) also, (it is clear that) the difference (between the means to realisation) conceived by (the Lord's) freedom as being, for example, (more or less) close or distant (from their goal) is with regards to (the degrees of) freedom of consciousness.


In what form does the Supreme Lord not appear by virtue of the fullness (of His) freedom in this way? (Verily,) He accomplishes miracles!


(Śiva) manifests free of obscuration. He manifests having obscured His own nature. He manifests as both (partially) obscured and unobscured. By associating with duality He manifests in many ways. Thus, there are three powers within the Lord (corresponding to these three conditions). (My) teacher has clearly elucidated (their nature) as being those named will, (knowledge and action), otherwise (collectively) called (His) (creative) freedom.


## BHAIRAVA AS SUPREME REALITY — Conceptual Teaching


(My) mother, Vimalā, is (joyous with) the glory of the ever new creation, her foundation the pure energy. (My) father is the hidden light with five faces and his body is full. May the body of the nectar of the Absolute, my Heart, the emission which is the vibrant state of the united form of both of them, pulsate radiantly!


## ETYMOLOGY OF BHAIRAVA — Sevenfold Meaning — Verses 94-105ab


(The nature of) God (deva) is taught by means of words stated in the scriptures (that serve as etymologies), the meanings of which are in accord with His nature. He is this great Bhairava, the Lord (Pati) and Supreme Śiva.


## THE DEPLOYMENT OF BHAIRAVA'S ENERGIES — Verses 106cd-115ab


(Śiva) has just these three powers, namely, (the Goddess) Parā (Supreme) and the rest. They manifest in (the phases of) creation, persistence, withdrawal and the Fourth (that both includes and transcends them). Thus (they) have arisen twelve-fold.


## THE NOURISHING POWER OF CREATIVE IMAGINATION (PRATIBHĀ) — Verses 115cd-122ab


The body of the one Lord of Consciousness is (His) inner creative imagination (pratibhā). (It is) worshipped (externally) as the cycle of the waves of the (outpowering of the powers of) consciousness (in a conditioned) limited (form as the deity made manifest thereby), whether peaceful or otherwise.


(When) the Goddess of Consciousness is clearly evident (in the form of the intention): 'may he be fulfilled,' she manifests by virtue of this meditation (dhyāna), that arises in association with the utterances (of Mantras) and outer (ritual) action, and bestows on him the appropriate fruit.


## LIMITED AND UNLIMITED DEITIES AS FORMS OF THE LORD — Verses 122cd-124


Therefore, the Lord of the universe, the Bhairava Who is Consciousness, is worshipped by those who desire worldly benefits or liberation, with a limited form or without limitation, respectively.


The teacher (Kṛṣṇa) has taught this (in a verse of the Bhagavadgītā) that begins with (the words): 'those also who are devotees of other deities.


Even those who consider something separate from consciousness to be an object of worship, they too — (rightly) distinguishing the object of worship — think of it as not different from consciousness.


## INJUNCTIONS DO NOT APPLY TO THE SUPREME DEITY — Verses 125-133


An injunction (vidhi) is (essentially), a command (niyoga) that impels (to action) (codanā) (as laid down according to the Mīmāṁsā in its standard) execution (bhāvanā) in three aspects.


## OBSCURED AND UNOBSCURED CONSCIOUSNESS — Verses 134-139


This (consciousness) veils itself, and having done so, is present on the plane of the insentient. Half-veiled and half-revealed, it is present (in living beings) starting from the gods right down to plants. Each of these two forms (of consciousness), sentient and insentient, is wonderfully diverse.


He (the Lord of Consciousness) is free. What may He not conceive? That is said in the Triśiraḥśāstra, (which declares that) one who knows (this wonderful diversity) is well awake (saṁbuddha).


Objectivity is a quality of consciousness (cit); its shadow cannot cover it.


## Preliminary Analysis of the Means: Will, Knowledge and Action


Thus, while the Pervasive Lord (vibhu) reveals His own complete form (in all His fullness) to a certain perceiver (pramātṛ), (He does so) to some (other) part by part, successively." Jayaratha explains: To 'a certain perceiver' — by the rapidly heightening gradation of the intense modality of the decrease of obscuration. To 'another perceiver' — part by part, successively, in accord with the gradation ranging from slow onwards, in which the obscuring covering decreases.


The (full and complete) experience of one's own nature as the one Being of all beings is the supreme knowledge (of Deity) individual souls possess. Inferior and multiple is that (knowledge) which is other than that." Jayaratha: The 'one Being' is the fundamental Being which is the supreme light of consciousness of all phenomena. That alone is supreme knowledge — the direct experience by means of the dynamic modality of consciousness free of thought constructs (avikalpavṛtti).


## Knowledge Extends into Action and Develops into Yoga


For action does not differ (from knowledge), rather that knowledge itself is such (tathā), for by developing (and becoming firm,) the (highest) limit of Yoga is attained. (It is said) in the venerable Gama teachings (śāsana)." Jayaratha explains: Action 'does not differ' from knowledge 'because' 'that knowledge itself', by its development (rūḍhi), that is, growth, having attained the reality which is the supreme summit and (highest) limit of Yoga, 'is such' (tathā), that is, action.


Yoga does not differ (from action) and action does not differ (from Yoga). The insight (mati) that, mounted up through the metaphysical principles, serves to quell the latent impressions (vāsanā) in one's own mind, is termed action." (151) "The latent impressions in one's own mind are the products of the (three impurities, namely,) Āṇava, Māyīya and Karma. The insight (mati) which is the means to quell (them) is (essentially) consciousness." (152) "That rests on (and deploys) the group of reality principles that, located externally, generate the body. This same (insight is both) action and Yoga, engaged in merging the reality principles into consciousness." (153)


Even in the world (of everyday life) the inner impulse (sphurā) (of consciousness) in the form (of the intention): 'I am going', penetrating the body, the organ (of action) and the location (to which it is directed), (results in and) is the movement (of the body)." Jayaratha: The 'inner impulse' is the radiant pulse (sphuraṇa) which is consciousness, the nature of which is the exertive state that impels the activity of the body, senses and mind. It 'penetrates' the body, making it dependent on itself, and the act of 'going' takes place.


Therefore, what is (commonly) called (ritual) action is also (essentially) just (a kind of) knowledge. Thus, (although yogic and ritual action is the basis of this means to realization), what was said (before), namely, that knowledge alone is liberating, is (logically) sound.


## Śiva is All His Powers


Liberation is nothing but the (full and complete) experience (prathana) of one's own nature. And the nature of the Self is (pure) consciousness. Indeed, there is nothing else there. Moreover, nor are those (various) powers of action and the rest other than the conscious nature, because, indeed, it is unreasonable (to maintain that anything else can exist) there that is not consciousness, and (also) because (the scriptures) do not describe (any underlying ground of these powers) that possesses (them as its) attributes. (In other words, Śiva, Who is universal consciousness, is Himself all His powers).


Unlike Kaṇāda's view, in the Supreme Lord's scripture, there is not said to be any substratum of the powers (to which they are related) as its attributes (that are separate from it in themselves)." (158) "Moreover, if the powers of will, knowledge, action and the rest were to be (independent and) separate from (their underlying ground), the statement (vāc) 'Śiva is one' would become devoid of (any) reality." (159) Jayaratha: The Vaiśeṣikas maintain that the Self is the permanent substratum of sensations and volitions. Pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, the will, etc., are considered to be independently existing qualities of the Self. Here, by contrast, each power is the one absolutely free consciousness, differentiated by particular limiting adjuncts.


Therefore, consciousness itself is this (power of creative) freedom, which (according to the measure in which) it is conceived (vivicyamāna) as this or that (power) results in many powers.


## Liberation is One, the Means are Many


There is so no such doubt (possible) here (with regards to our teachings, namely,) that even one who has (complete) knowledge (jñānin) of that (one ultimate reality) may not be liberated, (because, although knowledge is the cause of liberation, it may not bring about its result every time), as a cause does not necessarily give rise to its effect (immediately and in every case). (This objection is groundless,) because liberation is (in fact nothing but) the experience of one's own authentic identity (ātmaprathā) (and not merely its effect)." (161) "As the relationship said to exist between knowledge and liberation is not primarily causal, it is certain that no (such) undesirable consequence (prasaṅga) (is possible)." (162) Jayaratha: One who has knowledge is certainly liberated. As the Bhagavadgītā (7/17-18) declares, the man of knowledge is the most excellent and is considered to be Kṛṣṇa's very Self.


Thus, as action, which is just knowledge by nature, bears (vahati) within itself a gross state in this way, behold indeed the wonderful state of diversity (citratā) within it." (163) "The means based on action are divided into those that are perceived objectively (but are not manifest externally, as is the case with inner yogic practice) and external (ones, such as ritual). These are innumerable because they have many kinds of subsidiary divisions and subdivisions." (164) Jayaratha: Action is knowledge by nature because action is invariably associated with cognitive consciousness. It becomes 'gross' by pouring out as the duality of subject and object. Inner practices include uccāra (upward movement of Mantra/breath); external ones include the fire pit, maṇḍala, etc.


Thus, the doubts some learned people had are removed, namely that because there is a diversity of means there should also be a difference in the (forms of) liberation (to which they lead)." (165) "Although the causes may be various, (the results, namely,) the destruction, disappearance and removal of impurity (mala) and its power are nonetheless one, just as (any inert object), such as a jar, can be destroyed (in many ways)." (166)


## Definition of the Three Penetrations


This three-fold manner (of means to realisation) was taught by the Supreme Lord in the scripture called Śrīpūrva (i.e. the Mālinīvijayottara) in the course of explaining (the forms) of penetration (samāveśa) (into and by the supreme state)." The word āveśa (penetration) literally means 'entry' — commonly denoting possession by supernatural beings. Here it is transformed into a liberating realization: the penetration of individual consciousness by Śiva's energy.


The penetration (āveśa) that arises for one who does not think of anything, by an intense (guruṇā) awakening (prabodhataḥ), is said to be the one pertaining to Śiva (śāmbhava)." (168) "The penetration one attains whilst thinking of (the nature of) reality (vastu) with the mind alone, without (having to practice) the utterance of Mantra (uccāra) (or the like), is here called Empowered (śākta)." (169) "The penetration that takes place by (the practice) of the utterance (of Mantra and concentration on the movement of the breath) (uccāra), the instruments (of Yoga) (karaṇa), visualization (dhyāna), (the cycling of) phonemes (in the breath) (varṇa) (as the subtle practice of Mantra), and the formation of supports (sthānakalpanā) (for ritual concentration), is rightly said to be Individual (āṇava)." (170)


## Śāmbhavopāya: The Divine Means


The expression 'one who does not think of anything' (implies that in this means) thought constructs are of no use. Thus, (as they are of no use and do not arise,) the attainment of the object of realization (jñeyasamāpatti) is said to be instantaneous." (171) "How does this (realization) take place? (This takes place,) says (the Lord,) by means of that extremely intense (guruṇā) and awakened insight (bodha) directed at the object of realisation (jñeya) that develops in an instant." (172)


And (the term) 'penetration' (āveśa) is that state (of identity) with supreme (awakened consciousness) (paratadrūpatā) (that emerges) from Śambhu, Who is undivided from (His own) power and precedes (all other means to realization). (It takes place) by virtue of the submergence of that (contracted) nature of the one who is not free (asvatantra), which is one's own (svatadrūpatā)." Jayaratha: The individual soul has two aspects — contracted (sva-tadrūpatā) and supreme (para-tadrūpatā). When penetrated by Śiva's will-power, the contracted aspect submerges and the supreme emerges. This is the fundamental Impurity (āṇavamala) being removed.


Thus, the meaning of this statement here is this: the object of realization (vijñeya), unfolding by itself spontaneously, even without (any intervening) intellection (niścaya), suddenly subordinating the (limited) subject reflected in the mirror of the (supreme) subject (mātṛ), continuously revealing its own glory (vibhūti), abides at increasingly higher levels (tāratamyataḥ) within the excellence of the purity (nairmalya) of the Heart (of reflective awareness).


Moreover, that which is to be known (jñeya) is of two kinds, namely, (pure) consciousness alone (cinmātra) and the insentient (jaḍa) ... (An outer) penetration (samāveśa) by an insentient (object) is in the form of (unity-in-difference like an) image reflected (in a mirror). The (inner contemplative) penetration by (pure) consciousness is (experienced as one's own) identity with it. Indeed, it is nothing else!" (176-178) "Thus, Śiva's (śāmbhava) penetration is (a state of) consciousness (saṁvitti) free of thought constructs (avikalpā) that, independent of meditation (bhāvanā) or the like, has attained a state of oneness with Śiva." (179ab)


## Explanation of the Śāmbhava Penetration


The expression 'one who does not think of anything' (implies that in this means) thought constructs are of no use. Thus, (as they are of no use and do not arise,) the attainment of the object of realization (jñeyasamāpatti) is said to be instantaneous." Jayaratha: When one does make use of thought constructs, the object (in the highest sense — pure consciousness) cannot be attained. If a thought construct such as 'I am Śiva' gives rise to another like itself, and its lack of clarity progressively falls away, it eventually approaches the state of identity with consciousness free of thought constructs. This, however, is the domain of the Empowered Means, not the Divine.


How does this (realization) take place? (This takes place,) says (the Lord,) by means of that extremely intense (guruṇā) and awakened insight (bodha) directed at the object of realisation (jñeya) that develops in an instant." (172) "(The suffix) 'tasi' (at the end of the word 'prabodhataḥ'), according to this explanation (of the verse in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra), optionally imparts (to the word to which it is suffixed) the sense of the instrumental case. Otherwise, (the two words can also be understood) as not being in concord." (173ab)


And (the term) 'penetration' (āveśa) is that state (of identity) with supreme (awakened consciousness) (paratadrūpatā) (that emerges) from Śambhu, Who is undivided from (His own) power and precedes (all other means to realization). (It takes place) by virtue of the submergence of that (contracted) nature of the one who is not free (asvatantra), which is one's own (svatadrūpatā).


Moreover, that which is to be known is of two kinds ... (An outer) penetration by an insentient (object pictured in consciousness) is in the form of (unity-in-difference like an) image reflected (in a mirror). The (inner contemplative) penetration by (pure) consciousness is (experienced as one's own) identity with it. Indeed, it is nothing else!" (176-178) "Thus, Śiva's penetration is (a state of) consciousness free of thought constructs that, independent of meditation or the like, has attained a state of oneness with Śiva." (179ab)


## Conception and Nonconceptual Consciousness


The conceptions (viniścaya) that (arise) subsequently by the grace of that (nondiscursive awareness) attain a state of identity (with Śiva,) and (so) they serve no (further) purpose." Jayaratha: By 'that' is meant reflective awareness free of thought constructs. Śiva's nature is realised by consciousness that does not fashion thought constructs. As further means are unnecessary with regards to something that has been done and completed, the thought constructs that follow have nothing more to do. They serve no further purpose (na tu teṣām upāyatā).


He who says that (although) valid knowledge (māna) is not a thought construct, (but) depends (nonetheless) on thought constructs (to validate it) stands refuted indeed. (Only) that which has been (previously) correctly determined (siddha) can be (subsequently) understood by means of thought." Jayaratha: Buddhist logicians and some Śaivites (like Lolaṭa) maintain that daily life is based on thought constructs, and that the state free of thought arises only at the end of a series of them. Abhinava refutes this: the first moment of perception is free of thought; thought constructs subsequently operate on what has already been perceived.


Insofar as the experience (prathā) of the ascertainment (niścaya) '(this) has been perceived' is clearly evident, one knows (pratipadyate) that 'I perceive' by the power of oneness with thought-free consciousness (avikalpa).


The correct determination (siddhi) of (the nature of) an entity is (essentially) its radiant appearing (sphurattā) within consciousness that is free of thought constructs. It is not the result of a thought construct, because (thought) is independent of (that) entity." Jayaratha: All thought is recollection (sarvo vikalpaḥ smṛtiḥ). Thought operates with respect to an entity previously experienced that is not present. The recognition of nondiscursive consciousness is the essence of the practice of the Divine Means.


The fact that consciousness is independent within itself of thought constructs (and perceives the nature of things directly reflected within itself or else) depends upon them (in order to discern its objects) is only this movement to and fro (vibhrama) (between its) state of purity (nairmalya) and its opposite." (183cd-184ab) "(In fact consciousness always discerns its object directly, independently of thought constructs, just as a skilled jeweller) who knows jewels, even in the dead of night, discerns the particular qualities of even a large number of gems that are illuminated (for just the very short) span of time of a lightning flash." (184cd-185ab) "Now, as we shall explain later, (the ability to discern) this purity of consciousness (nairmalya) (which precedes and is the basis of all thought) is achieved by previous practice, or likewise, by the Lord's unrestricted will." (185cd-186ab)


## Varieties of Gradations and the Trika Triad


Fifty varieties of this penetration are described (in the Mālinīvijayottara-tantra) in accord with (how) these (three) clearly apparent categories (bheda), located amongst the thirty-six metaphysical principles (tattva), are discerned (and conjoined together) (abhisandhitaḥ)." Jayaratha explains: The fifty varieties come from MV 2/17-19: 1. Gross elements (bhūta) — 5 kinds 2. Metaphysical principles (tattva) — 30 kinds 3. The Self (ātman) — 3 kinds 4. Mantra (vidyā) — 10 kinds 5. Power (śakti) — 2 kinds The synthetic contemplation (anusandhāna) of these categories, located within the thirty-six principles, is the cause of these forms of penetration.


This is so because the three, namely, the Person (Nara), Knowledge (Vidyā) and Power (Śakti), that are amongst these (thirty-six) metaphysical principles (and span them), are of four, ten and three different kinds (bheda), respectively." (187cd-188ab) "The three called the Person, Knowledge and Power pervade the entire (series of thirty-six metaphysical principles). Thus, they have been reckoned apart from the other (principles), which are not pervasive." (188cd-189ab)


They are also mutually (related and yet distinguished) as (the Person, which is the principle that spans) the impure (principles), (Knowledge, those) in the process of being purified (and so are pure-cum-impure), and (Power, the one that) is pure." Jayaratha: The Person is 'impure' because the principles up to Māyā consist of duality (bheda). Knowledge is 'in the process of being purified' because the principles from Śuddhavidyā to Sadāśiva consist of unity-in-diversity (bhedābheda). Power is 'pure' because it consists of oneness (abheda).


## ŚAKTI TATTVA — Reflexive Power of Consciousness


As is this entire group of thirty-six (principles) and so too whatever else (may exist), such is the extent of the Great Goddess, Who is Rudra's power free of (all) restrictions.


## SADĀŚIVA TATTVA — The I-This


The three called the Person, Knowledge and Power pervade the entire (series of thirty-six metaphysical principles). Thus, they have been reckoned apart from the other (principles), which are not pervasive. They are also mutually (related and distinguished) as (the Person spans) the impure (principles), (Knowledge spans those) in the process of being purified, and (Power spans the one that) is pure.


## ĪŚVARA TATTVA — The This-I


The three called the Person, Knowledge and Power pervade the entire (series of thirty-six metaphysical principles). Thus, they have been reckoned apart from the other (principles), which are not pervasive.


## ŚUDDHAVIDYĀ TATTVA — Pure Knowledge, Balanced Awareness


They are also mutually (related and distinguished) as (the Person spans) the impure (principles), (Knowledge spans those) in the process of being purified, and (Power spans the one that) is pure.


## MĀYĀ TATTVA — The Power of Limitation


They are also mutually (related and distinguished) as (the Person spans) the impure (principles), (Knowledge spans those) in the process of being purified, and (Power spans the one that) is pure.


## PURUṢA TATTVA — The Contracted Experiencer


This is so because the three, namely, the Person (Nara), Knowledge (Vidyā) and Power (Śakti), that are amongst these (thirty-six) metaphysical principles (and span them), are of four, ten and three different kinds, respectively.


## THE FIVE TANMĀTRAS (SUBTLE ELEMENTS) — Śabda, Sparśa, Rūpa, Rasa, Gandha


(The existence) of the gross elements (bhūta) is proved by direct perception, and so they are classified separately from the (other) group of principles (tattva), (whose existence) can only be inferred by (their) effects, (of which they are) the cause.


## THE FIVE MAHĀBHŪTAS (GROSS ELEMENTS) — Ākāśa, Vāyu, Tejas, Āpas, Pṛthivī


(The existence) of the gross elements is proved by direct perception, and so they are classified separately from the other group of principles, whose existence can only be inferred by their effects. (The gross Elements are called 'bhūta', meaning literally 'existent', because) an 'existent' is that whose true nature is perceived by everybody, and they know that to be the case here with four of the five gross elements, along with space as the fifth.


## THE FIVE ELEMENTS AS THE GODDESS (PAÑCABHŪTĀNI DEVĪ)


(The existence) of the gross elements (bhūta) is proved by direct perception, and so they are classified separately from the (other) group of principles (tattva), (whose existence) can only be inferred by (their) effects, (of which they are) the cause.


An 'existent' is that whose true nature is perceived by everybody, and they know that to be the case here with four (of the five gross elements), along with space (āvakāśa) (as the fifth)." Jayaratha explains: The word bhūta means both "element" and "existent." The elements are directly evident to all, learned and unlearned alike, whereas the higher principles are known only through inference.


Surely, (one may ask: the Mālinīvijayottara) is expounding the fivefold penetration of Rudra's power, so what occasion is there to describe the penetration of the Elements and the rest there?" Abhinavagupta replies that in the nondualist scriptures, unlike the dualist ones, the elements are not taught as different from the Supreme Lord. They are the Goddess Herself.


As is this entire group of thirty-six (principles) and so too whatever else (may exist), such is the extent of the Great Goddess, Who is Rudra's power free of (all) restrictions." Jayaratha: The Goddess is the power of Rudra — free, unrestrained, identical with the entire spectrum of reality from Earth to Śiva. Whatever exists, the Goddess is that.


## THE DIVINE ATTRIBUTES AND THE PURIFICATION OF THOUGHT (GUṆAŚODHANA)


Therefore, just as any object which is in front of one is perceived as a whole, by means of the partial (perceptions) of its qualities and the like, know that in the same way here also (the totality of reality can be grasped part by part).


Therefore, (there are) those who attend with reverence on the Supreme All-pervasive Lord, either in (His) entirety or part by part, by means of His (divine) attributes such as His (transcendence) beyond thought, permanence, majesty, glory or others." Jayaratha: The attributes are not separate from Śiva — they are His power. By the intensity (pāṭava) of any one attribute manifesting repeatedly in thought, one enters the possessor of all attributes.


(O Lord,) if (perception,) born of the senses, were not to render Your inconceivable nature into an object in the domain of conceptualization, the diverse perceptions that are sketched out within (consciousness) would not be clear experiences.


## THE GODDESS, THE LORD'S POWERS AND ATTRIBUTES AS MEANS (ŚAKTIGUṆOPĀYA)


The same is said at the beginning of a chapter in the venerable Mataṅgatantra by (indicating various) distinguishing qualities: 'the Lord's sustaining ground consists of the rays of His own energies.'" The verses that follow (203–204) describe the Goddess as: well-illumined by nature, unwavering, possessing immobile form, the supreme level, subtle, present in every direction, all obscuring coverings destroyed, peaceful, the intense delight within reality alone.


The many powers Śiva is said to possess are the great extension of differentiation of the cosmic forces, metaphysical principles, and world-orders. Creation, persistence, obscuration, withdrawal and grace, as well as the Fourth state — all are the unfolding of the Lord's manifold power.


## THE ŚĀMBHAVA PATH FREE OF THOUGHT CONSTRUCTS (AVIKALPAMĀRGA)


He who is established on the path free of thought constructs, by whatever path he enters, from Sadāśiva to Earth, he becomes identified through it with Śiva.


When the Heart is pure and has within it a light that illumines the aspect which is the foremost (ever) radiant plane, (then, within that and) by means of that itself, (one attains) the state of Supreme Śiva Who is consciousness.


In this way, Sumati's disciples know this means which is the true one (sadupāya), which is an aspect of the power of the supreme (parā) will, and is the penetration called 'pertaining to Śiva'." Jayaratha: This power of the will is the venerable Goddess Parā. The Śāmbhava penetration is the direct means because it operates without stages, instantaneously, through pure I-consciousness.


## THE EMPOWERED MEANS (ŚĀKTOPĀYA)


Now we are going to talk about the Empowered (means to realisation). Mental consciousness (cetas), (consisting) of the intellect, mind and ego, is clearly evident (to everyone). As it is a state given to conceptualization (savikalpatā), it is Māyā, (although) in actual fact it (consists of) the powers of the will and the rest (of consciousness).


The Empowered (means to realisation functions) by the successive (operation of these three mental faculties, beginning with the ego, which) arrogates (a personal identity). (Identification is followed by the activity of the mind, which forms) the intention (to comprehend, and then the intellect, which makes the final conceptual) ascertainment. Although this means is based on Māyā, at the end of that (process one ultimately attains a state of consciousness which is) free of thought constructs.


The plane of (consciousness that even) the fettered soul (experiences in the first moment of perception) free of thought constructs, is Śiva's (state). However, it is incomplete as a result of (his) miserable state (as an individual, conditioned) subject. But once that (miserable state) ceases, it unfolds.


## THE INDIVIDUAL MEANS (ĀṆAVOPĀYA)


Surely, (one may ask, does this mean that) there in (the domain of) the Individual Means, the intellect is not engaged in thought? (No, thought persists in this means also. The difference is that the intellect is mediated by) other means, (whereas) here (the Lord) has said that the Empowered Means is devoid of (other practices such as the) utterance (of Mantras).


The word 'utterance' here by (its) plural (case) ending (also implicitly) states 'and the rest' (indicating) that they are absent in the Empowered Means. The empowered state (śaktitā) is one of unity and difference (not duality as is the individual state).


The duality between individual souls (aṇu) is evident. Here the means relating to it (that resolves it) is the individual one (āṇava). Its essential nature is the certainty (which is the correct determination of) conceptual representation. Ultimately (it culminates in a state of consciousness that is) free of thought constructs.


Surely, (one may ask,) the intellect, mind, ego and individual soul — they cannot pervade Śiva because they are lower (principles). How then has it been said that they can be a means to attain Him?" Abhinava resolves this: The mental faculties, though lower in the hierarchy, are included within the means that pertains to them. Action is not different from knowledge — it is knowledge that has assumed the nature of a succession of processes.


## ALL MEANS ATTAIN THE SAME GOAL (SARVOPĀYA EKAPHALA)


Even he who says that the (assessment of) the validity of knowledge (free of thought constructs) depends on thought, in that view (also), the validity of knowledge that is free of thought constructs is attained by means of a series of thoughts." Jayaratha: Even the Buddhist Vaibhāṣikas who hold that the validity of nondiscursive knowledge depends on discursive thought must admit that the nondiscursive state is attained through a progressive series of thought constructs. This applies equally to the three means.


## CONCLUDING SUMMARY OF THE THREE MEANS (TRIVIDHOPĀYASAṂGRAHA)


(Take for example the case) of a person who at first does not know the true nature (and value) of a gem. By deliberating (on its worth) by (a series of conceptual) means to assess it, he is (finally) said to be one who knows (the nature and value of) the gem when (a state of consciousness) that is free of thought and requires no (further) means is attained.


Here the means pertaining to Śiva (śāmbhava) is said to be that of unity (abheda). The Empowered means is said to be unity-in-diversity, and the means (based) on difference is the Individual one.


The entire extent of (ritual) action, which will be (described later), will be included in a clearly evident form in the last form of knowledge (listed) here, along with its means (that is, the Individual Means).


Action is not something different from knowledge; (rather it is knowledge itself) which, in order to serve as a means to realisation, has assumed the nature of a succession (of processes and ritual actions).


## THE TEACHER AND HIS SPIRITUAL FAMILY (GURU-SAṄTĀNA)


Right knowledge (samyagjñāna) is the sole cause of liberation, and it is present (both) in oneself (that is, in the teacher) and in the other (that is, in the disciple), because the manifestation of 'self', 'other' and the like is only imagination.


As (the notions of 'self' and 'other') are equally imaginary (kālpanika), the teacher, who is the radiant manifestation of oneness (with the disciples who are one with him), is thus one in nature (with them) and (as such,) is said to be 'accomplished' and 'liberated'.


A teacher is said to be as great as is his (spiritual) family (saṅtāna), and if (that) is made of right knowledge, he therefore liberates himself (when a member of this spiritual family attains liberation). Thus (the saying) that 'the man of knowledge liberates his own spiritual family' is fully proved both by reason and scripture.


## THE REMOVAL OF IMPURITY AND THE FOUR FORMS OF KNOWLEDGE (MALAŚODHANA-CATURVIDYĀ)


Knowledge is said to be of four kinds, according to the appropriate application." 1. Pramāṇa — knowledge as valid means of cognition 2. Prameya — knowledge as the object of cognition 3. Pramātṛ — knowledge as the subject who knows 4. Pramiti — knowledge as the act of knowing itself


## ENUNCIATION, DEFINITION AND INVESTIGATION (UDDEŚA-LAKṢAṆA-PARĪKṢĀ)


There (in that regard) whatever one reflects on here, whether internal or external, manifests initially in an undisclosed (generic, unspecified) form." Jayaratha: Doubt arises when only the generic attributes of an entity are perceived but not its specific features. It is not a total absence of knowledge — the "this" aspect is well determined; only the "what" is uncertain.


(Awakening) consciousness on the plane of the teacher and the taught is itself in this way (both) question and answer. Indeed, this difference between the bodies (of the teacher and disciple) is not ultimately real." Jayaratha: The entire process of teaching is the self-inquiry of consciousness. Consciousness asks itself questions and answers them. The teacher and disciple are roles assumed by the one reality.


## THE SUPREME AND OTHER RELATIONSHIPS (PARASAṀBANDHA-PAÑCAKA)


In the Supreme Lord's teaching, consisting of such questions and answers, the essential nature of the supreme relationship (between teacher and disciple) is present there within the five (types of their) relationships (as their basis).


(The relationships termed) 'Great' (mahat), 'Intermediate' (avāntara), 'Divine' (divya), 'Mixed', which is another, and the 'Other' (than divine), which is the fifth, are all the Supreme Power.


## ENUNCIATION OF THE TOPICS OF THE TANTRĀLOKA (TANTRĀLOKODDEŚA)


This is the preliminary enunciation (of the topics). Now we turn to the subsequent (detailed one). All (the topics) are implicitly indicated in due order in the (first) chapter, which deals with the various forms of consciousness." The detailed list specifies the exact content of each chapter, including: - Chapter 3: Reflection, the sequence of the fifty forms of reflective awareness, and the oneness of these forms with Mantra - Chapter 4: Purification of thought, discriminative reasoning, teachers, the Cycle of the Twelve Kālīs - Chapter 5: Meditation by the intellect, utterance through the vital breath, the phonemes - And so on through every chapter


## ŚIVA TATTVA — Pure I-Consciousness


The supreme reality (paraṁ tattvam) of the object (of perception) is Śiva Who is the Light (of consciousness), for that which is not Light can neither be illumined (i.e. be made manifest) nor even have (any) existence (vastutā).


The non-existence (avastutā) of entities is also in one (and the same) field of the wonder (of consciousness as is their existence). The notion (dhī) 'this is non-existent (avastu)' is not similar to (an inert object such as) a wall.


Indeed, this Light (of consciousness) shines at all times; so, as it cannot be denied, what is the use (of applying) contrived means of knowledge to it? (All that needs be done is to recognise that the One Light exists and that it illumines the manifestation of all things.)


The (many) means of knowledge give life to all things (vastu) (because it is by means of them that they appear to the sentient subject), while the supreme living essence (jīva) of those (means) also is that same Supreme Lord (Himself Who is the true identity of the perceiver).


For one who, independent and the master (of all things, transcends them,) spatial, temporal and formal processes are not restricted (niyata) (by Karma and natural law), and so He is Śiva Who is ubiquitous, eternal and omniform.


By virtue of His ubiquity, He is all-pervading. As He is eternal, He is free of beginning and end. As He is omniform, He manifests the wonderful variety of things, both sentient and insentient.


## THE ALL-EMBRACING WHEEL OF THE TWELVE KĀLIKĀS


These (six forms of) consciousness emerge as the power of action, and so, by penetrating (samāveśa) (into one another), are said to be twelve forms of consciousness. Within them everything is concluded (and contained)." Jayaratha explains that these twelve forms of consciousness, "arranged within the supreme subject as the twelve phases of the process of perception, are absorbed progressively into consciousness." Because there is no reality apart from consciousness, everything is brought to completion and satisfaction within them.


Such is the God of the gods' principal Wheel of Energies, by virtue of which the God of the gods is Bhairava, Who is endowed with all power (pūrṇaśakti)." The name Kālikā is derived from the root kal, which carries multiple meanings: resounding, projecting, emitting, enumerating, and knowing. Jayaratha explains: "Thus, in accord with the meanings of the root, the Kālīs, that is, those very Kālikās ('Little Kālīs') 'project' (kalayanti), that is, reflect (parāmṛśanti), 'emit' (kṣipanti), that is, create all things by emitting them out of themselves (visṛjanti), and withdraw them back (saṁharanti), that is, 'enumerate' them (gaṇayanti).


These (powers) are in some places (in the scriptures) called Kālikās, because their nature is reflective awareness, and because they project, emit, enumerate and know (all things).


It is also said in the venerable Sāra scripture that one should worship the (Goddess) Parā, Who is the one syllable (SAUḤ), and is called Bhairava's Self, surrounded by twelve Yoginīs." Jayaratha notes that the difference between 'Kālikās' and 'Yoginīs' is merely a difference in name, not in reality. These twelve forms of consciousness are essentially each of the twelve forms of reflective awareness corresponding to the twelve fertile vowels (omitting the four neuter vowels ṛ, ṝ, ḷ, ḹ). In the Trikasāra's ritual: "That seed is conjoined with the twelve vowels, in due order, and these are in this way the goddesses.


From (just) these (twelve energies) alone emerges (every) wheel of energies, right up (to the full complement of) sixty-four. (So too the wheel) with one spoke up to that of a thousand spokes. They have many names in the scriptures, according to their various functions. The ways they are worshipped are also various, according to whether the form of their worship is dual, nondual or mixed. This has been explained at length in the venerable Traiśirasa (Triśirobhairavatantra), but not written here for fear of going into too many details, and also because it would serve no purpose to do so." The twelve Kālikās are thus the fundamental matrix from which all energy configurations — from the simplest unity to the most complex thousand-fold manifestation — are derived.


Those same (powers), stainless and pure, are called Aghorā. They are established in creation, persistence and withdrawal, as well as in the passing away of these three limiting adjuncts, by generating the (powers) Ghorā and Ghoratarā, that are of their (same) nature. Their nature, which abides thus, is divided in many ways." Jayaratha explains: the three types of energies operating in the four phases become twelve. As there are innumerable energies of each type, they generate countless energies in this way. The "passing away of the three limiting adjuncts" uncovers the state of pure unconditioned consciousness called the Inexplicable (Anākhya), which is the source and resting place of the entire cycle.


## THREE WAYS OF ELIMINATING CREATION, PERSISTENCE AND DESTRUCTION


The teachers have said that the form which transcends (these) limiting adjuncts is of two types, according to whether limiting adjuncts do not emerge, or due to (their) cessation (praśama).


## PEACEFUL CESSATION AND VIOLENT DIGESTION


Again, (their) cessation (praśama) is of two kinds, according to whether it takes place peacefully (śāntyā) (by the normal procedures of initiation etc.), or by a process of violent digestion (haṭhapāka), brought about (in an instant by Bhairava), who is called the One Who (Delights) in the Aesthetic Savour of Devouring Completely (alaṁgrāsarasa), and whose nature burns perpetually.


This cessation brought about by violent digestion, the third type, which burns the fuel of differentiation (bheda), is (especially) worthy of being taught." Jayaratha explains that this alone has the supreme capacity (sāmarthya) to destroy relative distinctions with great force (sahasā). The "third type" refers to the third of the three ways of eliminating limiting adjuncts (after anullāsa and peaceful cessation).


All existing things offered forcefully (haṭhataḥ) (in an instant) to the fire that burns in the stomach of one's own consciousness, abandon the division of relative distinctions, and by their own power, they are (its) fuel.


When, by (this process of) violent digestion, the differentiated nature of things is destroyed, the deities of consciousness feed upon the universe (thus) turned to nectar.


(When) they are satisfied, they rest at one with God Bhairava, the Sky of Consciousness, Who, (as) their own full (and complete) (pūrṇa) nature, resides solitary in the Heart.


## THE UNFOLDING CONFIGURATIONS OF THE GODDESSES OF CONSCIOUSNESS


Although their nature manifests in unity (abheda) in this way, it is of many kinds, for many are their names and manner of worship (upāsā), due to their functions and operations.


Again, according to the way in which (these) goddesses merge together (āvāpa) and unfold (udvāpa), they become extensively diverse (by combining in groups of) one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, sixteen, eighteen and so on (infinitely).


## THE SEAL OF THE SUPREME MEANS: EVERYTHING REFLECTED IN THE MIRROR OF CONSCIOUSNESS


He within whose conscious nature the universe and this (whole) category of phenomena (bhāvavarga), freely extending (prapañcavat), appears as a reflection, is in truth the Lord of the universe! In the same way, he within whose nature this kind of reflective awareness, free of thought constructs, arises constantly, is indeed stamped with (the seal of) the Supreme Means (śāmbhavopāya)." The term prapañcavān (freely extending) conveys that phenomena are not merely static reflections but dynamically unfold. Jayaratha explains that the "city in a mirror" simile shows that even as the universe appears distinct from consciousness, it is not actually separate. The reflection exists as the mirror's own luminosity.


(Thus,) for one who possesses the discernment (pravivecita) which is the reflective awareness of 'I-ness' in all its fullness (pūrṇāhantā), there is nothing else (which differs) from that here of any kind, be it Mantra, Mudrā, ritual or worship." Jayaratha explains that for one established in the Supreme Means, there are no kinds of Mantra, Mudrā, ritual, or worship that differ from the spontaneous reflective awareness of full I-consciousness. They shine at one with one's own nature, the sole nature of which is the supreme subject. As Abhinavagupta declares: ritual ablution, vows, concentration, Mantras, oblation, repetition — all based on duality — are not applicable here at all (cf. verse 289cd–290).


## LIBERATION IN THIS LIFE (JĪVANMUKTI)


He who enters repeatedly into this state of penetration (samāveśa) (into pure Bhairava consciousness) free of thought constructs, attains Bhairava's state (bhairavībhāva), otherwise called liberation in this life." The repetition of bhūyo bhūyaḥ ("again and again") is significant: even at the level of the Supreme Means, the penetration into nirvikalpa consciousness must be renewed constantly. Jayaratha explains that although consciousness is always already Bhairava, the veiling of ignorance requires repeated re-entry into this recognition until it becomes stable and effortless. Bhairavībhāva is not a state to be produced but one to be uncovered — the natural condition of the Self that is temporarily obscured by thought constructs.


From this point onwards we will discuss (the nature of) this (state of) liberation in life (jīvanmukti), (which is such) even though this notion that there is a means and a goal (persists) there in a subtle form (sūtraṇayā). In the previous chapter there was (no question of) any formation of division (bheda), for (at the level) free of means, who is liberated, how and where?" Abhinavagupta here confronts a potential objection. In the previous chapter (Chapter 2, on the anupāya — the means-free path), he declared that no practice involving action can serve as a means, because Bhairava consciousness is a priori (ādisiddha) and ever-active (nityodita), requiring no activation. Yet here he speaks of repeated entry into samāveśa as a practice. The resolution lies in the recognition that the distinction between means and goal persists only in a subtle, thread-like form (sūtraṇayā) within the Śāmbhavopāya, and becomes clearly evident only in subsequent chapters dealing with the lower upāyas.


## THE REFLECTION OF THE PRINCIPLES IN THE FIFTY FORMS OF REFLECTIVE AWARENESS


The Awakened One should apply the fifty aforementioned kinds of reflective awareness free of thought constructs, (here) called the Divine Means (śāmbhavopāya). Beholding the Earth (principle) reflected within one's own nature by means of this (reflective awareness) free of thought constructs, it assumes Bhairava's nature. This (same) procedure is applied (to all the other principles) also, from that of Water onwards right up to the last, (where the yogi reaches) the supreme principle beyond all obscuring coverings, which pervades (all things), is free, omniscient, and conceived to be Śiva." The "fifty aforementioned kinds" refer to the fifty phonemes of the Sanskrit alphabet (Mātṛkā) introduced in the first chapter (1/186cd–187ab), where they are correlated with the fifty modalities of reflective awareness. Jayaratha explains that each phoneme embodies a specific form of vimarśa (reflective awareness), and by contemplating each tattva through its corresponding phonetic form, the yogi directly experiences it as a mode of consciousness rather than as a material principle.


The (yogi) free of thought constructs, beholding that (Śiva) also reflected in the noble and uncreated (akalpita) mirror of consciousness, becomes by himself (spontaneously) Bhairava." This verse addresses a subtle doubt: if Śiva is the supreme perceiver, how can he become an object of perception (a means)? Jayaratha explains that the Lord, by His own freedom (svātantrya), has conceived the state of means-and-goal within His own nature. The "mirror of consciousness" is called "noble and uncreated" because it is not a constructed artifact — it is the natural, ever-present self-luminosity of awareness. Beholding even Śiva as reflected there, the yogi realizes that the perceiver and the perceived are one.


One sees (something) initially, such as (for example) the red (colour of a jar), by means of (the aspect of) consciousness that is free of thought constructs and which (subsequently), by various means (dvāra), (develops into) a single stable and undivided perception of a jar. In the same way, for him who reflects upon his own nature through the unified emergence of each one of these (principles), starting with Earth, one after the other, it manifests (in all its) plenitude." This analogy explains why multiple principles are needed as means. Just as a jar is perceived first through its red colour, then its shape, and so on — each aspect serving as a "door" (dvāra) into the unified perception — so each tattva, from Earth to Śiva, serves as a doorway into the full realization of consciousness. Jayaratha's extensive commentary here draws on Utpaladeva's Pratyabhijñā epistemology: the specific identity (svalakṣaṇa) of any entity is constituted by a particular configuration of universal manifestations (ābhāsa), and consciousness shines as all of them.


## "I AM THE AUTHOR OF CREATION AND DESTRUCTION IN THE MIRROR OF MY CONSCIOUSNESS" — VERSES 280cd–288ab


All this is born from me", "it is reflected in me" and "is not separate from me" — three-fold is this Divine (Śāmbhava) Means. Abhinavagupta distills the entire teaching of the Supreme Means into this single threefold realization. The pronoun "I" (mat) denotes pure awakened consciousness (bodha), not the empirical ego. Everything arises from consciousness, appears in consciousness as a reflection, and is ultimately not different from consciousness. These three aspects correspond to creation, persistence, and withdrawal — but here they are experienced simultaneously as the unified play of one's own awareness.


That (reflective awareness thus) forges this link (which contains implicitly within itself and connects together) creation, persistence and withdrawal. As is said in the Spanda teachings: 'that in which all this creation is established and from whence it arises . . .'" Abhinavagupta invokes the authority of the Spanda teachings (Spandakārikā 1/2) to show that this realization is not his invention but the core of the entire Śaiva nondual tradition. The Spanda (divine vibration) is the pulse of consciousness that simultaneously generates, sustains, and reabsorbs the universe.


This (creativity) itself declares the supreme lordship of consciousness, and is its cosmic nature. Pray tell what else could be its characterising feature?" Jayaratha explains: The capacity of consciousness to bring about creation, persistence, and withdrawal is not a secondary quality — it is its very essence. Those who conceive of the Absolute as inactive or indeterminate (like the Vedāntins' Brahman) miss the dynamic, creative nature of supreme consciousness. The lordship (aiśvarya) of consciousness is precisely its power to manifest as all things while remaining one with them.


I, manifesting the universe in my own Self, the Sky of Consciousness, am the creator who is all things" — by this insight one becomes Bhairava. "The entire cosmic order is reflected within me alone, I am the agent of persistence!" — (with this insight) this (one's own) cosmic nature becomes evidently apparent. "The universe melts away into me, whose nature is the scorching fire of the great, perpetually active consciousness" — seeing thus, one becomes peaceful. Jayaratha explains these three insights as corresponding to the three phases of cosmic process: 1. Creation insight ("I am the creator who is all things"): The yogi sees the universe arising from his own consciousness as its source. This insight is not a conceptual affirmation but a direct realization that transforms one's identity into Bhairava himself. 2. Persistence insight ("I am the agent of persistence"): The yogi recognizes that the entire cosmic order — the six paths (ṣaḍadhva) of reality — is reflected within him and sustained by his awareness. His cosmic nature (viśvarūpatā) becomes self-evident. 3. Dissolution insight ("The universe melts away into me"): The yogi experiences all phenomena dissolving into the fire of his own perpetually active consciousness (sadodita mahābodha). This dissolution is not annihilation but the recognition of the universe's true nature as consciousness, which brings profound peace (praśāmyati).


The Fire (of consciousness) that pours forth (enflamed with the awareness that): 'I am indeed Śiva, who burns the mansion of the dreams of transmigratory existence with its endless and wonderfully diverse (worlds, which are its) wombs of existence.'" Jayaratha comments: Transmigratory existence (saṁsāra) is like a mansion of dreams — vivid while it lasts but without substance. The fire of Śiva-consciousness burns this mansion completely, leaving no trace. Even the latent traces (vāsanās) of past experiences are consumed in this realization. The phrase "I am indeed Śiva" (śiva evāham) is the mantra-like affirmation that fuels this inner fire.


The entire universe with (all its) diverse (aspects) emerges out of me (in many ways, and is also established here in the same way within me (in my pure consciousness), from which (all duality) has fallen away and nothing else (remains)." He who sees (the cycle of creation and destruction) in this way without parts because creation, persistence and withdrawal has been unified (and so) has penetrated the Fourth state (of pure, divine consciousness), shines radiantly (as supreme consciousness). Jayaratha explains: The yogi who sees creation, persistence, and withdrawal as the unified activity of his own consciousness — without division into separate phases — has penetrated the Fourth state (turīya). This is not a state among other states but the transcendental ground of waking, dreaming, and deep sleep. Such a yogi "shines radiantly" (sphurati) as supreme consciousness itself, the Inexplicable (anākhya).


## THE SUPREME MEANS IS BEYOND RITUAL — VERSES 288cd–290


Indeed, only a few, sanctified (bhāvita) by the (most intense grace of the) Supreme Lord, attain faith (and perfect satisfaction) in this, the supreme means, which is the repository of Śiva's oneness." Jayaratha explains: "Sanctified" (bhāvita) means purified (adhivāsita) by the most intense descent of the power of grace (śaktipāta) from the Lord. Not everyone is a fit recipient for this teaching. As the saying goes: "There are hundreds of worshippers, and devotees are thousands, but those who are fit recipients of the Lord's grace, who are fully satisfied, are just two or three, not even five or six." The reason this means is supreme is that it is "the repository of Śiva's oneness" (śāmbhavādvaitaśālini) — whereas the other means (the Individual and Empowered) operate within duality and so are inferior. The word śālin (possessing, rich in) indicates that this means is filled with, and overflows with, the nonduality of Śiva.


Ritual ablution, (the observance of a) vow, the purification of the body, concentration (dhāraṇā), the application of Mantras, the formation of the cosmic order (adhvakḷpti) (by intense meditation), sacrificial rites, oblation, repetition of Mantras and contemplative trance (samādhi), (all these, or any other means) one could conceive based on duality (bheda), are not applicable here (at all)." Abhinavagupta enumerates ten categories of religious practice that are inapplicable at the level of the Supreme Means. Each presupposes a dualistic framework: 1. Snāna (ritual ablution) — purifies the body, but the Śāmbhava practitioner knows the body as consciousness 2. Vrata (vow) — implies a discipline to be observed, but the natural state needs no discipline 3. Dehaśuddhi (purification of the body) — the body is already pure as a manifestation of consciousness 4. Dhāraṇā (concentration) — focuses the mind, but consciousness is already one-pointed in its own nature 5. Mantrayojanā (application of mantras) — mantras derive power from consciousness, but consciousness itself needs no mantra 6. Adhvakḷpti (formation of the cosmic order through meditation) — the cosmic order is already one's own nature 7. Yāgavidhi (sacrificial rites) — offering presupposes a separation between offerer and offered 8. Homa (oblation) — the fire of consciousness is already the supreme offering 9. Japa (repetition of mantras) — true japa is the silent awareness of identity with Śiva 10. Samādhi (contemplative trance) — the natural state is not a trance to be entered but the abiding ground of all states Jayaratha notes that at this point the transition is made from the Śāmbhava Means to No Means (anupāya). When even the Supreme Means is seen as a conceptual designation, the practitioner abides in the means-free state that is the culmination of all practice.


## THE ŚĀMBHAVA MASTER — VERSES 291–293ab


The teacher who is established herein evidently graces anyone who approaches him, if he is fit to be graced in this way." Jayaratha explains: "Herein" (atra) means in the Supreme Means — or, more precisely, in No Means, which is the culmination of the Śāmbhava state. Such a teacher does not need to perform rituals or give elaborate teachings. Merely looking at the disciple or speaking with him is enough to transmit realization. The phrase "if he is fit to be graced in this way" (tādṛg anugrāhya) refers to one who possesses the capacity to practice the Supreme Means — that is, one who has received the most intense descent of grace (tīvra śaktipāta). Such a disciple achieves the goal within himself spontaneously upon contact with the master, "like the flame of a lamp that has arisen from another flame.


Now if (the disciple) is not such, (but even then,) purified by devotion to Rudra (Bhava) and impelled by (the thought that) there will be such grace in the future, worships that (teacher), then the skilful (learned teacher) should impart initiation and (whatever other) wonderfully diverse (practice the disciple is fit to receive)." Jayaratha elaborates: If the disciple does not possess the capacity for the Supreme Means because the most intense descent of grace has not taken place in him, but he is nevertheless "purified by devotion to Rudra" (bhavabhaktyā bhāvitaḥ) — this devotion being the first sign of a descent of grace, according to the Mālinīvijayottaratantra (2/14ab) — then the teacher must adapt. The term "skilful" (kovida) is significant: the Śāmbhava master, though himself established in the nondual state, possesses the discernment to recognize the level of the disciple and employ the appropriate means. He may use the wonderfully diverse (vicitra) forms of initiation, mantra, and ritual practice that belong to the Individual (āṇava) or Empowered (śākta) Means, gradually leading the disciple toward the Supreme. Jayaratha cites the principle: "The teacher should not disregard his duty to rescue his disciple from the world of transmigratory existence when the time comes to perform the rite through which the disciple is initiated." Even a teacher established in the highest state must compassionately descend to lower means when necessary.


## THE SUPREME GOAL IS ŚIVA — VERSES 293cd–294ab


(All forms of) worship, even those in the future, (ultimately develop and) become well established (and fulfilled) here (in the profound) realization that: 'the supreme goal, which is such, is Śiva.'" Jayaratha explains: "The future forms of worship" refers to the teachings of the Individual (āṇava) and Empowered (śākta) Means that Abhinavagupta will expound in subsequent chapters. These lower means do not lead to a different goal — they give access to one another, progressively refining the practitioner's understanding until they culminate in the Supreme Means. As Swami Lakshmanjoo puts it: "All means lead one to the other, finally culminating in Śāmbhavopāya." The word "here" (atra) means in this realization — the recognition that the supreme goal is "of this nature" (etanmaya), that is, identical with Śiva. Nothing is possible without attaining this state of rest. Thus, although there are many means, the goals are not many. All paths, whether they know it or not, are moving toward the same recognition. Abhinavagupta cites his own earlier statement (1/227ab): "One should not imagine that there is any difference here in the fruit which is consciousness (attained by applying oneself to the various means of realisation).


So, we have explained at length this, the supreme insight into one's own nature pertaining to the Divine (śāmbhava) Means." This single half-verse closes the chapter. The phrase "supreme insight into one's own nature" (paramaṁ śāmbhavam ātmavedanam) encapsulates the entire teaching: the Divine Means is not a ritual, a meditation technique, or a philosophical system — it is the direct knowledge (vedana) of oneself (ātman) as Śiva. This knowledge has been explained "at length" (suviṣṭaram), meaning that everything from verse 1 of Chapter 3 to this concluding verse has been leading to this single point. The chapter colophon follows: "The third chapter called 'the Revelation of the Divine Means' is complete.


## KĀLAKARṢIṆĪ AND THE KRAMA LINEAGES — THE DESTROYER OF TIME


(This) measuring/operation (kalanā) is called Kālī and Kālakarṣiṇī (the Destroyer of Time)." Jayaratha explains (lines 20011–20100): The verb kal (from which Kālī and kalanā derive) has five meanings, each corresponding to an operation of the goddess: 1. Kṣepa (casting forth) — emission of phenomena 2. Jñāna (knowledge) — cognition of phenomena 3. Saṁkhyāna (enumeration) — discrimination and ordering 4. Gati (movement) — the dynamic flow of consciousness 5. Nāda (sound) — the subtle vibration that underlies all manifestation These five operations correspond to the five acts (pañcakṛtya) of Śiva: creation, persistence, destruction, concealment, and grace. Kālasaṃkarṣiṇī is the power that performs all five simultaneously, "measuring out" the universe of time and consciousness.


## THE VITALITY OF MANTRA (MANTRAVĪRYA) — SAUḤ AND THE HEART OF CONSCIOUSNESS


That which is to be repeated (jāpya) is that which cannot be uttered, and that which cannot be uttered is itself the (true) repetition. That which can be uttered, on the other hand, is pure; it is said to be (the inferior, outer form of) repetition." The true japa is the non-uttered, silent awareness of one's identity with Śiva. Vocal recitation is merely the external support for this inner recognition.


Mudrā is the union of Śiva and Śakti; by this, the state (of liberation) is attained." Jayaratha explains: The true mudrā is not a gesture of the hands but the radiant seal of nondual consciousness. The word mudrā means "that which delights (mud) and liberates (drā)." It is the recognition of the union of prakāśa (Śiva, light) and vimarśa (Śakti, reflective awareness) in every moment.


## The Nature of the Forces (Kalāsvarūpa)


It was said before that a (metaphysical) principle (tattva) is said to be (the common universal) nature (rūpa) that extends through its own particular group of worlds, and is distinct from the other (principles). Analogously, according to Śaiva doctrine (śaivaśāsana), a Force (kalā) is said to be the (common) universal nature that extends through its own (given) group of these principles, as distinct from other groups.


Again, (from another point of view,) some say that this Force is that extremely subtle power that is present within the Principles, as is, for example, the sustaining power within the Earth Principle.


Here, (according to us,) the essential point (vastu) does not appear to differ from these two perspectives, because we do not maintain that this common nature (anugāmin) is a universal (sāmānya), as do, for example, the Naiyāyikas.


Others say that 'Force' is (just) a conventional term (samaya) that refers to a group (of principles) imagined (kalpita) by Śiva, so that the rites of initiation and the like may be performed easily in an abbreviated form. (6) (We reply that this is not so.) A convention established by the Lord of the gods does not become ultimately unreal. Thus, it is not false, (nor is it arbitrary, as) no other convention arises (that can replace it). (7)


## The Five Forces and the Cosmic Eggs


Cessation' (Nivṛtti) (is the Force) located in the Earth principle. (The Force called) 'Foundation' (Pratiṣṭhā) is in the sphere of Unmanifest Nature (that is, within the Principles ranging from Water to Nature). '(The limited power of) Knowledge' (Vidyā) is (the Force) present (in the Principles ranging from the individual soul) up to Māyā, while the Tranquil One (Śāntā) (extends) up to the Principle of Power. These four (Forces) correspond to (the four-fold) Cosmic Egg (aṇḍa).


(The Force called) 'Beyond the Tranquil' is within the Śiva Principle. Supreme Śiva is beyond the Forces.


(The wise) say that the (Cosmic) Egg is an enveloping covering (āvaraṇa) that (extends) up to (the Principle of) Power, and is responsible for the division of the world orders into groups (up to that Principle).


## Supreme Śiva Makes Himself Known


(Supreme Śiva) is the omnipresent abode of the exuberance of the creative freedom (of consciousness), and so no classification, whether a convention or a conception (kalanā), is applicable here (to Him).


We can clearly observe that even though (Śiva's) own (essential) nature (rūpa) does not fall from (His) inherent nature as the (supreme and universal) subject (boddhṛdharma), He freely (chooses) to become an object of our understanding. (He does this) so that instruction may be possible, in order to achieve (true and) ultimate absorption (in Him). It is because of this that it is said that the Śiva Principle (śivatattva) also is associated with a Force.


## The Four Cosmic Eggs (Aṇḍa)


...even though a series of world-orders was previously said to be present in the principle called Śiva, it offers no resistance to penetration (apratigha), and so no enveloping covering is possible within it.


(Someone may object) that none of the Principles (that correspond to the four cosmic Eggs) except Earth, namely, Nature, Māyā and Power, offer resistance to penetration. So how is it possible for a Cosmic Egg to be within them? (14cd-15ab) Our teachers say (with regard to this objection) that apart from the group of five (gross elements), that is, Earth and the rest, that manifest directly perceived by the senses, nothing else exists. (The elements are the source of) thirty individual (vibhedātman) Principles. (Ten are at the level of) objectivity, because they are gross and subtle. (Five function as the) senses, that are the) instruments (of cognition,) and so are at the level of the means of knowledge. (The remaining fifteen) correspond to the state of the agent...


## The Five Elements Pervading the Universe and Beyond


Our teachers say that apart from the group of five (gross elements), that is, Earth and the rest, that manifest directly perceived by the senses, nothing else exists. (The elements are the source of) thirty individual Principles. (Ten are at the level of) objectivity, because they are gross and subtle. (Five function as the) senses, that are the) instruments (of cognition,) and so are at the level of the means of knowledge. (The remaining fifteen) correspond to the state of the agent, because, by the outpouring of (his) agency, it has clearly arisen.


## Supreme Śiva the Thirty-Seventh Principle


They say that the thirty-seventh principle is called Supreme Śiva (Paraśiva). Free, (that Principle) is (immanent) as the undivided nature of all things (equally), and is beautiful with consciousness.


## The Undefinable Thirty-Eighth Principle


When, (for the purposes of meditation and instruction, Supreme Śiva) is imagined, in the manner explained previously, to be objective (and so known to be the supreme deity), what (remains) that is undefined (anāvacchinna) is said to be the thirty-eighth (Principle).


...it is taught that (this reality) is nothing but consciousness, bliss and freedom. It manifests as the thirty-seventh (principle), where nothing else is needed (to be known, and one is perfectly satisfied).


## From the 36th to the 38th Principle and Back


This does not entail in this way an infinite regress. Let the wise consider the matter thus. When whatever manifests as an object (of perception) becomes one with consciousness, and so ceases (to be such), the Principle that shines within the Heart (of consciousness) is said to be the thirty-sixth.


When someone who is in the grips of the need (to know) what (this reality could be), whether it is just nothing or something of some kind...


(In the case) where that also manifests as an object fashioned (by the imagination, ultimate reality) which is (pure) consciousness (would be) the thirty-eighth (principle). If, for the purpose of meditation (bhāvanā), instruction is given about this also, it would again become the thirty-seventh.


The attributes (of the thirty-seventh and the thirty-eighth principles) are the same. They are both (pure) consciousness which is free and undivided etc. They differ only in the manner in which they are (conceptually) objectivized (vedyīkaraṇa).


## The Path Within the Body and the Rite


Now, all this Path is established in this way (internally) within consciousness, and through that in the void (experienced in deep sleep), the intellect, the vital breath, in the configurations (cakra) of the channels (of the vital breath), and in the body. It is also established in the same way externally, both as a whole and part by part, both successively or all at once (kramākramāt), in (all the components of the rite, including) the Liṅga, the icon, the fire, the sacrificial ground and so on.


(The adept) should manifest (his) own (limited nature) in the appropriate (unconditioned) form (as Śiva, by means of his reflective awareness), in every single aspect of this Path, that extends from pure consciousness to the external (material world).


## The Body as Abode of Deities and Inner Worship


Everything appears in everything (within the body). Indeed, we cannot tolerate being limited even in a dream.


## The Superiority of Śaivism and the Refutation of Ignorance


In order to discern either who is qualified here (to receive initiation and practice) or how (one may become so), we will discuss the sequence of the various types of descent of the power (of grace) (śaktipāta)." The chapter begins by acknowledging that different people have different qualifications (adhikāra). The descent of grace is not uniform — it varies according to the recipient's degree of openness. This variation is the subject of the entire chapter.


## Obscuration vs. Grace: The Preamble to Initiation


It is the Supreme Lord's (Parameśvara) nature to manifest in two ways — in accord with (the constraints imposed by causal and Karmic) necessity (niyati), and independently of it. This is why he is said to be free (svacchanda)." The Lord has two modes: 1. Ni yatikrama — manifesting within the constraints of karma and necessity, creating the intermediate cycles of emanation and dissolution 2. Niyatityāga — abandoning necessity, performing the Great Emanation (mahāsarga) independently Both are expressions of His freedom. He is not compelled by either mode — He freely chooses to be bound by His own laws.


The sequence of Karma and its consequences arises when (the Lord) progressively obscures his own nature by the power of necessity, and so experiences suffering, delusion and the like. When, having abandoned the constraints of Karma, he desires to manifest Himself in a state in which suffering and delusion have passed, he is free of obscuration." The mechanism of obscuration is self-obscuration. The Lord "progressively obscures his own nature" (svarūpācchādanakramāt) — the soul's suffering is the Lord's self-limitation. Liberation is the Lord's self-manifestation.


## The Lord Acts in Accord with Karma or Independently


It is the Supreme Lord's (Parameśvara) nature to manifest in two ways — in accord with (the constraints imposed by causal and Karmic) necessity (niyati), and independently of it. This is why he is said to be free (svacchanda)." The Lord's "nature" (svabhāva) is His own unconditioned will (icchā). Both modes — constrained and unconstrained — are expressions of this will. He is not more free in one mode than the other; His freedom includes the freedom to be bound by His own laws.


On the basis of the (constraint of) Karmic necessity and its fruit, the Lord performs the functions of emanation, persistence and withdrawal in their intermediate form." The "intermediate" (avāntara) form of creation is governed by karma. This is the realm of saṁsāra, where actions produce their appropriate results. But this is not a separate realm from the Lord — it is the Lord operating within self-imposed limitations.


Again, on the contrary, in the case of the Great Emanation that contains innumerable emanations and reabsorptions, God, the one Lord who is all things, (acts independently) by abandoning (the constraints of Karmic and causal) necessity." The Great Emanation (mahāsarga) is the creation of the pure path — the realm of Śakti and the principles beyond Māyā. Here, karma has no sway. Creation and dissolution are instantaneous, spontaneous, and unconditioned.


However, even in the case of the intermediate processes of emanation and persistence, he does not abandon his unconditioned nature. Thus, here also he is independent of necessity." Even when operating within the constraints of karma, the Lord's unconditioned nature (vapus) is never abandoned. He is always free, even when appearing to be bound. This is the paradox of divine freedom: it includes the freedom to appear as bound.


The sequence of Karma and its consequences arises when (the Lord) progressively obscures his own nature by the power of necessity, and so experiences suffering, delusion and the like. When, having abandoned the constraints of Karma, he desires to manifest Himself in a state in which suffering and delusion have passed, he is free of obscuration." The key term is svarūpācchādanakramāt — "by the process of covering His own nature." Obscuration is not something that happens to the Lord; it is something He does. He "covers" (ācchādana) His own form (svarūpa) with the veil of necessity. When He wishes to reveal Himself, He simply removes the veil.
